Imprimatur Liber cui Titulus est ORIGINES IURIDICIALES, Authore Gulielmo
Dugdale.

24 Maii. 1666. Orl. Bridgeman. Matthew Hale.


ORIGINES IURIDICIALES, OR Historical Memorials OF THE English Laws, Courts of
Justice, Forms of Trial, Punishment in Cases Criminal, Law Writers, Law Books,
Grants and Settlements of Estates, Degree of Sergeant, Innes of Court and
Chancery.

Also A CHRONOLOGY Of the Lord Chancelors and Keepers of the great Seal, Lord
Treasurers, Justices Itinerant, Justices of the Kings Bench and Common Pleas,
Barons of the Exchequer, Masters of the Rolls, Kings Attorneys and Sollicitors,
and Sergeants at Law, BY WILLIAM DVGDALE Esquire NORROY King of Arms.

LONDON, Printed by F. and T. Warren, for the Author. MDCLXVI.

Honoratissumus Illustrissimusque Dominus D. EDOARDUS HIDE Eques Auratus,
CLARENDONIAE Comes, Cornburiae Vicecomes, Baro HIDE de Hindon, Summus Angliae,
nec non almae Oxoniensis Academiae Cancellarius, ac sacrae Mati regiae a
secretioribus Consilijs.



Illustrissimo Domino D. EDOARDO HIDE, Eq. aur. Baroni HIDE de HINDON,
Vicecomiti CORNBURIAE, Comiti CLARENDONIAE, Summo Angliae, almaeque Oxon.
Academiae CANCELLARIO; S. Majestati Regiae a Consiliis secretioribus, eximio
bonarum Literarum fautori, Mecoenati suo colendissimo GULIELMUS DUGDALE
Warwicensis, Armorum Rex, cognomento NORROY, tenue hoc opus humillime D. D.

THE PREFACE.
THat Justice and Duty do oblige us to some endeavor for perpetuating the
memory of our dead Ancestors, from whose great cost, and long experience we
have so many advantages for regulating the course of our Actions in this life,
is a Truth which cannot be denied. Hence is it, that the Exploits of men famous
in their times, are with such care and industry recorded by our best
Historians, and their names gratefully preserved by so many glorious Tombs and
monumentall Pillars; that After-ages discerning what honor is done to their
Sacred dust, may be the more excited to an earnest imitation of their exemplary
virtues. Which consideration, having prompted me to an ardent desire of
acquainting my self with some memorials of those eminent persons, who have, in
times past, had to do in the chiefest places of civil employment in this
Realm, I thought it first necessary, thence to extract their Names, and the
Times, at least, when they respectively flourisht; so that afterward,
whatsoever else might occurr to my view, in reference to their Lives and
Actions, might with the less confusion be taken notice of, and added.

And though in that my purposed disquisition, I did not design my Collections
of this nature, to any other end, than my own private use: nevertheless,
communicating them to the view of some judicious persons, and learned in the
Laws, I have been prevayled with, to make them now public: partly, that
thereby it might, with one view, be seen how the most famous men for knowledge
in our Laws, stood contemporary through all ages, since the Norman Conquest:
partly also, what great and noble Families (as well of those which be gone out
in Heirs female, or otherwise, as such who still continue) have sprung from
those Roots; or at least, been much advanced by such their Ancestors, whose
rise was from this excellent study and profession: and lastly to rectify those
common and ordinary mistakes, which pass for good and current amongst diverse
young Students; who, finding in the ancient Year-books frequent authorities for
opinions; either do take all of them to be Judges of old, or, at least, are not
able to distinguish betwixt the Judge and the Pleader. And not only so; but,
which is much worse; Viz. in not being well acquainted with the true names of
the Judges, and principal Lawyers of those times, do take those abbreviations
of their names, there found, to be their very genuine and proper appellations;
Id est Mutt. for Mutford; Shard. for Shardelowe; Scorb. for Scorburghe; Aldeb.
for Aldeburgh; Malb. for Malberthorpe; Hepp. for Heppescotes; Cant. for
Cantebrigge; Loved. for Lovedaye; Trev. for Trevaignion; Parn. for Parning;
Stouff; for Stouford; Bauk. for Baukewell; Kels. for Kelleshull; Scott. for
Scotere; Sad. for Sadington; Hill. for Hillarie; Toud. for Toudeby; Frisk. for
Friskenye, with the like: by which means, not only their right and true names;
but consequently their so well deserving memory (whereunto much honor is due)
is utterly buried in the depth of Oblivion.

It was my chief desire, in this work, to have fixed the certain days and
times, when each of these persons, whose names are taken notice of, in my
Chronologiquo Tables, were first advanced to any of their particular
employments, or degrees: but finding those Records, wherein the appointment of
them thereto, ought properly to have been entered, to be, through the unhappy
neglect of the Clerks in all ages, often times deficient; I have been
constrained to pick out diverse of the mostantient, from the Liberatae Rolls
(wherein their Pensions and Salaries are recorded:) some from the Registers of
the Innes of Court; some from the Year-Books; and some from our late
Chroniclers; and from what other Authorities, for want of better light, I could
find most fit to be made use of in such a work.

And, having in my long searches, for the better informing my self in the
Historical Knowledge of our Laws; Courts of Justice; Conveyance of Estates;
Manner and Forms of Trial; Punishment in Cases Criminal, etc. made some short
observations, which I never deemed fit for, or worthy of being made public to
the world; much less intended them for that purpose: yet such has been the
importunity of some, to whose judgments I rather submit, than my own; as that,
I have also adventured them to the Press, as an Introduction to these Tables;
for which I crave pardon from the skillful in this profession: hoping, that as
I meddle not therein farther than an Historian, my forwardness in so doing, may
the more tolerably be dispensed with. And that, as I have endeavored to make
these Catalogues as exact as I can, by the help of our public Records, and
other authorities; the wants therein, if any (as it is not unlike but diverse may
be found) shall not be imputed to my heedlessness, but to the neglect of those,
whom it chiefly concerned in their times, and respective trusts, to have had
more care in preserving their Memorials, in such places, where most properly
they ought to have been recorded.

In what I have said touching those noble Societies of our Students in the Laws
(called the Inns of Court and Chancery,) it has not been with purpose to
magnify any one of them above the other, in what respect soever; nor to be
positive in anything; but briefly to express what I have met with, as to point
of fact; and that only where I had any light to guide me therein; leaving
matters of Argument to the learned in that excellent and useful study.

Moreover, forasmuch as in these my Chronologique Tables, it will not be so
clear to the Reader, as I could wish, when many of the Justices of the several
Courts at Westminster departed this life, or ceased to sit: therefore for the
better satisfaction therein of such as are most curious, I have calculated
those of the Common pleas, out of the Fines, from K. Richard the first's time
till this present, and of them have inserted a particular Scheme, at the end of
my discourse concerning that Court.

And though in the Registers of the several Innes of Court, the memorial of the
Christian names, to most of the learned Readers, Treasurers, and Governors in
those Houses, is often omitted: yet have I, with some satisfaction to my self
(and so I doubt not, but to many others) supplied the same, so far, as I could
discover them in any other parts of those Volumes.

So also of such of the Sergeants, for whose Surnames I have no other authority
than from the Year-books, or the like, wherein their Christian names are not at
all mentioned.

And lastly I am to advertise my Reader, that though I have adventured upon a
Catalogue of Law-Writers, and Law Books, I dare not say, that those whereof I
have taken notice, are all of that kind; for in private Studies some other
Manuscrips; and perhaps also some Printed discourses, may be yet found. Nor of
those that are published by the Press, can I affirm that they are all
authentic and warrantable, though they may be in some things useful,
considering the liberty in Printing which has been taken of late years.

CAP. I.
Of Government the Original.
THat this, -- jura dant singuli natis and uxoribus.
at first, was in the Father of the Household; and when generations of men
increased, in the chief of the Family, both the light of reason, and all
History do sufficiently manifest. How it therefore fell into other hands I
cannot better express than in the words of Sir Walter Raleigh, In tract of time
(says he) as Hist. of the world by Sir W. Raleigh lib. 1. Cap. 9. Sect. 1.
people grew numerous, and Kindreds more remote, Obedience, the fruit of
natural reverence, waxing cold, and brotherly affection by little and little
withering away; Wisdom being likewise severed from Power, and Strength from
Charity, Covetousness begot Oppression, and the more powerful man incroach'd
upon the weak; Necessity Ibid.
therefore, (which makes wise even the brute creatures as well as men)
occasioned both the prudent and ignorant, at once to understand, that the
condition of Reasonable men would become far more miserable than that of the
Beasts; and that a general flood of confusion would a second time overflow
them, did they not by a general obedience to order and dominion prevent it:
For the mighty, who trusted in their own strength, found others again (by
enterchange of times) more mighty than themselves; the feeble fell under the
forcible, and the equal from equal received equal harms; insomuch, that
licentious disorder, which seemed to promise liberty upon the first
acquaintance, proved, upon a better trial, no less perilous than an
unindurable bondage.

Hence therefore was it (as Cicero well conjectureth) that men fled to some one
amongst themselves, excelling others in Virtue and prowess, and submitted to
his Dictates and Decrees, as to Laws inviolable: praestat enim Regem Tyrannum
habere, quam nullum; it being better to have a Tyrant than no government at all.

Thus, Hist. of the world, ut supra.
to speak humanely, may the beginning of Empire be ascribed to Reason and
Necessity: but out of doubt it was from Almighty God himself, that this beam of
light did shine into the hearts of men; whereby they might discern, that they
could not subsist without a Guide and Ruler: for from the words of holy Writ we
find, that Dan. 5. 21.
the most High bears Rule over the Kingdoms of men, and appoints over them
whom he pleases.

Cap. II.
The beginning of Laws.
BUt by this Government though they found great advantages, considering the
miseries they underwent before; yet time (making all men wise that observe it)
showed them some imperfections therein: and therefore both the same Necessity
which invented, and the same Reason which approved of sovereign power, devised
certain Rules, whereby Dominion (in the beginning boundless) might likewise be
kept within her own limits; Principio rerum gentiumque imperium penes Reges
erat, quos ad fastigium hujus majestatis, non ambitio popularis, sed spectata
inter bonos moderatio provehebat. Iustine lib. 1.
so that the Governor might the more safely exercise his sovereign power, The
beginin^ (...).
and the governed more securely enjoy that which was their own right: for then
as Iustine says, Iusti^e lib. 1.
Populus nullis legibus tenebantur, arbitria principum pro legibus erant; The
people were not governed by any other Laws than the wills of their Princes: And
what the effect of those their wills were, hear what St. Augustine de Civitate
D^ i lib. 4. cap. 4.
expresses, -- Quid enim (says he) sunt Regna, nisi magna latrocinia, remota
Iustitia, quae est Legum effectus?

Since therefore the benefit of Law is so great, Their definition.
let us consider what it is, from some excellent and most proper definitions
which have been made thereof.

The famous Roman Orator Cicero de Legibus lib. 3. cap. 1.
tells us, that Lex est summa ratio, insita a natura, quae jubeat ea quae
facienda sunt, prohibeatque contraria; It is the great Dictate of natural
Reason, which commands what is to be done, and prohibits the contrary.

It is the Reformer (says he) of Vice, and the encourager to Virtue.

Chrysippus defines it thus, Justinian l^b. 2. ff. de Legibus.
(...) etc. Lex est omnium divinarum and humanarum rerum Regina. Oportet autem
eam bonis and malis Praesidem, Principem and Ducem esse: Et (secundum hoc)
justorum and injustorum regulam, and eorum quae natura civilia sunt animantium;
praeceptricem quidem faciendorum, prohibitricem non faciendorum.

Marsil. Fici^^ in argument. ad Plat^^^ Minos, seu de Lege.
Marsilius Ficinus out of Plato 's Minos, his Books de Legibus, and de
Republic^, sums up Plato 's whole description of a Law thus, -- Lex est vera
gubernaculi ratio, quae ad finem optimum, per commoda media, gubernata dirigit,
transgredienti poenam, obedienti praemium statuens.

And our famous Bracto ^ lib. 1. cap. 3.
Bracton thus, -- Lex specialiter significat sanctionem justam, jubentem
honesta, prohibentem contraria.

Under this (I mean the Law of Nature) did the old Patriarchs live; and in this
do most Nations of the world still concur.

And of so great power has it been esteemed, that ea, non homini sed Deo
Delphico tribueretur; that it ought not to be attributed to men, Cap. 2.
but to God, says De Leg. lib. 1.
Cicero. I have read, that the ancient Kings, for the better reputation of
their Laws, told their Subjects, that they received them from the Gods, -- Deum
ne an hominem aliquem condendarum Legum causam existimatis? quoth Plato Plato
de Legibus lib. 1. in initio.
in that Dialogue of his with Clivius the Cretian, and Megillus the
Lacedemonian; Clivius answering -- Deum (o hospes) Deum inquam, ut decet
asserere; apud nos quidem (Cretenses vult) Iovem, apud Lacedaemonios Apollinem:
and then tells us (out of Homer) of Minos (the great Lawgiver of Crete) how he
had nine years conversation and conference with Jupiter before he gave them
their Laws: and a little after calls him (...), one that gave Laws from God.
Marfilius Ficinus In argumento ad Dialogum seu librum 9 de Legibus.
observes truly, -- quod Plato dicit, priscos Legum latores fuisse Dei filios,
Legesque heroibus (qui etiam a Diis erant geniti) tradidisse: And the same
Ficinus elsewhere, In argumento ad Platonis Minos.
omnes illustres Legum conditores, inventionem Legum in Deum retulerunt:
Zoroastes Bractrianis and Persis Legem tradens, in Horomasim; Trismegistus
Aegyptiis, in Mercurium; Moses in Deum patrem; Minos in Iovem; Charondus
Carthaginiensibus, in Saturnum; Lycurgus Lacedaemoniis, in Apollinem; Draco and
Solon Atheniensibus, in Minervam: Numa Pomp. Romany, in Aegerium; Mahomet
Arabibus in Gabrielem, Zamolxis Scythis in Vestam: Plato noster Magnesiis and
Siculis, in Iovem and Apollinem. And to the same purpose an ancient and
excellent author Diodorus Siculus biblioth. lib. I. p. 84. Hanaviae 1604.
says, that Mneves, an old Egyptian Lawgiver, Leges a Mercurio sibi traditas
simulabat.

Our great English Lawyer Sir John Fortescue Knight (who was chief Justice of
the Kings Bench in the time of King Henry the 6th.) in that learned discourse
Impr. Land. 1599. cap. 15.
of his de Laudibus Leg. Angl. says, that All humane Laws are either the Law
of Nature; or Customs, or Statutes, which are called Constitutions: but
Customs and the Sentences of the Law of Nature, after that they were once put
in writing, and by the sufficient authority of the Prince published, and
commanded to be kept, were changed into the nature of Constitutions or
Statutes; and did, after that, more penally than before, bind the subject of
the Prince, to the keeping of them, by the severity of his commandment.

Consonant whereunto is that expression of the learned Seldom, All Laws, in
general ( says Notes upon Fortescue p. 17.
he) are originally equally ancient: All were grounded upon nature; and no
Nation was, that out of it took not their grounds: and Nature being the same in
all, the beginning of all Laws must be the same.

Now of those who have been most famous for making Laws in several Nations,
Moses may be very well ranked in the first place, by reason that the Israelites
received theirs from him.

Lycurgus in the next, from whom the Lacedaemonians had theirs; and from Solon
the Athenians; the memory of which men for their singular prudence in framing
such wholesome and beneficial Constitutions, in those Countries, is still no
less famous, than of the greatest Princes by whose power they were ever
governed.

The Romans received some of theirs, from their Kings; some from their
Decemviri; some from their Senators; some from their Lawyers, and some from the
People themselves.

Cap. III.
The Antiquity of our Laws in England.
OF these, Common Law.
that which we call the Common Law is, out of question, no less ancient than
the beginning of differences betwixt man and man, after the first peopling of
this land; it Plowd. Com. in his Case of Mines f. 316.
being no other than pure and tried Reason; ( as the late great Lawyer Mr.
Plowden expresses) or the Cokes Instit. part. 2. p. 179.
absolute perfection of Reason, as Sir Edward Coke affirms, adding, that In
his praef. to the 8th. book of his Reports.
the ground thereof is beyond the memory or Register of any beginning; And
these were they which the Norman Conqueror at his Coronation did swear to
observe; being then by him said to be -- Bonae and approbatae antiquae Regni
Leges. The Antiquity of our Laws.


The grave and judicious Thomas Lord Ellesmere, late Lord Chancellor of
England, in his learned discourse of the f. 32. 33^
Postnati, says, that the Common Laws of England are grounded upon the Law of
God, and extend themselves to the original Law of Nature, and the universal Law
of Nations; and that they are not originally Leges scriptae: which is consonant
to that of the eminent Lawyer Henry de Bracton (who lived in King H. 3. time)
In Bracton lib. 1. cap. 1.
omnibus aliis regionibus utuntur Legibus and jure scriptis; sola Anglia usa
est jure non scripto and consuetudine.

And that their being not written does no whit extenuate the authority and
esteem justly due to them, let us hear what Fleta excellently expresses to
that purpose, -- Fleta; in comentarii juris Anglicani pr^oemio.
Leges autem Anglicanas, licet non scriptas, Leges appellari non est absurdum;
cum hoc ipsum Lex sit, quod Principi placet Legis habet vigorem; eas scilicet
quas, super dubiis in concilio diffiniendis, Procerum quidem consilio, and
Principis auctoritate accordante, vel antecedente constat esse promulgatas: Si
enim ob solum scripturae defectum Leges minime censerentur, majoris proculdubio
auctoritatis robur ipsis Legibus videretur accomodare Scriptura, quam
decernentis aequitas, aut ratio statuentis.

It is not incongruous to call our English Constitutions, Laws, though they be
not committed to writing; forasmuch as the Law it self is, that what the King
appoints has the strength of Law; viz. that, which in doubtful cases, by
the advice of his Nobles, and his own authority concurring, or preceding shall
happen to be promulged: for if, through want of recording, they should not have
the estimation of Laws, the mere writing of them would attribute more authority
unto them, than the justness of the Judge, or reason of the composer.

Thus much, in general, in reference to the Common Law of England; whence I
shall descend to say something, briefly, of the most ancient Lawmakers in this
Nation.

That the Druydes (id est, the Priests) amongst the Britans, were the framers
of their Laws, is probable enough, for Caesar in the memorials (...) lib. 6.
of his war in Gallia, speaking of them, as the Determiners of all
controversies and matters of variance, there, as well public as private; (...)
and that they do, at one time of the year sit together at a certain hallowed
place on the borders of the (...)
Carnutes (whose Country is the middle of all Gallia) whereunto all such as
have any differences do resort, and submit to such Decree as is then and there
adjudged by them, says, Disciplina in Britannia reperta; atque inde in Galliam
translata esse existimatur. This Discipline of theirs was translated hither out
of Britain.

And that the Britans had certain, and firmly established Laws, Dio Lib. 5.
assures us; Britannia (says he) suis Legibus usa est: Videsis etiam Iani
Angl. p. 17. and 18.
and who was it like should be the makers of them but the Kings by the help and
assistance of the Druydes? for the same Caesar, in that relation, plainly tells
us, that Caesar de Bello Gallico ut supra.
Druydae fere de omnibus controversiis, publicis privatisque constituunt etc.
They determine almost of all controversies and matters in variance, as well
public as private: and if there happen to be any Crime All Criminal Causes.
committed, if murder, if controversy concerning All Civil Actio^^.
the inheritance or boundaries of land, they decide it, and award recompense
and penalties. Likewise, in case there be any person, private or public, who
shall not submit to their Decrees, they forbid him to come to their Sacrifices,
which is the most grievous punishment; and they who are thus interdicted, are
shunned by others, as the most wicked of all people; so that no man will abide
their company, left they should be infected and receive hurt from them: And if
they require the benefit of Law, (...).
or any dignity (being thus interdicted) they may not have it.

But to derive the rise and original of our Common Laws from that fountain, is
more than I dare adventure, though Sir John Fortescue does seem to incline
thereto, in his commendation of the reason and equity of them, in saying, Lib.
1. cap. (...). de laud. Legum Angl.
that the Romans, Saxons, Danes, or Normans would have altered them, had they
not been so; especially the Romans, who gave Laws almost to all the world
besides. -- Quae, Cap. 3.
si optimae non extitissent, aliqui Regum illorum, justicia, ratione, seu
affectione concitati eas mutassent, aut omnino delevissent; and maxim Romani,
qui Legibus suis quasi totum orbis reliquum judicabant.

For if we well consider the misery whereunto those people were, by the power
of the Romans brought, even almost to an utter expulsion, as their own
Historians Galfr. Monumethensis, and Humphrey Llhoyd do acknowledge; it cannot
probably be thought, that their Laws and Customs were transmitted to those who
afterward became Lords and Rulers here; but rather that the Saxons, after they
had well settled themselves, did lay the first foundation thereof, from the
usages and Customs of the Germans, whence they sprung. But my purpose being
here not to discourse argumentatively, leaving every one to their own judgment
therein, I shall proceed, and briefly show what I find historically set down
concerning this matter.

Cap. IV.
Our ancient Laws and Lawmakers.
IT is said of Mulmutius Dunwallo (a King of the Britains, who began his reign
no less than four hundred forty and four years before the birth of our blessed
Savior) -- Ioh. Brompton Monach. Iorv.
Primo Leges in Britannia edidit Dunwallo Molmucius; Inter Hist. Angl. Script.
antiq. col. 956. 8.
cujus Leges Molmucinae dicebantur: Inter quas (ut in Bruto habetur) statuit,
ut Civitates and Templa Deorum, viaeque ad illa ducentes, and aratra Colonum
immunitate confugii gauderent. Dunwallo Molmutius was the first (King) that did
constitute Laws in Britain, which were thereupon called the Molmucian Laws:
Amongst which he enacted, that the Cities and Temples of the Gods, and the ways
leading to them; as also the Husbandmans Plows, should have the privilege of
Sanctuary.

After him, that Mercia Queen of the Britans (sometime wife of King Guitheline,
from whom the Province of Mercia is thought to have had its name) Ioh. Brompt.
ibid.
made a Law, Cap. 4.
full of prudence and Justice, called the Mercian Law: And that our old
Historian Gildas, translating these two Laws out of the British language, into
Latin, it was thenceforth called Merchenelege, id est, the Law of the
Mercians, by which Law eight Shires of this Realm, Gloucester, Worcester,
Hereford, Salop, Chester, Stafford, Warwick, and Oxford, were anciently
governed.

The next Legislators here, that I read of, were Ethelbert Eccl. Hist. Ven.
Bedae lib. 2. cap. 5.
(the first of the Saxons, who received the Christian says, about the year of
Christ DCxiii.) Hlothere, Eadric, and Withred, all Kings of Kent; whose Laws
are extant in an ancient Manuscript, called Penes virum cl. Rog. Twysden Bar.
Textus Roffensis, and therein recorded by Ernulph the Venerable Bishop of that
place, about the year of Christ DCCLx.

After those Ina, Alfred, Edward the Martyr, Athelstan, and Ethelred all Kings
of the West Saxons; the first whereof began his reign about the year of Christ
DC Lxxxviii; the second in the year DCCCLxxiii; the third in the year
DCCCCLxxv; the fourth in the year DCCCC xxiii; and the fifth in the year
DCCCCLxxix. whose Laws are to be seen at large; viz. those of King Ina in the
Annals Hist. Angl. Script. antiq. col. 759. and col. 820. Videsis Iani Angl. p.
124.
of Ioh. Brompton (sometime a Monk of Iorvaulx Abbey in Yorkshire); those of
King of Alfred Hist. Angl. Script. col. 819. etc.
in the same Annals of Brompton; those of King Edward the Martyr, King
Athelstan and Ethelred, in Lambard de Priscis Anglorum Legibus, which Laws of
King Alfred were called West Saxon lega, id est, the Law of the West Saxons,
whereby in ancient time nine Counties, South of the River Thames, viz. Kent,
Sussex, Surrey, Berkshire, Wilteshire, Hantshire, Somersetshire, Dorletshire,
and Devonshire, were ruled.

After this, the Danes ruling here, here was a third Law by them constituted,
which was called Denelega, id est, the Danes Law: and by it were no less than
xv. of the Eastern and Northern shires of this Kingdom, heretofore governed,
viz. Essex, Middlesex, Suffolk, Laws and Lawmakers.
Norfolk, Hartfordshire, Cambridgsh. Huntendonsh. Lincolnsh. Notinghamsh.
Derbysh. Northamptonsh. Leicestersh. Buckinghamsh. Bedfordsh. and Yorkshire.

Out of all which three Laws, viz. Merchenlega, West-Saxonlega, and Danelega,
did King Edward (commonly called the Confessor, who began his reign in the year
of Christ Mxliiii.) select lb. col. 957. 15. Polychroa. lib. 1. cap. 50.
the best and choycest, and reducing them into one body, called Cokes Reports
part. 3. in procem.
them the Common Law. Which Laws of King Edward the Confessor are at large
published by Mr. Lambard. De priscis Angl. leg. fol. 126. b. Chron. H. i.
Knighton col. 2355.


And long it was not, after the renowned Norman Conqueror (King Will* the
first) had brought this Realm to subjection, K. Will. I.
but that he caused MS. in Scac. sub nomine Gerv. Tilb. cap. 32. Vide Iani
Angl. p. 63.
a view to Post adquisitionem Angliae, illi^lmus Re* quarto anno regni sui,
consi^o Baronum suorum, fecit summoniri, per univerios Angliae consul ^us,
Anglos nobiles, sapientes, and sua Lege eruditos, ut eorum Leges, and vitam and
consuetudines ab ipsis audiret: Electi ergo de singulis patriae Comitatibus
viri xii, jurejurando coram Rege primum confirmaverunt; ut, quoad possent,
recto tramite, neque ad dextram, neque ad sinistram divertentes, Legum
veritatem suarum, and consuetudinum sibi patefacerent; nil praetermittentes,
nil addentes, nil praevaricantes, nil mutantes etc.
be taken of all the before-specified Laws, and approving some, and rejecting
others, adding also some of his Norman constitutions to them (as most proper
for his government, considering how many of his subjects from that Dukedom he
brought over with him and settled here) made an establishment Chron. Ioh.
Brompton col. 982. 46. Annal. H. Knighton col. 2355. Annal. Malmesh. f. 342. b.
etc.
of such as he thought most just and wholesome for this his Dominion.

But this was Vide inter Leges S. Reg. Edw. per Will. Lamb. editas f. 138. a.
and f. 138. b.
not without great and earnest suit made to him by the native English; for he
would have imposed Vide inter Leges S. Reg. Edw. per Will. Lamb. editas f. 138.
a. and f. 138. b.
upon them the Laws of the Danes and Norwegians, affirming Vide inter Leges S.
Reg. Edw. per Will. Lamb. editas f. 138. a. and f. 138. b.
them to be better than others -- profundiores and honestiores omnibus aliis,
Vide etiam Spelm. Gloss. p. 436.
altarumq, Legibus nationam. Howbeit, Vide Flor. Wigorn. in anno 1142.
to give them all indifferent satisfaction, for quietness sake, for thus says
Math. Paris thereupon -- In vita and Frethrici Abbatis p. 48. n. 30.
Post multas disceptationes, Videsis etiam Iani Angl. p. 63. 64. and 65. Et
Rog. Hoved. in vita Regis H. 2. p. 347.
praesente Archiepiscopo Lanfranco, Rex, pro bono pacis, juravit super omnes
Reliquias Ecclesiae S. Albani, tactisque sacrosanctis Evangeliis, ministrante
juramento Abbate Frethrico, bonas and approbatas antiquas regni Leges, quas
sancti and pii Angliae reges, ejus antecessores, and maxim Rex Edwardus,
inviolabiliter observari jussit. -- After many disputes, in the presence of
Lanfrank A^chb. of Canterb. the King (at the length) for quieting the people,
swore upon all the precious Relics in the Church of S. Alban, laying his hand
upon the holy Evangelists, Frethrick then Abbot ministering the Oath to him,
that he would inviolably observe the good and approved ancient Laws which had
been made by the devout and pious Kings of England, his ancestors, and chiefly
by King Edward (the Confessor.)

Of which Laws Ingulphus, the then famous and learned Abbot of Croyland, faith
thus, 1 (...) hist. p. 519. b.
-- Attuli mecum Londoniis in Monasterium (Croylandiae) Leges aequissimi Regis
Edwardi etc. I brought with me from London unto the Abbey of Croyland, the Laws
of King Edward the just, De legibus will. Conq. vide Selde^^ Iin. Angl. lib. 2.
p. 123.
in the same language wherein they were made, which my renowned Lord King
William, having ratified and made authentic, did by Proclamation, through all
the Realm of England, command under grievous penalties, to be inviolably
deserved; and so recommended the same to his Judges.

But he laid great Impositions upon the Bishops and Religious Houses for the
support of his military Forces, from which they, holding their lands in pure
and frank Almoigne, were before that time free. -- Episcopatus and Abbatias
omnes, quae Baronias tenebant, and eatenus ab omni servitute seculari
libertatem habuerint, sub servitute statuit military says In Anno 1070. p. 7.
Math. Paris. And for the same purpose he imposed Ibid.
military Tenures upon the Laity: So also upon the people in general, in his
Purveyance for Victual, which he caused to be taken in kind, throughout all the
Land; until, upon sad complaint thereof, he did, by the advice of his Nobles,
reduce it into money. Of which Purveyance, then so taken and compounded for, I
shall here exhibit a brief Narrative from an Author, (...) MS. nuncupato (...).
T^bur. penes Came^ar. Scace. cap. 23. Videsis etiam Iani Angl. p. 74. and 75.
who lived near that time;

In primitivo regni statu, post conquisitionem etc.

In the primitive state of this Kingdom after the (Norman) Conquest, there was
not any gold or silver paid to the King, out of his own lands, but only
Victual, whereby the daily necessaries of the Court were supplied; and those,
who were assigned to this service, knew well how much came from each place;
coined money, issuing out of Cities and Castles, where no husbandry was
exercised, being only employed in Wages, and gifts to Soldiers, Purveyance how
taken anciently.
and for other necessaries relating to the Courts and public Conventions of
the Realm. Which institution continued during all the Reign of King William the
Conqueror, and until the time of his Son King Henry the first; so that I my
self ( says mine Author, who lived in King H. 2. time) have seen some of
those, who thus brought these Provisions to the Court.

The Officers of the Kings House, had likewise from some Counties of this
Realm, whence such Provisions were due, a certain proportion of Wheat; of other
several sorts of Provender for Horses; which being paid according to this
settled form, the said Officers; upon account with the Shireeves, did reduce
them into rates of money; viz. for so much Wheat in measure, as was a
competency to make bread for an hundred men, one Shilling; for the Carcass of a
Pasturing Ox, a shilling; and for a Ram or Sheep, four pence. But afterward,
the King ( viz. King Henry the first) being necessitated to go beyond Sea, for
the quieting those stirrs which were there raised, and to that end requiring
ready money, as most necessary for such a purpose; there came a sad complaint
to his Court, by a multitude of Country men; nay, which was much more
grievous, they brought their Plow-shares, as a testimony of the decay of
tillage, and offered them up to him, being so much oppressed by this Purveyance of
Victual, thus taken from their dwellings. The King therefore being not a little
moved therewith, did by the advice of his Nobles, send throughout his Realm,
diverse persons of whose prudence and discretion, for that purpose, he was
ascertained; who travailed, thereupon, into all parts, and viewed every man's
land, estimating the proportion of Victual, paid out of the same, which they
reduced into a rate of money; and constituted the Shireeve of each Shire the
general Receiver thereof; adding, that he should pay the same into the
Exchequer, by weight.

Fecit Flor. Wigor^. p. 449.
describi omnem Angliam etc. Moreover he (viz. King William the Conqueror)
caused the whole Kingdom to be surveyed, to the end he might know how much
Land each of his Barons did possess; as also the number of Knights fees and
Plowlands that it contained: Likewise what Bondmen and what Cattle any one had,
from the greatest to the least; and what Rent every man's Estate could yield;
all which he appointed to be recorded in his Exchequer at Westminster in that
Volume called D^mesday book; so named, as Gerv. Tilbur. says; non quod in eo
de propositis aliquibus dubiis feratur sententia; sed quod a praedicto judicio
non lic^at ulla ratione discedere; Not that in it was contained a judgment of
any doubtful matters; but that it might not be lawful to decline that
sentence for any respect whatsoever.

He first also appointed, Ingulphi hist. f. 512.
that Charters should be sealed with wax by each man's peculiar Seal: and
likewise that Pleadings should thenceforth be in French, and that Language
taught in Schools.

And so severe and strict he was for preservation of Deer, that Math. Paris.
Cervum vel Capreolum Capienti, oculi eruebantur; those who took a Deer or a
Goat should lose their Eyes.

And for preventing Insurrections, commanded; Polyd. Virg. hist. lib. 9.
that at the ringing of a Bell every Evening, the Fire in all Houses should be
covered.

Homicide he likewise punished H. Hunt. f. 212. b.
by loss of life: and Rape by H. Hunt. f. 212. b.
gelding of the offender.

His immediate successor was King Will. Rufus, but of any Laws he made we have
no memorial: Howbeit, to him was attributed the original of that Custom,
whereby his successors first claimed the profits of vacant Bishoprics and
Monasteries, which were of the Kings Patronage, commonly called First Fruits,
-- Sane Gulielmus Rufus, avaritia inflammatus, vectigalia ex sacris praediis
capie^ bat (etc.) says Polyd. V^g Angl. hist. lib. x. p. 168. a. 30. and 40.
Polyd. Vi^gil. -- and thus goes on, -- Etenim Reges qui successerunt, Rufi
institutum secuti, consueverunt, tam Episcopatuum vacantium, quam Coenobiorum,
quae maiores eorum condidissent, vectigal unius anni capere, perinde quasi ista
bona Deo consecrata, per hunc modum tantisper ad pristinum datorem jure
redirent, quoad essent, qui ea rursus possidenda reciperent. Estque ejusmodi
consuetudo ita deinde rata habita, ut etiam nunc Regibus fas sit Vectigal
quoddam capere ex Coenobiis vacantibus: nam ratio inita est, ut quoties vacent,
ex pacto, quaedam pecuniae summa debeatur Regi, ut Fundatori, qui etiam
potestatem faciat monachis novum eligendi sibi Praeposium. Item per idem ius,
ipsis Regibus licet and Episcopatuum vacantium praedia recipere, ac fructus in
sex menses, vel in integrum annum debitos capere, aut ab illis quibus ex
sacerdotia dantur, exigere: quemadmodum interea, dum vacant, primus Provinciae
antistes, in Episcopatibus ipsis jurisdictionem habet, and quicquid emolumenti
inde est, ei est.

The next of our Legislators that succeeded him, was King Henry the first, his
son, of whom another Historian says thus Ric. Prior Hagastald. Inter hist.
Angl. Script. col. 310. l. 52.
-- Bonas quoque Leges and consuetudines Regis Edwardi, praedecessoris ac
cognati sui, restauravit; and prout ei videbatur, sua sapientia and auctoritate
emendatas and corroboratas, in regno suo rigide and constanter, tam a
divitibus, quam a pauperibus observari fecit. That he confirmed the good Laws
and Customs of King Edward his Praedecessor and Kinsman; and caused them to be
strictly observed as well of the rich as poor, throughout his Kingdom.

But Sir Edward Coke expresses it thus Cokes Reports lib. 3. in procem^o.
-- Because he abolished such Customs of Normandy, as his Father had added to
our Common Laws, he is said to have restored the ancient Laws of England.

His Charter of Confirmation Hist. Angl. script. antiq. col. 121. a. n. 30. M.
Paris. in a. 1100. p. 55. Lib. rub. in Scacc. f. 131. b.
of those Laws, bears date at his Coronation: which Laws (as all the rest
whereof I have made mention) are exactly referred unto by my marginal
quotations. And added, that Counterfeitors of money should have their Eyes (...)
pulled out, be gelt, (...)
and lose their right hands. Likewise (...)
that Halfpence and Farthings should be round. Also that an Ell for measure
should (...)
be made of the length of his own Arm: and that the use of Lights in the Night
should be restored (...)
which, with fire, had been prohibited by his Father, after the ringing of
Coverfeu every Evening at eight of the Clock.

Moreover, he commanded (...) Hist. in An. 1124.
that the English should cut their hair after the fashion of the French, they
having till then used to wear it as long as women theirs.

And lastly, fearing the loss of Normandy by invasion of Jews le Gross King
of France, primum omnium populo imponit grave tributum causa novi belli
gerendi; id quod apud posteriors Reges in consuetudinem venit (...)
says Polyd. Virg. he first began the imposing of a Tax upon the people, for
maintaining of his military forces: which practice his (...)
successors have, since that time, brought to a Custom.

The Laws of his successor King Stephan, K. Steph^n.
granted by his Charter, bearing date at Oxenford in the year MCxxxvi. (being
the first year of his reign) are specified by W. Malmesh. in his Hist. (...) a.
n. 40. (...) Mal^. Hist. Nov. f. 101. b. n. 10.
Novellae, and others, Et Hist. Angl. Script. col. 314.
whereunto I refer my Reader, amongst which he abolished R. Hoved. In An. 1136.
f. 276. 2. n. 40.
the tribute called Danegelt; viz. ii.s for every hide of Land, which his
praedecessors had long enjoyed.

And to him succeeded King Henry K. Henry II.
the second; who, in a famous meeting of the Prelates and Peers of this his
Realm, at Clarendon in Wiltshire, on the Feast day of S. Hillary An. MCLxiiii.
(in the xth. year of his reign) established (...).
diverse Laws, chiefly relating to the Clergy and Ecclessiastical matters, who
aimed at exemption of their persons and possessions from secular jurisdiction.

Other Laws he also made in Anno Domini MCLxix. the xvth. year of his reign, he
being then in France; the tenor whereof I have Hist. Angl. Script. col. 1409.
referred unto.

The Trial by grand Assize, instead of that by Battle he likewise instituted
Glanvill lib. 2. cap. 7, 8, 9. [Vide Iani Angl. p. 110. and 111.]


And in the year MCLxx. (16 Justices Itiverant first constituted. Regni) he
constituted certain Justices Hist. Angl. Script. col. 1410.
Itinerant, and sent them into the several Counties of this Realm (as in my
Chronological Tables may be more amply seen) to make enquiry, according to the
direction of several Articles, concerning delinquencies of sundry kinds.

In the year 1176. ( scil. 22 regni) in a grand Council of his Peers held at
Notingham he also assigned Vide Annal. Rog. Hoved. f. 313. b.
more Justices Itinerant to ride into all the Counties of this his Kingdom;
viz. three for every six Counties; and to distribute Justice to his people,
upon all occasions, according to the before-specified Constitutions made at
Clarendon, and Vide Annal. Rog. Hoved. f. 313. b.
renewed at Northampton.

In the year 1179. (regni 25.) he sent Annal. Rog. Hoved. fol. 337. a.
other Justices Intinerant likewise into the several Counties of England, to
hear the complaints of his people upon all differences, and controversies, and
to do them right therein.

And in the year 1180. (27 regni) he made those R. Hoved. f. 350. a.
Constitutions for the Assize of Arms, whereby every person of what degree
soever was assigned what weapons and Arms for the defense of the Realm, Iani
Angl. p. 120, 121.
he ought to have.

And lastly, in the year 1188. (scil. 33 regni) having made certain Statutes
and Constitutions, in order to an expedition for the Holy land, which were
first R. Hoved. f. 365. b. n. 20.
framed in Normandy; upon his return into England, he Ib. f. 366. a. n. 20. Et
Chron. Gerv. Dorobera. inter Hist. Angl. script. col. 1522. K. Rich. I.
confirmed them in a grand Council held by him at his Royal Palace of Gaytinton
in Northamptonshire.

To King Henry the second succeeded Richard the first, his son; who in An.
MCXCiiii. (5 of his reign) constituted diverse Rules for the proceeding of his
Justices in Pleas of the Crown; which are at large recorded by Annal. parre
poster. fol. 423. a.
R. Hoveden: Likewise certain Ib. f. 424. a.
Statutes touching the Jews; and concerning Ib. b.
Tournaments: As also, that whosoever had any former grants from him, should
then come to confirm them under his new great seal.

The next year following, viz. An. 1195. (6 R. 1.) Hubert Archb. of Canterbury
and Justice of all England, sent the form Ib. f. 430. b. n. 40.
of an Oath, to be taken by every man, throughout the whole Realm.

In the year 1197. (8 R. 1.) the said King Richard did establish and constitute
Ib. 440. b. n. 10. Vide Chron. Ioh. Brompt. col. 1258. 18.
a certain Assise and rule for weights and measures.

The next year following (scil. 1198. 9 R. 1.) he imposed a Ib. f. 442. b. n.
50.
Tallage of five shilling upon every Plowland throughout the Kingdom; and Ib.
f. 442. b. n. 50.
appointed one Clerk and one Knight, with the assistance of the Shireeve, to
collect the same.

And the same year, he sent Ib. f. 445. b.
his Justices Itinerant into Lincolnshire and the rest of the Northern
Counties, to dispatch those Pleas of the Crown, which were not heard by them
who went into those parts last.

So also Ib. n. 40.
Hugh de Nevill, chief Justice of his Forests, with strict Articles of
direction, what to enquire of, and how to proceed: which were Ib. 446. a. n. 30.
as severe against the transgressors upon his venison, viz. to the loss of
their Eyes and privy members, as it was in the time of King Henry his
Grandfather; and for lesser trespasses upon his Vert; leading of Dogs
uncoupled, and carrying or Bows and Arrows, to be at the King's mercy.

Of King John's King John.
Constitutions, the first whereof I find mention, is Ex vet. Regist. in.
archivis Cantuar. Archiep.
for regulating and moderating the Fees of the great Seal, which had been
enlarged in the time of King Richard the first; and reducing them to what they
were in the reign of his Father King Henry the II. The next for establishing R.
Hoved. f. 453. a. n. 10.
the prices of Wines: And that he granted MS. penes Archiep. Cant. f. 9. b. n.
7.
to Hubert Archb. of Canterbury the liberty of a Mint for coining of money in
that City: As also authority to convert the tenure of such lands, as were held
of his Church of Canterbury, in Gavellkind, into Knights service.

In the second year of his reign he R. Hoved. Annal. f. 465. b. n. 30.
ratified the usage of his Exchequer touching such debts as were due to the
Crown; the form whereof is set forth by R. Hoveden sub a. 1200.

In the year 1201. (3 Ioh.) he sent his Precept Pat. 3. Ioh. m. 7.
to Hugh de Nevill, then chief Justice of his Forests, for the strict
observance of those sharp Laws against all transgressors in them, which were
used in the time of King Henry, his Father. And the next ensuing year, he made
Pat. 5 Ioh. m. 1. Math. Paris. in an. 1202.
and constituted an Assize of Bread, upon the several prices of Wheat.

In the year 1204. (6 Ioh.) he issued out a Proclamation Pat. 6 Ioh. m. 6.
against clipped money; and established Ib. in dorso n. 3.
an Assize for Coynage. And in the same year the Ex lib. rub. in Scacc. fol.
149. b.
price of a Sore Goshauke, was by the Kings Justices fixed at xxs. and of a
mewed Goshauke at xls.

That the whole reign of this King was very unquiet, is certain enough, the
Clergy and Laity all complaining of great and many oppressions: but referring
the relation of such discontents, whence those troubles arose, unto our
Historians; I shall now come to his grant of those two so eminent and memorable
Charters; viz. Magna Charta and Charta de Foresta; taking notice only of some
circumstances conducing thereto.

About the 14th. Call. of November in the year 1214. (being the 16th. year of
King John's reign) the Earls and Barons meeting Math. Paris. in an. 1214. p.
252. n. 50.
at St. Edmunds-Bury, to confer together about the regaining of the Liberties
confirmed by the Charter of King Henry the first (which contained all those
that were granted by King Edw. the Consellor) they solemnly swore Math. Paris.
in an. 1214. p. 252. n. 50.
there, at the high Altar; that if the King should refuse to ratify them, they
would forthwith but themselves in Arms, and withdraw their allegiance from
him, until such time as by his Charter sealed he would condescend thereto. And
they farther concluded; that after Christmas following, they would all of them
repair unto him, to represent these their desires; and in the mean time, make
such provision of Horse and Arms; that in case he should recede from his Oath,
viz. to restore the Laws of his ancestors; especially those of St. Edward; and
to do right to every one, (which he made at Ib. p. 239. n. 10
Winchester upon the day of St. Margaret the Virgin the foregoing year) they
would by seizure of his Castles compel him thereto.

Which accordingly they did, Ibid 253. p. 30.
coming in a warlike posture, he then Lodging in the New-Temple at London; and
there chardged him with his said Oath made at Winchester.

The King seeing himself in this straight, by reason of their strength and
power, desired respite till Ibid. n. 40.
the Clause of Easter, to the end he might the better consider what was fit for
him, in respect of his Kingly dignity, to do: whereupon after long discourse
had, he giving Ibid. n. 40.
pledges that he would satisfy them at the time prefixed, they departed to
Ibid. n. 40.
their several homes.

But after this; consulting his own safety, he required all his subjects
throughout England, to renew Ibid.
their Fealties and Homage: and that he might the better secure himself, he
assumed Ibid.
the Cross, upon the Feast day of the Purification of the blessed Virgin next
ensuing; esteeming, that so doing, it might be some kind of protection unto him.

But the Barons, who had got Ibid. n. 50.
to their party wellnigh all the Nobility of the Realm; resolving to carry on
their designs with power, met Ibid. n. 50.
at Stamford in Easter-week with a vegreat Army; and on the Monday following,
came Ibid. p. 254. n. 10.
to Brackley: unto which place the King Ibid. p. 254. n. 10.
sent the Archb. of Canterbury, Will. Mareschall Earl of Pembroke, and some
other discreet persons, to know of them what Laws and liberties those were
which they required.

To whom they (sc. the Barons) delivered a Ibid. p. 254. n. 10.
schedule, which did, for the most part contain the ancient Laws and Customs
of the Realm; expressing, that if the King should refuse to confirm them to him
by his sealed Charter; they would make seizure of his Castles, until he did
condescend thereto. Which Schedule being brought to the King by the said Archb.
and the rest; he in great Fury Ibid. n. 20.
told them, that he would never grant unto them such liberties, whereby he
should be made their servant:

Whereof the Barons having notice, they forthwith made choice Ib. n. 30.
of Robert Fitz Walter (one of their number) to be their General, calling him
the Marshall of the Army for God and holy Church: and thereupon betook Ib. n.
30.
themselves to their Arms; and grew so numerous, that the Londoners soon gave
them entrance Ib. n. 50.
into that great City without any noise of resistance; and diverse of the
Nobility, who were with the King, did also Ib. p. 255.
join with them. So that, being in this mean and forsaken condition, having
scarce Ib. p. 255. n. 20.
seven Horsemen left with him, he sent Ib. n. 30.
Will. Marshall Earl of Pembroke to them, with some others; to signify, that he
would meet them upon a fitting day, and at some proper place, to compose all
differences, and to satisfy their demands: which was accordingly done, soon
after, in a fair large Meadow (called Quod interpretatur pratum consilii;
eoquod, ab antiquis temporibus ibi de pace regni foepius Consilia tractabantur.
Flor. Hist. in Anno 1215.
Runnimede) Ib. n. 30.
situate betwixt Stanes and Windsore; where he ratifyed Vide tenorem earundem
in Annal. Math. Paris. An. 1215. p. 255. etc. Et lib. rub. Scace. f. 234.
the Charter of liberties, called Magna Charta (quae ex part maxima Leges
antiquas, and regni consuetudines continebat, says Math. Paris.) and likewise
that of the Forests, called Carta de Foresta.

But when he had performed all this, being not satisfied that it stood with the
dignity of a King, to be thus constrained and forced; repenting of what he had
done, he caused Math. Paris p. 269. An. 1215.
his Castles to be manned and fortified, and Math. Paris. p. 264. n. 50.
sent Messengers to Pope Innocent the 3d. offering to hold this his Kingdom of
him as his feudary, in case he would by his Apostolical power Cancel these
Charters: Whereunto the Pope agreeing, he sent Ib. p. 266. n. 10.
him his Bull to that purpose, bearing date ix. Call. Sept. xviii. Pontificatus
sui: And excommunicates Ib. 270. n. 40.
the said Barons. Upon which they Ib. 278. n. 40.
called in Jews son to the King of France, and chose him their King.

But soon after this King John departed Ib. p. 288.
this life, which put a period to these great distractions for a time.

For to him succeeded his Son King Henry the third, K. H. 111.
then about the age of ix. years; who, being solemnly brought to the high Altar
in the Church of Westminster by Ib. p. 289. n. 20.
Walo the Popes Legate, and the Bishops and Noblemen of England; and taking his
Oath, Ib. p. 289. n. 20.
that he would bear reverence to God and holy Church, and exhibit Justice to
his people; abolish all evil Laws and Customs, as also cause the good Laws to
be observed etc. was then Crowned: Whereupon he received Ib. n. 30.
the Homage and Fealties of all his Nobles, the famous William Marshall Earl of
Pembroke being then chosen Governor Ib. n. 40.
of his person, and of the Kingdom: And shortly after caused those Charters,
so ratified by his Father (as has been said) to be proclaimed Claus. 2 H. 3. m.
11. in dorso.
in the several Countries of this Realm.

But forasmuch as he was then young, and therefore what he did being not held
valid; the Archbishop of Canterbury with the rest of the Peers, on the Octaves
of the Epiphany, in the year 1223. (which was in the eighth year of his reign)
Anno 1223. 8 H. 3. M. Paris. p. 316. n. 50. Flor. histor. per Math. Westminster.
required his further confirmation of those their Laws and Liberties, for which
they had so much contested with his Father: alleging, that upon the departure
of Jews (son to the King of France) out of England, both himself and all the
Nobility of this Realm, did make Oath, that those Laws and Liberties should be
kept and preserved inviolable.

Unto which demand William de Briwere, Flor. histor.
one of the said Kings Council answered, Math. Paris. p. 316. n. 50.
that they having been by force extorted from him, ought not to be observed:
But the King, well remembering the Oath which he had taken (as my Author says)
resolved not to break it; and therefore upon mature advice, sent his Precepts
Ib. 317.
to all the Shireeves throughout this Realm, requiring them; that they should
cause enquiry to be made in their several Counties, by twelve Knights or other
lawful men, upon Oath, what Liberties those were, which the people of England
enjoyed in the days of King Henry, his Grandfather (viz. King Henry the 2d.)
and to make return thereof unto the King, within xv. days next after Easter
ensuing.

But herein there was nothing at that time done: howbeit, about two years
after, Anno 1225. (9 H. 3.)
viz. in the year 1225. (9 H. 3.) the King celebrating the Feast of the
Nativity of our blessed Savior, at Westminster, with all befitting solemnity,
Ibid. p. 323. n. 10.
praesentibus Clero and populo cum Magnatibus regionis, the Clergy, Commons and
Peers being present; Hubert de Burgh (then the Kings Chief Justice) acquainted
Ibid. p. 323. n. 10.
them with the losses and injuries which had been done to the King in the parts
beyond Sea; whereby not only the King himself, but many of the Earls and Barons
had been disherited: And as the grievance was general, so he told them that the
remedy ought to be: wherefore he desired, Ibid. p. 323. n. 10.
not only their advice, but their assistance for recovery of the ancient rights
and dignities which the Crown of England had lost in those parts: representing
further to them, that a full xvth. of all the moveable goods belonging to the
Clergy and Laity throughout the Realm, might, as he thought, accomplish the
same. Unto which the Archbishop of Canterbury and the rest of the Bishops,
Earls, Barons, Abbots etc. with great deliberation, answered; Ib. n. 20.
that they would cheerfully comply with these his proposals, so that he would
grant unto them their long desired Liberties: and made Claus. 9 H. 3. in dorso
m. 13.
performance thereof accordingly.

Whereunto the King then assented; Math. Paris. p. 323. n. 20. [Vide etiam
Claus. 9 H. 3. in dorso m. 14.]
forthwith causing several Charters to be Sealed with his Seal; and sent Math.
Paris. p. 323. n. 20. [Vide etiam Claus. 9 H. 3. in dorso m. 14.]
into every County of this Realm: and into those Counties, wherein any Forest
lay, he sent two; viz. one of their Common Liberties, and the other of the
Liberties of the Forest.

All which being done, a certain day was appointed, within a Month after
Easter, that xii. Knights, or other lawful men should be chosen Math. Paris.
p. 323. n. 20. [Vide etiam Claus. 9 H. 3. in dorso m. 14.]
out of every County, who upon Oath should distinguish betwixt the new and old
Forests; so that all those that were afforested after the first Coronation of
King Henry the 2d. (Grandfather to the then King) might be deaff^rasted.

And accordingly the said Hugh de Nevill (chief Justice of the Forests) and
Brian de L^isle, with other special persons assigned, were sent (...) p. 324.
n. 3^.
throughout all England, for to make choice of xii. Knights or other freemen,
to p^rambulate the bounds of the Forests, upon Oath; and determine what should
remain, and what be deafforested: All which in every respect was punctually
(...)
performed.

But notwithstanding all this, about two years after, in a great Council held
at O^ford, in the Month of February; the King declaring (...)
himself then to be of full age, and thenceforth out of tutelage; expressed,
(...)
that he would for the future take the reigns of Government into his own hands;
and thereupon quitted the Bishop of UUinchester as his Guardian; and applied M
Paris^ p. 336. n. 30.
himself to the Counsels of Hubert de Burgh his Chief Justice.

And at this Convention, he caused M Paris^ p. 336. n. 30.
all the Charters of the Liberties of the Forests throughout the whole Realm,
(...)
to be cancelled, after they had been enjoyed two years: praetending that they
were obtained from him in his minority, whilst he was in Custody, and had
neither power over himself nor his Seal, and therefore ought not to be of force.

At that time also it was made M. Paris. p. 336. n. 40.
known to all persons, as well religious as others; that they who desired a
confi^mation of their Charters of Liberties, Nov^m Sigilpu^.
should have them renewed and sealed with his new Seal; forasmuch as the King
would not repute any to be valid, Flor. hist.
which were not so ratifyed; paving for the same according to their abilities,
which was left to the discretion of the chief Justice.

But these things so startled the Barons, that on the Ides of July then next
following, they petitioned (...) 7. n. 40.
the K^^g, in a kind of minatory way, that, he would forthwith restore unto
them these their Charters of the Forest Liberties, sealed, which he had caused
so to be cancelled at Oxford: unto whom for the present he only gave good
words, but afterward, viz. in 21 of his reign, having in a full convention of
the Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, Barons, Knights and freemen of England met
together at UUestminster, in Parliament, on the Octaves of S. Hillarie, which
is the 21th. of January, obtained a grant Claus. 21 H. 3. in dorso m. 8.
of the xxxth. part of all their movable goods, upon the 28th. day of the same
Month he sealed them a new Charter Autogr. in bibl. Cotto^.
in confirmation of the former, which he so made in his minority, whereunto all
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal then assembled in that Parliament, as it
seems (for the greatest part of them are specially named) were witnesses, and
upon the xvith. of March then next following, he issued out his special Claus.
21 H. 3. m. 15.
Precept to all the Shireeves of this Realm, to publish them again, and see
them firmly observed.

Nor was all this thought enough, for in the Parliament held at Marlebridge in
52 of his reign he Stat. de Marlebridge cap. 5.
ratified them again.

It would be too great a step out of my way, to tell the whole story of the
particular discontents and differences that happened after this, betwixt many of
the then most potent Peers, and the King, which continued henceforth more or
less, till near the end of his long reign.

But my business here, being chiefly to point at the Laws, which were made in
this Realm, in those elder times; and not to descend lower than these memorable
Statutes of Magna Carta and Carta de Foresta, I will now hasten, to the full
and final confirmation of them, which was not absolutely accomplished till the
xxvth. year of King Edward the first: resolving to touch upon no other Laws,
made in this Kings reign, or after, forasmuch as they are all made public by
the Press, in sundry Volumes since the time of King Henry the eighth.

Having therefore already taken notice, that Magna Carta and Carta de Foresta,
first made by King John, and ratifyed by this King, in the 9th. year of his
reign (he being then, but xix. years of age) were cancelled at OxFord, about
two years after; I shall now show the cause, why the Confirmations of them in
this Kings time, were not kept inviolable, but that they were again ratified by
his son and successor King Edward the first.

Most certain it is, that the Nobility, in those days enjoying vast
possessions, had no small retinues: nay some of that Degree esteemed themselves
no less than petty Princes, as may seem from that bold answer given by John
Earl Warren, when he was called before the King's Justices, to show by what
title he held his lands. -- Produxit in medium (says my MS. in bibl. Bodl.
inter ^odices Digh. [n. 170.] f. 17. b.
Author) Gladium antiquum evaginatum; and ait, Ecce Domini mei, Ecce warantum
meum! Antecessores mei, vero, cum Will. Bastardo venientes, conquesti sunt
terras suas Gladio, and easdem Gladio defendam a quocunque eas occupare
volente: non enim Rex terram per se devicit and subjecit, sed progenitores
nostri fuerunt cum eo participes and coadjutores. He drew out an old Sword, and
told them, by that title he held them: for my Ancestors (quoth he) coming into
England with William the Bastard, acquired their lands by the Sword; and by the
Sword I resolve to hold them, against any man who would have them: For he did
not Conquer and subdue this Nation of himself; but our progenitors were sharers
and assistants with him, etc.

And as their estates and power was very great, so were their animosities one
against another; some being not willing to endure any equal, others no
superior: insomuch, as by fomenting discontents and jealousies amongst the
vulgar (with whom they had no small interest) they at length got themselves
into a warlike posture; in which, discerning their strength, and how far they
had possessed the people with a dislike of the Government, by infusing into their
giddy heads strange fears of oppression and slavery from the King; and what
glorious Reformers they themselves would be, they came, at length to Oxford,
with a powerful Army, and there forced the Kings consent to certain Ordinances
of their own framing; which, in substance were no other, than to divest him of
his Soverein Power, and to plant it in themselves, leaving him nothing but the
name of a King. In order whereunto, after the overthrow of that Army in the
Battle of Jews (which he had raised for his defense against those their
Usurpations) and the gaining of his person, and the person of Prince Edward his
eldest Son into their hands; they, in his name summoned a Parliament, of such
of the great Barons and others, who were of their party (as by the Writs Claus.
49^ H. 3. in. 11^ in dorso, in s^edula.
bearing date at UUorcester 14 Dec. and at Woodstoke 24 Dec. 49 H. 3.
appears) to meet at London on the Octaves of St. Hillary then next ensuing:
and likewise directed Precepts Claus. 49^ H. 3. in. 11^ in dorso, in s^edula.
to every Shireeve through England, to send thither two Knights out of each
County; as also to the Cities and Buroughs, the like number of Citizens and
Burgesses; and to the Barons of the Cinque Ports a certain number of their
discreetest men; whereby they might with the faire^ color settle the Realm,
and please the people with some shadow of those fair Liberties, for which they
so long had seemed to contend: But the little less than miraculous escape of
Prince Edward out of their Custody, happened soon after; by which means, he
giving them Battle at Evesham, about the beginning of August following,
obtained so clear a Victory, as did then put an end to their usurped power.

Having spoken thus much by way of Preamble, Magna Carta.
touching the confirmation of those two notable Charters (viz. Magna Carta, and
Carta de Foresta) I now come to the thing it self; which was done Chron H.
Knighton col. 2511. and 2512.
in the Parliament held at Chron. W. Thorn col. 1977. l. 24.
Linco^ne in the 25th. year of King Edw. the first's reign. By which Act it was
appointed; Annal. (...). Walsiagh. in a. 1298.
that there should be sent into every County of this Realm, the formal recital
and solemn Confirmation of them both, under the said King's great Seal, as well
to his Justices of the Forest as others; and to all Shireeves of Shires; and
all other the King's Officers, as also to all the Cities throughout the Realm,
together with the Writs, in which were contained the full cause of the
publication thereof; and likewise a command to let the people know, that the
King had so confirmed them in all points: And that all his Justices, Shireeves,
Mayors, and other Ministers, who under him had the Laws of the land to guide,
should allow them in judgment, so often as they might happen to be pleaded,
before them; viz. the great Charter as the Common Law, and the Charter of the
Forest for the wealth of the Realm. All which was done accordingly; and
sentences of Excommunication and Execration pronounced, by Robert Kilwarby at
that time Archb. of Canterbury, against the Violaters, and Infringers of them:
For which Confirmations the said King had then a grant T. Wal^. ut supra.
from the Commonalty of this Realm, of the ixth. penny of their goods, and from
the Clergy of the Province of Canterbury a xth. and of York a fifth.

But the next year following, Pope Clement the 5th. revoked this Sentence of
Excommunication, as by his special Bull (a Copy whereof I have Penes Math. Hale
eq. aur. Capi^^lem Baronem S^a^^. An. 1663.
seen) appears, which (though it needed not) might perhaps occasion that
further Confirmation of those Charters, together with the addition T. Wal^. in.
An. 1301.
of certain Articles, directing how the transgressors against them should be
proceeded with, made in the Parliament held at London 28 E. 1. called Articuli
super Cartas.

Cap. V.
Of Parliaments.
BY what has been said, it clearly therefore appearing, that these good and
wholesome Laws were made by the ancient Kings of this Realm; is is not to be
doubted, but they were so framed upon great and mature deliberation had and
taken with the most eminent men for powand prudence in their respective
Dominions; Cap. 5.
the Convention of which persons, was by the Britans called Kyfr-y-then, by
reason that Laws were therein made: for that they had such meetings before the
Romans arrival here, may very well be inferred from the words Lib. 5. de bello
Gallico.
of Caesar -- Summa imperii bellique administrandi, communi concilio permissa
est Cassibellano. And Tacitus seems to ascribe the success that the Romans had
at last against them, unto their neglect in the due holding of such public and
common Councills -- Tacitus in vita Agric. cap. 12.
quod in commune non consulerunt.

By the English Saxons these Assemblies were termed itena gemote, id est a
meeting of Wise men.

It is reported by Venerable Beda, K. Ethelbert.
Lib. 2. cap. 5. Eccl. hist.
of Ethelbert King of Kent (of whom I have already made mention) that -- inter
caetera bona, quae genti suae consulendo conferebat, etiam Decreta illa
Iudiciorum, juxta exempla Romanorum, cum consilio Sapientum constituit: quae,
conscripta Anglorum sermon, hactenus habentur etc. -- That amongst other good
things he did, for his people, he constituted Laws, with the advice of his wise
men, according to the example of the Romans. Whence Dr. Duck, in that learned
discourse De usu and authoritate Iuris Civilis Romans in Dominiis Principum
Christianorum. Impr. Land. 1653. p. 134.
of his lately published, observes; that though we find but few footsteps of
the Roman Laws amongst the Saxons and Danes, as more minding such as might best
curb the Britans and English: yet those of their Kings, who excelled others in
piety and virtue, did in their Decrees, and making of Laws, often imitate the
Romans: and herein does instance King Ethelbert, beforementioned, of whom Beda
so makes mention; that he did frame his Laws cum consilio Sapientum juxta
exempla Romanorum.

Which practice of King Ethelbert was not unsuitable to that of the Germans,
from whom their offspring, the Saxons (our ancestors) might most likely take
their pattern: for Tacitus, De moribus Germanorum.
speaking of their Custom in Lawmaking, says -- De minoribus rebus principes
consultant; de majoribus omnes: ita tamen, ut ea quoque quorum penes plebem
arbitrium est, apud principes pertractarentur.

But to descend lower: King Ina.
of Ina King of the West Saxons, I find, that he thus begins his Laws. Chron.
Ioh. Brompt. col. 761. l 40.
Ego Ina, Dei gratia, West Saxonum Rex, exhortatione and doctrina Ceonridi
patris mei, and Heddae Episcopi mei, Vide. Coke's Reports lib. ix. in Prooem.
Et Iani Angl. p. 124.
and Herchenualdi Episcopi mei, and omnium Aldermannorum meorum, and seniorum
sapientum Regni mei, multaque congregatione Servorum Dei; sollictus de salute
animarum nostrarum, and de statu Regni mei, constitui etc. Here is the advice
and counsel, we see, of two Bishops, and all his Earls, with other persons of
his Kingdom, eminent for their wisdom.

The next is King Alfred, K. Alfred.
who beginning his reign in the year DCCC-Lxxiii. thus expresses -- Ib. col.
820. l. 7.
Ego tunc Aelfredus Rex, haec collegi etc. consilio sapientum meorum etc. To
the like purpose does King Athelstan K. Athelsta^
begin Ib. col. 850. l. 9. and 855. l. 40.
his; and King Edmund K. Edm^^^
Ib. col. ^59. l. 42.
his. So King Edgar, King Edgar.
Ib. col. 871. l. 13.
Hoc est Institutum, quod Edgarus Rex consilio sapientem suorum instituit etc.
A^^ that also in a Parliament held at Sa^^sbury, cunctis Ib. col. 866. l. 51.
Regni proceribus congregatis. And likewise King Ethelred K. Ethelred.
Ib. col. 893. l. 66. and col. 895. l. 65.
Rex and Sapientes sui condixerunt etc.

King Canutus K. Canute.
begins his thus; Ibid. col. 914. l. 26. and col. 922. l. 35.
Haec sunt Instituta Kanuti Regis Anglorum, Danorum, and Norwiganorum,
venerando Sapientum ejus consilio etc.

Now who these Sapientes were, may best as (I presume) be discerned from the
words of Ingulphus (taken notice of by the learned Seldom) where speaking of
King Eldred, he says; that, S^ld. tit. of Honor p. 633.
in Festo Nativi^atis beatae Mariae, Anno DCCCCxlviii. universi Magnates regni;
per Regium edictum summoniti; tam Archiepiscopi, and Episcopi, ac Abbates, quam
caeteri totius Regni proceres, and optimates, Londoniis convenerant ad
tractandum de negotiis publicis totius Regni, which words optimates being here,
in the place of seniorum sa pientum, in the preamble of Ina's Law before
recited, may (doubtless) as well be interpreted to include the representatives
of the people, or Commons, as those words of seniorum sapientum in Mr. Lamb.
Archaeon edit. Land. 1635. p. 249. and 250.
Lambard's conceit do: Parliament
who says; that the Assemblies of such as the King convened, being in some old
Laws called itena gemote, id est, a meeting of the wise men, and in Ib. p. 252.
others Commune Concilium, id est the Common Council of the Realm, did involve
the Commons: And to enforce the argument more strongly, does note; Ib. p. 259.
that those Towns, which were the ancient demesne of the Crown (id est in the
possession of King Edward the Confessor, and his ancestors) having ever since
prescribed to be privileged from sending Burgesses to Parliament; it must
consequently follow, that there were Parliaments before that time, unto which
they of other places did send Burgisses.

Against which opinion, K. Edward. Confessor.
I shall not take upon me to argue; but rather from the words of King Edward
the Confessors Laws; Lamb. de priscis Angl. leg. Cap. 8. f. 128. 8.
which were made a Rege, Baronibus and populo, conclude, that the Commons were
then representated in some or other manner.

And thus much for the Saxons times in which we have so little light: Et. R.
Hoved. f. 343. b. l. 50.
I come now to the practice after the Norman Conquest; wherein the first guide
to me, is an old In bibl. Bodl. inter cod. MS. per w^^l. Archiep. Cant. l.
^ollatas [E. 80. fol. 64. b.]
Chronicle, written in King Stephens days; which speaking of King William the
first (commonly called the Conqueror) -- thus goes on Eac he aer sith
urdfulle: THria he baer her cynehelm* aelc gear sa often sa he aer on
Englalande: on Eastron he hine baer on ceastre on Pentecosten on estmynstre, on
mideintre on gleaceastre; and then aeron mid him ealle tha rice men ofer ealle
Englalande, arcebiscipas and leodbs abbodas and eorlas thegnas and cnihtas.

id est -- K. William Conq.
Also he was a person of great worth (or honor) Thrice he wore his Crown each
year, as often as he was in England: At Easter he bore it at Winchester; at
Whitsontide at Westminster, and at Christmas at Gloucester; and then were with
him all the wealthy (or potent) men throughout England, Archbishops, Bishops,
Abbots, Earls, Barons, and Knights. Whence may be inferred; that, if those
meetings were his Communia Concilia (as doubtless they were) then did some of
those represent the common people. For that they were represented in his great
Councills, seems clear to me; partly from this observation of Rog. Hoveden. In
An. 10^0. p. 60^.
viz. Willielmus Rex, quarto anno regni sui, Consilio Baronum suorum, fecit
summoniri per universos Consulatus Angliae, Anglos nobiles and sapientes, and
sualege eruditos; ut eorum and jura and consuetudines ab ipsis audiret: electi
igitur de singulis totius patriae Comitatibus viri xii jure jurando
confirmarunt; Primo, ut quoad possent, recto tramite, neque ad dextram, neque
ad sinistram partem divertentes, Legum suarum consuetudinem, and sancita
patefacerent: nil praetermittentes, nil addentes, nil praevaricando mutantes: A
Legibus itaque sanctae matris Ecclesiae, sumentes exordium etc.

And partly from what Sulcardus, MS. in bib^^ Cotton. sub effig^^ Vespasiani A.
1^
sometime a Monk of Westminster, has noted; viz. that the said King in his
Charter of ratification of the liberties of that Church, after he had
subscribed his own name, with the sign of the Cross, adding many of the Clergy
and Nobles; instead of cum multis aliis, has these words -- multis praeterea
illustrissimis virorum personis, and Regum principibus diversi ordinis omissis,
qui suniliter huic confirmation^, piissimo affectu testes and fautores fuerunt.
Hii etiam illo tempore a regia potestate e diversis provinciis and urbibus, ad
universalem Synodum, pro causis cujuslibet Christianae Ecclesiae audiendis and
tractandis, ad praescriptum celeberrimum Synodum, quod Westmonasterium,
dicitur, convocari etc.

Whether any solemn Convention of this kind was held by King William the 2d. K.
William Rufus.
(commonly called William Rufus) I cannot say: but certain it is, that when his
Brother Robert, purposing an expedition to the Holy land, sent to him to borrow
ten thousand marks of Silver, with promise he should have Normandy in pledge for
it; to satisfy his desire therein, he required from the great men of England, a
loan of what money they were able to spare: Whereupon, says my Author, (...)
Impr. (...)) Idem. ^ Hoved.
the Bishops, Abbots, and Abbesses brake in pieces the silver and gold
Ornaments of their Churches; the Earls, Barons, and Shireeves, suos milites and
villanos spoliaverunt, and Regi non modicam summam auri and argenti detulerunt
-- id est, took from their Tenants and brought a great deal of gold and silver
to the King.

Whence it being clear, that the Lords then answered for their Tenants; it may
the more likely be presumed, that they at other times represented them in all
great and public Councills.

Of King Henry K. Henry I.
the first it is certain, Math. Paris. Iani Angl. p. 78.
that per Commune Concilium Baronum he was Crowned; which words, as the same
Mr. Lambard Archaeon p. 261.
deemeth, do signify the Commonalty as well as the Nobles; considering, that
the Germans do render the word Baro, by Frehere; id est, a Freeman: whence it
was (says he) that the Citizens of London were at that time called Barons, and
the Burgesses of the Cinqueports ever since been known by that name; as also,
that the Courts in every Manor are termed Courts Baron, though the Lords of
them are of no higher degree than Gentlemen: And he further adds; Ib. p. 262.
that it is not altogether without ground said; that both the Nobility and
Commonalty of the Realm were meant under these words, viz. the Barons of the
Realm, and the rather, because that expression is accompanied with the word
Common Council, by which all our Writs grounded upon old Statutes, do intend
the Parliament; and that our old Historian Math. Paris. does afterward use the
words Communis assensus Baronagii when he purposes to signify a just
Parliament: and moreover, the better to illustrate that it is so meant, he
voucheth this Writ, Pat. 6 Ioh. in dorso.
directed by King John to the Shireeve of Roteland in 6 of his reign, viz. Rex.
etc. Vicecomiti Roteland etc. Sciatis, quod provisum est, cum assensu
Archiepiscoporum, Comitum, Baronum, and omnium fidelium nostrorum Angliae, quod
novem milites per totam Angliam, inveniant decimum militem, been paratum, equis
and armis, ad defensionem Regni nostri: Et quod illi novem milites invenient
decimo militi, quolibet die, duos solidos ad liberationem suam etc.

It appears Chron Ioh. Brompton col. 1166. l. 61.
also, that the same King Henry the first, in An. 1103. iii. Kal. Aug. Clero
and populo ad Concilium Londoniis congregato, astantibus Archiepiscopis and
Episcopis, caeteraque multitudine maxima procerum and magnatum, statuit etc.

And that King Henry the second held a great Council at Clarendon in An. 1164.
-- concurrentibus Episcopis and proceribus, are the words Ymag. Hist. col. 536.
l. 52.
of Radulfus de Diceto; -- congregato Clero and populo quoth R. Hoved. in an.
1164. (p. 493. l. 12.)
R. Hoveden: who further speaking of the transactions there, says Ibid. l. 23.
-- tunc praecepit Rex universis Comitibus and Baronibus Regni etc.

And Benedictus Abbas in the life of the same King Henry the 2d. has this
expression In bibl. Cotto^. sub effigy Iu^^i A. 11. f. ^2. b.
. An. MCLxxvi -- Circafestum S. Pauli venit dominus Rex usque Northampton, and
magnum ibi celebravit Concilium de Statutis regni sui, coram Episcopis,
Comitibus and Baronibus terrae: and coram eis, per consilium Regis Henrici
filii sui, and per consilium Comitum, and Baronum, and militum, and hominum
suorum, hanc subscriptam Assisam fecit, and eam teneri praecepit, scil. quod
Regnum suum divisit in sex parts, per quarum singulas, tres Iusticias
constituit, quorum nomina haec sunt, and sic Provincias inter eos divisit.

Hugo de Cressi etc.

So likewise King Richard the first in An. 1189. -- Chron. Ioh. Brompton col.
1166. l. 61.
congregatis Episcopis, Comitibus, and Baronibus Regni sui, Parliamentum
Londoniis etc. habuit.

From which testimonies it may seem that the people were in some sort
represented.

But that which makes it most evident, by whom they were so represented, is
King John 's great Charter in 17 of his reign; whereby he confirmed See the
last Chapt. where he swore to restore the Laws of his ancestors, especially of
King Edward.
to the people of England, their ancient rights and liberties, for which they
had so much contended; the words whereof run thus -- Nullum Scutagium vel
Auxilium ponam in Regno nostro, nisi per Commune consilium Regni nostri; nisi
ad Corpus nostrum redimendum; and ad Primogenitum filium nostrum militem
faciendum; and ad Primogenitam filiam nostram semel maritandam etc. he goes on
-- Et ad habendum Commune Consilium Regni de Auxiliis assidendis, aliter quam
in tribus casibus praedictis; and de Scutagiis assidendis, submoneri faciemus
Archiepisopos, Abbates, Comites, and majores Barons Regni, singillatim, per
literas nostras: Et praeterea faciemus submoneri, in generali, per Vicecomites
and Ballivos nostros, omnes alios qui in Capite tenent de nobis, ad certum
diem, scil. ad terminum xl. dierum ad minus, and ad certum locum in omnibus
literis submonitionis illius, causam submonitionis illius exponens: Et sic,
facta submonitione, negotium procedat ad diem assignatum, secundum consilium
eorum, qui praesentes fuerint, quamvis non omnes submoniti venerint.

Now that all the Peers had, of ancient right, their particular Summons
accordingly, is evident enough from the testimony of Math. Paris; Impr. Tiguri
an. 1606. p. 188.
who speaking of that Parliament held at Westminster in Ao. MCCLv. 39 H. 3. and
that diverse of the Peers for want of Summons were absent, says; that the rest
of the Barons refused to answer the Kings proposals then made unto them, for
this reason -- quod omnes tunc temporis non fuerunt, juxta tenorem magnae
Chartae vocati; and ideo, sine paribus suis, tuno absentibus, n^llum voluerunt
tunc responsum dare.

And forasmuch as from the words of that great Charter (before expressed) it may
be inferred, that the same was no new grant to the people of England, but a
Confirmation of their ancient rights and liberties (as has been said) it must
then necessarily follow; that the persons, who held of the King in Capite, were
the representative of the most of the Commons, called Vide Seldea's Tit. of
Honor p. 708.
by some Barons minores; for that the whole body of the Parliament had the
title of Baronage, appears by King Henry the 3ds. Writ to the Shireeve of
Herefordshire in these words Claus. 17 H. 3. m. 7.
-- Rex Vicecomiti Heref. Praecipimus tibi, quod, si aliqua gens armata, per
Ballivam tuam, contra provisionem nuper factam apud Gloucestriam, de communi
consilio Barnagii nostri, and per totum Regnum demandatam, ad pacem and
tranquillitatem Regni nostri servandam etc. and that the dependent Tenants
consent was included in the assent of his immediate superior Lord, whose
presence was ever so required in those great Councills, need not I think be
doubted.

Not were the Commons otherwise represented than by these Tenants in Capite for
the most part of King Henry the 3^^. reign, for ought I can yet discern; it
being evident, that the said great Charter was confirmed in the 9th. year of
that King, per Commune consilium totius Regni.

But in 49 H. 3. the rebellious Barons, having at the battle of Jews got the
King and Prince into their power (as in the last Chapter has been said) they
caused Writs to be sent out in the Kings name, and under his Seal; in which,
signifying the Kingdom to be then in Peace and quiet, and the Kings desire to
establish the same to the honor of God, and benefit of his people, they issued
out Summons to diverse Bishops and Abbots, and to such of the Nobility as were
of their party, to meet at London on the Octaves of St. Hillary: and likewise
(...).
Precepts to all the Shireeves of the Realm, to send thither two Knights out of
each County, as also to the Cities and Buroughs the like number of Citizens
and Burgesses, and to the Barons of the Cinque Ports a certain number of their
discreetest men -- nobiscum, ac cum praedictis Praelatis, and magnatibus
nostris, quos ibidem vocari fecimus, super praemissis tractaturi, atque
consilium impensuri -- to treat with him the said King, and with the Prelates
and great men of the land, touching the premises, and to give their advice.

From what therefore has been spoken, it may seem that the people of England,
in those great and public Councills, were from the time of the Norman Conquest
represented by such as held of the King in Capite, until the said 49th. of H.
3. but then by two Knights for each County, and certain Burgesses for several
Buroughs, and Barons for the Cinqu^ports, as appears by this short memorial,
which is entered upon Record Ibid.
with that Writ of Summons to the Peers, viz. -- Item mandatum est singulis
Vicecomitibus per Angliam, quod venire faciant duos Milites, de legalioribus
and discretioribus militibus singulorum Comitatuum, ad Regem London. in Octabis
praedictis in forma praedicta.

Item in forma praedicta scribitur Civibus Ebor. Civibus Linc. and caeteris
Burgensibus Angliae, quod mittant etc.

Item in forma praedicta mandatum est Baronibus and probis hominibus quinque
portuum etc.

Howbeit (which is observable) this Precept of King Henry the 3d. to send two
Knights for each County etc. was when the Barons had him in their power, and
exercised Regal authority in his name: and though there were several
Parliaments in K. Edw. the firsts time before the 23th. year of his reign, yet
there is no testimony left to us upon Record, of any Summons unto them till
that year; and then the Writ Claus. 23 ^. 1. m. 4. (...) dorso.
to the Shireeves was thus -- tibi praecipimus, firmiter injungentes, quod de
Comitatu praedicto, duos Milites, and de qualibet Civitate ejusdem Comitatus,
duos Cives, and de quolibet Burgo duos Burgenses, de discretioribus, and ad
laborandum potentioribus, sine dilatione eligi; and eos ad nos, ad praedictos
diem and locum venire facias; ita quod dicti Milites plenam and sufficientem
potestatem pro se and communitate Comitatus praedicti; and dicti Cives and
Burgenses pro se and communitate Civitatum, and Burgorum praedictorum divisim
ab ipsis tunc ibidem habeant, ad faciendum quod tunc de Communi consilio
ordinabitur in praemissis.

Which form continued till 6 E. 2. and then the words run -- Claus. 6 E. 2. in
dorso m. 12.
ad faciendum and consentiendum hiis, quae tunc ibidem de Communi consilio
dicti regni nostri, favente Domino, ordinari contigerint; the like whereof has
continued ever since to this day: that to the Peers being -- super praemissis
(id est diversis arduis and urgentibus negotiis, nos and statum Regni nostri,
ac tranquillitatem and quietem populi ejusdem Regni intime contingentibus, for
the most part till 31 E. 3. but then and Ecclesiae Anglicanae praecipue
concernentibus, was added) tractaturi, and consilium impensuri. At which time,
it seems, that the Lords with their then numerous attendants were entertained
at the Kings chardge: for I find, that Writs bearing date the 30th of August,
next ensuing the date of the Summons of a Parliament held that year (which was
6 Iulii before) were directed to the Shireeves of these following Counties, for
provision of Oxen, Muttons, and Hoggs at certain prices, for the said King's
Household, in respect of his then residence at Westminster; viz. to the Shireeve
of Devon for CC. Oxen and a thousand Muttons: To the Shireeve of Hantshire for
CCC. Oxen two thousand Muttons and two hundred Hoggs: To the Shireeve of
Somerset and Dorset for six hundred Oxen and a thousand Muttons; and to the
Shireeve of Surrey and Sussex for two hundred Oxen, a thousand Muttons, and one
hundred Hoggs, a Copy of which Writ I have here thought fit to add.

Rex Rot. Fin. 6. E. 2. m. 18.
Vicecomiti Devon. salutem. Quia ad expensas Hospicii nostri, pro tempore quo
nos apud Westmonast. pro Parliamento nostro quod ibidem summoniri fecimus,
moram facere proponimus, diversa genera victualium oportet necessario nos
habere; pro quibus quidem victualibus, propter diversa and ardua negotia nos
tangentia, ad praesens satisfacere non valemus: tibi praecipimus, quod in
Balliva tua, tam infra libertates quam extra, ad majus commodum nostrum, and ad
minus dampnum hominum partium illarum id fieri poterit ducentos boves and mill
multones, ad opus nostrum emi and provideri facias per certam appreciationem;
and Indenturas inter te and illos (etc.) de quibus etiam victualibus eisdem
hominibus in xv S. Michaelis proximo futuro, sine dilatione (etc.) satisfieri
faciemus (etc.) T. Rege apud Westminster. 30 Aug.

Eodem modo scribitur vic. Suthampt. pro CCC. bobus, mill multonibus and CC.
porcis, Vicecomiti Summers. and Dorset pro DC. bobus and mill multonibus;
necnon Surr. and Suss. pro CC. bobus, mill multonibus and C. porcis.

Cap. VI.
Of Judges. Of Judges and Lawyers.

Whereof first of the King himself.
TOuching the Original authority of Governing, having spoken briefly in my
first Section of this present discourse; viz. that it was at first in the
Father of the Family, and afterward in the Kings of several Nations; it now
remains to be next enquired, in whom it is that the judicative power does
fundamentally reside: wherein let us observe what Bracton's Cap. 9. and 10.
expression is; -- Rex, and non alius, debet judicare, si solus ad id sufficere
possit, cum ad hoc per veritatem Sacramenti teneatur astrictus: Exercere igitur
debet Rex potestatem juris, sicut Dei Vicarius and minister in terra. Sin
dominus Rex ad singulas causas determinandas non sufficiat; ut levior sit illi
labor, in plures personas, partito onere, eligere debet viros sapientes, and
timentes Deum, and ex illis constituere Iusticiarios.

The King, and no other, ought to judge, if he alone were able to perform that
task, being thereunto obliged by the tenor of his Oath: To him therefore it
belongs to exercise the power of the Law, as Gods Vicegerent and Officer on
Earth: But if the King cannot of himself determine every controversy; to the
end his labor may be the less, by dividing the trouble amongst diverse persons,
he ought to choose men of wisdom, fearing God; and out of them to constitute
Judges.

Consonant whereunto is that expression of King Edward the first, in the
beginning of his Book of Laws, called Breton Breton impt. Land. per Rob. Redman
( temp. H. 8.) f. 1. b.
, where, having declared, that he is Gods Vicegerent, and that he has
distributed his chardge into several portions, as being not able alone to hear
and determine all the complaints of his subjects; he thus goes on -- Nous
volons que nostre jurisdiction etc. -- We will, that our own jurisdiction be
superior to all the jurisdictions of our Realm; so that in all Felonies,
Trespasses, Contracts, and in all other actions personal or real, we have power
to give, or cause to be given, such judgments as do appertain (without any
other Process) wheresoever we know the direct truth, as Judges.

And hence it is, that the King being Iusticiae fons and origo, the head and
Fountain of Justice, that appeals from such as are his Ministers for
distribution of Justice, in case they fail in performing of that their trust,
are made to him himself; as is evident from those Laws of King Edgar, whereof I
have already briefly touched; where it is said Leges Edgari edit. per Lamb.
-- Nemo in lite Regem appellato, nisi quando domi jus consequi non poterit etc.

Cap. VII.
Of the Justice of England.
THe first and principal of those unto whom the Saxon Kings of this Realm did
commit that general trust of administering Justice universally under them (of
whom I have seen any direct mention) were Ailwin, H. Hunt. hist. lib. 6. Ian.
Angl. p. 128. 129.
the pious founder of Ramsey Abbey, then called totius Angliae Aldermannus,
Tostius H. Hunt. hist. lib. 6. Ian. Angl. p. 128. 129.
Earl of Northumberland, and Harald H. Hunt. hist. lib. 6. Ian. Angl. p. 128.
129.
Son to Godwyn Earl of Kent: But after the Norman Conquest, he who had that
power given to him, was termed Capitalis Iusticia, or Iusticiarius Angliae, of
which rank were Odo Bishop of Bayeux, and William fitz Osbern: and it is not
unlike, but that Lanfranke Archbishop of Canterbury, Goisfride Bishop of
Constance, and Robert Earl of Moretone had jointly the administration of the
same Office, during some part of the Conquerours reign; for I find, Regist. de
Eiy in bibl. Cotton. sub effigy Titi A. 1. f. 25. b.
that several precepts were directed to them from that King, which do imply no
less: So also Richard Basset and Alberic de Vere in some part of King Henry the
firsts reign, as may seem by a special Precept Ex ipso autogr. in bibl. Cotton.
to them from that King, though I have rankt them asunder in my Chronologick
Tables.

And Radulphus de Diceto (sometime a Canon of St. Paul's Cathedral in London) in
his Annals of King Henry the 2ds. Cap. 7.
reign, says, Hist. Angl. Script. antiqui col. 606. l. 7.
the Bishops of Winchester, Ely, and Norwich, were constituted Chief Justices
of England ( id est had the administration of that high place) in Anno 1179.
(which was the very year that Richard de Luci, quiting that great Office, took
the habit of a Canon regular in the Abbey of Lesnes of his own Foundation:) And
the reason he there gives, why these Ecclesiastic men were thus employed by
that King in such eminent temporal affairs, is not unworthy observation --
Transcensis igitur omnibus (says he) quae mutabilitati poterant subjacere de
facili, Rex ad Sanctuarium Dei recurrens, Wintoniensem, Elyensem, Norwicensem
Episcopos archi-Iusticiarios Regni, sed certis in locis, ea forsan
consideratione constituit; ut si caeteri, quos long prius praemiserat ipsum
regnantem in terra minus reveriti fuerint; isti saltem Deum Regem Regum,
hominum creatorem, judicem conscientiarum, operum retributorem revererentur
attentius and ardentius; ut nec ad sinistram declinantes, vel ad dexteram, nec
opprimerent in judicio pauperem, nec causam divitis ob acceptionem muneris
colorare praesumerent: Itaq, si se negotiis secularibus, contra Canonum
instituta Praesules immiscuerint, and ob hoc trahantur in causam, Regis
instantiam, Regis intentionem piam, suam actionem Deo placendam, plurimis
profuturam, ab hominibus collaudandam rigori Canonum instanter opponant: sic
reatum culpae, fraternae caritatis intuitus poterit mitigare.

Of these that had the Office of Iusticiarius Angliae Philip Basset was the
last; who was constituted in 45 H. 3. (as my Chronologick Tables do show) the
Kings Bench and Common Pleas having afterward one in each Court, who had the
appellation of Chief Justice there.

Which Philip, for his support in tht great employment, received an yearly
Pension of no less than a thousand Marks granted Rot. Liberat. 45 H. 3. m. 3.
to him, out of the Kings Exchequer at Easter and Michaelmass by even portions;
as Hugh le Bygod his predecessor Liberat^e 44 H. 3. m. 7.
did.

Cap. VIII.
Of Lawyers. Cap. 8.

IT is believed by some, that we had not many persons in this Realm, other than
of the Clergy, who were learned in the Laws, before the Norman Conquest; those
ages being so illiterate, by reason of the several inroads made upon them by
the barbarous Northern Nations, which necessitated the Nobility and Gentry to
exercise themselves in martial feats. And from this their ignorance of
Letters, probable it is, that the decision of most controversies and Trials in
Cases Civil, was so much by Combat; and in Criminal, by Fire and Water Ordeal.

And to this opinion I am the more inclined; in regard, that upon the
determining of that great controversy, which was betwixt Lanfranke Archb. of
Canterbury, and Odo Earl of Kent, in the time of King William the Conqueror,
it Ex Textu Roff.
appears; that Agelric Bishop of Chichester, was chiefly employed -- Ut Legum
terrae sapientissimus; qui, ex praecepto Regis, advectus fuit in una Quadriga,
ad ipsas antiquas Legum consuetudines discutiendas and edocendas -- Brought
thither in a Chariot, to discuss, and instruct them in the ancient Laws and
Customs of the land, as the most skillful person in the knowledge of them. As
also, that in the time of King William the Conqueror one Alfwin Regist. de
Abendon in bibl. Cotton. sub effigy Claudii C. 9. f. 138. a.
Rector of Suttun, and diverse Monks of Abingdon, amongst which Sacolus and
Godric are specially remembered, Ib. f. 134. a.
were persons so expert in the Laws, that others in diverse parts did easily
submit to their judgment.

And of the like condition ( viz. Clerical) was that Ranulph, in King William
Rufus his reign, whom Will. of Malmesbury De gestis Regum Angl. lib. 4....
calls invictus Causidicus, an unvanquish'd Lawyer: Nor, in truth, were there
many other in those days, Vid. Consuet. Norm. cap. ix.
as may seem from the words of that famous Historian, in his complaint of the
enormities of that time; for he says Ib. lib. 4. f. 69. b. l. 15.
Nullus Clevicus nisi Causidicus (it being long after this, Of Lawyers and
Judges.
that there were any settled places for Students of those our Laws, called the
Common Law, as I shall hereafter show): the first restraint of the Clergy, for
practicing publicly in that kind (which I have yet observed) being about the
beginning of King Henry the thirds reign; where Richard Poor then Bishop of
Sarisbury, amongst other his Ecclesiastical Constitutions, made in the year
MCCxvii. (2 H. 3.) under the title of that de bono Pacis, has these words --
Spelm. Council. Tom. 2. sub an. 1217.
Nec advocati sint Clerici, vel Sacerdotes in foro seculari, nisi vel proprias
causas, vel miserabilium personarum prosequantur.

But though the Clergy were thus restrained, as to their Pleading in secular
Courts, there was not the like restriction of Ecclesiastical persons for
sitting as Judges in those tribunals: for, from that Scil. 2 H. 3.
very time, of the Canons in one Cathedral ( viz. St. Paul's in London) I find
(besides some that were Lord Chancellours of England, Keepers of the great
Seal, or Lords Treasurers, as my Chronologick Tables will sufficiently
manifest) these several persons, here named, who were Justices in some of the
Courts at Westminster, or Itinerant, before the 6th. year of King Edw. 1. reign
(which is not above Lx. years time) viz.

Martin de Patshull in 2 H. 3. Will. de Eboraco in 11 H. 3. in 18 H. 3.
Rob. de Ros and Alex. de Swereford
John de Gatesden in 34 H. 3. Gilb. de Segrave in 35 H. 3. Egid. de Erdinton in
36 H. 3. Rog. de Wyrecestre in 38 H. 3. Herveius de Borham in 49 H. 3. Raphe de
Hengham in 55 H. 3. Solomon de Roff. (id est de Roucestre) and Raphe de
Frenyngham in 3 E. 1. and Philip de Wilegheby in 6 E. 1.
Nor were the Judges in those Courts of Justice, from the time of the Norman
Conquest, until King Henry the thirds reign, frequently other than such
Ecclesiastic persons, as might easily be demonstrated; there having been some
of them Canons of Paul's also; viz.

Hugh de Bocland, Justice of England in King Henry 1. time. Godfrey de Luci,
one of the Judges in King Henry the 2ds. time. John Common a Justice Itinerant
in the same Kings time. Thomas de Husseburne, a Judge in 9 R. 1. Eustace de
Fauconberge in 3 Ioh. and Henry de Northampton in 4 Ioh.
As ^^^^reth by an ancient Manuscript, written soon after the beginning of King
Edw. the firsts time, and now in the Custody of the Dean and Chapter of Paul's.

Cap. IX.
Courts of Justice.
THat these originally flowed from the same Fountain that all Laws did, viz.
Necessity, there can be no doubt: For when by the multiplying of people,
iniquity so increased, as that contentions and differences did daily more and
more abound; it was impossible, that any one person should hear and determine
all their Causes; or any one place be of capacity sufficient to receive all the
Surers. Hence was it therefore, that Iethro advised Moses, whom God had set
over the Israelites (the first people of the World unto whom any written Laws
was delivered) as their chief Ruler, to commit the distribution of Justice,
under himself, unto several persons, and in sundry places, as in the xviii.
Chapt. of the Book of Exodus appears.

The Israelites had theirs in the Gates of their Cities, as Godwin Godw. Iew^^^
antiq. impr. Load. 1655. Lib. 2. cap. 3.
observes; and as is fully manifested from Text of Scripture, Ierem. 26. 28.
where it is said, that the Prophet Jeremiah, being condemned to die by the
Consistory of Priests, was Godw. ut supra lib. 9 Cap. 1. Ie (...). 26. Verse. 16.
by the Consistory of Princes secular, or Judges sitting in the Gate, Cap. 9.
absolved and dischardged. And the reason thereof was (as it is very probable)
partly that the equity of their proceedings might be seen by all; and partly
that none might go out of the Common way to seek for Justice.

The old Romans, as we read, had at first their Seats of Justice within their
Temples Godw. lib. 1. cap. xi. Sigonius lib. 10. cap. 28.
purposel^ to show, that Justice was a Divine thing: afterward in Godw. lib.
1. cap. 10.
Curia and Foro, in the Court and public Market place*

The Athenians had Godw. Archcol. Attic. cap. 3 and 4.
theirs also in their Temples.

The old Britains theirs in some hallowed place, as is evident from Caesar's
relation De bello Gall. lib. 6.
concerning the Druydes (whereof I have already touched.)

The Saxons, imitating the old Germans, did Iura per pagos and vicos reddere
(as Tacitus De moribus Germanorum.
expresses) distribute Justice in each town and territory; it being their
Custom so to do; -- in more fuit, says he, ut unusquisque Agricolis suis jus
diceret. For which purpose, Ioh. Pomavius.
twelve of the most eminent men for their wisdom and worthiness, were made
choice of, from amongst others, to ride several Circuits, for the seeing of
Justice done, and good Customs observed. And so it is most like they did here,
after they had dominion in this Realm; it being nothing probable, that the
people, from all parts could repair to the King himself (the Fountain of
Justice:) But, at length, the same Necessity, which taught former ages how to
frame and establish some Government, with such Laws as might conduce to each
man's better enjoying the fruits of his own industry and pains, did farther
instruct the succeeding times, in sundry particulars, for more effectual and
easy ways in distribution of Justice.

Hence was it, that this Realm became first divided into Counties, or Shires,
by King Egbert (about the year of Christ DCCC.) and those into Hundreds,
afterward, by King Alfred: For when he was sole Monarch; like as the Germans
(our ancestors) as Tacitus also expresses, kept Courts, and ministered Justice
in every territory and town, and had an hundred men out of the Common people,
as Companions and assistants to perform that business: even so, as Ingulphus
Ingulphi hist. f. 495. b.
observes, he first divided (or rather renewed the division of) England into
Counties; by reason, that the neighbor Inhabitants, after the example, and
under color of the Danes, committed great outrages and robberies. Moreover, he
caused the Counties to be parted into Centuries, id est Hundreds; and into
Decimes, id est Tithings; and commanded withal, that every Homeling, or
natural inhabitant, should be in some one Hundred and Tithing.

He likewise divided Ibid.
the Governors of the Provinces, who before were called Vice-Domini, id est
Vice-Lords, into two Offices; id est Judges, now Justices, and Vicecomites, id
est Shireeves, who still retain the same names: By whose care and industry,
peace so much flourished, within a short space, through the whole Province,
that had a Travailing man let fall a sum of money, how great soever, in the
Fields or Common high ways, if he returned thither the next morning, or a Month
after, he might be sure to find it there safe, and untouched.

And to the same purpose, but more largely, speaks Will. de Malmesbury De
gestis Regum Angl. f. 24. a. n. 40.
(an old Historian) -- By occasion, says he, and example of the Barbarians (id
est the Danes) the proper and natural inhabitants also were greedy of spoil; so
that no man could pass too and fro in safety, without weapons for his defense:
Alfred therefore ordained Centuries, which they term Hundreds; and Decimes,
which they call Tithings; that every English man, living under Law, as a liege
subject, should be within some one Hundred and Tithing. And, if a man were
accused of any transgression, he should forthwith bring in some one, out of the
same Hundred, and Tithing, who would be bound for his appearance, to answer the
Law: but he who could not find: such a surety, should abide the severity of the
Laws. And in case any man, standing thus accused, either before, or after
suretyship, fled, then all the Hundred and Tithing was to incur a Fine, to be
imposed on them by the King. By which device he brought peace into the Country
etc. Courts of Justice.


And hence was it, after these Divisions thus made, and settled; that the Court
kept in the Shire-Town, called the County Court, as also the Hundred-Court, and
Town-Courts, had their first beginnings, of which I shall say more by and by:
For besides these Courts (according to the Example of Moses, the special
Minister of Justice, appointed Exodus cap. 18.
by God; who finding himself unable to undergo the trouble of deciding all
controversies of the people, constituted Judges over Tribes, Hundreds, and
Fifties, of the multitude; unto whom he committed the determination of lesser
matters; reserving the judgment of such as were of greatest importance to his
own wisdom and sentence:) the Chief and principal place for administration of
Justice, was in that Court kept in the Kings own House, wherein he himself, or
the Iusticiarius Angliae.
Iusticiarius Angliae sat; unto which Court any man might appeal in case he
had not right done him in those inferior Courts, which were nearer home; as
appears from King Lamb. de. prises Angl. leg. cap. ^.
Edgars Law (whereof I have already taken notice) -- Nemo in lite Regem
appellat, nisi qui Domi Iusticiam consequi, aut impetrare non poterit.

And of this I have seen a notable instance in 8 or 12 H. 2. (the King being at
that time beyond Sea) Where Robert Earl of Leicester, being Iusticiarius
Angliae, upon an Appeal then made to the King, issued out his Writ to the Prior
of Ely, thus -- Robertus Comes Legrecestriae Priori de Eli salutem; Ex ipso
autogr. in bibl. Cotton.
Praecipio quod sine dilatione teneas plenum Rectum Humfrido filio Gaufridi de
terra de Dunnigelande, nisi fit feodum militis, and nisi remaneat pro Assisa
Regis: Et nisi feceris Episcopus de Ely faciat: Et nisi fecerit ego faciam. In
which precept these particulars are observable: First that the Justice of
England commands the Prior of Ely to do the complaynant right in his Court, in
case the land in question did not extend to a Knights fee, and that the
decision thereof were not to be tried by the great Assize. Next, that if the
said Prior did make neglect therein, the Bishop of Ely (whose Court was
superior to that of the Priors) should do it: And lastly, that if the said
Bishop should fail, he himself (id est, the Iusticiarius Angliae) would do it.

So likewise from King Canutus his Laws -- Nemo Regem requirat de justica
facienda, (...)
dum ei Rectum offertur in Hundredo suo etc.

And hereof we want not some testimony at this day: for the Writ of Right, (...)
being the most solemn Trial now used, runs thus, Rex etc. A. B. domino Manerii
de S. Praecipimus tibi, quod sine dilatione plenum Rectum teneas T. D. de uno
messuagio, cum pertinentiis in W. quod clamat tenere de te per liberum
servicium etc. and quod N. P. ei deforciat; (...)
Et nisi feceris Vicecomes S. faciet, ne amplius Clamorem audiamus pro defectu
Recti. Test meipso etc.

Nor has the practice in this Realm been otherwise, as may seem from these
following authorities, taken out of our famous and ancient Law-writers; viz.
Glanvill and Bracton.

-- Solent autem placita ista (scil. de Recto, says Glanvill lib. 12. cap. 6.
Glanvill) in Curiis Dominorum, vel eorum, qui loco dominorum habentur, deduci,
secundum rationabiles consuetudines ipsarum Curiarum; quae tot and tam variae,
ut sunt, in scriptum de facili reduci non possunt.

Probantur (...)
autem Curiae ipsae de Recto defecisse in hunc modum; Conquerente autem se eo
qui petit Vicecomiti in Comitatu, and Breve domini Reg. afferente; mittet
Vicecomes ad Curiam ipsam, die qua litigatoribus a Domino ipsius Curiae statuta
fuerit, aliquem servientem, ut and ille coram quatuor, vel pluribus legalibus
militibus ejusdem Comitatus, qui ex praecepto Vicecomitis illic aderunt, audiat
and videat probationem ipsius potentis, scilicet Curiam ipsam ei de Recto
defecisse in placito ipso: quod and ipse petens sic esse, suo juramento, and
cum duobus aliis id audientibus and intelligentibus, and cum eo jurantibus
probabit. Sub tali ergo solemnitate solent loquelae a^ quibusdam Curiis ad
Comitatus transferri,
and ibi de novo tractari and terminari, sine contradictione, vel recuperaone
ipsarum Curiarum, quam inde habere possunt ipsarum Curiarum domini, sive
haeredes, quantum ad illud placitum: Sin autem priusquam Curia aliqua praedicto
modo probetur de Recto defecisse, loquela aliqua ab ea ad superiorem Curiam
trahatur, poterit dominus illius Curiae, die placiti, Curiam suam ea ratione
repetere, quod nondum probata fuerit de Recto defecisse; and ita eum per
judicium retro habebit, nisi ibi probetur de Recto eam, ut dictum est defecisse.

Sciendum tamen, quod si ad Capitalem Curiam domini Reg. ita tracta fuerit
aliqua loquela, frustra vendicabit ibi quis, die Placiti, Curiam suam, nisi
tertio die ante, coram legalibus hominibus eam vendicaverit. Nullo autem die,
posito ipsi petenti, unde ipse queri possit, and just, de dilatione ei facta,
sufficit ei falsare Curiam ipsam, sub forma praescripta, quocunque loco
voluerit in feodo ipso, si dominus nullam habuerit reseantisam super feodum
ipsum, sicut ipsi domino licet Curiam suam ibidem tenere, and ipsi petenti diem
ponere, quocunque loco voluerit super feodum ipsum. Extra autem feodum ipsum
non licet ei, de jure.

Debent Ib. cap. 8.
autem impetrari Breve solummodo ad illum de quo clamat tenere is qui petit;
non ad alium, nec etiam ad Capitalem dominum: Sed quid erit, si petens ipse de
uno clamat tenere, and tenens ipse de alio teneat? Equidem in tali casu, quia
is cui Breve dirigitur placitum id tenere non potest, cum alium non possit de
Curia, unde ipse seisitus esse intelligitur injuste and sine judicio
disseisire, ex necessitate itur inde ad Comitatum, and ibi procedit Placitum,
vel in Capitali Curia, ita quod uterque Dominorum per summonitionem ibi adesse
debet; ut, utroque praesente, res agatur, sicut superius dictum est in tractatu
de warrantis.

Ad Ib. cap. 9.
Vicecomitem autem Provinciarum pertinent praedicta placita de Recto, ubi
Curiae Dominorum probantur de Recto defecisse. Et alia quaedam placita etc.

So far Glanvill: Whereunto Bracton Bracton lib. 3. cap. 7.
thus adds: -- Et sciendum, quod earum ( scilicet actionum Civilium) quae
sunt ad rem, sicut rei vendicationes per Breve de Recto, terminari debent in
Curia Baronum, vel aliorum, de quibus ipse petens clamaverit tenere, si plenum
rectum ei non voluerit, vel possit, vel sciverit. Si autem noluerit, vel non
possit, vel nesciverit; tunc probato a tenente, quod Curia Domini sit, ei de
Recto defecerit, transferri debet placitun: ad Comitatum, ut Vicecomes Rectum
teneat; and sic a Comitatu transferri possit ad magnam Curiam, ex certa, causa,
si dominus Rex voluerit, and ibi terminari.

In this magna Curia, id est, the principal Court, which was within the Kings
Palace, before him, and such Vide Scat de Clerendon 10 H. 2. peers Gerv.
Dorobera. col. 1387. cap. xi.
of his Nobles, whom he pleased to associate with himself for that purpose,
were anciently all such Pleadings, as are now distributed into the sundry
Courts of Westminster: Amongst which of the Nobility the Iusticiarius Angliae
always sat (an Officer not much unlike to the grand Seneschal of France, there
called Major Domus) In the Saxons time he was called Alderman; for so in King
Edgars days they termed Alwyn; viz. totius Angliae Aldermannus: which
Iusticiarius did, in the Kings absence, judge all causes as his Vicegerent or
deputy: but in tract of time people increasing, and suits, consequently,
growing more numerous; there were certain persons, expert in the Laws and
Customs of the land, assigned to sit with him, as his Assistants, and to
attend the hearing of all causes, that should be brought before them:
Whereupon, by little and little such great men (Barons) who had usually sat as
associates and assistants with the King, declined that service; those so joined
with the Chief Justice, being such, as by study of the Laws, were more fit to
undergo that employment.

But I return to those inferior Courts beformentioned; viz. the County Court,
Shireeves Turn; the Trihing, or Lathe, the Hundred Court, and Court Baron.

As the Realm was divided into Counties, or Shires; and the Counties into
Tribings or Lathes; and they into Hundreds, and the Hundreds into Towns or
Villages; so, for the better distribution of Justice, these each of them held a
distinct Court, having the power of that which our ancestors called Saca and
Soca; that of Saca or Sak being a privilege to hear and determine causes within
their Liberties, and to receive the amerciaments of offenders: and of Soca of
Sok to have power of holding a Court of his own Tenants, id est, Freeholders.

Of all which Courts, to the end I may give the more brief and clear account, I
will speak in order, beginning first with the Town Court, anciently called the
Hall mote, it ^^ving been in old time kept in the Hall or Chief Mansion of each
Lord of a Manor, every three weeks once, but since called the Court Baron,
id est, the Court of the Freeholders, for by that name were they long ago
styled, as the Barons of the Cinque ports have been, and are to this day.

Cap. X.
Court Baron.
THis Court so kept in the Lords Manor house, according to the usage of the
Germans, as may seem by these words of Tacitus, viz. -- Tacitus de moribus
quod jura per Pagos and Vicos reddebant, that they distributed their Justice
in every Town and Village, Germ. cap. 12.
consisted of ten Judges or Triers, called in the old English Friburgi, or
Tenmentale; who were under the Lord of the Manor (Thain or Baron.) These were
to undertake Vide Leges Edw. Cous. apud Lamb. f. 132. a.
for every Inhabitant, and to satisfy for the offense of each man. Amongst
them, there was one called Decanus, Friboroughed, or Headborough (a name
retained amongst us to this day). And by these were all Civil actions, as of
debt, trespass, detinue, or the like, which arose betwixt any of their
Township, determined: But when there was a Cause which concerned men residing
in several Seigniories; then was it transmitted to the next superior
Jurisdiction; viz. the Hundred Court, (in some places called Vide Leges Edw.
Conf. apud Lamb. fol. 134. a. quare dicitur Wapentachium. Necnon Notas v. cl.
I. Seldeni in Fortescu de Laudibus Legum Angliae cap. 24.
the Wapentak): both these being proportioned to those of the Israelites,
wherein Tribuni, Centuriones, and Decani judicabant plebem omni tempore.

And these Court Barons were, Hundred Court.
in King Henry the firsts time and afterward, held once every fortnight, until
King Henry the third, in 18 of his reign, restrained Claus. 18 H. 3. m. 10. in
dorso. Cart. 2 R. 2. m. 12. per Inspex.
them to once in every three weeks.

Cap. XI.
The Hundred Court.
THis Court in times past was called hundred gemot, and Centuriata, because
originally it was composed, either ex Hidarum aliquot centenariis (as hida de
Centum acris commonly); because it consisted of an hundred Hides of land, as an
Hide, usually, of an hundred Acres: or else because super december Decanos, and
Centum Friburgos judicabat, that it had jurisdiction over ten Deanes or an
hundred Friboroughs.

Before the Norman Conquest, it was held Leges Edw. Conf. per Lambardum sol.
136. b.
xii times in the year, viz. once every Month; and in King Henry the first
time, once Cart. 2 R. 2. m. 12. per Inspex.
every fortnight: But King Henry the 3d. in the 18th year of his reign,
ordained Claus. 18 H. 3. in dorso. m. 10.
(as of the Court Baron) that it should be held once every three weeks.

In this Court, anciently, unus de melioribus, qui vocatur Aldermannus, one of
the principal Inhabitants, called the Alderman, together with the Barons of the
Hundred (id est, the Freeholders) was judge, as may seem by the Register of
Ely; which says, that Aegelwynus Aldermannus Ex Regist. de Fly, in bibl.
Cotton. sub effigy Titi A. 1. f. 6. b.
venit ad Ely, and infra Cimitcrium, ad Aquilonalem portam Monasterii, tenuit
placitum cum toto Hundredo: and the witness of contracts, and purchases, then
were Ibid. f. 5. b. and f. 7. a. and f. 13. b.
testimonio Hundredi. Here, not only temporal causes, but Ecclesiastical were
handled, the Alderman or principal Judge, being such a one as Dei Leges and
hominum jura studebat promovere, who studied to promote the Laws of God and
man, the Bishop or Archdeacon sitting therein, with the said Alderman: which
Jurisdiction so continued until the beginning of William the Conquerours
reign, that he by a special Precept did inhibit, Cart. 2 R. 2. m. 12. n. 5. per
Inspex.
quod nec Episcopus, Cap. 12.
nec Archidiaconus de legibus Episcopalibus amplius in Hundredo placitum teneat.

Of the reuniting of these Hundreds and Wapentaks, Videsis Analecta
Anglo-Britt. cl. viri 1. Seld. lib. 2. cap. 7.
to the bodies of the Counties, according to the Act of 2 E. 3. cap. xii. See
Rot. Fin. 2 E. 3. in dorso m. 33.

Cap. XII.
The Tribing or Lathe.
HEreof the Vestigia are still in Kent, where such a conjunction of three or
four Hundreds still remains. To this Court Lamb. de priscis Angl. leg. f.
135. b.
deferebantur causae quae non poterant definiri in Wapentachiis (id est,
Hundredis) were brought Vide Leges Edw. Conf. apud Lamb. f. 134. a. sub titulo
de Centurionibus and capitalibus Friborgis.
such causes, as could not be determined in the Hundred Court.

And in this, the Barons, or Freeholders of those parts (as in the Hundred)
were Judges, as appears by the suit, which Wulstan de Delham had for Stanneie
in Cambridshire in in the days of King Edward, successor to King Edgar; the
story whereof, in brief, was this Ex proed. Registro de Ely fol. 7. a. and f.
8. b.
A certain Widow, named Aescuen, having given Stanneie, with the Fen thereunto
belonging, unto this Wulstan de Delham, he the said Wulstan bestowed it on the
Monks of Ely, Vide Seld. Tit. of Honor p. 629.
and they did let it to ferm, for a Rent of Eels, unto certain Kinsfolk of the
said Aescuen; who, having held it some time, at length retained it as their
own, sine judicio and sine lege Civium and Hundredanorum, without any judgment
or law of the Freemen and Hundreders: whereupon Agelwin the Alderman summoned
those persons, who so unjustly held it, to attend him at Ely, to answer the
same: -- Venit Wulstanus de Delham, and cum eo Barons quamplurimi illu^ ( viz.
ad Elie) ibique collectis duobus Hundredis, versus Aquilonem, ad ostium
Monasteri, Placitum habuit etc.
who declining to appear, at length the said Aegelwyn sitting at Cambridge,
held a Court there of the Freemen and Hundreders, before xxiiii Judges; where,
after open manifestation of the wrong done, Judgment was not only given, that
the said Monks should be repossest of those lands and Fen, and to receive the
arrear of the Rent; but, that the King should have a Fine from the Defendants,
for that their injurious dealing: and moreover, that certain persons, then
named, should perambulate the said land, and put the Monks into possession
thereof again.

So also, Ibid. fol. 6. a. b.
upon a great dispute betwixt the Monks of Ely and one Ulfe, concerning lands
in Chypenham, the said Aegelwyne the Alderman, Alwold his brother, and the
Abbot of Ely, with all the ancient men of the East Angles and Cambridge, met at
a Town called Hegentune, the Inhabitants of three Hundreds being there
assembled; where the claim on each part was heard, and Judgment given therein.

Moreover we find, Ibid. f. 4. a.
that the same Aegelwyne, and primates Northamptonienses, placitum habuerunt
apud Walmesford, in octo Hundredis.

And that Contracts for land were also made in such Conventions, in those elder
times, we want not several instances; of which I shall take notice of these few.

In Ex. Just. E^^en. MS in bibl. Cotton [Domitian A. 15.] f. 76. a.
Stretham quaedam vidua, Wlfled vocabulo dicta etc. There was a certain woman,
called Wlfled, dwelling in Stretham, the Widow of Siverth, who sold xxiiii.
acres of land to the Abbot of Ely; which land her father did purchase in King
Athelstans time, and she had afterward quietly enjoyed; and hoc noverat totum
Hundredum; and of this all the Hundred had knowledge.

So also in Ibid. f. 7^. a.
Chypenham, one Wine purchased Lxxx. acres, and five pieces of ground whereon
houses were built; for which he gave Cs. unto Lefsius de Frakenham; and
likewise xx acres, and one parcel of land with building on it, for xx^. And
from Wulfelm brother to Wulfin, ten acres for ten shillings: Hoc quoq, factum
est coram Hundreti testimonio; This also was done in the face of the Hundred.

And moreover, that upon a controversy touching certain lands in Swasham,
claimed by one Wulstane, the Ex praef. Regist. Elien. Eccl. in bibl. Cotton.
sub effi^ie Titi A. 1. f. 4. a.
witness of no less than eight Hundreds on the Southern side of Cambridgshire,
was produced to prove his purchase thereof.

Nor is there want of testimony, The Trihi^g or Lath.
that the like was practiced after the Norman Conquest: for I have seen an
original Deed, Penes Tho. Merburie de Merburie in com. Cestr. arm. 14 Sept.
1663.
of no less antiquity than King Henry the seconds time (as may seem by the
hand) whereby Richard de Merburie of Merburie in Cheshire, granting the whole
Lordship of Mecburie to William de Merburie, his brother and his heirs, for
certain services to him the said Richard and his heirs reserved, concludes his
Charter of donation thus; Hoc autem feci consensu and concessu domini Guarini
Vernon and haeredum meorum; and depono a me, and haeredibus meis omne jus meum
de terra praedicta, Willielmo fratri meo praedicto and haeredibus suis
imperpetuum, pro tribus marcis and dimidia, quas Willielmus frater meus
praedictus dedit mihi; partem coram omni Comitatu Cestriae, and partem in
Curiaa domini mei Guarini de Vernon, and partem coram Wapentachio de
Hathelstona; Testibus Lidulfo de Twamlowe, Hamone de Bocchintona, Gilberto
filio Nigelli, Roberto de Stochalle, Radulfo Capellano, Richardo de Vernon,
Raiero de Stanthorne, Gilberto de Bostoc, and omni Comitatu Cestriae.

And that titles of land were tried also in this Court, as well after the
Normans entrance, as in the Saxons time, above remembered, is likewise evident
from this testimony of King Henry the seconds Praecept to the Shireeve of
Norfolk. Ex ipso autogr. in bibl. Cotton.
H. Rex Angliae, and Dux Norm. and Aquit. and Comes Andegaviae, Vicecomiti suo
de Norfolc salutem. Praecipio, quod Ecclesia S. Trinitatis de Norwico teneat
ben^ and in pace, and justo, and liber^ communiam pasturam suam, quae est inter
Bescheleiam and Framingeham, sicut melius and quietius tenuit tempore Regis
Henrici avimei, and sicut dirationatum est per homines Hundredi: Et nisi
feceritis Iusticia me a faciat fieri. Test Toma Cancellario apud S. Edmundum.

Cap. XIII.
The Shireeves Turn. (...)

THis was anciently called Scyre mote (id est the meeting of the Inhabitants of
the Shire) and was held twice in the year, Vide Fietam lib. 2. cap. 52. p. 112.
long before the Norman Conquest, as appears from sundry testimonies Leves
Edgari (pene^s Lamb.) cap. 5. f. 80.
but since that, the Shireeves Turn, from the French word tour, id est vicis,
Leges Can^ti (ibid.) cap. 17. f. 108. a.
and in English Turn. Herein fate together the Bishop of the Dioces and the
Earl or Eolderman, in Shires that had Ealdermen; Solder's Tit. of Honor part.
2. cap. 5. and Sect. 5. p. 628.
and the Bishop and Shireeves in such Counties as were committed to Shireeves,
for many ages in the axons time, as from these Laws of King Edgar and Canutus,
cited in the Margent, does appear; to the end they might determine as well of
what concerned Ecclesiastical as Civil matters: the words of whose Law run thu;
Ex Vide Ian: Angl. p. 130.
omni Comitatu, bis quotonnis conventus agitor, cui quidem illtus diaecesis
Episcopus and Senator intersunto quorum alter jura divina, humana alter populum
edoceto.

In every County let there be twice a year an assembly of the people: whereat
the Bishop of the Diocese and the Earl shall be present, the one to direct in
divine, the other in humane matters.

Which so continued (the Bishop and Earl sitting therein together) until King
William the Conqueror, in a full Convention Cart. 2. R. 2. per Inspex. m. 12.
of his Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots and temporal Lords, commanded, Cart. 2. R.
2. per Inspex. m. 12.
that Ecclesiastical matters should thenceforth be handled by the Bishop in
Courts of their own; and not any more be discuss amongst secular affairs.

In this Court were also grants and contracts, anciently, upon some occasions
made: for I have seen an original deed, Pene^s Walt. Wrottesley B^tonettum an.
1662.
in 4 Edw. 1. by Alice the daughter of William de wrottesle (of Wrottesle in
Staffordshire) in her pure Widowhood, of all that land which her father gave in
frank marriage with her, unto one Henry Fitz Hugh; which thus concludes -- Data
apud Wlvrenehamptone, Cap. 14.
die Iovis proxima post festum beatorum Petri and Panli Apostolorum, anno regni
Regis Edwardi quarto, coram domino Bogone de Cnovyle, tunc temporis Vicecomite
Staff. and Salop. and magnum Turnum suum ibidem eodem die celebrante:
Hiis testibus Willielmo domino de Burtone, Will. de Caldewall, Petro de eadem,
Roberto Buffere de Penna, Roberto de Hagele in Penna, and multis aliis.

But it may seem, notwithstanding these old Laws before cited, that the
Shireeves did keep their Turns oftener than twice in a year, before the Statute
of Magna Charta in 17 Iohannis: for by that Statute it was decreed, that no
Shireeve or his Bailiff* should keep his Turn in the Hundred, but twice in a
year; and no where but in due place and accustomed; viz. once after Easter, and
again after Michaelmass Videsis etiam Claus. 18 H. 3. in dorso m. 10. quod
Turnus Vic^comitis per Hundred^ nisi bis in anno tenaeatur. T. Reg. apud
Westin. II Oct.
. Which Charter was confirmed by King Henry the third in 9 of his reign.

And it may also seem, that after this Statute of Magna Charta, the Shireeves
did compel Religious persons as well as others to come to this Court, until
the Statute Cap. 10.
of Marlebrige in 52 H. 3. which exempteth all Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots,
Priors, Earls, Barons, and all other Religious men and women, from coming
thither, except their appearance be specially required thereat, for some other
cause.

Cap. XIV.
The County Court.
THis Court is also very ancient, and to be held once every Month by the
Shireeve, as from King Edward the elders Leges Edwardi senioris apud Lamb. cap.
xi. f. 51. a.
Laws appears -- Praepositus quisque ad quartam circiter quamque septimanam,
frequentem populi concionem celebrato: cuique jus dicito aequabile, Videsis
etiam Leges Canuti cap. 17. apud Lamb. f. 108. a.
litesque singulas (cum dies condicti advenerint) dirimito.

Every Shireeve shall convene the people once a Month, and do equal right to
all, putting an end to controversies at times appointed.

A notable instance whereof I find in King William the Conquerours time, the
said King directing his Precept to Will. de Cahannis for convening the
inhabitants of Northamptonshire, to enquire whether the Tenants to the Monks of
Ramsey for lands in Isham, had paid their Rent or not: the form of which
Precept, for the rarity thereof, I have here added, Ex R^gist. de Ramsey in
Seace. pen^^s Remem. Regis.
W. Rex Anglorum W. de Cahannis salutem: Praecipio tibi, ut facias convenire
Schiram de Hamtonia, and judicio ejus cognosce, si terra de Isham reddidit
firmam monachis S. Penedicti etc.

To this Court were anciently appeals made from the Hundred Court, as appears
by the Laws Cap. 39. apud Brompt. col. 924. Et apud Lamb. f. 108. a. n. 18.
of Canutus -- Et nemo namium capiat in Comitatu vel extra Comitatum, priusquam
ter in Hundredo suo rectum sibi perquisierit: Si tertia vice rectum non habeat,
eat quarta vice ad Conventum totius Comitatus quod Anglice dicitur Scyremot
etc. Vide Spelm. Gloss. vocab. Comitatus Curia.
No man by a distress shall compel another to the Country Court, unless he
have thrice complained in the Hundred Court: But if he have not right the third
time, he may then sue in the County Court, which is called the Scyregemot.

And besides Vide lib. rub. in Seace. f. 26. inter Leges H. 1.
Regis placita and causa singulorum debita; verae Christianitatis jura were
first determined here; where interesse debent Commissarii Episcopi, Comites,
and Ecclesiae potestates (and the Presbyter Ecclesiae, as well as quatuor de
melioribus villae were obliged to attendance) qui Dei Leges, as well as seculi
negotia, justa consideratione desinirent: And therefore Ex praef. Regist. de
Ely f. 4. b.
Sivardas in the time of King Edgar having made his Testament, and caused it to
be written in three chirographs, Vide Selden's Tir. of Honor P. 629.
sent it to the before-specified Aegelwyn the Alderman (who was principal Judge
in the County Court) to be there approved and recorded; all Causes, whether of
Perjury, Adultry, Tithes etc. being only there to be discussed.

Now let us see of what things the Shireeve, here, antienly held Plea: -- Ad
Vicecomites pertinent ista ( says Glanvile Lib. 1. cap. 4.
Glanvile) Placitum de Recto, de liberis tenementis, per Breve domini Regis,
ubi Caria Dominorum probatur de Recto defecisse: Placitum de Nativis, The
County Court.
sed per Breve Domini Regis.

Id est, It belongs to the Shireeve to hold Plea in this Court upon a Writ of
Right concerning freehold, in cases where the Lord of the Manor (wherein the
land lies) has not done justice: As also to hold Plea concerning Bondmen; but
by the Kings Writ.

Whereunto Bracton adds Bracton lib. 3. cap. 7.
-- Item in Comitatu and coram Vicecomite, placitari possunt plura Placita, in
quibus Vicecomes est Iusticiarius constitutus per Breve quod justiciet; sicut
de serviciis and consuetudinibus; de debitis; and aliis placitis insinitis. --
Also in the County Court, and in presence of the Shireeve, many things may be
tried, wherein the Shireeve is constituted Judge by the Kings Writ to do right;
viz. of services and Customs; of debts, and other disputes without number.

And Fleta thus Fleta lib. 2. cap. 43. (p. 94.)
-- In Com^tatu vero est Curia duplex: habet enim Rex suam, and Iusticiarius
suam, viz. Vicecomes, cum delegetur ei jurisdictio per Breve etc.

-- In the County there is held a twofold Court: for the King has his, and the
Judge his, viz. the Shireeve whenever such a jurisdiction is committed to him
by Writ, whereby he has a Record, the Praecept being to him, and not to the
suitors of the County, that he shall proceed according to right therein. This
Court also is of the nature of a Court Baron, or the Kings, which is held in
some of his Mannours, where the Shireeve is no other than a Bailiff or Fermour
of the Kings, and where wrong judgments pronounced by the suitors, without the
Shireeve, are to be punished.

Most certain it is, that in the Saxons time, not only causes of great moment
were heard and determined in this Court, but that the Iusticiarius Angliae (who
was the chief person in the Realm under the King for administering of Justice)
fate sometimes here, as I have before instanced in Aegelwine, who was totius
Angliae Aldermannus regnante Rege Edgaro: and so likewise after the Norman
Conquest, for some time; though for many ages since, there has been a
discontinuance thereof: For that great trial betwixt Lanfrank Archbishop of
Canterbury, and Odo Bishop of Baycut, in the time of King William the first,
for diverse lands belonging to his Archbishopric, withheld by the same Odo then
Earl of Kent, was in the County Court of Kent, at that time held at Pinendene;
where sat Geffrey Bishop of Constance, Justice of England, with some other
Bishops, and diverse Barons, as from this following relation is very evident; --
Tempore (...) cod. MS. in bibl. Cotton. s^b effigy (...) A. 22. tol. 120. n.
magni Regis Willielmi, qui Anglicum regnum Armis conquisivit, and suis
ditionibus subjugavit, contigit Odonem Bajocensem Episcopum and ejusdem Regis
fratrem, multo citius quam Lanfrancum Archiepiscopum in Angliam venire, atque
in Comitatu de Chent cum magna potentia residere, ibique potestatem non modicam
exercere: Et quia illis dielus, in Comitatu illo, quisquam non erat, qui tanti
fortitudinis viro resistere posset, propter magnam quam habuit potestatem,
terras quamplures de Archiepiscopatu Cantuarbiriae, and consuetudines nonnullas
sibi arripuit, atque usurpans suae dominationi ascripsit. Postea vero non multo
tempore, contigit praefatum Lanfrancum, Cadomensis Ecclesiae Abbatem, jussu
Regis in Angliam quoque venire, atque in Archiepiscopatu Cantuariensi, Deo
disponente, totius Angliae regni primatem sullimatum esse: ubi, dum aliquandiu
resideret, and antiquas Ecclesiae suae terras multas sibi deesse inveniret, and
suorum negligentia, antecessorumque illas distributas atque distractas fuisse
reperisset, diligenter inquisita, and bene^ cognita veritate, Regem quam citius
potuit and non pigre inde^ requisivit. Praecepit ergo Rex Comitatum totum,
absque mora considere; and homines Comitatus omnes Francigenas, and praecipue^
Anglos, in antiquis legibus and consuetudinibus peritos, in unum convenire.
Qui, cum convenerunt apud Pinendenam, omnes pariter consederunt: Et quoniam
multa placita, de dirationationibus terrarum, and verba de consuetudinibus
Legum, inter Archiepiscopum and praedictum Bajocensem Episcopum ibi
surrexerunt, and etiam inter consuetudines Regales and Archiepiscopales, quae
prima die expediri non potuerunt; ea causa totus Comitatus per tres dies fuit
ibi detentus. In illis tribus diebus dirationavit ibi Lanfrancus Archiepiscopus
plures terras, quas tunc ipse Episcopus and homines sui tenuerunt; viz.
Herebertus filius Ivonis, Turoldus de Toucet, Radulfus de Curvaspina, Hugo de
Monteforti, cum omnibus consuetudinibus and rebus, quae ad easdem terras
pertinebant; scilicet Raculfees, Sandwic, Rateburg etc. Et omnes terras illas,
and alias dirationavit, cum omnibus consuetudinibus and rebus, quae ad easdem
terras pertinebant, ita liberas atque quietas, quod in illa die qua ipsum
Placitum finitum fuit, non remansit homo, in toto regno Angliae, qui aliquid
indo calumniaretur, neque super ipsas terras etiam parvum quicquam clamaret:
Stoke vero and Denintune reddidit Ecclesiae S. Andrae, quia de jure ipsius
Ecclesiae antiquitus fuerunt. Et in eodem placito, non solum iftas terras
praenominatas, and alias terras, sed and omnes libertates Ecclesiae suae, and
omnes consuetudines suas renovavit, and renovatas ibi dirationavit, soca, soca
toll etc. Et ab omnibus illis probis and sapientibus hominibus, qui affuerunt,
fuit ita ibi dirationatum, and etiam a toto Comitatu recordatum atque
judicatum; quod, sicut ipse Rex tenet suas terras liberas and quietas, in suo
dominico, ita Archiepiscopus Cantuariensis tenet suas terras omnino liberas and
quietas in suo dominico.

Huic Placito interfuerunt Goisfridus Episcopus Constanciensis, qui in loco
Regis fuit, and justiciam illam tenuit, Lanfrancus Archiepiscopus, qui, ut
dictum est, placitavit, and totum dirationavit; Comes Canciae, viz. praedictus
Odo Bajocensis Episcopus; Ernestus Episcopus de Rovecestre, Agelricus Episcopus
de Cicestre, vir antiquissimus, and Legum terrae sapientissimus, qui ex
praecepto Regis advectus fuit ad ipsas antiquas Legum consuetudines
discutiendas and edocendas, in una Quadriga Ricardus de Tunebrugge, Hugo de
Monteforti, Will. de Arces, Haymo Vicecomes, and alii multi Barons Regis, and
ipsius Archiepiscopi, atque aliorum Episcoporum homines multi, and alii aliorum
Comitatuum homines; etiam in tote isto Comitatu multae and magnae authoritatis
viri Franciginae scilicet and Angli.

But of these, the Judges in this Court at that time, were only Godfrey Bishop
of Constance (the Iusticiarius Angliae) Egelric Bishop of Chichester, and Hamon
the Shireeve of the County, as appears by Archbishop Anselm's grant Ex
autogr. in bibl. Cotton.
to the Monks of Rochester, in these words -- Anselmus gratia Dei Archiepisc.
Cantuariensis, Hamoni Vicecomiti and Gileberto de To^nebregge, ac caeteris
hominibus, Francigenis and Anglis, salutem. Sciatis, quod ego, de mandato
domini nostri Henrici Regis Angliae, and rogatu Gundulfi Episcopi Roffensis,
concedo and confirmo Ecclesiae S. Andreae and eidem Gundulfo Episcopo, omnes
terras, and Ecclesias, and libertates and consuetudines, rectitudines, and
omnia maneria, quae and quas Lanfrancus Archiepiscopus, tempore VVillielmi
Regis magni, de ipsius mandato, in pleno Comitatu de Chent, coram Godefrido and
Egelrico Constanciensi and Cicestrensi Episcopis, and Hamone Vicecomite,
Iusticiariis Regis assignatis, dirationando evicit and recuperativit, Ecclesiae
Roffae, and Episcopo Gundulso sursum reddidit and restituit; nominatim scilicet
Stokes, cum Ecclesia; Frendesberiam, cum Ecclesia etc.

And that matters of title were tried in this Court for some time after the
Norman Conquest, may seem by these instances; Ex ipso autogr. in bibl. Cotton.
Henricus Rex Angliae Rogero Bigot and Rodulfo Passelewa salutem: mando vobis,
ut faciatis Herbertum Episcopum de Norwic, ita been and just and honorifice
tenere terram suam and homines de Bruselea, and Alwinum filium Floteni hominem
suum, and alios; and omnes res suas, sicut melius tenuit die qua frater meus
vivus and mortuus fuit; and non sit dissaisitus nisi justo judicio Comitatus.
Test Eudone Dapifero apud Niweberiam.

This was in King Henry the first's time.

And in King Stephen's Raphe Picot, then Shireeve of Kent, had a trial Ex ^et;
MS. in bibl. Cotton. sub effigy Faust^nae B. 6. n. 19.
with the Monks of Canterbury, also in pleno auditu Comitatus.

That Agreements upon disputes and controversies for title of land, were also
recorded here, I have seen very good testimony; Ex Registro de Leestoa in bibl.
Cotton. 38. a. b.
viz. Hae est conventio facta inter Ph^lippum Abbatem and Conventum de Leestune
tenentes; and Robertum filium Rogeri de Burende Parcarium, petentem, de prato
in Alringeham; quod Willielmus de Maleville, ut dicitur, tenuit: And so after
recital of the Agreement, the conclusion is thus; Haec autem conventio facta
est in pleno Comitatu, coram Iohanne de Cornherd, tunc temporis Vicecomite
Suffolchiae; and coram istis militibus ei assidentibus; scilicet Rob. de
Novill, Will. de Gretingeham, Will. de Henle, Ada^ de Bedingefeld, Rogero de
Braham, Huberto de Brumford, Rogero de Horshagh, Iohanne de VVestham etc.

Likewise, that Bargains, and sales of land, were anciently made here, I shall
exhibit an instance, of little less than five hundred years antiquity; which
is, that Hawisia de Iselham, with Raphe her Husband, and Roger their ^on and
heir, did pass the grant of their land of Iselham to William Rriwer in the
County Court of Dedon.

-- Haec venditio facta fuit (says the autograph) Ex ipso autogr. penes
praenob. Tho. Baronem Bruise, Comitem Elgin^iae. an. 1660.
in pleno Comitatu de Devenescire; and postea retracta and recordata apud
Westminster. die Iovis proxima post festum S. Lucae Evang. an. xxvi H. 2. etc.

It seems, that notwithstanding the Law of King Edward the elder (before
mentioned) which appointed this Court to be kept once every Month (as I have
instanced) it was afterward held oftener, as appears by the Statute of Magna
Charta, which restrained it to that distance of time, except anciently it had
been otherwise, as for certain it had: for in 2 Edw. 6. the Act Cap. 6.
which positively confines it to once a Month, intimates; that, in some
places, it had been held but every six weeks.

That this Court was sometimes held in the Church, is to me out of all doubt,
from that relation which Sim. Dunelm. Hist. G. Dinelm. col. 35. 7.
makes of a Priest, who lay, with his wife the night before he was to sing Mass
(which it seems he ought not to have done) where he says -- Quadam die multi,
tam Nobiles qua^m privati etc. Upon a certain day many persons, as well Noble as
other met together (at the Church) early in the morning, to Plead, but before
the Pleading began, they enquired for the Priest to say Mass etc. Besides a
farther testimony we have thereof from Gerv. Dorobernensis; who describing the
Cathedral Church of Canterbury, in speaking of the South-Door, says thus; (...)
-- quod ostium, in antiquorum Legibus Regum, suo nomine soepe exprimitur; in
quibus etiam omnes quaerelas totius regni, quae in Hundredis, vel Comitatibus,
uno vel pluribus, vel certe in Curia Regis non possent legaliter diffiniri,
finem inibi, sicut in Curia Regis summi, sortiri debere discernitur. Which
practice was not totally left, of a long time after (as it seems) for amongst
certain Ecclesiastical Constitutions made in a Synod held at Exeter in an.
1287. (15 E. 1.) by Peter de Wivill then Bishop of that Diocese, it was (inter
alia) decreed (...)
-- Ne in Ecclesiis vel cimiteriis earum, Mercata, vel Placita secularia
teneantur. The like inhibition do I also find in a Synod held at Winchester,
about that time -- (...)
Inhibemus firmiter, ne in Ecclesiis aut Cimiteriis publica fiant Mercata; nec
propter hoc figantur Tentoria in eisdem, seu Placita secularia teneantur etc.

Cap. XV.
Court Leet.
THis, though now held by diverse particular Lords, in their own Mannours, by
special grant at first from the King, was (...)
indeed originally that which I have already spoken of under the title of
Tryhing or Lathe.

Cap. XVI.
The Chancery.
HAving thus briefly touched upon the antiquity of these inferior Courts, I now
come to those of the highest rank; viz. the Chancery, the King's Bench, the
Common Pleas, and Exchequer.

It is the opinion of several learned Caisiod. Epist. 6. lib. 11.
men (as Mr. Cambd. in his Britannia, Cap. 16.
and Dr. Cowell in his Interpreter have observed) that this Court had its name
originally from certain bars of wood or iron, laid one over another Crosswise,
like a Lattisse, wherewith it was environed for to keep off the press of
people, and not to hinder the view of those Officers who sat therein, such
Grates or Cross-barrs being, by the Latins, called Cancelli: which as some
think, was the reason why those places that were only peculiar to the Priests,
being by the appointment Math. Paris.
of Pope Foelix, severed from the bodies of our Churches, for that purpose,
with certain Grates or Lattises, were also so called.

And that the Chancellours Office, originally, was to register the Acts and
decrees of the Judges -- qui conscribendis and excipiendis Iudicum actis dant
operam, as says Lupanus: Pythaeus also expressing, that he was anciently the
same as we now call Secretarius: Howbeit, not only in this, but in other
Kingdoms, this Office has been, for many ages so much advanced, that the
person who held it, has been the chief for administration of Justice,
especially in private Causes, next under the Prince.

As for its antiquity in this Realm, it is of no less, as our learned Seldom
Discourse of the name and dignity of Lord Chancelour, by him presented to Sir
Fr. Bacon.
conceives, than King Ethelberts time (who was the first Christian King of the
Saxons) for in a Charter Monast. Anglic. p. 24. col. 1. l. 40.
of his to the Church of Canterbury, bearing date in the year of Christ DCv.
amongst other witnesses thereto, there is Augemundus Referendarius mentioned:
where Referendarius (says he) may well stand for Cancellarius; and that the
Office of both (as the words applied to the Court, are used in the Code,
Novells, and story of the declining Empire, signifying an Officer, An. 605.
who received Petitions and Supplications to the King, and made out his Writs
and Mandates, as a Custos legis: And though (says he) there were diverse
Referendari^; as sometime xiii. then viii. then more again, and so diverse
Chancellours in the Empire; yet one especially, here, exercising an Office of
the nature of those many, might well be styled by either of those names.

It will be a much harder task than I dare adventure upon, to exhibit a perfect
series of these great Officers throughout the reigns of the successive Kings of
the Saxon race, until the Norman Conquest; I shall therefore content my self,
with the bare mention of the names of such, as I have met with from any good
authority. Of these Unwona Math. Paris. in vit. Abbatum p. 22. n. 10. and p.
23. n. 20. Anno 758.
is the first, who is styled Cancellarius to Offa King of the Mercians (who
began his reign in the year DCCLviii.) Next to him is Bosa, in King Withlafes
time Circa An. 825.
, but styled Scriba. I^gulphi hist.
After him Swithulphus I^gulphi hist.
called Notarius, under King Berthulph, about the year DCCCLi.

Then Turketill Ing^lphi hist.
under King Edward the Elder: of whom Ingulphus has this expression --
Cancellarium suum eum constituit, ut quaecunque negotia, temporalia vel
spiritualia, Regis judicium expectabant, illius consilio and decreto (tam
sanctae fidei, and tam profundi ingenii tenebatur) omnia tractarentur, and
tractata irrefragabilem sententiam sortirentur; which Turketill continued
I^gulph. (...) supra.
in that office also, under King Athelstan, Edmund, and Edred (all Sons and
successors to the said King Edw. the Elder) being I^gulph. (...) supra.
likewise Consiliarius primus, praecipuus, and a^ secretis familiarissimus --
his chief and principal privy Counselor; and in his old age was constituted
Abbot of Croyland.

After him, King Edgar had Adulphus Lel. coll. vol. 1. p. 4. and. 5.
to his Chancellor: King Ethelred, had M. Paris. in vit. Abbatum p. 43. n. 10.
Alfric (the xith. Abbot of St. Albans) to hit. Of which King Ethelred I also
find, Spelm. Gloff. p. 127. b.
that he appointed and ordained, that the Abbots of (...), S. Augustines in
Canterbury, and Glastonbury, should exercise this office of Chancellor, by
turn, ^^^anually; dividing the year into three parts.

That these Kings, before (...), had not any Seals (the (...) of which, in
succeeding times, was one of the principal duties belonging to this Office of
Chancellor) Ingalphus (who lived in the Norman Conquerours days) seems
somewhat positively to affirm, Ingulphi hist. f. 512. b. n. 20.
(...) graphorum confectionem Anglicandam (says he) quae antea, usque ad
Edvardi Regis tempora, The Chancery.
fidelium praesentium subscriptionibus, cum Crucibus aureis, aliisque sacris
signaculis firma fuerunt; Normanni condemnantes, Chirographa Cartas vocabant,
and Chartarum firmitatem, cum cerea impressione, per unins cujusque speciale
Sigillum, sub instillatione trium vel quatuor testium astantium, conficere
constituebant etc.

But, that Seals were used by the French, long before this, is sure enough: for
in a Charter Preuve de (...) Hist. des Contes de (...) etc. Impr. Paris. 1647.
p. 255.
of Charles the great, King of France, made to the Monastery of Karrof, in
(...) (of his own foundation) there is this expression -- Et at haec praesens
authoritas, nostris and futuris temporibus, inviolata perdurare valeat, manus
nostrae Signaeulis, eam decrevimus roborari, and de Annulo nostro jussimus
Sigillari.

So also in another Ibid. p. 1^
of Lewis, the Emperor (called Hludovicus pius) son and successor to Charles
the great, bearing date in the year of Christ DCCCxiiii. -- Haec vero
auctoritas, ut nostris futurisque temporibus melius credatur etc. manu propria
subscripsimus, and de Annulo nostro jussimus Sigillari.

Nay there are some learned men of opinion, that the Charter which King Edgar
made to the Monastery of Pershore, in Worcestershire, which begins thus --
Monast. Anglic. vol. 1. p. 204. a.
P. Orthodoxoru^ vigoris Ecclesiastica monitu creberrime instruimur etc. and
whereon there are apparent sign of three Labells, by the places cut therein for
them, had three Soals hanging thereat; viz. one of King Edgar, the other of St.
Dunstan, and the third of Alferus, afterward Duke of (...); for further
testimony whereof, these words, in a Discourse of the Office of Lord
Chanceilour by I. Seldom, dedicated to Sir Fr. Bacon Knight^ Lord Chancellor
of England.
Letter from Godfrey Archdeacon of (...), to Pope Alexander the third, are
vouched, viz. -- No verit Sanctius vestra, verum esse; quod concripti hujus
Scriptum originale, In virtute S. ^rinitatis, Sigilla tria, ^rium personarum
(...), ail (...), tripl^^ (...): Est (...) Sigillum (...) illustris Regis
Edgari, (...) S. Dunstani Can^^^ (...), Tertium Alferi (...) (...) ex diligenti
literar ^^impressarum inspectione (...) accepi, etc.

Whereunto I shall add what is recorded by Sulcardus a Monk of UUestm. in his
Register, (...)
of the same King Edgars Charter to that Abbey; viz. -- Et ut haec autoritas
nostris and futuris temporibus, circa ipsum sanctum locum, perenniter firma and
inviolata permaneat, and ab optimatibus nostris and Iudicibus publicis and
privatis certius credatur, manus nostrae subscriptione, subtus eam, decrevimus
roborare, and Sigillo nostro jussimus sigillari.

And of the said Dunstan (in an. 959) thus; -- Ego Dunstanus, ac si peccator,
nomine tantum Episcopus, hanc libertatis scedulam, impressione Sigilli mei, and
annuli, insuper and agalmate S. Crucis diligenter consignavi; ac dein, manibus
ad coelum extensis, dixi; Si quis hanc munificentiam auxerit, augeat ille Deus
etc.

Likewise that of King Eadwi (brother to King Edgar) an. 956. in his Charter of
Gaing made to the Monks of Abendon -- Ego Ex Regist. de Abend. in bibl. (...)
sub of(...) Claudii (...). f. 111. b. ^
Eadwi Rex meum donum proprio Sigillo roboravi.

And I also find, Textus Roff.
that in the time of King Ethelrede, Godwine being then Bishop of Rochester an
ancient controversy, betwixt Leofwyne, Aelfaege's son, the said Bishop, for
Cnoddingland, was determined in this manner; -- tha send se Cinge ge rit and
hi^ insegle to tham arc^b. alfrice and bead him that he and his thegnas on East
cent and on est cent by on riht ge^eindon be on tale. and be of tale. tha that
aer th^se b. tha com thider se scipes man Leofric etc. Which makes express
mention, (...)
that the Kings Writ and his Seal were sent to assemble the people of East and
UUest Kent for the ending of that controversy.

But admitting these few Examples, most certain it is; that, as Sealing of
Charters, in the time of our Saxon Kings was not common; so the Office of
Chancellor was not originally denominated from the keeping of the Kings Seal:
and that, for a constant succession of Seals, we are not to look higher than
King Edward the Confessor, in whose reign these were Chancellours; viz. (...)
Leofuicus surnamed Britannicus, W^lwius, and Rembaldus, the two last being
also Keepers of his Seal, as is most evident from the very words of these his
Charters to the Church of UUestm. viz. to the one; -- Ut Ex praef. Regist.
Cart. Abb. Westminster.
hoc Decretum, ^ nobis promulgatum, pleniorem obtineat vigorem, nostra manu
subter apposito signo roboravimus, atque fidelibus nostris praesentibus
roborandum tradidimus; nostraeque imaginis Sigillo insuper assignari jussimus
(etc.) And afterward; -- VVulwius regiae dignitatis Cancellarius relegit and
sigillavit etc.

And to the other -- Ego Ibid.
Reimbaldus Regis Cancellarius, relegi and sigillavi etc.

So likewise was Mauritius, Chancellor to King William the Conqueror, the
Keeper of his Seal, as appears by these words of his (the said Kings) Charter
of Confirmation unto the said Abbey of Westminster. viz. -- Ego Ibid.
Willielmus, Dei gratia Rex Anglorum, Dux Normannorum, and Princeps
Cenomannornm, hoc praeceptum scribere praecepi; and Scriptum hoc, Signo
dominico confirmando stabilivi; nostraeque imaginis Sigillo insuper assignari
curavi etc. And after -- Mauritius Regis Cancellarius relegit and sigillavit.

From these few (and indeed very rare) instances it will appear, that the
Sealing of Charters before the Norman Conquest, was little practiced: but after
that time, it became very usual, as may seem from what I have before taken
notice of, from the testimony of Ingulphus; and shall here from the Laws Cap.
xv.
of King Edward the Confessor, recited and confirmed by King William the first;
viz. -- Siquispiam murdratus alicubi reperiebatur, interfector illius, qui si
inveniri non poterat, mensis and unius diei ^abebunt respectum ad eum
perquirendum; qui, si infra terminum non inveniebatur, colligebuntur in villa
illa xl ta. marcae: quod si ad tantae solutionem pecuniae non suffictebat, per
Hundredum colligebatur, quod in villa non poterat: Veruntamen quando omnino
villa confundebatur, provider ant Barons, quod per Hundreda colligerentur, and
Sigillo alicujus Baronis Comitatus sigillarentur, and ad Thefauraiam Regis
deportarentur; quas sigillatas ipse servaret per annum and diem unum; quod, si
infra tunc terminum possit murderator haberi, traderetur Iusticiae Regis, and
ipsi marcas The saurario Regis commendatas rehaberent.

And the reason for such Sealing of Charters is given by Bracton Cap. xvi.
Quoniam Scripturae and non esset fides adhibenda, nisi Signum intervenerit
quod talis donatio and scriptura, a conscientia and voluntate donatoris
emanaret; ideo, in testimonium and approbationem rei gestae, apponit donator
Signum; adiciendo in Carta istam Clausulam; -- quod ut ratum sit and firmum;
vel, in cujus rei testimonium, huic Scripto Sigillum meum apposui. Non refert
utrum proprio, vel alieno Sigillo Carta est signata, cum semel a donatore,
coram testibus ad hoc vocatis, recognita and concessa fuerit.

Whence it is evident, that thenceforth (id est, from the Norman Conquest)
Seals were upon all occasions used, though at sometimes those, which were not
parties to the Grant: For instance; King Henry the third, in the first year of
his reign, ends his Letters Patents sent to Peter de Mauley, thus Pat. 1 H. 3.
m. 11.
-- Et in hujus rei testimonium has literas nostras Patentes sigillatas Sigillo
Comitis Willielmi Marescalli, Rectoris nostri and regni nostri, quia Sigillum
nondum habuimus, vobis inde mittimus. Test etc. apud Winton. xv Martii.

But he did not conclude his Writs and Grants with Test Rege, or Test meipso
till the 8th. year of his reign, though he had a Seal in 3^. but whilst he
used the Seal of the said William Marshall, with Test Ibid.
Will. Marescallo: and in 3^. (for then incoepit Sigillum domini Regis currere,
as the words of the Record Claus. 3 H. 3. m. 14. and m. 6. and ult.
are) sometime Pat. 3 H. 3. p. 1. m. 1.
with Test H. de Burgo Iusticiario: sometime Ibid. m. 5.
Test domino Petro (scil. de Rupibus) Winton. Episcopo: Sometime Test Ibid.
m. 5.
Comite (id est, Willielmo Marescallo, ut supra:) And in 4to, 5to, and 6to of
his reign, most of them with Test Huberto de Burgo Iusticiario etc. Nay I
find, that in 1^^ of his reign, some Precepts, though with Test Rege, were
Claus. 10 H. 3. in dorso m. 10. Et Rot. Fin. 10 H. 3. m. 9.
sub Sigillo Iusticiarii.

And for inferior persons, it was not unusual to seal with the Seal of a Dean
and Chapter, Corporation, or some eminent man, whose Seal was well known: with
this expression; -- Et quia Sigillum meum plurimis est incognitum, Sigillum
Decani and Capituli N N: or Sigillum Ballivorum and Communitas de N N etc.
apponi procuravi.

Having thus pointed at the Antiquity of this Court, I shall refer the farther
mention of the succeeding Chancellours (viz. from the Norman Conquest
downwards) to my Chronologick Tables, which are the principal part of this
work; and here briefly take notice of what I find most ancient, that does best
demonstrate the nature of this great Office.

Cancellarii dignitas (says the writer (...)
of the life of Thomas Becket Archbishop of Canterbury in King Henry the
seconds time) est, ut secundus a Rege in regno habeatur; ut altera part
Sigilli regii, quod and ad ejus pertinet custodiam, propria signet mandata: ut
Capella regia in illius sit dispositione and cura: ut vacantes
Archiepiscopatus, Episcopatus, Abbatias, and Baronias, cadentes in manum Regis,
ipse suscipiat and conservet: ut omnibus regiis assit consiliis, etiam non
vocatus accedat: ut omnia Sigilliferi Clerici regii sua manu signentur: Item ut
suffragantibus, ex dei gratia vitae meritis, non moriatur, nisi Archiepiscopus
vel Episcopus, si voluerit: Inde est, quod Cancellaria non emenda est.

And another at the same time, says thus, Cancellarius, sicut in Curia, sic ad
Scaccarium magnus est, adeo ut sine ipsius consensu vel consilio nihil magnum
flat, vel fieri debeat: verum hoc habet officium dum residet ad Scaccarium; ad
ipsum pertinet custodia Sigilli regii, quod est in Thesauro; sed inde non
recedit nisi cum praecepto Iusticiarii (scil. summi Angliae Iusticiarii,) ab
inferiore ad superius Scaccarium a Thesaurario vel Camerario defertur, ad
explenda solum negotia Scaccarii; quibus peractis in loculum mittitur, and
loculus Cancellario consignatur, and sic Thesaurario traditur custodiendus.

Item, cum necesse fuerit, signatus sub omnium oculis Cancellario offertur,
nunquam ab ipso vel ab alio alias offerendus. Item ad ipsum pertinet Rotuli,
qui est de Cancellaria, custodia, per suppositam personam.

Another about the time of King Edward the first, thus, Officium Cancellariae
viro provido and discreto, ut Episcopo vel Clerico magnae dignitatis de^et
committi, simul cum cura majoris Sigilli regni; cujus substituti sunt
Cancellarii omnes in Anglia, Hibernia, Wallia, and Scotia; omnesque Sigilli
regii custodes, paeter Custodem Sigilli privati.

Howbeit, notwithstanding what is before expressed, viz. that altera pars Sigilli
regii pertinet ad ejus custodiam, most sure it is, that the Custody of the
Seal, was in ancient time, not seldom committed to others, as will appear by
my said Chronologick Table: yet forasmuch as those who were Chancellours had
for the most part the custody thereof, it sometimes happened, that they who kept
the great Seal were vulgarly reputed to be Chancellours: for so we see, that
not only Matthew. Paris, (...)
(an eminent Historian, who lived in H. 3. time) calls Richard de Marisco,
Archdeacon of Richmund and Northumberland, but even the (...)
Records themselves.

But in the Parliament of 28 H. 3. it was ordained (...)
, that the Keeper of the great Seal should be always the Chancellor, and that
all things sealed otherwise should be made void; the words are -- Si aliqua
interveniente occasion Dominus Rex a^stulerit Sigillum suum a Cancellario,
quicquid fuerit interim sigillatum irritum habeatur and inane; and deinde
Cancellario fiat restitutio.

Which Law was not afterward strictly observed: for from our public Records,
cited in my Chronologick Tables, it will evidently appear; that the Custody of
the great Seal was not seldom committed to such persons, who were not the
Kings Chancellours, until by the Statute (...)
of 5 Eliz. it was declared; that the Common Law is, that the Keeper of the
great Seal of England, for the time being, (...) always was etc. and has
always (...) and used etc. as belonging to his (...), the like place as the
Lord Chancellor for the time being lawfully used etc.

The Jurisdiction of the Lord Chancellor for hearing of Civil Causes, how
ancient.
IT is the opinion Lambardi Archeion p. 62. and 63.
of Mr. Lambard, that the Lord Chancellours of England had not any
jurisdiction, for the hearing and determining of Civil causes, till King Edward
the firsts reign: but that then, the power of the Iusticiarius Angliae
declining, it being restrained ad Placita coram Rege tenenda, the King
committed to his Chancellor, together with the trust and chardge of his great
Seal, his own royal, and extraordinary pre-eminence of Jurisdiction in such
Civil Causes, as well for amendment, as supply of the Common Law; which power,
that it was not so disposed of by the King till then, may very well (says he)
be Ibid.
inferred from Breton (a learned Lawyer) who, in that Kings time, writing of
all other Courts, from the highest Tribunal to the Court Baron, makes no
mention of the Chancery: Howbeit, toward the latter end of this Kings reign,
it was 28 E. 1. cap. 5.
enacted, that the Chancellor, and the Justices of his Bench, should follow
the King: (id est, wheresoever his Court did move) so that he might have at all
times near unto him, some sages of the Law, which were able to order all such
matters, as should come unto the Court, at all times when need should require;
The Justices as to matter of Law (as it is most like) and the Chancellor for
Equity.

Nevertheless this Act did not give an absolute power to the Chancellor alone
of determining in such Civil Causes, as may seem by that Law Cap. 6.
which was made in 20 E. 3. where it appears, that the Treasurer was joined
with him, to hear the Complaints of all them, who would complain of Shiriffs,
Eschaetors, Bailiffs of Franchises, and their under Ministers; and also of
Maintainers, Common imbracers, and Jurors in the County; and of the gifts and
rewards which the said Ministers did take of the people to execute their office
etc. and to ordain that speedy remedy should be made thereof.

But in 36 E. 3. by an Act Cap. 9.
of Parliament, concerning Purveyours and Achators; as also of what things the
Mayor and Constables of the Staple should take cognizance, then made, it was
ordained; that if any man found himself grieved contrary to those Articles
(viz. touching Purveyours etc.) or others, contained in diverse Statutes, and
would come into the Chancery, or any for him, and thereof make his complaint,
he should presently there have remedy, by force of the said Articles and
Statutes, without elsewhere pursuing for redress.

Howbeit, notwithstanding this Act, there does not appear in the Reports of the
Common Law, as Mr. Lambard observes Archeion p. 67.
to have been any frequent mention of Causes, usually drawn before the
Chancellor, for help in Equity, till from the time of King Henry the 4th. In
whose days, by reason of those intestine troubles, Feoffments to use, did
either first begin, as some have thought; or else did first grow common and
familiar, as all men must agree. Nor are there found any Bills, and Decrees in
Chancery, before the 20th. of H. 6. Such causes as since that time were heard
in that Court, having formerly been determined in the Lords House of
Parliament, as may seem from the number of Petitions in Parliament, of that
nature, which are yet extant.

The place where the Lord Chancellor, anciently sat, and held this Court, was
at the upper end of UUestm. Hall, at that long Marble Table, which is there
situate (though now covered with the Courts there erected) whereunto are five
or six steps of ascent: for in 36 E. 3. when Simon Langham Bishop of Ely was
made Lord Chancellor (which was on Sunday 19 Febr.) the Record Claus. 36 E. 3.
in dorso m. 39.
says; that on Tuesday next following, taking the great Seal with him to
Westminster, and in sede marmorea, ubi Cancellarii sedere sunt assueti, sedens
etc. Literas patentes etc. consignari fecit, -- he placed himself in the marble
Chair wherein the Chancellours used to sit, and sealed Patents etc. Which
marble Chair to this day remains, being fixed in the Wall there, over
against the middle of that marble Table.

In farther testimony whereof I also find, Claus. 19 E. 2. in (...). m. 30.
that Thomas the son and heir of Raphe de Greneham, having entered upon his
Manor of Keten in Rutland (which he held by military service) before he
accomplished his full age; -- allocutus fuit in aula VVestmonasteriensi ad
Tabulam marmoream, coram venerabili patre Ebor. Archiepiscopo, Thesaurario;
Roberto de Baldok, Archidiacono Midd. Cancellario, Galfrido le Scrope Capitali
Iusticiario domini Regis, and aliis ipsius Regis fidelibus, super eo etc.

As to the formal Proceeding of this great Officer unto UUestm- Hall, after he
is advanced to that dignity, I shall give this only instance Ex Annal. Regis
Iacobi per ^ill. Cambdea. MS.
of Sir Francis Bacon Knight; who (being the Kings Attorney general) having
received the great Seal upon the 7th. of March 14 Iacobi Regis, upon the first
day of Easter-Term then next ensuing, went thus.

First the Clerks and inferior officers of the Chancery. Secondly young
Students of the Law. Thirdly the Gentlemen of his own Family. Fourthly the
Sergeant at Arms, and the bearer of the Seal (all on foot.)

Then the Lord Keeper himself on Horseback, in a Gown of Purple-Satin, betwixt
the Lord Treasurer, and the Lord Privy Seal; diverse Earls, Barons and
Privy-Councellors, as also the Judges and many Gentlemen of note following
after.

Being come into the Court, the Lord Treasurer, and Lord Privy Seal received
his Oath, the Clerk of the Crown reading it.

Cap. XVII.
The King-Bench Court. The Kings Bench.

THis was anciently called Curia domini Regis, because often times the King
himself sat here in person, and had his Justices a latere suo residentes, as
Bracton (...)
expresses; namely the Chief Justice, Chancellor and others, with the
Constable and Marshall.

Here ought Criminal Actions to be determined -- ubi terminari debeant Actiones
Criminales, vel placita, videadum est, says the same Author: (...)
Et sciendum, quod si Actiones Criminales sint, in Curia domini Regis debent
terminari, cum sit ibi poena corporalis infligenda; and hoc coram ipso Rege, si
tangat personam suam; sicut Crimen laesae majestatis; vel coram Iusticiariis ad
hoc spectaliter assignatis, si tangunt personas privatas.

And of the Justices that sit here, he adds (...)
-- quidam sunt Capitales, generales, perpetui, and majores, a latere Regis
residentes, qui omnium aliorum corrigere tenentur injurias and errores.

Though this Court, in those elder times, was not so certainly fixed as that of
the Common Pleas, I do not think it was often moved till after the 28th. year
of King Edw. the firsts reign, that by the Statute, (...)
called Articuli super Cartas, it was enacted; that the Chancellor and Justices
of his Bench should follow him; so that he might at all times have near unto
him some, who were learned in the Laws, that might be able duly to order all
such matters, as might come unto the Court at all times when need should
require.

For before that time, viz. in 42 H. 3. the King, whose removal to several of
his Palaces was frequent (as our public Records do plainly thew) appointed it
to be held at Westminster. till he should otherwise determine, as by his special Pat.
42. H. 3. ^. ^.
Commission to Roger de Thurkelby, Gilbert de Preston, and Nicholas Handlo
appears.

And soon after took their Oaths in the Exchequer, Cap. 17.
before the Lord Treasurer (as it seems) for in 1 E. 2. Roger le Brabazon, and
the rest of his fellow Justices of this Court, then constituted, being
appointed to do the like, the Record Claus. 1 E. 2. in dorso m. 19.
adds, prout moris est.

The first who had the office of Capitalis Iusticiarius ad placita coram Rege
tenenda, was Robert de Bruis, constituted Pat. 52. H. 3. m. 24.
8 Martii 52 H. 3. the title of Iusticiarius Angliae having an end in Philip
Basset, who was advanced Pat. 45. H. 3. m. 5.
to that place by the King in 45 H. 3.

In the 17 of Edw. 2. Hervie de Staunton, then Chancellor of the Exchequer,
was constituted Chief-Iustice of this Court; with command, that Claus. 17 E. 2.
m. 43.
he should not quit that office of Chancellor, but cause it to be executed by
some other fit person, at such times as he should be necessitated to attend the
hearing of Causes in this place.

It is reported, that John Whiddon a Justice of this Court in 1 Mariae, was the
first of the Judges, who rode to UUestminster- Hall on an Horse or Gelding; for
before that time they rode on Mules.

Cap. XVIII.
The Common Pleas.
THat this Court, for the hearing Vide Bracton lib. 3. cap. 10. (n. 2.)
of all controversies, in matters Civil, betwixt party and party, vulgarly
called the Common Pleas, was anciently kept in the Kings own Palace, and
distinct from that of the Kings Bench, there is not only this circumstantial
testimony from a Charter of King Henry the first, whereby he granted to the
Abbot of B. conusance of all Pleas, with this expression; Cokes Reports part.
8. in proem. ex 26. lib. Assis. pl. 24.
so that neither the Justices of the one Bench, or of the other, or Justices of
Assize, should meddle etc. but the express words of Magna Carta to prove it;
viz. Communia placita non sequantur Curiam nostram, sed teneantur in aliquo
certo loco; the Exchequer having been the place where those causes were heard,
Cap. 18.
and not any other peculiar Court, until the Confirmation of the great Charter
at soonest, which was about the latter end of King John's reign, as is evident,
not only from those authorities, which I have cited in my discourse of that
Court; which show that the Chief Justice of England, and other persons learned
in the Laws of this Realm, did anciently sit there, and hear complaints in
Cases Civil; as also that Fines were then and there levied before them; but
from the direct words of the Statute of 28 E. 1. (called Articuli super Cartas)
cap. 4. viz. that No Common Plea shall be henceforth held in the Exchequer,
contrary to the form of the great Charter.

And as the severing of this Court from the Exchequer, was at first, no doubt,
occasioned from the great increase of Suitors and Causes thereto: so
questionless was it, that, for moderating the expense and trouble unto which
the Subject was exposed by repairing to the Kings supreme Court, where ever he
moved; and for taking off the chardge and hazard in carrying the Records upon
all occasions of the Kings removal, this Law for fixing the Common Pleas in a
certain place ( viz. at UUestm.) was first made; to the end, that the people
might be sure, whither to resort for trial of their rights: After which time
the Writs ran thus Bracton lib. 2. cap. 32. n. 5.
; -- quod sit coram Iusticiariis meis apud Westmonasterium: whereas before --
Glanvil lib. 1. cap. 6.
quod sit coram me vel Iusticia mea.

The jurisdiction of this Court Bracton Bracton. lib. 3. cap. 7. n. 2.
does in a few words thus describe,

-- Habet etiam Rex Curiam and Iusticiarios in Banco residentes, qui cognoscunt
de omnibus placitis, de quibus authoritatem habent recognoscendi: Et sine
warranto jurisdictionem non habent, nec coertionem:

The first, who had the appellation of Capitalis Iusticiarius in this Court,
(that I have ever observed) was Gilbert de Preston, who by that title Liberatae
1. E. 1. m. 4.
had his livery of Robes in 1 E. 1.

It seems, that the certain fixing of this Court at Westminster. The Common Pleas.
occasioned much more resort thereto than before; for about the beginning of
King Edward the seconds reign, there were so many suits therein; as that the
King was necessitated to increase the number of his Justices, who were to sit
there, unto six, which commonly were not above three before that time: and so
to divide them as they might sit in two places -- Et covient, says the Record,
Claus. 3. E. 2. in. dorso m. 21.
que taunz ysoient, pur ceo q'il covent aver deus places pour le multitude des
plez, que plus est ore que unques ne fust en nuly temps: the names of which six
were these, Sire William de Bereford Chief Justice, Sir Lambert de Trikingham,
Sir Hervy de Staunton, Sir Henry le Scrope, Sir John de Benstede, and Sir
William de Bourne (as I have also in my Chronologick Tables expressed.)

How long they thus sat in two places, I cannot say: but certain it is, that
the number of them was afterward increased; for within three years following
(viz. in 6 Edw. 2.) there were seven, though no more than six in any year
afterward of that Kings reign: no nor in King Edward the thirds till 7 E. 3.
and then seven again: but in 11 and 12 E. 3. eight; viz. John de Stonore,
Will. de Shareshull, John Inge, John de Shardelow, Ric. de Aldeburgh, Roger
Hillary, Will. Scot, and Will. Basset: And in Trinity Term 14 Edw. 3. these
nine; viz. John de Stonore, Will. de Shareshull, John Inge, Will. de
Shardelowe, Ric. de Aldeburgh, Roger Hillary, Will. Basset, James de Wodestoke,
and Robert Parnyng, as by the Fines then levied before them appears.

Howbeit after that, there were never so many; there being, for the greatest
part of the same Kings and King Richard the seconds reign, but five: and so
till 1 Henr. 6. that they were again increast to seven: But that number held
not; for after, there were seldom more than five till 27 H. 6. then six, and
so the two ensuing years: In 29 and after, till 32. seven; and then eight. In
33 and after, seven: So also for a good part of King Edward the fourths time;
but toward the end of his reign no more than four, nor in all King Henry the
sevenths time.

Of this Court I find it also farther observable; that some of the Justices
thereof were also Chief Barons of the Exchequer at the self same time; viz.
John Ivyn in 5 H. 6. in consideration whereof, by reason that the Terms in the
Exchequer were longer than in this Court of Common Pleas, he had a grant Pat. 5
H. 6. p. 1. m. 13.
of one Tun of Wine, yearly to be received out of the Kings own Wines, at the
hands of his Chief Butler, in the Port of London, at the said Kings price. Sir
Humphrey Starkey in Pat. 1 H. 7. p. 1. m. 25.
1 H. 7. and John Fitz-Iames in Pat. 13 H. 8. p. 2. m. 1.
13 H. 8.

Vera Effigies ROBERTI HEATH Equitis Aurati primo Capitalis Iusticiarij de
Banco; deinde ad placita coram Rege tenenda assignati.



W Hellar fecit, 1664.
Tabula Chronologica Iusticiariorum Domini Regis coram quibus Fines levati sunt,
Ab anno septimo Regis Ric. I. ad ann. xvi. sereniss. nunc Regis Caroli II.
Sessionis eorundem primum, ultimumque Terminum indicans.
An. Regis Ric. Imi. 7. in Festo S. Margar. OSbertus fill. Hervaei, usque Oct.
S. Martini, 7 Ioh. Will. de Glanvill, non ultra. Die dominica prox. ante Festum
S. Lucae Evang. Hubertus Cantuar. Archiep. usque diem Martis prox. post festum
S. Dunstani eodem anno. Ric. London. Episc. usque diem Martis prox. post festum
S. Dunstani eodem anno. Gilbertus Roff. Episc. usque diem Martis prox. post
festum S. Dunstani eodem anno. Rad. Hereford. Archidiac. usque diem Veneris
prox. post festum S. Lucae Evang. 9 R. 1. Ric. Elien. Archidiac. usque in
Crast. S. Dionysii, 10 R. 1. Will. de Warenna, usque in Crast. S. Dionysii, 10
R. 1. Mag. H. de Castello, non ultra. Ric. de Herieth (five Herierd) usque diem
Martis prox. ante festum S. Margaretae Virginis, 5 Ioh. Osbertus filius
Simonis, non ultra. Simon de Patshull, usque xv. Pasch. 15 Ioh. Die Mercurii
prox. ante Festum S. Dunstani. Magister Tho. de Husseburne, usque in Crast. S.
Catherinae Virginis, 9 R. 1. An. Regis Ric. 1. 80. Die Lunae prox. post Festum
beatae Mariae. Ogerus filius Ogeri, non ultra. Die Iovis prox. post Festum S.
Mich. 9 R. 1. Galfr. fill. Petri (Comes Essexiae) usque 28 Maii, 11 Ioh. Steph.
de Torneham, non ultra. Iac. de Poterna, usque xv. Pasch. 15 Ioh. Ioh. de
Gestling, usque xv. Hill. 4 H. 3. Die Veneris prox. post Festum S. Lucae.
Godefridus Winton. Episc. non ultra. Herbertus Salesb. Episc. non ultra. Hugo
Bardulf, non ultra. Die dominica prox. post Festum S. Marci Evang. Henr. de
Wichenton, non ultra. 10 R. 1. Die dominica prox. post Oct. Hill. Mich. Belet,
usque in Crast. S. Dionysii. Crast. S. Dionysii. Robertus filius Rogeri, non
ultra. Will. de Aubeni, non ultra. Ioh. Rex. (...) Eustach. de Faucumberg,
usque tres septim. Trin. 3 H. 3. Godefridus de Insula, non ultra. Walt. de
Creping, usque Oct. S. Ioh. Rapt. 9 Ioh. D^e Ma^ti^ prox. ante F^stum S.
M^^gar. Gaufr. de Bocland, non ultra. Magister Rad. de Stokes, non ultra. 6
I^^. die Mer^^ii prox. post deco^l. S. Ioh. Bapt. Gocelinus de Wells, non
ultra. Di^ M^tis prox. ^nte Festum Annune. beatae M^riae. Ric. de Meceugros
(sive Mucegros) usque Dominicam proximam post Ascens. 7 Ioh. 7 Ioh. Domniic^
proxima post A c^nsio^^^m. Henr. Archidiac. Staff. usque Oct. Ioh. Bapt. 9 Ioh.
Die I^vi^ prox. ante Festum S. Margar. Henr. de Northampton, non ultra. Ioh. de
Braibroc, non ultra. 9 Ioh. die M^rtis, prox. post Clausum Pasch. Will. Briwer,
usq, 28 Maii, 11 Ioh. Rad. de Ardena, non ultra. Ioh. Oct. Trin. Henr. de
Ponteaudomare, usque xv Pasch. 15 Ioh. 11 Ioh. 28 (...). Hugo de Wells
Lincoln. electus, non ultra. G. Fill. Petri Comes Essexiae, non ultra. Walterus
domini Regis Cancellarius, non ultra. 12 Ioh. die S. Clem. Rob. de Aumari,
usque diem Animarum, 13 Ioh. Rog. de Huscarl, usque xv Pasch. 15 Ioh. (...)
Petrus Episc. Winton. non ultra dictum Term. Henr. 3. An. 2^. Terminus non
memo^atur. Will. Comes Arundell, non ultra. Martinus de Patshull (postea sc. 12
H. 3. Archidiac. Norff.) usque Crast. S. Iacobi, 12 H. 3. Alanus Basset, non
ultra. Rad. Hareng, usque Crast. S. Katherinae, 8 H. 3. Steph. de Segrave,
usque quinque septim. Mich. 14 H. 3. Simon de Insula, usque xv Hill. 4 H. 3. 3
H. 3. tres sept. Pasch. H. Abbas de Ramesey, non ultra dictum Term. Tho. de
Eydene, (sive Hayden) usque tres septim. Pasch. 10 H. 3. Mauricius de Audeley,
non ultra dictum Term. 4 H. 3. Oct. Mich. Rob. de Lexinton, usque Oct. Hill. 27
H. 3. 4 H. 3. 3 sept. Pasch. Hubertus de Burgo (Capitalis Justice. Angliae)
usque Crast. Apost. S. Phil. and Iac. 12 H. 3. Robertus de Vere Comes Oxon.
usque tres septim. Pasch. 5 H. 3. 6 H. 3. Crast. Purif. Ioh. de Monemue, non
ultra dictum Term. 7 H. 3. xv Mich. Gaufr. le Sauvage, usque tres septim.
Pasch. 10 H. 3. 8 H. 3. men's. Pasch. Thomas de Muleton (postea Capit. Justice.)
usque xv Pasch. 20 H. 3. 10 H. 3. 3 sept. Pasch. Warinus fill. Iohelis, non
ultra dictum Term. 12 H. 3. 3 tres Pasch. Will. filius Warini, non ultra dictum
Term. Will. de Insula, usque quinque septim. Pasch. 15 H. 3. Crast. Apost.
Phil. and Iac. 12 H. 3. Ioh. Marescallus, non ultra dictum Term. Crast. S.
Iacobi 12 H. 3. Hugo Abbas de S. Edmundo, non ultra dictum Term. 13 H. 3. xv
Mich. Will. de Ralegh, usque tres septim. Hill. 18 H. 3. Will. de London, usque
quinque septim. Pasch. 15 H. 3. Magister Rob. de Cherdelawe (sive Sherdelawe)
usque quinque septim. Pasch. 16 H. 3. Crast. invent. S. Crucis. Thomas de
Camvill, non ultra dictum Term. 14 H. 3. Oct. Ioh. Bapt. Rad. de Norwico, usque
tres septim. Hill. 18 H. 3. xv Hill. 14 H. 3. Ric. Reinger, usque quinque
septim. Pasch. 15 H. 3. 15 H. 3. 5 sept. Pasch. Will. de Eboraco, (praepositus
Beverlaci) usque Crast. Animarum, 24 H. 3. 17 H. 3. tres sept. Ioh. Bapt. Adam
filius Willielmi, usque tres sept. Hill. 21 H. 3. Will. de S. Edmundo, usque
Oct. S. Ioh. Bapt. 29 H. 3. 20 H. 3. xv Pasch. Ioh. de Kirkeby, non ultra
dictum Term. Will. de Culewurth, usque Oct. Purif. 26 H. 3. 22 H. 3. Crast. S.
Ioh. Bapt. Hugo Giffard, non ultra dictum Term. Henr. de Bathonia, usque Oct.
Hill. 42 H. 3. 26 H. 3. Oct. Purif. Gilb. de Preston (postea Capit. Justice.)
usque Oct. S. Ioh. Bapt. 2 E. 1. Rob. de Bellocampo, non ultra dictum Term.
Octab. Mich. 26 H. 3. Rog. de Thurkelby (postea Capitalis Justice.) usque Oct.
Mich. 43 H. 3. Iollanus de Nevill, usque Oct. Hill. 29 H. 3. 27 H. 3. Oct.
Hill. Rob. de Esseburne, non ultra dictum Term. 28 H. 3. men's. Pasch. Ioh. de
Cobeham, usque Oct. Mich. 35 H. 3. 29 H. 3. Oct. Hill. Rob. de Notingham, usque
Oct. S. Ioh. Bapt. eodem anno. 30 H. 3. xv Mich. Alanus de Watsand, usque xv
Mich. 38 H. 3. 31 H. 3. xv Trin. Will. de Wylton, usque tres sept. Mich. 33 H.
3. 34 H. 3. tres sept. Mich. Rob. de Bruys (sive Brywes) usque Oct. Hill. 42 H.
3. xv Hill. Ioh. de Gatesden, non ultra dictum Term. xv Mich. 35 H. 3. Magister
Simon de Wauton, Oct. Hill. 41 H. 3. Octab. Mich. Henr. de la Mare, non ultra
dictum Term. 36 H. 3. Oct. S. Ioh. Bapt. Egid. de Erdinton, usque xv Mich. 38
H. 3. 37 H. 3. Oct. Hill. Will. Trussell, usque Crast. S. Andr. Apost. 39 H. 3.
38 H. 3. xv Mich. Rog. de Witecestre, non ultra dictum Term. 39 H. 3. Crast. S.
Andr. Apost. Johannes Abbas de Burgo S. Petri, non ultra dictum Term. Rob. de
Shotinden, usque xv Mich. 41 H. 3. Ioh. de Kave, usque xv Mich. 44 H. 3. Nich.
de Handlo, non ultra dictum Term. 40 H. 3. Oct. Mich. Ioh. de Cokefeld, usque
xv Mich, 41 H. 3. 40 H. 3. xv Hill. Ioh. de Wyvill, usque Oct. Hill. 47 H. 3.
48 H. 3. xv Mart. Nich. de Turri, non ultra dictum Term. 49 H. 3. Oct. Mart.
Hervicus de Boreham, usque tres septim. Pasch. eodem anno. Will. Bonquor, usque
tres septim. Pasch. eodem anno. 50 H. 3. xv Ioh. Bapt. Ioh. de la Lynde, non
ultra dictum Terminum. (...) Walt. de Berstede, non ultra dictum Term. (...)
Rog. de Messenden, non ultra dictum Terminum. (...) Martinus de Litilbiry,
usque Oct. Trin. 56 H. 3. Magister Rog. de Seytone (postea Capit. Justice.)
usque Oct. Trin. 6 E. 1. (...) Steph. Haym, usque xv Mart. 2 E. 1. Rob. filius
Fulconis, usque xv Mart. 2 E. 1. (...) Radulphus de Hengeham (postea Capit.
Justice.) usque xv Mart. 2 E. 1. Will. Welond, non ultra dictum Term. (...)
Magister Ric. de Stanes, usque xv Purif 4 E. 1. Thomas de Welond (postea Capit.
Justice.) usque xv Mart. 17 E. 1. (...) Magister Rad. de Frenyngham, usque Oct.
Trin. 6 E. 1. Ioh. de Lovetot, usque xv Mich. 17 E. 1. (...) Rog. de Leycesire,
usque xv Mich. 17 E. 1. (...) Walt. de Helyun, usque Oct. Trin. 9 E. 1. Will.
de Burton, usque xv Mich. 17 E. 1. (...) Elias de Bekingham, usque xv Mart. 34
E. 1. (...) Rad. de Sandwico, non ultra dictum Term. Edw. 1. 18 E. 1. Oct.
Purif. Ioh. de Metingham, (Capit. Justice.) usque xv Mich. 26 E. 1. Rob. de
Hertford, usque xv Mart. 21 E. 1. Will. de Giselham, usque xv Mart. 21 E. 1.
Magister Rob. de Thorpe, usque Oct. Purif. 19 E. 1. 21 E. 1. xv Mart. Petrus
Malore, usque Crast. S. Ioh. Bapt. 2 E. 2. 23 E. 1. Crast. Mart. Will. de
Bereford (postea Capit. Justice.) usque xv S. Ioh. Bapt. 20 E. 2. 26 E. 1. xv
Ioh. Bapt. Will. Howard, usque Crast. S. Ioh. Bapt. 2 E. 2. 29 E. 1. tres sept.
Pasch. Lambertus de Trikingham, usque Crast. S. Ioh. Bapt. 9. E. 2. 34 E. 1. xv
Mart. Hervicus de Stantone, usque Oct. Trin. 6 E. 2. Et iterum Crast. Animarum
20 E. 2. (Capit. Justice.) Henr. de Gildeford, non ultra dictum Term. Edw. 2. 2
E. 2. tres septim. Pasch. Henr. le Scrope, usque Octab. Trin. 10 E. 2. Et
iterum a xv S. Ioh. Bapt. 1 E. 3. usque xv Hill. 3 E. 3. 6 E. 2. xv Mart. Ioh.
de Benstede, usque xv S. Ioh. Bapt. 14 E. 2. 6 E. 2. xv Hill. Will. Inge, usque
xv S. Ioh. Bapt. 9 E. 2. Octab. Trin. 6. E. 2. Ioh. Bacun, usque xv S. Ioh.
Bapt. 14 E. 2. 9 E. 2. xv Pasch. Ioh. de Mutforde, usque xv Hill. 3 E. 3. 10 E.
2. tres sept. Mich. Gilb. de Roubiri, usque xv S. Ioh. Bapt. 14 E. 2. 13 E. 2.
Oct. Purif. Ioh. de Doncastre, usque xv Mart. eodem anno. 14 E. 2. xv Mart.
Will. de Herle (postea Capit. Justice.) usque xv Mich. 9 E. 3. Ioh. de Stonore
(postea Capit. Justice.) usque Octab. Mich. 27 E. 3. Edw. 2. 14 E. 2. Oct. Trin.
Ioh. de Bousser, usque Crast. Ascens. 3 E. 3. 17 E. 2. Oct. ^ill. Walt. de
Friskenney, usque tres septim. Mich. eodem anno. Galfridus le Scrope, (postea
Capit. Justice.) usque tres septim. Mich. eodem anno. Edw. 3. 3 E. 3. Oct. Hill.
Ioh. Travers, usque Crast. Ascens. 5 E. 3. Ric. de Willoughby (quandoque Capit.
Justice.) usque xv Trin. 4 E. 3. Et iterum ab Octab. Hill. 17 E. 3. usque xv
Trin. 31 E. 3. 5 E. 3. Octab. Purif Ioh. de Cantebrig, usque tres sept. Mich. 8
E. 3. Ioh. Inge, usque men's. Mich. 14 E. 3. 5 E. 3. men's. Pasch. Rob. de
Malberthorp (quandoque Capit. Justice.) usque Oct. Mart. eodem anno. 6 E. 3. xv
Pasch. Ioh. de Shardelowe, usque men's. Mich. 14 E. 3. Ric. de Aldeburgh, usque
men's. Mich. 14 E. 3. 7 ^. 3 xv Mart. Will. de Shareshull, usque xv Hill. 24 E.
3. 9 E. 3. xv Mich. Ioh. Trevaignon, non ultra dictum Term. 11 E. 3. Oct. hill.
Rog. Hillary (postea Capit. Justice.) usque xv Hill. 30 E. 3. Will. Scot (postea
Capit. Justice.) usque xv Pasch. 13 E. 3. Will. Basset, usque xv Mich. 15 E. 3.
14 E. 3. Crast. Ioh. Bapt. Iacobus de Wodstoke, usque men's. Mich. eodem anno.
Rob. Parnyng, non ultra dictum Term. Edw. 3. Octab. Hill. 15 E. 3. Tho.
Heppescotes, usque xv Mich. eodem anno. Ric. de Kelleshull, usque xv Hill. 28
E. 3. 19 E. 3. Oct. Hill. Ioh. de Stouford, usque Crast. S. Ioh. Bapt. 33 E. 3.
22 E. 3. xv Hill. Thomas de Fencotes, usque xv Hill. 28 E. 3. 28 E. 3. xv.
Pasch. Henr. Grene, usque xv Hill. 35. E. 3. 29 E. 3. Oct. Mich. Tho. de Seton,
usque Crast. S. Ioh. Bapt. 33 E. 3. 30 E. 3. xv. Ioh. Bapt. Rob. de Thorpe
(Capit. Justice.) usque Crast. Purif. 45 E. 3. 31 E. 3. Oct. Hill. Henr. de
Motelowe, usque tres sept. Pasch. 35 E. 3. 33 E. 3. Oct Mich. Ioh. Moubray,
usque xv Pasch. 47 E. 3. 34 E. 3. xv Hill. Will. Skipwith, usque tres septim.
Pasch. 35 E. 3. Et iterum a Crast. Anim. 50 E. 3. usque Oct. Hill. 11 R. 2. 35
E. 3. Oct. Mich. Ioh. Knyvet, usque Crast. Ascens. 39 E. 3. 37 E. 3. xv Hill.
Ioh. Delves, usque Crast. Ascens. 39 E. 3. 39 E. 3. Oct. Hill. Will. de
Fyncheden (postea Capit. Justice) usque xv Trin. 48 E. 3. Will. de Wychingham,
usque Crast. Ascens. 51. E. 3. 46 E. 3. Oct. Purif. Rog. de Kirketon, usque xv
Ioh. Bapt. 4 R. 2. Ioh. de Cavendish, non ultra. 48 E. 3. xv Mich. Rob.
Bealknap (Capit. Justice.) usque Octab. S. Ioh. Bapt. 11 R. 2. 49 E. 3. Oct.
Purif. Rog. Fulthorpe, usque Oct. S. Ioh. Bapt. 11 R. 2. Ric. 2. 1 R. 2. men's.
Pasch. Henr. de Percehay, usque xv Ioh. Bapt. 4 R. 2. 4 R. 2. men's. Pasch.
Henr. Asty, usque xv Hill. 6 R. 2. (...) Ioh. Holt, usque Oct. Ioh. Bapt. 11 R.
2. Will. de Burgh, usque Oct. S. Ioh. Bapt. 11 R. 2. (...) Rob. de Charleton
(Capit. Justice.) usque xv Ioh. Bapt. 18 R. 2. Will Thirnyng (postea Capit.
Justice.) usque Oct. Hill. 14 H. 4. (...) Will. Rikhill, usque xv Trin. 8 H. 4.
Ioh. Wadham, usque Oct. S. Ioh. Bapt. 21 R. 2. Ric. Sydenham, usque Oct. Trin.
19 R. 2. (...) Ioh. Markham, usque Crast. Purif. 9 H. 4. (...) Will. Hankeford,
usque Oct. Hill. 14 H. 4. Will. Brenchesle, usque xv Pasch. 7 H. 4. (...) Ioh.
Cokayn, usque Octab. Trin. 7 H. 6. (...) Ioh. Colpepir, usque xv Ioh. Bapt. 2
H. 5. (...) Rob. Hill (sive Hulle) usque Oct. Hill. 3 H. 6. Henr. 5. Ric.
Norton (Capit. Justice.) usque men's. Mich. 8 H. 5. (...) Will. Ludyngton, usque
Crast. Ascens. 7 H. 5. Ioh. Preston, usque xv Hill. 6 H. 6. (...) Will.
Babington (Capit. Justice.) usque Crast Martini 14 H. 6. (...) Ioh. Martyn,
usque Oct. Mich. 15. H. 6. Henr. 6. 1 H. 6. men's. Pasch. Ioh. Hals, usque Oct.
Hill. 3 H. 6. Ioh. Ioh. Ivyn (postea Capit. Justice.) usque Oct. Trin. 16 H. 6.
4 H. 6. Octab. Ioh. Bapt. Iac. Strangways, usque men's. Mich. 21. H. 6. 8 H. 6.
Crast. Mart. Ioh. Cotesmore (postea Capit. Justice.) usque men's. Pasch. 17. H.
6. Will. Paston, usque xv Pasch. 22 H. 6. 17 H. 6. Crast. Purif. Ric. Neuton
(Capit. Justice.) usque Oct. Mart. 27. H. 6. Tho. Fulthorpe, usque Oct. Mart. 35
H. 6. 18 H. 6. men's. Pasch. Will. Ayscogh, usque xv Ioh. Bapt. 32 H. 6. 22 H.
6. xv Mich. Ioh. Portyngton, usque men's. Pasch. 32 H. 6. 23 H. 6. xv Hill.
Nich. Ayshton, usque Crast. Purif. 5 E. 4. 27 H. 6. Oct. Martia^. Petrus
Ardeen, usque xv Pasch. 7 E. 4. Crast. Purif. 27 H. 6. Ioh. Prysot (Capit.
Justice.) usque Crast. Animarum 38 H. 6. 29 H. 6. Oct. Mart. Rob. Danvers, usque
Octab. Mich. 6 E. 4. 32 H. 6. Oct. Hill. Rob. Danby (postea Capit. Justice.)
usque Octab. Trin. 10 E. 4. 33 H. 6. Oct. Mich. Walt. Moille, usque Octab.
Trin. 10 E. 4. 33 H. 6. Oct. Ioh. Bapt. Ioh. Nedeham, usque Octab. Trin. 10 E.
4. Edw. 4. 1 E. 4. Octab. Mart. Ric. Chokke, usque Crastin. Ascens. 1 E. 5. 6
E. 4. men's. Pasch. Tho. Littilton, usque Octab. Trin. 21 E. 4. 7 E. 4. Crast.
Purif. Thomas Young, usque Octab. Trin. 10 E. 4. 11 E. 4. Crast. Ioh. Bapt.
Thomas Bryan (Capit. Justice.) usque Crastin. Ascens. 15 H. 7. Ric. Neel, usque
tres septim. Pasch. 1 H. 7. 21 E. 4. xv Mart. Ioh. Catesby, usque Crast.
Animarum. 2 H. 7. Ric. 3. 1 R. 3. xv Mich. Humfr. Starky, usque Crast. S. Ioh.
Bapt. 1 H. 7. 2 R. 3. Crast. Ascens. Rog. Tounshend, usque Octab. S. Ioh. Bapt.
8 H. 7. Henr. 7. 2 H. 7. Crast. Purif. Ioh. Haugh, usque xv S. Ioh. Bapt. 4 H.
7. Octab. Trin. Will. Calowe (non ultra.) 3 H. 7. men's. Pasch. Will. Danvers,
usque Octab. Purif. 19 H. 7. 5 H. 7. Crast. Animarum. Ioh. Vavasour, usque
Octab. Mich. 22 H. 7. Men's. Pasch. 9 H. 7. Ioh. Fineux, usque xv Hill. 10 H. 7.
11 H. 7. Oct. Hill. Thomas Wode (postea Cap. Justice.) usque xv S. Ioh. Bapt. 17
H. 7. 17 H. 7. Crast. Purif. Ioh. Fisher, usque Octab. Purif. 24 H. 7. 18 H. 7.
Oct. Mich. Tho. Frowyk (Cap. Justice.) usque xv Mart. 21 H. 7. 19 H. 7. xv Ioh.
Bapt. Ioh. Kingismill, usque Octab. Purif. 24 H. 7. 22 H. 7. Crast. Purif. Rob.
Read (Cap. Justice.) usque xv Mart. 10 H. 8. Men's. Pasch. 22 H. 7. Ioh. Boteler,
usque xv Mart. 9 H. 8. Henr. 8. 1 H. 8. xv Pasch. Will. Grevill, usque Octab.
Purif. 4 H. 8. 1 H. 8. xv Pasch. Will. Fairfax, usque tres Pasch. 6 H. 8. 5 H.
8. xv Pasch. Ric. Elyot, usque Oct. Purif. 13 H. 8. 6 H. 8. Crast. Trin. Ludov.
Pollard, usque xv Mart. 17 H. 8. 9 H. 8. Octab. Purif. Johannes More, usque
Octab. Purif. 11 H. 8. 10 H. 8. xv Hill. Johannes Erneley (Capit. Justice.)
usque Octab. Purif. 11 H. 8. 12 H. 8. xv Pasch. Rob. Brudnell (Capitalis
Justice.) usque xv Mart. 22 H. 8. 12 H. 8. xv Pasch. Ricardus Broke, usque
quinque Pasch. 21 H. 8. 14 H. 8. men's. Pasch. Anthonius Fitzherbert, quinque
Pasch. 21 H. 8. 18 H. 8. Oct. Hill. Thomas Englefeild, usque tres Trin. 29 H.
8. 18 H. 8. Oct. Hill. Will. Shelley, usque Crast. Animarum, 2 E. 6. 22 H. 8.
Oct. Hill. Robertus Norwiche (Capitalis Justice.) usque Octab. Purif. 26 H. 8.
27 H. 8. tres Pasch. Johannes Baldwyn (Capit. Justice.) usque tres Trin. 37 H.
8. 29 H. 8. Oct. Mich. Thomas Willoughby, usque tres Trin. 37 H. 8. 30 H. 8.
Crast. Trin. Cristoph. Ienney, usque xv Mart. 34 H. 8. 34 H. 8. Oct. Hill.
Humfr. Brown, usque xv Mart. 5 Eliz. 37 H. 8. Oct. Mich. Edw. Mountagu
(Capitalis Justice.) usque 3. Trin. 7 E. 6. 38 H. 8. xv Pasch. Johannes Hynde,
usque xv Mich. 4 E. 6. Edw. 6. 3 E. 6. men's. Pasch. Iacobus Hales, usque tres
Trin. 7 E. 6. 5 E. 6. Octab. Hill. Edmundus Molineux, usque tres Trin. 6 E. 6.
6 E. 6. Octab. Hill. Will. Coke, usque tres Trin. 7 E. 6. 1 Mariae. Octab.
Mich. Ric. Morgan (Capitalis Justice.) usque tres Trin. 1 Mariae. 1 Mariae Oct.
Mich. Edw. Saunders, usque Crast. Ascens. 2 and 3 Ph. and Mariae. Mariae. 1 and
2. Ph. and M. Oct. Much. Rob. Brook (Capitalis Justice.) usque tres Trin. 4.
and 5. Ph. and M. 1 and 2. Ph. and M. men's. Mich. Will. Staunford, usque tres
Trin. 4 and 5 Ph. and M. 3 and 4. Ph. and M. Crast. Trin. Iac. Dyer, usque tres
Trin. 5 and 6. Ph. and M. 5 and 6. Ph. and M. Oct. Mich. Anth. Brown
(Capitalis Justice.) usque Octab. Hill. 1. Eliz. 5 and 6. Ph. and M. Crast.
Ma^t. Rob. Catlyn, usque Octab. Hill. 1 Eliz. Eliz. 1 Eliz. Octab. Hill.
Anthonius Brown, usque tres Trin. 9 Eliz. 1 Eliz. xv Hill. Iac. Dyer
(Capitalis Justice.) usque Octab. Purif. 24 Eliz. 2 Eliz. Octab. Hill. Ric.
Weston, usque tres Trin. 14 Eliz. ^ Eliz. Octab. Pa^^o Johannes Walshe, usque
Octab. Purif. 14 Eliz. ^ Eliz. Octab. Mich. Ric. Harpur, usque Octab. Hill. 19
Eliz. 14 Eliz. Oct. Mich. Rogerus Manwood, usque Octab. Hill. 21 Eliz. 15 Eliz.
Oct. Hill. Rob. Mounson, usque Octab. Purif. 22 Eliz. 20 (...). Crast. Purif.
Thomas Meade, usque Crast. Trin. 27 Eliz. 21 Eliz. Oct. Mich. Franciscus
Windham, usque tres Trin. 34 Eliz. 23 Eliz. xv Pasch. Will. Peryam, usque
Crast. Purif. 35 Eliz. 24 Eliz. xv Pasch. Edm. Anderson (Capitalis Justice.)
usque tres Trin. 3 Iac. 28 Eliz. Oct. Hill. Franciscus Rhodes, usque xv Mart.
31 Eliz. 31 Eliz. Crast. Trin. Thomas Walmisley, usque xv Mart. 10 Iac. 35
Eliz. Oct. Purif. Franciscus Beaumont, usque Octab. Purif. 40 Eliz. 36 Eliz.
Crast. Purif. Thomas Owen, usque xv Mart. 41 Eliz. 40 Eliz. Oct. Mich. Johannes
Glanvill, usque tres Trin. 42 Eliz. 41 Eliz. Oct. Purif. Georgius Kingsmill,
usque Oct. Purif. 3 Iac. 43 Eliz. xv Mart. Petrus Warburton, usque tres Trin.
19 Iac. Iac. 1 Iac. Octab. Purif. Will. Daniell, usque Crast. Ascens. 8 Iac. 3
Iac. Oct. Mich. Franciscus Gawdey (Capitalis Justice.) usque xv Mart. 3 Iac. 3
Iac. Oct. Hill. Thomas Coventre, usque xv Mart. 4 Iac. 4 Iac. Oct. Mich. Edw.
Coke (Capitalis Justice.) usque tres Mich. 11 Iac. 5 Iac. xv Mart. Thomas
Foster, usque Octab. Purif. 9 Iac. 9 Iac. Crast. Mart. Humfr. Winche, usque
Crast. Purif. 22 Iac. 10 Iac. Octab. Hill. Augustinus Nicholls usque tres Trin.
14 Iac. 11 Iac. men's. Mich. Henricus Hobert (Capitalis Justice.) usque xv Mart.
1 Car. 1. 15 Iac. men's. Pasch. Ric. Hutton, usque Octab. Purif. 14 Car. 1. 19
Iac. men's. Mich. Will. Jones, usque xv Mich. 22 Iac. 22 Iac. tres Mich.
Franciscus Harvye, usque tres Trin. 8 Car. 1. Car. 1. 1 Car. 1. xv Pasch.
Georgius Croke, usque Oct. Mich. 4 Car. 1. 1 Car. 1. men's. Pasch. Henricus
Yelverton, usque Octab. Hill. 5 Car. 1. 2 Car. 1. Oct. Hill. Thomas Richardson,
usque 3 Mich. 7 Car. 1. 5 Car. 2. Oct. Purif. Humphr. Davenport, usque Octab.
Purif. 6 Car. 1. 7 Car. 1. quinque Pasch. Georgius Vernon, usque xv Mart. 15
Car. 1. 7 Car. 1. men's. Mich. Rob. Heath (Capit. Justice.) usque tres Trin. 10
Car. 1. 8 Car. 1. xv Mich. Franciscus Crawley, exclusus per Ordinationem Parl.
xv Mart. 21 Car. 1. 10 Car. 1. tres Mich. Johannes Finche (Capitalis Justice.)
usque xv Mart. 15 Car. 1. 15 Car. 1. quinque Pasch. Edmundus Reeve, usque Oct.
Purif. 22 Car. 1. 15 Car. 1. xv Hill. Edw. Littleton (Cap. Justice.) usque Oct.
Hill. 16 Car. 1. 15 Car. 1. xv Hill. Rob. Foster, exclusus per Ordinationem
Parl. xv Mart. 21 Car. 1. 16 Car. 1. xv Hill. Johannes Banks (Capitalis
Justice.) usque xv Mart. 20 Car. 1. Car. II. xv Pasch. 12 Car. 2. Rob. Foster,
restoratus usque tres Trin. 12 Car. 2. 12 Car. 2. Crast. Ascens. Rob. Hide,
usque tres Mich. 15 Car. 2. 12 Car. 2. tres Trin. Thomas Tirell. Car. 2. tres
Mich. Orlandus Bridgeman (Cap. Justice.) 12 Car. 2. Oct. Mart. Samuel Brown.
15 Car. 2. Crast. Mart. Johannes Archer.

Cap. XIX.
The Exchequer.
THe Description of this Court, and its Original, is thus set forth by an old
Manuscript Penes Thesaur. and Camerar. Scacc.
, in King Henry the 2ds time, said to have been written by Gerv. Tilburiensis.

Scaccarium (says he) tabula est quadrangula etc. The Exchequer is a four
cornered board, about ten foot long, and five foot broad; fitted in manner of a
Table for men to sit about: On every side whereof is a standing ledge, or
border, four fingers broad.

Upon this board is laid a Cloth, bought in Easter-Term; which is of black
color, rowed with strekes, distant about a foot or a span. And a little after,
he goes thus on; This Court, by report, began from the very Conquest of this
Realm; and was erected by King William; but the reason and proportion thereof
is taken from the Exchequer Beyond Sea.

That this Court then had its name from the Board whereat they sat, there is
no doubt to be made; considering, that the Cloth which covered it was thus
party-colored; which the French call Chequy: Therefore I think we need not to
trouble our selves with looking farther, either into the German, Dutch, or
Latin Tongues, for the Etymology thereof; considering, that places have not
seldom received their names from the like occasions, as well as from the nature
of them.

And now touching the Authority and dignity thereof, let us farther see what
the same old Author expresses; -- Ex cod. nigro penes Thesaur. and Camerarios
Scacc. per Gerv. Tilbur. (ut fertur) composito temp. Regis H. 2. Cap. 1.
Nulli licet Statuta Scaccarii infringere, vel eis quavis temeritate resistere:
habet enim hoc commune cum ipsa Domini Regis Curia, in qua ipse in propria
persona jura decernit, quod nec recordationi nec sententiae in eo latae, liceat
alicui contradicere.

By which words it is manifest, that the Court of Exchequer, was then a
distinct Court from that Court of the King, where he himself used to sit in
person, and whence there was no appeal.

In this Court then sat, by the institution Dialog. Scacc. per Gerv. Tilbur.
Cap. 4.
of the said King William, not only the great Barons of this Realm, as well
Ecclesiastical as secular; but also the Justice of England, as President
thereof by his Office; and and so continued to do for a long space after: for
in Regist. a^ Abb^^^on in bibl. Cotton sub effigy Claudii C. 9. f. 177. a.
King Henry the seconds time, the Abbot of Abingdon being dead, and one sent by
the Kings Justices to seize the possessions of that Monastery into the Kings
hands; de communi consilio, says the Register of that House, misimus dominum
Nicholaum Priorem nostrum etc. by Common consent, The Exchequer.
we dispatched away Nicholas our Prior, and certain of the Monks, unto Ranulph
de Glanvill, who then executed the power of Iusticiar under the King,
throughout his whole Realm; to the end that he might, by word of mouth,
represent to him our Customs; and to entreat him, that they might not be
altered by reason of this seizure: And when they came to the said Ranulph, then
sitting in the Exchequer at Westminster.
and had manifested to him what our Liberties and Customs were; he, advising
with the Bishops, and other Justices who also sat there, published the
judgment of the Court; viz. that whether our Church were destitute of a Pastor
or not, our Customs should not be infringed.

And to come lower, even to King Henry the 3ds. time; I find, that upon the
seizure of certain lands into the Kings hands, which did beling to one Rose de
Chesterton; she was then commanded R(...)5.
to appear coram Huberto de Burgo Iusticiario, and Baronibus de Scaccario, die
dominica proxima post Octabas S. Trinitatis.

So also, about ten years after, Stephan de Segrave, Capitalis Angliae
Iusticiarius (they are the words) Math. Paris.
of Math. Paris.) rem Scaccarii tractavit; scil. Thesaurum, Custodias Puerorum,
and Eschaetas, usque annum Domini 1234. (id est 18 H. 3.)

In this Court Fines were anciently, sometimes levied and recorded, as by these
instances appears; the one upon an Agreement Ex ipso(...)
made betwixt Roger de Brai, and Mabell the Daughter of William de Orgr,
concerning lands in Maldone, sold by the said Mabell unto the same Roger --
coram Iusticiariis Regis; scil. Ricardo Pictaviensi Archidiacono and Reginaldo
de Warenna apud Dunstaplam: which agreement concludes thus; Hanc Cartam, quam
Sigillo meo confirmavi, concessi and confirmavi apud Scaccarium, coram domino
Ricardo de Luci, and aliis Baronibus de Scaccario. This, though not dated, was
in King Henry the 2ds. reign; for then was the said Richard de Luci Justice of
England, and sat in this Court as others, of whom I have already made mention,
having that Office then did.

The other was Ibid.
upon a grant made by Hawise de Iselham and Raphe her Husband, Cap. 19.
and Roger their Son and Heir, unto William Briwere (Chief Lord of the Fee) of
all their Lands in Iselham; wherein the words run thus -- Haec venditio facta
fuit in pleno Comitatu de Devenescire, and postea retracta and recordata apud
Westmonasterium, ad Scaccarium, die Iovis, proxima post Festum S. Lucae
Evangelistae an.xxvi. Regis Henrici secundi, coram Ricardo Winton. Gaufrido
Elien. and Iohanne Norwic. Episcopis; and Ranulpho de Glanvilla, and Ricardo
Thesaurario, and Will. Basset, and Alano de Furnellis, and Roberto Mantell, and
aliis Baronibus, qui tunc ibi aderant.

Whence also it is observable; that three of the Spiritual Barons then sat in
this Court, with Ranulph de Glanvill (who was at that time Justice of England)
and three temporal Barons.

So likewise in King Richard the firsts time, as from the Record it self is
manifest; In Scacc. penes Cameraries Scac.
Haec est finalis concordia facta in Curia domini Regis apud Westminster. ad
Scaccarium, die dominica proxima post Festum S. Marci Evangelistae anno regni
Regis Ricardi nono, coram H. Cantuariensi Aechiepiscopo (etc.) Iusticiariis
domini Regis (etc.)

So also in King John's, as appears by the Clause Claus. 14 Ioh. m. 4. in
dorso.
Roll of that year; Rex etc. I eadem gratia Norwicensi Episcopo etc. Nuncios
vestros ad nos destinatos suscepimus; and, audito eorum nuncio eos misimus ad
fideles nostros G. filium Petri Iusticiarium nostrum, Saherum Comitem
Wintoniae, VV. Briwar, Magistrum Ricardum de Mariscis, tunc ad Scaccarium
nostrum residentes, and ad caeteros Barons de Scaccario nostro; ut de
singulis, per eorum consilium vobis responderemus etc.

And plain it is, that, not only till the ixth. of H. 3. that the great Charter
was confirmed; but afterward for the greatest part of King Edw. the first
reign, the Common Pleas were usually held in this Court: for by the Statute
called Articuli super Cartas made in 28 E. 1. it is there expressly enacted,
Cap. 4.
that No Common-Plea shall be henceforth held in the Exchequer, contrary to the
form of the great Charter.

And, instead of these Ecclesiastical and Secular Barons, here sat Canonists
and other temporal persons, learned in the Laws of this Realm, who thereupon
had the name of Barons, because they sat in the same places as the real Barons
did; the Lord high Treasurer also supplying the room of the Chief Justice of
England, as Fleta tells us Lib. 2. cap. 26.
-- Iusticiarios ibidem commorantes, says he, Barons esse dicimus, eo quod
suis locis Barons sedere solebant, dum Comes Norfolciae and Marescallus
Angliae locum habuit in sedili, tanquam Capitalis Iusticiarius Regis Angliae,
Rege in regno suo non existente; cujus locum hodie occupat Thesaurarius, sed
officium tamen occupare non potest.

Consonant to which testimony of Fleta, the Record Claus. 18. H. 3. in dorso m.
16.
of 18 H. 3. expresses, that William de Beauchamp was appointed ad residendum
ad Scaccarium tanquam Baro: and so likewise were, at the same time, Alexander
de Swereford Treasurer of the Cathedral of St. Paul in London, and Richard de
Muntfichet, each of whom had a Pension Liberatae de an. 27. H. 3. m. 3.
of xl. marks per annum, payable out of the Kings Exchequer for their support
in that service. And that other such persons were so constituted in succeeding
times, my Chronologick Tables will plainly demonstrate: Amongst which Roger de
la Ley in 48 H. 3. who then, being the Kings Remembrancer in this Court, was
assigned Claus. 48. H. 3. m. 10.
-- ad officium Baronis in Scaccario praedicto explendum, there being Claus.
48. H. 3. m. 10.
no other Baron there, at that time, but himself.

Cap. XX.
Justices Itinerant.
IT cannot rationally be thought, considering the great change which the Norman
Conquest had made in this Realm, that the Government should easily so settle,
as that a firm tranquillity could be suddenly enjoyed; Justices Itinerant.
King William the first having enough to do, not only to secure himself from
those Insurrections of the native English, whereof he had sufficient cause to
be in fear; but to qualify his Norman subjects, who were inclinable enough to a
defection; and to oppose the invasions of the Scotts and Danes, on the behalf
of Edgar Etheling, which often threatened his quiet.

Nor in the time of his Son King William Rufus could it be well expected, by
reason of the Rebellion of his Nobles, on the behalf of Robert Duke of
Normandy; and the frequent incursions of the Welsh. And, though the reign of
King Henry the first was for the most part prosperous: yet until King Henry
the 2d. (by whose Grandmother Maud, the Saxon blood was restored) after no
small contests with King Stephan, did enjoy the Crown, the Clouds of trouble
were not clearly blown over: Howbeit in his days, peace and quiet beginning to
flourish; to the end that the people might have Justice with more ease
administered to them upon all oceasions, and consequently the better attend
their domestic affairs; by the advice Bcaedictus Abbas in vita Regis H. 2. in
bibl. Cotton. sub effigy Iulii A. 11. fol. 72. b.
of his great Council, assembled at Northampton upon the Feast day of the
Conversion of St. Paul (viz. 25 Ian.) in the year of our Lord MCLxxvi. (being
the 23th. year of his reign) he divided R. Hoved. f. 313. a. M. Paris. in anno
1176.
this his Realm into six parts; and into each of them sent three Justices
Itinerant; unto whom he gave an Oath, that they should faithfully observe those
Constitutions Quas vide apud Rog. Hoved. in anno 1164. fol. 313. b.
which he had then newly made in his great Council held at Clarendon (commonly
called the Assize of Clarendon) and cause them to be inviolably kept by all his
subjects of this Realm, the names of which Justices Itinerant, I have in my
Chronologick Tables expressed.

But notwithstanding I here fix the Original of our Justices Itinerant no
higher than the 23th. year of King Henry the 2ds. reign: yet must I
acknowledge, that there was something of this kind before, though not settled in
any constant course: for certain it is, that Geffrey Bishop of Constance, (...)
and some other great men (Barons Regis they are called) did sit at Kenteford,
in the time of King William the Conquerours reign; and (...)
did then hear and determine the Clayms touching the rights and liberties of
the Church of Ely, which were at that t^me disputed before them.

These Justices, as (...)
I^ acton observes, were called Itinerant, by reason of their journeying from
place to place; sometimes for the hearing of all causes in general; sometimes
only certain special matters; viz. Assizes, and the Gaols. Those, (...)
says he, who are appointed in their Iters to travail from one County to
another, for the hearing of all Causes in general, are to take an Oath for the
better behaving themselves in that employment; each of them having a particular
Writ to warrant his proceeding (...); and afterward one general Writ to them
(...): the form of the spe^^al Writ being as follow^^^.

(...) A. N. salut^m (...) cum dilectis and (...) nostris A. B. C. ad
itinerandum per Comitatum VV. (vel Comitatus D. S. R. nostns) de omnibus
Assisis and placitis, tam Coro^ae and nostrae, quam aliis, secundum quod in
B^evi nostro de generali summonitione, inde vobis directo pleni^s continetur.
Et ideo vobis mandamus; rogantes, quod in side qua nobis tenemini, una cum
praedictis sociis vestris, ad haec expedienda ^ideliter and diligenter
intendatis; u^ tam fidem vestram, quam diligentiam ad hoc appositam debeamus
merito commendare. Test etc.

In what manner and order they were to proceed in this service, Bracton does
fully set (...)
forth: where also he describes the Oath of the xii. Knights to be elected,
for to present the Truth in all Pleas of the Crown, with the Articles whereupon
they were to make enquiry.

The form likewise of the Writ directed to the Shireeves, for summoning all
such persons, as were concerned in this service, to appear before the said
Justices, I have here also added.

Rex Claus. 3 H. 3. in dorso m. 13.
Vicecom. Cap. 20.
Ebor. and Northumbr. salutem. Summone per ^onos summonitiones omnes
Archiepiscopos, Episcopos, Abbates, Comites, and Barons, milites and libere
tenentes, de tota ballivia tua; and de qualibet villa quatuor legales homines,
and Praepositum; and de quolibet Burgo xii. legales Burgenses, per totam
balliviam tuam; and omnes alios de ballivia tua, qui coram Iusticiariis
Itinerantibus venire solent and debent; quod sint apud Ebora^um coram
Iusticiariis nostris a die S. Martini in xv. dies, audituri and facturi
praeceptum nostrum. Facias etiam venire tantum coram eis, omnia Placita
Coronae, quae placitata non sunt, and quae emerserunt postquam Assisa ultimo
fuit in partibus illis, coram Iusticiariis Itinerantibus, tempore domini
Iohannis Regis, patris nostri; and omnia a^tachiamenta ad Placita illa
pertinentia; and omnes Assisas and omnia placita quae posita sunt ad primam
Assisam coram Iusticiariis, cum Brevibus Assisarum and Placitorum, ita quod
Assisae and omnia placita, pro defectu tui, vel summonitionis tuae non
remaneant. Facias etiam clamari and sciri, per totam Balliviam tuam, quod omnes
Assisae, and omnia placita, quae fuerunt terminata, and non finita coram
Iusticiariis nostris apud VVestmonasterium tantum, sint coram praefatis
Iusticiariis apud Eboracum in eo statu quo remanserunt per praeceptum nostrum
apud VVestmonasterium. Summone etiam per bonos summonitiones omnes illos, qui
Vicecomites fuerunt post ultimam itinerationem Iusticiariorum in partibus
illis, quod tantum sint ibidem, coram praefatis Iusticiariis, cum Brevibus de
Assisis and placitis quae tempore suo receper^nt; and ad respondendum de
tempore suo, sicut responderi debent, and coram Iusticiariis Itinerantibus: and
habeas ibi summonitiones and hoc Breve. Test VV. Marescallo Comite Pembrochiae
Rectore nostro and Regni nostri, apud VVestmonasterium, quarto die Novembris,
coram S. Cantuar. Archiepiscopo, and P. Winton. and Dunelm. Episcop.

Eodem modo scribitur omnibus Vicecomitibus Angliae, praeterquam Glouc.
Wigorniensis. Hereford, Staff. and Salop, Leic. and Warwick, sed variatur locus,
sicut continetur in dorso literarum patentium.

But these Justices continued not their Iters any longer than King Edward the
thirds time; Cap. 21.
for Selder's notes upon Hengham page 143.
then, those which we now call Justices of Assize, served in their stead.

Cap. XXI.
Justices of Assize and Gaol delivery.
OF these, the first mention I find is in Bracton -- Lib. 3. cap. 10.
Sunt etiam Iusticiarii constituti ad quasdam Assisas, duo, vel tres, vel
plures (says he) qui quidem perpetui non sunt; quia, expleto negotio
jurisdictionem amittunt.

And the form of the Writ whereby they were first constituted I have here added
from the Record.

Claus. 9. H. 3. m. 11. in dorso.
Rex N. N. salutem. Scias, quod constituimus te Iusticiarium nostrum, una cum
dilectis and fidelibus nostris N. and N. ad Assisas novae disseisinae
capiendas, and Gaolam deliberandam in Comitatu G. Et mandavimus Vicecomiti
nostro B. quod... die apud D. venire faciat coram vobis, omnes Assisas novae
disseisinae, quae summonitae sunt coram Iusticiariis ad primam Assisam, cum in
partibus illis venerint; and omnia Attachiamenta, and sectas quae pertinent ad
Gaolam deliberandam: and de qualibet villa Comitatus G. venire facias quatuor
legales homines and Praepositum: and de quolibet Burgo vel villa mercanda xii
legales homines; and omnes milites and libere tenentes, ad faciendum quod tu
and praedicti Iusticiarii eis dicetis ex part nostra ad pacem nostram
observandam de hiis qui male creduntur, vel indictantur de latrociniis,
roberiis, vel morte hominum: Et ideo tibi mandamus, quatinus, omni dilatione
and occasion postpositis, praedictis die and loco ipsis sociis tuis occurras;
and una cum eis diligenter and fideliter ad hoc intendas. T. Rege apud Westminster.
xiiii die Iunii, referring the names of the particular persons, who were at
that time sent into the several Counties of this Realm, for taking Assizes of
Novell disseisin and Gaol delivery to my Chronologick Tables; where, under the
title of Justices Itinerant they are inserted.

But after this, Justices of (...).
viz. in 21 E. 1. the King having by his last Statute Pl^c. P^rl. 21 E. 1. n.
12. [p. 130. im(...). Lo^d. 1662.
of Westminster. given command, that there should be special Justices assigned for
the taking of Assizes, Iurats, and Certificates at certain times, within the
several Counties of this Realm, and no other: And in regard, that as well the
Justices of each Bench, as Itinerant, appointed for that purpose at certain
times, when they were not in their Circuits, were often hindered in performance
of that service; as well in respect of their Office, as the Kings special
Precepts to them directed, so that they could not come at the times and places
by them so assigned: by reason of whose absence, many persons were hindered of
their rights, and diverse wrongs remained unpunished; the King, therefore, to
his power, willing that speedy Justice should be done to all his people, gave
command, that thenceforth eight discreet Justices should be assigned to take
Assizes, Iurats, and Certificates throughout his whole Realm; viz. two in the
Counties of York, Northumberland, Westmerland, Cumberland, Lancaster,
Notingham, and Derby: And two in the Counties of Lincoln, Leicester, Warwick,
Stafford, Salop. Northampton, Roteland, Gloucester, Hereford and Wigorn: And
two in the Counties of Cornwall, Devon. Somerset, Dorset, UUiltes. Southampton,
Oxon. Berks. Suffer and Surrey: and two in the Counties of Kent, Essex,
Hertford, Norff. Suff. Cambridge, Huntendon, Bedf. and Buck. And that the
Assizes, Iurats, and Recognizances for the County of Middlesex should be taken
before his Justices of the Bench.

Which said eight Justices, so assigned as aforesaid, were diligently to attend
that service throughout the whole year, on such days, and at such places, as
might most conduce to the advantage of the people.

(...)

Laws since the Norman Conquest.
KIng William Hist. Angl. script. col. 982. l. 46. Annal. H. Knighton col.
2355. Annal. W. Malmesb. fol. 342. b. Lamb. de pris^. Angl. leg. fol. 124. b.
MS. in bibl. Cotton. sub effigy Vitellii ^. 13. ^. 2. and E. 5. n. 25. Et sub
effigy Claudii D. 2. f. 36. Et sub effigy Othonis A. 15.
the Conqueror who began his reign in A. D. MLxvi.

King Henry Hist. Angl. script. col. 310. l. 52. Et col. 1021. n. 30. Et Lib.
rub. in Scacc. fol. 131. b. Et M. Paris. in an. 1100* MS. in bibl. Cotton. sub
effigy Claudii D. 2. f. 50. and f. 51. Et Vitellii E. 5. n. 19.
the first, who began his reign in A. D. MC.

King Stephen, W. Malmesb. f. 101. b. Hist. Angl. script. col. 314. MS. in
bibl. Cotton. sub effigy Claudii A. 8.
who began his reign in A. D. MCxxxv.

King Henry the 2d. who began his reign in A. D. MCLv. His Laws Hist. Angl.
script. col. 1385. M. Paris. in an. 1164. MS. in bibl. Cotton. sub effigy
Othonis A. 17. n. 13. Et Vitellii E. 11. n. 8.
in the Council of Clarendon.

His Law Rog. Hoved. fol. 350. a.
for Assize of Arms.

His Laws R. Hoved. f. 369. b. n. 20. and fol. 366. a. n. 20. Et Hist. Angl.
script. col. 1522. MS. in bibl. Cotton. sub effigy Claudii A. 8. f. 80.
and Orders touching his expedition into the Holy land.

King Richard the first, MS. in bibl. Cotton. sub effigy Claudii D. 2. f. 123.
who began his reign in A. D. MCXC.

His Laws R. Hoved. f. 423. a.
concerning the proceeding of his Justices in Pleas of the Crown.

His Laws Ibid. 424. a.
concerning the Jews.

His Laws Ibid. b.
concerning Tourneaments.

His Laws Ibid. f. 440. b. n. 10. Et Hist. Angl. script. col. 1258. l. 18.
concerning weights and measures.

His Statute R. Hoved. f. 442. b. n. 30.
of Tallage.

King John, who began his reign in an. MCXCix.

His Law Rot. Cart. de an. 1. Ioh. n.
concerning the Fees of his great Seal.

His Law R. Hoved. f. 453. a. n. 10.
for regulating the prizes of Wine.

His Law M. Paris. in an. 1202.
for the Assize of Bread.

His Law Pat. 6. Ioh. m. 6.
concerning Cliptmoney.

His Law, [Ibid. in dorso n. 3.]
or Assize of Coynage. Law-writers and (...)s


His Law [Lib. rub. in Scacc. f. 149. b.]
concerning the prices of Goshawkes.

His Math. Paris. in(...)
Magna Carta, and Carta de Forest*.

Henry 3d. began his reign in an. MCCxvi.

Statutum MS. in bibl. Cotton. sub effig. Claudii D. 2. f. 12^. n. 40.
vulgariter nuncupatum Dictum de Kenilworth.

Carta Ibid. n. 41. 43. and 44.
ejusdem Regis facta Baronibus, post turbationem Regni.

Provisiones MS. in bibl. Cotton. sub effigy Othonis C. 8. n. 6.
de Merton, cum aliis variis Statutis Regis H. 3.

Statuta Claus. 9 E. 1. m. 11. in dorso.
per Regem and Consilium suum facta in Comitatu Westmerlandiae.

Statutum Claus. 11 E. 1. in dorso. m. 2.
editum pro Mercatoribus, ad debita sua celeriter recuperanda.

Cap. XXIII.
A Catalogue of Law-writers and Law Books.
THe Mirror of Justices; Cokes Reports lib. 9. in prooemio.
being a Treatise of the Law and usages of this Kingdom, whereby it was
governed above eleven hundred years past. In which Book the whole frame of the
Common Law of this Realm appears. It treats of the several Courts, and
jurisdiction of them, inter alia.

To this Treatise Andrew Horn added much in King Edw. MS. in bibl. Hospic.
Lincoln.
1. time.

Impr. Land. An. 1642. Gallice. An. Cokes Reports Vol. 8. and 10. in prooemio.
1647. Anglice.

Sigebert King of the East Angles A. Ioh. Balaei Cent. 1. Cap. Lxxviii.
D. DCLiii. wrote a Book of the Laws of England, called Legum Statuta.

King Ethelbert (Son of King Ethelwolf) Circa ann. Christi DCCCLxiiii. caused a
Book to be made, Ioh. Balaei Cent. 1. Cap. Lxxiiii.
called Decreta judiciorum.

King Alfred wrote a Book of the Laws of England, Cokes Reports lib. 3. in
prooemio.
called Breviarium quoddam, Law-(...)
ex divertis legibus, s^il. Trojanorum, Graecorum, Britannorum, Saxonum, and
Dacorum compositum.

And another of the West-Sa^on Laws, (...)
and translated into English the Laws of Molmutius, and the Mercian Laws.

King Athelstan wrote three books; (...)
one of the ancient Laws corrected; another of the new Laws; and a third of
Constitutions for the Clergy.

The Volume, (...).
called Registrum Cancellariae, (...).
or the Register Original, in use before the Norman Conquest. Impr. Land. apud
Guill. Rastall an. 1531. Et per assign. Iohannis More an. 1634.

Iudicia Civitatis London. In bibl. C^^to^. ^^b effigy Claudii D. 2. fol. 14.
Sax. and Lat.

Le grand Coustumier du pays and Duche de Normandy. Impr. a Roven an. 1539.

Constitutiones Sapientum de reformatione Ecclesiae and Reipublicae (Saxonice.)
In bibl. (...) effigy Claudi^ A. ^. n. 6.


Tractatus imper^ectus de Legibus Angliae, Henr. I. In bibl. (...)
scriptus tempore Henrici primi Anglorum Regis; divisus in quatuor Libros;
quorum primus contin^t Leges Anglicas in Latinum translatas: Secundus habet
quaedam scripta (ut inquit Author) temporis nostri necessaria: Tertius est de
statu and agendis causarum: Quartus est de Furto and partibus ejus.

Ranulph de Meschines Earl of Chester temp. H. 1. compiled a Book of the Common
Laws of England. Cokes (...) vol. S. in prooemio.


King Henry the 2d. wrote a Book of the Common Laws and Statutes of England;
Henr. II. (...)
and according to the same division, entitled the one part Pro Republica
Leges, and the other Statuta regalia, whereof no fragment does now remain.

Tractatus de monet^ and assai^ temp. H. 2.

Consuetudines Angliae, quae proponebantur Tho. Becket Archiep. Cant. temp.
Regis H. 2. cum constitutionibus eiusdem Regis renovatis in Normannia.

Consuetudines Cantii. Cap. 23.
[MS. in bibl. Co^^oa. sub effig. Claudii A. 8. f. 135^

Assisa panis probata per Pistorem Galfridi filii Petri Iusticiarii Angliae.
MS. in bibl. Cotton. sub effigy Iulii D. 7. n. 17.


Ranulph de Glanvill (Chief Justice of England temp. H. 2.) wrote of part of
the Laws of England. Ioh. Balaei Cent. 3. Cap. 93.
(viz. de Legibus and consuetudinibus secundum quas placitatur in Scaccario.
Impr. Land. per Ric. Tothill an. 1557. Et per Thomam Wight an. MS. in bibl.
Cottoa. sub effigy Claudii D. 2. f. 82.
1604.

Fasciculus Iohannis de Oxonia de Cartis and contractibus. De hoc fit mentio in
vet. membr. in bibl. Cottoa.


Ockham wrote of Tenures of the King, De hoc fit mentio in Instit. super
Litleton f. 13. a.
but did not perfect it.

Henry de Bracton (a Justice Itinerant in 29 H. 3.) writ a Treatise of the
Customs of England (temp. H. 3.) Impr. Land. per Ric. Tottel an. Henr. III.
Ioh. Balaei Cent. 3. Cap. XCviii. MS. in bibl. Hosp. Linc.
1569. and R. Young an. 1640.

Rex etc. Sciatis quod commisimus dilecto Clerico nostro Henrico de Bracton,
Pat. 38 H. 3. m. 2.
domos quae fuerunt Willielmi de Ferrariis, quondam Comitis Derb. in London in
Custodia nostra existentes; ad hospitandum in eisdem usque ad legitimam aetatem
haeredum ipsius Comitis T. R. apud Winton 25 Maii.

A Treatise called Summa Southampton. De hiis fit mentio in vet. membrana in
bibl. Cottoa.


Another de antiquo dominico Coronae.[MS. vet. ejusd^m penes Guib. Goddard
Hosp. Lincoln. ar.]

Returna Brevium.

A Treatise called Summa fet asaver. MS. vet. ejusdem penes praef. Guib.
Goddard.


John de Bretton (one of the Pat. 53 H. 3. m. 2. Cokes Reports Vol. 8. in
prooemio.
Justices of the Kings Bench in 53 H. 3.) wrote a Book of the Common Laws of
England, by command of King Edward the first, ut in prooemio ejusdem patet.
Impr. Land. per Rob. Redman in parochia S. Dunstani in Fletestrete, apud Signum
S. Georgii (temp. H. 8.) Et an. Ioh. Balaei Cent. 4. Cap. xliiii.
1640.

Raphe de Hengham, Edw. I.
Chief Justice of the King's Bench in 6 E. 1. composed a Register of Writs. De
hoc fit mentio in vet. membrana in bibl. Cotton.


He wrote two other Volumes, MS. vet. penes Galfr. Palmer eq. aur. and Bar.
Attorn. generalem R. Car. 2. Necnon in Bibl. Hospic. Lincoln.
de Essoniis pro defaltis and formulis placitandi called Hengham magna, and
Hengham parva. Impr. Land. cum notis Ioh. Seldeni an. 1616. 8o.

De hiis etiam Facta est mentio in vetusta membrana in bibl. Cotton. Speculum
Iusticiariorum. Examen Cartarum. Curia Baronis. Modus calumniandi Essonium.
Cadit Casa. Cum sit necessarium. Natura Brevium. MS. vet. earundem penes Guib.
Goddard Hosp. Linc. ar. De Brevibus ordinandis; seu modus componendi Brevia
Breves pledes. MS. vet. penes Orl. Bridgman eq. aur. Capit. Just. de Banco. De
Brevibus cassandis, seu ordo exceptionum. Exceptionesgenerales. Tractatus de
Bastardia, vel summa Bastardiae. MS. vet. eorundem penes praef. Guib. Goddard.
Tractatus Coronae. Placita Coronae. Notabilia. MS. eorundem penes praef. G.
Goddard. Assisa in London. de muris and stillicidiis. De Narrando. Articuli in
Narrando. Proprietas Narrationum. MS. ejusdem penes praef. G. Goddard. Rageman
de Iusticiariis assignatis. MS. penes Matthew. Hal e eq. aur. Capit. Baronem de
Scacc. Casus qui tenent locum secundum Leges Angliae.

De compositione monetae and mensurarum. MS. in bibl. Cotton. sub effigy
Cleopatrae A. 16. f. 46.
[MS. vet. ejusdem penes praef Guib. Goddard.]

De hiis Fit mentio in vet. membr. in bibl. Cotton. Johannes de Metingham (Cap.
Justice. de Banco 18 E. 1.) tractatum scripsit, Iudicium Ess^niorum nuncupatum.
[MS. ejusde^ vet. penes praef. Guib. Goddard.] Ordinationes novissimae apud
Westmonasterium factae. [MS. penes Matthew. Hales eq. aur. Capit. Baronem de
(...).] De Divortio. Ordinale Compoti de Wulvesie secundum Oliverum. Modus
Cyrographandi in Curia Regis, de omnibus Pla^itis.

Summa de Legibus and consuetudinibus Angliae a Magistro Henrico de Bractono
composita tempore Regis H. In bibl. Seldeniana MS. ut patet ex dissert. ad
Fletam. p. 457.
3. in compendium redacta per Gilbertum de Thorntone Capitalem Iusti^^ ad
Placita coram Rege tenenda 18 E. 1.

Placita Parliamentaria, una cum judiciis forensibus, Ex vet. cod. MS. in
archivis regiis, in Arce London.
sive sententiis diffinitivis desuper latis, regnantibus Edwardo primo and
Edwardo secundo, Angliae regibus. Impr. Land. an. 1661. per Henr. Twyford and
Tho. Dring.

Statutum Regis in Iudaismo. In ver. MS. penes Matthew. Hales eq. aur. Capit.
Baronem de Scacc.


De Veteribus Placitis Coronae. Ex vetusto MS. penes Orl. Bridgeman Capit.
Justice. de Banco on. 1663.


Nova Capitula Coronae. Ibid.


Dampna in Duplo. Ibid.


Ordo Exceptionum. Ibid.


Placitorum Relationes, vulgariter nuncupatae Year-books de annis 22. 23. 27.
28. 29. 30. 31. 32. 33. 34. and 35. Edw. 1. MS. in bibl. Seldeniana.


Aliud vol. de annis 30. usque; 35 E. 1. inclusive.

Placita de Itinere Cornubiae 30 E. 1. MS. in bibl. Seldeniana fol. 311. a.


Fleta [cum dissertationibus V. Cl. Edw. 2.
Ioh. Seldeni.] Impr. Land. 1647. MS. in bibl. Cotton. sub effigy Iulii B. 6.


Ordinances des Barons an. 5. Regis Edw. 2. MS. in bibl. Cotton. sub effig.
Claudii A. 8. fol. 287. and 288.


Aliae Ordinationes eodem anno. Ibid.


Ordinances for establishment of the estate of the Household of King Edw. 2.
Ibid. fol. 296.


Relationes Placitorum, vulgariter nuncupatae Year-books, incipientes Term.
Mich. 1. E. 2. and finientes an. (...)
7 E. 2.

Aliud volumen continens tale^ Placitorum Relationes a Term. Mich. 5 E. 2. and
finientes Term. Trin. 19 E. 2.

Novae Narrationes (being certain praesidents for Pleadings) written (...)
about the beginning of King Edward the thirds time; (...)
vouched and allowed by Sir John Prisot Knight Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas temp. H. 6.

Assaium Auri an. MS. (...) Cotton^ sub (...) Cleopatrae A. 16. fol. 5^.
23 E. 3.

Natura Brevium vetus. Impr. Land. MS. in bibl. Hosp. Li^^.
per Ric. Tottel, an. 1572. Et impr. Land. 1584.

The Year-Books of King Edward the thirds time; MS. in bibl. Hosp. Li^^.
in three Volumes.

The first Imprinted at London by... And by Ric. Tothill, MS. in bibl. Hosp.
Li^c.
an. 1562.

The second part Impr. Land. per... and per Ric. Tothill, an. 1585.

The third part Impr. Land. per... and per Thomam Wight, an. 1600.

Liber Assisarum, tempore Regis Edwardi 3tii. compositus. Impr. Land. per
Societatem Stationariorum, an. MS. in bibl. Hosp. Linc.
1606.

Old Tenures. MS. in bibl. Hosp. Li^^.


Placita in Itinere in Com. Bedford, Not. MS. in bibl. (...)
and Derb. 3 E. 3.

Aliud vol. in quo continentur Placita in Itinere in Com. Not. Bedf. and Derb.
Ibid.
4 E. 3.

The Year-Book of King Richard the seconds time, Ric. 2.
containing Cases adjudg'd; being collected by Richard Bellew of Lincoln-Inn.
Impr. Land. per Rob. Robinson, an. 1585.

The Year-Book of K. Henry the fourths time. Henr. 4.
Impr. Land. per Ric. Tothill, an. 1562. Etan. 1575.

The Year-Book of King Henry the fifths time. Impr. Land. per Ric. Tothill,
Henr. 5.
an. 1563. Et 1570.

De laudibus Legum Angliae; written by Sir John Fortescu Knight, Lord Chief
Justice of the Kings Bench temp. H. 6. Imprinted at London an. MS. in bibl.
Cotton. sub effigy Otho^^s B. 1. n. 1.
1599.

Et cum Notis V. Cl. Ioh. Seldeni. Impr. Land. an 1616.

De dominio regali, and de dominio regali politico, MS. in bibl. Cotton. sub
effigy Claudii A. 8. n. 19. Et sub effigy Othonis B. 1. n. 2.
Anglice, per eundem Ioh. Fortescu.

Abridgment of the Book of Assizes... Cokes Reports Vol. 2. in prooemio.


De legibus and consuetudinibus Angliae. MS. in bibl. Cotton. sub effigy
Othonis E. 12.


The Year-Book of King Henry the sixths time; viz. the first part. Impr. Land.
per societatem Stationariorum, an. 1587. Et. an. 1609.

The second part. Impr. Land. per Ric. Tothill, an. 1567.

Stathoms Abridgment, Edw. 4.
containing an Abridgment of the Year-Books, Cokes Reports Vol. 2. in prooemio.
till King Henry the sixths time. Written by Nicholas Stathom one of the Barons
of the Exchequer, temp. E. 4. Impr. Land. per Ric. Pynson temp. H. 8.

Littletons Tenures, compiled by Tho. Litleton one of the Justices of the
Common Pleas temp. E. 4. wherein he had great furtherance from Sir John Prisot,
Cokes Reports Vol. 2. in prooemio.
Lord Chief Justice of the same Court temp. H. 6. Impr. Rothomagi per Ric.
Pynson temp. H. 8. in 4to.

Necnon temp. ejusdem Regis H. 8. in Civitate Londoniarum, juxta Ecclesiam
omnium Sanctorum, per Iohannem Lettow, and Will. de Machlinia, in folo. Et
Impr. Land. per W. West, an. 1581. in 8o.

The Year-Book of King Edw. the fourths time. Impr. Land. per The. Wight and
Bonham Norton, an. 1599.

The Year-Book of 5 Edward 4. commonly called Long 5to. Impr. Land. per Rit.
Tothill, an. 1587.

The Year-Book, containing the times of King Edw. Edw. 5.
the 5th. King Richard the 3d. Ric. 3.
King Henry the 7th and from the 12th. unto the 27th. of King Henry the 8th.
Henr. 7.
Impr. Land. per societatem Stationariorum, an. Henr. 8.
1619. and an. 1620.

Edm. Dudley (sometime a Sergeant at Law, Henr. 7.
and afterward of the Privy Council to King Henry the 7th.) wrote a Book, Ioh.
Balaei de Script. Brittan. Cent. xi. Cap. Lxxxiiii.
called Arbor Reipublicae.

Le bregement de touts les Statutes. Impr. Londini per Rob. Redman usque ad an.
18. Regis Henrici octavi. Henr. 8.


Sr Anthony Fitz Herbert Knight, one of the Justices of the Court of Common
Pleas temp. H. 8. wrote these several Books; viz.

The grand Abridgment, containing an abstract of the Year-Books till the time
he lived in. Impr. Land. an. 1516. and an. 1565. in folio.

Natura Brevium novel. Impr. Land. per Ric. Tottel, an. 1588. Et postea sc. an.
1635. in 8vo.

The Office of Justices of the Peace, Shireeves, Bailiffs, Eschaetors,
Constables and Coroners.

An. 1547. Impr. Land.
An. 1617.

A Book called the Diversity of Courts; Cokes Reports Vol. 10. in prooemio.
compiled an. 21 H. 8.

Magna Carta cum diversis aliis Statutis. Impr. Land. per Ric. Pynson, an.
1519. (in 12o.)

Cristoph. St. Germin (a Student of the Inner Temple) wrote a Book called
Doctor and Student, Cokes Reports Vol. 10. in prooemio.
being a Dialogue betwixt a Doctor of Divinity and a Student of the Common Laws
of England, touching the fundamental Laws of England, compiled an. 23 H. 8.
[Impr. Land. an. 1598.] Et an. 1604. per Tho. Wight. Et an. 1613. 8vo.

A Treatise made by Divines, Cokes Reports Vol. 10. in prooemio.
and other learned men in the Laws, of the Realm, concerning the power of the
Clergy, and the Laws of the Realm; published temp. H. 8.

Treatises concerning the manner of keeping of Courts Baron and Leet; Modus
tencndi Hundredum etc. Returna Brevium, Charta feodi, and Ordinances for Fees
in the Exchequer; published temp. H. 8. Impr. Land. per R. Tothill an. 1559.

Robert Kelway (Supervisor Liberationum Regis 10 H. 8.) wrote sundry Reports of
Cases in Law ab an. 12 H. 7. usque 21 H. 8. Impr. Land. per Ioh. Croke, pro
Tho. Wight, an. 1602. in folio.

John Perkins, an Utter-Barister of the Inner Temple, Edw. 6.
compiled a Treatise super certos titulos Legis Communis. Impr. Land. an. 1609.
8vo.

* A special Patent to Richard Grafton, to have the sole Printing of all the
Statute-books. T. R. apud Westminster. 22 Apr. Pat. 1 E. 6. p. 1. m. 7.

* A special License to Richard Tathille, Citizen, Stationer and Printer of
London; for him and his assigns, to imprint, for the space of seven years next
ensuing the date hereof, all manner of Books of the Temporal Law, called the
Common Law; so as the Copies be allowed and adjudged meet to be printed by one
of the Justices of the Law, or two Sergeants, or three Apprentices of the Law;
whereof the one to be a Reader in Court. And that none other shall imprint any
Book which the said Ric. Tathill shall first take and imprint, during the said
term, upon pain of forfeiture of all such Books. T. R. apud Westminster. 12 Apr. Pat.
7 E. 6. p. 3.

Pleas of the Crown, Qu. Mary.
and Prerogative of the King (in two Volumes) written by Sr William Stamford
Knight, one of the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas in the time of Queen
Mary. Impr. Land. per Ric. Tottell, primo An. 1557. and secundo cum
correctionibus, An. 1560. Et an. 1607.

Pleas of the Crown. Impr. Land. per Ric. Tottel, an. 1583.

Praerogativa Regis. Impr. Land. per Ric. Tottel, an. 1590.

(...)

He compiled another Book of certain adjudged Cases in the times of King Henry
the 8th. King Edward the 6th. and Queen Mary. Impr. Land. per Th^mam Wight, an.
1604 Et per Richard Tottel, an. 15^8.

The Book of Entries, (...)
containing dispersed, and undigested Pleadings. Impr. Land. ^er Ric. Tottel,
an. 1566.

Statutes abridg'd. Impr. Land. an. 1611. in folio.

Liber Intrationum. Impr. Land. per X. Yertswert an. 1596. folio.

Terms of the Law. Impr. London... 8^^.

Concordance of years. Impr. Land. an. 1614. 8^^.

Table to Fitz Herbert's Abridgment. Impr. Land. an. 1614. 8^^.

* A special License to John Cawood for the imprinting of all Acts of
Parliament, Proclamations, Injunctions, and other Books and things of what sort
soever, which are already published in English, or shall be published by the
Queen or her successors. T. R. apud Westminster. 29 Dec. Pat. 1 Mariae page 2.

* License to Ric. Tottle, Stationer of London, to imprint, or cause to be
imprinted, for the space of seven years next ensuing, all manner of Books
which touch or concern the Common Law, whether already imprinted, or not. T.
R. apud Westminster 1 Maii. Pat. 2. and 3. Ph. and M. page 1.

Dyers Reports, Qu. Eliz.
containing the Judgments upon sundry Cases, from 4 H. 8. to 24 Eliz. collected
by Sir James Dyer Knight, Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas in 1 Eliz.
Impr. Land. an 1601. Et an 1621. folio.

Abridgment of Dyers Reports by Sir Tho. Ireland of Gray's Inn. Impr. Land. 1651.

Table to Dyers Reports. Impr. Land. per Ric. Tottel, an. 1588.

* License to Ric. Tottell Citizen, Printer, and Stationer of London, to print
all manner of Books, touching the Common Laws of England, for his life. T. R.
apud Westminster. 12 Ian. Pat. 1 Eliz. p. 4.

Plowdens Comentaries, in two Volumes, containing Judgments and Pleadings upon
diverse Cases; collected by Edmund Plowden Esquire a Learned Sergeant at the Law, in
Qu. Mary's time. Impr. Land. an. 1599. folio, an. 21 Eliz.

Plowdens Quaeres. Impr. Land. temp. incerto.

Gregorye's Moot-book, compiled by... Impr. Land. per Tho. Wight, an. 1599. 8vo.

The Abridgment of the years of King Richard the 2d. collected by Ric. Bellewe
of Lincoln's Inn. Impr. Land. per Rob. Robertson, an. 1585.

Bendlows Reports, containing the Judgments upon sundry Cases in the times of
King Henry the 8th. King Edward the 6th. Queen Mary and Queen Elizabeth,
collected by William Bendlows a learned Sergeant at the Law. Impr. Land. 1661.

A Treatise of the Forest Laws written by John Manwood of Lincolns Inn. Impr.
Land.... Et postea an. 1615.

Simon Theloall his Digest of Writs. Impr. Land. an. 1579. per Ric. Tottel, 8vo.

De priscis Anglorum Legibus lib. per Gulielmum Lambardum, de Hospicio
Lincolniensi Arm. Impr. Land. an. 1568. (10 Eliz.) Et Cantabr. an. 1654. folio.

Eirenarcha, or the Office of Justices of Peace, by the same Will. Lambard.
Impr. Land. an. 1581. Et an. 1592. Et an. 1610.

Archaeon, or a Discourse upon the high Courts of Justice in England by the
same W. Lambard. Impr. Land. 1635.

Table to the Year-books, temp. Edward the 5th. Ric. the 3d. Henry the 7th. and
Henry the 8th. by Will. Fleetwood Sergeant at Law, and Recorder of the City of
London. Impr. Land. per Ric. Tothill, an. 1579. in 16.

Institutions or principal grounds of the Laws and Statutes of England. Impr.
Land. per Ric. Tothill.

The Lawyers Logic, exemplifying the Precepts of Logic and practice of the
Common Law, by Abraham France. Impr. Land. 1588.

The Court Leet and Court Baron; setting forth the manner of holding those
Courts, and the Jurisdiction of them; by John Kytchin of Gray's Inn. Impr. Land.
an. 1580. Et an. 1602. Et an. 1663. 8vo.

* License to Christopher Barker, for the imprinting of all Statutes and Acts
of Parliament, Proclamations etc. in English, for life. T. R. apud Westminster. 27
Sept. Pat. 19 Eliz. p. 8.

* License to Nicasius Yetsweirt to print all manner of Books concerning the
Common Laws of this Realm, for xxx. years. T. R. apud Westminster. 18 Nov. Pat. 20
Eliz. p. 10.

License to Charles Yetswert to print all manner of Books which concern the
Common Laws, for xxx. years. T. R. apud Westminster. 20 Martii. Pat. 36 Eliz. p. 11.

* A special License to Tho. Wright and Bonham Norton to print all Law Books,
for xxx. years. T. R. apud Westminster. 10 Martii. Pat. 41 Eliz. page 4.

* A special License to Rob. Barker for printing of all the Statutes, during
his life. T. R. apud Westminster. 19 Iulii. Pat. 1. Iac. p. 24.

The necessary use and fruit of Pleadings, compiled by Richard Carry. Impr.
Land. per Thomas Wight, an. 1601.

Parallel of the Civil, Canon, and Common Law, in sundry Dialogues, written by
Will. Fulbeck in two Volumes. Impr. Land. 1601. 4to.

A direction or preparation to the study of the Common Law, by the same Will.
Fulbeck. Impr. Land. an. 1620.

The Jurisdiction of Courts, compiled by Richard Crompton of the Middle Temple.
Impr. Land. an. 1594. 4to. Et an. 1637.

A Treatise de Pace compiled by Ferdinando Pulton of Lincoln's Inn. Impr. Land.
an. 1610. folio.

An Abridgment of the Statutes, by the same Ferdinando Pulton. Impr. Land. an.
1612. folio.

Office of Justice of Peace, compiled by Mich. Dalton of Lincoln's Inn. Impr.
Land. an. 1619. in folio.

Office of Shireeves compiled by the same Mich. Dalton. Impr. Land. an. 1623.
in folio.

Symbolography, containing Presidents for all sorts of conveyances and other
Instruments, commonly called Wests Presidents, compiled by William West of the
Inner Temple. Impr. Land. an. 1632. Et 1647. in 4to.

Fines and Concords, by the same Will. West. Impr. Land. 1627.

Treatise of Wills and Testaments, by Henry Swinborne. Impr. Land. An. 1611. Et
an. 1640.

Use of the Law Elements, compiled by Sir Francis Bacon Knight, Attorney
General to Queen Eliz. (afterward Lord Verulam and Viscount of St. Albans, and
Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England.) Impr. Land. an. 1629. in 4to.

Maxims of the Law, written by the same Sir Francis Bacon. Impr. Land. an. 1630.

The Reading of the same Sir Francis Bacon upon the Statute of Uses. Impr.
Land. an. 1642.

Epeikeia, or a Table to such Cases in Law as concern the Exposition of Stat.
by Equity, written by Tho. Ash, of Greys. Inn. Impr. Land. an. 1609. 8o.

A Treatise called the Promptuary, compiled by the same Thomas Ash, containing
2 Volumes of Tables to the Annals and other Books of the Common Law. Impr.
Land. an. 1614. in folio.

A Table in French to Sir Edward Cokes Reports, composed by the same Thomas
Ash. Impr. Land. 1618. in 8vo.

Reports of Cases adjudg'd ab an. 13 Eliz. usque; 13m Iacobi Regis, collected
by Sir Edward Coke Knight, Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, in xii. Volumes.
Impr. Land. an. 1602. Et an. 1615. in folio.

His Institutions in 4 Volumes

The first being a Commentary upon Littletons Tenures. Impr. Land. 1633.

The second containing an Exposition of Magna Carta and diverse other ancient
Statutes. Impr. Land. 1642.

The third concerning Pleas of the Crown and Causes Criminal. Impr. Land. an.
1644.

The fourth concerning the Jurisdiction of Courts. Impr. Land. an. 1648.

Another Volume, called the Book of Entries, containing perfect and approved
Presidents for Pleadings. Impr. Land. an. 1614.

Nomotechnia, Temp. Reg. Iacobi.
written by John Finche of Gray's Inn, Sergeant at Law. Impr. Land. an. 1613. in
folio.

Reports and Cases adjudg'd in Ireland, collected by Sir John Davyes Knight,
Sergeant at Law. Impr. London an. 1615. in folio.

The Office of Executors, by... Wentworth of Lincoln-Inn. Impr. Land. an. 1623.

Reports and Cases adjudg'd, collected by Sr John ^opham Knight, Lord Chief
Justice of the King's Bench. Impr. Land. an. 1656. in folio.

Reports and Cases adjudg'd, collected by Will. Leonard of Gray's Inn, from 18
Eliz. to 33 Eliz. Impr. Land. an. 1658. in folio.

Reports and Cases adjudg'd, collected by Sir Henry Yelverton Knight, one of
the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas. Impr. Land... in folio.

Reports and Cases adjudg'd, collected by Sir Humphrey Winche Knight, one of
the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas, containing the four last years of
King James, Impr. Land. an. 1657. in folio.

Reports and Cases adjudg'd, collected by Sir Henry Hobert Knight, Lord Chief
Justice of the Court of Common Pleas. Impr. Land. an. 1641.

Cowell's Interpreter, containing an interpretation of the Law Terms and diverse
obsolete words, written by John Cowell Doctor of the Civil Laws, and his
Majesty's Professor of the Civil Law in the University of Cambridg. Impr.
Cantabr. an. 1607. Et Impr. Land. 1637.

Institutiones Iuris Anglicani, written by the same John Cowell. Impr. Land.
An. 1630.

The English Lawyer, being a Treatise concerning... written by Sir John
Doddridge Knight, one of the Justices of the King's Bench. Impr. Land....

The Complete Parson, or a Treatise of Advousons, written by the same Sir John
Dodderidge.

Commission to Sir Henry Montagu Knight and others, for reviewing and reforming
of Sir Edward Cokes Reports. T. R. apud Westminster. 24 Nov. Pat. 14 Iac. p. 6.

Reports of Cases adjudg'd, temp. Reginae Eliz. Regis Iacobi and Regis Caroli
primi, by Sir George Crook Knight, late one of the Justices of the Kings Bench.

Vol. 1. Impr. Land. an. 1651.

Vol. 2. Impr. Land. an. 1658.

Vol. 3. Impr. Land. an. 1661.

Reports of sundry Cases adjudg'd temp. Regis Iacobi and Regis Caroli primi,
collected by Sir Richard Hutton Knight, one of the Justices of the Court of
Common Pleas. Impr. Land. an. 1656. folio.

Reports of sundry Cases adjudg'd temp. Regis Iacobi and Caroli, collected by
Sir James Ley, sometime Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench. Impr. Land. an.
1659.

Rerum judicatarum Centuriae 8o. collected by David Ienkins a learned Lawyer of
Gray's Inn. Impr. Land. an. 1661.

Reports and Cases adjudg'd from 3 Iac. unto 9 James, by Sir Richard Lane
Knight, Attorney General to Prince Charles; and afterward Lord Keeper of the
great Seal of England. Impr. Land. an. 1657.

Reports of diverse Cases adjudg'd, collected by... Goldesborough. Impr. Land.
an. 1653. 4to.

Reports of diverse Cases adjudg'd, temp. Reginae Eliz. Regis Iacobi, and Regis
Caroli 1. by William Hughes of Gray's Inn. Impr. Land. an. 1653.

Original Writs by the same Will. Hughes. Impr. Land. an. 1655.

Reports of diverse Cases adjudg'd temp. Reginae Eliz. Regis Iacobi, and Regis
Caroli, collected by William Noy of Lincoln's Inn, Attorney General to King
Charles the First. Impr. Land. an. 1656.

Reports of diverse Cases adjudg'd, collected by Sir John Bridgman Knight,
sometime Chief Justice of Chester. Impr. Land. an. 1659.

Abridgment of the Statutes by... Wingate of Gray's Inn. Impr. Land. an. 1655.
in 4to.

Maxims of Reason, by the same... Wingate. Impr. Land. an. 1658. in folio.

Reports of diverse Cases adjudg'd in the times of King James and King Charles,
collected by Sir Richard Hutton Knight, one of the Justices of the Court of
Common Pleas. Imprinted Land. an. 1656. folio.

Reports of diverse Cases adjudg'd in the 3d. 4th. 5th. 6th. and 7th. years of
King Charles the first, collected by Sir Thomas Hetley Knight, Sergeant at Law
(of Gray's Inn.) Impr. Land. an. 1657. in folio.

Epitome of Sir Edward Cokes Reports, by... Trotman. Impr. Land. an. 1640.

Reports of diverse Cases adjudg'd in the three first years of King Charles the
first, collected by John Latch of the Middle Temple. Impr. Land. an. 1662.

Reports of diverse Cases adjudg'd, collected by... Brownlow Prothonotary in the
Kings Bench Court. Impr. Land. an. 1651. in folio.

Writs judicial, by the same... Brownlow. Impr. Land. an. 1653.

Declarations and Pleadings by the same... Brownlow. Impr. Land. an. 1653.

Reports of diverse Cases, by Edward Bulstrode of the Inner Temple, in three
Volumes.

The first Impr. Land. an. 1657.

The second Impr. Land. an. 1658.

The third Impr. Land. an. 1659.

An Abridgment of the Law, under several Titles, by William Shepherd of
Gray's Inn. Impr. Land. 1656.

Cap. XXIV.
Law Books and Treatises of uncertain times.
DE judicio Aquae and Ignis, MS. in bibl. Cotton, sub effigy Vitellii A. 7.
Panis Hordeaci and Casei, and Sacramenti.

Narratio de Legibus Angliae, MS. in bibl. Cotton. sub effigy Iulii D. 2. n.
16. ^
ubi de Monetarum pondere and de Assisa Panis.

A Treatise concerning Suits in the Chancery by Sub-poena. Ibid. sub effigy
Cleopatrae A. 15.


De necessariis observantiis Scaccarii. Ibid. A. 16. n. 1.


Tractatus de Moneta and Assaia. Ibid. f. 38.


De potestate regia in Ecclesiasticis. [Ibid. E. 6.]

Touching the Jurisdiction of the Clergy. (...)


Touching jurisdiction of Prelates in Ecclesiastical things. (...)


Touching Prohibitions. (...)


The Exposition of Statutes concerning Ecclesiastical Causes; (...)
whether the interpretation of them belong to the Judges, or to the Civilians
and Canonists.

Concerning Actions for Tithes. (...)


Immunitas Clericorum a jurisdictione temporali. (...)


Liber Caerdiffe de consuetudine Walliae. (...)


Consuetudo Angliae, Ibid. sub. effifigie (...) E. 8. n. 33.
ex qua occisor Clerici esset sola Excommunicatione feriendus.

Cap. XXV.
Trial by xii men.
HAving thus briefly pointed at the Antiquity of our Courts of Justice, I shall
next take notice of the most ancient manners and forms of Judicature which
were heretofore used in this Realm, in Cases Civil and Criminal: those which I
call Civil, being title of Land, Debt, Trespass, Detinue, and the like; and
Criminal, Murder, Burglary, Felony etc.

It is not to be doubted, but that the most ancient form of Trial and decision
in these Causes, was by a certain number of sworn men, of good credit and
integrity; who, upon testimony given before them as to the matter of fact, were
to judge and determine thereof^ for by that Law (...)
of King Ethelred made at Wanting, no less appears -- In singulis (inquit)
Centuriis Comitia sunto etc. (...)
Let there be in each Hundred a Court; and therein xii of the chiefest men
together with the Provost (id est the Bailiff of the Hundred) sworn, according
to their evidence, Cap. 25.
to condemn the guilty and to acquit the innocent. Consonant whereunto was that
Leges Ethe^redi Regis per Lambardum editae, f. 91. a. Cap. 3.
of six English and six Welsh to be joined together, Videsis Analecta
Angl^-Britt. per I. Seldeaum page 103. and 104.
for determining of such controversies as happened in the Marshes of Wales.

Olaus Wormius (a person of great learning, and who in our age has made an
excellent discovery of the Danish Antiquities) tells Olai Worm. Monument.
Danic. Lib. 1. Cap. 10. p. 71.
us; that the English (for so he calls our Saxon Ancestors) did derive this
kind of Trial from the Danes -- a Danis ad Anglos defluxisse judicium hoc
Duodecim-virale arguunt Leges haec de re, ab Ethelredo in frequenti senatu
latae, and a Lambardo editae (says he) ubi inter reliqua hac extant -- In
singulis Centuriis Comitia sunto etc. Which people (I mean the Danes) laying
aside that bloody kind of Decision by Duel, long exercised by them, first
introduced it there, about the year of Christ DCCCxx. as the same Author
farther testifies, -- Ibid. and page 75.
Abrogato Duello, tanquam medio nimis cruento, causarum cognitio Duodecim viris
commendata est; qui, quod aequum, quodque justum publica authoritate
pronunciarent. Hanc controversias decidendi rationem primus invexisse videtnr
Regnerus cognomento Lodbrog; qui circa annum Christi DCCCxx. vixisse putatur:
De eo enim Saxo noster lib. 9. in hunc modum -- ut omnis controversiarum lis,
semotis actionum instrumentis, nec accusantis impetitione, nec rei defensione
admissa, duodecim patrum approbatorum judicio mandarentur, instituit: Cujus
Legis beneficio temeraria litium contractione summota, improborum calumniae
sufficienter obviatum existimans.

And to the Danes does Olaus magnus derive it from the Goths -- Cap. 21.
Expurgatio in judicio duodecim legalium hominum (says he) per Gothos, in
Italia degentes, vetusto tempore observabatur; and hodierno die in Gothicis
regnis observatur.

Cap. XXVI. Cap. 26.

Trial by Combat in Cases Civil.
BUt though the Danes were so much civilized, as to abrogate and abolish that
Trial by Duel, as has been said; yet the Normans, after their Conquest here,
under Duke William, in imitation of the ancient practice of those Northern
Nations, whence they sprung, did first ordain it here; reposing a strong belief
that a certain divine Justice did attend those sharp encounters, which were
exercised on such occasions, as our famous Seldom has notably observed in that
discourse of his entitled Impr. L^^d. an. 1610.
the Duello or single Combat.

The Northern Inhabitants (says he) have especially, of old time, made use of
this form of searching out hidden truth. The Russians, Hungarians, Almans,
Normans, English and others: but the most common judgment of writers, and
clearly the truest, derives the fountain thereof from the ancient Lumbards
(called by reason of their long Beards Longobardi) a people, that (out of those
Northern parts of Europe, which under the general name of Scandia, contain
Norway, Swethland, Denmark, and other regions by North high Germany) overran
some of the Chief Countries of this fourth part of the World; and indeed at the
first, when they sought those new habitations, tried their title of safe
passage, through some parts of Germany, by single fight twixt one of their own
Camp, and (as Paul Paul Warnfred de gestis Longobard. lib. 1. Cap. 12.
Warnfred reports) another of their Enemies. And subjoyns from Tacitus; Tacitus
de moribus Germannorum.
-- Ejus gentis, cum qua bellum est, captivum quoquomodo interceptum, cum
electo popularium suorum patriis quenque armis committunt, victoria hujus vel
illius pro praejudicio accipitur. And from another Author Carolus Sig^^^ius
hist. de regno Italiae lib. 2.
-- Longobardorum antiqua est consuetudo, ut crimina, vel maxima, singulari
praelio purgarentur; quo, postea per Leges translata, per multa tempora
observata est.

Insomuch says Mr. Seldom) that, by special Constitution Saxo Gram^^^^ (...)
and 10.
of Fronto (alias Frotho) King of the Danes, Trial by great Assize.
all controversies took this for their Touch-s^one, until such time, as King
Popp^ a Christian, by new induction of the fiery Ordel, made thereof
abrogation. And (...)
after the Gothique irruptions into the Empire, and the Lumbards Power and
Customs enlarged, the rest (not without allowance of one of the Pope Io^ns) of
Germany, France and Spain, not in Criminal only, but also in Civil Causes; have
admittance of it: And however Rhotaxis, Bodia. (...) republ. Lib. 4. Cap. 7. ex
Legibus Lo^gobard.
a Lumbard King, once prohibited it; yet he was constrained afterward to
restore it. Thus far Mr. Seldom.

Whereunto I shall add what Olalaus Wormius Olaus Worm. Mon. Danic. Lib. 1.
Cap. 10. p. 70. and 76.
(beforementioned) has further to this purpose -- Controversias per Duellum
dirimendi ratio, in Holsatia diu viguit; De ea enim Christianus Cilicius, de
bello Dithmersico Lib. 1. sic disserit -- Si acriores contentiones, de jure aut
honoribus inciderent, inter nobiles praesertim; antiquo Romanorum (immo
Danorum) more, initis Duellis, Mart judice, lites dirimebant. Addit --
Homicidii crimen ultimo supplicio non prosequentes, mulcta pecuniaria,
plectebant, ne uno infelici casu duo de medio tollerentur. Idque ita ^d
Christianum usque; ejus nominis tertium, Daniae Regem observatum est etc. Quae
idcirco adduco (inquit) ut vel inde colligere liceat barbaras hasce Leges and
consuetudines, tam altas apud Septentrionales egiffe radices, ut ne tanto
quidem temporis tractu extirpari potuerint. And he goes farther on, thus;
Duelli quidem examen, tanquam impium, abrogare conatus Rex Longobardorum
Luitprandus; sed frustra, ut patet ex Legum lib. 1. tit. 9. leg. 23. Incerti
(inquit) sumus de judicio Dei, and multos audivimus, per pugnam, sine justa
causa, suam causam perdere. Sed propter consuetudinem gentis nostrae,
Longobardorum Legem impiam vetare non possums. Eundem hunc ritum Agobardus
Episcopus, Nicholaus Pontifex, Concilium Lateranense, aliique damnarunt; unde
sensim aboleri coepit apud exteros. Apud nos, ad tempora Popponis viguisse
videtur, scil. circa an. 986. Christi. Thus far Olaus Wormius Cap. 10. p. 70.
and 71.

But in another (...)
place he referrs the abrogation of this kind of Trial, in Denmark, unto King
Sweno, about the year of Christ DCCCLxxxvi. and instead thereof that of Ordale
to be there introduced; for which he voucheth these words of Sa^o -- Dani
abrogata Duellorum cons^etudine, pleraque causarum judicia, eo experimenti
genere constatura decernerent, controversiarum examen rectius ad arbitrium
divinum qu^m ad humanam rixam relegendam putantes.

And now, touching the manner and form of this trial by Combat, I shall here
transcribe what Ranulph de Clanvill (a person famous for his knowledge in the
Laws of this Realm, and Justice of England in King H. 2. time) has left us, in
that part of his learned D^s^ourse (...)
of our Laws, under the title De hiis quae solent contigere, ci^^a vel statim
post ingressum litis; and de diracionatione tenementi per Duellum, vel per
magnam Assisam; and de Campionibus, and de hiis quae pertinent ad Duellum, vel
magnam Assisam.

Both parties (says he) being present in Court; and the Demandant claiming the
land in question; the Tenant may require the view thereof: But as to this,
there is respite to be made, to the end it may be ^nown, whether the Defendant
have not more Land in that Town, than what is in question; and if he have not,
then he shall not be allowed any respite; but if he have more, he shall; and
likewise have assignation of another day. And when he shall be so departed out
of the Court, at three reasonable Essoines the Defendant may recover anew; and
the Shireeve of the County wherein the land lies, shall have a Writ directed
to him, to send freeholders of his County to view the land; the tenor of which
Writ (...)
is as follows.

Rex Vicecomiti N. salutem etc. The King to the Shireeve of N. sends
greeting. We command you; that, without delay, you send free and lawful men of
the Neighborhood of D. to take view of one hide of land, lying in that Town
which A. B. claims against C. D. and whereupon there is a suit depending
betwixt them in our Court; and that you cause four of those men to attend me,
or my Justices, upon... day, to testify their view thereof. In Witness etc.

Then Ib. Cap. 3.
, after three reasonable Essoines concomitating the view of the said land; and
both Demandant and Tenant appearing again in Court; the Demandant sets forth
his claym in this manner. I do challenge against T. H. half a Knights Fee (or
two Carucates of land in that Town) as my right and inheritance; and whereof my
Father (or Grandfather) was seized in his demesne as of fee, in the time of King
Henry the first (or after the first Coronation of the King that now is) and
whereof he has taken the profits, to the value of x^. at the least; viz. in
Corn sowed, and other Commodities; and this I am ready to try by this my
Freeman N. And if any mischance shall befall him, then by that other person,
who has seen and heard this. Or thus -- and this I am ready to try, by this my
Freeman S. unto whom his Father, on his Death bed enjoined, upon the Duty
wherein a Son is obliged to a Father, that if at any time he should hear of a
suit for that land, he should adventure himself by Combat for it, as that
which his Father had seen and heard.

The claim and demand of the Demandant being thus made; it shall be in the
choice of the Tenant, either to put himself upon trial for the same by Combat,
or to put himself upon the great Assize of our Lord the King; and to require a
recognition which of them has most right in that land.

And if he will defend it by Combat, he is then obliged to defend the right of
the Demandant, from word to word, as he shows it against him, either by
himself or some other fitting person: But note, that after the Combat shall be
thereupon waged, it behooves him who holds the land, to defend it by Combat,
and thenceforth not to put himself into the great Assize. And after the Combat
waged, he may again reasonably Essoin himself thrice as for his own person; and
thrice for the person of his Champion. All which Essoins, being made, as they
rightly ought to be, it is necessary, that before the Combat be begun, the
Plaintiff do appear as in Court, and have his Champion there, in readiness to
fight: nor may he bring any other Champion, than one of those, upon whom he did
put the Trial of his Cause: Neither may he change another for him after the
first waging of the Battle.

But if he who did wage the Battle, shall die during the time that the
controversy depends; if by natural Death, and that declared by the
neighborhood, as it allways ought to be, in case there be doubt thereof; the
Demandant may have recourse to one of those upon whom he first put the Trial;
or on some other fit person, though he named no other, so that there be always a
fit witness; and so the Plea shall begin anew; but if he shall die by his own
fault, the Lord shall then lose his Suit.

Also see whether the Champion of the Demandant may substitute another in the
Court, to make the dispute, which he undertook in his sted; for according to
right, and the ancient Custom of the Kingdom, he may not make use of any but
his Legitimate Son.

And note, that the Champion of the Demandant ought to be such a one, who may
thereupon be a fit witness. Nor may the Demandant prosecute his Appeal in his
own person; because that may not be, except by a fitting Ear and Ey witness.
But the Tenant may defend himself, either in his own person, if he so please,
or another fit man, if he shall so choose to do. Howbeit, if he shall produce
his Champion, and he (the said Champion) do die in the interim, it is a question
in Law, whether the Tenant may defend himself by another, or lose his Suit, or
his seisin only; therefore here we are to distinguish as before.

Not also, that the Champion Defendant cannot in Court produce in his place any
other to undertake the Combat, than his own Legitimate Son.

But it often happens, that a Champion hired for reward, is produced in Court,
to undergo the Try^^* and if the adverse party shall except against his person,
alleging him to be less fit, by reason that he has been so hired; and be
ready to prove the same against him, in case he deny it, by himself or by some
person who saw the reward taken; upon this they shall be heard, and the
principal Duel shall remain.

And if he shall be thereupon convict, and the Champion of the Demandant
vanquished in the Combat, then shall his Lord lose his Suit, and the said
Champion, as a vanquished person shall have no benefit of the Law of the land;
that is to say, that thenceforth he shall never be admitted in Court as a
witness, upon Trial for any by Combat; But for himself he may, either in his
own person, or prosecuting other wrong done to himself, as breach of the Kings
Peace. He may also defend his own right against another by Combat, for his fee
and inheritance, and the Combat finished the vanquished person shall undergo
the penalty of Lx^. in the name of a Coward, and moreover lose the benefit of
the Law of the land.

And if the Defender (i. e. the Champion) shall happen to be vanquished, his
Lord shall lose the land by him claimed, with the profits and commodities
thereof, at the time of the seisin found in that fee; and shall never after be
heard in Court again for the same: But whatsoever things shall be determined by
Combat, in the Court of our Lord the King, are to remain firm for ever; and
thereupon there shall be a Precept directed to the Shireeve, that the Victor
shall have the land which was in dispute, and to give him seisin thereof by
this Writ.

Ib. Cap. 4.
The King to the Shireeve of N. sends greeting. We command you, that without
delay you give possession unto A. B. of one hide of land lying in the Town of
R. concerning which there has been a Suit betwixt him and G. H. in our Court;
because the said hide of land is adjudged unto him in our Court, by the
determination of Combat. Witness etc.

This, if the Demandant shall prevail in the Combat; but if he be overthrown
by the vanquishing of his C^^mp^on; then the Tenant shall be acquitted from his
claim, without recovery by the Demandant.

Thus far Glanvile, Howbeit, of (...) particular Combats, offered in (...)
Causes, our learned Seldom (...)
expresses, that he has not read of any which was before that in King Richard
the firsts time; which was [for a Knights fee in Corseton in Wiltshire demanded
by one Emme de^ p. from will Basset, where the (...)
Record (...) Emma de Peri petit versus Wil^^^^^ Basset, feodum unius militis
in Corston, and feodum unius militis in (...) quae ei descendere debent ex
(...) de Bray, avi sui, tempore (...) etc. Et post eum Fulco filius (...) earn
habuit. Willi^^^ (...), quod dictus Henri^^^ (...) etc. dedit avo suo Osmundo
(...) seoda: and post illum (...) de Basset illa tenuit etc.

(...) probare per corpus (...) etc. Willielmus dicit, quod (...), and ideo non
debet inde pro^ are p^r Corpis etc.

But as to the formalities in arming of the Combatants, and other particular
circumstances preparatory to this kind of Trial, I have not seen any narrative
so exact as this which I have here aded; which was in 3 E. 3. betwixt Thomas
fitz Hugh de Staunton, and the Prior of Lenton, for the Advouson of the Church
of Harlaston in Northamptonshire.

Ex v^tusto Codice MS. in bibliotheca Hospicii Lincolniensis 31 Ian. 1661. fol.
222. b.
THomas le fitz Hugh de Staunton porta une Brief de Droit d' avowson de une
Eglise, verse le Priour de Lentone; et counta, que a tort ly, deforce la
vowesoun del Eglise de Herleston, ove les apurtenaunces; et pur ceo atort que
cest son droit et son heritage, et don't son auncestor William per nom, fut
seisie, come de fee et de droit, en temps le Roy Henri, besaiel nostre seigneur
le Roy q'ore est, que a mesme le temps presenta un son Clerk, William de
Grendon per noum, que a son presentement fut resceu et institut de Evesque en
temps de pees, en temps de mesme le Roy: le quel clerk lez espleez prist, come
en grosses dismes, et meni dismes, oblacions, obvencions, et altre manner issue
de Eglise mountaunt a demi mark, et plus, com du droit del Eglise avauntdite.
De William descenda le droit a Will. son futz et heir: De William, pur ceo q'il
morust sanz heir etc. descenda le Droit etc. a Richard come a friar et heir: De
Richard a Clement, come a futz et heir: De Clement, descenda la droit a Thomas,
come a futz et heir, que ore demand; et que tiel soit son droit il condy suite
et d'reigne bone.

Godele pur le Priour defend tort et force etc. et demanda ay du Brief, et
Defendant derchief etc. et issit d'enparler, et revynt et defent tort et force
etc. et rehercea tut le count; et sur ceo defend tort et force, et le droit
Thomas tut atrenche, et la seisine William son auncester, de qui seisine il ad
countee tut, outre come de fee et de droyt; nomement del avoweson del Eglise de
Herleston, qui de ceo fut seisie come de fee et de droyt, a ceo q'l ad dit, et
prist est a defendre per le corpse une son frank home William le futz John per
noum, que cy est prist a defendre per son corpse, ou per quant que cest Court
agarde, que defendre le deyne; et si mes avegne a mesme cely William, que Dieu
Defend, prist est a Defendre per altre, qui doyt et put.

Et le Serjaunt que dit les paroles, prist le bras de Champioun en sa mayn,
quant il engaga la Batail: et le Champion fut vestu, de sa cote desoynte, et
deschevele, et deschauncee des soulers, et ses maunches reverses, issint que
ces bras furent nudz; et tynt sa mayn destre leve, et en ceo un gaunt plie, et
en chescun dey del gaunt un denier.

Et sur ceo Thomas pria conge d'enparler, et issint et revynt, et dit per
Shard. Sire! vouz avez bien entendu, coment Thomas le futz Hugh de Staunton
demand verse le priour de Lenton la voweson del Eglise de Herleston; et count,
que cest son droyt et son heritage, reherceant le Count, de parole en parole,
tanque a le fyn, et ad tendu suit et d'reygne.

A qui le Priour ad defendu le droit Thomas tut attrenche, et la seisine
William son auncester; de qui seisine il ad count tut outre come de fee et de
droit, reherceant tuttes les paroles en la manner come le Priour engaga la
Batail; et puis dit; Sire! vouz avez cy Thomas le futz Hugh de Staunton; qui
vous dit, que atort defend il son droit tut attrenche, et la seisine William
son auncester; de qui seisine il count tut, outre, come de fee et de droyt;
nomement de la voweson del Eglise de Herleston; and pur ceo a tort que cest son
droyt and son heritage; and per la reason que William son auncestor, per noum de
cel avoweson fut seisi etc. reherceant tut le Count, sanz nule parole
entrelesser, tantque celi clause, et que tiel soyt son droyt etc. Et dit, et
tiel soit son droyt cest il prist a derener per le corpse un son frank home,
William le fitz Thomas per nom, qui cy est, qui prist est a d'reygner le per
son corpse, ou per quant que ceste court agarde; qui d'reigner le deyne; et si
mes avegne a mesme cely William le futz Thomas, que Dieu Defend, prist est a
d'reigner per un autre, que deyne et puisse, et entedaunt le d'reigner, le
Serjeaunt tynt le Champion le demandant per le bras; and mesme cesty Champyon
estut en mesme le manner a la Bar, com fit l'autre devaunt. Puis fut
command per les Justices que ambedeus les Champiouns venissent outre la Bar
tauntque en bank, et il se firent; et command fut, que l'un estut al un boute
de la Table, et l'autre l'autre boute.

Les Justices regarderent lour pes, s'il furent deschaunces des soulers, et sic
fuerunt.

Scrope demanda de les parties, s'il savoynt rien dire, que ascun de eux avoyt
rien mespris en terms de ley; ou s'il savoyent eien dire a les persons des
Championes; et il dysoyent que non. Pur quoi Scrope dit al Champioun le Tenant,
q'il rendist sus son gaunt a luy; le Champion se genula donant, et fist. Et
puis dit al Champioun le Demandant en mesme la manner,

Et puis Scrope faca horse du gaunt le Champioun le Tenant v^. et les remyst en
mesme le gaunt; et en mesme le manner fit al gaunt le Champioun le Demandant,
et puis dona al Champioun le Demandant son gaunt; et puis al Champioun le
tenant, en mesme la manner.

Et puis demanda des Champiouns, s'il fuissent de perfourmir la Bataill solon
ceo, que les parties avoyent tonduz; et ill desoyent que ayl; pur quoi commanda
al Champioun le Tenant de profrer son gaunt al Champion le Demandant; et sic
fecit. Et se Chrmpioun le Demandant le restut. Et puis commanda al Champioun le
Demandant en mesme le manner; et il le fist. Et puis il commanda a l'un et
l'autre, q'il rendissens sus les gauntz a ly; et sic fecerunt.

Et puis Skrop rebailla a chescun des Champiouns son gaunt deyne.

Et puis Skrop demanda des parties, s'il savoyent rien dire, pur quoi le Court
ne dut agard la Battle. I^ dysoyent que noun. Pur quoy Shrop dit a les
parties, q'il dussent trover pleges de perfourmit la Bataill; et sic fecerunt,
chescun deux pleges.

Skrope. Nous avouns entendu, coment vouz avez gage la Bataill d'une part et
d'autre; pur quoi depuis que vouz ne savez rien dire pur quoi le Bataill ne
doyt estre agard, si agarde cest Court que la Bataill se face; et vous donous
jour le Lundy en la secunde semaigne de Karresme, d'aver cy a mesme le jour,
vos Champiouns correes de Bataill, prist a perfourmir la Bataill some ceo que
vous l'aves tendu; et puis commaunda as Champiouns, que null aprochast a altre
en le mien temps de nule part.

Et puis dit as parties, que chescun d'eux deveroyt garder son Champioun,
issint que null aprochat as autre, sur peril que appent. Et puis dit al Tenant,
q'il prist son Champioun, et q'il le amenast a une Eglise; et al Demandant,
q'il prist son Champioun, et le'menast a une autre Eglise, et offrer a les
Eglises l'un et l'autre les vd. que furent en lour gauntz, en le hon^ur des v.
plays Dieu; que Dieu dorreyt la victory a cely que droit en ad.

Puis Scrope dit a les parties, q'il venissent a lour jour, ove lour
Champiouns, et eux ferront une serement a la Bar, et un altre en le Champ.

Et en le samady prochein devant le Lundy avantdit, Scrope fist les parties
menir lour Champiouns en une Chamber privement, chescun per eux mesmes de veer
lour apparallle. Et Scrope ala en la Chaumbre, et fist le Priour venir devant
ly, ove son Champioun, de veere le apparaille de Champioun; et en le regardant
le quyr, et il le trova double ove une altre quyr; pur quoy Scrope commaunda
del ouster; et puis mesura la longure del bastone, et furent trovez de la
longure de v. quarters d'une aune; (...) de bone assise. Et pu^^^^ (...) trove
de longure d'un^ (...) our quarters d'un aune; et fur ajuge assie de certain,
outre (...) a^^i^e home ne deyt passer; mes (...) conge de user les de meyndre
(...), solon la volunte de Champioun* Et puis il commanda d'aver son Champion
prist al jour assign; et en mesme le manner fist al Demandant.

Al quel jour le Tenant vynt, et dit per Sharshull. Sires! vous ave cy le
Priour de Lentone, ove son Serjaunt, William le futz John par nom, qui cy est
correye, de Bataill prist affere et perfourmir, per la grace de Dieu, ceo que
la Court nostre seignieur le Roy ad agarde et agardera. Et ceo profre verse
Thomas le futz Hugh de Staunton, et pry q'il soyt eyd^ et fut Demand qui
(...). Et dit per Shard. Sire! vous aves cy Thomas le futz Hugh de Staunton,
ove son Serjaunt William le futz Thomas per nom, que cy est corree, de Bataill
prist a fair et perfourmir, ceo, que la Court nostre seignieur le Roy ad
agarde et agardera et ceo profre verse le Priour etc.

Puis Skrop fist le Champioun le Tenant estere verse le North, et le Champioun
le Demandant verse le South; et commanda le Champioun le Priour q'il prist le
Champion Thomas per la mayn destre, ove sa mayn senestre, et q'il tensist
swefe, sanz de strendre ou grever luy; et q'uil meyst sa mayn destre al livre;
et q'il deyt chescun parole solone ceo q'il serroyt charge, sanz dire plus ou
meyns; et sut charge en cest manner.

Ceo oyez vous home, que ieo per la mayn tiegne, que noum de Baptesme vouz
futez appele William, que Thomas de Staunton n'ad null droyt en l'a voweson de
l'Eglise de Herleston etc. Et que William son auncester, de qui seisine il ad
Count, unques de cel avoweson fut seisi etc. Et dedit tut le count enterement;
mes que ceo fut le droyt le Priour, et ceo jura, si Dieu ly eyde et ses Seyntz.

Apres ceo fut dit a le Champioun la Demandant; q'il prist le Champioun le
Priour per la mayn, en la form q'illy avoyt pris; et q'il meyst sa mayn devre
al Livre, et fut charge en ceste manner.

Ceo oyes vouz home, que ieo per la mayn tiegne, que per nom de Baptesme vouz
feistes appeller William, que vouz estes perjures, et pur ceo perjurie, que
l'avoweson etc. est le droyt Thomas le fitz Hugh de Staunton; et per le reason
que son auncester William; et recapitula tut le Count, et ceo jura, st Dieu ly
eyde et ses Seynts.

Et nota, que quant les Champiouns vindrent a la Bar, leur escuz furont
partez ovesque eux, et tenuz enter lour testes, tant come il esturent a la
Bar, et ove l'une et l'autre furent partez deus bastons, et livere a la
Court; et la Justices elust de ii lun, et le bailla al Champioun le Tenant, et
auxi al Champion le Demandant.

Et nota, que cest a la volunte des Champiouns d'aver lour Escuz greyndres ou
meyndres a lour peril demene, issynt q'il ne passerunt point l'assie limite.

Puis Scrope demanda del Priour, q'il voloyt qui portast l'Escu son Champion en
la place etc. Et le Priour respoundy, que mesme cely qui le tynt.

Puis demanda q'il voloyt que portast son baston. Et le Priour responde et noma
Richard de Maundevill Chivalier, que l'enprist, et a ly fut le baston livere.
Et puis demanda en qui guard il voleyt que son Champioun seut, tanque il
vousist a la place; Et le Priour respondy, et noma un Chivalier qui l'en prist,
et a luy fut le Champioun livere en mesme la form del Demandant; et en mesme
la form fut set.

Et puis Skrop commanda a les Champiouns, que quant il furent a la Bataill, que
mes que l'un abbatu l'autre, et il luy purreyt tuer d'un coup; et l'un party
vousist parler de pees, que mes que le baston fust leve et luy fut command
per la Court, q'il se tensist, q'il ne ferist point, et ceo sur forfeiture de
vie et de membre, tanque il eust conge de Court: Sur quoy fut command a les
Chivaliers, que avoyent les corpse des Champions en guard; q'il les amenassent
salvement en la place: et quant il vyendrent a la place, les parties
accorderent, et vyndrent devant les Justices, et prierent conge d'acorder; et
le Priour dona deners au Roy, et habuit.

Hillarye. Treyt la pees en ceste form; que Thomas le futz Hugh de Staunton
conust l'avoweson l'Eglise de Herleston estre le droyt le Priour, et le droyt
de sa Eglise de nostre Dame de Lenton; et cco relessa et quit clama, quites de
ly, et de ses heirs, al Priour et a ses successors a touz jours, sanz
garrantie.

Skrop. Thomas! vouz avez moult ey travaille la Court nostre seignieur le Roy,
pur quoy le Court veut avoir son droyt; cestasavoir, que les Champiouns fac^nt
lour avenues, ove lour Escues et Bastons, sanz crok, et entrerferrent les coups
le Roy, et puis q'ilentre luctent: Et le Champion le Tenant fut mys verse le
North, et le Champion le Demandant verse le South; et fyrene des avenues ove
bastons et ove Escues; et les fut dit per la Court q'assez; et donques enter
luterent per deuz tournes, et sen departirent, et le Court se leva et les
Champiouns avoyent bastons de livere de Court. Videsis etiam Plas. coram
Justice. Itin. apud Northampton 3 E. 3. penes These. and Camerarios Scace. Rot.
84. in dorso.


Cap. XXVII.
Trial by great Assize. Trial by great Assize.

BUt this kind of Trial by Combat being at the length deemed unchristian; King
Henry the second referred it to the choice of the person challenged (viz. the
supposed wrong-doer, or Defendant) whether he would defend his Title in that
fort, or put it upon the Trial by Oath of xii. good and lawful men, to be
chosen out of the Neighborhood (as in the Saxons time:) which Trial was then
and since called the Trial by great Assize, whereof the learned Ranulph de
Glanvill says Gla^v Lab. 2. Cap. 7. Vide Spelm. Gloss. p. 60.
thus -- Est autem magna Assisa regale beneficium etc. The Trial by great
Assize is a royal benefit vouchsafed to the people, through the Kings Clemency,
upon consultation had with his Nobles; whereby, in tenderness of life, men
might decline that doubtful success of Battle, and try the right to their
freehold that way.

And that this Trial by great Assize was first instituted by King Henry the 2d.
does also more fully appear, by this Circumstantial proof, from King John's
Charter of Liberties, granted to the Church of St. John of Beverley, in
Yorkshire, where he says, Volumus etiant, quod libertates and dignitates, ab
antecessoribus nostris, and ab aliis, Deo and beato Iohanni de Beverlaco, and
Praeposito illius Ecclesiae, in nullo depereant, vel minuantur, vel ledantur
per Assizas vel Recognitiones ubi Assisae fieri debeant, de tenemento aliquo,
vel de re aliqua quae pertineat ad Praepositum Beverlaci, and Praeposituram,
tam in Dominicis quam feodis; sed teneantur in Curia Praepositi Beverlaci, ubi
Placita inde fuerunt and esse consueverunt tempore Regis Henrici patris nostri,
vel tempore Henrici Regis avi patris nostri, antequam Recognitiones vel
Assisae in regno nostro essent constitutae etc. Dat. apud Vernonum 8 Oct. anno
regni nostri 4to.

The form of the Writ you have thus expressed by Glanvill.

Rex Vicecomiti N. Prohibe A. B. ne teneat Placitum in Curia sua, Gla^vill Lib.
2. Cap. 9.
quod est inter B. C. de quatuor hidis terrae etc. nisi Duellum inde vadiatum
fuerit; quia C. qui est Tenens, posuit se inde in Assisam meam, and petit
Recognitionem fieri.

Who describes the manner and form of this Trial, thus: Si autem in magna
Assisa domini Regis se ponere maluerit is qui tenet; aut petens similiter etc.

It the Tenant had rather put himself upon the great Assize; (...)
either the Demandant will likewise put himself upon the Assize; (...)
or he will not. If the Demandant shall once consent in Court, that he will put
himself upon the Assize, and express as much by word of mouth before the Judges
sitting on the Bench; he cannot afterward fly off, but either gain or lose by
the said Assize. But if he will not put himself upon the great Assize; then
ought he to show some cause, why the Assise may not be taken betwixt them; as
in case they were of the same blood, and of the same stock of parentage, whence
the inheritance moves.

And if the Demandant shall object that; the Tenant must either confess it, or
not: If he do confess it in Court, the Assise shall thereupon remain, so that
the business must be determined by Pleadings in the said Court; because then it
shall be lawfully enquired, which of them is nearer to the stock, and so
consequently the righter heir. And by this the next heir shall recover his
right, unless his adversary can give a reason in Court wherefore he, or any of
his ancestors, has lost his right otherwise, either for a time, or for ever;
as if he had given it away, or fold it, or exchanged it; or otherwise justly
aliened it; or that he or his Ancestors have by Felony forfeited their right
for ever; and if upon some of those Articles, the plaint be stayed, obliquely
by interpleadings between them, they may come to the Combat. But if he who
has put himself upon the Assize, shall maintain all his descent, betwixt
himself and the Demandant; or at least, that they are not from the same stock
whence the inheritance moves; then shall they have recourse unto their Common
Kindred, who for that purpose are to be called to the Court, to the end that by
them their Parentage may be discovered: who, if they shall unanimously affirm,
that they are descended from one and the same stock whence the inheritance
moves, their assertion shall state the same: but then; if either of the
persons at variance, shall stubbornly gainsay it; they must then have recourse
to the Neighborhood, upon whose, and their Kinsfolks testimony they are
thereupon wholly to acquiesce.

In like manner shall be done, if his Parents shall be found to differ; for
then he shall abide by the Verdict of the Neighborhood. But upon inquisition
made certainly, if it be proved that they are descended from the same stock
from whence the inheritance came, the Assise shall cease, and the Pleading
shall proceed verbally.

But if the contrary appear to the Court, and to the Kings Justices; then the
Demandant, who has objected this; viz. that they were of one stock, to the end
he might maliciously take away the Assize, shall lose his Plaint: But no one
interposing to hinder the Assize, then shall the business be as finally
concluded thereby, as by Combat.

For the great Assize is a certain royal benefit, by the favor of the Prince,
upon consultation had with his Nobles, vouchsafed to his people, whereby the
life of men, and the safety of their Estates, is so carefully considered, as
that in Law what any one does possess of his Freehold, he may in keeping it,
decline the ambiguous event of Combat. And by this means the punishment of
untimely Death is avoided; or at least the consequent perpetual infamy of that
disgraceful and lying word, which sounds so ill in the mouth of the vanquishr.

Out of the greatest Equity therefore is this lawful constitution sprung; in
regard that the right which by Combat, is scarce ever decided, by reason of
many and long delays, is more speedily and profitably dispatched by the
advantage of this Constitution. For this Assize does not expect so many
Essoines as the Combat does; Cap. 27.
and hereby and by men's labor, chardge to poor people is saved. Moreover, by
how much the credit of many proper witnesses does more weigh in judgment than
of one; by so much the more right ought this constitution to stand, than that
by Combat: for that of Combat proceeds from one sworn witness only, but this
requires the Oaths of xii. lawful men at the least.

Unto this Assise they attain on thus sort; wherefore he, who has put himself
upon the Assise from the beginning, is to move for a Writ to have peace; lest
afterward he be by his Adversary impleaded by the Writ, whereby the sure was
betwixt them of that Tenement, whereupon the Tenant did put himself into the
Assize. The form of which Writs are set forth in the 8th. and 9th. Chapter of
that Discourse.

And by the like writs the Tenent is to pursue peace, ^b. Cap. 10.
and puts himself upon the Assise; until his Adversary coming into the Court,
moves for another Writ, that by four lawful Knights of the County and
Neighborhood, twelve Knights of the same Neighborhood should be chosen, who
may express upon their Oaths, which of the parties at difference has the best
right to the land demanded; the tenor of which writ is set down in the xith.
Chapter of the Discourse aforesaid.

At which day the Tenent may essoin himself; Ib. Cap. 12.
again have three other reasonable Essoins; which may be justly done, as it
seems; because, as it has been before said as often as any one shall appear
in Court, and there performs what by right he ought to do, he shall again
have recourse to his Essoines; but then it chances or may chance, that so many
or more Essoines may happen by the great Assize, as by Combat, which is not
consonant to the premises.

But be it, that the Tenant may Essoin himself three several times, against the
choice of xii. Knights to be so made by the four Knights; yet after three
Essoines, he coming to the Court^ any one of those four Knights, may essoin
themselves the same day.

And if the Tenent, after those three Essoines, may essoin himself again anew;
then the Assize will scarce ever be brought to any effect. But note, that the
four Knights appearing in Court, upon the day prefixed for them, ready to
choose other xii; hence in equity there is to be a Constitution; according to
which, by the Council of the Court the business is so to be expedited; that if
the Tenent do come or not come, the election of the xii. shall be made by those
four and upon their Oaths. But because, in case the Tenent should be there
present, he might perhaps justly except against some of those xii. and be
thereupon heard in Court by his Council, and satisfy the party absent, the xii.
should not only be chosen; but so many, as that without contradiction or
dispute, the party absent, at his return might be satisfied.

The Jurors also may be excepted against, in such sort as the Witnesses in the
Ecclesiastical Court are justly refused. And furthermore note, that if the
person who has put himself upon the great Assize shall come, though not all of
the four Knights do come; yet, by the common agreement and consent of the
parties at difference, and one of the said four Knights, the said xii. Knights
may be chosen, associating to themselves two or three other Knights of the same
County, in case they shall be found in Court, though not on purpose thither
summoned.

And for greater caution, as also to shun all Cavills; it is usual to summon
six or more Knights to the Court for this election. And for the dispatch of
these things in this sort, it will be more fit to follow the Council of the
Court, than to keep the accustomed Course of the Law and Court: whence it is
referred to providence, and the Kings pleasure, or his Justices, to manage the
business to the best advantage and most equity.

Now any man may put himself into the Assize, for service or land; and moreover
for demands of service, and of the right of Advouson of some Church, not only
against a Stranger but against his Lord; that is to say, that it may be known,
which of them, sc. whether the Lord has more right to hold it in demesne; or
his Vassal to hold it of him; for it is easy to frame the Writs according to
the occasion.

When the xii. (...)
Knights are so chosen, they are to have Summons, to the end they may come
prepared to the Court, to express upon their Oaths, whether of them, viz. the
Tenent or the Demandant has most right in his claim. The form of which writ of
Summons is set forth in the xvth. Chapter.

And on the day prefixed for the xii. (...)
Knights to make their recognition; whether the Tenent do come, or not, the
Recognition shall proceed without delay; no essoin being of avail; as well for
that his presence there is not at all necessary, because the Recognition may be
taken without him, as also for that, if he were present, (...) could not say
any thing why it should rest, he having put himself upon the Assize. But it is
otherwise (...) the absence of the Demandant for if he shall be essoined, the
Assze shall stay for that day, and another day shall be appointed by the Court;
because any may lose by default, but by his absence he can gain nothing.

But the Assize proceeding to make the Recognition; (...)
either the right it self is well known to all the Jurors, or to some of them;
or either some of them do know it, or all are ignorant thereof. If none of them
does know the truth thereof, and this be or shall be testified in Court upon
Oath, recourse must be had to others, until such shall be found, who do know
the truth. But if some of them do know the truth of the thing, and some not;
those that know nothing thereof are to be set aside, and others to be called
into the Court, until xii. at the least shall be found to agree therein.

Also, if some of them shall speak for one of the parties at variance, and some
for the other; there must be more added to them, until xii. at least shall
agree upon one side. But every of them is to swear, being called thereto, that
they shall not say falsely; nor knowingly forbear to spoke the truth. And to
the understanding of those, who are sworn thereupon, it is required; that by
their own proper view or hearing, they have had knowledge of the thing in
question, or by relation from their Fathers, and by such whose credit they are
obliged to receive, as their own.

And when the xii. Ib. Cap. 18.
Knights shall appear to make the Recognition, and are satisfied of the truth
of the matter, then shall the Assize proceed to recognize whether of the
parties Demandant or Tenent has most right to the thing in question. And if
they shall say, that the Tenent has most right; or shall say otherwise,
whereby it may sufficiently appear unto our Sovereign Lord the King or his
Justices, that the same person has most right in the thing in question; then
by the judgment of the Court, he shall be for ever freed from any further claim
by the Demandant, so that the said Demandant shall thenceforth be never more
heard in Court, to any purpose: for controversies lawfully decided by the great
Assize of our Lord the King, may not be upon any occasion for the future raised
up again. But if by the said Assize, judgment in Court shall be given for the
Demandant, then shall the Tenent lose the Land, with all the proffits and
benefits found thereon at the time of his seisin, to be to him restored.

The Punishment in this Assise of each Jurors is Ordinary, Ib. Cap. 19.
and elegantly joined to the Kings Institution: for if the Jurors shall be
lawfully convict of Perjury in the Court, or confessed in Law, they shall
forfeit all their moveable goods to the King; but their Lands, through the
Princes Clemency shall be preserved. Furthermore they shall be imprisoned for a
year at least; and thenceforth moreover having no benefit of the Law of the
land, shall perpetually incurr a deserved mark of infamy; which punishment is
justly ordained, that the like may restrain others from taking an unlawful
Oath.

Also it is to be observed, that there never can be a Trial by Combat, where
an Assize may not be; nor on the contrary. But the Demandant, if the land be
adjudged to him, is to have recourse to the Shireeve of the County, wherein it
lies, for the recovery of his possession by this Writ.

Rex Vicecomiti N. salutem. Ib. Cap. 20.
Praecipio etc.

But if there be no Knights to be found in the Neighborhood; Ib. Cap. 21.
nor in that County, who do know the truth of the thing, what is right; whether
then shall the Tenent prevail against the Demandant? If this be so, it is to be
doubted whether the Demandant may not lose his right therein, if he have any.
Be it so therefore, that two or three lawful men, or more, but fewer than xii.
are witnesses of the thing, and do offer to plead the same in Court; if they be
of such an age, that they may dispute it by Combat, and do present all the
words in Court, whereby the Combat is to be considered in Court, whether
hereupon shall any of them be heard? Quaere.

And further, how these Assizes were to be held, take here from the words of
Magna Cap. 12.
Charta; Recognitiones de Nova disseisina etc. Assizes of Novell disseisin, and
Mort Dancestour shall not be taken but in their proper Counties, and in this
manner; If we shall happen to be out of this Realm, our Chief Justice shall
send out our Justices, throughout every Shire, once yearly; who with the
Knights of the Shire, shall take the said Assizes in those Counties: And such
things as at the coming of our said Justices, sent to take those Assizes in the
Counties, cannot be determined, shall be ended by them, in some other part of
their Circuit. And such things, which for difficulty of some Articles cannot be
determined by them, shall be referred to our Justices of the Bench, there to be
ended.

Assizes Cap. 13.
of Darrein Presentment shall be allway taken before our Justices of the Bench,
and there shall be determined.

Cap. XXVIII.
Trial by Combat in Cases Criminal. Trial by Combat in Cases Criminal.

THe form and order of this kind of Trial is thus set forth by Lib. 3. Cap. 18.
Bracton, under the title De illis qui capti sunt pro crimine, vel felonia
magna, sicut pro morte hominis.

-- Cum autem productus fuerit, and de crimine ei imposito accusatus; si crimen
statim confiteatur, satis plenum erit judicium. Si autem negaverit, Vide Breto^
Cap. de Appeals.
and crimen defenderit praecise; and si aliquis, qui eum appellat, per verba
legitima appellum facientia, tunc autem defendit omnia praecise quae ei
imponuntur, and nihil excipit contra appellantem, habebit electionem utrum se
ponere velit super patriam, utrum culpabilis sic de crimine ei imposito, vel
non; vel defendendi se per corpus suum: Si autem patriam elegerit, ad
defensionem per corpus suum, ex poenitentia reverti non poterit, sed per
patriam negotium terminabitur; nec e contra. Si autem per corpus suum intret in
defensionem, nihil excipiendo, statim vadiatur inter eos Duellum. Si omnia rite
concurrant, and principalia maxim appellum facientia, and quae jungunt
Duellum; and si forte appellatus hoc omiserit, Iusticiarii ex officio suo
debent omnia examinare: Inprimis factum and causam appelli; and si factum and
causa sufficiant, tunc inprimis examinare debent sectam, si been facta fuerit,
ita quod nulla sit variatio, ut si appellans unum dixerit in Comitatu and coram
Coronatoribus, and aliud modo dicat coram Iusticiariis: Non enim admittitur hic
variatio, secundum quod inferius dicetur before.

Si autem omnia been concurrant quae jungunt Duellum, tunc dat Appellatus
vadium se defendendi, and Appellator vadium disrationandi; and si Appellatus
victus fuerit, Capitalem subibit sententiam, cum exhaereditatione, and omnium
bonorum suorum amissione, and sicut esse debet in omni, vel quolibet genere
Feloniae. Si autem Appellans victus fuerit, jail committatur, tanquam
calumpniator puniendus; sed nec vitam amittit, nec membrum, licet secundum
leges, ad taliones teneretur, si in probatione deficeret, and Appellatus
quietus recederet de appel^o illo, nisi fort^ Iusticiarii, pro al^ qua alia
suspitione, vel Recto, duxerint ulterius retinendum, quod aliquando faciunt ex
causa etc.

Of judicial Combares in Cases criminal says (...)
Mr. Seldom, some are for Trial of a particular objected misdeed, against which
the common Law by ordinary Course proceeds; and of these the Justices of the
Kings Bench have the disposition; others for purgation of an offense against
military honor, and transmarine Treasons (remedyless by the old Custom of
England) which the high Court of Chivalry is to marshal by the Law of Arms.
The manner of this, both in proceeding and execution is much different from the
other; and therefore of it, by it self briefly thus.

A Chartell containing the Accusation is exhibited to the Judges of Chivalry
for demand of the Combat (if the Appellant make choice of a martial Trial) the
demand being comprehended in the Conclusion -- Tha^ he is ready to maintain the
same by his Body. The truth of the Chartell, and freedom of the Appellant from
all purpose of malicious wrong, is by his Oath confirmed: the Combat, upon due
consideration of circumstancs granted; denunciation of Challenge containing
the whole Chartell, by Officers of Arms (which was wont to be by some private
persons) is sent to the accused. If upon the Process he be returned not found,
then the challenge is published in his Territoties by the person (as
religiously to be observed) of an Herald. Hereof at his peril he takes
notice; (...)
and upon default, after six Months (which is the time of instance for the
Appellants proceeding) is adjudged guilty; But if upon receipt of the Chartell
of Challenge he appear not, (...)
the Judge may brand him with a note of dishonor hereby purchased; of which
(but only by undergoing a new Challenge, as Actor) he can never be cleansed; or
may, under pain of taking it for a Confession, denounce a new time of defense;
or further upon loss of his Coat Armor compel him.

If he appear, and make his defense, but upon the Duel day (his adversary being
there present till Sunset, and Proclamation of demand made at Noon and Night,
which is peremptory and final) without just cause hide his head, it is
sufficient conviction, and without all hope of restitution is his honor
attainted: Whereupon (says Alciat) some Appellants carry the Pictures of such
Dastards about them with exprobation, or their Coat Armor reversed, or
ignominously fastened under their Horsestayl, or with such like disgrace.

If he stand to his defense at the appointed time and place (which by an old
constitution of Frederick are at the Defendants election, Aliciat Cap. 6.
Beuter. concl. 56. atque haec vetus Anglorum Consuetudo, quam. habes in lib.
impress. de honor and Armis Lib. 4. Cap. 8.
but rather indeed at the Courts appointment) to be prefixed within xl. days,
both parties ought to appear in the Field within the Lists, which are
quadrangular, with Gates at each end (chosen in some spacious plain) adjoining
whereunto is pitched a seemly Pavilion (says Fern) of Gules, as a judgment
Seat of the Constable and Marshall; at their feet a competent number of
experienced Knights, with a King of Arms, and a Doctor or two of the Civil
Laws, all for assistance in advice to the Court.

The Appellant and his Procurator first come to the Gate on the right end of
the Lists, banded with his Esquiers clothed in his Colors, and arrayed with
his Arms, waiting on him. The Constable and Marshall demand by voice of
Herald what he is, and why he comes so arrayed? upon his answer and discovery
of his face, by removing the Vizor of his Headpiece, he is admitted, and by a
Knight with an Herald of the Province conducted into the Lists, and placed
before the Judgment Seat on the right hand.

In this like sort and converted solemnity, is the Defendant placed, with his
face opposite to his Adversary on the left side. Gloss ordinaire ^ur les
customs, cap. 68. did. 4.
The Gloss upon the Norman Customs say; que le cause est pour ce, que le de
xtre party est pluis digne; ct le sinistre meins digne. Search is made by the
Knights, both of equality of their weapons (which are also at the Defendants
election, so that he confine his choice within Ancient, Usual, and Military,
although omnium more receptum est (says Alciat) nobili and generoso viro magis
convenire, Alciat Cap. 39 and 40. Vide superius Cap. 8.
ut Eques and quidem loricatus congrediatur; quam mercenariorum peditum more
prodeat, cum Equestris militia nostris moribus dignior sit, and nobilium usu
frequentior. Solent autem (si aliter conventum non sit) in campum omnia
geminata Arma provocati defer; ut eorum quae ipsi in procinctu elegerint
paria adversariis, per Magistros, seu advocatos dari possumus;) as also,
whether they have any Enchantments, or magique assistance for the Victory.

Upon sound of a Trumpet the Appellant and Defendant are severally demanded,
who in person present, the Register to the Procurators, after recital of the
Process; Vous parains sachez rien dire en empeachment del Combat? The
Procurators affirming, that they admit all: It is demanded of the Appellant, if
he persist in his first purpose; and likewise of the Defendant. Both affirming,
the Appellant kneeling lays his right hand on the Evangelists, and with his
left takes the Defendant by the right.

Then the Register -- I. R. Appellant, what say thou to S. T. Defendant?
Hereuppon the Appellant briefly rehearses his Chartel of defyance to the
Defendant, with a concluding Oath for the truth of his quarrel; to which the
Defendant^ converso, reciting his Defense, with denial and Oath respectively
applied, gives answer, the beginning of both forms being thus;

-- Hear you this my Lords, Fern Lib. de gloria nobilit. p. 327.
all true Knights and Gentlemen bearers of Arms, and thou S. T. Defendant etc.
The Conclusion; and that my quarrel (or defense) is true; neither have I done
any thing whereby the Law of God and of Knighthood might be depressed, and the
Law of Satan enhaunced, so help me God.

All this finished the parties are s^t apart, and prepare themselves to the
Battle, an Herald pronouncing soi^ la battaille grantus, et victor ie a eux
que droit, with Proclamation, that none be so hardy, as by motion, speech, or
crying out, to discomsit the Combatants or disturb the Combat; then
immediately an Officer at Arms proclaims, Approver, gardes vostre Challenge;
et vous Defendour gardes vostre Defense. Upon the sound of the Alarm the
Battle begins.

The time or instance (as the Iustinianists call it) of the Combat, is an
artificial day, from Sunrising (when the lists are to be entered) unto Sunset;
Alciat Cap 41. de sing certam (...) de repa^^^^ Ang^. Lib. 3. Cap. 3.
and licet aliqui (says my Author) usque; ad Stellarum apparitionem
permanendum existiment, tamen receptior est sententia, ut simpliciter occasus
expectetur.

If the Appellant overcome not the Defendant within that time, the Defendant is
deemed guiltless of the imputation; but ben protebbe (Mutio Iustinopolitano
Lib. 2. Cap. 12.
tells me) la patente del campo esser stata ispedita con tal forma, che per
la partersi del sole la bataglia non si dourebbe partire, o^il seguente giorno
si dourebbe renovare.

He to whom either upon default (which prejudices the Approver also) or
performed Combat, the Victory is adjudged, shall after request of his
Procurator to the Constable and Marshall be publicly declared Victor.

But by the way observe; that it suffices not, that a superiority appear only
in their manhoods; Duelli enim est (my Author so says) finis; ut alter vel
pereat, vel dedititium se fateatur. Ante id factum, Beuther concl. 65. Aicial.
Cap. 45.
licet alter videatur superior, tamen propter bellorum casus, quibus quandoque
propiores victis sunt victores, non dicitur alter superatus; so that either
Death or Disdict, as they call it, which is yielding or confession of his guilt
must be the final issue whereon perfect Victory can be allowed. Then shall the
Victor with an honorable attendance of Knights and men of Arms mounted, Fer^e
Lib. de gloria nobil^^. p. 334.
enter the Field, and thrice march round the Lists; and shall take with him the
whole Process of the Chartell, defense, issue, and judgment, sealed with the
Court-Seal, in perpetual testimony of his performance and maintained honor.
(...)


Thus far Mr. Seldom verbatim transcribed.

That which follows is taken (...)
out of a MS Book, sometime belonging to Sr Edward Wyndham Knight Marshall of
the Camp to King Henry the 8th.

First a Bill of Challenge is, together with a Gauntlet delivered unto the
Court by the Appellant.

The Defendant denies the point of the Bill, and accepts the Gauntlet.

Then, if the Appellant have no witnesses to prove the matter of his Appeal,
the Marshall prefixeth a day, within xl. for deraigning the Combat, taking
pledges on both parties to appear at the day, and to do Battle between
Sunrising and Sunset.

The place appointed for the Combat is a hard and even ground, rayled within
certain Lists Lx. foot in length, and xl. foot in breadth; and without the Lists
are certain Counter-Lists, within which the Marshalls men come, as well to
attend any extraordinary accident within the Lists, as to keep off the press of
the people without.

Their Weapons are appointed a Glaive, a long Sword, a short Sword, and a
Dagger. At the day the Appellant does appear and come to the Eastgate of the
Lists, where he is admitted to enter by the Marshall himself, together with his
Arms, Weapon, Victual, and also his Council with him: and then is brought to a
certain place within the Lists, where he attends the coming of the Defendant.

The Defendant, if he appear not, is called by three Proclamations, made by the
Marshall of the King of Heralds of that Province wherein the Battle is
deraigned.

The Marshalls Clerk does enter into his Register their coming, the time of
their coming, and the manner, whether on Horseback or on foot; the fashion of
their Arms and their Weapons; the color of their Horses and the like.

The Marshall does measure their Weapons; and then the Marshall has a Clerk
ready, who brings forth a Crucifix and a Mass Book, whereupon both the
Appellant and Defendant do take their Oaths.

The Bill of Challenge of the Appellant; and the answer of the Defendant is
read unto them by the Marshalls Clerk; and then they take their Oaths.

1. That their Appeal and Defense is true.

2. That neither has advantage of other by Weapon.

3. That either would do his best endeavor to vanquish his Enemy.

Then Proclamation is made at every Corner of the Lists, for the clearing and
voydance of the Lists.

Then the Combatants being ready, the Constable and Marshall, sitting at the
Kings feet, pronounce these words with a high voice Lesses les aller, Lesses
les aller; Lesses les aller et fair leur devoir.

In the fight, if either of the parties do give any sign of yielding: or if the
King being present, do cry Hoe, the Constable and the Marshall do part them,
and observe precisely who has advantage or disadvantage either of other at
that instant: for if they should be awarded to fight again, they are to be put
in the same posture as they were before.

If the King take up the matter, they are brought honorably out of the Lists,
neither having precedence before the other.

If the Battle be performed, and one party be vanquished, then in case of
Treason the rayles of the Lists are broken down; and the party vanquished is
drawn out at a Horsetayl, and carried presently to execution by the Marshall.

Persons excused from Battle.
1. Clergymen; Vide Plac. coram Reg. apud (...). T. Pasch. 12 E. 2 rot. 118.
where two avoided Combat by feigning they were Clerici; but notwithstanding
they were committed to the Marshall.
and therefore 41 E. 3. tit. Coron. 99. an Appeal when he came into the Field
avoided the Battle, by praying his his Clergy.

2. Citizens of London, by the Charter of the City.

3. Sexagenarii, men of threescore.

4. Coecus. Blind by accident after issue joined.

And this difference is to be observed between an Appellant and an Approver in
an Appeal; viz.

If the Appellant vanquish he shall be quit; but if an Approver vanquish, he
may notwithstanding by executed, An 17 E. 2. T. Hill. Rot. 24. Glouc. Rex.
where the Approver, though he vanquished, was hanged.

If an Approver appeal xx. he must fight with them all, one after another. But
if diverse Approvers appeal one; if he vanquish one, he is quit against all the
rest.

The Appellant and the Defendant, both of them, before the day of Battle, do
sue to the King by Petition, for as many Privy-Seals as should be needful for
the providing of Armor, Weapons, Armourer, Proctor, and certain men to be of
their Council, at the Kings Charge, which the King accordingly grants.

Thus far out of Sir Edward Windham's Book; whereunto I shall add what I have
farther met with upon this subject, out of an ancient Manuscript.

The manner of ordenaunce withinne Lists.
FIrst the quarrels and Bills of the Appelaunt and Defendaunt shull be pleded
in the Court before Constable and Mareschall, Ex vetusto codice MS. in bibl.
Seldeai^^.
and when they may not make prefe by witness, nor by none other manner, but
determine their quarrels by strength; that one to prove his intent upon that
other; and that other in the same wise to defend him, the Constable has power
to join the Bataill, as Viker general under God and the King. And the Bataill
joined by the Constable, he shall assign them day and place, so that the day
be not within xl. days after the seid Bataill so joined, but only by assent
of the seid Appelaunt and Defendaunt, awardyng them than, how many manner
wepenes euerych of them shall have; that is to wite Gleyve, long Swerd, short
Swerd, and Dagger. Also that th'Appelaunt and Defendaunt find sufficient
plegges, that everych of them shall come to his journey, the Appelaunt to make
his proof upon the Defeudaunt, and the Defendaunt in his defense on the
Appelaunt, and there to be there youyn hour and term and Son to make his
proof, and to be at the farrest within the Lists to acquit his plegge, and in
like wise of the Defendaunt. And that none of hem do none harm, damage,
awayte assault, ne none other damage, nor Envye by them nor by none of their
Friends, Wellwillers, nor none other person.

The making of the Lists.
THe King shall find the Feld to fight on; and the Lysts shall be made at the
Mareschalls devise. And it is to be considred bitwene the Constable and
Mareschall, that the Lists be Lx. pace of length, and xl. pace of widness, and
that the ground be hard, stable, and steadfast, and evynly made, and without
great stones; And the ground plat, And that the Gates of the Lysts be shette
with good Barrers, and well kept with Sergeants of Arms; and that the Lists be
well and strongely barred all about: and that they suffer not the folk without
to nigh the Lists by iiii. foot: and a Gate in the Est, and anothir in the
West, with good and strong Bars of vii. foot high or more, that an Horse may
not lepe over.

Apperaunce of the pleggs.
THe day of the Bataile the King shall sit in a Stage, in a Scaffold an high,
and a place shall be made for the Constable and Mareschall at the foot of the
Steyre of the said Scaffold, where they shall sit; and then the pleggs of
th'appelaunt and Defendaunt shull be called to come into the Lysts before the
King, and to be present in the Court as Prisoners till th'appellaunt and
Defendaunt be come into the Lists and have made her Oaths.

Receyvyng of the Appelaunt.
When the Appelaunt comes to the journey, he shall come to the Gate of the
Lists in the Est, in such wise as he will fight with his Wepens assigned by the
Court. And there he shall abide til he be brought in by the Constable; so that
when he is come to the seid Gate, the Constable and Mareschall shull go
togidir; and the Constable shall axe him what man he is that is come armed to
the Gate of the Lists; and what is his name, and why he comes: and the
Appelaunt shall sey, I am such a man A. B. Appellaunt that am armed and horsed,
and am come to the Gate of thise Lists to ask enter to do my Devoir, and prove
mine intent against C. de D. and to acquyte my Pleggs. And then the Constable
shall opyn the vyser of his Basnet, so that he see opynly his visage, and that
it be the same man that is th'appelaunt. And after that he shall do opyn the
Gate of the Lists and do him come in, with his seid Armers, VVepyns, and
Vitailes, and other leefull necessaryes upon him: and also his Counsel with
him, and bring him before the King; and than to his place, where he shall abide
til the Defendaunt be come.

Dischargyng of the Pleggs.
ALso the Appellaunt shall require the Constable and Mareschall to deliver his
Pleggs and to discharge them of their pleggery; and the Constable and
Mareshall shull ask leve of the King to acqyte his Pleggs after that the
Appelaunt is come into the Lysts to do his devoir.

The first calling of the Defendaunt.
ANd if the Defendaunt come not betimes to his journey, the King shall command
the Counstable to do call him by the Mareschall, and the Mareschall shall
command his Leiutenaunt, and the Lieutenaunt shall command the Mareschall of
the Herauldes of the South, if it be in the March of the King of Clarenceux:
And if the Bataile be beyond Trent in the March of the King Noreys, the
Mareschall of the King of the North, shall make the Cry; and in defaute of
him an Herald of the March of the King Noreys shall cry in this wise, Oiez,
Oiez, Oiez. C. de D. Defendaunt, comes to your journey that ye have
entirprised at this day, to acquit your Pleggs before the King, Constable,
and Mareschall, to defend you against A. B. Appelaunt of that he has put
upon you. And if he come not betimes, he shall be called thrys at the iiii.
Corners of the Lists; and at the second time the Herald shall sey at the end
of the cry, for the day passes fast. And if he come not by times at the
second cry the Heralds shall cry by comaundment of the Constable and
Mareschall the third time again, bitwene the hour of Tierce and Midday at the
ferrest; and he shall say at the begynyng C. de D. Defendaunt, saves your
worship, and comes to your journey, that ye have entirprised at this day. And
at the end of the Cry, the day passes fast, and the hour of Midday is nygh,
and that ye come by that hour at the ferrest on peril that longs thereto.

How the time of their entree and array shall be regestred by the Constables
Clerk.
ALso the Constables Clerk shall enter in his Regestre her coming and the time
of their coming, and how they enter the Lysts, on Foot, or on Horsbak: and how
they ben armed, and the color of the Horses; and how the Horses ben armed; for
thing that might fall of enbeselyng of their Horses and harneyses.

ALso that the Constable take heed to the King if the King wole assign any of
his Knights of Worship to counsel them.

The examynacion of their Wepenes.
ALso the Constable and Mareschall shull send after their Speres and do cut
them of even mesure.

The keeping of the Appelaunts Place.
ALso the Constable shall send ii. Knights, or ii. Squires to the Appelaunt to
keep his place, that he use, ne hide no charm, ne carecte within the ground in
his own person, nor by none other till he have made his Oath. And in likewise
shall be done to the Defendaunt.

To enquire and know the Kyng's will for making of their Oaths.
ALso the Constable shall wite the Kings will, whethir her Oath shall be made
before the King; or that the King wole, that it be made in the Lysts before
Constable and Mareschall.

How the Appelaunt shall be sent fore.
ALso the Constable shall send by the Mareschall, first aftir the Appelaunt to
make his Oath, with his Counseill; And first before the making of his Oath, the
Constable shall ask of his Counseill, if they will make any moo protestacions,
that they put forth all her protestacions; for after that they shall make noe
moo protestacions.

How the Constable's Clerk shall ley forth a Cross, and a Masseboke for the
Oaths.
ALso the Constable shall have a Clerk that shall ley forth a Cross with a
Crucifix and an opyn Massboke writyn with the holy Gospells. And the Clerk
shall turn the Book to the Canon of the Mass and turn up the Crucifix of the
Book.

The redyng of the Bille of the Appelaunt and the first Oath.
THe Constable shall do his Clerk read his Bill through; and than the Constable
shall sey to the Appelaunt, and nempne his name; ye know this Bille and this
Glove, that ye gave up in our Court before us; ye shull ley your right hand
upon the Cross, and on the Gospels, that your Bille is true in all points,
from the begynyng of the quarrel contained in this Bille to the end: And that
is your intent to prove upon the seid C. de D. Defendaunt, So God you help and
the holy Gospells. And then he shall be brought to his place eyes; And the
Constable shall do call by the Mareschall the Defendaunt; and there shall be
done to him in like manner as to the Appelaunt. But that they both two at her
first Oath shall set him on her knees, or by favor of the Constable and
Mareschall, they shull stand on her fete.

The second Oath.
AFter that the Constable shll do bring by the Mareschall the Appelaunt before
them: and the Constable, if he wole, may license him to sit before them at
this Oath: And the Constable shall sey A. de B. ye shull ley your hand again on
the holy Gospels, and swear, that ye shull have no moo Wepnes or points, but
tho that been assigned you by the Constable and Mareschall, that is to wite
Gleyve, long Swerd, short Swerd, and Dagger: Nor no Kayfe, small ne great; ne
none Engine, ne none other instrument with point: nor stone of virtue, nor
herb of virtue; nor charm, nor experement, nor none other enchauntment by
you, nor for you, whereby ye trust the better to overcome the said C. de D.
your Adversary, that shall come ayens you within thise Lysts in his defense:
Nor that ye trust in none other thing propirly, but in God and your body, and
your true quarrel, so God you help, and all Halowes, and the holy Gospells.
And after that he shall be brought to his place, again, and the Keepers of the
place voided. And the same Ordenaunce shall be done on the Defendaunt of this
Oath.

The third Oath.
AFterward the Constable and Mareschall shull send after both to come before
them; and the Constable shall name the Appelaunt and afterward the Defendaunt;
and the Constable shall sey tak everych of you other by the right hand; and I
defend you that none of you be so hardy to handill other in evil manner by
your hands, on parell, that wole fall, and by your feithes. And ye shull ley
your left hands on the Boks, and the Constable shall sey, I chardg you A. B.
Appellaunt, by your feith, that ye take in the hands of your adversary C. de
D. and by all Hallowes, and the holy Gospels, that ye shull do your power and
intent, by all the weyes that ye may, to prove your intent, and appele upon C.
de D. your adversary, and Defendaunt, and to make him yield him into your
hands; and to cry and sey Creant; or to do him dey by your hand, before that
ye depart out of thise Lists by the time of the Son, that is assigned you by
us Constable and Mareschall, by your faith; and so God you help and his
Hallowes, and the holy Gospells. And in the same manner shall be done in all
points to the Defendaunt; and than every ych of them shall be brought to his
place, and her Counseill voided everych from his Cleaunt, and her servaunts.

The first Proclamation after the enter and Oaths of the parties.
THat no man approach to the Lysts by iiii, foot, on peyn etc.

After thise Oaths made, an Heraulde, by assignement of the Constable and
Mareschall, shall cry at the four Corners of the Lists in manner that
follows Oiez Oiez Oiez. We charge, and command you, on the behalf of the
King, and of Constable, and Mareschall; that noe person of great value, nor of
small estate, of what condition soever he be, be so hardy to approach the Lysts
by iiii. foot; Nor to speak word, nor to make Cry, countenance, semblaunt,
nor noise whereby any of thise two parties A. D. and C. D. Appelaunt, and
Defendaunt may take advantage one of anothir, by your tokyn, on perell to lose
life and lyme, and his gods at the Kyng's will.

The assignement of the place for the Kings at Arms, and Herauldes.
AFterward the Constable and Mareschall shall assign a place for the Kings at
Arms, and the Herauldes togidir, where they may see all her fetes within
Lysts; and to be nere if they be called; for after that time the mynistracion
of the Appelaunt and Defendaunt is theirs; that is to wite, if the Appelaunt or
Defendaunt have forgotyn any thing in her confession, than the Herauldes shull
be called to do a Confessor come secretly, for disclaundry of the people; and
if they will eat or drink of their vitailes that they have brought with them
within the Lists, the Herauldes shull serve them and none other person. And
if the Appelaunt wole ete or drink, he shall ask leve first of his
adversary; and the Appelaunt and Defendaunt shall be of one accord. And
afterward the Kyng's Herald shall go to the Constable and Mareschall, and
let them know their will. And afterward the Constable and Mareschall and the
Herald shull go to the King to ask leve to ete or drink; or in caas if the
Appelaunt or Defendaunt wole do other pryvy necessaryes, the mynistration shall
be done by the Heralds and the Purcyvaunts.

Voidaunce of the Lystes.
AFterward the Constable and Mareschall shull void the Lists of al manner
people, except a Knight and two Squyers for the Constable; and one Knight and
two Squyers for the Mareschall, that shull be armed on their bodies; but
everych of them shall have in his hand one Spear without Iryn, to depart them
when the King cries, Hoo, in manner as was used in old time. The Constable
shall not have within the Lysts but a Knight and two Squiers; and the
Mareschall a Knight his Lieutenaunt, and ii. Squiers, which shall be armed on
their bodies; but they shall nethir bear Swerds, Baselards, Knyfes, ne Daggers
in the Lists. And they that longen to the Constable, shull keep one corner, and
sit allow on the ground; and they that longen to the Mareschall shall keep
anothir Corner, allow in like manner. And there shull be no mor Rulers within
the Lists, but the Constable and Mareschall. And if the King be not present,
than the Constable and Mareschall shull keep the Kyng's place, and their
Leiutenauntes shall be in the field.

The sittyng of the Constable.
AFterward the Constable alone shall sit him allow in a Seige before the
King, in the Lysts, as his Viker general, and the Constable shall send his
Lieutenaunt to the Appelaunt to accompanye him and the Mareschall, or his
Licutenaunt shull accompanye the Defendaunt. And the Constable sittyng shall
sey this sentence, with high vois. Lessez lez alier; Lessez lez alier; Lessez
lez alier et fair lour Devoire. And after that, in the Kings presence, the
Appelaunt shall go to the Defendaunt, and assail him vigerously; and that
other shall defend him wisely. And the Constable and Mareschall shall alwey be
nigh, or her Lieutenaunt to here or wite if any of them speak or cry or make
any sign to yield him or his quarrel; and to take heed if the King cry Hoo,
than they that been in the Lists with the Constable and Mareshall, shall cast
her Speres bitwene the Appelaunt and Defendaunt, and suffer not that one come
nere that other, til the King have seide his Will or do cry Estsones, by the
Constable, Arer lessez lez alier, et fair lour devoire.

For the Defendaunt, if he come not before the hour of Midday.
BUt howbeit that the Constable have yeven hour and term to the Defendaunt,
to come to his journey; nevertheless though he tarry to the hour of Midday,
the Judgment shall not of right go against him, be it in cause of Treason or
other, cause; but not so of the Appelaunt; for he must keep his hour and term
lymyted by the Court, without any withdrawyng, or excuse, be it in cause of
treason, or other cause.

The Serhyng of the Wepyns.
ANd the Appelaunt and Defendaunt shall be serched by the Constable and
Mareschall of her Wepenes, that they be avowable, without any manner Engine
disavowable. And if they be other than reason wole, they shall thurghly be
voided; for reason nor good seithe, nor Law of Arms shall suffer no malengine,
nor trecherye in so great a fete. And it is to wite, that the Appelaunt and
Defendaunt may Arm hem as surely on their bodies, as they seem good, and to
have Targe and Pavys in the Listys; because it is but Armury; but it most be
without any Engine therein disavowable; howbeit that that one have it, and that
other have none; and if it hap that one of hem would make his Gleyve shorter
than the mesure of the Standard, nathelesse that other may have of the length
of the Standard, if he wole ask it of the Court. But if the Gleyves pass the
said measure of the standard, that one shall be made of evyn measure after that
other.

If the parties be dissevered or departed, what shall be done.
FUrthermore it is diligently to be considred by the Constable and Mareschall;
that if the King wole do the parties fightyng, to depart, rest, or abide for
any cause, what so it be; that they take good keep, how they ben departed, so
that they be in the same estate and degree i^ all things, if the King wole
suffer or do them go again to gidir. And also that they have good wacche, and
keep to them if any of them speak to other, be it to yield him, or any things
else: For to them perteyneth the witness and the record of their words, and
to none other.

The pain of him that is discumfite.
ANd if the said Bataill be in cause of Treson, he that is convyct and
discumfite, shall be unarmed in the Lists by the Commaundment of the Constable
and Mareschall; and a corner of the Lysts brokyn up in reproach of him, whereby
he shall be drawn out with Horses from the the place where he is so unarmed,
through the Lists unto the place of Iuyse, where he shall be heded or hanged
after the usage of the Country: which thing perteyneth to the Mareschall to
oversee, and do by his Office; and to putt it in execucion; and to go or ride
alweyes on that one side of him, til it be all done and performed; and that as
well of th'appelaunt, as of the Defendaunt; for good feith and right of Arms
wole that the Appelaunt run in the same pain that the Defendaunt should, if he
were convict and discomfite.

If the quarrel be taken into the Kyng's hand.
ANd if it happed so, that the King would take the quarrel in his hand, and make
them accorded, and let them fight no more, than the Constable taking that one
party, and the Mareschall that other, shall bring them before the King; and he
showing them his will, the Constable and Mareschall shull bring them to one of
the Gates of the Lists, with her wepyns, Horses, and Armuryes, like as they
have and been found, when the King takes the quarrel into his hand; and so
shull they evynly be brought out at the Port of the Lysts, so that that one
go not before that other by no wey in thing: For after that the King have
take the quarrel in his hand it were not honest, that any of the parties should
have more dishonor one more than an other; for it has been seide by many
auncyen people; that he that goes first out of the Lists has the dishonor,
and that aswele in cause of Treson as in any other cause.

For the Faux Lystes.
ANd it is to wite, that there most be faux Lists without the principal Lists;
bitwene the which the people of the Constable and Mareschall, and the Kings
Sergeauntz of Arms shull stond to keep and defend, if any person wole make
any offense or affraye against the cries made in the Court; or any thing that
might be against the Kings Magestee, or Law of Arms; and thise people shull be
armed at all points.

What people the Constable and Mareschall shull have.
THe Constable shall have there as many men of Arms as him seems good, and
the Mareschall also; which people shull have the keeping as it is aforeseid.

The keeping of the Ports of the Lists.
THe Kyng's Sergeauntz of Arms shull keep the Ports of the Lists, and make
arrestes if any shull be made by commaundment of Constable and Mareschall.

The feez perteynyng to my Lord.
THe Mareschalls fee is all the Wepyns, Horses, and Armures, aswele of the
Appelaunt as of the Defendaunt, whereof they have dismyssed them, or letyn
from them, after that they ben entered into the Lists: And all the Wepyns,
Horses and Armures of him that is discumsite; be it the Appelaunt or the
Defendaunt: And the Lists, Barrers, and Scaffolds of the same.

For crime that is other than Treson.
ANd if the crime be other than Treson, he that is convict shall be unarmed,
and amesne out of the Lists to his Juice, aswele of the Appelaunt as of the
Defendaunt; but he shall not be drawn, but if it be in cause of Treason.

For him that is convict, if it be in accion of Arms.
ANd if the Crime be in accion of Arms, he that is convict and discumfited
shall be unarmed, and boutz Horse out of the Lysts, without other Iuyse.

This shall be the first cry that shall be made sone after the Kyng's coming,
at his own lust and commaundment.
WE charge and command you in the name of the most high and excelent Prince or
Soveraygn Lord the King of England, and of France, and Lord of Ireland; and on
the behalf of Constable and Mareschall, that no manner of man of what degree,
estate, or condition that ever he be of, be so hardy to approach, ne enter
within the Barrers, ne the Lists of this place; nor no party thereof, except
such persons as are assigned thereto, and appointed by the King and his
Counseill, or else by the Constable and Mareschall; upon peyn of enprisonment,
and his body and goods at the Kyng's will.

This shull be the second Cry, what time the parties are cum into the place.
WE charge and command you in the name of the most high and excelent prince,
our Soverain Lord the King of England, and of France, and Lord of Ireland; and
on the behalve of Constable and Mareschall, that no manner man, of what degree,
estate, or condition that ever he be of, be so hardy to make any manner noise
or cry, whatsoever they see or here in this same field done bitwene thise two
parties that are comen to do and perform certain fetes of Arms at this
time: and also, that no manner man be so hardy to make no manner semblaunce,
tokyn, nor countenance, in no manner wise, to no party whereby that any of hem
may take any manner comfort, warnyng, Trial by fire and Water Ordale.
or advantage by, on peyn of emprisonement, and his body and gods at the Kings
will.

Cap. XXIX.
Trial by Fire and Water Ordale.
THis kind of Trial is deduced Dict (...).
from a Saxon Original Ordale, signifying judicium aequum, justum, indifferens;
an upright, just and indifferent judgment.

That our Ancestors the Saxon (when Pagans) were much addicted to Divination,
we have the testimony of Tacitus De moribus Germanorum Cap. ^. Videsis A(...)
; who says, that they made special observations on the flying of Birds; as
also on their Notes. So likewise on the neighing of Horses. And that when they
went to war against a people, in case it happened, that they did intercept one of
their Enemies party, they would cause a Duel to be fought betwixt one of their
own men and him, and divine the success of their whole Army, by taking notice
which of those two obtained the Victory.

Nor is it improbable, but that they then, in some Cases, both Civil and
Criminal, used this or some such kind of Judgment (scil. by Fire and Water
Ordale) which, when they became Christians they waived not; for that these
Trials were anciently practiced by them, we have apparent testimony from the
Laws of King Ina (one of our West Saxon Kings) who began his reign in the year
of Christ DCCx.

The manner of proceeding herein was either by Fire or Water, as from King
Athelstans Law Analect (...)Cap. 8. Inter Leges Athelstan Cap. ^^^
, I shall here take notice. -- De Ordalio praecipimus in nomine Dei etc.
Concerning Ordale we command, in the name of God, and by the Precept of our
Archbishops and Bishops, Videsis Chron. Ioh. B(...)t. col. 844. and 85^ l. 5.
that no man enter into the Church after the Fire is brought in, wherewith the
Judgment is to be made hot, except the Priest, and he who is to undergo the
Trial. And let there be measured ix. foot from the Staeke unto the mark, Cap.
29.
according to the measure of his foot, who is to come thus to judgment.

And if the Trial be by Water, let it be made hot till it boil, in a Vessel
of Iron, Brass, Lead or Clay: And if it be single, let his hand be put therein
after a stone or stock, up to his wrest: but if the accusation be threefold,
then to his elbow. And when the Judgment shall be prepared, let two men be
brought in on each side, to make experiment, that it be as hot as is before
expressed.

Let as many also come in on each side the judgment, along the Church; and let
them be fasting, and abstain from their Wives that Night; and the Priest shall
sprinkle Holy water on them, and give them the Text of the holy Gospel to
kiss, as also the sign of the Cross. And no man shall make the fire any longer
than whilst the Benediction begins; but shall cast the Iron upon the Coals
until the last Collect. Afterward it shall be put upon the... without any more
words, then that they pray earnestly to God, that he will vouchsafe to manifest
the Truth therein. Then shall the person accused drink Holy water; and his hand
wherewith he shall carry the Judgment shall be sprinkled therewith; and so let
him go, the nine foot measured being distinguished by three and three.

At the first mark next to the stake, he shall set his right foot; and at the
second his left foot, and thence he shall remove his right foot unto the third
mark, where he shall throw down the Iron, and hasten to the holy Altar; which
done, his hand shall be sealed up, and the third day after viewed whether it be
clean or unclean, where it was so sealed. And he who shall transgress these
Laws, let the Ordale Judgment, or Trial be done upon him, that he pay Cxxs. for
a fine or mulct.

Touching the Trial by cold water Ordale, I have here subjoyned what the Author
of the Antiquities of the Britannick Church, from certain ancient Missalls has
set p. 104.
forth; viz. Peractis, ut ante, trium dierum jejuniis etc.

The three days fast and other holy Duties performed (as in the Trial by Fire
Ordale) Holy water is given unto the party accused, which he is to drink with
this following Execration; Let this water be to thee now for a Trial. Whereupon
this following conjuration is to be used to the cold water wherein the person
supposed guilty, is to be put; viz.

I adjure thee O thou water, in the name of the Father Almighty, who created
thee in the beginning, commanding thy use for humane necessities, and that thou
should be separated from the Waters above. I adjure thee, by the unspeakable
name of the Lord Jesus Christ, Son of the living God, under whose feet, the Sea
and Element being severed, was trod upon; and who was pleased to be baptized
in the watery Element. I also adjure thee by the holy Ghost, which descended
upon the Lord when he was baptized. I adjure thee likewise by the name of the
holy and individual Trinity, by whose will the Element of waters was divided,
and the people of Israel forthwith passed thorough dry foot; At whose
invocation the Prophet Helisaeas caused the Axe which fell out of the helve, to
swim upon the water, that thou do not in any manner receive this man N. if he
be guilty of what he is accused, by his act, consent, or knowledge, or any
other device; but make him swim upon thee; to the end there may be no
counterfeiting with thee, or any exploit of the enemy, that may disguise it.
And by the name of Christ, we command thee, that for his sake thou obey us,
unto whom every creature does service; whom Cherubim and Seraphim do praise;
saying Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Hosts, who rules and reigns world
without end.

And afterward, other Exorcisms being recited, the person supposed guilty,
putting off his Garments is to be cast [his thumbs and toes tied together with
cords] into the water: into which if he sink, he is freed; but in case he swim
then to be condemned.

Some instances there are in our public Hist. of this Realm, of certain
persons who underwent this kind of Trial; H. Knighton Cap. 8. [Angl. hist.
Script. antiq. col. 2329.]
as of Emma Mother to King Edward the Confessor, whereunto I refer my Reader.

And I find Ex magno Rot. Pipe de an. 12 H. 2.
that Ogerus Dapifer being Shireeve of Nor and Suffolk, in 12 H. 2. in his
Account for that year, upon record in the Exchequer -- reddit Compotum de
Catallis fugitivorum, and eorum qui perierunt in judicio aquae; viz. de Ricardo
Haiward iiiis. viid. etc.

Nor was this Law totally out of use with us, until King Henry the 3d. in the
third year of his reign did abolish it, as will appear from his special
Praecept, Pat. 3 H. 3. p. 1. m. 5.
which I have here transcribed from the Record.

De Iusticia facienda, loco Ignis and Aquae.
REx dilecto and fideli suo Philippo de Ulecote, and sociis suis Iusticiariis
Itineratibus in Com. Cumbr. Westmerl. and Lanc. salutem. Quia dubitum fuit and
non determinatum, ante inceptionem Itineris vestri, quo judicio adducendi sunt
illi, qui rectati sunt de Latrocinio, murdro, incendio, and hiis similibus, cum
prohibitum sit per Ecclesiam Romanam Iudicium Ignis and Aquae; provisum est a
Consilio nostro, ad praesens, ut in hoc Itinere sic fiet de rectatis and
hujusmodi excessibus; viz. quod illi qui rectati sunt de criminibus praedictis
majoribus; and de eis habeatur suspicio quod culpabiles sint de eo unde rectati
sunt; de quibus etiam licet Regnum nostrum abjurarent adhuc suspicio esset quod
postea malefacerent, teneantur in prisona nostra, and salvo custodiantur, ita
quod non incurrant periculum vitae vel membrorum occasion prisonae nostrae.
Illi vero, qui mediis criminibus rectati fuerint, and quibus competeret
Iudicium Ignis vel Aquae, si non esset prohibitum, and de quibus si regnum
nostrum abjurent, nulla fuerit postea male faciendi suspicio, regnum nostrum
abjurent. Illi vero, qui minoribus rectati fuerint criminibus, nec de eis
fuerit mali suspicio, salvos and securos plegios inveniant de sidelitate, and
pace nostra. lonservanda, and sic dimittantur in terra nostra. Cum igitur
nichil certius providit in hac part Consilium nostrum ad praesens, relinquimus
discretioni vestrae hunc ordinem praedictum observandum in hoc Itinere vestro;
ut qui prisons hominum, formam delicti, and ipsarum rerum veritatem melius
cognoscere poteritis in hoc ordine, secundum discretiones and conscientias
vestras, Wager of Law.
in hujusmodi procedatis. Et in hujus rei testimonium etc. T. domino P. Winton.
Episcopo apud Westminster. xxvi. die Ian. Eodem modo scribitur Justice. Itinerantibus
per Angliam.

Cap. XXX.
Wager of Law.
THus much concerning Trials by xii. men, in matters of Title. But besides
this, in Actions of Debt, there has been anciently another manner of Trial,
which still continues in practice for small sums of money, throughout diverse
parts of this Realm; viz. where apparent proof is not made on the Plantiffs
part, the Defendant is admitted to Wage his Law; id est to take his own Oath,
that he owes nothing at all to the Plaintiff; and to bring as many credible
persons, as the Court shall assign, to make Oath, that they believe he swears
true: which manner of Waging Law (as they call it) is very ancient, as may seem
from what Mr. Lambard observes thereof, though there Explic. rerum and
Verborum, Vocab. Purgatio.
in Cases criminal.

Cap. XXXI.
Punishment in Cases Criminal.
That the punishment of Felons, by Death, with hanging upon Gallows, is very
ancient; appears from King Ina's Law; who (reigning almost a thousand years
since) so Inter Leges (...) per Lamb. n. 23.
ordained: which Law, and practice accordingly continued in force till the
Norman Conquest. Chron. Ioh. Brompt. col. 763. n. 26.
Howbeit then, King Will. the first inhibiting Inter Leges will. Conq. in Lib.
rub. in S^acc. f. 162. b. Et apud Lamb. fol. 126. a.
it; appointed Inter Leges will. Conq. in Lib. rub. in S^acc. f. 162. b. Et
apud Lamb. fol. 126. a.
that insted thereof, the punishment should be, pulling out Eyes, gelding, or
cutting off hands or foot, according to the greatness of the offense; to the
end they might live and be a terror to others; as were those Welsh men, of whom
Flor. Wigorn. in his Annals (viz. an. 1098) makes mention; who for Treason had
their Hands, Cap. 31.
Feet, and Stones cut off; and likewise their Eyes pulled out.

Rapinas Curialium, says Will. of Malmesb. furta, stupra, edicto compescuit,
deprehensis oculos, cum testiculis evelli praecipiens. For the better verifying
of which testmony, there is a miracle reported by Mr. Fox in his Martyrologie
Lib. 4. fol. 229.
of one Elivard of Weston Regis in Bedfordshire; who being convicted in the
time of King Henry the 2d. for stealing of a pair of Hedging Gloves and a
Whetstone, and for the same offense lost his Eyes and Genitals; was, through
his devout Prayers made at the Shrine of St. Thomas of Canterbury, restored to
them again.

This kind of punishment continued not long: for King Henry the first, in the
year 1108. (which was the 9th. of his reign) decreed Sim. Dunelm. col. 231. l.
4.
, that for Theft and Robbery they should be hanged. But Brompton places Chron.
Ioh. Brompt. col. 1000. l. 48.
this Constitution in the year 1103. (3 H. 1.) -- Contra Trapezitas, quos vulgo
Monetarios vocant, praecipuam sui diligentiam exhibuit: nullum falsarium, quin
pugnum perderet, impune abire permittens. W. Malm. -- Monetarii jubente Rege,
comprehensi, dextris amputatis, ementulantur. R. Hoved. Videsis Gul. Gemet. de
Ducibus Norm. lib. 7. Cap. 23.

And for the beheading of Noblemen, the first that I read of, was Waltheof Earl
of Northumberland, who suffered Sim. Dunelm. col. 209. l. 34.
Death in that kind, in the year 1075. (8 W. Conq.)

That Felons were also put to Death by Drowning, I find Ex vet. cod. MS. penes
Rog. Twysden Bar. p. 108.
by a notable instance in 6 E. 2. where the Jury for the Hundred of Cornylo in
Kent, exhibited a presentment, unto Hervi de Stanton and his fellow Justices
Itinerant, sitting at Canterbury, in the Octaves of S. John Bapt. importing,
that the Prior of ChristChurch in Canterbury, did, about ten years then past,
divert the course of a certain water, called Gestling, in which such Felons, as
were condemned to Death within the before-specified Hundred, ought to suffer
judgment, by Drowning.

It seems that the Decree of King Henry the first for putting to Death such as
should be convicted of Theft, and Robbery, by Hanging, was not used in the
County Palatine of Chester; for by an account of Will. de Melton Chamberlain of
Chester in 29 E. 1. it appears In quadam b^ga tit. Cestria, penes These. and
Camerar. Scacc.
that they were beheaded, and that the Justices of Peace in that Shire, did
receive xiid a piece from the King, for the head of every one which was cut off
by their Officers.

And Bromley, in the Argument Mich. 7 and 8 Eliz. in Banco Reg. Plowd. Rep. f.
306. b.
of Pledall's Case, to show what effects considerations of blood and kindred
has in our Law, amongst other things affirms, That, when upon an Appeal of
Murder the Appelle was found guilty, the ancient usage was, that all the blood
of the party murdered did draw the Murdered by a long rope to his Execution;
which he says was grounded upon the loss, which the whole blood had by the
murder of one of them; and for their common revenge, and the affection, which
they all were supposed to bear to the party slain, that Custom was used.

Cap. XXXII.
Of the four Terms, se. Hilary, Easter, Trinity, and Michaelmass, their
Original.
That these portions of the year assigned for the Kings Justices of his Courts
at Westminster, to hold Plea of all Causes appertaining to their jurisdiction,
were at first ordained and instituted by King William the first, there are not
a few, who resting upon the credit of Polydore Virgil, Holinshed, or some other
late Chroniclers, do without further disquisition believe, though Will. of
Malmsbury and our other old Historians of credit, say nothing thereof; To
rectify therefore this mistake I shall here briefly exhibit some particulars,
which I acknowledge to have gathered from an ample and most judicious discourse
upon this subject, written by the Learned Sir Henry Spelman Knight in the year
1614. very well worthy to be made public, The four Terms their Original.
wherein he mainifesteth; that our Saxon and Norman Ancestors, dividing the
year between God and the King (as he expresses) calling those days and parts
which were assigned unto God Dies pacis Ecclesiae, and the residue Dies or
tempus pacis Regis (as the Romans, when Heathen, had their Dies Fasti and
Nefasti) did make choice of these special seasons of the year for their
determining and judging in Civil affairs, as exempt portions of time from that
which was by them assigned and devoted to the service of God and his Church.

And the more clearly to demonstrate this, he shows, that in the League Lamb.
de priscis Angl. Leg. Cap. 39.
made between King Edw. the Elder and Guthrun the Dane they did forbid Ordal
and Oaths (by which name Law Trials at that time were called) to be used upon
Festival or right fasting days; and from the constitution made in the Synod
held at Eanhom, under King Ethelred adds -- Synodus Eanhamensis sub Rege
Ethelredo.
Iudicium quippe quod Anglice Ordal dicitur, and juramenta vulgaria, festivis
temporibus and legitimis jejuniis; sed and ab Adventu Domini, usque post
Octabas Epiphaniae; and a Septuagesima usque ad xv. dies post Pascha minime
excerceantur; sed sit his temporibus summa pax inter Christianos, sicut fieri
oportet.

Consonant whereunto he likewise cites the Law of King Canutus.

-- Canuti Leges
^^ e forbeadath ordal, etc. We forbid ordal and Oaths on Feast Days, and
Ember Days, and from the Advent of our Lord till the 8th. day after Twelfth be
past; And from Septuagesima till xv. nights after Easter. And the Sages have
ordained, that St. Edward's Day shall be Festival over all England on the xv.
Call. of April; and St. Dunstans on the xiiii. Call. of June; and that all
Christians, as right it is, should keep them hallowed and in Peace.

So also that of King Edward the Consessor;

-- Leges S. Edwardi Regis and Conf. Cap.
Ab Adventu domini usque ad Octabas Epiphaniae, pax Dei and Sanctae Eaclesi^
per omne Regnum; similiter a Septuagesima usque; ad Octabas Paschae. Item ab
Ascensione Domini usque; ad Octabas Pentecostes. Item omnibus diebus quatuor
temporum. Item ab omnibus Sabbatis ab hora nona, tertia post meridiem, and tot^
die sequenti usque; ad diem Lanae. Item Vigiliis S. Mariae, S. Michaelis, S.
Iohannis Baptistae, Apostolorum, omnium and Sanctorum, quorum solennitas a
sacerdotibus dominicis annunciatur diebus; and omnium Sanctorum in Kal.
Novembris, semper ab hora nona vigiliarum and subsequente solennitate. Item in
parochiis in quibus Dedicationis dies observatur. Item in Parochiis
Ecclesiarum, ubi propria festivitas Sancti celebratur. The Rubric or Title to
this Constitution, being De temporibus and diebus pacis Regis.

Moreover, out of the Customs of Normandy (received by Duke William from King
Edw. the Confessor, as in the beginning of their old Custumary may be seen)
under the title De temporibus quibus Leges non debent fieri.

-- Notandum autem est, quod quaedam sunt tempora in quibus Leges non debent
fieri, nec simplices nec apertae; viz. omnia tempora in quibus matrimonia non
possunt celebrari. Ecclesia autem Legibus apparentibus, omnes dies festivos
prohibet and defendit; viz. ab hora nona die Iovis usque; ad ortum solis die
Lunae sequente; and omnes dies solennes novem lectionum, and solennium
jejunorum, and Dedicationis Ecclesiae in qua Duellum est deducendum: hence
observing that the Term times of the English and Normans were anciently the
same.

Likewise out of the Laws of King Henry the first, under the title De
observatione temporis Legis faciendi.

Leges H. 1. Cap. 62.
Viz. ab Adventu Domini usque; ad Octabas Epiphaniae; and a Septuagesima usque;
ad xv. dies post Pascha, and festis diebus Quadragesimalibus, and aliis
legitimis jejuniis in diebus Veneris and Vigiliis Sanctorum Apostolorum non est
tempus Leges faciendi: idem vel jusjurandum (nisi primo de fidelitate Domini
vel concordia) vel bellum, vel ferii, vel aquae, vel Legis exactiones tractari;
set sit in omnibus vera pax, beata Charitas ad honorem omnipotentis Dei.

Hereunto he adds, that King Henry 2d. Cap. 32.
ratifyed the Laws of Edw. the Confessor and William the Conqueror saying R.
Hoved^.
, that he did it by the advice of Ranulph de Glanvill, then newly made Chief
Justice of England; and that the same R. Glanvill did accordingly make some of
his Writs returnable in Octabis, or Clauso Paschae, where though the Laws of
Edward the Confessor appoint the end of Lent Vacation, and that Gervasins
Tilburiensis also mentions the same Return; yet the MS. Laws of K. H. 2. in
the Red Book of the Exchequer, Cap. 62. following the Synod of Eanham, do
extend Lent Vacation, a Septuagesima usque; xv. dies post Pascha; and do lay
out the whole frame of the year, under the Rubric De observatione temporis
Legis faciendi, in manner following;

-- Viz. ab Adventu Domini usque; ad Octabas Epiphaniae; and a Septuagesima
usque; ad xv. dies post Pascha, and Festis diebus, and Quatuor temporum; and
diebus Quadragesimalibus and aliis legitimis jejuniis in diebus Veneris, and
Vigiliis singulorum Apostolorum non est tempus Leges faciendi; idem vel
jusjurandum (nisi primo de fidelitate Domini, vel concordi^) vel bellum, vel
ferri, vel aquae, vel Legis examinationes tractari; sed sit in omnibus vera pax
and beata Charitas ad honorem omnipotentis Dei, cujus sapientia conditi sumus,
nativitate provecti, morte redempti, consolatione securi; and qui debtor est
persolvat ante, vel induciet donec dies isti transeant gaudiis and honestis
voluptatibus instituti: Et si quis maleficium inter manus habens alicubi
retinetur, ibi purgetur vel sordidetur, si solum inculpatio sit, plegiis, si
opus est datis, ubi justum fuerit terminanda revertatur.

To set forth theeefore, the bounds of the Terms, according to these Laws, he
thus goes on;

1. Hilary Term began at Octabas Epiphaniae, id est 13o. Ian. which is seven
days before the first Return it now has; and 9 days before our Term begins.
And ended at the Saturday next before Septuagesima; which being movable, made
this Term longer in some years than other.

2. Easter Term, which now begins two days after Quindena Paschae, began then,
as the Law of King Edw. the Confessor appointed it, at Octabis Paschae, as is
also verifyed by Glanvill, who makes one of his Writs returnable thus; Rex
etc. Summone per bonos summonitiones quatuor Legales milites de Viceneto de
Stoke; quod sint ad Clausum Paschae coram me, vel Iusticiis meis apud
Westmonasterium, ad eligendum supra Sacramentum suum xii. legales milites etc.
but as it then began ix. days sooner than it now does, so it ended six or seven
days sooner; viz. the day before the Vigill of the Ascension; which (doubtless)
is according to the direction of King Edw. the Confessors law, appointing the
time from the Ascension inclusive, to the Octaves of Pentecost with Ascension
Eve, to be dies pacis Ecclesiae, and therefore Vacation.

3. Trinity Term in those days began as it now does (in respect of the Returns)
at Octabis Pentecostes; which being always the day after Trinity Sunday, is now
by the Statute of 32 H. 8. appointed to be called Crastino Trinitatis. But it
seems, that the Statute of 51 H. 3. changed the beginning of this Term from
Crastino Trinitatis to Octabis Trinitatis; and therefore the Statute of King H.
8. did no more herein than reduce it to its Original. And as to the end of that
Term, the same Statute of 51 H. 3. assigned it to be within two or three days
after Quindena S. Iohannis Baptistae, which is about the xiith. of July.

4. Michaellmass Term, as the said Law of King Edward the Confessor leaves it,
was more uncertain for the beginning thereof than for the end: but Gervasius
Tilburiensis in his Dialogue de Scaccario Cap. 2. has a Writ in these words.
Rex etc. Vicecomiti N. salutem. Vide, sicut teipsum and omnia tua diligis, quod
sis ad Scaccarium in Crastino S. Mich. vel in Crastino Claus. Pasch. and habeas
ibi tecum quicquid debes de veteri firma and novaw; and nominatim etc. whereby
it appears, that the Term in the Exchequer, as touching Shireeves and
Accomptants, and consequently in the other parts, began then as it now does.

And he concludes, that by the Stat. of 51 H. 3. called Dies communes in Banco;
the Terms did then either begin and end as they did in an. D. 1614. when he
wrote this discourse, out of which I have extracted this, or that those
Statutes did assign the times for them: As also that the Statute of 36 Edw. 3.
Cap. 15. confirmed that use, the Returns there mentioned being neither other,
more, or fewer than they then were, saving that Trinity Term is altered and
shortened by the Stat. of 32 H. 8. Cap. 21. which has ordained it, quoad
sessionem, to begin for ever the Friday after Corpus Christi day, and to
continue 19 days, whereas in elder times it began two or three days sooner.

But of late time, viz. in the Parliament held an. 17o. Car. 1. Michaellmass
Term, by a special Act Cap. vi.
then made, was shortened, and thenceforth appointed to begin upon tres
septimanas S. Mich.

Cap. XXXIII.
Fines how ancient; in what manner, before whom, and where levied.
THat the recording of Agreements, whether upon settling of differences, as to
title of land or otherwise, or for better manifesting the tenor of any contract
upon bargains and sales, or other conclusion, in what case soever, by this kind
of solemn memorial (scil. a Fine) has been found most necessary, long
experience has sufficiently taught us; the nature of which Concords Glanvill
Glanvill lib. 8. Cap. 1.
thus describes -- Contigit multoties loquelas motas in Curia Domini Regis
etc. says he -- It often times happens, that disputes moved in the King's Court
are by final Concord terminated; but it, then, is by consent and leave of the
King or his Iusticiar, upon what occasion soever the difference be; whether it
be for land or any other thing: which agreement is reduced into public writing
by mutual consent of both parties, and the same writing to be recited before
the King's Justices sitting in the Bench (id est, the Court of Common Pleas:)
Fines.
And before them, his part of the said writing, in all points alike to the
other, there delivered; the form whereof is as follows;

Haec Ibid.
est finalis Concordia facta in Curia domini Regis apud Westmonasterium, in
Vigilia beati Petri Apostoli, anno regni Regis Henrici secundi xxxiii. coram
Ranulfo de Glanvilla Iusticiario Domini Regis; and coram H. R. etc.

But another in the same King's time, and somewhat more ancient than this, I
have seen In bibl. Costoua.
; and for the rarity thereof here transcribed.

Hic est Finis factus in Curia domini Regis apud Westminster. die Sabati in festo
Apostolorum Philippi and Iacobi, anno regni Regis Henrici secundi xxviii. coram
R. VVint. and G. Elien. and I. Norwic. Episcopis, Rann. de Glanvilla
Iusticlario domini Regis, and Ric. Thesaurario domini Regis, and Rogero filio
Remfridi, and Thoma filio Bernardi, and VVillielmo Torell, and VVillielmo de
Albervill, and VValtero filio Roberti, and Gervasio de Cornhill, and caeteris
Baronihus and fidelibus domini Regis, qui tunc ibi aderant, inter Ricardum
Priorem and Conventum de Rovecestre, and VVillielmum filium Radulfi de Wi de
terra praedictorum Monachorum de Elham, quam ei vendiderant pro xx. marcis, and
Carta sua confirmaverunt; Scilicet, quod praedictus Willielmus, totam terram
praedictam quietam clamavit praedicto Priori and Conventui, de se and
haeredibus suis inperpetuum. Et quia Cartam praedictorum Monachorum, quam de
terra ipsa habuerat perdiderat, coram praedictis Baronibus promisit, quod si
eandem Cartam possit invenire, eis reddet, and Cartam confirmationis domini
Regis, quam inde^ habuit eis reddidit. Et pro hac quieta clamantia dederunt
idem Prior and Conventus eidem VVillielmo triginta marcas argenti.

As to the antiquity of these Fines, M^. Plowden, in his learned Comentaries In
Stowells Case.
, tells us, that they were levied before the Conquest.

And Fulbeck f. 91.
makes mention of one taken at Norwich in King Henry the firsts time,
instancing for testimony thereof an exemplification under the said King's Seal.
Howbeit till King Henry the second's time I have not seen any; Cap. 33.
but then there were diverse, some whereof (besides these abovementioned) I have
observed in my discourse concerning the Exchequer Court, Cap. 19. of this
present work: but in King Richard the first's time, and thenceforth, there are
many remaining in his Majesty's Exchequer Penes Thesaurarium and Camerarios.
.

The Persons before whom Fines were levied in ancient time, were diverse: Some
before the King himself, and such eminent persons as were then with him; as
this Ex Collect. Rob. Gloveri, quondam Somerset Heraldi.
in 5 Ric. 1. -- Haec est Finalis Concordia facta in Curia domini Regis apud
Winton. xx. die Aprilis anno regni Regis Ricardi quinto; coram ipso Domino
Rege, and H. Cantuar. Archiepiscopo, Will. Eliensi Episcopo, domini Regis
Cancellario, and aliis fidelibus; inter etc.

And this Penes Thesaur. and Camer. Scacc.
in 6 Ioh. -- Haec est finalis Concordia, facta in Curia domini Regis apud
VVigorniam, die Martis proxima ante festum beatae Mariae, coram ipso domino
Rege Iohanne, Gaufrido filio Petri Comite Essexiae, Sim. de Patshull, Iacobo de
Poterna, Ric. de Mucegros Iusticiariis, and aliis fidelibus etc. A multitude
more could I instance, if need were.

Some in the same King's time, and beginning of King John's, before the Chief
Justice, with other the Kings Justices, and aliis fidelibus domini Regis; but
most before such and such (as are there expressed) Iusticiariis, and aliis
Baronibus, as the Originals still remaining in the Tresury of his Majesty said
Exchequer will manifest. But after the seventh year of King John, they all run
-- coram (such and such) -- Iusticiariis, and aliis fidelibus.

In King Henry the second's time, some were levied in the Exchequer Court,
before the Chief Justice of England, then sitting there, and other the great
Barons of the Realm (as I have already observed in my discourse of that
Court,) and so likewise in King Richard the first's time; whereof I shall only
instance this one Penes These. and Camerar. Scacc.
, for the form thereof -- Haec est finalis Concordia, facta in Curia domini
Regis apud Westminster. ad Scaccarium, die dominica proxima post festum S. Marci
Evangelistae, anno regni Regis Ricardi, nono; coram H. Cantuar. Archiepiscopo
etc. Iusticiariis domini Regis etc.

Nor were they limited merely to the Courts at Westminster, in those times; for
I have seen a most ancient Copy of one levied in the County Court at Notingham,
in the first year of King John, in the presence of the Shireeve, and other of
the Chief Gentlemen of that Shire; a transcript whereof, I have for the rarity
of it, here thought fit to insert Ex Cartulario Abb. de Derley in bibl. Cotto^.
f. 74. b.
.

Haec est finalis Concordia, facta in Comitatu de Notingham, anno primo regni
Regis domini Iohannis, proxima die lunae post Nativitatem beatae Mariae; coram
Henrico tunc Vicecomite, and Will. de Leke, Simone Basset, Roberto de
Somervill, Will. de Grendon, and aliis fidelibus domini Regis ibidem tunc
praesentibus; inter VV. Abbatem and Canonicos de Derley tenentes, and Sampsonem
de Stretleg petentem, de tribus acris terrae, quas ab eis postulavit, per Breve
Recti in Chillewell, tanquam adjacentes ad duas bovatas terrae, quas ipse Simon
tenet in Chillewell, ex caruca terrae quae fuit Ulkel; scilicet quod dicti
Abbas and Canonici dederunt Sampsoni, unam acram terrae, and dimidiam marcam
argenti; and praedictus Sampson quietum clamavit totum jus suum and clamium,
quae habuit in praedictis tribus acris; and quod, de caetero, nunquam clamabit,
nec haeredes sui, aliquam partem versus praedictos Canonicos, in illis tribus
bovatis, quas ipsi tenent ex praedicta carucata terrae, quae fuit Ulkel;
praedictus etiam Sampson praedictis Canonicis Breve reddidit, per quod eos in
placitum posuit, and ut haec concordia firma sit imperpetuum.

So also another, in 3o. Iohannis, levied at Pontfract, in the Court of Roger
de Laci then Constable of Chester; the Copy whereof I have here also added; Ex
Regist. Abb. de Kirkstall in officio Dacatus La^c. f. 29. b.


Haec est finalis Concordia, inter Herveium de Losthus petentem; and Abbatem
and Monachos de Kirkstall tenentes, facta in Curia Rogeri de Laci Constabularii
Cestriae, anno tertio regni Regis Iohannis, xxii. die Septembris, apud
Pontemfractum, coram Roberto VValeys, tunc Seneschallo, VVillielmo filio
VVillielmi, Iordano de S. Maria, Iohanne de Birchemore, Ada de Reinewell,
VVillielmo Grauntus, Sampsone de VVurleston, Will. de Stapulton, and aliis
fidelibus domini Regis, de duabus Carucatis terrae, cum pertinentiis sui^ in
Alreton, quas praenominatus Herveius clamavit, versus praedictum Abbatem and
Monachos, per Breve Justice. in praefata Curia; viz. quod praedictus Herveius,
in praefata Curia, per fustum and bastonem reddidit praedicto Abbati and
Monachis, totum jus and clameum, quod ipse vel antecessores sui unquam
habuerunt in praedictis carucatis, liberum, quietum and solutum, de se, and de
omnibus haeredibus suis imperpetum etc.

Several instances I have also seen of Fines levied, where the King himself
has been a party thereto, whereof take these, for example.

Finis levatus apud Westminster. in Octabis Purif. beatae Mariae an. 53 H. 3. inter
ipsum dominum Regem, and consortem suam Alianoram Reginam quaerentes, and
Edwardum filium ipsius domini Regis primogenitum, deforciantem, de Honor
Aquilae, cum pertinentiis etc. esse jus ipsius Edwardi, de dono ipsorum Regis
and Reginae. Et idem Edwardus, ad instantiam Regis, concessit dictae Dominae
Reginae, praedictum Honorem, tota vita ipsius Reginae; revertere ad praedictum
Edwardum and haeredes suos. Sussex.

Finis levatus in Curia domini Regis apud VVestmonasterium, in Crastino S.
Martini, anno regni Regis Edwardi, filii regis Henrici, quarto; inter ipsum
dominum Regem quaerentem, and Adam quae fuit uxor Simonis de Vere deforciantem,
de december libratis terrae, cum pertinentiis, in Sprotele etc. esse jus ipsius
domini Regis etc.

Finis levatus apud Westminster. in xv. Trinitatis anno regni Regis Edwardi, post
Conquestum quarti, xv. inter ipsum dominum Regem quaerentem, and Ricardum
Martin clericum deforciantem, de dominiis and maneriis de Higham Ferrers,
Daventre, Raunds, Rusheden etc. in Com. Northampton; etc.

As the Fines, here instanced, thus levied, be very remarkable; so, do I
conceive, are these following Concords, the one concerning lands in Seile (in
Com. Leic.) touching which there had been a suit in the Knights Templars Court
there; betwixt Raphe Buche and Roger Fitz Hugh of the same Town; which Concord
being confirmed by William de Ridware, Chief Lord of the Fee, was recorded in
the Court of William de Ferrers Earl of Derby, at Tutbury, as appears by the
express words of that his confirmation Ex ipso autographo in bibl. Cotto^^^.
; viz. -- ut autem haec praefata Concordia firmior and stabilior futuris
permaneat temporibus, ego eam hac Carta, cum Sigilli mei appositione
confirmavi; and ad majorem ejusdem Concordiae firmitatem, ego eam recordare
feci and innovare in Curia domini mei VVillielmi de Ferrariis Comitis Derbeiae
apud Tuttesburie, praesente eodem Radulpho Buche and audiente and assensum
praebente. Hiis testibus VVillielmo de Greseleia, Iohanne filio Hereberti,
Rogero filio meo etc.

The other in King Edward the first time, upon a grant of lands in Broughton
Suleney in Comitatu Not. made by John the Son of Alured de Suleney, unto Adam
de Sancto Lando, whereunto Raphe de Hengham. then Chief Justice of the Court of
Kings Bench, added his testimony and Seal, in these words Ex autogr. penes
Gerv. Clifton de cli^ton in Com. Not. mil. and Bar.
-- in cujus rei testimonium ego Radulphus de Hengham, in praesentia praedicti
feo^fatoris, istud scriptum cognoscentis coram me, and coram Osberto de
Bereford, and Hugone de Kava Clerici mei, Sigillum meum apposui, anno Edwardi
Regis, filii Regis Henrici, quinto, die festi S. Petri ad vincula.

And because the Agreements thus made have ever been held inviolable, I shall
in the last place exhibit an ancient testimonial, to manifest how exact a
course has long ago been taken, not only by the Judges before whom they were
levied, in a strict questioning of the Cognizors, but the care which the
Cognizors themselves on their own parts had, by a serious deliberating what
they did in these great and solemn Conclusions.

To all christian men, to whom this present writing shall come, Claus. 8 E. 4. in
dorso m. 14.
Rose, that was the wyff of Sir John Merston Knight sends greting in God
everlasting: Know ye me the said Rose to sey and affirm, that Thomas
Littelton, oon of the King's Justices of the Common place, bargayned, bought,
and purchased for a certain sum of money, which he has truly paid, the
teversion of the Manner of Tixhale in Staffordshire, and of certain tenements
and Rents in other towns in the same shire, of the said John Marston, sumtyme
my husband, and of me; to have after the decece of my said husband and me: by
force of which a Fine was rered at VVestmynster; by which Fine a state was made
of the said Manner to my husband and to me, term of our lives; the remaynder
thereof unto the said Thomas Littilton and Jane his wife, and to the heirs of
the said Thomas Littilton for evermore, as in the said Fine more pleinly
appears. Before which Fine rered, I did ask of Sir John Prisot the Chief
Justice of the Common place, and diverse others to whom I had special confidence
and trust; and also of other diverse Apprentices learned in the Law, of my
Council; wheder that my seid husband and I, might sille the reversion of the
said Manner without perell of our souls: and they desired me to enfourme and
show them how the seid Manner before that time was entayled: and I showed them
the part of an hole Fine, whereof the tenor seweth in these words.

Haec est finalis concordia facta in Curia domini Regis apud VVestmonasterium,
a die S. Trinitatis in xv. dies, anno regni Regis Edwardi, filii Regis Edwardi,
decimo nono, coram VVillielmo de Bereford, Iohanne de Mutford, VVillielmo de
Herle, Iohanne de Stonore, and Iohanne de Busse Iusticiariis, and aliis domini
Regis fidelibus, tunc ibi praesentibus; inter Galfridum de VVasteneys de
Tyxhale quaerentem, and Rogerum de Aston personam Ecclesiae de Weston,
deforciantem, de Manerio de Tyxhale, cum pertinentiis, and advocatione
Ecclesiae ejusdem Manerii, unde Placitum conventionis summonitum fuit inter eos
in eadem Curia; scil. quod praedictus Galfridus recognovit praedicta maneria,
cum pertinentiis, and advocationem praedictam esse jus ipsius Rogeri; ut illa
quae idem Rogerus habet de dono praedicti Galfridi: Et pro haec recognitione
fine and concordia idem Rogerus concessit praedicto Galfrido praedictum
manerium cum pertinentiis and advocationem praedictam, and illa ei reddidit in
eadem Curia, Habenda and tenenda eidem Galfrido de Capitalibus dominis feodi
illius per servicia quae ad praedictum manerium and advocationem pertinent,
tota vita ipsius Galfridi; Et post decessum ipsius Galfridi (etc.) remanere
Maculino filio ejusdem Galfridi, and Margaretae uxori ejus, and haeredibus de
corporibus ipsorum Maculini and Margaretae exeuntibus; tenenda (etc.) remanere
Iohanni fratri ejusdem Maculini and haeredibus de corpore suo procreatis;
tenenda (etc.) remanere Henrico fratri ejusdem Iohannis, and haeredibus de
corpore suo procreatis (etc.) remanere VVillielmo fratri ejusdem Henrici, and
haeredibus de corpore (etc.) remanere rectis haeredibus ipsius Galfridi;
tenenda (etc.) imperpetuum.

And they asked me of whom and how that I came of any such persons named in the
said Fine: and I said; that I came of Makelyn VVastneys and Margaret his wiff
named in the said Fine; that is to sey, that I am daughter to Roger, son to
William, son to the said Maculine and Margaret. They examined me, wheder any of
the Brethren of the seid Maculine; that is to sey John, Herry, or William had
any issue on lyve: and I said to them Nay, but all ben ded without issu, which
is very troth. They asked me whider I was heir to Geffrey Wastneys named in
the said Fine; and I said I am heir to the said Geffrey; for he was my
Graunsire's Graunsire. They asked me whether there was any more issue now on
lyve, that come of the said Maculine and Margaret: and I said Nay: for I said,
if Alianourew Harecourt, which was mine Aunte, that is to sey my fadurs Suffer,
had bin on lyve, and overladed me, she should enherite the seid livelode by
force of the seid taill made to Makelyn and Margaret after me: but now she is
ded without issue, there is no more issue now on lyve that come of the seid
Makelyn and Margaret sauf only I, in as much as I was the last of the entaill,
and the fee simple thereof was in me: whereupon my husband and I rered a Fine
^t the form as I have said. And whereas Sir John Gresley Knight seyth, as I
am enfourmed, that he should be my next ryn to enherite after me the seid
Livelode; between God and me I sey, as I shall answer before the day of Dome, I
can not, nor never cowde we^e or know, nor never herd by my fader, nor
other in noe manner wise, how or in what wise be should be kyn to me, to
enherite in any wise the seid livelode; save that it was seid, that he come of
oon Sir Thomas VVastenesse, which VVastnesse was long time before the said old
Fine a rered: but how, or in what wise I was kyn to that VVastnesse I cowd
never here tell. And ferthermore I sey and affirm, that there is none on lyve,
that I know or can here of, that is or may be enheritable by any manner of fee
tail specifyed or comprised in the said old Fine reryd in the time of the said
King Edward the second: In witness whereof to this present writing I have put
my Seall.

Cap. XXXIV.
Pleadings in the French tongue.
THese were first introduced here by King William the first; who, having made a
full Conquest of this Realm, for the better establishing thereof, thought it
good policy utterly to abolish Seld. Notae in Edmerum p. 189. Ex Script. Rob.
Holkot qui vixit temp. E. 3.
the English language, and instead thereof plant the French: and therefore
ordained Seld. Notae in Edmerum p. 189. Ex Script. Rob. Holkot qui vixit temp.
E. 3.
, that, not only the Pleadings in Courts should be in that tongue; but that all
Children put to School, should first learn French, and then Latin. Plea^i^gs
in French.
But Fortescu De Laudibus legum Angliae Cap. 48.
adds another reason for the same; viz. that the French becoming by that
Conquest, Masters here, might not be deceived in the Accounts of their revenues.

Which manner of Pleading so continued, till by a Statute Cap. xv. Rot. Parl.
36 E. 3. n. 39.
Law in 36 E. 3. upon a Petition of the Commons in Parliament it was enacted by
the King, that all Plees, which be to be pleded in any of his Courts, before
any of his Justices, or in his other places; or before any of his other
Ministers; or in the Courts and places of any other Lords within the Realm,
shall be pleded, showed, and defended, answered, debated and judged in the
English tongue, and that they be entered and enrolled in Latin. And that the
Laws and Customs of the same Realm, terms, and processes, beholden and kept as
they be, and have been before this time; and that by the ancient terms and
forms of the Declarations no man be prejudiced; so that the matter of the
Action be fully showed in the Demonstration and in the Writ.

But, though the Pleadings in French did then cease, the terms in that language
(as being accounted more significant than other) were by this Act still
retained; So also Declarations (...) ut supra.
upon Original Writs.

And Judgments entered into Books (which are commonly called Reports) then began
Ibid.
to be made in that tongue: for which sir Edward Coke Cokes Reports Vol. 3. in
pr^oem^o.
gives this reason; viz. that King Edward having a lawful right to the
Kingdom of France, and diverse territories thereof in possession, it was not
thought convenient to publish those or any Statutes, then made, in the vulgar
tongue; lest the unlearned, by barely reading of them, without right
understanding, might be subject to errors, and trusting to their own conceits
endamage themselves.

Howbeit, as for Writs Original and Judicial; as also Records of Pleas: and so
likewise those old Law books of Glanvile, Bracton, Fleta, Novae narrationes,
and the Book of Entries, they are all in Latin, as Fortescu Fortescu, ut supra
Cap. 48.
and Sir Edward Coke Cokes Reports Vol. 3. in p^o^^io.
have specially observed.

Cap. XXXV.
Limitation of time for Pleading in some special Cases. Cap. 35.

DE Claus. 21. H. 3. m. 17. indorso.
Narratione descensus ab antecessoribus, in Brevi de Recto, a^ tempore Henrici
Regis senis (viz. H. 1.) anni and diei; Provisum est, quod, de caetero non fiat
computatio a^ tam longinquo tempore; sed a^ tempore Regis Henrici, avi Domini
Regis: (id est H. 2.) Et habeat locum ista constitutio and vigorem ad
Pentecosten, anno Regis istius 21o. and non ante; and Brevia prius impetrata
procedant.

Brevia Ibid.
mortis antecessoris, and de Nativis, and de Ingressu, non excedant reditum
Regis Iohannis de Hibernia in Angliam: Et vigorem habeat ista provisio a
tempore praedicto, and Brevia prius impetrata procedant.

Brevia Ibid.
vero Novae disseisinae, non excedant transfretationem Regis, qui nunc est, in
Hiberniam (scil. H. 3) and vigorem habeat a tempore praedicto, and Brevia prius
impetrata procedant.

Cap. XXXVI.
Outlaries, how ancient.
SOme might, perhaps, derive the Antiquity of Outlaries from Cain; who, for the
murder of his Brother Abel, was Genesis Cap. 4. verse. 11, 12.
out of the protection of the Law; but though we ascend not so high, certain it
is, that this kind of judgment is very ancient; for Caesar speaking of the
Druidos, says thus; De bello Gallico.
-- Si quis eorum decreto non steterit, Sacrificiis interdicunt; haec poena
apud eos est gravissima. Quibus ita est interdictum, ii, numero impiorum and
sceleratorum habentur; ab iis omnes decedunt; aditum eorum, sermoneque;
dissugiunt, ue quid, ex contagione incommodi accipiant; neque; iis petentibus,
jus redditur, neque; honos ullus communicatur -- Whosoever he is, that obeys
not their sentence, they forbid him their Sacrifices, which is amongst them the
most grievous of punishments; Cap. 36.
for they who are thus interdicted, are accounted in the number of the most
impious and wicked, all people shunning them, and refusing their conversation,
lest they should receive damage by the infection thereof. Nor is Justice to be
afforded them, at their desire; nor any honor allowed unto them.

Bracton describes the nature of our Outlaries, here in England, thus; --
Bracton Lib. 3. Cap. 13. m. 1.
Cum quis fuerit ita utlagatus, rite and secundm Legem terrae etc.

When any person is thus outlawed justly and according to the Law of the land,
let us see what he forfeits by this his Outlary, Videsis etiam Iani Angl. fol.
52.
if after the fourth summons he do not appear. First therefore, be it known,
that he forfeits his Country and the Kingdom, and becomes a banished man,
such a one the English calling Utlaugh, but anciently they had wont to call him
a Friendless-man: whereby, it seems, that he forfeiteth his friends, so that,
if after such outlary and expulsion, any one shall wittingly give him food, and
entertain him, or knowingly converse with him in any sort whatever, or shall
shelter him and hide him, he is to undergo the same punishment, as the person
outlawed ought to do; which is to lose all his goods, and also his life, unless
the King be more merciful to him etc.

Cap. XXXVII.
Justices of the Kings Courts in Westminster Hall, how created.
THe Lord Chancellor of England shall enter into the Court, Fortescu de
laudibus Legum Angl. Cap. 51. fol. 121. b.
where the Justice is lacking, bringing with him the Kings Letters Patents, and
sitting in the midst of the Justices, causes the Sergeant so elect, to be
brought in, to whom in the open Court he notifieth the Kings pleasure touching
the office of the Justice then void, and causes the said Letters to be openly
read, which done, the Master of the Rolls shall read before the same elect
person, the Oath that he shall take; which when he has sworn upon the Holy
Gospel, Justices how created.
the Lord Chancellor shall deliver unto him the Kings Letters aforesaid, and
the Lord Chief Justice of the Court shall assign unto him a place in the same,
where he shall then place him, and that place shall he afterward keep.

That he shall indifferently minister Justice to all men, His Oath. Ibid. fol.
122. b.
as well foes as friends, that shall have any suit or plea before him, and this
he shall not forbear to do, though the King by his Letters, or by express word
of mouth would command the contrary: and that from time to time, he shall not
receive any fee or pension, or livery of any man, but of the King only, nor any
gift, reward, or bribe of any man, having suit or plea before him, saving meat
and drink, which shall be of no great value.

A Justice thus made made shall not be at the chardges of any Dinner, Ibid. f.
123. a.
or solempnity, or any other cost at the time when he takes upon him his
office and dignity, forasmuch as this is no degree in the faculty of the Law,
but an office only and a room of authority to continue during the Kings
pleasure.

As to the manner of their riding to Westminster Hall, after they are so made,
take these instances from the authorities here cited.

Upon Wednesday 29 Ian. An. D. 1605. this House ( id est, Ex Regist. Inter.
Templi fol. 58. a.
the Inner Temple) with the Students of the Innes of Chancery belonging to the
same, did accompany Mr. Justice Coventrie (sometime a Bencher of this House,
and newly chosen a Judge of the Common Pleas) from his Chamber at Serjeant's
Inn, to Westminster, and that time the Judge went foremost, after him the Bench,
and then the Bar, then the Gentlemen of the House, and then the Students of
the Innes of Chancery aforesaid, which was erroneous: for the Innes of Chancery
should first set forth, then the young Gentlemen of this House, then the Bar,
then the Bench, the Ancients coming last, and then the Judge last of all. Which
error was the next day (being Thursday) reformed, in accompanying Mr. Justice
Tanfeild, newly chosen Justice of the Kings Bench to Westminster, from his
Chamber at Serjeant's Inn.

And accordingly did Sir Henry Mountagu Knight, one of the King's Sergeants at
Law and Recorder of the City of London, Ex Annal. Ia^^^ Regis. MS. per V. Cl.
(...)
proceed, in Michaelmass Term 19 Novembris, an. D. 1616. (and Regni Regis
Iacobi 14.) then succeeding Sir Edward Coke in the Chief-Iustice-ship of the
Kings Bench; viz. First went on foot the yound Gentlemen of the Inner Temple
(of which House he was;) After them the Barristers according to their
seniority; Next the Officers of the King's Bench; Then the said Chief-Iustice
himself on Horseback in his Robes, the Earl of Huntington on his right hand,
and the Lord Willoughby of Eresby on his left, with above fifty Knights and
Gentlemen of quality following.

Cap. XXXVIII.
Justices of the King's Courts at Westminster. their Vestments.
THat peculiar and decent Vestments, have, from great antiquity, been used in
religious services, we have the authority of God's sacred Precept to Moses.
Exodus Cap. 28. V. 2.
Thou shall make holy rayments for Aaron and his sons, that are to minister
unto me, that they may be for glory and beauty.

And reason tells us, that in places of Civil judicature, it is not only
proper, that the Magistrate should be distinguished from others, but all
possible care used, that a venerable respect be had to his person and office.
Hence was it, that the most civilized people of the world did accordingly make
it their practice, the Roman Senators having their vesture much different from
that of the Gentry; viz. Godw. Romans antiq. Lib. 1. Cap. 3.
a Garment bestudded with flourishings of purple silk, in manner of broad
Nayl-heads. And the Consuls Ibid. Lib. 3. Cap. 4.
a solemn Robe of purple, by which they were known from other Magistrates, and
private men, with large embroydered works thereon, called Trabea; and in
further honor of that their Consular dignity, xii. Lictors, who bare their
bundles of Rods and Axes before them; as also an Ivory Chair of State, Cap. 38.
which was commonly carried about for them in a Chariot; all which was done, to
draw a more awful reverence to them than ordinary.

And for the same reason it was, that the wisdom of our Ancestors, has, with
so great judgment, assigned such grave and venerable Garments for the Civil
Magistrate in all Courts of Justice in this Realm; the materials and form
whereof, as they were in ancient times, may partly be discerned from these
following instances; viz. first in 20 E. 3. where the King by his Praecept
Claus. 20 E. 3. P. 1. m. 15.
to the Keeper of his great Wardrobe, commands him to deliver unto William
Scot and the rest of his fellow Justices of his Bench, there named; as also to
John de Stonore and those with him, Justices of the Common Pleas, and likewise
to Robert de Sadyngtone and other the Barons of his Exchequer; viz. to each of
them for their Summer Vestments (or Robes) for that present year, half a short
Cloth, and one piece of fine Linen silk; And for the Winter season another
half of a Cloth color Curt, with a Hood, and three pieces of Fur of white
Budg. And for the Feast of the Nativity of our Lord, half a Cloth color Curt,
with a Hood of two and thirty bellyes of Minever, another Fur with seven tires
of Minever, and two Furs of silk.

Next in 21 E. 3. where Sir William de Thorpe, then Chief Justice of the Kings
Bench, with Sir William Basset, and Sir Roger de Baukewell his fellow Justices
of that Court, were allowed Ex Rot. Count. Custodis magnae Garderobae de an. 21
E. 3.
out of the same Wardrobe, at the Feast of All Saints, for their VVinter
Robes, each of them half a Cloth color Curt; three Furs of white Budg, and one
Hood of the same Budg. And for their Liveries at Christmas, each of them half
a Cloth likewise color Curt, one Hood containing xxxii. bellies of Minever
half pur., one Fur of Minever containing seven tires, and two Furs of silk,
each of seven tires.

And for their Summer Robes, each of them half a Cloth color Curt, with one
piece and an half of thin silk.

The like Liveries Ibid.
at the same time, had Sir John de Stonore, Sir Richard de Wylughby, Sir Roger
Hillary, Sir William de Shareshull, Sir Richard de Kelleshull, and Sir John de
Stouford, Justices of the Court of Common Pleas.

And so also had Ibid.
Sir Robert de Sadyngton, Sir Gervaise de Wilford, Sir William de Brokelesby,
Sir Alan de Asshe, and Sir John de Houton then Barons of the Exchequer.

In 11 R. 2. Sir Walter de Clopton Knight then Chief Justice of the King's
Bench, and John Hull his Fellow Justice in that Court; Sir Robert Charleton
Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, and William Thyrning, William Rykill, John
Wadham, and Richard Sydenham Justices also of the same Court, had Ex vet. cod.
MS. penes Custodem magnae Garderobae Regis f. 175. b.
for their Summer Robes these following liveries; viz. each of the Chief
Justices ten else of green Cloth long, and xxiiii. else of green Taffata; and
each of the rest ten else of green Cloth long. The like (viz. ten else of green
Cloth long) at the same time had John Cassy Chief Baron of the Exchequer.

And in 22 H. 6. John Fray then Chief Baron of the Exchequer, had Ex alio vet.
cod. MS. ibidem f. 75. b.
for his Winter Robe against Christmas allowed unto him x. else of violet in
grain. 1. fur of xxxii. bellies of Minever pur, for his Hood. Another fur of
Cxx. bellies of Minever gross; and two furs each of seven tyres of silk. As
also for his Summer Robe, against Whitsoutide, ten else of green Cloth long,
and half a piece of green Tartarin.

And at the same time Roger Hunt, Ibid.
Robert Frampton, and William Fallan, (the other Barons of the Exchequer) had
for the like Summer Robes, each of them ten else of Violet in grayn; with 1.
fur of Cxx. bellies of Minever gross; and another fur of xxxii. bellies of
Minever pur, for the Hood, as also two furs of silk, each of seven tyres.

From which allowance we may take notice, that the color of their Robes was
not constantly the same, there being so much variation in those times
abovementioned; (...)
though for the fashion of them (I presume) they did not much differ.

Sir John Fortescu Knight who was Chief Justice in this King's time, in his
learned discourse 123. 2.
de Laudibus Legum Angliae, setting forth the formality in making a Judge,
says, that he shall thence forward from time to time change his Habit in some
points; for being a Sergeant at the Law he is clothed in a long Priestlike
Robe, with a furred Cape about his Shoulders; and thereupon a Hood with two
Labells (such as Doctors of the Law use to wear in certain Universities) with
their Coyf: But being made a Justice, in stead of his Hood he must wear a
Cloak, closed upon his right shoulder, all the other Ornaments of a Sergeant
still remaining, saving that his Vesture shall not be party-colored, as a
Sergeants may; and his Cape furred with Minever, whereas the Sergeants Cape is
ever furred with white Lamb.

This is all concerning their Robes, that I have met with from any good
authorities, excepting these following; the first from a very old Seal affixed
to an Original Autogr. penes Sam. Roper de Henoure in Com. Derb. (...) Arm.
grant of Lands unto the Canons of Osulveston in Com. Leic. by Robert Grimbald
a Judge in K. Henry the seconds time: upon which Seal he is represented in his
Habit, holding a naked Sword, at length, in his right hand (as the emblem of
Justice) and in his left, one broken in the midst (as the emblem of Mercy.)
The second from a Monument of John Cokaine, one of the Justices of the Court of
Common Pleas temp. H. 4. still in being at Ashburne, in Derbyshire; and the
last from certain figures in Glass; viz. Sir William Howard Knight, who lived
in King Edward the firsts time, and the two other in King Edward the fourths
time set up in the Church of Long-Melford in Suffolk temp. Edw. 4. or H. 7.
all which I have thought fit here to exhibit.

SIGILLVM ROBERTI GRIMBALD
ROBERTI GRIMBALDI, olim Regis Angliae HENRICI secundi unius Iusticiariorum,
Sigilli exemplar; Cartae ejus de quibusdam terris in DVNINTON Canonicis de
OSVLVESTON in ^gro Leicestrensi concessis affixi: Iusticiam per Ensem
districtum, et Misericordiam per Gladium descisso cupide indicans.

Ex ipso autogr penes Sam Roper Arm Hospic Linc Socium. A D 1664.



In Ala ex part Boreali Ecclesiae paroch de ASHBVRNE, in Com Derb
Tumuli alabastrine IOHANNIS CORAIN, primo Capitalis Baronis de Scaccario,
deinde unius Iusticiariorum de Communi Banco sub Rege HENRICO IIIIto accurata
effigies.



In Fenestra Vitreata ex part Aquilonali Ecclesiae de LONG-MELFORD in agro
Suffolciensi
Pray: for: the: good: state: of: William: Haward: chef: Justice: of: Ingland:
and for: Richard: Pycot: and John Haugh: Justice of the law:



But there having been such variations in those ancient times, as I have
instanced; and more afterward, as it may seem: for certainty therefore as well
as uniformity in these their Habits, there was a solemn Decree and Rule made by
all the Judges of the Courts at Westminster, bearing date the fourth day of
June An. 1635. Sir John Brampston Knight being then Chief Justice of the King's
Bench; Sir John Finch Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, and Sir Humphrey
Davenport Chief Baron of the Exchequer, subscribed by them, and the rest of the
Judges in those Courts, appointing what Robes they should thenceforth use, and
at what times; the Copy whereof I have here inserted.

The Judges in Term time are to sit at Westminster in the Courts, in their
Black or Violet Gowns, whether they will; and a Hood of the same color put
over their heads, and their Mantles above all; the end of the Hood hanging over
behind; wearing their Velvet Caps, and Coyfes of Lawn, and cornered Caps.

The facing of their Gowns, Hoods, and Mantles, is with changeable Taffata;
which they must begin to wear upon Ascension day, being the last Thursday in
Easter Term; and continue those Robes until the Feast of Simon and Jude: And
upon Simon and Iude's day, the Judges begin to wear their Robes faced with
white furs of Minever; and so continue that facing till Ascension day again.

Upon all Holy days, which fall in the Term, and are Hall days, the Judges sit
in Scarles faced with Taffata, when Taffata facing is to be worn; and with furs
or Minever, when furs or Minever are to be worn.

Upon the day when the Lord Mayor of London comes to Westminster to take his
Oath, that day the Judges come in Scarlet. And upon the fifth of November
(being Gunpowder day) unless it be Sunday, the Judges go to Westminster-Abby in
Scarlet to hear the Sermon; and after go to sit in Court. And the two Lords
Chief Justices, and the Lord Chief Baron have their Collers of SS. above their
Mantles for those two days. Judges (...).


When the Judges go to Paul's to the Sermon, upon any Sunday in the Term time,
or to any other public Church, they ought to go in Scarlet Gowns; the two
Lords Chief Justices, and the Lord Chief Baron in their Velvet and Satin
Tippets; and the other Judges in Taffata Tippets; and then the Scarlet
Casting-Hood is worn on the right side, above the Tippets; and the Hood is to
be pinned abroad toward the left Shoulder. And if it be upon any grand days;
as upon the Ascension day, Midsomer day, All Hallow day, or Candlemass day;
then the two Lords Chief Justices, and the Lord Chief Baron wear their Collers
of SS. with long Scarlet Casting-Hoods, and Velvet and Satin Tippets.

At all times, when the Judges go to the Council Table, or to any Assembly of
the Lords, in the After-noons in Term time, they ought to go in their Robes of
Violet, or Black, faced with Taffata, according as the time of wearing them
does require: and with Tippets and Scarlet Casting-Hoods, pinned near the left
Shoulder, unless it be Sunday, or Holyday, and then in Scarlet.

In the Circuit the Judges go to the Church upon Sundays, in the fore Noon in
Scarlet Gowns, Hoods, and Mantles, and sit in their Caps. And in the after
Noons to the Church in Scarlet Gowns, Tippet, and Scarlet Hood, and sit in
their cornered Caps.

And the first Morning at the reading of the Commissions, they sit in Scarlet
Gowns, with Hoods and Mantles, and in their Coyfes and cornered Caps. And he
that gives the chardge, and delivers the Gaol, does, or ought for the most
part, to continue all that Assizes the same Robes, Scarlet Gown, Hood, and
Mantle. But the other Judge, who sits upon the Nisiprius, does commonly (if he
will) sit only in his Scarlet Robe, with Tippet and Casting-Hood: or if it be
cold he may sit in Gown, and Hood, and Mantle.

And where the Judges in Circuit go to dine with the Shireeve, or to a public
Feast, then in Scarlet Gowns, Tippets, and Scarlet Hoods; or casting off their
Mantle, they keep on their other Hood.

The Scarlet Casting-Hood is to be put above the Tippet, on the right side: for
Justice Walmesley and Justice Warbarton, and all the Judges before, did wear
them in that manner; (...)
and did declare, that by wearing the Hood on the right side, and above the
Tippet, was signi^^ed more temporal dignity; and by the T^^pet on the left side
only, the Judges (...) resemble priests.

Whenever the Judges, or any of them are appointed to attend the King's
Ma^^^ly, they go in Scarlet Gowns, Tippets, and Scarlet Casting-Hoods; either
to his own presence, or at the Council Table.

The Judges and Sergeants when they r^^e Circuits, are to wear a Sergeants Coat
of good Broad-Cloth with Sleeves, and faced with Velvet. They have used of late
to lace the Sleeves of the Sergeant; Coat, thick with lace. And they are to
have a Sumpter, and ought to ride with six men at the least.

Also the first Sunday of every Term, and when the Judges and Sergeants dine at
my Lord Mayors, or the Shireeves, they are to wear their Scarlets, and to sit
at Paul's with their Caps at the Sermon.

When the Judges go to any Reader's Feast, they go upon the Sunday or Holy day
in Scarlet: upon other days in Violet, with Scarlet Casting-Hoods, and the
Sergeants go in Violet, with Scarlet Hoods.

When the Judges sit upon Nisi prius in Westminster, or in London, they go in
Violet Gowns, and Scarlet Casting-Hoods and Tippets, upon Holy Days in Scarlet.

A word or two now concerning the Collars of SS. so worn by the Chief Justices
and Chief Baron as aforesaid.

That this kind of Ornament has been very anciently used here in England,
especially by Knights, we have sufficient testimony from Monuments and Tombs of
near 300. years old; how long before I dare not take upon me to say; but the
Original occasion of them is of much greater Antiquity; which, from an Author
of Credit, writing of the lives of Simplicius and Fau^^nus, (...)
Brethren and Roman (...), who suffered Martyrdom under Dioclesian the
Emperor, I shall here add -- Illo ipso loco (Bibliothecam Fuldensem
intelligit) reperi soctetatem Sancti Simplicii descriptam, Videsis etiam
Baronii Annals ad annum Christ CCCii. and Dioclesiaai 19. Necnon S^rium Tom.
3. ad Diem 31 Maii.
quae constitit ex viris Domi nobilibus. Horum consuetudo fuit Torques
argenteas de geminis SS. fabricatas collo gestare. Geminae vero SS. indicabant
S. Simplicii nomen. Per harum intervallum continebat Torquis duodecem laminas
minutissimas de argento, in quibus insculpti erant duodecem Articuli fidei
Christianae, unacum trifolio Simpliciano. A Torque autem visebatur Simplicius
pensilis, and ab eo septem laminae, septem Charismata Spiritus sancti
significantes. Porro hoc toto mysterio dicebatur, ut isti ita torquati in
religione Christiana, tam domi quam militiae perdurarent constantissimi.

And the reason of this Chain so used by such noble persons, was in regard that
these two Brethren were Martyred by tying a Stone with a Chain about their
Necks and casting their Bodies into the River Tiber. Ex ve^. Legenda Sinctorum
in bibl. Cotto^.


Cap. XXXIX.
Justices of the Kings Courts at Westminster, anciently dignified with
Knighthood.
THat this degree was most anciently conferred by Bathing, and diverse sacred
Ceremonies, I need not here stand to demonstrate, the learned Seldom in his
Titles part. 2^ Cap. 5. P. 781.
of Honor having so fully manifested the same. Therefore, passing by the
further proof thereof, I shall now only take notice of such of the Justices of
the Kings Courts at Westminster, as I find, in our public Records, to have
been anciently dignified therewith, and describe what allowance for Robes and
other things were made Ex Rot. Compoti de an. 6 E. 3. penes Remem. Reg. in
Scacc.
to them by the Kings, out of their great Wardrobe, upon their reception of
this Honor.

The first of them were Thomas Bacon, John de Shardlow, Richard de Aldeburgh,
and Will. de Shareshull, Justices of the Court of Common Pleas; will. de Denum,
one of the Barons of the Exchequer, and Rob. de Scorburgh, who had been a
Justice Itinerant in Derbyshire in 4 E. 3. Cap. 39.


These in order to their Knighthood, as for Bannerets, Their Robes as Knights
of the Bath.
had for their Hoods and Coats, wherein to perfrom their Vigils, First xxxvi.
Else of red Cloth mixed with...

Secondly, For six Mantles and five Coats of Cloth of Tartarin streked with
gold xxxvi. Else, and six ^irrures of Minever, each consisting of eight tires.

Thirdly, For vi. Robes, each with four garnishments of Cloth in grayn long,
two Cloths four Else, with xxiiii. furrures of Minever, each containing eight
tires, and xii. furrs of gray vary.

Fourthly, For vi. other Robes with four garnishments for the same of green
Cloth short; xii. Hoods of Minever, half... each containing xxxii. bellies.

Fifthly, For six Beds, six Coverlets of Cloth of gold Dyasper, two Clothes, as
also two pieces of fine linen.

Sixthly, For six pair of Sheets for the said Beds, of Cloth of Paris, each
pair xxiiii. Else -- Cxliiii. Else.

Seventhly, For six Canvasses for the same Beds of Card. Inde of Lumbard, two
Clothes for each Canvass, xii. pieces.

After this, viz. in 34 E. 3. John Moubray and Will. Skipwith, then newly
constituted Justices of the Common Pleas, had these parcells delivered Ex Rot.
de an. 34. E. 3. m. 5.
unto them for their Robes and other accoutrements, in order to their reception
of this degree of Knighthood as Bannerets, at the feast of the Nativity.

1. Viz. each of them ten Else of Cloth Marbrune, mixed, long in grayn.

2. Ten Else of green Cloth, mixed, long of Brucells.

3. A Cloak of Cxx. bellies of Minever pure.

4. Two furrs, each of vii. tires of Minever pure.

5. Two furrs of silk, each of them vii. tires.

6. Two Furrs of Popre, Two Hoods each of 32. bellies of Minever, half pur.

7. Six Else of Russet Cloth, Judges made Knights of the Bath.
long, for the making of one Cote and Hood for the Vigils.

8. Six Else of green Tartarin, streked.

9. Two Cloths of gold Sigastons.

10. One piece of fine linen Ynde beaten.

11. Two pieces of Lumbardie Cardie.

12. And xxiiii. pieces of Paris linen Cloth.

In 7 R. 2. John H^lt and William Burgh, being likewise to receive the same
Order at Eltham, upon Christmas day, and as Bannerets, had Ex Rot. de an. 7 R.
2. m. 10.
each of them, viz.

1. Ten Else of blew Cloth long.

2. Ten-Ells of green Cloth long.

3. Two Furrs, each containing Cxx. bellies of Minever gray.

4. Two Furrs of silk, each of 7. tires.

5. Two Furrs of Pople, each of 6. tires.

6. Two Hoods, each of xxxii. bellies of Minever pure.

7. And the making for each of them two other Robes, and furring them; as also
to each a furred Mantle, six Else of green streked Tartarin, and a Cloak of an
Cxx. bellies of Minever pure.

8. To each of them for an Hood, wherein to perform their Vigils, six Else of
russet long.

9. To each of them for his Bed, two Clothes of gold Sigaston; one piece of
green Sarcenet; xxiiii. Else of linen Cloth of Brabant; and two pieces of
Lumbardie Cardie.

And in 11 R. 2. Walter de Clopton then newly made Chief Justice of the Kings
Bench, and Robert de Cherleton Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, being also to
receive the Order of Knighthood, as Bannerets, at Wyndsore on the Feast of St.
George, had Ex cod. MS. penes Custodem magnae Garderobae R. f. 168. 2.
each of them for a Winter Robe,

1. Ten Else of blew Cloth long.

2. One Fur of Cxx. bellies of Minever gross.

3. One Fur of silk of 7. tires.

4. One Fur of popl. of 6. tires.

5. One Hood of xxxii. bellies of Minever pure.

And for a Summer Robe,

6. Ten Else of green Cloth long.

7. One piece and a half of green Sarcenet.

8. And for a Cote and Mantle of green Tartarin streked with gold; and furring
the Mantle with a Cloak of Cxx. bellies of Minever pure.

9. And for a Hood wherein to keep their Vigils vi. Else of Russet Cloth long.

10. As also to each of them for the making and lining of their Bed.

11. And for their Bath two Cloths of gold Sigaston, and one piece of green
silk.

12. And 24. Else of Cloth of Braband; and 6. pieces of Coloign Cardie.

Cap. XL.
Justices of the King's Courts at Westminster, their ancient yearly Fees or
Salaries.
TOuching the yearly Salaries paid to the King's Justices of his respective
Courts at Westminster, for their support in his service, I have not seen any
thing before the xith. year of King Henry the 3ds. reign, the Liberatae Rolis
before that time being all perished; but then Liberatae 11 (...). 3. m. 5.
Will. de Insula and R. Duket had each of them x. marks per annum; out of the
Exchequer.

Howbeit, not long after, these Fees were increast; for in 23 H. 3. Will. de
Culeworth, one of the Justices of the Common Pleas, had Lib. 23 H. 3. m. 3.
xxl. per annum Fee.

In 27 H. 3. Alexander de Swereford a Baron of the Exchequer (and Chief as it
should seem) had Lib. 27 H. 3. m. 3.
xl. marks per annum; and Lib. 38 H. 3. m. 7.
in 38 H. 3. John de Wyville, one of the Barons of that Court, xx. marks.

In 43 H. 3. Gilbert de Preston, then one of the Justices of the Kings Bench,
had Lib. 43 H. 3. m. 2.
xl l. per annum: and Lib. 44 H. 3. m. 8.
in 44 H. 3. Roger de Thurkilby, one of the Justices of the Court of Common
Pleas C. marks per annum: But he was then Chief Justice in that Court, as I
ghess, though there was a Iusticiarius Angliae at the same time (as in my
Chronologick Tables is evident:) Cap. 40.
for Robert de Briwes, then also a Justice in the said Court of Common Pleas,
had Lib. 45 H. 3. m. 1.
no more than xl l. per annum.

To Roger de Thurkilby (for he died in 44 H. 3.) succeeded Will. de Wilton in
the Chief Iusticeship of the Court of Common Pleas, whose Fee Lib. 46 H. 3. m.
2.
was advanced to C. l. per annum, the Fee of the other Judges in that Court,
being but xl l. a piece.

And as the Salaries in this Court were thus enlarged, so were those in the
Exchequer: for in 49 H. 3. Roger de la Lay, one of the Barons there, had Lib.
49 H. 3. m. 3.
xl l. per annum. But this held not long; for Gilbert de Preston, Chief Justice
of the Kings Bench in 53 H. 3. received Lib. 43. H. 3. m. 2.
but a C. marks per annum. Nor had he more Lib. 1 E. 1. m. 4.
in the beginning of King Edward the first's time, when he was Chief Justice of
the Court of Common Pleas. And after this they sunk more, for Thomas de
Weyland, Chief Justice of the Common Pleas in 7 E. 1. had Lib. 7 E. 1. m. 3.
etc.
but xl l. per annum as long as he lived; and Lib. 7 E. 1. m. 3. etc.
Walter de Wymburne, another Justice of the same Court, xl. marks, which
proportion, viz. xl l. per annum to the Chief Justices of both Benches; and xl.
marks a piece to the Justices, and Barons of the Exchequer continued till the
25th. of Edw. 3. as may appear by the Liberatae Rolls of those times. And then
the Salary of the Chief Justice of the King's Bench shrunk more; viz. Lib. de
an. 25 E. 3. m. 3.
to fifty marks per annum (which is no more than xxxiiil. viss. viiidd.) the
yearly Lib. de an. 25 E. 3. m. 3.
Fee of the Chief Justice of the Common Pleas being augmented to C. marks per
annum; the Chief Baron of the Exchequer having Lib. de an. 25 E. 3. m. 3.
no more than xl l. per annum; and the other Justices of both Benches and
Barons of the Exchequer, being then reduced to Lib. de an. 25 E. 3. m. 3.
xxl. per annum.

Neither in these their annual Salaries have I seen any direct certainty of a
long time after; for in 28 E. 3. it appears Lib. de an. 28 E. 3. m. 1.
, that Thomas de Seton then one of the Justices of the Kings Bench had Lxxx.
marks per annum.

In 36 E. 3. the Chief Baron and other Barons of the Exchequer had Lib. 36 E.
3. m. 2.
all alike; viz. xl l. per annum.

In Lib. 39 E. 3. m. 3.
39 E. 3. the Justices of the Common Pleas xl l. per annum. The Lib. 39 E. 3.
m. 3.
Chief Justice of the King's Bench C. marks. The Lib. 39 E. 3. m. 3.
other Justices of that Court xl l. per annum

In Lib. 5 R. 2. m. 13.
5 R. 2. the Justices of the Common Pleas no more than xl. marks per annum. So
also in Lib. 8 R. 2. m. 9.
8 and Lib. 14 R. 2. m. 5.
14 R. 2.

In 1 H. 4. the Chief Baron and other the Barons of the Exchequer but Lib. 1 H.
4. m. 7.
xl. mark per annum. The Ibid.
Chief Justice of the Common Pleas xl l. The other Ibid.
Justices of that Court xl. marks.

In Lib. 3 H. 4. m. 6.
3 H. 4. the Chief Justice of the Kings Bench xl l. per annum. And in Lib. 9 H.
4. m. 4.
9 H. 4. John Colepeper one of the Justices of the Common Pleas LV. marks Per
annum.

But I do incline to believe, that there was more of certainty, both in their
yearly Salaries, and allowances for their Robes, after the 18th. year of King
Henry the Sixths reign; in which year as well the Judges of all the Courts of
Westminster, King's Attorney, and Kings Sergeants exhibited a Petition in
Parliament; a Copy whereof I have here added.

Item quaedam alia Petitio exhibita fuit eidem domino Regi, Rot. Parl. de an.
18 H. 6. n. 27.
in Parliamento praedicto, per Iusticiarios suos de Banco suo; and de Communi
Banco; Iusticiarios ad Assisas capiendas assignatos, ac Servientes, ac
Attornatum suos in haec verba.

Please au Roy nostre sovereign signieur de considerer, coment les Justices de
Bank le Roy, et del commun Bank; ^es Justices as Assizes prendre, assignez;
les Sergeants et Attorney le Roy pur le temps esteantz; devant sez heures,
feurent toutz temps paies en mains, de lour Fees et regardez de Roy, per les
Tresorers D'engleterre, pur le temps esteantz, annuelment en lez Terms del
Pasche et St. Michell per owelx porcions, tanque jetarde en temps de William
Kenwoldmershe alors Tresorer D'engleterre: Et qe ore, mesmez lez Iusticez,
Sergeantz et Attourne, de lour ditz feez et regardez, ne de lour vesture,
pellure, ne linure, ne sount mye pa^ez; eins sount ascuns de eux arere dez lour
ditz fees et regardez nient paies per ii ans et pluis. Judges their annual
Sa^^^ies.
Et qe a quelle temps del an, que ascun dez ditz Iusticez, Sergeantz, ou
Attourne devie, ou soit discharge, soit le jour prochein devant le fest de
Pascq, on Seint Michell; luy, ou sez Executorz jammes n'ount paiement del rien
del rate de lour ditz feez et regardes, pur le rate del temps encurruz parentre
le jour de sa mort, ou discharge; et le proschen precedent feste dez Festez
suisditz; issent, qe per cas lez Iusticez, Sergeantz, ou Attourne ensi mort, ou
discharge, ferra son dit office, per dimy an, forsque un jour, a cez graundez
costagez, labor et expenses, saunz riens unques avoir pur ycell, a sa
tresgraund enpoverishment per cas en temps de sa plus graund necessite. Et que
il y ad null dez ditz Justices, forspris les chief, que ne ad damage et perde
de Cl. per annum; pur ^eo, q'il est en office del Justice, coment il soit paiez
de sez ditz feez et regardez; issint, que per les ditz damage et perde, et le
noun paiement dez ditz feez et regardez, et autres cousez de perte, covyendra a
mesmez lez Iusticez encountre lour gree de necessite ^ux retraher de lour dit
officez fair, a dishonor de vous et de vostre Royaulme, et avyntisment dez
mesmez lez Iusticez, si en ne soit remedy purveue.

Et sur ceo, per anctorite de cest present Parliament d'ordeigner, que le
Gardein, ou le Clerk de la Hanaper del Chauncellarie nostre seigneur le Roy,
pur le temps esteant, dez primiers deniers provenauntz du dit Hanaper, et queux
de droit et loialment, solonc la course de la Ley deivent apperteigner, destre
paiez en mesme le Hanaper; et les Collectours et Receivours dez graundez et
petitz Custumez de Roy en les Ports de London, Bristowe, et le ville de
Kingeston super Hull, pur le temps esteantz, dez primiers deniers, issuez, et
profitz severalment provenauntz dez custumez suisditz, outre lez chargez et
reprisez ent a present dewez; payent, et ayent power, et soient tenuz de paier
en money nombrez, severalment, et per severallez parcellez, come lour officez
requergent, as chescun dez ditz Iusticez, Sergeantz et Attorney, pur le tempz
esteantz, et sez Executourz, sez ditz feez et regardez annuelment as Festes de
Pascque et seint Michell per owelx porcions; et le dit rate de sez ditz feez et
regardez a celle feste, dez festes suisditz qe a proschein ensuit le jour de sa
mort, ou sa discharge: et annuelment dez Festez de Nowel et Pentecost, as
Chescun dez ditz Justices, pur sa vesture, pellure, et linure, tauntz et tielxs
sommes de monoy, come ount este, ou serrount allowez al Gardeyn de le graunde
Garderobe nostre seigneur le Roy, en sez accomptez de son ^it office, pur la
vesture, pellure, et linure de tiel Justice, annuelment, per le greindre part
de dix ans darren passez: et annuelment al feste de Nowell, as chescuns des
ditz Sergeantz et Attourne, tauntz et tielxs sommes de money come ount este, ou
serrount allows al dit Gardeyn de le dit Garderobe en sez ditz accomptez, pur
le vesture de tiel Sergeant, ou Attourne, annuelment, per le greindre party
des x. anz suisditz: Et as oeptas de seint Trinite preschein ensuant, as
chescun dez ditz Iusticez, Sergeantz, et Attourne, sibien autieils sommes de
money, pur lez arrerages de sa dit vesture, pellure, et linure ore encurruz,
et a luy dewes, come touz lez arreragez de sez ditz fees et regardez, anxi ore
encurruz et a luy dewes, sibien lez arreragez dez sommes de money ^er taillez
levez, et resceitz del (...) resire seigneur le Roy a luy (...), nient paiez
toft aprez mesmez lez taillez, al resceit de dedit Escheker restitut^, come
autrez arreragez.

Et que le dit Gardein ou le Clerk de la Hanaper, et lez ditz collectourz et
Receivours dez ditz Custumez, ne null de cux, null allowance, discharge, ne
respite per paiement de money, ne autrement en lour accomptz de lour ditz
officez, ^oyntement, ne severalment, de null parcel de lour resceitz, forspriz
allowance dez ditz chargez et reprisez ne aient, devant dew paiement per cux
faitz as chescun dez ditz Iusticez, Sergeantz, et Attourne, de sez feez,
regardez, et rate suisditz; et de lez sommes de money pur sa vesture, pellure,
et linure. Et si ascun allowance, discharge, ou respite, soit fait a contrari
de ceste ordenaunce, que ceo soit void et tenuz per null: Et que les ditz
Iusticez, Sergeantz, et Attourne, et sez Executours, et cheseun de eux
quytement ayt et ayent lour ditz feez, regardez, et rate, et lez ditz sommes de
money, pur lour vesture, pellure, et linure, pur le temps q'ils estoient en
lours ditz officez; et a tauntz et tielz briefs soubs le grand Seal nostre
seigneur le Roy et sez heirs, pur l'exploit et execution de lez premissez,
come a eux serront besoignablez en ceste party, ascun Estatute, ou ordenaunce
a contrary nient obstant: Savunt toutz temps, que le Chanceleur d' Engleterre,
le Clerk de Parliament du Roy; le dit Clerk du dit Hanaper; lez Clerks de Crown
du Roy en sa Chauncellarie, et autres officers du nostre dit seigneur le Roy en
mesme le Chauncellarie, en paiemantz de eux, ou ascun de eux affairez, de lour
feez a eux appurtenauntz, per cause de lour ditz officez, ou autrement, a eux,
ou ascun de eux, per lettrez patentz du Roy grauntez, et dez issuez de mesme le
Hanaper apaiers, et autre, ore eiantz estat de frank tenement en ascuns
annuitees, a paiers dez issuez de dit Hanaper, ou dez custumez suisditz; et
autre persons ore enheritez en ascuns annuitees, apaiers dez issues de dit
Hanaper, ou dez custumez suisditz, et autre persons eiantz ascuns assignementz
faitz a eux devaunt le primier jour de Feverer proschein ensuant le comencement
de ceste present Parliament, dez paiementz a eux affairez dez issues du dit
Hanaper, ou de les Custumez suisditz, soient en chescun manner preferrez: Purveu
toutz foitz, que null dez ditz Iusticez, Sergeantz, ou Attourne soit pay des
dit custumez en ascun dez ditz Ports, de sez ditz feez, regardez, et rate; ne
pur sa dit vesture, pellure, et linure, tanque le Chauncelleir d' Angleterre,
pur le temps esteant, soit apris per examination del Clerk de Hanaper ne
suffisent a mesme le paiement as terms suisditz, affair, outre lez autres
paiementz et chargez suisditz.

Qua quidem Petitione, in Parliamento praedicto, lecta, audita and before
intellecta; eidem Petitioni, de avisamento and assensu praedictis,
respondebatur sub hiis verbis.

Le Roy, del advys et assent des Seigneurs S. et T. et lez Commens en ceste
Parliament esteauntz, ad grant tout ceo q'est contenuz en iceste Petition.

Unto which Petition the King gave his assent, as it thereby appears.

Whereupon (as it seems) the King issued out Writs to the Treasurer and
Chamberlains of his Exchequer, thereby requiring to be certified what Salaries
had been paid to the Justices of the King's Bench, and Common Pleas, Justices
of Assise; as also to his Sergeants at Law, and Attorney in the Common Pleas.
And likewise what moneys had been paid unto them for their Winter and Summer
Robes, for the greater part of ten years then next preceding; the tenor of
which Writs, with the answers thereunto I have here added.

An. xviiio. Regis Henrici sexti.
BReve Regis emanavit Thesaurario and Camerariis Scaccarii, Ex Bundello Brevium
Regis in arce Londonensi.
ad certificandum, Quod and Quantum sit annuum feodum consuetum cuilibet
Iusticiariorum nostrorum ad Placita coram nobis tenenda assignatorum, and
Iusticiariorum nostrorum de Banco, Iusticiariorum nostrorum ad Assisas in
diversis Comitatibus Angliae capiendas assignatorum, Servientium nostrorum ad
Legem; and Iohannis Vampage Attoruati nostri in Communi Banco nostro, and
omnibus aliis Curiis nostris, ratione officiorum suorum praedictorum: and
quantum xii. die Novembris ultimo praeterito, tam tunc Capitali Iusticiario
nostro ad Placita coram nobis tenenda assignato, de dicto feodo suo consueto:
Et de Centum and quaterviginti marcis annuis, sibi ultra dictum feodum suum: Et
tunc Capitali Iusticiario nostro de Banco, de dicto feodo suo; and de
quaterviginti and tresdecem libris, sex solidis and octo denariis annuis, seil.
ultra dictum feodum suum: Et cuilibet aliorum Iusticiariorum nostrorum ad
Placita coram nobis tenenda assignatorum: Et cuilibet tunc aliorum
Iusticiariorum nostrorum de Banco, de dicto feodo suo: Et centum and december
marcis annuis cuilibet eorum ultra dictum feodum suum, per seperales nostras
literas patentes nuper concessis: Et cuilibet tunc Iusticiario nostro ad
Assisas capiendas assignato: Et cuilibet tunc Servientium nostrorum ad Legem,
and praedicti Attornati nostri, de eorundem cujuslibet feodo praedicto, ultra
omnes denarios per vos, aut aliquem vestrum sibi liberatos etc.

Responsio hujus Brevis patet in scedula huic Brevi consuta.
PRaetextu Brevis huic scedulae consuti, scrutari fecimus diversa Recorda and
memoranda, ad Receptam in eodem Brevi specificatam residentia, Feoda
Iusticiariorum, Servientium Regis ad Legem, and Attornati Regis in dicto Brevi
specificatorum concernentia. Inter quae, in Brevibus de Liberatae extra
Cancellariam Regis, de tempore in tempus emanantibus, and The saurario, and
Camerariis Regis directis, tam pro Capitali Iusticiario Regis ad placita coram
domino Rege tenenda assignato, quam pro Capitali Iusticiario de Banco etc.
continetur, Quod idem Thesaurarius and Camerarii liberarent utrique
praedictorum Capitalium Iusticiariorum annuatim, pr^ utroque terminorum Paschae
and S. Michaelis, de Thesauro Regis, xx l. de feodo suo quadraginta librarum
per annum. Et in similibus Brevibus de Liberatae, extra Cancellariam praedictam
etc. pro quolibet residuo Iusticiariorum ad placita coram domino Rege tenenda
assignatorum, and Iusticiariorum de Banco etc. continetur; quod praedicti
Thesaurarius and Camerarii liberarent cuilibet eorum Iusticiariorum annuatim,
proutroe Termino praedictorum, de Thesauro Regis, Viginti marcas de feodo suo
quadraginta marcarum per annum.

Et in consimilibus Brevibus de Liberatae etc. and praedictis Thesaurario etc.
pro quolibet Iusticiario ad Assisas capiendas assignato; and Servientibus Regis
ad Legem, annuatim pro utroque Terminorum praedictorum, de Thesauro Regis december
libras de feodo suo xx l. per annum. Et in similibus Brevibus de Liberatae etc.
pro Attornato Regis, liberarent eidem Attornato Regis annuatim, pro utroque
Terminorum praedictorum Centum solidos de feodo suo december librarum per annum.
Quae quidem feoda Thesaurarius, and Camerarii praedicti, praedictis
Iusticiariis, Servientibus Regis ad Legem, and Attornato Regis, juxta
praedictam formam praedictorum Brevium de Liberatae separatim solvere and
solvere consueverunt. Et quod omnia feoda praedicta, and Centum and
quaterviginti marcae annuae, tunc Capitali Iusticiario domini Regis ad Placita
coram ipso Rege tenenda assignato, in Brevi praesentibus consuto specificato:
Et quaterviginti and tresdecem libras, sex solidos and octo denarios annuos
tunc capit etc. (ut supra) solvenda sunt annuatim ad Receptam praedictam, ad
Terminos in eadem Recepta usuales, viz. Festa Paschae and S. Michaelis per
aequales portiones: Et quod in festo S. Michaelis proximo ante duodecimum diem
Novembris in dicto Brevi praesentibus confuto specificatis, ipso Festo
computato, Iohanni Ivyn tunc, ac dicto duodecimo die Novembris Capitali
Iusticiario domini Regis ad Placita coram ipso domino Rege tenenda assignato,
and uni Iusticiariorum praedictorum ad Assisas capiendas assignato, de dictis
feodis suis, pro utroque eorundem officiorum suorum: Et de praedictis Centum
and quaterviginti marcis annuis, in dicto Brevi praesentibus consato
specificatis, sibi ultra dictum feodum suum, pro dicto officio suo Capitalis
Iusticiarii etc. per literas patentes domini Regis concessis, ultra omnes
denarios per nos aut aliquem nostrum sibi liberatos, and omnes pecuniarum
summas per Tallias ad Receptam Scaccarii praedicti levatas sibi assignatas a
retro extiterint Cvii l. minime persolutas.

Similiter pro
Will. Westbury secundo Iusticiario ad Placita. Will. Godered tertio
praedictorum Iusticiariorum ad Placita. Iacobo Strangways secundo Justice.
domini Regis de Banco. Will. Paston tertio praedictorum Justice. domini Regis de
Banco. Thomae Fulthorp quarto praedictorum Justice. domini Regis de Banco.
Iohanni Hody uni Justice. praedictorum ad Assisas capiendas, ac uni Servientium
domini Regis ad Legem. Iohanni Fray uni Justice. ad Assisas. Will. Ascough uni
Justice. ad Assisas, ac uni Servientium domini Regis ad Legem. Iohanni Fortescu
uni Servientium domini Regis ad Legem. Iohanni Portington uni Justice. ad
Assisas. Et pro Iohanne Vampage Attornato domini Regis.
Eodem anno xviiio. Henrici sexti aliud Breve Regis emanavit Thesaurario and
Baronibus de Scacc. ad certificandum quanta pecuniae summa Custodi magnae
Garderobae nostrae in compotis suis de officio suo in Scaccario praedicto, per
majorem partem december annorum proxime ante xiim. diem Novembris ultimo
praeteritam factis, pro una roba cum furrura ad festum Natalis Domini; and alia
roba cum linura ad festum Pentecostes, tam cuilibet Iusticiariorum nostrorum ad
Placita coram nobis tenenda assignatorum, quam cuilibet Iusticiariorum
nostrorum de Banco, ad nunc existentium, ultra feodum suum consuetum, annuatim
ad festa praedicta, per eundem Custodem, praetextu separalium literarum
nostrarum patentium, and Brevium nostrorum sub privato Sigillo nostro superinde
confectarum liberandarum allocata extitit, seu existet: Ac etiam consimiliter
pro annuali vestura cujuslibet Servientium nostrorum ad Legem, and Iohannis
Vampage Attornati nostri in Communi Banco nostro, and omnibus aliis Curiis
nostris, ultra feodum suum consuetum. Et quantum, tam cuilibet praedictorum
Iusticiariorum, de praedictis duabus robis, cum pellura and linura annuis, quam
cuilibet praedictorum Servientium and Attornati, de praedicta annuali vestura
praedicto xii. die a retro extitit etc. de praesenti minime liberatum.

Certificatio super infra-contentis in Brevi, patet in scedula huic Brevi
consuta.
PRaetextu Brevis regii buic scedulae consuti, scrutatis libris de particulis
Compotorum Roberti Rolleston, Custodis magnae Garderobae in eodem Brevi
specificatis, tam de Emptionibus, Receptionibus, Liberationibus, and aliis
diversis rebus, qua^m de aliis custubus and expensis, per ipsum Custodem in
eadem Garderoba factis and appositis ad opus Domini Regis nunc, per december annos
ante xiim. diem Novembris, in Brevi praedicto specificatos, proxime elapsos;
viz. a Vigilia S. Michaelis anno regni Regis octavo, usque vigilia S. Michaelis
anno xviii. ad Scaccarium dicti domini Regis redditis, penes idem Scaccarium in
Thesauro residentibus, compertum est in dictis libris de particulis compotorum
praedictorum; quod in quolibet hujusmodi compoto, in quolibet anno praedictorum
december annorum, una magnae pecuniae summa pro pannis laneis, sub titulo
Draperie, emptae; and alia magna pecuniae summa pro Linura sub titulo Mercerie,
emptae pro robis, pellura, and linura, tam pro persona Domini Regis, and pro
Cancellario and Thesaurario Angliae, Custode privati Sigilli dicti Domini
Regis, quam pro Iusticiariis, Servientibus Domini Regis ad Legem, and Atturnato
ipsius Regis, in dicto Brevi specificatis; aliisque pluribus diversis personis,
per december annos, in dicto Brevi specificatos, praedicto Custodi, in dictis
libris de particulis Compotorum praedictorum annuatim in grosso sunt allocatae.

Compertum est etiam in dictis libris de particulis, quod dicto xii. die
Novembris, nihil dictis Iusticiariis, Servientibus ad Legem, vel Attornato
Regis extitit a retro minime liberatum, de robis, furruris, linuris, vel
vesturis suis in dicto Brevi specificatis, de aut pro praedictis december annis,
eo quod in dictis libris de particulis, sub titulo viz. Liberationes
forinseces, compertum est; quod in quolibet anno praedictorum december annorum,
liberatae fuerunt cuilibet Iusticiariorum praedictorum, pro festo Natalis
domini, december ulnas panni, coloris long. Unum Capucium de xxxii. ventris
minever pur. una furrura de Cxx. ventris minever grossis, Judges their Robes.
and duae furrusae de bys. Et pro festo Pentecostes x. ulnae panni, coloris
long. nulla facta mentione ibi de pretio vel valo^e panni, furrurae, vel
linurae praedictorum, seu alicujus parcellae inde.

Virtu^e tamen praedicti Brevis, and pleniore cognitione praemissorum, nos
praefati Thesaurarius and Barons habuimus and copimus informationem praedicti
Custodis in praemissis, per quandam Billam ipsius custodis, nobis ad Scaccarium
praedictum, per manus suas proprias, in scriptis liberatam, ex part
Rememoratoris domini Regis residentem: per quam quidem scedulam manifest
liquet, quod annuatim pro majori part praedictorum december annorum; viz. octavi,
noni, Decimi, undecimi, quarto-decimi and sextodecimi, quaelibet roba and
furtura cujuslibet Iusticiariorum praedictorum, erga festum Natalis Domini, in
emptione, valebat per medium valorem per idem tempus ad Cvis. xid. ob. qu. and
sextam partem oboli. Et quod quaelibet roba and linura cujuslibet eorundem
Iusticiariorum, erga festum Pentecostes, in emptione, valebat and se
extendebat, per medium valorem, per idem tempus ad Lxiii s. vid. Et quod
quaelibet vestura cujuslibet praedictorum Servientium ad Legem, and Attornati
Regis, erga festum Natalis Domini, in emptione valebat, and se extendebat, per
medium valorem per idem tempus ad xxvis. xid. Quae quidem summae Cvis. xi d.
ob. qu. and sexta pars oboli, Lxiii. s. vid. and xxvis. xid. annuatim, per
majorem partem praedictorum december annorum, dicto Custodi in praedictis Compotis
suis, sub praedictis magnis pecuniae summis fuerunt allocatae.

So that after this, they had (as it seems) an increase of their Salaries;
and likewise an allowance in money for their Robes: for it appears that in 1
Edw. 4. Par. 1 E. 4* p. 2. m. 3.
John Markham then Chief Justice of the King's Bench, had an yearly Pension of
a CLxx. marks granted unto him, and payable by the Clerk of the Hanaper: As
also Cvi s. xid. qu. and sixth part of an half penny, for his Christmas Robe;
and Lxvi s. vid. for his Robe at Whitsontide, juxta formam cujusdam Actus in
Parliamento an. 18 H. 6. as are the words of the Record.

So likewise Sir Will. Iudes their a^mual Sa^art^s.
Huse Knight constituted Chief Justice of the same Court in 1 H. 7. had the
yearly fee of Cxl. marks, for his better support in that place, granted Pat. I.
H. 7. (...)
to him; and Cvis. xi. d. farthing, and the sixth part of an half penny, for his
VVinter Robe; as also Lxvis. vi d. for his Robe at VVhitsontide.

After this, (...)
viz. in 37 H. 8. there was a farther increase of their Fees; viz. to the Chief
Justice of the Kings Bench and his successors for the time being, of xxxl. per
annum: To every other Justice of that Court, and their successors xxl. per
annum. And to every Justice of the Common Pleas, and their successors xxl. per
annum. 17 Nov. 37 H. 8.

Cap. XLI.
Sergeants at Law.
THese were, long since called Narratores, in Latin; and Countors in French;
id est Pleaders, as that notable Treatise, called the Mirror (...)
of Justices shows: which Book, if it be so old as Sir Edw. Coke (...)
conceives, will prove them to be of greater Antiquity than eleven hundred
years. But setting that testimony aside, it is sure enough, that this Degree of
Lawyers is very ancient; for it is evident, that the Statute Cap. 2^.
of Westminster the first (which was in 3 E. 1.) makes mention thereof;

-- Purvieu est, que si ul Sergeant Countor, ou auter, face ul manner de
desceit, ou de collusion en Court le Roy etc. et de ceo soit attaint, eit la
prisonement d^ un an et un jour, et ne soit oy en Court le Roy etc. id est.

-- It is provided also, that if any Sergeant Pleader, or other, do any manner
of deceit or collusion in the Kings Court, etc. and thereof be attainted; he
shall be imprisoned for a year and a day; and thenceforth not be heard to plead
in that Court for any man: And that Thomas de Weylaund, John de Metingham, John
de Cobbeham, and Elias de Bekingham (soon after Justice of the Court of Common
Pleas) being then the King's Sergeants had Pensions assigned Lib. 3. E. 1. m. 2.
them out of the Exchequer for that their Service. Cap. 41.


And if my authority and. MS. pene^s (...). Boothe interioris Templi ^^cium.
mistake not, of the same degree, about that time, was John de Lyte, owner of
Lyte's Carey in Com. Somerset, who lying there buried, with his Portraiture in
a Coyfe has this Epitapth. John de Lyte, and Amy sa femme; Pater Noster Ave
Amen.

And we find; that, in 3 E. 2. Roger de Scotre and Edmund Passelegh, were, by
special Writ assigned to be the King's Sergeants -- Sergeants assigns as plees
le Roy et a ses besoines, says the Record Claus. 3 E. 2. in dorso in. 21.
: In which employment, both they and their successors gained such high esteem,
that, from 20 E. 3. those, who were then in that place (viz. Rob. de Thorpe and
Henry de Grene ^ had Summons Claus. 20 E. 3. p. 2. m. 22. in dorso.
to Parliament, to sit amongst the Justices of both Benches: and were specially
exempted Mich. 22 E. 3. 18. f. Challe^ge. Hill. 26 E. 3. 57. fol. Droit 37.
from serving on those eminent Trials called the grand Assize, but where there
were no Knights in the County: which shows, that their rank and place was
little inferior to that degree of Honor. Whereunto Sir Edward Coke adds;
that they precede those who sit on an high Bench in Westminster- Hall; id est
Masters of the Chancery.

It should seem that this state and degree of Sergeant, considering their grand
Feasts made at the reception thereof (whereof I shall give instance by and by)
and the large See the Statute of S H. 6. Cap. 4. wherein it is observable, that
upon the restraint unto Knights and others of less degree, for giveing Liveries
to others than their own menial Servants, the Sergeants at Law were exempted.

So also by the Statutes of 1 H. 8. Cap. 14. and 7 H. 8. Cap. 7. they were at
liberty for the quantity of Cloth in their Gowns, others, under the degree of a
Knight, being limited.


retinue for attendance they then had, was anciently so chardgeable, as that
the learned in the Laws were not then very forward to it upon them; insomuch as
the Kings of this Realm became necessitated to require them thereunto by a
special Writ of Summons: The first of which Writs (wherewith I have met) was
in 6 R. 2. unto John Carry, Edmund Clay, and John Hille: Howbeit after that
time, several others had the like Writs, as in my Chronologick Tables will
appear; but not at their own seeking, as it seems by this following instance of
John Martyn, William Babington and others, who declining to take upon them that
degree and state, being called by Writ Claus. 3 H. 5. m. 20.
in 3 H. 5. had a complaint made against them in the Parliament of 5 H. 5.
whereupon they were compelled thereto, as by the Roll of that year (a Copy
whereof I have here added) appears.

Rot. Parl. 5 H. 5. n. 10.
L'assurance de ceux qi sont nomez d'estre Sergeants de la Ley.
FAit assavoir, qe combien sur grande compleinte fait a nostre tressoverain
seignieur le Roy, de ceo qe les gentz de Roialme en lour suites, matiers, et
causes moevez et pendantz en les Courtz n'eussent si been esploit come ils
soleient avoir, per cause de si petit nombre qe y fuit des Serjeantz de la Ley,
a tresgrande desayse, meschef, et damage de son people. Et nostre dit soverain
Seigneur voillant oustier tieux meschiefs et damages, per advise de son con
seil, fist appeller long temps passee, certeins Apprentices de la Ley, et lour
fist enjoindre estroitement de prendre l'estat de Serjant, pur l'ayse et
seurtee de toutz ceux q'avoient affair en ses courtz avantditz; cestassavoir
John Martyn, William Babington, William Pole, William VVestbury, John Ivyn,
and Thomas Rolfe; nient mains ne ont ils pas ceo mys en execution, come
l'onourable et puissant Prince, le Du^ de Bedford, Lieutenant du Roy ad, per
uraie enformation ore entendu; mesme le Lieutenant, eiant a tout ceo
consideration, del assent des seigueurs Espirituelx et Temporelx assemblez en
ceste present Parliament, fist venir devant eux illeoques en Parliament, le
xxiiii. jour de Novembre, de fuit le viii. jour de mesme le Parliament, lez dits
Apprentices, et eu^ enjoint de per le Roy sur grande peine, de lour haster a la
prise de tiel estat, sanz ascun delaie. Et puis, cestassavoir le quint jour de
Decembre, qe fuit le xx. jour du dit Parliament, viendrent mesmes ceux
Apprentices devant les ditz Lieutenant et seigneurs en Parliament, et prierent
de grace q'ils purroient estre respitez celle party, tanque a le Term de la
tresseinte Trinite proschein avenir, Sergeants at Law.
et promistrent et asseurerent de la perfourmer a celle temps sanz outre delaie
ou excusation qeconque Surquoy et bone deliberatione suz certeins c^uses et
matiers, per mesmes ceux Apprentices, devant eux monstrez et declarez, le dit
Lieutenant, del assent avaunt dit, l'avoit admys et grauntee come ils ont
desirez, issint q'ils esterront a le grace de Roy, s'ils ne le perfourment come
ils ont promys et asseurez.

Having thus briefly pointed to the Antiquity of this degree, I now come to the
form and solemnity of their Creation thereto: wherein, first, I shall take
leave to transcribe, what the learned Sir John Fortescu (Lord Chief Justice of
the Kings Bench in H. 6. time) has expressed in that excellent Treatise of his
De Laudibus Legum Angliae, written in France in the time of his expulsion, and
dedicated to Edward Prince of Wales, whose Chancellor he then was: Then add
some few and brief notes on such their Creation; and afterward subjoyn what I
have met with from good authorities, touching the manner thereof in succeeding
times: and lastly exhibit some notable instances touching the magnificence of
their Feasts.

Cap. XLII.
The ancient form and order used in making Sergeants at Law.
THe Lord Chief Justice of the Common Bench, Fortescu de laud. Legum Angl. Cap.
50.
by the Counsel and assent of all the Justices, uses, as often as he thinks
good, By whom made choice of.
to choose seven or eight of the discreetest persons, that in the foresaid
general study have most profited in the Laws, and which to the same Justices
are thought to be of best disposition, and their names he presents to the
Lord Chancellor of England in writing; Their names presented to the Lord
Chancellor.
who incontinent by virtue of the Kings Writ, shall charge every of the persons
elect, Their Writ of Summons.
to be before the King at a day by him assigned, to take upon him the state and
degree of a Sergeant at Law, under a great penalty in every of the said Writs
limited.

On the which day every one of them appearing, shall be sworn upon the holy
Gospel of God, (...)
to be ready at the day and place then to be appointed, to receive the state
and degree aforesaid; and that ^e the same day shall give Gold, according to
the Custom in that behalf used: howbeit, how and after what sort, every of the
said persons shall that day demean himself; and also the form and manner, how
that state and degree shall be given and received, for so much as the same
cannot be so briefly written, as to the shortness of this work is requisite;
therefore at this time I will leave these points untouched; and yet I have
declared the same to you ere now by way of talk.

But this you must understand; that when the day appointed is come; those elect
persons, (...)
among other solemnities, must keep a great dinner, like to the Feast of a
King's Coronation; which shall continue and last for the space of seven days;
and none of those elect persons shall defray the charges growing to him, about
the costs of this solemnity with less expenses then the sum of four hundred
Marks; so that the expenses, which eight men so elect shall then bestow, will
surmount to the sum of three thousand and two hundred Marks: of which expenses
one parcel shall be this;

Every of them shall give Rings of Gold to the value of forty pounds sterling
at the least: and your Chancellor well remembers, that at what time he
received this state and degree, the Rings which he then gave, stood him in
fifty pounds. For every such Sergeant, at the day of his creation, uses to
give unto every Prince, Duke, and Archbishop being present at that Solemnity;
and to the Lord Chancellor and Lord Treasurer of England, a Ring of the value
of xxvi s. 8 d.

And to every Earl and Bishop, being likewise present, and also to the Lord
Privy Seal; to both the Lords Chief Justices, and to the Lord Chief Baron of
the King's Exchequer, a Ring of the value of xxs.

And to every Lord Baron of the Parliament; and to every Abbot and notable
Prelate, and worshipful Knight, being then present; and also to the Master of
the Rolls, and to every Justice, a Ring of the value of a Mark; Cap. 42.
and likewise to every Baron of the Exchequer, to the Chamberlains, and to all
the Officers and notable men serving in the King's Courts, Rings of a smaller
pri^e, but agreeable to their Estates, to whom they are given.

Insomuch that there shall not be a Clerk, especially in the Court of Common
Bench, but he shall receive a Ring convenient for his degree: and besides
these, they give diverse Rings to other of their friends.

They give also Liverries of Cloth in one Suit or color, Liveries then given
by them.
in great abundance; not only to their Household meany, but also to their other
friends and acquaintance; which during the time of the aforesaid solemnity,
shall attend and wait upon them.

Wherefore, though in the Universities, they that are premoted to the degree of
Doctors, do sustain no small charges at the time of their Commencement, as in
giving of Bonets and other rich gifts; yet they give no gold, nor do bestow any
other gifts or costs like unto these expenses.

Neither in any Country of the World, No such degree but in (...).
is there any special degree given in the Law of the same Land, but only in the
Realm of England: Neither is there any man of Law, throughout the Universal
World, which by reason of his Office or profession gains so much as one of
these Sergeants.

No man also, be he never so cunning and skillfull in the Laws of the Realm,
shall be exalted to the Office and Dignity of a Justice in the Court of Common
Pleas before the King; None to be ^ Justice in any of the Kings Courts, but of
this degree.
or in the Court of the Common Bench, which are the chief ordinary Courts of
the same Realm, unless he be first promoted to the state and degree of a
Sergeant at Law: neither shall any man, but only such a Sergeant, None to plead
in the Court of Common Pleas, but ^ Sergeant.
plead in the Court of the Common Bench, where all real actions are pleaded.

Wherefore to this state and degree has no man been hitherto admitted, None to
be admitted to this degree, under xvi. years study of the Law.
except he has first continued by the space of sixteen years in the said
general study of the Law: And in token or sign that all Justices are thus
graduate, The Coif the principal ensignement of this degree.
every of them always, whilst he sits in the King's Court, wears a white
Quoif of silk, which is the principal and chief insignement of habit, Cap. 43.
wherewith Sergeants at Law in their creation are decked; and neither the
Justice, nor yet the Sergeant, shall ever put off the Quoif, no not in the
King's presence, though he be in talk with his Majesty's Higness.

Thus far from Fortescue.

Cap. XLIII.
The manner and order in making of three Sergeants at the Law; viz. Edward
Elyot, Lewis Pollard, and Guy Palmys, all of the society of the Middle Temple,
13o. Nov. 19 H. 7.
AD Parliamentum tentum nono die Nov. an. 19 Regis Henrici 7mi pro Servientibus
ad Legem; Ex cod. MS. penes subthesaurarium Hosp. medii Templi. f. 4. a.
viz. pro Elyot and Pollard. Et tunc datum fuit intelligi comitivae, quod
Palmys junior esset Serviens, virtute cujusdam waranti domini Regis, Episc.
London tunc Custodi magni Sigilli domini Regis directi: Et postea electi
fuerunt officiarii pro festo dicti Servientis; viz. Mareschalls, Surveyers,
Suers, Conneyers and Controllers, quilibet secundaum ordinem suum, prout etc.

Memor. quod praedicti Servientes non fuerunt ad praedictum Parliamentum, sed
consideratum fuit per Comitivam, quod haberent inter eos de Regardo xx: marcas,
prout solutum fuit etc.

Festum pro Servientibus ad Legem tentum fuit apud Lambeth, in hospicio
Archiepiscopi Cantuar. die Lunae proximo ante festum S. Martini Episcopi, in
yeme, anno regni Regis Henrici septimi xix.

Et ante praedictum Festum; viz. in die Veneris, circa horam tertiam, post
Nonam, convenerunt in Aula circa le Cubbard, omnes socii in villa, tam illi qui
fuerunt in Communibus, quam alii qui non tenentur esse in Communibus ratione
uxorum Suarum existentium in villa, quam ratione specialis pardonationis, per
Finem: Et tunc quatuor de illis Aunciens, missi fuerunt ad Cameras eorum, qui
fuerunt ordinati esse Servientes ad Legem, ut venirent usque; le Cuppeborde;
ubi Westby secundus Baro de Scacc. and Bollyng tertius Baro de Scacc. cum
Magistro Emson steterunt; necnon quamplures de senioribus; and quasi omnes
socii fuerunt praesentes; dictusque Westby; dandoque eis qui electi fuerunt
fore Servientes, laudem pro suo bono gestu, and bona gubernatione, quae fuerunt
causa electionis eorum, desiderando eos habere societatem in eorum favorem etc.
cum alia loquela convenienti pro materia. Et tunc Thesaurarius deliberabat eis
xx. marcas in auro and argento, inclusas in nova cyroteca; quibus receptis
regratiebantur Societatem, non solum pro pecunia, sed pro aliis beneficiis, ut
erudicione legum and legatione eorum ad studendum per bonas regulas ordinatis
per Comitivam, quae restrixerunt eis in juventute ab insolentia, ad studendum,
etc. Et extunc biberunt omnes insimul, and inierunt cum eis, perducentes eos
per la Barge, usque; ad Hospicium de Lambeth; and ibi eos dimiserunt etc.

Item crastino die; viz. die Sabati* diversi, viz. quasi omnes Socii quatuor
Hospiciorum, ad desiderium dictorum Servientium; viz. quilibet desiderabat
illos de societate sua propria, ad prandendum cum eis, and sic fecerunt etc.

Item die dominica omnes Iusticiarii, ante horam decimam fuerunt in Capella
Hospicii de Lambeth praedicta, and novi Servientes coram eis genuflectantes,
fecerunt declarationes super Brevibus prius eis deliberatis, per Mordaunt and
Muscott Prothonotarios Curiae: Quibus narrationibus finitis, Capitalis
Iusticiarius de Banco Regis, dedit eis laudem, pro eorum Declarationibus
factis; and monstrabat eis plura bona exempla de eorum praedecessoribus, and
tunc posuit les Coyfes super eorum Capitibus, and ligaverunt sub mentis eorum;
and induebant eos singulariter de Capital. de Skarletto (per ipsos Servientes,
ad sua propria custagia) ponentes eadem capicia super humeros suos, ad modum
Doctorum: and sic creati fuerunt Servientes ad Legem in publica praesentia,
^oram h... omni populo circumstante: Et tunc inierunt omnes Iusticiarii in
Aulam, cum praedictis Servientibus sequentibus eos: and Iusticiarii sederunt in
Aula ad altam tabulam, and alii magnates cum eis: Et Servientes sederunt ad
interiorem partem Aulae, in australi part ejusdem Aulae.

Item die Lunae venerunt dicti Servientes ad Aulam Westmonasteriensem; and
coram eis omnes deliberat... eorum and been conjuncti, tamen proximo coram eis,
unus Serviens ad Arma, cum magna Mace, and Gardianus de Flete cum Baculo suo;
and steteruxt omnes novi Servientes d^ Legem in australi part Aulae, ex
opposito Curiae de Communi Banco: and semper maximus senex eorum, quo ad
admissionem suam, de qua electus fuit Serviens in altiori part: Et tunc duo de
veteribus Servientibus inierunt a Barra Curiae, usque ad novos Servientes, and
ceperunt seniorem eorum inter se, and perduxerunt eum ad Barram, coram
Cancella^io Angliae, Thesaurario Angliae, cum omnibus aliis Iusticiariis tunc
ibi praesentibus: and ipse fecit declarationem suam; and unus de veteribus
Servientibus fecit defensionem; and Prothonotarius legit Breve; and sic
fecerunt de singulis etc.

Et postea inierunt ad Hospicium suum; and in eodem die dominus Rex, cum toto
Hospicio suo jantaverunt cum illis.

Memor. quod istos tres dies, nulla ordinatio facta fuit pro Comitiva in
quatuor Hospiciis Curiae; neque in Hospiciis Cancellariae; quia omnes
jantaverunt cum praedictis Servientibus, and quamplures alii, ad numerum Mill.

Cap. XLIV.
The manner or order of making of new Serjauntys, create and made in Trynytie
Term, An. terciodecimo Regis Henrici octavi; whois names be Mr. Rudhale; Mr.
Fitz-Iamys; Mr. Port; Mr. Faierfax; Mr. Spilman; Mr. Broune; Mr. Shelley; Mr.
Willughby; Mr. Norwich; and Mr. Inglefeld.
IN primis, in every house of the four Innes of Court, Ex ve^. cartacco MS.
p^ne^ Ric. Smith Lo^o^^e (...) an. 1661.
upone Fridaye affore there Creasions, abowte iii. of the clock at After noone,
Cap. 44.
the company assemblith, the new Serjaunts of every House thene being in there
Innes, in there own chaumbers. And after that the company is so assembled in
there Halle, thence comyth down to theme the new Serjaunts: and after that the
new Serjaunts be so come down to the company, thene all they stondynge
togeder, the most ancient of the company rehearsith the manner of learning and
stody, gevynge lawde and preyce to theme that have well usid theme, shewenge
what wurshipp and profit comythe and growith by reasone of the same, in proffe
wheroffe, those new Serjaunts for there konnynge, discrecione, and wisdom be
callide by the Kyng's Highness, and his honorabill Councelle, to the great
promocyone and dignytie of the Office of a Serjaunt of the Law: And thene he
gevythe theme a lawde and preyce for there good conversacione, and peyce, and
diligence, that they have takyne and used in there stodye, presentynge to theme
the reward of the House, besechyng theme to be good, and kind to the company.

And thene, those new Serjaunts geve onto the company thanks, and preye the
company to be good and kind to theme, and they shall alweys owe their favors
and love to theme; again, gevynge a great lawde onto the manners of the house
where thorough they have atteynid to there konnyng and promocyon. And after that
done, the new Serjaunts goo togedyr oon of theme taking anoder be the arm,
and goo forth toward the place, whereas the Serjaunts feast shall be kept: and
all the company, as they be in auncyentie follow theme two and two togedyr:
and when they come to the place where as the Serjaunt's feast shall be kept;
there shall be ready to receyve theme at there first entryng into that place, the
hie Styward and Countroller, which shall convey theme into the place, where as
they shall have spiced bredde, comfeits and oder godely conceyts with ypocras.
After which rekreatione, the new Serjaunts goo to there chaumbers, and the
company of Court gooith home again to there places. And upone Satyrdaye thene
next folowenge, all the Judges and old Serjaunts come from Westminster to
the place where the new Serjaunts be to Dinner; and when Dinner is done, thene
all the Iuges and old Serjaunts depart, except the chieff Justice of the
Comyne Place, which chieffe Justice of the Comyne Place goith into a secret
chaumber with the chieff Pronotare and the secund Pronotare, and then the
chieff Justice of the Comyne Place causith the Styward of the feste to speak to
the new Serjaunts to come before hyme in the seid secret place; and there he
gevyth to theme a godely exortacione, after which exortacione done, then the
eldest Serjaunt begynnyth after the manner of motyng to trete upone the Writ,
that he will trete and plede upone.

And then the next of the new Serjaunts in aunciente make the defense, and
axeth heryng of the Writ; and then the chieff Pronotary redith that Writ:
and then the seid secund new Serjaunt emparleth; and after that the secund
new Serjaunt doith in like manner, and the secund Pronotary redith the secund
Writ; and so the third and the fourth in like manner etc.

And after all these things done, the chieff Justice of the Comyne place
departith home, to his Lodgyng, and the new Serjaunts to there chaumbers etc.

And upone Sunday then next foloweng the chieff Justice of the Comyne place,
with all the oder Justices, and old Serjaunts, about ix. of the clok goo to
the chieff Justice lodgyng of the Kyng's Benche; and then all they togedyr in a
godely order goo to the place, where as the new Serjaunts be then a waytyng
upone them, the seid ii. Pronotaries and the VVardeyne of the Flete with his
servauntes, and the Marshall of the ComynePlace with all his Criours, and the
old Serjaunts servaunts, and in the new Serjaunts lyvere.

And then they goo into a great chaumber where the company of Court assembleth:
and there all the Justices set in a godely order, and the old Serjaunts
stonding nygh to them in ane order, with the seid ii. Pronotaries, then the
seid Styward of the feste, by the commandment of the Justice goith to the
new Serjaunts to bring them before them, which come in ane order ii. and ii.
togeder, and every oone of them a servaunt with a scarlet Hode one his arm,
and a Serjaunt's Coiff in his hand.

And the new Serjaunts set them sylff in ane order, the oldest in the mydds
stondyng arowe in new blewe gowns close affore with hooll sleves; and so
stondyng in ane order, the chieff Justice of the Kyng's Benche gevyth a godely
exortacione.

After which done, the seid new Serjaunts, and the seid ii. Pronotaries use
them sylff in declaracions and redyng of the seid Writtes, in form affore
rehersid.

And after that done, the oldest new Serjaunt knelyth affore the chieff
Justice of the Kyng's Bench; and all the oder new Serjaunts in ane order,
knele down affore the oder Justices, and every Justice puttith upone the new
Serjaunts so knelyng there coyffs, and there scarlet Hodes abowte there nekks.

And that done, they rise uppe, and make dew curtesye, and depart ii. and
ii. togeder to there Chaumbers: and then, all the Justices goo down into the
Hall to dinner; and then come all the new Serjaunts with there seid Coiffs upone
there hedes, and there seid Hodes about there nekks, and stand arowe oone by
anoder alonge affore the Table on the Sowth side in the Hall. And then all the
Iuges wasshe and sit down, and the chieff Justice of the Kyng's Benche
commaundith all the new Serjaunts to wasshe, and sit down, which sit down
in ane order oone a little distaunce from anoder, and ych of them has a Karvar
stondyng before him, and two of the new Serjaunts sit at oone mese, and so
dyne with sober countenance and little communycacion.

And after that they have dynyd they rise up and goo affore the Justices, and
make dew obedyence to them, and then stand again in like order as they did
affore they satte down.

And afterward the Justices arise and wasse and geff thanks onto the new
Serjaunts for there good Dinner.

And then the new Serjaunts make dew courtesy, gevyng thanks onto the
Justices for there pain.

And then the Justices depart home to there lodgyngs, and the new Serjaunts to
there chaumbers etc.

And upone Mondaye then next foloweng, the new Serjaunts goo soberly to
Westminster about ix. of the clok affore noone, the eldest affore, and the
next ancient foloweng, and so to the youngest.

And affore the new Serjaunts, goo the VVardeyne of the Flete, and the chieff
Marchall of the Comyne Place, and there Officers and servaunts in there Lyverees.

And after the new Serjaunts, goo there own serveaunts in there lyverees; and
they goo first thorough the Kyng's streite to Saint Edward, and there offer.

And then they goo to ower Lady of Pewe, and there they offer; and then they
come into the Hall, and stand severally with there bakks to the Tabyll affore
the Comyne Place, affore the Iuges: and so stondyng in ane order, the old
Serjaunts goo to my Lord Chaunceller; and then come with him my Lord
Treasorer and my Lord Pryve Seall into the Comyne Place with the Judges of the
Kyng's Benche, and all they with the Iuges of the Comyne Place sit down in
the Comyne Place.

And after that they be set, the chieff Justice of the Comyne Place
comaundith ii. of the old Serjaunts to fetch the eldest of the new
Serjaunts. And then those ii. old Serjaunts goo and take the eldest of the
new Serjaunts by the arms between them; and at the Table coming forward, they
iii. togeder make a low courtesy, and again in the myddis of the Hall a like
courtesy; and when they come to the Bar, a like courtesy; and they come
thorough a lane made mete and ready for them by the VVardeine of the Flete, and
the seid Marchall, and there Officers.

And when they be so at the Bar, the seid eldest new Serjaunt so brought
to the Bar seith after this manner, My Lord Brudenell, John at Style, ad sue
cye devaunt vous une breff de etc. envers Robert Down, and pride q'il soit
demand.

And then the chieff Pronotare shall seye cye per Attorney.

And then the seid eldest new Serjaunt shall declare upone his Writ.

And after declaracion made, the eldest of the old Serjaunts shall make his
defense and pray heryng of the VVritte; and then the seid chieff Pronotare
shall read the VVritte; and then the seid eldest of the old Serjaunts shall
emparle.

And then he that dealith the Ryngs for the eldest of the new Seraunts shall
rise up as he sittyth among the Officers of the Comyne Place, and shall stand
upone the mids of the board of the Comyne Place, and there make a low
courtesy, and then he shall come and step upon the Benche between both the
Pronotaries, and there he shall knele down before my Lord Chaunceler; and seye;
that the seid eldest of the new Serjaunts recomendith him to his Grace; and
sendith him a tokyne of his Creasione, and kiss it, and delyver it to him: and
in like manner he shall delyver a Ryng to my Lord Treasorer: and anoder to my
Lord Prive Seall, and anoder to the chieff Justice of the Kyng's Benche; and
anoder to the chieff Justice of the Comyne Place; and so forth to the oder
Justices, Pronotaries, and oder Officers of the Place.

And then shall the secund and the third of the eldest of the old Serjaunts
fetch the secund of the new Serjaunts, and demean them sylff as the first
did; and the secund Pronotare shall read the VVritte.

And then he that shall deal the Ryngs for him shall demean him sylff as the
first dealer did.

And after like manner, shall the residew of the eldest and new Serjaunts and
there dealers demean them sylff.

And when all that is done, then my Lord Chaunceller shall geff them thanks
for there Ryngs, and a great commendacion, and his soleme blyssing.

All which done, my Lord Chaunceller and the seid Iuges, and old Serjaunts
goo homward, to the Fest.

And after them goo the seid new Serjaunts with there Officers, as they came
forth.

And when those new Serjaunts come home, they goo to there chaumbers to there
wyffs and friends, and there have there hooll servyces brought to them by there
Clerks: And Gentilmen of Court serve there that day according to there lotts etc.

And when the seid new Serjaunts have dyned, then they goo in a sober manner
with there seid Officers and Servaunts into London, oone the Est side of Chepe
Side, oneto Saint Thomas of Acres, and there they offer, and then come down one
the West side of Chepe Side to Powles, and there offer at the Rode of North
door, and at Saint Erkenwald's Shrine, and then goo down into the body of the
Church,
and there they be appoyntid to there Pyllyrs by the Styward and Countroller of
the feste, which brought them thidder with the oder Officers.

And after that done, they goo home again to the place of the fest etc.

And upone Tewesdaye, the seid new Sergeants goo again in sober manner to
Westminster with the seid Wardeyne of the Flete and the Marchall, and oder
Officers affore them, and their servaunts after them in there lyverees; and goo
thorough Westminster Hall, onto ower Lady of Pewe; and after come down again
into Westminster Hall to the Tabyll against the Comene place, and there stondyng
with there bakkys against the same Tabyll, the seid Officers take there leve of
the seid new Serjaunts.

And then, when the Court is done, the seid new Serjaun^s goo home severally
with there own servaunts, and no more with them, except such as list to speak
with them for causis.

And then afterward the Justices of the Comyne Place appoynte them a day iiii.
or v. days after that, to argue there matter in Law appointed to them a
sevenyght affore there Creacione etc.

Cap. XLV.
The order in making of Sergeants at Law 1 Edw. 6. viz. Mr. Whiddone, Mr.
Meynill, Mr. Croke, Mr. Morgan, Mr. Pollard, and Mr. Coke.
THen the six new Sergeaunts here after named, Ex cod. nigr^ MS. vocato the
black Book of Lincolas Inn 178. b. (4.)
which were elected, and had their Writts in Trinite term before, to appear
before the Justices, and resceyve their charge according to their Vocation in
Crastino Purificationis beatae Mariae, which was the Thursdaye next after the
deyth of the seid King Henry the 8. whoes soul God pardone, they had new
Writts agene delivered to theme of like effect with the old, returnable the
same day.

And the seid new Sergeaunts proceeded, and kept their feast at Lincholnes
Inn, by the appoyntement, and at the special request of the seid Lord
Wriothesley thene Lord Chauncelor, as follows.

Uppone the seid Thursdaye in the morning being the next day after Candelmas
day, and the third day of February, camme ine to Lincholnes Inn Hall Sir
Richard Lyster Knighte, Chief Justice of England, Sir Edward Mountague Knighte
chief Justice of the Comen place, Sir Roger Cholmeley Knighte chief Baron of
the Escheker, and other the Justices of both Benches, and Barons of the
Escheker; and all the old Sergeaunts; viz. Mr. Molineux, Mr. Hales, Mr.
Harres, and Mr. Saunders; and after that the Justices were there set uppone
the Benche; Sergeants at Law made Term. Hill. 1 E. 6.
and after every of the seid new Sergeaunts of other Howses of Court were
browght that morning in like manner, with all their cumpanyes and felawshippe
severally to their several Chambers in Lincholnes Inn; and from thens the
seid new Sergeaunts being conveyed to the Librarye, there thene came down
ineto the Halle, and before theme went the Wardene of the Flete, and his Men
with Tipstaves all ine the seid Sergeaunts Lyvere, and Mr. Crafford oone of the
ancient Benchers of Lincholnes ynne their Steward, and Mr. Rollewoode of
Lincholnes ynne aforeseid chief Pronotary of the Comen place, their
Comptroller, ine the seid Sergeaunts Livere, Gowns also furred with Martrons,
and each of theme a great Cheyne of Gold abowte his neck, and a white stafe
ine his hand, ine like wise camme before the seid new Sergeaunts, whose names
now orderly follow; viz. Mr. Whiddone of the Inner Temple, Mr. Meynell of
Lincolnes Inn, Mr. Croke of the seid Inner Temple, Mr. Morgane of Lincolnes
Inn aforeseid, Mr. Follard of the Middle Temple, and Mr. Coke of Grayes ynne;
these six new elected Sergeaunts stonding before the seid Justices there
being placed on the Bench; and afterward a godly thowghe sumwhat prolixe and
long Declaration of their seid duties and exhortation to their full following
and execution of the same, accordingly made to theme by the seid Sir Rychard
Lyster Chief Justice of England, and their Writts and Declarations rehearsed,
their Coyfes were severally put one their heads; and their Hoods in like wise
delivered to theme.

And then the Justices so departing from Lincolnes ynne went to Westminster
about 10. of the Clock in the fornoone of the same day.

And thene, shortly after, the seid new Sergeaunts went also to Westminster
Hall, and from thens to our Lady of Pewes Chapel, and thene came agene ineto
Westminster Halle, and there stood orderly over against the Comen place; Cap.
45.
to the bar of which place were they solempnely browghte oon after ane other,
by ii. of the old Sergeaunts; and the seid Wardene of the Flete, from time to
time, particulerly, went before every of theme.

And there rehearsed they each of theme again their several Writts and
Declarations; and thene did gyve Ryngs to the Magistrates and Judges, there
being placed according to their degrees; as to the Lord Wriothesley Lord
Chancellor of England, to the Lord Russell Lord Prevy Seal, to the Lord
Seint John Lord great Master and Presedent of the Kings Magesties most
honorable Counsel; to the two chief Justices, and to as many other of the
Justices as cowde then there convenyently sit.

And this ended, the seid Lord Chancellor, and the other Lords and Judges camme
that day to dynner at Lincolnes ynne; and thither camme also to dynner my
Lord Mayer of Londone, with certene Aldermene, and the Sheriffs of the City,
and sum other men of Worship, and Gentlemene besides, which were biddene to
the Feast, (and but a few other) where they were all honorably resceyved,
thouwhe their dynner was not Epicuryous nor verrey sumptuous; but yet moderatly
discretely and sufficiently ordered, with a wise temperaunce, without great
excess or superfluyte, as it was most convenyent, and to learned Lawers, and
sobre and expert Crownselors was most decent, and requisyte.

At the seid dinner the high Table was furnyshed principally with my seid
Lord Chauncelor, and other noble men, Lords, and Gentlemenne of Woorshippe,
and good calling: At the second Table, being one the North side of the seid
Halle, did sytt my seid Lord Mayer with the Aldermene, Shirefes of the City,
and diverse other Gentlemene; as Mr Carrell Attorney of the Duchye, Mr. Chidley
Attorney of the Tenthes, with soche other of woorshipfull calling: The third
Boorde of the Southsyde of the said Halle was right woorshipfully and cumly
furnished with the sage Judges of the Laws, the most notable and profownde
Cownselors, the old Sergeaunts; and the two expert, discrete, grave, and deep
stodyed men yne the said Laws, Mr. Bradshawe of the Inner Temple, the Kings
general Attorney, and Mr. Griffyne of Lincholnes ynne the Kings Magesties
general Solicitor: At the fourth Boorde one the seid Southsyde of the Halle,
did orderly fyet uppone the Bench, all of oone side, the said new Sergeaunts,
every of them in their auncyentye: At the fifth Table on the seid North side
of the seid Halle, did sit Gentlemene of a meaner calling.

The Halle being thus furnyshed the Benchers of Lincholnes ynne did see the
seid dynner ine good course served; and thene they themselves furnished uppe
the Table in the mydds of the Halle, toward the lower end thereof, commawndyng
certene other Gentlemene of Lincholnes ynne, of the most sobre, and wise
sort, to several places in the Halle, appointed to wait and attend all the
seid dynner to the service thereof; which with all diligens they executed
accordingly.

And whene dynner was solempneley finished, the Lord Chauncelor, with the
other Lords departed from Lincolnes ynne about two of the clock in the after
noone.

And withyn ane hour after, the seid new Sergeaunts went to Paul's, and there
each of theme stood at their several Pillars in the body of the Church
according to the ancient custom ine that case used; and from thens they
camme to Sergeaunt's ynne, every of theme to their several Chambers, and there
remained.

And thus ended this honorable Sergeaunts Feast with all the circumstances and
process much to their praise, woorshippe, and perpetual same worthy
commendation.

And it is farther to be remembered, that the two new Sergeaunts of Lincholnes
yne; viz. Mr. Meynell, and Mr. Morgane, the night before they were made
Sergeaunts, weere called ineto the Chapel of Lincholnes ynne, and there after
an ornate Oration, made to theme by the right woorshipfull Mr. Baron
Pi^barowghe, in the presence of my Masters of the Benche, and all the cumpany
of the Gentlemene, and of the felawshipe of the seid House, every of the seid
Sergeaunts had thene to hyme deliverd, in the name of the seid whole
felawshippe, as of their free gift and reward, toward their charges vi l. in
a purse; which was gathered of all the cumpany of the House; and a good Sum
besides which was delyvered to Mr. Foster Treasorer of Lincholnes ynne; which
money was paid after the rate of xl d. every Gentlemane, whereof my Masters of
the Benche paid nothing, nor were contributary to the same.

Cap. XLVI.
Hereafter follows the manner or order of the making of new Serjaunts,
created and made in Michelmas Term An. xix. and xx. Regni Elizabethae
Reginae, the names of them hereafter is rehearsed, sc. Mr. Francis Gawdye, and
Mr. Aunderson of the Inner Temple, Mr. Shote of Grayes Inn, Mr. Aylofe, Mr.
Baber, and Mr. Wyndham of Lyncolnes Inn, and Mr. Fenner of the Myddle Temple;
and there Feast was kept in the Hall of the Myddle Temple.
MEmorandum, Ex vet. exemplari penes Eliam Ashmole Arm. foecialem a Wind^sora
denominatum anno 1662.
that the old Serjaunts then liveinge, were Mr. Bendlowes, Mr. Powtrell, and
Mr. Meade, and no more.

Item in Easter Term then last paste, all the Justices of both Benches, and
the Cheffe Baron of The Exchequer, did chose and name xii. of the best learned
and able, xii.
in the iiii. Innes of Court being, Sergeants at Law made Term. Mich. 19 Eliz.
and caused their names to be written in a bill, and delivered to the Queens
heighnes, and her grace did elect and prick those seven in that bill; and
after that, there warrant was made and signed, and other writts sealed and
delivered to them to appear, and take upon them the said estate and degree
in xv. Michaelis then next followinge: And then in Trynitye Term then next
before that Michelmas Term, the said seven Serjaunts elected, did desire
the said three old Serjaunts to a supper, and then and there communed with
them, of the makeinge of there Steward and Comptrowler and their Officers, and
of other things towcheinge their said degrees and doings etc.

Item the said Michelmas Term by means of the Pestelence in London was
adjourned to Me^se Michaelis and after to Crastino Martini, If the ^oll Term
had holden they should then have appea^ed the day ne^t before.
which was on a friday: And then that day being the first day of the sittinge
of Courts in Westminster haull, these Serjaunts elected, about ten of the
Clock appeared in the Chancerye, and went thither in Westminster haull, and the
Warden of the Fleet before them; and then their writts were showed, and stood
a row in ancyenty, and the ancient of them stood next to the Kings benche,
and then after exhortation given to them by Sir Nicholas Bacon Knight, And if
the said Lord Keeper had not been there then, after there being there they must
have gone in the Afternoon to him.
Lord Keeper of the great ^eale of England, how to behave themselves in
their Vocations, and how they should be discreet; for out of there flock may
come the Judges of this Realm etc. And then they wear severally sworn; and
after that the ancyent of those seven said to the said Lord Keeper these
words or other in effect as do follow, scil. If it please you my Lord Keeper,
by the ancyent order in this Realm, yt has been accustomed, that the new
Sergeants at there Creation, should give to the King or Queen's heighnes of this
Realm for the time being, The Qu^enes ^ing.
a Ring of gold, in token of there duetyes and thancks to there Majesty: And also
has been the old custom that the same Serjaunts should humbly desire the
Lord Chauncelor of this Realm, Cap. 46.
or the Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England for the time being, to
receyve that Ringe of them, and to deliver it to his or her Majesty; therefore
I and my brethren here most humblye beseech your good Lordshipp, to take this
ring, and to deliver the same accordingly. And then he to kiss that ringe and
send it upp to him, and he kisseth his hand and takes it and promissethe to
deliver it; and then the said Lord Keeper adjorneth them to appear in the
Common place in the Tewisdaye next after. And then they went ageine into the
Haull to there places ageine, And then to keep their feste.
in the North side of the Haull, with the Warden of the Fleet before them;
and after home to there houses. And after that in that day about four of the
clock in the after none they appeared all seven before Sir James Dyer Knight,
Sir James Dyer Knight.
Cheffe Justice of the Common place, at his Chamber in Serjaunts Inn, with the
two Cheeff Prothonotaries with them, and there the said Cheffe Justice declared
their vocation what the Law is, and rehearesed Scripture that the Law was
grounded cheeffely upon God, and that Mr. Fortescue said Quod Lex est sanctio
sancta, jubens honesta and prohibens contraria. And declared that all virtues
been contained in honestye: And he also rehearsed to them the effect of there
Writts, and of the old Oath; and also did council them not to use delays, nor
to give deceytfull council to take away any man's right by untrue vowchers, in
form doones; not to be captious one upon another, nor to mock one another;
but to be discreet, to ride with six horses and there Sumpter in long Journeys;
to wear there habit most commonly in all places at good Assemblies; and to
ride in a short Gown; to keep the common place bar; he said Melius est
modicum justo super divitias peccatorum multas, and injuste punientur; and
semen impiorum peribit; justi autem haereditabunt terram etc.

And then and their after that, In manner of moteinge in French.
the ancient Serjaunt elect they all stondinge a row before the same Lord
Chief Justice in auncyentye, did declare to him his Writ and Declaration:
And the second new Serjaunt next him did make defense thereto; and asked
heareinge of the writ: All in real actions.
And the chief Prothonotary standinge by the first of the leaft side did
read it; And that done, the said second Serjaunt did imparle, and every
other of them did so; And the second Prothonotarye to the second Serjaunt did
reed the second writ, and so the first and the second and all the rest; and
that done they had license to deperte.

And on the said twisdaye next followeing, the said Serjaunts elected in the
houses of Court, came before all the company of there said house at the
Cupborde there about eight of the Clock in the morning; and then the most
ancient of the company of that house rehearsed the manner of learning said
givinge lawde and praise to them, that they have so well used themselves,
shewinge what worshipp and profytt comethe and growethe by reason of the same;
in proffe whereof those new Serjaunts for there conning, discretion, and
wisdom, be called by the Queen's heighness and her honorable Counsel to great
promotion and dignity of the Office of a Serjaunt at the Law; and then he
givethe them lawde and praise for there good conversation, pain, and diligence
that they have taken and used in there study, presenting to them the reward of
the House; desireing them to be good and kind to the company; And then those
new Serjaunts give unto the company great thancks, and pray them likewise
to be good and kind to them; and they shall allwaye show there favor and love
to them ageine, giveinge a great lawde and praise to the manners and orders of
that House, where thoroughe they have attained to there learning and promotion:
And after that done the said new Serjaunts go together one of them takeinge
the other by the arm, and go forth toward the place where the new Serjaunts
feast shall be kept into there several Chambers there before appointed; and all
the company as they be in auncyentye follow them two and two together etc.

And then they mete all together in one chamber, and there put on their brown
blewe Gowns, and one of every there chief Clerks, do bear there skarlett Hodd
upon both his Arms, and the tail thereof upon there right shoulder, and the
Quoyff lieinge upon the myddest of that Hodd, and follow so every his
Master, and then the Warden of the Fleet with his men and Typstaves, the
Marshall of the Common place with his Cryers, the Steward and the Comptrowler
go before them into the Haull, and there in the upper end of that Haull, do sit
redye, the cheeffe Justice of England in the myddest; the cheeffe Justice of
the Common place on his left hand; and the cheeffe Baron on his right hand; and
so every other Justice on both Benches in there auncyentye; and then the eldest
old Serjaunt standinge at the right hand of the said Iusticyes, at the end
of the row by the last Justice, and the Steward and the cheeff Prothonotary by
him; and the second old Serjaunte at the other end of the row of those
Justices, the Comptrowler, and second Prothonotary by him; and so the other
old Serjaunts stand in order, some art the one end and some at the other; and
then and there Sir Christopher Wray Knight, Lord cheeffe Justice of England,
Sir James Dyer Knight, Cheeffe Justice of the Common place, Sir John Ieffrye
Knight, lately before made Cheeffe Baron of The Exchequer, Mr. Southcote
Justice, Mr. Manwood Justice, Mr. Mounson Justice, Mr. Thomas Gaudye Justice,
sittinge together in a row in auncyentye; and the said Sir Christofer Wraye in
the myddest of them, and the ancient new Serjaunt stood before him in the
myddest of his brethren over against him, about two yards from him; and all
his new Brethren in auncyenty on either side of him; and there said Clarks
next behind them; and the said Marshall and Warden of the Fleet did stand,
the one at the one end and the other at the other end of them: And then the
said Cheeffe Justice made a godly exhortation to them saying, Ambu^ late in
vocatione in qua vocati estis etc. and then exhorted them to fidelytie and
secretnesse, and then to circumspect prudence, and said Malum Consilium est
Consultori pessimum; and said that their Quoyff has two things in it;
videlicet, It is a Helmet or Sallet, that they should not fear havinge that on
to speak bowldly the Law, and est sicut vestis candida and immaculata, and
they might wear it in place of Justice before the King's presens; and there
party garment and hoodd betokens prudence and temperancye. They were the
old Collers used in this Realm in Judges in King Edward the Confessors time;
and the Taberte and Gown is close to there bodies and girte, and not open
before; that shows that they should be secret to their Clyants, not
discloseinge there Council: There two tongs and there taberts declare the, that
they should have one tongue for the poor, another for the rich; and their
rings that they give be of gold which is one of the best Mettells; the same
betokenethe there bountifullnesse; they be round, they have no end; it shows
there integrity. The Prophett sayethe, Ambula coram me and sis integer, that is,
holle and sound in there vocation; and said, Cavete de avaritia, ambitione,
necligentia, and excessu; and, discite cultum Dei, reverentiam superiori,
fortitudinem in causa Clientis, fidelitatem Clienti, and misericordiam pauperi
etc. And some Cheeffe Justice has begune sayeinge. Hortamur vos, ne gratiam
hanc in vanum recipiatis; and declared what that grace was, and said, Sepe
aures tuas spinis, and linguam nequam noli audire; ori tuo facite ostia, and
seras auribus tuis. And some other Cheffe Justice began saying, Omne datum
optimum and donum perfectum desursum est; and he expounded it etc.

And then when the said Sir Christofer Wraye had made an end of that his
said good exhortation, the said ancient new Serjaunt, first nameinge the
Cheeffe Justice of the Common place, does rehearse his writ and declaration,
and the ancient old Serjaunte does thereto make defense, and ask hearing of
the writ; and then the Cheffe Prothonotarye there redethe it formallye to the
end: And the second old Serjaunt thereto imparleth, and so after do all the
residue of the old and new Serjaunts, one after another etc. And that done,
the said ancient of the new Serjaunts knelethe down before the said Justice
of England, and so do all the other new Serjaunts in order knele down before
every of the other Justices, and every of the Justices puts on and
knyttathe (the said new Serjaunts so kneleinge) there Quoyffs, and layethe
there skarlett Hooddes about their necks a Cross behind; and the tail thereof
upon every of there right shoulders: And that done, they rise upp and make
low curtsye, and deperte in there ancyentyes, with there said Officers before
them to their Chambers ageine, and then all the said Justices go to
Westminster haull to there places, and the said new Serjaunts do put on there
party Gowns and there Hoods, and there Taberts upon that, the tail of the Hood
being pulled over the Tabart behind, and the Quoyffe on there heads, and go
soberlye a row one after other to Westminster about or before Ten of the
clock; the ancient before, and the next ancient followeinge him; and so to
the youngest; And before the said new Serjaunts go the servaunts of the
Warden of the Fleet, and of the Marshall of Common place in there lyverys; the
Marshall of the Common place and the Warden of the Fleet on his left hand, and
then the Steward and the Comptrowler on his lower hand, with there two white
staves and long Gowns of the new Serjaunts lyverys, furred with Marternes
and Chains of gold about there necks: And then next them follow the new
Serjaunts in order as aforesaid; and next after the new Serjaunts follow there
own servaunts in there lyvery; and they go first into the King's street, and so
to Westminster Church; and there kneleinge down, say there prayers to Allmighty
God; and then the come into Westminster haull, and stand severlye with there
backs to the Table before the Common place before the Judges; and then be set
in the Common place the Lord Chancelour, or Lord Keeper of the great Seal;
and many of the Privye Council, and all the Judges of both Benches: And then
the Cheeffe Justice of the Common place commands two of the old Serjaunts to
fetch the ancient new Serjaunt to the Bar; and then they go with the
Steward, Comptrowler, Marshall, and Warden of the Fleet before them; and take
the eldest of the new Serjaunts by the Arms between them; and at the Table
comeinge forthward, they three together make a low Curtsye, and so again in
the myddest of the Haull a like Curtseye; and when they come to the Bar, a
like Curtsey; and they come thorough a lane made meet and redye by the Warden
of the Fleet for them and the said Marshall and other Officers etc.

And when they be at the Bar, the said eldest new Serjaunt, so brought to
the Bar, says after this manner, scil. If it please you my Lord Dyer, I S ad
sue cy devaunte vous un breve etc. envers C D et pria que ill soit dd. And then
the Cheeffe Prothonotary shall say, Cyper Attorney; and the said new Serjaunt
shall declare upon his writ; and after declaration made, the eldest of the
old Serjaunts shall make defense, and pray hereinge of the writ; and the
said Prothonotarye shall reed it, and the second old Serjaunt shall imparle;
and then the said eldest Serjaunt, settethe the said new ancient Serjaunt,
at the North end of that Bar, and then and there, after he that deals the
rings for the said ancient new Serjaunt shall rise upp, as he settethe
amongst the Officers of the Common place, and shall stand upon the myddest of
the board of the Common place, and there make a low Curtsey; and then he shall
come and stepp before the Benche between the two Prothonotaryes, and there he
shall kneel down before the Lord Chauncelor, and say that the Cheeffe of
the new Serjaunts does commend him unto his Lordshipp, and sendethe him a
token of his Creation, and kiss the Ring and deliverethe it to him; and in
like manner he shall deliver a Ring to the Lord Treasurer; and after to the
Lord Privye Seal; and another to the Cheeffe Justice of the Kings Benche; and
another to the Cheeffe Justice of the Common place; and so forth to the other
Justices and Prothonotaryes, and other Officers of the place. And in that time
shall the second and third of the Eldest of the said old Serjaunts, fetch
the second of the said new Serjaunts, and demean themselves as the first
did; and the second Prothonotary shall say, Ci per Attorney, and read the
writ: And then he that shall deal Rings for the second new Serjaunt, The
second shall be set at the southe end of the Bar and sic alternatim.
shall demean himself as the first dealer did: And after the like manner
shall the residue of the eldest and new Serjaunts; and there dealers demean
themselves as the first did. And then when all is done, Then the eldest of the
old Serjaunts shall put a short Case material to the Cheeffe Justice of the
Common plees; and he may if he have time say his mind to it, or else say
that he will hear it the next day: And then when all that is done, then the
Lord Chaunceler doethe give them thancks for there Rings and Commendation, and
then the Lord Chauncelour etc. and the old Serjaunts etc. go homewarde to the
Feste; and after them go the new Serjaunts with there Officers and Servants, as
they came forth. And when these new Serjaunts come home they go to there
Chambers and put of that habitte, and put on there brown, blewe, and skarlett
hoodes over both there shoulders behind about there necks, and there Quoyffs
on; and then the said new Serjaunts did stand a row, one two yeards from
another, there backs against the north Table in the Haull: And then all the
Pryvye Council and Judges etc. do wash and set down; all the Privye Council
and Lords at the upper Table; the Mayor of London and his Brethren at the
Southe heighe table; all the Judges, Master of the Rolls, Barons of
The Exchequer, and the old Serjaunts, and the Queen's Attorney and Soliciter, at
a long Table in the myddest of the Haull; and the new Serjaunts at the said
North Table one two yeards from another: And then the heyghe table was served
by the Steward, (...)every Course.
and Comptrowler, Marshall, and Warden of the Fleet; and the young gentlemen
of that Myddle Temple: and then next the Mayer etc. was served; and after them
the Judges; and after the new Serjaunts, every one of them a hole mess of
meat: and after, the residue of the Tables. And every of the new Serjaunts
had there wives and friends dyned in there Chambers in that Temple; and then they
were served: And everye of the new Serjaunts had a Carver, Cuppbearer and
Sewer to him of the gentlemen of the House that he came from, standeinge before
him, and so they dyne with sober counteynaunces and little communication. And
after that before the second Course doethe come in they arise, and there
Steward, Comptrowler Marshall and Warden of the Fleet go and salute all there
Gests at all there Tables in the Haull in order; and then set down ageine.
And then comethe in the second Course. And after Dynner they stand upp ageine
against that Table in the like order as they did before Dynner: And after that,
all there Gests do wasshe and rise and do come by the said new Serjaunts, and
do give them thancks for there Dynner: And the said new Serjaunts make due
Curtsey giveinge thancks to them for there pains: And the Gests deperte to the
Houses, and the new Serjaunts to there Chambers etc.

And then the new Serjaunts put off that habyte, and put on there vyolett
Gowns, and there skarlett Hoodes about there necks, as they were before, and
there Quoyffs on* And then they go in a sober manner, with all there Officers
before them, and there Servants to London, on the East side of Cheapeside to St.
Thomas of Acres Chapel; and there kneel and pray, and give there Almise: And
then come down on the West side of Cheap side to Powles; and there at the
Steps in the Chauncell, they kneel and pray and give Almise: And then they
go down to the body of the Church; and there every two of the old Serjaunts
in there Auncyentye, bring them to there Pillars; videlicet the ancient new
Serjaunt to the uppermost Pillar in the North Isle, on the right hand thereof
there: And the secound new Serjaunt at the other pillar there, over against the
other in the I Will; and so the other new Serjaunts at the next other Pillars
downewarde in that I Will: And they stand A Pater noster wheyle there, and then
they come all in order to there Chambers again, and go to Supper etc. And then
afterward in that Term or next, or second Term after, the Cheeffe Justice
of the Common place do draw them a hole pleadeinge, and a Case to argue there
etc.

The names of there heighe Steward was Sir Thomas Barryngeton Knight; And Sir
Henry Cocks Knight was there Comptrowler; Mr. Billesbye was the Marshall; and
Mr. Aunseley was the Warden of the Fleet.

First to the Queen's heighnes a Ringe of vi l. xiii s. iiii d. Ordinarye Rings.
for them all in Common. Lex Regis praesidium, were the words in the Ring.

Item the Lord Keeper of the great Seal, a Ringe of xviii s. of every new
Serjaunt.

Item the Lord Tresurer a like Ringe of everye new Serjaunt.

Item the Lord Steward a like Ringe of everye of them.

Item the Lord Privye Seal the like.

Item the Lord great Chamberlayne a like Ringe of everye of them.

Item the Lord great Master likewise.

Item the Lord Chamberlayne of the Queen's Householde a like Ringe of everye of
them.

Item the Lord Cheeffe Justices like Rings of everye of them.

Item the Lord Cheeffe Baron, a Ringe of xvi s. of everye of them.

Item the Cheeffe Steward of that feast, a Ringe of xx s. of them all in
Common.

Item the Comptrowler, one like Ringe of them all in Common.

Item the Marshall, one Ringe of xii s. of them all in Common.

Item to the Warden of the Fleet, one like Ringe of them all in Common.

Item the Master of Rolls, a Ringe of xvi s. of everye of them.

Item to everye other Justice of both Benches a like Ringe of everye of them.

Item to the two Cheeffe Secretaries, like Rings of everye of them.

Item to everye of the old three Serjaunts, of everye of those new Serjaunts,
a Ringe of xii s.

Item to the Queen's Attorney a Ringe of xii s. of everye of them.

Item to the Queen's Solycyter one Ringe of like valewe of everye of them.

Item to two Clerks of the Crown, everye of them one Ringe of v s. of everye
of them.

Item to the three Barons of The Exchequer, everye of them one Ringe of everye
Serjaunt of x s. a piece.

Item to the three Prothonotaries of the Common place of everye of them one
Ringe, price v s: a piece.

Item to the Clarke of the Warrants, one like Ringe of everye of them.

Item to the Cirographer one like Ringe of everye of them.

Item to the Prothonotarye of the Kings Benche, of everye of them one Ringe,
price v s.

Item to the xv. Filacers and Exegenters to everye of them a Ringe of ii s. vi
d. the piece of everye of them.

Item to the Clarke of the Council, of everye of them a Ringe of the like
valewe.

Item to the Custos Brevium of everye of them one Ringe of the like value.

Item to as many Attorneys as they will, Rings.

Item many Rings to other several friends.

The Common liveryes geven by those new Serjaunts.
First to there heighe Steward four yeards of x s. The must color was on the
right side, and the morrey color was on the left side of all those garments.
the yearde xl s. Item to his four servants, vi. yeards, at vi s. the yearde
xxxvi s. Item to the Comptrowler iiii. yeards, at x s. the yearde xl s. Item to
four of his servants, vi. yeards, at vi s. the yearde xxxvi s. Item to the
Cheeffe Marshall iiii. yeards, at x s. the yearde xl s. Item to the Warden of
the Fleet, iiii. yeards at x s. the yearde xl s. Item to his viii. servants,
xii. yeards, at vi s. the yearde iii l. xii s. Item to the Marshall of the
Exchequer, iii. yeardes, at viii s. the yearde xxiiii s. Item to the Marshall
of the Common place iii. yeards, at vi s. the yearde xviii s. Item to the Lord
Cheeffe Justice of the Kings Benche iiii. servants, vi. yeards, at vi s. the
yearde xxxvi s. Item to the Lord Cheeffe Justice of the Common place, four
servants, vi. yeards, at vi s. the yearde xxxvi s. Item to the Lord Cheeffe
Baron of the Exchequer iiii. servants xxxvi s. Item to everye Justice of everye
Benche three servants, iiii. yeards and a half, at vi s. the yearde xxvii s.
Item to everye old Serjaunts two servants, iii. yeards, at vi shillings the
yearde xviii s. Item to iiii. Ushers of The'exchequer, xii. yeards at vi s. the
yearde iii l. xii s. Item to one of the Tenn Porters, one yearde and dim. the
yearde ix s. Item to the Keeper of Serjaunts Inn in Chancery Lane, two yeards,
at vi s. the yearde xii s. Item to the Bokebearer of the Common place, one
yearde and dim. at vi s. the yearde ix s. Item to the six Butlers, xviii.
yeards, at vi s. the yearde v l. viii s. Item to the four Cryers of the Common
place, ix. yeards, at vi s. the yearde Liiii s. Item to the Marshall of the
Kings Benche, iii. yeards, at vi s. the yearde xviii s. Item to the Crier of
the Chancery, iii. yeards at vi s. the yearde xviii s. Item to the Porter of
the Chancery, one yearde and dimidium, at vi s. the yearde ix s. Item to the
Crier of the Kings Benche, iii. yeards at vi s. the yearde xviii. Item to the
Porter of the Kings Benche, one yearde and. an half, at vi s. the yearde ix s.
Item to the Dresser of the Common place, one yard and an half ix s. Item to
the Porter of the Common place, 3. yeards, vi s. the yearde xviii s. Item to
the Steward and Buttlers of the Myddle Temple, xii. yeards, vi s. the yearde
iii l. xii s. Item to the Steward and Butlers of the Inner Temple, xii. yeards,
at vi s. the yearde iii l. xii s. Item to the Steward and Butlers of Lincolnes
Inn, xii. yeards, at vi s. the yearde iii l. xii s. Item to the Steward and
Butlers of Grayes Inn, xii. yeards, at vi s. the yearde iii l. xii s. Item to
the Clarke of the Kitchen, and his two men, vi. yeards, at vi s. the yearde
xxxvi s. Item to three Porters, iii. yeards and dim. at vi s. the yearde xxvii
s. Item to the Cheeffe Porter, iii. yeards, at vi s. the yearde xviii s. Item
to the Keeper of Serjaunts Inn in Fleetestreet, iii. yeards, at vi s. the
yearde xviii s. Item to the Tailor iii. yeards, at vi s. the yearde xviii s.
Item to the Cook and his iii. servants, vii. yeards and dim. at vi s. the
yearde xlv s. Item to the Keeper of the Records of the Common place, one yearde
and dim. at vi s. the yearde ix s. Item to another of the Tenn Porters one
yearde and dimidium, at vi. shillings the yearde ix s.
Item every of those new Serjaunts, had eight servaunts in there liveryes.

Whereof everye Serjaunt pays for his part.

And the diet of the feast appears in the book of there Clarke of the
Kitchen. Et termi^^ Sa^cti Hillarii ta^c proximo sequeat^, Magister Franciscus
Roods de Grayes Jane, and Mr. Johannes Popham del' Myddle Temple suerunt facti
Serjauntes a le Loy and non dedere aurum, scil. xxviii. die Ianuarii.


Cap. XLVII.
Sergeants Feasts.
TOuching these, I shall here exhibit what I have found amongst our
Historians, or otherwise, whereby the ancient grandeur of them may be the
better discerned.

In Stow's Survey of London p. 426.
Ely House, for the large and commodious rooms thereof (says John Stow)
diverse great and solemn Feasts have been kept, especially by the Sergeants at
the Law, whereof twain are to be noted for posterity: The first in the year
1464. Anno 1464. 4 E. 4.
4 Edw. 4ti. in Michaelmass Term, the Sergeants at Law held their Feast in
this House; to the which, amongst other Estates Matthew Philip Mayor of London,
with the Aldermen, Shireeves, and Commons of diverse Crafts being invited, did
repair: but when the Mayor looked to keep the state in the Hall, as it had
been used in all places within the City and Liberties (out of the King's
presence) the Lord Gray of Ruthin, then Lord Tresurer of England, unwitting the
Sergeants, and against their Wills (as they said) was first placed. Whereupon
the Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons departed home; and the Mayor made the Aldermen
to dine with him: Howbeit he, and all the Citizens were wonderfully displeased
that he was so dealt with; and the new Sergeants and others were right sorry
therefore; and had rather than much good (as they said) it had not so happened.

In the 10th. Holinsh. Chron. in an. 1495. p. 779.
of Henry 7th. on the xvith. of November, the Sergeants Feast was also held at
Ely House; where dined the King, Queen, and all the Chief Lords of England; the
new Sergeants names being Mr. Mordant, Higham, Kingsmill, Sergeants Feasts.
Conisbye, Butler, Yakesley, Frowick, Oxenbridg, and Constable.

In the 19th. Holi^gsh. Chron. in an. 1504. p. 504.
of Henry 7th. 19 Nov. the Sergeants Feast was holden within the Palace of the
Archbishop of Canterbury at Lambeth; where dined the King and all his Nobles:
and upon the same day Thomas Granger, newly chosen Shireeve of London, was
presented before the Barons of the King's Exchequer, there to take his Oath;
and after went with the Mayor unto the same Feast, which saved him money in his
purse: for if that day the Feast had not been kept, he must have feasted the
Mayor, Aldermen, and other Worshipful of the City. This Feast was kept at the
chardge of ten learned men; Robert Brudnell, William Grevill, Thomas Marrow,
George Edgore, John Moore, John Cutler, Thomas Eliot, Jews Pollard, Guy
Palmis, and William Fairfax.

In the 23th: of King Henry 8th. the Sergeants Feast was kept in Ely House;
Stow's Survey of London p. 426.
the Sergeants then made being in number eleven; scil. Thomas Audeley, Walter
Luke, I. Baldwin, I. Hind, Christopher Ienny, John Dowsell, Edward Mervine,
Edward Knightley, Roger Chomley, Edward Mountague and Robert York. These also
held their Feast here for five days; viz. Friday the 10th. of November,
Saturday, Sunday, Monday, and Tuesday.

On Monday, which was their principal day King Henry and Queen Catherine dined
there (but in two Chambers) and the foreign Ambassadors in a third Chamber.

In the Hall, at the high Table sat Sir Nicholas Lambard Mayor of London; the
Judges; the Barons of the Exchequer, with certain Aldermen of the City.

At the board on the South side fate the Master of the Rolls, the Masters of
the Chancery, and Worshipful Citizens: On the North side of the Hall certain
Aldermen began the Board; and then followed Merchants of the City. In the
Cloystry, Chapel and Gallery, Knights, Esquiers, and Gentlemen were placed.

In the Halls, the Crafts of London: The Sergeants at Law, and their Wives kept
in their own Chambers.

It were redious to set down the preparation of Fish, Flesh, and other
Victuals spent in this Feast, Cap. 47.
and would seem almost incredible; and (as to me it seems) wanted little of a
Feast at a Coronation: Nevertheless a little I will touch, for declaration of
the change of prices.

There were brought to the slaughter House twenty four great Beefes at 01l.
06s. 08d. the piece. From the Shambles one Carcass of an Ox at 01 04 00. One
hundred fat Muttons at 00 02 10 a piece. Fifty one great Veales at 00 04 08 a
piece. Thirty four Porkes 00 03 03 a piece. Ninety one Piggs 00 00 06 a piece.
Capon of Greece, of one Poulter (for they had 3.) ten dozen at 00 01 08 the
piece. Capons of Kent nine dozen and six, at 00 01 00 a piece. Cocks of gross
seven dozen and nine, at 00 00 08 a piece. Cocks course xiiii. dozen at 8d.
and three pence a piece -- Pullers the best 00 00 02 0b. Other Pullets 00 00 02
Pigeons 37 dozens, at 00 00 10 the dozen. Swans xiiii. dozen. Larkes 340.
dozen at 5d. the dozen. Edward Nevill was Senescall or Steward, Thomas
Ratcliffe Controller, Thomas Wilden Clerk of the Kitchen.

In 32d. of Henry the 8th. (...) Chron. in an. ^540. p. 241.
on St. Peter's Even, the the Sergeants Feast was kept at St. John's, with all
plenty of Victual; at which Feast were made ten Sergeants; three out of Gray's
Inn, three out of Lincolnes Inn; and of every of the Temples two. At which
Feast were present all the Lords and Commons of the Parliament, besides the
Mayor and Aldermen, and a great number of the Commons of the City of London.

Cap. XLVIII.
The ordering of the Sergeants Feast, Ex cod. MS. penes Eliam Ashmole arm. an.
1662.
with other things depending thereon, as it was managed the 16th. of October,
Anno Domini 1555. 2 and 3 Ph. and M.
I. Prideaux, The names of the Sergeants, at this Call, were;
of the Inner Temple. of the Middle Temple.
Francis Morgan, Robert Catlyn, Anthony Brown,
of Lincoln's Inn.
Will. Rastall, Will. Benlowes,
John Walpole, of Gray's Inn.
THese Sergeants at Law so elected, after the receipt of their several Writts,
assembled together, and concluded that their Feast should be kept in the Inner
Temple Hall; and thereupon they made choice of all manner of Officers for the
same, according to ancient custom.

Cap. 48.
Inprimis Mr. Albany, The Sergeants Feast in an. 1555.
a Draper in Watlingstreet, was appointed to furnish them with Cloth, viz.
Every Sergeant for his Robe, of Scarlet 5 yards and a half -- at 33s. 04d. a
yard. Of Violet in grayn, for a like Robe, 5 yards and an half -- at 16 00 a
yard. Of Brown blew, for a like Robe, 5 yards and an half -- at 14 00 a yard.
Of Mustard and Murrey, for a like Robe, 5 yards and half -- at 10 00 a yard.
And of the same several colored Cloths for Taberts every of them had 3. yards.
-- Every Sergeant had also eight Liveryes for 8 Servants, of Mustard and Murrey
Cloth, to each livery 1 yard and an half being allowed.

Cloth for the Liveryes of Common persons.
TO three of the two Chief Justices servants, every livery containing one yard
and an half at 10s. a yard.

To three of the six Judges servants 27 yards.

To three of the Lord Chief Barons servants the like proportion, viz. 1 yard
and an half to each:

The like Liveryes to two of the four antientest Sergeants servants.

To the Warden of the Fleet, for his Gown and Livery, 3 yards of the same price.

To the same Warden for six more of his Servants, to each 1 yard and a half.

To the Marshall of the King's Bench, for a Gown, 3 yards.

Liveries allowed to six of his servants, to each 1 yard and a half.

Liveries to the 4. Cryers in the Courts of King's Bench, Common Pleas,
Chancery, and Exchequer; viz. to each 3 yards.

Likewise to the 4 Ushers of the same Courts, each 3 yards.

To the 2 Porters in the Courts of Chancery, 1 in the King's Bench, and one in
the Common Pleas; viz. to each 3 yards.

To the Keeper of the Starr Chamber, 1 yard and half.

To the Keeper of the Tresury Records in the Court of Common Pleas, 1 yard and
half.

To the Chafe. wax, one yard and a half.

To the Keeper of Sergeants Inn in Fleetstreet, 2 yards and a half.

To the Keeper of Sergeants Inn in Chancery lane, 2 yards and an half.

To the Steward and 3 Butlers of the Inner Temple -- 12 yards.

To the Steward and Butlers of the Middle Temple -- 12 yards.

To the like Officers of Lincoln's Inn -- 12 yards.

To the like Officers of Grays Inn -- 12 yards.

Livery to the Chief of the grand Feast -- 4 yards.

To his 4 servants, each 1 yard and half -- 6 yards.

To the Comptroller of the Feast -- 4 yards.

To his 4 servants, each 1 yard and half -- 6 yards.

To the Clerk of the Kitchen and his 2. servants -- 6 yards.

To the Master Butler and his servants -- 18 yards.

To the Master Cook and his two servants -- 6 yards.

To the Master Porter for his attendance -- 3 yards.

To ten other inferior Porters 15 yards.

To the Tailor for his attendance 3 yards.

The rate of all this Cloth, thus allowed to these Common persons, being x s.
the yard.

So that the total chardge to every Sergeant amounted in Cloth to 33 yards and
the seventh part of a yard.

To total of all the Cloth being 231. yards and an half.

These Sergeants made choice of one Nicholas Deering, Goldsmith, to make their
Rings of Gold, who was allowed for the fashion of those Rings, which were given
to the King and Queen; viz. for each Ring xxd. And for the fashion of every
other Ring xiid.

It was also agreed, that all the Rings of x^. in gold, and above, should be
made with Swaies; and all under that value, their fashion to be plain. Likewise
that every Ring of gold of xx^. value, should contain in gold weight 18^. two
shillings being allowed for the fashion of every such Ring. And that every Ring
of xvi. in gold, to weigh 14^. and two shillings to be allowed for the fashion.
Likewise that every Ring of vi^. viiid. in gold, to bear his own making. And
every Ring of v^. iiiid. in gold, to have allowed 6d. for fashion, and no more.
And every Ring of 4^. in gold, to bear his full weight in gold, besides the
fashion. And lastly that all the said several gold Rings should be of one
value, and contain one weight secundum ratum, as before; and that every Ring do
contain one value, without diminution, in form severally before agreed on.

Note, that each Sergeant disbursed and delivered to the Goldsmith, toward the
provision of Rings, viz. in half Sovereignes, the weightiest that could be
gotten, xxl.

The Rings given to the King and Queen, were made of the finest Angel gold,
every Ring being in value, besides fashion, -- iii1. vis. viiid.

Ordinary Rings of gold, wherewith every Sergeant was chardged.
to each a Ring of xxs.
TO the Lord Chancellor of England a Ring of xxs. The Lord Steward, The Lord
Tresurer of England, The Lord Privy Seal, The Lord great Chamberlain of
England, The Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, The Chief Justice of the Common
Pleas, The Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer,
To every the Justices of both Benches, in number six, a Ring, each weighing
xvi. in toto 4l. 16s. 00. To the Master of the Rolls a Ring of the like value.
To the three Barons of the Exchequer, each a Ring of 14s. To four of the
antientest Sergeants, each a Ring of 6s. 8d. To the King's Attorney general, a
Ring of 6 8. To the King's Solicitor general, a Ring of 6 8. To the Clerk of
the Council, a Ring of 4 0. To the two Clerks of the Crown, to each a Ring of
4 8. To the Custos Brevium of the Common Pleas, a Ring of 4 0. To the Clerk of
the Warrants there, the like 4 0. To the Chirographer, and the three
Prothonotaries there, each of them a Ring of 5 0. To the xvi Filizers, and
Exigenters of the Court of Common Pleas, each of them a Ring of 2 6. Every
Sergeants chardge in ordinary Rings 20l. 04s. 00d. All the Sergeants chardges
in ordinary Rings 141 08 00. Other Rings of gold wherewith each Sergeant is
chardgable. To the King, one in value 03l. 06s. 08d. To the Queen, the like 03
06 08. To the Warden of the Fleet, one in value 11 00. To the Master Marshall,
the like 11 00. To the Steward of the Feast, one in value 20 00. To the
Comptrowler of the Feast, the like 20 00.

Note, that every Sergeant made choice of the Benchers of that House, whereof
he was a member, to see the disposing of the Rings, in a decent manner, unto
the persons beforementioned. And also of a like Bencher to be his Patron, for
the continuance of the Feasting.

Officers appointed to give their attendance, during the time of the Feast, and
ceremony thereof.
Mr. John Cook of the Inner Temple, Steward.

Mr. Guy Wade, of the same House, Comptroller.

To these two it appertained to make provision, for Tables, Forms, and Stools
convenient; with Carpenters, and others, to be in readiness, to carry, remove,
and recarry the same to and fro the Hall and Chambers, appointed for the repair
of every Sergeant unto, at pleasure.

To the said Steward and Comptroller it also appertained to provide to be
decently furnished diverse private Chambers, for every the said Sergeants to
resort unto, during their abode there, the time of the Feast: as also in their
absence to entertain within them, Guests invited to dine therein privately; as
also convenient rooms for the Clerk of the Kitchen, and the Master Cook.

Two gentlemen of the House there were also appointed for inferior Stewards, to
attend the Tables where the Lords dined; and two gentlemen more were to be
Carvers, and other two Cupbearers to the Lords.

Also two gentlemen of this House were appointed to be Sewers, to attend the
Body of the Hall.

The Steward and Comptroller beforementioned, in the morning that the new
elected Sergeants had taken their coifes, and ended Breakfast in the Hall, went
before them, bearing White staves, till they came without the Temple gate into
Fleetstreet: which done they made their return into the Inner Temple, to manage
things decent and convenient in the Hall, for the Feast.

The Sergeants being returned from Westminster Hall to the Inner Temple, and
the Judges and great men being assembled to participate of the Feast, the said
Steward and Comptroller went before the first course, to the Lords Table. Which
being performed, and the Lords placed, they kept order in the Hall till Dinner
ended.

After the Feast, and Tables voided, the said Officers went before the new
elected Sergeants from the Temple Hall, attending upon them thence, with white
staves, bareheaded, through Fleetstreet, with many others accompanying them
unto St. Thomas of Acres in London, and thence to the Cathedral Church of St.
Paul; and after some accustomed Ceremonies performed in both places, they
returned unto Sergeants Inn in Fleetstreet, where they received thanks of the
said Sergeants, and either of them a Ring of Gold: and so with Congees and
reverence on both parties, departed and were dismissed.

There came from every Inn of Court eight of the chiefest gentlemen Students
there, to be Servitors in the Hall, during the Feast.

Also to every several Sergeant was allowed from the Inn of Court, whereof he
was a fellow, three gentlemen of his choosing; the one to attend him at the
Table for Sewer, another for Carver, and the third for his Cupbearer.

The Lords of the Council, and Peers; the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of London,
the Judges, the old Sergeants; the King's Attorney, and Solicitor general; the
Chancellor of the Exchequer; the Kings Attorney of the Court of Wards and
Duchy, Sir Edw. Mountagu and Sir Roger Cholmley, were all of them invited to
the Feast, by the Steward and Comptroller, whose office it was to invite
persons of state.

Also the new elected Sergeants sat all Dinner time, on the Bench side,
distinct one from another a good space; and had their Table on the worthiest
side of the Hall, and every one a whole mess, served out in Lordly state.

The Lords of the Council first served in the Hall.

The Lord Mayor and Aldermen next to the Lords, whose Table was on the other
side of the Hall, with one full mess of meat.

Then the two Chief Justices served with one full mess, who sat at a middle
Table; the end of which Table was equal with the upper end of the Lord Mayors
Table, and the upper end of the new Sergeants Table.

Then was the auntientest Sergeant served with one mess.

Then the Aldermen of London.

Then the residue of the Judges.

Then the Sergeants new elect, in their degrees of auntienty. And lastly other
Tables furnished with guests of inferior quality.

The beforementioned Tables fully served, then was meat great plenty carried
from the Dresser, to feast the Guests that dined in the private Chambers
appointed for the new elected Sergeants.

The Sergeants made choice of one Wilcocks, for their Cook, whose office it was
to furnish the Kitchen, with Potts, Panns, Spits, Racks, Chafers, and other
like necessaries.

They also elected one Randle Kenaldone, the Lord Mayors Butler, to be their
Butler for the Feast; who furnished the same with all kind of Napery and Plate;
but none for private Chambers at all; every Sergeant providing for the private.

They also appointed to be Clerk of the Kitchen, one Christopher Bernard, the
Steward of Grays Inn, under whose chardge and oversight were all Kitchen
provisions, except Red Deer, and the like, which was sent in by every Sergeant
a portion, for the better furnishing of the Feast, as after appears.

All the new Sergeants named the Chief Master Porter: and besides, every
Sergeant, by himself nominated one other Porter: and all the Sergeants
consented to the choice of the said Clerk of the Kitchen, to appoint three
Porters more.

The said new Sergeants agreed to have four and four Mess of meat, to be
bountifully furnished for the Feast, as follows.

A proportion for two Mess of meat for the Table, prepared for the Lords of the
King and Queens Privy Council, and certain Spanish Lords and Gentlemen, that
came with them to the Feast.
A Standing Dish of Wax, (...)
representing the Court of Common Pleas, artificially made, the chardge thereof
04l. 00 00. A shield of Brawn for either Mess -- Boiled Capons in White-broth,
two at a Mess 00 05 00. Swans roasted two, each Mess one 01 00 00. Bustards two,
for each Mess one 01 00 00. Chewet Pies eight, to each Mess four -- Pikes four,
to each Mess two 00 10 00. Capons roasted four, to each Mess two 00 10 00.
Venison baked four large Pasties, every Mess two -- Hern and Bittern four, each
Mess two 00 16 00. Pheasants roasted four, to each Mess two 00 16 00. Custards
two -- A standing Dish of Wax, (...)
to each Mess one 04 00 00. Iellyes planted, two dozen -- Cranes two, for each
Mess one 01 00 00. Partridges twelve, for each Mess six 00 16 00. Read Deer
four Pasties, to each Mess two 00 16 00: Certain large Ioules of Sturgeon, to
each Mess one -- l. s. d. In VVoodcocks and Plovers, twelve each Mess 00 06 08.
Quince-Pies baked eight, for each Mess four Rabbet Suckers twelve, each Mess
six 00 04 00. Snipes roasted twelve, to each Mess six 00 03 04. Larkes three
dozen, to each Mess a dozen and a half 00 02 00. March-panes two, for each Mess
one 00 06 08. The proportion for thirty and six Mess of meat, for other Tables
in the Hall.
BRawn one Rand, First Course.
for every Mess of meat -- Boiled Capons in Whitebroth, one to a Mess, price
xviiid. 02 14 00. Swans roasted xxxvi. to each Mess one 18 00 00. Chewet Pies
Lxxii. not rated Pikes for xxxvi. Mess, one at a Mess 03 12 00. Capons roasted,
the like number, at every Mess one 04 10 00. Venison baked, the like number of
Pasties, one at a Mess Herns or Bitterns xxxvi. 06 00 00. Phesants the like
number, every Mess one 07 04 00. Custards the like number, every Mess one,
unrated -- Ielly planted xviii. dozen Second Course.
Partridges xii. dozen 09 12 00. Red Deer xxxvi. Pasties, not rated -- Sturgeon
for like number of Messes, unrated -- Woodcock, Plover, and Teal, ix. dozen at
03 12 00. Quince Pies baked xxxvi. -- Rabbet Suckers ix. dozen, to each Mess
two 01 10 00. Snipes xviii. dozen, three to a Mess 03 00 00. Larkes xxxvi.
dozen, each Mess a dozen -- March-panes xxxvi. rated at 06 00 00.

Memorandum, that the Sergeants private guests that dined in their several
Chambers within the House, were served with like proportion of Dishes as is
lastly before at both courses mentioned.

A proportion of Diet, for six Mess of meat, furnished for inferior Tables at
the lower end of the Hall.
BRawn six Mess, First Course
not rated Capons boiled in VVhite-broth six, one in a Mess 00 09 00. Swans
roasted six, one at every Mess 03 00 00. Chewet Pies xii. every Mess two Pike
six, at every Mess one 00 12 00. Venison, six Pasties, to each Mess one Capons
roasted six, one to a Mess 00 15 00. Custards six, not rated Iellyes three dozen
Second Course.
Mallard, Teal, or Pidgeon, six Mess 00 04 00. Sturgeon six Mess Quince Pies
baked six, each Mess one Larks six dozen, each Mess one dozen 00 04 00. Tarts
parted, six, to every Mess one Livery meat.
l. s. d. CApon, or Cony, boiled, twelve 00 18 00. Veal roasted xx. Mess Conyes
^osted vi. dozen 01 12 00. Venison baked xl. Pasties The Lord Mayor and
Aldermen presented, in reward, to the new Sergeants, the sum of 13l. 06s. 08d.
Cates sent in by the new Sergeants, for the better furnishing of the Feast, as
follows.
INprimis one Red Deer, (...)
baked into Seventeen cold Pasties, at xviii. Swans xvii. at ten shillings a
piece 08 10 00. One Crane, rated at 00 10 00. Pea-Chickens two, priced at 4s. a
piece 00 08 00. A Brawn, rated at the price of 02 00 00. Four fat Does, not
priced Summa 12 06 00. Cates sent in by Mr. Catline.
NIne Swans, each at 10s. 04 10 00. Pheasants three, at 4s. a piece 00 12 00.
Pigeons ix. dozen and a half, at xviiid. a dozen 00 14 03. Capons seven, at
2s. -- 6d. 00 17 06. Pea-Chickens 4. at ii.^ 00 08 00. Red Deer, rated at 00 10
00. Does fat, five, not valued Claret Wine one Hogshead, at 01 17 06. Quinces
Lx. 00 03 00. Summa 09 12 03. Cates sent in by Mr. Rastall.
INprimis three Does Fresh Sturgeon half a Barrel 01 05 00. Claret Wine half a
Tun 03 15 00. Summa 05 00 00. Cates sent in by Mr. Benlowes.
DOes two, not priced Capons 2. rated at 2s. -- 6d. 00 05 00. Cates sent in by
Mr. Brown.
ONe Hind, rated at 00 10 00. Fat Does, four, unrated Cranes three, at 10s. a
piece 01 10 00. Pikes two, at 3s. a piece 00 06 00. Capons four, at 2s. -- 6d.
00 10 00. l. s. d. Partridges xxii. at 16d. a piece 01 09 04. Plovers xvi. at
6d. a piece 00 08 00. Larkes xv. dozen, at viiid. the dozen 00 10 00. Summa 05
03 04. Cates sent in by Mr. Walpole.
ONe Hind and a half, rated at 01 10 00. Does three, not rated Woodcocks three
dozen, at 7s. -- 8d. a dozen 01 03 00. Partridges two dozen, at xvid. a piece
01 12 00. Bastard Plovers five, at 6d. a piece 00 02 06. Larkes 4. dozen, at
8d. the dozen 00 02 08. Crane one 00 10 00. Turkies 2. rated at 4s. a piece 00
08 00. Swans 24. at xs. a piece 12 00 00. The sum 17 08 02. Cates sent in by
Mr. Prideaux, beforenamed, for himself alone.
DOes four, unrated One Swan 00 10 00. Bustard one 00 10 00. Capons x. rated at
2s. -- 6d. a piece 01 05 00. Sum 02 05 00. Cates more, sent in at the joint
chardge of Mr. Morgan and Mr. Catlyn.
DOes two, unrated Turky-Chicks 4. rated at iiiis. a piece 00 16 00. Woodcocks
5. rated at 8d. a piece 00 03 04. Capons two, at 2s. -- 6d. a piece 00 05 00.
Curlews three, at xxd. a piece 00 05 00. Godwits xii. rated at 2s. -- 6d. a
piece 01 10 00. Knotts xxvi. at 1s. a piece 01 06 00. Plovers xii. at 6d. a
piece 00 06 00. Larkes 6. Dozen, at viiid. a dozen 00 04 00. Snipes xlvi. at
iis. a dozen 00 07 08. Plovers ix. at 6d. a piece 00 04 06. Teals five, at 3d.
a piece 00 01 03. Conyes two dozen, at 4s. a dozen 00 08 00. Summa 05 16 09.
Every Serjeant's part in money, for Cates 36l. 19s. 03d. ob. q. The whole
chardge of Cates sent in by the Sergeants and their friends, amounted in toto
258l. 14s. 11d. The Rewards and Wages given and paid unto Officers, generally
born and allowed by all the new Sergeants.
l. s. d. TO the Children of Paul's, in reward 01 06 08. To the Keepers of St.
Thomas of Acres, in reward 00 00 08. To the Keepers of the Doors in Paul's
Church 00 02 00. To the Clerk of the Kitchen, for wages and in reward 06 13 04.
To the Butlers, for hire of plate, napery, and wages 06 13 04. To the Cooks,
for provision in the Kitchen, and their wages 13 06 08. Summa 28 02 08. In
which every Sergeant bore for his part 04l. 04s. d. q. Every Sergeant in Robes
and Liveries 35l. 15s. 05d. q. Every Sergeant in Rings ordinary 21 12 01 ob.
Every Sergeant in Cates, Wages and Rewards 40 19 07 q. Summa 98 07 02 So that
the whole chardge amounts unto in Robes and Liveries 257 08 00. In Rings
ordinary 151 04 08. In Cates, Rewards, Wages etc. 258 14 11. The total 667 07
07.

Cap. XLIX.
The Writ of Summons.
THe Tenor of the Writ of Summons issued out to them from the Lord Chancellor,
runs thus;

Rex etc. N N. salutem: Quia de advisamento Consilii nostri ordinavimus vos ad
statum, and gradum Servientis ad Legem... die mensis... proximo futuro,
suscepturos: Vobis mandamus, firmiter injungentes; quod vos ad statum and
gradum praedictum, ad diem and locum, in forma praedicta suscipiendum,
ordinetis and praeparetis: and hoc, sub poena mill librarum nullatenus
omittatis. Test etc. But it is observed, Cokes Reports Vol. 10. in pro^emio.
that this Writ is not in the printed Register as Writs of Summons to
Parliament to those who are thereupon Barons; because they are ex gratia Regis,
whereas those in the Register are originally de jure Legis.

The Poesies to the Rings they give, are usually thus, or to this purpose;

Plebs sine lege ruit.
Robur Legis, decor Regis.
Qu^ servit Legi, servit Regi.
Cap. L.
Their Robes.
THe beforementioned Lord Chief Justice Fortescu, in his Book Cap. 51. f. 123.
a.
de Legum Angliae laudibus, says, that a Sergeant at Law is Clothed in a long
Priestlike Robe, with a Cape about his Shoulders, furred with Lambskin; and
thereupon an Hood, with two Labells, such as Doctors of the Laws use to wear in
certain Universities, with a white Coif of silk.

The Robes they now use, do still somewhat resemble those of the Justices of
either Bench, and are of three distinct colors; viz. Murrey; Black, furred
with white, and Scarlet: but the Robe which they usually wear at their Creation
only, is of two Colors; viz. Murrey, and Mouse-colour; whereunto they have a
Hood suitable; as also a Coif of white silk, or linen.

I am of opinion, that the form of the Robe, and color thereof, which they use
at their Creation, is very ancient: for in Chaucer's time (which is 3. hundred
years since) it is evident, Cap. 50.
that parti-colored Garments were much in fashion; and that the people of that
age were grown to a great exorbitancy therein; so that, in his Parson's Tale he
sharply inveighs against the vanity thereof: and amongst other particulars,
which he there instanceth, takes notice, that the one half of their Hose was
White, and the other Red.

For the better supporting the charge at the taking of this degree, the whole
House, whereof they were Students, did anciently contribute: for by an Account
Ex Registro H^sp. Linc. f. 34. a.
in 11 H. 7. upon the advanceing of John Boteler, Richard Higham, and Robert
Constable thereunto, it appears, that every person of the Society of Lincolns
Inn did give iiis. iiiid. and that the whole sum, then amounting to xxil.
xiiis. iiiid. being divided into three parts, was put into a pair of Gloves,
price xiid. and given to the new Sergeant.

Likewise at Grays Inn in 23 H. 8. Term. Mich. John Hynde, and Roger York,
then newly created Sergeants, had each of them Cs. and a pair of Gloves, price
iiiid. juxta antiquam and laudabilem consuetudinem, says the Register Ex
Registro Hosp. Grayensis fol. 128. a.
of that House.

And by an Order Ex Registro inter. Templi f. 103. a.
made in the Inner Temple 13 Iunii 32 H. 8. it appears, that Mr. Conysby, and
Mr. Bromley, who were made Sergeants Crast. Ioh. Bapt. the same year, were each
of them to have five pounds, and a pair of Gloves of iiid. according to the
ancient use, delivered unto them, upon their departing at the Hall door of the
Temple, after their proposition, and leave taken at the fire.

Ex praefato Registro Hosp. Grayensis fol. 172. b.
Again, at a Pencion held in Grays Inn 27 Ian. 38 H. 8. William Coke then
elected Sergeant, had eight pounds in gold given him, nomine Regardi.

And by the Account Ib. f. 179. b.
of John Walpole, Collector of the gifts, or Rewards, against the Sergeants
Feast in that House 12 Febr. 1 Edw. 6. it appears, that he received iiis.
iiiid. a piece of a Cxviii. Masters, on the behalf of the Sergeants at Law of
that House, which were called in Hillary Term the same year.

So also at a Pencion held there 12 Oct. Sergeants at Law.
6 E. 6. there was an Order Ib. f. 199. b.
made, that William Stamford, and William Dalyson, then made Sergeants, should
each of them have five pounds, and a pair of Gloves. But in 2 and 3 Ph. and M.
Sergeant Walpole of this House had xl. and a pair of Gloves, price six
shillings, given Ib. f. 217. a.
him at his Creation. And in 9 Eliz. Barham, Ieffrey and Lovelace had Ib. f.
253. a.
ten pounds a piece in money.

Cap. LI.
Sergeants at Law, when first made Knights.
IT seems, that those of this degree were not anciently made Knights: for I
find Communia de Term. Mich. 9 H. 6. Rot. 14. in dorso.
, that Thomas Rolfe a Sergeant at Law in 9 H. 6. being then summoned to receive
the Order of Knighthood, and for his not appearance, like to be fined, pleaded
his privilege; viz. that he was a Sergeant at Law, and bound to attend the
Court of Common pleas, and not elsewhere.

And that none of that degree were Knights before the 26th. of H. 8. appears
by this memorial Ex amplo and vet. MS. vocat. Spelmans Reports, nunc penes
Clem. Spelman de Grays Inn arm. an 1663.
-- Memorandum, quod Term. Trin. 26 H. 8. Thomas Willoughby and Johannes
Baldwin, Sergeants le Roy furont faits Chivaliers; et que null tielx Serjeaunts
devant fuere unque faitz Chivaliers.

Cap. LII.
The form and order in creating of a Sergeant at Law, as it is at this day
practiced.
ON the Morning of that day, on which he is to receive his Degree, Wine and
Cakes are sent to one of the Sergeants Innes, for the Judges and Sergeants: as
also to that Inn of Court, whereof the new Sergeant is; there to be presented
to the Benchers and others of that Society. After which repast, the said
Benchers and Baristers repair to the Sergeants Inn, where all the old
Sergeants are, passing two and two together; the Warden of the Fleet, and his
Tipstaves, with the Marshall of the Court of Common Pleas, proceeding all
bareheaded before them.

And from Sergeants Inn they proceed, in like sort, to Westminster. And being
come near to the Hall (about ix. of the Clock before Noon) the new clected
Sergeant in some private place, puts on his parti-colored Robe; and having
so done, (the Warden and other Officers still attending) he enters
Westminster Hall, and passes to that part of it, directly opposite to the
Court of Common Pleas. Where the Court being set, and all business ceasing,
two of the old Sergeants recede from the Bar with a solemn Conge, and go
toward the new Sergeant; and when they come to the midway betwixt him and the
Court, they turn their faces toward the Court, and make a second Conge; and
when they are come to the said new Sergeant, they make their third Conge
toward the Court. And then, after a little pawse, they proceed to the Court
again, with the new Sergeant betwixt them; making their three Conges; viz. the
first at their going forwards, the second in the midway; and the third at the
Bar of the Court.

Being thus come to the Bar (after a formal Exhortation given to him by the
Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench, who is to be then there sitting with
the other Chief Justice, and the rest of the Justices of the Court of Common
Pleas) he declares upon a real Writ, of what nature soever he himself
pleases; and in Law French: which being done, the most ancient Sergeant makes
answer, by way of Defense; and demands that the Writ be read. And so being
read and pleaded, and entry made thereof by the Prothonotary; the second
ancient Sergeant offers emparlance thereto. And then the Sergeant elect,
passing from the Bar into the Court, kneeleth down at the feet of the Lord
Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, Cap. 52.
where having first taken the Oath of Supremacy, the Oath of a Sergeant at Law
is by the Clerk of the Crown read to him; in manner following;

Ye shall swear well and truly to serve the King's people as one of the
Sergeants at the Law; and ye shall truly counsel them that ye be retained
with, after your cunning: And ye shall not deferr or delay their causes
willingly, for covetise of money, or other thing, that may turn ye to profit:
and ye shall give due attendance, accordingly, so help ye God.

Which being done, the Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, puts the Lawn
Coif on his head, and the Hood on his Shoulder. After which performed, the
Court ar^seth, and all depart.

An instance of their proceeding to Westminster take here from the Register
fol. 82. b.
of the Inner Temple.

Memorandum, that Edward Bromley, one of the Benchers of this House, being
solely elected Sergeant at the Law; upon Monday 5 Febr. An. 1609. (7 Iac.
Regis) took his leave in the open Hall of this House, where the Tresurer in
behalf of the House did present him with a purse and ten pounds in money: and
from thence the Benchers and fellows of this House, without the Innes of
Chancery, attended him to the Sergeants Inn: where having his Robes put on, he
went from thence, attended by the Benchers and fellows of this House, to
Westminster, they all following after.

Cap. LIII. Cap. 53.

A memorial concerning Sergeants at the Law taken 4 Iunii An. 1635. for a
president to posterity, made by Sir John Brampston Knight then Chief Justice of
the Kings Bench; Sir John Finch Knight Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas,
Sir Humphrey Davenport Knight Chief Baron of the Exchequer, Sir John Denham,
Sir Rich. Hutton, Sir Will. Jones, Sir George Crook, Sir Thomas Trevor, Sir
George Vernon, Sir Robert Berkley, Sir Francis Crawley, and Sir Richard Weston
Knights, Judges of the said Courts and Barons of the Exchequer.
FOr the Sergeants at their Creation; they come to the Lord Chief Justice of
the Kings Bench, the same day that they are to go to Westminster, in the Hall
of that Sergeants Inn, of which the Lord Chief Justice, for the time being,
is: And the Sergeant comes in a black Robe, his ancient Clerk bringing after
him a Scarlet Hood spread upon his Arms, and a Coif upon the Hood.

Then, after the solemnity of a Speech made by the Lord Chief Justice, and the
Pleading repeated, the Lord Chief Justice puts the Coif on the Sergeants Head,
and ties it under his Chin: and then he takes the Hood, and puts it upon his
right side, and over his right Shoulder. After this the Sergeant goes, and puts
off his black Robe, and puts on a party-colored Robe of black and murrey, and
his Hood of the same, so over his neck, with the Tabard hanging down behind;
and so goes to Westminster, his man carrying before him the Scarlet Hood,
spread on his Arms, and the cornered Cap upon it. And all that year, the
Sergeant, both in the Term, Guild Hall, Westminster, and Circuit, ought to go
in his party-colored Robes; and his men in party-colored Coats, unless upon a
Sunday or Holy Day; and then in Violet, with the Scarlet Hood.

At all times when the Judges sit at Westminster in Scarlet, all the Sergeants,
as well he of the first year, as the other, are to wear a Violet Robe, and a
Violet Hood close over his neck, with the tongue hanging back, and down behind.

And at all grand days, all the Sergeants are to wear Scarlet Gowns, and
Scarlet Hoods: but no Sergeant may pin their Hoods, nor have used to line their
Gowns.

Cap. LIVE.
A dischardge of the state and degree of Sergeant at Law to Rafe Rokeby.
PHilip and Mary, Pat. 2 and 3. Ph. and M. p. 1.
by the grace of God etc. To our trusty and well beloved subject Rafe Rokebye,
Sergeant at the Law, greeting. Where we of late by our Letters Patents, bearing
date at Westminster the xxiith. of June in the first and second years of our
Reigns, have constituted, ordained and appointed you one of our Justices and
Commissioners in the North parts, to enquire by the Oath of good and lawful
men, within our Counties of York, Northumberland, Cumberland, Westmerland, the
Bishopric of Duresme, the City of York, and the County of the same; the Town
of Kingston upon Hull and the County of the same, the Town of Newcastle upon
Iyne and the County of the same, and Town of Barwick upon Twede, and the
Liberties of the same; and by all other ways and means whereby ye may have best
knowledge, as well within the Liberties as without; of whatsoever riots, routs,
unlawful Conventicles, maintenances, assemblies, unlawful reteins, contempts,
trespasses, misdemeinours, wrongs and injuries, of all and singular Articles
and circumstances concerning the premises, as by the same Letters Patents more
at large it does and may appear: Know ye that we, for and in consideration,
that ye should be the more able to give your ready attendance, and about our
affairs within the said North parts; and for diverse other good causes and
considerations us moving, of our especial grace and mere motion, have
acquitted, released and dischardged, and by these presents do acquit, release
and dischardge, you of and from all attendance and service that ye should or
ought to give, or do, at any time or times, or at any place or places, for or
by reason of your being Sergeant at Law, or by reason of the said Office, state
or degree of Sergeant at Law: And also we release and dischardge you by these
presents of and for wering any Quayf, commonly called a Sergeants Quayf; and of
and for weryng all other apparel, garments, vestures, and habits, that by the
Laws and Customs of this our Realm ye should or ought to were or use, for that
ye be Sergeant at Law; except only in the presence of our Justices, at such
time and place as they sit in Judgment, or in any other place of Judgment. And
we of our further grace do also by these presence, acquit, release, and
dischardge of and from being or calling of you to any office of any our
Justices of any of our Benches, or of any Circuit; and generally of and from
all other things whatsoever, that ye by any manner of means ought or are bounden
to do, use, or exercise by reason that ye be a Sergeant at Law, as clearly and
freely to all intents and purposes as though ye had never been a Sergeant at
Law, or had never taken upon you the office, state, or degree of Sergeant at
Law; any Statute, Law, Custom or use, had, made, or used to the contrary,
notwithstanding. In Witness etc. Witness our self at UUestminster, the ^iiiith.
day of May.

A dischardge of the state and degree of Sergeant at the Law to Thomas Fleming
(who was then made the Queens Solicitor general.) Cap. 54.

ELizabeth etc. To our trusty and well beloved Subject Thomas Flemyng Sergeant
at the Law, greeting. Where we were minded, and do intend otherwise to employ
you in our service; Know ye, that we, as well in consideration thereof, as
diverse other good causes and considerations us moving, of our especial grace
and mere motion, have acquitted, released and dischardged; and by these
presents do acquit, release and dischardge you, of and for being any more from
henceforth Sergeant at Law, and of the name, title, and degree of Sergeant at
Law; and of and from all attendance and service, that you should or ought to
give or do at any time or times, or at any place or places, for or by reason of
your being Sergeant at Law; or by reason of the said office, state, or degree
of Sergeant at Law: And also we release and dischardge you for wearing of any
Quoif commonly called a Sergeants quoif; and of and for the wearing of all
other Apparel, Garments, Vestures, and Habits, that by the Laws and Customs
of this our Realm ye should or ought to wear or use, for that ye were or be
Sergeant at Law; and generally of and for all other things whatsoever, that ye
by any manner of means ought or are bound to do, use, or exercise, by reason ye
were or be Sergeant at Law, as clearly and freely to all intents and purposes,
as though ye had never been Sergeant at Law, or had never taken upon you the
office, state, or degree of Sergeant at Law, any Statute, Law, Custom or use,
had, made, or used to the contrary, notwithstanding. In VVitness etc. VVitness
our self at UUestminster, the 5th. day of November, in the 37th. year of our
reign.

Cap. LV. Cap. 55.

Settled places for Students of the Law, called Innes of Court and Chancery.
THat the learned in our Laws were anciently pesons in holy Orders, is out of
all question, if what I have instanced in the 8th. Chapter of this Discourse,
entitled of Lawyers, be well considered: as also, that diverse Justices of the
Kings Courts, and those called Itinerant, were Bishops, Abbots, Deans, Canons
in Cathedral Churches, Archdeacons, and the like, as in my Chronologick Tables
may evidently be seen: But, after the Statute 9 H. 3. Cap. xi.
of Magna Charta, whereby King Henry the 3d. appointed, that Communia Placita
non sequantur Curiam, sed teneantur in aliquo certo loco, it is not to be
doubted, but that, as well the Students in the Law, as the peculiar Ministers of
each Court, being at a better certainty how and where to exercise themselves,
began to fix and settle in certain places and stations most proper for their
Studies, conference, and practice: which, that they might the more regularly
do, King Edward the first, in 20o. of his reign, -- Plac. in Parl. 20 E. 1.
Rot. 5. in dorso.
injunxit Iohanni de Metingham, and sociis suis (says the Record;) quod ipsi,
Impr. Land. an. 1661. p. 104.
per eorum discretiones, provideant and ordinent certum numerum de Atturnatis
and Apprenticiis, de quolibet Comitatu, Videsis Cokes Reports lib. 9. in
prooemio.
de melioribus and legalioribus, and libentius addiscentibus, secundum quod
intellexerint, Et Notas Seldeni in Fortescu de Land. Legum Angl. Cap. 8.
quod Curtae suae and populo de regno melius valere poterit, and majus commodum
fuerit: Et, quod ipsi, quos ad hoc elegerint, Curiam sequantur, and se de
negotiis in eadem Curia intromittant, and alii non. Et videtur Regi, and ejus
Concilio, quod septies viginti sufficere poterint etc. Apponant tamen praefati
Iusticiarii plures, si viderint esse faciendum, vel numerum anticipent; and de
aliis remanentibus fiat secundum discretionem eorundem Iusticiariorum.

Id est -- King Edw. 1. did especially appoint John de Metingham (then Lord
Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas) and the rest of h^^ fellow Justices
(of that Court;) that they, Innes of Court and Chancery.
according to their discretions, should provide and ordain, from every County,
certain Attorneys and Lawyers, of the best and most apt for their learning and
skill, who might do service to his Court and people: And that those, so chosen
only, and no other, should follow his Court, and transact the affairs therein:
the said King and his Council, then deeming the number of seven score to be
sufficient for that employment; but it was left to the discretion of the said
Justices, to add to that number, or diminish, as they should see fit.

So that, soon afterward, though we have no memorial of the direct time, not
absolute certainly of the places; we may safely conclude, that they settled in
certain Hostells or Innes which were thenceforth called Innes of Court; Innes
of Court why so called.
because the Students in them, did there, not only study the Laws, but use such
other exercises as might make them the more serviceable to the King's Court, as
Sir John Fortescue in the xlix th. Chapter of his Book, de Laudibus Legum
Angliae, observes; where he says; that the Students in the University of the
Laws (for so he calls the Houses of Court and Chancery) did not only study
the Laws, to serve the Courts of Justice, and profit their Country; but did
further learn to dance, to sing, to play on Instruments on the ferial days; and
to study Divinity on the Festival; using such exercises, as they did, who were
brought up in the Kings Court. So that these Hostells being Nurseries or
Seminaries of the Court, taking their denomination of the end wherefore they
were so instituted, were called therefore the Innes of Court, But, their
Registers being lost, or by some unhappy accidents perished, I have not seen
any thing to point out the certainty of their settling in these Hostells, till
King Edw. the 3ds. time; and then the first that has come to my view, was a
demise Esc. 18 E. 3.
from the Lady Clifford, of that House neet Fleetstreet, called Cliffords Inn
(now one of the Innes of Chancery) Apprenticiis de Banco; which, as I take it,
is meant to the Lawyers belonging to the Court of Common Pleas. For, that there
were then such Innes and Hostells, will appear by this farther testimony; viz.
that in 20 E. 3. in a quod ei deforciat to an exception taken; it was answered
by Sir Richard de wilughby (then a learned Justice of the Common Pleas) and
William Skipwith (afterward also one of the Justices of that Court) that the
same was no exception in that Court, although they had often heard the same for
an exception, amongst the Apprentices in Hostells or Innes.

There is a tradition; that in times past, there was one Inn of Court at
Dowgate, called Iohnson's Inn; another in Fewter lane; and another in
Paternoster Row: which last they would prove, because it was next to S. Paul's
Church, where each Lawyer and Sergeant, at his Pillar heard his Client's Cause,
and took notes thereof upon his knee; as they do in Guild Hall at this day:
And, that, after the Sergeants feast ended, they do still go to Paul's in their
Habits, and there choose their Pillar, whereat to hear their Clyents cause (if
any come) in memory of that old Custom. But, if we may rely upon the testimony
of Sir John Fortescu, this tradition will prove but a mere conceit; for he
tells (...) Legum (...) 49.
us; that the Innes of Court and Chancery, were then (as they are now) placed
out of the City and noise thereof, in the Suburbs of London -- Situatur etiam
studium illud (says he) inter locum Curiarum illarum, and Civitatem Londini:
and a little after -- nec in Civitate illa, ubi confluentium turba studentium
quietem perturbare possit, situm est studium istud; sed seorsim parumper, in
Civitatis illius suburbio, and proprius Curiis praedictis; ut ad eas, sine
fatigationis incommodo, students indies, ad libitum accedere valiant.

This great and famous Lawyer, was Chief Justice of the Kings Bench in King
Henry the sixth's time, in whose days these Hostells flourished very much; for
there were then belonging to the Lawyers University, says he, (...)
four Innes of Court (which are the same now extant) each containing two
hundred persons; and ten Innes of Chancery, and in each of them one hundred
persons; (which are more than at this day; there being now but eight; and of
those, only two of the same which were then, viz. Cliffords Inn, and Thavies
Inn, as I think.)

And that it may the better appear in what an high estimation the study of the
Laws then was, let us observe what he farther says Ibid.
-- in hiis enim majoribus Hospiciis, nequaquam potest studens aliquis
sustentari, minoribus expensis in anno, quam octoginta Scutorum: and si
servtentem sibi ipse ibidem habuerit, ut eorum habet pluralitas, tanto tunc
majores ipse sustinebit expensas: occasion vero sumptuum hujusmodi, ipsi
Nobilium filii tantum in Hospiciis illis Leges addiscunt; cum pauperes and
vulgares, pro silioram suorum exhibitione tantos sumptus nequeant sufferre: and
Mercatores raro cupiunt tantis oneribus annuis attenuare mercandisas suas. id
est.

-- In these greater Hostells (viz. the Innes of Court) no Student can be
maintained at less chardge yearly than Lxxx. scutes ( id est xx. marks:) and if
he had a Servant with him, as many of them have, then is his chardge the
greater: So that, by reason of this great expense, the sons of Gentlemen do
only study the Law in these Hostells; the vulgar sort of people being not able
to undergo so great a chardge: and Merchants are seldom willing to lessen
their traffic by undergoing such burdens.

Whereunto I shall add, what Mr. John Fern (sometime a Student of the Inner
Temple) in his learned Book Impr. Land. an. 1586.
, entitled The Glory of Generosity (page 24.) expresses; viz. Nobleness of
blood, joined with virtue, compteth the person as most meet to the enterprizing
of any public service: and for that cause it was, not for naught, that our
ancient Governors in this land, did with a special foresight and wisdom,
provide, that none should be admitted into the Houses of Court, being
Seminaries, sending forth men apt to the government of Justice, except he were
a Gentleman of blood. And that this may seem a truth, I my self have seen a
Calendar of all those which were together, in the Society of one of the same
Houses, about the last year of King Henry the fifth, with the Arms of their
House and Family, marshalled by their names: and I assure you, the self same
Monument does both approve them all, to be Gentlemen of perfect Descents, and
also the number of them much less than now it is; being at that time in one
House scarcely threescore.

And here I may not omit to observe, that the Students in the Innes of Court
were anciently called Apprenticii nobiliores; for Thomas of Walsingham showing
that the Rebels in 4 R. 2. did plunder the Lawyers of the Temple, says Annal.
Tho. Walls. de hoc anno.
-- etiam locum qui vocatur Temple Bar, in quo Apprenticii juris morabantur
nobiliores, irruerunt.

Of this name, scil. Apprentise Apprenticius comes from Apprendre id est to
Learn. Seld. notes upon Fortescu Cap. 8.
thus then attributed to the Students of the Law (but now taken for a double
Reader) there is mention long before; viz. in the Year book Trin. 1 E. 3. en
bank le Roy.
of 1 E. 3. where it is said -- Et puis une Apprentise demand etc. So likewise
in the Year-book of 29 E. 3. fol. 47. b. where, upon an exception taken at the
Bar by Ingelby; wilby and Skypwith answered, that that was never an exception
taken in that place, but they had heard it ofttimes enter les Apprentices en
Hostells: by which instances it should seem, that the word Apprentise does
signify a Pleader only; as it does also (I think) in 2 H. 6. where it is said
Mich. 2. H. 6. fol. 5. a.
-- Une Apprentise vient en le Commen Bank; which is somewhat observable,
because none now but Sergeants at the Law do come to that Bar; unless that
expression were then equivocal with Sergeant, as perhaps it was: for I find,
that Walter Askham, who was made a Sergeant Claus. 12 H. 4. m. 29.
at Law in 12 H. 4. had the title of Aprentise attributed to him in 4 H. 5.
upon the demise of Sergeants Inn in Chancery lane at that time; the words of
my Ex compoto Balliv. Epise. Elien. de eodem anno, penes Math. ^pise. E^^^^.
an. 1640.
authority are these -- An. 1416. pro ^aryndon's Inn in Chancelerslane,
dimissio Rogero Horton and Will. Cheney Iusticiariis, and Waltero Askham,
Aprentisio Legis, ad vil. xiiis. iiiid.

But if the word Aprentise had that acception then, it had not at some time
before: for in an. 1363. 37 E. 3. it is said by one of out Fab^^^. Chron. p.
247.
Historians -- About this time was an Ordinance ad Statute made, that the
Sergeants and Prentyses at Law should plead their Pleas in their mother tongue
etc.

Cap. LVI.
Innes of Chancery.
THese were so called, as Justice Fortescu, in the same book says; Cap. xiix.
quia Students in illis, pro eorum part majori juvenes sunt etc. because the
Students in them are, for the greater part, young men, learning the first
elements of the Law; and becoming good proficients therein, as they grow up,
are taken into the greater Hostells, which are called the Innes of Court.

Now, that these Hostells did then consist of such young men, is appatent
enough from this testimony of the same Fortescue: but the reason why they were
called Innes of Chancery seems to have been from another ground; viz. because
they were anciently Hospicia for the Clerks of the Chancery. And if that Inn
of Chancery situate near St. Andrews Church in Holburne, now called Davyes, or
Thavyes Inn, be the same which is mentioned in the Fine Roll of 11 E. 3. (as
some judicious persons do think it is) considering the little difference
betwixt Travers and Thavye in pronunciation, it will then be out of doubt: Of
which Record, to the end the cleerer judgment may be given, I have here
inserted a true Copy.

Rot. Fin. 11 E. 3. p. 2. m. 14.
Rex omnibus ad quos etc. Sciatis, quod de gratia nostra speciali commisimus
dilectis Clericis nostris de Cancellaria, Thomae de Elingham, and Roberto de
Kettleseye, illas domos, cum pertinentiis, in parochia S. Andreae in Holburne,
in suburbiis London, quae fuerunt Iohannis Travers defuncti; and quae, pro
debitis and Compotis, in quibus idem Johannes nobis tenebatur die quo obiit,
tam de tempore quo fuit Constabularius noster, and dilecti Edwardi nuper Regis
Angliae patris nostri Burdegaliae, quam aliunde, in manu nostra existunt:
Habendos and tenendos eisdem Thomae and Roberto, Innes of Court and (...)
and eorum alteri, quamdiu illas in manu nostra, vel haeredum nostrorum,
occasion debitorum and Computorum praedictorum, nobis vel haeredibus nostris
praedictis non redditorum contingerit remanere. Reddendo etc. duas marcas per
annum etc. In cujus etc. Test Custode Angliae apud Windesore 8^. die
Septembris.

In the said Hostells (viz. the Innes of Court and Chancery) there are these
ranks and degrees of Students, as Sir Edw. Coke (...)
observes;

First Mootemen, which are those that argue Readers Cases in Houses of
Chancery, both in Terms, and in grand Vacations.

And that out of these, after eight years study, or thereabouts, are chosen
Utter-Baristers.

That, out of Utter-Baristers, after they have been of that degree twelve years
at least, are chosen Benchers, or Ancients: Of which one that is of the puisne
sort Reads yearly in Summer Vacation; and one of the Ancients, that has
formerly read, reads in Lent Vacation, and is called a Double Reader; it being
commonly, betwixt his first and second Reading, about nine or ten years: out of
which Double Readers, the King makes choice of his Attorney, and Solicitor
general; his Attorney of the Court of Wards and Liveries, and his Attorney of
the Duchy. And of these Readers are Sergeants elected by the King; and out of
them the King electeth two or three, as he pleases, to be his Sergeants: And
out of them are the Judges chosen.

Having said thus much, in general, touching the antiquity of our Hostells for
Students of the Laws, I come to the particular Houses of these Societies.

Cap. LVII.
The Inner Temple.
BEfore I go on to speak of this place as an Inn of Court, I shall take leave
to say something, by way of Preface, Cap. 57.
for discovery of what it was before; and so consequently how it had this name,
which nothing relates to the use it is now put to; viz. a Mansion for Students
of the Law.

About the beginning of King Henry the 2ds. reign, the Knights Templars,
leaving their House in Holburne (situate on the South part of that street,
where Southampton house lately stood, and upon which those new Tenements called
Southampton buildings, were lately erected) did, for their more convenience,
set up another habitation for themselves, over against the end of a Street,
heretofore called New-street, but now Chancerye sane; which had thereupon the
name of the New Temple, and contained all that space of ground from the UUhite
Friars Eastwards, unto Essex house, without Temple Bar; yea and part of that
too, as appears by the first grant Pat. 2 E. 6. p. 2.
thereof to Sir William Paget Knight, after Secretary of state to King Edward
6th.

That they thus settled themselves here about that time, is evident from the
date of the Church its Dedication; which was in anno MC Lxxxv. as by an old
Inscription yet to be seen over the Door thereof is manifest. But the Order of
Templars being throughout all Christendom suppressed, about the beginning of
King Edward the 2ds. reign, and their possessions here in England coming
thereupon to the Crown, the King gave Cart. 15 E. 2. m. 21.
this House unto Thomas Earl of Lancaster; who forfaiting Cart. 15 E. 2. m. 21.
it shortly after by Rebellion, it returned again to the Crown; and was Cart.
15 E. 2. m. 21.
granted, first to Adomare de Valence Earl of Pembroke, and after his decease
to Esc. 1 c. 3.
Hugh le Despenser the younger, for life: which Hugh being attainted Hist.
Anglie. script. antiqui. col. 2549.
in the first year of King Edward the third, the right thereof divolved once
more to the Crown, and might therein have continued, but that by a Decree Ibid.
col. 1730. l. 16.
made in the great Council at Vienna in anno MCCCxxiiii. (about the 19th. year
of the same King Edward the 2ds. reign) the lands of the Templars, being
generally bestowed Ibid. l. 34.
upon the Knights Hospitalers of St. John of Jerusalem, King Edward the 3d.
granted this Mansion unto the Knights of that Order here in England; who, soon
after (as the tradition is) demised the same, for the Rent of x1. per annum,
unto diverse professors of the Common law, that came from Thavyes Inn in
Holburne.

Now that there is nothing but tradition left to us for this, cannot seem
strange, considering what spoil Wat Tyler, with his fellow Rebels, made here,
in 4 Ric. 2. by destroying and burning their Books and Records, as an old Annal
Olim Abbath. S. Mariae Ebor. spectans.
tells us, in the Law french of that time; scil. -- - Les Rebels alleront a
le Temple, et jetteront les measons a le terre, et avegheront tighles, issint
que ils fairont coverture en mal array; et alleront en l' Esglise, et
pristeront touts les liveres et Rolls de Remembrances, que furont en lour
huches deins le Temple de Apprentices de la Ley; The Inner (...).
et porteront en le haut chimene, et les auderont. Consonant whereunto Thomas
of Walsingham (...)
, speaking of the mischief they did, in plundring and burning of the Savoy
(then the noble Palace of John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster) thus goes on --
quibus perpetratis, satis malitiose etiam locum qui vocatur Temple bart, in quo
Apprenticii Iuris morabantur nobiliores, diruerunt, ob iram quam conceperant
contra Robertum de Hales, Magistrum Hospitalis Sancti Iohannis (de quo praefati
sumus) ubi plura munimenta, quae Iuridici in Custodia in Custodia^ habuerunt,
igne consumpta sunt.

Howbeit, that they were here seated in King Edward the third's time, is out of
all doubt, from what our famous old Poet Geffrey Chaucer expresses in his
Prologue to the Manciple, concerning them (he having also been a Student of
this House, as the History of his life, printed in the front of his works,
shows) viz.

A Manciple there was of the Temple,
Of which all Catours might taken ensemple,
For to been wise in buying of Uitaile:
For whether be paid, or took by tail,
Algate he waited so in his ashate,
That he was aye before in good estate.
Now is not that of God a full fair grace,
That such a leude man's wit shall pace
The wisdom of an heap of learned men?
Of Masters had be mo than thrice ten,
That were of Law expert and curious;
Of which there was a dosen in that House,
Worthy to been Stewards of Rent and land
Of any Lord that is in England,
To maken him live by his proper good
In honor debtless, but if he were wood;
Or live as scarcely as him list desire,
And able to helpen all a Shire,
In any Case, that might fallen or hap;
And yet the Manciple set all her Capp.
But notwithstanding this spoil by the Rebels, those Students so increased
here, that, at length they divided themselves in two Bodies; the one commonly
known by the Society of the Inner Temple, and the other of the Middle Temple,
holding this Mansion, as Tenants to the said Hospitalers, till their
dissolution in 30 H. 8. and afterward from the Crown, by Lease, till the 6th.
year of King James, that they had a grant Pat. 6 Iac. p. 28.
thereof by Letters Patents, bearing date at UUestminster on the 13th of
August, by the name of Hospicia, and Capitalia messuagia cognita per nomen de
le Inner Temple, and le Middle Temple, sive novi Templi London. unto Sir Julius
Caesar Knight then Chancellor and under Treasurer of the said (...)

The Buildings.
OF these the Church is the most ancient and beautiful, having been built by
the Knights Templars in King Henry the 2^s time, according to the form of the
Temple near unto the holy Sepulcher at Jerusalem; and consecrated by Heraclius
Patriarch of Jerusalem, in the year from our Savior's Incarnation MC Lxxxv.
as the Inscription over the entrance (...) from the Cloisters, plainly ^^^weth.
But the Hall is a much later structure, as may seem by the (...) of the
Windows, which I suppose to be about King Edward the third's time.

Of the rest, as I find them recorded in the Registers of this House, I shall,
in their order, take notice.

The Wall betwixt the Thames and the Garden, The Buildings.
was begun in 16 H. 8. Mr. John Pakinton (afterward Sergeant at Law) and Mr.
Rice being appointed Overseers (...)
of the work. This Mr. Pakington was Treasurer here, in 20 H. 8. and caused the
Hall to be feeled. He also built diverse Chambers between the Library and
Barington's Rents; and gave ten pounds to the Treasury; for which respect it
was ordered (...)
by the Society 5 Febr. 25 H. 8. that those new Chambers should be thenceforth
called Packinton's Rents. The Lodgings in that Court, now known by the name of
Tanfeild Court (by reason of Sir Laurence Tanfeild Chief Baron's residence
there) were first erected Ib. (...)
by Henry Bradshaw Treasurer in 26 H. 8. whence they were long after called
Bradshaw's Rents.

In 1 Mariae the Kitchen was new Ib. f. 114. b.
built, every Knight and double Reader being taxed at xs. toward the chardge
thereof; every single Reader and Bencher at vi^. viiid. and every
Utter-Barrister, and other of this Society at iii^. iiii^.

In 2 Eliz. were those buildings raised f. 140. b.
near the Alienation Office, and called Fuller's Rents, by an Order of the
Society 22 Nov. 5 Eliz. by reason that John Fuller was then Treasurer.

In 16 Eliz. the great carved Skreen in the Hall was Ib. f. 165. b.
made, Thomas Bromley, then Solicitor to the Queen being Treasurer. And in 18
Eliz. those buildings paled about, that stood near to the Alienation Office
(commonly called the black Buildings) were erected by Mr. Bonham, Mr.
Bourchier, and Mr. Williams: which buildings were pulled down for enlargement
of the walks in an. 1663.

In 19 Eliz. the Alienation Office was built Ib. f. 176. a.
by the appointment of Robert Dudley then Earl of Leicester.

In 23 Eliz. those Lodgings in the Middle Temple lane, called Crompton's
buildings (in part whereof the Prothonotaries Office of the Common Pleas is
kept) were erected Ib. f. 188. a.
by Thomas Crompton Esquire a member of this Society.

In 31 Eliz. two sides of the Garden were enclosed Ibid.
with a brick wall, and the Posts whereon the xii. Celestial Signs are placed,
then set up, Robert Golding being at that time Treasurer.

In 38 Eliz. there were diverse lodgings of rough-cast work, built Ibid.
betwixt the Church and the Hall, on the East part of that Court; toward the
chardge thereof Sir Julius Caesar Knight (then Master of the Rolls) gave 300l.
in consideration whereof he had power to admit any Gentleman into the Society
during his life; which buildings are still called Caesar's buildings.

In 6 Iacobi those Lodgings called the Paper-buildings, Eastwards from the
Garden, containing Lxxxviii. foot in length, and xx. foot in breadth (being four
stories high) were begun Ex alio Registro ejusdem Hospicii f. 76. b. and 79. a.
by Mr. Edward Hayward and some others.

In 8 Iac. John Benet Esquire, then one of his Majesty's Sergeants at Arms,
built Ib. f. 85. b.
the Gate called the Inner Temple Gate.

In 15 Iac. or shortly after, the Brick-buildings Ib. f. 141. a. b. and 145. b.
in the Inner Temple lane, where the Butlers Chambers are, together with those
near Ram Alley: as also the great Brick-Buildings, wherein the King's Bench
Office is kept; and another Brick-Building Ib. f. 144. a. and 146. a.
in Fig Tree Court, were erected, Sir Thomas Coventre Knight, then the King's
Solicitor general, being Treasurer.

In 18 Iac. the Bridge and Stayres to the Thames were Ib. f. 141. b.
made.

In 4o. Caroli 1mi. the great Brick Buildings over against the Garden; as also
a new Kitchen, together with the Stayr-Case to that door of the Hall toward
the Garden, were erected, Ib. f. 167. a. and 168. a.
the whole chardge amounting to 2700l. Sir Richard Shilton Knight, then the
King's Solicitor, being Treasurer. And in the same year were more Buildings
Ib. f. 169. b.
in Fig Tree Court made.

In 5 Caroli 1. the Buildings betwixt the Hall, and the new Buildings in
Fig Tree Court were Ib. f. 173. b.
erected, the same Sir Richard Shilton being still Treasurer.

In 10o. Car. 1. The Inner Temple.
the East end of the Church was repaired Ibid. fol. 21^. a. and 226. a.
; and the little Brick Building, at the end of the Alienation Office erected
Ibid. fol. 21^. a. and 226. a.


In An. 1657. the Buildings of Brick betwixt the Inner Temple lane, and Hare
Court, were set up: and in An. 1662. those in Parsons Court, near the East end
of the Church.

Orders for good Government and advancement of learning.
IN 3 and 4 Ph. and M. (23 Maii) there was an Order Ex Registro ejusdem Hosp.
f. 118. b.
made, Admittances.
that thenceforth no Attorney, or Common Solicitor, should be admitted into
this House, without the assent and agreement of their Parliament. And in 5
Eliz. (19. Nov.) it was also ordered Ib. f. 140. a.
, that none should thenceforth be admitted of this Fellowship and Company, but
he that should pay for his Admittance, to the use of the House and Company,
xls. except he were the son of one of the Bench or Utter-Bart; or except he
were and had been by the space of one whole year of the Company of one of the
Innes of Chancery belonging to this House.

In 42 Eliz. it was further ordered Ex Registro ejusdem Hosp. Vol. 2. fol. 39.
b.
(scil. 8 Febr.) that none should be admitted of this Society, except he were
of good Parentage, and not of ill behavior.

In 36 Eliz. Lodgers.
there was an Order Ex Registro ejusdem Hosp. Vol. 1. fol. 173. a.
made (24 Iunii) that no Fellows of this House should admit any person to lodge
in their Chambers, except their known Clerks and Servants, upon pain of xls. to
the use of the House.

In 32 H. 8. Keeping Commons.
it was ordered Ib. f. 104. a.
that if sixteen persons, fellows of the House, would after the Term keep
Commons in the House, that then, the Officers of the House should give their
attendance, and they to find the Officers, and the House to allow them weekly
toward their chardges vis. viiid. a piece: This Rule being made (as the said
Order expresses) because no learning was then kept. And if there were under
sixteen persons, the Commons to break, and the Servants to have allowance after
vi^. viii^. a piece the week; but if any of them should depart, his allowance
to be deducted.

In 3 and 4 Ph. and M. there was an Order (...)
made, (...)
that every man called to the Bench, should keep some learning Vacations, next
after his calling to and coming to the Bench, upon pain of forfaiture for every
Vacation five pounds. And in 3 Eliz. (9 Febr.) that (...)
every single Reader should be at three Mootes in every Term, and in
Michaelmass Term at four Mootes. And every Bencher not a Reader, to be at five
Mootes in every Term, and in Michaelmass Term at six, upon pain of five
shillings every Moote.

Until the second year of Qu. Eliz. reign, (...)
this Society did (...)
use to drink in Cups of Ashen-wood (such as are still used in the King's
Court) but then those were laid aside, and green Earthen Pots introduced (...)
which have ever since continued.

In 6 Eliz. Calls to the Bar.
(2 Maii) there was an Order Ib. f. 14^. b.
made, that none should be called to the Bar, or received as an Utter
Barrister in this Society, before he had been first called and examined by the
whole Bench, as by a former Order made 5 Nov. 3 and 4 Ph. and M. was provided.
And in 42 Eliz. it was also ordered (...)
, that special regard should be taken of such as shall be called to the Bar
and Bench, for their learning.

In 3 and 4 Ph. (...)
and M. (20 Iunii) it was ordered (...)
, that all Fellows of this House, being in Commons, should from time to time,
come to the Church to hear divine Service; viz. Mass, Matens, Evensongs etc. as
before that time had been used. As also that every Fellow of this House, being
in Commons, or lying in the House, should from time to time observe and keep
xviii. Offering days in the year, according to the ancient laudable Custom of
this House. And in 42 Eliz. ^rders for Government.
it was further ordered Ex Registro ejusdem Hosp. Vol. 2. fol. 39. b.
, that all the Gentlemen fellows of this Society, should repair to the Church,
and hear divine Service and Sermons, at the usual days and times, unless
hindered by sickness or some other reasonable Cause. And that they receive the
Communion therein once at the least in every year.

In 38 H. 8. Apparel and Beards.
(30 Maii) there was an Order Ex Registro ejusdem Hosp. Vol. 1. fol. 36. a.
made, that the Gentlemen of this Company should reform themselves in their cut
or disguised Apparel, and not to have long Beards: And that the Treasurer of
this Society should conferr with the other Treasurers of Court, for an uniform
reformation, and to know the Justices opinion therein, and thereupon to perform
the same. Whereupon in their Parliament held 5 Maii 1 and 2 Ph. and M. there
was a decree Ib. f. 112. b.
made, that no Fellow of this House should wear his Beard above three weeks
growth upon pain of xxs. forfaiture.

And for their better regulation in Apparel, it was ordered Ex Registro ejusdem
Hosp. Vol. 2. fol. 18. b.
in 36 Eliz. (16 Iunii) that if any fellow in Commons, or lying in the House,
did wear either Hat, or Cloak in the Temple Church, Hall, Buttry, Kitchen, or
at the Buttry-Barr, Dresser, or in the Garden, he should forfait for every such
offense vis. viiid. And in 42 Eliz. (8 Febr.) that Ib. f. 39. b.
they go not in Cloaks, Hearts, Boots and Spurrs into the City, but when they
ride out of the Town.

So also Ib. f. 23. a.
in 38 Eliz. Weapons.
(20 Dec.) that no Fellow of this House should come into the Hall with any
Weapons, except his Dagger, or his Knife, upon pain of forfaiting the sum of
five pounds.

In 3 Iac. Precedence.
(10 Maii) it was ordered Ib. f. 54. a.
, that if any then, or thenceforth of this Society, should be called to the
Bench, at that time being, or that thereafter should be a Knight, that
notwithstanding such his dignity of Knighthood, he should take place at the
Bench Table, according to his auncienty in the House, and no otherwise.

In 8 Iac. (10 Iunii) there was an Order Ib. f. 85. a.
made, that Thomas Caesar, then one of the Benchers of this House,
notwithstanding an Act made 7 Iunii 5 Iac. viz. that none who should
thenceforth be called to the Bench, that had not Read, should take place of any
Reader, or have voice in Parliament; having not Read, but fined for not
Reading, and then called to be puisne Baron of the Exchequer, should have his
place at the Bench Table, the said Order notwithstanding. Also at the
Parliament held upon the 6th. of November next following, there was an Order
Ib. 87. a.
made, that John Sotherton, one of the Barons of the Exchequer, being called to
the Bench, should have his place at the Bench Table above all the Readers, in
such sort as Sir Thomas Caesar Knight late puisne Baron of the Exchequer had.

And in the same year it was likewise ordered Ib. f. 85. a.
(10 Maii) that the said Thomas Caesar, Attendance to Westminster.
then being the puisne Baron of the Exchequer (commonly called the Baron
Cursitor) should not be attended to Westminster by any but the Officers of the
Exchequer; forasmuch as none but such as are of the Coif, ought to be attended
by the Fellows of the House.

In 13 H. Sports.
8. in their Parliament held 17 Iulii it was ordered Ex Registro ejusdem Hosp.
Vol. 1. fol. 60. b.
that none of the Society should, within this House, exercise the play of
Shoffe grote, or Slyp-grote upon pain of vis. viiid.

And in Febr. 8 Iac. that Ex Registro ejusdem Hosp. Vol. 2. fol. 89. a.
for future prevention of disorder and Scurrility, no more Plays should be in
this House upon the Feast of All Saints, or Candlemass day: but this Order was
repealed the 4th. of November following.

And for keeping good Rule in Christmas time, these following Orders Ib. f.
195. a.
were made 7 Nov. 7 Caroli primi.

1. That Christmas Christmas.
Commons should continue by the space of three weeks only, and no longer,
according to the ancient usage and custom of this House.

2. That every week there be three Stewards chosen for that week, according to
the old Order of Christmas, and the innovation of Treasurers to be abolisht.

3. That every one of those Stewards be chosen of such of the Gentlemen, under
the Bar, as have Chambers in the House, who may be responsal for the moneys
they receive.

4. That the Gentlemen, who shall be Stewards, shall pay the Baker, Brewer,
Chandler, and all other Officers that shall serve the House with necessary
Provisions during the time of Christmas.

5. That no Stranger; nor any of this Society, that had not been in the
ordinary Commons of this House within two years then past, or stood put Extra,
per mandatum; or ne recipiatur, should be admitted to take any Repast, or to be
in Commons in the time of Christmas, or to be present at any of the Christmas
Parliaments.

6. That there be no allowance of Wine, but only one Pottle to the Stewards,
Mess, according to the ancient usage of Christmas.

7. That there be no drinking of Healths; nor any Wine or Tobacco uttered or
sold within the House.

8. That there shall not be any knocking with Boxes, or calling aloud for
Gamesters.

9. That no play be continued within the House upon any Saturday night; or upon
Christmas Eve at night, after xii. of the Clock.

10. That there be not any going abroad, out of the Circuit of this House, or
without any of the Gates, by any Lord or other Gentleman, to break open any
House or Chamber; or to take any thing in the name of Rent, or a distress.

11. That, for preventing of Quarrels within the House, and that general
scandal and obloquie which the House has heretofore incurred in time of
Christmas, there shall no Gentleman of this House, side with any person
whatsoever, that shall offer to disturb the peace and quiet of the House; but
shall endeavor to punish them, according to the old Custom of the House: and
that no Strangers be suffered to come within the Hall, but such as shall appear
and seem to be of good sort and fashion.

And now, Barryers.
after all this, I may not omit to take notice; that forty of the Gentlemen of
the four Innes of Court, whereof ten were of this Society, were appointed (...)
to be Barryers at the Court, upon the 4th. day of November, in the 14th, year
of King James, in honor of the Creation of Prince Charles, Prince of Wales;
which they performed accordingly, the chardge thereof being defrayed by a
contribution of xxxs. from each Bencher; every Barister of seven years
standing xvs. and all other Gentlemen in Commons ten shillings a piece.

And that there was also a Mask Maskes(...)
performed at the Court, by the Gentlemen of this House, and of Grays Inn, at
the marriage of the Lady Elizabeth (daughter to King James) unto Frederick
Prince Elector Palatine of the Rhene.

As also, that at Christmas 9 Car. 1. there was a Mask (...)
presented to his Majesty at the equal chardges of the four Innes of Court;
toward which was contributed.

by
Every Bencher -- 05l. -- 00s. Every Utter-Barrister of 7. years standing
02-10. Every Gentleman under the Bar -- 02 -- 00. Besides several Officers
larger Sums.

Nor is it to be forgotten, that upon the xvith. day of November, in the 3d.
year of Queen Elizabeth's reign, the Society of this House, taking into
consideration, that the Fellowship of the Middle Temple (who had lost
Strande-Inne upon the building of Somerset House, temp. Edw. 6.) having
endeavored to take away Lions Inn (an Inn of Chancery) from this House,
whereunto it had anciently belonged: as also that the two Chief Justices (viz.
Sir Robert Catlyn and Sir James Dyer) had abetted that their attempt; and that,
through earnest intercession to the Queen, by the Lord Robert Dudley
(afterward Earl of Leicester) there was a stop made therein; did then order Ex
Registro ejusdem Hosp. Vol. 1. fol. 136. b.
and enact, that no person or persons of this Society, that then were, or
thereafter should be, should be retained of Council against him the said Lord
Robert, Robert Earl of Leicester.
or his heirs: And that the Arms of the said Lord Robert should be set up and
placed in some convenient place in their Hall, as a continual Monument of that
his Lordships favor to them.

Of the grand Christmasses kept here.
IN the 4th. year of Queen Eliz. reign, there was kept Vide Regist. hujus domus
f. 138. a.
a magnificent Christmas here; at which the Lord Robert Dudley (afterward
Earl of Leicester) was the Chief person (his title Palaphilos) being Constable
and Marshall; whose Officers then were as follows:

Mr. Onslow, Lord Chancellor. Anthony Stapleton, Lord Treasurer. Robert
Kelway, Lord Privy Seal. John Fuller, Chief Justice of the Kings Bench. William
Pole, Chief Justice of the Common Pleas. Roger Manwood, Chief Baron of the
Exchequer. Mr. Bashe, Steward of the Household. Mr. Copley, Marshall of the
Household. Mr. Paten, Chief Butler. Christopher Hatton Master of the Game (He
was afterward Lord Chancellor of England.) Masters of the Revells.
Mr. Blaston, Mr. York, Mr. Penston, Mr. Iervise.
Mr. Parker, Lieutenant of the Tower. Mr. Kendall, Carver. Mr. Martyn, Grand
Christmasses.
Ranger of the Forests. Mr. Stradling, Sewer.
And there were fourscore of the Guard; besides diverse others not here named.

TOuching the particulars of this grand Feast, Gerard Leigh in his Accidence
Impr. L^nd. 1576.
of Armory page 119. etc. having spoken of the Pegasus born for the Arms of
this Society, thus goes on -- [After I had travailed through the East parts of
the unknown World, to understand of Deeds of Arms, and so arriving in the
fair River of Thames, I landed within half a league from the City of London,
which was (as I conjecture) in December last; and drawing near the City,
suddenly heard the shot of double Canons, in so great a number, and so
terrible, that it darkened the whole air; wherewith, although I was in my
native Country, yet stood I amazed not knowing what it meant. Thus, as I abode
in despair, either to return or continue my former purpose, I chanced to see
coming toward me an honest Citizen Clothed in a long garment, keeping the high
way, seeming to walk for his recreation, which prognosticated rather peace than
peril; of whom I demanded the cause of this great shot; who friendly answered:
It is, quoth he, a warning shot to the Constable Marshall of the Inner Temple,
to prepare to Dinner.

Why (said I) what, is he of that estate, that seeks no other means to warn
his Officers than with such terrible shot in so peaceable a Country. Marry,
says he, he utters himself the better to be that Officer whose name he
bears.

I then demanded what Province did he govern, that needs such an Officer. He
answered me, The Province was not great in quantity, but ancient in true
nobility. A place, said he, privileged by the most excellent Princess the high
Governor of the whole Island, wherein are store of Gentlemen of the whole
Realm, that repair thither to learn to rule and obey by Law, to yield their
fleece to their Prince and Common weal; as also to use all other exercises of
body and mind whereunto nature most aptly serves to adorn by Speaking,
countenance, gesture, and use of Apparel the person of a Gentleman; whereby
amity is obtained, and continued, that Gentlemen of all Countries, in their
young years, nourished together in one place, with such comely order, and daily
Conference, are knit by continual acquaintance in such unity of minds and
manners as lightly never after is severed, than which is nothing more
profitable to the Common weal.

And after he had told me thus much of honor of the place, I commended in mine
own conceit the policy of the Governor, which seemed to utter in it self the
foundation of a good Common weal; for that the best of their people, from
tender years trained up in Precepts of Justice, it could not choose but yield
forth a profitable people to a wise Common weal: wherefore I determined with my
self to make proof of that I heard by report.

The next day I thought for my Pastime to walk to this Temple, and entering in
at the Gates, I found the building nothing costly; but many comely Gentlemen of
face and person, and thereto very courteous saw I to pass to and fro, so as it
seemed a Princes port to be at hand: and passing forward, entered into a Church
of ancient building, wherein were many Monuments of noble personages armed in
Knightly habit, with their Cotes depainted in ancient Shields,
whereat I took pleasure to behold. Thus gazing as one bereft with the rare
sight, there came unto me an Herehaught, by name Palaphilos, a King of Arms,
who courteously saluted me, saying, for that I was a Stranger, and seeming by my
demeanor a lover of Honor, I was his guest of right: whose curtesy (as reason
was) I obeyed, answering I was at his Commandment.

Then said he, ye shall go to mine own lodging here within the palace, where we
will have such cheer as the time and Country will yield us; where I assure you
I was so entertained, as no where met I with better cheer or Company (etc.)

-- Thus talking we entered the Prince his Hall, where anon we heard the noise
of Drum and Fyfe. What means this Drum said 1. Quoth he, This is to warn
Gentlemen of the Household to repair to the Dresser, wherefore come on with me,
and ye shall stand, where ye may best see the Hall served: and so from thence
brought me into a long Gallery, that stretches it self along the Hall near the
Princes Table, where I saw the Prince set; a man of tall personage, a manly
countenance, somewhat brown of visage, strongly featured, and thereto comely
proportioned in all lineaments of body. At the nether end of the same Table
were placed the Ambassadors of sundry Princes. Before him stood the Carver,
Sewer, and Cupbearer, with great number of Gentlemen-wayters attending his
person; the ushers making place to strangers of sundry regions that came to
behold the honor of this mighty Captain. After the placing of these honorable
Guests, the Lord Steward, Treasurer, and Keeper of Pallas Seal, with diverse
honorable personages of that Nobility were placed at a side Table near
adjoining the Prince on the right hand: And at another Table on the left side
were placed the Treasurer of the Household, Secretary, the Prince his Sergeant
at the Law, four Masters of the Revells, the King of Arms, the Dean of the
Chapel, and diverse gentlemen Pensioners to furnish the same.

At another Table on the other side were set the Master of the Game, and his
Chief Ranger, Masters of Household, Clerks of the green Cloth and Check, with
diverse other strangers to furnish the same.

On the other side against them, began the Table, the Lieutenant of the Tower,
accompanied with diverse Captains of Foot-^ands and Shot. At the nether end of
the Hall began the Table, the high Butler, the Panter, Clerks of the Kitchen,
Master-Cook of the Privy Kitchen, furnished throughout with the Soldiers and
guard of the Prince: all which with number of inferior Officers placed and
served in the Hall, besides the great resort of strangers, I spare to write.

The Prince so served with tender meats, sweet fruits, and dainty delicates,
confectioned with curious Cookery, as it seemed wonder a world to observe the
provision: and at every Course the Trumpetters blew the courageous blast of
deadly War, with noise of Drum and Fyfe, with the sweet harmony of Violins,
Sackbutts, Recorders, and Cornetts, with other Instruments of Music, as it
seemed Apollo's Harp had tuned their stroke.

Thus the Hall was served after the most ancient order of the Island; in
commendation whereof I say, I have also seen the service of great Princes, in
solemn seasons and times of triumph, yet the order hereof was not inferior to
any.

But to proceed, this Herehaught Palaphilos, even before the second Course came
in, standing at the high Table said in this manner, The mighty Palaphilos,
Prince of Sophie, high Constable Marshall of the Knights Templars, Patron of
the honorable Order of Pegasus: and therewith cries a Largess. The Prince,
praising the Herehaught, bountifully rewarded him with a Chain to the value of
an hundred Talents.

I assure you I languish for want of cunning ripely to utter that I saw so
orderly handled appertaining to service; wherefore I cease and return to my
purpose.

The Supper ended and Tables taken up, the high Constable rose, and a while
stood under the place of Honor, where his Achievement was beautifully
embroydered, and devised of sundry matters, with the Ambassadors of foreign
Nations, as he thought good, till Palaphilos King of Arms came in, his
Herehaught Marshall, and Pursivant before him; and after followed his Messenger
and Caligate Knight; who putting off his Coronal, made his humble obeisance to
the Prince, by whom he was commanded to draw near and understand his pleasure;
saying to him in few words to this effect; Palaphilos, seeing it has pleased
the high Pallas, to think me to demerit the office of this place; and thereto
this night past vouchsafed to descend from Heavens to increase my further
honor, by creating me Knight of her order of Pegasus; as also commanded me to
join in the same Society such valiant Gentlemen throughout her Province, whose
living honor has best deserved the same, the choice whereof most aptly
belongs to your skill, being the Watchman of their doings and Register of
their deserts; I will ye choose as well throughout our whole Armies, as
elsewhere, of such special Gentlemen, as the Gods has appointed, the number of
xxiiii. and the names of them present us: commanding also those chosen persons
to appear in our presence in Knightly habit, that with convenience we may
proceed in our purpose. This done, Palaphilos obeying his Princes Commadement,
with xxiiii. valiant Knights, all apparelled in long white Vestures, with each
man a scarf of Pallas colors, and them presented with their names to the
Prince, who allowed well his choice, and commanded him to do his Office. Who,
after his duty to the Prince, bowed toward these worthy personages, standing
every man in his antienty, as he had born Arms in the field, and began to show
his Princes pleasure, with the honor of the Order.

Other particulars touching these grand Christmasses extracted out of the
Accounts of the House.
FIrst, it has been the duty of the Steward to provide five fat Brawns,
Vessels, Wood, and other necessaries belonging to the Kitchen: As also all
manner of Spices, Flesh, Fowl, and other Cates for the Kitchen.

The Office of the Chief Butler to provide a rich Cupbord of Plate, Silver and
parcel gilt: Seven dozen of Silver and gilt Spoons: Twelve fair Saltcellers,
likewise silver and gilt: Twenty Candlesticks of the like.

Twelve fine large Table-Cloths, of Damask and Diaper. Twenty dozen of Napkins
suitable, at the least. Three dozen of fair large Towells; whereof the
Gentlemen Sewers, and Butlers of the House, to have every of them one at
mealtimes, during their attendance. Likewise to provide Carving Knives: Twenty
dozen of white Cups and green Potts: A Carving Table; Torches; Bread; Beer, and
Ale. And the chief of the Butlers was to give attendance on the highest Table
in the Hall, with Wine, Ale, and Beer: and all the other Butlers to attend at
the other Tables in like sort.

The Cupbord of Plate is to remain in the Hall on Christmas day, St. Stephans
day, and New years day, from Breakfast time ended, until after Supper. Upon
the Banqueting night it was removed into the Buttry; which in all respects was
very laudably performed.

The Office of the Constable-Marshall to provide for his employment, a fair
gilt complete Harneys, with a nest of Feathers in the Helm; a fair Poleaxe to
bear in his hand, to be chevalrously ordered on Christmas day, and other days,
as afterward is showed: touching the ordering and settling of all which
ceremonies, during the said grand Christmas, a solempn consultation was held
at their Parliament in this House, in form following.

First at the Parliament kept in their Parliament Chamber of this House, on the
even at night of St. Thomas the Apostle, Officers are to attend, according as
they had been long before that time, at a former Parliament named and elected
to undergo several offices for this time of solempnity, honor, and pleasance:
Of which Officers, these are the most eminent; namely the Steward, Marshall,
Constable-Marshall, Butler, and Master of the Game. These Officers are made
known and elected in Trinity Term next before; and to have knowledge thereof by
Letters, if in the Country, to the end they may prepare themselves against All
Hallontide; that if such nomitated Officers happen to fail, others may then be
chosen in their rooms. The other Officers are appointed at other times nearer
Christmas day.

If the Steward, or any the said Officers named in Trinity Term, refuse or
fail, he or they were fined every one, at the discretion of the Bench; and the
Officers aforenamed agreed upon. And at such a Parliaments if i^ be fully
resolved to proceed with such a grand Christmas, then the two youngest Butlers
must light two Torches, and go before the Bench to the upper end of the Hall:
who being set down, the antientest Bencher delivers a Speech, briefly, to the
whole society of gentlemen then present, touching their consent, as before:
which ended, the eldest Butler is to publish all the Officers names, appointed
in Parliament: and then in token of joy and good liking, the Bench and Company
pass beneath the Harth, and sing a Caroll, and so to Boyer.

The Marshall at Dinner is to place at the highest Tables end, and next to the
Library, Christmas (...).
all on one side thereof, the most ancient persons in the Company, present: the
Dean of the Chapel next to him: then an Ancient, or Bencher, beneath him. At
the other end of the Table, the Sewer, Cupbearer, and Carver. At the upper end
of the Bench table, the King's Sergeant and Chief Butler: and when the Steward
has served in, and set on the Table the first Mess, then he is also to sit
down.

Also at the upper end of the other Table, on the other side of the Hall, are
to be placed the three Masters of the Revells: and at the lower end of the
Bench table, are to sit, the King's Attorney, the Ranger of the Forest, and the
Master of the Game. And at the lower end of the Table on the other side of the
Hall, the fourth Master of the Revells, the Common Sergeant, and
Constable-Marshall. And at the upper end of the Utter-Baristers Table, the
Marshall sits, when he has served in the first Mess: The Clark of the
Kitchen also, and the Clark of the Sowce-tub, when they have done their offices
in the Kitchen, sit down. And at the upper end of the Clarks table, the
Lieutenant of the Tower, and the attendant to the Buttry are placed.

At these two Tables last rehearsed, the persons there may sit upon both sides
of the Table: but of the other three Tables, all are to sit upon one side. And
then the Butlers or Christmas servants, are first to cover the Tables with
fair linen Table-Cloths; and furnish them with Salt-sellers, Napkins, and
Trenchers, and a Silver spoon. And then the Butlers of the House, must place at
the Salt-seller, at every the said first three highest Tables, a stock of
Trenchers, and Bread: and at the other Tables, Bread only without Trenchers.

At the first Course the Minstrells must sound their Instruments, and go
before: and the Steward and Marshall are next to follow together; and after
them the Gentleman Sewer; and then comes the meat. Those three Officers, are
to make altogether three solempn Courtesies, at three several times, between the
Skreen and the upper Table; beginning with the first, at the end of the
Benchers table; the second at the midst; and the third at the other end; and
then standing by, the Sewer performs his Office.

When the first Table is set and served, the Stewards Table is next to be
served. After him, the Masters table of the Revells: Then that of the Master of
the Game. The high Constable-Marshall: Then the Lieutenant of the Tower: then
the Utter-Baristers table; and lastly the Clerks table: All which time the
Music must stand right above the Harth side, with the noise of their Music;
their faces direct toward the highest Table: and that done, to return into the
Buttry, with their Music sounding.

At the second course every Table is to be served, as at the first Course, in
every respect, which performed, the Servitors, and Musicians, are to resort to
the place assigned for them to dine at; which is the Valects or Yeomans-Table,
beneath the Skreen. Dinner ended, the Musicians prepare to sing a Song, at the
highest Table: which ceremony accomplished, then the Officers are to address
themselves every one in his office, to avoid the Tables in fair and decent
manner, they beginning at the Clerks Table; thence proceed to the next; and
thence to all the others till the highest Table be solempnly avoided.

Then, after a little repose, the persons at the highest Table arise, and
prepare to Revells: in which time, the Butlers and other Servitors with them,
are to dine in the Library.

At both the doors in the Hall, are Porters to view the Comers in and out at
meal times: To each of them is allowed a Cast of Bread, and a Candle, nightly
after Supper.

At night, before Supper, are Revells and Dancing; and so also after Supper,
during the twelve days of Christmas. The antientest Master of The Revells, is
after Dinner and Supper, to sing a Caroll, or Song; and command other Gentlemen
then there present, to sing with him and the Company, and so it is very
decently performed.

A Repast at Dinner, is -- viiid.

Service in the Church ended, Christmas day.
the Gentlemen presently repair into the Hall, to Breakfast, with Brawn,
Mustard, and Malmsey.

At Dinner, the Butler appointed for the grand Christmas, is to see the Tables
covered and furnished: and the ordinary Butlers of the House, are decently to
set Bread, Napkins, and Trenchers in good form, at every Table; with Spoones
and Knives.

At the first Course is served in, a fair and large Bores-head, upon a Silver
Platter, with Minstralsye. Two Gentlemen in Gowns are to attend at Supper, and
to bear two fair Torches of Wax, next before the Musicians and Trumpetters, and
stand above the Fire with the Music, till the first Course be served in,
through the Hall. Which performed, they with the Music are to return into the
Buttry. The like course is to be observed in all things, during the time of
Christmas. The like at Supper.

At Service time this Evening, the two youngest Butlers, are to bear two
Torches in the Genealigo^. A Repast at Dinner is xiid. Which Strangers of worth
are admitted to take in the Hall; and such are to be placed at the discretion
of the Marshall.

The Butler appointed for Christmas, St. Stephan's day.
is to see the Tables covered, and furnished with Salt-Sellers, Napkins, Bread,
Trenchers and Spoones. Young gentlemen of the House are to attend and serve
till the latter Dinner, and then dine themselves.

This day the Sewer, Carver, and Cup Bearer, are to serve as before. After the
first Course served in, the Constable Marshall comes into the Hall, arrayed
with a fair, rich, complete Harneys, white and bright, and gilt; with a Nest of
Feathers of all Colors upon his Crest or Helm, and a gilt Pole-axe in his hand:
to whom is associate the Lieutenant of the Tower, armed with a fair white
Armor, a Nest of Feathers in his Helm, and a like Pole-axe in his hand; and
with them sixteen Trumpetters; four Drums and Fifes, going in rank before them:
and with them attends four men in white Harneys, from the middle upwards, and
Halberds in their hands, bearing on their shoulders the Tower: which persons,
with the Drums, Trumpets, and Music go three times about the Fire. Then the
Constable-Marshall, after two or three Courtesies made, kneeleth down before the
Lord Chancellor; behind him the Lieutenant; and they kneeling, the
Constable-Marshall pronounces an Oration of a quarter of an hours length,
thereby declaring the purpose of his coming: and that his purpose is to be
admitted into his Lordships service.

The Lord Chancellor says, He will take farther advice therein.

Then the Constable-Marshall standing up, in submissive manner delivers his
naked Sword to the Steward; who gives it to the Lord Chancellor: and
thereupon the lord Chancellor wills the Marshall, to place the
Constable-Marshall in his Seat: and so he does, with the Lieutenant also in his
Seat or place. During this Ceremony the Tower is placed beneath the fire.

Then comes in the Master of the Game apparalled in green Velvet: and the
Ranger of the Forest also, in a green suit of Satin; bearing in his hand a
green Bow, and diverse Arrows, with either of them a Hunting Horn about their
Necks; blowing together three blasts of Venery, they place round about the fire
three times. Then the Master of the Game makes three Courtesies, as aforesaid;
and kneeleth down before the Lord Chancellor, declaring the cause of his
coming; and desires to be admitted into his service etc. All this time the
Ranger of the Forest stands directly behind him. Then the Master of the Game
stands up.

This Ceremony also performed, a Huntsman comes into the Hall, with a Fox and
a Purse-net; with a Cat, both bound at the end of a staff; and with them nine
or ten Couple of Hounds, with the blowing of Hunting-Hornes. And the Fox and
Cat are by the Hounds set upon, and killed beneath the Fire. This sport
finished, the Marshall places them in their several appointed places.

Then proceeds the second Course: which done, and served out, the Common
Sergeant delivers a plausible Speech to the Lord Chancellor, and his
Company, at the highest Table, how necessary a thing it is, to have Officers at
this present; the Constable-Marshall, and Master of the Game, for the better
honor and reputation of the Commonwealth; and wishes them to be received etc.

Then the King's Sergeant at Law, declares and infers the necessity; which
heard, the Lord Chancellor desires respite of farther advice. Then the
antientest of the Masters of the Revells sings a Song, with assistance of
others there present.

At Supper the Hall is to be served in all solempnity, as upon Christmas day,
both the first and second Course to the highest Table. Supper ended, the
Constable-Marshall presents himself with Drums before him, mounted upon a
Scaffold, born by four men; and goes three times round about the Harthe,
crying out aloud, A Lord, A Lord, etc. Then he descends, and goes to dance
etc. and after he calls his Court, every one by name, one by one, in this
manner.

Sir Francis Flatterer of Fowleshurst in the County of Buckingham

Sir Randle Rackabite, of Rascal Hall, in the County of Rake Hell.

Sir Morgan Mumchance, of Much Monkery, in the County of Mad Mopery.

Sir Bartholmew Baldbreech, of Buttocks-bury, in the County of Break neck.

This done, the Lord of Misrule addresseth himself to the Banquet: which ended
with some Minstralsye, mirth, and dancing, every man departs to rest.

At every Mess, it a Pot of Wine allowed. Every Repast is via.

About seven of the Clock in the Morning, St. John's day.
the lord of Misrule is abroad, and if he lack any Officer or attendant, he
repaireth to their Chambers, and compels them to attend in person upon him
after Service in the Church, to Breakfast, with Brawn, Mustard, and Malmsey.
After Breakfast ended, his Lordships power is in suspense, until his personal
presence at night; and then his power is most potent.

At Dinner and Supper is observed the Diet and service performed on St.
Stephans day. After the second Course served in, the King's Sergeant,
Oratour-like, declares the disorder of the Constable-Marshall, and of the
Common Sergeant: which complaint is answered by the Common Sergeant, who
defends himself and the Constable-Marshall with words of great efficacy:
Hereto the King's Sergeant replyeth. They rejoyn etc. and who so is found
faulty committed to the Tower etc.

If any Officer be absent at Dinner or Supper time; if it be complained of, he
that sits in his place is adjudged to have like punishment, as the Officer
should have had being present: and then withal he is enjoined to supply the
office of the true absent Officer, in all points. If any offender escape from
the Lieutenant into the Buttery, and bring into the Hall a Manchet upon the
point of a knife, he is pardoned: For the Buttry, in that case is a Sanctuary.
After Cheese served to the Table, not any is commanded to sing.

In the Morning, Ch^dermass day.
as before on Monday, the Hall is served; saving that the Sewer, Ca^ver, and
Cup Bearer do not attend any service. Also like Ceremony at Supper.

In the Morning no Breakfast at all; Wednesday.
but like service as before is mentioned, both at Dinner and Supper.

At Breakfast, Thursday.
Brawn, Mustard, and Malmsey. At Dinner Roast-beef, Venison-Pasties, with like
solempnities as before. And at Supper Mutton and Hens roasted.

In the Morning, New Years day.
Breakfast, as formerly. At Dinner like solempnity as on Christmas Eve.

The Banqueting night.
IT is proper to the Butler's Office, to give warning to every House of Court,
of this Banquet; to the end that they, and the Innes of Chancery be invited
thereto, to see a Play and Mask. The Hall is to be furnished with Scaffolds to
sit on, for Ladies to behold the Sports, on each side. Which ended, the Ladies
are to be brought into the Library, unto the Banquet there; and a Table is to
be covered and furnished with all Banqueting Dishes, for the Lord Chancellor,
in the Hall; where he is to call to him the Ancients of other Houses, as many
as may be on the one side of the Table. The Banquet is to be served in, by
Gentlemen of the House.

The Marshall and Steward are to come before the Lord Chancellour's Mess. The
Butlers for Christmas must serve Wine; and the Butlers of the House, Beer and
Ale etc. When the Banquet is ended, then comes into the Hall the
Constable-Marshall, fairly mounted on his Mule; and devises some sport, for
passing away the rest of the night.

At Breakfast, Twelf-Day.
Brawn, Mustard, and Malmsey, after Morning-Prayer ended: And at Dinner the
Hall is to be served, as upon St. John's day.

On Thursday Aug. 15^. An. 1661. 13 Car. 2. Sir Heneage Finch Knight and
Baronet, Solicitor general to the King; being Reader, kept his Feast in the
great Hall of the Inner Temple.
TO the honor of whom, and of the whole Society, the King came in his Barge
from White Hall, accompanied by the Duke of York; and attended by the Lord
Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, Lord Privy Seal, the Dukes of Buckingham,
Richmund, and Ormund; Lord Chamberlain of his Household; the Earls of Ossory,
Bristoll, Berks. Portland, Strafford, Anglesey, Essex, Bathe, and Carlisse; the
Lords Wentworth, Cornbury, De la War, Gerard of Brandon, Berkley of Stratton,
and Cornwallis; the Comptroller and Vice-Chamberlain of his Majesty's
Household, Sir Will. Morice one of his Principal Secretaries of State: The Earl
of Middleton Lord Commissioner of Scotland; the Earl of Glencarne, Lord
Chancellor of Scotland; the Earls of Lauderdale and Newburgh, and other the
Commissioners of that Kingdom; with the Earl of Kildare and other
Commissioners of Ireland.

At the Stairs where his Majesty landed, stood to receive him, the Reader; and
the Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, in his Scarlet robe and Collar of
SS.

On each side, as his Majesty passed, stood the Readers Servants in Scarlet
Cloaks and white Tabba Doublets; there being a way made through the Wall into
the Temple Garden: and above them on each side the Benchers; Baristers, and
other Gentlemen of the Society, all in their Gowns and formalities, the loud
Music playing from the time of his landing till he entered the Hall; where he
was received with xx. Violins, which continued as long as his Majesty stayed.

D^nner was brought up by fifty select Gentlemen of the Society in their Gowns,
who gave their attendance all Dinner while, none other appearing in the Hall
but themselves; the King and the Duke of York sitting under a Canopy of State
at a Table set at the upper end of the Hall, advanced three steps above the
rest. The Lord Chancellor with the rest of the Noblemen sitting at a long
Table on the right side of the Hall; and the Reader with those of the Society
on the other side.

On the 3^^. of November following, to the farther honor of this Society, his
Royal Highness the Duke of York, the Duke of Buckingham, the Earl of Dorset,
and Sir William Morris K^ight one of his Majesty's principal Secretaries of
state, were admitted of this House; the Duke of York being then called to the
Bar and Bench.

And on the 4th. of November 14 Car. 2^^. his highness Rupert Prince Palatine,
Thomas Earl of Cleveland Iofcelyn Lord Percy, John Lord Berklye of Stratton
with Henry and Bernard Howard of Norfolk were admitted of this Society.

Orders and Exercises there.
THe Degrees of Tables in the Hall.

1. The Benchers Table.

2. The Utter-Baristers.

3. The Inner-Barr Table, which consists of two for those of the Masters
Commons.

And a third short Table, at the lower end of the Hall, called the Clerks
Commons Table.

There is also a Table without the Skreen, for the Benchers Clerks, called the
Yeomans Table.

Of the Clerks Commons, Clerks Commons
the most ancient amongst them is called the Abbot; who is the first man that
is to bring in the Moote into the Library, as also the Clerks Commons Case in
the Vacation, and to inform the rest what is meet to be done.

The Gentlemen of the Clerks Commons did in former times daily serve up the
first Mess, from the Dresser to the Bench Table, by us and Custom, and
likewife their own meat.

When any one of the Clerks Commons will, he may be removed or tolted thence,
unto the Masters Commons: but rather than the Clerks Commons Exercise should
fail, he is, for performance of Exercise, to be retolted by the ancient Mess at
the Bench Table, at the end of the Term, and the upper Mess of the Bar in
Vacation time.

An Inner Barister, or a Gentleman of the Clerks Commons, is to attend four
Vacations in like Exercise and like Vacations.

Upon great Festival days the Gentlemen of the Inner Bar do serve up into the
Hall, Inner Barristers.
the first and second Course from the Dresser, being attended on, at the first
Course, with Music; the Master of the Revells following next to the Music,
holding a white wand in his hand: and the Treasurer with another of the Bench
(viz. the last Treasurer, or he that is to have that office next) holding white
Staves in their hands. Then follows the Service to the Table where the Lords
and Judges do sit.

The Master of the Temple, for the time being, standing at one ^ide of the
upper end of the Table, says Grace: And if out of Reading time (after Grace
said) he takes his place and sits uppermost, though any Nobleman or Judge were
there. But in the times of Reading the Reader has that place above any person
whatsoever, of the highest degree.

When the Clerks Commons Exercise, Gentlemen of the Clerks Commons.
in the Vacation begins, the Abbot, or antientest of them, comes up to the
Bar Table, at the end of Dinner; and acquainteth them, that the Gentlemen of
the Clerks Commons, have a Case to put their Masterships: and after, during the
whole Exercise of that Vacation, upon Monday, Wednesday, and Friday, there are
Clerks Common Cases to be argued. The Gentleman, that is to bring it in, as
soon as the Tables in the Hall be covered, and Salt-Cellers set upon the Clerks
Commons Table, and that the Horn has blown to Dinner, he that is to put the
Case, lays a Case fair written in paper, upon the Salt, giving thereby
notice, of the Case to be argued after Dinner; which Case so laid upon the
Salt, if any one Gentleman of the House do take up and read, he, by order of
the House is to be suspended Commons, and to be amerc'd.

The time before any one ought to be called to be Bar, Barristers.
by the ancient Orders of the House, was heretofore eight years; but now
reduced to seven. And the Exercise then done by him so called (if he were not
called ex gratia) was, by the like ancient Orders, xii. grand Mootes, which
were performed at the Inns of Chancery, in the time of the grand Readings; and
xxiiii. petty Mootes at the Innes of Chancery likewise, in the Term times,
before the Readers of the respective Innes of Chancery. Which Exercises, having
been much discontinued, are now reviving, to the great advantage of young
S^^dents.

A Barrister newly called, is to attend the six next long Vacations, the
Exercise of the House; viz. in Lent and Summer: and is thereupon for those
three years called a Vacation Barrister.

For a Vacation Exercise, Vacation Exercise.
the first Moote, and the last tender of the Moote in that Vacation in the
Library, is always upon one Argumentable Quere: and all the residue of the
Exercise of Vacations in the Library, is to be upon two argumentable points:
and besides, the puisne Barrister, after the Case brought in, repeats the
pleading Verbatim, and takes as many exceptions to the insufficiency of the
pleading, as he can; and all this Ex tempore.

The second Barrister answers those exceptions, taken by the first; and takes
as many more exceptions as he can; and then argues the points in Law, contrary
to the first Barristers and Argument.

The third Barrister is to repeat all the Exceptions taken by both the puisne
Barristers; and those which he conceives to be good in Law, he allows; and
dissalows of the contrary. Then, if he find any more Exceptions than were
formerly moved, he shows those Exceptions, and then argues the points in Law,
as he takes the Law to be in his own opinion. Immediately after the Argument
ended in the Library, as before, the Barristers repair to their Table in the
Hall, and sit there according to their Antiquity: to whom the Inner Bar, and
those that brought in the Case, resort; and there, the most material Exceptions
spoken of in the Library, are again touched: and if any material Exception were
admitted by the Barristers in the Library, then it may be moved there; and
there the Gentleman that brought in the Case, may make answer to the Exceptions
that were taken, and maintain the Pleading to be good in Law, notwithstanding
those Exceptions, if he can.

The Utter-Barrister Vacationers, Utter-Barrister Vacationers.
have the rule, ordering, and government of the House in Vacation times, if the
Treasurer and the Benchers be absent.

The Eve next before the Reading Reading*
begins the Reader takes his place at the upper end of the Bench Table, in the
Treasurers place: and Supper ended, the antientest Utter-Barrister in Commons,
brings in a Case at the Bench-Table, which the Reader and Benchers are to
argue, if they will. And then, after, rising from the Table, the Reader first,
and next all the Benchers and Gentlemen follow, and come to the place between
the Buttry door, and backside of the Skreen in the Hall; where the Reader, by
some plausible words or House-speech, declares publicly the Statute whereon
the purposes to Read the next day. Then the antientest Bencher, by another
plausible House-speech, commends Mr. Reader's discretion in the choice of his
Statute; and declares the desires of the whole House, and what great desire
they have to hear the Reader's learned conceits upon that Statute, in his
ensuing Reading, and so take leave and depart.

The next Morning about 8. or 9. of the Clock, the Reader comes into the Hall,
followed by the Judges if any of that House be present, and Benchers that
attend the Case that day; and as soon as the Reader is set at the Table, and
all ceremonies of Curtesy made, the Reader takes the Oaths of Supremacy, and
Allegiance, and then makes another House-Speech; wherein he utters some
divisions and expositions of the Stature, whereon he is to read.

During the Reading time, the Reader is to read every Reading day, his two
first Cases twice, if the Barrister, who is to argue the Case, do desire it:
And the first day, the antientest Utter Barrister in Commons, is to take the
Reader's Case, and is to argue it. And the Readers of Innes of Chancery, and
the Vacationer Utter-Barristers, one after another, are to take the Reader's
Case in the Morning every Reading-day; and the antientest Bencher or the
antientest of the Judges then present, who are to argue the Reader's Case (if
they will) may put the Utter-Barrister, appointed to argue that Morning, to any
other of the Readers Cases: after whom, the Judges and Benchers argue according
to their antiquity, the puisne Bencher beginning first; and so every one after
another, till the antientest Judge or Bencher have argued the Case: All which
is to be done ex tempore pro and Con: and lastly the Reader to answer the
objections made against his Conclusion, to show his opinion of his Case, as he
takes the law to be; and so concludes that mornings Reading.

Immediately after the first Morning's Reading ended, the Reader delivers his
Paper of Cases, for that Morning, to the Puisne Vacationer Utter-Barrister, who
is to argue one of those Cases which he likes best, immediately after Di^ner,
at the Bench, Table end; and the puisne Barrister, and all the other Barristers
attending, the Reading, resort together, to break the Case, and open the points
to the said puisne Barrister; and then he argues the Case at the Bench Table,
after Dinner: and after him, every Bencher pr^^ent, argues the Case, por and
con. And lastly the Reader concludes the Argument with his opinion, as he takes
the Law: And so the Exercise is continued every Reading day, which is closed up
by the antientest of the Bench: and then the Reader, with congratulatory
House-Speeches, each to other for their company, pains, and attendance, costs,
and chardges.

If in Reading time, or other items of Exercise, their fail to be sufficient
attendance upon the Exercise, the Reader, Benchers, and Utter-Barristers
respectively may amerce the absents, dissolve the Exercise for that time, and
so depart.

Before any Moote in the Hall, after Supper, the Benchers go all behind the
Skreen as before, and there break the Case, which is to be argued then forthwith
in the Hall: and they have power to overruled the Case, as not argumentable;
and that overruling is termed a Fayler; and the whole Inner Bar is to be
amerced, unless they presently plead and argue another Case of the same
learning: which, if the Benchers that sit, approve of, the Amercement is saved.

Allthough the Reader at the first weeks end, or fortnights end do end his
Reading, yet there is Exercise in the House or abroad, by Readers, or
Vacationers, until the end of the whole Reading Month, as if the Reading had
so long continued. But if no Reading at all be in the House, yet are the
Readers of Innes of Chancery, and the Gentlemen of the Inner Bar, to hold the
grand Mootes, so long time as any other Reader of any other the three Innes of
Court do continue their Reading, except in time of mortality.

At the Benchers Parliament on St. Thomas Day (before Christmas) at night, all
the grand Officers, for the grand Christmas, Grand christmas.
are openly summoned and called in the Hall, and amerced for their default of
non appearance.

In the Term time certain Cases, Bench Table Cases.
called Bench-Table Cases, are at certain days, brought in by the
Utter-Barrister, and argued by four of the puisne Benchers; unless it please
the Treasurer or the Ancient Bencher then present, either to over rule the
Case, or else to take it up: and the Benchers are to choose the side, whereon to
argue, with and against the Action: and the Utter-Barrister is to put two Cases
to them: and sometimes the Benchers make the Utter-Barristers, afterward to
put a third Case, and to argue against the Action.

All the Bench Table, Battles.
every meal, and the antientest Mess of the Utter-barr, must also battle every
meal, by order of the House.

After Supper, Reader's Cases.
on that night the Steward's Drinking is, the auncientest Utter-Barrister in
Commons, is to put one of the Reader's Cases to the Reader, in the presence of
the Reader's guests: and this Case is seldom argued by the Utter-Barrister,
but the Reader makes a House-speech, and takes up the Case.

At the election of Readers Readers of Innes of Chancery.
for Inns of Chancery, the order is, that the last Reader of the Inn of
Chancery, near the time of Reading, delivers to the Bench, at Dinner, the names
of six Utter-Barristers, that have not yet read; out of which number the Bench
makes choice of three, and sends the names of those three, to the Inns of
Chancery, who choose one of those to be their Reader; only to Lions Inn they
send the whole six.

The three grand days are All-hallown, Revells.
Candlemass, and Ascension day; whereof All-hallown and Candlemass are the
chief, for cost, solemnity, dancing, revelling and Music, guided by a Master
of the Revells in from following.

First the solemn Revells (after Dinner, and the Play ended) are begun by the
whole House, Judges, Sergeants at Low, Benchers; the Utter and Inner Bar; and
they led by the Master of the Revells: and one of the Gentlemen of the Utter
bar are chosen to sing a Song to the Judges, Sergeants, or Masters of the
Bench; which is usually performed; and in default thereof there may be an
Amerciament. Then the Judges and Benchers take their places, and sit down at
the upper end of the Hall. Which done, the Utter-Barristers, and
Inner-Barristers perform a second solemn Revell before them.

When ended; the Utter-Barristers take their places and sit down. Some of the
Gentlemen of the Inner Bar; do present the House with dancing, which is called
the Post Revells, and continue their Dances, till the Judges or Bench think
meet to rise and depart.

A special Admittance Admittances
into this Society is vil. xiiis. iiiid. unless upon favor; then less, as the
Treasurer and Masters of the Bench do set down:

A general Admittance, is -- iiil. vis. viiid.

The Admittance of a Student, certified to have been in Commons two years, and
during that time kept the Exercises of the House, paid all duties there, and
been of good behavior, and so signified by the Principal and Reader, for the
time being, of any Inn of Chancery, is only xxs.

The Fees to the Head Butler, upon every Admittance, is -- ixs.

To each of the other Butlers -- iiiis.

The Officers of this House.
A Steward, who by his place and Office Officers of the House.
is in the degree of an Esquire, during the time he continues therein; and
anciently did wear a Gold Chain about his neck, of about the value of an C.
marks: his standing Fee being four marks a year.

The Head Butler, his standing Fee per annum -- iil. -- iiis. -- iiiid.

The Second Butler's Fee il. -- xs. -- ^.

The third Butler's Fee -- i. -- iii -- iiii.

The fourth and fifth, as the third.

The Head Cook, his Fee quarterly vis. -- vid.

The Under Cook per annum iiiil. -- ^.

A Gardener, his Fee per annum xixl.

A Porter who has the Rent of two Shops within the Temple gate, 2l. Fee.

A Lawndress for the House, per annum -- xl. vis. viiid.

The Master Commoners Master Commoners
are called from the Clerks Commons, by the Masters of the Bench, when it is
petitioned, and the time expired to sit any longer on the Clerks side.

These Master Commoners having for the space of about eight years, commendably
performed Exercises in the Terms, Readings and Vacations, and according to the
Orders of the House, are by the Bench called thence to the Bar Table, for
their sufficiency and merit.

The Utter-Barristers, Utter-Barristers called to the Bench.
or he that sits at that Table, being reputed a person able and fit to remove
to the Bench, is by Parliament there thence called to the Bench.

Vera Effigies Viri clariss EDOARDI COKE Equitis aurati nuper Capitalis
Iusticiarij ad Placita coram Rege tenenda assignati*



D Leggan fec
Catalogus Lectorum in Hospicio Interioris Templi. The Readers.
Inner Temple.
Ex Registro ejusdem Hospicii Vol. 1.

f. ^. b. An. 22 H. 7. Quadr. Johannes skilling electus. f. 2. a. and f. 3. b.
Autum. Thomas Babington electus, non legebat deficiente visu: ideo Johannes
Port [postea Attorn. Regius generalis; and deinde Justice. ad Plac. coram Rege]
sua vice legebat. An. 23 H. 7. Quadr*... Autum.... f. 6. b. An. 24 H. 7. Quadr.
Georgius Bromley. f. 8. b. An. 1 H. 8. Autum. Nicholaus Tichbourne. Quadr.
Nulla Lectura. f. 9. a. An. 2 H. 8. Autum. Thomas Pigot [postea Serviens ad
Legem.] f. 10. a. Quadr. Ricardus Snede. f. 14. a. An. 3 H. 8. Autum. Gilbertus
Stoughton. f. 15. a. Quadr. Edwardus Halys. f. 15. b. An. 4 H. 8. Autum.
Baldwinus Mallet [postea Sollicitator Regis generalis.] f. 17. a. Quadr.
Rowlandus Moreton. f. 17. b. An. 5 H. 8. Autum. Anthonius Babington. f. 18. a.
Quadr. Johannes Skilling, duplex Lector. f. 19. a. An. 6 H. 8. Autum. Radulphus
Swillington. f. 19. b. Quadr. Johannes Port, duplex Lector [postea unus Justice.
ad Plac. coram Rege.] f. 21. a. b. An. 7 H. 8. Autum.... Forman electus; sed
non legebat causa pestilentiae. f. 21. b. Quadr. Georgius Bromley, electus non
legebat. f. 22. b. f. 22. b. An. 8 H. 8. Autum. Johannes Baldwin [postea
Capitalis Justice. de Banco.] f. 23. a. Quadr. Thomas Brokesby. f. 25. b. An. 9
H. 8. Autum. Will. Shelley electus; sed non legebat causa morbi suderosi
[postea unus Justice. de Com. Banco.] Quadr.... An. 10 H. 8. Autum.... f. 29. a.
Quadr. Will. Coningsby electus, non legebat. Baldw. Mallet duplex Lector. f.
31. a. An. 11 H. 8. Autum. Franciscus Mountford. f. 32. b. Quadr. Johannes
Pakington. f. 55. a. An. 12 H. 8. Autum. Radulphus Massy. f. 56. a. Quadr.
Roulandus Moreton. f. 59. b. An. 13 H. 8. Autum. Johannes Baker [postea s^il.
temp. Reginae Mariae, Cancellatius Scacc. and unus de privato Consilio]
electus, non Iegebat. f. 61. b. f. 61. b. Quadr. Idem Johannes Baker. f. 63. a.
An. 14 H. 8. Autum. Henricus White. f. 65. a. Quadr. Radulphus Swillington,
duplex lector. f. 66. a. An. 15 H. 8. Autum. Ricardus Hassall. f. 66. b. Quadr.
Johannes Baldwine, duplex Lector. f. 67. b. An. 16 H. 8. Autum. Johannes Morice
electus, sed exoneratus. f. 68. a. f. 68. a. Johannes Latton loco suo electus.
f. 69. a. Quadr. Thomas Brokesby. f. 70. b. An. 17 H. 8. Autum. Johannes
Latton. f. 72. a. Quadr. Will. Coningesby [postea unus Prothonothariorum in
Curia de Communi Banco; and deinde unus Iusticiariorum Regis in eadem Curia.]
^. 72. b. An. (...) H. 8. Autum. Thomas A^dley [postea summus Angliae
Cancellarius.] f. 72. ^. Quadr. Franciscus Mountford, duplex Lector. f. 7^. ^.
An. 19 H. 8. Autum. Petrus Barnes. f. 7^. b. Quadr. Johannes Pakington, duplex
Lector. f. 7^. b. An. 20 H. 8. Autum. Johannes Whyddon electus, sed non
legebat. f. 78. a. Quadr. Idem Johannes Whyddon [postea unus Justice. ad Plac.
coram Rage.] f. 79. a. An. 21 H. 8. Autum. Robertus Chudley. f. 80. a. Quadr.
Johannes Baker, Recordator Civitatis Land. duplex Lector, postea A^^ornatus
regius generalis. f. 81. a. An. 22 H. ^. Autum. Johannes Only. f. 82. a. Quadr.
Henricus White, duplex Lector. Ib. (...). 83. a. An. 23 H. 8. Autum. Johannes
Baldewine, eo quod ad gradum Serve. ad Legem nunc electus est. f. 83. b. Quadr.
Ricardus Hassall, duplex Lector. f. 84. b. An. 24 H. 8. Autum. Nicholaus Hare
[postea Supplic. Libellorum Magister; deinde Magister Rotulorum.] f. 85. a.
Quadr. Johannes Latton, duplex Lector. f. 86. a. An. 25 H. 8. Autum. Thomas
Bromley [postea unus Justice. ad Plac. coram Rege.] f. 87. a. Quadr. Ricardus
Ward, duplex Lector. f. 89. b. An. 26 H. 8. Autum. David Brook [postea
Capitalis Baro Scacc.] Quadr.... f. 91. b. An. 27 H. 8. Autum. Thomas Moyne. f.
92. a. Quadr. Johannes Whyddon, duplex Lector. f. 93. b. An. 28 H. 8. Autum.
Henircus Bradshaw [postea Capitalis Baro Scacc.] f. 94. b. Quadr. Robertus
Chydley. f. 95. b. An. 29 H. 8. Autum. Johannes Beaumont. f. 96. a. Quadr.
Johannes Onley electus; exoneratus de Lectura. f. 96. b. f. 98. b. An. 30 H. 8.
Autum. Johannes Boisse. f. 99. a. Quadr. Thomas Sidenham. f. 100. b. An. 31 H.
8. Autum. Thomas Bromley, non legebat. f. 100. b. Quadr. Idem Thomas Bromley
electus; sed David Brook, duplex Lector, legebat. An. 32 H. 8. Autum. Nulla
lectura. f. 103. b. Quadr. Johannes Only, duplex Lector. f. 94. b. An. 33 H. 8.
Autum. Johannes Tawe electus. Nulla vero lectura, causa pestilentiae. f. 95. b.
and 96. a. Quadr. Henricus Bradshaw, duplex Lector [postea Attornatus Regius
generalis; deinde Capitalis Baro Scacc.] f. 97. a. An. 34 H. 8. Autum. Johannes
Lucas. f. 97. a. Quadr. Johannes Beaumont, duplex Lector. An. 35 H. 8. Autum.
Nulla Lectura. f. 99. b. Quadr. Johannes Boise, duplex lector. f. 100. a. An.
36. H. 8. Autum. Anth. Stapleton electus; nulla vero Lectura. f. 101. a. Quadr.
Johannes Carrell. f. 34. a. An. 37. H. 8. Autum. Johannes Cock electus; sed non
legebat. f. 34. b. f. 34. b. Quadr. Johannes Oteley. f. 36. b. An. 38. H. 8.
Autum. Johannes Cock. f. 37. b. An. 1 E. 6. Quadr. Johannes Tawe. f. 40. a.
Autum. Thomas Sanders electus, non legebat. f. 40. b. f. 41. b. Robertus
Keylway. f. 43. a. An. 2 E. 6. Quadr. Thomas Gaudy Senior. Autum. Nulla
Lectura. f. 44. a. and f. 45. a. An. 3 E. 6. Quadr. Georgius Willoughby. f. 45.
b. Autum. Willielmus Symonds. f. 46. a. An. 4 E. 6. Quadr. Ricardus Blakwall
electus, non legebat causa aegritudinis. f. 47. b. f. 47. b. Johannes Smith. f.
48. a. Autum. Johannes Fuller electus, recusavit legere. f. 49. b. An. 5 E. 6.
Quadr. Johannes Lucas, duplex Lector. f. 50. a. Autum.... Gurdon, loco Iohannis
Charles. f. 50. a. and b. An. 6 E. 6. Quadr. Johannes Prideaux. f. 104. a.
Autum. Anthonius Stapleton. f. 105. b. An. 7 E. 6. Quadr. Thomas Gaudy senior
electus, amerciatus quia recusavit legere. f. 108. a. f. 108. a. An. 1 Mariae
Autum. Gulielmus Simonds [posteaServiens ad Legem.] f. 109. a. Quadr. Ricardus
Harpur [postea Serve. ad Legem and unus Justice. de Com. Banco.] f. 112. b. An. 1
and 2 Ph. and M. Autum. Georgius Wood. Quadr. Johannes Smith, duplex Lector. f.
113. b. An. 2 and 3 Ph. and M. Autum. Johannes Preideaux, duplex Lector. f.
114. b. Quadr. Georgius Wood. f. 116. a. An. 3 and 4 Ph. and M. Autum. Georgius
Wall. f. 116. b. Quadr. Johannes Fuller. f. 118. a. An. 4 and 5 Ph. and M.
Autum. Gulielmus Poole. f. 120. b. Quadr. Thomas Williams [postea prolocutor
Parliam. scil. an. 5 Eliz.] f. 122. a. An. 5 and 6 Ph. and M. Autum. Iacobus
Rivet. f. 124. a. An. 1 Eliz. Quadr. Georgius Wall, duplex Lector [postea Serve.
ad Legem.] f. 124. b. Autum. Robertus Allot. f. 125. b. An. 2 Eliz. Quadr.
Thomas Gaudy junior, duplex Lector. f. 128. a. Autum. Johannes Thurstan
electus* amercia^us in xl. mar^is quia non legebat. f. 130. b. f. 132. b. An. 3
Eliz. Quadr. Georgius Bronley. f. 133. a. Autum. Will. Poole electus: sed nulla
lectura. f. 133. b. f. 134. a. An. 4 Eliz. Quadr. Gulielmus Poole, duplex
Lector. f. 139. a. Autum. Richard^s Onslowe [postea Recordator Civit. London.
Deinde Attornatus R. in Curia Wardorum.] f. 140. a. and b. An. 5 Eliz. Quadr.
Iacobus Ryvet. f. 143. a. Autum. Anthonius Gell electus: Nulla vero lectura.
An. 6 Eliz. Quadr.... Autum.... f. 144. a. and 145. a. An. 7 Eliz. Quadr.
Rogerus Manwood [postea Capitalis Baro Scacc.] f. 146. a. Autum. Thomas With.
f. 146. b. An. 8 Eliz. Quadr. Franciscus Gaudy [postea unus Justice. ad Plac.
coram Rege.] Autum. Thomas Bromley [tunc Recordator Civitatis Land.] f. 149. a.
An. 9 Eliz. Quadr. Edmundus Anderson [postea Capitalis Justice. de Com. Banco]
non legebat. f. 150. a. Autum. Idem Edmundus Anderson. f. 151. a. An. 10 Eliz.
Quadr. Ricardus Gwynes. f. 153. b. Autum. Thomas Marryot. f. 154. b. An. 11
Eliz. Quadr. Georgius Bromley, duplex Lector. f. 155. b. Autum. Edwardus
Flowerdue [postea unus Baronum de Scacc.] An. 12 Eliz. Quadr. Nulla lectura,
causa pestilentiae. f. 157. a. Autum. Tho. Ryseden electus: nulla vero lectura,
causa qua supra. f. 158. a. An. 13 Eliz. Quadr. Franciscus Gaudy, duplex
Lector. f. 159. a. Autum. Thomas Risedon. f. 159. b. An. 14 Eliz. Quadr.
Robertus With. f. 161. a. Autum. Edmundus Walter [pater Iohannis Walter,
postea (scil. 5 car. 1.) Capit. Baronis de (...).] (...) An. 15 (...). Quadr.
Robertus Halton. (...) Autum. Ranulphus Hurleston. (...) An. 16 E^^z. Quadr.
Edmundus Anderson, duplex Lector. (...) (...). Johannes Pagrave. (...) An. 17
E^^z. Quadr. Thomas Marryot, duplex Lector. (...) (...). Andraeas Gray. (...)
An. 18 E^^z. Quadr. Johannes Bullock. (...) (...). Georgius Wyot. (...) An. 19
E^^z. Quadr. Edwardus Flowerdue, duplex Lector. (...) (...). Humfridus Smith.
(...) An. 20 E^^z. Quadr. Thomas Risdon, duplex Lector. (...) Autum. Johannes
French. (...) An. 21 Eliz. Quadr. Edmundus Walter, duplex Lector. (...) Autum.
Robertus Golding. (...) An. 22 Eliz. Quadr. Robertus Halton, duplex Lector.
(...) Autum. Valentius Pigot. (...) An. 23 Eliz. Quadr. Ranulphus Hurleston,
duplex Lector. (...) Autum. Franciscus Beaumont [postea unus Justice. de Banco.]
(...) An. 24 Eliz. Quadr. Johannes Pagrave. (...) Autum. Thomas Smallman. (...)
An. 25 Eliz. Quadr. Andraeas, Gray duplex Lector. (...) Autum. Gulielmus
Hillyard. (...) An. 26 Eliz. Quadr. Edwardus Drew, Recordator Civitatis London.
(...) Autum. Gulielmus Hughes. (...) An. 27 Eliz. Quadr. Johannes Bullock,
duplex Lector. (...) Autum. Henricus Bea^mont [obiit 9 Aug. ^odem anno.] (...)
An. 28 Eliz. Quadr. Georgius Wyat, duplex Lector. (...) Autum. Johannes Cowper.
(...) An. 29 Eliz. (...) Humfridus Smith, duplex Lector. f. 206. a. Autum.
Johannes Dolman. f. 207. a. An. 30 Eliz. Quadr. Ricardus Tredway. f. 209. b.
Autum. Robertus Waterhouse senior. f. 211. ^. An. 31 Eliz. Quadr. Robertus
Golding, duplex Lector. f. 213. b. Autum. Johannes Cowper, duplex Lector. f.
214. b. An. 32 Eliz. Quadr. Ricardus Davies. Ex Re^ist. ejusdem Hosp^cii Vol.
2. f. 2. b. Autum. Radulphus Ratcliffe. f. 5. a. An. 33 Eliz. Quadr. Will.
Hilliard electus. f. 4. b. Johannes Hele, loco suo legebat. f. 6. a. Autum.
Thomas Wroth. f. 7. a. An. 34 Eliz. Quadr. Hugo Hare. f. 9. a. Autum. Edwardus
Coke, Recordaror Civitatis Land. [postea Attorn. dominae Reginae generalis;
deinde Capitalis Justice. ad Plac. coram Rege tenenda assignatus.] f. 11. b. An.
35 Eliz. Quadr. Gulielmus Price. f. 13. b. Autum. Thomas Coventre electus;
nulla vero Lectura causa pestilentiae. f. 16. b. An. 36 Eliz. Quadr. Thomas
Coventre iterum electus, sed Johannes Hele, tunc ad starum Serve. ad Legem
electus, legebat. fol. 17. a. f. 17. b. Autum. Idem Thomas Coventre [postea
unus Justice. de Communi Banco.] f. 18. b. An. 37 Eliz. Quadr. Laurentius
Tanfeild [postea Capitalis Baro Scacc.] f. 20. b. Autum. Georgius Wild [postea
Serve. ad Legem.] f. 22. a. An. 38 Eliz. Quadr. Iohannis Crook [postea
Recordator Civit. London. and Prolocutor Parliam. Deinde Serviens Reginae ad
Legem: Et postremo unus Justice. ad Placita coram Rege tenenda assignatus.] f.
25. a. Autum. Thomas Foster [postea unus Justice. de Banco.] f. 26. a. An. 39
Eliz. Quadr. Ricardus Tredway, duplex Lector. f. 27. b. Autum. Guilielmus Towse
[postea Serviens ad Legem.] f. 29. a. An. 40 Eliz. Quadr. Henricus Bourchier.
f. 30. b. Autum. Edmundus Prideaux. f. 31. b. An. 41 Eliz. Quadr. Ricardus
Davies, duplex Lector. f. 33. a. Autum. Georgius Crook [postea unus Justice. de
Communi Banco, deinde Justice. ad Placita coram Rege tenenda assignatus.] f. 34.
b. An. 42 Eliz. Quadr. Radulphus Radcliff, duplex Lector. f. 36. b. Autum.
Thomas Lauton. f. 38. a. An. 43 Eliz. Quadr.... Wroth electus. Nulla lectura.
f. 40. a. Autum. Rogerus Dale. f. 42. b. An. 44 Eliz. Quadr. Anthonins Dyot,
duplex Lector. f. 44. b. Autum. Edwardus Stapleton. f. 47. b. An. 45 Eliz.
Quadr. Hugo Hare electus: sed postea exoneratus. Robertus Barker legeba^. f.
48. b. An. 1 Iac. Autum. Nulla Lectura, causa pestilentiae. Quadr. f. 50. b.
An. 2 Iac. Autum. Johannes Hele. f. 51. b. Quadr. Iohannis Harris. f. 53. b.
An. 3 Iac. Autum. Elizaeus Hele. f. 56. a. Quadr. Edwardus Bromley [postea unus
Baronum de Scacc.] f. 58. b. An. 4 Iac. Autum. Iacobus Iackson miles. f. 64. a.
Quadr. Ricardus Gwyn. f. 67. b. An. 5 Iac. Autum. Johannes Walter [postea
Capitalis Baro Scacc.] f. 68. b. Quadr. Georgius Wild, duplex Lector. f. 72.
b. An. 6 Iac. Autum. Gulielmus Brook. f. 75. b. Quadr. Paulus Ambrosius
Crook. f. 78. a. An. 7 Iac. Autum. Iohannis Lloyd [postea equ. aur. and ^erv.
ad Legem.] f. 80. b. Quadr. Gulielmus Fletcher. f. 84. a. An. 8 Iac. Autum.
Nicholaus Chomley. f. 87. a. Quadr. Gulielmus Towse. f. 89. b. An. 9 Iac.
Autum. Thomas Brook. f. 94. a. Quadr. Andraeas Powell. f. 98. a. An. 10 Iac.
Autum. Thomas Rysdon. f. 100. b. Quadr. Johannes Stone. f. 101. b. An. 11 Iac.
Autum. Adam Scamler. f. 105. a. Quadr. Humfr. Wear. f. 108. a. An. 12 Iac.
Autum. Nichola^s (...). f. 111. b. Quadr. (...) Hayward f. 114. a. An. 13 Iac.
Autum. Thomas (...) f. 117. b. Quadr. Edmundus Prideaux, duplex Lector. f. 119.
b. An. 14 Iac. Autum. Thomas (...), Recordator Civitatis Land. [postea
Attornatus Regi g^neralis, deinde Custos magni Sigilli Angliae.] f. 122. a.
Quadr. Johannes Bridgeman [postea Iusticiarius Cestriae.] f. 124. b. An. 15
Iac. Autum. Edwardus Osburne. f. 126. b. Quadr. Georgius Crook, duplex Lector
[postea unus Justice. ad Placita coram Rege tenenda assignatus.] f. 129. b. An.
16 Iac. Autum. Iacobus Weston. f. 131. b. Quadr. Franciscus Myngaie. f. 133. a.
An. 17 Iac. Autum. Robertus Heath, Recordator Civitatis Land. [postea Capitalis
Justice. de Communi Banco.] f. 135. b. Quadr. Rogerus Dale, duplex Lector. f.
138. a. An. 18 Iac. Autum. Thomas Trevor [postea Equ. aur. and Solicitator
generalis Carolo Principi Walliae, deinde unus Baronum de Scacc.] f. 140. b.
Quadr. Ady Sayer. f. 142. a. An. 19 Iac. Autum. Georgius Vernon [postea unus
Baronum de Scacc. deinde Iusticiarius Communis Banci.] f. 143. b. Quadr.
Edwardus Stapleton, duplex Lector. f. 143. b. An. 20 Iac. Autum. Heneagius
Finche, eques aur. Recordator Civitatis Land. f. 146. b. Quadr. Thomas Whatman.
f. 147. b. An. 21 Iac. Autum. Johannes Farewell. f. 149. a. Quadr. Ricardus
Pritheroe. f. 150. a. An. 22 Iac. Autum. Timotheus Leuinge. f. 151. b. Quadr.
Ricardus Shilton equ. aur. [postea Sollicitator generalis Caroli 1 Regis.] f.
153. a. An. 1 Car. 1. Autum. Johannes Martin electus; nulla vero Lectura, causa
pestilentiae. Quadr. Nulla Lectura, causa qua supra. f. 156. b. An. 2 Car.
Autum. Johannes Martin. f. 159. b. Quadr. Elizaeus Hele electus. f. 162. a. An.
3 Car. Autum. Edwardus Trotman. f. 165. a. Quadr. Thomas Den. f. 166. b. An.
4 Car. Autum. Ricardus Weston [postea unus Baronum de Scacc.] f. 168. b. Quadr.
Thomas Chapman. f. 172. b. An. 5 Car. Autum. Thomas Lane. f. 182. b. Quadr.
Johannes Davies. f. 187. b. An. 6 Car. Autum. Johannes Wild, non legebat
ratione pestilentiae. f. 189. b. Quadr. Idem Johannes Wild. f. 191. b. An. 7
Car. Autum. Robertus Foster. f. 19^. b. Quadr. Johannes Wightwick [postea
Serviens ad Legem.] f. 196. b. An. 8 Car. Autum. Edwardus Littleton [postea
Solicitator generalis domini Regis: deinde Capitalis Justice. de Banco: postremo
Custos magni Sigilli Angliae.] f. 201. b. Quadr. Edwardus Bulstrode. f. 206. a.
An. 9 Car. Autum. Gulielmus Babington. f. 209. b. Quadr. Willielmus Farrer. An.
10 Car. Autum. Nulla Lectura, causa pes^lentiae. Quadr. Nulla Lectura, causa
qua supra. f. 214. a. An. 11 Car. Autum. Thomas Gates. f. 219. a. Quadr.
Ricardus Ask. f. 222. b. An. 12 Car. Autum. Edwardus Herbert [postea equ. aur.
and Attorn. generalis domini Regis.] f. 227. a. Quadr. Ricardus Godard. f. 223.
a. An. 13 Car. Autum. Henricus Roll electus; nulla vero Lectura, causa
pestilentiae f. 233. b. f. 238. b. Quadr. Nulla Lectura, causa pestilentiae. f.
239. a. An. 14 Car. Autum. Henricus Roll electus; nulla vero Lectura, causa
pestilentiae. f. 240. a. f. 241. a. Quadr. Idem Henricus Roll. f. 247. b. An.
15 Car. Autum. Thomas Gardner, Recordator Civitatis Land. Ex Regi^t. ejusdem
Hospicii Vol. 3. f. 5. a. Quadr. Unton Crook. f. 12. a. An. 16 Car. Autum.
Edwardus Johnson. f. 17. b. Quadr. Gabraell Ludlow. f. 21. a. An. 17 Car.
Autum. Elizeus Woodroofe. f. 24. b. Quadr. Johannes Merefeild. f. 27. b. An. 18
Car. Autum. Ricardus King. f. 29. a. Quadr. Carolus Holloway. f. 33. a. An. 19
Car. Autum. Walterus Norburne. f. 37. a. Quadr. Philippus Wyat, electus non
legebat. An. 13 Car. 2. Quadr. Franciscus Philips. Autum. Heneagius Finche,
eques aur. Sollicitator generalis domini Regis. An. 14 Car. 2. Quadr. Arthurus
Trevor. Autum. Edwardus Thurland, Sollicitator generalis celsiss. Principi
Iacob^ Duci Ebor. An. 15 Car. 2. Quadr. Will. York. Autum. Arthurus Bold
electus, non legebat. An. 16 Car. 2. Quadr. Johannes Turbervile. Autum. Thomas
Foster. An. 17 Car. 2. Ricardus Hopkyns equ. aur* electus.

Catalogus Thesaurariorum in Hospicio Interioris Templi. (...)
The Inner Temple.
(...)

(...) (...)... Leigh (...) (...) Raduiphus Leigh. (...) (...) Johannes
Carrill. (...) (...) Thomas Pigott. (...) (...) Edw. Halys. (...) (...)
Johannes Scott. (...) (...) Liem Ioh. Scot: (...) (...) Johannes Skilling.
(...) (...) Johannes Port. (...) (...) Nicholaus Tichburne. (...) (...) Anth.
Babington. (...) (...) Johannes Baldwyn. (...) (...) Radulphus Swillington.
(...) (...) Thomas Brokesby. (...) (...) Will Coninges^y. (...) (...)
Franc^scus Mondeford. (...) (...) Johannes Packington. (...) (...) Henricus
White. (...) (...) Johannes Latton. (...) (...) Ricardus Ward. (...) (...)
Johannes Whyddon. (...) (...) David Brook. (...) (...) Robertus Chidley. (...)
(...) Henricus Bradshaw. (...) (...) Id^m Henricus. (...) (...) Johannes
Beaumont. (...) (...) Johannes Bosse. (...) (...) Johannes Tawe. (...) (...)
Idem Ioh. Tawe. (...) (...) Anth. Stapilton. f. 117. a. 3 and 4 Ph. and M.
Thomas Saunders miles. f. 123. a. 5 and 6 Ph. and M. Robertus Keylway. f. 125.
b. An. 2. Eliz. R. Johannes Fuller. f. 140. a. 4 Eliz. Thomas Gaudy. f. 144. b.
7 Eliz. Will. Pole. f. 149. a. 8 Eliz. Iac. Ryvett. f. 151. b. 10 Eliz.
Georgius Bromley. f. 159. b. 13 Eliz. Franciscus Gaudy. f. 160. a. 14 Eliz.
Ricardus Lone. f. 165. b. 16 Eliz. Thomas Bromle, Sollicitator Reginae
generalis. f. 173. b. 19 Eliz. Robertus With. f. 176. b. 20 Eliz. Thomas
Marryot. f. 183. b. 21 Eliz. Edwardus Flowerdew. f. 185. b. 22 Eliz. Thomas
Risdon. f. 191. a. 24 Eliz. Edmundus Walter. f. 194. a. 25 Eliz. Ranulfus
Huddleston. f. 199. b. 27 Eliz. Nicholaus Hare. f. 202. b. 28 Eliz. Andraeas
Gray. f. 205. b. 29 Eliz. Johannes Bullock. f. 211. b. 31 Eliz. and 212. ^.
Georgius Wyot arm. Robertus Golding.
Ex alio Regist. ejusdem Hosp. f. 8. a. 34 Eliz. Will. Hughes. f. 16. b. 35
Eliz. Julius Caesar, Legum Doctor. f. 22. a. 38 Eliz. Edw. Coke arm. Attornatus
generalis dominae Reginae. f. 29. a. 40 Eliz. Johannes Crook. f. 32. a. 41
Eliz. Johannes Dolman. f. 34. a. 42 Eliz. Ric. Tredway. f. 33. b. Ricardus
Davies. f. 4^. b. 43 Eliz. Radulphus Ratcliff. f. 4^. b. 44 Eliz. Hugo Hare. f.
49. b. 1 Iac. Georgius Wild. f. 56. a. 3 Iac. Johannes Hare. f. 64. b. 4 Iac.
Ricardus Brownlo. f. 69. b. 5 Iac. Will. Touse. f. 76. a. 6 Iac. Edmundus
Prideaux. f. 80. b. 6 Iac. Georgius Crook. f. 87. a. 8 Iac. Rogerus Dale. f.
95. b. 9 Iac. Anth. Dyot. f. 101. a. 10 Iac. Edw. Stapleton. f. 105. b. 11 Iac.
Johannes Harrys. f. 111. b. 12 Iac. Elizeus Hele. f. 117. b. 13 Iac. Johannes
Iackson miles. f. 123. a. 14 Iac. Ricardus Gwynne. f. 127. a. 15 Iac. Thomas
Coventre miles, Sollicitator Regis generalis. f. 154. b. 1 Car. 1. Robertus
Heath m^^es, A^tornatus Regis generalis. f. 168. b. 4 Car. 1. Ricardus Shilton
miles, Sollicitator Regis generalis. f. 220. a. 10 Car. 1. Edw. Littleton.
miles, Sollicitator Regis generalis. Ex alio Registro. f. 7. a. 14 Car. 1 Edw.
Herbert arm. Attornatus dominae Reginae generalis. f. 18. b. 16 Car. 1. Thomas
Gardner arm. Recordator Civil. Land. f. 30. 17 Car. 1. Nich. Cholmley arm. A.
12 Car. 2. Ricardus Goddard arm. 13 Car. 2. Heneagius Finche miles and
Baronettus, Sollicitator Regis generalis.

Catalogus Gubernatorum in Hospicio Interioris Templi. Ex (...).
The Inner Temple.
(...).

(...) (...) RIcardus Littleton electus pro Morgano Kidwelly. Ricardus Sutton.
Will. Ruahale.
(...) An. 23 and 24 (...) Ric. Littleton. Will. Radale. Thomas Ba^yngton.
f. 15. a. An. 2 H. 8 Rob. Sheffeild miles.... Stagge Baro Scacc. Ricardus
Sutton.
f. (...). b. An. 6 H. 8 Rab. Sheffeild miles. Edw. Hales. Ioh. Scotte.
f. (...). a. An. 9 H. 8 Ric. Sutton. Will Rudhall. Johannes Skylling.
f. 56. ^. An. 12 H. 8 Ricardus Sutton. Johannes Port. Will. Shelley.
f. 61. b. An. 14 H. 8 Ric. Sutton. Edw. Hales. Ioh. Scott.
f. (...). a. An. 16 H. 8 Radulphus Swyllington. Ioh. Scott. Baldw. Mallet.
(...) An. 17 H. 8 Johannes Scott. Nicholaus Tichburne. Baldw. Malet.
f. (...). b. An. 19 H. 8 Johannes Scott. Balaw. Malet. Anthonius Babington.
f. 85. a. An. 24 H. 8 Anthonius Babington miles. Reldw Malet. Ioh. Baker.
f. 87. a. An. 25 H. 8 Anth. Babington. Thomas Brokesby. Will. Conyngesby.
f. 92. b. An. 27 H. 8 Anth. Babington. Johannes Baker. Franciscus Mounford.
Will. Conyngsby.
f. 99. a. An. 30 H. 8 Ioh. Baker Attorn. Regis generalis. Will. Conyngsby.
Nicholaus Hare.
f. 103. b. An. 32 H. 8 Johannes Baker miles. Nich. Hare miles. Johannes
Latton. David Brook.
f. 97. a. An. 34 H. 8 Johannes Baker miles. Johannes Latton. Robertus Chydley.
Henricus Bradshaw.
^b. f. 34. a. An. 37 H. 8 Ioh. Baker miles. Nich. Hare miles. Henr. Bradshaw.
Johannes Latton.
f. 49. b. An. 5 E. 6 Johannes Baker miles. Nicholaus Hare miles. Henr.
Bradshaw. Johannes Bosse.
f. 116. b. An. 3 and 4 Ph. and M. Johannes Baker miles. Nicholaus Hare miles.
Robertus Chydley.
f. 118. a. An. 3. and 4 Ph. and M. Johannes Baker miles. Nicholaus Hare miles.
Henr. White. Thomas Saunders.
f. 124. a. An. 1 Eliz. Ric Sackvile miles. Robertus Chydley. Johannes Caryll.
Robertus Keylway.
f. 144. a. An. 6 Eliz. Ricardus Sackvile miles. Robertus Chydley. Johannes
Carell. Ricardus Onslow Recordator Civit. London.
f. 148. b. An. 8 Eliz. Ricardus Onslow. Robertus Chydley. Anthonius Stapleton.
Robertus Keylway.
Hactenus de Gubernatoribus: deinceps enim non memorantur in Registris hujus
Hospicii.

The Church, belonging to the Temple.
TO this there did anciently several Priests belong, See also Stow's Survey p.
440. 41. and 762. and 763.
who had a Hall and lodgings assigned to them, as appears by some testimonials
of H. 7. time.

But since the dissolution of the Hospitalers ( temp. H. 8.) there has been a
Divine, by name of a Master or Custos, constituted by the King's Letters
Patents, who has administered the Sacraments, and performed other Divine
service therein; without any Institution or Induction, as in other Churches, by
the Bishop.

There are certain Buildings on the East part of the Churchyard, in part
whereof he has his Lodgings, and the rest he lets out to Students. His diet
he has in either House at the upper end of the Benchers Table, except in the
time of Reading, it then being the Readers place.

Besides the Master, there is a Reader, who reads Divine Service each Morning
and Evening; for which he has his Salary from the Master

And of late years, there has been a Lecturer maintained at the equal chardge
of both House; (viz. Inner and Middle Temple) who peacheth every Sunday
Afternoon: and besides 80^1. per annum. from each House; and convenient
Lodgings, has his Diet at the Benchers Table, in which House he pleases.

The Inscription cut in stone, over the Church Door toward the Cloisters.
ANNO AB INCARNATIONE DOMINI MCLxxxv. DEDICATA HAEC ECCLESIA IN HONOR BEATAE
MARIAE A DOMINO ERACLIO DEI GRATIA SANCTAE RESURECTIONIS ECCLESIAE PATRIARCHA,
IIII. IDUS FEBRUARU. QUI EAM ANNATIM PETENTIBUS DE INIUNTA SIBI PENITENTIA Lx.
DIES INDULSIT.

WIthin a spacious grate of Iron, in the midst of the round walk, under the
Steeple, doly eight Statu^es in Military Habits; each of them having large and
deep Shields on their left Arms. Of which five are cross legged. There are
also three other Gravestones lying about five inches above the level ground;
on one of which is a large Escocheon with a Lion rampant graven thereon.

Near to this Iron Grate do lie several Gravestones of Marble, on which are
these Epitaphs.
1 HIc jacet Johannes Portman, quondam unus Societatis Medii Temple; qui obiit
quinto die Iulii An. Domini MDxxi. Cujus animae propitietur Deus. Amen.

2 ORate pro anima Ricardi Wye, socii Comitivi Interioris Temple, qui obiit
xix. die Marcii An. Domini MCCCCCxix. Cujus animae propitietur Deus.

Domine secundum actum meum noli me judicare.
De precor majestatem tuam, ut tu deleas iniquitatem meam.
3 HIc jacet Ricardus Tulsington, quondam Clericus de Cancellaria Regis; qui
ob^^^^. Kal. Marcii anno Domini MCCCLxxxii. Cujus animae propiti^tur Deuteronomy. Amen.

4 HEre lies the body of Mark Blackmore, son of Mark Blackmore of Harpford
in the County of Devon. gent. who died the first day of February 1651. aged 23.
years.

5 HIc jacet Corpus Guli^lmi Langstoni, de Hanley castro, in agro Wigorniensi,
socii medii Templi. Obiit 17 die Iunii A. D. 1655. aetatis suae Tricesimo.

6 RObert Whitby Esquire Utter-Barrister of the Inner Temple, and Alderman of
Chester, deceased 15th. April, and interred the 18th. of the same Month. An.
1656.

7 HIc jacer Edwardus Barnard generosus, Medii Templi socius, qui obiit 25^.
die Iulii A. D. 1660. aetatis suae 22.

8 HEre lies the body of Daniel L'isle, the youngest of eight sons of Sir
William L'isle of the Isle of Wight. Obiit 25 Aug. 1663.

9 EDwardus Littleton, domini Thomae Littleton Baronetti, filius natu maximus,
Edwardi Baronis Littleton de Mounslow, magni Sigilli Angliae Cu^^odis, ex
unica, nepos praeclarae indolis, and ingenii praestantis and ingentis, si
quisquam, spei juvenis; heic jacet, adventum operiens Servatoris sui. An.
seculi supra decimum septimum sexagesimo quarto.

Adjoining to the North Wall is a fair Tomb of Alablaster for Richard Martin,
sometime Recorder of the City of London, with this Epitaph.
Salve Lector.
MArtinu^ jacet hic, si nescis caetera, quaere,
Interea Tumuli sis memor ipse tui.
Vale Iuris consulte.
Accedat totum precibus quodcunque recedit
Litibus, aeternum sic tibi tempus erit.
Upon a large Tablet of Marble, fixed to the South Wall, near the same round
walk.
JOHANNES SELDENUS heic juxta situs Natus est xvi. Decembris MDLxxxiiii.
SALVINTONIAE. Qui viculus est TERRING occidentalis in Sussexiae maritimis
parentibus honestis Ioanne Seldeno Thomae filio e quinis secundo Anno MDxli.
nato and Margareta filia and haerede unica Thomae Bakeri de Rushington ex
equestri Bakeriorum in Cantio familia filius e cunis superstitum unicus.
Aetatis fere Lxx. annorum. Denatus est ultimo die Novembris Anno salutis
reparatae MDCLIV. per quam expectat heic Resurrectionem foelicem.

Upon a large marble lying in the Alley below this inscription.
I. SELDENUS I. C. heic situs est.

Upon another Tablet fixed to the same South Wall.
ROgerio Bishopo, illustris interiotis Templi Societatis, quondam studioso: in
florentis aetatis limine, morte immatura praerepto. Qui ob foeli^^ssimam
indolem, moresque suavissimos, magnum sui apud omnes desiderium relinquens;
corpus humo, amorem amicis, caelo animam dicavit. Monumentum hoc amoris and
maeroris perpetuum testem, charissimi posuere parents. Obiit anno 1597.
aetatis 23. Septembris 7.

On the same South Wall, more Eastward.
IN vicino pulvere requiescit corpus Iohannis Denn, Hospicii interioris Templi
socii, and Barristarii; filii primogeniti, haeredisque apparentis Thomae Denn,
de Denn, alias Denn Hill, in agro Kanciano Orientali Armigeri, ejusque Hospicii
praelectoris olim; a paterno stemmate familias Danorum, Coamborum, Ardernorum
Kanciae, necnon alias plerasque jam multo tempore remotas congeneres habuit;
quicquid matris erat a familiis Tanfeildorum, and Clovillorum Essexiae,
illustribusque prosapiis Nevillorum Baronum de Abergavenny, Brookorumque
Baronum de Cobham; necnon Lovellorum, aliorumque familiis egerminavit antiquis.
Pubescentibus aetatis momentis, in alma Academia Oxoniensi, charus vixit
Mosarum alumnus: adultior vero evectus, in Legibus Angliae revolvendis multum
sudavit. Ad Barram (ut aiunt) vocatus, munus quod susceperat, togam exercuit
strenue.

In Termino ^anctae Trinitatis anno Domini MDCxlviii. in Lectorem Hospic^^
Cliffordin^^s electus est, Provinciamque susceptam adornavit: in hac a^ice
^^rum^ a^ uto correptus morbo; crudo, crudelique succubuit fato xvi. Ianuarii
A. D. 164^. aetatis suae 32.

At the entrance into the South I Will, upon a flat Marble, this Inscription, in a
brass plate.
Depositum
THomae Nashe generosi, honesta orti familia, ex agro Wigorniensi; viri (...)
militare eximii, and mire mansueti; Graece, Latin, Gallice^ (...) plurium
(...) scripsit, transtulit, elucidavit, and (...) Librorum Authoris jure
am(...) interioris Templi, annos cir(...), repagularis, non solidi (...)
sinceri.

Thomas Nashe obiit 25. Augusti 164^.

On another Marble in the same South I Will.
FOr a Sacred and religious remembrance of (...) Esquire a Gentleman of this
Society, Amye Heath his (...) Wife (...). this stone to (...). He died in the
year of his age the 34th. Of Christ 1657. by whom ^e expects a happy
Re^urrection.

On a Marble fixed to the South Wall.
M. S.
THomas Williams generosus, filius (...) Williams Venedoci, nuper de London
Armigeri H. S. E. Ianus Williams frater, de Minstercourt in Thaneto Insulam in
Com. Cantii Baronettus, hoc, affectus and doloris monumentum M. M. P. Ooiit 30
Martii An. 1645.

Near to this is a very ancient Monument of a Bishop, in gray Marble, whereon
is his statue vested and mitred, excellently cut; but no Inscription thereon.

Upon a stone fixed to the East Wall of this South I Will, near the Vestry-Dore.
M. S.
HEre rests the body of the Clement Coke of Langford, in the Country of Derby
Esquire youngest son of Sir Edward Coke Knight, late Chief Justice of England, and
of Bridget his Wife, daughter and coheir of John Paston of Paston in the
Country of Norfolk Esquire. This Clement married Sarah, daughter and coheir of
Alexander Rediche of Rediche in the Country of Lancaster Esquire and of Catherine
his Wife, sole daughter and heir of Humphr^y Dethick of Newall in the said
Country of Derby Esquire: and had issue by the said Sarah, living at his decease,
Edward, Robert, Bridget, and Agnes. He, in the Inner Temple (being a fellow of
the same) Christianly and comfortably, in his flourishing age, yielded up his
Soul to the Almighty the 23th. of March, An. 1629.

Upon another fixed to the same Wall.
HEre lies the body of Anne Littleton, Wife of Edward Littleton of the Inner
Temple Esquire son and heir of Sir Edward Littleton of Henley, in the Country of
Salop Knight; daughter of John Littleton of Frankely in the Country of
Worcester Esquire by Meriell the daughter of Sir Thomas Bromley Knight, Lord
Chancellor of England. She died the 6th. day of February 1623.

Upon a Stone fixed to the South Wall near to the South door.
RAdulpho Quatremano generoso, ex antiqua Quatremannorum familia oriundo:
Chalgroviae, in agro, Oxoniensi, parentibus liberalibus nato; adolescenti
singulari indole, insigni pietate, morbus suavissimis; in Academia Oxoniensi
artibus Baccalarii decus assecuto; mox Londini Interioris Templi contubernali,
jurisque studiis, per quadrennium initiato: denique ibidem, pie defuncto,
Iohanna Chibnall matter maestissima, hoc Monumentum posuit, Augusti xii. Anno
salutis 1621, aetatis 24 obiit: Sous sic extremum affatus, Ne te decipiat
juventus tua.

Pierides, Charites, Themi flete; intercidit ingens
Vestra cura Chori, maxima spesque fori.
Conditus hic Quatremanus, cui lustra videnti
Quatuor injecit, parca maligna, manum.
Lector vive, memor mortis, nec blanda juventus
Te fallat, mortem fallere nemo potest.
Death proves to me advantage; for to die
Was but to change time for eternity.
Upon two fair Tablets of stone fixed to the East Wall, above the Altar.
MEMORIAE SACRUM.
Near this place lies the body of Edward Turner of Paringdon in the Country of
Essex Esquire heretofore a member of this honorable Society. He married Anne, one
of the daughters of James Morris Esquire, then Attorney unto Queen Elizabeth of
her Majesty's Court of Wards and Liveries, and one of the Masters of the Bench
of this honorable Society. By her he had three Sons, Morris, Arthur, and
Edward; and eight daughters. He departed this life the 19th. of May A. D. 1623.

MEMORIAE SACRUM.
Near also unto this place lies the body of the Authur Turner Sergeant at the
Law, the second son of Edward Turner of Paringdon in the County of Essex Esquire
heretofore one of the Masters of the Bench of this honorable Society; and in
the xiith. year of the reign of King Charles called to be a Sergeant at Law. He
married Anne one of the daughters of John Iermy of Gunton in the Country of
Norfolk Esquire, lately one of the Masters of the Bench of this honorable
Society, by whom he had two sonns, Edward, now a member of this honorable
Society, and John lately deceased: and Anne his only daughter. He departed this
life in the 63. year of his age, the first of July A. D. 1651. Resurgemus.

On the South side of the Quire is a large monument of gray Marble, raised
above three foot from the ground, with this Epitaph graven in a square plate of
brass upon the top thereof.
HIc requiescunt corpora D. Nicholai Hare militis, and D. Catherinae consortis
suae qui quidem Nicholaus, potentissimis Regibus Henrico octavo and Edwardo
sexto, and Mariae Reginae, Supplicum Libellorum fuit Magister; and postea a
praefata Regina, officio Custodis, sive Magistri Rotulorum Cancellariae
honoratus, and in concilium suum secretum adeptus: in quibus omnibus
fidelissime and laudabiliter se gessit; adeo ut cunctis, tam summatibus, quam
infimatibus Regni, juxta fuerit charus. Obiit autem idem Nicholaus xxxi. die
mensis Octobris anno Christi 1557. Catherina vero xxi. die Novembris eodem
anno, divi Philippo and Maria Regibus.

Southwards from the last toward the Vestry lies a Marble with this Epitaph
in brass.
HEre lies burried John French, whilst he lived, one of the Benchers of the
Inner Temple; who died the fist day of May A. D. 1579. and in the xxi^^. year
of the most gracious reign of our sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth: And had by
Mary his Wife, one of the daughters of Thomas Godfrey Esquire (the late
Remembrancer of the First fruits and Tenths) three sons and three daughters.

On another Marble adjoining to the last, this Inscription upon a plate of
brass.
SUb hoc lapide jacet Lucia, quondam uxor Iohannis Hare Armigeri, unius
Sociorum hujus interioris Templi. Quae quidem Lucia 29 die Octobris Anno Domini
1601. obiit: Cujus pietatem, probitatemque Deus in coelis coronavit; and in die
Resurrectionis omnibus patefaciet.

Deus justificat, quis condempnet.

Above the Steps ascending toward the Altar, ly several Marble stones, whereon
are these following Epitapths.
Upon the first (whereon are the Portaitures of a man and his wife in brass)
this.
HEre lies buried the body of John Goldesburgh, of the Middle Temple Esquire one
of the Prothonotharies of the Court of Common Pleas: who had by his first Wife
Elizabeth the daughter of Robert Haule, of Waltham Abbey, in the Country of
Essex Esquire, four Children; two sonns, and two daughters. He was born on the
18th. day of October, in the year of our Lord 1568. and died the 9th. day of
October in the year of our Lord 1618.

On another, this Epitaph circumscribed on Plates of brass.
HIc jacet Henricus Beaumont Armiger, interioris T^mpli focius, filius junior
Iohannis Beaumont Armigeri, quondam Magistri Rotulorum, and Elizabethae uxoris
ejus filiae and haeredis Willielmi Hastings Armigeri, filii junioris Willielmi
domini Hastings. Qui quidem Henricus obiit anno aetatis suae xlii.

On another, this, in brass.
HEre lies buried the body of Katherine Jones, daughter of Rouland Morgan of
Maghen in the Country of Monmouth Esquire sometimes Wife to Miles Morgan of
Tredeger in the same County Esquire, and at her death the Wife of Henry Jones, one
of the fellows of this Inner Temple, Esquire. Which Katherine died the 20th. day of
September; anno Domini 1583.

On another this.
INter exuvias mortis, his requiescit in pace, corpus Thomae Gate, nupe^ unius
Baronum de le Coyfe de Scaccario publico: qui obiit 19 die Augusti A. D. 1650.
aetatis suae Lxiii.

On another this.
HEre lies the body of John White Esquire second son of Henry White of Heylan in
the County of Pembroke Esquire, a late useful member of the honorable House of
Commons in Parliament, and one of the Masters of the Bench of the honorable
Society of the Middle Temple: who was born on 29th. day of June A. D. 1590. and
departed this life the 29th. day of January 1644. leaving behind him Winifride
Wife to Richard Blackwell of Bushey, in the County of Hartford Esquire, by
Katherine his first Wife, daughter of Edward Barfoote of Lamburne Hall in Essex
Esquire four sons and four daughters. By Mary his second Wife and relict, (eldest
daughter of Thomas Styles of Little Missendon, in the County of Buck. Esquire he
had two other daughters, deceased in his life time.

Here lies a John, a burning shining light,
His name, life, Actions, were all White.
Upon another, this.
HEre lies the body of Charles Potts Esquire one of the Masters of the Bench, of
the honorable Society of the Middle Temple. He died the 18th. day of November
An. 1652.

Upon another, this.
SUmptibus and auspiciis honorab. Societat. Templi, subtus positae sunt
Reliquiae Radolphi Brounrici S. T. D. Cant. reverendiss. Episc. Exon. quem
honorem optime meruit, and per annos xix. tenuit; malo tamen seculi fato
(bellis Schismatibus, Sacrilegiis, and Regicidibus ferociente) nunquam
exercuir. Tandem, anno aetatis Lxvii. provinciam terrestrem nondum visa,
deserens, ad coelestem migravit, Era Christi MDCLx. illucescente Car. IIdi
foelicissimoreditu. L. M. P. I. G. Episc. Exon. electus.

In the North I Will
Upon a (...) Monument ad^oyning to the wall, whereon is the Statue of a Lawyer
in his Robe, this Epitapth.
(...) in hoc Tumulo corpus Edmundi Plowden Armigeri: qui, (...) in Comitat^
Salopiae narus est, a (...) est educa^us: in provectiore vero aetate, (...)
dedit. (...) jam factus and annum ae^ratis (...) in Christo Jesus sancte
o^dormivit, die (...) An. Domini 1584.

(...) and in novissima die de terra resurrec^^^ (...) Deum sal^atorem meum.

(...) Morior in po^tu.

In the same North I Will are these following Epitaphs on several Grave-stones of
Marble.
HEre lies buried the body of John Roop, the first son of John Roop of (...)
in the Country of Devon. gentilman, late Fellow of the Middle Temple; who died
the xxxith. day of October, aetatis suae 23. An. 1599.

On another.
HIc dormit Georgius Cole de Buckish Com. Devon. Armiger (Medii Templi socius)
natus anno mirabile 1588. denatus anno plusquam mirabile 1660. expectans
Resurrectionem.

On another.
Tendimus huc omnes.
Sub hoc marmore positum est, quod mortale ^uit Tobiae Newcourt de Pickwell in
Comitatu Devon. Armigeri: a vivis excessit octavo die Septembris, aetatis suae
vicesimo, annoque Domini 1661.

On another.
P. M. S.
ADsta viator, and ingemisce, sublata virtus and exemplum posteris, and dolorem
legate grande Depositum, pios cineres Thomae Heyhoe Armigeri, in spem foelicis
resurrectionis repositos, haec tellus tegir, meliori vitae, ac sincerae gloriae
redditura: trium Richmundiae and Leviniae Ducum procurator generalis: fidelis
patiator, cum hic justas rations reddidisset, coelo redditurus, obiit anno
MDCLxi. integritatis suae, and inculpatae virtutis, triste post se relinquens
desiderium immortale Monumentum. Apagite Elogiorum fusi; vitam marmor dat, non
mutatur sincera virtus.

Perge viator; and si lugere nescius; quod praestar, aemulare.

In the middle Alley of this Church (above the Partition) are these Epitaphs,
on several Gravestones of marble.
HIc jacet dominus Ricardus Lemster Capellanus; qui obiit xiiii. die mensis
Aprilis, anno domini MCCCCxx. Cujus animae propitietur Deus.

On another.
HEre lies buried the body of Edward Osburne Esquire, one of the Fellows of the
Inner Temple, who departed this life the 24th. day of March anno Domini 1591.
aetatis suae xxxii.

On another.
HIc jacet dominus Thomas Maghull Capellanus istius Ecclesiae beatae Mariae;
qui obiit xiiii. die... An. Domini MCCCCxlii. Cujus animae propitietur Deus.
Amen.

On another.
EDmond Berford D'irland gist icy. Dieu de s'alme eit mercy.

On another.
HEre lies the body of Daniel Cudmore of Loxbeare, in the County of Devon.
Esquire, who was a member of this Society. He departed this life the 18th. day of
June anno Domini 1631.

On another.
HEre lies interred the body of David Gwyn of the County of Brecknock Esquire, who
departed this life the 3d. of February 1652.

On another.
HIc jacet Robertus Gabyon Armiger, de Mildenhall in Com. Suff. qui obiit
tertio die mensis Octobris anno Domini MCCCCxlii. Cujus animae propitietur Deus
Amen.

Upon the same stone.
HIc jacet Thomas Bokynham Armiger, filius and haeres Georgii Bokynham nuper de
Snitherton in Com. Norff. Armigeri, and Margaretae uxoris ejus, filiae and
haeredis Francisci Heath Armigeri: qui quidem Thomas obiit nono die Decembris
An. Domini MCCCCCxxxv. and anno regni Regis Henrici octavi Vicesimo septimo;
cujus animae propitieture Deus. Amen.

Upon another.
(...) la Bear, Medii Templi socius; vir probus, pius, (...) Le^is tamen open
j^s suum non est assecutus. Parientia (...) aerum^is seculi liberatus, animam
Christo humillime reddidit, and (...) 18 Maii 1607. anno aetatis suae...

Frater fratri maerens posuit.

Upon diverse Plates of brass, within the precinct of this Church, were these
following Epitapths; which of late times have been torn out.
HEre lies the body of Sir John Crompton of Skarne, in the County of York
Knight, who was a member of this Society, and Master of the Fine Office. He
departed this life the 8th. day of December anno Domini 1623.

HEre lies Richard Lusher gentleman, sometimes student of Lincolnes Inn, who
resigned his virtuous and Godly life the 28th. year of his age, the 18th. day
of February An. Domini 1580.

HIc jacet corpus Iacobi Walrond Armigeri, Apprenticii ad Legem, and nuper
Thesaurarius Medii Templi, in hoc templo... in templo aeternitati quiesse:
Cujus memoriae Margareta, fidelissima conjux Thomae Danyell de Tabley in
Comitatu Cestriae Armigeri, filia, amoris ergo, hoc moerens posuit. Obiit fidus
Christi servus nono die Martii An. 1612. aetatis suae 61.

HEre lies the body of Thomas Crispe Esquire, born at Bolton, near Northampton,
one of the Society of the Middle Temple fifteen years: who departed this World
the 20th. day of March 1597. and in the 36th. year of his age. By his godly end
was showed his virtuous life.

RObertus jacet hic Thorn, quem Bristollia quondam
Praetoris merito legit ad officium.
Huic etenim semper magnae Respublica curae
Carior and cunctis patriae divitiis.
Far inopi auxilium; tristes componere lites
Dulce huic consilio quosque juvare fuit.
Qui vivis exaudi miserorum vota, precesque,
Christ huic in Coeli des regione locum.


HIc jacet dominus Thomas English, Capellanus istius Ecclesiae; qui obiit anno
Domini MCCCCxlii. Cujus animae propitietur Deus. Amen.

HEre lies the body of George Calthorpe gentleman, son of Martin Calthorpe in
the County of Norfolk Esquire, who after the pilgrimage of 32. years, surrendered
his soul into the hands of his Redeemer 12 Iulii 1627. Virtus post funera vivit
.

HIc jacet Johannes, filius Henrici Horn de Apuldry in Comitatu Kanciae, Cujus
animae propitietur Deus. Amen.

HEre lies buried Thomas Smalman, whilst he lived, one of the Benchers of the
Inner Temple: who died the 22th. day of July Anno Domini 1590. in the 32. year
of the reign of our sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth.

EN Iacobus Templo Bail requiescit in isto,
Qui fuerat gratus Medio Templo sociatus;
Cui Deus esto pius, ejus miserando reatus.
Vitam mutavit in mensis fine secundi
M. C. quater quae dato Lxx. quater annumerato,
Cui sit solamen Christus, dic protinus Amen.
HIc jacet Willelmus Langham, quondam Custos hujus Templi, qui obiit... A. D.
MCCCCxxxvii.

Tu prope qui transis, nec dicis aveto; Resist
auribus, and cord haec mea dicta tene.
Sum quod eris, quod es ipse fui, derisor amarae
Mortis, dum licuit pace manente frui:
Sed veniente nece, postquam, sum raptus amicis
Atque meis famulis orba... domus.
Me contexit humo, deploravitque jacentem;
Inque meos cineres ultima dona dedit:
Unde mei vultus corrosit terra nitorem
Quaeque fuit formae...
Ergo Deum pro me, cum pura mente precare
Ut mihi perpetua pace frui tribuat.
Et quicunque rogat pro me, comportet in unum
ut mecum maneat in regione poli.
WIlliam Burgh jadis Clerk de Chancelleri Gist icy. Dieu de s'alme eyt mercy.
Amen.

In magna Aula interiori Temppli In Orientali Fenestra
























Adhuc in dicta orientali Fenestra
























In A(...)aribus Fenestris dictae Aulae scilicet interioris Templi*
























In Australibus Fenestris ejusdem Aulae.








































Cap. LVIII.
Innes of Chancery belonging to the Inner Temple. Cap. 58.

Cliffords Inn.
THis House was anciently belonging unto the honorable Family of the Barons
Clifford (from whom the late Earls of Cumberland did descend:) and being their
habitation here in London, had thence the name of Cliffords Inn.

The first of them that possessed it was Robert de Clifford, who had the
inheritance thereof by Grant Pat. 3 E. 2. m. 19. Extractae Finium Cancellariae
de anno 3 E. 2. m. 8. n. 16
. from King Edward the second 24 Febr. in the 3d. year of his reign; to hold by
the service of one penny, to be paid into the Exchequer at Michaelmass: By which
Grant it appears, that it had been before that time the House of Malculine de
Harley, Eschaetor to King Edward the first on this side Trent, and came to that
King's hands for certain debts due to him from the said Malculine.

After the death of which Robert de Clifford, Isabell his Widow dimised it in
18 Edw. tertii to the Students of the Law ( Apprenticiis de Banco are the words
of the Record) for the yearly Rent of x1. So that, since that time, first by
Lease, and afterward by a grant thereof in Fee ferm to Nicholas Sulyard Esquire
Principal of this House, Nicholas Guybon, Robert Clinche and other the then
seniors thereof, in consideration of six hundred pounds, and the rent of iiii1.
per annum, as I have heard, it has continued to be a mansion for the Lawyers,
and called an Inn of Chancery.

Cap. LIX.
Clements Inn. (...)

THis had doubtless its name, from standing near unto St. Clements Church, or
St. Clements Well, and was an Inn of Chancery, or House wherein Students of
the Law had residence, in King Edward the fourths time, as may seem by the Book
Impr. Lord. 1595. f. 108
. of Entries, from the Record of Mich. 19 E. 4. fol. 61. titulo Misaomer: where
the Defendant, to show that he was not named of the right place of his abode,
pleaded thus -- Dicit, quod tempore impetrationis Brevis, fuit de Hospicio de
Clements Inn, in Parochia S. Clementis Dacorum, extra barram Novi Templi Land.
in Comitatu Midl-sexiae: quod quidem Hospicium est, and tempore ante
impetrationis Brevis, and diu ante, fuit quoddam Hospicium hominum Curiae Legis
temporalis; necnon hominum Consiliariorum ejusdem Legis.

Of whose inheritance it anciently was, I find not: but in 2 Henr. 7. Sir John
Cantlowe Knight, by a Lease Ex autogr^^ penes Principalem and socios, (...)
. bearing date 20 Dec., in consideration of xl. marks fine, and four pounds
vis. viiid. yearly Rent, demised it for Lxxx. years unto William Elyot and John
Elyot (in trust, as may be presumed for the Students of the Law.) And about the
20th. of H. 8. (as I have heard) Cantlows right and interest therein was passed
to William Holles Citizen of London (afterward Knight and Lord Mayor of that
City) and from him is descended to the right honorable John Earl of Clare, of
whom this Society do hold it.

Cap. LX.
Lyon's Inn.
THat this was an Inn of Chancery in K. H. 5. time, the old Books of the
Stewards Accounts do show; but how long before is uncertain.

Cap. LXI.
The Middle Temple. (...)

OF these, The (...).
the most ancient, now remaining, is the great Gate toward Fleetstreet,
commonly called the Middle Temple gate. This, a the History of Cardinal
Woolsey's life (written by Mr. Cavendish, one of his Gentlemen Ushers)
testifies, was built by Sir Amias Paulet Knight about the 7th. year of King
Henry the 8th. who, being upon an old grudge, sent for up by the Cardinal, and
commanded not to depart London without License, lodged in this Gatehouse, which
he re-edifyed and sumptuously beautified on the outside, with the Cardinal's
Arms, Hat, (...), Badges, and other Devices, in a glorious manner, thereby
Loping to appease his displeasure.

But the fairest structure belonging to this House, is the Hall, it being very
large and stately; the first preparation (...)
whereunto, was in the year 1562. (5 Eliz.) though not finished (...)
till the year 1572. 14. Eliz. Mr. Edmund Plowden being constituted Treasurer
(...)
for that work.

The next, whereof I find mention, are those (called then the Brick buildings)
which I suppose to be the same that now pass by the name of the Brick Court
(Northwards from the Hall:) toward the chardge (...)
whereof Thomas Daniel, sometime Treasurer of this House, bestowed no small
cost in II Eliz.

In 17 Eliz. the new Skreen in the Hall was (...)
made; toward which every Master of the Bench was assessed at xx^; every
Master of the Utter-Barr, Officer, and common Attorney at x^, and each person
else of this Society at vi^.viii^^.

It seems, that the fabric of the Hall did put the House much in debt; and
that it was not discharged of diverse years after: for in 17 Eliz. ( 16 Iunii)
there was an Order (...)
made in their Parliament; that, forasmuch as by one Decree made 8 Febr. 13
Eliz. the old Pensions had been augmented for three years then next following,
toward the payment thereof: and by another, in their Parliament held 10 Febr.
16 Eliz. that they had been augmented one year more, Cap. 61.
to the same purpose; and that all these helps were not sufficient; that the
augmentation of the said Pensions should continue yet one year longer.

In 9. Iac. certain Brick-buildings, adjoining to the Eastside of the Middle
Temple gate, were erected Ex (...) 3. f. 27. b.
by (...) Walter Cope, and Sir Arthur Gorge Knights.

And in 10 Iac. (an. 1612.) those also of Brick in the Vine-Court, over the
Cloisters three stories high, by lb. f. 36. b.
Francis Tate Esquire a person of great learning in the Laws, and eminent for his
knowledge in Antiquities.

In 13 Iac. those Buildings of Brick, near the Middle Temple gate, called
Luther's buildings, were made lb. f. 88. a.
by Anthony Luther, an Utter-Barrister of this House.

In 1o. Car. Imi. (an. scil. 1625.) were erected lb. f. 292. 1.
those fair Brick-buildings adjoining to the Hall. And the next year following,
those Ex Regist. 4 to f. 5. (...) b. 24. ^ and 25. b.
Brick buildings in the Pump Court.

In an. 1629. (scil. 5 Car. I.) there was an Order Ib. f. 32. b.
made (19 Iunii) for pulling down that Fabric erected by Sir Walter Cope and
Sir Arthur Gorge before mentioned, and to rebuild it that next Vacation.

And in the next year following ( viz. an 1630. 6. Car. l.) were erected those
lodgings of Ib. f. 42. b.
Brick, on the East side of the Middle Temple lane: those also in Elm-Court,
Ib. f. 47. a. 57. a. and 91. a.
and Ib. f. 66. b.
over the Church porch.

In an. 1631. ( 7 Car. I.) was the Building Ib. ^. 70. b.
by the Church in the Inner Temple lane made. And in an 1637. (13 Car. I.) the
rest of the Brick buildings Ib. p. 180.
in the Pump-Court; and Ib. p. 189.
between the Vine-Court, Elm-Court, Pump Court, and Middle Temple lane were set
up.

A particular chardge of the last great Brick building erected between
Elm-Court, Pump-Court, Vine-Court, and the Middle Temple lane. Which was begun
to be builded An. 1638. when Sir Richard Lane (afterward Lord Keeper of the
great Seal) was Treasurer, and continued in building An. 1639. William
Congniers (afterward Sergeant at Law) being Treasurer, and was finished An.
1640. when Richard Townsend was Treasurer, about two years in all, ere it was
perfected, and made fit to be inhabited. viz.

l. s. d. To the Bricklayer in Mr. Treasurer Lane's year 213 06 12. Cognier's
year 406 03 05. Townsend's year 135 08 01. 754 17 08. And for Bricks bought in
Mr. Treasurer Cogniers 463 08 08. Mr. Treasurer Townsend 085 11 09. 549 00 05.
To the Carpenter in Mr. Treasurer Lane's time 078 05 00 Mr. Cognier's time 348
04 07. Mr. Townsend's time 309 09 02. 735 18 09. To the Timber-man in Mr.
Attorney Lane's time 024 18 00. Mr. Cognier's time 620 16 11. Mr. Townsend's
time 157 11 06. 803 06 05. To the Scavenger and other Carters, for carrying
away the Earth dug out of the Cellerage and other foundations for the
buildings, and for carrying away the Rubbish etc. 083 05 00. For Deal-bords and
other bords in Mr. Attorney Lane's time, in toto 2538. Deals etc. 123 15 00.
And again, near that number more in Mr. Townsend's time 121 15 00. 245 10 00.
For Lime brought in and spent in Mr. Lane's time 025 00 06. Mr. Cognier's time
183 16 00. Mr. Townsend's time 071 11 06. 280 08 00. To the under Treasurer Mr.
Bailiff, for his Fees as Surveyer of this Building; in Mr. Attorney Lane's time
012 00 00. in Mr. Cognier's time 039 00 00. in Mr. Townsend's time 039 00 00.
And for fyling and entering Bills these three years 007 13 04. 097 13 04. l. s.
d. To the Sawyers in Mr. Treasurer Cognier's time 063 05 02. Mr. Treasurer
Townsenl's time 027 10 03. 090 15 05. To other Artificers, viz.
To the Mason for Stone-works 107 18 03. And to the Plumber 077 06 11. And for
Tyles and Lathes 036 09 00. To the Ironmonger 143 12 09. To the Playsterer 403
16 03. To the Painter 046 13 08. To the Smith 087 04 00. To the Glasier 085 15
01. And for the Loan of the Scaffold-stuff per Agreement. 040 00 00. 1027 15
11. Sum total: To the
Bricklayer 754 17 08. And for Bricks 549 00 05. Carpenter 735 18 09. Timber
803 06 05. Scavengers 083 05 00. Deal Bords 245 10 00. Lime man 280 08 00.
Surveyor etc. 097 13 04. Sawyers 090 15 05. And other Artificers ut supra. 1027
15 11. 4668 10 11.

Toward it is Sum of 4668l. -- 10s. -- 11d. There were collected, not full out
2^00l. by or amongst the Gentlemen that were Builders. Every one depositing
80^. for a whole Chamber, and 40^. for a half Chamber; the re^^ of the charge
went out of the Treasury, which did put the House much in Debt.

Besides the old materials of the former Buildings, Timber, Stone, Lead, Glass,
Backs, Tiles etc. which could not be so little of value as 331l. 09s. 1d. which
were wrought in again. The old Buildings were much more spacious than the new:
but not so high builded, it being five stories high, besides the
Celler-Chambers.

There has since that been built in the Middle Temple lane, a good fair
Fabric, but the first story thereof was only of Brickwork. It was erected An.
1653.

And since that one other very large, high spacious Brick building in Essex
Court, on the West side and North end thereof An. 165.

Orders for Government.
IN 10 Eliz. Admittances
(2 Iunii) it was ordered, Ex Registro ejusdem Hosp. [D.] f, 81. b.
that whosoever had been of an Inn of Chancery belonging to this House, should
pay xl^. only for his admission into this Society; but if he were of any other,
then to pay five pounds: and if of no Inn of Chancery vil. xiiis. iiiid.

And in 30 Eliz. by an order Ex Registro 2do. f. 280. b.
made 30 Iunii, it was decreed, that such Students of New Inn, who should be
desirous to be of this Fellowship of the Middle Temple, after such time as they
had mooted and done their Exercise of learning in the said House of New Inn,
should have their antiquity in this House, notwithstanding their continuance
and being in Commons in New Inn: provided always, that they bring a true
Certificate of their mooting and Exercise, under the Reader and Principal's
hands of the said House, for the time being, before their names be entered in
the Book of Admittances, or have any antiquity in this House; and the Fines for
their Admittances to be respited until their coming into to Commons in this
House: and to serve their Vacations, and to pay their Pensions presently upon
their coming into Commons in this House, and not before.

In 2 Iac. (25 Ian.) there was a confirmation lb. f. 332. a.
of an Order made here in Parliament 12 Maii 27 Eliz. viz. that none should be
admitted to be associate with the Bench, at the Bench Table, except he did
first pay the sum of ten pounds at the least, in Plate; of such like provision
for the said Bench Table, if he were no Reader.

In 1 Eliz. Barristers.
(3 Nov.) it was decreed Ex Registro [D.] f. 31. b.
in their Parliament, by command from the Judges, that the Utter-Barristers who
did then practice, or did afterward purpose so to do, should not presume to
plead at any Bar until they were of xii. years standing, and with the License
of the Benchers, upon pain of expulsion out of this Society: provided, that
they might be of Council with their Clyents, and come with them to the Bar,
upon their businesses already begun. How long this Decree was observed I have
not seen: but in 11. lac. (23 Apr.) there was an Order Ex Registro 3. f. 49. b.
made that none should be called to the Bar under seven years standing.

In 4 and 5 Ph. and M. it was ordered, Apparel.
Ex Registr^ [D.] f. 27. b.
that none of this Society should thenceforth wear any great Bryches in their
Hoses, made after the Dutch, Spanish, or Almon fashion; or Lawnde upon their
Capps; or Cut doublets, upon pain of ^iii. iiiid. for-faiture for the first
default, and the second time to be expelled the House. And in 26 Eliz. there
was this establishment Ex Registr^ 2do. f. 168. b.
here made, for Reformation in Apparel.

1. That no great Ruff should be worn.

2. Nor any white color in Doublets, or Hosen.

3. Nor any facing of Velvet in Gowns, but by such as were of the Bench.

4. That no Gentlemen should walk in the streets, in their Cloaks, but in
Gowns.

5. That no Hat, or long, or curled hayr be worn.

6. Nor any Gowns, but such as were of a sad color.

In an. 1631. Christmas.
(7 Car. 1.) at their Parliament held 25 Nov. there were diverse good Ex
Registr^ 3. fol. 81. a. and p. 184.
Orders established for Christmas government, as may be seen in their Register
whereunto I have here referred.

Orders Ibid. p. 1^^^
made and set down for the better government of the Society of the, Middle
Temple, in An. 1635. 11 Car. 1.
WHereas for the good government of the Innes of Court, An. D. 1635. 11 Car.
it has been lately advised and required by the Judges, by command from his
Majesty signified unto them by the Lords of his Majesty's most honorable Privy
Council, amongst other things; That every Gentleman of the several Societies in
Commons, shall once every year at the least receive the holy Communion. That no
Gentleman, foreiner, (...) discontinuer, or other not of the Societies, shall
be permitted or allowed to lodge in any of the said Societies. That no Common
Attorney or Solicitor be hereafter admitted of any of the four Innes of Court.
That no Utter-Barrister publicly practice at any Bar at Westminster. unti^l ^e have
been three years at the Bar. That none be admitted to the Bar under eight
years continuance, and such as have kept Exercises in the House, and at the
Innes of Chancery, according to the Orders of the House: And that when the
Bench shall find the (...) of fit and learned Students, of honest condition and
well deserving the same. That no Gentleman of any House shall come into the
several Halls or places of public Prayer, with Hats, Cloaks, Boots, Spurs,
Swords or Daggers; or shall wear long hayr. And that every Utter-Barrister and
other Gentleman do give due respect and reverence to the Readers, Benchers, and
Ancients of every House: The Masters of the Bench conforming themselves to the
gra^^ advice of the said Judges, and in obedience to his Majesty's command; and
finding all the said particulars agreeable to the ancient Orders and
constitutions of this House, have agreed and ordered concerning the same, in
manner and form as follows.

1. That every Gentleman of the House by the second Communion in next
Michaelmass Term at the farthest, that shall receive the holy Communion in the
Temple Church: and if any shall refuse or neglect so to do, to be expelled the
House. And it is farther ordered, that the Act of Parliament of this House,
made the 8th. day of July 12 lac. An. 1614. every man to receive the Communion
twice within the compass of every year, upon pain of expulsion, be revived and
from henceforth duly put in execution.

2. That the Orders of 26. Iunii 10 Iac. 1612. and of 20 Maii 1631. the former
forbidding any Gentleman to lodge any Stranger in his Chamber, upon pain to
forfeit five pounds for his first offense, and to loss his Chamber for the
second: The later forbidding every Gentleman having a Chamber, to suffer any
other Gentlemen of the House, that has none, to lodge in the same, without
allowance of the Treasure first had, upon pain of five marks for every week of
such sufferance; and for default of payment thereof upon demand, of the loss of
his Chamber: that every of these Orders be duly observed, and strictly put in
execution.

3. That the Act of Parliament of this House, touching none admittance of
Common Attorneys, made 25 Iunii 3 and 4 ph. and M. be from henceforth duly
observed: And further, that a list be made of the names of the present
Attorneys and Sollicitors of this House, and entered into the Parliament book:
and if any Gentleman from henceforth, after he shall be admitted, shall then
become an Attorney, or shall practice as 2 Common Attorney, or Solicitor in
any of his Majesty's Courts, shall ipso facto be expelled the House.

4. That whereas there have been heretofore, anciently, diverse Acts made by the
preceding Benchers, governors of this House, to restrain the too early
practice of young Barristers, which suit not so well unto these times: the
Masters of the Bench have therefore ordered, that no young Barrister presume to
take upon him to practice, in any of the Courts at Westminster. before he have been
full there years at the Bar, at the least; upon pain to be convented before
the Bench, and fined, or otherwise dealt withal as to them in their
discretions shall seem meet. Neither do they intend to call any to the Bar
hereafter, other than such as have their full time, and are otherwise qualified
thereunto, as the Orders of the House do require: And therefore they enjoin the
Gentlemen under the Bar to apply and follow their Studies; to keep the Case;
To perform their Exercises: To order their Habits and Hayr to decency and
formality, according to the Orders of the House; and to yield due respect and
observance to the Benchers and ancients, their Governors, as they expect and
desire the preferment to the degree of the Bar, or otherwise care to be liable
to the censure of the Bench; or (as the cause shall require) to be cut off from
the Society.

In an. 1642. (29 Apr.) there was an Order Ib. p. 265.
made, ^ibrary.
that the Books given by the last Will and Testament of Mr. Robert Ashley, an
ancient Barrister of this House, should be kept under Lock and Key till a
Library were built.

A Description of the form and manner, how and by what Orders and Customs the
state of the fellowship of the Middle Temple, (one of the Houses of the Court)
is maintained; and what ways they have to attain unto learning. (temp. Reg. H.
8.)
FIrst there is no lands nor revenues belonging to the House, Vitellius C. 9.
in bibl. Cotton. f. 320. a.
whereby any learner or Student might be helped and encouraged to study, by
means of some yearly Stipend or Salary; which is the occasion, that many a good
wit, for lack of exhibition, is compelled to give over and forsake study,
before he have any perfyt knowledge in the law, and to fall to practisyng, and
become a Typler in the Law.

The auctoryte of the bed Officer in there House.
ITem, that there is in the said House, yearly chosen by the Elders of the
House, one of the sagest of them to bear the Office and name of Tresorer; and
his auctorite is to admit into the fellowship, such as he thinks mete: His
auctorite is to assign to such as are of the fellowship there, their Chambers
and lodgings. His auctoryte is to gather of certain of the fellowship, a Tribute
yearly of iiis. iiiid. a piece, which among them has the name of a pencion,
and to receive of certain of the fellowship, a Rent of certain Chambers. His
Office is also to pay of the said money, the Rent due to the Lord of St. John's,
for the House that they dwell in; and to pay also of the same money for
reparations of their Chambers and Houses. His Office is also to pay of the same
money, the wages or salary of the servants of the House; as the Stuard, their
Butlers, Cokes, and other Officers; and yearly to yield Account of his receipt
unto two Auditors, which are appointed unto them by the Elders of the House.

The diversity of Fellowships there, their manner of Study, and preferment
therein.
ITem, that there is in the same House of the fellowship there, two Companyes;
the one called the Clerks commens, the other called the Masters Commens.

Item the Clerks commens are such young men as are admitted to the fellowship
of the House, who during two of the first years, or thereabout after their
admission, shall dyne and sup together, and sit one more at a Mess than the
Masters commens does; and until they be called up to be of the Masters
commens, they shall not pay the pension money of iiis. iiiid. a piece; neither
pay so much for their commens weekly as the Masters commens does, by vid. a
piece: and they serve the Masters commens of their meat, every day at Dynner
and Supper.

Item, that the Masters commens are such as have been in the House, by the space
of two years or there abouts; and then are by the Elders of the House, which
they call Benchers, called up to the Masters commens, whereas they sit one less
in a Mess, than the Clerks commens do; and pay vid. a week for their commens
more than the Clerks commens do; and pay each of them iiis. iiiid. yearly to
the Treasorer for their pension.

Furthermore the Masters commens are ferder divyded into three Companies; that
is to say, no Utter-Baristers, Utter-Baristers, and Benchers Item those that be
no Utter-Baristers, are such as for lack of continuance in the House, or
because they do not study or profit in lernyng, are not by the Elders of the
House called to dispute, argue and plead some doubtful matter in the Law,
which among them is called motyng, before the Benchers and Elders.

Item the Utter-Baristers are they, which after they have continued in the
House by the space of five or six years, and have profited in the Study of the
Law, are called by the Elders or Benchers, to plead, argue, and dispute some
doubtful matter in the Law, before certain of the same Benchers, in (...) term
time, or in the two principa^l times in the year, of their lern^^^s, which they
called Grand Vacations; and the same manner of argument or disputations is
called Motyng: and this making of Utter-Baristers, is as a preferment or
degree, given him for his lernyng.

Also the Benchers are those Utter-Baristers, which after they have continued
in the House, by the space of fourteen or fifteen years, are by the Elders of
the House chosen to read, expound, and declare some Estatute openly unto all
the Company of the House, in one of the two principal times of their learning,
which they call the Grand Vacation in Summer: and during the time of his
Reading, he has the name of a Reader, and after of Bencher.

Item, that they have two chief times of lernyng with them, which they call
their grand Vacations; the one does begin the first Monday in clean Lent, and
does continue three weeks and three days, in which time one of the Elders or
Benchers, that has before time read, and expounded some Estatute, does then
read and expound some other Statute again: The other does begin the first
Monday after Lammas day, and does continue three weeks and three days, in
which does read such as are first chosen to be Benchers.

Item by the old Custom of the House, all such as are made Fellows of the
House, unles they be dispensed withal at their Admittance, are compelled to be
personally present, at two the first grand Vacations in Lent, after their
coming: At two the first grand Vacations in Summer, after their coming, and two
the first Christmasses, that be solemly kept, after their coming, upon pain of
forfaiture of xxs. for every defaut.

Item all they, that are Fellows of the House, except at the time of their
admittance they be dispensed withal, or for their lernyng be promotyd and made
Utter-Baristers, are compelled to exercise all such rooms and offices, as
they shall be called unto, at such time as they keep a solemn Christmas,
upon such peynes as are by old Custom used to be assessed for the refusal of
occupying of such offices.

Furthermore in the same graund Vacations, when that one of the Elders does
read and expound an Estatute, such Utter-Baristers as are of long continuance,
do stand in a place together, where as they rehearse some one opinion, or saying
of him that reads, and by all ways of lernyng and reason, that can be
invented, do impugn his opinion: and sometimes some of them do impugn it, and
some other do approve it, and all the rest of the House give care unto their
disputations; and at last the Reader does confute all their sayings, and
confirms his opynion.

Also in the same grand Vacations, every day at night, except Sunday, Saturday,
or some feste of ix. Lessons, before three of the Elders or Benchers at the least, is pleadyd and declared in homely Law-french, by such as are young
Lerners, some doubtful matter, or question in the Law; which afterward an
UtterBarister does rehearse, and does argue and reason to it in the Law-frenche:
and after him an other Utter-Barrister does reason in the contrary part, in
Law-frenche also; and then do the three Benchers declare their minds in
English; and this is that they call motyng; and the same manner is observed in
the Term time.

Furthermore, besides this; after Dynner and Supper the Students and Lerners in
the House, fit together by three and three in a Company; and one of the three
puts forth some doubtful question in the Law, to the other two of his
Company; and they reason and argue unto it in English; and at last, he that
puts forth the question, declaryth his mind, also showing unto them the
judgment or better opinion of his Book, where he had the same question: and
this do the Students observe every day through the year, except Festival days.

Also after the Term ended, and after the two grand Vacations ended, then the
young men that be no Utter-Baristers, do dispute and argue in Law french,
some doubtful question, before the Utter-Baristers, who at the last, do show
their opinions, in Englysh, thereunto: and this manner of disputations is
called mean Vacation Motes, or Chapel Motes.

Item that the Myddil Temple does find two Readers, which are UtterBaristers
unto two Houses of Chancery; that is to say Stronde-Inne, and New-Inne: which
Readers do read unto them upon some Statute in the Term time, and in the
graund Vacations: and they of the Houses of Chancery do observe the manner of
disputations and motyng, as they do in the Temple: and their Readers do bring
each of them two with him of the Temple, and they argue unto it also.

And besides this, in the graund Vacation time, out of the four Houses of
Court, come two and two to every House of Chancety; and there according to
their years and continuance of the House that they be of, which they call
auncienty, they do argue and reason to some doubtful matter, that is proponed,
so that the most youngest does begin, and the next to him in continuance does
follow; and at last he that reads to that House of Chancery, does declare his
opynion in the matter that is called in question.

There is none there, that be compelled to learn, and they that are learners,
for the most part, have their Studies and places of learning so set, that they
are much troubled with the noise of walkyng and communication of them that be
no learners: and in the Term time they are so unquieted by Clyents and
servants of Clyents, that resort to such as are Attorneys and practysers, that
the Students may as quietly study in the open streets, as in their Studies.

Item, they have no place to walk in, and talk and confer their learnings, but
in the Church; which place all the Term times, has in it no more quietness,
than the Pervyse of Pawles, by occasion of the confluence and concourse of such
as are futers in the Law.

The chardges of the Masters commens and Clerks commens, for their mete and
drink by the year, and the manner of the Diet, and the Stipende of their
Officers.
INprimis every one of the Masters commens pays by the year, for his Diet
vil. 10s.

Item every one of the Clerks commens pays by the year for his Diet vl. --
iiiis.

This is a general rule allways observed, that whenever two of the Masters
commens, does sit at a Mess, then at so myche mete does sytt three of the
Clerks commens: and when three of the Masters commens does sit at a Mess, then
does four of the Clerks commens sit at so much meat.

Sunday.
Between two of the Masters commens, At Dinner.
is served meat to the value of iiid. and the third part of iid.

Between three of the Masters commens, At Supper.
at Supper, is served meat to the value of iiid.

Monday.
Between two of the Masters commens is served meat to the value of 1d. At
Dinner.
ob. and the third part of ii^d.

Between two of the Masters commens, At Supper.
is served meat to the value of ii ob.

Tuysday.
In the Term time is meat to the value of iiii^. (...)
served, between two of the Masters commens; and out of the Term between three
of the Masters commens, mete to the value of iii^. between three of the Masters
commens.

Wednsday.
Meat to the value of id. (...)
ob. and the third part of iid. between two of the Masters commens.

Meat to the value of id. (...)
and the third part of iid. between two of the Masters commens.

Thursday.
Two of the Masters commens have meat to the value of iiid. (...)


Two of the Masters commens have meat to the value of iid. (...)
ob.

Friday.
Two of the Masters commens have meat to the of iiid. (...)
ob.

Saturday.
Two of the Masters commens have meat to the value of iiiid. (...)
ob.

Every one of the Masters commens, (...)
and Clerks commens, have four Eggs.

The Stypend of their Officers by the year.
THe Stewards wages by the year, iiii. marks.

The Chief Butlers wages by the year, ^. iiiid.

The second Butlers wages by the year. vi^. viii.^

The third Butlers wages by the year viii^.

The Chief Cokes wages by the year, (...).

The Manciple, or Students servant, his wages by the year, xxvi^. viiid.

The Under-Cookes wages by the year, xxs.

The Laundresse of the Clothes of the House, her wages yearly vis. viiid.

Also at Christmasse the three Butlers have in reward of every Gentleman of the
House xiid. and some given them in reward more.

Also at Easter the Cooks Manciple have in reward of every Gentleman of the
House xiid. or thereabouts.

The manner of punishment of Offenses and making of Orders.
THere is among them no certain punishment for Offenses; but such offenses and
misdemeanors as are committed, are punished by the judgment of the Elders, or
Benchers; who punish the Offender, either by payment of money, or by putting
him forth of commens; which is, that he shall take no meat nor drink among
the fellowship, until the Elders list to revoke their judgment.

Item at certain times in the year, the Benchers and Utter-Baristers do resort
together, and there they do consult and advise themselves, concerning the
causes of their House, and make Decrees and Orders concerning such things, as
they think meet to be reformed in the House; and that they call a Parliament.

The manner of Divine Services in the Church, and their chardges thereunto.
ITem, that they have every day three Masses said; one after the other: And the
first Mass does begin in the morning at seven of the Clock, or thereabouts.
The Festival days they have Mattens and Mass solemnly sung; and during the
Matyns singing, they have three Masses said.

Their chardges toward the salary, or mete and drink of the Priests, is none;
for they are found by my Lord of St. John's; and they that are of the fellowship
of the House, are chardged with nothing to the Priests, saving that they have
eighteen offering days in the year, so that the chardge of each of them is
xviiid.

Their order for payment of Debts due to the House.
ITem, if any of the Fellowship be indebted to the House, other for his Diet,
other for any other duty of the House, he shall be openly in the Hall
proclaimed; and whosoever will pay it for him, shall enjoy and have his lodging
and Chamber, that is so indebted.

Apparel.
THey have no order for their Apparel; but every man may go as him lists, so
that his Apparel pretend no lightness, or wantonness in the wearer: for, even
as his Apparel does show him to be, even so shall he be esteemed among rhem.

The fashion of their House in the night.
IN the night time they have not their Yates shut, so that every man may go in
and out through the House, all seasons of the night; which is occasion, that
their Chambers are oftentimes robbed, and many other misdemeanors used.

Library.
THey now have no Library, so that they cannot attain to the knowledge of
diverse learnings, but to their great chardges, by the buying of such books, as
they lust to study. They had a simple Library, in which were not many books
besides the Law; and that Library, by means that at stood allways open, and
that the learners had not each of them a Key unto it, it was at the last robbed
and spoiled of all the books in it.

Their usage in time of Pestilence.
IF it happen, that the plague of Pestilence be any thing nigh their House,
they immediately break up their House, and every man goes home into his
Country, which is a great loss of learning: for if they had some House nigh
London to resort unto, they might as well exercise their learning, as in the
Temple, until the Plague were ceased.

The state of the House at this day.
THis Society consists also of three sorts or degrees of men professing the
Laws; viz. Benchers, id est, such as have been Readers (anciently called
Apprentices of the Law) Utter-Baristers, and Inner-Baristers, id est; Students
under seven years; all which have their Commons in the Hall.

The Officers are these; The Officers,
A Steward and his Servant; one Chief Butler, four others who wear Gowns, and
two more inferiors called Wash-pots; one head Cook, an under Cook, a
Turnbroach, two Scullions, a Porter and a Gardner. All which except the Porter
and Gardner have their diet in the House, and receive wages with certain Vailes
belonging to their Offices.

The Porter has his lodging under the Middle Temple gate, and two Shops there,
on the Eastside, which afford him Rent; his Office being to shut and open that
Gate at due hours, and to keep out Beggars, and such loose kind of people: as
also in Vacation time to see to Gentlemen's Chambers, that the Doors be not
broke open.

The Steward The Steward't Office.
is to provide the ordinary Diet for the House (extraordinary being to be taken
care for by the second Cook) and has his lodging under the Hall. He is allowed
a Servant under him, besides a Porter or Pannyer-man to bring in the mea^; and
keeps a Roll, wherein the names of all persons are entered, who are either in
whole, or in half Commons, viz. half the week, and such only as take Repasts;
every Repast being one meal in the Hall, and of which two and no more are
allowed: for if they exceed that number it goes for half a week; and
accordingly they are rated at the weeks end, viz. Saturday, when he casts up
the Commons in the presence of two Utter-Baristers in the Term times, and two
Gentlemen under the Bar in Vacation time, who are to oversee him and to
examine his Accounts, being termed Auditors. But it belongs to the Chief Butler
(and not to the Steward) to take a note of the names of such as are in Commons,
which entered in the Buttery book; out of which the Steward makes up his Roll;
wherein if any Gentleman be wronged, id est, cast in Commons, whereas in truth
he was absent and took no Commons that week; or cast in whole Commons, where he
ought to be but half Commons, yet he ought to pay it, the Stewards Roll being a
Record and signed by the said Auditors is a conclusion to him: his only remedy
in that case, being to pray an allowance of another week, or half a week, as
the case falls out, in lieu thereof; which is granted to him in case the error
be manifested.

To the Steward and his servant it belongs to serve in the meat in Messes
throughout the whole Hall, except the Masters of the Bench-Table and their
associates (being like Fellow-Commoners in the Universities) who are served by
the second Butler and his assistant; and the Masters of the Bar, that is the
Primier Bar-table (consisting of such as have been Readers of New Inn, or such
whose puis^es have been Readers there) who are served by the second Butler and
the Payner-man.

The Chief Butler is to keep a Buttry-book, (...)
and to enter therein all such Orders as are made by the Bench, at the Table,
but not such as are made in Parliament; for those are entered by the
Under-Treasurer. He is like-wise to enter the names of such as are admitted
into Commons, or which are admitted into the House by the Readers in their
times of Reading, and diverse other things of like nature. He also enters the
names of all such a perform any Moot or Exercise, either within the House or
abroad, to the end he may give a true account thereof when he is thereto called.

He is likewise to provide Bread and Beer, as also green earthen drinking pots,
which he casts into the Steward's Accounts, who pay for the same: but Cheese he
provides at his own chardges; and after Dinner cuts every man his portion; for
which he has a certain weekly allowance from every one in Commons. And to him
it belongs (as aforesaid) to enter into a Roll the names of all such as are in
Commons.

He is also employed to call any offender to the Bench Table, to be either
punished or admonished for his offense: and likewise to provide Torches for the
solemn Revells, and a white Rod, and a white staff for the Readers elect; and
others at those Revells; which are the two next ancients in Commons, then
present in the Hall: the first of whom, being denominated Master of the
Revells, is at all solemn Revells to carry the White staff, and leads the
several Dances, or ancient measures, conducting the whole Society ( id est, all
Under-Benchers) round the Hall at those times: The other is to carry the white
Rod or Verge, and is called Master of the Ceremonies, who standing at the
Cup-board, with a loud voice does thrice Summon the Master of the Revells to
come forth and perform that duty.

To the Office of the Chief Butler it likewise apperteineth to take the names
of those that are absent at the said solemn Revells, and to present them to the
Bench: as also inform the Bench of such as wear Hats, Boots, long Hayr, or the
like (for the which he is commonly out of the young Gentlemen's favor:) and to
appoint such as in Term are to recite Pleadings, or to Moot; or to perform any
assignement: and to inform the Bench thereof, in case they refuse.

These are to see the Tables throughout the Hall covered, The three other
Butlers Office.
and again voided at the end of every meal: the antientest of which three
attends at the Bar Table, and next upon them on that side of the Hall. The
puisne or fifth Butler attends on the other side, and serves the several Tables
there with Bread and Beer. Moreover this puisne Butler is to say Grace, both
before and after every meal, which he does with an audible voice, standing in
the Term time with his face toward the Bench Table; and in the Vacations
toward the Bar Table.

The antientest of these Butlers keeps the Pension Roll, and collects the
Pensions every Term, which are five Groats a Term from every one of the
Society; as well Students and Utter-Baristers, as Benchers; out of which
collection he is allowed for his pains xiid. in the pound: but anciently these
Pensions were collected Termly by a Gentleman of the Society. And the other of
these Butlers do collect the other Rolls; viz. the Calves head Roll, the
Parsons Roll, and other occasional Rolls, having the like poundage for their so
doing.

These three Butlers were heretofore (as appears by an entry in the Buttry book
made an. 18 Eliz.) to have xiid. yearly of every Gentleman, for their Salary;
and the Chief Butler was to make a Roll of all their names, to be signed by the
Treasurer and affixed to the Pension Roll, for the better collection thereof:
but now every Gentleman under the Bar pays xiid. and every Barister xviiid.
yearly; which sums are gathered yearly by the second Butler; who for that
purpose keeps a little Book of the Gentlemen's names, Five Butlers anciently.
and crosses those that have paid. Which Collections, by an Order made an. 19
Eliz. were thus distributed; viz. the three ancient Butlers to have three parts
thereof (of four to be divided) and the two puisne Butlers the fourth. Which
puisne Butlers serve, for the most part, The wash-pots Office.
to Wash pots, fill Beer, and serve the same into the Hall, for the ease of the
other Butlers; as also to chip Bread, and to do such other servile work. Of
these, the head Butler has for his wages iiil. vis. viiid. and the other four
but xxs. a piece yearly.

The Chief Cook, The Chief Cooks Office.
besides his ordinary service in the Kitchen, in looking to the Dressing and
serving out of the meat, To his Office do belong diverse Vailes; viz. Dripping,
and Scummings; the Rumps and Kidneys of loins of Mutton, which is the usual
Supper-meat of this Society, there being seldom any other joint served in the
Hall. Besides, for his farther benefit, he was wont yearly every Easter Term to
bestow upon the whole Society a Breakfast of Calves heads, for which every
Gentleman gave xiid. or more, according to his discretion: But by an Order made
in 11 Iacobi, these Calves heads used for Break-fasts were turned into a
Dinner, which was appointed to be on the first and second Monday in Easter
Term. And whereas heretofore the benefit of these Breakfasts was wholly
conferred upon the Cooks; now all other inferior Officers of the House, viz.
Scullions, Turn-spits, Washpots, under-Butlers, the Panyer-man, Porter, and
such like, do (by usurpation) partake of the Gentlemen's bounty; and heretofore
stood in rancks at the Hall door, ready (as the Gentlemen passed out of the
Hall after Dinner) to receive their Benevolence. But this custom of standing
being disliked by the Society, has been laid aside above thirty years since;
and in lieu thereof, there is a Roll, called the Calves head Roll instituted,
whereby every Bencher is taxed yearly at iis. every Barister at is. vid. and
every Gentleman under the Bar at is. which is a greater advantage to the said
Officers and servants, receiving the Tax now from the whole Society (all
admitted members, as well absent as present) whereas formerly they received not
a certain duty, but a voluntary gratuity from a few who were in Commons, only
in Easter week; and of them also, but such as did not absent themselves from
that Mundays Dinner in Easter week.

Besides the Vailes beforementioned, the Chief Cook has for his yearly wages
allowed him by the House iiil. vi^. viiid. The Under-Cook xls. yearly. The
Turn-broach xxvis. viiid. yearly; but the two Scullions no more than what they
receive from the benevolence of the Gentlemen.

To the second Cooks Office it belongs to provide special Achates for the
Bench Table, The second Cooks Office.
and likewise for the ancient Mess of the Bar Table; as also of the Auntients
Table, such as are past their Reading and never Read: which special Achates are
such (for the most part) as the Bench pleases to make choice of; and for the
same the Benchers pay weekly, but the rest by the meal.

The Panyer-man, The Panyerman's Office.
by the winding of his Horn, summons the Gentlemen to Dinner and Supper. He
also provides Mustard, Pepper, and Vinegar for the Hall; and has for his wages
yearly iiil. vis. viiid. and the fragments of certain Tables; viz. the
Barr-Table and those others in the middle of the Hall, which he serves, and is
to attend unto.

The Gardner is allowed vil. The Gardner and Porter.
xiiis. iiiid. per annum to dress the Gardens. And the Porter's wages is vl.
x^. per annum.

The Chief Treasurer, The Chief Treasurer.
who is chosen yearly at the first Parliament in Michaellmass Term, from
amongst the Readers, to receive and disburse the Fines and revenues belonging
to the House, is by reason of his Office dischardged of his Pension for that
year. He is the supreme Officer of the whole Society upon whom the Judges (who
have formerly been of this House, as Supervisors thereof) do call, if things be
amiss in the Society, to see the same corrected and amended. He admits all
Gentlemen into the Society. He has power to remit and abate of Fines at such
times; as also when they are admitted into Chambers, and to make sale of all
such Chambers as are forfaited, or such as do fall to the House by the Death of
any member thereof* And if a Chamber do so fall, he may admit any son of his
(being of the House) into such a Chamber Gratis and without fine. He may lay
out of the public moneys of the House, at his discretion, what is convenient
or requisite, on his own Chamber (being a Bench Chamber) in reedifying,
repayring, enlarging, Waynscoting, or adorning the same. He has also power to
compound and mitigate forfaitures, House-duties, Rents of Tenants, and other
matters which concern the Society: but he has no wages, fee, or gratuity by
reason of his Treasurer-ship. Heretofore one person has continued in this
Office two or three years, till by an Order made in an. 39. Eliz. it was made
annual.

The Under-Treasurer's The Under-Treasurer.
Office is to make entries of every Gentleman's admittance into this Society,
or into any Chamber belonging thereto; together with the Fines paid for such
admittances, and to take Bonds of them for payment of their duties. His entries
are preserved in a Book kept for that purpose; and therein also are registered
and preserved all such Orders as are made from time to time by the Bench in
their Parliament assemblies. He is, by reason of his Office, dischardged of all
Pensions, Taxes, and contributions, and has xxl. per annum fee or wages: as
also his Diet, with a Chamber for himself and another for his Clark. H^ has
likewise the Fee of iis. vid. per diem, as Supervisor of the Buildings,
reparations, and alterations of the House: and vis. viiid. upon the admittance
of any Gentleman into the Society, and his Clark (then) iis. vid. At every
admittance into a Chamber he has xs. And his Clark iis. vid. When any
Barrister is called and sworn of the Bar, he has xs. and his Clark iis. vid.
besides certain other allowance and Fees for paper, Parchment, Writing books
etc. He attends on the Masters of the Bench at all their Parliaments and solemn
assemblies, and is their Clark of the Parliament. He enters up all matters of
Record, is Custos Rotulorum for the Society, and receives Fees or gratuities
for searching, copying, or certifying of the Records and Orders of the House.

Their Parliaments Their Parliaments.
are held thrice in Michaelmass Term; viz. the first and last Friday of the
Term, and the Friday next before Allhallown tide: and twice in every other
Term; viz. the first and last Friday of the Term, in the Evening.

The Order in keeping these Parliaments is this; First the Benchers only, who
have been Readers, meet in the Parliament Chamber, which is at the lower end of
the Hall, and take their places according to their antiquities. Then the
Treasurer for the time being, sits at the Table bare-headed, and reads such
Petitions; and proposes such matters as shall be thought convenient for the
better government of the House; the Under Treasurer standing by as an
attendant: And when the Bench have concluded on any Order, he sees to the entry
of it. If they differ in any thing, every one gives his voice apart, beginning
at the puisne, and so upwards, and thereupon the most voices prevail.
Heretofore none who had been called to the Bench to read, came to these
meetings before he had Read, and was allowed by the Bench; nor was any
associate admitted to be present amongst them: but of late time, all such as
are called up to the Bench Table, and do re vera intend to read, have place and
vote in their Parliaments, except only the last Reader himself, who is excluded
from the first of their Parliaments (which is held in the next Term after his
Reading) to which he may not come until it is ended, and that the Barristers (
id est, all in Commons) be called in by the Under Treasurer, to have notice
given them by the high Treasurer of all new made Laws and Orders, or
alterations of the old ones: to which service they are bound by the Orders of
the House every last Friday of each Term: (which is called a Parliament of
Attendance,) and whosoever are absent, do forfait iiis. iiiid. pro non
consultando, although they may not consult (but must consent) when they meet
there.

After the Reader is thus entered and placed, his last and immediate predecessor
welcomes him thither with an Oration; and according to his merit reports of him
to the rest of the Masters of the Bench: unto whom the Reader replies in
another Oration, and excuses his imperfections and inabilities; but is
rejoyned unto by the high Treasurer in a third Oration, and in the name of all
their Masterships welcomed thither and pronounced a Bencher; who, from that
instant is as absolute as any of them.

The admittance of Students Admission of Students.
into the House is thus: First he makes his choice, whether he will be
generally or specially admitted. If generally, then he is to pay five marks for
his admittance; if specially, five pounds: but formerly it has been vil.
xiiis. iiiid. except he were of an Inn of Chancery, and then the Fine is less;
viz. if he has been two years, his special admittance is xls. and his general
xxs. When he has made his election, the Under Treasurer brings him to the high
Treasurer, who allows of him, and sets his Fine as aforesaid: yet sometime, by
special favor, the Treasurer mitigates the Fine. This being done, the Under
Treasurer enters into a Book the parties name; whose Son he is, and the day of
his admittance. Then the party, and two others formerly admitted of the House,
enter into Bond with him, as his Sureties, to observe the Orders, and
dischardge the duties of the House: after which the Under Treasurer makes him a
Recipiatur: which being delivered to the Chief Butler, he is thereupon admitted
into Commons, the Chief Butler having iis. vid. for his fee, and the senior
Wash-pot vid. from him that is a new Comer, at his entrance.

Afterward, if his admittance be general, he is bound to continue in Commons
two years Vacations: and if he fail, he is then fined xxs. at the least, for
every fayler: but if specially admitted, he is not then bound to any such
attendance.

His Habit is a Student's Gown, and in the Term time a round Cap, which he
wears both in the Hall, and in the Church. Boots and Spurrs, Swords and Cloakes
are in those places forbidden; as also extraordinary long hair: and for any
^ffence against these Orders, he is fined.

Next to his admittance into the House, he is admitted into a Chamber, when he
can purchase the same of any other of the Society; or of the House, when any
falls void by death. Touching which Chambers, it is to be noted, that all but
the Benchers go two to a Chamber; a Bencher only has the privilege of a
Chamber to himself. When any one is admitted to a Chamber, it is entered
generally by the Under Treasurer, that he is so admitted such a day, without
limitation of any estate at all: yet by the ancient usage and Custom of the
House, he has an estate therein, for the Term of his l^fe, if he so long
continue in the Society, and keep Commons: For unless he be in Commons six
weeks in every year, he forfaits his Chamber to the House. But though he has
only an estate for life therein, yet he has power to sell it to any other of
the Society; and the party that buys it, has his own life therein, and upon
his Admittance pays a Fine of vl. or thereabouts: but if any so admitted, die,
before sale made of his Chamber, it then falls to the House, who sell the same
to the best value.

If there be any one Chamber, consisting of two parts, and the one part exceeds
the other in value, and he who has the best part sells the same; yet the
Purchaser shall enter into the worst part: for it is a certain rule; that the
Ancient in the Chamber, viz. he who was therein first admitted, without
respect to their antiquity in the House, has his choice of either part.

These Students, heretofore used, in the Reading times, to carry the Reader's
meat unto the Bench Table; but now that use is omitted: nevertheless they carry
up the meat at the Reader's feast, and at the two other Feasts, viz. All
Saints, and the Purification of our Lady. They used also Post-Revells, upon
those Feast days, and every Saturday night between the said Feasts: besides
Masks and other disports in the time of Christmas.

After two or three years, these Students are to perform certain Exercises;
viz. first to recite the Pleadings of such Baristers, as moot in the Term time:
To Moot also in the Vacations; and shortly after, perform their Exercise of
mooting abroad, in the Inns of Chancery. After the performance of all which, at
home and abroad; and after the expiration of seven or eight years, they are by
the Bench (amongst other their fellow Students) admitted unto the Degree of
Utter-Barister; so that once at the least, every two year, a dozen or more, are
by a general Call preferred to this Degree. This now is an Act of the whole
Bench, at their Parliamentary meeting: But heretofore every Reader of the
House, made choice of such as he thought fit, and had power to call them to the
Bar; viz. every single Reader, two; and every double Reader, four; which is
confirmed by an Order of the House, made an. 37 Eliz.

Note, that there is no ceremony used in the calling of any to the Bar, more
than that their election is at the end of the Parliament, declared by the high
Treasurer to the rest of the Baristers, who are then called to be informed what
the Bench has concluded on, in that meeting. Their names then entered by the
Under Treasurer; the next day, immediately before Dinner, they are called to
the Cupboard; where the Treasurer of the House, with some of the Benchers
assisting him, cause the parties called, or elected, to take the Oath of
Supremacy, the one after the other: which being done, all is ended, and they
remain Utter-Baristers. Nevertheless, after this their call, it was not
heretofore allowed them, either to wear a Bar-gown openly at any Bar in Westminster.
Hall, or to practice the Law; but to forbear, for the space of two years, and
in the mean time to continue their Exercise of mooting in the Innes of Chancery.

There is an Exercise, besides, to be performed by every Utter-Barister, within
the House, in the Term time; viz. to perform two several assignments of Moots,
every such assignment consisting of three or four Moots, or Exercises; wherein
they argue pro and con, a Case agreed on between themselves; consisting for the
most part, of two Questions; three Benchers sitting as Judges, and arguing the
same Case after them. Amongst these Utter-Baristers, there is one (commonly of
about eight or nine years standing of the Bar) yearly chosen to be Reader of
New-Inne; who in the times of Reading, does there argue certain Cases, of his
own framing: which Cases are first argued by two Gentlemen of New Inn; and
afterward by two Gentlemen of every Inn of Court; whereof one is commonly of
the Bar, the other under the Bar; who argue in their turns, beginning with the
puisne; who maintains what side he pleases. The next argues against him, and
so all the rest maintain that conclusion, which falls to their turn. Lastly the
Reader himself argues the Case, and delivers his conceit and opinion, what he
thinks, in truth, the Law to be therein.

The next step, Cupboard men.
whereunto a Barister of this Society ascends, to the Cupboard; whereof there
are four, who in the Reading times, argue in turns, the Readers Case,
beginning at the puisne; who, of those C^ses, which the Reader proposes, takes
his choice, and is to argue against the Reader's conclusion: the next against
him, and the rest as it falls out to their turn. These four Cubboard men were
heretofore wont to be the four antientest Baristers of the House; who in time,
and by reason of their antiquity, were to be the two next Readers of the House:
and this was observed, whether they purposed to be Readers or not: But by an
Order of later time, no man ought to take upon him to be a Cupboard-man, unless
he resolves to Read, when his turn comes: therefore, if any one do declare
his intention not to Read, he is spared from the Cupboard; and the next in
antiquity unto him, is chosen to succeed in his roomth: Yet time alone makes
not a Cupboard man: for the Bench, upon just cause of dislike, may pass over
any whom they hold not fit for that place, and elect others next in Antiquity.
Which election of theirs is twice in every year, at the meeting of the Bench in
Parliament; viz. in the last Parliament of Hillary Term; at what time the four
Cupboard men, for the next Lent-Reading are chosen and declared by the
Treasurer; and in the last Parliament in Trinity Term, when, in like manner,
the four C^pboard men, for the next Summer Reading are chosen and declared.

The next degree is a Bencher: A Bencher,
then a Reader; which, at the farthest falls out to be within two years after
the parties first admittance to the Cupboard.

These Readers A Reader.
are likewise chosen by the Bench, at their assembly in Parliament yearly, upon
the Friday before the Feast of All Saints, at what time the two Readers for the
year following, are elected and declared: wherein, although it be seldom seen,
but that the parties so chosen, be the two ancient Cupboard men; yet the Bench
is not tied to any such necessity of choice: for if upon due consideration of
the estate, learning, (...)

(...)

(...)

(...), new chosen as (...), it the next Feast day of All (...) which day such
Judges and (...) at Law, as have issued out of this Society, are highly
feasted, and come in their Scarlet robes) are bound to give their attendance,
their duty being to meet the Judges and (...) at the lower end of the (...),
and to conduct them upwards. for distinction, and orders sake, the one of them,
viz. the Ancient, has (...) staff in his hand; the other (...) white Rod, with
which they usher in the meat, following next after the Music. When the meat is
brought to the Table (which at such folemn Feasts is allways performed by young
Gentlemen of the House, under the Bar) the one of the two new Readers elect,
receives every Dish of the Gentlemen, who carried it, and places ^t on the
Table, in decent order, the other standing by to wait on the Judges. And during
the Feast, they (...), with solemn (...), welcome both the Judges and
Ser^^eants.

Besides this, the puisne Reader e^ect, ^erves every Mess throughout the Hall,
receiving it from the Steward, and placing it on the Table. D^nner being ended,
they wait on the I^dges and Sergeants; ushering them, either into the Garden,
or some other re^ring place, until the Hall (...) ^^ensed, and prepared; and
then they usher them again into the Hall, and place them in their rooms, one
after another. This being done, (...) Ancient of the two that has the staff
in his hand, stands at the upper end of the Bar Table; and the other, with the
white Rod, places himself at the Cupboard, in the middle of the Hall, opposite
to the Judges; where the Music being begun, he calls twice the Master of the
Revells. And at the second call, the Ancient, with his white staff, advances
forward, and begins to lead the measures; followed, first by the Baristers, and
then the Gentlemen under the Bar, all according to their several antiquities:
and when one measure is ended, the Reader at the Cupboard, calls for another,
and so in order.

All such as are in Commons, under the degree of Benchers (except only them of
the Ancients Table, who are past their Readings) ought not to be absent from
solemn Revells: and whoever they be that do absent themselves, do forfait, or
are finable iiis. iiiid. And whosoever of the Bar that are made choice of to
carry up Wafers (on grand days) to the Judges, and do refuse, do forfait x.^
And whosoever of the young gentlemen under the Bar, that refuse, do forfait us.
And whosoever on days of solemn Revells, do refuse to carry up Bread and Beer
to the Masters of the Bench do forfeit, Baristers vis. viiid. and others iiis.
iiiid.

When the last measure is dancing, the Reader at the Cupboard, calls to one of
the Gentlemen of the Bar, as he is walking or dancing with the rest, to give
the Judges a Song: who forthwith begins the first line of any Psalm, as he
thinks fittest; after which, all the rest of the Company follow, and sing with
him. Whilst they are thus walking and singing, the Reader with the white Rod,
departs from the Cupboard, and makes his choice of a competent number of
Utter-Baristers, and as many under the Bar, whom he takes into the Buttry;
where, there is delivered unto every Barister, a Towell, with Wafers in it; and
unto every Gentleman under the Bar, a wooden Bowl, filled with Ipocras, with
which they march in order into the Hall, the Reader with his white Rod, going
foremost. And when they come near to the half pace, opposite to the Judges, the
Company divide themselves, one half (as well Baristers, as those under the Bar)
standing on the one side of the Reader; the other on the other side: and then,
after a low solemn Congee made, the Gentlemen of the Bar first carry the
Wafers; the rest, with the new Reader, standing in their places. At their
return, they all make another solemn low Congee, and then the Gentlemen under
the Bar, carry their Bowls of Ipocras to the Judges: and returning, when the
Judges have drank, they make the like solemn Congee, and so all depart, saving
the new Readers elect, who wait upon the Judges until their departure; and
then usher them down the Hall, unto the Court Gate, where they take their
leaves of them.

In the self same manner, they entertain the Judges and Sergeants on All
Hallown day and on the Feast day of the Purification of our Lady. Which two
Feasts, viz. All Saints and Candlemass, are the only Feasts in the whole year,
made purposely for the Judges and Sergeants in this Society: but of later time,
diverse Noblemen have been mixed with them, and solemnly invited as Guests to
the Dinner, in regard they were formerly of the Society.

As for the chardge of these Feasts, it is cast amongst the Gentlemen of the
House, in their Commons; no man exempt, if he be within the City, though not in
Commons: for in such Case he is called Visus in villa, and shall pay half that
weeks Commons, wherein the Feast day happens, though he take none.

Moreover, for a farther honor to the Judges and Sergeants at Law, two
ancient Baristers of the Society, are chosen to invite them to these Feasts;
who, to that end, do repair to their several Chambers, four or five days
before. Likewise, when they are in the Hall, and before they take their places,
two ancient Utter-Baristers are appointed to wait on them, with Basins and
Ewers of sweet water, for the washing of their hands; and two other like
ancient Baristers with Towells.

Besides these solemn Revells or measures aforesaid, they had wont to be
entertained with Post Revells, performed by the better sort of the young
Gentlemen of the Society, with Galliards, Corrantoe, and other Dances; or else
with Stage Plays: the first of these Feasts being at the beginning, and the
other at the later end of Christmas. But of late years, these Post Revells
have been dis-used, both here and in the other Innes of Court.

The next duty, which these new Readers are, in time, to perform, are their
Exercises within the House; which, together with the young Gentlemen under the
Bar, and the new-chosen Readers, they perform in this manner.

The new Baristers (as before has been intimated) are, for their degree to
perform each of them two several assignments of Mootes: which Exercises are
done in the Hall, in the Term time only, every Tuesday and Thursday night
immediately after Supper. The Case is framed with apt and proper Pleadings unto
it, by the two Utter-Baristers, who are to perform the assignment. These
Pleadings are recited by two Gentlemen under the Bar; one of which speaks for
the Plaintiff, the other for the Defendant: (...): which done, and the Case
briefly put, out of those Pleadings, and argued by the Utter-Baristers, three
of the Benchers, as Judges, argue the same Case, whereof one of the new elected
Readers is allways one, they supplying the place alternis vicibus. Which Course
(touching the two Readers) holds only, until the end of Hillary Term: for
shortly after, follows the Lent-Reading, performed by the ancient of the two
elect; after which time he is freed from this alternate Course of arguing,
taking his turn only as other Benchers do: For which Cause, in the two Terms
following (scil. Easter and Trinity) the former Reader elect, does, without his
fellows help, sit at every of their Mootes, until his own Reading be post; two
other Benchers (as aforesaid) arguing with him.

Besides these Exercises, the Reader, by the ancient Custom of this House,
ought to remain in Commons, from the end of the Term, next preceding his
Reading, until the week before he takes his place, as Reader; and in all that
time, viz. every Tuesday and Thursday night, to see the Exercises of the House
performed, and to be present and assistant to them. Which Exercises are Mootes
of the same nature as the other, and differing only in the persons; the Cases
and Pleadings to them, being framed and argued by two Gentlemen under the Bar,
and the Pleadings recited by two other puisne Gentlemen, and lastly argued by
two Utter-Baristers, and the Reader elect, the Reader sitting in the middle,
and arguing last of all.

Then follows the last peculiar Act, and Exercise of the Reader, being his
Reading; which begins regularly in Lent, viz. the first Monday of clean Lent;
and in Summer the first Monday in August, unless those days be Festival, and
then it begins the day following. Howbeit, the Reader, having first absented
himself out of Commons for the space of a week, in which time he seldom comes
abroad, that his entrance may be with the more state, appears first as a
Reader, at the Church, the Sunday afternoon, next before his Reading,
accompanied by such Benchers, as are in Town; whereof two are appointed for his
Assistants (being, for the most part, the two next precedent Readers) and
attended by twelve or fourteen Servants, at the least, in one livery; and the
same night at Supper, he takes his place in the Hall, in a Chair, at the upper
end of the Bench Table.

The next morning he makes choice for his Sub-Lecturer, of a puisne Gentleman
of the House, to whom he delivers his bag of Books and papers; and then
repairs unto the Parliament House to Breakfast. Which ended, he goes into the
Hall, where the whole Society expects his coming; and resting at the Cupboard,
does there take the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance. Then he takes his place
toward the lower end of the Bench Table; where the Sub Lecturer does first,
with an audible voice, read over the Statute, or at least that branch of it,
that he has chosen to read on.

This ended, the Reader begins with a grave speech, excusing his own weakness,
with desire of their favorable censures; and concluding with the Reasons,
wherefore he made choice of that Statute: Then he delivers unto them his
divisions made upon the Statute, which are more or fewer, as he pleases; and
then puts ten or twelve Cases upon his first division; of the which, the puisne
Cupboard-man, before spoken of, makes choice of one to argue; and in his
Argument, endeavors, what in him lies, to oppose the Reader's conclusion.
After him follow the rest of the Cupboard men, standing at the Cup-board: then
the Benchers, who are placed on a form opposite to the Reader, argue in their
turns; and last of all, the Reader himself, who maintains his own conclusion;
and oftentimes such Judges or Serjerjeants at the Law, as are of this Society,
come to argue the Reader's Case; who at such time, come always in their purple
Robes, and Scarlet Hoods, and are placed on a form, opposite to the Benchers,
with their backs to the Reader.

All Arguments being ended, Dinner is served in, where he entertains the
Company with a great Feast, at his own Table; with addition of one Dish
extraordinary unto every Mess throughout the Hall.

When Dinner is ended, and the Cloth taken away; the Sub-Lecturer repairs unto
him, with his bag of books; and then one of the Cupboard-men repeats another
of his Cases, and argues it against him: after whom follows the Reader, with an
Argument in maintenance of his own conclusion; and so that days Exercise is
ended.

This Course he observes three days in a week, until the end of the Reading;
viz. every Monday, Wednsday and Friday, the other intermediate days being spent
in Feasting, and entertainment of Strangers, who are commonly great Lords, and
other eminent persons: but, be the Guests of never so high a degree, the
Reader, within the Precincts of the House, has precedence of them; and at the
Table keeps his Chair at the upper end. His expenses, during this time of
Reading, are very great; insomuch as some have spent above six hundred pounds
in two days less than a fortnight, which now is the usual time of Reading.

Although latter times and examples have added to the Excess; yet heretofore,
when they were most frugal, a competent proportion, for entertainment of
Strangers (which was held to be a luster and honor to the House) was ever
expected from them, and in some sort has been prescribed unto them, as in part
appears by an Order of the Bench, made in the reign of King Philip and Mary;
whereby every Summer-Reader was enjoyed to spend xv. Bucks in the Hall, during
his time of Reading, on pain of... marks. And shortly after (to avoid all
occasion of superfluous expense) by an other Order, in the reign of the same
King and Queen, the Reader was enjoined not to exceed those xv. Bucks: but the
times are altered; there being few Summer Readers, who, in half the time that
heretofore a Reading was wont to continue, spend so little as threescore Bucks,
besides Red Deer: some have spent fourscore, some an hundred; whereof one brace
of Bucks are commonly bestowed on New Inn, to feast the Students there: And
the neighbor Parishes to the Temple, do also taste of the Reader's bounty in
this kind. Yet some help the Reader has from the House, which allows every
single Reader, one Hogshead of Wine, or five pounds in money; and a special
admittance of any Gentleman into the House, or five pounds more in lieu
thereof. Besides, in the last week of his Reading, a great and costly Feast is
provided for the entertainment of foreign Ambassadors, Earls, Lords, and men of
eminent quality: which, although it be called the Readers Feast, yet he bears
no part of the chardge, the same being imposed on four gentlemen of the House;
whom they call Stewards of the Feast; whereof two are Utter-Baristers, and the
other two under the Bar, whose chardge is now at the least xl. a piece; but
heretofore less: for by an Order made 34 Eliz. they were to be at no farther
chardge than five pounds a man.

Heretofore the Reading continued by the space of a Month; afterward three
weeks, but of later times no more than a fortnight; beginning commonly on the
Monday, and ending the Friday sevenight following: on which day, the Reader
(after Breakfast) comes unto the Cupboard, with his Assistants and Cupboard:
men, and there makes a grave and short speech to them, tending to the excuse of
his weakness, with desire of pardon for his errors committed: which forthwith
is answered by the most ancient Bencher then present, who extolleth the
Reader's bounty and learning; concluding with many thanks unto him: which
ended, he takes his usual place; and having put his Cases upon the division of
that day, two of the Cupboard men argue one of those Cases, and a third desires
to know Mr. Reader's opinion therein the next Term: whereupon the Reader
arises, without making any Argument at all; and taking his leave of the
society, retires unto his Chamber, and prepares himself for his journey
homewards; wherein the young Students, and many others, do usually accompany
him for that days journey, bringing him forth of the Town, with great state and
solemnity; and at night, bestow a great Supper upon him in his Inn, at their
own chardges; and the next Morning part company.

Yet here the formal part of the Reading ends not: for the first Parliament of
the next Term, when the Benchers there assembled, have dispar^hed their other
affairs, this new Reader is sent for to come amongst them; where being come,
and taking the lowest seat of the room, one of his Assistants (who commonly is
the next precedent Reader) being by the Bench called to give an account of the
Reading, makes a great Oration unto them; declaring the great learning and
chardge of the Reader, together with the Statute that he read upon, and his
divisions thereupon made, with other words, tending wholly to the Reader's
commendation. In answer whereof, the Reader makes another grave Oration, in his
own excuse; magnifying the learned Arguments of his Assistants and
Cupboard-men, as also the good order and behavior of the young Gentlemen; with
thanks to them all, for so patiently bearing with his infirmities. After which,
the Bench gives him thanks, and so they all together sit down to Supper: at
what time (and not before) the Reader is an absolute and confirmed Bencher, and
has voice, with the rest, in all succeeding Parliaments; and is, for the two
next Readings, chosen one of the Asssitants to those Readers. But note, that
before the new Reader is thus called into the Parliament House, the Bench
receives particular information of his carriage and proceedings, during the
time of his Reading: and if they find him guilty of any great fault, they (...)
a good fine upon his Head, or make such other Orders against him, as they think
fitting.

Note also, that in ancient times, the former Reader, by a Custom used in this
Society, was to be Steward of the House, for the time of Christmas: but this
Custom was abolished by an Order made an. 4. Eliz. whereby some other fellow
of the Society (fit in respect of his estate) was to be chosen Steward, and the
Reader to be spared, paying a reasonable Fine for the same: the which Fine is
now turned into a Brawn and Muskadine, which the Summer Reader does bestow on
the Gentlemen of the House, at Christmas before; the chardge thereof amounting
to about four pounds.

Yet a Reader's trouble and chardge here ends not: for in the Term time, the
Case is orderly kept every day after Dinner, as well amongst the Benchers, as
Utter-Barristers and Students, the manner thereof being thus; viz. One of the
Benchers (beginning commonly at the puisne, and so the rest in turn) puts a
short Case, consisting of two or three difficult questions in the Law, of his
own invention. The Case being put from one Mess to another throughout the
Table, they divide themselves by three in a Company, and so argue it; the party
that framed the Case, being the last of the Company that argues it: but all the
rest argue according to their antiquity, beginning at the puisne. The like is
done by a Case put by one of the Utter-Barristers; which runs through the whole
Table, and is argued in like Companyes, as aforesaid; which kind of Exercise,
does both whet their wits, and strengthen their memory.

Besides these daily Exercises, Mootes.
there are (as has been before remembered) Mootes every Tuesday and Thursday
night, brought in by two Utter-Barristers; wherein the Benchers proceed as
follows; Immediately after Supper the Benchers assemble themselves in the
Bay-window, at the upper end of the Hall; where, standing in order, according
to their antiquity, there repairs unto them two Gentlemen under the Bar, whose
turn it is to recite the Pleadings. Who, after a low obeisance, demand whether
it be their pleasure to hear a Moot; and depart with an affirmative answer.
Then the Benchers appoint two amongst themselves, to argue the Case, besides
one of the Readers elect, who stands not in their assembly, and is to be
allways one (as has been said.) Wherein note, that every man is appointed
according to his turn, as thus; The Benchers of this Society are divided into
two several ranks or Classes; viz. the upper Classis, consisting of the
Auncienty, and the lower of the Puisnes. Now at the first Moot of every tourn,
the puisne of the lower rank, and the puisne of the upper rank, are first to
argue, and so afterward of the rest in their turns. Which Order was (as it
seems) devised, to the end every Bencher might once in a Term, argue at one of
those Mootes.

When it is agreed on who are to argue, all the Benchers depart out of the
Hall, leaving the rest of the Company there. The two Arguers walk a turn in the
Court or Garden, until the Hall be prepared and made ready for them: which
being done, they return into the Hall, and-stay at the Cup-board, demanding if
the Moot-men be ready. During their stay at the Cup-board, there is oftentimes
a Case put unto them by one of the Utter-Bar, which is termed a Cup-board Case:
And when the two Benchers have argued it, then the party that put the same,
does also argue it; but this is on the By: for there is no necessity of any
such Cup-board Case: neither is it any part of the Exercise of the House, and
therefore it is but seldom, done, though every Utter-Barister may, at his
pleasure, put a Cup-board Case; and being put, it is, by Custom, to be argued.

But to return to the Mooting; All parties being ready, the two Benchers
appointed to argue, together with the Reader elect, take their places at the
Bench Table, the ancient Bencher sitting in the midst, the second on his right
hand, and the Reader elect on his left. Then the Moot-men also take their
place, sitting on a Form, close to the Cupboard, and opposite to the Benchers.
On the one side of them sits one of the Students* that recites the Pleading;
and the other on the other side. The Pleadings are first recited by the
Students; then the Case put, and argued by the Baristers, and lastly by the
Reader elect and Benchers, in manner aforesaid; who all three argue in English:
but the Pleadings are recited, and Case argued by the Utter-Baristers in Law
french. The Moot being ended, all parties return to the Cup-board; where the
Mootmen present the Benchers with a Cup of Beer, and a slice of Bread; and so
the Exercise for that night is ended.

So that no man, though of never so great antiquity in the House, is privileged
from keeping the Exercises of the House; those only excepted, which are past
their Reading, and have never Read.

Again, after this great chardge of Reading, Readers.
by the ancient Orders of the House (though of late years dis-used) he is in
his turn to Read again, and then is called a Double Reader: but there is not so
great expense in diet expected from him, as from a Single Reader, and yet he
has a greater allowance from the House toward his chardges. The ancient use
has been (before such time as the Professors of the Law did multiply to that
number, as now they are) to chose but one single Reader in a year, who allways
Read in Summer; and for Lent Vacation a double Reader was appointed; so as in
those days, men came to be single Readers at xv. or xvi. years standing in the
House; and Read double about seven years after: But if that Course should be
now observed, the number of UtterBaristers being so great, many other would not
live to Read at all, or be very old ere they did attain thereto.

These Readers and Benchers do enjoy diverse privileges above the rest of the
Society: For first they are Governors of the House, and in their Parliament
Assemblies, have power to make Orders to bind the rest: and out of Parliament,
have power also at the Bench Table, to punish such as shall transgress their
Orders; either by Fine, forfaiture of their Chambers, putting out of Commons,
or expulsion from the House; but not by imprisonment.

Secondly, every single Reader is allowed one Clark in Commons, pay-only 2^. --
6d. the week: and every double Reader two Clarks in Commons, at the like rate:
but note, that the two ancient Cupboard-men have like allowance of one Clark
apiece in Commons.

Thirdly, every Reader, during the time of his Reading, has power to admit any
into the Society, paying the usual rate for his admittance; viz. five marks for
a general admittance, and five pounds for a special admittance: and this is to
be understood only of such as intend to be Students; but of Lords, Knights, and
such like, he may admit, ^ans nombre, any without paying any Fine for such
admittance. besides, heretofore (as has been noted) a single Reader was
allowed to call two the Bar, during the time of his Reading, and a
Double-Reader four: but of late none have been called to the Bar, except at the
general Calls, and by the whole Bench in Parliament.

Fourthly, a Bencher Bencher^.
has this privilege, that his Son is to pay nothing for his admittance into
the House, or into any Chamber; but this has not been allways so, the favor
being granted to them by an Order in their Parliament an. 25 Eliz.

Fifthly, every Bencher is permitted to have a Chamber to himself, without a
Chamber-fellow, whereas others go two to a Chamber. And this privilege also
began by an Order in Parliament, made an. 20 Eliz. where all Benchers are
included, as well Readers as others. They likewise have choice of the Chambers
that fall void, and pay no Fine for their admittance thereunto. And in this
matter of choice, a Reader allthough puisne, is preferred before an Associat to
the Bench, being his ancient, for which there was a late Order made an. 14 Iac.

The Benchers also do come within the Bar at the Chapel of the Rolls, and sit
there promiscuously amongst the Sergeants at Law, and the King's and Queen's
Council learned. They are likewise heard by the Master of the Rolls, in course,
and before all Utter-Baristers, being called in by him (from the Utter Bar) so
soon as he first has notice of their being called to the Bench in their
respective Societies.

If any member of this Society be made Recorder of the City of London, he is to
be the next Reader, though he be not of Reader-standing.

It fell out in the year 1635. that Sir Henry Calthorp Knight (then the Queens
Solicitor general) was made Recorder of London; and thereupon, in Michaelmass
Term, he was by the Benchers in Parliament declared to be the next Lent Reader
following, and before Mr. Raphe Lathum (who was then the City Sergeant, and his
immediate Ancient:) Notwithstanding which Act of Parliament, and declaration by
their Masterships made thereof unto the Society; Afterward upon the death of
Sir Walter Pie, Sir Henry Calthorpe being made the Kings Attorney in his Court
of Wards, and deserting the Recordership; the Term following Mr. Lathum would
not give way to Sir Henry, but took his turn in course, according to his
antiquity, and did Read in Lent following.

Sixthly, Sergeants at Law have allways being chosen from amongst the Readers;
yet the power of the Prince is not to be disputed, whenever he shall please
to call any man to that Degree, who never Read; which has been seldom seen.
And if any person receive a Sergeants Writ, either in Hillary Term, returnable
in Easter Term; or in Trinity Term, returnable in Michaelmass, so as there be a
Reading time between the receipt and the return of the Writ, the party to whom
such Writ is sent, is to Read in that next Vacation, whether he has before
Read or not: And allbeit he has before been a Double Reader, yet that excuses
him not. And in all general Calls of Sergeants by Writ, returnable as
abovesaid, the puisne of them is to Read in the Vacation following: otherwise
it is in case and when there is no Reading Vacation between the Test and
return of the Writ.

Note also, that if there be a Reader elected and nominated in Parliament, and
afterward another receives a Sergeants Writ; in such case both of them, by the
Orders of this House, are to Read; viz. the Sergeant in respect of his degree,
is to supply the first week of the Reading, and the Reader elect the second
week: But if a Sergeants Writ be delivered to a Reader of this Society, before
any nomination in Parliament of any Reader, then it seems the Sergeant alone is
to supply the whole next Reading.

Likewise if any member of this House receive a Sergeants Writ, he is then
forthwith placed at the upper end of the Bench Table above all other Reader, as
being a Sergeant elect, though not complete: and notwithstanding such his Writ,
he continues still a Bencher, and in Commons, until the day of solemniry and
receiveing of the Coif; at which time he takes his leave of the House, in this
manner.

The Morning of that day, all the Benchers, Baristers, and Students of this
Society, meet in the Hall, whither comes the Sergeant elect; to whom the
Treasurer of the House makes a grave and learned speech; and in the conclusion
thereof, presents him (as from the whole Society) with a Purse, and ten pounds
therein. Which done the Elect Sergeant makes a congratulatory Oration; which
sum of money is raised by a Collection from every one of this Society, viz.
iiis. iiiid. apiece. But note, that the last Moot night, before the creation of
these Sergeants, all the elect Sergeants sit at the Moot, on a form, not on the
Bench; and there argue the Case. But albeit a Sergeant at the Law, does in
manner aforesaid, take his leave of the Society, yet he shall remain a member
thereof to some purposes; and therefore still keeps his Chamber, until he be
preferred to one in one of the Sergeants Innes. Yet some hold, that this is
rather by favor of the House than of right. Besides, if a Sergeant at Law be
suspended from his Degree, by reason of any Office given unto him by the King;
as if he be called to be the King's Attorney general or Solicitor, in such
Case he returns again into Commons in the Society, without any new admirtance.
Moreover, when any Sergeant at Law of this Society is made a Judge, he is
accompanied to Westminster Hall, by all the Fellows of the House, as being a
fellow member with him: and being a Judge, the Bench resort unto him oftentimes
for his advice and assistance in matters touching the government of the House.

A Reader also takes place, not only within this Society, but elsewhere abroad,
of all such as have not been Readers, though their ancients: so does not an
Utter-Baristser, as was declared by an Order of the Bench, made an. 9 Iac.
whereby Utter-Baristers were not to have antiquity at the Mootes abroad, above
others of the House their ancients, and not of the Bar. Howbeit, in the former
Case of a Reader, some say, that a Reader in his own House only takes place of
the ancients that have not been Reader; and likewise abroad of all those who
are past their Reading, but not of such as are their auntients, and whose turn
is not yet to come to Read. But clear it is, that a Bencher, within his own
Society gives place to none but his Ancients that have Read, unless to such as
are advanced to some eminent office or place: and therefore, if his puisne be
made a Knight, yet, within the House he has precedence of him: But if his
puisne be made the King's Attorney general, Solicitor, Recorder of London, or
the like; in such Cases he takes precedence of (...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

(...)

Note also, that the Associate is not of right preferred to any Chamber in the
House; ^or to have his choice, when any ^alls void: neither is he to sit at
Revells amongst the other Benchers.

There are other persons also that are (in truth,) to all purposes Benchers,
and yet in some respects have pre^eminence above them; as are Ser^eants at the
Law elect; which are such Benchers of the House as receive Writs to be called
to the State and degree of a Ser^eant at the Law. These, between the delivery
of the Writ unto them, are the return thereof, remain still Benchers, and take
their place at the upper and of the Bench Table, above all the rest.

There is likewise an Officer, Ba^^iff of the Mootes.
called the Ba^iff of the Mootes, who is elected always upon the Saturday
immediately after Dinner, before every Reading. He is exempt from all manner of
Exercises during the Reading time, in respect that he is to receive all the
Moot-Cases, which all the Readers of the Innes of Court and Chancery do go out
upon: and then he does assign to all Gentlemen that are Moot-men (as well them
of the Bar as Under graduates of this Society) to go out in their turns, and to
direct them to what Innes, and upon what Cases they are to go out upon; and to
see that they do accordingly; also that there be no faylers; which if there be,
it is five pounds forfaiture to him that is assigned, and xx5. a piece to all
the other Mootes men in Commons, who are not assigned by the said ^ayliff to go
out (at the same time) unto some other of the Innes of Chancery. And it is five
pounds forfaiture to the ^ayliff, if he do not see the same fayler recorded by
the puisne Butler in the Moot book. He is also to see, that all the Moot Cases
be likewise recorded; and that all the Moots men's names be recorded who did go
out upon those Cases. And he is to direct the Cook to dress a made Dish for
every couple of Mootes men that go out together; which they are to have at the
next meal following, besides Mr. Reader's Exceedings. He is also to see, that
the Mootes men do pay their due Fees unto the puisne Butler, for recording
their Mootes. This Officer is eligible (at the time before mentioned) only by a
Parliament of Baristers, and such Undergraduates as have been formerly Mootes
men; none else of the Society having any Vote at their election.

Touching Fines, Of Fines.
there are several sorts; First for Admittances into the House, into a Chamber;
or Fines imoosed for any offense, pro non legendo etc. which are uncertain, and
arbitrary according to the pleasure of the Bench. By forfaiture is understood
such penalty, for any neglector misd^ meanour, as are allways certain and known
before hand; as xiid. for every one, that comes, either into the Church or
Hall, in a H^t, o^ (...) out a round Cap. Likewise iii. iiiid. of every one
that fails his attendance at the solemn Revells; or of every Utter-Barister,
that attends not at the Parliament, when the Bench calls for them. Also of
every Utter-Barister xls. who neglecteh to Moot, being assigned. He that
commits a Fayler, being assigned, forfaiteth for the first offense five marks:
For every Fayler afterward v1. They who are bound to keep Vacations and fail;
under the Bar, for every Vacation do forfait xx^. and being Baristers v1.

Lastly Pensions are certain moneys, Pensions.
paid yearly by every one of the Society; viz. v^. viii^. per annum: but the
sum is payable by xxd. a Term; which is alike paid, both by the Students,
Utter-Baristers, and Benchers, whether they be in Commons or not: for though
any man, being of this society, disconti^ue diverse years; yet whenever he
comes again, he is called upon to pay all arrerages: howbeit, if there be any
reasonable excuse for his absence, the Treasurer (who has sole power therein)
will compound with him at an easier rate. Which moneys, so received, are by the
Treasurers direction disbursed, partly for necessaries belonging to the House;
as Table-linnen, Coals, Pewter-vessell, wages for Officers and Musicians; and
partly reparations or new buildings; which last are never undertaken, but by
the general approbation and allowance of the whole Bench, in Parliament. And
these Reparations are wholly left to the discretion of the Treasurer; who, by
the ancient Custom of the House, ought to see to the repair of all tilings of
Chambers, and the like; as also to the Glass-windows, and other necessary
repairs of every Benchers Chamber, leaving things of ornament to the owners
proper costs.

The annual Wages of all Masters, or Members of the Society of the Middle
Temple: and also of all Servants and their under Officers belonging thereunto.
l. s. d. TO the Lent Reader, one special admittance and a Hogshead of Wine;
beside in money II 00 00. To the Autum Reader, the like allowances. II 00 00.
To the Reader of Divine Service in the Church 10^. per annum, being a joint
payment from both Houses: therefore only from this Society 05 00 00. To the
Master of the Temple, is paid Rent from the House; and his Rents for the
Chambers; per annum. 34 13 04. To the Clark of the Church, for carrying the
Bell about, which Summons them to prayers: and for finding Wax lights for the
Altar, Mats, Bell-Ropes etc. per annum. 05 13 04. To the Under Treasurev, the
annual fee of 20 00 00. The Annual Rent of the house, and fees for the payment
of it into the Exchequer, their fees and acquittance. 10 07 08. Wages paid to
the Steward, the Chief Butler, the Chief Cook, the Panyer man, 4 marks a piece

13 06 08. And to the four puisne Butlers, I^. a piece 04 00 00. And to the
Porter 07 10 00. the Gardener 06 13 04. the second Cook 02 00 00. the Turn-spit
01 06 08. the two vvash-pots a piece the Laundress for washing the Linen 16 00
00. the Porter for cleansing the Lane and Rents 04 00 00. And for keeping the
Parliament Chamber, and the Furniture there 04 00 00. the Music their yearly
entertainment, besides their diurnal pay for service 02 13 00. the Cook for
allowance for Pewter 05 00 00. the Panyer-man for Sawcers 01 07 00. the Under
Treasurer for keeping and cleansing all the house plate, being 780 ounces. 01
03 00. the Stage Players, on the two grand days, for each play 10^. 20 00 00.
But of late these are doubled, and receive forty pound a play.

The moneys collected upon the Calves-head-Roll throughout the whole year
(being termly paid) in Michaelmas term, becomes a Dividend amongst the
Inferior Servants and Officers of the Society; according to the will and
pleasure of the Masters of the Board; and accordingly as they most merit, or
are best affected; yet the same is done much after one proportion, thus, viz.

That year when Sir Richard Lane (Attorney General to the Prince) was
Treasurer, the sum collected on the Calves-head-Roll, was 38 l. -- 14 s. -- 6
d. out of which deducting 2 l. -- 19 s. -- 8 d. for poundage (to the
Collectors) and to the under Treasurers man for writing the Rolls, there
remained to be divided amongs the Servants 35 l. -- 15 s. -- 10 d. which was
done accordingly, l. s. d. To the second Cook 05 06 08. The Panyer man 05 06
08. The Porter 05 06 08. The Under waiter at the Bench Table 04 02 04. The
chief Wash-pot 04 02 04. The under Wash-pot 04 02 04. The chief Turn-broach 04
02 04. The chief Cooks man 02 00 06. The under Turnspit 01 06 00. 35 15 10.

Vera Effigies IOHANNIS CLENCHE, Equitis aurati, unius Iusticiariorum Sereniss
Dominae nuper Reginae Elizabethae ad placita coram ipsa Regina tenenda,
assignati.



W Hollar sculp 1664.
Catalogus Lectorum in hujusmodi Medii Templi Hospicio. Ex Regist. ejusdem
Hospicii Vol. I.

f. 1. a. An. 17 H. 7. Quadr. Johannes Vavasour [postea unus Justice. de Communi
Banco.] f. 2. a. Autum. Brianus Palmys. f. 2. b. An. 18 H. 7. Quadr. Ludovicus
Pollard [postea unus Justice. de Communi Banco.] f. 3. a. Autum. Ricardus Elyot
[postea unus Justice. de Com. Banco.] f. 4. a. An. 19 H. 7. Quadr. Guido Palmys
senior. f. 5. b. Autum. Johannes Fitz-Iames [postea unus Justice. ad Plac. coram
Rege.] f. 5. b. An. 20 H. 7. Quadr.... Pinkeney. f. 6. b. Autum. Thomas Iubbes.
f. 7. b. An. 21 H. 7. Quadr. Willielmus Wilmer. f. 8. b. Autum. Johannes More,
non legebat causa pestilentiae. f. 9. b. An. 22 H. 7. Quadr. Johannes Bowring
[postea Capitalis Justice. ad Placita coram Rege tenenda, in Hibernia.] Autum.
Nulla Lectura. f. 10. b. An. 23 H. 7. Quadr. Johannes Fitz-Iames junior. f. 12.
a. Autum. Georgius Nichols electus. f. 13. a. An. 24 H. 7. Quadr. Idem Georgius
Nichols. f. 14. a. An. 1 H. 8. Autum. Gulielmus Portman [postea Capit. Justice.
ad Plac. coram Rege.] f. 15. b. Quadr. Thomas Iubbys duplex Lector. An. 2 H. 8.
Autum. Ricardus Brook and gradum Servientis ad Legem electus; duplex Lector f.
16. a. [postea Capitalis Baro Scacc.] f. 17. b. Quadr.... Wells. f. 18. b. An.
3 H 8. Autum.... Oreinge. f. 20. a. Quadr. Johannes More duplex Lector [postea
unus Justice. de Com. Banco.] f. 20. b. An. 4 H. S. Autum.... Watts. f. 21. b.
Quadr. Johannes Bowring duplex Lector. f. 22. b. An. 5. H. 8. Autum.... Matson.
f. 23. b. Quadr. Georgius Nicholls duplex Lector. f. 23. b. An. 6 H. 8. Autum.
Walterus Luke [postea unus Justice. ad Plac. coram Rege.] f. 24. b. Quadr.
Willielmus Portman duplex Lector. An. 7 H. 8. Autum. Nulla Lectura, causa
pestilentiae. f. 25. b. Quadr. Ricardus Lister [postea Capitalis Justice. ad
Plac. little Rege.] f. 27. a. An. 8. H. 8. Autum. Humfridus Brown [postea unus
Justice. de Communi Banco.] f. 28. b. Quadr.... Oreinge duplex Lector. f. 29. a.
An. 9 H. 8. Autum.... Vowell. Quadr. Nulla lectura. f. 30. a. An. 10 H. 8.
Autum.... Hussy. f. 32. b. Quadr.... Matton duplex Lector. f. 33. b. An. 11 H.
8. Autum.... Harding. f. 35. a. Quadr. Walterus Luke duplex Lector. f. 35. b.
An. 12 H. 8. Autum. Thomas Englefeild [postea unus Justice. de Communi Banco.]
(...) Quadr. Humfridus Brown duplex Lector. (...) (...) Johannes Brown. (...)
Quadr. Ricardus Lister, duplex Lector [postea Sollicitator generalis Regi H.
8.] (...) (...) Johannes Brown. (...) Quadr. Edmundus Knightley [postea
Attornatus genesis Ducatus Lanc.] (...) An. ^5 H. 3. Autum. Edmundus Mervin
[postea unus Justice. ad Plac. coram Rege.] (...) Quadr.... Vowell duplex
Lector. (...) An. 16 H. 8. Autum. Edwardus Mountagu [postea Capitalis Justice.
ad Placita coram Rege tenenda assignatus.] (...) Quadr. Edwardus Sanders
[postea Capitalis Baro Scacc.] An. 17 H. 8. Autum.... Warver. Quade. Nulla
Lectura. An. 13 H. 8. Autum. Johannes Fitz Williams. Quadr.... Hussy duplex
Lector. An. 10 H. 8. Autum. Iacobus Hadley. Quadr. Edmundus Knightley duplex
Lector. An. 20 H. ^. Autum.... Babthorpe. Quade. Nulla lectura. An. 21 H. 8.
Autum. Ricardus Rich [postea scil. an. 27 H. 8. Cyrographarius in Curia Banci
Communis, deinde summus Angliae Cancellarius.] Quadr. Edmundus Mervyn duplex
Lector. An. 22 H. 8. Autum.... Holte. Quadr.... Brown. An. 23. H. 8. Autum.
Edwardus Mountagu, duplex Lector, ^o quod ad gradum Servientis ad Legem ture
electus est. Quadr.... Edmonds. An. 24 H. 8. Autum. Will. Portman. Quadr.
Edwardus Sanders duplex Lector. An. 25 H. 8. Autum.... Mawdley. Quadr....
Warner duplex Lector. An. 26 H. 8. Autum. Nicholaus Luke [postea unus Baronum
de Scacc.] Quadr. Nulla Lectura. An. 27 H. 8. Autum.... Pollard. Quadr....
Bury. An. 28 H. 8. Autum. Ludovicus Fortescue. Quadr. Johannes Fitz-Iames. An.
29 H. 8. Autum. Willielmus Whorwood [postea Attorn. generalis Regi H. 8.]
Quadr. Nulla Lectura, causa mortalitatis. An. 30 H. 8. Autum.... Sewser.
Quadr.... Babthorpe. An. 31 H. 8. Autum. Edwardus Sanders. Quadr. Will. Portman
duplex Lector. An. 32 H. 8. Autum.... Southwell. Quadr.... Palmer. An. 33 H. 8.
Autum. Iacobus Hadley duplex Lector. Quadr.... Edmonds duplex Lector. An. 34 H.
8. Autum. Robertus Brook [postea Capitalis Justice. de Communi Banco.]
Quadr.... Mawdley. An. 35 H. 8. Autum.... More electus sed non legebat. Quadr.
Idem... More. An. 36 H. 8. Autum.... Brown. Quadr.... Bury duplex Lector. An.
37 H. 8. Autum.... Bradburne electus, sed non legebat. Quadr. Idem...
Bradbarne. An. 38 H. 8. Autum. Ricardus Morgan [postea Capitalis Justice. Banci
Communis.] An. 1. Edw. 6. Quadr. Ludovicus Pollard. Autum. Robertus Catlyn
[postea Capitalis Justice. ad Placita coram Rege tenenda assignatus.] An. 2 E.
6. Quadr.... Hadley. Autum.... Wood electus, sed non legebat. An. 3 E. 6.
Quadr. Idem... Wood. Autum. Edmundus Stewer. An. 4 E. 6. Quadr. Iacobus Hadley.
Autum.... Flewet. An. 5 E. 6. Quadr. Robertus Brook duplex Lector. Ex alio
Registro ejusdem Hosp. f. 2. a. Autum. Reginaldus Corbet [postea unus Justice.
ad Plac. coram Rege tenenda assignatus] ellectus, non legebat. f. 4. a. An. 6
E. 6. Quadr. Idem Reginaldus Corbet. f. 7. b. Autum. Iacobus Dyer [postea
Capitalis Justice. de Communi Banco.] f. 9. a. An. 7 E. 6. Quadr. Franciscus
Morgan. f. 12. b. An. 1. Maria. Autum. Anthonius Brown [postea Capitalis
Justice. de Communi Banco] non legebat. f. 14. a. Quadr. Idem Anth. Brown. f.
15. a. An. 1 and 2. Ph. and M. Autum. Richardus Weston [postea unus Justice. de
Banco.] f. 16. a. Quadr. Johannes Welshe [postea unus Justice. de Communi
Banco.] f. 17. b. An. 2 and 3. Ph. and M. Autum.... Arscot electus, and in ejus
defectu... Hunt. f. 19. b. Quadr. Thomas Carus [postea unus Justice. ad Plac.
coram Rege.] f. 20. b. An. 3 and 4 Ph. and M. Autum. Johannes Southcote [postea
unus Justice. ad Plac. coram Rege.] f. 21. a. Quadr. Edmundus Sture. f. 24. a.
An. 4 and 5. Ph. and M. Edmundus Plowden. f. 25. a. Quadr. Georgius Frevill
electus, sed praefatus Edmundus Plowden pro eo legebat. f. 26. b. An. 5 and 6.
Ph. and M. Autum.... Bellingham elec tus; sed... Cavell legebat. f. 28. a. and
b. An. 1 Eliz. Quadr. Georgius Frevill [postea unus Baronum de Scacc.] f. 29.
b. Autum. Johannes Southcote, ad gradum Serve. ad Legem eletus. f. 30. a. An. 2
Eliz. Quadr. Georgius Nicholls electus. f. 31. a. Autum. Idem Georgius
Nicholls. f. 35. b. An. 3 Eliz. Quadr. Edmundus Plowden duplex Lector. f. 38.
b. Autum. Thomas Farmer. f. 40. a. An. 4 Eliz. Quadr.... Ruswell. f. 44. a.
Autum. Thomas Mede [postea unus Justice. de Banco.] f. 46. a. An. 5 Eliz.
Quadr.... Chamber electus. Nulla vero lectura, causa pestilentiae. f. 54. b. f.
52. b. Autum. Guil. Fleetwood electus. An. 6 Eliz. Quadr. Gabraell Chambers. f.
55. b. Autum. Gulielmus Fleetwood. f. 55. b. An. 7 Eliz. Quadr. Georgius
Nicholls duplex Lector. f. 59. a. Autum. Robertus Bell [postea unus Baronum de
Scacc.] f. 66. b. An. 8 Eliz. Quadr. Thomas Farmer duplex Lector. f. 69. a.
Autum. Thomas Nicholls. f. 73. a. An. 9 Eliz. Quadr. Thomas Meade duplex
Lector. f. 77. b. Autum.... Hippesley. f. 79. b. An. 10 Eliz. Quadr. Gabraell
Chambers duplex Lector. f. 81. b. Autum. Johannes Popham [postea Attornatus
dominae Reginae generalis; deinde Capitalis Justice. ad Placita coram Rege
tenenda assignatus.] f. 84. b. An. 11 Eliz. Quadr. Will. Fleetwood duplex
Lector. (...) Autum. Georgius Phetiplace. An. 12. Eliz. Quadr.... Autum....
(...) An. 13. Eliz. Quadr. Thomas Gent electus [postea unus Baronum de
Scaccario.] (...) Autum. Petrus Rosse. An. 14 Eliz. Quadr.... Autum.... An 15
Eliz. Quadr.... Stephans. (...) Autum.... Crompton. (...) An. 16 Eliz. Quadr.
Thomas Gent electus. (...) Autum. Henricus Archer. (...) An. 17 Eliz. Quadr....
Stephans. (...) Autum.... Inckpenne. (...) An. 18. Eliz. Quadr. Mathaeus Dale
electus. (...) Autum.... Fenner. (...) An. 19. Eliz. Quadr.... Fetiplace.
Autum.... Bowyer. (...) An. 20. Eliz. Quadr.... Hemerford. (...) Autum. Iacobus
Morreys. (...) An. 21 Eliz. Quadr.... Crumpton. (...) Autum. Johannes
Agmundesham. (...) An. 22 Eliz. Quadr. Henricus Archer. (...) Autum.... Boys.
(...) An. 23 Eliz. Quadr.... Blancher, and... Snagge pro posteriori part f.
144. b. (...) Autum.... Lewkenore. (...) An. 24 Eliz. Quadr. Mathaeus
Cratcherwode electus. (...) Autum.... Hannam. (...) An. 25 Eliz. Quadr.
Mathaeus Cratcherwood. (...) Autum. Thomas Paget electus; nulla vero lectura,
causa pestilentiae f. 16 1. a. (...) An. 26 Eliz. Quadr. Thomas Paget. (...)
Autum.... Ayshe. f. 171. b. An. 27 Eliz. Quadr. Mathaeus Dale. f. 175. a.
Autum.... Weston. f. 178. a. An. 28 Eliz. Quadr.... Bowyer. f. 181. a.
Autum.... Savile. f. 182. b. and 185. a. An. 29 Eliz. Quadr.... Rosse electus.
f. 187. b. Autum. Richardus Johnson. f. 191. a. An. 30. Eliz. Quadr. Johannes
Sherley. f. 193. b. Autum. Thomas Harrys. f. 196. b. An. 31 Eliz. Quadr.
Johannes Agmundesham. f. 202. a. Autum. Willielmus Gibbes electus. f. 206. b.
An. 32 Eliz. Quadr. Will. Gibbes. f. 204. b. and 206. b. Autum. Georgius Snigge
[postea unus Baronum de Scacc.] f. 212. a. An. 33 Eliz. Quadr.... Williams. f.
216. b. Autum.... Ewins. f. 223. a. An. 34 Eliz. Quadr. Bartholomoeus Man
electus. f. 222. a. and 224. b. Autum. Johannes Marston. An. 35 Eliz. Quadr....
f. 227. b. Autum. Johannes Cavell electus. f. 232. a. An. 36 Eliz. Idem
Johannes Cavell. Quadr... Williams f. 233. a. f. 232. a. and 235. b. Autum....
Stamp. f. 240. b. An. 37 Eliz. Quadr. Thomas Paget. f. 247. b. Autum. Henr.
Hanle electus. f. 250. b. An. 38 Eliz. Quadr. Richardus Johnson. f. 250. b. and
258. a. Autum.... Philips. f. 262. a. An. 39 Eliz. Quadr.... Shirley. f. 262.
a. Autum. Ricardus Swayne. f. 275. a. An. 40 Eliz. Quadr.... Gibbs. f. 279. a.
Autum.... Daston. f. 282. b. An. 41 Eliz. Quadr. Georgius Snigge [postea unus
Baronum de Scaccario] duplex Lector. f. 288. a. Autum.... Morga^. f. 290. a.
An. 42 Eliz. Quadr.... Mann. f. 290. a. Autum. Nicholaus Overburie. f. 300. a.
An. 43 Eliz. Quadr.... Cavell. f. 304. b. Autum.... Walrond. f. 307. b. An. 44
Eliz. Quadr.... Hanle. f. 307. b. Autum. Augustinus Nicholls [postea unus
Justice. de Com. Banco.] f. 316. b. and 320. a. An. 45 Eliz. Quadr. Johannes
Dodderidge [postea unus Justice. ad Plac. coram Rege tenenda assignatus.] f.
322. a. An. I Iac. Autum. Thomas Stephens electus; nulla vero lectura, causa
pestilentiae. f. 323. a. f. 324. a. Quadr. Nulla lectura, causa qua supra. f.
326. a. An. 2 Iac. Autum. Thomas Stephens. f. 329. b. and 332. a. Quadr.
Georgius Wrightington. f. 329. b. and 334. b. An. 3 Iac. Autum. Willielmus
Bourne. f. 338. a. Quadr. Willielmus Bastard. f. 345. a. An. 4 Iac. Autum.
Henricus Mountagu [postea Capitalis Justice. ad Placita coram Rege tenenda
assignatus; deinde Dominus Custos privati Sigilli.] f. 352. a. Quadr. Johannes
Iermy. f. 356. b. An. 5 Iac. Autum. Franciscus Moore. f. 361. b. Quadr.
Franciscus Tate. f. 368. a. An. 6 Iac. Autum. Laurentius Hide. f. 373. b.
Quadr. Willielmus Swanton. f. 373. a. An. 7 Iac. Autum. Franciscus Harvie. f.
391. a. Quadr. Ricardus Swayne duplex Lector. Ex alio Registro f. 6. b. An 8.
Iac. Autum. Edwardus Cason. f. 9. b. Quadr. Robertus Smythe. f. 22. a. An. 9
Iac. Autum. Johannes Strode. f. 27. a. Quadr. Anthonius Ben [postea eques aur.
and Recordator Civit. London.] f. 27. a. An. 10 Iac. Autum. Johannes Low. f.
41. a. Quadr. Johannes Davie. f. 46. b. An. 11 Iac. Autum. Iacobus Welsh. f.
60. a. Quadr. Willielmus wotton. f. 73. b. An. 12 Iac. Autum. Ricar^us Reynell.
f. 77. a. Quadr. Thomas Barker. f. 77. a. An. 13 Iac. Autum. Georgius shirley
[postea eques aur. and Capitalis Justice. ad Placita coram Rege tenenda infra
reguum Hibernioe.] f. 93. a. Quadr. Ricardus Martin Recordator Civitatis Land.
f. 93. a. An. 14 Iac. Autum. Franciscus Ashley. f. 114. a. Quadr. Nicholaus
Hyde [postea Capitalis Justice. ad Placita coram Rege tenenda assignatus.] f.
118. a. An. 15 Iac. Autum. Richardus Hodsor. f. 130. b. Quadr. Walerus Pie
[postea equaer. and Attornatus Regis in Curia Wardorum and Liberationum.] f.
136. b. An. 16 Iac. Autum. f. 143. b. Quadr. Willielmus Ryves [postea equ.
aur.] f. 143. b. An. 17 Iac. Autum. Iacobus whitlock [postea equ. aur. and
Justice. Cestrioe: deinde unus Justice. ad Placita coram Rege tenenda
assignatus.] f. 155. b. Quadr. Johannes Hoskins. f. 160. b. An. 18 Iac. Autum.
Thomas Trist. f. 162. b. Quadr. Edwardus Curle, qui obiit tempore Lectionis. f.
162. b. An. 19 Iac. Autum. Thomas Grene. f. 170. b. Quadr. Thomas Southe. f.
176. b. An. 20 Iac. Autum. Egremundus Thynne. f. 179. b. Quadr. Johannes
Bramston [postea equ. aur. and Capitalis Justice. ad Placita coram Rege tenenda
assignatus.] f. 179. b. An. 21 Iac. Autum. Carolus Danvers. f. 188. a. Quadr.
Robertus Tanfeild. f. 188. a. An. 22 Iac. Autum. Rowleius Ward. f. 195. a.
Quadr. Robertus Thorpe. (...) (...) Thomas Mallet [postea Justice. aur. and unus
(...) ad (...) coram Rege tenenda assignatus. (...) (...) Robertus Berkley
[postea equ. aur. and unus Justice. ad Placita coram Rege tenenda assignatus.]
(...) (...) Iacobus Franklyn. (...) (...) Willielmus Whitaker. (...) (...)
Georgius Brown. (...) (...) Benedictus Llanden. (...) (...) Henricus Clerk.
(...) (...) Philippus Iermyn. (...) (...) Ricardus Lane [postea eques aur. and
Custos magni Sigilli Angl.] electus; sed non legebat causa pestilentiae. f. 50.
a. (...) (...) Nulla lectura, causa mortalitatis. (...) Quadr. Willielmus
Conyers. (...) An. 7 (...) Autum. Ricardus Townesend. (...) Quadr. Talbottus
Pepys. (...) An 8. (...). Autum. Ricardus Parker. (...) Quadr. Georgius Bear.
(...) (...) Autum. Gulielmus Boothe. (...) Quadr. Arthurus Tournor. (...) An
(...) 10 Car. 1. Johannes Pulesdon. (...) Quadr. Johannes Huchins. (...) An 11
(...) 1. Autum. Robertus Hatton. (...) Quadr. Radulphus Lathom. (...) (...)
(...) Curia Wardorum and Liberationum] electus; sed non legebat causa morta
litatis f. 165. a. Quadr. Nulla lectura, causa qua supra. An. 1^ Car. 1. Autum.
Nulla lectura. p. 180. Quadr. Robertus Brerewood [postea equ. aur. and unus
Justice.] p. 197. An. 14 Car. 1. Autum. Johannes Eltonhed. p. 201. Quadr.
Robertus Hyde [postea eques aur. and Capitalis Justice. ad Placita coram Rege
tenenda assignatus.] p. 201. An. 15 Car. 1. Autum. Edwardus Palmer. p. 218.
Quadr. Edwardus Bagshaw. p. 230. An. 16 Car. 1. Autum. Ricardus Pepys. p. 237.
Quadr. Petrus Ball [postea equ. aur. and Attornatus dominae Mariae Reginae.] p.
237. An. 17 Car. 1. Autum. Johannes White. p. 251. Quadr. Ricardus Seaborne. p.
251. An. 18 Car. 1. Autum. Will. Hussy. Ex alio Registro ejusdem Hosp. p. 41.
An. 12 Car. 2. Quadr. Thomas Monday. Autum. Thomas Lake. p. 55. An. 13 Car. 2.
Quadr. Benet Hoskyns. p. 63. Autum. Anthonius Barker. p. 70. An. 14 Car. 2.
Quadr. Henricus Procter. Autum. Franciscus Harvey.

Catalogus Thesaurariorum Societatis Medii Templi.
Ex cod. 1. f. 1. a. 16 H. 7. Johannes Brook. f. 8. b. 21 H. 7. Will. Mordant.
f. 15. b. 1 H. 8. Ioh. Fitz James. f. 19. b. 3 H. 8. Tho. Iubbis. f. 21. b. 4
H. 8. Tho. More. f. 37. a. 12 H. 8. Amisius Poulet miles. f. 42. a. 14 H. 8.
Ric. Lyster Solicit. Dom. Reg. Ex cod. 2. f. 22. a. 6 Nov. 1556. Thomas Denton.
f. 28. a. 3 Nov. 5 and 6 Ph. and M. Will. Hone. f. 39. a. 20 Iun^i 3 Eliz. Edm.
Plowden. f. 91. b. 12 Eliz. (...)... Andrews. f. 92. a. 27 Nov. 13 Eliz.
Matthaeus Smith. f. 111. b. 4 Maii 16 Eliz.... Ameredith. f. 142. b. 25 Nov. 23
Eliz. Johannes Popham Solicitator generalis Reginae. f. 199. a. 22 Nov. 31
Eliz. Milo Sands. f. 261. a. 38 Eliz. Iac: Morris ar. Attornatus (...)
^^^ginae Eliz. (...) VVardor. and Liberationum. f. 264. b. 1^ Feb. 39 Eliz.
Math. Dale ar. f. 285. a. 9 Febr. 4 Eliz. Tho. Pagytt. f. 293. b. 8 Febr. An.
1599. Ric. Johnson. f. 304. b. 2^ Mail 43 Eliz. Ioh. Shurley. f. 313. a. 14
Maii 44 Eliz.... Snygge. f. 322. a. 3 Iunii. Barth Man. f. 326. a. 18 Maii.
Johannes Cavell. f. 243. b. 4 Iac. Henricus Hanle (...). f. 354. b. 5 Iac. 23
Apr. Ric. Swayne ar. f. 366. b. 15 Apr. 6 Iac. Ric. Daston ar. Ex cod. 3. f. 1.
a. 27 Apr. 8 Iac. Nich. Overbury ar. f. 25. a. 25 Oct. 9 Iac. Iac. Walrond. f.
52. a. 14 Maii 11 Iac. Will. Bastard ar. f. 77. a. 28 Oct. 12 Iac. Johannes
Iermy ar. f. 112. a. 2^ Nov. 14 Iac. Laur. Hy^e miles. f. 135. b. 12 Iuii 16
Iac. Edw. Cason ar. f. 148. b. 11 Iunii 17 Iac. Johannes Strode ar. f. 161. b.
30 Iunii 18 Iac. Johannes Low. f. 169. b. 15 Iunii 19 Iac. Will. Wotten. f.
178. a. 11 Oct. 20 Iac. Iac. Welshe. f. 187. a. 10 Oct. 21 Iac. Thomas Barker
ar. f. 194. b. 15 Oct. 22 Iac. Ric. Hadsor. f. 200. b. 27 Ian. 1 Car. Nich.
Hyde. Ex cod. 4. f. 1. a. 14 Oct. Walt. Pie miles Attornat^ an. 1626. 2 Car.
Dom. R. Curiae VVardorum. (...) 18 Oct. 3 Car. Tho. Forde. (...) 11 Oct. 4 Car.
Tho. Tryst. (...) 19 Oct. 5. Car. Tho. Green. (...) 11 Iunii, 6 Car. Tho.
Southe. (...) 24 Iunii, 1631. Rob. Tanfeild. (...) 16 Oct. 1632. Rob. Thorpe.
(...) 14 Oct. 1633. Tho. Malet. (...) 18 Oct. 1634. Iacobus Franklyn. (...) 17
Oct. 1635. Will. Whitaker. Ib. p. 179. 16 Oct. 1637. Ric. Lane ar. Ib. p. 201.
16 Oct. 1638. Will. Conyers. Ib. p. 214. 28 Iunii, 1639. Ric. Townesend. Ib. p.
230. 19 Iunii, 1640. Ric. Pepys. Ib. p. 249. 9 Iulii, 1641. Ric. Parker. Ex
cod. 5. A. D. 1660. 12 Car. 2. Edw. Bagshaw. p. 29. 13 Car. 2. Galfridus Palmer
miles, Attornams Reg. Car. 2di. Ib. p. 57. 14 Car. 2. Edw. Turner eques aur.
and Prolocutor Parliamenti.

Insignia infra magnam Aulam Medij Templi.




















In ampla semicirculari fenestra ex Australi part ejusdem Aulae.






























Adhuc in dicta semicirculari fenestra




















































In Orientali Fenestra




















In prima fenestra ex part Australi ejusdem Aulae,
















In secunda fenestra ex Australi ejusdem Aulae part,
















In tertia fenestra dictae Aulae, Versus Austrum
















In quarta fenestra Versus Austrum,


















In quinta fenestra, Austrum versus,






















In prima Fenestra ejusdem Aulae sed quadrata, versus Aquilonem.


































In secunda fenestra, versus Aquilonem.
















In tertia Fenestra ejusdem Aulae versus Aquilonem.
















In quarta Fenestra versus Aquilonem.
















In quinta Fenestra versus Aquilonem.
















In sexta Fenestra saepedictae Medij Templi Aulae, versus Aquilonem.
















Cap. LXII.
Innes of Chancery belonging to the Middle Temple.
New Inn.
THis House having been formerly a Common Hostery or Inn for Travailers and
other; and from the sign of the blessed Virgin, called our Lady Inn, became-
Stow's Survey of L^ad. p. 427. b.
first an Hostell for Students of the Law, (as the tradition is) upon the
removal of the Students of the Law from an old Inn of Chancery, called St.
George his Inn, situate near Seacole lane, a little South from St. Sepulchers
Church, without Newgate: and was procured from Sir John Fineux Knight, sometime
Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, for the Rent of six pounds per annum, by
the name of New Inn.

Of this House Sir Thomas More afterward Lord Chancellor of England, was lb.
p. 493. a.
a Student in King Henry the 7ths. time, before he came to Lincolnes Inn.

Cap. LXIII.
Strand Inn.
THis (as also the Bishop of Worcester's Inn, Stow's Survey of Land. page 490.
a.
the Bishop of Coventure and Litchfeilds House, Videsis etiam Regist. inter.
Templi fol. 113. a.
commonly called Chester Inn; the Bishop of Landaff's House; and a Church
called St. Mary in the Strand) was pulled down, and made level with the ground
in an. 1594. (3 Edw. 6.) by Edward Duke of Some^set; and in the place thereof
Somerset House built: By which means the Middle Temple since that time has had
no more than one Inn of Chancery ( viz. New Inn) belonging thereto.

Cap. LXIV.
Lincolnes Inn.
THis being situate in Newstreet now called Chancery lane (corruptly for
Chancellours lane, by reason that the Office of the Rolls is there settled) is
composed partly of the ruins of the Black Friars House, which sometime stood
in Holburne and that House of Raph Nevill Bishop of Chichester and Chancellor
of England, which was built Regist. de Lincolns Inn, Vol. 6. fol. 361. a.
by him in the time of King Henry the 3d. upon a certain piece of ground and a
Garden, that he had there obtained Claus. 11 H. 3. p. 2. m. 7.
of the said King: Of which building, and of the Death of that Bishop, thus
speaks Math. Paris An. D. MCCxliiii. Venerabilis pater Episcopus (...)
Redu^phus de Nevilla, Cancellarius Angliae, vir per omnia laudabilis, and
immota columna in regni negotiis, fidelitatis, Londini, in nobili palacio suo,
quod a fundamentis, non procul a Novo Templo construxerat, Call. Februarii vitam
temporalem terminavit, perpetuam adepturus.

After this Raph Nevill, Richard de Wihtz (commonly called Saint Richard) had
also his residence Regist. de Liucolns Inn Vol. 1. fol. 144. b.
here. But in the next age, Henry Lacy Earl of Lincoln became possessed thereof,
and resided in it; whereupon, as many other great Houses, did in those days
take denomination from their Owners, this had then accordingly the name of
Lincolnes Inn, and has ever since been so called.

Of this Henry Earl of Lincoln, is the tradition still current amongst the
Ancients here; that he, about the beginning of King Edward the seconds time,
being a person well affected to the knowledge of the Laws, first brought in the
professors of that honorable and necessary study, to settle in this place: but
direct proof thereof from good Authority, I have not as yet seen any: Howbeit,
in after times, certai^ Regist. de Lincolns Inn Vol. 6. ut supra.
it is, that the succeeding Bishops of Chichester, of whose inheritance it was,
did let Leases of it unto the Students of the Law; reserving a certain Rent and
Lodgings for themselves, upon their repair to London: whereof one to Ibid.
Francis Syliard, a Bencher of this House temp. H. 7. continued in being till
27 H. 8. in which year Robert Sherborne, then Bishop of Chichester made a new
Lease Ibid.
thereof unto William Syliard (likewise a Student of this House and son to the
said Francis) for ninety and nine years, under the yearly Rent of vil. xiiis.
iiiid. which Lease ended at Michaelmass in An. 1634.

After that Lease so made to the said William, as abovesaid, Richard Sampson,
one of the succeeding Bishops of that See, did, by his deed Ibid.
bearing date 1 Iulii 28 H. 8. An. 1536.
pass the inheritance thereof, and of the Garden called Cotterell garden, or
Cony garth, to the said William Syliard and Eustace his brother: which grant
was confirmed Ibid.
by the Dean and Chapter of Chichester the first of August then next ensuing;
the said William then being one of the Ushers of King Henry the 8ths.
Bedchamber.

The inheritance therefore being thus in these two Brothers; and Eustace
surviving; Edward son and heir of the said Eustace, by his deed Ibid.
bearing date 12 Nov. 22 Eliz. in consideration of the sum of five hundred and
twenty pounds, conveyed to Richard Kingsmill and the rest of the then Benchers
here, this House, Garden etc. in see: whereupon a Fine was levied by him the
said Edward and his Wife.

The Buildings.
OF what form or composition this House was, when Henry Lacy Earl of Lincoln
(from whom it took denomination) left it, I cannot at all describe: nor have I
met with any thing of its alteration till Henry the 7ths. time; but in 6to. of
that King's reign, the Society getting in some money, partly by contribution Ex
Regist. de Lincolns I^^ Vol. 1. f. 15. b.
and partly by loan Ib. f. 20. b.
within two years after ( viz. in 8 H. 7.) they pulled Ib. f. 24. b. The Hall.
down the old Hall, though they made no great haste in erecting a new one: for
till Ex Regist. de Lincolns Ina Vol. 3. f. 2. b.
22 H. 7. (which was fourteen years after) I do not perceive it was finished:
within the compass of which time, viz. in 13 H. 7. I find, that John Nethersale
(late one of this Society) bequeathed Adhue ex Vol. 2. f. 77. a. The Library.
xl. marks; partly toward the building of a Library here, for the benefit of
the Students of the Laws of England; and partly, that every Priest of this
House, then being, or hereafter to be, who should celebrate Mass and other
Divine Service every Friday weekly, should then sing a Mass of Requiem; and
also, in the time of the said Mass, before his first lavature, say the Psalm of
De profundis, with the Orizons and Collects accustomed, for the soul of the
said John.

But this good work of the Hall, being perfected, they were drawn on further:
for the next ensuing year ( viz. 23 H. 7.) they began Ex Vol. 3. f. 10. b.
to make Brick, and to contract Ex Vol. 3. f. 10. b.
with Masons for the Stone-work of another fabric, The Gatehouse Tower.
viz. the great Gate House Tower; unto which, Sir Thomas Lovell, formerly a
member of this Society, but then Treasurer of the Household to King Henry the
7th. was a good benefactor Ib. f. 14. a.
fetching their timber Ib. f. 14. a.
by water from Henley upon Thames. And in 24 H. 7. they finished the Library,
as may appear Ib. f. 25. a.
by the chardg in seeling of it, then accounted for: But the work of the Gate
Tower went slowly enough on; for till the 9th. of H. 8. (which was nine years
after) that the said Sir Thomas Lovell gave Ib. f. 83. a.
more money to expedite it, I find no more thereof: which bounty of his so far
drew on the rest of the Society; that in 11 H. 8. all then in Commons, were
taxed; f. 89. a.
and farther Order f. 89. a.
made for the speedy payment in of the moneys: as also xl1. over and above,
allowed Ib. f. 94. a.
out of the public Treasury of the House, for perfecting of that structure:
so, that in 12 H. 8. it was totally finished, the whole chardg thereof
amounting Ib. f. 102. a.
to CLiiil. x.s. viiid. William Suliard being then the principal Expenditor
Ibid.
for the work; and the Brick and Tile used for the same, being dug Ibid.
fol. 102. a.
out of that piece of ground, then called the Coneygarth, lying on the West
side of the House, adjoining to Lincolns Inn fields. In whose Account Ibid.
fol. 102. a.
I find xvi.l. viis. vd. paid for xliii. Cart load of Freestone, together with
the wrought-work of the Chimneys, and carving the Arms over the said Gate. But
the Gates of wood were not resolved on till the 25th. of H. 8. for then there
was an Order Ex Regist. de Lincolas (...) Vol. 4. f. 49. a.
in their Council for them; as also for making of more Brick for anonew
Building, whereof Mr. William Ib. f. 76. a.
Heyden the elder (one of this Society) was principal Supervisor and
Expenditor; the same Building containing Ib. f. 93. a.
nine Chambers, and being Ib. f. 78. a. Buildings toward the fields.
three stories high, on the postern side of the House, toward the fields:
which was begun Ib. f. 96. b.
in Trinity Term 27 H. 8. the total chardg thereof amounting Ib. f. 98. a.
to CXCix1. viiis. iiiid.

The next year following, viz. 34 H. 8. there was an Order Ib. f. 135. b.
in their Council, for paving the street with stone, all along before this
House and Garden; in pursuance of an Act Cap. 17. Paving the Street.
of Parliament to that end made in 32 H. 8. for paving of the whole street,
called Chancery lane; the chardge Ib. f. 139. a.
whereof ( viz. so far as concerned this House) amounted to xlvii. ob.

But though the Fabric of the Hall was finished in 22 H. 8. The Loover over
the Hall.
(as I have already observed) the Loover (or Lantern) thereon, was not set
up till 6 Edw. 6. for in that year the chardg was accounted Ib. f. 257. b.
for; the Carpenters work and Timber amounting to xlv. The Smiths, for the Vane
viiis. The gilding thereof xis. The Plummers work viil. xs. and the Glasier's
work xxxis. On the outside whereof, in lead, the Arms of Lacy Earl of Lincoln,
with Quincy and the Earl of Chester's Come are still to be seen.

In 1 and 2 Ph. and M. the Walk Ib. f. 284. a.
under the Trees, The Walks in the Coneygarth.
in the Coneygarth was made.

The next of their Structures was the Kitchen; The Kitchen.
which, by an Act Ib. f. 316. a.
in their Council, in 3 and 4 Ph. and M. was ordered to be new built of Brick,
with a Wall and Gates: for supporting the chardg whereof, every one of the
Society at the Clerks Commons was assessed at xiiis. iiiid. Every one of the
Masters Commons xxs. and every of the Masters of the Bench xxvis. viiid.;
besides a Benevolence from any as would give above that proportion.

And in 1 Eliz. there was an Order Ib. f. b. 337. Brick Wall on the backside of
the House.
made, that a Brick wall and Gates should be set up on the backside of the
House, for the better and more sufficient enclosure thereof: and that the Gates
should be made on the foreside the House toward the Street; The Gates toward
the street.
which (it seems) notwithstanding that direction in 25 H. 8. were not then
done: But nothing was performed therein, I presume; for in 4 Eliz. new
direction Ib. f. 372. a.
was given for the making of three thousand Brick, in Ib. f. 378. b.
the Coneygarth; and Mr. Newdigate (a member of the Society) to be Surveyor of
the same: which was accordingly effected, and ten shillings allowed Ib. f. 378.
b.
to the Panyerman, in respect of his loss in the herbage of that place, by
reason of this Brickmaking there; the said Brick being employed Ex Regist. de
Lincolns Inn Vol. 5. f. 17. a.
for making of the wall all along the Garden side toward Chancery lane, with
the Gates Ex Regist. de Lincolns Inn Vol. 5. f. 17. a.
in the midst thereof (the former wall being of Clay: The Wall by the Garden
side.
) all which was perfected Ib. f. 17. b.
in 6 Eliz. And in 7 Eliz. there was an Order Ib. f. 25. a.
for building of the Gallery, The Gallery over the Skreen in the Hall. The
House of Office.
over the Skreen at the nether end of the Hall: In which year also the House of
Office was erected Ib. f. 31. a.
in the Coneygarth.

The next ensuing year ( viz. 8 Eliz.) it was ordered Ib. f. 34. a.
that a fair and beautiful wall should be made on the backside of this House,
Wall on the backside of the House.
in such sort, as Mr. Kempe, Mr. Salveyn, and Mr. Hayden should think most fit.
And likewise a Seller Ib. f. 38. a.
and a way into the Chapel; as also provision of timber Ib. b.
and other necessaries, for more Buildings, to be begun at Candlemass
following: which Buildings being those on the North Ib. f. 93. a.
part of the Quadrangle, Buildings on the Northside of the Quadrangle.
and on which the sum Ib. f. 88. a.
of CCCCXvl. -- xis. -- xid. was expended, were finished in the xth. year of
the said Queens reign, John Hayden Esquire (one of the Society) being Supervisor
Ib. f. 88. a.
of the work. But, it seems that this structure came short of their occasions;
for the next ensuing year ( viz. xi. Eliz.) Cxxviil. xiis. viiid. more, was
issued Ib. f. 105. b.
out of their Treasury, for the enlarging thereof in length. And in 14 Eliz.
the Well was converted Ib. f. 167. ^. The Pump.
to a Pump.

After this I find no more done till 24 Eliz. but then, 2 Iulii it was resolved
Ib. f. 336. a.
, by the Governors of this House; that LXXX. tun of stone should be provided,
and CLx. loads of timber, in the long Vacation, and Clay dug for the making
of Bricks. And in February following ( viz. 25 Eliz.) Mr. Thomas Ayloffe, and
Mr. John Lutwich were appointed Ib. f. 346. a.
Overseers of the intended building; which were Ib. f. 349. b.
the Chambers over the Kitchen, Chambers over the Kitchen etc.
over the Entry near the Hall, and over the Pastry: As also one Woodhouse under
the Stairs on the Eastside, and another on the West side.

In July next ensuing ( viz. 26. Eliz.) it was ordered Ib. f. 359. b.
that the Wall begun about the Backside should in that Summer Vacation, be
made throughout the full length of the Ditch. All which being effected, it was
in 30 Eliz. on Ascension Day, ordered Ib. f. 414. b. Brick Wall at the upper
end of the Backside. Gate toward Fickets fields.
that a Brickwall should be made at the upper end of the Backside, toward
Holburne: As also a Gate toward Fickets sields, and another in the Brick-wall
toward the Pump, with a Sink from the Kitchen.

In 35 Eliz. the Mount, and wall of Brick to set forth the same, were made Ib.
f. 475. b.
; the cost whereof came to xviiil. -- xiis. -- iiid. Two years after ( viz. 37
Eliz.) Mr. Dalton, Mr. Hughes, and Mr. Collins of this Society, were made
choice Ex Regist. de Lincolns Inn Vol. 6. f. 11. a. Water brought in Pipes of
lead.
of, to consider how water might fitly be brought to the House in Pipes of
lead; and what the chardg thereof would be.

In November 44 Eliz. it being resolved Ib. f. 63. a.
that the old Buildings, then standing between the great Gate house, and John
Bevington's house in Chancery lane (which was the nearest to Lincolnes Inn
toward the South) should be pulled down, and a new Building of Brick, Stone,
and Timber erected in the same place; it was ordered that all persons having
Chambers in those Buildings should remove Ib. f. 63. a.
thence before the first of March next ensuing.

In 2 Iac. 18 Iunii xx (...)
. was ordered (...)
to be allowed, for the making of a Brickwall of nine foot high, before the
Kitchen Windows, and Chambers; and for enclosing the Garden there.

In 4 Iac. a new brick wall was appointed (...)
to be set up, by line, from the new Wall, near the North Gate, which enters
into the walks, unto the new Wall toward the Antelope, and Lxl. assigned for
finishing the same: This being for enclosure (...)
of the long walk, and to be done Ib. f. 353. 9.
in March next following.

In 5 Iac. at a Council held 19 Iunii, an Order Ib. f. 363. 2.
was made for pulling down the old Buildings of the short Gallery, between the
Gatehouse and the Chambers of Sir John Tindall Knight, and Mr. Henry Davies
(two of the Masters of the Bench of this House.) and that a new Building of
Brick, The new Buildings from the Gatehouse Northwards.
Stone, and timber should be erected in the room thereof.

In 6 Iac. at a Council held 6 Maii, there was an Order Ib. f. 383. a.
made, that those who were the Supervisors of the intended buildings already
mentioned, which were then in hand, should take into their consideration the
building of a new Chapel, The new Chapel.
and likewise of the long Gallery, and some other buildings then intended to be
made in this House: And in October following, it was farther ordered Ib. f.
(...).
; that all such as had Chambers in the said long Gallery, should pay toward
those new Buildings fifty pounds for each Chamber; id est xxvl. a piece: and
such as were new Takers to pay Lxxl. viz. xxxvl. a piece; as also that the said
Buildings should be made xxiiii. foot square within the walls, and nether Rooms
to have Sellers wherein to lay wood.

And because the Library, The Library.
so built, as I have already observed, was not yet well furnished with Books,
in a Council held the 24th. of June, the same year, it was ordered Ib. f. 411.
2.
, that for the more speedy doing thereof, every one that should thenceforth be
called to the Bench in this Society, should give xx. toward the buying of
Books for the same Library: and every one thenceforth called to the Bar xiii^.
iiiid.: All which sums to be paid to Mr. Matthew Had; who, for the better
ordering of the said Library, was then made Master thereof.

In this year it was also concluded Ib. f. 422. a.
, in a Council here held 31 Ian. that the old Buildings in the long Gallery
near the Kitchen, The Buildings on the Southside of the Quadrangle.
and toward Bevington's house, should be pulled down, and a new Building of
Brick, stone, and timber erected in the place thereof; and, that in order
thereto, the persons having Chambers there, should remove before the 20th. of
February then next following: All which was perfected the same year, the
chardge amounting to MCCCCix. ix.s Vd. besides the old materials.

In 7 Iac. 2 Nov. there was an Order Ib. f. 427. a.
made; that an uniform Building containing xx. Chambers, Buildings on the
Southside of the House
should be erected on the North side of the House, answerable in length and
breadth to that last finished: as also a fair large Chapel, with three double
The Chapel.
Chambers under the same, be set in a place more convenient; that then standing
being grown ruinous, and not large enough for the Society: the chardge of which
new Building (erected in anno 1611. 9 Iac.) containing Ib. 488. a.
xx. Chambers, and being three stories above the ground, amounted Ib. f. 485.
a. and 487. a.
to MDCxviiil. viii^.

The next ensuing year, viz. 8 Iac. upon the xxiith. of June, it was ordered
Ib. f. 444. a.
, that the said old Chapel should be pulled down, and the new one
beforementioned, to be erected in the Court where it stood: And in 9 Iac. at a
Council held 9 Maii, it was determined Ib. f. 463. a.
, that a third uniform Building, containing xvi. Chambers should be erected the
year following: which Building was to begin with a return from the new
Buildings then in hand, Buildings on the Northside of the Quadrangle
and range along VVestwards, for the making up of a new Court on that side.

Howbeit, from this time, till 15 Iac. nothing more of Building went on;
neither had any thing before been done toward this intended new Chapel,
notwithstanding the several former Orders: but then Mr. Spenser, Mr. Waltham,
Mr. Selwyn, Mr. Broke, Mr. Pyne, Mr. Wandesford, and Mr. Sanderson, by an Order
Ib. f. 659. a.
in their Council made 25 Nov. or any two of them, were appointed to consider
of materials for this Chapel, The Chapel.
and what stone and timber should be provided for it; and whether Oxford stone
should be concluded on, according to the workmens direction: and the model
thereof was recommended Ib. f. 661. b.
to the contrivance of Inigo Jones the Kings Surveyor general; who, having made
a Draught thereof, estimated Ib. f. 671. a.
the charge of the same to MMl. Toward the defraying of which the Benchers
were pleased freely to contribute as follows Ib. f. 671. b.
; viz.

Sir James Ley xx l. Sir Will. Sidley xx l. Thomas Spenser xx l. Anth. Irby xx
l. Thomas Hitchcock v l. Henry Davy v l. Richard Diggon v l. Jasper Selwyn v l.
Christopher Brook vi l. xiii s. iiii d. John Ieffreys v l. Rouland Wandesford
v l. Edmund Estcourt v l. Hugh Cressy iii l. vi s. viii d. Edward Had v l.
John Darcy v l. Giles Ib. f. 673. b.
Tooker v l. Will. Ayloffe v l. Robert Air v l. Hugh Pyne v l. Nicholas Ib. f.
674. b.
Ducke v l. Thomas Sanderson v l. William Ib. f. 675. a.
Noy v l.
But these contributions coming far short of accomplishing the work, in a
Council held the 4th. of October, the year ensuing ( viz. 17 Iac.) it was
agreed and ordered Ex Registro de Lincolns Inn Vol. 7. f. 9. a.
; first that each of the Masters of the Bench, and associates thereunto should
pay toward this structure xxl. a piece; each of seven years continuance at
the Bar xx nobles; each of the Bar, under that time Vl. and each Gentleman of
the House, under the Bar xls.

And ten days afterward, at another Council Ib. f. 7. b.
there held; that there should be a general Tax upon all such as had not
contributed or showed their willingness so to do, toward this work. And for
receipt of these moneys, Thomas Spenser Esquire was appointed Ib. f. 18. b.
Treasurer, and Alexander Chart his Under-Treasurer.

Which fair beginning gave so great an encouragement, as well to those who had
already contributed as to others; that Sir James Ley and Mr. Spenser, who had
formerly given xx l. a piece, made it each Ib. f. 10. a.
of them an hundred pounds a piece, and many others gave very liberally; viz.

Sir William Ib. f. 10. a.
Owen C l. Sergeant Ib. f. 10. b.
More xx l. Sir John Ib. f. 25. a.
Dauntsey Knight v l. Richard Ib. f. 49. a.
Chamberlain, Clerk of the Court of Wards x l. Ellis Ib. b.
Win Clerk of the Petty bagg x l. Sir William Brereton Ib. f. 50. a.
of Cheshire Knight vi l. Sir John Wray Ib. f. 56. a.
Knight and Baronet, and Mr. Edw. Wray Ib. f. 56. a.
his brother (grand Children to Sir Christopher Wray, sometime Lord Chief
Justice.) xx l. Sir Thomas Ib. f. 61. ^.
Grantham Knight x l. Sir Henry Ib. f. 68. a.
Hobert Knight and Baronet, Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, C l. Sir
Randle Ib. f. 68. a.
Crew Knight, one of his Majesty's Sergeants at Law xx l. Sir Nich. Ib. f. 79.
a.
Sanderson Knight and Barronet x l. Sir Tho. Ib. f. 86. b.
Temple Knight and Barronet x l. The Earl Ib. f. 87. a.
of Bridgwater L l.
And besides these, there were diverse others who gave smaller sums; which for
brevity, I here omit to mention.

So that the work thereupon going vigorously on, this Chapel was fully
finished within the space of five years, and consecrated upon Ascension day An.
D. 1623. 22 Iac. by George Mountain the Bishop of London, as appears by an
Inscription placed under his Arms at the East end of the arched roof, under
the same; Doctor John Done, then Dean of Paul's preaching upon this Text, Facta
sunt autem encoenia Hierosolomis, and hyems erat, and ambulabat Jesus in
Templo, in porticu Salomonis. John. Cap. 10. v....

The next of their Buildings was the new Celler, together with repairing of the
Hall; for which there was an Order Ib. f. 165. b.
made in their Council 17 Maii 1 Caroli, and that all Baristers, above seven
years standing, should pay four Nobles; all under seven years standing a Mark;
and all Gentlemen under the Bar vis. viiid.

And the last was the enlargement of their Garden, The Garden.
beautifying it with a large Tarras walk on the West side thereof, and raising
the Wall higher toward Lincolns Inn fields. Which work was done in An. 1663.
(15 Car. 2.) the charge thereof amounting to little less than a thousand
pounds, by reason that the levelling of most part of the ground, and raising
the Tarras, required such great labor.

Pictures in the Windows of the Chapel.
In the first Window on the Southside.
THe Portraictures of St. Peter, St. Andrew, St. James, and St. John the
Evangelist.

Under that of St. Peter are the Arms of Henry Earl of Southampton.

Under St. Andrew, of William Earl of Pembroke.

Under St. James, of John Earl of Bridgwater.

And under St. John, of James Earl of Carlisle.

In the second Window, on the same Southside.
THe Portraictures of St. Philip, St. Bartholmew, St. Matthew, and St. Thomas.

Under that of St. Philip are the Arms of George Lord Abergaveny, and of Mary
his Wife, daughter to Edward Stafford sometime Duke of Buckingham.

Under St. Bartholmew, of Henry Lord Abergaveny, and of Frances his Wife
daughter of Thomas Earl of Rutland.

Under St. Matthew, of Sir Thomas Fane Knight and Mary Baroness le Despenser
his Wife.

In the third Window on the same Southside.
THe Portraictures of St. James the less, St. Simon, S. Jude, and St. Matthias.

Under that of St. James, are the Arms of Robert Lord Spenser of Wormleighton.

Under St. Simon, of Sir Henry Crompton Knight.

Under St. Jude, of Thomas Spenser of Claredon Esquire.

Under St. Matthias, of John Spenser of Ofley Esquire.

In the first Window on the Northside.
THe Portraictures of David, Daniel, Elias, and Esdras.

Under that of David, are the Arms of Sir James Ley Knight and Baronet, Chief
Justice of the Kings Bench.

Under that of Daniel, of Sir Humphrey Wynche Knight, one of the Justices of
the King's Bench.

Under that of Elias, of Sir John Denham Knight, one of the Barons of the
Exchequer.

Under that of Esdras, of Sir William Jones Knight, one of the Justices of the
King's Bench.

In the second Window on the Northside.
THe Portraictures of the Prophets Ieremias, Ezechiel, Amos, and Zacharias.

Under that of Ieremias, are the Arms of Sir Randle Crew Knight, one of the
King's Sergeants at Law.

Under that of Ezechiel, of Sir Thomas Harris Baronet, Sergeant at Law.

Under that of Amos, of Sir Thomas Richardson Knight and Speaker of the
Parliament.

Under that of Zacharias, of John Darcy Sergeant at Law.

In the third Window on the same Northside.
THe Portraictures of the Patriarch Abraham, the Prophet Moses, St. John
Baptist, and St. Paul the Apostle.

Under that of Abraham, are the Arms of Christopher Brook, and Thomas
Sanderson, Benchers of this House.

Under that of Moses, of Roland Wandesford Esquire, a Bencher also of this House.

Under that of St. John Baptist, of William Noy Esquire then likewise a Bencher of
this House.

And under that of St. Paul, of John Took Esquire an Associate to the Bench.

All which Arms, with the Inscriptions under them, are in the following pages
accurately expressed.

In Hospicio Lincolniensi^.
In semicirculari Refectorij versus Occidentem.








Adhuc in eadem semiculari Fenestra














In altera semicirculari Fenestra ejusdem Refectorij, Orientem versus






Adhuc in eadem semicirculari fenestra,










In Capella Hospicij Lincolniensis.
In prima fenestra versus Austrum hac Insignia, v^.








In secunda Fenestra Capellae, versus Austru^








In tertia Fenestra ejusdem Capellae, versus Austrum.








In prima fenestra ejusdem Capellae, versus Aquilonem.








In secunda Fenestra ejusdem Capellae, versus Aquilonem.








In tertia Fenestra ejusdem Capellae, versus Aquilonem.








In Occidentali Fenestra ejusdem Capellae.
































Adhuc in dicta Occidnetali Fenestra,


































































































Orders for Government.
Admittances.
Amongst these, that which I find to be the most ancient, is the Oath given to
every member of this Society, upon his first Admittance thereinto: Which Oath
was thus established in 18 H. 6. (An. D. 1439.)

Tu (...) Registro 1. Hofsp. Linc. fol. 3. b.
jurabis, quod sis obediens, assistens, and confortans Gubernatoribus ejusdem
Hospicii electis, eligendis, and pro tempore ibidem existentibus, in omnibus
gubernationem Societatis ejusdem concernentibus, and concernendis. And likewise
that taken by the Governors. viz.

Tu Ibid.
jurabis, pro viribus tuis videas and facias observari bonum regimen, honorem
and proficuum ejusdem Societatis, a festo S. Barnabe Apostoli, anno regni Regis
Henrici sexti xviii. usque festum omnium Sanctorum, quod erit in anno Domini
MCCCCxli. and deinde quousque nos and socii tui constituerint.

And to the intent that learning might the better flourish here, it was in 3
and 4 Ph. and M. established Ex alio Regist. seil Vol. 4. f. 311. b.
, that thenceforth none should be admitted into the fellowship of this House,
who had not been of an Inn of Chancery before, by the space of one year; except
he did pay for his Admittance, for his not being in Chancery xl. But, it seems
that this Order had not that due observation as was expected: for in 7 Eliz.
they imposed a Fine of five marks upon every person, who should be here
admitted, unless he had been of some House of Chancery before. But such was
their respect to those as were Utter -Barristers of Furnivalls Inn, and
Thavyes Inn, of one years continuance; that in 10 Eliz. they ordered Ex (...)
Registro f. 84. a.
that any of them should be admitted for four marks. And the next year
following they farther ordered Ib. f. 96. b.
, that every fellow of those two Inns of Chancery (by reason they were the
proper Houses of this House, as the Register expresses) who had been allowed
an Utter-Barrister there, and that had mooted there two Vacations at the Utter
Bar, should pay for their admissions into the Fellowship of this House only
xiiis. iiiid. but any like Utter-Barister of any other Inn of Chancery xxs. And
that, every Inner Barister of either of the said two Inns of Chancery, Orders
^or government
that had mooted there one Vacation at the Inner Bar should pay for his
admission into this House but xxs. every Inner-Barister of any other Inn of
Chancery, paying for the like xls. And, that every one, who should after that
time be admitted into this House, being of no Inn of Chancery, before such
their admission, to pay for their admission no less than five marks.

And farther, in 27 Eliz. they decreed Ib. f. 37^. b.
, that the Gentlemen after, that time to be admitted to the Fellowship of this
House; should pay for their Admittance, as follows; viz. such as were of
Furnivals Inn, or Davys Inn one year, xl.s and such as were of other Houses of
Chancery one year 3l. 6s. 8d.

And in 11 Iacobi it was ordered Ex alio Regist. feil. Vol. 6. f. 513. a.
, that thenceforth there should not be demanded or taken of any Gentleman to be
admitted into this House, who had not formerly been of any Inn of Chancery,
above the sum of iiil. xs. upon his admission.

And because they found, that some Attorneys, and Common Sollicitors had
obtained Admittances into this Society, which they esteemed to be no small
disparagement thereunto; it was in a Council held 4 Iunii in 11 Car. 1. ordered
Ex alio Regist. scil. Vol. 7. f. 339. a.
, that none such from thenceforth should be admitted. And the better to prevent
the like abuse, they farther ordered; that if any Gentleman, after his
admittance, should become an Attorney, or Common Solicitor, his Admittance to
be ipso facto void.

In 6 Edw. Exercises for advancement of learning.
4 for the better advancement of learning in this House, at a general Council
held in the Chapel here, dedicated to St. Richard, sometime Bishop of
Chichester, all the Bench and Bar being present; there was an Order Ex Regist,
ejusdem Hosp. Vol. 1. fol. 144. b.
made, that all the members of this Society, which then were, or should
thereafter be, and every of them, so soon as they should be called to the Bar,
or admitted to the Bench, should keep six whole Vacations, within the Compass
of three years immediately ensuing such their admission to the Bench; that is
to say, one Month in Lent, in the time of the Reading of this Society, and
another Month in Autumn in the time of Reading also; and that they should also
be personally present at the Readings there, in every Vacation, for the first
week wherein the same Lecture was to begin. Provided nevertheless, that if any
Bencher of this Society, did observe the whole remainder of the Vacation, it
should be allowed to him for a whole Vacation, and that he should be in Commons
for that whole Month, during the before-specified Reading And moreover, that
every member of this Society, who should thenceforth be called and admitted
from the Bar to the Bench, in manner and form aforesaid, should swear upon the
holy Evangelists, to keep and observe six Vacations, in all points as
aforesaid, without any excuse whatsoever, excepting sickness; or sickness of
his or their Fathers, Mothers, or Wives; or any Suits, pleadings of Assize or
Nist prius, relating to them, or any one to their use, happening within that
Month and time of such Reading; or within fourteen days before or after the
said Reading, upon pain of xxs. to be forfeited and paid to the Society, for
every default in the premises.

And in 6 Edw. 6. it was ordered Ex Registro ejusdem Hosp. Vol. 4 fol. 203. a.
, that every Puisne, at every Mess at Dinner, should put a short Case of one
point argumentable, and to be argued throughourly, by all that should sit at
the same Mess; and this Order to take effect in the beginning of the next Term;
and no man to depart from the same without reasonable cause, under the penalty
of xiid.; provided, that on such nights as were mootable, no Case to be argued.

Moreover, in 16 Eliz. it was ordered Ex Regist. ejusdem Hosp. Vol. 5. fol.
183. a.
, that at the end of every Term, examination and search should be made what
Exercises of learning had been kept the same Term, and by whom: and likewise in
the beginning of the Term to examine who kept their learnings in the Vacation
time. And in 18 Eliz. it was farther ordered Ib. f. 210. b.
, that thenceforth at Dinner, the Puisne in every Mess should put a Case; and
every man of the same Mess, in antientie to speak unto the Case, and show his
opinion therein, before his departure out of the Hall, upon pain as should seem
good to the Bench.

In 38 Eliz. Barristers Readers in Chancery.
there were these express Orders Ex Registro ejusdem Hosp. Vol. 6. ^05. 20. b.
made, in reference to those Barristers as were Readers in Chancery, and such
as were under the Bar in this House; viz. 1. That none should be called to the
upper Bar, but by the ordinary and general Council, in Term time; nor to
continue Utter-Barrister, unless he should by the space of three years after,
exercise ordinary mootings, and other ordinary exercises of learning, both in
Court and Chancery, as the Bench should allow. 2. That the Readers in Chancery,
should thenceforth keep their Summer and Lent Readings by the space of three
weeks in each Vacation; and each of them perform three grand Mootes, with their
Pleadings; two Lectures for every of their Cases, and also Read in each of
those weeks: And, in the Term time, that they should hold two petty Mootes in
each week; as also in each week of the Term read two Lectures at the least; and
leave the same written in paper in the House accordingly, as in former times
had been used and accustomed. 3. That no Reader should be permitted to Read by
Deputy, without special Warrant by the Bench.

So also in 12 Car. 1. for the Exercise of Mootes, they took care that they
should be performed Ex Registro ejusdem Hosp. Vol. 7.
by the Barristers.

And for decency in Apparel, at a Apparel.
Apparel. Council held on the day of the Nativity of St. John Baptist 23 H. 8.
it was ordered Ex Registro ejusdem Hosp. Vol. 4. fol. 13. b.
, that for a continual Rule, to be thenceforth kept in this House, no
Gentleman, being a Fellow of this House, should wear any Cut or pansyd Hosen,
or Bryches; or pansid Doblet, upon pain of putting out of the House.

Nay so regular were they in those days in point of Habit, that in 1 and 2 Ph.
and M. one Mr. Wide, of this House, was (by a special Order Ib. f. 283. b.
made upon Ascension day) fined at five Groats, for going in his Study Gown in
Cheapside, on a Sunday, about ten of the Clock before Noon; and in Westminster
Hall, in the Term time, in the fore-Noon.

And in 30 Eliz. they further ordered Et Regist* ej^sdem Hosp. Vol. 5. fol.
415. a.
, that if any Fellow of this House, should wear any Hat in the Hall, or Chapel;
or go abroad to London, or Westminster without a Gown, he should be put out of
Commons; and pay such a Fine before his readmittance, as the Masters of the
Bench, then in Commons should assess. And likewise, that if any Fellow of this
House should wear long Hair, or great Ruffs, he should also be put out of
Commons, and pay such a Fine, before he were remitted, as the Masters of the
Bench then in Commons should assess.

So also in 38 Eliz. Et Regist* ej^sdem Hosp. Vol. 6. (...). 10. b.
That if any Fellow of this House, being a Commoner, or Repaster, should within
the precinct of this House, wear any Cloak, Boots and Spurrs, or long Hair, to
pay for every offense five shillings for a Fine, and also to be put out of
Commons. And in 11 Car. 1. it was also ordered Ib. f. 336. b.
that what Gentleman soever should come into the Hall at Meal time, with any
other upper garment than a Gown, he should be suspended for being a member of
the Society.

And as this care was taken for regularity in their Apparel; Beard.
so also were there the like good Rules established concerning their Beards:
For in 33 H. 8. there was Order Ex. Regist. e^^dem Hosp. Vol. 4 ^ol. 134. a.
made, that none of the Fellows of this House, being in Commons, or at his
Repast, should wear a Beard; and who so did, to pay double Commons or Repasts
in this House during such time as he should have any Beard. But this Order
being not strictly observed, the penalty Ib. f. 275. b.
was made greater in 1 Mariae; viz. that such as had Beards, should pay xiid.
for every meal they continued them: and every man to be shaven, upon pain of
putting out of Commons.

And in 1 Eliz. it was further ordered Ib. f. 345. b.
that no Fellow of this House should wear any Beard above a fortnights growth;
and that whosoever transgress therein, should for the first offense forfeit iiis.
iiiid. to be paid and cast with his Commons; and for the second time vi^.
viiid. in like manner to be paid and cast with his Commons; and the third time
to be banished the House.

But the fashion at that time of wearing Beards, grew then so predominant; as
that the very next year following, at a Council held in this House, upon the
27th. of November, it was agreed and ordered Ibid:
, that all Orders before that time made, touching Beards, should be void and
repealed.

In 1 Eliz. there was likewise an Order Ibid.
made, that no Fellow of this Society, should wear any Sword or Buckler; or
cause any to be born after him into the Town. And that in case any one should
transgress therein, he should, for the first offense forfeit iii^. iiiid. to be
paid and cast with his Commons; for the second time vis. viiid. in like manner
to be cast into Commons, and the third time to be banished the House. And in 8
Iac. it was further ordered Ex. Regist, ejusdem Hosp: Vol. 6. f. 4^2*
, that no Rapiers should be worn in this House by any of the Society.

And to prevent all differences touching precedence Precedence.
amongst them, there was an Order Ex Regist: ejusdem Hosp: Vol. 7. f. 23. (...):
made in 18 Iac. upon advise and consideration of the course held in other
Innes of Court, and public places of Corporations, where additions gains no
precedence of their Ancients; that no Bencher being Knighted, and made a Master
of the Chancery in ordinary; or either of them, should take place within the
House, but in the course of antiquity and not otherwise.

Touching their Sports and corporal Exercises, Sports.
it was ordered Ex. Regist. ejusdem Hosp: Vol. 5. fol. 448. a.
in 32 Eliz. that not only all the Sportings, late watchings, and Exercises,
before that time yearly used on the Hunting night: but also their repair
usually at a certain day yearly to Kentish town; and the Dining with Sports and
assemblies before that time used, should be taken away, and no more exercised:
and that at those days and times, all the Fellows of this House should have and
take their Diet at such time and place, as on other days was then used by order
of this House, and not otherwise.

In 35 Eliz. Divinity Lecture.
upon removal of one Mr. Charke Divinity-Reader in this House, the Archbishop
of Canterbury wrote his Letters to the Masters of the Bench, here, to proceed
in the choice of another: who thereupon (6 Febr. the same year) ordered Ib. f.
476. 2.
, that there should be two learned men, chosen out of the University of Oxford,
and two others out of the University of Cambridge, to read each of them
quarterly a Divinity Lecture in the Chapel here, twice every week, and to
preach upon the Sunday, and at such other times as there should be a Communion
appointed; for the first half year they of Oxford to begin, and then for the
other those of Cambridge. And that they should for this their pains, have
quarterly ten pounds a piece; as also their Diet with the Masters of the Bench
in Term time, and in the Vacation times, when no Table is kept for the
Benchers, their Commons to be free with the Masters at the Bar, at the public
charge of the House.

Public Expenses at great Solemnities.
THe first of these, whereof the Registers of this House do take any notice,
was in 7 Edw. 4. Ex. Registro Hosp. Linc. Vol. 1. fol. 149. a.
at the Iusts then held in Smithfield, betwixt Wydevile Lord Scales, and the
Bastard Son of the Duke of Burgundy, upon a mandate received from the King, by
the four Innes of Court; that each of them should furnish out four armed men
for the said King's guard: which was accordingly done, Scaffolds being set up
to see the Iusts, and the charges of all born by a rate.

The next was at the Coronation of King Henry the viiith. for the honor
whereof they spent Ex alio Registro seil. Vol. 4. fol. 25. b.
one Hogshead of Claret wine, price xx^. and laid out five pounds in making of
Scaffolds at Westminster to stand on, for view of the Iusts and Tiltings, which
were then exercised.

The third upon a Mask Ex. alio Registro, scil. Vol. 7. f. 526. a. and 558. a.
in 11 Iac. presented by this Society before the King, at the marriage of the
Lady Elizabeth, his daughter, to the Prince Elector Palatine of the Rhene,
which cost no less than MLxxxvi. viiis. xid.

Shortly after which, viz. in 14 Iac. at the Creation of the most Illustrious
Charles Prince of Wales, they agreed Ib. f. 629. b.
upon a taxation of xls. a piece from every Bencher and associate; every
Barister and above, xxxs. 3 every Barister under seven years xxs. and every
Gentleman xiiis. iiiid. for defraying the charge of the performances at the
Barriers, in honor of that great solemnity.

And it is no less observable; that the motion Ex alio Registro se. Vol. 8. f.
290. a.
for that famous Mask, which was presented to the King at Christmas, 9 Caroli
1. first proceeded from this House unto the other three Innes of Court; the
total charge whereof to them all, amounted to MMCCCCl. toward the supporting
whereof, it was ordered Ib. f. 291. a.
in this Society, that every Bencher should pay vil. 3; Every Utter-Barister of
seven years standing or above, iiii. and under seven years standing xls.; and
every Gentleman xxs. Which Mask became so well accepted from his Majesty that
besides his thanks to them, he invited Ib. f. 305. b.
an hundred and twenty Gentlemen of the four Innes of Court unto that Mask at
Whine Hall, which was on Shrove-tuesday following.

Revells.
And that nothing might be wanting for their encouragement in this excellent
study, they have very anciently had Dancings for their recreation and delight,
commonly called Revells, allowed at certain seasons; and that by special order
Ex Registro Hosp. Liae. Vol. 1. fol. viz. 20. a.
of the Society, as appears in 9 H. 6.; viz. that there should be four
Reveals that year, and no more; one at the feast of All hallown, another at the
feast of St. Erkenwald; the third at the feast of the Purification of our Lady;
and the 4th. on Midsummer Day: one person yearly elected of the Society, being
made choice of, for director in those pastimes, called the Master of the
Revells: which sports were long before that time used, as may appear by this
Order (...)
, in their public Council, made upon Allhallown Day 8 Eliz. that the
Musicians, at the ancient and solemn Revells (for so they were then called)
should have their stipend increased, for their service on the two principal
Feasts; Allhallown tide and Car. lem ass; that is to sa^, where they were wont
to have, for their service done, for Allhallown Even, Allhallown Day at Noon,
and Allhallown day at night (...), that thenceforth they should have for their
said service. at that time vis. viiid. and the like sum at Candlemass, having
had but iiis. iiiid. before.

Nor were these Exercises of Dancing merely permitted; but thought very
necessary (as in seems) and much conducing to the making of gentlemen more fit
for their Books at other times; for, by an Order (...)
made 6 Febr. 7 Iac. it appears, that the Uader Raristers, were by Decimation
put out of Commons, for examples sake, because the whole Bar offended by not
Dancing on Candlemass day preceding, according to the ancient Order of this
Society, when the Judges were present: with this, that if the like fault were
committed afterward, they should be fined or disbarred.

Grand Christmasses.
TOuching the great state and magnificence used herein, having already spoke in
my Discourse of the Inner Temple; where I have fully described the splendid
Shows, notable pastimes, and costly feastings, anciently used at Christmas
time in that Society; I shall here only in brief observe; that the first Order
Ex Registro Hosp. Linc. Vol. 4. fol. 87. a.
, wherewith I have met, which makes any mention of these solemnities in this
House, was in 9 H. 8. it being then agreed and ordained; that he who should,
after that time, be chosen King on Christmas Day, ought then to occupy the
said room, if he were present; and in his absence the Marshall, for the time
being, by the advice of the Utter-Baristers present, to name another.

And for learning of young gentlemen to do service, that the Marshall should
sit as King on New years Day, and have like service as on Christmas Day: And
the Master of the Revells, during Dinner time, supply the Marshall's room.

Moreover, that the King of Cockneys on Childermass Day, should sit and have
due service; and that he and all his Officers, should use honest manner and
good Order, without any wast or destruction making, in Wine, Brawn, Chely, or
other Vitaills: as also, that he and his Marshal* Butler, and Constable Marshal
should have their lawful and honest Commandments by delivery of the Officers of
Christmas: And that the said King of Cockneys, ne none of his Officers medyll
neither in the Buttry, not in the Stuard of Christmas his Office, upon pain of
xl.s for every such meddling. And lastly, that Jack Straw, and all his adherents
should be thenceforth utterly banished, and no more to be used in this House,
upon pain to forfeit, for every time five pounds, to be levied on every fellow
happening to offend against this Rule.

But these Grand Christmasses were not, it seems, constantly kept; for thus I
find in an Order Ex alio Registro, scil. Vol. 5. f. 9. b.
entered in their Register, made 27 Nov. 22 H. 8. Yt is agreed, that if the two
Temples do keep Chrystemas, then Chrystemas to be kept here: and to know this,
the Steward of the House is commanded to get knowlydge, and to advertise my
Masters by the next day at night.

The Readers.
COncerning these; that which is first observable, is an Order Ex Registro
Hosp. Linc. f. 134. 1.
made in the Council of this House in 3 E. 4. whereby it was established, that
the Reader for Summer, should be chosen in Easter Term; and the Reader for Lent
in Michaelmass Term: And that in 5 H. 8. ( 23 Iunii) it was Ex alio Registro;
cil. Vol. 4. fol. 50. a.
concorded and agreed, by the assent of the whole Company of the Bench, that
none of the same Bench, who was to read in the Harvest Vacation, should
thenceforth charge the Company of this House, in any wise, over the number of
xii. Bucks; so that if it were the pleasure of the same Reader to have more;
then he himself to be at the charge of them; as well for the reward, as for the
baking.

And the next, that in 33 Eliz. (13 Iunii;) whereby, for the better disposal of
the Readings in this Society, and regulating of them, diverse wholesome Rules
were established; the tenor of which I have here thought fit to transcribe.

-- Ex alio Registro; scil. Vol. 6. fol. 461. b.
Whereas the Readings of Houses of Court have time out of mind been continued
in every Lent, and every August yearly, by the space of 3. weeks at the least,
till of late, that diverse Readers have made an end of their Reading in shorter
time, and have read fewer Readings then by the ancient Orders of the same
Houses they ought; to the great hindrance of Learning, not only in the said
Houses of Court, but also in Houses of Chancery, by reason that the Exercises
of Mootes, very profitable for Students, are by occasion thereof cut off,
almost the one half or more.

The excessive and sumptuous charges of which Readings, brought in of late
time, contrary to the ancient usage, have been, and are (as it is thought) the
chief, or great occasion of the same; which (if it should be permitted) would
be almost an utter overthrow to the learning and study of the Law, and
consequently an intolerable mischief to the Commonwealth uf this Realm.

The two Chief Justices and Chief Baron, and all the residue of the Justices of
both Benches, and the Barons of the Exchequer; well perceiving, that these late
Examples of short and few Readings are so dangerous, as they are not longer to
be suffered, have thought it very necessary, that the same Readings and Charges
of the Readers, shall be from thenceforth used as follows.

First that all single Readers, in every of the said Houses of Court, shall
continue every of their Readings, by the whole space of three weeks, or till
Friday in the third week, after the beginning of every such Reading, at the
least; and that there shall be as many Readings in every of the said 3. weeks,
as by the ancient Orders of the same Houses have been accustomed; and if there
shall be any cause allowed by the Benchers of the said Houses for fewer
Readings, there shall be, notwithstanding any such cause, three Readings in
every of the said three weeks at the least, any order to be taken to the
contrary notwithstanding.

And to the intent, that the charges of the same Readings may not be over
great, or burdensome to the same Readers, it is ordered and thought meet by the
said Justices and Barons, that no such Readers shall allow any greater diet in
the Hall of any such House, either in Wine, or mear, than was allowed usually
before the first year of the Queens Majesty's Reign that now is; viz. An. 1559.
--

And that the Stewards of the Readers drinking, shall not expend about the same
above the sum of twenty Marks, that is to say, either of them vil. xiiis.
iiiid.: and that the Steward of the Readers dinner shall not defray, about the
charges of the said dinner, above xxl. viz. either of them xl. at the most; And
that no Reader shall have more wine to be spent in his Reading then two
Hogsheads at the most.

And that no Reader shall make any Dinner, or be at any charges in his House,
but in the Reading time, and not in the Term before his Reading.

And the said Justices do think it meet, that the said Readers should be
advised by the Benchers of their Houses, not only in the proportion of their
own diet; but also, what number of Guests, and of what fort they should bid to
their Table, during their Reading, to the intent that a mediocrity may be used
frugally without excess.

The Orders aforesaid are at this Council ratified, and from henceforth to be
duly observed; and no Reader shall in any wise hereafter make any Dinner or be
at any charges of diet in the House in the Term or before the time of his
Reading.

That the Readers here, have anciently had some allowance for Wine spent in the
times of their Readings; there are diverse memorials in the Accounts Ex eodem
Regist o^ol. 175. b. and alibi.
of this House; viz. of xiiiil. at the Summer Reading, and viiil. at the
Reading in Lent. For the order and ceremony of their Readings, it is thus;

The Reader for Autumn, takes his place in the Hall, at the Bench-Table, the
last day of Trinity Term, with great solemnity at Dinner time; and is placed at
the upper end of the said Bench-Table; where he is thenceforth to have
precedence till his Reading shall end, and to make a Feast for the whole
Society.

The Reader also for Lent, with the like ceremony and Feast, is to take his
place at the Bench, at Dinner, upon the last day of Hillary Term yearly.

For Bucks brought in during the time of Reading, the House allows toward
the Reward for each, iiis. iiiid. the rest is at the Readers own charge.

So also does the House allow Pepper and Flower for baking of all the Venison,
which shall be spent in the Hall; but not for what is spent at the Reader's own
Table.

And this privilege they have, that every Reader may admit any person into the
Society, according as he shall think fit; and to be allowed one Clerk in
Commons at the rate of xxd. a week: but if he be a Double Reader, then two
Clerks, each at the same rate.

Of such learned Gentlemen who had been Readers in this House, there was a
Catalogue Adhuc ex Registro 6. f. 396. b.
made in 28 Eliz. by one Mr. Lee, an Utter-Barister here; but having not seen
it, I was constrained to gather them out of the Registers, as here follows.

Vera Effigies V. cl RANVLPHI CREW Equitis aurati, nuper Capitalis Iusticiarij
ad Placita coram Rege tenenda assignati.



W Hollar sculp 1664.
Catalogus Lectorum in Hospicio Lincolniensi.
Ex Regist. ejusdem Hosp. vol. 1. f. 138. a. An. 4. Edw. 4. Quadr. Willielmus
Huddesfeld. Autum.... Ibid. fol. 141. b. An. 5 Edw. 4. Quadr Johannes Sulyard
[postea unus Justice. ad Plac. coram Rege tenenda assignatus.] Autum.... f. 14^.
a. An. 6 Edw. 4. Quadr. Bartholomaeus Bolney. Autum.... An. 7 Edw. 4. Quadr....
f. 149. b. Autum. Willielmus Donyngton. An. 8 Edw. 4. Quadr. Rog. Towneshend
[postea unus Justice. de Banco.] f. 152. b. Autum. Willielmus Briscowe. f. 154.
b. An. 9 Edw. 4. Quadr. Willielmus Huddesfeld duplex Lector. f. 156. a. Autum.
Johannes Haugh [postea unus Justice. de Banco.] f. 158. b. An. 10 E. 4. Quadr.
Johannes Sulyard duplex Lector. f. 159. a. Autum.... Whitlegh. f. 162. b. An.
49 H. 6. Quadr. Johannes Ienney. An. 11 E. 4. Autum.... f. 176. b. An. 11 E. 4.
Quadr. Nicholaus Stathum [qui Abbreviationes Relat. scripsit, postea unus
Baronum de Scacc.] Autum.... Ex alio Registro ejusdem Hosp. scil. vol. 2. f.
25. a. An. 12 E. 4. Quadr. Willielmus Donyngton. Autum.... Ibid. fol. 26. b.
An. 13 E. 4. Quadr. Johannes Haugh duplex Lector. Autum.... f. 28. b. An. 14 E.
4. Quadr. Rogerus Townshend duplex Lector. Autum.... f. 30. b. An. 15 E. 4.
Quadr. Tho. Lovell [postea Thesaur. Hospicii Regi, H. 7.] f. 32. b. Autum.
William Huddesfeld triplex Lector. An. 16 E. 4. Quadr.... f. 33. b. Autum.
Thomas Ienney. An. 17 E. 4. Quadr. Willielmus Briscow duplex Lector. f. 38. a.
Autum. Johannes Sulyard. f. 41. a. An. 18 E. 4. Quadr. Iacobus Hoberd [postea
Attornatus Regis generalis.] Autum. Nulla Lectura causa Pestilentiae. f. 44. b.
An. 19 E. 4. Quadr. Kenelmus Dygas. Autum.... f. 47. b. An. 20 E. 4. Quadr.
Johannes Bradshaw. f. 48. a. Autum. Robertus Read [postea Capitalis Justice. de
Banco.] f. 49. b. An. 21 E. 4. Quadr. Tho. Lovell duplex Lector. f. 51. a.
Autum. Johannes Boteler [postea unus Justice. de Banco.] f. 52. b. An. 22 E. 4.
Quadr. Thomas Ienney. f. 53. b. An. 1 Ric. 3. Autum. Ricardus Higham. f. 57. b.
Quadr. Thomas Appylton. f. 56. a. An. 2. Ric. 3. Autum. Robertus Morton. f. 58.
a. Quadr. Willielmus Donyngton duplex Lector. f. 59. b. An. 3. Ric. 3. Autum.
Willielmus Frost. f. 81. a. An. 1 Hen 7. Quadr. Robertus Read [postea Capitalis
Justice. de Communi Banco.] f. 82. b. Autum. Thomas Gygges. f. 84. a. An. 2 Hen.
7. Quadr. Johannes Turpyn. Ex Registro ejusdem Ho^p. vol. 3. f. 1. a. Autum.
Johannes Thornborowe. f. 3. a. An. 3. Hen. 7. Quadr. Ioh. Boteler duplex
Lector. f. 4. b. Autum. Robertus Drury [postea scil. 10 H. 7. Prolocutor
Parliam.] f. 6. b. An. 4. Hen. 7. Quadr. Ricardus Heygham. f. 8. b. Autum.
Robertus Constabill. f. 10. b. An. 5 Hen. 7. Quadr. Edwardus Redmayn. f. 12. a.
Autum. Johannes More. f. 14. a. An. 6 Hen. 7. Quadr. Willielmus Frost. f. 15.
a. Autum. Johannes Aleyn [postea unus Baronum de Scacc.] f. 17. b. An. 7 Hen.
7. Quadr. Thomas Gyggs. f. 18. b. Autum. Franciscus Calybut. f. 21. a. An. 8
Hen. 7. Quadr. Rob. Drury duplex Lector. f. 23. a. Autum. Willielmus Cuttelerd.
f. 25. b. An. 9 Hen. 7. Quadr. Robertus Constable duplex Lector. f. 26. b.
Autum. Johannes Newport. f. 29. b. An. 10 H. 7. Quadr. Johannes More. f. 30. b.
Autum. Robertus Constable, eo quod ad gradum Servientis ad Legem electus est.
f. 34. a. An. 11 H. 7. Quadr. Johannes Aleyn. f. 36. a. Autum. Johannes Wode.
f. 38. a. An. 12 H. 7. Quadr. Franciscus Calibut. f. 39. b. Autum. Humfr.
Sygyswyk. f. 42. a. An. 13 H. 7. Quadr. Willielmus Cutlerd. f. 43. a. Autum.
Rogerus Martyn. f. 46. a. An. 14 H. 7. Quadr. Johannes Newport duplex Lector.
f. 47. b. Autum. Johannes Newdegate. f. 51. a. An. 15 H. 7. Quadr. Johannes
Wood duplex Lector. f. 54. b. Autum. Nulla Lectura, causa pestilentiae. f. 54.
b. An. 16 H. 7. Quadr. Willielmus Wadham. f. 55. a. Autum. Willielmus Ayloff.
f. 59. a. An. 17 H. 7. Quadr. Willielmus Elys. f. 62. a. Autum. Ricardus
Merlond. f. 64. b. An. 18 H. 7. Quadr. Willielmus Cutler, eo quod ad gradum
Serve. ad Legem electus est. f. 67. a. Autum. Ricardus Merlond. f. 71. b. An. 19
H. 6. Quadr. Nulla lectura, causa pestilentiae. f. 70. a. Autum. Johannes
Roper. f. 73. a. An. 20 H. 7. Quadr. Willielmus Wadham. f. 75. a. and 76. a.
Autum. Ricardus Evington electus, and pro defectu suo, Johannes Skewys. f. 80.
An. 21 H. 7. Quadr. Willielmus Ayloff. f. 84. a. Autum. Nulla lectura, ratione
pestilentiae. Ex Registro ejusdem Ho^p. vol. 4. f. 5. a. An. 22 H. 7. Quadr.
Walterus Stubbe. f. 6. b. Autum. Johannes Strange. f. 12. a. An. 23 H. 7.
Quadr. Ioh. Ropere duplex Lector. f. 15. a. Autum. Willielmus Wottone [postea
unus Baronum de Scacc.] electus; sed nulla lectio propter pestilentiam. f. 20.
a. An. 24 H. 7. Quadr. Johannes Skewys. f. 21. b. An. 1 Hen. 8. Autum.
Willielmus Wotton. f. 30. a. Quadr. Walt. Stubbes Senior. f. 30. b. An. 2 Hen.
8. Autum. Ioh. Newdigate, eo quod ad gradum Serve. ad Legem electus est; duplex
Lector. f. 35. a. Quadr. Radulphus Rokeby. f. 35. b. An. 3 Hen. 8. Autum. Tho.
Moore [postea summus Angliae Cancellarius. f. 39. a. Quadr. Thomas Wotton. f.
41. b. An. 4 Hen. 8. Autum. Will. Marshall. f. 44. a. Quadr. Radulphus Rokeby.
f. 50. a. An. 5 Hen. 8. Autum. Thomas Tempest. f. 53. b. Quadr. Johannes
Strange duplex Lector. f. 54. a. An. 6 Hen. 8. Autum. Robertus Thornburgh. f.
57. b. Quadr. Thomas More. f. 60. a. An. 7 Hen. 8. Autum. Ricardus Clerk
Senior. f. 63. b. Quadr. Will. Marshall duplex Lector. f. 66. a. Autum. 8 Hen.
8. Autum. Johannes Pullen. f. 70. b. Quadr. Tho. Tempest duplex Lector. f. 74.
a. An. 9 Hen. 8. Autum. Thomas Willughby [postea unus Justice. de Banco.] non
legebat. Ib. 74. b. Quadr. Idem Thomas Willughby. f. 75. a. An. 10 H. 8. Autum.
Robertus Norwich [postea Capitalis Justice. de Banco.] f. 84. b. Quadr. Robertus
Thornborough. f. 89. a. An. 11 H. 8. Autum. Ricardus Clerk senior, duplex
Lector. f. 93. a. Quadr. Willielmus Wadham, duplex Lector. f. 96. a. An. 12 H.
8. Autum. Georgius Treheyron. f. 103. a. Quadr. Robertus Norwich duplex Lector,
eo quod ad gradum Serve. ad Legem electus est. f. 108. b. An. 13 H. 8. Autum.
Christoph. Ienney, [postea unus Justice. de Banco.] f. 104. b. Quadr. Johannes
Poleyn. f. 111. b. An. 14 H. 8. Autum. Christopherus Ienney. f. 116. a. Quadr.
Ricardus Smytley, and in ejus defectu Will. Honychurch. f. 120. b. An. 15 H. 8.
Autum. Willielmus Honychurch. f. 125. b. Quadr. Rogerus Chombley [postea
Capitalis Justice. ad Plac. coram Rege tenenda assignatus.] f. 133. a. An. 16 H.
8. Autum. Johannes Densell. f. 136. a. Quadr. Georgius Treheyron. f. 137. b.
An. 17 H. 8. Autum. Johannes Harvye, non legebat. f. 140. a. Quadr. Johannes
Harvye. f. 143. b. An. 18 H. 8. Autum. Hugo Clerk Junior. f. 150. Quadr.
Ricardus Smetheley. f. 155. a. An. 19 H. 8. Autum. Willielmus Sulyard. f. 155.
a. and 161. a. Quadr. Willielmus Honychurche. fol. 163. a. An. 20 H. 8. Autum.
Nulla Lectura causa Pestilentiae. f. 270. a. Quadr. Rogerus Chombley duplex
Lector. f. 174. b. An. 21 H. 8. Autum. Robertus Curson. f. 183. a. Quadr.
Johannes Densell. f. 188. a. An. 22 H. 8. Autum. Johannes Danaster. Ex alio
Registro ejusdem Hosp. scil. vol. 5. f. 8. a. Quadr. Johannes Harvye electus,
sed non legebat. Johannes Densell legebat; eo quod ad statum Serve. ad Legem
electus est [triplex Lector.] f. 12. b. An. 23 H. 8. Autum. Rogerus Chomeley,
eo quod ad gradum Serve. ad Legem electus est [triplex Lector.] f. 20. a. Quadr.
Guido Crafford. f. 25. a. An. 24 H. 8. Autum. Johannes Harvye duplex Lector. f.
25. b. Quadr. Thomas Rushton. f. 37. a. and 42. a. An. 25 H. 8. Autum. Robertus
Townesend. f. 43. a. Quadr. Robertus Meinell. f. 50. a. and 54. a. An. 26 H. 8.
Autum. Thomas Lane. f. 59. a. Quadr. Johannes Danaster duplex Lector. f. 70. b.
An. 27 H. 8. Autum. Johannes Pilbarow. f. 74. a. Quadr. Johannes Harrys. f. 82.
a. An. 28 H. 8. Autum. Henricus See. f. 87. a. Quadr. Rob. Curson duplex
Lector. f. 99. a. An. 29 H. 8. Autum. Edwardus Gryssin [postea Attorn. R.
generalis.] Quadr.... f. 100. b. An. 30 H. 8. Autum. Clemens Higham [postea
unus Baronum de Scacc.] f. 110. b. Quadr. Guido Crafford. f. 116. b. An. 31 H.
8. Autum. Thomas Hemmyngs. f. 119. a. Quadr. Johannes Harrys. f. 121. b. An. 32
H. 8. Autum. Ricardus Heydon electus; sed non legebat causa pestilentiae, f.
126. b. f. 124. b. Quadr. Idem Ricardus Heydon. f. 127. a. An. 33 H. 8. Autum.
Georgius Sampoll. f. 133. a. Quadr. Thomas Atkyns. f. 135. b. An. 34 H. 8.
Autum. Ricardus Morgan [postea Capitalis Justice. de Banco.] f. (...). b. and
140. ^. Quadr. Johannes Pylborow duplex Lector. f. 143. b. An. 35 H. 8. Autum.
Willielmus Foster, non legebat, causa pestilentiae. f. 14^. b. Quadr. Idem
Willielmus Foster. f. 148. a. An. 36 H. 8. Autum. Henricus Heydon. f. 1^4. b.
Quadr. Edwardus Gr^ffith duplex Lector. f. 150. a. An. 37 H. 8. Autum. Egidius
Towneshend electus, non legebat, f. 160. a. f. 168. b. Quadr. Idem Egidius
Townesend. f. ^. a. An. 38 H 8. Autum. Ricardus Morgan, eo quod ad gradum Serve.
ad Legem electus est. f. ^. b. Quadr. Radulphus Rokeby. f. ^85. a. An. 1 Edw.
6. Autum. Willielmus Rastell [postea unus Justice. ad plac. coram Rege.] f. 193.
b. Quadr. Clemens Heigham duplex Lector. f. 203. a. An. 2 Edw. 6. Autum.
Willielmus Bendlows electus, non legebat, causa pestilentiae. f. (...). ^.
Quadr. Thomas Hemmyng. f. 213. b. An. 3 Edw. 6. Autum. Willielmus Bendlowys. f.
^. a. Quadr. Georgius Sayntpole. f. ^. a. An. 4 Edw. 6. Autum. Richardus
Cattelyn [postea Capitalis Justice. ad plac. coram Rege legenda assignatus.] f.
22^. ^ Quadr. Thomas Attekyns duplex Lector. f. 240. a. An. 5 Edw. 6. Autum.
Ronulphus Cholmley, electus, non legebat causa pestilenciae. f. 243. a. Quadr.
Williemus Forster duplex Lector. f. 250. b. An. 6 Edw. 6. Autum. Ricardus
Cattelyn, eo quod ad gradum Serve. ad legem electus est. f. 253. b. Quadr.
Ranulphus Cholmley. f. 265. a. An. 7 Edw. 6. Autum. Henricus Pain electus, non
legebat. f. 272. b. An. 1 Martiae. Quadr. Willielmus Cordell Solicitator
dominae Reginae. f. 273. b. Autum. Henr. Pain. f. 276. b. An. 1 and 2. Ph. and
M. Quadr. Henricus Heydon duplex Lector. f. 283. b. Autum. Willielmus
Bendelose, eo quod ad gradum Serve. ad Legem. noviter electus est. [Duplex
Lector.] f. 2^5. An. 2 and 3. Ph. and M. Quadr. Ambrosius Gilbert. f. 299. a.
Autum. Georgius Rythe. f. 308. b. An. 3 and 4. Ph. and M. Quadr. Robertus
Kempe. f. 3^3. a. Autum. Johannes Boyer. f. 326. a. An. 4 and 5. Ph. and M.
Quadr. Ranulphus Cholmley, Recordator Civitatis London, duplex Lector. f. 328.
b. Autum. Johannes Neudegate. f. 337. a. b. An. 1. Eliz. Quadr. Ranulphus
Cholmley Recordator Civit. London; eo quod ad gradum Serve. ad legem electus est
[triplex Lector.] f. 340. a. Autum. Ricardus Kingsmyll. f. 345. a. An. 2 Eliz.
Quadr. Henricus Pain. f. 348. b. Autum. Ricardus Kingsmill. f. 362. a. f. 364.
b. An. 3. Eliz. Quadr. Georgius Rythe, electus; non legebat causa aegritudinis
suae. f. 364. a. f. 367. a. Autum. Radulphus Scrope, electus non legebat f.
269. b. f. 370. a. An. 4. Eliz. Quadr. Robertus Kempe. f. 378. b. Autum.
Christoph. Wray electus, non legebat. Ex alio Registro ejusdem Hosp. seil. vol.
6. f. 3. b. An. 5 Eliz. Quadr. Christopherus Wray [postea Capitalis Justice. ad
plac. coram Rege.] f. 9. a. Autum. Johannes Salvein, non legebat, causa
pestilentiae. An. 6 Eliz. Quadr. Nulla Lectura causa Pestilentiae. f. 10. b.
Autum. Johannes Salvein. f. 19. a. An. 7 Eliz. Quadr. Johannes Bowyer. f. 24.
b. Autum. Robertus Munson [postea unus Justice. de Banco.] f. 32. a. An. 8 Eliz.
Quadr. Edwardus Blackwell. f. 34. b. Autum. Willielmus Thornton. f. 52. a. An.
9 Eliz. Quadr. Christopherus Weay, eo quod ad gradum Serve. ad Legem electus
est. f. 58. a. Autum. Rogerus Wetherell. f. 74. b. An. 10 Eliz. Quadr....
Painell legebat, ratione aegritudinis Ric. Kingsmill. f. 78. b. Autum. Johannes
Hooper. f. 83. b. An. 11 Eliz. Quadr. Johannes Salvein duplex Lector. f. 96. a.
Autum. Thomas Wilbraham [Recordator Civit. London. fol. III. a.] f. 99. a. An.
22 Eliz. Quadr. Robertus Munson duplex Lector. f. 108. b. Autum. Thomas
Calverley. f. 127. b. An. 13 Eliz. Quadr. Willielmus Ayloff. f. 131. b. Autum.
Edw. Baber. f. 148. b. An. 14 Eliz. Quadr. Nulla Lectura. f. 149. b. Autum.
Franciscus Windham. f. 156. a. An. 15 Eliz. Quadr. Georgius Stratford. f. 168.
a. Autum. Iacobus Dalton. f. 178. a. An. 16 Eliz. Quadr. Johannes Clenche
[postea unus Justice. ad plac. coram Rege.] f. 182. b. Autum. Thomas Wykes. f.
184. a. An. 17 Eliz. Quadr. Ricardus Davye. f. 205. a. Autum. Stephanus
Thymbleby. f. 197. b. An. 18 Eliz. Quadr. Humphridus Bridges. f. 209. a. Autum.
Ricardus Atkyns. f. 242. b. An. 19 Eliz. Quadr. Johannes Pucheryng [postea
Custos magni Sigilli.] f. 226. a. Autum. Edwardus Baber. f. 227. a. An. 20
Eliz. Quadr. Thomas Walmysly [postea unus Justice. de Communi Banco.] f. 245. b.
Autum. Georgius Kingsmill electus, non legebat causa pestilentiae. f. 253. b.
An. 21 Eliz. Quadr. Idem Georgius Kingsmill [postea unus Justice. de Communi
Banco.] f. 267. a. Autum. Robertus Ryethe. f. 273. a. An. 22 Eliz. Quadr.
Georgius Stratford duplex Lector. f. 287. a. Autum. Thomas Walmysly, eo quod ad
gradum Serve. ad legem electus est. f. 132. b. An. 23 Eliz. Quadr. Christoperus
Ienny. Autum. Henricus Townesend. f. 334. a. An. 24 Eliz. Quadr. Thomas
Egerton, Sollicitator generalis dominae Reginae [postea Summus Angliae
Cancellarius.] f. 335. a. Autum. Robertus Clerte. f. 345. b. An. 25 Eliz.
Quadr. Thomas Owen [postea unus Justice. de Com. Banco.] f. 347. and 348. Autum.
Nulla Lectura, ratione novorum aedificiorum structurae. f. 350. b. An. 26 Eliz.
Quadr. Petrus Warburton [postea unus Justice. de C^m. Banco.] f. 358. b. Autum.
Robertus Gardener. f. 364. a. An. 27 Eliz. Quadr. Iacobus Dalton. f. 374. a.
Autum. Johannes Tyndall. f. 381. a. An. 28 Eliz. Quadr. Ricardus Branthwayt. f.
388. b. Autum. Will Oldesworth. f. 397. a. An. 29 Eliz. Quadr. Stephanus
Thymelby duplex Lector. f. 420. a. Autum. Edwardus Heron. f. 413. b. An. 30
Eliz. Quadr. Humfridus Bridges electus; non legebat causa aegritudinis suae.
(...) Autum. Ricardus Wheler electus non legebat, causa infirmitatis f. 422. a.
f. 421 b. An. 31 Eliz. Quadr. Johannes Glanvill, eo quod ad gradum Serve. ad
legem electus est. [Postea unus Justice. de Com. Banco.] f. 426. a. b. Autum.
Thomas Flemyng electus, non legebat; fed dictus Johannes Glanvill, causa qua
supra. f. 435. b. An. 32 Eliz. Quadr. Thomas Flemyng [postea Sollicitator
generalis R. Iac. deinde Capitalis Justice. ad Plac. coram Rege.] f. 43^ b.
Autum. Math. Had. f. 449 a. An. 33 Eliz. Quadr. Robertus Houghton. f. 45^.
Autum. Anthonius Ieby. f. 469. b. An. 34 Eliz. Quadr. Georgius Kingsmill duplex
Lector. f. 482 a. Autum. Anthonius Death. f. 476. b. An. 35 Eliz. Quadr.
Franciscus Yarborow. f. 484. a. Autum. Nulla Lectura, causa pestilentiae. f.
485. b. An. 36 Eliz. Quadr. Thomas Flemyng* eo quod ad gradum Serve. ad legem
tunc electus est. f. 497. ^. Autum. Edwardus Bartelet, non legebat causa
aegritudinis suae. Ex (...) ejusdem (...). vol. 7. f. 9. a. An. 37 Eliz. Quadr.
Johannes Tindall duplex Lector. f. 10. a. Autum. Hugo Hughes. f. 12. a. An. 38
Eliz. Quadr. Will. Oldesworth duplex Lector. f. 20. b. Autum. Nicholaus
Collens. f. 24. a. An. 29 Eliz. Quadr. Ricardus Wheler. f. 32. b. Autum.
Johannes Pyne. ^. 33. b. An. 40 Eliz. Quadr. Mathaeus Had duplex Lector. f.
44. a. Autum. Humfridus Winche [postea unus Justice. de Com. Banco.] f. 47. a.
An. 41 Eliz. Quadr. Henricus Thursbye. f. 49. a. Autum. Tobias Wood. f. 50. a.
An. 42 Eliz. Quadr. Robertus Houghton duplex Lector. f. 59. a. Autum. Thomas
Harrys. f. 61. a. An. 43 Eliz. Quadr. Henricus Hubart [postea Capitalis Justice.
de Com. Banco.] f. 70. a. Autum. Edwardus Skipwith. f. 89. b. An. 44 Eliz.
Quadr. Iacobus Ley [postea Capitalis Justice. ad Plac. coram Rege deinde summus
Angliae Thesaurarius.] f. 102. b. Autum. Ranulphus Crew [postea Capitalis
Justice. ad Plac. coram Rege.] f. 204. b. An. 45 Eliz. Quadr. Henricus Hubert,
eo quod ad gradum Serve. ad Legem tunc electus est [duplex Lector.] f. 206. b.
Anno 1 Iac. Autum Leonardus Bawtre electus; nulla vero Lectura, causa
pestilentiae. f. 209. a. f. 210. a. Quadr. Nulla Lectura, causa qua supra. f.
213. a. Anno 2 Iac. Autum. Leonardus Bawtre. f. 218. a. Quadr. Edwardus
Barthelet duplex Lector. f. 306. b. Anno 3 Iac. Autum. Thomas Hitchcock. f.
337. b. Quadr. Ricardus Trefusi. f. 332. b. and 337. b. Autum. 4 Iac. Autum.
Ludovicus Proud. f. 383. a. Quadr. Johannes Denham [postea unus Baronum de
Scacc.] f. 354. a. and 383. a. Anno 5 Iac. Autum. Ricardus De la Bear. f. 408.
b. Quadr. Henricus Davye. f. 408. b. Anno 6 Iac. Autum. Johannes Moore. f. 415.
b. Quadr. Will. Methwould. f. 418. b. Anno 7 Iac. Autum. Ricardus Diggs. f.
427. a. Quadr. Egidius Tucker. f. 431. b. Anno 8 Iac. Autum. Ricardus Waltham.
f. 454. b. Quadr. Henricus Robins. f. 461. a. Anno 9 Iac. Autum. Iasperus
Selwyn. f. 478. b. Quadr. Thomas Wentworth. f. 497. a. Anno 10 Iac. Autum.
Will. Ayloffe. f. 500. a. Quadr. Leonardus Bawtre duplex Lector. f. 509. b.
Anno 11 Iac. Autum. Carolus Chibborne. f. 528. b. Quadr. Thomas Richardson, eo
quod ad gradum Serve. ad Legem electus est. f. 542. a. Anno 12 Iac. Autum.
Christopherus Brook. f. 543. b. Quadr. Thomas Hitchcock duplex Lector. f. 566.
b. Anno 13 Iac. Autum. Johannes Ieffreys. f. 577. b. Quadr. Will. Jones [postea
unus Justice. ad Plac. coram Rege tenenda.] f. 609. Anno 14 Iac. Autum. Hugo
Pyne. f. 627. a. Quadr. Robertus Air. f. 642. a. Anno 15 Iac. Autum. Roulandus
Wansford. f. 656. b. Quadr. Nicholaus Ducke. f. 666. b. Anno 16 Iac. Autum.
Edmundus Estcourt. Ex alio Registro ejusdem Hosp. scil. vol. 8. f. 3. b. Quadr.
Ricardus Diggs duplex Lector. Ibid. Anno 17 Iac. Autum. Edwardus Had. f. 7.
b. Quadr. Will. Thomas. f. 20. a. Anno 18 Iac. Autum. Anthonius Herenden. f.
24. a. and 47. a. Quadr. Thomas Sanderson. f. 48. a. Anno 19 Iac. Autum.
Johannes Darey. f. 55. a. Quadr. Henricus Den. f. 71. b. Anno 20 Iac. Autum.
Will. Noyne [postea Attornatus generalis Regi Car. I.] f. 137. a. Quadr.
Johannes Briscoe. Ibid. Anno 21 Iac. Autum. Thomas Woodward. f. 150. b. Quadr.
Henricus Sherfeild. f. 158. a. Anno 22 Iac. Autum. Nulla Lectura, ratione
constructionis novae Capellae. f. 160. a. Quadr. Will. Hakewill. f. 167. b. An.
1 Car. 1. Autum. Petrus Mutton miles, electus non legebat, causa pestilentiae.
f. 171. a. f. 174. a. Quadr. Nulla Lectura causa qua supra. f. 177. a. and 197.
a. An. 2 Car. 1. Autum. Johannes Wakering. f. 184. b. Quadr. Will. Powel. f.
204. a. An. 3 Car. 1. Autum. Ricardus Tailor. f. 154. b. Quadr. Johannes
Barkesdale. f. 141. a. An. 4 Car. 1. Autum. Eusebius Andrews. f. 145. a. Quadr.
Thomas Milward [postea eques aur. and Iusticiarius Cestriae.] f. 167. b. An. 5
Car. 1. Autum. Eusebius Wright. f. 174. b. Quadr. Johannes Glanvile. f. 198. a.
An. 6 Car. 1. Autum. Nulla Lectura, ratione pestilentiae. f. 207. b. Quadr.
Edwardus Fettiplace. f. 225. a. An. 7 Car. 1. Autum. Johannes Green. f. 229.
a. Quadr. Edwardus Byshe. f. 248. b. An. 8 Car. 1. Autum. Edwardus Atkyns. f.
289. a. Quadr. Johannes Harryson. f. 299. a. An. 9 Car. 1. Autum. Will. Air.
f. 304. b. Quadr. Godfridus Coply. f. 308. a. An. 10 Car. 1. Autum. Johannes
Clerk. f. 311. b. Quadr. Johannes Harrington. f. 333. a. An. 11 Car. 1. Autum.
Robertus Mason Recordator Civitatis London. f. 343. b. Quadr. Ricardus
Cresheld. f. 367. a. An. 12 Car. 1. Autum. Quadr. Nulla Lectura toto hoc anno
propter pestilentiam. An. 13 Car. 1. Autum. Nulla Lectura, causa qua supra. f.
396. Quadr. Will. Lenthall [postea prolocutor infausti Parliamenti.] f. 411. a.
An. 14 Car. 1. Autum. Hugo Rigby. f. 416. b. Quadr. Johannes Herne. f. 435. a.
An. 15 Car. 1. Autum. Erasmus Earl. f. 414. a. Quadr. Carolus Jones. f. 47^.
a. An. 16 Car. 1. Autum. Thomas Tempest. f. 503. b. Quadr. Thomas Bletcher. f.
503. b. An. 17 Car. 1. Autum. Nicholaus Franklyn. f. 489. a. Quadr. Robertus
Holburne. f. 513. a. An. 18 Car. 1. Autum. Samuel Brown [postea unus Justice.
de Com. Banco.] An. 14 Car. 2. Quadr. Will. Pryne. Autum. Nulla Lectura. An. 15
Car. 2. Quadr. Robertus Ashton. Autum. Nulla Lectura. An. 16 Car. 2. Quadr.
Georgius Day.

Catalogus Gubernatorum Gubernatores.
Hospicii Lincolniensis. (...)

Ex Registro Hosp. Linc. vol. 1. An. 3 H. 6.... Rye.... Gilbard. f. 9. b. Ioh.
Symonds [Postea Recordator Civit. Land.]... Crakenthorp.... Fortescu Junior. f.
18. b. Rob. Scheffeld. 4 Hen. 6.... Pek.... Fortescu Junior. f. 9. b....
Hampden.... Sperlyng.... Sheffeld. 6 Hen. 6. Robertus Sheffeld. Civit. Land.
deinde unus Justice. f. 11. a. Johannes Speak. Rob. Danvers [ postea Recordator
de Banco.] Johannes Fitz. 7 Hen. 6.... Fortescu.... Fitz. f. 17. b.... Speak.
Johannes Stafford. 8 Hen. 6.... Speak. Rob. Danvers. f. 19. b.... Fitz. Adam
Summayster. 13 Hen. 6. Nich. Sibyle. Barth. Bolney. f. 27. b. Tho. Marischall.
Will Boeff. 14 Hen. 6. Rob. Heywourght. Ric. Wood. f. 28. a. Tho.
Marischall.... Bunnye. 18 Hen. 6. Rob. Danvers.... Will. Boeff. f. 40. a. Ric.
Wode. Ioh. Stafford. 21 Hen. 6. Rob. Danvers Recordator Civit. Land. Nich.
Sibile. f. 46. a. b. Tho. Stotevile. Ioh. Brynchesle. 22 Hen. 6. Ricardus
Walshe. Will. Ienney [ postea unu^ Justice. ad Plac. coram Rege.] f. 48. a.
Ricardus Illyngworth [ postea unus Baronum de Scaccario.] Will. Gaynesford. 23
Hen. 6. Thomas Marshall. Johannes Ienney lepuis^ae. f. 60. ^. Nich. Repyngale.
Will. Moile. 24 Hen. 6. Robertus Heywurth. Nich. Sibile. f. 63. a. Barth.
Bolney. Tho. Stotevile. 25 Hen. 6. Ric. Drax. Will. Ienney. f. 67. a. Will.
Boeff. Will. Oseberne. 26 Hen. 6. Ric. Illyngworth. Will. Ganesford. f. 67. a.
Ioh. Ienney. Ioh. Bekyswell. 27 Hen. 6. Ric Illyngworth. Ioh. Bekyswell. f. 78.
b. Will. Gaynesford. Ioh. Ienney. 28 H. 6. Henricus Etwell. Will. Moile. 29 H.
6. Will. Ienney. Rob Willenhaie.. So. Tho. Mareshall. Nich. Sibile. 30 Hen. 6.
Henricus Etwell. Nich. Sibile. t. 83. a. Tho. Mareschall. Rob. Willenhale. 30
Hen. 6.... Heyworth. Alured Maleverer. f. 84. a. Will. Ienney. Tho.
Rypplingham. 3^ Hen. 6. Will. Gaynesforth. Will. Eland. f. 87. a. Ioh. Ienney
Junior. Tho. Elete. ^3 Hen. 6. Tho. Marchall. Henr. Etwell. f. 92. b. Ric.
D^ax. Tho. Umfrey. 34 Hen. 6. Rob. Heyworth. Rob. Falbery. f. ^3. a. Will.
Ienney.... Ga^^on. 35 Hen. 6. Tho Stoteville. Nich. Statham. f. ^00. a. Tho
Rypplingham. Ric. Yaxlay. ^6 Hen. 6. Ric. Illingwerth. Rob. Willenhale. f. 106.
a. Tho. Stodevile. Ric. Yaxle. 37 Hen. 6.... Maryscall.... Heworth. f. 112.
a.... Sebyle.... Asplon Junior. 38 Hen. 6.... Ganesforth.... Ryplyngham. f.
116. a.... Ienney Junior. Ioh. Sylyard. 39 Hen. 6.... Marischall.... Ienney. f.
122. b.... Sybyle.... Stathom. n. 1 E. 4. Tho. Marshall. Nich. Stathum. f. 125.
b. Will. Geney. Rog. Townesende. 2 Edw. 4. Ioh. Ienney. Ioh. Siliard. f. 12^.
a. Ienney. Tho. Riplyngham. Will. Huddesfeld. 3 Edw. 4. Tho. Marshall. Ioh.
Asplon Junior. f. 133. a. Nich Stathum. Rog. Townesend. 4 Edw. 4. Nich. Sybyll.
Ioh. Sulyard. f. 138. a. Tho. Replyngham. Will. Hudde^^eld. 5 Edw. 4. Tho.
Rypplyngham. Rog. Townesende. f. 14^ b. Ioh. Sulyard. Will. Hudde feld. 6 Edw.
4. Nich Stathum. Rog. Townesende. f. 148. a. Ioh. Asplon. Rob. Gascoig^e. 7
Edw. 4. 8 Edw. 4. Ioh. Ienney. Will. Huddesfeild. f. 154. b. Ioh. Suliard. Will
Donyngton. (...) Ioh. Iens^^ Will. Huddesfeld. (...) Ioh. Suliard. Will.
Donyngton. (...) Nich. Stathum. Tho. Playter. (...) Rogerus Townesend. Ioh.
Hawgh. (...) Ioh. Salyard. Will. Donyngton. (...) Ric. Walwyn. Ioh. Haugh.
(...) (...) (...) Rag. Towneshe^d. Iac. Hubert. (...) will. Huddesfield.
Renelm. Dygas. (...) Ioh. ^enney. Ric Walwyn. (...) Ion. Sulyard. Ioh. Hawgh.
(...) (...) Towathend. will. Donyngton. (...) Ric. Walwy^. Ioh. Bradshaw. (...)
Iim. (...). will. Briscow. (...) Will. (...) Tho. Lovell. (...) R^g.
Towneshe^d. Ioh. Hubert. (...) will. Danyngcan. Kenelm. Dygas. (...) (...).
H^ddesfeld. Will. Briscaw. (...) Ioh. (...). Tho. Appulton. (...)... walwya.
Kenelm. Dygae. (...) Ion. Hawe. Tho. Lovell. (...) will. Haddesfeld. Iac.
Hobert. (...) will. Donyng^^n. Tho. Appulton. (...) Ion. Hawgh. Tho. Lovell.
(...) Kenal. Dygas. Rob. Read. (...) will. Huddesfeld. Tho. Ienney. (...) will.
Donyngton. Ioh. Turpyn. (...) Ioh. Haugh. Ro^. Read. (...) Tho. Appylcon. Ioh.
Butlere. (...) will. Donyngton. Ioh. Turpyn. (...) Iac. Hobart. Ric. Higham.
(...) Tho. Lovell. Rob. Mortone. (...) Ioh. Haugh. Will. Froste. (...) Iac.
Hobert. Ioh. Turpyn. (...) Tho. Appulton. Tho. Gyggye. (...) (...) (...) Tho.
Ieney. will. Frost. (...) Ioh. Butler. Ioh. Thornburgh. (...) Iac. Hobert. Ric.
Heygham. (...) Tho. Appylton. Rob. Drury. (...) Iac. Hobert. Edw. Redmayn.
(...) Tho. Ienney. Rob. Constabill. (...) Iac. Hobert. Willielmus Frost. (...)
Ric. Heigham. Johannes Moore. (...) Iac. Hobart. Thomas Gyggs. (...) Tho.
Appulton. Johannes Aleyn. (...) Iacobus Hobart. Robertus Drury. (...) Johannes
Turpyn Franciscas Calybat. (...) Iacobus Hobert. Robertus Constable. (...)
Will. Frost. Will. Cuttelerd. (...) Iac. Hoberd. Johannes More. (...) Ricardus
Heigham. Johannes Newport. (...) Iac. Hobert. Johannes Aleyn. (...) Tho.
Appulton. Willielmas Frost. (...) Iac. Hobert. Franciscus Calibat. (...)
Johannes Moore. Johannes wood. (...) Iac. Hoberd. Willielmas Cutlerd. (...)
Rob. Drury. Humfr. Sygeswyke. (...) Iacobus Hoberd. Johannes Newport. (...)
Thomas Appulton. Rogerus Marten. (...) Iac. Hobert. Ioh. Wood. (...) will.
Frost. Ioh. Newdegate. (...) Iacobus Hobert. Franciscus Calybut. (...) Johannes
Aleyn. Willielmus Wadham. (...) Iacobus Hobert. Johannes Newport. (...) Thomas
Appilton. Willielmas Ayloff. (...) Iacobus Hubart. Johannes Alen. (...)
Willielmus Frost. Ricardus Merland. (...) Null. (...) Iacobus Hoberd.
Willielmus Wadham. (...) Johannes Newport. Johannes Roper. (...) Iac. Hobbert
miles Attorn. Dom. R. Willielmus Ailof. (...) Will. Frost. Johannes Skewys. Ex
alio Registro scil. ^ol. 4. (...) Iac. Hobbert miles Attorn. Dom. R. Ioh.
wood. (...) Ioh. Newport. Walt. Stubbe. 23 Hen. 7. Will. Frost. Ioh. Ropere.
f. 12. a. Ioh. Ne^degate. Ioh. le Strange. 24 Hen. 7. Franciscus Calibut.
Will. Aylove. f. 20. 1. Johannes Newport. Ioh. Skewys. An. r H. 8. Willielmus
Frost. Walt. Stubbs Senior. f. 30. a. Johannes Wood. Will. Wotton. 2. Hen. 8.
Johannes Aleyn. Ioh. le Strange. f. 35. a. Johannes Skewys. Rad. Rokeby. 3
Hen. 8. Johannes Aleyn. Will. Wotton. f. 39. a. Johannes Wode. Tho. More. An. 4
H. 8. Johannes Aleyn. Rad. Rokeby. f. 44. b. Willielmus Frost. Will. Marshall.
5 Hen. 8. Will. Frost. Ioh. Strange. f. 53. b. Ioh. Wodde. Will. Marchall. 6
Hen. 8. Franciscus Calibut. Tho. More. f. 57. b. Ioh. Wodde. Rob. Thornburgh. 7
Hen. 8. Will. Frost. Will Marshall. f. 63. b. Ioh. Skewys. Ricardus Clerk. 8
Hen. 8. will. Frost. Tho. Tempest. f. 70. b. Ioh. Wood. Ioh. Pulleyn. 9 Hen.
8. Ioh. wode Senior. Rad. Rokeby. f. 74. b. Will. Wotton Senior. Tho.
Willughby. 10 Hen. 8. Ioh. Wode. Tho. Willoughby. f. 84. b. Rob. Thornborough.
Rob. Norwiche. 11 Hen. 8. Will. Frost. Will. Wadam. f. 93. a. Ioh. Wode. Ric.
Clerk Senior. 12 Hen. 8. Johannes Ropper. Ric. Clerk. f. 97. a. Johannes
Skewes. Rob. Norwyche. 12 Hen. 8. Johannes Roper. Will. Marshall. f. 103. a.
Johannes Skewys. Georgius Treheyron. 13 Hen. 8. Will. Wotton Baro de Scacc.
Rad. Rokeby. f. 104. b. Ric. Clerk. 14 Hen. 8. Johannes Rooper. Will.
Marchall. f. 116. a. Johannes Skewys. Christoph. Ienney. 15 Hen. 8. Will.
Wotton Baro Scacc. Ric. Clerk Senior. f. 125. b. Rad. Rokeby. Will.
Honychurch. 16 Hen. 8. Will. Wotton. Will. Marchall. f. 136. a. Ioh. Skewys.
Ioh. Densell. 17 Hen. 8. Will. Wotton. Georgius Treheyron. f. 140. a. Ric.
Clerk Senior. Ioh. Hervye. 18 Hen. 8. Will. Wotton Baro Scacc. Christoph.
Ienney. f. 150. a. Will. Marshall. Hugo Clerk Junior. f. 161. a. Will. Wotton
Baro Scacc. Ric. Clerk. 19 Hen. 8. Will. Marshall. Will. Sulyard. 20 Hen. 8.
Ioh. Skewys. Will. Honychurch. f. 170. a. Christoph. Ienney. Rob. Curson. 21
Hen. 8. Will. Marshall. Christoph. Ienney. f. 183. a. Ric. Clerk. Ioh.
Danaster. Ex alio Registro Feil. vol. 5. 22 Hen. 8. Ioh. Skewys. Rog. Chombley.
f. 6. a. Will. Marshall. Ioh. Danaster. 23 Hen. 8. Will. Sulyard. Ioh. Harvye.
f. 20. a. Will. Marshall. Guido Crafford. 24 Hen. 8. Null. 25 Hen. 8. Will.
Sulyard. Ioh. Danaster. f. 43. a. Ioh. Harvye. Tho. Ryshton. 26 Hen. 8. Will.
Sulyard. Ioh. Danaster. f. 58. a. Ioh. Harvye. Rob. Townsend. 27 Hen. 8. Will.
Sulyard. Ioh. Harvy. f. 74. a. Ric. Smetheley. Ioh. Pilbarough. 28 Hen. 8.
Will. Sulyard. Rob. Townesend. f. 87. a. Ioh. Harvye. Will. Harrys. 29 Hen. 8.
Will. Sulyard. Ioh. Dannaster. f. 99. a. Ioh. Harvye. Rob. Curson. 30 Hen. 8.
Will. Sulyard. Ioh. Dannaster. f. 110. b. Ioh. Harvye. Guido Crafford. 31 Hen.
8. Ioh. Danaster Baro Scacc. Rob. Curson. f. 119. a. Ioh. Harvye. Ioh. Harrys.
32 Hen. 8. Ioh. Harvye. Guido Crayford. f. 124. a. Rob. Curson. Edw. Gryffith.
33 Hen. 8. Ioh. Harvye. Ioh. Pylbarough. f. 133. a. Rob. Curson. Edw. Gryssin.
34 Hen. 8. Ioh. Harvy. Ioh. Pylborow. f. 140. a. Rob. Curson. Edw. Gryffith. 35
Hen. 8. Rob. Curson. Ioh. Pylborow. f. 146. b. Tho. Lane. Edw. Gryffith. 36
Hen. 8. Rob. Curson. Edw. Gryffith. f. 144. b. Ioh. Pylbarow. Tho. Hemmynge. 37
Hen. 8. Edw. Gryffith. f. 160. a. Rob. Curson. Tho. Hemmynge. 38 Hen. 8. Ioh.
Pilbarough Baro Scacc. Edw Griffith Solicitator Regis. f. 174. a. Rob. Curson.
An. 1 E. 6. Rob. Curson Baro Scacc. Edw. Gryffith Solici Regis. f. 193. a.
Johannes Pylbarow Baro Scacc. 2 Edw. 6. Edw. Gryffith Solic. Regis. Clem.
Higham. f. 210. b. Guido Crayford. Will. Roper. Henricus Heydon. 3 Edw. 6. Edw.
Gryffin Solic. Regis. Clem. Higham. f. 218. a. Guido Crafford. Tho. Hemmyng. 4
Edw. 6. Edw. Griffin Solic. dom. R. Clem. Heygham. f. 227. a. Guido Crayfford.
Tho. Hemmyng. Tho. Attekyns. 5 Edw. 6. Edw. Gryffythe. Ric. Haydon. f. 243.
Clem. Hygham. Georgius Sampoll. Tho. Hemmyng. Tho. Attekyns. 6 Edw. 6. Edw.
Gryffith Attorn. Tho. Hemmyng. f. 253. b. Dom. R. generalis. Georgius
Sayntpoll. Clem. Hygham. Will. Foster. Ric. Haydon. (...) (...) Will. Cordell
Miles (...) Will. Roper. (...) (...) Will. Forister. (...) Edx. (...). Georgius
Rythe. (...) Ede. Griffin. Will. Forster. (...) Will. Roper. Rob. Kempe. (...)
Will. Roper. Rob. Kempe. (...) Will. Forder. (...) (...) Edw. Griffin. Will.
Forster. (...) (...) Henricus Pain. (...) Will. Corlell Miles Main Rot. Rob
Kempe. (...) Edw. Griffin. Ioh. Boyer. (...) Will. Roper. (...) Will. Foler.
Rob. Kempe. (...) Will. Roper. Ioh. Boyer. (...) (...) Tho. Wilhraham
Attornatus Reeine in Curia Wardorum and Liberationum (defunctus ante 10. Nov.
15 Eliz. f. 172. b.) Ioh. Leonard. Rog. Wetherell. Will. Ayleff. Edw. Baber.
Franc. Windham. Georgius Stratford. Iac. Dalton. Rob. Kempe. Ioh. Clenche. Ric.
Kingsmill. (...) Ric. Kingsmill Attornatus Dominae Reginae in Curia Wardorum
and Liberationum. Franc. Windham. Georgius Stratford Iac. Dalton. Ioh. Clenche.
Tho. Wykes. Will Aylost. Steph. Thymblebye. Edw. Baber. (...) Eliz. f. 187. a.
Ric. Kingsmill Attorn. etc. Georgius Stratford. Ioh. Leonard. Ioh. Clenche.
Rog. Wethereld. Tho. wykes. Edw. Baber. Ric. Dayve. f. 196. a. Will. Ayloff.
Tho Walmesley. Ioh. puckering. Geo. Kingsmyll. 18 Eliz. f. 214. Posthac. [Non
recordantur per nomina Gubern. quod nota.] Ric. Kingsmill Attorn. etc. Tho.
Wykes. Steph. Thymblebye. Rad. Rokeby. Ric. Davye. Will. Ayloff. Humphr.
Bridges. Edw. Baber. Ioh. Puckering. Franc. Windham. Tho. Walmesley. Iac.
Dalton. Georgius Kingsmill. Ioh. Clenche. 19. Eliz. f. 222. a. Iidem, ut in
Anno praecedenti. 20 Eliz. f. 245. b. Ric. Kingsmill Attorn. etc. Ric. Atkyns.
Ioh. Puckering. Gorgius Stratford. Tho. Walmesley. Iac. Dalton. Georgius
Kingsmill. Iu^ior. Ioh. Clenche. Tho. Wykes. Rob. Rithe. Steph. Thymelby.
Christoph. Iennye. Humphr. Bridges. 21 Eliz. f. 263. Ric. Kingsmill Attorn.
etc. Steph. Thimelby. Ric. Atkyns. Rad. Rookeby. Tho. Walmesley. Iac. Dalton.
Georgius Kingsmill. Ioh. Clenche. Rob. Rithe. Tho. wekes. Christoph. Iennye. 22
Eliz. f. 227. 2. Ric. Kingsmill. Ric. Atkyns. Ioh. Leonard. Tho. Walmesley.
Rad. Rokeby. Georgius Kingsmill. Georgius Stratford. Rob. Rythe. Ioh. Clenche.
Christoph. Ienney. Tho. Wekes. Tho. Egerton. f. 287. a. Steph. Thymelby. Rob.
Clerk. Ric. Davye. Tho. Owen. 23 Eliz. f. 3. 0. a. Iidem, ut in Anno
praecedenti. 24 Eliz. t. 235. a. Tho. Egerton Solic. generalis Dominae Reginae.
Ric. Davye. Humphr. Bridges. Ric. Atkyns. Ric. Kingsmill Attorn. Dom. Reg.
Curiae suae Wardorum. Georgius Kingsmill. Rob. Rythe. Christoph. Ienney. Rob.
Clerk. Ioh. Leonard. Rob. Gardyner. Rad. Rokeby. Petr. Warberton. Iac. Dalton.
Ioh. Tyndall. Steph. Thymelby. 25 Eliz. f. 345. b. Iidem, ut in Anno
praecedenti. 26 Eliz. f. 359. b. Thomas Egerton Solic. etc. Ricaraus Bra^slut.
f. 363. a. Ric. Kingsmill Attorn. Wardor. Rob. Rythe. Christopher. Ienney. Rad.
Rokeby. Rob. Clerk. Iac. Dalton. Petr. Warderton. Humphr. Bridges. Ioh.
Tyndall. Ric. Athyns. Will. Oldesworth. Georgius Kingsmyll. 27 Eliz. f. 372. a.
Iidem, ut in Anno praecedenti. 28 Eliz. f. 381. a. Rad. Rookeby Master of the
Requests. Humphr. Bridges Georgius Kingsmill. Tho. Egerton Solic. generalis.
Rob. Rithe. Ricardus Kingsmill Attorney of the Wards. Christoph. Ienney. Rob.
Clarke. Tho. Owing Petr. Warberton. Ioh. Leonard. Ric. Branthuayt. f. 396. a.
Steph. Thymelby. Tho. Spenser f. 390. b. Will Oldes morth. Edw. Heron Ric.
Wheler. Edw. Heron 29 Eliz. f. 396. b. Iidem, ut in Anno praecedenti. Nec non
Ioh. Glanvyle. f. 407. b. and Rad. Rokeby. 30 Eliz. f. 413. b. Rad. Rokeby Arm.
Magister Curiae Libell. Supply. Georgius Kingsmill. Rob. Rythe. Christoph.
Ienney. Tho. Egerton Arm. Petr. Warberton. Solic. Dom. Reg. Ioh. Tindall. Ric.
Kingsmill Arm. Will. Oldesworth. Attornatus Dom. Tho. Spenser. Reg Curiae suae
Ric. Wheler. Wardor. Ioh. Glanvile. Iac. Dalton. Tho. Fleming. Ric. Atkyns. 31
Eliz. f. 426. a. Tho. Owen Serve. ad Humphr. Bridges. Legum electus. Ric.
Atkyns. Ioh. Glanvill Arm. Serve. ad Legem electus. Georgius Kingsmill. Rob.
Rythe. Petr. Warherton. Tho. Egerton Sollic. etc. Ioh. Tyndall. Ric. Branthuay.
Ric. Kingsmill Attorn. etc. Wardor. aur. Will. Oldesworth. Tho. Spencer. Edw.
Heron. Ioh. Leonarde Arm. Custos Brevium. Ric. Wheler. Tho. Fleming. Iac.
Dalton Arm. Magister Ambulationum. Math. Had. Rob. Howghton. (...) Iidem, and
Anthon. I^^y. Tho. Buckley Arm. f. 437. b. Anthon. Death. Franc. Yarborough.
f. 448. a. (...) Iidem, ut in Anno praecedenti. (...) Iidem, ut in Anno
praecedenti. (...) Iidem, ut in Anno praecedenti. Iidem; necnon Edw. Bartlet.
Hugo Hughes. Nich. Collens. (...) Rad. Rokeby Arm. urus Supplicum Libell. Mag.
Willielm. Oldesworth Arm. Tho. Spenser Arm. Ric. Kingsmill Arm. Supervisor
Curiae Wardor. and Lilberationum. Edw. Heron Arm. Ric. Wheler Arm. Math. Hadd
Arm. Rob Haughton Arm Iac. Dalton Arm. Anth. Ireby Arm. Rob. Rithe Arm.
Franciscuns Tarburghe Arm. Christopheras Ienney Arm. Edw. Bartlet Arm. Ioh.
Tyndall Arm. Hugo Hages Arm. Nich. Collyns Arm. (...) (...) Rad. Rokeby Arm.
unus Magitrorum, etc. Ioh. Tindall. Will. Oldesworth. Tho. Spenser. Tho.
Flemyng Arm. Solic. genesis Dom. Reg. Math. Had. Rob. Houghton. Anth. Irbye.
Ric. Kingsmill Arm. Supervisor, etc. Hugo Hughes. Nich. Collens. Iac. Dalton.
Ioh. Pyne. Rob. Rythe. Humphr. Wynche. Christoph. Fenney. Henr. Thursbye. (...)
Tho. Fleming Arm. etc. Iac. Dalton. Anth. Irebye. Ric. Kingsmill Arm. etc. Edw.
Bartholet. Hugo Hughes. Christoph. Ienney. Ioh. Pyne. Henr. Townsend. Hamphr.
Wynche. Ioh. Tindall. Tho. Harrys. Will. Oldesworth. Henr. Hubart. Ric. wheler.
Tobie Wood. Math. Had. Henr. Thursbie. Rob. Houghton. (...) Iidem. (...) Tho.
Fleming Arm. etc. Christoph. Ienney. Ioh. Tindall. Iac. Dalton. Will. Lambard.
Will. Oldesworth. Hugo Hughes. Tho. Spenser. Ioh. Pyne. Ric. Wheler. Humphr.
Winche. Math. Had. Tho. Harris. Rob. Houghton. Henr. Hubart. Anth. Irby.
Nich. Collins. Edw. Barthelet. Tobie Wood. (...) Tho. Fleming Arm. etc. Hugo
Haghes. Ioh. Pyne. Ric. Kingsmill, etc. Nich. Collyns. Ioh. Tindall. Humphr
Wynche. Will. Oldesworth. Henr. Thursby. Will. Lambard. Tobie Wood. Math.
Had. Tho. Harris. Anth. Ireby. Henr. Hubart. Edw. Barthelet. (...) Tho.
Fleming Arm. etc. Edw. Barthelet. Hugo Hughes. Iac. Dalton. Nich. Collyns.
Christoph. Ienney. Ioh. Pyne. Will. Oldesworth. Humphr. Wynche. Tho. Spenser.
Tho. Harris. Ric. Wheler. Henr. Hubert. Math. Had. Edw. Skipwith. Will.
Lambard. Iac. Ley. Rob. Houghton. Rand. Crew. Anth. Irby. Edw. Walmesley. Anth.
Death. (...) 89. a. (...) Tho Fleming. f. 204. b. Henr. Huberd. Ioh. Pyne.
Christoph. Ienney. Humphr. Wynche. Will Oldesworth. Edw. Skipwith. Math. Had.
Iac. Ley. Ric. Wheler. Tho. Harris. Rob. Houghton. Edw. Walmesley. f. 125. a.
Tho. Harris. Anth. Irby. Leon. Bawtrye. Anth. Death. Hugo Hughes. Tho.
Hitchcock. Edw. Barthelet. Nich. Collyn. Ludow. Proud. f. 106. b. Tobias
Wood. (...) Tho. Fleming Solic. Humphr. Wynche. Rob. Houghton. Serve. ad Legem
electi Edw. Skipwith. Tho. Harris. Iac. Leighe. Henr. Hubbert. Rand. Crew.
Leonardus Bawtre. Tho. Hychcock. Christoph. Ienney. Ioh. Denham. f. 103 b. Tho.
Spenser. Ric. De laber. Anth. Irby. Ioh. More. Edw. Bartlet. Henricus Dauyes.
f. 209. a. Hugo Hughes. Ioh. Pyne. 2 Iac. f. 202. b. Ioh. Tindall Miles. Edw.
Bawtre. Christoph. Fenney. Ric. De la ber. Tho. Spenser. Henr. Davye. Math.
Had. Ioh. More. Anth. Irbye. Ludov. Proud. Edw. Barthelet. Carolus Calthorp
Attorn. Regis generalis in regno Hiberniae. f. 300 a. Hugo Hughes. Nich.
Collyns. Humphr. Wynche. Edw. Skypwith. Henr. Compton Miles de Balneo. f. 300.
a. Randolph. Crew. Edw. Walmesly. Tho. Hickcock. 3 Iac. f. 307. a. Ioh. Tindall
Miles. Tho. Hitchcoke. Tho. Spenser. Ric. Trefusis. Christoph. Ienney. Ioh.
Denham. Math. Had. Henr. Davye. Anth. Irbye. Edm. Abdye. Hugo Hughes. Ioh.
More. Nich. Collens. Henr. Hubert Miles Attorn. Curiae Wardor. etc. f. 328. b.
Ioh. Pyne. Humphr. Wynche. Tobias Wode. Edw. Skipwith. 4 Iac. f. 334. a. Henr.
Hubbert Miles Attorn. Curisae Wardor. Edw. Skipwith. Ludov. Proud. Rand. Crew.
f. 348. a. Christoph. Ienney. Ric. Wheler. Tho. Hitchcock. Math. Haddes. Ioh.
Denham. Anth. Irby. Ric. De laber. Hugo Huges. Henr. Davy. Ioh. Pyne. Ioh.
More. Humphr. Winche. Edw. Abdye. 5 Iac. 356. b. Henr. Hubbert Miles. etc. Edw.
Skypwith. Ludov. Proud. Foh. Tindall Milles. Ioh. Denham. Henr. Davye.
Christoph. Ienney. Ioh. More. Tho. Spenser. Rand. Crew. f. 354. b. Ric. Wheler.
Leon. Bawtrey Math. Haddes. Tho. Hitchcock. Anth. Irbye. Hugo Hughes. Ric. De
Laber. Nich. Collyns. Ricardus Trefuses. f. 358. b. Ioh. Pyne. Edm. Abdye. f.
384. b. Will. Sidley Miles. f. 367. b. 6 Iac. f. 389. b. Will. Sidley Miles.
Randolphus Crew. Tho. Spencer. Leonardus Bawtree. Ric. Wheler. Ludov. Proud.
Anth. Irbye. Iac. Ley Miles Attorn. Dom. Reg. in Curia Wardor. f. 413. b. Hugh
Hughes. Ioh. Pyne. Edw. Skypwith. Tho. Hitchcock. Will. Methwould. f. 390. a.
Ric. Trefuses. Ioh. Denham. Ricardus Delaler. f. 391. a. Ric. De la Bear. Henr.
Davyes. Rog. Owen Miles. f. 410. b. Egid. Tucker. Ric. Diggs. 7 Iac. f. 419. a.
Henr. Hobart Miles. etc. Ludov. Proud. Tho. Hitchcock. Iac. Ley Miles. etc.
Henr. Davy. Henr. Thoresby. Ioh. Moore. Christoph. Fenney. Will. Methwould.
Tho. Spenser. Ric. Diggs. Ric. Wheler. Egid. Tucker. Anth. Irby. Henricus
Robins. f. 425. b. Hugo Hughes. Ranulphus Crew. Ricardus Waltham. f. 427. a.
Leonardus Bawtree. 8 Iac. f. 442. b. Iac. Ley Miles Attornatus in Curia Wardor.
etc. Will. Methwould. Ric. Diggs. Egid. Tooker. Will. Sidley Miles. Ric.
Waltham. Tho. Spenser. Henr Robins. Ric. Wheler. Iasp. Selwyn. f. 455 a. Edw.
Skypwith. Tho. Went worth. Rand. Crew. Leonardus Bawtrey. Will. Aylysse. Ludov.
Proud. Carol. Chybborne. Tho. Hitchcock. Ric. De la bear. Tho. Richardson.
Henr. Davye. Ioh. Moore. 9 Iac. f. 430. a. Henr. Hobart Miles and Baron.
Attorn. genesis Dom. Reg. Ric. De la Bear. Ric. Diggs. Ric. Waltham. Iac. Ley
Miles etc. Henr. Robins. Tho. Spenser. Fasper Selwyn. Ric. Wheler. Tho.
Wentworth. Math. Had. Tho. Richardson. Anth. Irbye. Christoph. Brook. Rand.
Crewe. Will. Ayloffe. Leonard. Bawtrye. Ioh. Iessress. Ludov. Proud. Will.
Jones. Tho. Hitchcock. 10. Iac. f. 497. b. Henr. Hubart Miles. etc. Leonard.
Bawtrye. Tho. Hitchcock. Iac. Leye Miles. etc. Ric. Delabere. Jasper Selwyn.
Will. Sidley Miles and Baronettus. Tho. Wentworth. Carolus Chibborne. Rog. Owen
Miles. Tho. Richardson. Tho. Spenser. Christoph. Brook. Ric. Wheler. Will.
Jones. Anth. Irbye. Ioh. Iessreys. 11 Iac. f. 541. a. Henr. Hobart Miles. etc.
Tho. Hitchcock. Henr. Davye. Iac. Ley Miles. etc. Ric. Diggs. Rog Owen Miles.
Jasper Selwyn. Tho. Spenser. Will. Ayloff. Ric. Wheler. Christoph. Brook.
Anth. Irbye. Ioh. Ieffreys. Rand. Crewe. Will Jones. Ludov. Proud. Hugo Pyne.
f. 539. a. 12 Iac. f. 543. a. Iac. Leye Miles. etc. Ric. Waltham. Jasper.
Selwin. Henr. Townsend Miles. Tho. Wentworth. Will. Ayloffe. Rog. Owen Miles.
Will. Jones. Tho. Spenser. Rob. Air. Anth. Irby. Will. Thomas. Leonardus
Bawtrye. Roll. Wandesford. f 546. a. Ludov. Proud. Tho. Hitchcock. Edm.
Escouth. f. 561. a. Henr. Davye. Hugo Cressy. Ric. Diggs. Nicholaus Ducke. f.
563. b. Egid. Tooker. 13 Iac. f. 575. b. Iac. Leye Miles. etc. Tho. Wentwroth.
Christoph. Brook. Will. Sidley Miles. Will. Jones. Rog. Owen Miles. Rob. Air.
Tho. Spencer. Nich. Ducke. Anth. Irby. Hugo Cressy. Ludov. Proud. Edmundus
Estcourt. Tho. Hitchcock. f. 605. a. Ric. Diggs. Iac. Wolveridge. f. 608. a.
Egid. Tooker. 14 Iac. f. 609. b. Iac. Leye Miles Attorn. Regis in Curia Wardor.
Jasper Selwyn. Tho. Wentworth. Will. Ayloff. Rog. Owen. Christoph. Brook. Tho.
Spenser. Ioh. Ieffreys. Anth. Irbye. Will. Jones. Ludov. Proud. Rob. Air.
Tho. Hitchcock. Roll. Wandsford. Henr. Davye. Will. Thomas. Ric. Diggs. Nich.
Duck. Egid. Tooker. Edm. Estcourt. Ric. Waltham. Hugo Cressy. 15 Iac. f. 64^ a.
Iac. Ley Miles. Hugo Pyne. Rog. Owen Miles. Rob. Iyre. Will. Jones Miles, Serve.
ad Legem electus. Roll. Wansford. Nich. Duck. Edm. Estcourt. Tho. Spencer. Hugo
Cressy. Tho. Hitchcock. Edw. Had. f. 658. a. Egid. Tooker. Ric. Waltham.
Anth. Herenden. f. 658. b. Tho. Wentworth. Will. Ayloffe. Tho. Sanderson.
Christoph. Brooks. Toh. Ieffreys. 16 Iac. f. 671. Iac Ley Miles. etc. Ioh.
Ieffreys. Will. Sidley Miles and Baron. Roll. Wandesford. Edm. Estcourt. Tho.
Spenser. Hugo Cressy. Anth. Irby. Anth. Herenden. Tho. Hitchcock. Edw. Had.
Henr. Davy. Ioh. Den. Ric. Diggs. Henr. Den. Iasp. Selwyn. Will. Noy Arm.
f. 672. b. Will. Ayloff. Christoph. Brook. Ex alio Registro scil. vol. 8. 17
Iac. f. 5. a. Iac. Ley Miles. etc. Will. Ayloffe. f. 6. b. Tho. Spencer. Nich.
Duck. Anth. Irby. Hugh Cressy. Tho. Hichcock. Edw. Hadds. Ric. Diggs. Ioh.
Darcy. Egid. Tooker. Will. Hackwell. Tho. Wentworth. Henr. Den. Christoph.
Brook. Will. Noy. Ioh. Ieffreys. Anth. Herenden. Rob. Air. Tho. Sanderson.
Roll. Wandesford. Rog. Smith. f. 9. b. Jasper Selwyn. Will. Sherfeild. f. 21.
a. Hugo Pyne. 18 Iac. f. 46. a. f. 21. b. f. 22. a. Iidem and Tho. Woodward.
Ioh. Briscoe. Will. Ravenscrost Arm. f. 46. a. Iac. Clerk. 19 Iac. f. 51. a.
Tho. Spenser. Rob. Air. Anth. Irbye. Roll. Wandesford. Ric. Diggs. Nich.
Ducke. Egid. Tooker. Hugh Cressie. Will. Ravenscroft. Tho. Saunderson. Tho.
Wentworth. Henr. Den. Will. Ayloffe. Ioh. Briscoe. Chr. Brook. Tho.
Woodward. Ioh. Ieffreys. Will. Hakewell. Iac. Wolveridge Miles. Petr. Mutton.
f. 68. b. 20 Iac. f. 77. a. Tho. Spenser. Edw. Had. Anth. Irbye. Tho.
Sanderson. Ric. Diggs. Ioh. Darcie. Egid. Tooker. Henr. Den. Will.
Ravenscroft. Will. Noye. Tho. Wentworth. Ioh. Briscoe. Christoph. Brook. Tho
Woodward. Hugo Pyne. Henr. Sherfeild. Rob. Air. Will. Hakewell. Hugo. Cressie.
Petr. Mutton Miles. 21 Iac. f. 87. b. Tho. Spenser. Christoph. Brook. Ric.
Diggs. Iac. Wolveridge Miles. Egid. Tooker. Will. Ravenscroft. Hugo Pyne. Tho.
Wentworth. Rob. Air. Will. Ayloffe. Hugo Cressy. Edw. Had. Ioh. Brisco.
Anth. Herenden. Tho. Woodward. Tho. Sanderson. Henr. Sherfeild. Will. Noy.
Will. Hakewell. 22 Iac. 122. a. b. Tho. Wentworth. Iasp. Selwyn. f. 129 Will.
Ravenscroft. Will. Noy. Will. Ayloffe. Tho. Woodward. Christoph. Brook. Henr.
Sherfeild. Hugo Pyne. Will. Hakewill. Rob. Air. Will Powell. Roll. Wandesford.
Ric. Tailor. Edw. Had. Ioh. Wakering. Tho. Saunderson. Ioh. Barksdale f. 124.
a. Henr. Den. Eusebius Andrews Arm. Hugo. Cressy. Ioh. Brisco. An. 1 Car. f.
167. b. Tho. Wentworth. Edw. Had. Will. Ayloffe. Edm. Estcourt. Will.
Ravenscroft. Henr. Den. Christoph. Brook. Will. Noye. Hago. Pyne. Ioh.
Briscoe. Rob. Air. Henr. Sherfeild. Roll. Wandesford. Ioh. Barkesdale. Nich.
Ducke. Eusebius. Andrews. Hugo. Cressy. Iah. Wakering. 2 Car. f. 177. a. Tho.
Spenser. Tho. Sanderson. Tho. Wentworth. Ioh. Briscoe. Will. Ayloffe. Henr.
Sherfeild. Will. Ravenscroft. Will. Hackwill. Christoph. Brook. Will. Powell.
Rob. Air. Ioh. Wakering. Roll. Wandesford. Ric. Tailor. Hugo Cressy Ioh.
Barkesdale. Edw. Had. Eusebius. Andrews. 3 Car. f. 204. b. Tho. Spenser. Petr.
Mutton Miles. Tho. Wentworth. Ioh. Briscoe. Christoph. Brook. Will. Hakewill.
Will. Ravenscroft. Ioh. Barkesdale. Rob. Air. Eusebius. Andrews. Hugo. Pyne. Edw.
Clerk Miles. Roll. Wansford. Henr. Sherfeild. Hugo Cressy. Will. Powell. Anth.
Herenden. Ioh. Wakering. Edw. Had. Tho. Milward f. 207. a. Edm. Estcourt.
Ioh. Glanwill Tho. Saunderson. Eusebius Wright. f. 208. a. Will. Noy. Nich.
Duck. 4 Car. f. 141. a. Tho. Spenser. Hugo Cressy. Will. Ravenscroft. Edw.
Had. Rob. Air. Tho. Sanderson. Roll. Wandesford. Petr. Mutton. Miles. Nich.
Ducke. Edw. Clerk Miles. Edm. Estcourt. will. Noye. Will. Hakewill. Tho.
Milwarde. Ioh. Briscoe. Eusebius. Wright. Ioh. Wakering. Ioh. Glanvill. 471. a.
Henr. Sherfeild. Edw Fettiplace. 148. a. Will. Powell. Ric. Tailor. Ioh. Green
Ioh. Barkesdale. 5 Car. f. 171. b. Rob. Air. Petr. Mutton Miles. Roll.
Wandesford. Ioh. Wakering. Edm. Estcourt. Will. Powell. Edw. Had. Ric.
Tailor. Tho. Saunderson. Tho. Milward. Edw. Clerk Miles. Eusebius. Wright. Will.
Noy. Ioh. Glanvile. Ioh. Brisco. Edw. Fettiplace. Will. Hakwill. Ioh. Green.
Adhuc. 5 Car. f. 192. a. Edw. Eish. Will. Air. Edw. Alkyns. Ughtred
Shuttleworth Ioh. Harrison. 6 Car. f. 199. b. Rob. Air. Tho. Milward. Hugh
Cressy. Eusebius. Wright. Edw. Had. Edw. Fettiplace. Tho. Saunderson. Ioh.
Glanvile. Edw. Clerk Miles. Ioh. Green. Will. Noy. Edw. Byshe. Henr.
Sherfeild. Edw. Atkyns. Ioh. Brisco. Ioh. Harrison. Will. Hakewell. Will. Air.
Ioh. Wakering. Ughtred Shuttleworth Ric. Tailor. 7 Car. f. 225. a. Rob. Air.
Will. Hakewell. Roll. Wandesford. Ioh. Wakering. Hugh Cressy. Ric. Tailor. Edw.
Hodde. Tho. Milward. Anth. Herenden. Eusebius. Wright. Edw. Clerk. Miles. Ioh.
Glanvile. Will. Noy. Attorn. genesis D^m. Reg. Edw. Fettiplace. Ioh. Green. Ioh.
Brscoe. Edw. Byshe. Henr. Den. Edw. Atkyns. Henr. Sherfeild. Will. Air.
Petr. Mutton Miles. Ughtred Shuttleworth 8 Car. f. 248. b. 299. a. Will. Noy.
Attorn. etc. Henr. Sherfeild. Will. Powell. Rob. Air. Ioh. Wakering. Roll.
Wandesford. Ric. Tailor. Edm. Estcourt. Tho. Milward. Hugo Cressy. Ioh.
Glanvile. Edw. Had. Edw. Fettiplace. Tho. Saunderson. Ioh. Green. Edw.
Clerk Miles. Edw. Bysh. Petr. Mutton. Miles. Edw. Atkyns. Henr. Den. Ioh.
Harrison. Ioh. Briscoe. Will. Air. Will. Hakewill. Ughtred Shuttleworth 9 Car.
^. 283. a. Will. N^ye Attorn. etc. Tho. Mi^ward. Eusebius. Wright. Rob. Air. Ioh.
Glanvill. Roll. Wandesford. Ioh. Green. Edm. Estcourt. Edw. Fettiplace. Edw.
Had. Edw. Byshe. Tho. Sanderson. Edw. Atkyns. Edw. Clerk Miles. Ioh.
Harrison. Henr. Den. Will. Air. Ioh. Briscoe. Ioh. Clerk. Henr. Sherfeild.
Ric. Cresheild. Will. Hakwill. Will. Lenthall. Ioh. Warkering. Rob. Mason.
Will. Powell. Ioh. Harington. Ric. Tailor. Godfr. Copley. 10 Car. f. 309. a.
Will. Noy Attorn. etc. Ioh. Glanvill. Edw. Bysh. Rob. Air. Edw. Fettiplace.
Roll. Wandesford. Ioh. Green. Tho. Sanderson. Ioh. Harrison. Edw. Clerk
Miles. Will. Air. Henr. Den. Godfr. Copley. Ioh. Brisoe. Ioh. Clerk. Will.
Hakewill. Ric. Cresheild. Will. Powell. Ioh. Harington. Petr. Mutton Miles.
Will. Lenthall. Tho. Milward. Rob. Mason Recordat^ Land. f. 316. a. Ric.
Tailor. Eusebius. Wright. 11 Car. f. 332. b. Rob. Mason. Arm. Recordat. Land. Ioh.
Glanvile. Ioh. Green. Rob. Air. Edw. Byshe. Roll. Wandesfrod. Edw. Atkyns.
Tho. Sanderson. Ioh. Harrison. Edw. Clerk Miles. Will. Air. Henr. Den. Ioh.
Clarke. Ioh. Briscoe. Ioh. Harington. Will. Hakewell. Will. Lenthall. Petr.
Mutton Miles. Hugo. Rigbye. f. 339. a. Ioh. Wakering. Will. Powell. Ioh. Herne
f. 366 b. Ric. Tailor. Erasm. Earl Edw. Fettiplace. Car. Jones Tho. Milward.
Tho. Tempest 12 Car. f. 3^. a. Rob. Air. Ioh. Glanvile. Roll. Wandesford. Edw.
Fettiplace. Tho. Sanderson. Ioh. Green. Edw. Clerk Miles. Edw. Byshe. Henr.
Den. Edw. Atkyns. Ioh. Briscoe. Ioh. Harrison. Will. Hackewill. Will. Air.
Petr. Mutton Miles. Godsr. Copley. Ioh. Wakering. Ioh. Clerk. Ric. Tailor.
Ioh. Harington. Tho. Milward. Ric. Cresheild. Eusebius. Wright. Will. Lenthall.
Erasm. Earl. Tho. Tempest. Carolus Jones. Gilb. Bowne. 13 Car. f. 392. a. Roll.
Wandesford Attorn. Curiae Wardor, etc. Edw. Fettiplace. Ioh. Harrison, Ioh.
Clerk. Tho. Sanderson. Will. Air. Edw. Clerk Miles. Will. Lenthall. Henr.
Den. Hugo Rigby. Ioh. Briscoe. Ioh. Heron. Will. Hakewell. Godfr. Copley.
Ioh. Wakering. Erasmus Earl. Ric. Tailor. Ioh. Harington. Eusebius. Wright. Car.
jones. Edw. Atkyns. Tho. Tempest. 14 Car. f. 411. b. Roll. Wandesford Miles
Attorn. Curiae Wardor. etc. Ioh. Green. Edw. Byshe. Edw. Atkins. Rob. Air.
Ioh. Harrison. Tho. Sanderson. Will. Air. Edw. Clerk Miles. Godfrey Copley.
Henr. Den. Ioh. Clerk. Ioh. Brisco. Ioh. Harington. Will. Hakwill. Will.
Lenthall. Ioh. Wakering. Ioh. Heron. Will. Powell. Erasmus Earl. Ric. Tailor.
Tho. Tempest. Edw. Fettiplace. Hugo. Rigby. Eusebius. Wright. 15 Car. f. 435. a.
Roll. Wandesford. Miles, etc. Godfr. Copley. Will. Lentall. Henr. Den. Ioh.
Heron. Ioh. Brisco. Erasmus Earl. Will. Hakewill. Car. Jones. Ioh. Wakering.
Tho. Tempest. Will. Powell. Ioh. Baber. f. 461. a. Ric. Tailor. Tho. Fletcher
Edw. Bishe. Nicholaus Edw. Atkyns. Fraunklyn. Ioh. Harison. 16 Car. f. 463. a.
Roll. Wandesford Miles Attorn. etc. Godfr. Copley. Erasmus Earl. Tho.
Sanderson. Ioh. Clerk. Henr. Den. Will. Lenthall. Ioh. Briscoe. Car. Jones.
Will. Hakewill. Ioh. Herne. Will. Powell. Tho. Tempest. Ric. Tailor. Ioh.
Baber. Eusebius Wright. Tho. Fletcher. Edw. Fettiplace. Nich. Franklyn. Edw.
Bishe. Robertus Holburne f. 468. b. Edw. Atkyns. Ioh. Harrison. Oliver St. John
Solic. R. f. 483. b. Will. Air. 17 Car. f. 288. a. Oliver St. John Solic.
Regius. Ioh. Heron. Erasmus Earl. Roll. Wandesford Miles. Tho. Fletcher. Nich.
Franklyn. Tho. Sanderson. Rob. Holburne. Ioh. Briscoe. Sam. Brown. f. 489. a.
Will. Hakewill. Tho. Wild. Eusebius. Wright. Tho. Williamson. Edw. Byshe. Ioh.
Harrison. Joseph. Newton. Will. Air. Godfr. Copley. Ioh. Glyn. Ioh. Clerk.
Hucusque durante regno CAROLI primi Regis Angliae. 12 Car. 2. f. 673. a. Ioh.
Harrison. Will. Foxwist. Will. Prynne. Georgius Day. Rob. Ashton. Edw. Rich.
Tho. Beverley. Guibon. Godderd. Will. Glascock. Ioh. Wentworth. Edw. Harris.
Ric. Graves. Will. Page. Tho. Manby. Edw. Byshe. Ioh. Sadler. Ioh. Howell. Car.
2. f. 685. a. Ioh. Harrison. Georgius Day. Will. Prynne. Edw. Rich. Rob.
Ashton. Guybon. Godard. Tho. Beverley. Tho. Manby. Edw. Bishe Miles. Ioh.
Wentworth. Will. Foxwist. Will. Page. Franc. Boteler. Ioh. Howell.

Having now done with these Catalogues of the Readers, and Governors, wherein
in special observation made of all such as were afterward advanced, either to
be Judges in any of the Courts at Westminster, or otherwise: I am yet further
to take notice, that there were likewise of this House, these also, of whom
there is no mention in either of the said Catalogues; whose names, (for the
honor of the Society) are here added.

1. Sir John Fortescue Knight, sometime Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench,
so renowned for that learned discourse de laudibus Legum Angliae (written in
France, when he attended upon Edward Prince of Wales, eldest Son to King Henry
the 6th. being then his Chancellor, as the Preamble to that Book manifests)
was Ex Registro Hosp. Linc. vol. I. f. 2. b. and 14. a.
of this House in 6 H. 6.

2. Thomas Litelton (afterward one of the Justices of the Common Pleas) a
person famous for his learned works, was admitted Ex alio Registro ejusdem
Hosp. scil. vol. 2. f. 35. a.
of this House Term. Hill. 16 E. 4.

3. Sir Arthur Plantaginet Knight (natural Son to King Edward the 4th.)
afterward Viscount L'isle, admitted Ex alio Registro ejusdem Hosp. scil. vol.
4. f. 32. a.
of this Society 4 Febr. 2. H. 8.

4. William Lambard (a person skillful in Antiquities, publisher of the Saxon
Laws) concerning whom I find this following Ex alio Registro ejusdem Hosp.
scil. vol. 6. f. 264. b.
Order at a Council here, held 9 Febr. 21 Eliz

Forasmuch as Mr. William Lambard has deserved universally well of this Common
wealth, and Country, and likewise of the Fellowship and Society of this House,
and is like hereafter to win greater credit to himself, and the Society of this
House; it is therefore agreed, that he shall have a room to sit amongst the
Society of the Fellowship of the Bench, as other assistants use to do, without
any thing paying for the same: Provided always, that this be no President to
any other, that shall be called to the like place hereafter, but that they
shall pay for the said room such sums of money, as shall be assessed by the
Bench.

5. Sir Henry Spelman Knight (whose learned works are well known to be of high
esteem both here, and in foreign parts was admitted Ex alio Registro ejusdem
Hosp. scil vol. 7. f. 393. b.
of this Society in 28 Eliz.

The Copy of a Letter sent by the Lords of his Majesty's Privy Council, to
certain Justices of the Peace for the County of Middlesex, to restrain and
forbid the Buildings in Lincolns-Inn-Fields. Ex Registro Hosp. Linc, vol. 7. f.
530. b.

AFter our hearty commendations. An. 1663. 11 Iac.

It is well known unto you what Order has been taken, as well by public
Proclamation, as by often addresses from the Board; and not long since by
delivering unto your selves his Majesty's express pleasure and commandment, for
the restraint of n^w erected buildings, together with the inconveniences that
cannot be avoided by the swelling multitudes of people, which by that occasion
are drawn hither from all parts of the Kingdom; and that as well in regard of
the provision of victual, which is now grown to a high rate, as also in respect
of government and order; and yet nevertheless such is the liberty as men take
herein for the advantage of their private, as there is nothing frequent in the
skirts and confines of the City, then new erected buildings: amongst the rest
you shall understand that complaint has been made unto us by the Students of
Lincolns Inn; that some do go about to erect new buildings in a Field near unto
them, called Lincolns Inn. Fields, with an intent to convert the whole Field
into new buildings, contrary to his Majesty's Proclamation, and all other
public Orders taken in that behalf, and to the great pestring and annoyance of
that Society: Forasmuch as it is expedient that some present course be taken
for restraint thereof; we do hereby require you to take notice of the same, and
to restrain and forbid that building by such effectual means, as you shall
think meet, and if any person shall refuse to yield thereunto, we do hereby
require and authorize you, to commit him or them so refusing to the Goal, until
they conform themselves accordingly; or otherwise if you find cause, to take
good Bond of them to appear before us, that such further Order may be taken, as
shall be meet; whereof we require you to have a special care, and to signify
unto us your proceedings therein; and so we bid you heartily forewell.

From White Hall this 4th. of September 1613. Your Loving Friends G. Cant. T.
Ellesmere Canc. H. Northampton. Orders for Exercises.
. E. Stanhope. Iul. Caesar. Edw. Forsett Esquire. Knights.
Sir Lewis Lewkner, Sir Thomas Fowler, Sir William Smith,



Orders in this Society.
Exscribed from a Tablet hanging up in the Battry. Anno 12. Ias.
THat two Tables be made touching Orders for Exercise, during the whole year;
the one to remain in the Library, and the other to be set up in the Hall, which
Tables do contain as follows.

In the Vacation time, no Exercise upon Friday or Saturday: and in the Term no
Exercise on Saturday.

In the Vacation time, Monday and Wednsday are the Bolt-days and Tuesday and
Thursday the Moot-days; but in Term times e contra.

No Exercise upon any Holy day, nor upon the Eve, in the Term nor out of it:
nor upon Wednsday, Friday, or Saturday, in any Ember we^k.

No Exercise to be done, neither the day before the Term, nor after the Term
Neque Post, neque Piae, neque Bo. Neque Mo. neque Le. Neither the day the Term
begins or ends.

In All Saints, Candlemass, and Ascension week, being three grand weeks, there
is no Exercise.

In Trinity Term, if Midsummer day be a Grand Day, there is no Exercise the day
before, because the Eve of the Feast; nor the day after, because Crastine of a
Grand day. And if Midsummer day be not in Term, so as Sunday is a Grand Day,
then no Exercise upon the Monday following; but Exercise upon every other day,
save Saturday.

Easter.
THe first Monday after Low Sunday, a Moot and a Bolt is to be charged: and
that week one whole Moot is to be performed, and two Bolts: and upon Monday
following a Bolt, Orders for Exercises.
and no more Exercise until Thursday following, being the second day of the
Term; and then the Exercise to go on, according to the Rules aforsaid.

Upon Wednesday before Whitson day, a Moot and a Bolt are to be charged: the
Bolt to be performed that night, and the Pleading to be brought in on Thursday
following.

No Exercise in Whitson week, nor upon Monday after Trinity Sunday, because it
is the next day after a Grand day.

Upon Tuesday a Moot is to be charged and performed, and a Bolt upon Wednesday.

Upon Monday after the end of the Term, Exercise begins; and holds until
the Reading, except upon Fridays, Saturdays, and Holydays, and their Eves.

In the Reading time, a Bolt upon the first Tuesday, and a Moot upon the first
Wednesday; and so till the end of the Reading, except upon the Reader's
drinking night, and the Reader's Dinner, and Repetition day: but if the Reader
but alter his Day, then the Bolt is altered to the day after the Reading.

The next day after St. Matthew's day, Exercise begins; and so continues
till the Term Eve.

Michaelmass Term.
THe Exercises hold all the Term long, with the precedent cautions.

The Exercise begins the second day after the Term, unless the same be
Friday, Sunday, or Saturday, or a Holy Day; and continues till O Sapientia.

The Exercise begins the 2d. day of the Term and so continues until the
Term end. And if the House of Commons begin on the Wednesday night, then a Bolt
is to be charged on Tursday.

When Christmas Commons ends, Exercise begins, and so continues until
the Terms Eve: And if the House Commons begin upon Wednesday night, then a Bolt
is to be charged upon Thursday.

Exercise begins the second day of the Term, and so continues until the
last day of the Term, the Grand week excepted.

The second day after the Term, Exercise begins, and so continues until
Shrove-tide; and that week no Exercise.

Lent Reading.
THe Rule for Exercise is agreeable with the former Reading.

When the Reading is ended, here is no Exercise until the 5th. week in Lent.
Then Exercise continues, from Monday until Monday in the sixth week.

In the fifth week there be two Bolts; and one full Moot and one Bolt upon
Monday following: and then Exercises cease until Monday after Low Sunday.

Exercise in the Innes of Chancery every Tuesday and Thursday a Reading; and
every Wednesday and Friday a Moot in the Term; the first day of the Term and
the last, and the Grand-week, Holy Days, and twenty Vigils excepted.

In the Reading.
MOotes in Furnivall's Inn, every Monday, Tuesday, and Thursday; and in
Thavyes Inn, Every Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday, during the Reading, but no
Exercise after the Reader's feast.

Hactenus ex dicta Tabula in Promptuario Pendente.

Cap. LXV.
Innes of Chancery belonging to Lincolnes Inn.
Furnivalls Inn.
THis being long ago an House of the Lord Furnivall's, had thereupon the name
of Furnivall's Inn; and by some of them was anciently demised to the Students
of the Law: for in 9. H. 4. it appears by their Stewards Accounts, that they
resided in it.

By Joan Esc. 3. H. 4.
the Daughter and heir to William Lord Furnival (in the same King's time) the
Inheritance of it came to Ese. 3. H. 4.
Thomas Nevill (a younger Brother to Raph Earl of Westmerland and by Maude sole
Daughter and heir to the said Thomas and Joan, to John Talbot Earl of
Shrewsbury; in whose line it continued, till Francies Earl of Shrewsbury, in
consideration of Cxxl. by his deed Ex. Regist. 4. Hosp. l. 201. a.
bearing date the xvith. day of December 1 Edw. 6. sold it to Edw. Gryffin Esquire:
then Solicitor general to the King, William R^pere, and Richard Heydone Esquire and
their heirs; to the use of the Society of Lincoln's Inn, as it seems; forasmuch
as it appears, Ibid. f. 202. a.
that the said sum of one hundred pounds so paid by them, was delivered to
them out of the Tresurie of that House for the same purchase.

After which time the Principal and Fellows of this Inn have paid to the
Society of Lincoln's Inn, the Rent of iiil. vi^. viiid. as an yearly Rent for
the same, as may appear by the Accounts Ib. f. 260. b. etc.
of that House: and by special orders there made, have had these following
privileges; first ( viz. 10. Eliz. that E^Regist. ^. H^ p. Lin^. f. (...). a.
the utter Bartisters of Furnivall's Inn, of a years continuance, and so
certified and allowed by the Benchers of Lincolns Inn, shall pay no more than
four marks a plece, for their admittance into that Society.

Next ( viz. in 11 Eliz.) that Ex Regist. s. Hosp. Linc. f. 96. b.
every fellow of this Inn, Cap. 65.
who has been allowed an utter Barister here, and that has mooted here two
Vacations at the utter Bar, shall pay no more, for their admissions into the
society of Lincoln's Inn, than xiiis. iiiid. though all utter Baristers of any
other Inn of Chancery (excepting Thavyes Inn) should pay xxs. And that every
inner Barister of this House, who has mooted here one Vacation at the inner
Bar, should pay for his admission into this House, but xxs. those of other
Houses (excepting Thavyes Inn) paying xxvis. viiid.

Moreover, when by an Order Ib. f. 396. b.
made at Lincoln's Inn, in 27 Eliz. the admission of the Gentlemen of this
House and Thavyes Inn into that Society, was raised to xls. those of other
Innes of Chancery were strained to five marks. And in Ib. f. 50^. b.
36 Eliz. those of this House had so much farther favor; that they might,
after their admittance into Lincolns Inn, stay two years in this Inn of
Chancery, paying their pensions during those two years; and that they should be
discharged of casting into Commons, and of all Vacations and charges of
Christmasse, during the time of their stay here for those first two years.

Cap. LXVI.
Thavyes Inn.
IN this Inn of Chancery were Students of the Law resident in King Edward the
third's time, as may appear by these following words, taken out of the last
Will and Testament Inter Com. Placits in Hustingo Land. die Lunae in festo S.
Clem. Pap^e 23. E. 3.
of Ihon Tavye, whose House it then was, and of whom it took this name; viz. --
ego Johannes Tavie Armiger, etc-lego animam meam De^, etc. I^em Iego omnis
tenementa mea, ^um omnibus suis pertinentiis, quae habeo in part Australi, in
parochia S. Andreae, etc. Aliciae, uxori meae, ad terminum vitae suae: Et quod
post decessum praedictae Aliciae, Cokes Reports Vol. 10. in pro^emio.
totum illud Hospicium, in quo Apprenticii ad Legem habitare solebant, per
Executores meos, si superstites fuerint, una cum Executoribus praedictae
Aliciae, Cap. 67.
vendatur, and quod de pecunia inde percepte, unus Capellanus idoneus, pro
anima mea, and anima praedictae Aliciae inveniatur, etc.

But in process of time, the inheritance thereof, coming to the hands of
Gregory Nicholls Citizen and Mercer of London; he, by his Deed, Ex autogr. in
Thesaur. de Lincolns Inn.
bearing date... Ian. 4. E. 6. granted it to the then Benchers of Lincolns
Inn, and their successors, for the use of Students of the Law: After which
time, it was by them demised Ex cod. nigro de Lincolns Inn vol. 4. f. 260. b.
to the Principal and fellows of thig House, for the Rent of iiil. vis. viiid.
per annum; and has had the like privilege, for admission of their Students
into the Society of Lincolns Inn, as those of Furnivals Inn had, and still
have, as in my discourse of that Inn of Chancery I have fully expressed.

Cap. LXVII.
Grays Inn.
THat this House had its denomination from the Lord Grays of Wilton, whose
habitation it anciently was, there are none (I presume) that doubt: but when it
first became a mansion for Students of the Law, is a question that I cannot
directly resolve for in 8 E. 2. John the Son of Reginald de Gray resided here,
as may seem by a License Pat. 8. E. 2. p. 2. m. 10.
then obtained by him from the King, to grant xxx. Acres of Land, two Acres of
Meadow, and ten shillings Rent, with the appurtenances, lying in Kentishtowne
near London, and in the Parish of St. Andrews in Holburne, without the Bar of
the old Temple. unto the prior and covent of St. Bartholomew's in Smithfield;
to find a certain Chaplain, to celebrate divine Service every day, in the
Chapel and Pourtpole, without the said Bars (that being the Chapel to this
House) for the soul of the said John, and for the souls of his ancestors, and
all the faithful deceased, for ever. And no less certain it is, that the
inheritance thereof continued to the posterity of the said John, until toward
the latter end of King Henry the 7ths. reign, that it was passed by Claus. 22.
H. 7. p. 2. m. 42.
Indenture of bargain and sale, bearing date 12 Augusti 21 H. 7. by Edmund Lord
Gray of Wilton, unto Hugh Dennys Esquire his heirs and assigns, by the name of
the Manor of Portpole, otherwise called Grays Inn, four Messuages, four
Gardens, the site of a windmill, eight Acres of land, ten shillings of free
Rent, and the advouson of the Chantry of Portpole aforesaid. And that the said
bargain and sale, was farther confirmed by a Release, Ibid. m. 30.
from the said Edmund Lord Gray, Richard Gray Clerk, and John Gray, brother of
the said Edmund sons to Sir John Gray of Wilton Knight deceased, made unto the
said Huh Denis Esquire and Mary his wife, Edmund Dudley Esquire Roger Lupton Clerk,
Godfrey Tops, Edward Chamberleyn, William Stafford, John Ernley, Thomas
Pigot, Richard Broke, William Tey, and Michael Fisher, to the use of the said
Hugh, and Mary his wife, and the heirs of the said Hugh; which Release bears
date upon the xvth. day of Feb. an. 22 H. 7.

How long those Lords had their residence here, within that time, I cannot say:
for there is not only a tradition amongst the Ancients of this Society; but a
postive affirmation by John Stow, one of our late Chroniclers, from what Mr.
St. Low Kniveton (a person of great knowledge in Antiquities) had observed from
very good authority; that the Students of the Law held this House by Lease from
the Lord Grays of Wilton, in King Edward the third's time, and since.

But about eight years after this bargain and sale, so made to Hugh Denis, as
aforesaid, the Prior and Monks of Shene (near Richmund in Surrey) having in 20.
Edw. 4. got License Pat. 7. H. 8. p. 3. m. 3.
of the King, to purchase Lands in Mortmaine, to the value of Cl. per annum;
did, in pursuance thereof, obtain from King Henry the viiith. farther Pat. 7.
H. 8. p. 3. m. 3.
License in the 7th. year of his reign, unto Thomas Pigot then one of the Kings
Sergeants at Law, Richard Broke Sergeant at Law, John Herion Esquire Roger Lupton
Clerk, Godfrey Toppys, and Thomas Arture, (some of which were of the feoffees
before mentioned) that they might grant the said Manor of Portpole, with the
appurtenances, four Messuages, four Gardens, one croft, eight acres of land,
and x^. Rent with the appartenances; with the advouson of the same Chanteries
unto the said Manor belonging, unto the said Prior and Coven^ of Shene; to
have and to hold to them and their successors, in part of satisfaction, for
that C^. per annum land, which they had License from King Edw. the 4th. to
purchase, as aforesaid.

Which Manor of Portpole, otherwise called Grays Inn, with the appurtenances,
etc. being by the said Prior and Monks accordingly possessed; was demised by them
to the students of the Law, for the Rent of -- vi^. xiiis. iiiid. per annum, as
appears (...)
by the Accounts of the Stewards of this House: and so held till the general
dissolution of the greater Monasteries in the Parliament of 30 H. 8. But then
coming to the Crown, was granted unto them soon after by the said King, in see
farm, as it seems: for by the Account (...)
of the Treasurer of this Society made 18 Nov. 32. H. 8. it is evident, that
the said Rent of vi^. xiii^. iiiid. was paid to the Kings use, for the same,
for one whole year, ended at the feast of the Annunciation of our Lady then
past* and so has been ever since, as may appear by the Accounts of the
succeeding Treasurers of this House.

The Buildings.
AS to the greatest part of these, there is little to be said worthy
observation; there being not much of beauty or uniformity in them, in respect
they were raised at several times, upon the particular charge of sundry
persons; the structure of the more ancient, having been, not only very mean (as
by some parts of them, not long since standing appeared) but of so slender
capacity, that even the Ancients of this House, were necessitated to lodge
double: for at a Pension held here 9 Iulii 21. H. 8. John Hales, (...)
then one of the Barons of the Exchequer, produced (...)
a Letter directed to him from Sir Thomas Nevile, which was to request him to
acquaint the Society, that he would accept of Mr. Attorney general ( viz. Sir
Christopher Hales) to be his Bedfellow in his Chamber here; and that entry
might be made thereof in the Book of their Rules.

In 5 Edw. 6. the old Hall was Ib. f. 197. b.
seiled with fifty four yards of wainscote at iis. a yard: and in 3. and 4. Ph.
and M. the Society began Ibid. (...)
the reedifying it, as it now stands; every fellow of the House, having a
Chamber therein, being assessed Ibid. (...)
toward the charge thereof, upon penalty Ibid.
of loosing his Chamber, in case he did not pay what he was then taxt at: which
work was finished in 2 Eliz. as appears by the Account Ib. f. ^43. ^
of Sir Gilbert Gerard Knight, then Treasurer, made to Nov. the same year; the
whole charge amounting to 863^. 10s. 8d.

In 35 Eliz. there was Cl. iii^. iiiid. contributed Ib. f. 209. ^
by diverse particular Gentlemen of this House, for the building of the Gate in
Holbourn: And the next year following, there was an order (...)
made, that there should be a view taken for a place wherein to build the same,
and to line out a way for a passage thereto; as also to consider in what manner
it should be built: which was accordingly effected.

This is all that I shall say touching the Buildings, I next come to the Walks,
The Walk^^
which are very large and beautiful.

Of these, the first mention, that I find, is in 40 Eliz. Mr. Bacon, (viz. he
who was afterward Sir Fr. Bacon Knight, Lord Verulam, and Chancellor of
England) being, upon his Account, ^Ib. F. 235. ^.
made 4 Iulii, allowed the sum of viil. xvs. iiiid. laid out for planting
Elm-trees in them. Of which Elms some died, as it seems; for at a Pension held
here 14 Nov. 43 Eliz. there was an order Ib. f. ^43. ^.
made for a present supply of more young Elms, in the places of such as were
decayed: and that a new Rail and Quickset-hedges should be set upon the upper
long Walk, at the discretion of the same Mr. Bacon and Mr. Wilbraham:
Aomittances.
which, being done, amounted to the charge of Lxl. vis. viiid. as by the said
Mr. Bacon's account Ib. f. 246. a.
allowed 29 Apr. 42 Eliz. appears.

There was a purpose for re-edifying of the Chapel in 17 Iac. as appears by an
Order Ib. f. 329. b.
then made, whereby Sir Euball Thelwall, Mr. Fleetwood, Mr. Philip Gerard, and
Mr. Thomas Jones were appointed to take care thereof; but nothing was done
therein, as it seems.

Orders for Government.
IN 8 Eliz. at a Pension here held 24 Maii, it was ordered, Ex Registro hujus
Hospicii, vol. 1. f. 247. b.
that none should be admitted before he did pay unto the Treasurer of this
Society xls. for his Admission. And the next year following, viz. 10 Iunii the
rate for Admissions was raised Ib. f. 252. b.
to iiil. vis. viiid. excepting to those of the Societies of Barnards Inn and
Staple Inn, who were to pay but xl^. But in 12 Eliz. (11. Iunii) there was a
further Order Ex alio Registro f. 6. b.
made in these cases of Admittance, which referred the setting of the fine
thereupon to the judgment of the Treasurer and Readers of the House, to be by
them adjudged at a Pension or Cupboard.

Howbeit, in 14 Eliz. at a Pension held 4. Feb. it was ordained, Ib. f. 24. a.
that one of the Sons of every double Reader of this Society, should be
admitted without any fine at all: and that one of the Sons of other Readers in
this House, should be thenceforth admitted for the half of the fine. And in 23
Eliz. there was an Order Ib. f. 156. a.
made, that every person, thenceforth to be admitted, should himself personally
require such his Admittance of the fellowship.

In 30 Eliz. it was ordered, Ib. f. 194. a.
that thenceforth none should be admitted, unless his fine for admittance were
presently thereupon paid by him who so admits him. Moreover in 36 Eliz. it
was further ordered, Ib. f. 214. a.
that none should thenceforth be admitted, unless he find two Sureties to pay
his duties; viz. his Pensions for the House, and for his Chamber; and for his
Commons to the Steward for the time being; and all other duties, that should be
allowed of by the Readers of this House for the time being, to be collected of
any of this Society: and that they of his Sureties should be fellows of this
House, to be bound in x1. to the Treasurers of this Society for the time being,
which Order was again renewed Ib. f. 226. ^.
10 Apr. 39 Eliz.

In 1 Iac. (26 Ian.) upon signification of the King's commandment by the
Judges, that thenceforth none should be admitted of this Society, except he
were a Gentleman of Descent, until his Majesty's pleasure were farther known;
it was ordered, Ib. f. 260. b.
that none should be admitted therein, unless his name were first delivered to
the Pension; to the end that consideration might be had of his quality until
the next Pension, and then to be admitted, if he were fit.

Again, in 6 Iac. (15 Iunii) it was ordered, Ib. f. 281. a*
that none should be admitted to any Chamber, until they had paid all duties
whatsoever. And the next ensuing year, ( viz. 8 Nov. 7 Iac.) that Ib. f. 285. b.
no Gentleman of this Society should be admitted to the presence of any Chamber
in the House, before he had paid the fine of iiil. vis. viiid. at the least;
nor to any absence until he had paid a fine of xls. at the least, to the use
of the House.

Likewise, in 8 Iac. it was further ordered, Ib. f. 288. b.
that no man after that time should be admitted into any Chamber, but for three
lives at the most, and not for any number of years. Further, in 15 Iac. (6
Maii) that Ib. f. 315. b.
no admittance should thenceforth be granted in absence, to any: Also no Lease
Chamber assigned to any, before he attend the pension Table, and have the
allowance of the Bench thereto. Moreover, that none should be admitted into any
House Chamber, except Chambers for Readers; but that must first be surveyed by
two Readers, who should first report what the Chamber is, that thereupon the
Pension might take such composition for the same as they think fit.

In 18 Iac. (25. O^.) there was an Order Ib. f. 332. b.
made, whosoever should thenceforth be admitted into this House, should first
present himself personally to the Readers in Pension; and they to consider of
their Admissions.

And in anno 1630. ( 6 Car. 1.) at a Pension held here 7 Iunii, it was farther
ordered, Ib. f. 333. a.
that no Chamber in this House, should after that time be granted under ten
pounds fine, and xx^. Rent per annum at the least: and what more, either fine
or Rent, to be set down by the Bench; and none to have longer time, or more
interest in any Chamber than for term of life.

Exercise for Learning.
AT a Pension held here 3 Iulli 3. and 4. ph. and M. it was ordered, (...)
that every Fellow elected to be one of the Ancients of this Society, should
thenceforth, for the whole time of every the nine Vacations next ensuing their
said election, be attendant as well upon the Reader, for his Autumnal and Lent
Vacations, as upon the Marshall chosen at the Feast of the Nativity of our
Lord, upon the penalty of xl^. for every one making default:

In 12 Eliz. at a Pension held 24 Ian. it was ordered, (...)
that from thenceforth in Hillary Term, and Midsummer Term, the Mootes should
be kept ^^ee days in every week; viz. Monday, Tuesday, and Thursday, if none
of those days were Holyday; and if so, then the next following: and that the
Case be always assigned upon Sunday after Supper: As also, that upon the other
days not appointed for the Mooting, it should be lawful for the
Utter-Barristers to keep Bolts: and when they shall sit, other Students to be
bound to put Cases, according as had been accustomed in Michaelmass Term. And
in 16 Eliz. (26 Iunii) it was farther ordered, Ib. f. 41. b.
that two Bolts should be kept in every Term on such days when there is no
Moot kept, other than on Holy Days and half Holydays; upon penalty that every
Utter-Barrister then in Commons, Exercises for learning.
should forfeit for the not keeping of every Bolt lost, iii^. iiiid. And every
Inner-Barrister, for the not putting of Cases, according to the old order, to
pay ii^. for every default. As also, that every Utter-Barrister assigned in the
Moot, who should not Moot in proper person that week, to forfeit ten shillings.

In 21 Eliz. (22 Iunni) there was an order Ib. f. 87. b.
made, that the Readers of Chancery, should as well keep their Readings, as
their Mootes, according to the ancient Orders therein used; scil. for the Term
time to read the Tuesday and the Thursday, and to keep the Mootes on the
Wednesday and Friday: and in the Reading times their grand Mootes according to
the ancient Customs, upon pain of the loss of every Moot or Reading vis. viiid.
to be paid unto this House by the Reader for the time being. And in 25 Eliz.
(24 Apr.) it was ordered, Ib. f. 166. a.
that the assignment of Utter-Barristers for Mooting in the Hall in Term time,
should be according to anciency, and not after the former order of Chambers, as
had been before that time: And for the more certainty in the same, that a Table
should be made of the names of all Utter Barristers, and those to be set down
in their ancienty, before the beginning of the following Term, and to be set up
in the Library: And when any Utter-Barrister should Moot, according to his
course, being in Commons, and another his ancient to come into Commons the same
Term after such Moot kept by his Puisne; then such ancient Utter-Barrister, so
come in to keep the next course, until the next Utter-Barister following in
course by the same Table. Which Order for Mootes in the Library, viz. by
ancienty, and not by Chambers, according to the usage in the Hall, was ratifyed
Ib. f. 189. b.
6 Febr. 9. Eliz.

In 2 Iac. (24 Oct.) it was ordered, Ib. f. 263. ^.
that thenceforth, upon the Sunday at night, should be neither Bolt, nor Case
assigned, but that the case should be assigned upon Monday night continually,
whether it be Holy Day, or not. And in 16 Iac. (10 Iunii) that Ib. f. 320. a.
some one of the third Table should assign the Case, if any were in Commons;
but if none were in Commons, then all the Gentlemen under the Bar to be
amerced, if any default should be made: And whosoever had assigned it once, to
be excused for that Term. Also in 19 Iac. (24 Oct.) that Ib. f. 337. a.
the Reader for the time being, after he has taken his place, shall keep
Mootes in the Library, all the Vacation, between the Term and time of his
Reading: And if in case of necessity he cannot do it in his own person, then to
supply the place by a sufficient Deputy. And that he shall also keep Mootes in
the Hall, in the time of his Reading, according to the ancient Orders of this
House; and for every default to be amerced xs. to be paid before he be admitted
to sit at the high Table after his Reading, or to have any place in Pension.
Likewise, that the Readers of the Inns of Chancery, for the time being, shall
keep the Mootes twice a week in the Term time at those Houses whereof they
shall be Readers; and keep Moots at the Inns of Chancery in the Reading time,
according to the ancient Orders of this House, upon pain and being amerced for
every default that they shall make of a petty Moot xs. and of a grand Moot xxs.
And that the Barristers, in the time of serving of their Vacations, if they be
in Commons in the Reading time, shall keep the Mootes at the Innes of Chancery,
upon pain of being amerced for every grand Moot xs. and for every petty Moot
iiis. iiiid.

The next year following (scil. 28 Maii 20 Iac.) here was an Order Ib. f. 339.
b.
made, that all Ancients of that call, or any call thereafter, should serve out
all their nine Vacations, although their Puisnes had read: and that their being
past their Reading should be no excuse for them, unless they had read
themselves, but that they should pay the fine of iiil. if they be absent at the
Reading: And if present at the Reading, then to be seven weeks in Commons, if
it be in Summer Vacation; and five weeks, if in the Lent Vacation, according to
the ancient Orders of this House. And, that the Reading of their Puisnes, or
calling to the Bench shall be no discharge to them, but every Ancient to pay
his fine, for his default, in case of his absence, or being in Commons, if he
be present, as well as if his Puisne had not read, or been called to the Bench.
Moreover, in 22 Iac. (9 Febr.) it was f^rther ordered Ib. f. 356. b.
that those Ancients and Barristers as had been, then were, or after that time
should be members of the House of Commons in Parliament, should serve their
Vacations as other ought to do who were not Parliament men.

Also, in anno 1629. (5 Car. 1. 11 Febr.) there was an order Ib. f. 380. ^.
made, that every Barrister, who is to serve his Vacations, shall upon every
fail at the grand Mootes, forfeit xx^s. if he be in Town, and in Commons: And
that the Reader, for the time being (at the next Pension after every Reading)
shall present the names of those that make defaults; as also the names of all
such Students, and the number of their Exercises which they shall perform in
every Reading. And about two years after ( viz. 25 Nov. 7. Car. 1.) it was also
ordered Ib. f. 390. a.
that the fourth ^utler should thenceforth keep a Book, wherein the Exercises
of the Gentlemen under the Bar shall be set down and recorded, in manner as
follows; viz. for the Exercises abroad at the Inns of Chancery, the Surveyor
of the Mootes shall certify every several Exercise performed, and by whom, to
the Reader, at the end of every Reading; and the Reader to confirm the same
under his hand, and then to be registered in the book aforesaid. And for the
Mootes performed in the Library, the Ancients and Barristers that shall sit at
the Case, shall subscribe to the names of those that mooted before them in the
aforesaid Book; to which end the Butler is to attend the Barrister with the
Book upon every such occasion.

Readers and double Readers.
AT a Pension held here 17 Nov. 4 Edw. 6. it was ordered, (...)
that every double Reader of this society, have in Commons no more than two
Servants; and every single Reader but one. And in 6 Edw. 6. that Ib. f. 199. a.
whosoever should be chosen Reader, were he for his first or second Reading
elected, in case he refused, he should forfeit ten pounds to the use of the
House. In that year the Reader had xx^v^. allowed Ib. f. ^oo. b.
him for a Hoggshead of Wine: But it seems, that this allowance was not
certain; for in 16 Eliz. there was a special Order (...)
made at a pension held 5 Maii, that every one, thenceforth to be chosen
Reader, should have allowance of one Hoggshead of Wine, be the price more or
less. And at that time it was also ordered, that every Reader should have
allowance and Commons for eight persons every Moot during his Reading.

In 17 Eliz. (30 Iunii) it was ordered Ib. f. 42. a.
that every single Reader chosen, should continue his Reading and learning
Vacation, the time accustomed, three weeks, not wanting a day, except upon
occasion of sickness. And in 18 Eliz. (I Iunii) that Ib. f. 55. b.
no Reader of this House, should in the time of his Reading, or after, admit
any into the Society of this House, but their admittance in that behalf should
be referred only to the Pension. Moreover in 22 Eliz. (15 Iunii) that Ib. ^.
145. b.
none but Readers should come to the Bar in the Star Chamber, for hearing, or
Orders; nor set his name to any Bill, Answer, Replication, or other pleading in
the said Court, upon pain to be degraded, and to be put out of the House ipso
facto.

And, upon the 20th. of June the same year; that Ib. f. 146. ^.
thenceforth no Reader should pay and Repasts for any Guests that he bids,
during the time of his Reading; nor Commons for himself, nor any of his men.

Upon the 9th. of Febr. 23 Eliz. there was an Order Ib. f. ^50. a.
made, that the Reader elect should begin his first Reading upon the first
Wednesday in Lent, because the Term did not end before the first Monday in
Lent. In 26 Eliz. Readers and double Readers.
(5 Iunii) that Ib. f. 1^^. ^.
no Reader should thenceforth have allowance, either of Reward, or any other
allowances, in respect of Venison, for above the number of twenty brace of
Bucks, and a lease of Staggs, and the same to be spent in the House. And in 28
Eliz. (6 Iunii) the Reader for that Summer, was allowed Ib. f. 1^^. ^.
for every week ten B^cks and no more.

In 34 Eliz. (22 Nov.) Mr. Else the then Reader of this House for Autumn, was
amerced Ib. f. 205.
at ten pounds for breaking the Judges Order, in reading so short; and in
twenty Nobles for calling eight Utter Barristers, whereas by the Rules of this
House he was to have called but four.

In 36 Eliz. (ult. Ian.) it was ordered, Ib. f. (...). ^.
that the persons then chosen, and after that time to be chosen Assistants to
the Reader, should sit at the Reader's table in Term time: and sit with the
Readers at the Mootes, and be at the Pension to hear, but have no voices there:
And that if they should fail, in any part of performing their Exercises, then
to return back again to the Ancients Table, to their former places. And in 2
Iac. (4 Nov.) it was further ordered, Ib. f. (...). ^.
that thenceforth there should be two Assistants of such of the Ancients, as
should be next eligible for Readers, to be Assistants to the present Reader;
and that those two Assistants should sit at the Readers Table, and keep
Exercises as a Reader, but not to have voice in Pension. And, that if any
should refuse to be Assistant, then to be fined as the Table should think fit.
And moreover, that if any being chosen Assistant should refuse to Read, if
chosen Reader, then he to be put from the Readers Table, and to be fined at the
Readers pleasure. As also, that every such Assistant not attending the Reader
in the Reading time, to forfeit for two Vacations, either of them five pounds a
piece.

In 7 Iac. (7 Febr.) there was an Order Ib. f. 287. b.
made, that the Chambers appointed for Readers, being House Chambers, as they
should thenceforth become void, should be taken by the Readers, by succession,
as they be in antiquity: And that if any Reader should refuse to choose any
such Chamber, so falling, then the next under him, in order, to have the same.

In 9. Iac. ( 23 Nov.) it was ordered, lb. f. 293. b.
. that thenceforth no Wine should be provided for the Readers Table at the
general charge. And in 12 Iac. (4 Aug.) Mr. Thomas Southworth and Mr. Thomas
Athowe, being then Readers, the House allowed Ib. f. 306. b.
two Hoggsheads of Wine: which Wine, and some other allowances of the House,
viz. thirty bushells of flowr, thirty pound of Pepper, Reward for xxx Bucks,
and two Staggs, were equally divided between the said Readers: But the Grotes
of the Gentlemen in Commons, and the allowance for eight Gentlemen coming to
the Readers Table (which was xxxvis. viiid). was wholly allowed unto Mr.
Southworth the Reader elect, upon the going forth of the general Call of
Sergeants then made ( Viz. Mr. Sergeant Fi^che, Mr. Sergeant Chamberlein, and
Mr. Sergeant Athowe) there being allowed by every Gentleman in the House iiis.
iiiid.

And whereas it had been an ancient usuage, that when any House Chamber should
become void, any Reader unprovided of a House Chamber, ought to have the same,
if he would accept therereof: And that an ancient Reader leaving his former
Chamber to the disposition of the House, might upon election remove to the
other Chamber so to be disposed of; it was then declared and ordered, Ib. f.
331. a.
that such election belonged only to those Readers, that continued in the
House, and were in Commons every Term, and not to those who were preferred, or
lived abroad in other places.

Commons.
IN 4 Edw. 6. (7 Nov.) it was ordered, Ex Registro Hosp. Grayessis f. 190. a.
that four of the Ancients of this House, being in Commons out of Term, should
have four Servants in Commons; every man one, paying each week for their
Servants, as the Readers of this Society did for their Servants.

In 3. and 4. Ph. and M. (21 Oct.) that Ib. f. 217. b.
allowance at the accounts should be made by the Auditors to the Steward, for
every Mess, as follows; viz. for every Mess of a Roster in Beef, six pence;
for every loin of Mutton six pence; and for every Boyler in Beef a Mess iid.
And in 19 Eliz. (8 Maii) that Ex alio Registro ejusdem Hosp. ^. 7^. b.
every Fellow of this House, should thenceforth pay for every Repast taken at
Dinner viiid. and for every Repast at Supper viiid.

In 23 Eliz. (7 Maii) there was an Agreement Ib. f. 156. b.
at the Cupboard, by Mr. Attorney of the Duchy, and all the Readers then
present, that the Dinner on Good Friday, which had been accustomed to be made,
at the Costs and Charges of the chief Cook, should thenceforth be made at the
Costs of the House, with like provision as it had been before that time. And
likewise whereas they had used to have Eggs and Green sauce on Easter day,
after Service and Communion, for those Gentlemen who came to Breakfast; that in
like manner they should be provided at the charge of the House. And that from
thenceforth no Calves heads should be provided by the Cook; nor any Gentlemen
of the House to pay for the same: And also that the said chief Cook (it being
his own motion and agreement) should pay yearly to the second Cook and
Pannyerman, toward their losses xxs. viz. to each of them xs. at Easter.

In 29 Eliz. (17 Oct.) there was an Order Ib. f. 191. a.
made, that there should thenceforth be allowed out of the stock of the House,
four marks weekly in the Vacations, for the charge of the Officers Commons. And
in 33 Eliz. ( 21. Iunii) it was agreed, Ib. f. 304. b.
that all the Ancients, Utter-Barristers, and other Fellows of this House,
should thenceforth, during the time of their lodging in the House, be in
Commons, and pay all such duties, and be also contributors to all such charges,
as should grow due by the Rules and Orders of this House: And, that if any
should be out of Commons, by the space of one whole week, in any one Term,
during the time of his lying in the House (not visited with sickness, or
otherwise privileged) he should be immediately out of the House, and be
thenceforth accounted no Fellow of the House.

I^ 35 Eliz (5 Febr.) it was ordered, (...).
that at the Cross-Table in the Hall, being a Table only for the Ancients,
which could not conveniently have place at the Upper-Table, no other should sit
or take place: And that the same Cross Table, after the first Mess served to
the Utter-Barristers, should be served with meat, next after the said Upper
Table, and before any other. And in 38 Eliz. (24 Nov.) that (...).
in the Term time, there should be allowed only one p^ttle of Claret Wine at
every meal, and no more, except Fishmeals when Oysters are served, and then but
two pottles. And that in the Vacation time there should be no Wine allowed,
except there were two Readers, or more, in Commons; and then only one quart and
no more.

In 40 Eliz. (30 Ian) it was farther ordered, (...)
that to avoid disturbance and confusion of service, every Gentleman of this
House, not being of the third Table, who should, thenceforth, go down to the
Dresser, either no fetch his own meat, or change the same: or not presently to
sit down to his meat, when the Servitors have messed him; or take meat by
strong hand from such as should serve them, to be put out of Commons ipso
facto. Likewise, that none of the Gentlemen of the third Table, should serve
any Gentlemen out of rank, or course, upon pain of being put out of Commons.
And in the same year (viz. 15 Nov.) that Ib. f. 237. a.
no Wine should be allowed, except in the Term time, and in the weeks wherein
the Terms shall begin and end.

Again in 41 Eliz. (20 Iunii) it was also ordered, Ib. f. 240. b.
that no Gentlemen of this House should come down to the Dresser, to change any
Mess, or take any Mess of meat from any of the third Table, or from any other
Officer. Comm^ns.
And that no Gentlemen should be served out of rank, of course: and that the
order for payment of their Commons, should be every fortnight openly published
in the Hall. So also 17 Oct. following, there was another order (...)
made, that no Gentleman of this House should go down to the Dresser, in Dinner
or Supper time, to fetch or change any Mess of meat; or to take any meat from
any Gentleman or Officer, but be orderly served at their several places, upon
pain to forfeit five shillings for every such offense, presently the same week
to be cast into Commons.

And the next year following ( viz. 11 Febr. 42 Eliz.) that (...)
all the Gentlemen of this Society, who did lie in the House, by the space of
six days in any one month, and not in Commons, should be put out of the House,
and lose their Chambers, except a reasonable cause were showed, and the same
cause allowed in Pension. Also in 43 Eliz. (21 Nov.) that (...)
no Fellow of this House, then in Commons, or that thenceforth should be in
Commons, should go out of Commons until he had paid unto the Steward of the
House, for the time being, all which he should then owe him for Commons, or
other duties, upon pain of forfeiture of xiiis. iiiid. for every such default;
according to an ancient order made in King Edward the 6ths. time: and that the
Steward should give information of such as should offend therein.

In 6 Iac. (24 Nov.) it was ordered, (...)
that every Gentleman of this Society, lodging in the House in any Term, should
be cast into Commons a week in the Term, and pay all duties to the House; or
else his Chambers to be seized: and in case he have no Chamber, then the
Chamber wherein he ordinarily does lie. And in 8 Iac. (22 Iunii) that if any
Gentleman of this House should owe a fortnights Commons, and not pay, then to
be ipso facto out of Commons. Also, that (...)
if any Gentleman should go out of Commons, without paying his Commons, to
forfeit for every such offense xiiis. iiid. according to the ancient orders of
this House, and the Steward to see the order performed. And in 10. Iac. (17
Iunii) that Ib. f. 295. b.
Commons thenceforth should be certain; both in Term, and in Vacation; viz. at
six shillings in Term, and five shillings in Vacation, and no more. Likewise,
that all the Gentlemen of this House visi in villa, should come into Commons,
or be cast into Commons, both in Term and Vacation, according to the ancient
Rules of this House, and pay weekly half Commons, being cast in, though they be
not in Commons. Also that thenceforth the By-Roll should be abolished, and all
casting into Commons, Boltfayles, and other amerciaments put in the principal
Roll in Commons, as of ancient time had been used. And moreover, that all
Gentlemen of this Society, should pay their Commons at the fortnights end; or
else, upon complaint or presentment at the Accounts to be put out of Commons:
And if the Steward shall permit any to continue longer in Commons, it is to be
at his own peril, and not at the charge of the House. And likewise, that all
Gentlemen of this Society, having present interest in any Chambers, either
leased or other, within this House, should be in Commons, at the least eight
weeks in every year, and that in Term time; upon pain of forfeiture of his
estate in such Chambers. And also, that no Gentleman of this Society, should go
out of Commons without paying his Commons, upon penalty of a mark forfeiture
toties quoties, according to former order; which forfeiture to go to the
benefit of the House, and not of the Steward, or any other.

And the next year after, there was an Order Ib. f. 300. b.
made (14 Maii) that no Wine should be allowed to any in Vacation at the charge
of the House.

In 11. Iac. (14 Iunii) it was ordered, Ib. f. 301. a.
that whereas Banquets and Suppers were grown to an excessive charge, in
respect of and for Moots in the Term, and Vacation times, that thenceforth no
Suppers, Banquets, or charges should be made or pent, for, on in respect of
any; upon pain, that every man offending therein should forfeit five pounds.
And in 12 Iac. (26 Oct.) that Ib. f. 307. ^.
thenceforth neitheir in Term nor Vacation, there should be other Beer taken
in, then after the rate of six shillings the Barrel; and that in the Vacation
time no further allowance to be allowed, for and toward Commons, than fifty
three shillings four pence, and only in the long Vacation, and not else.

The next year ensuing ( viz. 13 Iac. 20 Maii) there was an order Ib. f. 311. ^.
made; that whereas the grand weeks are times of extraordinary charge, and
therefore fit to be born by the general number of Commoners; that thenceforth,
upon the grand weeks, there should be no half Commoners or Repasters admitted;
but every Gentleman, as well those that lodge in the Town, as they that lve in
the House, shall be cast into whole Commons; and yet nevertheless the former
orders of the House, for casting in at other items, to stand in force.

And in 17 Iac. (28 Apr.) it was ordered, Ib. f. 327. ^.
that no Gentleman of this Society, living out of Commons should have any Beer
sent him into his Chamber by the Butlers: Nor no Gentleman in Commons have his
Meat sent him to his Chamber, unless he were sick, or a Reader. And for that
the discontinuance of the third Table was thought to be inconvenient to this
Societies, it was ordered Ib. f. 332. b.
25 Oct. 18 Iac. that the same should again be put in use, and restored with
the ancient allowance. And about that time ( scil. 30 Oct. following) there was
an order Ib. f. 333. a.
made, that no Ancients of this Society, should have any Breakfasts out of the
Hall: As also that no Gentleman should come within the Buttery Bar, but
Ancients; and all other Gentlemen under the degree of Ancients, to take their
Boyer, or drinking, without, according to the ancient orders of this House.
Likewife, that no Gentlemen have their parts to their Chamber, but every man to
come into the Hall, unless in the time of his sickness, and that to be made
known to the Steward. Moreover, that the Gentlemen in the Hall, at Dinner and
Supper times, should be messed, as they sit in order, and no par^s to be
served, but at the end of a Table; whereas then, sometimes four fitting
together, every man would have a single part, and that to be a middle part,
contrary to the ancient Orders of this House: And that none be served with Meat
after Cheese has gone about the Hall; nor none to come down to fetch his Meat
at the Dresser, according to ancient Orders.

In 19 Iac. (30 Ian.) there was an Order Ib. f. 338. a.
made, that the three grand Weeks; Christmas, Allhallow week, and Chandlemass
week, should be cast up at ten shillings a week: and all the other grand Weeks,
as Shrovetide week, the Reading week, Easter week, Whitson week, and Midsummer
week to be all cast up as Term weeks: And, that in all these foresaid weeks, no
half Commons to be admitted, but all to be cast up whole Commoners by the
Auditor, who is to take the Accounts for any of those weeks.

And in 21 Iac. (6 Maii) it was ordered, Ib. f. 347. a.
that thenceforth the Commons should go at seven shillings six pence in Term,
and six shillings in Vacation: and that all the petty- grand weeks, viz.
Whitson week, Mid summer week, the Reading weeks, Shrovetide week, and Easter
should go as Term weeks. And forasmuch as the smallness of the number, that
then kept Commons, in comparison of times past, was an occasion that Commons
could not be kept at those rates, it was then farther ordered, Ibid.
that every week, as well in Vacation, as in Term time, those Gentlemen that
lived in Town, and not in Commons, should be cast into half-weeks Commons;
three parts of which castings in, to be for the advantage of the Steward, and
the fourth for the House. And that all the Fines, happening upon the default of
any Exercise of the House, should go wholly to the Steward, excepting the Fines
of the Pensioners, happening for default of appearance at the Readings (whether
Ancients or Barristers) to go wholly to the House. And in regard the Steward
had undertaken to keep Commons at that rate, win, or lose, at his own peril,
it was farther ordered, that one of those to be employed in the Buttry, should
be his man, to see to the taking in, and delivering out of the Bread and Beer,
and of keeping the Keys. So likewise one of them to be employed in the Kitchen,
to be his man, for seeing to all things taken in and delivered out; and the
Keys to be brought into his Chamber every night; and all superfluous hangers on
upon the Buttry and Kitchen to be avoided by the Steward, but not to make any
more Officers without the consent of that Table.

In the same year (27 Iunii) it was also ordered, Ib. f. 349. b.
that the Gentlemen of this House, whether they had House-Chambers or
Lease-Chambers, should be in Commons eight weeks in the year; and those to be
in the Term time; as also their Chambers to be seized for the use of the House,
according to the ancient Orders of this House. Nevertheless other Orders of the
House, for casting into Commons at other times, to stand in force
notwithstanding.

And in 3 Car. 1. (6. Febr.) it was farther ordered, Ib. f. 368. b.
that all those who were of the House, and in the Town, should be in Commons,
at the least once a week every Term, and pay Pensions twice a year, upon
penalty of their Chambers being seized; and those who have no Chambers to be
expelled the House. Likewise, that Ib. f. 369. a.
those under the Bar, and seen in the House, or in Town (though not in
Commons) to be put up by the Butlers, to moot in Vacation time, as it is the
usual course in Term.

Barristers.
FOr the better fitting of such, as should take upon them the degree of
Utter-Barrister in this House, there was an Order Ex Regist^o Hosp. Grayensis.
vol. 1^ 22. b.
made in 13 Eliz. (21 Iunii) that thenceforth none should be called to the
Bar, or eligible for an Utter-Barrister, before he had twice mooted in the
Hall, Baristers.
or as often in some Inn of Chancery: as also, who had argued or should argue
twice at the skreen in the Library, at times mootible. And after this Exercise
by him performed, and certificate thereupon made at the next pension, he should
thenceforth be eligible for Utter-Barrister, and not before; and his name
entered into the Register by the Steward. And the next year following (scil. 6
Maii 14 Eliz.) it was ordered, Ib. f. 24. b.
that all such Fellows of this House, as were called to the Bar at the Reading
then last past: and all others who thenceforth were to be called to the
Utter-Barr should keep three learned Vacations, next and immediately following
their said calling, as well to sit at the Reading, as otherwise to serve the
Houses of Chancery, during the Readings, upon penalty of xls. for their
default. As also (12 Iunii 14 Eliz.) that Ib. f. 25. 2.
those of this House, who had before that time been called to the Bar, or
should thereafter be called unto the Utter-Barr; and had done, or after should
do all such Exercises of Learning, as are appointed for an Utter-Barrister to
do, should bring Certificates thereof from them, before whom they were done and
performed, and the same deliver at the next Pension to be holden in this
Society after the time limited for the doing of those Ex^rcises.

Moreover in 21 Eliz. (1 Iulii.) it was ordered, Ib. f. 88. a.
that thenceforth there should at no election of Utter-Barristers be above two
chosen at one election. And in 22 Eliz. (15 Iunii) that Ib. f. 245. b.
none should come to any Bar at Westminster to Plead, nor set his name to any
Parle, unless he had been allowed an Utter-Barrister by the space of five years
before, and continued that time in Exercise of Learning; or Read in an Inn of
Chancery by the space of two years before, at the least, upon like penalty. So
also in 23 Eliz. (9 Febr.) it was ordered, Ib. f. 150. a.
that none should thenceforth be presented or elected for an Utter-Barrister,
except he had twice performed his Exercises in the Houses of Chancery two grand
Vacations. Likewise, upon the 23 of Nov. following, that Ib. 257. b.
none should be eligible, nor preferred to be an Utter-Barrister by any Reader
elected, but such as had before his nomination gone abroad to Mootes in two
grand Vacations; and the same to be certified at the said Pension wherein they
should be so preferred. And in 25 Eliz. (17 Iunii) it was farther ordered, Ib.
f. 174. b.
that no person of this Society, should be presented, or eligible to be an
Utter-Barrister, except he had mooted twice in several grand Vacations, and
twice at the least* in every Inn of Chancery: and that every of them so to be
eligible, be elected and chosen Utter-Barrister in his and their ancienty,
except there were just occasion to the contrary.

But in 30 Eliz. (19 Iunii) the election Ib. f. 193. b.
of Utter-Barristers in this House, was referred to the Reader for the time
being, so as he call not above four, and such not to be under six years
continuance, and known to be well affected in Religion, and users of Exercises
abroad at grand Mootes, two Vacations at the least before their Call; and
perform Exercises in the Library one whole year next before; who, nevertheless
were to be confirmed in Pension, or otherwise not to stand. And in 42 Eliz. (8
Iunii) it was ordered, Ib. f. 247. b.
that every Reader, who thenceforth at his Reading should call any to the Bar;
should, before, cause them to give security by Bond, with Sureties to the
Steward, for the paying of their Vacations and Commons.

And moreover in 4 Iac. (21 Maii) that Ib. f. 274. b.
all Readers, after that time, at their Readings, should before the calling of
any Gentleman to the Bar, peruse the Stewards Rolls, and the Pension Rolls,
whether the said Gentleman were there in arrearages, or not. And if such
Gentleman, so indebted to the Pensioner and Steward, or any other, did not
presently discharge the said Commons, Pensions, casting into Commons, Fines,
Amerciaments, and all other duties whatsoever; that then the Reader for the
time being, should not (before the full discharge of all the said duties) call
any Gentleman whatsoever, so indebted, to the Bar. And in 6 Iac. ( 3 Iunii) it
was farther ordered Ib. f. 23^. b.
that no Reader should thenceforth call above four Utter-Barristers at his
Reading, upon the penalty of xl^. a piece, to be paid to the use of the House,
and not to be admitted to the Readers Table till the said xl^. were paid. But
this number, being soon after thought too many, it was, the next year following
(scil. 12 Maii 7 Iac.) ordered, Ib. f. 234. b
that no Reader should after that time, call above two Utter Barristers at his
Reading, and either of them to be of seven years standing in this House, upon
pain of payment for every one of them so called, above that number, and under
that standing xl^. a piece, to the use of this House. And that the Reader shall
not be admit^ed to come to the Readers Table, nor to Pension, after his Reading
ended, before he shall pay xl^. for every Barrister above two, and under seven
years standing, so called. And those so called were by that order pronounced
and declared to be no Utter-Barristers, and to be ipso facto out of the House.

The like order Ib. f. 336. b.
24 Oct. 18 Iac. viz. that no Reader should call above two Barristers at his
Reading, and they to be of seven years standing in Commons at the least: and
moreover to have performed six grand Moots, and six Moots in the Library: And
that if the Reader should thence forth call any not so qualified, there should
be no confirmation of them at the Pension, to be lawfully called, and that they
should not be accounted, or reputed Barristers. And it was then also ordered,
that those Barristers, who were not assigned to Moot, should be presented by
the Butler to the Readers at the high Table in the Hall, on Thursday at Dinner,
weekly: who being allowed by the Readers, the Butler should warn them the same
day; and if any of them that were to be assigned, being in the House and out of
Commons, should refuse to perform the Moot, such persons to be warned to be
before the Readers on Friday then next following, at Dinner: And in case they
should not appear, or then refuse to take it upon them, then every such Refuser
to forfeit xxs. for his being out of Commons, and xx^. for his Moot-fayl: which
forfeiture to be charged upon them by the Auditors at the next Account, and
cast into Commons. And that there may be no fail in the Exercise, one or two
other then in Commons, as the case shall require, to be assigned.

And so careful have this Society been, for the strict observance of these
former Orders, that upon the 17th. of Nov. 4. Car 1. they again ordered, Ib. f.
373. ^.
that no man should be called to the Bar by Pension, or by any Reader, before
he had been of seven years standing, and had brought Certificate of their
performance of Exercise; saving only that the Reader might call his two
Surveyors at five years standing. And upon the 9th of Nov. the next year
following, farther ordered, Ib. f. 379. ^
that no Gentleman should be called to the Bar, unless he had been seven years
usually in Commons in this Society; or of two years continuance, usually in
Commons in an Inn of Chancery; and five years at least in usual Commons in
this House. As also, that no Gentleman should be called to the Bar, but at a
general Call by Pension: which general Call to be made at any Pension in the
Term. And that the first general Call should be made in the Term of Easter come
twelvemonth then next following; and from that time in every sixth Term at any
Pension as aforesaid, and not otherwise: and none to be called to the Bar, but
such as have performed six grand Moots in the Reading time, and fix Moots in
the Library.

Apparel.
IN 16 Eliz. (16 Iunii) there was an Order Ex Regist to hujus Hosp^^^ Vol. 3.
f. 41. ^.
made at a Pension then held, that every man of this Society, should frame and
reform himself for the manner of his Apparel, according to the Proclamation
then last set forth, and within the time therein limited; else not to be
accounted of this House. Apparel
And that none of this Society should wear any Gown, Doublet, Hose, or other
outward Garment, of any light color, upon penalty of expulsion. And within ten
days following, it was also ordered, Ib. f. 42. a.
that none should wear any white Doublet in the House after Michaelmass Term
ensuing.

In 27 Eliz. (15 Nov.) it was farther ordered, Ib. f. 186. b.
that whosoever, being a Fellow of this House, did thenceforth wear any Hat in
the Hall, at Dinner or Supper time, he should forfeit for every time of such
his offending iiis. iiiid. to be cast into Commons at the next Account, to the
use of the House, without any remission.

So also in 42 Eliz. (11 Febr.) that Ib. 245. a.
no Gentleman of this Society do dome into the Hall, to any Meal, with their
Hats, Boots or Spurrs; but with their Caps, decently and orderly, according to
the ancient orders of this House; upon pain, for every offense to forfeit iiis.
iiiid. and for the third offense expulsion. Likewise, that no Gentleman of this
Society do go into the City, or Suburbs, or to walk in the Fields, otherwise
than in his Gown, according to the ancient usage of the Gentlemen of the Inns
of Court, upon penalty of iiis. iiiid, for every offense; and for the third
expulsion, and loss of his Chamber.

In 7 Iac. (27 Nov.) there was an order Ib. f. 286. b.
made, that all the Gentlemen of this Society, except the Master of the
Requests, and the King's Solicitor, should thenceforth wear Caps in the Hall,
both in Term time and Vacation, except in the xii. days at Christmas, upon
penalty of xiid. for every default; and the Butlers to present such defaults:
Also, that no Gentleman of this Society should thenceforth come into the Hall
in Term time, or Vacation, in Boots, upon penalty of xiid. for each default;
and the Butlers to present such defaults. And in 8 Iac. (24 Oct). that Ib. f.
289. a.
if any Gentleman of this Society should come into the Common Hall of this
House, to Breakfast, Dinner, or Supper; or to hear any Exercise of Learning,
being Boored; that then he should be out of Commons ipso facto, and not to come
into Commons again until they had done their Conges.

Again in 2 Car. 1. here was a farther order Ib. f. 361. b.
made (14 Iunii) that every Gentleman of this Society, should conform himself
to wear a Cap in the Hall, at Dinner and Supper time, upon penalty of xiid. for
every default, according to the ancient orders of this House.

The Chapel.
AT a Pension held here 16 Maii 3 I. H. 8. consideration being had of the
King's command, that all the Images of Thomas Becket, sometime Archbishop of
Canterbury, in any windows, either of Churches of Chapells, should be
obliterated; it was ordered, Ex Registro hujus Hospieii f. 145. a
that Edward Hall then one of the Readers of this House, should take out a
certain window in the Chapel of this House, wherein the picture of the said
Archbishop was gloriously painted; and place another instead thereof, in memory
of our Lord praying in the Mount.

That in the Chapel of Portpole, there was a Chantry of one Chaplein, founded
in 8. Edw. 2. to celebrate Divine Service daily, for the Soul of John the son
of Reginald de Gray; and that certain lands were then granted to the Prior and
Covent of St. Bartholmews in Smithfield, and their Successors, for the
maintenance of the said Chaplein, I have already showed. Now, that this was not
only that very Chapel; but that the Service, in succeeding ages therein, was
performed for, and in the behalf of the Students, Gentlemen, and Fellows of
this Society, at the charges of the Prior and Covent of that House, is evident
from a Decree Ibid. f. 221. Recorda do Term. Hill. 4. Eliz. Rot. 239.
made in the Augmentation Court 10 Nov. 33. H. 8. which Decree farther
expresses, that the said Prior and Covent, and their Predecessors, were yearly
charged with the Pension of viil. 13s. 4d. for the Salary or stipend of the
said Chaplein: and, that the said said House of St. Bartholmew, being then
dissolved; this Society, in recompense thereof, should have of the King's
Highness, for the finding of the said Chaplein, during the Kings pleasure, the
sum of viil. 13s. iiiid. sterling, yearly to be paid, by the hands of the
Treasurer of the said Court of Augmentation, at the feasts of the Nativity of
St. John Baptist, and St. Michael th'arch-Angel, by even portions.

In 6 Edw. 6. (8 Nov.) in pursuance of the Act for Reformation, there was an
order Ib. f. 202. b.
made, The Cha^ell.
that the Pensioner and Steward of this House should make sale of certain
Utensils then being in the said Chapel, for the behoof of the Society; viz.
one Vestment with a Cross of red Velvet; a Holy Water stock of brass; two
Candlesticks; a little Bell of brass, a Vestment of silk, spect with gold; and
a pair of Organs. Which being accordingly sold, there then remained in the same
Chapel

A Chales. A Surpless. A Bible of the largest Volume. A Psalter. A Book of
Service. An Auter-Cloth. A Table. A Lanthorn of Glass. A Chist.
But in 1 Mariae, the Romish Religion being restored, there was a new Altar set
up, and Ornaments for the same provided; the Charges whereof were Ib. f. ^29. b.
as follows, viz.

s. d. For nine Else of Holland, for three Altar Clothes. 12 06. For seven Else
and a quarter of Lockram for an Albe. 07 03. For three quarters of an Ell, for
a Corporas. 00 03. For five pieces, for the Albe, and the Ephode. 01 08. Tape
for the Ephode and the Girdle. 00 02. Two Crewets. 01 08. For a Super-Altare.
01 08. For making of the Albe, Ephode, Towells, and Corporas. 01 02. For Ciiii.
foot of Oken board, for the Altar. 03 08. For six double quarters. 02 00. For
Nails. 00 05. For Carriage. 00 06. For making the Altar. 01 08. For a painted
Cloth, to hang before the Altar. 02 08. For bemming the Altar Clothes. 00 04.
For a Desk. 01 00.

In 11 Eliz. (13 Iunii) it was ordered, Exalio Regist oejusdem Hosp. ^. 1.
that a Pulpit be prepared in the Chapel; and that the partition in the said
Chapel should be removed, and Stalls made, according to the discretion of the
Dean of the Chapel.

Touching Religious Excercises therein, I also find these several Orders.

In 39 Eliz. (13 Iunii) that Ib. f. 230. b.
all of the House, in Commons, or lodging in the House, should receive the
Communion in every Term and Reading, when there be Commons, upon pain of being
put out of the House.

In 40 Eliz. (15 Nov.) that Ib. f. 239. ^.
a Reader of Divinity to the House, be elected at a Pension to be held the last
of January then next following: That he be a man unmarried, and having no
Ecclesiastical living, other than a Prebend, without cure of Souls, or
Readership in any other place; and that he should keep the same place during
his continuance unmarried, and not being preferred to any Ecclesiastical
living, or other Readership, and no longer: Also, that he be not farther
charged with Reading than twice in the week, except in the week wherein there
is a Communion.

In 42 Eliz. (11 Febr.) that Ib. f. 245. a.
all Gentlemen of this Society, should usually and orderly frequent the Chapel,
as well at Service as Sermons; and every Term yearly receive the Communion, if
they be in Common, or lie in the House, upon pain for every default in
receiving the Communion iiis. iiiid. and if not once every year, then to be
expulsed.

In 21 Iac. (30 Oct.) there was an Order, Ib. f. 350. a.
that all women should be barred from the Chapel, at Sermons; and all persons
Strangers, but such as were brought in by some of the Society: As also, that
all Gentlemen should go out of the Chapel bareheaded, in decent manner.

And in 5 Car. 1. (28 Apr.) that Ib. f. 381. a.
no women or Boys be suffered to come within any part of the Chapel at any
time: nor any Stranger, before the Bell has done ringing, except he brought in
by a Reader, or a Gentleman of the House.

Sports and Pastimes.
AT a Pension held here in Michaelmass Term 21 H. 8. there was an Order Ex
Registro hujus Hosp. f. 121. a.
made, that all the Fellows of this House, who should be present upon any
Saturday at Snpper, betwixt the Feasts of All Saints, and the Purification of
our Lady; or upon any other day, at Dinner, or Supper, when there are Revells,
should not depart out of the Hall, until the said Revells were ended, upon the
penalty of xiid.

In 4 Edw. 6. (17 Nov.) it was also ordered, Ib. f. 190. a.
that thenceforth there should be no Comedies, called Interludes, in this
House, out of Term times, but when the Feast of the Nativity of our Lord is
solemnly observed. And that when there shall be any such Comedies, then all the
Society at that time in Commons, to bear the charge of the Apparel.

And in 28. Eliz. (26 Nov.) that Ib. f. 187. a.
no Gentleman of this Society; nor any other by the appointment, choice, or
assent of any Gentleman of this House, should in time of Christmas, or any
other time take upon him, or use the name, place, or commandment of Lord, or
any such other like; or break open any Chamber; or disorderly molest or abuse
any Fellows, or Officer of this House, within the precinct of the same, upon
pain to be expulsed for the abuse or disorder against any such Fellow; and
being put out of Commons for abuse of any Officer.

In the 10th. of King James, the Gentlemen of this House were (together with
those of the other Innes of Court) Actors in that great Mask at White Hall at
the marriage of the King's eldest daughter unto Frederick Count Palatine of the
Rh^ne: the charge in Apparel for the Actors in which mask, was supported by the
Society, the Readers being each man assessed Ex alio Registro ejusdem Hosp. f.
298. a.
at iiii^. the Ancients, and such as at that time were to be called Ancients,
at iil. xs. a piece: the Barristers at iil. a man, and the Students at xxs. out
of which so much was to be taken as the Inner Temple did then allow.

Which being performed, there was an Order Ib. f. 301. ^. vide etiam f. 302. a.
and 303. a.
made 18 Maii then next following, that the Gentlemen who were Actors in that
Mask should bring in all their Masking Apparel, so provided at the charge of
the House.

In 14 Iac. (17 Oct.) it was ordered, Ib. f. 314. a.
that every Reader, ancient Barrister, and other Gentleman, that should be in
the Town, between that time, and the end of Hillary Term then next following;
or who then had any Chamber in the House, either of the House, or by Leaf, or
otherwise; should pay toward the Barryers, intended to be presented before his
Majesty; after these rates and proportions; viz. every Reader, or Ancient of
the Bench xls. every Ancient under the Bench xxxs. every Barrister xxs. and
every other Gentleman xiiis. iiiid.

And in 4 Car. 1 (17 Nov.) that Ib. f. 373. a.
all playing at Dice, Cards, or otherwise, in the Hall, Buttry, or Butler's
Chamber, should be thenceforth barred, and forbidden at all times of the year,
the xx days in Christmas only excepted.

In 23 Eliz. (30 Ian.) there was an Order Ex Registro ejusdem Hosp^^^ ^. 149. b.
made, that no Laundresses, Laundresses.
nor women called Victuallers, should thenceforth come into the Gentlemen's
Chambers of this Society, unless they were full forty years of age: and not
send their maidservants of what age soever, into the said Gentlemen's Chambers;
upon penalty, for the first offense, of him that should admit of any such, to
be put out of Commons; and for the second to be expelled the House.

And the next year following (viz. 5 Febr. 24 Eliz.) it was Ibid. f. 160. a.
ordered, that no Fellow of this House should thence forth lodge any Stranger,
Lodging of Strangers prohibited.
being no Fellow of this House, upon penalty of losing his Chamber.

So also in 27 Eliz. (15 Iunii) that, Ib. 185. b.
if any Fellow of this House, should lodge in this House, Lodging out of the
onse, the penalty.
by the space of six days in any one month, and not be in Commons, he should
be put out of the House, and lose his Chamber, except there were reasonable
cause, and the same to be allowed by the Readers in Pension.

In 29 Eliz. (6. Febr.) there was a charitable order made Ib. f. 18^. b. Relief
of the Poor.
for the better relief of the poor in Greys-Inne lane; Sports and Pastimes.
viz. that the third Butler should be at the carrying forth from the Buttry,
and also at the distribution of the Alms, thrice by the week at Greys-Inne
Gate; to see that due consideration be had to the poorer sort of aged and
impotent persons, according as in former times he had used to do. And whereas
the Pannyer man and under Cook did challenge to have a Corrody of the broken
Bread; it was likewise ordered, that for those days that the said Alms was
given, they should have each of them a cast of Bread; scil. three loaves a
piece, in lieu thereof; to the end the whole broken bread, and the Almes-Basket
might go to the relief of the poor.

And in 41 Eliz. (20 Iunii) it was ordered, Ib. f. ^40. b.
that thenceforth no Officers of this House, Officers of the House.
should keep or enjoy his office any longer than they should keep themselves
sole, and unmarried; excepting the Steward, the Chief Butler, and the Chief
Cook.

The Ancient Standing Orders and Constitutions of the said Society. Touching
Admittances Readmittances Into the Society.
The Copy of a Table: ba^gin: up in the Hall at Gr Y^ June ^s. 1664.

THat every Gentleman admitted into the Fellowship of this Society, enter Bond
with two Sureties before he come in Commons, to pay and discharge Commons and
Duties.

That every Gentleman so admitted, pay his Admittance money, and present
himself at a Pension before he come unto Commons, or at the next Pension after
he is come into Commons; and the Steward is to take care thereof accordingly.

That none but Readers Sons be admitted into the Fellowship of this Society
Absque Fine, unless it be by Pension Order.

The ordinary Fine for Admittance of every new Member not coming from an Innes
of Chancery, is four pounds.

The ordinary Fine for Admittance of every new Member coming from an Inns of
Chancery, is two pounds thirteen shillings four pence.

That if any Fellow of the Society be expelled, he is not to be Readmitted but
by Pension Order, and to pay forty shillings for his Readmittance.

Commons. And therein touching Coming into Commons. Going out of Commons.
Casting into Commons. Casting out of Commons. Payment for Commons. Serving up
of Commons.

(...) for Government.

THat all the Fellows of the Society being in Town keep Commons at least eight
weeks every year in Term time, viz. a fortnight in every Term, or be cast in
Commons.

That every Fellow of the Society having a Chamber in the House, be in Commons
once in every year, or forfeit his Chamber.

That every Fellow of the Society pay for his Commons every fortnight.

That every Fellow of the Society coming in, or going out of Commons, or taking
Repast, give or send notice to the Steward thereof, or be continued in Commons.

That no Fellow of the Society be admitted half Commons, or Repaster in Grand
weeks, but be put in whole Commons.

That no Fellow of the Society take above two Repasts in a week, and pay ten
pence for Dinner, and eight pence for Supper.

That every Fellow of the Society discharge all Commons and Duties before he go
out of Commons, or be continued in Commons.

That the cross Table be served next after the first Mess at the bar; and that
afterward no Messes be served out of course.

That when any Fellow of the Society is cast out of Commons, he is not to take
Commons in the Hall, till he has redeemed his offense: and yet he is to pay
for his Commons in the mean time.

That no Commons be served to Chambers, or elsewhere out of the Hall, except to
Readers.

That no particular parts be served, but at the lower ends of the Tables.

That none be served in the Hall after Cheese is gone about.

That no Fellow of the Society under the Decree of an Ancient, go within the
Buttery Hatch to drink or wash before meals.

That no Fellow of the Society take any meat from any Officer, or go down to
the Kitchen to fetch up his own meat.

That if any Fellow of the Society being out of Commons, send for beer or bread
into the Buttery, he is to be cast into half Commons.

That no Fellow of the Society under Degree of a Barrister, sit at the Bar
Table in Term time.

That no stranger be suffered to stand in the Skreen in Meal-times.

Chapel. And therein touching Attendance there. Communion there. Preachers
Allowance. Seats and sitting there.


THat every Fellow of the Society receive the Communion in the Chapel every
Term, or be Amerst, and if he fail above three Terms together, he is to be put
out of the House.

That none but Readers and their Assistants sit in the Readers seats upon pain
of Amerciament.

That none but Ancients sit in the two uppermost seats on each side in the body
of the Chapel; nor any but Barristers in the three feats on each side next.

That no Women or Boys be suffered to come within the Chapel.

That no stranger be admitted to come into the Chapel before the Bell cease,
unless he be brought in by a Fellow of the Society.

That every Reader pay termly three shillings four pence; every Ancient two
shillings; every Barrister one shilling eight pence; every Gentleman under the
Bar, one shilling four pence for the Preachers allowance; or in default, be
put out of Commons.

That he who comes in Commons in the Vacation, be liable to pay the
forementioned Duties of the Term before, in case he were not then in Commons.

Teaching
Exercises, viz. Readings in the Mootes in the House. Inns of Chancery. Hall.
Library.

Degrees, Bolts. Cases assigned. Readers. Ancients. Barristers.


THat Readers in Term sit at Mootes in the Hall in course, Ancient and Puisue
together.

That if the Reader elect, after he has taken his Place, fail by himself, or
some other for him, to sit at Mootes in the Library before the Reading, and in
the Hall in Reading, time, he is to be Amerst ten shillings for every fail.

That every Ancient called to be an Assistant to the Bench, attend each Reading
from his call, till he read, or be Amerst ten pounds for every fail.

That if any Vaca^ioner fail to continue a week at least in every Reading, his
appearance is not to be Recorded.

That if any Ancient be called to be an Assistant Reader, and shall refuse, he
is to be Amerst at the discretion of the Bench.

That no Reader in Inns of Chancery Read by Deputy, except the person deputed
be allowed by the Bench the Term before.

That Readers in Inns of Chancery hold their Readings so long as the Readings
in this House holds.

That the Readers in Inns of Chancery keep the Moots in Reading time, and at
the days appointed in Term time twice a week, or be Amerst ten shillings for
every fail of a petty Moot* and twenty shillings for every fail of a grand Moot.

That if any Ancient be called an Assistant to the Bench, and accept his
Reading; and after refuse to Read, he is to be put out of the House, and never
to be readmitted.

That every Fellow of the Society called to be a Barister, or Ancient,
respectively pay all former duties, and give new Bonds before he be fully
admitted.

That no Barister be called to his Degree by solicitation of Letters, or
otherwise, before he be eight years standing, and have performed all his
Exercises, viz. six grand Moots abroad, and six petty Moots in the Library, and
put six bolt Cases, and paid all his duties.

That every Barister do attend five Readings next after his Call, and is to
continue five weeks in Commons from the beginning of every such Reading, or be
Amerst three pounds; and he is to perform Exercises in his Course, or be
Amersed six shillings eight pence every grand Moot fail, and three shillings
four pence every petty Moot fail.

That if any Barister fail to sit at Moots in the Library according to his
antiquity, he is to be Amerst ten shillings.

That every Fellow of the Society, Barister, or under the Bar respectively,
being in Town, though out of Commons, be put up to Moot in the Hall and Library
respectively, according to their Antiquity, and in Course.

The Case is to be Assigned upon the first Monday in every Term; but if the
Term begin upon Tuesday, then upon the first Wednesday; and after upon every
Monday in Term, unless Tuesday be either Fasting day, Case Assigned.
or Holy day, and then upon Wednesday.

The Student under Bar who last took the Book, is to Assign the Case, or be
Amerst.

If the Book be not taken upon the third time Reading the Case, all the
Students under Bar are to be Amerst twelve pence a piece.

He who takes the Book is to repeat the Pleadings for the Puisne the next Moat,
or be Amerst.

When the Book is taken, if one Cross Table Ancient, and two Utter-Baristers,
or three Utter Baristers do not stand and argue the Case, they are all to be
Amerst three shillings four pence a piece.

This Exercise is to be performed on Wednesday nights, Bolt Case.
and also upon those other Exercise nights, when the Exercises proper for the
night hold not.

If one Cross Table Ancient, and two Utter-Baristers, or three Utter-Baristers,
do not sit and tender themselves to argue the Bolt Case, they are all to be
Amerst three shillings four pence a piece.

If three Bolt Cases be not put by three Students under Bar, they are all to
be Amerst twelve pence a piece.

Those who argue the Bolt Case, or Case Assigned respectively, are afterward
excused from that Exercise wherein they argued that Term.

He who puts the Bolt Case, which is argued, or Assigns the Case, or takes the
Book respectively, is afterward excused from those Exercises so performed that
Term.

Those who tender themselves to argue, or who put the Bolt Case, are excused
from the fail of that time, in case any fail than happen for want of full
number.

If one Cross Table Ancient sit and tender himself to argue the Case Assigned,
or Bolt Case respectively, he excuses the rest of his Table from that fail, in
case any fail then happen for want of full number: So if two Utter-Baristers
sit and tender themselves to argue, they excuse the rest of their Table for
that time.

This Exercise is to be performed upon Tuesdays and Thursdays.

It is be a whole week; the first pleading

To the Jurisdiction.

The second to the Person.

The third to the Count.

The fourth to the Writ.

The fifth to the Action.

If it be a broken week; the Action is to be a Replevin, or other Personal
Action.

The Pleadings are to be repeated memoriter, both within Bar and without; or
the Exercise is not to be allowed.

The Amerciament for fail of this Exercise, is forty shillings upon the
Utter-Barister, to be forthwith Recorded by the Judges who sit; and if it be
performed by Deputy, the Amerciament is twenty shillings to be also then
recorded.

The Exercises in Reading times, are in the same manner as in Term times.

Students under Bar being above three years standing in Commons, Library Moots
are to perform this Exercise in person in Course; but if it shall come to any
of their turns, before they be three years standing, such Student may tender a
Cap and a penny, the day before in the Hall, to the Ancient Mootman in Commons;
desiring him to be of his Council to perform it for him: and such Mootman
thereupon, is to undertake and perform the Exercise, or be Amerst the Glyents
Amerciament.

The Pleadings are to be read by the two young Gentlemen who sit: and are to be
repeated memoriter by him who brings in the Case, or the Moot not to be allowed.

Mootmen are to repeat Pleadings in the Hall, if they be required a convenient
time before; or be Amerst.

The Amerciament for the young Gentlemen's fail of a Library Moot, is six
shillings and eight pence; and for the Baristers fail, ten shillings.

The Chief Butler is to present, at the casting up the Accounts of Commons, all
the fails in Bolts, and Cases Assigned, and Library Moots, watch have happened
that week: and the Auditors are to record them, and to impose the Amerciaments.

Repasters are lyble to Exercises and Common fails of that day.

Utter-Baristers, and others in Town, are liable to their particular Exercises,
though out of Commons.

That a Surveyor of the Moots be yearly chosen by the Bench, to appoint the
Mootmen for the Inns of Chancery, and to keep Account of performance of
Exercises, both there, and in the House.

That if any Fellow of the Society keeping his Moots, to make Banquets or
Feasts in relation thereto, he is to be Amerst five pounds.

Pensions personal. Pension Writs.

THat every Fellow of the Society, pay his personal Pensions twice a year.

That no Officer compound for personal Pensions, but by authority from the
Pension Council.

That when a Pension Writ is once Issued; none Sued thereby by discharged or
continued in Commons, till all duties be paid.

Chambers. And therein touching Grants of Chambers. Licenses of Alienation.
Payments of Fines and Rents for Chambers. Seisures, and causes of Seisures of
Chambers.


THat none but F^llows of the Society hold any Chambers in the House; and
Chambers held by others are to be seized.

That before any Grant be made of any Chamber, all former duties to the House,
due by the last Owner, be discharged.

That no Fellow of the Society Assign his Chamber without License from the
Pension; and those Chambers which are otherwise assigned, or otherwise held
then by Pension Order, to the Tenant in possession, are to be Seized.

That upon every Grant of a Chambers, a valuable (...) paid, and three
shillings four pence Rent per Annum, at least, reserved to the House.

That no Grant of any Chamber be made before Survey of two Readers.

That no Fellow of the Society suffer any Stranger to lodge in his Chamber,
upon pain of forfeiting his Chamber.

That every owner of a Chamber discharge the Rent thereof every half year, or
forfeit his Chamber.

That to Chamber be Granted for years, but for lives only.

That every Chamber be Seized when the Term is expired, and be Surveyed and
Arrented again.

That every Chamber in the Society, and Goods therein, be liable by Seizure for
the Owners duties to the House.

Touching Civilities. Behavior. Misbehaviour. Contempts. Punishments.
Searches. Nusances.


THat Civility, and due respect be used by every Fellow of the Society to the
Readers and Ancients, and others his seniors, upon pain of Amerciament.

That such Fellows of the Society as come to Commons in the Hall, or to
Exercises, or to Pension, come in their Gowns, or be Amerst.

That no Fellow of the Society pass up or down the Hall, or from place to place
there, with his Hat on his head, when the Society is met at Meals or Exercises,
or other public Occasions.

That no Fellow of the Society stand with his back to the fire.

That no Fellow of the Society make any rude noise in the Hall at Exercises, or
at Meal times.

That no Fellow of the Society, under the Degree of an Ancient, keep on his Hat
at Readings or Moots, or Cases Assigned.

That it any Fellow of the Society, being summoned to attend the Pension, to
answer to any matter laid to his charge, and shall wilfully refuse to come, he
is to be Amerst for his first offense, and for the second offense, expelled.

That in all cases of wilful Contempts by any Fellow of the Society, against
the Orders of the House; and of opposition to Execution of the Penalties, the
Punishments are

As the Case shall require Amerciament. Skreening his name. Coming in with
Congees. Loss of Chamber. Prosecution by Pension Writ. Prosecution by Warrant
from the Judges. Suit upon his hand. Expulsion.


THat if any Landress, or other Servant empty any Stools; or cast any Ashes,
Filth, or Dirt, in any of the Courts; or empty Chamber-pots out of Windows; the
Master is to be Amerst for such offense.

That Search be made every Term for lewd and dangerous persons; that no such be
suffered to Lodge in the House.

Upon perusal of the Registers of this House by Mr. Osbaldeslon, Mr. Clopton,
and Mr. Whistler, those Orders were thus reduced by them into this Tablet, as
appears Regist-Hosp. Grayensis. vol. 2. f. 375. b.
by an Order made in Pension, 6 Maii, Anno 1629.

Catalogus Lectorum in Hospicio Grayensi. Lectores.

Ex (...) f. 32. a. An. 5 Hen. 8. Quadr. Johannes Spelman [postea unus Justice.
ad Plac. coram Rege.] f. 33. a. An. 6 Hen. 8. Autum. Johannes Halys [postea
unus Baronum de Scacc. f. 33. b. Quadr. Ricardus Hesketh. f. 36. b. An. 7 Hen.
8. Autum. Willielmus Marten. (...) Quadr. Heenricus Tyngelden. f. 39. a. An 8
Hen. 8. Autum. Petrus Dillon. f. 40. b. Quadr. Humfridus Wingfeld. (...) An. 9
Hen. 8. Autum. Johannes Petyte electus; fed nulla lectura causa pestilentiae.
f. 46. a. Quadr. Johannes Petyte [postea unus Baronum de Scacc.] f. 49. a. An.
10 H. 8. Autum. Johannes Hynde [postea unus Justice. de Com. Banc.] f. 49. b.
Quadr. Johannes Spelman duplex Lector. f. 61. a. An. 11 H. 8. Autum. Georgius
Harbroune. f. 62. b. Quadr. Ioh. Halys duplex Lector. f. 65. a. An. 12 H. 8.
Autum. Franciscus Brown. f. 68. a. Quadr. Willielmus Marten (^uplex Lector)
electus; sed Ioh. Spelman, tune ad gradum Serve. ad Legem vocatus, suavice
legebat. f. 70. a. f. 71. a. An. 13 H. 8. Autum. Robertus Chaloner electus;
nulla vero lectura, pestilentiae causa. f. 73. a. Quadr. Robertus Chaloner. f.
75. a. An. 14 H. 8. Autum. Rogerus York electus. Non legebat causa
aegritudinis. f. 78. a. f. 78. a. Quadr. Rogerus York. f. 80. b. An. 15 H. 8.
Autum. Edwardus Beresford. f. 83. b. Quadr. Humfridus Collys. f. 87. b. An. 16
H. 8. Autum. Christoph. Hales [postea Attorn. Regis generalis; doinde Magister
Rotulotum.] f. 88. b. Quadr. Thomas Herlakynden. f. 90. a. An. 17 H. 8. Autum.
Edwardus White. f. 92. b. Quadr. Ioh. Petyte duplex Lector, f. 92. b. An. 18 H.
8. Autum. Georgius Whetenhale f. 93. b. Quadr. Ioh. Hynde duplex Lector. f. 96.
b. An. 19 H. 8. Autum. Rob. Wroth electus (Attornatus generalis Ducatus Lanc.)
non legebat. f. 99. b. Quadr Franciscus Brown duplex Lector. f. 102. b. An. 20
H. 8. Autum Willielmus Gray. f. 105. a. Quadr Ricardus Sackvile [postea Cancel.
Curiae Augmentac. and Subthesaur. Scacc.] f. 107. a. An. 21 H. 8. Autum.
Willielmus Walsyngham. f. 109. a. Quadr. Walterus Henley f. 113. a. An. 22 H.
8. Autum. Johannes Colepeper. f. 118. a. Quadr. Rogerus York duplex Lector, eo
quod electus est ad gradum Serve. ad Legem. f. 117. b. f. 119. a. An. 23 H. 8.
Autum. Fohannes Hind clectus, co quod ad Statum Serve. ad Legem ascitus est. f.
117. b. f. 121. a. Quadr. Edmundus Molineux [postea unus Justice. de Banco. f.
124. a. An. 24 H. 8. Autum Iacohus Hales [postea unus Justice. de Banco.] f.
127. a. Quadr. Thomas Moyle. f. 132. a. An. 25 H. 8. Autum. Edwardus Halle. f.
135. a. b. Quadr. Anthonius Missenden. f. 138. a. An. 26 H. 8. Autum. Will.
Relverton. f. 138. a. Quadr. Walt. Henley duplex Lector. f. 138. b. An. 27 H.
8. Autum. Johannes Boyse electus; non legebar f. 117. b. f. 139. b. Quadr.
Edmundus Molineuse duplex Lector. An. 28 H. 8. Autum. Johannes Boyse. f. 142.
b. Quadr. Iacobus Hales duplex Lector f. 143. b. An. 29 H. 8. Autum Fobannes
Soutbwell electus, non legebat. f. 117. b. Quadr. Ioh. Southwell. f. 117. b. f.
143. b. An. 30 H. 8. Autum. Nicholaus Townley. f. 146. a. Quadr. Tho Moyle
duplex Lector, (fuit prolocutor Parliam. An. 33 H. 8.) f. 146. a. An. 31 H. 8.
Autum. Anthonius Missenden (duplex Lector) eo quod ad gradum Serve. ad Legem
electus est. f, 117. b. f. 146. a. Quadr. Iacobus Hales, eo quod ad statum Sc
gradum Serve. ad Legem electus est. f. 117. b. f. 142. b. and 147. a. An. 32 H.
8. Autum. Leonardus Backwith. f. 149. b. Quadr. Edw. Hall duplex Lector. f.
154. b. An. 33 H. 8. Autum. Edwardus Gray; exoneratus autem ad petitionem suam.
f. 156. a. f. 156. b. Quadr. Will. Yelverton electus; and in summa XX libr.
multatus eo quod non legebat. f. 160. a. Ioh. Gosuld. f. 160. a. f. 162. b. An.
34 H. 8. Autum. Johannes Boys Attornatus Regis pro Ducaru Lanc. Nulla lectura
causa pestilentiae. f. 162. b. Quadr. Edmundus Gray. f. 163. b. An. 35 H 8.
Autum. Edmundus Michell electus; exoneratus autem ad petitionem suam. f. 163.
b. Quadr. Willielmus Coke electus; sed nulla lectura causa pestilentiae. f.
165. a. f. 166. a. An. 36 H. 8. Autum. Will. Stamford electus; sed nulla
lectura causa pestilentiae. f. 166. a. f. 167. a. Quadr. Will. Stamford [portea
urius nus Justice. de Com. Banco.] f. 167. a. An. 37 H. 8. Autum Georgius Brown
electus; causa pestilentiae vero exoneratus. f. 168. a. Quadr Franciscus Noone.
f. 171. b. An. 38 H. 8. Autum Will. Coke duplex Lector, eo quod ad statum and
gradum Serve. ad Legem erigitur. [postea unns Justice. de Banco.] f. 172. b. An.
1 Edw. 6. Quadr Georgius Brown. f. 173. b. Autum Osmundus Gay. f. 175. a. An.
2 Edw. 6. Quadr Nicholaus Powtrell non legebat. f. 175. b. Autum Will. Dalison
[postea unus Justice. ad Plac. coram Rege.] f. 176. a. An. 3 Edw. 6. Quadr
Johannes Walpole. f. 184. a. Autum Henricus Ward. f. 184. a. An. 4 Edw. 6.
Quadr Johannes Gosnold duplex Lector. f. 188. a. Autum. Thomas Stanley (obiit
tempore Lectionis.) f. 189. a. An. 5 Edw. 6. Quadr. Will. Stamford duplex
Lector. f. 195. b. Autum. Johannes Byrche electus; sed nulla lectura. f. 196.
a. An. 6 Edw. 6. Quadr. Johannes Birche [postea unus Baronum de Scacc. f. 199.
a. Autum. Willielmus Dalison duplex Lector. f. 203. b. An. 7 Edw. 6. Quadr.
Osmundus Gay duplex Lector. f. 205. b. An. 1 Mariae. Autum. Gilbertus Gerard
[postea Eques auratus and Magister Rotulorum.] f. 206. a. Quadr. Franciscus
Noone non legeber. f. 207. b. An. 1 and 2. Ph and M. Autum. Idem Franciscus
Noone. f. 210. b. Quadr. Anthonius Thorold. f. 117. b. An. 2 and 3. Ph. and M.
Autum. Johannes Walpole duplex Lector. f. 214. b. Quadr. Thomas Seckford
[postea unus Magistrorum Supplic. Libellorum Elizabethae Regineae.] f. 215. b.
An. 3 and 4. Ph. and M. Autum. Johannes Rumsey. f. 218. a. Quadr. Franciscus
Noone duplex Lector. f. 219. b. An. 4 and 5. Pb and M. Autum. Ricardus Forset.
f. 241. b. Quadr. Laurentius Meres. f. 242. a. An. 5 and 6. Ph and M. Autum.
Ioh. Birche electus, defaltum vero fecit ratione aegritudiuis. Nicholaus Barram
legebat. f. 242. a. f. 242. a. Anno 1 Eliz Quadr. Radulphus Bartyon. f. 242. b.
Autum. Edwardus Halsall. f. (...). a. Anno. 2 E^iz. Quadr. Johannes Birche
duplex Lector. f. 243. b. Autum. Will. Gerrard electus; sed non legebat causa
aegritudinis. f. 243. b. and 244. a. Anno 3 Eliz. Quadr. Rob. Noell electus,
non legebat: super quo Johannes Ieffreys electus est. f. 244. b. Autum. Rob.
Noell (postea Attorn. generalis Curiae Wardorum and Liberationum.) f (...) a.
Anno 4 Eliz. Quadr. Will. Lovelace. f. 245. b. and 246. a. Autum. Johannes
Kitchen. f. 246. b. Anno 7 Eliz. Quadr. Robertus Alcock. f. 247. a. Autum.
Ricardus Chisnall. f. 247. a. Anno 8 Eliz. Quadr. Franciscus Roodes [postea
unus Justice. de Banco.] f. 247. b. Autum. Thomas Colby. f. 250. b. Anno 9 Eliz.
Quadr. Will. Lovelace. f. 251. b. Autum. Robertus Shirborne. f. 256. b. Anno 10
E. Quadr. Robertus Shute [postea unus Justice. ad Plac. coram Reg.] f. 257. b.
Autum. Radulphus Barton duplex Lector. Ex Registro de Grays (...). vol. a.
f. 1. a. An. 11 Eliz Quadr. Ricardus Payton. Autum. Nulla lectura. f. 6. b.
An. 12 Eliz. Quadr. Thomas Kirle; non legeba^ causa pestilentiae. f. 7. a.
Autum. Will. H^lsall electus^ exonerarus pro fine (...) iiiid. f. 7. a. An. 13
Eliz. Quadr.... Kirle. f. 22. a. Autum. Will. Allington. f. 23. a. An. 14 Eliz
Quadr. Johannes Kitch^^ duplex Lector. f. 24. b. Autum. Ricardus Aunger. f. 26.
b. An. 15 Eliz. Quadr. Rob. Alcock duplex Lector. f. 35. b. Autum. Will^
Whiskins. f. 37. a. An. 16 Eliz. Quadr. Christoph. Yelverton [postea unus
Justice. ad Plac. coram Reg.] f. 38. a. Autum. Thomas Snagge. f. 43. a. An. 17
Eliz. Quadr. Will. Cardinal. f. 52. b. Autum. Will. Burnham. non legebat, ideo
multatus. f. 49. b. An. 18 Eliz. Quadr. Franciscus Rodes duplex Lector. f. 55.
b. Autum. Johannes Brograve (postea eques aur. and Attorn. Reginae pro ducatu
Lan^.) f. 57. b. An. 19 E^iz. Quadr. Tho. Calby duplex Lector. f. 57. b. Autum.
Rob. Shute duplex Lector, electus, quia ad gradum Serve. ad Legem vocabatur. f.
78. a. An. 20 (...). Quadr. Ricardus Kempe. f. 80. b. Autum. Humfridus Purefey.
f. 83. a. An. 21 Eliz. Quadr. Ric. Aunger duplex Lector. f. 86. b. Autum. Will.
Daniell. f. 92. b. An. 22 Eliz. Quadr. Will. Whiskins duplex Lector. f. 145. b.
Autum. Tho. Snagg duplex Lector, eo quod ad gradum Serve. ad Legem fuit electus.
f. 147. b. An. 23 Eliz. Quadr. Michaell Lewis. f. 156. a. Autum. Gilb.
Sherington. f. 175. b. An 24 Eliz. Quadr. Petrus Pheasant, Attorna tus Reginae
in Partibus B^realibus. f. 160. b. Autum. Laurenting Blundeston, de Consilio
Reg. in parribus Boraelibus. f. 166. b. An. 25 Eliz. Quadr. Christoph.
Yelverton electus. (Nulla vero lectura, cause pestilentiae.) f. 166. b. Autum.
Ric. Shuttleworth (postea Serviens Dom. Reg. ad Legem, and Iusticiarius
Cestriae.) f. 176. b. An. 26 Eliz Quadr. Christoph. Yelverton duplex Lector. f.
179. a. Autum. Johannes Penruddok. f. 181. a. An 27 Eliz. Quadr. Johannes
Spurling. f. 185. b. Autum. Johannes Hales. f. 186. a. An. 28 Eliz Quadr. Will.
Cardinal. f. 188. a. Autum. Thomas Broxholme. f. 189. a. An. 29 Eliz. Quadr.
Edmundus Pooley. f. 190. b. Autum. Nicholaus Fuller. f. 191. b. An 30 Eliz.
Quadr. Franciscus Racon [postea summus Angliae Cancellarius.] f. 192. b. Autum.
Edmundus Pelham. f. 195. a. An. 31 Eliz. Quadr. Anthonius St. Ledger. f. 196. a.
Autum. Johannes Lancaster. f. 198. a. An. 32 Eliz. Quadr. Ricardus Kempe non
legebat. f. 197. b. Thomas Wade. f. 199. b. Autum. Ieronimus Betenham. f. 200.
b. An. 33 Eliz. Quadr. Johannes Lany f. 202. b. Autum. Johannes Ellis. f. 205.
a. An. 34 Eliz. Quadr. Galfridus Nightingale. f. 206. a. Autum. Car. Hales
(postea eques aur. and de Consilio Reg. in partibus Borealibus.) f. 208. a. An
35 Eliz. Quadr. Ioh. Penruddok duplex Lector. Autum. Nulla lectura,
pestilentiae causa. f. 211. a. An. 36 Eliz. Quadr. Ioh. Spurling, eo quod
Serviens ad Legem electus est (duplex Lector.) f. 213. a. Autum. Nicholaus
Potts. f. 215. a. An 37 Eliz. Quadr. Ricardus Barker. ^. 216. a. Autum.
Cuthbertus Pepper (postea equae aur. and Attorn. Reg. in Cutia Wardorum and
Liberarionum; denied de Consilio Reg. in partibus Borealibus.) f. 217. b. An.
38 Eliz. Quadr. Thomas Hesketh (postea eques au. and Attorn. Reg. in Curia
Wardorum and Liberationum; necnon de Consilio Reg. in partinus Borealibus.) f.
222. a. Autum. Franciscus Brakin. f. 225. a. An. 39 Eliz. Quadr. Will. Gerard.
f. 229. a. Autum. Georgius Cowfeild. f. 231. b. An. 40 Eliz. Quadr. Rogerus
Wilbraham (postea equrs aur. and unus Magistrorum Curiae Supplic. Libellorum)
f. 233. b. Autum. Will. Ellis (postea eques aur. and de Cons^ilio Reg. in
partibus Borealibus.) f. 236. b. An. 41 Eliz. Quadr. Clemens Goldsmith. f. 239.
b. Autum. Sam. Bevercotes de Consilio Reg. in partibus Borealibus. f. 242. b.
and 243. a. An. 42 Eliz. Quadr. Franciscus Bacon duplex Lector. f. 246. b.
Autum. Iacobus Altham (postea eques aur. and Baro Scacc.) f. 249. a. An. 43
Eliz. Quadr. Edmundus Pelham duplex Lector (postea eques aur. and deinde
Capitalis Baro Scace. in Hibernia.) f. 252. a. Autum. Geor. Chaworth (de
Consilio Reg. in partibus Borealibus.) f. 254. a. An. 44 Eliz. Quadr. Rob.
Sheffeild. f. 254. a. f. 256. a. Autum. Franciscus Aunger (postea eques aur.
and Magister Rotulorum in Hibernia.) f. 258. b. An. 45 Eliz. Quadr. Iacobus
Altham duplex Lector, eo quod ad gradum Serve. ad Legem electus est. (postea
eques aur. and Baro Scacc.) (...) Anno (...) Autum. Nulla lectura, causa
pestilentiae. Quadr. (...) Anno 2 Iac. Autum Henricus Fincbe. (...) Quadr. Rob.
Hitcham, eques aur. and Attorn. demini Regis. (...) Anno 3 Iac Autum. Elias
Brantingham. (...) Quadr. Thomas Tildesley (postea eques aur. and de Consiliis
Regiis in partibus borealibus. (...) Ann^ 4 (...) Autum. Thomas Hughes (postea
eques aur.) (...) Quadr. Henr. Yelverton (postea Attornatus generalis domini
Regis, and deinde unus Justice de Banco.) (...) Anno 5 Iac. Autum Tho.
Chamberlain (postea eques aur. and Justice. Cestriae; deinde unus Justice. ad
Plac. coram Rege tenenda assignatus.) (...) Quadr Thomas Athowe. (...) Anno 6
Iac Autum The Ireland (postea eques aur. and Vicecamerarius Comitatus Palate.
Cestriae.) (...) Quadr Henricus Fleetwood. (...) Anno 7 Iac. Autum. Lancelotus
Lovelance. f. 285. a. Quadr Henricus Topham. f. 288. b. Anno 8 Iac. Autum.
Edwardus Rolt. f. ^00. a. Quadr. Franciscus Evre eques aur. (...) Anno 9 Iac.
Autum. Philippus Gerard. (...) Quadr. Thomas Crew [postea unus Serve. Regis ad
Legem.] (...) An. 10 Iac. Autum. Ricardus Amberst. (...) Quadr. Hum^r.
Davenport (postea eques aur. and unus Justice. de Banco: Deinde Capitalis Baro
Scace. (...) (...) Iaco^us Main. (...) Quadr. Edwardus Henden. (...) An. 12
Iac. Autum. Tho. Sowthworth, eo quod ad gradum Serve. ad Legem yocatus est. Tho.
Athow duplex Lector, conjunctim legebat. f. 306. b. f. 308. b. Quadr. Will.
Holt. f. 311. a. An. 13 Iac. Autum. Regerus Downs (postea Vicecamerarius
Comitatus Palate. Cestr. f. 312. a. Quadr. Henricus Binge. f. 313. a. An. 14
Iac. Autum. Walterus Darell. f. 314. a. Quadr. Willielmus Ellis. f. 316 a. An.
15 Iac. Autum. Nicholaus Lacon. f. 318. a. Quadr. Robertus Blundell. f. 320. a.
An. 16 Iac. Autum. Ioh. Finche (postea prolocutor Parl.) f. 326. a. Quadr.
Ricardus Higgins. f. 327. a. An. 17 Iac. Autum. Thomas Jones. f. 329. a. Quadr.
Robertus Shute (postea Recordator Civil. London.) f. 330. b. An. 18 Iac. Autum.
Johannes Harding. f. 333. a. Quadr. Radulphus Cowper. f. 335. b. An. 19 Iac.
Autum. Will. Fish. eques aur. f. 337. a. Quadr. Thomas Lock. f. 340. a. An.
20 Iac. Autum. Robertus Callice. f. 343. a and 34^ b. Quadr Edw. Wrightington
electus: non legebat, and ideo multatus est in xll. f. 348. a. f. 347. b. An.
21 Iac. Autum. Franciscus Crawley (postea eques aur. and Justice. de Banco.) f.
352. a. Quadr. Will Denny, postea eques aur. f. 35^. a. and 353. a. An. 22 Iac.
Autum. Petrus Phesant. f. 351. a. and 355. b. Quadr. Will. Hudson. f. 359. a.
An 1 Car. 1. Autum. David Ienkyns electus, recusavit legere. Quadr. Nulla
lectura, pestilentiae causa. f. 362. a. An 2 Car. 1 Autum. Ricardus
Osbaldeston. f. 363. b. Quadr. Christopherus Sherland. f. 359. b. An. 3 Car. 1.
Autum. Johannes Godbold. f. 364. a. and 368. a. Quadr. Will. Colpton. f. 371.
b. An. 4 Car. 1. Autum. Christopherus Fulwood. f. 372. b. Quadr. Johannes
Whistler. f. 376. a. An. 5 Car. 1. Autum. Thomas Brickendine. f. 378. a. Quadr.
Johannes More. f. 383. b. An. 6 Car. 1. Autum. Nulla lectura. f. 383. b. Quadr.
Johannes Banks equ. aur. Attornatus Caroli Principis (postea Attornatus
generalis domini Regis; deinde Capitalis Justice. de Communic Banco.) An. 7 Car.
1. Autum. Robertus Wolriche. f. 389. b. Quadr. Timotheus Turner. f. 392. a. An.
8 Car. 1. Autum. Edmundus Reeve. f. 395. a. Quadr. Josephus Bryan. f. 399. a.
An 9 Car. 1. Autum. Radulphus Whitefeild [postea equ. aur. and Serve. domini
Regis ad Legem.] f. 401. a. Quadr. Walterus Rumsey. f. 405. a. An 10 Car. 1.
Autum. Franciscus Bacon (postea unus Justice. de Banco.) f. 407. a. Quadr.
Johannes Plat. f. 409. a. An. 11 Car. 1. Autum. Ricardus Precter. f. 409. a.
Quadr. Thomas Bedingfeild (Attornatus Ducat. Lanc.) f. 410. b. An. 12 Car. 1.
Autum. Nulla lectura, causa pestilentiae. Quadr. f. 413. a. An. 13 Car 1.
Autum. Nulla l^ctura causa supradicta. f. 411. b. Quadr. Sampson Ever electus:
nulla vero Lectura, causa pestilentiae. f. 414. a. An. 14 Car. 1. Autum. Thomas
Hughes. f. 416. a. Quadr. Ricardus Keble. An. 15 Car. 1. Autum. Will. Ward. f.
418. b. f. 420. b. Quadr. Ricardus Thorns. f. 422. a. An 16 Car. 1. Autum.
Robertus Lade. f. 424. a. Quadr. Thomas Widdrington. f. 424. b. An 17 Car. 1.
Autum. Franciscus Thorpe. f. 433. b. Quadr. Nathaniell Bacon.

Catalogus Thesaurariourum Hospicii Grayensis. (...)

(...) (...) An. 22 H. 8. Will Walsy^gham primus Thesaurarius, clectus Term.
Mich. (...) An. 32 H. 8. Edmandus Gray. (...) electi 25 Nov. Edm. Gray. Rob.
(...).

(...) An. 2 Edw. 6. electi 6 Febr. Williemus (...) Eqa. aur. Will Staunford
Arm.

(...) An 6 Edw 6. Nic^. Bacon. Arm. [Attornarus domini Regis in Curia sua
Wardorum.] electus. 240. (...) (...) Gilb. Gerard, unus Lectorum hujus
Hospicii, adjungitur N. Bacon, in Officio Thesaurarii. 16 Maii. (...) (...) An.
17 Eliz. Johannes Kitchyn, and Tho. Colby, electi 17 Nov. pro uno Anno, and non
amplius. (...) An. 18 Eliz. electi 7 Nov. Robertus Alcock Robertus Shute

(...) An. 20 Eliz. electi 5 Febr. Ricardus Anger Will. Whis^yns.

(...) An. 21 Eliz. electi 17 Nov. Chr. Yelverton Will. Cardinal

(...) An. 22 Eliz. electi: 10 Febr. Thomas Snagg Ioh. Brograve

(...) An. 22 Eliz. Ricardus Kempe. Will Daniall.
(...) An. 23 Eliz. Michaell Jews. Silbertus Sherington.
(...) An. 26 Eliz. electi 8 Feb. Ioh. Brograve Attorn. Dominae Reginae pro
Ducatu Lanca^riae. Tho. Colbye

(...) An. 27 Eliz. electi (...) Nov. Ricardus Anger C^r. Telverton

(...) An. 28 Eliz. electi 14 Nov. Will. Cardinal Ric. Kempe

(...) An. 29 Eliz. electi 3 Nov. Will. Daniell Edw. Stanhope

(...) An. 30 Eliz. electi 28 Nov. C^^b. Sherington Ioh. Sp^rling

(...) An. 33 Eliz. electi 19 Nov. Nich. Fuller Ed^. Peoley

(...) An 37 Eliz. electi 26 Nov. Ioh. Lancaster Ieron. Berham

(...) An 38 Eliz. electi 24 Nov. Ioh. Lany Ric. Barker

(...) An 39 Eliz. electi 15 Nov. (...) Brograve, Attor^. Dominae Reginae pro
Ducatu fuo (...). Ric. Anger. Arm.

(...) Anno 2 Iac. Cut^ertus Pepper equ. aur. Supervisor Wardor. and
Liberartionum, electus 2 Nov. (...) Anno 6 Iac. Franciscus Bafon equ aur.
Sollicitator generalis Domini Regis, electus 17 Oct. (...) An. 20 Iac. Thomas
Tildesley equ. aur. electus 4 Ialii. f. 342. b. An. 20 Iac. Thomas Ireland equ.
aur. electus 29 Oct. f. 350. a. An. 21 Iac. Franciscus Brackyn electus 30 Oct
f. 354. b. An. 22 Iac. Euball Thelwall equ. aur. electus 27. Oct. f. 359. b.
An. 1 Car. 1. Lancelot. Lovelace electus 27 Ian. f. 363. b. An. 2 Car. 1.
Johannes Finch equ. aur. electus 3 Nov. f. 368. a. An. 3 Car. 1. Willelmus
Denny equ. aur. electus 9 Nov. f. 372. b. An. 4 Car. 1. Regerus Downs Arm.
electus 29. Oct. f. 378. a. An. 5 Car. 1. Johannes Wright electus 21 Oct. f.
389. b. An. 7 Car. 1. Johannes Backs equ. aur. electus 16 Nov. f. 407. a. An.
10 Car. 1. Petrus Pheasant electus 1 Nov. f. 409. b. An. 11 Car. 1. Ric.
O^baldeston associatus Petro Pheasant 6 Nov. f. 311. b. An. 12 Car. 1. Will.
Clopton electus 3 Febr f. 413. b. An. 13 Car. 1. Christoph Fulwood associatus
Willielmo Clopton 3 Nov. f. 416. a. An. 14 Car. 1. Tho Bedingfeild equ. aur.
[Attorn, Dacatus Lanc.] electus 2 Nov. f. 432. b. An. 17 Car. 1. Tho.
Widdrington equ. aur. electus 18 Nov.

In Aula Hospicij Grayensis.
































Adhuc in dicta semicirculari fenestra














































Adhuc in eadem ampla semicirculari fenestra




















































































Adhuc in saepe-dicta semicirculari Fenestra














































In orientali fenestra ejusdem Aulae Hospicij Grayensis.


























Adhuc in dicta Orientali Fenestra Hospicij Grayensis.




















In Australibus praefatae Aulae Fenestris






























Adhuc in dictis Australibus Fenestris.


















































Adhuc in dictis Australibus Fenestris.










In Borealibus dictae Aulae, Hospicij Grayensis, Fenestris.








































Adhuc in dictis Fenestris Borealibus Hospicij Grayensis.














In Occidentali Fenestra dictae Aulae Hospicij Grayensis.
























In Fenestris Capellae Hospicij Grayensis.












Adhuc in fenestris dictae Capellae Hospicij Grayensis


















Insignia Hospiciorum Curiae, et Cancellariae.
























Cap. LXVIII.
Innes of Chancery belonging to Grays-Inne.
Staple Inn.
THis (as we have by tradition) was heretofore called Staple-Hall, being a
place where Merchants for woolls had their meetings.

By an ancient MS. Penes Principalem and So^^^^ ejusdem Hosp.
Book, written about K. Henry the 5ths. time, containing diverse orders and
constitutions relating to this Society; it should seem that this House was an
Inn of Chancery then, if not before those days; but held by Lease: for the
first Regist. Hosp. (...)
grant of the inheritance thereof to the Ancients of Grays-Inne, from John
Knighton, and Alice his wife, daughter of John Chapwood, was by Indenture of
Bargain and sale, dated to Nov. 20 H. 8. After which there were other
Feoffments made thereof: for upon the 4th. of June 20 Iac. Sir Francis Bacon
Knight, then Lord Verulam, and Viscount St. Alban, did enfeoffe (...)
Sir Edward Moseley Knight, Attorney of the Duchy of Lancaster, Sir, Henry
Yelverton, and diverse other the Ancients of Grays-Inne, thereof, by the name of
all that message of Inn of Chancery, commonly called Staple-Inne, and of one
garden thereunto adjoining, with all and singular their appurtenances, in times
past belonging to John Knighton Gentleman and Alice his wife, situate in the
parish of St. Andrews Holburne, in the suburbs of London; which message, etc.
the said Francis Lord Verulam lately had, together with John Brograve Esquire
Attorney to Queen Eliz. of her Duchy of Lancaster, Richard Aunger, William
Whyskins and others then deceased, of the grant and feoffment of Sir Gilbert
Gerard Knight then Master of the Rolls, Ralph Brereton Esquire and William Porter
Gentleman, as by their Deed dated 18 Maii 32 Eliz. more fully appears; to
have and to hold to the said Sir Edward Moseley and others, their heirs and
assigns, to the only use and behoof of the same Edward, Henry, Cap. 70.
and their heirs and assigns for ever. The Judges Orders


Cap. LXIX.
Barnard's Inn.
THis was anciently called Pat. 32. H. 6. m. 18.
Mackworth's Inn, and given Stow's Survey of London printed in fol. 1633. p.
430. b.
by Thomas Atkyns Citizen of London, one of the Executors of John Mackworth
Dean of Lincoln in 32 H. 6. unto the Dean and Chapter of Lincoln, and their
successors for ever, to find a Chaplain to celebrate divine Service in the
Chapel of St. George, within the Cathedral Church of Lincoln, where the body of
the said John Mackworth lies buried.

It seems it was an Inn of Chancery at or about that time: for upon a Tumult
Stow's Annals in 32. H. 6.
betwixt the Gentlemen of the Innes of Court and Chancery, the Citizens of
London, happening in Fleetstreet 32 H. 6. in which some mischief was done, the
Principals of Clifford's Inn, Furnivalls-Inne, and Barnard's Inn were Stow's
Annals in 32. H. 6.
sent Prisoners to Hartford Castle.

Cap. LXX.
Orders relating to all the Innes of Court.
Orders made and agreed upon, Ex Regist. interioris Templi f. 119. b.
be observed and kept in all the four Houses of Court xxii Iunii A. D. MDLVII.
3. and 4. Ph. and M. Videsis etiam Regist. Hosp. medii Templi. f. 24. a. Nec
non Regist. Hosp. Linc. f. 31^. ^.

1. THat none of the Companions except Knights, or Benchers, from the last day
of September next, wear in their Doublets, or Hoses any light colors, except
Scarlet and Crimsons; or wear any upper Velvet Cap, or any Scarf; or Wings in
their Gowns, White Ierkyns, Buskins or Velvet Shoes; Double Cuffs on their
Shirts; Feathers, or Ribbens on their Caps, upon pain to forfeit, for the first
default iiis. iii^. and the second, expulsion without redemption.

2. That none Attorney shall be admitted into any of the Houses. And that in
all Admissions, from henceforth this condition shall be employed; that if he
that shall be admitted, practice any Attorney-ship, that then ipso facto to be
dismissed; and to have liberty to repair to the Inn of Chancery from whence he
came, or to any other, if he were of none before.

3. That none of the Companies of the said Houses, shall wear their Study-Gowns
into the City, any further than Fleet-bridge, Holburn-bridge, or to the Savoy,
upon like pain as last before.

4. That none of the said Companies, when they be in Commons, shall wear
Spanish Cloak, Sword and Buckler, or Rapier; or Gowns and Hats; or Gowns girded
with a Dagger on the back, upon the like pain.

5. That the Mote-Cases in every of the Houses of Court, for the Vacation time,
do not contain above two points argumentable; and that the same cases be
brought in pleading, and the Puisne of the Bench to recite the whole Pleading,
according to the ancient Orders and custom: And that none of the Bench shall
argue above two points; and if he do, then the Reader shall show him, that he
breaks the Common Order, and so reform it.

6. That every Reader of Chancery give order to their Houses of Chancery, that
the said Orders for Apparel and Weapons, and Studygowns, be observed by their
Company, in manner and form before rehearsed.

7. That none of the said Companies, under the degree of a Knight, being in
Commons, do wear any Beard above three weeks growing, upon pain of xls. and so
double for every week after monition, that he shall be so in Commons.

8. That no Reader of any House of Court, shall have at his Dinner above three
Guests; and the Stewards of the same Dinner to have either of them but one
Guest; and that other of the said Stewards exceed not in the charges of the
said Dinner, the sum of xls.

Orders made by the Judges upon all Souls day, in the first year of Queen Eliz.
reign, for all the Inns of Court, with special Charge, that they should after
that time be observed. A. Reginae Eliz. 1.

1. THat none should wear any Sword or Buckler, Ex Registro de Lincolns Inn
Vol. 4. f. 345.
or cause any to be born after him into the Town.

2. That no Fellow of those Societies should wear any Beard above a fortnights
growth.

3. That an exhortation should be given to the utter Bar, that none should
come to any Bar at Westminster. and specially to be Chancery or White Hall, under
ten years continuance.

4. That order should be taken for reformation of excess in Apparel, according
to the Statute.

5. That for wearing of Swords or Bucklers, the forfeiture for the first
offense, to be iis, iiid. to be paid and cast in Commons: for the second time
vis. viis. in like manner to be paid and cast in Commons, and the third time to
be banished the House.

6. That none should wear any Valvet upper cap, neither in the House, not City.
And that none after the last day of January then ensuing, should wear any Furr,
nor any manner of silk in their Apparel, otherwise than he could justify by
the Statute of Apparel, made an. 24. H. 8. under the penalty aforesaid.

7. And that none should wear any great Hose, after the xxth. day of that
present month of November, upon the penalty aforesaid: Nor any Apparel,
otherwise than he could justify by the Statute of 1. and 2. Ph. and M.

Orders necessary for the government of the Innes of Court, established by
commandment of the Queens Majesty, with the advice of her Privy Counsel, and
the Justices of her Bench, and the Common Place at Westminster in Easter Term;
an. 16. Reginae Elizabethae. 1574. Ex Cod. nigro de Lincol^s Inn (Lib. 5.) f.
181. b.
Videsis etiam Regist. Hosp. medii Tampli ^. 112. a.

IMprimis, A. D. 1574. 16. Eliz.
that no more in number be admitted from henceforth, than the Chambers of the
Houses will receive, after two to a Chamber: Nor that any more Chambers shall
be builded to increase the number; saving that in the Middle Temple they may
convert their old Hall into Chambers, not exceeding the number of ten Chambers.

Item, if any hereafter admitted in Court, practice as Attorney or Solicitor,
they to be dismissed and expulsed out of their Houses thereupon; except the
persons that shall be Solicitors shall also use the exercising of learning and
mooting in the House, and so be allowed by the Bench.

Item, none to be suffered to have any Chambers, or to be in Commons in any of
the Houses of Court, which upon public admonition, once given by any Reader,
Bencher, or Utter-Barrister does not come and remain at the usual Common
Prayers at the Church and Chapels of the same House.

Item, none hereafter admitted shall enjoy any Chamber, or be in Commons,
unless he do exercise Moots, and other exercises of learning within three years
after his admission; and be allowed a Student or Inner-Barrister by the Bench.

Item, none to be called to the Utter-Barr, but by the ordinary Counsel of the
House, in their general ordinary Counsels in the Term time.

Item, none to be Utter-Barrister, as is aforesaid, to continue
Utter-Barrister, unless he do by the space of three years after, exercise
ordinary Mootings, and other ordinary exercises of learning; both in Court and
Chancery, as the Bench shall allow.

Item, none to be admitted to plead at any of the Courts at Westminster, or to
subscribe any Action, Bill, or Plea, unless he be a Reader, or Bencher in
Court, or five years Utter-Barrister, and continuing that time in exercise of
learning; or a Reader in Chancery two years at the least; and upon admonition
as aforesaid shall be at Common Prayer, as before is limited.

Item, none to be allowed to plead before the Justices of Assizes, except he be
allowed for a Pleader in the Courts at Westminster, or shall be all owed by the
Justices of Assizes to plead before them; and upon admonition as aforesaid,
shall be at Common Prayer as is before limited.

The Reformation and order for the Innes of Chancery, is referred to the
consideration of the Benchers of the Houses of Court, whereto they are
belonging; wherein they are to use the advice and assistance of the Justices of
the Courts at Westminster, and thereof to make a Certificate to the Privy
Counsel at the second sitting the next Term in the Starr Chamber.

Item, touching Apparel they shall observe such orders in their degrees, as
shall be shortly set forth by the Queens Majesty's Proclamation for the Apparel
of all estates generally.

N. Baconc. C. S. W. Burghly. E. Lincoln. T. Sussex. Arundell. A Warwick. R
Leicester. F. Knolles. James Croft. T. Smith. Fran. Walsingham. Wall. Mildemay.

Orders made by the Justices of both Benches, and Barons of the Exchequer, for
the better regulating of the Readings in all the Inns of Court. Ex Registro de
Grays Inn. vol 2. ^. 203. a.

WHereas the Readings in Houses of Court, An. 33. Eliz. Reginae.
have time out of mind continued in every Lent, and every August yearly, by the
space of three weeks at the least, till of late years, that diverse Readers in
the same Houses have made an end of their Reading in far shorter time, and
have read fewer Readings, than by the ancient Orders of the said Houses they
ought to do; to the great hindrance of learning, not only in the said Houses of
Court, but also in Houses of Chancery, by reason that the Exercises of Moots,
very profitable for study, are by occasion thereof, cut off almost the one half
thereof, or more: The excessive and sumptuous charges of which Readings,
brought in of late times, contrary to the ancient usage, have been, or are (as
it is thought) the chief, or a great occasion of the same: which, if it should
be permitted, would be almost an utter overthrow to the learning and study of
the Law, and consequently an intolerable mischief to the Common wealth of this
Realm; the two Chief Justices, and Chief Baron, and all the residue of the
Justices of both Benches, and the Barons of the Exchequer, well perceiving,
that these late Examples of short and few Readings are so dangerous, as they
are no longer to be suffered, have thought it very necessary, that the same
Readings, and charges of the Readers, shall be from henceforth used as
follows.

First, that all Single Readers in every of the said Houses of Court, shall
continue every of their Readings by the whole space of three weeks, or till
Friday in the third week after the beginning of every such Reading, at the
least. And that there shall be as many Readings in every of the said three
weeks, as by ancient Orders of the same Houses have been accustomed. And if
there shall be any cause allowed by the Benchers of the said Houses, for fewer
Readings; there shall be, notwithstanding any such cause, or excuse, three
Readings in every of the said three weeks at the least; any Order to be taken
to the contrary notwithstanding.

And to the intent that the charges of the same Readings, may not be over great
or burthenous to the same Readers; it is ordered and thought meet by the said
Justices and Barons, that no such Reader shall allow any greater diet in the
Hall of every such House, either in Wine or Meat, than was allowed usually,
before the first year of the Queens Majesty's Reign that now is; viz.

That the Stewards of the Readers drinking shall not expend about the same,
above the Sum of twenty marks; that is to say* either of them vi1. xiiis.
iiiid. And that the two Stewards of the Readers Dinner, shall not defray about
the charges of the said Dinner, above x^1 viz. either of them ten pounds at the
most. And that no Reader shall have more Wine to be spent in his Reading, than
two Hogsheads at the most.

And that no Reader shall make any Dinner, or be at any charge in this House,
but in the Reading time, and not in the Term before his Reading.

And the said Justices do think it meet, that the said Readers should be
advised by the Benchers of their Houses, not only in the proportion of their
own Diet, but also what number of Guests, and of what sort they should bid to
their Table, during their Reading, to the intent that a mediocrity may be used
frugally without excess.

Orders set down by the general consent, as well of all the Judges, as of the
Bench of Grays Inn, hereafter to be strictly observed in that Society. Ex
Registro de Grays Inn. vol. 2. f. 212. a.

FIrst, none shall be called to the Bar, An. 36. Eliz. Reginae.
but such as be of convenient continuance, and have performed Exercises three
years before they be called; that is to say, have gone abroad to grand Moots
six times: have mooted at the Utter-Barr in the Library six times: and have put
Cases at Bolts in Term six times, and thereof bring due Certificate; of the
first from the Reader, the Ancient that goes with him, and the Principal in
the Inns of Chancery: of the second from those two that sit at the Bench; and
of the third from those three that sit at the Bolt.

2. The Utter-Barristers which shall be called at one Reading, shall not exceed
the number of four; and if the Reader presume to swear any more, the Reader
shall be fined by the Bench; and such as shall be sworn after the number
filled, shall be disabled to be confirmed, and their names shall be given up to
the Judges, that they may be restrained from practice. And of the four that
shall be called by the Readers; if the Bench do disallow any, they likewise
shall be disabled, and their names also given up to the Judges, to the intent
aforesaid.

3. None shall be called to Read, in regard of Antiquity, or course; but such
as are men of good sufficiency, for their learning, credit, and integrity to
serve in the Commonwealth: and none shall be admitted to Read single, that has
not been a continuer, both in four Terms, and two Readings, by the space of one
whole year next before his Reading. And nevertheless it is not meant, but their
serving two Vacations after the Reading, according to former orders, shall
stand and continue.

4. The names of such as have Read double, or shall Read double, shall be given
to the Judges, who have promised to give them pre-eminence of hearing, after
Sergeants, and her Majesty's learned Council, to the end to draw them thereto
the more: yet nevertheless the calling to double Readings, or otherwise to
dispense therewith, is left as heretofore to the discretion of the Bench.

5. Every single Reader shall continue out his Reading, until the Friday in
the third week; and shall observe former orders, touching moderating of excess
in Diet.

6. No Utter-Barrister shall be called by Letters, or for any reward; and every
one that shall bring any Letter, or use any corrupt means, shall be ipso facto
disabled, and his name shall be given up to the Judges, to the end that he may
be restrained from practice; and the Reader that calls him shall be fined by
the Bench, and his name also given to the Judges for his farther rebuke.

7. The Readers in Court and Chancery, shall make their Cases short, not
containing above three points; and there in Reading in Court as much upon the
Statute as may be.

8. The pleadings in Moots, both in the Hall and Library, and Inns of Chancery,
by the Inner-Barristers, shall be rehearsed without Book, and in no wise read:
And so likewise by the first of the Utter-Barristers, and by the Puisne of the
Bench, be he Reader, or otherwise; and not to go to the Case without the
Pleading recited.

John Popham. Will Peryam. Tho. Wamysley. Edmund. Anderson. Francis Gaudy.

Orders to be observed by the Inns of Court and Chancery. Ex lib. 5. de
Lincolus lnne. f. 487. a.

FIrst, An. D. 1594. 36 Eliz.
that none be called to the Bar, but such as be of convenient continuance, and
have used the Exercises of the House, as in arguing of Cases, putting at Bolts,
and keeping of the Moots and Exercises there three years at the least, before
they be called.

2. That there be not above three or four at the most to be called to the Bar,
at any Reading, and those to be called by the Reader, where in times past it
has been so used of such as he will answer for; and yet the same not to stand
but for such of them only as shall be allowed by the Bench, at the first
Parliament the next Term after the call; or otherwise by the grand Counsel,
where it has been so used; and the names also of those that shall be so called
to be delivered by the Reader, or Treasurer of the House, the said next Term,
to the ancient Justice of that House, or (if none such be) then to the Chief
Justice for the time being.

3. That none be admitted to Read but such as be esteemed for their learning
and credits fit to serve in the Commonweal, The Judges Orders.
and such as have attended the Readings in the Exercises there two years before
their call to that place, unless upon some reasonable cause of let to be
signyfied unto the ancient Justice of that House; or (if none such be) then to
the chief Justice for the time being, it shall be thought otherwise convenient.

4. That no single Reader be admitted to Read in Lent, but that the same
Reading be always supplied by a double Reader, as heretofore has been
accustomed, unless upon some special occasion to be allowed of by the Justices
of that House, or if none such be, by the chief Justice or chief Baron, or two
of them, it be otherwise thought convenient.

5. That before any be called to Read, a note of the names of three or four
next in turn to Read be delivered to the Justices of the House, where the same
shall be; and in default of such Justice, to the chief Justices and chief Baron
for the time being, to the end they may give their advice therein.

6. That the Readings be holden out the whole three weeks, as in ancient time
was used; and that both for the diet and gifts to be admitted in Readings, the
former good orders in that behalf taken, may be from thenceforth duly observed,
as they will answer upon their credits the contrary.

7. That none be called to the Bar by any letters, corruption or reward, upon
pain of expulsing the Reader, that calls any such, and the party so called
out of the House and fellowship.

8. That the Readers be always moved to make their cases short, not containing
above two or three points at the most, and those as much upon the Statute read
over, as may be.

9. That in the Moots both in the Houses of Courts and Chancery, Pleadings be
rehearsed, and used as has been in former times past used; and thereupon to go
to the Case, but not without the pleading drawn, pleaded, and rocited; and that
no case in any Inn of Chancery do contain above three points, or questions at
the most, and that the Cases be but short.

The answer to the former Orders, by the Society of Lincolns Inn.
1. To the first there are Orders already taken by the Counsel within our
House heretofore tending to the effect of the same Article; which Order we have
observed, and do purpose to continue the same.

2. To the second, the use within our House is not to call any to the Bar by
the Reader, but by Common Counsel; at which Counsel we have good regard
according to the same Order.

3. To the third, as the Benchers have heretofore had special care in
appointing of the Readers from time to time; so we intend to have like care and
regard from henceforth, according to the Orders of our House, the rather in
respect of your Lo. good directions.

4. To the fourth, we will endeavor to moved and persuade such of the Benchers
of our House, as are in course to Read their Double Reading, to perform the
same; yet it seems very difficult to effect, for that they suppose that their
Double Reading is rather a hindrance than furthrance in their proceeding,
besides their charge.

5. To the fifth, by the Orders of our House we use to choose one only Reader,
who is chosen by the Common Counsel, and the same as sufficient a man as we
can choose, and the same Order our endeavor shall be to continue.

6. To the sixth, we will from time advise the Reader to observe the Order
prescribed by your Lordships, and to that effect we have former Orders in our
House accordingly.

7. To the seventh, we will observe the same Article so near as we can; and we
have former Orders to disable such from being called, as do seek the same by
letters, and not by deserts.

8. 9. To the eighth and ninth Articles, we will endeavor to observe to our
utmost; and has been our regard heretofore at all times.

But touching a Call of utter-Barristers at this time, it may please your
Lordships to understand the state of our House, as now it stands, is, that
almost for this three years there has been no call to the Bar; and our Order
is not to call at every Reading; but once a year, or in two years; and now
there are many good Students of nine years, and ten years continuance, who by
reason of their Study, Exercises, and good behavior, by all that time, are
thought fit to be called.

At Sergeants Inn 20. Iunii, ann^ 38. Eliz. Ex lib. 6. de Liacolas Inn f. 22.
a.

FIrst it was agreed by all the Judges, Et ex Regist. de. Grays Inn Vol. 2. s.
221. b.
by the assent of the Benchers of the four Innes of Court; that hereafter none
shall be admitted into Innes of Court, till he may have a Chamber within the
House, and in the mean time to be of some Inn of Chancery.

2. Item, that none be admitted to the Bar, but only such as be at the least
seven years continuance, and have kept the Exercises within the House, and
abroad in Innes of Chancery, according to the Orders of the House.

3. Item, that there be in one year only four Utter-Barristers called in any
Inn of Court (that is to say) in Easter Term, two and in Michaelmass Term,
two; where, by the orders of the House the Benchers call Utter-Barristers, and
where the Readers by the order of the House do call, then only two by the
Summer Reader in his Reading, and two by the Lent Reader in his Reading.

4. That such Students be called who be fittest for their learning and honest
conversation, and well given.

5. That the Readers hereafter be chosen for their learning, for their duly
keeping of the Exercises of their House; for their honest behavior, and good
disposition; and such as for their experience and practice be able to serve the
Commonwealth.

6. That every Reader continue his Reading three weeks, and to Read at least
thrice every week, and oftener in such Houses as has been used to Read oftener,
upon pain to be taken as no Reader, and to be removed from the Bench, except
only in case where they shall not be able to perform it by reason of sickness.

7. And that the Reader call few to his Table, and they to be of Ancients that
attend his Reading; and only on the Sundaies strangers, and of them but few;
and that excess in diet be not used.

8. That no Reader exceed the number of eight serving men in his Reading to
attend him, or under that number at his own pleasure.

9. That every Reader be assisted by such Benchers, Utter-Barristers, and
Vacationers, during the time of his Reading, as ought by the orders of the
House to attend him; upon such penalty and forfeitures, truly to be imposed and
levied, as by the orders of that House are or shall be limited and appointed,
and upon further pain that in case the Reader be not sufficiently assisted and
accompanied thoroughout his Reading; that then such by whose default that
defect grows, shall be removed both from the Bench and Bar.

10. That Double Reading be straightly observed in every House according to the
ancient Orders of every House.

11. That no Benchers be called but such as be fittest, both for their
learning, practice, good and honest conversation, and that they call not to the
Bench too often, but very sparingly, in respect of the great multitude that
there be already.

Concilium ibidem tentum 9. Ian. 1. Iac. Edward Coke. Tho. Flemynge. John
Brograve. Francis Bacon. Miles Sands.

Ex Ced. MS. d: Lincolas Inn; scil^^ib. 6. f. 210. a.

WE, A. D. 1603 1. Iac.
having received the Kings Majesty's Pleasure and express Commandment, by the
Right Honorable Sir John Popham Knight, Lord Chief Justice of England, and the
rest of the Judges, that none be from henceforth admitted into the Society of
any House of Court, that is not a Gentleman by descent; do now therefore order,
that from henceforth none shall be admitted into this Society contrary to the
said commandment of the King's Majesty.

We also order,
by the advice and direction of all the Judges of England; that every Fellow of
this Society, shall resort to our Chapel to Divine Service, and once in the
year at the least, receive the Communion in our said Chapel; and that every
Fellow of this Society, that shall wilfully refuse to come to the Chapel to
hear Divine Service, or shall not once every year receive the Communion in the
said Chapel, shall be expelled out of this society.

7. Nov. 12. Iac.
Orders for the Reformation and better Government of the Innes of Court and
Chancery, A. D. 1614. 12. Iac.
agreed upon by the common and uniform consent of the Readers and Benchers of
the four Houses-of Court: Ex Regist, 2. interioris Templi f. II2. a.
which Orders proceeded first, Necnon in Regist. de Grays Inn. Vol. 2. f. 307.
b. and 308. a.
from his Majesty's especial care and commandment; and were after recommended
to the said Readers and Benchers, by the grave direction and advice of all the
Judges, set down the 7 th, of November in the xii th. year of the Reign of our
Gracious Sovereign Lord King James, and of Scotland the xlviii th.
1. FOr that there may be great abuse in the lodging and harboring of ill
subjects, or dangerous persons in the said Innes of Court and Chancery, being
privileged and exempted places: it is therefore ordered, that there be general
searches in every House of Court and Chancery, twice every Michaelmass Term, to
be agreed upon by the general consent of the Readers and Benchers of the House
of Court; and likewise once every Vacation.

2. For that the Societies ought to give a principal Example of good government
in matters of Religion; and to be free, not only from the crime, but from the
suspicion of ill affection in that kind; it is ordered, that every Gentleman of
the several Societies aforesaid, which shall be in Commons at any time within
one year after the publishing of these orders, and shall not receive the
Communion by the space of one year together, shall be expelled ipso facto: and
nevertheless the further Orders of every particular House in that behalf to
stand in force.

3. For that the institution of these Societies, was ordained chiefly for the
profession of the Law; and in a second degree for the education of the sons and
youth of riper years, of the Nobility and Gentry of this Realm; and in no sort
for the lodging or abode of Gentlemen of the Country; which, if it should be
suffered were to disparage the said Societies, and to turn them from Hospitia
to Diversoria: it is ordered, that no Knight or Gentleman, foreiner or
discontinuer, shall be admitted or allowed to lodge in any of the Societies
aforesaid, or to be in Commons, except he be an allowed Utter-Barrister.

4. For that there ought always to be preserved a difference, between a
Councellor at Law, which is the principal person next unto Sergeants and Judges
in administration of Justice; and Attorneys and Solicitors, which are but
ministerial persons, and of an inferior nature: therefore it is ordered, that
from henceforth no Common Attorney or Solicitor shall be admitted of any of the
four Houses of Court.

5. For that the overgreat multitude in any Vocation or Profession, does but
bring the same into contempt; and that an excessive number of Lawyers may have
a farther inconvenience, in respect of multiplying of needless suits: it is
therefore ordered, that there shall not be called to the Bar in any one year,
by Readers or Benchers in any one Society, above the number of eight, or
according to that proportion, being of continuance and having done the
Exercises, according to the Orders of the several Houses.

6. For that the over-early and hasty practice of Utter-Barristers does make
them less grounded and sufficient, whereby the Law may be disgraced and the
Clyent prejudiced: therefore it is ordered, that for the time to come, no
Utter-Barrister begin to practice publikly at any Bar at Westminster until he
has been three years at the Bar; except such Utter-Baristers that have been
Readers in some Houses of Chancery.

7. For that the maintaining of the Readings in Innes of Court and Chancery, in
their due execution, is a principal means to breed and increase learning; it is
ordered, that no single Reader in any House of Court, shall give over his
Reading before Wednesday in the third week. And that the Readers of every House
of Chancery, shall read in person, and not by deputy, both in Term and
Vacation, except by the deputation by the Bench of the Term before.

8. For that disorders in the Christmas time, may both infect the minds, and
prejudice the estates and fortunes of the young Gentlemen in the same
Societies: it is therefore ordered, that there shall be Commons of the House
kept in every House of Court, during the Christmas; and that none shall play
in their several Halls at the Dice, except he be a Gentleman of the same
Society and in Commons; and the benefits of the Boxes to go to the Butlers of
every House respectively.

9. For that an outward decency in Apparel is an ornament to all Societies, and
contains young men within the bounds of Civility and order: it is ordered,
that no Gentleman of any House of Court or Chancery, shall come into their
several Halls with Cloaks, Boots, Spurs, Swords or Daggers.

10. Lastly, for that all government is strengthened or slackned by the
observing or neglecting of the reverence and respect, which is to be used
toward the Governors of the same: therefore it is required, that due
reverence and respect be had by the younger sort of Gentlemen to the Readers,
Benchers, and Ancients of every House.

And whereas there may have been some orders of like nature to some of these,
published in former time, which nevertheless have failed in the execution; the
Readers and Benchers do signify to the Gentlemen, that there is a settled and
constant resolution, to cause these Orders to be strictly and duly observed;
and that no man whatsoever do expect any toleration or dispensation concerning
the same.

Orders conceived for the settling and establishing of the Company of the Innes
of Court, Exl Cod. Ms. Hosp. Linc. (^ lib. 6. 643* a.
and Chancery in their exercise of Military Discipline (tempore Regis Iacobi.)
For matter of Religion.
1. FIrst, that none be admitted, but such as are well affected in Religion.

2. If any one be a common swearer, or quareller, and will not be reformed, he
shall be cashiered.

For the Commonweal.
1. First, that their Arms be not in their own custody, but kept in some
fitting place between times of exercise.

2. Next, that their times of exercise be limited both for Term and Vacation
respectively.

For their Government.
1. First, that the Benchers set forth and appropriate what Houses shall be of
the King's Patronage, and what of the Princes.

2. That for matters of great weight the Benchers determine, and for matters of
less weight in time or place of Exercise, twelve of the discreetest young
Gentlemen, chosen out of all the Houses, shall together with the Captain
determine.

3. Next, that for priority place, every House give their own Gentlemen their
Rank, and that the Houses take place first by chance of the Dice, and afterward
by course and turn.

4. Next, that the Officers be chosen by their Captain.

For the Charge.
1. The piece of ground for Exercise, to contain four Acres with the closing of
it, if such a piece already enclosed may not be found.

2. Next, the Arms of the Musquitier, which must be light and fitting -- iii1.

3. Next, the Arms of the Pikequere -- iiii1.

4. Next, the charge of admission of every one into these Bonds, what
themselves think fit.

5. Next, for dressing and keeping of their Arms, some reasonable allowance to
be given to an Armorer.

6. Next, for the Captains and other Officers such allowance as the Gentlemen
shall think fit.

And it is intended that no Gentlemen are to be enjoined to exercise in this
kind, but such as shall voluntarily offer themselves, to be tolerated to do it
at their own voluntary charge.

And as for the number of 600. it is not enjoined, but a number limited, beyond
which they shall not exceed.

And if the Benchers finding this exercise shall no way withdraw young
Gentlemen from their studies, being moderately used, but fill up that time
which would otherwise be worse spent, and manifold other benefits shall arise
thereby; shall be pleased to advise of a further allowance to the Officers to
be made out of the Houses, it will give them the greater livelihood and
encouragement; and if they be not pleased so to do, they only pray the
toleration of voluntaries (ut antea)

Orders to be observed in the Houses of Court, Ex. Registro de Grays Inn Vol.
2. f. 378. b.
subscribed by all the Judges of England Term. Hill. An. Dom. 1627. Ex Cod. MS.
(sc. 4.) penes Subthesaurarium Societatis medii Templi Land. f. 1.

1. THat henceforth every year, or at the least every second year, A. D. 1627.
3. Car. 1.
there shall be a double Reader chosen in every House of Court to read.

2. That the Lent Reader shall begin his Reading the first Monday in Lent,
unless it fall in Term: and in such case, it shall begin at such day after, as
has been used in the several Houses.

And every Summer Reader shall begin the first Monday in August.

The double Readers shall continue their Reading by the space of one whole
week, at least: And the single Reader shall continue by the space of a
fortnight at the least; and in that time to read as often as has been used in
the several Houses.

3. No Reader shall have above the number often men to attend him during his
Reading: And every Reader, the Sunday before the beginning of his Reading,
shall repair to the Sermon at Paul's Cross; and whilst he is there, shall wear
his Cap in such decent and orderly manner, as anciently has been used.

4. That no Reader shall give Exceedings throughout the Hall above thrice in
the week; and that at Dinner only.

5. That every Reader shall make and put in his Reading, so many Cases, as has
been most commonly used in the same House where he reads, and not fewer.

6. That no Reader in Court shall practice at the Bar at Westminster, but with
his Readers Gown, with the Velvet welt on the back: and that none but Readers
in Court shall at all wear or use any such Gowns.

7. That all Readers, Benchers, Baristers, and other Students and Fellows in
every House of Court and Chancery, shall repair to the Hall, at Dinner, Supper
and Exercises, in their Caps, and not in Hats: and shall likewise repair to the
Church, Chapel, and place of Prayer, in their Caps.

8. That no Fellows or Students in any Houses of Court or Chancery, shall come
into the Hall, Church, Chapel, or place of Prayer, with Boots; but orderly and
civily as anciently has been used; upon pain, that such as wilfully or
contemptuously break these two last Orders, or either of them, for the first
time shall be put out of Commons, until he be restored upon suit to the Bench;
and for the second time fined at the pleasure of the Bench; and the third time
shall be expulsed the House.

9. And such Reader as shall contemptuously break any of the Orders aforesaid,
shall not be suffered to practice at any Bar at Westminster, or at the Assizes.

Nicholas Hyde. Thomas Richardson. John Dodderidge. Richard Hutton. James
Whitlock. George Crook. H. Yelverton. John Walter. John Denham. Will. Jones.
Franc. Harvey. Thomas Trevor. George Vernon.

Orders made and set down the xv th. day of April 6. An. 1630. 6. c^. 1.
Caroli primi, Ex Cod. MS. penc^ (...) Hosp. metie Tem^ Load. p. 2.
by the Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England, and all the Judges of both
Benches, and Barons of the Exchequer, by command of the King's Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council, Et ex Regist. de Gray Inn Vol. 2. f. 381. b. and
382. a.
for the government of the Innes of Court and Chancery.
1. THat the Innes of Chancery shall hold their government subordinate to the
Benchers of the Innes of Court unto which they belong: And in case any
Attorney, Clerk, or Officer of any Court of Justice, being of any of the Innes
of Chancery, shall withstand the direction given by the Benchers of Court, upon
complaint thereof to the Judges of the Court in which he shall serve, he shall
be severely punished; either by fore-judging from the Court, or otherwise, as
the case shall deserve.

2. That the Benchers of every Inn of Court, cause the Innes Of Chancery to be
surveyed, that there may be a competent number of Chambers for Students; and
that once a year an exact survey be taken, that the Chambers allotted for that
purpose be accordingly employed.

3. For that there may be an abuse in the lodging or harboring of ill subjects
and dangerous persons in the Innes of Court and Chancery, being privileged and
exempted places: it is ordered, that there be general searches in every House
of Court and Chancery, twice every Michaelmass Term, and once every other Term;
to be agreed upon by the general consent of the Readers and Benchers of the
Houses of Court; and likewise once every Vacation.

4. For that the Societies ought to give a principal example of good government
in matters of Religion: and to be free, not only from the crime, but from the
suspicion of ill affection in that kind; it is ordered, that every Gentleman of
the several Societies aforesaid, which shall be in Commons at any time within
one year after the publishing of these Orders, or after; and shall not receive
the Communion, by the space of any one year together, shall be expelled inso
facto: and nevertheless the further Orders of every particular House in this
behalf, to stand in force, and be observed.

5. For that the institution of these Societies, were ordained chiefly for the
profession of the Law; and in a second degree for the education of the sons and
youth of riper years of the Nobility and Gentry of this Realm; and in no sort
for lodging or abode of Gentlemen of the Country; Which if it should be
suffered, would be a disparaging of the same Societies, and to turn them from
Hospitia to Diversoria, it is ordered, that no Knight, or Gentleman, foreiners
or discontinuers, or others not of the same Societies, shall be admitted or
allowed to lodge in any of the Houses aforesaid.

6. For that there ought always to be observed a difference between
Utter-Baristers, Readers in Court, and Apprentices at Law, which are the
principal persons next unto Sergeants and Judges in administration of Justice:
and Attorneys and Solicitors, which are but ministerial persons of an inferior
nature: therefore it is ordered, that from henceforth no common Attorney, or
Solicitor shall hereafter be admitted of any of the four Houses of Court.

7. For that the over-early and hasty practice of Utter-Baristers does make
them less grounded and sufficient, whereby the Law may be disgraced and the
Clyent prejudiced: therefore it is ordered, that for the time to come, no
Utter-Barister begin to practice publicly at any Bar at Westminster, until
he has been three years at the Bar; except such Utter-Barister, as for the
time be or shall have been Readers in some House of Chancery. Cap. 71.


8. That none be admitted to the Bar, but only such as be at the least of
eight years continuance, and has kept this Exercises within the House, and
abroad in Innes of Chancery, according to the orders of the House: and none to
be called to the Bar by Readers, but by the Bench, at Parliaments, Councels,
and Pensions: And that when they shall find the number of fit and learned
Students of honest conversation, and well deserving the same.

9. That the Readers hereafter be chosen for their learning; for their duly
keeping of the Exercises of their House; for their honest behavior and good
disposition: and such, as for their experience and practice be of best note,
and best able to serve the Commonwealth. And if any refuse to Read, then they
to undergo such Fine and censure, as the Benchers and Readers shall think fit
to lay upon them: which if they shall refuse to pay, or perform, then upon
complaint to the Judges, such course to be taken by them, as shall enforce them
to the performance thereof.

10. That double Readings be strictly observed in every House, at the least
once in two years in the Lent: and if any be appointed double Reader, and shall
refuse to perform the same, he shall be fined; which Fine shall not be under
the sum of xl1. and it shall be allowed to the next double Reader of the same
House.

11 That no Benchers be called, but such as be fittest, both for their
learning, practice, and good honest conversation; And that they call not to the
Bench too often, but very sparingly, in respect of the great multitude that be
already.

12. For that an outward decency in Habit and Apparel is an ornament to all
Societies, and contains young men within the bounds of Civility and Order; it
is ordered, that no Gentleman of any House of Court, or Chancery, shall come
into the several Halls, Chapels, and places of public Prayer, with Hats,
Cloaks, Boots, Spurs, Swords, or Daggers; or shall wear long Hair; upon pain to
undergo the penalties contained in the Orders of the several Houses, Which are
strictly to be put in execution.

13. Lastly, for that all Government is strengthened or slackned by the
observing or neglecting of the reverence and respect which is to be used
toward the Governors of the same; therefore it is required, that due
reverence and respect be had by the Utter-Baristers and younger sort of
Gentlemen to the Readers, Benchers, and Ancients of every House.

Tho. Coventry C. s. Nic. Hyde. Rich. Hutton. Tho. Trevor. Tho. Richardson.
Will. Jones. George Vernon. John Walter. James Whitlock. Francis Harvey. Humph.
Davenport. John Denham. Geo. Crook.

Cap. LXXI.
At White Hall 19. Martii 1636. (viz. at the Council Table.) Registro de Grays
Inn. Vol. 2. f. 412. b.

THeir Lordships did this day order, that when any Sergeant, or Councellor at
Law shall at any time come before the Board, to move their Lordships concerning
any matter, and shall not wear their Gowns according to their places; upon such
neglect by any of them, if it be a Sergeant, he to deposite immediately xxs. and
if it be a Counselor xs. which the Clerk of the Council attendent, who is to
distribute the same to the poor.

Cap. LXXII. Cap. 72.

A Table of the mootable days, in the Reading times, for the Innes of Chancery.
DIe Lune in prima septimana ante Meridiem. Fuurnivall's Inn. Bernard's Inn.
Die Martis ante Meridiem. Furnivall's Inn. Bernard's Inn. Staple Inn.
Thavyes Inn.
Die Mercurii ante Meridiem. Null. Die Iovis ante Meridiem. Furnivall's Inn.
Bernard's Inn. Staple Inn. Thavyes Inn.
Die Veneris ante Meridiem Null. Die Sabbati ante Meridiem. Thavyes Inn. Die
Lunae in secunda septimana, ante Meridiem. Furnivall's Inn. Bernard's Inn.
Die Martis ante Meridiem. Furnivall's Inn. Bernards' Inn. Staple Inn.
Thavyes Inn.
Die Mercurii ante Meridiem. Die Iovis, ut in prima septimanna. Die Veneris; ut
in prima septimana. Die Sabati, ut in prima septim. Post Meridiem. New Inn.
Post Meridiem. Clifford's Inn. Post Meridiem. New Inn. Clifford's Inn.
Lyon's Inn. Clement's Inn.
Post Meridiem. Null. Post Meridiem. New Inn. Clifford's Inn. Lyon's Inn.
Post Meridiem. Null. Post Meridiem. New Inn. Clifford's Inn. Lyon's Inn.
Post Meridiem. Null.

Tertia septimana sicut Secunda.

Cap. LXIII. Cap. 73.
C^une^ Table Order.

Sergeants Innes.
OF these there are two, in which the Judges of the Kings Bench, Common Pleas,
Barons of the Exchequer, and Sergeants at Law, have their respective Lodgings;
the one of them being situate in Fleet Street; the other in Chancery Lane.

I cannot take upon me to tell the very time, that the Judges and Sergeants at
Law first seated themselves in either of these, and therefore shall only, in
brief take notice how ancient I find them there.

Sergeants Inn in Fleet Street.
IN this the Sergeants at Law had their residence, about the beginning of K.
Henry the 6 time, if not before: for in a Lease In Archivis ejusdem Hosp.
for eighty years, made by the Dean and Chapter of York (of whose inheritance
in then was and now is) to William Auntrous, Citizen and Tailor of London,
bearing date 1 Oct. 21 H. 6. at the Rent of x. marks sterling, to be paid at
Christmas, Easter, the Nativity of St. John Baptist, and Midsummer by even
portions, it appears to be demised by the name of unum Messuagium, cum gardino,
in parochia S. Dunstani in Fleet Street, in suburbio Civitatis Land. quod nuper
fuit Iohannis Rote, and in quo Io^. Ellerkar, and alii Servientes ad Legem
nuper inhabitarunt.

It is very probable, that this William Antrous did himself then reside in part
of the House, and was in the nature of a Steward to them: and after him, one
John Wykes Esquire for in another Lease, Ibid.
made for the like term of years, and under the same Rent, unto the said John
Wykes, by the Dean and Chapter of York, boaring date 4. Oct. A. 1474. (which is
14 Edw. 4.) it is expressed, that the said John Wykes then inhabited therein. But
in 15 Henr. 8. it was, by another Lease, Ibid.
bearing date 20 Iunii, demised by the said Dean and Chapter, directly, unto
Sir Jews Pollard Knight, then one of the Justices of the Court of Common
Pleas, Robert Norwich, and Tho. Inglefeild, the King's Sergeants at the Law,
John Newdigate, William Rudhale, Humphry Brown, Will. Shelley and Tho.
Willoughby Sergeants at the Law, and Will. Walwyn the King's Auditor in the
South for his Durchy of Lancaster, from the feast of St. Michael the Arch
Angel, then next ensuing, for the term of xxi years, upon the Rent of Liiis.
iiiid. payable at the Feasts of the Annunciation of our Lady, and St. Michael
the Arch Angel. Since which time the Judges and Sergeants, have by other
Leases, from the same Dean and Chapter of York held it till this day.

Insignia in fenestris Refectorij infra cognomSERIEANTS INN in FLEETESTREETE
A.oD. 1599. uti tunctemporis reperta sunt per GUIL BURTON interioris Templi
socium, in rebusque Heraldicis non mminime peritum.
























































































































































































































Insignia in Fenestris dicti Refectorij de SERIEANTS INN in FLEET STREET
existentia XVj February AD, 1664.




























































































Cap. LXXIV.
Sergeants Inn in Chancerylane. Ex Rotuits Compotor^m in Achivis ven. pitris
Dom. Mat. Elica. Epise. An. 1641.

OF this House, the inheritance whereof belongs to the Bishops of Ely, the
ancientest mention I find, is in 17 R. 2. at Which time it was called
Tenementum Domini Ioh. Skarle, and let by the Bishop's appointment to one of
the Clerks of the Chancery, as appears by the Bailiffs Account to the then
Bishop. Next, that in an. 1401. (3 H. 4.) it was called Hospicium Domini Ioh.
Skarle.

About three years after ( viz. an. 1404. 5. H. 4.) in another Account is this
expression; Dominus Rob. Faryndon Clericus dom. Regis, habet Pensionem sibi
concessam ab Episcopo, de vil. xiiis, iiiid. per annum percipiendam de redditu
Hospicii domini in Chancelerslane, and ea occasion tenet idem Hospicium. In
the Account Of 7 H. 4. it is said, Hospicium nuper Faryngdon, in
Chancelers-lane, extitit vacuum per dimidium anni, ad decasum iii1. vis. viid.
and in 8. H. 4. Hospicium Domini Ioh. Skarle conceditur cuidam Clerico
Cancellariae per praeceptum Domini. But in an. 1411. (12. H. 4.) it was called
Faryndon-Inne; so also in 12 H. 4.

I am of opinion, that the Sergeants at Law had lodgings here at this time: for
within three years after, ( viz. in an. 1414. 2 H. 5. the Bishop's Bailiff
Accounts for the repair of Askham's Chamber: By which it may seem, that the
lodgings were let apart; but soon after, the whole House was entirely demised
to the Judges and others learned in the Law; for in an. 1416. (4 H. 5.) there
is accounted to the Bishop vi1. xiiis. iiiid. pro Faryndon's Inn, in
Chancelers-lane, dimisso Rogero Horton and Willielmo Cheney Iusticiariis, and
Waltero Askham Apprentisio Legis.

Besides this Walter Askham, there was about this time one Robert Askham
Sergeant at Law, who was of Council to the Bishop Of Ely, and had xls. per
annum pension for the same.

It seems that the Judges and Sergeants, were not constant Tenants to the
Bishop in those days, Cap. 74.
for this House; for in an. 1425. (3 H. 6.) these are the words of the Account,
-- Hospicium in Chancelers-lane stetit inoccupatum per totum annum, circa
reparationem ejusdem; and contra annum sequentem dimittitur 1. Martin, and
Iacobo Strangwiz, and T. Rolf Iusticiariis, ad v. lib. and then soon after, sc.
in an. 1430. (9 H. 6.) it had the name of Hospicium Iusticiariorum.

In an. 1430. (9 H. 6.) it was again demised Ioh. Hody, and aliis Servientibus
Legis for the Rent of v1. per annum. In an. 1474. (14 E. 4.) it was let to Sir
Robert Danby Knight then Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas, and other
the Judges of that time, at iiii1. per annum. And two years after, sc. in an.
1476. (16. E 4.) to Sir Tho. Gray, Knight, at the like Rent of iiii1. per an.
which Rent from him the said Sir. Tho. Gray, is accounted for, from that time
till the year 1481. inclusive. And in an. 1484. (2. R. 3) the same Sir Tho.
Gray had a new Lease thereof, by the name of Hospicium Vocatum Sergeants Inn
in Chancelers-lane, at iiii1. per an. doing all repairs, which Rent he paid
till the year 1490. (6 H. 7.) how much longer I find not; for in an. 1492. (8
H. 7.) it was in the Bishop's hand for lack of a Tenant. But after this, it was
but a while out of the Judges and Sergeants tenancy; for in an. 1508. (which
was the last year of K. H. 7. (...) (then two of the King's ^erjea^ts at Law)
at the Rent of iiiil. per an. keeping all repairs.

After this viz. in 2 E. 6. T. Goodrick then Bishop of Ely, by a Lease bearing
date 17 Dec. demised it to Chr. Fulnetby, his brother in Law (for he married
his sister) for Lxxxi. years: which Lease coming by mean assignment to Sir
Anth. Ashley Knight. and then by surrender to Bishop Felton, that Bishop granted it
to the said Sir Anth. for three lives ( viz. of Phil. then his wife, since
married to Carey Rawley Esquire and two of his servants,) under Whom the Judges and
Sergeants do now hold it

Insignia in Fenestris Refectorij at SERIEANTS INN in CHANCERYE LANE
existentia XVj A.D. 1664.


















































Cap. LXXV.
Scroopes Inn.
This is now called Scroopes Court; but was an Inn for Sergeants at the Law in
K. Ric. the 3 time; for in some ancient Accounts In an. 1484 (2 ^. 3.) pe^^s
M^^he^n Elies. Epi^c. ^. n. 1640.
of the Bayliff^ to the Bishop of Ely (unto whose House in H^lburn it
adjoyneth) it is called Mansio domini (...) R^lton, modo vocata le Sergeants
place. So also, Apud Guild Hall.
by an Inquisition taken 13 Oct. 14. H. 7. at the Guild Hall in the City of
London; is appears, Cap. 76.
that Sir Guy Fairfaix Knight, sometime one of the Justices of the King's
Bench, and then deceased, was sciled thereof, by the name of one message, or
tenement called Sergeants Inn, situate in Holburne opposite to St. Andrew's
Church; with two Gardens and two Cottages there to adjoining; and being so
seized, by his Deed indented, bearing date 8 Febr. 9. H. 7. did pass the same
to Sir John Scrope Knight, Lord Scrope of Bolton, and others; to the use the
said John, his heirs and assigns for ever.

Cap. LXXVI.
Monuments in the Chapel of the Rolls.
Against the North wall is the effigies of Doctor Young Dean of York and Master
of the Rolls, in a Scarlet robe and a four-corner'd Cup, with this Epitaph.

Dominos firmamentum meum.
IO Yo^^ Legum Doctori, Sacrorum
Seriniorum and hujus Domus
Custodi; Decano-olim Ebor.
Vita defuncto xxv Aprilis,
Sui fideles Executores
Hoc posuerunt MDxvi.
On the South side, opposite to the former, is a fair Monument with the
effigies of a man in Armor kneeling, and of his wife and children, with this
Epitaph.

RIcardus Allington Armiger,
qut hic sepultus est, obiit
xxiii. die Novembris 1561.
Hospes qui fueram quondam, si quaeris Amice,
Nomen Allingtonus stirps generosa fuit.
Haec monumenta mihi conjux sidissima struxit;
Quae mihi struxit, destinatilla sibi;
Charaque conjugii tres nacta pignora nostri
Sunt vultus, quarum marmora sculpta tenent*
Cum matre had omnes precor ut post funera sum
Coelica perducas in tua regna Deus.
On the North side of the same Chapel, Cap. 77.
is a large Monument for the Lord Kinlosse sometime Master of the Rolls, with
his effigies at length, in a Gown, with this Epitaph.

FUIMUS.
Sacrae memoriae
DOmini Edwardi Bruce, Baronis
Bruce, Kinlossensis, Sacrorum Scriniorum
Magistri diactum: Qui obiit 14 Ian. Sal. 1610 Aetat. 62. Iacobi Regis 8.
Brucius Edwardus situs hic et Scotus and Anglus,
Scotus ut ottu, Anglis sic oriundus avis;
Regno in uttroque decus tulit auctus honoribus amplis,
Regi a Consiliis Regni uttriusque fuit:
Conjuge, prole, nuru, genero, spe, reque beatus,
Vivere nos docuit, nunc docet ecce mori.
Cap. LXXVII.
The Copy of a Letter from the Lords of her Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Council, Ex ipso autog. in bibl. Cotton. an. 1661.
to the Shireeves of the several Counties in England, for easing them of the
charge in entertainment of the Justices of Assize and Jail-delivery, with Diet,
in their respective Circuits 21 Febr. an. 1573. 16 Eliz.
AFter our hearty commendations; Where, of long time, many Gentlemen, some
elegible to be Sheriffs; some that have been in Office in the most part of the
Counties of this Realm, have both in Parliament and other places complained of
the great burden and charge sustained in the said Office of Sheriff-wick, by
reason (as they have alleged) of the large diets and other charges of the
Justices of Assize, and Goaldelivery, yearly increasing in such sort, as many
Gentlemen, very meet for that Office in respect of their wisdom and dexterity,
to execute the same, though not so meet for wealth to bear the charge of
expenses, have of late years made most earnest suits to be forborne, only for
want of wealth to bear that burden. The Queens Majesty calling this cause now
of late into her remembrance, has thought it very necessary to cause the same
to be considered by her Counsel, and remedy to be provided therefore as the
cause may bear it. And in consideration hereof, it is by her Majesty and use of
her Counsel well perceived; that by the Petitions of diverse of the Sheriffs in
sundry Counties appearing in the Exchequer for the allowances for the Diets and
other charges of the said Justices, the same are yearly grown more and more in
charge to the said Sheriffs; and consequently her Majesty thereby more charged
than in reason ought to be allowed. And therefore to remedy this matter; it is
determined by her Majesty, with the advice of us of her Privy Counsel, that the
Sheriffs shall not after this Lent Assizes have that charges of the Justices of
Assizes Diets; but that the said Justices shall have of her Majesty, several
sums of money out of her Coffers, for their daily Diets, during the time that
heretofore the Sheriffs have been chargeable withal within their Counties;
with which determinations the more part of the said Justices have been by
diverse of us of her Majesty's Counsel made acquainted, and hereof we have
thought good to give you knowledge, as we do the like to all other Sheriffs in
the Realm; to the intent you may after this Lent Assizes forbear to enter into
such further charges; and yet it is meant that you shall against the Summer
Assizes by the authority of your Office, aid and assist the Servants of the
said Justices that shall require your advice or help, to make provisions for
their Masters Diets, and for lodgings and House-room at as reasonable charges
as may and ought to be for the Queens Majesty's Service, and as reason also
requires; that the said Justices in respect of their painful and careful
Services for administration of Justice should be both honorably and favorably
used in all things requisite for their own persons and Train; whereof, we trust
both you, as Sheriffs now being, and all other succeeding you, will have a care
and due regard. Finally, we also warn you, that now, when you shall be
unburdened hereof, as of a matter long time complained, you do not for your
private respect enter into any such unnecessary charge, as has not in former
times of her Majesty's Father or other her Progenitors been used nor allowed;
for it is not meant to give you allowance hereafter of any thing upon your
account, that shall not be well warranted to be allowed unto you. We also have
given notice unto the Justices, that it shall be very convenient that at the
first coming to the place appointed for the Sessions, they do begin to hear and
determine the causes of the Prisoners in your charge; and so far forth as it
conveniently may be done, proceed to the delivery of the Gaol, before they
proceed to the Assizes, whereby the attendance of the multitude of the Justices
of Peace shall not need to be so long as if the Jail-deliver should be last.
And therefore we will that you do so make ready your Gaol and Prisoners, that
the Justices may first finish that service, being the principal cause of their
Sessions; and so we bid you right heartily Farewell. From Hampton Court the 21.
day of February, 1573.

For these next Assizes it shall suffice that you make provision for two messes
of meat well furnished, and in case over and besides that, you shall demand any
further allowance of the Justices Diets, it is not meant you shall have any
allowance for the same afterward; you see what Order it has pleased her
Majesty to take herein.

Your Loving Friends W. Burghley. A. Warwick. F. Knollys. E. Lyncoln. F.
Bedford. T. Smith. T. Sussex. R. Leycester. F. Walsyngh. R. Sadleir. W. Mildmay.

CHRONICA SERIES Cancellariorum and Custodum Magni Sigilli; Thesaurariorum;
Iusticiariorum Itinerantium, Iusticiariorum ad Placita coram Rege and de
Communi Banco; Baronum de Scaccario, Magistorum Rotulorum, Attornatorum and
Sollicitatorum Regis, Servientium ad Legem Per Gulielmum Dugdale Warwicensem
NORROY Regem Armorum.

THE INDEX.
A.
ARMS, Viz. In the Windows of the Inner Temple Hall. 184. etc. In the Windows
of the Middle Temple Hall. 22^. etc. In Lincolnes-lnne Chapel, 238. etc. And
Hill. 241. In Grays-line Hill, 300 And Chapel. 308. Arms of the several lnnes
of Court and Innes of Chancery. Arms in the Windows of Serjeants-Inne in
Fleet Street. 324, etc. Arms in the Windows of Serjeans-Inne in Chancery Lane.
329.
B.
BArnard's-Inne. 210. b.
C.
CHancery Court, its antiquity. 32. a. Chancellor of England: the dignity of his
Office. 35. a. His jurisdiction for hearing of Civil Causes, how ancient. 36.
b. His Seat in Westminster Hall, where anciently. 37. a. The order of his going
thither when he is first advanced to that place. 37. b. Clement's-Inne. 187. b.
Clyfford's-Inne. 187. a. Common Pleas Court, where kept. 38. b. Number of
Judges antinently fitting there. 39. b. Catalogue of the Judges thereof from 7
R. 1. till this time; wherein is showed the first and last Return of each Term
that any of them sat. 41. a. Courts of Justice, where anciently held. 22. a.
b. etc. Court Baron. 25. a. Hundred Court. 26. a. Tribing, or Lathe. 26. b. The
Judges anciently therein. Ibid. County Court, the antiquity thereof. 28. b. Of
what Causes it anciently held Plea. 2^. a. b. And where. 31. b. Court Leet, 32.
a. Court of K. Bench. 38. a.
E.
Exchequer-Court, its antiquity. 49. a. Who anciently sat there. 49. b. Fines
levied therein. 50. a. Common Pleas there held. 50. b.
F.
Flues, how ancient; in what manner, before whom, and where levied. 91. b.
Furnivall's-Inne. 270. a.
G.
GOvernment, the original thereof. 1. a. Gray's-Inne. 271. a. The Buildings.
272, a. The Walks. 272. b. Orders for Government there. 273. a. 286.
Admittances. Ibid. Exercises for Learning. 274. a. 289. a. Of Readers and
Double-Readers. 279. a. 288. a. O Commons. 277. a. 287. O Barristers. 280. b.
288. b. Of Apparel. 281. b. The Chapel. 283. b. 287. Sports and Pastimes.
285. a. Laundresses. 286. a. Lodging of Strangers. 286. a. Lodging out of the
House. 286. a. Relief the Poor. 286 b. Officers of the House. 286. b. The
ancient standing Orders and Constitutions of the House. 286. Catalogue of the
Readers. 292. a. And Treasures. 298.
Arms in the (Hall there. 300. etc. And Chapel. 308.

I.
INaes of Court and Chancery, their antiquity. 141. a. Innes of Chancery. 143.
b. Inner Temple. 144. a. How anciently a Mansion for Students of the Law. 145.
a. The Buildings there. 146. a. Orders for Government and advancement of
Learning. 147. b. Grand-Christmasses kept there. 150. b. Readers Feast, An.
1661. 157. a. Orders and Exercises there. 158. a. Officers of the House. 161.
b. Catalogue of the Readers. 163. etc. Treasurers. 170. Governors. 172.
The Church. 173. etc. Monuments and Epitaphs therein. Ibid. Arms in the great
hall there. 184. etc. Judges, whereof first of the King himself. 19. a. Justice
of England, the antiquity and continuance or that great Office. 20. a. b.
Justices of the King's Courts in Westminster. Hall, how created. 97. a. Their
riding to Westminster Hall. 97. b. Their ancient Robes and Vestments. 98. a.
Expressed in Pictures. 100. Their present Vestments. or. a. Anciently dignified
with the order of Knighthood of the Bath. 102. b. Their ancient Salaries. 104.
a. Iustices-Itinerant, their antiquity. 51. a. Their Office. 52. a. b. Their
Cess^^on. 52. a. Justices of Assi^e and Gaol Delivery. 52. a. Letters from the
Lords of the Council for easing the Sheriffs of their Entertainment. 320.
K.
Kings-Bench-Court. 38. a.
L.
LAws, their beginning. ^. b. Their antiquity in England. 3. a. Laws and
Lawmakers in England. 4. b. Viz. Those of the Saxon Kings. 5. a. Those from
the Norman Conquest. 5. b. Brittish-Laws. 54. a. Saxon-Laws, where to be seen.
54. a. b. Laws since the Norm^n Conquest till K. Henry the 3ds. time; what, and
where to be found. 55. a. Lawyers anciently Ecclesiastique Persons 21. a. etc.
Law-Writers and Law Books, a Catalogue; as well of such as are not published by
the Press, as ^o those that are. 55. b. Lincolne's-lane. 231. a. The Buildings
there. 231. b. The Chapel. 234. a. Portraictures in the Windows thereof. 236.
a. Arms in the Hall and Chapel. 238, 239, 240, 241. Orders for Government
there, viz. 1. Admittances 242. a. 2. Exercies for advancement of Learning 242.
b. 3. (...), Readers in Chancery. 243. b. 4. (...) 243. b. 5. Beards, 244. a.
6. Weapons. 244. b. 7. Preceedance. 244. b. 8. (...). 244. b. 9.
Divinity-Lecture. 244. a. 10. (...) Expenses at great Solemnitio^* 24^. b. 11.
(...) 12. (...) 13. (...) the reader. 246. b. 14. Rules or their Reading. 247.
a 15. (...) Ceremony thereof. 248. a. 16. Catalogue of the Readers. 249. etc.
Catalogue of the Grveracurs. 257. Touching restraint of Building in
Lincoln-^ane-fields. 267. b. Orders in this Society hang up in a Tablet in the
Battery. 268. b. (...) 187. b.
M.
MAg^^ (...). and Charta de Foresta, how and when first obtained. 9. a. etc.
When and by whom confirmed. 11. a etc. 13. b. Middle Temple. 138. a. The
B^ildings there. Ibid. Orders for Government there. 191. a. b. 1^2. a. b. The
ancient Orders and Customs for Government there. 193. a. b. etc. The state of
the House at this day. 197. a. etc. Catalogue of the Readers. 215. etc.
Catalogue of the Treasurers. 221. etc. Arm^^^ the Hall. 223. 8. c. (...) in the
Reading times for the (...) of C^^ncery. 322.
N.
New^^^^^. 230. ^.
O.
ORders for Government, made by the Judges, relating to all the Inns of Court.
310. b. Order by the Lords of the Council touching the Habits in which the
Serica^ts and Lawyers shall come to the (...) Table. 321. O^tlaries how
ancient. 96. a.
P.
PArliaments (or great Counsels) their antiquity in England. 14. b. The
Commons represented therein before the Norman Conquest. ^5. b. And after. 16.
a. b. By whom. 17. a. etc. When first by two Knights for each Shire, and two
Burgesses for a Barrough. 18. a. b. etc. Pleadings in the French tongue. 95. b.
Limitation as to time of Pleading in some Cases. 96. b. Punishment in Cases
Criminal, the various manners thereof anciently. 88. a. etc.
R.
REadings in the Inns of Court; Order by the Judges for regulating thereof.
247. a. b. 248. a. Rolls in Chancery-Line; Monuement all ^ascriptions there.
329.
S.
Scroor's-line. 329. Seals to Characters, their antiquity. 33. a. etc.
Sergeants at Law. The antiquity of that their state and degree. 110. a. The
ancient form and order in making them. 111. b. 113. a. 114. a. 117. b. 119. b.
Liveries given by them at their Creations. 125. b. 129. a. Their great Feasts.
127. a. Attendance of Officers there^^. 131. a. Rings given at their Creation.
130. a. Their Writ of Summons 136. a Their Rabes 136. b. When first made
Knights. 137. 3. The from and order of (...) ^jeant at Law, as it is at this
(...) ^ 137. b. 13^ a. A Discharge of the Degree of Sergeant at Law. 139. b.
140. b. Serjeants-Iane in Fleet Street. 323. a. Arms in the windows there, 324.
etc. Staple Jane. 310. a. Staple Jane. 23. b.
T.
Terms in the Year; (Viz Hillary; Easter, Trinity and (...)) their Originalls.
89. a. Temple. See Inner Temple, and MiddleTemple. T^^yes-I^^e. 270. b. Trial
By XII. Me^, the antiquity thereof, 64. b. By Combat, the form and order
thereof. In Cases Civil. 65. a. In Cases Criminal. 75. b.
By Great(...) when first institueted; with the manner thero^. (...) b. etc. By
Fire and water Ordale, the anti^quity and order thereof, 86. a Its abolition.
87. b.

W.
WAger of Law, very ancient. 88. a.
CHRONICA SERIES
A. D. A. R. Cancellar. and Custod. Sig. Thesaurariorum. Iusticiariorum
Angliae. Iusticiariorum Itinerantium. 1173. Hen. II. 20. Radulphus de
Warnevilla. Flor. hist. and M. Paris in an. 1173. Fuit Sacrista Rothom. and
Thesaurarius Ebor. Ibid. 1176.... 22.... Warinus fill. Geroldi cui Rex H. 2.
concessit Cameram de Thesaurosou. Plac. in. com. summers. 11. E. 1. Missi per
singulos Aagliae Comitat^s, con^ilio Archiepiscoporum, Episcoporum, Comitum and
Baronum, etc. Regni, apud, Notingham existen^ium. R. Hoved. f. 313. a. ^. 50.
and 313. b. M. Paris. in anno 1176. (22. H. 2.) Hugo de Cressi. Walt. Filius
Roberti. Robertus Mantel. Norff. S^ff. Cantabr. Hunt. Bed^. Buck. Essex. Hartf.
Hugo de Gundevilla. Will. filius Radulfi. Willielmus Basset. Linc. Not. Derb.
Staff. Warwick. Northampt. Leicester.
Rob. fill. Bernardi. Ric. Giffard. Roger. Filius Reinfridi. Kent. Surr. Hants.
Sussex. Berks. Oxon.
Will. filius Stephani Bertramus de Verdon. Thurstanus fill. Simonis. Hereford.
Glouc. Wigorn. Salop.
Rad. Filius Stephani. Will. Ruffus. Gillebertus Pipard. Wilts. Dorset. Summers.
Devon. Cor^ub.
Ric. de Walls. Rad. de Glanvile. Robertus Pikenot. Ebor. Richm. Lanc. Copland.
Westmerl. Northumb. Clumb.

1179. 25. Ric. (fill. Nigelli Eliensis Episcopi) R. Hoved. f. 337. a. Decanus
Linc. 30. H. 2. Cod. M. Penes Dec. and cap. Land. (B) f. 34. b. (postea Episc.
Land.) -- Post Pascha, Ric. de Luci Iusticiarius Augliae, relicta Iusticiaria
potestate, factus est Canonicus regularis in Abbaria de Lesnes quam ipse in
fundo suo fecerat. R. Hoved. f. 337. a. Magno Concilio celebrato apud
Windeshores, communi consilio Archiepiscoporum, Comituni and Baronum, coram
Rege filio suo, Rex divisit Angliam in quatuor Parts, and unicquique partium
Prefecit viros sapientes, ad faciendum Iusticiam in terra sua, in hunc modum.
R. Hoved. f. 337. a. b. An. 1179. 25. H. 2.
Ric. Episc. Winton. Ric. Thesaur. Regis. Nich. Filius Toroldi. Thomas Baster.
Robertus de Witefeld. Hants Wilts. Glouc. Dorset. Summers. Devon. Cornub. Berks.
Oxon.
Gaufr. Elien, Episc. Nich. Capellanus Regis. Gilebertus Pipard. Regin. de
Wisebec Cleri^us Regis. Gaufridus Hosee. Cantabr. Hunt. Northampt. Leicester.
Warwic. Wigorn Heref. Staff. Salop.
Ioh. Episc. Norwic. Hugo Murdac Cleric. R. Mich. Belet. Ricardus del Pec.
Radulphus Brito. Norff. Stuff. Essex. Hertf. Midd. Kent. Surr. Suss. Buck. Bedf.
Godefridus de Luci. Johannes Cumin. Hungo de Gaerst. Ranulphus de Glanvilla.
Willielmus de Bendings. Alanus de Furnellis. Notingh. Derb. Ebor. Northumb.
Westminster. Cumb. Innter Rible and Merse. Lanc.

Isti sex sunt Iusticiae in curia Regis constituti, ad audiendum clamores
populi. R. Hoved. f. 337. a. b. A. D. A. R. Cancel. and Custod. S.
Thesaurariorum. Iusticiariorum Angliae. Iusticiariorum. Iusticiariorum
Itinerantium. 1181. Hen. 11. 26. (...) filius (nothus) Regis H. 2. constitutes,
Cancellarius. R. Hov. f. 349. ^. 10. A. M CLXXX. Ran. de Glavil. constitutus
summus Iusticiarius totius Angl. R. Hoved. f. 343. b. n. 30. M. Paris in eodem
an. Obiit in obsidione de Acon 1 R. 1. R. Hoved. f. 390. b. n. 20. Godefr. de
Luci. Johannes Cumin. Hugo de Gaerst. Ran. de Glanvilla. Will. de Bendings.
Alanus de Furnellis. R. Hov. f. 313. n. 50....... Gualterus de Bidun. Lel. Col.
vol. 1. 2. 38. Rob. Grimbald. Monast. Anglic. vol. 2. p. 278. (...) 33. Rad.
Archid. Colcestr. Rogerus fill. Reinfredi. Robertus de Witefeld. Mich. Belet. F.
lev. in curia Regis apud Cantuar. die Veneris prox. post festum S. Johan. Bapt.
Ex autogr. penes Math. Hales eq. aur. cap. Baronem de Scacc. an. 1661. 1187.
34. Godefridus de Luci Archid. and Will. Vavasour. Regist. de Wirksop. in bibl.
Seld. f. 49.
1189. Ric. I. 1. Will. de Lo^gacampo (postea f^ctus Eli^a. Episc.) R. Hoved.
f. 375. a. a. 40. -- In Concilio apud Pipwell, Rex constituit Hugonem Dunelm.
Episc. and Will. Comitem Albamarliae summos Iusticiarios Angliae R. Hov. fol.
375. b. n. 20. Rex Doveram profectus, ad transfretandum etc. Iusticiariam
Angliae cis Trentam Williel. de Longocampo Eliensi Episc. and ultra Trentam
Hugoni Dunelm. Episc. Commisit. R. Hov. f. 378. b. n. 40. M. Paris in an. 1189.
1193. 4. Hugo Bardulf, vicecomes Ebor. Justice. Regis. R. Hov. f. 412. b. n. 30.
1194. 5. Rex misit in Angliam pro Waltero Rothomagensi Episcopo, etc.
Constituit Hubertum Cantuar. Archiep. summum Iusticiarium in Anglia. R. Hoved.
fol. 416. b. n. 10. Mat. Westminster. in eodem an. -- Mense Sept. Missi sunt ex part
Regis, per singulos Comitatus Angliae, Iusticiarii errantes. R. Hoved. f. 423.
a. n. 30. An. D. An. R. Cancel. and Custod. Sigil. The saurariorum.
Iusticiariorum Angliae. 1067. W. Conq. 1. Mauricius (postea London. Episc.) W.
Malmesb. de gestis Pontif. lib. 2. f. 134. b. l. 53. Odo Episc. Bajoccusis and
comes Cantii. Gulielmus fill. O^berni. Hiis doubas praefectaram Angl^ae Rex
commisit.
Ord. Vit. p. 106. C. lib. 7. f. 213. n. 50. lib. 3. f. 62. b. l. 53. H. Huat.
W. Malm.
...... Osmundus ( Postea Sarum Episc.) Godw. de praesul. p. 389. 1073. 6.
Arfastus (Episc. Helmamensis) testis Cartae Regis Will. senioris factae Decano
and Canon. S. Martini Land. Pat. 8. E. 2. p. 1. m. 3. per Inspex. Guil. de
Warenna Ric. de Benefacta (filius Gisleberti Comitis) Praecipu^ Angliae
Iusticiarii. Ord. Vit. p. 535. a.
...... Baldricus testis Cartae Regis W. Conq. Factae Monachis de S. Florentio,
de Eccl. de Andeura. Pat. 8. E. 2. p. 2. m. 1. per Inspex. Goisfridus
Constancieasis Episcopus, in loco Regis fuit, and Iusticiam tenuit in illo
notabili placito apud Pinendene, inter Lanfrancum Archiepiscopum Cantuar. and
Odonem Commitem Cantii. Textus Roff. f. 50....... Hermannus Episc.
Scireburnensis....... Willielmus Welson (Capellanus Regis) Chron. Rob. de
Monte....... Will. Giffard (Episc. Winton.) testis Cartae Regis Willicimi, quam
fecit Ecclesiae S. Petri de Scrobesbiri. Cart. 51. H. 3. m. 1. per Iaspex.
1087. Will. Ruf. 1. Odo Episc. Bajoceasis, Iusticiarius and Princeps totius
Angliae. H. Hunt. lib. 7. p. 212. b. l. 49. and f. 213. a. n. 52. 1088. 2.
Willielmus Dunelm. Episcopus, factus Iusticiarius Regis. W. Malm. lib. 4. f.
67. b. l. 36. M. Paris. p. 14. n. 30....... Robertus Cogn. Bloet (postea Linc.
Episc.) Rog. Hoved. f. 265. b. n. 30. M. Paris. p. 17. n. 20. Ranulphus
Flambard ( Dunclm. Episc.) Ord. Vit. p. 786 C. M. Paris. p. 56. n. 40.... Henr.
1.... Will. Giffard (Episc. Wiat.) testis Cartae Regis, H. 1. factae Eccl. de
Rovecestr. Regist. Roff. cap. 6. Galfridus de Clinton, fundator Prioratus and
Castride Kenilw. in agro Warw. Regist. Pr. de Kenilw. Penes Sim. Clark bar. p.
1. Hugo de Bocland. M. Paris. p. 240. n. 10....... Rogerus (postea factus
Episc. Sarum) W. Malm. f. 91. a. l. 2. and f. 104. a. n. 50. and 104. b. n. 10.
Rad. cogn. Basset. Regist. Abbendoniae in bibl. Cotton. f. 165. a. Epist. H.
Hunt. de contemptu mundi MS. in bibl. Cotton. f. 8. b. Ord. Vit. p. 629.
c....... Galfridus. cogn. Ruffus (Postea Episc. Dunelm.) H. Hunt. f. 220. b.
10. R. Hoved. f. 275. a. n. 30. Testis Cartae Regis H. 1. 33. H. 1. Monast.
Anglic. vol. 2. p. 387. l. 22. Ranulphus Dunclmensis Episc. M. Paris. p. 56. n.
40....... Ricardus Basset, filius praedicti Radulphi Basset. Epist. H. Hunt. ut
supra. Ord. Vit. p. 905. D. Lel. Coll. vol. 1. p. 17....... Galfridus Ridel.
Epist. H. Hunt. ut supra. Lel. Coll. vol. 1. p. 16....... Galfridus de Clinton.
Epist. H. Hunt. ut supra....... Rogerus Salisb. Episc. H. Hunt. lib. 7. f. 219.
4. Ord. Vit. p. 919. C. An. D. An. R. Cancellar. and Custod. Sig.
Thesaurariorum. Iusticiariorum Angliae. Iusticiariorum Itinerantium.... Hen.
1.... Randulphus. H. Hu^t. f. 218. b. n. 40. Flores hist. (...). MCXII. Epist.
H. Hunt. de contempt^ mundi, (...) bibl. Cotton. f. 4. a. Nigellus Episcopus
Eliensis. R. Hoved. f. 275. a. n. 30. Albericus de Vere. Ex cod. MS. de
miraculis S. Osithae, inter I. Lelandi Collectanea....... Gaufr. Episc.
Dunelmensis. Regist. E^^^ Elien. in bib^. Cotton. sub ^^figie Tit^ A. 1. f. 29.
a.... Steplt. Alera^der Episc. Linc. G^^l. Nabrigeasis. lib. 1. cap. 6. Rogerus
Saresburieasis Episc. Et Willielm. de Pontearcus W. Malm. f. 101. a. n.
10....... Rogerius cogn. Pauger (filius Rolgeri Sa^esb. Episcopi) Ord. Vit. p.
919. C. D. 920. A. and 978. A. 1153. 18. Plulippus.... Regist. Eccl. Elien. in
bibl. Cotton. Sub essigie Titi A. 1. f. 32. a. Hen. Dux Normanniae. R. Hoved.
f. 281. n. 20. 1157. Hen. II. 3. Thomas Archidiaconus Cantuariensi. R. Hoved.
s. 281. b. n. 20. Resignvit sigillum anno 1162. Flores hist. Factus Archie^.
Cant. R. Hove^. f. 282. a. n. 20. 1162. 8. Ricardus de Luci. R. Hoved. fol.
283. b. n. 30. Rob. Comes Leicestriae. M. Paris. p. 99. 1. and p. 104. b. n.
40. 1168. 14. Obi^t Rob. Comes Leicestriae, summus Angliae Iusticiarius. R.
Hoved. fol. 293. b. n. 20. 1170. 16. Iusticiarii Itinerantes in Comitatibus
Cantii, Middlesex, Berks. Oxenford, Buck. and Bedford. An. 1170. 16. H. 2.
Chron. Gerv. Dorobern. inter Hist. Angl. Script. antiq. col. 1410.
Abbas S. Augustini Cantuar. Abbas de Cherteseie. Comes de Clare. will. de
Abrincis. Manaserius de Dammartin. Geroldus Filius Radulphi. Gilbertus de
Pinkent. willielmus filius Heltonis. willielmus filius Nigelli. willielmus
filius Martini. Radulphus de Hospitali. Radulphus de Dene.
A. D. A. R. Cancel. and Custod. S. Thesaurariorum. Iusticiariorum Angl.
Iusticiariorum. Justice. Itinerantium. 1196. Ric. 1. 7. -- Deposito H. Cantuar.
Archiep. Gaufridus filius Petri successit ei in regimine regni. R. Hov. f. 443.
a. n. 30. and 40. vid. M. P. and Mat. westminster. in an. 1198. Obiit Gaufr. filius
Petri totius Angl. Iusticiarius 2. Oct. 15. Ioh. Mat. paris p. 236. n. 37. and
p. 243. Iusticiarii in Curia Regis. apud vvestim. F. leavat die mart. Prox.
post Festum S. Dunstani 7. R. 1.
Hubertus Cant. Archiep. Ric. London. Episc. Gilb. Ross^^sis Episc. Rad. Heref.
Archid. Ric. Elien. Archid. will. de vvarenna. Ric. de Heriet. Sim. de
Patshull. Osbertus filius Hervei. Mag. Tho. de Husseburn.
F. lev. apud Norwic. in Festo S. Margar. 7. R. 1.
will. de Glanvill.
F. lev. die Domiminica prox. ante Festum S. Luc. Evang. 7. R. 1.
Mag. H. de Castle, unus Justice. in Curia R. apud westminster.
1197. 8. F. levat. die Lunae prox. post Purif. S. Moriae. 8. R. 1.
Ogerus fill. Ogeri, unus Justice. in Curia R. apud westminster.
1198. 9. Eustachius Eliensis Episcopus. R. Hoved. fol. 449. a. n. 40. Justice.
in Curia R. apud Bedf. F. lev. die lovis prox. post Fest. S. Mich. 9. R. 1.
Galfr. filius Petri. Steph. de Torneham. Tho. de Poterne.
Iusticiarii in Curia Regis apud westminster. ad Scaccarium 9. R. 1. F. lev. die
dom. prox. post. Fest. S. Marci Evang.
H. Cantuar. Archiep. Ric. Eliea. Archid. Sim. de Patshull. Ric. de Heriet.
Osb. fillus Heriet. Mag. Tho. de Husseburn. Hen. de Wichinton.
F. lev. apud westminster. die Iovis prox. post convers. S. Pauli 9. R. 1.
Ioh. de Gestlingeks.
Hugo Bardulf, Mag. Rog. Arandel, and Gaufr. Hachet; quibus Commissae fuerant
Lincolnscire, Notinghamscire, Derbiscire, Everwicscire, Northumb. westmerland,
Cumberland, and Lancaster, Itin^^antes placitaverunt placita Coronae Regis. R.
Hoved. f. 445. b. 1199. 10. Justice. R. apud Westminster. F. lev. die Ven. prox. post
fest. S. Luc. Evang. 9. R. 2.
Godefr. de Luci Wint. Episc. Herbertus Salesb. Episc. Hugo Bardulf.
F. levat. die Dom. prox. post Octab. S. Hill. 10 R. 1.
Mich. Belet unus Justice. in Curia R. apud Northampt.
Justice. in Curia R. apud Norwic. F. levat. in crast. S. Dionisii. 10 R. 2.
Rob. filius Rogeri. Will. de Aubeni.
1199. Ioh. 1. Hubert. Cantuar. Archiep. constit. Cancellarius. R. Hoved. f.
451. a. n. 40. Iusticiarii in Curia Regis apud Westminster. 1 Ioh. Fin. levat. men's.
Pasch.
G. filius Petri. Ric. de Heriet. S. de Patshull. Osb. filius Hervei. Ioh. de
Gestling. Hugo de Bobi. Hen de Wichinton. Eustach. de Faucunburg.
F. lev. XV. Pasch. Crast. Ascens.
Will. de Warenna. Mag. Tho. de Husseburn.
1200. 2. W. Thesaur. Scaccarii. Oblatae 2 Ioh. Fin. lev. 2. Ioh.
Godefr. de Insula. Walt. de Crepping.
A. D. A. R. Cancel. and Custod. S. Thesaurariorum. Justice. Angl.
Iusticiariorum Regis. Baronum de Scaccario. Iusticiariorum Itinerantium. (...)
(...) F. lev. 3 Ioh.
Rad. de Stokes. (Archid. Staff. 7 Ioh.) F. lev. 7 Ioh.
1202. 4. F. lev. 4 Ioh.
M. R. Arundel. Hugo Bardulf.
Oct. Mart. 4 Ioh.
S. de Pathull. Ric. Malbiffe. Henr. de Northampton. Alex. de Pointone.
1203. 5. F. lev. 5 Ioh.
Hugo de Chaucumb. Ioscelinus de Wells.
1204. 6. H^go Archid. Wellen^^ R. Cancell^r^^^. Testis (...) R. Ioh. (...) I
^. 1205. 7. (...) Fin. lev. domin^a prox. post Ascens. 7 Ioh.
Hen. Archid. Staff. Ric. de Mucegros.
1206. 8. (...) 1208. 10. Hugo de Nevill Thesaur, Regis. Pat. 10 Ioh. m. 7.
Adam de Port. Iac. de Poterna. Hen. de Pont Audomare. Rob. de Perci. Alex. de
Pointon. Hen. fill. Hervaei. Will. de Huntingfeld. F. lev. 10. Ioh. Rob. Aumari.
Girardus de Camvill. Will. de Furnellis. Rad. harenge. Henr. de Northampt. F.
lev. 10 Ioh.
Girardus de Camvilla. Will de Huntingfeld. Mag. Eustach. de Faucumberge. Iac.
de Poterne. Walt. de Crepping. Rob. de Aumeri. Apud Linc. a die S. Mich. in
tres septim. Exipso autogr. penes praenob. Tho. Comitem Elginiae.
(...) 12. Will. (de Ely) Canon. Eccl. Liac. Thesaurarius Regis. Pat. 31. H. 6.
p. 2. m... per Inspex. Fin. levat. 12 Ioh.
Rog. Huscarl. Sim. de Waldhull.
1212. 14. Ricardus de Marisco Regis Cancel. Mat. Westminster. G. fill. Petri
Iusticiarius Regis. Saiherus Comes Winton. W. Briwer. Ric. de Mariscis, simul
cumaliis. Claus. 14. Ioh. m. 4. in. dorso.
A. D. A. R. Cancel. and Custod. S. Thesaurariorum. Iusticiariorum Angl.
Iusticiariorum. Iusticiariorum Itinerantium. 1213. Ioh. 15. 19. Oct. Magist.
Ricardus de Marisco Archid. Richm. and Northumb. liberavit Domino Regi Sigil.
apud Ofpreng. Pat. 15 Ioh. p. 1. m. 8. 22. Decemb-Liberatum fuit Sigil. apud
Windlesh. Radulfo de Nevile, sub Domino Winton. Episcopo (sc. Petro de Rup^)
deserendum. Pat. 15 Ioh. p. 1. m. 6. Rex in Pictaviam transfretaturus, dominum
P. Winton. Episc. (sc. Petrum de Rupe) Justice. Angliae, constituit loco suo ad
pacem Regni Angl. tuendam. T. R. apud Portesmuth 1. Febr. Pat. 15. Ioh. m. 4.
and m. 3. F. lev. apud Westminster. XV. Pasch. 15 Ioh.
P. Episc. Win^. S. de Pathhull. Iac. de Poterna. Rog. Huscarl. Henr. de Pont
audomare.
* B. Roffens. Episc. Rad. Tablir. Gilb. de Ambingworth. Hen. de Cobbeham. Ioh.
de Gestl^ng. Iac. le Sauvage Clericus. Just. Itin. in Com. S^^ff. S^rr. ^ Mid.
Pat. 3. H. 3. in dorso

Abbas de Ramsey. Will. de Cantilape. Steph. de Segrave. Will. de Trumpington.
Maur. de Audley. Walt. de Pateshull. Tho. de Heydene. Just. Itin. in Com. Beds.
Back. H^ ^t. (...) North (...) Rult. Ibid.
R. Sarum Epsci. Math. fill. Herberti. Rad. H^reng. Walt. Foliot. Iac. de
Poterna. Walt. de R^pariis. Maur. de T^rvill. Ioh. de Wigenholt Clericus.
Justice. Itin. in Com. Wills. Southampt. Berks. Oxo^. Ibid.

Philippus de Ulecot. Tho. de Muleton. Rad. de la Ferte. Will. de Vernon. Laur.
de Wilton Cler. Justice. Itin. in Com. Cumb. Westmerl. and Lanc.
H. Linc. Episc. Will. de Albini. Ioh. Mar. Adam de Novomercato. Will. de
Cressy. Walt. Mauclerc Clericus. In Com. Lincoln. Nolt. Derb. Ibid. m. 5.

Ioh. de Bajocis. I. Bathon. and Glascon. Episc. In Com. Cor^^b. Devoa. Summers.
Dors. Ibid. m. 5.
Mart. de Patshall. R. Dunclm. Episc. Will. fill. Rogeri. Rog. Huscarle. Rog. de
Veteri ponte. Justice. Itin. per Com. Ebor. and North^^b. Claus. 3 H. 3. m. 13.
in dorso.

In Com. Essex, Her^f. Norff. Suff.
Gaufr. de Bokland. Faukef. de Breant. Rad. Gernun. Walt. de Verdon. Iord. de
Saukevill. Sim. de Insula. Ric. de Seeing. Ioh. de Winchestede. Ap. Westminster. F.
lev. prox. post Festum S. Marg. 3. H. 3.

1214. 16. Hubertus de Burgo. Pat. 16 Ioh. P. Wint. Episc. Ioscelinus de
Stivichal Fin. levat. 16 Ioh.

1216. H. III. 1. Will. Comes Penbroc. Justice. Regis (ut videtur.) M. Paris p.
376. l. 41. 1217. 2. Eustachius de Faucunberg Thesaur. Reg. 4. Nov. Claus. 2.
H. 3. m. 16. Will. Comes Arundel. Martinus de Patshull (Archid. Norff. 12. H.
3.) Simon de Insula. Steph. de Segrave. Alanus Basset. Rad. Hareng. Ioh. de
Gestling. Fin. levat. 2. H. 3. in in Curia domini Regis.
1218. 3. Eustachius de Fauconberg Thesaur. Regis. F. levat. 3. Sept. Trin. 3.
H. 3. (in Ep-Lond. electus an. 1222.) H. Abbas de Ramesa^. Eust^c. de
Fauconberg, R. Thesaurarius. Mart. de Patishull. Tho. de Eydene. Mauric. de
Audeley. F. lev. apud Westminster. 3 Sept. Trin. 3 H. 3.
1219. 4. Hub. de Burgo Justice. Angl. Fin. levat. apud Westminster. 3. Sept. Pasch. 4
H. 3. Rob. de Vere Co. Oxon. Fin. levat. 3. Sept. Pasch. 4 H. 3. Rob. de
Lexinton. F. lev. Oct. Mich. 4 H. 3.
1220. 5. Abbas de Reding. Abbas de Evesham. Mart. de Patshull. Ioh. de
Monemuta. Rad. Hareng. Rad. Musard. Rad. de Lexintone. In Com. Wigorn. Heref.
Glonc. Staf. Salop. Leic. Warw. Wiltes. and Cornub. Claus. 5 H. 3. p. 1. m. 11.
ia dorso.

1221. 6. Ioh. de Monemue. Fin. lev. apud Westminster. crast. Purif. 6 H. 3. 1222. 7.
Hub. de Burgo Justice. R. habet CCC l. annuas ei concessas, ad se sustentandum
in Justice. R. Claus. 7 H. 3. m. 24. Gaufr. le Sauvage. F. lev. apud Westminster. XV.
Mich. 7 H. 3. A. D. An. R. Cancel. and Custod. S. Thesaurariorum. Justice. Angl.
Iusticiariorum. Iusticiariorum Itinerantium. 1223. H. III. 8. R. ((...) Cancel
Claus ^ H. 3. m. 25. (...) Tho. de Muletone. (...) apud West. meas. (...) H. 3.
1224. 9. Claus. 9. H. 3. ia dorso m. 11.
Mat. de Patshull. (Archid. Norff.) Gilb. de Abbingworth, Will de Haunfard,
Ioh. de Wauton. Surr.

M. de Patefhull, Alanus de Englefeld, Johannes de S. Helena. Berks.

M. de Pateshull, Walt, de Verdune, Rob. de Aumari, Ioh. de S. Iohanne. Oxon.

M. de Pateshull, Ioh. de B^^lun, Ric. de Veym, Abbas de Theokesbiry. Glouc.

M. de Pateshull, Galfr. le Sauvage, Hugo le Droes, Rog. de Auntreivye, Regin.
de Kauune. Wiltes.

M. de Pateshull, Ioh. de Beingny, Ior^anus Oliver, Rad. de Lydiard. Sumers.

M. de Pateshull, Aluredus de Lincolnia, Will. le Wale^s, Johannes de Bajocis.
Dorset.

M. de Pateshull, Walt, de Rumesey, Rog. de Balune, Adam de Porteseye. Suthampt.

Ric. de Lexintone, Ric. de Munfichet, Ric. fill. Sinionis, Adam fill. Willielmi,
Hugo de Clahaul. Essex and Hertf.

Sim. de Hall, Ric. Duket, Ric. Beyvill, Hen. de Evesae, Will. de Wythintune,
Walt. fill. Roberti. Cant. and Hunt.

Sim. de Hall, Ric. Duket Archid. Bedf. Walt. fill. Guarini, Henricus de
Braybroc. Bedf.

Simon de Hall, Ricardus Duket, Ric. de Stoke, Walterus Duredent. Buck.

Sim. de Hall, Ricardus Duket, Will. de Fraunchevill, Herbertus de Allentune,
Barth, de Glanvill, Wall. fill. Rocelini, Nich. Pincerna, Will. de Ambly. Norff.
and Suff.

Sim. de Hales, Ric. Duket, Mauric. de Aundeley, Will. de Insula, Mart. de
Pateshull. North. and Rutl.

Rob. de Lexintone, Will. de Vernuue, Rob. filius Willie^mi, Adam de
Novomercato, Will. de Cressy. Not. and Derb.

Robertus de Lexintone, Tho. de Muletone, Will. de Wells, Iordanus de Esseby.
Liac.

Rob. de Lexintone, Will. de Albiniaco, Brunus fill. Alani, Abbas de Saleby,
Rob. de Kokefeild. Theob. de Valoins. Ebor.

Rob. de Lexintone, Rog. de Merlay, Rog. Bertram, Iordanus Heyrun. Northumb.

Rob. de Lexintone, Rad. de la Ferte, Ricardus de Levintune. Cumb.

Robertus de Lexintune, Rad. de la Ferte, Ric. de Levintone, Iordanus Heyrun.
Westmerl.

1225. 10. Warinus fill. Iohelis. F. lev. apud Westminster. 3. Sept. Pasc. 10. H. 3.
Claus. 10 H. 3. in dorso m. 15. Test I. de Muleton apud Westminster. 17. Maii.

Abbas de Burgo, Ioh. de Lasey Coastab. Cestr. M. de Pateshull, H. de Braibroc,
Will. de Insula, Ricardus Duket. Linc.

Episc. Linc. Steph de Segrave, Rob. de Lexintone, Will. fill. Warini, Will.
Basset. Not. Derb.

Rob. de Veteriponte, M. de Pateshull, Tho. de Muleton, Ioh. fill. Roberti,
Brian. de Insula, H. de Braibroc. Ebor.

Abbas de Witeby, M. de Pateshull, Tho. de Muleton, Pertus de Brus, Will. de
Tametone. Northumb.

Mart. de Pateshull, Rogerus de Merlay, Rog. Bertram, Will. de Lancastre. Cumbr.

Martinus de Pateshull, Rad. de la Force, Johannes de Daivill. Westmerl.

Constab. Cestr. M. de Pateshull, Tho. de Muletone, Ran. fill. Roberti, Brianus
fill. Alani. Lanc.

Steph. de Segrave, Rob. de Lexintone, Will. fill. Warini, Rad. Musard. Warw.
Leic.

Abbas de Winchecumb, Steph. de Segrave. Rob. de Lexintone, Will. fill. Warini,
Rad. Musard. Wigora.

Steph. de Segrave, Rob. de Lexintone, Will. fill. Warini, Walt. de Bellow
campo, Walt. le Poer. Glouc.

A. D. A. R. Cancel. and Custod. S. Thesaurariorum. Iusticiariorum Angl.
Iusticiariorum. Iusticiariorum Itinerantium. 1226. H. III. 11. Rad. Nevill.
Cicestr. Episc. factus Cancel. ad vitam. T. etc. 12. Febr. Cart. 11 H. 3. m.
28. Rob. de Veteriponte. Tho. de Muletone. Iord. fill. Roberti. Brianus de
Insula. Fia. levat. 11 H. 3. Claus. 11 H. 3. la dorso in. 23. Test R. apud
Wudestoke 1 Ian.

Steph de Sagrave, Will. fill. Warini, Walt, de Bellocampo, Rad. Musard, Walt.
le Poer. Heref. Oxon.

Tho. de Muletone, Rob. de Lexintone, Warinus fill. Ioelis, Will. de Sorewell,
Iord. Oliver. Summers. Dars. Wills.

Rob. de Lexintone, Sim. de Hale, Warinus fill. Ioelis, Iord. Oliver. Suthampt.

Ibid. m. 5.
Tho. de Muletone, Rob. de Lexintone, Mauricus de Gan^, Rad. Musard. Heref.
Salo^. Staff. Decon Suthampt. Berks.
Mart. de Pateshull, Math. fill. Herberti, Will. de Insula, Ric. Duker. Kanc.
Essex. Her^f. Norff. Suff.
Steph. de Sergrave, Will. de London, Will. fill. Warini, Willielmus Basset,
Ioh. de Kirkeby. Northampt. Bedf. Buck. Cantabr. Hunt. Roteland.
Brianus fill. Alani, Rogerus Bertram, Simon de H^le, Will. de Eboraco. Cumberl.


1227. 12. Hub. de Burgo (Co. K^^lii) habet Iusticiariam Angliae sibi concessam
ad vitam T. etc. 27. Apr. Cart. 12 H. 3. m. 6. Will. fill. Warini. Will. de
Insula. F. lev. 3. Sept. Pasch.
Ioh. Marescallus. Fin. lev. crast. Apost. Ph. and Iac. 12 H. 3.

Hugo de Bolebec, Iordanus Heyrun, Magr. Steph. de Lucy, Will. de Eboraco.
Inf. libertates Ep. Dunelm. T. R. apud Reding 30 Martii. Claus. 12 H. 3. in
dorso m. 10.

1228. 13. Rob. de Lexinton. Will. de. Ralegh. Will. de London. Magr. Rob. de
Cherdelawe. Fi^. lev. XV. Mich. apud Westminster. 13 H. 3. Tho. de Camvill. F. lev.
in crast. Inveat. S. Crucis 13 H. 3. H. de Braibroc. F. lev. 13 H. 3.
1229. 14. Rad. de Norwico constit. unus Justice. de Banco 29. Apr. Claus. 1 H.
3. m. 8. Claus. 14 H. 3. in dorso m. 23.
Tho. de. Muletone, Will. de Ralegh, Will. de London, Will. de Insula, Steph.
de Segrave, Mauricus de Aundele, Rad. fill. Reginaldi, Ioh. de Ulecote. Sussex.
Roteland.

1230. 15. Custodia Sigilli concessa praesato Radulso, ad vitam. 14 Iunii.
Cart. 15 H. 3. m^^ 8. Ric. Reinger. F. lev. XV. Hill. 14 H. 3.
Will. de Eboraco ( prepos. Beverlaci.) Fin. lev. 5. sept. Pasch. 15 H. 3.
Claus. 15 H. 3. in dorso m. 14.
Steph. de Sedgrave, Rand. fill. Roberti, Brianus fill. Alani, Will. de Infula,
Rob. de Lexintone, Magr. Rob. de Sl^ardelowe, Sill. de Loudham. Ebor.

An. D. An. R. Cancel. and Custod. (...). Thesaurariorum. Iusticiariorum
Angliae. Iusticiariorum Regis. (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) W^ll. a^ S. Edmundo. F. lev. 3 sept. ^. I. Bapt. 17 H. 3. (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) 123^. 22. (...) spectant^bus, Episcopo,
quasi Cancellario, redditis and assignatis. M. Paris p. 474. An. D. An. R.
Iusticiariorum de Banco. Baronum de Scaccario. Iusticiariorum Itinerantium.
1231. Hen. III. 16. Claus. 16 H. 3. in dorso m. 1^.
Steph. de Sedgrave, Adam de Novomercato, Will. Basset, Will. de Eboraco, Magr.
R. de Shardelow, Magr. Walt. de Cantilupe, Will de Insula. (...)

Will. de Ralegh, R. de Lexinton, R. Duker, Adam fill. Willelmi, Rad. fill.
Reginaldi. Warw. Leic. Northampt. Beds. Back.

Ibid. m. 17.
Steph. de Sedgrave, Tho. de Muletone, Rob. de Lexintone, Will. de Insula,
Magr. R. de Shardelowe, Will. de Ralegh. ^^ac.

1231. 17. Hen. de Tracy, Will. de Ralegh, Adam fill. Williclmi, Ric. Duket,
Iordanus Oliver. Cornub. Claus. 1 H. 3. (...) dorso m. 1^.


1233. 18. Rob. de Ros constitutus 6 Iulii. Claus. 18 H. in dorso m. 16. Rob.
de Bellocampo Regin. de Moyun, Rob. de Rockele, constituti 6 Iulii, Ibid. Et
mandatum est Rob. de Lexinton, and W. de Eboraco quod ipsos admittant. Ibid. m.
19. Will. de Bellocampo assignatus ad residendum ad Scacc. tanquam Baro. Nec
non Alex. de Swereford Thesaur. S. Pauli Land. and Ric. de Muntsichet. Et
mandatum est These. and Baron. de Scacc. quod ipsos admittant. 6 Iulii. Claus.
18 H. 3. in dorso m. 16. Tho. de Muleton, Rob. de Bellecamp, Rob. de Lexintone,
Oliverus de Vallibus, Adam filius Willielmi. Justice. Itin. (...) Norss and
(...) constit^^^ (...). 18 H. 3. in dorso m. 7.

Ioh. de Lascy Co. L^ac. Will. de Eboraco, Norm. de Ar^^^y, Rob. de Ros, Abbas
de Bardney, Rad. de Norwico. Linc. Ibid.

Rob. de Ros, Will. de Eboraco, Iollanus de Nevill. Rad. de Norwico, Rog.
Bertram, Adam de Novomercato. Ebor. Northumb Ibid.

Comes Rog. Bigot, Rob. de Lexintone, Rob. de Bellocampo, Sim. de Furnellis,
Adam fill. Willielmi. Essex, Herts. Ibid.

Rob. de Salceto, Rad. fill. Reginldi, Rob. Grymbald, Will. de Insula. Roteland.
Ibid.

Will. de Eboraco, Tho. fill. Iohannis, Rog. Bertram, Ranulfus fill. Henrici.
Cumberl. Ibid.

Will. de Eboraco, Rob. de Ros, Rog. Bertram, Ric. de Lemington. Lanc. Ibid.

R. de Lexinton, Oliverus de Vallibus, Rob. de Bellocampo, Sim. de Furnellis,
Adam fill. Willielmi. Cantabr. Hunt. Midd. Ibid.

1235. 20. Tho. de Muleton Justice. de Banco ( Capitalis ut videtur.) Claus. 20
H. 3. in dorso m. 14. Adam filius Willielmi Justice. de Banco, mandatur usque
Westminster. ad residendum ibi una cum fociis suis. 12 Apr. Ibid. Ioh. de Kirkeby,
and Will. de Culeworth. Fin. lev. XV. Pasch. 20 H. 3. 1238. 22. Hugo Giffard,
and H^n. de Bathonia. F. levat. in. crast. S. Ioh. B. 22 H. 3. Will. de Eboraco
( praepositus Beverlaci.) Adam fill. Willielmi. Iordanus Oliverus. Robertus de
Bellocampo. In Com. Cornub. and (...). T. R. apud Theokesbiri 8 Apr. Claus. 22
H. 3. in dorso m. 16.

An. D. An. R. Cancel. and Custod. S^^^^ Tnesaurariorum. Iusticiariorum
Angliae. Iusticiariorum Regis. (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) An. D. An. R. Iusticiariorum de Banco. Baronum de Scaccario.
Iusticiariorum Itinerantium. 1239. Hen. III. 23. 1240. 24. Obiit Tho. de
Muletone Iusticiarius. Math. Paris. p. 538. l. 12. Dominus Will. de Eboraco
praepositus Beverlaci, cum sociis suis assignatus ad itinerandum per Australes
Regni parts; and Rob. de Lexintuna cum sociis suit, per Septentrionales
parts. M. Paris p. 533. n. 30. F. lev. apud Ebor. 5. sept. S. Ioh. Bapt. 24.
H. 3. Rob. de Lexintone. Rad. de Sulleg. Will. de Culeworth. Iollanus de
Nevill. Rob. de Haya. Sim. de Hales. Warnerus Engaine.

Will. de Eboraco, praepositus de Beverley, Henr. de Bathonia, Rog. de
Turkebya, Gilbertus de Prestun. Justice. Itin. apud Hertford. a die Nativ. S.
Ioh. Bapt. M. Paris p. 538. n. 30. vide Rot. Liberat. 24 H. 3. m. 14.

1242. 26. Rob. de Lexinton. W. de Culleworth. Gilb. de Preston. Plac. de Banco
XV
Pasch. 26. H. 3. Rob. de Lexinton
Rog. de Turkiby, and socii. Plac. de Banco octab. Mich. 26 H. 3. Iollanus. de
Nevill.
F. lev. oct. Mich.
1243. 27. Rog. de Thurkilby, and socii. Plac. de B. T. Pasch. 27 H. 3. Rob. de
Esseburne. F. lev. oct. Hill. 27 H. 3.
1244. 28. Ioh. de Cobeham. F. lev. men's. Pasch. 28 H. 3.
1245. 29. Rob. de Notingham. F. lev. oct. Hill. Claus. 29 H. 3. in dorso m. 8.
Rog. de Turkilby, Normannus de Arci, Henr. de Bracton, Gilb. de Prestun, in
crast. Apost. Petri and Pauli. Not. Derb.

1246. 30. Claus. 30 H. 3. in dorso m. 8.
Rog. de Thurkilby, Gilb. de Prestune, Hen. de Bractone, Hugo fill. Willielmi,
Magister Sim. de Wautone, Ioh. de Cobham. Northumb. Westmerl. Cumber. Lanc.

1247. 31. Alanus de Watsand. F. levat. XV Mich. Liberatae 31 H. 3. m. 7. Will.
de Wyltone. F. levat. XV Trin. Liberatoe 31 H. 3. m. 7.
An. D. An. R. Cancel. and Custod. Sigilli. Thesaurariorum. Iusticiariorum
Angliae. Justice. ad Plac. coram Rege. (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) A^^nu^ le Zonsh Just C. Regis, and ejus ampla potestas. Pat. 34 H. 3. M.
2. and 3. (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) 37. XV Maii commissum suit (...)
P. C^^^^^ and I. de Le^^^^, qu^a Magr. (...). Rot. Fin. 37 H. 3. m. 9. XXII
Iu^^ii custo^^^ Regi^^^ committitur magnum Sigillum, Rege in Vasco^^^
proficiscente. Pat. 37 H. 3. Henricus de Bathonia. Pat. 37 H. 3. m. 5. (...)
38. M^gr. (...) de ^^^eay, Regis Clericus and Cancellarius specialis, supplevit
officium Cancellarii. M. Paris p. 895. 7. An. D. An. R. Iusticiariorum de
Banco. Baronum de Scaccario. Iusticiariorum Itinerantium. 1248. Hen. III. 32.
Claus. 32. H. 3. (...) dorso m. 6.
Henr. de Bathonia, Alanus de Watsand, Will. de Wiltone, Reg. de Cobeham. Essex.

Ibid. m. 11.
Henr. de Bathonia, Alanus de Watsand, Will. de Wilton, Regin, de Cobeham,
Will. Brito. Pat. 32 H. 3. m. 8. Surr.


1249. 33. Henricus de Mara Iusticiarius. Mat. Paris p. 760. n. 20. Rog de
Thurkilby, Gilb. de Prestone, Magr. Sim. de Waltone, Ioh. de Cobeham. Berks.

H. de. Bathonia, Alanus de Watsand, Will. de Wilton, Reg. de Cobeham, Will.
Brito. Kanc. lb. m. 9

Claus. 33. in dorso m. 16.
H. de Bathonia, Alanus de Watsand, Will. le Wilton, Regin. de Cobeham, Will.
de Breton. Suthampt. Wiltes.

Hen. de Bath. Alanus de Watsand, Will. de Wyltone, Reg. de Cobham, Will. le
Brito. Midd. Ib. m. 8.

1250. 34. Henr. de Bathonia haber C l. annuatim percipiendas ad Scacc. ad
sesustentandum in officio Iusticiarii. Liberatae de anno 34 H. 3. m. 9. John.
de Gatesden. F. levat. XV Hill. Obiit Robertus de Lexinton 4. Kal. Iunii. M.
Paris p. 786. n. 20. Pat. 34 H. 3. m. 6.
Henr. de Bathonia, Ioh. de Gatesden, Magr. Sim. de Wauton, Gilb. de Preston,
Will. de Wilton. Li^c.

1251. 35. Simon de Wauton. F. levat. XV Mich. Henr. de la Mare. F. levat. oct.
Mich. Pat. 35. H. 3. m. 2.
W. Sarum Episc. Ioh. de Plessetis Comes Warwici, Ioh. de Lexintone, Gilb. de
Segrave, Egid. de Erdinton, and Will. Briton. Justice. ad Plac. civit. Land.
quae coram Justice. Itin. terminanda solent.

S. Carleol Episc. R. de Thurkilby, Gilb. de Preston, Ad a m de Hilton. Ebor.
Pat. 35 H. 3. m. 4

1252. 36. Will. Trussel constitutus 3 sept. Claus. 36. H. 3. in dorso m. 6.
Egid. de Erdinton oct. Ioh. Baptist. Claus. 36. H. 3. m. 4.
Sim. de Wauton associatus Gilb. de Preston, and sociis ad itinerandum in Com.
Oxon. Berks. Northampt.

Ibid. in dorso m. 27.
S. Carleol Episc. Rog. de Turkelby, Gilb. de Prestone, Adam de Hiltone. Not.
Derb. Warw. Leic.

Ibid. in dorso m. 6.
Gilb. de Prestone, Alan. de Watsand, Henr. de Colevile, Sim. de Trope, Rob. de
Riperiis. Oxon. Berks. Northampt.

1253. 37. Pet. de Ryevallis constitutus 16 Iunii. Claus. 37 H. 3. m. 8. Ioh.
de Wyville, term. Mich. 37 H. 3. Liberatae 38 H. 3. m. 7. Claus. 37. H. 3. in
dorso m. 22.
Magr. Sim. de Wautone, Gilb. de Prestone, Henr. de Colevile, and Simon de
Trope. Cantabr. Hunt. Essex. Herts.

1254. 38. Rog. de Wircestre. F. lev. XV Mich. Pat. 38 H. 3. m. 1.
Abbas Colecestriae, Gilb. de Prestone, Will, le Bretun, Rog. de Wycestre.
Essex. Hertf.

An. D. An. R. Cancel. and Custod. Sigilli. The saurariorum. Iusticiariorum
Angliae. Justice. ad Plac. coram Rege. (...) Hen. III. 39. (...) 1250. 42. 1257.
41. Circa Fest. S. Mich. mort^o Hartaldo Regis Consiliario and Clerico
speciali, ac Thesaura^^^ de Camera Regis, s^brogatur Petrus de (...)
alienigena. M. Paris p. 957. 7. Hago Bigod, frater Comitis Marescalli,
constitutus Iusticiarius per Barons. Mat. Paris p. 971. 48. 1258. 42. VII Maii
morabatur Hear. de Weagham Londoniis infirmus; and Sigillum remansit penes
dominum W. de Merton. Pat. 42. H. 3. m. 29. Claus. 42. H. 3. m. 8. (...)
judicio Barnagii a suo officio depositus; Johannes de Crachal Archidiac.
Bedfordiae, loco ipsius substituitur Thesaurarius 2. Nov. and Tho. de Wymundham
praecentor Lich. Thesaur. ad Scace. Mat. Paris p. 978. n. 50. Vide pat. 43. H.
3. m. 15. Rog. de Thorkelby, Gilb. de Preston, Nich. Handlo assignati ad
tenendum Bancum Regis apud Westminster. donee Rex de eodem Banco pleniu or dinaverit.
T. R. Apud Winton. 3. Oct. Pat. 42. H. 3. m. 2. 1258. 43. An. D. An. R.
Iusticiariorum de Banco. Baronum de Scaccario. Iusticiariorum Itinerantium.
1255. Hen. III. 39. Ioh. Abbas de Burgo S. Petri, Rob. de Shotinden, Ioh. de
Kave, Nich. de Handlo, Fin. levat. in crast. S. Andr. Apost. 39. H. 3.
Libertates pro Baronibus de Scaccario and homin bus suis. Pat. 39. H. 3. m. 23.
Pat. 39 H. 3. m. 16.
Ioh. Abbas de Burgo, S. P^tri, M^g^. Sim. de Wautone, Rob. de Sh^tindon, Nich.
de Handlo, Will. Trussel, Ioh. de Cave. Gl^^^. Staff.

Ibid. m. 7.
Will. le Breton, Nich. de Romesei, Galfr. de Leuknore, Simon de Trope. Hunt.
Buck. Novthampt. Oxon.

Ibid. m. 1.
Gilb. de Preston, Rog. de Whice^^re, Will. de Eng^e^eld, and Will. de Cobham.
Sussex. Suthampt. Wiltes.

1256. 40. Ioh. de Wyvile constitutus 1. Febr. Claus. 40 H. 3. m. 16. Ioh. de
Cokefeld. F. lev. oct. Mich. 40 H. 3. Abbas de Burgo, S. Petri. Rog. de
Thurkelby. Nich. de Handlou. Johannes de Wyvyle. In Com. Norhumb. Cumberland.
Westmerl. and Lanc. Claus. 40 H. 3. in dorso m. 14.


Gilb. de Prestone. Rog. de Whicestre. Will. de Englefeld. Will. de Cobham.
Wiltes. Summers. Dors. Devon. Cornub. Ibid.


Abbas de Burgo. Rog. de Turkelby. Per. de Percy. Nich. de Handlou. Johannes
Wyvile. Linc. Norff. Suff. Ibid. m. 7.


Will. le Bretun. Nich. de Romesey. Galfr. de Leukenore. Sim. de Thorpe.
Iusticiarii Itin. ad plac. Forest^e in Com. Berks. Roteland. Essex. Pat. 40 H.
3. m. 16.


1257. 41. Rob. de Briwes associatus Magistro Simoni de Wauton and sociis suis
Iusticiariis de Banco 13 Apr. Claus. 41 H. 3. m. 8. Obiit Alanus de Watsand
Regis Clericus and Iusticiarius. M. Paris p. 942. n. 40. Gilb. de Prestone.
Rog. de Whicestre. Will. de Englefeld. Will. de Cobham. Justice. itin. in Com.
Norff. Claus. 41. H. 3. in dorso m. 12.


Gilb. de Prestone. Rog. de Whicestre. Will. de Englefeld. Will. Cobham.
Johannes de Cokfeild. Suffolk. Ibid. m. 8.


1258. 42. Abbas Westmonasterii. Communia de T. Mich. 42 H. 3. Rot. 6. Anno
1257. obiit Henricus de Mara Justice. Regis itinerans. M. Paris p. 945. 34. Anno
quoque sub codem obiit Robertus de Sotindune, domini Regis Clericus specialis,
and Iusticiarius quandoque itinerans. Ibid. p. 952. 49. 1259. 43. Rog. de
Thurkilby residens ad Bancum habet C. marc. annuas 29 Dec. Liberatae 43 H. 3.
m. 4. and 7. Dominus Hugo Bigotus, capitalis totius regni Iusticiarius,
associatis sibi Rogero de Turkeby, and Gilberto de Preston, coepit per Angliam
circuire, a Comitatu in Comitatum, and a liberate in libertatem, omnibus,
promeritis, impensuris justiciam. M. Westminster. in anno 1259. An. D. An. R. Cancel.
and Custod. Sigilli. T^esaurariorum. Iusticiariorum Angliae. Justice. ad Plac.
coram Rege. 1260. Hen. III. 44. (...) (...) Hugo (...) Inbre (...) sibi (per
Barons) commissam. M. (...) e^tm. vide M. Paris (...) (...) 262. p. 991. ^ ^0.
1261. 45. (...) Philippus Basset assignatus est Angliae Iusticiarius inconsulto
Baronagio. M. Westminster. Ets Pat. 45 H. 3. m. 5. In carta Regis H. 3. de Treugis,
facta apud Banneburg 25 Aug. 46 H. 3. Test Philippo Easset Iusticiario
Angliae. Pat. 46 H. 3. m. 4. 1262. 46. Mortuo apud London. Abbate (...) Bargo
Thesaurario Regis; (...) Archidiaconus Ebor. Creatur Thesaurarius. Regi^^.
Prierat. de Dunstaple f. 46. in bibl Cotton. vide Pat. 47 H. 3. m. 12. Thomas
Basset. Cart. 46 H. 3. m. 4. An. D. An. R. Iusticiariorum de Banco. Baronum de
Scaccario. Iusticiariorum Itinerantium. 1260. Hen. III. 44. Obiit Rog. de
Turkeby, Regi praecipuus, and nulli in toto regno, maxim in Iustica and terrae
legibus secundus. M. Westminster. in an. 1260. Pat. 44 H. 3. m. 7. Henr. de Batonia.
Will. de Wiltone. Justice. Itin. in Com. Hunt. Claus. 44. H. 3. (...) m. 18.


Iac. de Audele. Egid. de Erdinton. Bedf. Buc^. Northampt.

Hugo le Despenser, Nich. de Turri. Et postea Will. de Englefeud, loco
praedicti Hugonis. Oyal. Berks. (...).

I. Comes Warennae. Johannes de Gray. Johannes de Wivyll. Somerset. Dorset.
Devo^.

Humfr. Co. H^ref. Henr. de Bretton. Glouc Wigorn. Hereford.

Rog. de Montealto. Johannes de Verdune. Gilb. de Prestone. Salop Staff. Warw.
Leic. Lincoln.

Henr. de Bathonia. Will de Wiltone. Norff. Suff. Cantab. Hunt.

H. le Bigod, Iusticiarius, per seipsum, vel per alium quem ad hoc providebit.
Land. Mid^. Esse^. Hertf. Sussex. Suthampt.

Hugo le Despenser. Nich. de Turri. Oxo^. Berks. Wills.

Hii omnes, per provisionem Magnatum Angliae, qui sunt de consilio Regis, ad
meliorationem status totius Regni, assignati erant ut supra. Claus. 44 H. 3. in
dorso m. 18. 1261. 45. Henr. de Bathonia defunctus. Claus. 45 H. 3. m. 14.
Will. de Wilton, Nich. de Turri, Gilb. Talebot, Rob. de Briwes, and Adam de
Greynvill. Heref. Pat. 45 H. 3. m. 13.


Will. de Wilton, and alii fideles. Cantab. Claus. 45 H. 3. in dorso m. 26.


Gilb. de Preston, and alii. Oxon. Glouc. Berks. Hertf. Ibid.


Egid. de Argentyne, Gilb. de Prestone, Mart. de Litlebyri, Galfr. de Leuknore.
O^on. Berks. Glouc. Wigor^. Hereford. Salop. Staff. Ibid.

Rog. de Sumeri, Nich. de Turri, Nich. de Handlo. Cantab. Hunt. Ibid.

Will. de Wilton, Nich. de Turri, Gilb. Talebot, Rob. de Brewes, Adam de
Greynvill. Northampt. Bedf. Back. Essex. Herif. Ibid. m. 13.

1262 46. Will. de Wilton habet C. l. per annum ad se sustentandum in officio
Iusticiariae II Dec. Pat. 46 H. 3. m. 16. Nich. de Turri xl. lib. Liberatae 46
H. 3. m. 3. Rob. de Briwes, Ric. de Middelton, Will. Banquer, similiter. Ibid.
Martinus de Litilbiri, Walt. de Burgsted, Galfr. de Leukenor, Ric. de
Hemington. Leicestersc. Pat. 46 H. 3. m. 16.

Rob. de Nevill, Hugo de Bolebec, Rad. fill. Ranulphi, Will. de Notingham.
Iusticiarii itin. ad placita Forestae in Com. Noti^gh. Ebor. Northumb. Cumb.
and Lanc. Ibid. m. 14.

Mart. de Litlebiry, Egid. de Erdinton, and alii. Leic. Warw. Claus. 46 H. 3.
m. 16. in scedula.


Nich. de Turri, Rob. de Briwes, Will. de Englefeud, Adam de Grenevill. Bedf.
Essex. Hertf. Ibid.

Alanus la Zuche, Nich. de Romeseye, Magister Will. de Powyk. Hunt. Buck.
Northampt. Pat. 46 H 3. m. 12.


Rob. de Briwes, Ric. de Midelton, Ioh. de Aure, Will. de Staunton. Cornub.
Devon. Ibid. m. 5.

Nich. ^ de Turri, Will. Bonquer, Will. de Englefeld, Adam de Greinvill. Kanc.
Ibid.

An. D. An. R. Cancel. and Custod. ^igilli. Thesaurariorum. Iusticiariorum
Angliae. Justice. ad Plac. coram Rege. (...) (...) 4^. (...) R^b. de Bruis
Capitalis Iusticiarius tempore turbationis, fine socio, and ^^ne contrarotulo,
and (...) Regem. Plac. coram R. de T. Mich. 51. and 52 H. 3. Rot. 12. Surr.
Wilt^. (...) (...). (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...). (...). Magr. Thomas de
(...) Thesaur. Regis 4. Apr. ^. Pat. 50. H. 3. ^. 20. An. D. An. R.
Iusticiariorum de Banco. Baronum de Scaccario. Iusticiariorum Itinerantium.
1263. Hen. III. 47. Gilb. de Preston, Ioh. de Wyvill. Plac. apud Westminster. a die
Pasch. in XV dies 47 H. 3. Mart. de Litlebiri, Walt. de Berkstede, Galfr. de
Leukenore. Ric. de Hemingtone. Norff. Linc. Saff. Claus. 47 H. 3. in dorso m
13. and ^.


Nich. de Turri, Will. Bonquer, Will. de Englefeud, Adam Greinvill. Suth^mpt.
Wiltes. Ibid.

Ric. de Briwes, Ric. de Middeltone, Ioh. de Aure, Will. de Stauntone. Summers.
Dors. Ibid.

Gilb. de Preston, Ioh. de Wivyll. Roteland. Ibid.

1264. 48. Nich. de Turri. Fin. lev. XV Mart. Mandatum est Magr. I. de Chishull
Archid. Land. Cancellario Scaccarrii sui, and caeteris residentibus in eodem
Scacc. quod Scaccarium Regis apertum teneant, prout temporibus retroactis
teneri consuevit; Et quia Rex Baronem in eodem Scaccario ad praesens non haber,
ut intellexit, assignavit Rogerum de la Leye Rememoratorem Scaccarii praedicti,
ad Officium Baronis in Scaccario praedicto explendum; mandans eisdem, quod
ipsum ad hoc admittant etc. T. R. apud Oxon. 1 Nov. Claus. 48 H. 3. m. 10.
1265. 49. Will. de Wilton, and Fulco filius Warini occisi in praelio de Jews.
Lel. coll. vol. 1. p. 177. Herveius de Boreham, Will. Bonquer. F. lev. 3. sept.
Pasc. and oct. Mart. 49 H. 3. Et Liberatae 49 H. 3. m. 7. Idem Rog. de la Leye
habet XL. marcasannuas ei concess. ad se sustentandum in officio predicto. T.
R. apud Westminster. 15 ^or. Liberatae 49 H. 3. (...) 3. 1266. 50. Ioh. de la Lynde.
F. lev. XV Ioh. Bapt. Walt. de Berstede. F. lev. crast. Purif. Adam de
Greynvill. Liberatae 50 H. 3. m. 5. An. D. An. R. Cancel. and Custod. Sigilli.
Thesaurariorum. Iusticiariorum Angliae. Justice. ad Plac. coram Rege. 1267. Hen.
III. 51. Magister Godefr. Giffard. Pat. 50 H. 3. n. 40. vide Claus. 52 H. 3. m.
7. and m. 10. Tho. de Wymu^dham, praecentor Eccl. Lich. Pat. 51 H. 3. m. 6.
1268. 52. Idem Thomas habet L. marcas annuas ei concessas ad se sustentandum in
Officio Thesaurarii. Liberatae de anno 52 H. 3. m. 5. Rob. de Bruis constitutus
Capitalis Justice. 8 Martii. Pat. 52 H. 3. m. 24. Idem Robertus habet C. marc.
per annum sibi concessas, ad se sustentandum, etc. Liberatae 53 H. 3. m. 13.
1269. 53. Gode^^idus Giffard Wigora (...). dre (...) in craft. Apost. Sim. and
Iadae reddidit dom^no Regi (...) suum. Et die Martis (...) idem Rex dictum
(...) tradid^^ Magistro Ioh. (...) Decano Load. custoci^^um. Pat. 53. H. 3. m.
29. Ric. de Middiltone constituitur (...) Sigilli diz Lunae prox. ante Festum
be^ti Pe^^i ad vincula. Claus. 53 H. 3. m. 3. Pat. 53 H. 3. m. 6. Ioh. le
Bretun. Pat. 53 H. 3. m. 2. Will. de S. Omero, habet XL. l. per annum ad
sustentationem suam sibi concessas, quandin placitis praedictis intenderi^. T.
R. apud Clarendon 30. Nov. Claus. 53 H. 3. m. 13. Ric. de Stanes. Pat. 53 H. 3.
m. 1. 1270. 54. Magister Ioh. de Chishull Decanus S. Pauli Land. constitutus
Thesaur. 6. Febr. Pat. 54 H. 3. m. 23. Iac. de Paunton habet XL. marc. per
annum ad sustentati^nem, etc. Libeberatae 55 H. 3. m. 5. Rad. de Heagbam habet
XL. l. per ann. ad sustentationem, etc. Liberatae de anno 55 H. 3. m. 3. An. D.
An. R. Iusticiariorum de Banco. Baronum de Scaccario. Iusticiariorum
Itinerantium. 1267. Hen. III. 51. Ioh. le Breton, Henr. de Monteforti, Claus.
51 H. 3. m. 2. Rog. de Missenden. Fia. levat. 51 H. 3. XV Ioh. B. Gilb. de
Preston, Ioh. de la Lynd. Plac. de Banco de eodem anno. 1268. 52. Mart. de
Litilbiri and Magr. Rog. de Seyton. Fin. levat. oct. Trin. 52 H. 3. Liberatae
52 H. 3. m. 1. and m. 5. Will. de Grancurt. Claus. 52 H. 3. m. 6. Gilb. le
Preston, Ioh. de Bretun, Walt. Helyun, Ioh. de Oketon. Ebor. Westmerl.
Northumb. Cumb. Lanc. Not. Derb. Warw. Leic. Liac. Rotel. Pat. 52 H. 3. m. 3^.


Petrus de Brus praefato Gilberto associatus in Com. Ebor. Ibid. m. 31.

Ric. de Middelton, Adam de Greynvill, Rog. de Messenden, Ioh. del Estrode.
Summers. Dors. Gluec Here Is. ^^gorn. Salop. Staff. (...). Berks. Buck. Beds.
Northumpt. (...). Cantab. Ibid. m. 33.

Rich. de Turri, Henr. de Monteforti, Magister Ric. de Stanes, Henr. de
Wollaveston. W^lts. Suthumpt. (...) Surr. (...) Essex. Hert^. Norss. (...).
Ibid.

Ric. de Middelton, Rog. de Messenden, Adam de Greynvill, Thomas Trevet.
Dorset. Glouc. Heref. (...). Salop. Staff. Oxo^. Berks. (...). Bedf. Northampt.
Hunt. (...) Ibid. m. 20.

Henri^ns de Monteforti, ad associa^dum Nich. de Turri, loco Rob. de Brywes,
assignatus. Norff. Ibid. m. 18.

Martinus de Litlebiri, Magister Rog. de Seyton, Ioh. de Cobeham. Surr. Ibid.
m. 6.

Rob. de Briwes, Adam de Greynvil, Rog. de Missenden, Thomas Trever. Glouc.
Heref. Wigorn. Salop. Staff. Buck. Bedf. Northampton. Hunt. Cantab. Pat. 53 H.
3. m. 26.


Rog. de Clifford, Math. de Columbariis, Nich. de Romesey, Regin. de Acle.
Roteland. Surrey. Suthampt. Dors. Summers. Glouc. Ibid. m. 12.

Gilbertus de Preston, Galfr. de Leukenore, Johannes de Oketon, Walt. de
Helyun. Cornub. Devon. Ibid. m. 5.

1269. 53. Gilb. de Preston habet C. marc. per annum ad sustentationem in
officio Iusticiariae. Liberatae 53 H. 3. m. 2. Magr. Rog. de Seyton. habet XX
l. annuas ad sustentationem etc. Ib. Mart. de Litilbiri similiter, Pat. 54 H.
3. m. 12. 1270. 54. Ioh. de Cobehan habet XL l. annuas ad sustentationem etc.
Liberatae 54 H. 3. m. 6. Magister Will. de Cliff habet XL. l. per annum ad
sustentationem, etc. Liberatae de anno ^5 H. 3. m. 6. Galfr. de Nevile, Galfr.
de Upsale, Will. de Boscehale, Will. de Notingham. Justice. Itin. ad placita
Forestae in Com. Notingh. Ebor. Cumb. Northumb. Pat. 54 H. 3. m. 2.


Gilb. de Preston, Ioh. de Oketon, Walt. de Helyun, Petrus de Cestria. Lanc.
Ibid. m. 1.

An. D. An. R. Cancel. Angl. and Custod. Sig. Thesaurariorum. Justice. ad Plac.
coram Rege. Iusticiariorum de Banco. Baronum de Scaccario. 12^^. Hen III. 55.
Ioh. de C^kefeud habet XL. l. per annum ad sustentationem etc. Liberatae 55 H.
3. m. 1. Robertus Fulc constitutus 15 Maii. Pat. 55 H. 3. m. 17. Steph. Haym.
Finlevat. 3. sept. Pasch. 55 H. 3. 1272. 56. Ric. de Middil^^^^ quondam (...)
Regis, obiit die Dominica prox. ante fest. S. (...): Et. Sigill^^ Reg^s
liberatum fait Io^. de (...) custodiand^m; qui associavit sibi ad hoc dominum
^. de (...) tunc custodem Garderobae Regis praedicti. Pat. 56 H. 3. m. 6.
Philiyyus de Eye Thesaur. Claus. 56 H. 3. p. 1. m. 1. Ioh. de Cakefeud
defunctus. Claus. 56 H. 3. m. 1. 1273. 57. Magister Ric. de Stanes habet XL. l.
per an. ad sustentationem etc. Liberatae 57 H. 3. m..... 1274. (...) (...)
(...) Nich. de Stapelton. Liberatae 1 E. 1. m. 3. Will. de Saham. Ibid. m. 4.
Rad. de Hengeham, Will. Welond. F. lev. oct. Mart. 1. E. 1. Gilbertus de
Preston Capitalis Justice. Liberatae 1 E. 1. m. 4. 2. (...) (...) (...) de
Seytone (...) Justice. Plac. de Term. Mich. 2. E. 1. Ric. de St^nes. F. lev. 3.
sept. Mich. 2. E. 1. Walt. de Hopton. Liberatae 2 E. 1. m. 6. 1275. 3. Henr. de
Monte^orti, Solom. de Roff. Walt. de Hopton, Rad. de Hengham, Liber. 3 E. 1. m.
3. Ioh. de Love^ot. Lib. 3 E. 1. m. 2. Henr. de Montfort. Lib. 3 E. 1. m. 3.
Rad. de Frenyngham. Fin. levat. oct. Mich. 3 E. 1. An. D. An. R. Attornatorum
R. Justice. ad Assisas, Iuratas and Certificationes. Iusticiariorum
Itinerantium. Servientium ad Legem. 1271. Hen. III. 55. Rog. de Seyton, Rad. de
Hengham. Kanc. Pat. 55 H. 3. m. 17.

Adam de Greynv^lle, Ioh. de Cobbeham. Surr. Ibid. m. 10.

Rad. de Hengham, Hen. de Montetorti, Tho. Trevet. Heref. Staff. Pat. 56 H. 3.
m. 16.

Rogerus de Seyton, Prior de Spalding, Adam de Greynvill, Hen. de Wollavynton.
Essex. Ibid. m. 8.

Abbas de Croyland, Gilb. de Preston, Will. de Weyland, Walt. de Helyun,
Johannes de Oketon. Leic. Ibid. m. 7. and m. 26.

Tho. de Weyland associatus Magistro Rog. de Seyton, and aliis. Essex. Hertf.
Ib. m. 3.

1272. 56. Rad. de Hengham, and alii. Salop. Claus. 5^ H. 3. m. 3.

Rad. de Hengham, Henr. de Monteforti, Tho. Trevet. Heref. Staff. Ibid. in
dorso m. 10. Et Pat. 56 H. 3. m. 16.

1273. 57. 1274. Edw. I. 1. Rad. de Hengham, Henr. de Monteforti, Tho. Trevet,
Walt. de Hopton. In Com. Wigorn. Pat. 57 H. 3. m. 2.

2. Henr. de Monteforti, Stepha^^s Heym. In Com. Coraub. Devo^. Summers.
Suthampt. Dors. Wilts. Glouc. Heref. Salop. Staff. Wigorn. Notingh. Derb. Lanc.
Cumberland. West^erland. Northumb. Ebor. Linc. Claus. 2 E. 1. m. 3. in dorso.

Magister Rog. de Seytone, Ioh. de Cobeham, Walt. de Hoptone, Elias de
Bekingham. Midd. Claus. 2 E. 1. in dors. m. 4.

Magister Rog. de Seytone, Ioh. de Cobeham, Walt. de Hopton, Solomon de Roff.
Midd. Pat. 2 E. 1. m. 3.

1275. 3. Will. de Northburg unus Justice. R. ad Assisas capiendas ultra Trentam
assignatus. Lib. 3 E. 1. m. 2. Nich. de Stapelton, Will. de Saham, Ioh. de
Reygate, Solomon de Roff. Wigorn. Pat. 3 E. 1. m. 23.

Tho. de Weila^nd, Ioh. de Metingham, Ioh. de Cobbeham, Elias de Bekingham,
Serve. Regiss ad Legem. Liberatae 3 E. 1. m. 2. An. D. An. R. Cancel. Angl. and
Custod. Sig. Thesaurariorum. Justice. ad Plac. coram Rege. Iusticiariorum de
Banco. Baronum de Scaccario. (...) (...) (...) Ioh. de Met^ngham. L^^ 4. E.
^^7. (...) Tho. de Weyland. Lib. 4. E. 1. m. 6. Rog. de Leycestre. ^ (...) XV.
Tri^. 4. E. 1. M^^r. Ric. de Stanes Liberatae 4 E. 1. m. 5. Ioh. de Cobbeham.
Ibid. Ioh. de Cobbeh^m ^ Iunii. (...) de T. Tsin. 4 E. 1. in dorso. Rog. de
Northwood, Ioh. de S. Valerico. Lib. 4. E. 1. m. 11. 1278 ^. Rad. de Hengham
Capitul^s, qu^ perci^^t per annum nomine feodi, ad sustentationem suam in (...)
o R. L^. marc. (...) Claus. 6 E. 1. m. 6 in (...). Thomas de Wellond Capitalis
Justice. qui percipit per annum nomine feid, ad sustentationem suam Lx. marc.
Walt de Hely^^ L. marc. Ioh. de Lovetot L. marc. Rog. de Leicestre xl. marc.
Will. de Brompton. Claus. 6 E. 1. m. 6. (...). Philippus de Welegheby habet xx.
i. per annum sibi concessas 23 Iunii. Pat. 6 E. 1. m. 6. 12^9 7. (...) (...) 8.
(...) Phil. de Wyleby. Communia de T. T^in. 8 E. 1. 12^1 9. Abbas
Westmonasterii. Ex vet. membr. pe^es Thesau^. and Camer. Scace. 1282 10. De
Banco Regis Plac. Westminster. and Scaccario ad Salopiam removendis. 10 Apr. Claus.
10 E. 1. m. 6. An. D. An. R. Attornatorum R. Justice. ad Assisas, Iuratas and
Certificationes. Iusticiariorum Itinerantium. ^ervientium ad Legem. 1276. Edw.
I. 4. Ioh. de Reig^te, Solomon de Roffecestre, Elias de Bekingham, H. de
Monteforti. Lib. 4 E. 1. m. 6. Magister Tho. de Sodingtoa. Civit^s and Turris
Land. Lib. 4 E. 1. m. 7.

1278. 6. Godefr. Episc. Wigorn. Johannes de Reygate, Will. de Northburg.
Heref. Claus. 6 E. 1. in dorso m. 6.

Abbas Westmonast, Ioh. de Vallibus, Will. de Saham, Rog. de Loveday, Ioh. de
Metyngham. Magr. Tho. de Sodington. Cumb. Westmerl. Northumb Claus. 6 E. 1. m.
6. in schedula.

Episc. Wigorn. Ioh. de Reygate, Galfr. de Leukenore, Will. de Northburg, Walt.
de Hopton, Solomon de Roff. Hertf. Ka^c. Ibid.

1279. 7. Will. de Gisilham. Plac. coram Justice. Itin. in com. Suss. 7 E. 1.
vide etiam Lib. 8. E. 1. m. 3. Ioh. de Reyg te, Galfr. de Leukenore, Will. de
Norburg, Solomon de Roff. Ric. de Boyland. Dorset. Somerset.. Wiltes. Pat. 7 E.
1. m. 6.

1280. 8. Gilbertus de Thornton. Plac de Quo war. 8 E. 1. rot. 2. Not. Alanus
de Walkingham Justice. ad Assisas in diversis Comitatibus. Lib. 8 E. 1. m. 2.
Rog. de Clifford Se^ior, Ioh. de Luvetor, G^lfr. de Pycheford, Will. de
Hamilton. Justice. itin. ^d plac. Forestae in Com. Suthampt. Pat. 8 E. 1. m. 24.

Rog. de Clifford, Math. de Columbariis, Adam. Gurdon, Will. de Hamelton.
Justice. itin. ad Plac. Forestae in Com. Wilts. Ibid. m. 15.

Solom. de Roff. Ric. de Boyland, Rob. Fulcon, and Will. de Braboef. Devon.
Cornub. Wilts. Suthampt. Pat. 8 E. 1. m. 11.

Ioh. de Vallibus, Will. de Saham, Rog. Loveday, Ioh. de Metingham, Tho. de Sod
ngton. Notingham. Claus. 8 E. 1. m. 1.

1281. 9. Alan. de Walkingham. Plac. apud Ebor. coram Justice. Itin. 9 E. 1.
Ebor. Tho. de S. Vigore unus Justice. ad Assisas in diversis Comitatibus. Lib. 9
E. 1. m. 7. Ioh. de Vallibus, Will. de Saham, Rog. de Luveday, Ioh. de
Metingham, Magister Tho. de Sodington. Linc. Pat. 9 E. 1. m. 26.

Gilb. de Thorntone Serviens R. ad Legem. Will. de Giselham similiter. Lib. 9
E. 1. m. 1. 1282. 10. Solomon de Roff. Ric. de Boyland, Rob. Fulc, Will. de
Br^iboef, Alanus de Walkingham. Cora^b. Pat. 10 E. 1. m. 1. 8.

An. D. An. R. Cancel. Angl. and Custod. Sig. Thesauratiorum. Justice. ad Plac.
coram Rege. Iusticiariorum de Banco. Baronum de Scaccario. (...). (...) (...)
(...) (...). 12. (...) (...) Steph. de Pencestre. (...) de T. T^in 12 E. I.
Rot. 7. Pe^rus de Cestri^ p^^posims Bever^^^. Liberatae 12 E. 1. m. 1. 1285.
13. Elias de Suttone. Liberatae 13 E. 1. m. 2. Elias de Bekingham. Fi^. levat.
craft. Mart. 13 E. 1. Et Liberatae 13 E. 1. m. 1. 1286. 14. Die Lunae prox.
ante festum S. Dunst^^i. R. Batho^. and Well. Episc. Cancellar. R.
tran^^retavit apud D^vor versus Franc. cum ipso Rege and magno Sigillo. Pat. 14
E. 1. m. 9. Will. de Karleton habet xx. l. per annum ad se sustentandum etc.
Liberatae 14 E. 1. m. z. Will. de Middelton habet xx. 1. etc. Ibid. 1287. 1^.
1288. 16. Tho. de Weylond, eo quod male tractavit populum, ab officio
Iusticiarii amotus, exhaereditatus, and a terra exulatus. Chron. MS. in bibl.
Bodl. [K. 84.] ^. 68. b. Will. de Middleton, Petrus de Cestria. Commun. de T.
Mich. 16. incip. 17 E. 1. Rot. 1. in dorso. 1289. 17. Die Veneris prox. ante
festum Assump. S. Mariae applicuit Rex apud Dovor de partibus Vasco^. and
Franc. and R. Bathon. and Wellen. Episc. Cancellarius suus, cum magno Sigillo
ipsius R. Pat. 17 E. 1. m. 13. Rad. de Sandwico. F. levat. xv Mich. 17 E. 1.
An. D. An. R. Attornatorum R. Justice. ad Assisas, Iuratas and Certificationes.
Iusticiariorum Itinerantium. Servientium ad Legem. 1283. Edw. I. 11. 1284. 12.
Ioh. de Vallibus, Will. de Saham, Rog. Loveday, Ioh. de Metingham, Magister
Tho. de Sodington. L^ic. Pat. 12 E. 1. m. 6.

1285. 13. Will. de Seleby. Plac. de Quo warranto in Com. War. 13 E. 1. Walt.
de Hopton, and Elias de Bekingham, Justice. ad Assisas in diversis comitatibus.
Lib. 13 E. 1. m. 6. and m. 8. Ioh. de Vallibus, Will. de Saham. Northampt.
Claus. 13 E. 1. m. 6. in dorso.

Solomon de Roff. Ric. Boyland. Essex. Ibid.

Johannes de Vallibus, Will. de Saham, Walt. de Hopton, Ioh. de Metingham,
Magister Tho. de Sadington. Warw. Pat. 13 E. 1. m. 29.

1286. 14. Gilbertus de Thornton. Plac. de Quo war. in Com. Buck. 13 E. 1.
Will. de Gisilham. Plac. de Quo war. 14 E. 1. Norff. Ioh. de Vallibus, Will.
de Saham. Cantab. Hunt. Claus. 14 E. 1. m. 9. in dorso.

Solomon de Roff. Walt. de Hopton. Suff. Ibid.

Will. de Vesey, Tho. de Normanvill, Ric. de Creppings. Justice. itin. ad Plac.
Forestae infra Com. Not. and Lanc.

1287. 15. Will. Inge retentus ad negotia Regis prosequenda and defendenda in
Festo S. Trin. 15 E. 1. Lib. 19 E. 1. m. 3. Solomon de Roff. Walt. de Hopton,
Ric. de Boyland, Robertus Fulc, Magister Tho. de Sadington, Walt. de
Stircheleye. Hertford. Pat. 15 E. 1. m. 15.

Rog. Brabazun, Will. Wyther. Justice. itin. ad Plac. Forestae in Com. Lanc.
Ibid.

1288. 16. Ioh. de Metingham, Ioh. de Cobham, Nich de Stapilton, Elias de
Bekingham. Dors. Pat. 16 E. 1. m. 14.

1289. 17. An. D. An. R. Cancel. Angl. and Custod. Sig. Thesaurariorum. Justice.
ad Plac. coram Rege. Iusticiariorum de Banco. Baronum de Scaccario. (...).
(...) (...) (...) (...) Ioh. de Metiagham Capitilis Justice. Plac. de T. Hill.
18 E. 1. (...). (...). (...) Adam de Stratton captus, and inventa sunt in ejus
Thesaur xvi. millia marc. monetae novae, and tria millia veteris. Lel. Col.
vol. 1. p. 493. H. Knighton col. 2466. 1. 5. Will. de Carleton. Com. de T.
Hill. 19 E. 1. rot. 3. in dorso. 1292. 20. Waltterus de Langton Custos
garderobae Regis, Custos Sigilli efficitur apud Berewik die Sab. prox. ante
festum Apost. Sim. and Iudae, quo die R. Bath. and Well. Episc. Cancellariu^ R.
obiit ibidem. Pat. 20 E. 1. m. 2. Petrus de Leycestri^. Liberatae 20 E. 1. m.
1. 1293. 21. Johannes de Langton. Pat. 21 E. 1. m. 23. Ca^rcellariu^ R. in
Episc. Elien. electus etc. 26 E. 1. Pat. 26 E. 1. m. 10. Petrus Malore. F.
levat. xv Mart. 21 E. 1. Liberatae 21 E. 1. m. 2. Rog. de Leycestre constitutus
2 Ian. Com. de T. Hill. 21 E. 1. Rot. 5. 1294. 22. Magister Ioh. Lovell.
Liberatae 22 E. 1. m. 2. Will. de Bereford T. Mich. 22 E. 1. Libearatae de anno
27 E. 1. m. 1. An. D. An. R. Attornatorum R. Justice. ad Assisas, Iuratas and
Certificationes. Iusticiariorum Itinerantium. Servientium ad Legem. 1290. Edw.
I. 18. 1291. 19. 1292. 20. Will. Inge. Plac. de Q. War. in Com. Lanc. 20 E. 1.
Hugo de Louther. Salop. Assis. 20 E. 1. Rot. 42. Petrus Heym Justice. ad Assisas
in diversis comitatibus. Lib. 20 E. 1. m. 3. Hugo de Cressingham, Will. de
Ormesby, Johannes Wogan, Magr. Ioh. Luvel, and Will. de Mortuomari. Lanc.
Westmerl. Cumb. Pat. 20 E. 1. m. 16. Northumb. Ib. m. 4.

Ioh. de Berewyk, Tho. de Normanvill, and alii (quorum nomina non Recordantur.)
Heref. Claus. 20 E. 1. in dorso m. 7.

Rogerus Extraneus, Sim. de Ellesworth, and Ioh. de Crokesleye. Justice. itin.
ad Plac. Forestae in Com. Essex. Pat. 20 E. 1. m. 5.

Will. Inge Serviens Regis ad Legem. Lib. 20 E. 1. m. 3. 1293. 21. Johannes de
Bateford, Willielmus Haward. Ebor. Northumb. Westmerl. Cumb. Lanc. Not. Derb.

Henricus de Eynefeld, Johannes de Bosco. Cornub. Summers. Devon. Dors. Wiltes.
Suthampt. Oxon. Berks. Suss. Surr.

Gilbertus de Kirkeby, Johannes de Insula. Kent. Essex. Hertf. Norff. Suff.
Cant. Hont. Bedf. Buck. Claus. 21 E. 1. in dorso m. 7.

Adam de Crokedayk. Willielmus Inge. Linc. Leic. War. Staff. Salop. Northampt.
Rotel. Glouc. Heref. Wigorn. Ibid.

Ioh. de Berwyk, Tho. de Normanvill, and alii non specificati. Heref. Claus. 21
E. 1. in dorso m. 10.

Walt. de Cambhou, Tho. de Fisheburn. in Tindale. Ibid.

Hugo de Cressingham, Will. de Ormesby, and alii. Ebor. Ibid.

Ioh. de Berewik, Tho. de Normanvill, Ioh. de Lythegreynes, Hugo de Cave. Surr.
Pat. 21 E. 1. m. 5.

Nich. de Warwik Serve. Regis ad Legem. Lib. 21 E. 1. m. 3. 1294. 22. Ioh. de
Mutford. Plac. de Q. war. in Com. Midd. 22 E. 1. An. D. An. R. Cancel. Angl.
and Custod. Sig. Thesaurariorum. Justice. ad Plac. coram Rege. Iusticiariorum de
Banco. Baronum de Scaccario. 1295. Edw. I. 23. (...) (...) (...) 1296. 24.
(...) (...) 1297. 25. Wi^^. Howard admissus, and Sacramentum (...) 11 Oct. Rot.
de Term. Mich. 25 E. 1. Vide de fecdo (...) sibi coccesso Liberatae 27 E. 1. m.
2. 1298. 26. Ioh. de Insula. Liberatae de an. 27 E. 1. m. 3. 1299. 27. Magister
Ric. de Abe^don constitutus 17 Oct. Com. de T. Mich. 28 E. 1. (...). (...).
Lambertus de Trikingham. Lib. de anno 23 E. 1. m. 4. Rog. de Hegham 13 Iunii.
Com. de T. Mich. 28 E. 1. Ioh. de Insula. Ibid. (...). (...). (...) de Hengham,
constitutus Capitalis Justice. 19 Sept. Pat. 29 E. 1. m. 7. 13^2. 30. (...)
1303. 31. Magnum Sigillum dicto Cancellario liberatum, die Martis ante festum
S. Luciae Virg^nis. Claus. 31 E. 1. in dorso m. 18. Will. de Carleton constit.
Capitalis Baro 26 Iulii. Liberatae 31 E. 1. m. 2. 1304. 32. An. D. An. R.
Attornat. Regis. Custod. Rot. Cancel. Justice. ad Asissas, etc. Iusticiariorum
Itinerantium. Servient. ad Legem. 1295. Edw. I. 23. Domius Adam de Osgodby
constit. per I. de Langton Cancellar. Regis. 1 Oct. Claus. 23 E. 1. m. 5. in
dorso. 1296. 24. 1297. 25. 1298. 26. 1299. 27. Ioh. de Berewyk, Will. de
Ormesby, Ioh. de Lythegreynes, Ioh. de Baukwell, Lambertus de Trikingham.
Cantabr. Pat. 27 E. 1. m. 39.

1300. 28. Nich. de Warrewick. Lib. de anno 32 E. 1. m. 4. 1301. 29. Johannes
de Cestria. Lib. de anno 29 E. 1. m. 1. and m. 4. Will. Inge unus Justice. Regis
ad Assisas in diversis Comitatibus. Lib. 29 E. 1. m. 3. 1302. 30. Johannes de
Mutford. Plac. de Quo war. in Com. Cornub. 30 E. 1. Ioh. de Berewyk, Henr.
Spigurnell, Ioh. Randolf, Hervaeus de Stauntone, Will. de Burnetone. Cornub.
Claus. 30 E. 1. in dorso m. 8.

1303. 31. Will. de Bereford, Will. de Ormesby, Henr. Spigurnell, Hervaeus de
Staunton. Dunelm. Pat. 31 E. 1. m. 30.

1304. 32. Will. de Mortimer Justice. ad Assisas, in Com. Linc. Rotel.
Northampton. War. Leic. Salop. Staff. Wigorn. Glouc. and Heref. Lib. 32 E. 1.
m. 2. An. D. An. R. Cancel. Angl. and Custod. Sig. Thesaurariorum. Justice. ad
Plac. coram Rege. Iusticiariorum de Banco. Baronum de Scaccario. (...). (...)
I. 33. (...) (...) He^r. de Gildeford. constitutus 22 Nov. Claus. 33 E. 1. m.
3. (...). 34. Her^i^us de Stant^^^, constitutus 20 Apr. Pat. 34 E. 1. m. 27.
Hamfr. de Waledea^ constitutus 19 Oct. Pat. 34 E. 1. m. 5. 1307. 35. (...)
1308. Edw. II. 1. Ioh. de (...) Cicestrensis Episc. constitutus etc. Rot. Fin.
1 E. 2. m. 9. Walt. Regin^sd Clericus R. constitutus Thesaur. 22 Aug. Pat. 1.
E. 2. p. 1. m. 21. Idem Walterus Canonicus S. Paali London, in Episc. Wigorn
praefectas. Pat. 1 E. 2. p. 2. m. 15. (...) R^d. de He^gham, Will. Haward,
Petr. (...), Lamb. de (...), and Her^lcus de (...) juramentum, raestiterunt
etc. Claus. 1 E. 2. in dorso m. 19. Will. de Carleto^, Rog. de Hegham, Tho. de
Cantebrig, constit. 16 Sept. Pat. 1 E. 2. p. 1. m. 18. Ioh. de Bauquel 10 Nov.
Ib. m. 11. Ioh. de Everdon Clericus 28 Nov. Ibid. m. 8. Ric. de Abyndon 15 Ian.
Pat. 1 E. 2. p. 2. m. 28. 13^^. 2. Will. de Bereford constitutus Capitalis
Justice. 15 Martii. Pat. 2 E. 2. p. 1. m. 9. He^r. de Scrope constit. 27 Nov.
Pat. 2 E. 2. p. 2. m. 17. Ioh. de Foxle constit. loco Rogeri Hegham defuncti.
28 Febr. Pat. 2 E. 2. p. 1. m. 15. 13^^. 3. Ioh. de Sandale Clericus constit.
Thesaur. Scacc. loco (...). Episc. 6 Iulii. Pat. 3 E. 2. m. 3. Rog. le Brabazon
Capitalis Justice. Liberatae de anno 6 E. 2. m. 4. Ioh. de Beastede, and Will.
de Burn constituti 6 Oct. Pat. 3 E. 2. m. 32. 1311. 4. Walt. (Reginald)
Wigora. Episc. recepit magnum Sigillum Regis custodiendum 6 Iulii. Claus. 4 E.
2. m. 26 in dorso. Rog. Scoter constitutus loco Tho. de Cantebrig 17 Iulii.
Pat. 4 E. 2. p. 1. m. 26. An. D. An. R. Attornatorum R. Justice. ad Assisas,
Iuratas and Certificationes. Iusticiariorum Itinerantium. Servientium ad Legem.
1305. Edw. I. 33. Henr. Spigurnell unus Justice. ad Assisas in Com. Kanc. Essex.
Hertf. Norff. Suff. Cantab. Hunt. Bedf. and Buck. Lib. 33 E. 1. m. 5. 1306. 34.
1307. 35. Hervicus de Stantone unus Justice. ad Assisas etc. in Com. Surr. Suss.
Oxon. Berks. Suthampt. Wilts. Summers. Dors. Devon and Cornub. Lib. 35 E. 1. m.
3. 1308. Edw. II. 1. 1309. 2. 1310. 3. Mathaeus de Scaccario. Pat. 3 E. 2. m.
1. Rogerus de Scotre, and Edmundus Passelegh S^rj^^nts assigns as plees le
Roy. Claus. 3 E. 2. in dorso m. 21. 1311. 4. Ioh de Insul^, Henr ^e Scrope,
Ioh. de Doncastre. Ebor. Northumb. Cumb. Westminster. Lanc. Claus. 4 E. 2. in dorso
m. 19.

Rog. de Scotre, Ioh. de Mutford. Nich. de Bolingbroke. Li^c. Rotel. Not.
Derb. Warw. Leic.

Will. de Conesby, Herv. de Stanton, Will. de Colneye. Norff. Suff. Cantab.
Hunt. Northampt.

Ioh. de Foxle, Ioh. de Batesford, Will. de Burn. Suthampt. Wiltes. Summers.
Dorset. Cornub. Devon.

Rob. de Retford, Ioh. de Westcote, Ric. de Bereford. Essex. Hertf. Buck. Bedf.
Oxon. Berks.

Henr. de Guldeford, Will. de Goldyngton, Rob. de Clyderhou. Kanc. Suss. Surr.

Henr. Spigurnel, Walt. de Gloucestre. Milo de Rodeborwe. Salop. Staff. Wigorn.
Heref. Glouc. Ibid.

Will. de Ormesby, Hen. de Guldeford, Ioh. de Mutford, Rob. de Retford. In
Episc. Dunelm. Pat. 4 E. 2. p. 2. m. 17.

An. D. An. R. Cancel. Angl. and Custod. Sig. Thesaurariorum. Justice. ad Plac.
coram Rege. Iusticiariorum de Banco. Baronum de Scaccario. 1312. Edw. II. 5.
Idem Walterus Wigorn. Episc. Cancellarius Regis. Claus. 5 E. 2. in dorso. Walt.
de Norwico unus Baronum de Scacc. constitutus locum tenens Thesaur. 12 Oct.
Pat. 5 E. 2. p. 1. m. 12. Walt. Cov. and Lich. Episc. constitutus Thesaurarius
14 Martii. Pat. 5 E. 2. p. 1. m. 15. Walt. de Norwico, constit. loco Rog. de
Scoter defuncti 3 Martii. Pat. 5 E. 2. p. 2. m. 19. Ioh. Abel constitutus 8
Martii. Ibid. m. 17. 1313. 6. Ioh. de Sandale Clericus Regis constit. locum
tenens Thesaur. in Scacc. 4 Oct. Pat. 6 E. 2. p. 1. m. 14. Ioh. Bacun constit.
19 Febr. Pat. 6 E. 2. p. 2. m. 21. Ioh. de Insula constit. 30 Ian. Pat. 6 E. 2.
p. 1. m. 2. 1314. 7. Rog. le Brabazon Capitalis Justice. ad Plac. coram R.
constitutus locum tenens Thesaurarii 16 Oct. Pat. 7 E. 2. p. 1. m. 8. 1315. 8.
Ioh. de Saadale (postea (...) Episc. Cancellarius Regis. Pat. 8 E. 2. p. 2. m.
2. Walt. de Norwicco (Baro Scacc.) constitutus Thesaurarius 26 Sept. Pat. 8 E.
2. p. 1. m. 21. Will. I^ge constitutus loco Hervici de Staunton 28 Sept. Pat. 8
E. 2. p. 1. m. 19. Herv. de Staunton constit. loco Walt. de Norwico 20 Sept.
Pat. 8 E. 2. p. 1. m. 20. 1316. 9. Rog. Brabazon quia in officio Iusticiarii,
ad senium usque deservivit, exauctoratus, factus est unus de secreto consilio
Regis. Pat. 9 E. 2. p. 3. m. 3. Galfr. le Scrope. Com. de. T. Pasch. rot. 4.
Gilb. de Roubiri constitutus loco Will. Inge 10 Martii. Pat. 9 E. 2. p. 2. m.
32. Ioh. de Mutford constitutus 20. Apr. Pat. 9 E. 2. p. 2. m. 24. 1317. 10.
Ioh. Hothum Elien. Episc. constitutus Thesaurarius Scacc. 27 Maii. Pat. 10 E.
2. p. 2. m. 10. Magister Ioh. Walweyn constitutus 10 Iunii. Pat. 10 E. 2. p. 2.
m. 10. Will. Inge Capit^lis Justice. Claus. 10 E. 2. m. 28. Lambertus de
Trikingham. associatus Will. Inge and aliis Justice 6 Aug. Claus. 10 E. 2. m.
28. He^r. le Scrope constitutus Capit^lis Justice. loco Will. Inge 15 Iunii.
Claus. 10 E. 2. m. 28. Ingelardus de Warlee constit. loco Herv. de Stanton 29
Dec. Pat. 10 E. 2. p. 2. m. 35. Ioh. de Okham ratione impotenotiae Ric. de
Abyndon 18 Iunii. Pat. 10 E. 2. p. 2. m. 4. Walt. de Norwiico qui in officio
Thesaur. Scacc. ad senium usque deservivit, exauctoratus, factus est Capitalis
Baro and de numero secretorum consiliariorum Regis. Pat. 10 E. 2. p. 2. m. 11.
1318. 11. Ioh. Hothum Episc. Elien. Pat. 11 E. 2. p. 2. m. 8. An. D. An. R.
Attornatorum Regis. Magist. Rotulorum. Iusticiariorum Itinerantium. Servientium
ad Legem. 1312. Edw. II. 5. 1313. 6. Ioh. de Norton. Pat. 6 E. 2. p. 1. m. 20.
Liberatae de anno 7 E. 2. m. 4. Hervicus de Staunton, Ioh. Wogan. Kanc. Claus.
6 E. 2. in dorso m. 4.

Henr. Spigurnell, Will. de Ormesby, Ioh. de Mutford. Et Pat. 6 E. 2. p. 2. m.
2.

1314. 7. 1315. 8. 1316. 9. Will. de Langeleye. Liberatae 9 E. 2. m. 3. Will.
de Herle, Gilb. de Toutheby, Galfr. le Scrope, Ioh. de Stonore, in subventionem
expensarum suarum circa negotia Regis prosequenda and defendenda, habent scil.
quilibet eorum xx l. per annum sibi concessas. Liberatae 9 E. 2. m. 1. 1317.
10. Willielmus de Ayrmin; cui assensu Cancellarii custod. Rot. commissa est.
Claus. 10 E. 2. in dorso m. 28. 1318. 11. An. D. An. R. Cancel. Angl. and
Custod. Sig. Thesauratiorum. Justice. ad Plac. coram Rege. Iusticiariorum de
Banco. 1319. Edw. II. 12. Ioh. Stratford, Winton. Episc. constitutus Thesaur.
Scacc. 16 Nov. Pat. 12 E. 2. p. 1. m. 18. Ioh. de Donecaster, constitutus 5
Iunii. Pat. 12 E. 2. p. 2. m. 7. 1320. 13. Ioh. (Salmon) Episc. Norwic. in
pleno Parliamento Cancellarius a Rege nominatus, recepit Sigillum. Claus. 13 E.
2. in dorso m. 9. Walt. de Norwico constitutus 6 Nov. Claus. 13 E. 2. m. 15.
Walt. Stapleton, Exon. Episc. constit. 18 Febr. Pat. 13 E. 2. m. 19. 1321. 14.
Rob. de Malberthorp. Liberatae 14 E. 2. m. 1. Will. de Herle, constitutus loco
Ioh. de Benstede 16 Oct. Pat. 14 E. 2. p. 1. m. 15. Ioh. de Stonore constitutus
loco Ioh. Bacun 16 Oct. Ibid. Ioh. de Bousser constitutus 31 Maij. Pat. 14 E.
2. p. 2. m. 6. 1322. 15. Xxv. Augusti Walt. de Norwico, iterum constit. ad
instantem requisitionem W. Exon. Episc. Pat. 15 E. 2. p. 1. m. 19. Walt. Exon.
Episc. rursum constit. 9 Maii. Pat. 15 E. 2. p. 2. m. 16. Galfr. de Say, and
Guliel. de Dive. Lel. col. vol. 1. p. 330. 1323. 16. Guliel. de Ayrmin
(Magister Rot. Cancellariae) habuit Custodiam magni Sigilli, Iohanne Norwicensi
Episcopo infirmitate detentus. Claus. 16 E. 2. m... Walt. de Norwico locum
tenens Thesaurarii, durante recessu, pro negotiis suis etc. W. Exon. Episcopi.
Claus. 16 E. 2. m. 20. Hervicus de Stanton Capitalis Justice. ad Placita etc.
Liberatae de anno 17 E. 2. m. 2. 1324. 17. Rob. de Baldok, Arelud. Midlesexiae,
constituitur Cancellarius 20 Aug. Claus. 17 E. 2. Hervicus de Stantone
Capitalis Justice. Pat. 17 E. 2. p. 1. m. 9. Galfr. le Scrope Capitalis Justice.
and mandatum est Herv. de Staunton. T. R. apud Westminster. 21 Martii. Claus. 17 E.
2. m. 20. Ioh. de Stonore. Liberatae 17 E. 2. m. 3. Walt. de Friskeny (unus
Baronum de Scacc.) constitutus 9 Iulii. Pat. 17 E. 2. p. 1. m. 22. Galfr. le
Scrope 27 Sept. Pat. 17 E. 2. p. 1. m. 15. 1325. 18. Will. de Melton Archiep.
Ebor. constitutus Thesaur. Scacc. 30 Iulii. Pat. 18 E. 2. p. 2. m. 5. Walt. de
Friskeneye. Liberatae 18 E. 2. m. 2. 1326. 19. 1327. 20 Ioh. de Stratford,
Episc. Wint. constitutus locum tenens Thesaurarii 6 Nov. Com. de T. Mich. 20 E.
2. Hervicus de Staunton constitutus Capitalis Justice. 18 Iulii. Pat. 20 E. 2.
m. 29. 1328. Edw. III. 1. Ioh. de Hothum, Episc. Elie^. habuit magnum Sigillum
sibi a Rege liberatum 28 Ian. and ad faciendum inde quod ad officium
Cancellarii pertinet. Claus. 1 E. 3. p. 1. in dorso m. 25. Adam de Orleton,
Herefordensis Episc. constitutus Thesaurarius Scacc. 29 Ian. Pat. 1 E. 3. p. 1.
m. 38. Hear. de Burghersh Lincoln. Episc. constitutus Thesaur. Scacc. Pat. 1 E.
3. p. 1. m. 9. Hear. le Scrope de officio Capitalis Just iciarii exauctoratus 1
Martii. Pat. 1 E. 3. p. 1. m. 24. Walt. de Friskeney 6 Martii. Claus. 1 E. 3.
p. 1. m. 23. Rob. Baynard 9 Martii. Ibid. Will. de Herle constitutus Capitalis
Justice. 4 Febr. Pat. 1 E. 3. p. 1. m. 35. Ioh. de Stonore, and Walt. de
Friskeneye 31 Ian. Pat. 1 E. 3. p. 1. m. 38. Henr. le Scrope constitutus
secundus Justice. 5 Febr. Pat. 1 E. 3. p. 1. m. 36. Ioh. de Bousser constit. 24
Martii. Pat. 1 E. 3. p. 1. m. 10. An. D. An. R. Baronum de Scaccario.
Attornatorum Regis. Magist. Rotulorum. Justice. Itinerantium. Servientium ad
Legem. 1319. Edw. II. 12. Roh. de Wodehonse, loco Ingelardi de Warle constit.
24 Iulii. Pat. 12 E. 2. p. 2. m. 29. (Archidiac. Richm). Lib. 1 E. 3. m. 3.
Adam de Fyncham. Liberatae 12 E. 2. m. 2. 1320. 13. 1321. 14. Lambertus de
Trikingham, and Walt. de Freskeneye constituti 6 Aug. Pat. 14 E. 2. m. 17.
Galfr. le Scrope. Plac. de Q. War. apud Turrim Land. 14 E. 2. rot. 56. Ioh. de
Denum. Liberatae de anno 14 E. 2. m. 2. 1322. 15. 1323. 16. Will. de Fulburn
constit. 1 Iunii. Pat. 16 E. 2. p. 2. m. 3. Rog. Beler constit. loco Ioh. de
Foxle 20 Iulii. Pat. 16 E. 2. p. 1. m. 30. Galfridus de Fyngale constitutus 6
Nov. Pat. 16 E. 2. p. 1. m. 15. vide Liberatae de anno 18 E. 2. m. 3. 1324. 17.
Edm. de Passele constit. loco Walt. de Friskeney 20 Sept. Pat. 17 E. 2. p. 1.
m. 16. Magr. Rob. de Ayleston constit. 21 Maii. Pat. 17 E. 2. m. 15. Will. de
Everdon, Humfr. de Walede^ constit. 18 Iunii. Ibid. m. 8. 1325. 18. Adam de
Fyncham. Plac. de T. Trin. 18 E. 2. rot. 174. Midd. Magr. Henr. de Clyf
constit. 4 Iulii. Pat. 18 E. 2. p. 2. in dorso m. 1. 1326. 19. 1327. 20.
Magister Ioh. de Redeswell constit. 1 Sept. Pat. 20 E. 2. m. 19. Hervicus de
Staunton constit. Cap. Baro 18 Iulii. Ibid. m. 29. 1328. Edw. III. 21. Walt. de
Norwico constit. Cap. Baro 2 Febr. Pat. 1 E. 3. p. 1. m. 38. Will. de Fulburn,
Will. de Everdon constit. 2 Febr. Ibid. Will. de Boudon constit. secundus B^ro
4 Febr. Pat. 1 E. 3. m. 35. Rob. de Notingham loco Will. de Boudon 15 Oct. Pat.
1 E. 3. p. 3. m. 14. W. de Mershton, ad proseq. etc. coram Justice. de Banco 26
Febr. Pat. 1 E. 3. p. 1. m. 35. and m. 28. Alex. de Hadenham, similiter. Pat. 1
E. 3. p. 1. m. 37. Adam de Fyncham Cleric. R. ad proseq. etc. coram Justice. ad
Plac. coram R. Pat. 1 E. 3. p. 1. m. 35. Ioh. de Denum and Gilbertus de
Toutheby Serve. Regis ad Legem. Liberatae 1. E. 3. m. 3. An. D. An. R. Cancel.
Angl. and Custod. Sig. Thesaurariorum. Justice. ad Plac. coram Rege.
Iusticiariorum de Banco. 1329. Edw. III. 2. He^. de (...) Custos Rot.
Cancellariae, and domin^^ Will. de (...) Clericus Cancel. constituti Custode^
Sigilli 1 Martii. Claus. 2 E. 3. in dorso m. 33. Henr. de Barghersh, Li^^
Episc. Cancel. Angliae. Pat. 2 E. 3. p. 2. m. 34. and 19. Cui R. tradidit
magnum Sigillum custodiendum 12 Maii. Claus. 2 E. 3. in dorso m. 26. Rog. de
Northburgh, Cov. and Lich. Episc. Pat. 2 E. 3. p. 1. m. 17. The. de Carleton,
Heref. Episc. 20 Maii. Pat. 2 E. 3. p. 2. m. 32. Galfr. le Scrope constitutus
Capitalis Justice. 28 Febr. Pat. 2 E. 3. p. 1. m. 27. Rob. de Malberthorp.
Liberatae 2 E. 3. Henr. de Hambury, de annuo feodo ^uo x l. marcarum. Vide Lib.
4 E. 3. m. 1. Ric. de Wylughby constitutus 6 Martii. Pat. 2 E. 3. p. 1. m. 20.
1330. 3. Ro^. de Wodebus, Archid ac. Richm. constitutus These. Scacc. 16 Sept.
Pat. 3 E. 3. p. 2. m. 22. Rob. de Malberthorp assignatus Capitalis Justice. (
Galfr. le Scrope ad parts transmarinas profecturo) 1 Maii. Claus. 3 E. 3. m.
24. Henr. le Scrope constit. Capitalis Justice. 28 Oct. Claus. 3 E. 3. m. 7.
Ioh. de Stonore constit. Capitalis Justice. 3 Sept. Pat. 3 E. 3. p. 2. m. 23.
Ioh. Travers constitutus 2 Martii. Ibid. m 26. Tho. Bacoun constit. 30 Dec.
Ibid. m. 7 Ric. de Wylughby constit. secundarius Justice. 3 Sept. Ibid. m. 23.
1331. 4. Ioh. de Stratford, Episc. (...) habuit magnum Sizilium sibi a Rege ad
custod endum traditum 28 Nov. Claus. 4 E. 3. in dorso m. 16. Will. Archiep.
Ebor. constit. Thesaur. Scacc. 28 Nov. Pat. 4 E. 3. p. 2. m. 27. Galfr. le
Scrope constitutus Capitalis Justice. 19 Dec. Claus. 4 E. 3. m. 13. Galfr. de
Edenham constit. 18 Ian. Claus. 4 E. 3. m. 3. Ric. de Wylughby, Tho. de Louthe
constituti 1^ Dec. Ibid. Rob. de Malberthorp, Ioh. de Cantebrig, and Ioh. Inge
constituti 18 Ian. Pat. 4 E. 3. p. 2. m. 11. 1332. 5. Guil. Episc. Norwic.
constit. Thesaur. Scacc. 1 Apr. Pat. 5 E. 3. p. 1. m. 18. Tho. de Louthere.
Lib. 5 E. 3. m. 2. Will. de Herle constitutus Capitalis Justice. and mandatum
est Iohanni de Stonore etc. 2 Martii. Pat. 5 E. 3. p. 1. m. 30. Ioh. de Stonore
constitutus secundarius Justice. 1 Apr. Pat. 5 E. 3. p. 1. m. 13. 1333. 6.
Magister Rob. de Stratford, frater Ioh. Winton. Episcopi, habuit custodiam
Sigilli, dum frater ^uus quibusdam negotiis Regis intendebat, 23 Iunii. Claus.
6 E. 3. in dorso m. 22. Rob. de Ayleston, Archid. Berks. constitutus Thesaur.
Scacc. 29 Martii. Pat. 6 E. 3. p. 1. m. 11. Will. de Denum. Lib. 6 E. 3. m. 2.
Ric. de Wilughby constitutus Capitalis Justice. loco Galfr. le Scrope, qui in
comitiva Regis, ad parts exteras profecturus est, 28 Martii. Claus. 6 E. 3. m.
31. Tho. Bacoun constitutus 28 Ian. Claus. 6 E. 3. m. 39. Galfr. le Scrope
constit. Capitalis Justice. and mandatum est Ric. de Wylughby 20 Sept. Claus. 6
E. 3. m. 13. Ioh. de Shardelow constitutus 28 Ian. Pat. 28 E. 3. p. 1. m. 28.
Ric. de Aldeburgh constitutus 3 Febr. Ibid. m. 26. An. D. An. R. Baron. de
Scaccario. Attornat. Regis. Magist. Rotulorum. Iusticiariorum Itinerantium.
Servientium ad Legem. 1329. Edw. III. 2. Gilbertus de Totheby Serviens Regis,
haber xx l. per an. pro expensis suis cirea negotia Regis defendenda and
prosequenda. Liberatae 2 E. 3. m. 7. 1330. 3. Ioh. de Stonore constit.
Capitalis Baro 22 Febr. Pat. 3 E. 3. p. 1. m. 34. Rob. de Wodehous constit.
secundarius Baro 16 Apr. Ibid. m. 22. Ric. de Aldeburgh. Plac. de Quo War.
apud Northampton 3 E. 3. Will. de Herle, Rad. de Bereford, Ioh. de fseld, Adam
de Brom, Will. de Denum. Notingh. Claus. 3 E. 3. m. 9.

Galfr. le Scrope, Lamb. de Trikingham, Ioh. de Cantebrig, Ioh. Randolf, Ioh.
de Radenhule. Northampt. Ibid.

Ric. de Aldeburgh, and Ioh. de Cantebrig Servient. Regis. Lib. 3 E. 3. m. 4.
and m. 6. 1331. 4. Hear. le Scrope constit. Capitalis Baro 19 Dec. Pat. 4. E.
3. p. 2. m. 20. Rob. de Ayleston constitutus 20 ec. Ibid. (Archidiac. Berks.)
Will. de Coshale. Lib. 4 E. 3. m. 3. Hugo de Courtney, Ioh. de Cantebrig, Tho.
de Louthe, Pet. de Middeltone, Ioh. de Rodenhale, Tho. de Radeclyve. Bedf.
Claus. 4 E. 3. m. 32.

Will. la Zouche de Haringworth, Will. de Herle, Rob. de Malberthorpe, Rob. de
Thorpe, Rob. de Scorburghe, Nich. Fastolf. Derb. Ibid.

Ioh. de Trevaignone^ Serve. Regis. Lib. 4 E. 3. m. 5. 1332. 5. Magister Thomas
de Garton constit. secundarius Baro 10 Oct. Pat. 5 E. 3. p. 2. m. 1. Rob. de
Scardeburgh constitutus Justice. Itinerans in Insulis de Guernesey, Ieresey,
Serk, and Aureney, habet liberationem xl. marc. Lib. 5 E. 3. m. 5. Will. de
Denum constit. Serve. Reg^s 8 Febr. per breve R. Claus. 5 E. 3. m. 30. Will. de
Shareshall Serve. Regis. Lib. 5 E. 3. m. 2. 1333. 6. Tho. de Blaston, and Rob.
de Scorburgh, constituti 2 Nov. Pat. 6 E. 3. p. 3. m. 16. Magister Ioh. de
Hildesle constit. 18 Dec. Ib. m. 8. Adam de Steyngrene constit. 24 Iulii. Pat.
6 E. 3. p. 2. m. 18. Will. de Denum constit. 24 Sept. Ibid. m. 7. An. D. An. R.
Cancel. Angl. and Custod. Sig. Thesauraniorum. Justice. ad Plac. coram Rege.
Iusticiariorum de Banco. 1334. E^^. III. 7. Will. Archiep. Ebor. Custos m^gni
Sigi^li, virtute mandati Regis dictum Sigillum Hear. de Ed^estowe, Tho. de
Baunburgh, and Ioh. de S. Paulo liberavit custodiendum die Iovis in Epiph.
Domini. Claus. 7 E. 3. p. 2. m. 4. in dorso. Ric. de Wylughby iterum constit.
Capitalis Justice. loco Galfridi le Scrope, qui in servicio Regis ad parts
transmarinas profecturus est 10 Sept. Claus. 7 E. 3. p. 1. m. 2. Will. de
Shareshull constit. 20 Martii. Claus. 7. E. 3. p. 2. m. 32. Henr. le Scrope
constit. Capitalis Justice. and m^ndatum est etc. Will. de Herle 18 Nov. Pat. 7
E. 3. p. 2. m. 15. Will. de Herle iterum constituitur Capitalis Justice. 19 Nov.
Ibid. m. 11. Will. de Shareshall constit. 30 Maii. Pat. 7 E. 3. p. 1. m. 3.
Ric. de Aldeburgh constit. 19 Nov. Pat. 7 E. 3. p. 2. m. 11. 1335. 8. Ioh. de
Stratford Cantuar. electus, confirmatus Cancellarius 6 Apr. Et liberavit magnum
Sigillum Magistro Rob. de Stretford, fratri suo, custodiendum. Claus. 8 E. 3.
m. 27. in dorso. Ric. Episc. Dunelmensis constituitur Cancellarius, and habuit
magnum Sigillum sibi liberatum 2^ Sept. Ibid. in dorso m. 10. Ricardus Dunelm.
Episc. constitutus Thesaur. Scaccarii 3 Febr. Pat. 8 E. 3. p. 1. m. 40. Henr.
de Burghersh Episc. Li^c. constitutus Thesaur. Scacc. 1 Aug. Pat. 8 E. 3. p. 2.
m. 39. Rob. de Scardeburgh constitutus 24 Sept. Pat. 8 E. 3. p. 2. m. 27. Ioh.
de Cantebrig constitutus 30 Ian. Pat. 8 E. 3. p. 1. m. 24. Galfr. le Scrope
constit. loco Ioh. de Stonore 16 Iulii. Ibid. m. 3. Ioh. Trevaignon constit. 24
Sept. Pat. 8 E. 3. p. 2. m. 32. 1336. 9. Ioha^^es Can'uariensis Episc. constit.
Cancellarius, and habuit magnum Sigillum Regis sibi liberatum 6 Iunii. Claus. 9
E. 3. m. 23. Will. de Herle Capitalis Justice. aetate gravatus, ad petitionem
suam officio exutus, ita quod sit de secreto consilio Regis quamdiu vixerit.
Pat. 9 E. 3. p. 2. m. 31. Ioh. de Stonore constituitur Capitalis Justice. 7
Iulii. Pat. 9 E. 3. p. 2. m. 32. 1337. 10. 1338. 11. Magister Rob. de
Stratford, Archid. Cant. and electus Cicestr. constit. C^ncellarius, and Custos
Sigilli 23 Oct. Pat. 11 E. 3. p. 3. m. 11. Claus. 11 E. 3. in dorso p. 1. m.
20. Magr. Will. la Zouche, Decanus Ecel. S. Petri Ebor. constitutus Thesaur.
Scacc. 24 Martii. Pat. 11 E. 3. p. 1. m. 22. Ioh. de Thorpe constit. locum
tenens These. 4 Sept. Pat. 12 E. 3. p. 3. m. 18. Rog. Hillari, and Will. Scot,
constituti 18 Martii. Pat. 11 E. 3. p. 1. m. 30. Will Basse^. Lib. 11 E. 3. m.
2. 1339. 12. Magister Ric. de Bynteworth, electus London. Episc. constit. est
Cancellarius, and Custos Sigilli 6 Iulii. Claus. 12 E. 3. p. 2. in dorso m. 23.
Rob. de Wodehouse Archidiac. Richm. constitutus These. 10 Martii. Pat. 12 E. 3.
p. 1. m. 23. Will. la Zouche constit. 16 Dec. Rot. Pat. pro mercatoribus de
anno 12 E. 3. Rob. Brundishe constitutus 4 Apr. Claus. 12 E. 3. p. 1. m. 11.
Will. Faunt similiter. Ibid. 1340. 13. Mortuo Ric. Land. Episc. Cancellario,
liberatum fuit magnum Sigillum Ioh. de S. Panlo Custodi Rot. Canc. Mich. de
Wath. and Tho. de Baumburgh custodiendum 8 Dec. Claus. 13 E. 3. p. 3. in dorso
m. 11. Rob. de Sadington constitutus locum tenens These. ( Will. le Zo^che in
partibus transmarinis existente) 25 Iunii. Pat. pro mercator. 13 E. 3. m. 18.
Will. Scot constitutus 2 Maii. Pat. 13 E. 3. p. 1. m. 16. Ioh. de Shardelowe
constit. loco Roberti de Scardeburgh 6 Sept. Pat. 13 E. 3. p. 2. m. 23. Rob. de
Sardeburgh constit. loco Ioh. de Shardelowe 6 Sept. Pat. 13 E. 3. p. 2. m. 23.
An. D. An. R. Baron. de Scaccario. Magist. Rotulorum. Attornatorum Regis.
Justice. Itinerantium. Servient. ad Legem. 1334. Edw. III. 7. Henr. le Scrope
constit. Capitalis Baro 19 Nov. Pat. 7 E. 3. p. 2. m. 11. Mich. de Worth
constit. 20 Ian. Claus. 8 E. 3. in dorso m. 35. Galfr. le Scrope, Ioh. de
Stonore, Ricardus de Aldeburgh, Will. de Shareshull. In Episc. Dunelm. Claus. 7
E. 3. p. 2. m. 16.

Galfr. le Scrope, Ioh. de Cantebrigg, Galfr. de Edenham, Ioh. de Radenhale,
Ioh. Claver. Kanc. Ibid. m. 9.

1335. 8. Adam de Lymbergh constituitur loco Iohannis de Hildesle 9 Nov. Pat. 8
E. 3. p. 2. m. 11. Sim. de Trewythosa pro prosequendo negotia Regis in Parliam.
and coram Justice. de Banco habet xx. marcas. Lib. 8 E. 3. m. 5. Will. Scot,
Rob. Parayag, Sim. de Tren^thosa, Iohanne^ de Trevaig^o^, Lucas de Burgh, Serve.
R^gis. Lib. 8 E. 3. m. 1. 1336. 9. Will. de Hopton Serve. Regis. Lib. 9 E. 3. m.
8. 1337. 10. Nich. Haweman constit. 3 Oct. Pat. 10 E. 3. p. 2. m. 22. Ioh. de
Shordich constit. 10 Nov. Ib. m. 11. 1338. 11. Rob. de Sadington constit.
Capitalis Baro 20 Martii. Pat. 11 E. 3. p. 1. m. 27. Ioh. de S. Paulo 18 Apr.
Claus. 11 E. 3. m. 13. 1339. 12. Ioh. de Clone constit. 4 Aug. Attorn. R. in
Com. Banco. Pat. 12 E. 3. p. 2. m. 8. Ioh. de Lincoln constit. Attorn. Regis in
Banco Regis 28 Maii. Ibid. m. 31. 1340. 13. Ioh. de Clone constitutus Attorn.
R. in Com. Banco 16 Iulii. Pat. 13 E. 3. p. 2. m. 24. Et mandatum est Will. de
Meringtone. Ibid. An. D. An. R. Cancel. Angl. and Custod. Sig. Thesaurariorum.
Justice. ad Plac. coram Rege. Iusticiariorum de Banco. 1341. Edw. III. 14. Ioh.
de S. Paulo constitutus ^olus Custos Sigill^ 13 Febr. Claus. 14 E. 3. p. 1. m.
42. in dorso. Ioh. Archiepisc. Cantuar. constitutus Cancellarius and Custos
Sigilli 28 Apr. Claus. 14 E. 3. p. 1. m. 27. in dorso. Die Iovis, in festo S.
A^dr. Apost. Rob. Cicestr. Episc. Cancellarius R. liberavit magnum Sigillum
domino Regi. Claus. 14 E. 3. p. 2. m. 12. Rob. Burgchier miles constitutus
Cancellarius die Iovis in crast. S. Luciae Virginis, cui Rex adtunc liberavit
magnum Sigillum. Claus. 14 E. 3. p. 2. in dorso m. 10. Rob. de Sadyngto^
const^t. Thesaur. 2 Maii. Pat. 14 E. 3. p. 1. m. 10. Rog. de Northburg, Cov.
and L^ch. Episc. constit. Thesaur. 21 Iunii. Pat. 14 E. 3. p. 2. m. 10. Rob.
Parnyng constit. Thesaur. 15 Dec. Pat. 14 E. 3. p. 3. m. 7. Rob. Parnyng
constitutus Capitalis Justice. (loco Ric. de Wylughby) 24 Iulii. Claus. 14 E. 3.
p. 2. m. 53. Will. Scot constitutus Capitalis Justice. etc. loco Rob. Par^ing. 8
Ian. Ibid. m. 8. Rob de Scardeburgh constit. Justice. 8 Ian. Ibid. Iac. de
Wodestoke constit. 4 Febr. Pat. 14 E. 3. p. 1. m. 45. Rob. Parnyng constitutus
23 Maii. Pat. 14 E. 3. p. 2. m. 32. Ric. de Wylughby constit. 9 Oct. Pat. 14 E.
3. p. 3. m. 29. Rog. Hillary constitutus Capitalis Justice. 8 Ian. Pat. 14 E. 3.
p. 3. m. 7. Tho. de Heppescotes, Ric. de Aldeburgh, and Will. Basset,
constituti 8 Ian. Ibid. 1342. 15. Rob. Parnyng Cancell^rius R. cui Rex
deliberavit magnum Sigillum 27 Oct. Claus. 15 E. 3. p. 3. in dorso m. 13. Will.
de Cusance constit. Thesaur. 28 Oct. Pat. 15 E. 3. p. 2. m. 5. Will. Basset
constitutus 28 Oct. Claus. 15 E. 3. p. 3. m. 15. Adam de Stayngrave constit. 10
Ian. Ibid m. 7. Rog. de Baukewell. Lib. 15 E. 3. m. 4. Will. Scot Capitalis
Justice. 27 Apr. Lib. 15 E. 3. m. 3. Ric. de Kelleshull constit. 30 Maii. Pat.
15 E. 3. p. 2. m. 45. Adam. de Stayngreve constit. 28 Oct. Pat. 15 E. 3. p. 3.
m. 15. 1343. 16. Ioh. de Stonore constitutus Capitalis Justice. 9 Maii. Pat. 16
E. 3. p. 1. m. 8. Will. de Thorpe, and Ioh. de Stouforde constit. 23 Apr. Pat.
16 E. 3. p. 1. m. 13. Will. de Shareshull similiter 10 Maii. Ibid m. 8. Ioh. de
Shardelowe similiter 16 Maii. Ibid. m. 2. Rog. Hillary similiter 4 Iunii. Ibid.
p. 2. m. 42. 1344. 17. Rob. de Sadyngton constit. Cancellarius, cui magnum
Sigillum in die S. Mich. liberatum fuit. Claus. 17 E. 3. p. 2. m. 20. in dorso.
1345. 18. Will. de Edyngton constit. Thesaur. 10 Apr. Pat. 18 E. 3. p. 1. m.
22. 1346. 19. 3 Iulii Rex a portu de Sandwico super mare transivit, and eodem
die liberavit magnum Sigillum suum pro regimine Regni, Rob. de Sadynton
Cancellario suo regendum and custodiendum. Pat. 19 E. 3. p. 2. m. 31. Will. de
Thorpe. Lib. 19 E. 3. m. 3. and m. 4. An. D. An. R. Baronum de Scaccario.
Magist. Rotulorum. Attornatorum Regis. Servientium ad Legem. 1341. Edw. III.
14. Will. de Northwell constitutus loco Will. de la Pole 21 Iunii. Pat. 14 E.
3. p. 2. m. 5. Tho. de Blaston, Will. de Broclesby, Gervasius de Wilford, and
Will. de Stowe constituti 20 Ian. Pat. 14 E. 3. p. 3. m. 3. Magister Tho. de
Evesham constit. in crast. post Circumcisionem Domini. Claus. 14 E. 3. p. 2. m.
9. in dorso. Ioh. de Stovord Serve. Regis. Lib. 14 E. 3. m. 5. 1342. 15.
Magister Ioh. de Thoresby Clericus constit. 21 Febr. Claus. 15 E. 3. p. 1. m.
34. in dorso. Will. de Thorpe constitutus Serviens Regis in Itinere
Iusticiariorum apud Turrim Land. die Lunae in secunda septimana Quadragesimae,
3 Febr. Claus. 15 E. 3. p. 1. m. 45. 1343. 16. Will. de Thorpe Attornatus
Regis. Regist. de Cirencestre penes Will. Masters arm. an. 1662. f. 34. a.
1344. 17. Ioh. de Lincolnia. Regist. de Cirencestre, ut supra f. 35. b. Dictus
Ioh. de Clone Lib. 17 E. 3. m. 4. 1345. 18. Will. de Shareshull constit.
Capitalis Baro 2 Iulii. Pat. 18 E. 3. p. 2. m. 3. Alanus de Ash constitutus 2
Iulii. Ibid. 1346. 19. Rob. de Thorpe, Henr. de Grene, Tho. de Setone, Serve.
Regis. Lib. 19 E. 3. m. 5. An. D. An. R. Cancel. Angl. and Custod. Sig.
Thesaurariorum. Justice. ad Plac. coram Rege. Iusticiariorum de Banco. 1346.
Edw. III. 19. Magister Ioh. de Offord constitutus Cancellarius, cui magnum
Sigillum 26 Oct. (...) beratum (...). Pat. 19 E. 3. p. 2. m. 7. Will. de
Shareshull (...) secund rius Justice. 10 Nov. Pat. 19 E. 3. p. 2. m. 2. 1347.
20. 2 Iulii (...) tum ^uit (...) gnum Sigillum Mag^stro Ioh. de Th^re^by, Ioh.
de Offord Cancellario Reg^s versus parts tran^m^rinas proficiscente. Claus. 20
E. 3. p. 2. in dorso m. 26. Will. de Thorpe constit. Capitalis Justice. loco
Will. Scot 26 Nov. Claus. 20 E. 3. p. 2. m. 8. Rog. de Baukwell. Claus. 20 E.
3. p. 1. m. 15. 1348. 21. Thomas de Fencotes constit. 14 Ian. Pat. 21 E. 3. p.
3. m.... 1349. 22. 1350. 23. Ioh. Menevenfis Episc. constitutus Cancellarius,
^abuit magnum Sigillum sibi traditum 16 Iunii. Claus. 23 E. 3. p. ^. in dorso
m. 8. (poste^ ^^gorn. Episc and Archiep. Ebor.) 1351. 24. Will. de Thorpe
Capitalis Justice. pro quibu^dam maleficiis etc. omnia bona, terras etc.
forisfecit. Claus. 24 E. 3. in dorso m. 4. Will. de Shareshull constit.
Capitalis Justice. 26 Oct. Pat. 24 E. 3. p. 3. m. 1. 1352. 25. 1353. 26. 1354.
27. 1355. 28. Tho. de Seton. Lib. 28 E. 3. m. 1. Henr. Green constitutus 6
Febr. Pat. 28 E. 3. p. 1. m. 24. Rog. Hillary constitutus Capitalis Justice. 20
Febr. Ibid. m. 25. 1356. 29. Will. de Notton constitutus 12 Oct. Claus. 29 E.
3. m. 11. Tho. de Se^a. Lib. 29 E. 3. m. 1. An. D. An. R. Baronum de Scaccario.
Attornatorum Regis. Justice. Itinerantium. Servientium ad Legem. 1346. Edw. III.
19. Ioh. de Stouford constitutus Capitalis Baro 10 Nov. Pat. 19 E. 3. p. 2. m.
2. Rob. de Sadington constit. Capitalis Baro 8 Dec. Pat. 19 E. 3. p. 3. m. 11.
1347. 20. Rob. de Thorpe, and Henr. de Grene, Servientes Regis ad Legem,
summoniti ad Parl. inter Iusticiarios utriusque Banci. Claus. 20 E. 3. p. 2. m.
22. in dorso. Will. de Notton Serve. Regis. Lib. 20 E. 3. m. 3. 1348. 21. Ioh.
de Houton constit. 8 Martii. Pat. 21 E. 3. p. 1. m. 25. Rob. de Thorpe, Henr.
de Grene, Will. de Notton, Tho. de Seton, Serve. Regis summoniti ad Parl. Claus.
21 E. 3. p. 2. m. 9. in dorso. 1349. 22. Will. de Thorp, Rog. Hillary, Ioh. de
Stonford, Will. de Scothou, Will. de Herlastone. Kanc. Claus. 22 E. 3. p. 2. m.
20.

1350. 23. Simon de Kegworth constit. 12 Oct. Pat. 23 E. 3. p. 3. m. 34.
(Attorn. R. etc. ad Plac. coram Rege.) 1351. 24. Gervasius de Wilford constit.
Capitalis Baro 7 Apr. Pat. 24 E. 3. p. 1. m. 19. Iacobus Huse constitutus 16
Apr. Ibid. m. 20. 1352. 25. 1353. 26. Will. de Thorpe constitutus secundarius
Baro 24 Maii. Pat. 26 E. 3. p. 1. m. 1. 1354. 27. Henr. de Graistok. Plac. de
T. Trin. 27 E. 3. Rot. 21. 1355. 28. Will. de Retford constitutus 27 Nov. Pat.
28 E. 3. p. 1. m. 24. Will. de Skipwith, Ioh. de Moubray, Serve. Regis summon.
ad Parl. Claus. 28 E. 3. m. 25. in dorso. Videsis etiam Lib. 28 E. 3. m. 1. pro
feodis. 1356. 29. An. D. An. R. Cancel. Angl. and Custod. Sig. Thesauratiorum.
Justice. ad Plac. coram Rege. Iusticiariorum de Banco. 1357. Edw. III. 30. Will.
de Edington Winton. Epise. constit. Cancellarius, hab iit magnum Sigillum sibi
traditum 19 Febr. Claus. 30 E. 3. in dorso m. 4. Ioh. Roffensis Episc. constit.
Thesaurar. 28 Nov. Pat. 30 E. 3. p. 3. m. 10. Rob. de Thorpe constit. Capitalis
Justice. 27 Iunii. Pat. 30 E. 3. p. 2. m. 19. 1358. 31. Thomas de Seton
Capitalis Justice. ad tempus, loco Will. de Shareshull 5 Iulii. Claus. 31 E. 3.
in dorso m. 13. Idem Thomas de secreto Consilio R. Pat. 33 E. 3. p. 2. in
dorso. Henr. de Motelowe constit. 4. Iulii. Pat. 31 E. 3. p. 2. m. 19. Idem.
Henr. habet xx l. per an. sibi concessas eo quod ordinem militarem a Rege
sulcepit. Pat. 33 E. 3. p. 1. m. 30. 1359. 32. 1360. 33. Ioh. de Moubray
constit. 11 Iulii. Pat. 33 E. 3. p. 2. m. 22. Will. de Skipwith constitutus 25
Oct. Pat. 33 E. 3. p. 3. m. 21. 1361. 34. Simon de Langham Abbas Westminster.
constitutus Thesaur. 21 Nov. Pat. 34 E. 3. p. 3. m. 12. 1362. 35. Henr. Grene
miles constitutus Capitalis Justice. 24 Maii. Orig. 38 E. 3. rot. 3. Thomas de
Ingelby habet xl. lib. per an. sibi concess. pro statu suo manutenendo, 30
Sept. Pat. 35 E. 3. p. 1. m. 15. Ioh. Knyvet habet xl. per an. pro statu suo
manutenendo 30 Sept. Pat. 35 E. 3. p. 1. m. 15. 1363. 36. Sim. de Langham
Elien. Episc. recepit Sigillum a Rege 19 Febr. Claus. 36 E. 3. in dorso m. 39.
1364. 37. Ioh. Barret Episc. Wigorn. constit. Thesaur. 19 Febr. Pat. 37 E. 3.
p. 1. m. 29. (postea Elien. Epise.) 1365. 38. Ioh. Delves constitutus 3 Febr.
Pat. 38 E. 3. p. 1. m. 46. 1366. 39. Ioh. Knyvet constitutus Capitalis Justice.
loco Henrici Grene. 29 Oct. Pat. 39 E. 3. p. 2. m. 21. Ioh. de Cavendish
Capitalis Justice. Lib. 39 E. 3. Will. de Fyncheden, and Will. de Wychingham
constituti 29 Oct. Pat. 39 E. 3. p. 2. m. 16. Rog. de Kyrketon. Lib. 39 E. 3.
m. 3. 1367. 40. 1368. 41. Guil. de Wickam Winton. Episc. in officio Cancellarii
confirmatus 17 Sept. Cart. 41 E. 3. 1369. 42. An. D. An. R. Baronum de
Scaccario. Magist. Rotulorum. Attornatorum Regis. Servientium ad Legem. 1357.
Edw. III. 30. Henr. de Greystok constitutus 6 Oct. Pat. 30 E. 3. p. 2. m. 3.
Ioh. Gaunt. Lib. 30 E. 3. m. 1. (Attorn. R. etc. coram Justice. de Banco.) Will.
de Fifhide. Lib. 30 E. 3. m. 1. 1358. 31. ^Ioh. de Bukyngham. Lib. 31 E. 3. m.
2. Ioh. Knyvet. Lib. 31 E. 3. m. 2. 1359. 32. 1360. 33. 1361. 34. Ric. de
Fryseby constitutus 4 Maii. Pat. 34 E. 3. p. 1. m. 15. 1362. 35. 1363. 36.
Will. Skypwith Capitalis Baro. Lib. 36 E. 3. m. 2. Rob. de Pleste. Lib. 36 E.
3. m. 2. David. de Wollere constitutus 15 Martii. Claus. 36 E. 3. Will. de
Frisby Attorn. R. etc. coram Rege. Lib. 36 E. 3. m. 2. Edm. Chellerey, Will. de
Wychingham, Will. de Fyncheden, Serve. Regis. Lib. 36 E. 3. m. 2. 1364. 37.
Will. de Nessefeild constitutus 4 Nov. Pat. 37 E. 3. p. 2. m. 25. 1365. 38.
1366. 39. Thomas de Lodelowe constit. Capitalis Baro: Et Almaricus de Shirland
secundarius Baro 29 Oct. Pat. 39 E. 3. p. 2. m. 16. Ioh. de Stokes constitutus
3 Nov. Pat. 39 E. 3. p. 2. m. 19. 1367. 40. Tho. de Shardlow Clericus constit.
9 Nov. Pat. 40 E. 3. p. 2. m. 12. Rob. Bealknap, Rog. de Meres, Serve. Regis.
Lib. de an. 40 E. 3. m. 1. 1368. 41. Ioh. de Ashwell. Pat. 41 E. 3. p. 1. m. 20
(constit. 20 Maii.) Mich. Skilling Attorn. R. etc. coram Justice. de Banco. Lib.
41 E. 3. m. 1. 1369. 42. An. D. An. R. Cancel. Angl. and Custod. Sig.
Thesauratiorum. Justice. ad Plac. coram Rege. Iusticiariorum de Banco. 1370.
(...) III. 43. (...) 1371. 44. 1372. 45. (...) Ric. de Scrope constit. Thesaur.
27 Martii. Pat. 45 E. 3. p. 1. m. 22. Will. de Fyncheden constitutus Capitalis
Justice. 14 Apr. Pat. 45 E. 3. p. 1. m. 20. Ioh. de Cavendish, and Rog. de Meres
constituti 27 Nov. Pat. 45 E. 3. p. 2. m. 8. 1373. 46. (...) Ioh. Cave^dish
constitutus Capitalis Justice. 15 Iulii. Claus. 46 E. 3. m. 15. Decollatus per
Rebels 5 R. 2. Hist. Th. Walls. Rog. de Kirkiton. Fin. levat. Octab. Purif.
1374. 47. 1375. 48. Rob. Belkaap constitutus Capitalis Justice. 10 Oct. Pat. 48
E. 3. p. 2. m. 25. Rob. de Fulthorp, constitutus 28 Nov. Pat. 48 E. 3. p. 2. m.
3. 1376. 49. Rob. de Ashton constit. Thesaur. 26 Sept. Pat. 49 E. 3. p. 2. m.
23. 1377. 50. Adam de Honghton Me^ev Episc. constit. Cancellarius 11 Ian. quo
die magnum Sigillum ei liberatum fuit. Claus. 50 E. 3. in dorso p. 2. m. 7.
Henr. de Wakefeild Episc. Wigorn. constit. Thesaur. 11 Ian. Pat. 50 E. 3. p. 2.
m. 4. Will. de Skipwith constitutus 8 Oct. Pat. 50 E. 3. p. 2. m. 26. 1378. 51.
1378. Ric. II. 1. Thomas de Brantingham Episc. Exon. constit. Thesaur. 19
Iulii. Pat. 1 R. 2. p. 1. m. 28. Rob. Tresylian constitutus 6 Maii. Claus. 1 R.
2. m. 8. Ioh. Cavendish Capit. Justice. habet C. marc. singulis an. percipiendas
sibi concessas 26 Iunii. Pat. 1 R. 2. p. 1. m. 28. Rob. Bealknap constitutus
Capitalis Justice. 26 Iunii. Pat. 1 R. 2. p. 1. m. 31. Henr. de Percehay (Baro
Scacc.) constitutus Justice. 26 Nov. Pat. 1 R. 2. p. 2. m. 27. Rob. de Preston
chivalier constit. Capitalis Justice. 5 Oct. Pat. 1 R. 2. p. 1. m. 8. Will.
Skipwith, Rog. de Fulthorp, Rog. de Kirketon, and Tho. de Ingelby habent xl.
marcas annuas sibi concessas 26 Iunii. Pat. 1 R. 2. p. 1. m. 28. An. D. An. R.
Baronum de Scaccario. Magist. Rotulorum. Attornatorum Regis. Servientium ad
Legem. 1370. Edw. III. 43. 1371. 44. Rog. de Fulthorpe, Henr. de Percehay,
Serve. Regis. Lib. de an. 39 E. 3. usque 47 E. 3. m. 3. 1372. 45. Will. Burstall
constitutus 28 Martii. Claus. 45 E. 3. 1373. 46. 1374. 47. 1375. 48. Will.
Tanks constit. Capitalis Baro 3 Febr. Pat. 48 E. 3. p. 1. m. 33. 1376. 49.
Henr. de Percehay constitutus 5 Oct. Pat. 49 E. 3. p. 2. m.... Henr. Asty
constitutus Capitalis Baro 12 Nov. Pat. 49 E. 3. p. 2. m. 10. Laur. Allerthorp
constitutus 27 Nov. Ibid. m. 1. 1377. 50. Magister Nich. de Drayton constitutus
14 Nov. Pat. 50 E. 3. p. 2. m. 12. 1378. 51. Will. Gunthorpe, Ioh. de Blockle.
Lib. 51 E. 3. m. 2. Ioh. Holt Serve. Regis. Lib. 51 E. 3. m. 2. 1378. Ric. II.
I. Henr. Asty Capit. Baro constitutus 26 Iunii. Pat. 1 R. 2. p. 1. m. 29. Ric.
Stokes constitutus 9 Oct. Ibid. m. 5. Will. Gunthorp secundarius Baro,
constitutus 26 Iunii. Pat. 1. R. 2. p. 1. m. 8. Laur. de Allerthorp and
Magister Nich. de Drayton 26 Iunii. Ibid. Rob. Tresulyan, Ioh. Holt, Walt. de
Clopton, David de Hannemere, Serve. Regis. Lib. ab. an. 1. usque ult. R. a. m.
15. Ioh. de Middeltone Serve. Regis. Ibid. m. 14. An. D. An. R. Cancel. Angl.
and Custod. Sig. Thesauratiorum. Justice. ad Plac. coram Rege. Iusticiariorum de
Banco. 1379. Ric. II. 2. Ric. de Scrope miles constit. Cancellarius, cui Rex
inde magnum Sigillum tradicit custodiendum. Pat. 2 R. 2. p. 1. m. 24. 1380. 3.
Simo^ de Sadbury Archiep. Cant. factus Cancellaries and Custos Sigilli die
Lunae prox. post festum Convers. S. Pauli. Claus. 3 R. 2. in dorso m. 22. 1381.
4. Will. de Courtney Episc. Lonad. constitutus Cancellarius die Sabbati in
festo S. Laurentii. Claus. 5 R. 2. in dorso m. 35. Frater Rob. de Hales prior
Hosp. S. Ioh. Ierus. in Anglia, constit. Thesaurarius 1 Febr. Pat. 4 R. 2. p.
2. m. 28. Decollatus per Rebels. Plac. apud Westminster. 5 R. 2. T. Mich. rot. 48.
Henr. Asty. Fin. lev. men's. Pasch. 3182. 5. Ric. l^ Scrope chivalier
constitutus Cancellarius, and Custos Sigilli die Mercurii prox. post festum S.
Andraei Apostoli. Pat. 5. R. 2. p. 1. m. 1. Hugo de Segrave miles factus
Thesaur. 10 Aug. Pat. 5 R. 2. p. 1. m. 19. Rob. Tresilian constitutus Capitalis
Justice. 22 Iunii. Claus. 5 R. 2. m. 38. 1383. 6. Rob. de Braybroke Episc. Land.
factus Cancellarius, habuit magnum Sigillum sibi liberatum die Sabbati in
vigilia S. Matthew. Apostoli. Claus. 6. R. 2. p. 1. in dorso m. 24. Mich. dea
Pole chivalier constit. Cancellarius and custos Sigilli 13 Martii Claus. 6 R.
2. p. 2. in dorso m. 12. David Hanemere constitutus 26 Febr. Claus. 6 R. 2. p.
2. m. 18. 1384. 7. Ioh. holt, Will. Burgh. Fin, levat. xv Trin. 1385. 8. 1386.
9. Ioh. de Ford^am Episc. Dunelm. constit. Thesaur. 17 Ian. Pat. 9 R. 2. p. 2.
m. 42. 1387. 10. Tho. de (...) Episc. Elien. constitutus Cancellarius, and
magni Sigilli Custos 24 Oct. Claus. 10 R. 2. m. 35. (postea Archiep. Ebor.)
Ioh. Gilbert Episc. Heref. constit. Thesaur. Scacc. 24 Oct. Pat. 10 R. 2. p. 1.
m. 16. 1388. 11. Ioh. de Lokton constitutus 25 Oct. Claus. 11 R. 2. m. 29.
(Attinctus Esc. 16. R. 2. p. 1. n. 131. Ebor.) Walt. de Cloptone constitutus
Capitalis Justice. 31 Ian. Claus. 11 R. 2. m. 14. Ioh. Wadham, Ric. Sidenham. 11
R. 2. Ex vet. cod. MS. penes custodem magnes Garderobae f. 175. b. Will.
Thirnynge constit. 11 Apr. Pat. 11 R. 2. p. 2. m. 21. Rob. de Cherleton
constit. Capitalis Justice. 30 Ian. Pat. 11 R. 2. p. 2. m. 36. An. D. An. R.
Baronum de Scaccario. Magist. Rotulorum. Attornatorum Regis. Servientium ad
Legem. 1379. Ric. II. 2. Tho. de Shardelowe. Plac. coram R. apud Glouc. T.
Mich. 2 R. 2. rot. 8. 1380. 3. 1381. 4. ^Rob. de Plesyngton constit. Capitalis
Baro 6 Dec. Pat. 4. R. 2. p. 1. m. 2. 3182. 5. Ioh. de Waltham Clericus,
constitutus 8 Sept. Pat. ^ R. 2. p. 1. m. 23. Will. Else Attorn. R. etc. coram
Justice. de Banco. Lib. 5 R. 2. m. 13. 1383. 6. Ioh. Carry, Edm. de Clay, Ioh.
Hille, summoniti ad gradum Serve. ad Legem suscipiendum die Lunae prox. ante
festum Purif S. Mariae 26 Nov. Claus. 6 R. 2. p. 1. m. 11. 1384. 7. Will. de
Karleol constitutus Capitalis Baro 27 Iunii. Pat. 7 R. 2. p. 1. m. 41. Will.
Rikhill Serve. Regis. Lib. 7 R. 2. m. 9. 1385. 8. Will. Forde constitutus 20
Iulii. Pat. 8 R. 2. p. 1. m. 33. Will. de Horneby Attorn. R. etc. coram Justice.
de Banco. Lib. 8 R. 2. m. 9. 1386. 9. Walt. Clopton, Ioh. de Lokton, Serve.
Regis. Lib. 9 R. 2. m. 8. 1387. 10. Rob. de Plessington, iterum constitutus
Capitalis Baro 8 Aug. Claus. 10 R. 2. m. 42. in dorso. Ioh. Carry constitutus 5
Nov. Pat. 10 R. 2. p. 1. m. 5. Ioh. de Burton constitutus 24 Oct. Pat. 10 R. 2.
p. 1. m. 18. Edmundus Brudnell Cleric. Attorn. R. etc. coram. Justice. ad Plac.
etc. Lib. 10 R. 2. m. 7. 1388. 11. Laur. Allerthorp constit. 2 Nov. Pat. 11 R.
2. p. 1. m. 14. Thomas Pynchebek constitutus Capitalis Baro 24 Apr. Pat. 11 R.
2. p. 2. m. 22. Johannes de Lokton Serwiens Domini Regis ad Legem. Hist. Angl.
Script. antiq. Col. 2694. l. 39. An. D. An. R. Cancel. Angl. and Custod. Sig.
Thesaurariorum. Justice. ad Plac. coram Rege. Iusticiariorum de Banco. 13^^.
(...) II. 12. (...) Tho. de B^atingham Episc. (...) const^^. (...) 4 Maii. Pat.
12 R. 2. p. 2. m. 12. Ioh. Hull, and Hugo Huls constituti 20 Maii. Claus. 12 R.
2. m. 1. Will. Rikhill constitutus 20 Maii. Pat. 12 R. 2. p. 2. m. 5. 1390. 13.
Ioh. Gilbert Episc. (...) constit. Thesaur. 20 Aug. Pat. 13 R. 2. p. 1. m. 24.
1391. 14. Ioh. de Waltham Episc. Sarum constit. Thesaur. 2 Maii. Pat. 14 R. 2.
p. 2. m. 20. Ioh. Penres constitutus 15 Ian. Pat. 14 R. 2. p. 2. m. 41. Ioh.
Hull. Lib. 14 R. 2. m. 5. 1392. 15. Tho. de Arundel Archiep. Cantuar. constit.
Cancellarius 7 Sept. quo die magnum Sigillum ei liberatum fuit. Pat. 15 R. 2.
p. 1. m. 19. 1393. 16. 1394. 17. 1395. 18. 1396. 19. Rogerus Walden constitutus
Thesaurar. 20 Sept. Pat. 19 R. 2. p. 1. m. 18. Will. Thirnyng constitutus
Capitalis Justice. 15 Ian. Pat. 19 R. 2. p. 1. m. 1. 1397. 20. (...) Custos
magni Sigilli 23 Nov. Claus. 20 R. 2. p. 1. in dorso m. 22. Ioh. Markham
constitutus 7 Iulii. Pat. 20 R. 2. p. 1. m. 25. 1398. 21. Guido de Mona Menev.
Episc. Godw. de praesul. Will. Hankford constitutus 6 Maii. Pat. 21 R. 2. p. 3.
m. 18. 1399. 22. Will. le Scrope Comes Wiltes. constit. 17 Sept. Orig. 22 R. 2.
rot. 4. Will. Brenchesle. Fin. levat. Octab. Trin. 1400. 23. Ioh. Norbury ar.
constitutus 3 Sept. Pat. 23 R. 2. m. 1. Henr. IV. 1. Ioh. de Scarle (Custos
Rot. Canc.) constitutus Cincellarius and magni Sigilli Custos 15 Nov. Pat. 1 H.
4. p. 3. m. 27. Idem Iohaanes constit. 30 Sept. Pat. 1. Sept. p. 1. m. 32. Ioh.
Hill and Hugo Hulls constituti 30 Sept. Pat. 1 H. 4. p. 1. m. 35. Will.
Thirning constitutus Capitalis Justice. 30 Sept. Pat. 1 H. 4. p. 1. m. 35. Ioh.
Markham, Will Hankford, Will. Brenchesle, Will. Rikhill, constit. 30 Sept.
Ibid. Ioh. Hull, Hugo Huls. Lib. 1 H. 4. m. 7. 1401. 2. Edmunaus Episc. Exo^.
constit. Cancellarius and Custos Sigilli 9 Martii. Claus. 2 H. 4. p. 2. in
dorso m. 3. Laur. de Allerthorpe Cler. constit. Thesaur. 31 Maii. Pat. 2 H. 4.
p. 3. m. 15. Will. Gascoigne constitutus Capitalis Justice. 15 Nov. Pat. 2 H. 4.
p. 1. m. 28. An. D. An. R. Baronum de Scaccario. Magist. Rotulorum.
Attornatorum Regis. Servientium ad Legem. 1389. Ric. II. 12. Ioh. Cassy
constitutus Capitalis Baro; Laur. Allerthorp secundarius, Will. Forde, and Will
Doubridge constit. 12 Maii. Pat. 12 R. 2. p. 2. m. 13. 1390. 13. 1391. 14. Ioh.
Markham, Ioh. Wadham, Serve. Regis. Lib. 14 R. 2. m. 5. Will. Hankeford, Will.
Brenchesle, Serve. Regis. Lib. 14 R. 2. m. 5. 1392. 15. 1393. 16. 3194. 17.
Magister Rad. de Selby constit. tertius Baro 24 Oct. Pat. 17 R. 2. p. 1. m. 15.
1395. 18. Ioh. le Scarle constit. 22 Iulii. Pat. 18 R. 2. p. 1. m. 28. 1396.
19. 1397. 20. 1398. 21. Tho. Stanley Cler. constitutus 11 Sept. Claus. 21 R. 2.
p. 1. m. 26. Will. Gascoigne Serve. Regis. Lib. 21 R. 2. m. 1. 1399. 22. 1400.
23. Henr. IV. 1. Ioh. Cassy constitutus Capitalis Baro 14 Oct. Pat. 1 H. 4. p.
1. m. 32. Laur. Allerthorp secundarius Baro. Tho. Ferriby tertius Baro. Will
Forde, Ioh. Staverton, constit. 14. Oct. Ibid. Will. de Lodington constitutus
30 Sept. Orig. 1 H. 4. rot. 23. (scil. in communi Banco.) Will. Gascoigne, Rob.
Terwhit, Will. Hornby, Serve. Regis. Lib. 1 H. 4. m. 7.... Hill Serve. Regis.
Mich. 1 H. 4. f. 1. a. 1401. 2. Ioh. Cokayn constitutus Capitalis Baro 15 Nov.
Pat. 2 H. 4. p. 1. m. 37. Ioh. Tuttlebury constitutus secundarius Baro. 27
Iunii. Pat. 2 H. 4. p. 3. m. 9. An. D. An. R. Cancel. Angl. and Custod. Sig.
Thesaurariorum. Justice. ad Plac. coram Rege. Iusticiariorum de Banco. 1402.
Hen. IV. 3. Henr. Bowel, Bathon. Episc. constit. Thesaur. 27 Febr. Pat. 3 H. 4.
p. 1. m. 11. 1403. 4. G^ido Episc. Meneve^sis constitutus Thesaur. 25 Oct. Pat.
4 H. 4. p. 1. m. 24. Guil. Rosse de Hamlake constitutus 9 Sept. Rot. Fin. 4 H.
4. 1404. 5. Henr. Beusort Episc. Linc. Cancellarius. Pat. 5 H. 4. p. 2. m. 18.
1405. 6. Tho. La^gley Dun^lm. Episc. Godw. de praesul. Ioh. Cokayn constitutus
14 Maii. Pat. 6 H. 4. p. 2. m. 26. 1406. 7. Nich. Bubwith Episc. Linc.
constitutus Thesaur. 15 Apr. Pat. 7 H. 4. p. 2. m. 24. Ioh. Colepeper
constitutus 17 Iunii. Pat. 7 H. 4. p. 2. m. 7. 1407. 8. Tho. Archiep. Cantuar.
constitutus Cancellarius and magni Sigilli Custos 30 Ian. Claus. 8 H. 4. in
dorso m. 23. 1408. 9. Johannes Tiptoft miles constitutus 14 Iulii. Pat. 9 H. 4.
p. 2. m. 10. Rob. Hill constitutus 14 Maii. Pat. 9 H. 4. p. 2. m. 29. 1409. 10.
Rob. Tirwhyt. Lib. 10 H. 4. m. 3. 1410. 11. Ioh. Wakering Cler. Custos Rot.
Canc. habuit Custodiam sigilli 19 Ian. Claus. 11 H. 4. in dorso m. 8. Thomas
Beaufort chivalier constitutus Cancellarius, cui Rex inde liberavit magnum
Sigillum 31 Ian. Ibid. Hen. dominus Scroope. Th. Walls. Hist. Angl. p. 421. n.
10. 1411. 12. 1412. 13. 1413. 14. 1414. Hen. V. 1. Henr. de Beufsort Episc.
Winton. constitutus Cancellarins and Custos Sigilli. Claus. 1 H. 5. Thomas
Fitz. Allan Co. Arundell constitutus 21 Martii. Pat. 1 H. 5. p. 1. m. 37. Will.
Hankford constit. Capitalis Justice. 29 Ian. Pat. 1 H. 5. m. 33. Rob. Tirwhit,
and Hugo Huls constituti 2 Maii. Pat. 1 H. 5. p. 1. m. 36. Will. Thirnyng
constit. Capitalis Justice. 2 Maii. Pat. 1 H. 5. p. 1. m. 36. Ioh. Colepeper,
Ioh. Kokain, and Rob. Hill, constit. 2 Maii. Ibid. Ric. Norton constit.
Capitalis Justice. 26 Iunii. Pat. 1 H. 5. p. 2. m. 36. An. D. An. R. Baronum de
Scaccario. Magist. Rotulorum. Attornatorum Regis. Servientium ad Legem. 1402.
Henr. IV. 3. Will. Ermyn. Lib. 3 H. 4. m. 6. Nich. Bubwith constitutus 24 Sept.
Pat. 3 H. 4. p. 2. m. 3. Tho. Couley Attorn. R. Lib. 3 H. 4. m. 6. (scil. in
Banco R.) Johannes Read. Mich. 3 H. 4. f. 34. a.... Frisby. Hill. 3 H. 4. f.
37. b. 1403. 4. Rog. Westwode constitutus secundarius Baro 1 Martii. Pat. 4 H.
4. p. 2. m. 41. Tho. Overton. Lib. 4 H. 4. m. 5. Tho. Tildeslegh, (...)
Colpeper, Serve. Regis. Lib. 4 H. 4. m. 5. 1404. 5. 1405. 6. Ioh. Wakering Cler.
constit. 2 Martii. Pat. 6 H. 4. p. 1. m. 14. 1406. 7. 1407. 8. 1408. 9. Henr.
Somer constitutus 8 Nov. Pat. 9 H. 4. p. 1. m. 29. Tho. Dereham constitutus 13
Iulii. Pat. 9 H. 4. p. 2. m. 11. Rog. Hunt. constitutus 17 Aug. Ibid. m. 9.
Ric. Norton Serve. Regis. Lib. 9 H. 4. m. 4. 1409. 10. Henr. Merston. Lib. 10 H.
4. m. 3. Willielmus Skrene Serve. Regis. Lib. 10 H. 4. m. 3. 1410. 11. Ric. Bank
constitutus 19 Iunii. Pat. 11 H. 4. p. 2. m. 13. 1411. 12. Tho. Tikhill Attorn.
Regis. Lib. 12 H. 4. m. 2. Ioh. de Preston, Will. Ludyngton, Iac. Strangways,
Will. Cheyne, Ioh. Bartone junior, Walt. Askham, Ioh. Martin, and Will. Wynard,
summoniti ad gradum Serve. ad Legem sucip. in cra^t^trium Sept. Pasch. 3 Febr.
Claus. 12 H. 4. m. 29. 1412. 13. 1413. 14. 1414. Henr. V. 1. Rog. Westwode
constit. secundarius Baro. Henr. Merston tertius Baro 28 apr. Johannes
Staverton, and Ric. Bank constit. eodem die. Pat. 1 H. 5. p. 1. m. 26. Rob.
Malton constit. 14 Nov. Pat. 1 H. 5. p. 4. m. 11. Will. L^syngby Capitalis
Baro. Lib. 1 H. 5. m. 6. Comm^^. de T. Pasch. 1 H. 5. Rot. 1. Will. Babington
constitutus 16 Ian. Pat. 1 H. 5. p. 5. m. 30. Will. Skrene, Will. Lodington,
Ioh. Hals, Serve. Regis. Lib. 1 H. 5. m. 6. An. D. An. R. Cancel. Angl. and
Custod. Sig. Thesaurariorum. Justice. ad Plac. coram Rege. Iusticiariorum de
Banco. 1415. Henr. V. 2. 1416. 3. Ioh. Radenale constitutus est Deputatus
Thomae Comitis Arundelliae in officio Thesaur. donec Rex aliter duxerit
ordinandum, 9 Aug. Pat. 3. H. 5. p. 2. m. 42. Hugo Mortimer constit. Thesaur.
10 Ian. Pat. 3. H. 5. p. 2. m. 18. Rog. Horton and Will. Cheyne constit. 16
Iunii. Pat. 3 H. 5. p. 1. m. 8. Will. Lodyngton, and Ioh. Preston constituti 16
Iunii. Pat. 3 H. 5. p. 1. m. 8. Robertus Tirwhit, Will. Cheyne, Rog. Horton.
Lib. 3 H. 5. m. 5. 1417. 4. Simoa Garnstede Clericus, Magist. Rot. Canc. habuit
custodiam Sigilli 4 Sept. usque 12 Oct. Claus. 4 H. 5. in dorso m. 13. Henr.
Winton. Episc. iterum habuit magnum Sigillum sibi liberatum 12 Oct. Ibid. Rog.
Leche chivalier constitutus Thesaur. 17 Apr. Pat. 4 H. 5. m. 35. 1418. 5. Tho.
de Langley Episc. Dune^m. habuit magnum Sigillum sibi a Rege traditum 23 Iulii.
Claus. 5 H. 5. in dorso m. 15. 1419. 6. 1420. 7. 1421. 8. Will. Kinwolmersh
Decanus liberae capellae S. Martini Land. constit. Thesaur. 26 Febr. Pat. 8 H.
5. m. 1. Will. Babyngton constit. 30 Iunii. Pat. 8 H. 5. p. 2. m. 16. Ioh.
Martyn. Fin. levat. men's. Mich. 1422. 9. 1423. 10. Henr. VI. 1. Thomas Dunelm.
Episc. constitutus Cancellarius, de avisamento and assensu totius Concilii in
Parliam. Pat. 1 H. 6. p. 4. m. 19. Will. Kinwolmersh Decanus liberae capellae
S. Martini Load. constit. Thesaur. 30 Sept. Pat. 1 H. 6. p. 1. m. 32. Ioh.
Stafford Clericus, constit. 18 Dec. Pat. 1 H. 6. p. 1. m. 15. Rogerus Horton,
Will. Cheyne, Rob. Tirwbit. T. R. apud Westminster. 1 Oct. Pat. 1 H. 6. p. 1. m. 31.
Will. Hankford constit. Capitalis Justice. T. R. apud Westminster. 6 Oct. Pt. I H. 6.
p. I m. 31. Will. Babington, Rob. Hulle, Ioh. Cokayn, Ioh. Preston, Ioh.
Martin, constit. 1 Oct. T. R. apud Westminster. Pat. 1 H. 6. p. 1. m. 31. Ioh. Hals
constitutus 5 Maii, T. R. apud Westminster. Pat. 1 H. 6. p. 3. m. 10. Will. Babyngton
(Capitalis Baro Scac.) constit. Capitalis Justice. 5 Maii, T. R. apud Westminster.
Pat. 1 H. 6. p. 3. m. 5. Ioh. Ivyn. Fin. lev. men's. Pasch. An. D. An. R.
Baronum de Scaccario. Magist. Rotulorum. Attornatorum Regis. Servientium ad
Legem. 1415. Henr. V. 2. Ioh. Martin, Ioh. Ivyn, Will. Wynard, Tho. Rolf, Ioh.
Barton Junior, 15 Febr summoniti ad gradum Serve. ad Legem suscipiendum ad xv
Pasch. prox. suturam. Claus. 2 H. 5. m. 1. 1416. 3. Simon Garnsted Clericus
constit. 3 Iunii. Pat. 3 H. 5. p. 1. m. 7. Ioh. Martyn, Will. Babyngton, Tho.
Rolf, Ioh. Ivyn, Ioh. Barton senior, Ioh. Barton Junior, Tho. Lopham, Will.
Poulet, Will. Wynard, summoniti 11 Iulii ad gradum Serve. ad Legem suseip. ad xv
Mich. prox. venturam. Claus. 3 H. 5. m. 20. Iac. Strangways Serve. Regis ad
Legem. Lib. 3 and 4 H. 5. m. 5. 1417. 4. 1418. 5. Will. Pole. Hill. 5 H. 5. f.
9. Ioh. Cotismore. Hill. 5 H. 5. f. 2. a. 1419. 6. Rog. Waltham. Lib. 6 H. 5.
m. 2. 1420. 7. Will. Babington constit. Capitalis Baro 4 Nov. Pat. 7 H. 5. m.
12. 1421. 8. Will. Babthorp Attorn. Regis. Lib. 8 H. 5. m. 1. Will. Westbury.
Hill. 8 H. 5. f. 7. a. Will. Paston. Hill. 8 H. 5. f. 1. b. 1422. 9. Will.
Hesill constitutus 13 Iulii. Pat. 9 H. 5. p. 1. m. 8. 1423. 10. Henr. VI. 1.
Will. Babington constitutus Capitalis Baro, T. R. apud Westminster. 30 Sept. Pat. 1
H. 6. p. 1. m. 32. Rog. Westwode secundarius Baro. Rob. Malton, Will. Hesyll,
Test ut supra. Ibid. Ioh. Ivyn constitutus Capitalis Baro, T. R. apud Westminster 5
Maii. Pat. 1 H. 6 p. 4. m. 18. Will. Babthorpe constitutus 11 Nov. T. R. apud
Westminster. Pat. 1 H. 6 p. 1. m. 28. An. D. An. R. Cancel. Angl. and Custod. Sig.
Thesaurariorum. Justice. ad Plac. coram Rege. Iusticiariorum de Banco. 1424.
Henr. VI. 2. Henr. Beaufort Episc. Winto^. constitutus Cancell^rius and habuit
magnum Sigillum R. custodiendum 16 Iulii. Claus. 2 H. 6. in dorso. m. 2. Will.
Cheyne constitutus Capitalis Iusticiarius, T. R. apud Westminster. 21 Ian. Pat. 2 H.
6. p. 1. m. 6. Ioh. Hals constitutus 23 Ian. T. R. apud Westminster. 23 Ian. Pat. 2
H. 6. p. 2. m. 28. 1425. 3. 1426. 4. Ioh. Kempe Episc. Loadoa. constitutus
Cancellarius etc.... Martii. Claus. 4 H. 6. in dorso. m. 8. Walt. Hungerford
miles, constit. 16 Martii. Pat. 4 H. 6. p. 2. m. 21. Willielmus Westbury unus
Justice. ad Plac. coram Rege tenenda, habet Cx. l. annuatim, de Scacc. ad statum
suum decentius manutendum, and duas robas. Brevia de privato Sigillo 4 H. 6.
Iacobus Strangways, Will. Westbury constit. T. R. apud Westminster. 6 Febr. Pat. 4 H.
6. p. 2. m. 21. 1427. 5. Ioh. Ivyn Capitalis Baro Scacc. and unus Justice. de
Banco habet unum dolium vini sibi concessum etc. T. Rege apud Westminster. 13 Febr.
Pat. 5 H. 6. p. 1. m. 13. 1428. 6. Ioh. Preston, senio confractus, exoneratus
ab officio Justice. de Banco, T. R. apud Westminster. 28 Ian. Claus. 6 H. 6. m. 12.
1429. 7. 1430. 8. Johannes Cottesmore, Will. Pastone, constit. T. R. apud
Westminster. 15 Oct. Pat. 8 H. 6. p. 1. m. 29. 1431. 9. 1432. 10. Ioh. Stafford
Episc. Bathon. constitutus Cancellarius etc. 28 Febr. Claus. 10 H. 6. in dorso.
m. 8. (postea Archiep. Cant.) Ioh. le Scrope miles, constit. 26 Febr. Pat. 10
H. 6. p. 1. m. 8. 1433. 11. Ioh. Frank Clericus, Custos Rotul. Cancel. recepit
de Ioh. Stopyngdon Clerico, ex part domini Cancellarii Angl. magnum Sigillum,
ad occupandum and exercendum. 22 Apr. Claus. 11 H. 6. in dorso. m. 12. Rad.
Cromwell miles, constit. 11 Aug. 11 H. 6. Pat. 11 H. 6. p. 2. m. 13. 1434. 12.
Will. Goderede constit. unus Justice. de Banco Regis, T. R. apud Westminster. 3 Iulii.
Pat. 12 H. 6. p. 1. m. 3. An. D. An. R. Baronum de Scaccario. Magist.
Rotulorum. Attornatorum Regis. Servientium ad Legem. 1424. Henr. VI. 2. Tho.
Bank constitutus. T. R. apud Westminster. 18 Maii. Pat. 2 H. 6. p. 3. m. 33. Tho.
Banaustre constitutus. T. R. apud Westminster. 3 Nov. Pat. 2 H. 6. p. 1. m. 31. Ioh.
Frank Clericus, Arciddiaconus Suff. constitutus 28 Oct. Pat. 2 H. 6. p. ^. m.
31. 1425. 3. Iohiaac, Ellartur, Will. Godred, Will. Hall, Ric. Newetone, Tho.
Fulthorpe, Will. Chanatrell, Rob. cau^dish, Ioh. Weston, per Breve R. ad gradum
Serve. ad Legem vocati. T. R. apud Westminster. 28 Nov. Claus. 3 H. 6. m. 12. 1426. 4.
Will. Ward constitutus. T. R. apud Leye. 26 Maii. Pat. 4 H. 6. p. 2. m. 20.
1427. 5. 1428. 6. Nich. Dixon constitutus... Orig. 6 H. 6. Rot. 38. 1429. 7.
1430. 8. Ioh. Vampage constit. T. R. apud Westminster. 28 Oct. Pat. 8 H. 6. p. 1. m.
19. Ioh. Fortescu. Mich. 8 H. 6. f. 8. a. 1431. 9. Will. Godrede Serve. Regis ad
Legem. Trin. 9 H. 6 f. 22. a. Ric. Neuton Serve. Regis. Trin. 9. H. 6. f. 22. a.
1432. 10. 1433. 11. 1434. 12. An. D. An. R. Cancel. Angl. and Custod. Sig.
Thesaurariorum. Justice. ad Plac. coram Rege. Iusticiariorum de Banco. 1435.
Henr. VI. 13. 1436. 14. Ioh. Ivya constitutus Capitalis Justice. T. R. apud
Westminster. 9 Febr. Pat. 14 H. 6. p. 1. m. 19. 1437. 15. 1438. 16. 1439. 17. Ioh.
Ivyne constitutus Capitalis Iusticiarius. T. R. apud Westminster. 20 Ian. Claus. 17
H. 6. m. 25. Ricardus Newtone constitutus. T. R. apud Eltham 8 Nov. Pat. 17 H.
6. p. 1. m. 25. Ioh. Cottesmore constitutus Capitalis Justice. T. R. apud
Wodstoke 20 Ian. Pat. 17 H. 6. p. 1. m. 25. Tho. Fulthorp. Fin. lev. crast.
Purif. 1440. 18. Ioh. Hody constitutus Capitalis Justice. 13 Apr. Plac. coram
Rege T. Pasch. 18 H. 6. Rot. 1. Johannes Hody Capitalis Justice. habet Cxl.
marcas annuas sibi concessas, ad statum suum decentius manutenendum. T. R. apud
Wyndsore 13 Apr. Pat. 18 H. 6. p. 3. m. 5. Mandarum est Administratoribus
bonorum Ioh. Cottismore defuncti, liberare Ric. Newton, quem Rex, per literas
suas pat. constituit Capitalem Iusticiarium de Banco, omnimoda Recognitiones
Finium, Recorda etc. T. R. apud Kenyngton 14 Oct. Claus. 18 H. 6. m. 27.
Willielmus Ayscoghe (unus Servientium Regis ad Legem) constitutus etc. T. R.
apud Esthamstede 27 Apr. Pat. 18 H. 6. p. 2. m. 10. 1441. 19. 1442. 20. Ioh.
Fortescue constitutus Capitalis Justice. T. R. apud Westminster. 25 Ian. Pat. 20 H. 6.
p. 1. m. 10. 1443. 21. Rad. Boteler miles, constitutus 7 Iulii. Pat. 21 H. 6.
p. 2. m. 25. 1444. 22. Ioh. Markham constit. etc. T. R. apud Westminster. 6 Febr.
Pat. 22 H. 6. p. 1. m. 12. Will. Yelverton T. Hill. Plac. coram Rege T. Mich.
22 H. 6. Rot. 14. Norff. Ioh. Portyngton. Fin. levat. xv Mich. An. D. An. R.
Baronum de Scaccario. Magist. Rotulorum. Attornatorum Regis. Servientium ad
Legem. 1435. Henr. VI. 13. Ioh. Fray constitutus secundarius Baro. T. R. apud
Westminster. 8 Febr. Pat. 13 H. 6. p. 1. m. 21. Will. Derby Clericus constitutus
tertius Baro. T. ut supra. Ibid. 1436. 14. Ioh. Fray constitutus Capitalis
Baro. T. R. apud Westminster. 9 Febr. Pat. 14 H. 6. p. 1. m. 19. Will. Derby
constitutus secundarius Baro. T. R. apud Westminster. 16 Iunii. Pat. 14 H. 6. p. 2.
m. 19. 1437. 15. 1438. 16. 1439. 17. Rog. Hunt constitutus, loco Willielmi
Derby defuncti. T. R. apud Eltham 3 Nov. Pat. 17 H. 6. p. 1. m. 31. Ioh.
Stopinden Clericus, constitutus 13 Nov. Pat. 17 H. 6. p. 1. m. 14. 1440. 18.
Ioh. Portyngton constitutus unus Serve. Regis ad Legem. T. R. apud Esthamstede
17 Apr. Pat. 18 H. 6. p. 2. m. 14. Will. Yelverton, Ioh. Markham. Pasch. 18 H.
6. f. 1. 1441. 19. Ioh. Fortescu Serve. Regis ad Legem. Pasch. 19 H. 6. f. 62.
a. 1442. 20. 1443. 21. Nich. de Ayshtone, Ric. Byngham, Rad. Pole, Rob. Danby,
Ioh. Prysot, Walt. Moyle, Petrus Ardern, Rob. Danvers, ad gradum Serve. ad Legem
asciti, in Oct. S. Ioh. Bapt. prox. futuro. T. R. apud Westminster. 14. Febr. Claus.
21 H. 6. m. 22. 1444. 22. Ioh. Arderne constit. T. R. apud Westminster. 5 Febr. Pat.
22 H. 6. p. 1. m. 12. Rob. Frampton, and Will. Fullan. 22 H. 6. Ex cod. MS.
penes Custodem magnae Garderobae f. 75. b. Rob. Danvers Serve. Regis ad Legem.
Mich. 22 H. 6. f. 18. b. Ioh. Markham Serve. Regis ad Legem. Fitz. Abr. f. 10.
a. An. D. An. R. Cancel. Angl. and Custod. Sig. Thesaurariorum. Justice. ad
Plac. coram Rege. Iusticiariorum de Banco. 1445. Henr. VI. 23. Nich. Ayshton.
Fin. lev. xv Hill. 1446. 2^. 1447. 25. Marmaducas Lumley Episc. Karleol.
constitutus Thesaur. 18 Dec. Pat. 25 H. 6. p. 2. m. 25. Ioh. Fortescu miles,
Capit. Justice. habet xl.^. per annum ei. concessas ultra omne id quod per
aliquas literas patentes antehac ei concessum est. T. R. apud Westminster. 22 Martii.
Pat. 25 H. 6. p. 1. m. 12. 1448. 26. 1449. 27. Ioh. Prisot Capitalis Justice.
habet xl. lib. xiii. l. vi. s. viii. d. annuas sibi concessas, ad statum suum
decentius manutenendum: necnon Lx. l. vi. s. vi. d. per annum, pro roba
aestivali; and Cvi. s. xi. d. ob. pro roba hyemali, juxta formam statuti, in
Parl. tento apud Westminster. anno regni Regis H. 6. xviii. T. R. apud Westminster. 16 Ian.
Pat. 27 H. 6. p. 1. m. 8. 1450. ^8. Ioh. Cardinalis Archiep. Eboraceasis
constitutus Cancellarius 31 Ian. Claus. 28 H. 6. in dorso m. 7. Iacobus Fiennes
Baro Say and Sele constitutus Thesaur. 30 Oct. Pat. 28 H. 6. p. 1. m. 18. Ioh.
Beauchamp miles, constit. Thesaur. 22 Iunii. T. R. apud Leic. Pat. 28 H. 6. p.
2. m. 19. Roh. Danvers constit. T. R. apud Westminster. 14 Aug. Pat. 28 H. 6. p. 2.
m. 17. 1451. 29. 1452. 30. Ioh. Tiptost Comes Wigorn. constit. Thesaur. 15 Apr.
Pat. 30 H. 6. p. 2. m. 30. Rad. Pole (Serve. ad Legem) constitutus. T. R. apud
Westminster. 3 Iulii. Pat. 30 H. 6. p. 2. m. 10. Rob. Danby (unus Serve. domini Regis
ad Legem) constitutus 28 Iunii. Pat. 30 H. 6. p. 2. m. 23. 1453. 31. 1454. 32.
Ricardus comes Sarum, constitutus 2 Apr. Claus. 32 H. 6. in dorso m. 8. Walt.
Moyle (unus Serve. Regis ad Legem) constitutus. T. R. apud Westminster. 9 Iulii. Pat.
32 H. 6. p. 1. m. 9. An. D. An. R. Baronum de Scaccario. Magist. ^ Rotulorum.
Attornatorum Regis. Servientium ad Legem. 1445. Henr. VI. 23. 1446. 24. Ioh.
Holme constit. 6 Febr. 24 H. 6. habuit literas pat. de liberatura, pro vestura
aestivali and hyemali ad term. vitae suae, sibi concessas. T. R. apud Westminster. 28
Maii. 27 H. 6. Pat. 27 H. 6. p. 2. m. 11. 1447. 25. Tho. Kirkeby constitutus
etc. in reversione etc. 29 Martii. Pat. 25 H. 6. p. 1. m. 7. 1448. 26. Pet.
Ardern (unus Serve. domini Regis ad Legem) constitutus Capitalis Baro. T. R.
apud Westminster. 2 Maii. Pat. 26. H. 6. p. 2. m. 5. 1449. 27. Ioh. Durem
constitutus. T. R. apud Westminster. 26 Maii. Pat. 27 H. 6. p. 1. m. 2. (loco Tho.
Levesham Clerici, Ibid. p. 2. m. 17.) 1450. 28. 1451. 29. 1452. 30. Will.
Notingham constitutus etc. loco Ioh. Vampage defuncti. T. R. apud Westminster. 30
Iunii. Pat. 30 H. 6. p. 1. m. 20. 1453. 31. Will. Hyndestone, Will. Laken,
Will. Wangford, Will. Boeff, Tho. Litelton, Ric. Chok, Ioh. Nedeham, Tho.
Billing, ad gradum Serve. ad Legem suscipiendum asciti 2 Iulii prox. futuro. T.
R. apud Westminster. 1 Febr. Claus. 31 H. 6. m. 13. 1454. 32. Walt. Moyle Serve.
Regis. Hill. 32 H. 6. sol. 20. a. Ioh. Nedeham Serve. ad Legem, constitutus
Serviens Regis ad Legem. T. R. apud Westminster. 13 Iulii. Pat. 32 H. 6. p. 1. m. 9.
An. D. An. R. Cancel. Angl. and Custod. Sig. Thesaurariorum. Justice. ad Plac.
coram Rege. Iusticiariorum de Banco. Baronum de Scacc. 1455. Henr. VI. 33.
(...) (...) (...) 14^6. 34. 1457. 35. (...) Ioh. Talbot Comes. Salop. constit
Thesaur. 5 Oct. Pat. 35 H. 6. p. 1. m. 46. Ric. Bingham. Hill. 35 H. 6. fol,
52, and 53. Ioh. Nedeham (unus serve. Regis ad Legem) constitutus. T. R. apud
Westminster. 9 Maii. Pat. 35. H. 6. p. 2. m. 16. 1458. 36. 1459. 37. Iacob^^ Comes
Wilton constitutus Thesaur. 30 Oct. Pat. 37 H. 6. p. 1. m. 21. Brianus Rouclyff
constit. tertius Baro de Scacc. T. R. apud Westminster. 2. Nov. Pat. 37. H. 6. p. 1.
m. 4. Tho. Thorpe constitutus secundarius Baro, loco Gilberti Haltoft defuncti.
T. R. apud Westminster. 30 Nov. Pat. 37 H. 6. p. 1. m. 8. 1460. 38. Georgius Nevill
Episc. Exoa. constitutus 25 Iulii. Claus. 38. H. 6. in dorso m. 7. (postea
Archi^pisc. (...).) 1461. 39. Ioh. Clerk constitutus secundarius Baro. T. R.
apud Westminster. 10 Oct. Pat. 39 H. 6. p. 1. m. 20. 1462. Edw. IV. 1. Hen. Vicecomes
B^urchier constit. Thesaurar. Scacc. prout Walt. Hu^gerford etc. T. R. apud
Westminster. 18 Martii. Pat. 1. E. 4. p. 1. m. 17. Ioh. Markham constit. Capitalis
Justice. T. R. apud Westminster. 13 Maii. Claus. 1. E. 4. m. 29. Will. Yelvertoa
constitutus 8 Apr. Plac. coram Rege T. Pasch. 1. E. 4. rot. 1. Ric. Bingham
constit. T. Patch. Plac. coram Rege T. Pasch. 1 E. 4. rot. 1. Rob. Danby
constit. Capitalis Justice. T. R. apud Ebor. 11 Maii. Pat. 1. E. 4. p. 1. m. 19.
Ric. Chok constit. Capitalis Justice. T. R. apud Bristoll 5 Sept. Pat. 1. E. 4.
p. 3. m. 1. Petrus Ardern miles constitutus. T. R. apud Westminster. 8. Pat. 1. E. 4.
p. 4. m. 11. Ioh. Durem constitutus 8 Apr. 1 E. 4. Confirmatus 17 Nov. 7 E. 4.
Bri^^us Rouclyf constitutus tertius Baro. T. R. apud Ebor. 8 Maii. Pat. 1 E. 4.
p. 1. m. 19. Pet. Arderne miles constit. Capitalis Baro. T. R. apud Westminster. 20
Iunii. Pat. 1 E. 4. p. 3. m. 4. 1463. 2. Ioh. Tiptost Comes Wigorn. constit.
Thesaur. 14 Apr. Pat. 2. E. 4. p. 1. m. 19. Ioh. Ingoldesby constit. T. R. apud
Westminster. 4. Nov. Pat. 2 E. 4. p. 2. m. 18. Ric. Illingworth constitutus Capitalis
Baro 29 Sept. Comun. de T. Mich. 2 E. 4. rot. 1. An. D. An. R. Magist.
Rotulorum. Attornat. Regis generalium. Solicitat. Regis generalium. Servientium
ad Legem. 1455. Henr. VI. 33. Tho. Litelton (serve. ad Legem) constitutus
Servi^ns Regis ad L^gem. T. R. apud Westminster. 13. Maii. Pat. 33. H. 6. p. 2. m.
13. 1456. 34. 1457. 35. 1458. 36. Tho. Billing (serve. ad Legem) constitutus
Serviens. Regis ad Legem. T. R. apud Westminster. 21 Apr. Pat. 36. H. 6. p. 2. m. 8.
1459. 37. 1460. 38. 1461. 39. 1462. Edw. IV. 1. Rob. Kirkham constitutus 23
Dec. Pat. 1 E. 4. p. 3. m. 15. Johannes Alcock Decanus liberae Capellae S.
Steph. apud Westminster. constit. 29 Apr. Pat. 1. E. 4. p. 1. m. 28. Ioh Herbert
constitutus etc. ad vitam. T. R. apud Westminster. 12 Aug. Pat. 1 E. 4. p. 3. m. 27.
Henricus Sothill constitutus etc. ad vitam. Orig. 1 E. 4. p. 2. Rot. 31. Ric.
Fowler constit. T. R. apud Westminster. 12 Martii. Pat. 1 E. 4. p. 2. m. 10. 1463. 2.
An. D. An. R. Cancel. Angl. and Custod. Sig. Thesaurariorum. Justice. ad Plac.
coram Rege. Iusticiariorum de Banco. Baronum de Scaccario. 1464. Edw. IV. 3.
Edm. Gray de Rutbin constitutus Thesaur. 24 Iunii. Pat. 3. E. 4. p. 2. m. 16.
1465. 4. Walt. Blount miles constit. Thesaurar. 24 Nov. Pat. 4. E. 4. p. 2. m.
28. Thomas Billing constitutus. T. R. apud Staunford 9 Aug. Pat. 4 E. 4. p. 1.
m. 7. 1466. 5. Will. Laken constit. T. R apud Westminster. 4 Iunii. Pat. 5. E. 4. p.
1. m. 8. 1467. 6. Ric. Wydevill miles, dominus Rivers, constitutus Thesaur. 4
Martii. Pat. 6 E. 4. p. 1. m. 14. Tho. Litleton constitutus. T. R. apud Westminster.
27 Apr. Pat. 6 E. 4. p. 1. m. 15. 14^8. 7. Robertus Stillington Episc. Bathon.
and Wellen. constit. Cancellarius 8 Iunii. Claus. 7 E. 4. m. 12. in dorso. Tho.
Young unus Justice. de communi Banco habet december marc. annuatim recipiendas
sibi concessas ad statum suum decentius manutenendum. T. R. apud Westminster. 4 Nov.
Pat. 7 E. 4. p. 3. m. 16. Rad. Wolsley constitutus quartus Baro loco Io.
Ingoldsby. T. R. apud Dogmersfield 29 Sept. Pat. 7 E. 4. p. 2. m. 24. Nich
Stathum constit. secundus Baro. T. R.... 30 Oct. Pat. 7. E. 4. p. 2. m. 17.
1469. 8. Tho. Billing constitutus Capitalis Iusticiarius. T. R. apud Westminster. 23
Ian. Pat. 8 E. 4. p. 2. m. 9. Johannes Ingoldesby habet officium Baronis in
Scacc. sibi concessum post mortem vel resignationem proxim^m aliquorum nunc
Baronum. T. R. apud Westminster. 22 Nov. Pat. 8 E. 4. p. 2. m. 11. 1470. 9. Ioh.
Langstrother miles, Prior Hosp. S. Ioh. Jerusalem in Angli^, constit. Thesaur.
16 Aug. Pat. 9. E. 4. p. 1. m. 3. Willielm. Episc. Eliensis constitutus
Thesaur. 25 Oct. Pat. 9 E. 4. p. 1. m. 19. 1471. 10. Johannes Comes Wigorn.
constit. Thesaur. 10 Iulii. Pat. 10. E. 4. p. 1. m. 7. Johan. Ingoldesby
constitut. unus Baronum de Scacc. loco Rad. Welseley 14 Iunii. Pat. 10 E. 4. p.
1. m. 7. An. D. An. R. Magist. Rotulorum. Attornat. Regis generalium.
Solicitat. Regis generalium. Servientium ad Legem. 1464. Edw. IV. 3. Tho.
Young. Ric. Neel, Will. Ienney, Guido Fatrsar, Tho. Brian, ^ Ioh. Greaefeld,
Ioh. Catesby, Ric. Pigot, ad gradum Serve. ad Legem suscipiendum 7 Nov. prox.
futuro asciti. T. Rege apud Westminster. 23 Maii. Claus. 3. E. 4. m. 10. Festum in
aedibus Episc. Elien, in Holbur^e. Stow's Survey. p. 727. Thomas Young
constitutus (...) Serve. Regis ad Legem. T. R. (...). Westminster. 8 Nov. Pat. 3. E.
4. p. ^. m. 1. 1465. 4. Ricardus Neel constitutus (...) Serve. Regis ad Legem.
T. R. (...) Staunford 12 Aug. Pat. 4. E. 4. p. 2. m. 3. 1466. 5. 1467. 6. 1468.
7. Guido Fairfax constit. unus Serve. Regis ad Legem. T. R. apud Westminster. 28 Apr.
Pat. 7. E. 4. p. 2. m. 3. Ric. Pygot constit. unus Serve. Regis ad Legem. T. R.
apud Westminster. 4 Nov. Ibid. m. 17. 1469. 8. 1470. 9. Ric. Page constit. T. R. apud
Westminster. 31 Ian. Pat. 9 E. 4. p. 2. m. 16. Ioh. Catesby constit. Serve. Regis ad
Legem. T. R. apud Westminster. 18 Apr. Pat. 9. E. 4. p. 2. m. 1. 1471. 10. An. D. An.
R. Cancel. Angl. and Custod. Sig. Thesaurariorum. Justice. ad Plac. coram Rege.
Iusticiariorum de Banco. Baronum de Scacc. Henr. VI. 49. Tho. Billing
constitutus Capitalis Iusticiarius. T. R. apud Westminster. 9 Oct. Pa^. 49 H. 6. m.
1. Ric. Bingham miles, Will. Lakene, Ric. Neele, Will. Yelverton, constituti.
T. R. apud Westminster. 9. Oct. Pat. 49 H. 6. m. 18. Rob. Darby miles constitutus
Capitalis Justice. T. R. apud Westminster. 9 Oct. Pat. 49 H. 6. m. 18. Walt. Moyle
miles, Ioh. Needham miles, Ric. Chokke miles, Tho. Littleton, Tho. Yo^ge,
constit. etc. T. R. apud Westminster. 9 Oct. Ibid. Ric. Illingworth miles constit,
Capitalis Baro. T. R. apud Westminster. 9 Oct. Ioh. Clerk secundus Baro. Brianus
Ro^cliff t^rtins Baro. Ioh. Dorem unus Baronum: constituti ut supra. Pat. 49 H.
6. m. 18. 1472. Edw. IV. 11. Henricus Comes Effexiae constitutus Thesaurarius
22 Apr. Pat. 11. E. 4. p. 25. Tho. Billing constit. Capitalis Justice. T. R.
apud Westminster. 17 Iunii. Ioh. Needham, Will. Lakene. T. ut supra. Pat. 11 E. 4. p.
1. m. 25. Tho. Bryan constit. Capitalis Justice. T. R. apud Westminster. 29 Maii. Pat.
11. E. 4. p. 1. m. 25. Tho. Littleton, Ric. Chok miles, Ric. Neel, T. ut supra.
Ibid. Tho. urswyk miles constit. Capitalis Baro. T. R. apud Westminster. 22 Maii.
Pat. 11 E. 4. p. 1. m. 24. Brianus Roucliff tertitus Baro. T. R. apud Westminster.
22. Apr. Johannes Clerk secundus Baro. T. ut supra. Ibid. 1473. 12. Ioh.
Alcock Episc. Roffensis, constitutus Custos Sig. 20 Sept. Claus. 12 E. 4. m.
16. in dorso. 1474. 13. Laurentius Episcopus Dunelm. constitutus Cancellarius
etc. 5 Iunii. Claus. 13 E. 4. m. 3. 1475. 14. Thomas Rotheram Episc. Lincoln.
constit. Cancellarius hoc anno. Godw. de praesul. 1476. 15. Tho. Young
constitutus. T. R. apud Westminster. 29 Apr. Pat. 15 E. 4. p. 1. m. 7. 1477. 16.
1478. 17. Guido Fairfax. Mich. 17 E. 4. fol. 4. a. Will. Ienney. Trin. 17 E. 4.
fol. 4. a. 1479. 18. Radulfus Wolseley, constitutus quartus Baro. T. R. apud
Westminster. 8 Martii. Pat. 18 E. 4. p. 1. m. 18. 1480. 19. Will. Notingham
constitutus Capitalis Baro. T. R. apud Bukeden. 3 Apr. Pat. 19. E. 4. p. 1. m.
27. (...). 20. Thomas Whityngton constit. Secund. Baro. T. R. apud Westminster. 3
Febr. Pat. 10 E. 4. p. 2. m 16. An. D. An. R. Magist. Rotulorum. Attornat.
Regis generalium. Solicitat. Regis generalium. Servientium ad Legem. Henr. VI.
49. Will. Morland Clericus, constitutus 12 Febr. Pat. 49 H. 6. m. 1. 1472. Edw.
IV. 11. Will. Husee constit. Attornat. generalis in Anglia, cum potestate
deputandi Clericos ac Officiarios sub se in qualibet Curia de Recordo. T. R.
etc. 16 Iunii. Pat. 11 E. 4. p. 1. m. 28. 1473. 12. Ioh. Mortone Clericus
constit. 16 Martii. Pat. 12 E. 4. p. 1. m. 15. Ric. Wigham electus, tempore
Natalis domini. Cod. niger Hosp. Linc. 1474. 13. 1475. 14. 1476. 15. Magister
Ioh. Mortone constit. 2 Maii. Pat. 15 E. 4. p. 1. m. 9. 1477. 16. 1478. 17.
Will. Husee, Humfr. Sterkey, Tho. Tremayle, Ioh. Sulyard, Will. Colowe, Ioh.
Vavasour, Rog. Townesead, Tho. Bryges, Tho. Rogers, ad gradum Serve. ad Legem
suscipiendum 9 Ianii prox. futuro asciti. T. R. apud Westminster. 14 Oct. Claus. 17
E. 4. m. 3. 1479. 18. Rob. Morton constitutus 30 Maii, in reversione post
mortem Ioh. Morton Clerici. Pat. 18. E. 4. p. 2. m. 12. 1480. 19. 1481. 20. An.
D An. R. Cancel. Angl. and Custod. Sig. Thesaurariorum. Justice. ad Plac. coram
Rege. Iusticiariorum de Banco. Baronum de Scaccario. 1482. Edw. IV. 21. (...)
(...) Ioh. Catesby constitutus. T. R. apud Westminster. 20 Nov. Pat. 21 E. 4. p. 2.
m. 1. 1483. 22. Will. Ienney habet Cx. marc* annuas, ad statum suum decentius
manutenendum. T. R. apud Westminster. 14 Maii. Pat. 22. E. 4. p. 2. m. 22. Guido
Fairfax similiter. T. R. apud Westminster. 8 Oct. Ibid. 1484. Edw. V. 1. (...) (...)
Justice. T. R. apud Westminster. 21 Apr. Pat. 1. E. ^. m. 2. Guido Fairfax miles,
Will. Ieaney, constitutus T. R. ut supra. Ibid. Ric. Neel miles, Fiz. Chokke
miles, Ioh. Catesby miles, constituti. T. R. apud Westminster. 21 Apr. Pat. 1 E. ^.
m. 2. Hum^ridus Starkey constitutus Capitalis Baro. T. R. apud Westminster. 15.
Iunii. Pat. 1 E. 5. m. 2. Ric. III. 1. Ioh. (...) Episc. Liac^la. constit.
Cancel. 26 Nov. Claus. 1. R. 3. in dorso. Idem Ioh. Wood constitutus Thesaur. 2
Iulii. Pat. 1 R. 3. p. 1. m. 12. Will. Hase miles, constitutes Capitalis
Justice. T. R. apud Westminster. 26 Iunil. Pat. 1 R. 3. p. 1. m. 12. Guido Fairfax,
Will. Ienney constit. T. ut supra. Ibid. Tho. Briaa constit. Capitalis Justice.
T. R. apud Westminster. 26. Iunii. Pat. 1 R. 3. p. 1. m. 12. Ric. Neel miles, Ric.
Chokke miles, Ioh. Catesby miles, constituti. T. ut supra. Ibid. Humfr. Starkey
miles, constitutus Capitalis Baro. T. R. apud Westminster. 26 Iunii. Pat. 1 R. 3. p.
1. m. 12. Brianus Rouc^^ff secund. Baro. Edwardus Goldesburg tertius Baro. Rad.
Wolseley quartus Baro. Ibid. 1485. 2. Ioh. Audley miles, dominus Audley,
constit. Thesaur. 6 Dec. Pat. 2 R. 3. p. 1. m. 1. Ioh. Sulyard constitutus. T.
R. apud Notingham 22 Oct. Pat. 2. R. 3. p. 2. m. 3. Rog. Touneshend. Fin.
levat. crast. Ascens. Ioh. Holgrave constit. quartus Baro. T. R. apud Notingham
24 Sept. Pat. 2. R. 3. p. 1. m. 16. 3. Tho. Barow Magist. Rotul. Cancel.
constit. Custos Sigilli. 1 Aug. Claus. 3. R. 3. An. D. An. R. Magist.
Rotulorum. Attornat. Regis generalium. Solicitat. Regis generalium. Servientium
ad Legem. 1482. Edw. IV. 21. Thomas Tremayle constit. Serve. Regis ad Legem. T.
R. apud Westminster. 26 Nov. Pat. 21 E. 4. p. 2. m. 3. Walt. Keble. Mich. 21 E. 4. s.
10. b. 1483. 22. 1484. Edw. V. 1. Morganus Kydwelly constitutus pro term.
vitae. T. R. apud Westminster. 28 Maii. Pat. 1 E. 5. m. 4. Ioh. Vavasour constitutus
Serve. Regis. ad Legem. T. R. apud Westminster. 15 Iunii. Pat. 1. E. 5. m. 2. Thomas
Tremayle, similiter. Ibid. Ric III. 1. Morganus Kydwelly constitutus, ut supra.
T. R. apud Westminster. 3 Iulii. Pat. 1. R. 3. p. 5. m. 4. Thomas Lynou constitutus.
T. R. apud... 26 Aug. Pat. 1. R. 3. p. 5. m. 7. Ioh. Vavasour Serviens ad
Legem, constitutus Serviens Regis ad Legem. T. R. apud Westminster. 27 Iunii. Pat. 1.
R. 3. p. 1. m. 12. Rog. Townesende, Tho. Tremayle, similiter. Ibid. 1485. 2.
Tho. Lynon constitutus 20 Oct. T. R. apud Notingh. Pat. 2 R. 3. p. 1. m. 4. 3.
An. D. An. R. Cancel. Angl. and Custod. Sig. Thesaurariorum. Justice. ad Plac.
coram Rege. Iusticiariorum de Banco. Baronum de Scacc. 1486. Henr. VII. 1. Ioh.
(...) Episc. Elieas^ constit. Cancellarius die Lunae 6 Martii. Claus. 1 H. 7.
in dorso. John. Dynham miles, dominus de Dynham, constitutus Thesaur. 14 Iulii.
Pat. 1 H. 7. p. 4. m. 11. Will. Huse miles, constitutus Capitalis Justice. T. R.
apud Westminster. 20 Sept. Pat. 1 H. 7. p. 1. m. 22. Ioh. Sulyard, Guido Fai^fax
constit. T. R. ut supra. Ibid. Tho. Bryan miles, constitutus Capitalis Justice.
T. R. apud Westminster. 20 Sept. Pat. 1 H. 7. p. 1. m. 27. Ioh. Catesby miles,
constit. 20 Sept. Ibid. m. 5. Rog. Towneshend similiter. Ibid. m. 17. Humhr
Starkey miles, similiter. Ibid. m. 25. Ric. Neel miles, similiter. T. R. apud
Westminster. 13 Oct. Ibid. m. 16. Hums. Starky miles, constitutus Capitalis Baro. T.
R. apud Westmon. 20 Sept. Pat. 1 H. 7. p. 1. Brianus Rouclyff constitutus
secundarius Baro. T. R. apud Westmon. 24 Sept. Ibid. m. 16. Edw. Goldeshorongh
constitut. tertius Baro. Ibid. Johan. Holgyave quartus Baro. Ibid. 1487. 2.
Ioh. Morton Archiep. C^^tuar. constitutus Cancellarius Regis 8 Aug. Pat. 2 H.
7. p. 2. Ioh. Haugh. Fin. levat. crast. Purif. Will. Calowe constitutus 31 Ian.
Bill. sign. 2 H. 7. Will. Hody constit. Capitalis Baro. T. R. apud Suthwyk 29
Oct. Pat. 2 H. 7. p. 1. m. 21. 1488. 3. Tho. Tremayle constit. 16 Iusii. Bill.
sign. 3 H. 7. Will. Danvers constit. 5 Febr. Pat. 3 H. 7. p. 2. 1489. 4. Tho.
Goldesburgh constitutus secundus Bato, Nich. Lathelle tertius Baro, Tho. Rocbe
quartus Baro. Pat. 4 H. 7. p. 1. m. 20. 1490. 5. Ioh. Vavasour constitutus 14
Aug. Bill. sign. 5 H. 7. 1491. 6. 1492. 7. 1493. 8 1494. 9. Ioh. Fineux
constitutus. T. R. apud Westminster. 11 Febr. Pat. 9 H. 7. p. 1. m. 19. 1495. 10.
Tho. Barnewell constit. secundus Baro. 1 Oct. Pat. 10 H. 7. 1496. 11. Ioh.
Fyneux constit. Capitalis Justice. T. R. apud Westminster. 24 Nov. Pat. 11 H. 7. p. 1.
Rob. Read constit. T. ut supra. Ibid. Tho. Wode constit. T. R. apud Westminster. 24
Nov. Pat. 11 Nov. p. 1. m. 9. 1497. 12. Andraas Dymock constit. secund. Baro.
T. R. apud Westminster. 2 maii. Pat. 11 H. 7. p. 2. m. 20. An. D. An. R. Magist.
Rotulorum. Attornat. Regis generalium. Solicitat. Regis generalium. Servientium
ad Legem. 1486. Hen. VII. 1. Robertus Morton, and Willielmus Elyot constituti
13 Nov. Pat. 1 H. 7. p. 4. Will. Hody constitutus. T. R. apud Westminster. 20 Sept.
Pat. 1 H. 7. p. 1. m. 15. Andraeas Dymmok constit. T. R. apud Westminster. 15 Nov.
Pat. 1 H. 7. p. 1. m. 3. Idem Andraeas constitutus iterum. T. R. apud Westminster. 5
Aug. Pat. 1 H. 7. p. 4. m. 9. Tho. Wode, Rob. Read, Ioh. Hawes, Ioh. Fyneux,
will. Davers, Tho. Kebell, Rye. Iay, ad gradum Serve. ad Legem asciti 20 Nov.
Claus. 1 H. 7. p. 1. Ioh. Vavasour constit. Serve. Regis ad Legem. T. R. apud
Westminster. 13 Oct. Pat. 1. H. 7. p. 1. m. 16. Ioh. Tyemaylle constitutus Serve.
Regis ad Legem. T. R. apud Westminster. 12 Nov. Pat. 1 H. 7. p. 1. m. 8. Will.
Huddesfeild similiter. T. R. apud Westminster. 28 Martii. Pat. 1 H. 7. p. 3. m. 20.
Ioh. Fysher similiter. T. R. apud Westminster. 30 Iunii. Pat. 1 H. 7. p. 4. m. 12.
Will. Hody.... 1 H. 7. f. 26. 1487. 2. Iac. Hobard constit. 3 Nov. 2 H. 7. Et
eo quod Literae patentes amissae erant, irrotulantur 8 Iulii. 22 H. 7. Pat. 22
H. 7. p. 3. Et Communia de Term. Trin. 22 H. 7. Rot. 2. 1488. 3. David Williams
constitutus 26 Nov. Billae sign. 3 H. 7. Tho. Wode constit. unus Serve. Regis ad
Legem 3 Iunii. Privata Sigill. 3 H. 7. 1489. 4. 1490. 5. 1491. 6. 1492. 7.
Magist. Ioh. Blithe Clericus, constitutus 5 Maii. Pat. 7 H. 7. p. 1. m. 10.
1493. 8. 1494. 9. Willielmus Warham Clericus, constit. 13 Febr. Pat. 9 H. 7. p.
1. Rob. Read Serviens ad Legem, constitutus Serviens Regis ad Legem. T. R. apud
Cantuar^ 8 Apr. Pat. 9 H. 7. p. 1. m. 17. 1495. 10. Robertus Constable electus.
Cod. niger Hosp. Linc. f. 30. b. 1496. 11. Humfr. coningesby, Ioh. Boteler,
electi 10 Sept. Bill. sign. 11 H. 7. Tho. Keble, Tho. Oxonhingge, Tho. Frowyk,
Ric. Higham, Ioh. Kingsmill, Ioh. Yakley, Tho. Mordant, electi 10 Sept. Bill.
sign. 11 H. 7. Festum apud Ely House in Holburne, Rege and Regina praesentibus.
Holingsh. Chran. p. 779. Ioh. Mordant constit. unus Serve. Regis ad Legem. T. R.
apud Westminster. 25 Nov. Pat. 11 H. 7. p. 1. m. 6. 1497. 12. Ioh. Kingstmill Serve.
Regis ad Legem. Pasch. 12 H. 7. f. 15. ^. An. D. An. R. Cancel. Angl. and
Custod. Sig. Thesaurariorum. Justice. ad Plac. coram Rege. Iusticiariorum de
Banco. Paronum de Scaccario. 1498. Henr. VII. 13. 1499. 14. 1500. 15. 1501. 16.
Defuncto Ioha^ae Morten Archiepiseopus C^nt. and Cardinale do^inus Rex 13 Oct.
apud Woodfloke liber^vit magnum Sigillum Henric^ Deane Epise. Sarum,
custodrendum: [qui quicem Hen^. Paulo post factus est Archiepife. Cant.] Claus.
16 H. 7. in dorso. Thomas Comes Surriae constitutus Thesaur. 25 Iunii. Pat. 16
H. 7. p. 2. m. 11. Tho. Wode constit. Capitalis Justice. T. R. apud Westminster. 28
Oct. Pat. 16 H. 7. p. 1. m. 19. Barthol. ^estby constit. tecundus Baro. T. R.
apud Westminster. 12 Maii. Pat. 16 H. 7. p. 1. m. 14. Idem Barthol. factus unus
militum Elcmosinae infra Collegium de Wyndsore. T. R. apud Westminster. 5 Maii. Pat.
6 H. 8. p. 1. 1502. 17. Will. Warham Epise. London. electus Cantuar. habet
magnum Sigillum Anglia fibi liberatum 11 Augusti; posteaque seil 1 Ian.
ordinatus est Cancellarins. Claus. 17 H. 7. in dorso. Ioh. Fysher constitutus.
T. R. apud Westminster. 3 Nov. Pat. 17 H. 7. p. 1. m. 20. Will. Bolling constitutus
tertius Baro. T. R. apud Westminster. 11 Oct. Pat. 17 H. 7. p. 2. 1503. 18. Tho.
Frowyk constit. Capitalis Justice. T. R. apud... 30 Sept. Pat. 18 H. 7. p. 1.
Johan. Kingsmill constitutus. T. R. apud Westminster. a Iulii. Pat. 18 H. 7. p. 1.
1504. 19. Ioh. Aleyn constitutus quartus Baro de Scace. T. R. apud Westminster. 18
Febr. Pat. 19 H. 7. p. 1. m. 29. 1505. 20. 1506. 21. An. D. An. R. Magist.
Rotulorum. Attornat. Regis generalium. Solicitat. Regis generalium. Servientium
ad Legem. 1498. Henr. VII. 13. 1499. 14. Ric. Higham Serve. Regis ad Legem.
Trin. 14 H. 7. f. 28. Thomas Keble Serve. Regis ad Legem. Mich. 14 H. 7. f. 7.
a. 1500. 15. 1501. 16. Humsridus Coningesby constitutus unus Serve. Regis ad
Legem. T. R. apud Wodstoke 30 Oct. Pat. 16 H. 7. p. 1. m. 10. 1502. 17. Magist.
Will. Barous constit. 1 Febr. Pat. 17 H. 7. p. 1. m. 2. 1503. 18. Will. Cutler
electus. Cod. niger Hosp. Linc. f. 64. b. 1504. 19. Edmundus Dudley exoneratus
ab officio Serve. ad Legem. Bill. sign. 19 H. 7. Guido Palms ad gradum Serve. ad
Legem ascitus 1 Nov. Bill. sign. 19 H. 7. 1505. 20. Christoph. Baynhring
constit. 13 Nov. Pat. 20 H. 7. p. 1. m. 26.... Brook. Mich. 20 H. 7. f. 4. a.
Rob. Brudnell, will. Grevill, Tho. Marrow, Georgius Edgore, Ioh. More, Ioh.
Cutler, Tho. (Ric.) Eliot, Ludovicus Pollard, Guido Palms, Will. Fairfax.
Term. Mich. 20. H. 7. Festum Lambetha in aedibus Archiep. Cantuar. die Veneris
proximo ante Festum Sancti Martini Episeopi. Regist. Medii Templi f. 4. a.
Holingsh. Chron. p. 791. Rob. Brudnell constitutus unus Serve. Regis ad Legem.
T. R. apud Westminster. 25 Oct. Pat. 20 H. 7. p. 1. Tho. Pigot. Mich. 20 H. 7. f. 6.
a. 1506. 21.... Newport. T. Hill. 21 H. 7. f. 17. b. An. D. An. R. Cancel.
Angl. and Custod. Sig. Thesaurariorum. Justice. ad Plac. coram Rege.
Iusticiariorum de Banco. Baronum de Scacc. 1507. Hen. VII. 22. Robertus
Brudnell constitutus 28 Apr. Bill. sign. 22 H. 7. Rob. Read miles, Capitalis
Justice. Finlevat. crast. Parif. Ioh. Boteler constable it. 26 Apr. Pat. 23 H. 7. p.
2. Bill sign. 22 H. 7. 1508. 23. 1509. 24. 1510. Hen. VIII. 1. Tho. Comes
Surriae constit. Thesaurar. 28 Iulii. Pat. 1 H. 8. p. 1. m. 18. Hamfr.
Coningsby constitutus. T. R. apud Westminster. 21 Maii. Pat. 1 H. 8. p. 2. Robertus
Read miles, constitutus Capitalis Justice. T. R. apud Westminster. 25 Apr. Pat. 1 H.
8. p. 2. m. 31. Rob. Brudnell constit. 25 Apr. Ibid. Ioh. Boteler constit. 25
Apr. Ibid. Ioh. Fysher miles, constit. 25 Apr. Ib. m. 33. Will. Grevyle
constit. 21 Maii. Ibid. Will. Faerfax. Fin. levat. xv Pasch. 1 H. 8. Ioh. Aleyn
constit. quartus Baro. T. R. apud Westminster. 25 Apr. Pat. 1 H. 8. p. 2. m. 31.
Will. Bolling constit. ^ertius Baro. T. R. apud Westminster. 26 Apr. Ibid. m. 32.
Barth. Westhy constit. secundus Baro. T. R. apud Westminster. 2 Iunii. Ibid. m. 31.
Will. Hody constit. Capitalis Baro 26 Apr. Com. de T. Pasch. 1 H. 8. Rot. 2.
1511. 2.... Stagg Baro Scacc. Regist. inter. Templi. f. 15. a. 1512. 3. Rob.
Blagge constit. 27 Iunii. Pat. 3 H. 8. p. 1. 1513. 4. Ioh. Scot constitutus
Capisalis Baro. 8 Ian. Pat. 4 H. 8. p. 2. 1514. 5. Tho. Dux Norff. constit.
Thesaur. 2 Martii. Pat. 5 H. 8. p. 2. Ric. Elyot constitutus 26 April. Pat. 5
H. 8. p. 2. Edm. Denny constit. quartus Baro. 6 Maii. Pat. 5 H. 8. p. 1. 1515.
6. Ludovicus Poll^rd constitutus 29 Maii. Pat. 6 H. 8. p. 1. An. D. An. R.
Magist. Romlorum. Attornat. Regis generalium. Solicitat. Regis generalium.
Servientium ad Legem. 1507. Henr. VII. 22. Ioh. Ernley constit. T. R. apud
Westminster. 12 Iulii. Pat. 22 H. 7. p. 3. Ludovicus Pollard constit. unus Serve.
Regis ad Legem. T. R. apud Westminster. 9 Iulii. Pat. 22 H. 7. p. 3. m. 16. Ric.
Elyot constitutus Serve. Regis ad Legem 19 Iulii. Pat. 22 H. 7. p. 3. 1508. 23.
Ioh. Young (Decanus Ebor.) constitutus 22 Ian. Pat. 23 H. 7. p. 2. m. 7. 1509.
24. 1510. Hen. VIII. 1. Ioh. Young Clericus constit. 11 Iunii. Pat. 1 H. 8. p.
1. Ioh. Erneley constitutus 28 Apr. Pat. 1 H. 8. p. 1. m. 4. Ludovicus Pollard
constit. unus Serve. Regis ad Legem. T. R. apud Westminster. 28 Apr. Pat. 1 H. 8. p.
1. m. 4. Ricardus Elyot. similiter. Ibid. 1511. 2. Ioh. Newport. Ioh.
Newdigate, Brianus Pal^nys junior, Ric. Brook, Thomas Pigot, Ioh. Carrell,...
Brook, Ioh. Roc, Anthonius Fitzherbert, ad statum and gradum Serve. ad Legem
asciti 18 Nov. 2. H. 8. Ex cod. MS. in officio nuncupato le Pettibagg. Rex
concessit Ricardo Broke, quod ipse ad statum and gradum Servientis ad Legem
suscipiendum, contra voluntatem suam non assignetur: Et quod, si electus sit,
starim recipere recuset. T. R. 11 Iulii. Bill. sign. de anno 2 H. 8. 1512. 3.
1513. 4. 1514. 5. Guido Palmys constitutus unus Serve. Regis ad Legem. T. R.
apud Westminster. 9 Maii. Pat. 5 H. 8. p. 1. Thomas Pygot similiter. T. ut supra.
Ibid. 1515. 6. Ioh. Port Solicitator generalis domini Regis. Pat. 6 H. 8. p.
2. Ioh. Carrell Serve. ad Legem constitutus unus Serve. Regis ad Legem. T. R.
apud Otford 1 Iunii. Pat. 6 H. 8. p. 2. An. D. An. R. Cancel. Angl. and Custod.
Sig. Thesaurariorum. Justice. ad Plac. coram Rege. Iusticiariorum de Banco.
Baronum de Scaccario. 1516. Hen. VIII. 7. Deliberatum erat magnum Sigil.
Angliae Thoma^ Wotsey domino Cardinati, Eborac. Archiepiscopo, 7 Decembris,
quem in Cancellarium Angliae tune Rex constituit. Claus. 7 H. 8. in dorso.
1517. 8. 1518. 9. Johannes More. Fin, levat. octab. Purif. 9 H. 8. 1519. 10.
Ioh. Ernele constit. Capitalis Justice. T. R. apud Westminster. 27 Ian. Pat. 10 H. 8.
p. 1. 1520. 11. 1521. 12. Robertus Brudnell constitutus Capitalis Justice. T. R.
apud Westminster. 13 Apr. Pat. 12 H. 8. p. 2. Ric. Broke. Fin. levat. xv Pasch. 12 H.
8. 1522. 13. Ioh Fitz-Iames constitutus. T. R. apud Westminster. 6 Febr. Pat. 13 H.
8. p. 2. Will. Wotton constit. secundus Baro, 10 Iulii. Pat. 13 H. 8. p. 3.
Ioh. Fitz-Iames constitutus Capitalis Baro, 8 Febr. Pat. 13 H. 8. p. 2. m. 1.
1523. 14. Thomas Comes Surriae constitutus Thesaur. 4 Dec. Pat. 14 H. 8. p. 1.
Anthonius Fitz-Herbert. Fin. levat. men's. Pasch. 14 H. 8. Ioh. Hales
constitutus tertius Baro de Scacc. 1 Oct. Pat. 14 H. 8. p. 1. 1524. 15. 1525.
16. 1526. 17. Johan. Fitz-Iames constitutus Capitalis Justice. 23 Ian. Plac.
coram Rege T. Hill. 17 H. 8. Rot. 1. Ric. Brook constitutus Capitalis Baro, 24
Ian. Com. de T. Hill. 17 H. 8. Rot. 1. 1527. 18. Tho. Englefeld. Fin. levat.
octab. Hill. 18 H. 8. Will. Shelley. Fin. levat. octab. Hill. 18 H. 8. An. D.
An. R. Magist. Rotulorum. Attornat. Regis generalium. Solicitar. Regis
generalium. Servientium ad Legem. 1516. Hen. VIII. 7. 1517. 8. Cuthbertus
Tunstall Clericus, constit. 12 Maii. Pat. 8 H. 8. p. 1. A^^^^ (...)
Fitz-Herbert Serve. ad Legem, constit. unus Serve. Regis ad Legem. T. R. apud
Westminster. 24 Nov. Pat. 8 H. 8. p. 2. 1518. 9. 1519. 10. Ioh. Fitz-Iames arm.
constit. 26 Ian. Pat. 10 H. 8. p. 1. 1520. 11. 1521. 12. Ioh. Newdigate Serve.
Regis ad Legem. Tria. 12 H. 8. f. 3. b. Baldw. Malet electus ad gradum and
statum Serve. ad Legem recipiendum in Octab. St. Ioh. Bapt. Regist. inter.
Templi f. 58. b. Disoneratus per specialem laborem amicorum suorum. Ibid. f.
60. a. 1522. 13. Ric. Lister constit. 8 Iulii. Pat. 13 H. 8. p. 1. Will.
Rudhale, Ioh. Fitz-Iames, Ioh. Port, Tho. Fairfax, Ioh. Spilman, Ioh. Brown,
Will. Shelley, Tho. Willughby, Rob. Norwich, Tho. Inglefeld, ad gradum Serve. ad
Legem erecti Term. Trin. 13 H. 8. Ex vet. cartaceo MS. penes Ric. Smith London.
an. 1662. Festum apud Ely House in Holburne. Regist. intel. Templi f. 60. a.
1523. 14. Ioh Clerk Legum Dr. constitutus 20 Oct. Pat. 14 H. 8. p. 2. Rob.
Norwich Serve. ad Legem, constitutus unus Serve. Regis ad Legem. T. R. apud
Westminster. 11 Iulii. Pat. 14 H. 8. p. 1. 1524. 15. Tho. Hannibal Clericus,
constitutus 9 Oct. Pat. 15 H. 8. p. 2. Radulf. Swillington arm. constit. 1 Apr.
Pat. 15 H. 8. p. 2. Tho. Englefeld, Serviens Regis ad Legem, habet redditum
annualem C lib. sibi concessum, durante vita, T. R. apud Hampton Court 3 Dec.
Pat. 15 H. 8. p. 1. 1525. 16. 1526. 17. Christoph. Hales, constitutus etc.
prout Ric. Lyster. T. R. apud More 14 Aug. Cod. MS. in Recepta Scacc. 1527. 18.
An. D. An. R. Cancel. Angl. and Custod. Sig. Thesaurariorum. Justice. ad Plac.
coram Rege. Iusticiariorum de Banco. Baronum de Scacc. 1528. Hen. VIII 19. Ioh.
Petyte secundarius Baro. Will. Elys quartus B^ro. Term. Mich. 19 H. 8. Cod. MS.
in Recept. Sacc. 1529. 20. Ioh. Halys constit. secundus Baro, 14, Maii. Vide
Pat. 31 H. 8. p. 7. Ioh. Scot constit. tertius Baro. T. R. apud Westminster. 15 Maii.
Pat. 20 H. 8. p. 1. 1530. 21. (...) liberatam die L^^ae 25 Oct. Claus. 21 H. 8.
in dorso. Ric. Lyster. Arm. constitutus Capitalis Baro. T. R. apud Westminster. 1 2
Maii. Ex cod. MS. in Recepta Scacc. Hic Ricardus non fuit Serviens ad Legem. Ex
vet. Cod. MS. vocato Spelmans Reports. 1531. 22. Rob. Norwyche constitutus. T.
R. apud Westminster. 22 Nov. Pat. 22 H. 8. p. 1. Idem Rob. Norwiche Capitalis Justice.
F. levat. oct. Hill. 22. H. 8. 1532. 23. 1533. 24. Tho. Audley habuit magnum
Sigil. sibi liberatum d^c Lunae 20 Maii, quo tempore Rex ordine militari ipsum
^ signivit. Claus. 24 H. S. in dorso. Novum Sigil. factum and liberat. dicto
Thomae 6 Sept. eodem an. Ibid. Idem Tho. constit. Cancel. Angliae 26 Ian. tun^
prox. ^equente. Ib. Will. Luke (Serve. ad Legem) constit. T. R. apud Westminster. 23
Aug. Pat. 24. H. 8. p. 1. Ioh. Spelman miles, Cod. MS. penes Clem. Spelman arm.
Ioh. Port constit. 26 Ian. Orig. 24 H. 8. Rot. 5. Ioh. Petyte constitutus
tertius Baro. T. R. apud Westminster. (...) Oct. Pat. 24 H. 8. p. 1. An. D. An. R.
Magist. Rotulorum. Attornat. Regis generalium. Solicitat. Regis generalium.
Servientium ad Legem. 1528. Hen. VIII. 19. Ioh. Tailor Clericus, constit. 26
Iunii. Pat. 19 H. 8. p. 2. 1529. 20. Ioh. Spelman Serve. ad Legem, constitutus
Serviens Regis ad Legem. Pat. 20. H. 8. p. 1. 1530. 21. Christoph. Hales arm.
constit. 3 Iunii. Pat. 21 H. 8. p. 2. Idem Christoph. fursum reddidit dictas
Literas patentes cancellendas 9 Iulii. 28. H. 8. Ibid. 1531. 22. Tho.
Willoughby Serve. ad Legem, constitutus Serviens Regis ad Legem. T. R. apud
Westminster. 28 Apr. Pat. 22 H. 8 p. 1. 1532. 23. Baldw. Malet. Pat. 23 H. 8. p. 2.
Humsr. Brown Serve. ad Legem. Pat. 23 H. 8. p. 1. in dorso. The Audley, Walt.
Luke, Ioh. Baldwia, Ioh. Mind, Christoph. Ienacy, Ioh. Densell, Edw. Mervin,
Edm. Knightley, Rog. Ch^lmley, Edw. Mouatagu, Rog. York, ad statum and gradam
Serve. ad Legem as citi T. Mich. 23. H. 8. in crast. S. Martini. Ex cod. MS.
vocato Spelmans Reports ( scil. Ioh. Spelman Quondam Justice. ad Plac. coram
Rege) Penes Clem. Spelman Bar. Scacc. an. 1663. Festum apud Ely House. Stow's
Survey of Land. Tho. Andley constit. Serve. Regis ad Legem. T. R. apud Westminster 14
Nov. Pat. 23 H. 8. p. 1 [fuit Prolocutor Parliam. 22 H. 8. Regist. inter.
Templi f. 82. a.] Ioh. Baldwin similiter 16 Nov. Ibid. Ioh. Pakyngton
similiter. Regist. inter. Templi f. 83. a. 1533. 24. An. D. An. R. Cancel.
Angl. and Custod. Sig. Thesaurariorum. Justice. ad Plac. ^oram Rege.
Iusticiariorum de Ban^o. Paronum de Scaccario. 1534. Hen. VIII. 25 1535. 26.
Thomas Nalshe Rememorator Regis in Scacc. constit. quartus Baro, prou^ ^ill
Elys etc. T. R. apud Westminster. 27 Apr. Pat. 26 H. 8. p. 1. 1536. 27. Ioh. Baldwia
miles, Capitalis Justice. Fi^. lev. t^es Pasch. 27. H. 8. 1537. 28. 1538. 29.
Thomas Willough by illoughby miles, constitutus. miles, contitutus. T. R. apud
Westminster. 9 Oct. Pat. 29 H. 8. p. 2. 1539. 30. Edw. Mountagu mil^s, constit.
Capitalis Justice. T. R. apud Westminster. 21. Ian. Pat. 30. H. 8. p. 2. Christoph.
Ienney miles, constit. 30. Iunii. Pat. 30. H. 8. p. 2. 1540. 31. Nich. Luke
constitutus tertius Baro. T. R. apud Westminster* 14 Apr. P^t. 31. H. 8. p. 5. Ioh.
Smyth arm. Remem. Thesaur. in Scacc. habet Literas Pat. de officio secundi
Baronis in Scacc. in reversione, post mortem vel cessionem Ioh. Halys. T. R.
apud Terlyng 1 Aug. Pat. 31 H. 8. p. 7. 1541. 32. Willielm. Coningesby
constitutus. T. R. apud Westminster. 5. Iulii. Pat. 32 H. 8. p. 1. m. 1. Edwardus
Mervyn (Serve. Regis ad Legem) costit. T. R. apud Westminster. 22 Nov. Pat. 32. H. 8.
p. 5. 1542. 33. An. D. An. R. Magist. Rotulorum. Attornat. Regis generalium.
Solicitat. Regis generalium. Servientium ad Legem. 1534. Hen. VIII. 25. Ric.
Rich Arm. constitutus. T. R. apud Westminster. 10. Oct. Pat. 25. H. 8. p. 1. 1535.
26. Tho. Cromwell Arm. constitutus 8 Oct. Pat. 26 H. 8. p. 2. Ioh. Hyade
constitutus (...) Serve. domini Regis ad Legem. T. R. apud Westminster. 2 Ian. Pat.
26. H. 8. p. 2. 1536. 27. Will. Whorwood constitutus. T. R. apud Westminster. 13 Apr.
Pat. 27. H. 8. p. 1. Christoph Iea^^ Serve. Regis ad Legem. Pat. 27. H. 8. p. 1.
Humfr. Brown Serve. Regis ad Legem. Pasch. 27 H. 8. f. 4. a. 1537. 28.
Christoph. Hales Arm. consiliarius and Attornatus generalis domini Regis,
constit. 10 Iulii. Pat. 28. H. 8. p. 2. Ioh. Baker miles, constit. T. R. apud
Westminster. 10 Iulii. Pat. 28 H. 8. p. 1. 1538. 29. Edw. Mountagu Serve. ad Legem,
constitutus Serviens Regis ad Legem. T. R. apud Westminster. 16 Oct. Pat. 29. H. 8.
p. 2. 1539. 30. Edw. Mervin Serve. ad Legem, constitutus Serve. Regis ad Legem.
T. R. apud Westminster. 11. Febr. Pat. 30 H. 8. p. 2. 1540. 31. Thomas Rushedon, Rob.
Towneshead, Ioh. Harrys, ad gradum Serve. ad Legem elcti. Cod. niger Hosp. Linc.
[lib. 4.] f. 122. b. Necnon Memoranda Prothonoth. de Com Banco. Tho. Bromley
similiter. Regist. inter. Templi f. 100. b. Memoranda Prothonoth. Com Banco.
Ioh. Carrell similiter. Ibid. f. 99. b. Rob. Chydley, Will. Conyngesby,
similiter. Ibid. f. 101. b. Memoranda Prothonoth. de Com. de Banco. Hii omnes
ad dictum statum and gradum evecti Term. Trin. 32. H. 8. 1541. 32. Willielm.
Whorwood constit. 8 Nov. Pat. 32. H. 8. p. 7. Henr. Bradshaw constitutus. T. R.
apud Westminster. Pat. 32. H. 8. p. 5. Will. Portman, Edw. Saunders, Iac. Hales, Iac.
Missenden, similiter ad dictum statum and gradum evecti Term. Trin. 32. H. 8.
Memoranda Prothonoth. de Com. Banco. Tho. Bromley Serve. ad Legem, constitutus
Serviens Regis ad Legem. T. R. apud Westminster. 2. Iulii. Pat. 32. H. 8. p. 7. Will.
Portman constit. unus Serve. Regis ad Legem. T. R. apud Westminster. 23. Nov. Pat. 32
H. 8. p. 5. 1542. 33. Rob. Southwell miles, constit. 1 Iulii. Pat. 33. H. 8. p.
1. An. D. An. R. Cancel. Angl. and Custod. Sig. Thesaurariorum. Justice. ad
Plac. coram Rege. Iusticiariorum de Banco. Baronum de Scaccario. 1543. Hen.
VIII 34. Humfridus Brown constit. T. R. apud Westminster. 20 Nov. Pat. 34 H. 8. p. 2.
and p. 7 Ludovicus Fortescu constit. quartus Baro. T. R. apud Westminster. 6 Aug.
Pat. 34. H. 8. p. 6. 1544. 35. Robertus Brook T. Trin. 35 H. 8. Dyers Reports
f. 56. 1545. 36. Tho. dominus Wriothesley Cancel. Angliae habait magnum
Sigillum sibi liberatum 3 Maii. Claus. 36 H. 8. p. 1. Tho. Bromley (Serve. Regis
ad Legem) constit. T. R. apud Westminster. 4 Nov. Pat. 36 H. 8. p. 22. Ioh. Baldwin
miles, constitutus Capitalis Justice. T. R. apud Westminster. 2 Iulii Pat. 36 H. 8. p.
5. m. 33. 1546. 37. Ric. Lyster miles, constitutus Capitalis ^ustic. T. R. apud
Westminster. 9 Nov. Pat. 37. H. 8. p. 2. Ioh. Hynde (Serve. Regis ad Legem) constit.
T. R. apud Westminster. 4 Nov. Pat. 37. H. 8. p. 18. Edw. Mountagu miles, constit.
Capitalis Justice. T. R. apud Westminster. 6. Nov. Pat. 37 H. 8. p. 18. Rog. Cholmely
miles, (Serve. ad Legem) constit. Capitalis Baro. T. R. apud Westminster. 11. Nov.
Pat. 37 H. 8. p. 17. 1547. 38. Will. Port^^ (Serve. ad Legem) constit. T. R.
apud Westminster. 14 Maii. Pat. 38 H. 8. p. 3. 1547. Edw. VI. 1. 29 Iunii Sigillum
magnum Will. Paulet militi domino St. John de Basing liberatum fuit. Pat. 1. E.
6. p. 4. Ric. Rich miles, dominus Rich constitutus Cancellarius Angliae 30
Nov. Pat. 1 E. 6. p. 3. m. 14. Edward. Comes Hertfordiae Protector and
gubernator personae Regis, constit. Thesaur. 29 Ian. Pat. 1. E. 6. p. 6. m. 9.
Rob. Curson constir. secundus Baro. T. R. apud Westminster. 15. Febr. Pat. 1. E. 6.
1548. 2. Johan. Darnall, Ingrossator magni Rotuli domini Regis in Scacc.
constit. quartus Baro, post mortem Ioh. Pylbarough jam defuncti. T. R. apud
Westminster. 5. Maii. Pat. 2. E. 6. p. 5. An. D. An. R. Magist. Rotulorum. Attornat.
Regis generalium. Solicitat. Regis generalium. Servientium ad Legem. 1543. Hen.
VIII. 34. Edw. Molineux constit. Serve. Regis ad Legem. T. R. apud Westminster. 20
Nov. Pat. 34. H. 8. p. 7. Humfr. Brown similiter. Ib. Et Liberatae 15 Maii. 35
H. 8. 1544. 35. Robertus Towneshead constit. Serve. Regis ad Legem. Pat. 35 H.
8. p. 12. Thomas Bromley similiter. Ibid. Iac. Hales Serve. ad. Legem. (...) 3^.
H. 8. Dyer f. 56. a. 1545. 36. Rogerus Cholmley miles, constitutus Serve. Regis
ad Legem. Pat. 36 H. 8. p. 18. Iacobus Hales similiter. T. R. apud Westminster. 4
Nov. Pat. 36 H. 8. p. 24. 1546. 37. Henricus Bradshaw Arm. constit. T. R. apud
Westminster. 18 Iunii Pat. 37 H. 8. p. 13. Edw. Griffin constitutus. T. R. apud
Westminster. 18 Iunii. Pat. 37 H. 8. p. 14. 1547. 38. David Brook, Ioh. Whiddon,
Ludov. Pollard, Rob. Meynell, Ric. Morgan, Will. Coke, Brevia de T. Tri^. 38 H.
8. habuere ad statum and gradum Serve. ad Legem suscip. in crast. Purif. beatae
Mariae Virg. proximo tunc sequente; quo eveniente in die Iovis post mortem
dicti Regis H. S. immediate sequente; alia Brevia ad eundem gradum dicto crast.
Purif. ab. Edwardo 6. receperunt. Codex niger de Lincolns Inn f. 178. b.
Festum in magna Aula Hosp. Linc. Ibid. f. 177. a. Ioh. Harrys Serve. ad Legem,
constitutus unus Serve. Regis ad Legem. T. R. apud Westminster. 13 Maii. Pat. 38 H. 8.
p. 5. 1547 Edw. VI. 1. Edw. Saunders constitutus unus Servientium Regis ad
Legem. T. R. apud Westminster. 11. Febr. Pat. 1. E. 6. p. 6. 1548. 2. An. D. An. R.
Cancel. Angl. and Custod. Sig. Thesaurariorum. Justice. ad Plac. coram Rege.
Iusticiariorum de Banco. Baronum de Scaccario. 1549. Edw. VI. 3 Iac. Hales
constitutus T. R. apud Westminster. 20 Maii. Pat. 3 E. 6. p. 4. Edw. Saxby constit.
unus Baron^^^ T. R. apud Westminster. 28 Nov. Pat. 3 E. 6. p. 2. 1550. 4. Guliclmus
Comes Wilton constitututs Thesaur. 3. Febr. Pat. 4 E. 6. p. 2. Edward. Molineux
miles (Serve. ad Legem) constit. T. R. apud Westminster. 22 Oct. Pat. 4 E. 6. p. 3.
Rob. Broae constitutus secundus Baro. T. R. apud Westminster. 6. Maii. Pat. 4 E. 6.
p. 3. 1551. 5. Tho Goodrick Elionsis Episc. constitutus Cancel. Angliae, 19,
Ian. Claus. 5 E. 6. p. 5. 1552. 6. Rogerus Cholmeley miles, constitutus
Capitalis Iusticiarius. T. R. apud Westminster. Pat. 6 E. 6. p. 4. Will. Cook
constitutus 16 Nov. Pat. 6 E. 6. p. 3. Heny. Bradshawcon stitutus Capitalis
Bator. T. R. apud Westminster. 21 Maill. Pat. 6 E. 6. p. 6. 1553. M. R. 1. Steph.
Gardener Epise. Winton. constit. Cancellarius Angliae, 21 Sept. Pat. 1. M. p.
8. Willielm^s marchi. Winton. constitutus Thesaur. 30 Sept. Pat. 1. M. p. 7.
Tho. Bromley miles, constit. Capit. Justice. T. R. apud Westminster. 4 Oct. Pat. 1 M.
p. 2. Ioh. Whiddon (Serve. ad Legem) constitutus. T. R. apud Westminster. 4 Oct. Ibid.
Will. Portman miles, constit. T. R. apud Westminster. 4. Oct. Ibid. Ric. Morgan miles
(Serve. ad Legem) constit, Capit. Justice. T. R. apud Westminster. 5. Sept. Pat. 1 M.
p. 2. Humfr. Brown miles, Edw. Saunders (Serve. ad Legem,) Jacob. Hales miles,
constir. T. R. apud Westminster. 4 Oct. Pat. 1. M. p. 2. David Broke (Serve. ad Legem)
constitutus Capitalis Baro. T. R. apud Richemont 1 Sept. Edw. Saxilby, Rob.
Brown, Nich. Luke, constituti. T. R. apud Westminster. 29 Sept. Pat. 1 M. p. 2.
(...) 2. Will. Portman, miles constitutus Capitalis Justice. T. R. apud Westminster.
11 Iunii. Pat. 1 and 2 Ph. and M. p. 14. Rob. Brook miles, constitutus
Capitalis Justice. T. R. apud Westminster. 8. Oct. Pat. 1 and 2 Phil. and M. p. 2.
Will. Staunford. Fin lev. men's. Mich. 1 and 2 pb. M. An. D. An. R. Magist.
Rotulorum. Attornat. Regis generalium. Solici^at. Regis generalium. Servientium
ad Legem. 1549. Edw. VI. 3 1550. 4. Ioh. Beaumont arm. constitutus 13 Dec. Pat.
4 E. 6. p. 6. Will. Cook constitutus Serve. Reg^s ad Legem. T. R. apud Westminster.
22 Oct. Pat. 4 E. 6. p. 3. Ioh. Pollard exoneratus a statu and gradu Serve. ad
Legem. T. R. apud Westminster. 21 Oct. Pat. 4 E. 6. p. 3. 1551. 5. Ioh. Whiddon
constitutus anus Serve. Regis ad Legem. T. R. apud Westminster. 4 Nov. Pat. 5. E. 6.
p. 1. David Brook similiter. T. R. apud Westminster. 25 Nov. Pat. 5. E. 6. p. 3.
1552. 6. Rob. Bows miles, constit. 18 Iunii. Pat. 6. E. 6. p. 4. Edw. Griffith
arm. constitutus. T. R. apud Westminster. 21 Maii. Pat. 6. E. 6. p. 6. Ioh Gosnol
constitutus. T. R. apud Westminster. 21 Maii. Pat. 6. E. 6. p. 6. Rob. Brook ad
statum and gradum, Serve. ad Legem erectus Term. Mich. Memoranda Prothonoth. de
Com. Banco. Will Cook, Iac. Dyar. Serve. dom. Regis ad Legem constit. T. R.
apud Westminster. 16 Nov. Pat. 6. E. 6. p. 3. Iac. Dyar, Ioh* Carrell, Tho. Gawdey
senior, Ric. Catlyn, Rad. Rokesby, Will Stanforde, will. Dalyson, ad gradum and
statum Serve. ad Legem, per Breve Regis asciti. T. R. apud Westminster. 19 Maii. Pat.
6. E. 6. p. 6. in dorso. Rob. Keylway similiter. Regist. inter Templi. f. 103.
b. Festum apud Grays-Inne. Regist. i^ter. Templi f. 103. b. 1553. M. R. 1.
Nich. Hare miles, constitutus 18 Sept. Pat. 1 M. p. 8. Edw. Griffin constitutus
30 Sept. Pat. 1. M. p. 2. Will. Cordell arm. constit. 30. Sept. Pat. 1. M. p.
2. Iac. Dyer, Will. Stanford constituti Serve. Reginae ad Legem. T. R. apud
Westminster. 19 Oct. Bill. Sign. 1. M. Et Pat. 1 M. p. 6. 1554. 2. Georgius Wood a
gradu Serve. ad Legem exoneratus. Regist. inter. Templi. f. 113. b. Ioh.
Prydeaux, Georgius Wood, Franc. Morgan, Rob. Catlyn. Anth. Brown, Georgius
Seintpoll, Will. Bendelowes, Georgius Brown, Ioh. Walpole, ad gradum Serve. ad
Legem suscepturi in 15. Mich. prox. futuro coasciti. T. T. apud Westminster. 1 Iunii.
Pat. 1 and 2 Ph. and M. p. 3. in dorso Ioh. Caryl ad dictum gradum in Octab. S.
Trin. suscipiendum ascitus. T. ut supra. Ibid. Will. Rastell ad dictum gradum
suscipiendum in 15 Mich. ascitus. T. R. apud Hampton Court 4 Iulii. Ibid. An.
D. An. R. Cancel. Angl. and Custod. Sig. Thesaurariorum. Justice. ad Plac. coram
Rege. Iusticiariorum de Banco. Baronum de Scaccario. 1555. M. R. 3. (...) 1556.
4. Edw. Sanders miles, constit. Capit. Justice. T. R. apud Westminster. 8 Maii. Pat. 3
and 4 Ph. and M. p. 5. Iac. Dyer miles, constit. T. R. apud Westminster. 8 Maii. Pat.
3 and 4 Ph. and M. p. 5. 1557. 5. Franciscus Morga^ constit. 23 Ian. Pat. 4 and
5 Ph. and M. p. 1. Iac. Dyer miles, constit. T. R. apud Westminster. 23 Apr. Pat. 4
and 5 Ph. and M. p. 11. Clemens Higha^^ constit. Capitalis Baro. T. R. apud
Westminster. 2 Martii. Pat. 4 and 5 Ph. and M. p. 3. 1558. 6. Will. Rastall (Serve. ad
Legem) constit. T. R. apud Westminster. 27 Oct. Pat. 5 and 6 Ph. and M. p. 6. Anth.
Brown (Serve. ad Legem) constit. Capit. Justice. T. R. apud Westminster. 5 Oct. Pat. 5
and 6 Ph and M. p. 6. Roh. Catlyn (Serve. R. ad Legem) constit. T. R. apud
Westminster. 27 Oct. Pat. 5 and 6 Ph. and M. p. 6. 1559. Eliz. R. 1. Nicholaus
Bacon^s eques aur. and Attornatu^ Curiae Wardorum, constitutus Custos magni
Sigilli 22 Dec. Annal. Cambdeni. T. R. apud Westminster. 13 Ian. Pat. 1 Eliz. p. 3.
Will. marchio Winton. constitutus Thesaur. 21 Ian. Pat. 1 Eliz. p. 4. m. 17.
Edw. Sanders miles, constit. Capit. Justice. T. R. apud Kings-Hatfeild, 18 Nov.
Pat. 1 Eliz. p. 4. Ioh. Whiddon miles, Will. Dalyson arm. Will. Rastell arm.
constit. T. ut supra. Ibid. Regin. Corbet (Serve. ad Legem) constit. T. R. apud
Westminster. 16 Oct. Pat. 1 Eliz. p. 2. Rob. Catlyn constit. Capit. Justice. 22 Ian.
Plic. de T. Hill. 1 Eliz. rot. 1. Anth. Brow^ constit. Capit. Justice. T. R.
apud Hatfeild, 18 Nov. Pat. 1 Eliz. p. 4. Iac. Dyer miles, Humfr. Brown miles,
Roh. Catlyn arm. constit. 18 Nov. T. ut supra. Ibid. Iac. Dyer miles, constit.
Capit. Justice. T. R. apud Westminster. 22 Ian. Ibid. Anth. Brown (Serve. ad Legem)
constit. T. R. apud Westminster. 22 Ian. Ibid. Ric. Weston (Serve. R. ad Legem)
constit. T. R. apud Westminster. 16 Oct. Pat. 1 Eliz. p. 2. Edw. Sanders miles,
constit. Capit. Baro. T. R. apud Westminster. 22 Ian. Pat. 1 Eliz. p. 4. Georgius
Frevile arm. constit. 3 Baro. T. R. apud Westminster. 31 Ian. Ibid. Edw. Saxby
(alias Saxilby,) constit. 1 Febr. Hill. Rec. 1 Eliz. rot. 1. 1560. 2. 1661. 3.
An. D. An. R. Magist. Rotulorum. Attornat. Regis generalium. Solicitat. Regis
generalium. Servientium ad Legem. 1555. M. R. 3. Anth. Brown const^t. Serve.
dom. Regis and Reginae ad L^gem. T. R. apud Westminster. 16 Oct. Pat. 2 and 3 Ph. and
M. p. 2. Ric. Catlyn similiter. T. R. apud Westminster. 27 Apr. Ibid. p. 3. Will.
Dalison similiter. T. R. apud Westminster. 3 Nov. Ibid. p. 4. 1556. 4. Rob. Catlyn
constit. Serve. R. and Reginae ad Legem. T. R. apud Westminster. 4 Nov. Pat. 3 and 4
Ph. and M. p. 5. 1557. 5. Will. Cordell miles, constit. 5 Nov. Pat. 4 and 5 Ph.
and. M. p. 7. Ric. Weston arm. constit. T. R. apud Westminster. 20 Nov. Pat. 4 and 5
Ph. and M. p. 3. Ioh. Prydeaux constit. Serve. R. and Reginae ad Legem. T. R.
apud Westminster. 23 Ian. Pat. 4 and 5 Ph. and M. p. 1. 1558. 6. Tho. Caru^, Regin.
Corbet, Ioh. Welshe, Ioh. Southcote, Edm. Plowde^, (...). Gawdey, Georgius
Wall, Ric. Har^^^, ^ill. Foster, ^anulphus Cholmeley, Gilbertus Gerard, Ioh.
Birche, ad gradum Serve. ad Legem suscipiendum, ^ die Pasch. in tres septim.
aseiti. T. R. apud Westminster. 27 Oct. Pat. 5 and 6 Ph. and M. p. 6. 1559. Eliz. R.
1. Gilbertus Gerard constit. T. R. apud Westminster. 22 Ian. Pat. 1 Eliz. p. 4.
Will. Roswell arm. constit. T. R. apud Westminster. 1 Febr. Pat. 1 Eliz. p. 3. Tho.
Carrus, Regin. Corbet, Ioh. VVelshe, Ioh. Southcote, Will. Symonds, Georgius
Wall, Ric. Harpur, Raa. Cholmeley, Nich. Powtrell, Ioh. Byrche, ad gradum
Serve. ad Legem suscipiendum vocati per Breve R. Test R. apud Westminster. 12 Dec.
Pat. 1 Eliz. p. 4. Ric. Weston similiter. T. R. apud Westminster. 24 Ian. Pat. 1
Eliz. p. 4. Idem. Ric. Weston constit. unus Serve. Reginae ad Legem. T. R. apud
Westminster. 13 Febr. Pat. 1 Eliz. p. 9. 1660. 2. 1661. 3. An. D. An. R. Cancel.
Angl. and Custod. Sig. Thesaurariorum. Justice. ad Plac. coram Rege.
Iusticiariorum de Banco. Baronum de Scaccario. 1562. Eliz. R. 4. Thomas Pyne
unus Baro. Scacc. Mich. Rec. 4 Eliz. rot. 408. 1562. 5. Iohannis Southcote
(Serve. ad Legem) constit. T. R. apud Westminster. 10 Febr. Pat. 5 Eliz. p. 1. Ioh.
Welshe (Serve. ad Legem) constit. T. R. apud Westminster. 10 Febr. Pat. 1 Eliz. p. 5.
Ioh. Birche arm. constit. tertius Baro de Scacc. T. R. apud. Westminster. 11 Maii.
Pat. 5 Eliz. p. 8. 1563. 6. Georgius Frevyle arm. constit. secundus Baro de
Scacc. T. R. apud Westminster. 28 Apr. Pat. 6 Eliz. p. 12. 1564. 7. Tho. Carrus
(Serve. ad Legem) constit. loco Regin. Corbet defuncti. Plac. de T. Trin. 9
Eliz. rot. 342. 1565. 8. Iac. Lord constit. etc. post mortem Thomae Pymme
nuper defuncti. T. R. apud Westminster. 12 Nov. Pat. 8 Eliz. p. 8. 1566. 9. Ric.
Harpur. Fin. levat. Octab. Mich. 9 Eliz. 1567. 10. 1568. 11. 1569. 12. 1570.
13. 1571. 14. Will. Cecyll ord. Gart. miles, dominus Burgley, constit.
Thesaur. 15 Sept. Pat. 14 Eliz. p. 9. m. 14. Christoph. VVraye constit. T. R.
apud Westminster. 14 Maii. Pat. 14 Eliz. p. 10. Rog. Manwood constit. T. R. apud
Westminster. 14 Oct. Ibid. p. 7. Rob. Mounson constit. T. R. apud Westminster. 31 Oct.
Ibid. An. D. An. R. Magist. Rotulorum. Attornat. Regis generalium. Solicitat.
Regis generalium. Servientium ad Legem. 1562. Eliz. R. 4. Nich. Powtrell Serve.
Reginae ad Legem. Mich. 4 Eliz. Dyer f. 209. b. Tho. Carrus Serve. Reginae ad
Legem. Pasch. 4 Eliz. Dyer f. 212. a. 1563. 5. 1564. 6. 1565. 7. 1566. 8. Ric.
O^slow arm. constit. T. R. apud Westminster. 27 Iunii. Pat. 8. Eliz. p. 8.... Baker,
Ric. Catlyn, Serve. Reginae ad Legem, Dyer f. 249. a. 1567. 9. Tho. Gaudy
senior, Rog. Manwood, Christoph. Wray, Tho. Meade, Nich. Barham, Ioh. Ieffreys,
Will. Lovelace, Term. Pasch. 9 Eliz. Festum apud Grays-Inne. Holinsh. Chron. p.
791. Plowd. Rep. f. 342. b. Christoph. Wraye, Serve. ad Legem, constit. unus
Serve. dominae Reginae ad Legem. T. R. apud Westminster. 18 Iunii. Pat. 9 Eliz. p. 7.
1568. 10. 1569. 11. Tho. Bromley arm. constit. T. R. apud Westminster. 14 Martii.
Pat. 11 Eliz. p. 6. 1570. 12. 1571. 13. 1572. 14. Rob. Mounson electus per
speciale mandatum Reginae Term. Mich. 14 Eliz. [Cod. niger Hosp. Linc.] Et pat.
14 Eliz. p. 8. Ioh. Ieffreys constit. unus Serve. dominae Reginae ad Legem. T.
R. apud Westminster. 15 Oct. Pat. 14 Eliz. p. 7. An. D. An. R. Cancel. Angl. and
Custod. Sig. Thesaurariorum. Justice. ad Plac. coram Rege. Iusticiariorum de
Banco. Baronum de Scaccario. 1573. Eliz. R. 15. 1574. 16. Christoph. Wray
miles, constit. Capit. Justice. T. R. apud Westminster. 8 Nov. Pat. 16 Eliz. p. 9.
[obiit 8 Maii, A. 1591.] Tho. Gawdye constit. T. R. apud Westminster. 16 Nov. Pat. 16
Eliz. p. 5. 1575. 17. 1576. 18. Ioh. Ieffreys constit. 15 Maii. Pat. 18 Eliz.
p. 4. Tho. Greek constit. 20 Ian. Pat. 18 Eliz. p. 4. 1577. 19. Rob. Bell
miles, (Serve. ad Legem) constit. Capit. Baro. T. R. apud Westminster. 24 Ian. Pat. 19
Eliz. p. 6. Ioh. Ieffreys miles, constit. Capitalis Baro. T. R. apud Westminster. 12
Oct. Pat. 19 Eliz. p. 12. 1578. 20. Tho. Meade. Fin. levat. crast. Purif. 20
Eliz. Christoph. Muschampe constit. T. R. apud Westminster. 28 Nov. Pat. 20 Eliz. p.
10. 1579. 21. Tho. Bromleius Solicitor dominae Reginae generalis, constit.
Cancellarius Angliae 25 Apr. Claus. 21 Eliz. p. 4. in dorso. Francisc. Windham.
Fin. levat. Octab. Mich. 21 Eliz. Rog. Manwood constit. Capit. Baro. 24 Ian.
Com. de T. Hill. 21 Eliz. Rot. 227. Ioh. Sotherton constit. T. R. apud Westminster.
16 Iunii. Pat. 21. Eliz. p. 2. Rob. Shute constit. secundus Baro; and quod
reputabitur and erit in eo ordine, gradu, estimatione, dignitate, and
praeheminentia, ad omnes intentiones, prout aliquis inferior Iusticiarius de
Banco, vel de communi Banco est sive esse debet. T. R. apud Westminster. 1. Iunii.
Pat. 21 Eliz. p. 2. An. D. An. R. Magist. Rotulorum. Attornat. Regis
generalium. Solicitat. Regis generalium. Servientium ad Legem. 1573. Eliz. R.
15. Nich. Barham Serve. Reginae. Plowd. f. 552. b. 1574. 16. 1575. 17. 1576. 18.
1577. 19. Will. Ayloff, Edw. Baber, Franc. Windham, electi 19 Eliz. Term. Mich.
Cod. niger Hosp. Linc. f. 225. b. Franc. Gaudy, Edm. Anderson, Rob. Shute, Edw.
Fe^ner, electi Term. Mich. 19 Eliz. Ex cod. MS. penes Eliam Ashmole Arm. Rob.
Bell constitutus unus Serve. dominae Reginae ad Legem. T. R. apud Westminster. 22 Ian.
Pat. 19 Eliz. p. 9. Festum in Aula medii Templi Land. MS. penes praef. Eliam
Ashmole. 1578. 20. Franciscus Rodes, Johannes Popham, electi Term. Hill. 20
Eliz. Bendlows Reports MS. f. 134. 1579. 21. Ioh. Popham arm. constit. T. R.
apud Westminster. 26 Iunii. Pat. 21 Eliz. p. 2. Ioh. Popham arm. exoneratus de
nomine, statu, and gradu Serve. ad Legem. T. R. apud... Pat. 21 Eliz. p. 2. Edm.
Anderson Serve. Reginae. Dyer. f. 364. a. An. D. An. R. Cancel. Angl. and
Custod. Sig. Thesaurariorum. Justice. ad Plac. coram Rege. Iusticiariorum de
Banco. Baronum de Scaccario. 1580. Eliz. R. 22. 1581. 23. Will. Periam constit.
T. R. apud Westminster. 13 Febr. Pat. 23 Eliz. p. 2. 1582. 24. Edm. Anderson (Serve.
ad Legem) constit. Capit. Justice. T. R. apud Westminster. 2 Maii. Pat. 24. Eliz. p.
10. Ioh. Clinche constit. tertius Baro. T. R. apud Westminster. 27 Nov. Pat. 24 Eliz.
p. 7. 1583. 25. 1584. 26. Ioh. Clene^e constit. 29 Maii. Pat. 50 Eliz. p. 12.
Edw. Flowerdus constit. tertius Baro. T. R. apud Westminster. 23 Oct. Com. de T.
Trin. 27 Eliz. Rot. 74. 1584. 27. Roh. Shute constit. 8 Febr. Pat. 30 Eliz. p.
12. Franciscus Rodes constitutus 29 Iunii. Pat. 30 Eliz. p. 12. 1586. 28. 1587.
29. Christoph. Hattonus eques aur. constit. Angliae Cancellarius 29 Apr. Claus.
29 Eliz. p. 24 in dorso. 1588. 30. Tho. Gent. (Serve. ad Legem) constit. 28
Iunii Pat. 30 Eliz. p. 12. Rob. Clerk constit. 22 Iunii Pat. 30 Eliz. p. 12.
An. D. An. R. Magist. Rotulorum. Attornat. Regis generalium. Solicitat. Regis
generalium. Servientium ad Legem. 1580. Eliz. R. 22. Ioh. Clenche, Ioh.
Puckering, Tho. Walmisley, ad gradum Serve. ad Legem electi. Cod. niger Hosp.
Linc. f. 287. b. Will. Fleetwood, Edw. Flowerdew, Tho. Snagge, Will. Periam,
Rob. Halton, Electi T. Mich. 22 Eliz. Festum apud Novum Templum. Holinsh.
Chron. p. 1314. Et Stow. p. 687. 1581. 23. Gilb. Gerard miles (Attornatus
generalis dominae Reginae) constit. 30 Maii. Pat. 23 Eliz. p. 1. Ioh. Popham
arm. constit. 1 Iunii. Pat. 23 Eliz. p. 1. Tho. Egerton constit. 28 Iunii. Pat.
23 Eliz. p. 1. 1582. 24. Franc. Roodes constit. unus Serve. dominae Reginae ad
Legem. T. R. apud Westminster. 21 Aug. Pat. 24 Eliz. p. 5. Franc. Gawdye, similiter.
T. R. apud Westminster. 17 Maii. Pat. 24 Eliz. p. 10. 1583. 25. 1584. 26. Tho. Ge^t,
factus Serve. ad Legem 2 Iunii. Pat. 26 Eliz. p. 12. Ric. Shuttleworth,
similiter 4 Iulii. Ibid. [postea Justice. Cestriae.] 1585. 27. 1586. 28. 1587.
29. 1588. 30. Ioh. Puckering constit. unus Serve. dominae Reginae ad Legem;
Iulii. Pat. 30 Eliz. p. 12. Rob. Gardener electus Term. Hill. [postea cap.
Justice. in Hibernia ad placita coram R.] Pat. 30 Eliz. p. 9. Rob. Clarke solus
electus 12 Iunii, an. 29. Pat. 30 Eliz. p. 9. An. D. An. R. Cancel. Angl. and
Custod. Sig. Thesaurariorum. Justice. ad Plac. coram Rege. Iusticiariorum de
Banco. Baronum de Scaccario. 1589. Eliz. R. 31. Franciscus Gawdye constit. 25
Nov. Pat. 31 Eliz. p. 12. Thomas Walmsley Constit. 10 Maii. Pat. 31 Eliz. p. 9.
1590. 32. Edw. Fen^er constitutus 16 Maii. Pat. 32 Eliz. p. 10. 1591. 33. 1592.
34. Ioh. Puckeringus eques aur. et Serve. ad Legem, habuit custodiam magni
Sigilli Angliae sibi commissum 28 Maii. Claus. 34 Eliz. p. 14. in dorso. Ioh.
Popham miles, constit. Capit. Justice. T. R. apud Westminster. 2 Iunii. Pat. 34 Eliz.
p. 7. 1593. 35. Franciscus Beaumont constit. 25 Ian. Pat. 35 Eliz. p. 8. Will.
Peryam miles, constitutus Capitalis Baro. Term. Hill. Pat. 35 Eliz. p. 3. 1594.
36. Tho. Owen constit. 21 Ian. Pat. 36 Eliz. p. 13. Matthew. Ewens constit. 1
Febr. Pat. 36 Eliz. p. 13. 1595. 37. An. D. An. R. Magist. Rotulorum. Attornar.
Regis generalium. Solicitar. Regi generalium. Servientium ad Legem. 1589. Eliz.
R. 31. Christoph, Yelverton electus Term. (...). Regist. de Grays-Inne vol. 2.
f. 196. b. Tho. Hamo^d, Tho. Harris electi. Regist. Hospic. medii Templi. f.
202. a. Edw. Drew, Ioh. Cooper similiter. Term. Mich. Regist. inter. Templi. f.
213. b. Ioh. Glanvyle, Tho. Owen electi. Cod. niger Hosp. Linc. f. 426. a.
Christoph. Yelverton constit. unus Serve. dominae Reginae ad Legem. 10 Maii.
Pat. 31 Eliz. p. 9. 1590. 32. Tho. S^agge constit. unus Serve. deminae Reginae
ad Legem. 29 Apr. Pat. 32 Eliz. p. 4. 1591. 33. 1592. 34. Tho. Egerton miles,
constit. 2 Iunii. Pat. 34 Eliz. p. 7. Edw. Coke arm. constit. 16 Iunii. Pat. 34
Eliz. p. 7. Will. Fletewood constit. unus Serve. dominae Reginae ad Legem. 27
Ian. Pat. 34 Eliz. p. 15. 1593. 35. The. Owen constit. unus Serve. dominae
Reginae ad Legem. 25 Ian. Pat. 35 Eliz. p. 6. 1594. 36. Tho. Egerton miles,
constit. 10 Apr. Pat. 36 Eliz. p. 5. Edwardus Coke, constit. 10 Apr. Pat. 36
Eliz. p. 13. Edw. Heron ad statum et gradum Serve. ad Legem evectus Term. Hill.
Memoranda prothonoth. de com. Banco. Ric. Lewkenor, Petrus Warburton, Ric.
Branthwaite, Ioh. Savile, Ioh. Heyle, Tho. Fleming, David Williams, Matthew.
Ewens, Ioh. Spurling ad gradum Serve. ad Legem suscipiendum vocati. T. R. apud
Westminster. 29 Nov. Pat. 36 Eliz. p. 13. Georgius King smill electus similiter. Cod.
niger Hosp. Linc. f. 485. b. and 497. a. Georgius Kingsmill constitutus unus
Serve. dominae Reginae ad Legem. T. R. apud Westminster. 19 Martii. Pat. 36 Eliz. p.
13. Will. Daniell similiter. T. R. apud West^. 9 Febr. Ibid. 1595. 37. Tho.
Flemyng arm. constit. 6 Nov. Pat. 37 Eliz. p. 9. Tho. Flemyng a statu et gradu
Servientis ad Legem exoneratus. T. R. apud Westminster. 5 Nov. Pat. 37 Eliz. p. 9.
An. D. An. R. Cancel. Angl. and Custod. Sig. Thesaurariorum. Justice. ad Plac.
coram Rege. Iusticiariorum de Banco. Baronum de Scaccario. 1596. Eliz. R. 38.
Thomas Egertonus eques aur. and Magister. Rotul. Cancellariae, habuit custodiam
magni Sigilli ^bi commissum 6 Maii. Claus. 38 Eliz. p. 14. in dorso. 1597. 39.
Franciscus Gaudy constit. 30 Nov. Rot. Pat. de diversis annis, in quo de hoc
anno 39. Tho. Meade constit. 30. Nov. Rot. Pat. de diversis annis, in quo de
hoc anno 39. 1598. 40. Ioh. Glanvile constit. 30 Iunii. Pat. 40 Eliz. p. 6.
Ioh. Savile constit. 1 Iulii. Pat. 40 Eliz. p. 6. 1599. 41. Tho. Sackvile Baro
Buck^urst constit. Thesaur. 15 Maii. Pat. 41 Eliz. p. 10. m. 21. Georgius
Kingsmill constit. Octab. Purif. 1600. 42. 1601. 43. Petrus Warburton constit.
24 Nov. Pat. 43 Eliz. p. 5. 1602. 44. Christoph. Yelverton constit. 8 Febr.
Plac. de T. Hill. 44 Eliz. rot. 20. 1603. 45. 1603. Iac. R. 1. R. Iac. per
Billam sign. 5 Apr. an. primo regni sui Angl. appunctuavit magnum Sigillum
dominae nuper Reginae Eliz. adtunc in custodia Tho. Egerton mil. esse magnum
Sigil. Angliae don^e, etc. Posteaque scil. 29 Iunii prox. seq. dirupto dicto
Sigillo, idem Rex aliud Sigillum imagine, Armis and titulis honorum s^i ipsius,
dicto T. Egerton liberavit: and 24 Iulii ipsum Tho. (tun^ in Baronem Ellesmere
creatum) Angliae Cancellarium constituit. Claus. 1 Iac. p. 12. in dorso. Thomas
dominus Buck^urst constitutus Thesaur. ad vitam, 17 Apr. Pat. 1 Iac. p. 14.
Ioh. Popham miles, constit. Capit. Justice. 11 Apr. Pat. 1 Iac. p. 14.
Franciscus Gaudy constit. 25 Apr. Ibid. p. 24. Christoph. Yelverton constit. 29
Apr. Ibid. Edw. Fenner constit. 29 Apr. Ibid. p. 14. David Williams constit. 4
Febr. Ibid. p. 5. Edm. Anderson constit. Capit. Justice. 11 Apr. Pat. 1 Iac. p.
24. Georgius Kingsmill constit. 19 Apr. Ibid. Petrus Warburton constit. 21
April. Ibid. Thomas Walmisley constit. 29 Apr. Ibid. p 14. Will. Daniell
constit. 3 Febr. Ibid. p. 5. Ioh. Savile constit. 4 Apr. Pat. 1 Iac. p. 24.
Ioh. Sotherton, Rob. Clerk constit. 14 Apr. Ibid. p. 24. Will. Peryam miles,
constit. Capit. Baro 26 Apr. Ibid. p. 14. An. D. An. R. Magist. Rotulorum.
Attornar. Regis generalium. Solicitar. Regi generalium. Servientium ad Legem.
1596. Eliz. R. 38. Edw. Drew Serve. Reginae. Mich. 38 Eliz. Crokes Rep. (3^)
514. 1597. 39. 1598. 40. Christoph. Yelverton constit. unus Serve. dominae
Reginae ad Legem 11 Maii. Pat. 40 Eliz. p. 1. 1599. 41. Georgius Kingsmill
constit. Serve. dominae Reginae ad Legem 8 Febr. Pat. 41 Eliz. p. 13. 1600. 42.
1601. 43. Edmundus Pelham ad statum and gradum, etc. evectus, Term. Mich. 43
and 44 Eliae. Memoranda Prothonoth. de Com. Banco. 1602. 44. Ioh. Heal
constit. unus Serve. dominae Reginae ad Legem 16 Maii. Pat. 44 Eliz. p. 10.
1603. 45. Henr. Hubart electus. Cod. niger Hosp. Linc. f. 204. b. Edw. Philips,
Augustinus Nicholls electi T. Hill. Regist. medii Templi f. 320. a. 1603. Iac.
R. I. Edw. Bruce constit. 18 Maii. Pat. 1. Iac. p. 2. Edw. Coke arm. constit.
22 Apr. Pat. 1 Iac. p. 14. Tho. Fleming constit. 2 Apr. Pat. 1 Iac. p. 14. Ioh.
Crook, Tho. Coventre, Laur. Tanfeild, Tho. Foster, Rob. Barker Electi....
Febr. ad recipiendum gradum Serve. ad Legem Term. Pasch. seq. Regist. inter.
Templi. f. 47. b. Ioh. Shirley, Georgius Snigg, Iac. Altham, Ric. Hutton ad
statum and gradum Serve. ad Legem asciti T. Pasch. 1 Iac. Crokes Rep. f. 1. Rob.
Houghton, Tho. Harris electi. Cod. niger Hosp. Linc. f. 207. a. Iac. Heal
constit^ unus Serve. R. ad Legem 22 Apr. Pat. 1 Iac. p. 14. Edw. Philips
similiter 18 Maii. Ibid. p. 2. Ioh. Croke miles, constit. Serve. ad Legem 29
Maii. Ibid. p. 18. Iac. Ley similiter 22 Nov. Ibid. p. 4. Ioh. Doderidge
similiter 20 Ian. Ibid. p. 21. An. D. An. R. Cancel. Angl. and Custod. Sig.
Thesaurariorum. Justice. ad Plac. coram Rege. Iusticiariorum de Banco. Baronum
de Scaccario. 1604. Iac. R. 2. Georgius Saigg constit. 14 Oct. Pat. 2 Iac. p.
7. Tho. Flemyag (solic. R. generalis) constit. capit. Baro 27 Oct. Pat. 2 Iac.
p. 21. 1605. 3. Laurentius Tanfeild constit. 13 Ian. Pat. 3 Iac. p. 2.
Franciscus Gaudy constit. Capit. Justice. 26 Aug. Pat. 3 Iac. p. 3. Tho.
Coventre. Fin. levat. Oct. Hill. 3 Iac. 1606. 4. Edw. Coke miles, constit.
Capit. Justice. 30 Iunii. Pat. 4. Iac. p. 20. Nowellus Sotherton constit. 8
Iulii. Pat. 4 Iac. p. 20. Ioh. Altham constit. 9 Febr. Pat. 4 Iac. p. 28. 1607.
5. Tho. Fleming Capit. Justice. constit. 25 Iunii. Pat. 5 Iac. p. 14. Ioh.
Crook miles, constit. 25 Iunii. Pat. 5 Iac. p. 14. Tho. Foster miles, constit.
24 Nov. Pat. 5 Iac. p. 6. Laur. Tanfeild constit. Capit. Baro 25 Iunii. Pat. 5
Iac. p. 14. Edw. Heron miles, constit. 5 Nov. Pat. 5 Iac. p. 6. 1608. 6. Rob.
Comes Sarum Constit. These. 4 Maii. Pat. 6 Iac. p. 30. and p. 34. 1609. 7. Edw.
Bromley constit. 6 Febr. Pat. 7 Iac. p. 32. 1610. 8. Tho. Casar constit. 26
Maii. Pat. 8 Iac. p. 58. Ioh. Sotherton constit. 24 Oct. Pat. 8 Iac. p. 55.
1611. 9. Humfr. Winche constit. 7 Nov. Pat. 9 Iac. p. 10. 1612. 10. Ioh.
Doderidge miles, constit. 25 Nov. Pat. 10 Iac. p. 4. Augustinus Nicholls miles,
constit. 26 Nov. Pat. 10 Iac. p. 4. Revocatae fuerunt istae literae patentes 28
Oct. 13 Iac. Pat. 13 Iac. p. 6. An. D. An. R. Magist. Rotulorum. Attornar.
Regis generalium. Solicitar. Regi generalium. Servientium ad Legem. 1604. Iac.
R. 2. Ioh. Doderidge exoncratus a gradu Serve. ad Legem 29 Oct. Pat. 2 Iac. p.
21. 1605. 3. Tho. Coventre constit. Serve. Regis ad Legem 13 Ian. Pat. 3 Iac. p.
2. Henr. Hobert miles, a statu and gradu Serve. ad Legem exoneratus 2 Nov. Pat.
3 Iac. p. 16. 1606. 4. Henr. Hobert. miles, constit. 4 Iulii. Pat. 4 Iac. p.
20. Edw. Coke ad statum and gradum Serve. ad Legem a^citus 20 Iunii. Crokes Rep.
(2) 125. Ioh. Davies ad statum, etc. evectus Term. Trin. Memoranda prothonoth.
de com. Banco. Humfr. Winche ad statum ut supra vocatus Term. Trin. Cod. niger
Hosp. Linc. (6.) f. 339. b. 1607. 5. Franc. Basin miles, constit. 25 Iunii.
Pat. 5 Iac. p. 14. Ioh. Doderidge constit. unus Serve. R. ad Legem 25 Iunii.
Pat. 5 Iac. p. 14. 1608. 6. Edw. Philips miles, constit. 2 Dec. Pat. 6 Iac. p.
27. 1609. 7. Ioh. Denham arm. ad statum and gradum Serve. ad Legem ascitus Term.
Pasch. Brev. R. de a. 7 Iac. Edw. Bromley similiter Term. Hill. Brev. R. de
^odem anno. 1610. 8. Julius Caesar miles, constit. Magist. Rotul. in
reversione, post mortem Edw. Philips militis. T. R. apud Westminster. 16 Ian. Pat. 8
Iac. p. 39. Henr. Mountagu miles Recordator Civit. Land. ad statum and gradum
Serve. ad Legem suscipiendum ascitus in Octab. Purif. T. R. apud Westminster. 4 Febr.
Brev. R. de an. 8 Iac. Henr. Mountagu constit. unus Serve. R. ad Legem 11 Febr.
Pat. 8 Iac. p. 19. 1611. 9. Will. Methwould arm. ad statum. and gradum Serve. ad
Legem suscipiendum in xv. Martini electus. T. R. aapud Westminster. 23 Nov. Ex bund.
Brev. R. de an. 9 Iac. 1612. 10. Ioh. Davis constit. Serve. Regis ad Legem 30
Iunii. Pat. 10 Iac. p. 10. An. D. An. R. Cancel. Angl. and Custod. Sig.
Thesaurariorum. Justice. ad Plac. coram Rege. Iusticiariorum de Banco. Baronum
de Scaccario. 1613. Iac. R. 11. Edw. Coke miles, constit. Capit. Justice. 25
Oct. Pat. 11 Iac. p. 5. Rob. Hughton constit. 21 Apr. Ibid. Henr. Hobert
constit. Capit. Justice. 26 Nov. Pat. 11 Iac. p. 5. Revocatae fuerunt istae
literae Pat. 1 Apr. 15 Iac. Pat. 15 Iac. p. 20. 1614. 12. Tho. Comes Suffolciae
constitutus Thesaur. 11 Iulii. Pat. 12 Iac. p. 24. 1615. 13. August. Nicholls
miles, constit. 29 Oct. Pat. 13 Iac. p. 6. 1616. 14. Franc. Bacon eques aur.
and Attornatus Regis generalis, habuit custod. magni Sigilli sibi commissum 7
martii. Claus. 16 Iac. in dorso part. 15. Henr. Mountagu miles, constit.
Capitalis Justice. 16 Nov. ( Edw. Coke milite amoto) 15 Nov. Pat. 14 Iac. p. 2.
1617. 15. Claus. 16 Iac. in dorso p. 15. Idem, Franciscus, Baro verulam,
constit. Cancellarius Angliae 4 Ian. ^ [Abdicatus ob corruptelas 3 Maii, ^.
1621.] Henr. Hobart miles, constit. Capit. Justice. 2 Apr. Pat. 15 Iac. p. 20.
Ric. Hutton miles, constit. 3 Maii. Ibid. p. 11. Ioh. Denham constit. 2 Maii.
Pat. 15 Iac. p. 1. 1618. 16. Iacobus Ley constit. Capit. Justice. 29 Ian. Pat.
18 Iac. p. 19. Tho. Chamberlain miles, (Serve. ad Legem) constit. 8 Oct. Pat. 18
Iac. p. 5. 1619. 17. 1620. 18. Custodia magni Sigil. commis. Henr. Vic^com.
Mandevill, domino Praes. Council. L^dov. Duci Richm. Will. Comiti Pembrochae,
and Iulio Caesar eq. (...) Magist. Rotul. in Quadragesima. Henr. Mountagu
miles, constit. Thesaur. 14 Dec. Pat. 18 Iac. p. 6. An. D. An. R. Magist.
Rotulorum. Attornar. Regis generalium. Solicitar. Regi generalium. Servientium
ad Legem. 1613. Iac. R. 11. Franc. Bacon miles, constit. 27 Oct. Pat. 11 Iac.
p. 5. Hearicus Yelvertoa constit. 29 Oct. Pat. 11 Iac. p. 5. 1614. 12. Julius
Caesar miles, constit. 1 Oct. Pat. 12 Iac. p. 5. Rob. Hicham miles, electus ad
statum and gradum Serve. ad Legem suscip. 25 Iunii. Ranulphus Crew electus, etc.
1 Iulii. Pat. 12 Iac. p. 24. Ex bund. Brev. R. de an. 12 Iac. Tho. Richardson,
Leonardus Bautrey, Ioh. Moore, Carolus Chibborne, electi xv Mich. Cod. niger
Hosp. Li^c. f. 573. b. Tho. Athow arm. Henr. Finch arm. Tho. Chamberlain arm.
Franc. Harvey, Georgius Wild arm. Franc. More arm. Will. Touse arm. similiter
electi ad statum and gradum Serve. ad Legem suscepturi in xv Mich. T. R. apud
Westminster. Ex bund. Brev. R. de (...) 12 Iac. Festum in magna Aula medii Templi
Land. 1619. 13. 1616. 14. Henr. Yelverton miles, constit. 12 Martii. Pat. 14
Iac. p. 3. Sequestratus ab executione dicti Officii 27 Iunii 18 Iac. Pat. 18
Iac. p. 3. Tho. Coventre constit. 14 Martii. Pat. 14. Iac. p. 3. Hearicus
Fy^che constit. unus Serve. R. ad Legem 11 Iunii. Pat. 14 Iac. p. 6. Edw. Henden
ad statum and gradum Serve. ad Legem evectus Term. Mich. Memoranda Prothonoth.
de Com. Banco. Rob. Hicham miles, constit. Serve. Regis ad Legem 4 Ian. Pat. 14
Iac. p. 2. Will. Jones ad statum and gradum Serve. ad Legem erectus 14 Martii.
Ibid. p. 3. 1617. 15. Franc. Ashley arm. ad statum and gradum Serve. ad Legem
erectus 15 Febr. Pat. 15 Iac. p. 11. 1618. 16. Tho. Coventre miles, constit. 11
Ian. Pat. 18 Iac. p. 16. Roh. Heath arm. constit. 22 Ian. Pat. 18 Iac. p. 16.
1619. 17. 1620. 18. Ioh. Shirley ad statum and gradum Serve. ad Legem evectus T.
Pasch. Memoranda Prothonoth. de Com. Banco. Iac. Whitlock similiter Term. Trin.
Ibid. An. D. An. R. Cancel. Angl. and Custod. Sig. Thesaurariorum. Justice. ad
Plac. coram Rege. Iusticiariorum de Banco. Baronum de Scaccario. 1621. Iac. R.
19. Ioh. Williams, S. Th. D. and D^canus Eccl. colleg. Westminster. (postea Episc.
Linc.) constit. Custos Sigil. 10 Iulii. Claus. 19 Iac. p. 13. in dorso.
Leonellus dominus Cranfeild constit. Thesaur. 13 Oct. Pat. 19 Iac. p. 7. Will.
Jones. Fin. levat. men's. Mich. 19 Iac. 1622. 20. 1623. 21. Tho. Chamberlain
miles, constit. 20 Oct. Pat. 21 Ia^. p. 1. Georgius Crook miles, constit. 11
Febr. Ibid. p. 4. 1624. 22. Commissio Ric. Weston militi, ad exercendum
officium Thesaurarii Scacc. Regis, ad Placitum Regis. T. R. apud Westminster. 25
Maii. Pat. 22 Iac. p. 16. Iac. Leye miles and Baron. constit. Thesaur. 20 Dec.
Pat. 22 Iac. p. 4. Randolp. Crew miles, constit. 26 Ian. Capit. Justice. Pat. 22
Iac. p. 4. Tho. Chamberlain miles, constit. 17 Oct. Ib. p. 1. Will. Jones miles
similiter. Iac. Whitlock miles, 18 Oct. Ibid. p. 1. Will. Jones miles, constit.
16 Oct. Pat. 22 Iac. p. 1. Francisc. Harvey (Serve. ad Legem,) constitutus 18
Oct. Pat. 22 Iac. p. 1. 1625. Car. I. 1. Tho. Coventre eques aur. Attorn.
generalis domini Regis, constit. Custos magni Sigilli 1 Nov. Henr. Yelverton
constit. 10 Maii. Pat 1 Car. p. 4. Georgius Croke. Fin. levat. xv Pasch. 1 Car.
1. Ioh. Walter miles, constit. Capit. Baro 10 Maii. Pat. 1 Car. p. 4. Tho.
Trevor miles, constitutus 10 Maii. Pat. 1 Car. p. 4. 1626. 2. Nich. Hide miles,
constit. Capit. Justice. 31 Ian. Pat. 2 Car. p. 7. Tho. Richardson constit.
Capit. Justice. 28 Nov. Pat. 2 Car. p. 21. An. D. An. R. Magist. Rotulorum.
Attornar. Regis generalium. Solicitar. Regi generalium. Servientium ad Legem.
1621. Iac. R. 19. 1622. 20. 1623. 21. Georgius Crook, Franc. Crawley,
Heneagius Finch, Rice Gwyn, Humfr. Davenport, Ricardus Diggs, Ioh. Darcy,
Egremondus Thinn, Thomas Hetley, Ioh. Hoskyas ad statum and gradum Serve. ad
Legem suscipiendum asciti 26 Iunii. Pat. 21 Iac. p. 12. Richardus Am^urst
similiter 2 Aug. Ibid. Tho. Crew similiter 21 Sept. Ibid. Henr. Bynge, Ioh.
Bridgeman, Ioh. Brampston similiter 22 Sept. Ibid. Festum in magna Aula medii
Templi Load. Georgius Crook in unum Serve. domini Regis ad Legem erectus 18
Oct. Pat. 21 Iac. p. 10. Ioh. Llhoyd ad statum and gradum Serve. ad Legem
ascitus 29 Dec. Pat. 21 Iac. p. 12. 1624. 22. Tho. Richardson miles, similiter
constit. Serve. Regis 20 Febr. Pat. 22 Iac. p. 4. Tho. Crew miles, constit. unus
Serve. domini Regis ad Legem 21 Febr. Pat. 22 Iac. p. 4. 1625. Car. I. 1. Rob.
Heath constit. 31 Oct. Pat. 1 Car. p. 24. Ric. Shilton constit. 1 Nov. Pat. 1
Car. p. 24. Ioh. Walter miles, Tho. Trevor miles, ad statum and gradum Serve. ad
Legem asciti 8 Apr. Brev. R. de an. 1 Car. Ioh. Walter miles, constit. unus
Serve. domini Regis ad Legem 9 Apr. Pat. 1 Car. p. 4. Henr. Yelverton miles, ad
statum and gradum Serve. ad Legem ascitus 30 Apr. Ibid. Franc. Ashley similiter
5 Maii. Ibid. Humfr. Davenport miles, constit. Serve. Regis ad Legem 9 Maii.
1626. 2. Nich. Hide arm. similiter 21 Ian. Pat. 2 Car. p. 11. Rowleyus Ward ad
statum and gradum Serve. ad Legem vocatus 12 Febr. Pat. 2 Car. p. 15. Rob.
Bartley similiter 28 Febr. Pat. 2 Car. p. 15. An. D. An. R. Cancel. Angl. and
Custod. Sig. Thesaurariorum. Justice. ad Plac. coram Rege. Iusticiariorum de
Banco. Baronum de Scaccario. (...) Car. I. 3. Will. Jones miles, constit. 3
Apr. Georgius Vernon (Serve. ad Legem) constit. 13 Nov. Pat. 3 Car. p. 8. 1628.
4. Ric. dominus Weston constit. These. 15 Iulii. Pat. 4 Car. p. 25. Georgius
Crook miles, constit. 9. Oct. Pat. 4 Car. p. 27. 1629. 5. Humfr. Davenport
miles, constitutus 2 Febr. Pat. 5 Car. p. 4. 1630. 6. Humfr. Davenport miles,
constit. Capit. Baro 10 Ian. Pat. 6 Car. p. 13. 1631. 7. Tho. Richardson miles,
constit. Capit. Justice. 24 Oct. Pat. 7 Car. p. 2. Roh. Heath miles, constit.
Capit. Justice. 26 Oct. Pat. 7 Car. p. 2. Georgius Vernon miles, constit. 8
Maii. Ibid. p. 18. Iac. Weston constit. 16 Maii. Pat. 7 Car. p. 18. Ioh. Paget
similiter 24 Oct. Ibid. p. 2. 1632. 8. Rob. Berkley miles, constit. 11 Oct.
Pat. 8 Car. p. 1. Franc. Crawley (Serve. ad Legem) constit. 11 Oct. Pat. 8 Car.
p. 1. 1633. 9. Commissio Franc. domino Cottington ad exequendum officium
Thesaurarii durante mora domini R. in Scotia. T. R. etc. 30 Maii. Pat. 9 Car.
p. 4. in dorso. 1634. 10. Commissio Willielmo Cantuar. Archiep. and aliis, ad
officium Thesaurarii exequendum. T. R. etc. 25 Martii. Pat. 10 Car. p. 36. in
dorso. Ioh. Finche miles, constit. 14 oct. Pat. 10 Car. p. 39. Ric. Weston
constit. 30 Apr. Pat. 10 Car. p. 23. 1635. 11. Will. Episc. Land. constit.
Thesaur. 9 Martii. Pat. 11 Car. p. 1. Ioh. Brampston miles, constit. Capit.
Justice. 14 Apr. Pat. 11 Car. p. 18. Roh. Heath amoto, Ioh. Finche miles,
constit. Capit. Justice. 21 Ian. Pat. 11 Car. p. 10. An. D. An. R. Magist.
Rotulorum. Attornar. Regis generalium. Solicitar. Regi generalium. Servientium
ad Legem. 1627. Car. I. 3. Rob. Barkley constit. Serve. Regis ad Legem 12 April.
Pat. 3 Car. p. 8. Roh. Callice ad statum and gradum Serve. ad Legem vocatus 12
Apr. Ibid. will. Ayloff constit. Serve. Regis ad Legem 19 Apr. Ibid. Georgius
Vernon ad statum, etc. Serve. ad legem vocatus 4 Iulii. Ibid. 1628. 4. 1629. 5.
Humphr. May miles, constit. Magist. Rotul. in reversione, post mortem I^lii
Caesar. militis, 10 Apr. Pat. 5 Car. p. 19. 1630. 6. Dudleyus Diggs miles,
constit. Magist. Rotul. in reversione, etc. 29 Nov. Pat. 6 Car. p. 6. Iac.
Weston ad gradum and statum Serve. ad Legem vocatus 19 Martii. Pat. 6 Car. p.
16. 1631. 7. Will. Noye arm. constit. 27 Oct. Pat. 7 Car. p. 2. Roh. Heath
miles, ad gradum, etc. Serve. ad Legem vocatu^ 26 Oct. Pat. 7 Car. p.... 1632.
8. 1633. 9. Ric. Weston arm. ad statum and gradum Serve. ad Legem ascitus 25
Febr. Pat. 9 Car. p. 13. 1634. 10. Ioh. Banks miles, constit. 27 Sept. Pat. 10
Car. p. 32. Edw. Litleton arm. constit. 17 Oct. Pat. 10 Car. p. 39. Ioh.
Brampston constit. Serve. Regis ad Legem 8 Iulii. Pat. 10 Car. p. 23. Ioh.
Finche miles, ad statum and gradum Serve. ad Legem ascitus 8 Sept. Pat. 10 Car.
p. 36. 1635. 11. Rad. Whitfeild miles, ad statum and gradum Serve. ad Legem
ascitus ^1 Apr. Pat. 11 Car. p. Tho. Mallet similiter, 15 Maii. Pat. 11 Car.
p.... An. D. An. R. Cancel. Angl. and Custod. Sig. Thesaurariorum. Justice. ad
Plac. coram Rege. Iusticiariorum de Banco. Baronum de Scaccario. 1636. Car. 1.
12. 1637. 13. 1638. 14. Edmundus Reeve Serve. ad Legem, constitutus 14 Martii.
Inter Memoranda Clerici de Corona in Canc. de hoc anno. Will. Page arm.
constit. 29 Oct. Pat. 14 Car. p. 27. (quartus Baro.) Edw. Henden similiter 22
Ian. Ibid. 1639. 15. Defuncto Thom^ Barone Coventre, liberatum suit magnum
Sigillum Ioh. Finch eq. aur. Capitali Justice. de Banco, 23 Ian. qui inde
Iuramentum praestitit. Inter Memoranda Clerici Coronae in Cancellaria de hoc
anno. Edw. Litleton constit. Capit. Justice. 27 Ian. Pat. 15 Car. p. I. Rob.
Foster constit. 27 Ian. Ibid. 1640. 16. Iohanne domino Finche ad parts exteras
fugiente, magnum Sigil. Edwardo Litletono eq. aur. Capit. Justice. de Banco
liberatum erat 23 Ian. qui Iuramentum ^nde praestitit, etc. Inter Memoranda
Clerici Corona in Canc. de hoc anno. Rob. Heath miles, unus Serve. domini Regis
ad Legem constit. unus Justice. ad Plac. etc. 23 Ian. Inter Memoranda Clerici de
Corona in Canc. de hoc anno. Ioh. Banks miles, constit. Capit. Justice. 29 Ian.
Inter Memoranda Clerici de Corona in Canc. de hoc anno. 1641. 17. Tho. Mallet
Serve. ad Legem, constit. 1 Iulii. Inter Memoranda Cler. de Corona, etc. 1642.
18. Franc. Bacon Serve. ad Legem, constit. T. R. apud Bridgnorth 14 Oct. Inter
Memoranda Clerici de Corona iu Canc. de hoc anno. Tho. Leek^ Arm. constit. 25
Nov. Inter Memoranda Clerici de Corona in Canc. de hoc anno. 1643. 19. Franc.
dominus Cottington constit. Thesaur. ( Oxonii) 3 Oct. Inter Memoranda Clerici
de Corona in Canc. de hoc anno. Roh. Heath miles, unus Justice. ad Plac. etc.
constit. Capit. Justice. ( Oxonii) 31 Oct. Inter Memoranda Cler. Coronae. Rob.
Brerewood miles, constit. unus Justice. etc. 31 Ian. Ibid. Ric. Lane miles,
Attornatu^ Carolo Principi, constitutus Capit. Baro Scacc. ( Oxonii) 25 Ian.
Inter Memoranda Clerici Corona in Canc. de hoc anno. An. D. An. R. Magist.
Rotulorum. Attornar. Regis generalium. Solicitar. Regi generalium. Servientium
ad Legem. 1636. Car. I. 12. Julius Caesar eques aur. Magister Rotulorum obitt
12 Apr. Esc. 13 Car. 1. p. 4. n. 159. Dudleius Diggs eques aur. cui dictum
Officium in reversione (ut praesertur) concessum erat, successit ei. Henr.
Clarke arm. Ric. Cresheld arm. Roh. Foster arm. Nath. Finche arm. Timoth.
Leving arm. Ioh. Wild arm. Tho. Milward arm. Ioh. Godbold arm. Edm. Reve arm.
Arth. Turner arm. ad statum and gradum Serve. ad Legem alciti 20 Maii. Pat. 12
Car. p. 21. in dorso. Gilb. Boon similiter 10 Iulii. Ibid. p. 2. in dorso.
Rob. Heath miles similiter 12 Oct. Ib. p. 25. Phil. Iermyn similiter 19 Ian.
Ibid. p. 2. in dorso. 1637. 13. Ioh. Glanvile ad statum and gradum Serve. ad
Legem ascitus 20 Maii. Pat. 13 Car. p. 40. 1638. 14. Mortuo Dudl. Diggs eq.
aur. 18 Martii, Carolus Caesar eques aur. constit. est Magister Rotulorum.
1639. 15. Edw. Herbert miles, constit. 25 Ian. Pat. 15 Car. p. 1. Edw. Litleton
ad gradum and statum Serve. ad Legem ascitus 18 Ian. Pat. 15 Car. p. 1. 1640.
16. Edw. Herbert miles, (Solicitator generalis domini Regis) constitutus 29
Ian. Inter Memoranda Clerici de Corona in Canc. de hoc anno. Oliverus S. John
De Lincolnes Inn Arm. constit. 29 Ian. Inter Memoranda Cleriei de Corona, de
hoc anno. Nath. Finch^ constit. Serve. dom. R. ad Legem 10 Maii. Pat. 16 Car. p.
12. Edw. Atkins, Rob. Brerewood, Franc. Bacon, Ioh. Green, Roh. Hide, Will.
Litleton, Petrus Phesant, Hent. Roll, Ioh. Stone, Edw. Tailor, Ioh. Wightwick
ad statum and gradum Serve. ad Legem asciti 19 Maii. Pat. 16 Car. p. 12. Sampson
Evre Serve. ad Legem, constit. Serve. Regis ad Legem 15 Iunii. Inter Memoranda
Clerici de Corona in Canc. de hoc anno. Ioh. Glanvile constit. unus Serve. R. ad
Legem 6 Iulii. Pat. 16 Car. p. 12. 1641. 17. 1642. 18. Johannes Culpeper miles,
constit. 30 Ian. Inter Memoranda Clerici de Corona in Canc. de hoc anno. 1643.
19. Tho. Gardner eques auratus (Recordator Civit. Land.) constit. etc. T. R.
apud Oxon. 30 Oct. Inter Memoranda Clerici de Corona in Canc. de hoc anno. Ric.
Lane eques aur. and Attornatus Carol^ principi ad statum and gradum Serve. ad
Legem vocatus ( Oxonii.) 23 Ian. Inter Memoranda Clerici de Corona in Canc. de
hoc anno. An. D. An. R. Cancel. Angl. and Custod. Sig. Thesaurariorum. Justice.
ad Plac. coram Rege. Iusticiariorum de Banco. Baronum de Scaccario. 1644. Car.
1. 20. 1645. 21. Defuncto Edward. Barone Litleton, magni Sigilli Angliae
Custode, liberatum fuit dictum Sigillum Ricardo Lane equ. aur. Capit. Baroni de
Scacc. custodiendum, ( Oxonii) 30 Augusti. Inter Memoranda Clerici de Coroia in
Cancellaria de hoc anne. DOMINANTE 1646. 22. 1647. 23. 1648. 24. 1649. Car. II.
1. 1650. 2. 1651. 3. PERDUBLLIONE 1652. 4. 1653. 5. 1654. 6. 1655. 7. 1656. 8.
1657. 9. Edw. Ride Equ. aur. and Cancellar. Scacc. sereniss. ^uper Regi Car.
primo, habuit magnum Sigillum sibi liberatum 13 Ian. Idem Edw. constit. summus
Angliae Cancel. apud Bruges in Flandri^ 29 Ian. IUSTITIUM. 1658. 10. 1659. 11.
An. D. An. R. Magist. Rotulorum. Attornar. Regis generalium. Solicitar. Regi
generalium. Servientium ad Legem. 1644. Car. I. 20. 1645. 21. DOMINATE 1646.
22. 1647. 23. 1648. 24. 1649. Car. II. 1. 1650. 2. 1651. 3. PERDUELLIONE 1652.
4. 1653. 5. 1654. 6. 1655. 7. 1656. 8. 1657. 9. IUSTITIUM. 1658. 10. 1659. 11.
An. D. An. R. Cancel. Angl. and Custod. Sig. Thesaurariorum. Justice. ad Plac.
coram Rege. Iusticiariorum de Banco. Baronum de Scaccario. 1660. Car. II. 12.
Thomas Comes Southampt. constit. summus Angliae Thesaurarius 8 Sept. Inter
Memoranda Clerici de Corona in Canc. de hoc anne. Tho. Mallet miles, constit.
unus Justice. ad Plac. coram Rege tenenda assignatcrum 31 Maii. Inter Memoranda
Clerici de Corona in Canc. de hoc anno. Tho. Twysden Serve. ad Legem, constit.
27 Iunii. Ibid. Rob. Foster miles, unus Justice. de Banco, constit. Capit.
Justice. ad Plac. coram Rege tenenda 22 Oct. Ibid. Wadham Windham Serve. ad
Legem, constit. unus Justice. ad Plac. coram Rege tenenda 24 Nov. Ibid. Rob.
Foster miles, constit. unus Justice. de Banco 31 Maii. Inter Memoranda Clerici
de Coron^ in Cano. de hoc anno. Rob. Hyde miles, similiter. Ibid. Tho. Tyrrel
Serve. ad Legem, similiter constitutus 7 Iulii. Ibid. Orlandus Bridgeman miles,
Capit. Baro Scacc. in Capitalem Justice. de Banco erectus 22 Oct. Ibid. Samuel
Brown Serve. ad Legem, constit. unus Justice. de Banco 3 Nov. Ibid. Orlandus
Bridgeman miles, in Capit. Baronem Scacc. erectus 1 Iunii. Inter Memoranda
Clerici de Corona in Canc. de hoc anno. Edw. Atkins Serve. ad Legem, constit.
secu^d* Baro Scacc. 23 Iunii. Ibid. Christopherus Turner Serve. ad Legem,
constit. tertius Baro Scacc. 7 Iulii. Ibid. Matthew. Hale Serve. ad Legem, in
Capit. Baronem de Scacc. erectus 7 Nov. Ibid. 1661. 13. 1662. 14. 1663. 15.
Ioh. Keeling miles, Serve. Regis ad Legem, constit. unus Justice. ad Plac. coram
Rege tenenda 18 Iunii. Inter Memoranda Clerici de Corona in Canc. Rob. Hyde
miles, unus Justice. de Banco, in Capit. Justice. ad Plac. coram Rege tenenda,
erectus 19 Oct. Ibid. Ioh. Archer Serve. ad Legem, constit. unus Justice. de
Banco 4 Nov. Inter Memoranda Clerici de Corona in Canc. de hoc anno. Clemens
Spelman Arm. in Baronem Scacc. erectus 9 Martii. Ibid. Ric. Raynesford miles,
and Serve. ad ^egem, in Baronem Scacc. erectus 16 Nov. Inter Memoranda Clerici
de Corona in Canc* de hoc anno. An. D. An. R. Magist. Rotulorum. Attornar.
Regis generalium. Solicitar. Regi generalium. Servientium ad Legem. 1660. Car.
I. 12. Harbottle Grymston Baronettus, constit. Magister Ro^ul. 3 Nov. Inter
Memoranda Clerici de Corona in Canc. de hoc anno. Galfridus Palmer Arm.
constit. Attornatus Regis generalis 31 Maii. Inter Memoranda Clerici de Corona
in Canc. de hoc anno. Heneagius Finche Arm. constit. Sollicitator Regis
generalis 6 Iunii. Inter Memoranda Clerici de Corona in Canc. de hoc anno.
Orlandus Bridgema^ miles, ad statum and gradum Serve. ad Legem per Breve Regis
datum 31 Maii immediate suscipiendum vocatus. Inter Memoranda Clerici de Corona
in Canc. de ^oc anne. Ioh. Glanvill miles, and Serve. ad Legem, factus Serve.
Regis ad Legem, 6 Iunii. Ibid. The. Widdrington miles, Tho. Beddingfeild miles,
Samuel Brown Arm. Ioh. Glynn Arm. Erasmus Earl Arm. Rob. Bernard miles, Math.
Hale Arm. Ioh. Maynard Arm. Ric. Newdigate Arm. Tho. Twysden Arm. Hugo Tyndham
Arm. Ioh. Fountain Arm. Evans Says Arm. Ioh. Archer Arm. Tho. Walter Arm. per
Breve Regis datum 1 Iunii, ad statum and gradum Serve. ad Legem immediate
suscipiendum vocati. Ibid. Tho. Tirrell Arm. Christoph. Turner Arm. similiter
vocati per Breve Regis datum 4 Iulii. Ibid. Carolus Dalyson miles, Georgius
Bear Arm. Edw. Hoskyns Arm. Wadbam wyndham Arm. Will. Morton miles, Job
Charleton Arm. Ioh. Parker Arm. Ioh. Keeling Arm. Ioh. Merevill Arm. Tho.
Broom Arm. ad dictum gradum suscipiendum voczati a die S. Mich. prox. suturo,
per Breve Regis datum 4 Iulii. Ibid. Johannes Glyn Serve. ad Legem, factus
Serviens Regis ad Legem, 8 Nov. Ibid. Johannes Maynard Serve. ad Legem, factus
Serviens Regis ad Legem, 9 Nov. Ibid. 1661. 13. Will. Wild miles and Bar.
R^car^us Raynesford Arm. Carolus Holloway Arm. Fredericus Hyde Arm. vocati per
Breve Regis datum 5 Oct. ad statum and gradum Serve. ad Legem suscip. tres Mich.
prox. futuro. Inter Memoranda Clerici de Coro^a in Canc. de hoc ano. Ioh.
Keelyng Serve. ad Legem, f^ctus Serviens Regis ad Legem, 6 Nov. Ibid. Will.
Wild miles and Baronettus, and Recordator Civitatis Land. factus Serve. Regis
ad Legem, 10 Nov. Ibid. 1062. 14. 1663. 15. Will. Morton miles, Serviens ad
Legem, factus Serviens Regis ad Legem, 1 Iulii. Inter Memoranda Clerici de
Corona in Canc. de hoc anne. An. D. An. R. Cancel. Angl. and Custod. Sig.
Thesaurariorum. Justice. ad Plac. coram Rege. Iusticiariorum de Banco. Baronum
de Scaccario. 166^. Car. II. 16. 1665. 17. Ioh. Keeling Miles, unus Justice. ad
Plac. coram Rege constitutus Capitales Justice. 21 Nov. Inter Memora^nda Clerici
de Corona in Ca^c. de hoc anno. Will* Morto^ Miles, Serv^ Regis ad Legem,
constitutus unus Justice. ad Plac. corain Rege 2^ Nov. Ibid. 1666. 18. An. D.
An. R. Magist. Rotulorum. Attornar. Regis generalium. Solicitar. Regi
generalium. Servientium ad Legem. 1664. Car. II. 16. 1665. 17. 1666. 18.

Such literal Faults as are of small moment, or mistakes in any of the Pages,
may be easily discerned by the Judicious Reader; and the other thus corrected.
In the Historical Part.
Page 15. col. 1. lin. 26. Sapientum. Page 25. col. 2. l. 5. or Sok. Page 34.
col. 1. l. 32. and the said Bishop. Page 35. col. 2. l. 7. Communitatis. Page
46. col. 2. l. 20. Ardern. Page 64. col. 2. l. 7. Marches. Page 66. col. 1. l.
43. a Veiw. Page 79. col. 1. l. 17. ^e. Page 98. col. 1. l. 11. dele ( of which
House he was.) Page 120. col. 2. l. 52. injusti. Page 146. col. 1. l. 32.
later. Page 210. col. 2. l. 46. been chosen. Page 253. col. 2. l. 27. Clerk.
Page 254. col. 1. line 18. Irby. Page 255. col. 1. l. 28. Noye. Page 260. col.
2. l. 7. Hoper. Page 261. col. 2. l. 16. Owin. Page 264. col. 1. l. 46. Air.
Page 268. col. 1. l. 18. more frequent. Page 271. col. 1. l. 35. of Pourtpole.
Page 275. col. 1. l. 33. pain of. Page 285. col. 1. l. 6. Commons. Page 286.
col. 2. in margin, dele (...) and (...). Page 310. col. 2. l. 20. and the
Citizens. Page 296. col. 1. l. 6. Attorn. Domin^ Reginae.

In the Chronologique Tables.
Page 5. col. 6. in An. d. 1199. lin. 5. lege Evang. 9 R. 1. Et ibid. l. 12.
lege Dionysii 10 R. 1. Page 42. col. 2. sub Anne 1340. Rob. de Scardeburgh.
Page 49. col. 3. Rob. de Plosle. Page 55. col. 3. Ioh. Tuttebury. Page 61. col.
6. Ioh. Ellarker. Page 74. col. 5. An. D. 1487. dele Ioh. Haugh and pone dictum
nomen sub titulo Justice. de Banco de eodem Anne. Page 96. col. 6. Edw.
Flowerdus. Page 105. col. 6. Rob. Barkley. page 113. col. 6. 1. 18. Tho. Waller.

Note, that in the Registers of the Inns of Court, some names are variously
written; as Branth^ait, sometimes written Branthut: Ienney, sometimes Genney:
Hughes sometimes Huges, (and the like) so that they must be understood to be
the same Persons.


