THREE POEMS Upon the Death of the Late USURPER Oliver Cromwell.

Written By Mr. IO. DRYDON. By Mr. SPRAT, of Oxford. By Mr. EDM. WALLER.


LONDON: Printed by William Wilson, in the Year, 1659. And Reprinted for R.
Baldwin, 1682.

HEROIQE STANZA'S, On the Late USURPER Oliver Cromwell. Written after his
FUNERAL.
ANd now it is time for their Officious have,
Who would before have born him to the Sky,
Like eager Romans, e're all Rites were past,
Did let too soon the Sacred Eagle fly.
(2)
Though our best notes are treason to his fame,
Joined with the loud applause of public voice;
Since Heaven, what praise we offer to his name,
Has rendered too authentic by its choice:
(3)
Though in his praise no Arts can liberal be,
Since they whose Muses have the highest flown,
Add not to his Immmortal Memory,
But do an Act of friendship to their own.
(4)
Yet it is our duty and our interest too,
Such Monuments as we can build to raise;
Lest all the World prevent what we should do,
And claim a Title in him by their Praise.
(5)
How shall I then begin or where conclude,
To draw a Fame so truly Circular?
For in a round what order can be showed,
Where ^ll the parts so equalperfect are?
(6)
His Grandeur he derived from Heaven alone,
For he was Great e're Fortune made him so;
And Wars, like mists that rise against the Sun,
Made him but greater seem not greater grow.
(7)
No borrowed Bays his Temples did adorn,
But to our Crown he did fresh Jewels bring,
Nor was his Virtue poisoned soon as born
With the two early thoughts of being King.
(8)
Fortune (that easy Mistress of the young,
But to her ancient servants coy and hard)
Him at that age her favorites ranked among
When she her best-lov'd Pompey did discard.
(9)
He, private, marked the faults of others sway,
And set as Sea marks for himself to shun;
Not like rash Monacrhs who theiry outh betray
By Acts their Age too late would wish undone,
(10)
And yet Dominion was not his design,
We owe that blessing not to him but Heaven,
Which to fair Acts unsought Rewards did join,
Rewnads that less to him than us were given
(11)
Our former Cheifs like sticklers of the War.
First sought to inflame the Parties, then to poise;
The qnarrel loved, but did the cause abhor,
And did not strike to hurt but make a noise.
(12)
War our consumption was their gainful trade,
We inward bled whilst they prolonged our pain:
He fought to end our fighting, and assaid
To stanch the Blood by breathing of the vein.
(13)
Swift and resistless through the Land he past,
Like that bold Greek who did the East subdue;
And made to Battles such Heroic have
As if on wings of Victory he flew
(14)
He fought secure of fortune as of fame,
Till by new Maps the Island might be shown,
Of Conquests which he strewn where e're he came,
Thick as the Galaxy with Stars is sown.
(15)
His Palms though under weights they did not stand,
Still thrived; no Winter could his Laurels fade;
Heaven in his Portraict showed a VVorkman's hand
And drew it perfect yet without a shade.
(16)
Peace was the Prize of all his toyls and care,
Which War had banifh't, and did now restore;
Bolognia's Wall thus mounted in the Air,
To Seat themselves more surely than before.
(17)
Her safty rescued, Ireland to him owes,
And Treacherous Scotland to no interest true,
Yet blessed that fate which did his Arms dispose,
Her Land to Civilize asto subdue.
(18)
Nor was he like those Stars which only shine,
When to pale Mariners they storms portend,
He had his calmer influence; and his Mine
Did Love and Majesty together blend.
(19)
It Is true his Countenance did imprint an awe,
And naturally all Souls to his did bow;
As Wands of Divination downward draw,
And point to Beds where Sovereign Gold dothgrow.
(20)
When past all offerings to Feretrian Jove
He Mars desposd, and Arms to Gowns made yield,
Successful Councels did him soon approve
As fit for close Intrigues, as open field.
(21)
To suppliant Holland he vouchsafed a Peace,
Our once bold Rival in the British Main,
Now tamely glad her unjust claim to cease,
And buy our Friendship with her Idol gain.
(22)
Fame of the asserted Sea through Europe blown
Made France and Spain ambitious of his Love;
Each knew that side must conquer he would own,
And for him fiercely as for Empire strove.
(16)
No sooner was the French man's cause embraced
Than the light Mounsire the grave Don outweigh'd,
His fortune turned the Scale where it was cast,
Though Indian Mines were in the other laid.
(24)
When absent, yet we conquered in his right;
For though some meaner Artist's Skill were shown,
In mingling colors, or in placing light,
Yet still the fair designment was his own.
(25)
For from all tempers he could service draw;
The worth of each with its allay he knew;
And as the Confident of Nature, saw
How she Complexions did divide and brew.
(26)
Or he their single virtues did survay
By intuition in his own large Breast,
Where all the rich Ideas of them lay,
That were the Rule and measure to the rest.
(27)
When such Heroique Virtue Heaven sets out.
The Stars like Commons sullenly obey;
Because it drains them when it comes about,
And therefore is a Tax they seldom pay.
(28)
From this high-spring our foraign Conquests flow,
Which yet more glorious triumphs do portend,
Since their Commencement to his Arms they owe,
If Springs as high as Fountains may ascend.
(29)
He made us Freemen of the Continent
Whom Nature did like Captives treat before,
To nobler prey's the English Lion sent,
And taught him first in Belgian walks to rore.
(30)
That old unquestioned Pirate of the Land,
Proud Rome, with dread, the fate of Dunkirk har'd;
And trembling wished behind more Alps to stand,
Although an Alxander were her guard.
(31)
By his command we boldly crossed the Line,
And bravely sought where Southern Stars arise,
We traced the far fetched Gold unto the Mine,
And that which bribed our Fathers made our prize
(32)
Such was our Prince; yet owned a Soul above
The highest Acts it could produce to show:
Thus poor Mechanique Arts in public move
Whilst the deep Secrets beyond practice go.
(33)
Nor died he when his ebbing Fame went less,
But when fresh Laurels courted him to live;
He seemed but to prevent some new success;
As if above what triumphs Earth can give.
(34)
His latest Victories still thickest came,
As, near the Center, Motion does increase;
Till he pressed down by his own weighty name,
Did, like the Vestal, under Spoils decease.
(35)
But first the Ocean as a tribute sent
That Giant Prince of all her watery Heard,
And the Isle when her Protecting Genius went
Upon his Obsequies loud sighs conferred.
(36)
No Civil broyls have since his death arose,
But Faction now by habit does obey:
And Wars have that respect for his repose,
As Winds for Halcyons when they breed at Sea.
(37)
His Ashes in a peaceful Urn shall rest,
His Name a great example stands to show
How strangely high endeavors may be blessed,
Where Piety and Valor jointly go.
To the Reverend Dr. WILKINS WARDEN OF WADHAM COLLEGE IN OXFORD.
SIR,
SEeing you are pleased to think fit that these Papers should come into the
public, which were at first designed to live only in a Desk, or some private
friends hands; I humbly take the boldness to commit them to the Security which
your name and protection will give them with the most knowing part of the
world. There are two things especially in which they stand in need of your
defense. One is, that they fall so infinitely below the full and lofty Genius
of that excellent Poet, who made this way of writing free of our Nation: The
other, that they are so little proportioned and equal to the renown of that
Prince on whom they were written. Such great Actions and Lives deserving rather
to be the Subjects of the Noblest Pens and most Divine Phansies, than of such
small beginners and weak essayers in Poetry, as my self. Against these
dangerous Prejudices, there remains no other shield than the universal Esteem
and Authority, which your judgment and approbation carries with it. The right
you have to them, Sir, is not only upon the account of the Relation you had to
this great Person* nor of the General favor which all Arts receive from you;
but more peculiarly by reason of that obligation and zeal with which I am bound
to dedicate my self to your service. For, having been a long time the object of
your care and Indulgence toward the advantage of my studies and fortune,
having been molded, (as it were) by your own hands, and formed under your
Government; not to entitle you to any thing which my meaness produces, would
not only be injustice, but sacrilege. So that if there be any thing here
tolerably said, and which deserves Pardon, it is yours, Sir, as well as he, who
is

Your most Devoted and Obliged Servant.

TO THE MEMORY Of the Late USURPER Oliver Cromwell Pindarick Odes.
(1)
It Is true, Great Name thou art secure
From the forgetfulness and Rage
Of Death or Envy, or devouring Age.
Thou can the force and teeth of Time endure.
Thy Fame, like men, the elder it does grow,
Will of it self turn whiter too
Without what needless Art can do;
Will live beyond thy breath, beyond thy Hearse,
Though it were never heard or sung in verse.
Without our help, thy Memory is safe;
They only want an Epitaph,
That does remain alone
Alive in an Inscription
Remembered only on the Brass or Marble Stone.
It Is all in vain what we for thee can do,
All our Roses and Perfumes
Will but officious folly show,
And pious Nothings to such mighty Tombs.
All our Incence, Gums and Balm
Are but unnecessary duties here:
The Poets may their spices spare
Their costly Numbers and their tuneful feet:
That need not be inbalm'd, which of it self is sweet.
(2)
We know to praise thee is a dangerous proof
Of our Obedience and our Love:
For when the Sun and Fire meet,
The ones extinguish't quite;
And yet the other never is more bright.
So they that writ of Thee and join
Their feeble names With Thine,
Their weaker sparks with thy Illustrious light,
Will lose themselves in that ambitious thought,
And yet no Flame to thee from them be brought.
We know, blessed Spirit, thy mighty name
Wants not Addition of another's Beam;
It Is for our Pens too high and full of Theme.
The Muses are made great by thee, not thou by them.
Thy Fames eternal Lamp will live
And in thy Sacred Urn survive,
Without the food or Oil, which we can give.
It Is true; but yet our duty calls our Songs
Duty Commands our Tongues,
Though thou want not our praises, we
Are not excused for what we owe to thee:
For so men from Religion are not freed.
But, from the Altars, Cloud must rise,
Though Heaven it self does nothing need;
And though the Gods don't want, an Earthly Sacrifice.
(3)
Great life of Wonders, whose each year
Full of new Miracles did appear!
Whose every Month might be,
Alone a Chronicle or a History!
Others great Actions are
But thinly scattered here and there;
At best, all but one single Star:
But thine the Milky way,
All one continued light, and undistinguish't day.
They thronged so close, that naught else could be seen
Scarce any common Sky did come between
What shall I say, or where begin?
Thou may in double Shapes be shown;
Or in thy Arms, or in thy Gown.
Like Jove sometime with Warlike Thunder, and
Sometimes with peaceful Scepter in thy hand,
Or in the Field, or on the Throne;
In what thy Head, or what thy Arm has done.
All that thou did was so resin'd,
So full of Substance, and so strongly joined;
So pure, so weighty Gold,
That the least grain of it,
If fully spread and beat,
Would many leaves, and mighty volumes hold.
(4)
Before thy name was published, and whilst yet
Thou only to thy self were great:
Whilst yet thy happy Bud
Was not quite seen, or understood;
It then sure signs of future greatness showed;
Then thy domestic worth
Did tell the World, what it would be
When it should fit occasion see,
When a full Spring should call it forth.
As bodies, in the Dark and Night,
Have the same Colors, the same Red and White,
As in the open day and Light;
The Sun does only show
That they are bright, not make them so:
So whilst, but private Walls did know
What we to such a Mighty mind should owe:
Then the same virtues did appear
Though in a less, and more Contracted Sphere;
As full, though not as large as since they were.
And like great Rivers, Fountains, though
At first so deep, thou did not go;
Though then thine was not so enlarged a flood
Yet when 'twas Little, 'twas as clear as good.
(5)
It Is true, thou wast not born unto a Crown,
The Scepter's not thy Fathers, but thy own.
Thy Purple was not made at once in haste,
But after many other colors past,
It took the deepest Princely Dye at last.
Thou did begin with lesser Cares
And private Thoughts took up thy private Years:
Those hands which were ordained by Fates
To change the World, and alter States,
Practiced, at first, that vast design
On meaner things, with equal mind.
That Soul, which should so many Scepters sway.
To whom so many Kingdoms should obey,
Learned first to rule in a Domestic way:
So Government, it self began
From Family, and single Man,
Was by the small relations first
Of Husband and of Father nursed
And from those less beginnings past,
To spread it self, over all the World at last.
(6)
But when thy Country (then almost enthralled)
Thy Virtues and thy Courage called,
When England did thy Arms entreat
And t'had been sin in thee, not to be great;
When every Stream, and every Flood,
Was a true vein of Earth, and ran with blood.
When unused Arms, and unknown War,
Filled every place, and every Ear;
When the great Storms and dismal Night
Did all the Land afright;
`T was time for thee, to bring forth all our Light.
Thou lest'st thy more delightful Peace
Thy Private life and better case;
Then down thy Steel and Armor took,
Wishing that it still hung upon the hook:
When death had got a large Commission out
Throwing her Arrows and her Stings about;
Then thou (as once the healing Serpent rose)
Was It listed up, not for thy self but us.
(7)
Thy Country wounded 'twas, and sick before,
Thy Wars and Arms did her restore:
Thou knew'st where the disease did lie
And like the Cure of Simpathy,
Thy strong and certain Remedy
Unto the Weapon did apply,
Thou did not draw the Sword, and so
Away the Scabbard throw;
As if thy Country should
Be the inheritance of Mars and Blood;
But that when the great work was spun
War in it self should be undone:
That Peace might land again upon the shore
Richer and better than before.
The Husbandman no Steel should know
None but the useful Iron of the Plow;
That bays might creep on every Spear.
And though our Sky was overspread
With a destructive Red,
'Twas but till thou, our Sun, did in full light appear.
(8)
When Ajax dyed, the Purple Blood
That from his Gaping Wounds had flowed
Turned into Letters, every Leaf
Had on it writ his Epitaph:
So from that Crimson Flood
Which thou by fate of times were led
Unwillingly to Shed
Letters and Learning rose, and were renewed.
Thou fought'st not out of Envy, Hope or Hate,
But to refine the Church and State;
And like the Romans, what er'e thou
In the Field of Mars did mow,
Was, that a holy Island thence might grow.
Thy Wars, as Rivers raised by a Shour
Which Welcome louds do pour;
Though they at first may seem
To carry all away, with and enraged Stream
Yet did not happen, that they might destroy
Or the better parts annoy;
But all the filth and Mud to scower
And leave behind a Richer Slime,
To give a birth to a more happy power.
(9)
In Field unconquered, and so well
Thou did in Battles, and in Arms excel,
That Steelly Arms themselves might be
Worn out in War as soon as thee.
Success so close upon thy Troops did wait,
As if thou first had conquered Fate;
As if uncertain Victory
Had been first overcome by thee;
As if her wings were clipped and could not flee,
Whilst thou did only serve,
Before thou had what first thou did deserve.
Others by thee did great things do,
Triumph'st thy self and made them Triumph too:
Though they above thee did appear,
As yet in a more large and higher sphere,
Thou the Great Sun, gav'st light to every Star.
Thy self an Army were alone,
And mighty Troops contain'dst in one:
Thy only Sword did guard the Land
Like that which slaming in the Angels hand
From Men God's Garden did defend:
But yet thy Sword did more than his,
Not only guarded, but did make this Land a Paradise.
(10)
Thou sought'st not to be high or great,
Not for a Scepter or a Krown,
Or Ermyne, Purple or the Throne;
But as the Vestal heat
Thy Fire was kindled from above alone.
Religion putting on thy shield
Brought thee Victorious to the Field:
Thy Arms like those which ancient Hero's wore
Were given by the God thou did adore:
And all the Swords, thy Armies had
Were on an Heavenly Anvil made.
Not Interest, or any weak desire
Of Rule, or Empire, did thy mind inspire:
Thy valor like the holy Fire,
Which did before the Persian Armies go,
Lived in the Camp, and yet was sacred too.
Thy mighty Sword anticipates
What was reserved for Heaven, and those blessed Seats
And makes the Church triumphant here below.
(11)
Though Fortune did not hang on thy Sword,
And did obey thy mighty word;
Though Fortune for thy side, and thee,
Forgot her loved Inconstancy;
Amidst thy Arms and Trophies Thou
Were Valiant, and Gentle too;
Wounded'st thy self, when thou did kill thy Foe.
Like Steel, when it much work has past
That which was rough does shine at last;
Thy Arms by being oftener used, did smoother grow*
Nor did thy Battles make thee proud or high;
Thy Conquest raised the State not thee:
Thou overcame'st thy self in every Victory.
As when the Sun in a directer line
Upon a Polished Golden Shield does shine,
The Shield reflects unto the Sun again his Light;
So when the Heavens smiled on the in Fight,
When thy propitious God had lent
Success and Victory to thy Tent;
To Heaven again the Victory was sent.
(12)
England, till thou did come,
Confined her Valor home;
Then onr own Rocks did stand
Bounds to our Fame as well as Land;
And were to us as well
As to our Enemies unpassible:
We were ashamed, at what we read;
And blush't at what our Fathers did;
Because we came so far behind the dead.
The British Lion hung his Main and droopt,
To slavery and burdens stoopt,
With a degenerate sleep, and Fear
Lay in his Den and languish't there;
At whose least voice before
A trembling Echo ran through every Shore,
And shook the World at every Rore.
Thou his subdued Courage did restore,
Sharpen his Claws, and in his Eyes
Made the same dreadful Lightning rise;
Made him again afright the neighboring Floods
His mighty Thunder sound through all the woods.
Thou have our Military Fame redeemed
Which was lost, or Clouded seemed,
Nay more, Heaven did by thee bestow
On us at once an Iron Age, and Happy too.
(13)
Till thou Command'st, that Azure Chains of Waves
Which Nature round about us sent
Made us to every Pirate slaves,
Was rather burden than an Ornament.
Those fields of Sea that washed our shores
Were plowed and reaped, by other hands than ours.
To us the Liquid Mass
Which does about us run
As it is to the Sun,
Only a Bed to sleep in was.
And not, as now, a powerful throne
To shake and sway, the World Thereon.
Our Princes in their hand a Globe did show,
But not a perfect one
Composed of Earth and Water too.
But thy Command the Floods obeyed;
Thou all the Wilderness of Water swayed;
Thou did but only Wed the Sea
Not make her equal, but a slave to thee.
Neptune himself did bear thy Yoke,
Stooped and trembled at thy Stroke:
He that ruled all the Main
Acknowledged thee his Sovereign.
And now the Conquered Sea does pay
More Tribute to thy Thames; than that unto the Sea.
(14)
Till now our Valor did our selves more hurt;
Our Wounds to other Nations were a sport;
And as the Earth, our Land produced
Iron and Steel which should to tear our selves be (used.
Our Strength within it self did break,
Like Thundering -- Cannons Crack,
And kill those that were nere;
While the Enemies secured and untouched were.
But now our Trumpets thou have made to sound
Against our Enemies Walls in Foraign-ground,
And yet no Echo back on us returning found.
England is now the happy peaceful Isle,
And all the World the while
Is exercising Arms and Wars
With foreign or Intestine Jars.
The Torch extinguish't here, we lend to others Oil,
We give to all, yet know our selves no fear,
We reach the Flame of ruin and of death
Where e're we please Our Swords t'unsheath.
hilst we in calm and temperate Regions breath.
Like to the Sun, whose heat is hurled
Through every corner of the World;
Whose Flame through all the Air does go,
And yet the Sun himself the while no fire does know.
(15)
Besides the Glories of thy peace
Are not in number, nor in value less;
Thy hand did Cure and close the Scars
Of our bloody Civil Wars;
Not only Lanc'd, but healed the Wound;
Made us again, as healthy and as sound.
When now the Ship was well nigh lost
After the Storm upon the Coast,
By its Mariners endangered most;
When they their Ropes and Helms had left,
When the Planks asunder clest,
And Floods came roaring in with mighty sound;
Thou a safe Land, and Harbor for us found,
And savedst those that would themselves have drowned.
A work which none but Heaven and thee could do,
Thou made us happy whe're we would or no:
Thy Judgment, Mercy, Temperance so great,
As if those Virtues only in thy mind had seat.
Thy Piety not only in the Field but Peace,
When Heaven seemed to be wanted least.
Thy Temples not like Janu's only were
Open in time of War:
When thou had greater cause of fear
Religion and the Awe of Heaven possessed.
All places and all times alike, thy Breast.
(16)
Nor did thou only for thy Age provide,
But for the years to come beside,
Our aftertimes, and late posterity
Shall pay unto thy Fame, as much as we;
They too, are made by thee.
When Fate did call thee to a higher Throne,
And when thy Mortal work was done,
When Heaven did say it, and thou must be gone:
Thou him to bear thy burden chose,
Who might (if any could) make us forget thy loss:
Nor had thou him designed,
Had he not been
Not only to thy Blood, but Virtue Kin;
Not only Heir unto thy Throne, but Mind.
It Is He shall perfect all thy Cures
And, with as sine a Thread, weave out thy Loom.
So, One did bring the Chosen people from
Their Slavery and Fears,
Led them through their Pathless Road,
Guided himself by God,
He brought them to the Borders: but a Second hand
Did settle and Secure them, in the Promised Land.
UPON THE LATE STORM, AND DEATH Of the Late USURPER Oliver Cromwell Ensuing the
same.
By Mr. Waller.
WE must resign; Heaven His great Soul does claim
In storms as loud, as His Immortal Fame:
His dying groans, his last Breath shakes our Isle,
And Trees uncut fall for His Funeral Pile,
About His palace their broad Roots are tossed
Into the Air; So Romulus was lost:
New Rome in such a Tempest mis't their King,
And from Obeying fell to Worshipping.
On Oeta's top thus Hercules lay dead,
With ruined Oaks and Pines about him spread:
The Poplar too, whose bough he wont to wear
On his Victorious Head, lay prostrate there.
Those his last fury from the Mountain rent,
Our dying Hero, from the Continent,
Ravished whole Towns; and Forts from Spaniards rest*
As his last Legacy to Britain left.
The Ocean which so long our hopes confined,
Could give no limits to His vaster mind;
Our Bounds enlargement was his latest toil;
Nor has he left us Prisoners to our Isle;
Under the Tropic is our language spoke,
And part of Flanders has received our yoke.
From Civil Broils he did us disingage,
Found nobler objects for our Martial rage;
And with wise Conduct to his Country showed
Their Ancient way of conquering abroad.
Ungrateful then, if we no Tears allow
To him that gave us Peace and Empire too.
Princes that feared him, grieve, concerned to see
No pitch of glory from the Grave is free.
Nature her self took notice of his death,
And sighing swelled the Sea with such a breath
That to remotest Shores her Billows rold,
The approaching Fate of her great-Ruler told.
FINIS

