AN ARGUMENT DELIVERED BY PATRICKE DARCY ESQVIRE, By the express order of the
House of Commons in the Parliament of IRELAND, 9. Iunii, 1641.

royal blazon or coat of arms

Printed at Waterford by Thomas Bourke, Printer to the Confederate Catholics
of Ireland, 1643.

5. Iunii, 1641.
By the Commons House of IRELAND in Parliament assembled.
FOrasmuch as M. PATRICKE DARCY, by a former order of this House, was appointed
Prolocutor, at the Conference with the Lords, touching the Questions propounded
to the Judges, and their pretended answers to the same; It is hereby ordered,
and the said M. DARCY is required, to declare and set forth, at the said
Conference; the manifold grievances, and other causes and grounds that moved
this House, to present the said Questions to the Lords House, to be propounded
as aforesaid, and to give particular reasons for every of the said Questions.

Copia vera. Extract. per Phil. Fern. Cleric. Parl. Com.

AN ARGUMENT DELIVERED BY PATRICKE DARCY ESQVIRE, By the express orders of the
Commons-House of the Parliament of Ireland; at a conference with a Comittee of
the Lords House, in the dyning room of the Castle of Dublin, 9. Die Iunij
1641. upon certain Questions propounded to the Judges of Ireland in full
Parliament; and upon the answers of the said Judges to the said Questions.
And in the conclusion, a declaration of the Commons House upon the said
Questions.
THE QVESTIONS.
Questions, Wherein the House of Commons humbly desired, that the House of the
Lords would be pleased to require the Judges to deliver their resolutions.
IN as much as the Subjects of this kingdom, are free, loyal, and dutiful
Subjects to his most Excellent Majesty their natural Liege, Lord and King; And
to be governed only by the Common Laws of England, and Statutes of force in
this kingdom, in the same manner and form, as his Majesty's Subjects of the
Kingdom of England, are and ought to be governed, by the said Common Laws,
and Statutes of force in that kingdom; which of right the Subjects of this
kingdom do challenge, and make their protestation to be their birthright,
and best inheritance; yet, in as much as the unlawful actions and proceedings
of some of his Majesty's Subjects, and Ministers of Justice of late years,
introduced and practiced in this kingdom, did tend, to the infringing and
violation of the laws, liberties, and freedom, of the said Subjects of this
kingdom, contrary to his Majesty's Royal and pious intentions. Therefore the
Knights, Citizens and Burgesses in Parliament assembled, not for any doubt, or
ambiguity, which may be conceived, or thought of, for, or concerning the
premises, nor of the ensueing questions, but for manifestation and declaration
of a clear truth, and of the said Laws and Statutes already planted, and for
many ages past, settled in this kingdom. The said Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses, do therefore pray the House of the Lords may be pleased to command
the Judges of this kingdom; forthwith, to declare in writing their resolutions
of and unto the ensuing Questions, and subscribe to the same.

1. Whether the Subjects of this kingdom be a free people, and to be governed,
only, by the Common Laws of England, and Statutes of force in this kingdom?

2. Whether the Judges of this Land do take the oath of Judges, and if so,
whether under pretext of any Act of State, Proclamation, Writ, Letter, or
Direction, under the great, or privy Seal, or privy Signet, or Letter, or
other Commandment from the Lord Lieutenant, Lord Deputy, Justice, Justices, or
other Chief Governor, or Governors of this kingdom; they, may hinder, stay,
or delay, the suite of any Subject, or his Judgment, or execution thereupon; if
so, in what Case, and whether, if they do hinder, stay or delay, such Suite,
Judgment or Execution thereupon, what punishment do they incur for their
deviation and transgression therein?

3. Whether the Kings Majesty's privy Council, either with the Chief
Governor, or Governors of this kingdom, or without him or them be a place of
Judicature, by the Common Laws, and wherein; Causes between party and
party, for debts, trespasses, accounts, possession, or title of land, or any
of them may be heard and determined, and of what Civil Causes they have
Jurisdiction, and by what law, and of what force is their order or decree in
such Cases, or any of them?

4. The like of the chief Governors alone.

5. Whether grants of Monopolies be warranted by the Law, and of what, and in
what cases, and how, and where, and by whom are the pretended transgressors
against such grants punishable, and whether by fine, mutillation of members,
imprisonment, loss and forfeiture of goods or otherwise, and which of them?

6. In what Cases the Lord Lieutenant, Lord Deputy, or other Chief Governor,
or Governors, of this kingdom, and Council; may punish by fine, imprisonment,
mutillation of members, pillorie, or otherwise, and whether they may sentence
any to such, the same, or the like punishment for infringing the Comands of, or
concerning any Proclamations, or Monopolies, and what punishment do they
incur that vote for the same?

7. Of what force is an Act of State, or proclamation, in this kingdom, to
bind the liberty, goods, possession, or inheritance of the Natives thereof,
whether they or any of them can alter the Common Law, or the infringers of them
loose their goods, chattells, or leases, or forfeite the same, by infringing
any such Act of State, Proclamation, or both, and what punishment do the
sworn Judges of the Law that are Privy Counselors incur that vote, for such
Acts, and execution thereof?

8. Are the Subjects of this kingdom subject to the Marshall law, and whether
any man in time of peace, no enemy being in the field with Banners displaied,
can be sentenced to death, if so, by whom, and in what Cases, if not, what
punishment do they incur, that in time of peace execute Marshall law?

9. Whether voluntary oaths taken freely before Arbitrators for affirmance, or
disaffirmance of any thing, or the true performance of any thing be punishable
in the Castle Chamber, or in any other Court, and why, and wherefore?

10. Why, and by what law, or by what rule of policy is it that none is
admitted to reducement of fines, and other penalty in the Castle Chamber, or
Councell-Table, until he confess the offense for which he is censured, when
as Revera he might be innocent thereof, though suborned prooffes or
circumstance might induce a censure?

11. Whether the Judges of the Kings Bench, or any other Judges of Jail
delivery, or of any other Court, and by what law do, or can deny the copies of
Indictments of Felony, or Treason, to the parties accused contrary to the laws?

12. What power has the Barons of the Court of Exchequer; to raise the respite
of homage, arbitrarily, to what rate they please, to what value they may raise
it, by what law they may distinguish between the respite of homage upon the
diversity of the true value of the fees, when as Escuadge is the same, for
great and small fees, and are proportionable by Parliament?

13. Whether it be censurable in the Subjects of this kingdom, to repair unto
England, to appeal to his Majesty for redress of injuries, or for other
lawful occasions, if so, why, and in what condition of persons, and by what
law?

14. Whether Deanes or other dignitaries of Cathedral Churches be properly,
and de mero jure Donative by the King, and not Elective or Collative, if so,
why and by what law, and whether the confirmation of a Deane de facto of the
Bishops grant be good and valid in law or no, if not by what law?

15. Whether the issuing of Quo-warrantoes out of the Kings Bench, or
Exchequer, against Burroughes that anciently and recently sent Burgesses to the
Parliament, to show cause why they sent Burgesses to the Parliament, be legal,
or if not, what punishment ought to be inflicted upon those, that are, or has
been the occasioners, procurers, and Judges of, and in such Quo-warrantoes?

16. By what law are Jurors that give verdict according to their conscience,
and are the sole Judges, of the fact, censured in the Castle-Chamber, in great
fines, and sometimes pillored with loss of ears, and boared through the
tongue, and marked sometimes in the forehead, with a hot iron, and other like
infamous punishment?

17. By what law are men censurable in the Castle-Chamber, with the mutillation
of members, or any other brand of infamy, and in what causes, and what
punishment in each case there is due without respect of the quality of the
person or persons?

18. Whether in the Censures in the Castle-Chamber regard be to be had to the
words of the great Charter ( viz) salvo contenemento, etc?

19. Whether if one that steals a sheep, or commit any other felony, and
after flies the course of Justice, or lies in woods or mountains upon his
keeping, be a traitor, if not, whether a Proclamation can make him so?

20. Whether the testimony or evidence of Rebels, Traitors, protected thieves,
or other infamous persons, be good evidence in law to be pressed upon the
trials of men for their lives, or whether the Judge or Jurors ought to be
Judge of the matter in fact?

21. By what law are Fayres and Markets to be held in Capite, when no other
express tenure be mentioned in his Majesty's Letter-Pattents, or grants of the
same Fayres and Markets, although the rent or yearly sum be reserved
thereout.

Copia vera. Extract. per Phil. Fern. Cleric. Parl. Com.

THE ANSWER AND DECLARATION OF THE IVDGES, Unto the questions transmitted from
the Honorable House of Commons unto the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in
Parliament assembled, whereunto they desired their Lordships, to require the
said Judges answers in writing forthwith. May 25. 1641.
IN all humbleness the said Judges do desire, to represent unto your
Lordships, the great sense of grief that they apprehend out of their fear,
that they are fallen from that good opinion, which they desire to retain with
your Lordships and the said house of Commons in that (notwithstanding their
humble petition and reasons to the contrary exhibited in writing, and declared
in this most honorable house) your Lordships have overruled them, and often
commanded their answers unto the said Questions, although they have informed
your Lordships, and still with assurance do aver, that no president in any
age can be shown that any Judges before them were required or commanded to
give answer in writing, or otherwise unto such general, or so many questions,
in such a manner in Parliament, or elsewhere, unless it were in that time of
King Richard the 2d. which they humbly conceive, is not to be drawn into
example. And therefore they yet humbly supplicate your Lordships so far, to
tender their profession and places, and their relation, to his Majesty's
service, as to take into your serious considerations, the reasons that they
have annexed to this their answer, before their answer be entered, or admitted,
among the Acts of this high Court, and that if your Lordships in your wisdoms,
shall after think fit to give any Copies of their Answers, that for their
Justification to the present and succeeding times your Lordships will be
pleased to require the Clerk of this most honorable House, that no Copies may
be given of the said answers without the said reasons.

2. Secondly the said Judges humbly desire your Lordships to be pleased, to be
informed, that the words in his Majesty's writs, by which they are commanded to
attend in Parliament, are, that the said Judges shall be present with the
Lords-Iustices or other chief Governor and your Lordships, at the said
Parliament, called Pro arduis and urgentibus regni negotijs super dictis
negotijs tractaturi and consilium suum impensuri: And they desire your
Lordships to take into your consideration whether any advice may be required by
your Lorpships, from them, but concerning such particular matters, as are in
treaty and agitation and judicially depending before your Lordships, upon which
your Lordships may give a judgment, order, or sentence, to be recorded among
the Records and Acts of this honorable House, and whether they may be commanded
by your Lordships, to subscribe their hands unto any opinion or advice they
shall give upon any matters in debate before your Lordships there, and whether
your Lordships can conceive any final resolution upon the matters contained in
the said Questions.

3. Thirdly, although the said questions are but twenty two in number, yet they
say, that they contain at least fifty general questions, many of them of
several matters, and of several natures, within the resolution of which most
of the great affairs of this kingdom, both for Church and Commonwealth, for
late years may be included; and therefore the said Judges do openly aforehand
profess, that if any particular, that may have Relation to any of those
questions shall hereafter come judicially before them, and that either upon
argument or debate (which is the sive or fann of truth) or discovery of any
general inconvenience, to the King or Commonwealth in time (which is the
mother of truth) or by further search or information, in any particular, they
shall see cause, or receive satisfaction for it, they will not be concluded by
any answer, they now give to any of these general questions: but they will
upon better ground and reason with their predecessors the Judges in all ages
with holy Fathers, Councels, and Parliaments, retract, and alter their opinion
according to their conscience and knowledge, and the matter and circumstances
of the cause as it shall appear in judgment before them, it being most
certain that no general case, may be so put, but a circumstance in the matter
or manner may alter a resolution concerning the same.

4. Fourthly, the succeeding Judges, and age notwithstanding any answer given
by the now Judges, may be of another opinion then the now Judges are, without
disparagment to themselves, or the now Judges, in regard that many particular
circumstances, in many particular cases may fall out, that may alter the reason
of the Laws, in such a case; which could not be included or foreseen in a
general question, or answer thereunto: And therefore they desire your
Lordships to consider of what use such answers may be, to the present and
future times.

5. Fifthly, many of the said questions, as they are propounded (as the said
Judges humbly conceive) do concern his Majesty in a high degree, in his
Regal and prerogative power, in his Government, in his Revenue, in the
Jurisdiction of his Courts, in his Martial affairs, and in his Ministers of
State, so that the said Judges considering their Oaths, and the duty which by
their places they owe unto his Majesty humbly conceive they may not with safety
give answer thereunto, without special license from his Majesty, and therefore
they still humbly pray your Lordships (as formerly they did) not to press any
answers from them until his Majesty's princely pleasure, therein be signified.

6. Sixthly, if the matters of these questions which aim at some abuses of
former times, were reduced into Bills, they conceive it were the speedy way to
have such a reformation which might bind the present times, and posterity, and
in such proceeding they ought and would most cheerfully contribute their
opinions and best endevors, but in such a course (as they apprehend it) which
points at punishment they have reason to be sparing in giving any opinion
further then the duty of their places does command from them.

7. Seventhly, although it may be conceived, that the answering of such and so
many general questions, by the now Judges may contribute some help to the
reformation now so much desired, yet no man knows but this new president in
propounding of such questions to Judges in succeeding times (as the Judges and
frame and constitution of the Commonwealth may be) may fall out to be most
prejudicial to the State and Commonwealth.

8. Eighthly, most of the matters in several of the said questions, are already
by your Lordships and the said house of Commons voted and represented to his
Majesty for grievances, and therefore no opinions of the Judges, under favor
are needful or to be required thereunto, unless the same shall come in
further agitation and discussion in this honorable House.

9. The Judges opinions are not usually called upon in Parliament, but when
upon debate great and difficulte points in Law do arise, where, this most
honorable house does think fit to command their opinions, but no resolutions,
do belong unto the said Judges, in Parliament, but unto your Lordships; Yet in
the front and preamble of the said questions, the resolution of the said
questions by the Judges, is forthwith desired, to be required by your Lordships
in writing, although the first question, viz. Whether the subjects of this
kingdom be a free people, etc. be positively, resolved by the preamble to the
said questions, in which it is likewise declared that the said Judges answers
thereunto, are not desired for any doubt or ambiguitie which may be conceived
or thought of, for, or concerning the premises, nor of the said questions; but
for manifestation and declaration of a clear truth, and of the Laws and
Statutes already planted and settled in this kingdom: And they say that it is
impossible, to make any manifestation or declaration of Law, or statutes, which
may hold or be useful, upon such general questions as most of these are,
namely. By what Law? in what cases? of what? and which of them? of what power?
of what force? how? where? by whom? why? wherefore? what punishment? by what
rule of policy? in what condition of persons? in regard that the next
succeeding Judges may be of another opinion, and that a circumstance may alter
the reason of this Law, in many particular cases, which the wit of man is not
able to forsee, or give a general rule in. And they say that to give answers
unto such questions as might give any satisfaction to your Lordships, or to the
honorable house of Commons, would make up a great volume, and require more time
than your Lordships have afforded unto the said Judges, considering their great
toil, in their Circuites the last short vacation, their other employments in
the Commonwealth, and their daily attendance on your Lordships in Parliament,
and the ordinary Courts of Justice: And yet least they might seem to come any
way short in performance of that duty, which they confess to be due unto your
Lordships, or be wanting in promoting or advancing the Commonwealth, which
they believe to be aimed at by the said questions, though it may seem to draw
damage or prejudice upon their particulars, they do in all humbleness present
unto your Lordships, the ensuing answers unto the said questions which is as
much as by their Oaths or in the duty they owe unto his Sacred Majesty (before
his princely pleasure be therein signified) they can answer thereunto.

1. To the first, they answer, that the subjects of this kingdom are a free
people and are, for the general to be governed only by the Common-lawes of
England and statutes of force in this kingdom, yet they say that as in
England, many statutes are grown obsolete, and out of use, and some particular
ancient Laws (as well in criminal as in Civil causes) have been changed by
interpretation of the Judges there, as they found it most agreeable to the
general good of the Commonwealth, and as the times did require it; So, our
predecessors the Judges of this kingdom as the necessity of the times did
move them, did declare the law in some particular cases otherwise than the same
is practiced in England, which the now Judges cannot alter, without apparent
diminution of a great part of his Majesty's standing revenue, and opening a gap
for the shaking and questioning of the estates of many of his Majesty's
subjects, and the overthrowing of several Judgments, Orders, Decrees, which
depend thereupon. For example, If it be found by office of Record, sufficient
for form that a man was killed in actual rebellion, and at the time of his
death was seized of lands, hereditaments, goods, or chattels, by the constant
declaration of Law, and practice of former times here, the Crown was entitled
to such lands, goods, and chattels, and many men's estates depend thereupon, and
yet the law is not so taken in England, So if one or more commit Felony, and
then stand out upon his or their keeping, and he or they will not submit
themselves to be tried by the law, but being in that state do rob or spoil
and terrify his Majesty's people, whereby the country is disquieted, this by
the constant opinion of our predecessors in this kingdom has been adjudged a
leavying of war within the Statute 25. Edw. 3. and so consequently treason.
Also by the common received opinion and practice in this kingdom, the Wife is
to have a third of all the goods, chatels and credits of her husband (the debts
being paid) although he dispose of all by his will from her: And yet the
constant practice is otherwise in England, and other instances of that kind,
might be made, so that the words (only) must receive a benign exposition
before the first question can receive a general answer, in the affirmative.
Secondly, many causes of great weight and consequence in this kingdom, are to
be decreed and ordered by equity in the proper Courts of equity, and in
course of State at the Councell-board, and by particular customs, and contrary
to law, for which the Common Law and statutes of force in this kingdom give no
remedy. Thirdly, there are several other laws of force in England, and
Ireland so far as they have been received, which though some would have to be
part of the Common Law of England, yet we find them particularly distinguished
from it in our Printed Books in Parliament Rolls in England, as Lex est
consuetudo Parliamenti, jura belli, Ecclesiastical or Canon law in certain
cases, Civil law in some cases not only in Ecclesiastical Courts, but in the
Courts of Constable and Marshall, and of the Admiralty, and upon particular
occasions, in the other Courts lex Mercatoria, etc.

2. To the second, They say that the Judges of this kingdom do take the Oath
of Judges, which Oath is specified amongst the statutes in 18. Edw. 3. and is
after explaned by the statute of 20. Edw. 3. and that they may not stay,
hinder, or delay the suite of any subject, or his judgment, or execution
thereupon (otherwise then according to the law and course of the Court, where
they sit) under pretense of any act of state, proclamation, writ, letter, or
direction under the great or privy Seal, or privy Signet, or Letter, or other
Commandment from the Lord Lieutenant, Lord Deputy, Justice, Justices, or other
chief Governor of this kingdom, most of which, does appear by their Oath
expressed in the said statutes, and the said statute of 2^. Edw. 3. cap. 8. and
the statute of 28. Edw. 3. cap. 2. as to Barons of the Exchequer. And that as
they know no punishment due to Judges, for their deviations and transgressions,
without other aggravation; So they know no punishment laid down by any law
against them for their deviations and transgressions, in hindering staying, or
delaying of Justice, contrary to their said Oath, other then what is declared
in their said Oath, and the statute of 20. Edw. 3.

3. To the third, they say that it is part of their said Oath, as Judges, that
they shall not counsel or assent to any thing that may turn to the damage or
disherison of our Sovereign Lord the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by any
manner of way or color. And that they shall give no advice or counsel to any
man great or small in no cases, wherein the King is a party, And they shall do
and procure the profit of the King and his Crown, in all things where they may
reasonably do the same; And that in the explanation of their said Oaths, by
the statute of 20. Edw. 3* cap. 1. It is declared that they shall give no
counsel to great men, nor small, in case where the King is party, or which
does or may touch the King in any point. And as your Lordships have been
honorably pleased by an order of this honorable house, bearing date the first
of March Anno Dom. 1641. Annoque Regni Caroli decimo sexto to give way, that
they should not be compelled to answer any part of those questions, which did
concern his Majesty's prerogatives or were against their oaths so they humbly
represent unto your Lordships, that they conceive that the answering of the
particulars of this question, does concern both, for that the Kings privy
Counsel as the question terms it, or the Councell-board, is a Court of his
Majesty's high prerogative, where all proceedings are before him, and his
Counsel, or before his Governor (who does immediately, to many purposes
represent his Majesty's person) and the Counsel. And where the great affairs
of state concerning his Majesty's honor, government, profit, and of great
persons and causes concerning the Commonwealth, which, may not conveniently be
remedied by the ordinary rules of Common Law, and many other causes have been
treated, of, and managed. And as his Majesty is the fountain of all Justice,
with in his kingdoms and may grant Cognizance of pleas unto his subjects, and
Corporations, and may by his Commission authorize whom he shall think fit, to
execute many branches of his authority, so they humbly conceive, it does not
stand with their Oaths or duties of their places, who are but Judges of the
ordinary Courts of Justice, before his Majesty's pleasure signified in that
behalf, to search into the Commissions or instructions of the chief Governor
and Counsel, or to give any opinion concerning the limits, jurisdiction,
orders, decrees, proceedings, or members of that high Court, and that the King
has a prerogative for the hearing some of the matters in this question
specified before his chief Governor; We beseech your Lordships to cast your
eyes on the statute of 28. H. 6. cap. 2. in this kingdom, where after m^^ters
are directed to be sent to the ordinary Courts, yet the Kings prerogative is
expressly saved, notwithstanding all which his gracious Majesty (for whom it
is most proper) has of late been pleased to limit the proceedings of that
Board by his instructions in print.

4. To the fourth, they answer as to the Third.

5. To the fifth they say that generally all grants of Monopolies, whereby
trading, manufacture, or commerce is restrained, and the profit which should
go to many hindered and brought into a few hands, are against law, the liberty
of the subject and the good of the Commonwealth, though they carry never so
fair a pretense of reforming abuses, and that the pretended transgressors
against such grants are not at all punishable by any rule of law, that they
know of, And yet they say, that they conceive that his Majesty, that is, the
head and father of the Commonwealth may restrain the use and importation and
exportation of certain commodities, or confine the same into a few hands for a
time where there may be likelihood of his Majesty's profit, (which is the
profit of the Commonwealth,) and no apparent prejudice to the Commonwealth
does appear, and that when time shall discover such prejudice, then such
restraints ought to cease; So if a man by his own invention at home, or
travel, observation, or charge abroad does introduce a new profitable, and
useful trade or profession into the Commonwealth, in such cases his Majesty
may lawfully grant and license the only making of such commodity or teaching
or using of such trade for a certain time, and the transgressors against such
warrantable grants, may be punished by payment of damages unto the Patentee, in
an ordinary course of Justice, or otherwise, as the nature of the offense and
matter does deserve; and as the consequence and importance of the matter may be
to the King, State, or Commonwealth. And they say that the matter, manner,
restrictions, limitations, reservations, and other clauses contained in such
grants or licenses, and the Commissions or Proclamations, thereupon and undue
execution thereof, and several circumstances may make the same lawful or
unlawful, whereof they are not able to give any certain resolution (before
some particular commes in judgment before them) neither are they otherwise
able to answer the general in the particulars of the said question, of what,
in what cases, how, where, and by whom, or which of them, wherein whosoever
desires further satisfaction he may please to have recourse unto the known
cases of Monoplies, Printed authorities, and written Reports, and unto the
statute of 21. Ia. in England concerning Monopolies, and the several
exceptions and limitations therein.

6. To the sixth, they say they can no otherwise answer then they have already
in their answer to the third question, for the reasons therein setforth.

7. To the seventh, they say, that a Proclamation or act of State cannot alter
the common law, and yet Proclamations are acts of his Majesty's prerogative,
and are, and always have been of great use, and that the contemners of such
of them as are not against the law, are and by the constant practice of the
Star Chamber in England have been punished, according the nature of the
contempt, and course of the said Court, and although acts of State, are not of
force to bind the goods, possessions, or inheritance of the subject, yet they
have been of great use for the settling of the estates of very many subjects in
this kingdom, as may appear in the Report of the case of Irish gavelkind in
Print. And further to that question they cannot answer for the reasons in their
answer unto the third question set forth.

8. To the eight, they say, that they know no ordinary rule of law, by which
the subjects of this kingdom are made subject to Marshall-law in time of
peace, and that they find the use thereof in time of peace, in England,
complained off, in the petition of right, exhibited to his Majesty in the
third year of his reign, And that they conceive the granting of authority and
Commission for execution thereof, is derived out of his Majesty's Regal and
prerogative power, for suppressing of sudden and great insolences and
insurrections, among armies, or multitudes of armed men lawfully or unlawfully
convented together, (the right use whereof in all times has been found most
necessary in this kingdom) And further to that question they cannot answer,
for that as they conceive, it does concern his Majesty's Regal power, and
that the answering of the other part of the question does properly belong to
another profession, whereof they have no Cognizance.

9. To the ninth they say, that as the taking of any Oath before any but such
Judges or persons as have power to give or demand an Oath, for decision of
controversies, is by most Divine in most cases counted to be a rash Oath, and
so an offense against God, within the third Commandment, so the prescribing
and demanding of a set Oath by any that cannot derive power so to do from the
Crown (where the fountain of Justice under God does reside) is an offense
against the law of the Land, and as for voluntary and extra judicial Oaths,
although freely taken before arbitrators or others, they say (as this kingdom
is composed in many particulars, as the nature and consequence of the cause, or
the quality of the person who takes, or before whom the same is taken, may
concern the Commonwealth, or the members thereof) such taking of such Oaths
or proceeding or grounding on such Oath in deciding of controversies, according
to the several circumstances, that may occur therein, or the prejudice, it
may introduce to the Commonwealth, may be punishable by the Common Law, or (if
it grow unto an height or general inconvenience to the commonwealth or
members thereof) in the Castle-chamber; For though such an Oath be voluntary,
yet in most cases, it is received by him, that does intend to ground his
Judgment thereon, and after the Oath is taken, the arbitrator, or he that
intends to yield faith to the party, that took the Oath, does examine him upon
one or more questions, upon the said Oath, unto the answer whereof, he does
give faith and assent, trusting on the said Oath. And whereas Oaths by Gods
institution were chiefly allowed to be taken before lawful Magistrates, for
ending of controversies, yet common experience does teach in this kingdom,
that oftentimes orders and acts grounded on such voluntary Oaths, beget
strife, and suits; and commonly such orders when they come to be measured by
rules of law, or equity in the Kings Courts become void, after much expense
of time, and charge that we say nothing of that, that thereby many causes
proper to the Kings Courts are drawn ad aliud examen, and thereby the Kings
justice and Courts often defrauded and declined.

10. To the tenth, they say, that they are not Judges of rules of policy, but
of law, and that they know no certain rule of law, concerning reducement of
fines. The same being matters of his Majesty's own mere Grace, after a man is
censured for any offense: And that they know no law, that none shall be
admitted to reducement of his fines or other penalties in the Courts in the
question specified, until he confess the fact for which he was censured. But
forasmuch as the admittance to a reducement after conviction, for an offense,
is matter of Grace and not Justice; It has been the constant course of these
Courts both here and in England, for clearing of his Majesty's justice (where
the party will not go about to clear himself, by reversall of the censure
or decree) not to admit him to that grace, until he has confessed the
justness, of the sentence pronounced by the Court against him. And that the
rather for that commonly the ability and disabilitie of the party does not
appear in judgment before them but the nature and circumstances of the
offense, according to which, they give sentence against him or them, in
terrorem after which, when the party shall make the weakness of his estate
appear, or that the Court is otherwise ascerteyned, that they do of course
proportion the censure, or penalty, having regard to his estate.

11. To the eleventh, they say, That neither the Judges of the Kings Bench (as
they inform us, that are of that Court) or Justices of Jail delivery, or of
any other Court, do or can by any law they know, deny the copies of
Indictments, of Felony, or Treason, to the party only accused as by the said
question is demanded.

12. To the twelfth, they say, that where lands are holden of the King by the
Knights service, in Capite, the tenant by the strict course of Law ought in
person to do his homage to the King, and until he has done his homage, the
ancient course of the Exchequer has been and yet is, to issue process of
distringas out of the second remembrance Office, to distrayne the tenants ad
faciendum homagium or pro homagio suo respectua^do, upon which process, the
Shiriffes returns issues. And if the Tenant do not thereupon appear and
compound with the King, to give a fine for respite of homage, then the issues
are forfeyted to the King for his contempt, but if he appear, then the Court
of Exchequer does agree with him to respite his homage for a small fine,
wherein they regulate themselves* under the rate expressed and set down in
England by virtue of a privy Scale in the 15. year of Queen Elizabeth,
whereby the rates are particularly set down, according to the yearly value of
the Lands, which rates are confirmed by act of Parliament in 1. Jacob. Regis
cap. 26. in England, before which time there was not any such certayntie, but
the same rested in the discretion of the Court by the rule of Common Law, and
so it does at this day in Ireland, howbeit we conceive that the Court of
Exchequer here do well to regulate their discretions by those rates in
England, and rather to be under then to exceed the same, which the Barons
there do, as they do inform us, that are Judges of the other Courts.

13. To the 13. they say, that they know no rule of Law or statute, by which it
should be ce^surable, in the subjects of this kingdom to repair into England,
to appeal unto his Majesty for redress of injuries, or for other their
lawful occasions, unles they be prohibited by his Majesty's writ, or
proclamation or, other his Command. But they find that by the statute of 5.
Rich. 2. the passage of the subject out of the Realm, is prohibited without
special license, excepting Noblemen, and others in the said statute specially
excepted, and some inference to that purpose may be made upon the statute of
25. Hen 6 cap. 2. in this kingdom.

14. To the 14. they say, that some Deanries and dignities, not Deanes or
dignitaries (as the question propounds it) are properly, and de mero jure
donative by the King, some Elective, and some Collative, according to the first
foundation and usuage of such Churches, and they humbly desire that they may
not be required to give any further answer to this question; for that it may
concern many men's estates which may come judcially in question before them

15. To the 15. they say, that they conceive that where privileges are claymed
by any body politic, or other, the Kings Counsel may exhibit a quo-warranto
to cause the parties clayming such privileges, to show by what warrant they
claim the same, and that the Court cannot hinder the issuing of process at
the instance of the Kings Attorney, or hinder the Kings Attorney to exhibit
such informations. But when the case shall upon the proceedings be brought to
judgment, then and not before the Court is to take notice and give judg^ment,
upon the merit and circumstances of the cause, as upon due consideration
shall be conceived to be according to law, in which case the Judges or the Kings
Attorney (as they conceive) ought not to be punished by any ordinary rule of
law or statute that they know. But for the particular case of Quo-warranto for
that it has been a great question in this present Parliament, and so
concerns the highest Court of justice in this kingdom, and also concerns two
other of his Majesty's Courts of justice, and therein his Majesty's prerogative
in those Courts, they say that they cannot safely deliver any opinion therein,
before it comes judicially before them, and that they hear it argued and
debated by learned Counsel on both sides.

16. To the sixteenth they say, that although the Jurors be sole Judges of the
matter of fact, yet the Judges of the Court are Judges of the validity of the
evidence, and of the matters of law arising out of the same, wherein the Jury
ought to be guided by them. And if the Jury in any criminal cause between the
King and party, give their verdict contrary to clear and apparent evidence
delivered in Court, they have been constantly, and still ought to be censured
in the Star Chamber in England, and Castle-chamber here, for this misdemeanor
in perverting the right course of justice, in such fines and other punishment
as the merits and circumstances of the cause does deserve, according to the
course of the said Courts, for that their consciences ought to be directed by
the evidence, and not to be misguided by their wills or affections. And if the
Jury know any matter of fact, which may either better or blemish their
evidence, they may take advantage thereof, but they ought to discover the same
to the Judges. And they say that this proceeding in the Court of Castle-chamber
is out of the same grounds, that writs of attaint are against a Jury that gives
a false verdict, in a Court of Record at the Common Law betwixt party and
party, which false verdict being found by a Jury of twenty four,
notwithstanding that the first Jury were Judges of the fact, yet that infamous
judgment was pronounced against the first Jury, which is next or rather worse
then judgment to death, and did lay a perpetual brand of perjury upon them,
for which reason it was anciently called the villainous judgment, and they say
that the law to direct the punishment for such offenses is the course of the
said Court, which is a law as to that purpose, and the statute of 3. Henr. 7.
cap. 1. and other statutes in force in this kingdom.

17. To the seventeenth, they say, they can answer no otherwise, then they have
in their answer to the next precedent question.

18. To the eighteenth, they say, that in a Legal construction the statute of
Magna Charta in which the words Salvo contenemento are mentioned is only to be
understood of amerciaments and not of fines, yet where great fines are imposed
in terrorem upon the reducement of them regard is to be had to the ability of
the persons.

19. To the nineteenth, they say, that if one does steal a sheep or commit
any other selony, and after flies the course of justice, or lies in woods, or
mountains upon his keeping, yet does he not thereby become a Traitor, neither
does a Proclamation make him so, the chief use whereof in such a Case is, to
invite the party so standing out to submit himself to justice, or to
forewarne others of the danger they may run into by keeping him company, or
giving him mayntenance, and relief whereby he may the rather submit to Justice.

20. To the twentieth, they say, that the testimony of Rebels, or Traitors
under protection of Thieves, or other infamous persons is not to be used or
pressed as convincing evidence upon the trial of any man for his life, and so
is his Majesty's printed instructions, as to persons condemned, or under
protection, yet the testimony of such persons not condemned and being fortified
with other concurring proof, or apparent circumstances may be pressed upon any
trial, and for discovering of their fellows, abetors, or relievers as the
circumstances may offer themselves in their examinations, especially if before
they confess themselves guilty of the offense in imitation of the approver at
the Common Law, whereof no certain rule may be given. And it need not be made
a question here, whether the Jurors or Judges ought to be Judges of the matter
of fact, it being positively laid down in the sixteenth question that they
are. And though their false verdict does convince, or not convince the
prisoner, yet they may be questioned, and punished for a false verdict, as in
their answer to the sixteenth is already declared.

21. To the twenty one, they say, that that question is now judicially
depending, and has been already solemnly argued in his Majesty's Court of
Wards, in which Court their assistance for declaration of the law therein is
already required. And therefore they humbly desire they may not be compelled to
give any opinion touching that point until it be resolved there.

22. To the twenty two, they say, that they do conceive, that there is no
matter of Law contained in the said question, yet for the further satisfaction
of your Lordships, they say that upon view of an Act of state, bearing Date at
his Majesty's Castle of Dublin the twenty fourth of December 1636. grounded
upon his Majesty's Letters of the fifth of July then last past, it appeared unto
them that four shillings in the pound, as of his Majesty's free gift and
reward, out of the first payment of the increase of rent reserved to his
Majesty, was allowed to the Judges that were Commissioners and attended that
service. And we humbly conceive that the receiving of that four shillings in
the pound, of his Majesty's bounty, stands well with the integrity of a Judge,
and those Judges did inform them that they did not avoyde any Letters Patent
upon the Commission of Defective Titles but received such to compound as
submitted for the strengthening of their defective Patents and Titles, and such
as would stand upon the validity of their grants were left to the trial at
law. And that the Compositions made after the said grants of the four
shillings in the pound were made according to rules and rates agreed upon by
all the Commissioners before his Majesty's said Letters or the said Act of
State, and not otherwise.

George Shurley. Hu. Cressy. William Hilton. Edw. Bolton. James Barry. Sa.
Mayars. Iam. Donellan

Copia vera. Extract per Phil* Percivall.
Mr DARCIES REPLY TO THE ANSWER OF THE IVDGES.
MY LORDS,
His Majesty's most humble and faithful subjects, the Knights, Citizens, and
Burgesses in Parliament assembled representing the whole Commons of this Realm
calling to mind the late invasion made upon the Laws and just rights, have
heretofore presented unto the Lords House certain questions of great weight
and moment, to the end their Lordships might thereunto require the answer of
the Judges in writing, which being long sithence accordingly commanded by
their Lordships, the Judges have of late delivered in, a writing to the Lords
House by them styled, an Answer unto the said Questions, which being sent to
the Commons house to be taken into consideration, and the same and all the
parts thereof being weighed in the balance of the grave judgment, and
knowledge of the said house of Commons, the said answer was upon question voted
to be ( minus pondus habens) and not to merit the name of an answer.

This my Lords being the occasion of this conference, the house of Commons
appointed me, a feeble Organ, to utter part of their sense of the style and
manner of this writing, and to declare part of those reasons which satisfied
their judgments; that, the said writing was short and insufficient ( o utinam)
that were all.

My Lords, the Judges had diverse Months time to answer plain questions
(plain, I speak of those who would be plain) the house of Commons a few
days only to consider of that intricate writing. My powers are weak, and the
infirmities of my body are visible, both in part occasioned by an high hand, I
should therefore faint under the weight of this burden; but that the task is
not great, I do represent to your Lordships by way of rehearseall only some
parts of those reasons and authorities which were gathered and ripened to my
hands by the house of Commons.

My Lords in matters of importance the course has been ancient and not yet
deserted, to begin with Prologues or Exordiums, the work is not mine I will
only ( In nomine sanctissimae Trinitatis) make my entrance upon the matter of
this Conference which is a general concernment; a great concernment of the
whole kingdom: And to that purpose I will declare the causes and reasons which
moved or rather enforced the house of Commons, for to digest and propound the
said Questions, and to make it appear that none of them is ( Idea Platonica)
none of them circumventing, and all depending now or of late.

To mantayne the preamble to Questions (viz.) Preamble to the questions.
That this Nation ought to be governed by the Common-lawes of England, that
the great Charter and many other beneficial statutes of England are here of
force, by reasoning or argumentation, were to alter a foundation laid 460.
years past, and to shake a stately building thereon erected by the providence
and industry of all the ensuing times and ages: This is so unanswerable a
truth and a principle so clear, that it proves all, it needs not to be
proved or reasoned.

Reasons why the Questions were propounded.

The reason for the first was, 1. q. 1. rat.
the late introduction of an arbitrary government in many cases by some
Ministers of estate contrary to the laws and statutes aforesaid, a government
contrary to the just freedom and property of his Majesty's people, in their
lives, estates and liberties, whereas the subjects governed by the laws of
England are and ought to be free subjects, the late disuse therefore of those
laws in execution, and the measure of justice being squared by the Lesbian
line of uncertaintie, as contrary to the laws aforesaid, as any ( oppositum is
in objecto) produced the first question, and I hope not improperly.

The reason for the second in part arises out of the Oath of a Judge 18. Edw.
3. 2. q. 2. rat.
to be found among the Printed statutes Polton fol. 144. and out of the
statutes of 20. Edw. 3. cap. 1. 2. and 3. Polton fol. 145. This Oath is
comprehensive and extends to the Judges, the Barons of the Exchequer, and
Justices of Gaole-delivery, and their associats.

This great and sacred Oath contaynes several branches. First, well and
lawfully to serve the King and his people in the Office of a Justice. Secondly,
not to Counsel or consent unto any thing tending to the Kings damage or
disinherison. Thirdly, to warn the King of his damage when he knows it,
Fourthly, to do equal Justice to rich and poor, etc. without respect of
persons. Fifthly, to receive no reward. Sixthly, to take no Fee of any other then
the King. Seventhly, to commit such as break the peace in the face of Justice.
Eighthly, not to mantayne any suite. Ninthly, not to deny Justice
notwithstanding the Kings Letters or Commandments, and in that Case to
certify the King of the truth. Tenthly, by reasonable wages to procure the
profits of the Crown. Eleventhly, if he be found in default, in any the
matters aforesaid, to be in the Kings mercy, body, Lands, and goods.

The second reason principally moves from the following particulars; In the
Kings Bench the Major-part of the Judges denied his Majesty's writ of
prohibition to the late Court called the high Commission, in a cause merely
temporal. The four Courts of Justice durst not proceed in any cause
depending before the chief Governor, or at the Counsell-board upon paper
petitions, or rather void petitions, these paper-petitions being the oblique
lines aforesaid, grave Judges of the law were commonly assistants, and more
commonly referrees in the proceedings upon these paper-petitions, in what
causes? in all causes proper for the Cognizance of the Common Law, and
determinable by writs of right, and petitions of right, and so to the most
inferior action, the like of the Courts of equity, whether this be lawfully to
serve the King and his people, or whether the King, was at loss by the
non-prosecuting of the causes aforesaid in their proper orbs, by original
writs, which might afford the King a lawful revenue, and likewise by the loss
of fines, and amerciaments, natural to actions at the Common Law, or whether
the loss aforesaid was made known to his Majesty, or who consented to the
Kings damage therein, or whether this be a denial of justice? to defer it
upon paper Orders or Commands, be conformable to that Oath, I will pretermit;
yet your Lordships may even in this mist discern a clear ground for the
second question.

The motive which in part stirred the third, 3. and 4. q. 3. and 4. ratio.
and fourth questions, was the infinity of Civil causes, of all natures
without exception of persons, without limitation of time proceeded in, ordered,
decreed, and determined upon paper-petitions at Counsell-board, and by the
chief Governor alone; The Commons of this kingdom observing the Judges of the
law who were Counselors of estate, to have agreed and signed unto such Orders,
the Judges of the four Courts, and Justices of Assize in all the parts of the
kingdom to be referrees upon such proceedings, whereby these new devises, were
become so notorious, that as all men heavily groaned under them, so no man
could be ignorant of them.

By the color of Proclamations more and more frequent, 5. 6. 7. q. 5. 6. 7.
rat.
and of the Orders, and Acts of state at Counsell-board, which were in a manner
infinite, and other proceedings mentioned in these questions, these effects
were produced; First imprisonment, close imprisonment, of such numbers, that a
great defeat in a battle could hardly fill more gaoles and prisons, then by
these means were surcharged in Ireland, Secondly by seizures made by crewes of
Catchpoles and Caterpillars, his Majesty's Liege people lost their goods, as if
lost in a battle, nay worse without hope of ransom; Thirdly possessions were
altered, and that so often, and so many, that more possessions were lost by
these courses in a few years, then in all the Courts of Justice in Ireland in
an age or two; The fourth effect was this, after liberty was taken away,
property altered, and possession lost, by the ways aforesaid, that was not
sufficient, the subject must be pillored, papered, stigmatized, and the image
of God so defaced with indignities, that his life became a continuing death the
worse of punishments, in these feats were advising, and concurring some grave
and learned Judges of the Land, who were Counselors of estate, as by their
signatures may appear.

The house of Commons finding as yet no warrant of president, nor countenance
of example in the law of England, to bear up the courses aforesaid, have
drawn the said Questions from the effects aforesaid.

My Lords, 8. q. 8. rat.
the liberty, estate in lands or goods, the person of the subject; nay his
honor and spirit being invaded, altered, and debased in manner aforesaid, there
remained yet one thing, his Life: See how this is brought into play, nothing
must escape, were not the Gates of Ianus shut up, was not the Kings peace
universal in his three kingdoms, when a Peer of this Realm, a Counselor of
the Kings, a great Officer of state was sentenced to be shot to death in a
Court Marshall, what the cause was, what defense was permitted, what time
given, and what loss sustained? I submit to your Lordships, as therein most
nearly concerned, were not others actually executed by Marshall law, at such
time as the Kings Justice in his Courts of law, was not to be avoided by any
person whatsoever. This was in part the ground of the eight question.

This question is plain, 9. q. 9. rat.
a late introduced practice here, contrary to former use, and no appearing
president to warrant such prosecution for a voluntary Oath, and the great
benefit, and quiet accrewed to his Majesty's people by arbiterments conceived
by consent of parties, has in part occasioned this question.

Heretofore this Confession was not required, 10. quest. 10. ratio.
for the Justness of the Judgments was then able enough to bear them up, and
if the judgment in some Case had been otherwise, what force can the
confession of a delinquent add to a Judicial act, 11. quest. 11. ratio.
this is part of the reason for this question.

A complaint exhibited in the house of Commons touching the denial of the Copy
of a Record, which the complaynant undertook to Justify, in part raised this
question.

In King James his time, 12. q. 12. rat.
by an order conceived in the Court of Exchequer upon great debate, and
warranted by ancient presidents the respite of homage was reduced to a
certainty, viz. two shillings six pence sterling* For a Manor yearly, and so
for Towns, and other portions of Land, this course was always held until now
of late the respite is arbitrarily raised as appears by the second
remembrances certificate, viz. I find that anciently before the beginning of
King James his reign, The second remembrancers certificate.
every Manor paid three shillings four pence Irish per annum, and every
Towne-land, twenty pence Irish per annum, as a fine for respite of homage, 1.
Iunii, 1641.
but cannot find any order or warrant for it, until the fifth year of the
said Kings reign, and there, in Easter Term 1607. I find an order entered
directing what homage every man should pay a Copy whereof you have already from
me, the preamble of which orders shows that, that matter had been long
depending in the Court undecided, which induces me, to believe that there was
no former president or order in it. About three years after, the freeholders
of the County of Antrim as it should seem, finding this rate to be too heavy
for them, they petitioned to the Lord Chichester then Lord Deputy for relief
therein, and I find his Lordships opinion to the Court thus Recorded.

I know much of the petitioners. Lands is waste, and no part of it improved by
any manner of husbandry, other then in grazing of Cattle, and in sowing of
little Oats. And the proprietors of the Land, to be for the most part very
poor, and needy, and the two Children of Neale mac Hugh to be yet under age;
Wherefore I think it fit that the Court of Exchequer should consider thereof,
and rate the respite of homage accordingly for a time, until the County be
better inhabited, and these men made to understand that it is not an
imposition, but a lawful duty and payment due to his Majesty. This is my
advise and opinion for the present, xxx. die April. 1610.

Arthur Chichester.

Upon this the said Freeholders were admitted to pay but four pence Irish
every Twogh of Land, it consisting of sixteen Towne-lands, and according to
this rate they still paid until the year 1630. and then the Court taking
notice of the unequalitie of it, made this order, 5. Febr. 1630.

After this I find that all his Majesty's Tenants did conform themselves to
the said order of 1607. until Easter Term 1637. in which Term this ensuing
order was made which is the last that I can find Recorded in my Office.

Henry Warren.

I find by the payments made in the late Queen Elizabeth's time that the rates
of homage paid was according to the said order of 1607.

Henr. Warren.

Diverse were actually imprisoned and long kept in close restraint, 13 quest.
13. ratio.
for none other cause then in dutiful manner and be seeming terms to have
made known their particular complaints to his sacred Majesty imprisonment of
this kind was frequent, therefore it is not improper to demand by what law it
was done.

Many have lost great estates and possessions by Orders of the Counsel-bord,
14. quest. 14. ratio.
although the Deanes elected, or actual Deanes confirmed their estates, if no
donation from the Crown were found upon Record to the confirming Deane, and
this after that by verdict at the Common Law the Deanrie was found to be
Elective, this Question therefore is not improper.

After such time as this Parliament was agreed upon at Counsell-board to be
summoned; 15. q. 15. rat.
some persons having prepared bloody and destroying Bills to be past as laws,
and intending to defeat by act of Parliament very many of his Majesty's
faithful subjects of this kingdom of their estates and liberties, and having
obtained some undue elections by threats or entreaties, and mistrusting that
all should run clear before them, have caused twenty four Corporations to be
seized, upon the return of the first summons in several Quowarrantees
procured by Sir Richard Osbalston late Attorney general to show cause why they
sent Burgesses to the Parliament, the said Corporations having formerly sent
Burgesses to the Parliament, even to the last Parliament, by means whereof the
said Corporations sent no Burgesses in the beginning of this Parliament, from
this act being done in a legal Court against the high Court of Parliament
sprung this question, which My Lords is of consequence, if Parliaments be so as
without question they are.

The faith which the Common Law gives to verdicts, 16. quest. 16. ratio.
the Jurors being Judges of the fact, 17. quest. 17. ratio.
the late usage of that great Court growing to the punishment of Jurors, 18. q.
18. rat.
and others in greater numbers by heavier fines, and more shameful punishments
without respect to estate, age, sex or quality then was or can be observed in
all precedent times, and the just sense thereof, moved the house of Commons to
propound these questions.

My Lords, 19. quest. 19. rat.
a poor fellow stole or was accused to have stolen a Sheep, fear, or guilt,
or both brought him to the mountains, another relieved him, the reliever was
executed as a Traitor, and after the principal submits to trial and judgment,
and was acquitted, this example My Lords I hope may warrant the question.

The testimony of such infamous persons, 20. que. 20. rat.
have brought men of quality to their trial, for their lives and being
acquitted the Jurors being of very good rank, were heavily censured in the
Castlechamber, as well by fines surmounting their abilities, as by most
reproachful punishments, upon these acts, the question is grounded.

There being no warrant in the Printed law, 21. quest. 21. rat.
or otherwise for ought yet appearing for to make this a Tenure in Capite, the
constant course of the Court of wards taking it to be no Tenure in capite,
since the erection of that Court until Trinity term 1639. it was then and
not before certified a tenure in capite by the then Attorney of that Court, who
said that the Judges concurred with him in that opinion, by which means
Counsel did not then argue, and the next term after were denied to be heard,
ne aliquid contra responsum prudentum this being done in the Court of wards,
the question did spring from thence.

The two and twentieth question was not yet agitated in the house of Commons
nor brought thither, therefore My Lords that may be deferred to a further
conference; By this which I have opened being the smaller part of those weighty
reasons delivered unto me by the house of Commons, yet the best I can for the
present remember, I hope your Lordships are satisfied that those questions were
not intrapping, feigned, or circumventing, or phantazies, as formerly I touched.

In the next place I will labor to give your Lordships a more clear
satisfaction, that those questions grounded upon sufficient and apparent
reasons, and causes do deserve clear and satisfactorie answers, and to remove
all doubts, The questions I will no more call Questions, I will humbly style
them Causes of weight and Consequence, wherein the Lords and Commons of this
Realm on the behalf of themselves and their posterity in after times, are
Plaintifes, and only delinquents of an high nature are defendants, in this high
Court of Parliament. Hopperus de vera Iuris prudentia. page 118.
It is not unworthy your Lordships consideration; to whom the questions were
put, I answer unto the Judges of the Land, who are, and sure I am ought to be
first etate graves, secondly, eruditione praestantes, thirdly, usu rerum
prudentes, fourthly, publica authoritate constituti.

The persons unto whom being thus qualified, the place where, is most
considerable, it is the high Court of Parliament, the Judges are called thither
( Circa ardua and urgentia negotia regni) of the whole kingdom what to do (
Quod personaliter intersint, Lord Chancel. Egerton de postnat. fol. 17.
cum Rege ac cum caeteris de consilio suo super dictis negotijs tractaturi
consiliumque impensuri.) Therefore they are not called thither to be ciphers
in augurisme, or tell clockes, no, those great causes are mentioned in their
writ, and upon that great Oath, they are to give faithful counsel and make
direct answers to your Lordships in all things wherein ( ardua and urgentia
regni) are concerned, and whether? that concernment do comprehend the matters
aforesaid. I do humbly offer to your Lordships great consideration most of the
matters included in those questions are solemnly voted in both houses as
grievances, as may appear by the petition of Remonstrance, the Judges could
not be ignorant of this, and do take notice of the same in their preamble.

My Lords, In the third place no man is more unwilling to discover the
nakedness of my Fathers, if any be, then I am, yet the question being not
whether the Arc should be rescued from the Philistines, but whether it should
be preserved against the negligence of some Ophni and Phines in their hands
that have the custody of it, Therefore I must obey, and as I am Commanded I
will offer unto your Lordships, how the preamble and answers of the Judges
might be sufficient, and wherein they are both defective and dangerous.

The Judges in the first reason of their preamble, insist much upon the want of
president in this kind, only one president in the reign of King Richard the
seconds time, which they pray may not be drawn into example.

My Lords, ^. ratio.
This reason requires a more clear explanation which we hope shall be
demanded in due time. It urges us to this just protestation, that before the
best flower in his Majesty's Royal garland should wither, we shall be ready
to water the same with showers of our blood, even to the last drop in his
Majesty's service, and with our lives and substance will mantayne the just
prerogative of our gracious Lord King Charles and his posterity, whom we pray
God to flourish on earth over us and ours, until all flesh be convoked before
the last great Tribunal; Yet My Lords that president might be spared by the
Judges, of this no more for the present, I will not exasperate, had they
pleased, more natural presidents might be stood upon, and easily found, and
even in that ill remembered president; if the Judges in Richard the seconds time
had made direct and lawful answers, they had escaped punishment and prevented
many inconveniences which ensued.

My Lords, if presidents be necessary, of many I will enumerate a few,
Deutronomy cap. 17 verse. 8. Si difficile and ambiguum, etc. Almighty God
directs us the way to truth, Deutronom. cap. 32. verse. 7. Interroga patrem
tuum, etc. The Romans sent to Greece for a declaration of their laws, in
causes like to happen, Tit. Live. decad. 3. fol. 45. g. Lancelotus de
Ecclesiasticis Constitutionibus tit. 3. Canonum alij sunt decreta Concjliorum,
alij statut' ialij dicta sanctorum, Rottoman de Iure Civili tit. 4. Praetorum
dicta and responsa prudentum, which cannot be without questions, venerable Bede lib. 1. cap. 27. S. Augustine demanded general questions; M. Sleiden
super Eadmerum, fol. 171. William the Conqueror did call to the Judges, to
declare and compile Edgars laws, and S. Edwards laws, which were buried, and
forgotten, by the interruption of the Danish government.

In the time of King Henr. 3. certain knights of Ireland, Poltons stat. fol. 8.
desired resolutions in England concerning Coparcenerie and received
resolutions according to the laws of England, and this in Parliament, as
appears in the statute called statut. de Hiber. 14. Henr. 3. in the printed
Book.

Ordinationes factae de statut' terr' Hiberniae at large in the Roll of 7. Edw.
2. Atchi. Tu^ris Land.
part prima, memb. 3. and 18. Rot' Claus. anno 2. Edw. 3. membr. 17. Rex
concedit quod ad primum Parliamentum omnes Hiberni qui volue^int legibus
utantur Angliae sine Cartis inde fiendis. Rot. Claus. anno 5. Edw. 3. part
prima membr. 25. The same law in Case of wardships.

Ordinationes pro Regimine Hiberniae 5. Edw. 3. Pat' membr. 25. and 35. Edw. 3.
part prima, memb 9. which Consilium ought to be understood of the Parliament
as hereafter I will declare.

Ordinatio facta de ministris Regis in Hibernia Claus. 18. Edw. 3. part
secunda memb. 9. and 17. and ann. 20 Edw. 3. part prima in dorso, and anno 25.
Edward. 3. membr. 30.

My Lords, I have not yet learned how Sillogismes can be made, or answers
Cathegoricall, without propositions. I am as ignorant after what manner
Ordinances or reformation could be made without questions or propositions.

It may be objected that the word Quere or Question is new, that word was
nothing strange in Edward the thirds time, Rot. Parliament, 21. Edw. 3. number. 41.

The Commons in Parliament prayed that it may be inquired how, Cambd. Anals
Hibern.
it comes to pass that the King has no benefit of his land of Ireland,
considering he had more there then any of his ancestors, may it not be as
lawful to inquire in this Parliament, wherefore the King is in debt, and yet
his people here gave him more supplies then to any of his ancestors, or
wherefore his laws are not observed, I find no difference.

In the printed year Book 2. Rich. 3. fol. 9. the King propounded several
questions to the Judges in the Star Chamber in Cases not then depending.

Their second reason, 2. ratio.
is fully answered to the first, and for more clear satisfaction, the words of
the writ, which bring them hither, are viz. to give Counsel circa ardua and
urgentia negotia regni, the matters now in agitation are maxim ardua, maxim
urgentia.

The year books of law do prove Provisiones and Ordinationes, and no cause
is said to be depending f. N. B. 32. d. 39. Edw. 3. 7. b. Thorp. The Lords
being assembled can make Ordinances as strong as a statute, by the opinion of
that Judge such Ordinances cannot be avoided, but in Parliament, an act or
statute may be avoided or repealed in Parliament.

Where they say that the Questions though in number but twenty two, 3. ratio.
yet they include fifty two questions, that all the affairs of Church and
Commonwealth may be included in the resolution thereof, and that they will
not be concluded by their answers to the same.

My Lords, the house of Commons made the questions so many as they are for the
more clear explanation of their candid intentions, and not for difficulty,
whereas they might reduce them to fewer, but to the end the answers might be
the more punctual, and satisfactorie unto positive points, and known law, and
the custody of the law, the great treasure of the Land, being committed by his
Sacred Majesty to their trust, to the end they should declare how? and after
what manner, they issued and dispensed that treasure, and discharged that great
trust? and not to be bound by their resolutions in Parliament; For Judges are
and ought to be bound by resolutions in Parliament, and not Parliaments by
them.

To their fourth reason, 4. ratio.
what succeeding ages will do, we do well hope, they will not do amiss, that
no occasion shall be administered hereafter which may enforce the house of
Commons to propound the like questions.

That by reason the Kings prerogative and the concernment of his other
interests they cannot answer without his Majesty's especial direction, 5.
ratio.
considering the duties of their places and their Oaths.

My Lords, It is manifest that by their Oaths they are bound to interpret the
laws truly between the King and his people, and between party and party,
and if in any Case granted, it cannot be denied when the Commonwealth desires
a Declaration of the law in certain points, wherein they conceive their just
liberties to have been invaded, least under color of prerogative which the
Parliament holds to be sacred, some ministers may presume (as of late they have
endeavored) to destroy the peoples just liberties.

In the ordinary Courts of Justice, the Judges upon Oath are bound to afford
the subject Justice against the King, and all others, and are appointed by his
Majesty for that purpose, all writs are in his Majesty's name in the Kings
bench, the pleas are styled Coram Rege, Letters Patent and writs original are
Test me ipso, the King is therefore present in Parliament, being the highest
tribunal, where in truly he sits in the exaltation of Royalty and
greatness. Therefore the Commands of all his ordinary Courts are the commands
of the King, much more Commands in Parliament, where his presence is more
apparent and essential then in all other Courts of this kingdom.

It appears copiously by the great Charter, and by constant practice of all
Parliaments since that time, that all Courts and Judges were regulated by
Parliaments, as for the Kings prerogative, or revenue, the Judges cannot be
ignorant, but the Parliament is and ever has been the best mantayner of his
just prerogatives, the best overseer of his revenue, which if it fall short,
they only are able and willing to supply.

It is true, 6. ratio.
that the abuses of former times might be reformed for the future by Bills to
be past as statutes Yet that is away about, and we may not loose the
possession of our laws, and just liberties nor by new statutes admit
impunitie, or give countenance to past offenses, statutes of this kind
sufficient were already enacted and passed in former ages.

The declaration of a known law, 7. ratio.
and the manifestation of wholesome statutes already established well may help
the Commonwealth, for the present, but cannot in any probability fall out
hereafter to be prejudicial to the state or Commonwealth, and there is no
president or example of any such prejudice.

It is confessed that most of the matters contained in the Questions are
already voted for grievances in both houses, 8. ratio.
and that very justly, but how the law is therein, remaynes yet to be declared,
as to this present Parliament, which I hope in due time shall be declared,
according to law and justice, as in many Parliaments before the same or the
like has been often done.

Where they do again insist upon the want of president, 9. ratio.
and withal that in the preamble to the Questions, the protestation cleares
the law.

This word President strikes close unto us, I have answered it before by
presidents, yet some more presidents I will offer as often as they speak the
word president 7. 8. Elizabeth Die. fol. 241. b. placit. 49. The Kings Attorney
demanded the opinion of the Judges, 9. Elizab. Die. 261. placit. 28, Casus
Hiber. where the Judges of England signed their opinions to questions
propounded by the Judges of Ireland, 11. Eliz. Die. fol. 282. b, plac. 26. Casus
Hiber. 19. and 20. Elizab. Die. 360. The Case of arraignement of a Peer, the
like 13. Caroli by all the Judges of England; the Earl of Ormonds Case, and
yet in none of these Cases the matter was depending before them.

Notwithstanding the protestation may clear the law, yet in all precedent
ages, laws clear in themselves, for their greater honor and countenance, they
have been declared and enacted in Parliament.

The Law declared by Magna Charta was clear before, yet it was enacted 9.
Henr. 3. and in thirty Parliaments since Cook 8. 19. b. Primes Case the
statute of praerog. Regis. And the statute of 25. Edw. 3. of treasons, is
declarative and so are many other statutes. Genes. c. 3. verse. 7. etc. 4. verse.
8.
Adam eat the forbidden fruit, Cain killed his brother, God demanded whether
this was done, yet he could not be ignorant of the fact. The first article in
the Civil and Canon law Courts, is, whether there is such a law all this is
done for illustrations sake.

My Lords, The ground of the Questions, and the preamble to the writing styled
an Answer, kept me so long, that I fear much to have trespassed upon your
patience; and yet the importance of the cause urges me to importune your
Lordships favor a little further.

This Question is short and yet comprehensive, 1. Quest.
that we are a free people, 1. Answer
is confessed to my hands, to that part of the answer I do not except, the
second part of the Question is, whether we are to be governed by the laws of
England and statutes of force in Ireland only. First though I need not prove
it, yet it is clear we ought to be so governed, Matthew. Paris. historia maiori
fol, 121. Sir John Davis discovery of Ireland fol. 100. King Henry the second
held a Parliament at Lismore in Ireland, in which Parliament Leges and
consuetudines Angliae fuerunt gratanter acceptae by the representative body of
this whole Nation, Magna Charta and other beneficial statutes of England, are
here in the red Book of the Exchequer in, and since King John's time, and so is
Gervasius Tilberiensis of the Course and Officers of the Exchequer, in the
white book of the Exchequer of Ireland, leges and consuetudines Angliae
received in Ireland by Parliament and otherwise this appears, Archi. Turris
London.
9. John. pat membr. 2. 1. Henr. 3. pat. memb. 13. 10. Hen. 3. pat. membr. 4.
12. Henr. 3. claus. membr. 8. by which words, and by the constant practice of
all ages since, this kingdom was governed, and ought to be so by the law of
England, as the law of the land, which law as it was always here received,
consists of three parts. First, the Common Law. Secondly, the general customs
of England. Thirdly, statutes here received. The Common Law that is cleared
already, Customs as Tenant by the Courtesy. Inne-keepers to be responsible for
things within their houses, or the like when we speak of a Custom in the law,
it must be intended a general Custom over the Realm, and no particular
Custom. And this appears by the year books of 37. Henr. 6. fol. 5. 21.
Henr. 7. 17. 18. Particular customs, as Gavelki^d, Boreugh, English-tenant
right, or the like are not to be intended when we speak generally of Custom,
and these Customs are warranted by the Common Law of England, being not
contrary to the same, but praeter legem, so there may be and are particular
customs here praeter legem, and yet not contrary to law, as in many
Corporations and Countries, so the wives third of goods is good in England, by
the custom of many counties and places, F. N. B. 122. 7. Edward. 4. 21. 40.
Edw. 3. 38. 17. Edw 2. f. detinue 58. Therefore it is not contrary to law, that
such a custom is here, over all the kingdom, And yet if any man ask the
question; by what law we are governed, there is no proper answer, Stat.
Hiberniae. 67. a.
other then by the law of England. And for the statutes of England general
statutes were received in this kingdom, some at one time, some at another, and
all general statutes by Poynings Act, anno 10. Henr. 7. but no other statute,
or new introducting law, until the same be first received and enacted in
Parliament in this kingdom, and this may appear by two declarative statutes
the one 10. Henr. 4. the other 29. of Henr. 6.

The law of England as it is the best humane law, so it is a noble and sociable
law, and for the more clear discerning of the truth and equal administration
of Justice it referres many causes to their genuyn and natural proceedings as
Maritime causes to the Court of Admiralty, Co. Institutes 260. 361. Stamford.
57. b. Co. 5. 106. 107, Constables Case, and there the proceeding is by the
Civil law, Co 8 47. b. Matters beyond the Seas are determined in the Court of
constable and Marshall; Cooks institutes 391. b. matters of Latin the law
referres to Grammarians, Com. fol. 122. matters merely Ecclesiastical to be
tried and determined in the proper Courts Coke 7. 43 b 8. Co. 68. 5. Co. 57. 1.
R. 3. 4. matters of merchandise to Merchants, 34. Henr. 8. Die, 52 and 54. Many
other cases upon this learning are to be found; Co. 9. fol. 30. 31. 32. Strat.
Marclads case, Yet in all these and the like Cases the trial and determination
thereof, are bounded and controuled by the rules of the Common Law, they are as
Rivers which are necessary to run through the land, to help the inhabitants
thereof, but if they overflow the banks, the banks are made higher and
stronger to suppress their violent current, so in all the cases aforesaid, and
the like. The Common Law has limited the proceedings, if they exceed their
bounds, witness the prohibitions in all our Books, and the statutes of
Provision and praemunire, and cases there upon in many ages, by which it is
manifest that the Supreme, and governing law, are the Common Law,
Common-customes, and statutes of the Realm, and the rest, but ministers and
servants unto it, brevia remediana are only by the Common Law, mandatoria, may
be in the said other cases, 7. Co. Calvin's case Die. 176.

So that the answer as to the words (in the general) is short and ought to be
positive.

As to the Courts of equity they have been ancient in England, and the
Courts of eqnity here, ought to be guided by the constant proceedings in
England in ages past, I mean not, by this or that Chancellor but by that
natural and just equity in the Courts here observed. This equity is of
absolute necessity in many cases ( ipsae etenim leges capiunt ut jure
regantur) and therefore is included within the law of the Land, and not to be
divided from it, as out of this writing it may be inferred.

As to the case of killing in rebellion to operate an Attaynder, if this be no
law in England it cannot be law here, vide Dame-hales case com. 263. a. 8.
Edw. 3. 20. fitz Dower 106. Cromptons Jurisdiction fol. 84. a. by which it may
be urged, that it is an Attaynder for that he prevented the judgment of law
by fighting against the Crown, and by his killing therein, which ensued his
unlawful and traiterous act, but I observe to the contrary, the books of 7.
Henr. 4. 32 b. and Cook. 4. 57. Sadlers case. I do confess that in England
statutes may be obsolete as the statute of William Butler, by which the heir
may have an action of wast, Rastall 5. 21. all the books are contrary, and so
is the statute of Merton of disparagment as to an action to be brought for the
same, so are some antiquated laws, 40. Edw. 3. 42. 42. ass. 8. and 25. one
present and aiding to murder was accessory, but now is principal 4. Hen. 7.
18. Com. 99. and 100. a Vicar could not anciently have an action against a
Parson, 40. Edw. 3. 28. Finchden the law is now otherwise, and so of an entry
upon a feoffee with warranty sit fol. 23. 24. in the case of disparagement,
give the reason, because that those statutes and laws were never used,
therefore obsolete, our case is nothing like, for life, liberty, and property
being in debate, but an obsolete law is no law in force. Therefore the answer
as to that is defective.

As to the case of a fellon upon his keeping and terrifying of the people, I
conceive the answer is uncertain and dangerous, if such a fellon raise an
armed power against the Crown and terrify that way no doubt this is treason
within the statute of 25. Edw. 3. or the equity of it, and by the statute of
10. Hen. 7. cap. 13. in Ireland, statuto Hiberniae fol. 62. but if such
terrifying be without raising arms, or by committing the same or the like
fellonies, it is no more then the case of purse-takers by force in the high
ways of England, many a man was terrified thereby in Salisbury-plaine, and yet
no treason; and if there be no statute here, which is not in England, to make
it treason certainly it cannot be treason; since the Conquest, writ of error
have been brought for to reverse Judgments given in the Kings Bench here, in
the Court of Kings Bench in England, no course here which is contrary to law,
can alter the law of England, therefore, to what purpose is a declaration of
Judges here, contrary to the law there. This writ of error is a writ framed in
the Register and appears by common experience. I will offer a notable case
which I saw adjudged in the Kings Bench in England, Pasc. 18. Iacobi for
Stafford against Stafford in a writ of error for to reverse a Judgment given in
the Kings Bench in Ireland when Sir William Jones was Chief Justice here, in
an ejectione firm, for that in the declaration there was contained among other
things ducentas acras Montani. Sir William Jones being in England, affirmed
the course here, to have been so, and vouched many notable Presidents,
thereupon an order was conceived that Sir James Ley, Sir Humphry VVinch, and
Sir John Denham knights, who were formerly Chief Justices here should certify
the course, who made report that the course in Ireland was and ought to be, in
writts original and Judicial to be directed by the Register, in pleading to
be guided by the books of entries, and thereupon the Judgment was reversed,
And the Chief Justice Mountague said, that if they did not proceed in Ireland
according to law, they should learn it, And so I conclude that the answer to
the first Question, is insufficient.

As touching the second Question, 2. Quest.
which is concerning the Oath which this Judges do take, the question is
whether the Judges of the land do take the Oath of Judges? And if so, etc.

The answer of the Judges to the first part is, 2. Answe.
that they confess they take the Oath of Judges, which is specified amongst
the statutes in 1^. Edw. 3. and 20. Edward. 3 as I said before, and that they
may not stay, hinder, or delay the suite of any subject or his judgment or
execution there upon, otherwise then according to the law and course of the
Court, where they sit under pretense of any act of state, proclamation, writ,
letter, or direction under the great Seal, or privy Seal, or privy Signet,
or Letter, or other Commandment from the Lord Lieutenant, Lord Deputy Justice,
Justices or other, chief Governor of this kingdom, most of which does appear
by their Oath expressed, expressed in the said statutes, and the statute of 2.
Edw. 3. c. 8. and the statute of 20. Edw. 3. as to the Barons of the Exchequer,
and as they know no punishments due to the Judges for their deviations and
transgressions without other aggravation, so they know no punishment laid down
by any law against them for their deviations and transgressions, in hindering,
staying, or delaying of Justice, contrary to their said Oath other then what is
declared in their said Oath, and the statute of 20. Edw. 3.

I conceive the answer is not a full and perfect answer to the Question. For
where the Question is whether the Judges under pretext of any act of state,
proclamation, writ, Letter or direction under the great, or privy Seal, or
privy Signet, or Letter, or other Commandment from the Lord Lieutenant, Lord
Deputy, Justice, or Justices, or other chief Governor or Governors of this
kingdom, they may hinder, stay, or delay the suite of any subject, or his
judgment, or execution thereupon; if so, in what cases, and whether, if they
do hinder, stay, or delay such suite, judgment, or execution thereupon, what
punishment do they incur for their deviations and transgressions therein.

To this they answer, that they may not stay, hinder, or delay the suite of any
subject, or his judgment, or execution thereupon otherwise then according to
the law, and course of the Court, where they sit, under pretense of any act of
state, proclamation, writ, letter, or direction, under the great or privy
Seal, or privy signet, or letter, or other commandment from the Lord
Lieutenant, Lord Deputy, Justice, or Justices, or other chief Governor, or
Governors of this kingdom, whereas they ought to have expressed the particular
of this exception, for by that clause, it is supposed, or may be strongly
employed, that in some cases they may hinder, stay, or delay the suite of any
subject, or his judgment, or execution thereupon, under pretext of any act of
state, proclamation, letter, or direction under the great or privy Seal, or
privy signet, or other Commandment from the Lord Lieutenant, Lord Deputy,
Justice, Justices, or other chief governor, or governors of this kingdom,
which they ought to have expressly laid down, the question being if they may
stay, hinder, or delay the suite of any subject upon any such pretext, then to
set forth in what Cases, which ought to be particularly answered unto.

In the next place the Question is, if they do stay, hinder, or delay such
suite, judgment, or execution thereupon, then to set forth what punishment they
do incur for their deviation, or transgression therein.

Unto this they answer, they know no punishment due to the Judges for their
deviation, and transgressions without other aggravation,

This I conceive is an implication, that there is a punishment where there is
matter of aggravation, and therefore it ought to be expressed what matter of
aggravation they intend the same to be.

They further say, they know no punishment: laid down by any law against them,
for their deviations or transgressions in hindering, staying or delaying of
Justice contrary to their Oath, other then what is declared in their said Oath,
and the statute of ^0. Edw. 3.

This I conceive not to be a full answer, in respect the punishment laid down
in that Oath, is in a generality; viz. that the Judges so offending contrary to
their Oath, are to be at the Kings will of body lands and goods, which they
should declare, and express how far that punishment extends in their
bodies, lands, and goods.

Whether imprisonment of their bodies, or in their lives, and whether in
forfeiture of their lands goods, or how else?

The breach of an Oath is a very high offense, and the higher it is, that the
matter it does concern is the greater, and therefore it is much, secundum
subjectam materiam.

It is to be considered to whom the oath of a Judge is made, and what matter it
does concern.

To the first the Oath is made to GOD, the King and to the Commonwealth.

For the matter, it is concerning the true and equal administration and
distribution of Justice to the people.

If the Judge do offend contrary to his Oath, he commits breach of the trust
reposed in him by the King, besides the violation of his Oath. Look upon trust
between Common persons. A man makes a Lease for years, the Lessee makes a
scoffment, this is a forfeyture of his estate by the Common Law, 5. Ed. 4. 2.
by reason of the breach of trust. Lessee for life in an action brought against
him prays in aid of a stranger: this is a forfeyture of his estate.

A quid Iuris clamat brought against Lessee for life, 36. Hen. 6. 29.
he claymes a fee, which is found against him, this is a forfeyture of his
estate. So much for breach of trust.

To come unto a false verdict given by a Jury, 14. Hen. 7. 13.
which is a breach of their Oath, they being sworn ad veritatem dicendam. For
this false verdict an attaynt lies at Common law against the petit Jury.

The judgment at the Common Law in an attaynt imports eight grievous
punishments. 1. Quod amittat liberam legem in perpetuum. 2. quod forisfaciat
omnia bona and Catalla sua, 3. quod terrae and tenementa in manus Domini Regis
capiantur, 4. quod uxores and liberi extradomus suas eijoiantur, 5. quod domus
suae prostrentur, 6. quod arbores suae extirpentur, 7. quod prata sua arentur,
8 and quod corpora sua Carceri mancipentur. So odious is perjurie in the eye of
the Common Law. It follows therefore that the breach of the Oath of a Judge,
materia considerata, in regard it tends to the subversion of Justice, is an
offense of an higher nature deserving a far greater punishment in his body,
lands, and goods, as I conceive.

This question is very short and as plain, 3. quest.
it is no more then whether the Councell-table be a Iudicatorie, 3. answ.
in Civil causes between subject and subject for lands, goods, or Chattels,
and by what law. The answer is wholly ad aliud. But it is answered fully by the
great Charter capit. 11. 9. Henr. 3. Communia placita non sequantur Curiam
nostram, Common Pleas, which are the pleas in question shall not follow the
Kings Court, again cap. 29. No Freeman shall be taken, imprisoned, put off his
freehold, liberties and free customs, etc. other then by the lawful judgment
of his Peers, as by the law of the land.

This great assurance in the 38. Chap. of the same statute was granted for the
King and his successors to all his people, and was confirmed in thirty
Parliaments as I said before Cook. 8. the Princes Case. by the statute of 5.
Edw. 3. cap. 9. 25. Edw. 3. Cap. 4. 28. Edw. ^; cap. ^. 42. Edw. 3. cap. 1 and
^.

The great Charter is again confirmed, and not only so but proceedings
contrary to the same, before the King or his Counsel are declared void. The
King is to observe and mantayne the law, the Judge by his Oath, 18. Edward. ^.
is bound to do right between the King and his people, and that right
strengthens the Kings prerogative, presidents or practice contrary to so many
statutes are of no use, in many ages past encroachments were made upon these
just liberties, which were always removed by Parliaments. Yet I must confess
that of all antiquity some pleas have been held in the Kings Royal house, as
in the Court held by the Marshall of the Kings household for things arising
within the Verge, Fleta, lib. 2. cap. 2. but when that Court exceeds its due
bounds, declaratory statutes were always made to meet them as mischiefs in
the commonwealth, when they meddled with land or the like, as appears by the
statute of Articule super Chartam 28. Edw. 1. 15. R. 2. cap. 12. all these
statutes My Lords, and many more to this purpose are undenyably of force in
this kingdom, and none of them can be with impunitie said to be obsolete or
antiquated.

My Lords, they raise another doubt, viz that as the King may grant cognizance
of pleas to Corporations, or the like, and therefore to the Councell-table; if
this need an answer, I will answer it thus, that a grant of cognizance never
was, neither can it be otherwise, then to proceed per legem terrae, or per
judicium parium, and in the same manner as Courts do proceed at Common Law,
and not upon paper petitions, or summary hearings such cognizance was never
granted, the King is at loss by such proceedings, he loses fines upon
originals, he loses amerciaments, and fines incident to every judgment at
Common Law, as I said before, I he subject undergoeth an inconvenience. First
the law will decline, writs original will by disuse be forgotten, Clerks who
should draw them discouraged to learn, legal proceedings out of doors being
the foundation of the law, and in stead of regular and orderly proceeding,
rudeness and barbarism introduced, the subject will loose the benefit of his
attaynte and writ of error; by which the law might relieve him against false
verdicts or erroneous judgments he will loose the benefit of his warranty,
which might repair a purchaser, in case his acquired purchase were not good.
Whereas if a Judge or Iuror do wrong, the remedy is at hand, but against the
Lord Deputy and Council, who will seek for it? therefore the countenance of
this Judicature in Common Pleas, is against the Kings prerogative, and the
peoples just rights: both which the Judges ought to maintain, and likewise
against the intent of your Lordships order.

My Lords, as in England, the said several statutes were made to prevent the
inconveniences aforesaid, one good statute was made in Ireland, 28. Henr. 6.
cap. 2. Irish statut. fol. 15. which directs matters of Interest to be
determined in the Common Pleas, matters of the Crown in the King's Bench,
matters of equity in the Chancery: This law, if there were no more, regulates
the proceedings in this kingdom.

The Judges insist upon the words in the end of that statute, viz. Saving the
Kings prerogative. My Lords, this was stood upon at the late great trial in
England, and easily answered, for by the Common Law, the King may by his
prerogative, sue in any of the four Courts, for his particular interest,
although it be contrary to the nature of that Court, for he may sue a Quare
impedit in the Kings Bench, and the like, yet so as the said suite be bounded
by the rules of law, I will demand a question whether the King may bring a
Quare impedit in paper, Sir Thomas Tempest Knight.
at the Councell-board, the Kings now Attorney, I am confident will answer me,
he cannot*

The word salvo or saving is in construction of law of a thing in esse or
existente, and no creative word, 26. Ass. pla. 66. and cannot in the Kings Case
be construed to overthrow the law, nor many express, and positive acts of
Parliament.

My Lords, in all humbleness and duty I will and must acknowledge his
Majesty's Sacred and lawful prerogative, whereof the King himself is the best
expositor, in his answer to the Petition of right, Poltons stat. fol. 1433. he
declares that his prerogative is to defend the peoples liberty, and the
peoples liberty strenghtens the Kings prerogative, the answer was a Kingly
answer, and ( More ^ajorum) this is conformable to the great Charter, and to
all the statutes before recited. The government of England being the best in
the world, was not only Royal, but also politic, some other princes like
Cain, Nemrod, Esau, and the like hunters of men, subverted laws; The Kings of
England maintained them, and did never assume the power to change or alter the
laws, as appears by Fortescue that grave and learned Lord Chancellor in King
Henry the sixts time de laudibus legum Angliae cap. 9. fol. 25. and in the same
Book cap. 36. fol. 84. nor to take his peoples goods, nor to lay tax, nor
tallage upon them, other then by their free consent in Parliament, this
appears by the Book Cases in 1^. Henr. 4. fol. 14. 15. 16. the great case of
the Awlnage of London, and in the Case of toll-travers and toll-through 14.
Henr. 4. 9 37. Henr. 6. 27. 8. Henr. 6. 19 all agreeing, nor to alter the
nature of land as by converting land at Common Law to Gavelkind, or Borrough
English or e conuerso; as to the estate, otherwise as to the person of the King
Ple. Com. the Lord Barclyes Case fol. 246. 247. Yet it is most true that the
law of the land gives the King many natural and great prerogatives, far
beyond all other men, as may appear in the said Case fol. 243. but not to do
wrong to any subject, Com. 246. The person of the King is too sacred to do a
wrong in the intention of Law; if any wrongs be done his minister^ are Authors
and not the King; And the Kings just prerogatives, by the Kings Royal assent
in Parliament were bounded, limited and qualified, by several Acts of
Parliament, as if Tenant in cap. did alien at Common Law without license, this
was a forfeyture of his estate Plo: Com. case of mines fol. 332. the statutes
of 2. Edw. 3. cap* 14. makes this only finable, and the statute of Magna Charta
cap. 21. takes away the Kings prerogative, for cutting woods where he pleased:
many other cases there are upon this learning.

By this great Justice and bounty of the Kings of England, the Kings grew still
greater and more permanent.

The people became free and wealthy, no King so great as a King of rich and
free people. If the Councell-table may retain cognizance of causes contrary to
the Law, and to so many Acts of Parliament, why may they not avoyde all Acts of
Parliament as well? This no man will affirm, nor they intend.

My Lords, 1. object.
two objections seem to stand in my way. First, the multitude of presidents
countenancing the cognizance of the Councell-board in the matter aforesaid,
some in ancient times, and of late in great clusters and throngs. 2. object.
Secondly, that in book Cases it appears, the Judges of Law did take advice in
their Judgments with the Kings Counsel, as 40 Ed. 3. fol. 34. 39. Ass.
placito primo 35. Edw. 3. fol. 35. 19. Edw. 3. fitz. Judgment. 174.

In answer to the first, 1. Resp.
as for the multitude of presidents ( hinc illae lachrymae) there is our
grief, I find in our Books that presidents against Law, do never bind, there
is no down right mischief. But a president may be called upon, to bear it
up; Iudicandum est legibus non exemplis, Cook, 4. fol. 33. Mit^ons case Cook
11. fol. 75. Magdalen Colleges case Cook. 4. fol. 94. Slades case, multitudo
errantium non parit errori patrocinium.

I answer to the second that in those year books of Edw. 3. It is true, 2.
Resp. ad 2. Object.
that the Judges appealed to the Kings Council for advice in law, but who gave
the Judgment? the Judges, and what Judgment? a legal Judgment, and no paper
or arbitrary Judgment.

If this objection were material, I might answer further, that the Council
here may be understood, the great Council ( viz.) the Parliament ( propter
excellentiam) vide Cook, 6. 19. 20. Gregory's case. By the stat. of 4. Edw.
cap. 3. 14. and 36. Edw. 3. c. 10. Rastall, fol. 316. Parliaments were then to
be held once a year, the book of 39. Edw. 3. fol. 35. in the case of a
formedon; may well warrant this explanation of those books, the Bishops,
Abbots, Earls and Barons mentioned in the said books, may be well taken to be
the Lords house, which might sit by adjournements in those times of frequent
Parliaments, My Lords, I kept you too long upon this Question, I will be as
short in the next. And so I conclude the answer as to this point is no answer,
and whether the matters therein comprised be of dangerous consequence I submit
to your Lordships.

If the Chief Governor and Council of this kingdom cannot hear or determine
the causes aforesaid, 4. Quest.
surely the Chief Governor alone cannot do it, 4 Answer
all I have said to the third I do apply to this Question, together with one
president worthy your observation in 25. Edw. 1. Claus. m. 20. where I have an
authenticke coppie ( viz.) Archiv. Turris Londin.


Claus. vicessimo quinto Eaw primi m. 20.
De comunibus placitis per billas coram Iusticiariis Hiberniae nequaquam
terminandis.
Rex dilecto and fideli suo Iohanni VVogan. Iusticiario suo Hiberniae salutem;
cum intellexerimus quod vos comunia placita quae totis temporibus retroactis,
per brevia originalia de Cancellaria nostra Hiberniae placitari, deberent, and
consueverunt, per billas and petitiones vacuas jam de novo coram vobis deduci
facitis, and etiam terminari, per quod, feodum sigilli nostri quo utimur in
Hibernia, and fines pro breuibus dandis ad alia commoda quae nobis inde solent
accrescere di versimode subtrabuntur, in nostri and incolarum partium, illarum,
damnum non modicum, and gravamen. nolentes igitur hujusmodi novitates fieri per
quas nobis damna gravia, poterunt evenire, vobis mandamus quod si ita est, tunc
aliqua placita comunia, quae per brevia originalia de Cancellaria nostra
praedict^ de jure and consuetudine, hucusque visitata habent terminari per
petitiones and billas coram vobis deduci, placitari, aut terminari de caetero
nullatenus praesumatis, per quod vobis imputari debeat aut possit novum,
incommodum, in hac part.

Test Rege apud Shestoniam, xxiij. die Martij. Convenit cum Recorda,

William Collet.



Your Lordships, may see that in Edward the firsts time the King took notice,
First, that the said petitions were void. Secondly, that his revenues were
thereby impaired. Thirdly, that it was against the Custom of the land of
Ireland. Fourthly, that it was to the grievance of the people of Ireland.
Fifthly, he commanded John VVogan, then Chief Governor, not to presume to deal
in the like proceedings thereafter; I marvel not a little, wherefore the
Judges in our time after so many acts of Parliament since 25. Edw. 1. should
make any doubt or question to answer this clearly.

My Lords, 5. Quest.
I humbly desire not to be misconstrued in the debate of this Question, 5.
Answer
my meaning is not to pry into his Majesty's just prerogatives. Qui enim
majestatem scrutatur Principis, corruet spelndore ejus, the old saying in
English is as good, he that hewes a block above his head, the chipps will fall
into his eyes. The Question warrants no such scrutinie, I may not officiously
search into it. The Question is only, whether grants made of monopolies to a
subject be good in law, And whether by pretext of such grants the Kings free
people may loose their goods by seisures, or may be fined, imprisoned,
pillored, and papered, etc. Those things have been done and acted in many
cases, where the Monopolites were Judges and parties, in which case if an act
of Parliament did erect such a Iudicatorie, it were void, as against natural
Justice, Cook 8. 118. a Doctor Bonhams case; I speak to that thing, that
odious thing, Monopoly, which in law is detestable Cook 11. 53. b. the
Tailors of Ipswich case, by which any subject is hindered to exercise his
lawful trade, or lawfully to acquire his living, and the Condition of a bond
being to restrain any man from his trade, the bond is void in law, 2 Hen. 5.
5. b.

In this case the Judge Hull swoare ( par Dieu) if he who took this bond,
were present he would fine him to the King, and commit him to prison, by which
case I observe, that the consent of the party cannot make it good; That a
Patent of any such Monopolies is a grievance against the Common wealth, and
consequently void in law, the case was of Cards which is observable Cook 11.
85. 86. 87 etc. and Darcy and Allens Case There is a Condition tacit or
express in every grant of the Kings, Ita quod patriamagis solito non gravetur
vel oneretur, vid. Fitz. N. br. fol. 222. Cod. ad quod damnum. This learning is
so clear as to Monopolies thus stated, that I will dwell no longer upon them,
as I hope they may no longer reside among us. The answer is insufficient; as in
the case of a new invention of manufactory or the like; in such cases a Patent
may be good they say for certain years, whereas the years ought to be
competent, ten thousand years are certain, but not competent, and they who
offend are to give damage in an ordinary Court of Justice to the Patentee, unto
which they add (or otherwise) Oh, this arbitrary word) the like arbitrary
advice of others (I fear) has occasioned this Question. Where Monopolies were
clearly void, punishments were inflicted upon. The honest man, and the
Monopolist escaped, they answer nothing to the loss of goods, heavy fines,
mutillation of members, the before recited statutes direct clear answers to
these particulars.

My Lords, the statute of Magna Charta cap. 30. (quod omnes Mercatores tam
indigenae quam alienigenae) have free passage sine omnibus malis tolnetis, and
consuetudinibus ex Anglia and in Anglia, nisiantea public prohibiti fuerunt,
the subsequent statutes declaring many oppressions and grievances occasioned by
restraints in trade and Commerce made trade free for victual and merchandises,
and in them Nisi, etc. is omitted as the statute of 9. Edw. 3. c. 1. 25. Edw.
3. cap. 2. 2. Rich. 2. cap. 1. 11. Rich. 2. cap. 7. 16. Rich. 2. cap. 1. these
statutes give double damage to the party and the offender to be imprisoned.

The statute of 21. Jacob, c. 3. in England, against Monopolies, in the
exception of new inventions limits the time to a reasonable number of years,
viz. fourteen years or under, whether the heavy punishments aforesaid, can
be in this case especially the private interest of a subject being therein
only or mainly concerned, Magna Charta cap. 29. gives me a clear answer and
satisfactory; Nullus liber homo capiatur, imprisonetur, disseifietur vel aliquo
modo destruatur, etc. nisi per judicium parium and legem terrae, if this be law
or a lawful statute as no doubt it is, the question is soon answered.

My Lords, by this time you know, how the Innocent was actually punished, in
these cases; Now it is time, and not improper to show how the Nocent ought to
be punished, who took unlawful Monopolies, and seized the subjects goods by
violence, imprisoned, fined, mutilated, and destroyed the Kings people, and
caused all the evils that depended thereupon; For that, my Lords, it is not
within my charge, yet I hope it shall not remain unrepresented by the house of
Commons, nor unremembred by your Lordships in due time.

To this the Judges answered nothing, 6. Quest.
but with a reference to their answer to the third, 6. Answer*
whereas in truth this comprehends two matters besides of great weight and
consideration, first whereas the third question concerns the decision at
Counsell-board of matters of interest only, This question is of matters of
punishment, in an extrajudiciall way, secondly this question demands knowledge
of the punishment due to such as vote for such extrajudiciall punishments, to
these main matters there is no answer at all.

My Lords, the statutes and authorities before mentioned upon the third and
fourth questions against the determination at Councell-board, or before the
chief Governor in matters of interest, do clear this business, as to the
punishments depending upon those interests, although not e converso. And as for
such as voted, and acted therein if they besworne Judges of the law, the before
recited Oath of 18. Edw. 3. declares enough.

His Majesty at his Coronation is bound by Oath to execute justice to his
people according to the laws, this great trust the King commits to his Judges,
who take a great Oath to discharge this trust, if they fail therein. Sir
William Thorp in Edward the 3. time for breaking this oath in poor things,
was indicted thus. Quia praedictus Willielmus Thorp habuit Sacramentum Domini
Regis erga populum suum, ad custodiendum, illud fregit malitiose, false and
rebelliter, quantum in ipso fuit, this extends to a Judge only who took that
Oath, and habuit leges terrae ad custodiendum.

The trust between the King and his people is threefold; First as between
Sovereign and Subject, Secondly, as between a Father and his Children, under
Pater Patriae; Thirdly, as between Husband and Wife, this trust is
comprehensive of the whole body politic, And for any Magistrate or private
person to advise, or contrive the breach of this trust in any part, is of all
things in this world the most dangerous ( vae homini illi.)

First, 7. Quest.
I do conceive that an act of state or Proclamation cannot alter the
Common Law, 7. Answer*
nor restrain the old, nor introduce a new law, and that the same has no
power, or force to bind the goods lands, possessions, or inheritance of the
subject, but that the infringing thereof is only a contempt, which may be
punished in the person of the delinquent, where the Proclamation is consonant,
and agreeable to the laws, and statutes of the kingdom, or for the public
good, and not against law, and not otherwise punishable.

I do conceive, that a Proclamation is a branch of the Kings prerogative, and
that the same is useful and necessary in some cases, where it is not against
the law, wherein the public weal is interested, or concerned, but that any
clause therein, containing forfeyture of the goods, lands, or inheritance of
the subjects, is merely void; for otherwise this inconvenience will ensue,
That Proclamations or acts of state, may be made in all cases, and in all
matters to bind the liberty, goods, and lands of the subjects; and then the
Courts of Justice that have flourished for so many ages may be shut up, for
want of use of the law, or execution thereof, and there is no case where an
offense is committed against law, but the law will find out away to punish the
delinquent.

The King by his proclamation, Natura Br. fol. 85. in se Brief de securitate
inveniend. quod non se divertat ad parts extras pars extra cannot be intended
the Kings dominions.
may inhibit his subject that he shall not go beyond Sea out of this Realm
without his license, and this without any writ, or other Commandment to his
subject. for perchance the King may not find his subject, or know where he is,
And if the subject will go out of the Kings Realms contrary to this
proclamation, this is a contempt, and he shall be fined to the King for the
same, as says Fitz-Herbert, that such a proclamation can prohibit the Kings
subjects to repair into England, for England is our Mother, and though the Sea
divide us, that Sea is the Kings, and therefore it is not pars extra in this
sense.

It seems by the Lord Chauncellor Egertons argument upon the case of post
nati, Fol. 12. and 13.
that a proclamation cannot bind the goods, lands, or inheritance of the
subjects.

A provision was made in haec verba, Natura Br. 32.
Promissum est coram Domino Rege Archiepiscopus, 19. Hen. 3. fitz Her. Darien
presentment 23.
Comitibus, and Baronibus quod nulla assis ultimae praesentationis de caetero
capiatur de Ecclesiasticis praebendatis, nec de praebendis, but I do not find
any forfeyture or penalty upon the liberty, goods, or lands of him that would
bring an assize of Daren, presentment for a prebendary.

I do find that a provision was made in haec verba Promissum est a Consilio
Regis quod nullus de potestate Regis Franciae respondeat in Anglia antequam
Anglici de jure suo in terra Regis Franciae, ^. Hen. 3. fitz Her. Dower. 179.
etc. Yet by that provision no forfeyture upon the lands, or goods of him who
sued a Frenchman in England at that time.

It is true that a Custom may be contrary to the law, 35. Henr. 6, 26.
and yet allowable, because that it may have a lawful commencement, and
continual usage has given it the force of a law, Consuetudo ex certa
rationabili causa vsitata private communem legem, but no proclamation or act of
state may alter law.

For example sake, at Common Law a Proclamation cannot make lands devisable,
which are not devisable by the law, nor alter the course of descent.

The King by his Letters Patent cannot do the same, 37. Hen. 6. 17. 49.
nor grant lands to be ancient demesne at this day, Edw. 3. 4.
nor make lands to be descendible according the course of Gavelkind or Borrough
English, unless that the custom of the place does warrant the same, nor
Gavelkind land to be descendible according the course of law, a fortiori an act
of state, or proclamation, which I hold to be of less force then the Kings
patent under the great Seal cannot do it.

And in the case of Irish Gavelkind, it is not the proclamation, or act of
state, that did abolish, or alter it, but the very custom was held to be
unreasonable and repugnant to law.

If an act of state be made, 11. Co. 86.
that none within the kingdom shall make Cards but John at Style, this act is
void, for the King himself, cannot grant a Patent under his great Seal, to
any one man for the sole feazance of Cards; So it is of all proclamations or
acts of state, that are to the prejudice of Traffic, trade or Merchant
affairs, or for raising of Monopolies, or against the freedom and liberty of
the subjects, or the public good, as I said before.

Also if proclamations, or acts of state may alter the law, or bind the
liberty, goods, or lands of the subjects, then will acts of Parliaments be to
no purpose, which do represent the whole body of the kingdom, and are
commonly for creating of good and wholesome laws.

Therefore I conceive, that all proclamations made against law, are absolutely
void, and that the infringers thereof ought not to loose, or forfeyte their
liberty, goods, or lands.

And for the punishment of such Judges that vote herein, I refer to the sixth,
they deny to answer to this question.

This answer is general and dangerous withal, 8. Quest.
it is general, 8. Answer*
viz. they know no ordinary rule of law for it, they ought to declare the law
against it, the right use of it here they commend, and yet they do not
describe that right use, therefore they commend two things, the one the life of
a subject to be left to Marshall law in time of peace, the other they leave it
likewise discretionary when they describe not the right use, their last resort
is to the Kings prerogative.

I have said before, that Lawyers write the King can do no wrong, and sure I
am our King means no wrong, the Kings of England did never make use of their
prerogative to the destruction of the subject, nor to take away his life nor
liberty, but by lawful means. I conceive this advise should become the
Judges, other advise they find not in their law Books; The statute of Magna
Charta cap. 29. and 5. Edw. 3. cap. 9. the petition of right, the third of King
Charles in full Parliament declared, Tell them, nay do convince them, that no
man in time of peace can be executed by Marshall law. 9. Quest. 9. Answer


My Lords, I could wish the Judges had timely stood in the right opposition to
the drawing of causes proper for the Kings Courts to an aliud examen, the
improper and unlawful examen thereof on paper petitions, whereby the Kings
Justice, and Courts were most defrauded, whereas an arbitrament being a
principal mean to compose differences arising between neighbors, and to
settle amity between them, without expense, of time or money was a course
approved by law, all our Books are full of this.

It is by consent of parties by arbitrators indifferently chosen, bonds for
performance thereof are not void in law, and Judgments given upon
arbitrements, and such bonds in our Books without question or contradiction to
the lawfullnesse of an arbitrament or bond in proper Cases, the principal good
wrought by them, was the hindering of suites, and debates at law, therefore that
exception falls of it self, then I am to consider, how far an Oath in the
particular is punishable, I will not speak of an Oath exacted, or tendered,
that is not the question, the question is of a voluntary Oath, which the
arbitrator cannot hinder, I speak not to the commendation of any such Oath,
nor do I approve of any Oath, other then that which is taken before a
Magistrate, who derives his authority from the King, the fountain of Justice,
but only how far this Oath is punishable by the late statute, 10. Caroli
fol. 109. a profane Oath is punished by the payment of twelve pence, and no
more, vide stat. of: Marl. cap 23. 52. Hen. 3. viz. Nullus de caetero possit
distringere liber' tenentes suos etc. nec jurare faciat libere tenentes suos
contra voluntatem suam, quia nullus facere potest sine praecepto Domini Regis,
which statute teaches us, that an exacted or compulsive Oath, is by the Kings
authority, a voluntary Oath is not reprehended, 19. Edw. 4. 1. a. It was not
reprehended in the case of an arbitrament, this voluntary Oath is punishable
in the Star Chamber, as the Judges would affirm, which I conceive to be
against the law: First, for that we cannot learn any president in England for
it, It was but lately introduced here, therefore the house of Commons is
unsatisfied with the answer to this question, in Boyton and Leonards case in
the Star Chamber in Ireland, Boyton was dismissed in a Case to this purpose
about the year 1630. or 1631.

It has been the late introduced course of the Castle-chamber, 10. Quest.
and Councell-table not to admit the party censured to the reducement of his
fine, 10. Answ.
before he acknowledged the justness of the sentence pronounced against him,
and that for diverse reasons, First, the course of a Court being as ancient, as
the Court, and standing with law is Curiae lex, as appears by our books, 2.
Co. 16. b. Lanes case 17. Long 5. Edw. 4. 1. but if it be a course introduced
de novo in man's memory, or a course that is against law, it cannot be said to
be lex Curiae, for consuetudo licet sit magnae authoritatis nunquam tamen
praejudicat manifestae veritati.

Let us therefore examine the course alleged here, in both those points, and
if it be found to fail in either of them it is to be rejected.

As to the first, I cannot find or read any president of it until of late, and
the usage of it for a few years cannot make it to be cursus Curiae which ought
to be a custom used time beyond the memory of man.

As to the second, it is confessed by the Judges, that they know no law to
warrant this course, let us see then whether it be against law, or stands
with the law, and I conceive it is against law for diverse reasons.

First, by the Common Law, if a judgment be given against a man after a
verdict of twelve men, which is the chief and clear proof which the law
looks upon, or upon a demurrer after solemn argument he shall in the one
case have an attainte against the Jury, and in the other a writ of error to
reverse the judgment; but in this case by the confession of the justness of
the sentence all the means to reverse the sentence is taken away, and
therefore contrary to law, and reason. Whereas by the Common Law, fines ought
to be moderate secundum quantitatem delicti in reformationem and non in
destructionem, of late times, the fines have been so high in destruction of
the party in the Castle-chamber, as his whole family and himself, if he did
pay the fine should be driven to beg, and without performance of the
sentence he could not be admitted to reverse the sentence, in respect of all
which, howbeit in his conscience he is not guilty, yet to gain his liberty,
and save part of his estate, he is necessitated to acknowledge the justness
of the sentence, so that the confession is extorted from him, and consequently
is against law.

Third reason if the fine were secundum quantitatem delicti, as it ought to be
without danger of destruction, the reducement of the fine had not been so
necessary: and therefore no just ground for this confession.

Lastly, the confession of the party after sentence does rather blemish the
sentence then any way clear it, for the confession coming after the sentence,
which ought to be just in it self can add nothing to it but draw suspicion
upon it, and in that respect a confession is strayned, the rack used by the
course of the Civil law in criminal causes, to clear the conscience of the
Judge to proceed to sentence, is intolerable in our Common Law.

And therefore this course being an innovation against law, and without any
reasonable ground; the said Judges ought in their said answer to declare so
much, to the end a course might be taken for abolishing the same.

This answer I will not now draw into question, 11. Quest.
I could wish the rest were answered no worse. 11. Answ.


What power have the Barons of the Court of Exchequer to raise the respite of
homage arbitrarily, 12. Quest.
etc. 12. Answ.


Unto this they answer, that until the Kings Tenant by knights service in
capite has done his homage, the ancient course of the Exchequer has been,
and still is, to issue process, to distrayne the tenants ad faciendum
homagium, or ad faciendum finem pro homagio suo respectuando, upon which
process the Sheriff returns issues, and if the tenant do not appear, and
compound with the King to give a fine for respite of homage, then the issues
are forfeyted to the King. But if the Kings tenant will appear, the Court of
the Exchequer does agree with him to respite his homage for a small fine.

They say further, Vide 5.
that it rests in the discretion of the Court by the rule of the Common Law
to lay down a fine for respite of homage, Henr. 7. 9. a. prescription to
impound Cattle until amends be done according to his will, not good.
according to the yearly value of the said lands, which I conceive to be very
unreasonable and inconvenient, that it should lie in the power of any to
assesse a fine for respite of homage, such as to him shall be thought meet in
discretion, for if so he may raise the fine to such a sum, as may exceed the
very value of the lands. Neither has the same been the ancient course, for it
appears by several ancient Records, and by an Order of the Court of Exchequer
made Termino pascae 1607. that there should be paid for respiting of homage
for every Towneship xx. d. Irish, and for every Manor xxxx. d. Irish, and that
such as hold several houses, acres, or parcels of land, which are not Manors,
nor Towneship shall pay for every hundred and twenty Acres of Land, Meadow,
and pasture, or of any of them xx. d. Irish, and no more, and according to that
rate, and proportion if a greater, or lesser number of Acres, and for every
house without ground iiij. d. Irish, This appears by several Records in Hen.
6. and Hen. 7* time in the second Remembrancers Office in Ireland. 24. Hen. 8*
B Fealty* and homage 8.
and of Cottages, or Farm houses which be upon the Lands, no fine to be
paid for them solely alone.

And I conceive where a man holds several parcels of land of the King by
several homages, that in such case he is to pay but for one respite of homage
only and no more, for that a man is to do homage but once, and consequently
to pay for one respite of homage only.

The late course in the Exchequer here has been contrary, whereas in their
answer they go in the Exchequer, according to the statute of primo Iacobi cap.
26. in England, under their favor they go clear contrary, for that statute
was made in confirmation, and pursuance of former Orders in the Exchequer:
Whereas the Barons here go directly contrary to the ancient course and Order
of the Exchequer in this kingdom, more of this in my reason or ground for this
question. So I conclude their answer to this is short.

My Lords, 13. Quest.
the question contaynes two points, First, 13. Answ.
whether the subject of this kingdom is censurable for to repair into
England, to appeal to his Majesty for redress of injuries, or for his lawful
occasions; Secondly why, what condition of persons, and by what law?

The first part of the Judges their answer is positive and full, viz. They know
no law or statute for such censure (nor I neither) and could wish they had
stayed there. In the second part of their answer, they come with an if, viz.
unless they be prohibited by his Majesty's writ, proclamation, or command, and
make mention of the statute of 5. Rich. 2. cap. 2. in England, and 25. Henr. 6.
cap. 2. in Ireland, I will only speak to the second part of this answer.

My Lords, the house of Commons in the discussion of this point took two
things into consideration, First what the Common Law was in such cases;
Secondly, what alteration was made of the Common Law by the statute of 5. Rich.
2. cap. 2. in England, and 25. Henr. 6. cap. 2. in Ireland, as to the subjects
of Ireland. As for the first the Register has a writ framed in the point, viz.
the writ De securitate in venienda quod se non divertat ad parts extras sine
licentia Domini Regis, Fitz. Nature. br. fol. 85 the words of this writ cleares
the Common Law in the point, it begins with a datum est nobis intelligi, etc.
The King being informed that such person or persons in particular do intend to
go, whether ad parts exteras, viz. foraigne Countries, to what purpose, to
prosecute matters to the prejudice of the King and his Crown, the King in such
a case by his writ, warrant, or Command under the great Seal, privy Seal,
privy Signet or by proclamation, may command any subject not to depart the
kingdom without the Kings license; this writ is worthy to be observed, for the
causes aforesaid therein expressed, the writ extends only to particular
person or persons, and not to all the subjects of the kingdom, no man can
affirm that England is pars extera as to us, Ireland is annexed to the Crown
of England, and governed by the laws of England: our question set forth the
cause, viz. to appeal to the King for Justice, or to go to England, for other
lawful causes, whereas the said writ intends practices with foraigne Princes
to the prejudice of the King and his Crown; At the Common Law, if a subject in
contempt of this Command went ad parts exteras, his Lands, and goods ought to
be seized, 2. and 3. Philip. and Mary Die. 128. b. and yet if the subject went
to the parts beyond the Seas before any such special inhibition, this was not
punishable before the statute of 5. Rich. 2. cap. 2. as appears, 12. and 13.
Elizab. Die. 296. a. So that before the inhibition, the law was indifferent, now
the question is at Common Law, whether the subject of Ireland having no Office,
can be hindered to appeal or go to the King for Justice: The King is the
fountain of Justice, and as his power is great to command, so the Scepter of
his Justice is as great, nay the Scepter has the priority, if any be, for at
his Coronation, his Scepter is on his right side, and his Sword on his left
side to his Justice he is sworn, therefore if any writ, Commandment or
proclamation be obtained from him, or published contrary to his Justice, it is
not the act of the King, but the act of him that misinformed him, then will I
add the other words of the question, viz. or other his lawful occasions, as I
said before in the case of a writ of error in the Kings Bench of England, or in
the Parliament of England, which are remedies given by the law, therefore the
Common Law does not hinder any man to prosecute those remedies which are given
to every subject by the same A scire facias may be brought by the King in
England to repeal a patent under the great Seal of Ireland of lands in
Ireland, 20. Henr. 6. fol. a.

An exchange of lands in England for lands in Ireland is a good exchange in
law, 8. ass. placit. 27. 10. Edw. 3. fol. 42. tempor. Edw. 1. Fitz voucher 239.
What law therefore can prohibit any subject for to attend this scire facias in
England, or to make use of his freehold got by exchange.

The law being thus, then it was considered, what alteration was wrought by one
branch of the statute of 5 Rich. 2. cap. 2. by which the passage is stopped out
of the kingdom (Lords, notable Merchants, and the Kings soldiers excepted) I
conceive this statute does not include Ireland, I never heard any Irishman
questioned upon this statute for going into England, nor any Englishman for
coming into Ireland until the late proclamation by the statute 34. Edw. 3. c.
18. in England, all persons which have their heritage or possessions in
Ireland, may come with their beasts, corn, etc. to and fro, paying the Kings
dues. The statute of 5. Rich. 2. did never intend by implication to avoyde the
said express statute of Edw. 3. between the Kings two kingdoms, being
governed by one law, and in effect the same people, the words of the statute of
5. Rich. 2. are observable, the principal scope of it is against the
exportation of Bullion, in the later part there is a clause for licenses to be
had in particular Ports, by which I conceive that the Customers of those
Ports may grant a let pass in such Cases.

It is therefore to be considered, whether that branch of the said statute of
5. Rich. 2. was received in Ireland, I think it is clear it was not, for by
the statute 10. Henr. 7. cap. 22. in Ireland, all the general statutes of
England were received in Ireland with this qualification, viz. such as were for
the Common and public weal, etc. And surely it cannot be for the weal of
this kingdom, that the subjects here be stayed from obtaining of Justice, or
following other lawful causes in England.

The statute of 25. Henr. 6. cap. 2. in Ireland, excuses absentes by the Kings
command, and imposes no other penalty; so that upon the whole matter, this
question is not answered.

For so much as they do answer of this question, 14 Quest.
the answer is good, 14. Answ.
for there is no doubt to be made but Deaneries are some donative, some
elective, and some may be presentative according to the respective foundations.

I will only speak of a Deane de facto, if a Deane be made a Bishop and has
a dispensation Decanatus dignitatem in commenda in the retinere, the
confirmation of such a Deane is good in law. This was the case of Evans and
Acough in the Kings Bench in England Ter. 3. Caroli, where Doctor Thornbow
Deane of York was made Bishop of Limmericke with a dispensation to hold in the
retinere after his patent, and before consecration it was adjudged his
confirmation was good; and yet if a Deane be made a Bishop in any part of the
world, this is a Cession, Co. 5. 102. a. VVindsors case, Davis Rep. 42. 43.
etc. Vide 2. and 3. Phil. and Ma(...)e 123. b.
The Deane of Fernes his case, and 18. Elizab. Die. 346. the confirmation of a
mere Laicus being Deane is good, though he be after deprived, 10. Eliz. Die.
273. 12. and 13. Elizab. Die. 293. although the Deane be after deprived by
sentence declaratorie, yet his precedent confirmations are good.

So I conceive that a Deane, who has stallum in Choro and vocem in Capitulo
during all the time of his life, and never questioned, and usually confirmed
all Leases without interruption is good; And to question all such acts, 40. 50.
100. years after, is without president especially in Ireland, until of late
years, and in this kingdom few or no foundations of Bishoprics or Deaneries
can be found upon any Record, therefore I conceive the Judges ought to answer
this part of the question.

My Lords, 15. Quest.
I know you cannot forget the grounds I laid before for this question, 15. Answ.
nor the time nor the occasion of the issuing of Quo warrantoes, nor what was
done thereupon in the Court of Exchequer.

Now remains to consider of the answer to this positive question, the answer
is too general, viz the Parliament is concerned therein, and so are two other
Courts of Justice, and likewise the Kings prerogative is interested therein,
wherefore they cannot answer till the matter come in debate and be argued
before them.

The consideration of the Court of Parliament will much conduce to the clearing
of this question, Co. preface to the fourth Report, the exposition of Laws
ordinarily belongs to the Judges, but ( in maximis difficillimisque causis ad
supremum Parliament' Iudicium) Cook preface to the ninth Report, describes
that supreme Court in this manner ( si vetustatem spectes est antiquissima, si
dignitatem, est honoratissima, si jurisdictionem, est capacissima) of this
enough, the learning is too manifest, that it is the Supreme Court, nay the
primitive of all other Courts; to that Court belongs the making, altering or
regulating of laws and the correction of all Courts and ministers. Look upon
the members of it, Co. Inst. 109.
first the King is the head, who is never so great nor so strong, as in
Parliament where he sits insconced with the hearts of his people; the second
are all the Lords Spiritual and Temporal* the third the knights, Citizens and
Burgesses, these three do represent the whole Commonwealth. Look upon the
causes for which they are called ( Circa ardua and urgentia negotia Regni)
look upon the privileges of it, if any member or members servant thereof be
questioned, or any thing ordered against him, in any other Court sitting the
Parliament, Stat. Hib. 3. Edw. 4. cap. 1.
or within forty days before or after, all the proceedings are void by the
laws and statutes of this Realm, The not clearing of this question is against
the Kings prerogative, which is never in greater splendour or Majesty then in
Parliament, and against the whole Commonwealth therein concerned as aforesaid,
the King has four Councels, the first is commune concilium, which is this
Council, secondly Magnum Concilium, which is the Council of his Lords;
thirdly the privy Council for matters of estate; fourthly the Judges of his
law, Co. institut. 110. a.

Then by what law or use can the inferior of these four Councels question the
first Supreme and mother Council, I know not, the state of the question
considered, which is of Buroughs, who anciently and recently sent to the
Parliament, by the same law, that one member may be questioned, forty eight
members may be questioned as was done in our case in one day, six such days
may take away the whole house of Commons, and consequently Parliaments,
especially as this case was, for upon the return of the first summons four
and twenty Corporations were seized, the learning therefore is new, that it
should rest in the discretion of the Sheriffs, who might make unfaithful
returns, and of three Barons in the Exchequer, who have no infallibility, to
overthrow Parliaments, the best Constitutions in the world. Search has been
made in the two books of Entries, in old Natura brevium, and in all the year
books that are printed, there is not one president that in any time ever so
badde, such a Quo-warranto was brought in, Co. entries 527. a a Quo-warranto
was brought against Christopher Helden, and others to show cause, why they
claymed such a Borrough, etc. which is nothing to our purpose, the
quo-warrantoes in the question, and those which were in the Exchequer, did
admit them Borroughs, and yet required them to show cause why they sent
Burgesses to the Parliament, this is oppositum in objecto, to admit them
Burgesses, and to question their power to send Burgesses, which were formerly,
both anciently and recently so admitted in Parliament, Master Littleton, the
first book we read cleares this question, sectione 164. There are ancient
Towns called Borroughs, the most ancient Towns of England, all Cities were
Borroughs in the beginning, and from them come Burgesses to the Parliament, so
that in effect if an ancient Borrough, ergo, they sent Burgesses to the
Parliament; all these ancient Towns in England, did remain of Record in the
Exchequer, 40. ass. plac. 27. In Ireland they do remain of Record in the
Parliament Rolls, the trial of them is by the Record it self, and not
otherwise; If a Town send Burgesses once or twice, it is Title enough to send
ever after, 11. Henr. 4. 2. So if a Peer called once by writ, and once sitting
as a Peer, Co. institut. fol. 9. b. he is a Baron ever after.

In the four ordinary Courts they have privilege for the meanest of their
members, or servants, why not the Parliament. It was the custom of the ancient
grave Judges to consult with parliaments in causes of difficulty and weight, a
parliament was then to be at hand, they did not stay to advise with them in a
point which concerned the parliament, so nearly and which was of the greatest
weight of any cause that ever was agitated in the kingdom: In our books, and
all the entries it is true and clear, that Quo-warrantoes are brought and
ought to be brought against such as claim privileges, Franchises, Royalties,
or the like flowers of the Crown: but to question Burgesses in this nature is
to question the Kings prerogative in an high degree; privileges take from the
King, parliaments add, and give unto him greatness and profit, in parliaments
he sits essentially, in other Courts not altogether so, but by representation,
what greater disservice could be done the King, then to overthrow parliaments,
how shall Subsidies be granted, or the kingdom defended, how shall ardua
Regni be considered? Oh the Barons of the Exchequer, I wot will salve all these
doubts.

I may not forget My Lords, how the law of the land, and the whole
Commonwealth is herein concerned, and upon that I will offer a Case or two, If
a statute be made wherein the private interest of a subject, or the general
interest of the Commonwealth be enacted, the King by his Letters Patent
cannot dispense with this statute, Co. 8. 29. a. Co. 4. 34. Bozoons case.
Princes case, though they be with a non obstaute, nor make any grant, Non
obstante of the Common Law, therefore I conclude this question.

First, that it is against the Kings prerogative, to issue such a Quo-warranto,
as is here stated. Secondly it is against the Commonwealth, as destructive of
parliaments, and consequently of government. Thirdly this is no privilege but
a service done to the King and whole Commonwealth, which cannot receive so
much as a debate but in parliament. Fourthly all the proceedings in the
Excheqver, touching this parliament were Coram non judice, as was already voted
in both houses, as for the punishment, we come not to urge your Lordships to
punish other then with reference to that which I said before, viz. the Oath.

These two questions have so near a relation, 16. Quest.
the one to the other meeting in the Center of the Castle-chamber, 16. Answ.
that I will speak to them at once or as to one question. 17: Quest.


My Lords, 1. Answ.
if that golden mean, and mediocritie which regulated the power of that great
Court in former times had not been of late converted and strayned unto that
excess we saw, these questions had never been stirred, but many things being
extended to their uttermost Sphere, or I fear beyond the same enforce me,
although unwillingly and slowly, to look upon our laws and just rights.

The answer to the sixteenth, viz. whether Jurors giving their verdicts
according to their conscience, may be punished in the Castle-chamber by fines
excessive, mutillation of members, etc.

I find in my Lord Barcklayes case, placit. Com. 231. from the beginning, the
usual trial at Common Law was divided between the Judges and the Jurors,
matters of fact were and are tryable by the Jurors, and matters in law by the
Judges, the antiquity of this trial appears, Glan. fol. 100. b. in Henr. the
seconds time, Bracton 174. Briton, fol. 130. a. Fortescue, de laudibus legum
Angliae, fol 54. and 55. So much being cleared they being, Iurati ad dicendum
veritatem, are Judges of the fact, Co. 9. 13. a. Dowmans case, and 25. etc.
Strata Marcellas case, and infinite other authorities, they are so far Judges
of the fact, that although the parts be estopped to aver the truth, yet
these Judges of the fact shall not be so estopped, because they are upon their
Oath, Co. 2. 4. b. Goddards case, Co. 4. 53. a. Raw-hins case, 1. Henr. 4. 6.
a. etc. They are so far Judges of the fact, that they are not to leave any part
of the truth of the evidence to the Court, Co. 1. 56. b. Chauncellor of Oxfords
case, nay they may find releases and other things of their knowledge not given
in evidence, 8. ass. plac. 3. Co. 10. 95. b. Doctor Leyfields case, what is
done by Judges, shall not be tried by Jurors, Co 9. Strata Marcellas case 30.
Ergo e converso; but if any doubt in law arises upon the evidence, there is a
proper remedy by bill of exception by the statute of VV. 2. cap. 30. which Co.
9 Dowmans case, fol. 13. a. says to be in affirmance of the ancient
Common Law, as to this point of law, the Judges of the law are Judges of the
validity of the evidence, but under favor not of the truth of the fact, as it
is set forth in the answer; if the Judges of the law do err in matter of law,
the party grieved has his remedy by writ of error, but he is not punishable
if practice or misdemeanor do not appear, 2. Rich. 3. fol 9. 10. Fitz Nature.
br. 243. E. 27. ass. 18. 4. Henr. 6. and other books by the same reason the
Judges of the fact, if they go according to their conscience as our question
is stated, if the Jury in this case go contrary to their evidence, the
Common Law gives a full remedy by attainte, wherein the judgment is ^ost
heavy if the Jurors have done amiss as I said before to another question, yet
in this action the law gives credit to the verdict before it be falsified, for
if a judgment be given upon this verdict and after an attainte is brought, no
super sedeas can be in this writ to hinder the party who recovered from his
execution, 5. Henr. 7. 22. b. 33. Henr. 6. 21. otherwise in a writ of error.

Your Lordships therefore may see what faith is given to verdicts at
Common Law, I observe the notable case of 7. Henr. 4 41 b. where Gascoigne
answers the King that would give judgment contrary to his private knowledge.

As for the next part of these two questions, it was the late height of
punishments, and the drawing of more causes to that Court, then in former
times, moved this debate, out of the statute of 3 Henr. 7. cap. 1. concerning
this Court. I make these observations, first, that the Judges of that Court
according their discretion may examen great offenses, Verba Statut.
secondly, that they may punish according to the demerits of delinquents after
the form of the statute thereof made, thirdly, in like manner and form as
they should or ought to be punished if they were convict by the due order of
the Common Law For the first, what discretion this is, we find in our books,
Co. 5. fol. 100. Rookes case, discretion is to proceed within the bounds of
law and reason, at Common Law a Man in a Leete is fined but in ten groats for a
light bloodshed; in the Castle-chamber a Nobleman for an offer of a switch to
a person inferior to him, upon provocation perhaps given, was fined in four
thousand pound, Lo. Visc. Clanmoris.
committed to long imprisonment, and low acknowledgements were imposed on him.
For the second and third observations, if men of quality and rank were
pillored, papered, stigmatized, and fined to their destruction, in cases where
if they had been convicted by due order of law, they could not be so punished
by any law or statute, I humbly offer to your Lordships sad and grave
consideration.

And whether these courses be warranted by the said statute of 3. Henr. 7. cap.
1. or by any other law or statute of force in this Realm, and if all Jurors
be brought to the Castle-chamber, what shall become of that great and noble
trial, by which all the matters of our law regularly are tryable; And so I
conclude that the answers to these two questions are not satisfactorie.

Whether in the Censures in the Castle-chamber, 18. Quest.
regard be to be had to the words of the great Charter, 18. Answ.
viz. salvo contenemento, etc.

I conceive that in the Censures in the Castle-chamber, regard is to be had to
the words of the great Charter, viz. Salvo contenemento, etc although in the
great Charter, and in the statute of VVestminst. 1. cap. 6. amerciamentum and
misericordia are expressed and not fines or redemptio, because a fine and an
amerciament are in the old year books used promiscuously as Synonima, for one
and the same thing, and therefore in 10. Edw. 3. fol. 9. and 10. The Jurors of
the Abbot of Ramseis Leete, being sworn, and refusing to present the articles
of the Leete, were amerced and there it is resolved, because all did refuse to
present, all shall be amerced, but when the same shall be imposed or affeared,
shall be imposed severally upon each of them secundum quantitatem delicti
salvo contenemento suo, yet the sum there imposed was revera a fine, and not
an amerciament as an amerciament is now taken, and here with agrees, 4. Eliz.
Die. 211. b. in these words (if the Jurors of a Leete refuse to present the
articles of the Leete, according to their Oath, the Steward shall assesse a
fine upon every of them) and Godfries case, 11. Rept'. fol. 42. b. 43. a.

Secondly if by intendment of law, as the law was conceived at the time of the
making of the statutes of Magna Charta and Westminster. 1. fines and amerciaments
had not been or taken to be Synonyma, the feazors of those acts would not have
so carefully provided remedy in case of amerciaments, which were always
moderate, and wherein a moderata misericordia did lie for all men, ab
enumeratione partium, viz. Comites and Barons non amercientur and miles and
liber homo amercientur and salvo contenemento suo, mercator salva merchandiza
sua, Villanus salvo VVainagio, Clericus salvo Laico, Feoudo, etc. and have
thought of no redress or moderation of fines, which are more grievous, and of
late times infinitely swollen above amerciaments, for in 19. Edw. 4. fol. 9. and
21. Edw. 4. fol. 77. the amerciament of an Earl Baron, etc. is but five
pounds, and of a Duke ten pounds, yet a Barons ancient fee or livelihood
consists of four hundred marks land per annum, an Earls of four hundred
pounds, a Dukes of eight hundred pounds per annum.

Thirdly, amerciaments imposed upon those that have the administration of
Justice execution of the Kings writs, for their Commission or Omission,
contrary to their duty are out of the letter of Magna Charta, are indeed
fines and to be imposed and taxed by the Judges, yet are they called
misericordiae, because great moderation and mercy must be used in taxing of
them, Grisleyes case, 8. Rep. fol. 48. a. b.

Fourthly, in case fines be not within these words of Magna Charta, amercietur
salvo contenemento, etc. yet ought they by law to be reasonable and not
excessive, for every excess is against law, excessus in requalibet, jure
reprobatur communi, as excessive distress is prohibited by the Common Law 41.
Edw. 3. fol. 26. So is excessive and outrageous aid, as appears by the
statute of Westminster. 1. cap. 35. and by Glanv. l. 9. fol. 70. an assize lies for
often distrayning because it is excessive, and therefore against law an
excessive fine, at the will of the Lord is an oppression of the people, 14.
Henr. 4. fol. 9. If tenant in Dower have rich villains or tenants at will and
she by excessive taxes or fines make them mendicants, it is waste in the eye
of the law, 16. Henr. 3. Fitz. waste 135. Register' Iudiciale, fol. 25. If the
fines of Coppy-holders be uncertain, the Lord of the Manor, cannot exact
unreasonable and excessive fines, and the unreasonablenesse of the fines shall
be determined by the Judges having respect to the value of the Coppy-hold, 4.
Rep. fol. 27. b. The King before the making of Magna Charta had rationabile
reliuum of noblemen and it was not reduced to any certainty, yet ought it to
have been reasonable and not excessive, Co. institut. 83. b.

They say that in a legal construction, the statute of Magna Charta, in which
the words salvo contenemento are mentioned, is only to be understood of
amerciaments and not of fines, yet where great fines are imposed in terrorem,
upon the reducements of them, regard is to be had to the ability of the
persons.

Now whereas they allege that upon the reducements of fines, regard is to be
had to the estate of persons, I humbly conceive that makes but little, either
for the ease or security of the subject, or the providence or wisdom of the
law, for that such reducements are not grounded upon any rule of law, but rest
merely in the Kings grace and bounty, which if the Prince should withdraw,
and leave the subject to the law, in what case he is in, I leave it to your
Lordships. If there be no rule in this case, it may rest in the arbitrarie
will of four or five persons in that Court to destroy any man, and in their
will to reduce as they please, but never to reduce before confession of the
sentence which is destructive, wherein perhaps thereis no infallibility, Magna
Charta, cap. 29. Nullus liber homo aliquo modo destruatur, ande. and so I
conclude as to this answer.

This answer as it is here is sufficient, 19. Quest.
yet contrary to their answer; 19. Answ.
to the first question upon the same point, and so contrary, that both are
incompatible.

My Lords, 20. Quest.
I am come to the life of man, after that God concluded the work of the whole
world saying to every particular and erant valde bona, 20 Answ.
to make the work complete creavit hominem ad imaginem and similitudinem suam.
Genesis cap. 1. v. 31.
Aristotle in his treatise de natura animalium says that unum vivens est magis
dignum; Gen cap. 1. v. 27.
which is man, that creature which alone is more perfect and noble then all the
world besides. The Common Law of the land has three darlings, life, liberty,
and dower, the former recited statutes give protection to three things, to
life, estate, and liberty, the life of man is the eldest Child admitted to the
favor of the law, and the first and chief within the protection of these
statutes, the other two are but ministers and servants unto it, the trial of
this life by the law and statutes aforesaid is regularly judicium parium, to
multiply cases upon so plain a learning, were but pass time, or wast time,
your Lordships have other business of weight and consequence: the proof which
takes away this life with infamy, which corrupts the blood of him and his
posterity, defeates the wife and innocent Children of their fame and substance,
surely ought to be clear and convincing proof.

The case of an approver is the only case we find in our law, where a person
infamous may accuse another for his life, this accusation cannot take away the
life of any man, otherwise then by a legal trial, viz. by a trial of Jurors,
who ought to have other good proof before they find a subject guilty, or by
both, wherein the approver hazards his own life, which is sacred unto him by
the law. This approver is not received in another felony, or treason then he
himself is guilty of by confession, of the fact, nor for his relief, after
he commits the crime confessed, Stamford pleas of the Crown, fol. 142. 143.
for notorious rebels or malefactors, I find not any book in law to give
countenance unto such testimony. I find in the fourth article of the Kings
printed book of instructions, that such testimony shall not be pressed when
any man stands upon trial of his life. The Judges do answer well to one part,
viz. that such testimony is not convincing, but they go further that the
testimony of such persons, not condemned concurring with other proof or
apparent circumstance may be pressed upon the trial of a man for his life;
the said Article in the Instructions says it shall not be pressed at all, no
law warrants such pressure.

It is quite different from the case of an approver, who confesses himself
guilty, and who is limited to the crime whereof he is guilty, a Rebel is
left at large to prove any crime, nay the relief of himself.

The testimony mentioned in the question differs in all things from the
approver, therefore they cannot be resembled; the concurrence of such
testimony with other proofs is not material, for other proof will do the
deed without this bad concurrence, and so will a violent presumption, as if
two go safe into a Room, one of them is found stabbed to death the other may
suffer, this presumption is inevitable the law of God, the laws and statutes
of the Realm protect and preserve the life of man, it were therefore hard to
take away by circumstance such a real and noble essence. This concurrence
marrs the evidence, it helps it not. If one gives false testimony once by the
ancient law, his testimony shall never be received again, Leges Canuti Regis,
Lamb. Saxons lawss, fol. 113. p. 34. much less where they are notorious ill
doers, this and the reason and ground of this question already opened, will I
hope give your Lordships satisfaction.

For this question, 21. Quest.
I will state it without any tenure reserved by express words as the question
is put, 21. Answ.
whether the reservation of rent, or Annual sum will raise this to be a
tenure in capite; I conceive it will not for sundry reasons. First from the
beginning there have been Fayres and Markets, and no president, booke-case, or
Record, to warrant the new opinion in this Case before Trinity term 1639. in
the Court of wards. Secondly the practice of that Court was always before to
the contrary in the same, and the like Cases. Thirdly, it is a thing as the
question is of new creation, and never in esse before, for this see the Books
of 3. Henr. 7. 4. 12. Henr. 7. 19. 15. E. 4. 14. 46. E. 3. 12. 21. Henr. 6. 11.
Stamford prerogative 8.

Therefore there is no necessity of a tenure thereof; 48. Edw. 3. 9. 33.
H. 6. 7. 8.
upon the Conquest it was necessary that all lands should be held by some
tenure for the defense of the kingdom. Hen. 7. 12.


1. The statute of Quia emptores terrarum, Co. 6. 6^
etc. praerogativa Regis speak of Feoffator, Co. 9. 123.
Feoffatores, etc. therefore a tenure I mean this tacit or employed tenure was
originally only intended of Land.

2. The King may reserve a tenure in all things not mainerable by express
reservation or Covenant, 44. Edw. 3. 45. Fitz. nature. brevium, 263. etc. but
that is not our Case.

3. Here it is left to construction of Law, which is aequissimus Iudex, and
looks upon the nature of things, and therefore in Cases that include Land, or
where land may come in liew thereof, a tenure may be by implication, as a
mesnalty a reversion expectant upon an intayle and the like, 10. Edw. 44. a.
42. Edw 3. 7. Fitz. Grants, 102. and diverse other books.

4. No tenure can be employed by reason of a rent, if the rent be not
distreynable by some possibility of its own nature upon the thing granted, as
appears by 5. Henr. 7. 36. 33. Henr. 6. 35. 40. Ed. 3. 44. 1. Henr. 4. 1. 2.
3. Fitz-cessabit. 17.

5. The distress upon other land is the Kings mere prerogative like the case
of Buts Co. 6. 25. a distress may be for rent in other land by Covenant.

6. This is no rent because it issues not out of land.

7. If the Patentee here had no land, there can be no distress in this case.

8. This is a mere privilege, it issues out of no lands, and participates
nothing of the nature of land, all the cases of tenures in our books are
either of land or things arising out of land, or some way or other of the
nature of land, or that may result into land, or that land by some possibility
may result into it; Therefore I humbly conceive that new opinion is not
warranted by law or president.

These My Lords, are in part the things, which satisfied the house of Commons
in all the matters aforesaid, they are now left to the judgment and Justice of
your Lordships.

QVESTIONS PROPOVNDED IN PARLIAMENT AND Declarations of the Law thereupon in
Parliament.
WHither the Subjects of this kingdom be a free people, Question 1.
and to be governed only by the Common-lawes of England, and statutes of force
in this kingdom.

The subjects of this his Majesty's kingdom of Ireland, Declaraon.
are a free people, and to be governed only according to the Common Law of
England, and Statutes made and established by Parliament in this kingdom of
Ireland, and according to the lawful customs used in the same.

VVhither the Judges of this land do take the Oath of Judges, Question 2.
and if so, whether under pretext of any Act of State, Proclamation, writ,
letter or direction under the great or privy Seal or privy Signet or Letter
or other Commandment from the Lord Lieutnant, Lord Deputy, Justice, or other
chief Governor, or Governors of this kingdom, they may hinder, stay, or delay
the suite of any subject, or his Judgment or execution thereupon, if so, in
what cases, and whether if they do hinder, stay or delay such suite, judgment
or execution thereupon, what punishment do they incur for their deviation
and transgression therein?

That Judges in Ireland ought to take the Oath of the Justices or Judges
declared and established in several Parliaments of force in this kingdom and
the said Judges or any of them, Declaraon.
by color, or under pretext of any act of state, or proclamation or under
color, or pretext of any writ, Letter, or direction under the great Seal,
privy Seal, or privy Signet from the Kings most Excellent Majesty, or by
color or pretext of any Letter or Commandment from the chief Governor or
Governors of this kingdom ought not to hinder or delay the suite of any
subject, or his judgment, or execution thereupon and if any letters, writs, or
commands come from his Majesty or any other, or for any other cause to the
Justices, or to other deputed to do the law and right according to the usage
of the Realm in disturbance of the law, or of the execution of the same, or of
right to the parties, the Justices and other aforesaid ought to proceed, and
hold their Courts, and processes where the pleas and matters be depending
before them, as if no such letters, writs, or commaundments were come to them,
and in case any Judge, or Judges, Justice, or Justices be found in default
therein, he or they so found in default ought to incur and undergo due
punishment according the law, and the former declarations and provisions in
Parliament in the case made and of force in this kingdom, or as shall be
ordered, adjudged, or declared in Parliament. And the Barons of the Exchequer,
Justices of assize, and Goale-delivery if they be found in default as
aforesaid, it is hereby declared that they ought to undergo the punishment
aforesaid.

Whether the Kings Majesty's privy Council either with the chief Governor,
Question 3.
or Governors of the kingdom, or without him or them, be a place of
Judicature, by the Common-lawes, and wherein causes between party, and party
for debts, trespasses, accounts, possession, or title of Lands, or any of them,
and which of them may be heard and determined, and of what Civil causes they
have jurisdiction, and by what law, and of what force is their order or decree,
in such cause or any of them?

That the Councell-table of this Realm either with the chief Governor or
Governors is no Iudicatorie wherein any action real, Declaraon.
personal, popular, or mixed, or any suite in the nature of the said actions or
any of them can or ought to be commenced, heard, or determined, and all
proceedings at the Councell-table, in any suite in the nature of any of the
said actions are void (especially causes particularly provided for) by
express acts of Parliament of force in this kingdom only exempted.

The like of the chief Governor above. Question 4.


The proceedings before the chief Governor, Declaration.
or Governors alone in any action, real, personal, popular, or mixed, or in
any suite in the nature of any of the said actions are Coram non Iudice and
void.

Whether grants of Monopolies be warranted by the law, Question 5.
and of what, and in what cases, and how and where, and by whom are the
pretended transgressors against such grants punishable? and whether by fine,
mutillation of members, imprisonment, loss and forfeyture of goods or
otherwise and which of them?

All grants of Monopolies are contrary to the Declaraon.
laws of this Realm, and therefore void, and no subject of the said Realm
ought to be fined, imprisoned, or otherwise punished for exercising or using
their lawful liberty of a subject, contrary to such grants.

In what cases the Lord Lieutenant, Question 6.
Lord Deputy, or other chief governor or governors of this kingdom and
Council may punish by fine, imprisonment, mutillation of members, pillory or
otherwise, and whether they may sentence any to such, the same, or the like
punishment for infringing the commands of or concerning any proclamation, of
and concerning Monopolies, and what punishment do they incur that vote for
the same?

The Lord Lieutenant, Declaration.
Lord Deputy, or other chief governor or governors, and Council of this
Realm, or any of them, ought not to imprison any of his Majesty's subjects,
but only in Cases where the Common-lawes or statutes of the Realm do enable
and warrant them so to do, and they ought not to fine, or to censure any
subjects in mutillation of members, standing on the pillory, or other shameful
punishment in any case, at the Councell-table, and no subject ought to be
imprisoned, fined, or otherwise punished for infringing any commands, or
proclamation for the support, or countenance of Monopolies: And if in any case,
any person or persons shall be committed by the command or warrant of the
chief governor, or governors and privy Council of this Realm, or any of
them, that in every such case, every such person or persons so committed,
restrained of his, or their liberty, or suffering imprisonment upon demand,
or motion made by his or their Council, or other employed by him or them for
that purpose unto the Judges of the Court of King's Bench, or Common Pleas, in
open Court, shall without delay upon any pretense whatsoever, for the ordinary
fees usually paid for the same have forthwith granted unto them, or him a writ
or writts of Habeas Corpus, to be directed generally to all, and every
Sheriff, Gaoler-minister, officer or other person, in whose custody the party
or parties so committed or restrained shall be, shall at the return of the
said writ, or writs, and according to the command thereof upon due and
convenient notice thereof given, unto him at the charge of the party or parties
who requires or procures such writ or writs, and upon security by his or
their own Bond, or Bonds given to pay the charge of carrying back the
prisoner, or prisoners, if he or they shall be remanded by the Court, to
which he or they shall be brought, as in like causes has been used, such
charges of bringing up and carrying back the prisoner or prisoners to be
always ordered by the Court, if any difference shall arise there about, to
bring, or cause to be brought the body, or bodies of the said party, or
parties so committed, or restrained unto and before the Judges, and Justices of
the said Court from whence the same writ or writs shall issue in open Court,
and shall then likewise certify, the true cause of such his, or their
detayner, or imprisonment, and and thereupon the Court after such return made,
and delivered in open Court, shall proceed to examine and determine, whether
the cause of such commitment, appearing upon the said return be just and
legal or not, and shall thereupon do what to justice shall appertain, either
by delivering, bayling, or remanding the prisoner, or prisoners.

Of what force is an act of state, Question 7.
or proclamation in this kingdom to bind the liberty, goods, possessions, or
inheritance of the Natives thereof, whether they or any of them can alter the
Common law or the infringers of them, loose their goods, chattels, or leases,
or forfeyte the same by infringing any such act of state, proclamation or both,
and what punishment do the sworn Judges of the law, that are privy
Counselors, incur that vote for such acts and execution thereof?

An act of state, Declaration.
or proclamation in this kingdom, cannot bind the liberty, inheritance,
possession, or goods of the subjects of the said kingdom, nor alter the
Common Law, and the infringers of any such act of state, or proclamation ought
not to forfeyte lands, leases, goods, or chatels for the infringing of any such
act of state or proclamation. And the Judges of the law who do vote for such
acts of state, or proclamation are punishable, as breakers and violaters of
their Oaths of Judges.

Are the subjects of this kingdom, Question 8.
subject to the marshall law, and whether any man in time of peace, no enemy
being in the field, with banner displaid, can be sentenced to death, if so, by
whom, and in what causes? if not, what punishment do they incur, that in
time of peace execute marshall law?

No subject of this kingdom ought to be sentenced to death, Declaration.
or executed by Marshall-law in time of peace, and if any subject be so
sentenced, or executed by marshall-law, in time of peace, the authors and
actors of any such sentence or execution, are punishable by the law of the land
for their so doing, as doers of their own wrong, and contrary to the said law
of the land.

Whether voluntary Oaths taken freely before arbitrators for affirmance,
Question 9.
or disaffirmance of any thing, or for the true performance of any thing be
punishable in the Castle-chamber, or any other Court, and why or wherefore?

No man ought to be punished in the Castle-chamber, Declaration.
or in any other Court, for taking a voluntary Oath before arbitrators for
affirmance or disaffirmance of any thing, or the true performance of any thing
in civil causes, nor are the arbitrators before whom such voluntary oaths
shall be taken punishable.

Why and by what law, Question 10.
or by what rule of policy is it that none is admitted to reducement of fines,
and other penalty in the Castle-chamber or Councell-table until he confess
the offense for which he is censured; when as revera he might be innocent
thereof, though suborned proofs, or circumstance might induce a Censure?

By the laws and statutes of the Realm, Declaration.
no man is bound, or ought to be compelled to acknowledge the offense laid to
his charge, or the justness of any censure past against him in the
Castle-chamber, or at the Councell-table, nor ought to be detayned in prison,
or abridged of his liberty, or the reducement of his fine, stayed or delayed,
until he do acknowledge such offense or the justness of such censure. And it
is further declared that no such enforced or wrested confession, or
acknowledgment can or ought to debar, or hinder any subject from his Bill of
reversall, or review of any sentence or decree past, or conceived against him
in the Castle-chamber, or in any other Court.

Whether the Judges of the King's Bench, Question 11.
or any other Judge of Gaole-delivery, or of any other Court, and by what law,
do or can deny the Copies of indictments of felony or treason, to the parties
accused contrary to the law.

The Judges of the King's Bench, Declaration.
or Justices of Gaole-delivery, or the Judges of any other Court, ought not to
deny Copies of indictments of felonies, or treason to the parties indicted.

What power has the Barons of the Court of Exchequer, Question 12.
to raise the respite of homage arbitrarily, to what rate they please, to what
value they may raise it, by what law they may distinguish between the respite
of homage upon the diversity of the true value of the Fees, when as Escuage is
the same for great and small Fees and are proportionable by Parliament?

The Barons of the Exchequer ought not to raise the respite of homage above the
usual rates appearing in and by the course and presidents of that Court
continued until the year of our Lord God, Declaration.
1637. and the raising thereof since that time was arbitrary and against the
law, and the Barons of the Exchequer, ought not to distinguish between the
respite of homage upon any diversity of the true values of the knights Fees.

Whether it be censurable in the subjects of this kingdom to repair into
England to appeal to his Majesty for redress of injuries, Question 13.
or for other lawful occasions; if so, why, and what condition of persons and
by what law?

The subjects of this kingdom may lawfully repair into England, Declaration.
to appeal to his Majesty for redress of injuries, or for other their lawful
occasions; and for their so doing, ought not to be punished or questioned upon
the statute of 5. of K. Rich. the 2. nor by any other law, or statute of force
in this kingdom (eminent officers and ministers of state, Commanders and
soldiers of his Majesty's Army. The Judges and ministers of his Majesty's
Courts of Justice, and of his highness Revenue and customs, whose attendance
is necessary requisite, by the laws and statutes of the realm only excepted.)

Whether Deanes or other dignitaries of Cathedral Churches be properly and de
mero jure donatiue by the King, Question 14.
and not Elective or collative; if so, why, and by what law, and whether the
Confirmation of a Deane de facto of the Bishops grant be good and vallid in
law, or no? if not, by what law?

Deaneries or other Ecclesiastical dignities of this Realm, Declaration.
are not de mero jure donative, but some are donative, and some elective, and
some are collative, according to their respective foundations, and the
confirmation of the Bishops grant by a Deane de facto having actually stallum
in Choro, and vocem in Capitulo, together with the Chapter is good in law.

Whether the issuing of Quo-warrantoes, Question 15.
out of the King's Bench, or Exchequer against Borroughs, that anciently and
recently sent Burgesses to the Parliament to show cause why they sent Burgesses
to the Parliament, be legal? if not what punishment ought to be inflicted on
those that are or has been the occasioners, procurers, and Judges of, and in
such Quo-warrantoes?

The issuing of Quo-warrantoes out of the Court of King's Bench, Declaration.
Court of Exchequer, or any other Court against Boroughs, that anciently or
recently sent Burgesses to the Parliament, to show cause why they sent
Burgesses to the Parliament, and all the proceedings therein are, coram non
Iudice, illegal and void, and the right of sending Burgesses to the Parliament
is questionable in Parliament only, and the occasioners, procurers, and Judges
in such Quo-warrantoes and proceedings are punishable as in Parliament shall be
thought consonant to law and Justice.

By what law are Jurors, Question 16.
that give verdict according their conscience, and are the sole Judges of the
fact, censured in the Castle-chamber in great fines, and sometimes pillored
with loss of ears, and boared through the tongue, and marked sometimes in the
forehead with a hot Iron, and other like infamous punishment?

Jurors are the sole Judges of the matter in fact, Declaraon.
and they ought not for giving their verdict to be bound over to the Court of
Castle-chamber, by the Judge or Judges, before whom the verdict was, or shall
be given.

By what law are men censurable in the Castle-chamber, Question 17.
with the mutillation of members, or any other brand of infamy, and in what
cases, and what punishment in each case there is due, without respect of the
quality of the person or persons?

No man ought to be censured in the Castle-chamber, Declaraon.
in the mutillation of members, or any other brand of infamy, otherwise, or in
other cases then is expressly limited by the statutes of this Realm in such
cases provided?

Whether in the censures in the Castle-chamber, Question 18.
regard be to be had, to the words of the great Charter, viz. Salvo
Contenemento, etc.

In the censures of the Castle-chamber, Declaration.
especially regard ought to be had to the words of the great Charter, viz.
Salvo Contenemento, etc.

Whether if one that steals a Sheep, Question 19.
or commits any other felony, and after slieth the course of Justice, or lies
in woods or mountains upon his keeping, be a Traitor, if not, whether a
proclamation can make him so.

A Felon who flies the course of Justice, Declaration.
and lies in woods, mountains, or elsewhere upon his keeping is no Traitor,
and a proclamation cannot make him a Traitor.

Whether the testimony or evidence of Rebels, Question 20.
Traitors, protected Thieves, or other infamous persons be good evidence in
law, to be pressed upon the trials of men for their life's, or whether the
Judges, or Jurors ought to be Judge of the matter in fact?

The testimony of convicted, Declaration.
or protected Rebels, Traitors, or Fellons, is no sufficient evidence in law
upon the trial of any person for his life, and the credit of the testimony of
persons accused or impeached, and not convicted of felony or treason, ought to
be left to the Jury who are sole Judges of the truth, and validity of the said
testimony.

By what law are Fayres and Markets to be held in Capite, Question 21.
when no other express tenure be mentioned, in his Majesty's Letters Patent,
or grants of the same Fayres and Markets, although the rent or yearly sum be
reserved thereout?

The King grants Lands to be held in free and Common-soccage, Declaiation.
as of a Castle, or Manor by Letters Patent under the great Seal, and by the
same Letters Patent, or by other Letters Patent, grants a Fair and Market,
reserving a yearly rent or sum without expressing any tenure as to the said
Fair or Market, the said Fair or Market, is not held by knights-service in
Capite or otherwise in Capite.

Copia vera, Ex' per Phil: Fern: Cleric. Parl. Com.

FINIS.
Faults escaped.
Page 9. l. 19. instead of causes read Cases, p. 40. l. 6. for the, read
their, p. 44. l. 10. for wages, read ways, p. 56. l. 17. for best, read
least, p. 57, lin, 18. for Rottoman, read Hotoman, ibid. l. 21. for Master
Sleyden, say Seldom, p 61. l. 3. and is omitted before that p. 63. l. 19. for
strike, r. stick, p. 64. l. 14, for Primes case say Princes case, p. 67, l,
ultima for Strata Marclad, say Strata Marcella. p. 68. l, vlt. for here, say
there. p, 70, l, 1, for sit, say Litt. ibid. l, 2, for give say gives. p, 70,
l, 22, for writ, say writs. p, 72, l, 1. for this, the, p, 7^, l, 23. for as
say or. p, 86. for Willielmi Collet* say Willielmus Collet. p. 87, l, 12, for
Monopolites, Monopolists. p, 88, l, 8, for Cod. say C. p, 93, l, 19, for
promissum est, say provisum est, p, 94, l, 2, for promissum, say provisum p,
97, l, 21, for the say this. p, 109* l. 3, for Thornbow, say Thorn borow, page,
116. l. 7. for Placit. Com. say Plo. Com. ibid. l, 19* for parts say parties,
p, 121, l, 7, non is omitted, p, 122, l, vltim, for relivuum, say relevium.


