A True Copy OF A PROJECT FOR THE REUNION OF Both Religions IN FRANCE.
WE whose Names are here underwritten Ministers of the Reformed Religion; being
desirous to carry our obedience to his Majesty's Commands as far as the great
interest of our Consciences will give us leave; and hoping, from the great
goodness of his Majesty, that in consideration of this our compliance, and the
steps we make toward the Religion he professes, he will be pleased to command
the persecution that we are under to cease; do promise to contribute, what lies
in our power, to the Religious design which he has of uniting all his Subjects
under one Ministry, and do resolve to reunite our selves to the Gallican
Church, which in its Pastoral Letter does likewise say that they will yield
some of their right in favor of the public Peace, and will rectify those
things that want redress, provided the wound of Schism be once healed. We do
likewise on our side engage our selves, that if the following Articles are bona
fide granted to us, we will with all our hearts give his Majesty that
satisfaction which he desires.

I.
That there shall be no Obligation upon any body to believe Purgatory, that all
Disputes on this Article shall cease; every one speaking with great moderation
of the state of Souls after this life.

II.
That the Pictures of the Holy Trinity shall be taken out of the Churches; and
those which shall be left shall be only as Ornaments, etc. That the Pastors
shall carefully instruct the people to avoid upon this point the abuses which
are but too common among the ignorant.

III.
That such Relics of Saints as shall be undoubtedly owned to be true, shall be
preserved with respect, but shall not make any essential part of the cult of
Religion, and that none shall be bound to Worship them.

IV.
That it shall be taught that God alone is the true Object of our Adoration,
and that the people shall be warned not to attribute to any Creature, though
never so eminent, that which is peculiar and proper to God: But nevertheless
since the Saints in Heaven do concern themselves in our miseries, we may pray
to God to grant that to the Prayers of the Church triumphant, which the
indifference and coldness of Ours cannot obtain from him.

V.
That amongst the Sacraments of the Christian Religion Baptism and the
Eucharist shall be reputed the chiefest, and that the others shall have the
Name of Sacraments in a more large Sense only

VI.
That touching the necessity of Baptism the Canon of the Council of Trent shall
be the Rule, and it shall not be intended to any other than the natural sense
of these words. Siquis dixerit Baptismum liberorum ad salutem non esse
necessarium anathema sit. And therefore there shall be no modification to the
tenth Canon of the precedeing Chapter; which declares, that it is not lawful
for all persons to administer the Sacraments, that power belonging only to the
Ministers of the Gospel who have received it from Jesus Christ.

VII.
That Jesus Christ is really present in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, though
the manner of his presence be incomprehensible to the Wit of man, and therefore
none shall be obliged to define the manner of his presence, neither shall there
be any dispute about it, since it passes our understanding, and that God has
not revealed it to us.

VIII.
That in receiving the Sacrament One shall be in a posture of adoration, the
Communicants at that time paying to Christ those supreme honors which are only
due to God; but no more shall be exacted from any body for the species of the
Bread and Wine, than that respect we pay to Sacred things.

IX.
That none shall be obliged to kneel before the Host, except at the Communion.

X.
That the people shall have the Liberty of reading the Scripture, which shall
be read publicly in the Churches, and that the Service shall be performed in
the vulgar Tongue: That the Cup shall be given to the people, and that no other
Sacrifice shall be owned, but that upon the Cross, that it shall be taught that
Christians have but one victim which was sacrificed once for all, and that the
Eucharist is only a Sacrifice of commemoration or the representation, which the
true Christian makes to God of the Sacrifice of the Cross.

XI.
That before we be obliged to receive Auricular confession, all abuses
proceeding from it shall be redressed, and those necessary modifications added,
which may contribute to the quiet of our Consciences.

XII.
That all Fastings and other Mortifications shall be looked upon only as helps
to Piety, and to preserve us in a state of Grace: That all the Orders of
Religious men or Women shall be reformed, particularly the Mendicants: And
those only shall be preserved that are most Ancient, such as the Benedictines,
together with the Jesuits and Fathers of the Oratory, all which shall be
subject to the inspection and authority of the Bishops alone.

XIII.
That the Ministers shall be preserved in the state Ecclesiastic, and shall
have in the Church a particular Rank; Except only those who have been twice
married, who shall be considered some other way.

XIV.
That Jesus Christ having bestowed on his Ministers the power of administering
the Sacraments gratis, that they shall likewise dispense them gratis, and
without selling them as is now practiced.

XV.
That the people shall be dispensed from that great number of Holy days, which
now do burden them, and shall be obliged to celebrate only the Mysteries of
the Nativity and Resurrection; with those of the Apostles and Saints of the
first Century.

XVI.
That the limits which the last Assembly of the Clergy of France have set to
the Popes authority shall be inviolable, and that as to the Rank he is to have
amongst the Bishops, he be looked upon only, as Primus inter pares.

XVII.
That those Observations and Ceremonies, which are beneath the Majesty of the
Christian Religion, and of which there is no footsteps in Antiquity, shall be
abolished; such as Torches at Burials, Canonisations, Processions, Pilgrimages,
and the postures of the Priests at the Altar.

XVIII.
That upon all questions of the merit of good Works, and the power of Grace,
the opinion of St. Austin shall be followed, and the exposition of the Bishop
of Meaux.

XIX.
That the gaining of Pardons and Indulgences shall be reformed, and that the
people shall be instructed as much as possible, that they are to hope for the
remission of their sins by the blood of Jesus Christ.

May the Lord send down his Spirit upon men, that they be all one heart, and
one Soul, and that we may in our days see this blessed Reunion. It is the Vows
and Prayers of all good people of both Communions, and to which all ought to
contribute according to their talent both by word and writing. Amen fiat.

Signed by DV BOVRDIEV LA COST. And above sixty more.


London, Printed for Randal Tailor, 1685.


