THE Moral Practice OF THE Jesuits;

Demonstrated by many remarkable Histories of their Actions in all parts of the
World.

COLLECTED, Either from Books of the greatest Authority, or most certain and
unquestionable RECORDS and MEMORIALS.

By the Doctors of the Sorbonne:

Faithfully rendered into English.

LONDON, Printed for Simon Miller, at the Star at the West End of St, Paul's,
1670.

THE PREFACE Of the Design of this BOOK.
There Is no doubt but all who love the purity of the Moral Doctrine of Christ,
are very sensible of the Corruption the Jesuits labor to introduce thereinto
by the Opinions they have invented: But it may be said, That nothing is more
dreadful in the Conduct of these Fathers than to see them pursue those corrupt
maxims in their Practice, and that of the many things they allow in others
contrary to the Law of God, and the principles of the Gospel, there is not any
they commit not themselves, to satissie their Avarice, or to promote the
Grandeur and Glory of their Society.

To prove this, is the business of the present Collection of those Learned and
Pious Doctors of the Sorbonne to inspire the World, and the Jesuits themselves
with horror at their detestable Morality, there being no better way to
demonstrate the danger of the looseness they authorize, that latitude and
remisness whereof they are Patrons, than by discovery of that abyss of
Injustice, Avarice, Lust, and Other Vices wherein they have plunged them.

Let none imagine we were moved to gather the different pieces that make up
this Collection, with design to decry or prejudice the Society. God is our
witness, we have undertaken it out of the Charity we have for them, and the
grief we are sincerely affected with to see them so unhappily engaged. We sigh
to ^ind them the causes of the loss of so many souls they seduce, and draw with
themselves into the precipices of Error and Vice. We deplore their obstinacy
in shutting their eyes against the Light held forth by the Pastors of the
Church, to guide them out of their wanderings into the right ways of Piety and
Truth; and tremble when we consider, that every day they literally fulfill the
Prophesies delivered of them in the infancy of their Society.

For is it not a terrible judgment of God, not only on the Jesuits, but the
whole Church, that almost in all parts of the world providence has raised
persons wise, illuminated, and full of the Divine Service, who from the first
establishment of this Company have foreseen all those mischiefs it has wrought
in the Church, its turning topsie turvy the Ecclesiastical Discipline, its
troubling and disordering all Estates and Conditions, and that in the mean time
the same Company has been permitted to mount to that degree of Power and
Authority, that they have laid at their feet almost all that is Great in the
World, that those of their Order are Masters of almost all the Consciences of
Christendom, that they resist all Bishops, and very often attempt against their
Sovereigns.

Melchior Canus* Bishop of the Canaries, that Great Luminary of the Church of
Spain in these last ages, no sooner discovered their appearance in that
Kingdom, but he believed the end of the world drew nigh, and that Antichrist
would forthwith appear, for that the Forerunners and Emissaries (the Titles
they confess he calls them by) began to walk abroad: He published everywhere,
not only in particular discourses, and private Conferences, but in his Sermons
and public Lectures, that he discovered in them all the marks which the
Apostle declared should be seen in the followers of Antichrist. And when
Turrien one of his Friends who wa^ turned Jesuit, desired him to forbear
persecuting his Order, and alleged on that occasion the approbation given him
by the Holy See, he made him no other Answer, but that he held himself obliged
in Conscience to advertise the people as he did, that they might not pe^mit
themselves to be seduced by the Jesuits.

D. Jerome Baptista de Lanuza Bishop of Albarazin and Balbastro; a person
admirable for Holiness and Piety, and particularly endowed with the gifts of
Prophecy, of Wisdom and Understanding, composed an express work to make it
appear that the prophecy of St. Hildegard ought to be understood of the
Jesuits, and that it was easy to discern all the lineaments of the Society in
the pourtraite she had made.

Tarvisius Patriarch of Venice confirmed by an Oath upon the Holy Evangelists
his prediction, that they should one day be expelled that City for their
Factions and Politic Genius, which happened accordingly five hundred years
after, for their having raised strange factions and seditions in the bosom of
that Republique.

All the Catholic Universities, particularly those of Cracovie, Lovaine, and
Padua, those of Spain and France; the Bishops, the Clergy, all the Orders of
Religion, and the Courts of Parliament, almost every where opposed their
establishment, as contrary to the good of the Church, and the security of
States. And in particular, The faculty of Theology at Paris in their Famous
Decree which we cannot too much Commend, Declared Unanimously, THAT THIS
SOCIETY APPEARED DANGEROUS AS TO THE FAITH, APT TO TROUBLE THE PEACE OF THE
CHURCH, TENDING TO THE OVERTHROW OF THE MONASTIQUE ORDERS OF RELIGION, AND MADE
MORE FOR DESTRUCTION THAN FOR EDIFICATION.

GOD has not only permitted that all those Great Men of Spain, Italy,
Almaigne, Flanders, Poland, and France, should predict the mischiefs this
Society would do in the Church, but has raised many of the Society i^self,
even Generals of their Order, to represent and set forth with that Energy, and
Liberty, wherewith Charity and Truth do inspire men, the corruptions crept in
amongst them, and by their means spread through the whole body of the Church.

The learned Mariana has made an express Treatise Of the Defaults he had
observed in their Government, and makes it appear, That at the time he writ,
their Society was so much disfigured, That had St. Ignatius their Founder come
again into the world, he would not have known it: Mutius Vitteleschi their
sixth General, reflecting upon that criminal facility wherewith those of his
Congregation embraced All the New Opinions that ^ended (as his phrase is) to
corrupt and ruin the Piety of the Faithful, says in a Letter addressed to the
Superiors of all their houses, That there was reason to fear, the latitude and
liberty of Opinion of some of the Society, especially in the matter of manners,
would not only utterly ruin the Company, but cause very great mischiefs in the
whole Church of God.

So many Voices and Ora^les ought ^ertainly at least to have inclined the
Jesuits to examine themselves and reform in their Doctrine and Conduct, what
so many Great Men judged capable to destroy their Society, and annoy the whole
Church: But by a just judgment of God, what St. Paul the Apostle declares to
be the condition of every one, Who does not embrace the Holy Instructions of
Christ, and the Doctrine which is according to Godliness, is happened to them;
for, says the Apostle, He is proud, knowing nothing, but doting about
questions and strifes of words, from whence comes, envy, strife, evil
surmisings, perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds, who have not the
knowledge of the Truth, supposing that gain is Godliness, 1 Timothy ^. 3.

The design of this Collection is to make appear, that God by a secret order of
his Providence has abandoned the Jesuits to these unhappy Attendants of
insi^cerity in Religion, and to demonstrate particularly in this, That he has
given them up to the two most pernicious enormities, which according to the
Apostle, are the effects of men's infidelity and unwillingnesse to embrace the
instructions of Jesus Christ, which are, To be puffed up with pride, and to
imagine that godliness is to be used as a means to enrich themselves. For by
the extracts we have reported out of the Image of their First Age, will appear
on the one side The pride of their hearts, and to what a pitch of extravagance
their self-conceitednesse has carried them, as that there is not any artifice,
injustice or violence they impl^y not to enrich themselves, by the spoils of
all sorts of persons Secular and Religious, Sovereign and private.

They have no cause of complaint, that we attribute these disorders to the
Society, for that though they were only the faults of those particular persons
who committed them, they might nevertheless be justly imputed to the Society,
as authorizing them all by the doctrine she defends, and the impunity the
offenders find in her bosom.

For where are the punishments she inflicted on them who acted such violences
and inhumanities against the Nuns of Voltigerode? What course has she taken to
repair the damages sustained by so many desolate families ruined by the
banquerupt of the College at Sevil. Let any one, says Mariana, Chap. 14. have
but boldness enough, what faults soever he be guilty of, he remains in the
Society, if he have but the wit to frame an excuse, or any pretense for what he
has committed. I pass by gross crimes, a great number whereof is winked at
under color of want of sufficient proof, or fear to have them noysed and so
become public, ^or our Government seems to aim at nothing else but covering of
faults, like them who rake the ashe^ uppermost, as if the fire that lies under
would not sooner or later send forth some smoke. No rigor is exercised but
upon those poor wretches who have neither power nor protection, whereof there
are instances enough; others shall commit the greatest mischiefs imaginable,
and yet no man touch one hair of their head: A Provincial or Rector shall turn
all upside down, violate the Rules and Constitutions of the Order, squander
away the Estate belonging to their Houses, or give them to his Kindred, without
any punishment after several years miscarriage, but the rendering of his
condition better than ever, by discharging him of his Office. Does any man know
a Superior chastised for such excesses as these? And afterward having wished,
that there were in the Society Rewards provided for the good, and Punishments
for the vicious, he adds, It Is a lamentable thing, and permitted by God for
our sins, that oftentimes we practice the contrary, for among us the Good are
afflicted, yea put to death without cause, or for very light reasons, because
we are assured to find no contradiction nor resistance from them, whereof we
could produce many deplorable examples; and the wicked are upheld; because they
are feared. A conduct capable to provoke God to precipitate the Society into
the Abyss of Destruction.

See how this* Author, who was a member of the Soiety, deplores ^her policy
that engages her unhappily to con^ive at the greatest enormities of the persons
of whom she consists! And how far she is answerable for their greatest
extravagancies by cherishing and maintaining them, and making it her Choice to
tolerate in them all sorts of Corruptions, rather than discover to the World
any thing that may induce the people to believe, the Society is composed of any
but Saints.

It were easy to prove, that the Greatest part of the Maxims of their Moralls
are grounded on nothing else but the libertinage of the members, whose
justification the Society undertakes: When one of the Company had seduced his
Penitent, and made use of pretended Revelations to cover under the name of
marriage his impurities and sacrilege: Another of the Society to justify the
Crime, fails not to teach, That a Friar professed may marry upon a probable
Revelation. If one publish Calumnies against the most innocent persons, because
he imagines they did the Society prejudice; Another will teach, That a Friar
may not only destroy the reputation, but slay the person of any he foresees may
annoy the Glory of his Order: Lastly, if some be so wicked, as to inspire the
Subjects of best Princes with designs against their Lives, and the quiet of
their Estates; Others will compose entire Volumes to justify those Assassines
and Murderers, and the Society will Canonize them for Saints, and Register
them in the Catalogue of Martyrs, especially if they be of her Children.

May it not be truly said then, that the Members of the Society commit not any
disorder that may not justly be imputed to the Society it self? But it is not
our purpose in this Collection; where we shall report nothing but what has
been done by whole Houses, and entire Provinces, and the Society it self
appeared highly in defense of. So that we shall omit a great number of stories,
whereof we have most ample and Authentic Memoirs in our hands, with the Names
and Surnames of the Persons, the Houses, the Provinces, and the Circumstances
of their Crimes specified so particularly, that there cannot remain the least
doubt of the truth of the facts alleged; which yet shall one day see light,
if these Fathers force us to publish, there is not any enormity in the
Catalogue of Vices which is not practiced amongst them; that they abuse their
Missions into strange Countries, to lay snares for the Chastity of the
Inhabitants, their Conversation, the Word of God and surintendence of
Monasteries to corrupt Virgins consecrate to God, Men's Daughters and Wives, the
Sacrament of Penance to pervert men's Consciences; and pollute their Colleges
and Congregations, by Enormities not to be named.

There is evidence sufficient for this in the book F. Jarrige the Jesuit of
Rochell published against them, wherein the matters of fact are set forth with
all their particular circumstances, that not to believe them were to offer
violence to our senses: It Is true the Book was published during his Apostasy,
but it is as remarkable, that after his return to the Church of Rome, and his
publishing at Antwerp in the Jesuits College, the causes of his return, and
discoursing at large of that Book, he charges himself with too much heat in the
writing, but does not particularly disavow any one of those scandalous stories
he reported therein: This is an indubitable proof of their truth, it being
impossible that the Jesuits would have absolved him, having published against
them so many Calumnies without obliging him to a public acknowledgement, that
they were false, if the facts he had reported had not been true.

But we were willing to pass by these and many other enormities, as well to
avoid offense to the Reader, by writing things which cannot with modesty be
made public, as for that what openly appears in the visible conduct of the
Society affords too clear proofs of the perfect Conformity between their
Practices and their Maxims: And that having abandoned the Rules of the Gospel,
to follow their vain Ratiocinations, God has delivered them up to the
wanderings and errors of a depraved and corrupt spirit, which has engaged them
in Actions unworthy not only of Priests, and of Friars, but of Virtuous Pagans.

The benefit we propose in publishing this Collection, is to confirm the
faithful in the abhorrency they ought to have of the Moralls of the Jesuits,
which as a poisoned spring convey venom into the hearts of all that approach
them, and to persuade the people to avoid their detestable Maxims, which having
corrupted the understanding, engage the will in dissoluteness and debauchery;
and to incline the Jesuits to give better attention to the Judgment past of
them by so many great persons, particularly those of the Faculty of Theology at
Paris, in 1554. the accomplishment of whose sentence is cleared by the
Historical Relations reported in this Collection.

It Is our hearty desire the Jesuits may reap the benefit of our Labor, for,
(whatever they say) we love them, and have for them all the Charity we ought:
But we dare not hope they will profit by what we have done, for that these
Fathers never return from the Abyss they are plunged in; but as they are
invincibly obstinate in the defense of their greatest enormities, we are to
resolve upon an inflexible firmitude, and indefatigable constancy to reproach
them therewith, and press them to amend, with incessant sighs for their errors
and miscarriages, and prayers to God to mollify the hardness of their hearts.
Qui enim ista non dolent, non est in eis charitas Christi; qui autem etiam de
talibus gaudent, abundat in eis malignitas Diaboli. St. August. Epist. 137.

Of the Pieces contained in this First Part.
ALl the Pieces, whereof this Collection is composed are reduced to two things
we have undertaken to justify, that is, That the Jesuits are animated with a
spirit of Pride and of Avarice.

The first is made appear by the Extracts we report from a Book Entitled The
Image of the first Age of the Society of Jesus, which the Jesuits caused to be
printed in Flanders in 1640. The reason of the Title was their design, to
represent in that Book all the different Events happened to their Society since
their establishment in 1540: which they have pursued with so much affectation,
and executed in a manner so full of vanity and pride, that we cannot open the
Book without abhorring the impudence of these fathers, in turning all things to
their advantage, and laboring to draw Glory from that which ought rather to
humble and confound them. It might have been necessary to have translated the
whole Book to make known their folly at large, and to discover their
extravagancies in their perfect dimensions; but we have been content to make
only some Extracts, to which a person of Piety has added reflections, no less
solid than ingenious, the Light whereof renders their Vanity more ridiculous.
We doubt not but the Readers will judge, that we ought to have refuted them
thus, since, as Tertullian says, there is nothing more due to the vanity of men
than to be railed at. We hope that these Extracts will servs to demonstrate the
utility and necessity of the present Collection, for that this Society having
affected to give the world such false Ideas of themselves, and representations
quite different from what they really are, it was but just to present men with
the true pictures of these Friars, and give them the occasion To know them by
their Fruits, Mat. 7. 16.

The other pieces of this Collection serve to prove, they employ all sorts of
means to enrich themselves, and that nothing escapes the claws of their avarice

The first stories we report, are taken out of works so authentic, that to
name them will be sufficient to exempt their credit from question, as being
Extracts out of a Memorial presented to His Majesty's Council by the
Vicar General of the Order of Cluny in Almaigne, others out of a book of a
famous Benedictine Friar in Almaigne, and others from an arrest of the
Parliament of Metz.

The residue are Extracts of a Spanish Book, Entitled, The Theater of
Jesuitisme, or the Jesuitique Theater; being an Apology for other Orders of
Religion against the Jesuits addressed to Pope Innocent the 10th, and Printed
at Conimbre in 1654, But because this book is not well known to the world, and
men may possibly ser^ple to give it the credit it deserves without a more
particular knowledge of the Author, and occasion that moved him to write, we
shall endeavor in few words to satis^ie their doubts:

To begin with the Occasion that gave birth to the Theater of Jesuitisme; we
are to observe that the licentiate Esclapes, having made a Book Entitled, A
manifest addressed to all the Faithful in Jesus Christ; of the wicked maxims
taught, maintained and practiced by the Jesuits: Another Author under the name
of Doctor Aquila answered it by a Book which appeared with this Title, Ladreme
el Perro y no me muerda: Let the Curr bark at me but not bite me. This
pretended Doctor undertook in this work to justify all that Esclapes had
reproved, and to show ^e understood not the matter he Treated of, when he
affirmed the Jesuits to have been sole Authors of those Maxims, whereas they
had only followed the Authors who preceded them, and especially the Dominicans,
in whose Books they had learnt them.

The Author of the Theater of the Jesuitisme undertakes by that Book, the
refutation of Aquila, and the defense of all the Authors he had attaqued.

The Book is divided into two parts: The first comprehends the refutation of
Aquila upon the Maxims reported by Esclapes: We have taken nothing out of
this; The Moral Doctrine of the Jesuits, not long since published, containing
large Entracts made of that part: We have confined our selves principally to
the second, as conducing most to the design of this Collection, which is to
demonstrate the practice of that doctrine in the Conduct of the Jesuits.

We shall observe here only two things: 1. That this passed in Spain the same
time when the pernicious Morals of the Jesuits were attaqued with such zeal
and success in France. 2. That the Author says, he affirms not any story in
his Book, but what concerns the Society entire, or some particular person,
whose protection and defense the Community undertook, and for whom by
consequence they are responsible. To which he adds, that it is visible, that
among the Jesuits, it is not so much the particular persons that offend, as in
other Orders of Religion, who correct and expel them that are guilty, but that
a general dissoluteness has seized the whole body; which he justifies by the
words of Azeuredo, and Villa Sante Jesuits of Spain, who renewed the Sect of
the Illuminated Heretics, and having been imprisoned and interrogated upon
their abominable Tenets, answered the Magistrates, That if they were imprisoned
for them, they might have as well imprisoned the Society.

As for the Author of the Theater of Jesuitisme, the name of La Pieta^, which
he assigned was not his tru^ Name: He was a Natural Son of the deceased King of
Spain, and has been always reputed very considerable in the Court at Madrid:
Nor was it his intention by that assumed name to conceal his composure of that
work, which he has always publicly owned as the true Author thereof; and had
it been feasible to have confined the Book to the Kingdom of Spain, he had
prefixed his Name, since none in that Realm but knew it his work; but his
modesty and humility inclined him to hide his name from those of foreign
Countries who were ignorant of it.

He was a Dominican when he composed the Book; his name is Ildefonso de S.
Thomas a Sancto Thoma: And though his Book by the Credit of the Jesuits has
been condemned and put into the Index Expurgatorius, it hindered him not from
being named successor to John de Pallafox in the Bishopric of Osme, and
presently after in that of Placentia worth fifty thousand Crowns annual rent;
and lastly, in that of Malaga, which he is new possessed of, having preferred
it before that of Placentia, though it be worth but twenty thousand Crowns,
which is thirty thousand Crowns less than the other, to justify this choice,
he said, that the Monastery where he made his profession was in the City of
Malaga; though the more probable cause may be, that being a person of most
accomplished piety, having past all the Offices and Dignities of his Order, he
gladly embraced the occasion by his dis-interesment on this occurrence to
edi^ie the Church, and lessen his account to be rendered to God, which would
have been increased, had he continued in charge with a Bishopric so
considerable as that of Placentia, being one of the richest of Spain after
Toledo.

The King of Spain has acknowledged him his Son, and he was made Bishop in the
Life of the King. The three Bishoprics mentioned, were all void in less than
three months; so that he has stood charged with no other Church but only that
of Malaga, and is highly esteemed in his Diocese; He is reputed one of the
greatest and most zealous preachers this day in Spain, and applies himself much
to Confession, and the direction of Souls committed to his care.

His Mother was Maid of Honor to Isabel of France, late Queen of Spain, and
was Sister to the Marquess Mortara Governor of Milan; but being with Child,
the King to save his Honor married her to the Marquess Quintana, one of the
greatest and richest Lords of his Court. The Marquess had that passionate love
for this Lady, and gave her those Evidences of real affection, that she held
her self obliged to testify her acknowledgements, by revealing the secret of
her being with Child by the King before her Espousals with the Marquess her
Husband: But all the Protestations she could make of inviolable sidelity to him
could not save the poor Marquess from receiving in this news his mortal wound,
for though he gave his Wife no testimony of it, he was seized with such grief
upon the report, that it brought him to his end within two months after.

The Marquess having lain in retired into a Monastery, whence she took great
care of her Sons education, and afterward became a Nun and died there: But
having before told her Son who he was, he took a resolution to take the habit
of St. Dominique in the City of Malaga, about which is situate the Estate he
quitted to become a Friar of that Order, wherein he lived ever since, and
continues at present with the dignity of Episcopacy, and a high reputation of
singular piety.

The Merit and Piety of the Author of the THEATER of JESUITISME takes away all
doubts of the truth of the facts he reports. What remains, but to add, a word
of those pieces that immediately follow this PREFACE, and to observe that they
are common to all parts of the Collection, being Prophesies, whose
accomplishment is seen in all the Stories whereof the work is composed, which
are but effectual Comments and Explications of what has been predicted.

It is not our purpose in this Treatise, or others, to heap all the ^xamples
that might be brought on the Subject, which might require an infinite number of
Volumes, but to pick out the most Authentic, and proper to justify that we
undertake to prove.

Mar. 31. 1670.
Licensed, and Entered according to Order.

THE Moral Practice OF THE IESVITES.
The words of St. Paul, taken out of the third Chapter of the second Epistle to
Timothy.
Interpreted of the Jesuits by the Pious and Learned Bishop of the Canaries,
Melchier Canus, the Famous Divine of the Order of St. Dominique.
Acknowledged accordingly by O^landin the I^suite, in the History of the
Society.
1. KNow then that in the latter days perilous times shall come.

2. For there shall be men wh^ shall be lovers of themselves, covetous,
boasters, pr^ud, blasphemers, dis^bedient to parents, un^hankfull, unboly.

3. Without natural affection, truce breakers, false-accusers, incontinent,
fierce, despisers of those that are good.

4. Traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasures m^re than lovers of God.

5. Having a form of Godliness, but denying the power thereof, from such turn
away.

6. For of this sort are they that creep into houses, and lead cap^i^e silly
women laden with sins, led away with diverse lusts.

7. Ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the Truth.

8. Now as James and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these also resist the
truth; men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the Faith.

9. But they shall proceed no further, for their ^olly shall be made manifest
to all men, as theirs also was.

12. Yea, and all that will live Godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer
persecution.

13. But the evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving, and
being deceived.

The Prophecy of St. Hildegard.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THe Prophecy of St. Hildegard has been applied to the Jesuits by many
persons, and among others, by D. Jerome Baptista de la Nuza of the Order of St.
Dominique, afterward Bishop of Albarazin and Balbastro, whose Elegy may be
seen in the Acts of the Chap. General of that Order Celebrated at Rome in 1629.
It Is said of him, that all his life he observed exactly the rules of his Order,
even in the smallest matters, and added thereto in his practice frequent Fasts,
and instead of cords made use of chains of iron in acts of Penance and
Mortification; his constant exercises were Prayer and Reading of Godly Books;
he had the gift of Prophecy, was of great Wisdom, and excellent Understanding,
whereof his Master St. Lewis Beltram and his Books give ample testimony and a
clear evidence: He spent fifty years in the Ministry of the Word, and when he
preached his face was often seen to shine with extraordinary luster; his
Charity, when Bishop, made him very poor, for he gave all his Goods, even the
Bed he lay on, in Alms; his Confessor assures us he never sinned mortally, and
in the seventieth year of his Age died at Albarazin reputed a Saint.

The Holy Woman speaks of a sort of men to come in the last Ages: And it is
observed in the Life of St. Engelbert the Martyr, Archbishop of Cologne,
written by an Author his Contemporary, That in the life of that Prelate, when
the Domi^i^ans and Franciscans came to Cologne to Found for themselves Houses
of Religion, the Ecclesiastics murmured, and endeavored to persuade the
Archbishop to expel them; alleging for reason, their fear that these were the
men of whom St. Hildegard had Prophesied; to which the Prelate made answer,
that there was no cause of complaint against those Orders, for that till then
they had not given other than good Examples; but the time would come, when the
Prophecy should be fulfilled; which in the Margent of this Prophecy in the
Annals of Baronius is observed to be these latter days.

I shall relate the Prophecy as I find it recited in Bzovius a famous Author;
for though the Copy, the Bishop of Albarazin followed in his Commentary, differ
somewhat from that Bzovius made use of, yet both agree exactly in sense.

The Mavelous Prophecy of the Abbess Hildegard, Reported by Bzovius in the
15th Tome of his Ecclesiastical Annals, Anno Dom. 1415. Q. 39. under Pope John
23.
THere will arise men without a Chief, who shall feed and grow fat upon the
sins of the people, but profess themselves of the number of Beggars; shameless
in their behavior; studious to invent new ways to do mischief; a pernicious
Order odious to all wise men, and those that are faithful to Jesus Christ,
healthy and strong, but lazy and idle, that they never work, pretending
beggary, busy antagonists against the Teachers of the Truth; by their Credit
with Great Ones opposing the Innocent; having four principal Vices rooted in
their hearts by the Devil; Flattery, to gain gifts from the World; Envy, to
make them impatient to see good done to others, and not to them; Hypocrisy, to
please by dissimulation; and Detraction to render themselves commendable by
dispraising others; Preaching incessantly to Secular Princes to procure
themselves applause from the people, and to seduce the simple, but without
Devotion or Example of true Martyrdom, robbing true Pastors of their Rights to
administer the Sacraments, and depriving the Poor, the miserable and the sick
of their Alms, cajoleing the populace, and courting their favor, familiar
with Ladies, and other women, and ^eaching them to cheat their husbands, and
give away their goods to them in private; receivers of ill gotten goods,
saying, give them to us and we will pray for you, and obtain pardon for all
your sins; making these they Confess to forget their kindred; receiving goods
from ^obbers on the highway, extortioners, sacrilegious persons, usurers,
fornicators, adulterers, heretics, schismatics, apostates, lewd women,
perjured tradesmen, corrupt Judges, cashiered soldiers, tyrants, and all other
miscreants led by the Devil; living deliciously, passing this transitory life
in society, and at last falling together into damnation, having the world at
will; but the people will by degrees grow cold toward them, and having by
experience found them seducers, cheats and impostors, will hold their hands
from further gifts; then will they run about their houses like famished or mad
dogs, with their eyes to the ground, shrinking their necks like (...), seeking
bread to satis^^e their hunger; but the people will cry out, Woe be to you, ye
children of desolation, the world has deceived you, the devil is seized of
your hearts and mouths, your minds are gone astray in vain speculations, your
eyes were delighted with beholding vanities, your delicate palates have
searched out the most pleasant wines; your feet were swift in running to
mischief, and you may remember you never did good; you were the fortunate
malignants, pretending poverty, but very rich, and under color of simplicity,
of great power; devout flatterers, hypocritical saints, proud beggars, offering
petitioners, wavering and unstable teachers, delicate martyrs, hired
confessors, proudly humble, piou^ly hard-hearted in the necessities of others,
sugared slanderers, peaceable persecutors, lovers of the world, sellers of
indulgencies, disposing all things for your convenience, admirers of luxury,
ambi^ious of honor, purchasers of houses, sowers of discord, building still
higher and higher, but not able to attain a height equal to your desires; and
now ye are fallen as Simon the Magician, whose bones were bruised, and his body
struck by God with a mortal plague upon the Apostles prayer; so shall your
Order be destroyed by reason of your impostures and iniquities: Go then you
teachers of sin, the Doctors of disorder, Fathers of corruption, Children of
wickedness, we will no longer follow you for Guides, nor give ear to your
doctrine.

An Expository Comment upon this prophecy by the Right Rever^nd Don Jerome
Baptista de La Nuza, Lord Bishop of Albarazin, and afterward of Balbastro;
whereby it appears that it is ^o be applied to those who call themselves the
Society of Jesus, though their actions and opinions b^speak them his enemies,
being con^radictory to His, which they profess with their month, but deny in
their works:
Reported by the Author of Theatrum Iesul^i^um, page 183. as a true Copy of the
Original under the Prelates hand, remaining in the Convent of Dominicans at
Saragosa.
1. There will arise men witho^t a Chief, who shall feed and grow far upon the
sins of the people, but profess themselves of the number of Beggars.
FIrst, It appears this is spoken of Ecclesiasctical persons, for of them the
Prophet said, That they did eat the sins of the people, which is the same with
the Holy woman's expression in the Prophecy.

Secondly, They must be of a begging Order, which she confirms on another
occasion by express words to that purpose: ( Assumentes potins exemplum
mendicandi) And though the Jesuits are not comprehended in any of the four
Orders of Friars Mendicant, yet have they Brieves like theirs, whereof they
glory in their Books, and make use upon occasion.

Thirdly, That they shall be an Order which shall not bear the name of their
Founder or chief, which is the meaning of those words, Sans Chef, and denotes
what is afterward intimated in the name La Company, which Hildegard uses,
where she says, That they shall live deli^iously in the Company or S^ciety; a
name not newly assumed, but from the time of their foundation, as appears by
their Constitutions and Histories; you anger them as nicknamed if you call
them Ynnigistes or L^yolistes, from Ynnigo de Loyola their Founder, and though
they new Christened him Ignacius, yet will not they be content to be called
Ignacius, but diligent only in that of the Society, as most honorable; though
other Orders, as the Friars, Predicants and Minors, who pass usually under
those Appellations, think it no affront to be called Dominicans or Franciscans,
from the names of their Founders.

The Abbot I^achim near contemporary with St. Hildegard, whose prophecies the
Jesuits say are to be understood of them, is of the same opinion with her,
calling that sort of men he speaks of Turbs Ass ciata, a Multitude living in
Society.

What Solomon says of the Locus^s, that they have no King, yet go forth by
bands, may be applied here as agreeable to the Jesuits, who in their
Constitutions assume the title of Vni^^^sa S^^ietas, The whole Society without
a head.

2. Shameless in their behavior.
The whole world with an unanimous Vote still censure them impudent in all
their actions; when they undertake any thing, happen what will, say what you
please, it never troubles them; there is not a sort of men under heaven that
care so little what becomes of the most important concerns, provided they may
obtain their desires; we have instances of their impudence against the Cardinal
of Toledo, D. Gasparde Quiroga, who had been their great friend, and D. Jerome
Manrique, whom King Bhilip the second had given them for visitor. It Is a maxim
amongst them, that to promote self-interest is the only wisdom, for what men
say for the present is soon forgot: The Prophecy in Latin declares them sine
rubore, so shameless they cannot blush, but like Libertines, nor fear nor care
for any thing.

3. Studious to invent new ways to do mischief.
Who invented and practiced Confession by Letter? Who would have obliged
^enitents to discover their accomplices against their wills? Who have said that a
Friar may marry upon a Revelation he shall imagine certain or probable, and not
only marry but refuse to obey his Superior in any matter whatever, or the
Laws. which oblige all other men; that he need not go to Confession who has a
Revelation, he is in the state of Grace? Hence it comes that men of Religion
traffic and deal in merchandise, and a hundred other things full of impurity,
usury and simony.

It Is matter of astonishment how they all defend whatever any of their Society
has said, though nerver so new, never so scandalous. To verify this Prophecy
they have filled the world with new tricks and devices, and from the magazine
of their invention furnished impostors. with subtle artifices and cheats in all
matters of consequence, whether great or small.

4. A pernici^us Order odious to all wise men, and those that are faithful to
Jesus Christ.
It Is to be admired there is not a person but complains of them, and the manner
of their acting; the world observes they love to intermeddle in all sorts of
affairs, to tamper: with inheritances and successions, to give frequent visits
to Ladies, that they are fine hypocrites, flat^erers; of Princes, enemies to
men of Religion, full of artifice in their proceedings, presumptuous, main
sticklers for credit from knowledge and virtue, practicing respect of persons
as a piece of their decalogue, and a thousand things more of the like nature;
and yet they have advocates who plead, while all the world murmures against
them, that all the world esteems and honors them; that is, as one expounds it,
Men abhor them in their hearts, but must praise them with their lips.

5. Healthy and strong, but lazy and idle, etc.
This needs no Comment, every hours expe^ience expounds it.

6. Pretending beggary.
They appear Beggars, but are not so, for in truth it is but for a color of
mortification that they sometimes send of their young men to beg; and if the
old ones do it, they eat not the hread that is gathered, but either sell or give
it away: Valentia knows so much, that we need not add more to disabuse the
world in this particular.

7. Strong Antagonists against the Teachers of the Truth.
So (...) of the Iesnites, that one would think they had made it their task to
contradict the Fathers, and if they Comment on St. Thom^s, it is that they may
the better oppose his judgment, as appears by their books. To prove this, see
how Molina handles St. Augustine upon the Efficacy of Grace, he calls him cruel,
and adds other very strange epithites, because the Father a^tributes not to
free will all that this Jesuit allows it.

8. By their Credit with Great ones, oppressing the innocent.
The F. Provincial of the Dominions of Arragon, in his Memorial presented to
King Philip the second, in Answer to the Calumnies of the Jesuits against that
Order, affirms it a matter of certain truth, that these Fathers maintain one of
their Society constantly at Court, on no other employment but to make continual
complaints to the King and the Nuncio against the Dominicans, which they do
upon the least occasion offered from any matter that occurs in the Dominicans
writings. The same Provincial proves that the Jesuits do this in things
absolutely false, to incense the King, and exasperate the Nuncio against the
Dominicans. I pass over a thousand fabulous stories they have composed which
they would make Authentic by the amity of Princes, and their credit with Great
Men, to disparage and destroy the reputation of other Orders of Religion, as
they possess men of power in private addresses with ill opinions of those who
are not their friends, and bespeak their protection against all such as bear
ill will to their Order.

9. Having four principal Vices rooted in their bearts by the Devil, flattery
to gain gifts from the world.
Judge now, whether the Jesuits be not guilty of this Vice, and those others
of envy, hypocrisy and detraction wherewith they are charged by the Prophecy;
see whether they are any veil to cover them, or practice them openly in the
face of the Sun, especially their flattery. There Is not a Race of men in the
world, that flatter and sanctify their Proselytes as these men do. To be of
their Congregation, and to be a Saint, are in their dialect terms equivalent,
though the person be a public usurer; as he that is not their friend cannot
(in their language) be of the Communion of Saints. Their Envy and Hypocrisic
are so palpable, that the Text needs no interpreter, but their practice to make
it intelligible.

10. Detraction to render themselves c^mmend^ble by defaming others.
They never scruple at slanders, if they may serve for their honor or the
credit of their friends, raising themselves on the ruins of others. When
Seneca advised to be moderate in Commendations, and sparing in Dispraises, lest
by excess in the one men incur suspicion of flattery, and in the other be
liable to the cen sure of malignity; we may think he had these Fathers in
prospect, and provided a remedy for their disease who are fallen into extremes
on both sides, directly opposite to the duty he com mends, for they speak too
ill of good, and too well of bad men, and slander both the doctrines and the
persons of the Saints, that they may bring the one and the other out of credit,
and exalt themselves above both, in letting us see they have greater authority,
and have learnt things the Saints never knew: This produced that expression in
their Public Act, We are to give Molina thanks for inventing that which St.
Augustine could never have found. It Is their common discourse, that other Orders
of Religion are but dregs or trees past bearing, that they are sprung up in
their place full of that quick spirit and vigor which at their first
institution flourished in other Orders now in decay.

They stick not to say, that the Orders of St. Dominique, St. Francis, and
others are but a trouble to them, a surcharge to the body politic, and
superfluous members of the Ecclesiastical, the Rector of their College at
Majorca a few years since had the impudence to write to the Provincial of the
Dominicans at Arragon.

11. Preaching incess antly to secular Princes, to procure themselves applause
from the people, and seduce the simple, but without devotion or example of true
martyrdom.
It Is a common saying that the Jesuits keep themselves to be Confessors,
having no inclination for martyrs, whose Catalogue among them is so short, that
you may count them all on your fingers of one hand: This was the ordinary
discourse at Rome when Venice published Edicts against the Apostolic See. All
Catholics under the Popes Obedience were in danger of that Conjuncture, but
the Jesuits went fairly off of themselves for fear of those Prisons,
Banishments, and greater punishments, which Religious persons of other Orders
underwent and endured; fear had a stronger influence, and more powerful
operation on the spirits of the Jesuits, than the love of the truth which kept
up those of other Orders from retyring voluntarily or by force: But the
Jesuits were safe enough, having a cloak for their knavery, in pretending they
were expelled, whereas they withdrew of themselves, and claiming merit for
choosing to run away, which they would make the world believe they were forced
to by violence.

Thus the Prophecy describes accurately their manner of preaching, and
maintaining the Faith among the Great Ones without hazard of life. The Apostles
and Preachers of the Gospel went among infidels, like Sheep among Wolves,
exposing themselves to Martyrdom for the propagating of the Faith; and the
Dominicans and Franciscans treading their steps, have since the beginning of
their establishment swelled the Catalogue of their Martyrs to a volume: But the
Jesuits being to preach at Iapan, and seeing their persons in danger by the
displeasure of the Emperor there, addressed themselves to King Philip for a
guard of Soldiers, that they might preach in safety; which was so scandalous to
all that knew it, that D. Michael de Bonavides Bishop of the Philippines held
himself obliged to write thereof to the King; and though they were the first
Preachers in most parts of Iapan and the Indies, they can hardly name a martyr
of the Society; which appears strange where the cruelty of the people, and
aversness from the Gospel, might have made many.

12. Robbing true Pastors of their Rights to administer the Sacraments.
When I consider what happened in the time of Gregory 13th, I think it easy to
demonstrate how properly this may be applied to the Jesuits: As soon as they
entered Iapan, they persuaded the Emperor of the Country and the Pope, that it
was not expedient to admit any persons to come thither who differed from them
in Habits, Customs, or Ceremonies; giving for reason, that the new Converts
would be scandalized at the diversity. As if the Church were not like a
Monarchy, composed of different estates, and compared in Scripture to a Queen
attyred in diverse colors, but were wholly Jesuitical in habit and all other
things. This reason was sufficient to surprise the Pope, and procure them his
Grant, that none but they should enter Iapan; so that had there been a Bishop
for the Country, he was excluded his Diocese: A thing never heard of, to shut
the door of the fold against the true shepherds, and hinder them to administer
the Sacraments; which has been the Cause that many have renouneed the faith
for want of Confirmation: But such is the consequence of the Jesuits Doctrine,
that Confirmation and Orders by Bishops are not necessary. And that this is
their tenet, the occurrences of Iapan, the passages between the Jesuits, and
the Papers sent to the Pope by the Bishop of the Philippines, and the Jesuits
actions in England and elsewhere, do clearly prove.

13. Depriving the poor, the miserable, and the sick, of their Alms.
This needs no explication, every poor man knows it.

14. Cajoleing the Populace, and Courting their favor.
It Is certain, they labor nothing more than for the favor of the people, and
gain the multitude to their party, by publishing Letters, which are often
counterfeit; pretending success in their affairs, and feigning miscarriages in
their adversaries, and ludeing their misfortunes when their interest requires
it: They tell stories of Iapan, Poland, Almaine and Rome, and if it may serve
their Turns they will forge news upon the places they live in, though they are
sure the next day to be convicted of lying; but they care not what happens if
they attain their ends in cheating the people to think favorably of them:
Wherein they are so confident, that they boldly told Pope Clement the 8th, that
if he decreed any thing against them in the matter of Ayds, the whole Church
should smart for it.

15. Familiar with Ladies and other women, teaching them to cheat their
husbands, and give away their Goods to them in private.
The Prophecy is so clear in this particular, that who knows the Jesuits,
knows the meaning of it without an Expositor.

16. Receivers of ill gotten Goods.
I know not to whom the words may be better applied. It Is not long since their
establishment, yet are they more rich than all the Mendicants and other orders
of Religion, but it is no wonder, if you Audit their Accounts and examine their
ways to get money expressed in this Prophecy: for they take it from all the
world, Robbers, Usurers, Merchants, corrupt Judges, debauched Youths,
Apostates, Sodomites, Whores, and generally from all those who live contrary to
the Evangelical Law: And when I see how close they stick to such sort of
people, and make use of them in their affairs, I know not whether they have not
some secret surreptitious privileges, to compound with these sinners for some
Alms they receive, or for promoting some other Concerns of the Society: I can
produce some instances, and have read in their Constitutions, that their
General ought always to labor the obtaining new privileges, exemptions and
favors for the Society.

17. Saying, Give them us, and we will pray for you, and obtain pardon for all
your sins.
The years now last past have discovered their practice toward persons of whom
they have most need in their affairs: They tell them the Society is charged
with their sins, and will repent for them, so that the sinners need take no
care, but repose in security, bearing them in hand that they shall be
sanctified though they do nothing in order to it; and instead of instructing
them in the fear of God, leading them through vain hopes into the paradise of
fools.

18. Making those they confess to forget their Kindred.
There are so many examples of the Jesuits extraordinary avarice in engaging
their Disciples to give them their Estates, to the prejudice of their Kindred
whom they leave in poverty, that the tenth part of what we know is su^^icient
to verify the p^^phecy.

19. Receiving Goods from Robbers on the Highways, Extortioners, sacrilegious
persons, etc.
See the Commentary, Number. 16.

20. Living Deliciously.
The whole world can witness of the Jesuits, that self-denial is no part of
their practice; none wear ^iner Linen, none lie on softer beds. And they that
would excuse them for not using woollen about their persons, nor in their beds,
tell us, the seams of the finest Linnens are troublesome to them. They never
rise before day to say Mattens; they know no Vigils, nor Fasts, but what
Seculars who live most at ease, do observe. They make excellent cheer, drink
the best wines, and are stored with all sorts of the most delicate Liquors: for
Furniture and Housholdstuffe they exceed the Grandees of the world, with this
advantage, that the Jesuits are at no pains, and as little Cost to get them.
And though they fare so well, and admit of no extraordinary Fast, yet have they
procured Brieves of Dispensation for Lent, and such other Fasts as their
Superiors may impose.

21. Passing this tranfitory life in Society, and at last falling together into
Damnation.
The word Society is so proper to the Jesuits, as we observed before, that it
serves for an Argument, the prophecy aims at them.

22. Having the World at will.
More may be said of this than my brevity will allow; it shall suffice that
they dispose all things before hand to bring more Grist to their Mill, and in
all their affairs propose no other end but their advantage and particular
interest.

23. But the people will by degrees grow cold toward them, and having by
experience found them seducers, cheats and impostors, will hold their hands
from further Gifts; then will they run about their houses like famished or mad
Dogs, etc. But the people will cry out, etc. Remember you never did good.
I see not the Prophecy altogether fulfilled in this point, yet true it is the
world begins to know the Jesuits better than formerly; and there be many that
say of them the same things that St. Hildegard does, having discovered at
length that all is not Gold that glisters in them.

24. You were the Fortunate Malignants.
Consider well all the following Epistles, and you shall see that the eloquence
of Demosthenes could not have invented more proper or elegant to declare the
thoughts lay concealed in the hearts of the people: They call them first, The
fortunate Malignants, who under color of sanctity pretend great trouble and
care for the credit and reputation of other orders of Religion, as if they came
with that heat and fervency that is necessary to repair that vigor and
strength they have lost by age. Their envy appears in telling their friends
tales to the disadvantage of other Orders, publishing the Crimes of some
Friars, and feigning stories of their condemnation, which they deliver in a
compassionate Accent, full of tenderness and sympathy, casting words by the by
of the dangers they are in, for no other end but to persuade the hearers into
fear for them, and a solicitous care for their safety, though in truth they do
it only out of envy against other orders, whose Grandeur is their trouble,
whose growth and increase, they esteem their wane and decay.

25. Pretending poverty, but very rich.
This is the character St. Bernard gives of such Friars, who being Votaries of
poverty labor for riches, and to live in plenty of all things: Examine whether
this agrees not with the Jesuits, who call themselves poor, and would be
thought so, but in the mean time receive more yearly than all other Orders of
Religion together.

26. And under color of simplicity, of great power.
They do what they please, while they pretend to the innocence of Doves, and
compass all their designs by holding their peace, and catch the bird while
others make a noise in beating the bush.

27. Devout Flatterers.
To say, such a one is of our Congregation is sufficient with them to make him
pass for a Saint.

28. Hypocritical Saints, Proud Beggars.
Experience in these particulars surpasses expression.

29. Offering Petitioners.
It Is their custom to beg and petition for favors from others by offering
them theirs, their intercession, their cares, their good offices; and to give
them their due, there is none better able to perform what they offer their
Devotes, for they accommodate all sorts of people; they find Clients for
Lawyers, Servants for Masters, Scholars for Professors, Tutors for Children,
Brides for Young men, and Bridegrooms for Ladies, Offices and employment for
other persons, in Cities and Families of Princes; though now they are very
cautious what Domestiques they commend to Lords and Ladies, because they have
been formerly unlucky in some, who chose rather to be faithful to their
Masters than Spies for the Society, who placed them there on no other design
but to know by them all that passed in the Family.

30. Wavering and unstable Teachers.
Their Books show how little solidity there is in their doctrine, and on how
weak foundations and false grounds they rely for advancing conceits and
newfangled opinions opposite to those of the Fathers and Ancien^ Doctors,
received and approved by the Church, whom they would abase to exalt themselves
in their place, and so become the Rabbines of Chri^tendome.

31. Delicate Martyrs.
The state of Religion is a kind of Martyrdom, but that of the Jesuits so
full of delicacies and pleasures, that it may be thought a Regal condition.
They have no woollen to their skin, no abstinence, no Fasts, no Vigils, no
Cloister, no other thing to afflict the body, but are like those delicate
Soldiers St. Ierom speaks of, fitter to spin with Penelope, and live in
dallyance with Paris, than fight with Hector, or watch with Ulysses.

32. Hired Confessors.
Reflect well on this Epithet, and you shall ^erceive what profit they have
made, and still ^o make every day by Confessions. Have you ^ver known a person
who confesses to them, ^ho left them not at his death his whole ^state, or at
least a Legacy very considerable? ^esides what they hook in by a thousand
Arti^^es in the lifetime.

33. Proudly humble.
Humble in appearance, but really proud, abasing themselves outwardly, while
their thoughts are employed to exalt themselves above all the world.

34. Piously hard-hearted in the necessities of others.
This we see in their dealings with the Children and Kindred of some persons
who have left their Estates in their hands, in confidence of a compassionate
and pious regard from them to the necessities of the Orphans, but they have
deceived the hopes of the Parents, and miserably frustrated the expectations of
the Children.

The poor receive alms from the Superiors of other Orders so often that they
are ashamed to beg of them; but who ever saw the Jesuits give away a penny
they could make use of? In short, they are better Preachers than practisers of
that Precept in the Gospel, Give Alms, for they get every day more and more
wealth, retain tenaciously what they have gotten, and hardly part with other
men's Estates in their hands, on what Account soever they are possessed of them,
but though they see the owner perish for want, they will not spare him a farthing:
The world is full of instances of this kind.

35. Sugared Slanderers.
With what sweetness do they express all the evil they please of other men? and
to show their compassion for the misfortunes of other Orders, they will recount
the fall of some Friar, and covering their malignity with some specious
pretense will write things to the disparagement of Religion and its professors,
or any other persons who are not in their books. Ribadeneira their founders
Companion, in the book he writ of Tribulation, produces the Example of
Savanarola, only that he might say he was a Dominican, to cast odium on the
Order by the miscarriages of a particular person.

36. Peaceable Persecutors.
They persecute so gently, that they seem not to touch men, and in the mean
time make so cruel a war against those they love not, that no secret poison
kills more infallibly. It is their Maxim, Never to forgive, but to dissemble a
while to gain opportunity of a severer revenge.

37. Lovers of the World.
The truth of this Prophecy is demonstrated by the Jesuits care to root
themselves in the world, to settle themselves in the Palaces of Kings and
Princes, Ecclesiastical and Secular, exalting themselves by degrees of favor,
till they render themselves Masters of all, and how hardly they are gotten out
of a Palace where they have once put their foot in, though but a moment. We see
the same in their buildings, their Churches, and the Artifices they use to draw
into their houses the most considerable persons of the places they live in,
their Balconies, their Galleries, their half-Paces, their Footclothes, their
Canopi^s, their Foot-stools, and other things never used by other Orders who
studied more to undeceive then to deceive the world: consider further, how they
have undertaken the instruction of youth, how they prefer in their Classes the
Sons of Gentlemen and rich Tradesmen, ^carrying them in triumph to be Emperors
and Captains of their Schools, though not perfect in the Alphabet, not
regarding the poor who are excellent Scholars, and deserve the honor bestowed
on the illiterate. Their principal intention is not the instruction of youth,
but to gain by any means the amity of the rich, and favor of the powerful, to
exalt themselves, and become Masters of the World, which they entirely love,
and at the same time most slavishly serve.

38. Sellers of Indulgences.
The P^^phecy speaks not of the favors and indulgences of the Popes, which
their Order has not as the Mendicants, but is to be understood of their
facility in granting large permissions to sinners by their loose opinions,
whereof their books are fu^l; which never fail to sell well, as being a Mine of
convenienceies for wicked men, and a magazine of means to accommodate sinners;
some to keep in their possession the Estates of other men, other to break the
fasts, and ^light the abstinences, and other laws of the Church, and others for
matters of greater infamy.

39. Disposing all things for your convenience.
The whole world may learn of them the course they are to take for profit and
convenience; they think of all things, foresee all things, provide and dispose
all things at a thousand leagues distance, that nothing may escape them; and
though this appear impossible, it is said of them, that they reason of things
impossible to render them possible. This may be well understood in another
manner, for whereas the devout Founders of Religious Orders, employed all their
care to root out thence all sensual delights and pleasures of life, as the
principal enemies of a Religious Estate, and of the Cross of Christ, the
Jesuits seem to bend all their thoughts for good accommodations, good Linen,
good Stuffs, good Beds, good Chambers, good Horses, and good Provisions for
their Voyages, good Victuals, besides extraordinaries which they want not; the
best Fruits, the whitest Bread, and the best baked, and old Wine; of all which
they have in their Constitutions, a Law which they observe punctually, and
peradventure more then the Law of God, so that you may strictly call them with
St. Hildegard, Ordinatores Commodi, a name most proper for them, for they have
reduced carnal worldly enjoyments under rules, and recalled them into
Monasteries, whence the Saints had carefully banished them.

40. Admirers of Luxury,
Which denotes their inclinations to sensuality, and the pleasures of the
palate, and other irregular passions.

41. Ambitious of Honor.
We may fill a volumn on this Articles; for they pretend to a Supremacy in
Knowledge, in Virtue, in Sanctity, etc. In the time of Gregory the 13 th. they
attempted to take from the Order of St. Dominique, the Mastership of the sacred
Palace, and were so importunate with that Pope, that they engaged him to
propose it in Consistory, and had obtained their desires, had not the Cardinals
represented the great services done the Church by the Dominicans.

Ribadeneira the Jesuit, in the last Book he writ, giving an account of the
Customs of his Order, says, that though they have neither Quires, nor Fasts,
nor Discipline, nor Penance, etc. yet they deserve higher esteem than all other
Orders, whereupon he tells us admirable stories: For instance, when he gives
the reason why the Jesuits assist not at Proc^ssion, he says, It is because
they ought to have a (...) H^n^urable Rank than any other Order and out of
humility absent themselves. To back this strong reason, he invents a Fable,
which I understand not how other Orders can endure, That it was declared in the
Council of Trent, That the General of the Jesuits ought to have a place more
Honorable then the Generals of other Orders: (...) impudent lie they publish
not to the world, but disperse in private among their Confidents the Book that
contains it, till the lie gather force, and then the Book shall be public; in
the mean time it is every day printed, and will in time work out the effect they
proposed to themselves. Such are their Artifices to fill the world with
falsities for their credit and advantage.

42. Purchasers of Huses.
They that are acquainted with the mysteries of their Trade, know that where
houses are Let at dear rates, the I^suites have the best part of them,
especially at Court. In matters of merchandise and traffic, there is no trader
so dexterous as they; the Geno^se are dunces when compared to them in matters
of Exchanges, wherein their gains are excessive, for their consciences are
large, and their Trade universal, in small as well as great Commodities, in
Puppets, and Babies, and other Trinkets and Baubles for Children to play with,
and every thing else that brings in profit, be it never so vile, never so
contemptible; nor is their trade limited to particular places, but is driven in
all parts of the world, by Land and by Sea, by Corresponds, and Factories.

43. Sowers of Discord.
There is not a City or kingdom where they are established, wherein they have
not caused dangerous Commotions, so considerable in some parts, that they have
troubled the Church; as at Venice, at Paris and in other places: the worst is,
the Divisions they have sown, have taken such root that it is probable they will
continue to the end of the world.

44. Building still higher, but not able to attack a height equal to your
desires.
Were this understood of the buildings of the I^suites it were literally true
their edific^s being always the highest, and a league before you come to a
Town, the first thing in view, are the towers of their Chapels, the galleries
on their Houses, and the walls of their Churches, but yet they arrive not at
the height they pretend to, for God resists the proud, and gives not Grace
but to the lowly.

45. But now you are fallen as Simon Magus, etc.
Here ends the Prophecy of St. Hildegard, which shows the fall and destruction
of the Order the speak of, which we judge to be the society of the Jesuits by
all these marks, which by this comment appear so proper to them.

These are the words of that Pious Bishop. There is none but will acknowledge,
that if we would search further into the interessed and ambitious conduc^ of
this Society since his time, in excusing the grossest sins; seizing other men's
goods, turning away the people from their true Pastors, oppressing honest men,
and for destruction of Bishops, we might give you a more ample explication of
the Prophecy, it being easy to prove, that this Society is estranged from God
proportionably to its prodigious growth, and the grandeur whereof they are so
jealous, has served only to verify that remarkable expression of the Royal
Prophet; The presumption of them that hate thee, increases ever more and more.

The Conclusion of the Divine Professors at Paris in their ordinary
Convocation, held December. 1. 1554.
THe first day of December, Anno Dom. 1554. The sacred faculty of Theology at
Paris, having heard the Mass of the Holy Ghost solemnly sung in the Chapel of
the College of Sorbon, was then the fourth time assembled by oath, to
determine of two Bulls, said to have been granted by two Popes, Paul 3. and
Julius the 3. unto those who affect the name of the Society of Jesus, which
Bulls, the Parliament of Paris by their Usher sent on purpose, committed to the
view and examination of the said faculty, the tenor whereof follows:

And first of the Bull of Paul 3.

Then of the Bull of Iul. 3.

But before this Faculty would begin to treat of a matter of so great weight,
all, and singular the Masters thereof made open and public profession that
they would not think, much less, decree or attempt any thing against the
Authority and Power of the Pope; but as they and every of them, as obedient
Children have always acknowledged and confessed, so they now do sincerely,
faithfully and willingly acknowledge and confess the Bishop of Rome Sovereign
Vicar of Jesus Christ, and Universal Pastor of the Church, to whom Christ gave
the fullness of Power, whom all persons of either Sex are bound to obey, to
reverence his Decrees, and every one in his place ought to defend and observe:
But forasmuch as all men, especially Divines ought to be ready to give
satisfaction to every one that demands it in matters relating to the Faith,
manners and edifying of the Church, the said faculty held themselves obliged to
satisfy the demand, command and request of the said Court.

Therefore, all the Articles of both Bulls having been often read, repeated and
understood, and according to the greatness of the subject, many months, days
and hours, solemnly and most diligently discussed and examined, the said
faculty, with unanimous consent, but deepest reverence and humility leaving the
whole matter to the correction of the Apostolic See, then at length past this
judgment.

This new Society claiming peculiarly to it self an unusual appellation of the
Name of Jesus, so licentiously and promiscuously admitting any persons th^ugh
wicked, lawless and infamous, differing nothing from secular persons in outward
habit, in censure, in saying privately, or singing publicly in the Church the
Canonical h^ures, in Cloisters and Silence, in choice of meats and of days, in
Fasts and other various Laws and Ceremonies, whereby the States of Religion
are distinguished and preserved; having so many and various privileges,
indulgences, and liberties granted it, especially in the administration of the
Sacrament, of Penance and the Eucharist, and that without difference of places
or persons, and also in the office of preaching, reading and teaching, in
prejudice of the Ordinaries and Hierarchical Order, and in prejudice of other*
Orders of Religion, yea of Princes and Temporal Lords against the privileges of
Universities; Lastly, to the great gri^vance of the People, seems to violate
the honor of Monastic Religion, enervates the studious, pious, and most
necessary exercise of virtues, abstinences, ceremonies and austerities, and
gives occasion to Apostatize freely from other Religious Orders, withdraws the
obedience and subjection due to the Ordinaries, unjustly deprives Lords
Spiritual and Temporal of their Rights, induces disturbance in Civil and
Ecclesiastical Policy, many quarrels among the people, many suits, differences,
contentious aemulations, and various schisms; All these things therefore, and
others, having been diligently examined, and thoroughly weighed, This Society
seems in the matter of Faith dangerous and to tend to the distu^bance of the
Peace of the Church, to the subversion of Monastic Religion, and more for
destruction then for aedification.

Remonstrances of the Court of Parli^m^nt of Paris to King Henry the 4th, upon
the Reestablishment of the Jesuits, made by the Prime President M. de H^rlay,
in 1604.
SIR,
YOur Court of Parliament having deliberately considered of your
Letters Patent for Re-establishing within some places of their jurisdiction
the Priests and Scholars of the College of Clermont, assuming the Name of
Jesuits, has ordained that humble remonstrance be made to your Majesty, and
charged me to represent some particulars, importing* in our judg^m^nt the good
of your affairs, and the public safety (which depends on the preservation of
your person) as the consid^rations which have stayed, us from proceeding to the
verification; and before I descend to the particular points, I am to render
your Majesty their humblest thanks for the Honor you have been pleased to do
them, in that you have vouchsafed these Remonstrances should be made by word of
mou^h, whereby your indulgence and goodness to us appears so much the more
worthy of praise, as it differs from the austerity of the first Emperors of
Rome, who gave not their subjects access to their persons, but ordered all
demands and petitions to be presented writing.

The establishment of those of this Order, who call themselves Jesuits, in
this Kingdom, has been judged so pernicious to this Estate, that all the
Orders Ecclesiastical opposed their reception; and the S^^bon declared that
this Society was introduced for destruction, not for edification; and
afterward in the assembly of the Clergy in September. 1561. where the
Archbishops and Bishops were present, and the Cardinal of Tournon President,
this Society was approved of, but with so many clauses and restrictions, that
had they been pressed to observe them, it is probable they had soon changed
their abode.

They were received but upon Provisa, and by arrest of the year 1564. were
prohibited to take the name of Jesuits, or Society of Jesus; notwithstanding
this, they have not forborne to take that illegal Name, and exempt themselves
from all powers Ecclesiastical and Secular: To reestablish them would increase
their authority, and render their condition better then ever. This judgment
was so much more worthy of your Court of Parliament, in that all your people
and Religious Orders held it necessary to retain them with caution, to put a
stop to the licentiousness of their actions then too great, which they foresaw
would increase to the prejudice of the public, and produce greater mischiefs
then could then be discovered.

And as they vow universal obedience to the Pope, so the propositions in their
doctrine are uniform, that they acknowledge no Superior but the Pope, to whom
they swear fealty and obedience in all things, and hold it an undoubted maxim,
That he has power to Excommunicate Kings, and that a King excommunicate is but
a Tyrant, that his people may Rise against him, that all the inhabitants of his
Realm, who are in any the meanest Ecclesiastical Orders, what crime soever they
commit cannot be judged traitors, for that they are not his subjects, nor under
his jurisdiction; so that all Ecclesiastics are exempt from the secular power,
and without fear of punishment may lay bloody hands on sacred persons. This
they write, and impugn the opinion of those who hold the contrary propositions.

Two Spanish Doctors of Law, having written that Clerks were subject to the
Power of Kings and Princes, one of the prime men of the Society writ against
them, alleging, that as the Levites under the Old Testament were exempt from
all secular powers, so are Clerks by the New.

Your Majesty will not approve of these Maxims, they are too false and
erroneous: Therefore they that hold them and will abide in your Realm, must
publicly abjure them in their Colleges; if they do it not, will you permit
them to stay? they will subvert the foundations of your Power and
Authority-Royall: if they do it, will you believe that by shifting places, they
can lay down and take up again a Doctrine which is part of their Religion, good
for Rome, and good for Spain, but quite contrary for France, which rejects
that the others receive? if they say they can do it by secret dispensation,
what assurance can you have of men nourished in a profession which by change
and diversity of place becomes good and bad?

This Doctrine is common to them all, wherever they are, and make such
progress in your Kingdom, that it will at last slip into the most reserved
Societies.

At their establishment they had no greater adversary than the Sorbonne, which
at present favors them, by reason of that multitude of young Divines, who have
studied in their Colleges. Other Scholars will do the like; and will in time
be advanced, and may be admitted into the chief Offices in your Parliaments,
holding the same Doctrine, withdrawing themselves from your obedience,
permitting the loss of all the Rights of your Crown, and Liberties of the
Church of France, and judging Treason committed by a Churchman not punishable
by your Laws.

We have been so unhappy as to have seen in our days the effects of their
instructions upon your sacred person; Barriere (I tremble Sir when I pronounce
that word) was instructed by Varade the Jesuit, and confessedly had taken the
Sacrament, upon the Oath he had administered him for murdering you. Having
failed in his enterprise, others raised the courage of that little Serpent, who
performed in part what was conspired.

Gingnard the Jesuit wrote books to justify the Parricide of the late King,
and confirm the Proposition condemned in the Council of Constance.

Why should not we fear when we think upon these mischievous Acts of
disloyalty, that they may be too easily renewed? If we must pass our days in
continual fear to see your life in danger, what repose can we find in our own?

Were it not impious to foresee the danger and mischief, yet draw it so near
you? were not this to plunge our selves into the depth of misery, and not to
desire to survive the ruin of the State which as we told you already is at no
greater distance than of the length of your life.

Thanks be to God, Sir, for the mutual Amity between you and the Pope; God
preserve you long in your Throne, and him in his Charge. But if age or
infirmity shorten his days, and his Successor ill affected to your Crown,
should insheath against you his spiritual Sword, as his Predecessors have done
against other Kings of France and N^varre, what regret would it be to your
Subjects to see in the midst of us so many enemies of your Estate, and
Conspirators against your Majesty, as against that of the late King of blessed
memory? how dreadful would it be to behold them in the bowels of the Realm,
who have been the Authors and principal Ministers of the Rebellion in his
Reign, and not guiltless of his murder?

They say, they ought to be no more charged with past faults than other Orders
and Companies which have failed no less than they. But it may be said to their
prejudice, that though fault may be found in other Orders and Societies, yet it
has not been universal. The companies were divided, and all the members did
not withdraw themselves from the obedience due to your Majesty, but those of
their Society have continued united and close-linked in their rebellions,
insomuch that not only not one of them stood on your part, but were all most
partial for the ancient enemies of your Crown, used the advantage of being in
your Country to act more maliciously against your interest: Otho one of their
Society being chosen for chief by the 16 Conspirators.

And if I may be allowed to interweave among our own a passage taken from
foraign affairs, it shall be that lamentable one in the History of Portugal.
When the King of Spain attempted the usurpation of that Kingdom, all the Orders
of Religion stood firm in the obedience due to their King, the Jesuits only
deserted him to advance the Dominion of Spain, and caused the death of two
thousand Friars, and other Ecclesiastiques, for which they had a Bull of
absolution.

Their Doctrine and Deportment in time past caused that when De Chastel rose
against you, there followed an Arrest as well against him as against those of
their Society condemned by your mouth. An Arrest which we have consecrated to
the memory of the happiest miracle of our time; judging from thence, that if
they continued to bring up Youth in that mischievous Doctrine, and Damnable
instruction, your life could not be in safety, which made us pass over those
formalities which oblige us to judge of Causes in our Conusance by regular
instances, which we postposed to the safety of the public, by sentencing them
who being peculiarly subject to the Jurisdiction of your other Courts, might in
ordinary cases have claimed exemption from ours, But

We had not any malice, envy or ill will against them in general or particular;
if we had, God had punished us for being their Judges, though the atrocity of
the Crime, and the affection we had for your Majesty's preservation for the
future, invited us to give this Arrest, though executed within the Jurisdiction
of the Parliament of Roven and Dijon, by your commandment, and met with no
resistance from any but them, who were not well settled in their obedience to
your Majesty, and could not but with difficulty part with their ill will and
disaffection to your Government.

They complain by their writings that the whole Society ought not to be charged
with the faults of three or four: But their enormities are such, that had they
been reduced to the condition of those, called the Humble Friars, they had not
had just occasion to complain: one Friar of that Order had plotted only the
Assassinate of Cardinal Borrom^o about thirty years since, and the whole Order
was suppressed, and for ever abolished by Pope Pius the fifth, pursuant to a
resolution of the College of Cardinals, notwithstanding all the instance of
the King of Spain to the contrary: our judgment is not so severe, if they say
there is no comparison between their Order, and that of the Humbled Friars
theirs being far greater, we shall tell them that there is less comparison
between a Cardinal and the greatest King of the world, exalted far higher above
a Cardinal then their Order above the meanest that may be: That the Humbled
Friars were in less fault then they, for one only of them was author of the
Assassinate of the Cardinal, but they all are guilty of your parricide by means
of their instruction.

We do therefore most humbly beseech you, that as you approved of the arrest so
justly given, and then necessary to deter so many traitors from conspiring
against you, so it may please you to maintain it, and cast your eye back on the
danger we then were in to see the life of our Common Father taken away, which
is dearer to us than our own, and we could not but expect the shameful reproach
of disloyalty and ingratitude; did we not keep in perpetual memory the danger
you were in, since it is you have restored us our lives, our peace, and our
estates. The remembrance of the past ought to serve us for precaution to take
such Order that we be not for want of foresight buried in the abyss of a second
shipwreck. I cannot omit a particular petition on the behalf of the university
that you would have pity and compassion for it, which cannot but dread the
consequences that may ensue upon the admission of so pernicious an Order as
those we have spoken of.

These are in short our humble Remonstrances and Reasons that have stayed us
from causing your letters to be published, fearing least we might be justly
reproached to have proceeded with too much facility to the verification.

Extracts out of the Book entitled, An Image of the first age of the Society
of the Jesuits; wherein is seen that spirit of pride and self-esteem that
reigns in this Society, even to extravagance.
THere need not any great researches to evidence that the Jesuits practice
those maxims of pride they teach other men. That one book they composed to
give the world an image and representation of their Society, is sufficient to
demonstrate that ambition, vanity and presumption, inspire men, with nothing
which these fathers believe not allowable, and that the desire of Honor and
Glory they take for the object of their conduct in all things, has transported
them even to the utmost extravagances.

The Society is the fiery chariot of Israel, a troop of burning and shining
Angels.
The Society, say they, is that fiery chariot of Israel, which sometimes made
Elisha weep over that in which he ascended, and that now by the particular
favor of God, this and the other world rejoice to see it brought back in the
necessities of the Church; wherein if you inquire for Armies and Soldiers which
every day multiply by new victories their triumphs of the militant Church, you
will find them in this society, being a choice Troop of Angels, who in Animal
forms execute in this warfare the desires of their Sovereign head, Lib. 3.
Orat. 1. Page 401.

As the Angels illustrated with the brightness of the Divinity shine as streams
of light and perfection; so the Companions of Jesus imitating the purity of
Angels are closely united to their Origin, that is, to God, from whom they
derive those quick and ardent motions, those clear and bright rays of virtue,
loosing all impurity of pleasures in that furnace of Sovereign and most chaste
love that consumes them, and attaining such degrees of clarity and perfection,
that they have sufficient, not only to trim their own lamps, but to communicate
to others a light mingled with heat, being no less illustrious by the splendor
of their virtues than divinely inflamed by the ardour of charity, ibid.

They are all eminent in learning and wisdom, it is the Society of the Perfect.
They are Angels like St. Michael in their combats against heretics, like
Gabriel in the conversion of infidels, like Raphael in the consolation of
Souls, and conversion of sinners by their Sermons and Confessions* they all
express as much promptitude and fervency to confess and catechize the poor and
the ignorant as to govern the consciences of great Men and of Princes, and are
all no less famous for their learning and wisdom, than those who direct and
govern those Princes; So that we may say of the Society, what Seneca said in
his 33. Ep. that there is inequality when eminent things are rare and
remarkable, but that a tree is not admired where all others of the forest are
of equal height. And here cast your eyes which way you please you shall not
discern any thing which would not be eminent above others, were it not placed
among such as are of equal height, Lib. 3. Orat. 1. Page 402.

We cannot doubt now, but it was in their favor, as themselves assure us, that
the Abbot Ioachim prophesied, That at the end of the world there should be a
Religious Order composed of Perfect men, who should imitate the life of Christ
and his Apostles. These good Fathers are doubtless the same, for they are
almost all perfect, and all so eminent in the Art of governing consciences, as
they call it, that what is rare elsewhere is so common amongst them, that
excellence looses its luster, because it is common, and that miracles are not
admired, because ordinary with them.

Sure Avila and St. Francis de Sales nere thought of this Society, when they
said, that we may be to seek a good Director of conscience among a thousand,
since there is so great a number in this Order, that even those who confess the
people are as learned, and as wise as those that confess Princes, that whereas
else where we may be to seek one good Director among ten thousand, we shall
hardly find one bad among ten thousand of these Fathers, being all good and
excellent, and numerous beyond imagination, and all as able as the Confessors
of the great men of the world. O multitude of Sages! which is the health of the
Universe? they are all as ready and servent to confess a poor man, or instruct
an insant, as to govern the consciences of Princes. O multitude of Saints! O
disinteressed charity! O seraphick zeal, the Glory of Christianity!

They are all Lions, Eagles, Heroes, choice men, thunderbolts of war, born with
helmets on their heads, every one worth an Army.
Admire you the courage of undertaking in one of these Fathers? They are all
masculine persons, or rather generous, Lions, not dismayed at any danger,
slighting with constancy all misadventures: Paleness and fear prevail not upon
them; you shall see these Heroes receive with undaunted force of spirit, for
the cause of God and Religion, all the tempests and storms of heaven, in the
midst of fire, thunders and lightnings. After the example of the Apostles,
whose lives and travels they strive to imitate and represent; they share among
themselves the whole earth, and distribute the spoils and victories between
them.

The spirit of the Lord animates these new Samsons -- They are of the Spirits
of Eagles, seizing with a mavelous swif^ness, like those birds on the prey at
greatest distance, Lib. 3. Orat. 2. Page 402. and seq.

All they of the Society are born, as it is said of some children, with Helmets
on their heads, because they are to be exposed to the point of the sword, to
the buffets of Fortune, and all the injuries of their enemies. Prol. Heroes.
Societ. Immortal God! what choice men, what thunderbolts of war, what a flower
of Chivalry, what pillars, what tu^ilar Angels and protectors of the Church are
they? I dare affirm every one of them capable of the greatest matters, and
worth an Army; for maugre the rage of the Enemy, by the favor of heaven, and
with the applause of all the world, one of this Society carries the victory
against so many Enemies, that you would swear, a complete Army not capable
easily to overcome. Judge from hence (...) at the Society joining their Forces
in an entire body can do. This Society, (shall I say of men or Angels) what
ruins, what massacres, of errors and vices will it not procure? what succors
will it not afford the Church when attacked? But why say I, shall afford? We
may rather say, what has she not afforded? As we may believe foretold by the
Oracle of the Royal Prophet, Psalm. 67. since the Hebrew interpreters, Arias
montanus Pagninus, and Genebrard, instead of Your living creatures render it
your Society, your Congregation, your Elect, your Troop shall inhabit the La^d;
and the Chaldee Paraphrase bath expressed it, You have prepared an army of your
Angelical troops, To do good to the poor of God. I take this passage as if the
Prophet inspired by God had had a near view of the Society of Jesus in his
visions, Page 410.

These Fathers are so prophetical, that they are not content to speak
magnificently of their Society by studied discourses in prose and verse, but in
imitation of the Prophets of the Old Testament they express themselves by
actions and representations that are obvious to the sight, and dazzle our eyes.
This was seen in the City of Goa, when to celebrate their Secular year, they
caused a triumphant Chariot to be drawn, wherein the Society was represented
with all the pomp and splendor they could devise: It Is true, this Chariot was
not lift up in the air as that (...) Elias, but in recompense of that defect it
was viewed and admired by a great number of persons, and trilled through the
town with the acclamations of the beholders.

They went not to heaven to seek Angels to guide it, that had been too
troublesome, they chose them among their Scholars, who became Angels by
changing their habits: these young Angels provided of white robes and wings of
all colors were employed to draw some of these good Fathers in the chariot for
a spectacle to the whole City.

This triumph was accompanied with delicate music, which ceased not till
silenced by a more masculine, composed of the sounds of Drums and Trumpets,
which sounded an Alarm and Charge when they came to any narrow lane; for there
they must engage the Devils, who placed there of purpose pretended to stop the
chariot, and hinder the triumphant Society to finish their carreire: But as the
Society is ever victorious, so these combats ended always to their advantage;
and the Devils being chosen, as well as the Angels, out of their Scholars,
were of intelligence with them, not to make long or eager resistance.

While they thought nothing, but the pleasure of their divertisement, an
accident which all their prophetic prudence could not foresee, marred all
their mirth, and was an ill omen to their proceedings: One of the wheels of the
Chariot fastened in a hole whence all the virtue of these Elias's who were in
it, and the strength of the Angels that drew it could not get it out, though
the poor Angels strained hard to sair it, but in vain; then, as their custom
is in extremiti^s, to make use of any thing to serve their turn, they were
necessitated to invoke the aid of of their Devils to pull out their Chariot,
which they did, but not without the laughter of the spectators, and scandal to
many who begun to say publicly, That the devils had at least as great a share
in the triumph of the Jesuits as the Angels.

He that is really virtuous, however things happen, continues so still: But
when one is not in reality an Elias or a Saint, but goes to heaven only by
emblem, and in a machine all is in disorder when the machine fails: This may be
confirmed by another accident at the same time, and in the same City.

One of these Fathers praising the Society in his Sermon, compared it to a
clock which is under Regulation, and regulates all other things; but as he
enlarged magnificently upon the subject, the Clock of their house by misfortune
struck above a hundred, and by the irregularity caused such disorder in the
auditory, that they could not forbear mocking the Preacher and the Society,
which they publicly said was as just and regular as their Clock.

The Society is a great miracle like the world, and therefore needs not do
miracles.
The principal and greatest miracle of the Society, is, the Society it self;
There is not in the world a m^racle greater than the world: The same may be
said of the Society, as being a little world of is self; This great body of the
Society moves and turns by the will of one man; to move it is easy, but to
trouble it difficult: He that sees a multitude of men flourishing in age,
excellent in parts, and eminent for their vigor and vivacity of spirit,
conducted and governed so long in the Cariere of Virtue, and learning for the
service and advantages of others without any interruption in their course, and
upon examination d^^h not judge it the principal and greatest miracle, let him
not expect another from the Society. It Is my opinion, that as in the world
there is no greater or other miracle than the world it self, so there cannot be
found in the Society a greater miracle than the Society.

Think it not strange then if the Jesuits do not any particular miracles as
other Orders of Religion in the first age of their institution have done, and
expect not the same from Ignatius their Founder, who did no miracle at the
foundation of the Order, as Ribadeneiro in the first edition of his life
assures, whereas other Founders have done so many, since the Society is a
public and perpetual miracle, as the Creation and preservation of the world.

I know it may be said nevertheless, that the Foundation, Propagation, and
subsistence of the Church over all the Earth in the time of Paganism was much
more miraculous in the first ages, than the foundation and extent of the
Society of Jesuits among Christians, and that the Church did millions of
miracles by the Saints and Bishops who succeeded the Apostles, which by
consequence were so much more desirable in the Society of Jesuits, as it is an
Apostolical Order, (if they interpret of it the Prophecy of Abbot Ioachim)
destined for conversion of Heretics, insidels, and ill Christians, to which
miracles would be very subservient: But we must believe that though no miracles
are to be found amongst them, as they say here, were not to esteem them less
Apostolical or less Holy, for these sixty or eighty years last past since the
death of their first Fathers, because their Society is a miracle of miracles,
and that though the Orders of St. Benedict, St. Dominick, and St. Francis did
so many miracles in the first age of their institution, it proceeded not from
their sanctity alone, as if it were greater than that of the Jesuits, who are
(as they say) A Society of Angels, of new Apostles, new Samsons, full of the
Spirit of the Lord, and the most perfect of all Orders; but because God would
supply the defects of those Societies in general by the particular miracles of
their individuals, whereas the default of particular Jesuits who work not
miracles is recompensed and made up by the general miracle of the Society it
self, and the imperfection of all the members in particular by the universal
perfection of the whole body.

That the Society is the Oracle on the breast of the High Priest who decides
infallibly thereby.
When I consider the square form of the Oracle, I discover the Society figured
thereby as spread into the four parts of the world: And when I behold the three
rows of four precious stones to a row, whereof it consisted; (These good
Fathers are deceived, for according to the Text they ought to have said four
rows of three precious stones to each row) it represents to me the diverse
works of several of this Society which transoend Nature, but are confirmed by
the Doctrine of Truth: When I call to mind that this Ornament was carried on
the breast of the High Priest of the Jews, methinks I behold this little
Society wrought in as it were on the breast of a more holy Pontife: The Church
will now be offended with these expressions, because she loves the Society, not
only more than she ought, but more than indeed the Society deserves. N^^ will
other Orders of Religion wonder as it, since this binders not but that they
continue as always in the Church, what the Table, the Manna, and the Rod, those
three Oracles of the Ancient Religion, and instruments of so many prodigious
miracles were in the Ark of the Covenant, Lib. 5. c. 5. p. 622.

This sublime Elegy of this admirable Society obliges us to render it
extraordinary honors, for can men say more, than that it is the Oracle of the
Doctrine of Truth, which the High Priest of Jesus Christ carries on his breast,
and on his heart, as the Scripture says in Exodus? It was called The Oracle of
judgment, because as Vatablus and other Interpreters say, The High Priest never
gave judgment in matters of importance, but he had this Ornament on his
stomach; and as others say, Because it contained the Judgment and Decree of
God, that the High Priest should be odorned with a sovereign doctrine, and most
perfect accomplished purity of manners. So it may be believed with reason, that
the Society of Jesuits so straightly united to the Pope, is the Oracle of his
judgment, being as eminent in Knowledge as Sanctity; Nor may men admire any
more that they maintain the Pope infallible, provided he first consult the
Divines and Scholastical Doctors, among whom they esteem themselves with good
right to hold the first rank, as master^ of the world, the most knowing of
mortals, the teachers of all Nations, the Apollons, the Alexanders of divinity,
and the Prophets come down from heaven, who deliver Oracles in ecumenical
Councels; and so sharing infallibly with the Pope, on whose heart (they tell us
here) their Society rests as the Oracle of Doctrine and Truth, which he ought
to consult in affairs of moment, as the High Priest of the Jews never
consulted the Deity, but clothed with this Ornament; so that we are to
conclude, that there is just cause to believe the Pope infallible, when he
takes advice of this famous Oracle of Truth, or does any thing in favor of the
Jesuits, as in the name of the Company of Jesus granted them by Paul the 3d.
at their desire, with many extraordinary and unheard of privileges, as they
themselves testify, when they say, That the Popes having said in their Bulls,
That this Society has been raised by the Providence of God; their judgments
in these things are not subject to error, because it seems God gives his
Oracles by him: But the Popes infallibility is subject to contest when he
censures the Books of three famous Jesuits, Poza, B^uny, and Cellot, with such
brands of errors and heresies condemned, that he makes their Books of the
number of prohibited ones, so dangerous and pernicious, that they ought not to
be read or imprinted; and then when he darts the entire thunderbolt of Anathema
against the Book of Rabardean the Jesuit, saying, That the Sa^^ed Congregation
having maturely examined the propositions contained in his Book, has judged
that there are many rash, scandalous, offensive to devout ears, seditious,
impious, entirely destructive to the Papal Power, contrary to the immunities
and liberties of the Church, approaching very near the heresies of the
Innovators, erroneous in the Faith, and manifestly heretical.

For there is cause to believe, that the Pope consults not his Oracle, when he
acts against it, and attributes to the famous Authors of this August Society,
falsities, impieties, and heresies approaching near those of the Innovators:
And why should not the Disciples of the Jesuits, piously believe, that it were
easy for this High Priest on these occasions to have seen false visions, than
that these Oracles of Doctrine and Truth should become liars.

Now me thinks these good Fathers ought to reserve their humility, and modesty
for some occasion, and not call her the Little Society, when they tell us,
their Society is the Oracle of the Sovereign Pontife, and spread through the
four parts of the world, Elogies that denote her of the greatest grandeur,
excellence and extent of all Societies in the Universe: But it may be, that
when they say, This Society fastened on the breast of the Pope, they would
qualify her with the title of Little, lest men should think she might lie
heavy on his stomach, and be a burden to him because of her greatness.

As for what they add, that the Church loves their Society more than she ought,
or the Society deserves; it is a modesty not to be approved, for that in Truth
the Church ought entirely to love those who are not only the Restorers of the
Life of Christ and the Apostles among men, A Society of Angels and Heroes, but
are besides the Oracle of Doctrine and Truth, which he who represents her Head
and her Spouse carries on his breast; the owes them not love only, but respect,
Truth being venerable of it self, and the Oracles of Truth deserving a double
Reverence.

As to that they insinuate of purpose to sweeten the Envy of other Orders
against their Society, That other Orders of Religion are in the Church, what
the Manna, the Tables, and Aarons Rod were in the Ark of the Covenant; and that
they call these three things, the three Oracles of the Ancient Religion, to
make the Title they assume of the Oracle of Doctrine and Truth more passable
and current; I fear the able persons of other Orders will believe those good
Fathers do but jear them, making them believe that these three things were
sometimes Oracles, which they never were but continued shut up in the ark
without use in the external pa^^ of religious Worship, whereas this Oracle of
Judgment, Doctrine and Truth was the most august and necessary Ornament of the
High Priest, without which he could not execute any function of Priest and
Supreme Judicature: It seems by this, that the Jesuits would reduce other
Orders of Religion, to continue locked up in their Monasteries, as relics in
their Chests, and as the Manna, Tables and Rod were in the Ark, and keep for
themselves all the honorable employments of the Church which can have no
favorable construction among other Orders; most men, even those who make
profession of piety, not loving to be mocked with false titles of honor
pretended to be given them by those who assume the true and most illustrious to
themselves: But though the patience and charity of good men of other Orders
were sufficient to bear this mockery with simplicity, it would not excuse the
malignity of the Jesuits in offering the indignity.

The Example of Bishops who preferred that of the Society to their Character
and Titles of Honor.
A Bishop in 1602. Declared publicly, That he gloried more in the title of a
brother of our Society, than in that of a Bishop, and esteemed it a greater
Ornament than his Cross and his Myter, lib. 3. c. 7. page 363.

Not long since a Bishop of the Realm of Naples, who in his lifetime had more
love for his Mitre than for the Society, said at his Death, O holy Society,
which I have not sufficiently known until now, nor deserved to know thee, thou
surpassest the Pastoral Crosier, the Mitres, the Purple of Cardinals, the
Scepters, the Empires and Crowns of the world. Lib. 5. c. 10. p. 667.

An excellent Document for our Lords the Bishops, Archbishops and Cardinals, if
they love their Churches and Dignities more than the company of Jesuits, that
is, if they are more BishopS, Archbishops and Cardinals than Jesuits. When
they appear before God* Christ will not ask them whether they have loved their
sheep, whether they have fed and guided them aright, and labored, for the good
of the Church, but whether they have loved his Companions the Jesuits, upheld
the interest, and favored the enterprises of this Little Society, of these
Little and Beloved Benjamins.

A Bishop of France, who knew the Jesuits better than this Prelate of Italy,
and was endued with a more Episcopal science, told these Fathers, That there
was great difference between the Order of Bishops and theirs, for that there is
no doubt that the former was of an holy institution, and its Authority
necessary for the preservation of the Church, though all were not Saints who
were invested with the dignity; but as for the Jesuits, without examining
particulars, the whole body was of no value, it being more than probable th^^
the spirit of the world and politic respects had contributed more to their
establishment, than the Spirit of Christ; and that the Good Ignatius brought
into it, was presently destroyed by the interessed Ambition of his Successors.

Three great Archbishops of Malines, who possessed that dignity immediately one
after the other, and dyed reputed Saints, had thoughts very different from
those of the Italian Bishop: For the ancientest of the three speaking of the
Jesuits, said, These men shall flourish at first, but afterward become a
Curse to all People; his Successor added, These men shall trouble the Church:
The last Propheeyed of them in these words, These men shall become as the dung
of the Earth.

To conclude, the last Bishop of Cahors lately deceased, whose piety was famous
throughout the world, declared what value he had for the Jesuits, having
desired the Abbot of Terrier, Grand Vicar of Alby, present at a fit of sickness
which brought this Prelate almost to his end, being about four months before
his death to give some advice on this subject^ to the Bishops his friends,
whereof the Abbot acquitted himself, having written to M. de Pannez, in these
words, Aug. 22. 1659.

My Lord of Cahors is of opinion that the Jesuits are a Flayle, and ruin to
the Church, so that he believed, that neither your Lordship nor any other
Bishop faithful to God ought to employ them; and has charged me to tell you
and others who tender the safety and advantage of their Dioceses, that you
^ught not to admit them into your houses, for that gives them credit, and gains
them Authority with the people.

The admirable Conformity of the Society of Jesuits with the Church.
IN that proud Pourtraiture on the frontis^piece of this book, the Society is
represented as a young Virgin with three Angels ove^ her head, Crowning her
with the three Crowns of Virginity, Learning and Martyrdom: On her right side
she has an Angel sounding a Trumpet, and saying, Ignatius has accomplished
100 years: On the left side another Angel sounding also a Trumpet, and saying,
Let him fill the whole world, Totum impleat Orbem.

She has the name of Jesus on her breast, and says, Not unto us Lord, not
unto us give the Praise; Non nobis, Domine, non nobis: In her right hand she
has a Pen, in her left a flaming Cross, at her right foot Time, and at (I say
not under) her left foot a Mitre and a Cardinals Cap.

On the brimms of the Picture are six Emblems answerable to the six books of
this work, whereof the five first representing the Society in General, show her
resemblance with the Church.

The first Emblem, is The Name of Jesus with the Sun and Moon Crescent under
it, with this Inscription above, The Society Derived of Jesus; and below this,
She has all that the Sun has.

The second Emblem is a Globe of Light with this Inscription above, The
Society spread over all the World; and below this, She shines in all the World.

The third Emblem is a Moon in the middle of the Night with this device above,
The Society doing good to all the World; and below this, She preserves all
things in the midst of night.

The fourth Emblem is a Moon Eclipsed by the interposition of the Earth
between it and the Sun with these words above, The Society suffering evil from
the World, and below this Eclipsed by the opposition of the Earth.

The fifth Emblem is a Sun, Moon, and shadow of the Earth with these words
above, The Society more glorious by persecution, and below these, Fairer for
the shadow.

These five Emblemes are common to the Church with the Jesuits.
The sixth regards the Province of Flanders in particular, being The Lion in
the Zodiac, with these words, And this the Belgic Lion Goes about.

At the basis of one of the Columns is a Palm, to show she shall flourish as
that Tree, and on the other side, a Phoenix to show she shall flourish like it;
according to Tertullians interpretation, who renders the Greek Septuagint, She
shall flourish as a Phoenix, But it is a mistake from the equivocal term
Phoenix, which in Greek signifies a Phoenix and Palm Tree, though the Hebrew
word signifies only a Palm, and all other interpreters have rendered it
accordingly.

It Is to be observed, that they cite Ulysses Aldronandus a famous Author, who
has treated of Birds, because he says there are many Phoenixes, quoting his
words to that effect, that their Society may be taken for a Company of
Phoenixes.

At the foot of the Picture are two little Angels, one holding a Glass with
these words* Without spot; which may be also said of the Church, being termed
to be without spot o^ wrinkle; the other carrying these words written, Without
Money: The one denoting their Chastity, the other their Poverty.

At the end of the abridgement of this Volumn, they have painted the Image of a
little Jesus, framing a Ring on an Anvill, which he gives in Affiance of his
marriage to the Society (which he espouses) as a pledge of its eternal
duration, with these words, To give the Ring of Aeternity for a Covenant of an
ever^^sting Marriage.

In the first book they represent their Order ^s a new foundation of the
Church, St. Peter and Ignatius were at Rome, St. Paul and Xave^u^ among the
Nations.

Twelve Apo^tles, ten Jesuits, 72 Disciples, (...) Jesuits by the first Bull
of Paul 3. lib. 2. ^p. 2.

As the virtue of the Holy Ghost was shed on the ^ostles, so was it on St.
Ignatius newly reconed with God after his conversion, with as great Earthquake,
and equal fame, lib. 5. c. 5. P. 5.

It is allowable therefore, if I mistake not, to ^ibu^e without Arrogance to
the Society of ^s that Oracle which the Royal Prophet pub^^d in Sion the Church
of Jesus Christ. Very ^^ellent things are spoken of thee, thou City God, the
most High has established thee, made thee immovable against all advers: ibid.

It cannot be doubted but that the Society is exactly like the Church, if you
consider further t^^ persecutions she endures; and that we may say (...) her,
what St. Hillary said of the Church, the it is her property to conquer when
m^st beset wi^^ Enemies, to clear her innocence best when accus^ with most
malignity, and to conquer when forsak^ by the World, lib. 5. cap. 1. p. 582.

St. Jerome says of the Church, that it (...) cre^ses by Persecutions, and is
crowned by Man tyrdome; we may say the same of the Society, a^ ask with Horace,
What part of the World but ^et with our blood. Lib. 5. c. 4. ^. 619, 620.

When I consider the great favors and bene^ done by Kings and Popes to our
Society, it appe^ credible, that the Prophecy of Isaiah, which (...) rejoice to
see accomplished in the Christian Chur^ belongs in some sense to the Society of
Ies^^ Kings shall be your Nursing Fathers, (...) Queens your Nursing Mothers;
ye shall (...) the milk of Nations, and the Breasts of Kin^ the Lord shall be
your everlasting light, (...) your God, your Glory; the days of my peo^^ shall
be as the days of a Tree, and the wo^^ of their hands shall continue many
Ages. ^^mit me to believe, that in this Prophecy Isaiah not only cast his
thoughts on the Church and ^^ple of God, but upon Ignatius and his Fa^^ the
brethren of the Society, and their exce^ works, lib. 5. Ora. 1. p. 686.

Jesus is to the Iesui^es what he is to ^h^ Church, and fights for them as for
Christianity* lib. 1. c. 4. p. 70. To prove the truth of this, they cite these
words of St. Jerome on the 70 th Psalm, Let us give thanks to Jesus our Chief,
for he is our Captain who fights for us, and gains us the victory.

I will endeavor to make it appear, that Jesus has showed to the World that
foundation and propagation ^f the Society, is like an illustrious monument, to
make his Name admirable, and rem^in to perpetuity for the declaration of his
Glory.

As Christ said to his disciples, that they should be hated of all men for his
Names sake which is the Name of Christians, the whole Earth being then Pagan
and Id^latrous, so they pretend they are hated and persecuted only for the name
of Jesuits they bear, though all Europe be Christian and adores Jesus Christ:
And as Jesus Christ is in the Vessel of the Church, they pretend he is also in
the Vessel of their Society, being as they call it an Epitome of the Church
within the Church: Lib. 4. c. 1.

Our Fathers had recourse to God in tempests, being seized with the like fear
as the Apostles when they ran to Christ asleep in the ship: But Jesus is so in
the Vessel of the Society, that as it was the Mariners safety to have in his
B^at Caesar and his fortune, so the name of Jesus we bear is our assurance,
though it be also the cause of our perils* he shall command the winds and the
sea, and there shall be a calm: Lib. 4. p. 483.

All these passages cited by these Fathers in their favor, are no solid proof
that the Authors of holy Scripture and the Prophets spoke of them, but show
their presumption and self-love in entertaining themselves with the thoughts of
their excellencies, whereof they are so full that they see them in every thing:
This is the cause they have so little respect for Holy Scripture, that they
fear not to make it serve the desires of their heart, and to substitute
themselves in the place of Jesus Christ and the Church. They have reason to
fear, lest by abusing the Word of God with so much indignity and insolence,
they make themselves of the number of those of whom St. Paul in his 3d chap. of
the 2d to Timothy says, that having a form of godliness they deny the power
thereof.

The pre-eminence of Ignatius above Moses, the Apostles, and Founders of
Religious Orders.
One of the three Sermons made by the Dominicans at the Canonization of
Ignatius, which the Jesuits have made theirs by translating it out of Spanish
into French, by their F. Sollier, and have been censured by the Sorbonn, has
these expressions:

We know that Moses with his Rod in his hand did great Miracles, in the Air,
the Earth, Water, Rocks, and in all he thought good, to the drowning of Pharaoh
and his who'e Army in the Red Sea. But it was the in^ffable Name of God, which
Learned Tostatus Bishop of Aula says was graven in the Rod that wrought the
Miracles: I was no great wonder then, that the Creatures seeing the Ordinances
of God their Sovereign Lord and King, subscribed with his Name rendered him
obedience: Nor is it to be m^rvel^ed, that the Ap^stles did s^ many Miracles,
for that they wr^ught all in the Name of God, by the virtue and power he had
given them, se^ling it with the Inscripti^n, In my Name they shall cast out
Devils, speak with new Tongues, etc. But that Ignatius with his Name in Paper,
should work M^racles greater than Moses, and equal to the Apostles, that his
Seal had so much authori^y, that the Crea^ures ^ave it quick and sudden
obedience; it is this that makes him the subject of our greatest admiration.

Upon which Article, the Sorbonn in their Censure printed in 1611. says, that
this manner of speech whereby the name of the Cr^atures seems equalled to that
of Almighty God; and where Miracles are lessened and exte^^ated for having been
wrought in the Name of God; lastly, where uncertain Miracles are preferred to
those which ought to be held for Articles of Faith, is scandalous, erroneous,
blasphemous and impious.

And in the 91 page of the same Sermon: While Ignatius lived, his life and
manners were so grave, so holy, and so elevated even in the opinion of Heaven,
that none but Popes as St. Peter, Empresses as the Mother of God, some
Sovereign Monarch as God the Father and the Son, had the happiness to enjoy a
full Vision of it.

Whereupon the Sorbon also has declared, That this Assertion suggesting that
God receives benefit by the Vision of a creature, is scandalous, and contains
manifest heresy.

In the third and fourth page of the 2d Sermon: Doubtless the Founders of other
Religious Orders were sent in favor of the Church; But since these last days
God has spoken to us by his Son Ignatius whom he has established heir of all.

Whereupon the Sorbon has further declared, that the application of the Text
of St. Paul, In these last days, literally to any other but Christ, is
scandalous, erroneous, and ^avours of blasphemy and impiety.

Proud Comparisons of the Fo^nders and Generals of the Society with Emperors,
Conquerours* and Great Princes of the World.
They make an Apostrophe to Mutius Vit^^l^schi their General, and say, All
Posterity shall know that you have been the first General in the end of the
first Age, as Rome called their Emperors by the name of Augustus from the end
of his time. Lib. 1. Dissert. 5. p. 17.

They compare the union of the Jesuits to that of two Roman Emperors, and to
that effect tell us of the Emperor Aurelian, where two Emperors are graven
with the Sun above them, giving them both equal irradiation, with this
Inscription, The agreement of the Caesar's, comparing the concord of the
Jesuits to that of Heathe Princes.

When Alexander had tamed the Horse called Bucepbalus, Philip his Father told
him, that he must entertain thoughts worthy the Generosity of his heart, and by
the power of Arms seek a Kingdom equal to his invincible courage, Macedon being
too little for him. When Ignatius had so valiantly subdued the unruly passions
of corrupt Nature, we have reason to believe that Christ stirred him up to
undertake the greatest matters in the world; using the like expressions, and
saying, Rome and Italy are too narrow for thy courage, Europe is not large
enough, seek out new Realms, and new Worlds wherein to plant the Trophyes of
thy Religion. Lib. 1. c. 10. O^. 3. p. 118.

The Mission which Christ gave his Apostles to subdue all the Earth was
somewhat more effectual, but not expressed in such terms of Pride. But these
Fathers are not ashamed to make the Savior of the World, and great pattern of
humility, to speak in Language suitable to their Arrogance and Presumption.

They say further, That Ignatius had no need to imitate the Captain of the
Hebrews, in commanding the Sun to stand still, that he might have time to
complete his Victory, for he in the perpetual course of his illustrious and
most glorious Victories, has followed the Sun from East to West almost
throughout the World; And having conquered himself, he had cause to hope to
conquer the Universe.

What could be said more of Christ? who says in the Gospel, that he has
overcome the world; of whom the Church sings, that he has subdued all the
Earth, not by the edge of the sword, but the wood of the Cross, whom David
compares in the 18 Psalm* to the Sun, who sets out from one end of the Heavens,
and continues his course to the end of it again, nothing being hid from the
heat thereof.

Were Ignatius at this day raised from the dead, his humility would be offended
with words so full of vanity and pride.

The Epitaph of Ignatius.
You that by the felicity of wit, and exc^llence of conceit can represent in
your fancyes the images of Pompey the Great, Caesar or Alexander ^open your
eyes t^ truth, and you shall read on this M^^ble, that Ignatius was greater
than all these Conquerours. Lib. 2. p. 180.

The Epitaph of Xavier.
Stay a while you Heroes, Great spirits, and Lovers. of virtue. You are not to
do; or undertake any thing more, since Xavier is buried under this tomb: But I
am deceived. There Is nothing in a manner here of that Great Ap^stle of the
East, c^uragious beyond nature, illustrious beyond imitation, admirable beyond
envy, the companion of Jesus, the Son of Ignatius that imm^rtal Angel in a
mortal body. There Is nothing here, I s^y, of him that could be corrupted, since
he had not any thing subject to corrup^ion, who subdued more people to the
Church than the Romans and Greeks did to their Empires in several Ages.

We may with good reason say to the Jesui^es in the words of Christ, (...) Woe
be to you Lawyers and Pharisees hypocrites* who build the tombs of the
Prophets, and garnish ^he Sepulchers of he righteous. For methinks, they mock
these Saints, when on the one hand they praise them to excess, to draw thence
glory for themselves, and on the other hand follow another spirit and contrary
Maxims: To show the difference between the conduct of the Jesuits and that of
Xavier, it will be sufficient to report what themselves say of this Saint, that
though he was Nuntio from the Pope, yet when he arrived at Goa, he went to
prostrate himself at the feet of the Bishop, to inform him for what end the
Pope and the King of Portugal had sent him into that Country; he presented to
him, and left in his hands the Popes Brieves, promising never to make use of
his Authority as the Apostolical Nuntio, further than it should please the
Bishop to allow, To which the Author of the history adds, that he always kept
inviolable his custom of submitting to the Prelates of the Church, of what
degree soever: These are the words of F. Daniel Bartoli, lib. 1. dell^ 1. part.
dell. (...), della Comp. de Jesus ^ell Asia. But the Jesuits, no otherwise
qualified than as brethren of the Society, do every day exalt themselves
against the power of Bishops, and pretend to preach and administer the
Sacraments in spite of them, which has obliged a great number of the best
Bishops of France to interdict them.

Vain and false Elegies of other Authors.
Lessius, say they, has gotten eternal reputation, not only by the works of
his wit, but the renown of his Virtues, and was consulted as an Oracle from all
parts of the world, Lib. 1. Dissert. 5. page 17.

When Laine's spoke in the Council of Trent, for the Conception of the Virgin
without Original Sin, the whole Council gave ear to him, not as a man speaking
out of a Chair, but as a Prophet descended from heaven, for pronouncing of
Oracles, declaring of mysteries, and publishing of secrets: And he by his
eloquence preserved the Virgin from receiving a spot in the purity of her
conception, and fetched but that stain she had received before by the opinion
of many (he means the Dominicans) lib. 1. Or. 5. p. 139.

It Is principally from Spain those great men issued, who by the excellence of
their parts, and depth of their learning have extended the limits of Sacred
knowledge, have been the Ornament of our age, and will be the admiration of
posterity, lib. 11. c. 4. p. 211. He means Suarez, Vasquez, Molina, and others,
to whom they may now add Escobar, Guimenius, etc. infamous for errors and
ignorance, as the others celebrated for learning and knowledge.

What shall I say of those Ramparts of sacred learning, Suarez and Vasquez? Who
in the great heap of difficulties opposed to their scrutiny, and the vigor of
their wit, believed, and with reason, that they could penetrate through all,
and that nothing could be inaccessible to them? What vaste thoughts had
Cornelius de la Pierre who has comprehended in his Commentaries all the Holy
Scripture? What shall I say of Sanchez and Lessius, those men ^f knowledge, so
pure and so perfect? they should have added Virginal and Maidenly, for Alegamb
gives their knowledge that title of hon^ur, lib. 5. c. 6. p. 644. S^arez whom
the most knowing persons have not doubted to call the Universal M^ster of this
Age, p. 438.

It must be confessed, that there are in the Society of the Jesuits some
knowing persons, but when they take occasion from thence to extol themselves
above all the world, they give just cause of complaint, that the knowledge of
those few serves only to blow up the rest with pride and vanity, even to the
meanest conducters and ministerial officers, they all have great opinions of
themselves, though no right to the praises of the Society; so that when they
hear the magnificent Encomiums they give Vasquez, Suarez, and some others, they
easily persuade themselves, that they are considerable members of so
illustrious a body, and that one day they shall have their badge of dignity,
and a more honorable place in the Records of the Society.

Their vain and pr^^ended Conformity with Jesus Christ.
It Is not enough for the ambition of the Iesu^tes to compare their Society with
the Church, the spo^se of Christ, and to represent him working on an anvil, a
ring to be given them in token of an indissoluble marriage with the Society;
but all the great volumn of the Image of their first age, consists only of
comparisons of themselves with Christ, making the resemblance to lie in Five
points, which are the subjects of the five Books of that work, which they have
abridged and placed in the beginning of their first Book, as follows:

1. Jesus Christ made himself of no reputation.
Igna^ius descended of an Illustrious Family, was reduced to beg his bread.
Hence sprang this little Society (so they call it here:) They persevered well
in the humility of their Founder, when in China they quitted their ordinary
habit and went as Gallants, to prevent, as they affirm, the contempt that
attends a poor appearance.

2. Jesus Christ increased in wisdom, in age, and in grace in the sight of God
and of m^n.
This is the Image of the Society Cr^scent; it is strange, that notwithstanding
the knowledge men have of the irregularities of the Jesuits, they have vanity
enough to think to persuade the world, that they exceed in virtue all their
Predecessors; but whatever they say they cannot be believed without new Idea's
of their first Fathers.

3. Jesus Christ began to do and teach.
This is the Image of the Society acting; and when they write of their
continual labors; they write, In this thou approachest nearer to Christ, O
Glorious Society, which have produced works of such Grandeur: But what could be
so horrible as the Idea we should have of this Society, if we were persuaded
she has acted and ordered her conduct according to those maxims which her
Casuists have written and taught?

4. Jesus suffered a shameful death.
This is the image of the Society suffering, but he endured a little more, but
boasted much less than these men do.

5. Jesus Christ through suffering is past into Glory.
This is the image of the Society triumphant: It might be wished, these Fathers
would not so much seek their Glory of men, that they might have a greater share
in that of Christ, who in the Gospel has forbidden us to seek our own Glory.

When the Jesuits compare their Hero's* to Alexanders, Hercules, Po^^ies and
Caesar's, the style is tolerable, though very ridiculous. It Is not very rare
for men, even writers, to want judgment and common sense; but whatever these
good Fathers say, they are too well known to be taken for Angels. Yet since
they lift up their voice to heaven, and affect altogether to compare their
Society to the Church, and themselves to the Apostles, and to Jesus Christ whom
they look upon as their companion, it may do well to advertise the world how
dangerous and irregular their passion is, which makes them use such extravagant
expressions.

They ought to remember that we cannot draw near to God but by humility, and
that the way entirely to de^ace the small remainder we have of resemblance with
him, is, not to acknowledge our distance from his Grandeur, his Holiness and
his Goodness, and not to lay sufficiently to heart that we are really mere
nothings as he is the Sovereign Omnipotent Essence.

Pride being the first crime that corrupted Angels and Men, is also the most
deeply rooted in our nature; so that there always remains in us an inclination
to desire with our first Parents to be like the most High, and to make our
selves and the things we affect, Idols to be set up in the place of God.

It Is true, that since the light of the Gosp^l, there have not appeared where
Christ is adored, any persons so impudent to cause themselves to be worshipped
as Gods, or that durst attribute that honor to any other man: But we see a
shadow of this disorder in Christendom it self; for as soon as it falls out
that we have a virtuous friend, because we dare not make him a God; yet this
does not restrain us from making him a Saint, and if we may be believed, the
greatest in Paradise; and if it lie in our power, we extol him so high, that
none but Christ shall be fit to compare with him: But this passion more easily
spreads in communities and succeeds more happily; they cover it with the
presence of the Glory of God, promoted by publishing holiness, which is no
where so resplendent as in the Saints: They make it their devotion, and subject
of their zeal to commend the members of the Society. One Jesuit thinks he
merits by praising another, and as that other is of his coat, so he agrees in
the practice as well as prof^ssion of the same rule, and is his companion, his
brother and other-self, obliged to barter Elegies, and make suitable returns
for the commendations received: But it might have been affirmed, that the
ambition of these Fathers had proceeded ^urther than themselves could have
imagined, had they not taken such care to make it app^ar with a witness in the
proud representation they have made of their company: Because there are amongst
them some persons reputed holy and learned, they would impose on the world to
have no other Idea of their Society, but that it is composed only of persons no
less chaste and bright than the Angels, and have not a body but to ^ight and to
suffer for Jesus Christ. There is nothing on Earth, as they say, wherewith to
compare this Holy Society, but the Church of Christ, with this difference, that
the Church is obliged to continual mourning for the rareness of Virtue among
the members thereof, and because the wheat is almost all covered with chaff,
whereas in the Society there is only wheat without any chaff. The Church has
this advantage, that none can be saved but in her bosom; but though all that
live there are called to salvation, yet few are saved, and chosen for heaven.
And those few who are happy enough to be saved, and persevere to the end, must
do it with much labor, and continual combats against their infirmities and
imperfections the whole time of their life. They confess with St. Paul, they
see no good thing in themselves, that the law of sin from which they are not
entirely exempt, causes them often to do the ill they would not, as the weight
of their corruption hinders them to do the good that they would; they
acknowledge, that though they are enlightened with the Faith, their light is but
small, and would be wholly extinct, did they not constantly pray to God to
increase it; that they find themselves often involved in such darkness, that
they know not what they ought, or ought not to do, to perform the repentance
they owe unto God, and the charity they are obliged to pay unto their neighbor.

Lo here, what men the Saints of the Church of Christ are! they always walk in
humility, in fear and in self-denial, knowing they must fall when they quit
this path; but the Church of the Jesuits is all perfect, and composed entirely
of persons that are perfect, there are no children nor imperfect ones amongst
them; they are all born with helmets on their heads, they are all Ph^^nixes,
Heroes, and men at arms, they have all strength sufficient to conquer, and more
wisdom is necessary to govern the world.

Moreover they are all Saints, and shall be all saved; they have express
Revelations which put it out of doubt* that for three hundred years, and to the
end of the world, not one of them shall dye in the h^bit of a Jesuit who shall
not have the gift of perseverance: They are no sooner dead, but according to
their prophecyes Jesus Christ com^s to meet them, for to conduct them to
heaven, and make them reign there above all other Religious Orders, whereof the
most perfect are but as silver, whereas by another (...) they know that they
are the most precious gold.

Lastly, having exhausted all sort of praises, and compared themselves to
Angels, to Prophets, to the Apostles, the twenty four Elders in the Apocalipse,
the Pharisees and Emperors, having applied to themselves all they could find
in Scripture, which might make for their Glory, to end all, they compare this
great body to Christ Jesus himself, as if all other perfections, but that of
God-man were unworthy of them: They are strongly possessed with a fancy, that
their Company is like unto Christ, and that as there is nothing in Christ but
what is Holy, it follows in their imagination, that all is holy among them too:
There is nothing so corrupt in their manners, so extravagant in their devotion,
so false in their Theology, which they maintain not as the Sentiments of the
Church. Many of their Divines invent fanatic opinions, and the Universities
have been often obliged to censure their Authors.

But these Fathers persist in their principles, and thinking it necessary to
maintain themselves to be infallible as the Church, they never recant, and have
all in their hearts what one of them sometime stuck not to pronounce, That the
opinion of a Jesuit is always Catholic, dogma Catholicum and Iesuiticum
convertuntu^.

And thus supposing always this Society to be, all holy, all luminous, all
perfect, without spot, without infirmity, without malady, they believe it
impossible to praise it excessively, as a work of God beyond all praise; and
that these holy companions of Jesus Christ are so united to him, that all that
may be said to their advantage, returns unto God. In so great a measure does he
partake of all that concerns them.

But while they admire themselves in this manner, they perceive not the misery
of the condition they are fallen into; which we cannot better express, than to
say, that the extreme desire they have had to pass for the wisest and most
illuminated in the world, has rendered them foolish and senseless, that they
have lost themselves in their vain Ratiocinations; that their minds and their
hearts having been covered with darkness, they have transferred the honor due
only to the incorruptible God, unto their Society full of corruption and misery
and as the Pagans, having chosen for Gods, men subject to all sorts of passions
and vices, were in pursuance of that folly obliged to sanctify those
disorders; so the Jesuits always supposing themselves Saints, take no care to
purify themselves from those faults which are common to them with other men,
but labor to sanctify those faults, in giving the greatest vices of a I^suite
the golden titles of virtue and goodn^ss; so that though they are ambitious,
covetous, inter^ssed, revengeful, as other men, they are still innocent, for
considering themselves under no other notion than that of one of the most
excellent works of God, they fancy that in praising themselves they but praise
God, that in exalting themselves above the world, they do but establish the
Empire and Authority of Christ, that in heaping up riches and scraping wealth
together all the ways they can devise, they serve not their interest, but
Jesus Christ; for as for them, though they lodge in magnificent houses, and
amass all the estate they possibly can; by ^e^^aments and donations, by
trafick; by borrowing money, and then proving bankrupts; they pretend to be
poor and always without money, because they have nothing whereof they divest
not themselves speculatively into the hands of Jesus Christ.

As they pretend they have no enemies, but those of God, they think it
permitted them to oppress them as they please; and as if their power, were as
Gods, inseparable from Justice, they never show the least scruple or repentance
for any evil they do them who oppose their most wicked designs.

Lastly, though their Authors are guilty of almost infinite errors, and fill
their books with detestable maxims, they forbear not to regard them with such
respect and submission, as if they alone were the Rule of the Truth, and as if
every opinion written in their books must of necessity be holy and good.

St. Augustine teaches us, that God serves himself sometimes of the most
shameful miscarriages of proud men to make them see their corruption, to humble
them, and oblige them to have recourse to repentance; but it seems this remedy
is of no use for the Jesuits, those remarkable and most shameful falls so
frequent in their Society, having not been yet able to open their eyes, nor to
persuade them that they are not impeccable. So great is their passion to make
their Society pass for a Virgin without blemish, that they have entirely
abolished repentance amongst them, and all the marks of it as a superfluous
thing.

I cannot but report on this occasion the complaint made to me by one of their
brethren, for some few there are who mourn for these horrible disorders, and
begin to open their eyes: He told me, that as soon as any of them is Priest, if
he be unhappy enough to fall secretly into a mortal sin, he must of necessity
dye in impenitence; for they are indispensably obliged to say Mass every day
which supposes them all saints, or that a simple confession can in a moment
reestablish them in the sanctity they had lost, and restore them to the
dispositions necessary in them who approach the Altar, what crime soever they
have committed. I enter not the secrets of the heart, and of the consciences of
particular men, but if we may be allowed to guess in general at their weakness
and infirmities, by those of many who publicly fall into infamous Actions, I
think it may be said, without passing rash Judgment, that it is very possible
that some of them fall into sins that oblige them to repentance; and that it is
so much the more possible, that they are of a very great number, that they live
without any Austerity, and great liberty of converse with all sort of people,
besides that their ordinary employments, their Preaching, Confession, and
Classes are oftentimes near dangerous occasions of falling into sin; so that it
being very probable that some fall into those precipices which all are so near,
it is strange, that the passion they have for their Glory, should so harden them
in their Crimes, that it has never been seen, that any of them that have
fallen, came out of that state by a true and complete repentance.

This love of Glory is so great amongst them, that it has not only made them
abolish repentance, for fear of giving any color to think they need it, but
has carried them sometimes to the doing of extreme violences, and great
injustice, for covering those faults whereby they might receive any dishonor;
and the better to conceal them, they labor with all Artifice to justify the
persons who have committed them. We have an instance of this Excess in the
Theater of the Jesuits, p. 396. so horrible that the Author durst not report
it: But the world knows it by other means, and Mariana acknowledges, that it
is their custom, when they fear the fault of any Father not yet discovered may
come to light, to transport him presently into another Province. And when some
disorder appears in a Superior, whose reputation they would maintain in the
world, whom notwithstanding they dare not trust any further, they suggest to
him that he may desire leave to go to the New World, to which he has no sooner
consented, but they make this forced desire pass for an extraordinary ^eal for
the Faith, and a necessary banishment for an Apostolical mission: And for one
that undertakes these Voyages sincerely, and with good intentions, there are
twenty which go not but upon carnal considerations, and become worse after than
they were before.

Lastly, as they make use of every thing for their Glory, they are not ashamed
to count those of their* Society Martyrs, who dyed for their Crimes, and to
make them companions of Christ crucified, who justly* suffer as capital
offenders, they make it their merit to have been driven out of England and
France, though they drew on themselves that just punishment for their crimes;
for having taught men to kill Kings, and confessed or instructed three
Assassinators of the Monarchs of France: Barriere confessed by Varada, John
Chastell instructed by Guignard, and Ravaillac confessed by F. D'Aubigny, as
all the World may read in history; insomuch that Guignard was hanged and
strangled for having inspired Chastell his Scholar in Philosophy with the
Parricide, and having taught it in his writings. In England, Gardner and other
Jesuits were executed for having been Accomplices in the Powdertreason, where
they would have blown up in a moment the King, Queen and all the great men of
England, by a piety worthy the moderation of these new Apostles, as they call
themselves, and justly, as not led by the spirit of the old.

They have been also expelled from Venice, for raising factions, according to
the Prophecy of the Venetian Patriarch Farnisius, who apprehending their
factious and politic Genius, foretold 50 years before, swearing on the
Evangelists as themselves confess in this book, p. 494. that they should be one
day driven out of Venice.

To conclude, though in* other Provinces and Cities of Europe, and other parts
of the World they have been often ill treated for their Plots and Cabals, they
forbear not to say by a horrible blasphemy that these persecutions are the
Crowns of their piety, humility and innocence, as they were in the Sacred
Person of Jesus Christ.

Privileges and Extraordinary Advantages of the Society above other Orders.
I. Privilege.
That the Society is a Virgin.
THis we have seen in the proud Image on the frontispiece of this book, where
the Society is represented as a young Virgin, though Ignatius their founder had
lived in the disorder of a man of War, before his Conversion, as Ribadeneira
testifies in his life; and was a slave to the vanities of the world, and those
unruly passions of corrupt nature, as they express it in this image of their
first Age, and at last of a dissolute Soldier became a Saint of Penitence.
Whereas other Religious Societies in a Christian humility confess their
weakness, acknowledge their imperfections, and dare not speak of their virtue,
though most of their Founders were really Virgins, as we learn by their Lives,
and were Saints rather of innocence than Penitence.

On the other side these Fathers consider not that when they boast their
Society a Virgin with so much earnestness, they give occasion to say, that they
ought to be ashamed that their Casuists make this Virgin speak with so much
impudence, words so little becoming a Virgin, and capable to corrupt the
Masters that teach, and the Scholars that shall be sufficiently unhappy to
follow them.

II. Privilege.
That it is the Company of Jesus: And that the use and Office of his Name
particularly belong to them.
THe name of the company of Jesus and of Jesuit is the most August upon Earth;
not Granted them by Popes of mere motion, but desired and demanded by their
first Fathers according to the express terms of the first Bull of their
Institution. And yet if you will believe them, 'twas God himself gave it them,
as they say expressly in these terms, Et nobis Divinitus concessum est, lib. I.
or. 4. p. 127.

St. Thomas in his Sum of the body of Divinity demands why Christians have
taken their name from Christ, and not from Jesus; and are called Christians and
not Jesuits? and answers, it is because they partake of the holy Unction,
denoted by the name Christ, by receiving it in the Sacraments; so that they may
be called the Christ's, and Anointed of God* whereas they have no part in the
signification of the sacred name Jesus, which signifies Savior, they being The
saved, and he alone the Savior: Whence it is that this name is not the
surname, but the proper name of Jesus Christ, which was given him by God, by
the ministry of the Angel, because he was to save his people, in delivering
them from the sins which held them captive: And that at this Adorable name
every Knee should bow in Heaven; in Earth, and under the Earth. Hence it is
also that the whole Sorbonne, in the year 1554. with unanimous consent, (and
not, as they pretend, some Doctors of the Sorbonne) having been consulted by
the Parliament of Paris, found this name of Jesuit extraordinary, and in their
famous Censure, give it a mark, calling the Jesuits The New Society, which
particularly attributes to it self the unusual title of the name of Jesus.

And M. Eustache de Bellay the illustrious Bishop of Paris, who also was
consulted by the Parliament of Paris, having given his advice in Writing,
proposed in the Assembly of the Church of France held at Poissy, by the command
of the King, in 1561. that if they should be received, it should be only as a
Society and Company, and not as a new Order of Religion, and that they should
be obliged to take another name than that of the company of Jesus, or Jesuits:
This was held so reasonable by the whole Assembly General of the Gallican
Church, that she received them not but with express Charge, that they should be
obliged to take another title than that of the Society of Jesus, or Jesuits,
and under many other conditions, to which they then submitted out of politic
prudence, but performed them not, having then no other end but to establish
themselves in France, and knowing according to one of their Emblemes, that as
soon as their Society should put in a foot, it would move the whole Land, p.
321. by tumults and popular seditions, before they could be removed out of
their places.

But because they have taken this Glorious Name, and preserved it by the favor
of a Pope who not being able to resist their importunities, gave them as many
Bulls as they thought fit to desire as themselves have observed, they say, That
the use and office of this Name which consists in fighting for the Church seems
to belong to their Fathers by the particular privilege received by the Popes
Bulls, since none can, be ignorant that we can prove to our glory by every
days experience, that no man almost has declared war against the Faith and
Religion in these evil times, who thought it not his duty to swear an immortal
enmity against our Fathers: So that the passage in Scripture may be as properly
applied to our Society as it was to St. Paul, I will show him how much he must
suffer for my Name, p. 123.

Why should I trouble my self further to consider the boldness of these new
Apostles who pretend to make as many Articles of Faith as they please, to find
new senses of Scripture, in corrupting it, and turning the passages from the
true sense to apply them to themselves; for if you believe them, 'twas not so
much of St. Paul, as of their Society that Christ spoke when he said, I will
show him how much he must suffer for my Name: They who have any love for their
salvation, are much concerned that the faith be not corrupted by these new
additions, and those who receive easily these Articles of Faith of the
Iesuitick Church, ought to fear lest they forget those which Christ has taught
his Church; what they add in the same behalf is an imagination without ground,
pretending the heretics (as they call them) make war particularly against
them, by reason of the Name of Jesus, which they bear; to show it is not for
the Name of Catholics which they have common with the Bishops, the Popes, and
an infinite number of Doctors, Ecclesiastical persons and Friars, but because
by particular privilege they bear the Name of Jesus in bearing that of
Jesuits. As if the heretics believed not in Jesus Christ, and held not the
Name of Jesus Sacred and adorable as we, and as if it were not known that
Calvin has put the Name of Jesus at the top of every page of his Institution,
to endeavor to sanctify his books by that Holy Name, as the Jesuits make use
of it to hallow their unholy actions and opinions.

In another place with a pride proper to them, and on design to draw glory to
themselves from the hatred of heretics toward them, say they, all the enemies
of the faith, fling their darts at us, as if the maintenance of holiness, and
the Catholic Religion depended on the subsistence of our Society alone, being
persuaded, that if this pillar of public safety were pulled down and ruined,
there could be nothing easier than entirely to destroy the faith, with the
piety, the ceremonies and worship of the Church: As this thought is suitable to
the good opinion the Jesuits have of themselves, I believe them at least as
capable of it, and all other thoughts of self-conceit, and vain glory, as the
worst of those Heretics.

But as to the particular animosity between the Lutherans and Calvanists, and
these fathers, all the learned know, that it proceeds not from an opinion that
they are better able to re^ute their errors, than the Doctors of Universities,
the Bishops and Cardinals; it being notorious to the world that the books of
Ruard Tapper the famous Doctor of Loven, of Drued, of Augustine, S^ucchius
Eugabinus a Bishop in Italy, and many other excellent persons of the faculty of
divinity, and other eminent Prelates are stronger against the Lutherans than
those of the Jesuits, and that when compared with Saintez upon the Eucharist,
or Cardinal Perron against the Lutherans, the books of the Jesuits look like
those of Students or Schoolboys: besides it comes not to pass, because they of
the Reformed Churches think them more holy than other Orders of Religion
(though they publish themselves altogether perfect and Ramparts of the Doctrine
of Faith) for they know as well as the Roman Catholics that their spirit is
less humble, their life less austere, their knowledge less Ecclesiastical,
their charity less patient and meek, their piety less dis-interessed, than
those of other Orders; but it is because the Jesuits preach no other thing in
their books against heretics, but that they ought to be exterminated and
burnt: And that those Heretics who have not zeal enough to seek the Glory of
false martyrdom, love more the charity and gentleness of Catholic Doctors and
Bishops, who desire not the death of a sinner but that they may be converted
and live, than the irregular zeal of those who labor not so much to convince
men by Truth, and overcome them by Charity, as to destroy them by injuries, and
ruin them by violent counsels, which they inspire into Kings and Rulers
against them.

Another Reason that the Heretics are more inclined to engage with them than
other Catholic Doctors, is, that those Fathers fill their books with new
Opinions, fantastic tenets, and corrupt maxims which give the heretics great
advantage against them, this medley of ill things making it more facile for
them to desend themselves against their writings, and to answer their Reasons:

Other Orders are said to come of the Saints who have founded them, as the
Benedictins from St. Benedict, the Dominicans from St. Dominique, and so of the
rest, which is the reason they are called the Orders of St. Benedict, St.
Dominique, etc. But the Jesuits have this advantage above all other Orders,
That their Company is the Company of Jesus himself, the Society of the Son of
God, the Order whereof he is the true Author, and that b^a^s his Name, That
Christ is their first F^u^der, the Virgin the second, and St. Ignatius only the
third, lib. 1. c. 6.

St. Ignatius was so humble, that he thought himself unworthy to give the Name
of Ignatians to his Companions, after the custom of other Founders, wherein he
seems willing to have imitated the Apostles, whose humility St. Augustine
praises, in that they gave not the Names of Paulians and Petrians, but
Christians to the faithful; but if we will judge ^right of things, we may say,
the Society has taken the Name of their Author: for Ignatius attributing all
unto God in the founding of his Society, and nothing to himself, and declaring
that Christ was the first and principal Author thereof, he did it with great
reason, that according to the custom among the Philosophers in the Christian
Religion, and the Orders thereof, the Society should bear the Name of their
Author without mention of Ignatius, who desired to be concealed, p. 68.

Wherein he pretends that the Divine Excellence which is found in the
foundation of the Church, in that it has Jesus Christ for its first and true
chief and founder, and in that he has given it the surname of Christian, from
his name Christ, appears in the foundation of this Society, whereof they say
Christ is the true and first Author, and gave it his Name incomparably more
August than his Surname, as if he had waved his general Society of the Church,
that he might reserve this highest honor for the particular Society of
Jesuits, That Virgin, knowing, and Martyr, Society, as another calls it: and
if you take their word you may believe Ignatius had the place of St. Peter,
Xavier of St. Paul, their ten first Fathers, that of the twelve Apostles, and
the sixty first Jesuits established by the first Bull of Paul the 3 d. that of
the seventy Disciples of our Lord.

Ignatius, say they, was first inclined to take the name of the Company of
Jesus in 1538. after a vision in a desert Church on his way to Rome, where God
the Father appeared to him, recommending Ignatius and his two Companions, Peter
le Teure, and James Laines to his Son Jesus Christ bearing his Cross, who
turning to them said, I will be favorable to you at R^me. This vision, says
Maffens the Jesuit, was the principal ground of the Name of the Society of
Jesus. But it is a strained conclusion, and will hardly pass for a good
inference in any but Iesuitical logic, that because Christ promised to favor
them at Rome; it was his intention that a particular Order should assume his
Name, which the Church in reverence durst not take for the reason before given
out of St. Thomas. Besides we have equal evidence of Christ's appearing and
promising his assistance to several founders of other Orders, who never thought
it a commission to call themselves Jesuits, which is not common to all
Christians, as they tell us, lib. 1. c. 4. p. 69 the name of Christian which is
the Surname of Jesus, being the Name common to the whole Church, which has
expressed that respect to the August Name of the Savior of the world, which
the Popes have to that of St. Peter which they never assume, though his
successors in the Chief Chair of Christianity.

III. Privilege.
That they are the freemen and companions of Jesus Christ; a vision wherein
they are preferred before the Capucins and Chartreus Monks.
It Is for this reason, that whereas the Apostles styled themselves the servants
of Jesus Christ, the Jesuits have the Pri^iledge to call themselves his
Freemen, and his Companions, page 24. And that in a vision at Paris, St. John
the Evangelist having appeared to a young lad, and asked him whether he would
be a Capucian or a Chartreus, the B^y answering, what God pleased, St. John
left him a paper, and told him, see there three Orders, cho^se which you will,
the paper containing the names of the Capucins and Chartreus in silver, but of
the Jesuits in Golden Letters; which they attribute to the Sacred Name of
Jesus they bear, and visibly insinuate, that as Gold is the most precious of
metals, so their Order is the most venerable and divine of all the Orders of
Religion.

They that flatter the ambition and pride of the Grandees of the world, exalt
them in titles, and magnify their dignities which often serve to make them
more vicious: But it is strange, these Fathers who are All Perfect, should boast
so much of their Name, as if to call one Jesuit were to Canonize him a Saint.

But let them take heed left for their unworthiness of the Name it rise in
judgment against them to their condemnation: great titles are common to good
and bad men, but as ambition is the ordinary purchaser, so they fall commonly
into the possession of wicked persons, it being generally observed, that none
are more worthy contempt, than those who by their titles claim preferance to
other men; the Bishop in the Apocalypse, said he, was rich, and wanted nothing
as the Jesuits pretend themselves the Companions of Christ, and exalted above
other men, as the Name Jesus is of a superlative dignity, but they, like that
Prelate, know not that they are poor, naked and blind, said to live but really
dead, Rev. c. 1.

IV. Privilege.
All those who dye in the Society, though never so young, have accomplished an
Age before their decease.
THough Old Age be rare in the Society, where Study consumes men in the flower
of Y^uth, yet no man dies in the S^ciety but he has lived a full Age; laugh
not at the Expression, it is not extraordinary but demonstratively true:
Virtuous Actions extend Life, and lengthen our days. Jesus was old at his
birth, Solomon at twelve years of age, Daniel and Joseph when very young, and
so were Francis Strada, Gonzaga, Stanislaus, Ubaldin, Cajetan, Berchman and
others.

Studious men repair the brevity of life by reading of histories, and the
capacities which of themselves are long a ripening, by the help of that Divine
Wisdom, and Heavenly light conspicuous in our constitutions quickly attain
complete maturity, which makes the least Apprentices of our Company as men of
one hundred years old in Knowledge, and ripe in the Sciences before the flower
of their Age.

The whole world admits them to be such, for as soon as initiated in the
Society they are presently Presbyters, ( which signifies old) and called
Fathers, though in their Childhood, and by the Privileges of the Society may
preach though they be not in Orders, and are all guided by a Divine Wisdom of
greater assurance than the most approved Philosophy, and longest Experience.
And being called by Jesus the Eternal Wisdom of his Father to partake of his
care and share in his labors, and assisting the world with Paternal affection,
there is not one among them to whom the Glory of Age is not due, none who has
not accomplished his days, and lived an Age though he dye a youth.

This concludes not the Jesuits wise, but in their own eyes, which is the
worst of follies* but the Author had good reason to tell us, that Old Age is
rare in the Society, not but that many of them live very long, but that few
attain a maturity in wisdom.

V. Privilege.
They are more prudent and politic than the Ministers of Spain.
WE read this brave Privilege in one of the Sermons preached at the
beatification of Ignatius, translated into French by F. Sollier the Jesuit,
and printed by him at Poitiers in 1611. under the title of Three Excellent
Sermons, which he dedicated to Madam Frances de Foix, Abbess of Nostre Dame de
Xaintes, and writ an Apology in defense thereof against the censure of the
Sorbonne, who had declared several propositions therein to be scandalous,
erroneous, manifestly her^tical, blasphemous and impious.

The Order is divided into thirty three f^ir and large Provinces ( now above
thirty six) inhabits three hundred and six Houses and Colleges ( since
increased to above eight hundred) and con^^^ts of above one thousand five
hundred and fourscore Brethren of the Order, so Prudent in Governm^n^* that
there are among their Lay-brothers, persons who may read Lessons in the
Politiques to the Chancellours of Granada at Valladoldo, and instruct the
Council of State of our King, page 172.

It Is no wonder that men who have so good opinion of their Wisdom and Charity
for mankind should intermeddle so much in the affairs of Government: It Is a
Privilege they have beyond the Apostles prohibited by Christ to touch that
secular Dominion that belongs to Kings and great men of the Earth; The Kings of
the Gentiles exercise Authority over them, but it shall not be so among you.
But since the Jesuits so willingly undergo the toylsom burden of the
administration of Kingdoms as we see at this day in Spain, and do nothing but
to promote the Glory of God; we must not question but they have an express
command from Christ to war^ant their Actions: Besides, it were an unpardonable
injury to look on their General as those of the Ia^obins or Augustine Friars
who govern only men of Religion; but if you will frame your Idea suitable to
the Grandeur of the Subject, you must conceive him a Sovereign no less Secular
than Ecclefiastick, that affects the Government of the world no less than that
of the Church. It Is not long since that a French Lord had this confirmed from
their Generals mouth, telling him, That from his Chamber he Governed not Paris
only, but China; not China ^^ly, but the whole world, yet no man knew how.

VI. Privilege.
That Christ comes to meet every Jesuit at his death to receive him to Glory.
It Is one of the Privileges of the Society of Jesus, That upon the death of
each Jesuit he advances to meet and conduct him to bliss: Happy Souls, assured
to pass from the prison of mortality into the immortal bosom of our Lord
Jesus, the verity of this proposition depends not on my authority, but of the
Oracle that delivered it; F. Crifoel the Jesuit tells us, that in 1616 in the
vision of Saint Therese a soul on her way to Glory in company of many more told
this Saint, A Brother of the Society of Jesus is our Guide: how happy are we in
such a Chief, to whose virtue and prayers we owe our deliverance this day out
of the pains of purgatory. Wonder not that the Almighty comes to meet us, it is
no new thing, the brethren of the Society of Jesus have this Privilege, that
when one of them dies Jesus comes to meet and receive him to Glory, lib. 5. c.
8. p. 648.

These Visions may be proper entertainments for the vanity of these Fathers who
may need humility and repentance to bring them to Heaven. As for the Vision it
might appear in the fancy of a Jesuit, but never to St. Therese who never
related it, and was so far from regarding such Apocryphal Revelations, that she
gave small encouragement to rely on any at all now adays.

VII. Privilege.
That no Jesuit shall be damned, that the Society has no cause to fear
corruption.
ALphonso Rodrigues had it revealed by Vision, that not only his Companions
then living, but those that succeeded many years after should live with him
eternally in Celestial bliss.

These are great favors, but lo here a greater! Francis Borgia told Mark his
Companion with tears of joy, Know Brother Mark that God has extreme love for
our Society, and granted it the Privilege formerly given the Order of St.
Benedict, that for the first three hundred years no person that perseveres to
the end in the Society shall be damned. See the express terms, as here rendered,
page 649.

I heartily desire the salvation of these Fathers, but must advertise them that
nothing exposes them more to damnation then this false confidence that they
cannot be damned. Let them remember their Emblem, Time ne tumeas, fear the
judgment of God, and damnation of Hell, lest the pride of our heart link us
into it. Where presumption has banished fear from the Soul, it becomes more
bold to commit all manner of wickedness, but where a servile fear ends in a
filial, this will make way for Charity to enter, which when perfected will
expel all fear.

A Friar of another Order (but Anonymus) at the point of death sent for F.
Matres the Jesuit, Confessor to the Viceroy of Barcelona, to tell him these
words, Happy are you, O Father, to be of an Order wherein whoever dies enjoyes
eternal felicity* God has revealed it, and commanded me to publish it to the
world. The Jesuit confounded with admiration and modesty, and asking him
whether all of his own Order should not be likewise saved, the dying man
answered him with a groan, That many should, but not all, but that all of the
Society of Jesus without exception of any who persevered therein to the end
should be crowned with eternal beatitude, ibid.

How great, how divine was the wisdom of Ignatius, who has so armed the
Society against the injuries of time, and built on supporters of such strength
that it is an instance to the world to prove, that all things are not the
supplies of time! But that Virtue and Religion may be so guarded, that the
course of Ages cannot corrupt them; and what brings other things a decrepit
age, or certain death, promises the Society ^ perpetual youth, so verdant and
flourishing, that she shall feel the revolution of ages without these effects
of decay and ruin that usually attend it, page 104.

Thus their Society shall be more privileged than the Church, and other Orders
of Religion, which being like theirs mingled with the world are not exempt from
its corruption; but this Privilege of incorruption is proper to these
extraordinary Saints, who are all Phoenixes and birds of Paradise. Since then
all the brethren of this Holy and ever flourishing Society shall be saved
without exception, according to the vision of that Anonimus Friar they quote,
the first purity of this Society must endure to the end, and surpass the
Sanctity of that Friars Order, who though he observed a severe and most pure
Discipline, as they tell us, lib. 5. c. 8. assures us that all of his Order
could not be saved.

Thus page 147. they tell us, the Society has no cause to fear corruption,
though they confess the spirit of Ambition, the greatest of corruptions seized
them so soon, that immediately after the death of Ignatius in 1565. being only
twenty five years after their Institution; Rashness and Ambition animated
Nicolas Bobadille, two of their first ten Brethren, and four m^re of the
prof^ssion, against two of their first Fathers, and the rest of the Society,
they Solicited Cardinals, rose eagerly against Laines then Vicar General, and
afterward General, and violently questioned the Constitutions of the Order.

This they call, The fate of Kingdoms and Republics, which erected with great
pains turn their Forces and their Power against themselves; the Dispute was for
the Generalship, which Laines by subtlety carried from the rest.

If you read Mariana, of the Defects of the Society, you may judge with what
appearance of Truth they tell us their Society needs fear no corruption: Let
them beware that for want of judging and condemning themselves they be not at
last condemned of God.

VIII. Privilege.
That the Blessed Virgin is entirely theirs.
THe Mother of God has declared, not only that the whole Society is hers, but
that she is wholly the Societies. Platus a Brother of the Order, Reports a
Vision, wherein the Virgin appeared with the Society under her Mantle -- The
Society covered with this Mantle of the Virgin, shall abide firm against all
the furies of Hell, the menaces of Tyran^s, and the attaques of her Enemies, as
the immovable stone of the Capit^l. For as God said to the Sea, hitherto shall
thou come; so the Virgin seems to have said to the Enemies of the Society,
hitherto shall ye ^^me, unto my Mantle, that is, to the Society, but no
further, for this is the Asylum where I protect my Devotes.

What shall I say more? We have obtained such power by the protection of the
Virgin alone, that we generously surmount, or happily end all evils that befall
us, page 140, 141.

The Fathers may do well not to trust much to these Revelations, for fear they
prove pure delusions: If the worst of their affairs have happy issues
answerable to their desires, it is the effect of their cunning and subtlety not
of Devotion. Varenna their Partisan, who was in credit with them for the
Reasons every man knows contributed more than any for their return into France;
it may be questioned whether the Virgin made use of such a minister for the
re-establishment of these Fathers, who was so corrupt, that though he loved
them well, could love them no otherwise than as Patrons of vice, or companions
in lewdness.

IX Privilege.
That they may without vanity attribute to themselves, and admit from others
hyperbolical praises.
LEt none suspect or fear that we have undertaken this work out of vanity, as
if we aimed at no other end but self-commendation; the Society is the work of
God alone and not of men, we celebrate this work. And has not he commanded us
often to praise his works, and highly ox^oll the operations of his hands? page
3.

Thus the Jesuits being a company of Angels and Apostles, do but praise God in
praiseing themselves, and are not subject to the vanity of other simple men:
You may hold them impeccable, as the Angels and Saints in Heaven, for, you see,
they are exempt from the most subtle and most spiritual sin, which destroyed
the Chief Order of Angels in Heaven, and might have kept Paul from ever coming
thither, had not God sent him the Messenger of Satan to buffet him, lest
through the multitude of Revelations he should have been exalted above measure,
which these new Apostles declare they have no need of, having attained a Purity
transcendent to St. Paul's.

This justifies the famous saying of F. Noijet in his Sermon in St. Lewis
Church, against the book of frequent Communion, where mentioning the great
Elogies given Xavier by Arnauld, he adds, This man would impute vanity to us,
as if we were capable thereof.

It Is the privilege of these Examples of humility above other men, that they
can without danger of spiritual pride reflect on their humility, and fear to
lose it should they once dare to boast that they have it; the Jesuits not only
see humility in their hearts, but with rare modesty assure all men, they are
not capable of pride, nor subject to vanity.

Those pious but simple persons who could not comprehend how the Jesuits acted
still, as they pretended, for the Glory of God, though interest and ambition,
Pride and Avarice set them a work, may be resolved their doubt; for they teach
us here, that the greatest Glory of the Society is the same thing with the
greatest Glory of God, that being the work of God alone, as they do but praise
God when they praise themselves, so they act for God when they act for
themselves, and love God in loving themselves: And that we can no more accus^
them with any unjust passion in their Actions of greatest profaneness, than we
can suspect them guilty of vanity on these extravagant expressions of pride and
vainglory.

It is the will of Jesus Christ, that the Society be c^vered with branches of
Palms, and crowne^ with Chaplets of flowers, in this Festival Triump^ for the
Glory of his Name, that it may be celebrated from Age to age by Secular Poems,
in memo^^ of the accomplishment of every age they have past. This is the reason
we er^ct this monument to b^ Glory, which shall endure longer than statues o^
Brass, and be more famous than the Royal Pyramids of Egypt. p. 2.

The end of this 5 th book entitled, The Society honored, is to collect the
modest honors of the Society, or rather the Glory due to our Jesus, pa. 583.

It may be doubted, whether the Son of God who was not pleased with the
Sacrifices of the Jews, though ordained by the Law, but seeks Worshippers in
spirit and in truth, can be delighted like a worldly Prince in these secular
days and profane feasts, which please the vanity of the weak spirits of men by
pomps and magnificence like those of the Heathens in their superstitious
solemnities by Machines, Obelisques, Guildings and Emblemes; And whether those
proud though empty preparations may be Acceptable to God, which appear
ridiculous Pastimes to Serious men.

That the Society has Reformed the Church, and altered the face of
Christianity, ruined the Devil, and Recalled Virtue.
It Is the Common voice of almost all Europe, and the general sentiment of men,
that the Society has demolished in Europe the fortresses of the Devil, drawn
the M^nsters of vice out of their holes and their dens, called home Virtue
from Exile, raised the Muses from their Graves, and re-established Learning in
the Schools, and the use of the Sacraments in the primitive vigor and
frequency, page 27.

Thus the false opinion of having reformed the World, has filled their spirit
with a real corruption of pride.

That the Jesuits are Mystical and Spiritual Physicians above all other
Ecclesiastics.
It Is for this the Society was formed on the day of St. Cosmus, and St. Damien,
who were Physicians, and that the science of Physic seems to have passed as by
Emanation into all the members of this Society, who like sons of Aesculapius
labor with equal care and good fortune to preserve the health, and cure the
maladies of souls. The whole Society being as a Sovereign medicine, or a shop
of spiritual and mystical Physic. Heroes. Societ. page 31.

If the Physic of a Christian consist in repentance, the Jesuit cannot be his
Physician, for it is no ingredient in the Medicines he gives. Had they written
themselves Physicians of the body, we had had more cause to believe them, from
their Bulls of permission to practice that Art, their Shops at Rome, at Lions
and elsewhere, furnished with Druggs from their Warehouses in the Indies, where
they buy for little* that they may vent them at dear rates, which gave them
good reason in one of their Emblemes, p. 464. to represent the Society by an
Apothecaries Shop furnished with all sorts of Druggs, especially Treacle.

We see, say they, that by their Precepts and care the coldest hatred is warmed
by the heat of Charity, and the Ardour of impurity cooled by the refreshment of
Chastity, the intemperance of the palate digested and purged by the Fasts they
ordain, the sharpness of choler tempered by the sweetness of moderation, hearts
contracted with Grief are dilated by peace of Conscience, the Remisness of
Negligence locked up by the severity of Discipline, the harshness of tempers
mollifyed into Gentility of manners, and the whole Army of Moral maladies
defeated by the contrary force of their Remedies.

The Morals of the Jesuits shortly to be published, will be such a proof of
the severity of Discipline as the Pharisees Phylacteries were of their strict
observance of the Law: But hear what they say further.

Those that enter into this Society are Sons of the Physicians, and exercise
the Art of Curing transmitted from Heaven by Cosmus and Damien, whom they
imitate in bounty and Goodness as well as in vigilance and care. Ibid.

When first the Society began to appear, the Pastors of Souls and other
Ecclesiastics, who had strangely neglected their own, and the peoples
salvation, suddenly looked about them, and as newly awakened from a deep sleep,
labored to be such in Virtue and Goodness as they ought to have been by their
Office and Dignity, p. 53.

We have often heard old men say, that wherever the Society was established,
immediat^ly all things put on a new face, Christianity flourished, purity of
Religion and Manners succeeded, where impiety, ignorance, and luxury had
reigned, nor could they refrain from tears of joy, that they had lived to see a
time, wherein decayed piety recovered strength, and Virtue was restored to her
throne which Vice had usurped. page 54.

It was the pleasure of God to cure by the Society that part of the Church
which ought to have preserved the rest in health, that by a happy change the
people might receive Benefit from them from whom they had before contracted
impurity and contagion. Ibid.

The Jesuits think they have re-established the spirit of Christianity in
primitive perfection, when they see their Churches full of Communicants, which
gains them reputation in the sight of men. But they that love truly the
interest of the Church, sigh to see so many crowd and throng Jesus Christ, but
so few touch him to the cure of their maladies, and reformation of their Lives,
so few that examine themselves before they approach those dreadful mysteries,
and so many that receive them to condemnation: But if the persons seduced do
miserably perish, how much more guilty are those negligent Guides, and
complaisant Directors, who fear not to cast the childrens Bread to Dogs, and
force in a manner the Dogs and the Swine to eat that which is holy?

The Great, though Doubtful fruits of their Sermons.
We have seen three thousand persons so moved by one exhortation that they went
all presently to Confession: We have seen inveterate ^atred defaced, peace
restored to a divided City, Luxury in Apparel banished from Towns, places of
public debauchery deserted, and Monast^ries filled, lib. 3. c. 2. The Scene
of these Actions was the Enchanted Island, or the Cities of Utopia.

Flanders can witness by the Experience of our Churches in Lent, what powerful
influence the pre^ching of Christ crucified has on the spirits of men,
^sp^cially when animated by a holily enfl^^ed e^^quence, and attended with
outward and visible helps, and Corporeal representations of the subject of the
discourse, which are the inventions and A^tifices proper to our Society,
whereby she kindles, inflames and maintains the piety and devotion of the
people. John Ramire the Jesuit, by one Sermon converted from their Lewdness to
an honest life 22 Courtesans at Valence, p. 335.

It Is true, there are many Converts in appearance, and from the teeth outward,
that is, that come to Confession, which satisfies these Fathers to cry them up
for Proselytes of Heaven. But permanent conversions are rare, those attended
with relapses into sin are frequent and ordinary.

I will give you an instance of the singular address of these Fathers, for
converting the most hardened sinners, being a story from the mouth of one of
them, in a conference had with the Nuns at the Visitation of St. Anthonyes
street in Paris:

There was, said he, a person of quality, who having lived very dissolutely at
Court, and in the Army, was dangerously sick, and would by no means hear of
going to Confession, it being so long since he had performed any duty in that
kind, that he could not remember he had ever done it. Those about him used
their best endeavors to persuade him to send for a Confessor, but in vain; the
multitude of his Crimes making him ashamed to declare them. But being willing
to receive the other Sacraments; a Jesuit was made choice of to administer to
him. The sick person had no sooner discerned him, but he cried out, he might
have saved his^pains in coming, for he was resolved not to confess. The Jesuit
promised him not to mention Confession, but believed him willing to exercise
Acts of Faith, Contrition and others necessary to prepare him for death; and
told him he came to direct him therein: The sick man consented, and after
instruction given in the other particulars, the Jesuit asked him whether he
would exchange his sins for his good works: Which the sick man willingly agreed
to; the Jesuit thereupon assured him, he would take upon him all his sins, and
from thenceforth esteem them his own, and transferr to the sick person the
merit of all his good works: This done, he pronounced his absolution, and
retired. But being gone to the Gate, he returned to tell the sick, he had
forgotten to ask him what those sins were wherewith he had charged himself, so
that he could not make confession of them as his sins, which he desired to do,
to prevent damnation: The sick man without any difficulty or shame recounted
those crimes which he believed not his own. The Jesuit presently brought him
the Eucharist, and the sick man soon after dyed, and at night appeared to the
Jesuit, to give him thanks for the gift of his merit, for which God had
received him to Glory, though he had deserved the torments of Hell; and to
assure him that his charity in charging himself with his sins, was so
acceptable with God, that he would not impute them to the Jesuit, but pardoned
him freely.

This Jesuit, in relating the story considered not, that nothing does so
quench the spirit of repentance in men of Religion, as to bear them in hand,
that the most hardened sinners may enter Paradise without being obliged to
repentance or confession of their sins with the humility necessary in actions
of that moment: The Examples are every where obvious of persons propense not to
fear any sin, which they think may be easily remitted. This induced the
ancient Fathers of the Church to believe and teach, that Deathbed repentance
is very dangerous; and though they refused not to absolve such as humbly and
earnestly desired reconciliation with God, yet it is true, that admitting their
repentance, they did not assure them of salvation. But the Jesuits are far
bolder, and more illuminated; they absolve sinners who will not vouchsafe to
confess their sins, or if they confess them, they do it historically by way of
relation, without any compunction or contrition for committing them. And lest
the validity of the Absolution should come into question, they are furnished
with revelations to confirm them. But he that has care of the health of his
Soul, will not rely on these broken reeds of pretended miracles, which serve
only to beget a false confidence in sinners. And the charity of these Fathers,
who charge themselves so freely with the most horrible crimes committed by
others, may assure us they have artifices to exempt themselves from repentance,
as they have devices to excuse others from it.

The great advantages of their Congregations in Christendom. The Distinction
between their Nobles and others: The happiness of Kings, Princes and Bishops
which are in their lists.
THe honor of the Son, and Reverence due to the Mother were neglected and laid
aside in most Provinces of Christendom. Who then presented Offerings in the
Temples of the Virgin? who gave her their hearts and affections, which she has
ever loved above all offerings in the world? When Gregory the 13th had
confirmed them, the same ardour of piety inflamed the Universe. Lib. 3. c. 7.

We mingle not Noblemen and persons of quality, with Tradesmen and Mechanics;
it being impossible, equally to procure the salvation of Souls without this
inequality in our Assemblies, pa. 361.

In the Church of Christ the rich and poor are mingled together, or rather in
Christ there remains no distinction of Rich men and poor, being all one body,
and one Spirit in him: But the Church of the Jesuits has another custom,
these Fathers separate, and treat them with very great difference; they flatter
the one, and domineer over the other, and deal equally with them in nothing but
this, that they endeavor to make their advantage equally of both.

They give extrordinary praises to Ferdinand the 2d, and Ferdinand the 3d,
because their names are Registered in their Congregations: Posterity, say they,
shall see in these Registers the piety of Ferdinand marked with those Letters
that compose his Name, engraven in characters drawn by the hand that holds the
Scepter of the Empire, whereof every one stands for an evidence of his
veneration and respect to his spiritual Soldiers of the Society of Jesus. To
this they add the magnificent Inscription in their Register, where they put
into the mouth of Ferdinand the 3d, the Expressions they thought fittest for
extolling their Order, by commending his Devotion. They are ravished at the
recital of the names of Sigismund the 3d, King of Poland, the late Cardinal
Infant, the late Duke of Savoy, the Mother of the Emperor Rud^lphus, and the
Wife of Charles the 9th of France, registered in their books.

It Is hard to determine, whether the brethren of the Society rejoice more for
being members of this body, whereof those August persons, the prime Agents and
Intelligents in the Spheres of Christendom are their fellowmembers; or those
Kings and Queens for being enrolled in their Registers: They esteem their other
titles, titles of Dignity, but this they reckon the title of their Happiness,
which gives them clearer right to the supreme dignity of being a Christian:
This is so true, that a Bishop publicly declared, he gloryed more in that he
was one of the Brethren of the Society, than in the title of Bishop, and
accounted it a greater Ornament than his Cross and his Mitre. Pa. 363.

These Fathers should have suppressed the Book of Father Bary, called Paradise
opened by the hundred Prayers and some others of Rinet and Posa, before they
had ^oasted their Devotion for the Virgin; the books being as full of
impertinencies and impious questions on that subject, as the practices of their
Worship are vain and ridiculous.

The good effects public and private of their Congregations.
All Christendom has received benefit from these fraternities, as having
suppressed the licentiousness of Vice, and brought to light examples of eminent
virtue; the Officers of Justice have declared in several towns, that the
boldness of offenders has been more restrained by these Societies than by fear
of punishment, and that after the introduction of those exercises of Religious
Devotion to the Virgin into Cities, they have found few criminals on whom to
execute the severity of the Laws, which upon accurate and exact observation
they have solemnly declared, and among other praises of these assemblies
asfirmed their establishment a public good. Ibid.

The Iesuitical Casuists pretend that they, and not the Congregations have
banished Sin from the World: But it is as credible of the one as the other; for
the truth is, neither have done it.

A man above seventy years old, yet more wise than aged, complained he had
lived only two years being those elapsed since his Name had been entered in the
Roll of our Congregation. Ibid.

The Duke de Popolo sick of a mortal distemper, having sent ^or one of our
Fathers told him, he died cheerfully, and full of hope, but that the confidence
he had, he owed entirely to the Congregation; and the same time commanded his
Son to give them his Name and his affection, prote^ting he could not leave him
a nobler Title, or Richer inheritance than his succession in the good opinion
of the Society: And what could have been bequeathed him by his Father of more
advantage than the favou^ of the Virgin, a sure pledge of Eternal Salvation.
Ibid.

It is impossible the Society should think on those multitudes of Souls saved
by these fraternities (which have preserved so many from burning in hell as
victims of Divine Vengeance) and not at the same time to find such satisfaction
and pleasure in so good a work, as serves for a sharp spur to quicken her in
her course, for propagating and encouraging those fraternities; that the saving
Standards of Jesus Christ and the Virgin, the Mother as well as the Son may be
set up in all parts of the Earth, and that they who justly fear the rigor of a
severe Judge may be invited by the amiable indulgence of the Virgin. Ibid.

You hear their Rodomantades, but the use they make of their Congregations is
to draw the people to them from their lawful pastors, to bring into contempt
the parochial mass, to make themselves masters of men's spirits and consciences,
and in a word, to serve their interest.

That the frequent use of Confession and Communion grown obsolete is
re-established wonderfully by the Society.
What an excellent privilege, and beyond all hope and expectation of mankind,
is it that God has established man in his place, not only to remit their
crimes who are guilty of treason against Heaven, but to restore them to their
first dignity and familiarity with him, and in a moment by one words speaking
to make them of guilty men favorites of God, of Enemies, Friends, and of
condemned Traitors, heirs of a Kingdom: That Criminals obtain pardon as often
as they offend, and receive remission by the absolution of man though the sins
they commit merit the ange^ of heaven, and just punishment from God, lib 3. c.
8.

It appears this Author was of the spirit of the Society, to believe, that
Confessors are sovereign masters of the interests of God, and have full power
to absolve the most enormous offen^ dors according to their fancy, without
obli^ging them to repentance, or requiring an^ fruits of it: But this is in
truth a horrible abuse of the power as well as the mercy of Jesus Christ, but
acted by them to procure themselves Glory from men, and to fill their Churches
with such Proselytes as being sure of their pardon, will never fear to sin.

When the Society was first established, people communicated but once a year,
and they who communicated twice or thrice, passed among some for persons of
rare sanctity, and among others for men who affected a Name of Devotion, and to
exalt themselves above other men by a vain show and ostentation of piety.
Others pretended that the reverence of the mysteries of that Sacrament kept
them from the Eucharist, and so covered their disgust and neglect thereof with
the Name of respect. Thus the frequent use of communion, that assured aid of
salvation seemed laid by on all sides, and (which is most heinous) principally
by them whose duty it was to have commended and pressed its continual use.
Ibid. This is meant of the Pastors of the Church.

It is in truth a new kind of piety, and new aid of salvation reserved for the
Society of the Jesuits not to exclude any from frequent approach to the
Eucharist, to admit thither the Goats with the Sheep, to mingle Sacrilege and
Impiety with Holy Actions, and to make no difference between the worthy and
unworthy, as if St. Paul and the Church understood not what they said, or were
deceived in their Doctrins, when they tell us, The wicked Communicate t^ their
damnation.

There was at Valentia a great stir kept against the Society for frequent
Communion. The Arch-Bish^p spoke in their favor, and having assembled many
Doctors, Ordered, that all the people should be at Liberty to Communicate every
day in the week. Ibid.

They are not only at Liberty to do it, but to be commended for it, though they
be never so wicked, provided they seriously repent and reform their lives.

The Society then finding the times so contrary and averse to virtue, and men's
manners universally corrupted, was animated the more to endeavor a
reformation. She hoped that the use of the Sacraments would weaken men's Vices,
and the vigor of the one become the ruin of the other. This engaged her from
the beginning to employ all her strength to inflame the whole earth with the
love of these saving aides; but with what wonderful success? a success great
beyond the hopes of the Society! What concourse from all parts? how the
assiduity of the Confessors was overcharged by the multitudes of them that
came to Confession? insomuch, that the continual throng laid siege, as it were,
to several Churches of the Society. Crimes are n^w expiated with much more
alacrity and ardou^ than they were heretofore committed. Nothing is more
ordinary now than monthly, yea, than weekly Confession; and many are no sooner
stained with sin, but they cleanse themselves by confessing their faults.

The Fathers in answer to the Novatians who reproached the Church for the
Authority she took to absolve great offenders, as encouraging impenitence, told
those Heretics, They had been in the right, if the Church had promised pardon
to sinners without engaging them first to repent: But had the practice of the
Church been conformable to the Jesuits, she had been to seek an Answer to the
Objection of the Novatians. And St. Augustine assures us, That if great sinners
could as easily wash off, as contract the guilt of their transgressions, or if
sighs, watchings and prayers were not necessary for regaining the fav^ur of
God, they would make it their sport to commit the gr^ssest enormities: but now
the time is come, since these complaisant Directors have taught men, that it is
as eas^e to expiate as to commit sin; that they scruple not to transgress when
it is so easy to gain remission.

Before the founding of the S^ciety, the Curates confessed not their
Parishoners but at Easter; And, if I may be allowed to declare it, some of them
were more willing to be eased of the labor, than to quiet men's consciences,
and took more care to dispatch than amend the Penitents. But now in diverse
Cities their Successors every Sunday and Holiday are almost oppressed with the
number of other Penitents, as well as men professing Religion in the Orders of
the Church. Ibid.

These Fathers by a lamentable abuse do visibly place the salvation of sinners
in the bare outward acts of Confession and Communion, which are but acts of
Sacrilege without sincere repentance and resolutions of amendment.

Friar Jerome a Roman tells us, that upon the founding of the Society, all Rome
was changed in a moment, and that then the Ancient Devotion of the Primitive
Church in frequenting Confession and the Eucharist began to revive. A Burgess
of Bolduc says the same of that Town, there is not a Town upon Earth where the
Society has been established which thinks not the same, and openly declares
it.

But since all this change is only superficial, and that the Conduct as well as
Morality of the Jesuits rather covers and daubes than roots out m^ns vices,
the praise they deserve is, that they have filled the world and their Churches
with an infinite number of hypocrites, which to their other crimes add
profanation of Sacraments, and a false and vain affectation of piety.

Before the times of the Society the people scarce knew the name of General
Confession, though nothing be more ordinary now, above ten thousand General
Confessions having been made in the Province of Iapan. So that it is credible
the whole Society established in thirty six Provinces purifies yearly above a
hundred thousand Consciences by these General Confessions: How immense is the
benefit? How worthy their pains, by this sole invention to draw yearly out of
the slavery of vice, and the Devil a hundred thousand Souls, and set them at
liberty in the state of the Children of God: should the Society reckon how many
she purifies otherwise yearly, how many thousands would be added to the number?
But were they to be numbered she would esteem them too few, and not answerable
to the greatness of her zeal for souls. Ibid. page 374.

It Is true, General Confessions were not so frequent heretofore, nor the
progress of Religion accounted to depend on them; but the Priests were employed
to prepare Penitents so well, and confirm them so solidly in the hatred of ^in,
and the love of obedience to the will of God, that they were not subject to
relapse into former miscarriages, and the disorders committed appeared like
monsters rarely seen; but since these Fathers by acquaintance with these
monsters have rendered them ordinary and familiar, that their Penitents have so
often need of General Confessions: It Is a clear evidence they confess not as
they ought, but spend their time, and bestow their pains to no purpose. I could
wish they would learn, that the end of Confession is to convert men at once,
that they commit not the same offenses again.

That there is no commerce between frequent C^mmunion and Vice.
To frequent the Sacraments is highly useful for all duties of Christianity:
And you shall hardly find them defective in any part of Christian
Righteousness, who often approach these fountains of virtue and salvation, or
any public licentiousness in a town where the frequent use of these mysteries
has been confirmed by a laudable custom: For what Commerce can there be
between the Author of holiness and corruption of manners? What place is
therefore the darkness of hell in those hearts that are irradiated by the
eternal light? Therefore the Society having proposed for the end of her
labors, to establish virtue, declare war against vice, and to serve the
public, it is no marvel she commends to our greatest veneration the frequent
use of the Eucharist, as the Arsenal of the Christian Militia, the Sovereign
Remedy against all maladies, and infallible comfort in the worst of miseries.

You have heard already, and shall hear further in its proper place how the
Jesuits to promote their interest, and carry on their carnal designs, admit
all persons without examination to the participation of the body of Jesus
Christ.

Artifices of Devotion invented by the Society to draw the people on the three
gaudy days, and the first days of the month to the Communion.
I shall produce here one only example of the Roman magnificence in the present
year 1640. for we have certain news that the brethren of our Congregation laid
out nine thousand Florins on the solemnity of these three days to draw the
minds of the people from profane licentiousness to the love of piety. They
(...) a great Machine in our Church of Farnese at Rome in honor of the Holy
Sacrament of the Eucharist, the height was one hundred and twenty spans, the
breadth was eighty; exquisitely embellished with curious Statues, Images,
Histories and Emblems to the ravishment of the Spectators, the Church shining
with extraordinary luster, by the light of four thousand Flambeaus. The service
was celebrated with so much pomp, and so delicious a consort of the Popes
music, that there wanted only the presence of the Pope, to make it the most
Majestic sight on Earth. Alphonso Gonsague Archbishop of Rhodes said Mass,
seventeen Cardinals, and almost all the Prelates of the Court of Rome were
present; five Cardinals more came in afterward, all the Ambassadors of Kings
and Princes, several Religious Orders, and all the Arch-Fryaries of Rome.
Lastly, during the three days such throngs of people flocked to the Communion,
that instead of profane Bacchanals they really kept a feast of Paradise.

Another Artifice of the Society for more frequent Communion was the invention
of Communicating the first day of the month, which pleased Pope Paul the fifth
so well, that he granted indulgencies thereupon, and by that bait of public
de^^tion drew ^ great concourse of people to the Holy Table.

The Society rejoicing at the success, took the boldness to invite Cardinals to
administer. (...) Sacr^ment, whereby the number of Communicants (...) greatly
augmented, the people being ravished to receive at the hands of so Illustrious
Pers^ns the pledge of their Salvation: Five Cardinals did it, and at Rome at
one day, and in one Church they comp^ed s^metimes sixteen thousand, sometimes
twenty, and sometimes thirty thousand Communicants; and from thence this pi^us
custom overspread the whole Earth. So that at Lisbon in the Church belonging
to the house of our Profession the Sacrament (...) administered to twenty five
th^usand in one day, (...) six or seven in Brussels, and as many at Antwerp in
one of those days, and bad our Churches been capable of more persons, the
number of Communicants would have been greater.

General Reflections on all the extracts out of the Image of the first age.
THe Jesuits never spoke truer of themselves than when they assumed the title
of The Pharisees of the New Law. And though they have been so vain as to
attribute to themselves undue praises, they have this once declared so great a
truth, that we may take them at their word. It Is the Spirit of Pharisaisme has
caused them to write those great Volumes stuffed only with their praises, and
to prove they are not as other men. Christ blamed the Pharisees of his time for
affecting the chief places in Assemblies, and to be honored as the principal
Doctors and Guides of the people; The Jesuits extol themselves above all
Orders of Religion, march still in the first rank, and call themselves masters
of the world.

The ancient Pharisees took upon them to dispense with the principal
Commandments of the Law, but are clearly outdone by their successors, the
Pharisees of our time, for what have they left undone, to show We are not
obliged to Love God nor to give alms? And they that find most subtleties to
dispense with good works, are in most esteem among them, and to this Banius
Tambenius, ^scobar and others owe their reputation.

Those holy men that went before them had no other secret for the conversion of
men, than to preach Christ crucified, and to take off the s^andal of the Cross
by the practice of humility* But the prudence of these new Apostles consists in
hiding from the people, they pretend to convert the folly of the Cross as may
be one day proved more clearly than they are awar^ of.

The first word of St. John Baptist, of Christ and his Apostles address to
Sinners, was, Repen^^ But the Jesuits willing to spare all that is
troublesome, and professing themselves complaisant, civil and gentle directors
have foun^ out a way to remit sins without obliging (...) a rude and harsh
Repentance, and to make Confession so easy and pleasant, that the most
criminal will not decline it, but run to it as willingly as they did to Sin, as
themselves assure us When Confessors believed it a matter of difficulty to
leave ill habits, and that we (...) strive to enter in at the strait gate of
Heaven they were not satisfied with words, without seeing the fruits of a solid
Repentance; so th^^ those who were inclined not to reform the^^ lives, nor to
make restitution of ill gotten good^ nor quit ill company, durst not present
themselves before the tribunal of the Church, whose severity they feared, which
made true penitence rare even in the primitive times; a thing not easily
performed, but difficult and toylsom. The same Fathers who taught us, That the
life of Grace was freely received by us in Baptism, instructed us also, That a
Soul dead in sin is not easily revived, and that when we have made our selves
slaves to the Devil* it is very hard to break his chains; when we have blinded
our selves in following our lusts, we cannot without miracle come out of
darkness, and return into the way of Jesus Christ. Lastly, St. Paul is bolder
than we durst have been, when to show how difficult it is for Sinners to return
to God after their fall, he uses these terms in the Epistle to the Hebrews,
Chap. 6. It is impossible for those who have been once enlightened, and tasted
the good word of God, and the gift of the Holy Ghost, and the power of the life
to come, if they fall away, to renew them again to repentance, seeing they
crucify the Son of God afresh. And Chapter 10. of the same Ep. v. 26. For if we
sin wilfully after we have received the knowledge of the Truth, there remains
no more sacrifice for sin, etc. The reason why the Apostle made use of those
vehement expressions, was his belief that he could not implant in Christians
too great an Opinion of the difficulty to repent after falling into sin. But
since it appears, that it is the great secret of the Jesuits policy, and the
design of their Casuists and Confessors to persuade men that there is nothing
easier than for the most hardened sinners to re-enter into Grace; I assure my
self, that these modern directors of Conscience who guide men by new lights,
never read those words of St. Paul, which condemn their practices, but they say
with their Father Adam, That this Apostle suffered himself to be transported by
the heat of his Nature into strange expressions: And if they durst use language
suitable to their practices, they would accuse all the ancient Fathers as too
hard and morose, and applaud themselves for enlarging and making plain the
ways of Heaven, which from Jesus Christ to their time continued narrow and
rugged; in a word, whereas heretofore it was a rare thing to see a sinner
Converted, you may now see thousands in their Churches. Where there needs not
such formality* so many tears, such ^ighs and groans, and so much humiliations
as in the Primitive Church. The danger is only that God changes not according
to their fancies, but is as just, and as severe as ever: But this matters not
with them whose design is to make good compositions with sinners, and ^ell the
blood of Jesus Christ cheap, that their market may be quicker, and yield large
returns of profit and advantage by the multitude of their customers. The Sinn^^
needs no more than tell his Confessor the story of his disorders, and he is
presently capable of the greatest favors of the Church, and cleared of his
sins without fear of an after clap.

When Bishops and Priests were not without difficulty induced to proceed to the
reconciliation of Penitents to God, for fear of binding themselves in those
sins, whereof they pretended to loose others, whom it may be, the Sovereign
Judge had not absolved, sinners though reconciled, continued in fear and
humiliation, having their sins ever before them, and after the practicing of
all sorts of good works, and submission to the rigor of Ecclesiastical
Discipline, they were still afraid they had not satisfied the Justice of God.
And that their sins were not so mortified, but that they might recover the
dominion of their hearts to their eternal destruction, and ceased not to charge
themselves with sins of ignorance and infirmity, with omissions and neglects.
But now as if the most heinous crimes were as inconsiderable as the lightest
faults, and as easily pardoned as the smallest miscarriages, as if the maladies
of the Soul were not difficult to cure, and as if God had for the future for
ever remitted the severity of his judgment against sinners from the time they
follow the advice of the Jesuits; the most wicked of men, the most dissolute
wretches are no sooner absolved by these complaisant directors, but their
Consciences are in peace for all their past sins, though they are resolved to
commit them again: These are the persons that make up these vast numbers which
fill the Churches of the Jesuits, and swell the list of their Confessions.
They are directors of all those Consciences which love not to hear any but
pleasing Doctrines, who pretend condescension to men's weaknesses and
infirmiti^s, and never employ the Knife and the Lance in the cure of their
wounds.

This makes all those who cannot endure sound doctrine, but have itching
desires to be flattered in their ways, to have recourse to these Prophets of
the last times, and having shut their ears against the truth, are by the just
judgment of God given up to be seduced by fables, which serve only for their
greater seducement and Depravation.

It may be said to the glory of the Society that they are Guides to an infinite
number of persons, and with this advantage, that whereas St. Paul says, That
not many wise men after the f^esh, not many mighty, not many Noble were called;
these good Fathers have in their Churches so many persons of greatest quality,
so many rich, so many wise men after the flesh, that they have no room for the
Common people, and ordinary men: And have made the ways of repentance so
smooth and easy, that the most tender and delicate sinners run thither with as
much ardour and facility as they could possibly have done to their sins and
disorders.

If you consider these Fathers as to worldly enjoyments, and weigh their
condition in the balance of humane opinion, they have cause to be entirely
satisfied with their Estate in the places where they reign, as having all the
Grandeur of the World prostrate at their feet; but if you view them by the
light of Faith, nothing will appear so miserable as these blind Guides, who
lead the blind, and together with them fall into the ditch, and abyss of
darkness. They have reason to fear, that God may require at their hands the
blood of an infinite number of Souls, who for want of repentance dye in their
sins, whom they abused by hasty absolution, and covered their faults instead of
curing them.

It Is lamentable to observe, how sinners are daily confessed by these Ghostly
Fathers, but never converted to newness of life, repenting every moment, but
never truly, drawing nigh to God with their lips, but denying him in their
hearts; becoming Proselytes to these new Phari^^es, and thereby more the
children of Hell than before. It Is true, they practice not these things alone,
but this augments rather than excuses their condemnation; as having drawn
others to follow their courses, being tempted to like Actions, in hopes of
equal success, and as many disciples as the Jesuits had gained by their easy
devotion; so that now there are Jesuits every where, and in all habits, and
though they claim the honor of being the first Authors of Moralls which have
quite overthrown those of the Church, there want not others who have imitated
them in deceiving the world.

I remember, that on a Holiday, in a Church in Flanders, I saw a vast multitude
of people thronging to Confession and the Sacrament: And soon after in
discourse with one of these Fathers, I told him I was much edified at the
Devotion of the people, and asked him whether it was always equal to what it
appeared on the last Holiday: The Father assured me I had seen only what was
usual and ordinary, that the people were very devout, and failed not to
frequent the Sacrament often. But Sir, said I, to complete my joy, give me
leave to ask you whether all these persons that communicate so often, do it
with that piety and holiness the Greatness of these mysteries requires, whether
they examine themselves seriously before they approach the Holy Table, for fear
of coming thither to condemnation, and eating there their eternal ruin: To
speak plainly, is it probable, that all those who I see communicate every day
in the week, do all lead an holy and innocent life, exempt from relapse into
mortal sins, after their repentance, and in a word, are so holy as they ought
to be who so often partake of those holy things?

I perceived I spoke to this good Father in a Language he was not accustomed to
hear; for being by this time sufficiently astonished, he told me I demanded too
much, and what I required was the highest perfection; that it was a rare thing
to see men who fell not into mortal sins; but that those Communicants took care
to confess without fail, as often as they fell:

What Sir, said I, those persons that fill your Churches are the same that
after dinner people Taverns and Tipling-houses, Bowling-greens and Theaters,
and other places of divertisement? Contrary to the Gospel, they serve two
Masters, in the Morning Christ, and the rest of the day the Devil; if so, their
Confession may in appearance bind the strong man of sin armed in their hearts,
but do not you know, that when the House of our Soul has been swept only by a
servile and ^ruitless Confession, and not filled after with sincere
compunction, and garni^hed with good works, that strong man armed whom they
fancyed bound and cast out, returns thither with seven other spirits more
wicked than himself, and the last state of that man is worse than the first?
The Good Father had not the patience to hear what I would have said, but
speaking out of the abundance of his heart, Sir, said he, must we not save all
the world? and if we cannot send sinners straight into Paradise, it is good to
send them at least into Purgatory. The frailty and weakness of men is so great
in these times, that to require great matters from them in duties of Religion,
is to make them quit all; therefore as often as they fall into sin, we must not
neglect to grant them absolution whenas they demand it, for as in their demand
there is an appearance of their fear of damnation, that fear with Confession,
are sufficient Grounds to give them absolution, nor can it be denied them,
according to the common opinion of the Casuists.

This Father could not have been more surprised at my Answer than I was at his
reply, Repenting in a manner that I had engaged with a person of Principles so
different from mine, that I foresaw it was impossible for us to agree; however
I resolved to make good my ground, and one affault more to bring him to reason.
Father, said I, I am amazed at your expressions; what agreement can there be
between your practice, and the Doctrine of the Fathers? They teach us, that to
persist in the Commission of sin, for which we pretend to have repented, is not
true repentance, but a mocking of God, that the Vicis^itude and Revolution of
sins, and Confessions succe^ding one another, is to turn and return in the
ways of the wicked, which certainly end in everlasting perdition.

I know, it is not strange, that men who sin naturaly, should be capable of
falling into all kinds of disorders; but it is insupportable, to see them from
whom ^inne^s ought to receive light and instruction, to serve for nothing but
to blind them the more, and to put them out of that just fear they ought to
have to approach Jesus Christ, without reforming their Lives. It was St.
Augustines direction, that he only should partake of the body and blood of the
Savior of the world, who is already a part of his body by the union of
Charity. St. Basil would have Communicants able to say with St. Paul, that it
is not they that live, but Christ that lives in them. St. Francis de Sales, in
this last Age advises none to a daily Communion, but such who not only never
relapse into mortal sins, but have no affection for the most Venial. But by
your practice, Father, these rules are exploded, for with you they are worthy
to be Communicants as often as they confess, and to receive the bread of life,
though their crimes live, and flourish in their hearts and their Actions. Thus
Confession alone is sufficient to make them pass for Devout, and a life better
regulated is an extraordinary sanctity, not proportioned to the frailty and
infirmities of persons of this Age.

The Father impatient to give me the hearing, could not refrain from
intterrupting me, to tell me, that they did no more than what Christ had
allowed in the Gospel, for in St. Matthew, when Peter asked Christ how often he
should forgive the sins of his Brother, the Savior of the World made answer,
Not seven times, but seventy times seven.

I was so moved at his producing so strange a proof, and vouching a Text so
improper to confirm the Maxim he maintained, that I gave him not leisure to
add any more, but told him: Have you read that passage in the Gospel? I doubt
not but you have, but your desire to make it subservient to your purposes, and
to apply it so as it may countenance your practices, has made you forget part
of it which renders it wholly useless for your designs. Permit me then to put
you in mind, that there are in that passage these very words, Lord, how often
shall my Brother sin against me, and I forgive him? Observe those words,
Against me, which show, that he treated only of particular offenses which our
Brethren may have given us, but not of Crimes they commit against God. And the
question is not touching the use of the Keys which Christ has committed to the
Pastors of the Church, but of that patience, that meekness and charity every
particular person ought to have toward them that offend him. The Priests ought
not to remit sins committed against God, but according to the Rules prescribed
by God in the Sacred Canons, nor have any power, according to the Fathers, to
unbind Lazarus, who is the type and figure of a Sinner, but after he has been
raised by Jesus Christ to new life: But as to offenses which concern us
particularly, Charity has no bounds, but an indispensable command to love even
our enemies, and what ill soever is done us we are obliged to overcome by
pardon and forgiveness; not seven times only, but as often as the offense is
reiterated: This is the meaning of the place, as all Commentators unanimously
agree in the explication, not one pretending that those words favor the
facility of some Confessors in pronouncing absolution to Sinners as often as
they please to demand it.

I thought sufficient had been said to convince and gain this good Father, but
was deceived, and saw by experience, that he had a Spirit that was
Reason-proof. And to be rid of me, he told me plainly, he little valued all the
proofs I could bring, and that he would proceed as he was accustomed; this
being a common practice, authorized by good Casuists, and should they attempt
to do otherwise, Repentance would become an intolerable yoke, Confession
forsaken, all the world forced away from the Altar, and Sinners despair; he
should have added, that it would ruin many Sacred Communities which had no
better means of subsistence than this easy absolution, and truly by the genius
and countenance of the Father, I discovered that this last was the most
prevalent argument with him, and therefore resolved to hold my peace; for it is
to no purpose to bring the most demonstrative evidences to undeceive a man
whose persuasions are grounded in reasons of interest, unless you first cure
the coverousness of his heart. We have no more to do upon these occasions, but
to sigh, and pray God that he would effect what to us is entirely impossible.

To return to the Jesuits, it must be confessed that they have been very
prudent in the choice of proper and successful means to compass their design of
drawing after them a great number of people; they easily perceived, that had
they exacted from Sinners the fruits of a solid repentance, entire self-denial,
reformation of life, serious mortification of Vice, they could not have easily
attained their ends, and that if they treated the Sinner that should come to
them, according to the Rules of the Church, their Churches should never have
been filled, nor their Confessors much employed: But judging very wisely, that
though they obliged not Sinners to put off the old man, they would be content
to put on the new, if they promised men Heaven for some petty works of no
weight or difficulty; there could be no Sinner so hardened who would not be
their proselyte on so good terms, and pay them to boot for the pains they
should take to send him to Hell: This is the reason that moved them to pitch on
these works of ostentation, and exhort all the people to communicate every day
in the week, and to authorize their practice, pretend it was approved by an
Archbishop of Valentia, in an Assembly of Doctors, and that he Ordained It
should be free for all the people to Communicate every day in the year, to see
the vanity of their pretense of being authorized by this Archbishop; Observe,
that it has been ever allowed for persons truly virtuous to Communicate every
day: But these are not the persons they understand in the Ordinance for being
few in number, they could not be expressed by the term of All the People: So
that All the People, who, the Jesuits say have permission to Communicate every
day in the week, are all kinds of persons, and the common sort of men who live
in such a manner, that they are not worthy to Communicate once in their age,
and never approach the Altar, but they abuse the facility of their Confessors,
and make themselves guilty of a new crime.

But let the Jesuits say what they please it cannot be denied, but the face of
affairs is the same it was before they appeared in the world, no less Simony
and Usury, Injustice and Iniquity, Impurity and Violence committed now than
before: Tradesmen cheat as they were wont, Judges take bribes, Soldiers
blaspheme and ^ob as much as ever; that which the Jesuits have done, is, that
men commit wickedness with ease, without fear or remorse, they make it a sport
upon the credit of these Fathers, affirming it easy to get pardon, and when
they have chosen one of them for their Confessor, they find him so apt to
condescend, so full of good words, and of so pleasing an h^mour, that, as
themselves say, Sinners expiate their crimes with as much cheerfulness and
ardency, as they committed them; and in a moment become Saints worthy to
receive the body of Christ as often as they please; but the mischief is, that
their sanctity having cost little, it is but short lived, and their passions
not mortified, presently produce the same disorders again: But these Fathers
care not though the multitudes of people about their Altars dishonor Christ in
pro^aning his body, provided they serve to promote the Glory of the Society.

We read in Scripture, that though the manners of the Jews were extremely
corrupt, they ceased not to offer to God abundance of Sacrifices, and were
persuaded to it by the Priests, who valued not the loss of men's souls if they
could but profit by the multitude of Oblations brought to the Temple: But these
profane Sacrifices instead of appeasing provoked the wrath of God, which makes
him complain in the first Chapter of Isaiah, He was weary of their Offerings,
and despised their Sacrifices, and that the bl^od of Bulls and of Goats c^uld
not expi^^e the sins in which they persisted, that the Oblations of the carnal
people were vain, that he could not away with their Cerem^nies and Festival
Days, that he hated their Assemblies, and would not hearken to their prayers
who had wickedness in their hearts.

If God thus used the Jews who were subject to the Law of Moses, what (...)
justice may we expect if we honor him only with our lips, and instead of a
real and cordial Conversion^ content our selves with an imaginary and
superficial. I know the Jews Sacrifices were but gross shadows of the Sacrifice
now in the Church; but if our hands and our hearts are no less defiled than the
Jews, we are so much more worthy condemnation, as the sanctity of our Sacrifice
is greater than theirs; for God respects not the Sacrifice only, but the person
that offers it; nor can we present him an Oblation so Holy that can appease his
anger, while he sees abominations in our hearts, and crimes in our hands, and
our souls unfit to be a sacrifice to him* he seeks Servants to worship him in
Spirit and in Truth, not such as say only Lord, Lord, but such as do the will
of his Heavenly Father.

I know there is nothing so Holy as the Sacraments, and that the Primitive
Christians derived all their strength and their comfort from the continual use
of the Eucharist; but we are not to think that we are therefore arrived to the
perfection of those Primitive Christians, because we imitate them in this
particular; but that there is nothing will sooner draw upon us the anger of
God, than to presume to feed on the bread of Angels, when we deserve not to
gather the crumbs. This makes it appear strange, that these Fathers fear not to
affirm, That they are seldom defective in any part of Christian Righteousness,
who approach to the Sacraments, the fountains of virtue and salvation, that you
cannot find any public licentiousness in a Town where the frequent use of
these mysteries has been confirmed by a laudable custom, because the Author
of Salvation can have no commerce with vice, nor the darkness of Hell find any
room in hearts so often irradiated by the E^ernal Light. It Is strange, I say,
that these Fathers who pretend to be the Masters of Theology speak so
ignorantly of the most Comm^n T^u hes of the Faith, and are so blind as to take
the Sacraments for virtues which cannot be abused. Is it possible that they
know not what the world is assured of, that there is an infinite number of
Priests, Friars and Persons of all sorts who are the more wicked the oftener
they Communicate, and serve themselves of that which is most Sacred in
Religion, to cloak their Abominations from the sight of the world? Can they be
ignorant of this, that the reception of Christ in the Eucharist, though he be
the true light does only increase the blindness of those wretches, and render
them more wicked and corrupt who presume to receive the fountain of purity
without repenting for their sins? And that the Devil ceases not to continue
master of their hearts who would seem to divide them between God and the Prince
of Darkness.

It may be admired, that they are so hot and intent upon the praise of their
Society in the Image of their first Age, as not to remember what they chaunt
every day of the Holy Communion in their Churches; Mors est malis, vita bonis,
vide paris sump^ionis qu^m sit dispar exitus. It Is true, Christ is Life, but in
the Eucharist he is not life to them who were not alive before, but a severe
judge of them who being dead in sin, presume to approach the Fountain of Life:
So that there is great cause to bewail that all the reformation made by the
Jesuits in the Church amounts only to the commission of an infinite number of
sacrilegious Communions, filling their Churches with innumerable multitudes of
persons who never part with their Confessors without absolution, what crimes
soever they are guilty of, and as soon as confessed, are held fit for the Altar.

I cannot forbear the relation of a story on this occasion, often told by a
Jesuit with very great delight: This good Father acknowledged he had been much
hindered from admitting to Communion, a person so Choleric and subject to
blaspheme, that he could not go from the place of Confession to the Altar
without falling into the same crimes, loosing in a moment all the fruit of his
Confession, and wholly indisposing himself to receive the Eucharist: The Father
according to the custom of the Society, being more solicitous to make this man
Communicate, than to cure him of so dangerous a malady, resolved to confess him
at the foot of the Altar, and to administer the Sacrament to him immediately
after absolution. This rare expedient he afterward mentioned as a most refined
invention and quintescence of spirituality which he had brought into practice
by the happiness of his conceit without a president.

How extravagant soever this conduct may be, it is certainly very proper for
persons who serve their interest, and despise that of Christ. The more corrupt
men are, the more they love to be flattered, and desire to be rid of that
trouble and fear that are the natural companions of crimes: And if they find
such directors of Conscience as will assure them they are in the way to eternal
beatitude, there is not a person amongst them so sensele^s as not to hold
himself indebted to so obliging Divinity, and to impart their temporal goods
unto them who are so liberal of those of God; and as the Casuists resolve, that
the Fathers are not bound in duty to give, but may sell these things to their
Devotes; so these cannot but make good payment for their gentleness, their
condescendence, their lies and their cheats. Nor can it be doubted, but that
the confessionals they multiply so carefully in their Temples are so many
little mines of Silver and Gold, for as they procure all conveniences for
their penitents, it cannot be supposed they forget themselves. And while others
who have not the excellent address of these Fathers take great pains by serious
examination to dispose penitents to a sincere repentance, and a newness of
life, these good Fathers are so dexterous and nimble, that they dispatch in a
short time the most detestable and inveterate sinners. The most corrupt
consciences which appear to others as an impenetrable abyss, never stop their
Carriere, who Can confess the Devil himself in less than a quarter of an (...),
says F. Grisiel.

If you examine their other practices of Devotion, you will find no less
disorder than in their administration of the Sacraments of Penance and the
Eucharist; for proof whereof you need only consider their Relations of the
pomps and shows they fill their Churches withal, they make it their Glory to
draw the people thither, by erecting machines which may render their industry
admirable, and surprise the eyes of spectators. But in the mean time neglect
their cures, and the Churches of other benefices they have usurped, though they
forget nothing to satisfy the most curious; their Altars are adorned with the
most exquisite picture and delicate sculptures, nothing appears but rich and
magnificent, and all animated by Consorts of Music that ravish the sense: So
that the house of Prayer and Penitence, is converted into a place of pleasure
and divertisement; and oftentimes they act their Tragedies and Comedies, and
pass several days in most profane manner, though it must be confessed they
forget not for all that to say Mass. The world knows how they profane the
Chapel of the College of Marmonsteir, which they had united to their College
at Paris. The Rector of the University was obliged to exhibit an information
against them upon his own view of the disorder, having found in one part of the
Chapel a Haberdashers shop, and the rest full of Hey for the horses of a
person of quality their Pensioner. Since that time I have seen men at work
there to dress up a Theater, and prepare Machines for a Ballad which we must
have learnt in the Chapel, or gone all day in search of the Dancing Master who
practiced there only, and was not permitted to come into their College for
fear of disturbing their repose and troubling their exercises.

I know not whether they find these means very proper to incline men to
prayer, and inspire them with compunction for their sins; But to me who have
not studied Divinity in their School, nothing appears so opposite to the Spirit
of Christ, and the instructions he left us for prayer. For our Divine Master in
the sixth of St. Matthew commands us when we would pray, to enter a private
place and shut to the door, that we may be separated from the world, and appear
only to God; which rule ought to be observed, as far as possibly it may in
public prayers, as we see many Religious Communities pray with the same sed^te
and composed tranquillity of mind in their Quires as they would in their private
Chambers and Oratories, as being together but one body and one spirit: They
chaunt so together that they make but one voice, and and hear not one another,
but when it is necessary to continue the Chaunt, and to render their prayers
more efficacious by joining with their brethren in supplication: Besides when
they Chaunt, all their words are intelligible, that their thoughts may be
employed and taken up in attending the sense, and filled with the affections of
David in the composure of the Psalms: Thus the Chartreus and other Orders of
Religion retaining their primitive purity and simplicity of spirit, have
nothing in their Churches to scatter and dissipate their thoughts and
meditations, nothing to ravish their eyes and their ears, and to draw away
their hearts from minding their devotions, to gaze on fine fights, and wander
in vanities. The like may be observed in such of our Cathedrals, wherein
according to the ancient simplicity, as there is nothing wanting that may be
necessary for the decent performance of the external worship of God, so we find
not there such numbers of superfluous Ornaments that serve only to amuse
grossie and carnal spirits and earthly dispositions.

Such simplicity and modesty please not the Jesuits, they must have something
to quicken the senses; and whereas Christ Commands us to offer our Prayers in
the most private retirements of our houses, and from the bottom of our hearts
to prevent the distractions of our straying and wanton senses; these Fathers
invite us to enter their Churches, to see and hear thing to ravish our eyes and
tickle our ears, but to empty our hearts of all affections of devotion, and
render us incapable to pray with Reverence and Attention.

In the mean time they glory in their shame, and triumph in that which ought to
be their confusion; they rejoice in these practices for which they should
mourn, and prove by experience that men are so wretched, that there is nothing
so ridiculous, nothing so contemptible but may serve to flatter the vanity of
their humors, and raise up in their fancies mountains of pride.

Had we leisure to examine that entire Volume composed by Alegambe, of the
names of their Authors, it would be a fresh instance of their vanity and pride.
Can any thing be more ridiculous than to amass an infinite number of names of
pitiful Books, and more pitiful Authors, to make the world believe their
Society is full of extraordinary men? What Glory was it for the company to have
produced those innumerable Casuists, who have corrupted all Christian Morality,
and turned topsie turvy the Maxims of the Gospel, as Sam^ies, Tambou^in,
Escobar, Castro Palao, Banny, Guimenius, etc? What glory to have produced
Divin^s who have extolled themselves above the Fathers, and their Authority, to
bring their own profane and ridiculous Novelties in Credit, as Molina, Poza,
Garasse, etc. have done.

Is it not a shame, that they have permitted those scosting Companions, those
ill-made Spirits of their Fathers, Binet, Monk, and Barry; to write Books so
entirely ridiculous?

Are they not struck with prodigious, and irrecoverable blindness, to boast of
those works they have composed against the sacred persons of Kings and of
Bishops, and to own those mischievous Books, which were published under feigned
names, and deserved censure as soon as they came forth, as those of Seribanius,
Smith, and Mariana?

Lastly, What reason have they to insert in the Catalogue of their Works those
books they have stolen from others, whereof their Father Abbot and others have
been often convicted? But though this be common among these good Fathers, and
every days practice, I will content my self at present with one example, by
which it will appear, they spare not their best friends; but are ever ready to
do them any injury which may afford them the least hope of Glory.

It Is notorious to the world, that in the process they maintained against the
University of Paris, M. De Monthelon, whose name is famcus in the Parliament of
Paris, defended their Cause against M. De la Martiliere; and that this later
having published his Argument in Print, M. De Monthelon published his also.
There Is no man but thinks it the misfortune, so good an Advocate to have
undertaken so bad a Cause; but the misfortune was greater to have Clients so
ingrate as the Jesuits proved to him. For is it not strange, these Fathers
should envy their Advocate the glory of having defended them, and attribute the
Argument he published, to their F. Cotton? and should have the boldness to do
it in the lifetime of M. de Monthelon, their Advocates Nephew, who can, when
he pleases, convince them of falsehood, by producing the Original of the Printed
Argument, all of his deceased Unkles handwriting: That I may not be thought to
impose on these Fathers, hear the very words of Alegambe the Jesuit, in his
Bibliotheque of the Writers of their Society, page 379. col. 2. Where speaking
of F. Cotton, he says, Edidit Apologiam pro Societate contra Martellerum sub
nomine Montolo^ii. He published an Apology for the Society, against Martellier,
under the name of Monthelon: Certainly the Pharisees of the Old Law never did
the like, nor were guilty of a vanity so malignant and Ridiculous.

Artifices and Violences of the Jesuits of Almaign to take from Religious
Orders several considerable Abbyes and Priories.
Stories on this subject taken out of the Memorial of F. Paul William, Vicar
General of the Order of Cluny:
Presented to the FRENCH Council in 1654. Against the Rector of the three
Colleges of Jesuits at Selestat, En^isheim, and Fribourg in Brisgau. OF The
Three Priories in Alsatia, usurped by the Jesuits from the Order of St.
Benedict. And First, Of the Priory of St. Valentine of Ruffach, taken away
violently by virtue of Bulls against Bulls.
THe three Priories Conventuals of St. Valentine, St. James, and St. Morand,
are of ancient foundation, between five and six hundred years standing,
belonging to the Order of St. Benedict, and holding of France, though all three
situate in Alsatia, and in the Diocese of Basil. The first stands in the Town
of Ruffach, parcel of the temporalties of the Bishop of Strasbourg: the second
in the Village of Veldbach, and the third near the town of Altkirk in the
Country, reunited to France by the Treaty of the peace of Allemaigne. The
first depends on the Abbey of Chesy, and the two last on that of Cluny, the full
right of collating being in the Abbots, and preserved without interruption, and
the Prioryes always possessed by Benedictines of the Nation of France.

The Priory of St. Valentine was founded about the eleventh Century, by two
Monks of the Abbey of Chesy, in the Diocese of Soissons, assisted by the
Offerings and Liberalities of the people, upon the occasion of the Great
Miracles wrought by the Martyr Bishop of Soissons, when those Monks in their
return from Pilgrimage to Rome arrived at Ruffach, enriched with his Relics
by hte Gift of the Abbot of St. Potentience of the same Order in the City of
Rome, so that in a short time they built that Priory which continued always in
the possession of the Monks and Abbot of Chesy, though the Jesuits have not
omitted any artifice from the beginning of their institution, to make
themselves masters thereof, contrary to the Bulls of the Popes, Lucius and
Alexander 3d, who excommunicated all those that should attempt any thing
concerning the said Priory, in prejudice to the rights of the said Abbot and
Monks: For after the year 1578. they procured and obtained from time to time
Bulls upon Bulls, but so void and null they durst not produce them: And in
1618. they huddled up all the nullities and obreptions of the precedent Bulls
into one, suggested by them to have been obtained for the benefit of the
College of Selestat* founded some 3024. years before, wher^in* they set forth
contrary to the truth that it was a simple Priory without a Convent, and
aliened long since from the said Order with the usual formalities, and consent
of all parties interessed. In pursuance of this Bull, these Fathers having by
strange precipitation and extraordinary haste outed the Prior Nicolas Verdot
Monk of Chesy, with unheard of vexations possessed themselves timely of the
said Priory in 1618. without any form of Justice, and* 18 years before the time
prescribed by the pretended Bull, that is, before it became void by the death
or cession of the said Prior, who was Canonically possessed of it ever since
1610. and never juridically deprived thereof.

Letters gained by surprise from the King, and ^ Mandamus from the Bishop of
Strasbourg: The dependence of the three Priories.
This violent intru^ion, notwithstanding the Oppositions, complaints,
Protestations and pursuits of the said Prior, with the interposition of the
Authority of the Crown of France, endured till God himself brought the remedy
by a change of the State in 1634. when the Jesuits upon the arrival of the
French Armies having quitted the Priory, the said Prior was re-established by
his Majesty's Authority, and dyed in peaceable possession thereof in 1636.
whereupon James Boescot of the Order of St. Dennis, succe^ded him, and
possessed it till 1644. though the Jesuits in 1638. had obtained Letters
Patents from the said King, in Confirmation of their right if any they had,
which they got by surprise, upon false suggestions that the said Priory ever
since 1578. had been Canonically united to the College of Selestat, which had
not been founded before 1615, and that the said Verdot of Chesy, whom death had
deprived of power to defend his Cause, had been an usurper, Intruder, and
illegally possessed of the said Priory, as if he had been a Lutheran, seized of
it by main force.

But the Letters Patents were of no use to the Jesuits; for Boescot seeing
that the continuance of the War in Germany, made the place not habitable, in
the year 1644 resigned the said Priory into the hands of the Abbot of Chesy,
who bestowed it on Paul William, a Friar of the strict Observance of the
Congregation on of S. Vanne, who by the Kings Order took possession thereof,
and peaceably enjoyed it with those of his Order till the 2d, of June, 1651. on
which day, in pursuance of a Mandamus issued from Archduke Leopold, Bishop and
Lord of Strasbourg, under pretense of executing some Articles of the Treaty of
peace, but really in breach thereof, the Archdukes Officers re-established
there some Jesuits strangers, and by force and violence outed the said Prior
and his Friars of the reformed Order of St. Francis, notwithstanding all their
oppositions, Appeals and Protestations of force, which the said Officers
refused to enter of Record among the Acts of their Courts, though it was
afterward granted them upon renewing their suit at Brisac.

Now these three Priories depending as to their spiritualty and right of
Collation upon the Abbyes of Chesy and Cluny have ever been subject and
answerable for their temporaltyes to the Archdukes Chamber of Justice of
Ensi^heim, belonging to the house of Austria, though this of St. Valentine be
situate in the Territories of the Bishop of Strasbourg; and that by the Treaty
of Munster, in 1648. all the rights of the House of Austria, in the higher and
lower Alsatia were granted in Sovereignty to the Crown of France, and
consequently the said Priory being at present under the Jurisdiction of the
most Christian King, and his Justice, to whom alone belongs the cognizance
thereof, and the maintenance of the said Prior in his possession, it follows
that the intrusion of the said Jesuits strangers into the place of the said
Prior, outed without cause or lawful Authority in 1651. is an unjust attempt
against the tenor of the said Treaty of peace.

Nor is the Kings interest less engaged for keeping the two other Priories of
St. James, and St. Morand, which the Jesuits would have taken away from the
Order of Cluny, and consequently from France, to alien them to perpet^ity, and
unite them to the Colleges of strangers, to the great prejudice of his
Majesty's Subjects, and the order of St. Benedict.

False suggestions to pope Gregory XIII. to obtain a Bull of Union of the said
Priory: False Charge of Crimes on the Prior.
That it may the better appear, what artific^s the said Fathers make use of,
for want of right, to usurp the said Priories; observe that in 1578. John
Sancey being Prior of that of St. Valentin, they obtained from Popoe Gregory
xiii. by the procurement and Authority of John Bishop of Strasbourg, a Bull of
Union of the said Priory, for founding a College in the Town of Molsheim, and
that they should enjoy it upon the first vacancy; upon the false suggestion
that it was a Priory only without a Convent, without declaring that it depended
on France, and the Abbey of Chesy, without an information Super commodo and
incommodo, of the convenience and inconvenience, which according to Custom
ought regularly to have been first exhibited, without the consent of the Prior
or his Convent, the Abbot of Chesy, the Bishop of the Diocese, or of the King,
though all interessed parties.

These Jesuits being otherwise sufficiently founded at Molsh^im, not knowing
how to betake themselves to execute their Bull, so full of nullities, and void
Clauses, left it dormant without the least mention 31 years, in which time two
vacancies incurred, by the decease of Sancey in 1589. and of Adrian Verd^t his
Successor in 1598. which they let pass without stirring at all, or giving the
least notice or hint of their pretensions. So that the said Bullby this means
lay superannuate and useless.

At last in 1609. they pitched on an expedient very disagreeable to the Charity
of Christians, which was, to charge with Crimes and infamous Calumnies Nicholas
Terrastre, Successor to Adrian, that they might d^prive him of his Benefice,
and make use of this third vacancy for Entry. They managed this business so
dex^erously, that by false reports spread against Terrastre, the Matter was
brought to that pass as to oblige the Officers of the Archdukes Chamber of
Ens^sheim, to write about it, not to the Bishop of Strasbourg, nor the
Diocesan, but to the Abbot of Chesy as the lawful Collator, praying him to
call back Terrastre, and provide another of his Monks to succeed in the Priory,
for prevention of scandal: To give more credit to the Letter, they persuaded
Nicholas Verdot one of the Monks of the said Abbey, then resident in the Priory,
to carry it, who inflamed with Ambition to succeed Terrastre, conveyed the
Accusation against his Superior, who without other information was recalled,
and Verd^t sent back Prior in his place: This serves to clear what we affirmed
before, that this Priory is Conventual, and that neither the Bishop of
Strasbourg, nor his Officers had ever Authority over it, or took cognizance of
any cause that concerned it, But that the Abbot has the Jurisdiction in the
Spiritualty, and right of Collation, and disposing of the Friars* as the
Chamber of Ensisheim has in the Temporalties.

Other Calumnies of the Jesuits. A feigned Seminary, false suggestions to Pope
Paul the fifth, their Artifices, Avarice and Violences.
But providence permitted not their designs to have the desired success, for
Verdot succeeding in the said Priory of St. Valentine filled the vacancy; but
could not escape drinking deep in the bitter cup of their calumnies, more black
and infamous than those he carried against his Superior, whose innocence being
at last cleared and acknowledged, he was honored with the dignity of Prior in
the same Abbey on which the Priory depends, where he died in peace eighty three
years old: As for Verd^t he was hampered by the Jesuits as you shall hear
hereafter.

The Fathers of Molsheim, having in vain solicited the Prior to a Cession with
offers of a considerable Pension, persuaded Archduke Leopold as Bishop of
S^rasbourg, to demand the said Priory from the Pope, upon pretense he would
bestow it ^or endowment of a Seminary, (which was but imaginary) in the City of
Strasbourg for reducing the Heretics there to the Catholic Faith, which was
granted accordingly on this false suggestion, together with this also, that the
Bull of union for the College of Molsheim was still in force, for that there
had happened no overture for the execution thereof, Neither Cession nor
decease, notwithstanding the three vacancies aforesaid, and that the Rector of
the said College consented to the dis^nion for so pious a work as the erecting
of a Seminary. Thus was Pope Paul the fifth surprised, who thought the said
Rector the only party concerned.

This Bull was not more null and abusive than the execution wrongful and
injurious, for the Jesuits, concealing from the Archduke their principal
design to get the said Priory out of the hands of the Prior, to be applied to
another College of theirs newly erected in a Pri^ry of the same Order, called
St. Faithes of ten thousand Livers rent in the Town of Selestat, and besieging
him daily with constant importunities persuaded him at last to molest poor
Verdot as a criminal. A French man by birth, and consequently a stranger in
that Country, to force him to resign and quit the said Priory for a Pension,
with threats, if he disputed it, to take it absolutely from him without any
allowance to be made him: But Verdot unwilling to be a Traitor to his Abbot,
and his Country by quitting his right notwithstanding the tempest raised
against him by the Jesuits to serve their designs by a multitude of crimes,
whereof they accused him, resolved to prevent shipwreck by a prudent retreat,
in hopes that time might produce a calm.

Their Execu^ing a Sentence never given, informing of Crimes invented by
themselves; procuring a gift to Archduke Leopold of what belonged not to him.
A new Bull.
But the Archduke took the advantage by this occasion to seize the Priory
without any process upon pretense of bestowing it on the feigned Seminary, and
after endeavored to obtain a sentence by the Authority of the Nun^io of
Lucerne against the said Verdot; but the Nuncio having caused an information to
be drawn up against Verdot for those crimes invented by the Jesuits, could not
find any ground for sentence of condemnation against him; so that he continued
still titulary Prior, though outed unjustly.

His Adversaries afterward acknowledged him the Legal Prior (and not an
usurper as the Jesuits had injuriously calumniated in the let^ers-patents
surreptitiously obtained in 1638.) the Archduke ordering them to pay him an
annual pension of one hundred and sixty Florins, which amount to about three
hundred Levres, though he refused to accept it as a thing that might be
prejudicial to his right, and involve him also in the guilt of Simony.

The Jesuits se^ing the affair pretty well disposed in order to the attaining
of their design by the retreat of Verdot, threw off the vizard of their former
pretenses, and plainly discovering themselves to the Archduke persuaded him to
apply the said Priory to their College of Selestat, for its better endowment,
as if he had been absolute Master thereof; and Letters Patent were past to
that effect 27 of Aug. 1616. without any mention made of the Prior, or the said
Seminary which was merely imaginary, and never had a being but in the projects
of the I^sui^es, who knowing the nullity of this donation made against Law, and
the right of several persons, endeavored to cov^r and supply its defects, and
to make sure their title by a new Bull in 1618, setting forth in their p^tition
on to the Pope, that the Rector of their Chymerical Seminary freely yielded his
consent to this donation or endowment, whereupon they obtained the Bull under
the conditions and refervation following; Dummodo tempore datae praesentium non
sit in (...) ali^ni jus spe^i^li^er quaesitum: i. e. Provided that at the time
of the date of these presents, no person have any right thereto especially
purchased, as Verdot had ever since 1610; and that only with this reservation
annexed, s^ tunc, vel cum primum (...) per cessum vel per d^c^ssum, i. e. in
case it be then vacant, or as soon as the same shall be void by Cession or by
decease, without any mention of the pretended donation from the Archduke.

And though this Bull was absolutely void by reason of the false suggestions on
which it was obtained yet by color hereof the Jesuits hastily took possession
of the said Priory without any formality of law, eighteen years before the
vacancy incurred by the death of Verdot in 1636. These are the artifices, such
are the titles the Jesuits make use of to rob France, the Order of St.
Benedict, and the Abbey of Ch^s^y of the Priory of St. Valentin: But it is no
wonder the Jesuits have surprised the Holy See by these tricks, which are
ordinary with them, since they have endeavored after that to circumvent the
Emperor in a business of like nature, but far greater importance, as will
appear by the story.

A notable fiction and imposture of the Jesuits, to take from the Order of the
Cisteaux Monks, the Abbey called Aula Regia.
During the last wars of Germany about 1644. the Jesuits of the College of
Prague remonstrated to his Imperial Majesty, that they wanted a house of
Recreation to refresh their spirits in their vacations from public
employments; and that there was a little Abbey called Aula Regia belonging to
the Order of the Cisteaux about a league from the City very convenient for that
purpose, possessed by six Monks only, and they very ill livers, dissolute, and
scandalous, neglecting Divine Service, and minding nothing but their
divertisement in hunting, and other pastimes: Whereupon the Emperor was so far
persuaded, that at last he deputed a Commissary to put them into possession of
the said Abbey without requiring any further information. But the Commissary
being arrived upon the place was not a little astonished to find there a good
Abbot with threescore and one professed Monks, and thirteen Novices newly
initiated and entered in the Abbey, living regularly and constant at Divine
Service, at which he was present, as also at the Common Table of their
Refectory, though the two Jesuits sen with him to take the possession would
have persuaded him, that they were but Country men in Monks habit* and
straggling persons whom the Abbot had sent for, after he had an inkling of what
should happen.

But the Abbot having justified the contrary by Authentic Acts of all their
professions, the Commissary brought him to the Emperor, who upon his report
sent back this worthy Abbot with honor into his Abbey, whence the two Jesuits
prudently retained there to attend the resolution of the Emperor were
dismissed with shame and confusion.

Of the Priory of St. James of Veldbach, whereof the Jesuits became
under-farmers to make themselves Masters.
The Priory of St. James founded in 1144. at the Village of Veldbach by
Frederick Count Fer^ette for the Order of St. Benedict, under the institution
of the Congregation of Cluny which ^lourished then, has been always possessed
without interruption, and now is possessed by the reformed Friars of the said
Order, the collation and provision reserved by express terms to the
Abbot-General of the Order of Cluny: The last Prior John Nie^lin deceased in
1637. succeeded in 1602. Claudius Dorez* Bishop of Lauzane, who had been
possessed of the said Priory ever since 1567. But Nicolin by dispensation in
that behalf kept his residence in another Priory he had in Burg^gue, having
Leased that of St. James to the Abbot, and Convent of Lucell^ of the Order of
the Cisteaux, near the said Priory of St. James, for the term of his life from
1628. on the same conditions he had granted it them for years in 1621.
particularly that they should maintain the Friars to celebrate Divine Service
according to the obligation of the foundation and their profession, and should
pay yearly to the said Prior six hundred Florins, and several other
reservations specified in an instrument apart from the Grant; Whereupon the
Records and Evidences of the Priory, the Church Ornaments, Plate, and other
movables of the house were consigned by inventory into the hands of the said
Abbot and Convent who acquitted themselves of their Charge with great
satisfaction to all, and performed their Conditions to the edifying of the
Church. The Jesuits were established at Ensisheim fifteen or sixteen years
since by Archduke Leopold, who had assigned them for their foundation three
thousand Florins Annual Rent to be paid out of the Receipt of his Archiducal
Chamber, over and above the Salaries of the ancient regents secular, upon
condition that they should maintain in their College twenty two Jesuits; but
they not content with this allowance, though more than sufficient, bethink
themselves of an expedient to better their condition, but fatal to the Order of
St. Benedict, and such as gave occasion to say of them what St. Paul said of
himself, though in a different sense, I am made all things to all men, that I
might gain the more; so they thrust themselves into all sorts of affairs,
intermeddle and undertake all manner of businesses, and act any part attended
with profit. Who would have believed that these Fathers would have reduced
themselves to the quality of under-farmers to get footing in Monasteries, and
render themselves Masters thereof? Yet this was the practice of F. Anthony
Weinhard Rector of the said College of Ensisheim since 1628; this was the
course he took to rob the Order of Cluny of the said Priory of St. James, and
some others of the same Order situate thereabouts, though it be a thing so
contrary to the statutes of their Society, that it would appear a fable; but
that the instrument under the signature of the Rector, the seal of the
College, and confirmation of the Archduke put it out of question.

This good Steward of the Society knowing that the Priory of St. James was set
at a low rate, being really worth above three thousand Florins, by the
Authority of Archduke Leopold forced the said Abbot, and Convent of Lucelle
without the knowledge of the absent Prior to assig^ and make over the said
Lease to him as Rector of the College of the Jesuits, which was accordingly
done with the same clauses and condi^ions that they enjoyed it; not for the
better Celebration of Divine Service, which is no part of their profession; nor
for adorning the Church, or maintaining the house in repair, for they have left
both to decay and come to ruin; but on design to make themselves Masters of
the said Priory, and insensibly to deface all memory thereof as appears by
their proceedings; for as soon as the Jesuits had go^ footing there, and
constrained the poor Prior (by ways so strange, that I dare not express them)
to consent to the assignment after three years contest, the Rector to prevent a
Revocation of this extorted consent obtained the confirmation of the Archduke
upon a fraudulent request, setting forth quite contrary to the Truth, that the
confirmation was desired for the Priors security, and to take away all umbrage
and apprehension he might have of damage or inconvenience to ensue upon the
assignment to the prejudice of the Prior.

They expel the Friars thence, pursue the Union at Rome of that and several
other Benefices under the Name of the Archduke whom they interessed therein.
Their subtle^ies and violences.
Having fastened a hook in the jaws of the Prior, that he could not hinder them
from enjoying the benefit of the assignment, the Rector turns out all the
Friars of the Priory, the Prior not daring to resist or contradict him; so that
the Priory stood abandoned, and the Divine Service suppressed, as generally it is
in all the Benefices wherein the Jesuits are installed.

Pursuant to this they wrought the Archduke so fit for their designs, that he
was persuaded for coloring their usurpation to write to Rome to obtain an
Union for them, not only of the Priory of St. James, but of the Abbey of
Val-Dieu, the Priories of Froid^fontaine and St. Nicolas of the same Order, and
the Commandery of St. Anthony of Isenheim without the consent or knowledge of
the parties concerned, the Titulars or Collators of the said Benefices, and
without showing the estate or nature thereof, which they ought to have done
before the passing of the Grant: In the mean time they entertain the good Prior
Nic^lin, with Letters of complement and counterfeit amity which may be
produced. The better to induce the Archduke to interpose and prosecute the
business in their behalf, they propose an agreement somewhat extraordinary,
That every of the said five Benefices being respectively worth between two and
three thousand Florins should yield the Archduke five hundred Florins apiece,
in deduction of so much of the three thousand Florins assigned them for their
foundation. This was easily agreed to by the Archduke (though he had no power
to do it) and decreed they should enjoy them in Commendam during the dependence
of the matter of the Union with charge to satisfy the obligations of the
foundations, which was impossible for them by reason of the inconsistence and
repugnancy of their institution and Rules with those of the foundations: By
this means the Divine Se^vice and communities of five good Monasteries were
suppr^ssed ^o ^ound a College almost useless, as being environed on all sides
with other Colleges more considerable, at Potentrut, Frib^urg, Selestat,
M^lsheim and Haguen^u; so that they have in the said College but forty or
fifty Scholars in six Classes under three Regents.

But this design was not approved of by the Holy See, which refused the union,
as appears by another letter of the Archduke of Insp^uch, written to Rome
December. 9. 1651. on the same subject, and to as little purpose as the former;
nevertheless these good sub-farmers, who fancied that the Archdukes Authority
would never fail them, and that the Scripture meant them, where it is said to
the Jesuits, Every place you set your foot on shall be ^o^rs, disposed of the
Priory as their own.

In the mean time the Abbot of Cluny advertised of the death of Nicolin,
bestowed the Pri^ry of St. James on a ^ryar called Guill^t, who having taken
possession by Attorney; d^signed to go in person to establish good Orders
there, but both he and they who assisted in taking the possession were so
frighted by the threats of the Jesuits, and all the Peasants of the village so
deeply fined by the Sir Derlach at their instigation for having suffered an
entry to be made, that the Prior menaced with imprisonment durst not go
further, but returned into France; So the Jesuits continued as farmers to
usurp the mean profits, in hopes the Archduke recovering his Estates by a
treaty of peace, would maintain them by absolute Authority. But F. William
established by the Prince of Conty, Vl^ar General of the Order of Cluny in
Almaigne, being provided of the said Priory 15 July, 1651. by the single device
of Guillott, and authorized by the Kings Letters addressed to the Governor of
the Country, went upon the place, took possession thereof according to
Custom, the 7 of September the same year, and established there a community of
Reformed Friars, having found the Priory abandoned, and almost all ruined,
without a Curate, without Pr^est, without Friar, as it had continued ever since
the usurpation of the Jesuits, though the Church thereof was Parochial; All
which he caused to be presented by Information at Law:

An Abbey of St. Benedict coveted, and almost taken away by the Jesuits.
This Artifice of F. Weinhard has no small relation and resemblance to another
feat which one of his Brethren (whose name for some reasons shall be concealed)
made use soon after against a good Abbot of the Order of St. Benedict, in
Alm^igne, after the death of the Emperor Ferdinand the 2d. This Father went to
the new Emperor, and informed him of a design he had to write the Life of the
deceased Emperor Ferdinand the 2d his Father; but it was his desire to compose
a piece worthy the subject, and for that purpose to retire into some pleasant
place, where he might have good Air and refreshment, and named a fair Abbey of
the Order of St. Benedict, excellently seated, as a place fit for his designs.
Which the Emperor approving of, gave him Letters of recommendation to the
Abbot, who made him all the welcome and good entertainment imaginable while he
sojourned there. The Jesuit was so taken with the pleasantness of the place,
that he was enamoured of it, and resolved to beg it of the Emperor: To
compass this design, he made it his business, not only to watch narrowly, and
accurately observe but amplify the smallest defects and imperfections of the
Friars, and having finished his double work, took his leave with all the marks
of greatest satisfaction from the Abbot and Friars, who believed their Guest
would serve them for the future as a powerful Advocate with the Emperor upon
occasion: The Jesuit Arrived at Court, and having presented his Majesty the
Book he had composed of the life of Ferdinand the 2d, told him with
unparalled ingratitude, that he had been much deceived in the choice he had
made of the place to write in, for whereas he thought it a House of Religion,
he found it a House of scandal and debauchery, and had seen examples of a most
dissolute life amongst men professing Religion, but having nothing of it but
the habit. That his Majesty was obliged in Conscience to remedy it speedily.
The good Emperor answering, that disorders must be reformed: The Jesuit
replied, that these disorders were arrived at such excess, that he saw no other
remedy but a total expulsion of those debauched Monks; and that if his Majesty
pleased to give the Society the management of it, such good Order should be
taken that the Change would quickly appear. The Emperor taking this for a fit
means to grati^ie and reward the work of this Author, granted his request: And
it was resolved in Council that all those Monks and their Abbot should avoid
the place within eight days, and leave it to the Jesuits.

Another Abbot of the Order who by good Fortune was by the Council immediately
dispatched an express to the poor Abbot, to advertise him of the Resolution
taken against him, The affair being communicated in the Chapter (as usual) it
was concluded that the Abbot accompanied with one of the ablest of his Monks
should go to Court, to seek a remedy for this misfortune, and to prevent their
total ruin. When they presented themselves to the Emperor, they found him so
prepossessed, that he presently rejected them, telling them his word was
engaged, and he could not revoke it: The Abbot bethought himself of this
Expedient; he besought his Majesty to be graciously pleased, that he might at
least defend his Cause by a public dispute; which was granted him, and the
dispute continued three days successively. The Jesuit, who maintained the
part of the Society, and flattered the Emperor by attributing to him a power
he had not, to dispose at his pleasure of the Benefices of Ancient Orders, and
change their Foundations, thinking he had born away the Bell the two first
days, grown insolent upon his pretended victory, the third day insulted over
the Monk who accompanied the Abbot, slighting him as a Cipher, and one that
came thither only to fill up a room, or make up a number: The young Monk more
able, as well as more modest than the Jesuit, having on his Knees desired the
Abbots blessing before he made his Defense, and received it, made it appear,
that there is a time to be silent as well as to speak, and that as he knew the
former, he was not ignorant of the later: He began to repeat from one end to
the other all that had been said, objected, answered and replied, on the one
side and the other the two first days; and after that so refuted the seeming
reasons of the Jesuit, that he taught him to hold his peace, having put him to
the nonplus, and left him nothing to answer, and maintained the right of the
Abbey, with arguments so convincing, that the Abbot and he were by the Emperor
sent back into their Abbey, with the applause of the whole Assembly.

The Priory of St. Morand, and two others usurped by a show of piety and
surreptitious Bulls.
If the Rector of Ensisheim played his part well in gaining entry into the
Priory of St. James of Veldbach, the Jesuits of Fribourg in Bresga^ used no
less artifice to seize that of St. Morand, while Alsatia was yet under the
house of Austria; for though two only of the Society were by the favor of the
Archduke introduced there about 1623. under pretense of Catechizing and
hearing the confessions of the neighborhood and Pilgrims frequent in that
place, as if the Benedictines who then were there, whose names and surnames
remain recorded in the information made thereupon had not been able to have
performed it; yet these Jesuits did so ply the Officers at Rome, that they
obtained secretly a Bull of Union in 1626. without the knowledge of the
Benedictines* which they have not dared hitherto to produce, as being full of
suggestions notoriously false, as That the said Priory was several years (they
say eighty) forsaken and abandoned by the Prior and Monks, and without any
Convent: That the buildings were all gone to ruin; that the Revenue of the
Benefice was very small, and that the Collation belonged to the Arcb-Duke,
which in every particular are publicly known to be false; Besides, the
pretended Bull has an express Reservation, sine praejudicio alicujus; that the
grant shall not operate to the prejudice of any, yet they forthwith expelled
Peter Gaspard, and Peter Michael then Monks there, who retired into the Abbey of
St. Peter of the same Order in the black forest.

It appears clearly not only by the said information, but by the confession of
the Jesuits in their memorials (though in other things injurious and
di^^amatory) that the said Priory of St. Morand is by foundation of the Order
of Cluny and conven^ual, and that the collation thereof belongs to the General
of the Order, as of all others that depend thereon; that it has continued
always conventual, and was actually possessed and served by the Benedictine
Friars without any reproach until the intrusion of the Jesuits who expelled
them: That the revenue they set forth at one hundred Ducats, exceeds eight
hundred; that the buildings of the Priory, and particularly the Cloister were
entire and in good repair; and that these Fathers enemies to monastic
regularity, to deface their power, all the marks thereof have on purpose pulled
down the Cloister, since their entry, and caused the materials to be carried to
St. Vlrich, another Priory of the said Order about two leagues from thence, to
repair it, and not far from a very rich Priory of St. Augustine called
Ellenberg; which two last Priories situate in the Territories of France, the
said Jesuits strangers of Fribourg are in possession of at this day with as
little right as that of St. Morand; the last having been given them in reward
for a Tragedy acted by them for that purpose before the Archduke, wherein St.
Augustine is introduced, complaining of the idleness and dissoluteness of those
of his Order, and offering the said Priory of Ignatius, whom they bring on the
stage to accept it, after a thousand praises of their Society.

A deed of gift without right in favor of the Jesuits, who not able to keep
the Priory carry away the movables, evidences and ornaments.
Four years after they had surreptitiously obtained this Bull, and without
consent of the parties concerned, and particularly of the General of Cluny, to
whom alone the collation did of full right belong, these Fathers finding their
Bull was no assurance of it self, resolved to help it out by propping it with a
deed of gift, which they easily procured from the Archduke, though he had no
right to make it other than usurped authority guided by their advice to dispose
of the concerns of France; But being their opinion, no person could be so hardy
as to adventure the questioning of the palpable nu^lities of their Bull, when
protected and supported by a Sovereign Authority. And the Tragedy having been
acted about the beginning of the Germane Wars, the Jesuits had a fair
opportunity to keep the Priory in their hands during the troubles; but the
Treaty of Peace being published in 1648. and the Countries of A^s^^tia, and
Sundriga^ reunited to France; the Prince of Conty holding himself obliged to
Retake into his hands the Estates and Possessions usurped from his Order, and
depending on his Abbey of Cluny, and having received advice of the vacance of
the said Priory at the Re-commendation of M. de la Barde the Kings Ambassador
to the Swisses bestowed it in August, 1651. on Benedict, Schwaller a Friar of
the Order, and Doctor of the University of Paris; In pursuance whereof
Schwaller by his Majesty's Order took possession in the usual form, and
Re-established there a Community of Friars of his Order, according to the
tenor of the said Treaty of Peace, ordaining, That Monasteries usurped from
the Catholics, whether by other Catholics or by ^^e^eticks, should be
restored to those Orders from whom they were originally founded, and not to any
other.

This hindered not the Jesuits to prevaricate, and by shifts and dodging tricks
to keep the Prior four days in play, and in that time by night and by day to
convey away all the Grain, Writings, Evidences, Church-Ornaments, and other
movables of the Priory, leaving nothing behind that could be carried away,
though it was never theirs; after which to get some pretense for complaint, and
to give out (as they have done) that they were driven away by force, they
prevailed with the Sieur Beta Lord of Altkirk to send thither for Soldiers who
arrived upon the place, and the Jesuits having made them drink after the
Germane mode retired to Ellenberg.

Of the Abbey of Nostre Dame des Ermites in Suisserland, and the Jesuits entry
thereby notorious falsi^ies.
Though the means used by the Jesuits to usurp the Priory of St. Morand were
unworthy of men of Religion and of Christians, yet those whereby they
insinuated themselves into the Abbey of Nostre Dame des Ermi^tes in Swizz^rland
are more base and villainous: The story is so common in that Country, that
every one knows it. This Monastery is a stately Abbey of the Order of St.
Benedict, very famous, the best regulated, most reformed, and populous of all
Germany, having ordinarily forty or fifty Monks all employed and well skilled
in the Sciences of Philosophy, Theology, and Cases of Conscience, of good
abilities of Preaching, Catechizing and Conf^ssion, which they exercise
constantly, and the Di^ine Service performed to a perfection proportionable to
the wishes of the most Devout: The Jesuits nevertheless took the same pretense
of Preaching and Confession to get in thither as at St. M^rands, with this
difference, that at St. M^rands they made use of the secular Authority of the
Archduke only, but for this Abbey they had recourse to the Holy See, and
surprised the Pope, informing him most falsely, that the Church of the said
Abbey, which is renowned for miracles and multitudes of Pilgrims, resorting
thither from all parts to pay their vows to the Blessed Virgin was very ill
served, the Pilgrims ill instructed, and little satisfied, and that it would be
very expedient to settle there some persons capable to exercise this Holy
Ministry, being almost incompatible with a monastic prof^ssion; and offering
to sacrifice their persons to that Labor if his Holiness thought fit to employ
them. The Pope who discerned not the hook hid under this fair pretense,
dispatched a Brieve to the Abbot, commanding him to receive into his house fix
Fathers of the Jesuits capable and appointed to assist and ease the Friars of
his Order in that Holy Exercise, with Order to entertain them in all things
according to their prof^ssion.

Though the Abbot received and made them welcome, yet he mistrusted them, and
apprehended the danger he saw himself suddenly and unexpectedly fallen into:
This made him Assemble from all the neighboring places such persons both
Religious and Secular, whom he accounted most Judicious, To consult with them
how to secure himself against these dangerous spies; The Resolution was, That
an ample information should be drawn up in good form of the state of the Abbey,
the employment of the Monks, and Celebration of Divine Service, and that it
should be sent to the Pope, to dis-abuse and undeceive him, which was
accordingly done: And the Pope thereupon immediately sent a second Brieve, in
revocation of the former, commanding the Iesui^es to retire to their Colleges,
and leave the Benedictines to continue their spiritual harvest in the fields of
the Church.

C^rruption of Judges by presen^s.
The Rector of the Jesuits of Fribourg resolved to retain if possible the said
Pr^ory of St. Morand, bethought himself beforehand of means most unworthy a man
of Religion, and a Christian, to secure what he had unjustly obtained: To this
purpose he was fully determined at what price soever to gain the
Auditor-General being Sovereign Judge at B^isach, to their side, and to corrupt
him by bribery from doing Justice to the adverse party, engaging him to his
power to favor the usurpation of the Jesuits, never minding the scandal would
be given this heretic, (being one of the subtlest amongst them) and to other
men of Religion when it should appear, that a Rector of the Jesuits who would
be thought the flower and cream of Christi^nity was guilty of an iniquity so
h^mous, as to endeavor by presents to shake the constancy of a Judge, and sway
him from his duty who ought to be inflexible: But the Rector who valued not
such considerations, made the Judge a present of a Crystal Vessel to oblige
him to maintain them in their usurpation of St. Morand: This is clear by a
letter in Latin, the Original whereof was shortly after found in the said
Monastery, signed by the Jesuit Gebhardus Deminger, and addressed to F.
Gaspard Schiez, Rector of the Society of Jesus at St. Morand, dated July 27.
1651. containing among others these express terms, as may appear by the whole
letter entirely recited in the said memorial of Paul William, Viz. Heri and
hodie rations congessi, easque cras (...) Brisacum ipse feram. Et ut D.
Aud^torem nobis faventem efficiam crystallinum mecum feram poculum december
ducatorum, affabre hic elaboratum, ad eundem nobis devinciendum, i. e.
Yesterday and this day I have collected reasons, (for the strengthening of our
Cause) which God willing to morrow I will carry to Brisach; and that we may
have the Auditor our friend and oblige him to us, I shall present him a vessel
of Crystal of ten Ducates value, and cu^iously wrought.

In a word, this Lutheran Auditor to the utmost of his Power, favored the
Jesuits in their usurpation; but the Kings Orders, and the Justice of the
Benedictins Cause prevailed and obliged the Governor to perfer the interesses
of the Crown of France to the pretensions of the Jesuits, and not permit the
alienation of Monasteries to the profit of strangers; so that they were forced
to restore them to the ancient and legal possessors.

Complaints grounded on lies; corrupting of witnesses; surprising the King.
The Fathers were no sooner outed, but they repented their quitting their prey
so easily, they made a great bustle, and spread their complaints every were,
that they were expelled the Priory of St. James, and St. Morand by violence,
and ^orce of arms; they conveyed these complaints to the ears of the Emperor,
and the Archduke, and by their Pens to Cardinal Colonna Protector at Rome of
the nation of Almaigne, having a fit opportunity to send the letters by their
Provincial Fr. Schorrer who was deputed to assist at the Election of their new
General. At the same time they held an Assembly of several Rectors with their
Secular Council at the village of Hirsingen, a league from St. James, and St.
Morands, and having invited the Dean of the place to dinner, they presented him
for the first course an Act to sign, dressed after their manner, to testify
that they had been expelled the said Priory of St. Morand injuriously and by
violence: But the Dean being a man of honor, and resolute, answered, He could
not testify a matter whereof he had no knowledge, and that the report was on
the contrary, that they had desired the Soldiers to come, and made them drink
deep to have some color of saying, That the Soldiers had forced them away,
though no violence had been used. Whereupon the Assembly resolved to make their
address to the Apostolical Nuncio at Lucerne, to desire him to inform himself
of the pretended violences, fancying that upon the rumors they had spread they
should ^ind persons enough to depose the fact they alleged, and that in the
mean time their F. Grandm^nt Rector of Fribourg in Swizzerland should carry
their complaints to the Court of France. The information taken by the new
Nuncio discovered nothing more than the fictions, the ar^i^ices and malignity
of the Jesuits: But the voyage of F. Grandmont to Paris took effect, for
having by the mediation of F. Paulin then confessor to the King, represented to
his Majesty all the falsi^ies of advantage to their Cause, as that the Jesuits
were expelled the said Priories unjustly and by force, contrary to the tenor
of the Treaty of Peace, and in prejudice of the Canonical Union of the said
Priories to their Colleges, they obtained Orders by surprise for their
re-establishment without hearing the other side, in confidence to have them
executed blindfold, and that if they were once established by the Authority of
the King no man durst molest them for these two Priories, or that of St.
Valentin, to which they would with equal boldness and falsehood aver, that they
had been restored in pursuance and execution of the Treaty of Peace.

The Jesuits (...) to the Pope, and Estates of the Empire to surprise them.
As soon as F. Grandmont had the Kings Letters, one for M. de la Barde
Ambassador in Swizzerland, and the other for M. de Charlevois Commander at
Bris^ch, he sent to F. Schorrer the Provincial to supersede his demands from
the Emperor, and Archduke to the Pope, for that he had obtained letters from
the King for their re-establishment in the Priories in question: This appears
by Cardinal Colonnas Answer of the 5 th March 1652. to the Letters of the
Emperor and the Archduke: But the Father, though he thought the Orders would
be executed without taking any cognizance of the Cause was deceived in his
account; for neither the Governor nor the Ambassador judged it in their power
to obey them for many reasons both of State and of Law; declaring frankly to
the Jesuits that they were willing to serve them; and that the Letters were
very good, but their Cause worth nothing.

This obliged the three Rectors to reassume their first course, and continue
their pursuit in the Court of Rome by the favor of the Emperor, to procure
from the Pope a confirmation of the Union of these three benefices artificially
suggested in all their addresses: But the success here proved worse than in
France: For the Pope judiciously refused it, telling them, that if they had
such an Union as they pretended, they needed no confirmation, and to grant one
were to derogate from the Authority of the Holy See.

To omit nothing that artifice or ambition could suggest, they had recourse at
last to the Imperial Di^t at Ra^isbonne, where they made a great noise,
complaining loudly, but ^alily, that they were outed of the Priories of St.
Mor^nd, and St. James against Right, and were troubled and disturbed in their
possession of St. Valentines in prejudice of the Treaty of Peace, and the
Canonical Union obtained from the Holy See. Endeavoring thus to engage the
States of the Empire to re-establish them, or to break with France. But M. de
Vautorce his Christian Majesty's Ambassador in that Assembly, being well
informed of the Truth, and of the Justice of the Benedictines Cause,
inseparable from that of the Abbeys of Cluny and Chesy, and the inter^sses of
France, rendered these new attempts of the Jesuits ineffectual and vain.

Their recourse to Heretical Officers of War and of Justice; their Calumnies
and recommendations to promote their injustice.
They were not daunted for all this, but though their Cause was so unjust, that
they failed of their hopes in Germany, and in Italy, from the Emperor, the
Apostolical Nuncio, and the Archduke of Inspruch, they resolved to try the
French King once more, and solicited new Orders from him on the same
suppositions they had procured the former: and because they could not incline
the Si^urs De la Bard, and de Charl^vois to favor their injustice, they
labored with all their might to have these second Orders dispatched and
directed to Major General Rose their particular friend, though an Heretic,
judging him proper for the execution they needed, having disposed him before by
the great treats they had made him in their College of Ensish^im, where they
had lodged and entertained him with all Almaign Civilities in the beginning of
the year 1652. the ^^rrain Troops being then in their winter quarters in
A^s^^ia: But they could never obtain at Paris the Orders they desired; this
made them play other pranks to compass their designs.

They slandered F. Paul William the Benedictine for defending himself against
their unjust usurpations as a villain, a cheat and notorious impostor: These
are the very terms in the Latin Letter from the Rector of Fribourg to the
Warden of the Capucines of Brisach dated July 25. 1652. and inserted at large
in the memorial abovementioned; By the same letter it appears, that they
procured from several persons of Quality their friends at Paris Letters of
Recommendation to Madam the Countess of H^rc^ur, to M. the Count of Serny, and
to the Baron de Mele at Brisach to desire their favor for the Jesuits: But
their Cause was generally judged so bad upon the place, that no person would be
persuaded to undertake their d^^^nce except the Audit^r General, who not able
to maintain them in possession of the P^iories of St. James, and St. M^rand,
granted them a sequestration in August 1652. without taking any cognizance of
the Cause, without hearing or summoning the defendants, to the prejudice of the
Suitors, and against the prohibitions of the Privy Council, who had retained to
themselves the whole cognizance of this affair.

Their Rapine and Dilapidation of Benefices.
By the favor of this Judge, and several artifices, the Jesuits turned the
deaf ear to the frequent demands made for restitution of the Deeds, Evidences,
Relics, Plate and Ornaments they had carried away from the said Priories,
though obliged to restore them not only in Conscience, but by an express
Article of the treaty of Peace page 82. importing, That all Records and
Wri^ings whatsoever, and other movables found in the said place at the time of
the possession taken, should be restored; so that their refusal obliged the
Benedictines to commence new Suits, and obtain judgments against them for
recovery of their goods.

That which is most lamentable, is, that while they were in possession of the
three Priories of St. James, St. Morand, and St. Valentin they left nothing
entire but what respect hindered them to demolish, or interest obliged them to
preserve. And they who so often pretend (to the injury of others) that the
Divine Service is ill managed or neglected, and object against the^ great
imperfections and disorders in their manners, as grounds for their usurpation,
and account them Canonical Titles for intruding into the Rights of other men
ought to have been confounded for these real enormities, which though committed
by them, they have the impudence to own in the face of the world to the scandal
of Christianity.

You have heard before, that upon their entering St. Morand they demolished the
Cloister, and caused the materials to be conveyed to St. Vlrich.

At St. Valentines, every one knows that they changed into a hey-house and
stable for the Archdukes horses, a fair and large Hospital magnificently
built, and with extraordinary charge by D. John Sancey the Benedictine Prior at
the gate of the Monastery for receiving and lodging poor Pilgrims; and that
they dissipated and imbezelled the Relics, and a quantity of Plate and
Ornaments which the Priors had provided by their frugality.

But the Priory of St. James of Veldbach, though let them in good condition,
and at a great undervalue in the Rent, fared worst of all, and was used with
least respect as situate in a village where they held themselves at liberty to
act those abuses which in Cities and great Towns they durst not attempt, for
they not only permitted the Dormitory of the Friars adjoining to the Church,
and the Founders Chapel, beside the High Altar, to decay and run to ruin, but
pulled down the Steeple, and threw great pieces of timber on the Founders
Tombs, which were in the middle of the Quire, and by this Barbarism broke all
to pieces: Thus they demolished part, and spoiled the residue of this poor
Church, that there was not left one ornament for saying Mass, of twelve they
found there, which they carried into Swizzerland, with all the Plate of the
Priory: And it is probable they had not spared the rest of the Church from utter
destruction, but that it was Parochial, which notwithstanding they le^t in
extreme disorder.

Of the Priory of Maizere, of the Order of St. Benedict, changed into a Farm by
the Jesuits.
What you have heard is no more than what their brethren of the College of
Porentr^t (who pretend no less Veneration for sacred places than the rest of
the company) had given sufficient cause of credit and belief to, having three
years before ruined the Church of another Priory of the same Order, called
Maizere (formerly famous for Pilgrimage in the Country) to the great scandal
of the Heretics, who carefully maintain and preserve their Churches, and to
the great regret of the Country adjacent, who deplored the profanation, to see
the materials of the House of God employed to repair the houses, Barns and
Stables of a Farmer, so that there remained no sign of a Priory, nor any thing
else but a plain Farm.

Such is the condition to which the Jesuits reduce the benefices they usurp,
whereof they consider nothing but the revenue, beginning always as soon as
they enter them to abolish the Divine Service, and all those marks which might
make it appear, they once belonged to the ancient Orders of Religion, without
any regard to the intention of the Founders, nor the Charges they imposed,
which is the Iesuitical way to promote the glory of God.

Their taking away Evidences and Registers.
Another Detriment and injury done by the Jesuits to these three Priories, for
which the Priories were obliged to seek their remedy in the Great Council, was
their taking away the Evidences and Registers concerning the Rights and
Revenues of these Monasteries, which the Jesuits could make no other use of,
but to accommodate themselves in case of a re-entry there, which nothing but an
unjust Ambition could give them any hopes of; or to deprive the right owners of
the enjoyment of them, to which nothing but an extreme malignity could incline
them; or lastly, to conceal and suppress some debts to which their Goods might
be liable, which though it denotes a malicious avarice, yet is not strange in
the J^suites practice.

For the Jesuits of the Colleges of Novices at Nancy have 40 years since used
the like practice against the Friars of Senon, of the Order of St. Benedict in
Lorrain, when the Abbot of St. Vanne of Verdun having given them the Lordship
of Barbonville, being a dependant on his Abbey, charged with the ancient rent of
22 quarters of Corn to the Abbey of Senon, they craftily embezled all the
Evidences they could light on, that made mention of that duty; And when the
Friars of Senon sent to demand the Rent as accustomed, the Jesuits who thought
all the Evidences that concerned that duty were safe in their hands, pretended
ignorance, and refused payment, telling the demanders, they thought nothing
due. A suit was thereupon commenced in the Council of Lorrain, and the Friars
for want of their Evidences to make out their title, were cast. But some years
after the reformation of the said Abbey, the reformed Friars made so diligent
search, that they found three Registers wherein the said duty was charged, in
pursuance whereof they brought a new Action, which the Jesuits stiffly defended
but the Registers being produced, they submitted to pay what they could no
longer dispute.

The Jesuits proceeding in three several Tribunals, and three Distinct
Countries at the same time, for the same Priories, and other petty foggeries.
We have cause to believe, that on the same d^sign the Rectors of the three
Colleges of Selestat, Enssheim, and Fribourg, carried away the Deeds and
Evidences of the three Priories abovementioned; And when the Priors of the
Benedictines sought restitution by Law, it is incredible how many artifices and
petty foggeryes they used to detain them.

To give an instance, when they saw themselves pressed by the Benedictines to
restore them, they procured a prohibition from the Privy council, to prevent
proceedings in the inferior Courts, interdicting the ordinary Judges the
cognizance of the Cause: The Council being thus entirely possessed of the
Cause, at the instance of the Jesuits, the Prince of Conty, and the Abbot of
Nesmond interposed in behalf of the Benedictines, the former as General of the
Order of Cluny, the later as Abbot of Chesy and Collators of the Priories: The
Jesuits hereupon fearing their success in the Council, while the matter
depended there, prosecuted the Benedictine Priors at the same time both at Rome
and Brisach; and obtained of the Auditor General at Brisach, whom we spoke of
before, a sequestration of the Priories of St. James and St. Morand, without
any form of Justice, and without hearing or summoning the Defendants. And at
Rome they procured a Monition to cite the Benedictines thither, with an
Excommunication against all that should oppose the execution of their Bull,
which they durst never produce. And caused the Monition to be printed
throughout: And the Benedictines of St. Morand to be cited by the Bishop of
Basle, for which, as an injury and abuse, the Friars were forced to make an
Appeal.

In pursuance of this, they used all the tricks the spirit of Wrangling could
invent in the most shifting petty-foggers, by delays, by reiterated defaults,
new Assignations, contesting about the qualities of the parties, producing
ridiculous, impertinent and insignificant matters; falsities and manifest
untruths; diffamatory Libells; forged Letters; informations without date or
subscription, and a thousand other devices, to be seen at large in the
Memorial abovementioned, which is therefore the more credible, for that upon
the whole matter a notable Arrest was given in favor of the Benedictines, you
shall see hereafter.

Bulls without president, and contrary to the Canons and Councels of the
Church. An Arrest in favor of the Benedictines against the Jesuits.
We must not forget some remarkable things to be observed in the Bulls the
Jesuits obtained for the three Priories spoken of before: for besides the
false suggestions, nullities and obr^ptions whereof they were full, which
inclined the Benedictines to procure and produce Duplicates thereof against the
Jesuits, and besid^s the express provision in some of them, that they should
not operate to the wrong or prejudice of any, they were most abusively and
maliciously framed in two points: 1. In that contrary to all forms and
presidents, they gave power to the Jesuits to take possession* of the said
Benefices by their proper Authority, without observing the ordinary formalities
requisite in such cases, and that contrary to the Canons and the Councels of
Constance, of Lateran of Chalcedon, and others, they made alienation of Estates
without consent of the parties, united several Benefices situate in diverse
Dioceses, and suppressed Monasteries and Benefices Conventual, which ought to
remain to perpetuity: 2. In that by an unparalled and unheard of abuse, they
contained a Clause ordaining, that they should not be questioned for any
nullity, obreption, or subreption, whereof they were full, Decernen^es easdem
praesen^es nullo unquam tempore de subreptionis vel obreptionis a^t nullitatis
vi^io A^gui seu notari: which takes away all cause of wond^r why the Jesuits
were always loath to produce them, as knowing they could serve for nothing more
than to discover their Artifices and Deceits, the clearer, though notorious
enough to the world already, upon other occasions.

And now, none can think it strange that after so many shifts and tricks of
petty foggery, they were at last wholly defeated, and for ever debarred of
their pretensions to the Priories in question, by Arrest of the Kings Council,
the Judi^ial part whereof, and the sentence is here transcribed, but the
proceedings purposely omitted, for that they are herein before succinctly
reported, and may be seen at large in the Printed Memorial we mentioned often.

The Arrest of the Privy Council.
THe King in his Council giving Judgment, and doing right in the said Cause,
has maintained and kept, and does maintain and keep the said Friar Paul
William in the possession and enjoyment of the said Priories of St. Valentine
of Ruffach, and St. James of Veldbach, and the said Friar Benedict Schwaller in
the possession and enjoyment of the said Priory of St. Morand: Forbidding and
pr^hibiting the Demandants (the Jesuits) and all others to trouble or m^lest
them in this behalf, and ordering the Sequestrators to deliver the possession
into the hands of the said William.

And having done right upon the demands respectively made by the said parties
for restitution of the Re^iques, Ornaments, Evidences, Movables, and other
things that were heretofore in the said Priories, has ordained and ordains,
that the parties within two months join issue in the same, and d^bate t^em at
large, before the Sieur De Baussan Intendant in the Country of Alsatia, and
that the said Sieur De Baussan shall assist and further the execution of this
Arrest, which shall be executed notwithstanding any opp^sition or Appeals
whatsoever. Yet so as the said Appeals shall not be barred or prejudiced
hereby, but in the mean time the parties are to proceed to executi^n, which
shall not be delayed by ver^ue or color of any Appeal whatsoever. And his
Majesty reserves unto himself and his Council, the cognizance and
de^er^ination of any Appeal that shall or may happen to be made in this ^ause,
which Appeal shall be proceeded in summarily without the ^sual formality of
Suits.

Examined, Signed, De Moris.
Given at the Kings Privy-Councel held at Paris, Aug. 4. 1654.
OTHER Historical Passages AND Relations of the Artifices and Violences of the
Jesuits of Almaigne in taking away several Abbeys from the Orders of St.
Benedict, and the Cisteaux monks.
Collected out of the Books of the Famous F. Hay, a Benedictine of Almaigne,
the one called ASTRUM INEXTINCTUM, Printed in 1636. and the other HORTUS
CRUSIANUS, Printed at Frankfort in 1658. and Printed also within these ten
years with all their Qu^tations, in France in 4to, and at Cologne in 8vo in
1659.
A notable imposture of F. Lamorman the Jesuit, Confesser to the Emperor of
the Vsurpa^ion of Abbeys.
THE Emperor Ferdinand the second, having had great advantages over the
Protestants of Germany after the rising in Bohemia, and the battle of Prague,
which he won against them, by a General Edict of the 6 th of March 1629.
ordained, That all the Abbeys, and other E^tates Ecclesiastical which had been
usurped from the Catholics by the Protestants against the Articles of the
Treaty of Passau in 1552. should be restored to those to whom they belonged
according to their founda^ions. In pursuance of which Edict he sent
Commissioners throughout the Empire to see it executed, and published other
particular Edicts in favor of St. Benedict the Cisteaux, and others.

As there is nothing more just than to restore every one what belongs to him, so
this Edict of the Emperor was highly approved by the Pope who writ an express
Brief to the Emperor, To te^tifie his joy, and that of the whole Consistory of
Cardinals for this re-establishment of the Clergy, and the Friars in their
estates.

The Emperor at the same time writ to his Ambassador at Rome the Prince of
Savelli the 14th of April 1629. the reasons of his Edict, which were, That he
was of opinion he could not have done any thing more profitable, and conducing
to the good of Religion in Almaigne, then to take such course that the
Religious Orders might flourish again, which had been heretofore the firm
pillars thereof: that pursuant to this design he had ordered by his Authority.
Imperial, that the Abbeys, and other places Consecrate to Religion, which had
been profaned by the iniquity of the times, or converted to other uses should
be restored every one to the Order to which they belonged, as being Consecrate
thereto from their first foundation, and not to another. He sent him afterward
a more ample instruction of the 25 of October. the same year wherein he gives six
principal reasons of his Edict.

The Jesuits extremely nettled and perplexed, that they had no share in this
restitution to the Ancient Orders, consulted among themselves how to enrich
their Society with other men's Estates, and take from the Proprietors some of
these Abbyes: To effect this, they make use, according to their custom, of the
credit their Father Lancorman had in the Court of the Emperor Ferdinand the
2d, whose Confessor he was. This I^suite, animated by his Brethren, made great
instance to two Abbots, the one of St. Benedict, and the other of the Cisteaux,
Deputed by their Orders to hasten the Execution of the Emperors Edict, and was
very importunate with them to quit unto the Society all the Nunneries to be
restored by the Protestants, and some of the less considerable Abbeys: These
Abbots who had no power to consent to so unjust and extraordinary a demand
against their Conscience, r^turned him Answer in general words of C^mplement,
that they were ready to serve him in any thing but what concerned the interest
of their Orders: F. Lamormam seeing them leave the Court, presently suggested
to his friends, and gave out in Speeches, That these two Abbots had made a
voluntary Cession of several Abbeys to the Society: And on this fiction,
(whereof he was afterward convicted by public and authentic Acts) he
grounded a Memorial, which he presented to the Emperor, desiring that in
pursuance of the voluntary Cession of these two Abbots, his Imperial Majesty
would send Commissioners into several Provinces of the Empire, to put the
Society in possession of those Abbeys. Having by this means surprised the good
Prince and his Council who took this Imposture for truth, they obtained
Letters addressed to the Commissaries General of the Circles, to three
Provincials of the Society, and to the Generals of the Imperial Army, the Duke
of Friesland, and Count Tilly, forthwith to sequester the said Abbeys.

All the world was astonished, says learned F. H, at this sudden and unjust
Change of the Emperors former Orders, not knowing what cause could possibly
incline this Prince to R^voke so soon his public Edict for restitution of
these Abbeys to the ancient Orders, which had been so highly commended by the
Ho^y See; and to out men of Religion of their Estates, unheard* against the Law
of Nations, and common right.

But the Jesuits raised a report, that this Change proceeded from the
voluntary Cession the two Abbots had made of their Abbeys in the name of their
Orders* So that the two Abbots were obliged to make a solemn protestation,
against this notorious falsehood, both by Letters to the Confessor, and by
public Acts, insisting that they had not so much as thought of a promise to
consent to the translation of their Abbyes to the Jesuits, nor had any power
so to do. And a famous Benedictine, who was of the Emperors Council, and
created at that time Bishop and Prince of Vienna, being brought in as a witness
by F. Lamorm^n, declared the quite contrary to what the Jesuits alleged, as
appears by a writing reported by F. Hay.

The Jesuits Writings, their Intrigues at Rome, their Confidence to d^cry the
Edict and Council of the Emperor.
The common experience, that the Iesui^es once engaged in a lie, will not
easily unsay it, was con^rmed by an instance in the p^esent affair; ^or all
these Acts and solemn protestations could not hinder them from continuing the
spreading of this Imp^sture, even by Printed books. But seeing their fictions
and falsities discovered, they resolved for maintaining their unjust
usurpation, openly to confront and attaque the Edict of the Emperor, and the
right of the ancient Orders: This they did by two Writings, wherein the
Emperors instructions to his Ambassador at Rome, suitable to his Edict
executed already in several Abbyes, whereof the Monks of the Order of St.
Benedict, and others were in possession, were censured and dishonored, as
containing Things contrary to Truth, the holy Canons, and Immunityes
Ecclesiastical, and the Emperor himself charged to have exceeded his power in
the restitution of these Abbyes to their ancient Orders. But seeing that all
the Ministers of State of the Emperors Council had discovered the artifice of
the Confessor, and opposed their unjust pretensions, they changed the Scene,
and plied amain their intrigues at Rome, and besides their private
solicitations published a Book entitled, Remarques in the Cause of Estates
Ecclesiastical, and Monasteries suppressed in Almaigne: And though F. Layman
their Casuist at Dilingue justifies and highly commends this book, calling the
Author, An illustrious person, and ^ Divine well informed of the affairs of
Almaign, though he durst not own him a Jesuit; yet it is incredible how it
slanders and vilifies the Ministers of State of the Council Imperial, what
odium it casts on them, as having attempted against the Ponti^ical Authority by
the restitution of these Abbyes to the lawful owners: For ( says the Author)
you are to observe first of all, that the design of the Council Imperial is
absolutely to debarr the Pope from ^aving any part in the r^stituti^n of the
Catholic Religion in Almaigne: This is evident, in that the Emperor
published his Edict f^r restitution of Ecclesi^stical Estates, without
acquainting the Pope, or taking his advice to whom to restore them. This
Council tends not only to exclude the P^pe from the Re-establishment, but to
shake off the yoke of the Apostolic Jurisdiction throughout the Empire: And
the reason why this Council does with so much ^emerity and imp^e^y attaque the
Holy See, is that there are in it some persons ill affected to the Ap^stolical
Chair, some who as m^er Politiques, to ingratiate themselves with their Prince
by flattery, labor the exaltation of his Authority in all things; And some
perhaps who under a Vizard of Catholic profession are Heretics in their
hearts: And as for the Abbot of the Monastery of Cremounster, of the Order of
St. Benedict, and of ^he said Council, he is a man full of pride: Who
nevertheless for his merits and suff^ciency was soon after promoted to the
Dignity of Prince and Bishop of Vienna.

See here, how the Council Imperial by a sudden Metamorphosis is from Catholic
turned Schismatic, and an enemy to the Holy See, as soon as the Jesuits have
discovered that Justice had a stronger influence over the spirits of these
Ministers of State to maintain what the Emperor had so religiously ordained by
his Edict than their Solicitations for accommodating themselves with other men's
Estates.

Two books were about the same time published in defense of the rights of the
Ancient Orders; whereupon the Jesuits gave charge to their F. Laym^n, who had
formerly written a book on this subject, entitled Placida Disceptatio, to
employ his pen against the two Books, and handle them (which he did) as
infamous Libels; Because the Authors approved not of the Jesuits intentions to
take away the Abbyes from the ancient Orders, but had refuted those injurious
suggestions and falsities they made use of to that purpose; and because the
Jesuits would have usurped other men's Estates, without incurring the infamy
inseparable from an usurpation so unjust, and so violent as theirs: The Jesuit
entitles his book, The just Defense of his H^liness the Pope of Rome, His
Imperial Majesty, the Cardinals of the holy Roman Church, the Bishops, Princes,
and others, and also, Of the little Society of Jesus: This the learned and
pious Benedictine F. Hay, show* by an excellent book entitled, A^trum
inextinctum, which he opposed to that of the Jesuit, to be the most shameful
illusion and mockery that ever appeared; for that instead of defending these
powers it formally questions, and opposes an Imperial Edict approved by the
Pope, and College of Cardinals by an express Brief, as well as by all the
Bishops, Princes of Almaigne. And that the thing he really maintained, though
very weakly, was the Little So^iety of Jesus, which he represented as so great
and necessary for the Church, that he feared not to affirm, That God had not
sufficien^ly provided for the Chruch, if having established all other Orders of
Religion, theirs only had been wanting.

1. Imposture of the Jesuits, that these Abbeys were suppressed.
It Is incredible what artifices they made use of in these Books to maintain a
pretention most ^njust, and most unworthy men professing Religion.

I. They would have made the Pope believe, That all those Abbeys were suppressed;
and that the E^tates were vacant, i. e. such as ^ad no owner. That the Emperor
or Pope might dispose of them at their pleasure; Declaring, sometimes that it
belonged to the Emperor to give them with the approbation of the Pope, and
sometimes that it belonged only to the Pope to bestow them as devolved to him
by a special and particular right, upon design, that of these two Powers that
should be adjudged to have most right, which they by their* intrig^es and
insinuations should render most inclinable to give them these Abbeys.

But this erroneous illusion was folidly refuted as contrary to the Laws Civil
and Canon by the Benedectins, who justified by the Authority of the
Ecclesiastical Laws, and by presidents both ancient and modern of above thirty
famous Abbeys, as that of Mount-Cassin, S. Ma^^ in Anjou, and others, that
Abbeys possessed and destroyed by foreign enemies when recovered, were always
restored to their proper Orders. That it was an unheard of pretense, that the
sole-violence of the heretics founded only on the force of Arms should
operate so as to cause these Abbeys to be adjugded suppressed; and that it would
appear very unjust, if re-entring their Abbeys they might not of right say with
the Maccab^es; We have not possessed our selves of a strange land, nor are we
entered upon the Estates of others; but by the benefit of the Revolution of
time, we resume the possession of the heritage of our Fathers, which has for
sometime been inju^tly ^surped by our Enemies.

2. and 3. Impostures; That it was an abuse* and not within their power who did
it, to restore these Abbeys to the Fr^ars.
Though these Abbeys had been adjudged to the Religious Orders by an arrest of
the Court Imperial of Spire, and the Edict of the Emperor approved by the
Pope; yet these good Fathers who stick not to exalt themselves above the
Emperor and the Pope had the boldness to publish in print, That this affair
was of the number of those, whereof we are to say, that they pass only by way
of sufferance and tollera^ion, which if weighed in the balances of judgment
are inconsistent with the Rules of Justice; whereby they would impose on us a
belief, that the re-establishment of the Friars in their Abbeys, that is, the
plain ^xecution of the Laws of Nations and Nature was an intolerable abuse;
and that on the contrary the most unjust usurpation of other Men's Estates,
which the Jesuits in their hopes had already devoured was pure justice, and
most unquestionable right.

But there is nothing of greater wonder than the extravagant Answers they made
to the invincible Arguments and Reasons of the Friars. In vain did the
Benedictines object to them the ^xpress terms of the Emperors Edict, and the
Orders he had sent his Commissaries General for execution, viz. Our pleasure
is, that the Abbeys possessed against the Treaty of Passau, and the Peace for
regulating the state of Religion, which have been to this time unjustly
detained, be surrendered and restored by virtue of this our Edict Imperial, to
such persons of the Religi^us Orders to whom they belonged, before the said
unjust detenti^^* for the Jesuits with an unconceivable boldness made answer,
that there was not one word to be found in his Imperial Majesty's Edict, which
imported th^^ the Abbeys ought to be rest^red to the Orders for which they had
been f^unded; and to main^^^ this false and strange assertion, they (...)
themselves of a gross illusion, which t^nds only to make the Emperors Edict
ridiculous, (...) (say they) the pleasure of this Prince was, tha^ restitution
should be made of the Abbeys to the sam^ individual persons to whom they
belonged before the^ were possessed by the Lutherans, which is in effect, That
the Emperor had sent his Commissari^s to make restitution of the Abbeys, to
persons dead and interred forty or fifty years before, and not to the Religious
Orders, which in that they never dye were capable of the benefit of the pious
intentions of the Emperor.

4. and 5. Impostures; That the Jesuits were persons proper to possess the
Abbeys, and comprehended under the name of Monks.
In vain did the Benedictines object against them, That the Emperor had
expressly Ordained by his Edict, that the foundations of Abbeys should be
preserved, and the vacancies filled with persons proper according to the rules
of the foundation, duly called, and fitly qualified according to law; for the
Jesuits answered, That it was true, but it could not be proved, that the
Fathers of the Socie^y were not persons duly called, and legally qualified,
according to the foundations of these Abbeys given them by the Pope with his
Imperial Majesty's Consent; That is as F. Hay does elegantly expound it, That
these Abbeys founded for the Order of St. Benedict six or seven hundred years
before there were Jesuits in the world were founded, for the F^thers of the
Society of Jesus.

In vain did the Benedictines object, That these Abbeys had been established
for M^nks and Friars, and that it was Ordained by the Canon Law, That
Monasteries should continue Monasteries to perpe^uity, for the Jesuits
answered, That in matters of favorable construction (such as tended to the
enriching themselves with the Estates of the Manasteries) the Je^uites were
comprehended under the name of Monks: To which the Benedictines replied, That
it was pleasan^ to consider, that the Jesuits who on all other occasions
express so great aversness from the name of Monks, are very willing to be
called Monks, when it may serve to introduce them into the inheritance of Monks.

And it is fit to observe here, that the Jesuits brand Au^elius with error for
alleging, that a Monk, and a person of a Religious Order are convertible
terms, and denote the same thing: so in France, when there is nothing to be got
by assuming the name of Monks, it is an error that deserves censure to call a
Jesuit Monk; but in Almaigne where there a^^ Abbeys to be taken from Monks and
given to Jesuits if qualified as M^nks, it is an error that deserves censure,
not to take a Jesuit to be a M^^k. (...) (...)

6. Imposture; That the Pope has an extraordinary power to derogate from any
thing not favorable to the Jesuits.
In vain did the Frya^s object, That the Popes by their ^gr^ements ^ith the
Germane Nation had obliged themselves to preserve every man in his rights and
estates* And that Filiutius of their Society had written, That the Pope not
only by his Office, but by ^on^ract employed between him and those wh^ give
Est^^es to the Church is obliged by the Divine and Nalu^al Law ^o preserv^ them
for those wh^ legally possess them, and that the contrary cannot (...) done
without injury to the Founders, and the successors of the Friars of the Order
in c^using them to lose their Estate and their Honor. For the Jesuits who
never think themselves hu^t by any objection from the Law Natural or Divine,
helped themselves out by this neat distinction; They confess the Power of the
Pope is limited by particular Concordates and Agreements of Nations, which have
the force of Bargains and Contracts; So that the Pope himself is obliged to
perform them according to the Law of Nations; But they add, That this is to be
understood, that the Pope cannot Ordinarily derogate from these Concordates or
Agreements but may do it Extraordinarily for the public good of the Church
when necessity requires it; that is, when they are employed about establishing
rich Colleges for the Society; for they pretend to express terms, That nothing
can conduce more for the Re-establishment of the Cat^ilick Faith, than to
bestow on them the Estates and Revenues of Abbeys and Nun^eries for enriching
their Ancient Colleges, and for founding of New; as also for buying little
Cat^chis^s, Chaplets, and other things of that kind, that may serve at once
both to instruct and delight Youth; and that the expenses these things will
require, cannot be fur^ished but from the Estates of the Abbeys resumed out of
the hands of the Protestants*

To which the Friars replied, That they might for the future Found Colleges,
if they pleased, without robbing the Orders of St. Benedict, the Cisteaux* and
others of their Estates, as they had been founded heretofore without any such
injury, and showed several means for that purpose: And when the Jesuits
insisted, there were no other means but that all treasures were exh^usted; The
Friars Replied,

1. That there were some Treasures not yet exhausted, namely, theirs who had
within a short time offered the Venetians five hundred thousand Crowns to be
re-established in those Colleges they had at Venice heretofore, and in other*
Territories of that Republic, from which they were banished.

2. They made it app^ar, that their Colleges were not so necessary for the
re-establishment of the catholic Faith as they pretended; for that they had
Colleges in several Cities, where heresy was as rife as ever; And that
themselves have confessed, All the upper Pal^tinate was converted to the
Catholic Religion before ever they had one College there; so that it is
clear, sdy^h F. Hay, That to make men believe* as the Jesuits endeavor, that
Germany: cannot be converted to the Catholic Faith, without turning the Abbeys
of ^eligious Orders into Colleges of Iesui^e^, is to contradicta manifest
experience, and make all the world confess themselves blind*

3. That the first Friars of the Order of St. Benedict had Converted almost all
Germany* and at this day, the Benedicti^es labor with success equal to the
Jesuits in the Co^version of Heretics, though they are not so much addicted
to ostentation, as they who send Catalogues to Rome of the least things they
do* who compute how many they confess by the year, their Masses, their Prayers,
their Visits to the sick, and other things both great and small.

4. They remonstrated, that the multitude of Colleges they so earnestly
pres^ed for, savored not of the first spirit of the Society, and was
diametrically opposite to an express Article of their second Congregation
G^neral in these words: We are to Act for the (...) with (...) moderation* And
(...) stay our hands from multiplying Colledg^^* And the Congregation make
(...) request to the Father-General, and recommend it to his serious
observation, to apply himself ^at^er ^o the compledting and perfecting of the
Colleges already establish^d* (...)

5. As to the little (...) and Chaplu^s which the Iesu^^^^ would buy ^or their
Scholars with the Estates and Revenues of Abbeys; They answered, That it was
somewhat strange, the Jesuits would r^i^e foundat^^^s, v^ol^te agreements,
hinder men of Religious Orders ^o renew their solemn prayers, and ce^eb^^te
Divine Service in their* Abbeys* that she (...) might have wherewith to buy
bawbles for children; which must be extreme dear, if there be not sufficient to
purchase them* without employing to such uses the estates designed by the
founders to maintain the holy exercises of a Religious life in these
Mona^teries.

7. Imposture* That by reason of the Charges of the War, the Emperor was
Founder and Master of these Abbeys.
In vain did the Benedictines object, That the Emperor was obliged by the Oath
he had taken when he came to the Empire; and as the Supreme Protector and
Defender of Churches, to preserve the Ancient Orders in their Rights and
Estates; and that the Emp^rour had declared and confirmed it anew by his
particular Edict in favor of the Benedictines, March 28. 1629. The Jesuits
confessed all this to be true, but scrupled not to elude it by this shameful
evasion, whereby they would Authorize the Perjury of a Great Prince; That the
Charges and Expenses the Emperor laid out in the W^r for recovery of these
Churches and Abbeys, were ^o great, that they exceeded all the Estates of
Consecrated places; and therefore he ought to be acknowledged, not only as a
new Founde^, Endower and Patron of these Re^igious Houses, but the Purchaser;
and that the Religious Orders ought in acknowledgment there of, to leave them
freely and wholly to his Disposal, and not pretend any interest therein, for
fear of making themselves guilty of ingratitude against his Imperial Majesty;
But the Religious Orders Answered, That the Emperor by his Edict had declared,
He never desired from them an acknowledgement which could not be made him,
without forcing tears from the Ancient Orders of Religion; that he liked not a
gratitude, which allowed them no recompense for so many Millions furnished by
them for the War, and other Faithful Services done him and the Empire, but the
destruction of their Rights and Suppression of their Abbeys; and that his
Majesty ought to account them ingrate who had invented such gratitude.

8. Imposture; That they may change their Opinions when their interest requires
it.
In vain did the Benedictines object, That three Principal Jesuits (whereof F.
Lam^rma^ the Emperors Confessor was one) being consulted with about an Abbey,
which having been long in the possession of Lutherans, and Secular Persons, the
Cardinal Archbishop of Prague would have procured for himself by gift from the
Emperor, had delivered their opinion in writing, That it could not be done
with a safe Conscience, and that the Abbey being Benedictine ought to be
restored to the Order of St. Benedict; and that the Emperor in giving it to
the Cardinal had committed the same injustice, as if after winning the battle
of Prague, he had given away the land of some Catholic Lord recovered from the
enemy to another Catholic Lord having no right thereto; the Jesuits not able
to deny this opinion, delivered at large in writing, agr^^d that the Jesuits
were then of that judgment; bu^ answered, that since they had changed their
Opinion; This rare privilege have these ^xcellent Casuists, to alter their
sentiments and their conscience upon any occasion when it may be for their
profit to change: So when the question was about giving an Arch-Bishop^a
Benedictine Abbey, their judgment was, the Emperor was in justice obliged to
restore it to the Order of St. Benedict* but when* there is hopes they may
procure them for themselves by their shifts and artifices* they presently
maintain, that the Abbeys of St. Benedict are Abbeys suppressed* and the Estates
that belong to them at the disposal of the Empero^^ and the Pope, who may give
them whom they please without any injustice to the Friars of the Order, who are
the lawful proprietors, when an Archbishop desires to have one; but have no
Title at all, when the Jesuits would have many of the same Abbeys for the use
of their Society.

9. Imposture: That F. Lamorman in cheating the Emperor did well, i. e.
according to the rules of the Society.
In vain did the Benedictines reproach them, that all the trouble had been
raised for taking from them these Abbyes against the Edict of the Emperor,
proceeded only from their F. L^^^man, who had the boldness to write to his
Imperial Majesty, that his Edict and Instructions given his Ambassador,
contained things not agreeing with the Principles of the Catholic Faith; And
that it were fit his Majesty should name some person to examine the whole
business a^ew with him his Confessor. To this the good Fath^^s made answer in
these express words: The prudent, sage and devo^t Read^r, havi^g well
considered of all things, will doubtless observe* that the Confessor e^gaged
not hastily in an affair of such moment, but after long deliberation how to
remedy this evil (which was the restitution of the Abbyes to their several
Orders* without allowing the I^suites to alienate any from the Lawful
Proprietors) and that it must be avowed, the Father had done well, and ought
not to have done otherwise, and that if he had not advertised his Imperial
Majesty thereof* he had deserved the blame of not dischargeing the duty of a
Good Confessor* according to the light of N^tural reason, and the rules of our
Society: to which the Friars of St. Benedict, with good reason replied, That
from hence we are to conclude, that the hinderance of justice is the duty of a
good Confessor: That we are required by the light of N^^^ral Reason, to allow
that for Just, which is really against the known rules of Justice, and that the
Rules of the Society Ordained, that such of their Fathers as are Confessors to
Princes, must earnestly endeavor, that the Abbeys which those Princes have
Ordered to be restored to their Orders may fall into the hands of the Society
against the Authority of the most legal Edicts.

10. Imposture; That these Abbi^s b^l^nge^^ not (...) any; and that they
de^^red them not of the Princes, but Princes demanded them for the Society.
In vain did the Friars object the Commandment of God, Not to (...) other men's
goods; for the Iesui^es answered, That they coveted not other men's goods in
coveting these Abbeys which belonged not to any; and than it was not they
demanded these Abbeys, but the Princes of the Empire demanded them for the
Society; that as they could not have demanded these Estates without envy, so
they could not refuse them without injury to the honor of God* when the Powers
thought fit to bestow them on their Company for promoting the Glory of God, and
the salvation of the people of Almaigne; So that the Society desired not these
Abbeys, but only submitted to the pleasures and dispositions of the Sovereign
Powers of Christendom: Adding with equal sincerity in the same Book, That when
they built themselves, they built not so sump^uously; but that Princes against
the will of the Society built for them great Colleges, and magnificent
Chur^hes.

To the first point, where the good Fathers suggest, that the Friars had not
title to the Abbeys; They Answer, That the Jesuits denying that the Abbeys did
belong to the Ancient Orders of Religion, did not cover their injustice, but
render it more visible; and that they did as a Robber, who taking another man's
purse should tell him, Friend, I do you no wrong, I desire not your goods; this
purse belongs not to you. And as to the second point of their pretended
moderation, and their perfect disinteresment, The Friars answered with
astonishment, That having written so many Books, and published such Volumes to
destroy the Edicts of the Emperor, having sent so many Letters to the great
Lords of Almaigne, to engage them to solicit from his Majesty Imperial a gift
of these Abbeys to the Society of Jesus, they feared not to say, That the
Sovereign Powers of Christendom constrained them by force to accept of these
Abbeys, and that they were not ashamed to call themselves Children of
Obedience, who could not resist the Sovereign Pastor of the Church, whom they
were obliged to obey by a quadruple vow. In the mean time, to inform the world
with what Faith these Fathers proceed in their Actions, the Benedictines
produced a letter of the late Cardinal Riche^ieu to the Congregation of
Cardinals in 1630, wherein as the Abbot of Cluny he complains, That the
Emperor having Ordained, That all the Monasteries which had been possessed by
the Protestants should be restored to the same regular Orders on which they
depended before the usurpation; It was informed nevertheless, That the
Provost-ship of Colmar being a dependant on the Abbey of Cluny, to which his
Prodecessor had presented an Abbot, was claimed by the Jesuits, who disputed
his Orders, and desired to possess themselves of it on pretense to found a
Seminary there.

But because these solemn testimonies, and their violent actions publicly done
in the face of the Sun, made it visible to all, that they had a passionate
desire to take away these Abbeys from the owners, they thought fit to confess
their desire, but with this trim and pleasant distinction; That the Fathers of
the Society coveted the Estates of these Abbeys, not for the Estates, but for
the convenience of entertaining a greater number of persons to labor the
propagation of the Catholic Faith in Almai^n. Whereupon the Benedictines no
less wisely than truly; Observe that the Jesuits did not so eagerly covet the
Abbeys, in order to a Religious end for the maintaining Divine Service, and
constant Prayers according to the Rules of their Foundations (which they
pretend not to observe) but desired only to finger the money, and receive the
Revenues.

The Jesuits endeavor to take away an Abbey of the Cisteaux, and another of
St. Clare: A hansome Letter of a Germane Lord against their Covetousness.
The observation of the Benedictines is clearly proved by the courses taken by
the same Jesuits of Almaign to take away two Nunneries, one of the Order of
Cisteaux, and the other of St. Clare, and to unite them to their College of
Mayence; for Father John Theodore Lenn^p having by Order of his Rector and
Provincial addressed a Letter to that Effect to the Baron of Questemberg his
Cousin, and of the Emperors Council, desiring him to procure a Grant thereof
from his Majesty Imperial unto their College, without once mentioning the
Pope, concludes with an earnest entreaty for speedy execution: And the
principal motive he alleges for their desiring these Abbeys, particularly that
of St. Clare, called Clarental, is, that it would be of great use to their
College of Mayence, especially in the multitude of Pastures and Meadows
belonging thereto; on which F. Hay has this remark, That the good Father had
greater care of the Soil than the Soul, to accommodate Beasts, than to guide
men to Salvation.

The Almaign Lord, in answer to his Cousin the Jesuit having expressed a
particular affection and kindness for the Society, and promised his assistance
in any thing he could think reasonable, frankly declares in an Excellent Letter
Printed at large in F. Hayes Book, That he held himself obliged to caution,
lest by favoring one party he might prejudice another, and lest whilst he
thinks to comfort himself in the acknowledgements and joys of the one he be
not oppressed with affliction for the groans and tears of the other, that he was
afraid to appear against St. Benedict, St. Clare, St. Francis, and St. Bernard
those great Lights of the Church Triumphant and Militant, and could not believe
it allowable in Conscience to trouble and molest their Holy Orders, and tread
under-foot their ancient and commendable foundations: That he was not
acquainted with the secrets of Theol^gy, but to speak according to his sense,
he could give this enterprise no other name than that of Robbery and Rapine: I
have often admired, ( says he) that they who profess a contempt of the good
things of the world, and to reject all hope and desires to possess them, but to
imitate nearly the nakedness and simplicity and purity of Christ, should so
vehemently labor and employ with such earnestness the best part of their lives
to augment the Estates and Possessions of their Orders: And now men of Religion
are clearly discovered, notwithstanding all their disguises to run the same
course with the Secular, with this advantage, that their sin is the greater,
who act unjustly under false appearances of piety and vain pretenses of
spiritual good: Why should I think my self a Criminal, or the Preachers
presently brand me for an offender, if I endeavor by usury, by fraud or other
unlawful means to take away and usurp my neighbors Estate, if you who are the
peculiar servants of Christ may without crime or offense appropriate to your
selves the Estate of another Religious Order who oppose it, protest against
your violence, and Cite you to Answer at the Tribunal of God? I could enlarge
on this subject, Dear Cousin, but my employments take me of, and I fear the
little I have said will displease you, though you know better than I, that the
faithful wounds of a friend are of more value, and deserve greater esteem than
the deceitful kisses of an enemy: Nor had I touched on this matter, but that
the frequent (not to say continual) complaints and reproaches of many persons
against the insatiable avarice, (as they call it) of your laudable Society had
not in a manner forced me to give you this hint; there being nothing but this
covetousness the most pious find fault with in the Fathers of the Company.

This pious and Christian Letter which ought at least to have cooled the heat
of the Jesuits in^lamed it; for they made the same Jesuit his Cousin by a
second Letter of Ian. 15. 1630. to write back to this Lord, That he committed a
great sin before God in not advising the Emperor to join these Nunneries to
their College of Mayeme, that this omission tended to the defrauding of the
Church of necessary laborers in the Vineyard of her Lord, to the retarding the
gain of Souls, to the favoring of Heresy, and opposing the Holy Enterprises
of their Society; that he knew the Society had many that envied her prosperity,
and very powerful adversaries, but presaged that they and their posterities
should one day acknowledge under the sense of the Chastisements of the Divine
vengeance; That they had hurt the apple of Gods eye: That other Orders of
Religion were either unwilling to employ themselves in the Conversion of
Heretics, or unable to perform with that dexterity and success which was
visible in the actions of the Society: That all they desired from him, was, to
have procured a Grant from the Emperor to the Society of the annual revenues
of one or two Nunneries that were wholly vacant (taking no notice that the
violence of the Heretics was the sole cause they were not then full.) That he
had not attempted to justify the many sorts of translations and unions of
Abbeys made in favor of others; but as a Divine of the Society labored only
for that which might be profitable for the company, and was fully assured a
good Counselor of State might in good conscience, in prudence and piety have
advised the Emperor accordingly, and that he who opposed it, not only
committed a great fault, but made himself guilty not of one but many very
heinous offenses: That it was true, men made it their custom to reproach their
Society with imputations of Avarice, of Rapine, and unjust coveting others
Estates; but that it was a stale heretical objection, and had been learnedly
refuted^ by their Father Gretser.

That they accommodate their Kitchins not the Monasteries. Four Abbies^
alienated for an addition to one of their Colleges.
To their pretense of dexterity and success in converting Pagans and Heretics
to the Catholic Faith; The Benedictines replied, That almost all the North had
been converted by the ancient Orders of Religion; and 'twas strange these good
Fathers would persuade us, That there is no other way, no better means to
propagate the faith of Christ in Almaigne than by multiplying Jesuitical
preachers; that there were multitudes of other pious men of Religion ready to
take pains in converting the Heretics; that the Iesui^es did them wrong to
say, they were unwilling or unable to do it with the dexterity and success of
their Society; that it was a piece of injustice and falsehood to say they would
not, and of arrogance to affirm they could not perform as well as others; That
if the Jesuits were as necessary to the Church as they would be taken to be,
God had provided other means for their subsistence than to uncover one Altar to
cover another, to rob the ancient foundations for enriching new comers. That it
would be hard to prove, that the change they desired was for the bettering and
improvement of the ancient Abbeys: That when Jacob saw the Ladder, he built an
Altar of stone, and poured oil upon it; but these good Fathers keep for
themselves the profits of the oil, reduce Monasteries into bare heaps of
stones, and Abbeys into Countrey-houses; so that in truth, the change they make
for the better is not in the Monasteries, but in the Ministeries of their
Kitchins.

This War of the Jesuits of Almaign against the ancient Orders of Religion
for taking away their Monasteries endured above ten years: At last the
insatiable Avarice of these Fathers was stopped by the opposition of the
Ecclesiastical Electors, and other Catholic Princes of the Empire, who
addressed themselves in writing to Pope Urban the 8th, about this matter by
their Deputies in the Ass^mbly General at Ratisbone in 1641. And so says F.
Hay, the Jesuits heat for invading Monasteries, was a little cooled, not out
of any virtuous disposition, but disability to attain their unjust desires: And
though they appropriated by their shifting devices four of the said Abbyes unto
one of their Colleges in 1659, the strong opposition they ^ound in other
Provinces of Germany caused that the same Abbyes became Sepulchers to bury
rather than encouragements to cherish the Acts of their Covetousness.

The Lies and Impostures of the Jesuits to possess themselves of an Abbey of
the Nuns of the Order of St. Bernard in Saxony.
The History of the life of the Emperor Ferdinand the 2d, informs us, that
having resolved to take from the Protestants all the Abbyes they possessed
themselves of since the treaty of Passa^ in 1552. he ordained by a public
Edict of Mar. 6. 1629. that they should be restored to those orders for whom
they were founded: The Abbot of the Monastery of Cesarea of the Order of the
Cisteaux, being deputed by his General, to put this Edict in execution sent
the Abbot of Valenciennes, to put four Nuns professed of the Order of St. Bernard
with two Novices, and one converted Sister into possession of the Abbey of
Voltigerode in the Lower Saxony: And the Bishop of Osnabrug, one of the
Commissioners Imperial having established them there by one of his Officers,
they continued there several months performing Divine Service, and all other
exercises of a Religious life.

The Jesuits having a design to possess themselves of this, as of all other
Nunneries the Protestants were to restore, made use of the credit of their
Father Lamorman with the Emperor to effect it: The Father served himself of
two notable lies to procure a Grant from the Emperor: the first, That the
Abbots deputed by the Orders of St. Benedict, and the Cisteaux had made unto
the Jesuits a voluntary cession of all Nunneries, and some other of the less
considerable Monasteries of their Orders. The other, that the Abbey of
Voltigerode near the Imperial Town of Ges^ar was desert and vacant, and that no
person demanded or claimed it, and that it would be very convenient for the
Society for a Nursery of Novices in that Town where they had a College
already: All this appears in express terms in the Commission they obtained,
though the one and the other were notoriously false, the said Nuns of the Order
of the Cisteaux, having been in possession of the said Abbey many months before.

It Is the saying of a Pious Doctor, that the Devils prophecy what they will
do; so these Fathers bestirred themselves with all expedition to make that
appear true in Act and execution which was absolutely false in allegation: The
first Cheat they applied themselves to was this: Having persuaded these Nuns,
that they were not secure in this Abbey, as situate in the Country, and exposed
to the incursions of Soldiers and violences of War; they proposed as an
expedient that they should for a while quit the Abbey and retire to Goslar,
where it should be their care to procure them reception, which was accordingly
done in the Monastery of Franquemberg in March 1631. But though the Nuns,
frighted by this artifice departed the Abbey, their Movables, their Servants,
their Cattle, and Household Stuff, were left at Voltigerode.

The Jesuits having sped so well in this piece of craft, soon made it appear,
that the Nuns had no reason to fear any incursion of Soldiers, or violence
but theirs. For presently after, viz. 29 of the same month of March, Herman
Gauvinz, Provincial of the Company, took possession of the Abbey, and left some
Jesuits in it, and forced the Nuns Servants to swear fealty to them, without
any signification to the Superiors of the Order of the Cisteaux, or to the
Abbot of Cesarea, Guardian of the Monastery.

Their unparalled cruelty in driving away these Nuns, and their Confessors
out of this Abbey.
The Nuns seeing themselves so maliciously cheated, found means secretly to
re-enter the Abbey, and having placed themselves in the Quire at the upper end
of the Church, continued there night and day, performing Divine Service, the
Jesuits being in possession of the Lodgings. This return of the Nuns angered
the Good Fathers, who left no stone unturned to persuade them, by entreaties
and by threats, to be gone, and had certainly starved them, had they not been
relieved with Victuals by some heretic women of the Country thereabouts. The
Jesuits seeing them, maugre all this hard usage, to continue unmoved, resolved
to expel them by violence. And the ^2 of April being Palm Sunday Eve* assisted
with Sergeants and Soldiers sent for of purpose, one of their Novices being
principal Actor in this irreligious Tragedy; with a temerity and cruelty
unheard of among persons of Religion, they dragged by force out of the body of
the Church these Virgins Consecrate to God, who groaning and shrieking, were
violently haled away at so Holy a time to the scandal of the whole Province,
the Novice handling them so barbarously, that some of them who felt his fury
most lay sick of their hurts a long time after.

The matter of this story is so extraordinary and surprising that it were
easily credible; ^. H^y who reports it, had used some exaggeration, but that
his relation delivers it more favorably than the hainousness of the fact
proved by Authentic Acts of Justice, inserted at large both in Dutch and
Latin, in his work, deserves, as may partly appear to the Reader, by the Copy
of the Process Verbal, or complaint of the said Nuns, exhibited in Du^ch to
the Official of Osnabrugg, as follows.

It is not in our power, (poor abandoned Orphans that we are) not to lift up
our voice to complain of the miserable condition, the strange and cruel
proceedings exercised against us by the Fathers Jesuits on Saturday being
Palm Sunday Eve, on the Evening, have reduced us unto: For being come with the
Lord Widelag, and two Sergeants, who are the ordinary Ministers made use of by
the Magistrates to take Robbers and other Malefactors, into our Abbey of
Voltigerode, wherein we had been established by our spiritual Father the Abbot
of Walhenriedh Commissioner Sub-delegate, in pursuance of his Imperial
Majesty's Edict of restitution, they entered between six and seven of the Clock.
And finding us in the Quire of the Church, where we said our Prayers, the said
Lord and the Jesuits spoke to us fiercely, and preffed us to be gone. But we
continued on our Knees, in our ^eats, and answered, that we were under the
obedience of our holy Order: And had no allowance or permission to depart out
of our house without the command of our Superiors: Afterward I Mary Kogel Nun
Professed laying hold on my seat with both my hands hung thereupon with all my
forc^: But the two Sergeants and the Jesuit Novice violently pulling away my
hands from the Seat, took me off, and the Jesuit h^ld me by the middle fast
locked in his Arms, and so carried me some part, and dragged me the rest of the
way from my Seat to the end of the Quire: And as I cried out, Vi^lence Jesus,
violence, I believe you will kill me, (for I was quite out of breath) they drew
me out of the Quire: Whereupon our Confessor arrived, and found me laid along
on the ground, crying out against the violence they had done me. But having
lift me up, by force they put me in a Chair to carry me away, which they did,
forcing me clear round the Abbey, and having cast me out of the Cloister, they
made me march between the two Sergeants in the midst of a field, led by the
Arms like a thief. Meeting a Chariot by the way, I catched at the wheel, but
was forced off by them with such violence, that on the morrow I found my self
so maimed in the Arms, and had such pain in my breast (to omit the fright and
emotion caused by this violence) that I know not whether ever I shall recover
it.

After me followed the Noble Virgin Anne Lucy De Dernbach, near kinswoman to
his Imperial Majesty's Vice Chancellor, whom they carried away in like manner,
and with like violence, in presence of our Confessor, who reproached the Father
Rector of the Jesuits, for acting such a tragedy in so holy a time; and
represented to the Sergeants, that they ought to remember, she whom they used
so, was near Kinswoman to M. de Stralendorf, Vice Chancellor of the Empire; but
our Confessor prevailed not by his Remonstrances, for they took her away, as
they had done Me.

The third was sister to the last mentioned, her name Anna Sidonia de Dernbach,
whose hands they forced from off the Seats of the Quire, with like violence:
And the Jesuit Novice holding her fast by the middle, dragged her forth, and
put her in a Chair to carry her away, who in the mean time cried out to the
Jesuit, Whether this were their acknowledgement of the great good Offices her
Kinsman had done for their College at Fulde; and that this injury was done to
the Vice Chancellor of the Empire in the person* of his Cousin. But they were
deaf to all reason, and used two Nuns more in the saine barbarous manner. And
this we can assure before God and the whole Court of Heaven, that all we
allege is clear truth.

Who can hear so lamentable a story, and not be equally moved with compassion
toward the Nuns, Votaries of piety, and nobly descended, thus cruelly
handled in their proper Monastery, and with indignation against the Authors of
such barbarous violence, which yet will appear more shameful by the addition
of some circumstances faithfully reported by the famous Benedictine F. Hay, in
these words. Heretofore, under the Old Law, Criminals who fled into the Temple,
purified only by the blood of Goats and of Calves were safe in that Asylum, if
once they laid hold on the horns of the Altar: But now under the New Law, the
Fathers of the Society make no conscience of using Sergeants, and the servants
of Hangmen, to put themselves by their insolence, into the possession of
Temples dedicated to the living God, consecrated by the dreadful and adorable
Mysteries of Jesus Christ. And to dragg away innocent Nuns from thence by
force and violence: O shame! O infamy! The reverend F. David, Prior of the
Dominicans of Alberstad, and a converted brother named Angel happened to be
present at this sad and unparalled spectacle, and did so zealously and
fervently reproach the Jesuits with the enormity of the Action, that the
Convert could hardly abstain from Actual resistance: But the Jesuits not
satisfied with the violence done to the Nuns, thought it necessary to expel
from the Abbey their Superior and Confessor, a Friar of the Abbey of Cesarea,
called F. Michael Go^z; who being returned from Brunswick, where he had been in
search of the Chalices belonging to this Nunnery, came timely enough to be not
only a spectator of the Tragedy, but to bear a part in it. For having
reproached the Rector of the Jesuits to his face, for the indignity of the
outrage committed against these holy Virgins, for not obeying the commands of
the Jesuits to depart the Abbey; and having retired into the Churchyard, as in
search of security from their violence among the dead interred there, they
ordered two Soldiers, who were very averse from laying hands on the Priest, to
throw the dice who should drive him out. This done, one of them took him and
violently thrust him out of the gate of the Monastery; which gave a Protestant
Soldier of Meclenbourg,) moved at t^is lamentable spectacle) occasion to say,
with indignation against the Jesuits, We suffer not Ministers to be thus used
in our Country: Behold the end of the Canonical Establishment (as Crusius the
Jesuit entitles it) of the Fathers of the Society in the Abbey of Voltigerode.

An Abbot of the Order of Cisteaux turns out the Jesuits with shame, and
re-establishes the Nuns.
The Abbot of Cesarea Guardian of this Monastery, who by the Emperors
Authority had established there these Nuns according to the Edict, having
received advice of this horrible proceeding, writ of F. Lamorman the Jesuit,
Confessor to the same Prince, as follows; I am informed of matters of great
grief and trouble to me: The event will show in time whether they may conduce
to their good, who regard only their private interest and advantage: You have
played, my Fathers, a very strange part, whereof I send you the Relation, which
being acted in the time of the passion of ^ur Savior, has unhappily
represented to us its image and form. But there are in it two astonishing
differences: The one, that Females represented the person of Christ; the other,
that they who assume the Name of Jesus, accompanied with their Guard of
Soldiers acted not his part, but that of the Jews, (...) persecuted and abused
him: O Society of Jesus! Is this the Society you have with Jesus? I conjure
your pa^ernal Reverence by the ^owels of our Redeemers Mercies, to cause
restitution to be made of the Abbeys, which the Society have possessed
themselves of, under ^olou^ of a pretended Cession, for fear these Angels of
Peace, according to Scripture phrase, be obliged to continue their sighs and
their tears; if voluntary restitution be not speedily made, we shall not fail
of means to cause it to be done. Cesarea May 30. 1631.

To conclude, notwithstanding the great power this Jesuit had over the
Emperors spirit; The Order of Cisteaux up in their prosecution of
re-establishment from his Imperial Majesty obtained a solemn arrest in their
favor for restoring these Nuns to their Abbey; whence the Jesuits were obliged
to dislodge with shame, as they had entered by a violent intrusion, contrary to
the Civil and Canon Law, for which by the Canons they deserved exemplary
punishment: For the ancient Orders of St. Benedict, St. Bernard, and others
needed only the Emperors authority for their re-establishm^nt in their proper
Abbeys, as Estates. violently u^^^ped from them by the Lu^herans, to which the
said Orders had a continual and most unquestionable right of re-entry: But
besides, that the gift of this Abbey which the Jesuits pretended to have had
from the Emperor was Null in it self, as contrary to the Edict, and had not
been obtained but by manifest surprise, as was observed, before the Jesuits
themselves acknowledged by their Books, that the Pope only could make such
translation of Abbeys from the Ancient Orders to their Society; and when in the
mean time they were pressed to show, that the Pope had given them this by some
Rescript or Bull, they had none to produce, but made an illusory answer worthy
of themselves:

That the Pope had given it them by the Emperor, as if, says F. Hay, the Pope
^ad accustomed to grant such extraordinary favors by Secular Commissions of
Emperors or Kings, and not by Bulls or Apostolic Brieves.

The Jesuits forbear not afterward to attempt the possession of several
Abbeys under the specious pretense of the greater Glory of God; insomuch that
the Catholic Noblesse of the Rhine in Weteravia held themselves obliged to
make public Complaints against their Avarice to Pope Urban the 8th, in these
words; We see, Holy Father, to our very great astonishment, that the Fathers of
the Soci^ty of Jesus by diverse persecutions and flatteries they use to the
Sovereign, Chief, and Princes of the Empire, over and above the vast riches
they have gained, labor to possess themselves of Abbeys, Foundations, and
Monasteries, principally those of Noble and Illustrious Virgins under diverse
pretexts of propagating the Faith, and advancing the salvation of Souls. They
represent to him further, That in such holy places as the Jesuits were
possessed of, presently all marks of the ancient duties of the foundations
vanished upon their entry, all works of Mercy and Charity in practice there
before did immediately disappear. That the Monasteries being abandoned, did
sensibly decay, and would by degrees moulder to nothing, contrary to the pious
intentions of the founders their Ances^ors; that the buildings were ruined and
fallen to the ground: and that nothing remained but the Estates and Revenues to
enrich the Colleges of the Jesuits by the spoils of the ancient Orders of
Religion.

So that notwithstanding the great pride and vanity of these self-conceited
Fathers, and their contempt of the Nunneries, saying, That the virginity of
females consecrated to Christ is a solitary recluse and lazy virginity, which
works out only their particular salvation, whereas theirs of the Society is
public, active, employed in preaching, and fervent with zeal for the happiness
and beatitude of the souls of all; Their Covetousness and Avarice appeared the
more odious by their insolent brags, and provoked every person to indignation
against them, for having such presumptuous thoughts of their Company, as to
dare to pretend that Religion was in danger of ruin, and a total destruction,
unless change were made of the Holy Habitations of Religious Virgins, whose
prayers are so useful to the States Eccl^siastical and Civil, into Farms for
their Colleges, whose disorders and irregularities are so notorious to the
world, and pernicious to mankind.

The Famous Story Of the Enormous Cheat upon the Nuns of the Order of St.
Vrsula, by the Rector of the Jesuits of Metz, in the sale of a house for their
new establishment in that City: Confirmed by an arrest of the Parliament of
Metz in 1661. a Copy whereof is here inserted.
Whereby appear the equivocations, lies, deceits, and cheating impostures
practiced by the said Rector against the said Nuns, th^ugh he was their
director Spiritual and Temporal.
Extracted and faithfully transcribed out of the Registers of Parliament.
BEtween the Nuns professed and Convent of the V^sulines of this City of Metz,
authorized by the Court to prosecute their rights appellantes for the Seizures
made of the goods and revenues of the said Monastery the 24th and 27th Nov. and
19th Ian. last, demandants in conversion of appeal into opposition, and upon
letters of form of Rescision and Restitution by them obtained in Chancery 29
Dec. last, against a certain contract of Sale of Sept. 7. 1649, that of
ratification of December. 13. in the said year, and all other acts ensued thereon
of the one part,
And the Rector of the College of the Jesuits of the said City summoned and
defendant of the ^ther part.
And also between August de Montigny Burgess of Metz and his Consorts, next
kinsmen to the Appellants, Demandants by request to obtain intervention of one
part.
And the said Rector defendant of the other part.
As also between Thomas le Blane Provincial of the Jesuits, partly by
intervention of one part.
And the said Nuns defendants of the other part. A law term.
Without that the qualities shall hurt or prejudice the parties.

COVRCOL for the Appellantes and Demandantes sets forth, That the Suite was of
a Contract of Sale of a house situate in this City of Metz passed by F. Forget
then Rector of the Jesuits of the said City for the use of the Vrsuline Nuns
of Mascon, stipulating for a new establishment of the Nuns of the same order to
be made at Metz aforesaid.

That the qualities of the parties would decide the cause, it being certain
that the Nun^ come from Mascon, for the new establishment of this Monastery,
were not of the Community or Nuns of this Monastery; for that according to the
constitutions of the Order, such Nuns as had not made profession in the new
Monastery remained still professed Nuns of the Monastery whence they came out,
and whither they might return or be recalled; and the Nuns of the new Monastery
were not obliged to retain them: so that neither this Monastery of St. Vrsula
of Metz, nor the Community thereof had a beginning but from the day when the
first of the Appellantes made profession there, and the Community was not
accomplished until there were three Nuns professed; that two infallible and
decisive consequences arose from hence; the one, that the Appellantes who made
up the true Monastery, having not been privy to the Contract nor ratified it,
the Defendant had no Action against them, nor morgage on their dowers; the
other, That they could not be otherwise answered than as Minors, who are
always relieveable in these things, they may have done to their prejudice;
That judgment had been given in the like case for the Jesuits of Authun and
Bourg in Bresse, as may appear by an Arrest of the Parliament of Dijon in 1632.
and by a judgment of the Presidial of Bourg in Bresse, whereby the Jesuits
relieved for purchases they had made to their prejudice, being damnified a
third part thereby in the price paid above the value of the things purchased.
That there is damage sustained of above two thirds; for in 1627. this house
with another adjoining called Duponce was bought at twenty seven thousand
Francs Messines. In 1642. the Jesuits upon an exchange valued it but at thirty
thousand Francs with all the improvement and buildings they had erected, after
the demolishing of others very considerable. In 1646. it was farmed at four
hundred and fifty Francs M^ssines per Ann. In 1649. they offered it to Nuns,
and a person of quality at twenty seven thousand Francs of the same money, but
they refused it as not worth so much: Yet the same year 1649. F. Forget the
Rector, having been in several Cities of the Kingdom, and afterward addressing
himself to the Vrsulines of Mascon surprised them by several untrue
suggestions, and sold them this house at thirty thousand Livers Tourtois
current money of France, which make fourscore thousand Francs Messines; so that
the Nuns are damnified above two thirds; that besides the consideration of
damage, the frauds, artifices, cheats, and false suggestions on which the
contract was grounded, make it void and null.

This will appear by a writing of F. Forgets entitled Important Avisoes
wherein he has described this house, but with many fictions and disguisements
of the Truth, both as to its situation, and the consistence of the buildings,
and promised several advantages which had never been, nor ever will be; and to
gain the better credit, he writ, and caused to be written a great number of
Letters to the said Vrsulines, and the late Lord Bishop of Mascon; and not
content with this, he sold the house according to a platform, and model both
of the body of the lodgings, and the frontispiece signed with his hand, but
found false upon view, and comparison made of the house with the model; That he
had sold it as in good condition according to the view taken, and by him
reported at Mascon, which was also false. That he sold it, as all regularly
built and fit for Nuns, so that there was not, said he, any thing unfinished
but the grates and windows, whereas in truth there was not one regular place,
save the Dormitory, which was not habitable by reason of the stink and
infection of the River Seille, and the public Sewers; that there was no
Church, no burying place, no Cloister; that he suggested, other Nuns would have
bought it, which was not true; that the Nuns of Mascon who were sent to
instruct the Virgins of this new Monastery in the rules of Religion, and their
Order being accompanied with two persons of Quality bound for Metz to see
whether they had been cheated in the buying of this house: when they came to
Chaumont, F. Forget made them believe that they could not pass further without
danger of their lives, which caused their return to Mascon, as may appear by a
letter of F. Forgets; yet the morrow after F. Forget writ another letter quite
contrary to the former. Lastly, that there was so much deceit and fraud in the
business, that it was evident F. Forget to make the Nuns of Miscon believe that
this house cost the Jesuits more than he sold it for, suggested to them that
the decree of adjudication was made to them for twenty two thousand and three
hundred Livers, without adding Messines, and afterward in his suggestions of
the workmens accounts and acquittances, he made them also believe that there
were improvements and buildings of above fifteen thousand Livers Tourtois
value, which was not so, in regard that allowance being made for the buildings
they had demolished, all the improvements were not worth two thousand five
hundred Livers Tour^ois. Further, F. Forget fearing lest the Nuns upon the
place might have discovered the trick of Livers Messines, dexterously
stipulated by the bargain of Sale, that the Evidences of their purchase of this
house were not to be put into the hands of the buyers till after full payment
of the whole price.

That the lapse of ten years could not be objected against the Appellantes,
because their Community had its beginning between five and six years since:
That by Evidence communicated by the Defendant himself, it appeared that the
Nuns of Mascon who remained there, had made continual complaint against the
Rector of the Jesuits for the cheat he had put upon them. That this was
carefully concealed from these in this Monastery, that the Rector of the
Jesuits did plot and contrive by intelligence and correspondence with others
to deceive the Nuns that were to make profession in this Monastery, by keeping
the contract from their knowledge; That the pretended ratification of December.
13. 1649. made by the Nuns of Mascon sent hither, could not hurt or prejudice
the Appellants, who never appeared nor intermedled therein, nor had ever
agreed or ratified it: That the pretended ratification had been contrived and
extorted by F. Forget, who was Director Spiritual and Temporal to the Nuns who
came from Mascon, that by the reading it was evident he had digested and
compiled it as he pleased. That it was visibly false in all its propositions,
and could not give validity to a contract in it self fraudulent and null. That
the Contract of Sale could not oblige the Appellants who were not privy to it,
since it is not permitted for any to stipulate for a third person. That the
Letters of restitution were not necessary for the Appellants but for a
surabundance of good right they had taken them, to the end no act they could
have done might be objected against them; That the Defendant having already
received eighteen thousand Livres Tournois, it was much more than the house was
worth; therefore he concluded, that in regard of the said Letters, and in
allowance thereof the parties ought to be remitted into the same estate they
had before the Contracts of September. 16. and December. 13. 1649, and the
Defendant condemned to restore the eighteen thousand Livres by him received
upon the Appellants offer to abandon the said house: And in the Suit by
conversion of Appeal into opposition, that the Seizures made at the Defendants
request be declared null, injurious, and wrongful; and an Ousterlemain granted
thereon with costs, damages and interest.

DE CLOS for the parties intervenant being the Fathers, Mothers, and next Kin
of the Nuns, said, It may not be thought strange these parties intervene in the
cause, as being of no less concern than the destruction of a Monastery, and
tending to the famishing of their Children the Nuns. That the Defendant, or F.
F^rrest his Predecessor in the Office, having by a fraududent Contract
surprised the Nuns of St. Vrsula of Mascon, had the dexterity to conceal this
Contract ten or twelve years till he had apprehension of the letters of
Rescision; that to secure his debt by sufficient morgages of the Dowers, which
from time to time should be brought by new Nuns into this Monastery, having
published abroad that this house had been given the eight Nuns come from Mascon
to establish the Monastery for their Dowries; he proceeded at last to the
Seizure of all the Revenues of these Nuns, and had caused the Rents and
Pensions of the Nuns and Pensioners to be seized to draw from them the payment
of the sum of twelve thousand Livres pretended residue of the price of the
house in question, and nine years arrerages: That this unexpected rigor
reduced the Nuns to the necessity of begging, contrary to the rules of their
Order, and the tenor of the permission of their establishment at Metz, or
falling again into the hands of their kindred; That the Dowries of Nuns were
sacred, and not subject to Commerce: That the Church tolerated no other use of
them, than only for the Alimony of Nuns: That they could not be diverted to the
payment of debts, much less of debts liable to question, secret and fraudulent
as this; yet it appeared, that by the Contract of Sale of the said house F.
Forget had the boldness to stipulate a particular morgage to secure his debt
upon the Nuns Dowries, who should make profession in this Monastery; and so the
Dowries of these Nuns should be aliened along time before their profession,
which cannot be judged to be other than Simony; that the moneys of these
Dowries having been stipulated for Alimony, could not be seized for the
Defendants debt. That the new Nuns, who alone made up the Monastery, had never
signed any of the Contracts made use of by the defendant against them which
were always kept secret; so that they were at their full liberty to accept
them or not. That the Nuns of Mascon had been so grossly surprised in this, that
they were excessively damnified. That these parties had a notable interest, and
were concerned to take care that their Daughters the Nuns should not long
continue in an unhealthy and infected place; therefore he concluded, That
having regard to their intervention, it would please the Court to grant the
Appellants and Demandants their Fines and Cenclusions.

LE FEVRE for the Rector of the Jesuits, said, That he could not admit the
App^llants to be parties; that they were not qualified to sue; that being Nuns
professed of the Monastery of St. Vrsula of Metz aforesaid, they were incapable
to proceed at Law without their Superior; the particulars which compose the
body, having no power without their head: That all the Convent ought to have
been parties, or audience denied to the particular Nuns, whose proceeding was
so unjust, that they were forsaken by their Superior; that though the Contract
had been past by the Vrsulines of Mascon, who were not professed of the Monastery
of Metz: it was good notwithstanding, for that it was passed for, and to the
profit of the Monastery to be established at Metz: That new establishments were
made no other way; that if such Contracts should not oblige houses newly
estabished, and the Nuns that should make profession there, the Sellers should
be always cheated; that they should give away their estates without any
assurance to receive the price for them. That the Committy of the Monastery of
Metz begun on the day when the first Nuns sent from Mascon were encloystered
and continued, and was increased by the profession of such as were newly
received; that though the Nuns newly professed were not named in the Contract,
nor had ratified it, yet they were obliged by it, as the new Monks of a
Monastery are bound to pay the debts of their predecessors in the same house.
That the Dowers of the new Nuns coming by acquisition to the Convent, were from
thenceforth subject to the discharge of privileged debts, as the price of the
said house, which was their habitation and part of their Alimony: That the
juniority they alleged could stand them in no stead, because the purchase was
made with all formalities requisite, and by the Authority and Counsel of their
Superiors who had contracted; and therefore the Contract must stand, otherwise
no person will Contract for like establishments, nor with Nuns. That the desire
of an object came as well by the ears as the eyes* so that it was not necessary
the buyer should see the thing he would buy, but it sufficed if he knew its
condition and value by the report of another: That there had not been any
deceit, fraud, surprise, or trapan on F. Forgets part, who in his Important
Avisoes delivered nothing but what was true concerning the description of this
house: That the platforms and models of that house which he gave them, were
true, if the places were measured by the foot of Metz according to the custom
of the Country where they were drawn: That the Nuns had the liberty to cause
it to be viewed before they took possession; that they had perused it six
weeks, ratified the Contract, and declared it agreeable to the model received
of F. Forget in the City of Mascon, and that they had found it fair and more
convenient for regularity, and the functions of their institution, than they
conceived or imagined at the time of the purchase; that if F. Forget had been
their Director Spiritual and Temporal, it was an extraordinary favor received
of him who deserved other acknowledgements than those they made, and that for
this reason they could not annul the ratification, for otherwise they who
intermedled with their direction, and should take care of their temporalities
and affairs could make no Contract with them; that the intervention of their
Parents and Kindred was precarious and useless: Therefore he concluded, that
without regard to their Letters of Rescision and restitution, or to their
opposition, the App^llants and Opposants should lose the benefit thereof, and
pay costs to the Defendant.

Ioly was heard for the Kings Atturny General, and said, That the business
depending was of great importance, as well in respect of the parties
contesting, as the Grounds of the Suit: That the Court was possessed of the
Cause by an Appeal put in by the new professed Vrsulines of Metz, for seisures
made at the request of the Jesuits on the Goods given them by their kindred
for their Dowers and alimony: And that the cause of the seizure was a contract
made in 1649. with the Vrsulines of M^scon, whereof till then they had no
knowledge, and were thereupon obliged to obtain Letters of Rescision against
this Contract, to declare it null, by reason of their being damnified above a
moity of the just price, the personal deceit on Father Forge^s part; who had
made the sale, and the juniority on the Gran^ees part: That whereas question
was made in the Cause, touching the quality of the Demandants, as not parties
capable to plead, without the assistance of their Superior, the establishment
of the quality was a thing previous to the Suit, and that he was of opinion,
that this objection was not con^iderable, because the Appellants only were
concerned in the differences now in Judgment, as well because that if the
Jesuits pretensions took place they should be reduced to beggary, and see
themselves deprived of things given for their Dowers and Aliment, without
having contracted with or known these suits to have been their Creditors, as
also for that the Superior and other Nuns remaining of the 8 come from
Mascon, to make this new establishment, should be received at any time to
return into the Convent, whereof they were always deemed to be part, according
to the rules and constitutions of their Order. That which removes all obstacles
in this point, is that in all Communities Secular and Regular, when any thing
has past prejudicial or contrary to the Canons, Ordinances and Arrests, there
is not one particular member in the body, who has not good ground of Appeal as
for wrong; and that in such case the assistance of the head was needless, for
that it falls out often in such occasions, that the head is the party to be
complained of. Having established the quality of the parties Appellants, with a
brief summary explication of the fact, the parties reasons for maintaining
their pretensions, he said, It might have been wished that an affair of this
nature had not appeared in public: And that the parties had not of themselves
been inclined to have agreed among themselves and done one another Justice.
That it was horrid to see persons who made profession of a life more perfect
than other men, disposed to break the sacred tie of that holy union, which we
ought to find among the most Lukewarm Christians* that we must endeavor by
exact examination to stop the further oppression of Justice and Equity, and
to preserve them from incertitude in their stations. To effect this, we must
inquire whether the damages sustained exceed the moity of the Just price,
whether there were any deceit or surprise, whether the Appellants were Minors,
and lastly how con^iderable the Contract in question might be: To settle the
damage he said, That the house had been bought by the Jesuits by Decree for 22
thousand 300 Livres Messines, every Livre twenty Groats value, which makes 12
Sols six Deniers Tournois, and amounted in all to 13 thousand 935 Livres, ten
Sols Tournois. That the Jesuits had assured the Vrsulines as well by Letters
as by their Avisoes, entitled Important, that the house with the improvements
would come to 30 thousand Livres, not adding Messines: That as to the
reparations and improvements, they produced no Account or acquittance of the
workmen who had labored there; so that it might be truly said that they had
none, or that they were so inconsiderable, they durst not show the just sum
they amounted to. That it was true the Jesuits agreed not to the value of
Livres Messines, as before reduced to Livres Tournois, but would by this means
have obscured the business, and prevent Judgment at the hearing; but at last
upon the Defendants Calculation by Letters, the 22 thousand 300 Livres Messines
were valued at no more than 16 thousand Livres Tournois; so that the damage
remained still most enormous, and approached very near the moity of the just
price. As to the fraud and deceit, it was visible by them that F. Forget had
great power over the V^sulines, who placed an entire confidence in his words
and writings; so that it was no wonder that they gave so easily 30 thousand
Livres Tournois for a house which he assured them to be worth so much; which he
offered to justify, laying a Paper on the Table to declare the particulars,
but never spoke to them of Livres Messines which was the ^quivocation that drew
the V^sulines into the snare. That instead of showing the Contracts and
Acquittances, he stipulated that after payment of the purchase-money for the
house, he would deliver into the Nunn^s hands Extracts of all the Contracts and
Evidences concerning the said ^ouse: Further, that neither the Nuns, nor any
person on their behalf had seen the house, and that there was presented them a
model which was not agreeable to the house, but represented the house fairer
and more convenient for Lodgings, and of greater extent than in truth it was,
being 16 fadomes, two feet and three inches more than the house did effectually
contain, as appeared by the last process verbal of the view taken by Order of
this Court. The truth is, the Jesuits, to defend themselves against this
objection which annulled the Contract, for that it was an error in the
substance and matter of the Contract, would have denied the model as a
counterfeit thing, and not delivered by them, had it not been signed in two
places by Fa. Forget; so that they bethought themselves of the shift to say,
that the Stair-cases were added in the model which are usually left out of
designs of Architecture, and confined themselves at last to the sole defense of
saying, that the measure of the Stairs was not taken by the Kings fadom, as in
truth it was, but by the fadom of that Country; which caused a greater Error,
for that the fadom of Metz is almost two foot and a half greater than the
Kings. That true it was, by the foot it was less than that of France, but it
was as true, that it contained ten feet, and* that of France but six: As to
their minority, there was no difficulty in the case, since it was insisted,
that the Nuns newly pro^est were Minors not only in respect of their Age, but
of their quality of Nuns, and as members of a Community which is always
considered in minority: But* against all those reasons, the Jesuits opposed
the prescription of 12 years, and that it was never heard of, that a purchaser
should be received to propose damnification, thereby to procure* restitution of
the purchase-money paid, or part thereof. As to the prescription, it could not
be pleaded against the Nuns newly professed; for that they could not be
esteemed a Community till they were of the number of three, according to the
Law, Ner atius at D. de verb. signif. Besides, it may be said, the Community
has not yet commenced, for that they have not any administration of the
affairs of the house, as appeared by a Letter produced by the Jesuits, written
by their Superior to F. Forget, wherein she told him she took excessive pains,
to conceal from the new Nuns the state of the House, and feared their care in
the inqui^y would quench in them the spirit of their vocation.

As to the restitution, there were some difficulty in it in the state of his
Majority, but in a Minors Case damnification is a sufficient cause of
Restitution: That the Jesuits themselves had been relieved in a purchase they
made as was observed by the Demandants advocate, though they were damnified but
a third part: That in the last place it was opposed on the Jesuits part, that
the Contract was ratified five or six days after the Cloysture of the Nuns.
But this Act was of no force, for that it was signed at the Grate, and by
Duresie* That the terms it contained made it suspicious, for instead of a pure
and simple ratification they made an Elogy of this House to the Nun^, who upon
a visible induction were to say, that they found it much fairer and more
convenient than they had imagined it to have been* though in truth it be less
commodious and spacious than by the model it ought to have been. But though
this Act had been drawn in the best form, it might be said it could not any
ways oblige the new Nuns, for that when the Act was past, not one of them
was then received into the Monastery, and that since their Entry they had not
ratified any Act: That the last observation to be made, was to consider the
validity of the Contract, which may be said to be absolutely null, for that no
person is thereby obliged: Not the Nuns of Mascon who passed it, for that by
an express Clause they had stipulated, that they were not in any wi^e to be
bound in, or liable unto the payment of the Principal and Interest of such sums
as might become due in pursuance of the said Contract. Not the Nuns newly
professed, who were never privy to the Contract, nor ratified it afterward, so
that they were in Sta^^^ ^ntegro; that they were neither bound personally nor
by real security: That if it were objected, that the Nuns of Mascon had
obliged the dowers of the new professed Nuns, it were vain, since it would
prove to be Res inter alios acta quae tertio noc^re non debet. So that we may
observe an enormous damnification in this Contract, a considerable surprise, a
constant minority, against which they could not prescribe; and three nullities,
whereof two might be drawn from the disagreement of the house with the model:
The first, by reason of the error that occurred in the substance of the thing
sold, the other drawn from the defect of capacity and ability to contract, for
that the permission and Authorization of the Lord Bishop of Mascon, was
grounded on the Conformity of the model with the house. And for the third
nullity it might be taken from the Contract which was null in it self, as not
effectually obliging any person to the execution. Therefore he was of opinion,
that there was sufficient reason to receive the Kindred intervenant in the
Cause, and to do them right upon their intervention, together with the Letters
of rescision, and allowing them to declare the contract in suit null and of
none effect, and consequently to remitt the parties into such estate as they
had before the Contract of 1649. to convert the Appeal into opposition, and
having done right thereon, to grant an Ousterlemain to the Demandants for the
things seized* Co^rcol was afterward heard for the Nuns, Demanding
Dismission in the Cause against the Provincial of the Jesuits, and that as to
the profits, the Arrest to be Given to bind the Provincial.

The Court having regard to the Lett^rs, and allowing the same, has remit^ed,
and remitts the parties into the same Estate they were in before the Contract
in question, unless the Jesuits had rather rest satisfied with 18 thousand
Livres in full payment for the house; and declare their option within a month:
H^th Received and receives the parties intervenant; the Nuns Kindred in
respect of their intervention to Convert the Appeal into opp^sition, and having
done them right therein* to grant the Demandants an (...) for the things
seized, without (...). Has granted a Dismission in the Cause of the Provincial
of the ^esuites, and for the profits* has declared, that h^ shall be bound by
the present Arrest.

Signed, Bouchard,
Given at (...) in (...), Tuesday; May 10. 166^.
THE Famous Banquerupt OF THE Jesuits of Sevil;
For above four hundred and fifty thousand Ducats, to the ruin of a multitude
of persons and whole families;
As appears by the Relation inserted in the Spanish Book, Entitled the Theater
of Jesuitism, page 378. And by the MEMORIAL presented to the King of Spain in
person by the Creditors of the College of the Jesuits of Sevil concerning
this Banquerupt: Faithfully rendered out of a Spanish Copy under the hand of
John Vn^^fre Salazar; whereby is discovered that spirit of Ambition, Avarice,
and Iniquity that reigns in the Jesuits.
See the words of the Memorial.
SIR,
JOhn Onufre de Salazar in his Name, and the Names of other your Majesty's
Subjects ^reditors of the College of Jesuits of Sevil, commonly called St.
Hermenigildes, come to prostrate themselves once more at your feet, to
represent to your Clemency the lamentable effects of a banquerupt of the said
College for above four hundred and fifty thousand Ducats, and to desire
justice against the most pernicious cheat that ever was heard of, and whereof
no precedent was ever seen in these Kingdoms since the establishment of this
Monarchy, they shall not be declared at large. SIR, With tears, and other
lamentable agitations of grief and affliction, which have been the only
payment, made so many poor Widows, so many Orphans, so many Wives separated
from their Husbands, so many Nuns without a Monastery, so many ruined
Gentlemen, and generally so many persons of several sorts, who trusted this
Religious House, being in greatest credit among all those in this City, with
their only stock, for subsistence, their Dowers, the patrimony of their,
Children, who now sustain greater Losses* Imp^stures and malice, from this
House of Religion, than ever they imagined to avoid by qu^^^ing commerce with
secular men. But they will con^ent themselves to represent to your Majesty with
all possible brevity the state of this affair, omitting of purpose many things
that appear by the Proc^ss at Law, and reporting nothing disagreeing from it,
but closing in few words what ought to be ^^reated at large.

^riar Andrew De Villar, being the Procurator of the College, employed his
thoughts to improve and increase their estate, and to this effect borrowed at
interest, upon ^ents and other securities above 450 thousand Ducats, whereof he
made use to trade in Sevil. He imbarqued for the Indies several sorts of
Merchandises, Linnens, Iron, Saffron and Cinnamon; he built Houses and Mills,
bought Lands* Gardens and many other things. This Money he borrowed of persons
best affected to their College, and depending most upon it, and of some
others: The most grave Fathers of the Company assisted him in this affair of
borrowing, which he compassed to his and their satisfaction by his address, and
his good managery; being Authorized by powers received of his Superiors, which
is justified by several Accounts seized in his Custody, and by several
Memorials and Registers, wherein he made mention of all.

^. Peter de Aviles Provincial of Andaluzia, and Rector of the College,
considering the condition of their estate, and desirous to maintain this house
in its Grandeur, and wealth, the holy zeal they have for their Greatness put
them upon the search of all means imaginable for success in their designs: They
found none so ready as to dispose their affairs, so that their Creditors might
lose a moity of their debt, and made use of one of their Confidents to make the
proposal. They debated it together, Whether it might be for their purpose to
send out process to their Creditors, and all the reasons Father Villar
represented to them in a Memorial produced in the suit depending in Your
Majesty's Council, Piece 3. fol. 144. could not divert them from the resolution
they had taken already, never troubling themselves for the loss of their
credit. This appears by the Original Letter of F. de Aviles* produced also in
the said suit, piece 3. fol. 136. See here the express terms of the Letter of
this Provincial to the said Procurator. I have received the Memorial, wherein
you set forth reasons to diver^ (...) from sending Process to our Creditors, I
have considered of them seriously, (...), that by pr^dent management of (...)
^ffair, which is (...) our power and ordering, we shall remove most ^f the
inconveniences that may arise from it. The less of our credit does not much
trouble us, for that as the Proverb says, What can you have more of the Cat
than her skin, or the Crow than her Feathers? above fifty or at least forty
thousand Ducats (...) not the last year to stopp the mouths ^f our Creditors,
much less will so much be suff^cient at present. We have no more left that we
can tell. And there is no other way to avo^d these Losses than to reduce the
Interests to the Rents* and think ^f no other payment than what we are obliged
to by our real securities: I have sent you the Ratification: The Lord preserve
you, etc.

Peter de Aviles*
At Quadix, Oct. 12. 1644.

The 8. of March, 1645. being the day appointed for execution of what they had
long before designed, the first thing they did was the Arresting of Villar the
Procurator of the College, under pretense of an Assembly and Consultation they
intended to hold, and took from him all his books of Accounts, Papers and
Registers he had in his Chamber.

The day following being March 9. the Provincial and Rector assembled all their
Creditors in their house of profession, and in presence of the most
considerable persons, and of best quality in the City, who came to this
Assembly, the Provincial declared the desire they had to give satisfaction to
all the world, endeavoring nevertheless at the same time to persuade them to
lose the moity of what was their due. And though they had caused a Notary to
come, that they who could be made consent to so impious a resolution should
sign it before him, there was not one person would do it: The small hopes they
saw of success in their design, gave them cause the next day being the tenth of
the same month, by means of their Rector to suborn a Creditor, who having
accepted the Proposal made by the Provincial should call upon the rest of the
Creditors to accept as he had done, and join all together to receive payment
accordingly: Upon this demand a Judge Conservator named by the College,
proceeds to the sequestration of the Estate of the College, but acted with so
much partiality, and other defaults in the procedure, that he gave the Rector
of the Jesuits way to pay them who would receive Money, six millions of
Maravedis, and the Conservator himself paid above fourteen thousand Ducats, and
in all these payments made by the Rector and Conservator, they followed the
Orders given by the F. F. Jesuits, and executed to their power the Provincials
de^ign, changing personal debts into real securities, and treating with every
one how much he would lose.

The procuring of a Conservator wholly at their devotion was of so much
advantage to the Jesuits, that by assuring him or recompense of a pension of
one thousand Ducats per annum; they made him their Protector, who ought to have
been the avenger of such cheats, and criminal impostures. The noise of this
Banquerupt was so great, and so scandalous, that all the world was amazed and
scandalized at it, and especially the Creditors who saw no remedy for their
misery, nor comfort for their affliction; for they who had treated with these
Fathers saw themselves involved in great inconveniences for what they had
quitted to them, and almost hopeless of receiving any part of the residue which
the Jesuits were resolved to reserve to maintain the splendor of their
College, and to keep it up in that height of riches and luster, wherein their
other houses in Sevil to the number of six do flourish ( viz. The Colleges of
St. Herminigilde, the Noviciate, St. Gregory, the English College, the Irish
College, the house of profession, the College de las Vacas.)

John Onufre de Salazar, in his name, and the name of all others the Creditors
had recourse to the only Sanctuary that remained, being your Majesty's
Council-Royal, whom he petitioned to apply a^ remedy to so great a wound, and
to stop the effusion of so many of your poor subjects blood, by obliging them
who had given the wound to cure it. The request he presented was so full of
strong and moving Reasons, that they wrought compassion in the Council; so that
they ordered the audience of Sevil to take cognizance of the affair, and make
their report to the Council which was accordingly done, with an addition of
several learned considerations in augmentation and confirmation of Salazars
relation: Upon the report the Council gave a special Commission to the
Li^entiat D. John de Santelices Counselor in the same Counc^l, and then
President of the Audience of Sevil, to proceed to the sequestration of all the
estate of the College, until the Creditors were fully paid, and to make
inquiry and search for their goods, papers and books of account they had hid
and put out of the way; a few days after, by virtue of this Commission he
ordered the Procurator of the College to make ready his accounts: But the
Conservator refusing notwithstanding to quit the cognizance of the affair, the
Procurator Fiscal of the Audience of Sevil intervened in behalf, and for
defense of the Iurisdiction-Royal, and required the Conservator to decline the
business, for that he was prohibited to take cognizance of it, and the cause to
be remitted to the Judge delegated by the Council; whereupon several writings
past on the one side, and the other, which coming to the knowledge of the
Procurator-General of your Majesty's Council, he desired, that for stopping
this Conservator, who was so obstinately humoursome in his endeavors to
intrude into, and retain to himself the judgment of this affair, That it might
be declared by arrest, that the Estate of the College of Jesuits was a lay
estate; which was done accordingly by an arrest of the Council of Feb. 5. 1647.
By virtue of which arrest your Majesty's first and second Letters of provision
were dispatched, prohibiting the Conservator to intermeddle in the affair, and
ordering him to transmit all the evidences and process he had into the hands of
the Judge appointed by the Council: The Conservator had notice of these
Letters, but was so far from obeying them, tha^ before the third Letter could
be issued out by ordinary course, he declared by sentence given at the pursuit
of the Jesuits, that all the Estate of the College was Ecclesiastical, except
only thirty thousand Ducats: This engaged the Creditors to prove the ^alsi^y of
this judgment, which they did in a year and a halfs time to their great costs
and charges* and at last justified all the estate of the College to be
secular, except only that of the foundation which amounted to no more than
eight hundred Ducats rent.

The Jesuits having failed of their design in this article, invented another
which was to cause persons to intervene in the suite, who should pretend
themselves Creditors, and set forth false promises, and produce forged
obliga^^ons. This may easily be made out, in that most of the promises are
promises of the Religions brethren of the company under the names of S^^ulars,
and others in favor of the Procurator of the College under the names of
S^culars, but supposititious and feigned, as was verified by the information
exhibited by the audience of Sevil by order of the Council, and produced in the
first^piece of the pro^^ss, Fol. 42. They made them sign a Compromise, but that
they acted this by indirect means, appears (...) that seventy six persons who
sig^ed it were poor Widows and Maidens without any support, and the rest are
Jesuits of the same College: But this was done ^n design only to immortalize
the Suite in this affair, to retard the payment, and that in the mean time they
might continue Masters of the whole, and thereby prevent your Majesty's Council
from relieving the grievances of your poor subjects or healing the wound the
Jesuits had given them in causing them to lose all their estates. They had
also a design by this dissimulation and cheat to give their Banquerupt some
color of honesty, and cover their Knavery with a plausible pretense, as if
they who are cited to appear at Law became Banquerupt after the Suite
commenced: These Creditors by the Compromise consented to lose proportionably
so much of their respective debts, as five of them to be deputed to that
purpose should judge meet, which five are the most addicted to the Jesuits*
and most nearly concerned with them. And it is remarkable that one of them is F.
Andrew de Villar whom they caused to leave the College for that purpose, and
at present he solicites subscriptions to the Compromise and process in this
Court in a Secular habit: These Creditors have also agreed, that until they
have assigned a provision sufficient for maintaining the Fathers, the Rector of
the College shall have one of the two keys of the chest wherein they have put
all the money both of the Stock and Rents of the Creditors, and that the
Jesuits shall keep this this key till the deputies have assigned them three
thousand five hundred D^cats rent to be enjoyed by them, and received out of
the clearest and best estate of the College now all sequestered.

Besides this they enjoy above sixteen hundred Ducats, which they have taken
away from Don Roderigo Barba Cabeca de Vaca inhabitant of Sevil who is also
their Creditor, for they have usurped from him for thirty nine years, three
thousand three hundred Ducats Rent left him by John de M^nsalvo his Uncle one
of the 24 of Sevil, who trusted and left them by way of Depos^um in hands of a
Jesuit of this College his Confessor; the Fathers being content to give the
said D. Roderigo three hundred Ducats per annum as alms from them, because he
was a poor Gentleman. This is justified by a Book which the Licentiat D. John
de Santelices found among other papers of the College, which was entitled,
The Book of Secret Works of Piety, wherein there was a note of instruction
given by the Superiors in these terms: We must temporize with De Roderick
Barba. Cabeca de Vaca till the death of the Beneficiary D. Segner de Velasco,
and afterward let the gate be shut against Roderick as a person with whom we
have nothing to do: Under which there follows this further instruction, no
person, save the Procurators of the College, the Rector, the Provincial and
Consultors of the Province ought to have cognizance of this Book, and the goods
whereof it speaks: This we learn in the three and four pieces of second process.

By means of these sixteen hundred of D. Rodericks, and the three thousand five
hundred annual provision assigned them by the said Deputies by their own
Authority, without speaking of other Rents, these Fathers are more at ease, and
better accommodated than ever they were before the Banquerupt, and the process
of the Creditors; and if they gain what they pretend to, in obtaining a
confirmation of this new Compromise sorting so well to their advantage; their
College shall possess their estate after the Banquerupt with more assurance
than before, unless, as the common saying is, We stop the pipes that carry
water to their mill. This ought not to be suffered, chiefly because the Council
on the positive demand of the Creditors was possessed of the cause, and
interposed their puissant and sovereign authority for recovery of all this
estate, and payment of all the Creditors; This the Judge executes who was named
by the Council. And as the Jesuits know well enough, that all their subtleties
will be discovered if they come to be examined by the Creditors proofs, who
make it appear that all the Estate of these Fathers is temporal, since the
R^venues of benefices which are spiritual are an estate temporal, they are
afraid the Council may judge accordingly; and this has obliged them to make
the deputation to the five Creditors their Confident, to try, if by color of
their not being Authors of this cheat, whereof in truth they are guilty, they
may exempt themselves from the jurisdiction of your Council, where their
public commerce, their illegal traffic, and damnable negotiations for
aggrandizing their estate has been already so clearly proved.

All this, Sir, has need of a speedy and exemplary remedy, and the Creditors
hope from your Majesty's Piety and Justice, that they shall owe you, Sir, those
lives which the Jesuits have rendered so troublesome by the miseries and
necessities they see themselves reduced to, that they esteem it greater
happiness to lose them, than to be obliged to live without ability to maintain
themselves in that port and rank they formerly flourished in respectively* It Is
possible they may breath again if the Judge of the Council causes payment to be
made them, and these men of Religion learn at the same time, that they ought
not under pretense of their privileges, and of their profession to ruin their
best friends, but content themselves with what the Laws allow them to possess:
By stopping the course of so dangerous a precedent, the I^sui^es of other
Colleges and Provinces will see, it concerns them more to accustom themselves
to tra^fick in prayers and supplications, to pass with safety the Sea of the
miseries and travels of this world, where so many are shipwracked, than to
apply themselves to trade for the Indies, to send merchandises thither, and to
maintain Commerce, and get Gain prohibited by Law.

It Is, Sir, very remarkable, and merits a particular attention, that the other
Colleges of the Jesuits of the Province of Andaluzia, owe great sums of money
to many private persons which are no less considerable than those of the house
of Sevil; and they attend with impatience the resolution of your Council, that
they may do as their brethren of Sevil have done, if they come off well in this
affair; for their thirst to amass money, Sir, is so insatiable, that it is
believed, their houses in both Castilles owe two millions of money for things
deposited with them in confidence of fair dealing, for moneys they have
borrowed, and for debts they have contracted on diverse pretenses.

It Is worthy observation of how great sums they defraud the Church and your
Patrimony Royal, in that neither this College, nor any house of theirs in the
Kingdom pay any tithes* Imposts, or part of the Contributions which are levied
for your Majesty on Ecclesiastical Estates; so that it would be more profitable
for the Church and your Majesty, that these Estates were possessed by Secular
persons.

You cannot too much consider and reflect upon these sins, and those crimes
which the ruin and poverty of so many Widows, Maidens, and women of quality
have caused; and what strangers not well grounded in our Faith and Religion may
say, to see an affair of this Nature pass before the eyes of a King so
Catholic and Just, and of his Council-Royal, consisting of persons so
eminently Christian; besides what may be apprehended from the desperate
resolutions of so many considerable persons who find themselves ruined in
honor, and their Estates, which they see in the hands of their Enemies.

These poor Creditors, SIR, most humbly beseech your Majesty with tears in
their eyes, that you would protect them in a Cause so worthy of your Majesty's
Care, and Christian Charity, since the Justice thereof does so clearly appear
to you; And that you will be Graciously pleased to order your Council, that in
regard of the evident malice of the Iesui^^s they would not give place for
further delays, nor permit any new incidents to be foysted into the Cause now
depending, but think it sufficient that the Jesuits have already had eight
years time to plead, and not allow them to make the Process immortal, as they
vaunt they will do by their great credit: These miserable Creditors shall spend
their lives, and consume these poor remains of their Estate (which these
Fathers have not taken away) to prosecute this Suite, and solicit the payment
of their debt, if the Judge appointed by the Council to take ^ognizance of this
Banquerupt, and the Plaint of the Creditors will not cause payment to be made
them, by dispatching the third provi^ion, and an Act to declare, that the
Estate of the Jesuits is not Ecclesiastical, to the end the Conservator named
by the College intermeddle not any further in the business, nor take any
cognizance thereof, and that in the same time he vacate and annul this new and
artificial deputation.

YOUR MAJESTY, SIR, shall in this do a piece of service very acceptable to God,
and by this means your poor subjects the Creditors shall recover their Estates,
and shall every one live in the Rank, Honor, and Reputation suitable to their
quality, which this Banquerupt has caused* them to lose.

Signed, John Onufre de Salazar.


THE History of this FAMOVS BANQVERVPT is reported by the Author of the
IESVITICK THE ATRE, page 378. Where the Relation agrees exactly with this
Memorial, with this addition only, that the Council prohibited the Conservator
the cognizance of the affair, and ordered him to transmit all the papers to D.
John de Sante^ices. By this means de Villar was set at liberty from the
Jesuits prison, and secured upon bail in the Convent of Saint Francis, where
he made it appear to the world, that he had done nothing in all this but by
order of his Superiors, whose original Letters he produced to stop the mouths
of these Fathers, and silence their Calumnies, which Letters are inserted in
the proceedings at Law, and Copies of them dispersed in several places: Villar
was afraid, that if aft^r this he entered again among the Jesuits, they might
practice on him the Doctrine of their Father Amy, who allows a man of Religion
to kill him who publishes things scandalous of his Order, as they had practiced
on several occasions, and particularly on the person of Doctor John D' Espino
whom they poisoned three times; which is so notorious, that there is not a
person in Spain or the Indies, who fears not their poisons and violencies: This
obliged Villar to quit the Jesuits habit, and take his cloak and his sword,
and to marry in the peace and face of the Church, having first obtained a
dispensation of the vows ^e had made four or five times, but they were vows
for the profess^on of Iesuitisme, to which nothing can oblige a man. Now the
Jesuits give out, that the Cause of the Banquerupt was the Knavery of Villar
who reigns in his roguery, and triumphs, and feasts himself with the spoils of
other men. He answers, they lie, and refers himself to what appears in writing,
and tells them, men's tongues should be silent when prayers and such evidences
speak, which is expressed in the Sp^nish Proverb; Hablen Cartasy callen barbas.

The same Author recounts afterward a story to which this Proverb has some
relation, which we have rendered verbatim out of another Spanish Impression
which seems more exact, and contains the matter we come next to declare.

Other Marks of the Avarice, Injustice and Cheats of the Jesuits in the
following Story, reported by the Author of the Iesuitique Theater, page 381.
and another Printed Book in Spanish, ENTITLED, A Relation of the Passages in
the strange Discovery made by D' John De Santelices Guevara, Councellor in the
Council Royal, of the Fraud and Cheat whereby the Jesuits of the College of
St. Hermenigilde of Sevil, concealed and detained for above 39* Years, from D.
Rod^rick Barba Cabera de Vaca, Inhabitant of the said City, Three thousand
three hundred Ducats Rent, left him by John de Monsalve his Uncle, one of the
24 The Com^on-council of the City.
of Sevil, which all that time they enjoyed to their own use and behoof, giving
him only 300 Ducats yearly by way of Alms.
THE Council Royal of Castille, having granted a Commission to the Si^ur D.
John De Santelices Councellor in the said Council, and President of the
Audience Royal of Sevil, for taking cognizance of the Process and causes of
the Assembly of the Creditors of the Jesuits of the College of St.
H^rmenigilde of the said City, to seize all the Goods and Rents of the said
Jesuits, to search for such Goods as they had concealed and laid out of the
way, and to recover them, and to give entire satisfaction to the said Creditors
by payment, the said Sieur D. John caused all the books of Accounts, of the
store and Chest of the said College to be brought before him, for the better
execution of what was enjoined him. Among others he found a book entitled, A
Book of secret works of piety: Reading it leaf by leaf he saw the manner how
the Accounts were to be kept, of the employ and distribution of the said secret
works of piety, so called because the Fathers were Masters thereof; as also the
Accounts given by the Provincials, at their Visitations by the Stewards or
Procurators of the College, all ^igned with the hands of the Provincials:
There he finds written these very words: We must temporize with Don Roderick
Barba Cabeca de Vaca, till the death of the Beneficiary John Segner de Velasco,
and when he is dead shut the door against Roderick Barba, as a person we have
nothing to do with. And a little lower another advertisement, importing, That
no person ought to have Cognizance of this Book, n^r of the Estate and
Revenues of the College, but only the Procurators, the Rector, the Provincial
and Consultors of the Province. The said Sieur D. John having taken great
notice of this Title, and the two advertisements, and Articles of the Book
cited before him the said De Villar, formerly Procurator of the College, but
then in the Convent of St. Francis, D. Rodrick Barba, and the Beneficiary John
Segner de Velasco: And having given them their Oaths, and demanded what they
could say to these Articles, and what this pious work was, they declared as
follows, and confirmed it by Oath.

Nine and thirty years ago, a Gentleman, one of the 24 of Sevil, called John
De Monsalve, returned very rich from the Indies: He was not married, nor had
any Child, but a woman sued him who pretended to be his Daughter, and that he
had not only begotten her before marriage, but that afterward he privately
married her mother, so that she was his daughter, and could not be debarred
from inheriting his Estate. John de Monsalve falling sick of the sickness,
whereof he dyed, while this suit depended, for clearing his Conscience sent for
a Jesuit of the College of St. Hermenigilde, with whom he settled what
concerned his Conscience and Testament, and told him the Action this woman had
brought against him was altogether unjust, and the matter of fact she had
alleged utterly false, and that he was obliged to dispose of his Testament
so, as this woman might not know after his death what he should leave behind
him, in Money and Movables. Whereupon this Father ordered his Testament as
follows.

John De Monsalve has disposed of his Immoveables (which could not be
concealed* nor conveyed out of the way) by right of eldership Heritable, and
made D. Roderick Barba Cabeta de Vaca his Nephew heir thereof; and as to his
Movables and Money, which amounted to eighty five thousand Ducats, he made a
Writing signed by himself and the said F. Jesuit his Confessor, whereby he
declared he would leave the said sum by way of Dep^situm in the hands of the
said Father, that in case after his death judgment were given for him in the
suit, or that on any occasion this woman would d^sist from her pretensions, all
the Estate he left in the Jesuits hands should descend by right of Eldership,
excepting only 800 Ducats per Ann. which he reserved out of this Revenue, to be
employed in the marriage of a certain number of Maidens, in the redemption of
such a number of Captives, and to buy provision o^ Victuals for the Prisons for
certain days. Ordaining further, that if any of those to whom this right of
Eldership should descend; had Children, those works of piety should cease, but
so as provision should be first made for giving and founding an endowment for
portions, suitable to the Condition and quality of a number of maidens to be
married, and the heirs by right of eldership to be Patrons and Administrators
of this work of piety: Pursuant to this disposal, the said sum of 85 thousand
ducats, and the writing were put into the hands of the F. Jesuit, who assured
Monsalve they should be used according to the declarations abovementioned.

John De Monsalve being dead* his Heirs and Executors of his will, soon after
agreed with the woman, who for ten thousand Ducats of Billon or black Money, (a
sort of Base Coin cried down) surceased her proceedings, and quitted her
pretensions. And the Woman within a short time after dyed without Heirs, which
had been sufficient alone to end the suit; so that the Jesuit was obliged as
the case stood, to have published the writing, and have paid the money to
Monsalve's heirs: But all this was too little to incline the Jesuits to
discover the Money and Writing, either in the lifetime of this Confessor, or
after his death. And thus they detained for above 39 years this sum, out of
which they raised a Rent of three thousand three hundred Ducats per ann. which
they have enjoyed to this present, when Providence has so ordered the matter,
that the scandalous and lamentable Banquerupt of their College has caused the
discovery of this particular Business.

The Sieur John De Santelices forthwith caused a Copy to be made of Monsalve's
Testament, and annexing it to the other Papers, Declarations and Verifications,
transmitted them to his Majesty and his Council Royal of Castille, where the
suit of the Creditors of the Bankrupt College depends; See the Process No. 3.
and 60.

The Council having seen all these pieces of Obedience, ordered they should be
communicated to the Attorney General, who gave his opinion thereof: On the
other side D. Roderick Cabeca sent a procuration to demand from the Council a
Councellor, to be named Commissioner, for determining this Process. The
Council thereupon sent a special Commission to the Sieur D. John de
Santelices, to take cognizance of this affair, and put the said Roderick in
possession of this Estate, causing the Jesuits to make restitution of the
Principal Money with all the mean profits made by the use thereof. D. John de
Santelices began to cause this to be executed, and his successors in that
Charge continue the execution to this day.

As to these words of the book of Pious works, We must temporize with D.
Roderick Barba Cabeca de Vaca, till the death of the Beneficiary John Segner de
Velasco his Uncle, and when he is dead, shut the door against Roderick as a
person we have nothing to do with. They were inserted because the Jesuits gave
him yearly three or four hundred Ducats, telling him that a Kinsman of his
having left them the disposal of a pious work, they were very glad of the
occasion to employ it for his relief as a poor Gentleman.

And their design was, as appears by the book, to continue this Gift no longer
than till the death of John Seg^er de Velasco, who was the only person privy to
the whole affair, being Cousin to John de Monsalvo, whose life they hoped could
not be long, being above fourscore years old.

It Is to be observed as a truth made out by this secret book, that for sever^l
years they had conv^rted these charitable works of marrying Maidens, redeeming
Captives and others, into Alms bestowed on the Fathers Of their po^r little
professed house of Sevil as they call it.

A Jesuit of Madrid engages a Woman to give all her Estate to the Society by
will, another Jesuit persuades her to give it her Heirs, and is expelled the
Society for doing so. They destroy the life of another for the same Cause.
PAge 248. the Jesuits are of opinion, that no persons deserve Legacies better
than they, which is founded on the detestable maxim in the last Paragraph of
their secret advice, that all the Church militant together does not so much
good by all other Orders of Religion jointly, as they alone do. This sets them
awork to procure Gifts, and severely chastise such as promote not that design,
as destroyers of the Society; whereof you have a fresh instance in the
following story at Madrid.

A rich Woman, who had much Kindred in that City, fell sick: She had for her
Confessor a Jesuit, who attended her in her weakness, and as a faithful
servant of the Company disposed her to make her will in favor of the Jesuits,
and leave them all her Estate, without the least thought or remembrance of
persons whom Nature did strictly oblige to take care of, being her Nephews: The
Confessor returned home overjoyed with his success, and in sport demanded the
reward due to them that bring good news, as thinking he had done an heroic
Action, having gained the company so considerable an Inheritance: It so fell
out that one of these Fathers illustriously descended, and as Noble in
Disposition as blood, was moved at this impudence, and desiring to undo what
the other had done, went to the sick woman's house at a time when the Confessor
was absent, his habit procured him entrance, which had been denied to one of
another Order* for it is a Maxim of the Jesuit not to admit any of another
Religious Order to the sick they visit, for fear they should reverse what they
have contrived. This good Jesuit brought a Notary with him, and represented to
this woman, that in the condition she was in, she was more obliged to satisfy
the duties of Nature than devotion, and so engaged her to revoke her Testament,
and all the Legacies she had given the Society, and to leave her estate to her
lawful heirs: The woman died, and the Confessor made himself master of the
house, and all the keys; he caused the Testament to be opened, whereby it
appeared that she made the Jesuits sole heirs of all her estate: But as the
Jesuit pleased himself in being Master of this inheritance, and having
compassed his designs, and behaved himself with great haughtiness toward the
Nephews of the woman, thinking to make them dance attendance in waiting his
leisure for an inconsiderable Legacy their Aunt had left them, the Chief of the
Nephews presented them the Codicil, took from the Jesuits the keys of the
house, and drove them all out.

The Jesuits made narrow search for the Author of this treason, and having
found him to be the Father of whom we have spoken, the morrow after they put a
billet under his napkin, commanding him to retire, for that the Company had no
more need of hi^^ he went to prostrate himself at the feet of his Catholic
Majesty, to whom he related the story, and was received into his protection,
where he was safe from the fury of the Jesuits.

There is another Domestic example of this kind in the person of Father
Ximenes, whose life the Jesuits of the profest^house of Madrid destroyed in
1633. for that being Confessor to a widow he had not advised her to give them
her estate.

The Jesuits of Madrid Expel a Smiths S^n from their Society, but retain his
money, which the Smith dexterously recovers.
P. 66. A Smith at Madrid placed his Son among the Jesuits, and had him
admitted for two thousand Ducats, though the Jesuits habit commonly costs
more; but after a short time they judged this young man not proper for them, as
wanting the address and fineness necessary for their profession* and stripped him
of his habit* he returns home to his Father, who went presently to the Jesuits
and summoned them to perform the Contract he had made with them, for the
reception of his Son; but when they refused to give ear to him, he sued them at
law for his two thousand Ducats which they were obliged to restore, as having
not satisfied t^^ conditions on which they received them: They had credit
enough to obtain sentence against the Smith, who seeing himself deprived of the
money his Sons Habit had cost him, resolved to make that whereby he had lost
his money to regain it, and that the Iesuite^ Habit which had cost him so much
should be worth him something: So the next day he habited his Son like a
Jesuit, and made him work and beat the Anvil that day, and after in the Robe
and Hood of a Jesuit; this gave the people notice of the Jesuits cheat, who
being mocked p^blickly for what they had done to the poor man and his Son, were
at last ashamed of it, and restored him his money, which made him strip his Son
of their Habit.

A Jesuit of Granada gives two contrary advices, but would not sign the one of
them by reason of a Maxim of the Society to the contrary.
P. 121. Don Lewys Lasso de Vega being Steward of Granada, the King demanded a
Contribution from the City; an Assembly was called and divided in Opinion, and
every one consulted persons of learning, and fearing God, who might give them
advice most profitable in their judgment for the good of the City: Some of
either part went to advise with F. Marmol the Jesuit, then Divinity-professor
at Granada, and afterward Rector of the College of St. Hermenigilde at Sevil,
in whose time, and by whose Council they made that memorable Banquerupt. The
Answers this Father gave we^e suited to the desires of those who consulted him,
whether to grant or refuse the Contribution, equally telling the one and the
other that it would be a mortal sin for the one to grant, and the others to
refuse it: Those who were for granting it, demanded of Father Marmol^ his
Opinion in writing to show it to the Assembly that the Concession was Just,
which the Jesuit fraudly gave them and signed it: Those who were against the
Kings demand, seeing F. Marmol so strongly of their Opinion, demanded also his
sentiment under his hand, to let the Assembly see they had advised with him to
purpose. But he made them answer, it was not the custom of the Society to sign
Advices that were not pleasing to Kings and Princes: This I know by the
relation of one of them who consulted him:

The Jesuits driven out of Malta for their insatiable Avarice, and an
abominable Crime.
P. 250. It Is certain, that it is not ordinary to expel whole Communities for
the fault of one particular, and that persons of wisdom and judgment, as
those who govern Kingdoms and Republics punish not a whole Order of Religion
for the miscarriage of one Friar. This may assure us, that the Jesuits having
been driven away from several parts, it was not for the fault of some
particular person, but for that of the whole body, and the chiefs who govern it.

In 1643 or 1644. they were expelled Malta on this occasion.

They entered this Island with intention to make themselves Masters of the whole
Order of St. John Resident there; To gain credit with the Knights, they thought
it their duty to charge themselves with the instruction and education of the
young Knights brought up there. The Grand Master of the Order gave them a
House, and Revenue sufficient to entertain them with honor. The Isle of Malta
is of a rocky soil and barren throughout, insomuch, that an inhabitant of the
City cannot have a Garden without fetching earth from Sicily in the Galleys.
All the victuals they have comes by Sea; and Corn, (whereof the Merchants make
commonly great gains) is very dear there. The Jesuits carried by their
natutural inclination to traffic, entered into this Commerce to the great
prejudice of the Island* they caused a great quantity of Corn to be imported
from Sicily; which they locked up till they saw the people threatened with
Famine* and in very great want, intending to sell it then at excessive rates.
The Isle was in time sore pressed with Famine, and little corn remaining in the
Public Granaries, or in those of private men; the Galleys of Biserte, and
other Vessels of Turkey blocked up their harbors, were Lords of the Sea, and
took all the Merchants Vessels that sailed, so that there was no hope of relief
from Sicily: The Jesuits seeing this extremity, were careful no^ to declare
that they had in their Granary about five thousand bushels of Corn to be sold,
fearing, that if the Grand Master came to know it, he would oblige them to part
with it at cheap rates without any profit. This made them think it fitter for
their purpose to dissemble and make themselves of the number of those who were
in want* They went to the Great Master, and told him they were in extreme
necessity, and had passed the day before without a bit of bread, having none of
their own, nor knowing where to buy any: The Grand Master who pitied and loved
them, ordered some bushels to be given them of that little quantity of Cor^
that remained. Some of the most considerable Knights would have stopped his
Liberality, and prevented the Gift, telling him they were informed by persons
who knew it very well, that the Jesuits had Corn sufficient to nourish the
whole Island for several months; but the Grand Master regarded them not, but
believed it the discourse of passionate persons ill affected to the Jesuits.

There happened at the same time a thing which the Author describes at large,
but so horrible in all its circumstances, that I thought fit to pass it over in
silence, and content my self with saying, that it was a crime so abominable,
that it provoked all the K^ights to punish F. Cassiaita the Jesuit who was
Author of it, in a manner proportioned to his fault, and afterward clapped him
on board a Feluca with all his Companions, and sent them for Sicily.

The College was presently searched, and a Granary found, con^aining Corn
sufficient to maintain the whole City a long time. The Grand Master having
heard the disorder committed by the Knights in a place he looked upon as a
Sanctuary, came to the remedy when it was too late; they showed him Granaries
full of wheat, and disabused him in letting him see the truth of what they had
affirmed awhile before. He approved of what they had done, and made use of the
Corn they found to relieve the present necessity. I will not at present insist
on the story of Cassiaita, but observe that the avarice of the Jesuits was the
cause of their expulsion, for they kept their Corn when the people were in
want, and had no compassion for the public necessity, but preferred their
inter^st before the good of the Island.

The Book of Parsons the Jesuit to make himself Master of all the
Ecclesiastical Estates of England.
P. 242. Parsons the Jesuit published heretofore in England, a Book Entitled,
The Reformation of England, wherein having observed several faults and defects
in the Council of Trent, he concludes with this saying, that if England ever
returned to the Romish Religion, it must be reduced to the form of the
Primitive Church, by putting all Ecclesiastical Estates in ^ommon, and that the
care of that Church ^ust be given to seven discre^t persons of the Society to
distribute the said Estates as they shall think fit: And for a mark of the
Jesuits blinded self-love, he says, that no Friar of of any other order must
be permitted to pass into England, and adds, that for five years at least the
Pope must not present to any benefice, but refer himself wholly in that
particular to those seven Sages of the Company. Thus they make nothing of
ruining the Church, provided it may conduce to make them Masters of all.

The Jesuits in preaching the Gospel at Japan so^^ Seditions, and dispose the
people to War, and are persecuted and chased away as Cheats and Impostors.
Page 310. Their cares are confined to their interesses; and to promote them,
they raise troubles and War, as Father Diego Collado the Domini^an has well
observed in a Memorial he presented to the Council Royal of the Indies,
December. 17. 1633. where in the third Paragraph he has these expressions: The
Iapanois were persuaded ever since 1565. that wherever the Preachers of the
Gospel should come, they would ruin all by Wars and Seditions. But we are to
take notice, that to that time and afterward till 1593. they saw no other
Preachers but Jesuits.

This Friar speaks not this of himself, but has taken the words out of the
General History of Iapan printed at Alcala in 1601. which the Author Lewys
Gusman the Jesuit, says, He had gathered out of Relations of certain truth,
or ocular testimonies: The same Author, Cap. 3. Lib. 2. reports the persecution
raised against them by the Emperor of Iapan, and the cause alleged by the
Emperor to have been, that the Jesuits were Cheats and Impostures who made
pretense of preaching salvation, came to raise the people, and plot some
treason against him, and the Kings of Iapan; and that had he not taken heed of
them, they had long since deceived him as they had done many other Kings and
Princes; so that in six years they had discovered the end they had in preaching
the Gospel, and made it appear to have been the destruction of Princes.

It cannot be said the Emperor did this out of hatred to the Christan Faith,
who gave permission in writing in 1593. to the Order of St. Francis to enter
his Empire, to found there Churches, Hospitals and Convents, and appear
publicly in their poor habit: All which notwithstanding the persecution
continued against the Society, who had but one Church left at Nangazaqui a Port
town, and a place of great Commerce. This Church the Emperor permitted to
stand, because of some Jesuits Inhabitants there who took care of
merchandises, one of whom named John Roderick was the Emperors Interpreter:
This shows how f^r the Jesuits were engaged in trade, that some of them were
necessary to be left to uphold it when the rest were expelled; and that they
were not chased away for their Faith, since the the Order of St. Francis, who
labored more effectually the Conversion of Infidels, were admitted the same
time; but for the horror and detestation of the Iapanois conceived against them
for their double dealing and falsehood.

The Avarice and Ambition of the Jesuits cause the destruction of two
Christian Kings of Japan: Their Treason against the King of Omura, makes the
Ministers of the Gospel to be accounted Trayt^rs.
P. 311. I could not in silence pass by two cruel Treasons which the Ambition
of the Jesuits produced in these Countries by policies most repugnant to the
maxims of Christianity. The King of Omura received the Christian Faith with
very great devotion, and for that reason, and because he reputed the Jesuits
Ministers of the Gospel favored and protected them in his Realm. Nangazaqui is
one of the principal Cities there, and capable to enrich all the Country,
being a Port well frequented, as we hinted before. The Jesuits thought to draw
more advantages to themselv^s from another person whom they designed to make
Master of a Port so considerable, though not without the br^ach of all the Laws
of Fidelity due to a Catholic King their friend. They went to the Emperor,
and represented to him the conveniences of the Port, the various Merchandises
brought thither, the commodiousness of its situation for security of his
Vessels, and at last assured him, that as a Sovereign Lord he might take it
away from the King of Omura, giving him something else equivalent to it. The
Emperor followed their advice, and took away the Port from the King of Omura,
but as soon as he had done it he banished the Jesuits from all parts of that
Kingdom, saying, with much wisdom, That having betrayed their Benefactor, they
would with more reason betray him, the Emperor who had far less obliged them
than the King of Omura. Thus they lost the amity of the King, and gained not
that of the Emperor they affected, but left the Ministers of the Gospel the
reputation of being Traitors. This has been assured upon the oaths of above
fifty Christian villages in a Memorial presented originally to his Catholic
Majesty in his Council of the Indies, and to the Pope in the Congregation de
Propaganda ^ide.

A Mischievous Counsel given the King of Arima, which cost him his life, and
^aused a bloody persecution against the Christians.
P. 312. There happened another thing equally strange to the King of Arima a
Christian and great Benefactor to the Jesuits, whose Seminaries and Colleges
flourished in his Realm. They put a chimera into the head of this Prince, and
persuaded him to demand of the Emperor the restitution of some Lands which his
Predecessors had lost by war. The I^suites design in this was to enlarge their
Power by extending the Dominions of the King of Arima their friend beyond the
ordinary limits; to attain their desires, they made use of a man who was
entirely at their devotion; his name Dayfaqui a Secretary to one of the
Emperors Ministers; but though they gained him to their side, he forbore not
to discover the whole intrigue which cost the lives of the one and the other;
for the Emperor caused the King to be beheaded, and Dayfaqui burnt, and
Morejon the Jesuit escaped but narrowly the same flames. This King is charged
with the killing of a Son he had by a former wife, to make way for the
succession of one by a second wife, as a person from whom the Jesuits hoped
more favor in his Reign than they could expect from the other. The Emperor
hereupon conceived a very ill opinion of our Religion, and its Ministers, for
that all who acted in this Tragedy were Friars or Christians; and this moved
him to the second persecution, which was much more bloody than the former. He
chased away all Friars from his Empire, so that the Conversion of this people
was extremely obstructed by the ill Counsels and Flatteries of the Jesuits. Is
not the Ambition of the Jesuits very strange, and their flattery a horrible
thing, who to extend their Dominion, and please the King of Arima, though they
were settled in very good condition proposed to him the design of re-entring
these Lands his Predecessors had possessed, though then in the hands of another
Master?

In a Contribution made by all the Religious Orders of Spain the Jesuits give
three advices instead of money.
P. 392. The King of Spain wanting moneys at the beginning of the War with
France, demanded of all the Orders of Religion a succor by way of
Contribution; The Collector applied themselves presently to the Jesuits, not
doubting but they who were Laborers, Burgers, Usurers, Bankers, Merchants,
Mint-men, Exchangers, Victuallers, Intelligencers, Emissaries into China,
Legatees and executors of Testaments throughout the world, would on this
occasion make appear to the world their affection for the public good, and
their Power, and would give the King a considerable sum to help him out of the
great straits he was in. The Fathers answered them who made the proposal, that
when they had demanded the Contributions of other Religious Orders the S^cie^y
would give as much as they who gave most, yea as much as they all should give
together: The Commissioners made use of this answer of the Jesuits to make the
greater instance to other Orders, and persuaded some to contribute beyond their
ability.

After this they returned to the Jesuits, and r^quired them to perform their
promise, the I^suites answered they would give his Majesty three Advices, by
means whereof his Majesty might gather above twelve millions of money. This
made the Conde D' Olivarez look about him, who thought he had already
sufficient to remedy the pressing necessities of the State, and was very
inquisitive for the Counsels of the Jesuits which they gave him.

The first was, That if the King would give them all the Chairs of Professors
in the Universities of the Kingdom, they would not desire any Salary for their
Lectures; but his Majesty might impropriate or sell the Salaries of the
Professors which amount yearly to above four hundred thousand Ducats, and were
worth to be sold above eight Millions.

The second, That the King should prevail with the Pope to reduce the breviary
to a third part of what it is; when this should be obtained, they would print
Breviaries and Diurnals of the new model to be used; but that they who would
make use of them should pay in acknowledgement of the pleasure they had done
them in abridging their Office ten Ducats for every Breviary, and five for
every Diurnal, as every Clergyman pays yearly four Rials for his Bull of
permission to eat white meat in Lent: By the calculation they made, the profits
of this exceeded the former.

The third, That whereas they were not permitted by the rules of their Order to
receive money for their Masses, his Majesty should take all the money of the
Ecclesiastical Fraternities of Spain and the Indies, and oblige them to say
Mass Gratis as the Jesuits.

It Is evident by these three Advices that the Jesuits aimed only at their
convenience and interest, and to express their hatred against other Religious
Orders under pretense of doing the King service. The execution of the first
Advice was attempted, but the Universities made a generous opposition, and F.
Bas^le Ponce de Leon Professor of the evening Lecture in the University of
Salamanca composed a learned Memoire which I have seen in the hands of Doctor
D. Michael John de Vimbodi Secretary to his Eminence the Cardinal Spinola then
Archbishop of Granada; wherein he convinced the Jesuits of all manner of
Heresies, and concluded that it was their intention to possess themselves of
all the Chairs of Professors, that they might discard all men of Religion, and
afterward establish their pernicious maxims without contradiction. The Pope
would not enter upon the second and third expedient, but said, that the
iniquity of our times should incline us rather to augment than diminish our
prayers. And as for the Alms for Masses they would be of use to maintain poor
Priests and poor Friars. But the Jesuits gave the King nothing.

The Jesuits of the Indies always for the Governors against the Bishops:
they persecute the Archbishop of St. Foy: Absolve those he had excommunicated,
and teach there are two Gods.
P. 260. Don Ber^ardin de Almansa a very holy man, being chosen Archbishop of
St. Foy of Bogera in 1633. went thither to take possession of the Dignity. D.
Sancho Giron President of the Audience, and Captain General of the new
Kingdom, sent him two Jesuits, John Baptista Coluchini, and Sebastian Morillo
as Ambassadors: The design of the Embassy was to persuade the good Bishop to
make submissions to the Governor, utterly unworthy of the Character he bore.
The Prelate would not consent, but having taken possession of his See, did
vigorously defend the rights of the Bishopric against the encroachments of the
insulting Governor, whom he excommunicated, and his Officers, for having
Arrested those workmen who were guilty of no crime, but laboring in the
Church, and preaching the Gospel: The Governor and his Officers being declared
excommunicate by Papers publicly affixed, the Jesuit Sebastian Morello, whom
we mentioned before, had the insolence to tell the Governor, He ought not to
be troubl^d for these Excommunications from which he would forthwith absolve
him on the place, saying, the Society had the privilege to do so. This was the
occasion of very great scandal, and induced the Governor by advice of the
Jesuits, to name a Judge Conservator against the Archbishop: And these Fathers
in the mean time lodged secure and Regaled in their College: The Dean of the
Church of St. Foy, found means to take away this Judge Conservator, and put him
in Prison in the Archbishops house. But the Jesuits came in Arms to the
Prison, broke down the walls, and took out the Judge, and led him back to their
College.

To recount all the passages in this rencounter, would swell up the story to a
very great length. But they are set forth at large with all the insolences of
the Jesuits, in the 4th Chapter, and so to the 11th of the life of this
Archbishop, written by the Bachelor D. Pedro de ^olis, and Valencenela, where
is also described the miserable end of some Jesuits who did more ^ignally
abuse the holy man: his words are these. Though the Fathers of the Society, who
assisted the Governor against the Archbishop, changed their habitation in
going to Quito, yet they could not escape the chastisement of God, for one was
killed by a Mule, on which they carried him into the Town, between two sacks of
Cha^^e; another dyed at Tunia, a third of the Plague in the Port of Onda, and
was buried in a deep pit with his Books and his baggage, and a fourth became
distracted at Popayan.

Father D. Burno de Valeneuela a Chartreus, known to me at Paular, is Brother
to this Pedro De Solis, and has in his custody a Manuscript of the life of
this holy Archbishop: But when he speaks of the difference between this Prelate
and the Jesuits, he relates matters of so much amazement, that they would be
incredible, but that the sanctity and virtue of the Author, who was an ocular
witness of them, does warrant the truth thereof, and render it un^uestionable:
Among other things he tells us, the Jesuits taught the Indians, That there
were two Gods, one of the Poor, and another of the Rich; that this was far
more powerful than the other; that the ArchBishop served the former, and the
Governor the latter. He reports other like things taught by a whole College,
which being established for the instruction of Youth, shows by these pernicious
maxims, that the Society aims at nothing but to uphold it self by credit with
men of power, and affects a strict alliance and union with them, so that it
appears an extraordinary thing to see a Viceroy or Governor in the Indies not
engaged in their Interests, which is the cause of their chasing Bishops from
their Sees, and dragging them before all the Secular Tribunals.

Don Mattheo De Castro Bishop in the East Indies ill used, and slighted by the
Jesuits, who made him go three times to Rome, and jeared at the B^lls and
Censures be brought thence.
Page 281. they declared a contempt parallel to the former, though not in their
Actions yet in their intentions and writings against D. Ma^thew De Castro
Bishop in the East Indies, who being a Braman by Nation, was consecrated by
Pope Urban 8th, and sent to make missions into the Kingdom of Idabria. This
good Prelate did that which neither the Archbishop of Goa, nor all the Orders
of Religion were able to effect, either by Entreaties or Gifts, in 140 years,
which was to obtain leave from the Moorish King to build Houses and Churches
throughout all his Kingdom: But the Jesuits so misused this poor Bishop, that
they forced him to break the course of his mission, and to make three journeys
with very great difficulties to Rome, where Fa. John Baptista de Morales of the
Order of St. Dominique, and Missionary of China, left him in 1645. laboring
against his Enemies who hated and treated him with great slights and Contempt:
This F. M^^rales has a Letter written by a Jesuit to his Provincial, wherein
are these words: There is come hither a pitiful Negro for Bishop, but is gone
among the Moors, because he loves not to live among the Portuguese: ' It Is a
shame for the Nation, that such a man should become a Bishop: The Friar adds,
he found this poor Bishop on his bed ^ick, for the contempts and ill usage of
the Jesuits; that he stayed with him a month to comfort him, that he solicited
his business at the Congregation De propaganda fide, and having obtained all
necessary dispatches, he went in person to see them executed: But the Jesuits
mocked at all that was done, and would not alter their conduct for any Bulls or
Censures.

This story may inform how sincere and candid they are in their expressions:
for speaking of a Bishop, they say, He is gone among the Moors; that is in
their Language, turned Infidel again, whereas he went thither for Conversion of
Souls. And this may serve for an instance of their zeal, who use in this manner
those who employ themselves to propagate the faith, and in their writings to
their superiors, make it their business to slander the Bishops.

The Ambition and Tyranny of the Jesuits in the foundation and administration
of the I^ish Colleges in Spain.
P. 294. The Jesuits express zeal for the faith when they persuaded the King
of Spain, and several Lords to contribute to the foundation of Colleges for
the Irish, for education of their Youth, who came into Spain, and to render
them capable at their return to do their Country men service; but this was the
Cloak only to their intentions and designs, to make themselves more powerful,
in being Masters of those Colleges and their Revenues. The Receipt does
always much exceed the expense, yet they complain still, and treat those poor
Scholars so ill, and with such scorn, though some of them be Priests, that
they seem to be their And when they demand necessaries, the Jesuits retrench
their Pensions, and sometimes the Rectors and Coadjutors beat them and misuse
them, that they are obliged to make defense. They serve themselves of them as
their Grounds, and while they fare daintily upon Estates, whereof they have
only the administration by right, they give to the owners but a poor piece of
Beef as the most splendid entertainment: These poor strangers have presented to
his Majesty a Memorial containing five Articles, wherein they represent the
ill usage of these tyrants, the domination they exercise over them, and how
they do publicly risle their Estates.

A succinct Abridgement of the Relation of the persecution raised by the
Jesuits, against Don Tray Hernando Guerrero Archbishop of Manille in the
Philippines, written in Spanish by a Nephew of the Archbishops.
Don Hernando Guerrero Archbishop of Manille in the Philippine Islands, having
called an Assembly of the Superiors of Religious Houses, and other learned
persons of greatest repute in his Archi^piscopal City, to consult them about a
scruple of Conscience, which was that the Fathers of the Company of Jesus in
that Country, preached and heard Confessions without permission from the
Ordinary, the resolution of the Assembly after several meetings was, That it
was the Archbishops duty to demand of the said Fathers, what permission they
had to exercise those Functions which he did, but had no other Answer, but that
they had Privileges: The Archbishop not satisfied with this, endeavored by
way of right and legal pursuit to oblige them to show by what power they
exercised this jurisdiction, by Declaring the permissions or privileges they
pretended to: But they were so far from giving him satisfaction, that they
named a Canon which had a Dignity in the Church of Manil^e, but the Archbishops
enemy, to be their Conservator. This Conservator proceeded against the
Archbishop, encouraged by the favorable occasion he had from the spleen of the
Governor Don Sebastian Hurtado de Corynera against the Archbishop, for having
refused to give the Jesuits a House and Garden of pleasure belonging to the
Archbishopric, and of the Gift of the Augustine Friars, who bestowed it for a
place of retreat and repose for the Archbishops: And because this House was
very convenient for the Fathers of the Society, and that the Governor was
their particular friend, as his Confessors and Counselors, they assembled
together, and resolved to chase away the Archbishop. The Governor willing to
execute this resolution, sat President of the Audience, without the assistance
of any but a single Councellor, who was found dead on the morrow without
Confession. The Archbishop demanded leave to make his defense, but the
Governor instead of hearing him, being animated by the Jesuits, resolved by
their advice to execute upon the place the banishment of the Archbishop: All
the Religious Communities having been informed, that the Ministers of Justice
were gone to the Archbishopric, resorted to their Prelate, and with their
Tapers in their hands advised the Archbishop to put on his Pontifical habit, to
stay in the Chapel, and hold the Eucharist in his hand, to serve him as a
Buckler against the Governors tyranny, and the violence of the Jesuits: The
Governor having intelligence of what passed, commanded Soldiers forthwith to
march away with Matches lighted, and their Muskets cocked, to cause all the
Friars to depart the Chapel, and leave the Archbishop there alone. And when
the Provincials, the Commissaries, the Priors and Wardens, had answered the
Soldiers, that they were there to pay their respects to the holy Sacrament,
the Governor gave the Soldiers new Orders, on pain of death, to execute his
Commands, and dragg them by force out of the Chapel: The Soldiers obeyed
him, driving out and dragging away all the Friars thence; and though some of
the most ancient and venerable amongst them, in hope to preserve themselves
from their violence, covered themselves with the Archbishops Pontifical habit;
the Soldiers had no respect for those Ornaments, but furiously laying hold on
them who had wrapped themselves therein, they dragged away the Archbishop, who
holding the holy Pix in his hands fell in the crowd, and wounded himself in the
face. So the Prelate remained alone, but having five hundred Soldiers left
about him to seize his person as soon as he should quit the H. Sacrament. In
the mean time one of the Soldiers considering the violence used to make them
keep him there, and that they must on pain of death execute the Governors
Orders, drew his sword, and falling upon it, said, He had rather dye by his own
hands, than see such enormities among Christians.

The Archbishop having continued so long in his pontifical habit, found
himself so weakened by reason of his great age, and that he had taken no food
that yielding at last to weariness and necessity, and in compliance with the
Advice of the wisest of the Friars, who signified to him that if he died in
that manner his Conscience would charge him with it as an offense; he laid by
the Holy Sacrament, and was presently carried away out of the City in a Coach
by the Sergeant Major and Soldiers, and put into a little pitiful bark
unprovided of all things, without permitting any Christian to give him any
nourishment, or any of his domestics to accompany him, but was conducted by
five Soldiers whom they gave him for his Guard into a poor desert Island where
he had not as much as a Cabin for shelter.

And when in all this time Divine Service was not said in any part of the City,
by reason of a solem^ interdict, which all the Friars observed with the respect
and sentiments they were obliged to express, the Jesuits only kept their
Churches open, preached, confessed and said Mass there, and went to say Mass in
the Governors house, to whom they administered the Sacraments.

They took from the Archbishop the Government of the Diocese, and gave it
another by order of the Judge Conservator and the Jesuits, till the
Archbishop was re-established, which happened after they had seized all his
Goods, and sold them by Outcry even to his Cross to satisfy several fines,
and pecuniary pains, to which they had condemned him. The people having with
great instance demanded his restoration, had it granted, but not before the
Fathers of the Company had fulfilled their desires by means of the Governor.

The Archbishop sent two Friars, the one to Rome, and the other to Madrid, to
inform the Pope and his Catholic Majesty of the Enormities committed against
him, and the excess of his sufferings: They arrived accordingly having passed
the streights of Magellan in a vessel of the Heretics, but hired and equipped
by the Merchants of Manille out of love to their Pastor.

Not long after these passages the Sergant Major, who had taken the Archbishop
being carried in a chair, for that he was very old, the people fell upon him in
the place, and so buffeted him with their fists, that he died without
Confession upon the place.

An Extract of a Letter from Madrid of July 8. 1653. whereby is seen the
punishment of this Governor who misused the Archbishop.
It happened soon after that his Catholic Majesty having received secret Advice
of fourteen Chests from the Indies, had in a private Chamber of the Jesuits of
Burgos, sent secret Orders to the Seneschal of that City to take them out
thence: He executed his Commission so well, that he went directly where they
were, and having broke open a lock found all the fourteen Chests; he demanded
of the Fathers an inventory of the Contents, who answered, That they belonged
to Don Sebastian de Corquera Seneschal of Cordona who had been Governor of the
Philippines: The Seneschal of Burgos drew out the Chests from the places they
were in, and having opened them found a quantity of stones of very great value.
This Gentleman had been reputed a Saint, but a Jesuitical Saint, because he
loved them passionately. This discovery made way for some others, whereby it
appeared he had brought great riches from the Indies, and occasion was given to
call him to an exact account of his administration.

ADVERTISEMENT.
The Story of this persecution is related by the Author of the IESVITICAL
THEATER p. 230. where he gives another cause of the Governors Animosity
against the Archbishop, whereof the Jesuits were Authors: For they persuaded
the Governor to send to hang a man in the Churchyard of the Augustines: The
Archbishop not able to endure such profanation to punish the Governor made
use of the Arms of the Church, and fulminated censures against him; but the
Governor also made use of the Arms of his Office, as appears by the precedent
relation.

It is easy to Judge, says the Author of The Iesuitique Theater, that the
Jesuits moved the Governor to execute this violence against the Archbishop,
because the Governor who did nothing in Secular Affairs without the Jesuits
Advice and Consent, in all probability consulted them in this which concerned
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, which as a Secular Person he was ignorant of. 2.
Because the Jesuits had on several occasions had very great differences with
this Prelate as they have had with the greatest part of the Bishops of the
Indies, and finding a fair opportunity by the Governors being wholly theirs,
thought it not fit to let it slip, but with their own hands avenged themselves.
3. Because all the Superiors, and a multitude of Friars attended the
Archbishop, and left him not till forced off by violence, but there was not
one Jesuit with him. add hereto the Common Sentiment of all the people in the
Philippines.

The Avarice of the Jesuits in the Pearl-fishing at Cochin, for which they are
diven away, and a curse denounced against the Lake and the Pearls.
We are now to declare how they were expelled Cochin in the East Indies; this
City, though the Territory be poor and steril, is an Episcopal See, and the
Inhabitants, and all these of the Diocese live on fishing for Pearls which they
find in a Lake, whereby God in his providence has given them subsistence. The
Jesuits heard of this Lake, and thought it for their advantage to make
themselves Masters thereof, to the end, they might draw to themselves the whole
profit. To effect this, two of their Fathers came from Goa to Cochin to visit
the Bishop, an Apostolical man, and formerly a barefoot Friar of the Order of
St. Francis: They told him they were moved with compassion to see him alone
without any assistant for conversion of Infidels, that they were come to bear
part of his sufferings, and help him to cultivate the souls of those of his
Diocese. They offered to found a College there, provided the Bishop would give
them aid, and a house ready b^ilt with revenues to maintain five or six
Jesuits: The Bishopric is very poor, as the place of its residence; the
Bishop having nothing but what is strictly necessary to maintain him with
honor.

The good Prelate hearing this proposal o^ the Jesuits, thought he saw the
heavens opened and Angels descended, believing they mad^ it out of zeal to save
souls, and to propagat^ the faith; he made them great welcome, considering them
as a powerful succor God had sent him for the good of those of his Diocese; he
told them he had not an estate sufficient to assure them a revenue, but would
propose to the inhabitants of the City to give them whereby to subsist, and
that in the mean time they should lodge at his house, and make use of what he
had or should have for the future. The Jesuits were satisfied with these
offers which the Bishop performed. For the first two years these Fathers
labored to good purpose, in Preaching, in Catechizing, in pleasing all the
people, in composing differences, in winning the Indians, by presents, ^sing
them with great gentleness, and testimonies of affection; and thus became
Masters of the hearts of the people.

When they saw themselves so established, they thought it high time to labor
the execution of the design on which they first came into that Country. To
compass it, they persuaded the Indians by good usage and caresses to sell them
the pearls they drew out of the Lake, it being but just, that they who were
their preachers and instructors should be preferred before the Portuguez
Merchants, who came from a Country remote, and at a certain time of the year to
make gain thereof by carrying them into diverse places: The simple Indians
discovered not what lay hid under this malicious proposal, but easily granted
what the subtle Jesuits demanded; so that every week they brought the Pearls
they had taken and sold them the Jesuits (whom they looked on as their Masters
and benefactors) for the same price they were accustomed to sell them to the
Portugueze; and having received their money and other things they gave them,
returned to their houses very well satisfied.

The Portugueze Vessels coming at their usual time, there was not an Indian now
would sell them any Pearls, so that they returned without trading, and lost
very much by the merchandises they had brought to give in exchange. And the
year following running the like fortune, they resolved to come thither no more,
being otherwise informed that the Jesuits had made themselves Masters of the
Trade.

The Fathers seeing they had removed the Portugueze, and made them abandon this
Commerce as unprofitable to them, so that they of Cochin knew not whom to sell
their Pearls to, made the inhabitants become suitors to them of the Society to
buy them, and told them they would not without great abatement of the price;
that the Portugueze had forsaken the trade, only because they made no benefit
by it, nor could sell the Pearls at a higher price than they cost them.

Under these and the like pretenses they reduced these poor Indians to extreme
misery, and constrained them at last to yield to their desires, and when they
could not do otherwise to sell the Pearls at a very low rate: they passed about
two years in this manner, exercising violences over the people; and the most
considerable persons of the City murmured against the Jesuits, yet some did
defend them, whose interests were joined with these of the Jesuits.

The Bishop knew the rise of the disorder but durst not intermeddle for
applying the remedies necessary, because the Governor of the City was a
Creature of the Jesuits, and it may be, went snips in the profits; so much
will they do for those that protect them.

This time elapsed, they resolved to change their battery, and gain greater
advantages in the Commerce, telling the Indians they would not buy the pearls
any more at the ordinary price, because their gain thereby was not
considerable: but they offered them a condition, as if they would have dealt
with them to their greater advantage, though it was in effect to make them
their slaves, which was, that the Indians should work by the day in the Lake;
and what they took in fishing should be for the Jesuits: The poor Indians
rather than famish accepted of the condition. The pay was very short, and the
labor excessive, for they made them begin at break of day, and suffered them
not to come out of the water till noon, and ^hen allowed them an hour for
repast and rest, ^ut forthwith after sent them to the water where they were
forced to continue till night. Many died in the water, because the fathers
would not permit them to come to land when they had need, which obliged the
poor people to complain to the Bishop; he would have remedied it but could not,
for that the Jesuits seeing themselves upheld by the Governor and others of
their Cabal, made nothing of the good Prelate. And to deliver themselves of all
fear took a resolution so haughty, which no boldness but theirs could have ever
produced.

They built a Castle on a little Island in the middle of the Lake, they planted
artillery there sufficient for their defense in case of necessity, and so
became masters of the Lake, and would not permit a person to fish there any
more, saying, The Lake was theirs, and that they had purchased it by the right
their preaching had gi^^^ them: The Bishop knowing they had built this Castle,
commanded them on pain of Ecclesiastical Censures to disarm and demolish it;
b^^ they laughed at his Orders, telling him the^ were exempt from his
jurisdiction: The goo^ Prelate seeing their insolence, exhibited a process
against them before the Pope and the Kin^ of Spain, who ordained the one by his
Bulls and the other by his Arrests, that they should do as the Bishop required,
but the Governou^ hindered it; the Jesuits defended themselv^^ both at Rome
and at Madrid by accusing the B^^shop of several crimes, but all false. There
came new Bulls, but to no purpose, for the Jesuits persisted in their
rebellion. At last the Bishop seeing no way left to reduce them, assembled some
Spaniards and many Indians together, and carrying the Cross of Christ in his
Standard with the Arms of the Pope, and of the King of Spain on the sides,
marched toward the Lake where the Jesuits attended him with an Army more
numerous than his with the name of JESUS in their flags.

The Bishop gave them battle, defeated them, demolished the Castle, and found
they had nailed up all their Canons when they perceived themselves unable to
resist: they continued nevertheless in the Island in hopes after the death of
the Bishop to renew their tyranny. But the Prelate inspired by God put on his
pontifical habit, and coming to the Lake side spoke in this manner; Though I be
the least and unworthiest of all the Ministers of God, yet I command thee in
his Divine Majesty's Name, and by his Authority, not to form or give any pearls
till the Jesuits be departed this Country; and if thou continue to produce
them, I pray God to give thee his Curse as I give thee mine: The Bishop had
scarce finished these words, but the waters retired and returned to their
center to the astonishment of the spectators: The Pearls disappeared, and the
Jesuits seeing themselves deprived of the profit they drew from this Commerce
and abhorred by the people quitted their College at Cochin, and returned to
Goa with their mouths full of insolent expressions against the Bishop: When
they were gone, the Lake filled again as before, and produced Pearls in
abundance to the Indians, and the Portugueze informed of it returned to their
ancient traffic. This story was told me at Granada by F. Diego Collado of the
Order of St. Dominick an illustrious person, an Apostolical preacher, and the
most considerable Missionary that yet went to China.

The Jesuits Merchants, Bankers and Carriers a^ Carthagene in the Indies with
ill success.
P. 383. Behold an example of the horrible Avarice of the Jesuits at
Carthagene in the Indies; they designed to make themselves masters of all the
Carriages necessary for transporting merchandises from Carthagene to the
Province of Quito, and had they compassed it they had become masters of all the
Country thereabouts: The Merchants of Quito; and of the new Kingdom came to
Carthagene to buy merchandises to be carried in the Gallions of Spain, though
they arrived there in Canoes by the great River of Madeleine. The Jesuits who
have a public bank at Carthagene and at Quito, thinking that if they had some
Canoes and beasts for carriage, they might become masters of all that
Territory, settled themselves on the banks of the great River, under pretense of
confessing and saying Mass to those who inhabited the Magazines and Warehouses,
where merchandises were locked up till they were fetched away on Mules to be
carried further into the Country; they found means by good words and fair
carriage to introduce themselves into the Ports of Onda and Mompoz where they
built Houses and Chapels on the pretenses aforesaid; soon after they built
Warehouses, and from Quito solicited the Merchants to disembark their
Merchandises there upon color that they would give them money at Carthagene by
exchange to be paid at Quito, whereby they obtained their desires: The profit
they made of this sharpened their appetite to gain more by greater matters; they
bought a quantity of Mules for carriage of Merchandises to the port of
Barranco, where they were embarked on Canoes; those who were accustomed to have
the benefit of these carriages began to perceive the prejudice the Jesuits did
them, but not having credit enough to oppose so powerful enemies, gave them no
disturbance, though the Masters of the Warehouses and Carriages did every day
lose more and more their usual gains.

The Jesuits rested not there, but would undertake further to take away all
the profit from the traders. To effect this, they built sixty Canoes for the
great River, and a vessel at Carthagene which they sent into Spain, defraying
the charge of the equipage by the profit they received from the merchandises
they embarked.

They Ordered those in the Vessel, when they returned from Spain to pass to
Angola and take in Negroes to row in their Canoes; they prospered in their
design, and in less than a year the vessel returned to Carthagene laden with
above six hundred slaves, of whom they sold some, and employed the rest in
their Canoes. By the pleasure they did the merchants in lending them money,
they engaged them to make use of their Canoes and Mules; so that the Jesuits
were entirely satisfied to see nothing escape them by land or by water: But the
Masters of the Canoes and Carriages were so far dissatisfied that they
complained to the Council of the Indies, and while they expected judgment
found means to burn all the Canoes of the Jesuits, and, which is worse, the
Council prohibited the Jesuits to have any Canoes or Warehouses for the
future, punishing them both in their Credit and Estates, whereof they are most
sensible.

They surprise the King of Spain to give them a Marsh of great value for
nothing.
P. 385. There was in the same City of Carthagene a Marsh, which being in the
Jesuits ^ye they begged of the King as a thing of small importance. His
Majesty granted it, either because he was not well informed of the value of the
thing, or because the Jesuits by their flatteries and presents, had gained
some person to facilitate the donation: The City being informed of what past,
advertised the King, that the Marsh was worth ten thousand Patacons per annum;
which obliged his Majesty to command, it should be taken from the Jesuits,
which was executed accordingly. These were not the faults of particular
persons, but of the Society who shared in them, the General having approved and
favored those who gave him the advice.

Their strange exactions for very questionable duties, in the Meades of Granada.
Ibid. There are Meadows near the hill called Montague des Neges by Granada,
where the King has certain duties, but not levied for several years, as being
of small consequence, difficult to be collected, and it may be not due in
conscience and equity; but nothing escapes the piercing eyes of the Jesuits,
they had notice of these duties, and in the time of the Earl of Olivarez
represented to the King their great poverty, and begged of him by way of Alms
these duties which he did not receive; that time was so favorable to them that
nothing was denied them, and they had their desire: They went to Granada, and
demanded of all persons concerned an exact account of the arrears of what had
not been paid for above sixty years past: They began to turn over papers, to
seize men's goods and the lands of several deceased long before, and demanded
from their heirs the payment of the whole debt. Granada was upon the point to
stone the Jesuits, and the Jesuits upon the point to put Granada into a
combustion; the City undertook the defense of those people, and set forth that
since the King in several occasions wherein he was in great necessity of money
had nevertheless left so many years pass without receiving these duties, it was
a strong argument he doubted the right by which they were redemanded, they went
to the Council who applied the remedies necessary: This is the recompense
Granada received for all the Services done the Jesuits, no City in Spain
having equally benefited them.

They go to Law with the Chartreus of Evora, for a Rent upon Granada.
P. 388. Let Us hear another story before we leave Granada. The Chartreuse Abbey
of Evora has a considerable Rent in Granada, but though the Chartreus had no
hand in the rebellion of Portugal, whereof the Jesuits were Authors, the
Jesuits forbore not to beg that Rent of the King, to repair their Damages by
many considerable losses sustained in Portugal by reason of the War. The King
not knowing the truth, granted their desire: The Chartreus of Granada bring
their Action against the Jesuits, but in vain, at least to my knowledge, who
could not learn that they obtained any thing since 1649. when I left them at
Madrid soliciting this affair. Certain it is, that the Jesuits were strangely
insolent, who having caused the Revolt of Portugal, would have taken other men's
Estates who had no share in the Guilt of that Rebellion.

They turn a Water from its Channel, and build ^ Mill thereupon in one night.
P. 388. I am so troubled with these things, that I would quit Granada very
willingly, but am stopped by the way, by the memorable story of the Mill which
the Jesuits of the College of Granada caused to be built at St. Foy, two
leagues from the City. The better to comprehend what I am to say, we must look
back to the time of King Ferdinand and Q. Isabelle: These pious Princes
Graciously granted the first Inhabitants of St. Foy, for them and their
Successors, permission to draw a Channel from the River Genil, to flood their
Grounds by a Watercourse, with condition that none should make use thereof
without their consent: The Jesuits had several years longed for the possession
of this Channel, and had used a thousand artifices and addresses to that
purpose, but in vain, by reason of the constant opposition of the Inhabitants
of the Town, who had always made a vigorous resistance: The Jesuits were loath
to entreat persons so inexorable, and took a resolution worthy the Society, in
confidence of protection in this as in other affairs, from the Chancery of
Granada, the rather because they had already possessed with the business, and
made sure to their side, almost all the Judges of the Chamber, who were to take
cognizance of the cause. They bought a pitiful piece of Ground contiguous to
the Territory of St. Foy, and not far from the Channel whereof they designed
to make themselves so absolute Masters, that the Inhabitants of the Town should
not take of the waters without their permission. F. Fonseea then Rector of the
College had a Lay-brother a Great Architect, whom he commanded to make a Mill
of wood, and dispose of all the Carpenters work, so as in an hour to be erected
and made fit to grind, which was accordingly done; and the Timber, Milstones,
and other things necessary carried in Carts to the piece of ground
abovementioned. In the evening they sent thither several servants of their
house, and the Farms they have in those quarters: These workmen instructed by
the Jesuit, made a watercourse on that side where the Mill was to be built,
and labored with such diligence in the trench, and the Jesuit plied his part
in erecting the mill so nimbly, that at Eleven a Clock in the Evening it
turned, and ground as if it had stood there several years.

The Jesuits brought with them a Notary whom they paid well, and he in
acknowledgement gave them an act importing he had seen the Mill grind in their
Land without contradiction, and took the depositions of above twenty witnesses,
who said the same thing. The Fathers thought, that being thus in possession and
otherwise assured of the Judges, no man in the world could out them from
thence: 'Twas hardly light the next day but the Inhabitants of St. Foy
understood all that past. The sight of their walls built by K. Ferdinand and Q.
Isabel their Founders in a night, prevented their Astonishment at the nimble
erecting of the Mill: They called an Assembly, and by the command of one of
their Civil Officers, a man of spirit and courage, now a Priest called Thomas
Muros, they went to the Mill, rased it to the ground, and filling the new
trench with rubbish turned back the water into the Ancient Channel: The
Jesuits seeing their Mill destroyed, made their Complaints in the Chancery of
Granada, treated the Inhabitants of St. Foy with great insolence, and in
pursuance of the instructions received of their Advocates and procurators,
exhibited an information which they had caused to be drawn, of the peaceable
possession of their Mill. The Audience of Granada caused the Inhabitants of St.
Foy to be cited, and some to be arrested: They spent much money in the suit,
and escaped but narrowly from being condemned by the Judges to rebuild the Mill
at their own charges: But D. Paul Vasquez de Aguilar, one of the Judges showed
himself so Generous in defense of the Inhabitants, that the rest seeing they
had not reason on their side, durst not contradict him, and in conclusion gave
the Jesuits a Reprimande (at least checked their Proctors) condemned them to
pay costs, enlarged the prisoners, and approved of all that had been done.

They coin many millions of Money for one.
P. 389. When I was at Malaga, says the Author, they kept such a noise with
their hammers, and so unseasonably, that I could not sleep: From thence I went
to Salamanca; where I understood that the Jesuits coined Money by permission
of King Philip the 3d, for one million, to serve for the building of their
magnificent College in that City: They were not content with one million, but
coined above three, but the pieces of four Maravedis were so small, that they
were commonly called the Jesuits Money. The pleasantness of it is, that if the
King upon information of their insolence had not prohibited them, they had
continued their work, and would have been coining of this million till
Doomsday: Hence came that abundance of their Money in Spain, whereof the King
was obliged again and again to lessen the value, to the great damage of the
Kingdom, for which they are in some measure beholding to the Jesuits.

A Jesuit makes his Penitent relapse into his Crime, by presenting him with
the picture of a Lady he had loved, and forgot.
P. 244. There is a Maxim among their secret advices, for proof whereof the
Author reports this story: The Maxim is, That in the Guidance of the
Consciences of Great ones, they are to follow the loosest opinions: By this
they introduce and preserve themselves in favor, and render themselves
acceptable by their complaisance.

A very rich Gentleman falling sick confessed to a Jesuit, and among other
sins accused himself of the love he bore to a Lady whose picture he had for a
pledge of Affection, which expecting to dye he bestowed on his Confessor. The
Gentleman recovered and repented of his fault so sincerely, that he entirely
forgot the person who had caused it, and thought no more of the Jesuit. But
the Father de^irous to renew his acquaintance, went to see him when recovered,
and discoursing of his sickness, spoke to him of the Lady mentioned in his
Confession, and returned him her picture: This putting the Gentleman in mind
of the Lady whom he had quite defaced out of his memory, he returned to his
vomit, and persisted in it long.

What shall we say of these Maxims, and practices of the Jesuits, but that
they will destroy the Church, Religion and the Sacraments; if it may serve
their interest: And that the least temporal advantage shall prevail more over
their spirit than all the Laws of God.

The Jesuits stir not abroad by night for the Poor, but do it for the Rich: A
merry prank played them by the Governor of Evora in his particular.
P. 394. What passed at Evora is very pleasant: A Governor of that City some
years before the revolt of Portugal, knew the Jesuits well, and that they run
upon wheels when their interest calls them, but have Lead in their heels when
there is nothing to be got, though the business concern the good of their
neighbor and the service of God: He was informed, that a poor man being sick
to death, they went at midnight to the Jesuits College (because this man
lodged near them) to desire one of them to come and confess him. The Porter
answered, that the Fathers never stirred out of the College by night, and so
the poor man dyed without being confessed: The Governor took this occasion to
make others know the Jesuits as well as he knew them, and to undeceive such as
had a good opinion of them, he sent his servant one night to desire a Confessor
from the Jesuits for a woman that lay a dying, but instructed him well, and
forbad him to tell whence he came: The servant went to the College, and having
called and knocked a long time, the Porter came to the Gate, cursing him to the
Devil that knocked, but took the Message, and went to deliver it to the F.
Rector: The servant waited for an Answer, which after a long attendance was
brought him to this purpose, that the F. Rector advised him to go seek out the
Curat of the Parish, for that they of this holy House stirred not abroad by
night: Some days after the Governor sent them a message from him, that after
supper he had been suddenly taken with an Apoplexy, whose consequence might be
dangerous, and to prevent the ill that might otherwise ensue, he desired that
he might have a Jesuit to confess him. As soon as the servant had delivered
his message, two Jesuits came forth warmly clad, for it was Winter, and went
beside the Governors house, who attended them by the way with the Officers of
Justice: When he saw them, he asked who they were, and whither they went: They
answered they were Jesuits, and went to confess the Governor who lay a dying.
This is all false, replies he, for I am the Governor, and very well in health,
and you are not Jesuits but Robbers; and so sent them to prison, where they
continued all night: The Rector having heard of this Accident in the Morning,
went in search of those of his Order, found them in prison, and complained to
the Archbishop who proceeded against the Governor: But the Governor would not
let them go till they had made an Authentic information, and proved by the
depositions of several witnesses, that they were men of a Religious Order, and
that they were acknowledged, and commonly reputed such: This took up a days
time, and the Rector and other Jesuits bestirred themselves to purpose, and
would have given money to clear themselves of the mischance, and thought
themselves kindly used that the Governor insisted on no more satisfaction for
delivery of the Prisoners: The Governor excused himself for what past, because
he knew on one side that the Jesuits stirred not abroad by night, no not to
confess persons that lay a dying, and that on the other side finding at
midnight two persons in the streets in Jesuits habit, it gave him just cause
to suspect that they were Robbers who made use of that disguise. This story was
told me by a Lay-brother a Jesuit named Pantaleon d' Almeyda, who was at
Granada not many years since, whom his Superiors have since sent into New Spain.

The corrupt Manners of their Scholars and Priests in three Great Provinces:
How they keep their Vow of Obedience to the Pope, and endeavor to cheat
Princes.
P. 410. The Jesuits make a particular vow of obedience to the Holy See,
though sufficiently obliged without it, and as if all Catholics were not of
their opinion in the point, but it is easy to discover by what follows, how ill
they perform it.

It Is known, these Fathers take on themselves the instruction of youth in all
parts of the world, to infuse into them the Principles of Learning and Good
manners. They managed it so well in the Provinces of Stiria, Carinthia, and
Carniola, that the Ecclesiastics who had studied under them, led so infamous
lives, and gave such ill examples, that Pope Paul 5. held himself obliged by
the duty of his Office to take order for their reformation: For this purpose in
1619. he appointed the Bishop of Serzane his Nuntio in the Empire, to be
Visitor, that he might correct and punish the debauchery of their manners so
dishonorable to the Church, The Jesuits who loved these wretched Priests and
Students, as their true disciples, to discharge their vow of obedience to the
Holy See left no stone unturned to hinder the Visitation: But seeing the Nuntio
far advanced in the chastisement and reformation of these corrupt Churchmen,
they found a rare expedient to hinder the effect of the punishments given them,
and to procure them impunity in their loose courses of life. F. Bartholome^
Villers a Jesuit was then Confessor to the Archduke, and had the privilege to
give his advice first in all sorts of Affairs. He represented to this Prince,
that the Popes design in this Visitation was to know and procure a Memoire of
all the forces and fortifications of all his Estate, for some purposes unknown,
but such as there was just cause to suspect; That the Nuntio being an Italian
would take with him some persons of the same Nation to assist in the
Visitation, that it was not fit to give strangers liberty to enter the State,
to penetrate its secrets, and reduce them into Memoirs: Had this Prince been
less pious, he had not needed greater motives to cross the good intentions of
the Pope. But having discovered these of the Jesuits, and the weakness of
their reasons, he seconded the designs of the Pope, and the Visitation was held
throughout these three Great Provinces, wherein there were found only fix
Priests who used not Concubines, and were otherwise guilty of scandalous living.

What shall we now say of the Jesuits, who would have persuaded this Prince to
hinder the execution of the Ordinances of the Pope* And is not this a good
obedience to the Sovereign Pontife? I have often heard it said, The Robber and
Receiver merit the same punishment.

Another Author who relates this story, says that these debauched Priests, had
not only studied under the Jesuits, but made it their custom to give the
Fathers several Presents, and that this engaged these Masters to favor their
Scholars, and take them into protection though public and scandalous sinners;
Plerique enim provinciarum illarum Sacerdotes ex Iesuitarum scholis profecti
munusculd illis frequenter missitabant, adeoque duplici nomine quamvis palam
essent improbi, Magistrorum patr^cinium gratiamque meceri videbantur. Alphons.
de Vargas Relat. de stratag. Jesuitarum. cap. 20.

They make themselves Masters of the University of Prague against the Rights of
the Archbishop, by attributing Rights not due to the Emperor.
P. 411. What passed at Prague is fresher in memory, the judgment of the
difference having been referred by the Cardinal d' Arach Archbishop of Prague
to the Pope and Cardinals of the Congregation of the Inquisition. The fact is
as follows.

Pope Clement the 6th, at the desire of the Emperor Charles the 4th, erected
in 1348. an University at Prague, whereof the then Archbishop was made
Chancellor, and his successors for the time being to have that dignity annexed
to their Archbishopric; the power given him was not only to bestow the
degrees of Master, Doctor and others, but to exercise all other things
belonging to the Jurisdiction of an ordinary by the Canons which have been
expounded by the Council of Trent, and extend even to the inferior Schools.
From hence it appears, that Secular Princes have no jurisdiction in this
University, and that by consequence, he that takes this right from the Bishop
incurs the sentence of excommunication pronounced by the Bull in Coena Domini
against those that usurp Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction that belongs not unto them.

The Jesuits who have the pride of the Devil, and an extravagant ambition to
command; thought it a good way to please their itch of Superiority, by bringing
under their power the people, and Ecclesiastics of Prague, and making
themselves Masters of the University, and all the Schools there; to effect
this, they were to establish him for Chancellor, Rector and Governor of all
the Schools, who should be Rector of their College, though not feasible
without interessing the conscience of the Emperor, which they made no
difficulty of; they persuaded the Emperor as they pleased and executed their
desires accordingly trampling under foot the Laws Divine, and all humane
respects, the Emperor reposing entire confidence in them, and leaving them to
effect their design, as themselves should think fit.

They drew up an Ordinance which the Archbishop presented in his complaints to
the Pope: Some passages whereof are here inserted out of the clauses pertinent
to the matter in hand.

By our Authority Royal and Imperial we unite by full right and to perpe^uity
th Caroline University (so called from the founder Charles the 4 th) to
Ferdinands College of the Society of Jesus established in our City of Prague,
without that any privilege of the Caroline University shall prejudice this
Union. What Is this in plain terms, but that though the Apostolic See, and the
Council of Trent would have the University of Prague submit to the Jurisdiction
of the Archbishop as their Sovereign Chief in matters Ecclesiastical,
notwithstanding we will take away this Right from the Archbishop, and maugre
the Authority of the Holy See and the Council, make the whole University
subject to the Rector of the College of Jesuits?

The Emperor proceeds: Whereas we can abolish as faulty, and do hereby
effectually abolish all that may be contrary to the union we make: Therefore we
will, that to perpetuity, the Rector of our College Imperial of the Society of
Jesus established according to custom by the Superiors of the said Society
shall be Rector of the whole University, and we make void by these presents,
and annual the right which any others might pretend thereto (and by consequence
that of the Archbishopric;) And we do hereby submit unto the said Rector all
the Masters, as well of inferior Schools, as others of the City of Prague, who
shall be obliged to obey the Orders of the said Rector or his Deputy for making
visitations, or establishing any reglement. No person shall have power to
establish any new School in any faculty whatsoever without permission in
writing from the said Rector, to whom we submit also all the Colleges and
petty Schools of all the Kingdom (of Bohemia) as well those now established,
as such as are to be established hereafter: and by the same Secular Authority
they give the Rector of the Jesuits all rights of inquisition and correction
of here^icks, and the censure of all Books to be printed or sold.

The Emperor gave all this Authority (which he had not himself) to the
Jesuits, who had given him the occasion of committing this Sacrilege for
them, for it cannot be said the Emp^rour did it of his own accord, since it was
by their procurement by giving him the means by a comparison as unjust as the
example they produced for a precedent: See here the ground.

They said, that the Ancient Orders of Religion had lost all their right to
their foundation, and rents, ever since the heretics became Masters of their
Monasteries; and that the Emperor having recovered them by Conquest through
the force of his Arms had acquired a right in domaine to them, and was become
absolute Master thereof, the Patron having lost all his right. From hence they
inferred, that the Emperor having delivered the University of Prague from the
tyranny of the heretics who had been Masters thereof for two hundred years,
was of a Protector become Master thereof by his Arms, and therefore might give
it to whom he pleased: They framed an Imperial Constitution on this ground.

Who ever heard of a villainy like this? they would despoil the ancient Orders
of Religion, and an Archbishop of their unquestionable rights, and to compass
their ends, trample under foot the Popes Bulls, mock at his Authority, persuade
the Emperor to do that, whereby he incurs the penalties declared by the Bull
in Coena Domini, and all this to make the Rector of the College of the
company, governor of the University of Prague.

They make their F. Cyprian, who was a cheat, and aspy, to pass for a Saint and
a Prophet.
P. 402. I have long desired to know the truth of a story I have been often
told, and learnt it at last of F. Morales as follows.

In 1638. a Jesuit called Francis Matthew Cyprian came from the East Indies to
Macao. He had scarce set foot on land, but the Bells of the College rung out
so loudly, that they shook the whole town, and gave the inhabitants reason to
enquire the cause: but they were soon satisfied by the Jesuits running all
about and saying; F. Cyprian is come at last. He lived as those whom the
Jesuits call Saints, and the people in compliance with them published him for
such; but that you may the better judge of the person they so unanimously
canonized, I shall relate in few words, not his whole life, which is too long
to be written, but what he did this time at Macao, whereof all the people have
been witnesses, and at the same time Heralds to proclaim his impostures.

Cyprian one day after long entreaty by the Jesuits went up into the pulpit in
the Church of the Society, but what is usually said of impudent Musicians, who
must be more entreated to hold their peace than they were to sing, was true of
him, for he preached three hours by the clock, and notwithstanding all the
diligence used, and signs made to stop his impertinent prattling, nothing could
stay the course of his ^opperies for three hours together.

The subject of his Sermon was, that of his folly, That St. Francis Xavier had
sent him to preach at Iapan, and in the familiar discourses often held with him
had given him that order. To authorize what he said, he took to witness the
holy images, the walls and pillars of that Church, and to persuade his Auditors
to believe the certainty of his Revelations and ravishments, he told them, that
if they of the City opposed his passage from the territories, they could not
hinder it, for he would make use of his mantle for a bark, his staff for a
mast, and would so pass over with more security than in a vessel well equipped:
These and other expressions in his Sermon gave the people much trouble,
because, if all things fell out as he said, it would break the Commerce between
Portugal and Iapan to the ruin of the people. All the Ecclesiastics and
learned persons assembled together, to consider what might have inclined the
Jesuit to talk at that rate, and what remedy to apply. The most judicious were
of opinion, that he was a fool, but that at that time he practiced
dissimulation more than solly; which opinion had sufficient grounds, for that
it was propable he hid under these appearances of dotage, the design he had to
favor the interest of the Hollanders, who made use of him as an instrument
proper to ruin the City.

When Cyprian knew what past in this assembly by the information of those
co^fidents of the Jesuits whom fear or interest ingages to give them advice of
all that is transacted; this impostor writ in a paper all that past in the
Assembly, and put it into the hand of a statue of St. Francis Xavier which
stood in the Cell of the Visitor Manuel Diaz the Jesuit. One of the Assembly
came to see the Visitor, and Cyprian having notice of it went to his Chamber,
and having whispered him in the ear in the presence of the Secular person, who
came to the Visitor went his way: When he was gone, the Visitor forthwith says
to the townsman; SIR Know you what F. Cyprian saish? See what that paper is in
the hand of St. Francis Xavier. The townsman took the paper, wherein he found
the names of all who had been in the Assembly written with F. Cyprians hand,
and that within two months they should all dye, for having given so
disadvantageous a judgment of the Jesuit: The Visitor with great exclamations
conjures the townsman to publish the paper, that they who were to die might
prepare themselves for it ^ but the event was quite contrary, for some of those
men who were before Crazy, had their health very well for these two months and
a long time after: Perhaps because their distemper forbore to afflict them out
of respect to F. Cyprian, who peradventure had given them some of his relics,
as his gray hairs, his old shirts, or other like things, which he distributed
very liberally.

The common people had a great esteem of him, and would have torn in pieces his
robe to serve them for relics, but it was new and of very fine cloth which
made F. Cyprian willing to preserve it, telling the people that the habit he
wore abroad was not a relic considerable enough, but if they came to his
lodging he would give them excellent new cloth of his old torn shirts.

A Pagan Indian trimmed him for nothing, which Cyprian said was an action
sufficient to convert him; but the truth is, he made great gains every time
that he shaved him by selling every hair of his beard for a relic, and when
Cyprian knew it, he said, The man must be allowed to advance dev^tion.

They were at last confirmed in the opinion they had of him, as being a spy, or
what fell out afterward. A Jesuit, simple and devout, (for such also there
uses to be among them) and to F. John Baptist Morales, and told him in private:
Within two months the Emperor of Japan shall send in search of us, and twelve
of the College, whereof I will be one, will go where required, and the first
five years we shall suffer three sorts of punishments, the Sword, the Fire, and
the Cross; and we have seen great miracles done by F. Cyprian in confirmation
of this truth. There past not only two months but two years, and a thousand may
pass before any come in search of them, or they go to Iapan. It is true
nevertheless that F. Cyprian had taken his measures to go to Iapan within two
months, and had for that purpose sent two Jesuits into a D^sart Island to
build a vessel for his passage; the City was advertised of it, and sent to
destroy it: But F. Cyprian warned them who had commission to do it, not to put
it in execution, foretelling them that there would fall fire from heaven on
them who would adventure to touch it: He said truth in some measure, but not
altogether, for fire there was, but not from heaven, and that burnt not men,
but men burnt the barque. By this they discovered his design, and gave account
to the inquisition of his Revelations, his Prophecies and Impostures he made
use of for cheating the world, and the inquisitors having found the truth of
the information, ordered he should be sent back to the Indies, and charged
Anthony Cardin the Jesuit to bring him thither; but as one who had sucked the
same milk, and learnt the same doctrine, he permitted him to flee among the
Moors where he ended his life with as much sanctity as he began, and led it to
that time. And I doubt not but Poza the Jesuit has put him in his Martyrology.

They seek in the Indies the means to enrich themselves, not the salvation of
souls: And dishonor Religion by their Concubinages and impostures.
P. 407. The story of what past among the Indians Chiriguanaes is worth the
reporting: I heard it, says the Author, at Madrid of a person of honor, a
Friend and Correspondent of D. John D' Elizarazo his Majesty's Commissioner in
the City of Plat^ in Peru.

The Indians Chiriguanaes live beyond the Mountains of Peru, and are a Nation
very docil and susceptible of the doctrine of the Gospel, but Enemies to those
labors and pains the Indians now suffer. The Jesuits undertook their
Conversion, and in a short time labored to good effect; these Infidels
receiving the Gospel with very great devotion; when the Fathers saw them almost
all Converted and Baptized, and that they were dexterous and tractable, they
resolved to propose to them the end of their preaching, which was not, as it
appeared, the Conversion of the souls of these Infidels, but to make advantage
by their estates. They told them, that being their preachers they desired to
live amongst them, but wanted lands and hereditaments for maintenance, and
desired their Aid for planting some Sugarcanes, whereby they might be enabled
to live with Credit.

The Indians perceived the Avarice of the Jesuits, and were confirmed in their
opinion, wherein all they of Peru concur, that these people are not Ministers
of the Gospel, but under pretense of preaching the faith of Christ, labor
only to establish their tyranny, and deprive the Indians of their Liberty: So
that they resolved to set upon them by night, and to chastise them so as to
make them an example to others. Though the Jesuits had not been long in that
place, they had contracted great familiarity with the Indian women, who had
such affection for them, that they made it appear to the prejudice of that they
ought to have expressed to their Husbands and Kindred; for they gave them notice
of the resolution taken to kill them, and furnished them with means to flee
away. Six of them escaped, and came to the City of Plata, where they blazed it
abroad, that the Indians out of unwillingness to receive the Gospel had driven
them away; And that their Companion F. Mendiola had renounced the faith, and
married after the manner and Ceremonies of the Indians. That this obliged them
to give Account of what past, that he might be ^etched out thence by force of
Arms, it being otherwise impossible the Infidels should be converted: 1.
Because Mendiola cherished them in their blindness, for fear of being punished
for his faults: 2. Because they would be confirmed in their Error by the ill
example of a Priest and Minister of the Gospel, who had embraced their
Religion, this made them desire forces of D. John D'ilisaraze for the
enterprise, and for an evidence of the truth of their allegations, they had
taken from Mendi^la the Jesuits habit, as having apostatized from the Faith.

The Kings Minister Judged this an affair of too Great consequence to be
hastily engaged in, and took better advice which was to send an express to
Mendiola, to assure him of his protection and assistance to obtain absolution
from his Crime. This Father was extremely surprised at the news, as having
never thought of Renouncing the Faith, or quitting the Jesuits habit. This
made him resolve to be gone forthwith and inform himself of all that concerned
him on this occasion: He presented himself in this condition to the Jesuits,
and by his presence convinced them of the falseness of their allegations
against him. Declaring that all this was grounded on their weakness and
wretchedness, which had precipitated them into Concubinage: And that these
Jesuits to cover their fault had attributed his to Idol^try. And that it was
strange, that the fault being common to all, he alone who was the least guilty
should bear the shame: This obliged him to quit the Society, and take the habit
of a Secular Priest, with the hatred we may easily imagine he conceived against
them who had raised such an infamous slander against him, with design to
destroy him among the Indians, left he should discover their villainies,
abhorring that Order, who on such occasions, and to cover such wickedness will
strip their Friars of the habit they wear.

A Jesuit stabbed by the Husband of a Woman he loved, the Jesuits suborn
Witnesses to save their Credit.
P. 398. The College of Jesuits of Granada has an Estate in a place called
Caparacena two Leagues from Granada, the administration whereof they gave to
Balthazar des Rois one of the Society: he had such affection for a married
woman of that place, that it was publicly known, though the Husband was the
last who had notice of it: for the Jesuit having employed him to work in the
Grounds, to make him more tractable, had doubled his wages. At last the poor
Cuckold provoked by the injury done him, studied a fit occasion of revenge. The
Jesuit doubting nothing, came one day from Granada to the Farm, and went
directly to the Woman's house, not knowing the husband was there. But the man
having hid himself to see what should pass between his Wife and the Jesuit,
when he found them both at their Ease stabbed the Jesuit, and left him dead on
the place, having thrown his Bonnet aloft, and said, Away Horns. An Information
was exhibited of what happened, and it was constantly affirmed the Jesuit was
an Adulterer, that the Husband had often warned him from seeing his Wife, and
had been blamed by his Neighbors, as having consented to his own infamy: The
Rector of the College of Granada hearing this, exhibited a Plaint Criminal
against the Murderer, and designed to make a new Information quite different
from that which had been exhibited, and took with him a Notary of Granada to
effect it: He endeavored both by promises and presents to persuade the
witnesses examined in the first information to contradict themselves, or at
least to use ambiguous expressions in some matters: And 'twill be worth the
observation how he managed the business.

He that had deposed in the first information, that as soon as the Husband had
killed or wounded the Jesuit, he threw the Bonnett aloft, and said Away Horns,
upon the second Deposition said, He remembered not that he had mentioned that
circumstance, but that if it was inserted in the Process, the Clark had put it
in of himself: Another desirous to justify the Jesuit, to show that the woman
was not liable to suspicion, by an Equivocation said, She was a Woman of Age,
that is, as he would have it, Very old, though I can affirm on my own knowledge
she was but 28. Most of the witnesses used like Equivocations, but agreed all
in this, That the Jesuit was a Saint, and that they had often seen him with
his Chapelet in his hand: The Jesuits having gotten this information,
vigorously prosecuted the murderer, and caused him to be condemned (by
contumacy for not appearing) to be hanged, and when the sentence had been
pronounced, they printed the whole Process and Information verbatim, with the
Definitive sentence, and distributed it throughout the City, to those who had
known the story. I have a Copy of it by me. I consider not so much the fault of
this Friar, as a thing to which others may be subject, but that the Action must
be holy, just, and canonized, because done by a Jesuit; and that it is better
cause a man to be hanged, than acknowledge that the Society consists of men,
and of sinners. Thus their Apologies prove more scandalous than their Crimes.

The horrible corruption of a holy Sister by Mena the Jesuit, her Confessor,
who was saved by the Jesuits from the Inquisition, married, and taught
Judaisme.
P. 25. Mena was a Jesuit in appearance, of very great abilities, he was lean,
pale, and his eyes sunk in his head, wore always a great head, and a great
Chapelet, but it was the better to cover his greater hypocrisy: when I was a
Student at Salamanca, being very young, I heard sometimes his discourses and
exhortations, which he made with such force, that his Auditors trembled, and so
he gained the respect and esteem of a Saint; but it was observed, he made his
Sermons before the exercise of the Discipline of Penance, practiced by many in
that College, for which this good Father seemed to have no great affection or
Devotion, though none needed it more.

Among many others who confessed to him, there was a devout woman who was very
simple, to whom he said that God by Revelation had signified to him that it was
his will he should marry her, and that they should live together as married
persons, but it must be kept secret, and no person to know it. The woman would
not be persuaded without seeing the opinions of some learned persons in
approbation of Mena's assertions. And as one Crime easily draws on another,
the Jesuit used this Artifice to make the poor woman believe that several
persons of Learning agreed with him in opinion; he spoke with the ablest
Doctors of the University, and told them he confessed a person very spiritual
and pious, but withal very scrupulous, and to that degree, that she Rested not
assured in following the directions he gave her, without confirmation from
other Learned men; therefore he entreated them, that if they had a good opinion
of him, and his long experience in the conduct of Souls, they would appease
this unquiet spirit by assuring her she might safely follow what F. Mena
advised her: The Doctors who had always observed the modesty of this man's
behavior, had often heard him preach, and knew his discourses were powerful,
that he spoke of nothing but eternity, that he repeated almost every day, that
Judas fried in Hell above 1600 years for one mortal sin, and should burn there
for ever, with a thousand other expressions of like nature, granted his request.

The I^suite having their testimony, went to his holy Sister, and having made
use thereof to deceive the poor wretch, who thought the Doctors had approved
the pretended Revelation of her Confessor, she consented to marry him* (the
circumstances of this infamous marriage* reported by the Author are so
abominable, that we thought fit to omit them.) The Jesuit continued a long
time the commission of his Villainies before and after Mass, and forbore not at
the same time to continue his discourses of piety in the College, but leaving
us to perform the Discipline of Penance we used in the Church, he retired to
his pleasures with his holy sister in an Ermitage where he kept her.

The Inquisition was advertised of all this, and caused Mena to be imprisoned
at Valladobid: The taking of him made as much noise as his pretended virtue had
gained him reputation: The Society undertook his defense, and by their credit
and Certificates that F. Mena was sick, and by extenuating his Crime, they
obtained leave to take him into their College, where he might be in custody of
the Officers of the Inquisition: But they were so desirous to set him at
liberty, that while the Officers of the Inquisition, who were ordered to attend
the sick man, went to dinner, the Jesuits sent to toll the Bell, and gave it
out that Mena was dead. And to cover this Lie, they made a face and hands of
past-board, and having fagotted up a kind of body of Sticks and old Clouts,
they put this wooden Mena on a Biere, and in the mean time mounted the true
Mena on a good Mule, which rested not till he came to Genes, where he has
within these twenty years, publicly read the Law of Moses to the Jaws. He
married there, and had Children, and a friend of mine told me he had spoken
with them at Genes, and asked them news of their Father, who was not long
before dead: And those he had by his holy Sister I have seen Students in the
Jesuits College of Salamanca, and very well used: As for the she-Saint* she
appeared no more.

That a Friar professed may marry upon a probable Re^elation.
It was upon the occasion of F. Mena, that the Jesuit Salas, lib. 2. tract. 8
Disp. unica Sect. 5. Nunt. 51. teaches, That a Friar pro^est, of an Order
approved, who shall have a probability of a Divine Revelation, that God
dispenses with his Vow to enable him to marry, may marry, and make use of this
probable, though doubtful dispensation: I know very well that Doctor Aquila
answers, that Salas changed his opinion before they had printed the Leaf that
contains this proposition. But if that be true, why did he not tear off those
that were printed already: But it is a known and ordinary Artifice of the
Jesuits, for evading the reproaches justly due to them for any proposition
cited out of their Books, to produce a corrected Copy, where it has been
expunged: But it is not so here, for there are several Copies of Salas in print,
which are not corrected; and Salas who should have corrected the Proposition,
has maintained it; and three of the gravest Fathers according to the practice
of the Society have approved, and three thousand had done it, had the book been
read by so many.

A Thes^s of the Jesuits: That they are not obliged to say the Breviary: And
that it is but ^ Customary Error.
P. 43. I have seen, says the Author, when I was at Ocagna in 1636. a Thesis
maintained by the Jesuits, wherein they affirmed, that the Ecclesiastiques
Secular and Regular, were not obliged neither on pain of sin mortal nor
venial, to say the Breviary: That there was no Law in the Church to command it,
but that it was a Custom derived from common Error: I assisted in person at
these Theses, upon this token, that three days after the Jesuit was cited by
the Inquisition, but what became of the business, I know not.

The extravagancy of the Jesuits in the matter of Revelations, and
self-conceit; falsifying Books. Valentia confounded on this occasion before
Pipe Clement the 8th and died.
Page 43. In the first Edition of the Spiritual Exercises of the Jesuits,
there is this proposition p^g. 31 and 32 of the Impression at Burg^s, 1574. It
is the great perfection of a Christian to keep himself indifferent to do what
God shall reveal to him, and not to determine himself to do what he has
already revealed and taught in the Gospel. This is the source of many other
maxims of theirs, and particularly of that affirmed by a I^suite named
Eusebius in a Book Entitled, Of the Love of Jesus and Mary, that St. Ignati^s
had more wisdom, and spiritual prudence than St. Paul, and that if the
Apostles were now in the world they would regulate their lives according to
th^se of the Jesuits. He that answers for the Jesuits, says this is not
true, and that these words are not in the Book which the Authors of the
Extracts quotes, and that he understood not Latin.

The Author of the Reply doubts not but the words of Eusebius are to be found
in the first Ed^tion of his Book; as having been read there by persons of good
credit, who assured him thereof, but told him at the same time, that the
Jesuits had quickly suppressed it, and dexterously substituted another very like
it.

As to the Apologists reproaching the Author of the Extract, that he understood
not Latin, the Author of the Reply makes this reparty, That perhaps he had
studied Grammar in the Schools of the Jesuits. This, says he, was the answer
of a Divinity Professor of a Religious Order, who pressing a Jesuit extremely
in dispute, and in the heat of his Argument slipped into a Solecis^, the
Jesuit who was in perplexity how to extricate himself from the ill
consequences of his opinion, which the professo^ urged very much, would have
diverted the dispute by reproaching him with having committed a fault against
Grammar; I confess it* says the Professor, but not against Divinity; and the
reason is clear, for I have studied Divinity in my Order, but Grammar in your
College.

But, our Author adds, The Spiritual Exercises, I have in Latin and Spanish
differ as much the one from the other, as Yea and No, and it is not
extraordinary with the Jesuits to make entire impressions of Books to take
away those words which make against them.

Thus they did in the time of the Congregation de Auxiliis, making an express
impression of St. Augustine, and cutting of what was contrary to their
assertions, that Valentia might maintain their sentiments by the words of that
Holy Doctor, by taking from him his own, and putting into his writings words
purely Pelagian. They were convicted of this before Pope Clement the 8 th. For
Lemos the Dominican having quoted St. Augustine in defense of a position which
he maintained against the Jesuits, Valentia denied there was any such
expression as Lemos cited in the works of St. Augustine; Lemos desired the
Books might be brought, the Jesuit had in readiness those he had printed and
falsified, and read the quite contrary to what Lemos affirmed; But the
Dominican desired they would fetch the works of St. Augustine out of the Popes
Library, and the Pope himself read there the passage as Lemos had cited it, and
having thereby discovered the cheats of the Jesuits he said to Valentia: Is it
thus, you pretend to deceive the Church of God? These words were like a
thunderbolt to strike down Valen^ia, and made him fall in a swoone before the
Pope, and die two days after. By this it appears that they had made an entire
Edition of the works of St. Augustine only to leave out the words cited by
Lemos.

Their interessed and extravagant devotion under pretense of honoring the
Virgin.
P. 7. What passed at Alcala whereof Doctor Aquila speaks makes it appear, that
the Devotion of the Jesuits to the immaculate conception of the Virgin is
proportioned to their interests, and increases according to the account of the
profits they draw from it in pleasing Princes, or gathering money from the
people to keep the feast. They have at Alcala, as in their other houses,
Congregations for their Scholars, and other persons who frequent their
Colleges. They assembled on a Saturday to make a vow to defend the purity of
Mary in her Conception; after which they told them, now you cannot be
Dominioans, for they make a vow quite contrary, which is quite false; this
done, they gathered money from all them that were to make the vow (which was
the principal part of the Ceremony) under pretense of the Charges they were to
be at, and made some artificial fires which were like to burn an Image of the
Conception, which served as a Crown to the Machine. When the Congregationists
had supped, the Jesuits gave them in their hands a standard of our Lady, and
having many in company very far on their way, the squadron arrived between ten
and eleven a clock in the evening at the College of St. Thomas D' Alcala with
fearful cries, and a horrible bustle mixed with scurrilous, foul, and unhandsome
expressions, calling the Dominicans Jews, Heretics, and enemies of the Virgin;
they threw stones, and discharged pistols against the gates and the windows,
brake down the glass, and wearied at last, and hoarse with crying, they went
with their standard (which they let fall more than once) to the Convents of St.
Catharine, and the mother of God, where they played the like pranks.

F. Oquete the Jesuit preached the next day, and persuaded them to defend the
Conception of the Virgin with the sword, with the poinard, with their blood,
and with fire, and that if any opposed them St. Iago etc. which is a Spanish
Oath by St. James, or a menace. He forgot only (which some say was done of
malice) to call those of old Castile to the Assembly, who provoked by the
neglect went the night following to throw stones at F. Oquetes Chamber,
exalting the Virgin, St. Thomas and his Doctrine: From hence proceeded the
challenge between the Captains of the Castellines, and the Navarr^is, who
carried the Standard the night of the Congregationists triumph, of which
Captains the one was killed, and died without confession.

F. Oquete said in this Sermon, that the Virgin had rather be eternally in Hell
deprived of the vision of her Son, to see Devils there, than to have been
conceived in original sin.

P. 114. It Is not out of Piety, but hatred to the Dominicans, and to render
them odious to the people, that they teach the immaculate conception of the
Virgin: The Cardinal of Lugo a Jesuit in a letter to one of their Fathers at
Madrid writes: Your Reverence may do well to order things, so that those of the
Society apply themselves diligently in your quarters to revive the Devotion of
the Conception, to which they are well affected in Spain, to see if by this
means we may divert the Dominicans, who press us here in the defense of St.
Augustine: And I believe they will surmount us in the principal points De
Auxiliis, if we oblige them not to employ their force another way.

Their Artifices toward vain w^men.
P. 247. The Jesuits make use of several Artifices to surprise them with whom
they have to do, and especially women. They speak of nothing but magnificence
and liberality to those who are vain, telling them that by these virtues they
establish reputation, and cite examples to that purpose; and having puffed up
their hearers with such vain conceits, they represent their necessities, that
they have no Ornaments in their Vestries, and some of the Fathers want shirts
to shift them.

Their Artifices toward women having Children under their care.
Ibid. There are other women well affected to the Jesuits, but obliged to take
care of the children they have. To these they represent the sanctity of a
Religious Estate, or the advantages that attend the service of the King, and so
engage the children in Arms or Monasteries, and so render themselves Masters
of the Family.

Their Artifices to procure gifts from simple people: a cruel example of this
kind.
Ibid. Some people are melancholique and scrupulous, and to these the Fathers
do effectually represent, that all they have of good must be applied to their
salvation, and to set their Conscience at rest they must make their Wills,
wherein they provide always a good Legacy for themselves, and if it be
possible, persuade them to make a deed of gift to the Jesuits instead of a
Testament: As it happened at M^laga in 1643. where a poor man resolved to
retire from all secular affairs, put entire confidence in a Jesuit for drawing
his Will, and signed it as presented without reading or hearing it read: But
was strangely surprised, when by the end of four days he was turned out of his
house by the Jesuits; for thinking he subscribed a will to take effect after
his death, he had signed a deed of Gift, whereby he past all his Estate to the
Jesuits in his life time. The man sued them at law, but where judgment is
given on what is produced in writing, tears could not prevail, and the Jesuits
continued in possession of the Estate, and he the right owner reduced to
beggary.

Purgatory according to the Jesuits like Mahomets Paradisefull of all sorts of
sensual pleasures.
P. 22. Esclapes the Licentiat who made an Extract of the wicked maxims of the
Jesuits in his 8 th proposition reproaches them with an affirmation, that it
is probable, that besides the Purgatory generally believed, there is another
very pleasant, full of flowers and sweet scents, where the souls that are
purified endure no pain of sense, nor are afflicted that their entry into bliss
is deferred; so that this place is to them as a noble and honorable prison.
Bellarmine the Jesuit lib. 2. de Purg cap. 7. refuted by Malvenda the
Dominican in his Book of Paradise, cap. 92. Observe if there be any difference
between this Purgatory and Mahomets Paradise.

Doctor Aquila who undertakes the defense of these maxims of the Jesuits,
answers, That this Opinion is a revelation which venerable Bede delivers as
true, and approves, lib. 5. Hist Cap. 13. and that there are many other
revelations to confirm it reported by St. Gregory, Lib. 4. Dial. Cap. 36.
Bellarmine relying on his Authority, says, It Is not improbable these
Revelations are true, and that by consequence there is such a place as they
report where souls are purified; Vbi licet nulla poena sensus sit, tame^ poena
damni. If the Jesuits reviled him who said a Revelation delivered as true by
St. Thomas was not improbable, we have as much reason to pay them in their own
coin on this occasion. Let the wise judge now whether the I^suites are wronged,
when we say they assert the Paradise of Ma^omet.

The Author of the Iesuitique Theater on these words of Aquila, says, it must
be supposed the Paradise of Mahomet was a place feigned by that wretch, wherein
were all pleasures that men may enjoy without desiring Divine, because by his
tenets beatitude consists in eating and drinking, and other pleasures of sense.
Let the wise judge whether he who dares affirm that there is a purgatory where
men desire not the vision of God, where there is not any grief or pain, but
sweet scents, pleasant and flourishing fields, makes any difference between
this Purgatory and Mahomets Paradise. It is cause of astonishment that these
Authors would corrupt the sense of the Saints to Authorize their perverse
Opinions, for there is a vast difference between their Revelations, and the
Error which Dr. Aquila would introduce and defend under the title of an
Opinion. The Saints said no more, but that in their prayers they smelled sweet
savors, and saw pleasant fields, wherein were men's souls; which denotes the
comforts they received from the prayers of the faithful: When parables are used
to express any matter, we must not stick at the shell but enucleate the
meaning; as when our Savior compares the Kingdom of Heaven to a grain of
mustardseed, it is not to be literally understood, for he speaks by a Metaphor.
My judgment of this opinion is agreeable to that of Suarez concerning it, whom
the Jesuits so often call The thrice Sage Suarez, who says, Tom. 4. 3. Part.
dis. 46. Sect. 1. n. 13. that this Opinion is contrary to the sense of all
Divines, the Truth, and the Holy Fathers.

F. Gabriel de Henao the Jesuit differs little from this Opinion, when he
says in his Empirology, that there shall be music in Heaven with material
instruments as upon Earth: Nor is F. Lewis Henriques far from their sentiments,
having made a Book Entitled, The business of the Saints in Heaven, which is
not a Book secret and unlicensed, but Authorized with the approbation of F.
Francis de Prado then Provincial of Castille Dat. at Salamanca Apr. 28. 1631*

He proves in the 22 Chap. that every Saint shall have his particular house in
Heaven, and Christ a Magnificent Palace: That there shall be large streets and
great piazza's strong house and walls to environ and defend them.

He says in the 24 th Chapter That there shall be a Sovereign pleasure in kissing
and embracing the bodies of the blessed, that they shall bathe themselves in
one another sight, that there shall be pleasant bathes for that purpose, that
they shall swim like fishes, and sing as melodiously as Nightingales.

He affirms in the 58 th Chapter that the Angels shall put on Women's habits, and
appear to the Saints in the dress of Ladies, with curles and locks, with
wastecoats and fardingales, and the richest linnens.

He says in the 47 th Chapter That the men and women shall delight themselves in
muscarades, feasts and ballads.

In the 27 th Chapter That the streets of Paradise shall be adorned with Tapestry,
and all the Histories of the world engraven in the walls by excellent sculptors.

He tells us in the 60 th Chapter The Angels shall not have particular houses, but
that it is better for them to go from one quarrer to another for diversity.

Chapter 65. That women shall sing more pleasantly than men, that the delight may
be greater.

Chapter 68. That wom^n shall rise again with very long hair, and shall appear with
ribbands and laces as they do upon earth.

In the 73 th Chapter that married people shall, as in this life, kiss one another,
and the pretty mignons their children, which will be very pleasant.

See what he says of the general judgment, n. 50. where you will find the
origin of all this, and how the whole Society had then approved it, and the
Provincial having afterward allowed of it by order of the General Mutius
Vitteleschi, it is no wonder D. Aquila appears in its defense.

In the Indies and at China they carry on their breasts the marks of Idolatrous
Sectaries, publishing falsely that the Pope had declared it allowable.
P. 401. Behold another story I heard of F. John Baptista de Morales the
Dominican my friend, Missionary to China, which past at Macao.

The Jesuits in the Indies serve a Nation called Bramins, who being of a
different Sect from other Idolaters, do for distinction carry on their breasts
little cords enterlaced as a chain, as the particular marque of their
profession: The Jesuits who serve this people, and are willing to please them
(which concludes them Rich) wear these cords as the Idolaters, as at China they
go in the habit of Bonzes, and canonize in their persons the idolatry of their
parishioners. The other orders of Religion were astonished at the sight, and
consulted the H^ly See what they were to do on this occasion, as not being able
to persuade the Jesuits out of this habit: But much about the time they
expected an answer. Rubinos the visitor of the Jesuits published in Micao,
that his holiness had declared, that it was allowable to wear the habit of
those Indians. F. Morales being shortly after at Rome remembered this passage,
and inquired of the Commissioner of the Holy Office what judgment had been
given in that point; the Father ^hewed him the sentence pronounced, whereby it
appeared that that sort of Ornament or marque of distinction was prohibited as
heretical, directly contrary to what the Visitor had published.

A strange vow of a Jesuit of quality, whom the Fathers dismissed their
College for receiving an inheritance he had renounced, obliging him by v^w to
re-enter the Society when master of the Estate.
Charles Zani Son of Count John Zani of Bologne in Italy entered into the
Society of the Jesuits in the year 1627. and before his entrance made an ample
renunciation to all the Estate that might at any time belong to him in what
manner soever it should be, specifying expressly, that neither he nor the
Society should be able* to make any pretense thereto. When he had continued
amongst them eleven years, his Father and Count Angelo his Brother dying in
that time, the Fathers of the Society persuaded him to quit the College for
receiving the inheritance, and when he had done it to return thither again. To
this purpose they desired of the F. General Vitteleschi the letters of
dismission necessary for the occasion which were sent to F. Menochins the
Provincial, but before they were given to F. Charles Zany, they made him vow to
return into the Society with all the estate that should belong to him, as F.
Bargellin should think fit; the form of the Vow signed by F. Charles was as
follows:

I Charles Zany being ready to receive my letters of dismission from the
Society of Jesus which I have desired, before they are delivered me by the
Right Reverend F. Provincial Stephen Menochius do in his presence voluntarily
make this vow to God, whereby I oblige my self in conscience to his Divine
Majesty as strictly as is possible, that having received my said Letters of
dismission, I shall again desire with all instance the Superiors for that time
being, that I may re-enter the said Society as soon as I have ordered my
affairs, for which I have desired and received the said Letters, intending and
obliging my self to make such instance, and desire of re-entring the Society,
and to take such time as shall be judged most convenient by the Reverend F.
Vincent Marie Bargellin, as he shall think my affairs are sufficiently
regulated; holding my self obliged in this to follow his pious judgment and
his will, to exempt my self from all scruples, and to know more assuredly the
time and term of accomplishing my vow to the good pleasure of God.

He quitted the habit of Religion November. 27. 1639. in his Country, as he has
testified by writing, signed with his hand; Having afterward taken possession
of his Estate he changed his resolution and came to Rome to procure a
Dispensation of his vow, but could not obtain it of Pope Innocent the 10 th,
fell sick of a fever, and made his Will in favor of the College of Jesuits
of Boulogne by the persuasion of these Fathers who attended him day and night,
and shortly after he died.

The Jesuits forth with seized the Estate: but the vow of F. Charles being
unhappily thwarted by a contrary settlement made by the Lords of Zany, a Suite
was commenced at the Ruota at Rome. The Jesuits fearing lest in the
prosecution and judgment of the cause, the strange vow of Charles Zany might
be published, and their insatiable Avarice and new Artifices to invade
inheritances discovered, obtained of Pope Alexander the 7 th; a signature of
Grace, whereby he commanded the Auditors of the Ruota to determine the business
by way of accord. This was accordingly done by dividing the Estate in question
into twelve parts, five whereof were assigned to the Jesuits, and the
remaining seven to the Lords of Zani, who got not the possession but through
infinite difficulties and hindrances interposed by these fathers, to the total
dissipation of almost all the inheritance.

ALETTER OF MONSIEUR***** to one of his Friends at Paris: Wherein is seen the
base Complaysance of the Jesuits toward opulent and puissant persons, and
their strange conduct concerning a Regular Abbot, whom they feared not to
absolve on his deathbed, without obliging him to make restitution of his
Robberies, nor reparation for his horrible scandals, but took care to interre
him in their Church at Lions, and to extoll^ him for his piety, by public
Monuments.
Written from Grenoble, 28, October, 1661.
SIR,
YOu desire an Account of our journey: And it is fit I perform that little you
desire, to give this testimony at least of my readiness to obey you in the most
important occasions. We had good Weather every day since we parted from Paris,
as if Winter had put off her coming, to afford us the leisure to return home
with convenience.

I need not tell you, we passed by Clairvaux, Auberine, Cisteaux, la Ferte, and
Clugny, those great and vast Houses, which stand famous Monuments of our
Ancestors piety. But it is matter of Lamentation, that the spirit of those
Saints who founded them* being expired almost as soon as their persons, they
have left us nothing but so many heaps of stones; and that after they were
sanctified by poverty and penitence, their reputation has gotten their
Successors riches, which serve only to maintain in idleness and sloth those
that enjoy them. But because these evils are without remedy, I shall not insist
longer on them, but make a step as far as Lions, to tell you the story of a
little Conference I had there with a Jesuit.

Monsieur de M. one of their good Friends, upon our arrival brought us to see
their House of Belle-Cour: Having prayed a while in their Church, I staid to
look on an Epitaph I had heard of, and hardly then finished; but it being late,
and my sight short, I could scarce read any more than these two words, Pie
obiit. When I was come forth, I was glad to understand from the Father who
accompanied us, that it was the Elogy of Monsieur the Abbot of St. Sulpice, and
as I had known something of the life of that miserable Abbot, I endeavored to
learn some particularities concerning his death. I told this Father, it would
be much to my comfort, if it were true, that this Abbott dyed piously, as I had
read in his Epitaph, but I should be more joyful to hear some particulars of
his repentance.

He answered me very simply, there was no doubt but he dyed in a very good
condition, for that he had been assisted by their Fathers, in his last
sickness. Father, said I, pray tell me how he came into this good condition? if
after he had scandalized all the world by his Debaucheries, infamous Avarice
and Impieties, he edified the Church by some marks of repentance, what penance
did he? has he at least restored the vast sums whereof he robbed his
Monastery and the poor? For you know without doubt that he enjoyed above twenty
years two Benefices whereof he never gave Alms. And that to gain the greater
Revenue, he let almost all his Monks die without receiving any: He spent no
more in repairs than in Alms, so that all the Regular plac^s of his Monastery
are run to ruin; particularly there is neither Dormitory, Infirmiry, nor
Refectory; lastly, not satisfied with all the money he heaped up by such
extraordinary niggardliness, he has cut down the best part of the Woods of his
Monastery, and converted them to his use.

The Good Father assured me, the Fathers took no cognizance of all this; that
his Estate passed to Monsieur his Brother, a person of Credit, and prime man of
a City. I was impatient, and cried out, Father, What Conduct, what Aveings are
here? what, did they not represent to this Abbot, that a man of Religion cannot
amass Money, without amassing for himself a treasure of wrath against the last
day? Did they not tell him, the fire must devour their souls, who have been so
unhappy as to hide the Gold and Silver which they had to be employed for
relieving the necessities of the members of Christ? Did they not threaten him
with the dreadful Judgments of God, who has no compassion for Robbers and
Sacrilegious persons, who dye in their sins.

Father, I know they had leisure enough to declare to him what he was obliged
to do, for that he was above six months sick, and your Fathers visited him
during all that time: If it be true, that they did not forget to oblige him to
make restitution of his Rapines, that he might thereby at least satisfy one
part of his sins, but that he notwithstanding continued obdurate. How could
your Fathers give absolution to a sinner, who had given no signs of repentance,
but persisted wilfully in his Crimes, in keeping to the last vast sums of
money in his hands, to which he had no right? St. Peter has taught us, with
what ^everity they are to be judged, who divert and retain for themselves any
part of things consecrate to God. This Crime was punished by sudden death in
the person of Ananias; and it was the Prince of the Apostles who pronounced
that terrible Judgment: If your Fathers have given any hope of salvation to a
person more criminal than Ananias, what was it but to abuse the power of
Christ, in declaring that a living soul which was really dead? I confess,
Father, that what opinion soever I conceived of your speculative Morality, I
see now you surpass it in your practical. They who write books, and expose
their though^s to the eyes of the world, have commonly some Reserves, and dare
not express their wicked opinions barefaced and naked, but clothe them with
some specious probabilities of truth; which conceals at least from the eyes of
the people some part of their lies. But I perceive by this instance you trouble
not your selves to disguise your detestable Maxims; that you easily dispense
with the most indispensable Laws, and will do any thing to please men: By the
ancient custom of Monasteries, every Friar with whom they found money after his
death, was held unworthy of Christian Burial, and his body exposed to be
devoured by Birds and by Beasts: But you, my Fathers, you have fine subtleties
and devices to save all the world, especially those who have money: The vast
sums found with the Abbot of St. Sulpice, prevailed not with you to think him
unworthy absolution; and though he dyed without giving any thing to the poor,
which is a sensible mark of his Reprobation, you were not afraid to interre his
miserable Relics in your Church, and adorn him with public Monuments of
piety.

I beg your pardon, Father, for the liberty I take to tell you my thoughts: I
shall add one thing more, which doubtless all persons of a mean understanding,
that shall here speak of this story, will presently infer: The world does you
the right to take you for persons of prudence and wisdom, and wanting no
address or dexterity when your interest is concerned. This well-grounded
persuasion will naturally incline them to believe, that when you give
absolution to sinners, who have done nothing to merit it, you are well paid for
it, as a thing of your gift, which you owe not in justice: And that you take to
your selves at least a great part of the Estates of those wicked rich men, to
whom you promise Paradise, without regard to Gods Word, who excludes them from
thence who never repent. And certainly M. the Abbot of St. Sulpice made ill
acknowledgement of the goodness you expressed toward him, if he gave you not
part of those Rapines he could not carry with him to the other world, and were
no longer of any use to him: 'Twere well then, Father, that men knew your
behavior in this affair: They may possibly find some reasons to excuse you,
and justify the memory of your penitent. It Is possible, he has made some
restitution which turned to your advantage, and was applied to your use, and
may advance his salvation as much as if it had been made to them to whom of
right it belonged: In a word, it is probable there may be reason sufficient to
prefer you before a Rabble of poor Folks and Monks, that are of no use to the
World, who had right to the Money he bestowed on you.

This Father being none of the ablest, appeared sufficiently perplexed at this
discourse, but at last being obliged to say something in Justification of the
Company, he assured me this Abbot had given them nothing, and that for the
Enterrement and Epitaph, whereof they took care, they had received only Sixty
Lonyses, which was little more than what it had cost them: All this was so
simply related by the poor Father, that certainly he knew no more, so that I
said no more to him, but that I blamed them very much for doing so wicked a
work at so cheap a rate.

From Lions we went to St. Sulpice, where I was an Eyewitness of the disorder
wherein this wretched Abbot le^t the Monastery, both in its spiritual and
temporal Concerns, and understood he committed enormities which sufficiently
demonstrated he had neither Honor nor Religion: A Friar he was, but seldom or
never wore the habit of his Order: A Priest he was but never said Mass, unless
when he was obliged to receive some Nuns to profession in the Houses, that
d^pended of him, over whom he had Jurisdiction in quality of Vicar General of
the Order in Savoy and Press, but before he went from their houses he
chaffer'd what they were to give him, and was so punctual and exact in making
them pay, that one of the Nuns being unable to make up the sum they had
agreed upon, he put off his Priestly Ornaments, and deferred the Mass and
Ceremony to another time: Not to stay any longer in giving you a Catalogue of
all his Disorders, it may be said in a word, that he wanted nothing to make him
a completely wicked man. I was told upon the place, he had carried to Lions
part of the most precious things in his possession, having left almost all the
rest in a Castle called Machura: That in his sickness his Brother had sent
Horsemen thither, who by force took away all from the House; and came after to
the Abbey to do the like, but that the resistance the Friars made obliged them
to return without their Errand.

The report of the Country is, that the Inheritance his Brother is seized of
amounts to above a hundred thousand Livres, which may be easily believed, for
what cannot that man amass who enjoyed two such fat Benefices, and was at no
charge? He had scarce any Friars, and those few he had he gave not any thing
to; no servants, no retinue, yet had he industry and care sufficient to Revell
good cheap, and pay little for the most scandalous Debaucheries.

From St. Sulpice we went by the Grand Chartreuse to Grenoble. But two days
ago Monsieur De M. went to the Brother and heir of the Abbot, to demand
Justice, and represent to him, that it was not allowable for him to possess
himself of, and retain by force an Estate that belonged to other men: But we
had no satisfaction from this great Magistrate, he expressed no repentance for
the Robbery committed, but has formed his Conscience so in this matter, that
'twill be no easy thing to persuade him to let go such a prey: He told us in
few words, but gravely, that he had done nothing but what had been approved by
twenty good Casuists, whereof above half were very able Jesuits: And that is
Decisme.

Before I conclude my Letter, I will propose a question wherein I should be
very glad to receive your advice. It cannot be unknown, what the conduct of the
Jesuits has been in regard of this Abbot; to what degree of condescendence
they are fallen, and how apt they are to flatter sinners in the desires of
their hearts: But the difficulty is to find out that which has particularly
obliged them to this behavior, on the present occasion. Is it because these
complay sans Directors have got such a habit of loose complying with all the
wills of their Penitents, that it is not in their power to contradict them, and
are as it were forced in spite of themselves to do yet more than their Maxims
permit: Is it because they observe no rule in their practice, but to do what
they list? Do they believe in good earnest that sinners they guide in this
manner, or rather permit to walk in the broad way to destruction, may be saved?
and that men need not any more seek the narrow Path? Have they not had greater
regard to the Authority of the Living, than the Salvation of the Dead Brother?
And since they have been capable of approving the unjust Usurpation he made of
the Estate left by his Brother, is it not probable they are capable of
demanding his favor to serve their turn on very ill Accounts? When we meet at
Paris, we may discourse of this Affair more at large, and then if you be not
satisfied with my word, I shall produce you unquestionable witnesses. M. the
present Abbot of St. Sulpice is fully informed of all I have told you: M. his
Uncle will confirm the same, and also his Father, whom the RR. FF. cannot
suspect of partiality against them, for that he is their particular Friend.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, or Sold by Simon Miller at the Star at the west end of St.
Paul's.
Quarto.
PHysical Experiments; being a plain description of the causes, signs and cures
of most Diseases incident to the body of man; with a discourse of Witchcrast:
By William Deage, Practitioner of Physic at Hitchin in Harifordshire.

Bishop White upon the Sabbath.

The Artificial Changeling.

The Life of Tamerlane the Great.

The Pragmatical Jesuit, a Play, by Richard Carpenter.

Large Octavo.
Master Shepard on the Sabbath.

The Rights of the Crown of England, as it is Established by Law; by E. Bagshaw
of the Inner Temple.

An Enchiridion of Fortification.

The life, and adventures of Buscon, the witty Spaniard.

Epicurus M^rals.

Small Octav^.
Daphnis and Chloe, a Romance.

Merry Drollery.

Butler of War.

Ramsey of Poisons.

Record of Urines.

Large Twelves.
Artimedorus of Dreams.

Oxford Jests.

Doctor Smiths practice of Physic.

The third part of the Bible and New Testament.

The duty of every one that will be saved; being Rules, Prec^pts, Promises and
Examples, directing all persons of what degree soever, how to govern their
passions, and to live virtuously and soberly in the world.

Doctor Spurstows Meditations.

Small Twelves.
The Understanding Christians Duty.

A help to Prayer.

A new method of preserving and restoring health, by the virtue of Coral and
Steel.

David's Sling.


