NEW POEMS, SONGS, PROLOGUES and EPILOGUES. Never before Printed.

Written by THOMAS DUFFETT, And Set by The most Eminent Musicians about the
Town.

Qui fugit Molam fugit Farinam.

LONDON: Printed for Nicholas Woolfe at the End of Breadstreet, next to the Red
Lion in Cheap Side. 1676.

With Permission.

Roger L'Estrange.
September 30. 1675.
THE DEDICATION TO CELIA.
THe suffering Soldier, that with sliGhted prayer,
Has Often sought His just Arrears of war,
Shows his Maimed boDy to the gazing Crowd,
ProclAims his services and Wants aloud;
Is Pitied and whEne'r the story's named,
The valor's Praised, and the iNjustice damned;
So all by whoM Amintor'S Love is read,
Will praise his Faith and blaMe the cruel Maid.
While by this Name Secured, more close tO veil
YouR blushing guilt, Against your self yoU rail;
PerhaPs the fRequeNt cheat may Make you kind,
And with your language Change yOur cruel miNd.
Strong NatUre does LovEs secret Paths oRdain,
But Powerful custom doeS over NAture reign.
And those coMplaints wHich singly wanted Art,
May thus unitEd, melt yoUr fRosen heart.
Swift time maY bring the blessings Chance denied,
And we May glory in thoSe cHains we hide.
Pardon mY daring hopeS --
And do Not what your Beauty mAde despIse;
If to onE soaring thought -- My faNcy rise,
It Was inspired -- By Celia's ch Arming eyeS.
T. D.

TO THE READERS.
I.
You gentle Readers, whose lost coin and time,
Are richly paid with warbling Tune and Rhyme,
Look up -- my gingling Bells begin to chime.
II.
Like sated wenchers, when the charge comes on*
Don't the poor suffering Lass disown,
That you gallanted so about the Town.
III.
Fierce Critics, that Amboyna Justice Act,
By whom each Line's to horrid postures rackt;
Write what you would have me say, I Will own the fact.
IV.
I Am hardened in my errors and should be,
As known Buffoons are, from correction free,
Your witty malice would be lost on me.
V.
The old debauch, still boldly walks the street,
Lifts his half nose and shakes his palsy'd feet,
While modest sinners fly from all they meet.
VI.
Yet fear not, Mr. Woolfe, the Book will go,
When Nature's fairest works neglected grow.
Monsters maintain the Master of the show.
NEW POEMS, Songs, Prologues and Epilogues.
Song to the Irish Tune,
I.
SInce Caelia's my foe,
To a Desert I Will go,
Where some River
For ever
Shall Echo my woe:
The Trees shall appear
More relenting than her;
In the morning
Adorning
Each leaf with a tear.
When I make my sad moan
To the Rocks all alone,
From each hollow
Will follow
Some pitiful groan.
But with silent Disdain
She requites all my pain,
To my mourning
Returning
No answer again.
II.
Ah caelia adieu,
When I cease to pursue,
You Will discover
No Lover
Was ever so true.
Your sad Shepherd flies
From those dear cruel eyes,
Which not seeing
His being
Decaies, and he dies.
Yet it is better to run
To the Fate we cannot shun,
Then for ever
To strive, for
What cannot be won.
What ye gods have I done,
That Amyntor alone
Is so treated
And hated
For Loving but one.
The Complaint.
ONe Saint with equal and impartial ears,
The Vows of many several sinners hears:
Nor is she to the first that Prayed, most kind,
The truest Zeal, does still most pity find.
As many Lovers to your shrine repair,
At your bright Eyes to offer up their Prayer;
But with unequal pity you reward,
True Vows are scorned, while Hypocrites are heard.
So persecutions on the faithful wait,
While the Apostate thrives in every State.
Perhaps my sufferings must your power show,
Love, like Religion must have Martyrs too.
Once more for mercy to your feet I fly;
Alas I cannot change, and would not die:
No Saint in the other World will pity show,
To one that never thought their Worship due,
Nor ever Prayed to any Saint but you.
Song set by Mr. Marsh junior.
COme all you pale Lovers that sigh and complain,
While your beautiful Tyrants but laugh at your pain;
Come practice with me
To be happy and free,
In spite of Inconstancy, Pride or Disdain.
I see, and I Love, and the Bliss I enjoy,
No Rival can lessen, nor envy destroy.
My Mistress so fair is, no Language or Art,
Can describe her Perfection in every part,
Her meen's so Gentile,
With such ease she can kill:
Each look with new passion she captives my heart.
I see, etc.
No Rival, etc.
Her smiles the kind message of Love from her Eyes,
When she frowns it is from others her Flame to disguise,
Thus her Scorn or Spite
I convert to delight,
As the Be gathers Honey where ever he flies.
I see, etc.
No Rival, etc.
My Vows she receives from her Lover unknown,
And I fancy kind answers although I have none.
How Blessed should I be
If our Hearts did agree!
Since already I find so much Pleasure alone.
I see, and I Love, and the Bliss I enjoy,
No Rival can lessen, nor Envy destroy.
To Madam M. H.
MAdmen we pity, though their crimes we hate,
And lay the guilt on their too rigid Fate.
Robbed by your Eyes of Reason and of Sense*
Your Beauty may excuse my great offense.
He that does seriously of sins Repent,
Unto the Gods appears as Innocent;
Never was Penitence more true than mine,
Then Pardon me, for you are all Divine.
Conditional Love.
THe sad unhappy Merchant that beholds
A late tempestuous Ocean gently smile,
While yet each Wave his wrackt Estate infolds,
And seems to Triumph over the wealthy spoil:
Stands shivering 'twixt hope and fierce despair,
He fain would hazard all he has once more,
At once his many losses to repair;
But first his Cargo does at home ensure:
So does the sad Fidelio doubting stand,
While fair Miranda's sparkling eyes he sees,
Longing to have the Jewel in his hand,
But loath to trust his heart to Loves false Seas.
Insulting Fortune, and deluding Love,
So often have betrayed my easy heart,
Their fairest shows my Faith can hardly move,
From the remaining stock of peace to part.
Yet would I pay an age of sighs and pain,
Pass all the storms by Fortune raised or Art,
If you would ensure I should at last obtain
The unvalu'd Treasure of your Love and Heart,
Let not my Passion be misunderstood,
To make Conditions does it strength evince:
The Valiant Soldier that has lost his blood,
And after been neglected by his Prince;
Though all his heart's with war and glory filled,
Till his reward's assured the battle flies,
That done, none goes more boldly to the field,
None lives more faithful or more bravely dies.
To Francelia.
IN cruelty you greater are,
Then those fierce Tyrants who decreed,
The Noblest prisoner ta'n in war,
Should to their gods a Victim bleed.
A year of pleasures and delight,
The happy prisoner there obtained,
And three whole daiese'r deaths long night,
In power unlimited he reigned.
To your Victorious Eyes I gave
My heart a willing Sacrifice;
A tedious year have been your slave,
Felt all the pains Hate could devise.
But two short hours of troubled Bliss,
For all my sufferings you restore;
And wretched I must die for this,
And never never meet you more:
Never, how dismally it sounds!
If I must feel eternal pain,
Close up a while my bleeding wounds,
And let me have my three days reign.
On a Rose taken from Francelia's Breast.
I.
POor hapless Emblem of Amyntors Heart,
Thy blooming Beauty's overcast;
Deep shades of grief seem to o'respread each part,
Yet still thy fragrant sweets do last.
II.
Thou were not, when my dearest Nymph is kind,
In all thy Pride so Blessed as I,
She gone my wounded heart thy fate does find,
So does it droop, and so will die.
III.
What joyful blushes did thy leaves adorn!
How gay! how proudly did thou swell!
When in Francelia's charming Bosom worn,
That Paradise where Gods would dwell.
VI.
O had my heart thy happy place possessed,
It never had from thence been torn,
But like a Phoenix in her spicy nest,
It still should live and ever burn.
V.
No wonder thy perfume so near thy death
Still lasts, though thy Vermilion's gone,
Thy sweets were borrowed from her sweeter breath,
Thy fading color was thy own.
VI.
See how my burning sighs thy leaves have dried,
Where I have sucked thy stolen sweets,
So does the amorous youth caress his Bride,
And print hot kisses on her lips.
VII.
Had thou ungather'd fallen, among the rest
Lost and forgotten thou had been,
Thou had not flourished in Francelia's breast,
Nor been the Subject of my Pen.
VIII.
Amber dissolved and beaten Spices smell,
That Gold is valued most that is proved,
Coy beauty's lost, but lasting fame will tell
Their praise that love and are beloved.
Song set by Mr. Marsh senior.
THe spring with fresh beauties has dressed up
each field,
And the gardens with sweets and soft music
are filled,
The Birds pretty notes to new pleasures invite,
And Nature herself appears young with delight;
Sad Strephon sees this, but can be no partaker,
His Nymph is unkind and he cannot forsake her.
Amidst all these glories I walk like a shade,
And adore the bright Nymph by whose Eyes I Am
betrayed;
Each moment her shape to my fancy appears,
I sigh, and I court her to stay with my tears.
But when my embraces their prisoner would make her,
Francelia flies off and I cannot overtake her.
Asleep I am happy, for then she seems kind*
But some God that does Envy the Blessings I find:
The embraces, the smiles, O the joys in extreme,
It Is Heaven to have her, though but in a dream.
Disturbs my short sleep that from me he might take her,
And then she is unkind, yet I cannot forsake her.
Great Love, whose high power we strive with in vain,
Let her share in my sighs, or give me her disdain;
Show her all the delights of a mutual flame,
The greatness and truth of my Passion proclaim.
One Arrow of thine to Loves joys would awake her,
And when my Nymph's kind I will never forsake her.
To Francelia.
LOve without hope of Pity who can bear?
Consuming firebrarnds in his Bosom wear?
Always endure Diseases of the mind,
Still forced to seek what he must never find?
Pardon me Madam, for I must complain,
Sure you may hear, though not relieve my pain.
Those that a glorious Martyrdom pursue,
When certain and eternal joy's in view;
On their Tormentors cruelty complain,
And sigh aloud in the beloved flame:
The short lived fires that round their bodies roll,
Soon end their griefs, but leave their Spirits whole;
Love ever burns the never dying Soul.
Condemned to death without hopes of reprieve,
What they no more can keep with ease they give,
I bleed and die for you even while I live.
If Love's requited with such rigid fate,
What tortures can you find to punish Hate?
Ah Francelia!
If in your heart I never must gain a room,
At least be cunning in the cruel doom:
Your eyes from your too charming eyes I took,
My first deep wound was conquered with a look.
O let me read that fair condemning book,
'Till I have gazed away my panting breath,
I Would give the world to die so sweet a death.
Alas! In vain I sigh, in vain I rave,
Like drowning men in vain my hands I wave,
And cry to one that can but will not save;
As thirsty Trav'lers in a sandy plain,
Call to the scorching Sun for help in vain,
Which drinks all moisture up but sends no rain.
When friends or business for my presence stay,
Love and Francelia call another way;
My feet move on, my thoughts are fixed on her,
Dreaming of kindness I shall never hear;
I know not how, for what, or where I run,
Till at the window I behold my Sun;
In vain the envious Casement's shut, alas,
The daz'ling Jewel sparkles through the Case,
Like beauteous Pictures through a Crystal glass:
Swifter then Lightning it consumes my heart,
Leaving no marks on the exterior part.
At last, at last be kind, O do but prove
The charming sweets of a successful Love.
Why should dull custom or cold fear prevent
Pleasures so sweet, and Joys so innocent?
What ever the World pretends to you or me,
Francelia and Amyntor still are free.
Must I not see you? Why will you create
Laws more severe, than Virtue, Man or Fate?
If at your feet I wait your loved command,
And breath my Soul in kisses on your hand,
While thousand Beauties in your eyes do shine,
And raise as many smiling joys in mine,
To heat your speech, while pleasure stops my own;
Then sigh and wish that you were mine alone.
Where is the Crime? Virtue all this has taught,
But if you hate me, -- O that dismal thought,
It Stabs -- my pen falls from my trembling hand,
My heart beats faintly, all my Spirits stand.
If still your Servant you with hate pursue,
Let me receive my doom from none but you;
And like a Christian Lover, my last breath
Shall praise and pardon her that caused my death.
Song set by Mr. Staggins.
To the Tune of Augusta.
FRancelia's heart is still the same,
Cold and hard as Winters morning,
Round her Love is ever burning,
Yet no Sighs or Frowns can ever
Warm her Ice, or cool my Fever.
So much I think and talk of her,
That every Grove and Stream can name her;
All the Nymphs and Ecchos blame her:
If she keeps her cruel fashion,
Only death can ease my Passion.
All the Arts that Lovers have,
All the Vows, and all the anguish,
All the looks with which I languish,
Move not her to any feeling;
Beauty takes delight in killing.
A Rant against the God of Love.
I.
THou damned perpetual peevish folly,
Curse of a quiet life,
Father and Child of lazy Melancholy,
Author of public care and secret strife,
Expensive ruin, everlasting cheat,
Beloved consumption of the great,
Plague of the poor:
Son of a salted frothy Whore;
Whose Emblematick birth,
Foretold her mischiefs to the misbelieving Earth*
II.
So rotten and so base
The Embryo was,
The Gods in Heaven and Earth* could find no place
Impure enough for such vile Midwifry,
But drenched it in the Worlds sink, the Sea;
There by the rapid motion,
And the briny pickle of the Ocean,
Which like a sickly Stomach, strove
To disembogue the Potion
On the resisting Rocks, who drove
The Poison back again
Into the troubled main:
Preserved from dissolution,
It became
The Queen of Beauty, Lust and Shame.
III.
Thy lawless Sire,
Composed of Rapine, Blood and Fire.
God of destructive Rage, and War;
Lean Poverty and Desolation, are
The Blessings which do fall from his vainglorious Car.
With horrid slaughter all imbrued,
With Curses and with hate pursued,
He Venus wooed:
The Union of this matchless pair,
Of Rash and Brave, Lustful and Fair,
Produced this most accomplished Heir;
An Offspring for such Parents fit,
Eternal Moth of Treasure, Peace and Wit.
The Excuse.
TRansports of Passion cannot be withstood,
Therefore are pardoned by the wise and good.
Anger in misbecoming language flies,
And over the kindest Friends would Tyrannize.
Enlarging joys like swelling Torrents roll,
All prudent caution from the fearless Soul.
And griefs contracting pain benumbs each sense,
Driving the care of life and safety thence.
What then should be forgiven to o^e that is filled
With Love, to which all other Passions yield?
And what compassion should that Lover gain,
Whose heart at once all Passions did sustain?
When I my dear Francelia sought to meet,
I saw her trouble, and I grieved to see it;
Yet intervals of joy did grief o'repow'r,
To be so near that Beauty I adore:
Then storms of rage my trembling heart did seize,
That I should injure whom I Would die to please.
Armies of different thoughts at once possessed,
Conquered and changed the purpose of my breast;
But Love, resistless Love, whose slave I am,
Hurrid'd me on, and every stop o'recame.
When rapid flame some petty house surrounds,
The amazed owners fear no death or wounds,
But flighting all concerns of pain or health,
Fly through fire to save a little wealth.
Loves raging flame on all my Vitals preys,
And every part insensibly decays.
And can you, Madam, think it much that I
Should for relief to the Crystal Fountain fly?
O pardon me, and I Will no more contend,
But like a Willow bow to every wind.
And all your blasts of Scorn and Anger bear,
Until my Sufferings do the Tempest tire,
Or by my fall the great example prove,
Of endless Cruelty and matchless Love.
Song set by Mr. Smith.
LIberty, Liberty!
Reason and Love are at War,
No more on wild Passion I Will wait,
Or cringe to an upstart despair,
The Creature of idle conceit.
Draw up my thoughts, let Shame the Fight begin,
Charge to the heart, O let not Hope get in,
It Is Loves Hero, if that appear in his defense,
A thousand thousand reasons cannot force him thence.
Victory, Victory!
Love the Usurper is fled,
His Flames and his Arrows are spent,
The toys by which Fools are misled,
To adore what themselves do invent.
The thing appears that did support his cause*
How pale she looks that to my heart gave Laws!
The Nymph's vanished, set are the Suns that made me
blind,
And only Woman, vain weak Woman's left behind.
Phillida, Phillida!
What Is of my Goddess become?
O where is the shape and the Mien,
Whose presence has often struck me dumb,
Whose beauty I thought all Divine?
As in the dark to one overcome by fear,
Deformed shapes and sprites seem to appear.
The fond Lover strange wonders in his Nymph does find,
When all the Charms are in his own deluded mind.
To Madam R. P.
REason and Love, their ancient feud laid by,
Equally strive to raise your power high,
Beauty, Loves never failing dart in you,
Exceeds all praise, and does all hearts subdue.
Cupid in every careless smile is dressed,
Kindling a fire in the beholders breast.
And Reason, if the slave don't straight submit,
Proclaims your Virtue and Victorious Wit;
Love give the charge, and Reason strengthens it.
Alas what heart can make resistance, where
Youth, Beauty, Wit and Virtue do appear?
Gratitude to Fidelia.
THe Frantic Zealot who to Bliss aspires,
On Racks of care and mortified desires,
Mistakes the way, by blind devotion driven;
Your favors lead me to a sweeter Heaven.
As Souls of Lovers murdered with despair,
Do hover still where their fair Tyrants are.
On you I waited till your kind reprieve
Raised my long buried hope, and made me live.
Eternal blessings your great favor pay,
Delights unclouded, Joys without allay:
Fate ever smiling like perpetual day.
In ecstasies of pleasing thought I see,
Divine Fidelia smiling bow to me.
Each hour my Soul recals the Bliss and then,
Languishing dies, till I enjoy't again.
If one short beam of hope such raptures move,
Ah! what would my adored Fidelia's Love?
Fidelia.
With struggling Doubts and dying Hopes oppressed,
My heart is wandering in a Sea of fire.
I see, but cannot reach the port of rest,
Forced back by Storms of fear and fierce desire.
No happy Star, but Fair Fidelia's Eyes
Can change the Scene of my decaying state,
And turn this Tempest to a Paradise;
Beauty commands all hearts and conquers fate.
Loves greatest pleasure to his stupid foes,
Seems childish folly in a grave disguise,
So sacred Worship to the Atheist shows,
Who Is dully blessed and ignorantly wise.
Those that Religion for brisk Wit deny,
And slight sweet Love for Wine or flattering mirth,
Are cheated with false pleasures, while they fly
The Bliss of Heaven, and greatest joys on Earth.
One smile to me from my Fidelia's Eye,
Is more then Kings can give, or Empire buy.
The Mistake.
I.
ALas how short? how false and vain?
Are the uncertain joys of man,
But O how true? how fixed are
His restless pain?
His certain grief and never ceasing Care?
The Trees that bend with flakes of Snow,
Spring will adorn with verdant Leaves.
The Fruitful Grain that buried lies,
In joyful Blades again shall rise
And grow,
To pay the Rusticks pain with golden Sheaves.
But man, poor wretched man,
Once in Loves boundless Ocean launched, no more
Returns again to joys forsaken shore.
II.
By flattering hope deceived,
For what is wished is soon believed;
Francelia's favor like a cheerful Sun,
I thought on her Amyntor shone,
Which swelled my joys to such a wild extreme,
I made an Idol of each daz'ling beam.
Pardon my easy Faith, O fond deluded Soul,
'Twas but a waking dream,
Thy comforts vanished but thy grief is whole.
III.
Rivers by Ebbing Waves left dry,
Returning Tides as swiftly fill;
The Valley that does lowest lie,
Ends at the rising of a Hill.
All things to change do swiftly have,
A welcome light
Succeeds each night;
Only my Passion and my Pain must last,
Since my Francelia's rigid doom is past.
Confined as sinners are in Hell,
I see with Envy, where the Happy dwell.
Deep Lakes and rugged way,
My passage stay;
But Ah how soon,
That weak defense should down,
Were it not guarded by my Angels frown!
IV.
Mistaken Hope, be gone,
Wait on the Happy and the Fair,
To whom thy cheats are yet unknown,
Let sad Amyntors fate alone;
Thy fading smiles increase despair,
Without a murmur or an altered face,
My unrelenting fate I will embrace.
So close my fire shall be confined,
I will not trust the whispering wind.
My Sighs shall Fan the Flame and feed the smart,
Till it consume my rash despised heart;
Then one short groan shall fix a lasting date,
To this long difference of Love and Hate,
Unless our present thoughts attend our future state.
That point I Will leave to those that here are blessed;
Souls with neglected Love and Grief oppressed,
Can find no greater Hell by seeking Rest.
Mine to discover seats of Bliss or Woe
Would freely go,
Were it assured Francelia though too late,
Would sigh and say she was ingrate,
A Love so True deserved a kinder Fate.
Song set by Mr. Marsh senior.
DOwn with this Love that has made such a pother,
This Jack with a Lanthorn that leads us a round,
Till with dull Marriage we cheat one another,
For joys that do vanish as soon as the are found.
Repent, ye proud Nymphs, for your tricks shall not pass,
We Will change no more Gold and good Stones for your
Glass.
While so severely you rail at the pleasure,
And kill the poor Lover that is at your command,
Like Doctors you turn your heads from the
treasure,
But, O how you grasp what is put in your hand.
Repent, etc.
We Will change, etc.
When the short minute we sighed for, is over,
The Nymph is more brisk and more kind than before,
But how dejected and dull is her Lover,
To find all his Passion can purchase no more.
Repent, etc.
We Will change, etc.
The Resolve.
I.
FOrtune, I scorn thee now,
Thou have not left one dart,
To move my hardened heart,
Or cloud my smiling brow.
Like cunning Tyrants, thy severest pain
Thou keptst till last:
It racks my Soul, but yet I Will not complain.
When this short fit is past,
I Will never Love nor Grieve again.
II.
Thou can not any mighty conquest boast,
For had I never won, I had not lost;
Then we are even,
And after this,
What ever comes amiss
Or well, I Will take as sent from Heaven.
Thou art no more with me
A Deity.
Chance, Fortune, Fate, you are all but empty names,
Since fair Francelia thus the War proclaims.
Love, Joy, Grief, who Lord it so over slaves, hence
I Am down, but from my fall,
I Will rise above you all,
Shake off your Chains, and be in thought a Prince.
III.
Ah Francelia must I never? Curse on my fond heart,
It heaves and pants still loath to quit the pleasant smart,
Thou shall submit or break,
Swell on, I Will never speak,
Nor look, nor write, nor think, nor hope, nor fear.
Be wise, my heart, thou can not hers subdue,
She loves already, none can well love two.
Hate all the World since the art despised by her:
Or if thou ever can again
Be sensible of Joy or Pain,
Rejoice thou were not poorly slain,
But by a Beauty which over all does reign:
Rejoice that thou lov'dst her alone,
And though thy service she disown,
Yet pity her that can adore
A man that loves a hundred more.
Over one small Province to command alone,
Is sweeter than to share a mightly Throne.
Song set by Mr. Staggins.
WHy should we ever Beauty fade,
Slaves to care and age be made,
Since our flying youth can no more be had.
Where Love and Mirth do call, let us go
And crop new joys each minute as they grow;
Tomorrows fate there is none can know.
Let Us sing and laugh sad thoughts away,
Mirth shall rule the active day,
And the night to raptures of Love we will pay.
Thus should youth in pleasures reign;
And gods that cannot put on Earth again,
Shall wish for such delights in vain.
To the King on his Birthday. 1675. Song set by Mr. Staggins.
GReat Love and mighty War be gone,
With all your flattering charms and glorious noise.
A nobler theme our Art imploys,
A theme for gods to think upon.
Let the glad sound,
Which our voices deliver,
Rebound
To the Hills, from the River,
Thence to the Sky
Let the shrill Echo fly.
On the winds nimble wing,
Round the Earth let her run,
Like the rays of the Sun,
That all may rejoice for the life of the King.
Chorus.
O how blessed is the day that your birth has made great!
And how happy, how happy are we that do see it!
While we offer up Vows to the Gods in a Song,
That your Fame may shine bright,
As the Worlds great light,
And your Reign may continue as long.
Long life and never-fading health,
A mind untroubl'd as the sleep of Saints,
When Heavens joy the fancy paints.
New Mines of never-ending wealth.
Hearts that are true,
And devoted to Heaven
And you,
All the gods have ever given,
Kindly to bless
The soft pleasures of Peace.
All that story can bring,
And the joys yet unknown
Be contracted in one,
And for ever attend on the life of the King.
Chorus.
O how blessed is the day that your birth has made great!
And how happy, how happy are we that do see it!
While we offer up Vows to the Gods in a Song,
That your Fame may shine bright,
As the Worlds great light,
And your Reign may continue as long.
To the Queen. Set by Mr. Marsh senior.
MOunt, mount, my Muse: Up to the gods aspire,
And take a spark of their Celestial fire;
No influence else fit raptures can raise,
To sing great Gloriana's praise.
Her Heavenly smiles more joys create,
Than dawning day to wand'rers brings:
Than peace to a decaying state,
Or thriving War to youthful Kings.
Nature, no longer boast thy flattering snares,
Thy Gems, thy Flowers, and thy Stars.
Wise Lovers, that quickly coy Beauties would gain,
Compare them no more to things fading and vain,
But what is more resistless, more sweet and more fair,
To the Beams of her Eyes, or the Nets of her Hair.
The Royal graces of her mind,
So glorious are, so unconfined;
Those happy slaves that on her wait,
That can behold and imitate
The Zeal that in her worship flames,
Will for their never-dying names,
With Saints on Earth gain blessed abodes,
And place their Souls among the gods.
A Persuasive to Love.
HOw long, O dearer then my Soul? how long
Shall weak distrust my Passion wrong?
And make each prattling child of fear,
The shape of monstrous danger wear.
Your Honor and your safety are,
Of all my thoughts the chiefest care.
Dearer to me, than precious breath
To wealthy Misers near their death:
Than Heirs to mighty names, above
The joys and hopes of all my Love.
Fixed like a Statue I would stand,
While some bold Villains bloody hand,
Tears from my breast my panting heart.
Die smiling at the greatest smart,
Ever one kind word or favor shown
By my fair Goddess, should be known.
But Ah! too well, too well I know,
The cause that makes you fly me so;
You fear to see the wounds you make,
Lest pity your hard heart awake:
Pity, the noblest Virtue of the mind,
For sure it is Virtue to be kind,
Since Heaven to pity is so much inclined.
Fear not our meeting should be known,
Believe my heart and trust your own.
Why should the blessing be delayed?
The price of Love we both have paid:
You when that -- was betrayed.
That damnd -- which all my curses bears;
My heart weeps blood to pay your precious tears.
All I have suffered, even your Hate.
That crime can never expiate.
Like seeds that must to flowers spread,
Our Love with water has been fed;
Our Love! O pardon what I said,
My wishes do my pen mislead:
Yet I Will wish on, wish that my dear
Loved me as much as I love her,
Then should my flame so faithful prove,
I Would recompense your Grief with Love.
Such joys, such pleasures, Love can give,
As none but Lovers can believe.
As one in false Religion bred,
Whose Faith, by Sense and Custom's led;
Derides the myst'ries more Divine,
Till Practice does his Faith refine.
Of Love such may your fancy be,
But then, my Dearest, think of me:
Of me, who, spite of adverse Fate,
Strengthened by all your Scorn and Hate,
Have never yet apostatized,
So sweet is Love although despised.
The hope at last success to gain,
(For Hope does still with Love remain.)
Brings Comfort in the midst of Pain.
Try, O my dear Francelia, try
But one short minute, Love and see
What Heavenly joys, what ecstasy,
Do in your presence wait on me.
Song set by Mr. Le Grange.
WIth a damned sullen fate let us no longer conspire,
To feed the fierce torments of fear and desire?
Thy frowns and coy looks do thy Passion discover,
My care to conceal it declares I Am thy Lover.
Then why should we fear the smooth Ocean of Love,
Since padling and straining will keep us above?
Let business and wealth to their Chaos be hurled,
It Is Love's the delight and support of the World.
He that dotes on his bags while his passing Bell touls,
The modest Platonicks that talk of their Souls,
The grave men of State that are wise in Grimaces,
The canting Reformers that say such long Graces,
The fur'd men of Law those deciders of doubt,
When Passion is stirring do briskly cry out,
Let business, etc.
It Is Love's, etc.
Song set by Mr. Heart.
BElieve me, dear Mall,
For I Have traded with all
Those of name and Estate,
That have made the Town prate
Of their many brave deeds and great forces,
When they come to the matter
Are weaker then water,
And have nothing that is strong but their purses.
With high jellys and broth,
They make the blood froth,
Which creates a false fire,
And a sickly desire.
They embrace her as if they could eat her,
Such eager hot flashes,
Straight turn into ashes,
And deceive both themselves and the creature.
Mother -- gives this
For a Maxim to Miss,
For thy grandeur and fame,
Keep a Cock of the game;
But a tough brawny dunghill to tread ye.
Let the wealth of thy Cully
Provide for thy Bully,
Then his weapon will always be ready.
The Rival, a Song set by Mr. Marsh senior.
INsult not too much on thy fading success,
For all that thou have, I before did possess,
I know, my fair Rival, how happy thou art,
I know all the secret delights of thy heart.
To tempt thee those pleasures were taken from me,
And to please some new beauty he will take'em from thee.
When first thy Ambition was flattered, how sweet?
How dazzling was power and wealth at thy feet?
How dear were the minutes when Passion was young,
And played with the languishing Eyes and the Tongue?
What followed, ye gods, I remember too well,
Such pleasures, such pleasures no tongue can revele.
But ever long thy fond Heart and sad Eyes will deplore
That Coldness and Scorn I lamented before.
Thy Beauty and Humor, which makes thee so fair,
Will pine with pale Envy, and end in Despair.
If then thy lost heart can its freedom regain,
More sweet it will be over thy Passion to reign.
I am free from the pangs of desire and hate,
I envy no Lovers their wretched estate;
No wishes or fears or fierce jealousies keep
My eyes on the rack, or afright my soft sleep
But safe on the Shore without Passion I see
Poor Lovers tormented and lost on the Sea.
The Modish Lover. Song set by Mr. Marsh senior.
AT last I find it is vain to believe
The Coy or Kind any Cure can give
To a heart that to Love does incline
Like mine,
Fruition is but a reprieve.
I thought my first flame
Would still be the same.
If Cloris could Love, O I Would ever be true;
But Love is so blind,
When Cloris was kind,
I changed for less Beauty to one that was new.
I felt again the pleasure and smart,
The joy and pain which captives the heart.
And as many true Oaths as before
I swore,
From Phillis I never would part.
The next pretty face
Got Phillis's place,
Which my Vows and my Passion as hotly pursued:
The next did appear
More charming than her,
And thus are my torments for ever renewed.
When I love one who thinks she is above
Loves sacred throne, whom nothing can move,
Who thinks that it is great to appear
Severe,
And slight the soft pleasures of love;
I fly for relief
To the next pretty thief:
And to quench my hot flame I seek a new fire;
But never could meet
That Beauty or Wit,
Whose love or disdain, could confine my desire.
All things of course to change do submit,
O're-rul'd by force, by fortune or wit;
Then how can a Lover compel
His will,
When Beauty and Fate wo'n't permit?
Where Love does invite
I Will seek my delight,
And give the same freedom to her I adore.
Though many pretend
Their flame can never end,
That woman's deceived that believes any more.
Song set by Mr. Marsh senior.
CLoris I come to learn my fate,
To Love we are accused,
Who mad to see his power and state
By easy mirth abused;
Has from thy Eyes a real dart
Into my breasts conveyed,
And now tormented by the smart,
I come to thee for aid.
Since you so long did feed my flame,
Till in my heart you reigned,
Since you did know and did not blame
My Passion that was feigned,
Condemn not with your cruel frown
The story of my fate,
It is injustice to disown
The Love you did create.
Why should you now refuse to hear,
What once you did invite?
If Love when dressed in truth appear
Less able to delight.
Let me in jest loves pleasure taste,
I never will complain;
So the deluding cheat may last,
I Will never love truth again.
Thus Damon wooed but all in vain,
She still was more unkind.
His Vows could no belief obtain,
No pity could he find.
But when he ceased to be her slave,
And all her scorn repaid,
The Nymph relented and she gave
What she so long delayed.
To Miranda.
MEn vainly boast the power that nature gave.
All-conqu'ring Beauty rules the King and
Slave.
Read fair Miranda's charming face, and then
Tell me where is the prerogative of men.
Here Natures self in all her gayest dress,
All her delights and power does express;
And with true luster free from fading Art,
Rules every Eye, and reigns over every heart.
No formal pride her Beauty does o'reshade.
O happy man, for whom this blessings made!
Let her in joys for ever live, while I,
Doomed for her Victim, at Loves Altar die.
Song set by Mr. Smith.
I Sighed and I Writ,
And employed all my Wit,
And still pretty Silvia denied;
'Twas Virtue I thought,
And became such a sot,
I adored her the more for her pride.
Till masked in the Pit
My coy Lucrece I met,
A crowd of gay Fops held her play;
So brisk and so free
With her smart repartee,
I was cured and went blushing away.
Poor Lovers mistake,
The addresses they make
With Vows to be constant and true.
Though all the Nymphs hold
For the sport that is old,
Yet their play-mates must ever be new*
Each pretty new toy
They would dye to enjoy,
And then for a newer they pine;
But when they perceive
Others like what they leave,
They will cry for their bauble again.
One fallen in love with the sight of a Ladies -- Song set by Mr. Marsh senior.
I Long was tormented with Envy and Rage,
At the freedom that is used in this amorous
age,
To see the brisk youth even while I was by,
Court the Nymph that I loved as freely as I:
But Fortune, for which I shall ever adore her,
Has showed me a Beauty which is my restorer.
So pretty, so plump, such a delicate shape,
Such a pure Red and White, as no heart can escape.
All the raptures of Poets the skin does surpass,
Without any help of Paint, Patches or Glass.
An Innocent wash that is of Natures own making,
Is all it ever used for to make it so taking.
Though blind, the deep wounds that it gives more
surprise,
Then the Stars or the Di'monds of Phillis's Eyes;
Had it sight, it would always be staring abroad,
And make the whole World esteem it a God.
Its mouth has such melting agreeable motion,
All Nations fall down to it with heat of devotion.
It Is veiled like a Spaniard but guarded much more,
By the Virtue of Sylvia which waits at the door;
A Champion so jealous no force or design,
Can gain a new sight often until it is mine.
Yet this makes me happy, for though it is so pretty,
It never will be common, like Phillis or Betty.
Ah Sylvia, how soon all my sorrows would end!
If you heard the advice of your beautiful friend.
It showed, when I saw it, as if 't would be kind,
O be not severe to the dumb and the blind.
There can be no change or decay in my Passion,
It Is caused by a Beauty that is never out of fashion.
Song set by Mr. Marsh senior.
NAy pr'y thee no more of this love masquerade,
Now all sorts of Fops are grown old in the
trade.
All the pleasure is gone,
And the cheat's so well known,
That 'twill ruin more Lovers than ever it made.
If you think you are a wit and would fain have me
know it,
You must leave this dull rode of the over-rid Poet.
Alexis and Damon, and twenty Swains more,
Have been Sighing and Vowing a hundred times over.
Let me dye, and all that,
Is insipid and flat,
And your Courtship's as serious to every Whore.
Ah charming Divine! and O sweet preety Creature!
Is so old, the Amor of a Cobbler is greater.
You torture a Song till you make the ears ache,
Your Alamode wit from the Playhouse you take;
And are airy and bold
While the borrowed stock hold,
But more mouths than a disciplined Monkey you make
When it is spent; and with Cringes and new fashioned
Curses,
Or the price of your Trappings make up your discourses.
These shallow designs, and the plots that you cast,
Can never prevail over a woman that is Chaste.
And a Wench so well knows
Where to take all your blows,
That she turns your Weapon against you at last.
If such humorous folly can raise love in any,
Scaramouch will be sooner preferred then his Zany.
Epilogue to The Shoomaker's a Gentleman, Spoken by the Master-Shoomaker.
DEar Brothers of the Gentle Craft you see
The original of our Gentility;
We have new vamp'd, new soald, and made it tite,
Lend us your aid to keep it still upright.
These Goths and Vandals who do hate your glory,
Are met to raze this monumental story.
Stand boldly to it now is the heat of the Battle,
Let Crispin live, and let Saint Hugh's bones rattle.
Valentines Day.
BEfore the youthful Spring had died
The Earth with Flora's checkered pride.
Before the new thawed fields were seen
Dressed in a joyful Summers green.
Gray bearded Winters frosty Chain,
Was just dissolved by Phoebus Wain;
And the aspiring God flown high,
To guard the Spring in's Infancy,
Inviting Flora from her bed,
To rob her of her Maidenhead*
Ever fair Aurora's blushing head
Had edged the Eastern Hills with red,
My restless fancy guided me
Into a happy privacy,
Where the embracing Trees had made
A pleasant, though yet leafless shade.
Each naked branch in coupling wise,
A pretty harmless love-knot ties;
From which conjunction Nature shoots
Sweet blossoms and delicious fruits.
The winged music of the Air,
Did to this amorous Grove repair;
And with their tempting notes did grace
The various pleasures of the place.
As I surprised with wonder sat,
Each Bird chose out his feathered mate,
And seeming fearful of delay,
Through yielding Air they cut their way,
Some to the Woods, some to the Groves,
To consummate their eager Loves.
So have I seen at Hymen's feasts,
A company of youthful guests,
A thousand ways advance delight;
But when the long-wish'd lazy night,
To bed invokes the blushing Bride,
Loves endless quarrel to decide,
A silent envy spreads each face,
The Men wish his, the Maids her place:
And ever that single Wedding's over,
It gives a birth to many more.
Musing how powerful Nature was,
Sometimes through prickly thorns I pass,
Whose winding branches seemed to court
Me to attend the harmless sport.
Sometimes I walk by Crystal Springs,
Whose gliding streams in circling rings,
Unto the music listening stood,
Till pressed by the pursuing flood,
Their angry murmurs did betray,
How loath they were to pass away.
Grown weary with this pleasing sight,
Excess of pleasure dulls delight,
To rest my drowzy sense I sought
The softest, sweetest, grassie plot,
But as I wand'red here and there,
A voice arrests my idle ear,
Which from a neighboring thicket flies,
Drawn thither by my greedy Eyes.
Two loving Rogues within it lay,
And thus I heard the Puppets play.
Long did I muse but all in vain,
What wanton stars that day did reign.
But as my steps did homewards stray
I met my Phoebe by the way,
My Phoebe, whose commanding Eyes,
Had made my heart her Sacrifice;
To her fair hand I paid a kiss,
But she returned a greater bliss,
Presenting Violets to me,
Good morrow Valentine, said she.
Prologue to a Play Acted privately.
PRologues, those pleasing and successful ways,
To gain protection for ill written Plays,
Most useful are in our ingenious times,
To cloud brisk nonsense and amazing times;
The are interposed like flashy glaring light,
For they the judgment cheat, as that the sight.
Now Poets like the worst Mechanics grown,
Do rail at others ware to sell their own.
The last new Play still the other house does huff,
To set some newer mess of folly off.
Poor harmless Punck they fiercely do abuse,
Because she did Heroic love refuse,
Or made the running Nag outstrip the Muse.
Finding that Gallants now do Spaniel like,
Fawn most on those whose Satyrs deepest strike.
Fop, Critic, Flaxen Wig, the Miss and Cit,
Are daily massacr'd by Prologue Wit,
A modish wheedle to amuse the Pit;
With dropping follyes of their own they drive them in,
That their great showr's of dogrel stuff may fall unseen;
From all this mighty pother we are freed,
Our Play does no excuse or Prologue need.
He, who all other Poets would devour,
Who swells with Poison sucked from every flowr,
Who rakes up dirt and lays it by his door,
To make his glittering dross seem golden Ore;
Even he, when his Satyrick humor reigned,
Permitted this rare Play to pass unstained.
Now to our selves --
By railing first your censures which we fear,
We may prevent or make them less severe;
But to oblige you rather we will believe,
None will so rudely take what we so freely give.
If any should condemn our harmless sport,
We will not plead high presidents from Court:
But with an equal rashness we will maintain,
If serious, he is a formal Fop, whose brain
Does envy what it never could attain.
The brisker Critics we will debauched proclaim,
Mere noise and froth without or salt or flame.
How patiently the Verestreet crowd do stay,
And for loud zealous nonsense weep and pray*
So eager are they to be led astray.
Had you but half their zeal for no expe(...)
With founder reason and far better (...)
You all may go much more reformed from hence.
Prologue to a Play Acted privately.
I Know your thoughts, and see in every Eye
The dreadful marks of a censorious spy;
You come, as modish wits to Church these times,
Not to reform, but note the speakers crime.
Our case is hard, we must be censured still,
For Acting first, and then for Acting ill.
We want brave Scenes, gay Clothes and Confidence,
More fit for Players than their Wit or Sense.
I (...) you would say now -- since it is thus,
What Is their design to fool themselves and us?
Tell me, why with such mighty cost and care
Our jaunty youth to Masquerades repair?
Why in such raptures they return back,
What sport? what pleasures we have had, dear Jack?
What Vizards? O what Gowns? did thou but see it,
When, Do you know me now? is all the Wit,
And stranger dresses daily fill the street.
Why some with dull discourse and forced Grimaces,
Take pains to be accounted serious asses?
Inspired by News and Coffee, with what ease
They manage Empires and command great Seas!
Wasting whole days in stories which they make
More vain and empty than the smoke they take.
Tell me --
Why some in drunken frolicks spend the night
To make one knock, and cry I love the white?
Then frisk and roar until the active brain,
Too great and brave for Taverns to contain,
Leads them into Loves field to run at Tilt,
Where many wounds are given when no blood's spil^^
The next days language to a friend is this,
Rare Mirth, brisk Wine, yet hanged, it cost a Piece:
But such a fine airy Wench -- Plague take the
Whore,
The young man found she had the Pox before;
These things will be, but Gentlemen, we know
That none of you were ever wheedl'd so.
Tell me, why old sage Matron did of late,
Mourn over her dog and let him lie in state?
Why some make visits six hours longs to know
The health of Shock or of my Ladies Toe?
Why others to fond husbands do pretend
They heard a Sermon, when they met a friend?
A thousand such ill stories we may hear,
But we are confident there is no such here.
Since humor shelters all the Vice in use,
We think this mirth of ours needs no excuse.
You Are all our friends and every one's a guest,
Then be like well-bred people at a Feast,
Who, whether pleased or not, still speak the best.
Epologue to the same.
NOw we have done our parts, I do foresee
We must the Audience, you the Actors be.
And by your pithy Comments you will say,
You make a Farce much better than our Play.
Lord, to what desperate terms we are brought,
For all that strive to be ingenious thought,
Will show their Rares of wit by finding fault.
Vain women cheated by a flattering glass,
Which shows fine Charms and Colors in the face,
Are not with shame and anger more surprised,
When their conceited Beauty is despised;
Then we like them, with scorn will hide our spite,
And that applause we could not gain, will slight.
Men of the Gustan, at the French house eat,
Many new dishes of the self same meat,
No dress not sauce their queazy sense controuls,
But Novelty alone commands their Souls.
If you will be modish, you must do so too;
Our Play is old, but all the Actors new,
Such Actors as both Theaters cannot make,
Adzooks you are not Wits, if this don't take.
If pleased, you are kind and wise, but if you hiss,
We know who games, who drinks, who keeps the
Miss.
Ladies, your close Intrigues and Loves we know,
If you are severe, your secret crimes we will show;
We Will do it -- nay our revenge shall speak them worse,
So fare you well, Gallants -- now take your course.
Prologue to Every Man out of his Humor, Spoken by Mr. Hayns, July, 1675.
SO fast from Plays approved and Actors known,
To drolling, stroling Royal Troop you run,
That Hayns despa^ring is Religious grown.
So Crack enjoyed, the queazy Gallants slight,
And she, though still her beauty's in its height,
In rage turns Nun and goes to Heaven in spite.
O Novelty, who can thy power oppose!
Polony Bear or strange Grimace out-goes
Our finest language and our greatest shows.
As thick-scul'd Zealots, who from Churches fly,
Think doleful nonsense good that makes them cry;
You Are pleased and laugh because -- you know not why.
There ign'rant crowds round traveled Gallants sit,
As amorous youths round Vizards in our Pit,
And by their motions judge the Farces Wit.
If they but grin, a jest is understood,
All laugh outright and cry -- I'gad that is good;
When will our damned dull silly rogues do so?
You Are very complaisant, I fain would know
Where lies the wit and power of (il ohe.)
The modish Nymphs now every heart will win,
With the surprising ways of Harlequin.
O the fine motion and the jaunty mean,
While you Gallants --
Who for dear Missie never can do to much,
Make Courtships alamode de Scarramouch.
Ha -- ha --
I could have taught you this, but let that pass,
You Have heard I Have wit, now you shall know I Have grace,
I will reform --
But what Religion's best in this, lewd Town,
My friends I Am yet like most of you, of none.
If I'commence, I fear it will not do,
Religion has its Scarramouchys too,
Whose hum's and has get all the praise and pence.
For noise has still the upper hand of sense.
Well since it is so --
I Will keep my Station till your humors come,
Though like the longing woman, now you rome,
And leave all dainties for the Butchers thumb.
You and vile husbands equally proceed
Like rambling Bees, you quit your balm to seed
On every gaudy flower and painted weed.
When Winter comes you will again grow wise,
And visit home the wife that you despise,
With empty purses and with laden thighs.
Epilogue to Every Man out of his Humor.
HOw crosly and how kindly things do go!
Though foreign troop does very powerful
grow,
Kind Justice beats down our domestic foe.
The enchanted Castle's once more overthrown,
That Nursery where all the youth in Town,
Such deeds of Valor and of Love have shown.
Britains Low Countries, where at mighty rates
The younger Brothers urged their needy Fates,
And the Elder got diseases for Estates.
See how the scattered Cracks in parties fly,
How like a nest of Wasps disturbed they ply,
And fiercely fix on any Fop that is high.
I warn you, though your presence theirs will bring,
Be not too eager for the pretty thing*
The bag of Hony's sweet, but 'ware the sting.
Play round the light, but from the heat retire;
For if you are joined between hot Love and Ire,
Like Samsons Foxes you will set all on fire.
Reform your selves, Reformers of the Stage,
Blame not my Zeal, who can suppress their rage?
When Love and Wrath spare neither Sex nor Age.
For our Play we say nothing --
The merit of it will your plaudits gain,
Or else new Wit would strive to prop in vain,
What Iohnsons sacred memory cannot sustain.
Prologue to The Mistaken Husband.
OUr modest Poet's in as great a fright,
As a young Bride upon the marriage night,
She starts and trembles when she sees the Bed,
Like Criminals to Execution led;
Alas, poor thing, she is loath to lose her head.
As boys that shiver on the Rivers-brim,
Enquire the warmth and depth of those that swim.
She asks her married friends what shall I do?
I do so shake -- Ah, was it so with you?
And yet she makes a hard shift to go through:
Poets were once as full of trouble too,
But now the are desperate --
To lose this Play as much our Poet strives,
As you to hide your Misses from your Wives,
He thinks you Critics and in faith it is right,
Are even as merciless to those write,
As Husbands to their Wives of the Wedding night;
You care no more for Poets pains and fears,
Than those fierce men regard the women's tears.
At the least fault --
If one snuffs and mouths it -- there there she went,
You open all and damn a Play by the sent.
One of our Nymphs should in my place appear,
But you are so dreadful she is fallen sick for fear.
Those that pay dear for love, the very'st fools,
Though they condemn the work, preserve the tools.
Faith, Gallants, lets compound with you to day,
Be you indulgent to our Orphan Play,
We'll be as kind to you another way.
Epilogue to the Mall or Modish Lovers.
WHat has our Poet done you look so big?
Has he not treated you with brisk intrigue?
Some with dull Morals would affront the Age,
And make a Coventicle of the Stage;
Should we but offer you such things as those be,
Dam the sententious Fop -- come let us to Mosely.
Had we a lively Scene, where you might see
The Duck-pond-side and each beloved Tree;
It would recall such stories of your own,
What on this bench or that green tuft was done,
That our poor Play uncensur'd might have gone.
Like boasting Greeks, Troy's Conquest you would tell,
Here Helen lay, and there stout Hector fell.
To that soft bank the eager foe retired;
There the hot breach was manned and City fired.
You Rogue, cries one, the very place I see
Where I and Phillis did -- O happy Tree,
The kind supporter of my Nymph and me.
Another with fierce indignation raped,
Cries, rot her for a Bitch, there was I clap't.
If you repeat next year such things as these,
You Will rub the rind off and destroy the Trees.
Well may our boldest Scenes fall short of you,
We do but copy, by the life you drew.
Now will you rail when you are gone from hence,
O hanged, it is baudy, all mere impudence.
No serious lines will please you half so well,
Unless we Huff the gods and Hector Hell.
With Wit and Women you deal much at one,
First you debauch, and then you cry them down.
Prologue in the Vacation.
WHile wars between the first rate houses cease,
For want of new supplies compelled to peace,
We little fifth rates, whom they still despise,
May boldly cruise and make all lawful prize,
With thundering Tempests, Fire and Div'ls they fish,
And catch adventurers by twosh and threesh.
One shilling is the greatest price we wish.
They in deep gulfs and spreading Oceans roll,
We poor smart things put into every hole.
Your fishing Bess or shoulder o'mutton Malls,
I'gad we snap at every thing that sails.
Then for your Company, look, I dare swear
You Had never the like in either Theater,
Here Is Vizards too, but look your Punks elsewhere*
There Is a Beauty, Heavens! So smooth, so fat,
Nay, never blush for such a face as that,
No Miss in Town is half so plump and round, that is flat.
We have a Poet too --
Who sweats and stinks for his Heroic piece
As much as ever -- did for his.
In all we imitate the Playhouse thus,
Only in Acting they come short of us.
Yet as old Nurse instructs young smikring Maid,
When she sits stroaking little mark of Lad:
See by our penny how their shilling's made.
My friends, keep all your hands in sight, I pray,
While we are Acting mind no other Play.
Our sports but one short hour last, that all the year;
Besides no Company but ours must Act here.
Prologue to The Supposed Prince.
TRappolin supposed a Prince this humor shows,
All pleasures do depend upon suppose.
We by a strong suppose, may have to do
With Wine and Women, Wit and Money too.
Thus while you think a zealous Sisters eyes
Are lifted up in pious ecstasies,
In strong suppose all her Religion lies.
The modest longing girl that dares not woo,
Thus does enjoy her fame and pleasure too.
He that sits next a pretty female, knows
His hand trembles, and something comes and goes.
He gazes, faints and dies, why all this shows
The power and pleasure of a sweet suppose.
Those that for garnished dishes keep ado,
May have as wholesome Fish well buttered too,
In a plain earthen pan for half the toil;
But for suppose -- for all is but --
The bodies all one flesh, and yet, dear hearts,
A mere suppose makes difference of parts.
All were designed alike for our delight,
Yet we suppose it fit to lose our right,
And keep the sweetest both from touch and sight.
Let that suppose that leads us so astray,
As strongly further our supposing Play.
The Duke and Trappolin must both be thought
Transformed really, though they are not.
Suppose that strongly thence our mirth all flows,
Then we shall please you all -- as we suppose.
Prologue to The Armenian Queen.
BEloved Miss and Punck, Vizard and Fop,
All Is gone that made your modish Prologues up.
Ah, Gentlemen, what hope have we to please,
When we have lost such powerful helps as these!
Helps, that did Soul to all our actions give,
Helps, without which nor you nor we can live.
Though wit a thousand various ways is shown,
From Love all flows, and to it all does run;
As liquors round a spacious Funnel roll,
Yet all at last sinks into one small hole.
You now like several Ghosts, but haunt the place,
Where once your joy and life's dear treasure was,
While one sits thus -- his Soul's to Windsor fled,
Hunts every Closet, searches every Bed;
At last he finds his nown dear Phillis laid
In some close shade, where he had often played
At Post and Pair with some fresh Country Maid.
Enraged with thought, he mutters out -- Ah Curse!
Those that sit next believe he rails at us;
Such Plague themselves and fright our friends away,
Another Ghost's employed a sweeter way,
Fixing his Eye upon that very place,
Where he picked up his last obliging Lass,
He sees her, Courts her, nay while he sits there,
Carries her to the Tavern, finds the very Chair;
Feels her -- soft hand, her melting Eye beholds,
In empty Arms her airy Body folds;
As a famous Author has it --
But as the cursed Drawer disturbed him there,
Some loud Heroic rant awakes him here;
He Is disobliged and huffs, the Play's cried down,
And we are ruined ever the cause is known.
Yet though you damn us all, we still Act on,
But what dull sport one party makes alone?
While one thrusts on and the other still wheels round,
Between two stools -- you know what falls to ground:
Where both are willing there true pleasure's found.
Epilogue to The Armenian Queen.
ALas, what hope does there remain for us,
When you have already shut up the other house;
Yet we this Visitation-time stay here,
When raging censure reigns and wit grows dear,
In hope to gain your custom all the year.
When Tempests and Enchantments fly the Town,
When Prosp'ro's Devils dare not stand your frown;
They to the Country strole with painted ware,
Where mighty sums of precious time they share;
While Author Punch does strange Machines prepare
For their new Opera in Barthol'mew Fair.
He, pricked in Conscience that he choused you so,
With but the Copy of a Puppet-show;
To please you, thither does invite you all,
For two pence to behold the original.
They who for double prices scarce would do,
Now that you are in want, do jilt you too.
But we are constant still to your delight,
Since dear Miss Punch is gone, 'faith do us right,
And visit your poor Spouse once every night.
Nay, Gentlemen, this is no strange request,
For night and want do bring home Man and Beast.
Epilogue by a Woman.
Gentlemen,
OUr men's late disappointments have made known,
Without our Sex no business can be done;
They treated you just as you deal with us,
You promise fair --
But if you once get in, never pay a souse,
Women support the World and we the house.
Nature and Power teach vile men to rome,
We poor good humor'd things still play at home.
Men's active Legs with one nights dancing grow
Quite dull and tired -- Our Tongues are never so:
Their lazy Instruments are out of Tune,
And then forsooth there is nothing to be done.
S'life, out or in we women never lie still,
While our Pit's kept warm and our Purses fill.
Yet, Gallants, you may pardon them for this,
We often have Played when you never came to see's.
Be constanter and less Capricious,
How long shall we weak Vessels teach you thus?
And yet in troth you are always kind to us;
But we must rail as cunning Lovers do,
Not that you are false but to preserve you true.
You seem best pleased when you are most abused,
But fawning wit and easy love's refused.
A murmuring Miss revives your faint desire,
And huffing Prologues raise your kindness higher;
As blustering winds increase decaying fire.
Cover our matted Seats but once a day,
And to content you, we will Act any way.
Then Clap us soundly, while we Play our parts,
Or else -- a mischief on your stony hearts.
Prologue to The Indian Emperor, Acted by the Duchess of Portsmouth's
servants, spoken by Mr. Poel.
I Come from my despairing friends within,
Who, conscious of the desperate state they are in*
Dare not before their pardon's sealed be seen.
By flattering hopes of loud applause betrayed,
Which they have seen to our best Actors paid.
As boldly they engaged and came thus far,
As young brisk Reformadoes go to War.
Success and triumphs take up every thought,
They never think how hardly they are got:
All Is brave and well until the foe appears,
Then they begin to shrink and shake their Ears.
Some few hours past with an assured mien,
And cheerful voice they practiced every Scene.
Do It? Poh! because I did but seem to doubt,
All were for turning envious Poel out;
But now my huffing Gallants come about.
Mr. dear Mr. Poel --
Unless you help us out we are undone,
I fear they will be out to fast alone.
As serious Lovers can alone explain,
In some well ordered speech their amorous pain;
But when their Beauteous Idol comes in place,
All Is lost in Cringes and a begging face:
Fear of offending and desire to please,
Turns all to blushes and half-sentences;
Yet that confusion shows a Love more true,
Than all the flowers of Rhetoric can do.
And if our good intentions here may please,
I fear you will have too many signs like these.
They sent me to excuse their Crimes, who ought
With all my skill to heighten every fault.
If they should please, others would treat you thus,
And mak't a mode, then what becomes of us?
The Chamber-trade would quite shut up our house,
So jarring Tradesmen, all their Interest made,
To have the sale of Foreign Wares forbad,
And great men's servants straight set up the trade.
But for this once may every one that Plays,
Advance your pleasure and obtain your praise.
Since they engage no more to do amiss,
Their fear is punishment enough for this.
Epilogue to the same, spoken by a Girl.
Abused by that insulting Poel.
Player's power,
Who from a slave they made an Emperor;
Our Indians gladly saw him die, for fear
His Epilogue should be much more severe.
There is a strutting Spanish Coysh.
General too,
Another of that envious huffing Crew,
Although the Indian's Foe -- in this design,
To ruin them they equally combine.
So Lawyers rail in parties at the Bar,
But on the Clients lay the charge of the War.
Therefore they for their Epilogue chose me,
A stranger and from either Faction free,
Young, Innocent, and what is more, a Maid,
If this will not do, what can your smiles persuade?
Nay, let me tell you, but let not them hear,
These Indians are not what they do appear;
If they are pleased, none knows what you may get;
For they have Mines were never discovered yet,
Which frowns, or fiercest torments cannot find,
In that they are all of Montezuma's mind:
But by your kindness and obliging Arts,
You may command their Treasure and their Hearts.
Prologue to Psyche Debauched.
PSyche debauched, poor Soul! she made great have,
I knew the jilting Queen could never last
Five weeks, she (must perhaps decay more fast,)
-- As our friend Nicander has it.
Whilst our rich neighbors mock our Farce, we know
Already the utmost of their Puppet-show.
Since they against Nature go, they Heaven offend,
If Nature's purpose then cross Nature's end,
Unnat 'ral Nature is not Nature's friend.
-- There Is Nature for you.
As Aesop's Cat dressed like a Lady, this
At first surprised, now where is the gaudy Miss
You saw, and knew, and left her in a trice?
None but the Dirty Rout would like her twice.
Their well-drest frolic once may please the Eye,
But Plays like Women cannot so satisfy.
Ye masked Nymphs can tell there is something in ye,
Besides the painted face, that gets the penny;
Yet all the fame you give 'em we will allow
To their best Plays, and their best Actors too,
That is, the Painter, Carpenter and Show,
Beaumont and Fletcher, Poet and Deva^.
But, Sirs, free harmless mirth you here condemn,
And Clap at downright baudery in them.
In Epsom-wells for example --
Are they not still for pushing Nature on,
Till Nature's feat thus in your sight is done.
-- O Lord! --
Let Us take off Psyche's borrowed plumes a while;
Hopkins and Sternhold, rise and claim your style.
Dread Kings of Brentford, leave Lardella's Hearse,
Psyche's despairing Lovers steal your Verse.
And let Apollo's Priest restore again,
What from the nobler Mamamouchy's ta'n,
Let them restore your treble prices too;
To see how strangely they did bubble you,
It made me blush and that I seldom do.
Now Psyche's stripped from all her gay attire,
Te de Pollykagathoy -- behold the fire.
But, O a long farewell to all this sort,
Which Music, Scenes, nor Preface cannot support,
Or if they could, who cares a farthing for it?
Epilogue to the same.
NOw to get off, gadzooks, what shall we do?
It Is plain, my friends, that we have choused you too*
Our Psyche that so pleasantly appears,
Has proved as very a jilting Crack as theirs.
When your high hopes for Beauty were prepared*
To meet a common ill-drest thing it is hard;
But pardon us and your resentments smother,
We promise you ever long a touch with the other.
Song.
ALas, my Coy Phillis, this humour's too old,
Pish, fie and for shame, are too silly from you;
For your looks, your sighs, and your blushes have told,
That your Vows to cry out will never prove true.
Then away with this folly and let us to the thing,
for; In Faith, I must water my Nag at the Spring*
Elyzium's a trick, and the Shades but a cheat,
To cheer up some overgrown slighted old Maid.
If my Phillis should live to that wretched Estate,
How she would repent that I heard when she praid!
Then away with this folly, etc.
For In Faith, etc.
Like zealous Platonicks, we will rail at all sin;
I Will praise thy great merits, and thou cry up mine:
To practice in private we'll lock our selves in;
And while silly soft mortals believe us divine,
We'll laugh at their folly and turn up the thing,
And In Faith I will water my Nag at the Spring.
Overcome with my Passion and noble intent,
My Phillis embraced me and led my Nag on,
He dashed up the water each step that he went;
But alas, Sir, she cried how soon he has done.
Your Nag's a May-Colt and deserves no good thing,
For In Faith he lies down in the middle of the Spring.
The serious Thought.
I.
O Wretched state of helpless man!
Flattered with lofty sounds of sovereign power;
Over every Creature he is said to reign,
Yet only drags a longer chain;
Ordained a slave to every fatal hour,
And every cruel thought's his Emperor.
II.
Reason, that golden Calf to which we fall,
Formed of those various toys despairing Souls
And sullen Stoics to their comforts call;
Our pleasure and our happiness controuls,
To torments it directs an easy way;
But when delight with smiling looks,
To soft intrancing bliss invokes.
Virtue -- we Virtue must obey,
Virtue, that dull fantastic edgless tool,
The stalking Horse of every Pedants School,
The beggar's Tyrant, but the rich man's Fool,
For Gold to any shape 'twill move,
And be what ever-Monarchs love:
Yet this confines our hands and eyes,
While every creature we despise,
Freely injoys those sweets for which man dies.
III.
Why was I born a slave to Nature's law,
Subject to frail desires of flesh and blood,
Eager to ^ast each beauteous pleasing good*
If other rigid rules my thoughts must awe?
A servant to one mighty -- power ordained,
And to the dictates of another chained.
Is It justice to impose upon the heart
Law less desires of love, and then
To call that Passion sin,
And for relief add torments to the smart?
Hear me, ye powers divine,
All hearts and powers to yours their strength resign,
Pardon my thoughts, or else my thoughts confine.
IV.
Thou glorious torment of my life,
Too dear Francelia, with whose eyes alone
The gods could in my heart raise Love a throne,
And set my peaceful thoughts at strife.
Despise my heart no more, for it is the shrine,
Where thy fair Image will for ever shine,
Pardon the fierce complaints to which I Am driven;
Or my loud Passion do not blame,
If thy injustice it proclaim.
Since it has rashly dared to question Heaven,
I can no more endure this lukewarm state,
This Purgatory where I dwell
Between Love's Paradise and Hell,
Celia, I dare my fate,
And am prepared to meet thy Love or Hate.
V.
Alas, I fain would be deceived and find
Some change in thy obdurate mind:
Still like a desperate loosing gamester, I throw on,
Urging ill fortune till my stock of hope is gone;
With gradual losses tired, I now set all,
O Love, be kind, or let me quickly fall.
It Is not, O Celia, it is not well,
To cheat your truest Lover with a smile,
And to another give that heart for which I toil:
Yet it is more cruel far,
Your final doom not to declare,
But let me still love on and still despair.
To Celia.
LOve, with which I long have been possessed,
Does like an evil spirit haunt my breast,
Sleeping or waking it allows no rest;
When with strong Reason I would drive it thence,
It puts new tortures upon every sense.
My Passion to the utmost height to raise,
All Celia's Beauties in my sight it lays;
Beauties, which all admire and vainly strive to praise.
But to destroy all budding hopes lays down
My little merit and her constant frown;
Thus does it urge me to a just despair,
Then whispers, only death can end my care;
Tempts me to drown my self in floods of tears,
Or sigh away at once my griefs and fears;
Thus am I racked, this dismal life I lead,
Till tired with pain my heart seems cold and dead.
And to the wretched it is a sad relief,
To be insensible of joys or grief.
But when my murth'rers much loved name resounds,
My heart bleeds out afresh and feels new wounds.
Unless Francelia has my death decreed,
Let me from this tormenting spright be freed,
Or mine will haunt her when I Am dead indeed:
Show your great power, remove this heavy rod,
And by your kindness make this Devilish a God.
Song.
WHen Celia my heart did surprise,
In an Ocean of grief my fair Goddess did rise,
And like Crystal dissolved the tears flowed from her Eyes.
From her Beautiful Cheeks all the Roses withdrew,
And she looked like a Lilly o'reladen with dew.
How sweet did her sorrow appear!
How I trembled and sighed, and for every tear
Made a Vow to the gods and a prayer to her!
O how soft are the wounds we receive from the fair!
But the joys and the pleasures there is none can declare.
What panting and fainting I feel,
When embracing her feet, before Celia I kneel,
O how dear are her smiles and how sweetly they kill!
Every minute I die with the thoughts of my bliss,
And she breaths a new life in each languishing kiss.
O Love let us still wear thy Chain,
Let no Passion but Love in our fancies e're reign,
Let us often be cured and never freed from the pain.
All the pleasures of Wine to the sense are confined,
But it is Love is the noblest delight of the mind.
A Dialogue between Dorus and Amintor.
Dorus. WHence does this solemn sadness rise,
Which all thy spirits has oppressed,
And like a dull contagious mist,
Hangs heavy on Amintor's Eyes?

Am. O Dorus! --

Dor. O Amintor! speak --
Passions concealed, like struggling wind
In concaves of the Earth confind,
Too often their trembling Prison break.
Grief entertained and fed with tears,
With such insinuating Art,
Deludes the easy thoughtful heart,
It makes it love the pain it bears.
Awake, Amintor, from this dream,
This drowzy Lethargy that steeps
Thy sense in death-resembling sleeps,
And give thy thoughts a cheerful theme.

Am. Tell me, O Shepherd, in this spacious round
Of Earth and Sea, what pleasure's to be found;
It Is all but one large grave, one gloomy den,
Where ravenous time devours both things and men.
On yonder shaded hill let us sit a while,
And mark how poor mistaken mortals toil;
Behold hard labor and laborions mirth,
See how those Reapers court the teeming Earth,
Look how they bend and with unwearied pain,
Adore the ground for every Sheaf they gain,
These are the sweetest of the Rustick's days,
This is the life which sinking Monarchs praise.
Now to the neighboring Green thy sight transport,
And there behold the drudgery of sport;
How many silly antic steps they tread,
How every sweating Dancer toils to spread
The restless arms, and shake the empty head.
O endless toil! O flattering sordid noise!
Where can this World show true and solid joys?
Did not fore-knowledg tell us what they are,
Who could know idle mirth from busy care?

Dor. That knowledge which has mirth and care expressed,
Instructs the judgment to elect the best.
Since mirth prolongs that life that care would kill,
And life's concern makes all things good or ill,
Reason should overcome the stubborn Will.

Am. Knowledge and Reason's force men disavow,
To Beauty's tyranny all hearts must bow.

Dor. Beauty and Tyranny --

Am. Yes Dorus, yes,
Despised Love does all my joy suppress.

Dor. To one that is cruel who would be confined,
When Beauties are so numerous and kind?

Am. Have thou observed the Infancy of day?
When from the Eastern Sea all fresh and gay,
The rosy mornings glory fills our eyes,
The Moon and every meaner luster dies.
So when my daz'ling Shepherdess appears,
All other Beauties fade and yield to hers.
Her eyes such pleasure and such awe impart,
As Monarchs smiles do to a Favorites heart;
The Rose and Purple Violet she stains,
With her more blushing Cheek and clearer Veins,
Those powerful charms which from her face are sent,
Would make a Ravisher seem innocent.
Nor polished Ivory nor falling Snow,
The whiteness of her whiter neck can show;
No Down of Swans, no Lillies ever expressed
The charming softness of her swelling Breast,
Those mounts of pleasure, where Loves Monarch lies
Boasting the vict'ries purchased by her eyes.
A shining Vale those panting Twins does sever, A Vale where murdered Lovers
hearts do bleed,
Whose sweets all thought, all ecstasy exceed.
O let Amintor's heart rest there forever.
Now, Shepherd, an eternity of joys
And hidden bliss my roving thought imploys.
O let me die, Francelia, let me die,
Ever from this Paradise of thought I Am driven;
For to a Lover so unblest as I,
There is no way but death to enter Heaven.

Dor. Pri'thee, Amintor, quench this raging fire;
From hopeless Love it is prudence to retire.

Am. Thou may as soon cast water in the Sea,
And take it thence unmixed, as set me free.
Quench this raging fire --
Sing to a Tempest till thou make it kind,
And with thy music part the mingled wind:
Sow Corn upon a stream that never stood,
And hope a Harvest from the moving flood.
When Poison has invaded every part,
And fixed its deadly Venom in the heart,
Bid the tormented patient quit his pain,
But never hope I can my love restrain.
Here Celia walked, and here was I undon,
Viewing those glories which around her shon.
Such Rays of Beauty as the Artist paints,
To Crown the heads of Celebrated Saints.
This Walk did, like a blessed Elyzium yield,
All that adorns the Garden or the Field.
Hither did Nature all her treasure bring,
And here exposed the glories of the Spring.
Enchanting Birds sat warbling on each Tree.

Dor. Here such a Paradise could never be,

Am. Where e're she is it is Paradise to me.
All the bright Beauties Nature ever made,
When Winters stormy weather makes them fade,
With her as in their storehouse do remain,
And every Spring are copied thence again.
Dull Poets, praise no more the Thracian's String;
When Celia speaks a Quire of Angels sing.
Here 'twas I robbed her of a balmy kiss,
And eager to ensure a future bliss,
I sighing asked her --
Dear, will not you love -- she sighed and whispered; yes.
Yes! Yes! O Cruelty! For at that very time,
She vowed my death should expiate my crime.
Was It not enough to murder with disdain?
Must loss be added to complete my pain?
Loss of the highest blessing Love could give,
When you said yes, alas I did believe;
And after such a loss, who'd wish to live?
Tell me, unkind and cruel as you are,
Are you less beautiful, less chaste or fair,
If one poor kiss is wanting from your store?
I Will freely pay you back ten thousand more.
Did ever my joys or sufferings find a tongue
To boast your smiles, or do your honor wrong?
Was ever hopeless love preserved so long?

Dor. How vainly do thou court the senseless Air,
And to regardless Trees repeat thy prayer?
Did thy insulting cruel Goddess hear,
Thou would as little pity get from her:
Leave Love's ungrateful God, shake off his chain,
Go where the God of Wine and Mirth does reign,
He Will see thy merit and relieve thy pain.

Am. She loves me not -- forbids my Tongue and Quill.

Dor. Do thou love her, and disobey her Will?
To hardened hearts insensible of Love,
Courtship does horrid Persecution prove.
Thy Love's best shown by serving her desire.

Am. I cannot suppress, but I Will conceal my fire;
And by my sufferings raise my merit higher.
Never had Lover such hard fate as I,
To show my Love I must my Love deny,
And to be blessed, all hope of blessings fly.
So when destroying Plagues did threaten Rome,
The noble Curtius did prevent its doom;
All love of life and safety he o'recame,
And by his death immortalized his name.

Song.
THy rigor, O Celia, has shortened thy reign,
And made my bright Goddess a Mortal again.
How faint are they glories, how dully they move,
That used to inflame me with raptures of Love!
Chorus.
Tyrannical Beauties, prevent your sad state,
It Is kindness alone can support your high throne,
But cruelty hastens your fate.
I paid my devotion each day to thy eyes;
I thought it no morning till Celia did rise.
With Celia the Court and the Theaters rung,
Her praise was the subject of every song.
Chorus.
Tyrannical Beauty, lament thy lost state,
My Passion is gone and thy Empire is done,
Thy cruelty hastened thy fate.
Love heightens our joy, he is the ease of our care,
A Spur to the Valiant and Crown to the Fair;
O seize his soft wings and enjoy while you may,
For pleasures of Love will like Empire decay.
Chorus.
Tyrannical Beauties, prevent your sad state,
It Is kindness alone can support your high throne,
But cruelty hastens your fate.
The Pavier's Song. Set by Mr. Marsh junior.
Master,
YE tough brawny Lads, that can live upon stone,
And skin the hard Flint for good Liquor,
Let Love to the idle and wealthy be gone,
And let Preaching alone to the Vicar.
Let all be made plain with your strikers and thumpers,
And when the work's done we'll about with the bumpers.
The little blind God of which Lovers so prate,
Makes all that adore him grow lazy;
For counterfeit blessings he long makes you wait,
And with Sighs and Diseases he pays ye:
But he you serve now with your strikers and thumpers,
When your work's done will about with the bumpers.
1. Pa. The Walks are all gravel'd, and the Bower shall be
Prepared for the Bear and Psyche.
2. But ever we go in let the drinking begin,
And then we will thump it again.
Chorus.
With full double Pots
Let us liquor our throats,
And then we'll to work with a hoh ho ho,
But let us drink ever we go, let us drink ever we go.
1. Here Harry.
2. Here Will.
Chorus.
Old true-penny still,
While one is drinking, another should fill.
3. Here Is to thee Stephen,
4. Thanks honest Phil.
Chorus.
Old true-penny still,
While one is drinking, another should fill.
Chorus.
With full double Pots
We'll liquor, etc.
Master,
Dispatch, or the Bear and the Princess will child,
For Love can no hindrance abide*
1. Pav. We have more need of drinking then
loving by odds;
We'll bouze it in spite of the gods.
Chorus.
With full double Pots
We'll liquor our throats,
And then we'll to work with a hoh ho ho,
But let us drink ever we go, but let us drink ever we go.
Marina sitting for her Picture.
POor barren Art, how vainly do thou strive,
To Rival Natures greater excellence!
While the admired Marina does survive,
Whose Beauty dazles the most daring sense.
See how the captived Painters trembling hand
Wanders at large, while his amazed eyes
Dart looks of envy that he cannot command
Colors so fair as on her cheeks arise.
Lay by thy Pencil, Ned, and think with me,
If in her face such glorious things we find,
Who can resist those charms thou do not see;
The brighter Beauties of her heavenly mind?
There Is sacred Virtue, and each powerful grace,
Which cannot be surprised by feeble Art:
When creeping Age drives Lovers from the face,
Those will for ever hold the conquered heart.
Thou Tyrant, Love, that have my Soul possessed,
Give me this treasure or my heart again:
Were I with wealth and mighty Empire blessed,
Without Marina, all the rest were vain.
Uncertain Love.
THe laboring man that Plants or Sows,
His certain times of Profit knows.
Seamen the roughest tempest scorn,
Hoping at last a rich return.
But my too much loved Celia's mind
Is more inconstant and unkind
Than stormy weather, Sea or Wind.
Now with assured Hope raised high,
I think no man so blessed as I;
Hope, that a dying Saint may own,
To see and hear her speak alone.
What if I snatch one kiss or more?
Were Heaven gives a wealthy store,
It Is to be bounteous to the poor.
But ever my swiftest thought can thence
Convey a blessing to my sense,
My hope like Fairy treasure's gone,
Although I never made it known.
From all untruth my heart is clean,
No other Love can enter in,
Yet Celia's never will come again.
FINIS.

