THE ACCOMPLISHED Woman.

WRITTEN ORIGINALLY in FRENCH, since made ENGLISH, BY The Honorable, Walter
Montague, Esquire;.

LONDON, Printed for GABRIEL BEDELL and THO. COLLINS, at the Middle Temple Gate
in Fleetstreet, 1656.

To the DUCHESS of BUCKINGHAM Her Grace.
Madam,
IF ye could see your self without the help of a reflex, I should not need to
present you with this glass, but since even internal speculations result most
from outward intuitions in this mirror of an Accomplished woman, you may let
your self into your self at your eyes, and so fit them with an object
proportionable to their own beauty: and only thus could I lessen the distance
between my obligations and my services, by an exact account of you to your
self, since it is so hard for you to take it from our sex, which are auditors
in the valuation of yours, because the loveliness of your person may expose
even a true estimate of your virtues to your suspicion of passion. This is the
only ill office, Madam, your body can do your mind, which it does by so fair
means, that you may easily forgive it. The original of this Woman is French,
whose perfection must needs fall some degrees, in this change of the Horizon.
You, Madam, are in English the Edition, as well as the Dedication, and your
actions do translate better this book, then my words; so that this cannot
enform your understanding in any new unacquired grace or virtue, but by a
duplication of your memory, convince your modesty of a needless desire to
improve; and as your conversation may be instruction for others, so this which
was meant for edification, is but strict enough for your entertainment. Here
(Madam) you shall find Ill both severely reproved, and fairly shamed, by
showing the excellency of good in Ill's greatest brag, Variety: and shame does
not only restrain, but rectify more then fear; For women apprehend less the
effusion of blood for punishment, then the diffusion of it for shame. Here you
shall find humors as well mixed and shadowed by one another, as ever you saw
colors; and so much diversity in Loves archery, as one would think Cupid shot
out of a Rainbow. Each several humor has a point to fasten on its
correspondency, therefore there is no wondering at the seeming extravagancy of
passions.

Here (Madam) I conceive, you may learn by reading, what you cannot so easily
by conversation, because no body dares tell it you, when any body is in love
with you; which you may be assured of, when you find a judicious admirer of an
Accomplished Woman; and this Rule is their protection as well as their
discovery. I (Madam) may be an admirer of this Woman in French, but an excuser
of this in the language of

Your Graces most Humble and Obedient Servant, WALTER MONTAGUE.

The CONTENTS.
Of Cheerfulness and Melancholy, 1 Of Reputation. 19 Of Inclination to Virtue,
chiefly to the Devotion of the times. 30 Of Chastity and Complacency. 38 Of
Courage. 47 Of Prudence and Discretion. 56 Of Knowledge and Ignorance. 65 Of
Constancy and Fidelity. 72 Of Curiosity and Censure. 83 Of a Debauched Woman.
88 Of the Cruelty and Pity of Women. 95 Of Beauty. 102 Of Gracefulness. 109 Of
Clothes and Ornaments. 116 Of Jealousy. 123
THE ACCOMPLISHED WOMAN.
Of Cheerfulness and Melancholy.
THe Noblest Design that we can propose to our selves in conversation, is to
have such a kind of wit as makes us acceptable, and by a welcome violence
acquires us a command as powerful as pleasing. A cheerful humor is more
advantageous for the attaining of this, then a Melancholy; which indeed is not
unfit for Knowledge, but is too heavy for Discourse, and too gross for
delicacies and sharp returns. Cheerful humors are gracefuller and freer in all
they do, and so are welcomer to all Companies; as more natural in their
affections, and less constrained in their behavior, and more innocent in
their designs and thoughts. Notwithstanding all that can be said in favor of
the Melancholy, if their thoughtfulness be commendable in something, it has
as many il effects as good; and those that call it the Mother of Wisdom, must
confess also that it is often too of Extravagancy. They would persuade us,
that their wits make many discoveries, and that they reach far in their
Meditations: But sometimes too their journey is so long, as they never come
home again; or if they do return, it is like Pilgrims, that leave their own
Country, to wander idly in strange ones, without any advantage, but to bring
from thence poverty and weariness.

Thinking is a Labyrinth where one may be easily lost, and is hardly to be got
out of; yet the Melancholy call it the Element of good Wits; believing to
excuse their own weakness by giving it a brave name. But as lame men cannot
brag, if after the expense of a great deal of time and labor, they get a
little way; so these musing Wits deserve no praise, for being long a seeking,
what quicker find sooner, and with more ease. Readier Wits have the same
advantage of them, as Birds have of Serpents, or Angels of Bodies and
materiality But chiefly, I cannot conceive why they glory in speaking little;
because their silence comes rather from barrenness then discretion; and if
they hold their peace in many occasions, it is not so much to choose words, as to
seek them. Such persons would have easily been good Disciples of Pithagoras,
but that they holding their peace by command, would not have been capable also
of learning to speak handsomely. They should have a School quite contrary to
these Philosophers, to learn the faculty they want; they had more need of
Physicians and broths, then of Tutors; they must not only have Lessons read
them to cure them, but Miracles wrought upon them. Just as Fire can easier
descend, then Earth ascend; so hasty humors may be moderated by reading and
experience; but gross and heavy ones can hardly with what pains soever be
taken, be made lively and subtle. Though Birds have wings to fly, yet they can
trusse them up when they will, to ease themselves; transcendent. Wits can do so
for action or rest: but when the Melancholy ones strive to animate their
languishings, they run Icarus his hazard, that was too material, and had not
skill enough to fly upon artificial wings. Their Discourse and their Arguments
are ungracious, when they force themselves to express in them a heat that is
not natural to them. They are like some old men, that run when they think they
walk, and get not forward but by chance; and after the least straining of
themselves, are suddenly out of breath, in stead of wiselyer fitting their pace
to their weakness. The most part of these sick ones glory in the
disapprobation of ordinary company, seeking to persuade the credulous, that
nothing but affairs of that importance (which heretofore the Senators consulted
with the Gods about) can serve them for discourse: But to believe that their
coldness should be so excellent at that, it should seem, one must be of the
same humor, to make that conclusion; If ever it prove happy that way, its more
by chance then art. If quick Wits be accused of snatching too soon at
opportunity, Melancholy ones are in danger of making use of it too late: and if
those stay not till it present it self; these oftententimes think not of it
till it be past: they are inclining to fear and despair; as they want heat, so
they are unactive, and their frozen humor figures almost all things impossible
either to avoid or undertake. It is a Lethargine feeling, not to be perceived
but by a wound, by blows and violence; they seem rather resuscitated then
waked; they are sick ones, that one must almost kill, to know they are not
dead. If they have judgment to deliberate, they have almost no confidence to
resolve, and yet less courage to execute. It is a Palsie-vertue, that must be
thrust into occasions, and that lies languishing by the remedies, without
applying them, unless it be drawn to them by fear. It were to do them too much
wrong, not to believe that there be many wise and honest persons of that
temper: but we must affirm too, that it is too injurious to wisdom and virtue,
to keep them always in a study or musing, as though those that neither fear
nor wish any thing beyond themselves, should not show a cheerful countenance,
to witness the satisfaction of their conscience. On the contrary, if Serpents
engender in still waters, ill thoughts are nourished in musing humors; and if
their Wits be fit to invent knaveries, their Face is no less to cover them.
When rust is got into the Spring of a Clock, there is no more regularity in the
motions, nor certainty in the point. When once a continual thoughtfulness
possesses us, the mind is disquieted and the face distorted: what light or
reason can one believe to be, where there is nothing but black fumes, which
Melancholys sends up to the brain? Just as evil spirits join with storms to
destroy Men, to burn Temples; so do they often make use of this black humor to
cherish in the soul superstition, despair and hypocrise. Caesar mistrusted more
the melancholy humor of Brutus and Cassius, then the mirth of Dolabella.
Notwithstanding, if coldness be only an effect of this constitution, it
deserves excuse or pity: but if it proceeds from art, it cannot be exempted
from suspicion and blame. And to examine well the difference between these two
humors, the modesty of women that are naturally free is in all their heart,
and that of the affected ones is only in their faces and outside; the one are
not good in effect; the other ill only in show. Suppose that Casuists may
rightly say of sports and pass-times, as Physicians judge of Mushrooms, that the
best are naught: notwithstanding that, pleasures that are of themselves
indifferent, and that the intention may make good, may not be absolutely cried
down: St. Elizabeth of Hungary did not forbear dancing, and her good humor did
not impeach her canonization. Those that are so nice in the use of lawful
things, are ordinarily very free in the enjoying of forbidden, when they are
free from witnesses. And it is the misfortune of these times, that people put
on so much coloring and studiednesse, that one dares not so much as laugh
without giving occasion of suspicion to weak spirits, or censure to wicked; as
if a merry humor were an infallible foreteller of the illness of the mind.
There be some Stipocondriaques, that can endure mirth no more then Owls can
daylight; and indeed, their faces presage somewhat so ominous, that it raises
rather horror then inclination. They that will maintain their own good humor
without any constraint for the vulgar error, should chiefly keep themselves
free from Desire or Sorrow, as from the greatest Tyrants over our quiet; for
the one transports us to what is to come, and the other brings us back to what
is past; taking from us the liberty of settling our happiness in our present
content, as long as we either desire what is not yet, or lament in vain that
which is no longer. Strong wits easily resist this tyranny: As when ships are
tossed even in the height of the storm, the Needle keeps always straight upon
its Star, though the Masts break, and the Sails tear; So we should always be
even in the greatest inequality of our business. And if the winds can cast off
the Ship from the Port, not the Needle from its Pole: So when it happens that
misfortunes retard our pretension, they should notwithstanding never remove us
from our reason and constancy. It is fit always to avoid Melancholy, what
pretense soever it has, as too troublesome to others, and too prejudicial to
our selves; for if it be natural, we humor too much such a temper; if it be
casual, we yield too much to the inconstancy of Fortune.

After having told what I like in a Merry humor, it is time to examine what I
find fault within it: And since we have marked out those defects which many
ascribe to Melancholy, let us set our selves to speak the good effects and
commendations of it. It Is that which renders our spirits subtle for knowledge,
indefatigable for business, serious in conversation, constant in their
designs, modest in good fortune, patient in ill, judicious and rational in
all things. It Is with this just temper that Virtue clothes her self to appear
with all her ornaments; and it is that which Nature has chosen to make Kings
and Philosophers of; and that Grace it self has always employed to bestow on
the world extraordinary portions. Those of this humor seem to be born wise, and
that Nature gives them more then the others can acquire by study; and that
without the incommodity of age, they are possessed betimes of the maturity of
it. Indeed, their meditation is sometimes better then their discourse; but as
their judgment is solid, they despise that superfluous gloss which light wits
set out to get opinion among the vulgar. In this modesty they resemble the
Eagle in the Apocalypse, that had lights hidden within, and had eyes under her
wings; whereas great talkers have them only in their feathers, as Peacocks have
them on their train, being rational only in color and appearance. I deny not
but merry humors have a kind of pleasantness in them, but they are subject
also to great faults, because if jests (which they ordinarily exercise
themselves in) be well received of some, they offend more then they please,
especially when Religion or Reputation are made their subject, it is the
easiest thing in the world to turn them into impiety or scandal. Points of wit
are fine in discourse; but we must take heed they be not so sharp as to draw
blood; or otherwise, since one cannot jest on great ones without indiscretion,
nor on the miserable without cruelty; so that one must always offend against
the laws of Policy or Nature, Serious wits do well to abstain from such a
practice, which most commonly makes those that use it pass for buffons or
enemies; and gives themselves at last occasion to cry, after they have
presented one for others to laugh: For my part, I think it not injury to
Melancholy humors, to affirm, they have no inclination to so idle a quality,
which supposes almost always a lightness of wit, and often a looseness of
conscience. It was of this windy temper that the foolish Virgins were of; and
that those are of yet, which have more wit then judgment; which notwithstanding
seem at first to have some light, but it is such as is either false, or else
lasts not long ere it be extinguished, letting it self be surprised for want of
prevision enough in matters of importance. Whereas the wise do never so much as
slumber, when they should be ready upon good or ill accidents, for fear of
being reduced to repentance and shame. And to take things as they are, since
the soul and senses have a quarrel that must last as long as our life, and
that the mind is strongest in the weakness of the body, as in the ruin of an
enemy; it is likely that when the humor is so gay and free, that is become the
stronger; on the contrary, when it is sad and pensive, it is made a slave to
Reason, as a maid that has a discontented face when her Mistress chides her.
The joy that rises from the Conscience is not of this kind, it is purer, and
is like the Stars, that appear always the same; but that which comes from the
body or constitution, is like Comets, that draw their nourishment from below,
from the exhalations of the Earth, which presage only woeful events, and seem
to leap into the air to run after vapors that nourish them, till they go out
for want of that terrestrial matter: The passion of the Melancholy ones has no
such thing as these tragic Meteors to form or preserve it self: their love
has no pretension beyond the possession of the spirit; so as their fire is
most pure, it remits not the heat, it remains always equal, like that which
the Philosophers believe to be under the Orb of the Moon. I confess, that for
affection, quick and lively humors are readier and franker; but then the
Melancholy are the discreeter and more confident: these fasten themselves
constantly to their designs, whilst the other change every moment; their
passions fitting themselves to all objects that are presented them, if not out
of malice, it is out of weakness; and though their simplicity may deserve some
excuse; yet sure it is not reasonable that one should value much a natural
goodness, that is rather an effect of the Constitution, then the Election: one
that cannot easily do ill, may not glory in being good: if the simple do not
much harm, they are not the better for that, since they do as much as they know
how. And to alledg, that if they be not the better, yet they are the happier,
because their spirits are as free from disquiet, as void of design; indeed
this is the greatest reproach can be made them, to speak thus of them; since it
is to ground all their felicity upon their defects, and to confess them happy
only by their ignorance or stupidity. Because Marble feels no pain, we do not
say, it is in good health; we do not call it healthful, but insensible. It Is
thus that the simple are not unhappy, as the want of sense secures them; and it
is no great advantage to them to be exempt from care or disquiet, as Stones are
from diseases, or Beasts are from contrition. If the stupid find themselves
sometimes at the same point of tranquillity of spirit as the Philosophers, it is
in a different way; these overcome, what those understand not: Snakes under
ground are as safe from storms, as the Serpent in the sky; low spirits find
security as well as they in crawling, safety in weakness: but it is much a
braver thing to be above, then below the storm, to have it under our feet, then
over our heads: Since true felicity cannot be attained without virtue, and
without morality, the happiness of the silly ones is of a far different nature
from that of the wise: and (me thinks) they are happy in this world, but as
infants without Baptism are in the other world, in a Limbus, where they subsist
between good and ill, without being affected with either. The Melancholy live
not in this indifferency, they ow not their felicity to ignorance, but to the
force of their wits; they would be ashamed of such a happiness, and would
complain of it, if they were enjoined to purchase an exemption from the sense
of ill, by an insensibility of good.

To know how much Melancholy is superior to other humors, we must consider
that those that have but the hasty and light part of it, are not less
incapable of resisting misfortunes, then of tasting true delights. Their heat
precipitates them into extremities; they do nothing but by fits; and as if they
were composed of sulphur and gunpowder, the least spark fires their actions and
thoughts, for which there is no remedy but to stay till the end of that
impetuosity, which is quickly weary, and likely puts out it self. Those spirits
that have no conduct in their understandings, have also no courage in their
afflictions; they are ill soldiers, that use their buckler as ill as their
sword. The same lightness which makes them rash in their assaults, renders
them as yielding or impatient when they come to suffer or defend themselves. On
the contrary, the Melancholy, that by a profound meditation, and a long habit
of reasoning, have as it were formed to themselves a certain knowledge of the
success of all things, are never surprised with ill events. This Stoicall
virtue (essential to their temper) easily masters all those tumultuous and
unruly motions that agitate violent spirits: the solidity of their judgments
lets nothing be new or extraordinary to them, both for the diseases of the
body, which they curb as wild Beasts, when they cannot tame: and for the
distempers of the mind, which are the Passions, which they subdue by force of
reason, and so remain always victorious.

If heretofore there has been a man so bold as to stab the Duke of Milan in
the midst of his Guard, in the face of his Court, nay in the Church, (the
reverence and respect of the place, the glorious and awful Majesty which God
imprints on the sacred face of Princes not being able to give him the least
sense of horror or apprehension, in a purpose as detestable, as difficult to
execute) only by having often practiced upon the picture of this Prince: What
boldness will not providence afford the wise? since this Parricide, by having
only studied a little while such a design, the very thought of which was enough
to shake into a trembling every moment, both his hand and his conscience,
testified so much assurance and resolution.

We should not wonder if the Melancholy are so constant, and that we never see
them troubled, even when they are constrained to yield to necessity; since they
keep a secret retreat within themselves, whither the storms of Fortune cannot
reach. It Is thither where the soul retires to maintain her self in an eternal
serenity, where she obtains an absolute Empire over her opinions, where she
entertaines her self solitarily even in the midst of company, and the crowd of
the world interrupts not her repose and silence: It Is in this solitude of the
superior part, that the mind fortifies it self, and learns true morality, and
where she advances to her self almost without time or experience, the
providence of old Men, and the Wisdom of Philosophers. Lastly, It Is here,
where if we lay up the Images of pleasant things, by these means we may furnish
our selves always with fair thoughts; for if the pleasing Objects displease
us, we may, coming back into our selves, content our spirits while our senses
are persecuted, and entertain our fancy with Beauty at the same time when
Deformity takes up our eyes. But who can praise enough this noble
thoughtfulness of the Melancholy? since it is by that the soul seems to rid
her self, when she pleases, of the troublesome commerce with the senses; and
we consider with an intention less distracted, what we are, when our
imagination reflects us to our selves more clearly, and with less danger then
the lovely Fountain did to Narcissus. I wonder not, that the Poets feign that
he lost himself, since he looked for himself out of himself: We are to be found
truly no where but in our selves, every where else we meet but with our
fantasme or our shadow. And therefore many have reason to say, That Meditation
is harder then Ecstasy, as its easier to go out of our selves, then to re-enter
into them, without the use of this noble Thoughtfulness, to which the temper
of Melancholy is disposed. Man seems to have but an imperfect reason, and even
an useless: For as Bees must retire themselves to make the honey, when they
have gathered the matter from flowers; so it is necessary, that after we have
surveyed many objects, we should make a regress into our selves, to gather
their fruit, and to draw from them conclusions; otherwise all the study or
experience we can have, will be but a confusion or mixture, it would be wealth
that we should be ill husbands of; our actions would be misguided, our thoughts
without order, and our discourse without judgment.

The most part of gross spirits are of a quite contrary opinion, and cannot
imagine pensiveness to be any thing but such a trans, as mad men or sick
persons are in; this kind of meditation would hurt them as much as it frights
them, and would be as contrary to them as unpleasing: It dazels weak spirits,
and vexes malicious ones; it is the blind of the one, and the torment of the
other: it is not like, that they that have nothing in their minds but
ignorance, or in their conscience but crimes, should be much pleased to look
into themselves to seek there satisfaction or rest: But to despise
pensiveness, because many lose themselves in it, is it not to condemn the use
of fire and water, for some incommodities they have, without considering their
necessity for our life? I had as lieve blame the Sun, because Owls cannot
endure the brightness of it, which Eagles look upon so fixedly; as if one
should quarrel with the Light, because weak eyes are dazzled with its beams,
and because they draw darkness even from the spring it self of Light.

There is enough said for the Apology and praise of Melancholy, and for fear of
being tedious in the Problem, if I should go on, since both Humors have
somewhat good and ill in them, I have nothing to add, but that they should
serve for remedies to one another: For the Romans accounted them best among the
Tribunes that were most inclined to the Senate, and those the wisest among the
Senators, that favored most the Party of the People; to divert on the one side
authority from tyranny, and on the Other, liberty from insolence. So it seems,
that the most excellent of the Merry humor, are those that draw nearest to
Melancholy; and amongst the Melancholy, they that confine closest to the Merry;
for being so tempered, the first will be discreeter, and the other less
austere and troublesome.

Of Reputation.
REputation is a great Treasure, and is no less useful to Virtue, then light
to Pictures, to set them off; it is the fairest ornament of our civil Life,
and without which, the most glorious and illustrious actions remain smothered
and obscured: But as it is got and lost now a days, it may be reckoned among
the benefits of Fortune, of which fools have often a better share then
deserving persons. If it were to be distributed by good Judges, Virtue would
suffice for the acquisition of it; but it has often so ill Arbitrators, that
were we not bound by all means possible to avoid Scandals, worthy persons might
content themselves with the testimony of their own Conscience, without being
troubled for the Opinions of the unadvised, which chance may make good or ill.
Opinion depends too little on our selves to make us unhappy, and it were a
felicity very unsure, that the ignorance or malice of an Enemy could remove.

Fame is sometimes an effect that seems to have no cause, and is raised like
those alarms that disorder a whole Army, without any bodies conceiving the
occasion. Why then should we spend our spirits with so much unquietness, to
know how we stand in the opinion of others, and afflict our selves for the
error of the vulgar; as if the ignorant began but now to deceive themselves,
and belie others. I should have reason to wonder with Aristotle, why the
Ancients rewarded rather the strength of the body then mind, giving Laurels to
Wrastlers, and not to Wise men; but that ignorance and poverty disenabled them
to set a prize of Virtue: Ignorance, because having the foundation and roots in
the heart, Men abuse themselves in their judgments of Virtue Poverty, because
when we perceive the excellency of it, there is nothing in the world precious
enough to serve for the recompense or Coronation. The unadvised conceive often
Virtue, where there is nothing but Vice, and without thinking what they do,
give ill-favored names to lovely things; like Astronomers, that call some
Stars Bulls and Scorpions, that notwithstanding have neither fury nor venom,
only purity and light.

I could wish that those that undertake to judge of things without well
understanding the nature of them, were punished with such a correction as
Midas, that (as Ovid reports) did prefer the noise of Pan's rustic Field-pipe,
before the sweet ravishing tunes of Apollo's Lute, giving his voice to that
whch made most noise. His judgment is like many of these times, that value
every thing by the color and looks, deserving no less then he, to wear long
Ears for a mark of their stupidity, and indeed to make more account of
apparency then reallity; is it not to prefer Pan before Apollo? a Pipe before a
Lute? Noise before Harmony? There is much brutality in such savage opinions;
yet notwithstanding they are the greatest number in the world, and it is they
that defame those that deserve a fair estimation: Therefore I would reserve my
sensiblenesse only for those that may justly award reproach or praise, and
would not think it fit to be angry at that, which I should laugh at. There are
very few competent judges of things; many men's Wits go no further then their
Eyes, and stay upon the colors: And I think that avoiding scandals, it is
enough to escape their imputations, without seeking their approbation.

We are in an age of bravery and show, where morality is thrown down, and where
the virtues of the times consist no more in any thing but excess and
extravagancy: to be believed devout, we must go as far as superstition or
hypocrisy; and politic spirits use Christianity as the Stoics did
Philosophy, to abuse the vulgar, forming to themselves imaginary virtues, which
humanity cannot attain to. It is a great unhappiness that there is no honesty
left in commerce, nor purity in Religion; and that we, as well as they in the
Exchange, must overvalue our selves above what we are worth, or hope for, to
keep up our credits.

But to speak my opinion, rather as a Philosopher then a Disputant, we must not
conclude, that Reputation is to be neglected, because it is il distributed:
This disorder does not dispense with us for our duty; and it were as ungracious
to make our selves infamous for that reason, as to commit murders or robberies,
because there have been thieves acquitted, and innocent persons condemned for
that crime. Since all women are not wise, and that there are more ruled by
example, then by reason; the most virtuous should consider, at least, that
Reputation is a public good, and when it is corrupted, we are to seek to cure
it, as we would to quench a fire, or to purge a popular contagion. Indeed, one
may laugh at them that allow themselves all kind of liberty, because ill
tongues rank the most virtuous with the most dissolute in the ill repute, and
the most vicious with the most worthy in the good: as if Kings would light
torches at noon, because the Sun lights Peasants as well as them; or as if they
would be sick, and cast away their health, because their Subjects are well!

We should not make our selves vicious, because others think ill of us; but we
should live better to deserve another opinion: the testimony of the Conscience
is more to be esteemed then all reports, though there were neither friends nor
enemies to praise or reproach. Handsome Women will always find satisfaction
enough in their Glass; and illfavoured ones, vexation: The Conscience does the
same for vice or virtue, as a glass for Faces. Dissolute Women are far from
standing on good opinion, since they do all they can to have an ill one: And to
consider well the life of a great many, it seems they would imitate Lesbia in
Martial, that affected pomp and ostentation in her Debauchery, and took more
pleasure in the Spectators, then the Adulteries. She was in her
voluptuousness, as the Sophisters were in their virtues; they loved to do
nothing well, she nothing ill, but upon the Stage. Men should not throw
themselves into despair for this, since this misfortune depends not on their
carriage, and since the most illustrious persons have been liable to it. The
insolency of Lucia did not abate the glory of her Husband's Victories. Drusus
Nephew to Augustus and Marcus Aurelius, obtained an immortal reputation,
notwithstanding the lasciviousness of his Wife. Infamy should be personal, as
sin is; and we should not partake of the punishment or shame, when we have no
part in the crime. Since it is not enough to be virtuous, but it must be
believed, we must be careful of the apparances, and leave no pretenses for ill
tongues, which makes faults when they find none. I will allow, that Socrates
loved not young Alcibiades, but with all kind of honor, and that his
affection did not contradict his Philosophy: Yet notwithstanding, making him
lie with him every night, he should have been cautious of his coming, and
return, to take away the means from those that saw him come back in the
mornings, to make use of the time and place of his visit for an occasion of
censure; though the Oracle published his virtue, one cannot justify his
unadvisednesse in the carriage of this friendship. Discretion and love agree
not even in the best wits: It may be it is for that the Poets faign Cupid to be
still a Child, because let love grow never so old, it never arrives at the
years of Discretion; his childishness lasts as long as himself, lest he should
be ashamed of the fondness of his sports and dalliances.

I do not wonder if Love make us lose our Reputations, since it makes us lose
our wits; and since Socrates himself could not escape reproach in a bare
friendship amongst the Romans; Claudia, a vestall Virgin, was innocent, yet was
accused to have forfeited her honor, for smelling too curiously; and it was
thought enough to condemn her, that she took a little more pains with her
clothes and discourse, then was necessary for a Nun. Indeed it was a light
appearance to arraign her on; but she would not have been acquitted but by a
prodigy, when she moved a ship with her girdle, that many Engines and Men
could not stir.

Whatsoever one can do or avoid, there is no infallible rule or means to
preserve her reputation; and since it depends on the opinion of others, there
is more fortune then wisdom in it. We must not think that ignorance joined with
caution is sufficient for it, since God himself that is the spring of goodness
and wisdom, saw himself traduced for a while by the impostures of his enemies
that reported him a Man addicted to vice and debauchery. This one example
shows sufficiently that there is somewhat else requisite besides virtue and
dexterity to preserve it. There is a strange unhappiness in some persons, that
exposes them to be talked of, no body knows why: and that happens oftener to
the virtuous then the other, because their denials procure them Enemies, and
they are often in danger, like Susanna, to be accused of a crime they have
refused to commit. There are some faces too that attract censure; and this
proceeds from fools, imagining that one cannot laugh without being vicious, and
that there is no innocence but in frowardness and Melancholy. It is the belief
of the ignorant, that virtue should always cry, and know not that we should
beware of a dark humor, as of water that is overcast. And of all kind of
wits, there are none so harmless, as the most cheerful. It were to be very
dull, to believe one could not have a good humor without having an ill
conscience: if there were neither malice nor enemies in the world, there are
few things so sure or so true, that cannot be taken diverse ways; and if we
examine well all our Actions, it seems that they are almost all subject to
interpretation and dispute. Who can judge certainly (setting Christianity a
side) of a man giving alms in public, if it be for good example or vanity?
May not one say of a patient Man, that it is a sign of insensibleness, as
soon as of virtue? Who knows whether a merry humor be a testimony of
looseness or of freedom? Those that are serious, may they not pass for vain or
stupid, as well as for modest? the interpretation makes all; and if the things
were not indifferent, we speak of them more according to our sense, then
their nature. Since it is so, we should seek our consolation in our own
hearts, as wise men do; and when we have done all that lies in us to deserve a
good reputation, we may despise an ill one. The neglect of detraction silences
ill tongues, and the being moved with it quickens them: It is to acknowledge the
force of their weapons, to confess that they have wounded us; and those that
are extremely troubled with them, comply with their designs that would offend
them, for it is to satisfy our enemy to let him know, he keeps us unsatisfied.
They that say that ill tongues are like sharp set rasors, should add, that
their edge has most effect upon soft and yielding things, and that stones
turn their edge: it is as much as to say that spirits too sinsible suffer more
then those that are of a firmer and more constant temper. Whatsoever one
steals or cuts from Reputation, at last it comes again like hair after it
has been cut, if the root remain, and innocence stays with patience:
howsoever if we be unjustly taxed, we should comfort our selves more in the
truth, then be displeased by an imposture. The innocent should be no more
afflicted when they are called guilty, then if they were said to be sick when
they are well. From hence we may learn why virtuous women are less vindicative
when they are taxed then vicious, because as the most ill favored will sometimes
be thought the handsomest by painting, so the most unworthie strive by their
cunning to be believed the modestest. This is the reason, they are so
troublesome, and that one cannot touch their sore never so lightly, but they
will cry out. All the world knows how Lucretia killed her self upon the
violence of Tarquin; she said when she was dying, that she had two
irreproveable witnesses, her blood to Men, and her soul to the Gods. But I am
almost of the opinion of a great Author, that accuses her not to have bin
always so chaste, as she would have had believed by her death, and that if she
had not bin guilty, she would have found more remedy in her Conscience then in
her death. Some say, that she resisted rather out of an humor then
consideration of virtue, and that having passed her time with some other
Minions of less quality then the Tyrant, she feared that all her other faults
should have been discovered by this, and that this fear made her resolve rather
to let her self out of the world with her own hands, then to stay in it too
long to survive her Reputation.

Of Inclination to VIRTUE, chiefly to the Devotion of the times.
THose that imagine that Women's Piety is but a tenderness in their nature, or
weakness of their wits, are not of my opinion; and me thinks, do them no less
affront, to deny them this divine quality, then if they should take their eyes
from them, which make the best part of the face. We may believe, that they that
would have a woman irreligious, desire she would be insolent and without
ingenuity; and having after razed out of her mind the sense and respect of
Religion, they mean to spoil her of that which gives her so powerful an
advantage amongst men. It is an old craft that began with the world, and
licentious men do but the same in that with the Women of this age, which the
Devil did practice upon the first, when he took from her the fear of God, that
so he might afterward easily persuade her to all kind of liberty. Those
impious ones, that steal the immortality of the Soul, to bestow it on their
infamous delights, and that would (if they could) deprive of an eternal
existence this most pure and simple essence, that contains all, and is bounded
by nothing, are very foolish to aim at the reputation of good wits, by the
slighting of Religion; especially during a Reign, and in a Court, where there
may be engraven in greater Characters, then was ever upon the Medals of Adrian
the Emperor, The Imperial Piety. The Hermits of this time, may (as well as
that of Theodosius the younger) leave their solitude, and come and study
perfection in the Kings Palace, and take examples of austerity in the seat it
self of pleasures. We have no need now adays to seek in Cloisters precepts for
a Christian life; it is enough now to be a good Courtier, to be devout. One
cannot now observe the laws of Policy by violating those of Christianity; and
it is an happy necessity, that makes the licencious Wits of the Court
inexcusable; that now adays, unless one will make himself ridiculous, a man
must get his fortune and his salvation both together. Ladies that would show
that they are inclined to virtue, should be more gracious to such Spirits as
are addicted to it then to the other, lest it should be thought if they
favored either libertines, or stupid ones, that the resemblance had tied this
knot; Those that show either hatred or coldness to deserving persons, declare
by the repugnancy to good things, they are fit for nothing but ill ones: weak
wits have not estimation enough to publish their virtue, nor discretion enough
to conceal their defects. Yet we often see those that are full of vanity and
affectation, pick out among those fools their admirers and confidents; as if
it were not a blind choice to elect so ill judges of their merits, and so ill
secretaries to their delights. Ignorance and simplicity are two unsure trusts,
interest and persuasion will draw any thing from them, and if imprudency were
not provoked, it would often speak, when it should be silent. Midas addressed
himself ill to reeds to keep secret his long ears; he would have been
better served by a discreet Man, then he was by that plant; and dull people, as
he did, find by woeful experience, that there can be no true fidelity, where
there is no wit or reason: there are more Histories of this then fables, we
need not look back to the times past to seek examples, which we have store of
every moment, which might serve for the subject of Tragedy and farses.

And for piety, if any body objects against it, that it deads good humor, and
breeds too much Melancholy for company. Indeed I do not approve of those that
put their devotion upon the rack to make it scoul, as if one could not be
saved without being ugly. When the grace of God is in the soul, the face is
touched over with the sweetness of it, and not the features and colors of the
damned. The weather is overcast when it is disposed to rain, and dejected
looks prognosticate somewhat ominous in their musings. Those that have no
purpose to do ill, nor remorse for having done ill, are not of this froward
humor, which is as contrary to devotion as to comeliness. This no way detracts
from penitence; it raines in summer, as well as winter, and love sheds as many
tears, as fear. Joy cries as well as sorrow, and the remembrance of sin does
not deject us so, that the return to grace may not raise us again to joy.
Sometimes it rains when the Sun shins, so Repentance does often power down tears
upon smiling faces. Bees draw honey from Flowers without spoiling them by
touching them; Devotion does yet more in every profession where it is,
beautifying and making it more lovely. And if precious Stones put into honey,
take a luster from it according to their natural colors; so there is no
condition in the world that does not improve the estimation of it, when it is
accompanied with Piety; it makes the professed Religious more cheerful, and
Lay men less insolent, moderating pleasures, and sweetning austerities; it
makes Marriage the comlier, War the juster, Commerce the faithfuller, and the
Court the fuller of honor. It is much ignorance and tyranny, to believe it can
be found no where but in Cloisters, and that one can have nothing to do with it
abroad in the world, without incroaching upon the Charter house or the
Capuchins.

We are in times where it is not accounted of, if it be not excessive in
appearance; so that many content themselves to have a becoming Devotion, or
rather, a humane Religion. I never see this monstrous Devotion, but it puts me
in mind of the Trojan Horse, that was stuffed with enemies, for which
notwitstanding (by reason of the pretense of piety they did not only open
their Gates, but broke down their Walls to receive with more solemnity the
Present devoted to Minerva; but since Laocoon, that took a Lance in his hand to
sound it, and to try if it were hollow, was punished for his just curiosity,
let us content our selves to disapprove of these shows of the times, lest we
come off as ill as he did, if we undertake to quarrel with it. Indeed, those
Women that keep such ado, and use so much craft to deceive some eyes under the
pretext of conscience, do like Spiders, that take a great deal of pains to make
Webs, where they themselves are hung at last, without any other advantage, but
to have caught flies, and they shallow-brains. Clear spirits scorn this, and I
cannot conceive how discreet women can mistake dreams for revelations, or let
themselves be surprised by such illusions. Likely, those that seem very fond of
their Husbands, it is with design to deceive them; and among the Romans,
Ladies have been suspected of their Husbands death, only for crying
excessively over their Tombs.

In Religion as well as Society, dissimulation is commoner then truth; and this
great show is at least suspicious, if not vicious: superstitious women make
more scruple of a little sin then of a great one. And are like the Jews, that
made more Conscience of entering into the Pretor-hall, then of condemning
Christ; or of not washing their hands, then of persecuting Innocence. It is
true, that women retain that of the first, that made more Ceremony, and showed
more fear to touch the forbidden fruit, then to eat it. These questions,
tales and scruples without reason, trouble not discreet persons, that follow
Alexanders example, virtuously cutting off troublesome knots, rather then
yielding themselves to unty them, as the vulgar do, that are ignorant of true
devotion. Notwithstanding this, lest we should pass from one extreme to
another, we must behave our selves in taxing superstition, as those that in the
time of Xerxes, burned the houses in Asia. They meddled not with the buildings
near the Temples, not only to preserve those sacred places from being burnt,
but for fear they should be so much as black'd: so in this case, we omit many
things which we might blame with justice, but not without danger of driving
weak Spirits to impiety: when superstition rises from simplicity, it deserves
pity or excuse; but when from art, punishment and suffering. The ears that
cover the corn, or the leaves about trees are not superfluous, nature has
given them either to preserve or beautify them. Ceremonies are of the same use
to Religion, and as devotion is inseparable from love, it borrowes often loves
raptures, and Gods servants can contain themselves no more, then profane
ones, which honor their Mistresses, even in hair and Ciphers; Divine love
expressed more favor in the effects then the worldly: and a great Author says
very well, That if the Poets Cupid have two wings, that the Seraphins have six.
It is true, that Hypocrites are not so reproveable as Libertines, because it is
better to counterfeit virtue then vice. But in what concerns conversation, the
best covering is to have none, because it is easier to be good in effect, then
only in show, and it is less pain to certify the Conscience then to set the
behavior. After all this, it cannot be denied that women are not firmer and
truer in their devotion then men, since in that occasion where there was most
affection to be showed to God, there were found three Maryes under the Cross,
where there was but one Disciple.

Of Chastity and Complacency.
IT is fit to join these two fair Qualities, to reduce them to a perfect
temper; since there be some that become shy and wild by being Chaste; and
others that refuse nothing out of Complacency. It is indeed, to be either too
good, or too ill an humor, and is but changing of vices, in stead of avoiding
them. If Virtue have two extremes that offend it equally, one must not make use
of the one for defense against the other; as if one must be covetous, for fear
of being prodigal; or throw ones self into the fire, to escape the water.
Morality approves not such a carriage; it does not teach us to pick out, but
fly from sins; to fix only upon Virtue, which is hard to find, because either
excess or scarcity hides it from the ignorant. They that think women cannot be
virtuous and obliging, understand little the nature of Virtue: nay, are void of
common sense, much more of any right opinion. Virtues are but diverse, not
contrary, and the correspondence is too natural not to be able to subsist in
the same subject; when they are well suited, they do better in one another
company, then alone. It Is that which Theodosius was so much commended for among
the Emperors, seeming to make himself esteemed by contrary Qualities; his
gentleness abated not his Majesty, nor his severity his Complacency.

There are some that affect so much a pleasingnesse, as their smiles seem
rather ridiculous then cheerful; and others so much on the contrary, as to put
on gravity, look like Furies, or School-mistresses: whatsoever is in it, when
one considers well these two Humors, they are to be suspected either of art or
stupidity; because if it be without design, there is no wit in it; if it be
with design, the serious ones intend to deceive, and the easy ones to be
deceived. These believe, that their easiness is ascribed to their humor; and
the others, that their coldness is understood an effect of their Virtue. These
tricks take not long, especially with discreet persons, among which the best
way to seem chaste is to be so. As the Hypocritical are least devout, so the
most reserved are sometimes the least chaste. Hecuba may have an handsome
Masque, and Hellen an ill-favored one; but this ugliness or that Beauty
abuses but such eyes as stagger at appearancies. They have more diversity of
falsifying and colors, then the Rainbow, whose figure turned upward, their
dissimulation does often set on their husbands foreheads Chastity must needs be
a divine Quality, since even the enemies of it esteem it, and that the most
debauched respect them less that yield, then those that hold out. Apollo being
in love with Daphne, when he could not work upon her by his discourse nor
pursuit, turned her into a Laurel, of which he himself has since worn
Crowns. Jupiter being passionate for Io, had no sooner gained her, but he
changed her into a Cow. How different are these two Metamorphoses? the refusal
is better rewarded then the consent. Respect waits upon Desire, and neglect
follows Possession. The God Pan being taken with the beauty of a Nymph, used
violence after his prayers, pursuing her to the brim of a River, where she
going to precipitate her self, he in pity of her, changed her into a Reed,
which he made himself a Pipe of, in honor of her resistance, and to have it
every foot in his hands to play with it, and kiss it. Those that are gained
are not used so, because they have not that honor, which our Cavaliers seek
with so much care and pains. Those that promise to themselves never to go so
far, and never to do any but indifferent favors, such as Civility allows,
after having given way to more then they should, find a precipice where they
looked only for entertainment. Love (like Serpents) works himself in entirely,
at the least overture is made him; his beginning is ordinarily contrary to his
end; the pretenses are always useful or honorable. I could wish that the
imprudency of many Ladies did not so often make a truth of the Fable of Europa:
This young Princess walking innocently on the sea side, where she considered
her flocks, saw a Bull that pleased her better then any of the rest; she draws
near to make much of him, and gets upon him; he proud of his fair office, gets
by little and little into the water, and so far, as she looks back too late to
the shore, not being able to return to it, she was carried away into an Island,
where she finds too late, that this Bull was a God, disguised to surprise her.
Thus you see what becomes of it when one plays with beasts, when one is freer
and more familiar with stupid then witty passions: Europa was bolder with a
Bull, then she would have been with Jupiter, if he had declared himself; He
made his approaches easier under the skin of a beast, then he could have done
in the likeness of a God. The most crafty (in his imitation) counterfeit
themselves simple and ignorant, to attain easier their pretensions. They steal
from little favors to greater, and so still carry on their work, till they
change their entreaties into threats, and their softness into violence; and
then one finds too late, that true simplicity is abused, when it plays with
falsified. The fear of losing their reputation after having given some
advantages, debaucheth many: but it is fit they should be punished for this
facility, to teach them, that there is no trusting to beasts; and that the
freest and most ingenuous wits are the most virtuous, and most capable of
friendship. A Poet speaking of the Favors which Ladies give, says, That fools
are happier in them then deserving persons, because their violence takes more
then the others persuasion, by reason of their opinion, that it is less shame
to let men take, then to give, as the violence seems to excuse the consent. But
it is the opinion but of one man, fitter to be despised, then believed; and that
does not detract less from Truth, then from Ladies Honors, which ordinarily
are not woundded, but for want of cunning against the subtilty of their enemies.

It is hard to use so many tricks and inventions to be lovely, without loving;
those that give love at their pleasure, do sometimes receive it as pleases
him. They should do a miracle, to have so much fire in their eyes, without any
in their heart; and let them be never so confident, their looks cannot warm
others, without heating it self in its own sphere. Loves weapons are but ill
ones; for one seldom uses them to wound others, but they either begin or end
with themselves.

I have heretofore thought much upon the Statue of Venus made by Phydias, which
had a Tortoise under the feet of it; and I believe, the greatest mystery that
can be found in it, is, that Tortoises seldom move, or if they do sometimes
stir, it is always covered or armed, carrying their house over their head. Venus
despises the solitary and the reserved; those that run after all companies and
public assemblies so eagerly, please her better to enlarge her Empire; and
above all things, she has always loved Nakedness, since it got her the
golden Apple, which Pallaases Arms and Iunu's Clothes could not obtain of
Paris. When either solitude or company grow wearisome, they serve for remedies
to one another, as rest and labor, or day and night; but we must know, that
the one gives more occasions of doing ill then the other; and those that
delight to be often among their enemies, have a mind either to master them, or
make them friends. Let the company be never so good, cautiousness is better
then confidence: and since she that should be the Example of her sex, was
abashed with an Angel that appeared with the face of a man, women should always
apprehend men, though they are in the form of Angels, unles it be, that not
meaning as she did, they have no need of fear.

It is ill argued, to say, that timorousness restrains women more then virtue:
if their inclination be ill, solicitation will imbolden it; experience
teaches us, that if they be apprehensive, it is rather of being vicious, then
of being censured. Those that writ the Scriptures and the Proverbs, have said
all things to their advantage; they have confessed, that Chastity belongs
particularly to Women, because they that have it not are counted Monsters. One
could not have wondered so much at the want of it, if the quality were not
natural to them. Indeed, there have been men that have possessed this Virtue,
but it has been upon occasions where some consideration has taken away the
merit from it. Alexander showed some continency with Darius his wifes; but to
prove it was rather policy, then virtue, what did he not do with the Amazons?
Scipio being very young, restored a very handsome woman that was presented him,
to her Husband; but there it was pride that was stronger then love, because he
had lost his credit with the Spaniard, if he had accepted the offer. What
praise does Lenocrates deserve for forbearing to enjoy that Lady which was
brought him? his coldness proceeded from his age; besides, he was drunk, and
sought for rest; and if he had not been neither drunk nor sleepy, it was so
common a one, as the most debauched would have been ashamed of, as well as a
Philosopher. There needs no long discourse to prove that chastity belongs not to
men, they themselves quit their part of it, and believe it were to encroach on
the profession of women, to practice the precepts they give them, or not to be
before them in the violation of so fair Maxims for Honor and Chastity.

Is is not a strange custom and worthy of reproof, to see men take all kind of
liberty, without allowing the least? One might think by their tyranny that
Marriage was instituted to only make Jailers for Women. There is much
ingratitude, as well as injustice in it, to exact a fidelity which one will not
return, when the obligations to it are equal. Women have wit and conscience
enough to believe that revenge would cost them too dear, if they lost their own
Virtue to take satisfaction of their Husbands viciousness. Octavia did not
desist from loving Mark Antony singularly, whilst he made love to Cleopatra,
and left a great Beauty at Rome, to possess a less in Egypt. They that have
this constancy, deserve admiration; but those that have it not, have some
color for their weakness: Example pleads for them; for they imagine that it
is not likely that a Crystal should resist blows that might break Diamonds or
Marble.

If I may be allowed to give my opinion after my prayers, since God loved one
of his disciples more tenderly then the rest, one may have a particular
inclination without blemishing chastity, that does not banish affections, but
regulates and moderates them: yet we must take heed that kindness which in its
own nature is a virtue, be not made a vice in the practice: not to be couzened
in it, the end and design of it must be examined as soon as it begins, and we
must assure our selves, that it is forbidden, if we pretend to any thing but
affection; since dishonest love is the trade of those that do not spend their
time in some commendable employment; we must believe that Chastity is preserved
by occupation, and corrupted by idleness. Diana hunts, and Pallas studies, but
Venus is idle.

Of Courage.
MEN think that Courage is a Quality inseparable from them, and by a peculiar
privilege essentially tied to their Sex, without bringing other ground or
title to it, but their own presumption: But he that had much ado to imagine
that there was so much as one brave or valiant Woman in the world, made them
full reparation for so great an injury; and though he was accounted the wisest
and most powerful of all men, he lost that high advantage among women, which
weakened him so far as to bring him to Sacrifice to Idols: Histories are full of
their generous action for the preservation of their country, for love of their
husbands, and for the Religion of their ancestors. As the strength of the
brain is showed in walking a top on high, without fear of falling; so the
force of our wits is expressed in looking upon precipices and danger without
disorder. The stupid have not this advantage when they expect hazards, nor the
rash when they seek them; none but the wise defend themselves from misfortune,
without either being precipitate or insensible, since Courage should always be
with a free deliberation; and that it is neither a forced virtue, nor a parley
natural. I can hardly hold them generous whose constitution makes so light, as
they are transported without any cause; nor those that Nature has made so
heavy, as they cannot resent injuries and offenses. This is either an excess
or a defect of sensibleness, and may be better called stupidity or levity then
courage. If there must be Judicionsnes in all the discourse of an Orator,
prudency should be found in all the actions of a wise man; and without that,
let Polyphemus be never so strong, it will not save his sight; and though
Ulysses be the weaker, the Giant with all his strength cannot defend himself
against him.

They that know the temper of women, will confess, that they have a great
disposition to true Courage, being neither cold to a degree of insensibleness,
nor hot to a degree of rashness. Courageous persons do not throw themselves
into all occasions, as if they had as many lives to lose, as the world had
hazards and misfortunes: let them set never so good a face on it, even the
bravest find some pain to expose themselves, for that which depends merely on
opinion, and are unwilling to commit a fault, which even the loss of their
lives cannot repair. Temerity is punished in the other world after it has bin
blamed in this: those that have this virtue, will not allow anger or despair
the name of Courage, and I cannot think that men have reason to call women
fearful, because they are not hasty and unadvised. Those that say, I make an
Apology for slackness, will not take it ill, if I answer, That they make one for
brutality. What glory is there to cut one another throat? and what advantage,
but the fashion to brag of a Profession, which the G^thes were masters of, and
has given us both the rules and examples of? What is easier then to let our
selves be carried away with fury, and follow the Motions of our passions? Those
that the vulgar call valiant are like glasses, which one can scarce touch
without breaking. They know not that wits, like bodies, are always most
sensible where they are weakest. If it be generosity to be tetchy and complain
every foot, the sick have more then the found, old men then young, and fools
more then wise men: when sear and boldness are reasonable, they oppose not one
another, the one opens our eyes for a prevision of misfortunes, the other
animates us to a resistance of them when they are present.

I do not think that any body will deny this fair quality to women, when
they shall have read this story which Tit. Livius has left us to their
advantage, which he confesses to have writ with love and admiration. After
Philip King of Macedon had put to death the Principal Lords of Thessaly, Many,
to avoid his cruelty, fled into strange countries; Poris and Theoxena took the
way to Athens, to seek that Safety which they could not have in their own
Province: they put to sea, but so unhappily, as the contrary winds drove them
back into the same port from whence they had set sail. The guards perceiving
them at the Sun rising, advertised the Prince of it, and strived to take from
them that liberty which they valued above their lives. Poris in this extremity
uses prayers to satisfy the soldiers, and to call the gods to his relief.
But Theoxena, seeing her death unavoidable, and resolving not to fall into the
tyrants hands, saved her children from captivity by an extraordinary
resolution. She offered a dagger to the eldest, and to the lesser a little cup
full of poison, saying thus, There is no saving of our lives and liberties; and
since we must resolve to die, Courage Children, it is better to choose a death
then to be forced to take it from these insolent hands. They that are strong
enough let them make use of this weapon, and the weaker of this drink. Her
children having obeyed her, she threw them half dead into the sea, and embraced
her dear Poris to throw her self into the water in his arms in the sight of
his soldiers, that could not choose but lament the loss, and admire the
resolution of this Lady.

I do confess, there is somewhat in this story contrary to our faith, but
courage and constancy shine in it in a mavelous brightness. I can scarce
believe there can be found among men greater, nay even a parallel.

If the courage of Theoxena appeared in the defense of her liberty, this of
Megistona was yet more remarkable to save that of her country. After that
Aristotimus had usurped the sovereignty of Elida, he expulsed the best part of
the Citizens, and seemed to grant the prayers of those unfortunate men, that
asked leave for their wives to follow them in their distresses: he yielded them
their request; but as soon as he perceived that the wives were prepared to be
gone, and preferred the company of their husbands before the staying in the
town, he put many of them to death and the rest in prison. Yet because Tyranny
does not do less hurt to those that exercise it, then those that endure it,
and that there is little safety when one has as many enemies as subjects,
Aristotimus began to apprehend his fall; news was brought him that the banishd
Citizens had made a body and joined to besiege Elida. The Barbarian being in
despair, conscious of his own weakness, finding no readier remedy, went
furiously to the prison to command the wives to write to their husbands to
pacify them. Megistona despised his command, and without fearing the effects of
his unjust power, made this answer in the name of all. Thou show enough that
thou want judgment, as well as Courage, if thou come to entreat those that
thou have used so ill, and if thou expectest favor from those that never
received mercy from thee; The horrid darkness of this place, nor the threats of
death shall never make us so base as to betray our country, for which we will
constantly give our lives, after having lost our liberty. Aristotimus being
exasperated by this discourse commands Megistona's son to be brought to him
to put him to death in the presence of his mother; and when he could not be
known among the rest, Megistona calls him out by his name, with a protestation
that she had rather see him dead then captive in Aristotimus his hands, who
drew his sword to kill him. In this disorder the Tragedy was ended, he was
besieged without, and they conspired against him within the town, where he was
murdered in the market place. Megistona comes out of prison to be as merciful
as she had bin generous. She saved Aristotimus his daughters from being
ravished, representing to this mutinous people, that they should not make
themselves guilty of a crime that they had punished, nor commit a cruelty upon
the children in doing Justice on the Father. Euripides admireth the
temperatness of Iphigenia, when she was made an immolation to Diana for the
stag which Agamemnon had killed. Why do you lament (said she to her father) her
that dies so pleased, since the oracle commands it, and for the good of Greece?
and if the success of your arms be dependant on the loss of my life, I
accuse not destiny, and am sorry for nothing but that I have but one life, that
I might offer you as many life's as I wish you triumphs: howsoever your
victories shall be cheerful like to this offering, which is the price and
presage of it. This young Beauty in the midst of the public fears dyed thus
sweetly and (...), and res^sted no more the Sacrifi^^^, then a Rose does the
gatherer.

What resolution did the French Ladies express at the siege of Beauvais, when
they repulsed Charles Duke of Burgundy when he besieged the town in Lewis the
Second his time? Though Xenophon has made Cyrus the example of all Monarks,
was he not defeated by Queen Tomyris, with these reproaches, Drink now thy
fill of that thou bast so much thirsted after? Did not the Ladies of Aquileia
give their hair to make bow-strings against the Emperor Maximinus? Did not
the Roman, and Marcellian Ladies do the same? And if I may be allowed to give
my opinion after my commendations, Those that kill themselves are not
courageous but defperat; it is to render the place in stead of defending it,
and give our selves to the enemy, without his taking the pains to overcome us.
There is no great resolution to choose death for its own remedy, and become
our own executioners. Notwithstanding, men are found as often guilty of this
lightness as women, without exempting even the greatest personages. Cato
conceived he should find more redress for his ill fortune in his wounds, and
his violence to himself, then in constancy and reason. Ladies must take heed
too, that they be not bolder for their passions, then for virtue; it is that
wherewith their enemies charge them. But howsoever I cannot approve of those
that are like Theria the Corinthian; She was so afraid of flies, as she would
endure no light in her chamber, for fear of seeing them; yet she had boldness
enough to kill her husband. It is to abuse fear as well as boldness, to
apprehend flies, and to commit murders with so much confidence.

Of Prudence and Discretion.
IF the Oracle of Apollo declared Socrates the wisest of all men: Socrates
confessed freely, that his Diotima had taught him the Wisdom and Prudence which
the Gods themselves judged incomparable. It was no little advantage to this
Woman, to have instructed this Philosopher, which might give rules to all men
for life and manners.

Though Aristotle were one of the greatest enemies of Women, he has
notwithstanding given testimonies, that he preferred truth before hatred,
confessing in the second Book of his Politics, That they did manage amongst
the Lacedaemonians, the Affairs of greatest importance. It is a Tyranny and a
Custom that is not less unjust then ancient, to reject Women from Public and
Particular Government, as if they were fit for nothing but to spin: Their Wit
is apt for more elevated actions: and if one will mark what they have done, one
may easily judge what they are capable of. If men sometimes took their advice,
whom God has given for their help and consolation in their affairs, it may be
they would have a happier success. At least, these following Stories will
witness, That the praises we give them, are not ill grounded, and that we have
a reason to maintain, that their Prudence has often brought remedy to the most
desperate diseases of States and Provinces.

When the Sabines demanded Roman Women in Marriage with their Swords in their
hands to revenge a refusal; The Senate was puzzled to make an answer, in a
case where a denial would beget a certain War, or the grant of it would
hazard their State; because their Alliance was but a color to make themselves
Masters of Rome: Tutola being very young, presented her self with her advice,
which at first surprised them; but afterward succeeded to the glory of the
Romans, and shame of the Strangers. After having perceived a great irresolution
in the discourse of so many old Senators, whom experience should have furnished
with good counsel, she proposed to them, to agree to their demands, and to
dress their Maids like Brides, and to carry them to the Sabines, who preferred
their pleasure before their design of making War. These slaves seeing their
pretended Husbands in a sound sleep, subtly stole their Arms from them, and
advertised the Roman Soldiers of it by a lighted Torch; who carried back a
Victory where Fortune had no part. One cannot praise enough the conduct,
courage and affection of Tutola, that found an expedient for the Commonwealth,
when all the Senate could find nothing but fear and apprehension.

The Sabine Women have not got less reputation in the like occasion, then the
Roman. Although these two people were allied, yet they made mortal war one
upon another: The Squadrons being ready to join battle, the Sabines threw
themselves between the two Armies, covered with mourning, their hair about
their ears, and their children in their arms. What? (said they to the Romans)
have you forgot that we are your daughters? Do you not see that we are between
our Fathers and our Husbands; and that you will be no less obliged to lament
the victory if you gain it, then if you loose it; since these children will be
without Fathers, and your daughters without husbands. And you Sabines, what
fury transports you to seek the spilling of blood, which is so allied to you?
You can never report your victory, without publishing in Parricide, and
relating a story which will be as shameful to you as lamentable to us. We have
put on black, because mourning is unevitable, since we must needs bewail our
husbands, or our Fathers: if you have a mind to go on, exercise your rage
upon us, that had rather dye then be either widows or Orphans. This Spectacle
with their discourse, did so soften the hearts of those warriers, that they
contracted an inviolabile Friendship. The Sabins afterward inhabited Rome, and
these two people became one; and Romulus, to honor the wisdom and conduct of
the Sabines, gave their names to the Decargos, bands of ten men.

The prudency and generosity of Ladies, gave the Laced monians an occasion to
build a Temple dedicated to Venus armed, where Pallas seemed to cite her before
Paris, to demand satisfaction of him for taking away her arms, after having
carried the Apple from her; but Venus replies nothing in her defense, but that
if she had been victorious naked, she would be so much more, armed. Yet to
speak my opinion more particularly in this Moral; me thinks, it is not enough
for worthy women to have a pleasingnesse without Discretion: Ladies are but
humane by Beauty; but as it were divine by Prudence: Beauty asks but love,
but Wisdom challenges admiration. It is Virtue that gives them most authority
and respect: and without which, the rest are without ornament, at least without
order, like scattered Flowers which the wind parts, and carries up and down
confusedly. With Discretion the vicious preserve their honor, and without it
the virtuous lose it. In matters of Love and Pride Women never want dexterity;
their Wit always accompanies their Passion. Jacobs Mother is witness enough
of their ability, in the inventions she gave him to supplant his brother.

Prudence and wariness are inseparable: and as Rashness exposes the most
powerful to danger, so Distrust keeps the weakest in safety. Ladies may, as
well as Misers, be afraid of the shadow of a Reed, that is, of the least
occasion; since they have a treasure about them as well as they, which is
easier lost, and worthier to be kept. The Poets Pallas, which should be an
example to the wise, was always armed; to show them, that they should be still
upon their guard. And indeed, what worth soever one can have, she that is
without fear is like a City without Walls; as easy to be taken as hard to be
kept. I mean not a frantic fear, which is a greater ill then that which is
threatened; but a wise one, which proposes ill accidents without distempering
the Body or disquieting the Conscience. If prattling and pert Women be offended
that I esteem Modesty more then Prudence, I would advise them to quarrel with
their own shameless humor, that decryes them in all companies. Those that
ordinarily take so much upon them, have little in them; that are like Apes,
that are never more beasts, then when they put on men's clothes. Discretion is
never parted from Prudency, it is Treasure that nourishes it self whilst it
is covered. Like that Lamp in the time of the Romans, that remained almost a
thousand years lighted, as long as it was under ground, and went out as soon as
ever it was brought into the air. Those that would seem wise labor in vain;
the best wits cover the Springs of their motions, lest they should not be
ingenuously dealt with, and so they should be rather fenced with then trusted.

The greatest and most common sin in the world, is to choose ill, either for
love or fortune. Prudence provides against this miscarrying, since it is
particularly employed to deliberate and elect. Indeed, a great many have much
need of this Virtue, and should not wonder if they repent them of their loves;
because understanding and election does not precede them. There are some Women
that seem to have mere brutality in their designs, making monsters the objects
of them, even as far as to imitate her in Ariosto, that preferred a Dwarse
before a Prince; violating at once the Laws of Merit, Quality, and Marriage.

There Is no wisdom to hold ones peace, or to talk always; Prattling shows a
giddiness in the brain, and overmuch silence either stupidity or scorn. One
may discourse a whole day, and yet speak little; but sometimes one may say too
much in speaking but a word. There is not so much discretion to speak few
words, as no superfluous or impertinent ones: Otherwise, the dumb were borne
with great advantage, if we must retrenche the use of the tongue in stead of
moderating it. Women dispute secrecy with a great deal of Justice, with men;
and though they are accused, to have no inclination to silence, they do keep
it inviolably when it is required. What threats soever Nero could make to
Epicarmis a Roman Lady to learn of her the Accomplices in a conspiracy she was
accused of, he could never make her speak against the purpose she had, of
keeping a secret of that importance; the sight of torments shook the
resolution of her partners, but she prevented the executioners, and made the
Tyrant confess, that she had more constancy and discretion, then the men had
feebleness. This Action witnesses sufficiently, that they are much to blame,
that neglect women where wisdom and silence are required. When Theseus was in
the Labyrinth exposed to the Mino-taur, who gave him means to escape but
Ariadne? whithout the third that she gave, how could he ever have unwinded
himself out of those Mazes? This Labyrinth is the Image of intricate affairs
or occasions, Theseus represents men puzzled in them, the third is wisdom: and
Ariadne gives it, who figures to us judicious Ladies, which ordinarily rescue
men in extremities, which they could not deliver themselves from. When Jason
should have served for a prey to the furious Bull which guarded the Fleece, was
it not Medea that charmed them, and freed the passage for that Cavalier, to
carry that away which no body durst undertake? By the Bull we must unstand
Perils, which often intercept the possession of brave things; by the Fleece,
our designs and pretensions; and by Medea, ingenuous women, that can charm
dangers, and have no other spells but their wisdom and behavior to deliver
those that, like Jason, have more boldness then dexterity to undertake what
they have no means to accomplish.

Of Knowledge and Ignorance.
A Woman without wit when she is handsome, is an object rather of pity then
desire; and when she is ill favored, it is a fearful Monster that frights all
the world: because as beauty withont discretion, cannot defend it self; so
ugliness with ignorance is not to be endured; and if the knowledge of good
things, sets a gloss and luster on the actions of the one; it serves to excuse
and varnish the imperfections of the other, to make her less troublesome, and
to repair by the faculties of her wit, the defects of her face. And if I would
maintain, as my theme obliges me, that a Lady should be learned to excel in
conversation, It may be this opinion will offend at first, that of Ignorant and
stupid men, that imagine to make a near resemblance to themselves, that a
woman cannot study nor read without forgetting honor and virtue, at least
without requiring a justification for it. But those that judge so rashly,
neglecting what they should desire, as if they were bound to hate the
perfection they have not, or that they should not esteem any but shallow wits,
to satisfy the diffidence of themselves, in stead of representing to
themselves, that such women, that have not judgment enough to discern vice,
have no more to make choice of virtue, or to know how to prefer upon all
occasions, reallity before apparency. But they that are never so little versed
in morality, are not of this mind, because we find every day by experience,
that the light of reason is as it were natural virtue, which disposes us to
do well, almost without study. And that we seldom see a good wit, without a
good conscience. The help of reading fortifies this good inclination, and
those that persuade themselves, that reading is a School to learn to do ill
cunningly, it would become them better to believe, that Ladies find in it more
arms to defend, then to hurt themselves; and more means to Conquer, then to be
overcome. Reading and conference are absolutely necessary to render both the
wit and the humor acceptable; and as the one collects the matter of our
discourses, the other gives us a method to express them gracefully, to join
together facility and abundance; otherwise conversation is but an insupportable
tyranny, and it is impossible without suffering the torture, to stay long with
such women, that can entertain one with nothing but with the number of their
sheep, if they be of the country; or if they be of the Court, that speak
nothing but what bands and gowns are in fashion. Tailors or shepherds are
better read in this, and a plain semstresse has a great advantage over them in
company. It must not then be imagined, that speaking of this accomplished
woman, whose image we have now to draw, that we mean to figure the mother of
a family, that can govern well her maids, and takes care to comb her
children. Music, History, Philosophy, and other such exercises, are more
suitable to our design, then those of a good huswife, and there are none so
removed from common sense, that will not confess that without these good
qualities, though Ladies have an excellent wit, yet it is often full of ill
things, and troublesome in discourse; the best land bears but briars and
thorns, when there is nothing sowed upon it, where Art and Labor might bring
fourth Lillies and Tulips: It is that which is often wanting to their good
inclinations and desires, when tyranny or some other misfortune bars them the
possession of these fair qualities, of which Nature has given them a capacity.
For to say they are not fit for knowledges, me thinks it is to mis-judge of
there constitution, which as the Physicians say, being more delicate then ours,
is also better disposed for them: but it maybe, it is an effect of their
Judicious choice, to quit freely the vexation and musings of study, as an
occupation that the wisest and most knowing of men, had called wearisome. And I
may say without flattering them, or without pretending by this insinuation to
the honor of their good graces, that they are capable of as many virtues as
men; and if sometimes they quit their claim which they may lay to them, it is
rather out of Modesty or consideration then unaptness. Our ancient Gauls
divided with them, the glory of peace and war: reserving only the active part
of arms unto themselves, and leaving them the establishment of the laws and
the preservation of common wealths, that was not to be done by ignorant ones:
and one may judge in what esteem our ancestors held them, since they alloted
to the men only the exercises of the body, and to women the abilities of the
mind. What knowledge can be thought either so difficult or so divine, in which
women have not excelled, at least, as well as men? was not Aspatia judged
worthy to teach Pericles, who notwithstanding might have instructed all the
world? What need we to name many women, that have penetrated the greatest
mysteries, and have bin so knowing in Divinity, even to the admiration of the
greatest Doctors?

This matter is too ample to prosequute; although men be very sparing and
reserved in writing their praises, they cannot choose but witness this truth,
and fill their books with such examples. And if we may be allowed to go as far
as Fable, we shall find that if men have an Apollo for an Author of their
Sciences, that women have also a Minerva, that has invented the best Learning,
and that gives them as just a claim for this pretension. And if I did not
fear to support so known a truth by fiction, I would be content to refer
those that doubt of it to the Poets nine Muses, to which we ascribe the
invention of Arts. But not to continue farther proofs, which authorize the
justness of this side, Those that say that women draw great advantage out of
ignorance, do they not do too much honor to the silly and ridiculous
village-simplicity, which ordinarily defends it self ill in occasions, and
makes little resistance against the importunity of the first that presses or
sollicits her. Or if this opinion be good; were not blind men the surer for
having lost their sight? as if winking were enough to avoid a precipice. In the
Court, as in the ocean, one must know the rocks, and the sands, to prevent
shipwreck; and if woman do ill after they know it, one should impute the cause
of that misfortune to their will, not their knowledge. Otherwise if all kind of
reading or Learning be interdicted them, a thousand disorders will arise out of
their ignorance: they will find to their cost, if contempt can move them, that
those that forbid them the use of reading or study of good things, cannot
endure an Inequality of wits. I cannot choose but laugh, when I think of the
error of Francis Duke of Brittany, that expressed a great passion for Isabella
the daughter of Scotland, when he understood that she had been studied,
believing that a woman was knowing enough, when she knew the difference
between her own smock, and her husbands doublet. The beleese of this good
Prince, would be very ridiculous in those countries, where the men go naked, or
among those nations that make the shirt and the doublet all of a piece: his
estimation of the silly and ignorant obliges me to believe he had made a vow
to love only his own refemblance. The Emperor Theodosius did not so much
value the ignorant, he married Athenais only for her wit and learning, without
sticking at her being but the daughter of a Pedant, of whom she had received
nothing, but beauty in her birth, and Philosophy in her education. Those that
mistrust a woman when she understands any thing but her beads, live according
to the proverbs, and dare not do any thing, when it is told them that our
ancesters did not use it. These are weak Spirits, that deserve what they
fear, and that ground their suspicions even on the same reasons that should
secure them. Indeed I do not commend those that affect too much sufficiency.
But excepting this abuse, it must be acknowledged, that women that have
knowledge and reading, are more pleasing in conversation, and are better
pleased in solitude when they entertain themselves. Their Idea has somewhat
to delight it self with, whilst the ignorant lie open to ill thoughts, because
knowing nothing wherewith to busre their wits, as their discourse is wearisome,
so their thinking must be extravagant. Therefore I would advise them to vow a
perpetual Solitude, because they are every where insupportable, easy to be
seduced, virtuous by chance, and vicious by necessity.

Of Constancy and Fidelity.
THose that believe levity natural to women, reading this discourse, which
proves the contrary, will imagine that I have undertaken to find setlednesse in
the wind, assurance in the waves, and strength in reeds: but passing by their
opinion, since I have neither purpose nor commission to undeceive all those
that are in error, I will show that for inconstancy, women are in more danger
to be injured by it, then guilty of it; and that their diffidence is very just
in this time, when the friendships that are promised them with most ceremony,
are either without truth, or durance. Constancy is: but for good things,
obstinacy for evil. otherwise sin should be Eternal, and repentance should
be forbidden for fear of charge. When the alteration is just, it is election,
and when it is not, it is lightness. As it is not just, that they that are
sick, should always remain in that state, for fear of being inconstant; so I
believe that it is no more blamable, to shake off an ill opinion, then a
fever, and that repentance is as necessary for the mind as Medecines for the
body. What harm is it to prefer a greater merit before a less? or to confess
that the Sun has more light then the Stars? otherwise the first thing we had
seen in the world, should chain up our liberty, and even deprive us of the
right of choice, or make us love that which should be hated.

Those that esteemed Nero, whilst he carried himself moderatly, the first
five years of his reign, were they bound to love him when he be came a
Tyrant? afterward when he had lost his virtue, was there any affection due to
him? I loved this man for his merit, this face for beauty, that flower for
color; this man is become vicious, this face disfigured, this flower faded;
after this why should I dote on an object whose lovely qualities are ceased?
How can the building subsist when the foundations are removed? unless to keep
the adored laws of constancy, those that love a picture are obliged afterward
to love the cloth, when the features are defaced? There is no religion in love,
that obliges us to honor such relics, unless that the affection change into
pity, and that it be rather to avoid ingratitude, then inconstancy. This is the
reason that those that love but the beauty of the body, cannot both live and
love long. There is nothing but the fairness of wit and virtue, that can truly
fasten our constancy: Faces as well as years, have their seasons, though the
spring be never so pleasant, we must resolve to see the flowers pass away,
and to suffer a winter after the fair weather.

Yet for all this, there is no color to intend to blame so noble a virtue, and
a quality so necessary in the world, as Constancy, without which all Love is
but treachery, whether it be understood according to custom, or reason. The
following examples will show sufficiently, that men are to blame, to give the
name of vice to women's virtues, calling them obstinate in their perseverances,
and light in theirreasonable changes. Synogaris being in love with Camna wife
to Synates, used all manner of devices to bring her to yield to his passion;
but all his pursuits, with the eminency of his Quality having no power to
shake the resolution of this Lady, he imagined that if her Husband were out of
the world, he should compass what had been refused him: He put him to death,
and after this cruelty importuned so the kindred of this Widow, that she made
show of an agreement to a Marriage with Synogaris: when they came to the
Ceremonies, and that they were to go to the Temple of Diana, this chaste Lady
carried with her a drink, of which she drank half her self, and then gave the
rest to Synogaris, who drank it joyfully, not imagining it to be poison: Camna
seeing her design accomplished, cast her self upon her knees before the Image
of Diana, to whom she presented these thanks and excuses; Great Deity, thou
know how unwillingly and to what purpose I have consented to a Marriage with
this murderer: If Grief killed as often as it arises to an extreme, I had not
been now in this world: where notwithstanding I have not refused to stay a
while, to take vengeance of this persidious man, that thou see, who believes
that I can love him, after he has ravished from me my dear Synatis. Think on
thy self, barbarous man, and confess what right I have to sacrifize thy life
to that, which thou have robbed my Husband of. I do not reckon mine own, since I
have employed the end of it to give posterity a remarkable testimony of my love
and thy cruelty. Camna was so happy, as to see him die first, though he drank
last: the Gods gave this satisfaction to her Fidelity; and she went out of this
world often calling upon Synatis, that he might come and meet her to accompany
her in this her journey. Can men produce a nobler example of Constancy? and was
it not an erring Philosopher, that maintained publicly, that among a thousand
men there could hardly be found one constant; but amongst all women none?

If Constancy be shown in the continuation of a design, in spite of all
impeachments and crosses; how great was that of Psyche in the search of Cupid?
she saw three goddesses set against her pretensions, Juno, Ceres, and Venus,
and yet her passion became victorious over their malevolence, she did things
that seemed impossible, she went down to hell, where she spoke to Proserpina,
and the gods esteemed so much her resolution, that they Deified her, and gave
her her love, which she had sought so constantly.

After so many effects of their fidelity, it is hard to decide whether the
Prince of Philosophers had reason to compare women kind to the first matter,
because they desire always to change forms, and though they have a most
perfect one, they turn a general inclination for all others. This Philosopher
meant to conclude by this parallel, that women are insatiable and variable for
men, as matter is for forms* But it is a comparison too injurious, and would
suit better with this Philosopher, then with the lightest woman, since he left
his Herina for another Mistress, to whom he erected Altars, to convince
himself with more solemnity of that fault, which he had accused women of. They
have more reason to complain of men, then to fear their reproaches. How is the
simplicity of credulous ones now abused? What pawn soever men give, they my be
better called cousners then inconstant, because at the same time that they
promise fidelity, they purpose to violate it, so as there is no change in their
resolution, but only in their discourse.

Variableness does not distract Wits of the higher strain, one may rely on
them: even their least designs remain firm in all the storms of Fortunes.
Levity arises from the weakness of the brain, and Constancy from the force of
it. After Affection has fastened two hearts, the separation of them should be
impossible; for if Love in its own nature be immortal, it is not true, if it
can cease. St. Austine himself said, that his friend and he seemed to have but
one soul to live, as well as to love; and death had not so properly separated
two, as divided one; and after the loss of this his confident, he feared death
and abhorted life, because without him he lived but one half of himself; and
that he was obliged to preserve this rest, lest his friend should die
outright. There were few so constant as this great person. On the contrary,
many would believe themselves too innocent, if they did not annex treachery and
persidiousnesse to Inconstancy. I cannot conceive how there should any remain
of this profession, because all the world detests it; those that use it
distrust it, and those that are injured by them, cannot* orgive them. Indeed,
not to pursue all the ^^ules of Physiognomy to know them, their mind alone
witnesses, that falling out with all the world, they do not agree themselves;
confessing without speaking, that horror which is their sins conception. It
must needs be that theirs is the greatest guilt in the world, since they
arraign themselves in their own Court of Conscience, even going sometime as far
as execution with their own hands; practicing a new form of justice, where they
are Judges, Parties, Accusers and Executioners: though we naturally love our
selves, they cannot show themselves mercy; and one may read in the color of
their face, that none can absolve them, when their own soul condemns them and
torments them. It must needs be the most horrible, and the most inexcusable of
all sins, since those that are guilty of it have so much pain to commit it, and
that they do much harm unto themselves, in doing it to others. It Is for this
reason, that Fidelity is always cheerful among thorns, and Perfidiousnesse
always troubled, and pensive even in the beds of Roses. A loyal spirit feels
not his torments, and a traiterous one tastes not his pleasures. Their senses
are diversely suspended, because vitiousness bitters even their delights, and
virtue sweetens and relisheth the others ills and sufferings.

There needs no proofs to show that Women are seldomer perfidious then men: we
may judge by these following examples of the rest. What excuse could Ptolomy
King of Egypt find after the receipt of so many obligations from Pompey, for
his commanding him to be murdered, while he fled to him for refuge, after the
defeat of Pharsalia? those that have read the History, will confess that it
was an unparalleled cruelty and treachery. Though Julius Caesar had declared
Brutus for his heir, yet he was one of the first that struck him in the Senate,
without any consideration of the favors which he expected or enjoyed from this
Emperor. When the soul is sullied with this vice, it is capable of all the
malice that can be imagined. Covetousness keeps close to it, which when any
woman has a propensity to, she can hardly be faithful; there is nothing that
she would not buy or sell to be made rich. It is the most infallible mark of a
gross spirit and a debauched soul: Ladies should not express any inclination
to it, for fear of the fortune of Prochis, who after she had resisted menaces
and submissions, yielded when she saw the money told. Credulous and ignorant
women are in no less danger, their goodness betrays them; they are persuaded
to many things which their easiness consents to against their honor. It seems
that such are neither false nor faithful, since they have neither intention for
the one, nor ability for the other. It is this simplicity, which as the Poet
says, may be excused, so they delight not in their own delusion. The crafty
are subject to do that by malice, which the silly do by misfortune. Subtilty
sometimes lays traps where it self is caught: There are ills in which flight is
better then resistance; good swimmers are oftnest drowned, because their skill
tempts them to fall so far down the stream, as they cannot come up again.
Constancy and Fidedelity express themselves even in the least actions; the
gate gives marks of it, and the lightness of the motions leads us to judge of
the weight of the wit.

Alfonso King of Arragon said, that women's inconstancy appears in their
inclination to dance; It was an ill conclusion drawn from an innocent thing:
But that Prince seemed to have such an experience of it, as seeing a young Lady
dance with a Gentleman who made love to her, said to him, Comfort your self,
this Sybil will quickly render the Oracle you ask; because the Sybils
heretofore gave no answers but in motion.

But to leave the marks of Constancy and fidelity, and come to the effects. It
must be confessed, that women have been incomparable in them. Among the
Heathen, Pompeia Paulina caused her veins to be cut, when she saw her Husband
Seneca condemned by Nero, refusing to live after the death of him that had
taught her to love philosophically, that is, constantly. They closed up her
veins against her will, but she testified always after, by the palenesse of
her face, that the cure was unwelcome, and that she stayed in the world
unwillingly, Seneca not being there, of whom she had learned to despise life
and death, to value Constancy in love. The Wife of Mithridates seeing the
Affairs of her Husband desperate, took the Crown that she had on her head, and
hung it about her neck, so to end her self; and having broke it at the first
stresse, she took the rest into her hands, complaining sensibly, that Crowns,
which in good fortune serve for ornament, could not serve for remedy in ill.
Among the Christian Ladies, in the most noble occasion of courage that was ever
offered, did not Mary Magdalen constantly accompany her Master every where,
when the Disciples fell off, after all their protestations of never deserting
him?

Of Curiosity and Censure.
CVriosity never agreed well with silence* those that know much news, do not
resolve to hold their peace; and Censure infallibly disperseth what
indiscretion collects. The wits of curious women are like the vessels of the
(...), that emptied as fast as one went to fill them. That which comes in at
the ears, run^ presently out of the mouth, because indiscretion, that directs
to hearken as lightly as to speak, lets lies out as freely as in. I do not
tax the divine curiosity of Philosophers, and good wits, which have detected
the secrets of nature, and given us means to regulate the passions of our
mind, as well as brought us the wisdom of above; it is that has taught us
more morality, civility, policy, and what is useful to the civilization of our
lives. I condemn but that which is a desire to know what is useless or vit^ous
which removes us from the knowledge of our selves, and the truths necessary for
virtue or for conscience. Ladies that are pleased to hear all kind of censures,
occasion ill opinion of their virtue, because that easiness they show to
believe ill, is as it were an assured proof that they would have the same to
act it. There are those that cannot endure that any body should be
advantageously spoken of, and that believe the censure of all the world, to be
an Apology for their faults, since it comprises them in so much company as if
the number of the malefactors did authorize the offense; when they hear other
women's virtues commended, they grow as sad, as ugly when handsome ones are made
love to before them. And if one should examine their thoughts, one should find
yet a blacker spring; They are glad to have company in their infamy, but they
would have none in their delights, being more moved with jealousy then shame,
imagining that those that use their pleasures, steal somewhat from them* They
are like the Emperor Tyberius, that set officers in Rome to discover and
condemn adulteries, that he only might commit. Virtuous women excuse faults,
in stead of publishing them; vicious ones are always merciless to their like,
thinking to testify by their hatred, that the crime is unknown to them; but
the effects give their words the lie; and this cunning takes so ill, that they
rather defame then defend themselves. Worthy women banish vice from the world
by charity, and licentious ones expel virtue by detraction. It Is easy to
discern a chaste woman from another; the last examines all, even to the least
circumstacce, her ill-nesse is the pattern she judges by, her experience and
her design makes her give, even to the best things ill interpretations. After
Prochis had betrayed her husband, she spyed into all his actions, hardly
blieving him clear in what she her self was guilty. Vicious old women are
always apprehensive, and fear the abuse of liberty, not imagining that even
conversation or taking the air, may be harmless. They fear, me thinks,
lest any should do so much ill, as they have done, or would do yet, if they
had as much vigor as vitiousnesse. They have no better means to cover their
sin, then to express displeasure or astonishment, when they hear others
blamed, because showing so ready a belief to all imputations, one may judge
that they are far from being liable unto them; for if they did not set off
themselves by a comeliness, their face consenting to what their mouth forbids,
a vicious boldness would be too much encouraged, which is well pleased too
with a slack facility. Curiosity for trifles and ill things, is a mark of the
loosnesse of conscience, and defect of wit. Such as busy themselves with
little tales of their neighbors, and entertain company with them, furnish
their wits, as the Chinesais do their Cabinets, with old strange rags and
gugaus: I would advise all of this humor, that bestow their time either
uselesly or ill, to study the Anatomy of flies, or the art to count the Attomes
of the air; and to punish their body as well as their mind, to live only upon
shrimps, in which there is more business then meat. This light idleness gives
an ill character of them, because they are judged capable of vice by weakness,
if not by illness. There are those that speak ill of other on purpose, yet
would seem to do it unwillingly; but it is to do like Archers, that draw the
shaft toward themselves, that it may go stronger to the mark. How much error
and vanity is there in our judgments and discourse, since between the even and
the next morning we differ from our selves more then we did from others? How
can we be assured that she that was to day given to pleasure, shall not to
morrow shut her self up to austerity? But suppose our judgments be not false,
we must needs offend against charity, if not against truth. Such as have but
yet committed one sin, should not be called vicious, and those that have done
many, it may be, will not continue in them; the first correct, the other change
themselves. And indeed, there is no certainty to speak of the illness of any,
without indangering a lie, since a moment or a thought are enough to change
perdition into penitence.

Of a Debauched Woman.
THere are few such Islands as that of Cio, where it is said that the laws of
honor and chastity, were preserved in their purity the space of seven hundred
years, without ever being violatedby the ladies of the country. I know not
whether it be an effect of their cunning, or their virtue; but howsoever, it
was either a chastity, or a reputation of a great standing, which deserves as
much admiration, as the depravation of this age does blame, sufferings, or
corrections. It may be this discourse will not be welcome to such as I should
be glad it should be useful. But if the vicious be not disposed* to take our
remedies for this cure, at least they must resolve to endure our reproaches for
their shame; and if our precepts be not Sovereign enough to close up the
incurable ulcers of these old she-sinners, and to draw them out of the mire
where the weight of their crimes has buried them; and those whose eyes are
more contrite then their consciences, being always awater rather to lament the
loss of their youth, then the enormity of their crimes: at least this will
restrain the young ones from sinking into so obstinate a loosnesse; I speak
boldly of all, because if they be debauched, I would not be friends with them;
if they be virtuous, I need not fear falling out with them; the one will
applaud my censure, the other will do me honor in disproving of my doctrine, as
I do of their life. This passion is not that which properly is called love, but
some other disease which cannot be cured but by miracle; and one may reproach
such as are infected with it, as the Poet did Myrrha, that it is not Cupid, but
one of the enraged furies that lights such a flame. It is a fire of hell that
has blindness for smoke, scandal for light, and infamy and shame for ashes;
these are the sad relics of such, that having long prostituted themselves, save
of the ruins of their honor, nothing but a sad repentance* but what honor
soever we conceive of them, we must be more obscure then reprochful in this
matter, in which we should cover by modesty, that which hatred and truth might
oblige us to publish: this crime has one great advantage being so reproveable,
that its own beastliness defends it, but it is rather by others shame then pity.

Those that have inclination for all our sex, love none, though they love all;
when one is come to that pass, there is no more distinction, the most brutish
seems the loveliest, their fire kindles even in water, by objects that deserve
even horror and hatred. Semyramis loved a horse, Pasiphae a Bull, Glauce a Dog,
and Glaucippe an Elephant; Appelles musing on this, drew Venus face with her
mouth half open, to show, that those of her humor have never their mouths
closed, for lures to their own designs; and though they be never so old, their
desires always exceed their abilities. Indeed, many resemble Iberina in
Iuvenal, that would have as many men as kisses. Then the number of their sins
passes that of their thoughts, and without borrowing any thing from Poetry, one
may say that Arithmetic cannot multiply so high.

Many of this humor have sought remedies for their infamous disease in magical
intoxications. What extravagancy is it to think to find in druggs means to be
beloved, as if love had any roots but in merit and virtue? it is that which
gives it birth and nourishment; and those that use so much art to make
themselves lovely, run the hazard which Apuleius speaks of, that used an
ointment to get wings to fly in at his Mistress window, but in stead of being
changed into a bird, he was turned into a beast. If herbs had any power to
recover those that are struck with this disease, Apollo, which is the god of
Physic, would have made use of it, when the beauty of Daphne had made him quit
heaven for earth, and changed the form of a god, for that of a shepherd, Those
that endure with so much delight lascivious discourse, show that they would
take much more in the action, and that there is nothing said to them, but what
they are acquainted with, both by knowledge and desire; it is not their
gentleness, nor good humor that brings this facility, complacency reaches not
so far. Modesty is always severe, when it is entire, and is tainted, when it
is brought to such a softness. The widow of Sigismund discovered her self
sufficiently, by an answer she made to those who counseled her to imitate the
turtles, That she loved as much the company of men, as our Lady apprehended
that of an Angel; she told him, that if she were to live like birds, she would
take an example rather from Sparrows, then Doves. There is no less danger to
read men's Courtings, then to hear them. After Helin had opened Paris his
letter, she imagined then that she ought to refuse him nothing. When one has
given any favor, she engages her self afterward beyond either the obligation
or the intention. Those that have no mind to be overcome, should at first
distance all rash hope, lest they take a gentle refusal for a permission. As
the most ill-favored have most need of painting, so the most debauched are
most curious in the apparency of virtue This is the reason that they are
ordinarily unequal, appearing to day insolent, according to their humor, and
to morrow modest by affectation. Those that compare vicious women to Sirens, it
may be, do not know the mystery of this similitude. One of the monsters was
called Parthenope, which is to say, virgin, having a smiling face to allure
Mariners, to break their Ships against the points of rocks that were covered
under water. The most immodest, ordinarily, study to appear the chastest; but
for all their falsifying, they are whirlepits of infamy, where none but the
unadvised and desperate are shipwracked. The reservednesse of an honest woman,
is far different from that of another; the one is natural, the other forced;
they seem to live freely and ingenuously, the better to deceive those that are
so simple as to believe, that what they do, is by their humor or innocence,
which is a plot to sink some young Pilot. I never saw censorious women, that
were not debauched, or that did not mean to be so, imagining that by a false
policy, that the universality of their sin would be their justification. Yet to
show the irregularity of their humor, they hate those that imitate them, so
that conformity that produces correspondence in all other professions, begets
aversion in this; this is the way to dis-agree with all sorts of women, since
the presence of the virtuous seems to reproach them, and the company of the
vicious to diminish their delights. Poison dogs adultery, when a woman is once
branded with that vice, she believes she cannot preserve her Reputation, nor
find rest nor assurance in any thing, but the extinction of the witnesses of
her uncleanenesse; then reason cannot curb a Spirit that is frighted with the
remembrance of sin, who draws boldness from vengeance, and natural
weakness renders it inconsiderable.

The salvation of impudent women is almost desperate, how well soever they
propose to themselves their own conversion, they relapse always into their
own hell, and there repentance may be ranked among the miracles. If death did
not purge the world of them, we should be constrained to make public
processions, to desend our selves from them, as from a curse, that is worse
then the other three; but God reserves to himself their punishment, and
forbids our meddling with those afflictions which he has prepared for them in
the world to come.

If one had well considered these old she-sinners, and compared the features of
their faces, with those of their conscience, one should find an equal
deformity; or if one could draw them to the life, and persuade us that the
devils are like them, I believe no body would be damned; and that this fearful
object would deter us more from hell, then the severest preachers.

But that I may be as brief as obscure in a subject that feeds my melancholy,
and gives me ill thoughts, I will finish this old picture, as Apelles did one
of his: When this admirable painter had considered with much delight, the
features and charms of Compasp^s face, Alexanders Mistress, he grew so
passionate, that he was feign to ask the Original of the Emperor, in stead of
finishing the copy. I do that out of hatred, which he did by love; I find so
many horrible features in the picture of a debauched woman, as the pensill
falls out of my hand, having too much anger, and too few revilings to perfect
this piece in colors black enough.

Of the Cruelty and Pity of Women.
WHatsoever the most part of men believe of women's fury, pity is so natural to
them and their inclination bent to mercy, as even the furies themselves could
not choose but lament the misfortune of Orpheus, that went into Hell to demand
his Euridice; those pitilesse places, where horror raigns always with cruelty,
were not able to suppress the sensible compassion that the furies were
affected with, at such a misery. After this must it not be confessed, that
tenderness is an inseparable quality from women. Since anger is an enemy to
this commendable habit, I believe it were more advantageous to them, wholly to
extinguish this passion, if it were possible, then to think to moderate it by
prudence. Indeed it is the most unjust of all, because other passions may have
a real good for their object, whereas this has never but a seeming, to
satisfy the error of those it possesses, which account not themselves happy,
till they have left others in an incapacity of being so. Thus therefore this
passions flattery is ill grounded, because if mischief be transportable from
one subject to another, it is without a self diminution, as torches communicate
their light. I must confess it is an incomparable blindness to believe that
the impression of an injury, wears out by stamping its own likeness on
another: Women are accused of extremities in their passions, the world believes
that they seek not so much the opportunity of an hasty, as a home revenge,
especially when they are irritated either in love or fortune. Though this
imposture require rather neglect then answer; yet if one would do so much as
examine their inclination, one shall find it as innocent as their enemies have
drawn it injurious: at least excusable, if not to be commended. Indifferent
wits are easily moved and settled, because their violence slacks; and their
motions must needs grow remiss and weak if they continue, because they are
neither natural nor rational. Time, that is received of all the world for so
great a Physician, cures but the first troubles of our mind; but when passion
is just, it augments proportionably as it lasts, because thoughts and
meditations strengthen and nourish it, when we weigh maturely the reason of its
generation. The sensibleness of infirm and loose spirits, is like fire, that
flashes out, as soon as it is lighted in flax; but conserves it self longer in
Iron, and more solid Subjects. Women are not of this light temper, to fly out
without reason; as they are unapt to be moved, so have they an equal
backwardness to reconciliation as well as quarrel. One would be very much
deceived, if he should believe by this that my proofs were less reasonable
then natural; I submit always Morality to Christianity, and confess that I
should rather set up a School for vice then virtue, if I would justify revenge
to oblige women to the prejudice of Religion, and even their own nature, which
is inclined to gentleness and courtesy. I only praise the constancy of their
designs, when they are just, otherwise I should be a pernicious Advocate if I
pleaded for a sin that is so prejudicial to them, as it makes them pass for
monsters; and which they have so little inclination to, or acquaintance, as it
is not improper for them only to be cruel, but misbecoming to be severe; and of
the two parts of justice they seem to be borne, but execute the milder. Amongst
all the effects of cruelty, one of the most insupportable is, that it is as
averse to beauty, as it is to conscience: If tears sometimes become a face,
anger has the same privilege as grief, and though one may often see a
beautiful melancholy, yet I have never heard of a lovely fury; this passion is
too violent, not to race out all the fair lineaments out of the face: the eyes
by little and little fright in stead of charming; the frowardness of their
mind is drawn out by all their motions, and that may come to such a degree of
horror, that one shall not dare to approach them without prayer, as we do such
as are possessed, whose faces they either have or make.

Proud and ill women are almost always infected with this crime, because that
meeting with many enemies to their evil intents, there is no malice so black
that passion does not infuse into them, for the ruin of those that intercept
either their love or fortune. Aphrodisia wife to the Emperor Dioclesian, tried
always to be beloved of her son in law Erastus, but after having lost many
entreaties on him, in a chamber where she thought the opportunity would afford
her victory, the refusal incensed her with as much spite as shame, she came
perplexed to her husband to accuse this innocent of a crime he would not commit.
It Is the custom of Debauched women to turn their love into hate, when their
desires are discovered and not satisfied and to plot the preservation of their
credits even by the ruin of those that would not be their accomplices. It should
seem that the Philosopher Chilon spoke of such when he maintained that it was
the uttermost of all comminations could be made to enemies, the anger of women.
Me thinks it is an incomparable Masterpiece, and an art that no body is passed
Master of, the pacification of a furious woman. If this passion last till they
grow old, they will be sick of it all their lives, because they will fright
those that would appease them; when they can no longer give love, they will
hardly give patience. The wrinkles will score out their years in their faces,
as lines do hours upon the Dyall. And you may judge of the vileness of their
infamous age, since they frighted their nurse even in the Cradle. The head of
Medusa that struck so much fear into the world, had but her hair changed into
Serpents: these have their eyebrows over and above, to be completely
horrible. The devil which inspires them with so much fury, must needs trouble
their sight also, when they look in a glass, since they do not scare
themselves, and in stead of being content to be endured, expect still to be
beloved. Hell may keep its furies, these will serve in the world, to act or
persuade sins blacker, then those that heretofore drew fire from heaven, or
have opened the jaws of the earth. If ugliness be the mark of cruelty, want of
wit is the spring head of it. I hold it infallible, that those that have no
sweetness nor gentleness, are void of understanding and courage. Generous
women are always pitiful, they know it is more glorious to overcome their own
passions, then their enemies; and that to give life where it may be taken, is
almost to resusciate the dead without a Miracle.

But for fear this morality should not be understood, Anaxarates was not cruel
in seeing Iphis die in despair before her door; the refusal was just, because
the demand was not so. 'Twas an offender that did injustice on himself for his
temerity. Worthy women should fear less the ruin of importunate men, then of
their own honor; and it were to be ill advised, to be cruel to themselves, to
be so unfittingly pitiful to insolence or detraction.

Of Beauty.
THose that adore or despise Beauty, either offer too much or too little to the
image of God. It is one of the rarest presents that heaven has made to earth*
but we must ascribe all the merit to the power of him that gratifies us with
it. In the opinion of Plato, it is a humane splendour, amiable in its own
nature, that has the power to ravish the mind with the eyes. Since heretofore
deformed Ministers have been rejected from the Temple, let us not believe ill
of beauty; God himself has thought it necessary, for those that approach his
Altars; it must be a mark of our inclination to good, since we as seldom find
beauty without virtue, as ugliness without mischief. The judgment that we make
of the beauty of the min^ by that of the body, are not most commonly ill
grounded; souls like Queens, prepare their residence, where they themselves
take the pains to adorn them when they are received into them. And indeed, if
virtue be necessary for the establishment of Sovereign authorities: beauty also
sweetens them, and welcomes even servitude which otherwise would be
insupportable. I find sometimes fair wits in ill-favored bodies, but they are
relics ill set, which the country people do not so much respect and reverence,
as if they were covered with Gold or Pearl. This lovely quality may challenge a
command every where, wherethere is the light of eyes or reason. The face alone
of Scipio the Affrican Subdued many a barbarous Nation without so much as the
drawing of a sword; and Heliogabalus himself from a Priest of the Sun, rose to
be Emperor of all the world, as soon as his mother had shown him to the
Soldiers; so as all the world pays a duty to such as nature has thus
advantaged. The vulgar believe, that if there be no ill in handsome women, at
least there is inconvenience; the temptation is there, though the sin be not:
when beauty is the occasion of ill, it is an innocent that makes offenders, and
those that complain of it, do as idly, as if one should accuse the Sun for
dazzling his sight, when he looks too fixedly on that glorious body. This is
objected, one can hardly keep that which many love, and there is no great
assurance in the possession of that all the world aspires to: sometimes Towns
are so long besieged, and assaulted at so many several places, as at last they
are taken: one cannot praise beauty better, then in confessing all desire it as
the object of their delight. If handsome women are sometimes gained, this
complaint must be addressed rather to their wit then face. A place is not the
weaker, because he has yielded which should have kept it; the fault is in the
Captain, not the Fort. Howsoever, ill-favored ones can have no advantage in
this reproach, because since they are never attempted, their holding out cannot
argue their strength. They should have curiosity only to seek darkness,
because the Sun never rises but to their shame, which seems to shine only to
give light to fair objects. They are in more pain to defend themselves from
contempts, then suits, and patience is the virtue they had most need of.
Handsome women are accused of being scornful, but when we think well of it, we
shall find that their disdain proceeds rather from conscience then vanity,
because they cannot endure the idolatrous pursuits of the excessive praises
which artificial men offer up to surprise them. As Kings laugh at the
complements of Courtiers, because they are made more for interest then
affection: so women may mock the officiousness of Gallants, because all their
pains tend but to their own pleasure, and the ruin of indiscreet ones. There
is not so much presumption in the most admired women, as there is poorness in
men that tie their own chains; the services they do them, and the names they
give them, express as much their weakness, as the extravagancy of their
passion. What reason is there to call their Empire Tyrannical, since their
subjects are but so to their own wills, and refusers of liberty? The grave Cato
reverenced beauty so much, as he said publicly, it was no less crime to
injure it, then to sack a Temple. Those that imagine that the number of their
Gallants, adds something to their beauty, and are over-pleased with the
submissions and duties that are rendered them, go out to meet their enemies,
and show they be easily overcome; since respects and praises are strong enough
against them, of which men are no less prodigal, then women can be covetous;
but they should believe that when ingenuity bargains craft, that it seldom
gets any thing by it. If women are handsome, those that praise them would
deceive them; if not, but make sport with them. Therefore all kind had need of
wit and virtue to exempt themselves from danger or neglect. There are some that
are scrupulous to praise beauty, because it passes away so soon, and lasts no
longer then lightning, and most commonly as well as that, promises tempests and
storms. It Is a flower, say they, that fades as soon as ever it is blown, which
the wind sheds, the Sun dries, the rain flaggs, and hands do gather it; and
that is so delicate, that without being touched, or having enemies, in a moment
dies by its own natural faintness. But is not the same to be said of all
other things in the world, which cannot last always? and all beauty can be
complained of, is, that it has not the durance of stars, as well as the
fairness and luster. The fairest women would find an excellent prevention of
vanity, if they could represent to themselves at sixteen or twenty years old,
the defects, decays, and incommodities of age. What fair plumbs soever nature
or art decks them with, they would like Peacocks be ashamed, looking down to
such horrible feet, if they foresaw so much change and ruin. I do not profess
here, to preach mortification; but me thinks, they should not so much afflict
themselves for what years draw from them insensibly, and even diminishes it
self every moment in spite of Art; were it not for painting, which discovers
the defects it is laid upon, they would be comfortless and irremediable. Natural
beauty deserves estimation, but that of their own making nothing but aversion.
Sulpitia among the Romans had so lovely eyes, that those of her time could not
see her without adoring. The cheeks of Lavinia were so cornation, that they
amazed the Roses into palenesse. The neck and breast of Theodota an Athenian
were so beautiful, that Socrates himself fell in love with them. These features
or charms must not be acquired by art, nor possessed by vanity; nature blesses
some persons with them, on purpose to please our eyes, and elevate our spirits
to the love of him that is the head of all humane perfection. Counterfeit
beauties fall shamefully in the sight of all the world, almost like those false
stars, which after they have abused our eyes a while, show us by their fall,
that what we took for stars, was but a little lighted vapor.

Yet for all this we must not altogether forbid ornament or care for the face,
since we whiten over walls when they are old. The ill-favored also are to be
allowed to paint, so it be for public good, and out of a consideration of not
frighting those that look upon them. They would be very much surprised, if they
were used as Phryne used those in her company; as soon as ever this Curtisan
appeared (says Gallen) she distasted all those of the assembly, leaving them
nothing to show but shame and jealousy; they invented a Game to relieve their
dejection, which was mutual commands to one another; when it came to Phrynes
commands, she gave order there should be water brought, and they should all
wash their hands and faces; as soon as they had obeyed her, one might see
patches and plasters float, and none almost knew one another, they were other
faces full of spots, and fearful features. This game would trouble many of this
time, that natural beauty remained with a great advantage. By her the Are
pagites themselves lost the names of uncorrupted, because not believing her
innocent, yet having seen her, they could not judge her faulty. Hyperides
pleaded against her to no purpose, though he was very Eloquent; as soon as she
appeared, her presence made her Apology, and she did but show her self for her
defense. It is not now adays only, that handsome Women get their Causes; when
Justice unvayles her self to see them, with a very little Solicitation they get
a happy Trial.

Of Gracefulness.
THe Soul is not more requsite to life then gracefulness to please: it takes
off from the defects of the ill favored, and sets off the beauty of the
handsome, by an addition to their perfections. When one is possessed with this
lovely quality, (whose praises I write, rather then rules) all that one
undertakes is comely. There be many kinds of it; hearts as well as bodies are
wounded with several weapons, the complexion, the hair, the gate, the shape,
the looks, the discourse, the actions, the voice, and even silence have diverse
attractions. There have been those that were never so handsome, as when they
cried. Panthea had so graceful a melancholy, as she obliged Araspes to adore
her tears; it seems that Ladies possess this taking quality, with more
advantage then men, and this command which they obtain by these charms, is much
more powerful and more assured then that which we take by violence. Though this
be a gift of nature, rather then art, yet it needs some rules to perfect it,
which are learned with pleasure and easiness in the conversation of Ladies. If
the face be the mirror of the soul, morality is necessary to preserve this
perfection, since it prescribes rules to the motions both of the body, and the
mind. And indeed anger, fear, the disquiet and repose of the conscience, are
well figured in the looks; and malice has an inseparable remorse, which
dissimulation cannot long bail; by this we may perceive that the beauty of the
body depends partly on that of the mind, and that the rules of gracefulness are
annexed to those of this regularity.

One may better understand the effects of this admirable quality, then express
the nature of it. It is never to be found where there is constraint, art or
ignorance; we must not aspire to an impossible excellence. And art cannot
strain it self too high, no more then nature, without making monsters. It
happens often, that the extreme desire that some have to please, begets hate in
stead of love. On the contrary, naturalnesse has so gentle charms, as none
resists, because they arise from innocence; and affectation is never without
some imperfection, or too much self-love. How ridiculous is it not to dare to
laugh for fear of loosning their patches? or not to change their looks, but in
the morning when they dress them? yet this is the fashion of the life of those
which will have no glass, if it do not flatter, nor no light if it be true;
and though they pretend much to the devotion of the time, they never go to
Mass till the holy water be spent, for fear that receiving any of it, their
plasters should be moystened, and that there should be stains discovered on
their faces: but their design shows it self with their deformity; because
striving to shadow their Defects, they make them the more conspicuous.
Gracefulness is so averse to this slavery and fetterednesse, as though we could
always do well, it is a question whether that would always please. There must
be in every thing intermissions to unbend our spirits. Art in this should
conform it self to Nature; that has not set Stars all over the heaven, nor
Flowers over the earth; and though flowers are not so fair and precious as
Stars, yet we look upon them with more pleasure and attentiveness, because
their beauty being of so little stay, leaves us always a desire of seeing them
again. Our spirits are cloyed as well as our Senses; they need some rest and
relaxation to digest delights. It Is not my meaning to persuade by these
reasons, that one should affect faults; but so they be but light ones, we may
sometimes commit them so happily, as they prove advantageous; because
bashfulnesse that follows them, and displayes it self in the face, is an
infallible testimony of an innocent soul; that is far from conceiving of great
ills, since it is so sensible of slight ones, and sometimes when they are but
imaginary.

If gracefulness then be described by doing all things by Nature, and not by
studiedness; an ingenuous freedom is better then constraint. All the world
yields, that difficulty consists in rarities; there is no dexterity to declare
a painfulnesse, since a Clown may do as much, but to hide it so finely, as the
cunning of it may not be discerned. Candor and Ingenuity is not less to be
wished for Discourse, then for Action; the most ordinary words are most
excellent; a word that is obscure is forbidden. The Philosopher that always
wept, it may be, would have had a mind to laugh, if he had heard many women,
that would pass for Learneder then they are, use in their Discourse such hard
words, that do easier express their Extravagancie then Conceit.

This excessive desire of pleasing which we have blamed, goes along almost
always with the apprehension of not being liked; and then when these two
contrary passions meet, they cause great inequalities, because if desire
excites them, fear cools them; when the one animates us to speak well orsharply,
the other interrupts us, and ties us to silence: by this one may judge, how much
apprehension as well as vanity injures gracefulness. It happens ordinarily,
that such that are always on their guard, and fear every moment to fail, do
almost nothing else. Extreme fearfulness disposes the mind to error, as well
as the body to sickness.

Me thinks, if one examined well the cause of this same troublesome passion,
that Education does not contribute less to it, then Constitution or Nature.
There are those that are bred in such a slavery, they can do nothing freely,
they dare not hold up their heads with that becoming confidence that graces
actions: their thoughts are always low, and what good inclinations soever they
have, shamefac'dnesse retards the success of their purpose: Those that have
seen nothing, are subject to be amazed at a very little, because the diffidence
of themselves makes them admire or fear every thing. Most commonly, after their
Salutations they begin their Complements, as we end our Letters. They would
find an excellent remedy, if they could believe that so little things are not
to be admired; and that if one were at leisure to examine that which we wonder
at first, after an hours conversation, we should often change the subject of
our admiration into the object of our contempt. But every body cannot attain to
this resolution; it is hard even for the best Wits, to have dexterity without
experience, or facility without practice. Actions beget Habits with difficulty,
and then the Habit being formed, it produces actions with gracefulness and
ornament. Yet notwithstanding, in blaming this rustic shamefac'dnesse, I do
not mean to praise Impudency, because both have limits and effects irregular,
because the one carries us beyond our power and decency, and the other keeps us
short of them; whereas the modesty that I desire, is between these two vicious
extremes, to distance us from too good or too ill opinion of our selves.

Of Clothes and Ornaments.
THere must be a certain discretion observed in clothes, lest old men should
tax the excess, or theyoung defects; and that a decency may keep the one from
laughing, and the other from being angry. This is the reason that it is so hard
to please all, and to suit the fashion well to reason, because there are some
so absurd humors, as they can endure nothing done in the fashion, and will
certainly conclude every thing unjust, if the invention of it be not proved by
at least one ages Antiquity. This is very much to undervalue the present time,
and to honor that that is past, without considering that wisdom suffers what
it cannot redress, and that there is also less vanity and difficulty to
follow the received fashion, then to resuscitate the antiquated. Indeed the
light and giddy invent fashions, but the wise and sober accommodate themselves
to them, in stead of contradicting them. Habits and words should be suited to
the time: and as one would think them mad, that should speak in the Court the
language of Chaucer; so we could not judge better of such as would affect to be
clothed so too. Those that censure the inconstancy of the French, should do
better to quit their own slavish opinions, that forbid them their own
commodity, lest they should not be clothed like their Grandfathers. I would
fain know of those that will not follow the times, of what date they would have
their clothes; because if Antiquity must be the rule, they should go back as
far as Adam to cloth themselves with leaves, to render the fashion more
venerable by this ancient derivation. Those that say, reason and custom
resemble the Sun and the Moon, did light well upon it, because we must serve
our selves according to the occasions of the Illuminations of both these
Lights, though the one be clearer then the other. Excess is blameable in all
things, but principally in novelties; it is folly to despair them, and vanity to
be too much affected with them. As I do not approve those women that study with
too much curiosity new fashions, so I cannot esteem those that yet lament the
putting down of high wyers and vardingals. This obstinacy comes from self love;
they are no less punishable, then those that would make old medals current in
commerce for money, against the laws of Princes, and custom of the Country.
Such women make their own antiquity ridiculous, and make much a do to bring
the ruin of time, and the defects of nature to be more remarkable in
themselves. The care and time that is spent in curious dresling, is reprovable
when it is excessive, or when the intentions are not allowable. I do not
believe that there is any more harm to beautify faces, then to set precious
stones, or polish marble. We azure wainscots, paint images, guild swords,
enrich garments. We make even Temples brave, why should ornament be forbidden
to complexion or beauty, when the designs are fair too, since it is permitted
to all things else? Saint Jerome writing to Gaudensius, about the clothes of
young Pacutula, seems to excuse the curiosity of women in very remarkable
terms. Their sex (says he) is curious in ornaments, and studies naturally the
sumptuousness of clothes, in so much as I have seen many chaste Ladies, that
dress themselves very costly, without having any aim in their designs but
their particular contentment, by a certain harmless complacency or
satisfaction: This inclination is so natural to them, as heretofore many Ladies
did entomb their ornaments with themselves, to carry into the other world, that
which they had loved so much in this.

Those that dislike these indifferent things which the intention either
justifies or perverts, imagine that they have a great advantage over women when
they call them the devils fortresses, without considering, though ill spirits
work sometimes in their actions and clothes, that they are no more guilty of
the ill that happens when their designs are irreprochable, then thunder is
when the devils make it light upon men or Churches. Yet this discourse does not
enlarge it self to the defense of vice, or the justification of
licentiousness. Modesty is a powerful charm, without it beauty is
soul-lesse, and other Virtues may deserve admiration, that only merits love:
Fxcessive Ornaments add not to Beauty, nor diminish deformity, since in
Pythagoras his Opnion, an ill favored woman set out very brave, is laughter
for Heaven, and lamentation for earth. Women that glory so much in their rich
clothes, have nothing but what may be had in Shops; and if they were well
considered, it would be found that they abuse our eyes, as those old Images,
which are all hollowed within with rottenness.

But is it not a shameful thing, to see that men are more set on these
Superfluities then women? Hortensius a Roman Orator passed half the day in
considering and sprusing himself, in stead of learning his Speeches: And
without going back so far, we are in an Age where men profess more then ever
this blameable curiosity. I believe if one had well examined the set faces and
Baby looks of a great many, one would give them the quality of Aristogares,
that took so much pains to make himself fine and genteel, that at last he was
called, Madam: To speak truly, they are as far out of their design as the
decency of their Sex, because they are never less pleasing then when they
force themselves to constrain others to think so. Negligence is more
advantageous to them, then studiednesse, and freedom then reservation.
Therefore me thinks that a Poet says well, that marks, that Theseus was not
brave when Ariadne gave him such proofs of her love. It is to be feared Ladies
that too Chevaliere, are beyond modesty: Men too much Ladyed, are short of
Manhood. I do not wonder that Pompey lost so many Battles, since his men had so
much care of their faces, as they were never hurt, but in their backs.

But to return to what concerns our purpose. Caesar seeing his daughter Iulia
Augusta too curiously brave, considered her a great while, without gracing her
with a word, expressing his dissatisfaction by his silence. The next day seeing
her more modestly dressed, he told her with a smiling face; That that habit
became better the daughter of Augustus: the reply of this Princess was not
less considerable, then the admonishment of the Emperor, I was dressed
yesterday (said she) for my Husband, but to day for my Father. The wisest allow
women to please many, to subject one; but after they have made that choice,
then they are forbidden the continuance of their design. It must be
acknowledged, that if women dressed themselves only for complacency to
marriage, there would be not so much excess; and Husbands would not complain
so much, that profusion introduces poverty and jealousy into their Families. I
do not wonder that women have so much ado to walk, since most commonly they
carry three or four houses hanging at their ears.

Of Jealousy.
ONe cannot lose that without sorrow, that is possessed with love, and
preserved with carfulness; therefore Jealousy is not so unjust as many
imagine, because it makes us only fear that another should dispoile us of that
which we believe should be only ours. Is it such a fault to watch the keeping
what we love; principally in a time where fidelity is so rare, as there is none
but those that are assured to be deceived, that do not fear to be so? If the
goods of fortune and body yield to those of the mind, so their loss must be
most sensible: when affections which we believe we have deserved by ours, are
taken from us, it is the greatest stealth, as they are the most valuable
proprieties. And indeed, to reason well of it, Love is an Empire only of two
Persons, which cannot be extended further without destruction, and in it
obedience and sovereignty are reciprocal. It is so covetous, as it would not
lose so much as a cast of an eye, or a hair. Indeed it is no less folly to
believe that there is no love left in the mind that begins to be jealous, then
to conclude that there is no life in one, that is but sick: on the contrary,
pain and sensiblenesse, are never in dead bodies; so jealousy is never found
in hatred or in difference. It must needs be, that this passion has likelihood
of reason, since God himself heretofore allowed husbands to try the fidelity of
their wives, with a water which they called the water of probation or
jealousy. If all suspicions were extravagant or unjust, God would have
interdicted them, not have cured them by so solemn remedies, he would have
shown rather a detestation, then compassion on them.

So those are grossly deceived, that think they have criminated jealousy, when
they maintain that it derogates from the opinion of our own merits, or the
fidelity of the person we love: if one examine well this passion, it rises not
commonly from that distrust; and we do at the same time believe our selves
lovely, and others beloved. It Is a fear that discovers not so much our own
weakness, as it confesses the merit of our enemies. We do but the same in
this, as we do for treasures or other things, which we cannot love without fear
of losing. As the most firm in Religion may have doubts, so the most confident
in love are capable of some suspicion. The strongest trees are shaken by the
wind, though the roots be fixed, whiles the leaves and branches are tossed. One
would wish to have no il belief, but reports and conjectures shake us rather to
a fearful then a confident conclusion. The mind suffers much in this
irresolution, and apparencies trouble much when one cannot directly judge of the
falsehood or truth of them. There are both good and ill examples, both to settle
and to shake us; and ordinarily our thoughts light upon them that persecute us,
rather then those that ease us. That of Penelope comforts us, when we represent
to ourselves, that her fidelity lasted five and twenty years in the absence of
her Husband; but that of Messalina tyrannizes over us, and awakes our
suspicions: when we think of our infamous impurities, our minds are balanced on
both sides, but the misfortune is, that conjectures having given the Alarm,
that by too strict an enquiry, we either find, or invent somewhat, to change
our doubts into beliefs. Should we not rest our selves, after having had a
trial of a person, and may effects for testimonies of the affection? But all
those proofs keep us not from vexing our selves, because fear which is not in
our power, interprets ill the least appearances, and buries it self even in
false objects, when it finds no true.

What trial soever we have had of fidelity, when love has nothing left to
desire, it has all to fear. It is the natural course of our passions, that
threaten change, when they are in extremes, and ruin themselves without any
occasion, only because they are humane. Hypocrates has made a good maxim, to
advertise us, that bodies are in danger of sickness, when they are too high and
strong. But a Poet has a better conceit, for the alteration of minds raised
with too violent an affection. The will deserves as well a wheel of
inconstancy for her passions, as fortune for her favors; in the top there is
no subsistence long, either by reason of misfortune, or imbecility. Those that
are in the highest pitch in love, are like those which are on the top of too
great Elevations, their head grows dizzy, and though no body touch them, they
reel till they fall of themselves, merely by the fear of falling. When the Sun
is at noon, it begins to decline, because when it cannot pass that point, it
retires and removes it self, when nothing drives it to its setting or another
Hemispheere. Our minds seem to have the same motions, and distaste follows
liking by an order that is as natural, as that which makes night succeed the
day, or ebbs and floods in the sea.

We feel our selves insensibly weary even of the loveliest things, and though
the soul be immortal in her own nature, yet she seems in her actions to express
a youthfulness and age, as bodies do. Socrates said, that the Gods did strive
to mingle pleasure and pain one with another; but when they could not do that,
yet at least they tied them together, that the alternative succession may
prevent insolence and despair. This happens often without our own voluntary
contributions, and as we slip down from joy to sorrow, so oftentimes we
perceive our love change into coldness or indifferency. The diseases of the
mind as well as the body, are formed most commonly without our consent; we lose
the quiet of our soul, as our health, all at once, without any prevision of the
change, and not knowing how to find the cause or remedy of this passion, no
more then of a Quartain Ague.

But I have too long spoke against my own mind, as well as reason, in favor of
a passion that ruins loves reputation, and disorders the souls tranquillity.
Reason ingenders love, and love jealousy: but the one and the other resemble
little worms that corrupts the matter that forms them; The one kills his
father, and the other his mother. How moderate soever this passion be, it is
always dangerous, and in this case there must be injustice committed,
forbidding the practice by reason of the abuse, because they are too much
fastened to one another. As there is no little Serpent without some Venom, there
is no so well tempered jealousy, that does not produce many misfortunes. Those
that compare it to Ivy, do it very fitly, because as that grows ordinarily but
upon old heaps of ruins; so this passion wreaths it self most commonly about
tortured and dejected spirits. We see Ivy flourishing with green upon trees
that are dry and sapples, so the older men grow, this passion youthens the
more, and becomes the stronger in such as age or craziness of wit infeebles or
stupifies; other plants have their root at the foot Ivy has every where, and
even more root then leaves; Jealousy roots it self every day more and more, and
insinuates it self more inseparably into the soul, then Ivy can do into trees
or walls. It is but the middle kind of wits, that are capable of this
contagion; excellent ones are above it, and mean ones below; these are ignorant
of the occasions, and the other unmoved with them. It is in this, that
stupidity arrives at the same point as wisdom, and Clowns are as happy as
Philosophers, otherwise those that afflict themselves for a misfortune where
there is no remedy but patience do entertain this error in the world, and have
a whole moon in their head, when they think they have but half an one on their
forhead. It is to be very senseless, to afflict ones self without obliging
any body, and make a damnation in this world, for fear of missing it in the
next. If the mistrust of jealous ones be known, they augment the il instead of
the redress; if it be not, it is superfluous, and it is a hidden pain which
silence and modesty render more supportable. I do not wonder if jealous ones be
lean, their passion feeds on nothing but phantasmes. Good wits restrain their
curiosity, while indifferent ones let it loose to learn what should be unknown;
not considering that in the commerce of this world, the most exact do not make
best their accounts. If we could regulate well our opinions, we should
suppress many enemies. Melancholy and meditations entertain jealousy;
diversion and forgetfulness put it away. Wit as well as sight wearies, when it
is fixed too long on one object. In these occasions we must overcome, as the
Parthians do by flying, and rather divert our thoughts, then direct them with
too much intentivenesse; it is an enemy with poisoned weapons, and his approach
is enough to overthrow; when the memory has once received it, reason comes
often too late for a resistance. One may hinder the entrance, but it never goes
out before it has ruined the host. Cydippus among the Romans, was so pleased to
see bulls baited, as he thought so much of it all night, as he rose in the
morning with horns on his head. This spectacle pleasing him, he had
entertained his fancy with it, and in the end his imagination did him this ill
office. It Is thus that many make their heads ache without considering that their
unquietness and curiosity is hurtful to them, because if they discover their
suspicions to be false, they are obliged to repentance; if they find them true,
they cannot be too miserable for being too curious. Those that think jealousy
or envy was the sin of the Angels, do half justify those that have this
passion, since Angels were capable of it with all their illumination, which is
so above the reach of men. But we learn too by this example, that it was that
which made hell, and that every day renders many miserable, by their own
delights, even to drive lovers out of Paradise, if there be one in imaginary
contentments. There is no malice black enough to blind this passions capacity,
it gives craft to the dullest, and perverts the most virtuous, to seek
satisfaction for this injury.

Cyrce jealous of Silla, fearing that Glausus was in love with her, poisoned
the water where she did ordinarily bathe, to make a monster of a Nymph. Murder,
poison and witchcraft are but sports; jealousy has no bound to its inventions
and crimes, but impossibility; it is strange, that those that pass their time,
are notwithstanding jealous of their husbands, and violate the law of nature,
as well as of Divinity, not enduring to be paid what they lend. Women are most
commonly debauched, because they practice what they fear, and their
apprehension arises from their experience. Jealous spirits never confess their
error, but when there is no help for it. All the world knows Herod's suspicions
of Mariana, only because she was handsome, having no other ground to believe
her faulty, but because her merit might make her be solicited; but what fury
and rage is this, after that he had put this innocent Lady to death, he calls
for her, as if she had not been dead, and thinks to find her in his palace, as
if he had not sent her to her grave? This Tyrant would have committed many of
their crimes in a month, since he forgot them so soon, and had as ill a memory
as a judgment. Jealousy carries us out of our selves; we have some reason to
disavow the effects of it, when we are come back, and when we consider the
malice and extravagancy of it. We do often by his example grieve many to death
by our suspicions, and then we sorrow for it to no purpose, rendering them their
reputation by our repentance, but not their life which they have given to
Melancholy, because we do too late convict our blindness, to justify their
innocence. The reports of ill spoken women, made Prochis jealous of her husband
Cephalus; she imagined he had a Mistress, which he went to seek in the woods,
under the pretense of hunting; she hid her self behind a bush, thinking to hear
the discourse of his solitary thoughts; he hearing a noise, and believing it
was a Deer, shot an arrow at it, which hit her in the heart, she dying, cried
out, Cephalus. This word made him know, that he had taken his wife for a beast,
it may be he was not deceived, it is to be very senseless, so lightly to
abandon our reason, and give a belief to our worst interpretation of the best
things.

An ingenuous liberty is a better guard then any restraint, freedom
extinguishes desire, and interdiction kindles it. When the opportunities of sin
are common, they are neglected, when they are rare, they are made use of lest
they should not be met with again so commodiously. In any case, how extreme
soever jealousy were, me thinks, the jealousy of Vulcan should remedy it;
when he was jealous of Mars and Venus, he spread nets to take them in presence
of all the gods, but afterward what got he by all his curiosity and dexterity,
but to be declared infamous with more solemnity, even to be thrown from heaven
with a broken leg?

Yet for fear of being deceived in this matter, we must take notice, that
jealousy is for love, envy for fortune, and emulation for virtue; the goods of
fortune are too gross and material, those of love too light for our minds, only
those of virtue deserve to be made their object. It Is for her only that
competitors endure one another in their designs, and there is no more sedition
or dispute amongst them, then there is for the impropriation of the light of
the Sun, or the influence of the Stars. So we see among the ancients, that the
three Graces hold one another by the hand, and are united in the alliance of
virtue, while the three Goddesses are quarrelling for the apple of beauty, and
the Triumvirate cannot agree about the possession of the Empire. If we must
join for this, Christianity to morality, to find retreats for the persecution
of jealousy, let us make use of holy Joseph and the Virgin to teach us, that
the chastest of women, has made jealous the simplest of men. There is sometimes
more misfortune in it then ill meaning; we must neglect the apparencies like
him, and suffer suspicions like her. It is no small consolation to think, that
after all the proofs and testimonies that may seem to constrain us to conclude
ill, it is better in this extremity to believe a miracle then a sin, and to
acknowledge the power of God, rather then the weakness of the creature.

FINIS.
Page 78. last line but two, read forgive* line penult. read rules* line ult,
read mind.

A Catalogue of Books Printed for, and sold by Gabriel Bedel, and Thomas
Collins, 1656. viz.
Books in Folio.
THE Complete Ambassador, by Sir Dudly Diggs, Containing the Letters and
Negotiations of Sir Francis Walsingham, the Lord Burleigh, and other Eminent
Persons: being a perfect Series of the most remarkable Passages of State, both
at home and abroad, in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory. The
History of the Civil Wars of France, Written in Italian by D' Avila, Translated
into English by Sir Charles Co^terel Knight, and William Aylesbury Esquire the
whole fifteen Books. Idem, The Continuation alone being ten Books. Sir Richard
Bakers History of the Kings of England. Stowes Chronicle, continued to the year
1631. by Edmund Howes Gentleman, with an Appendix of the Universities of
England. Seldeni Eadmerus. Idem, His Mare Clausam. Idem, His Notes or
Illustrations on Palaealbion. The History of the Reign of King Henry VII.
written by the Right Honorable Francis Lord Verulam, Viscount S. Alban; unto
which is annexed a very useful Table. The Life and Reign of King Henry VIII,
written by the Right Honorable Edward Lord Herbert of Cherbury. Orlando
Furioso, in English Heroical Verse, by Sir. John Harrington Knight, with the
Addition of the Authors Epigrams. The Marrow of the French Tongue, by John
Woodro^ph. Babbingtons Fire works, with Logarithmes. A French English
Dictionary, with another in English and French, compiled by Mr. Randal
Cotgrave: whereunto are added, the Animadversions and Supplement of James Howel
Esquire. Usserii Annals, in two Volumes in Latin. Devotions upon certain
Festivals, piously and learnedly expressed in Meditations, by that Accomplished
Gentleman, William Austen of Lincoln's Inn Esquire. Of Government and Obedience, as
they stand directed and determined by Scripture and Reason, four Books by John
Hall of Richmond Gentleman. Daltons Country Justice, Corrected and enlarged by
the Authors own hand before his death; unto which is Annexed, an Appendix or
Abridgment of all the late Acts and Ordinances that relate to the Office of a
Justice of Peace, to the year 1655. by a Gentleman learned in the Laws. A
Collection of Acts, in the years, 1648, 1649, 1650, 1651. very useful
especially for Justices of the Peace, and other Officers, with several other
Ordinances of like concernment, by Henry Scobel Esquire Clerk of the Parliament. In
Co-partnership with Mr. Lee and Mr. Pakeman.
Books in Quarto.
Cabala, sive Scrinia Sacra, Mysteries of State and Government, in several
Embassies and Letters, by the great Ministers of King James and King Charles,
collected by a Noble hand, in two Parts. Mr. Seldens History of Tithes. Clavels
Recantation, or Discovery of the Highway Law. Powels Search of Records. Three
Readings by the Lord Dyer, Brograve and Rysden of Wills, Jointures and Forcible
Entry. The Arguments of the Learned Judges, upon the Writ of Habeas Corpus,
with the opinion of the Upper Bench Court thereupon, with Sir John Elliots
Case. Miscellanea Spiritualia, first and second Part, written by the Honorable
Walter Montague Esquire Abbot of Nantuel. Barclayes Argenis, Englished by Sir
Robert Le Grey's Knight. The Christian Man, or the Reparation of Nature by
Grace, written in French by that Elegant and Pious Author, John Francis
Sennault, Englished by H. G. Master of Arts, and Student of Christ's Church in
Oxford. Potters Interpretation of the Number 666. The Perfect Conveyancer.
Shoppards Legal part of Tithes. The History of the Grand Seigneurs Serraglio,
unto which is added the History of China. Ross against Copernicus and
Gallilaus, concerning the Earths motion. Mr Durhams Assize Sermon at Warwick
before the Judges, 1651. Palmerin D' Oliva, both parts complete. The Jesuit the
Chief, if not the only State Heretic in the World, or the Venetian Quarrel, by
Dr. Swadlin.
PLAYS.
The Devils an Ass, by Ben Johnson. in Folio. The Marriage of the Arts, in
Quarto, by Barton Hollyday. The Just General, in Quarto. The Bastard, in
Quarto. The Raging Turk, or Bajazet the II. The Courageous Turk, or Amurath the
I. The Tragedy of Orestes, in quarto. Written by Thomas Goffe, Master of Arts,
and Student of Christ's Church Oxford. The Wits The Plationick Lovers The
Triumphs of Prince D' Amor, a Mask. Written by Sir Will. D' Avenant, in
quarto. The Faithful Shepherdess, by John Fletcher Gentleman. The merry Wives
of Windsor, by Shakespeare, in quarto. Edward the IV. the first and second part,
in quarto Micha^lmas Term, in quarto. Fine Companion, in quarto. Capils
Whirlegig, in quarto. The Phaenix, in quarto. Love in its Ecstasy, in quarto.
The Combat of Love and Friendship, by Dr. Mead. The Martyr. Horatius. S^avol^,
now in the Press Three Tragedies by Sir William Lower Knight in quarto. The
Hectors, or the False Challenge, a Comedy newly written, by a Person of
Learning and Eminency; wherein is discovered the humors of our present
Hectors, false Gamesters, etc: in quarto.
Books in Octavo.
Horace, englished by Richard Fanshaw Esquire An Apology for Learning and Learned
Men, by Edward Wa^erhouse, Esquire Idem, His two Divine Tracts. Shepherds Justice
of Peace, two parts with Additions. In Copartnership with W. L. and D. P. Idem,
His Court-Keepers Guide. Idem, His Clerks Cabinet, or Presidents. A Learned
Treatise of the Common Laws of England, by Francis White Esquire, Barrester of
Grayes-Inn. In Co-partnership with W. L. and D. P. Lambards Archeion, or
Comment on the High Courts of Justice. The Parsons Law. Ashes Tables to the
Lord Cooks Eleven Reports, English. In Co-partnership with W. L. and D. P.
Davenports Abridgment of the Lord Cooks Institutes English. The Nuptial Lover
Hippollito and Isabella Two small Romances. Brinsleyes small Copy-Books. 3 d.
price. Callendarium Pastorale, by Theodoro Bathurst, Latin and English. The
Countess of Arundels Experiments. A Synopsis, or compendium of the Fathers in
English.
Books in Twelves.
Sir Henry Wottons Works. The Book of Oaths. Ross his Cases of Conscience. Of
Liberty and Servitude, in English, by I. E. Esquire. Iacksons Evangelical Temper.
Balzacks Prince, in English. Malvetzies Politic Christian Favorite, or the
Life of C. Olivarez. The State of France English, published by I. E. Esquire
Haywards Life and Reign of Edward the VI. Supplementum Lucani, by Thomas May,
Anglo. The Accomplished Woman, written by the Right Honorable Walter Montague
Esquire. Steps of Ascension to God, or a Ladder to Heaven, Containing Prayers and
Meditations for every day of the week, and all other Occasions, by Edward Gee,
Doctor in Divinity, now the ninth time reprinted.
Courteous Reader,
YOU may please to take notice, that here are some few Plays worn out of
print, which we purpose to reprint; and there are several other Books in the
Note also grown scarce, and but small numbers left. The reason of this
intimation, or printed Catalogue, is to perpetuate the memory of the said Books
and Copies belonging to your Servants,

G. B. and T. C.

FINIS.

