THE LIFE OF HENRY CHICHELE, Archbishop of Canterbury, Who lived in the Times
of HENRY the V. and VI. Kings of England.

Written in Latin by ARTH. DUCK. LLD.

Now made English. And a Table of CONTENTS Annexed.

LONDON: Printed for Ri. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCXCIX.

The most Reverend Dr. HENRY CHICHELE Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.



MBurghers delin. et sculp.

To the most Reverend Father in God, THOMAS, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury,
Primate of all England, and Metropolitan.
My Lord,
WHILE the World is so fond of Voyages, and the Discoveries of Unknown
Countries; I hope it will not be unacceptable to bring into view one of the
best Lives of one of the Greatest Prelates of this Church; writ in Latin with
great Judgment by a Man very eminent in his Profession. If this Prelate had
lived in happier Times, he would probably have exerted those great Talents
which he carried far in so dark an Age, in Services of a high nature. He had a
true Judgment and firm Courage, with a generous Temper, and was a great Patron
and Promoter of Learning; He despised Wealth, was free from aspiring, and
asserted the Rights of the Crown, and the Liberties of this Church against
Papal Usurpations. These were great Qualities, and so much the greater, because
the Corruptions of the Clergy from the Papacy down to the Begging Orders, were
then to an insupportable degree.

In any other Age the publishing a Life which has so great a Relation to the
most Glorious part of our History might have looked like a reproach of the Time
in which it came out. But the Present Age may well bear it, in which if we have
not carried our Conquest into France as was then done, yet we see a GREAT
PRINCE who has far outdone the Performances of that time. Then a Feeble King
and divided Court made the Work as easy in it self, as it looks great in
History: But we have seen a Mighty and United Power managed by Wise Counsels,
flushed with a long course of Success, that gave Law to All about it, stopped in
its full career by a King born to be a Blessing to the present Age, and a
Wonder to all Succeeding ones; to Whose Reign the most renouned Pieces of our
History are but foiles to set it off, and make it shine the brighter.

My Lord, I could not be long in suspense for the choice of a proper Patron to
my small Interest in this Work, which is only the care of the Translation of it
into English: The Sea that you do now govern with so Apostolical a Temper, and
in none of the easiest Times, is not the chief reason of my addressing to Your
Grace the Life of one of the most Eminent of all Your Predecessors. I could
give many more Reasons for the choice that relate immediately to Your Self, but
I will rather leave it to the Reader to find out, than offer a thing so
ungrateful to Your Lordship: I pay Your Grace so profound a Reverence, that I
will not venture on that which I know will offend You, for I am with the truest
Zeal, and the highest Respect possible,

My Lord, Your Grace's most Humble and most Obedient Servant.

THE LIFE OF HENRY CHICHELE, Archbishop of CANTERBURY.
Born at Higham Ferrars in Northamptonshire.
HENRY CHICHELE was Born at Higham-Ferrars, an ancient Town in
Northamptonshire, so called from the Ferrars, who were formerly Lords of it.
His Father's Name was Thomas Chichele, his Mother's Agnes. The Family was but
mean and obscure, but through his Virtue it became illustrious in afterages. In
his Youth he applied himself to the Study of the Civil and Canon Law at Oxford,
being made Fellow of Made Fellow of New-College Oxford* by William of Wyckam.
New-College by William Wyckam, then Bishop of Winchester, who had lately at a
vast Charge founded and endowed with large Revenues two stately Colleges, one
at Oxford, and the other at Winchester. In these Studies of the Law he improved
his good natural Parts by his great Industry, and commenced Doctor in that
Faculty.

Went to live with Medeford Bishop of Sarum.
He left the University at the instance of Robert Medeford Bishop of Salisbury,
who took him first into his House and Family, and afterward communicated also
to him his most private and important Concerns, with whom he ever after
preserved a strict and intimate Friendship. He was preferred by him Made
Archdeacon of Sarum.
to the Archdeaconry of Salisbury, which was his first step to Ecclesiastical
Promotions. But one Walter Fitzpers a Priest, commenced a Suit against him for
this Dignity, claiming it by virtue of a Grant from King Henry the Fourth,
under the Great Seal. The Cause being brought by Appeal before Thomas Arundel
Archbishop of Canterbury, the Archdeaconry was adjudg'd to Henry Chichele, by
the Auditor of the Archbishop's Court, who was deputed with full Power to
determine this affair. 1402.
This was about the Years 1402 and 1403, in the Reign of King Henry the Fourth.
He held this Dignity for about two years, and with great diligence 1404.
performed the Duty of his Office; after which he was made Chancellor of Then
Chancellor of the same.
Salisbury. For Walter Medeford, the Bishop's Brother, who enjoyed that Place,
made an exchange with him, which was allowed to be lawful according to the
Constitutions of the Canon Law; and having both quitted their several
Dignities, Henry was made Chancellor by the Bishop, and Walter Archdeacon.
There was annexed to the Chancellorship the Parsonage of Odyham, in the Diocese
Parson of Odyham.
of Winchester, which was then void, and was given to him by the Bishop and he
was immediately put in possession of it by the Custos Rotulorum of the Sea of
Winchester, which was then vacant by the Death of William Wyckam, who on the
27th of September, changed a Life which he had spent very gloriously in the
Service of that Church, for Immortality. These Preferments he obtained by the
favor of the Bishop of Salisbury, who always highly esteemed him; and when he
died, which was about three years after, made very honorable mention of him in
his Will, and left him a And chief Executor to his Benefactor.
golden Cup with a Cover, and made him the Chief of his Executors which were
named in the same Will*

His eminent Qualifications began now to be generally taken notice of, and
particularly by King Henry the Fourth, who afterward employed him in many
Negotiations. For besides his extraordinary Learning, he had a sharp and
piercing Wit, which with his Experience and Skill in Civil Affairs, rendered him
very dextrous in the management of Business. The first public Employment that
he had, beside those Affairs which he dispatched for the King here at home,
with great Commendation, was in an extraordinary Embassy, which Sent Ambassador
by H. 4. to Pope Greg. the 12th.
was sent by the King to Pope Gregory the Twelfth, to Congratulate his late
Advancement to the Papacy, or to reconcile him to Benedict the Thirteenth, who
assumed the Pontifical Dignity at Avignon. The Ambassadors arriving in Italy,
took their Journey toward Rome; but in their way thither they met with the
Pope at Siena, which is a very pleasant and noble City of Tuscany, at that time
Commonwealth, and governed by its own Laws; it was afterward subdued by the
Medici, and is now subject to the Great Duke of Tuscany. There it was that In
nemore unionis, cap. 31.
Theodoric of Nismes, who was Secretary to Pope Gregory, and was then in his
Court at Siena, relates that he saw our Ambassadors, who were all Men of
eminent Note; but through the Negligence of Writers, their Names are not
preserved in Memory. How well Henry Chichele acquitted himself of this
Employment, and how much he gained the Pope's Favor upon this account, Gregory
himself did soon after evidently demonstrate: For News being brought to the
Court of Rome of the Death of Guido Moan* Bishop of S. David's, who died this
year on the 31st of August, which was after the Departure of the Ambassadors
out of England, of his own voluntary Motion he created Henry Chichele Bishop of
By whom made Bishop of St. David's.
S. David's, and consecrated him with his own hands, according to the ancient
Form, on the 4th of October, and by Letters written to Thomas Arundel
Archbishop of Canterbury, he acquainted him, that by the Advice of the
Cardinals, he had promoted Henry Chichele Chancellor of Salisbury, Doctor of
Laws, and Priest, a Man of eminent Wisdom, Integrity, and other Virtues, to the
vacant See of S. David's, desiring him upon his Recommendation, to make use of
his Assistance in the Administration of his Archiepiscopal Function. He
attended the Pope from Siena to Luca, and 1408.
continued with him till the end of April the next year. He then returned home,
of an Ambassador being made a Bishop, and on the 26th of August he went to the
Cathedral Church of Canterbury according Accordingly took the Canonical Oath in
England.
to the usual manner, and there took an Oath of Legal and Canonical Obedience
and Reverence to the Archbishop and his Successors. How fit he was esteemed by
all Men for the Exercise of this Function, the Bishops and Prelates of the
Province of Canterbury assembled in Convocation at London in 1409.
January following, did very amply and fully testify. For when it was debated
Sent Delegate to the General Council at Pisa.
in the Synod about sending Delegates to the General Council at Pisa for the
English Nation, Robert Hallum Bishop of Salisbury, Henry Chichele Bishop of St
David's, and Thomas Chillirgdon Prior of Canterbury, were unanimously chosen;
and it was also decreed* that every beneficed Person should pay Four pence in
the Pound out of their yearly Income toward the Charges of their Journey. This
Council was appointed to be held at Pisa by the College of Cardinals assembled
at Leghorn, for composing the difference between Gregory the Twelfth, Held to
Reconcile the Competitors for the Popedom.
and Benedict the Thirteenth, who both set up for Pope, one at Rome, and the
other at Avignon. But because we shall have occasion sometimes in the following
Narration to make mention of this Schism of the Popes, it seems agreeable to
the design and method of this undertaking to deduce it from its Original, and
to explain briefly from whence it arose, and by what ways it increased and was
carried on.

After that Philip the Fair, King of France, slighting the Excommunications of
Pope Boniface the Eighth, had by his Boniface the Eighth deposed.
Letters, which are extant in most of the Writers of that Age, sharply
reprehended his Folly and Madness, and at length divested him of the Papacy;
the Cardinals fearing the King's displeasure, elected into his room Clement the
Clement the Fifth Elected Pope.
Fifth, a Frenchman, and Native of Gascoigne; Who being created by the College
of Cardinals at Perusium in his absence, summoned them all to Lions, where in
the Church of S. Justus, in the Presence of Philip King of France, Edward King
of England, and Alfonsus King of Arragon, he received the Pontifical Crown in
the Year 1305, and the same Year having created a great many French Cardinals;
he fixed his Residence at Avignon, where also after his Death the six
succeeding Popes, John the Twenty second of Cahors, Benedict the^ Twelfth of
Toulouse* Clement the Sixth, Innocent the Sixth, Urban the Fifth, and Gregory
the Eleventh of the Province of Limosin, Who with six Successors, all French,
Resided at Avignon for seventy Years.
all Frenchmen, resided for the space of seventy Years, having quite forsaken
Rome.

Dell'inferno. Canto 19. and del Paradiso Canto 27.
Dante Aligeri and Nella terza part* sonetto. 8, 9, 10, and epist. 20.
Francis Petrarch, two Italian Poets, who lived in those Times in the Court of
Rome at Avignon, do very severely* reprehend the Rapine, the Debauchery, Luxury
and Excess of those Popes, and particularly of Clement the Fifth, and John the
Twenty-second; Most of them hated by the Italians for their Nation, or vicious
Lives.
which they did either out of their Hatred to the French in general; or because
being Men of Integrity themselves, they could not bear the debauched and
profligate Lives of the Popes. Clement the Fifth is also mentioned often by the
The Clementines added to the Canon Law.
Lawyers upon the account of the Book of Clementines, which was put out by him
in the Council of Vienne, and added to the Canon Law. But Gregory being
concerned at the Decay of the City of Rome, and the Tumults of Italy, privately
left Avignon, and returned to Rome Pope Gregory returned to Rome.
in the Year 1376, and the 71st from the Departure of the Popes; where being
received with incredible Joy, he began to repair the Churches, Palaces, the
Walls and other Edifices of the City which were run to ruin.

He dying two years after, the Cardinals, who were almost all Frenchmen,
fearing the outrage of the People of Rome, who demanded an Italian Pope, chose
Bartholomew Archbishop of Bari, who changed his Name for that of Urban Was
succeeded by Urban the Sixth.
the Sixth; and with his Name soon changed his Nature also; for whereas before
he was generally looked upon as a Man of a moderate Temper; he now began to
treat all the Cardinals with great Rigor; and one time when Otho of Brunswick,
Prince of Tarentum, who had married Joan Queen of Sicily, presented him the Cup
at Dinner upon his Knees* he let the Prince continue for some time in that
posture, till being admonished of it by the Cardinals, with much ado he took
the Cup from him.

The Cardinals being very uneasy under this unseasonable Pride and Severity of
the Pope, fled to Fundi, a City in the Kingdom of Naples; where having first
declared the Election of Urban to be void, as being made through fear, and by
compulsion, they proceeded to For whose Rigor and Pride, Clement the Sixth was
set up against him.
Elect Rupert Cardinal of Geneva, who took the Name of Clement the Sixth, and
with his Cardinals retired to Avignon. Thus whilst one assumed the Papacy at
Avignon and the other at Rome, and both of them made new Promotions of
Cardinals, the whole Christian World was divided between them. For the Germans,
the English, the Poles, the Hungarians, the Bohemians* the Danes, the Swedes,
and most of the Italians, acknowledged Urban, but the French and the Spaniards
submitted to Clement.

Urban, in the Eleven Years that he held the Pontificate, debased the Dignities
of the Church by promoting the meanest Persons to the Purple; and fomented
Urban, for preferring the Base, and fomenting of Wars, called Turbanus; a
perverse and most cruel Pope.
Wars between the Christian Princes; for which cause, instead of Vrbanus, he was
generally called Turbanus. He exceeded all the Popes that ever possessed the Sea of Rome in Cruelty; for of those Bishops and Cardinals who were accused as
secret Favorers of Clement, some he imprisoned, others he put to the Torture,
and at last put to death six of the most Eminent of the Cardinals, one of whom
he caused to be inhumanly murdered in his sight as they were traveling
together on the Road; and the others, while he was at Genoa, to be sowed up in
Sacks, and thrown into the Sea. Neither did Clement, who was at Avignon, come
far Clement not far short of Him in wickedness.
short of his Rival in wickedness; for it is affirmed on all hands, that he was
ambitious, prodigal, self-willed, proud, and one that had nothing to recommend
him but the Nobility of his Birth, for he was descended from the Earls of
Geneva.

After the death of Urban, Cardinal Peter Tomacellus was chosen Pope at Rome,
who was called Boniface the Urban succeeded Boniface the Ninth, and
Ninth; and Clement dying soon after at Avignon, the Cardinals, that they might
not be without a Head, elected Peter de Luna, a Spaniard, who took the Name of
Benedict the Thirteenth. Clement by Benedict the Third. Both worse than the
former.
These two surpassed their Predecessors in all manner of wickedness; nor would
either of them, to restore the Peace of the Church, quit their Pretensions to
the Papacy.

Boniface before his election was not only expert in Writing, Singing, and all
other kinds of Learning, except Boniface more Politician than Grammarian,
Grammar, but was also very well vers*d in the management of public Affairs;
and after his advancement, his whole design, during his Government, was to
enrich his Nephews by the sale of all things belonging to the Church, which
Trade he carried on in the most shameful and scandalous manner that ever was
practiced by any of the Popes.

It was he that first impos*d the Tax Imposed the Tax of Annates on the clergy.
of Annates upon Ecclesiastical Preferments, by which every one that was
presented to a Benefice in any place, was obliged to pay half the yearly income
of it into the Pope's Treasury; which Imposition was admitted by all Christian
Nations, except the English; for with us it was exacted only of the Bishops,
but all other Benefices were exempted from it. Nor was his Avarice satisfied
with this Device; for he suffered Bishoprics Suffered Bishoprics to be sold
by Auction.
and Livings to be sold by Auction; in which kind of Traffic sometimes he made
use of his Brothers and Nephews for his Factors, and many times he sold them
himself to those that bid most, and received the Money with his own hands;
sometimes he would transfer a Benefice to a second Chapman that offered a
better price, Sold the same Livings twice to several Chapmen,
after he had received Money for it of the first, alleging that he had no wrong
done him, who would have cheated him by paying less for it than it was worth;
and would force the Purchasers most impiously to swear that Yet made the
Purchaser swear he came fairly by it.
they had not procured those Livings, for which he himself had taken the Money,
by any Simoniacal Contract. Beside these Spoils of the Church, he extorted
Money even from the Poor, whose Petitions he refused to subscribe unless they
would pay him for them a Floren each, Made poor Petiti^^^rs pay a Floren apiece.
which he valued more than the sacred Rites of Christianity, or even his own
Soul; for in the time of Divine Service he used to ask those that were about
him Enquired after G^s in the time of Divine Service.
whether any body were there that had brought him any thing; and a few hours
before he died, when one asked Had no comfort when dying, but in Money.
him how he did, he answered, he should be well if he had but Money.

But though he was generally hated and abhorred for these sordid Practices, yet
the Lawyers defended him, maintaining Defended by the Lawyers.
that the Pope was not guilty of Simony, though he sold Bishoprics and Livings,
which was also affirmed by almost all Jo. Andr. Ancharan. Cardin. and Dd ad c.
1. de Simon. Felin. in c. ex part n. 1. de off deleg.
the Ancient Canonists, who were too much engaged in the Pope's Interests. But
most of the Divines of that Age were so far from this sordid Flattery, that
Theod. Niem. lib. 2. de Schism. cap. 32.
they taught publicly while But opposed by the Divines.
Boniface was alive, that the Pope was guilty of Simony if he sold the
Dignities and Benefices of the Church; which Opinion was received by Thom. 2.
2. qu. 100. art. 2. and ibi Cajetan. and omnes. Navarr. in manual. c. 23. n.
108. Paul* Anglic. in Speculo Aureo.
all the Divines afterward, and by the more Panor. in repetit. c. extirpandae
sect. Cj ia vero. n. 53. de Praeben. and in c. 1. de Simon. Bar^ t. ad c. cum
pridem de pact. Barthol. Ugolin. de Simon. Tab. 1. cap. 3. sect. 5.
Modern Canonists, Panormitanus, Barbatia and others.

Benedict also at Avignon, though he had the Character of a Person of Wit,
Learning and Prudence, yet in making a gain of the Goods of the Church he
Benedict the like spiritual Robber.
equaled Boniface, for both of them set to sale all Dignities, Livings,
Dispensations, Indulgences, and the Lands and Lordships of the Church, so that
the sacred Power of the Keys grew contemptible in all men's Opinion through this
scandalous Traffic of the two Popes. Baldus, an eminent Lawyer, and at that
time Professor of the Civil Law at Padua, though he seems to have Bald. ad c.
quia propter. de elect.
approved the Election of Urban, and to have looked upon Clement as an Usurper,
yet he inveighs against both Boniface and Benedict, comparing Bald. ad c. olim.
de rescript.
Boniface to an Boniface compared to an Ox, Benedict to a wild Beast.
Ox, and Benedict to a wild Beast, and affirms that neither of them was the
Minister of God, or truly and lawfully Pope, because they fomented Seditions in
the Church, and would neither of them quit the Chair to restore the Peace of it.

Whereupon, when Boniface was dead, who governed the Sea of Rome fourteen
Years, the Cardinals being assembled to choose a new Pope, they every one
solemnly swore with dreadful The Cardinal's Oath upon Boniface's death, to
resign if chosen.
Imprecations upon themselves if they violated their Oath, that whoever should
happen to be chosen to the Papacy, he would immediately resign it, upon
condition the other Pope would do so too; which Oath had also been taken a
little before by the Cardinals at Avignon upon the Election of Benedict.

The choice fell upon Cardinal Innocent Boniface sueceeded by Innocent the
Seventh, who broke his Oath.
Cosmatus, who was called Innocent the Seventh. But he little regarding the
obligation of his Oath, very stiffly retained the Pontifical Dignity, nor
during the two years that he was Pope, could he be prevailed upon to lay it
down. He was A great Canonist, debaucht and covetous.
a Person of great experience in the Canon Law, but very prone to Debauchery,
and too intent upon acquiring Wealth.

After his death all the Cardinals in On his death the Oath repeated with
Imprecations.
the Conclave took the same Oath again with many Imprecations on the Perjured,
and promised moreover to create no new Cardinals, if the other Pope would
desist from doing it; and upon the last day of September, in the Year 1406.
they chose Angelo Comaco a Venetian, Gregory the Twelfth succeeded.
who took the name of Gregory the Twelfth.

After his Advancement to the Chair, he protested publicly with Tears that he
would not have accepted the Papacy, as being the most unfit person for it in
the World, but only that he might become the Author of establishing Peace in
the Church; and he openly declared that he desired nothing more than that a
time and place might be appointed for a Conference with Benedict, and that by
the voluntary resignation of them both, the Church might be governed again by
only one Pastor. For which end he presently sent Letters to Benedict, to our
King Henry the Fourth, Who treated with Benedict for the Church's peace.
and to all the Christian Princes and Bishops, in which he exhorted and
entreated them that they would not be wanting in their endeavors to put an end
to this Schism in the Church; he also sent Ambassadors to Benedict, his Nephew
Antony Cornaro Bishop of Bologna, William de Vinea Bishop of Todi, and Antony
de Butrio first Professor of Canon Law in the University of Bologna, who makes
mention of this Embassy in his Anton. de Butr. ad cap. quod ad consultationem
n. 3. de Sent. and re jud.
Commentaries; Their Instructions were to treat with Benedict about the place
where this Resignation should be made. They met with him at Marseilles, and it
was concluded that And for a Resignation by them both at Savona.
by November following both the Popes should meet at Savona; which is a City
belonging to the Republic of Genoa, and situated upon that Coast; where after
they had both resigned the Papcy, a new Pope should be chosen: From Marseilles
they went to Paris to treat Sends to Charles the Sixth of France about the same
Affair* Gregory harshly treated his Ambassadors at their return.
with Charles the Sixth, King of France, about this Affair, where they were
received by all people with incredible joy; but when they had finished their
Embassy, and were returned to Gregory, he treated them so harshly, that Antony
de Butrio soon after dyed of grief. For all this was but a Trick of Gregory's
to shift the imputation of these Dissentions from Drew back and shuffled.
himself; for first he began to draw back from the Agreement, pretending that
Savona was a suspected place, as belonging to the Genoeses, who acknowledged
Then plainly refused to stand to the Agreement.
Benedict, and afterward absolutely refused to stand to it, alleging the
Opinions of his own Divines, who being set on by him, taught the people
publicly in their Sermons, that he could not without impiety desert the care
of the Christian Flock which was committed to him by Christ the chief Shepherd.
But before the end of the Summer, there being a hot discourse that Benedict was
come to Savona, that the blame might not lie wholly upon him, he departed from
Rome, though very unwillingly, and the next year on Hearing Benedict was come
to Savona, he comes to Siena.
the first of September came to Siena, where he staid till the end of the next
January.

During his stay There, beside the Ambassadors from Benedict, from Charles King
of France, and other Princes, those from our King came thither also, among
whom, as we said before, was Henry To whom Chichele was one of the Ambassadors
from England, and there made Bishop of St. David's.
Chichele, who was there made Bishop of St. David's by the Pope. These all
earnestly besought him to establish peace in the Church, which he had so
solemnly promised and sworn to do before the College of Cardinals.

Pope Gregory goes to Lucca.
From Siena he went to Lucca in the beginning of February, where though he were
often pressed by our Ambassadors, who staid with him at Lucca till the end of
April, to go to Savona, he absolutely Refuses to go to Savona.
refused it, and dealt underhand with Benedict by his Emissaries, persuading him
not to recede from his Pretentions to the Papacy; for which cause, when
Trinkles with Benedict, is for his Hypocrisy called Errorius.
every one plainly perceived that he played the Hypocrite, and designed to impose
upon all Christendom, instead of Gregorius they called him Errorius.

The Cardinals displeased for his promoting Condelmarius.
The Cardinals were very much troubled, that against their will, and contrary
to the obligation of his Oath, he had promoted to the Purple Gabriel
Condelmarius his Nephew, who was afterward Pope, and three more, and had
strictly charged the rest of the College to hold no correspondence with the
Cardinals of Benedict, without his knowledge, which, as it was said, some of
them privately carried on; and had also deprived John Proset, Archdeacon of
Norfolk of all his Preferments, for no other reason but because he spoke to
some of the Cardinals of the contrary Faction. Whereupon those of his own His
own Party fly to Pisa. They appeal from him to Christ, a general Council, and
the next Pope.
Party in May 1408. fled to Pisa, which is distant from Lucca about ten Miles,
and there by a public Protestation they appealed from the Curses and
Excommunications which Gregory had pronounced against them, to Jesus Christ the
Supreme Judge, to a General Council, and to the Pope that should hereafter be
This justified by Panormitan.
chosen; which appeal the Abb. ad c. Inquisitioni. n* 5. de Sent. Excom.
Abbot Panormitanus afterward allowed to be just and lawful, and that the
Cardinals were not at all affected with the Excommunication of an unlawful Pope.

And though some of Gregory's Creatures taught publicly that he was freed from
the obligation of the Oath that he had taken to extinguish the Schism, in that
he might absolve himself from it by his own Authority; yet the best Lawyers, as
Ancharan. Cons. 181. Card. Zabar. Cons. 150. Anton. de Butr. ad c. 1. n. 10. de
Constit.
Peter Ancharanus, Cardinal Francis Zabarella, and Antony de Butrio, who all
flourished at that time, maintained the contrary, affirming that in this case
both the Popes were guilty Both Popes accused of Perjury by the best Canonists.
The Cardinal's leaving the Pope, grateful to the Christian Princes. The Kings
of England and France withdrew their Obedience from both the Popes.
of Perjury, which Opinion was afterward followed by Philip Dec. in Consil. pro
Authoritate Concilii supra Papam.
Decius.

This departure of the Cardinals from the Pope was very acceptable to most of
the Christian Princes, and particularly to our King Henry and Charles King of
France, who being tired with the shifts and delays of the Popes, had lately
withdrawn their obedience from them both, which nevertheless the Historians of
both Nations, who were Pentioners to the Pope, have unfaithfully
omitted. For the English, though they hitherto paid their obedience to Urban
the Sixth, and those Popes that were created after him at Rome so religiously,
that Thomas Arundel, Archbishop of Canterbury, in the Oath that he took to
Boniface the Ninth, according to the Custom at his entrance into that See, did
expressly promise that he would account Rupert, Cardinal of Geneva, commonly
called Clement the Sixth, as an Usurper; yet in a Synod holden at London this
Year by the King's Authority, it was forbidden to pay any Money due to the
Treasury of Rome out of Bishoprics At the Request of the Cardinal's Letters
English Money withheld.
or Parsonages. This the Cardinals requested by their Letters, which are yet to
be seen in the public Records, affirming that those vast Sums of Money which
were carried to Rome every Year out of this Kingdom, did incite the Popes to
seek the Papacy, and hindered them from laying it down when they had once
obtained it; neither is this taken notice of by any of our Writers.

And though the French had all along sided with the Popes at Avignon, yet now
that King perceiving the obstinacy of Benedict, refused to obey him any longer,
as Bald. add. c. olim de rescript.
Baldus relates, who also The French King withdraws Obedience to Benedict,
defended by Baldus.
proves that his withdrawing his obedience from him was just and reasonable:
Afterward by a Decree of the Parliament of Paris, the Cardinals and Officers
of the Apostolic Chamber were forbid to meddle with the Profits arising out of
Annates; and two of the Pope s Emissaries who had brought to Paris Two
Bull-Carriers (the Pope's Emissaries) were ignominiously treated at Paris.
his Bulls of Excommunication against the King and the Princes, were put in a
Dungcart with Paper-miters upon their Heads, carried through that City in an
ignominious manner; as Carol. Molin. de Monarch. Franc. n. 140, 141, 142.
Charles Molinaeu^, an Accurate Lawyer, not relying upon the credit of the
French Historians, has proved out of the public Acts of that Court.

Wheresore Niem. lic. 3. de Schism. cap. 7. and nemore unionis, Tract. 6. cap.
31.
Theodoric of Nismes does deservedly accuse the Remissness of the Emperors. For
Charles the Fourth, in Charles the Fourth of France did neither regard the
Church nor his own Kingdom.
whose time the Schism began, not only neglected the Calamities of the Church,
but also shamefully weakened the Empire by renouncing the Kingdom of Arles in
France, and by alienating many of the Cities of the Empire; he afterward by
dishonorable Means prevailed upon the Electors to choose his Son Wenceslaus, a
Man of a mean Spirit, King of the Romans, and to appoint him his Successor, who
when he came to the Empire did nothing becoming a Prince. Whose Son's Successor
Robert of Bavaria King the Romans siding with Gregory, chiefly fomented the
Church-Divisions.
Robert of Bavaria, who after the deposing of Wenceslaus by the Electors, was
made Emperor, little minded the Affairs either of the Empire or the Church, for
he suffered Italy, Avignon, and several other Parts of the Empire to be
detained by those that had no right to them, and siding with Gregory he was
accounted the chief Author of these Dissensions in the Church.

The Emperors then were degenerated. When their Power was most requisite to
rectify the Pope's mismanagement.
It is certain that the Emperors in those times were much degenerated from
those of former Ages, who both C. Hadrianus, c. in. Synodo Did. 63. c. Victor
Honorium Did. 97.
made and C. Si quis. 2. qu. 7. etc. nos si in compenter. ead.
deposed the Popes, and C. H^beo librum. Did. 16. c. Valentinianus. Did. 63.
c. mandastis. 2. qu, 4.
called Councils for composing the Differences of Christendom: And indeed there
was never more need of such a power in the Emperor than at this time, for
through these Factions of the Popes, the Faith of Christians began to stagger,
all holy things were bought and sold, the Manners of the Clergy were corrupted
without Censure; and the Popes themselves were men of such dissolute Lives,
that these things would find but little credit with Posterity, if they were not
delivered by two Writers of approved integrity, Theodoric of Nismes, and
Baptista Platina, who were both Secretaries to Popes, and lived in the Court of
Rome, one under Sixtus the Fourth, and the other under Urban the Sixth,
Boniface the Ninth, Innocent the Seventh, and now at this time under Gregory
the Twelfth.

Gregory Renounced by his Cardinals at Pisa.
The Cardinals of Gregory's Party perceiving that the Emperor was not very
sollicitous in appeasing these Tumults in the Church, presently after their
arrival at Pisa, declared by a public Edict that Gregory was the Author of the
Schism, that he was divested of the Papacy, that whatsoever should be acted by
him as Pope for the future, was actually void, forbidding the Bishops, Abbots,
Prelates, and all those that held of the Church, to pay to any of his Officers,
any Annates, Tribute, or other Dues; and having called into them the Cardinals
of Benedict's Party, who had lately revolted from him at the persuasion Who
with those of Benedict, deprived them both of the Papacy.
of Charles King of France, by a general Consent they divested them both of the
Papacy, and appointed a Council to be held the next Year at Pisa, on the Feast
of the Annunciation for choosing a new Pope; all which they signified by Letters
to all the Princes of Christendom, desiring their favor and assistance for
settling the peace of the Church, to which end they enjoined all the Bishops of
the Western Church to be present at the Council.

For which some worldly Divines charged them with Schism.
Now although some of the Vide Niem. in nem. Union. Tract. 4. cap. 9.
Divines of that Age, to serve their own Interests by flattering the Pope,
maintained that the Cardinals were guilty of Schism, and that a C. Multis Did.
17.
Council could not be called without the Pope's Authority, yet Baldus, Cardinal
Zabarella, and Peter Ancharanus defended them. For Bald. ad. d. c. olim de
rescrip. and in c. quia propter de elect.
Baldus says, that against such kind of Popes they ought first to make use of
fair words, then of Herbis.
Bulrush-spears and at last of Stones and open Force, and that they are to be
deposed by a Council Zabar. in c. licet. n* 13* de elect. and in cons. 150. and
in Tract, de Schismate hujus temporis. Ancharan. Cons. 181.
. Zabarella and Ancharanus who were present at the Council of Pisa, have very
fully proved that the Cardinals have power to call a Council, in which the Pope
may be called in question and deposed, which Opinion of theirs is followed by
P^nor. ad c. licet de vitanda. n. 8. de elect. Dec. in Consil. pro Concilio
Pisano. Felin. ad c. super literis. n. 21. de rescript. Cardin. Jacob. de
Council. lib. 3. Art. 1. n. 11. Jo. Royas. de Haeret. n. 518.
Ponormitanus, Decius, Felinus, and other more Modern Authors, who expressly
approved of the Council of Pisa; to which may be added the Niem. in nem.
unionis Tract. 6. cap. 15, 16.
sense of the Universities of Paris and Bologna, who put out their Decrees in
favor of the Cardinals; and very lately, Card. Bellar. lib. 1. de Council. cap.
8.
Cardinal Bellarmine, a very rigorous Defender of the Pontificat Dignity, as he
does not plainly allow of the Authority of the Council of Pisa, so neither has
he ventured positively to deny it. The King of England and France, etc. favor
the Cardinals, and their aforesaid Sentence in Council. Which the Cardinal of
Bourdeaux with great zeal got ratified in England. Walsingh.
minds of all the Christian Princes, especially of our King and the King of
France, were very much inclined in favor of the Council; and this Year the
Cardinal of Bourdeaux, a man of known Wisdom and Integrity, came from Pisa,
first into France, and afterward into England, where in a long Oration before
the King and Parliament, he so incensed them all against Gregory, that Thomas
Archbishop of Canterbury, being also induced to it by Letters from the
University of Paris, had determined to go himself to the Council, but at the
King's persuasion, who put him in mind of the care of his Health, the
inconveniences of traveling, and the public Affairs of the Kingdom, he laid
aside that Design, and it was unanimously agreed upon to send Delegates to
assist at the Council in the name of the English Nation. This was the state of
the Church of Rome when the Council of Pisa was appointed.

To return now to Henry Chichele; 1409.
In the beginning of the Year 1409. Robert Hallum Bishop of Salisbury, Henry
Chichele Bishop of St. David's, and the Prior of Canterbury, who were the
Delegates pitched upon by the Synod at H. Chichele one of the Delegates to Pisa.
London, took their Journey toward Pisa through France. Upon their arrival at
Paris, John Gerson an eminent Divine, and Chancellor of that University, Before
whom and Associates a Learned Sermon preached. Hos. 1. 11.
preached a learned and elegant Sermon before them upon these words of the
Prophet Hosea, The children of Israel and the children of Juda shall be
gathered together; in which after he had spoken in praise of the University of
Oxford, which had lately sent thither their Deputies to promote the calling a
Council, and establishing Decrees against the Contumacious Popes, and had
discoursed very largely upon that Text of Scripture concerning the Power of an
Ecumenical Council, he assured them that all the People of Paris congratulated
their arrival; he commended their Piety who would undergo such inconveniences
for the Peace of the Church, and in the name of the University offered them all
the assistance and friendly Offices that they were capable of performing. This
Sermon is extant among In vol. 1. Operum Jo. Gerson.
Gerson's Works.

Having passed through France, they made a splendid entry into Pisa on the 27th
of April, where they found assembled in the Council One hundred and forty
Archbishops and Bishops, besides Abbots and others of the Clergy who Bishop of
Sarum another Delegate made an eloquent Oration in the Council of Pisa.
were there in great numbers. The Bishop of Salisbury, as superior in dignity to
the other Delegates, in an eloquent Oration exhorted them in the Name of the
King his Master, to establish a Peace, and compose those Divisions in the
Church, which was earnestly recommended to them by the Ambassadors from the
other Princes, French, Spaniards, Scots, Portuguese, Hungarians, Danes, Suedes
and Poles. Upon which the Advocatus Fisci.
Fiscal having laid before the Council the Crimes of the two Popes, Gregory and
Benedict, and praying that the Examination of them might be referred to some
Persons deputed with full power of enquiring into them, they were both
convicted by the testimony of Witnesses who were cited for a punishment of
their Contumacy, and by other proofs, and were e Niem lib. 3. de Schism cap 44.
pronounced by the Council, perjured, Schismatics, Where both Popes were
pronounced perjured, etc. and Alexander the Fifth elected.
Heretics, and divested of the Papacy; and on the 7th of July the Cardinals by
a power delegated to them from the Council, Abb. ad. c. licet de vitanda. n. 8.
de elect.
elected Peter Philardus, who was called Alexander the Fifth.

This Alexander was by birth a Cretan, but it is not certainly known who his
Father was. When he was a Boy he was taken up by a certain Franciscan Friar, as
he was begging from Door to Who, when a Boy, had begged from door to door.
Door, who perceiving good Parts in him, admitted him into his Order, and
instructed him in Grammar and Logic whilst he was in Italy; from thence he
sent him to Oxford, where applying himself to the Studies of Philosophy
Afterward, his Parts known, sent to Oxford.
and Divinity, he attained to a very great perfection in both those Sciences, as
he showed afterward in his Lectures at Paris, and his close and subtle
Commentaries upon the Books of Sentences. After that, by the Interest of John
Galeatius Then made Archbishop of Milan; and created Cardinal by Innocent the
Seventh.
Duke of Milan, he was made Archbishop of that place; then he was created
Cardinal by Innocent the Seventh, and now at last he was made Pope: He was a
man of great Learning and Integrity, but having been wholly addicted to study,
and confined to a Monastic Life, he was generally esteemed unfit for the
Administration of Alexander was too honest, studious and Monastic to be
politically qualified for the Chair. It Is thought he was poisoned.
Public Affairs. He enjoyed not the Sea of Rome either long or peaceably; for
the next Year going from Pisa to Bologna on the first of May, in the Tenth
Month of his Pontificate, he was poisoned, as it is believed, and Balthazar
Cossa, whom he had made Legate of Bologna, a man of a fierce Disposition, and
fitter for the Soldiery than the Priesthood, was chosen Pope by the College of
Cardinals, partly through fear of the Soldiers that he kept in Garrison in the
City, and partly by bribing the poor Cardinals that were lately promoted by
Gregory, and took the name of John the Twenty third.

He was succeeded by John the Twenty Third A papal Triumvirate.
Now while Alexander was Pope at Pisa and Bologna, Gregory assumed that Title
at Ariminum, and Benedict at Panischola a City of Arragon, so that three Popes
sat at one time in St. Peter's Chair which could hardly contain the Pride of
one, and by the just judgment of God their Vanity was made manifest, who would
have the holy Flock of Christ and the Faith of all Christians to depend upon a
perpetual succession of Popes in that See.

The Council of Pisa being broke up, and the Winter coming on, Henry Bishop of
St. David's, (who is mentioned in the Ann 11. H. 4. fol. 78. 8.
Statute-Books this Year as the King's Ambassador) with the other Delegates,
returned into England; and the two following Years he was called by 1410.
the Archbishop to two Synods holden 1411.
at London; as appears out of the public H. Chichele returns from his Embassy.
Acts of those Synods; the rest of his time he spent in visiting his Diocese
examining into the Lives of the People; and all the other Duties of his
Episcopal Was diligent in his Function.
Function, which he perform d with great diligence as often as he had leisure
from public Affairs, in which he was often employed by King Henry the Fourth,
who always highly honored him for his great Wisdom.

1413.
On the 20th of March 1413. Henry the Fourth dyed at Westminster, and Henry the
Fifth, a very accomplished Prince, succeeded him, to whom, in respect of his
excellent Endowments, Allegiance sworn to Henry the Fifth before his Coronation.
the Nobility of their own accord swore Allegiance before he was crowned, which
we never read to have been done to any of our Kings before him. While he was in
a private Capacity, he spent his younger days loosely and extravagantly; but
when he came to the Crown, he changed his course of Life together with his
Condition; for he presently put away from him all those that he had made his
Equals, and who had served him as Instruments of his Extravagances, and took to
him all the wisest and gravest men, whose Counsels his Father had made use of,
amongst them Henry Bishop of St. David's, whom he ever after highly esteemed,
and this very Year, in the beginning of his Reign, he chose him out of all the
rest, and sent him upon two very honorable That King sent our Henry Ambassador
to the French King and Duke of Burgundy.
Embassies, first to the King of France, and then to the Duke of Burgundy; the
remembrance of which we owe to the French Writers, for ours have omitted this
and many other passages.

For a War was begun in France between Charles the Sixth and Henry the Fourth,
occasioned by the frequent Incursions of the French into Aquitain, which at
that time was in the possession of the English. This Quarrel was transmitted,
together with the Crown, to Henry the Fifth by his Father. But King Charles
being taken up with the Intestine Divisions between his Brother Lewis of
Orleans, and John Duke of Burgundy, desired a Truce with the English, from
which King Henry, being newly come to the Crown, and his Affairs at home being
not yet thoroughly settled, was not much averse. Whereupon Enguerrant de
Monstrellet. cap 106.
Richard Earl of Warwick, and Henry Bishop of To the former, for a Treaty of
Peace.
St. David's, were sent out of England; and from the French King, the Master of
the Horse, which is the highest Honor in France, and the Admiral, who meeting
at Calais, concluded a Truce for one Year.

When he was come back from France, he was Enguerrant de Monstrellet. chap. 109.
sent again the same Year with To the latter about a Marriage.
the Earl of Warwick to demand the Duke of Burgundy's Daughter in marriage for
King Henry. They met with the Duke at Lisle in Flanders, and treated with him
according to their Instructions, but returned without concluding any thing,
either because they did not like the person of the Lady, or because the King
Whilst the King seemed more inclinable to the French King's Daughter.
was become more inclinable to a Match with the King of France's Daughter, and
had sent Ambassadors into France at this very time to treat about it. Some few
Months after his return, he received a very ample Reward of these Embassies and
his other Merits. For the Creation of an Archbishop of Canterbury being in H.
Chichele chosen President of the Council.
consultation, he of all the Bishops of England was chosen without dispute as
most capable of exercising the highest Office in the Kingdom next to the King
himself, in whose Judgment he was looked upon as the fittest Person to deliver
his Opinion first in the Privy Council. For Thomas Arundel Archbishop of
Canterbury dying on the 19th of February, in the Year 1414.
1414. John Wodneburgh, Prior of Canterbu* and the Monks of that Church, desired
The Monks desire leave to elect an Archbishop of Canterbury.
leave of the King to elect a new Archbishop, which was a Prerogative that the
Kings of England had challenged to themselves since the time of Edward the
Third, Polyd^r. lib 19. in Edvard. 3.
who took it away from the Pope, and constituted Bishops by his own Authority,
which practice of theirs Abb. ad. c. ^. de Consuet. n. 4. and Apostil. ibid.
Panormitanus affirmed to be agreeable to the Constitutions of the Canon Law.

When they had obtained leave of the King by a Grant under the Great Seal, they
first called home the absent Monks, and celebrated the Funeral of Thomas
Arundel in Christ's Church in Canterbury, and on the 4th of May they all
assembled in the Chapter House, where after Solemn Service, and a Sermon, in
which they were all admonished of their Duty out of the Holy Scriptures in a
matter of so great importance, and having also caused the King's Grant to be
re^d, Henry Bishop of St. David's was immediately demanded by all their Voices,
which demand was declared by John Langdon one of the Monks, in the name of the
rest, to the People who were assembled in the Church in great numbers expecting
the Election of a new Archbishop.

Now he could not be elected to the Archbishopric, but must only be demanded
according to the Rules of the And Canonically demanded H. Chichele.
Canon Law, in which a Bishop is said to C. sicut vir. 7. qu. 1.
contract marriage with his Church, and C. inter corporalia extr. de translat.
Episc.
cannot part from it without the Pope's leave; so that a Bishop being engaged to
his See, is not elected to another, but is Tot. tit. extr. de postul. Prelat.
demanded, and is said not to be promoted to a second Bishopric, but Tot. tit.
de translat. Episc. and Rebust. in prax. benefit. par. 1. tit. de translat.
Episc.
translated from the first; all which Which Custom was introduced by Papal
Ambition.
was introduced by the Ambition of the Popes, who by this Device got the
disposal of most of the Bishoprics in Christendom into their own hands.

The same day two of the Monks of that Society, William Molesh and John Moland,
were appointed Proxies for the rest, who on the 15th of March waited upon the
Bishop at London, and acquainted him with the desires of the Prior and Monks,
humbly entreating him in their name to take upon him the government of the
Church of Canterbury. At that time he answered only, that for the present he
could determine nothing positively in a matter of so great concern, but desired
a day's time to consider of it. The next day, when they came to him again in
the Bishop of Norwich's House, in the presence of Edward Duke of York, and
several other Persons of the greatest Quality, he told them in express words,
that he could not gratify their desires, because it was not lawful for him to
lay down his Bishopric of St. David's without leave from the H. Chichele
expects the Pope's leave.
Pope; however, that he was not wholly averse from accepting their offer, if the
Pope would consent to it, and therefore he referred their Petition to his
Arbitrament. Whereupon the Prior and Monks by their Proxies sent to Rome,
humbly To obtain which, Proxies are sent to Rome,
requested of Pope John the Twenty third, that he would confirm their Petion of
Henry Bishop of St. David's to the vacant See of Canterbury; and at the With
the King's Letters in his favor.
same time King Henry signified by Letters to the Pope, that he had granted
leave to the Prior and Monks of Canterbury to elect an Archbishop, that upon
their request of the Bishop of St. David's he had given his assent to their
Petition, that the Bishop was a Person of eminent Note, and had deserved this
Dignity by his Virtue, and that nothing now remained, but that he would do his
part in this Affair.

Now the Merits of the Bishop were well enough known to the Pope, first in the
Court of Gregory the Twelfth, with whom he sided when he was Cardinal, and
after that in the Council of Pisa, where he was also present; so that the
Proctors for the Chapter of Canterbury soon obtained of the Pope, who was then
at Bologna, on the 27th of April, that by his Bull he would absolve the Bishop
from the Bond by which he was The Pope divorced H. Chichele from St. David's.
Made him Archbishop by way of provisor.
tied to the Church of St. David's, and translate him to the Sea of Canterbury;
in which, notwithstanding he did not confirm the Demand of the Monks, but
promoted him to the Archbishopric by way of Provisionis titulo.
Provisor, that so he might not depart from the received Custom of the Popes in
assuming to themselves a right of donation of Bishoprics and Livings; he added
moreover this Restriction, That he should not enter upon But he was first to be
sworn to the Infallible Chair.
the exercise of his Archiepiscopal Function till he had taken an Oath of
Fidelity to him and the Church of Rome, before the Bishops of Winchester and
Norwich; and lastly, by several Bulls sent to the Prior and Monks of
Canterbury, to the Bishops of that Province, to the Prelates and Vassals of the
Church, and to all the People he commanded them to obey Henry Archbishop of
Canterbury, and to pay him all the reverence, honor, obedience, and other
Services due to his Function.

But beside the Petition of the Chapter and the Pope's Bull, there yet remained
the Pall, which was an C. Significasti. 4. de elect.
Ornament taken from the Body of St. Peter who is buried at Rome, and was worn
C. Antiq. 23. de Privileg.
only by Patriarchs and Archbishops, and some Bishops to whom it was granted by
a particular Privilege, to C. nisi 3. de usu Pallii.
denote that The Pall, denoting full power over the other Bishops,
full power that they have over the inferior Bishops, and that C. 1. eod. lit.
only in the Churches of their own Province, and upon Holidays appointed by the
Pope, and C. ex tuarum. 5. eod. tit.
till they had received it, it was accounted unlawful for them to call a Synod,
to make holy Water, to confer Orders, to consecrate Churches, or to exercise
any part of their Function. This he obtained of the Pope by the means of Robert
Apilton Canon of York, whom he sent to Bologna for that purpose; which
afterward the Bishops of Winchester and Norwich, by a Power delegated to them
by the Pope's Bull, delivered Delivered him in the King's Palace of Sutton.
to him with great solemnity in the King's Palace of Sutton, in the presence of
the King himself, Humfry Duke of Gloucester, Richard Earl of Warwick, George
Earl of March, and many other of the Nobility; and there he took an Oath of
Obedience and Fidelity to the Pope (without which they A c. Significasti. de
Electi.
could not deliver him the Pall) in these words. Where he took the Oath of
Obedience.
I Henry Archbishop of Canterbury, will be faithful and obedient to St. Peter,
to the holy Apostolical Church of Rome, and to my Lord John the Twenty third,
and his Successors that shall be canonically elected. I will not consent to,
nor engage in any Design against their Life, Limbs or Liberty. The Secrets that
they shall entrust me with, either by themselves, by their Legates, or by
Letters, I will not willingly reveal to any one to their prejudice. I will
assist them in maintaining and defending the Papacy, and the Rights of St.
Peter, against all persons whatsoever, as far as it consists with my Order. I
will honorably attend the Legate of the Apostolic See both at his coming and
return, and will supply him in his necessities. When I am called to a Council I
will come, except I shall be hindered by some lawful Impediment. I will visit
the Apostolical Palace every three years, either in my own person, or by my
Deputy, except I shall be excused by leave from the Pope. The Possessions
belonging to my Archiepiscopal See I will not sell, nor give away, nor
mortgage, nor grant any new Infeoffments of them, nor any other way alienate
without the consent of the Pope. So help me God, and his holy Gospel.

But though he had obtained a power in Ecclesiastical Affairs from the Pope,
The Pope gave the Church, but the King could only give the Land.
yet he could not meddle with the Lands and Revenues of the Church without the
King's Authority. Wherefore he went to the King at Leicester, where he was put
in possession of them on the 30th of May, after he had sworn Allegiance to the
King, and had expressly renounced all those Clauses in the Pope's Which was done
after renouncing of the Clauses derogatory to the King's Power.
Bull for his Translation which might prejudice the King, or derogate from his
Royal Prerogative; after which the whole Revenue of the Archbishopric, which
upon the death of Thomas Arundel fell to the Exchequer, were by a particular
favor granted him by a Patent For his Patent he paid Six hundred Marks.
under the Great Seal, after he had paid Six hundred Marks.

He came to Leicester upon the account of the Parliament which the King had
called there, that he might consult with his Prelates, Lords and Commons about
making new Laws, raising Money, and the State of the Kingdom in general. In
this Parliament the Archbishop by his great Wisdom averted a Secured the Church
from the Envy of the two Houses.
terrible Storm from the Church, which was raised against it by the envy of the
Nobility and Commonalty at the Wealth of the Prelates, which had showed it self
at several times during the Reign of Henry the Fourth, but now seemed to
threaten them more nearly in this new Government. For ten years before this in
a Parliament holden at Coventry in the Year 1404. when King Henry the Fourth
demanded Money of them for his Wars with the Scots, the Welsh, the Bretons, the
Flemings, Being formerly voted to supply King Henry the Fourth by the Church's
Wealth.
and the French, the House of Commons replied, that there was no other way of
supplying the necessities of the Public, but by diminishing the excessive
Wealth of the Clergy; and that such was the Condition of the People of England,
that they not only advanced Money continually for the Service of the War, but
also exposed their persons to the common Enemy, while the Clergy staid at home,
and neither served their Country with their Persons, nor their Estates. To this
Thomas Arundel Archbishop Whilst the Church paid Tenths oftener than the Laity
did Fifteenths, etc.
of Canterbury, briskly replied, That the Clergy granted Tenths oftener than the
Laity did Fifteenths, and that more of their Tenants and Domestics served in
the Wars, than of those of the Nobility, beside their Prayers which they poured
out to God day and night for the prosperity of the Kingdom. And presently
turning himself to the King, he fell upon his Knees, and besought him that he
would be mindful of his Oath by which he had solemnly promised Which
Consideration, but chiefly the Intercession of his Predecessor with the King,
had then averted the storm,
before God and Man to preserve the Rights and Privileges of the Church entire
and unviolated; by which, and by engaging those of the Nobility whom he thought
to favor his Cause, he prevailed so far, that the Demands of the Commons were
thrown out by a public Act.

Six years after this in another Parliament holden by Henry the Fourth at
Another Address of the Commons against the Clergy.
Westminster, the Commons in an Address presented to the King, set forth that
the Revenues of the Prelates and Monks which they consumed in Debauchery and
Excess, were sufficient to supply the Necessities of the King and Kingdom, that
out of them might be maintained Fifteen Earls, Fifteen hundred Knights, Six
thousand two hundred Esquires, and One hundred Hospitals, and therefore they
besought the King that he would seize them into his own hands, and out of them
would defray the necessary Expenses of the Kingdom. Which was designed, as the
then Bishop alleged, for the enriching of themselves.
To which Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury again replied, That the Commons did
not desire the Lands of the Clergy to enrich the Exchequer, but to repair their
own Fortunes, which were wasted by their Prodigality out of the rich Spoils of
the Church; as it had formerly happened to the Monasteries in France, which in
the Wars between the English and the French were brought King of France, said
he, has not a Noble now of the Revenues of the Monasteries that were brought to
the Exchequer. The Petition rejected.
into the Treasury, out of which (said he) the King has not now so much as a
Noble left. At that time also the King rejected the Petition of the Commons,
whether it were that he feared an eternal Infamy would attend him if he should
rob the Church, or because he thought that the Promoters of this Design were
secret Favorers of the Doctrine of John Wickliff, to which he had always a
great aversion.

Henry the Fourth averse to Wickliff's Doctrine, abetted by the Petitioners. In
Henry the Fifth's time the Address renewed.
From that time, during the Reign of Henry the Fourth, there was nothing
attempted against the Church. But in this Parliament at Leicester, the House of
Commons in an Address petitioned the new King, that their demands against the
Clergy which were represented four years ago, might be taken into consideration
again, and voted in both Houses. The Archbishop was extremely troubled at this;
for he was very sollicitous that the Church should receive no prejudice under
his Government; his greatest fear arose from the consideration of the King's
Youth, which is generally bent upon hasty Designs and Innovations. Having
therefore communicated this Affair to the Bishops, it was determined To avoid
which the Clergy resolved to give the King Money for a War with France.
by them that the Clergy should offer the King a great Sum of Money, and excite
him to make war with the French, and to assert his Title to that Crown, which
falling to Edward the Second by Marriage, was by him transmitted to his
Successors.

Most of the Writers of that Age relate that the Archbishop upon this occasion
For which a Synod is called at London.
presently called a Synod at London, yet none of their Decrees are now to be
found among the public Records.

The Title of the Kings of England to France.
Now our Kings claimed the Crown of France by this Title, Charles the Fair King
of France, who was the only surviving Male-Heir of the Line of Philip Claimed
by Edward the Third.
the Fair, his Father dying without Issue, Edward the Third King of England,
Son to Edward the Second by Isabella, Daughter of Philip the Fair, by his
Ambassadors demanded the Crown of France of the Estates of that Kingdom, as
next of kin to Philip the Fair his Mother's Father, and Charles his Uncle. On
the Whose Competitor was Philip de Valois.
other side, Philip de Valois, Son to Charles de Valois, who was Brother to
Philip the Fair, maintained that he was next Heir by right of Succession, as
Cousin German to the late King Charles the Fair, whereas Edward claimed only in
right of his Mother, as being Grandson to Philip the Fair by his Daughter, and
Nephew to Charles the Fair by his Sister; which Claim was contrary to the Laws
and Constitutions of France, by which the Crown is to descend upon the
Male-line only; alleging the words of the Salick Law, that no Woman should
inherit in Salick Land, which Salick Land he affirmed to be the Kingdom of
France. The French therefore King Edward claiming by's Mother, rejected under
pretense of the Salick Law, assumed the Title. Successfully invaded France, and
entailed the Quarrel. Richard the Second waved the Quarrel. Henry the Fourth
was (...)
rejected King Edward's Claim, and acknowledged Philip for their King, whereupon
Edward presently assumed the Title of King of France, which our Kings have used
ever since; and having invaded France successfully, he left the Quarrel
entailed upon his Successors, together with the Crown of England. After him
Richard the Second, a weak Prince, desisted wholly from the War with the
French; and Henry the Fourth, though he were a Valiant Prince, yet being taken
up partly with the Rebellions of the Welsh, and partly with the Intestine
Divisions of his own Nobility, he could not employ the whole Force of the
Kingdom against them. But in But the happy Juncture was in Henry the Fifth's
time.
Henry the Fifth all opportunities concurred for carrying on the War, a
vigorous Age, a great Courage, Riches and Peace at home. Beside which, the
Archbishop was of opinion, that the As Chichele thought, for a more glorious
Diversion.
fierce and restless Disposition of the Young King ought to be employed in some
difficult Enterprise; and that the only way to keep him from making any
Disturbances at home, was to show him an Enemy abroad, as there is no other way
to stop the fury of a Torrent, but by dividing the Water into several Channels.
For this end he rose from his Seat in the House of Lords, and addressed himself
to the King, who sat on his Throne, in this manner.

May it please your Highness,
His Speech to the King for that purpose.
IN this Consultation about the public Affairs of the Kingdom, when so many
things have been proposed, tending to restrain the Vices of your Subjects by
good Laws to the impartial Administration of Justice, and to the establishment
of the Peace of the Kingdom, it would be accounted the highest ingratitude, if
I alone, who by your bounty have been lately advanced to the highest pitch of
Honor, should conceal those things which seem so necessary to me, for
enlarging the Bounds of your Dominion, and advancing your Reputation amongst
Foreign Nations. For although by establishing good and wholesome Laws, by the
due administration of Justice, and by the settlement of peace at home, you may
live safely and securely; yet certainly you will have but little Accommodates
himself to the King's Heroic Temper.
regard to your Honor, unless you look abroad, and consider how you may extend
the limits of your Empire, and revenge the Injuries done to you by your
Enemies; for this Opinion has been constantly received by all Princes
whatsoever, that the eminence of Kingly Dignity does consist not so much in the
Nobility of their Birth, the enjoyment of Pleasures, the abundance of all
things, the Wealth of their Subjects, and the Peace of their Kingdoms, as in
the extent of their Dominion, the multitude of their Subjects, and the number
of their Towns.

And though the Realms of England and Ireland, which are devolved upon you from
a long series of your Ancestors, may sufficiently furnish you with all these,
yet they are very small if compared with the spacious Kingdom of France, which
in number of Thinks France no less than the Envy of the World.
People, the Wealth of its Cities, in strong Garrisons and fortified Towns,
exceeds all the Kingdoms in the World; containing, as the French themselves
report, above Eighty Provinces exceeding populous, One hundred and eight
Bishops Sees, above One thousand Convents, and Thirteen thousand Parishes. All
which descending to your Represents the King's Right.
Highness by right of Inheritance from Edward the Third, your Great Grandfather,
And insinuat^ the Injuries done his French Provinces.
are unjustly detained by Charles the Sixth, commonly called King of France; to
say nothing of those Injuries which are daily offered your Subjects, in
Normandy, Gascogne, Aquitain, and the Provinces of Anjou and Maine, which your
Ancestors long ago possessed by another kind of Title, and with the consent of
the French themselves.

The Salick Law an Obtrusion.
And that they may have some color for this Injustice; they obtrude upon you
the Salick Law made by Pharamond the first King of the Francs, by which Law
they say it is provided, That no Woman shall succeed in Salick Land, affirming
by a fallacious Interpretation, that by the Salick Land is meant the Kingdom of
France, And a Cheat to debar the Female Line.
and by this Cheat they would debar the Female Line of their right of
Succession, and defraud them of their Inheritance.

Now the very Title of the Law does sufficiently evince the novelty of this
Interpretation. For it is affirmed by most of the Gregor. Turon. lib. 2. Paul.
Aemyl. in princ. Girard. du Haillan. livre 1.
Not made by Pharamond, as pretended.
Writers of that Nation, that Pharamond was only Duke of Franconia in Germany,
that he never passed the Rhine, nor ever came near the Confines of France; but
that Four hundred years after his death, when Charles the Great had conquered
the Saxons, and brought them over to Christianity, some of his Soldiers passing
the Rhine, settled their Habitations upon the River Sala (who from thence were
called Salick Francs) in that part of Germany which is now called Misnia; and
that being very much offended at the immodest behavior of the German Women,
they made a Law, by which they excluded that Sex from inheriting any part of
the Salick Land. So that this Constitution is absurdly ascribed to Pharamond,
which had its original from a People that sprung up four But Four hundred years
after him, and in Germany.
hundred years after him, and can no more concern the French, than it does the
Belgians, who at that time were contained within the bounds of France, or any
other Neighboring Nation.

If it obliges the French, it relates to private Inheritances only; for,
But suppose that it did oblige the French, yet even then it relates only to
Franc. Hottom. in Franco-gall. cap. 10.
private Inheritances, and not to public Right of Government, or the Succession
of the Kingdom; and therefore whenever the French Kings disputed the Title with
one another, In dispute, one French King never used it against another; for
they never made any account of this Law; but when they contended with Foreign
Princes they then alleged it, that by this means they might exclude them from
the Government.

Pepin claimed by a Female,
For Pepin who deprived the Race of Pharamond of the Kingdom by deposing
Childeric, claimed the Cromn as next Heir to Blithild, Daughter to Clothaire
the First, which Title was confirmed by Pope Zachary, and by the consent of the
People of France.

and so did Hugh Capet.
When his Posterity had reigned for Two hundred years, Hugh Capet put by
Charles Duke of Lorrain, who was the only surviving Heir of the Line of Pepin
and Charles the Great, pretending himself to be lineally descended from
Lingarda, the Daughter of Charlemain who was Grandson to Charles the Great, by
which Title he obtained the Crown.

And by the like Lewis the Tenth confirmed his Right.
His Grandson Lewis the Tenth, who was canonized for a Saint, and whom all we
Christians honor as such, being not very well satisfied with the right of his
Grandfather Capet, out of a religious scruple would have declined the
Government, had he not called to mind, that his Grandmother Queen Isabel was
next Heir to Ermingarda, Daughter and Heir of Charles of Lorrain, whom Capet
had impiously deprived both of his Life and Kingdom*

From him all these later Kings of France and this Charles the Sixth, who now
reigns, are descended, and all these obtained the Kingdom in right of Female
Succession, which by the Salick Law they This Law made a Bugbear to Foreigners,
contemned by themselves.
would now debar you of, and would fain terrify you with this Bugbear, which
they themselves securely contemn.

Nor can that be properly called a Law, which has no show of equity or justice
in it, nay which contradicts all Laws both Divine and Humane, but ought rather
to be termed a masque or shadow of a Law. For by the Civil Laws of the Romans,
which are approved by the consent of all Nations, L. maximum intem. c. d.
liber. praeterit. 1. lege 12. Tab. c. de legit. haered. sect. Si quis igitur.
Anth. de haered. ab intest. sect. Item vetustas. Instit. eod. tit.
Women It Is contrary to the Civil Law, and
are admitted to inherit equally with Men, and the distinction of Agnation and
Cognation is taken away upon very good grounds, for they that introduced it,
seemed to have laid the blame upon Nature for producing some Women as well as
Men, and Women suffer through the fault of their Parents in being born of that
Sex, and not of the Male.

These Laws were afterward admitted by the Sicilians, Neapolitans, Navarrois,
Spaniards, Portuguese, Scots, and (to say nothing of our selves) by almost all
Nations, The Constitutions of most Nations,
by the Constitutions of all which, Women for want of Male-heirs, are admitted
to the Government; and herein they all follow the prescription of that Divine
And to the Divine Law.
Law which God Almighty gave the Jews by Moses in the Twenty seventh Chapter of
Numb* 27. 8.
Numbers; If a man dye and have no Son, the Inheritance shall pass to his
Daughter: To which Ordinance if any Laws in any Nation whatsoever be found
repugnant, they are not Laws but Corruptions, seeing they depart from that
principal Rule of Justice which the great Lawgiver prescribed to his own People.

But setting aside those Women who governed that very People, and those Kings
who inherited that Crown in right of their Mothers, we Christians do all
acknowledge, Jesus Christ the Lawful Heir, by his Mother of the Jewish Kingdom.
that Jesus Christ was the lawful Heir of the Jewish Kingdom; now they who deny
a right of Succession to be derived from the Female Sex, do not only oppose his
Title, but also deprive us of those exceeding great Benefits which God has
promised to Mankind through Christ. For God having promised Abraham that in his
Seed all the Nations of the Earth should be blessed, because the Messiah was to
come out of his Family; and the Prophets Isaiah and Micah, by the inspiration
of the Holy Ghost, having prophesied many Ages before that Christ should spring
out of the Root of Jesse, and out of the Family of David, and that the Tribe of
Juda should be the noblest of all the rest, because Christ was to arise out of
it who should govern the People of Israel; if the right of Succession be taken
away from the Female Sex, we shall find no truth in these Divine Oracles, for
Christ being begotten by an Eternal Father, could not spring from the Seed of
Abraham, from the Root of Jesse, from the House of David, and from the Tribe of
Juda but by Inheritance from his Mother.

The French rather deny the Bible, than submit to a Foreign Prince.
But the French choose rather to destroy the veracity of the Divine Promises,
than to submit to a Foreign Prince; and they that call themselves most
Christian, do prefer a supposititious Law of Pharamond a Heathen, before those
sacred Laws given by God himself.

I would ask the French why they exclude Women from a right of governing, whom
all other Nations do admit? Is it because their Government is so much better
than that of all other Nations, and even than that of the Jews, which was
constituted by God himself, that only men are capable of administering it? or
does France, which as they say produces the bravest men in the World, bring
forth the weakest and most despicable Women? or did your great Grandfather's
Mother Isabella commit some heinous Crime, for which she a King's Daughter, and
Sister to Kings, deserved to be deprived of the Crown?

But though we should grant them all this, yet seeing they have formerly
rejected your great Grandfather King Edward, and do now disclaim any Authority
that your Highness has over them, they are very manifestly convicted of
Treason against you.

For admitting the Salick Law to be in force in the Kingdom of France, let
Females be excluded, and the Male Issue only inherit the Crown, yet by what
words of The Salick Law literally excludes not the Sons of Females.
that Law are the Sons of those Females excluded? Shall a Law that debars Women
from inheriting, in respect of the natural Levity of their Sex, be made to
contradict it self, and for a quite contrary reason, to put by Men also? or
will they by a kind of malicious comprehension extend those words of the Law to
the Male-Sex, which reach only the Female? Wherefore, though they exclude
Isabella, why did they not admit her Son Edward, a magnanimous and prudent
Person? why do they not invite your Highness, a Prince every way qualified for
Government? For it is a received Maxim amongst the Lawyers, that one L. Si ex
patronis. 10. sect. Julianus. ff. de bonis libert. l. Divi fratres. 17. ff. de
jure patr. l. 1. sect. si filius. ff. de suis and legit. haered. l. cum dotem.
57 ff. ad leg. Falcid. l. 2. sect. nullum. ff. de decurion. l. in servitutem.
16. sect. si patroni filius. ff. de bonis libert. l. si. vellem. 4. sect. si
deportatus. ff. eod. tit. l. 1. sect. filium. ff. de bon. poss. contr. tab.
unworthy or incapable may transmit some sort of right to his Heir; and that
Sect. neque Authent. de trient. and sereniss. d. l. maximum vitium c. de liber.
praeter Bald. ad. l. 2. n. 7. c. quae sit. long. consuet. Bald. ad l. si
defunctus. n. 8. C. de suis and legit. Anchor. ad c. Canonum statuta. n. 311.
de Constit. Alex. Cons. 16. vol. 1. Bart. ad. l. cunctos populos. n. 33. C. de
sum. Trinit.
those Laws that take away from Females the right of Inheritance, are contrary
to right Reason and natural Justice; that none but the strictest interpretation
of them is to be admitted, and that they L. Curials. C. de praed. decur. lib.
10 l. filius fam. 7. sect. sed meminisse. ff. de donat. l. maritum. 42. ff.
sol. matr. l. si vero. 64. sect. si vero. ff. eod.
may not be stretched beyond the very Letter, L. Si ita scriptum. 45. in princ.
ff. de leg. 2. Rebuff. ad. l. 1. ff. de verb. sign.
from Women to Men, nor to the L. Prospexit. 12. sect. 1. ff. qui and a quib.
manum. l. commodissim. 10. ff. de lib. and posthum. l. si cum dotem. 22. in
princ. ff. sol. matr.
exclusion of a Sex that is not mentioned in them, but ought rather And is to be
taken in the most favorable sense.

The Archbishop asserts the King's Call as well as Right to France.


to be taken in the most C. Statutum 22. de Elect. in 6.
favorable acceptance.

Seeing therefore (most mighty Prince) that you are called to the Kingdom of
France by the Laws both of God and Man, assert that Right which is denied you
by the French by force of Arms, strike off that Crown from the head of the King
of France which he has unjustly put on, repress the Rebellions of that People
with fire and sword, maintain the ancient Honor of the English Name amongst
Foreign Nations, and suffer not Posterity to accuse your Tameness in passing by
those Affronts put upon you by your Enemies.

For besides a very just Cause, which is commonly attended with the Divine
Assistance, you have all things that can be desired With other great
Encouragements to the Expedition.
for carrying on a War with success; a vigorous Age, a strong and healthful
Constitution, a loyal Nobility and Commonalty, and a flourishing Kingdom; and
lastly, We your Subjects of the Clergy have granted your Highness a greater Sum
of Money than your Predecessors ever received of our Order, which we very
readily and cheerfully offer you for the Charges of this War, and shall daily
in our Prayers implore the Divine Majesty, that by the prosperous success of
your Arms he would make known Success a Good Sign in the Virtuous and Brave.
to all the World the Justice of your Cause.

The Archbishop having ended his Speech, the King seemed very much affected
with it. But Ralph Nevil Earl of Westmorland, President of the But the Earl of
Westmorland advises a War with the Scots.
North, fearing the Incursions of the Scots if the King should pass over into
France, in a long Oration endeavored to persuade, That a War with the Scots
was to be undertaken before that with the French; and after he had excused
himself in the beginning of his Speech for his want of Learning, as not being
able to contend with my Lord of Canterbury either in Eloquence or Knowledge, he
added, That he had learned from Wise men, and from his own Experience, that
Forces united are stronger than disjoined; and that it was less hazardous to
invade a Neigbouring Enemy, than one more remote. Thus the From the Roman
Example to begin with the lesser Enemy.
Romans first reduced to their obedience the Samnites, the Fidenates, the
Volsci, and those People of Italy that lay next to them, before they attempted
to meddle with Foreign Nations; and afterward preferred the little Island of
Sicily because it bordered upon Italy, before the vast Regions of Pannonia,
Numidia and Germany.

He showed that the War with the And the readiness of Provisions for the latter.
Scots would be managed here at home where Soldiers and all other necessary
preparations for War would be ready at hand, whereas against the French there
was a necessity of providing a great Fleet and Army at a prodigious charge,
when the Seat of the War was to be in the Enemies Country; With the easiness of
the Victory.
that the Victory would be easily obtained over the Scots, their King being
Prisoner in England, and the state of Affairs there being in confusion through
the unseasonable severity of Alban the Regent; and lastly, The justice and
necessary of the War.
That the cause of this War would be very just, being occasioned by the Ravages
and Robberies daily committed by the Scots, which they would exercise with
greater fury while the English were engaged with the French, who are in strict
conjunction with the Scots by an ancient and even natural Alliance that is
between the two Nations, and therefore that it would be very hazardous to
invade the French, before England was secured from the Scots at home.

The Earl Answered by Jo. Duke of Exeter.
To this Speech of the Earl's, replied John Duke of Exeter, a Man of great
Wisdom and Learning, which he had acquired in the Universities of Italy,
whither he was sent by his Father, who designed him for the Church; He very
eloquently maintained, That the That the Scot's Strength (lying in the French)
ought to be first attaqued.
French ought first to be invaded, upon whose aid the Scots relying, infested
the English: That if they were subdued, the Scots would come in of themselves,
according to this Aphorism of the Physicians, That the Remedy must be first
applied to the Cause of the Disease; and that in order to the healing a Wound
effectually, the peccant Humor must first of all be purged. For from whence,
said he, do the Scots draw the first rudiments France once conquered, the Scots
will be helpless.

Advised to hinder the Scots Attempts in the King's absence. Which Opinion
highly applauded


either of Learning or Arms, but from their Education in France? How can the
Scotch Nobility be maintained, if those Pensions should fail which they use to
receive from France? or if that Kingdom should be subdued, with what Nation
will the Scots maintain any Commerce, or from whom will they implore
Assistance? Not from Denmark; that King is allied to you by marriage with your
Sister; not from Portugal or Castile, both those Princes are your
Cousin-Germans; not from Italy, that is too remote; not from Germany or
Hungary, they are both in league with us; so that the Scots will submit to you
of themselves when the French are conquered, as the Tree necessarily withers
when the Sap fails.

He also showed in the Instances of Malcolm and David Bruce, that the Scots
never invaded England, but when the English were at war with France, and
therefore he proposed that the Earl of Westmorland should be sent with some
choice Troops to hinder them from attempting any thing in the King's absence.
He concluded, that the Conquest of France would be a rich and plentiful reward
of their Victory, in comparison of which that of Scotland was but poor and
inconsiderable.

And War with France was the Cry of the House.
The King and the Nobility were so much inclined in favor of this Opinion, but
especially the Dukes of Clarence, Bedford and Gloucester the King's Brethren,
who were enflamed with the desire of acquiring Honur and Renown in the War with
France by the Example of their Ancestors, that when it came to be voted after
the usual manner, they all concurred in their Opinion with the Archbishop, and
cried out confusedly in the House, War, War with France.

The Archbishop's renowned for the wisdom of his Counsel.
By this means the Archbishop obtained great commendation of Posterity for his
Wisdom, who by this Counsel of his promoted a very successful War, and averted
a very great Calamity from the Church.

The King having dissolved the Parliament, with great diligence provided his
Army and Navy, and made all other The King provides Army and Navy.
necessary preparations for such a War, designing to invade France the next
Year. In the beginning of which, that France the Bishops of Durham and Norwich
Sends Ambassadors to demand France.
to demand the Kingdom of King Charles, who received them civilly, and told
them, that he would shortly send Ambassadors into England to return an Answer
to their Demands. The Fleet and Army being ready for this Expedition, and the
Soldiers being ordered to The Army's Rendezvous at Southampton.
rendezvous at Southampton, in order to embark on Board the Fleet, The King in
his Journey thither staid some time at Winchester, where the French Ambassadors
came to him, who were the Earl of Vendosme, William Bouratier Archbishop of
Bourges, Peter Fremell Bishop of Lisieux, and Walter Cole Secretary to the
King. The Archbishop of Bourges made an Eloquent Oration in the name of the
rest; in which, after he had largely and floridly described the Miseries of
War, and the Advantages of Peace, he offered the King in marriage the Lady
Catharine, The French Ambassadors, in Answer, offer the French King's Daughter
in Marriage.
King Charle's Daughter, if he would desist from the War, promising for her
Dowry a great Sum of Money, and some part of those Provinces which the King
demanded by right of Inheritance. The King only answered at that time, that he
would consider of the Conditions which they proposed, and the next day sitting
on his Throne, and attended with a great number of the Nobility, the
Ambassadors being called in, Their Conditions not thought honorable by the
King.
he told them that the Conditions which they offered were such, as he could not
accept of with honor; and calling Henry Archbishop of Canterbury, he commanded
him to give a fuller Anser to the Archbishop of Bourges Oration; which he did
to this effect.

The Archbishop's more full Answer.
That the King as soon as he came to the Crown, thought nothing of greater
importance than to maintain peace as well at home amongst his own Subjects, as
abroad with Foreign Princes. For which cause he had called a Parliament, in
which having settled his Affairs at home, he had sent Ambassadors into France to
claim his right, and to demand that part of the Kingdom of France which the
Kings of England had held for some Ages by a lawful possession. But seeing his
Ambassadors had brought That the French King had not answered King Henry's
Demand.
back no Answer from King Charles, that he had levied an Army, and provided all
things necessary for the War, and that he was now ready to pass over into
France, and revenge the wrong they had done him when he perceived they made no
account of his Right. Nevertheless, that he might testify to all the World, how
averse he was from shedding Christian Blood by the mutual Butchery of War, that
he would remit something of his Right, that he would disband his Army, and
establish a Peace between the two Nations by marriage with Catharine, upon
condition that they would restore to him the Dutchies of Aquitain and Anjou,
and the other Dominions which Who insisted only on the Dominions his Ancestors
had enjoyed.
his Ancestors enjoyed in France neither forcibly, nor clandestinely, nor
precariously. That unless these Conditions were accepted, the King would
immediately enter France with his Army, and lay it waste with Fire and Sword;
nor would he ever desist from slaughter and revenge, till he had reduced it to
his obedience, and had recovered the Dominion transmitted to him by right of
Inheritance from his Predecessors. And lastly, That he called God Almighty both
for a Witness and Avenger of his Cause, whose Majesty he trusted would be
propitious to so just a War.

Which Answer the King confirms.
When the Archbishop had done speaking, the King interposed, and with his Royal
Word confirmed all that he had delivered in more copious and Rhetorical Terms.
To which when the Archbishop of Bourges began to reply with reproachful
Language, and to reflect upon the King with more freedom than consisted with
the Character of an Ambassador, the King only The French Ambassadors remanded.
reprimanded him for the liberty which he took, and commanded the Ambassadors to
depart the Kingdom under safe Conduct.

The King sets sail.
The King soon after followed them, setting sail from Southampton with his
whole Army on the 13th of August; And at his first arrival in Normondy, he took
Harflew, a very strong Town, Takes Harflew.
after a Month's siege; the Winter coming on, he marched from thence toward
Calais, and having passed the Seine, and being provoked and set upon in his
march by the French, he defeated them in a pitched Battle near Agincourt Deseats
the French at Agincourt.
on the 25th of October. It is certain that the English never fought with
greater success, than in this Battle; for of the French Ten thousand were
slain, Of whom Ten thousand are slain.
with the loss of Two hundred only on our side, as the Paul. Aemyl. in Carol. 6.
French Writers themselves have recorded it, and the Dukes And many Noble
Prisoners.
of Orleans and Bourbon, with a great many of the Nobility of France, were taken
Prisoners, and brought over into England.

In the King's absence, the Archbishop arms the Clergy in Kent.
Whilst the King was in France, by his command the Archbishop of Canterbury
ordered all the Clergy of that Diocese to be in Arms, lest the French should in
the King's absence make any attempt upon the Coast of Kent, which lay exposed
to their Invasion; after which he appointed a Synod of his Calls a Synod.
Province to be held at London on the 28th of November: The first day of their
meeting was taken up in Religious Solemnities; For after Mass, which was
celebrated in the Morning by the Archbishop on the High Altar in St. Paul's,
William Lyndewood Chancellor of Canterbury preached before the whole Body of
the Clergy (which was assembled in S. Mary's Chapel in that Cathedral) upon
these words of the Prophet Jeremy (cap. 6. v. 16.) Stand ye in the ways and
see. The following days the Bishops and Abbots met in St. Mary's Chapel, and
the Priors, Deans, Archdeacons, and Proctors of the several Diocesses withdrew
into the Chapter House,
where they consulted separately about the Affairs of the Church, from whence
they are generally called the Upper and Lower House of Convocation.

In which two Tenths are granted for the War.
In this Synod two Tenths were granted to the King for the War with France out
of all Ecclesiastical Revenues and Benefices that used to pay Tenths, one of
them to be paid at St. Martin's day next following, and the other on the same
day the next Year: On the 2d of December the Archbishop dissolved the Synod;
after that, at the King's desire, and with the consent of both Houses, he had
appointed the days of St. George, St. David, St. Cedda, and St. Winifred, to be
observed as Holidays. This Decree is still to be seen amongst the C.
Ineffabilis. de feriis. Lyndw.
English Constitutions.

The next Year he held another Synod London on the first of April, to consult
Another Synod.
with the Bishops and other Prelates about sending Delegates to the Council at
Constance. For Christendom was Christendom divided between Three Popes.
still divided between three Popes, John the Twenty third, who exercised the
Pontifical Function at Rome, Gregory the Twelfth at Ariminum, and Benedict the
Thirteenth at Avignon. For both By two of whom the Council of Pisa refused.

A General Council appointed by the Third.


Gregory and Benedict had refused to submit to the Sentence pronounced against
them by the Council of Pisa. But John being solicited by all the Christian
Princes to put an end to the Schism, had two years before this appointed a
General Council of all Christendom to be held at Constance in Germany, though
it were with great reluctance and unwillingness, fearing that the Council would
deprive him of the Papacy, which afterward happened, as we shall hereafter
show.

The Archbishop appears at Constance by Proxy.
The Archbishop being cited by the Pope's Bull to Constance, had sent thither
two years ago as his Proxies, Robert Apulton Canon of York, and John Forced
Canon of Lincoln, to assist in his Name at the Council; and at the same time
the Earl of Warwick, the Bishops of Salisbury, Bath and Hereford, with the
Abbot of Westminster, and the Prior of Worcester, were sent thither also as
Delegates from the King, and the Body of the Clergy, whose number being
diminished by the death of Robert Hallum Bishop of Salisbury, and Robert Mascal
Bishop of Hereford, who died at Constance; and because the Deputies of other
Nations appeared at the Council in greater numbers, therefore in this Synod,
Richard Clifford Bishop of London, and twelve Doctors, together with the
Chancellors of the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge were chosen for Their
Charges 2 d. per l. out of the Clergy's Revenues.
this Employment, and Two pence in the Pound out of the Livings and Revenues of
the Clergy was allowed them for their Expenses.

The Emperor comes to England as Mediator.
About this time the Emperor Sigismond came first into France, and afterward
into England, to endeavor by his mediation to establish Peace as well in the
Church by deposing the contumacious Popes, as betwixt the two Kings of England
and France by putting an end to the War. At his request, the Whereupon the
Delegates are pressed to Constance.
King pressed the Archbishop and the Synod to dispatch their Delegates to
Constance with what speed they could.

Where a Decree passed about Wills and Administration.
In this Synod also it was decreed, That the Goods of Persons deceased should
be deposited in the hands of a Trustee, till their Will should be exhibited and
proved; that Administration should not be granted to their Executors till they
had made a true Inventory of the Goods, and that they should meddle only with
those Goods that were contained in the Inventory; it was further added
(according to the Circumstances of those Times) that no more than Five
Shillings should be demanded for the Registring That 5 s. shall be paid for a
Probate.

And that the Clergy shall bring in the Tenth six Months sooner.


or Probate of Wills; and lastly, to gratify the King, it was ordered that the
Clergy should bring in the Tenth, which by a Decree of the former Synod was to
be paid at the Feast of St. Martin, six Months sooner.

The Mediation in vain between the Two Kingdoms,
But Sigismond labored to no purpose to compose the Differences between the
French and the English. For whilst a Treaty of Peace was carried on with the
French Ambassadors, who came over into Harfleu being besieged, and Four hundred
English slain by the French.
England with the Emperor, News was brought out of France that Harfleu was
besieged by the French, and that Four hundred English were slain in a Battle
lately fought with John Earl of Armagnac; the King was so incensed at this
Defeat, that from that time he was wholly averse from the least mention of
Peace, and would have gone over forthwith into France, if he had not been
dissuaded from it by the Emperor; Wherefore the King sends his Brother the Duke
of Bedford, to Normandy. Presents the Emperor with the Garter,
wherefore he sent his Brother John Duke of Bedford with a Fleet and Army into
Normandy; and having presented Sigismond with the Order of the Garter, and made
a League with him, after he had magnificently entertained him in England for
four Months, about the end of And conducts him to Calais.
August he conducted him as far as Calais, being attended with a very splendid
Retinue, and a numerous Fleet.

The Emperor goes to Constance.
The Emperor went from thence to Constance to assist at the Council; but the
King staid there some time to order his Affairs in France, and the
Archbibishop, when the Synod was broke up, The Archbishop goes to France.
came thither out of England.

Ambassadors from the French to King Henry at Calais.
While the King was at Calais, there came to him John Duke of Burgundy, the
Archbishop of Rhemes, and other Ambassadors sent from Charles King of France to
sue for Peace at a very unseasonable time, when the King upon the late Injuries
received of the French, was wholly intent upon preparations for War, lest he
who the last Year was Conqueror in the Battle of Agincourt, should now, upon
the account of his late Losses seem not to give, but to receive Conditions of
Peace.

Wherefore having settled his Affairs in France, he returned soon after into
England, and held a Parliament at Westminster, Who returning got a Supply from
the Parliament.
of which he easily obtained a supply of Men and Money for the service of the
War with France the next Year. At the same time the Archbishop came back from
Calais, and by the King's Command called a Synod at London on the 9th of
November, in which, at the request of Henry Beaufort Bishop of Winchester, the
Earl Marshal, and Henry Ware (who from Chancellor of Canterbury had some time
before been made Keeper of the Privy Seal) who for that purpose were sent
thither by the King, he prevailed with them to grant the And Two Tenths from
the Synod.
King two Tenths for his Expedition into France. There was nothing else done in
that Synod, but on the Days of John of C. Anglicanae de feriis.
Beverley, and of Crispin and Crispinian, Martyrs, on which the Battle of
Agincourt happened, were made Holidays.

The King setting sail, left the Duke of Bedford Vicegerent.
The King, having commanded the Nobility to attend him, and having levied a
choice Army, and equip't his Fleet, sailed over into Normandy on the August
1417. leaving John Duke of Bedford to govern the Kingdom in his absence. When
he was gone, the Archbishop commanded all the Bishops of his Province to cause
solemn Processions to be made to all Churches and Chapels for the safety of
the King, and the success of his Arms.

The same Year by a signal Example of his Justice and Courage, he showed how
much all People whatsoever in that Age stood in awe of the Authority of the
Church. For on Easterday the Lord Strange, with the Lady Elizabeth his Wife,
and a great Train of Servants attending them coming to St. Dunstan's Church to
Vespers, and meeting Sir John Trussel there, with whom he had an ancient
Quarrel, his Servants drew their Swords in the Church, wounded Sir John, his
Son, and some others of his Family, and killed one Thomas Petwardy a Citizen of
London, who to accommodate the matter between them, had thrust himself into the
Scuffle. The Matter being The Archbishop interdicts the Church of St. Dunstans.
brought before the Archbishop, he interdicted the Church, which had been
polluted with Blood, the Authors and Accomplices of the Crime were publicly
excommunicated and cursed before Excommunicates the Criminals, viz.
the People at Paul's Cross, and the Archbishop sitting as Judge in St. Paul's
Church, after he had examined into the Lord Strange, Lady and Servants.

The two former with Tapers, and all in their Shirts and Drawers only, did
processional Penance from St. Paul's to St. Dunstan's; for purification of
which


Fact, imposed this Penance on the Lord Strange and his Lady, who fell on their
knees before him, and humbly begged pardon of the Church; That their Servants
in their Shirts and Drawers only, and he and his Wife with Tapers in their
hands, should go through the great Street of the City from St. Paul's to St.
Dunstan's, all which was accordingly performed with great solemnity; and when
the Archbishop purified St. Dunstan's The Lady filled the Vessels with water*
Church, the Lady Strange filled the Vessels with Water; they were also
commanded to offer each of them a Pyx and Altarcloath.

In the mean time the matter was hotly debated in the Council of Constance
about taking away the Schism in the At Constance they dispute about a new Pope.
Church by the creation of a new Pope; and restraining those Persons who with a
great deal of liberty inveighed against the Pride of the Popes, the Luxury of
the Clergy, the lazy Lives of the Monks, and the innumerable Corruptions of the
And against John Wickliff.
Church of Rome. Of these John Wickliff was accounted the chief, who in the
Reign of Edward the Third, and Richard the Second, by his public Lectures at
Oxford, and afterward by his Books which he put out, drew to his Party a great
many not only of the Students of that University, but also of the Nobility By
whom the Seeds of sound Doctrine had been dispersed. Particularly among the
Bohemians.
and common People. By him the Seeds of sound Doctrine were dispersed among
other Christian Nations, and particularly among the Bohemians, who embraced his
Tenets so readily, that they had already in a manner renounced the Pope.

Wickliff pronounced Heretic.

And decreed that his Bones be taken up and burnt.

And his Followers be prosecuted as Heretics.


To put a stop to their progress, John Wickliff was pronounced a Heretic by a
Decree of the Council; and it was further ordained that his Memory should be
accursed, that his Bones should be taken out of his Grave and burnt, and that
all those who maintained his Opinions should be prosecuted as guilty of Heresy.

Then they proceeded to the Bohemians, and having likewise condemned their
Opinions, John Huss and Hierome John Huss, and Jerome of Prague, condemned to
Flames.
of Prague were adjudg'd Arch-hereticks and condemned to the Flames. The death
of these two Persons brought a great deal of infamy upon the Emperor Whose
death made the Emperor and Council infamous.
Sigismond, and the whole Council; for being cited to Constance, they came
thither under the security of the public Faith, which Sigismond had engaged to
Ladislaus, King of Bohemia, for their safe return; Which being so shamefully
violated, the Bohemians were so incensed, The public Faith being shamefully
violated, The Bohemians revenge it.
that having made John Zisca, a valiant Commander, their General, they
afterward brought the Emperor into very great Straits. But the Council, to
take away the infamy of this Action, decreed that Faith was not to be kept The
Council decreed; Faith is not to be kept with Heretics.
with Council. Constable. Sess. 15.
Heretics, having first consulted Panormitanus and Ludovicus Romanus, two
Lawyers of great repute, who delivered this as their Opinion, as did also some
others whom the Fathers of the Council could Mar. Solomon. ad l 2. sect.
exactis. ff. de orig. jur. Petr. Plac. lib. 1. Epit. delict. c. 37.
sway by their Authority. Notwithstanding the more Menoch. lib. 2. de Arbit.
Jud. Cent. 4. Cas. 336. Farrinac. in prac. Crim. tit. de carcerib. and
carcerat. q. 20. and Menoch. Cons. 100.
Modern Lawyers were of a contrary Opinion, Of which the Papists ashamed, kept
it to Luther and others.
and the Papists themselves were so ashamed of this Decree, that they did not
offer to violate the public Faith given to Bodin. lib 5. de repub. cap. 6.
Luther at the Diet of Worms, and afterward to the Protestants which came to
the Petr. Aerod. de ord. Judic. par. 4. n. 15.
Council of Trent. For what can be more absurd, or indeed more impious, than
that Christians should make no account of their word, which was always esteemed
sacred even by the Heathens themselves?

After these things the Council was wholly intent upon composing the
Differences between the Popes. For when the Emperor Sigismond was returned out
of England, several heinous Crimes were Pope John the Twenty third charged for
not leaving the Papacy;
alleged against John the Twenty third, because he had not laid down the
Papacy, as he had solemnly promised; whereupon he fled privately, and in
disguise, from Constance into Austria; but being pursued by the Emperor, he was
taken in the Habit of a Fencer, or a Huntsman, and brought before the Council,
by whom he was committed to Prison; and some of the chief Men out of every
Nation there present being deputed to examine into his Actions, he was accused
before them of Adultery, Incest, And accused before the Council of Adultery,
Incest, Witchcraft, etc.
Witchcraft, Murder, and other horrid Crimes, particularly of Simony, that
being first made Cardinal, and afterward Pope, through Bribery, he had set to
sale Livings, Dignities, Bishoprics and Cardinalships, Orders, Indulgences,
and all other things belonging to the Church; all which being proved by
Witnesses, by the Sentence of the Council he was divested of the Papacy, and
condemned to Imprisonment.

There remained yet Gregory the Twelfth, and Benedict the Thirteenth. Gregory,
when he saw that he must submit, sent Charles Malatesta Prince of Ariminum, as
his Legate to Constance, with a large Commission, in which full power was
granted him to lay down the Pontificate in his Name. Whereupon the Legate
putting on the Pontifical Robes, and sitting in the Papal Gregory by Proxy
resigns the Chair, as did also Benedict.
Chair, as representing the Person of Gregory, read his Commission publicly,
and resigned the Papacy.

Benedict also being deserted by Ferdinand King of Arragon, who had hitherto
obeyed him, by the Sentence of the Council was divested of the Popedom. And
that these Depositions of the Popes might appear to be lawful, it was
determined by a Decree of the Council,
that a Sess. 4, and 5.
General Council does derive its At Constance a Council is decreed superior to
the Pope.
Power immediately from Christ, and that the Pope is subordinate to it.

After this they consulted about choosing a new Pope, and it was agreed upon by
the Council, that six men out of each Nation should be deputed to go into the
Conclave with the Cardinals, Five Nations composed the Council.
and elect a Pope. Now all things were managed in the Council by the Suffrages
of five Nations, the Germans, the Italians, the English, the French, and the
Spaniards; for it was in this Council that the English were first allowed to be
a Nation. Out of them were chosen the Bishops of London, Bath, Worcester and
Litchfield, with the Abbot and Dean of York. The third day after their entrance
into the Conclave, the Bishop of London leading the way with these words, I
Richard Bishop of London, come to my Lord Cardinal Colonna, all the rest
followed his Example, and chose Otho Colonna a Roman Prince, and Cardinal of
St. George of the Golden Fleece, on the 11th of November, which being St.
Martin's day, the Pope took Martin the elected Pope.
the Name of Martin the Fifth.

This Sess. 12.
Decree of the Council of Constance concerning the power of a General Council,
extremely troubled the succeeding Popes, insomuch that it was repealed by Leo
the Tenth in the last The D cree of the Council's Power repealed by Leo the
Tenth.
Lateran Council; since which a great many of the Canonist. ad c. si Papa.
Did. 40. etc. significasti de elect.
Canonists in their Commentaries, and the Bellarm. lib. 2. de Council. Author.
cap. 14. Sander, lib. 7. de visib. monar.
Popish Divines in their long Disputations have disallowed it, either out of
flattery to the Popes, or else out of fear, as having lost that liberty of
speaking and writing which every one enjoyed at the time of the Council of
Constance when there was no Pope. For Ancharan. Cons* 181.
Peter Ancharanus who was Advocate of the Council Bald. ad. c. olim. n. 32. de
rescript.
, Baldus and Abb. ad c. quia diligentia. n. 2. de Elect. and ad c.
significasti. n. 4. eod. tit. and ad c. fraternitatis. n. 1. and 2. de haeret.
Panormitanus gave it openly as their Opinion at that time, That the Pope was
subordinate to a Council, and might be deposed by it, following herein the
Authority of the Gl. ad. c. si Papa did. 40.
Gloss of Archidiac. and Gemin* ad c. in fidei favorem. de haeret in 6.
Archdiaconus and Geminianus, who had delivered the same before in their
Writings, with whom Felin. ad c. super literis. n. 21. de rescript. Dec. in
Consil. pro Authoritate Concilii supra Papam. late. Cardinal. Jacobat. lib. 3.
de Council. art. 1. n. 11. Jo. Royas de haeret. n. 18.
Felinus and other more modern Authors do agree, who approve the Council of
Constance, and maintain the same Opinion.

A Council not to be restrained by a new Pope;
Nor is the Power of a Council restrained within such narrow limits, that
immediately upon the creation of a Pope it loses its Authority, and can make no
Decrees without the consent of the new Pope, as Philip Decius ad c. Osius. n.
2. de Elect.
Decius imagined, who is therefore deservedly censured by In notis ad Decium.
ded. c. Osius.
Charles Molinaeus; and Abb. ad. c. licet de vitanda n. 8. de elect.
Panormitanus further adds, That if the Pope dye, or And that, on the Pope's
death, a new Election belongs to the Council.
be deposed in the time of a Council, that then the power of Election is in the
Council, and not in the Cardinals, alleging this Instance of the Council of
Constance, in which Martin the Fifth was chosen by the Cardinals and others, to
whom that Power was delegated by the Council.

But though this Decree was established at that time in this Sess. 19.
Council of Constance, yet it was afterward of no force in the Council of
Trent, in which Yet during that of Trent, the Cardinals chose Paul the Third.
the Ambition of the Cardinals prevailed, who upon the death of Paul the Third,
who Thu^n. lib. 4. histor.
died in the time of the Council, posted from Trent to Rome to That of Constance
gave order about the Money due by England to Rome.
create a new Pope. But the Council of Constance by virtue of their Supreme
Authority in the beginning of their Session gave Commission under the Seals of
the several Nations to Henry Bishop of Winchester, and John Bishop of
Litchfield, to gather the Moneys due to the Chamber of Rome in England.

The Election of Pope Martin was mightily liked.
The Election of Martin the Fifth caused an incredible joy all over
Christendom, for every one thought that by this means the Peace of the Church
would be reestablished. The first notice of it in England was given by the
Archbishop to the Synod, and was presently divulged by Thanksgivings and solemn
Processions. This Synod was appointed by the Archbishop to be held at London on
the 26th of November upon a Command from the King by Letters out of France.
Thither came Thomas Bishop of Durham Lord Chancellor of England, Thomas
Beaufort Duke of Exeter, Henry Percy Earl of Northumberland, and Ralph Nevil
Earl of Westmorland, being sent from the Regent John Duke of Bedford to desire
of the Clergy a supply of Money for the King, who was then carrying on the War
successfully in France; which being seconded by London Synod grants the King
two Tenths.
the Request of the Archbishop they granted two Tenths.

In this Synod also Robert Gilbert Doctor of Divinity and Warden of Merton
College, in a long and eloquent Oration, having first praised the University of
Oxford, laid before them the miserable Condition of the Students there, who
after many years spent in the study of the Sciences, were not called thence to
receive any reward of their Labors, but were suffered to grow old in the
University. His Example was followed by Thomas Kington Doctor of Law, and
Advocate of the Arches, who pleaded the same Cause for the University of
Cambridge; they both entreated in behalf of both Universities, that by a Decree
of the Synod some care might be taken to prefer them. Whereupon By a Decree
therein Students of both Universities were provided for.
it was decreed, That all Livings whose yearly income amounted to sixty Marks,
should by the Patrons be given only to Doctors of Divinity, Law or Physic;
those that were worth fifty Marks a year, only to Licentiates in those
Faculties, or Batchelors of Divinity; and those which did not exceed forty
Marks yearly, only to Masters of Arts or Batchelors of Law. This related to
those Benefices to which was annexed the Cure of Souls; The same Order almost
was taken in those which are called Sinecures, according to their respective
Values. It was further added, That this Decree should not extend to those who
had taken Degrees by some particular Grace. But because it was provided by the
Statutes of both Universities, that the Students of Divinity should take no
Degree in that Faculty, till they had commenced Masters of Arts, and that no
Student of Canon Law should be created Doctor, except he had studied the Civil
Law, this Condition was added to the Decree in favor of the Monks and Canon
Lawyers, that it should not be in force unless those Statutes were repealed.

For which purpose Thomas Field Dean of Hereford, and Thomas Lentwardyn
Chancellor of St. Paul's in London, were sent by the Synod to Oxford to treat
about this Affair with the Masters of Arts, by whose Suffrages the University
is governed. This was also signified to the Masters of Arts of Cambridge by
Letters from the Synod; but they all refusing the Condition, lest they should
be accounted inferior to the Doctors in Presentations to Livings; this Decree
which would have been for the good of Which was opposed and laid aside.
both Universities, was at that time laid aside.

When the Synod was ended, the injurious proceeding of Martin the new Pope,
began to be inquired into. For Pope Martin at pleasure filled the Episcopal
Sees in England;
about this time several Bishops dying in England, the Pope substituted others
at his own pleasure. In the beginning of the next year he made Benedict Nicoll
Bishop of St. David's, William Barrow Bishop of Bangor, John Chandeler Bishop
of Salisbury, and Philip Morgan Bishop of Worcester, by virtue of that absolute
Power which the Popes in that Age arrogated to themselves in disposing of the
Bishoprics of England.

Whose Clergy were quiet during the Council of Constance.
The Clergy here had been quiet for some time during the Council of Constance
after the deposing of John the Twenty third. For the Bishops of Salisbury and
Hereford dying at that time, two new Bishops were made by the free Election of
both those Chapters; nor could the whole College of Cardinals by their Letters
written from Constance, prevail upon the Chapter of Salisbury to demand John
Bishop of Litchfield the King's Commissioners at the Council for their Bishop.

Martin first claimed an universal Right of Presentation.
But Pope Martin having now got quiet possession of the Sea of Rome, became far
more insolent than his Predecessors; for in the beginning of his Pontificate,
he claimed a Right of presentation to all Churches whatsoever, reserved to
himself the Donation of all Bishoprics by provision, disannulled all the
Elections of Bishops made by the In two years made thirteen Bishops in the Sea
of Canterbury.
Chapters, and within two years time made thirteen Bishops in the Province of
Canterbury, taking his opportunity, while the King was engaged in the War with
France, to venture upon an Action which Edward the Third and Richard the Second
had prohibited by most severe Laws; he also made his Nephew Prospero Colonna, a
Youth of Fourteen years of Age, Archdeacon of Canterbury by Provision, to whom
some years after, to gratify the Pope, the King granted the Profits of as many
Benefices in England as did not exceed fifty Marks yearly. Besides this,
Complaints were made of his promiscuous uniting of His Appropriation. censured.
Churches (which are commonly called Appropriations) and Consolidations, of his
easiness in granting Dispensations, by which Priests were excused from residing
upon their Benefices, and Laymen were permitted to hold Spiritual Preferments;
and lastly, that there The English neglected in the Grants of the Roman
Dignities.
was no notice taken of the English in the distribution of the Dignities of the
Court of Rome.

The King's Commissioners at the Council of Constance, John Bishop of
Litchfield, and John Polton Dean of York, were ordered to represent these
Grievances to the new Pope, who soon obtained a concession of some Privileges
to the English, which in the Instrument it self are called Agreements between
Martin Martin afterward agreed to some redress; In uniting Parishes; And for a
power to Bishops therein; For avoiding the Unions made in time of the Schism;
the Fifth, and the Church of England. These were, That the uniting of Parishes
should not depend wholly upon the Pope's pleasure, but that the Bishops of the
several Diocesses should have power to examine into the reason of it; That the
Unions of Churches and Consolidations of Vicarages made in the time of the
Schism, should be made void; That those Dispensations granted For recalling
Dispensations for nonresidence;
by the Pope, by which Priests were excused from Residence, and Laymen and Monks
were made capable of holding Livings, should be recalled; That for the future
For Lessening the Number of Cardinals, and for their equal promotion.
the number of Cardinals should be lessened, and that they should be promoted
equally out of all Nations, and that the English should be admitted to all
other Offices in the Court of Rome.

The King required that Pope not to meddle with his Presentations.
About the same time the King sent another Embassy to the Pope to desire him
not to intermeddle in the disposing of those Livings in England, the
Presentation of which belonged to him as well by Agreement made between the
Kings of England and the Popes, as by his Royal Prerogative; That no French be
preferred in Aquitain, etc.
that no Frenchmen might be preferred to any Bishoprics or Livings in Aquitain,
or any other of the King's Dominions in France; that Dignities and That Irish
Livings be given to those that understand English; That the Bishops there
promote the English Speech only; That French be not preser'd to Monasteries in
England; That the Pope supply the King with some of the English Money.

The Pope not answering favorably,


Benefices in Ireland might be conferred only upon those that understood
English; and that the Bishops of that Kingdom in their respective Diocesses
might take care that the People should speak only English; That for the future
no Frenchmen might be admitted into the Monasteries founded by the French in
England, and that the Pope would grant the King a Supply, who was now making
war in defense of the Sea of Rome, out of the Money that was paid to the
Treasury of Rome in England. To which Requests, when the Pope returned no
favorable Answer, the Ambassadors added, that if he did not speedily satisfy
their demands, they were commanded to declare openly that the King would make
use of his own Right in all 'Twas declared the King would take his course.
these things, which he had desired of him not out of necessity, but only to
show his respect to his Holiness, and to put in a public Protestation
concerning these Matters before the whole College of Cardinals.

The French also and the Germans protested The French and Germans declare
against the Pope's Provisions.

The former revived the Laws to restrain him. That if he were refractory,
they would disown him.

The Pope's Interdict of the Church of Lions removed by the Parliament of Paris.

An Appeal from the King to the Pope High Treason.


against these Provisions, and other Artifices of the Pope: For the Estates of
France being assembled at Paris Carol. Molinae de Monar. Fran. n. 145.
in May this Year, by their Edict revived all the Ancient Laws that had been
made to redress the Grievances, and restrain the Tyranny of the Popes; in which
Edict it was further added, that Martin should not be acknowledged as Pope by
the French, unless he would subscribe to this Decree; and when he had
interdicted the Church of Lions, the Interdict was taken off by the Parliament
of Paris, and the Rector of that University was tried for High Treason, for
appealing from the King's Edicts to the Pope. The Germans also about The
Oppressed Germans not redressed.
this time being pillaged by the Extortion of the Pope's Receivers, desired of
him a redress of their Grievances, but they were put off with Indulgences and
Pardons, as In Epistolis passim.
Aeneas Sylvius relates, who lived at that time in Germany.

Toward the end of this Year the Archbishop of Canterbury, after he had visited
the Diocese of Rochester, being sent for by the King, passed over into France,
leaving John Wodnesburgh, Prior of Canterbury, his Vicar General. He found the
King at Roan in Normandy, who since his arrival in France, had taken partly by
storm, and partly by surrender, Caen, Cherbourg, Allenson, Constance, Falaise,
and several other strong Towns in Normandy, and had then laid siege to Roan,
the Capital City of that Province.

The King besieges Roan the Capital City of Normandy.

Proposal of a Treaty betwixt England and France.


About this time it was agreed upon by the two Kings to send Commissioners on
both Sides to treat of a Peace, who were to meet at Pontlarch, a Town lately
taken by King Henry, situated upon the Seine about eight Miles from Roan. On
the King of England's part From our King were sent the Archbishop and Earl of
Warwick;
were sent the Enguerr. de Monstrell. cap. 200.
Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Earl of Warwick; from the French King, Philip
Morvillier, President of the Parliament of Paris, the Bishop of Beauvais, and
Reginald Tolleville, Knight; and from the Pope, Cardinal And Cardinal Ursini,
as Mediator from the Pope.

The Commissioners did not conclude.


Vrsini, who was to mediate the Peace on both Sides. The Commissioners debated
fifteen days about composing Matters, but came to no conclusion: For the French
showed up and down the Picture of Catharine King Charles's Daughter, very
curiously drawn, whom they proposed in Marriage to King Henry; but the English
demanding for her Dowry a Million of Our King demanded a Million of Crowns,
Normandy, Aquitain, and Ponthieu Dowry with his Mistress. The French straightened,
refused all Terms*
Crowns, together with Normandy, Aquitain, and the County of Ponthieu,
independent of the Sovereignty of France, the French at length openly refused
all Terms of accord, conceiving that King Charles was not capable of
transacting any thing, having lately lost his Senses; nor the Dauphin, who
acted in right of another, and not for himself; nor the Duke of Burgundy, who
had no power to alienate the Dominions of the Kingdom of France.

Roan holds out obstinately;
All this while the People of Roan held out very obstinately, though they were
reduced to the greatest Extremities. For after six Months siege, in which Six
thousand Men perished, partly by the Sword, and partly by Famine, those that
remained were forced to feed upon the most loathsome Animals, as Dogs, Horses
and Mice, and they were reduced to so great a scarcity of all things, that as
it is reported, an Where it is said an Apple was sold for 3 s. a Dog for 10 s.

The Citizens helpless, their King being Lunatic, and the Kingdom in a Civil
War.


Apple was sold for Three Shillings, and a Dog for Ten; nor could they any
longer hope for Relief, for King Charles was not well in his Wits, and the
Princes were engaged in a Civil War, in which all France was involved, being
divided between Charles, the Dauphin, and John Duke of Burgundy. Wherefore two
of the Nobility, two of the Clergy, and two of the Citizens, with a Herald,
were sent out of the Town, who falling down at the King's Feet, humbly sued for
Peace. The King sent them to the Enguerr. de Monstrell. cap. 202.
Archbishop's Tent, to whom he had given power, together with the Earls of
Warwick and Salisbury, the Lord Fitzhugh, Sir Walter Hungerford, Sir Gilbert
Vmfrevil, and Sir John Robsert, to treat with the Besieged about the Conditions
of Surrender. The Articles being agreed on, which were, That the Inhabitants
should be safe both in their Persons and their Fortunes, and that they should
pay 365000 Crowns, they delivered Upon (...) made, they surrenderd, paying
365000 Crowns.
up the Town. This was in the beginning of the Year 1419. and on the 19th of
January the King entered the Town with his Army in a triumphant Here the King
settled his Exchequer and Courts for the Affairs of Normandy.
some new Works, he settled there his Exchequer, and the principal Court of
Judicature for all matters relating to the Province of Normandy.

After this he conquered the rest of Normandy in a little time. For first he
took Meudon, and then Pontoise by storm. Took Meudon and Pontoise by storm; And
others by surrender.
The other Towns being terrified by the example of that of Roan, surrendered of
their own accord.

The Archbishop of Canterbury staid some time with the King at Roan, being
entertained in a Convent of Preaching Friars there, and afterward attended him
in his Camp at Meudon and Pontoise, serving him both in the quality of a
Confessor and a Counselor, and did not leave him till the end of August. At
which time he return*d into England, that he might hold a Synod and take care
of the Government of his Province.

This Synod was appointed to be held at London on the 30th of October, that the
Clergy might consult about granting a supply of Money to the King, who was
carrying on the War in France with success, which the King had given in charge
to the Archbishop at his departure out of France, and again very lately Half a
Tenth granted the King in a Synod, where
by Letters. The Synod granted half a Tenth upon all Livings; and it was also
agreed, that those that held Chapels or Chantries, or that received Stipends
for saying Mass, should pay to the King 6 s. 8 d. each; but withal a public
Protestation was made by William Lyndewood in the name of the Proctors for the
Clergy, that this Concession should be no prejudice to them hereafter, nor be
made a Precedent for succeeding Ages.

Walker a Priest convicted of Witchcraft, for
There was brought before this Synod one Richard Walker, a Priest, in the
Diocese of Worcester, who was accused of Witchcraft; and several Books, Waxen
Images, Stones, and other Instruments of Charms and Conjuration were produced,
which were afterward owned by him, and burnt at Paul's Cross, John Wells
Bishop of Landaff preaching a Sermon upon the Occasion. He himself having done
solemn Penance in a public Procession, abjured that wicked Which he abjured,
Art. After this some Persons were accused before the Synod for embracing the
Tenets of John Wicklyff, who were And some of Wicklyff's Followers recanted.

Processions for the King's Success, with whom


forced to recant, and thus the Synod broke up.

The Archbishop afterward ordered Processions to be made to all Churches for
the King's success in France, who at this time, by the Providence of God, began
to conceive some hopes of reducing the Kingdom of France without bloodshed
through the Divisions of the French. For Philip Duke of Burgundy, Duke of
Burgundy made a private League;
in revenge of his Father's death, whom Charles the Dauphin had treacherously
slain at Montereau, under pretense of conserring with him, made a private
League with King Henry by his Ambassadors, and promised him the Lady Catharine
in marriage, with all other assistances for the prosecution of his Conquests.
He only desired him to come in person to Troyes, and there conclude a Peace
publicly with King Charles.

Who then had King, Queen and Daughter of France in's power.
The Duke of Burgundy had at that time in his power King Charles, Queen Isabel,
and their Daughter Catharine, with Paris the chief City of the Kingdom, and the
whole management of the Government; for Isabel, who hated the Dauphin, had put
him by, and advanced the Duke of Burgundy to the Regency.

The King, that he might not let slip so fair an opportunity of managing all
things to his own advantage, and being much taken with the great Beauty of the
Lady Catharine, came with all speed Our King at Troyes marries the said
Daughter Catharine, On agreement, himself should be Regent, and their Children
succeed to the Crown of France.
to Troyes; where he received her in marriage at the hands of Charles and
Isabel, upon these Terms; That King Henry, during the life of Charles his
Father-in-law, should have the Government of France with the Title of Regent,
after whose death he or his Children begotten of the Lady Catharine should
succeed in the Kingdom, and that the Dauphin should be looked upon as
disinherited, and a public These Conditions ratified.
Enemy. To these Conditions the Princes and Nobles of France, who were there
present in great number, gave their assent, and with the Duke of Burgundy, who
first took the Oath, swore Allegiance to King Henry; for they conceived a
greater esteem of his Wisdom and Courage when they saw him present amongst
them, than they had done before from the bare admiration of his Actions at a
distance.

It was toward the end of May, 1420. Troyes; the News of which being brought
into England, the excess of joy wherewith it was universally received* almost
lessened the belief of the truth of it. The Archbishop of Canterbury, having
left the Office of Vicar*general to John Prior of Canterbury, and that of
Auditor to William Lyndewood, on the 10th of June took shipping at Winchelsea,
and The Archbishop goes to France to congratulate the King.
sailed over into France* to congratulate the King upon his late Marriage, and
by his Counsels to confirm his new Government. He arrived at Troyes just as the
King was departing thence to go against the Dauphin, who was the only Who goes
against the Dauphin his only Enemy. Took Montereau.
Enemy he had now remaining.

In the beginning of July the King marched toward Sens, and having taken
Montereau, his next Attempt was upon Melun, which after a Siege of four Melun
surrendered.
Months, was surrendered to him in the beginning of November. There were present
at this Siege with King Henry, Charles King of France, James King of Scotland,
Philip Duke of Burgundy, William Duke of Bavaria, with several other Princes;
the Archbishop also continued all the while in the Camp, and after the
surrender of the Place, attended the King with his Father-in law and both the
Queens to Paris, from whence The King returns to England.
he returned into England about the end of November.

February 1421. the King having left the management of his Affairs in France to
Humprhy Duke of Gloucester, and Philip Duke of Burgundy, came over into England
with Queen Catharine, where he was received with incredible applause, and
universal demonstrations of joy, and by the Archbishop's Processions for four
days.
command Processions were made to all Churches and Chapels for four days
together. Soon after his arrival in England, he desired Money for the War with
France of the Parliament assembled at Westminster, during whose Queen Catharine
Crowned.
Session the Queen was solemnly crowned with great splendour by the Archbishop of
Canterbury, who about this time called a Synod at London, and obtained of them
a Tenth for the service of the The Synod gives a Tenth,
King, which was granted upon some Conditions which were put in by William
Lyndewood in the name of the Proctors for the Clergy. They were these: That the
King's Purveyors should not meddle with the Goods of the Clergy; that they
should not be committed to Prison, but upon manifest conviction of Theft or
Murder; that for all other Crimes they should only find Sureties for their
appearance at their Trial, but should not be imprisoned; and that it should be
Felony to geld a Priest; On condition. That it should be Felony to geld a
Priest.
all which the King confirmed in this Parliament. Beside the Bishops and other
Prelates, there were call d to the Synod by the Archbishop's Mandate John
Castle Chancellor of Oxford, and John Rykynghall Chancellor of Cambridge, both
Doctors of Divinity, who in two eloquent Speeches requested in Moved to publish
a late Decree with a Clause in favor of Monks and Priests.
behalf of both Universities, that the Decree made in the Synod four Years
before, about conferring Benefices upon those only who had taken Degrees in the
Universities according to the value of the several Livings, and the dignity of
the Degrees might now be published, with the addition of the Clause formerly
put in, that by repealing those Statutes of the Universities, Monks might be
admitted to Degrees in Divinity before they were Masters of Arts, and Priests
might commence Doctors of Canon Law, though they had not studied the Civil Law,
which the Masters of Arts of both Universities having changed their minds, had
at length consented to. Moreover, to restrain the Avarice of Bishops and
Archdeacons, Decreed a Bishop take only 12 s. for Institution, and an
Archdeacon for Induction.
it was Decreed, That no Bishop should take more than Twelve Shillings for
Institution, nor an Archdeacon for Induction, and that Orders should be given
gratis. Also Simon Terraminus, one of the Pope's Receivers, in a handsome
Speech desired Money of the Synod for Pope Pope Martin denied Money besides the
Tenths, etc.
Martin, but they gave no ear to him, conceiving that the Tenths, Annates, and
other Perquisites which were paid yearly into the Pope's Exchequer, were more
than sufficient to supply his Necessities.

The Archbishop having dissolved the Synod, employed his care upon that
Jurisdiction which he had hitherto exercised In order to unite the two Churches
of France and England.
in France, that so the same Peace which had reconciled the two Kingdoms, might
also unite both the Churches* To which end he recalled those Judges The
Archbishop recalls the Judges from the Conquests, And commanded the French to
obey their Ordinaries.
which he had placed in most of those Diocesses that were conquered by the King,
and by his Letters commanded all the People of France, that for the future they
should obey their Bishops, and the Ordinaries of the Places in which they lived.

After this, the King having received news of the death of his Brother Thomas
Duke of Clarence, who was slain in a Battle lately fought with the Forces of
the Dauphin in Anjou, hastened into The King hastens to France on his Brother's
death.

His Son Henry born at Windsor.


France, leaving the Queen big with Child, who on the 8th of December was
delivered of a Son at Windsor, who was Christened by the Archbishop with great
Solemnity, and named Henry. His Godfathers were John Duke of Bedford, Regent of
England, and Henry Bishop of Winchester, the King's Uncle; and his Godmother
was Jaqueline Countess of Holland. Afterward, when he came to the Crown, he
used to call the Archbishop Godfather, and always paid him a great deal of
respect.

In the beginning of April, 1422. the Queen being recovered of her lying in,
The Queen recovered, goes to France.
was conducted into France to the King by the Duke of Bedford, and Humphry Duke
of Gloucester was left Regent in England.

The time was now at hand in which another General Council was to be held
according to the Decree of the Sess. 39.
Council of Constance, by which it was ordained that at the end of five years a
Council should be called, seven years after that another, and so every ten
years constantly. It was now the fifth year since the dissolution of the
Council of Constance, Pavia chosen by Pope Martin for a General Council,
according to that of Constance.

A Provincial Synod at London.


whereupon this Year Pope Martin pitched upon Pavia for the place of their
Session.

In England the Archbishop called a Synod of the Province of Canterbury at
London on the 4th of August, in which many Persons out of the whole Body of
Bishops, Prelates and Doctors were nominated, who were to be referred to the
King's approbation; and it was concluded Whence Delegates were designed.
that the Archbishop should signify their Names by Letters to the King, who
should choose whom he pleased out of them to represent the English Nation at the
Council of Pavia, and that there should be allowed for their Expenses Three
pence in the Pound out of all Benefices that paid Tenths, and Eight pence out
of those that did not come under that Tax.

But this Affair came to nothing. For Alfonsus King of Arragon, having a
quarrel against Pope Martin, because at his instigation, Joan Queen of Naples
had put him by, and appointed Lewis of Anjou her Successor in the Kingdom, sent
his Ambassadors to Pavia, who with Gifts and Promises promoted the Interest of
Benedict the Thirteenth, But through Benedict the Thirteenth's Interest the
Pavian Council is dissolved, Called to Siena, And seven years after to Basil.
who was still alive, and acted as Pope at Panischola; whereupon Pope Martin
presently dissolved the Council which had been begun at Pavia, and from thence
by reason of the Plague was removed to Siena, and appointed another to be held
seven years after at Basil.

In the Synod at London one William White a Priest, and one Henry Webb of H.
Webb for preaching without Orders, whipped in three principal Cities.
Worcester, were accused of Heresy; the first for preaching publicly without a
License, who was therefore forced to recant before the Synod; and the other for
saying Mass without being in Orders, who was sentenced to be whipped in three
of the chief Cities, London, Worcester and Bath. Also one William William
Taylor's honest Principles condemned as impious.
Tailor a Master of Arts, was called in question for spreading abroad again
some Opinions which he had recanted in the Synod two years before, for which he
was said to be relapsed into Heresy. His Tenets were these: That God alone was
to be invoked by the Prayers of the Faithful; that that Worship was due to
Christ himself not upon the account of his Human Nature, but of his Divine
Nature only; that it was not lawful to pray to Saints, or any other created
Being; that those that offered Gifts to the Image of the Cross, or of the
Saints were guilty of Idolatry; that a Monastic Life was contrary to the
Institutions of Christ; that the Administration of Civil Affairs and all
Secular Government was forbidden to Priests by Christ himself; and that many of
those Opinions that were condemned as impious by the Council of Constance, were
Orthodox. All these Assertions were referred by the Archbishop as Judge in this
Affair, to the four Orders of Mendicant Friars, who were to examine whether
they were agreeable to the Holy Scriptures, and the Sense of the Fathers; and
the Lawyers were ordered to consider what punishment was to be inflicted on one
relapsed into Heresy. The Divines delivered their Opinion, That the Tenets
maintained by him were impious, and contrary to the Holy Scriptures and the
Decrees of the Church of Rome. As to matter of Law, William Lyndewood, Official
of the Court of Arches, Thomas Brown, Dean of the same Court, and the other
Lawyers answered, That one suspected of Heresy, was to be debarred from the
Communion of the Church for a year, and if after this probation he repented of
his Errors, he was to be received again into the bosom of the Church; but if he
relapsed into Heresy again, he was to be reputed guilty of a capital Crime, and
delivered over to the Secular Power; whereupon by the Sentence of the Synod he
was declared a Heretic, and solemnly divested of his Orders.

Soon after the end of this Synod, the whole Kingdom was seized with the
greatest consternation imaginable upon the News of the King's death, who having
pursued the Dauphin with too much heat as far as Bourges, on the 31st of August
died at Bois de Vinciennes, King Henry the Fifth dies of a Fever at Bois de
Vinciennes.
about three Miles from Paris, of a violent Fever, which he had contracted by
his excessive Fatigues. He died in For which his Father-in law pining away,
died with grief within twenty days. The King's Body buried at Westminster.
a very unlucky time; for King Charles his Father-in-Law, pined away with grief
for the death of his Son King Henry, who was very dear to him, and died within
twenty days after. The King's Body was brought over into England, and buried at
Westminster. The Inheritance of both Kingdoms descended to Henry the Sixth* who
was then an Infant, the government of which was left by the late King in his
Will to his two His Brothers were left his Son Henry's Guardians.
Brothers; that of England to Humphry Duke of Gloucester, and that of France to
John Duke of Bedford, till his Son should come of Age, the care of whose
Education was committed to Henry Beaufort Bishop of Winchester, and Thomas
Beaufort Duke of Exeter his Great Uncles.

Certainly no King of England ever excelled King Henry the Fifth in all
virtuous Qualifications; nor was there any one whose death was so prejudicial
to Great loss of a King so virtuous, So generally and princely qualified,
the Kingdom. He was adorned with all the Accomplishments both of Body and Mind,
that could be desired in a Prince; with Prudence, Courage, Constancy, Modesty,
Bounty, Eloquence, Beauty Of singular good fortune and esteem thereupon.
and Strength; all which being attended with a singular good Fortune, procured
him a wonderful esteem amongst Foreigners, and are celebrated as well by the
French Writers, as by those of our own Nation.

Duke of Gloucester calls a Parliament.
The Duke of Gloucester, that he might settle the Affairs of the Kingdom
according to the Injunctions of his Brother King Henry, called a Parliament at
Westminster on the 9th of November; and first of all he commanded the Rotul.
Parlia. Ann. 1. H. 6.
Archbishop of Canterbury to declare to both Houses the cause of their meeting;
for Thomas Bishop of Durham upon the death of the King had resigned the Seal
and other marks of the Chancellorship (to which this Office belongs) to the
Duke of Gloucester at Windsor, and had laid down the Place. The Archbishop
having spoken largely in praise of the Virtues of King Henry the Fifth, and
made honorable mention of his Actions in France, came to speak of the Young
King; and affirmed that it was by the special favor of Almighty God that a Son
of such promising The hopes the Archbishop conceived of young King Henry.
hopes should succeed so great a Father; that his very* Title of the Sixth was
attended with a lucky Omen, for as the number Six was the most complete of all
the rest, because in so many days God Almighty had made this vast Fabric of
the World, so this King Henry, the Sixth of that Name, would be the greatest of
all his Predecessors, that he would complete what his Father had so
prosperously begun in France; and that as he was descended both from the Kings
of England and France, so he would at length enjoy both those Crowns which were
devolved to him by lawful Inheritance. That he, in the King's Name did declare
to the Peers, and all the People, that they should enjoy all the Privileges and
Immunities granted to them by his Highness's Predecessors, and that he was
commanded Three Reasons for calling the Parliament, viz. to assign the King
Governors, and consult about the Peace, and for the defense of the Realm.
to give them three Reasons for calling this Parliament: Which were; That
Governors might be assigned the King by a public Act; that they might consult
about the Peace of the Realm, and the Administration of Justice; and that they
might provide for the defense of the Kingdom against the Insults of Foreign
Enemies. Lastly, Jethro's Advice.
He exhorted them by the Example of Jethro, Moses's Father-in-law, to make
choice of the best and wisest of the Nobility to take upon them the government
of the King and Kingdom, and besought them that they would use their utmost
endeavors for the safety of the King, and the benefit of their Country.

When the Archbishop had done speaking, the Protectorship was unanimously
confirmed to the Duke of Gloucester, The Duke of Gloucester confirmed Protector,
and the Archbishop named First of the Council.
and some of the most Eminent of the Bishops and Nobility were appointed to be
of the Privy Council till the King should come of Age, of which the Archbishop
was named first. But he having lost his King and Patron, who had advanced him
to the highest Honors, and who dearly loved him, when the Parliament was
dissolv d, retired within the Bounds of his Province, in which he performed the
Duties of his Function But he retired to his Function.
with great diligence. For the Year after the death of Henry the Fifth, by his
Chichester and Salisbury, and the next year that of Lincoln, in which

In his journey through the Diocese of Lincoln he came to Higham Ferrers, the
Founded a College at Higham Ferrers,
Town where he was born, in which out of a pious and commendable design of
adorning the Place of his Nativity, he dedicated a Noble College which he had
formerly begun there, to the Honor of the Virgin Mary, of St. Thomas of
Canterbury, and King Edward the Confessor, and placed in it Eight Chaplains or
Fellows, Four Clerks, Six Choristers, and over all these a Master, who were to
pray for the Souls of the deceased. He And a large Hospital.
also built a large Hospital for the maintenance of the Poor of that place, both
which Foundations he endowed with ample Revenues, which were afterward The
Considerable Revenues of which were augmented by his Brothers Robert and
William.
augmented with great Legacies, which his Brothers Robert and William Chichele,
two Eminent Citizens of London, left them in their Wills.

After his return from his visitation of the Diocese of Lincoln, he held a
Synod A Synod held by him at London.
at London on the 12th of October, being solicited by Letters from the King to
demand a supply of Money of the Clergy for the War with France. For after the
death of Henry the Fifth, and Charles the Sixth, the Dauphin supposing that the
Name of King would be of great advantage to him, caused himself to be The
Dauphin crowned King of France at Poictiers.
crowned at Poictiers, and took upon him the Title of Charles the Seventh, King
of France; and a great many Princes and Governors of Towns coming in to him,
who still retained an affection for the Name of France, he made Whereupon
preparation was made for War.
preparations for War with greater vigor. On the other side John Duke of
Bedford, who by his Brother's Will was appointed Regent of France, having The
Regent of France and Duke of Burgundy oppose the Dauphin.
contracted a stricter League of amity with Philip Duke of Burgundy by marrying
his Sister Ann, attacked the Dauphin in several parts of France, and having
divided the Forces betwixt himself and Philip Duke of Burgundy, he sent Thomas
Montacute Earl of Salisbury, toward Sens, with some choice Troops, and desired
of Humphrey Duke The former sent for Supplies from England.
of Gloucester Regent of England, a fresh Supply of Men and Money.

Whereupon Henry Bishop of Winchester Lord Chancellor of England, John Stafford
Bishop of Bath Lord Treasurer, Richard Earl of Warwick, William Alnewyke Keeper
of the Privy Seal, Lewis Lord Bourchier, and Ralph Lord Cromwell, were sent
from the Duke of Gloucester to the Synod. The Bishop of Winchester in a formal
Speech having The Bishop of Winchester moves for Money in the Synod.
laid before them the present condition of Affairs in France, exhorted and
entreated them to bestow some part of their Revenues for subduing the remains
of the Dauphin's Forces. But then it plainly appeared how much they were Which
now wants Henry the Fifth.
all affected with the loss of King Henry the Fifth. For whereas they had
granted Tenth's so frequently and so readily in former Synods (as we have
related before) they now stuck at the very first demand of the new King,
thinking that As Henry the Sixth is like to go without their Money.
all the hopes of conquering France depended upon Henry the Fifth, and that
nothing could succeed now he was gone. For when the Proctors for the Clergy had
debated the Matter several days, William Lyndewood was deputed by them to
return their Answer, which was, That The Clergy's Estates being already so much
drained,
the Estates of the Clergy were so drained by the continual expenses of the
War, that they were hardly sufficient to maintain them and their Families
handsomely; that the value of a great many Livings was so fallen, And Livings
fallen so low.
that there were not Priests to be sound who would supply the Cures; and in
Being also alleged, that the power of granting Tenths was taken away. The
Bishop succeeded no better in the Lower House; and so
short, That in the Commissions of all the Proctors for the Clergy the power of
granting Tenths was expressly taken away. Upon this the Bishop of Winchester
went to the Lower House, and in a long and pressing Oration besought them to
supply the Necessities of the Public; but when he could obtain nothing of
them, who excused themselves upon the narrowness of their Commissions, The
Synod The Synod was adjourned.
was adjourned by the Archbishop to the 26th of January following.

At which time the Bishop of Winchester with the rest of the Lords came thither
again, and having made a Speech to the Bishops, Abbots and Priors of the Upper
House in the Name of the King, At the next Sessions half a Tenth was granted by
the Higher House on condition the Proctors consented;
they granted half a Tenth, protesting withal, that This Concession should not
oblige them, unless the Proctors for the Clergy would consent to it, for that a
division of the two Orders of the Clergy in the matter of granting Tenths being
introduced by this Example would be of very pernicious consequence to
Posterity. But the Lower But refused by the Lower House.
House persisting stiffly in their former Resolutions, were not at all moved
with the importunate Demands first made by the Bishop of Winchester, and
afterward by the Archbishop and the rest of the Bishops. Whereupon the
Archbishop presently The Synod dissolved.
dissolved the Synod, and appointed another to be held two Months after on the
23d of April, thinking that by the Election of new Proctors the business would
be more easily affected.

When this Synod was assembled, the Archbishop first of all commanded the Lower
House to choose their Speaker, (who is commonly called the Prolocutor) who
pitched upon William Lyndewood, of which he himself makes mention C. Quoniam.
v. provinciam de decim.
in his Commentaries. After which the Lord Chancellor, the Lord Treasurer,
William Alnewyke Keeper of the Privy Seal, the Lord Scrope, the Lord Cromwell,
with some others of the Privy Council, came again to the Synod; and the Lord
Chancellor with his florid Speeches, and the rest of the Lords engaging them
severally At the next Half a Tenth's given with much ado.
by Flatteries, Threats and Promises, at length with much ado they obtained half
a Tenth.

When this business was over, one Hoke and Drayton's Heresy; and
Robert Hoke, and one Thomas Drayton, both Priests, one of the Diocese of
Lincoln, and the other of Canterbury, were brought before the Synod, and
accused of Heresy. It was alleged against them, That they would not kneel
before the Crucifix, and that they had in their possession certain Books, in
which it was said, that the Priest could not change the Host in the Sacrament
into the Body of Christ; that a Monastic Life and Auricular Confession were
the Inventions of the Devil, and that amongst Christians all things ought to be
in common; which Opinions they abjured publicly at Paul's Cross. But the
sharpest Accusation was brought against one William Russel of the Order of
Minor Russell denies personal Tithes to be Jure Divino.
Friars, for teaching the People in his Sermons, That personal Tithes were not
commanded by God, but that it was lawful for all Christians to bestow them in
charitable uses upon the Poor as they pleased themselves. This extremely
troubled and perplexed the Clergy, who fear that if this Opinion should spread
it self among the People, they should lose this part of their Income, by which
the Wealth of their Order would be greatly diminished. Wherefore he was ordered
by the Synod on a day prefixed to recant out of the Pulpit at Paul's Cross, but
before the time came he fled out of England, whereupon he was pronounced
contumacious by Edicts set forth against him, and afterward in open Court
proclaimed a Heretic, and his Opinion was adjudg'd In his absence proclaimed
an Heretic,
to be impious by the Decrees of both Universities, which the University of
Oxford presently signified by their Letters to the Archbishop, and the Synod,
which are Liter. Academ Oxon. in Archiv. ep. 20.
yet extant.

Shortly after the Synod being informed that he was at Rome, sent Messengers
And prosecuted at Rome.
to apprehend him, and accuse him before the Pope, who were allowed a Farthing
in the Pound out of all Ecclesiastical Preferments. The Examination of this
Matter being referred by the Pope to Branda Cardinal of Placenza, he was
condemned to perpetual Imprisonment, unless he repented of his Error; but
afterward escaping out of Prison, he returned into England, and having
preached a Sermon at Paul's Afterward he abjured his Error in England.
Cross, he abjured his Error with a formal Oath. The Archbishop also by his
Mandate enjoined the Franciscans, that as often as they preached to the People,
they should teach them, that personal Tithes were commanded to be paid both by
the Laws of God, and the Constitutions of the Holy Fathers.

The same Year after the Synod was ended, the Archbishop by his Prudence
dispelled a dreadful Storm that threatened the Kingdom, which was raised by the
Dissentions of the Nobility. For Henry H Beaufort Bishop of Winchester, an open
Enemy to the Lord Protector.
Beaufort, Son to John Duke of Lancaster by Catharine Swinford his third Wife,
being puff d up with the nobility of his Birth, and the great Wealth which he
had got together out of the Bishopric of Winchester, and not brooking the Rule
of Humphry Duke of Gloucester the Lord Protector, he began to maintain an open
enemity against him; the Quarrel being afterward more enflamed on both Sides,
and many of the Nobility Great Parties on each side
and others engaging in either Party, they both went Armed, and attended with
their Servants and Adherents, and a great number of Profligate and Seditious
Persons wearing Arms by their Example went about the Streets of London; Appear
in the Streets of London.
and their Number was so great, that the Citizens shut up their Shops, and left
off their Trades, and were forced to keep Guard Day and Night in all the
Streets of the City to repress the Insolence of these Mutineers. Upon this The
Archbishop interposed.
the Archbishop, accompanied with Peter Duke of Conimbra, Son to the King of
Portugal (who was lately come into England to visit the King his Cousin) rid
through the City eight times in one Day betwixt the Duke's and the Bishop's
Palaces, and prevailed so far upon them both by his Authority and Entreaties,
They then laid down their Arms.
that they laid down their Arms, and Matters were composed for a time. But the
Bishop, though he had quitted his Arms, had not yet relinquished his Hatred;
for soon after by The Bishop of Winchester accuses the Protector to the Duke of
Bedford.
Letters sent into France to the Duke of Bedford, he accused the Duke of
Gloucester, desiring the Duke of Bedford to come over into England with all
speed, if he tendered the Safety of the King, and the Peace of the Kingdom,
which otherwise must of necessity be involved in Blood, and the devastations of
a Civil War. The Duke, though the War went on succesfully in France, by the
surrender of a great many strong Towns, and the defeat of a great Army of the
French in a pitched Battle at Vernoil, yet esteeming the success of Affairs in
France to depend upon the Peace of England; immediately upon the receipt of
these Letters, he committed the Administration Who hastens into England.
of his Office to Thomas Beauchamp Earl of Warwick, and came with all speed into
England in the beginning of Calls a Parliament.
at Leicester, he examined the Quarrel between his Brother and the Bishop. When
they had both showed the Finds out the causes of the Quarrel,
causes of their discontent, and from arguing began to break out into greater
heats, at the Duke of Bedford's entreaty And inclines them to the arbitration of
they agreed to refer all Differences on both Sides to the determination of
Arbitrators; of whom Rotul. Parliam. an. 4. H. 6.
Henry Archbishop The Archbishop and Duke of Exeter, etc.
of Canterbury, was named first, after him Thomas Duke of Exeter, John Duke of
Norfolk, Thomas Bishop of Durham, Philip Bishop of Winchester, John Bishop of
Bath, Humphry Earl of Stafford, William Alnewyke Keeper of the Privy Seal, and
Ralph Cromwell, who ordered them to join hands, and in a set form of words to
be repeated by them both, to forgive all Injuries on both Sides, and be friends
with one another; which Reconciliation was confirmed by Their Reconciliation
confirmed by the Votes of the whole Parliament, Which granted Money for Levying
Men.
the Votes of the whole Parliament.

In this Session a supply of Money was granted for levying Soldiers; for which
end also about this time the Archbishop assembled a Synod at London on the 15th
of April. Thither came John Kempe Archbishop of York and Lord Chancellor of
England, with Walter Hungerford Lord Treasurer; and the Lord Chancellor having
extolled the great pains and diligence of the Duke of Bedford in an And Half a
Tenth granted in the Synod. Bishop of Winchester made Cardinal.
Eloquent Oration, the Synod granted the King half a Tenth.

The Bishop of Winchester who was created Cardinal thsi Year by Pope Martin,
the next Year went over with the Duke of Bedford into France, and at Calais, in
the great Church of that Place, he put on the Cap and other Ensigns of that
Dignity with great solemnity on Candlemas-day. He had sought this Honor with
great earnestnss eight years before in the time of King Henry the Fifth, and
had obtained a Promise of it of Pope The Cap, with a Legacy for England, had
been promised him by John the Twenty third.

But the Archbishop had shown that the Pope's Legates derogated from the Royal
Dignity, etc.


John the Twenty third; who designed to promote him very speedily, and to
appoint him his Legate a latere in England with a very large Authority. But the
Archbishop perceiving his Ambition, at that time interposed with the King, who
was then in France, by Letters which he wrote to him in a grave and modest
style, in which he showed, That the Power of the Pope's Legates did derogate
very much from the Dignity of the King, from the Laws of the Land, and from the
Privileges of the Church of England. A Copy of this Letter, the Original of
which is yet to be seen, Which he did in a Letter to the King.
written with the Archbishop's own Hand, we have here subjoined.

Wherein there is a Specimen of the English Language at that time.
Sovereyn Lord, as your humble Pressed and debout Bedeman, I recommand me to your
Hygnesse, desyreing evermore to hear and know of your gracious speed, hele of
body and of soul, also my Lordys your brethren and all your royal host. And
as hertly as I can, or may thank Almighty God and Lord of all strengths and
hosts that so graciously has continued his mygty hond upon you sythen the
time of your beginning hedirtoward into your most worship, your Liege menys
most hertly gladness, and abating of the hy pride of your enemies. And beseech
God both day and night with all your subgetts both spirituel and temporel so
continue his hy Grace upon you and yowre that the mow come to the effect of
your hy labor, pees of both your regmes after your hertly desires. Gracious
Lord like it to remember you that be your most worthy letters written at your
town of Caen rrb. day of September you charged me, that be the abys of my Lord
your brother of Bedford, and of your Chaunceler should be ordeygned that all
manner of men of your subgets wat astaat or condition that they were should
abstyne letter No Suit to be made to the Pope, after Election, till the Pope
has wrote to the King, and has got an Answer.
of wrytes or pursuit making to the Pope after his election, till the time that
he have written to you, and ye again to him, as it has be acustumed of honest
of your land. for the which cause neither I, nor non odir man as ferforth as it
may be know, has yet written nor sent, ne no leve has of passage to the
Cowrte, wow it so be that many lych at London to pursue to my Lord your
brother, your Chaunceler, and your Counseil for to have leve and letters of
passage. Werfore Soverain Lord my Lord your brother charged me write to you,
and in as miche as your letter forseid was direct to me, to wite, in wat wise
we shol govern us herafter, for if ye have resteyned our holy faders letters,
or written to him it is unknowen to us unto this time. Like it therefore,
gracious Lord, to write to my Lord your brother in wat manner wise this matier
schal be governed hereafter.

Forthermore gracious Lord, of trowth that I am bound to you be my ligeaunse,
and also to quite me to God, the chirch of your land, of the which God and, ye
gracious Lord, have maked me governor, howeth to open to you this matier that
suyeth, of the which I have herd pribily, but now it is more opend, and in such
wise that credence should be yive to by reason; that is to seyne, that my
brother of Winchester should be maked a Cardinal, if ye would give your asent
thereto, and that he should have his Bishoprich in comende for term of his life,
and thereto have a stat, and sent to your rengme of Yngland as a legate a latere,
to the which manier of legacy non has be acustumed to be named but Cardinals,
and that legacy also to ocupie thorgh all your obeysaunce, saunce, and all the
time of his life. Sovereyn Lord and most Christien Prince, what instanse A
Pope's Legate in England durante vita, without Precedent.
schall be maad to your Highness for this matier, I wot not, but blessed be
Almighty God undir your worthy protection, your Church of Yngland is at this
day, I dare boldly say, the most Honorable The Doctrine and
Church Christien as weel as debin servise, as honest living thereof, governed
after streit laws, and holy constitutions, that be maad of hem withowten any
great erorbitaunses, or any thing that migt torn to by shlaundre of your
forseid Chirch, or of your land, and if any trespases of mannys Discipline of
the Church dispensable by the Ordinaries, etc. not Legates.
frelte falls we may be coretid and punished by the Ordinaries there as the
caas falls. But wat that this offis of legacy to be ocupied in the form
aforseid, and suich comendis of Bishopriches not used in your holy Aunsetres
time here before, would extend to, or gendre ageines the good governanse of your
subgets, in your by wisdom I trist to God ye will consider. And forasmich as ye
schal be enformid what the office of suych manier of legacy extendith to, and
appyly your Clerhys have not in mind, for it has shield be seyn, and have not
all here bookys with hent pleynly to inform you in this time of your great
labor, I send you a scrowe written with The Archb^shop sends a Minute of the
Legate's Office or Instructions to the King.
inn this letter containing that is expressed in the Popis law, and fully
concludyd be Doctors. And over that what he may have in special of the Popis
grace no man wot, for it stond in his will to dispose as him good liheth. And
be inspection of laws and cronicles was there never no Legate a latere sent in
to no loud, and specially in to your rengme of Yngland Such Legacies are
extraordinary, and not without great and notable cause; and no resident above
two Months at most.
withowte great and notable cause. And they when they came after they had done
her legacy abiden but lytul wyle, not over a yer, and sum a quarter, or two
months, as the needs requeryd: And yet over that he was tretyd with, or he
cant into the land whon he schold have exercise The Instructions to be express
and limited.
of his power, and how myche schold be put in erecucion. An aventure after he
had be reseyved he whold have used it to largely to greet oppression of your
people. Wherefore most Cristien Prince and Sovereyn Lord, as your true Priest,
whom it has lyked you to set in so hy astaat, the wych with owte your
gracious Lordship, and supportation I know my self insufficient to ocupie.
beseech you in the most humble wise that I can devise or thenke that ye wile
this matier take tendirly at heart, and see the staat of the Church be
meyntenid and susteyuid, so that everich of the Ministers theroffe hold hem
content with her own part: for trewly he that has leest has inow to rekene
fore: And that your poor pepul be not pyled, He deprecates the Oppressions and
cormorant Exactions of the Legates.
nor oppressyd with diverse eractious and unacustumed, thorgh wych they schold
be the more feeble to refresche you owre liege Lord in time of need and when it
lyketh you to clepe up on hem, and all plees and sklaundre cese in your
Church.

Towchinge our holy fadir the Popis Ambassiat that late came in to your land, I
wot well my Lord your brother writes to you pleynly, and also of odir
governance of your land, the wych blessed be God stond in good quiet pees and
rest withowte any great ryotis or debatys and al your true people have her
herys opyn to here good tydinges of you and continuely pray for your prosperity
and al yowrys, the much Almighty God grant for his mercy Amen. written at
Lambyth vi day of March.

Your Pressed. H. C.
Indorsed Au Roy nostre Souverein. S.

The King was so moved with this Letter of the Archbishop's, that he commanded
the Bishop of Winchester not to take upon him the Cardinalship, Upon this
Letter the King forbad the Bishop of Winchester the Cardinal's Cap.
and protested several times that he Polychron. in Hen. 5.
had rather see him wear the Crown than the Cardinal's Cap. During the King's
Life the Bishop desisted; but now relying upon the Infancy of the King, and the
Favor of his Nephew the Duke of Bedford, he attempted it again, and After the
King's death he is created Cardinal.
was created Cardinal by the Pope with the Title of Priest of S. Eusebius; which
easily occasioned their mistake, who Antiq. Britan. in Henr. Chich.
instead of Henry Bishop of Winchester, For whom our pious Henry Archbishop was
mistaken.
relate that Henry Archbishop of Canterbury was made Cardinal of S. Eusebius,
who was a Man of such Piety and Moderation, that he was never known to court a
Preferment, by which being engaged in the Interests of the Pope, he must
necessarily have swerved from that Loyalty to his Prince which he had always
preserved entire and untainted. A Vigorous Defender of the King's Authority.
For he was a most vigorous Defender of the King's Authority, and the Rights of
the Kingdom against the Ambition of the Popes, and the Oppressions of the Court
of Rome; by which at this very time he drew upon himself the Whence he incurred
the displeasure of Pope Martin the Fifth.
heavy displeasure of Martin the Fifth. For the Epist. Academ. Oxon, 36. in
Archiv.
University of Oxford by Letters bearing date the 24th of July this Year
interceded for him with Pope Martin; in which after they had given him a very
extraordinary Character, calling him the The Archbishop's Character from Oxford.
mirror of Life, the light of Manners, a Person most dear to the People and
Clergy, a golden Candlestick set up in the Church of England, they besought him
that he would not suffer the Credit of so eminent a Prelate to be blasted by
the secret Calumnies of Detractors; to which purpose also in the Parliament at
Westminster Rotul. Parliam. an. 6 H. 6.
the House of Commons petitioned the King to send an Ambassador forthwith to the
Court of Rome to intercede with the Pope in behalf Great Intercession mads for
him.
of the Archbishop, who had incurred his displeasure for opposing the excessive
Power of the Court of Rome. And indeed it was but reasonable that he, who for
promoting the common good of all, and maintaining the Honor of the Kingdom, so
little dreaded the Pope's Anger, should be defended by the public Authority.

Bishop of Winchester is Legate in England, with a Faculty.
But the Bishop of Winchester, beside his Title of Cardinal, had the power of
Legate in England conferred upon him by the Pope, with a very large Commission
(or as they commonly termed it) a Faculty; which Power he exercised with So
exercised the Power, that he was styled the Rich Cardinal.
so great Avarice, and got together such a prodigious Wealth, that he was
generally styled the Rich Cardinal.

England, and having opened his Commission in the presence of Humphry Duke of
Gloucester the Protector, and many of the Bishops and Nobility, Joan. Foxius in
Martyrolog. sub H. 5.
The Cardinal opposed by R. Caudray the King's Proctor.
Richard Caudray who was appointed Proctor for the King by the Duke of
Gloucester and the Privy Council, expressly declared, That by a particular
Prerogative of the Kings of England, which they had enjoyed ever since the
memory of man, no Legate from the Pope could come into England without the
King's leave; and therefore if the Cardinal of Winchester, by virtue of his
Legantine Office, should act any thing contrary to this Right of the King's,
that he in the King's Name did interpose, and disown all his Authority.
Promises not to exercise his Office without the King's leave.
Whereupon the Cardinal promised openly before the Duke of Gloucester, and all
that were present, that he would not exercise his Office of Legate without the
King's leave, and that he would act nothing in it that might any ways infringe
or derogate from the Rights, Immunities and Privileges of the King or Kingdom.

Eodem jure semper usi sunt Gallire Reges, quorum injussu Legatis Pontificum
nunquam licuit Galliam ingredi, aut mandata promulgare, Sicuti clarissimus
Advocatus Regius L. Serv^n aux playdoier. vol. 4.
Ludovicus Servinus coram Senatu Parisiensi Turonibus tum sedente demonstrabat,
cum Ann. MDXC. Cardinalis Cajetanus ad Henricum IV. Galliae Regem Legatus
mitteretur.
Now upon his being made Cardinal and Legate, he was obliged to lay down his
Place of Lord Chancellor, Laid down the Office of Chancellor, as obliged;
which he did the Year before in the Parliament at Westminster; he ought also to
have been removed from the Privy Council; but in respect of the Nobility of his
Birth, and his near alliance to the King, by a particular favor he was allowed
to keep his Place there, except when any But kept his Place in the Council,
with exception.
matter was to be debated between the King and the Pope, for then it was
expressly concluded that he should not be present; which Limitation was
confirmed Rot. Parliam. ann. 8 H. 6.
the next Year by Act of Parliament, and ordered to be entered in the Journals of
the Privy Council.

Now the chief Reason that moved the Pope to create the Bishop of Winchester a
Cardinal, was, that he might employ him in the War that he designed The Pope
raised imm against the Bohemians, Who had pulled down the Monasteries, etc.
against the Bohemians, who having embraced the Doctrine of Wickliff, had pulled
down the Monasteries and Images, and having abolished almost all the Rites and
Ceremonies of the Romish Church, had openly revolted from the Government of the
Pope. He therefore The Cardinal made General in the Bohemian War, etc.
made him his General in the Bohemain War, and appointed him Legate in Hungary,
Bohemia, and all Germany, with a far larger Commission, by which He could
pardon Rapes on Nuns, etc.
he was empowered to pardon Rapes committed upon Nuns, to dispense with
Marriages contracted within the fourth degree of Consanguinity, with the Age of
Persons to be admitted to Orders and Benefices, with Interdicts, and many other
things which were contrary to the Constitutions of the Canon Law; He was to
demand a Tenth of the English Clergy for the War.
he was also ordered to demand a Tenth of the English Clergy for the Service of
this War. For this cause the Archbishop being solicited by the Pope's Bull,
and being also pressed by Letters from the King to consider of raising Money
for carrying on the War in France, called a Synod at London which began on the
5th of July.

In their first Session, at the request of the Archbishop of York Lord
Chancellor, and Walter Hungerford Lord Treasurer, they granted the King half In
the next Synod half a Tenth is given the King.
a Tenth. The Synod was afterward prorogued by reason of the excessive heat of
the Summer, to St. Martin's day in November following, and then again to the
29th of October the next Year; at York was sent to them again from the King,
together with the Duke of Norfolk, the Earls of Warwick, Stafford and
Salisbury, th e Lords Cromwell, Tiptoft and Hungerford, at whose desire a Tenth
and a half And in another a Tenth and an half.
was granted, and solemn Processions were ordered to be made for the success of
the Duke of Bedford, who went on Duke of Bedford had besieged Orleans.
prosperously, and had now besieged Orleans, a noble City upon the River Loyre.
These Concessions of Tenths which were granted so readily by the 8 H. 6. c. 1.
Synod, were*rewarded by an Act made in the Parliament holden at this time at
Westminster, by which The same Privilege was granted to the Clergy, which the
Members of the House of Commons do enjoy when they are chosen to serve in
Parliament, For those Grants, the Members of the Synod, etc. were freed from
Arrests.
which was, that neither they nor their Servants should be arrested while they
were assembled in Convocation, nor in their journey thither.

But Conzo Zuolanus the Pope's Nuntio, came often to the Synod, and pleaded in
behalf of the Pope, but to no purpose: The Pope's Nuntio prevailed not in the
Synod;
When he could not obtain of them a Supply for the War with the Bohemians, which
he had solicited in a long and pressing Oration, he produced the For showing
his Letters for a Tenth
Pope's Letters before the Synod, in which he signified that he had imposed a
Tenth upon the Kingdom of England for the support of the Bohemian War; which so
incensed the whole Synod, that they absolutely denied to grant a Tenth. However
at the importunity of the Pope He was denied, but got 8 d. per Mark from
Livings, With a Salva praerogativa Regia.
they gave him Eight pence in every Mark out of all Benefices according to their
respective values, provided that this grant were not contrary to the King's
Prerogative and the Laws of the Land.

After this John Jourdelay, John Galle, Robert Heggley, Ralph Mungyn, Thomas
Garenter, all men in Orders, with several others, were brought before the
Synod, who were accused of Heresy, for holding diverse corrupt Opinions
concerning the Sacrament of the Altar, the Adoration of Images, Religious
Pilgrimages, and the Invocation of Saints; for maintaining that the Pope was
Antichrist, and not God's Heresy in holding the Pope to be Antichrist, etc.
Vicegerent; that the Divine Oracles were contained only in the Scriptures, and
not in the Legends or Lives of the Fathers; and for keeping privately by them
several Books of John Wickliff, and others, concerning matters of Religion,
written in the Vulgar Tongue. All which Opinions Some recanted, others were
imprisoned.
some of them recanted before the Synod, and the rest were committed to Prison.
After them one Joan Dertford Joan Dertford, by means of her Answer, acquitted.
being questioned about the same Tenets, cleared her self of the Accusation by
an uncertain Answer; saying, That she had learnt only the Creed and Ten
Commandments, and never durst meddle with the profound Mysteries of Religion,
upon which she was committed to the Bishop of Winchester's Vicar*general to be
instructed by him. The Ordinaries also The Ordinaries charged to persecute the
Wicklevists and Lollards.
of every place were commanded vigorously to prosecute those that dissented from
the Church of Rome, whom they called by the invidious Names of Wiclevists and
Lollards, and whose number daily increased, and William Lyndewood Official, and
Thomas Brown Chancellor of Canterbury, with some other Lawyers And Process
ordered to be formed against them.
both Canonists and Civilians, were ordered to draw up a Form of the Process
against them.

Pope Martin troubled that he obtained not the Tenths.
But Pope Martin was very much troubled to see the Power of the Keys decrease
daily in England both by the denial of a Tenth for his War with the Bohemians,
and several other Affronts that he pretended to have lately received: For some
years before this having by his Bull of Provision translated Richard Flemming
Bishop of Lincoln to the Sea of York, which was then vacant by the That his
Bull was opposed at York,
death of the Archbishop; the Dean and Chapter of York opposed his entrance into
their Church, so that the Pope was forced by a contrary Bull to transfer him
back again to the Sea of Lincoln. The That his Legate was imprisoned,
Year after John Opizanus the Pope's Legate was imprisoned for presuming by
virtue of that Office to gather the Money due to the Pope's Treasury contrary
He expostulated with the Duke of Bedford.
to the King's Command; which Matter the Pope by his Letters sharply
expostulated with the Duke of Bedford.

He would certainly have called to mind all these things, if he had not been
diverted by the more important Concerns of the Council of Basil which The Pope
is diverted with the prospect of the Council of Basil.
was now to be called. For the time prefixed for the assembling of it was now at
hand, the seventh Year being almost expired since the end of the last Council;
for which cause the Archbishop of Canterbury called another Synod at London in
the beginning of the next Year, on February, in which Delegates Wherefore
Delegates are chosen in a Synod at London with 2 d. per l. Charges.
were chosen to be sent to Basil, and Two pence in the Pound was allowed them
out of all the Revenues of the Clergy. Their Instructions were, To desire in
the name of the Church of England, Their Instructions did run Against
Pluralities, And Non residence, etc.
That a stop might be put to that vast number of Dispensations which were daily
granted, by which some were permitted to hold two Livings beside Dignities,
others had leave to be absent from their Cures, and some who were scarce at
Age, were admitted to the highest Offices in the Church; and that no Unions of
Churches might be made but where there were Convents within the bounds of the
Parish.

The Synod gave the King a Tenth
The Synod also granted the King a whole Tenth at the solicitation of John
Kempe Archbishop of York, and Lord Chancellor of England, who in a long Oration
told them, That the Siege of For the Siege of Orleans.
Orleans was raised by the death of the Earl of Salisbury a Renowned Commander,
Many other Towns revolted.
that Troyes, Beauvais, Rhemes, and many other Towns, had revolted to King
Charles, that a great number And many English slain at Patau.
of our Men were lately slain in a Battle at Patau, and that all France would
soon come under the obedience of Charles, unless Supplies of Money were raised
in England; that for this cause he, with several others of the Privy Council,
were sent to them from the King.

The Synod also made an Order which concerned the general good of the Kingdom,
The Synod decreed just Weights.
That Tradesmen should be obliged to sell their Goods by a full weight, and
prohibited any one under pain of Excommunication, to make use of a certain
deceitful Weight with which they cheated their Customers.

But Pope Martin, though it were Popes generally afraid of Councils.
with great reluctance that he had called the Council at Basil, fearing lest his
Life and Actions should be inquired into (for which cause also the Fr.
Guicciard. lib. 9. and Paul. Jov. lib. 2.
succeeding Popes were always very averse from calling a General Council) yet
because this was the Place and Time appointed both by his own Edicts and the
determination of the Fathers assembled first at Constance, and then at Pavia,
that he might not seem to equivocate in the opinion of all Christendom,
appointed Julianus Caesarinus Cardinal of S. Angelo to preside in his Name at
the Council; Martin appoints a President.
who at that time was his Legate in the Bohemian War against the Followers of
Hus, the Cardinal of Winchester, being lately recalled from that Post. But
before his journey to Basil, in the beginning of the next Year Pope Martin died
Rome, and Gabriel Condelmarius, who The Pope dies before he took his Place.
was created Cardinal at Lucca by Gregory the Twelfth, as is before related, was
chosen into his room on the 3d of March, and changed his Name for that of
Eugenius the Fourth; by whom also Eugenius the Fourth succeeds him; and
continues the President who was his Legate.
Caesarinus being continued in the Office of Legate, he went to Basil, and
opened the Council there in the beginning of December.

In which the matter was hotly debated concerning the Power of the Pope; and on
the 15th of February it was Determined, That a General Council does derive its
Authority immediately from Sess. 2.
Christ, and that the Pope is subject to it; The Pope adjudged subject to the
Council, etc.
that he has no power to remove or prorogue it; that if the Pope die in the
time of their Session, the right of erecting a new one is in the Council, and
that the supreme Sess. 4.
Government of the Church is committed to a Council, and not to the Pope; and by
virtue of this supreme Authority they constituted By their susupreme Authority,
the Council makes a Legate of Avignon, etc. The Pope alarmed, removes the
Council to Bologne. Is opposed.
Alfonsus Cardinal of S. Eustace Legate of Avignon, and forbad Eugenius to make
any new Cardinals before the end of the Council.

The Pope being alarmed at these Decrees, by his Edict removed the Council from
Basil to Bologna, which Translation the Fathers by a contrary Edict disanull'd,
and both of them by their Letters cited the Archbishop of Canterbury, one to
Basil, and the other to Bologna.

Upon this the Archbishop called a Delegates from London Synod to the Council
of Basil, and others to the Pope.
Synod at London on the 15th of September, and advised with the Bishops and
Prelates what course was to be taken in the Dissension between the Council and
the Pope; who unanimously concluded, To send Delegates to the Fathers at Basil,
and others to Pope Eugenius, to compose the Differences on both sides; to whom
they voted a Penny in the Pound out of all the Profits of the Clergy, besides
the Two pence granted in the former Synod. They also gave the King half a
Tenth, Half a Tenth given the King.
which was demanded of them in an Eloquent Speech by John Stafford Bishop of
Bath, and Lord Chancellor of England, with whom came also to the Synod William
Lyndewood, who was lately made Keeper of the Privy Seal. This William Lyndewood
was esteemed one of the Wisest and most Learned Men of that Age; he was very
much beloved by the Archbishop, who removed him first from the Chancellorship
of Salisbury to that of Canterbury, afterward he made him Official at the
Court of Arches, and gave him several rich Livings; he also recommended him to
both the Kings, Henry the Fifth and Sixth, the first of which sent him
Ambassador into Spain, and afterward into Portugal, and now under Henry the
Sixth he was made Keeper of the Privy William Lyndewood Keeper of the Privy
Seal,
Seal, and soon after Bishop of St. David's. Amongst Jo. Balae. de scriptor.
Angl. Cent 7.
other of his Works, which are now lost, he got a great deal of reputation with
Posterity by his learned Writ excellent Commentaries ^n the English
Constitutions. And was styled, the Light of the Law. Complaint in the Synod
against the Vicars General, etc.
Commentaries upon the English Constitutions, which Work he dedicated to the
Archbishop, whom for his In Epist. Dedic.
great knowledge in both Laws, he styled the light of the Law.

In This Synod the Clergy of the Lower House complained to the Bishops, that
their Vicars General, Commissaries and Officials were for the most part
ignorant both in the Civil and Canon Law, and that they had never taken any
degree in the Universities; whereupon Decreed, that a Judge of a Spiritual
Court must have some degree of the Law.
it was Decreed, That no one should be made a Judge in any of the Spiritual
Courts, unless he had taken some degree in Law: After which the Synod broke up.

In speaking of This Synod we made mention of John Stafford Bishop of Bath, who
was made Chancellor in the room of John Kempe Archbishop of York, who being
lately advanced to the Purple with the Title of Cardinal of S. Balbina, had
laid down that Office. Between him and the Archbishop of Canterbury there arose
a very sharp Dispute about Priority. For in the Parliament holden shortly after
at Westminster, the Archbishop of York, in respect of his Cardinal's Archbishop
of York as Cardinal, claimed precedence of Canterbury,
Dignity, claimed precedence of the Archbishop of Canterbury, which he on the
other side rightly maintained to belong to him by the ancient Prerogative of
his See.

The Archbishop of Canterbury on the contrary by ancient Prerogative. Referred
to the Pope.
The cognizance of this Affair through their mutual Contentions being referred
to the Pope, the Archbishop of Canterbury pleaded his Cause himself by Letters,
and appointed Antony de Capharellis his Proctor at the Court of Rome, who in
his Name maintained, that the Archbishop of Canterbury was within his The
Arguments for Canterbury urgent.
own Jurisdiction, in which it was fit that he should take place of every one,
and that in the Province of Canterbury no respect ought to be had to the
Dignity of Cardinal possessed by my Lord of York, who being removed from the
Pope's presence, was deprived of the brightness of those Rays, whose splendour
he received by communication from his Holiness; and that even a Bishop, Abb. ad
c. sane n. 4. de for. comp.
while he is in another Bishop's Diocese, is looked upon but as a private
Person, and not as a Bishop.

But the Pope out of his desire to maintain the Honor of the Sea of Rome, and
of the Cardinals his Brethren, being more inclined to favor the Archbishop of
York, writ back to the Archbishop of Overborn in the Cardinal's favor.
Canterbury, That the first Degree in the Church next to the Papacy, belonged
to the Cardinals; that they were those venerable Priests mentioned by Moses in
the Seventeenth Chapter of Deuteronomy; that they were afterward instituted by
St. Peter, and were to be accounted as Members of the Pope's Body, and that the
whole Church did turn upon them as upon its Hinges. Seeing therefore that it
has obtained by the Customs and Constitutions of particular Churches, that in
the same Province a Priest should take place of a Deacon, a Bishop of a Priest,
and an Archbishop of a Bishop, that much more the Laws of the Catholic Church
ought to be universally observed; for as every Archbishop presides in his own
Province, so the Cardinals are set over the Universal Church by the Pope.
Lastly, He exhorted and entreated the Archbishop to submit to the Customs of
the Church of Rome, and give place to the Cardinal, promising both him and the
whole See of Canterbury all the kindnesses that could be expected from a most
affectionate Father. This Letter is inserted at length by Cardinal Jacobatius
in his Lib. 1. de council. art. 12.
Book of Councils, when he comes to discourse about the degrees of Cardinals and
Patriarchs.

By this it plainly appeared to Posterity how strenuously the Archbishop
desended the Dignity of the Church of England against the Pope, whose
displeasure he had incurred, as we said before, for maintaining the King's
Authority.

The Differences betwixt Eugenius and the Council of Basil, gave occasion to
the calling another Synod the next A Synod called at London on occasion of the
difference between the Pope and Council.
Year: For after that Eugenius had removed the Council from Basil to Bologna,
and had been urged in vain by the Fathers at Basil to revoke his Decree, they
commanded him by their Edict to Council, and repair to Basil The Pope is
summoned to Basil.
within sixty days, otherwise they declared that they would proceed against him
as contumacious, and divest him of the Papacy.

Whereupon, in a Synod begun at London the 7th of November, the Archbishop
commanded the Proctors for the Clergy, and all the Prelates of the Of which
London Synod consults.
Lower House to consult and determine whether the Pope might dissolve a General
Council at his own pleasure, and And what Pope they should obey, if another be
set up.
in case the Fathers at Basil should depose Eugenius, and set up another Pope,
which of them they ought to obey? To which Questions some days after Thomas
Bekyngton, Official of the Archbishop's Court, answered in the name of Alleged
1 st, that the Pope might dissolve a Council; and if another be set up, the
Synod is to obey Eugenius.
the rest, That the Pope by his sole command might dissolve a Council, and that
they were not to withdraw their Obedience from Eugenius, though another Pope
should be created at Basil. For the Affections of a great many People in
England began some time ago to be alienated from the Fathers at Basil upon the
account of By which they resent a Decree made at Basil, transferring Votes from
the Nations to a few Delegates,
a Decree made by them, which took away the Custom of voting by the Suffrages of
every Nation, and referred all things to the determination of some particular
Delegates; whereupon the English Representatives then at Basil, Thomas Bishop
of Worcester, William Prior of Norwich, Thomas Brown Dean of Salisbury, Peter
Patrick Chancellor, and Robert Borton Precentor of Lincoln, John Sarysbury
Doctor of Divinity, and John Symondisborough Licentiate in the Canon Law,
protested against it; which was also done at the same time here in Which was
protested against on the place.
England, by William Lyndewood, Proctor for the King, who repeated a set form
of Appeal, in which he protested against the Decree as unjust, for that this
way of voting might hereafter be prejudicial to the King, and the Rights of the
Clergy and Parliament.

After this the Archbishop consulted with the Synod about nominating more Eight
new Delegates nominated.
Delegates, because several of those that were sent before, were dead at Basil;
and eight Doctors of Divinity and both Laws were chosen, who were to be sent to
Basil, provided the Fathers would admit them without imposing upon them any new
Oath.

At this time our Affairs in France declined daily, by the revolt of the chief
Cities to King Charles, who had been lately crowned at Rhemes with great
solemnity; King Charles crowned at Rhemes.
for which cause the Duke of Bedford who was lately come into England, and his
Brother the Duke of Gloucester, thought it expedient to raise a A new Army
against France designed.
new Army here in England, and John Stafford Bishop of Bath Lord Chancellor, the
Earls of Warwick and Salisbury, the Lord Treasurer Cromwell, and the Lords
Scrope and Tiptoft were sent to the Synod Money desired of the Synod.
to desire Money of them. The Chancellor in an elegant Speech laid before them
the miserable state of Affairs in France, and the poverty of the Exchequer, and
brought them to supply the Necessities of the King and Kingdom.

After a denial,
At first they absolutely refused to grant any Supply, alleging that the
Wealth of the Clergy was exhausted by their advancing Money continually for the
use of the War; by the Rapines of the King's Purveyors, and by unjust Citations
to the King's Courts. But some other Lords soon after coming to them, as the
Earl of Huntington, the Lords Hungerford, Audly and Cornwallis, who urged again
the same Reasons, and reckoned up the extraordinary Benefits conferred on the
Church by the Kings of England, they They gave three quarters of a Tenth.
at length obtained three quarters of a Tenth.

For at that time the Clergy complained grievously of the unjust proceeding of
the King's Judges, and the The Grievances of the Church at that time.
common Lawyers; That Priests against all Law and Equity were brought to their
Secular Courts, that the Power of the Ecclesiastical Judges was restrained by
their unjust Prohibitions, and particularly that by a fraudulent interpretation
they wrested a strict Law of Richard the Second against Provisors, and turned
it upon those Persons who were Judges in the Spiritual Courts of those Causes
which they pretended to belong to their Jurisdiction. For which cause the
Archbishop held another Synod at London the next Year on the 7th of October;
where in a pathetical Speech, he expressed how solicitous he was that the The
Archbishop zealous to rescue her from the Oppressions of the Lawyers.
Church might receive no prejudice under his Government, that it might be
delivered from the illegal Oppressions of the Lawyers, and restored to its
ancient dignity; and commanded them all to consider what measures were to be
taken to ease the Clergy of the weight of these Oppressions. But the Plague
breaking out in the City, the By reason of the Plague, the Synod dissolved.
Synod was quickly dissolved, having only appointed a Holiday to be kept in
honor of S. Frideswide the Protectress of the University of Oxford, and
denounced excommunication against any one that should detract from the
Privileges and Jurisdiction of the Church.

After this the Archbishop applied himself industriously to the Government of
his Province, and called never another Synod in three Years, till the
Necessities of the Exchequer call d upon the Clergy for a Supply to maintain
the Charges of the War with France. The Duke of Burgundy revolts to the French,
and Bedford dies; The former occasioned
The revolt of the Duke of Burgundy to the French, and the death of the Duke of
Bedford, which happened the next Year, gave a terrible blow to our Affairs in
France.

Eugenius and the Council of Basil, Commissioners from our King, from Charles
King of France, and the The ill success of the Treaty at Arras.
Duke of Burgundy, met at Arras in order to treat of a Peace; But the English
and French not agreeing by reason of the extravagant Conditions demanded on
either side, the Burgundians at last went over to the French; and soon after
the Duke of Bedford fell sick and died, whose death soon caused a great
alteration The English driven out of Paris, etc.
next Year the People of Paris conspired privately together, and drove the
English out of the City; and many other Towns being stirred up by their
example, and in a manner all the People of France, as if they were impelled by
a And generally the French surrendered to Charles.
fatal necessity surrendered themselves to King Charles.

Wherefore to preserve the remains of our Dominion in France, the Duke of
Gloucester with a great Army and a gallant Fleet sailed over to Calais, which A
new English Army set sail for Calais.
was then besieged by the Duke of Burgundy, and the King by Letters to the
Archbishop of Canterbury pressed him to move the Clergy for a supply of Money
for levying more men; who having assembled the Bishops and Prelates of his
Province at London on the 30th of April, The Clergy grant a Tenth.
for they all earnestly desired the recovery of France.

The Archbishop had designed a long time ago to erect some noble Monument for
the service of the Church, of Religion and Learning, and for his own glory in
the University of Oxford, which out of a pious regard to his Education there,
he desired to adorn as much as was possible: For at that time the Estates of
almost all private Persons, as well as the public Revenues being exhausted by
the long continuance of the French War, the University was so thin and empty,
that most of the Colleges and Halls which were formerly full of Students, were
now quite forsaken and uninhabited; and of those many Thousand Scholars that
used to flock thither, there was not one remaining; which Epist. Acad. Oxon.
125. in Archiv.
they heavily lamented in their Letters to the Archbishop and the Synod.

Wherefore that he might by his Bounty repair the decays of Learning occasioned
by the general poverty of the Kingdom* he gave Orders for building a large and
stately Edifice of a square form in the North part of the Suburbs The
Archbishop built a stately Edifice at Oxford;
of Oxford, which he designed for a College; but when the Work was almost
finished, whether it were that he found fault with the Builders, or that he did
not like the situation of it, he changed his mind, and gave it to the Monks of
Gave it to the Monks of St. Bernard.
S. Bernard, that the Novices might be sent thither out of all the Convents of
that Order to study the Arts and Divinity; afterward in the general Calamity
of Monasteries it was seized by Seized in Henry the Eighth's time.

Purchased by Thomas White, Merchant, who Founded there St John the Baptist's
College.

From whence came many Reformers.


King Henry the Eighth, of whom Sir Thomas White, Merchant of London, a very
great Favourer of Learning, purchased it, and founded there the noble College
of St. John Baptist, which has since produced a great many eminent Men in all
Faculties, and particularly in Divinity, who labored very succesfully in
carrying on the Reformation in the Church of England. This prudent Person
showed by his excellent Example that those sacred and stately Houses which were
taken from the licentious Monks, and afterward unjustly seized on by the
Avarice and Luxury of private Persons, should have been applied toward the
advancement of Learning, the relief of the Poor, or the public good of the
Church and Kingdom. But the Archbishop chose another place for building a
College, very commodious for the Students, in the middle of the Town, near S.
Mary's Church. In which place having pulled down the Houses that stood there,
which he bought of the Owners, he laid out a The Archbishop chose another place
for a College.
square Court; and on the 10th of February this Year, the first Stone of this
Auspicious Building was laid, and the inspection of the Work was committed to
the care of one John Druell a Clergyman, who performed that Trust with great
integrity and diligence.

In the mean time, Pope Eugenius being threatened by the Edict of the Fathers
The Edict of the Council of Basil against the Pope, backed by the Emperor.
at Basil, as we said before, which was seconded by the Authority of Sigismond
the Emperor, who came to Basil accompanied with a great many of the German
Princes, revoked his Translation of the Council to Bologna, and confirmed Sess.
16. Council. Basil. The Council's Translation revoked.

Sess. 19, 24. Ambassadors to the Council from Greece and Constantinople, where
The Emperor and Patriarch designed to be present, If the Council would secure
them, and defray their Charges.


their Session at Basil, whither also he sent his Legates, the Cardinal de
Santa Cruce, and the Bishop of Padua, to support his Interests there.

There arrived also at Basil Ambassadors from John Paleologus Emperor of
Greece, and Joseph Patriarch of Constantinople, who were received with great
joy, and declared, that the Emperor himself, the Patriarch, and the Bishops of
the Greek Church would come to the Council in order to compose the Differences
between the Eastern and Western Churches in matters of Faith, if the Council
would engage the public Faith for their security, and defray Which was agreed.
the Charges of their Journey. Both which the Fathers immediately promised and
confirmed by their Ambassadors sent to Constantinople. But the Emperor
Sigismond, who was a valiant But on Sigismond's death the Pope removes the
Council to Ferrara, Sess. 29.
and wise Prince, dying this Year, Eugenius being freed from his Apprehensions,
removed the Council from Basil to Ferrara, and by Letters sent into England, he
desired the King to send his Ambassadors thither, and commanded the Archbishop
of Canterbury to assemble all the Bishops of his Province in the beginning of
the next Year, Ferrara; Whether he summoned the Bishops from England.

Sess. 32.


which he signified also by Letters written at the same time to all the Princes
and Bishops in Christendom.

This opposed by the Council.
On the other side, the Fathers at Basil forbad any one to appear at Ferrara;
and indeed almost all Nations detested this double dealing of Pope Eugenius;
for most of the Italians, the Germans, and the Spaniards, sided with the
Fathers at Basil, and Charles the Seventh King of France not only forbad the
Prelates of that Kingdom to go to Panor. Tract. de Council. Basil. n. 6. Carol.
Molinae. de Monarc. Franc. n. 149.
Ferrara, but also having called an Assembly of the Estates of France at
Bourges in Berry, King Charles of France puts forth the pragmatical Sanction
against Annates, etc.
he put forth the Pragmatical Sanction against Annates, Provisions, and other
Extortions of the Popes, which contained in a manner nothing else but the
Decrees of the Council of Basil, and commanded it to be received for Law in the
Kingdom of France. This Sanction curbed the Power of the Popes in France for a
long time, till the Reign Which curbed the Pope's Power there, till the time of
Lewis the Twelfth.

The English generally sided with the Pope.


of Petr. Rebuff. Tract. de nominat. quaest. 2. n. 2.
Lewis the Twelfth, who at last was prevailed upon by the Solicitations of
Pope Leo the Tenth to abolish it.

But almost all the English sided with Eugenius; for first of all the King
appointed some Persons of eminent Quality King Henry sent Ambassadors to
Ferrara.
to be sent Ambassadors to Ferrara, to whom the Bishops assembled in Convocation
voted an Allowance suitable to their Quality, which notwithstanding But their
allowance was disputed.
was denied by the Proctors for the Clergy in the Lower House, who were more
inclined in favor of the Council of Basil; only the Proctors for the Convents
granted Four pence in the Pound out of their Revenues.

In this Synod holden at London, the Archbishop complained heavily of a late
Injury offered him by Pope Eugenius, who by his sole Authority had given the
Bishopric of Ely in Commendam to Lewis Archbishop of Roan, and by his The Pope
gives away the Bishopric of Ely, in Commendam.

The Archbishop in Synod opposes the Affair,


Bull had confirmed him in the Government of that See, and therefore he ordered
the Synod to consider how to put a stop to this Affair, which was never
attempted before by any Pope. And indeed such a Precedent as this would have
been of very pernicious consequence to Posterity; but Philip Morgan, who was
then Bishop of Ely, outliving the Archbishop of Roan, by this means Which was
frustrated by the Survivorship of the then Bishop.
the Pope's Design was frustrated.

After this Richard Carpenter Chancellor of Oxford, desired of the Synod (which
had been prorogued to the 6th of October) in the name of both Universities,
that the Decree about conferring Proposed in Synod to Renew a Decree, that
those not in Orders should not be beneficed.
Benefices upon those only that had taken Degrees in the Universities, which was
made in the Years 1417, and 1421. and limited to a certain term of Years, which
were now expired, might be again renewed. The King also by his Wherein the King
concurred; and obtained it.
Letters desired the same of the Synod, who readily assented to it upon the
Conditions mentioned in the former Decrees.

Eugenius had now begun the Council at Ferrara, and by his importunity and fair
Promises had drawn thither John Palaeologus the Emperor, and some of the Greek
Bishops; but the Plague breaking out there, in the beginning of the The Council
begun at Ferrara, by occasion of the Plague removed to Florence.

Where the Greeks present submitted in Opinion to the Latins. Which so
offended the Greek Church, that after their death, they were not allowed
Christian Burial.

Sess. 33.

The Council of Basil maintained its Authority;


Florence; where after long Disputes about the Procession of the Holy Ghost,
about Purgatory, the Supremacy of the Pope, and some other Controversies
between the two Churches, the Greeks who were there present, submitted to the
Opinion of the Latins. For which they were so detested by the rest of the
Greek Church, that after their death they were not allowed Christian burial,
nor would the Greeks recede from one Article of their ancient Creed.

In the mean time the Fathers at Basil being incensed at the obstinacy of
Eugenius, by virtue of their Supreme Authority declared, That the Pope was
subordinate to a General Council, that he had no power to dissolve, transfer or
prorogue it, and that Eugenius for attempting all these things was guilty of
Heresy; they Deposed the Pope.
also divested him of the Papacy, being convicted of Contumacy, Simony, Perjury
and Impiety; and Aene. Sylv. lib. 2. de act. Council. Basil.
having chosen Thirty two of the greatest note out of the four Nations,
Italians, French, Germans (The English going to Ferrara)
and Spaniards (for the English were all gone to Ferrara) who were deputed with
full power to elect a new Pope, Amedeus Duke of Savoy, who had left the Dukedom
to his Son, and retired to an Hermitage, was created Pope, and took the Name of
Felix the Fifth. There were then at Basil And by the Deputies of four other
Nations, Felix the Fifth elected Pope.
two of the greatest Lawyers of their time, the Abbot Panormitanus and Ludovicus
Romanus, who were sent Ambassadors out of Italy from Alfonsus the great King of
Arragon. These two in a great many Speeches maintained, that the Authority of a
Council was superior to that of the Pope; and condemned the Actions of Eugenius
with so much sharpness and Eloquence, that no one durst pretend to contradict
them; all which they have left recorded to Posterity in their Writings. For
Panormitanus in a Panorm. tract. de Council. Basil. in 5. vol.
Book A defense of the Council at Basil.
which he put out in defense of the Council of Basil against Eugenius, shows
clearly, That the Authority of a Council is more sacred than that of the Pope;
that the Pope has no Jurisdiction over a Council, but on the contrary is
subordinate to it, and may be called in question, imprisoned and deposed by it;
and that this punishment was justly inflicted upon Eugenius, as contumacious, a
Deserter of the Faith, an Enemy to the Church, and guilty of Simony, Perjury
and Murder: And in Panor. ad c. significasti. n. 4. de elect. ad c. licet de
vitanda. n. 8. eod. tit. ad c. fraternitatis n 1. de haeret.
several places of his Commentaries he speaks of the power of a Council as
superior to that of the Pope. Ludovicus Romanus in his Responses maintains,
That an Appeal may lawfully be made Romans Cons. 521.
from the Pope to a General Council, that his Command for the Romans Cons. 522.
dissolution of it ought not to be obeyed, and that he may be Romans Cons. 523.
deposed by a Council. He was a The high Character of Lodovic. Romanus.
man (says Aene. Sylv. lib. 2. de act. Council. B sil.
Aeneas Sylvius) worthy not only of Rome, but also of Heaven it self; and had
he lived to have doubled his Age, would have given matter not only of
admiration, but of astonishment to the World; but Fortune envied Italy so
extraordinary a Person, and took him away at Basil, where he died of the
Plague, having hardly past the Thirtieth Year of his Age.

Aeneas Sylvius also himself was present and assisted at the Council both by
his approbation of their Proceedings against Eugenius, and by two Books which
he put out of the History of that Council; which afterward, being made Pope by
the Name of Pius the Second, he called in, and would fain have suppressed.

And indeed all the Gl. in c. si Papa did. 40. Archid. Gemin. and Fran. ad c.
in fidei favorem de haeret. in 6. Card. Zab. cons 150. Anchar. cons. 181.
Felin. ad c. super literis. n. 21. de rescript. Jo. Royas. de haeret. n. 518.
Fr. Marc. decis. 944.
Lawyers held this Opinion concerning the power of a Council over the Pope, as
long as they maintained the liberty of speaking and writing; but in the next
Age being brought under the subjection of the Popes, they began to flatter
them; and having positively Card. Jacobat. lib. 3. de Council. n. 85. Hier.
Alban de potest. Pap. n. 240. Cataldin. de Boncompag. de potest. Pap. n. 31.
Alfon. Hoied. de benefic. incompat. par. 1. n. 86.
condemned the Council In the next Age the Council of Basil is condemned.
of Basil, they raised the power of the Pope above that of a Council and the
whole Church; and this power the Card. Bellar. lib. 2. de Council. cap. 18.
Divines in the following Ages did affirm to be so inherent in the Sea of Rome,
that the Pope could not divest himself of it, nor any way make himself inferior
to a Council.

Before the end of the Year in which these things passed at Basil, the
Archbishop A Synod called at London,
called another Synod at London, which began on the 21st of November, but being
hindered by some indisposition, he could not be there that day: However he came
some days after, and in a long Speech, in which he could hardly refrain from
Tears; He reckoned up the grievous Miseries of the Church, proceeding from the
Penalties daily inflicted on the Ecclesiastical Judges, which by the Where the
Statute of Praemunire is reckoned a lamentable Church-Grievance;
Statue, commonly called the Statute of Praemunire, were designed against
Provisors, and from the Citations of the Clergy as well as others to the
Secular Courts. Whereupon it was unanimously agreed that the Archbishop should
present a Petition to the King in the name of the Clergy, wherein they set
forth, That the Penalties which by the 16. R. 2. 15.
Statute of Richard the Second were designed against those that should sue any
of the King's Subjects in any of the Pope's Courts either at Rome or In so far
as a Suit in an Ecclesiastical Court is construed a suing in Rome.
elsewhere, by a cunning interpretation of the Common Lawyers were turned
maliciously upon those that had any Cause depending in the Spiritual Courts
here in England, the cognizance of which they challenged to themselves; by
which means all People being deterr d from coming to their Courts, the
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction was very much diminished, and the Privileges
granted to the Church by his Highness's Predecessors became insignificant.
Wherefore They petition the King to limit the Penalties to those who sue in a
Foreign Court strictly taken.
they besought the King that he would settle it by Act of Parliament, that those
Penalties should be taken to extend only to those that commenced any Suits, or
procured any Writs or public Instruments at Rome, or any where else out of
England, and that no one should be proceeded against upon that Statute for any
Suit in the Spiritual Courts of this Kingdom; and that if the Ecclesiastical
Judges exceeded the bounds of their Jurisdiction, they might be restrained by
Prohibitions, and other lawful Punishments.

The King answered the Archbishop who pleaded in behalf of his Brethren, The
King promises them im^unity till a Parliament be called.
That he would consider of their Petition in the next Parliament, and that in
the mean time he would take care that no one should be molested by his Judges
upon the account of that Statute, unless the Cause were first approved by
himself or the Privy Council.

This Answer procured the ^ing a Tenth.
This gracious Answer of the King's so pleased the Synod, that they immediately
granted him a whole Tenth, with this Condition, which was particularly
expressed, that the Revenues and Benefices belonging to the College of All
Souls should not be included in the Concession.

This was the last Provincial Synod that the Archbishop held: From that time he
bent all his thoughts, as far as public business would give him leave, upon
finishing his College, which he designed to dedicate to the service of
Learning. For by this time the Walls of it, which were very stately and
magnificent, were built, and the Workmen had begun to lay the Roof; the
Archbishop had also purchased Lands and Manors for the perpetual maintenance
of his Foundation, all which he acquainted the King with, and humbly besought
him that he would permit the College to be founded in his Name, because The
Archbishop prayed the King to suffer his College, almost finished, to be
founded in his Royal Name.
the Lawyers were of opinion, that the Splendor and Authority of the King's
Name was of great importance toward founding a College in due and lawful manner.

Now the King was always very favorably inclined toward the good of the
Church, and the encouragement of Learning, and had a great love and veneration
for his Godfather the Archbishop. Wherefore by his Letters-Patent Letters
Patent accordingly granted.
under the great Seal he erected into a College this Building which the
Archbishop had endowed with all the Lands which he had purchased, and granted
it very large Privileges; he also gave leave to the Founder to place in it a
Warden and Fellows, and to make Laws and Statutes to oblige both them and their
Successors. Upon which he went the next Year to Oxford, where he solemnly
consecrated the Chapel The Chapel consecrated.
of his College, and made Richard Andrew, A Warden of the College made.

And twenty choice Fellows, with power to elect twenty more


Doctor of Law and Chancellor of Canterbury, Warden of it; he also made Twenty
Fellows, who were all choice men picked out of the whole University, to whom he
gave power to elect into their Society Twenty more: Out of which Number he
ordered that Twenty for Divinity and Sciences, And the Civil and Canon Law.
four should study Divinity and the Liberal Sciences, and the other Sixteen the
Civil and Canon Law. He also commanded all the Members of his Foundation to
pray for the Souls of King Henry the Fifth, of Thomas Duke of Clarence, and of
the Nobility and common Soldiers that had been killed in the French War, and
for all Christians in general according to the custom of those Times; being
troubled in Conscience, as it should seem, that he had been the Author and
Promoter of that War, in which a vast number of men had lost their Lives; for
which cause he ordered Wherefore the Archbishop called the College All Souls,
etc.
his College to be called the College of All Souls departed in the Faith in
Oxford. He added also two Chaplains, several Choristers and Servants who were
to attend upon the public Service of the College.

Prescribed them Statutes.
After this he prescribed them Laws and Statutes, by which their Studies and
Manners, their Offices and Profits were to be regulated; and lastly, having
inspected John Druel's Accounts of the Building thus far, he committed the care
of beautifying it within, and enlarging it without to Roger Keys, who was
afterward made Warden. For the Cloisters, and that part of the Building that
faces the great Street of the Town, were built, as it is said, some part in his
lifetime, and the rest after his death.

After the Foundation of this College, we find no mention of any public Action
done by him either in the Records of the Kingdom, or in the Historians of that
Age: only some noble Benefactions of his to the University of Was very liberal
to Oxford and Canterbury Church.
Oxford and the Church of Canterbury are recorded, with which we shall conclude
the History of his Virtues.

There had been begun some time ago at Oxford by the Munificence chiefly of the
Duke of Gloucester, a lofty and magnificent Structure, the upper part of which
was designed for a Library, and the lower for the public Divinity Laid out a
great Sum on the Structure begun by the Duke of Gloucester*
Schools. To this Work the Archbishop gave a great Sum of Money himself, and was
very earnest in soliciting all the Bishops and Peers who came to the
Parliament at Westminster, to contribute something toward it; all which is
gratefully acknowledged by the University, in their Epist. Acad. Oxon. 26.
Letters to him.

And Two hundred Marks to the public Chest of the University.
He also gave Two hundred Marks to the public Chest of the University, which
he ordered to be kept by three Masters of Arts, two Regents and one Non-regent,
who were to be chosen yearly* and were bound by an Oath to the faithful
discharge of that Trust, out With the Method of its disposal,
of which the University might borrow for the public use Five Pounds, every
particular College Five Marks, a Master of Arts Forty Shillings, a Licentiate
or Batchelour Two Marks, and an Undergraduate One; with this Condition, That
every one should deposite a sufficient Pawn, which, if the Money were not
repaid within a Month, was to be forfeited.

Besides the Decree mentioned concerning graduated Dignitaries.
He also did the University a signal piece of service by that Decree, which we
mentioned before, concerning the bestowing Benefices upon those only that had
taken Degrees which was made by the Synod at his intercession. For they
esteemed it as a singular kindness, and often Epist. Acad. Oxon 1. 124, 125,
143, 144. in Archiu.
returned him thanks upon this account with the highest expressions of
gratitude; for before this Constitution was made, Men, though they had attained
to the knowledge of all Sciences, spent their whole Life in the University.
These and many other Favors conferred by him upon the University, are
honorably mentioned by them in their Letters; and that the memory of them
might remain for ever, it was ordained by a Stat. cist. Chich* in Archiv.
public Decree, that his Name should be registered His Name decreed to be
Registered among the Benefactors of Oxford University.
among their Benefactors, and read every Year in the Public Schools by the
Chaplain of the University, and that a solemn Mass should be said for him on
the Anniversary of his Death.

All this was justly due to him, who had increased the glory of the University
by Having founded two Colleges, etc.
the soundation of two Colleges, and by so many public Benefactions, beside his
private Charities to many poor Students, to whom he allowed yearly Stipends, as
appears out of his private Accounts.

He adorned the Cathedral of Canterbury.

Repaired Christ's Church there, building and furnishing a Library, etc.


Beside this, he very much adorned his Cathedral Church of Canterbury; he there
laid out a great deal of Money in repairing Christ's Church, and building a
Library and Steeple; he also gave a great many Jewels and Ornaments to that
Church, and furnished the Library with many valuable Books in all kinds of
Learning; which are all reckoned up in a public Instrument made by the Prior
and Monks of Canterbury, and described among the public Acts of that Church;
in which they promise on their part that his Body should be laid in the Tomb
that he had caused to be built on the North side of the Chancel, and that no
one beside should ever be buried in that place, which they and their Successors
would take care to see performed.

He also gave very liberally toward Gave liberally toward the building of
Croydon Church, and Rochester Bridge.
the building of Croydon Church* and Rochester Bridge. I omit the rest of his
Benefactions, lest the enumeration of every smaller Deed of Charity should seem
to detract from the glory of his more Illustrious Actions.

Thus having left the Monuments of his Piety and Liberality in all Places,
being worn out with Age, he departed this Life on the 12th of April, in the His
Death, Apr. 12. 1443. and magnificent Burial.
Year 1443. His Body was laid in the Tomb which he had built himself, as we said
before, in the upper part of which is his Statue very handsomely cut in White
Marble, and on the side of it this Epitaph is written.

Hic jacet HENRICUS CHICHELE Legum Doctor, quondam Cancellarius Sarum, qui anno
septimo Henrici IV. Regis ad Gregorium Papam XII. in ambasciata transmissus, in
civitate Senensi per manus ejusdem Papae in Menevensem Episcopum consecratus
est: Hic etiam Henricus anno secundo Henrici quinti Regis in hac sancta
Ecclesia in Archiepiscopum postulatus, and a Joanne Papa XXIII. ad eandem
translatus est, qui obiit anno Domini millesimo quadringentesimo quadragesimo
tertio, mensis Aprilis die XII.

Here lies HENRY CHICHELE Doctor of Laws and sometime Chancellor of Salisbury,
who in the Seventh Year of King Henry the Fourth, was sent Ambassador to Pope
Gregory the XIIth. and was consecrated Bishop of S. David's by the hands of the
Pope in the City of Siena. The said Henry in the Second Year of King Henry the
Fifth, was demanded for Archbishop in this Holy Church, and translated to it by
Pope John the Twenty third. He died in the Year of our Lord 1443. on the 12th
of April.

Soon after which, a Fatal Change in England.
Soon after his death followed a very deplorable Turn in the State of this
Kingdom. For Queen Margaret, a Woman of a Masculine Spirit, by the assistance
and Counsels of William Pole Duke of Suffolk, got the Government of the King,
and the whole management Which came to be governed by Queen Margaret.

Whence the Kingdom was divided, and the People oppressed.

The French also under a Female Revolt to King Charles.

Normandy, then Aquitain lost, after 300 years possession.


of the Kingdom into her own hands; upon which the Nobility was divided into
Factions, and drew along with them the rest of the People who were oppressed
with Exactions. The French also who were under the English Dominion being
encouraged by our Divisions, revolted to King Charles, and first we lost
Normandy, and then all Aquitain, which we had held ever since the time of King
Henry the Second, almost Three hundred years. The Kingdom was embroiled in
Civil Dissentions within, and labored under a Foreign War without. For the
Kentish men under Jack Cade Jack Cade 's Insurrection.
took Arms, and raised an Insurrection; the French invaded the Coast of Kent on
one side, and the Scots on the other ravaged the Northern Borders; and to
complete all our Miseries, the Family The French invade Kent, and the Scots the
Borders.

The Civil War from the House of York, in which King Henry was imprisoned,
exiled, deprived of Crown and Life by Edward the Fourth.

Our Chichele's Wisdom supported the Kingdom. From the Calamities of which he
was by his happy Fate delivered.


of York took occasion from hence to raise that lamentable Civil War, in which
King Henry being twice taken Prisoner in the Field, forced to fly out of
England, and by the mockery of Fortune restored again to his Kingdom, was at
last deprived both of Life and Crown by Edward the Fourth. If we consider all
these things, Henry Chichele died in a very seasonable time, and deserved of
Posterity a Character both of Wisdom, seeing the Kingdom which had been
supported by his Counsels, fell with him, and also of Happiness, in that God
Almighty did not suffer him to live to see the Calamities that were just coming
upon the Kingdom.

WHAT is here related concerning the Government of the Church or Kingdom in
general, is taken from the English and French Historians, who wrote of the
Affairs of those Times. The rest of the Story relating to the Church of
England, and to Henry Chichele in particular, is taken out of the Books of the
public Acts of the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, which are carefully kept by
the Vicar-general's Secretary, and out of some Manuscripts which Sir Robert
Cotton furnished me with; This I thought fit to acquaint the Reader withal, as
well that he might be satisfied of the authority of those things that are here
delivered, as that I might not be forced to crowd the Margin with Authors Names
and Quotations.

FINIS.
THE TABLE TO THE Life of Archbishop CHICHELE.
BOrn at Higham-Ferrars in Northamptonshire, Page 1 Made Fellow of New-College,
Oxford, by William of Wyckam, Ibid. Went to live with Medeford Bishop of Sarum,
2 Made Archdeacon of Sarum, Ibid. Then Chancellor of the same, 3 Parson of
Odyham, Ibid. And chief Executor to his Benefactor, Ibid. Sent Ambassador by
Henry the Fourth to Pope Gregory the Twelfth, 4 By whom made Bishop of St.
David's, 5 Accordingly took the Canonical Oath in England, 6 Sent Delegate to
the General Council at Pisa, Ibid. Held to Reconcile the Competitors for the
Popedom, 7 Boniface the Eighth deposed, Ibid. Clement the Fifth elected Pope,
Ibid. Who with six Successors, all French, resided at Avignon for seventy
Years, 8 Most of them hated by the Italians for their Nation, or vicious Lives,
Ibid. The Clementines added to the Canon Law, Ibid. Pope Gregory returned to
Rome, 9 Was succeeded by Urban the Sixth. Ibid. For whose Rigor and Pride,
Clement the Sixth was set up against him, 10 Urban, for preferring the Base,
and fomenting of Wars, called Turbanus; a perverse and most cruel Pope, Ib.
Clement not far short of Him in wickedness, 11 Urban succeeded by Boniface the
Ninth, and Ib. Clement by Benedict the Third. Both worse than the former, Ib.
Boniface more Politician than Grammarian, 12 Imposed the Tax of Annates on the
Clergy, Ib. Suffered Bishoprics to be sold by Auction, Ib. Sold the same
Livings twice to several Chapmen, 13 Yet made the Purchaser swear he came
fairly by it, Ib. Made poor Petitioners pay a Floren apiece, Ib. Enquired after
Gifts in the time of Divine Service, Ib. Had no comfort when dying, but in
Money, Ib. Defended by the Lawyers, Ib. But opposed by the Divines, 14 Benedict
the like spiritual Robber, Ib. Boniface compared to an Ox, Benedict to a wild
Beast, 15 The Cardinal's Oath upon Boniface's death to resign if chosen, Ib.
Boniface succeeded by Innocent the Seventh, who broke his Oath, 16 A great
Canonist, debaucht and covetous, Ib. On his death the Oath repeated with
Imprecations, Ib. Gregory the Twelfth succeeded, Ib. Who treated with Benedict
for the Church's peace, 17 And for a Resignation by them both at Savona, Ib.
Sends to Charles the Sixth of France about the same Affair, 18 Gregory harshly
treated his Ambassadors at their return, Ib. Drew back and shuffled, Ib. Then
plainly refused to stand to the Agreement, Ib. Hearing Benedict was come to
Savona, he comes to Siena, 19 To whom Chichele was one of the Ambassadors from
England, and there made Bishop of St. David's, Ib. Pope Gregory goes to Lucca,
Ib. Refuses to go to Savona, Ib. Trinkles with Benedict, is for his Hypocrisy
called Errorius, Ib. The Cardinals displeased for his promoting Condelmarius,
20 His own Party fly to Pisa, Ib. They appeal from him to Christ, a general
Council, and the next Pope, Ib. This justified by Panormitan, Ib. Both Popes
accused of Perjury by the best Canonists, 21 The Cardinal's leaving the Pope,
grateful to the Christian Princes, Ib. The Kings of England and France withdrew
their Obedience from both the Popes, Ib. At the Request of the Cardinal's
Letters English Money withheld, 22 The French King withdraws Obedience to
Benedict, defended by Baldus, 23 Two Bull-Carriers (the Pope's Emissaries) were
ignominiously treated at Paris, Ib. Charles the Fourth of France did neither
regard the Church, nor his own Kingdom, Ib. Whose Son's Successor Robert of
Bavaria King of the Romans siding with Gregory, chiefly fomented the Church
Divisions, 24 The Emperors then were degenerated, Ib. When their Power was most
requisite to rectify the Pope's mismanagement, Ib. Gregory Renounced by his
Cardinals at Pisa, 25 Who with those of Benedict, deprived them both of the
Papacy, 26 For which some worldly Divines charged them with Schism, Ib. King of
England and France, etc. favor the Cardinals, and their aforesaid Sentence in
Council, 28 Which the Cardinal of Bourdeaux with great zeal got ratified in
England, Ib. H. Chichele one of the Delegates to Pisa, 29 Before whom and
Associates a Learned Sermon preached, Ib. Bishop of Sarum, another Delegate,
made an eloquent Oration in the Council of Pisa, 30 Where both Popes were
pronounced perjured, etc. and Alexander the Fifth elected, 31 Who, when a Boy,
had begged from door to door, Ib. Afterward his Parts known, sent to Oxford,
Ib. Then made Archbishop of Milan; and created Cardinal by Innocent the
Seventh, Ib. Alexander was too honest, studious and Monastic to be politically
qualified for the Chair, 32 It Is thought he was poisoned, Ib. He was succeeded
by John the Twenty Third, Ib. A Papal Triumvirate, Ib. H. Chichele returns from
his Embassy, 33 Was diligent in his Function, Ib. Allegiance sworn to Henry the
Fifth before his Coronation, 34 That King sent our Henry Ambassador to the
French King and Duke of Burgundy, Ib. To the former, for a Treaty of Peace, 35
To the latter about a Marriage, Ib. Whilst the King seemed more inclinable to
the French King's Daughter, 36 H. Chichele chosen President of the Council, Ib.
The Monks desire leave to elect an Archbishop of Canterbury, Ib. And
Canonically demanded H. Chichele, 37 Which Custom was introduced by Papal
Ambition, 38 H. Chichele expects the Pope's leave, 39 To obtain which, Proxies
are sent to Rome, Ib. With the King's Letters in his favor, Ib. The Pope
divorced H. Chichele from St. David's, 40 Made him Archbishop by way of
provisor, Ib. But he was first to be sworn to the Infallible Chair, Ib. The
Pall, denoting full power over the other Bishops, 41 Delivered him in the
King's Palace of Sutton, 42 Where he took the Oath of Obedience, Ib. The Pope
gave the Church, but the King could only give the Land, 43 Which was done after
renouncing of the Clauses* derogatory to the King's Power, Ib. For his Patent
he paid Six hundred Marks, 44 Secured the Church from the Envy of the two
Houses, Ib. Being formerly voted to supply King Henry the Fourth by the
Church's Wealth, Ib. Whilst the Church paid Tenths oftener than the Laity did
Fifteenths, etc. 45 Which Consideration, but chiefly the Intercession of his
Predecessor with the King, had then averted the storm, Ib. Another Address of
the Commons against the Clergy, Ib. Which was designed, as the then Bishop
alleged, for the enriching themselves, 46 King of France, said he, has not a
Noble now of the Revenues of the Monasteris that were brought to the Exchequer,
Ib. The Petition rejected. Ib. Henry the Fourth averse to Wickliff's Doctrine,
abetted by the Petitioners, 47 In Henry the Fifth's time the Address renewed,
Ib. To avoid which the Clergy resolved to give the King Money for a War with
France, Ib. For which a Synod is called at London, 48 The Title of the Kings of
England to France, Ib. Claimed by Edward the Third, Ib. Whose Competitor was
Philip de Valois, Ib. King Edward claiming by's Mother, rejected under pretense
of the Salick Law, assumed the Title, 49 Successfully invaded France, and
entailed the Quarrel, Ib. Richard the Second waved the Quarrel, Ib. Henry the
Fourth was diverted by Intestine Commotions, Ib. But the happy Juncture was in
Henry the Fifth's time, Ib. As Chichele thought, for a more glorious Diversion,
Ib. His Speech to the King for that purpose, 50 Accommodates himself to the
King's Heroic Temper, Ib. Thinks France no less than the Envy of the World, 51
Represents the King's Right, Ib. And insinuates the Injuries done his French
Provinces, Ib. The Salick Law an Obtrusion, 52 And a Cheat to debar the
Female-Line, Ib. Not made by Pharamond, as pretended, Ib. Put Four hundred
years after him, and in Germany, 53 If it obliges the French, it relates to
private Inheritances only; for, Ib. In dispute, one French King never used it
against another; for Ib. Pepin claimed by a Female, 54 And so did Hugh Capet,
Ib. And by the like Lewis the Tenth confirmed his Right, Ib. This Law made a
Bugbear to Foreigners, contemned by themselves, 55 It Is contrary to the Civil
Law, and Ib. The Constitutions of most Nations, Ib. And to the Divine Law, 56
Jesus Christ the Lawful Heir, by his Mother of the Jewish Kingdom, Ib. The
French rather deny the Bible, than submit to a Foreign Prince, 57 The Salick
Law literally excludes not the Sons of Females, 58 And is to be taken in the
most favorable sense, 60 The Archbishop asserts the King's Call as well as
Right to France, Ib. With other great Encouragements to the Expedition, Ib.
Success a Good Sign in the Virtuous and Brave, 61 But the Earl of Westmorland
advises a War with the Scots, Ib. From the Roman Example to begin with the
lesser Enemy, Ib. And the readiness of Provisions for the latter, 62 With the
easiness of the Victory, Ib. The justice and necessity of the War, Ib. The Earl
Answered by Jo. Duke of Exeter, 63 That the Scot's Strength (lying in the
French) ought to be first attaqued, Ib. France once conquered, the Scots will
be helpless, Ib. Advised to hinder the Scots Attempts in the King's absence,
Ib. Which Opinion highly applauded, Ib. And War with France was the Cry of the
House, 64 The Archbishop's renowned for the wisdom of his Counsel, 65 The King
provides an Army and Navy, Ib. Sends Ambassadors to demand France, Ib. The
Army's Rendezvous at Southampton, 66 The French Ambassadors, in Answer, offer
the French King's Daughter in Marriage, Ib. Their Conditions not thought
honorable by the King, The Archbishop s more full Answer, 67 That the French
King had not answered King Henry's Demand, Ib. Who insisted only on the
Dominions his Ancestors had enjoyed, 68 Which Answer the King confirms, Ib. The
French Ambassadors remanded, Ib. The King sets sail, 69 Takes Harflew, Ib.
Defeats the French at Agincourt, Ib. Of whom Ten thousand are slain, Ib. And
many Noble Prisoners, Ib. In the King's absence, the Archbishop arms the Clergy
in Kent, Ib. Calls a Synod, 70 In which two Tenths are granted for the War, Ib.
Another Synod, 71 Christendom divided between Three Popes, Ib. By two of whom
the Council of Pisa refused, Ib. A General Council appointed by the Third, Ib.
The Archbishop appears at Constance by Proxy, 72 Their Charges 2 d. per l. out
of the Clergy's Revenues, Ib. The Emperor comes to England as Mediator, 73
Whereupon the Delegates are pressed to Constance, Ib. Where a Decree passed
about Wills and Administration, Ib. That 5 s. shall be paid for a Probate, Ib.
And that the Clergy shall bring in the Tenth six Months sooner, Ib. The
Mediation in vain between the Two Kingdoms, 74 Harfleu being besieged, and Four
hundred English slain by the French, Ib. Wherefore the King sends his Brother
the Duke of Bedford, to Normandy, Ib. Presents the Emperor with the Garter, Ib.
And conducts him to Calais, Ib. The Emperor goes to Constance, Ib. The
Archbishop goes to France, 75 Ambassadors from the French to King Henry at
Calais, Ib. Who returning got a Supply from the Parliament, Ib. And Two Tenths
from the Synod, 76 The King setting sail, left the Duke of Bedford Vicegerent,
Ib. The Archbishop interdicts the Church of St. Dunstans, 77 Excommunicates the
Criminals, viz. Ib. Lord Strange, Lady and Servants, Ib. The two former with
Tapers, and all in their Shirts and Drawers only, did processional Penance
from St. Paul's to St. Dunstan's; for purification of which the Lady filled the
Vessels with water, 77, 78 At Constance they dispute about a new Pope, Ib. And
against John Wickliff, Ib. By whom the Seeds of sound Doctrine had been
dispersed, Ib. Particularly among the Bohemians, Ib. Wickliff pronounced
Heretic, 79 And decreed that his Bones be taken up and burnt, Ib. And his
Followers be prosecuted as Heretics, Ib. John Huss, and Jerome of Prague,
condemned to Flames, Ib. Whose death made the Emperor and Council infamous, Ib.
The public Faith being shamefully violated, the Bohemians revenge it, Ib. The
Council decreed; Faith is not to be kept with Heretics, 80 Of which the
Papists ashamed, kept it to Luther and others, Ib. Pope John the Twenty third
charged for not leaving the Papacy, 81 And accused before the Council of
Adultery, Incest, Witchcraft, etc. Ib. Gregory by Proxy resign's the Chair, as
did also Benedict, 82 At Constance a Council is decreed superior to the Pope,
Ib. Five Nations composed the Council, Ib. Martin Vth. elected Pope, 83 The
Decree of the Council's Power repealed by Leo the Tenth, Ib. A Council not to
be restrained by a new Pope; 85 And that, on the Pope's death, a new Election
belongs to the Council, Ib. Yet during that of Trent, the Cardinals chose Paul
the Third, Ib. That of Constance gave order about t h M due by England to Rome,
86 The Election of Pope Martin was mightily liked, Ib. London Synod grants the
King two Tenths, 87 By a Decree therein Students of both Universities were
provided for, Ib. Which was opposed and laid aside, 89 Pope Martin at pleasure
filled the Episcopal Sees in England, Ib. Whose Clergy were quiet during the
Council of Constance, Ib. Martin first claimed an universal Right of
Presentation, 90 In two years made thirteen Bishops in the Sea of Canterbury,
Ib. His Appropriations censured, Ib. The English neglected in the Grants of the
Roman Dignities, 91 Martin afterward agreed to some redress, Ib. In uniting
Parishes, Ib. And for a power to Bishops therein, Ib. For avoiding the Unions
made in time of the Schism, Ib. For recalling Dispensations for nonresidence,
Ib. For lessening the Number of Cardinals, and for their equal promotion, Ib.
The King required that Pope not to meddle with his Presentations, 92 That no
French be preferred in Aquitain, etc. Ib. That Irish Livings be given to those
that understand English, Ib. That the Bishops there promote the English Speech
only, Ib. That French be not preferred to Monasteries in England, Ib. That the
Pope supply the King with some of the English Money, Ib. The Pope not answering
favorably, 'twas declared the King would take his course, 93 The French and
Germans declare against the Pope's Provisions, Ib. The former revived the Laws
to restrain him, Ib. That if he were refractory, they would disown him, Ib. The
Pope's Interdict of the Church of Lions removed by the Parliament of Paris, Ib.
An Appeal from the King to the Pope High Treason, Ib. The Oppressed Germans not
redressed, 94 The King besieges Roan, the Capital City of Normandy, Ib.
Proposal of a Treaty betwixt England and France, Ib. From our King were sent
the Archbishop and Earl of Warwick, 95 And Cardinal Ursini, as Mediator from
the Pope, Ib. The Commissioners did not conclude, Ib. Our King demanded a
Million of Crowns, Normandy, Aquitain, and Ponthieu Dowry with his Mistress,
Ib. The French straightened, refused all Terms, Ib. Roan holds out obstinately, 96
Where it is said an Apple was sold for 3 s. a Dog for 10 S. Ib. The Citizens
helpless, their King being Lunatic, and the Kingdom in a Civil War, Ib. Upon
suit made, they surrenderd, paying 365000 Crowns, 97 Here the King settled his
Exchequer and Courts for the Affair of Normandy, Ib. Took Meudon and Pontoise
by storm; and others by surrender, Ib, Half a Tenth granted the King in a
Synod, where Walker a Priest convicted of Witchcraft, for which he abjured, and
some of Wickliff's Followers recanted, 98, 99 Processions for the King's
Success, with whom the Duke of Burgundy made a private League; who then had
King, Queen and Daughter of France in's power, 100 Our King at Troyes marries
the said Daughter Catharine, on agreement, himself should be Regent, and their
Children succeed to the Crown of France, Ib. These Conditions ratified, the
Archbishop goes to France to congratulate the King, 100, 101 Who goes against
the Dauphin his only Enemy, Ib. Took Montereau, Ib. Melun surrendered, 102 The
King returns to England, Ib. Processions for four days, Ib. Queen Catharine
Crowned, Ib. The Synod gives a Tenth, on condition, that it should be Felony to
geld a Priest, Ib. Moved to publish a late Decree with a Clause in favor of
Monks and Priests, Ib. Decreed a Bishop take only 12 s. for Institution, and an
Archdeacon for Induction, 104 Pope Martin denied Money besides the Tenths, etc.
in order to unite the two Churches of France and England, Ib. The Archbishop
recalls the Judges from the Conquests, and commanded the French to obey their
Ordinaries, 105 The King hastens to France on his Brother's death, Ib. His Son
Henry born at Windsor, Ib. The Queen recovered, goes to France, Ib. Pavia
chosen by Pope Martin for a General Council, according to that of Constance,
106 A Provincial Synod at London, Ib. Whence Delegates were designed, Ib. But
through Benedict the Thirteenth's Interest the Pavian Council is dissolved,
called to Siena, and seven years after to Basil, 107 H. Webb for preaching
without Orders, whipped in three principal Cities, Ib. William Taylor's honest
Principles condemned as impious, 108 King Henry the Fifth dies of a Fever at
Bois de Vinciennes, 109 For which his Father-in-law pining away, died with
grief within twenty days, 110 The King's Body buried at Westminster, Ib. His
Brothers were left his Son Henry's Guardians, Ib. Great loss of a King so
virtuous, so generally and princely qualified; of singular good fortune and
esteem thereupon, Ib. Duke of Gloucester calls a Parliament, 111 The hopes the
Archbishop conceived of young King Henry, Ib. Three Reasons for calling the
Parliament, viz. to assign the King Governors, and consult about the Peace, and
for the defense of the Realm, 112 Jethro 's Advice, Ib. The Duke of Gloucester
confirmed Protector, and the Archbishop named First of the Council, 113 But he
retired to his Function, Ib. Founded a College at Higham Ferrers, Ib. And a
large Hospital, 114 The Considerable Revenues of which were augmented by his
Brothers Robert and William, Ib. A Synod held by him at London, Ib. The Dauphin
crowned King of France at Poictiers, Ib. Whereupon preparation was made for
War, 115 The Regent of France and Duke of Burgundy oppose the Dauphin, Ib. The
former sent for Supplies from England, Ib. The Bishop of Winchester moves for
Money in the Synod, Ib. Which now wants Henry the Fifth, 116 As Henry the Sixth
is like to go without their Money, the Clergy's Estates being already so much
drained, and Livings fallen so low, Ib. Being also alleged, that the power of
granting Tenths was taken away, Ib. The Bishop succeeded no better in the Lower
House; and so the Synod was adjourned, 116, 117 At the next Sessions half a
Tenth was granted by the Higher House on condition the Proctors consented; but
refused by the Lower House, Ib. The Synod dissolved, Ib. At the next half a
Tenth's given with much ado, 118 Hoke and Drayton's Heresy; and Russell denies
personal Tithes to be Jure Divino, 118, 119 In his absence proclaimed an
Heretic, and prosecuted at Rome, 119, 120 Afterward he abjured his Error in
England, 120 H. Beaufort Bishop of Winchester, an open Enemy to the Lord
Protector, 121 Great Parties on each side appear in the Streets of London, Ib.
The Archbishop interposed, Ib. They then laid down their Arms, 122 The Bishop
of Winchester accuses the Protector to the Duke of Bedford, Ib. Who hastens
into England, Ib. Calls a Parliament, Ib. Finds out the causes of the Quarrel,
and inclines them to the arbitration of the Archbishop and Duke of Exeter, etc.
123 Their Reconciliation confirmed by the Votes of the whole Parliament, which
granted Money for Levying Men, Ib. And half a Tenth granted in the Synod, 124
Bishop of Winchester made Cardinal, Ib. The Cap, with a Legacy for England, had
been promised him by John the Twenty third, Ib. But the Archbishop had shown
that the Pope's Legates derogated from the Royal Dignity, etc. Ib. Which he did
in a Letter to the King, 125 Wherein there is a Specimen of the English
Language at that time, Ib. No Suit to be made to the Pope, after Election, till
the Pope has wrote to the King, and has got an Answer, 126 A Pope's Legate in
England durante vita, without Precedent, 128 The Doctrine and Discipline of the
Church dispensable by the Ordinaries, etc. not Legates, Ib. The Archbishop
sends a Minute of the Legate's Office or Instructions to the King, 129 Such
Legacies are extraordinary, and not without great and notable cause; and no
resident above two Months at most, Ib. The Instructions to be express and
limited, Ib. He deprecates the Oppressions and cormorant Exactions of the
Legates, 130 Upon this Letter the King forbad the Bishop of Winchester the
Cardinal's Cap. 131 After the King's death he is created Cardinal, 132 For whom
our Pious Henry Archbishop is mistaken, [in Antiquit. Britan.] Ib. A vigorous
Defender of the King's Authority, Ib. Whence he incurred the displeasure of
Pope Martin the Fifth, Ib. The Archbishop's Character from Oxford, 133 Great
Intercession made for him, Ib. Bishop of Winchester is Legate in England, with
a Faculty, Ib. So exercised the Power, that he was styled the Rich Cardinal,
134 The Cardinal opposed by R. Caudray the King's Proctor, Ib. Promises not to
exercise his Office without the King's leave, Ib. Laid down the Office of
Chancellor, as obliged; But kept his Place in the Council, with exception, 135
The Pope raised him against the Bohemians, who had pulled down the Monasteries,
etc. 136 The Cardinal made General in the Bohemian War, etc. Ib. He could
pardon Rapes on Nuns, etc. Ib. He was to demand a Tenth of the English Clergy
for the War, Ib. In the next Synod half a Tenth is given the King, 137 And in
another a Tenth and an half, Ib. Duke of Bedford had besieged Orleans, Ib. For
those Grants, the Members of the Synod, etc. were freed from Arrests, 138 The
Pope's Nuntio prevailed not in the Synod, Ib. For showing his Letters for a
Tenth, he was denied, but got 8 d. per Mark from Livings, with a Salva
praerogativa Regia, Ib. Heresy in holding the Pope to be Antichrist, etc. 139
Some recanted, others were imprisoned, Ib. Joan Dertford, by means of her
Answer, acquitted, Ib. The Ordinaries charged to persecute the Wicklevists and
Lollards, Ib. And Process ordered to be formed against them, 140 Pope Martin
troubled that he obtained not the Tenths, Ib. That his Bull was opposed at
York, Ib. That his Legate was imprisoned, Ib. He expostulated with the Duke of
Bedford, Ib. The Pope is diverted with the prospect of the Council of Basil,
141 Wherefore Delegates are chosen in a Synod at London with 2 d. per l.
Charges, Ib. Their Instructions did run against Pluralities, and Non-residence,
etc. Ib. The Synod gave the King a Tenth for the Siege of Orleans, 141, 142
Many other Towns revolted, Ib. And many English slain at Patau, Ib. The Synod
decreed just Weights, Ib. Popes generally afraid of Councils, Ib. Martin
appoints a President, 143 The Pope dies before he took his Place, Ib. Eugenius
the Fourth succeeds him; and continues the President who was his Legate, Ib.
The Pope adjudged subject to the Council, etc. 144 By their supreme Authority,
the Council makes a Legate of Avignon, etc. Ib. The Pope alarmed, removes the
Council to Bologne, Ib. Is opposed, Ib. Delegates from London Synod to the
Council of Basil, and others to the Pope, Ib. Half a Tenth given the King, 145
William Lyndewood Keeper of the Privy Seal, writ excellent Commentaries on the
English Constitutions, 145, 146 And was styled, the Light of the Law, Ib.
Complaint in the Synod against the Vicars General, etc. Ib. Decreed, that a
Judge of a Spiritual Court must have some degree of the Law, Ib. Archbishop of
York as Cardinal, claimed precedence of Canterbury, 147 The Archbishop of
Canterbury on the contrary by ancient Prerogative, Ib. Referred to the Pope,
Ib. The Arguments for Canterbury urgent, Ib. Overborn in the Cardinal's favor,
148 A Synod called at London on occasion of the difference between the Pope and
Council, 149 The Pope is summoned to Basil, Ib. Of which London Synod consults,
150 And what Pope they should obey, if another be set up, Ib. Alleged 1st,
that the Pope might dissolve a Council; and if another be set up, the Synod is
to obey Eugenius, Ib. By which they resent a Decree made at Basil, transferring
Votes from the Nations to a few Delegates, Which was protested against on the
place, 150, 151 Eight new Delegates nominated, Ib. King Charles crowned at
Rhemes, Ib. A new Army against France designed, 152 Money desired of the Synod,
Ib. After a denial, they gave three quarters of a Tenth, Ib. The Grievances of
the Church at that time, 153 The Archbishop zealous to rescue her from the
Oppressions of the Lawyers, Ib. By reason of the Plague, the Synod dissolved,
Ib. The Duke of Burgundy revolts to the French, and Bedford dies, 154 The
former occasioned the ill success of the Treaty at Arras, Ib. The English
driven out of Paris, etc. Ib. And generally the French surrendered to Charles,
155 A new English Army set sail for Calais, Ib. The Clergy grant a Tenth, Ib.
The Archbishop built a stately Edifice at Oxford, 156 Gave it to the Monks of
St. Bernard, Ib. Seized in Henry the Eighth's time, 157 Purchased by Thomas
White, Merchant, who founded there St. John the Baptist's College, Ib. From
whence came many Reformers, Ib. The Archbishop chose another place for a
College, Ib. The Edict of the Council of Basil against the Pope, backed by the
Emperor, 158 The Council's Translation revoked, Ib. Ambassadors to the Council
from Greece and Constantinople, where the Emperor and Patriarch designed to be
present, if the Council would secure them, and defray their Charges, Ib. Which
was agreed, Ib. But on Sigismond's death the Pope removes the Council to
Ferrara, whether he summoned the Bishops from England, 159 This opposed by the
Council, Ib. King Charles of France puts forth the Pragmatical Sanction against
Annates, etc. 160 Which curbed the Pope's Power there, till the time of Lewis
the Twelfth, Ib. The English generally sided with the Pope, Ib. King Henry sent
Ambassadors to Ferrara, Ib. But their allowance was disputed, Ib. The Pope
gives away the Bishopric of Ely, in Commendam, 161 The Archbishop in Synod
opposes the Affair, which was frustrated by the Survivorship of the then
Bishop, Ib. Proposed in Synod to renew a Decree, that those not in Orders
should not be beneficed, Ib. Wherein the King concurred; and obtained it. Ib.
The Council begun at Ferrara, by occasion of the Plague removed to Florence,
162 Where the Greeks present submitted in Opinion to the Latins, Ib. Which so
offended the Greek Church, that after their death they were not allowed
Christian Burial, Ib. The Council of Basil maintained its Authority, Ib.
Deposed the Pope, Ib. (The English going to Ferrara) 163 And by the Deputies of
four other Nations, Felix the Fifth elected Pope, Ib. A defense of the Council
at Basil, Ib. The high Character of Lodovic. Romanus, 164 In the next Age the
Council of Basil is condemned, 166 A Synod called at London, where the Statute
of Praemunire is reckoned a lamentable Church-Grievance; in so far as a* Suit
in an Ecclesiastical Court is construed a suing in Rome, 166, 167 They petition
the King to limit the Penalties to those who sue in a Foreign Court strictly
taken, Ib. The King promises them impunity till a Parliament be called, 168
This Answer procured the King a Tenth, Ib. The Archbishop prayed the King to
suffer his College, almost finished, to be founded in his Royal Name, 169
Letters Patent accordingly granted; Ib. The Chapel consecrated, Ib. A Warden
of the College made, and twenty choice Fellows, with power to elect twenty more
for Divinity and Sciences, and the Civil and Canon Law, 170 Wherefore the
Archbishop called the College All Souls, etc. Ib. Prescribed them Statutes, Ib.
Was very liberal to Oxford and Canterbury Church, 171 Laid out a great Sum on
the Structure begun by the Duke of Gloucester, and two hundred Marks to the
public Chest of the University, 171, 172 With the Method of its disposal,
besides the Decree mentioned concerning graduated Dignitaries, Ib. His Name
decreed to be Registered among the Benefactors of Oxford University, 173 Having
founded two Colleges, etc. Ib. He adorned the Cathedral of Canterbury, 174
Repaired Christ's Church there, building and furnishing a Library, etc. Ib.
Gave liberally toward the building of Croydon Church, and Rochester Bridge,
Ib. His Death, Ap. 12. 1443. and magnificent Burtal, 175 Soon after which, a
Fatal Change in England, 176 Which came to be governed by Queen Margaret, Ib.
Whence the Kingdom was divided, and the People oppressed, Ib. The French also
under a Female, Revolt to King Charles, Ib. Normandy, then Aquitain lost, after
300 years possession, Ib. Jack Cade 's Insurrection, 177 The French invade
Kent, and the Scots the Borders, Ib. The Civil War from the House of York, in
which King Henry was imprisoned, exiled, deprived of Crown and Life by Edward
the Fourth. Ib. Our Chichele's Wisdom supported the Kingdom, Ib. From the
Calamities of which he was by his happy Fate delivered, Ib.
FINIS.
ERRATA of Moment are these Two.
PAge 27. line 2. for Bulrush Spears, r. Poisons or Medicines.

P. 35. l. 14. for Master of the Horse, r* Constable.

Others less material, are left to the Candor of the Reader.


