AN Historical Dissertation UPON THE THEBEAN LEGION, Plainly proving it to be
Fabulous.

BY JOHN DVBOVRDIEV, M. A. Chaplain to his Grace the Duke of Schomberg and
Leinster, and one of the Ministers of the French Church in the Savoy.

LONDON, Printed for R. Bentley, in Russel Street in Covent Garden, 1696.

TO THE Right Honorable My LORD MOUTHERMER, Eldest Son to the Right Honorable
The Earl of MOUNTAGUE, Master of the Wardrobe, and one of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council.
My Lord,
I Could not deny my self the Pleasure of Dedicating this little Book to your
Lordship, having the Honor of seeing you twice or three times a Week, but
never without being Charmed with you Behavior, and your many* Excellent
Qualities.

The ill Practices of this Age, have so far infected the Noblemen, and made
them so solicitous of their private Interests, that it is to be feared, we may
live to see those times return again upon us, when Men's worth was measured by
their Riches, and Persons of Quality were proud of their ignorance.

Ingenium quondam fuerat pretiosius auro,

At nunc barbaria est grandis, habere nihil.

One cannot without grief see so many Young Noblemen, the Hopes of the Church;
and Flower of the State, spend the best of their Years in Pleasures and
Idleness.

And though they have no Noble Qualities which can Entitle them to the Worlds
respect, yet they still hope to recommend themselves to their esteem by their
Noble Birth, their Splendid Living, and the flattery of Sycophants.

But you, my Lord, are far from thinking that the advantages of Nature and
Fortune can make amends for all other Defects, or ought to incline you to
despise the Study of Curious Arts and Polite Learning.

The constant Application, by which you improve those rare Talents you brought
into the World with you, the great attention you give to the Instructions of
your Masters, the pleasure you take in having your Judgment informed, and the
Impression which right Notions make upon you, do clearly discover the just
Opinion you have of what things are truly worthy of Honor.

Val. Flac* Arg. L. 1. Phasidos.
-- Tu sola animos mentemque peruris Gloria, te viridem videt, immunemque
Senectae

Thamisis in ripa stantem, juvenesque Vocantem.

As the Roman Noblemen used to return from Athens and Marseilles, laden with
the Spoils of Greece, and perfected in the choicest Studies, that they might be
qualified for sitting and speaking in the Senate; doubtless, My Lord, you are
moved by the same Spring, when you consider, that the Parliament (to which your
Birth will one Day call you) is the most August Assembly in the World, whose
greatness was never perhaps so well understood as since this present War, when
we see all Europe waiting upon their Consultations, and that their Winter
Resolutions Govern the Actions of the Summer.

How happy are you, My Lord, in a Wise and a kind Father, who has added to so
solid a Judgment, so great Experience of the World, who not thinking it
sufficient to give you the ablest Masters in all Sciences, reserves the
inspection of your Studies and Education to to his own fondness and care.

And how Happy is your Father in such a Son, who makes so good use of his
Admonitions and Example; and by the Blossoms of your Spring, promise him so
fruitful an Autumn.

But that which strikes me most in you, My Lord, is, the observing, as often as
I have the Honor of waiting on you, that the pleasure you take in sound
Literature and gentile Studies, which would otherwise be your chief delight, do
yield to your stronger Love of Virtue and Honesty.

What may we not expect from that regard you have for your Preceptors, that
Complaisance to your Equals, and Courtesy to your Inferiors, the
acknowledgments you pay unawares to those whose Duty is to serve you, your
generous Inclinations, your sweet Nature, your Modesty and Affability, which
Charm every Body that comes near you, the perfect Obedience and profound
Respect, which you pay to your Father on all occasions, and above all your
Religion and Piety, which added to all your other rare Qualities, show you to
be the Care of Heaven, which seldom or never bestows so many Excellencies on
the same Person.

Cla^dian.
-- sparguntur in Omnes. In te mixta fluunt, and quae divisa beatos Efficient,
collecta tenes;

I think, My Lord, I may very well be allowed to quote Latin Authors to you,
since you already understand their Language; and its needless to speak of the
Progress you have made in the French, after having seen an Answer which Mr. de
St. Euremont wrote to a Letter you sent him, whereby it appears how full of
admiration he was at your Wit, the Correctness of your Style, and justness of
your Thoughts, and when Mr. de St Euremont has decided so much in your Favor,
it is better than if your Lordship had the Approbation of the whole French
Academy. I beseech God, to confirm you more and more in his Love and Fear, and
fill you with the Blessings of his Holy Spirit. I am,

My LORD, Your most Humble and most Obliged Servant, John Dubourdieu.

AN Historical Dissertation UPON THE MARTYRDOM OF THE Thebean Legion.
CHAP. I.
The Occasion of this Essay.
THE Duke of Schomberg, whom I had the Honor to serve as Chaplain, arrived at
Turin the 18 th of July, 1691. He found the State of Affairs there in a bad
Posture, and the People in a great Consternation. The French had lately
Fortified Carmagnole. Coni was Besieged and given over for lost. Monsieur la
Hoguette had forced the Passages of the Valley of Aoste, which gave him
entrance into the Country of Verceil and the Frontiers of the Milanese. Our
Army instead of making some motion to disturb the Enemy, Encamped upon the
Descent of Mountcallier, being Spectators of the waste and burning of the
Plains below. Turin dreaded every hour being invested. There was an universal
fear; and the retreat of the Princesses to Verceil added yet more to the
terror of the Inhabitants. The Favorers of France gave out publicly that his
Royal Highness would unavoidably be stripped, this Campaigne, of all his
Territories, and that he had no way left, but to submit to the King's mercy.

Certain it is, that without that firmness and greatness of Soul which his
Royal Highness showed on this occasion, all had then been lost; and though the
beginning of his Reign seems to prognosticate a series of Heroic Actions, yet
this part of his History will be none of the less Illustrious. Emmanuel
Philibert, oppressed during the Wars between Charles the V. and Francis the I.
sunk at last under the weight of his Misfortunes. He had the weakness to take
upon him the Name of St. Mark's Son; and that he might be assisted by the
Venetians, he Sacrificed to that Republic the prcedency he had in all the
Courts of Europe. The Affairs of his now Royal Highness were almost as
desperate: Nevertheless a manly and undaunted Air did always appear on the
Face, and in the mien of this young Hero. Neither the Proposals of France,
joined with Italian craft, the bad Condition of his Troops, the exhausting of
his Treasury, nor the Enemies Army Incamping in the Plain of Millefleurs, a
League distant from Turin, could ever raise in him the least degenerate
Thought. And it may be said that his Constancy and steddiness bore up against
his ill Fortune, and that himself put a stop to the desperate Condition of his
Affairs.

The Duke of Schomberg came to him in this dangerous juncture; and did by his
Example and Counsels confirm his Royal Highnesses's Resolutions. Two or three
days after his Arrival, waiting on the Prince on Horse back to observe the
French Army, which had then passed the River Po, and was encamped between
Carmagnolle and Mountcallier; Duke Schomberg speaking High-German to one of the
Guards of that Nation, his Royal Highness declared his desire to Learn that
Language, adding that he had attempted it two or three times, but was always
discouraged by the difficulty he found in it; which gave occasion to Duke
Schomberg to offer his assistance, and to be his Master. The Prince replied
that others might Instruct him in the German Tongue, but that it was the Art of
War that he desired to Learn of him. A visible change was soon perceived in the
State of Affairs. Our Infantry which was posted on the rising Ground of
Mountcallier, came down to the Foot of the Hill. Our Horse stretched on the
Plain where the Enemies were Encamped, and caused the Siege of Coni to be
raised, and forced Catinat to retire, which freed the City of Turin from their
Allarm.

The Wisdom and Valor of his Royal Highness were justly praised. And public
Prayers were made to bless God for having averted the Storm, and removed in a
great measure the sad apprehensions they had lain under. And thus far all
things went right. But to speak freely, I could not see without grief, a part
of that Incense, the Smoke whereof ought wholly to have ascended to the Glory
of the Lord of Hosts, burnt to the Honor of the Thebean Soldiers. I was
present at my return from the Compaign, at a Sermon Preached by a Jesuit in
the Church of the Old College, on the Holy Day kept in Honor of the Thebean
Soldiers, Solutor, Adventor and Octavius, to whose Memory this Church is
Dedicated; and to whom the City of Turin pays veneration as to their Patrons: O
People of Turin (said the Preacher above a hundred times) O people of Turin,
bless your deliverers! Bless these Sacred Martyrs who watch for your safety,
and whose Merits and Prayers have preserved your City, your Families, and
Estates. I saw afterward all the Religious Orders, and the Confraternities or
Brotherhoods come to the Feet of the Altars, where the Relics of these
Soldiers are deposited, to receive, what the Romish-Church calls, the Blessing.

This occasioned the first desire I had to examine the Martyrdom of the Thebean
Legion, as soon as I could have both time and Books necessary for that purpose.
And that which further moved me to do it, was my being afterward an
Eyewitness of the Church Service which the Magistrates of the Town ordered to
be performed on the 20 th of Jan. 1693. for the discharge of a Vow they had
made in Honor of the Thebean Soldiers, which, by reason of some difficulties,
they had not been able sooner to perform.

The Relics of the Thebean Soldiers were set in the Church of the Jesuits,
upon a Throne covered with a Golden Brocado, illuminated with an infinite
number of White-wax-tapers. The Archbishop accompanied with the whole Chapter,
came and Officiated in his Pontifical Habit. The Court was present at this
Solemn Service, and adored the Urn in which these Sacred Corpses were (for so
they are Styled by the Jesuit, who Printed a Relation of the Ceremony) Indi
sopravenne la Corte, e s'espose alla publica Ferrero. p. 205.
Adorazione l' Urna de' Sacri Corpi All the Orders, the Monks and Friars, all
the Confraternities, the White, Blue, Black, Red, and Gray Penitents, came in
Procession to adore the Sacred Shrine, which contains the Fate and Hopes of
their City. Toward the Evening it was carried about from the Church on Men's
shoulders under a rich Canopy of State, supported by four Persons of the first
Quality. The Canopy was attended by twelve Knights of St. Mauritius and of St.
Lazarus, appointed by their Order for that performance. The most part of the
Nobility and Gentry of the Town followed with lighted Wax-Torches, and almost
all the People, of what Rank and Condition soever, flocked thither to Worship
the pretended Relics of their Protectors.

I withdrew my self, not a little concerned to see the Devotion of all sorts of
People, applied to the Honor of the Saints, when it should have been wholly
directed to the Glory of God, the only Author of their Deliverance, and present
safety. And my grief was heightened, by a Sense of gratitude to a People that
had showed so much good Nature to me a Stranger, and a Protestant Minister;
which Character, though odious to all the rest of Italy, yet was in nothing
prejudicial to me during two Years that I Preached there. Though I confess the
Kindnesses I received were owing most to the great esteem they had for the Duke
of Schomberg, and especially to the great regard they have there for the
English Nation, whose Valor and Power are as rightly understood there at this
time, as in the rest of Europe. But I cannot, without, ingratitude forbear here
giving to the Inhabitants of Turin their due, which is, that they are extremely
Courteous and Civil to Strangers, and partake of the Politeness of the Court of
Savoy, which has been for a long time looked upon as one of the most Polished
and Civilized, and where Conversation is justly tempered, between the Liberties
of Paris, and the Restraint of Florencc.

Since then it is neither out of unthankfulness, nor for want of respect for
the City of Turin, but out of mere Love to Truth, and as a Duty incumbent on my
Function, that I do Attack their Patrons in this Work of mine, no body I hope
will take any offense at my design. Morever, as this whole business depends on
Proofs; if they are frivolous, the Thebean Soldiers will still peaceably enjoy
the Glory of their Martyrdom; but if they prove good, it will be some Service
to have undeceived the World in this matter. Now I desire this Justice may be
done me, that my Thoughts may not be misinterpreted, nor a construction put
upon them, which I do not design. For I know some Protestants do make use of
the Martyrdom of the Thebean Legion to back some other questions, which are not
at all to my present Design, nor proper for one in my circumstances to meddle
with. Those who are acquainted with my Temper will believe me in this point.
And I have always applied to my self this wise saying, Exul tace.

CHAP. II.
That both the Court and City of Turin have been Ancient Worshippers of the
Thebean Soldiers.
GReat Honor and Reverence have been paid for a long time at Turin to the
Thebean Soldiers. And the general Opinion is, that they have signalized
themselves there by a great number of Miracles. Hyacinto Ferrero, a Jesuit,
relates, that by their means, Constantine the Great got that memorable Victory
which opened him the way both to Rome and to the Empire. He says, that when he
considers that the Battle was Fought in the Neighborhood of Turin, he cannot
but believe that the Flying Squadron which was then seen in the Air, and cried
to Constantine, Carolo Hyacinto Ferrero vita de' primi Protettori, etc. page 72.
n'andiamo a soccorso di Costantino, were those Thebean Soldiers slain by
Maximian, who were Armed by Heaven on this occasion; to cause the true
Christian Religion to Triumph, which that Tyrant had endeavored to destroy. If
after the rise of Constantine to the Empire, Paganism began to fall, and if the
Progress of the Gospel in Turin went so successfully on, and with so much
rapidity, that in a short time several Churches, Ferrero page 76. Tuttosi deve
al Sangue a' Miracoli, all preghie re de' nostri Benignissimi Protettori.
and a Bishop with a numerous Clergy, were seen there: All this, adds the same
Author, was owing to the Blood, Miracles, and Prayers of the Thebean Soldiers.
He relates afterward two or three Adventures, in which the Thebean Soldiers
have visibly showed their watchful care over Turin, and how intent they were to
procure Blessings from Heaven upon this City. He says, that the Romish
Religion was in extreme danger at Turin at the time when the Famous Claudius
Ferrero page 76.
Bishop of that See endeavored to abolish the Adoration of the Cross, and of
the Sacred Images, and the Worshipping of Martyrs: And likewise several Years
after, when L'Ediguieres entered into Piedmont with an Army of Calvinists, but
that the Thebean Soldiers, by the Merits of their Martyrdom, and the Efficacy
of their Prayers, removed the danger, and preserved that Religion there. But
here is something yet more wonderful. The same Jesuit relates, that a General
of the Emperor Charles the V. besieged Turin in the Year 1537. and had taken
it infallibly by the secret Intelligences he had there, had he caused his
Soldiers to Scale it at any other place Ferrero. page 131. Difesero in un
pericol^ estremo il Principe e la Citta dall' Arm et dall' Eresia de'
Calvinisti.
than that which is called now the Bastion of St. George. But that, unluckily
for him, the Relics of the Thebean Soldiers rested then near the same
Bastion; and that when his Men went to get up, they were frighted by the
Sparkling Arms and threatening looks of these Holy Martyrs, who miraculously
appeared for the defense of the City.

And perhaps Cardinal de la Rovere spoke of this Miracle in a Sermon which he
Preached before Emmanuel Philibert, in a certain Solemnity in Honor of the
Thebean Soldiers. These are the Saints, Great Prince, said he, who have
preserved Il Card. de Rovere Questi sono quei santi liquali, Serenssimo
Principe vi hanno restituita intie^a questa fidelissima Citta vestra, etc.
to you your Loyal City of Turin, and have averted from it the desolations of
War. These are the Saints, O City of Turin! who are the Towers and Bulwarks
which have been and shall be thy Defense, to the end that thou may remain
still a peaceable and a Triumphant Place to thy Prince. Grant us, O ye glorious
Saints, that we may always cry out with joy and Devotion, Jacta est Pax in
virtute vestra and abundantia in Turribus vestris.

Charles Emmanuel the First, could not possibly have given a greater Testimony
of his Devotion to those Saints, than by freely giving up to the Valesians the
Town of St. Mauricius, and other places which they had Usurped from him during
the Wars between his Grandfather and Francis the First; upon Condition, that
the Valesians should give him leave to Convey to Turin the Corpse of St.
Mauricius, Chief of the Thebean Legion, one of whose Arms he had already gotten
out of Bohemia, whither it was Transported in the Year of 1250. by King
Ottocarus the Fifth. And 'twas perhaps about that time that St. Mauricius
Cromerus de Reb. Pol. l. 3.
his Lance, spoken of by Chromer, was brought to Cracovia, where it lies yet
exposed to public Veneration. I question very much, whether France would now
give up Pignerol to the House of Savoy, though that House should proffer in
Exchange il Santo sudario, or the Holy Shroud, notwithstanding the great Zeal
it ptetends to have for the Romish Religion, and though this Holy Shroud is
looked upon as the most Precious Relic of that Religion. But Charles
Emmanuel, in the Devotion he had for the Thebean Soldiers, did nothing but
tread in the steps of Emmanuel Philibert his Father. When the Relics of these
Saints were conveyed from the Church of the Blessed Virgin into that of the
Jesuits, where they do rest to this Day, Emmanuel Philibert honored the
Ceremony with his presence, and was at a great expense toward the Magnificence
of it. And this wise Prince, knowing well that Saints without Power are
ordinarily neglected, and that the giving of Indulgences is a means for them to
gain a good Reputation, obtained a considerable share of them from Gregory the
Thirteenth, for all those who by Offerings and Prayers should show their
Devotion to the Thebean Soldiers. His Bull was obtained in the Year 1574. And
the Bull Greg. 13. ob eximiam devotionem quam erga eosdem sanctos dilectus
Filius Emmanuel Phil. Dux sabaudiae, and universus Civitatis Taurinensis
Populus gerunt, etc.
Pope expresses in it, that he grants these Indulgences upon consideration of
the singular Devotion, which both the Duke of Savoy and the People of Turin do
pay to the Thebean Soldiers.

Charles Emmanuel had so great a Zeal for the glory of the Thebean Soldiers,
that he imparted to Spain some of their Relics, to the intent they might
partake of their Merits and Intercession. He charged Charles Broglia,
Archbishop of Turin, with his Orders concerning it, as appears by the Copy of
the Certificate, which, according to the Custom of the Roman Church, was put up
with the Relics, and was Signed in the Month of September 1603. This
Archbishop says in the same Certificate, that he himself has taken a Rib of
St. Mauricius's Body, one of St. Secundus's great Toes, three Bones of the
Fingers of Solutor, Adventor, and Octavius, and a Leg-bone of one of St.
Gerion's Companions. Charles Emmanuel caused these Relics to be put in a
Silver-gilt Shrine, all set with precious Stones, and dispatched Leonardo
Roncassio his first Secretary of State, to present it to Margaret of Austria
Queen of Spain.

All these things plainly show the great respect and Devotion, that both the
Court and City of Turin have long paid to the Martyrs of the Thebean Legion.

CHAP. III.
That it is worth ones Labor to examine the Passion of the Thebean Soldiers,
though it passes for current amongst all sorts of Christian Societies.
WE shall now endeavor to prove, that there were never any such Persons as
these Thebean Soldiers, and that the Relation of their Martyrdom, said to have
been writ by Eucherius, Bishop of Lions, is altogether false and Counterfeit.

Avia Pieridum peragro loca, nullius ante Trita Solo.

This matter is quite new, and was never handled, for ought I know, by any
Author before. Though after so many Books written, there is, one would think,
hardly any thing in Ecclesiastical Antiquity that has escaped the strict
Examination of judicious Critics; some Learned Men indeed have suspected the
Passion of the Thebean Legion to have been a Fiction, but none of them had the
Courage to oppose an Opinion which they saw so Universally established.

If general Approbation might be admitted as a Proof, there would be scarce any
Opinion more Probable than that of the Martyrdom of the Thebean Legion, if we
consider the great number of grave and Learned Authors who have all asserted it
as an undoubted matter of Fact. Rome, Geneva, the Lutherans, the Church of
England, and generally all Christian Societies have given Credit to the History
of this Legion; and that, no doubt, upon account of the Honor which they
imagined the Martyrdom of it did to the Christian Religion, by the
wonderfulness of the Action, the greatness of Soul, and the Glorious Characters
of the Persons that suffered.

John Lewis Fabritius relates the Example of the Thebean Legion, in his Learned
Dissertation concerning the just Limits of humane obedience, in order to
establish this so important a Maxim in Morality; That we ought always to side
with God, whenever there is more certainty and evidence in the Prohibitions of
God, than in the Ordinances of Princes. Archbishop Usher, a Man of so vast a
knowledge in Ecclesiastical Antiquity, fell into the same common opinion: And
the Martyrdom of the Thebean Soldiers, making for him in his Book of Regal
Power, he lays as great a stress upon it, as if it were a thing of
unquestionable certainty. The famous Grotius speaks twice of it in his Learned
Book, Crot. lib 1. c. 2. and Cap. 11. 11, 12.
de jure Pacis and Belli, and makes use of it, as that which of all things he
least doubted the Truth of. And though since the death of these two great Men,
the exactness of Criticism upon the Works of the Fathers has been much
improved, yet the Martyrdom of the Thebean Legion is still Edward Fuller, the
Des. of Christian. Sect. 3. c. 16. page 187.
cried up amongst those other popular Errors the World is fallen in Love with.
Edward Fuller, Bishop of Gloucester, has made it one of the Ornaments of a very
fine Treatise, composed by him upon the great Design of Christianity, which is
the Sanctification of Men. And Doctor Dr. Cave, Primitive Christ. part 3. c. 4.
page 331.
Cave, one of the Prebends of Windsor, brings in, with great great Pomp, the
History of this Legion in that Work of his, in which he gives us a very fine
Representation both of the Religion and Manners of the Primitive Christians.

There is scarcely, I confess, any Divine who has outdone him in the Study of
Church History, as may appear by the great Volume he has given us upon the
Writings of the Fathers. Now how great a respect soever we have for the
extraordinary merit of these Learned Authors, we ought to reject their Errors,
be they never so Ancient. There is no prescription against Truth; and a long
prepossession gives no right at all to Error. I have seen, says one of our
Old Writers, the Birth of many Miracles in my time, and though they no sooner
saw the Light, but they were stifled, we do however foresee the course they
would have taken, had they happened to have lived to their full Age. For the
main business is to find out out the end of the thread, then you may wind as
much as you please; and there is a greater distance from nothing to the least
thing that may be, than there is from that least to the greatest that can be
imagined. A private Error first causes a public one; and then that public
Error occasions other private ones. Thus the whole work goes on, patched up
and fashioned by a succession of several hands; so that the remotest witness
knows more of the matter than the nearest, and the last informed is better
persuaded of it than the first. This was exactly the way the Passion of the
Thebean Soldiers first crept into the World, and then insensibly got credit in
the Church. And they have been for these Eight or Nine Hundred Years in a quiet
Possession of the glory of their Martyrdom, and do enjoy it peacably to this
day, under the shadow and Authority of the greatest Names, and the most
renowned Doctors of all Christian Communions. Now that we may distinguish the
Romance from the History, we must remove all the Mists which the Legendaries
and Martyrology-makers have spread over it. For the support of so much of it as
is purely Romantic; there are alleged Manuscripts and Old Writings; and we
must show that those who do pretend the greatest skill in Antiquities, are
liable to mistakes.

CHAP. IV.
That the most skilful Men are sometimes mistaken in the Judgments they make
upon the Works of the Ancients.
IT will Evidently appear from what shall be said hereafter, that Baronius,
Peter Francis Chifflet, Archbishop Usher, and Grotius, have been mistaken in
their Judgments concerning the Martyrdom of the Thebean Legion, and the
Relation Fathered upon Eucherius.

For Critics are not always in the right. Though they have contributed much to
the reviving of Learning, yet it does not thence follow, that even the most
skilful Men in that Science are infallible. It has very often happened that
they have taken false Copies for Originals, and set upon Modern Writings the
worth and value due to those of Antiquity.

Those who have any skill in Medals, know that the most understanding Men
themselves are apt sometimes to be mistaken. If one Examines Vaillant Praest.
Imp. Numism. page 12. 14, 16. 13.
the first Edition of the Praestantiora Imperatorum Numismata of Mr. Vaillant,
Printed at Paris in the Year 1682, there one will find the Medals of
Germanicus, of Nero Drusus his Father, of the Emperor Claudius, of Julia Wife
to Severus, and of Gordianus Affricanus the Son, the Price and Rarity whereof
this Medalist does mightily Extol. But if you cast your Eye upon the Second
Edition of 1692. there you will find the same Medals very much debased. Mr.
Vaill. page 49.
Vaillant, acknowleging the three first to be suspicious, and the two last
absolutely false. He praises likewise in the same Work, one of Trajan's Page
71.
Medals with a Pillar and an Owl on the top of it. And in his Remarks upon
Scelecta Numismata Seguini, Published at Paris in the Year 1684. he confesses
ingenuously that the same was Counterfeit.

It Is no less usual to be deceived in matter of Statues and Basso-Relievos,
then in Medals. We have a great many Examples of this kind; but it will suffice
to give here only one single instance: Vazari tells us, that Michael Angelo, to
convince some Vertuosos and Antiquaries, who valued nothing but what was
Ancient, of the rashness of their Judgment in such cases, made a Cupid and
buried it under the ruins of an Old Building, having first broken off one of
its Arms which he kept at home. All the Lovers of the Art came immediately to
look upon it, and no Body did so much as question the Antiquity of the piece,
till Michael Angelo showed them the Arm which he had kept by him, to convince
them of their Error, and to show them how easily they might be imposed upon,
in a matter wherein they pretended to so much skill.

But mistakes of this kind, have been yet more frequently made by those who
have employed their-Criticks upon those Heathen Authors, which have been left
to us either by the Grecian or Latin Antiquity. Every Body knows the witty
trick Muret put upon Scaliger; how he composed some Verses, and told him he had
found them in an Old Manuscript: And how Scaliger, who boasted that he was very
well ^cqu^inted with the genius and Style of every Age both in Prose and Verse,
found immediately an Ancient Author for those Verses of Muret's making: And
being afterward informed they were of his composing, he revenged himself of
him by a Distich upon his Cheat. These feigned and Counterfeit Works were not
unknown to Ancient Greece, since the Learned of those times made it their Study
to find them out. Dionysius Longinus made a Treatise upon the same Subject; and
we should be (...).
informed now of a great many Fabulous Relations inserted into Histories, had
not the ill Fate of Learning deprived us of the Works of that excellent Critic.

But seeing that Men have naturally a respect for things which belong to
Religion, one would think that they should not suffer themselves to be misled
by those who have made it their business to impose upon the World; by inventing
Fables, and Publishing supposititious Ecclesiastical Writings and Transactions.
Nevertheless, by what Misfortune I know not; these frauds have been more
frequent in the Church, than any where else, and it is impossible to Sum up
the mistakes, they have occasioned amongst the Learned in all Christian
Societies. So many spurious Writings, and supposititious Facts were made and
Published even in the three first Ages of Christianity, that Amphilochius,
Bishop of Iconium, so much esteemed by St. Basil, one of the most worthy
Fathers of the Church, composed a whole Book of them, which is cited in the
Acts Council. 7. act. 5. Tom. 3. page 552.
of the Seventh Council. There was scarcely any thing to be seen, (to make use
of Fontanel's Words in his History of Oracles,) but false Gospels, false
Epistles of the Apostles, false Histories of their Lives, etc. The chief Men of
the Church have been sometimes deceived, etc. They did not always narrowly
examine what seemed to favor Religion. The heat and fervor they felt, when
they fought for so good a cause, did not always suffer them to choose the best
Weapons.

And the Distemper was so far from lessening in the following Ages, that it
still more increased and the boldness in inventing Fables, and Forging false
Lives of Martyrs and Saints, went so far, and became so common, that the Church
thought it necessary to put a stop to it, by the Authority of its Canons. For
in the Council of Constantinople, held in the Year 692, under Justinian the
Younger, the Church condemned, in the 63 d* Canon, the false Passions, and
Fabulous Lives of Saints and Martyrs.

A great number of Learned Men have endeavored in these latter times, to find
out these supposititious Writings, and to ascribe to every Author the Works
belonging properly to him. And they would undoubtedly have been more succesful
in it, had they not been mis led, as well as the People, by Interest or
Partiality. For oftentimes both their Minds and Pens are swayed by prejudice
and Passion: As if a Work were good or bad, Ancient or Modern, as it chanced to
be looked upon by Protestant or Popish Eyes; false and supposititious, if
contrary to their Opinions, but Ancient, and of the true stamp, if it proved
fovourable to them.

But though they should be allowed to have been free from Prejudice and
Passion, yet it is no strange thing to see Men differ in their Judgments. This
follows necessarily the different applications, and Natural inclinations of
their minds. Some view things only on one side, and some on another. The
greatest part fix themselves, before they have well examined all the Reasons
that are, and may be produced on both sides. And sometimes it happens that Men
concern themselves for some Works, as they do for some Persons, without knowing
why they are more for those than for the others. Hence it is that the Writers
of the same Church do not always Ann. Baron. Tom. 1. An. 51. Bellarm. de lib.
arb. lib. 5. c. 25.
agree in their Opinions. Cardinal Baronius speaks of the Recognitions
attributed to St. Clement, as of a sink full of filthiness and lies: Whereas
Bellarmine maintains that they are St. Clement's own, or of some other Author
as Ancient and as Learned as he. The same difference in Opinions is observed
amongst the Protestants concerning St. Ignatius's Letters, though these Letters
are generally, and with good reason looked upon as one of the fairest Monuments
of the Apostolic Age. And Mr. Dupin, in his Bibliotheca nova, sets aside in a
hundred places the Judgment and Authority of his Friends Possevinus, Sixtus of
Siena, Rainaldus, Bellarmine, Labbe, and other Writers of his Religion, who
have Criticis'd upon the Works of the Fathers.

This shows that the most Learned may sometimes be mistaken in their Judgments
upon the Works of the Ancients. Nor is this much to be wondered at, since the
intricacy and confusedness wherewith some Transactions are related, and the
distance of the time wherein they happened, make it a very hard matter for us
now to discern Truth from Falsehood. Critics borrow most part of their Light
from the Quality of the Manuscripts; and sometimes these Manuscripts, the
Antiquity whereof sounds so high with some Men, are but Modern Writings. And
particularly we shall consider in another place, wh a Judgment one ought to
pass upon a Relation of the Martyrdom of the Thebean Legion, which Peter
Francis Chifflet took out of an Ancient Manuscript of St. Claudius's Monastery.
But it is now time to come to our Proofs.

CHAP. V.
That St. Eucherius, Bishop of Lions, ^s not the Author who wrote that Passion
of the Thebean Soldiers, which both Surius, and Baronius have followed.
THE first proof we bring against the Relation of the Martyrdom of the Thebean
Legion, is, That it is clear and plain that St. Eucherius, Bishop of Lions, is
not the Author of it, and that his Name has been set to it by some Cheat, to
gain more Credit thereto, from the esteem which the Church always had for the
extraordinary Virtues and Merits of this great Prelate. To be convinced of
this, 'twill suffice to mention only one passage, wherein it is said of
Sigismond King of Burgundy, D^u noctuque hymn^rum, Psalmorumque decantatio non
desini^, quod jubente praeclaro Sanctoque Martyr Beato Sigismu^do Rege
institutum, usqu^ bo^ie co^servatum est.
That they never cease Night nor Day to sing Psalms and Hymns in the Monastery
of Agaunum: And that this Holy Praclice, first appointed there by the blessed
King and Martyr St. Sigismond, is observed there to this very day. It visibly
appears from this place, that when this Relation was made, King Sigismond was
dead. It follows moreover from thence, that it must have been composed several
Years after the Death of this Prince; since that Author, after he has spoken
of the Rule which King Sigismond caused to be established there, adds, that
this Rule was strictly observed there, usque ^odie, to this very day. So that
were it true, that St. Eucherius was the Author of this Work, he must of
necessity, not only have been contemporary to King Sigismond, but more than
that he must have outlived him many Years. But now it happens to be quit^
contrary, for St. Eucherius was dead, when Sigismond was yet on the Throne.

Most Historians do reckon the Death of this King of Burgundy, to have happened
about the Year 520, and place that of St. Eucherius in Dupin Nov. Bibl. Tom. 4.
page* 175.
the Year 441. It Is true, that Mr. Dupin refers it to the Year 454. upon the
Authority of Prosper's Chronicle. Some on the contrary carry it as far back as
the Year 421. Amongst whom are Gennadius and Ado. But there is much reason to
suspect in both these Authors, the disingenuity of some Transcriber, since it
could not be unknown to Gennadius and Ado, that St. Eucherius was present at
the Council of Orange, where his Name is found amongst the Subscribers; and
that it is agreed on by every Body, that this Council was held about the Year
of our Lord 441. Some indeed, to save this Anachronism, pretend that there have
been two Eucherius's, like the Jews, who to mend their desperate Cause, have
invented two Messia's, to reconcile in both the fulfilling of the Oracles,
which they cannot apply to one alone.

But, in short it is not possible that St. Eucherius, Bishop of Lions, should be
the Author of the Passion of the Thebean Legion* unless we allow him to have
had the gift of Prophecy, and make him speak Prophetically of those Rules which
were to be settled in the Monastery of Agaunum, several Ages after his Death.
Should some Person now put out any Writings, under the Name of Monsieur de
Marca, or of Cardinal Duperron, and mention therein the establishment and
Foundation of St. Cyr. To show that these Writings ought not to be ascribed to
these two great Men, it would suffice to make it appear, that they were dead
several Years before Lewis the 14 th made this Foundation. Nevertheless, this
so plain a demonstration of Forgery, has not hindered Surius, in his Relation
of the Surius Tom. 5* 22. S^p*
Martyrdom of the Thebean Legion on the 22. of September, from confidently
asserting, that St. Eucherius was the Author of the Acts of their Passion. It Is
very strange that Baronius should Martyr. Rom 10. Kal^n^. Oct. page 3^5.
make the same blunder, both in his Annals and in his Notes on the Roman
Martyrology. And indeed this would seem yet more strange, were it not plain,
that this Learned Cardinal undertook in his Annals* not so much to give us the
History of the Church, as to defend the prejudices and ambitious pretensions of
the Church of Rome Therefore when its an advantage to him, to overlook some
supposititious and Counterfeit Writing, he pretends he sees neither
contradiction nor Anchronism in it; he is no longer that able Critic, whose
pierceing knowledge nothing can escape, and who clears and extricates the most
obscure and knotty things of Antiquity: Bellarm. in Catal. Script. Eccl. in
Euch.
In a word, he is no more Baronius.

Cardinal Bellarmine, whose Zeal for the glory of the Roman Church did not
yield to that of Baronius, has taken another way to save the truth of the
Passion of the Thebean Legion, that it might not be objected to his Church,
that it worshipped some for Saints, who never had so much as a being in the
World. For since Men would at the very first sight be startled, to see so long
an interval of time between St. Eucherius and St. Sigismond, he has
endeavored to cut it much shorter, and to render it so little, as that it
might pass wholly unobserved, or however be but very little minded. He tells
us, that this Bishop of Lions lived till the Year 499. and he grounds his
conjecture upon a place in the Life of St. Cesarius, Bishop of Arles, composed
by Cyprian the Priest; where it is said, that these two Bishops, being in
company together, restored a Woman to her former health, who was afflicted with
a very sore Distemper. If there were any certainty in this Conjecture of
Cardinal Bellarmine, Eucherius would have been almost contemporary with King
Sigismond. For Messanius a Priest, and Stephen a Deacon, two other Disciples of
St. Cesarius, in the Book they have added to the Life of this Holy Prelate, say
that he dyed forty Years after he had been made a Bishop, and since every body
knows that he succeeded Ennoius, about the Year 504. his Death should be placed
in the Year 544 or 545. For it is certain that he was present at the Council of
Arles in 524 and at the second Council of Orange in 529* And to prove that he
was alive in 528. we have a Letter that Pope Vigil wrote to him under the
Consulship of John and Volusian.

But though we should grant Cardinal Bellarmine's Conjecture not to be
groundless, yet he would be but little the better for it. It Is not enough to
prolong St. Eucherius's Life to the Year 499. It Is to no purpose, likewise to
prove that St. Eucherius might have seen St. Cesarius Bishop of Arles. King
Sigismond dyed about the Year 520. and they must make it appear that St.
Eucherius outlived him a great many Years, to make good the usque hodie of the
place we have before quoted. Now it is so far from being true, that St.
Eucherius did outlive St. Sigismond, that on the contrary, there is no
likelihood that he lived till the Year 499. according to Cardinal Bellarmine's
Conjecture. It appears by the Subscriptions of the first Council of Orange,
that he was Bishop of Lions in 4^1; and consequently he must have been then at
least thirty, or forty Years Old; for at that time it was not usual to raise
any person under that age to the Dignity of a Bishop; Bishoprics being not yet
bestowed as rewards upon Families, and the Holiness of Canons holding yet out
against the Vanity of the Clergy, and the Usurpations of Kings. Now since we
are certain of this, can we think it probable that St. Eucherius should live to
see St. Cesarius Bishop of Arles, who was not raised to that Dignity, till
after the Death of Ennoius, about the Year 504 Indeed, I think a Man must needs
be very bold in his Conjectures, who can allow St Eucherius to have lived above
a Hundred Years, if he have no other Warrant for it, but that place of the Life
of St. Cesarius: Those who shall carefully examine this Life of St. Cesarius,
will agree, that it ought not to be relied upon too much. It Is true, it is
polite and judicious enough for that Age, and seems not unworthy of him who had
been one of the Disciples of St. Cesarius, and who for his great Piety and
Merits was raised to the Dignity of a Bishop, as appears by his Name found in
the Subscriptions of the second Council of Orange* But what if some Impostour
here disguised himself under the Name of a Famous Disciple of St. Cesarius? At
least this pretended Disciple seems not to be much informed of his Masters
Affairs. He says in one place, that St. Cesarius sent some Grave and Learned
Men to a Council Assembled at Valence to Condemn the Opinions of Pelagius.
Which having given me occasion to examine the Acts of the Councils held at
Valence, I ^ind nothing in them concerning the Heresy of Pelagius, wherein St.
Cesarius could have any hand. So that being mistaken in a matter of Fact of
this Importance, he might as well have been over-seen in joining Eucherius and
Cesarius in the Cure of that Diseased Woman.

Cave Hist. Li^. Script. Eccles. p. 333. in C^sario.
It appears that the Learned Doctor Cave relied a little too much upon this
Life of St. Cesarius. He says in his History of Ecclesiastical Writers, that
this Holy Bishop, understanding that he was suspected of Pelagianism, caused a
Council to be Assembled at Valence, to clear himself of this accusation; and
being hindered by reason of the illness of his Health from going to it, he
maintained there publicly by his Legates, that Man in the state of Sin, cannot
work out his Salvation without a preventing Grace. But if, instead of following
this Cyprian, Disciple of St. Cesarius, and who was afterward Bishop of
Thoulon, Doctor Cave had given himself the trouble to look over the Councils of
Valence, he would have observed that in the first, which was held in the Year
734. their whole business was about Bigamy; that in the Second, which met in
599. (some place it in the Year 684, and some in 589.) they were wholly taken
up with the great Donatives which Guntran King of Burgundy had bestowed upon
the Church: And that the Third, in which Pelagius, Hinmark, and John Scot were
Condemned, and the Acts whereof are cited by Forbesius in his Instructions, was
not called till the Year 855. as appears by the Acts of it being presented to
the Emperor Lothary, and to Charles the Bald. Now St. Cesarius was unborn at
the time of the First Council, since Doctor Cave brings him into the World,
only in the Year 469. And he was Dead when the Second met, according to the
same Doctor, who places his Death in the Year 542. And it is, I think needless
to add that he was not concerned in the Third, which was held in 855. and in
which the Pelagian Opinions were Condemned. This short digression, which we
have thought necessary, to remove St. Cesarius from St. Eucherius's times, will
not seem, I hope, unseasonable. It appears then that Bellarmine, for all his
Conjecture, cannot bring St. Eucherius near enough to St Sigismond King of
Burgundy. The distance is too great to admit of any means of reconciling the
Dispute. We shall observe by the way, that Usuard and Aimonius have committed
the like mistake: But because it is but a matter of three or four Years
difference, they may perhaps find Friends to help them out. These two Writers
say, that Clovis was delivered from a dangerous Sickness, by the Vows and
Prayers of St. Severine, Abbot of Agaunum. And it is certain that Clovis was
Dead three or four Years before Sigismond had founded that Monastery. Gregory
of Tours says, that he caused the same to be Built, and richly Endowed it,
after the Death of his Father Gombaldus. But Marius Bishop of Avanches marks
precisely the Year in his Chronicle, and says that Sigismond founded the
Agaunian Monastery, under the Consulship of Florentius and Anthemius, viz. Four
Years after the Death of Clovis. This Remark is owing to Monsieur de Valois, in
his Notice of the Gauls; Hadr. Vale^i^s Notit. Gall in Heaunum.
where he says, that he cannot understand how Severine could have been Abbot of
that Monastery in Clovis's time. Nevertheless the Miraculous recovery of a
great King, being of great Credit to the Prayers and Suffrages of Monasteries,
Usuard and Aimonius, who were both Monks, caused Prayers to be made for Clovis
in Agaunum, even before King Sigismond had it in his thoughts to build a
Monastery there. It Is true, that Bollandus would fain persuade us, that this
Prince did only repair and beautify it. But this he asserts without any
ground, since both the Ancient and Modern Writers who speak of the first
Foundation of the Agaunian Monastery, do all generally agree that 'twas St.
Sigismond King of Burgundy, who caused it to be Built to the Honor of the
Thebean Legion, which suffered Martyrdom in that place.

CHAP. VI.
That the Acts of the Council of Agaunum, concerning the Thebean Legion, are as
false as the Acts of their Passion*
BUT whether King Sigismond only beautified the Monastery of Agaunum, or
whether he laid the first Foundations thereof, it is all one to us. It Is enough
that we can prove that the Passion, which we assert to be false, is posteriour
to all this. And that it is so cannot be denied, since mention is made there of
the Basilick, which was Dedicated at Agaunum to the Memory of the Thebean
Soldiers. If you are not pleased to rely upon the History of their Passion as
it is related in Surius and Baronius, and wherein notice is taken of the Rules
made by St. Sigismond in the Agaunian Monastery; we shall willingly pitch upon,
and refer our selves to the latter Acts that are mended, since in these as well
as in the others, mention is made of a Miracle that happened when the Church of
Agaunum was a building to the Honor of the Thebean Legion. For if King
Sigismond did only repair and Adorn that Church, the time of these Works must
necessarily be placed in the Year 500. and consequently St Eucherius could not
have made mention of them, seeing all do agree that he dyed about the Year 440.

We may strengthen this Argument with another taken from the Acts of a Council,
supposed to have been assembled by order of King Sigismond at Agaunum, and in
which Sixty Bishops put it into his Head to gather the Bones of the Thebean
Soldiers, and to Dedicate a Basilick, or stately Church to them. Though this
Council is visibly false and supposititious, yet it will be of good help to
discover the falsity of the Passion of the Soldiers of Agaunum, Fathered upon
St. Eucherius. The Acts of this pretended Council are set down in the Fourth
Tome of the Councils by Labbe and Cossart. Tom. 4. Council Labbe and Cossart.
page 1557.
These two Learned Jesuits were very sensible of the Forgery of these Acts, but
it would have been too much against the grain to have confessed it* They were
therefore content to say, they wondered they did not see amongst the
Subscriptions the Name of Avitus Archbishop of Vienna, who both by reason of
his Eminent Qualities, and for the Dignity of his See, ought of course to have
been present at that Council. The Oratory-Priests being fairer dealers than the
Jesuits, Le Cointe, one of them, freely declares in his Le Cointe Ann. Eccles.
an. chapter 536. number. 224. page 534.
Annals, that the Acts of this Council were altogether false. However, as false
as they are, they have brought great incomes to the Monastery of Agaunum. They
make St. Sigismond to give to it a great number of Villages, and very
considerable Lands in the Dioceses of Vienna, Lions, Grenoble, and of the
Cities of A^^te, Avanches, Lausanne, and Besanson, etc. The Cheat indeed was
worth the making. But we must confess that the makers thereof were not very
skilful in their contrivance of it. The truth is, that in those times People
were so credulous, that they gave Credit to the grossest tales. They were
contrived and conceived under the shadow of Monkish Holiness, and were brought
forth into the World without contradiction, or any Body to oppose them. The
Monk who Forged this Council, makes both King Sigismond and the Bishops to say
very ridiculous things. The Country Peasants of Valesia would now speak better
Sense. Le Cointe observes, that the Acts of this Council are Dated in the
beginning of the last of April, and toward the end of the Ides of May: That it
is said at first, that the Council was held at Agaunum, and again, that it was
Assembled near that place. Which shows the poor Monk hardly knew what he did.
He adds that Sixty Bishops met together at Agaunum, and in Sigismond's time
there were not above Seven and Twenty Bishops in all, throughout the whole
Kingdom of Burgundy. He says, that Theodorus, Bishop of Sion in Valesia, asked
what should be done with the Bodies of the Thebean Soldiers that laid yet
unburied upon the Ground. And in St. Sigismond's time, there was no Bishops-See
at Sion. The Bishops-See was transferred thither, not till many Years after, it
having always been before at a place which is called Martignac, or Martigni,
which is the Ancient Octodurum. So that this Theodorus being contemporary with
King Sigismond, ought to have been called Octodurensis Episcopus, and not
Sedunensis, as the Council-Forger has done.

Tom. 4. Council Labbe. Coss. page 1557.
But the thing we ought chiefly to observe, is, that both Labbe and Cossart,
place this Council in the Year 516. The Acts do expressly mention, that when it
was held, the Buildings which King Sigismond ordered to be made at Agaunum,
were finished, and wanted only to be Dedicated, and appointed to their use.
This Prince says, in the beginning of De jam dicto Monasterio quod vocatur
Agaunum, quod nunc Domino adjuvante infra Reg^um nostrum Burgu^dionum
construximus.
his Deed of Gift, that he makes Hinnemond* Abbot of the Monastery of Agaunum,
which, by the help of God, he has Built in his Kingdom of Burgundy. And a
little before he says, that all the Bishops do represent to him, that the
Relics of Mauricius; Exuperius, Candidus, and Victor, ought to be deposited
in the New Church, which he has caused Infra ambitum Basilicae quam clementia
Regis ad hoc opus ornare jussit.
to be Built. The Bishops of this pretended Council, are there chiefly taken up
with regulating the singing of Psalms, the Offices, Observances, and whatever
was to be Practiced in that Monastery. Now the business is to know, whether the
Passion of the Thebean Legion, which we assert to be false, is anteriour to
that Council, or happened after its sitting. If they say it is anteriour, we
ask, how could the Author of it speak of a Monastery which was not yet Built,
and of Rules not yet established? If it be answered, that this Passion was
Written after the sitting of the Council, which according to Labbe and Cossart
met in the Year 516. it follows, that St. Eucherius is not the Author of this
Passion, since he died in the Year 440.

If the Acts of this Council be compared with the Passion, one cannot but
suspect that the Impostour, who composed it, had before his Eyes the Acts of
this Council. It Is said in these Acts, that the Bishops consulted with King
Sigismond, what Discipline was to be set up in the Monastery of Agaunum, and
that the Rules which should be prescribed to the Monks, might be so framed as
to last for ever. And the Author of the Martyrdom of the Thebean Soldiers, as
it is related both by Baronius and Surius, says, that they never cease, Day
nor Night, to sing Psalms and Hymns in the Agaunian Monastery; this practice
having been established by the Blessed King and Martyr St. Sigismond, and being
still in force there to this very day.

But that the Acts of this Council, are forged, Father Le Cointe has given
infallible proofs. And whereas Labbe and Cossart place this Council in the Year
516. we should not fear being much mistaken, if we charged the Forgery upon
some Impostor of the Seventh or Eighth Century. For these and the like Writings
are the Titles and Foundations both of the Worship, vast Power, and Immense
Revenues of the Church of Rome. It Is true, we are told that the Manuscripts of
these things are kept in the Vatican Library, or in that of Florence; and that
they have all the Characters of an uncontrollable Antiquity. But Marsham, a man
very well skilled Marsh. in Propyl. ad Mon* ^ug.

Cante intuendae sunt hujus^nodi Chartae, quae fidem ha^ent e^ minorem quo
majorem prae se ferunt Antiquitatem.


in distinguishing between Old and Modern Manuscripts advises us to trust to
them so much the less, by how much the Older they are said to be* And he is
favored in his Opinion by Papebrook a Jesuit, who Papebrookin Propylnum. 125.
Cha^tas sinceras and genuinas vix reperi^i.
observes, that you will scarcely find any Acts or Manuscripts true and sincere
from the Reign of Dagobert the First, upwards; that is beyond the Year of our
Lord 640. Which is much about the time, in which the Fables which we are now
Examining were invented

It Is strange indeed, that Father Mabillon, one of the most Eminent Men in
Europe in that kind of Learning, should Condemn the Opinion both of Marsham and
Papebrook. He thinks that these two Learned Men were mistaken, and to prove it*
he reports some Acts of the 6 th or 7 th Age; but this is nothing to the
purpose; for Marsham and Papebrook did never deny but there were true Acts
ancienter than* the Reign of Dagobert the First; but they only affirmed, that
these Writings are very scarce, and can hardly be found; so that Father
Mabillon, to have an occasion to contradict these two great Men, makes them say
absolutely, what they only meant with a restriction. And besides* it is one
thing to go about to prove from the Words of some Authors, that there have been
Kings before Dagobert the First, who made Gifts in Writing to several Churches,
and another to prove that these Writings do yet continue, and have been handed
down to us, and that they have not been worn out by time, lost or destroyed by
the Accidents and Revolutions which have happened in the course of so many
Ages, nor falsify'd and corrupted by the covetousness, ignorance, and
infidelity of Men. The first of these two things, which is not in question,
Father Mabillon takes upon him to prove, but says not one word of the second
which he ought to have proved. But here is the business. Papebrook is plain and
downright, because he, being a Jesuit, is of an Order of a very new Date, and
which therefore needs not go up and search very high for Titles: Whereas Father
Mabillon is a Benedictine Monk, of the Congregation of St. Maur. And St.
Benet's Order has a great concern to maintain the Antiquity of their rich
Foundations. Papebrook confesses ingenuously, that most of the Acts in the
Tenth and Eleventh Centuries have been falsify'd by Monks, because this
reproach could not fall on the Jesuits, who were not then in the World. But by
reason there were at that time almost no other Monks in the West but the
Benedictines, it is worth the while to see, with what Zeal Father Mabillon
stickles in their defense. But while he endeavors to make their Cause too
good, he betrays his own.

He proves that the falsification of Acts, ought not to be laid only at the
Church*mens Doors; that every Body had then a hand in the corrupting of them;
that Cheats and Impostours were as common at that time amongst the Laity, as in
the Church; and that both the watchfulness and Authority of the Emperors were
taken up in preventing and chastising these knavish tricks. This is just what
Marsham and Papebrook do both mean and say. We have thought fit to make this
Observation. For having a very great Veneration for true Antiquity, we should
be unwilling to have any Body alarmed at our impugning the Martyrdom of the
Thebean Legion, which has obtained the Belief of so many Ages in the Church.

CHAP. VII.
That the Passion of the Agaunian Martyrs, Published by Francis Chifflet in his
Edition of Paulinus, is as false as that which Surius and Baronius have
followed.
THE Relation of the Passion of the Thebean Soldiers, which both Surius and
Baronius have followed, is a piece so notoriously supposititious, that it is
now quite laid aside even in the Roman Church. This does evidently appear, in
the Judgment which Anthony Pagi makes of it in (...) 5790. chapter 297. Diocl. 14.
Maxini. 12. p. 124.
his Critics upon Baronius. The Acts of the Martyrs of Agaunum, says he, which
Baronius has taken out of Surius, and which he thought were written by St.
Eucherius, Bishop of Lions, are false and supposititious. There it is said, that
this Martyrdom happened under the Pontificate of Marcelline, when Maximian went
into Gaul, to put a stop to the Bagaudian Rebellion; and it is certain that it
was in the beginning of Diocle^ian s Reign, that Maximian made this Expedition
during the Pontificate of ^ajus Therefore the Doctors who had the direction of
the Impression of Bibliotheca Patrum, which was Printed by the Anissons at
Lions in the Year 1677 were wiser than to give out amongst the Works of St.
Eucherius the Passion of the Thebean Soldiers, as it was Bibl. Patrum apud
Aniss. Lug* dunt, an. 1677. Tom. 6. page 866.
reported both by Surius and Baronius. We give (say they) the Acts of the
Martyrs of Agaunum written by St. Eucherius Bishop of Lions and extracted out
of a very Ancient Manuscript; those that are put out by Surius having been
spoiled and corrupted by some Anonymous Writer of the last Ages. Peter Francis
Chifflet is the Man who Printed these new Acts of the Agaunian Martyrs in his
Paulinus Illustratus, and which, he says, he Copied out of a very Ancient
Manuscript Theod. Ruin. Act. prim. Martyr. page 285.
of St. Claude's Monastery. As for Theodorus Ruinart, he has followed Chifflet
s Copy, in that ^ollection of the Acts of Martyrs which he caused to be Printed
at Paris in the Year 1689. There he confesses, that the former Acts Published
by Surius were Counterfeit, and those likewise that were Printed by Mombritius,
then he adds, that in the very time it was given over by the Learned, to find
out the true Acts of the Agaunian Martyrs, Chifflet had happily discovered them
in an Ancient Manuscript. ^t seems then that the Thebean Soldiers case is not
yet quite desperate, there being another door for the true Acts of their
Martyrdom to come in at. The Jesuits are very Crafty Men, I must confess. They
find immediately a way to remove every difficulty. The World was ready to
forsake the Thebean Soldiers and their Passion, when just in the nick of time,
Father Chifflet, has found a Manuscript in the Monastery of Mount Jura, which
gives a faithful account of the Martyrdom of the Thebean Legion, and is free
from those falsities which are so palpable both in Surius and Baronius. Not a
word there of Marcelline's Pontificate, of King Sigismond, nor of the Revolt of
Aelius and Amandus, Authors of the Bagaudian Insurrection in Gaul. You have all
in it but this. Both the Passions are in every thing alike. Only two or three
Events are wanting in that of Chifflet, which might serve as a sure Epoche,
whereby to discover exactly the time wherein it happened. A person more
mistrustful than I, might easily believe, that it is not without some good
reason, that these places are not to be found in Chifflet's Manuscript. There
would be less cause to suspect it, had other circumstances been left out of
smaller consequence, and such as do not serve to mark out exactly the time and
age of the Piece.

But it is in vain for Father Chifflet to boast the antiquity of his Manuscript.
We have not forgot the Advice which Marsham and Papebrook have given us, not to
trust too much to Manuscripts, which have on them the most ancient dress. Were
we admitted to compare Chifflet's Manuscript with that of Surius, we should
soon see whether of them has got the best looks of Truth and Antiquity. The
Acts of the Martyrdom of the Thebean Soldiers were Printed at Ingolstadt,
under the Jesuits inspection, in the Year 1617. by the care of Stewartius, who
was sure he had Examined the best Manuscripts he could find Peter Natalis and
William Baldesan, who in Italy, writ the History they have left us of the
Thebean Legion, were not wanting to consult the Manuscripts, extant in the best
Libraries of that Country. Though Father le Cointe does disown the Acts of
Surius, nevertheless he acknowledges 'em to be conform to the greatest number
of the Manuscripts that are kept in the Archives of the Church.
Notwithstanding, Father Chifflet will needs have his Manuscript to be the only
one that is true and sincere, and those of all the other Writers to be spurious
and corrupted. I would fain know who told him, that his own was not mended by
some Monk, who understood History so well, as to perceive the Anachronisms and
contradictions in the Acts of the Martyrdom of the Thebean Legion. This is not
without Example, and we might mention several; for the Monks formerly did what
they pleased with the Writings of their Predecessors. Faustus composed the Life
of St. Severine, Abbot of Agaunum, of whom mention has been already made. An
Anonymous Author, some Ages after, added to it some things, cut off others, and
dressed it up after his own Fancy; as Father le Cointe complains in his Annals.
He tells us Le Cointe, An. 609.
further, that another Faustus having Written the Life of St. Maurus, it was not
liked by Odo, an Abbot in the Diocese of Angers, in the Year 863. and that he
changed it in such manner, that it were to be wished he had never meddled with
it at all. And now can Father Chifflet warrant that no such hand has ever made
bold with his Manuscript? The Acts of the Agaunian Soldiers, having no such
thing in them as Gifts to Monks and Monasteries; 'twas no hard matter to find
them corrected in some Old Manuscripts But I question much whether any such
Manuscript can be produced, as will serve to rectify the Acts of the Council
of Agaunum, wherein so many considerable Revenues are bestowed on the Monks of
that place. Let any Body read Mr. Dodwel's Dissertation upon the small number
of Martyrs, and he will see there what stress one ought to lay upon the Acts
and the Manuscripts from whence they were taken. It Is true, that Theod. Ruin.
Praef. in Act. Martyr. alii resecuerunt noilnulla, quae sibi in illis Actis
displicebant.
Theodore Ruinart, in the Edition he has lately put out at Paris, of the Acts
of some Martyrs, prefixes a long Preface, wherein he opposes Mr. Dodwels
Opinion concerning the small number of Martyrs; but at the same time, he
confesses, that they who gathered their Acts have often added to, or cut off
from them what they listed.

Ex iis etiam Actis pleraque perierunt quibus alia postmodum substituta fuere,
sed quae ad istorum Auctoritatem non pert ingunt nedum ad priorum sinceritatem.
One may see in the same Preface, that the Acts of most of the Martyrs having
perished, either by the ravage and burnings made by the Barbarians, or by the
Orders of Heathen Magistrates; others were substituted in their place, but such
as have not the Authority of the former, and much less can they pretend to the
same sincerity and exactness. These Acts have been, by the Monks of the last
Ages, so disfigured and stuffed with so many Fables, that the honester and more
ingenuous of the Church of Rome have been ashamed of it, and have publicly
expressed Lud. Vives de Trad. Disc. lib. 5.

Melchior Canus, Loc. 11. c. 6.

Dolenter hoc dico multo Severius a Laertio Vitas Philosoph^rum scriptas, quam
a Christianis Vitas Sanctorum; long^que incorruptius and integrius Suetonius,
etc.


their Sorrow for it. Lewis Vives, and Melchior Canus, have grievously
complained that Diogenes Laertius has Written the Lives of the Pagan
Philosophers with more integrity and Wisdom, than the Christians have done
those of their Martyrs* Confessors, and Virgins. When it was first given out
that Lippomanus, Bishop of Verona, was upon correcting the Acts and Old Legends
of Saints, all good Men of the Romish Church were very glad at the News, hoping
that he would have purged them from all the gross lies which Metaphrastes,
Comestor, and Jacobus de Voragine had left behind them. But Lippomanus, and
Surius made all things worse, instead of mending them. For before this, the
Acts and Lives of Saints were looked upon as pious Romances, and a production
of the ill-regulated zeal of the Legend-Writers. But then they were esteemed
quite another thing, after they had been Revised by Surius, Lippomanus, and
Junius Mombritius, who contented themselves with taking away only the most
palpable and obvious falsities, retaining those which they thought were not so
offensive, and then protesting that they had gone up to the head, and had
consulted the best Manuscripts Rosweidus, Bollandus, Godfrey Henschenius, and
Papebrochius, who are come after, thinking to do some Service to the Learned,
by gathering all whether good or bad* have not given us a truer account of the
Acts of Martyrs and Saints, but only have encumbered Men's Studies with their
huge and bulky Volumes.

It Is not that we believe, that the Doctors of the Romish Communion are willing
to countenance lies and Forgeries. We do them more justice than so They would
undoubtedly have all this silly stuff taken out of their Church Service,
Breviaries, and Martyrologies, but they know not how it can be done. They fear
to give some advantage to the Protestants, and to furnish them with Weapons
against the infallibility of their Church. And the Learned amongst them are
afraid to bring upon themselves the hatred and persecution of Monks and Friars,
who make a Trade of these Impostures amongst silly Women, and the more ignorant
sort of People. It Is known all over France, what troubles they brought upon the
Bishop of St. Pons, one of the most worthy Prelates of that Kingdom, for taking
out of the Calendar of his Diocese several Saints, whose Saintship might be
called in question, and whose Suffrages he did not so much esteem. This is the
reason why most of those who are sufficiently convinced of these abuses, are
contented to bewail them in secret, not having the Courage to undertake the
redressing of them. There are some others, who, thinking it unsufferable that
their Religious Worship should seem to have no other ground than the false
Legends of Saints and Martyrs, have indeed taken away from the Story what was
most fictitious, but yet have kept still the Essential part of it. Father
Chifflet was perhaps one of these, and therefore he found just in time a
Manuscript of the Passion of the Agaunian Martyrs, more accurate, and truer
than the Manuscripts of Surius and Baronius. Finally, we might add; that
Manuscripts, as well as other Books, are subject to the rigor of the Index
Expurgatorius. And how should they stick at maiming them when they fear they
will give any advantage to the Protestants, since they make no scruple
sometimes of suppressing them wholly. We are not willing to set down here the
Story of the Edition of Anastase, Published by the Jesuits of Mayence in 1602.
in which they cut off what we read in the Manuscript of Heydelberg about Pope
John, and of the trick they put us upon Marquardus Freherus, who had discovered
it to them. Fabrotus, in his new Edition of that Author, Printed at Paris in
the Year 1649. has been so sincere as to own the expunging that passage; but
at the same time, was not so ingenuous as to restore it. Every Body knows the
Story of St. Chrysostom's Letter to Cesarius the Monk, and of Theodoret's
Commentary upon the difference that arose between St. Paul and St. Peter, the
which as not favoring Transubstantiation, and the Authority and Infallibility
of the Pope, they have endeavored to stifle and to suppress. Alix Expostul* de
St. J. Chrysostom. page 9.
Mr. Alix having discovered this Mystery of iniquity, acquainted the Public
with it, in his excellent Letter to Mr. Hambden. But after all, Peter Francis
Chifflet is not the first Writer, who to extricate himself out of a difficulty,
or to purchase the glory of some curious discovery, has taken an occasion to
find a Manuscript. It Is not of late Years that there have been Annius's of
Viterbo and Varilla's, especially amongst the pretenders to Antiquity, and
Compilers of Anecdota, or Secret Histories.

But though these Remarks may not perhaps seem unseasonable, yet we have no
need of them for clearing the matter of Fact now in question. Father Chifflet's
Manuscript has not brought us to such straits, as to reduce us to mere guesses
and conjectures. For admitting his Manuscript to be both as Ancient and Correct
as he pleases; the Thebean Soldiers would not be a jot the better for it. We
shall, in the conclusion, examine their cause without any regard to the
Manuscripts and Acts of their Passion, and shall deduce, from the very
circumstances of their Martyrdom, such Arguments as will demonstrate the
falsity of it. And we must own our obligation to Father Chifflet, that we shall
now Fight no longer in the Dark, without either seeing or knowing our
Adversary. We know now whom we are to deal with, and who it is we are to
encounter. Before this, while we attacked the Acts which Surius and Baronius
have left us, and were proving that St. Eucherius, Bishop of Lions, could not
be the Author of them, it might have been answered we took pains to no purpose;
that we ought to have known that there have been two St. Eucherius's, and that
the Acts of the Agaunian Passion were of the latters composing, who Theoph.
Raynal. in Ind. Sanct. Lugd. p. 227.
was present at the Council of Orange in the Year 529. This very thing
Theophilus Raynaldus has endeavored to prove in his Catalogue of the Saints
of Lions. So that after all our endeavors, we might chance to be in the same
plunge with the Sofia's in Plautus, concerning the two Amphytrions, and with
the Parliament of Toulouse in the case of the two Martins Guerra. But now we
must return our thanks to Father Chifflet, for having helped us out of these
doubts and uncertainties. He agrees with Baronius, that there was but one St.
Eucherius; and his Reasons are so weighty and strong, that it seems strange,
that the Learned Dr. Cave, who must needs have seen Cave Ann. ch, 434. p. 335.
quamplurimi Eucherio Juniori ascribunt, and recte quidem.
them in the Paulinus Illustratus of that Author, should yet be of the Opinion
of Theophilus Raynaldus, about the two Sts. Eucherius's, and should attribute
to the Junior the Acts of the Martyrdom of the Thebean Soldiers. We shall now
go on with our proofs against the Agaunian Martyrs, and shall draw them from
that Ancient and accurate Manuscript, upon the Credit of which Father Chifflet
has reformed those Acts, which both Surius and Baronius have followed.

CHAP. VIII.
That the Style of the true St. Eucherius is different from that of the Passion
of the Agaunian Soldiers, Published by Chifflet.
IF we compare Chifflet's Copy with that of Surius, we shall observe in it the
same Style, the same Expressions, Thoughts, and Opinions; so that one would
conclude it to be the very same Piece; that place only excepted, where mention
is made of King Sigismond, who in that Copy is not contemporary with the true
St. Eucherius by many Years. But one cannot find in these Acts of Chifflet, the
Style, Genius, and Air of St. Eucherius. Erasmus, Erasm. Bibl. Patr. Tom. 6. p.
886. Nihil video profectum a nostrae Religionis hominibus, qui Eloquentiae
quoque gloria floruerunt, quod cum hujus phrasi sit conferendum.
who had not the Reputation of being too Liberal of his praises, thinks he can
never Extol too much the true St. Eucherius's Letter to Valerian, de Contemptu
mundi. He says, that the Christian Religion never had any Writers, no not
amongst the greatest Professors of Eloquence, who could Andreas Schottus in
Epistola aurea ad Valerianum.
match him in his Style and way of Writing. Andreas Schottus calls his Letter,
in his Preface to St. Eucherius*s Works, a Golden Letter. But these so high
Praises, and given too by Men of so refined a knowledge, are in no wise
suitable to the Author of the Passion of our Martyrs. And it is certain, that
if Eucherius, Bishop of Lions, composed that Letter to Valerian, he never could
be the Author of the History of the Agaunian Soldiers.

It Is true, an Author cannot always be the same in all his Works. The most
happy Genius, does not like a fertile soil always bear alike, nor yield so
plentifully at one time at it does another. The Treasures of Invention and
Eloqence do not lie open at all hours even to the greatest Wits. There are some
lucky Moments for composition that are not at our command; besides, the
difference of Age causes some difference in the productions of the brain, as
may be observed in the Iliads, and Odysses, of Homer; some Subjects being
delightful, we are fond of them, and fall greedily to work; whereas others,
because dry and insipid, do naturally cause in us some neglect. Nay sometimes a
Subject does even require a Man to descend from his usual greatness, and to lay
aside all the pomps and loftiness of Style. In a word, there are few Writers,
how able soever, that can bear up with a constant and continued evenness.
Therefore the Learned Vossius was in the right to condemn Massius, for denying
Xenophon to be the Author of the Expedition of Cyrus, because the Critic,
forsooth, did not observe in it all the strokes of that unimitable Eloquence,
which is the Character of that excellent Writer. For although, for the Reasons
we have hinted at, an Author may sometimes deviate from his Character, yet
notwithstanding there will still be discovered in his Style a tincture, as it
were of himself, and a particular Air that is proper to no other but him.
Fannius pronounced publicly in Rome an Oration, and there being some who
envied the applause he had got, they gave out, that he was obliged for it to
his Friends, who had helped him in the making it. But Cicero in Bruto. unus
enim sonus est totius Orationis, and idem Stylus.
Tully, on the contrary, maintained that it could not be so, because in the
discourse of Fannius, both the Style, the turn, and Harmony all over the same.

According to this supposition, we ought not to Father upon the true St.
Eucherius, the Passion of the Agaunian Martyrs. For instance, let us but
compare it with that excellent Epistle of his, upon the contempt of the World,
and Worldly Philosophy. Wherein his way both of Thought and Expression; and
indeed every thing is quite different from the former. One would take this
Letter to be the product of Augustus's Age, when the Latin Tongue was in its
greatest purity, whereas the Style of the Passion of the Martyrs of Agaunum,
tastes like that of the Empire in its declension, and of the Age of
Cassiodorus. Mr. Du Pin, a Doctor of Paris, so much to be commended both for
his diligence and sincerity, has without doubt, perused the Acts which Father
Chifflet has taken out of his Old Manuscript. And see how he speaks of 'em in
his Bibliotheca Du Pin Nova Bibl. (...) tom. page 175.
Nova. The History, says he, of the Passion of St. Mauritius, and of the other
Thebean Soldiers, is not the Style of our St. Eucherius.

But perhaps we have been too favorable to this Relation of the Martyrs of
Agaunum, in attributing it to the Age of Cassiodorus. For in the At Basil in.
15^^. At Rome in 1564.
Old Editions of St. Eucherius, Printed at Rome, and at Basil, they have
inserted amongst the Works of this Father, some Commentaries on Genesis, and
upon the Book of Kings, which seem to have been made not in Cassiodorus's time,
but even since Gregory the Great, that is above an Hundred Years after, as
appears by the Books of Morals of this Pope, being cited in these Commentaries.
This Remark has been made long ago, by Possevinus, and Sixtus Senensis. And
there is much more resemblance between the Style and Character* of these
Commentaries, and the Style and Character of the Passion of the Agaunian
Martyrs, than there is between the Letter of the contempt of the World, and the
Relation of the Martyrdom of the Thebean Legion.

This Conjecture is strengthened by the Epistle Dedicatory, prefixed to these
Commentaries on Genesis. It will be of some use to set it here. Eucherius, to
the Holy and most Blessed Bishop Salvlus. I have sent to your Beatitude, the
History which I have written of the Passion of our Martyrs. I feared least the
Memorable Events of their glorious Martyrdom, should have been buried in
Oblivion, both by long tract of time, and the negligence of Men. I have
endeavored to know the truth from those who are able to inform me of it, who
have assured me, that they had the thing from Isaac, Bishop of Geneva, much
after the same manner as I have related it. And I believe these things came to
the knowledge of Isaac, by the means of the most Blessed Bishop Theodorus* who
lived in the former Ages. Viro anterioris temporis. And now whereas others from
diverse places, and even from the remotest Provinces, offer Gold, Silver, and
several other things to the Honor of our Saints, we present them with our
writings, if so be you vouchsafe to approve of them; and I beg for their sakes
the remission of all my sins, and for the future, the continual assistance of
my perpetual Patrons. Remember us likewise in your Prayers, when you come
before God, and do attend the Services of the Saints.

There are several things very observable in this Letter. First, that he who
wrote it says, that he is the Author of the Passion of the Agaunian Soldiers.
Secondly, that the Monastery of Agaunum was Built a long time before, and was
in great repute in the World, since Offerings were sent thither from all parts.
Thirdly, that this Theodorus, who is called there a Man of the former Ages, is
in all probability the same Theodorus Bishop of Sion, whereof we have spoken on
the occasion of the Council of Agaunum; which shows this Letter was written at
least in the Seventh Century, since that otherwise, this Theodorus could not be
called Vir anterioris Temporis. Fourthly, that it mentions one Isaac, Bishop of
Geneva, who is not to be found in the Catalogue, which Leti, and Mr. Spon, have
made of the Bishops of that place* and which they have taken out of an Ancient
Bible of that City. Fifthly, that whereas in the Bibliotheca Patrum, Printed at
Lions, this Letter is placed immediately after the Passion of the Martyrs of
Agaunum, the Editors who have taken care to advertise the Readers, that the
Passion written by Surius, was not altogether Authentic, do not give the least
caution about this Letter, which is visibly later by some Ages than St.
Eucherius. Sixthly, that this Letter Baron. an. chapter 297. page 734.
is inserted at full length by Baronius in his Annals, as an irrefragable proof
that St. Eucherius is the Author of the Acts of the Agaunian Martyrs, seeing it
is brought there to serve as a Preface to it. Seventhly, that after you have
read this Letter, when you come to the Acts of the Thebean Martyrs, you cannot
perceive any difference. You find there much the same Matters, Style, and way
of Expression in both of them. Eighthly, that this Letter, in all the Editions
of the St. Eucherius's Works, is prefixed as a Dedication to the Commentaries
on Genesis, which have been composed by the Monks two Hundred Years after St.
Eucherius, as appears by some places of the Morals of Gregory the Great being
inserted in them. Ninthly, that the Author of the Commentaries upon Genesis,
and the Book of Kings, is very probably the Author of this Letter. And that he
who wrote the Letter, composed likewise the Passion of the Agaunian Martyrs.
Which leads us to this Observation, that perhaps we seek abroad for what we may
find at home. I mean, that perhaps, the Acts of the Thebean Legion may be the
growth of this Land, and the Work of some English Writer. See how the pretended
St. Eucherius speaks in his Commentary upon In 30. Comm. in Lib. Reg. c^p 22.
the Book of Kings. The Blessed Pope Gregory, Armed with an Evangelical
Eloquence* governed then in our days the Romish Church, when the most Reverend
Fathers, Austin and Paulinus, and their Companions, came into England, and
Preached the word of God to a People, who had been Bibl Pat^. tom. 6. p. 823.
non Gallus ho^o sed Britannus.
Infidels for so many Ages. These words have given occasion to the Learned
Jesuit, Andreas Schottus to think that the Author of these Commentaries, I
mean the pretended St. Eucherius, was not a French but an Englishman.

I do not know but one might strengthen yet this Conjecture, by an Expression
which we have observed in the Acts of the Agaunian Martyrs, It Is said there,
that Mauricius, who commanded the Thebean Legion, exhorted the Senators of the
Soldiers to suffer Martyrdom, Senatores militum. For though this Office is not
altogether unknown, and strange in the Roman Militia, Hieron. Epi^t. ad
Pammach. Deinde Senator, Ducenarius, Biarchus, Cirmicitor, Eques, deinde Tire.

Glossar. du Cang. tom. 3. p. 796.


and that St. Jerome speaks of it in his Letter to Pammachius, nevertheless you
will hardly find it in those Authors, who write about military employments.
Whereas this Expression was common then amongst the English, who used to give
it to those persons who held the first rank, not so much in consideration of
their Age, as for their Wisdom and merit. One may see in Mr. du Cange, the
Examples he alleges of it, taken from the Laws both of King Edward the
Confessor, and of Kenulphus King of the Mercians.

CHAP. IX.
That in Father Chifflet's Copy, as well as in that of Surius, the Commander of
a Legion, is called by a Name not then in use, and that there is a fault in the
number of the Legionary Soldiers.
BUT it matters not much, to know whether the Author of the Passion of the
Thebean Soldiers, was English of French. These two Warlike Nations will
scarcely fall out with one another, for the Honor of having given him to the
World. We must pass now to other Remarks. It Is not only the difference in the
Style, which shows that the Acts of the Martyrdom of the Thebean Legion are not
of the true St. Eucherius, but there are yet other manifest proofs of it. It
appears from the Instructions which St. Eucherius gave to his Son Salonius,
that this Father knew the use and propriety of Hebrew; but if he was the Author
of the aforesaid Passion, he must needs have been very ignorant even of Latin
terms, though his Letter upon the contempt of the World, shows that he was a
great Master of it. In the Edition of Surius, and of Chifflet, St. Mauricius,
who Commanded the Thebean Legion, is called Primicerius Legionis. Can one
imagine, that the true St. Eucherius did not know that the Commander of a
Legion, was called Praefectus Legionis? Let any Body examine carefully all the
Old Tombs and Monuments, which can give us any light into the Names and Titles
of Military Offices, from Augustus's time, to that of Justinian; let any Body
read the Notitia Imperii, with Pancirole's Notes; let any Body turn over the
Codes of Theodosius, and of Justinian, in which there are so many Laws
concerning the Civil, as well as the Military Offices of the Empire; let any
Body look over all the Inscriptions of those times which are commonly so full
of Titles, and you will no where find that the Commander of a Legion was ever
called Primicerius Legionis. The Reason of the Name Lazius Comin. Rp R^m. lib.
3. c. 17. page ^58.

Primicie^u primi erant and antesignani omnium. Digni^atum quod in tabula
cerata prime notarentur.


is, that whereas formerly they made use of a Paper prepared with Wax,
therefore they called Primicerii those of their respective Orders who were set
down first in the Public Registers. Hence it is that so many of that Name are
to be found amongst the diverse Orders of Dignities and Magistrates of Suid^s
(...) Hera^lii. (...).
the Empire. There was the Primicerius of the Imperial Chamber, of the Wardrobe,
of the Liberalities, of Notaries, of the Court of Accounts, of the Golden Mace,
of the Singing-School, of the Servants, of the Judges, of the Readers, and of
many others, whose Names are seen in the Notitia, or State of the Empire. This
term was also received into the Church in the following Ages. The dignity of
Primicerius is very considerable in the Clergy of Venice. Balusius nov. Coll.
Council. page 480.
And in the Collection of the Councils by Mr. Baluze, this Name is given to one
Peter a Priest of Alexandria. The Church writers have sometimes made use of it
Metaphorically, St. August. Sermon. 2.
calling St. Stephen Primicer of Martyrs, and St. Peter Bodicus delonsis. Arch.
in Hist. Hieros.
the Primicer of the Apostles, and at last this term has been appropriated to
these Priests who carry Wax Tapers before Princes and Prelates. But as for the
Military Officers, I confess I cannot well understand what rank and command the
Primicerii had there. Lipsius, and Salmasius, don't give us much light
thereupon in their Goltzius These. rei antiquariae page 149.
Books of the Roman-Militia. It Is true, that Goltzius, in his Catalogue of
Military Dignities, makes mention of Primicerius Castrensis. But all the
Learned do agree, that what Goltzius does relate, ought not always to be relied
upon, for he writ this, as well as the rest of his Books, upon other Peoples
word, and without having seen himself the Medals and Inscriptions which he goes
upon. If Goltzius has been mistaken, we have found out methinks the cause of
his Error. In the Notice or State of the Empire, in the Chapter of the Civil
and Military Dignities in the West, we see one Primicerius Sacri Cubiculi,
Primicerius Notariorum, Castrensis, Sacri Palatii, etc. And perhaps he thought
that before Castrensis ought to be understood Primicerius* which might give
occasion to the Dignity of Primicerius Castrensis, set down in his Catalogue.
But had he minded another Chapter, wherein an account is given of the Offices
which were sub dispositione viri spectabilis Castrensis, he would have observed
that this Dignity, Castrensis, related chiefly to the Sacred-House which was
the Emperor's Palace.

Veget. lib. 2. cap. 21. Sicut Primicerius in Officio Praefectorum praetorioque
ad honestum quaestuosumque Militiae pervenit gradum.
It Is true indeed, that Vegetius speaks of one Primicerius, who after he had
been a Prefect, and in the Praetorship, was raised to an Honorable and gainful
Military Dignity. His Commentators are silent upon this place, which yet seems
difficult enough. But Mr. de Valois does not leave us quite in the dark about
this matter, in his Notes upon Ammian Marcelline. For Ammian. Marcel. lib. 18.
c. 3.

Inter quos Valentinus ex Primicerio Protectorum Tribunus.


this Historian having spoken of one Valentinus, who was made a Tribune after
he had been Primicerius of that Body which was called Protectores, Mr. de
Valois Valesius page 190.

Caeterum ex Primicerio Protectorum ad Tribunatum prevenire mos erat.


observes that from Primicer of Protectors it was usual to be made a Tribune.

And it is true, that Ammianus Marcellinus speaks in his thirteenth Book of one
Gratian, who after he had been made Primicer of the Protectors, and Tribune,
was made superintendant to the Military Affairs in Africa. Which place does
explain that other in a Collection of the Acts of Constantine, In Excerptis de
Gestis Constantini. Constantius D. Claudii opt. Principis Nepos ex fratre,
Protector primum, exin Tribunus, postea Praeses Dalmatiarum fuit.
where it is said, that Constantius, Nephew to Claudius the Emperor, after he
had been first a Protector, then a Tribune, was at least created President of
Dalmatia. But we don't find in all this, that in St. Eucherius time the
Commander of a Legion, was called Primicerius Legionis. For it is only in the
last Ages, that it was given to all those who had Matthew. Paris an. 1240.
Sciscitabantur in Exercitu quis foret Primicerius.
any Command. Matthew Paris in the Year 1240. speaks of an Army where it was
demanded, who was the Primicerius of it, that is, who commanded it. So that as
the term Commander in English is very general, and may be applied to those, who
either do command a Company, or a Regiment, or are Governors of Towns and
Provinces; so likewise in the last Ages, in the which it is likely the Passion
of the Thebean Soldiers has been Forged, the quality of a Primicer had a very
large signification; I am tempted to say, specially amongst the English, and
from thence to make another conjecture, viz. That the Author of the Acts of
Agaunum was an Englishman. We did just now cite Matthew Paris, who was a great
Ornament to this Nation in the twelfth Century. There Monasticon Angl. Tom. 1.
page 838.
is an Act in the History of the English Monasteries, in the which the Kings,
Edmond, and Edgar, qualify themselves Kings and Primicers of all England,
Primicerii totius Albionis. Therefore this Primicerian Quality being Gulielm.
Tyrius lib. 4. cap. 8.

Pracedebant autem ejus Exercitum quasi Legion^m Primicerii, vexilla bajulantes
^iri Nobiles and inclyti.


so general at that time, it is no wonder that William of Tire, who lived about
Fifty Years before Matthew Paris, does mention some Legionary Primicers.
Honorable Men, says he, bearing Ensigns, went before the Army, as if they had
been the Primicers of Legions. If it can be inferred from these words, that the
Legionary Primicers were the Signiferi, or Ensign-bearers of those times, one
ought to confess that in William of Tire his time, things were very much
altered, and that nothing can be concluded from this expression that may
authorize that in the Relation of the Agaunian Martyrs, unless one would
confess that they suffered Martyrdom about the time of William of Tire, to wit,
many Ages after the true St. Eucherius. But let us examine what Surius Copy,
and that of Father Chifflet tells us of the number of the Thebean Soldiers.
That of Surius says, that in the Emperor Maximian's Army, there was a Legion
of Soldiers called Thebeans, and that a Legion was made up of Six Thousand,
Six Hundred, and Sixty six Soldiers, according to the custom of the Ancient
Romans. In Father Chifflet's Manuscript, the number of Sixty and six, and what
is said of the custom of the Ancient Romans is cut off, being said only there,
that a Legion was then made up of Six Thousand and Six Hundred Men.

If by the custom of the Ancient Romans, spoken of both in Surius and
Baronius's Copy, was meant the Military Discipline anciently established by
Romulus, it is certain that in his time the Legions were composed only of three
Thousand Foot, and some Horse. And let one look over all the times in which
that Commonwealth flourished, from the expulsion of Kings to Julius Caesar,
one shall observe many changes in the number of the Soldiers which composed
the Legions, and that it was sometimes lesser, and sometimes greater, according
to the Exigencies* and Revolutions of the Empire: But it will be a hard matter
to prove, that there has been a time, in which the Legions had precisely the
number of Soldiers specified in those two Copies.

Tit. Livius lib. 13.
Livy, says indeed, that it was a privilege of the Legions, which were in
Macedonia, to be composed of Six Thousand Foot, and Three Hundred Horse, the
others Ex veteri Instituto, according to the Ancient custom, being formed only
of Five Thousand Foot, and two Hundred Horse. This great Author in all
probability was better informed in the Roman Customs, than the Author of the
Passion of the Thebean Soldiers. For the Legions having been raised to Five
Thousand Men in the Roman Wars against Polyb. lib. 6.
Carthage. Polybius observes that to his time, they still retained the same
number of Five Thousand Foot, and Three Hundred Horse. It cannot be denied, but
the number of the Legionary Soldiers increased under the Emperors, since at
the time of the Emperor Tacitus, the Legions were of Six Thousand, One
Hundred, and Twenty Foot, and of Seven Hundred, and Sixteen Horse, which is a
Remark of Modestus, in the Treatise he addresses to him of the Terms used in
the Military Art. Vegetius, who Dedicated his Book to the Emperor Valentinian,
tells us likewise, that in his time the Legions were of the same number. So
that it would be an obligation to the Public, to prove, by good Authors, that
at the time of Dioclesian, and Maximian, in which it is supposed that the
Thebean Legion suffered Martyrdom, the Legions were of 6666, or 6600 Men, as
it is said in the Copies both of Surius, and Chifflet.

CHAP. X.
That in the Editions both of Surius and Chifflet, a Miracle is related which
has all the appearance of a feigned Story.
IN the Acts of the Agaunian Martyrs, there is a Miracle set down that deserves
our consideration. This Miracle happened on the occasion of a man, who in
Surius's Original was a Goldsmiths by Trade, and in that of Chifflet Aurifex.
Faber.
a Blacksmith or a Carpenter. It Is said in these Acts that all the Christians
of Agaunum being Assembled at Church upon a Sunday, this Man, who was a Pagan,
stayed alone in the new Church which was then a Building to the Honor of the
Thebean Soldiers. Whereupon the Saints appearing to him in a bright and
glorious Apparel, dragged him from the place where he was, stretched him as it
were upon a rack, and having banged him soundly, reproached him with his
absenting himself from the Church on the Lord's Day, and that he being a Pagan,
had been so bold as to work upon a Church which was Erecting to them. It is
incredible that a grave Author, as St. Eucherius was, should have made the
Blessed Martyrs to speak such Nonsense. For it is an easy thing to infer from
their discourse, that the Pagans themselves were obliged, even as Pagans, to
observe the keeping of the Lord's Day, and this is a Tenet which one cannot by
any means admit. For if the Fourth Commandment had obliged the Heathens, as
well as the Jews, as the other Commandments of the Decalogue did, 'twould be a
certain proof that the Duty enjoined by the fourth Precept concerning the
Sabbath Day, is a Duty Essentially Moral, of a Natural and inviolable
Rectitude; and it would be a very intricate difficulty to justify the
Apostolic Church about the translation of the Sabbath to the Day of the
Resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ. When we dispute against the
Sabbatarians, one of the strong Reasons we bring against them, is, that the
distinctive Character of the Laws Essentially Moral, is their extension and
universality, that is, that they bind all sorts of Persons at all times, in all
places, and under both Covenants. So that we conclude, that the observance of
the Seventh Day is not a Moral Duty, since the fourth Commandment did not
oblige the Gentiles; and I do not know, if the same thing may not be said of
our Sunday, which has suceeded to the Rights of the Sabbath*

It Is true, that after Nature has taught Men the existence of a God, it may
teach them further the reasonableness of Consecrating a settled time to his
Service: But it can lead them no further, and will leave the choice of that
time to their Liberty. Let it be the Fourth, the Sixth, or the Seventh Day,
it is all one in the main. And to render the Pagans guilty in not keeping the
Sabbath, either according to the Jewish, or Christian Institution, the Sabbath
ought to be See Lock of Hum. Underst.
one of those Duties that are as well known to us, as the first Principles
inbred in our very Nature, at our coming into the World, and ingraved by the
Hand of God in the Hearts of all Men. The Agaunian Saints were much in the
wrong to use a Pagan so scurvily, under pretense of his not observing the
Sunday. They ought first to have instructed him, to have set before him the
excellency and Holiness of the Christian Religion, and showed him how just and
reasonable it is to Consecrate the Sunday, to the glory of Jesus Christ, the
Mediator and High Priest of this new Law: And after this, had he been stubborn
and Rebellious to their Charitable instructions and admonitions, then in Gods
Name let him fall under the Censure. But to knock him down out of hand, this is
a way of Conversion only known and practiced in our Days in France, and which
cannot be attributed to Saints, without a great offense to their Charity. It
was an ordinary thing indeed, at that time, to see the Pagans drag the
Christians by force to their profane Sacrifices, but not one Example of those
times can be produced of any Christians, in places where they had the power to
do to it, tormenting the Pagans, and compelling them to come and join with them
in their Worship. Nay, it seems that in those former times, they made some
scruple of admitting Infidels into the places where their Holy Mysteries were
Celebrated. For otherwise, to what purpose should the fourth Council of Con.
Carth. 4. can. 84.
Carthage have Ordered the Bishops to suffer the Pagans, the Jews, and other
Heretics to enter their Churches, and hear the Word of God? It Is true, that it
is added in that Canon, that they shall not be suffered to stay but to the Mass
for the Catechumens, so that after the Sermon and Prayer for the Catechumens,
the Infidels were obliged to withdraw, before the Celebration of the Holy
Sacraments.

Another circumstance against the credibility of it, is, that, the Agaunian
Saints do reproach this Pagan, for his boldness in working upon the Church
which was a Building for them. Is it possible than an Author, so wise and
knowing, as Sr. Eucherius was, should have put in the Mouth of his Saints such
unbecoming reproaches! Saints are not certainly so nice as this comes to, I am
sure God himself is not. For when Solomon was Building him a Temple, it does
not appear that he found fault with him for sending for Wood and Stones from
Heathenish Countries. And according to St. Austin, he would not have taken it
ill, though all the Aug. Ep. 154. ad Publ.
Timber of his Temple had been cut down in the Groves Consecrated to Idols, ex
lucis alienorum Deorum. When we reflect on the the prodigious number of
Workmen, who were employed in the Building of the Temple, we cannot but
conclude, that many of the Infidel Neighbor Nations were also employed in it,
and so much the rather, because the Jews applied themselves more to Husbandry,
than to other Mechanic Arts. It was by God's Order, that Josue Ch* 6. 24*
the Gold and Silver of the Idolatrous Jericho were put into the Sacred
Treasury. Those Tables and Precious Vessels, and the other rich Presents which
Ptolomy Philadelphus, and Queen Helena, sent to the Temple at Jerusalem, were
no doubt of the Gentiles making, nevertheless, Lightfoot. De^cript. Temp.

Hier. sect. 4. page 649.


they were accepted of by the Highpriests, and Consecrated to the Service of
the God of Israel. In what School then did the Thebean Soldiers Learn that
piece of Morality, that it was not allowable in a Pagan to help in the Building
of Christian Churches? Certainly the Romish Church must think that Saints have
nowadays much abated of the severity of their Morals, and are grown much more
humane and tractable, since in the Cathedral in Rome, a Brazen St. Peter is
seen which, formerly was a Statue of Jupiter, and in whose Hands the Keys were
put, instead of the Thunderbolt and fiery Arrows that they held before; and
since the Pantheon, which was the Temple Dedicated to all the Heathen Gods, is
now a Church Consecrated to the Blessed Mother of our Lord.

CHAP. XI.
In which the thoughts and dispositions for Martyrdom, which are attributed to
those Saints in the Acts of Agaunum, are Examined.
WE must not forget, that the Historian of the Thebean Soldiers represents
them all possessed with a burning Zeal for Martyrdom. He says, that they were
all inflamed with a Noble desire to die for Jesus Christ, and that the
Ministers of the Emperor being arrived to put his barbarous Orders in
Execution, the Thebean Soldiers made not the least resistance or endeavor to
escape, but ^endered their Necks of their own accord to the Executioners. This
was not set down without some design; the Author had a mind to answer
before*hand, a difficulty which might be objected by the Readers. He fore*saw
that it would not well go down with some considering Men, that a whole Legion
well Armed, had suffered their Throats to be cut without making the least
opposition, and that these brave Soldiers who fought like Lions in so many
Battles, should have permitted themselves to be led as Lambs to the Slaughter.
But now he thinks he has removed the difficulty, by saying that they were
possessed with a fiery heat, and a kind of fury for the glory of Martyrdom; as
appears especially, in that Victor, whose Death is related toward the end of
the Acts of the Martyrs of Agaunum, who sought for Death, and brought it upon
himself by his own indiscretion. For being invited by some Pagan Soldiers to
come and make merry with them, with the spoils of the Thebean Soldiers, he
returned their kindness with a Thousand Imprecations and Curses, and declared,
without necessity, that he himself was a Christian. But these things are not
perhaps so certain, as to leave no manner of suspicion behind them. It Is true,
that we find in Eusebius, Sulpitius Severus, and Lactantius, many fine things
said upon the Noble Ardour of Christians (in the primitive Ages) for Martyrdom.
It cannot be denied neither, but in the Church History there are particular
Examples of some who had more zeal than knowledge, and who in the time of
Persecution, when they might have made their escape, or hidden themselves,
chose rather to run into the hands of their unmerciful Judges and Tormenters.

But here the case is otherwise, for we are not speaking of some simple
ignorant People, whom a blind zeal might carry too far in the first heats of
Christianity, but of a whole Legion, which they suppose had been well
instructed by a Bishop of Jerusalem, and confirmed in the Faith by Pope
Marcelline. Amongst these were a great number of Officers, who no doubt had a
competent share of Learning, and were sufficiently instructed in Christian
Morality, as not being Christians by their Birth and Education, but by choice.
In the Archives of the Metropolitan Church of Turin is kept a Manuscript-life
of St. Second, one of the Thebean Soldiers, wherein it is said that he was of
one of the best Families of the Province of Thebaide, brought up in all the
best accomplishments, and by his extraordinary Merit, raised to a considerable
Office in the Imperial Palace. Now if notwithstanding all these fine
qualifications, this St. Secundus was left out in the Acts of Agaunum, we may
well think that Mauricius, Candidus, Exuper, Ursus, and Victor, who are
mentioned there, ought to have been Men of transcendent Parts and Ability.
Nevertheless, the Acts of their Passion do attribute to them, such Thoughts as
are quite contrary to the Principles and Morals of Christianity. If the Author
of these Acts was of opinion, that they should have offended God by
endeavoring to fly from the Orders and Cruelty of the Emperor, we need no
other premises to conclude, that the true St. Eucherius is not the Author of
this Relation. This Holy Bishop well knew that Christ did suffer his Disciples,
when they were persecuted in one place to flee to another. He knew undoubtedly
very well, that true Religion strengthened the Saints against dangers, but that
it forbad 'em to stay for them, or to go meet them. A man that is thoroughly
convinced of the truth of Gods promises, and has experienced the Comforts of
'em, will certainly without any change, or being in the least daunted, look
upon a fiery Furnace* but yet he will not run himself headlong into it. As we
ought not to be afraid of Death, so neither are we to grow weary and prodigal
of Life. Ignatius and Albina may serve as Patterns to Christians of both Sexes,
but not Cato and Lucretia. The Crown Cypr. de (...) Nam cum (...) de (...) ^c.
of Martyrdom comes from the hand of God; we ought to wait for it without
anticipating the time, (said St. Cyprian the great Panegyrist of Martyrdom) the
Thebean Soldiers had an excellent Model in St. Paul to frame themselves upon;
who being chosen by God to ^reach the Gospel to the Gentiles, feared neither
Tribulation, nor Anguish, nor Persecution, nor Hunger, nor Nakedness, nor
Peril, nor Sword; he challenged Life and Death, Angels, Principalities, Powers,
things present, and things to come, the height, the depth, and all the
Creatures together, to shake his unmovable steadiness and fidelity. But withal
he never faced the dangers, whenever it was in his Power to decline them, and
made no scruple to turn aside when he foresaw some great mischief in the way.
An instance of which was his going out of Damascus, as you see in the 9. Chapter of
the Acts.

This was also a known Practice in the time in which it is supposed that the
Thebean Legion suffered Martyrdom. Let one but look over the Collection of
Penitential Canons by Peter of Alexandria, who was in great esteem about the
time of the Persecutions of Dioclesian. This Bishop does there Censure those
obstinate Martyrs, who having opportunity to make their escape, sought
notwithstanding for Death. Christ, says, he, withdrew himself to shun the
malice of the Jews who laid in wait for him; and though he knew that the time
appointed in the Counsel of his Father was not far off, he went not in search
after his Cross, but waited for it from the fury of the Jews in a solitary
place, whither he did retire. And when he foretold his Apostles of all the
Persecutions they were to suffer for his Names sake, he told them that they
should be delivered to the Councils and Synagogues. Whereupon this Bishop
observes that Christ said, they shall deliver you, and not, Ye shall deliver
your selves. Tillemont Hist. des Emp. 2. p. 3. ^om. page 864.
For this reason Mr. de Tillemont, in his History of the Emperors, makes this
wise observation, speaking of the Acts of St. Maximus, That these Acts do
appear very well deserving the esteem which Baronius had for them, though they
do express that this Saint delivered himself to Death, which is more usually
seen in spurious, Council Elib. can. 60.

August. in Breviar. colla^. Di. 3. c. 13.


than in true Acts. In short, one may see what were the Morals of the Ancient
Church about this thing, from a Canon of the Council of Eliberis, and from a
special place in St. Austin; and the same Morals may be seen practiced in the
Lives of St. Cyprian and Athanasius, who fled from Persecution whenever God
gave them opportunity to do it.

All the business is then to examine whether the Thebean Soldiers, being
informed of the Emperor's resolution, might have prevented it by their flight;
and for the clearing of this point, we need only read the Acts of their
Martyrdom. The Army of Maximian having passed the defiles of Valesia, the
Thebean Legion which was in the Rear, understood at Agaunum, that this Army was
designed to cut off the Christians in Gaul. They stopped at this News, and
refused to March any further. First every Body will agree that they might have
disbanded and betook themselves to flight; for in such cases as this, Military
Laws ought to yield to that of self-preservation, and then desertion is not, it
seems, a greater infraction of Military Discipline, than to refuse to March at
the Orders of the General. It Is further said in the Acts, that Maximian being
informed of the refusal of the Thebean Soldiers, commanded them to be
Decimated, hoping by the Death of some to terrify the others into their duty.
The Legion with an undaunted Courage suffered the Decimation, and the Ministers
who Executed the Emperors Orders, made their report to him, that the
Rebellious Legion was nothing frighted by this Exemplary punishment, but
persisted in their obstinate resolution not to March. During all this while,
the Army is not seen to come back in Order to observe the Motions of this
Legion; neither was it observed, that the Emperor did command any Troops to
watch them, for preventing the ill effects of their mutinous disposition. It Is
very natural to think that if the whole Legion was not able to save all their
Lives, part of them at least might have got away, and yet it is said in the
Acts, that not so much as one of them did escape the Emperors Cruelty.
Whatever care is now taken to hinder the Desertions in an Army, all the
diligence and watchfulness of the Officers cannot hinder a great many Soldiers
to run away from their Colors every Campaign; and what is yet worth our
observation is, that the Situation of Agaunum afforded great facility to the
Thebean Soldiers to flee away for their safety. I have passed my self that
way, when I went with the Corpse of Duke Schomberg from Turin to Lauzane, where
he had ordered me to Bury him. And having then some Thoughts of this
Dissertation, I staid a good while to consider the ^venues and Situation of
Agaunum. It is seated at the bottom, and further end of a very narrow Valley,
and there is no access to it but by continual Defiles, having on both sides
Woods and high Mountains. So that, had the Thebean Soldiers taken advantage
from the place, the whole Army of the Emperor had not been able to have
hindered the greatest part of them from making their escape. From this we may
conclude, that the Author of their Acts has not much observed the rules of
Probability in the Romance he has left us, since he says, that all the
Thebean Soldiers were Massacred, not one of them caring to make his escape,
but all with one accord cheerfully holding up their Necks, and wishing for
nothing so much as the glory of Martyrdom.

CHAP. XII.
That there is no likelihood that a Legion should be sent for from the East to
suppress a Tumult of the Gauls.
WE have hitherto considered the Martyrdom of the Thebean Legion, with Relation
both to the Acts wherein it is contained, and to the Author to whom these Acts
are attributed. It Is time now to come to the Fact it self, and to treat it
without any regard either to the Acts or their Author. Father le Le Cointe Ann.

Franc. tom. 3. An. Chapter 636.


Cointe thought in his Annals to salve both the Martyrdom of the Thebean
Legion, and the Relation of their Passion, by betaking himself to the Acts and
to the Copy of Father Chifflet. We do not deny, says he, that the Acts of the
Martyrs of Agaunum, were written by St. Eucherius, Bishop of Lions; but we say
that those published by Surius, and which are found in the Manuscripts of most
Churches, are spurious, and falsely attributed to St. Eucherius. We acknowledge
none to be true besides those published by Francis Chifflet in his Paulinus
Illustratus, and the which he has Extracted out of a very Ancient Manuscript
of St. Claud's Monastery. And we believe St. Eucherius to be the true Father of
that Work. But whether St. Eucherius be the Author of that work, or whether he
be not* whether the Acts be falsified in the Copy of Surius, and whether they
be true in Father Chifflet's Manuscript, this is now no more the matter in
question. We have hitherto in a manner Attacked only the Outworks, but we come
now close to the Fact, and will show in it palpable Characters of falsity.

Acta Martyr. Agaun. Hi in auxiliu^ Maximiano ab Orientis partibus acciti.
The first of which is this supposition, namely, that the Emperor Maximian,
caused a Legion to be put Death, which he had sent for from the East to go with
him into Gaul. We don't deny but there were in the East some Legions called
Thebeans. In the Book we have already cited of the Dignities of the Empire,
mention is made of four Thebean Legions.

Sub dispositione Viri illustris Magistri militum per Orientem Legiones
Comitatenses 9.

Secunda Flavia Constantia Thebaeorum, secunda Felix Valentis Thebaeorum.

And in another Chapter.

Sub dispositione Viri illustris Magistri militum per Thracias Legiones
Comitatenses.

Prima Maximiana Thebaeorum

Tertia Diocletiana Thebaeorum.

* Laziu^ Rcip. Romans lib. 3. comitabantur Augustum in procinctum abcuntem.
We will not deny neither, but that the Exigencies of the Empire, calling
Maximian into Gaul, the Emperor might have been attended by some of those
Legions. They are all four numbered amongst those Legions which the Romans called
Comitatenses.

But our business is to Examine which was that Thebean Legion, whereof it is
spoken in the Acts of the Agaunians Martyrs The Copies both of Surius and
Chifflet, do agree that Maximian caused this Legion to come from the East. So
that according to the pretended St. Eucherius, it cannot be either Prima
Maximiana Thebaeorum, or Tertia Dioclesiana Thebaeorum, these two Legions
remaining in Thracia, appointed to Guard those Frontiers of the Empire. This
Legion, then must have been one of those which were under the Command of the
General of the Foot in the East. But it is not very likely, that the Emperor
should have sent for a Legion, so far to persecute the Christians in Gaul, or
to quell a Sedition raised there. The Legions on the Rhine, on the Danube, in
Moesia, and in Illyria, were much nearer at hand. No Example can be showed in
History, that to make War against the Gauls, Garrisons were drawn out of the
Frontier places of Egypt, or Mesopotamia. Should it be replied, that the Romans
were at peace with the Persians and that all things were quiet upon the
Confines of Africa and Asia, that the danger was pressing in Gaul, that Rome
did tremble at the first news of a Mutiny in those parts, and at the bare
naming of Tumultus Gallicus, and therefore, that it ought not to appear so
strange that Legions were called from the utmost parts of the East. And should
it be added in confirmation of this Conjecture, Sex^. Aurel. Victor. Eutr^p.
lib. 9.
that the danger ought to have been very great, since the Historians do observe
that this was one of the reasons which induced Dioclesian to divide the Empire
with Maximian, to the end that being invested in the Imperial Dignity, and
having a greater Authority, he might sooner make an end of this business: All
these replies make for us, by lessening the probability of the Martyrdom of the
Thebean Legion. For the War which Maximian was to undertake being of so great
importance, it is not likely he would wilfully have deprived himself of a
Legion, which he had sent for from the extremities of the Empire. But suppose
Maximian had been as Zealous as ever Emperor was, for the Service of his Gods,
and as implacable an Enemy and persecutor of Jesus Christ and his Disciples,
yet after all, we ought not, without good reasons, to make a mad Man of him,
and so bad a Politician, as to imagine he would have commanded one of his best
Legions to be Massacred in the very face* as I may say, of the Enemy, and at
the beginning of a War, the success whereof ought to have commended to the
World the choice which Dioclesian had made of him: And by so much the rather,
for what Aurel. Victor. quanquam semiagrestem, Militiae tamen atque ingenio
b^^um.
Aurelius Victor says of him, viz. That though he was but half a Courtier, yet
he was a brave and skilful Warrior. Besides this, if with Father Labbe, we
refer the Martyrdom of the Thebean Legion to the Year 286. it is like that at
that time the State of Affairs did not permit that the Frontiers of Egypt, and
of the Eastern Provinces, should be unguarded; since it was not long after,
that Achilleus took the Purple upon him, and that the Quingentians, or
Inhabitants of the Five Towns, joined their Forces against the Empire. And if
this Martyrdom be placed in the Year 297. with Cardinal Baronius, I question
very much whether the War was not then raging upon the Frontiers of Persia, and
whether the Emperor Galerius had by that time repaired the Loss of that
unfortunate day, in which all his Army was defeated, and he himself had much
ado to escape.

But now I come to something more positive. The very Names which in the Book of
the Dignities of the Empire, are given to those Thebean Legions which were in
the East, may suffice to show that the Martyrdom here mentioned, cannot be
applied to any of them. For one of these Legions is called Secunda Flavia
Constantia Thebaeorum. Where we are to take Notice, that the Romans gave
different Names to their Legions for distinction sake, as Princes do now to
their Regiments. These Names are sometimes taken from the Order or time of
their Creation, as the First, Second, Third, and Fourth Legion. And sometimes
they were given upon the Account of some remarkable Action, whereby they had
signalized themselves, accordingly one was called the Victorious, another the
Conquering, the Iron Legion, etc. Now and then they took their Names from the
Countries and Frontiers that were committed to their charge, as the Germanick,
and the Pannonick Legions, appointed to Guard the Empire in Hungary and
Germany. Some of them had also their Names from the Countries where they had
been raised, as the Nervian, and Isaurian Legions. Mezeray, in his History of
France, before Clovis's time, gives this very same reason for the Name of the
Thebean Mezeray Hist. before Clovis, etc. page 218.
Legion Maximian, says he, having also taken upon himself the defense of Gaul,
departed from Nicomedia, and took with him some Legions, and amongst them that
of the Thebeans, so called from its having been raised in Thebais of Egypt. But
most commonly the Legions bore the Names of the Emperors who had raised them;
such were the Ulpian, Trajan, Claudian, Dioclesian, and Maximian Legions. And
it is most likely the two Thebean Legions, which were in the East, were of this
last Order. For one of them was called Flavia Constantia Thebaeorum, from the
Name of the Emperor, Constantius. Pancirollus observes judiciously, that this
ought to be understood of Canstantius, Son to the Emperor Constantine, and not
of Constantius his Father: only the Reason he gives for it is false. He
supposes then, that Constantine the Great was the First Emperor who added to
his Titles, that of Flavius; and that most of his Successors after him took the
same likewise, as a mark of the esteem they had for his Virtues, and of their
desire to bear some resemblance with him. Mr. du Cange, in his Byzantine
Families, speaks of some Medals of Constantius, Father to Constantine, with the
Name Flavius, upon them. And Mr. Baluze, in his Notes on Lactantius's Book of
the Deaths of the Persecutors, produces an Inscription which he had from Mr.
Vaillant, where this Emperor is inscribed FLAVIUS VALERIUS CONSTANTINUS, so
that we should rather think that at the time when Maximian was raised to the
Empire* and when he undertook his Expedition into Gaul, Constantius, Father to
Constantine, had not sufficient Authority to raise Legions in the East, and to
give them his own Name. And since the other Legion was called Secunda Felix
Valentis Thebaeorum, from the Emperor Valens his Name, it follows that neither
the one nor the other could possibly suffer Martyrdom by the Order of Maximian,
who was taken into a Partner-ship of the Government several Years before
Constantius and Valens came to the Throne.

Guido Pa^cirol. Notit. Imper. cap. 48. fol. 34.
Pancirollus seems to have been sensible of this difficulty, but finding no way
to evade it, he falls with all his knowledge into pitiful contradictions.
Instead of one Thebean Legion, which is supposed to have suffered Martyrdom, he
relates the Passions of two Thebean Legions. He says that the Legio Secunda
Flavia Constantia Thebaeorum was raised by Constantius, and put in the room of
the Second Thebean, who were Christians, and had been Massacred at Treves, by
Rictiovarus, a Prefect of the Emperor Maximian; And as for the Legio Secunda
Felix Valentis Thebaeorum, Pancirollus will have it, that the Emperor Valens
raised it to make up the loss of the Legion which perished at Agaunum, on this
side of the Alps, for refusing to take the Military Oaths with the Pagan
Ceremonies. That which led him into this Error, was his having read in other
Legends, that Maximian having passed the Alps, made a Detachement of some
Cohorts of the Thebean Legion, with some other Troops, to reinforce the Army
wherewith he designed to oppose Carausius. Thus this famous Antiquary of these
few Cohorts, has made an entire Legion. Which is so far from being true, that
in the following Chapters the same Thebean Soldiers, who are now supposed to
have been sent against Carausius, will furnish us with new proofs against the
Martyrdom of the whole Thebean Legion.

CHAP. XIII.
That if the History of this Legion were true, there would not be so much
uncertainty of the time wherein it happened.
ANother Character of falsehood, in the History of the Thebean Legion, which
deserves our observation, is the uncertainty and contrariety of the Writers of
the Church of Rome, concerning the time in which they suppose the Thebean
Legion suffered. The Martyrdom of a whole Legion is so Memorable an Event, that
if it were true, it would certainly have been written and described in all its
circumstances in the Annals of the Church. And though the Ecclesastical writers
had been so negligent as to be silent therein, yet, Aurelius Victor, Eutropius,
Jordanes, or some other Author, would undoubtedly have made amends for this
Omission Titus Livius, failed not to relate the Tragical end of that Legion,
whereof all the Soldiers were Condemned to Death for Mutining and possessing
themselves of Rhegium, during the War of the Romans with Pyrrhus. And yet some
would have it, that Six Thousand, Six Hundred, Sixty and six Officers and
Soldiers, were Massacred by the Emperor's Order, upon their refusal to swear
by his false Gods, and to join with the other Troops that were Heathens, in
shedding of Christians Blood; though not one word is to be found either in
Profane or Ecclesiastical Writers, whereby to discover the exact time of an
Event, which so many circumstances render so extraordinary and wonderful.
Neither do the ablest writers of the Romish Church agree upon the Year, the
Pope, or the Consul, under whom it happened. Cardinal Baronius puts their
Martyrdom under the Pontificate of Marcelline, in which Error he was followed
by two Learned Fathers of the Oratory, Namely Le Cointe An^. Chapter 638.

^o^i^us part. 2. cap. 3. de rebus a Constable. gestis.


le Cointe, and Morin. Anthonius Pagi refers this Martyrdom to the first Years
of Emperor. The Jesuit Labbe Chr. Hist. part 1. an. chapter 2^6. page 216.
Labbe forsakes here the Opinion of his Baronius, and it is he perhaps, whom
Anthonius Pagi followed. His words are these. It Is said that about the Year 286
Sebastianus Tiburtinus, Tranquillus, Marcellinus, Zeus, Mauricius, and several
others with the Thebean Legion suffered Death for the Faith of Jesus Christ at
Agaunum, at the entrance of the Pennine Alps This agrees very well with the
Pontificate of Cajus, and the beginning of the Empire of Dioclesian. And
whereas Cardinal Baronius refers the Martyrdom of the Thebean Soldiers to the
Year 297. it happened according to Father Labbe's computation in the Year 286,
viz. immediately after that Carinus was killed, and that Dioclesian had taken
Maximian into the Government* Which if true, what Duchesne Hist. of the Popes
page 45.
will become of Mr. Duchesne's Argument in his History of Popes, who to prove
that Pope Marcelline did not Sacrifice to Idols in the time of Persecution, as
is most commonly believed, says, that this Pope adminstred the Sacrament of
Confirmation to the Thebean Legion, when they passed by Rome, and earnestly
exhorted them to Piety and to perseverance in Religion? Here Labbe and Pagi,
put the Martyrdom of this Legion several Years before the Pontificate of
Marcelline In the mean while we may take notice of the extraordinary fair
dealing of this Jesuit, who does not give us the Martyrdom of the Thebean
Legion, as a thing whereof he himself is very well assured, and of which he
has found any Authentic Records and Proofs, but only with an, It is said, or
given out; and this no doubt he does, as being unwilling to vouch for a
Relation which he found to be somewhat fabulous.

Now if it be replied, that it is not fairly done to deny a matter of Fact,
merely because its Epoche is uncertain; it may be answered, that there is a
great deal of difference between one Transaction and another; that there are in
Ecclesiastical History, several Relations of matters of Fact, concerning which
this Argument would prove of no great force. But the Martyrdom of a whole
Legion is a thing so extraordinary, so singular, and so remarkable in it self,
that the uncertainty of the time in which they say it happened, makes it very
suspicious. And for the same Reason several Person doubt of the Dispute of St.
Peter with Simon Magus, and of the surprising Death of this wicked Man, whom
the Devils let fall to the ground, after they had born him up for some
considerable time in the Air. It Is true that Eusebius, Sulpitius Severus, and
St. Austin, take Notice of this Memorable Event. But those who believe it to be
false, do reply that one ought not always to trust to the Relations of the
Ancient Ecclesiastical Authors, because the Zeal they had for Religion, made
'em not always very Nice in the choice of Proofs and Examples; and sometimes
they had a mind to oppose one Miracle to another, seeing that the whole Pagan
Religion was Built upon the Belief of Miracles, and the Apparitions of their
false Gods. They add farther, that had this Event happened, as it is reported,
it would have occasioned so much Noise in Rome, and through the whole Empire,
that some Footsteps thereof would have been preserved in the Writings of Pagan
Authors. And that after all, though it was believed by Eusebius, Sulpitius
Severus, and St. Austin, this does not make it less dubious, since those three
Writers do not agree about the time wherein it happn'd. Eusebius puts it under
the Empire of Claudius, St. Austin, and several others, under that of Nero,
about the Year of our Lord 67. and Sulpitius Severus refers it to the time when
St. Paul came to Rome, toward the Year 57. And this is the very argument we
urge against the Martyrdom of the Thebean Legion.

CHAP. XIV.
That the Martyrdom of the Thebean Legion cannot be referred either to a
General, or to a Local and particular Persecution.
ANother Character of falsehood, yet more palpable, and in the very Fact, is
this, that if the Thebean Legion suffered Death for being Christians, this must
have happened in the time of the General Persecution, or of a Local and
particular one. Now if we examine exactly all the afflictions and calamities
that befell the Church uuder the Reign of Dioclesian, we find neither time nor
room where to place the Martyrdom of the Thebean Legion. For place it if you
please with Cardinal Baronius in the Year 297. or put it in the Year 286. with
Labbe and Pagi, what side soever you take, you shall never make it fall in with
the General Persecution, which happened in the Year 303. according to the
Opinions of the Learned Henr. Noris Epochae syron. Diss. 3. p. 143.

Valesius in Notis ad cap. 2. lib. 8.

Balusius in Notis Lactantii Riccioli Chr. Ref. lib. 4. cap. 10.


Petitus 3. Eccl. Chron. 5*
Henry Noris, Mr. de Valois, and Mr. Baluze. Riccioli a Jesuit, in his
reformed Chronology finds, fault with Baronius and Petau, for placing the
beginning of it in the Year 302. and Remarks that Onuphrius has been more
exact in his Computation, who makes the General Persecution to begin in the
Month of March, and in the Year 303. Samuel Petit has thought fit to put it
off to the Year 304. in his Summary Collections of Chronology, where he says,
that the difference about the Celebration of Easter, caused this Persecution to
begin sooner in one Country than in another; and that the Emperor* Dioclesian
(the better to surprise the Christians, and to make the Effects of his rage
both the more certain and dreadful) commanded they should be Massacred on
Easter Day.

But though the Martyrdom of the Thebean Legion, could be made to agree in
point of time with the General Persecution, yet this would not remove all
difficulties, since it is possible this Persecution might not reach so far as
the Country where it is supposed that the Thebean Soldiers suffered. However,
notwithstanding the Diversity of Opinions about the circumstances of their
Martyrdom, all the Writers who have handled this Matter, do agree, that the
Country of Valesia, and the Neighborhood of Agaunum had their Soil Honored
with the effusion of their Blood. Now the business is, to know whether that
Canton was not of Gaul, and Aurel. Victor quae irans Alps Galliae sunt
Constantio sunt co^^m^ssae.
in the Division of Constantius. Aurelius Victor does clearly decide the
Question, saying, that in the partition of the Empire, Constantius had for his
share all the Gallick Provinces beyond the Alps; and one need only cast his
Eye upon the Map, and he will find that Agaunum is beyond the Alps in respect
to Rome. In the Book which we have already cited of Dignities of the Empire,
Notice is taken of the Seventeen Provinces of Gaul, and amongst them the Alps
called Grajae and Penninae are comprehended. Now it is certain, that the
Ancient Agaunum was Brietus parall. Veter Ge^gr. and Novae page 374.
situated in these Alps, which were Inhabited by a People called Veragri. And
therefore, Briet the Jesuit, a Man so very well seen in Ancient and Modern
Geography, puts in the Fifth Viennese Octodurum, which is now the chief City of
Valesia. This Fifth Viennese included most part of the Alps called Grecian,
and Pennine, and belonged to Gaul, by the Division which the Romans made of the
Provinces of the Empire. Ant. Pagi Crit. Hist. Chr. p. 218.
Morever, Father Pagi proves that these Grecian Alps were none of the Five
Provinces, which composed the Ancient Province of Narbonne, and that they were
in Gaul at the time when the Province of Narbonne was separated and joined to
Italy.

Seeing then that the Country of Valesia, where Agaunum stood belonged to the
Gauls at that time, and was then under the Government of Constantius, this will
suffice to show that the Martyrdom of the Thebean Legion, cannot be placed in
the time of the General Persecution Mr. Bosquet Hist. Eccl. lib. 4 c. 11.

Dodwel Diss. Cypr. 11.


Bosquet, Bishop of Montpellier, and Mr Dodwel in his Dissertations upon St
Cyprian, have made it out, that Constantius Chlorus was the only Prince of all
those that had then a share in the Empire, who never Persecuted the Christians.
And of this great moderation of his, the Donatists were not wanting to take
Notice, in their Humble Address to Constantine, hoping thereby to incline him
to mildness, and a Toleration of their Sect. Likewise Eusebius, in the Life of
the Emperor Constantine, relates one of his Edicts, in which he gives this
Commendation to his Father, that of all his Colleagues in the Empire, he only
left the Christians in Peace and unmolested. It Is true indeed, that yielding to
the necessity of the times, he comply d so far with the two other Emperors, as
to permit the Christian Ver^m autem Dei Templu^^ quod est in h^miri^^^ i^colume
serv^v^^.

Lactant de Mort. p^rsec. lib. 15.


Temples in his Division to be demolished; But Lactantius observes, that he
took care that no harm should be done to their Persons.

For this Reason, the defenders of the Martyrdom of the Thebean Legion, will be
forced to have recourse to some Local and particular Persecution, which must
have been raised against the Church some Years before the time of the General
One. But then they ought to mark out to us, out of some good Authors both the
places and times of these Local and particular Persecutions. For we are a
little too hard of Belief for the Legend-writers; nor can we swallow the
Relations of things said to have been done in the Second and Third Centurys
when there is nothing produced in confirmation thereof but Lives and Passions
composed by Monks, who lived some Eight or Nine Hundred Years after. And yet it
would be no easy matter to find any one of that Order, who refers the
Martyrdom of the Thebean Legion to a particular Persecution, which only raged
in some single Country. They Matthew. Westminster. page 67.
have all-spoken of it, after the same manner as Matthew of Westminster has
done, who places this Martyrdom in the Year 303. and says, that it was at that
time that the Thebean Legion, made up of Six Thousand, Six Hundred, Sixty and
six S uld^ers, suffered Death courageously for the Faith of Christ. According
to the ^hronology of this Benectine Monk, the Thebean Legion suffered in the
time of the General Persecution; and he joins this Event with the Martyrdom of
St. Alban and other English Saints; though it is not true neither, that
Constantius permitted these violences to be done in England; and besides,
Gildas, and Polydor Vergil, place their Martyrdom in the Year 305. In the mean
while it is worth our Observation, that the Manuscript so much commended by
Father Chifflet, is different from that which Matthew of Westminster made use
of, for it is said in that as well as in the Copies which Surius and Baronius
followed, that the Legion was composed of Six Thousand, Six Hundred, Sixty six
Soldiers. We don't pretend however, to deny that there have been some Local
Persecutions before that Fatal interview of Dioclesian and Valerius, at
Nicomedia, where these two Emperors resolved the General Persecution. For we
do agree with the Learned Theodorus Ruinart, Theod. Ruinart, in Praef. contra
Dodwelum.
that sometimes the Governors, the Judges, and the Pagan Priests in their
turns, raised some Persecutions, here and there, in some or place or other of
the Empire. But we say, that it cannot be referred to any of the Local
Persecutions, which are found in Church History. If it could be applied to any
particular one, it must be to that which was raised at Rome (and in which
Baronius relates that St Sebastian suffered Martyrdom) rather than to any
other. But of this the Cardinal observes, that Baronius an. Chapter 286.
it extended not much further than Rome, and consequently not so far as the
Alps, and to Agaunum. In short, before the time of the General Persecution, we
find some Christians Condemned to Death in some parts of the Empire; but before
the unhappy Congress at Nicomedia, 'ts not possible to show any-where, during
the whole Reign of Dioclesian, any such Massacre as that of a whole Legion.

CHAP. XV.
That the Martyrdom of the Thebean Legion cannot be reconciled with the
History, and Years of the Emperor Maximian.
THE Character of Forgery which we have dispatched in the Precedent Chapter,
will appear yet more Evident, by considering further, that it is supposed that
the Thebean Legion suffered Death by Order of Maximian; whereas there is no
room for this Martyrdom, either in the Life or Years of this Emperor. The
Copies of Surius and Chifflet, and all the Legend-Writers who have followed
them, agree in this, that this Emperor caused the Thebean Soldiers to be put
to Death in an Expedition which he made into Gaul. Accordingly then a place
must be found for their Martyrdom in some of Maximian's Voyages, on the other
side of the Alps. Lactantius, in his History of the Deaths of the Persecutors,
makes mention of three of them. The First, was occasioned by the Marriage of
his Daughter Fausta with Constantine, to whom he gave the Title of Augustus, he
having had only that of Caesar before. He was forced to undertake the Second to
shun the fury of his Soldiers, who were extremely incensed against him, for
designing to deprive his Son Maxentius of the Empire, by whom he had been
restored to the Purple, which he had freely Abdicated before. And he came the
third time into Gaul, at his return from his Journey into Hungary, whither he
went, but unsuccessfully, to Solicit Dioclesian to resume the Government; and
it was then that Constantine, perceiving the ill Design he had formed to
destory him, thought it necessary to prevent him, and caused him to be
strangled. But the Martyrdom of the Thebean Legion, does not answer to any of
these Expeditions, since they are all posterior to the Year 306. and all
Historians agree, that the General Persecution at that time began to abate in
the West. Besides, it is certain that Maximian in none of these Progresses
passed the Alps with an Army, and that his Fortune and the posture of his
Affairs at that time, did not put him into a condition to deprive himself of a
whole Legion.

Where shall we then find a fourth Expedition of Maximian into Gaul, in which
this Emperor might be supposed to have Murdered the whole Thebean Legion?
There is none left but that which is mentioned by Eutropius, and Aurelius
Victor. These two Historians agree that some Troops of Banditi or Rapperees,
who were called Bagauds, having raised a Tumult in Gaul, and put themselves
under the Conduct of Amandus and Aelianus, Dioclesian made Maximian his Partner
in the Government, and sent him in all haste with an Army to punish those
Rebels. But the time of this Expedition is not agreed upon. Petau de D^ctr.
Temp. lib. xi. cap. 31.
Father Petau relates at large the different Opinions of the Learned concerning
it, in his Book of the Doctrine of times. He thinks that Maximian's Reign began
in the Year of our Lord 285. Dioclesian being then Emperor, and vested the
second time with the Tribunitian Power; and he confutes Baronius who was led
into a mistake by a passage of Balus. in Notis ad Lactant.
Mamertine. Mr. Baluze affirms, that Dioclesian having been raised to the
Empire on the 20 of November in the Year 284. took Maximian into the Government
on the First of April, in the Year 285. and sets it down as a point universally
agreed in History, that the I wentieth Year of Maximian ought to answer his
Eighth Consulship. From whence he concludes, that Dioclesian Reigned Twenty
Years, Five Months, and twelve Days; and Maximian, Twenty Years, and a full
Month. So that if this Calculation be just, the beginning of Maximian's Reign
ought to be reckoned from the First of April, in the Year 285. Father Pagi an.
284. number; 3. p. 112.
Pagi follows the Author of the Alexandrian Chronicle, and having placed Pagi
Dissert. by^. cap. 2. number. 8.
the beginning of Dioclesian's Reign on the 17 th of September in the Year 284
he adds that Maximian was Created* Caesar on the 20 of November. the same Year.

Eutropius, and Aurelius Victor, are different in their Expression concerning
the Character which Dioclesian gave to Maximian, when he sent him into Gaul
against the Bagands. Eutropius says, Herculeum Caesarem misit, and Aurelius
Victor says, Imperatore^ jubet. Which difference occasioneth another Dispute
amongst the Critics, viz. Whether Maximian was made first Caesar, and then
Augustus, according to the usual Custom; or whether both the Dignities were
conferred on him at one and the same time. Anthony Pagi, and Henry Noris,
differ only in the time, in which they suppose Maximian was raised to the
Dignity of Augustus; and they are of Opinion that before this he was made
Caesar. But though both of them are great Masters, and seem able to pronounce
upon this Matter, yet Mr. Baluze, in his Notes on Lactantius, is for the
contrary, and alleges several Laws from whence he gathers, that Maximian was
first Created Augustus. Against which Opinion of his, a Medal of Francis
Angeloin's inscribed NOBILIS CAESAR, and on the Reverse PRINCIPI IVVENTVTIS,
was thought to make very much. But this difficulty the famous Mr. Cuper, in his
Notes on Lactantius has removed. Where he observes, that this Medal ought to
be referred to Galerius Maximianus, by reason that several of his are found
with the same Inscriptions, which are not upon any of the Medals of Herculeus
Maximianus, Collected by Count Mezabarba.

But the Subject we have before us does not require that we should trouble our
selves about these Chronological questions. We are in search of the time when
Maximian took another Journey into Gaul, not mentioned by Lactantius. Now the
difficulty is not to find out that time, seeing it is circumstanced both in
Eutropius, and Aurelius Victor, by two Memorable Events; one of which is his
Exaltation to the Empire, and the other the Bagaudian Revolt under their
Leaders Amandus and Aelianus. Both which do show, that he undertook the
Gallican Expedition in the Year of our Lord* 285. to Wit, at the beginning of
his Reign, and above Eighteen Years before he took his other Journies spoken of
by Loctantius. But our business is to examine, whether we can fix the Martyrdom
of the Thebean Legion to that time. And the Dispute is at an end, if we give
Credit to those Acts of the Agaunian Martyrs, which both Surius and Baronius
have followed. For there mention is made of the Bagauds, of Amandus and
Aelianus, of Maximian s Assumption to the Empire, and of his Expedition into
Gaul with the Thebean Legion. All which does agree well enough with the time we
have assigned for the same Expedition. And it is strange, that Cardinal
Baronius, who has followed the Acts of Surius, and ought consequently to have
joined the time of the Bagaudian Revolt, with that of the Death of the Thebean
Soldiers, has, notwithstanding this, placed their Martyrdom in the Year 297,
viz. Twelve Years after Dioclesian had taken Maximian into the Government, and
sent him into Gaul to suppress the Rebellion of Amandus and Aelianus. And since
these two Events fell out so well to the purpose, one would wonder Father
Chifflet should be so transported, upon his finding a Manuscript in which there
is not a word spoken of the Begauds, no^ of Amandus nor Aelianus, if it were
not that King Sigismond unluckily appeared there also amongst the rest. For as
these two concuring Events very much favored the Martyrdom of the Thebean
Legion, so what is there related of St. Sigismond made it evident, that St.
Eucherius could not be the Author of the Acts of that Martyrdom, since he Dyed
several Years before this Prince came into the World. Bollandus thought he
might save the Credit of this piece, prove it to be the work of this Holy
Bishop of Lions, and remove the Anachronism, by saying, that there was formerly
a Monastery at Agaunum, and that King Sigismond only repaired and beautified
it. But because it is but a poor shift, destroyed both by the Acts of Surius,
and the Accounts which all the Historjans give of that Martyrdom, Father
Chifflet was overjoyed upon his finding a Manuscript, wherein not the least
mention is made of King Sigismond, or of the Bagaudian Insurrection. We have
already declared how good an Opinion we have of Father Chifflet's integrity,
which we don't pretend to retract. Nevertheless, if he be not the Man who has
helped this place out of the Acts of the Martyrdom of the Thebean Legion, no
Body ought to find fault with us, if we suspect that some others might have
conjured it away. Whatsoever may be the Antiquity of Father Chifflet's
Manuscrpit, sure Theod* Ruin. Praf. in Act. Man. alii r^se^uerunt non nulla qua
in illis Act is displicebant.
it is that Impopostors are yet much ancienter than it. Now I hope Father
Ruinart will not except against us, for making some advantage of the Advice he
himself gives in his Answer to Mr. Dodwel, viz. That the Collectors of the Acts
of Murtyrs have frequently added too, and lop't off such things as they did not
like.

But let us come now to the Matter it self, and examine whether the Martyrdom
of the Thebean Legion, can be made to fall in with Maximian's fourth Expedition
into Gaul, mentioned by Eutropius, and Aurelius Victor. The Emperor
Dioclesian, fearing lest the Gallican Revolt should be of dangerour
consequence, assumes him into the Government, to the end, that by his
assistance he might with more ease to himself undergo the weight of it; He
raises an Army with all speed to suppress this threatening Insurrection in its
Birth; then it is supposed that he sent for the Thebean Legion from the East,
to serve in the Expedition. And yet they needs will have it, that having passed
the Mountains with them, and in a manner facing the Enemy, such a Frenzy of
superstition on a sudden seized him, as made him weaken his Army by the
Martyrdom of this whole Legion. We took Notice before, that the Author of this
Romance was not very cautious in observing the Rules of probability, But
because some things may be true, though they do not seem very probable, we
shall therefore add something of more weight than mere Conjeures, for the proof
of our Assertion.

First then, let a Man be never so little versed in Roman History, he will find
no ground there to believe, that Maximian, being but lately admitted to a share
in the Empire, should by his own single authority cut off a whole Legion. For
though Dioclesian had made him Augustus, Eutrop lib. 10. Divisusque inter eos
Romanus Orbis.

Oros. lib. primi Imp. Romans in du^s parts determinaverant.


yet were they Masters in Common, and joint sharers of the Provinces, Arms, and
Legions of the Empire. Galesius and Constantius were the First that shared the
Empire. This the City of Rome took very ill, looking upon it as a diminution of
its Power and glory. But this sharing of the Empire ending in the Victories
which Constantine got over all his Competitors, Rome became again the Mistress
of the Universe. Whereupon the Poet Porphyrius, in a Poem which he composed in
the 15 th Year of this Prince, has these words.

-- lacera cruentis
Imperii pars fessa Poli, diversa gemehat
S^eptra, and Ausoniae moerebat perdita jura.
During the Division of the Empire, each Emperor acted as he pleased in his
own District, and was under no obligation to Communicate his Affairs and
Conduct to the other Emperors; whereas when the Empire was possessed jointly
by two or three Emperors, they Consulted one another in all Affairs of
Importance, because each had an equal right to the whole, Aequo Jure, as
Eutropius says, speaking Eutrop. lib. 7.
of Marcus Aurelius, and of Lucius Verus. Whence we may judge, if it be possible
in reason to suppose, that Maximian would of his own head have Commanded a
whole Legion to be put to Death, and without so much as Consulting Dioclesian,
have alarmed all the Christians throughout the Empire by so violent a
Persecution. It Is true indeed, if the loss of a whole Legion, cut off by the
Command of a Choleric and Enraged Prince, were to be looked upon as a trifling
matter, and of no consquence to the State, there would have been no great need
for Maximian upon this occasion, to have asked the Advice of his Colleague; but
I question much, whether any considering Person will think it so.

Secondly, Let us reflect upon what the Historians tell us of the Reign of
Dioclesian and Maximian till the time they begun to persecute the Christians,
and we shall find that they represent those times to us, as times of Ease and
Plenty, and they speak of their Government as managed with Clemency and
Moderation. Mamert. in gene^hli^ su^ finein.

Vt vero lucem ^en^ibus extu^istis, exi^ de soluta res (...) j^g^^er mar^nt.

Eus^b. lib. 8. cap. 12. and 13.


Matermin tells Maximian, that no sooner had the Light of his Government shined
upon the Empire, but it overspread all places with peace and security.
Eusebius, in the 12 th and 13 th Chapter of the 8 th Book of his
Church History, cannot forbear making frequent mention of the Happiness, which
both the Church and Empire enjoyed before Dioclesian and Maximian had resolved
to Exterminate the Christians. Who can express (says he) the Prosperity and
Plenty which the Empire enjoyed, so long as those who Governed were well and
kindly affected toward us. He had said before, we want Words to express the
great value and esteem which the Doctrine of our Blessed Savior met with
amongst the Greeks and Barbarians, and the perfect Liberty and Tranquillity
which the Professors of it enjoyed before the Persecution which was raised
against the Church in our Days. The particular affection the Emperors showed
toward those of our Religion, and the Honor they did them, in conferring upon
them the Government of Provinces, without obliging them to Sacrifice to their
Idols. And a little after he adds. Who can recount the great numbers of those
who came over every Day to make profession of our Faith; how many Churches were
Erected in every City, and in what Crowds came People to pay their Homage to
God; insomuch, that the Ancient Buildings proving too narrow to receive them,
it was necessary to have others built more large and capacious. Neither could
the Envy of Devils, or Malice of Men, put a stop to this Progress of
Christianity, so long as the People of God were not unworthy of his Almighty
Protection and Favor. But when the excessive Liberty we enjoyed, had slackned
the strictness of our Discipline; so that we begun to make War amongst our
selves with abusive and bitter Words; and Bishops Incensed against Bishops,
raised dissentions and disorders; in a Word, when Malice and Couzenage were
come to their height, then Divine Justice lift up his Hand to punish us, First
gently, as it uses to do, and permitted those amongst the Faithful, who made
profession of Arms, to be Persecuted first. Now, who can believe that the
Thebean Legion was Massacred at the time here described by Mamertine and
Eusebius? Can any one Style that a Reign of Peace, Meekness, and Felicity, in
which above Six Thousand Six Hundred Persons were at one time inhumanly
Murdered? It Is supposed that Maximian Commanded them to be put to Death, upon
their refusal to Sacrifice to Idols, and yet Eusebius told us just now, that
both Dioclesian and Maximian conferred the Government of Provinces on
Christians, without any obligation to Offer Sacrifice. It was then the Custom
amongst the Romans, that the Proconsuls, the Governors, and other Magistrates
should Sacrifice to the Gods, to the safety and Genius of the Emperors, and
should be present at all the public Sacrifices Offered to them; which is the
Reason, that the first Christians shunned those Employments as very dangerous
baits, and occasions of Sin. But their Exemplary integrity being without doubt
a motive to the Emperors, to desire they might be employed in places of
public Trust, Eusebius observes, that they acquitted them from the (...).
obligation of doing Sacrifice, (as Mr. de Valois Reads that passage out of the
Manuscripts of the Medicean, and the Mazarine Libraries) It Is true, that
Eusebius says, that the Faithful who made profession of Arms were Persecuted
first. But this cannot be applied to the Martyrdom of the Thebean Legion. For
it is supposed that this Legion was Barbarously Massacred; and Eusebius speaks
of (...).
a Persecution, whereby God did only Gently and Modarately chastise the Church.
But certainly the Martyrdom of a whole Legion cannot be called a light and
gentle Chastisement.

But Thirdly, these last Words of Eusebius show clearly, that it is not
possible to make the Martyrdom of the Thebean Legion, f^ll in with Maximian's
Expedition into Gaul against the Begauds. Eusebius having said expressly, that
the faithful who made profession of Arms were Persecuted first, we need only
find out the time when that Persecution against the Soldiers begun. For if it
was in the Year 285. we may suppose, indeed, that the Thebean Legion was then
Condemned to Death, since it was about that time that Maximian was taken into
the Government, and caused the Legions to March into Gaul, to suppress the
Rebelion of Amandus and Aelianus, as Eutropius, and Aurelius Victor relate. But
what will they say, if the Persecution of the Soldiers did not begin till
above Twelve An^h. Pagi ad an. Chapter 298.
Years after that time. Father Pagi places it in the Year 298. and Mr. Dodwel in
301. whose Reasons may be seen in his Dissertations upon St. Cyprian. But
without entering upon these Disputes of Chronology it will be sufficient to
prove that the Persecution of the Soldiers happened several Years after
Maximian's Expedition Lactant. de Mort. Perse^. cap. 10.
into Gaul. Now the Account which Lactantius has given, both of the time and
occasion of the Persecution of the Thebean Soldiers, leaves no place to doubt
of it. He says, that Dioclesian being anxious about the Success of the War
against the Persians, which he had left to the Conduct of Galerius, Consulted
the Aruspices concerning the Event thereof, and adds, that the Inspector having
told him, that the presence of the Christians hindered him from making any
Discovery in the Entrals of the Victims* the Emperor thereupon Commanded that
the Soldiers should Sacrifice to the Idols, and upon refusal should be drawn
out of their respective Ranks, and Disbanded. Mr. Baluze, on this place of
Lactantius, says, that Eusebius has very well observed, that the Persecution
begun with the Soldiers; and that really none but those who served in the Army
were at first Persecuted. We ought especially to observe Lactant. de Morte
Persecut. cap. 10.

E^^am milites cogi ad n^fanda Sacrificia prae^ipit, ut qui non paruissent
mili^ia solverentur. Hactenus furor ejus and ir a processi^.


that Lactantius says expressly, that the Emperors Anger and Fury against the
Soldiers proceeded no further at that time than to Cashier them. Which Act of
his, Eusebius calls a punishment; for amongst the Romans to be Cashiered and
turned out of the Army, was accounted a great shame and disgrace, as Hirtius
tells us, speaking Hirtius lib. 5. ^e Bello Africano.
of the African Wars. However, Eusebius is in the right, to call this Ignominy a
light and gentle Punishment, in comparison of the other Evils which the
Christians suffered some Years after. Therefore Sulpitius Sever. lib. 2. page
387.

Sed id inter Persecu^i^nes um computatu^. Ade^ res (...) nego^^^ f^it quam ut
ad Ecclesiarum v^lnera perveniret.


Sulpitius Severus, after having said that Licinius contending for the Empire
with Constantine, Commanded the Christian Soldiers either to Sacrifice to the
Idols, or to lay down their Arms, adds, but we don t reckon this amongst the
Persecutions, as being too inconsiderable a thing to deserve a place amongst
the Wounds which the Church received. Had the Thebean Legion suffered Martyrdom
at that time, they would certainly have been reckoned among the Soldiers who
suffered Persecution; and because so great and remarkable an Event as this
could not have escaped the knowledge both of Eusebius and Laciantius, it is not
likely the latter would have said, that the Emperors did only at first Cashier
the Soldiers, and the former would not have called this Persecution a light
and gentle Punishment. And since it is agreed on all hands, that those who made
profession of Arms were Persecuted first, it is manifest that the Martyrdom of
the Thebean Legion cannot be referred to the Expedition which Maximian made
into Gaul, to suppress the Revolt of Amandus and Aelianus. For Maximian
undertook this Expedition some Months after his Admission to the Government,
about the Year 285. and the Persecution of the Soldiers, according to
Lactantius, did not begin till a long time after. The same Author says, that
the Persian Wars did then take up all the thoughts of the Court; whence it
follows, that this Expedition did not happen till after he had settled his
Affairs in Egypt, and severely punished those who had followed the party of
Achillaeus, and at the time when he was putting himself into a Condition to be
revenged upon Narses King of Persia, who taking advantage of the Revolt of
Egypt* made irruptions into Armenia and Mesopotamia. Which happened several Years
after Maximian's Advancement to the Empire, and his Bagaudian Expedition.

CHAP. XVI.
That it is not true, that the Bagauds were Christians, and that the Thebean
Legion suffered death for refusing to persecute them.
IT will not be amiss to take notice here of an Objection, which may perhaps be
made a against us, Viz. That it is true that the Persecution mentioned in the
precedent Chapter did not begin till near the year 298, or 301; But that
Maximian was obliged to cut off the Theb. Legion upon another account, which
was, that those People who had revolted, and went under the nickname of
Bagauds, being Christians, the Emperor was afraid least the Theb. Soldiers
who Mezeray Hist. do France avaunt Clovis live. 2. page 219.
were of the same Religion, should join with the Rebels, and therefore he
thought it the best course he could take to get himself thus rid of them, and
that This was the chief, and indeed, the true cause of their Martyrdom. Here we
are to consider what Mezeray says in his second Book of the Origin of the
French concerning this matter. These are his words. After Carinus at his
departure from Gaul had drawn thence all his Legions to go and encounter
Dioclesian; the Provinces, being freed from the Troops that kept them in awe
attempted likewise to shake off the heavy Yoke of settled Taxes, and the
arbitrary extorsions of their Governors: Which lying heaviest upon the
Country people, they took up arms first and Aelianus and Amandus, two Officers
in the Roman Army, were so unwise as to put themselves at the head of them.
Such slaves as were hardly used by their Masters, joined with them; some came
into this Party of their own accord, and others were surprised into it, several
were sollioited, but most of them scorned the invitation. This Rising was
called Bagaud, and the followers of it Bagauds or Bagaudians. Which word (as
some say) signifies Revolt, and perhaps a Revolt of such as lived in Gaud in
the old Gallick language, in low British gouer, and in High dutch wald signify
Wood.
the Woods, according to the Etymology of the word from the Ancient Celtick
Language. For it is likely that those People having no other Fortresses and
Places to retire to but Woods, they there entrenched themselves after the
manner of the Germans and Ancient Gauls. There were many Woods without doubt in
several places of that Country, but the chiefest and biggest of them was two
Leagues from Paris on the River Marne, in a place where now stands the Abbey of
St. Maur, called des Fossez, or of the Ditches, because they had dug up a
very spacious Trench to incamp there. Most of them were Christians. And who
knows, but that after so many horrid Persecutions which they had suffered,
their patience did turn at last into a just fury in arming them both against
the Torments, and their Tormentors. Maximian taking a review of his Troops near
the Town of Aoste on this side of the Alps, the Theb. Legion refused to take
the Oaths with the Ceremonies used amongst the Pagans, and being encouraged by
the Speeches of their Tribune Mauritius, chose rather to undergo two or three
Decimations, and at last to be all cut to pieces, then to desite themselves by
those abominable Rites. The whole Legion was not there, some Cohorts having
been detached, who, as we shall see hereafter in another place, signalized
themselves by a like Victory. So many brave Men who despised Death would have
sold their lives to the Romans at a very dear rate, if it had not been more
glorious to die for the Faith, which they professed, than to fight for it. I
say further that they would have strengthened very much the Bagaudian Party,
had their Religion permitted them to dissemble till they had joined them.
However Maximian having defeated some of these Bagauds and received others into
his favor, and by this means having divided them, he besieged their great
Intrenchment both by Land and by Water, with so great Vigor and Resolution,
that at last he took it. All those who were found in it were put to the Sword
without exception; and their strong works were so entirely ruined and
demolished, that nothing of them but some few Ditches remained We are to
believe, says the Author of the Life of St. Baboulene, that these Men being
Christians, and despising their lives for the sake of their Religion, passed
through Martyrdom to the Kingdom of Heaven; and though we have not their Acts
in writing, nevertheless their Memory and Names shall never be blotted out of
the Book of Life. These are the new Weapons wherewith M. de Mezeray furnishes
the Asserters of the Martyrdom of the Theb. Legion. Now all these difficulties
we are very desirous to remove, the better to clear this piece of
Ecclesiastical History. First then it is supposed in the Objection, that most
part of the Bagauds Army were Christians, and that the Emperor Maximian caused
the Theb. Legion to be cut off, for fear so many brave Men should join with and
strengthen the Rebels. Then it is said, that this Objection is taken out of an
Ancient Anonymous Writer, who has given us the Life of St. Baboulene, and who
ought therefore to be credited, by reason that these Transactions happened in
an Age nearer to his, than to our times. Our Answer to this will not a little
contribute, I hope, to discover the Falsehood of the Martyrdom of the Theb.
Legion.

And First in this Account of Mezeray, supported by the Authority of that
Anonymous Writer, we find the Christians divided in their Practice upon a very
considerable point of Morality. For some of them leaving the Plow take up Arms
against their Sovereign, and others on the contrary being up in Arms lay them
down, and patiently submit to the Execution of the barbarous Orders of their
Prince. Now to what shall we ascribe this difference in their Judgment and
practices? Was it that the Morality on the other side of the Alps differed from
that of the Gauls? Or must we attribute the cause of this difference to the
diversity of their Climates, Educations, Tempers and Manners? But we should
spend too much time should we go about to untye this knot, therefore the
shortest way is to (...) it, and to (...) positively, that both (...) of (...)
that is ^ Christianity would rather loose than get by it. The Martyrdom of the
Theb. Legion is asserted, because it is thought very honorable to
Christianity; but then to support the Assertion, and Insurrection of the first
Christians in Gaul is brought in, and a rebellious Conspiracy to shake off the
Yoke of their Masters. So that if those who set up for the defense of an
Obedience so entirely passive, have, in the Example of the Theb. Soldiers a
Legion of Martyrs to boast of: Those, who on the contrary believe, that there
are some Cases and Times, in which Patience ought to give place to other
Virtues, shall find in the Bagauds a whole Army of Christians, in Rebellion
against the Empire, to oppose to that Legion: And shall the Example of one
single Legion, be of more Weight and Consideration, then that of a whole Army?

Sulpitius Severus, lib. 2. page 283.
Secondly, Sulpitius Severus, speaking of the persecution which ac tum primum
inter Gallias Martyria visa, serius trans Alps Religione suscepta.
Marcus Aurelius raised, against the Christians, says, That that was the first
time that Martyrs were known to have suffered in Gaul, Christianity having
been received somewhat late beyond the Alps. From which words we may very
reasonably infer, That it is not likely that when Dioclesian admitted Maximian
to a Partnership in the Government, the Christians were so numerous as to form
an Army. But if to destroy this consequence, and the Authority of Sulpitius
Severus, it be replied, that there is no likelihood that the Gospel was
preached so late in France, a Country so near adjoining to Italy, since in the
time of Marcus Aurelius, the Apostles and their Disciples had published it in
the most distant parts of the World; we will oppose nothing to this Answer,
that may any way detract from the Antiquity of the French Churches. For
besides, that this would carry us too far beyond our purpose, the Persecution,
which their unworthy Posterity have raised against us, shall never lessen that
high and just respect and veneration, we have always had for the first Churches
of the Gauls. But suppose it were True, that St. Luke, St. Philip, St. Paul,
Crescent, and some other Disciples of Christ did Preach the Gospel in Gaul,
and let it be supposed likewise, That it is not without ground that Vienna,
Lions, Aix, Narbonne, Sens, Paris, Reims, Limoges, and Toulouse, do boast of
having received the Christian Religion from the Apostles, and Apostolical Men,
yet all this would not suffice, unless we should also further suppose, that
these first Preachers left there both Successors and very great numbers of
Converts. Nay, indeed it ought to be made out, That their Preaching proved very
effectual, and made considerable progress every where. But if none but well
approved Acts must be trusted, this matter will prove of greater difficulty
than may at first be imagined. The Assembly of the French Clergy having ordered
all the Bishops to send Memoirs to the Messicurs of St. Marthe, concerning the
Foundations and Antiquity of the Churches of their Dioceses; these learned Men
made to these Memoirs several Additions and Discoveries of their own, and at
last caused those large Volumes of theirs, of Christian France, to be Printed:
It Is true we find in them, that the Christian Religion was Preached in Gaul
very early by the Apostles and their Disciples; and we believe, That in that
respect, the Titles of the Gallican Churches are as good as those of many other
Churches that flatter themselves with the like belief of their having been
honored with the Presence, and the Preaching of some or other of the Apostles,
who came there in Person. But if you strictly and impartially consider the
Works of Messicurs de St. Marthe, after the Apostolic Age, you fall into a
kind of Wilderness, a large waste of almost 250 years, filled up with nothing
but fabulous Legends and uncertain Traditions, except the Relations of some few
Martyrs, as those of Lions, who shine as Stars, in so profound and long a
Darkness, all the rest being made up of nothing but groundless Suppositions, or
Acts that may easily be proved to be spurious. I have by me the Original Copy
of the Memoirs, which Artus de Lion Bishop of Gap sent to Mrs. de St. Marthe,
written by himself, and signed with his own hand. Where he proves, that St.
Demetrius, Disciple of the Apostles, was Bishop of Gap; and gives two Reasons
for it; the First is, That before the Protestants had pulled down the Episcopal
Palace in the year 1577, there were seen upon the Walls of the great Hall, the
Images of the Bishops of Gap, and that St. Demetrius was at the head of them
with these Words, Saint Demetrius the First Bishop of the Church of Gap, and
Disciple of the Apostles: And that by the Grace of God they had yet an Eye
Witness of it in their Chapter, namely Mr. Paul of Bauvais, who when he wrote
these things, was in the hundredth year of his Age. The other Authority he
produces is taken out of a Berviary, which Bertrand of Champeaux Bishop of Gap,
caused to be Printed in the year 1499, where St. Demetrius is placed in the
Calender on the 26th of October, with the Character of Bishop and Martyr, and
the Word totum Duplex, which according to the use of the Church of Gap
signifies the same as (according to the use of the Council of Trent) Duplex
primae Classis, which is proper to the Festivals of Patrons and Titulars of
Churches. After these so special and convincing proofs, who would venture now
to deny that St. Demetrius, Disciple of the Apostles, did plant the Faith in
the Diocese of Gap? That Breviary of Gap, Printed in the Year 1499. is a
curious Piece indeed. We read there in the. 8th Lesson of St. Demetrius's
Office, speaking of the Etymology of that Saint's Name, that Demetrius ex eo
dictus, quia de Medio, id est, de Mundo triumphavit: And in the fourth Lesson,
that the City of Gap, having been taken by the Sarazens, Count William beat
them out of it, and gave the half thereof for the Redemption of his Soul, to
God and to the Blessed Virgin Mary, in the Year of our Lord 86, on the Kalends
of January, in the fifth Indiction. Though it is well known to every body that
the use of the Indictions did not begin till three Hundred Years after Christ,
and that the Sarazens did not make Inruptions into Gaul till several years
after. Should we come to Examine narrowly the traditional Origins of most
Gallican Churches, we should not, I think, find much more solidity in any of
them. And especially we may observe that after the First Age, there happened to
that kind of Traditions such an Eclipse, or Discontinuation, that they do'nt
appear again till after the time of the General Persecution. And yet
notwithstanding, if we believe Mezeray and take his Anonimous Writer's bare
word for it, the Christians made a figure great enough at that time in Gaul,
to raise whole Armies against the Emperors.

However, there is no need of straining very much for to preserve to the
Churches of France their Antiquity, and to Sulpitius Serverus the Authority he
deserves in a matter of this nature. For though the Apostles and their
Disciples had preached the Christian Religion in Gaul very early, yet this
blessed Seed, as well as that in the Parable, was soon after choked by thorns,
and sprung not up again till a long time after, so that it was very late before
it came to any considerable Maturity there. Gregory of Tours gives us this way
of saving both the Authority of Sulpitius Severus, and the Antiquity of the
Gallick Church, who says, that about the Year 250, under the Reign of Decius,
the City of Toulouse had Saturnine for its Bishop, and that he came from Rome
with six others to preach the Gospel in Gaul, Viz. Gatian at Tours, Trophimus
at Arles, Paul at Narbonne, Dionysius at Paris, Astremonicus at lermont, and
Martial at Limoges These are then the new Evangelists sent in the time of
Decius, to re-kindle the Light of the Gospel in Gaul, which had been so long
extinguished there. From whence it may be gathered that the Christian Religion
had not then made any great progress amongst the Gauls, since in the Year of
our Lord two hundred and fifty there was need to preach Pagl. 214. Galliarum
nomine antiquam Narbonensem Provinci^m minime comprebendit.
it a fresh there, and even at Narbonne and Arles, Citys rather belonging to
Italy then to Gaul, and which Sulpitius meant not to speak of, if we may
believe Father Pagi. How is it possible then to imagine that four Years after
the Reign of Decius, the Christians should be so multiplied in Gaul, as to be
in a condition to make up vast Armies, and those so formidable as to strike a
terror into Rome it self, and to perplex its Emperors. This they would fain
persuade us, by Asserting peremptorily, that the Bagauds were Christians, and
that Maximian destroyed the Theb. Legion for no other reason, but because he
was afraid They should join with them.

But Thirdly, They are at a very great loss for Arguments to prove the
Martyrdom of their Theb. Legion, when they are forced to this shift of
supposing those Bagauds to have been Christians. For they cast no small blemish
upon the Ancient Gallican Church, who fix such a Character upon her Sons* and
besides they are very much unacquainted with the Morals of the Christians of
those Primitive Ages, who think they were capable of such injustice and
violences, as the Bagauds stand charged with in History. Therefore Mezeray
receiving the Bagauds into the Church, thought fit to clear them from these
odious Aspersions and to justify their proceedings. Who knows, says he, but
that having suffered so Mez. Hist. of France before Clovis lib. 2. page 219.
many horrible Persecutions, their Patience turned at last into a just Fury, in
arming themselves both against the Torments and the Tormentors. Bucherius
endeavors likewise to excuse them saying, That the Bagauds were moved to a
Rebellion Aegidius Bucherius Belg. Romans number. 6. page 220.
which was in a manner just, by reason of the Crueltys and Tyranical
Impositions of their Governors.

Bagaudas ad Rebellionem tum fere justam Praepositorum suorum acerbitatibus and
tyrannicis incitates.
Salvianus did the same before them, whom perhaps they have both followed.

Savl. lib. 5.
He says, That the Bagauds oppressed by their unjust Judges, lost all De
provincia inceperunt esse Barbari quia non permittebantur esse Romani.
respect for the Majesty of the Empire, because they had been Stripped of the
Rights and Privileges of Roman Liberty.

In short, the Emperor Augustus, the better to procure himself the good
Affection of the Gauls, had granted to some of them the Roman, to others the
Latin, and to others again the Italic Laws and Liberties. Whence Salvian took
occasion to say: We call the Bagauds Rebels and Profligate Villains, when it is
we that have hurried them into these Outrages. For how came they to be Bagauds,
but by our own injustice, by our proscriptions of their Persons, and violent
Usurpations of their Estates; and this is the effect of their being condemned
to death and hanged for the Robberies of their Judges, That they are now become
like Barbarians, because they were not suffered before to live like Romans.

That Priest of Marseilles, who wrote about the year of Our Lord 495, adds
several other things, whereby the Crimes and Violences which were imputed to
the Bagauds are laid to the Charge of the Governors of the Gauls, of their
Judges and of the Collectors of the Taxes. But he never speaks the least Word,
from whence we may conclude, that the Bagauds were Christians, but on the
contrary, his way of speaking on their behalf shows plaingly enough, that they
did not profess the Christian Religion, we need only compare his Apology with
those of Athenagoras, of* St. Austin, of Tertullian, and especially of
Arnobius, who lived at the time of the Bagaudian Revolt. These Fathers speak of
nothing so much as of the Piety, Meekness, Charity and Innocence of those happy
Ages of the Church. Whereas Salvian Apologizes for the Bagauds by excusing
their Crimes of Injustice, Violence and Rebellion. Were that true which Mezeray
says of them, perhaps Eutropius and Aurelius Victor, would have told us
something concerning their Religion. Prosper might also have taken some notice
of it, since he makes mention Eumenius in Paneg. de schol Just.
of them in his Chronology; so likewise Eumenius in his Panegyric, wherein he
informs us, that the Bagauds having besieged Autun, that City implored the
Emperor's Assistance. But it is most incredible that Marmertine would have
been silent in this Matter in the Panegyric, which he made at Treves in praise
of the Emperor Maximian. Mr. Cuper says, that he made it in the Cuper Notae
in La. p. 145. H. Noris Diss. de Number. Dio. Mammer. in Paneg. page 91.
year 288. The Learned Henry Norris puts it a year later, in his curious
Dissertations upon the Medal of Dioclesian and Maximian. Howsoever it be,
Mamertine made this public Speech but few years after the defeat of the
Bagauds; wherein he endeavors to quicken his discourse by drolling upon their
Army; and Cum Militares habitus ignari Agricolae app^tiverunt. Cum Arator
Peditem, cum Pastor Equitem, cum hostem barbarum suorum Cultorum Rusticus
Vastator institutus est.
makes a mere jest of it: That a Crew of ignorant Rusticks should pretend to the
Exercise of Arms, and Military Discipline; that the Plowman should change his
Goad for a Pike; the Shepherd leave his Flock to turn Trouper; and that the
Husband man should plunder and waste his own Estate, and destroy the Fruits of
his own Labor with as little concern as the most Barbarous Enemy would have
done.

From which sharp and pungent Expressions, One may give a shrewd Guess at what
he would have added, had the Bagauds professed the Christian Religion.
President Fauchet is One of the French Writers, who has made the greatest
discoveries in the Gallick Antiquities. But it does not appear, that he was of
Opinion, that the Bagauds Fauchet lib. 1. Antiq. Gall.
were Christians; for he says of them. The Gauls being overburdened with
public Subsidies and Taxes rose up in Arms in the year of our Lord 290 or
thereabouts, under the conduct of Amandus and Aelianus, and took the Name of
Bagauds, which some say, signifies in the old Gallick Language, Forced Rebels
or Traitors, and some are of Opinion, that they were all Peasants, and will
have it, That the Word Bagaud signifies Tribute; the heavy Taxes being in some
parts of France not many years ago, called Bagoges. These troubles were
appeased by Maximian, Scalig. in Chro. page 222.
Dioclesians Partner in the Empire. Joseph Scaliger, says, That Bagaud is not a
French Word, but the Name of a Faction or People, and that ever since the time
of Dioclesian, the Highway-men and Robbers were called Bagauds. Which agrees
with what Aur. Vict. Excitamanu Agrestium and Latronum* quos Bagaudas Incolae
Vocant.
Aurelius Victor says, That Amandus and Aelianus gathered together great
numbers of Peasants and Robbers. And that which shows it to be the Name of a
Faction or Party according to Joseph Scaliger's Observation, is, that Idacius
in his Chronology speaks of the Bagauds, who mutined in Spain in the Province
of Tarragonia, under the Kings Rechila and Theodoricus. It Is also very likely,
that they wandered from one Country to another as the Hordes of the Tartars do.
This Conjecture is seconded by what Prosper tells us of a Physician named
Eudoxius, who took shelter in the Bagaud, which then had changed In Bagauda id
temporis mora delatur.
Station. And because perhaps they lived in Tents, their Name might well be
derived from thence; since Amerbachius remarks that formerly the Tents were
called Baugas. Menage in his Origines of the French Tongue says, That Ciron
fetched the term Bagaud from the Greek (...), which signifies in Suidas to live
a Vagabond, or rambling Life, and that Mr. Bochart derived it from the Hebrew
Bagad, which signifies, says he, to revolt, (...)
though it is properly used for Perfidious. He relates besides one of the
Memoirs, which Mr. Dupuy communicated to him upon the Names which diverse
Nations and People have given to the Gangs of Robbers, or Highway-men, where
the Bagauds seem to Answer to the Vscoks of Dalmatia, the Cosaks of Poland, the
Heydukes of Hungary, the Arabs of Africa, and the Pyrenean Mikelets. So that it
makes doubtless very much to the honor of the Ancient Gallican Church to
maintain, that those Bagauds professed the Christian Religion. Thus we see what
poor shifts they are forced to make use of in defending the Martyrdom of the
Theb. Legion, when they find themselves obliged to assert that the best and
most Ancient Christians were Banditi, Rebels, and Rapperies. And besides let
the say what they will, they shall never persuade us that in the Church of the
Third Century, there were sufficient numbers of these goodly Christians to make
up an Army. So that upon the whole it seems much better to reject as we do, the
Martyrdom of the Theb. Legion as a groundless Romance, then to cast such a
scandal upon the primitive and golden Ages of the Church? But had Mazeray and
the other Writers read with attention the fifth Book of Salvian, in which he
deplores the sad misfortune and miseries of Gaul, they would never have
imagined, that the Bagauds had been Christians. The Christians being there very
numerous in his time and involved in public calamities, Salvian represents
them as Persons of a Spirit and Principles quite different from those which
Mezeray attributes to the Bagauds. What place is there (says he) where the
Magistrates and Governors of Towns do not devour the entrails of the Widows
and Orphans, nay and even of the Saints too, with whom they deal in like
manner, because either the love they have for their Religion hinders them from
making any resistance, or their innocence and humility does not leave them the
power to do it.

This was the true Spirit of the Ancient Galican Church, and we ought rather to
follow Salvian, who lived nearer to those first times of Christianity, then
Mazeray and the Legend-Writers, who say that the Christians in Gaul rose up in
Arms, and that Maximian caused the Theb. Legion to be put to the sword, for
fear they should join with and strengthen that Party. Nevertheless it is
Universally believed as a certain Truth, not only at Turin, but throughout all
Italy. All the Modern Writers speak of it after the same manner; and all the
Preachers on the Festival of the Theb. Soulders do from their Pulpits deliver
it so to the People. After the very same manner Emmanuel Tesauro, famous for
several of his other Works, and especially his History of the Kings of
Lombardy, relates the matter in the account he gives of the Martyrdom of the
Theb. Legion in his History of the City of Turin Printed in ^olio; where he
says that at the Place where St. Mauritius's Em. Tes. ^^isi. de Torino lib. 2.
page 112. Ch^ogni (...) a ^^^ove et giur^sse la guerra ^on^ro a' Christiani.
Town now stands, there was an Altar upon which the Emperor Maximian commanded
all the Soldiers of his Army to sacrifice to Jupiter, and swear hostilety
against the Christians. But Mezeray, Tesauro, and all the others have been led
into this mistake by the Acts of the Martyrs of Agaunum. For those Acts in
Surius's Copy and in that of Chisslet do attribute the cause of their Death to
their refusal to go and persecute the Christians in Gaul. Passio Mart. Ag.
C^^a hi ^^ut c^teri militum ad per^r thendam Christianorum multitudinem destin
trentur, etc.
There it is said, that they, together with the rest of the Army, were Commanded
to persecute the Christians, and that they alone refused to Execute that Bloody
Order. And a little after it follows, that the Emperor having commanded the
whole Theb. Legion to be decimated, sent new Orders, to force all those who
were left to promise that they would persecute the Christians. But this chiefly
appears in the Speech the Theb. Soldiers are made to speak to Maximian,
wherein the Author of these Acts has displayed all his Wit and Rhetoric. We
offer you, say they, the best Service our hands can perform, against all your
enemies whatsoever; but we look upon it as the blackest of crimes, to imbrue
them in innocent blood. These hands know how to fight against Wicked men and
Rebels to the Empire, but they have never yet learned to destroy good Men and
loyal Subjects etc. -- You command us to go and seck for the Christians, that
they may be brought to punishment, but there is no need for you to make these
enquiries any further, for here we our selves are Christians, and do confess
God the Father the Author of a^ things, Jesus Christ his Son, and the Holy
Ghost. This one particular related in all the Acts of the Agaunian Martyrs, to
wit, that Maximian's Army was ordered to persecute the Christians, and to
punish their Rebellion, shows evidently the Martyrdom of the Theb. Legion to be
but a counterfeit Story. Such a studied and pathetick Speech as this, which
they are made to deliver to the Emperor, is another proof of the Forgery of
their Acts. These little School Declamations would have been very unbecoming
the mouths of dying Christians and Martyrs, whose minds were wholely taken up
with the thoughts of another Life. Whenever such Speeches as these are found
in the Acts of Martyrs we may well conclude, that either those Acts are
counterfeit, or that those Speeches were added to them by some Christians of
the following Ages. The true Acts of Martyrs, are those that have been taken
out of the public Registers, Church-Offices, and Proconsular Acts. Now after
the Stentence of Death pronounced against the Christians, it was not usual
amongst the Romans to insert or add to them Mezer. Etat de la Religion dans les
Gauls live. 4. page 486.
any thing more in the public Registers. The Opinion of Mezeray upon this
matter is so just and so rational, That it is well worth reciting. In all the
Authentic Acts of Martyrs (says he) you will find an ardent Charity for God
and their Brethren, a modesty and humility so much the greater by how much they
were more constant and worthy of Glory, an entire confidence in the Grace of
God, an extreme diffidence of their own Weakness, much Meekness and Compassion
for those who were fallen, great Wisdom and Strength, and above all, continual
Prayers to God: All which godly dispositions render those other Acts, which
make Martyrs utter long Speeches and elaborate Discourses, Invectives and
Threatenings, justly suspected.

Fourthly, since Mezeray was induced to believe, that the greatest part of
Maximian's Army were Christians, only upon the Authority of the Authors of St.
Baboulene's Life, it will not be amiss to examine what can be built upon this
Writer's Authority; And i^ we cast but half an eye upon this Work of his, we
shall plainly discern that the whole from the beginning to the end of it is
made up of nothing but fabulous Legends and Fictions. The Manucript is kept at
Paris in the Library of St. Germain Des-Prez, and James Dubrcuil, a Monk of
that Abbey, made an abrigdment of it, and published it in the Year 1614. Mr. Du
Chesne inserted it some Years after in his History of France; Father Le-Cointe
takes notice of it also Le-Conte An Fr. tom. 3. p. 73. Anonymum Fabulatorem qui
gesta Regum Francorum scripsit.
in his Annals, and rejects it as altogether unworthy of credit; for he
observes, that this Writer exactly follows in every thing that Anonymous
Impostor, who wrote the Acts of the Kings of France; of which he gives these
following particulars. First, That he makes Erchenald Major of the Palace in
the first Year of Clovis, whereas Fredegair calls him, who was then in that
Office Aeganes. Secondly, that he confounds Aubert, Bishop of Paris under King
Clovis, with Agilbert, who was Bishop of that ^^e under Clotary. Son to Clovis.
Thirdly, that of two Baboulenes, one of whom was Abbas Bob^ensis, and the other
Abbas Fosatensis, he makes but one. Fourthly, That he reckons but 85. Years
from the Death of Clovis the first to the Death of Clovis the second; Fifthly,
That he makes Clovis the second to succeed his Father Dagobert in the Year of
our Lord 643, in the first Indiction. And several other faults he finds in the
same Author all contrary to the known truth of History. But a most notable one
is his Saying, that the Abbey of St. Maur des Fossez is situate in the place
where formerly the Camp of the Bagauds was, and that they encamped there
because there was then standing an old Castle, built by Julius Caesar, enclosed
with Walls, and secured on all sides with large Ditches. The truth is, that
that Abbey of St. Maur is called by several Writers of the Later Ages Castrum
Bagaudarum. Mr. Menage in his Origines upon the Word Bagauds says, that in a
Charter of the Abbey of St. Maur, granted in the Year 868. St. Maur des Fossez
is called Castrum Bagaudarum, and adds because Anciently it was a Fort of the
Bagauds. But who told that Anonymus Author, that Julius Caesar had built there
a noble Castle, Nobiliter Constructum. He is the only Writer who speaks of that
Castle, there is not the least mention of it in the Commentaries of Julius
Caesar, though all his Actions in Gaul are therein Written with the greatest
exactness. Moreover, this Oros. lib. 9 cap. 25.
Impostor makes Orosius to say things, which he never thought of. For Orosius
says, that Amandus and Aelianus having got a considerable number of Peasants
together, raised great disturbances in Gaul, which Obliged Dioclesian to
create Maximianus Herculeus, Caesar, and to send him thither, who being a Man
of considerable experience in War, easily dispersed that Army of Peasants which
was altogether without Order and Discipline. But this Anonymous Scribler makes
Orosius to say, That Amandus and Aelianus were Christians, and that they
revolted only, because they thought that their Religion did not allow them to
obey Pagan Princes. It is a strange impudence this, first to invent Fables, and
then for the confirmation of them, to quote a Famous Historian. If we take this
Authors quotation out of him for truth, Orosius attributes very Noble and
Evangelical Morals to the Christians of the Third Century, in making them shake
off the Authority of their lawful superiors, only because they were not
Tirlemont 2. p. ^om. 3. page 868.
of their own Religion. Monsieur de Tirlemont makes a Remark very su^iable to
the purpose. It is upon the Acts of St. Maximus, related by Baronius in the
year 254. There arises, says he, yet greater difficulties from what Optimus
says, That the Edict of Decius, commanded all Christians to forsake their
Superstition, and to acknowledge their lawful Prince, on whom all things
depended, and to Worship his Gods. Against which Mr. Tirlemont with great
reason does except thus. What does all this mean? Should then the Christians
have made any difficulty to acknowledge Decius for their Emperor? By no means.
But the truth is, that though they were the most Submissive and Truest Subjects
to their Princes, Nevertheless, because they did not prefer them to God
himself, they were deemed to fall from the duty of their Allegiance. In fine,
this Anonymous Writer of Mezeray's relates the Martyrdom of the Theb. Legion
very differently, both from the counterseit St. Eucherius, Surius, and Father
Chifflet. For he says, that Maximian having ordered, that all the Soldiers of
his Army should swear upon the Altars of his Gods, Sacrifice to them, and
oblige themselves by an Oath, that they would persecute the Christians
wherever they should meet with any of them: Mauritius answered for the whole
Theb. Legion under his Command. We know, O Emperor, how to fight against
Rebels and Wicked Persons; but we know not how to make War upon Good Men, and
our own Fellow Subjects: Though we are all well Armed, yet we do'nt make any
resistance, as being more willing to have our own blood shed, than to shed that
of others. So without any more ado they stretched out their necks to the
Executioners, and were raised by their Torments to the glory of Paradise. And
thus this Anonymous Author leads us immediately to the end of his Romance,
whereas the supposed St. Eucherius, after Maximian has given his barbarous
Orders, makes the Theb. Legion to withdraw; supposes, that it refuses to march;
says, that it was only decimated at first; makes the Emperor to reiterate his
Orders, relates their Speech to this Prince; and so entertaining his Reader
with a great number of intervening particulars, he at last brings him to the
Catastrophe of his Tragedy. Whence it follows, that the Martyrdom of the Theb.
Legion is not originally found but in false and supposititious Writings, and
was only related at first by Impostours. One invented and published the Story
of this Martyrdom, Another vouched for the Truth of that Narrative, by another
of his own: And upon the credit of these two Relators, hundreds of others
believed it, and at last it became a common Opinion in the World. For a Tale
never misses to be credited, when it begins to grow ancient; and we see every
day, that when any Relation has passed for current for fifty or threescore
years, it is then almost too late to Contradict, or call it in Question.

CHAP. XVII.
That it is not True, That some Cohorts of the Theb. Legion were detached out
of Maximian's Army to March against Carausius.
TOWARD the end of the counterfeit Agaunian Acts there is a passage which
affords us another proof, that this Story of the Theb. Legion is a Forgery. Ex
eadem Legione fuisse dicuntur etiam illi Martyrs, Ursus and Victor quos
soloduro passos fama confirma^, etc.
It was, says the Author, a common report, That Vrsus and Victor, two Soldiers
of that Legion, suffered death for Christ at Soleurre.

If we ask the Legend Writers, how it came to pass, that these two Theb.
Soldiers left their Legion, and were martyred so far off in Suisserland, they
answer, that Maximian upon his March into Gaul, to compose the Bagaudian
troubles, was informed that Carausius had revolted, and seized on both the Port
of Bologne and the Navy which the Romans kept there. Which news obliged him to
make a great detachment of his Army, and to send it in haste down the Rhine
against this Rebel. They add, that there were amongst this detachment some
Cohorts of the Theb Legion, all the Soldiers whereof were massacred upon the
roads, upon the news of what had happened at Agaunum to the body of the Legion;
so that Vrsus and Victor were put to death at Soleurre: Three Hundred and
Eighteen were thrown into a Well at Colen, and the rest in several places
suffered Martyrdom. If you ask them further, who told them all these
Transactions and Particulars, they cite you one Helinaud a Monk of the
Cistertian Order, and Author of the Acts of Florentius, Cassius, Victor, Gerion
and several other Soldiers of the Theb. Legion. These Acts are found Sur. romans
5. 10. Octo. Bar. romans 2. an. chapter 297. number. 18.
in Surius on the 10th of October, where he puts the death of these pretended
Saints; and it is strange, that Cardinal Baronius should not scruple to follow
these Acts, and to make use of them, when they are full of such visible and
Palpable Untruths; unless he did it for the reason we have formerly given, viz.
That in examining the Martyrdom of the Theb. Legion so many Apocryphal Authors
and supposititious Writings do occur by the way, that it is very troublesome to
get rid of them. Which thing however, far from being favorable to that
Martyrdom, ought the rather to render it more su^picious, seeing that nothing
can be produced in its defense but spurious and counterfeited Acts. But let us
hear what Helinaud himself says, he tells us; That the Emperor Maximian
marching against the Bagauds had notice given him, that Carausius was forming
some enterprise against the Empire; That this Carausius was a Man of quality,
and made by the Romans Governor of a Province near the Ocean and upon those
Confines of Gaul and Saxony, which the Franks, driven a second time out of
their own Country, were come to inhabit. That the Emperor upon this News gave
Orders that part of his Army should go down the Rhine; amongst which were some
Cohorts of Christian Soldiers commanded by Gerion, Victor, Cassius and
Florentius. Then he relates the Martyrdom of the Theb. Legion, upon their
refusing to adore an Idol, that Maximian set up at a place called afterward
St. Maurice, and to which he Ordered all his Army to do Sacrifice. Then he
says, that the Emperors Life-Guards followed the Detachment sent against
Carausius, and that having understood, that Cassius and Florentius with seven
others were of the Theb. Legion, they cut off their heads near Verona on the
Rhine; That Gerion marching before with three hundred and eighteen Theb.
Soldiers, the Imperial Ministers came up to them before they had heard any
thing of this massacre of their Fellow Soldiers; That all of them received with
constancy the Crown of Martyrdom in a Field near Colen, and that the
Executioners having cut their Bodies to pieces threw them into a deep Well.
Then headds, That the other Cohort com mnded by Victor was marching in great
haste to their Rendevouz, and was come to the Town of the Gauls, called by the
Inhabitants Troy, or Xanthus, in rememberance of the Old Troja, from whence
their Ancestors came. But that while they were encamping in the pleasant
Meadows, near that place, the Commissioners of the Emperor arrived, who having
massacred Victor, that Illustrious Soldier of Jesus Christ, with three hundred
and thirty other Theb. Soldiers, sunk their dead Bodies into marshy Grounds
and Ditches.

Mezeray has also suffered himself to be imposed upon by this account of
Helinaud, as well as by that other of the Anonymous Author of St. Baboulene 's
Life. Since therefore he has collected the materials of his History of France,
before the times of Clovis, out of such uncertain and adulterate writings, this
may serve as a caution to his Readers not to believe every thing he says.
Mezeray Hist. of France before Clovis Lib. 2. page 228.
This Helinaud, says he, wrote about the year 1212, but he must have taken this
Narrative from other Authors more ancient than himself. But for those which he
makes use of, we know nothing of them, I wish they had told us where that new
Troy was, which was then inhabited by the Gauls. Some are of Opinion that he
meant by it, the Trajan Colony, and that through Ignorance and Affectation they
imagined it to have been a Trojan Colony. But if there ever really was a City
in that Country called Troy, we must believe, that it was built by the Gauls,
and that they were ever afterward persuaded of their Trojan Original; being
either flattered into that Opinion by the Romans, the better to tame them by a
pretended affinity; or else attributing to themselves that Honor, as not
willing to yield in point of Antiquity to those to whom they were not inferior
in Valor. But the following Remarks will suffice to show what little certainty
there is both in the Text of Helinaud Helin.
and in Mezeray 's Commentary.

Carausius quidam Nobilis Eu. Carausius qui vilissims natus, Oros. Carausius
quidem genere infimus.
First, This Cistercian Monk makes Carausius to have been a Man of quality,
whereas Eutropius, who in all likelihood was better informed than Helinaud,
about the birth of Carausius, says expressly, that he was a Man sprung from the
very dregs of the People. Which account of him is confirmed by Orosius, who
calls him also a Man of the meanest extraction.

Secondly, Helinaud says, That Cassius and Florentius, with seven other Theb.
Soldiers suffered at Verona on the River Rhine. This Surius also relates upon
the Credit of those Acts; and Baronius has inserted them in his Annals. It Is
Baron. Martyr. Romans page 402. ad 10. Oct. Sed Verona perperam legitur loco
Bonae.
true, that this Cardinal being afterward sensible of this gross blunder, has
corrected it in his Notes on the Roman Martyrology, where he says, that
instead of Verona, we ought to read Bon, which is a Town of Germany situate on
the Rhine near Colen. But does he establish this his correction by the
authority of any more authentic Manuscript? Does he say, that he has taken it
out of a more exact Copy? Not at all. He only says, that it is his Conjecture,
Baron. ubi horum sanctorum Corpora requiescere accepimus.
because he has been told that it is at Bon, where the Relics of these two
Theb. Soldiers are kept. So that if he had been told, that their Relics were
at Basil, Worms, or Spire, he would in all likelihood have made no difficulty
in setting down any of these instead of Verona. And for the same reason another
may conjecture, that it was at Verona in Italy, because in that Town of the
Milanese, they think they have the Relics of Cassius, as Garnier a Canon
relates it in his History of St. Alexander.

Eutro. Cum apud Bononiam pertractum Belgicae and Armoricae pacandum mare
accepisset, quod Franci and Saxones infestabant.
Thirdly, Eutropius says, that Carausius was by the Romans commissionated at
Bologne, to free those Seas from the Piracies of the Franks and Saxons.

Helin.

Procurator constitutus erat Provinciae quae est juxta Oceanum, ubi Franci jam
secundo a sedibus expulsi juxta Gallorum and Saxonum consinia consederunt.


And Helinaud makes Carausius Procurator for the Romans, in a Province
bordering upon the Franks, contrary to the Geography of those times, which
places the Franks in Germany and very far from the Belgic Frontiers.

Besides, if Eutropius represents the Belgicks, infested by the Franks, he
observes at the same time, that they were Pirates who kept the Seas, and
consequently whose places of abode might have been at a great distance. ut if
any body will undertake to defend Helinaud's Relation, he will do us a kindness
to mark us out the Province, where, he says, that the Franks, when driven a
second time out of their own Country, came to settle near the Confines of the
Gauls and Saxons, and whereby it is supposed, that the Gauls and Saxons were
Neighbors. This particular we shall examine no further, but leave it to the
consideration of those that are better versed in ancient Geography.

But Fourthly, what does Helinaud mean by that Town of the Franks, to which the
Inhabitants gave the Name of Troy, or Xanthus, in remembrance of the Ancient
Troy, from whence their Ancestors came? Unless one should imagine it to have
been the same with Troy in Champaine, as some ignorant Writers have done; who
were led into that mistake by that French Name: For anciently that Town was not
called Troja, but Trecae, as appears by Ammianus Marcellinus. But Mezeray is
not to be excused, when he pretends to find any tolerable Sense in this
Discourse of Helinaud; especially, when he himself discovered so great a
blunder in it; and which made him in his Translation of this place of Helinaud,
at large, to leave out the Word Xanthus, which is the Name of the River, that
ran near the Walls of Troy, and which the Franks, as Helinaud says, gave to
their Town in remembrance of the Ancient Troy. Mezeray, who in his History of
France before Glovis, does affect to appear well versed in the old Gallick
Geography, would have been hard put to it to have produced any good Geographer
or exact Historian, that makes any mention of that Troy, built by the Franks,
after they were driven the second time out of their own Country. This is
exactly the Fable, that was revived by the Abbot Trithemius, and is by all the
Learned rejected as a Dream, though he would fain have persuaded the World,
that he collected it out of the two Famous Authors Vastaldus and Hunibaldus,
whom he makes to say, That after the destruction of Troy, some Trojans, under
the conduct of Francion, fixed their abode near the Palus Moeotis, from whence
being expelled by the neighboring Nations, they retired into Hungary, where
they built the Town, Sicambria, which they forsook afterward to make an
Irruption into Germany, where they conquered the Country of the old
Sicambrians, which they possessed till the year 420, when following the Example
of the Vandals, Visigoths and Burgundians they spread first into Gaul, and
came to settle into Gueldria; but that after having got several Victories and
driven the Burgundians and Visigoths from their Conquests, they made themselves
Masters of the greatest part of Gaul. All which agrees with the Romance which
the Cistercian Monk has given us, Baron. tom. 2. an. 297. n. 18.
and wherewith he has also set off another Romance, to wit, the Celebris
Temporum suorum Scriptor, qui eadem omnia ex Antiquioribus Monumentis accepta
brevi Sermon contexuit.
Martyrdom of Gerion and some other Theb Soldiers. Now shall we after all this
depend upon Cardinal Baronius, who cites Helinaud with such high Commendations,
calling him a Famous Writer, who took every thing he wrote out of very Ancient
Monuments, and drew them up into a Compendious History?

Fifthly, We have formerly observed, that it is very ordinary for Impostours to
thwart and contradict one another; and we must here again make the same Remark,
because in the Agaunian Tragedy, we see none but Liars and Cheats appear upon
the Stage. The counterfeit St. Eucherius says not one Word there of those
Cohorts of the Theb. Legion, detached from Maximians Army, and sent down the
Rhine to join the Body which was assembling against Carausius. But according to
his Acts, the whole Theb. Legion was at Agaunum, and suffered there. For he
says, that Maximian by one sentence condemned Un a Sententia interfici omnes
decrevit, etc.
all the Theb. Soldiers, and the more effectually to put his sentence in
execution, he caused them to be surrounded by several Bodies of his other Sic
interfecta est illa plane Angelica Legio.
Soldiers, and thus, says he, that truly Angelical Legion was slain. But if we
believe Helinaud, the whole Legion was not at Agaunum; for a great Detachment
had been made out of it against Carausius, and Gerion was Martyred near Colen
with three hundred and eighteen Soldiers, while Victor had in another place
the same destiny, with the three hundred and thirty, who accompanied him. Add
to these, the nine who suffered Martyrdom near Bonne, and you shall find, that
after Helinaud's, own reckoning six hundred fifty nine suffered in other places
then at Agaunum, where the supposititious St. Eucherius affrms the whole Legion
to have been barbarously slain.

But Sixthly, because these two Cities, Colen, and Bonne, desirous to maintain
the reputation of their Martyrs, and the worship which is paid to them, may
replay, that St. Eucherius in his Relation has followed the ordinary use of
giving the name of the whole to the most considerable part of it, and therefore
that what he says does not destroy the account given by Helinaud, Viz. That
Maximian, upon his march into Gaul to suppress the Bagaudian Insurection,
understood, that Carausius had revolted and threatened the Confines of the
Empire; which was the reason why he divided his Army and sent part of it with
all speed against this Rebel: We object, that this Answer, and the account of
Helinaud suppose, that the Revolts of the Bagauds and of Carausius happened
both at one and the same time, which suppositions cannot be proved. For
Eutropius and Orosius, who without doubt were better informed than Helinaud
concerning these two Events, do exactly distinguish them; both of them saying,
that Carausius did not begin to move till after the Bagaudian Insurrection was
over Eutrop. lib. 3.

Post haec tempora etiam Carausius qui Vilissime natus, Purpuram sumpsit and
Britannias occupavit.


And Eutropius having spoken of Amandus and Aelianus, and of the disorders
caused by the Bagauds, adds, that after that time, Carausius a Man of a very
low and vile Extraction, etc. took the Purple and possessed himself of Britain.

Orosius, loco citato, qui facile agrestium hominum imperit^m and confusam
manum militari virtu^e compescuit.

Deinde Carausius quidam genere insimus, etc.


Orosius places these two Events in the same order as Eutropius, saying, that
Maximian defeated the Bagauds, and easily dispersed their ill disciplined Army,
and that after this Expedition Carausius begun to stir.

An. Pagi an. 286. page 116.
Therefore Father Pagi having put the Bagaudian Insurrection in Henri Noris.
Diss. 1. de Number. smpp. Dio. and Max.
the year of our Lord 285, refers the Revolt of Carausius to the following year;
which the Famous Henry Noris places yet a whole year later, viz. in 287, and
though these two learned Men do not agree about the time that Maximianus
Herculeus was made Augustus, nevertheless they both say that the Troubles in
Gaul were ended, before Carausius formed any Enterprise against the Empire.
This Aurelius Victor is peremptory in; and no Man that reads him can doubt of
it.

Bagaudian
For after he has spoken of the War, he adds, That in the same Aurelius Victor.

Quo bello Carausius Menapiae Civis, fact is promptioribus enituit eoque eum
simul quiae gubernandi (quo officio adolescentiam m^rcede exercueraet) gnarus
habebatur parandae Classi, and prpulsandis Germanis maria infestantibus
praefecere.


War Carausius a Citizen of Menapia, distinguished himself with so much
Gallantry and Valor, that the Esteem and great Reputation he acquired, and the
Opinion they had conceived of his being a good Officer, as having bore Arms
from his Youth, were Motives to the Romans to make choice of him to fit out
their Navy, and to clear the Seat of the German Pirates then swarming in those
Parts. From which Words of Aurelius Victor, it will appear, that Carausius made
War with Maximian against the Bagauds, and so signalized himself by his
illustrious Actions, as moved the Romans to entrust him with their Naval
Forces; and that it was not till afterward, that being informed they suspected
him, and had resolved his Ruin, he declared openly against the Empire, put on
the Purple, and invaded Britain. So that it is certain, that the Bagaudian
Revolt was not at the same time with that of Carausius. Now since this
Carausius was personally in conjunction with the Imperial Troops, employed in
the War against the Bagauds, it makes it evident, that the Monk Helinaud was
grossly mistaken, in going about to persuade us, that Maximian in his march
against the Bagauds, detached some Cohorts of the Thebean Legion against
Carausius, who at that time threatened to invade the Fron^iers of the Empire.

CHAP. XVIII.
That no Writer for two Hundred Years after Maximian has made any mention of
the Martyrdom of the Theb. Legion.
Martyr. Romans Baron. dec. Kal. Oct. page 375.
CArdinal Baronius in his Notes on the Roman Martyrology, observes that the
Greek Church has amongst its Martyrs, one Mauritius and his Companions, who at
the time of Dioclesian and Maximian's Persecution, suffered Death at Apamea, a
City of Syria. He further says, that he was the same Mauritius who was chief
of the Thebean Legion; that the Martyrs of Apamea were the Agaunian Martyrs,
and that formerly he himself was of that Opinion, condemning Metaphrastes for
having confounded the Eastern with the Western Martyrs. And adds, Theodoret. de
Evang. verse. lib. 8.
that he was persuaded to the contrary by reading a Place of Theodoretus, Bishop
of Cyr, where he speaks of the most eminent Martyrs that were come to his
Knowledge. It would here be superfluous either to examine this Passage of
Theodoret, or the Reasons which induced Baronius to change his Opinion. It is
enough that by this Learned Cardinal's own Confession, we know that there was a
time when he thought that Mauritius and his Companions were martyred at Apamea;
which is as much as to say, that he looked upon Eucherius's Relation to be
Fabulous; and that the Latin Writers designing to do Service to the Western
Churches, had removed the Scene of this Tragedy from Syria into the Alps. We
cannot pretend to know certainly the motives which Baronius had then to call in
question the Martyrdom of the Thebean Legion. Nevertheless, there is some
reason to believe, that one of those which made the strongest impression upon
him, was the universal silence of the Ecclesiastical Writers for above Two
Hundred Years after the time in which it is supposed that this Legion was cut
to pieces at Agaunum. For indeed the Martyrdom of a whole Legion is so
considerable an Event, that had such a thing ever been, it must needs have been
taken notice of, in above a Hundred Places of Church History. And can any
pertinent Reason of this general Silence be assigned? Those who believe that a
Woman possessed the Roman See, between the time of Leo the IV, and Bennet the
III, have something to answer to those, who, as an Argument against it, press
the Churches silence for above Two Hundred Years, viz. to the time of Marianus
Scotus, who was one of the first who spoke of Pope Joan. To which they reply,
that those were very ignorant and barbarous Ages, wherein Writers were very
scarce; and that though some few of them may be found, yet the matters they
handled had no relation to the succession of Popes: That perhaps those who
treated of it were by the care and industry of the Church of Rome wholly
suppressed, or else have perished by the same misfortune, that has ravished
from us so many other Works; That Hincmarus, Photius and the Defenders of the
cause of the Emperors, against the Usurpations of the Popes Hildebrand and
Nicholas, have always spared the Chair of St. Peter and the successors of the
Apostles. What other reasons they give for this silence, may be seen in that
excellent Treatise concerning Pope Joan, lately published by Mr. Spanheim. But
now there is no substantial reason, can be given for the silence of the
Ecclesiastical Writers concerning the Martyrdom of the Theb. Legion, till about
the time of Gregory of Tours, viz. almost three hundred Years after Maximian's
Expedition into Gaul. For had there been any ground for the belief of the
Martyrdom of the Theb. Legion, two sort of Writers would have undoubtedly
spoken of it. Viz. Either those Preachers who have made Homilies, or Sermons
upon the Martyrs, or else the Compilers of Chronologies, and Ecclesiastical
Historys. We have still a great number remaining of the Sermons of those
Fathers, who lived two hundred years after Maximian's Empire, and which are
either upon all Martyrs in general, or some Martyrs in particular. It Is true
indeed we have lost Methodius's Discourse upon the Martyrs, except only a
fragment of it transmitted to us by Theodoret, the Panegyric of Martyrs, by
Theodoret. Dial. 1. p. 37. Hieron. de Script. Ec. c. 33. Genand. de Script.
Eccles. cap. 1. Cassiod. Lect. Div. cap. 32. Gennad. cap. 37.
Phileas an Egyptian Bishop, mentioned by St. Jerome, in his Book of
Church-writers, the Treatise of the Persecution of Christians, by James
surnamed the Wise, whereof Gennadius speaks with great Commendation, a Letter
of St. Jerome upon the sufferings of Martyrs addressed to Chromatius and
Heliodorus, as we are told by Cassiodorus, a Treatise of Vigilius in praise of
Martyrs, and a Letter of the Acts of Martyrs amongst the Barbarians cited by
Gennadius. And though these and several like writings are now lost, yet if the
Authors of them had spoke of the Martyrdom of the Theb. Legion, doubtless some
footsteps of it would be seen in the remaining Writers of those times, who had
occasion to make use of their Works. Methodius wrote about the year 290,
Phileas Bishop of Thinus in Egypt was beheaded in the year 311, under the
Persecution of Maximian, and had they spoken of the Martyrdom of the Theb.
Legion, Lactantius who flourished at the beginning of the fourth Century, must
in all probability have known something of it. But besides Lactantius, being an
Italian born, and called into Gaul by Constantine for the Education of his Son
Crispu^, it is very unlikely that he should have been wholly unacquainted with
so remarkable an Event, as that of the Agaunian Martyrdom, which might have
happened but thirty years before: And had he known any thing thereof, it would
have fallen in so pat to his Treatise of the death of the Persecutors, That it
cannot be imagined he would have left it out, specially when he was describing
the Cruelties of the Emperor Maximian, and the dreadful Punishments which God
inflicted upon him. Whosoever therefore shall weigh with an unprejudiced Mind
this silence of Lactantius, will doubtless be persuaded, that the Martydom of
the Thebean Legion is nothing but a Fiction.

Though the Sufferings of Confessors in general do afford a rich Field of
Eloquence to Preachers, yet it must be granted, that there is no Martyrdom more
capable of receiving Ornament from the Pulpit, and of elevating the genius and
thoughts of a Christian Orator, than the Martyrdom of this Legion. How comes it
then to pass, that of so many Fathers, who have writ Homilies in the praise of
Martyrs, none of them have ever made use of so pathetick and powerful an
Example as this would have been. Ephrem, a Monk of Syria, wrote Encomiums on
all the Martyrs of Christ, about the Year 360. Gregory of Nazianzen has
handled the same Subject much about the same time. We have the Sermons of St.
Chrysostom, upon Martyrs in general. Asterius Bishop of Amasia in Pontus, who
lived at the beginning of the Fifth Age, has made likewise a Panegyric on all
Martyrs, but none of these Fathers, nor any other who treated of the same
Matter, have made the least mention of the Martyrdom of the Thebean Legion.

If any had mentioned it, it must have been Maximus, Bishop of Turin, who died
under the Reign of Honorius, and Theodosius, Junior: For he wrote in the
Country, where it is supposed that this Martyrdom happened, and the Memory of
it would therefore have been fresh in his Days; but in all his Works there is
not one Word relating to it. We read, amongst his Writings that are yet extant,
a Sermon, De Sanctis Martyribus, which Gennadius has taken notice of, and
called, Generalem omnium Sanctorum Homiliam. But in this Sermon, there is not
the least stroke in reference to the Thebean Legion. It Is true, that amongst
his Works, there is another Sermon with this Title, In Natali Sanctorum
Taurinorum Octavii, Aventitii and Solutoris. These are the same Saints, whose
Names are seen in Capital Letters, on the Frontispiece of the Jesuits Church
at Turin. In which Church; there is a Chapel where the Relics of these
Saints are kept in an Urn, which Madam Chrestiene of France caused to be made
on purpose, with this Inscription ingraved on it, Augustae Taurinorum Patronis
Christiana a Francia. These Saints have done many Miracles, if we may believe
the Vows and Offerings hung up in their Chapel; but we may observe, that this
Sermon which we speak of, is to be found amongst those of St. Ambrose, of the
impression of Basil, in the Year 1555, with this Note in the Margent, A Sermon
of St. Maximus. The Benedictines of Paris in their new Edition of St. Ambrose,
do likewise restore it to that Bishop of Turin, and say, that St. Maximus had
been so conversant in the Works of St. Ambrose, that he sometimes uttered long
Passages out of them in his own Sermons; the doing whereof, occasioned great
Confusion in the Homilies of these Two Fathers; and they likewise judge St.
Maximus to have been the Author of the Book of Sacraments attributed to St.
Ambrose. However, Gennadius does not mention that Sermon in his Catalogue of
Maximus's Works. And Father Mabillon Mus. Ital. Tom. 1. p. 2. Gennadio duce
restitui possunt.
Mabillon publishing some new Pieces of this Father, in his Musaeum Italicum,
says, that we ought to consult Gennadius, to distinguish the genuine Works of
this Father, from those which are spurious. I should be very sorry, that this
Sermon should be disowned to belong to Maximus, for it is so principal a
support to the Cause we defend, that if there was any ground for what we are
told of the Thebean Legion, this is the very work where we should find it. But
if we look for it in the Body of that Sermon, we shall loose our labor. I have
read it several times over, but never could find one word in it relating in the
least to the Martyrdom in question. Should any pretend to make his best of the
Inscription, In Natali Sanctorum Taurinorum Octavii, Aventitii and Solutoris;
this Title does not import these Three Saints to have been Thebean Soldiers:
For those People whom the ancient Geographers called Taurini, were extended far
into the Cottian Alps, and into Liguria; so that we ought not therefore to
conclude that Octavius, Aventitius and Solutor, were Three Saints particular to
the City of Turin, because they are called Sancti Taurinorum. In St. Ambrose's
Works, printed at Basil in the Year 1555, there is Sanctorum Tauricorum. In the
Geographical Manuscript of Seldom, there is likewise (...); and who can tell
but St. Maximus might mean some Saints whose Zeal and constancy had been
remarkable amongst those People called Taurisci, who are placed by some
Geographers in the Fifth Rhetia. If we had that Manuscript of St. Maximus,
mentioned by the Benedictine Monks, in their new Edition of St. Ambrose, we
might perhaps make some other Remarks on the Title of that Sermon: But without
examining whether the Titles of St. Maximus's Sermons be ancient, and writ by
himself, here is a Proof, that Octavius, Aventitius, and Solutor, were not
Thebean Soldiers, and such a Proof that nothing can be replied against it. The
Counterfeit St. Eucherius, does not mention any of those in his Relation; but
says, that in his time none of them were known by Name, except them following,
viz. Mauritius, Exuperius, Candidus, Victor, and another Victor who suffered
Death at Soleur, with Vrsus; adding that the Names of the others were unknown
to him, but were written in the Book of Life. As we believe the Author of the
Acts of the Thebean Soldiers more modern than St. Maximus, this suffices to
convince us, that the Three Saints whose Piety this Bishop of Turin did
formerly celebrate, were not Thebean Soldiers. But to prevent all cavilling
about the time in which St. Eucherius might have written, we shall produce
other Writers, who lived some Ages after St. Maximus. Ado, died about the Year
of our Lord, 875. This Ado who was Archbishop of Vienna, has collected all
the Names of the Thebean Soldiers that were Ado Martyr. 7. Kal. 7. bris.
heard of in his Time, thirteen whereof he reckons in his Martyrology, to wit,
Mauritius, Exuperius, Candidus, Molossus, Victor, Innocentius, Vetalis Gerion,
Victor, Orsus, Alexander, Secundus and Antoninus. Amongst which we find not
either Octavius, Aventitius, or Solutor. Now Vienna being but fifty Leagues
distant from Turin, had these Saints, whose Memory was celebrated in Piedmont,
been generally thought to have been Theb. Soldiers, there is no Likelihood,
that Ado would have left them out of his Catalogue. This reason is yet more
confirmed by Vsuard's silence upon it, who was a Monk of St. Germains, and
contemporary with Ado He formed the design of making a Martyrology both more
exact and copious than any that had appeared before: For he thought, that St.
Jerome and Beda had handled this matter too carelessly; and it is even reported,
That the Emperor Charles the Bald, to whom he dedicated his Book, had set him
at work. And therefore it is more likely, that he did every thing answerable to
the Zeal of his Age for Martyrs and Relics. Which notwithstanding, his
diligence and all the care he took, could effect no more than the Discovery
which he made of two other Theb. Soldiers, namely Cassius and Florentius, who
are also recorded by Helinand, But further, had it passed for current, at that
time, that the three Saints in St. Maximus's Sermon were Theb. Soldiers, it is
very improbable, that they could have escaped the diligent Search of Vsuard. If
after this, any one should allege to us the Lives of Saints, as the Legends of
Octavius, Aventitius and Soluter, we have no other Answer for them, but that
there are none so blind, as they that will not see. But since it has so fallen
out, that Maximus his Sermon has given us an occasion to speak of St. Ambrose,
we ought not to pass by, without some Reflection, the Silence of this Father in
this particular, viz. concerning the Theb. Legion and their Martyrdom, though
in an hundred places of his Works, he speaks of Saints and famous Martyrs in
general. The time he lived was not long after that, wherein it is supposed,
that the Theb. Legion was cut off. He was Bishop at Milan, not very far distant
from Agaunum, where this Martyrdom is said to have happened, and he had
conversed sometimes with Theodorus Bishop of Octodurum or Martigni, where
Agaunum is situated Both these Bishops were present at the Council of Aquileia,
assembled to give a decision in the cause of Palladius and Secundianus, Arrian
Bishops in Illyria. They met again at Milan, where Theodorus signed the Letter,
which St. Ambrose and the other Bishops wrote to Pope Siricius, concerning the
condemnation of Jovinian, who had uttered blasphemous Expressions against the
Virginity of the Blessed Mother of God. And though the false St. Eucherius, in
the Letter already related, does write to the Bishop Salvius, That Theodorus,
whom he calls vir anterioris Temporis had informed Isaac Bishop of Geneva of
all the circumstances of the Martyrdom of the Thebean Legion, it does not
appear, that he ever spoke of it to St. Ambrose, seeing there is not the least
notice taken of it in all the Works of this Father.

But let us come now to another sort of Writers, and ask the Fathers, who have
composed Chronologies or Church-Histories. These perhaps will tell us something
of the Martyrdom of the Theb. Legion; for this is not so inconsiderable a
Transaction as can be supposed to have been overlooked, or lost amongst the
Crowd of those great Events, which they had to relate. It is a memorable matter
of Fact, worthy of their Pens, and to be recommended to Posterity; for it is
the Martyrdom of a whole Legion, and the most Famous Historians of the Church,
either lived at the time of this supposed Martyrdom, or wrote about a hundred
Years after; I mean Eusebius, Socrates, Sozomen, Theodoret, Evagrius, Jerome,
Orosius, Sulpitius Severus: If this Martyrdom were true, it is impossible, that
they should have been ignorant of it, and had they known it, it is not to be
imagined, they would all have conspired together to leave us in the dark about
it.

To begin with Eusebius, of whom those who favor him least, as Joseph
Scaliger, do Mr. le Prefident Cousin dans son advertissementa. le Histoire de
Eusebe.
yet agree, that with great care he has searched into the Original Pieces
concerning the Foundation of the First Sees, the succession of their Bishops,
the Persecutions moved by enraged Pagans against the Primitive Christian
Religion, the many Conflicts of the Blessed Martyrs, for its Defense and the
Victories which their Faith and constancy have obtained over Infidelity and
Error. St. Jerome, or whosoever is the Author of the Letter to Chromatius and
Heliodorus, agrees with the Remarks of President Cousin upon the care and
diligence of Eusebius in collecting the Acts of the Martyrs. It is said in that
Letter, that the Emperor Constantine at his arrival at Cesarea permitted
Eusebius to ask him whatever he had most a mind to, and that Eusebius desired
him to command, that they should send him from all the Courts and Tribunals of
Judicature throughout the Empire, all the Processes, Trials and Sentences
concerning Martyrs, that so he might be particularly informed of their right
Names, Qualities and Numbers, and also of the different kinds of their Torments
and Death, and of the Provinces, Towns, and Days of their Excecutions, and
lastly with what Patience and Courage they had suffered their Torments.
Therefore Antipater Bishop of Bostra in Arabia, thinking to obscure the Glory
and Reputation of Eusebius, said in his confutation of Origen's Apology. I
allow Eusebius to be excellently versed in History, and that there is nothing
in the Monuments of Antiquity which he is unacquainted with; but the Emperors
Authority favoring his design, it was an easy thing for him to gather up
whatever Writings were scattered all over the World. So that Eusebius having so
many ways of being imformed of the Truth, of the Agaunian Martyrdom, no body
can deny but he is a well qualified Witness, to be called and heard upon this
Matter of Fact. And so much the rather, because he not only was alive at the
time of this Martyrdom, but of age to know what was then transacted. In the
first Book of Constantine's Life he says, that in his youth he first saw this
Prince in Palestina, in the Retinue of the Emperor Dioclesian; And in the
Third Book of his Church History, speaking of Dionysius of Alexandria, (...).
he says, that it was in his time that he was raised to the Honor of the
Episcopal Chair; seeing therefore that it is agreed on all hands, that
Dionysius of Alexandria dyed in the twelfth Year of the Empire of Gallienus's
Reign; Eusebius his Birth must necessarily precede the Death of this Prince.
The Learned Doctor Cave conjectures, that he was born about the Year 270. As to
the time of Gallienus's Death we are under great uncertainties. Cardinal
Baronius placeing it in the Year 269, upon the Testimony of Eusebius, who will
have him to have Reigned but fifteen years, but Antonio Pagi is of a different
opinion and thinks he lived some few Years longer and this upon the Authority
of a Medal of Gallienus; spoken of by Mezabarba, with this Inscription P. M.
TR. PO. XVI. CON. VII. So that it appears to be a difficult thing to assign
precisely the time of Eusebius his birth. But it is not our business here to
cast the Horoscope of this Father, or to make an exact Calculation of the time
of his Nativity, it is sufficient to our purpose that the circumstances here
specified will make it appear that Eusebius was at least fifteen or sixteen
Years old, when Maximian went into Gaul, in the Year 285, the very time
wherein the Theb. Legion was supposed to have been Massacred. We are then much
in the right to produce Eusebius, in this cause as a Witness very fit to inform
us about the Truth of Falsehood of the Martyrdom of the Theb. Legion. But in
all his Works there is not one Word spok'n either of this Legion, or of this
Martyrdom. However he had often a fair opportunity to speak of it, seeing that
his whole Ecclesiastical History is chiefly filled up with long accounts of the
Persecutions and Conflicts of Martyrs. His Eighth Book is nothing but an ample
Narrative, both of Dioclesian and Maximians Cruelties, and of all the great
Examples of Zeal and Constancy, which the Christians of all Orders and
Conditions soever gave in those times. If any ancient Writer had occasion to
speak of the Theb. Legion, without doubt it was Eusebius, but since he has
said nothing of it, his silence is an Historical Demonstration, that it is only
a mere Fable. To this we might add, that the same silence is observed by
Socrates, Sozomen, Theodoret and Evagrius, who have now and then picked up some
Facts that are wanting in Eusebius; That St. Jerome who has followed Eusebius
in his Chronology, and carefully collected those things that have escaped his
knowledge, says nothing of the Theb. Legion; That Sulpitius Severus, whose
Ecclesiastical History goes beyond the Era of Martyrs, and who is so much
noted for his great credulity, and fondness of opinion about Saints and
Miracles, had not heard of it at the beginning of the fifth Age; That we find
it not in Paulus Orosius, who speaks of the Bagauds, of Amandus and Aelianus,
of Maximian's Expedition into Gaul, and greedily swallows any thing that does
but serve his turn, whether Dupin. Nov. Bibl. ^om. 3.
well grounded or no (as Monsieur Dupin observes) Voss. de Hist. Lat. lib. 2.
cap. 14.
and sometimes even debaseth the Dignity of History so much as to insert into
it mere popular Reports (according to Vossius's Judgment.) However the Fable of
the Theb. Legion, being not yet brought into the World in the Reign of the
Emperors Arcadius and Honorius, wherein he lived, we do not see, he has
adorned the Seven Books of his History with the recital of it. It remains then
only for us to examine, whether according Joannis Launoij Diss. de Auth. Arg.
neg. p. 190.
to the Principles of the Doctors of the Romish Church, we may not infer a good
Conclusion from this Negative Argument. John Launoy a Doctor of Paris in his
Dissertation upon the Authority of Negative Arguments, lays down this Rule,
that we may reasonably conclude the untruth of a Fact from it is not being
attested either by contemporary Writers, or by any Author within two hundred
Years after. He confesses, That this Space of two hundred Years is indeed too
long; but that he feared, if he had chalked out a shorter, he should thereby
have drawn upon himself the reproaches and calumnies of most People, who are
not willing, that too strict a Search should be made after Truth. But what if
Mr. de Launoy had been so very complaisant to the Monks, and the Admirers of
Fables and Legends, as to throw 'em in the other fifty Years, yet this would not
in the least have weakened the strength of our Argument, since that it is almost
Three hundred Years after Maximian's Expedition into Gaul, that not one Writer
has spoken of the Martyrdom of the Theb. Legion. It Is true, that upon the
Superstitious Party of the Popish Church's being alarmed by Mr. de Launoy's
Book, because they saw, that the Method in it was like to pull down a great
number of their Saints, and would bring into contempt their Miracles and
Relics, John Baptist Thiers, a Divine of Paris, endeavored to re assure them
by a Dissertation in answer to that of Mr de Launoy, which indeed he did not
think worth his while to answer, or to show the vanity of his Arguments and
Evasions. Now this is the Tenet of John Joann. Bap. Thiers Exercit. (...) 53.
part. 6.
Baptist of Thiers: We grant that a negative Argument ought to be of some force
in Historical Accounts, when in matter of very ancient Facts, the Argument is
taken from the general silence of Grave, Learned and Diligent Writers, who were
not lightly wrought upon, but prudent in their Judgment and Choice, and who
have succeeded one another during many Ages. Where notwithstanding that all his
Words be exactly measured and fitted to his design, viz. to render negative
Arguments of no use, by putting them under impossible conditions, etc. yet
nevertheless we desire no other concessions, than what he himself grants: For
the Fact here in question is very Ancient, and no body can deny but the Writers
here spoken of, are some of the most Grave, Learned and Diligent that ever
appeared in the Church; and that for a continued succession of two or three
Ages, and yet not one of them but is wholly silent upon the Martyrdom of the
Theb. Legion. Now after this long silence, on the one side, let us see who
those were who first opened their Mouths on the other, and who should these be
but two Authors who lived toward the end of the sixth Century; Greg. Turon.
lib. 10. Hist. Franc. cap. 3. and Glor. Miracul. cap. 76. Venant. Fortun. lib.
2. carm. 15.
namely Gregory of Tours and Venantius Honorius Fortunatus; the latter of which
was a Poet, and consequently more likely to make use of their old Privilege in
the Verse, Pictoribus atque Poetis, He has Translated into Verse an Abridgment
of St. George's Legend, which Baronius confesses to have been originally writ
by the Arrians. Seeing then that this Poet was so grossly mistaken in
attributing the Character of a Saint to one who was an Arrian and a wicked Man,
may we not think but his credulity might have been likewise imposed upon
concerning another matter of Fact, of an older date than this was? Dupin Nov.
Bibl. Tom. 5. p. 90.
And as for Gregory of Tours, Mr. Dupin observes, that he was very credulous and
easy in the matter of Miracles, and made no scruple of recounting uncertain and
fabulous Histories. Which agrees with what Abbot Hilduinus wrote concerning him
to the Emperor Lewis: We ought to Pardon the Simplicity of this Pious Man, for
having written several things contrary to the Truth of History, not indeed out
of any crafty design of imposing upon the World, but merely through his
credulity. And seeing, that Fortunatus took a journey to Tours, where he hoped
to have been cured of his sore eyes, by the intercession of St. Martin, and
that he had a great esteem and affection for Gregory, it is very likely, that
he received all that he knew concerning the Theb. Legion from this good Bishop.
Now to let you see the very Foundation on which Gregory's own belief of this
matter was established, I shall only transcribe the Place where he speaks of it
in the Tenth Book of his History of France. I found, says he, a little Chest
in St. Martin's Treasury in which our Fathers had deposited the Relics of the
Agaunian Martyrs, as I was informed by some very aged Priests. The very Seal
which their Piety had put to it, was by old Age and Rottenness quite worn away;
and it happened, that during the solemn Office that was celebrated to their
Honor in the Eve of their Festival, it came into my thoughts to take a Torch,
and view them more carefully. Now while I was a searching with great attention,
one of the Porters told me, Here is a Stone with a Cover upon it, what may be
in it, I cannot tell, neither did my Predecessors, to whose Custody these
things were committed, know any more of it than my self; if you please, I will
bring it hither, that we may see what it contains; and when he had brought it,
I opened it, and found a little Silver Trunk, wherein were not only some
Relics of the Martyrs of the Blessed Legion, but also of several Holy Martyrs
and Confessors. We found likewise in the same Trunk, several other hallowed
Stones, with some Relics of the Apostles and other Martyrs. From which Words,
we may judge not only of the Character of this Gregory of Tours, but also of
the genius of his Age. However, both he and Venantius were without doubt great
Men, considering the time they lived in; nor do we suspect either of them of
Fraud or Imposture, but only say, that they were too credulous, and the
Christians were then strangely affected and hankering after Relics and
Miracles. Do but read the 30th Epistle of the Third Book of Gregory, the 28th
Chapter of St. Austin, de Opere Monachorum, the 62d Canon of the Council of
Lions, and the 7th Act of the Second Council of Nicea, and you may see what a
scandalous Trade was then droven with the Limbs and Bones of Martyrs, which
were broke in Pieces, and transported from Town to Town, and from one Province
into another, under pretense of Devotion. St. Austin even then lamenting, said,
That the Bodies of several Persons were had in veneration upon the Earth, whose
Souls were tormented in Hellfire. And it was not without reason that he thus
complained, for do but read St. Martin's Life, in Sulpitius Severus, who says
there, That the People of Tours ran in great Grouds to a Place where they
thought some Martyrs had been buried. That the common Tradition was, that the
Altar there had been erected by the ancient Bishops of Tours. But that St.
Martin having not been able to learn any thing for certain from the eldest
Priests of his Clergy, concerning the Names of those Martyrs, and the time of
their Death, was in great perplexity and doubt about this matter, fearing on
the one side to cause some prejudice to Religion, if he should forbear his
usual coming to that Place, and on the other to increase Superstition, if he
had authorized it by his presence. But one day being gone thither with some of
his Brethren, and having prayed to God to discover to him who it was who was
there buried; he saw on his Left Hand a frightful and deformed Spectre, which
he commanded to tell what it was. Whereunto the Shade answered, I am a Robber
condemned formerly for Crimes to an ignominious Death. The Error of the People
makes me here to be honored, but I have no part with the Martyrs, they being
in Glory, and I in Torments. After which, St. Martin caused the Altar to be
thrown down, and freed the People of Tours from that gross Superstition. This
Example alone may suffice to show, that in matter of Relics, Impostures are
no new Device. Moreover, it serves to discover the false Zeal of the
Christians, of the Sixth Age, and the ignorance and base connivance of the
Bishops and Priests, in not repressing the indiscretion of it. Sulpitius
Severus has told us just now, that it was the common Opinion that the Altar
upon the Grave of that Robber had been erected by the ancient Bishops of Tours.
Now after this, is it so much to be wondered at, for the Good Man Gregory, who a
Hundred Years after was made Bishop of Tours, to be deceived himself by some
uncertain Tradition, or that he should give so much Credit to an Inscription
upon the little Truck, in which were supposed to be shut up the Relics of the
Agaunian Martyrs? Now from St. Martin's time, the evil was so far from
diminishing, that it increased more and more. Religion and Piety did then it
seems chiefly consist in searching the Graves, looking for the Bodies of
Saints, erecting Altars, and contriving all sorts of ways to honor them. The
Sixth Age having brought into the Church, St. Bennet and his Rule, his Children
departed very soon from the Institution of their Holy Founder, applying
themselves wholly to get plentiful Possessions, and large Revenues. The
Martyrs, their Relics and Miracles, were the properest means in the World for
that purpose, and God knows how they improved the knack they had already got of
making use of them; for it is certain, that they owe most of their vast Incomes
and Estates to mere Dreams and Chimaeras like that of the Agaunian Martyrs.
Then the Old Saints grew out of date, and new ones came in Fashion, being
reputed to exceed the others in multiplicity of Miracles. Therefore they found
the way to dig every Day a new one out of the Ground, as if the Priests of
those times had made use of a Divining Rod, to find out Bodies of Saints. No
wonder therefore if some Martyrs of the Second and Third Age, unknown to
Eusebius, Orosius, and Sulpitius Severus, were discovered since by some Monks
of the Eighth and Ninth Century.

It is very probable, if I may give my Opinion, that the Acts of the Agaunian
Martyrs were forged toward the end of the Sixth Age, or at the beginning of
the Seventh, the Author of them says, That the Names of the Thebean Soldiers
are written in Heaven, and that only these following were come to his
knowledge, viz. Mauritius, Exuper, Candidus, Orsus, and the Two Victors. But it
seems not long after, some others began to peep out; Ado, Archbishop of Vienna,
who wrote toward the middle of the Ninth Century, adds to these Malosius,
Victor, Innocent, Vitalis, Gerion, Alexander, Secundus and Antoninus. Vsuard a
Benedictine Monk of St. Germans, had the good luck to find out Two more, namely
Cassius and Florentius. In the Archives of Treves is kept the History of St.
Thirsus, wherein is mentioned another Thebean Soldier, called Bonifacius. In
Burgundy some Churches are consecrated to Viator, and St. Amor, who, by the
Authors who have written their Lives, are said to have been Agaunian Martyrs.
So that we see already Fourteen or Fifteen of them, who were not come to the
knowledge of the pretended St. Eucherius. But further Discoveries have been
made yet, for one Day tells another. St. Paul exhorted the Psalm. 19. Col. 3.
Christians, to seek the things that are above, but the Monks of the Tenth
Century, pressed them to nothing so much, as to look into the things that are
below, and to search into the Graves. And though Christ had said, speaking of
himself, that where the Body was, there the Eagles should gather also; yet the
Christians did now, no longer with Joseph of Arimathea, frequent the Sepulcher
of our Lord. The Death of Christ was to them an old Story, and grown out of
date, and new Objects were then required to excite the Zeal and Devotions of
Christians. Hence it was, that from time to time, some Thebean Soldier or
other, was dug out of the Ground, and proposed to their Veneration. The
Citizens of Pignerol make their boast of having there in the Abbey of our Lady,
the Corpse of St. Tiberius. In the Diocese of Saluces, are showed the Tombs of
Constantius and Theophredus or Jafredus, and a new Inscription clapped thereon,
causes them to be worshipped as Soldiers of the Thebean Legion. Some Years
ago passing by Fossano, I had the curiosity to go and view the Place, where
according to the Tradition of that Town, Alverius and Sebastianus, Thebean
Soldiers, are said to be Buried. Garnier in his History of St. Alexander,
says, that the Bodies of Cassius, Severinus, Licinius and Secundus, lie
deposited at Crantzius Sax. 7. 16.
Como in the Milanese. Crantzius tells us, that at Brunswick, they believe,
that they have some Martyrs of Agaunum. The City of Colen vaunteth to have a
great number of them. But above all, the Town of Turin brags of having been
enriched with their Spoils. In the Abbey of St. Solutor are kept some Relics
with this Title, Reliquiae Sancti Benigni Thebensis. They show in the same
Abbey, a Manuscript, wherein are recorded the Lives of Solutor, Adventor and
Octavius, set off with all those incidents and flourishes, which generally
adorn the common Legends. The Jesuits of Turin have made a sudden discovery
all at once, of Ciro, John, Cacusat, Chrysogon, Cyriacus, Felix, Fortunatus and
Achilles, as they inform us in the History which they have published of the
Holy Martyrs, Abondius and Abondantius. When you have passed the Bridge of
Turin, and taken your way toward the Mountain that leads to Chiers, you find
on the side of the River Po, a little Chapel, where there is an Inscription
which I had amongst my Papers, but by mischance it has been almost blotted
out; however here is the remainder of it. D. O. M. Beatae Virgini Mariae
Thebaeorum Martyrum.... Ex vetustate labentem Aediculam, ampliorem....
Divinoque Ministerio eptiorem Comes Gregorius Johaninus..... a Solo
excitavit.... an 1654. I remember that the Names of two Theb. Soldiers are to
be seen there. And it is certain, that if in traveling through Italy, One
would be at the trouble to take information of the Saints of every particular
Place, and to read both the printed and manuscript Lives of Saints that are
kept in the Archives of the Cathedral Churches, there would great numbers of
Theb. Soldiers start up from behind the bushes, who had no other being but
what they received from the Monks of the last Ages, in order to serve their
turns and promote the Trade they made of the poor People's superstition.
However it be, as the case stands, I have in this Dissertation struck of from
the Romish Church 6666 Saints, as the learned Father Sirmond with one dash of
his Pen had taken lately from them eleven thousand. For having met with these
Words in an Old Martyrology, S S Vrsula and Vnde ci milla V. M. i. e.
Vndecimilla, Virgin and Martyr, he showed the shameful blunder of those who
imagined that Vnde ci milla with the V and M had been an abbreviation to
express eleven thousand Virgins. Mr. de Launoy had both the honesty and courage
to publish what he thought of St. Bruno, and several other Saints; and might he
have enjoyed the protection, either of the Court or Clergy, he would have been
a great instrument of Reformation in the Roman Worship. I was told, That this
Mr. de Launoy, being once at dinner with the Curate of a Country Parish, in the
Diocese of Man's, on the Festival of the Chief Saint of that Village, desired
the Curate to tell him the Name of that Saint. You must excuse me for that,
answered the Curate, for should you once go about to pull down my Saint, as you
have done so many others, I should be undone, and my Boors would Valesiana page
48,
find themselves without a Patron. Mr. de Valois says, that the Life of St.
Catharine, Virgin and Martyr is but a Fabulous Legend, from the beginning to
the end; and likewise, that of St. Eustachius Patron of the biggest Parish in
Paris; and as for what is related of St. Lazarus, of St. Martha, of Mary
Magdalen, and of the St. Baume he added, credant qui volent, as for me I shall
never believe a Word of it, and I hold their arrival into France to be one of
the most Fabulous things in the World. Menagij animad. in Diog. La. page 493.
Mr. Menage, in his Book of Learned Women, having enumerated amongst them St.
Catharine, takes Notice, That Baronius suspected it to be but a Fable. And it
is material to observe by Baron. Ann. ad an. 317. Sect. 23. Cumdoleamus ab
Eusebio praetermissa etc.
the by, that Baronius's suspicion was grounded upon the silence of Eusebius
which we have also alleged against the Agaunian Martyrs. Moreover, Mr. Menage
tells us, that Francis de Harlay, Archbishop of Paris, having chosen some of
the most understanding Men of his Clergy in 1680, to revise and reform the
Breviary for the use of the Church of Paris, these Doctors thought fit to
expunge the Life of St. Catharine, looking upon the Acts of her Martyrdom, as a
mere Fiction. The Bishops of St. Pons, in the year 1684, took from the Calendar
of his Diocese about sixty Holy Days, amongst which were St. Amarante, the
Immaculate Conception of the Blessed Virgin Mary, the Chair of St. Peter, St.
Ignatius Loyola, etc. He is a Prelate, who has very much distinguished himself
both by his Learning and Piety, but who had the misfortune to incur the hatred
of the Jesuits as being a Disciple of the famous Bishop of Alet; and also to
displease the Court for refusing to persecute the Protestants of his Diocese,
and not following Cardinal Bonzi, and the Bishops of his Cabal, in Voting in
the States of Lauguedoc the Subsidies that were demanded by the French King.
Therefore the Jesuits looking for an occasion to bring him into Trouble, the
Abbot of Aulergues, his Archdeacon, devoted himself to serve their Revenge. So
that if an Archdeacon is called in the Canons of the Church Oculus Episcopi, it
may be well said, that here the Light of the Body became darkness. This Abbot
appealed from his Bishop against the Reformation of his Calendar to the
Parliament of Toulouse. The Jesuits who cared but little for the other Saints,
but resented very much the disgrace put upon their St. Ignatius, procured an
Order from the Court to that Parliament, that they should favor the Abbot's
Cause without further delay. I was then at Toulouse, where I was obliged to
stay during the Months of July, August and September, at which time the Cause
was Pleaded. I was present at the hearing, and the Kings Attorney broke into a
furious passion against the Bishop of St. Pons, and taking occasion from the
Feast of the Immaculate Conception, to speak of the Honors due to the Blessed
Virgin, he carried them as far as Bonaventure, Bernardine and Crasse^. But at
last the Archdeacon's Appeal was declared frivolous and faulty. The Bishop of
St. Pons, was maintained in the power which the Councils of the Gallican Church
gave to their Bishops of making a Calendar, and regulating the Church Service
of their Diocese. And this Sentence was the effect of the Virtue and Honesty of
the first President, who without contradiction was a Great Magistrate and
worthy of a better Age.

I have related these Facts upon this Account only, that they of the Romish
Religion, who may read this Work of mine, may see, that I had reason to
question the Truth of the Acts of some of their Saints, since some of the
greatest Men of their Communion have done the same, and do agree that many
false ones are found amongst them. And if some Preachers should not like our
Endeavors in exposing the Falsehood of the Martyrdom of the Theb. Legion;
because hereby they find themselves at a loss for want of so many fine
Passages, elevated thoughts, and an Example so moving, and ready at hand,
whenever they had a mind to exhort their Hearers to patience and perseverance
in the Faith, we need only to recommend them the reading their Eusebius,
wherein they shall find great numbers of true Martyrs, whose Examples are much
more instructive, and fit to move the affections, then the Martyrdom of the
Theb. Legion, is pretended to be. It is neither Arthur of Britain, nor the
Roland of Ariosto, nor the Renaldo of Tasso, which those who are entrusted with
the first Education and Instruction of young Princes do propose to them for a
Pattern of Imitation, but those Heroes, who had a real being in the world, such
as Scipio, Hanibal and Augustus. In like manner Church History being full of
the glorious Conflicts and great Examples Saints de Contrebande.

It alludes to prohibited Wares unlawfully and surreptitiously imported without
paying Custom, which are called in French Marchandises de Contrebande.


of the Piety of true Martyrs, Christian Princes would betray the Holiness of
their Ministry, did they propose to their People false Martyrs and Counterband
Saints as Mr. de Valois used to call them.

CHAP. XIX.
That the Fabulous Relations of the pretended Agaunian Martyrs, and other
fictitious Saints, are sufficient to destroy all the Reasons brought by the
Roman Church to justify the Worship they pay to Saints.
THE first shift of the Romish Church in this matter, is, to distinguish
Worship into Absolute and Relative, Mediate and Immediate. They say, that God
alone ought to be the Object of absolute and immediate Worship, but that the
Relative and Mediate Worship, may be paid to Saints and Angels, since it
passes only through them, and terminates in God. That this is but a mere
Evasion, our Writers have showed a thousand times. And more than that, they
have proved, that upon Examination of the Matter of Fact, it is not true
neither, that the Romish Church renders to the deceased Saints, only mediate
and relative Honors. For this distinction has place only in their Schools,
being no way discernible in their Practice. They make no distinction as to
Place, since they worship both God and the Saints in the same Churches; nor in
respect of time, for as God has his, so the Saints have likewise their
Holy Days; nor yet in the Church Service, since the Saints are mentioned four
or five times in the Service of the Mass, which they offer most immediately to
God; nay, not so much as in the bodily Postures of the Worshippers, since they
fall down on their Knees, and make the same bodily Prostrations before God and
his Saints. Neither can it be distinguished in the quality of their Petitions,
since they who pray to Saints, ask pardon of them for their Sins, and the Grace
of the Holy Ghost; No more is it in the multitude of their Prayers; for they
will say ten Ave Maria's to one Pater noster. So that the Saints do, if I may
so say, reap all the Worship of the Roman Religion, and God, who should gather
the whole, has only the Tithe of it. This distinction therefore has place no
where but in Disputes, no real difference being perceivable between the Honors
paid to God, and the Saints. Our Writers have likewise discussed the Question,
de Jure, viz. whether it be lawful to bestow upon the Creatures a Worship which
terminates in God. Their Writings are full of good Reasons showing that
religious Worship is the Glory of God's Excellency, and that not so much as the
least portion of this Glory can be bestowed upon the Saints, without provoking
the anger of that Jealous God. It Is true, that in coming near to God to know
him, we may make use of the Creatures as steps to the knowledge of Him: But
when we approach God in the duty of Worship, all our Thoughts, Attention and
Affections ought wholly to be fixed upon him alone. We ought then to banish the
thoughts of all created beings out of our Minds, and so to Bless, Pray to and
Worship him, as if there were none but He and We in the World. But when all is
done, what use soever they may make in their Disputes of the distinction of
Worship into Absolute and Relative, it is certain the Doctors of the Roman
Church can make none of it, when we charge them with calling upon such Saints,
as never had any being in the World, such for instance, as St. Longinus, St.
Christopher, St. Catharine, the eleven thousand Virgins, and the Soldiers of
the Thebean Legion. They cannot* surely have the face to say, That the Worship
paid to these pretended Saints, has any relation to God, or terminates in him.
And therefore they ought to confess, that their Church has erred, and is yet
in error.

Secondly, The Romish Doctors, to justify the Worship they pay to the Saints,
say, that all their Prayers to them do amount to no more, according to the
intention of their Church, than barely to desire them that they would please to
pray to God for them. To which it has been replied and abundantly proved, that
the Use and Form of the Terms, do determine the quality of Prayers, and not the
Intention of the Church; that if the Matter, or the Form of Prayers be faulty,
it is not the Intention of the Church that can rectify them; and that the
Common People mind only the literal signification of Prayers, and never think
while they are pronouncing them, of giving a Catholic sense to Idolatrous
Expressions. Why then do they put so many ignorant People in danger of making
unlawful Prayers? Why do they give Protestants so great an occasion of Scandal?
Why do they not take out of their Prayer-Books and Breviaries all those Forms
of Prayer in which they ask the Saints to have mercy on them, to cleanse them
from their Sins by their Merits, to illuminate their hearts, and to excite in
them a true Repentance? If this Principle of the Roman Church had any good
foundation, I don't see why she might not as well have put an Arrian Creed into
her Liturgy, with a warning to her Children to follow her Intentions, and give
an Orthodox sense to that Heretical-Creed. It would prove a hard matter to
reduce to an Orate pro nobis that Prayer used at the Consecration of their
Altars; Sanctify O Lord this Stone to thine Honor, to the Honor of the Virgin
Mary, and to the Honor of all Saints. You see here the Saints and the Blessed
Virgin joined equally with God. Mons. de le Habespine Bishop of Orleans has
labored Albasp. p. 250. fol imppar.
in vain to justify this Prayer. And from hence we must necessarily conclude,
that the Romish Church pays to the Saints a Religious. Worship of the same
nature with that which she gives to God; For otherwise Bellarmine does not
argue well when Bellarm. lib. 1. de Chr. cap. 13.
he proves from the Form of Baptism, that the Holy Ghost, being joined therein
with the Father and the Son, ought therefore to be esteemed, God, as well as
the Father and the Son. Go and Baptize all Nations in the Name of the Father
and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost. But what can the Romish Church reply,
when it is objected that she prays to Saints who never had any being, as St.
Christopher, St. Catharine, the eleven thousand Virgins, and the Soldiers of
the Theb. Legion? Let these Prayers be reduced as much as they please to the
general Spirit of the Church, yet she cannot justify them, and therefore she
must confess that she has erred, and is yet in error.

Thirdly, They of the Church of Rome, to excuse the Worship they pay to the
Saints, say, That they pray to them in the same manner as we pray our living
Brethren to intercede for us. But had they not thus explained their meaning by
the Bishop of Meaux's Pen, we would hardly believe that they were in good
earnest. What! Is there then no difference between the Prayers which the Sick
Protestants desire to be made for them in their Churches, that God would
comfort and relieve them in their several necessities, and those which the
Papists direct to their Saints? When the Protestants desire these Offices of
Charity of their Brethren, do they ask them after the same manner, and in the
same order as the Romish Church implores the Intercession and Assistance of her
Saints? Do they consecrate Holydays and Altars to them? Build them Churches?
Make Vows and Pilgrimages to their Honor? Do they light Wax-candles before
their Images? Approach them with Censers? Present them with Offering? And make
Processions and Confraternities in honor of their Memories? Quite contrary.
Our Brethren are there present with us, where they see our necessities with
their own Eyes, and we desire them to join with us in Prayer. We don't look
upon them as if they were of a superior Order to us, but as Fellow Laborers,
subject to the same weaknesses and infirmities as we are, and thereby engaged
to compassionate our sufferings. Our practice is authorized by the Example of
the Faithful of all Ages, and by St. James cb. 5. v. 16.
the express command of the Apostle St. James, who exhorts us to Pray one for
another. But the Romish practice is very far from having a Title to any of
these advantages. Under the Old Testament no Prayers were ever made to the
deceased Saints, though the Faithful prayed one for another, as we do.
Notwithstanding they had at that time Saints whose Holiness could not be called
in question, since God himself had, if I may so speak, canonized Elias and
Enoch. All these Answers are solid and good. But how can they apply this? Or
what other Answer can they make, when we charge them with praying to such
Saints as never were in the World, such as St. Christopher, St. Catharine, the
eleven thousand Virgins, and the Soldiers of the Theb. Legion, seeing these
Saints were only mere fictions and the invention of Legend-Writers? They cannot
sure answer that they Pray to these after the same Manner, as we do to our
living Brethren; and therefore they ought to confess that they have erred, and
do remain still in error.

The Fourth Evasion of the Romish Church is to have recourse to the equivocal
Sense of the Terms Worship and Adoration. They say, that there is a Supreme
Worship and Adoration of Latria, and that God alone deserves this Worship and
Adoration; but that there is an inferior Worship and a Service of Dulia, which
we ought to pay to Angels and Saints. But this Distinction is not in, nor is it
grounded upon, Scripture. For St. Paul makes use of the Term Dulia, when he
speaks of the Supreme Worship, telling the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 1. verse. 9.
That they turned to God from Idols to serve the Living and True God. And the
Septuagint have used it in the same Sense, 1. Sam. c. 7. v. 3. and Ps. 11. v.
11. and on the contrary, they have expressed by that of Latria, the Services
which Men do one to another in that Threatening, which God makes to his People,
That they should servetheir Enemies, Deuteronomy. 29. verse. 48.
which God would send against them in hunger and in thirst and in nakedness.
But besides, this Distinction is very insignificant; for let the Terms be never
so Equivocal, yet the things expressed by them are not so. For Churches,
Festivals, Altars, Vows, Offerings, Lights, and Processions are not Equivocal
things, but determined to the highest sort of Religious Worship. To prove this,
let an Indian or a Chinese go into a Popish Church, tell him, That this Temple
is consecrated to Francis of Assise; that this is his Holy Day, and that they
are going to make a Procession to his Honor; That the Image which he sees
adorned with so many flowers, and illuminated with so many Torches is his
Representation. And let him see afterward all the People prostrating
themselves before it, in order to the Addressing their Prayers to it: And then
ask him, what this People is a doing? He will answer, that they adore St.
Francis, or his Image, the simple Notions of Nature leading him to that Answer,
because all the Actions of this People are determined to Religion, which being
taken altogether are the formal and distinct Signs of the Supreme Worship. And
therefore it is in vain for them to endeavor to palliate the Matter by a
pretended equivocal use of Words. Had the Romish Doctors been pleased to
express themselves more clearly, there would have been no wrangling about the
Terms. We acknowledge, that the Acts of Religion are not all of the same Weight
and Importance. The first are those that are called Elicite and Immediate,
which are referred only to God. The second are grounded upon the reference or
relation which certain Things and Persons have to Religion. In this Rank we
place the reverence due to Pastors, to Churches, Holy Vessels, to the Elements
of the Sacraments, to Saints, to Angels, to the blessed Mother of God; That is,
That there are some Degrees of respect due to each of these, in proportion to
the Rank which they hold in Religion, and to the Account which God makes of
them. The last Sorts of Religious Acts are those that are commanded by Religion
it self, as for Example, the Submission and Honor we owe to Parents and
Magistrates. But if these Controversies were fairly managed, all the Dispute
would be about the first Sort of these Acts of Religion, which are called in
the Language of the Schools, Elicite and Immediate, and such as God reserves
peculiarly to himself, with exclusion of the noblest and most exalted Rank of
Created Beings, such, for instance, as Invocation, Psalm. 50. v. 15 Trust and
Affiance Jer. 17. v. 17. Vows, Isa. 19. v. 21. Worship, Sacrifice and
Adoration, Exodus 20. v. 50. Act. 10. v. 26. Apocal. 19. verse. 10. These are the
Acts of Religion which we accuse the Roman Church of giving to the Saints.
Those amongst them who pretended to devotion, make Vows to the Saints upon
every occasion, though St. Thomas has said, that a Vow is an Act of Latria.
But however this be, the Equivocal Sense of the term Adoration, can do them no
service, where they are accused of paying a Religious Worship to Supposititious
Saints, such as St. Christopher, St. Longine, St. Catharine, the eleven
thousand Virgins, and the Soldiers of the Theb. Legion. They cannot pretend
that they pay these Saints only a Worship of Dulia, and Honors much inferior
to the Supreme. They ought therefore to confess that they have erred, and do
still persist in their error.

Fifthly, the Roman Church speaking by the Mouth of the Bishop of Meaux, says,
that she instructs her Children to make a great deal of difference between
the affections that accompany the Prayers they make to Saints, and the Zeal,
Piety, and profound Humility they ought to be possessed with, when they direct
their Devotions immediately to God himself. But to this have not we just reason
to reply, that God alone knows the Affections of the Heart, and that we cannot
judge of them but by Men's Words and Actions? We don't pretend to usurp the
Prerogative of God, and should be very unwilling to pass a rash Judgment upon
Men. Moses has taught us, that secret things belong to the Lord our God; and
Christ has told us, that we shall know Men by their Fruits; that is, by their
Words and Actions. This way of passing Judgment upon Men's Hearts, is so common
a notion, and so universal a Principle, that all Men in the World do follow it
in the judgments they make of others. So that it is very unjustly done by those
Acts of the French Clergy of 1685, A^^i. 6.
of the French Clergy, who accuse us of calumny in finding fault with their
Church for its paying to Saints a prohibited Worship, since our Accusation is
founded upon their Words and Actions. For let them say what they please, that
they do not form the same Idea of the Saints, as they do of an Infinite and
Supreme Being, and that their Prayers to God are accompanied with Affections
far more lively, ardent and humble, than those they address to the Saints: This
is known to none but God, and discernable only by his all-seeing Eye. And all
that we see and hear of their Performance toward the Saints, as Prayers,
Temples, Festivals, Illuminations, Burning of Incense, Processions,
Prostrations; all these things, I say, are the proper and formal Characters of
the Supreme Worship, which God has in a peculiar manner reserved to himself.
Are we then in the wrong, to conclude that they carry the honors they render
to the Saints too far? The Jansenists in that Book of theirs, entitled the
imaginary Heresy, charged the Jesuits with making the Pope a God by their
Tenet, that the Pope is infallible, because Infallibility is a property
belonging only to God. But we have yet more reason to reproach the Roman Church
for dealing with Saints as if they were Gods, not only upon account of the
external Worship she pays to them, but also because of the good things she asks
of them, which suppose that they know the Hearts of Men, are present every
where, and have an unlimited power; all which, are Properties belonging only to
the Supreme being. But after all, suppose it should be true, that the Romish
Church puts a great difference between the Thoughts that accompany the Prayers
to God, and those addressed to the Saints, we leave every wise Man to consider,
whether this distinction in the Thoughts, does not raise in the Mind
troublesome Scruples, and hinder its due application and adherence to God.
These Theological Principles leave one always unquiet and uneasy, for fear of
going beyond, or stopping short of the Mark. Thus far in their Opinion the
Worship is lawful and right, but to go ever so little further, is Idolatry.
When those who repeat after the Priest the Confession of Sins at the beginning
of the Mass, hear him say, I confess to God Almighty, they must mind to do an
Act of Latria, but when he adds, and to the Blessed Virgin, they must take care
to descend lower to Hyperdulia, and when he goes on saying, to the Angels, and
to the Saints, to the Holy Apostles, Peter and Paul, etc. it would be a Crime,
should they offer to them any of the Two former kinds of Worship; and therefore
they must pass to that of Dulia. If an Image be presented to them, they are to
offer but a relative honor to it; but let it be a little piece of the true
Cross, they may go as far as the indirect Latria. And because these different
Worships are often mixed in the same Service and Litanies, we leave it again to
Wise Men to consider, whether all those who are present at these
Church-Services, have in that instant of time all these distinctions present in
their Minds; whether they be all capable of these nice and refined subtilties
of the Schools; and whether all this be proper to raise the heart, and to
inflame true piety. At least, our Religion has this advantage above theirs,
that God alone being proposed to us as the Object of our Worship and Prayers,
we need not busy our Minds about any of these Distinctions; no scruple arises
to disturb our Zeal, we embrace the Divine Object with all our Heart, and with
all our Soul, free from fears and danger of running beyond the Mark. But after
all, this difference of Thoughts in their Prayers, will do them no Service, as
to the worship which they render to Saints that never existed, such as St.
Christopher, St. Catharine, the Eleven Thousand Virgins, and the Soldiers of
the Thebean Legion. These being mere Chimeras and groundless fancies, which
deserve not any the least respect; they who pay any sort of Religious Worship
to them, ought to confess, that they have been, and are, yet in Error.

The Sixth Subterfuge of the Roman Church is, that they make great difference
between Christ's Mediation, and that of the Saints. For, say they, Christ is a
Mediator of Redemption, and the Saints are only Mediators of Intercession. But
in answer to this, all the Functions of the Mediator of Redemption, may be
reduced to these Three principal ones. First, Christ has taught Men the true
and only way that leads to Heaven, having brought Life and Immortality to 2 Timothy 1. 10.
light, through the Gospel. Secondly, Christ by his Death, has reconciled God
to Men, and the Merits of his Cross, are the source of their Peace and
Righteousness, God having made him to be sin 2 Cor. c. 5. v. 21.
for us, who knew no sin, that we should be the Righteousness of God in him. In
the Third Place, Christ is the Dispenser of all those good things which are the
effects and consequences of that eternal and new Covenant which he has brought
into the World, and sealed with his own Blood upon the Cross, all power being
give^ him, both in Heaven Heb. 7. 25.
and Earth, that he might save to the uttermost all that come to God by him.
Now we think we have great reason to accuse the Roman Church, of attributing to
the Saints these Functions of the High Priest of the New Covenant. For as if
the Gospel were not a sufficient Rule to direct us the way to Heaven, the
Romish Church teaches, that her Dominicks, Francis's, Loyola's, etc. have
received from Heaven, Rules more certain and powerful to raise those who follow
them to a higher Perfection, than those of the Gospel it self. And for the
proof hereof, they produce the Heavenly Visions, Divine Apparitions, and other
Miracles wherewith they pretend God has honored the calling of these Founders
of Orders. Moreover, the Romish Church holds, that by Christ's Death, only our
Mortal Sins, and the eternal punishment due to them were expiated; so that Men
must have recourse to other ways of Expiation, both for their Venial Sins, and
the temporal Punishments due to their Mortal ones. Therefore was Purgatory
invented; and to that purpose are likewise applied the Fasts, the disciplining
Whips, the Obits or Offices for the Dead, the pious Foundations, the Masses,
and the Canonical Penances enjoined by the Confessors at the Tribunal of
Penitence (as they call it.) But the most powerful Machine, is the Treasury of
Indulgences, that Treasury which has drawn so much Money into the Pope's
Exchequer, and which, they say, is silled up with the Overplus of the
Satisfactions and Merits of Saints; which superabundance is by Indulgences
applied either for the expiation of Venial Sins, or for a compensation for the
temporal Penalties due to Mortal Sins. This is the ground of that Prayer which
the Priest says in the Mass, when he asks of God the forgiveness of Sins, by
the Merits of those Saints whose Relics are at rest under the Altar. Finally,
the Roman Church makes her Addresses to the Saints, as to the Dispensers of
Heavenly Graces; and we might observe a Hundred Places in their Prayer-Books,
Rituals, Breviaries, and other Books of their Religion, where it plainly
appears, that they ask of them the forgiveness of Sins, the Grace of
Perseverance, and good Dispositions for Dying well. But here perhaps it may be
objected, that the Church of Rome makes a great difference in its Practice,
between Christ's Mediation, and that of the Saints; which is so far from being
true, that one of her most famous Writers, sadly complains, that it is evident,
that most of the People put Alexand. Al. quaest. 93. number. 1. Artic. 4.
more trust in the Intercession of the Saints, than in Christ's Intercession;
and that they have recourse with more zeal to their Protection, than to the
Patronage of that great Redeemer. And after all, this distinction of Mediator
of Redemption, and Mediator of Intercession, is very injurious to Christ, and
to the fullness of his Priesthood. The Apostle willing to condemn the
partialities of the Corinthians, some saying they were of Paul, and others of
Cephas, asked them with indignation, 1 Cor. 1. 13.
Have Paul, Apollos or Cephas, been Crucified for you? And may not we then with
more reason, ask the Doctors of the Romish Church, have Francis, Dominick, or
Ignatius Loyola, been Crucified for you? For Christ's Priesthood comprehends
two parts, namely Sacrifice and Intercession, one upon the Earth, and the other
in Heaven, one on the Cross, and the other beyond the Vail in the true and
incorruptible Sanctuary, that is to say, that his Intercession is nothing but a
continuation of his Priesthood; and that the reason why he is our Advocate, is,
because he was crucified for us. But in what order of Mediators can the Romish
Church put St. Christopher, St. Longine, St. Catharine, the eleven thousand
Virgins, and the Thebean Soldiers, since it is plain, that at the best they
are nothing but mere figments? They will not sure offer to own them Mediators
of Intercession, and therefore they must confess that they have err^d, and are
still in error.

The Seventh device of the Church of Rome to excuse the Worship they render to
Saints, i^, That they would fain persuade us, That the Council of Trent has
not determined this Worship to be necessary, but only simply declared, that it
was a good and profitable practice. To which it will suffice to oppose this
Argument. That Practice must needs be held necessary to Salvation for the not
observing of which People are declared to be damned: Now it is evident, that
the Church of Rome damns all those who believe that Saints ought not to be
prayed to, from whence it ought to be inferred, that the Worship of Saints, is,
according to the Principles of the Roman Church a practice necessary to
Salvation. The proof for the Minor of this Argument is found in the 25th
Session of the Council of Trent, where is a Canon that Anathematizeth all those
who deny the lawfulness of calling upon Saints conformably to the use and
practice of the Roman Church: Unless they would say, that the Council of Trent
did pronounce these Anathemas, notwithstanding, they were of Opinion that the
worshipping of Saints is not a practice necessary to Salvation. But while they
go about to set off the Wisdom of the Fathers assembled in that Council, they
are not aware, that they accuse them both of Levity, and want of Charity in
damning Men, for things that may be either done or let alone without prejudice
to Salvation. The Doctors of the Church are hardly put to it to know what
things the Council of Trent has judged Ceremonial, and what Dogmatical and
Essential to Religion. That which gives occasion to these Disputes is, That in
some States that submitted to the Pope's Authority, the Decisions of the
Council of Trent, have been recieved as to the Dogmatical part of Religion,
though they will not acknowledge them as to Rites and Ecclesiastical
Discipline. I shall observe by the by, that the Illustrious Peter de Ma^ca,
frequently lays i^ down as a certain Truth, That France approved of and
received the Council of Trent in the year 79 of the last Age. However, we find
in the History of the Cardinal Duke of Joyeuse, composed by Haberi, a Barester
at the Parliament of Paris, a Brief of Pope Paul the V. sent to the Cardinal of
Joyeuse Bishop of Ostia, above five and forty Years after the time when M^uns.
de Marca says, That France received the Council of Trent, wherein this Pope
complains very bitterly of the refusal, which they still made in France to
approve this Council, and to submit to its Decisions. Whatsoever it is, most of
the Doctors of the Romish Church do agree, that to know the difference which
the Council of Trent has put between things dogmatical, pertaining to
Religion, and things merely ritual and belonging to Discipline, the most
certain Rule to judge by, is the Anathemas that are fastened on them. And
therefore, since that Council has Anathematized all those who do not approve
the Worship of Saints, it follows, that the Fathers of that Council did look
upon this Worship as a thing of great moment and necessity in Religion, and not
as one of those Practices and Ceremonies, which though they be allowed to be
very good and profitable, yet may be left out or changed at the will and
pleasure of the Pope and Church. But let them say what they please, certain it
is that the Romish Church does not only believe, that it is necessary to
Salvation to call upon Saints, but is moreover bound to believe so. And their
Doctors pretend, that this piece of service to Saints is commanded in the
Scripture, wresting I know not how many Texts to make them apparently comply
with their fancy, and utter what they would be at. Now if we believe, that God
has commanded a Worship, there is no doubt but we ought also to believe that
we cannot omit the peformance thereof, without putting our Salvation to stake.
But what can they say for those Services that are established in so many places
to the honor of such Saints, as owe all their being to the forgeries of a
parcel of Monks, and the credulity of a deluded People? Whereas instead of
declaring these Practices to be necessary, the Church of Rome ought to
acknowledge that they fall short of being even good and profitable. And
therefore that Church must confess that it has erred, and is yet involved in
error.

The Eight Shift is that of some Doctors of the Romish Church, who do deplore
the excess that the Worshipping of Saints is grown to, and protest altogether,
that if in some places some Saints that never were are Worshipped, they are but
local practices tolerated, though not approved by the Church. This is the Rock
on which do split every day the Learning, Piety, Knowledge and Conscience of
many Ecclesiastics in the Church of Rome, who being desirous of Salvation and
having made a considerable study in Religion, yet comparing the mischief of
that false Worship, with the consequences of a Separation, think it much safer
for their Souls to live in a corrupted Church, and to groan under its Errors,
than to make a breach of Charity by separating from its Communion. In which
they are like those cowardly and unworthy Citizens, who while a generous
Deliverer hazards his Fortune and his Life, to preserve to them both their Laws
and Country, are content with folded Arms to wish him good success and
prosperity; and if he chances to fail in the attempt, will also bewail and pity
him. Of which sort of People a The Duke of Rohan*
great Man used to say, that they were the most useless of all Friends, for that
having the Virtue of wishing us well, and shedding some tears for us, they had
not yet courage enough to afford us their Assistance. For indeed all these good
Wishes and Lamentations are no remedy to the misfortunes of a Church or
Country. Works they are and honest endeavors which God requires at our hands,
and not timorous Wishes and unprofitable Vows. If some of the Romish Party do
sigh at the sight of a Worship, which they think dishonorable to their Church,
why do they not likewise join with those who apply themselves to reform it? I
believe there are but few very amongst them who have not heard of the wholesome
Advices of the Blessed Virgin Mary to her Indiscreet Votaries, and of the
Pastoral The Bishop of Tournay.
Letter which a Bishop of France adjoined thereto, recommending them to the
perusal and practice of all the good Christians of his Diocese. This was just
the time, and a fair occasion for those Doctors, who bewail so much in private
the Abuses of their Church, to appear and to speak, had not some unworthy
considerations stopped them in the way, and made them Speechless. The Prelates,
the Universities, Rome it self condemned those wholesome Advices, no body having
Piety and Courage enough to defend them, while Error and Falsehood found a World
of Zealous Protectors. Crasset a Jesuit stood in the defense of all the
Excesses of the Bonaventures and Bernardines: And the Sorbonne by giving their
Approbation to his Works, condemned likewise both the wholesome Advices, and the
pastoral Letter of the Bishop of Tournay. How can they say then, that most of
those things, which we find fault with in the Church of Rome, are but local
Practices, or Excesses only tolerated, and not approved by the Church? Those
very things which we disallow, are of such a nature, that a bare toleration of
them, has the force of an Approbation. For they are not Dogmatical Errors,
nor empty Speculations, but Errors in the Practice, and False*worship, in the
public Service of Religion: Which, whenever a Christian Society does tolerate,
it gives thereby a sufficient ground to believe, that it approves them
likewise. Yet had not all our just Complaints upon this matter, power enough to
induce the Commissioners of the Index Expurgatorius, to expunge the scandalous
Excesses of their Bonaventure, Bernardine of Siena, and Gabriel Biel. The
Congregation of the Holy Office, and that de Ritibus, are very well informed of
the Honors paid in diverse Places to the Soldiers of the Thebean Legion. But
let the Protestants prove as clear as the Day, the Forgery of their Martyrdom,
these imaginary Beings, consecrated by a blind Superstition, are permitted
notwithstanding still to retain all the Deferences of Honor and Worship
formerly paid to them.

A Ninth evasion of the Romish Party is, that we cannot, they say, condemn
their worshipping of Saints, without involving both the Fathers, the Church of
the first Ages, and the most ancient Christians in the same Condemnation. But
this Accusation which they enter against us with so much confidence, is wholly
groundless The truth is, that in the times of St. Basil, St. Chrysostom and
Gregory Nazianzen in the East, of St. Ambrose, St. Jerome, St. Austin and St.
Paulinus in the West, some Practices may be observed which have been in the
After-Ages the Origin of the false Worship paid to the Saints. The People
beginning then to esteem a little too much of their Relics, they flocked from
all parts to their Sepulchers, and with an extraordinary zeal, they celebrated
the memorial of them; the Preachers in the mean time, by Rhetorical Figures,
directing their Speech to them in such manner, as if they had been actually
alive. But however the Veneration they had then for them, came nothing near to
the Worship which the Romish Church pays to them now adays. Gregory the First,
who died in the Seventh Century, began in his time to innovate in the public
Worship of the Church, by inserting in the Litanies, the Name of the Blessed
Virgin Mary, those of the Saints having not been introduced till a long time
after. And we defy the Doctors of the Church of Rome to show us, that the
Worship which they render to Saints, is mentioned in any of the Ecclesiastical
Writers, who Perez de Trad. part. 3. cons. 7. page 197.
lived before the Year of our Lord 350. Martin Perez Hiala, Bishop of Cadiz,
confesses, that they cannot justify by ancient authority, the Invocation and
Intercession of Saints, before the time of Cornelius, who lived toward the end
of the Third Century. And this good Prelate would have descended Blondel in
Epist. Pontif. page 308.
yet a Hundred Years lower, had he seen the Reasons which Blondel alleges, to
prove that that which is cited of Cornelius is merely spurious. Had the
Invocation of Saints been in use in the times of St. Athanasius, and St.
Hilary, we must Athan. Epist, ad Adelph. 2. contr. Arr. Hilar. de Trinit. lib.
8. and 12.
confess that the Arrians had but very little wit, when it being objected, as it
was by these Fathers to them, that they were downright Idolaters, in praying
as they did to Christ, whom they thought to be but a Creature; they did not
reply that this Accusation ought to rebound on their Adversaries also, since
notwithstanding they did not believe their Saints to be Gods, yet they made
Prayers and Supplications to them But how is it possible to believe, that in
those first Ages of Christianity, the Christians made their Addresses to the
deceased Saints, seeing they were of Opinion, that the Souls of the Faithful
did not enjoy the Beatifick Vision before the general Resurrection of the Dead.
If we ask Cardinal Bellarmine why the Saints were not invoked under Bellarm. de
Bea^. Sanct. lib. 1. c. 19.
the Old Testament, he answers, Because the Souls of the Just were then in
Limbo, and did not yet behold the Face of God. For which very Reason, we may
likewise conclude, that the Christians of the first Ages did not pray to
Saints, since they believed that their Souls were not to be admitted into the
presence of God till the General Resurrection. Which Opinion of theirs, has
forced Cardinal Richlieu to make this Confession, Richlieu Tract. Conv^r. lib.
3. c. 4.
That several Fathers in the First Ages, held for certain, that the Souls of
the Faithful deceased in the Grace of God (those of Martyrs only excepted)
should not enjoy the Beatifick Vision, till after the Resurrection of the Dead;
and therefore 'its no wonder, that they spoke in those times, of the Veneration
and Invocation of Saints, with more caution and wariness, than it has been
done since it has been commonly believed, that the Souls of the Faithful who
have departed this Life in the fear of God, did not wait till the Resurrection
for the enjoyment of the Beatifick Vision. In the Church of the first Ages,
they observed another Practice inconsistent with that Worship, which the
present Church of Rome renders to the Saints. For now a days, the Living Pray
to the Dead, whereas, formerly the Living prayed for them. Cardinal Richelieu
(as you have seen in the place above quoted) has excepted the Martyrs from the
general Rule; but in this case there was no exception made of any; for
according to the Liturgy ascribed to St. Mark, the Christians used to say.
Remember O Lord Our Ancestors the Bibl. Patr Gr. Lat. 2. Page 17.
Patriarcks, the Prophets, the Martyrs, and all the Spirits who are perfect in
the Faith of Jesus Christ, and grant that their Souls may rest in the Sanctuary
of thy Saints.

This practice of praying for all the Saints, was yet in use in Hinkmar's time.
And in the Rubric upon the Decretals at the Title of the Celebration of
Masses, chapter 6. sect. Oration quae dicitur, etc. we find this curious Remark in
the Gloss on the Margent. It was formerly Dicebatur olim annue nobis Domine ut
animae famuli tui Leonis haec prosit Oration. Ho^ie aurem dicitur ut
Interc^ssione Beati Leonis hac nobis prosit Oration.
said, Grant O Lord that this Prayer may be profitable to the Soul of thy
Servant Leo: But now it is said, Grant that this Prayer may be profitable to us
by the Intercession of thy Servant Leo.

So little distinction was made in those times between the Martyrs and the
Saints of the first Order, That they used to pray even for the Blessed Mother
of God. For in the Liturgy attributed to St. Chrysostom, we find these Words:
Let us pray to the Lord, for all those who Bibl. pp. ^. 9. romans 2. p. 62.
have heretofore administered and fulfilled the Duties of Priesthood, for the
eternal remission of their Sins, and for the memory of all those who are
deceased, in hope of the Resurrection. Forgive them O Merciful Lord. And we
offer also this reasonable Service unto thee for our Ancestors who rest in the
Faith, the Fathers, the Patriar^s, the Prophets, the Apostles, the Martyrs, and
especially for the most Blessed and Immaculate Mary. After this do ye think it
well done of the Romanists to accuse us of condemning the Primitive Church, and
all the Ancient Fathers, because we condemn the Worship which they pay in our
days to the Saints? Certain it is that in this we don't condemn Origin, who
wrote thus against Celsus Origin. contra Cells. Tir^* 8. and 5.
We ought not to pray to Creatures, who have as much need to make Prayers and
Supplications for themselves, and do therefore rather by their calling upon
him, admonish us to make our addresses to God only, and not to debase our
selves before them by dividing between God and them the honor of Prayer, God
forbid that we should follow Celsus's advice, who would have us to pray to
Angels. We ought to pray to none but God, who is the Paramount Lord of a^l
things. We do not condemn St. Austin, who says, August. contra Epis. 1. Parm.
lib. 2. cap. 8.
That were St. Paul and the other Apostles our Mediators, we should have many of
them, but then this Apostle had not been in the right who says, that there is
but one God and one Mediator between God and Man who is Jesus Christ. And he
declares in Aug. de Civi^. Dei. lib. 22. c. 19.
another place: That in offering the Sacrifice, mention was made of the
Martyrs, as of Men of God, who by the Confession of his Name, had triumphed
over the World, but that they were not invocated. We don't condemn Ignatius, a
Disciple of the Apostles, who recommended this to the Christians, to have none
before their Eyes when they pray but Christ Jesus and his Father. We do not
condemn Iren. lib. 2. cap. 57.
St. Irenaeus, that Holy Bishop of Lions, who had framed himself both upon the
Lessons and Examples of Polycarp, and who says, That the Church does not mix
in her Service either the Invocation of Angels, or any other criminal
Curiosity, but does direct her Prayers merely, purely and openly to God, the
maker of all things, by calling upon the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ. We do
not condemn Tertul. Apol. cap. 17. and 30.
Tertullian, who giving an Account of the Faith and Hope of the Christians,
before the Roman Emperors, says. That they do Invocate none but the true God
and do pray for the prosperity of the Emperor, but that they ask it of him whom
they know alone to be able to grant it. Nor do we condemn Lactantius who
declares, That those who pray to deceased Saints, do Sin both against Reason
and Piety, revolt against God, break all sorts of Laws, and in Worshipping dead
Men, do commit an unpardonable Theo ^o (...) in Cells. 2. 18. and ^. 7.
Fault. But if the Romish Church, does side with those Ancient Heretics, who,
as Theodore^ informs us, held, That whosoever will have a free Access to God,
ought first to endeavor to secure to himself the Favor of Angels; and if we
find fault with that Church for doing the same, we leave it to our Readers to
examine, whether we do condemn also that Ancient Doctor, who answered these
Heretics, That it is but a pitiful subterfuge to say, that we make our
addresses to the Creatures, only upon the account of making by their means our
Approaches to God, as they are used to do, who desire to be introduced to the
King, by making first their Application to his Officers. True it is, that to be
admitted to the audience of a King, and to be promoted by him, it is necessary
first to speak to and court those who do attend him, because a King being but a
Man cannot of himself know whom to trust with the administration of his
Affairs, but as he receives information from those that are about him. But that
we may approach God, who is Omniscient, there is no need of imploring the
Patronage of Men. It is enough, if we have a sincere and upright heart, and a
religious mind; for God will answer in any place of the Universe whosoever
speaks to him in that holy disposition. How unjustly then are we condemned by
the Romanists, for holding Opinions contrary to those of the Ancient Church
concerning the Saints, since in conformity to that Church of the first Ages, we
do not address our Prayers to any but God through Jesus Christ. We do, as she
did, honor the Saints, and reverence their memory, we propose their Examples
to our Imitation, we applaud their Triumph, and do Crown them with praise.
(...) Imitation, (...) Praise, (...) Love, (...) Commemoration, were all the
duties which the Piety of the Primitive Christians paid to the Saints. And if
we do restrain our selves within the same bounds, we have for us the most
Authentic Acts of Antiquity as the 34. and 57. Epistles of St. Cyprian,
wherein this blessed Martyr speaks of the Commemoration which the Church made
of Martyrs; and the 3. chapter of the Book Corona militis by Tertullian, in which
are mentioned the Oblations which in those times were offered for the dead,
especially for Relations and Friends: But chiefly we have on our side the
Declaration of the Ancient Church of Smyrna concerning Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 25.
St. Polycarp's Body, related by Eusebius, and in the Acts of this Blessed
Martyr Printed by Vsserius, and which are quoted by Mr. de Valois in his Notes.
It is a very memorable Fact, and which happened about the year of Our Lord 167,
and is as follows: The Jews being unwilling that the Christians should have the
comfort of burying their Polycarp, represented to the Pagan Magistrates, that
if the Christians were permitted to keep the Body of that Holy Martyr, they
would soon forsake their Master to serve his Disciple, not knowing, said the
whole Church of Smyrna, That it is impossible we should leave Christ who has
suffered for the Redemption of all those who are saved through the whole World,
and that we should pay a religious Worship, or address our Prayers to any other
but him. For as to Christ, we adore him as being the Son of God, whereas we
love the Martyrs as the Disciples and Imitators of the Lord. And certainly this
is nothing but what is very just, considering the Zeal and fervent Love they
had for their own King and Master. God grant that we may so imitate their
Piety, that we may be partakers of their Glory. Which discourse of the Church
of Smyrna, as it is our Apology, so it is a condemnation of the Worship which
the Romish Church renders now a days to Saints. And if the Ancient Church
speaks thus of true Martyrs, we may easily judge how it would have behaved it
self toward false and supposititious ones, such as are the Soldiers of the
Theb. Legion.

Tenthly, Father Malbranche is without contradiction, one of the greatest Wits
of our Age, did he not too much affect to be an Original. His System concerning
the Worship of Saints, and the way he takes to defend the Practice of his
Church is as follows. First, he lays down for a Malbranche Moral. c. 9. page
156.
Foundation, that all our good things come from God, and that he is the only
cause and dispenser of them. Secondly, He says, That when we receive from him
any thing that is good, Christ is the occasional Cause thereof, God by an
Eternal Law having decreed not to communicate any Good to Mankind, but at
Christ's Desire and Request. Which Tenet of his is set forth more largely both
in his Christian Meditations, and his Treatise of Nature and Grace. Thirdly, He
declares, That it is not in the Power of the Saints to impart any of these
Goods unto us, and that we ought not so much as to say, That they are the
occasional Causes of them, it being a Privilege, that belongs to none but
Christ, as he is the Mediator of the New Covenant, and the High Priest of
Things Eternal. It is at the Desire of Christ, and not at those of the Saints,
that God by an Eternal Law has bound himself to communicate his Graces.
Fourthly, Nevertheless he adds, that the Saints do excite and incline the
Desires of Christ toward us, in which chiefly he makes the force of their
Intercession to consist. Fifthly, and lastly, He believes, that they have the
Power to heal Sicknesses, and to bless with fertility our Fields, because the
Order of the Universe seems to require, that inferior things be made Subject to
the Power of the Superior Beings. I know not how Father Malbranche, with all
the Sagacity and Sharpness of his Wit, can reconcile these Principles of his
both with the Doctrine and Practice of his Church. For having Established in
the First, That God is the only Dispenser of all good things, hence it follows,
that the asking the Saints for Graces, which come only from the hand of God, is
downright Idolatry. And when he says, secondly, That God does not dispense
his Graces but at the Desire of Christ, who is established by him the Mediator
of the New Covenant, and the High Priest of Things Eternal, and that he alone
can make Intercession for us to his Father in determining and contracting by
his desires the general Laws of God's Mercy to some particular Sinners, whom he
has more kindness for, we may easily conclude, that the imploring the
Mediation of Saints, and asking them to pray directly and immediately to God
for us, is a high Injury offered to the Priesthood of Jesus Christ. Now as to
his third Tenet, viz. That the Saints have not the Power to convey to us those
Graces which we want, and that we ought not so much asto look upon them as the
occasional Causes of them, if this opinion of his be true, what will become of
so many Litanies and Prayers set down in the Popish Breviaries, and in their
Prayer and Mass-Books, in which they ask the Saints to cleanse them from all
their Sins, to preserve them Missal p. 353. and 359.

Brev. p. 826. die 18. Jan. die 15.

October. page 1095, etc.


from the Sicknesses of the Spirit, to inflame their hearts with the Fire of
Charity, to deliver them from Hellfire, to open the Gates of Heaven to them,
and to make them sit on Thorns with the glorious Company of the Blessed above,
etc. Lastly, if according to Malbranche's fourth and fifth Principles all the
good Services, which the Saints are able to do, are only to move and excite
Christ's desires toward us, and to give us ease in our Afflictions, or afford
us a good Crop, he Asserts these last Tenets in so dubious a manner and so
faintly (though upon any other matter, he uses to be very Vigorous and
Positive) that it is an easy thing to discern that he himself is not very well
convinced of it. It Is, says he, The Opinion of the Church that the Saints do
know all our wants. We may pray to the Saints, that they be pleased to stir up
the desires and the Charity of Jesus Christ. One Saint perhaps is more in
Favor, and has more Access to Christ upon his own Holy Day than at another
time, or than another Saint. It may be also that they have the power of healing
our Sicknesses, or of procuring us a plentiful Year. We see by these shy and
uncertain expressions, how hard he is put to it to reconcile his Opinions with
the Doctrine and Practice of his Church. For indeed there is a palpable
incompatibility of his Principles, with that Religious Worship which the Romish
Church pays to the Saints. And we need only to examine the Principles, which he
had already laid before, viz. That the Church by praying to the Father through
the Son, does acknowledge the Son to be equal and of one substance with the
Father: For if he were not so, says he, we could not call upon him. And
likewise he had already said, that the Father has tied his Blessings and
Treasures to Christ's Desires, and that this is the Reason why we ought to
adore the Father, and to call upon Christ. But what he after adds deserves
especially our consideration, namely, that these Desires of Christ are the
desires of his human Will, that his Flesh is the Principle of these Desires,
which make all the riches of the Church and the Sanctification of the Elect:
And that this is the reason why Religion teaches us to Address sometimes our
Prayers to the Father, because if we never did invocate any but Christ, by
reason of those Privileges which God has by an eternal Decree adapted to his
Desire, to those human desires, he says, which do proceed from the Child of
the Blessed Mary, we should be in danger of adhering to Christ as he is a Man,
and of trusting in his Flesh with the same kind of Love and Trust, which we owe
only to the Infinite and Sovereign Being. We may easily perceive that this way
of reasoning is quite contrary to the Doctrine of the Roman Church, and to that
Worship it renders to Saints. The Esteem indeed, which I have for Great Men is
such, that I cannot forbear having also a kind of respect even for their odd
fancies, and by-ways of Writing, which made me take notice by the by of Father
Malbranch^ his System concerning the worshipping of Saints, though I know in
the bottom of it there is no more reality than in a shadow or dream. But after
all, should we suppose his Opinion to be not altogether groundless, who would
venture to say, that supposititious Saints, such as we have proved those of the
Theb. Legion to be, can move and excite Christ's desires? Therefore the Roman
Church ought to confess, that she has erred in permitting and approving the
Worship which is paid to them.

FINIS.
Some BOOKS Printed for R. Bently.
Books in Folio.
1. BEaumont's and Fletcher's Plays in one Volume, containing 51. Plays. 2. Mr.
William Shakespeare's Plays in one Volume. 3. Towerson's Works complete in one
Volume. 4. Dr. Allestry's Sermons in one Volume. 5. Dr. Comber's Works, the
four Parts in one Volume. 6. The Council of Trent; By Father Paolo. 7.
Toriano's Italian Dictionary. 8. Mr. Milton's Paradise lost, with 13 Copper
Cuts finely engraven, to express the whole Poem. 9. Milton's Paradise Regained;
in the same Volume, Paper and Print, to bind with it. 10. Fodina Regalis; or,
the History of the Laws of Mines. By Sir John Pettus. 11. Bishop Brownrig's
Sermons.
Books in Quarto.
1. The Burnt Child dreads the Fire. 2. A Treatise of our Sanguinary Laws
against Papists. 3. Dr. Whitby's Answer to S. Cressy. 4. Mr. Nathanael Lee's
Plays in one Volume. 5. Mr. Thomas Otway's Plays in one Volume.
Books in Octavo.
1. Dr. Whitby, Of Idolatry. 2. Dr. Whitby, of Host-Worship. 3. The Life of the
Marsh^l Turenns. 4. The Secret History of the House of Medicis. 5. Cronelius
Agrippa, Of the Vanity of Arts and Sciences. 6. Mauger's French Grammar. Edit.
13. 7. Lipsius, Of Constancy. 8. Agiates, Queen of Sparta. 9. Nicorotis. 10.
Plurality of Worlds, Translated by Mr. Glanvil. 11. Boyle's Art of Poetry;
Traslated by Mr. Soames. 12. Poems and Songs, by Mr. Cuts. 13. Sir. James
Chamberlain's Poems. 14. Mr. Coppinger's Poems. 15. Madam Colonna's Memoirs.
16. Hudibras complete, in Three Parts. 17. Seneca's Morals; By Sir Roger L'
Estrange. 18. Comber's Companion to the Altar. 19. Godfrey of Boloign; A Poem.
20. Plato's Apology of Socrates. 21. Natural History of the Passions.
Books in Duodecimo.
1. Present state of England. 2. Enter into thy Closet. 3. Moral Essays, in
Four Volumes. 4. A perfect School of Instructions for the Officers of the
Mouth. 5. A Prospect of Human Misery. 6. Vanity of Honor, Wealth and Pleasure.
7. Bishop Andrew's Devotions. 8. Covent Garden Drollery. 9. Zelinda; A Romance.
10. Happy Slave. 11. Hatige, or the King of Tameran. 12. Homais Queen of Tunis.
13. Triumphs of Love, 14. Obliging Mistress. 15. Uufortunate Hero. 16. Countess
of Salisbury. 17. Count Teckely. 18. Essex and Elizabeth. 19. The Pilgrim. 20.
The Empire betrayed, by whom, and how. 21. The Character of Love. 22. Don
Henrick. 23. Princess of Fez. 24. Marce Christianissimus. 25. Gallant Ladies;
in two Parts. 26. Victorious Lovers. 27. Love in a Nunnery. 28. Duke of Lorain.
29. Minority of St. Lewis. 30. Queen of Majorca. 31. Count de Soysons. 32.
Clytie. 33. Dialogues of the Dead; in Two Parts. 34. Neapolitan; Or, the
Defender of his Mistress. 35. Instructions for a young Nobleman. 36. Five
Love Letters from a Nun to a Cavalier. 37. Five Love Letters from the Cavalier
in Answer to the Nun's. 38. Religio Laici, in a Letter to Mr. Dryden. 39. Count
Gabalis. 40. The chaste Seraglion. 41. Rules of Civility. 42. The Extravagant
Poet. 43. New Disorders of Love. 44. Ottoman Gallantry; Or, The Life of the
Bassa of Buda.
The End.

