Counselor Manners HIS LAST LEGACY TO HIS SON: Enriched and Embellished WITH
Grave Adviso's, Pat Histories, and Ingenious Proverbs, Apologues, and
Apophthegms.

By JOSIAH DARE.

Sunt bona, sunt quaedam mediocria, sunt mala plu^a,
Quae legis hic: aliter non fit, Avite, liber.
Mart. Lib. 1. Epig. XVII. LONDON, Printed for Edward Gough, and are to be sold
by most Booksellers in London. 1673.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
I Shall not according to the usual mode of those Epistles which are prefixed
to printed Books, crave the patronage of any person whatsoever to this: for I
hope that thou thy self, when thou have perused it, wilt patronize it,
considering the honesty and innocence of it; neither shall I dedicate it to any
Right Worshipful or Right Honorable person, because I think it incongruous to
present a small Book to a great Personage: Nor will I beg Pardon of any man for
this my scribble, since I might have prevented it, if I would have refrained
from dipping my Pen in mine Inkhorn, and indeed I esteem them unworthy to be
pardoned who consultedly commit a fault, and then desire to be excused for it.
All that I desire of thee is that thou would take in good part, what is here
offered thee in good will: The design of all Theologues in the Pulpit is, to
teach men Grace; and it is mine out of it, to teach them Manners, and truly a
moral life is a fair step to an holy one, and a good Behavior to a sanctified
Conversation. Unmannerly Clowns are, like Bears Cubs, mere lumps of flesh, till
they be lickt into a more comely shape; and ill tutored persons are like rough
hewn Statues you shall scarce perceive the lineaments of a man in them, till
they be wrought smooth and polished. Good manners make the man,
Quoth William of Wickham.


Be a man never so brave in his Apparel, if his Deportment be not answerable,
he is as ridiculous an Object as a Monkey or a Baboon in a Scarlet Coat, with a
Tiffany Ruff about his neck; good Manners adorn those very things that most
adorn us, for what is a Gold Ring in a Swines snout. Since then I present thee
here with such Jewels as will set thee forth and gain thee honor and respect
amongst all persons, with whom thou shall converse; I hope thou will in manners
accept them kindly, as well for thine own sake, as for his who here subscribes
himself

Thine affectionate friend and humble Servant JOSIAH DARE.

THE Grave Counselors LAST LEGACY TO HIS SON.
THere dwelt sometimes in this Island of Britain, an ancient Gentleman, called
Counselor Manners, a Man of a very fair Estate, who being both aged, and
sickly, found such weakness in himself, that he thought Nature would yield unto
Death, and Physic unto his Diseases: this Gentleman had one only Son, who
nothing resembled the Qualities of his Father; which the old Man perceiving, he
caused him to be called to his Bed side, and the Chamber being voided, he brake
with him in these Terms.

1. My Son thou art too young to Die, and I am too old to Live, and therefore
as Nature must of necessity pay her Debt to Death, so must she also pay her
Devotion to thee; whom I alive, had to be the Comfort of mine Age, and whom
alone I must leave behind me, to be the only Monument of my Name, and Honor.
If thou could as well conceive the care of a Father, as I can level at the
Nature of a Child, or were I as able to utter my Affection toward thee, as
thou ought to show thy Duty to me, then would thou desire my Life, to
enjoy my Counsel; and I should correct thy Life, to amend thy Conditions: yet
so tempered, as that neither Rigor might detract any thing from Affection in
me, or Fear any whit from thee in Duty. But seeing my self so feeble, that I
cannot live to be thy Guide, I am resolved to give thee such Counsel as may do
thee good: wherein I shall show my care, and discharge my Duty. My good Son,
thou art to receive by my Death Wealth, and by my Counsel Wisdom; and I would
thou were as willing to imprint the one in thy Heart, as thou will be ready to
bear the other in thy Purse: to be rich is the Gist of Fortune, to be wise the
Grace of God. Have more mind on thy Books* than on thy Bags, more desire of
Godliness than Gold, greater affection to die well, than live wantonly.

II. Behave thy self as becomes one of thy Birth, for if thou vauntest of thy
Lineage, and titular Dignity, and want the Virtues of thy Ancestors, thou art
but as a base serving Man, who carries on his sleeve the badge of some Noble
Family, yet is himself but an ignoble person. In which respect Aristotle
discoursing of Nobility, makes four parts thereof; the first of Riches, the
second of Blood, the third of Learning, the fourth of Virtue. And to the two
last he ascribes the first place of true Gentry, because Boors may be rich,
and Rakehels may be of ancient blood, but Virtue and Knowledge cannot harbor,
but where God and Nature has left their noble endowments. It was the saying of
old English Chaucer, that to do the gentle deeds, that makes the Gentleman.
Have what thou will, without these thou art but a three-half-penny fellow:
Gentry without Virtue is blood indeed, but blood without fat, blood without
Sinews; blood is but the body of Gentility, excellency of Virtue is the Soul:
and as Virtue is the high way to honor, so without it honor falls down in the
dust: and therefore when Hermodius a Nobleman born, but of a deboist life,
upbraided the valiant Captain Iphicrates, for that he was a Shoomakers Son, he
knowing that it was more commendable, to be made honorable for virtue, than
born noble by blood, replied, In me my Gentility begins, in thee thine ends. Be
the birth never so base, yet honesty and virtue is free from disgrace; be the
birth never so great, yet dishonesty and vice is subject to dishonor:
therefore since thou art well descended by thy birth, prove not base, either by
bad vices of thine own, or lewd devices of other men: take thy great Birth, to
be an obligation of great Virtue; suit thy behavior unto it; ennoble thy
Parentage with Piety; and since true Honor must come of thy self, and not of
others worth* work out thine own Glory by performing good deeds; and stand not
upon what thou do borrow of thy Predecessors, if thou reach not the Goodness
of those which gave thee outward Glory, and do not so much honor thy House,
with the glory of thy Virtues, as thy House has honored the with the title of
thy Degree; but do as a noisome Weed grow the ranker because thou springest
out from a rich soil, know thou art but a wooden Dagger, put into a gaudy
sheath, to help fill up the place, when that of good metal is lost, and can no
more be found. If thou do not learn Patri^are, and let my Virtue mix with thy
blood; know thou art but as a painted Fire, which may become the Wall, but
gives no light to the beholder: and that the greater my Honor and Reputation
was, the greater will thy blemish be, if thou come short of my Merits: for thou
art guilty of neglecting so good a President. Remember what Dionysius King of
Sicily said to his Son, whom he knew to have committed Adultery, Did thou
(says he) ever find such a thing in thy Father? the Son (as though he would
make his height and grandeur, a privilege of looseness, and as though it were
no matter whether men were good, so they were great,) answered, oh (said he)
you had not a King to your Father, neither (said the Father) shall thy Son,
except thou turn over a new leaf, and take a better course, ever be King. And
again remember what King Edward the First said to John Earl of Athol, who was
nobly descended, having committed a Murder upon John Cominaeus, The higher thy
calling is, the greater must be thy fall, and as thou art of higher parentage,
so shall thou be the higher hanged: and so he was on a Gallows 50. Foot high.
And as I would have thee remember the foregoing Examples, so likewise this
ensuing one, of Boleslaus the fourth King of Poland, who bore the Picture of
his Father hanged about his Neck in a plate of gold, and when he was to do any
thing, he took this Picture, and kissing it said, Dear Father, I wish I may not
do any thing that is base, or unworthy of thy Name.

III. Be acquainted with good carriage, let thy behavior be civil, and
inoffensive, unto those in whose Company thou art, to that end do nothing which
may be unpleasant, and offensive to their Senses.

And first of the Sense of Hearing, offend not the Ears of the Company with
talking loud like a Clown, for it savours not of a Gentleman so to do; besides,
it may draw upon thee, the aspersion of being a Fool, according to that
Graecians saying, (...), the loudest talkers are none of the wisest Men,
forbear also singing, especially if thy voice be harsh, and untunable; for who
will be taken with the braying of an Ass, or the notes of a Cuckoo? If in
Company thou chance to gape, put thy hand before thy Mouth, and continue not
thy discourse while thou art gaping, for that is both ridiculous, and to many
as offensive, as the gaping of a stinking Oyster: neither when thou gapest,
yawl, and roar, as some do, for that ill beseems a Man; briefly, as much as in
the lies, refrain from gaping often in Company, that those thou do converse
with, may not fancy that the Oven is gotten into the Parlour, or that one of
the wide mouthed Anticks over the Church Porch, is come amongst them. Neither
sneeze or cough too loud, and violently if thou can help it, but (if
possible) repress it, lest thou besprinkle with the dew of thy Lungs, his face
that stands by thee.

IV. And as thou must not offend the Sense of Hearing, so likewise thou must
neither offend that of Seeing; be not seen with a drop hanging at thy nose,
like an Iceicle on the Eaves of an House; neither pick thy Teeth, or blow thy
Nostrils aloud, when thou sit at the Table, nor look into thine
Handkerchief, as if thou had blown out a Pearl, or Carbuncle; neither when
thou do arise from thence, openly unbutton, or unhasp thy Breeches, as if
thou were in have to ease Nature; nor return to the Company, from the necessary
House in the Garden, with thy Hose untied; for this carries with it a show of
immodesty in thy self, and of disrespect to others; let not therefore the
impudent Dog that cares not before whom he exonerates his Belly, be thy
President, but rather let the modest Cat be a Pattern to thee of more civility,
which, as soon as me has eased her self, does presently hide and bury her
Excrements. If thou art walking with any one, and shall see any thing that is
filthy in the way, thou shall not presently turn and show it him; neither shall
thou bring any odious or loathsome thing to others, that they may see it or
smell to it.

V. For thou must be careful that thou offend not this Sense of Smelling also;
never at the Table smell to the Meat that is carved to thee; for this is very
offensive, to those that have invited thee, and seems to put an affront upon
them, as if what they had provided for thine Entertainment did stink: I
remember how a Lady returned the affront upon a Gentleman that did so; for when
she espied him to smell to the Meat she had carved to him, she said aloud
before all her Guests, Sir, if you smell any thing that is offensive, it is
your own Breath reflected from your Trencher.

VI. The next Sense is that of Tasting, which thou must take heed of offending;
never give him to whom thou drinkest, an empty Cup or Glass; for that will
argue to many an empty Pericranium: neither give to any one a Pear, an Apple, a
Peach, or an Apricock, which thou have bitten; let Kings only have their
Tasters. Smack not with thy lips in chewing thy meat, for so feeds the Swine at
his Trough; neither let thy fingers be knuckle deep in the Sauce, for that is
loathsome, and savours of Slovenry, or that thou have been better fed than
taught. Rub not thy Bread between thine Hands into Crumbs and Mammocks, as if
thou were rather to feed Chickens than thy self; but especially abstain from
doing so, when thou art to put thy bread into a Mess of Broth, or Cream,
brought to the Table, lest the sweating of thy hands may seem to make it Bread
and Butter too.

VII. Let thy Man that waits on the at the Table, observe these Instructions;
when he gives thee Wine, Beer, or Ale, let him not clum the Glass or Cup, in
his fist, but with an even and steady hand, present it to thee on a fair Plate
or Trencher; and be sure that he fills them not over-full, for that is called
Piss-pot Measure: tell him that he must not cough, spit, or sneeze, when he
presents thee that liquor which thou call for, and that he must not be
slippery fingered, for so he may sauce thy Clothes; the first thing to be
learned in Falconry, is, to hold fast. When he takes a Tossed, or a roasted Apple
from the fire, he must not blow upon it to blow off the Ashes, for men are wont
to say, that there is never Wind without some Water: let him rather strike off,
and brush off the Ashes. Let him be neat in his Clothes, let his Hands and Face
be clean, for the slovenry of the Servant, redounds to the shame and disgrace
of the Master; and men will be apt to say, like Master, like Man. Briefly, if
thou would have him to be a good Serving Man indeed, urge him to observe
these four things, 1. Speak when I speak to thee. 2. Come when I call thee. 3.
Do what I bid thee. 4. Shut the door after thee.


But to return to thy Self, and to the last Sense, which is of Touching, or
Feeling.

VIII. And this Sense thou must as little offend as any of the other four: when
thou art talking with another, stand not so near unto him, that thou may
touch him with thy Breath, for thy breath may peradventure offend him, more
than thy words may please him: neither in thy Discourse sulch him, or punch him
with thy Elbows, as if thou would rather beat it into his sides, than into
his Ears; for this is prodigiously offensive to Personages of Quality* Besides
these, there are also things done without any peculiar trouble to the Senses,
and yet they displease most men and therefore are to be avoided.

IX. Sleep not in that place where there is good Company, which may delight, or
teach thee by their discourses; lest either thou may seem to have taken a Cup
of Nimis, or little regardest the present Company; or their talk; besides it is
often seen, that sweat runs down the faces, and spittle down the Beards of such
Sleepers, which is no pleasant sight, and they commonly snort and rout which is
no pleasant hearing.

X. Pull not out of thy Pocket now this Letter or Epistle, now that, neither
take a Book by thy self in the Window, and read it; nor compose thy whole body
to cut thy Nails with thy Scissers or thy Knife, as if thou esteemest not those
who are with thee, or their discourse; and therefore to pass away the time,
thou seek for some other employment or avocation.

XI. When thou sit down, turn not thy Back to another Face, neither rest
or lean upon another, as on a prop, making him thy leaning stock, lest thou
receive the like taunt, which a Gentleman passed upon a Clown, that leaned hard
upon him, Pray friend when you have done with my shoulder, let me have it again.

XII. Imitate as much as thou can the Custom of thy Country, and People, in
the adorning and attire of thy Body, although the Clothes that are used are of
less profit, or are not so fit unto the body as the old were, or did seem to
be; if all the Country cut their Hair short, I would not have thee wear thine
long, and if they wear long Hair, I would not have thee clip thine even to thy
Ears, which would make thee show like a Duckatoon, as Mr. Cleaveland does
express it. For that is to be singular and contrary unto others, which thou
should not be, unless it be by some necessity, for this will render the most
ridiculous and contemptible unto others, and prove thee to be as humoursom as
the Cynick Diogenes, who would always go against a crowd, because he would be
contrary to all others: it is better in many things to swim with the stream,
than crosly and perversely with the Sturgeon, always swim against it: for thou will be accounted nothing, if thou opposest the public Customs of all. Do thou
therefore accommodate, or fashion thy self unto them, in a certain Mediocrity,
and be not thou the only He in thy Country, who have thy Coat hanging down to
thy Ankles, when others have it scarce hanging down to their Knees, neither
wear it very short, when others wear it very long: let not thy Beaver be made
with a steeple Crown, whilst the Crowns of other men's Hats are flat and
couchant, lest they that meet thee take thee for a stalking antic, or an Image
broke loose from an old piece of Arras. Let thy Clothes be neat, fit, and
fashionable, not over-gaudy, that the wiser sort of men may not take the for
the Kings Jester. When one was at the Printing House, busy to prepare a course
Treatise for the Press, whose margin was all filled with citing of Authors, a
learned Man came in, to whom he presented a Sheet, desiring him to peruse it,
and give him his true Judgment of it, the Gentleman having cast his eye over
the Paper, told him, that the lace was better than the Cloth; to apply this, I
know that many Gallants of the Town, upon the coorsest Cloth set the richest
Lace, which I take to be a great vanity, and therefore not sit for thy
Imitation; rather let the Cloth thou wearest be rich, and thou thy self the
best triming to it.

XIII. Wear not Clothes or Jewels, which are not fit for thy place or degree;
there are some who wear Chains of Gold about their Necks, Rings upon their
Fingers, their Garments being hung with Jewels, who will be Clothed in Purple
for Ostentation, and fine linen for Delectation, who will go beyond their
Degree and place, beyond the Rate of their Living, the State of their Calling,
and the Rule of good Laws, so that they seem to be Great and Noble Men, when
they are no better than a pitiful Barber, or some finical French dancing
Master; resembling the Foxes and Polecats, whose Cases are more worth than
their whole Bodies besides: he never goes seemly, that cuts not his Coat
according to his Cloth.

XIV. Love not thy self too much, and above measure, for if thou do, there
will be left no place in thine heart, to love others as thou should: neither
be scornful, nor disdainful; for to live with scornful and disdainful Men,
whose friendship is as easily broken as a rotten thread, is not to live with
them as Friends, but as Slaves.

Spernere Mundum, spernere nullum, spernere Sese,
Spernere se sperni, quatuor ista beant,
If thou despise the World thy self,
If thou none else despire,
If thou despise, thou art despised,
These four will make the wise.
XV. I therefore advise thee to be humble, Humility is of an excellent good
Nature, and has a singular obligingness in its constitution, it will make thee
acceptable to all men; do thou not see how intolerable the proud are, and
what is the reason of it? but because they scorn all that are not of their
Rank; they cannot be obliged, because they think, that whatsoever thou do is
due to their merit; they would be beloved by all, without loving any; they will
command in all companies, they will teach all, but learn of none; they are
incapable of gratitude, and think thou art honored sufficiently for all thy
services, if they do but receive them, and give thee a gracious nod; but the
humble man is the most agreeable person upon earth, thou obligest him by a good
word, which he thinks he does not deserve; he is thankful for the smallest
courtesy, had rather obey than rule, he is desirous to learn of the meanest
Scholar, he despises none but himself; he loves though he be not beloved, and
thinks nothing too much to do for them that esteem him, and have showed him any
civilities; of all Vices Pride is the worst, especially where it is not backed
with worth and good Parts: Aristotle espying a rich young man, but altogether
unlearned; strutting along the Streets, with a proud affected gate, and his
eyes so elevated toward Heaven, as if he would have snuft up the Moon, came to
him, and whispering him in the ear, said Friend such as thou think thy self
to be, I wish I were; but to be as thou art, I wish only to mine Enemy. Pride
is like the precedence of Funerals, he that puts himself foremost is likely the
Mourner: King Lewis the Eleventh was wont to say, When pride rides in the
Saddle, shame and confusion rides on the Crupper. He that climbs high had need
take heed to his sure footing, for the higher he mounts the greater will be his
squelsh.

XVI. Thou may err diverse ways in thy discourse, to the end therefore that
thou may avoid it, I will give thee these following Instructions.

Let not thy talk be frivolous, but especially let it not be lewd, it is a
deadly sign or symptom when a man's filthy Excrements come forth at his mouth;
one observes, that the discourses of some are so foul and obscene, that some
one or other as little acquainted with God, as themselves, will be apt to
conclude, that Nature spoiled them in the making, in setting their mouths at
the wrong end of their Bodies: and certainly it is a sign of a corrupted and
putrisied soul within, whence there steems out so much odious and stinking
breath. It becomes honest men to please others with civil and chaste language.

Neither let thy talk by any means be against God or his Saints, his Word or
his Ministers either in jest or in earnest, for if thou talk so in earnest,
thou will show thy self Atheistical, and if in jest, thou will thereby show thy
self Profane: Leave this, and domnation to boot, to the Hectors of the times. I
my self have many times observed, that some (who I am persuaded truly feared
and adored the Majesty of the most high) have often forsook the place, where
there was as well talk of God as against him.

Neither do thou call the dreadful and omnipotent God for a Witness to every
frivolous matter, nor do thou in thy familiar discourse, swear vainly by his
most sacred Name; he that usually swears to gain credit, will be sure to lose
it. For as we say, Show me a Liar, and I will show thee a Thief; so we may say,
Show me a common Swearer, and I will show thee a common Liar: this horrid Vice
like a two edged Sword will do thee mischief two ways; for it will make thee
odious first to God, and then also to all good men.

Begin no talk before thou have considered the form of it in thy mind, true
consideration is the Tutor both to acting and speaking, and a great Enemy both
to untimely Actions and Narrations: consider therefore the Matter of thy
Discourse, the Manner of it, the End of it, the Persons of whom, and to whom
thou speak. 'Twas sound and good counsel, that the Lyrick Poet gave us in
one of his Epistles, Quod de quiq viro, and cui dicas saepe caveto.
When thou do talk of any man take care. Of whom, to whom, and what thy
speeches are.

At merry meetings shun the relating of melancholy matters, but let thy
discourse be genial and frolic fit for such Times and Places; it were far
better to be silent, than to relate such things as may contristate their minds,
who are met only for the sake of mirth and jollity; neither do thou at a Feast
preach temperance, or talk at the Table of nauseous things, for these are as
much the Tricks and Devices of a Glutton, as it would be for a man to spit in
his Pottage, that he might eat them all by himself, and deter others from
eating with him: briefly, when thou art in company observe these two things,
First, Hold no Arguments.
Secondly, Lay no Wagers.


For these have often been the breach of friendship. Take heed that thou do not
do as those, who have nothing else in their mouths but their Children, their
Wise, their Nurse, saying, O how my little Boy did move me to laugh yesterday*
you never heard one of his age talk so wittily in your life, neither did you
ever see a Boy more amiable than my little Tommy: but especially run not out in
the commendations of thy Wife, what a good Huswife she is, what a Wise and
understanding Woman, and how beautiful, and yet how chaste she is, that never
man had her peer, this is as great a folly as to brag of thy Gold amongst
Thieves and Robbers: remember how it cost Candaules dear, even his life, for
showing his beautiful Wife to Gyges. Besides no body can be so idle, as to
answer these things, or to give his mind to such trifles, and there is no one
but must needs be affected with trouble to hear them.

Use not in thy discourse certain common Places and Themes wherein thou art
good, but shall want variety, which kind of Poverty is for the most part
tedious, and when once found out and observed ridiculous; thou must talk of
many matters not always harp upon one string, he that always sings one Note
without descant, breeds no delight; he that always plays one part brings
loathsomness to the ear, it is variety that moves the minds of all men; vary
therefore and intermingle thy speech with Reasons, Tales, asking of Questions,
telling of Opinions, and mixing jest with earnest, for it is a dull thing to
tire and as we say to jade any thing too far. Recite not thy stories again and
again, for this is as Nauseous as it would be to feed a man, as a Nurse does
her Child with meat chewed over and over; though the Rose be sweet, yet being
tied with the Violet the smell is more fragrant, though meat nourishes, yet
having good sauce it provokes appetite, the fairest Nosegay is made of many
Flowers, the finest Picture of sundry colors, the wholesomest Medicine of
diverse ingredients, and so the best discourse consists of various things.

My Son, as for jesting there are certain things, which ought to be privileged
from it; namely Religion (of which I have already spoken) matters of State,
great Persons, any man's present business of importance, and any case that
deserves pity: for to jeer at him that is miserable is inhumane, and as great
a cruelty, as it would be to flea a man first, and afterward to salt him. Yet
there are some that think their wits have been asleep, unless they dart out
something that is piquant, and to the quick: this is an humor which should be
bridled, and generally men ought to find the difference between saltness and
bitterness; certainly he that has a satirical vein, as he makes others afraid
of his wit, so has he need to be afraid of others memory. To jest is
tolerable, but to do hurt by jesting is insufferable; yet many there are, that
will lose their friend rather than their Jest, or their Quibble, Pun, Punnet,
or Pundigrion, fifteen of which will not make up one single jest. This like
cursed Cham, first lays open a man's nakedness, and then exposes it to the scorn
and laughter of others.

As there are some who cannot jest, so there are others who cannot bear a jest,
of whom beware, lest whilst thou breakest thy jest they break thy Pate: Non
tutum est scribere in eos, qui possunt proscribere (said an old Roman) which is
in effect* as much as to say, meddle not with those that can avenge themselves
upon thee, for thy drollery upon them; they that will irritate such Wasps, may
smart by their stings, but shall never taste of their Honey. Qui mockat
mockabitur, though it be but a piece of Mock-Latine, yet it is experimentally
found to be a serious Truth; for those that will be always jeering and flouting
at others, commonly meet with a Match for their Game Cock: As amongst an
hundred more will appear by this one instance; Three University Youngsters, who
because they had run through the Predicables and Predicaments, thought
themselves as wise as Solomon, had gotten into the best Room in an Inn, where
they were very merry, after them came riding into the same Inn a grave Country
Parson with a long white Beard, and being alone, craved leave by mine Host to
be admitted into their Company; to which they gladly condescended, resolving
within themselves to make themselves very merry with the old Country Rat, as
they termed him; whom coming into their Room they thus accosted, the first with
a low Lout said, Welcome Father Abraham, the second, welcome Father Isaac, the
third, welcome Father Jacob, to whom the old Stager replied, Gentlemen, you are
all mistaken; for I am neither Abraham, Isaac, nor Jacob, but my Name is Saul,
who has been seeking my Fathers Asses, and lo here I have found them.

There are some that will answer others contrary to what they expect, and that
without any wit at all; as if one shall ask of a Servant, Where is thy Master?
he should answer in his skin: how does the Wine taste? as if it were moist: how
came thou hither? upon my legs. These and many other like these avoid
carefully; It is better to say nothing than that which is nothing worth. When
any one of thy Company tells a story, take heed thou rejoyn not (as some
usually do) saying now, Sir, you have done telling your story, I will tell you
another, and it is a true one; for that is little better than to give him the
lie: and may with some hot Spurs give them a ground to quarrel with thee. When
thou do relate a Tale or Jest, omit the Oaths that are sometimes mingled with
it; for he that would cleanly and safely feed, will first pare his Apple, and
then cut out the Core, and what is worm-eaten. If thy merry Tales, witty
Sayings, and pleasant Jests are not approved of by the laughter of those that
are with thee, thou shall forthwith leave: briefly laugh not out at thy own
Jests, for this will sooner make thy self ridiculous, than thy Company merry.

Be not impertinent as some, who when they relate a story, will say him of whom
I speak, was the Son of this or that man, who lives in such a place, do you not
know the man? he has a Wife and Children, he is a tall man, and something
ancient; truly if you know him not, you know no body, I know such a man knows
him very well: all this is but beating about the Hedge, but no catching the
Bird.

In thy Discourse thou must use as much as thou can words that are proper,
and express a thing according to Art; that thou may not therefore talk like a
Clown in the Company of Gentlemen, I advise thee to be skilful in the terms of
Heraldry, Hawking and Hunting, lest thou make thy self as ridiculous by using
improper terms, as the Frenchman was, when he called to the Maid to cleanse his
Chamber, saying, he had untrust a point there.

Never talk French, Latin, or Italian at the Table, or in the Company of those
who understand neither of these Languages; for this will either argue
Ostentation in thy self, or make those with whom thou do converse jealous,
that thou talkest no good of them. I have heard of one that was fitted in his
kind for this folly, who drinking to a grave Matron, said, Come, Madam, here is
an Health omnibus Nebulonibus, and Nebulonibus nostris, to whom she replied, I
thank you, Sir, not forgetting your Father and your Mother.

Use not flat and mean expressions, when thou art talking of great and
illustrious things, or such as require more full ones. When Seneca heard a dull
Fellow describing a Tempest at Sea, after a very mean rate, he laughed at him,
and told him; Sir, I have seen a greater tempest in a Pail of Milk than you
have described. Of this fault also was that French man guilty, who styled
Christ the Dauphin of Heaven: and he who called the Sun the Lanthorn of the
World, of the two he had been better to have said the Moon; for few men make
use of a Lanthorn by day, unless it be as Diogenes did to seek for an honest
man. Another there is who tells us, that the body is the Socket of the Soul,
which is but a greasy and stinking Metaphor; and a thousand more like these
could I here reckon up to thee, but the following one shall serve for all,
which is this, I remember that when I was a Schoolboy one of my Fellows was
well whipped, because in a Copy of Verses upon the Gunpowder Treason, he called
Guydo Fawks for attempting to blow up the Parliament* House, a very Knave.
Werefore remember I advise thee to adequate and adapt all thine expressions, as
the Grandeur of the matter that thou speak of does duly require.

Begin no talk, unless thou art able to continue it, lest thou do as that
Rump-Parliament-man, who all the while he sat in the House, would start up at
every thing proposed, and say, Mr. Speaker, I conceive, and so without speaking
any more words would sit down again; upon which another Member of the House
stood up, and said, Mr. Speaker, this Gentleman does still conceive, but has
never strength to bring forth. Farther, be sure to know when to begin Talk, and
when to end it, that thou may avoid that Vice, which Songsters are guilty of,
who being entreated will scarce sing Sol Fa, but not desired will strain above
Ela; for which the Satyrist does thus stigmatize them, -- They cannot abide to
sing a Song,
If they are entreated, but they will never give over,
If not desired --
Be not thou either so Morose as not to talk at all, or if thou have once begun
so tedious as never to make an end, but to keep a perpetual noise as Crickets
do in the Chimney-corner; a man had as good have a Drum always beating in his
ears, as be troubled with such impertinent Coxcombs. The wisdom next to
speaking well, is to know when to begin and when to end; therefore keep measure
in thy Communication, if thou art too brief thou shall not be understood, if
too long thou will be tedious.

XVII. Neither do thou follow the Example of those, who will prefer themselves
in all things above others, who will put themselves in the best Beds, in the
best Chambers, and in the highest Places, and will like nothing but what they
themselves invent or do, but will set aside and suspend others with a Jest, and
will have themselves accounted best in solemn Feasts or Banquets, in
Horsmanship, in Plays, and in all Refreshments of the Body and Exercises of the
Mind to excel all others, and boast much of what they have, and what they have
done; which things are odious, and therefore I advise thee to avoid them: and
remember that nothing makes a man's breath stink worse than commendations of
himself. Speech of thy self ought to be seldom and well chosen. I knew one,
says Sir Francis Bacon, who was wont to say in scorn; he must needs be a wise
man he speaks so much of himself: and there is but one case wherein thou may
commend thy self with good Grace, and that is in commending Virtue in another,
especially if it be such a Virtue whereunto thou thy self pretendest.

Never speak well of thy self, unless thou be taxed for any dishonesty by a
slanderous Tongue; for a man may tell his Slanderer, that he is as honest a man
as himself, or any of his Generation; and if a man shall say I am an honest
man, he is not to be taxed of vainglory; but if he say I am a learned man, or
I am a wise man, he will show himself to be very vain; so then a man may praise
himself as to his Morals, but not as to his Intellectuals.

XVIII. Resemble not those, who when a Question is proposed unto them, are so
long before they give their Opinion, that they prove very troublesome in making
a very long Circumstance or Excuse, saying, Sirs, I am the unworthiest and the
unlearnedest in the whole Company, here are Gentlemen who are far worthier and
far more learned than I am, and are better able to answer the Question
propounded (when indeed he is by the confession of all, the learnedest there,
and best able to give a resolution) yet for the sake of obedience I shall
willingly submit my self to your commands, whilst these and many other vain
Preambles are made, they put a stop to the present business, and in that time
the Question might have been answered: when a Fiddler is long and tedious in
tuning his Fiddle, who will care for his Music?

XIX. Be not thou like those who are so heady, sharp, sullen, and rough, that
nothing can please them, howsoever or by whomsoever it is done; who, whatsoever
is said unto them, do answer with a grim or sower countenance; and in
whosoevers company they are, chide their Servants, nay sometimes beat them, so
that they disturb the whole company, to whom all humors are odious, but what
are Debonaire: and to jar, scold, and ruffle with those about thee, just when
thy Guests are ready to sit down at thy Table, is as if thou should scrape
thy Trenchers to set their Teeth on edge, before they begin to eat their meat:
be not angry at thy Table whatsoever happens, but rather contain thy self and
dissemble it, lest there should a sign of trouble appear in thy countenance,
and so thy Guests be induced to believe, that some in the company are not so
welcome as they should be: but rather be merry and facetious at thy Meals, for
this like Poynant sauce will make thy Meal the more savoury.

XX. Be not contrary to others desires, neither oppose the delights of others;
when they talk of what Sports they most delight in, do not thou undervalue
them, nor, if they desire thee to make one at their Recreations, refuse their
desires; for that argues morosity; complacency is hugely pleasing to all those,
with whom we converse, and one jarring string spoils the harmony of a whole set
of Music.

XXI. Be not rough or strange but rather pleasant and familiar, accustom thy
self to salute every one very kindly, to talk with them and answer them very
pleasantly and familiarly; it is a true token of Nobility and the certain mark
of a Gentleman to be courteous to all, and especially to Strangers.
Themistocles was so full of courtesy, that he never entered the Marketplace,
without saluting every Citizen by his name, or some other friendly
compellation; as a Bell is known by the sound, so is a man's Gentility by his
courteous affability. Ferdinando King of Spain was wont to say, that proud
looks lose hearts, but courteous words win them. Courtesy will drew unto thee
the love of Strangers, and the good liking of thine own Countrymen.

XXII. Avoid the custom of many, who will always be of a sad countenance, and
will never be merry with their friends, but refuse all things that are offered
to make them merry, and when any one sends commendations unto them, they will
answer the Messenger, what am I the better for his commendations? and if any
one tells them that such or such a friend of late asked for them, whether they
were in good health or no, they will answer he may come and see if he please.

XXIII. Thou must not be melancholy, and thoughty in that place, where any one
is, as if thou were snatched and placed without thy self; yea although this may
be born with in those, who have spent many years, in the consideration and
contemplation of the Liberal Arts and Sciences, yet I tell thee in others
without doubt, it is not to be approved of, yea thou do well at that time, in
which thou think to meditate, to go in from the company of others, either
into thy Study or some other solitary Place, the solitary Nightingale sings
sweetest, when all other Birds are fast asteep.

XXIV. Be not of too nice and delicate a Mind, and too precise in thy
discourse, for I say that talk with such men, as are so, is rather a Bondage
than an equal Society: there are some who are so nice and curious in all their
words and actions, that to live and converse with them, is no other than to be
surrounded with brittle Glasses, so that men greatly fear to touch them, they
must handle and observe them very softly and gently, they must fitly and
carefully salute them, visit them, and answer their questions, otherwise they
will be very angry; they are so delighted with their titles, that unless any
one shall have them at his fingers ends, and use them at every word, they will
be displeased, nay they will scarce answer him, or if they do it will be thus,
I truly (as thou know) am called Master, but thou do forget to put a M
under thy Girdle.

Take heed of lying, for if thou usest this vice often, thou will lose thy
credit amongst all men; the Persians and Indians deprived him of all honor and
further speech, that lied. Homer writes of the great and valiant Captain
Achilles, that he did more abhor lying than death: remember how that the
Cretans for lying became a byword to the whole world; much less do thou add to
thy lying execrable wishes; Munster writes of Popiel the Second, King of
Poland, who had ever this word in his mouth* if it be not true, I would the
Rats might eat me, but shortly after being at a Banquet, he was so fiercely
assailed by Rats, that neither his Guard, Fire, or Water could preserve him
from them. Neither be thou like those Jesters, who practice lying and telling
strange inventions of their own, which are most false, to please for a time the
Hearers; nor like those who devise and spread false News, and account it good
sport to deceive the simple; but be thou slow to tell News and Tales;
whatsoever thou see or hear of others, either meddle not with it, but
strive to be quiet and do thine own business; or if it so concern thee, that
thou must needs speak of it, take heed that thou do not mistake any part of it,
many things are so spoken, that they may be taken well or ill, yea and what can
be said but some one or other may turn it into an evil Meaning? as the Spider
that out of the best Flowers will suck some Poison: but be thou of the mind to
take every thing the best way, and as it were by the right handle; knowing that
it is the Devils property to make the worst of every thing. Thou may be
deceived in what thou hear another speak; because thou can not see the
Heart and Meaning of the Person, much more in that which thou have of him by
Hearsay, for Reports are commonly very faulty, and seldom hold truth in all
points; and those that told it thee, are apt to deny it again, if thou have not
witness, and so thou may run thy self into great trouble: therefore imitate
Epimenides the Painter, who after his return from Asia, being enquired of News,
answered, I stand here to sell Pictures not to tell News.

Neither follow thou the example of vain Travelers and Praters, who merely out
of vanity, and because they would say something, set such things as they have
seen or heard upon the Tenter-hooks, stretching them most palpably beyond all
credit, or coining incredible things out of their own Mint, that never before
saw any light, and have no more affinity with Truth, than the opinion of
Copernicus of the motion of the earth; or that Relation of our Countryman of
the New World in the Moon, or of Domingo Gonzales, and his flight thither upon
the Wings of his Ganzas: I have read of a Knight (who shall be nameless) that
rendered himself ridiculous by this Means; for using to make multiplying Glasses
of what he in his long and great Travels had observed,* professed that he once
conversed with a Hermit who was (in the opinion of all men) able to commute
any Metal into Gold with a Stone he kept still hanging at his Girdle: and being
asked of what kind it was, and not readily answering, the witty Lord of Saint
Albans standing by said, he did verily believe it was a Whet-stone.

Make not Lies upon thy self as many do, boasting vain-gloriously of
themselves, praising their knowledge and bragging of what great acts they have
done, as if they only were wise, when alas it is well known they are otherwise;
such men may fitly be compared to the Bell in the Clock-house at Westminster,
which had this Inscription about it,

King Edward made me,
Thirty thousand and three,
Take me down and weigh me,
And more shall ye find me.
But when this Bell was taken down and weighed, this and two more, were found
not to weigh twenty thousand: Such vainglory as this being like a Window
Cushion specious without, but stuffed with Hay within, or some such Trash;
wherefore when a Soldier bragged of a Wound in his Forehead, Augustus asked
him, whether he did not get it, when he looked back as he fled.

XXVI. Go not vauntingly and proudly as some, who go as if they were the only
men of their Country, and speak and look very high and losty when they have
scarce any home to go to, or any thing to maintain their Highness and
Lostiness, imitating the Spaniards who are highly conceited of themselves,
great Braggers, and extremely proud even in the lowest ebb of Fortune, which
appears by the Tale of the poor Cobbler on his death bed, who commanded his
eldest Son coming to him for his last Blessing, to endeavor to retain the
honor worthy so noble a Family; also a Woman of that Country attended on by
three of her Brats, went a begging from door to door some French Merchants
traveling that way, and pitying her case, offered her to take into their
Service the bigger of her Boys, but she proud, though poor, scorning (as she
said) that any of her Lineage should endure an Apprentiship, returned this
answer, that for ought she or any knew her Son (simple as he stood there) might
live to be King of Spain; such Braggadocios as these, are like the Peacock, who
though he be hatched on a Dunghill, yet is he the proudest of Birds: Nay some
of these are so proud that they are ashamed of their Parents, resembling those
Beasts who think themselves well hid, if they can but hide their Heads: never
remembering Sir Thomas Moor who being Lord Chancellor in his time, and
consequently in an Office, next and immediately to the King himself, and having
his own Father living, and at that time but one of the inferior Judges of the
Kings Bench (that then was) never went to Westminster Hall, to sit in the
Chancery there, but he would go up to the Kings Bench, where his Father then
sat, and there on his Knees would ask him blessing before a multitude of
beholders; so little was he ashamed of his Father, though then in a far lower
Condition than himself.

XXVII. Take heed of being too ceremonious and complemental, lest thou give
others an occasion to think, that thou art full of Craft because thou art full
of Courtesy; the bowings, bendings, and cringings of some resemble but such
gestures as men use when they go about to catch ^otterils: yet there are some
Cere^^^^es in giving men their due Titles of Honor, according to their several
Degrees, either when we write to them, or talk with them, which we cannot omit,
without the imputation of being ill-bred: thou must not write to a Knight or an
Esquire thus, To Mr. B. G. Knight, or Esquire, but must call the one
Right-Worshipful, the other Worshipful; nor must thou style a Lord Right
Worshipful, but Right Honorable, or a King or Prince Right Honorable, but in
discourse thou shall say to a King, and it please your Majesty, to a Prince,
and it like your Highness, to a Lord, and it like your Honor, to a Knight or
an Esquire, and it like your Worship, to an Archbishop, and it like your
Grace, to a Bishop, and it please your Lordship, and the one thou must style
the most Reverend, the other the Right Reverend Father in God: give therefore
to every one his due Title, which does properly belong to him, for as we must
not clip money nor embase it, so neither must we detract any thing from the
honor of any person whatsoever: Neither must we give to Tradesmen and
Mechanics, or other persons of low Degre^ such Titles as are too big for them
to ^^ar; for that were to take a Giants Clothes, and put on upon the back of a
Pigmie. (My Son) not to use Ceremonies, or Complements at all is to teach
others not to use them again; and so diminishes respect unto thy self;
especially they must not be omitted to strangers, and formal Natures: but the
laboring too much to express them, does lose their grace, for that must be
natural and unaffected, and the dwelling upon them, and exalting them above the
Moon, is not only tedious, but will diminish thy faith and credit: for (as one
says) Men had need to beware, how they be too perfect in Complements; for be
they never so sufficient otherwise, their Enviers will be sure to give them
that attribute, to the disadvantage of their greater Virtues; Yet certainly,
there is a kind of conveying of effectual and imprinting passages amongst
Complements, which is of singular use if a man can hit upon it. Amongst thy
Peers thou shall be sure of familiarity, and therefore it is good a little to
keep state, amongst thy inseriours thou shall be sure of reverence, and
therefore it is good a little to be familiar: too much of either will breed
contempt: Briefly, let not thy behavior be like a Verse, wherein every
syllable is measured, but like thine Apparel, not too straight, or Point
Device, but free for Exercise and Motion: using Ceremonies and Complements as a
Taylour does Clothes, which he does so cut and join together, until at length
he makes them fit for the body; so thou must cut off superfluous Ceremonies
and Complements, and take only those that are decent for thee to use.

XXVIII. Take heed of slandering another, or poisoning his reputation, or
reporting evil things of him, or of carrying Tales and false accusations, this
will make thee most odious, if thou do use it, for those to whom thou do
report slanderous tales of others, will think that thou will report slanderous
tales of them unto others, and so they will abhor thee.

XXIX. Oppose no man whilst he is talking or disputing, which many use to do;
there shall not a word drop from another Tongue, but they presently will take
it up, and oppose him, and contend with him, and say it is not true, or it is
not so as he reports it, the man was not so and so, nor the things thus; truly
it is a sign of a man not well educated, nor well learned; for every one loves
Victory and will hardly be overcome, as well in words as in deeds: besides it
begets nothing but hatred and disdain: wherefore thou were far better to yield
to the opinion of others, especially in things of small moment, and which
perhaps do not concern thee: the victory in this kind is loss, for the Victor
in any frivolous Question does in the mean while often lose a loving friend, as
Ixion lost his Juno to grasp an empty Cloud.

XXX. If thou art desired at any time to dispute of any thing, in whosoevers
company it be, thou shall do it after a pleasing manner; thou must not desire
the commendation of thy wit, in being able to hold all arguments, but of thy
judgment, in discerning what is true; thou must not think it praise enough to
know what might be said, but what should be thought: neither in disputing do
thou strive so much as if thou were more greedy of obtaining the Victory, than
of discussing and sisting out the truth: neither suffer the Heat of disputation
to cool and extinguish that of charity and love.

XXXI. Be not thou like those, who that they may show themselves subtle,
intelligent, and wise men, will always be giving of counsel unto others, always
reproving of others, and always disputing with others, and many times they come
from words even to blows, and by this means render themselves odious unto all:
by their counselling and rebuking of others, they show that they account
themselves wiser than other men, and so indeed such men ought truly to be, for
as he is a wise man that will take good counsel, so he is the wiser man that
can give it.

XXXII. Resemble not those, who will pluck up Tares out of other men's fields,
and all the while they will suffer their own to be overgrown with Briars and
Nettles: Many are most severe to others in their slips and falls to which they
themselves are most subject, as appears by Johannes Cremensis a Priest Cardinal
the Popes Legate, who in a Convocation at Westminster called in the year of our
Lord 1126. inveighed most bitterly against the marriage of Priests, and was
himself the next night taken in Bed with a common Harlot, for shame whereof, he
got him away leaving all his business at six and seven, without taking leave of
any.

XXXIII. Mock no body with their poverty, Lateness or Blindness, or any thing
they cannot help; neither do thou imitate either Stammerers Crook backed or
cromp-footed men, neither make a Laughing Stock of thy worst enemy, much Iess
of thy best friend; thou ought not to laugh at one for the sake of
recreation and pleasure, nor at the other for the sake of contempt and disdain.

XXXIV. Thou must not do any thing that is base, unhandsom, or scurrilous, to
excite others to laughter, such as the writhing of the Eyes, Mouth, or Face, or
the imitating of Fools in Stage Plays, or Puppet-plays; for this is to make thy
self a Fool, that wiser men may laugh at thee.

XXXV. Give no man the Lie, lest thou be answered with a Stab, or compelled to
answer for it by a Duel; for few there are who can pass by such an Affront, as
King Henry the Third did, who though Simon Mounford Earl of Leicester (who was
of a very testy and choleric Constitution) gave him the Lie to his Face, yet
he passed it over without Revenge, showing himself thereby to be a King over
himself as well as over his Subjects.

XXXVI. It is not good to excuse another, in that which thou do know him to
have deserved blame; and if he have erred, thou shall make that error both
yours, and when thou do admonish him of it, or reprehend him for it, thou
shall say, We have greatly erred, we must remember how we did yesterday commit
this or that error, although he alone be guilty of it, and not thou. By this
civil and gentle Method thou shall the easier mould him like soft wax to take
the impressions of good counsel for the future: a wild Heifer is sooner to be
tamed with gentle usage than rough handling.

XXXVII. As thou respectest thy credit amongst men, be careful to perform thy
promises, otherwise they will count thee but a Whiffling-fellow, a right honest
man will be as much obliged by his word as by his Bond; nothing makes a man
more like God than these two things, Holiness and Truth. To promise and not to
perform is to do a Lie, and a true Gentleman must abhor as well to do a Lie as
to speak one. It was a foul Character which one gave of the Neopolitans, who
were wont to promise much, but to perform little, viz. that they had
wi^emouths, but narrow hands; Promises are Debts, and Debts are Sins if we
never pay them.

XXXVIII. Interrupt no one whilst he is talking, either by making of a noise,
or by speaking out of thy turn, neither shall thou cause his talk to be
forsaken, or neglected, or slighted by the Hearers, either by showing some new
thing, or by calling aside the attention of those that are present any other
way; but be attentive when others talk, lest thou shall by and by be forced to
ask what he said last: if he be slow in expression, thou shall not run before
him, and minister words unto him, as if thou were rich, and he poor; many take
this in ill part, and especially those who think themselves better Masters of
their Language than thy self. Take heed therefore of taking a man's talk out of
his mouth; for as it is a shame for a man to eat his own words, so it is
shameful also for a man to eat another man's words out of his mouth: this is as
offensive to some as it would be to clap thy hand upon their mouth, when they
are about to gape.

XXXIX. There are some, who though they know least, yet they talk most; as the
weakest Wheel in the Cart screeks loudest, and the emptiest Hogshead gives the
greatest sound. Wise men refrain from too much talk, fearing lest in talking
much, they should err much: Nature has given us two Ears, two Eyes, and but
one Tongue, to the end we should see and hear more than we speak: the Tongue is
but a small Member, yet many times does more hurt than the whole Body besides;
and many a man does with his Tongue cut his own Throat. Use therefore thine
Ears and Eyes more than thy Tongue; those that are too full of words, render
themselves odious; for it carries in it a certain kind of Pride in them, viz.
that they esteem themselves more excellent, wiser men, and better learned than
those that hear.

XL. In talking it is better to further another man's desire, than to hinder it;
wherefore if another be about to tell any thing, thou shall not say, I know
that already, and so by that means break off his Discourse; for though thou
do know it, yet perhaps the rest that are then present do not: neither shall
thou, if thou think any thing that is reported by another, to be a Lie, in any
wise upbraid him with it, either in word or gesture, either by shaking thy
head, or wresting aside thine eyes, or blaring out thy tongue, for this is next
of kin to the giving a man the Lie.

XLI. And as immoderate Talk does beget disdain, so too much Silence and
Reservation is odious, and by most men hated. Therefore as those who are wont
to drink in their Feasts and Solemnities, an d make themselves merry, do remove
those that do not, or will not comply and be merry with them, so those which
are too silent and grave, no Company will love; for they seem to the rest to
sit as Judges and Censurers of their words and actions: Compliance begets
Complacency. Take therefore thy turn to speak as well as thy turn to hold thy
peace.

XLII. In questioning much, thou shall learn much, and content much, but
especially if thou apply thy questions to the skill of the persons, whom thou
ask, for thou shall give them occasion to please themselves in speaking, and
thou thy self shall continually gather knowledge: but let not thy questions be
troublesome, for that is fit for a Poser.

XLIII. Follow not the Example of those, who when all are ready to sit down at
Table, the Meat being brought in, will seem to have forgotten to write
something, and therefore call for a Pen and Ink, or run out to make water,
desiring the Company to stay for him but a Pissing while, which must needs give
no small trouble or distaste to those who are sharp and hungry.

XLIV. Avoid all kind of Vice that may deform thee, and since thou art
beautiful, do such things as become thy Beauty: let the Beauty of thy Mind,
which consists in choosing Virtue, and avoiding Vice, set forth that of thy
whole Body, which consists in Favor, Color, and in decent Gestures and
Motions; Beauty when it is not joined with Virtue, is like the Feathers of a
Phoenix, placed on the Carcass of a Crow: and he or she who is fair without and
foul within, may no more justly be thought or called Beautiful than a stinking
Dunghill, because it is covered with Snow.

XLV. When thou art to go to any place, run not, nor make too much haste, for
that is not the part of a Gentleman, but of a Footman. It is observed of the
Lion, which is the noblest Beast in the Forest or Desert, that he is never seen
to run: as thou may know much of a man's disposition by his Countenance or
Mien, so also by his Gate; for thou may many times discover a totty Pate by
the Legs that bear it. To walk with thy Nose erected, and thine Arms always a
Kembow, like the Ears of a Pottage pot, will induce such as either meet or
follow thee, to censure thee for a proud Coxcomb. If thou tread mincingly with
thick and short steps, as if thou were walking upon Eggs, they will be apt to
believe that thou art a finical self conceited Fool. Let not thine Arms as
theirs do that are sowing Corn, when thou go, seem to walk as fast as thy
Legs, for this will make them account thee for a Country-Clown; nor in thy
going creep like a Snail, or jump like a Grasshopper, or lift up thy feet too
high like a blind Mill-horse, neither take wide steps as if thou were measuring
of Land, or straddle, lest thou make the Ladies suspect that thou art shot
between wind and water; in fine, let thy manner of walking be grave, modest,
and no way affected: for this is very decent and comely. My Son, these
Animadversions which I have before mentioned, may seem to thee minute and
trifling matters, yet I assure thee in our familiar Converse with men, like the
filings of Gold, they have their weight and price as well as things of a
greater Mass or Bulk; but to proceed in my advice.

XLVI. The next thing is I would not have thee force another man to drink more
than he well can; for this is so far from using him with Civility, that it
savours rather of such Barbarity, as the Dutch used at Amboyna against our
English, whom by putting the brim of an Hat under their Chins, and pouring
water continually upon it, they forced to drink till their Bellies were ready
to break, and their Eyes to start out of their Sculls. It Is the noblest
Entertainment amongst sober and grave, wise and good men, to give every man his
own freedom.

XLVII. When any Visitants of Quality come to wait upon thee, withdraw not thy
self from their Society, but with the greatest Civilities entertain them, and
let them have all the freedom and the best Accommodations thy House will
afford; yet when the Bottles like Hand-Granado's fly about, reserve to thy self
thine own liberty: so shall thou the longer enjoy thy Estate, because thy
Temperance and Sobriety will prolong thy days: remember that thou art the
Master of the House, and not mine Host, to drink with all comers as he does.

XLVIII. Take great care for the preservation of thy good Name; for as thy
Garment after it has been once rent and torn is like so still more to be by
every Nail and Tenterhook thou come near, so will it fare with thy good Name,
if it be once tainted with just reproach; nothing is more hardly to be found
again, if once it is lost, than a man's good name or reputation: which one
prettily expresses thus, by this Apologue, it happened that upon a time, Fire,
Water, and Reputation went to travel together, but before they set forth they
considered (that if they lost one another) how they might meet again; Fire
said, where you see smoke there you shall find me; Water said, where you see
Flags growing in Moorish grounds, there you shall find me; but Reputation said,
take heed how you lose me, for if you do, you will run a great hazard never to
meet with me again.

XLIX. To the end therefore that thou may keep thy good Name, abandon the
society of those, which are noted for evil living and lewd behavior; for by
holding familiarity with such men, thou will incur two evils, for either thou
shall be thought such a one thy self, or in a little time shall really be so,
for it is commonly seen, that a man contracts a tincture upon himself, suitable
to the conditions of those persons with whom he does familiarly converse, as
those that accompany a Collier shall be black, and those who live with a Miller
shall be white; it may be said of frequenting ill company, as they were wont to
say in a common Proverb here in England of going to Rome, He that goes to Rome
once, sees a wicked man; he that goes twice, learneth to know him; but he that
goes thrice thither, brings him home with him; so he that frequenteth wicked
company, the first time that he comes amongst them, he sees their courses; the
second time he learns them; and the third time he commonly brings them home
with him. Company is good, if it be good company, he that keeps company with
lewd and infamous persons, shall be thought a Bird of the same Feather. It was
Seneca's observation upon Canopus a Town in Egypt so branded in old time for
variety of all kinds of beastliness and luxury, that he who avoided the
vitiousness and debauchery of it could not escape the infamy, the very place
administering matter of suspicion: Beware of these three Bs Back. Belly.
Building.


L. In reference to the first B the Back, take heed how thou consumest thy
Estate by thy prodigious Bravery, some men have been so vain, as to make their
Garments of a Lordship, and have lined them with their Farms, and laced them
with all the Gold and Silver which their friends left them; the Barks of such
vain Fools, like that of the Cinamon-Tree, are more worth than their Truncks:
while their variety and several changes of Apparel cover a thread bare Purse.

LI. Next, in reference to the Belly, which is the second B, take heed thou be
not like the Epicures and Belly-Gods, Velvet-mouth'd and sweet-tooth'd, who are
not content with the choicest Viands, unless their very sauce be sauced too;
and think they shall be starved, unless the third course be brought to Table,
and the Sweetmeats after that: how many by such luxuries have drawn at length
their goods through their guts. Such men like Cleopatra (who drinking a health
to her Antony, swallowed a Pearl dissolved in Vinegar worth many millions)
gulch down their Estates by gulps, till in the end they come to be glad of a
dry Crust; and in conclusion, by keeping too great a House, they keep no House
to cover their heads; and their sat Revenues like their rostmeat drips all
away: the Purses of such Prodigals may be said to be poor by their great goings
out, while their Bellies may be said to be rich by their great comings in.

LII. Lastly, in reference to Building, which is the third B, take heed thou
engage not too far in it, for this will pick a man's Purse, as it did the
foolish Builders in the Gospel, who began to build but could not make an end;
and leave their houses desolate, as the slothful man's Vineyard, described thus
by Solomon, Lo it was all grown over with thorns, and Nettles had covered the
face thereof, and the stone walls thereof were broken down. Or if they be
resident on their houses, it necessitates them to keep a Table, which will
starve twenty tall men, besides many a Mouse: the House being the bigger for
the smallness of the Kitchen. They can keep but few fires in many Chimnies, the
smoke comes all out of one hole only: and though a man may see them a far off,
yet he cannot smell them nigh at hand; Bread and Beef are turned into stones;
the stately roof, the costly pavement, and the curious workmanship, has pined
away hospitality, and brought her into a consumption, not to be recovered:
Therefore, I advise thee in thy diet, not to be too curious, nor yet too
coorse; in thy attire not to be too costly nor yet too clownish; and finally as
for thy buildings, let them be useful and commodious, not vain and over
sumptuous; it was a severe but just scoff which the Lord Treasurer Burleigh
past upon a Knight, that shall not be named, who having built a very stately
fabric, to the great diminution of his estate and revenue, was yet ambitious
to entertain the Queen at his fine house; and to that purpose new painted his
Gates, with his Coat of Arms and his Motto in great golden Letters, thus o^ia
Vanitas.

The Lord Treasurer offering to read it, desired to know of the Knight, what he
meant by o^ia, who told him, it stood by contraction for omnia; whereupon the
Lord Treasurer replied, truly Sir I very much wonder that having made your
omnia so little as you have, you notwithstanding make your Vanitas so large.
Therefore (the premises considered) content thy self (my Son) with that House I
shall leave thee, without any alteration, unless it be for thy convenience. The
Spaniards think that they cannot curse a man worse, than to say the Plague of
Building light upon thee; and we have here at home an English Proverb, That he
who often does dip his fingers in Mortar will lose his Nails.

LIII. There is a fourth thing that is as great a waster, if not a greater, of
a man's Estate, than any of those three things we last spoke of, and that is
Whoring; this has undone many; the Harlot is an Horseleech, which if thou have
Gold or Silver about thee, will never out of thy bosom, till that be out of thy
Purse; and has brought thy hundred to six, as the Usurer adds six to his
hundred. Nor will she bereave thee of thy goods only, but of thy good Name
also; a bad report is ever the Whoremasters portion, and even whilst he lives
he may be Administrator to his own good Name, for that dies before him, and
stinks above ground; yea his reproach is such, as shall not only outlive
Himself but his Posterity likewise: for it shall never be put out, the Town and
Country shall ring of his baseness and dishonesty with the accent of shame.

And as Harlots will bereave a man of his goods and good name, so will they
shorten his days, as (according to the observation of Herbalists) those Plants
dye soonest which run most into seed: and so likewise the Naturalists have
observed, that the salacious Sparrows of all Birds are shortest lived, by
reason of their immoderate and frequent copulation: and assuredly it was not
without a Mystery, that (as Plutarch informs us in his 23. Romans Quaest.) the
things belonging to Funerals were ordered by the Roman Magistrates, to be sold
in the Temple of Venus. Wherefore as the crasie Emperor Adrian said once inter
turbam Medicorum pereo, amongst many Physicians I perish, so may many a Gallant
say of himself, by accompanying my self with many Strumpets I have ruined my
self. For such unclean Beasts, like Murrain Cattle, infect those that herd with
them, with such foul diseases as will stick by them, when their best friends
give them over; their very Hairs having the falling sickness, and whereas other
men lose their lives, these cast them away; not so much in hatred to
themselves, as love to their Mistresses. I have read that Jovanni Zecca the
famous Bolognian Physician, openly professed by his Bills to give a certain
Antidote against taking of the French Pox, and when multitudes flockt to him,
for his Medecin (believing that it consisted of Pills, Potions, Diet*drinks,
Diaphoreticks, Salivations, Oils, Plasters, Electuaries, Powders, and other
such medicinal ingredients) he only gave them the Picture of a Gallant drawn to
the life, with his Nose eaten off, telling them, that the way how to use this
Receipt, was, that just as they were about to lie with a lascivious Woman, they
should take this Picture out of their bosoms, and seriously view and consider
it, and if this did not preserve them from taking that foul Disease, he
believed nothing would do it: how much more may I hope, that exposing to thy
view the shame and deadliness of this sin, causing the loss of the Soul, which
is more precious than that of the Nose, to make thee loath and abhor those
shameful and pernicious courses, and dead all carnal desires in thee of eating
those dainty Bits, which how savoury soever they seem in the chewing, are so
mortiserous when swallowed down.

For this sin of Carnality not only ruins a man's Estate, or impairs his
health, but also like a Cancer eats into the very Soul; for Harlots are the
highway to the Devil, when a man looks upon them with desire, he begins his
Journey, when he sits toying and prattling with them, he mends his pace, and
when he lies with them, his Journey is at an end.

Since therefore the exercise of Venery is the high way to Beggary, to the
losing of thy Credit and Reputation, to he shortning of thy life here, and the
eternal loss of it hereafter, avoid it carefully. It is very true what
Aristotle observes, (...) that the concupiscence of the flesh is less boundless
than the unruly Sea: one Woman is enough for a man's Love, two too much for his
Estate, three too few for his Lust. To avoid therefore the Temptations of the
Flesh, I counsel thee not to frequent the Company of handsome, but immodest
Women; Platonic Love is but a mere Chimaera: if a man sit down and say Grace
to it, he will soon fall to the Flesh that is set before him: to rely then upon
the strength of thine own Chastity is more rash than wise, and therefore if
thou make profession of not staining thy Reputation with the spots of
Lasciviousness, thou must shun all those that may entice or allure thee
thereunto. For as one ingeniously speaks, It Is not only a great piece of folly,
but an infinite rashness, to make Gunpowder in a Smiths Shop, and hope to make
people believe that there is no danger in it. In the next place.

LIVE. If thou desire to be rich, and continue so, shun high Play; the way to
keep what is thine own, is not to covet what is another man's. The common
Gamester, who is never well at ease any longer than he is shuffling a Pack of
Cards, will at last come to shuffle for his living; and the Dice he delights in
will in the end waste his Estate to the very bones; for the Palsy (I mean the
shaking of his Elbow) will be his overthrow: and when he has played away his
Patrimony he may curse the Bones, as well as the Whore-master cries out upon the
Flesh. But some will say they pick out a pretty living by Play, indeed they
cannot use a fitter term; for as Vultures, they pick and prey upon others: But
let them cast up their account, and in the end they shall find, that they put
their Winnings in a broken Bag. Make not an Occupation of Play and Pastime, and
though thou may sometimes recreate thy self (for a Bow too much bended may
break) yet make not an hahit o using generous Delights, much less of bass ones.
When thou art playing, look not pale for fear to lose, nor be transported with
desire to win, lest thou fret, and sum, and disquiet thy self, and so at once
lose thy patience together with thy Money. Therefore assure thy self, that the
best Cast at Dice is to cast them quite away: For he that lays his Estate upon
the Eyes of the Dice, will leave a small Estate for his own eyes to look upon
in the end.

LV. Beware of Flatterers, those that will commend in thee qualities which thou
have not, or too much extol those thou have; and will make thee believe, thou
do not know thy own Worth, and bless themselves with both their hands, if any
thing proceed from thee worthy but mere commendation: thou must not give ear to
these Claw-backs: but stop their passage, and bend thy Brows upon excessive
praise; never courting it otherwise, than as it follows upon just and apparent
Merit: neither let the praises of others, no not of good men, be a Syrup to
Insolency, but a Whetstone to set an edge upon thy good actions, that if it be
not so as is reported, yet thou will have it so, because men report it. Neither
let it be Music in thine Ears to hear Flatterers commend thee, but open thy
mouth and reprove these kind of persons; for some of them level at their own
profit, their Art is nothing but delightful Cosenage: the Fox in the Fable
commended the Crow for his sweet Notes, to see if he could make him open his
mouth, and let fall his Provant. These men will spend their Tongues to maintain
their Teeth, they are Moths, which will eat out a liberal man's Coat, Vines,
which will cling to the stalks, not for any true love to them, but for their
own sustentation and support; they follow not thee, but thy Fortunes, and will
not leave thee till they wear thee Thredbare: Therefore Antisthenes was wont to
say, It were better for a man to fall among Ravens than among Flatterers; for
Ravens will eat none but the dead, but these will devour a man while he is
alive. Again, some of them intend mischief, they flatter thee, that they may
circumvent thee, and the more easily effect their malicious projects; they are
like the Bees sting, which pricketh deepest when it is fullest of Honey. Mark
how the Butcher claweth the Ox, when he means to knock him on the head, how the
Basilisk poisons those on whom he seems to cast an eye of regard, how the
Crocodile intends to destroy those over whom she weeps and counterfeits
compassion, and how the Sirens sing when they intend the Mariners shipwreck:
and by these Instances, guard thy self from all such as claw and flatter
others; their words being as soft as oil, but are indeed very Swords. These are
those miry Dogs that make a man dirty by their sawning upon him. This foul
Hypocrisy, Court Holy Water, dishonest Civility, and base Merchandise of
Praises and Commendations is nothing else but gilded Treason, carrying thee up,
as the Devil did our Savior, to the top of a Pinnacle only to throw thee down
headlong to break thy Neck It was an excellent Answer (and if we duly consider
the weightiness of it, never a whit the more to be despised, because
Lycosthenes reports it) which Diogenes gave to his Question, who asked him,
What Beast did bite the sorest, that of wild beasts it was the Back*biter, of
tame beasts it was the Flatterer. By such Parasites (my Son) many young
Gentlemen are drawn into Debauchery either by Wine or Women, either to haunt
the Taverns, Inns, and Alehouses, or else the Stews and Brothel-houses, and to
marry before they are wise. It is said of the Bear, that she licks her Cubs
into form, but these by licking thee with a glozing Tongue (if thou take not
the more heedful care) will utterly spoil and desorm thee.

LVI. Next to the tame Beast the Flatterer, beware of the wild one the
Backbiter; but because thou can not hinder him from speaking ill of thee, for
his Tongue like a Mill-Clack will still be waging, that he may grind to powder
thy good Name, learn therefore to make this good use of his Clack as to make
thy bread by it; I mean to live so, that no credit shall be given to the
slandering of his lips. Let thy Conversation be blameless and innocent, so
shall thou gag the Teeth of Malice it self, that it shall not be able to bite
thee: and the consciousness of thine integrity will make thee to despise their
Calumnies, and to value them no more than a generous Lion does the barking of a
whifling Cur. Neither will thou any more be disturbed at them, than the Moon or
the Sun is ever a whit the more troubled or molested at the noise of an ill
favored Ass, when he erects his Nose against the Clouds, and brays against the
bright firmament of Heaven. Indeed it is the part of a silly Mouse, to bite
every one, that does but touch him: they may cast a mist upon thy splendor,
they cannot extinguish it, as the clouds that rise from Moors and Fens may take
from the Sun the aspect of men's eyes, but they cannot deprive it of its own
proper light: and at length they all vanish away. And truly the best way to
stop a lying slanderous mouth, is to take no notice at all of such false
reports as are cast upon thee; if thou will Father another man's Bastard, it
must pass for thine own Child. Wherefore please not thine Enemies so much, as
to make show thou do apprehend, that they have wronged thee; omnis injuria
est in sensu patientis. If malice shall see it has wrought thy vexation, and
made thee hurt thy self, it has that it wished for: cast therefore a smiling
contempt upon a false report, let it meet thee as if a Glass did encounter a
Rock. Contempt puts ill will out of countenance, makes it withdraw it self, and
quickly find its own Grave; whereas to take it to heart is to own the scandal,
and crown the revenge of the Author. And thus the Back-biter by corroding thy
reputation, shall reap no better advantage than the Serpent in the Fable did,
who wore away his Teeth by gnawing the File. However be sure to give no just
occasion to ill reports of thee, and then thy credit will be impregnable. The
Forest in that other Apologue, had never needed to have complained how she was
cut and hackled, had she not lent out of her own self the wood that made the
Helve to the Hatchet; nor had the Eagle felt the shaft sticking at her heart,
had she not afforded some of her own Plumes to the feathering of it: Diamonds
are not to be cut* engraved, or pierced without some of their own powder concur
to the work of the Engraver.

As Arrows or Bullets that are shot into the air higher than our sight, yet
touch not Heaven, and as they that overthrow Temples do not any way hurt the
Godhead to whom they are consecrated; so injuries affixed to a wise man return
without effect; and are to him but as Cold or Heat, Rain or Hail, the weather
of the world. It Is Womanish not to endure evil speaking, and therefore King
David when he reprehended Abishai who would have had him been revenged on
Shimei for his cursing, said, What have I to do with you O ye Sons of Zerviah:
he calls them from the Mother not the Father, to show, that they had too much
of the Mother in them who were too impatient of evil speeches.

LVII. Shun slothfulness and idleness, man is born to labor; therefore nulla
dies sine linea, follow thy Books, look to thy Grounds, yoke thine Oxen, follow
the Plough, graft thy Trees, behold thy Cattle, and devise with thy self, how
the increase of them may increase thy profit; in Autumn pull thine Apples, in
Summer reap thy Harvest, in the Spring trim thy Gardens, in Winter thy Woods:
and if thou art desirous of profit, praise, Pleasure, or knowledge take pains,
study, leave nothing unattempted. No Garland is given to the Sluggard, thou
can not enter into the Temple of Glory and Honor, but through the Temple of
Virtue and Labor: Sloth loses time, dulleth the understanding, nourishes
humors, choketh the brain, and hinders thrift; exercise burnisheth the mind,
without which it will eat it self out by its own rust; and if the proud man be
the Devils Chair of State, the idle man is his Cushion: and as the Ox that will
not plough is brought to the slaughterhouse, so lazy unprofitableness must
look for its slaughterhouse in the other world, if it take not a Newgate in
the way here.

LVIII. Above all things (my Son) make good use of thy Time, it is a very
slippery thing, and like an handful of fine Sand will slip through thy Fingers,
though thou grasp it never so fast: and whereas a man may have many of the
things of this world at once, it is certain that he can have but one Time, and
that is the present, the Time past is no longer thine, and the Time to come may
never be thine, therefore make the best advantages that thou can of the
present moment of Time for that only is thine; the Emblem will teach thee that
Time is bald behind, there is no hold fast there, catch it therefore by the
Forelock, it is like a Bird let fly at large out of the hand which returns not,
or as a word babbled out which cannot be recalled: O what would the prodigal
squanderers, and the abusive Mispenders of their precious Time, give, when the
final judgment of eternal Death is passed upon them, for some few grains of
that Sand, which seemed too many whilst they were passing through their
Hour-glasses. Before Time therefore deliver thee up to Eternity, imitate him
who having a very short Lease-hold, without impeachment of waste, takes all the
advantage he can before the approaching Expiration of it; he rips up the
ground, eats up the grass; sells down the Timber, cuts down the Coppices: do
thou the like, sithence thy Time in this world is short, nay and what is more
uncertain, match the velocity of it, with thy celerity in making all the
beneficial uses of it, for (as St. Augustine speaks elegantly) he only may be
said to be Master of Time, who in the swiftest current of it lays such
foundations as are not transitory. Thus as Time flies over thy head, thou
may plume her of some of her Feathers, though thou can not stop her
flight: and though thou can not recall Time past, yet thou may redeem it,
and therefore to that end let me once more put thee in mind to ponder seriously
the shortness, slipperiness, and uncertainty of Time, and withal the
irrecoverableness of it, when thou have let it pass: that thou may endeavor
to make the best use of it, and not to slip occasion, it is a good admonition
which Seneca gave to the Loiterer, Neglecter, and Mispender of his precious
Time, Begin not then to live, when life begins to leave thee: Or rather bear in
thy mind the saying of that Holy man who (as I have read) never heard the Clock
strike, but he would say, now I have one hour less to live in, and one hour
more to give an account for.

LIX. Go to Bed with the Lamb and rise with the Lark; late watching in the
Night breeds ill humors in the body, and long sleeping in the morning
ungodliness in the mind: to rise betimes will make a man rich, healthy, and
holy: Astronomers observe that the most propitious Planets of all the seven Sol
and Mercury leave us at night, and return to shine upon us in the morning,
which mystically intimates unto us that then our wits and knowledge are
quickest and clearest, and that it is the fittest Time for the dispatch of all
business, and humane Affairs; which Tusser in his Book of good Husbandry thus
plainly expresses, Some work in the morning may trimly be done,
That all the day after may hardly be won.


Mounsieur Villeroy the great French Statesman wished his Son, always to
dispatch business in the morning, as if he were sure to lose his opportunity in
the Afternoon. Apollonius coming very early in the morning, to Vespasians Gate,
and finding him stirring, conjectured thereupon that he was worthy to command
an Empire, and said unto one who accompanied him, undoubtedly this man will be
an Emperor, he is so early a stirrer: To be brief, imitate rather Hercules in
Zenophon, than Bonacius in Poggius; before the one contended Dame Virtue, and
Dame Pleasure, both seeking to seize upon his will, but at last after some
wavering and debate, he submitted unto Virtue and rejected Pleasure: before
Bonacius in the shape likewise of women, came Carefulness and Slothfulness, the
former bade him to rise out of his lazy Den, and betake himself to some work;
but Dame Slothfulness advised him to lie still at his ease, and to beware of
the mornings cold, and so while they were contending, he like a slothful Idiot
remained neutral, continually looking when they would agree, until at length
the greater part of the day was overpast to his loss and damage. It Is a true
saying, that Beds make Beggars; I would not have thee therefore follow the
common custom of many of our Gentry, who lie in Bed, and rise not, till their
meat be ready to be set on the Table, to which after they are tirck'd and
trimmed, have powdered and kembed their Perruques, have patched their Faces, and
set themselves by their Looking-glasses for all day, sit down to eat and drink,
and then rise up to play, or take a Coach to see a Comedy or Tragedy acted, and
when that is done, to visit in a Masquerado their Mistresses, by which they (as
if God had put them into the World as he has put the Leviathan into the Sea,
only to take their pastime therein) idly, vainly, and unprofitably spend their
precious time, for which they can neither give a good account to God or
themselves.

LX. Hate Wastfulness and Vnthristiness, for they will bring thee into
necessity, and then thou must live like a Dron^e, if not by wicked shifting,
yet by base beggary. Thrist is a great Virtue, having diligence to provide
things necessary truly and justly, and care to save and keep when gotten: yet
be thristy without filthy niggardness and unmercifulness, but give thy Need,
thine Honor, thy Friend, the Church, and the Poor their dues; never exceed thy
Income, nay I would not have thee live up to the height of it, it is an old Saw.
If Youth did know what Age would crave,
Many a Penny he would save.


By no means run in debt, neither do thou break any thing of thy Stock; it is
related of the Stone Tirrhenus, how that being whole, it swimmeth, but never so
little diminished, it sinketh to the bottom; so he who keeps his stock full is
ever afloat, but wasting of his store, by degrees becomes Bankrupt; neither
let thy liberality exceed thine ability; he that gives beyond his power is
prodigal, he that gives in measure is liberal, he that gives nothing at all
is a Niggard. Follow the example of those young Gentlemen, who coming to their
Wealth before they come to their Wits, run beyond the Constable, and live
without compass, making their own Hands their Executors, their own Eyes their
Overseers, and all their Purchases with Dedimus and Concessimus.

LXI. Enter not into Bonds, no not for thy best Friends. King Solomon, who in
his time was the wisest man in the World, tells us, that he that hates
suretiship is sure. He that obliges himself to pay another man's Debt, takes the
Shackles from his Feet, and claps them on upon his own; it is as rare to see a
rich Surety as a black Swan: and he that ends to all that will borrow,
shows great good will, but little wit. If thou lend a round Sum of Money be
sure to have either a Lease or a Mortgage of Land made over, or two or three
good Sureties bound to thee for it: either of these, and especially the two
first are good Gages to borrow by.

LXII. Entertain such men as shall be trusty; for if thou keep a Wolf within
thy doors to do mischief, or a Fox to work craft and subtilty, thou shall find
it as perilous, as if in thy Barn thou should maintain Rats, and in thy
Ground Moles.

Let thy Maidens be such as seem readier to take pains than follow pleasure,
willinger to dress up their House than their heads, not so fine-fingered as to
call for a Lute, when they should use a Distaff, not so dainty-mouth'd as that
their silken Throats should swallow no Packthread.

Choose such Servants as shall be willing to learn whatsoever is necessary,
faithful in performing whatsoever is their duty, careful in seeking all honest
means to profit thee, and silent in Tongue, in not revealing abroad what thou
do at home, and in not replying to, or contradicting of what thou command
them to do; never endure those that will answer again, when they are reproved
by thee for the neglect of their Duty; especially take care that they be
seasoned with the fear of God. He that entertains one addicted to Lies,
entertains a Thief; and he that admits a common Swearer or a debauched person
into the bowels of his Family, admits a Jonah that may sink his Ship.

Make not thy Servants too familiar with thee, for that will in the end bring
thee into contempt with them; it has been ever observed, that gentle and
clement Princes have more rebellious Subjects than those that are rough and
fierce, that loving and indulgent Parents more ungracious Children than those
who are rigid and austere, and that soft and mild Masters more disobedient
Servants than those that are harsh and severe.

Amongst other things (my Son) if thou have a regard to Thrift, keep no more
Cats than will kill Mice; my meaning is, retain not more Servants in thy Family
than are for thy profit or advantage; a long Retinue may make thy State the
greater, but it will make thine Estate the less; the length of the Peacocks
Train makes his Wings the shorter.

LXIII. There are some that will not tap their Beer till it be sour, nor cut
their Bread and Cheese till it be moldy, or their Meat till it be soisty; some
again will cobble their Shoos, till, like Theseus his Ship, none of the first
Materials of them remain; some will drive into them so many Hob-nails and
Sparabils, as they may be rather said to be- shod like Horses than shooed like
Men; some will burn only Rush or Pissing Candles, and all this but to eke out
their Store, and others rather than they will be at the Charge of a Quarrel or
Pane of Glass, will stop the hole in their Windows with an old Stockin or a Wad
of Straw; nay I have heard of an old Woman, who would commonly sit
bare-breech'd to save her Petticoats: all which are to be abhorred, because
they do not so much express any good Husbandry and Thrift as base Sordidness
and Niggardize. These and the like petty Arts leave to those covetous Misers,
who heap up Riches for they know not whom.

LXIV. Be not hasty to marry, it is better to have one Plow going than two
Cradles, and more profit to have a Barn filled than a Bed. We are told in holy
Writ, that it is better not to marry, but withal we are told there also, that
it is better to marry than to burn. It is not unlikely that those persons that
live and dye pure and unspotted Virgins, shall sit in Heaven next to the
Martyrs, and wear Crowns as they do, whilst such as are married and live
Chastely in that state and condition of life, shall wear Coronets only; but a
pure and unspotted Virginity is very rarely attained among Men and Women, whose
half of themselves consists of flesh and blood; and therefore if thou can not
live chastely in a single life make use of the remedy, which God has prescribed
thee, and that is Marriage, which is an honorable estate amongst all men: but
yet if thou must needs marry, be sure to choose such a Wife as may bring with
her such advantages to thee, as may at least counter-ballance all the
inconveniences of a married life; for many leap* like the Mouse in the Fable,
into the Brass-pan, without considering at all such inconveniences, and
afterward would fain leap out again, but cannot. And truly (my Son) if a man
well ponder beforehand the continual cares and fears, and the frequent jars
and discontents, which Man and Wife suffer under, he will discover, that
Marriage, like the Medicine prescribed for the disease commonly called the
Squinzy, has as much Album Graecum as Honey in it: and thus thou may
perceive my great love to thee, in preferring the peace and quietness of thy
life before the propagating of my Name and Posterity; nevertheless in this
Matter I leave thee to thine own liberty and discretion.

But because by thy sanguine and debonaire Complexion I forbode, that thine
inclinations will tend to a married life, I would have thee observe these
Instructions in the choice of her whom thou art minded to make thy Bedfellow.
Choose such a one as may be more commended for her Virtues than her Beauty; a
good Huswife is a great Patrimony, and she is most honorable who is most
chaste. In thy choice and election mark these four, Ps Piety, Parentage,
Proportion, Portion.
The first P. is Piety: see in the first place that she be piously brought up
in the fear of God, well educated, of civil and modest Deportment and
Behavior, avoid her that is fantastical, for she will still be hurrying thee
up to London; or that is ambitious, to be taken for a Wit, for it is more than
an even lay but she will attempt to make thee a Fool; nor choose her the rather,
because like a pretty Parakeeto, she can speak a little French or Italian, for
one Tongue is enough in conscience for a Woman, or because she is Poetically
given, and can make a good Verse, for it would be much better that she were
able to make thee a good Pudding. But note this, that though I would have her
whom thou would mate with to be pious, I would not have her to be precise;
for it is commonly found, that those Women are most Heart hollow, who are most
Lip-holy, and such a one will nibble thine Estate worse than the Rats will thy
Holland or thy Chedder Cheese, by stealing out of it large contributions to the
Bartholomew Martyrs.

The second P. is Parentage: see that she come of good and honest Parentage,
and such as are of a good Repute in their Country; a good Wise can hardly be
chosen out of a wicked and irreligious Family; a man cannot expect to gather
Grapes from Thorns, or Figs from Thistles.: If the Springhead be poisoned, so
will the Streams; it is a Rabbinical Proverb, Take not a Wise out of that
Family wherein there is a Publican, for such are all Publicans. If thou
desire to be the Sire of an happy Son, or the Father of a fortunate Child,
abstain from those Women that are either base of Birth, or bare of Honesty.

The third P. to be observed in the choosing of a Wife, is Proportion; let the
Woman thou shall pitch upon be built up with comely parts and Features. Love
ever first enters in at the Eye, and to keep it warm and alive, it is fit that
Member should be pleased. When one asked a very homely Woman her name, she told
him it was Rebecca, upon which he replied, I thought your name had been
Asarabecca, for I can hardly behold you without ridding of my stomach: have a
care therefore, notwithstanding all other advantages, that thou match not with
such a one as will sooner make thee Stomach-sick than Lovesick; and be not of
Not. Feeld, the Players humor, who vowed, that if the old Woman that crawled
upon her tail at Holborn-Bridge, had a thousand pound for her Portion, he would
marry her and adorn her Breech with a French Velvet Hood. Neither for gain or
lucre sake marry some rich but very old Widow, lest when she kisses thee she
drop her Teeth (if she have any) into thy mouth; but perhaps thou may hope
that thou shall outlive her, but this is just as if a man should hang himself,
in hope that some body or other may come before he be dead, and cut the Rope.

The fourth and last P. is Portion, and this thou must look after, that in
tying thy self fast, thou do not undo thy self; in thy Match thou must
respect the mending of thine Estate and Fortunes; other things may help and be
an Appendix, but it is Wealth must be the Substance, without which never expect
to eat thy Bread without Gravel in it, and if Grist be wanting, the Mill stones
will quickly set the Mill on fire. When thou art married, if thy Wife in the
first month chide and chafe, thou must hear without reply, and endure with
patience; for they that cannot suffer the wranglings of young married Women,
are not unlike to those, that tasting the Grape to be sour before it be ripe,
leave to gather it, when it is; or to those, who being stung with the Be
forsake the Honey; or else to those, who will pull off the Heads of their
Poultry, because they will sometimes cackle; though for the sake of the Eggs
they lay, they should (as Socrates did with his Zantippe) bear the more with
them. Fair means will do more with crabbed Natures than force, as the Sun in
the Fable, by fairly shining on the Traveller made him lay aside his Cloak,
whereas the ruffling wind made him gird it the faster about him. In like
manner, if the Husband thinks to make his Woman the more tractable, and to bow
to him by force, he shall find her Joints to be but the stiffer still; but mild
words, gentle persuasions, good counsel, and fair entreaties, like Nerve Oil,
will supple them. Musical Instruments, the softlier they are touched, the
sweeter they sound. A Wife, like a mettlesom Horse, will be stark mad, if
reined in too hard, but with a gentle curb she will bear a white mouth. If a
Husband will after an unmanly manner fight with his Wife, and beat her Ribs, if
she have not the more Grace, it is the way to make her break his Forehead. And
further I must tell thee, that the fallings out of Man and Wife betwixt
themselves, are like the breakings of each others bones, there is no rest or
case till they be set and composed again. If the cross Husband wrest one way,
and the cross-grained Wife another, they both together as it were twist a Rope
to hang themselves. Indeed Marriage is either an Heaven or an Hell upon Earth;
where there is Love and Unity, there it is an Heaven; where Jars and
Discontents, there it is an Hell. All therefore who desire in that estate and
condition of life to make themselves happy, must mutually be good and kind to
each other* for as a good Jack makes a good Jill, so a good Jill makes a good
Jack.

Be not too imperious over thy Wise* for that will make her to hate thee;
neither be too fond and uxorious, for that will make her to disdain thee: let
her neither be thy Slave nor thy Sovereign, neither tread her under thy foot,
nor set her upon thy head. God made Woman at first of a Rib, which is placed
between both.

In the Government of thy Household use her hands as well as thine own eyes; for
good Husbandry and Huswifry consists as well in settling of things, as in
looking to them; if thou rule in the Hall or Parlour, let her rule in the
Kitchen and Bedchamber. To be short, let the Keys hang at her Girdle, but the
Purse at thine own: so shall thou know what thou do spend, and how she can
spare; yet do not penuriously keep her too bare of money, but let thy Hen peck
at thy Barn-door, though thou set her not to pick at the whole heap.

Above all things when thou art married, avoid Jealousy; a man's mistrust that
his Wife is dishonest, may but the sooner make her so: and truly it is either
needless or bootless to do so; it is not the Italian Lock, nor the close
Mewings of her up like a Haggard that will secure her Chastity, who is addicted
to Wantonness; if Pasiphae cannot have the company of a man, she will be bull'd
and admit a Bull; and an ugly Dwars, litt^e more than a Cubit high, if she
cannot have an handsome proper man, shall serve the turn of the lascivious Queen
(Queen I should have said) of whom the Poet Ariosto makes mention: For if a
Woman be modest no gold will, like Danae, corrupt her; and if she be immodest,
nor grief nor care will amend her. Jealousy is a fire to which every thing
adds fuel: if a jealous man's Wife frown, he straight conjectures, either it is,
because she hates him, or loves others better; if she smile, it is because she
has had success in her Love, or it is to entice another to love her; if she
turns aside her head from any man, he thinks that she only dissembles; if she
cast an eye upon him, he thinks she courts him, and then, like a man possessed
with a Frenzy, he stamps and stares, and tears his hair from his head, and cries
out, that neither fire in the Straw, nor love in a Woman's looks can be hid.
Thus he watches over every gesture and behavior of his Consort, as a Cat
watches over a M^use, and seeks for that he would not find; like him that goes
to the House of Office in the dark feeling about the Seat, for that which he is
afraid to meet with.

LXV. Eat not thine own Heart, that is, do not vex thy self with thine own
inward thoughts, neither lay the load of such things as grieve thee upon thine
own self; fire pent in burns the more furiously, and Bottles too close cork't
up, often fly all in pie es, by the strength of the Spirits with which they are
filled; for as those Wounds are most dangerous that bleed inward, so are those
griefs which are too closely concealed: However keep thy mishaps secret from
thine Enemy, that he may not rejoice at them, but reveal them to thy sincere
Friend, that he may pity, advise, and help thee, if he can, or at least may
bear a part with thee: Burdens divided are easily born. Those that want true
Friends, to whom they may open themselves, tell their minds, and impart their
vexations and troubles, are strange Cannibals, for they eat their own hearts.

LXVI. Have therefore with Pylades an Orestes, with Damon a Pythias, some
faithful Friend to whom thou may impart thy griefs and joys, thy fears and
hopes, thy suspicions and counsels, thy intentions and affairs, and whatsoever
lies hard upon thy heart. Two fast Friends are like Millstones which are
never singly made use of but by couples, and each stands in need of the
others help for the performance of the work whereunto they are ordained. Yet
take good heed with whom thou do shake hands and contract friendship; try the
man thou meanest to trust, lest shining like the Carbuncle, as if he had fire,
he be found when he is proved to be as cold as Ice. A wise Soldier will try
the proof of his Armor before he gird it about him. Learn out therefore
(before thou take a friend into thy bosom) how he has dealt with others with
whom he has contracted friendship; for look how he has served them, so will
he likewise deal with thee: and try him before thou have need of him, so shall
thou find what his readiness will be, to serve thee when necessity requires his
help. When thou have gotten a true Friend, be sure to keep him, be faithful to
him, and contented with him; it is not a Paradox to say, He that has many
Friends has none; for true Friends are like Turtles, which go by pairs, not
like Starlings, which fly in flocks.

LXVII. Keep thy Secrets, if they be of any great moment to thy self; but be
sure, if thou impart them, let it be to none but thy faithful Friend; remember
that whatever three persons know, it commonly then cease to be any longer a
Secret: imitate the Reservation of that wise Roman, who professed, that if he
thought his Shirt did know his Secrets, he would burn it. He that tells his
Errand to every one he meets, is a babbling Fool; and he that discovers unto
others his intentions beforehand, courts his own disappointment: And as I
would not have thee to discover thine own secrets, so neither would I have thee
to be curious and inquisitive into the secrets of others; lest thou be put off
with a slur, as the Countryman in Plutarch, put him off, who inquired what he
carried so close in his Basket, saying; Friend, if you might know what it is, I
should not carry it so close covered as it is. Or as that General slighted the
curiosity of his Lieutenant General, who came to know when and whither they
should march, saying, Sir, when the Trumpet sounds you shall know.

But above all, in this matter be cautious, that you trust not a Woman's breast
with such secrets as thou would have no man know; for, like Sieves, they are
rimarum plenae, and can hold nothing that is poured into them; and their mouths
can no more hold long a secret, than they can a spoonful of scalding Custard.
All that may be said, to excuse a man's folly in this particular is, that we may
venture to tell them our secrets, because no wise man will imagine, that he may
find them there reposited, unless it be by some very Fool. The Story of
Papirius Pretextatus will come in here very pat to our purpose, who being but a
young Boy, went along with his Father into the Senate House, where many weighty
matters were debated, from whence when he came home, his Mother (being very
curious and inquisitive) took him aside privately, and questioned him what was
said and done there, the Youth, ultra aetatem sapiens, being wise and discreet
beyond his years, to elude her curiosity, and to keep from her the Secrets of
State, told her, that the Senate had concluded, that every man should have two
Wives; upon this she gathered the Roman Matrons together, and told them what
her Son had told her; who all unanimously went presently to the Senate, and
petitioned them, that since they had decreed, that every man should have two
Wives, that they would also make a second Decree, that every Woman should have
two Husbands: the Senate greatly marvelled at this sudden coming of the Women
and their words, till at length understanding how it was, they highly admired
and commended the Boy for his wit and secrecy; and to honor him the more,
admitted him (though but a Child) to be a Member of the House. It seems (though
he was but a green Youth) that he had imbibed this Principle (though I believe
it was not from his Mothers milk) that there is neither safety nor wisdom in
it, for a man to entrust a Woman with those privacies, which are of any great
importance, and require such secrecy, as is not to be found or expected amongst
tatling Gossips.

LXVIII. Envy no man's Purse or Estate, because it is richer than thine; the
envious man does murder himself; for envy consumes the heart wherein it is
nourished, as the Moth does the Garment whereof and wherein it was bred. Not
like the Maid Avicen speaks of, who feeding her self with poison, was
nevertheless very healthful, but yet infected others with her venomous breath:
But the envious man may be compared to the poisonous Amphisbaena, which instead
of hurting others, bites and tears her self; who suffers his indignation at
other men's good, like the Fox which the Lacedemonian Boy stole and hid under
his Coat, to gnaw out his own bowels. But it is enough to discountenance this
Vice, that in the Gospel the Devil himself is called the envious Man.

LXIX. As I would have thee shun Envy, so likewise be thou sure to avoid malice
and hatred, he that hates another man is the Patient, he that is hated is the
Agent, contrary to the sound of the words; for the Hater is in torment, the
Hated in ease: so that nothing in this World is so much to be hated as hate it
self.

LXX. Take heed of being vindicative; for this as an Imposthume breaking forth,
commonly strangles and choaks a man with his own blood: the Be might keep her
sting still, and not live like a Drone, did she not in her anger employ it to
envenom the flesh of him that puts her from him. It is safer to forget an
injury or smother it, than to go about to avenge it, if it were for nothing but
this, yet this were punishment enough, that when thou go about to avenge thy
self upon any man, all shall be sure to be laid open in Choler that can be
remembered, and his Tongue shall cast all thy faults in thy teeth. If he were a
Friend that offended thee (says Seneca) he did that he meant not; if an Enemy,
he did but what he well might be expected to have done. If a wise man wrong
thee, endure him; if a Fool, forgive him. Be not so foolish as to waste time in
the pursuit of an Ignis Fatuus, which burns only to light thee to some Bog or
Precipice: yet because thou may say that forbearance will make men
presumptuous, and a second wrong is provoked by digesting the first, therefore
I answer, thou may revenge wrong, but not by violence, but by Law.

LXXI. Yet avoid going to Law as much as possibly thou can; for be thy Cause
never so good, thou may nevertheless not only fear the packing and embracing
of the Jury, the suborning of false Witnesses, the bribing of the Judge, and
those that are of Counsel with thee, but also the quickness of the Wit, the
subtilty of the Rhetoric, and the volubility of the Tongue of those that are
fee'd to plead against thee. There was a Lawyer that injuriously kept a poor
man's Cow from him, wherefore he went immediately and complained to the King,
who having heard his complaint, told him, that he would hear what the other
could say to the matter, nay then, said the poor man, If you hear him speak, I
shall surely lose my Cow; for he thought that the smooth Speeches and eloquent
Rhetoric of his Adversary would effascinate the Kings ears, and lead him which
way he pleased. To this our purpose, it is worthy the observation, which
Socrates said before the Judges in his own Defense, touching his Accusers, My
Lords (says he) I know not how you have been affected with mine Accusers
Eloquence while you heard them speak; for my own part I assure you, that I whom
it touches most, was almost drawn to believe, that all they said, though
against my self was true, when they scarcely uttered one word of truth.

Avoid therefore I say once more, the waging of Law, especially I would not
have thee go to the Lawyer for every toy or trifle; for that will be to make
him Rich, and thy self a Beggar. An honest Attorney gave an intimate Friend of
his that had commenced a Suit at Law against another, this counsel (and truly
he deserved a good Fee for it) Make an end with the Lawyers, before they make
an end of thee. The Courts of the Law (says my Lord Verulam in his Essays) are
like those Bramble-bushes, whereunto while the sheep fly for defense and
succor, they are sure to lose part of their Fleeces. There is an old Story,
that a blind man and a lame man went to travel together by the Sea side, the
lime man who was carried on the blind man's shoulders espied an Oyster, which he
claimed because he espied it, the other claimed his share, because he carried
him to the place where he found it, the case being doubtful, they referred it
to the next man they met, who in the debating of the matter eat the Oyster, and
gave them the shells. Thus it fares with many who go to Law, the Lawyers eat
the fish, and give them the shells, that is, they bleed their Purses, and that
in a little time cures the heat of their contentions as Phlebotomy cures Fevers
and Inflammations. Yet I would not have thee lose thy Right, nor suffer thy
self to be fooled, wronged, and cheated, nor to let every Carrion Crow ride
upon thy back and pick out thine eyes: and to the end thou thy self may not
run into the lapse of the Law, I advise thee to live honestly, to trespass no
man wilfully, and to render every man his due carefully.

LXXII. It well becomes a Gentleman to make some inspection into the Laws of
the Land, which I advise thee to do; that if thou be commissionated to be
in thy Country a Justice of the Peace, all thy wit to manage that Office may
not lie only in the Skull of thy Clark: For as one of our modern Poets says,
It is the Clark many times that makes the Justice of the Peace. Many without
skill in this particular, have run into very dangerous Premunires; but besides
this will make thee know, how to secure thy Estate against those who may
endeavor to pick a hole in it; He had need (we say) of a long Spoon that eats
with the Devil. And yet further, this will discover to thee the knavery or
honesty of thy Lawyer in the managery of thy Lawsuits, in case thou be so
unhappy as to be involved in any But I would not have thee to study the Quirks
of the Law, for this may induce thee for thine advantage to be a Knave; unless
thou study them merely to secure and defend thy self from them. Briefly, study
to attain so much knowledge in the Law as may sufficiently inform thee of thine
own Right, but not so much as to make thee quarrelsom and contentious with thy
Neighbor or Parson; for this were to put a Sword into a Mad-mans hand. It is
great pity, that it is so true, which once I heard a wise man say, That a good
Lawyer is very seldom a good Neighbor.

LXXIII. Avoid Duels; there are some whose fingers itch to be dipped in blood:
and as among contentious men it is but a word and a writ, so among swaggering
Hectors it is but a word and a wound. But thou will say, I think it a stain to
my Credit, and a disgrace to my Name, if I shall not answer him, who having
abused me in words, has sent me the length of his Sword, and from whom I have
received a proud Challenge: to this I reply, Will thou show such a base esteem
of thy self, and set so low a rate on thy life, as to stake it for a Brawl and
a few rash words of an Enemy, and yet would be highly esteemed of others? In
such a case be not troubled with a frivolous report of Dishonor, rather be
prodigal of thy Reputation than thy life; run not wilfully into an Aceldama,
into the Grave, into Hell to be counted valorous, care not so much for the
shame of the world as the danger of thy body and soul. Men of great Valor have
rejected Challenges, which have proceeded from those who have had more heart
than brain, more head than wit, and that without any blemish at all to their
Credit. When Anthony challenged Augustus, he answered, That if Anthony were
weary of life, there were ways enough to death besides Duelling. But say, some
will call thee a Coward, yet fear not shame so much as sin: thou have but one
body, do not adventure it upon the Sword of an Enemy, but one Soul, do not
adventure it upon the Sword of God. Love a good Name, but yet as an Handmaid of
Virtue; woo and court common Fame no further than it follows upon honest
courses and virtuous actions, and think thy self but base, if thou should
depend upon vulgar breath, which is commonly none of the sweetest. It is as
great a Symptom of a crazy Reputation, as it is of a crazy body, to be too
impatient upon every slight touch. And truly (methinks) it is strange* that men
should so eagerly pursue Honor, and so hotly court her, as to vindicate her
upon any man, who should but touch her, though never so slightly, with the
hazard both of body and soul. Whilst in their impious and inhumane Duels they
make themselves, if they survive their Antagonists, either liable to be hanged
by the Laws of men, or to be damned by the Laws of God: or finally liable to
both, if God show not more mercy to them, than they did to their Brethren,
whose blood they spilt in some vain, or perhaps drunken Brabble. But let them
pass as dangerous men to be conversed withal, only 'twere good men would
hearken to Gonsalvo, that famous Commander, who was wont to say, that a
Gentleman's honor should be de tela crassiore, of a stronger warp or web, than
that every slight thing should catch in it, and be thought able to break it.
Think besides the bloody fact being once committed, of those terrors which
will (if thou have any Grace left in thee) dog thy Conscience with the
srightful Vissions of thy murdered Friend; and think moreover, how together
with him thou have murdered (unless thou can procure a pardon) thy poor
Children, and undone thy whole Family; and laid such a blemish upon thy
posterity after thee, as peradventure shall never be blotted out again, the
stain being laid so deep in blood.

LXXIV. Be not too ventrous in exposing thy self, like a Knight Errand, to
needness dangers; it is an unhappy Proverb, He that courts perils shall dye the
Devils Martyr. I have heard that in our last Civil Wars, a young Cavaliero
being well mounted, started out to pickeer with another of the Enemies side and
killed him, and returning in a vain glorious manner to his Company, Prince
Rupert, who then commanded that Party, and was a Spectator of his Bravery,
asked him this Question, Sir, pray resolve me, whether you are an elder or a
younger Brother? who replying, that he was an elder Brother, the Prince told
him, That he had then that day showed his younger Brother fair play for it. And
what got my Gallant by this, but instead of the applause he expected, the
estimation of being Fool Hardy, rather than truly valiant. As I would not have
thee kneel with the Camel to take up a burden, under which thou can not rise
again, so with the Elephant, I would have thee, like a stout man, to bear a
Castle, if it be laid upon thy back* There is a time for the tolerancy of a
man's crosses; and therefore neither like the wild Beast bred in a cold Climat,
run from the fire, nor like a Moth, flittering about the Candle, run into it.

LXXV. Come not presumptuousty into places where some are contagiously sick,
lest thou come untimely to thy Grave: come not within the lists of destruction,
he that would not fall into the pit, must not approach the brink. Likewise
bestow cost, as long as thou may, to continue thy life, by upholding and
repairing thy Cottage of clay. It is against the course of Nature, and a way to
tempt the very God of Nature to destroy thee, wilfully to hinder thy health, or
not to seek means to preserve it. God sends several Diseases, and has
appointed several Medicines as Remedies to encounter them: therefore honor the
Physician, and with King Hezekiah, lay a plaster upon the Boil, say not man's
life has a period, as the Sea has its bounds, beyond which it cannot pass;
and therefore think not like a Turk, that if thy time be not yet come, that
though thou thrust thy head into a Cannon, it cannot kill thee; for though no
man can live one minute beyond the set time God has appointed him to live, yet
by refusing the due means to preserve thy self, or by thy sins and deb
nicheries, thou may cut thy days the shorter. God that predestines the end,
does as well predestine the means tending to the attainment thereof. This the
Psalmist makes evident, when he tells us, The wicked and bloodthirsty men shall
not live out half their days. And we may observe by our daily experiences, that
men in Fevers, Squinancies, and Pleurisies are preserved many years longer by
timely Phlebotomy, who without such means would unavoidably and immediately
perish. To this purpose I have read a remarkable Spanish Story, and it is this:
There was in Toledo a debauched young Gentleman, scarce twenty years of age,
who for Robbery and Murder was condemned to dye, and being hanged, on the day
of Execution, upon a Gibbet, suddenly there grew out of his, a little before
unflidged Chin, a long Beard, white as Snow, which when the Archbishop of the
place, coming to the Gallows, observed; he gave the amazed people that stood by
this conjecture of so strange an Accident, that God by this wonderful thing had
shown, that if the young Man had not cut himself off by his vicious and
abominable courses, he might have lived to an extreme old age. Say not when thy
Glass is run, do what thou will, thou can stay no longer, and the Clock will
strike when the Minutes be past, neither say, that that which must be shall be,
and let death seek thee, yet it shall not find thee, till thy time be come, and
therefore away with Physic, what shall means do? For then a Rope upon thee,
try every Knife, eat Coloquintida thy belly full, frequent places, where the
Air about thee does infect, and where the breath of one body is poison to
another, and by the like reason thou may excuse thy wickedness, and be
desperately and dissolutely careless: But in matters of Hope, where the end is
not known, use means with Asa, though thou rely not upon them; and though many
times they avail not, yet take thou all the fairest ways, of all lawful
remedies, since Gods determinations are concealed from thee. And be not like
those miserable minded men, who if they fall sick, had rather dye a thousand
deaths than pay the Apothecaries Bills. Upon the Miser in the Epigram, the
Quipp lay heavier than his Grave stone, in which it was engraven, Here lies
Father Sparges,
Who died to save Charges.
Some others there be, who starve their bodies to make their purses fat, and
put their bellies into their bags, as the Epicures put their money into their
bellies, resembling a Dog in a Wheel, who roasts meat for others, but never a
good bit for himself. Others warm themselves only with the sticks of a Crows
Nest, and dare not take so much as a Faggot-stick out of their Stacks and
Piles, which they make to outlive all the Woods in the Country round about
them: and hoard their Corn, rather to feed Rats and Mice, than themselves; so
that they will not afford their own selves such necessaries as may keep them in
good sort, and whereby they may preserve their lives. Yet I would not have thee
to be like those, who for every Qualm take a Receipt, and cannot make two
Meals, unless Galen or Hippocrates stand by their Trenchers; if thou do so,
thy purse will ever be without money, and thy body never without diseases.

LXXVI. I would have thee to follow thy Study, and those Affairs in which thou
art concerned; yet not to seek so immoderately the Wealth of thy Brain or
Purse, as to lose the Health of thy Body; neglect not thy body to accomplish
thy mind: when thy weakness checks thee, and thy body controuls thee from
assiduous, hard, and immoderate study, and from great cares and affairs of
importance, affect not so much knowledge or wealth, as to debar thy self of
those things, whereby thy health may be regained or retained.

LXXVII. Further, I advise thee to study Men as well as Books; take heed of
those that wink with one eye, and see with the other, it is a Proverb worth
observation, He that winks with one eye, and sees with to other,
I will not turst him, though he were my Brother.
Likewise take heed of those, that have their Beards of two colors, or their
Head of one color, and their Beard of another, for they are marked; and
another Proverb bids us beware of those, whom God has marked. A man's
disposition is never better known than when he is crossed, as Proteus never
changed shapes, till Hercules griped him; but what a man is inward, is best to
be discovered by these three things, Oculis, by his Eyes, Loculis; Purse,
Poculis, Cups. To this we may add a forth, and that is Anger; for this passion
will lay him open, as the fire burning in the Chimney, discovers all the things
that are in the Room: and besides these four things, the very Lineaments,
Color, Complexion, and Habitude of the Body may give us some light of the
Qualities and Dispositions of Men and Women, as is signified by these Rimes, in
which the small Poet speaking first of Women, gives us this account.

Fair and foolish, little and loud,
Long and lazy, black and proud,
Fat and merry, lean and sad,
Pale and peevish, red and bad.
Then for Men he gives us this Account following.
To a red man read thy read,
To a brown man break thy bread,
At a pale man draw thy Knife,
From a black man keep thy Wise.
LXXVIII. If thou take Tobacco, which it matters not, whether thou do, or
no, yet if thou take it moderately and Physically, it may as lawfully be
taken as well as other things* which God has afforded us, for our delight as
well as our necessity: but to take it vainly as too many do, who are never well
any longer than the Pipe, like a Turkey-Cocks snout, hangs dangling under their
Noses, or to take it merely to pass away thy precious time, or as a salt bit to
draw down thy Liquor, or as an help to discourse, is both ridiculous and
blameworthy: but besides, this Indian Weed immoderately taken, is very
prejudicial to the bodies health, it dries up the Lungs, it putrifies the
Breath, and being of a Narcotick quality, it stupifies the Brain, and combines
with the Bottle, to make a man a very Sot: which mischiefs and inconveniences,
are altogether summed up in these Rimes, by another small Poet.

Tobacco that outlandish Weed,
It dries the brain, and spoils the seed,
It dulls the spirit, it dims the sight,
It robs a Woman of her right.
LXXIX. Hate ingratitude above all things, for nothing is more hateful to God
and Man: no Billings-gate Scold can fix a worse name upon thee, than to call
thee an ungrateful person: it is worthy of remark, that unthankfulness and
unholiness in sacred Writ, like an Harl of Hellish Hounds, are coupled
together: never therefore forget to be thankful to any one from whom thou have
received a courtesy or benefit; in this thou will show both grace and wit, for
thankfulness for the present benefits received, makes way for future ones. In
the whole course of Nature, man may read a Lecture of gratitude; Rivers return
their floods into the Ocean, from whence they derived their streams; the Clouds
of Heaven repay the exhalations and vapors, which the earth sent up to them,
with fruitful Flowers; thy Flocks and thy Kine recompense the Pasture and
Fodder thou affordest them, with their Fleeces and their Milk; and thy Bees,
for thy kindness in hiving them in thy Garden requite thy love, with their Wax
and Honey: and as I would not have thee be ungrateful thy self, so I advise
thee to guard thy self against such as are so; for these like the savage Bears
will be apt to bite the Water that quenches their thirst. Save a Thief from the
Gallows and he will cut thy throat: indeed there are not a few such Villains to
be sound in the world, who are apt to return evil for good, and are not ashamed
to degenerate into such Monsters (Monsters did I call them? I might rather have
termed them Devils, who labor to damn them the deepest, that serve them the
most) as to hurt or betray those, to whom they are by Nature, by Blood, and by
kindnesses most engaged and obliged. When King Richard the Third pursued the
Duke of Buckingham, to put him to death (for usurping Tyrants use to cut down
the stairs by which they climb up to their height) the Duke in his extremity
did fly to one Bannister his Servant, upon whom he had bestowed great Means to
enrich him. Bannister very carefully conveyed him into a Coppice* adjoining to
his Mansion House and there preserved him, but within a while there is a
Proclamation made, that whosoever could reveal where the Duke was, if he were a
Bondslave, he should be enfranchised, and made free; if a Freeman, he should
have a General Pardon, and be rewarded with a thousand Pounds, hereupon
Bannister either for fear of danger, if he did conceal him, or hope of gain, if
he did reveal him, bewrayed where his Master was, whereupon he was apprehended
and carried to Shrewsbury where King Richard then lay, and there without
Arraignment or any legal proceeding, he was in the Market place beheaded:
Whether Bannister received the proclaimed Reward, or no, is uncertain; King
Richard (loving the Treason but hating the Traitor) said (as it is reported)
that he that would be false to so good a Master, would never be true to any,
but certain it is, he received the Reward of a Villain, from Divine Justice;
for himself was after hanged for murder, his eldest Daughter was deflowered by
one of his Carters, or (as some say) stricken with a foul Leprosy, his eldest
Son in a desperate Lunacy destroyed himself, and was found to have done so, by
the Coroners inquest, and his younger Son was drowned in a shallow Puddle.

LXXX. Be faithful to thy Prince and Country; and hate Rebellion and Treason as
thou would the Devil himself, for he was the first Rebel and Traitor that
ever was: it is but just that his heart should be pulled out of his breast
alive, who bears a false one to his Prince. Neither do thou grumble or repine
at the Taxes and Impositions which are laid upon thee; for this is all thou
payest to thy Sovereign, who, by his good Government and just Laws secures thy
Peace and Safety, thy Life and Liberty, thy Estate and Religion. Observe it
well, that in all Ages the sin of Rebellion has constantly been attended with
one swinging vengeance or other. Take one remarkable instance of this, in
Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, for whom the Earth it self turned Sexton, and made
their Graves. And as I would have thee according to Christ's injunction, Give
unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's, so would I have thee, Give unto God
the things which are Gods.

LXXXI. Wherefore be just in the payment of thy Tithes, for he that Robs the
Priest, Robs God himself also. And it will in the end rather impoverish than
increase thine Estate: the Rabbis have a Proverb, and it is a true one, Pay thy
Tithes and be rich: The Eagle which snatched the flesh from the Altar, to carry
it to his young ones, burnt them and his Nest with a burning Coal which stuck
to it, had a due Reward of his Sacrilege: above all things, meddle not with
the Lands of the Church, for that will bring a curse upon those lands which I
shall leave thee; to be sure (according to Sir Henry Spelman's observation) the
third Heir seldom or never enjoys the sacrilege of his Predecessors.

LXXXII. Take heed by all means that thou break not the Peace of the Church;
for Schism is but the Handmaid of Rebellion: The better therefore to preserve
that, keep thy private Opinions in matters of Religion to thy self, if they be
contrary to the established discipline of the Church. It is better thou did
never wear a Shirt upon thy back, than thou should quarrel at another decent
wearing of a Surplice; this is but tithing of Mint and Cummin, and neglecting
the weighty matters of Gods Laws: It Is a bad matter to break the Kings Peace,
but it is a worse to break the Peace of God.

LXXXIII. My Son, since I by mine own industry, and God by his Providence, has
provided for thee a fair Estate, forget not to be charitable to the poor, it is
a goodlier sight to see the Poor standing at a rich man's Gate than the Porter:
and therefore as thou take care to feed thy Hounds without doors, and to
cloth thy naked Walls within with Tapestry and Cloth of Arras, so much more
would I have thee to be careful, to fill the bellies of the hungry, and clothe
the backs of the naked, that they perish not with hunger and cold: for as thou
take notice of thy comings in, so God assuredly takes notice of thy layings
out; to whom thou must one day give a severe Account, for every idle Penny,
that thou have spent as well as for every idle Word that thou have spoken.

LXXXIV. I have heard a story of a Gentleman and his Son, and the passages in
it are very well worth thy observation; and that thou may the better
remember it, I will cut it as short as the things will bear: This Gentleman had
one only Son, whom he called to him and told him, that he was going out of the
world, and therefore desired him to remember these three Precepts.

First, To take a good proffer when it was offered.

Secondly, Not to tarry at a Friends house too long.

Thirdly, Not to go too far for his Wife.

The young Gentleman promised him, that he would carefully observe them; but
shortly after, there came a Gentleman to his House, who saw in his Stable a
very good Horse, unto whom he had a very great liking, and for which he
proffered 80 l. but he refused it, and would not part with him under an 100 l.
that night his Horse was taken in the Staggers and dyed; then he remembered his
Fathers first Admonition; wherefore he calls one of his Servants and commands
him to skin his Horse, and take the skin and hang up in his barn* which
accordingly was done. After this he rides abroad to visit a friend, who made
him very welcome, but he stayed there so long* that his friend was weary of
him, and caused to be brought to Table nothing but brown bread, whereupon
seeing nothing but white bread before, he bethought himself that he had not
observed his Fathers second Precept; wherefore coming away, he begged one of
the brown Loaves, telling them, that he liked the bread so well, that his
Butler should make the like for him: so they gave him a Loaf, which when he
came home, he bid his Man to hang in a Rope by the Horse skin. After this he
bethinks himself of taking a Wife, wished he was to a Gentleman's Daughter,
which lived an hundred miles or more from him; thither he goes, and woos the
young Lady, and all things were agreed upon for the conclusion of the Match:
but being upon some urgent occasion sent for home, he acquainted the old
Gentleman after Supper with it, telling him, that his return should be short,
and therefore craved that he might take his leave of his Mistress over night;
but the old Gentleman would by no means suffer him, but told him that he was a
better Husband, and his Mistress a better Huswife than so; and that they would
be up time enough in the morning to take their leave of him; but the young
Genleman being up very betimes, and having ordered his Horses to be made ready,
and bethinking himself, that it would not be handsome to ride away without
taking leave of his Mistress, he went to her Chamber Door, and knocked very
softly* but no body answering, and finding the Key in the outside of the Door,
he unlock't it, peeped in toward the Bed, where he espied two in the Bed, and
who should they be but the old Gentleman's Clerk and his Mistress asleep?
Wherefore stepping into the Chamber, he took away the young Man's Breeches,
which lay upon a Trunk, and put them into his Man's Port-mantle; which after he
came home, he caused to be hung by the Horse-skin and the Loaf, and never went
more to visit his Mistress. At this the old Gentleman marvelled greatly, and
therefore he would ride to see what the matter was, and especially to s^e his
Son-in-laws Estate. And being come to the young Gentleman's house, he was very
richly entertained; but being weary with his long and tedious Journey, the
young Gentleman brought the old to his Chamber, and there left him to take his
repose. The next morning the old Gentleman was up very early, and walked abroad
to see what a good Husband his Son-in-law was, and saw all things very neat and
handsome. As he was walking about, one of the Servants went and told his Master,
that the old Gentleman was risen and walked abroad; he hearing it, presently
arose, and met him, and then carried him into his Stable to see his Horses,
from thence he conducted him into his Barn, where the old Gentleman looking up*
espied the Horse-skin, the Loaf, and the pair of Breeches, of which he desired
to know the meaning: Oh Sir, replied the other, those hang there to put me in
mind of the three Cautions my dying Father gave me, and so he told him the same
I have before mentioned. I understand well enough; said the old Gentleman, what
the ^orse-skin and Loaf means, but do not, what the Breeches signify, Why,
Sir, said he, they signify, that I had forgot that Caution my Father gave me,
Not to go too sar for a Wife. Now those Breeches are your Clerks, whom I found,
when I was at your house, in Bed with your Daughter, and therefore she is a
fitter Wife for him, than she is for me: and thereupon he related the whole
story, which when the old Gentleman, to his great grief had heard, he
discontentedly departed, with a Flea in his Ear, and the young Gentleman stayed
at home with more Wit in his Pate.

LXXXV. Go not, or send (if thou have lost any thing, or art not in health) to
Cunning-men, Sorcerers, South-sayers, Conjurers, or Witches, for the helping
thee to what thou have lost, or for the recovering of thy health; for if thou
once go to them, thou shall always have need of them: besides, thou make
thy self a Servant to the Devil. A Neighbor of mine, whom I shall not name,
for the respect I bear him, having lost some of his Goods, went to a
Cunning-man or Conjurer, for the helping him to what he had lost, who asking
him whether he did believe, that he could help it to him; for (says he) it is a
Principle amongst us, that the firm belief of the party that addresses himself
to us, that we can help him, is of as much force, for the accomplishment of his
desires, as all our Schemes, Figures, Characters, and Conjurations. My
Neighbor hearing this, told him that he now came to him with that firm belief:
whereupon the Cunning-man (for so he was styled and accounted to be) asked him
what Goods they were which he had lost, he told him, one of his best Horses,
having thus answered, the Cunning-man withdrew himself into an inner Room; but
my Neighbor being very desirous to see what he did, or to hear what he said,
went very softly to the door, where attentively listening, he heard him say to
the Devil, Thy Servant in the next Room has lost one of his best Horses, which
thou must help him to again; which as soon as my Neighbor heard, he answered,
That he would not have his Goods upon such terms, but said, rather than he
would be the Devils Servant, he would lose his Horse and Saddle too, and so
away he came, leaving the Conjurer and the Devil at a Parley.

LXXXVI. If thou walk in the paths of Policy, thou must be careful how to be
reserved, not like the Snail, leave a Trace where thou have gone, for that may
betray thee; he that lies at too open a Ward, may soon be hit. But thy way must
be like that of an Arrow or Bullets through the Air, quick for Dispatch, and
safe for Secrecy: or rather thou must be like the River Arar, which flows into
Rhodanus with such an incredible softness, that it is not to be discerned which
way it ebbs or flows. He that taught us to be as innocent as Doves, taught us
also to be as wise as Serpents. The changes and chances of a man's life, are as
Casts at Dice, good and bad; a good one may be marred with oversight, and a bad
one may be mended by good play. Fortune is like the Market, where many times,
if you can stay a little, the price will fall: And again it is like Sybilla's
Offer, which at first offers the Commodity at full, then consumes part and
part, and still holds up the price. For Occasion turns a bald Noddle, after
she has presented her Locks in Front, and no hold taken: or at least turns
the Handle of the Bottle, first to be received, and after the Belly which is
hard to clasp. There is certainly no greater wisdom than to time, and consider
the beginnings and onsets of things. Dangers are no more light, if they once
seem so; and more dangers have deceived men, than forced them. Nay it were
better to meet some dangers half way, though they come nothing near, than to
keep too long a Watch upon their Approaches: For if a man watch too long, it is
ten to one but he will fall asleep. On the other side, to be deceived with too
long shadows (as some have been, when the Moon was low, and shone on their
Enemies back) and so to shoot off before the time; or to teach dangers to come
on, by over early buckling toward them, is another Extreme. The ripeness or
unripeness of the occasion (as we said) must ever be well weighed; and
generally it is good to commit the beginnings of all great Actions to Argus
with his hundred Eyes; and the ends to Briareus with his hundred Hands: first
to watch, and then to speed. For the Helmet of Pluto, which makes the Politic
man go invisible is, secrecy in the Counsel, and celerity in the Execution. For
when things are once come to the Execution, there is no Secrecy comparable to
Celerity* Yet measure not Dispatch by the Time, but by the Advancement of the
Business. For as in Races, it is not the large stride or high lift that makes
the Speed: So in Business, the keeping close to the matter, and not taking of
it too much at once, procures dispatch: And many times, and in many things it
is better to make more use of the Ballast than of the Sail: And as we say in
the Schools, that it is easier to oppose than answer; so it is easier to prevent
dangers than to tarry for them, and better to have a good Buckler to keep off
the blow, than a good Plaster to heal the wound. But be sure thou do not,
like Machiavel, in all thy Politics leave out the Grace of God, or the
Principles of Honesty and Justice. In all thy Actions be wise rather than
crafty, and piece the Fox skin with that of the Lamb. For as our Savior does
advise us to be as wise as Serpents, so does he also advise us to be as
innocent as Doves. Imitate those skilful and honest Physicians, who mix all
their Deleterious Prescriptions with due Correctives. Climb to Preferment
rather by thy Virtues and Merits than by thy Politics, if thou would avoid
the censure and fatal end of Boniface the Eighth, of whom it was said, that he
entered into the Popedom like a Fox, lived like a Lion, and dyed like a Dog. And
as I would have all thine Actions and Designs mixed with Honesty and Simplicity,
so I would those Counsels, which thou imparts to others, to be no way
pernicious, either to the Life, Estate, or Honor of any man. Wicked
Counselors are but the Devils Agents, and they that hearken to them, and take
up their ungodly Propositions, are like those Sponges that suck up Aqua Fortis,
which will afterward consume and confound them. Never make God or Religion thy
Stalking-Horse, to gain those designs at which thou do level thine eye. (My
Son) whether thou considerest the foul ways or satal ends of such Achitophels,
thou shall find in the conclusion, that Honesty is the best Policy.

LXXXVII. Beware of those that pretend to Religion and Godliness, but have it
not in them, who Canonize themselves and call themselves the Saints, but will
not call those, whom we know to be glorious Saints in Heaven by that style;
which though they refuse to do for Honors, yet so should they do if it were
but for distinctions sake, to difference them from other men. And here I cannot
but tell thee a pretty Story. A Presbyterian Parson sent his Man upon Sunday
morning (his old ones being done) for a pair of new Shoos to his Shoemaker,
whose Christian Name was Paul, but his Servant stayed till he was in the midst
of his Sermon, in which just as his Man step't into the Church, his Master with
a loud voice said, but what says Paul, who replied as loud (thinking that his
Master had spoken to him about his Shoos) Marry, Sir, he says that you shall
have no new Shoos, till you have paid for the old ones. Now had he said, but
what says Saint Paul, he had prevented so gross and ridiculous a mistake.
These are the men, that seem to gape so wide after Holiness, as if they would
take it all into themselves, whereby they resemble the Fishes of the Sea, which
by their wide mouths seem to suck in the whole Ocean, whereas, if a man cuts
them up, he shall not find so much as one drop of water within them. For if
thou note their Pride, Vainglory, and Hypocrisy, their rash Judgments and
uncharitable Censures of all other men, their Covetousness, holy Cheats, and
false Dealings with those with whom they commerce, their Contumacies and
Rebellions against the King and his Laws, together with their Unmercifulness
and Tyranny over those over whom they have gotten the Power and Dominion, as
signally appeared by their Plundring, Sequestring, Articling against their
Pastors, and thrusting themselves into their Livings, and by their Decimating,
Plundring, Sequestring, Shipping, Imprisoning, and Murdering their Brethern,
yea and their Sovereign Himself also, and what is worse than all these, their
to this very day not repenting themselves of all these Villainies, as is plainly
manifest by their proneness and inclinations to relapse into the same, if they
had the power so to do upon every Overture, thou shall find them only to be
Olivers Saints, and not Gods. These men make use of piety more to deceive men
than to please God. They use Religion as some men do Glass-eyes, merely to
honest, the ill-favouredness of their faces, not that they may see, or be the
more enlightened by them. They have learned that Principle of Machiavel, That a
man seek not to attain Virtue it self, but the appearance of it only, because
the credit of it is a help, but the use of it is a cumber. They speak as if
their Tongues were tipped with Religion, but their Deeds are from it. They are as
Lillies, fair in show, but foul in scent. They speak so fairly, and deal so
foully, that a man would not believe they were made all of a piece; but when
the wind sings and whistles in the leaves, look after for a storm. Take heed of
these Devils wrapped up in a Samuels Mantle, trust them not when they speak, as
though nothing but Gospel could drop from their lips, for in their hearts they
mumble over the Devils Pater Noster.

LXXXVIII. It Is no impolitick matter, when thou payest off thy Bills to thy
Mercer, Tailor, or any other Tradesman with whom thou dealest, not to trust the
crossing of their Books, without a Receipt under their hands, so thou shall be
sure never to pay for the same things twice: And so also, when thou receivest
any Letters of importance, be sure to put them upon the File, for thou know
not of what importance they may be to thee for the time to come; especially
those that are sealed with a Coat of Arms. I knew an ancient Knight, whom Age
and Experience had made a very prudent and politic Person, who when he
received from any Gentleman or Person of Quality a Letter so sealed, would be
very careful in the opening of it, to preserve the Seal entire; and he gave
this Reason, why he was so careful in this seemingly slight matter, because if
any thing written in such Letters, might hereafter be denied, or called in
Question, he might show how the business stood, under the Hands and Seals of
the Parties. But if thou receivest Letters that may import secrecy or any
danger to thy Self or Friend, remember that as soon as ever thou have read them
to thy self, that thou commit them to Vulcan; remembering that as Bellerophon
came to a fatal end, by those Letters which he himself carried and delivered,
so many have done the like, by those Letters they have received and kept by
them: as by instances may be made appear, almost in all Histories.

LXXXIX. Shun Neutrality; Alphonsus observed, that the Senenses, Neuters in the
Italian Wars, became at length a Prey to both sides, comparing them to such as
dwell in the middle story of an House, annoyed by smoke from beneath, and dust
from above.

XC. When thou art weary of thy study, or any other employment, take some
honest recreation, use Hunting or Hawking, either start the Hare, or dislodge
the Buck, or unkennel the Fox, or rowse the Heart, or unpearch the Pheasant;
recreations which are honest, are as necessary for the mind, which is employed
in great Affairs and cares of importance, as meat is for the body, which is
exhausted with daily labor: But follow not thy sport with chafing, for it is a
most improper thing to see men follow their P^stimes with sretting and pelting,
for thus, like a leaking Ship, they suffer the water to sink them which should
bear them up. I mean, they let that which should be their recreation and
delight, be their vexation and disquiet. There are as well generous delights as
ingenious studies, and the one must lend some sweetness to the other; diverse
while they have been so precise, that they thought they might not delight in
any sport, at last come to be so crest-fallen, as that they take no delight in
any thing: Nature made them sociable because she made them men, but they have
sullenly strayed from the Drove, and abandoning all Mirth and Jollity, carry
always cloudy foreheads, which is no way commendable, no not in an Horse:
Doubtless God loves a cheerful man, as well as a cheerful Giver: and such
assuredly deceive themselves, who think that they shall never look, like
blessed Angels in Heaven, who look not like tormented Devils here on Earth; or
that they shall never sing there, unless after a most disconsolate and
discontented manner, they whine and Pule here, and speak as small as an Hair:
Religion consists not in drawling Tones, or making of Faces, for a man may
perform his duty more acceptably to God, without, than with dis-figuring his
countenance; otherwise our Savior himself would not have said be not of a sad
(or as another Translation reads the word (...)) be not of a sower countenance:
do thou therefore use lawful recreations, and keep up an honest merry heart.

XCI. But above all Recreations I recommend unto thee these two, good
Horsemanship and skill at thy Weapon; the one highly becomes a Gentleman, and
will make him serviceable to his Prince and Country, if any occasion be; the
other will teach him how to guard and defend himself: nevertheless I would not
have thee suffer thy skill in that which I last mentioned, to make thee
quarrelsom, or the more confident in thine own strength; but rather use thy
Rapier as a defensive than an offensive Weapon, and as a Shield rather to ward
the blow than give one.

XCII. Be not addicted to superstitious vanities; some will look pale presently
like death, if the Saltseller fall toward their Trenchers; others will take it
for an omen that they shall be crossed in those negotiations they go about, if
a Hare chance to cross them in their way, when the cross lies only in this,
that they could not catch her; others, if they do but stumble at the Threshold,
will not take their Journey that same day, but defer it to another time; others
will by no means pare their Nails on Friday, because they say it is a cross
day; many of these make Erra Pater their old Testament, and the Shepherds
Calendar their New; and take all that they say, to be as true as Gods Oracles;
others if they but hear a Crow croke from the Roof of their Neighbors house,
they presently set their house in order, saying they shall dye and not live;
and were I disposed to recount all the Roman superstitions of this kind, as
their Dies fasti, and nefasti, their unfortunate and fortunate days, their
inspections into the Entrails of Beasts, and their Augurations and
Soothsayings, upon the flight of Birds and the noises they make: I might reckon
up a thousand such like vanities as these.

Others there are who put their confidence in Astrologers, and therefore when
they fall sick, the Stars are their Counselors, they take their Almanac, if
they find it an evil day when their sickness began, their soul is poured out
upon them, they fear that they shall not only be weakened and sore broken, but
that their health passing away as a cloud, they shall go the way of all the
earth, that the grave shall be their house, and making their Bed in the dark,
the worms shall feel their sweetness, and therefore making their wills, they
take their leave of all the world; but if it be a good day, they doubt not, but
all sickness shall be taken away from them, that health shall be unto their
Navel, and marrow to their Bones, that their flesh shall be as fresh as a
Child's, and return as in the days of their youth. In the year of our Lord 1524.
one Bolton Prior of St. Bartholomews listening to the Prognosticators, who then
generally foretold, that upon the watery Trigon, which should happen in the
Month of February that year, many thousands should perish by a Deluge, caused
an house to be builded upon Harrow on the Hill, whither he carried for himself
and Family, provision for two months; so great a fear of an Inundation possessed
him, and so great credence gave he to the Almanac Makers Predictions, yet was
there not a fairer Season many years before.

Others there be who are very foolishly superstitious in reference to their
Dreams; such a one was that Knight in the Reign of King Henry the First, who
dreaming that one was about to strangle him with his own Hair, as soon as he was
awake caused it all to be cut off, though he delighted much in it: to whom we
may join those, who if they but dream forsooth of Eggs or Fees, they presently
conclude they shall hear of anger the next day; or if they dream of Flowers or
a Garden they shall hear of a Funeral: now the reason of this vain
superstition, is grounded upon this, because they take an exact notice when
they hit, but not when they miss. I am not ignorant that Artimedorus in his
Oneirocriticks gives us a large account of the signification of those dreams,
which possess our Brains in the night, but for mine own part I hold them to be
of no signification at all, unless they come by divine immission: of which kind
(not to speak of those which we meet with in Holy Writ) I take these two, which
I shall now relate to be; the first of which signifies, that God comprehends in
himself all wisdom, and that all men in the World, are Fools: and the second
that divine Justice will not suffer Murder to go undiscovered.

1. A Noble man of Rome dreamt that he was sitting in the Shop of an
Apothecary, into which a great Rabble suddenly rusht, and catching up all the
Glasses and Bottles that they found filled with Syrups and distilled waters,
they drunk up every one of them, except only one great Bottle, out of which
they sucked not up so much as one drop: after them he seemed to see a person of
a very majestical and venerable aspect, who came likewise into the same Shop,
and as soon as he espied that Bottle, which all the rest had refused, he set it
to his mouth, and drank up every drop of that Liquor with which it was filled;
and having done so, he likewise departed, at whose Person and Action the
Nobleman admiring, asked the Apothecary who that reverend man was, to whom he
replied, Oh, Sir, that person you saw was God, and the Water in the great
Bottle which he drank up, and which all the other Rout refused, was Wisdom.
Upon which the Nobleman awaked, highly pleased with his most excellent dream.

2. The other is this, two Fellow Travelers riding together, came by night, to
a certain Town, where they parted, the one to his Friends House, the other to a
common Inn, he that lodged at his Friends House, dreamt that he saw his
Companion that lodged at the Inn stand at his Bedside, and desired him that he
would arise and make haste to help him, or he should be murdered by his Host,
but being very drowsy and weary with his Journey he arose not; wherefore in a
short time after his Companion again appeared, and requested him more earnestly
to arise and succor him; but he making no account of all this slept again; but
he left him not so, but appeared unto him the Third time, all bloody, telling
him that it was now too late to implore his aid, but yet he requested him to
avenge his Blood upon the Murderer his Host; who (as he told him) had killed
and buried him in his Dung-Mixon, where he should find his Corpse: at which the
other started out of his sleep, and arose, and taking the Officers with him*
secured mine Host, and upon further search found the Body of his Fellow
Traveller, with his Throat cut: and so by this means God disclosed the Murder,
and those that had an hand in it were brought to condign punishment.

My Son, if such foolish Conceits and Phansies as those which I have before
mentioned, call at thy Door, use them as vagrant Passengers, with slight
respect, let them not take up any lodging within thee. But though I would not
have thee superstitious, yet I would have thee devout.

XCIII. Wherefore forget not to begin and end with God, by thy morning and
evening Devotions; so will every thing thou set thine hand about fadge and
prosper the better, yea the quicker shall be thy dispatch; for as the Dutch
Proverb has it, Stealing never makes a man rich, Alms never make a man poor,
and Prayer never hinders a man's business. Before thou do compose thy self to
take thy rest, make up thine accounts between God and thine own soul; and
consider what the day past thou have thought, done, or spoken amiss; Short
reckonings (we say) make long friends. And where thou have found that thou have
failed in thy duty, resolve to amend the next day following: but be sure thou
make good thy resolutions, that thou resemble not St. George on the Sign Post,
always seeming to strike at, but never wounding the Dragon: or that of the
Archer, always aiming at, but never hitting the mark: good intentions are but
Buds, but God requires we should bring forth Fruit meet for Repentance. But
above all close not thine eyes, without begging pardon for what is past;
remembering that sleep is too much like Death, to be trusted without a man's
Prayers.

XCIV. Keep thy self to the true Principles of Piety, Virtue, and Honor; for
this will bring thee to a better Inheritance than I shall leave thee:
especially I would have thee well grounded and settled in Religion; the best
profession of which I have ever esteemed that of the Church of England, in
which thou have been educated, yet I would have thine own judgment and reason
now seal to that sacred Bond which Education has Written, that it may be
judiciously thine own Religion which thou do profess, and not other men's
Custom or Tradition.

XCV. My Son, as for Traveling it is very good, if it be used well; Homer
highly exalts the wisdom and experience of Ulysses, which he gained in his
twenty years Travels; for as he tells us Multorum mores Hominum conspexit, and
Vrbes.
He observed the Citys and the Manners of the People whithersoever he
traveled; and from thence drew such useful Theories, as made him a most
accomplished person. Indeed he that Travels with Wit in his head as well as
money in his Purse, makes the whole World his Library, and all men therein his
Books: but sill not up thy Table Book with trivial slight Observations, for
that will call thy judgment and discretion in question; as it did Tom. Coryats
of Odcomb, who gives us an account where he made water when he was in Italy,
what the mending of his Stockings cost him there, and how he hardly escaped the
losing of his Testicles, with a thousand of as mean occurrences, as these. Let
thine observations in thy Travels be weighty and material; observe the humors
and conditions of those Nations amongst whom thou shall come; their Customs,
Ceremonies and Religion, that seeing their Idolatry, thou may the more
firmly stick to thine own Religion, which thou do prosess. Next take notice
of their Churches and Oratories, and whatsoever is notable in them, their
Government, Laws, Judicatures, and Proceedings, against Malefactors with their
dealings in matters of Traffic and Commerce, their Castles, Magazines, and
Discipline in War, their Ships, the commodiousness of their Havens, their
Rivers, Fish, Birds, Beasts, and Mines of all sorts, their Buildings,
Structures, and all those curious Arts, which seem to be peculiar to the genius
of the People, and every thing that justly claims a man's wonder and admiration:
for by these thou shall the better acquaint thy self with the wonderful
operation of the handy-works of God, and shall the clearer see his infinite
wisdom in his Government of this inferior World. Finally note the Virtues of
the people and imitate them; their Vices and Vanities likewise, but to avoid
and abhor them. There are many young Sparks that travel abroad, who leave the
English Gentleman they carried out with them, and bring home again nothing,
unless it be a formal Spaniard, a drunken Dutchman, or an airy Frenchman: nay
it is well if they bring not home a Turk instead of a Christian; instead of
returning like Solomon's Ships fraught with Gold, they return furnished only
with Apes and Peacocks; my meaning is, they return learned only in the pride
and vanity of those Foreigners, amongst whom they conversed with in their
Travels; instead of taking a due cognizance of those things which are of such
worth and remark as might enrich their judgments and understandings. Doubtless
it cannot be worth a man's cost, pains, and perils to go so far (as some do)
only to learn a new Mode or a new Oath, a politic shrug, or a mimical cringe,
or a little Gibberish pronounced with an ugly Face: If this be all, it were
better for my young Gallant to be chained at home in the chimney corner, like a
Monkey, than to return such an Ape.

Wherefore, if thou intendest to travel, and to avoid these Rocks upon which
others have dashed themselves to pieces, take along with thee a grave and wise
Companion or Tutor, who by his own former Travels has acquainted himself with
the things forementioned: for Travels by Land are like Voyages by Sea, unsafe
without a skilful Pilot. And furthermore take along with thee, these few
advices and necessary cautions, which I shall give thee.

First be grave, sober, and reserved; Momus found great fault, that the great
Creator had not made men with Windows in their Breasts, that men might have
seen into their insides; and a bold Atheist he was, that thus durst impeach the
wisdom of God: but sure I am, it is a very grand folly for any man to make as it
were such a Window in his own Breast, especially when he Travels into foreign
Countries; the way to put by those mischiefs which may befall thee in thy
Travels, is to lie at a close guard; and not be like Cristal, for every one to
see through thee.

If thou travellest into Italy, munite thy self there from three things most
especially, The Men. The Women. The Inquisition.
For the Men there are very jealous and vindicative; the Women unchaste and
allective, and very much affected with the English above all men; and the
Inquisition is like Hell, from whence there is no Redemption: to avoid which in
all those Countries where that is set up, take heed of raising disputes
concerning matters of Religion; for this will make thee guilty of as rash a
madness, and as huge an imprudence, as that of the Quaker, who resolved to go
from London to Rome to confute and convert the Pope. If thou think him to be
Antichrist, let no man however hear thee call him so in his own Territories and
Dominions: Learn more wit of that Collier, who durst not bid a Fig for my Lord
Mayor, till he had got beyond Temple Bar, which is out of the Limits of his
jurisdiction. One of our Countrymen intending in his Travels to visit Rome, was
highly commended for his rare parts and abilities in all manner of Learning to
his Holiness; who was then by birth an Englishman: who, upon his commendatory
Letters, the more to show honor and respect due to the merits of the
Gentleman, went himself in person to show him the Vatican; where after many
Discourses, and the turning over of many Books, he took him aside into one of
the Criel Windows and conjured him to tell him ingeniously his thoughts of the
Pope; assuring him with many deep promises and protestations, that he should
not be prejudiced by it in the least; whereupon the Gentleman freely told him,
that he thought the Pope to be a great Wen, growing in the Nape of the Churches
neck, which some foolish people mistook to be the head of it. This was a very
bold, but withal a very dangerous resolution of the Question, notwithstanding
all engagements passed for his security: since it is a Maxim amongst all of the
Romish persuasion,

Nullam fidem tenendam esse cum Haereticis.

That no Faith is to be kept with Heretics.

My last Advice in the point concerning Traveling into other Countries shall
be this; be sure before thou visit other Nations and Kingdoms, to acquaint thy
self well, with the knowledge of that in which thou have been born and bred:
for it will be a great shame, to be inquisitive into what is done abroad in
other Countries, and to be wholly ignorant how things stand at home in thine
own: for this were to do as the Lamiae, who carried their Eyes shut up in a
Box, when they were at home, and put them into their Heads only, when they went
abroad.

XCVI. To conclude, be useful where thou do live, that those who live about,
by, and with thee, may both want and wish for thy presence still. Be temperate
and sober at thy Meals and Compotations; and look to thy Mouth, for there
commonly most diseases enter; and more graves are made with men's teeth than
their hands, and the Knife kills more than the Sword. When thou art invited to
an extraordinary etertainment, that thou may not be tempted to exceed the
bounds of temperance, and sobriety, Carve or Discourse; he who Carves is kind
to two, he that Discourses is kind to all. Scorn no man's love, though he be of
never so mean degree, that person deserves to be bitten by that Dog whom he
will not stroke, when he kindly sawns upon him. Much less make any one though
never so much below thy self, justly thy Enemy; remembering that Fleas can bite
as well as Lions, and that Bees can sting as well as Serpents. Pitch thy
Behavior low, thy projects high: Be humble to thy Superiors, gentle to thine
Equals, affable to thine inseriours, courteous to all. Be not light to follow
every man's opinion; like a young Spaniel, that quests at every Bird that rises
before him: Etiam ab errore facile discedere, levitatis est, says Scaliger, to
discede over easily, even from an Error, argues too much levity: yet would I
not have thee perversely obstinate in thy own courses or opinions: it is the
Character of a Fool to abhor instruction; hard Wax will never take any
impression, and Wisdom will never commit Burglary, to break in upon those who
lock and Bolt their doors against her; though a man cast an empty Bottle into
the Ocean, yet if it be close corkt, it will still be but an empty Bottle.
Amongst all those Treatises which may leave thee Wiser than they found thee, I
commend to thy frequent reading the Proverbs of King Solomon, and his
Ecclesiastes or the Preacher. Finally (my Son) serve, love, and fear God; to
whose Grace, Mercy, and Protection I leave thee: And so farewell, until we meet
in another World.

FINIS.
Errata.
Which together with some smaller literal faults the Courteous Reader is
desired to excuse and with his Pen to amend.

Page 5. line 17. read Patrizare for Patricare. p. 20. l. 24. r. quoque for
quique p. 27. l. 16. r. not for no. l. 28. r. the Hen had untr(...) there, for
he had untrust a point there. p. 28. l. 12 (...) ^onabus nostris, for
Nebulonibus nostris.

Other Faults there may be, but they are not worth speaking of, and therefore I
shall not speak much of them: But let the Reader take this for good advice, and
as a general rule, never to read any Book whatsoever, until he has corrected
the faults (if they are collected in an Errata) for so he shall prevent the
committing any himself.

LICENSED,

October 26. 1672. R. L.


