Tyrannick Love, OR THE Royal Martyr. A TRAGEDY. As it is Acted by his
Majesty's Servants, at the THEATER ROYAL.

BY JOHN DRYDEN, Servant to his MAJESTY.

Non jam prima peto -- neque vincere certo;
Extremum rediisse pudet. -- Virg.
LONDON, Printed for H. Herringman, at the Sign of the Blew Anchor in the Lower
Walk of the New Exchange, 1670.

To the most Illustrious and Highborn Prince, James Duke of Monmouth and
Bucclugh, one of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, and Knight of the
most Noble Order of the Garter, etc.
SIR,
THE favorable Reception which your Excellent Lady afforded to one of my
former Plays, has encouraged me to double my presumption, in addressing this to
your Graces Patronage. So dangerous a thing it is to admit a Poet into your
Family, that you can never afterward be free from the chiming of ill Verses,
perpetually sounding in your ears, and more troublesome than the neighborhood
of Steeples. I have been favorable to my self in this expression; a zealous
Fanatic would have gone farther; and have called me the Serpent, who first
presented the fruit of my Poetry to the Wife, and so gained the opportunity to
seduce the Husband. Yet I am ready to avow a Crime so advantageous to me; but
the World, which will condemn my boldness, I am sure will justify and applaude
my choice. All men will join with me in the adoration which I pay you, they
would will only I had brought you a more noble Sacrifice. Instead of an Heroic
Play, you might justly expect an Heroic Poem, filled with the past Glories of
your Ancestors, and the future certainties of your own. Heaven has already
taken care to form you for an Hero. You have all the advantages of Mind and
Body, and an Illustrious Birth, conspiring to render you an extraordinary
Person. The Achilles and the Kinaldo are present in you, even above their
Originals; you only want a Homer or a Tasso to make you equal to them. Youth,
Beauty, and Courage (all which you possess in the height of their perfection)
are the most desirable gifts of Heaven: and Heaven is never prodigal of such
Treasures, but to some uncommon purpose. So goodly a Fabric was never framed
by an Almighty Architect for a vulgar Guest. He showed the value which he set
upon your Mind, when he took care to have it so nobly and so beautifully
lodged. To a graceful fashion and deportment of Body, you have joined a winning
Conversation, and an easy Greatness, derived to you from the best, and best
beloved of Princes. And with a great power of obliging, the world has observed
in you, a desire to oblige; even beyond your power. This and all that I can say
on so excellent and large a Subject, is only History, in which Fiction has no
part; I can employ nothing of Poetry in it, any more than I do in that humble
protestation which I make, to continue ever

Your Graces most obedient and most devoted Servant, John Dryden.

PREFACE.
I Was moved to write this Play by many reasons: amongst others, the Commands
of some Persons of Honor, for whom I have a most particular respect, were
daily sounding in my ears, that it would be of good Example to undertake a Poem
of this Nature. Neither was my own inclination wanting to second their desires.
I considered that pleasure was not the only end of Poesy; and that even the
instructions of Morality were not so wholly the business of a Poet, as that the
Precepts and Examples of Piety were to be omitted. For to leave that employment
altogether to the Clergy, were to forget that Religion was first taught in
Verse (which the laziness or dullness of succeeding Priesthood, turned
afterward into Prose:) and it were also to grant, which I never shall, that
representations of this kind may not as well be conducing to Holiness, as to
good Manners. Yet far be it from me, to compare the use of Dramatique Poesy
with that, of Divinity: I only maintain against the Enemies of the Stage, that
patterns of piety, decently represented, and equally removed from the extremes
of superstition and Profaneness, may be of excellent use to second the
Precepts of our Religion. By the Harmony of words we elevate the mind to a
sense of Devotion, as our solemn Music, which is inarticulate Poesy, does in
Churches; and by the lively images of piety, adorned by action, through the
senses allure the Soul: which while it is charmed in a silent joy of what it
sees and hears, is struck at the same time with a secret veneration of things
Celestial, and is woond up insensibly into the practice of that which it
admires. Now, if, instead of this, we sometimes see on our Theaters, the
Examples of Vice rewarded, or at least unpunished; yet it ought not to be an
Argument against the Art, any more than the Extravagances and Impieties of the
Pulpit in the late times of Rebellion, can be against the Office and Dignity of
the Clergy.

But many times it happens, that Poets are wrongfully accused; as it is my own
Case in this very Play; where I am charged by some ignorant or malicious
persons, with no less Crimes than Profaneness and Irreligion.

The part of Maximin, against which these holy Critics so much declaim, was
designed by me to set off the Character of S. Catharine. And those who have
read the Roman History, may easily remember, that Maximin was not only a bloody
Tyrant, vastus corpore, animo ferus, as Herodian describes him; but also a
Persecutor of the Church, against which he raised the sixth Persecution. So
that whatsoever he speaks or acts in this Tragedy, is no more than a Record of
his life and manners; a picture as near as I could take it, from the Original.
If with much pains and some success I have drawn a deformed piece, there is as
much of Art, and as near an imitation of Nature, in a Lazare as in a Venus.
Maximin was an Heathen, and what he speaks against Religion, is in contempt of
that which he professed. He defies the Gods of Rome, which is no more than S.
Catharine might with decency have done. If it be urged, that a person of such
principles who scoffs at any Religion, ought not to be presented on the Stage;
why then are the lives and sayings of so many wicked and profane persons,
recorded in the Holy Scriptures? I know it will be answered, That a due use may
be made of them; that they are remembered with a Brand of Infamy fixed upon them;
and set as Sea-marks for those who behold them to avoid. And what other use
have I made of Maximin? have I proposed him as a pattern to be imitated, whom
even for his impiety to his false Gods I have so severely punished? Nay, as if
I had foreseen this Objection I purposely removed the Scene of the Play which
ought to have been at Alexandria in Egypt, (where S. Catharine suffered) and
laid it under the Walls of Aquileia in Italy, where Maximin was slain, that the
punishment of his Crime might immediately succeed its execution.

This, Reader, is what I owed to my just defense, and the due reverence of that
Religion which I profess, to which all men, who desire to be esteemed good or
honest are obliged: I have neither leisure nor occasion to write more largely
on this subject, because I am already justified by the sentence of the best and
most discerning Prince in the World, by the suffrage of all unbiased Judges;
and above all, by the witness of my own Conscience, which abhors the thought of
such a Crime; to which I ask leave to add my outward Conversation, which shall
never be justly taxed with the Note of Atheism or Profaneness.

In what else concerns the Play, I shall be brief: for the faults of the
writing and contrivance, I leave them to the mercy of the Reader. For I am as
little apt to defend my own Errors, as to find those of other Poets. Only I
observe, that the great Censors of Wit and Poetry, either produce nothing of
their own, or what is more ridiculous than any thing they reprehend. Much of
ill Nature, and a very little Judgment, go far in the finding the mistakes of
Writers.

I pretend not that any thing of mine can be Correct: This Poem, especially,
which was contrived and written in seven weeks, though afterward hindered by
many accidents from a speedy representation, which would have been its best
excuse.

Yet the Scenes are every where unbroken, and the unities of place and time
more exactly kept, than perhaps is requisite in a Tragedy; or at least then I
have since preserved them in the Conquest of Granada.

I have not every where observed the equality of numbers, in my Verse; partly
by reason of my haste; but more especially because I would not have my sense a
slave to Syllables.

It Is easy to discover, that I have been very bold in my alteration of the
Story, which of it self was too barren for a Play: and, that I have taken from
the Church two Martyrs, in the persons of Porphyrius and the Empress, who
suffered for the Christian Faith, under the Tyranny of Maximin.

I have seen a French Play, called the Martyrdom of S. Catharine; but those who
have read it, will soon clear me from stealing out of so dull an Author. I have
only borrowed a mistake from him, of one Maximin for another: for finding him
in the French Poet, called the Son of a Thracian Herds-man, and an Alane Woman,
I too easily believed him to have been the same Maximin mentioned in Herodian.
Till afterward consulting Eusebius and Metaphrastes, I found the Frenchman
had betrayed me into an Error (when it was too late to alter it) by mistaking
that first Maximin for a second, the Contemporary of Constantine the Great, and
one of the Usurpers of the Eastern Empire.

But neither was the other name of my Play more fortunate: for as some who had
heard of a Tragedy of S. Catharine, imagined I had taken my plot from thence;
so others, who had heard of another Play called L'Amour Tyrannique, with the
same ignorance, accused me to have borrowed my design from it, because I have
accidentally given my Play the same Title, not having to this day seen it: and
knowing only by report, that such a Comedy is extant in French, under the name
of Monsieur Scudery.

As for what I have said of Astral or AErial Spirits it is no invention of
mine, but taken from those who have written on that Subject. Whether there are
such Beings or not, it concerns not me; it is sufficient for my purpose, that
many have believed the affirmative: and that these Heroic Representations,
which are of the same Nature with the Epick, are not limited, but with the
extremest bounds of what is credible.

Prologue.
SElf-love (which never rightly understood)
Makes Poets still conclude their Plays are good:
And malice in all Critics raigns so high,
That for small Errors, they whole Plays decry;
So that to see this fondness, and that spite,
You Would think that none but Madmen judge or write.
Therefore our Poet, as he thinks not fit
TO impose upon you, what he writes for Wit,
So hopes that leaving you your censures free,
You equal Judges of the whole will be:
They judge but half who only faults will see.
Poets like Lovers should be bold and dare,
They spoil their business with an over-care.
And he who servilely creeps after sense,
Is safe, but never will reach an Excellence.
Hence it is our Poet in his conjuring,
Allowed his Fancy the full scope and swing.
But when a Tyrant for his Theme he had,
He loosed the Reins, and bid his Muse run mad:
And though he stumbles in a full career;
Yet rashness is a better fault than fear.
He saw his way; but in so swift a pace,
To choose the ground, might be to lose the race.
They then who of each trip the advantage take,
Find but those Faults which they want Wit to make.
Persons Represented.
Maximin, Tyrant of Rome. By Major Mohun. Porphyrius, Captain of the Praetorian
Bands. Mr. Heart. Charinus, the-Emperour's Son. Mr. Harris. Placidius, a great
Officer. Mr. Kynaston. Valerius, Tribunes of the Army. Mr. Lydall. Albinus,
Tribunes of the Army. Mr. Littlewood. Nigrinus, a Tribune and Conjurer. Mr.
Beeston. Amariel, Guardian-Angel to S. Catharine. Mr. Bell. Berenice, Wife to
Maximin. By Mrs. Marshall. Valeria, Daughter to Maximin. Mrs. Ellen Guyn. S.
Catharine, Princess of Alexandria. Mrs. Hughes. Felicia, her Mother. Mrs.
Knepp. Erotion, Attendants. Mrs. Vphill. Cydnon, Attendants. Mrs. Eastland.
SCENE The Camp of Maximin, under the Walls of Aquileia.

Tyrannick Love; OR, THE Royal Martyr.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
A Camp or Pavilion Royal. Maximin, Charinus, Placidius, Albinus, Valerius,
Apollonius, Guards. Max. THUS far my Arms have with success been crowned;
And found no stop, or vanquished what they found.
The German Lakes my Legions have o're-past,
With all the bars which Art or Nature cast:
My Foes, in watery Fastnesses enclosed,
I sought, alone, to their whole War exposed.
Did first the depth of trembling Marshes sound,
And fixed my Eagles in unfaithful ground:
By force submitted to the Roman sway
Fierce Nations, and unknowing to obey:
And now, for my reward, ungrateful Rome
For which I fought abroad, rebels at home.

Alb. Yet it is their fear which does this War maintain:
They cannot brook a Martial Monarchs Reign:
Your Valor would their sloth too much accuse;
And therefore, like themselves, they Princes choose.

Placid. Two, tame, gown'd Princes, who at ease, debate
In lazy Chairs, the business of the State:
Who reign but while the people they can please,
And only know the little Arts of Peace.

Char. In fields they dare not fight where Honor calls;
But breathe a faint defiance from their Walls.
The very noise of War their Souls does wound;
They quake, but hearing their own Trumpets sound.

Val. An easy Summons but for form they wait,
And to your Fame will open wide the gate.

Placid. I wish our Fame that swift success may find;
But Conquests, Sir, are easily designed:
However soft within themselves they are,
To you they will be valiant by despair:
For having once been guilty, well they know
To a revengeful Prince they still are so.

Alb. It Is true, that, since the Senates succors came,
They grow more bold.

Max. -- That Senate's but a name:
Or they are Pageant Princes which they make:
That power they give away, they would partake.
Two equal powers, two different ways will draw,
While each may check, and give the other Law.
True, they secure propriety and peace;
But are not fit an Empire to increase.
When they should aid their Prince, the Slaves dispute;
And fear success should make him absolute.
They let Foes conquer, to secure the State,
And lend a Sword, whose edge themselves rebate.

Char. When to increase the Gods you late are gone,
I Will swiftly choose to dye, or reign alone:
But these half-Kings our courage cannot fright;
The thrifty State will bargain e're they fight:
Give just so much for every Victory;
And rather lose a fight, than over-buy.

Max. Since all delays are dangerous in War,
Your men, Albinus, for assault prepare:
C^^spinus and Menephilus, I hear
Two Consulars, these Aquileians cheer;
By whom they may, if we protract the time,
Be taught the courage to defend their crime.

Placid. Put off th 'assault but only for this day;
No loss can come by such a small delay.

Char. We are not sure to morrow will be ours:
Wars have, like Love, their favorable hours:
Let us use all; for if we lose one day;
That white one, in the crowd, may slip away.

Max. Fates dark recesses we can never find;
But Fortune at some hours to all is kind;
The lucky have whole days, which still they choose;
The unlucky have but hours, and those they lose.

Placid. I have consulted one, who reads Heavens doom,
And sees, as present, things which are to come.
It Is that Nigrinus, made by your command
A Tribune in the new Panonian Band.
Him have I seen, (on Isters Banks he stood,
Where last we wintered) bind the headlong flood
In sudden ice; and where most swift it flows,
In crystal nets, the wondering fishes close.
Then, with a moments thaw, the streams enlarge,
And from the Mesh the twinkling Guests discharge.
In a deep vale, or near some ruined wall
He would the Ghosts of slaughtered Soldiers call;
Who, slow, to wounded bodies did repair,
And loath to enter, shivered in the air;
These his dread Wand did to short life compel,
And forced the Fates of Battles to foretell.

Max. It Is wondrous strange! But, good placidius, say,
What prophesies Nigrinus of this day?

Placid. In a lone Tent, all hung with black, I saw
Where in a Square he did a Circle draw:
Four Angles, made by that circumference,
Bore holy words inscribed, of my stick sense.
When first a hollow wind began to blow,
The Sky grew black, and belli'd down more low,
Around the fields did nimble Lightning play,
Which offered us by fits, and snatched the day.
'Midst this, was heard the shrill and tender cry
Of well-pleased Ghosts, which in the storm did fly;
Danced to and fro, and skim'd along the ground,
Till to the Magic Circle they were bound.
They coursing it, while we were fenced within,
We saw this dreadful Scene of Fate begin.

Char. Speak without fear; what did the Vision show?


Placid. A Curtain drawn presented to our view,
A Town besieged; and on the neighboring Plain
Lay heaps of visionary Soldiers slain.
A rising mist obscured the gloomy head
Of one, who in Imperial Robes lay dead.
Near this, in Fetters stood a Virgin, crowned;
Whom many Cupids strove in vain to wound:
A voice to morrow, still to morrow rung:
Another Io; Io, Paean sung.

Char. Visions and Oracles still doubtful are,
And never expounded till the event of War.
The Gods foreknowledge on our Swords will wait:
If we fight well, they must fore-show good Fate.

To them a Centurion. Cent. A rising dust which troubles all the air,
And this way travels, shows some Army near.

Char. I hear the sound of Trumpets from afar.


[ Exit Albinus. Max. It seems the voice of Triumph, not of War.


To them Albinus again. Alb. Health and success our Emperor attends:
The Forces marching on the Plain, are friends.
Porphyrius, whom you AEgypts Praetor made,
Is come from Alexandria to your aid.

Max. It well becomes the conduct and the care
Of one so famed and fortunate in War.
You must resign, Placidius, your Command,
To him I promised the Praetorian Band.
Your duty in your swift compliance show,
I will provide some other charge for you.

Placid. May Caesar's pleasure ever be obeyed
With that submission, which by me is paid.
Now all the Curses envy ever knew,
Or could invent, Porphyrius pursue.

Aside. Alb. Placidius does too tamely bear his loss;
[To Charinus. This new pretender will all power ingross:
All things must now by his direction move;
And you, Sir, must resign your Father's love.

Char. Yes; every name to his repute must bow;
There grow no Bays for any other brow.
He blasts my early Honor in the bud,
Like some tall Tree the Monster of the Wood,
O're-shading all which under him would grow,
He sheds his venim on the Plants below.

Alb. You must some noble action undertake;
Equal with his your own renown to make.

Char. I am not for a slothful envy born,
I Will do it this day, in the dire Visions scorn.
He comes: We two, like the twin Stars appear;
Never to shine together in one Sphere.

Exit cum Alb. Enter Porphyrius attended. Max. Porphyrius, welcome, welcome as
the light
To cheerful Birds; or as to Lovers night.
Welcome as what thou bring'st me, Victory.

Por. That waits, Sir, on your Arms, and not on me.
You left a Conquest more than half achieved;
And for whose easiness I almost grieved.
Yours only the Egyptian Laurels are;
I bring you but the relics of your War.
The Christian Princess to receive your doom,
Is from her Conquered Alexandria come.
Her Mother in another Vessel sent,
A Storm surpised; nor know I the event:
Both from your bounty must receive their state;
Or must on your triumphant Chariot wait.

Max. From me they can expect no grace, whose minds
An execrable superstition blinds.

Apoll. The Gods who raised you to the Worlds Command,
Require these Victims from your grateful hand.

Por. To minds resolved, the threats of Death are vain;
They run to fires, and there enjoy their pain:
Not Mucius made more have his hand t'expose
To greedy flames, than their whole bodies those.

Max. How, to their own destruction, they are blind!
Zeal is the pious madness of the mind.

Por. They all our famed Philosophers defy;
And would our Faith by force of reason try.

Apoll. I beg it, Sir, by all the powers Divine,
That in their right, this Combat may be mine.

Max. It shall; and fifty Doctors of our Laws,
Be added to you, to maintain the cause.

Enter Berenice the Empress, Valeria Daughter to the Emperor, Erotion. Placid.
The Empress and your Daughter, Sir, are here,


Por. What dangers in those charming Eyes appear!
Looking on the Empress. How my old wounds are opened at this view!
And in my murd'rers presence bleed anew!

Max. I did expect your coming to partake
To the Ladies. The general gladness which my Triumphs make.
You did Porphyrius as a Courtier know,
But as a Conqueror behold him now.

Ber. You know (I read it in your blushing face)
To Por. To merit, better than receive a grace:
And I know better silently to own,
Than with vain words to pay your service done.

Por. Princes, like Gods, reward e're we deserve;
Kneeling to kiss h^^^ And pay us in permitting us to serve.
Oh might I still grow here, and never move!

(lower.) Ber. How dangerous are these ecstasies of Love!
He shows his passion to a thousand Eyes!
He cannot stir nor can I bid him rise!
That word my heart refuses to my tongue!

Aside. Max. Madam, you let the General kneel too long.


Por. Too long, as if Eternity were so!


Aside. Ber. Rise, good Porphyrius, (since it must be so.)


Aside. Por. Like Hermits from a Vision I retire;
rising. With Eyes too weak to see what I admire.

Aside. Val. The Empress knows your worth; but, Sir, there be,
To Porphyrius, who kisses her hand. Those who can value it as high as she.
And it is but just, (since in my Fathers cause,
You fought) your Valor should have my applause.

Placid. O Jealousy, how art thou Eagle-ey'd!
She loves; and would her Love in praises hide:
How am I bound this Rival to pursue,
Who ravishes my Love and Fortune too!

Aside. A Dead March within, and Trumpets. Max. Somewhat of mournful, sure, my
Ears does wound;
Like the hoarse murmurs of a Trumpets sound,
And Drums unbrac'd, with Soldiers broken cries.
Enter Albinus. Albinus, Whence proceeds this dismal noise?

Alb. Too soon you will know what I want words to tell.


Max. How fares my Son? Is my Charinus well?
Not answer me! Oh my prophetique fear!

Alb. How can I speak; or how, Sir, can you hear?
Imagine that which you would most deplore,
And that which I would speak is it, or more.

Max. Thy mournful message in thy looks I read:
Is he (oh that I live to ask it) dead?

Alb. Sir --


Max. Stay; if thou speak that word, thou speak thy last:
Some God now, if he dares, relate what is past:
Say but he is dead, that God shall mortal be.

Alb. Then, what I dare not speak, look back and see.


Charinus born in dead by Soldiers. Max. See nothing, Eyes, henceforth, but
Death and woe,
You Have done me the worst office you can do.
Youv'e shown me Destinies prepost'rous crime;
An unripe fate; disclosed e're Nature's time.

Placid. Assuage, great Prince, your passion, lest you show
There Is somewhat in your Soul which Fate can bow.

Por. Fortune should by your greatness be controlled:
Arm your great mind, and let her take no hold.

Max. To tame Philosophers teach constancy;
There is no farther use of it in me.
Gods (but why name I you!
All that was worth a prayer to you is gone:)
I ask not back my Virtue, but my Son.

Alb. His too great thirst of fame his ruin brought.
Though, Sir, beyond humanity he fought.

Placid. This was my Vision of this fatal day!


Alb. With a fierce have he led our Troops the way:
While fiery showrs of Sulphur on him rained;
Nor left he till the Battlements he gained:
There with a Forest of their Darts he strove;
And stood like Capaneus defying Jove.
With his broad Sword the boldest beating down,
While Fate grew pale lest he should win the Town.
And turned the Iron leafs of its dark Book,
To make new dooms; or mend what it mistook.
Till sought by many Deaths, he sunk though late,
And by his fall asserted doubtful Fate.

Vale. Oh my Dear Brother! whom Heaven let us see,
And would not longer suffer him to be!

Max. And did not thou a Death with Honor choose,
To Alb. But impudently liv'st to bring this news?
After his loss how did thou dare to breath?
-- But thy base Ghost shall follow him in death.
A decimation I will strictly make
Of all who my Charinus did forsake.
And of each Legion each Centurion
Shall dye: -- Placidius, see my pleasure done.

Por. Sir, you will lose by this severity
Your Soldiers hearts.

Max. -- Why, they take Pay to dye.


Por. Then spare Albinus only.


Max. -- I consent
To leave his life to be his punishment.
Discharged from trust; branded with infamy
Let him live on, till he ask leave to dye.

Ber. Let me petition for him.


Max. -- I have said:
And will not be entreated, but obeyed.
But, Empress, whence does your compassion grow?

Ber. You need not ask it, since my birth you know.
The Race of Antonin's was named the Good:
I draw my pity from my Royal Blood.

Max. Still must I be upbraided with your Line?
I know you speak it in contempt of mine.
But your late Brother did not prize me less,
Because I could not boast of Images.
And the Gods owned me more when they decreed
A Thracian Shepherd should your Line succeed.

Ber. The Gods! O do not name the powers divine,
They never mingled their Decrees with thine.
My Brother gave me to thee for a Wife,
And for my Dowry thou did take his life.

Max. The Gods by many Victories have shown,
That they my merits and his death did own.

Ber. Yes; they have owned it; witness this just day;
When they begin thy mischiefs to repay.
See the reward of all thy wicked care,
Before thee thy succession ended there.
Yet but in part my Brothers Ghost is pleased:
Restless till all the groaning world be eased.
For me; no other happiness I own
Than to have born no Issue to thy Throne.

Max. Provoke my rage no farther, lest I be
Revenged at once upon the Gods and thee.

Por. aside.] What horrid tortures seize my laboring mind!
O, only excellent of all thy kind!
To hear thee threatened while I idle stand:
Heaven! was I born to fear a Tyrants hand?

Max. to Ber. Hence from my sight, -- thy blood, if thou do stay, --


Ber. Tyrant! too well to that thou know the way.


(going.) Por. Let baser Souls from falling Fortunes fly:
I Will pay my duty to her, though I dye.

Exit leading her, Max. What made Porphyrius so officious be?
The action looked as done in scorn of me.

Val. It did, indeed, some little freedom show;
But somewhat to his Services you owe.

Max. Yet, if I thought it his presumption were --


Placid. Perhaps he did not your displeasure hear.


Max. My anger was too loud, not to be heard.


Placid. I Am loath to think he did it not regard.


Max. How, not regard!


Val. Placidius, you foment
On too light grounds my Father's discontent.
But when an action does two faces wear,
It Is Justice to believe what is most fair.
I think, that knowing what respect there rests
For her late Brother in the Soldiers breasts,
He went to serve the Emperor: and designed
Only to calm the tempest in her mind,
Lest some Sedition in the Camp should rise.

Max. I ever thought him loyal as he is wise.
Since therefore, all the Gods their spite have shown
To rob my Age of a successive Throne;
And you who now remain
The only Issue of my former bed
In Empire cannot by your Sex succeed:
To bind Porphyrius firmly to the State,
I will this day my Caesar him create:
And, Daughter, I will give him you for Wife.

Val. O day, the best and happiest of my life!


Placid. O day, the most accursed I ever knew!


Aside. Max. See to my Son performed each Funeral due:
Then to the toyls of War we will return;
And make our Enemies our losses mourn.

Exeunt. ACT II.
SCENE I.
The Royal Camp. Berenice, Porphyrius. Ber. POrphyrius, you too far did tempt
your Fate,
In owning her the Emperor does hate.
It Is true, your duty to me it became;
But, praising that, I must your conduct blame.

Por. Not to have owned my zeal at such a time,
Were to sin higher than your Tyrants crime.

Ber. 'Twas too much my disgrace t'accompany;
A silent wish had been enough for me.

Por. Wishes are aids, faint Servants may supply,
Who ask Heaven for you what themselves deny.
Could I do less than my respect to pay,
Where I before had given my heart away?

Ber. You fail in that respect you seem to bear,
When you speak words unfit for me to hear.

Por. Yet you did once accept those vows I paid.


Ber. Those vows were then to Berenice made;
But cannot now be heard without a sin,
When offered to the Wife of Maximin.

Por. Has, then, the change of Fortune changed your will?
Ah! why are you not Berenice still?
To Maximin you once declared your hate;
Your Marriage was a Sacrifice to the State:
Your Brother made it to secure his Throne,
Which this man made a step to mount it on.

Ber. Whatever Maximin has been, or is,
I am to bear, since Heaven has made me his.
For wives, who must themselves of power divest,
When they love blindly, for their peace love best.

Por. If mutual love be vowed when faith you plight,
Then he, who forfeits first, has lost his right.

Ber. Husbands a forfeiture of love may make;
But what avails the forfeit none can take?
As in a general wreck
The Pirate sinks with his ill-gotten gains,
And nothing to another use remains:
So, by his loss, no gain to you can fall:
The Sea, and vast destruction swallows all.

Por. Yet he, who from the shore, the wreck descrys,
May lawfully enrich him with the prize.

Ber. Who sees the wreck can yet no title plead,
Till he be sure the Owner first is dead.

Por. If that be all the claim I want to love,
This Pirate of your heart I Will soon remove;
And, at one stroke, the world and you set free.

Ber. Leave to the care of Heaven that world and me.


Por. Heaven, as its instrument my courage sends.


Ber. Heaven never sent those who fight for private ends.
We both are bound by trust, and must be true;
I to his Bed, and to his Empire you.
For he who to the bad betrays his trust,
Though he does good, becomes himself unjust.

Por. When Brutus did from Caesar Rome redeem,
The Act was good.

Ber. -- But was not good in him.
You see the Gods adjudg'd it Parricide,
By dooming the event on Caesar's side.
It Is virtue not to be obliged at all;
Or not conspire our Benefactors fall.

Por. You doom me then to suffer all this ill,
And yet I doom my self to love you still.

Ber. Dare not Porphyrius suffer then with me,
Since what for him I for my self decree?

Por. How can I bear those griefs you disapprove?


Ber. To ease'em, I Will permit you still to love.


Por. That will but haste my death, if you think fit
Not to reward, but barely to permit.
Love without hope does like a torture wound,
Which makes me reach in pain, to touch the ground.

Ber. If hope, then, to your life so needful be,
Hope still.

Por. -- Blessed News!


Ber. -- But hope, in Heaven, not me.


Por. Love is too noble such deceits to use.
Referring me to Heaven, your gift I lose.
So Princes cheaply may our wants supply,
When they give that their Treasurers deny.

Ber. Love blinds my Virtue: if I longer stay,
It will grow dark, and I shall lose my way.

Por. One kiss from this fair hand can be no sin;
I ask not that you gave to Maximin.
In full reward of all the pains I Have past,
Give me but one.

Ber. -- Then let it be your last.


Por. It Is gone!
Like Soldiers prodigal of their Arrears,
One minute spends the Pay of many years.
-- Let but one more be added to the sum,
And pay at once for all my pains to come.

Ber. Unthrifts will starve if we beforehand give:
[Pulling back her hand.] I Will see you shall have just enough to live.

Enter Erotion. Ero. Madam, the Emperor is drawing near;
And comes, they say, to seek Porphyrius here.

Ber. Alas!


Por. -- I will not ask what he intends;
My life, or death, alone, on you depends.

Ber. I must withdraw; but must not let him know
Aside. How hard the precepts of my Virtue grow!
But what e're Fortune is for me designed,
Sweet Heaven, be still to brave Porphyrius kind!

Exit cum Erotio. Por. She Is gone unkindly, and refused to cast
One glance to feed me for so long a fast.

Enter Maximin, Placidius, Guards. Max. Porphyrius, since the Gods have
ravished one,
I come in you to seek another Son.
Succeed him then in my Imperial state;
Succeed in all, but his untimely fate.
If I adopt you with no better grace,
Pardon a fathers tears, upon my face,
And give 'em to Charinus memory:
May they not prove as ominous to thee.

Por. With what misfortunes Heaven torments me still!
Why must I be obliged to one so ill?

[Aside. Max. Those offers which I made you, Sir, were such,
No private man should need to balance much.

Por. Who durst his thoughts to such ambition lift?
[Kneeling. The greatness of it made me doubt the gift.
The distance was so vast, that to my view
It made the object seem at first untrue;
And now it is near, the sudden excellence
Strikes through, and flashes on my tender sense.

Max. Yet Heaven and Earth, which so remote appear,
[raising him.] Are by the Air, which flows betwixt 'em, near.
And 'twixt us two my Daughter be the chain,
One end with me, and one with you remain.

Por. You press me down with such a glorious Fate,
[Kneeling again.] I cannot rise against the mighty weight.
Permit I may retire some little space,
And gather strength to bear so great a grace.

[Exit bowing. Placid. How Love and Fortune lavishly contend,
Which should Porphyrius wishes most befriend!
The mid-stream's his; I, creeping by the side,
Am shouldered off by his impetuous Tide.

Enter Valerius hastily. Val. I hope my business may my haste excuse;
For, Sir, I bring you most surprising news.
The Christian Princess in her Tent confers
With fifty of your learned Philosophers;
Whom with such Eloquence she does persuade,
That they are Captives to her reasons made.
I left 'em yielding up their vanquished cause,
And all the Soldiers shouting her applause;
Even Apollonius does but faintly speak,
Whose voice the murmurs of the assistants break.

Max. Conduct this Captive Christian to my Tent;
She shall be brought to speedy punishment.
I must in time some remedy provide,
[Exit Valerius. Lest this contagious Error spread too wide.

Placid. TO infected zeal you must no mercy show:
For, from Religion, all Rebellions grow.

Max. The silly crowd, by factious Teachers, brought
To think that Faith untrue their youth was taught,
Run on in new Opinions blindly bold;
Neglect, contemn, and then assault the old.
The infectious madness seizes every part,
And from the head distills upon the heart.
And first they think their Princes faith not true,
And then proceed to offer him a new;
Which if refused, all duty from 'em cast,
To their new Faith they make new Kings at last.

Placid. Those ills by Malcontents are often wrought,
That by their Prince their duty may be bought.
They head those holy Factions which they hate,
To sell their duty at a dearer rate.
But, Sir, the Tribune is already here
With your fair Captive.

Max. -- Bid 'em both appear.
Enter S. Catharine, Valerius, Apollonius, Guards. See where she comes with
that high Air and mien,
Which marks, in bonds, the greatness of a Queen.
What pity it is! -- but I no charms must see
In her who to our Gods is enemy. --
Fair foe of Heaven, whence comes this haughty pride,
[To her. Or is it Frenzy does your mind misguide
To scorn our Worship, and new Gods to find?

S. Cath. Nor pride nor frenzy, but a settled mind;
Enlightened from above, my way does mark.

Max. Though Heaven be clear, the way to it is dark.


S. Cath. But where our Reason with our Faith does go,
We Are both above enlightened, and below.
But Reason with your fond Religion fights,
For many Gods are many Infinites:
This to the first Philosophers was known,
Who, under various names, adored but one.
Though your vain Poets after did mistake,
Who every Attribute a God did make.
And so obscene their Ceremonies be,
As good men loath, and Cato blushed to see.

Max. War is my Province; Priest, why stand you mute?
You gain by Heaven, and therefore should dispute.

Apol. In all Religions, as in ours, there are
Some solid truths, and some things popular.
The popular in pleasing Fables lie,
The truths, in precepts of Morality.
And these to humane life are of that use,
That no Religion can such Rules produce.

S. Cath. Then let the whole Dispute concluded be
Betwixt these Rules and Christianity.

Apol. And what more noble can your Doctrine preach,
Than Virtues which Philosophy does teach?
To keep the passions in severest awe,
To live to Reason, (Nature's greatest Law)
To follow Virtue, as its own reward;
And good and ill, as things without, regard.

S. Cath. Yet few could follow those strict Rules they gave;
For humane life will humane frailties have;
And love of Virtue is but barren praise,
Airy as Fame: nor strong enough to raise
The actions of the Soul above the sense.
Virtue grows cold without a recompense.
We virtuous acts as duty do regard;
Yet are permitted to expect reward.

Apol. By how much more your Faith reward assures,
So much more frank our Virtue is than yours.

S. Cath. Blind men! you seek even those rewards you blame:
But ours are solid; yours an empty name.
Either to open praise your Acts you guide,
Or else reward your selves with secret pride.

Apol. Yet still our Moral virtues you obey;
Ours are the Precepts though applied your way.

S. Cath. It Is true, your virtues are the same we teach;
But in our practice they much higher reach.
You but forbid to take another due;
But we forbid even to desire it too.
Revenge of injuries you Virtue call;
But we forgiveness of our wrongs extol:
Immodest deeds you hinder to be wrought,
But we proscribe the least immodest thought.
So much your Virtues are in ours refined,
That yours but reach the actions, ours the mind.

Max. Answer in short to what you heard her speak.


[ To Apol. Apol. Where Truth prevails, all arguments are weak.
To that convincing power I must give place:
And with that Truth that Faith I will embrace.

Max. O Traitor to our Gods; but more to me;
Dare thou of any Faith but of thy Princes be?
But sure thou rav'st; thy foolish Error find:
Cast up the poison that infects thy mind;
And shun the Torments thou art sure to feel.

Apol. Nor fire, nor torture, nor revenging Steel
Can on my Soul the least impression make:
How gladly, Truth, I suffer for thy sake!
Once I was ignorant of what was so;
But never can abandon Truth I know:
My Martyrdom I to thy Crown prefer;
Truth is a Cause for a Philosopher.

S. Cath. Lose not that Courage which Heaven does inspire;
[ To Apollonius. But fearless go to be baptized in fire.
Think it is a Triumph, not a danger near:
Give him your blood; but give him not a tear.
Go, and prepare my Seat: and hovering be
Near that bright space which is reserved for me.

Max. Hence with the Traitor; bear him to his Fate.


Apol. Tyrant, I fear thy pity, not thy hate:
`A Life Eternal I by Death obtain.

Max. Go, carry him, where he that Life may gain.


Ex. Apollonius, Valerius, and Guards. Placid. From this Enchantress all these
ills are come:
You are not safe till you pronounce her doom.
Each hour she lives a Legion sweeps away;
She Will make your Army Martyrs in a day.

Max. It Is just: this Christian Sorceress shall die:
(Would I had never proved her Sorcery:)
Not that her charming Tongue this change has bred;
I fear it is something that her Eyes have sed.
I love: and am ashamed it should be seen.

[Aside. Placid. Sir, shall she die?


Max. -- Consider she is a Queen.


Placid. Those claims in Cleopatra ended were.


Max. How many Cleopatra's live in her!


[Aside. Placid. When you condemned her, Sir, she was a Queen.


Max. No, Slave; she only was a Captive then.


S. Cath. My joyful Sentence you defer to long.


Max. I never knew that Life was such a wrong.
But if you needs will die: -- it shall be so.
-- Yet think it does from your perverseness flow.
Men say, indeed, that I in Blood delight;
But you shall find -- Haste, take her from my sight.
-- For Maximin I have too much confessed:
And for a Lover not enough expressed.
Absent, I may her Martyrdom decree;
But one look more will make that Martyr me.

[ Exit S. Catharine Guarded.] Placid. What is it, Sir, that shakes your mighty
mind?


Max. Somewhat I am ashamed that thou should find.


Placid. If it be Love which does your Soul possess --


Max. Are you my Rival that so soon you guess?


Placid. Far, mighty Prince, be such a crime from me.
[Kneeling.] Which, with the pride, includes impiety.
Could you forgive it, yet the Gods above
Would never pardon me a Christian Love.

Max. Thou lie: -- there is not a God inhabits there,
But for this Christian would all Heaven forswear.
Even Jove would try more shapes her Love to win:
And in new birds, and unknown beasts would sin;
At least, if Jove could love like Maximin.

Placid. A Captive, Sir, who would a Martyr dye?


Max. She courts not death, but shuns Captivity.
Great gifts, and greater promises I Will make;
And what Religion is it, but they can shake?
She shall live high: -- Devotion in distress
Is born, but vanishes in happiness.

Exit Maximin. Placid. solus. His Son forgot, his Empress unappeas'd;
How soon the Tyrant with new Love is seized!
Love various minds does variously inspire:
He stirs in gentle Natures gentle fire;
Like that of Incense on the Altars laid:
But raging flames tempestuous Souls invade.
A fire which every windy passion blows;
With pride it mounts, and with revenge it glows.
But I accursed, who servilely must move;
And sooth his passion for his Daughters Love!
Small hope, it is true, attends my mighty care.
But of all passions Love does last despair.

Exit. ACT III.
SCENE I.
The Royal Pavilion. Maximin, Placidius, Guards and Attendants. Max. THis Love
that never could my youth engage,
Peeps out his coward head to dare my age.
Where have thou been thus long, thou sleeping form,
That wak'st like drowsy Seamen in a storm?
A sullen hour thou chusest for thy birth:
My Love shoots up in tempests, as the Earth
Is stirred and loosened in a blustering wind,
Whose blasts to waiting flowers her womb unbind.

Placid. Forgive me, if I say your passions are
So rough, as if in Love you would make War.
But Love is soft --
And with soft beauty tenderly complies;
In lips it laughs, and languishes in eyes.

Max. There let it laugh; or, like an Infant, weep:
I cannot such a supple passion keep.
Mine, stiff with age, and stubborn as my arms,
Walks upright; stoops not to, but meets her charms.

Placid. Yet fierceness suits not with her gentle kind;
They brave assaults; but may be undermined.

Max. Till I in those mean Arts am better read,
Court thou, and fawn, and flatter in my stead.
Enter S. Catharine. She comes; and now, methinks, I could obey:
Her form glides through me, and my heart gives way:
This Ironheart, which no impression took
From Wars, melts down, and runs, if she but look.

Exit Maximin. Placid. Madam, I from the Emperor am come
T'applaude your Virtue, and reverse your doom.
He thinks, whatever your Religion be,
This Palm is owing to your constancy.

S. Cath. My constancy from him seeks no renown;
Heaven, that proposed the course, will give the Crown.

Placid. But Monarchs are the Gods Vicegerents here;
Heaven gives rewards; but what it gives they bear:
From Heaven to you th'AEgyptian Crown is sent,
Yet it is a Prince who does the gift present.

S. Cath. The Deity I serve, had he thought fit,
Could have preserved my Crown unconquered yet:
But when his secret Providence designed
To level that, he levelled too my mind;
Which, by contracting its desires, is taught
The humble quiet of possessing naught.

Placid. To Stoics leave a happiness so mean:
Your Virtue does deserve a nobler Scene.
You are not for obscurity designed:
But, like the Sun, must cheer all humane kind.

S. Cath. No happiness can be where is no rest:
The unknown, untalk'd of man is only blessed.
He, as in some safe Cliff, his Cell does keep,
From thence he views the labors of the Deep:
The Gold-fraught Vessel which mad tempests beat,
He sees now vainly make to his retreat:
And, when from far, the tenth wave does appear,
Shrinks up in silent joy, that he is not there.

Placid. You have a Pilot who your Ship secures;
The Monarch both of Earth and Seas is yours.
He who so freely gives a Crown away,
Yet asks no tribute but what you may pay.
One smile on him a greater wealth bestows,
Than Egypt yields, when Nilus overflows.

S. Cath. I cannot wholly innocent appear,
Since I have lived such words as these to hear.
O Heaven, which do of chastity take care! --

Placid. Why do you lose an unregarded prayer?
If happiness, as you believe, be rest,
That quiet sure is by the Gods possessed: --
It Is greatness to neglect, or not to know
The little business of the world below.

S. Cath. This doctrine well besitted him who thought
A casual world was from wild Atoms wrought:
But such an order in each chance we see,
(Chained to its cause, as that to its decree,)
That none can think a workmanship so rare,
Was built or kept without a Workman's care.

To them Maximin, Attendants, and Guards. Max. Madam, you from Placidius may
have heard
Some news, which will your happiness regard.
The Egyptian Crown I to your hands remit;
And, with it, take his heart who offers it.
She turns aside. Do you my person and my gift contemn?

S. Cath. My hopes pursue a brighter Diadem.


Max. Can any brighter than the Roman be?
I find my proffered Love has cheapned me:
Since you neglect to answer my desires,
Know, Princess, you shall burn in other fires.
-- Why should you urge me to so black a deed?
Think all my anger did from Love proceed.

S. Cath. Nor threats nor promises my mind can move:
Your furious anger, nor your impious Love.

Max. The Love of you can never impious be;
You are so pure --
That in the Act 'twould change th'impiety.
Heaven would unmake it sin --

S. Cath. I take my self from thy detested sight:
To my respect thou have no longer right:
Such power in bonds true piety can have,
That I command, and thou art but a Slave.

Exit. S. Cath. Max. To what a height of arrogance she swells!
Pride or ill nature still with Virtue dwells;
Her death shall set me free this very hour;
-- But is her death within a Lovers power?
Wild with my rage, more wild with my desire,
Like meeting tides -- but mine are tides of fire.
What petty promise was it that caused this frown?

Placid. You heard: no less than the Egyptian Crown.


Max. Throw AEgypt's by, and offer in the stead;
Offer -- the Crown on Berenice's head.
I am resolved to double till I win;
About it straight, and send Porphyrius in.
Exit Placid. We look like Eagles towering in the Sky;
While her high flight still raises mine more high.

To him Porphyrius. Por. I come, Sir, to expect your great commands.


Max. My happiness lies only in thy hands.
And, since I have adopted thee my Son,
I Will keep no secret from thy breast unknown:
Led by the interest of my rising Fate,
I did espouse this Empress whom I hate:
And therefore with less shame I may declare,
That I the Fetters of thy Captive wear.

Por. Sir, you amaze me with so strange a Love.


Max. Pity, my Son, those flames you disapprove.
The cause of Love can never be assigned;
It Is in no face, but in the Lover's mind.

Por. Yet there are Beauties which attract all hearts;
And all mankind lies open to their darts:
Whose Sovereignty, without dispute, we grant;
Such Graces, sure, your Empress does not want.

Max. Beauty has bounds, --
And can no more to every heart be so,
Than any Coin through every Land can go.
Some secret Grace, which is but so to me,
Though not so great, may yet more powerful be:
All guard themselves when stronger Foes invade;
Yet, by the weak, surprises may be made:
But you, my Son, are not to judge, but aid.

Por. What is it, Sir, you can require of me?


Max. I would from Berenice's bonds be free:
This yoke of Marriage from us both remove,
Where two are bound to draw, though neither love.

Por. Neither the Gods nor man will give consent
To put in practice your unjust intent.

Max. Both must consent to that which I decree.


Por. The Soldiers love her Brother's memory;
And for her sake some Mutiny will stir.

Max. Our parting therefore -- shall be sought by her.
Go, bid her sue for a Divorce, or dye;
I Will cut the knot, if she will not untye:
Haste to prepare her, and thy self return;
Thy Hymen's Torch this day with mine shall burn.

Exit. Por. Rather my Funeral-torch; -- for though I know
Valeria's fair, and that she loves me too,
Against her my Soul is armed on every part:
Yet there are secret Rivets to my heart;
Where Berenice's Charms have found the way;
Subtle as Lightnings, but more fierce than they.
How shall I this avoid, or gain that Love!
So near the Rock I, to the Port, must move.

To him Valeria attended. Val. Porphyrius, now my joy I may express,
Nor longer hide the Love I must possess.
Should I have stayed till Marriage made us one,
You might have thought it was by duty done;
But of my heart I now a present make;
And give it you e're it be yours to take.
Accept it as when early fruit we send:
And let the rareness the small gift commend.

Por. Great Monarchs, like your Father, often give
What is above a Subject to receive:
But faithful Officers should countermand,
And stop the gift that passes through their hand:
And to their Prince, that mass of wealth restore,
Which lavished thus, would make whole Nations poor.

Val. But to this gift a double right you have:
My Father gives but what before I gave.

Por. In vain you such unequal presents make,
Which I still want capacity to take.
Such fatal bounty once the Gauls did show;
They threw their Rings, but threw their Targets too.
Bounty so placed, does more like ruin look;
You pour the Ocean on a narrow Brook.

Val. Yet, if your Love before prepares a Boat,
The stream so poured, drowns not, but makes it float.

Por. But when the Vessel is on Quicksands cast,
The flowing tide does more the sinking have.

Val. And on what Quicksands can your heart be thrown?
Can you a Love besides Valeria's own?

Por. If he who at your feet his heart would lay,
Be met with first, and robbed upon the way,
You may indeed the Robbers strength accuse,
But pardon him who did the Present lose.

Val. Who is this Thief that does my right possess?
Name her, and then we of her strength may guess. --
From whence does your unwonted silence come?

Por. She bound and gagged me, and has left me dumb.


Val. But of my wrongs I will aloud complain:
False man, thou would excuse thy self in vain:
For thee I did a Maidens blush forsake;
And owned a Love thou have refused to take.

Por. Refused it! -- like a Miser midst his store,
Who grasps and grasps, till he can hold no more,
And when his strength is wanting to his mind,
Looks back, and sighs on what he left behind.

Val. No, I resume that heart thou did possess;
My Father shall my injuries redress:
With me thou losest his Imperial Crown,
And speedy death attends upon his frown.

Por. You may revenge your wrongs a nobler way;
Command my death, and I will soon obey.

Val. No, live; for on thy life my cure depends:
In Debtors deaths all obligation ends:
'Twill be some ease Ungrateful thee to call;
And, Bankrupt-like, say, trusting him lost all.

Por. Upbraided thus, what generous man would live!
But Fortune will revenge what you forgive.
When I refuse, (as in few hours I must)
This offered grace, your Father will be just.

Val. Be just! say rather he will cruel prove,
To kill that only person I can love.
Yet so it is! --
Your interest in the Army is so high,
That he must make you his, or you must dye!
It is resolved! who e're my Rival be,
Aside after a pause. I Will show that I deserve him more than she.
And if at last he does ungrateful prove,
My constancy it self rewards my Love.

Exit. Por. She Is gone, and gazing round about, I see
Nothing but death, or glorious misery;
Here Empire stands, if I could Love displace;
There, hopeless Love, with more Imperial Grace:
Thus, as a sinking Hero compassed round,
Beckens his bravest Foe for his last wound,
And him into his part of Fame does call,
I Will turn my face to Love, and there I Will fall.

To him Berenice, Erotion. Ber. I come, Porphyrius, to congratulate
This happy change of your exalted Fate:
You to the Empire are, I hear, designed;
And fair Valeria must the Alliance bind.

Por. Would Heaven had my succession so decreed,
That I in all might Maximin succeed!
He offers me the Imperial Crown, it is true:
I would succeed him, but it is in you.

Ber. In me! I never did accept your Love;
But you, I see, would handsomely remove:
And I can give you leave without a frown:
I always thought you merited a Crown.

Por. I never sought that Crown but on your brow;
But you with such indifference would allow
My change, that you have killed me with that breath:
I feel your scorn cold as the hand of death.

Ber. You Will come to life in your Valeria's arms:
It Is true, I cannot boast of equal Charms;
Or if I could, I never did admit
Your Love to me, but only suffered it.
I am a Wife, and can make no return;
And 'twere but vain, in hopeless fires to burn.

Por. Unkind! can you whom only I adore,
Set open to your Slave the Prison-door?
You use my heart just as you would afford
A fatal freedom to some harmless bird,
Whom, breeding, you never taught to seek its food;
And now let fly to perish in the Wood.

Ber. Then, if you will love on, and disobey,
And lose an Empire for my sake, you may.
Will a kind look from me pay all this score,
For you well know you must expect no more?

Por. All I deserve it will, not all I wish:
But I will brave the Tyrants rage, for this.
If I refuse, my death must needs ensue;
But you shall see that I dare dye for you.

Ber. Would you for me,
A Beauty, and an Empire too deny?
I love you now so well -- that you shall dye.
Dye mine; it is all I can with honor give:
Nor should you dye, if after, I would live.
But when your Marriage and your Death I view,
That makes you false, but this will keep you true,

Por. Unbind thy brows, and look abroad to see,
O mighty Love, thy mightiest Victory!

Ber. And yet -- is there no other way to try?
It Is hard to say I love, and let you dye.

Por. Yes, there remains some help which you may (...)
If you, as I would dye for Love, would live.

Ber. If death for Love be sweet, sure life is more:
Teach me the means your safety to restore.

Por. Your Tyrant the Egyptian Princess loves;
And to that height his swelling passion moves,
That, fearing in your death the Soldiers force,
He from your bed does study a Divorce.

Ber. The Egyptian Princess I disputing hard,
And as a Miracle her mind regard.
But yet I wish that this Divorce be true.

Gives her hand. Por. It Is, Madam, but it must be sought by you.
By this he will all Mutinies prevent;
And this, as well, secures your own content.

Ber. I hate this Tyrant, and his bed I loath;
But, once submitting, I am tied to both:
Tied to that Honor, which all Women owe,
Though not their Husbands person, yet their vow.
Something so sacred in that bond there is,
That none should think there could be ought amiss:
And if there be, we should in silence hide
Those faults, which blame our choice when they are spied.

Por. But, since to all the world his crimes are known,
And, by himself the Civil War's begun,
Would you the advantage of the fight delay,
If, striking first, you were to win the day?

Ber. I would, like Jews upon their Sabbath fall:
And rather than strike first, not strike at all.

Por. Against your self you sadly prophecy:
You either this Divorce must seek, or dye.

Ber. Then death from all my griefs shall set me free.


Por. And would you rather choose your death, than me?


Ber. My earthy part --
Which is my Tyrants right, death will remove,
I Will come all Soul and Spirit to your Love.
With silent steps I Will follow you all day;
Or else before you, in the Sunbeams, play.
I Will lead you thence to melancholy Groves,
And there repeat the Scenes of our past Loves.
At night, I will within your Curtains peep;
With empty arms embrace you while you sleep.
In gentle dreams I often will be by;
And sweep along, before your closing eye.
All dangers from your bed I will remove;
But guard it most from any future Love.
And when at last, in pity, you will dye,
I Will watch your Birth of Immortality:
Then, Turtle-like, I Will to my Mate repair;
And teach you your first flight in open Air.

Exit Berenice cum Erotio. Por. She has but done what Honor did require:
Nor can I blame that Love, which I admire.
But then her death!
I Will stand betwixt, it first shall pierce my heart:
We will be stuck together on his dart.
But yet the danger not so high does grow:
I Will charge death first, perhaps repulse him too.
But, if o'repow'r'd, I must be overcome;
Fore'dback, I Will fight each inch into my Tomb.

Exit. ACT IV.
SCENE I.
Indian Cave. Placidius, Nigrinus. Nigrinus with two drawn Swords, held upward
in his hands. Placid. ALL other means have failed to move her heart;
Our last recourse is, therefore, to your Art.

Nig. Of Wars, and Bloodshed, and of dire Events,
Of Fates, and fighting Kings, their Instruments,
I could with greater certainty foretell;
Love only does in doubts and darkness dwell.
For, like a wind, it in no quarter stays;
But points and veers each hour a thousand ways.
On Women Love depends, and they on Will;
Chance turns their Orb while Destiny sits still.

Placid. Leave nothing unattempted in your power:
Remember you oblige an Emperor.

Nig. An earthy Fiend by compact me obeys;
But him to light intents I must not raise.
Some Astral forms I must invoke by prayer,
Framed all of purest Atoms of the Air;
Not in their Natures simply good or ill;
But most subservient to bad Spirits will.
Nakar of these does lead the mighty Band,
For eighty Legions move at his Command:
Gentle to all, but, far above the rest,
Mild Nakar loves his soft Damilcar best.
In Aerie Chariots they together ride;
And sip the dew as through the Clouds they glide:
These are the Spirits which in Love have power.

Placid. Haste, and invoke 'em in a happy hour.


Nig. And so it proves: for, counting sev'n from Noon,
It Is Venus hour, and in the wexing Moon.
With Chalk I first describe a Circle here,
Where these AEtherial Spirits must appear.
Come in, come in; for here they will be strait:
Around, around, the place I fumigate:
My fumigation is to Venus, just:
The Souls of Roses, and red Corals dust:
A lump of Sperma Ceti; and to these
The stalks and chips of Lignum Aloes.
And, last, to make my fumigation good,
It Is mixed with Sparrows brains, and Pigeons blood.
Nigrinus takes up the Swords. They come, they come, they come! I hear 'em now.

Placid. A death-like damp sits cold upon my brow:
And misty vapors swim before my sight.

Nig. They come not in a shape to cause your fright.


Nakar and Damilcar descend in Clouds, and sing. Nakar. Hark, my Damilcar, we
are called below!


Dam. Let us go, let us go!
Go to relieve the care
Of longing Lovers in despair!

Nakar. Merry, merry, merry, we sail from the East
Half tippled at a Rainbow Feast.

Dam. In the bright Moonshine while winds whistle loud,
Tivy, tivy, tivy, we mount and we fly,
All racking along in a downy white Cloud:
And lest our leap from the Sky should prove too far,
We slide on the back of a new-falling Star.

Nakar. And drop from above,
In a Gelly of Love!

Dam. But now the Sun's down, and the Element's red,
The Spirits of Fire against us make head!

Nakar. They muster, they muster, like Gnats in the Air:
Alas! I must leave thee, my Fair;
And to my light Horsemen repair.

Dam. O stay, for you need not to fear 'em to night;
The wind is for us, and blows full in their sight:
And over the wide Ocean we fight!
Like leaves in the Autumn our Foes will fall down;
And hiss in the Water --

Both. And hiss in the Water and drown!


Nakar. But their men lie securely entrenched in a Cloud:
And a Trumpeter-Hornet to battle sounds loud.

Dam. Now Mortals that spy
How we tilt in the Sky
With wonder will gaze;
And fear such events as will never come to pass!

Nakar. Stay you to perform what the man will have done.


Dam. Then call me again when the Battle is won.


Both. So ready and quick is a Spirit of Air
To pity the Lover, and succor the sair,
That, silent and swift, the little soft God
Is here with a wish, and is gone with a nod.

The Clouds part; Nakar flies up, and Damilcar down. Nig. I charge thee,
Spirit, stay; and by the power
[ To Damilcar.] Of Nakar's Love, and of this holy Wand
On the North quarter of my Circle stand:
(Sev'n foot around for my defense I take!)
To all my questions faithful answers make,
So may thou live thy thousand years in peace;
And see thy Aerie progeny increase:
So may thou still continue young and fair,
Fed by the blast of pure AEtherial Air.
And, thy full term expired, without all pain
Dissolve into thy Astral source again.

Dam. Name not my hated Rival Gemory,
And I Will speak true whatever thy questions be.

Nig. Thy Rivals hated name I will refrain:
Speak, shall the Emperor his love obtain?

Dam. Few hours shall pass before your Emperor shall be
Possessed of that he loves, or from that love be free.

Placid. Shall I enjoy that Beauty I adore?


Dam. She Suppliant-like, e're long, thy succor shall implore:
And thou with her thou love in happiness may live:
If she not dies before, who all thy joys can give.

Nig. Say, what does the Egyptian Princess now?


Dam. A gentle slumber sits upon her brow.


Nig. Go, stand before her in a golden dream:
Set all the pleasures of the world to show,
And in vain joys let her loose spirit flow.

Dam. Twice fifty Tents remove her from your sight,
But I Will cut through them all with rays of light:
And covering other objects to your eyes,
Show where intranc'd in silent sleep she lies.

Damilcar stamps, and the Bed arises with S. Catharine in it. Dam. singing. You
pleasing dreams of Love and sweet delight,
Appear before this slumbring Virgins sight:
Soft visions set her free
From mournful piety.
Let her sad thoughts from Heaven retire;
And let the Melancholy Love
Of those remoter joys above
Give place to your more sprightly fire.
Let purling streams be in her fancy seen;
And flowery Meads, and Vales of cheerful green:
And in the midst of deathless Groves
Soft sighing wishes ly,
And smiling hopes fast by,
And just beyond them ever laughing Loves.

A Scene of a Paradise is discovered. Placid. Some pleasing objects do her mind
employ;
For on her face I read a wandering Joy.

SONG. Dam. Ah how sweet it is to love,
Ah how gay is young desire!
And what pleasing pains we prove
When we first approach Loves fire!
Pains of Love be sweeter far
Than all other pleasures are.
Sighs which are from Lovers blown,
Do but gently heave the Heart:
Even the tears they shed alone
Cure, like trickling Balm their smart.
Lovers when they lose their breath,
Bleed away in easy death.
Love and Time with reverence use,
Treat 'em like a parting friend:
Nor the golden gifts refuse
Which in youth sincere they send:
For each year their price is more,
And they less simple than before.
Love, like Spring-tides full and high,
Swells in every youthful vein:
But each Tide does less supply,
Till they quite shrink in again:
If a flow in Age appear,
It Is but rain, and runs not clear.

At the end of the Song a Dance of Spirits. After which Amariel, the
Guardian-Angel of S. Catharine, descends to soft Music, with a flaming Sword.
The Spirits crawl off the Stage amazedly, and Damilcar runs to a corner of it.
Amar. From the bright Empire of Eternal day,
Where waiting minds for Heavens Commission stay,
Amariel flies: (a darted Mandate came
From that great will which moves this mighty Frame,
Bid me to thee, my Royal charge, repair,
To guard thee from the Demons of the Air;
My flaming Sword above 'em to display,
(All keen and ground upon the edge of day;)
The flat to sweep the Visions from thy mind,
The edge to cut 'em through that stay behind.)
Vain Spirits, you that shunning Heavens high noon,
Swarm here beneath the concave of the Moon,
What folly, or what rage your duty blinds,
To violate the sleep of holy minds?
Hence, to the task assigned you here below:
Upon the Ocean make loud Tempests blow:
Into the wombs of hollow Clouds repair,
And crush out Thunder from the bladder'd Air.
From pointed Sunbeams take the Mists they drew,
And scatter 'em again in pearly dew:
And of the bigger drops they drain below,
Some mould in Hail, and others stamp in Snow.

Dam. Mercy, bright Spirit, I already feel
The piercing edge of thy immortal steel:
Thou, Prince of day, from Elements Art free;
And I all body when compared to thee.
Thou tread'st the Abyss of light!
And where it streams with open eyes can go:
We wander in the Fields of Air below:
Changlings and Fools of Heaven: and thence shut out,
Wildly we roam in discontent about:
Gross-heavy-fed, next man in ignorance and sin,
And spotted all without; and dusky all within.
Without thy Sword I perish by thy sight,
I reel, and stagger, and am drunk with light.

Ama. If e're again thou on this place art found,
Full fifty years I Will chain thee under ground;
The damps of Earth shall be thy daily food;
All swollen and bloated like a dungeon toad:
And when thou shall be freed, yet thou shall ly
Gasping upon the ground, too faint to fly;
And lag below thy fellows in the sky.

Dam. O pardon, pardon this accursed deed,
And I no more on Magic fumes will feed;
Which drew me hither by their powerful steams.

Ama. to S. Cath. Go expiate thy guilt in holy dreams.
[Ex. Dam. But thou, sweet Saint, henceforth disturbed no more
With dreams not thine, thy thoughts to Heaven restore.

The Angel ascends, and the Scene shuts. Nig. Some holy Being does invade this
place,
And from their duty does my Spirits chase.
I dare no longer near it make abode:
No Charms prevail against the Christians God.

Exit. Placid. How doubtfully these Specters Fate foretell!
In double sense, and twilight truth they dwell:
Like sawning Courtiers for success they wait,
And then come smiling and declare for Fate.
Enter Maximin and Porphyrius, attended by Valerius and Guards. But see, the
Tyrant and my Rival come:
I, like the Fiends, will flatter in his doom:
None but a Fool distastful truth will tell,
So it be new and please, it is full as well.

Placid. whispers with the Emperor who seems pleased. Max. You charm me with
your news, which I Will reward:
By hopes we are for coming joys prepared:
Possess her Love, or from that Love be free --
Heaven speaks me fair: if she as kind can prove,
I shall possess, but never quit my Love.
Go, tell me when she wakes --
Exit Placidius. Porphyrius seems to beg something of him. -- Porphyrius, no;
She has refused, and I will keep my vow.

Por. For your own sake your cruel vow defer;
The time's unsafe, your Enemies are near.
And to displease your men when they should fight --

Max. My looks alone my Enemies will fright;
And over my men I Will set my careful Spies,
To watch Rebellion in their very eyes.
No more, I cannot bear the least reply.

Por. Yet, Tyrant, thou shall perish e're she dye.
Aside. Enter Valeria. Valeria here! how Fortune treats me still
With various harms, magnificently ill!

Max. Valeria, I was sending to your Tent,
To Valeria. But my Commands your presence does prevent.
This is the hour, wherein the Priest shall join
Your holy Loves, and make Porphyrius mine.

Val. aside. Now hold, my Heart, and Venus I implore,
Be Judge if she he loves deserves him more.

Por. aside. Past hope! and all in vain I would preserve
My life, not for my self, but her I serve.

Val. I come, great Sir, your justice to demand.


To the Emp. Max. You cannot doubt it from a Fathers hand.


Por. Sir, I confess before her Suit be known;
And, by my self condemned, my crime I own.
I have refused --

Val. -- Peace, peace, while I confess
I have refused thee for unworthiness.

Por. I am amazed.


Max. -- What Riddles do you use?
Dare either of you my Commands refuse?

Val. Yes, I dare own how e're 'twas wisely done
TO adopt so mean a person for your Son:
So low you should not for your Daughter choose:
And therefore, Sir, this Marriage I refuse.

Max. You liked the choice when first I thought it fit.


Val. I had not then enough considered it.


Max. And you have now considered it too much:
Secrets of Empire are not safe to touch.

Por. Let not your mighty anger rise too high;
It Is not Valeria merits it, but I.
My own unworthiness so well I knew,
That from her Love I consciosly withdrew.

Val. Thus rather than endure the little shame
To be refused, you blast a Virgins name.
You to refuse, and I to be denied!
Learn more discretion, or be taught less pride.

Por. O Heaven, in what a Labyrinth am I led!
I could get out, but she detains the thread!
Now I must wander on till I can see,
Whether her pity or revenge it be!

Aside. Max. With what child's anger do you think you play?
I Will punish both, if either disobey.

Val. Since all the fault was mine, I am content
Perphyrius should not share the punishment.

Por. Blind that I was till now, that could not see,
'Twas all the effect of generosity.
She loves me, even to suffer for my sake;
And on her self would my refusal take.

Aside. Max. Children to serve their Parents interest, live.
To Val. Take heed what doom against your self you give.

Por. Since she must suffer, if I do not speak,
It Is time the Laws of Decency to break.
She told me, Sir, that she your choice approved:
And (though I blush to own it) said she loved.
Loved me desertless, who, with shame, confessed,
Another flame had seized upon my breast.
Which when, too late, the generous Princess knew,
And feared your justice would my crime pursue,
Upon her self she makes the Tempest fall,
And my refusal her contempt would call.

Val. He raves, Sir, and to cover my disdain,
Unhandsomly would his denial feign.
And all means failing him, at last would try
TO usurp the credit of a scorn, and dye.
But -- let him live: -- his punishment shall be
The grief his pride will bring for losing me.

Max. You both obnoxious to my justice are;
And, Daughter, you have not deserved my care.
It Is my Command you strictly guarded be,
Till your fantastic quarrel you agree.

Por. Sir --


Max. I Will not hear you speak, her crime is plain,
She owns her pride which you perhaps my feign.
She shall be Prisoner till she bend her mind
To that which is for both of you designed.

Val. You Will find it hard my freeborn will to bound.


Max. I Will find that power over wills which Heaven never found.
Free will's a cheat in any one but me:
In all but Kings it is willing slavery.
An unseen Fate which forces the desire:
The will of Puppets danced upon a wyre.
A Monarch is
The Spirit of the World in every mind;
He may match Wolves to Lambs, and make it kind.
Mine is the business of your little Fates:
And though you war, like petty wrangling States,
You're in my hand; and when I bid you cease,
You shall be crushed together into peace.

Val. aside. Thus by the world my courage will be prized;
Seeming to scorn, who am, alas, despised:
Dying for Love's, fulfilling Honor's Laws;
A secret Martyr while I own no cause.

Exeunt Porphyrius and Valeria severally. To Maximin enter S. Catharine. S.
Cath. I come not now, as Captive to your power,
To beg; but as high Heavens Ambassador,
The Laws of my Religion to fulfill:
Heaven sends me to return you good for ill.
Your Empress to your Love I would restore;
And to your mind the peace it had before.

Max. While in another name you Peace declare,
Princess, you in your own proclaim a War.
Your too great power does your design oppose;
You make those breaches which you strive to close.

S. Cath. That little beauty which too much you prize
Seeks not to move your heart, or draw your eyes:
Your Love to Berenice is due alone:
Love, like that power which I adore, is one.
When fixed to one, it safe at Anchor rides,
And dares the fury of the winds and tides:
But losing once that hold, to the wide Ocean born,
It drives away at will, to every wave a scorn.

Max. If to new persons I my Love apply,
The Stars and Nature are in fault, not I:
My Loves are like my old Praetorian Bands,
Whose Arbitrary power their Prince commands:
I can no more make passion come or go,
Than you can bid your Nilus ebb or flow.
`Tis lawless, and will love, and where it list:
And that is no sin which no man can resist:
Those who impute it to me as a crime,
Would make a God of me before my time.

S. Cath. A God, indeed, after the Roman style,
An Eagle mounting from a kindled Pile:
But you may make your self a God below:
For Kings who rule their own desires are so.
You roam about, and never are at rest;
By new desires, that is, new torments, still possessed.
Qualmish and loathing all you had before:
Yet with a sickly appetite to more.
As in a fev'rish dream you still drink on;
And wonder why your thirst is never gone.
Love, like a ghostly Vision haunts your mind;
It Is still before you what you left behind.

Max. How can I help those faults which Nature made?
My appetite is sickly and decayed,
And you forbid me change (the sick man's ease)
Who cannot cure, must humor his disease.

S. Cath. Your mind should first the remedy begin;
You seek without, the Cure that is within.
The vain experiments you make each day,
To find content, still finding it decay,
Without attempting more, should let you see
That you have sought it where it never could be.
But when you place your joys on things above,
You fix the wandering Planet of your Love:
Thence you may see
Poor humane kind all daz'd in open day,
Err after bliss, and blindly miss their way:
The greatest happiness a Prince can know,
Is to love Heaven above, do good below.

To them Berenice and Attendants. Ber. That happiness may Berenice find,
Leaving these empty joys of Earth behind:
And this frail Being, where so short a while
The unfortunate lament, and prosperous smile.
Yet a few days, and those which now appear
In youth and beauty like the blooming year,
In life's swift Scene shall change; and cares shall come,
And heavy age, and death's relentless doom.

S. Cath. Yet man, by pleasures seeks that Fate which he would shun;
And, sucked in by the stream, does to the Whirl-pool run.

Max. How, Madam, are you to new ways inclined?
To Ber. I fear the Christian Sect perverts your mind.

Ber. Yes, Tyrant, know that I their Faith embrace,
And own it in the midst of my disgrace.
That Faith, which abject as it seems to thee,
Is nobler than thy Purple Pageantry:
A Faith, which still with Nature is at strife;
And looks beyond it to a future life.
A Faith which vicious Souls abhor and fear,
Because it shows Eternity to near.
And therefore every one --
With seeming scorn of it the rest deceives:
All joining not to own what each believes.

S. Cath. O happy Queen! whom power leads not astray,
Nor youth's more powerful blandishments betray.

Ber. Your Arguments my reason first inclined,
And then your bright example fixed my mind.

Max. With what a holy Empress am I blessed,
What scorn of Earth dwells in her heavenly breast!
My Crown's too mean; but he whom you adore,
Has one more bright of Martyrdom in store.
She dies, and I am from the envy freed:
Aside. She has, I thank her, her own death decreed.
No Soldier now will in her rescue stir;
Her death is but in complaisance to her.
I Will haste to gratify her holy will;
Heaven grant her zeal may but continue still.

To Val. Tribune, a Guard to seize the Empress strait,
Secure her Person Prisoner to the State.

Exit Maximin. Val. going to her. Madam, believe it is with regret I come
To execute my angry Prince's doom.

Enter Porphyrius. Por. What is it I behold! Tribune, from whence
Proceeds this more than barbarous insolence?

Val. Sir, I perform the Emperor's Commands.


Por. Villain, hold off thy sacrilegious hands,
Or by the Gods -- retire without reply:
And, if he asks who bid thee, say 'twas I.

Valerius retires to a distance. Ber. Too generously your safety you expose
To save one moment her whom you must lose.

Por. 'Twixt you and death ten thousand lives there stand;
Have courage, Madam, the Praetorian Band
Will all oppose your Tyrants cruelty.

S. Cath. And I have Heaven implored she may not dye.
As some to witness truth Heavens call obey;
So some on Earth must, to confirm it, stay.

Por. What Faith, what Witness is it that you name?


Ber. Knowing what she believes, my Faith's the same.


Por. How am I crossed what way so e're I go!
To the unlucky every thing is so.
Now, Fortune, thou have shown thy utmost spite:
The Soldiers will not for a Christian fight.
And, Madam, all that I can promise now,
Is but to dye before death reaches you.

Ber. Now death draws near, a strange perplexity
Creeps coldly on me, like a fear to dye:
Courage, uncertain dangers may abate;
But who can bear the approach of certain Fate?

S. Cath. The wisest and the best some fear may show;
And wish to stay, though they resolve to go.

Ber. As some faint Pilgrim standing on the shore,
First views the Torrent he would venture over;
And then his Inn upon the farther ground,
Loath to wade through, and lother to go round:
Then dipping in his staff does trial make,
How deep it is; and, sighing, pulls it back:
Sometimes resolved to fetch his leap; and then
Runs to the Bank, but there stops short again;
So I at once --
Both heavenly Faith, and humane fear obey;
And feel before me in an unknown way.
For this blessed Voyage I with joy prepare;
Yet am ashamed to be a stranger there.

S. Cath. You are not yet enough prepared to dye:
Earth hangs too heavy for your Soul to fly.

Por. One way (and Heaven I hope inspires my mind)
I for your safety in this straight can find:
But this fair Queen must farther my intent.

S. Cath. Name any way your reason can invent.


Por. to Ber. Though your Religion (which I cannot blame,
Because my secret Soul avows the same)
Has made your life a forfeit to the Laws,
The Tyrants newborn passion is the cause.
Were this bright Princess once removed away,
Wanting the food, the flame would soon decay.
And I Will prepare a faithful Guard this night
To Attend her person, and secure her flight.

Ber. to S. Cath. By this way I shall both from death be freed,
And you unforced to any wicked deed.

S. Cath. Madam, my thoughts are with themselves at strife;
And Heaven can witness how I prize your life:
But it is a doubtful conflict I must try
Betwixt my pity and my piety.
Staying, your precious life I must expose:
Going, my Crown of Martyrdom I lose.

Por. Your equal choice when Heaven does thus divide,
You should, like Heaven, still lean on mercy's side.

S. Cath. The will of Heaven, judged by a private breast,
Is often what is our private interest.
And therefore those, who would that will obey,
Without their interest must their duty weigh.
As for my self, I do not life despise;
But as the greatest gift of Nature prize.
My Sex is weak, my fears of death are strong;
And whatever is, it is Being would prolong.
Were there no sting in death, for me to dye,
Would not be conquest, but stupidity.
But if vain Honor can confirm the Soul,
And sense of shame the fear of death control,
How much more then should Faith uphold the mind,
Which, showing death, shows future life behind?

Ber. Of death's contempt Heroic proofs you give;
But, Madam, let my weaker Virtue live.
Your Faith may bid you, your own life resign;
But not when yours must be involved with mine.
Since, then, you do not think me fit to dye,
Ah, how can you that life I beg, deny!

S. Cath. Heaven does in this my greatest trial make,
When I for it, the care of you forsake.
But I am placed, as on a Theater,
Where all my Acts to all Mankind appear,
To imitate my constancy or fear.
Then, Madam, judge what course I should pursue,
When I must either Heaven forsake, or you.

Por. Were saving Berenice's life a sin,
Heaven had shut up your flight from Maximin.

S. Cath. Thus, with short Plummets Heavens deep will we sound,
That vast Abyss where humane Wit is drowned!
In our small Skiff we must not lance too far;
We here but Coasters, not Discov'rers are.
Faith's necessary Rules are plain and few;
We, many, and those needless Rules pursue:
Faith from our hearts into our heads we drive;
And make Religion all Contemplative.
You, on Heavens will may witty glosses feign;
But that which I must practice here, is plain:
If the All-great decree her life to spare,
He will, the means, without my crime prepare.

Exit S. Cath. Por. Yet there is one way left! it is decreed
To save your life that Maximin shall bleed.
'Midst all hisGuards I will his death pursue,
Or fall a Sacrifice to Love and you.

Ber. So great a fear of death I have not shown,
That I would shed his blood to save my own.
My fear is but from humane frailty brought;
And never mingled with a wicked thought.

Por. It Is not a Crime, since one of you must dye;
Or is excused by the necessity.

Ber. I cannot to a Husband's death consent;
But, by revealing, will your crime prevent:
The horror of this deed --
Against the fear of death has armed my mind;
And now less guilt in him than you I find:
If I a Tyrant did detest before,
I hate a Rebel and a Traitor more:
Ungrateful man --
Remember whose Successor thou art made,
And then thy Benefactors life invade.
Guards to your charge I give your Prisoner back:
And will from none but Heaven my safety take.

Exit with Valerius and Guards. Por. solus. It Is true, what she has often urged
before;
He Is both my Father and my Emperor!
O Honor, how can thou invent a way
To save my Queen, and not my trust betray!
Unhappy I that e're he trusted me!
As well his Guardian-Angel may his Murderer be.
And yet -- let Honor, Faith, and Virtue fly,
But let not Love in Berenice dye.
She lives! --
That Is put beyond dispute, as firm as Fate:
Honor and Faith let Argument debate.

Enter Maximin and Valerius talking, and Guards. Max It Is said; but I am loath
to think it true,
To Porphy. That my late Orders were contemned by you:
That Berenice from her Guards you freed.

Por. I did it, and I glory in the deed.


Max. How, glory my Commands to disobey!


Por. When those Commands would your Renown betray.


Max. Who should be Judge of that Renown you name
But I?

Por. -- Yes I, and all who love your fame.


Max. Porphyrius, your replies are insolent.


Por. Sir, they are just, and for your service meant.
If, for Religion you our lives will take;
You do not the offenders find, but make.
All Faiths are to their own believers just;
For none believe, because they will, but must.
Faith is a force from which there is no defense;
Because the Reason it does first convince.
And Reason Conscience into fetters brings;
And Conscience is without the power of Kings.

Max. Then Conscience is a greater Prince than I:
At whose each erring call a King may dye.
Who Conscience leaves to its own free command,
Puts the worst Weapon in a Rebels hand.

Por. It Is Empire, therefore Sir, should bounded be;
And but in acts of it is Religion, free:
Those who ask Civil power and Conscience too,
Their Monarch to his own destruction woo.
With needful Arms let him secure his peace;
Then, that wild beast he safely may release.

Mix. I can forgive these liberties you take,
While but my Counselor your self you make:
But you first act your sense, and then advise:
That is, at my expense you will be wise.
My Wife, I for Religion do not kill;
But she shall dye -- because it is my will.

Por. Sir, I acknowledge I too much have done;
And therefore merit not to be your Son:
I render back the Honors which you gave;
My liberty's the only gift I crave.

Max. You take too much: -- but, e're you lay it down,
Consider what you part with in a Crown:
Monarchs of cares in Policy complain,
Because they would be pitied while they reign;
For still the greater troubles they confess,
They know their pleasures will be envied less.

Por. Those joys I neither envy nor admire;
But beg I from the troubles may retire.

Max. What Soul is this which Empire cannot stir!
Supine and tame as a Philosopher!
Know then, thou were adopted to a Throne,
Not for thy sake so much as for my own.
My thoughts were once about thy death at strife;
And thy succession's thy reprieve for life.

Por. My life and death are still within your power:
But your succession I renounce this hour.
Upon a bloody Throne I will not sit;
Nor share the guilt of Crimes which you commit.

Max. If you are not my Caesar, you must dye.


Por. I take it as the nobler Destiny.


Max. I pity thee, and would thy faults forgive:
But thus presuming on, thou can not live.

Por. Sir, with your Throne your pity I restore;
I am your Foe; nor will I use it more.
Now all my debts of gratitude are paid,
I cannot trusted be, nor you betrayed.

Is going. Max. Stay, stay! in threatening me to be my Foe,
You give me warning to conclude you so.
Thou to succeed a Monarch in his Seat!
Enter Placidius. No, Fool, thou art too honest to be great!
Placidius, on your life this Prisoner keep:
Our enmity shall end before I sleep.

Placid. I still am ready, Sir, when e're you please,
To Porphy. To do you such small services as these.

Max. The sight with which my eyes shall first be fed,
Must be my Empress and this Traitors head.

Por. Where e're thou standst I Will level at that place
My gushing blood, and spout it at thy face.
Thus, not by Marriage, we our blood will join:
Nay more, my arms shall throw my head at thine.

Exit guarded. Max. There, go adoption: -- I have now decreed
That Maximin shall Maximin succeed:
Old as I am, in pleasures I will try
To waste an Empire yet before I dye:
Since life is fugitive, and will not stay,
I Will make it fly more pleasantly away.

Exit. ACT V.
SCENE I.
Valeria, Placidius. Val. IF, as you say, you silently have been
So long my Lover, let my power be seen:
One hours discourse before Porphyrius dye,
Is all I ask, and you too may be by.

Placid. I must not break
The order, which the Emperor did sign.

Val. Has then his hand more power with you than mine?


Placid. This hand if given, would far more powerful be
Than all the Monarchs of the World to me:
But it is a bait which would my heart betray;
And, when I Am fast, will soon be snatched away.

Val. O say not so; for I shall ever be
Obliged to him who once obliges me.

Placid. Madam, I Will wink, and favor your deceit:
But know, fair Coz'ner, that I know the cheat:
Though to these eyes I nothing can refuse,
I Will not the merit of my ruin lose:
It is enough I see the hook, and bite:
But first I Will pay my death with my delight.

[Kisses her hand, and Exit.] Val. What can I hope from this sad interview!
And yet my brave design I will pursue.
By many signs I have my Rival found:
But Fortune him, as deep as me does wound.
For, if he loves the Empress, his sad Fate
More moves my pity, than his scorn my hate.

To her Placidius with Porphyrius. Placid. I am, perhaps, the first
Who forced by Fate, and in his own despite,
Brought a loved Rival to his Mistress sight.

Val. But, in revenge, let this your comfort be,
That you have brought a man who loves not me.
However, lay your causeless envy by;
He is a Rival who must quickly dye.

Por. And yet I could with less concernment bear
That death of which you speak, than see you here.
So much of guilt in my refusal lies,
That Debtor-like, I dare not meet your eyes.

Val. I do not blame you, if you love elsewhere:
And, would to Heaven, I could your sufferings bear;
Or once again could some new way invent
To take upon my self your punishment:
I sent for you, to let you know that still
(Though now I want the power) I have the will.

Placid. Can all this Ocean of your kindness be
Poured upon him, and not one drop on me?

Val. It Is poured; but falls from this ungrateful man,
Like drops of water from a rising Swan.
Upon his breast no sign of wet remains;
He bears his Love more proudly than his Chains.

Por. This thankless man his death will soon remove,
And quickly end so undeserved a Love.

Val. Unthankful as you are, I know not why,
But still I love too well to see you dye.
Placidius, can you love, and see my grief,
And for my sake not offer some relief?

Placid. Not all the Gods his ruin shall prevent;
Your kindness does but urge his punishment.
Besides --
What is it I can for his safety do?
He has declared himself your Father's Foe.

Val. Give out he is escaped, and set him free:
And, if you please, lay all the fault on me.

Por. O do not on those terms my freedom name:
Freed by your danger I should dye with shame.

Placid. I must not farther by your prayers be won.
To her, All I could do I have already done.

Val. To bring Porphyrius only to my sight,
Was not to show your pity, but your spite:
Would you but half oblige her you adore?
You should not have done this, or should do more.

Placid. Alas, what hope can there be left for me,
When I must sink into the Mine I see?
My heart will fall before you, if I stay;
Each word you speak saps part of it away. --
-- Yet all my Fortune on his death is set:
And he may love her, though he loves not yet.
He must -- and yet she says he must not dye:
O, if I could but wink, I could deny.

To them Albinus. Alb. The Emperor expects your Prisoner strait:
And, with impatience, for his death does wait.

Placid. Nay, then it is too late my Love to weigh.
Exit Alb. Your pardon, Madam, if I must obey.

Por. I am prepared, he shall not long attend.


Val. Then hear my prayers, and my submissions end.
Placidius know, that hour in which he dies,
My death (so well I love) shall wait on his.

Placid. O, Madam, do not fright me with your death!


Val. My life depends alone upon his breath.
But, if I live in him, you do not know
How far my gratitude to you may go.
I do not promise -- but it so may prove,
That gratitude, in time, may turn to Love.
Try me --

Placid. -- Now I consider it, I will:
Musing a little. It Is in your power to save him or to kill.
I Will run the hazard to preserve his life,
If, after that, you vow to be my Wife.

Val. Nay, good Placidius, now you are too hard:
Would you do nothing but for mere reward?
Like Usurers to men in want you prove,
When you would take Extortion for my Love.

Placid. You have concluded then that he must dye.


[Going with Porphy.] Val. O stay, if no price else his life can buy,
My Love a ransom for his life I give:
[Holding her Handkerchief before her face.] Let my Porphyrius for another live.

Por. You too much value the small merchandise:
My life's o're-rated, when your Love's the price.

Enter Albinus. Alb. I long have list'ned to your generous strife,
As much concerned for brave Porphyrius life:
For mine I to his favor owed this day;
Which with my future Service I will pay.

Placid. Lest any your intended flight prevent,
I Will lead you first the back-way to my Tent:
Thence, in disguise, you may the City gain,
While some excuse for your escape I feign.

Val. Farewell, I must not see you when you part:
[Turning her face away.] For that last look would break my tender heart.
Yet -- let it break -- I must have one look more:
[Looking on him.] Nay, now I Am less contented than before.
For that last look draws on another too;
Which sure I need not to remember you.
For ever -- yet I must one glance repeat:
But quick and short as starving people eat.
So much humanity dwells in your breast,
Sometimes to think on her who loves you best.

[Going, he takes her hand and kisses it] Por. My wandering steps where ever
Fortune bear,
Your memory I in my breast will wear.
Which, as a precious Amulet, I still
Will carry, my defense and guard from ill.
Though to my former vows I must be true,
I Will ever keep one Love entire for you.
That Love which Brothers with chaste Sisters make:
And by this Holy kiss, which now I take
From your fair hand --
This common Sun which absent both shall see,
Shall never behold a breach of Faith in me.

Val. Go, go, my death will your short vows restore:
You Have said enough, and I can hear no more.

Exit Valeria one way, and Porphy. and Alb. another. Placid. Love and good
Nature, how do you betray!
Misleading those who see and know their way!
I, whom deep Arts of State could never beguile,
Have sold my self to ruin for a smile.
Nay, I am driven so low, that I must take
That smile, as Alms, given for my Rivals sake.
He, like a secret Worm, has eat his way;
And, lodged within, does on the kernel prey:
I creep without; and hopeless to remove
Him thence, wait only for the husk of Love.

Enter Maximin talking with Valerius. Max. And why was I not told of this
before?


Val. Sir, she this evening landed on the shore.
For with her Daughter being Prisoner made,
She in another Vessel was conveyed.

Max. Bring hither the Egyptian Princess strait.
To Placid. And you, Valerius, on her Mother wait.

Exit Valerius. Placid. The Mother of the Egyptian Princess here!


Max. Porphyrius death I will a while defer.
And this new opportunity improve
To make my last effort upon her Love. --
Exit Placidius. Those who have youth may long endure to court;
But he must swiftly catch whose Race is short.
I in my Autumn do my Siege begin;
And must make haste e're Winter comes, to win.
This hour -- no longer shall my pains endure:
Her Love shall ease me, or her death shall cure.

Enter at one door Felicia and Valerius, at the other S. Catharine and
Placidius. S. Cath. O, my dear Mother!


Fell. -- With what joy I see
My dearest Daughter from the Tempest free.

S. Cath. Dearer than all the joys vain Empire yields,
Or then to youthful Monarchs conquered fields.
Before you came -- my Soul
All filled with Heaven did earthly joys disdain.
But you pull back some part of me again.

Placid. You see, Sir, she can own a joy below.


Max. It much imports me that this truth I know.


Fell. How dreadful death does on the waves appear!
Where Seas we only see, and Tempest hear.
Such frightful Images did then pursue
My trembling Soul, that scarce I thought of you.

Placid. All Circumstances to your wish combine:
Her fear of death advances your design.

Fell. But to that only power we serve I prayed,
Till he, who bid it rise, the Tempest laid.

Max. You are a Christian then!
To Felicia. For death this very hour you must prepare:
I have decreed no Christians life to spare.

Fell. For death! I hope you but my courage try:
Whatever I believe, I dare not dye.
Heaven does not, sure, that Seal of Faith require;
Or, if it did, would firmer thoughts inspire.
A Woman's witness can no credit give
To Truths Divine, and therefore I would live.

Max. I cannot give the life which you demand:
But that and mine are in your Daughter's hand:
Ask her, if she will yet her Love deny;
And bid a Monarch, and her Mother dye.

Fell. Now, mighty Prince, you cancel all my fear:
My life is safe, when it depends on her.
How can you let me languish thus in pain!
To S. Cath. Make haste to cure those doubts which yet remain.
Speak quickly, speak and ease me of my fear.

S. Cath. Alas, I doubt it is not you I hear.
Some wicked Fiend assumes your voice and face,
To make frail Nature triumph over Grace.
It cannot be --
That she who taught my Childhood Piety,
Should bid my riper age my Faith deny:
That she who bid my hopes this Crown pursue,
Should snatch it from me when it is just in view.

Fell. Peace, peace, too much my age's shame you show:
How easy it is to teach! how hard to do!
Mylab'ring thoughts are with themselves at strife:
I dare not dye, nor bid you save my life.

Max. You must do one, and that without delay;
Too long already for your death I stay:
I cannot with your small concerns dispense;
For deaths of more importance call me hence.
Prepare to execute your office strait.

To his Guards. Fell. O stay, and let 'em but one minute wait.
Such quick Commands for death you would not give,
(Ah) if you knew how sweet it were to live.

Max. Then bid her love.


Fell. -- Is duty grown so weak,
To S. Cath. That Love's a harder word than Death to speak?

S. Cath. Oh! --


Fell. Mistake me not, I never can approve
[privately to S. Cath.] A thing so wicked as the Tyrants Love.
I ask you would but some false promise give,
Only to gain me so much time to live.

S. Cath. That promise is a step to greater sin:
The hold once lost, we seldom take again.
Each bound to Heaven we fainter Essays make:
Still losing somewhat till we quite go back.

Max. Away, I grant no longer a reprieve.


Fell. O do but beg my life, and I may live.
To S. Cath. Have you not so much pity in your breast?
He stays to have you make it your request.

S. Cath. To beg your life --
Is not to ask a grace of Maximin:
It is a silent bargain for a sin.
Could we live always, life were worth our cost;
But now we keep with care what must be lost.
Here we stand shivering on the Bank, and cry,
When we should plunge into Eternity.
One moment ends our pain;
And yet the shock of death we dare not stand,
By thought scarce measured, and too swift for sand:
It Is but because the Living death never knew,
They fear to prove it as a thing that is new.
Let me th'Experiment before you try,
I Will show you first how easy it is to dye.

Max. Draw then that Curtain, and let death appear,
And let both see how easy 'twill be there.

The Scene opens, and shows the Wheel. Fell. Alas, what torments I already feel!


Max. Go, bind her hand and foot beneath that Wheel:
Four of you turn the dreadful Engine round;
Four others hold her fast'ned to the ground:
That by degrees her tender breasts may feel,
First the rough razings of the pointed steel:
Her Paps then let the bearded Tenters stake,
And on each hook a gory Gobbet take.
Till the upper flesh by piecemeal torn away,
Her beating heart shall to the Sun display.

Fell. My dearest Daughter at your feet I fall;
Kneeling. Hear, Oh yet hear your wretched Mothers call.
Think, at your Birth, ah think what pains I bore,
And can your eyes behold me suffer more?
You were the Child which from your infancy
I still loved best, and then you best loved me.
About my neck your little arms you spread,
Nor could you sleep without me in the bed.
But sought my bosom when you went to rest,
And all night long would lie across my breast.
Nor without cause did you that fondness show:
You may remember when our Nile did flow;
While on the Bank you innocently stood,
And with a Wand made Circles in the flood,
That rose, and just was hurrying you to death,
When I, from far, all pale and out of breath
Ran and rusht in --
And from the waves my floating pledge did bear,
So much my Love was stronger than my fear.
But you --

Max. Woman, for these long tales your life's too short;
Go, bind her quickly, and begin the sport.

Fell. No, in her arms my Sanctuary's placed:
[Running to her Daughter.] Thus I will cling for ever to her waste.

Max. What must my will by women be controlled?
Haste, draw your Weapons, and cut off her hold.

S. Cath. Thus my last duty to you let me pay:
[Kissing her Mother.] Yet, Tyrant, I to thee will never pray.
Though hers to save I my own life would give,
Yet by my sin, my Mother shall not live:
To thy foul lust I never can confent;
Why do thou then defer my punishment?
I scorn those Gods thou vainly do adore:
Contemn thy Empire, but thy Bed abhor.
If thou would yet a bloodier Tyrant be,
I will instruct thy rage, begin with me.

Max. I thank thee that thou do my anger move:
It is a Tempest that will wreck my Love.
I Will pull thee hence, close hidden as thou art,
[Claps his hand to his breast.] And stand with my drawn Sword before my heart.
Yes, you shall be obeyed, though I am loath,
Go, and while I can bid you, bind 'em both.
Go, bind 'em e're my fit of Love return:
Fire shall quench fire, and anger Love shall burn.
Thus I prevent those follies I should do;
And it is the nobler Fever of the two.

Fell. Torn piece by piece, alas what horrid pains!


S. Cath. Heaven is all mercy, who that death ordains.
And that which Heaven thinks best is surely so:
But bare and naked, shame to undergo,
It Is somewhat more than death!
Exposed to lawless eyes I dare not be,
My modesty is sacred, Heaven to thee.
Let not my body be the Tyrant's spoil;
Nor hands nor eyes thy purity defile.

Amariel descends swiftly with a flaming Sword, and strikes at the Wheel, which
breaks in pieces, then he ascends again. Max. Is this the effect of all your
boasted skill?
These brittle toys to execute my will?
A Puppet-show of death I only find,
Where I a strong and sinewy pain designed.
By what weak infant was this Engine wrought?

Val. From Bilbilis the tempered steel was brought:
Metal more tough the Anvil never did beat,
Nor, from the Forge, did hissing waters heat.

Placid. I saw a Youth descend all Heavenly fair,
Who in his hand a flaming Sword did bear,
And, Whirlwind-like, around him drove the Air.
At his raised arm the rigid Iron shook;
And, bending backwards, fled before the stroke.

Max. What! Miracles, the tricks of Heaven to me?
I Will try if she be wholly Iron free.
If not by Sword, then she shall dye by fire;
And one by one her Miracles I Will tire.
If proof against all kind of death she be,
My Love's immortal, and she is fit for me.

S. Cath. No, Heaven has shown its power, and now thinks fit
Thee to thy former fury to remit.
Had Providence my longer life decreed,
Thou from thy passion had not yet been freed.
But Heaven, which suffered that, my Faith to prove,
Now to its self does vindicate my Love.
A power controls thee which thou do not see;
And that is a Miracle it works in thee.

Max. The truth of this new Miracle we'll try;
To prove it, you must take the pains to dye.
Bring me their heads --

Fell. That mercy, Tyrant, thou deny'st to me,
At thy last breath may Heaven refuse to thee.
My fears are going, and I death can view:
I see, I see him there thy steps pursue.
And with a lifted arm and silent pace,
Stalk after thee, just aiming in his chase.

S. Cath. No more, dear Mother, ill in death it shows
Your peace of mind by rage to discompose:
No streak of blood (the relics of the Earth)
Shall stain my Soul in her immortal birth;
But she shall mount all pure, a white, and Virgin mind;
And full of all that peace, which there she goes to find.

Exeunt S. Catharine and Felicia, with Valerius and Guards. The Scene shuts.
Max. She Is gone, and pulled my heart strings as she went.
Were penitence no shame, I could repent.
Yet it is of bad example she should live;
For I might get the ill habit to forgive.
Thou soft Seducer of my heart, away --
Who lingering would about its confines stay
To watch when some Rebellion would begin;
And ready at each sigh to enter in.
In vain; for thou
Do on the outside of the body play,
And when drawn nearest, shall be whirled away.
What ails me, that I cannot lose thy thought!
Command the Empress hither to be brought;
To Placid. I in her death shall some diversion find,
And rid my thoughts at once of womankind.

Placid. It Is well he thinks not of Porphyrius yet.


Aside. Exit. Max. How hard it is this Beauty to forget!
My stormy rage has only shook my will:
She crept down lower, but she sticks there still.
Fool that I am to struggle thus with Love!
Why should I that which pleases me remove?
True, she should dye were she concerned alone;
But I love, not for her sake, but my own.
Our Gods are Gods 'cause they have power and will;
Who can do all things, can do nothing ill.
Ill is Rebellion against some higher power:
The World may sin, but not its Emperor.
My Empress then shall dye, my Princess live;
If this be ill, I do my self forgive.

To him Valerius. Val. Your will's obeyed; for mighty Emperor,
The Princess and her Mother are no more.

Max. She is not dead!


Val. -- Great Sir, your will was so.


Max. That was my will of half an hour ago.
But now it is altered; I have changed her Fate,
She shall not dye.

Val. -- Your pity comes too late.
Betwixt her Guards she seemed by Bride-men led,
Her cheeks with cheerful blushes were o'respred,
When, smiling, to the Ax she bowed her head.
Just at the stroke --
AEtherial music did her death prepare;
Like joyful sounds of Spousals in the Air.
A radiant light did her crowned Temples guild,
And all the place with fragrant scents was filled.
The Balmy mist came thick'ning to the ground,
And sacred silence covered all around.
But when (its work performed) the Cloud withdrew,
And day restored us to each others view,
I sought her head to bring it on my Spear;
In vain I sought it, for it was not there.
No part remained; but from afar our sight
Discovered in the Air long tracks of light;
Of charming Notes we heard the last rebounds,
And Music dying in remoter sounds.

Max. And do thou think
This lame account fit for a Lovesick King?
Go -- from the other World a better bring.
[Kills him, then sets his foot on him, and speaks on.] When in my breast two
mighty passions strove,
Thou had erred better in obeying Love.
It Is true, that way thy death had followed too.
But I had then been less displeased than now.
Now I must live unquiet for thy sake;
And this poor recompense is all I take.

Spurns the bod^ Here the Scene opens and discovers Berenice on a Scaffold, the
Guards by her, and amongst them Porphyrius and Albinus, like Moors, as all the
Guards are. Placidius enters, and whispers the Emperor whilst Porphyrius
speaks. Por. From Berenice I cannot go away;
But, like a Ghost, must near my Treasure stay.

Alb. Night and this shape secure us from their eyes.


Por. Have courage then for our bold enterprise.
Duty and Faith no tie on me can have,
Since I renounced those Honors which he gave,

Max. The time is come we did so long attend,
To Berenice. Which must these discords of our Marriage end.
Yet Berenice remember you have been
An Empress, and the Wife of Maximin.

Ber. I will remember I have been your Wife;
And therefore, dying, beg from Heaven your life:
Be all the discords of our Bed forgot,
Which, Virtue witness, I did never spot.
What errors I have made, though while I live,
You cannot pardon, to the dead forgive.

Max. How much she is to piety inclined!
Behead her while she is in so good a mind.

Por. Stand firm, Albinus, now the time is come
To free the Empress.

Alb. -- And deliver Rome.


Por. Within I feel my hot blood swell my heart,
And generous tremblings in each outward part.
It Is done -- Tyrant, this is thy latest hour.

Porphyrius and Albinus draw, and are making at the Emperor. Ber. Look to your
self, my Lord the Emperor:
Treason, help, help, my Lord!

Maximin turns and defends himself, the Guards set on Porphyrius and Albinus.
Max. Disarm 'em, but their lives I charge you spare.
After they are disarmed. Unmask 'em, and discover who they are.
Good Gods, is it Porphyrius whom I see!

Placid. I wonder how he gained his liberty.


Max. Traitor!


Por. -- Know, Tyrant, I can hear that name
Rather than Son, and bear it with less shame.
Traytor's a name which were my arm yet free,
The Roman Senate would bestow on thee.

To Ber. Ah, Madam, you have ruined my design,
And lost your life; for I regard not mine.
Too ill a Mistress, and too good a Wife.

Ber. It was my duty to preserve his life.


Max. Now I perceive
To Porphyriu In what close walks your mind so long did move:
You scorned my Throne, aspiring to her Love.

Ber. In death I Will own a Love to him so pure;
As will the test of Heaven it self endure.
A Love so chaste, as Conscience could not chide;
But cherisht it, and kept it by its side.
A Love which never knew a hot desire,
But flamed as harmless as a lambent fire.
A Love which, pure from Soul to Soul might pass,
As light transmitted through a Crystal glass.
Which gave Porphyrius all without a sin;
Yet kept entire the Right of Maximin.

Max. The best return that I to both can make,
Shall be to suffer for each others sake.

Por. Barbarian, do not dare her blood to shed,
Who from my vengeance saved thy cursed head.
A flight no Honor ever reached before;
And which succeeding Ages will adore.

Ber. Porphyrius I must dye!
That common debt to Nature paid must be;
But I have left a debt unpaid to thee.
To Maximin --
I have performed the duty of a Wife;
But, saving his, I cast away thy life.
Ah, what ill Stars upon our Loves did shine,
That I am more thy Murderer than he mine.

Max. Make haste.


Por. So hasty none in execution are,
But they allow the dying time for prayer.
Farewell, sweet Saint, my prayer shall be to you:
My Love has been unhappy, but 'twas true.
Remember me! Alas what have I sed?
You must dye too!
But yet remember me when you are dead.

Ber. If I dye first I will --
Stop short of Heaven, and wait you in a Cloud;
For fear we lose each other in the crowd.

Por. Love is the only Coin in Heaven will go:
Then take all with you, and leave none below.

Ber. It Is want of knowledge, not of Love, I fear.
Lest we mistake when bodies are not there,
O as a mark that I could wear a Scroul,
With this Inscription, Berenice's Soul.

Por. That needs not, sure, for none will be so bright,
So pure, or with so small allays of light.

Max. From my full eyes fond tears begin to start;
Dispatch, they practice treason on my heart.

Porphyrius kisses his hand, and blows it to Berenice saying, Por. Adieu: this
farewell sigh I as my last bequeath,
Catch it, it is Love expiring in a breath.

Berenice kissing hers in the same manner. Ber. This sigh of mine shall meet it
half the way,
As pledges given that each for other stay.

Enter Valeria and Cydon her Woman. Val. What dismal Scene of Death is here
prepared!


Max. Now strike.


Val. They shall not strike till I am heard.


Max. From whence does this new impudence proceed,
That you dare alter that which I decreed?

Val. Ah, Sir, to what strange courses do you fly,
To make your self abhorred for cruelty!
The Empire groans under your bloody Reign,
And its vast body bleeds in every vein.
Gasping and pale, and fearing more, it Iyes;
And now you stab it in the very eyes:
Your Caesar and the Partner of your Bed;
Ah who can wish to live when they are dead?
If ever gentle pity touched your breast --
-- I cannot speak, -- my tears shall speak the rest.

Weeping and sobbing. Por. She adds new grief to what I felt before,
And Fate has now no room to put in more.

Max Away, thou shame and slander of my blood.
To Val. Who taught thee to be pitisul or good?

Val. What hope have I
The name of Virtue should prevail with him,
Who thinks even it, for which I plead, a crime?
Yet Nature, sure, some Argument may be;
If them you cannot pity, pity me.

Max. I will, and all the World shall judge it so:
I will the excess of pity to you show.
You ask to save
A dangerous Rebel, and disloyal Wife,
And I in mercy -- will not take your life.

Val. You more than kill me by this cruelty,
And in their persons bid your Daughter dye.
I honor Berenice's Virtue much;
But for Porphyrius my Love is such,
I cannot, will not live when he is gone.

Max. I Will do that Cure for you which on my self is done.
You must, like me, your Lovers life remove;
Cut off your hope, and you destroy your Love.
If it were hard I would not bid you try
The Medicine: but it is but to let him dye.
Yet since you are so soft, (which you call good)
And are not yet confirmed enough in blood
To see his death;
Your frailty shall be favored with this grace,
That they shall suffer in another place.
If after they are dead, their memory
By any chance into your mind be brought,
Laugh, and divert it with some other thought.
Away with 'em.

Exeunt Berenice, Porphyrius, Albinus carried off by Guards. Val. Since prayers
nor tears can bend his cruel mind,
[ Looking after Porphy.] Farewell, the best and bravest of Mankind;
How I have loved Heaven knows; but there is a Fate,
Which hinders me from being fortunate.
My Father's Crimes hang heavy on my head,
And like a gloomy Cloud about me spread;
I would in vain be pious, that is a grace
Which Heaven permits not to a Tyrant's race.

Max. Hence to her Tent the foolish Girl convey.


Val. Let me be just before I go away:
Placidius, I have vowed to be your Wife;
Take then my hand, it is yours while I have life.
One moment here, I must another be:
But this Porphyrius gives me back to thee.

Stabs her self twice, and then Placidius wrests the Dagger from her. Placid.
Help, help the Princess, help!


Max. What rage has urged this act which thou have done?


Val. Thou, Tyrant, and thy Crimes have pulled it on.
Thou who can death with such a pleasure see,
Now take thy fill, and glut thy sight in me.
But -- I Will the occasion of my death forget;
Save him I love, and be my Father yet:
I can no more -- Porphyrius, my dear --

Cyd. Alas, she raves, and thinks Porphyrius here.


Val. Have I not yet deserved thee now I dye?
Is Berenice still more fair than I?
Porphyrius, do not swim before my sight;
Stand still, and let me, let me aim aright.
Stand still but while thy poor Valeria dies,
And sighs her Soul into her Lovers eyes.

Dies. Placid. She Is gone from Earth, and with her went away
All of the Tyrant that deserved to stay:
I Have lost in her all joys that life can give;
And only to revenge her death would live --

Aside. Cyd. The Gods have claimed her, and we must resign.


Max. What had the Gods to do with me or mine?
Did I molest your Heaven? --
Why should you then make Maximin your Foe,
Who paid you Tribute, which he need not do?
Your Altars I with smoke of Gums did crown:
For which you leaned your hungry nostrils down.
All daily gaping for my Incense there,
More than your Sun could draw you in a year.
And you for this these Plagues on me have sent;
But by the Gods, (by Maximin I meant)
Henceforth I and my World
Hostility with you and yours declare,
Look to it, Gods; for you the Aggressors are.
Keep you your Rain and Sunshine in your Skies,
And I Will keep back my flame and Sacrifice.
Your Trade of Heaven shall soon be at a stand,
And all your Goods lie dead upon your hand.

Placid. Thus, Tyrant, since the Gods the Aggressors are,
[Stabbing him.] Thus by this stroke they have begun the War.

Maximin struggles with him, and gets the Dagger from him. Max. Thus I return
the strokes which they have given;
[Stabbing Placid.] Thus, Traitor, thus, and thus I would to Heaven.

Stabbing upward with his Dagger. Placidius falls, and the Emperor staggers
after him, and sits down upon him, the Guards come in to help the Emperor.
Max. Stand off, and let me, e're my strength be gone,
Take my last pleasure of revenge alone.

Enter a Centurion. Cen. Arm, arm, the Camp is in a mutiny:
For Rome and Liberty the Soldiers cry.
Porphyrius moved their pity as he went,
To rescue Berenice from punishment,
And now he heads their new-attempted crime.

Max. Now I am down, the Gods have watched their time.
You think --
To save your credit, feeble Deities;
But I will give my self the strength to rise.
He strives to get up, and being up, staggers. It wonnot be --
My body has not strength my mind to bear.
I must return again -- and conquer here.
Sits down upon the Body. My coward Body does my will control;
Farewell thou base Deserter of my Soul.
I Will shake this Carcass off, and be obeyed;
Reign an Imperial Ghost without its aid.
Go, Soldiers, take my Ensigns with you, fight,
And vanquish Rebels in your Sovereign's right:
Before I die --
Bring me Porphyrius and my Empress dead,
I would brave Heaven, in my each hand a head.

Placid. Do not regard a dying Tyrants breath.
[To the Soldiers.] He can but look revenge on you in death.

Max. Vanquished, and dare thou yet a Rebel be?
Thus -- I can more than look revenge on thee.

[Stabs him again. Placid. Oh, I am gone!


Dies. Max. -- And after thee I go,
Revenging still, and following even to the other world my blow.
Stabs him again. And shoving back this Earth on which I sit,
I Will mount -- and scatter all the Gods I hit.

Dies. Enter Porphyrius, Berenice, Albinus, Soldiers. Porphyrius tooks on the
Bodies entering, and speaks. Por. It Is done before, (this mighty work of Fate!)
And I am glad our Swords are come too late.
He was my Prince, and though a bloody one,
I should have conquered and have mercy shown.
Sheath all your Swords, and cease your enmity;
They are not Foes, but Romans whom you see.

Ber. He was my Tyrant, but my Husband too;
And therefore duty will some tears allow.

Por. Placidius here!
And fair Valeria new deprived of breath?
Who can unriddle this dumb-show of death?

Cyd. When, Sir, her Father did your life deny,
She killed her self, that she with you might dye.
Placidius made the Emp'rours death his crime;
Who, dying, did revenge his death on him.

Porphyrius kneels and takes Valeria's hand. Por. For thy dear sake I vow each
week I live
One day to fasting and just grief I Will give:
And what hard Fate did to thy life deny,
My gratitude shall pay thy memory.

Cen. Mean time to you belongs The Imperial power;
We with one voice salute your Emperor.

Soldiers. Long live Porphyrius Emperor of the Romans.


Por. Too much, my Country men, your Love you show
That you have thought me worthy to be so.
But, to requite that Love, I must take care
Not to engage you in a Civil War.
Two Emperors at Rome the Senate chose,
And whom they chose no Roman should oppose.
In Peace or War, let Monarchs hope or fear;
All my ambition shall be bounded here.

Kissing Berenice's hand. Ber. I have too lately been a Prince's Wife,
And fear the unlucky Omen of the life.
Like a rich Vessel beat by storms to shore,
'Twere madness should I venture out once more.
Of glorious troubles I will take no part,
And in no Empire reign, but of your heart.

Por. Let to the winds your golden Eagles fly

[To the Soldier Your Trumpets sound a bloodless Victory:
Our Arms no more let Aquileia fear,
But to her Gates --
Our peaceful Ensigns crowned with Olives bear;
While I mix Cypress with my Myrtle Wreath
Joy for your life, and mourn Valeria's Death.

Exeunt omnes. Epilogue
Spoken by Mrs. Ellen, when she was to be carried off dead by the Bearers.

To the Bearer. HOld, are you mad? you damned confounded Dog,
I am to rise, and speak the Epilogue.
To the Audience. I come, kind Gentlemen, strange news to tell ye,
I am the Ghost of poor departed Nelly.
Sweet Ladies, be not frighted, I Will be civil,
I Am what I was, a little harmless Devil.
For after death, we Sprights, have just such Natures,
We had for all the World, when humane Creatures;
And therefore I that was an Actress here,
Play all my Tricks in Hell, a Goblin there.
Gallants, look to it, you say there are no Sprights:
But I Will come dance about your Beds at nights.
And faith you will be in a sweet kind of taking,
When I surprise you between sleep and waking.
To tell you true, I walk because I dye
Out of my Calling in a Tragedy.
O Poet, damned dull Poet, who could prove
So senseless! to make Nelly dye for Love,
Nay, what is yet worse, to kill me in the prime
Of Easter-Term, in Tart and Cheese-cake time!
I Will fit the Fopp; for I Will not one word say
TO excuse his godly out of fashion Play.
A Play which if you dare but twice sit out,
You Will all be stander'd, and be thought devout.
But, farewell Gentlemen, make haste to me,
I Am sure e're long to have your company.
As for my Epitaph when I am gone,
I Will trust no Poet, but will write my own.
Here Nelly lies, who, though she lived a Slater'n
Yet died a Princess, acting in S. Cathar'n.

