An humble REMONSTRANCE Presented to the Right Worshipful COMPANY OF
Merchant-Tailors Maii 15. 1661.

By WILLLIAM DV-GARD.

Qui non deliquit, decet a^dace^ esse, audacter and confidenter pro se loqui.

Plaut. Vi opprimi in bona causa melius est q^a^ male cedere.

Cic. LONDON, Printed in the Year of our Lord. 1661.

To the worshipful, the Master, Wardens, and Assistants of the Right
worshipful Company of Merchant-Tailors. Maii 15* 1661. The humble Remonstrance
of William Du-Gard, touching his Discharge from the place of Chief
Schoolmaster.
GENTLEMEN!
I Have received an Order from you December. 27. 1660. whereby you are pleased to
discharge me from the place of chief Schoolmaster of your School* only* out
of savor to me, you give me time until Jun. 24. 1661. the better to provide
for my self.

For that Favor, though I humbly acknowledge my thankfulness: yet I cannot but
wonder at your proceedings with me in my discharge from the place.

For, 1. You have do^ it indicta caus^* the innocentest man living may be
condemned by this Course. When Ter^^llu^ the Orator in an eloquent Oration
accused* St Paul before Fel^^ the Governor, Act. ^4. yet Felix* though an
Heathen, gave St Paul leave to answer for himself. The Law gives a Felon* or a
Traitor leave to except against some of a Jury, and to answer to his indictment
before he be condemned. It Is a rational and just saying of Julian, Si accusasse
sufficere^, (...) es^et innoceus. And Seneca, Qui statuit aliquid part
i^a^di^^ alter^, aqu^m licet statuerit, haud aequ^^ est.

2. You have don it, some of my Capital adversaries being both my Accusers and
Judges: and how easy it is for men of parts and power, upon specious pretenses,
when there is no liberty for the Defendant to answer, to draw others to their
opinion, and pronounce sentence, an ordinary judgment may quickly understand*
(...). Qui ad (...) respi^iu^t de facili pronunciant.

But what is my Crime, that must deserve so hard a Censure? It is alleged in
your Order, That many Complaints have been frequently from time to time made to
the Master and Wardens of the Company, and to the Court, by the parents and
friends of the young Scholars, of the neglect of the chief-Master's duty in
that School, and of the breach of the Companie's Orders and Ordinances thereof.

-- pudet hac opprobria nobis
Et dici potuisse, and non potuisse refelli.
-- A shame 'twould be reputed
That such things should be said, and not refuted.
The French have a Proverb, That when a man would have his dog hanged, he must
first make folks beleev he is mad.

Two things are here objected:
1. Neglect of Duty. 2. Breach of the Companie's Orders.
1. To the first I answer, That it is very strange to me, that so many
Complaints should be made by the Parents of the Scholars, and I never hear of
any, nor ever called to answer one complaint in seventeen years space. D^lus
est in generalibus. Let any particular Parent appear, that ever accused me in
particular, as to any neglect, on my part* and I shall willingly be your
bondslave.

But I may say as innocently as David, Psalm. 35.11. They laid to my charge
things that I knew not. I have been in the profession 33 years, and in all
places wherever I came, I have had ample Testimonials of my faithfulness and
diligence, and my Scholar's proficiency. Religion has taught me better than
to be an eye-Servant. Besides, experience of my painfulness and diligence,
easily confute's this allegation: for I have kept the School in as flourishing
a condition, as in any seventeen years from the foundation: and might do so
still, if I might be permitted to have the ordering of it.

Formerly I have had many thanks from the Company for my care and diligence,
and no encouragement they thought too much for me: I am the same man still:
yet such is my unhappiness, that I cannot give some men content, do what I can.

-- Tempora mutantur. -- It is alleged in the Order, as an Aggravation of my
Negligence, and as an issue and consequence thereof, That the School must
Decay, and that the Decay thereof will tend to the prejudice of the Common
wealth in general, and to the great dishonor and disgrace of the Company in
particular, if the same be not timely prevented.

To which I answer, 1. THat, if the premises were true, that indeed would be
the Consequence: but the premises can never be proved; and therefore that
Conclusion cannot follow.

2. It is to be considered what is to be understood by the Decay of the School,
which must thus tend to the prejudice of the Common wealth in general, and the
dishonor and disgrace of the Company in Particular.

The Decay of a School (in common understanding) is, when Scholars cease to
resort to it: which may proceed from diverse causes: viz. either for negligence
of the Master, unskilfulness in his teaching, or exorbitancy in his life* as
the decay of a shop is, when Customers forsake it for want of good wares; or of
an handicrafts-man for want of skill; or ill husbandry, when a man cannot get
his work don in due time. But it is obvious for any man to say, that when he
see's a shop well custom'd, There are good wares or a mechanic well employed,
he is a good Ar^ist* or an house well-furnisht, there is a good husband. What
ever the Pretense is I bless God for it, it cannot truly be said, that the
^chool ever decayed under my hand. The Records of the School will easily show
the contrary* and when ever I leave it, I may say, as the Emperor said of Rome,
Lu^erit^am^^ccepi, man more ^m re^iq^^.

When Sir Thomas More, by commission from the King, went down into Kent, to
enquire the cause of Goodwin sands, he ^ound not that Te^ter^^n steeple was the
cause of the decay of Sandwich Haven, though that was alleged before him. But,
under favor, I will demonstrate unto you the true cause, that now is, and
hereafter will be the decay of the School, if not timely remedied* wherein I
shall give an answer to your second objection, viz. the Breach of the Companies
Orders.

II* By your Order of Ma^^^i 16. 16^9. you have absolutely forbid the
Schoolmaster to admit any Scholars, but such as bring a warrant under the
Master and Warden's hands: which being rigorously observed and exacted, must
needs destroy the School, as in part it has been the decay of it already. For,
to my knowledge, within this twelvemonth, at least threescore Scholars that
would have com'n to the School, for want of the Master's power to admit them,
have gone to other Places, to the great prejudice and decay of your own School,
and to the great advantage of other places.

I have no Scholar now in the School, but what I have warrant for according to
your Order. But what inconveniences it has already brought on the School, we
are too too sensible, it has been damage to the Master and Ushers at least
100 ^ and yet neither profit nor honor to the Company.

We cannot compel Parents to com to the Company, when they can have them at
other places for their money; nor will they suffer their children to lose their
time in waiting sometimes a month, sometimes six weeks before there be an
ordinary Court to admit them, unless they be such poor people that expect
benefit from the Companie's Charity. Some have answered, that they will not pay
and pray too (...) others, that they expect not to have their children gratis*
and therefore if the Master cannot admit them they will go to other places that
will; and so they carry them away, and never return again.

It Is the Companie's honor, that they are the Found^rs, Patrons, Go^ernors of
the School. But yet the Company cannot make a Scholar. As the Parent is the
natural cause of the Child's Being; the Company the providential Political
cause of good education* so Scholars* that are skillful in* Arts and Sciences,
are the instrumental cause of their learning: and yet the credit of the whole
Art and work redound's to the honor of the principal efficient.

True it is, that an hundred years ago, when it was an hard matter to get a
Scholar to read Greek* there was such an Order made, That no Scholar should be
taught in the School, unless first admitted by the Company. But afterward there
was found a necessity to dispense with that Order; and so it was with my
Predecessors; which I can prove for above threescore years bygone: They (and
my self too from them, until the last year) had such an Indulgence, that did
not limit nor restrain them to admit quarteridg-Scholars, who did not
immediately depend on the Charity of the Company: and the Motto engraven on the
School speak's as much* Nulli pracludor, Tibi pat^o.

Since the Company have been so strict and severe with me, as to urge and
press the Observation of that Order, I have obeyed* though to the great
prejudice of the School in general, the damage of the Master and Ushers in
particular, and discouragement of all.

I am not so void of reason, but that I know, if the Company will have it so, I
must obey, nor can I contradict. Yet I cannot but* deplore the sad condition
the Master* is cast into* For by this means the School must decay, the Master
cannot remedy it* and yet the blame must be laid upon the Master for
negligence; when as in truth the Masters hand's are tied, and be he never so
industrious and obedient, he cannot help it. It is an easy matter to fi^de a
staff to beat a dog.

It Is said of Draco, the Athenian Lawgiver, that he wrote his Laws, not with
Ink, but Blood, because he made the least offense capital. It Is said of some
penal Statutes, that they are like Statute -- lace, make a fair show afarr off,
but look near upon them, they are but cruel. In point of Divinity, if God
should mark what we do amiss, who could abide? In Political conversation, if
the extremest rigor in every thing be exacted, no man could live by his
Neighbor: In Scholastic discipline, if every punctilio should be punished, the
School would be no better than a Bridewell.

I know nothing by my self (I thank God) but, for the substance, I have been a
faithful Servant, and observed your Orders. Allow me but common and humane
infirmities (which Christian charity will allow, for there is no Angelical
perfection in this life) and, I bless God for it, I know the Devil himself
cannot justly accuse me of any notorious or scandalous Crime: But if you will
be so extremely rigorous, as to make every conceived punctilio capital; and,
upon suggestions, without hearing, discharge your Servant pro arbitrio, I do
not know any man living, of any part^ fit for the place, that either can or
will serve you on that condition.

My Comfort is, That I have faithfully discharged my conscience in my place:
That I have maintained the School in honor and credit for my time,
notwithstanding the sinister prejudice of some men: That I have as really and
truly honored the Company as ever any man did in the place: That I have not
only bestowed pains* but cost in a Scholastic way, the better to furnish my
self for my employment: That I have don that for the School in some particulars,
that few men in England could have don besides, whereof I shall leave lasting
monuments behind me, and I know there be not many that can follow me, even in
that, which some men count negligence. And I hope I have don God good service in
training up many that are now excellent and eminent instruments of God's glory
both in Church and Commonwealth.

Howbeit I count it some unhappiness, that, after seventeen years service to
such a noble Company, I should be condemned for negligence, that I was never
guilty off* and to have so hard measure, as to be discharged from my place and
livelihood* indicta causa, and not to be suffered to answer for my self.

Yet I must lay my hand upon my mouth* and look up unto God, without whose
providence an hair falls not from our heads, nor a Sparrow to the ground, and
conclude; That, If I cannot longer with love and encouragement serve the
Company* I must humbly take my leave and pray for them; and wish that my
Successor (whatever he be that is designed to my place) may be more painful,
more diligent, and do more for the honor of the Company than I have don.

My former experience of God's merciful providence assure's me, that whatever
befall's me in my pilgrimage here is for my eternal good. That he can turn the
emnitie of men to my advantage; that still he will accept of my service, in my
generation, having fitted me in some sort for my calling: and I doubt not with
God's blessing still to be, as formerly, a successful instrument in training
up of Youth, to his glory, both for Church and Commonwealth.

(...)

Quicquid patimur mortale gen^^s
Quicquid facimus venit ab alto.
This former Remonstrance was enclosed in this Letter following Maii 15. 1661.
To the Worshipful, the Masters, Wardens, and Assistants of the right
Worshipful Company of Merchant-Tailors.
Right Worshipful!
I Make bold to present to your Worships my humble Remonstrance touching my
Discharge; and I humbly crave this favor That, if I may not longer continue
with your love and encouragement, as formerly, yet that I may be dismissed
fairly with your favor: and therefore may it please you to consider.

1. That I left a good livelihood in another place, when I entered upon your
service; and brought with me many Scholars to the School.

2. That I have continued seventeen years in your service* and till of late,
with much encouragement.

3. That I had the Companie's leave to set up my Press.

4. That when the Company were displeased with it, I sold it with as much
expedition as I could, at 300l. loss.

5. That in seventeen years I have lost above 800l. by nonpayment of
quarteridges.

6. That by a strict observance of your Order of Mar. 16. 1659. the School has
lost above 100l. this last year.

These considerations I humbly lay before you, and take my leave,

Maii 15. 1661. Your Worship's most humble Servant William Du-Gard.

To the right Worshipful, the Master, Wardens, and Assistants of the right
Worshipful Company of Merchant-Tailors.
GENTLEMEN!
I Read of Hen. 7. who, being very thirsty, called for a cup of Beer: his
Cup Bearer making more haste than good speed stumbled and fell, and spilt the
beer, even then, when he was ready to deliver it: The King, though a little
moved with his heedlessness, yet, seeing the man did it not willingly to offend
him, demanded of him, is this well don? yes, answered the Cup Bearer, it is
well don: how can thou make that good, quoth the King? thus Sir, said he: we
have a Proverb, That every thing is well don that is well taken: and if it
please your Majesty to take it well, it is well don: the King not displeased
with his answer, pardoned his offense, and dismissed him without displeasure.

I wish I could say this were my case. I perceive that I have offended the
Company by my Remonstrance, presented Maii 15. 1661. My Aim and End in it was
no further than to vindicate mine own innocence, and to assoil my self from
that Crime which was objected against me; not to lay any aspersions on the
Company.

I know very well that it is my duty to submit to the Company* in all
Reverential respect and Observance: which I have ever don, and shall ever do,
whether my Relation hold, or cease: those that know my deportment, could never
justly charge me with the contrary. I know likewise, that I ow a Despoticall
respect, that is, such as a Servant owe's to his Master* at whose command he
is: this I acknowledge to be my duty: and where ever I have erred in either of
these respects either in unbeseeming words or deeds I confess my fault and
humbly crave your pardon: it is an error of my judgment, not of my Will and
Intention. Actus non facit reum, nisi men's sit rea.

But to make my self guilty of a Crime that I am not obnoxious unto, were to
betray mine own innocence; which cannot reasonably be expected from a rational
man; much less from a Christian.

Nothing is charged upon me but in general; to which I have given a general
answer.

I looked no further than your Order of Dec. 12. 1660. whereby I stand
discharged* at that time ( I hope I may speak the Truth without offense) I was
not called, or summoned to answer for my self at all: nor did I receive that
Order until Dec. 2^. following.

I must needs acknowledge that formerly many Disquisitions were made concerning
the irregularities of Scholars admissions* and other things: and, upon debate,
all was concluded in an Order made Febr. 15. 1659* and delivered to me Mar^ii
16. 1659. strictly forbiding the Master to admit any Scholars, without warrant:
which I have observed to my own great damage, and the unspeakeable prejudice
of the School. I conceived then that all forepast irregularities and errors,
swerving from the primitive Statutes were then cancelled, and an Act of
indemnity past upon them: and therefore I could not but wonder, that they
should be revived again, and raised from the grave of Oblivion (wherein I
thought they had been all buried) to give a Charge against me.

If his Majesty should now null and make void his gracious Act of indemnity and
Oblivion, and deal severely according to the strict rigor of the Laws of the
Land, few men could escape the condemnation of Treason.

I suppose not many made conscience of eating flesh in Lent, though by Statute
forbidden, because for a long time it was intermitted* yet when his Majesty's
Proclamation revive's it, it is dangerous to do it. I kept the School for 16
years, as I received it from my predecessors: but when your Order of Martii 16.
1660. came and revived the former statutes, I have fasted from the former
permitted Custom, though I have grown lean upon it. I hope there is no Crime in
that.

I set up my Press by the leave of the Company: when that was offensive, I sold
it at 300 l. loss* I hope there is no Crime in that.

When a Minister is presented to a Benefice, he is not usually ejected, nisi ob
aliquam rationabilem causam, as the Civil ^aw speak's, and in such a case the
judicial proceedings are secundum allegasa and pr^bata: I conceived my self in
the same Constitution. But if it be otherwise, I must be contented. I humbly
submit to your ^^easure, and God's providence.

Friday Junii 12.16 Your most humble servant William Du-Gard.


