A PLAIN and EASY METHOD; SHOWING How the Office of OVERSEER of the POOR may
be managed, whereby it may be 9000 l. per Annum Advantage to the County of
DEVON, without abating the Weekly Relief of any Poor, or doing a Penny damage
to any Person.

By RICHARD DUNNING, Gent.

-- Venienti occurrite morbo.
Nil habet infelix paupertas durius in se.
Juven. Sat. LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCLXXXV.

This may be Printed,

R.L.S.
September. 15. 1685.
To the Right Worshipful, and my Honored Masters, the Justices of the Peace
for the County of DEVON.
AS Justice is the common preserver of Humane Society; of Order, Peace, and
Commerce, consisting of those two general parts, Preventing and Punishing; so
the first is the chief and more noble part thereof: That not only nips Vice in
its Bud and Blossom, but so refines its Natural Soil, that its very Source
becomes to be obstructed, and its Progress prevented; neither are the mischiefs
few or inconsiderable, where this first branch has not its due and wished
effects. Those who are not employed in duly discharging what properly belongs
to their Places and Callings, soon becoming dissolute, following the wild mazes
of their Wills and Passions; hence arise such swarms of Mutineers and
Levellers, the loud noise for Liberty and Property, tho the invading that of
others is only aimed at.

The Prefaces of several Laws observe it as too common, That they who lay aside
their Lawful Trades and Employments, do thereupon betake themselves to the
taking, killing, and stealing of Game, appropriated to Noblemen, Gentlemen,
etc. And common Experience shows that such takers seldom confine themselves to
the breach of Laws for preserving Game, but having gone over those bounds and
limits, beyond which they may not innocently pass, are in a short time dextrous
in other Pilfrings. And did not the diligence of Magistrates, and their often
punishing such loose Persons, prevent them from acting barefaced, they would
soon in no less measure than the Goths and Vandals of Old, and the Wastcoteers
of late, be a terror to all People.

It has been an aspersion unjustly cast on the Statutes of the 43 Eliz. for
Relief of Poor, That that Law has made multitudes idle and careless: And that
allowing them a Refuge for Relief from their Parishes, has caused them the
less to provide for themselves. Indeed, by that Law the Parish is (as they
commonly say) bound to find them, but that in a far other and larger sense than
they mean, viz. Work for those that WILL Labor, Punishment for those that WILL
NOT, and Bread for those that cannot. And if the two first parts of that Law
were duly observed, the Poor would not only be reduced to a small number,
comparatively to what they now are, but there would be no such Poor as idle and
wandering Rogues and Vagabonds, as the Statute of the 29th. of the same Queen
shows there were before that time: And the Punishment appointed for such loose
Persons being, that they be Whipped, and sent to the place of their Birth, as an
Admonition to the Inhabitants of that place, to bring up their Children better.

Those who have observed the Method that the Ancient Laws direct for Pursuing
and Apprehending Felons and other Capital Offenders, by Hue and Cries, have
looked on it as almost impossible (were such ways duly pursued) for such to
escape the reach of Justice. But they that have deliberately considered of the
Laws of a later date, especially the 4th. 39th. 43th. of the late Queen, and
the 4th. and 7th. of King James; and of the Methods they direct for the early
placing out the Children of the Poor, Apprentices; and those of riper Years in
Service; That none be entertained in Service without due Testimonials whence
they came; nor then by the pound, piece, or pair, in which Masterless Method
many serve more Masters in a Week than they spend sober Nights, but for no less
time than a Year: That Persons of all Ages and Sexes be duly employed, and of
all Qualities, be neither Idle nor disorderly: The Annual choice of Officers in
every Parish to see those things, and others of the like Nature, duly observed;
and withal, the Penalties on them that remain remiss or negligent. To which
may be added the late Laws of Excise, which as they are Advantageous in
producing a vast Revenue to the Crown, so are more Advantageous to the Country
in affording a constant and Genteel livelihood to multitudes of decayed
Tradesmen, Gentlemen, etc. (to which every one contributes as little as he
pleases, no one being Obliged to keep or frequent Alehouses) may well admire
that there is any longer a Felon in the Gaol, or an Idler in the Streets. And
that there may not be such, there can scarce be better ways contrived than the
Laws direct, nor any in a greater measure enablea. to effect it than the
Justices of the Peace are. To you through His Majesty's favor belongs the
choice of nominating, placing, displacing, directing, and encouraging almost
all subordinate and inferior Officers; and of Examining, Inspecting, and
Punishing their omissions and neglects, and now, if ever, it is time to restrain
the increase of the Poor, by restraining the Idleness and Insolence of the
meaner sort. That the Method hereby proposed is both practicable and easy, is
manifest, and the Legality of it is fully attested, by being Examined and
Approved of by a considerable number of eminent Justices of the Peace of this
County; being no new thing, but a more literal and direct observance of the Law
than the common practice is.

And tho it cannot be certainly asserted what Annual Advantage such Method in a
whole County may produce, yet as far as can well be computed, and as may upon
good grounds be presumed, the Yearly Profit to the Public would far exceed
what this Paper mentions.

If the Children in the City of Norwich between the Ages of Six and Ten Years,
gain 12000 l. per Annum beyond their Maintenance, as an * Author of good Credit
affirms Author of the State of England, Dr. Chamberlain.
to have appeared upon a late Computation there made, how much greater Sum
might be advanced in so many Populous Towns, and in so large a County as this
is, by the Labors of such and others of riper Years, who now spend most of
their time idly, or worse? Besides many other Advantages would thence arise,
some whereof are obvious to the meanest Capacity: And when ever an Act of this
Nature shall be thought worth the vigorous prosecution, a sufficiency of fit
subservient Agents will never be wanting.

A plain and easy Method, etc.
ALthough I have no particular knowledge of the several Parishes in this
County, yet as it is true, that the Charge to the Poor in many Parishes does
exceed W. in a proportionable rate; and that every Parish is, or may be equally
burdened with W. So it is as true, that the general increase of such Charge
(which is near double what it was Thirty Years since, and like to double again
in a shorter time) is not occasioned by any Dearth or Scarcity of Necessaries,
there being never a greater Plenty. Nor for want of Employments, there being
never more; nor through the smalness of Wages, that being never so great: But
by Idleness, profuse Expenses, the ill bringing up of Children, and the younger
sort. Now, how all those inconveniences may with ease, and without the help of
any new Law, or breach of an old, be so far remedied, as to be of 9000 l. per
Annum clear Advantage to this County, I shall briefly demonstrate.

First, That 40 l. per Annum in the Parish of W. is somewhat more than 1000 l.
in the Subdivision and 1000 l. per Annum in the Subdivision is somewhat more
than 9000 l. per Annum in the County. (The disproportion between the South and
the other two grand Divisions being considered) consequently that which may be
done elsewhere as well as in Winckley, as what is hereby proposed may, and is
40 l. per Annum clear Advantage to the Parish of W. may, and will be 9000 l.
per Annum and upwards Advantage to this County. This being granted, nothing
more remains than to show how an Overseer of the Poor of W. has, and still may
benefit that Parish not only 40 l. per Annum, but a far greater Sum beyond what
has been done by any other.

Each private Person being considered as a Member of the Public, nothing is
more plain than this; That he that spends an hour idly, or in Begging,
Cheating, or Stealing, either in that time gets nothing at all, or nothing to
the Public, some one o^ other receiving damage equal to his gains: Whereas he
that spends that short time in any Lawful Labor, and thereby earns a penny,
earns that small sum without any damage to any Person, (Sic parvis componere
magna.) And therefore lay this as a Foundation, That whatsoever is Lawfully
earned by the procurement of an Overseer of the Poor by such Persons, and in
such time, who would otherwise spend the same time in idleness, unprofitable or
ill Employments, is clear gain, no one receiving any damage thereby.

This being granted, the bringing common Beggars to Work, as also common
Bailiffs and Apparators, who perchance serve a Process or two in a Month, and
live idly die rest of their time. The keepers of small Tippling-houses, and
suchlike loose Persons, they being with their whole Retinue brought constantly
to Labor in an honest Employent, the product of their Labor is clear gain.

It has been almost a Proverbial saying, That it is a great trouble to bring
Beggars to Stocks, but to bring Beggars, etc. to Work, to leave a habit of
Idleness, and the Advantages of Stealing being the perquisites of their Trade;
to bring them, and such as are before mentioned, constantly to Labor, some
will say, here is a Task indeed, hic labor hoc opus est. But when the
slenderness of their Power to resist such or the like easy Method for
reforming them as is herein set down (which may receive the better
encouragement tending to their own and the Public good) and the plainness of
those Laws which require it, and the easiness of putting them in execution are
seriously considered; 'twill soon appear that their not demeaning themselves as
useful Members of the Commonwealth, rather arises from the neglect of those
that should regulate them, than from any Power in themselves to avoid being
regulated by such or the like Method as is herein mentioned, according to the
Act of Parliament in that case made and provided, whereby the Churchwardens
and Overseers of the Poor are positively required by raising a convenient Stock
or otherwise, to Employ and set on Work all such Poor of their Parishes,
married or unmarried, as have no Estates to maintain them, and use no ordinary
and daily Trade of Life to get their Living by. So that such as have no Estates
sufficient to maintain them, and such as have no Trade in which they are
ordinarily and daily Employed, are by the plain words of the Law to be employed
and set on work by the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor, who are to
meet once in every Month at the least, to consider of fit ways for setting and
keeping such Poor on Work, upon pain of forfeiting 20 s. a piece for each month
they neglect so to do. And such Poor as shall refuse to Work according to such
appointment, are by the same Law to be sent to the House of Correction.

But the Law that says they shall set their Poor on work, cannot be understood
otherwise, than that such Officers shall set them on work, in such Employments,
in such manner, and by sud^ ways and means as may best suit with the Capacities
of Persons employing, and to be employed; and the occasions and circumstances
of time and place, conceive, that the setting down a method is no adding unto,
or a digressing from the Law, but rather a submissive compliance therewith. But
before I mention such Method as I presume to propose, shall in pursuance of
what I before said, viz. that 40 l. per Annum, or rather a far greater sum
has, and still may by such method be gotten in W. and proportionably be of
Advantage to this County beyond 9000 l. per Annum, if the same or like means
were used. For Instance,

G.B. a common Beggar in adjacent and remote Parishes, complaining of
extraordinary swellings in one of his Legs (which with Plasters, Binders, etc.
seemed near as great as his waste) pretending to have a sick Wife and young
Children (all false) made Begging his ordinary and daily Trade; and having for
near Twenty Years so complained, was generally believed therein: But the method
herein to be proposed for bringing idle and counterfeit Beggars, and other idle
Persons to work, brought him in a few days time to throw off his burden of
Clouts from his feigned griefs, and to follow his work day by day; so that by
his Threshall, Mattock, and the like, he now gains his Meat and Drink, and 5 d.
per Day; and in likelihood has forgotten which was the lame Leg. 5 d. per Day
is 2 s. 6 d. per Week, in one Year, abating two Weeks for Holy Days, comes to
-- 6 l. -- 5 s. -- 0 d.

His Diet being part of his Wages, cannot be less than 5 d. a Day more, and in
the like time comes to -- 6 l. 5 s. -- 0 d.

His Wife a lusty Woman, and formerly a common Vagabond, can well by her labor
earn her Diet, which may be valued at 18 d. a week, and 6 d. a week Wages, and
will scorn to work at that rate; yet so, comes to per Annum -- 5 l. -- 0 s. --
0 d.

L. B. another common Beggar, would sometimes be on his Range without once
returning home in a quarter of a Year, and at last return as lousie, pennyless,
and ragged as he went out; now constantly keeps his Church, having formerly no
Clothes to come there, earns his Meat and Drink, which cannot be valued less
than 2 s. 6 d. in a Week, consequently in a Year, abating as before, comes to
-- 6 l. -- 5 s. -- 0 d.

He likewise receives 2 s. per week Wages in the Summer, and 1 s. 6 d. per week
Wages in the Winter, and has his constant work at one place, which Yearly
comes to -- 4 l. -- 7 s. -- 6 d.

His Wife, a lusty Woman, and formerly a common Vagabond, can well earn her
Diet, and 6 d. per week, and I conceive would scarce accept of 12 d. per week
and Diet, if offered; yet at 6 d. per week and Diet comes yearly to as before
-- 5 l. -- 0 s. -- 0 d.

W. P. a strong Person, but of weak Capacity, having a lusty Woman, and a
common Vagrant to his Wife, who could by her begging Trade gain his and her own
Diet, and the Parish provided him Clothes; yet in a short time after, he had
Necessaries in order, could well earn his Diet, and 2 s. per week Wages; his
Diet per Annum valued at -- 6 l. -- 5 s. -- 0 d.

And his Wages at 2 s. per week, comes to per Annum -- 5 l. -- 0 s. -- 0 d.

His Wife can well earn as each of the other two per Annum, as before -- 5 l.
-- 0 s. -- 0 d.

I have hinted at only but a small part of this one sort of Idlers that the
Parish of W. could lately afford, there being many others, some that can get
Wages beyond their Diet; others that can earn their Diet, which singly in a
years time is considerable; some continue reformed, and all would with a little
care; and I cannot believe but that any that can walk some miles to beg, can
earn their Bread at home, but forbear particularizing them, the labor of those
already mentioned, and who formerly spent their time idly, or unprofitably as
to the Public; amounting yearly to more than I before pretended to
demonstrate: And know not where there are two Parishes together, in one of
which may not be found of idle and loose Persons a number answerable to 6 in W.
or rather more.

And now having by an usual and demonstrative way set down the experienced
effects of our Method, shall next mention the cause or manner thereof.

First, How to find and provide Employments for all sorts.

Secondly, How to compel both Men and Women constantly to follow their
Employments, who receive Relief of the Parish, and can wander abroad; for such
can labor at home.

Thirdly, How to compel the Poor of each Sex, who receive no such Relief,
constantly to follow their Labor.

First, For providing Work for men in Husbandry, this was our Method; we gave
them Lists (taken out of a Book, wherein all our Lists of this sort were
entered, subscribed by the Officers, and allowed by two Justices of the Peace)
in this manner.

You A. B. when not otherwise constantly Employed, are to work for C. D. four
days, E. F. three days, etc. the Payers to the Poor successively as herein
named, to receive for your work your Diet, and 3 d. per Day in the Summer, and
2 d. per Day in the Winter, and to give each Person three days notice before
you apply to them for their work, and to give us an account of your due
observance hereof at -- on S. seven night next, between the hours of -- and to
give the like account at the same place on every S. seven night for three
months then next following, between the hours of --

Note, That such as receive Relief from the Parish, were to give such account
as above, before they received their Pay.

And for Employ to Women, this was our Method: We agreed with one Person, who
usually Employed several Spinsters; the substance of which Agreement was, That
Was to Employ in Spinning, Carding, etc. all such Women as by direction of the
Overseers should apply to him for Work, to pay them such Wages as they should
deserve; and accordingly Order them where to go for Work: And in case any of
them should detain or imbezzle any Wool to them delivered, the Owner to prove
the delivery thereof before two Justices of the Peace; and thereupon the
Overseers to pay him the value thereof; and they in recompense thereof, to
receive such satisfaction from the imbezler as the Justices should order. By
this means both sorts had sufficient Employents provided for them: And such as
afterward should refuse to Work, came directly within the reach of that Law,
that such shall be sent to the Bridewell.

Note, The like may be done for Employing of Combers and Weavers, where such
are.

Secondly, How to compel such as receive Relief of the Parish, to follow their
Labor, etc.

They having fit Employments provided for them in manner before mentioned as
they ought, so they can easily make out that they have constantly and
diligently been Employed therein, or in some other Lawful Employments (if they
have been so Employed) either by procuring their Employers, or some of their
Families to come at the Pay-Board, or elsewhere, to certify how they have been
Employed, and what they have done since last Pay-Day: Or else they may bring a
Certificate thereof in Writing from those who Employ them; and until they give
a good account of their diligence, and in such manner attest the same, to
receive no Relief.

Thirdly, How to compel such Poor as receive no Relief from the Parish, to
follow their Labor.

Both Men and Women had Employments provided for them in manner before
mentioned: But their Necessities not bringing them to the Pay-board, used these
several ways.

First, Knowing that those who received Relief, would account it no small
Punishment to be at once deprived of their pleasant old Trade of walking and
begging, and be compelled daily to Labor. And likewise in manner aforesaid to
prove the same, would be apt to envy their old Companions and other Idlers. And
therefore to make them the forwarder in complaining, promised them a Reward of
1 s. for each Person they should discover and complain of for Begging; and the
like Reward for discovering and complaining of any of the lustier or stronger
sort of Poor that should spend any working day idly, or in loose disorderly
Employments (tho they did not beg) and the like Reward to any other complainer:
By this means they had store of Overseers or Spies, and were afraid one of
another.

And tho this (like setting one Thief to catch another) may be a good way, yet
lest the Knaves should agree, it is a sure way for the Overseers, or one of
them, or rather some Person to be continually employed for that purpose once in
a week or fortnight, till there be a full Reformation, to call all such to an
account, whom they shall any way suspect to have neglected their work, whether
they have wrought according to the Order they lately received; if not, that
they make out by good circumstances how else they have been Employed, and what
they have done since last examined: And in case they cannot, or will not give a
good account (to wit) that they have done so much work in that time, as Persons
of their strength and capacity might conveniently do; then their not giving
such account is a just inducement to suspect they have been idle or ill
Employed: And therefore 'twill be both proper and easy to have than before two
Justices of the Peace: And in case they do then prove they have constantly
followed their Lawful Employments, yet for their refusing to give an account at
home, their Journey will be a just Punishment. But if they cannot then prove
that they have constantly followed their Lawful Employments, it will be a just
cause for the Justices to send them to the Bridewell, as the foresaid 43. Eliz.
cap. 2.
Statute in this case directs.

And now having, as I conceive, briefly mentioned a plain Method, I shall
withal observe those Objections that have been by some, and may again be made
by others.

First, That those who are by Lists to work round a Parish, live at so great
distance from some places, that they cannot return home at Night, and are, for
the most part, unfit to be Lodged.

This Exception may be thus salved: They may have a Bed, viz. a Sheer or
Blanket provided for them by the Overseers, the charge thereof deducted out of
their own Wages, which they may carry with them as often as they change Houses
(as soon as they have been at such places in order according to their Lists,
whence they may return home at Night) which will not only be a Lodging fit for
such Persons, who may well be supposed not to be of the better sort of Workmen,
but equal with the Scotchmen, the most genteel sort of Runabouts.

Yet this is an Objection that will seldom or never need this or any other like
remedy; for such loose Persons once finding that they must constantly follow
some Lawful Employment either out of, or in Bridewell, will get themselves into
constant Work, or take Tasks, yea, and work at half Price, rather than so
wander from place to place, and as 'twere, beg Work, which the worst Workmen
scorn to do, especially of such who desire their room rather than their company.

The next Objection is the Obstinacy of those that should Employ them according
to their Lists; some pretending they have no Employments other than for those
whom by compact they are to employ, and so will not employ such as shall be
sent unto them by the Overseers.

This Objection seldom or never needs an answer; for the resolution that may be
expected from those that are so appointed to work, not to work according to
such appointment as has been observed, will prevent the grounds of such
clamor: Yet if any shall apply to such, who either cannot, or will not Employ
them; for instance, should one that has 20 l. per Annum, he appointed to
Employ one of the Poor two days, and for his work to give him Diet, and 2 d. or
3 d. per day. If such Master will pay the Wages, which for two days may be 4 d.
or 6 d. that should excuse him for his turn, and the Workman to the next on his
Lists, and the money so to be paid, not to be paid to the Workmen, for if it
should, they will get half a dozen Masters in a day to put them off, but paid
to the Overseers, and accounted for by them, as for and with the races to the
Poor. And if any refuse to pay such small sum, which will not cost the owner of
20 l. per Annum 1 s. in a Year, considering that few or none will go round
according to such Lists, I conceive so much may be added to their rates to the
Poor beyond their usual proportion; or charged on them by a rate made for the
purpose, to be entitled, Arate made by the Churchwardens and Overseers of the
Poor, for setting on Work, and better Relief of the Poor, etc. And all to be
charged as by other rates, and those to be excused from Payment that Employ
them according to the Lists.

A Third Exception is, The trouble or difficulty in the oversight or managery
hereof.

But in one Year this Method will prevent abundance of trouble; for loose, idle
Persons being always at leisure, do often clamor for Relief when they need
none: And if their demands be not satisfied, they complain to the Justices, who
never do, nor can do less than order the Officers to come before them, to
answer, and show cause, if any, for not providing for them according to their
need, or else to relieve them according to their necessity without appearing.
And such Officers as live far from the place where the Justices meet, will
often give the Complainers far more than they need, merely to lave themselves
such a Journey, especially when they have the wit to complain in a busy time.
Whereas few or none will be willing to accept of Relief from the Parish upon
such terms, as once in a week or fortnight publicly to give an account of
their demeanor unto him to whom they will soon give die Title of
Bridewell-keeper. And many will maintain a decrepid Husband, Wife, or Child,
rather than come under such weekly Examination, whose maintenance otherwise
would not only lie on the Parish, but make all the rest of such a Family idle.

For men in Husbandry, it will be a very small trouble to procure them
Employments; it is only writing and delivering them Lists, where and at what
rates to work: And the Wages should be the less, for that the Masters may be
the willinger to Employ them, and that they may the rather get work themselves.

And for Employing Women in Spinning, Carding, etc. that trouble will be less
to the Overseers than writing and delivering Notes, for Men in Husbandry; for
one Person that usually Employs Spinsters, may Employ them all without 1 d.
damage, there being enough of such in or near most Parishes in Devon, and
scarce a Parish wherein some Weaver, Comber, or other does not Employ a good
part of the Spinsters therein. And it can be no damage to the Employer of them;
for it is certain he will pay them no more Wages than they deserve: And he is
sure in case they spoil his Goods, to be satisfied for the same by the
Officers, he proving the delivery thereof. And the Officers need not fear of
being at any great charge in making such satisfaction, for the Poor that
receive the Wool, will make satisfaction themselves, rather than be publicly
Whipped, as the 7. Jac. 7.
Law directs.

And as to the calling them to an account, that trouble scarce requires an
hours time in a fortnight; for if they work according to the appointment of the
Officers, those that Employ them will soon give an account thereof. If
elsewhere, they must satisfy the Officers thereof, or such as they shall
appoint to examine them at some time and place, once in a week or fortnight to
be limited unto them: And in case of neglect, or refusal, to be punished as is
before mentioned in the clause for setting such Poor on Work as receive no
Relief. And there is scarce a great Parish wherein there is not a Person or
two, who for 40 or 50 s. per Annum will undertake the setting up, and continual
managery thereof, which will be more than so many pounds gains to the Parish:
And in small Parishes it will be little or no trouble, and in a short time
little or none in a great one.

Another Scruple has been made by Overseers of the Poor, and some others, that
whilst the Statute by which they are constituted, only requires them to set
their Poor on Work, whether such as never received Relief for themselves or
Families from the Parish, or are not otherwise apparently Poor, may be
compelled constantly to follow some Lawful Trade or Employment. And because the
satisfying of such Officers of their Power and Duty herein, is of vast
consequence, the labor of such People, when they come to be placed in
Almshouses being small, comparatively to what it might have been when they
followed the Alehouses, etc. I shall transcribe the resolution of the Oracle
of the English Laws on another Statute, whose words are these.

By the Stat. of the 7. of K. James, tho they have Lawful means to live by; yet
if they be idle or disorderly Persons, the Justices of the Peace have power to
commit them to the House of Correction: A general and large Power given unto
them, without exception of any Person. And says further, that their Mittimus
may be more safe upon this Statute, Quia otiosa and inordinata persona; for
that he is an idle and disorderly Person, Or, that he is an idle Person, Or,
that he is a disorderly Person; according to the words of this Act, than on the
39. Eliz. with this Marginal Note here inserted. The words are in the
disjunctive.


Besides, this new Method of Catechizing will soon get the name of a new
Bridewell; and to be so Examined, will be looked on to be such a disgraceful
thing, that the beginning with two or three in a Town or Parish will affright
the rest into an orderly manner of living.

Another Exception is the obstinacy and neglect of Officers that should Employ
them, who will not take this or any other Method for setting their Poor on
work, tho the Law, and the Magistrates Order thereupon, positively require it.

The contempt, obstinacy, and neglect of Inferior Officers are in this Age as
'twere Treason-proof against all Authority, Public Interest, common Reason and
Civility, the Mare Lethi of all Laws; such swallow Oaths without the least
straining, seldom present the most apparent Offenses without being set on by
some personal Prejudice or Quarrel of their own; hence Faction and Profaneness
have their shelter. Yet tho they look on their Oaths as things of form and
insignificant, their own personal Interest is still minded. So as that those
who will not present an Offense for their Oaths sake, nor for securing the
Public Peace, nor for suppressing Profaneness, will do it to save themselves a
shilling. And now having observed where they are least Fortified, next follows
how to make an attempt there.

If the Justices of the Peace, who are emphatically, or more eminently the
Overseers of the Poor of the County, (all others being their Substitutes, and
acting by their Nomination and Order) shall be fully convinced of the great
Advantages of reforming the loose, idle, and leuder sort, and more orderly
bringing up the Children of such. If they consider what the charges of
maintaining them may otherwise in a short time come to, and what other ill
consequences may be expected from their numbers and Levelling Principles, of
which they gave some hint by their Mutineers in the late Frost. As they would
be willing, so they would find it an easy matter to cause a general
Reformation of such. And although I cannot propose as fit expedients as
themselves may know, yet presume to propose one, which doubtless will soon make
the Officers diligent therein, and consequently effect all the rest.

Informers being never wanting against any sort of Offenders whom the Justices
of Peace, or others of Worth and Quality desire to punish; whenever any that
is herein countenanced by them shall see a Person begging, or wandering, or
otherwise idly behaving himself, let him procure such Person to be warned to
appear before the two next Justices to answer for such his loose, idle, or
disorderly manner of living; and also in like manner procure the Churchwardens
and Overseers of the Poor of the Parish where such idle Person dwells, to
appear before the same Justices at the same time co answer for not providing
Work for, and setting on Work such poor Person, as the Law directs. And upon
hearing the matter, if it shall appear that such Officers have fully discharged
their Duty, in providing Work and fit Employments for such poor Person, (...)
the Person so wandering is by the positive words of (...) Law to be sent to the
Bridewell for his or her not duly ^^^^wing the same. But if such Officers
cannot prove (...) (...) that they have provided Work, etc. for such poor
Person, then they are by the same (...) Eliz. cap. 2.
(...) Law to pay 20 s. apiece for each Month (...) have so neglected: And the
Punishment of one Offi^^^^ will make an hundred others diligent to do their
Duty.

And that Informers may never be wanting, the Anci^^^ Method of Marshals (which
yet in some measure re^^^^s) may be renewed, their numbers increased, their
(...) not Yearly, as now, but proportioned to their ^^^igence and numbers of
Vagrants they Apprehend, etc.

Having been already tedious, I shall only add, that (...) will be so far from
over-stocking the County Bride^^^^ that 'twill soon eradicate the very Roots of
Idleness, (...) which so many are now brought up and prepared for (...) place.

Cum totidem quot nos habeant animasque manusque.
Dic Cur. vitam alio nequeant traducere pacto?
FINIS.

