The DUKE of Mo^nmouth's Kind Answer TO HIS Mournful Duchess Complaint, In the
time of His Absence: With the great Acknowledgement of His Princely Father's
Love, whose Mercy is beyond compare, and Pity admired by all the AEuropean
Princes.
Entered according to Order.

WHat noise is this that sounds in mine ear?
Sure it is the voice of my beloved dear;
My Noble Duchess surely does Complain
For my long absence, which does her constrain
To sigh and mourn, then mourn and drop a tear,
Ah! what is become of my beloved dear?
Where is he gone, cries she? where is he fled?
Without all doubt, my Princely Love is dead.
Were he alive I think it could not be,
That my Delight should stay so long from me
A live or dead, Love, would I were with thee.
This sound methinks does pierce me to the heart,
I mourn that I was forced from her to part:
Well, i will Return, what ever does betide,
With her to dwell, where my Soul does abide;
I come, my Duchess, do no more complain,
Thou will enjoy thy hearts Delight again:
That Princely Monarch whom I did offend,
I hope in God, once more will be my Friend;
And if my Pardon I can once obtain,
To gain the World i will never offend again:
My Soul within me bleeds, to think that I,
Was from my Father's presence forced to fly,
And then I check my self, fie! Jemmy, fie!
But if I live, mine Honor i will regain,
To wipe out that which Folly once did stain*
Through Seas of Dangers for my Father, I
Will freely venture, in his Quarrel dye;
Or gain such Honor that all shall admire
Young Jemmy's heart should to that height aspire!
Nay, and to make amends too, I will strive,
And if I can by any means contrive,
To add such Glory to my Father's Name,
That every tongue shall through the world proclaim.
And as to thee, my Duchess, if I live,
For thy true love i will Satisfaction give:
No longer for thy Jemmy shall thou mourn,
Nor drowned thy self in Tears, like one forlorn;
And every sigh thou gav'st for my amiss,
Shall be rewarded with a loving Kiss:
Sigh you, i will grieve, and when you shed a tear,
I Will hugg and comfort my beloved Dear;
Love never so well, i will strive thee to outvie,
I hate to be in debt for Constancy;
What Kindnesses soever you do show
To me, i will not one dram of Kindness owe;
For when you smile, i will smile, but if you frown
On me my Dear, you will see me sinking down;
A signal Token that I ill resent,
The Emblems of my true loves discontent.
My study now shall be to make-amends,
First to my Prince, next to my Royal Friends;
And every Friend I find that I have here,
I Will find some way or other to endear.
A Prince that sprung from such a Royal Line,
Or had a Princely Father like to mine,
Should unto Deeds of Honor still incline,
The residue of all my days i will spend
So, that the Universe shall me commend*
I Will merit Honor if it may be gained,
Ignoble Actions all shall be disdained.
And having compassed what I here do say,
With Honor lie down in my Bed of Clay;
For all the Honors that a Prince can gain,
He must from hence, not always here remain,
Then let our actions Righteous be and Just,
Princes and Peasants* all must turn to Dust,
At God's Tribunal there appear he must.
All Youthful Vigor will in time decay,
And Riches they have wings and fly away*
There Is nothing Stable underneath the Sun,
Lofty Ambition thousands has undone.
But findng more than I could well expect,
And since the Powers above do me protect*
I Will strive to merit what is bestowed on me,
And to maintain my Father's Dignity.
My Duchess I do hope, shall grieve no more,
Who for my absence was oppressed sore*
And her dear love i will certainly repay,
Her love I will ingraft, my King obey;
So that when I submit to pale-faced Death,
Who certainly must stop my murmuring breath,
Sure some kind Soul so mournfully will say,
'Twas pity Death snatched this poor Duke away.
Sure to the Power Divine I must submit,
And beg of God, Transgressions to remit;
That when at his Great Bar I shall appear,
I may be loved there as well as here.
That Monmouth's Name may never be forgot,
Whose Carcass in the Grave must lie and rot;
Yet my immortal Soul I hope will be,
Through Jesus Christ, blessed to Eternity:
A Heavenly Diadem I would obtain,
To live where Jesus does in Glory Reign,
Then shall I have no reason to complain.
FINIS.
Printed for Tho* Wright, 1683.


