THE Duke of Monmouths Triumph over all his Misfortunes.
Who is now Pardoned and Entertained at Court, by the Intercession of His Royal
Highness the Duke of YORK.
^ I.
Come Brethren of Faction, Rebellion Distraction,
throw by all your hopes of a future Success,
We are totally Routed, both Design and Action,
each hour gives us Caution to pine and look less:
Brave Monmouth we have lost him, since fortune has crossed him
he finds how by all our Intreagues he was shamed,
We all are confounded, both Whig, Rump, and Roundhead,
since Monmouth has left us to Hang and be Damned.
II.
Monmouth at Court again, we must come short again,
of making of Kings, and disposing of Crowns,
I sear our chief Plotters will sculk and desert amain,
there is nothing appears in the Heavens but frowns:
Let no Fool Dissenter, rejoice at a venture,
the Consequence tells me the Cause will be shamed;
We all are confounded, both Whig, Rump, and Roundhead,
since Monmouth has left us to Hang and be Damned.
III.
Great Monmouth, Tom draw'd him, and Shaftsbury showed him
what a short easy step it was into the Throne;
And made all the Factious and Rout to applaud him,
for leaving both Father and Uncle alone:
Now we are all blamed, and he is Entertained,
and may be advanced as he was before;
We all are confounded, both Whig, Rump, and Roundhead,
since Monmouth has loft us to Hang or live poor.
VI.
Great Monmouth we praisd' him, with Bone-fires amazed him,
and made him the God and Idol o'th Crowd,
In every County o'th Kingdom Carress'd him,
till we were all quasht and dissolved in a Cloud:
But now we must scamper and run at a venture,
he has made such discoveries we all shall be Hanged;
We all are confounded, both Whig, Rump, and Roundhead,
since Monmouth has left us to Hang or be Damned.
V.
The chief of our number, I fear will fall under
the lash of the Law, and the Hatchet and String;
For making of parties Conspiring to murder,
so lawful, so loving, so gracious a King:
Now Monmouth abhor it, he will Hang them that is for it,
great York has most bravely his pardon obtained;
We all are confounded, both Whig, Rump, and Roundhead
since Monmouth has left us to Hang and be Shamed.
VI.
There Is Thousands unnamed, that will be Arraigned,
and Godfrey's murder perhaps may be known,
A Harvest of Rebels by Ketch must be tamed,
then Charles may live happy and safe in his Throne.
Let Tom and Grays fancies, stick close to their wenches,
I fear they will be found out where e're they are ram'd;
We all are confounded, both Whig, Rump, and Roundhead,
since Monmouth has left us to Hang and be Damned.
FINIS.
Printed for J. Dean, in Cranborn- Street, in Leicester-Fields near Newport-
House, 1683.


