THE GLORY OF Chelsey College REVIVED.

Wherein is declared; I. Its Original, Progress, and Design, for preserving and
establishing the Church of Christ in purity, for maintaining and defending the
Protestant Religion against Jesuits, Papists, and all Popish Principles and
Arguments. II. How this design was by the Renowned King James, and the three
Estates of his first Parliament, highly applauded; As also by the most
Illustrious Prince Henry, and King Charles the First of ever blessed Memory,
with the Right Reverend the Bishops, etc. III. By what means this excellent
work of such incomparable use and public concernment has been impeded and
obstructed.


By JOHN DARLEY, B. D. and of Northill in the County of Cornwall Rector.

Now the Prophetess dwelt in Jerusalem in the College. 2. Chron. 34. 22. But
when diverse were hardened and believed not, but spoke evil of that way, He
departed from them and separated the disciples, disputing daily in the School
of one Tyrannus. Acts 19. 9. LONDON, Printed for J. Bourn at the South entrance
of the Royal Exchange, 1662.

(...)dell of Chelsey COLLEGE as it was intended to be built.
depiction of Chelsey College Truth shall bud out of the earth and
righteousness break down from heaven. Ps: 81. 11. This stately structure,
Royal in design
Yea more, for mighty reasons, most Divine
(Which Sov'raign's Senat's, Synods, wisdom too,
Did vote promote and fort, the Kingdom woo)
Else not malign'd so, Had it its end?
Vows Heresies to choke, Truth to defend:
Bee-hive, a Trojan horse, you may it call
Heavens fire, to Church and State for happy wall.
Hells hate, Romes horror, of our poisoned times
The best of Antidotes, to purge the crimes
Shal't sink? O shame! may't shine yet to God's glory
And sound the Parliaments aeternall story.


TO THE MOST SACRED MAJESTY, CHARLES II. OF Great Britanny, France and Ireland
KING, DEFENDER OF THE FAITH.
Most Dread Sovereign, and ever Blessed of the Lord,
MAY it suffice to show and say unto Your most High and Sacred Majesty, That
the Design of Chelsey College (which I now, in the demonstration of it,
prudently and most humbly dedicate unto Your Majesty) was first of all by Your
Royal Grandfather King James graciously and greatly applauded, whose most
excellent Sagacity having understood the wisdom of God in it, gave thereunto,
with his Parliament, it is Feat and glorious Form. Afterward it was no less
approved off by Your Royal Father of ever blessed Memory; by Him it was
abundantly Commended, who with great zeal commanded his late Archbishop Laud to
promote to the utmost this admired Design, and speedily to put it into all good
posture and Accommodation. And therefore this Plot is of most precious
Concernment in all sorts of due Reverences, for the great and incomparable
welfare of the Church of Christ: For so it was in the real and tender account
of those Noble Sons of Honor and true prudency of the first Parliament of Your
Royal Grandfather: which is therefore above all recommended to Your Gracious
Majesty, whom the most High and Holy One has so Miraculously Preserved, so
wonderfully and blessedly Restored, to be in many things and ways the Repairer
of decayed Persons and Places. And especially, because the Case and Dignity of
Chelsey College had a known and very large interest in the pious affections of
Your famous and Glorious Uncle, Prince Henry, which he set his heart upon, to
get immortal Honor by his most endeared favor and Princely respects
thereunto, studying with all his power and prudence to advance this College to
be the Pillar, yea, the standing and living Monument of his flourishing Fame
and deserved Glory. But the Lord made and found him fully ripe for his
Celestial Throne; that he might make Your Blessed Father (the Mirror of
Princes) most fit to sway the Scepter of these Kingdoms, whose Princely
Affections and Commands were full of integrity for the Completing of this Seat
and Nurse of Learning and Truth. Now, if Your Majesty shall be pleased in
regard of this, with the aforesaid respects, to espouse this College, and to
meditate the perfecting of it, for the most Blessed employment thereof; oh
then, how shall the Hearts and Tongues of all Good men (whose eyes behold You
as most Happy, propense, and Precious) bless Your Sacred Self, and multiply
their delight and most holy Prayers in and for You, that from the first entering
upon Your temporal, You readily Contemplate to make this Your eternal Praise
and Dignity? The rather let Your most Admired Majesty humbly be beseeched to
set Your Kingly Countenance on this Design of so much weight and worth, for
that the King of Kings has in his amazing and astonishing way of
never-to-be-forgotten Mercy, now at length, like Noah's Dove, returned You
without Gall (in all gracious Clemency) with an Olive hopeful branch of
long-desired and blessed Peace into the Ark of our most happy Church and State;
where, let the High and Lofty One ever delight in and over Your Majesty to do
You good, with the Richest and Choicest Blessings of this and the next life
poured out both into and upon Your gracious Heart and Head. And the Lord grant
that You may be Crowned with the Glory of a long, prosperous, and uninterrupted
Reign over us, That holy Truth and Peace being perfected, You may so have the
Heavenly and eternal Kingdom begun in You,

which is The utmost flame of the zeal of the most holy and hearty Prayer of
the humblest of Your Majesty's liege Subjects, JOHN DARLEY.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
IF thou shall wonder that a Man so near his grave, and withal so far from
Chelsey, should labor to revive and give a Resurrection to a Design so long
buried in its dust; let me then assure thee, it is not from any hope or desire
of self-preferment in this world, being daily about to strike sail, and run my
aged, weak, and infirm vessel into the harbor of Common (but sure) Rest. Nor
is it from any Corrupt Principle of Vainglory and applause. That were to leave
my spirit in the greatest darkness, by sinning against the clear Light of
Knowledge taught in the Princely Preacher, Prove. 25. 27. For Men to search
their own Glory, is no Glory. But forasmuch as some broken thoughts upon this
Subject had for sundry years last past lain by me, which were perused by some
of my Judicious Friends and Faithful Fellow Laborers in the Gospel, after a
review, they exhorted me to print my Schedules and papers in these
Halcyon-times (and to trust the Lord with Issues, who can make this good work
so Joyfully begun, yet to flourish for Sion's higher Rise, and Babylon's deeper
Ruin.) Which I have done, not so much in full hope of effecting what I would,
as being unwilling to refuse them, and desirous of making trial: for I had
rather (as Peter du Moulin once said) that Godly and Learned men should find in
me want of Prudence, then accuse me of Negligence. Besides, some Worthies
having gone before me in this way, I was thereby further persuaded to cast my
Mite into their treasury, that they might be thankfully remembered by me, and
diligently followed by others. Again, that which did set a little sharper Edge
on my willingness herein was, that I might take an occasion to clear the
innocence of Dr Feately, (the late Provost of Chelsey College, and one that is
honored in his dust for his known Virtues, eminent Piety, abundant Learning,
and Labors) somewhat blotted by Dr Fuller's pen, proceeding rather (in my
Judgment of Charity) from an Error in his Judgment, then Will. But that which
principally moved me was, a clear persuasion of heart, how much the perfecting
and completing of this College would contribute Glory to God, Honor to the
true Religion, encouragement to Learning and Learned men in every Age; what
invincible help and assistance it might afford our Gracious King and his Royal
Successors against the many subtle and unwearied Adversaries of Christ's
Kingdom, Gospel, Faith, Doctrine, and holy Discipline; lastly, what cheerful
and beautiful light of divine and heavenly knowledge, what soul-reviving and
refreshing satisfaction the Lords People in these three Nations (yea, in all
the world) continually in every Age and Condition might receive from the
Studies, Disputations, and Writings of such eminentlyqualified Persons, as
ought to have been chosen into the Orthodox Society and Learned Fellowship of
this College, so richly provided for, and happily accommodated with
encouragements of every kind. Prolixity must be avoided: I therefore reine in,
imploring the choicest Blessings of Heaven upon my Dear Sovereign, his Royal
Relations, and Great Council, that the work of Righteousness may be Peace, and
the effect of Righteousness Quietness and Assurance in our Land. Now the Great
Counselor give thee (Good Reader) peace, and understanding in all things, and
that by all Means.

Which is the Prayer of the unworthiest of those that serve thee in the Faith,
JOHN DARLEY.

Erratum.
Page 7. lin. 3. ( for, read ( but.

THE GLORY OF CHELSEY COLLEGE REVIVED.
I Shall not by any needless flourish of my own words begin this Treatise of
CHELSEY College, but First, deliver the disert words of the Act of Parliament
made in the seventh year of King James of Blessed Memory in the behalf of the
same College; as also a Declaration published by Authority in the year 1616.
concerning the Reasons that moved his Majesty and the State to erect the same
(God assisting me) as I find it diligently Collected and extracted to my hand
by the Author of the most Remarkable Monuments of London and the Precincts
thereof: Then, Secondly, give you Bishop Hall's Judgment and Recommendation,
with Dr. Fuller his more special report of it; as also Mr. Baxter's Instigation
for it, and Grounds of the Necessity of prudent provision of Able and adequate
Men for the work: And so I shall in the Conclusion add something concerning
Dr. Sutcliffe his being the first Mover (under God) to advance the design in
this beginning of the Embryo that it now appears in. Thirdly, I shall intimate
the Obstructions and Impediments of it: Fourthly, adjoin some prevalent Motives
for the Renewing, or rather the reviving of the Design to it is original
intended perfection: Fifthly, stop the mouth of the chiefer Objections against
it: Sixthly, propose the means (though in these hard and Exhausted times) to
complete it: Lastly, conclude with prayer for Grace, Grace unto it.

First, The Abstract of the Act runs thus:

Whereas his Majesty, of his Royal and zealous Care for the defense of true
Religion now established within this Realm of England, and for the Refuting of
Errors and Heresies repugnant to the same, has been graciously pleased by his
Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England, to found a College in Chelsey
near London, and therein to place certain Learned Divines, and to incorporate
the same by the Name of the Provost and Fellows of the College of King James in
Chelsey, of the foundation of the same James King of England; and has of his
most gracious Goodness and Bounty not only endowed the same with certain Lands,
Privileges and Immunities, but has also, for their further Maintenance and
sustentation, given unto them a Capacity and Ability to receive and take from
his Majesty, or any of his Loving Subjects, any Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments, Gifts, Benefits and Profits whatsoever, not exceeding in the
whole the yearly value of three thousand pounds, as in and by the said Letters
Patents does more at large appear: And whereas also it is manifest and evident,
that the bringing in of such streams of Running water to the City of London is
very convenient, necessary and profitable, as well for the private use of such
as shall rent the same, for the help of cleansing the said City in the time of
sickness, and preserving the same against all sudden Adventures of fire, etc.
whereby they had the free Grant of and for draining the field and Marshes
between the Bridge called Lock-bridge in or near the parish of Hackney in the
County of Middlesex, and the Bridge called Bow-bridge at Straford-Bow, in the
parish of Stepney in the said County, etc. Which by reason of the Ample Grant,
may seem to be a Royal Privilege indeed; yet by reason of the vast Labor and
Cost, not only of digging and trenching, but of buying leave of the owners of
the grounds, fields and limitations, may seem (with Reverence be it spoken, and
regard had to Clergymen not versed in such Affairs) not only like that in
Holland, but somewhat resembling that of Hercules his Labor of cleansing
Augeas his stable, wherein 3000 Oxen so long were tied up, by drawing the River
Alpheus to run through it. When I consider the many Provisions in that Grant,
it appears somewhat like the Arduousness of their task and undertaking.
Notwithstanding Christian duty ought (especially when backed with so many
advantageous encouragements) to swallow up greater difficulty. It is the most
holy exhortation Jude 3. Earnestly to contend for the Faith once delivered to
the Saints. And it is the delight of the Holy One, to behold his enabled
Servants studying and laboring to ridd the Land of the immense Dunghill of
Errors and Heresies; which is not for every hand that can make of Scripture
fine Posies in Preaching, but are too tender to pluck up or thrust away thorns:
this can be done only by men fenced with Iron, and the staff of a spear, 2 Samuel 23. 6, 7. And this above all is now (if ever) especially to be looked
unto, that the Cause of Christ be not betrayed and lost in this Age abounding
with so many Antichristian deceipts.

A brief declaration of the Reasons that moved his Majesty and the State to
erect a College of Divines and other Learned men at Chelsey; together with a
Copy of his Majesty's Letters in favor of the same, and an Addition of some
Motives very forceable to excite the zeal of good Christians to a voluntary and
liberal Contribution.
Understanding by experience that want of Information has much hindered men's
Devotion in Contributing toward the Erection and Donation of Chelsey College,
We have thought it very fit, together with his Majesty's Letters, seconded by
my Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, to declare the Reasons that caused this work
to be undertaken, and to add such Motives as we have supposed may be most
effectual to give satisfaction to his Majesty's desire, and perfection to this
Honorable Design.

First, It was considered, That the Popes Agents traveled Sea and Land, wrote
Books in favor of their Faction, devised Lies and Slanders to bring Religion
and Professors thereof into hatred, and not sparing any standing in their way,
by falsehood and Treachery oppugned Kings and Princes that could not endure the
Popes Tyrannical Government: and to this end, men of ready Wits, good Speech,
long Experience and competent Learning, have been maintained in Colleges,
furnished with Books, helped with Counsel and Direction, bound with Laws and
Oaths to uphold the Papal Hierarchy and Heresy, and (which moves most with
most men) encouraged with great Promises and large Rewards: Whereunto albeit
private men, piously affected, have from time to time opposed themselves; yet
because they wanted encouragement to undertake so great a labor, Counsels of
the Ancients to direct them, Books and Libraries to instruct them, Forms of
proceedings to keep them in compass, and Rewards to maintain them, (those
excepted that are due for Ecclesiastical Cures) it was further advised, That to
make a sufficient defense for the Truth of Religion and Honor of the State,
and a strong and continued opposition against the continued Lies, Slanders,
Errors, Heresies, Sects, Idolatries, Blasphemies of our Adversaries, that it
was necessary to unite our forces, and to appoint special men that without
other distraction might attend the Cause of Religion and of the State; being
furnished with Directions, Instructions, Counsels, Books, Presses, competent
Maintenance, and other necessaries.

This then was the reason why this College by his Majesty and the State was
first designed, and a Corporation granted, with large Privileges, viz. That a
select number of Divines and others should be gathered together into one body,
and united with one form of Laws, and there maintained, who being furnished
with Books, and directed by men of experience and action, might always be
ready to maintain our Christian Faith, to answer the Adversaries Calumniations
as well against Religion as the State, to defend the Majesty of Kings and
Princes against the Usurpation of Popes, the Liberty of Christians against the
yoke of Superstition, to supply the defect of Teaching where Appropriations
have devoured Ministry, by Teaching and Conference to convince the obstinate
Papist and Atheist, and by all means to maintain Truth and discover Falsehood.

This is the College commended to his Majesty, and intended by the State, and
easy to be perfected, if it please all true Christians to further it with
their help and favor, according to some proportion of their means.

His Majesty's Letters directed to my Lord of Canterbury follow in these words.
Right trusty and welbeloved Counselor, We greet you well.
Whereas the Enemies of the Gospel have been forward to write and publish Books
for confirming of Erroneous Doctrine and impugning the Truth, and now of late
seem more careful then before to send daily into Our Realms such their
Writings, whereby Our loving Subjects, though otherwise wel-disposed, may be
seduced, unless some remedy thereof should be provided: We, by the advice of
Our Council, have lately granted a Corporation, and given Our allowance for
erecting a College at Chelsey, for learned Divines to be employed to write (as
occasion shall require) for maintaining the Religion professed in Our Kingdoms,
and confuting the oppugners thereof. Whereupon Dr Sutcliffe, designed Provost
of the said College, has now humbly signified unto Us, that upon diverse
promises of help and assistance toward the erecting and indowing the said
College, he has at his own Charge begun and well preceeded in the building, as
does sufficiently appear, by a good part thereof already set up in the place
appointed for the same.

We therefore, being willing to favor and further such a Work, will and
require you to write your Letters to the Bishops of your Province, signifying
unto them in Our Name that Our Pleasure is, they deal with the Clergy and
others of their Diocese, to give their charitable Benevolence for the
perfecting of this good work so well begun.

And for the better performance of Our desire, We have given order to the said
Provost and his Associates, to attend you and others unto whom it may
appertain, and to certify Us from time to time of their Proceeding.

Thetford the 5th of May, 1616.

These Letters the Lord of Canterbury, Archbishop, sends abroad to the
Bishops of his Province, and secondeth them, in these terms.

Now because it is so Religious and Pious a work, conducing both to God's Glory
and the saving of many Souls within this Kingdom, I cannot but wish that all
devout and well-affected persons, should by your self and the Preachers in your
Diocese, as well publicly as otherwise, be excited to contribute in some
measure to so holy an intendment, now well begun. And although these and the
like motions have been frequent in these latter times: yet let not those whom
God has blessed with any wealth be weary of well-doing, that it may not be
said, that the Idolatrous and Superstitious Papists be more forward to advance
their Falsehood, then we are to maintain God's Truth. Whatsoever is collected, I
pray your Lordship may be carefully brought in to me; partly, that it pass not
through any defrauding hand; partly, that His Majesty may be acquainted with
what is done in this behalf.

Your Lordships very loving Brother, G. Canterb.


The like Letters are written to my Lord Chancellor, and my Lord Mayor of
London.

So that by this that has been said it must manifestly appear, that Chelsey
College has not only King James his Majesty's and his first full Parliament's
and Convocation's (the entire representative body, with the Head of Church and
State) but that of the prime Powers and Prudencies of both of them, the
Archbishops, the Chancellor, and the Lord Mayor of London, the acclamation of
their Energetical Prudence and Zeal.

By these Letters it may appear that this College is not an idle Project merely
of any private man, but a most Pious Work, projected, or rather approved and
applauded, by the King and State (for Dr Sutcliffe must have the eternal
Honor, in that his most pious and sedulous wisdom moved the first stone, as
from God, about it;) and that all that profess Religion, and desire the
continuance and advancement thereof, yea, all that honor his Majesty, and wish
the prosperity of the State, and desire the increase of Learning, have Interest
therein, and I hope shall receive comfort, content and good satisfaction by the
same, if they put their hands and hearts unto it.

Being then such a work of Piety, for the maintenance of true Religion, who can
be accounted truly Pious and Religious, and yet yield no help to advance it?
Being a Project to maintain the honor of the State, what good Subject will not
contribute to set forward this Project? But to touch only the point of Gods
Honor, Prove. 3. 9.
let us remember the words of the Wise man, Honor the Lord with thy substance:
let us also consider what the Lord himself says, 1 Samuel 2. 30.
Them that honor me, I will honor; and they that despise me, shall be
despised. Now who can say that he honors God, that suffers him by
Idolatry, Superstition, Blasphemy, to be dishonored, and will give nothing to
suppress Baal's Priests, but is content that the Pope be worshipped like the
Idol Bell? Can God's Honor stand with the Superstition, Heresy, Idolatry and
Blasphemy of Papists, and the Profaneness of Atheists? It is not sufficient
for true Christians to profess true Religion, but they must with zeal maintain
it, and with heart abhor, and with hand suppress Idolatry and Superstition. Who
will rise up with me against the wicked? Psalm. 94. 16.
says the Prophet. And Psalm. 139. 21. he says, he hated those that hated the
Lord, with a perfect hatred. The Law Deuteronomy. 13. is direct against such as entice
us to serve other Gods: our eye may not pity them, nor may we show mercy unto
them; no although they be our brothers, our wives that lie in our bosoms.

An odious thing also it is either to suffer Truth to be suppressed, or Lies to
be received. St. Augustine, in his Epistle ad Casulanum, says, it is a foul
Fault to hide Truth, as well as to tell Lies: Vterque reus est, and qui
veritatem occultat, and qui mendacium dicit Chrysostom Hom. 25. in Matthew. does
charge him to be a traitor to Truth, that dares not boldly utter it, to defend
it. Non ille solum est proditor veritatis, qui veritatem transgrediens, pro
veritate mendacium loquitur; sed etiam qui non libere veritatem pronuntiat,
quam pronuntiare tenetur, aut non libere veritatem defendit, quam libere
defendere convenit.

Some suppose that Christianity and Popery may stand together, and themselves
as Newters stand between both, or as Mediators would reconcile both. But can
Christ be reconciled to Antichrist? There is no Concord between Christ and
Belial (says the Apostle) 2 Cor. 6. 15, 16. Upon which place Dr. Featly's
Paraphrase is here fitly to be inserted. Mark the Apostles Gradation (says he)
What fellowship has Righteousness with unrighteousness? what Communion has
Light with da^kness? and lastly, what Concord has Christ with Belial? No more
agreement may we have, who are temples of the Living God, with Idols. There is
great opposition between Righteousness and unrighteousness, greater between
Light and darkness, greatest of all between Christ and Belial. Righteousness
and unrighteousness, the one being a Virtue and the other a Vice, are opposed
contrarily; but Light and darkness privatively, which is a greater opposition:
but Christ and Belial contradictorily, which is the greatest of all.
Righteousness and unrighteousness so opposite, as that they cannot subsist in
the same Soul; Light and darkness so opposite, as that they cannot subsist in
the same room; Christ and Belial so opposite, as that they cannot subsist in
the same heaven. Righ^eousness fights with unrighteousness wheresoever it
meets with it, Gal. 5. 17. But Light does more, it presently banisheth
darkness. But Christ does yet more, he utterly confounds Belial. So true
Religion not only fights with all Heresy and Superstition wheresoever it
meets with it, but banisheth it, and in the end confounds it. Dr. Featly
Vertum. Romans p. 156. No Toleration then of false and true Religion together (no
more then truce of the Dog and the Hyaena, Ecclus. 13. 18.) No halting, no
halfing between God and Baal, no sodering of Religion; no pulling of Rome to
Protestancy, no more then the Fisher's pulling the Rock to his Boat, who the
more he pulls, the more he brings his Boat to the Rock. The Bishop of the
Church of Pergamus was reproved for suffering them that taught the doctrine of
Balaam, and the Bishop of Thyatira for permitting Jezabel to teach and to
deceive the people. And shall the Church of England any longer suffer the
Romish Balaamites, the false Priests of Baal (maintained by the Romish Jezabel
and her Consorts) to seduce God's people? The false Priests of Bell used all
Arts and cunning practices to deceive, and now will not suffer any Religion but
that of their God Bell, the Pope. And shall not true Christians use equal
diligence to maintain holy Truth, most pure Protestant, holy and saving Truth,
and suppress Popery, and all other Idolatrous and false Religions? Ingemui
(fateor) (says Hierome) minus nobis inesse voluntatis ad propugnandum
veritatem, quam inest illis cupiditas ad inculcandum mendacium. I sighed (says
he) seeing less desire in us to defend Truth, then in our Adversaries to
maintain Lies. Are not here motives of moment enough to be mighty with any that
have any true tender Conscience, more then to persuade them, even to make them
zealous after the Work? Yet there is added more yet moving ones, as follows.

The College being erected then for the maintenance of Truth and God's true
Service, and for a resolute opposition against Errors and false worship of God,
it cannot but please God and content godly men, if it be helped onward. The
same also will be a means to increase Learning, and prevent the dangers of
places haunted with the spirits of Antichrist, the Jesuits and Mass-Priests;
and therefore cannot choose but be well accepted of all that either desire a
learned Ministry, or love Learning. Finally, seeing the Church has received no
greater dishonor by any then by insufficient and unlearned Churchmen; I hope
this may be a means to recover some part of their lost Honor.

Wherefore, whether we regard the Service of God, or the Honor we owe unto the
King, or the love we bear unto our Country and State, and above all, that which
omnes omnium complectitur charitates, the Piety to our Church, let us not show
our selves sparing and backward in yielding our aid to set forward a Work so
religious and profitable for the Church, so honorable for the State, so
necessary in regard of our Adversaries Malice, and the defects and
discouragement of our own Forces. Other Collections have been either for
private persons, or Strangers, or places remote, or matters concerning some
particular occasions: This concerns a general good, and touches every man both
in Honor and Conscience. Heretofore we have endeavored to maintain Religion,
and favor others abroad: let us not therefore now neglect our selves, and our
own honor and profit and necessary service at home. Neither let any man think
it strange, that a work of such greatness should be advanced by this weak
means; or that a Project so necessary should proceed so slowly. Almighty God,
albeit sufficient, yet would have his own Tabernacle built by the voluntary
Offerings of his own people. Speak (says he to Moses Exodus 25. 1, 2, etc.) to
the children of Israel, that they bring me an offering of every man, whose
heart gives it freely: and Exodus 36. 3. there it follows, they brought still
unto Moses free gifts every morning, and they ceased not till they were stayed
from offering. King Solomon likewise was greatly helped in the building of the
Temple by the contribution of his Subjects, as appears by the words of
Scripture, 1 Chronicles. 29. 6, 7. Further, by voluntary Offerings and Contributions
the Temple was repaired by Joash, 2 Kings 12. and by Josiah 2 Chronicles. 34. And
this has been the use and practice of ancient times, in building and endowing
most famous Churches, Colleges, Schools, and other monuments of Religion and
Learning, both in our own and other Countries. Our Adversaries by this course
have had means to build many Monasteries, Colleges and Schools, for their
Jesuits and Friars, as propugnacles of Superstition, Heresy and Idolatry, and
Antichrist his Tyranny, to uphold and make good their own Corruptions in
Religion, and Usurpations upon the Magistrates Government, and every Christian
man's Liberty. And this have they done not only in Europe, but also in the
Indies; and not only one in every Kingdom, but in some States diverse, and
almost in every City one. And shall not our flourishing Kingdom build and endow
one College for the maintenance of God's true Service, and the Honor of the
whole State? It were a dishonor to our Nation, and the whole Church and State,
to think the contrary.

The work has (we confess) hitherto proceeded slowly; and no marvel, seeing
great works are not easily achieved. Noa^'s Arc, God's Tabernacle and Temple,
and famous Schools and Colleges, albeit founded by Kings and great men, were
long in building: and do we wonder that this College is not yet finished?
Further, it pleased God to deprive us of Prince Henry, our principal hope, and
the chief Author of this Design. Lastly, who knows whether God has
appointed these weak Means to set forward a great Work, that his Power in our
Weakness might have the whole Glory?

Let us therefore (good Brethren and Countrymen, yea Christians) hearken
willingly to his Majesty's motion, and readily follow his Example: Let it
appear by our Bounty, how blessedly zealous we are to maintain the everlasting
Truth, and to root out Error and Idolatry: Let us by effects declare how
studious we are to do good works, and to advance God's and our Churches
honor. They that have much may give of their abundance; the rest, according to
the measure of their means: God as well accepts of the widows mite and poor
man's good will, as of the rich man's treasure.

If we honor God with our substance, he will honor us, and increase our
substance: if we build an house for the maintenance of his Truth, that it may
continue in our Posterity, God will build us an house, restore it to us, and
double it to our Posterity. Abraham by offering his son to God, was made a
Father to many Sons, yea and of many Nations. And Solomon, that showed his
Royal magnificence in building God a Temple, in Honor and Riches passed all
other Kings, 1 Kings 3. 13. How can we excuse our selves at the last day, if we
now deny God a small Offering, who daily offers unto us many Graces, and
gives to us all good things that we possess? Psalm. 68. 9, 10. Yea, our souls
are a sacrifice due unto him, 1 Cor. 6. 20. and Romans 12. 1. And then much more
our external things. And therefore no Christian may deny to him an offering out
of his wordly goods, if God's service (for God's members and Church) require
it. That in 1 These. 5. 23. and, indeed, whatsoever it is that we have, more or
less, is God's; and whatsoever we give, we give unto God but of his own, which
he has first given unto us, 1 Chronicles. 29. 14. For all that is in heaven and
earth is his. For the Lords is the Kingdom, and he is to be exalted as head
above all. Both riches and honor come of him, and he reigns over all, and in
his hand is power and might, and in his hand it is to make great and to give
strength unto all, 1 Chronicles. 29. 11, 12.

As for those that draw back in this his Service, and refuse to concur in
promoting God's Honor, let them mark the words of our Savior, Matthew. 12. 30.
He that is not with me is against me: and the Curse of the Angel on the people
of Meroz, Curse ye Meroz (says the Angel) for they came not up to help the
Lord.

But we hope we shall not need many more words, to move them that are (already)
so well persuaded, nor persuade men that in Religion and Devotion are so
forward, who know and take to heart that severe increpation of the Prophet Esaias
32, 6, 7, 8. against the evil-eyed, hard-hearted, fast-handed Churl, and vile
man; but withal, that the liberal devises liberal things, and by liberal
things (especially in this kind) he shall stand: for he sowes unto the spirit
Gal. 6. 8. to reap life everlasting.

It is the duty of good Christians to advance God's Honor, and repress
Superstition, Heresy, Idolatry, Blasphemy. It is the office of good Subjects
to defend the Honor of the State against the Sycophancies of English
Fugitives, and the secret practices of foreign Enemies their adherents. The
Adversaries using all their skill, and joining their forces against Religion
and the State; it behooves us likewise to unite our forces, and to join in
Confultation how to resist them. This Common business requires Common help;
the practice of our Adversaries provokes us to use speed; and there is too much
precious time already let run in waste, almost, if not altogether, or more then
full forty years, from the first Commencement. And since the Work has been let
lie absolutely dormant, if not dead, what tares of Heresies of all sorts has
the Vigilant and indefatigable envious man sown and fomented, as in the field
of the sluggard? so as there is nothing appearing but Camelions of monstrous
uncouth Errors.

The Quality of the work, being for the defense of true [pure] Religion, and
the State, will move any (whose heart is not hardened and leavened in errors)
cheerfully to give: For whosoever shall give, shall receive of God a full
reward in this Life, and when they dye, their works shall follow them; and then
whatsoever they have sown in righteousness on earth, that shall they reap in
heaven in mercy; whatsoever they contributed to God's work on earth, they shall
be rewarded in heaven, measure heaped together and running over into their
bosoms.

Wherefore recommending the College of Chelsey to every Religious Christians
devout thoughts, we cease further to press them, but only desire them, in the
words of St Paul, respectively to the excellency of this good deed, in
advancing and laying out themselves, to advance this College; Whatsoever things
are true, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are honest, and lovely,
and of good report; If there be any virtue, any praise, think upon these
things, Phil. 4. 8.

Lastly, for satisfaction of those that desire to know why this College is
erected at Chelsey, and not in one of the Universities, this we thought fit to
add; That this place was thought fittest to receive directions from our
Superiors, to consult with men of best experience, to obtain intelligence from
foreigne parts, to print books and to disperse them, and lastly, to obtain the
favor of the State and City. Farther, hereby as all emulation may be avoided,
so the help of both the Universities may as well be had by intercourse, as if
the College stood in either of the Universities. Thus all things now stand, God
bless the proceeding of this College, etc. and give Grace, Grace unto it.

Thus have you (by the Author of the remarkable Monuments of, and in, and about
London) a just and full Narrative of Chelsey College in the Constitution, Cause
moving and promoving, sovereign care and solicitation, the use and ends of it,
with some fair and forward Provision for it, and great and gracious motives of
persuasion to stir up men's hearts to contribute, and that not in a sparing but
liberal way, unto it, and not to let the Gates sink in the foundation of it,
Lament. 2. 9. The Affair, not only auspicated by King James his wisdom, but
forwarded by his zealous care in writing unto and calling upon the Archbishop,
and in his writing to the Bishops, and the Chancellor of England, and the Lord
Mayor of London; as also the Pithananches of vulgar prudence, either from the
grave Archbishop himself, or some one of the Reverend Fellows, as I gather from
the latter words of his goads, of his wise words, where he says, that the
reason of this College it is fitness to be more respectively at Chelsey, is
because of receiving directions from our Superiors. In which exhortation, even
in the whole carriage of it, I appeal unto the Godliest Judgments, whether he
has not spoken as with the tongue not only of men, but as of an Angel of God;
so that now, nihil supra.

And yet to him let me join or add another Angel of our Church, Doctor Joseph
Hall, sometimes our Diocesane Bishop of Exceter, afterward of Norwich, who,
upon this Commencing of Chelsey College, may well come after and second the
business, as Nathan after Bathsheba; who in his Peacemaker (wherein he most
truly says, one of the principal means of Peacemaking in the Church and State
for ever is, by absolute silencing of Schismatics and Heresies) is pleased in
his prudence to show and say, and set down at full his Judgment of this
Chelsey College, suppositively, if promoted and perfected, and so according to
the end prosecuted and adorned, as to be the undoubted and blessed means both
to purify Truth, and to set up Peace for ever; not Peace alone without Truth,
nor Truth alone without Peace, but both Peace and Truth together, as the two
Chapiters upon Solomon's two pillars with their carved works, called Jachim and
Boaz, that Establishment, and this Strength, 1 Kings 7. 21. For the most
reverend Bishop and Father in God, (as I must ever in honor mention him) in
that precious piece of his Peacemaker, (for which he must of future
Generations be blessed) O that he had not had the fate of Cassandra, to
prophecy truth, but not to be believed and obeyed! For upon rich grounds, his
divinely-illuminated heart, foreseeing the Calamities which turbulent spirits
in malcontents would bring by storm, through Civil Wars and intestine
Contentions, bethought himself (as a true Prometheus) of this Remedy, showed to
K. James and to his Parliament, (whilst God's Good Spirit was with them and in
them, and before he suffered the Evil spirit, the foul and Rebellious spirit,
to possess the hearts of Belials, to open the postern to act his horrid deeds
of darkness.) He foreseeing (I say) yea presuming, that if the design of
Chelsey College had been advanced into a forwardness, and faithfully effected,
so as to have made choice of and placed these 20 Colleagues, with two
Historians, sworn to defend the public professed Truth of our Church,
according to the Articles, they might have effected so much by their wisdom,
as with a Caduceus to have stilled the furious spirits of very many bad ones,
and so charmed them to have worshipped the blessed Peace of God, and so
prevented a world of Blood, Mischief and Confusion and Misery, and still
pestilent Conspiracies, to souls as well as bodies on all sides, that we might
have enjoyed to this day the blessed of the Lord, and so only have fed and
feasted with the banquet of the Peace of the kingdom of God in our Consciences,
and they have had all their Donatives and Honors blessed unto them: The Bishop
represents his Judgment (respectively about Chelsey College) thus.

It is Great pity (says he) that the late Chelseyan Project was suffered so
foully to fall to the ground; whereof had not the Judicious King seen that
great use might have been made of it, he had not condescended to so gracious
Privileges as his Majesty was pleased to enrich it withal.

The wise and Learned Prince well observed how great an advantage our
Adversaries have of us in this kind, who come with conjoined forces (on every
side being ready to be ingruent upon us with preparations, as floodgates set
open and enlarged) whilst we stand upon single resistance. And therefore,
without a mavelous providence of Almighty God, we might have verified the old
word, Dum singuli pugnant, universi vincuntur. Blessed be God, the world has
had ample proof of single (yet singularly) learned Champions, and seen and
heard such learned Advocates to plead for the Protestant Profession, such
Stephens, such Jewels, such Mortons, such Fields, Whites, Abbotts, Reynolds,
Featlyes; who (that is Featly especially) alone, as in single duel, incountred
abroad in France, Dr Bagshaw and Smith, and at home in England, alone also
sustained and incountred Fisher, Sweet, Eaglestone, Everard, Muskett, and ever
came off from all intaminatis honoribus: as also University Professors, Peter
Martyr, Holland, Prideaux, Whitakers, Collins; so as one has been able, in
Spiritual Polemicks, to resist a thousand.

But if these heads and hands have been so powerful, what would they have done
if united together? Ne Hercules contra eorum Duos. Certainly none of these
upstarts, pernicious, prodigious late Heresies, would have stood before them,
[For the Associating Divines of the Province of London, in their testimony to
the Truth of Jesus, in detecting and detesting the Errors and Heresies, have
given them their deadly wound] nor have breathed so long under their hands, to
have brought such Disturbances [yea such Distractions, Schisms, Factions,
Divisions, as of late we have seen to have crept in, with their infestings
amongst us, and to be lamented, if not possible by single hands to be
amoliated, making our present England an African Scene of new Heretical
swarming Monsters, threatening an hellish Chaos of Libertinisme, Licentiousness,
etc. But yet (if Chelsey College find favor) I hope that Rome's word of hope,
for all their insulting, may never be found to be verified upon us: I will set
(and men shall see it) the Egyptians against the Egyptians; that is (say they)
the Protestants against the Protestants, the Lutherans against the Calvinists;
as Bishop Morton reports it, and Breerly has seemed to have done it; as Bishop
Morton (I say) in his Catholic Appeal to Breerly the Priest in his
Protestants Plea.]

But if we may not be so happy to see such a sure established Preservation of
holy Truth and Peace, Zach. 8. 16, 19. (as our Palladium, or holy Arc, which
will keep us safe unto Salvation, so long as we keep it) it will be requisite
yet, that order be taken, that none may be allowed to enter into the lists to
maintain the Combat with Heretical seducers, but those who (upon egregious
experiment) are approved Champions. For certainly there cannot be a greater
advantage to prevalency of Error, then a weak oppugnation. I remember St
Austine professes in his Manicheism, this was it that heartned him, that he met
with feeble Opponents, and such as his nimble wit was able easily to overturn.
When therefore any overbold Champion shall step forth, and cast down his
Gauntlet in defiance of Truth, it is fit that he be incountred with an
Assailant that has brawn in his Arms and marrow in his bones; [and holy spirit
in his head and heart] not with some weak and wearyish Combatant, whose heart
may be, as his hand is, feeble, and so may rather betray the better Cause with
an imprudent and impotent managing.

Now this strong plea for Chelsey College thus far having so much
Sanctuary-weight in it and witness for it, I need not add any grain more to
it, for it will hold certainly current in the balance of sanctified Judgment,
so that it will be vanity to draw a line after Protogenes. But yet further, for
the establishing your Judgments and the attracting of your Affections, in the
third place (for A threefold cord is not easily broken; and, Under the mouth of
three witnesses shall every word be established, 2 Cor. 13. 1.) let me produce
the venerable Relation and Judgment of one who may be well called a
Chrysostom, and so be joined with a Bishop, that is, Dr Thomas Fuller, out of
his Church History.

This College was intended (says he) for a spiritual Garrison [of Stationary
Church-Champions] with a Magazine of books to that purpose [as a well-furnished
Armory] where learned Divines should study, and write in maintenance of all
Controversies against the Papists [the grand Wolves, and also against the
subserving Heresies of the little Foxes.] Indeed the Romanists in this may rise
up and condemn those of the Protestant Profession: for as Solomon used not his
Military men for any servile work in building the Temple, whereof the text
assigns the reason, For they were men of war: so the Romish Church does not
burden their Professors with Preaching, or any Parochial encumbrances, but
reserves them only for Polemical exercises and studies; whereas in England the
same man Reads, Preaches, Catechises, Disputes, delivers Sacraments, etc. so
that were it not for God's mavelous blessings on our studies, and the
infinite odds of truth on our side, it were (in humane probability) impossible
that we should hold up the bucklers against them.

And further, this College was further intended to be Acted with 20 choicer
School-divines, and to have amongst them two able and prudent Historians, to be
maintained in this College, faithfully and learnedly to record and publish all
memorable passages in Church and Commonwealth.

And further, this College or Corporation was to consist of such a competent
and steady number of Divines, as I said before, at least 20. And let us hear Dr
Fuller's going on still, to furnish us with the first List of first Heroes who
engaged themselves to be on the Frontiers, our Scipioes and Fulminae belli.

1. Matthew Sutcliffe, Deane of Exceter, Provost, and Promoter of this College,
a man worthy to be Captain, because a Champion, whose skill as well as zeal,
whose Art as well as heart, adorned him with Prudence as well as spirit. 2.
John Overall Deane of Paul's. 3. Thomas Morton Deane of Winchester. 4. Richard
Field Deane of Gloucester. 5. Robert Abbott. 6. John Spencer. 7. Miles Smith.
8. William Covett. 9. John Howson. 10. John Layfield. 11. Benjamin Carrier. 12.
Martin Fotherby. 13. John Boys. 14. Richard Brett. 15. Peter Lilly. 16. Francis
Burley. Doctors of Divinity.
17. William Hellier Archdeacon of Barnstable. 18. John White Fellow of
Manchester College. 19. William Cambden Clarenceaux 20. John Haywood Doctor of
Law Historians.

Lo here (says Dr Fuller) none who were actual Bishops were capable of places
in this College, and when some of these were advanced to Bishoprics [as Deane
Morton and Doctor Abbott] and others translated to heaven, King James, by his
new Letters patents 1622. November 2 substituted others in their places.

And yet since such Rapine, and Sacrilegious sale of Bishops Revenues has of
late been made, so as that they are rather Titular then Real Bishops; this
College (if Bishops in true Christian high magnanimity will submit their necks
to this yoke of Christ, and what can be more honorable? may best fit and be
ordained for such a Patriarchy of Bishops, as a Jericho, till their beards be
grown, and their garments be repaired. For Jericho was not only the City of
Palmtrees, but the City, and the great School, yea the College, of, and for
Prophets; whereof the two great Prophets (that were in their time called the
Chariots and horse men of Israel) were the heads, having younger Prophets under
them, 2 Kings 4. 38. O that by their superintending in this School, they might
show against Baal's Prophets the spirit of Eliah and Elisha doubled upon them!
In which College of Jericho Elisha succeeded Eliah, as Father of the sons of
the Prophets; healing both their City fountain, and their College common Pot of
infected pottage, and multiplying the loaves of barley. So these Prophets are
fittest to heal the Pot of Protestants, which is so poisoned with the
Coloquintida of the Popish wild gourds of Traditions, Falsehoods, and corrupting
of Scriptures, that there may be no more evil in them, 2 Kings 4. 41.

Now to these, for the building of their College and their Mansion (as Dr
Fuller says) K. James gave all the Timber requisite thereunto, which was to be
fetched out of Windsor Forest. And that long range which alone is extant,
scarce finished at this day, yet thus the College made, not of freestone, but
of free timber, cost (O the dearness of College and Church work!) full three
thousand pounds. But (alas!) what is this piece? not an eighth part to a double
Quadrant, besides wings on each side, as it was intended. If the Ancient
Fathers, which remembered the magnificence of Solomon's, wept at the meanness of
the second Temple; such must needs be sad who consider the disproportion
betwixt what was performed, and what was projected in and about this College
[as in the Synopsis of the Model in the Frontispice may be observed. Save that
(I confess) the destruction of beautiful buildings once really extant, leaves
greater impressions in men's minds, then the miscarriages of only intentional
structures, and the faint Ideas of such future things as are seriously
propounded, but fail to be effected.

But this College when once the Act was made for it, in pursuance thereof, His
Majesty Incorporated the said Foundation, by the name of King James his College
in Chelsey; and bestowed upon the same by Letters Patents, the Reversion of
good Land in Chelsey, (then in possession of Charles Earl of Nottingham, the
lease thereof not expiring till thirty years hence:)

and also his Majesty was pleased further to grant his Letters Patents for a
general Collection all over England and Wales, of the free benevolence of the
willing people, and the Bishops were carefully to urge it: so that to go on
with, much moneys were gathered; but (says Dr Fuller) it was kept in some
pockets, and withal wishes (as well he might) that those pockets which
yielded not the moneys to the right use, might rot, and be broken baggs.

Something I have said before of King James his Commendation, and confessing Dr
Sutcliffe his diligence in soliciting about the College work, to put this fair
project into a full and faithful effect, who (that is, Dr Sutcliffe) also
bequeathed a good part of his own revenues unto it. And thus may I echo out the
work unto the world, in the Angelical trumpet of Dr Fuller, whose expressions
sweeter then honey, or any music, thus proclaim and warble it forth.

Next King James, let me place Dr Matthew Sutcliffe, Deane of Exceter; who,
though no Prince by birth, seems little less by his bounty to this College. But
as a subject ( Araunah) gave things as a King to God's service; such was the
Royal Liberality of Dr Sutcliffe, bestowing on this College The Farms of
Kingstone The Farms of Hazard The Farms of Appleton The Farms of Kemerland in
the parish of Staverton in the parish of Harberton in the parish of Churchston
in the parish of Stoke-Rivers
All in the County of Devon, and put together richly worth 300li per annum.

Besides these, by his Will dated November 1. 1628. he bequeathed unto Dr John
Prideaux and Dr Clifford, (the Feofsees in trust to settle the same on the
College) the benefit of an extent on a Statute of 4000li acknowledged by Sr
Lewis Steukley. To all which, as a precious Signet, he gave his Library too,
and that no mean one: as also Archbishop Bancroft promised his; but neither
Archbishop Abbott nor Archbishop Laud did part with it. A bountiful
benefaction, and the greater, because the Doctor had a daughter, and she
children of her own. And although this endowment would scarce make the Pot of
the sons of the Prophets to sees; yet what Feasts would it have made in his
private family, if continued therein? Seeing therefore so public a mind in so
private a man, the more the pity that the good Doctor was deserted,
Vriah-like, engaged in the front, to fight these battles alone against an Army
of Difficulties; which he incountred [or rather took truce with] in this
design, whilst such men as were to be the wings retreated from him, not
seasonably succouring and seconding him in this Action, to face the Enemy;
which Dr Sutcliffe, the first mover of the first fundamental stone of this
business, and (as far as in him lay) the Promoter of Chelsey College, was in
readiness to do.

It may well therefore be said of him, as Paul said of Timothy, There was no
man like-minded, who did naturally care for the College, or for the Cause of
Christ and of his Church, as Dr Sutcliffe did, in that vigorousness of spirit,
and energy of zeal, and that erogation of large and wise charity, to his
power. For all men seek, and hug their own Ape-Cubbs, their own things, the
Minervals and reaches of their own brains; and not the Man-child of their
laboring Mother the Church, which mystically is Christ and his Cause, Rev. 12.
3. the Child of God, whom the dragon waits even in the birth to devour, who
yet is to rule all Nations with a rod of Iron, and who is caught up to God,
ver. 5. to his Throne.

Now this Chelsey College Project, howsoever maligned and obstructed in the
birth thus long and strongly, (as the beginning of the building of the second
Temple was for 40 years, from the first year of Cyrus to the second year of
Darius, Ezra 4. 24.) yet though it has by the negligence of our side, and the
Policy and malignancy of the other side, been thus treacherously impeded and
oppugned, we may not think but in it self, and in the approvement and purpose
of God, it is most honorable, and to be advanced in the Lords season, and by
the men whom he has ordained and sanctified: and why not at this shining
instant (by raising up the spirits of the Prophets in the Convocation to speak
for it, and by prophesying to promote it?) that the College Adornation may be
as Michael and his Angels fighting with the Dragon and his Angels, til the
Dragon not prevailing, his place may be no more found in the Heaven of our
Church, but he be utterly for ever cast out of it.

Which Impediments and Obstructions, though they have tended almost unto
destruction (as the Enemies applaud and hug themselves, saying, Have not our
foxes, going up with secret and subtle Policies and underminings, broken down
their stone wall? Nehem. 4. 3.) yet we must and do say, as the Church in the
Prophet Micah's time, yea the College of this our Church may say, Rejoice not
against me, O mine Enemy: though I am let and left to fall, I shall arise;
though I sit in silence and in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me,
etc. Micah 7. 8, 9, 10, 11. And England might go on and say, in her late long
suffering, because of our late long sinning, and our long not perfecting our
General Repentance, I will bear the Indignation of the Lord, because I have
sinned against him; until he plead my Cause, and execute Judgment for me. He
will bring me forth to his light, and I shall behold his Righteousness.

But here is yet the great wonder unto many Godly men's hearts, that such a
gracious work, in all likelihood and great probability, of God, and also
according to the most holy way of his Wisdom, so wisely commenced by Dr
Sutcliffe, approved and promoted by King James and his Parliament, so far
proceeded in and to such a measure, in building and endowing, having by King
James his Letters Patents so much and such Contributions so far and fairly
advanced, should yet at length, after so long expectation, be let fall, and
sink, and dye, and lie in it is foundation: What might be the cause of so great
a Calamity? to do, what Ithacus velit, what the Roman Adversary would have to
be done, and that without him, yea and for him too.

Let me here give you the Impediments, first in the discerning and discreetness
of Dr Fuller, who has gathered and expressed the Obstructions, not only in
oppressing the College by William Lord Mounson, but even in the suppressing it,
unto desperateness of never any more emerging or resurrection, in all humane
Judgment, unless the Lord, who does great and wonderful things alone, does
give it a joyful resurrection. And therefore may you receive them in his own
more prudent words.

First, the decay of the College (says he) is ascribed to the large, loose,
and lax nature of it; no one prime person ( Sutcliffe excepted, whose shoulder
sunk under the weight thereof) zealously engaging therein: King James his
maintenance making, or amounting but to little more then Countenance of the
work. Those children will have but thin chapps and lean cheeks, who have every
body (and yet no body) nurses unto them.

Secondly, the Decay of the College is to be ascribed to the original means of
the College, principally founded on the fluid and inconstant means (Element
unstable as water) the Rent of a new River (when made) which at the best (thus
employed) was beheld but as a religious Monopoly. And seeing that design took
no effect (though afterward in another Notion and nature it was perfected) no
wonder if the College sank with the means thereof. For this first tender and
plot for the College profit was cut off by another allowance of Middleton's
plot, of bringing water actually from Ware to Islington, to be conveyed to Pipe
through every street in London. And now, -- Quis virtutem amplectitur ipsam,
Praemia si digna justa negentur ei?


Thirdly, some of the greatest Prelates (how much self-ingrossing is there in
all men?) though seemingly forward, yet really remiss, in the matter: supposing
those Controversial Divines would be looked upon as the principal Champions of
Religion, or more serviceable in the Church then themselves, and happily might
therefore acquire Privileges prejudicial to their Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction.

Fourthly, the Jealousies of the Universities, beholding this design with
suspicious eyes, as which in process of time might prove detrimental unto them
too.

Fifthly, the suspicion of some Patriots and Commons in Parliament too, such as
carried the keys of Countrey-mens Coffers under their girdles (may I safely
report what I heard from no mean mouths) that this College would be too much
Courtier* and that the Divinity (but especially the History) of it would (...),
propend too much in favor of King James, and report all things to the
disadvantage of the Subject: wherefore though the said Patriots in Parliament
countenanced the Act, (as counting it no Policy publicly to cross the Project
of the then King James) yet when returned home, by their suspicious Items and
private instructions, they beat off and retarded the peoples Charities
thereunto. The same conceived this Foundation superfluous, to keep men to
confute Popish Opinions by writings, whilst the maintainers of them were every
where connived at and countenanced, and the penal laws not put in any effectual
execution against them.

Sixthly, its being begun in a bad time, when the world swarmed with a world of
prowling Projectors and necessitous Courtiers, contriving all ways to get
Moneys We know, that even honest persons (if strangers and casually coming
along in the company of those that are bad) contract a suspicion of guilt to
themselves, in the opinions of those to whom they are unknown. And it was the
unhappiness of this innocent College, yea the useful good design of it, that
it appeared in a time when so many Monopolies were on foot.

But was not Christ himself prejudiced for being with Publicans? So sad a thing
it is, not to discern things that are excellent, and to distinguish the
Instruments.

To all this, seventhly, may be added the Papists their conjuring up again
their Project for Toleration (by their great potent Patrons, especially Henry
Earl of Northampton, so mainly for the bringing of that Trojan Horse) to be
introduced to be stationary amongst us, partly because Chelsey College was not
advanced, (but rather kept under Hatches, for Non progredi est regredi) and
partly because of King James his Age, and Fears, which then were most awakened
and revived in him, and inhaunced, and meeting him in every way, Eccles. 12. 5.
yea more created; and partly because of the Popish Interest which was got on
high, near at him, re-inforcing their Petition for Toleration so far as that
(in effect) it was said, The King is not he that can deny you any thing. And
this was about the year 1623. immediately after the dismal downfall of the
Assembly of Papists and Blackfriars, where almost 300 of them perished
suddenly in the Pit. King James was not long after again solicited so strongly
as he was on the point of inclining, or (as I may say rather) of seeming to
incline, (as wise Kings many times, Jehu King of Israel, who succeeded Ahab,
and Constantine being President.) Partly therefore to be ridd of tedious
importunities, and partly to explore which of his servants in weighty and right
Religious affair were truly faithful and constant, he began to seem only (I
say) so far to take the Sticklers Reasons into Consideration, as to suffer a
Proposition at length for a Toleration of Popery, (that Religion which yet
before he had been so long and strong against, and in his soul abhorrent from)
by the Chancellor, on a Sunday, to be made at the Councel-Table.

But God stirred up, and was with the spirit of the Archbishop of Canterbury
(Dr G. Abbott) our of great dislike, as became him, though with hazard of his
high Favor, to speak against the Toleration, and not a little charge the
Chancellor for it; and though his Majesty himself came to the Councel-Table
that or the next day, expressing some seeming high displeasure, the Archbishop,
like a true Father of the Church and Master in the Place, vented his mind upon
the Keeper in a sharp reprehension of his Error, that suited his Conscience to
the time. But the Proposition the Archbishop absolutely refused, and desired
the rest of the Lords to second him; of whom there were so many for him as made
this Resolution, and so it was laid aside. The King understanding soon what was
past at the Councel-Table, came in himself, and expressed some discontent, etc.
The Archbishop maintained the fidelity of his Judgment, humbling himself at
his Majesty's feet, and seeking to qualify him with an Oration. First, he
acknowledged the Honors he had received of the King, which he laid down at his
Majesty's feet, remonstrating the affections he had served him with, etc. The
Issue whereof was, that all the Kings great heat of Anger was by means thereof
allayed and appeased. Ille regit dictis animum, and pectora mulcet. And in his
inward secret affections he was altogether pleased; which the Archbishop
afterward found, in that, afterward, after the fatal unhappy killing of the
Keeper by him in the Lord Zouch his Park, the King was not pleased to hear the
Aggravation of the Crime against him, but suffered him to live in place and
grace to his last period; having received his faithful admonition, as the duty
of a good Conscience and zeal from a Religious Counselor, for the King's and
Christ's honor, as to this effect. -- Quin aspice quantum
Aggrediare nefas, and dum licet, effuge crimen.
And this, knowing how, and being indeed happily in season admonished, Eccles
4. 13. according to the wisdom which comes down from heaven, being first pure,
peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, James
3. 17. without partiality, and without hypocrisy. And this fruit of
righteousness was sown thus, in peace, of him that, according to his Royal
Motto ( Beati Pacifici) made Peace. He (that is, his Majesty) therefore
considered further, preferring the leniment of a good Conscience before all the
Sirens Songs of seducing, vel tantillum, from the right way; and concluded as
he began, according to Queen Elizabeth's Motto, and his own Resolution and
Religion, not only in style Defensor Fidei, but in zealous Vindication, as well
in his Apology for the Protestant faith, as in the Oath of Allegiance. And
therefore he held out through the good hand of God helping him, without having
that blame as the Angel of Thyatira had, I have something against thee, because
thou suffer that woman Jezabel: and so concluded, as the Sun in his setting,
as we see, Intaminatis honoribus, and ut esse Phoebi Dulcius lumen solet jamjam
cadentis. Chelsey College Institution was his extreme aim, to have had it
completed in his lifetime, for after-ages to have the fruit and the fruition
of it, and to bless God for his so gracious Indulgence. Hereupon the King
considered further (I say) and would be no more at leisure to hear of the
Toleration, but rather, as Prove. 25. 23. the North wind drives away rain; so
did the Kings angry Countenance the intolerable Solicitors for Toleration.

I might go on yet further, in showing not only that Middleton's Aquaeduct
from Ware to London spoiled the water-Project for Chelsey College; but that the
design for repairing of Paul's Church likewise quite eclipsed and damped the
building of Chelsey College: but above all, the untimely death of Prince Henry,
as is before mentioned, who was the stately Elm by which the Vine of Chelsey
College did hope to rise and spread; but the Divine hand having cut him off,
the poor and weak Vine of this Project fell to crawle on the ground, and to be
trod under the feet of wild and impure beasts.

Let us hereupon still hear and heed what Dr Fuller says, and he is ever most
worthy to be heard.

At this time the College has but little of the Case, and nothing of the Jewel
for which it was intended: Almost rotten before ripe, and ruinous before it was
finished. It stands bleak, (like a lodge in a garden of Cucumbers) having
pleasant waters [the River Thames] near it, and store of wholesome air about
it; but very little of the necessary Element of Earth belonging unto it. Yea
since I am informed, that since the College takes not effect according to the
desire and intent of the first founders, it has been decreed in Chancery, by
the joint Consent of Dr Daniel Featly, the third Provost of the College
[wherein by the way, and favor of Dr Fuller, there is a gross mistake, when he
calls Dr Featley the third Provost, for Dr Featley was indeed next to Dr
Sutcliffe himself, and but the second Provost, whom indeed the Lord Mounson
commenced his suit with for the Land whereon that part of the College is built,
to whom Dr Sutcliffe traveled to London, on purpose to seek out Dr Featley,
and actually and personally to resign the Provostship unto him, and invest Dr
Featley with it, in all the dignity and rights unto it belonging: and therefore
no likelihood of suit with Dr Featley in Chancery, either by Dr Sutcliffe or
his heirs, but more likely rather with the third Provost indeed, which was Dr
Slater, with whom perhaps the Chancery suit was commenced, and Dr Prideaux the
surviving Feoffee, entrusted in Dr Sutcliffe's will] that the aforesaid Farms
of Kingstone, Hazard and Appleton, should return again to the possession of Mr
Halee Esquire;, as the Heir General to the said Dr Sutcliffe: on what Consideration
I leave, and cease to inquire; it is enough to persuade me, (says Dr Fuller)
it was done in equity, because done by the Lord Coventrie [But I say, if Dr
Featley had had any hand in it, then Dr Sutcliffe resigning to him, a condition
or word of Caution had been enough, what needed a suit with Dr Featley? More
probable rather that the suit was commenced (I say) with and against Dr Slater
(or if not with Dr Slater, with Dr Wilkinson, the present (I know not by what
means) since Dr Slaters death, self-surping Provost) and that the transaction
was from him rather, because the disert mention is of the third Provost, which
was not Dr Featley, but Dr Slater; or by Dr Wilkinson, from himself imposed
upon Dr Slater.] So that now only the Farm of Kemerland in Devon of Dr
Sutcliffe's donation remains to the College. All that I will add (says Dr
Fuller) is this: As this College was intended for Controversies, so now there
is a Controversy about the College; costly suits lately being commenced
betwixt William Lord Mounson, (who married the widow Dowager of the aforesaid
William Earl of Nottingham) and the present Provost [ viz. Dr Samuel Wilkinson]
about the Title of the very ground whereon it stands: and that but for a
lease of some few years, the land it self being Crown-land.

To say nothing concerning its Calamity in the extent of late fury, the Abuses,
the Abominations in the desolation, it becoming as a Cage of ( Horresco
reputans) unclean birds, a Prostibulum for whores, a stable for horses, etc.
and not only a place petitioned for to make leather Guns in, but desired also
for a Palaestra to manage great horses and practice horsemanship.

Now to all these three great witnesses, in their wisdom approving and
improving the design of Chelsey College; Archbishop Abbott wisely and
sedulously soliciting the Bishops, and persuading the Kingdom with most grave
and gracious motives to contribute unto it; Bishop Hall sweetly commending and
insinuating the Project to be promoted, that it might not perish; and Dr Fuller
amply setting forth the Institution, nature, provision, uses, and end of it at
full: let me add but one more, that is Mr Richard Baxter, who is so learnedly
verst, especially in the most subdolous devices of the Papists, and expressly
the Panurgy of Adam Contzen, Jesuit, his directions for preserving and
restoring Popery, and changing Religion in a Nation before the people are
aware: in the said Adam's Politics, lib. 2. page 16, 17, 18. Who ( i. e.) Mr
Baxter, in his Holy Commonwealth, or his Political Aphorisms, expresses his
mind thus, (in his additions to his Preface;)

Consider how suitable Popery is with a carnal Inclination: Secondly, what
plausible reasons Papists have to delude poor souls with from their pretended
Universality, Antiquity, etc. Thirdly, how few of the vulgar are able to defend
their faith, or to answer to the two great Sophistical Questions of the
Papists; ( viz.) Where has your Church been visible in all Ages? [Only Dr
Featley, not only in his Disputation with Fisher, but in his Manuscript
dedicated to the Lord Craven, not yet printed, and in his Grand Sacrilege,
particularly concerning the taking away the Cup from the Laity, has fully (as
much as they demanded) answered that other point. For the Nameless Romanist
thus contrives and moulds his subtilties, not as Cases of Conscience, to be
resolved by some learned Divine, but as it were laying (as Dr Featley
resenteth) a snare to entangle the Answerers therein. Let (says he) those
points be propounded one after another, and receive their positive answer under
their hands to the first, before they know the second, and so in order to the
rest: when that is done, you shall hear further from me. What is this (says Dr
Featley) but in effect to say, draw the Protestant Respondents by degrees, and
by little and little, into the snares which I have laid for them, and when they
are entangled in them, I will come and take them, and entangle them with their
own subscriptions? Which Tract of Dr Featley's, yea the very (...) of it, is in
the Right Honorable the Lord Craven's hands, who is extremely desired that he
would be pleased to communicate it for the Churches good, if he have it by him;
or else I have a transcript, which I shall crave his leave to put forth.] And
how prove you the Scripture to be the Word of God? Though not only the Papists
themselves, but especially our Divines, as Whitakers against Stapleton, and in
a large Tract besides, yea Arminius himself, Vrsinus, and all our Catechetical
Divines, especially the Confession of our English Churches faith, against the
Popish Traditions and Papal Decretals, have abundantly proved the sufficiency,
perfection and divinity of the Scriptures unto salvation, 2 Timothy 3. 16. that
they be the word of God only, and not of man, as spoken and delivered by holy
men of God, as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, 1 Pet. 1. 21. And therefore
we may say, What is the Chaff to the word of God? what are Traditions, Legends
of Saints, to the word of God? Jer. 23. 28. Alphonsus de Villega his more
refined Legends of the Saints. Fourthly, how will it take with the people, to
be told that their forefathers all dyed in the Roman faith? which Reverend Mr
Hocker, that wrote the Ecclesiastical Policy in five books, will abundantly
resolve them in. And fifthly, above all, what a multitude of Jesuits and Friars
and Priests they can prepare for the work, and pour out upon us at their
pleasure, from Flanders, France, and Rome, and other places: and how those
sorts of men are purposely trained up for this deceivable and illusive work,
and have their common Arguments at their fingers end; which though they are
threadbare and transparent fallacies to the wise, yet to the vulgar, and to our
unstudied Gentry, they are as good as if they had never been confuted, or as
the best. [I appeal unto that gloriosum Certamen between King Charles the first
and the Marquess of Worcester at Ragland Castle, who (I say, the Marquess)
wanted not his College of Priests and Popish Jesuits: with what hazard did the
Kings Majesty encounter, and escape the most subtle Circumventings of that
night in single Combats, having only for his second Dr Bayley, a single
Chaplain?] Sixthly, what a world of wealth and secular helps is at their becks,
in France, Flanders, Italy, Spain, and Germany? They have Millions of gold,
and Navies and Armies ready to promote their work, which other Sects have none
of. [So as that the Jesuitical Collegiated Hives, for them in all Countries, in
Italy, France, Spain, Germany, as one of credible Intelligence has mustred
(only the Jesuits) and reported them, small and great, Tyrones, Veterani,
Pupils, Tutors, Pensioners, Governors, maintained in their Armies and pay, are
ten times more then all the Students in both Universities, and in all the Inns
of Court in London too, ( viz. 2000000.) Which Computation is taken out of the
Muster-book of Harley's Defense Des Jesuits. And therefore no marvel that these
hives every where so swarm, and such multitudes of them are sent to seek their
hiving quarters in our England. For they account Scotland as yet too poor for
them, or too cold and barren to thrive in, as not having those flores inscripti
nomina Regum, for them to suck their honey out of.] Seventhly, what worldly
motives have their Priests and Friars to promote their zeal? Their Superiors
have such variety of Preferments and ample Treasures to reward them with, and
their single life allows them so much vacancy from domestic Avocations, and
withal, they so much glory in a zeal, in compassing sea and land to make
Proselytes, that it is an incredible advantage that they get by their Industry,
the Envious man by them sowing his tares, whilst others sleep, and are not half
so industrious to resist them.

Eighthly, What abundance have they lately wone in England? Notwithstanding
they have wanted public liberty, and have only taken secret opportunities to
seduce persons, many of the Nobility, Gentry, yea and of the Clergy, as well as
of the Common people, and zealous Professors of Religion (lately,) as well as
of the profane, have been seduced by them, and by them Princes in other
Countries have been won, and the Protestant Religion cunningly worm'd out. And
what a lamentable increase they had made in England before our Wars, by that
Countenance and favor which through the Queen was procured them, (though
incomparably short of this absolute Liberty) is sufficiently known.

Ninthly, It is not the least of our danger, that the most of our Ministers are
unable to deal with a Cunning Jesuit or Priest. And this is not to be wondered
at, considering how many of them are young men, put in of late in the Necessity
of the Churches, (which the world knows who have caused;) and there must be
time before young men can grow to maturity, and an unfurnished Nation can be
provided with able, experienced men. And the Cessation of Popish assaults of
late has disused Ministers from these Disputations. The Reformation had seemed
to have brought down Popery so low, that we grew secure, and thought there was
no danger of it; and the Papists of late have forborne much to meddle with us
barefaced, and have played their game under the vizor of their Sects. And
withal, young Ministers have been so taken up with the greater work of winning
Souls from common profaneness, that most have laid by their defensive Arms, and
are grown too much unacquainted with Controversies. We have so much noted how
Controversy in other Countries has eaten out much of the power of Godliness,
that we have fallen by disuse into an unacquaintedness with the means of our
necessary defense: and whilst we thought that we might lay by our weapons [as
Sampson his Jawbone, or David his Goliah's Sword] and build with both hands; we
are too much unready to withstand the adversary. Alas! what work would liberty
for Jesuits and Friars make in our Congregations in a few months space? I must
confess this (though some will think it our dishonor) it is not from any
strength in their cause, but from their carnal advantages and our disadvantages
[because we are not stored with our learned Garrison, with the Magazine of
Library and maintenance] For it is easier to pull down then to build, and to
set a Town on Fire then to re-edife one house, and to wound then to heal. [But
as the fountain was hid at the present from Hagar's eyes; so Mr Baxter for the
present did not see, nor think on the adequate remedy of this ( viz.) Chelsey
College Project and design; this being to this present utterly, to all seeming,
as it were dead and buried, without hope of recovery, and so discovery, unless
some Angel awaken and open our eyes to see it.] And then if Popery should come
in again [through our giving over our watch and guards, and then doubtless if
so, not without seven worse devils of Infection, Rage, Thraldom, Superstition,
Tyranny, gross Idolatry, Perniciousness] what measure Protestants may look for
at their hands, we need not go out of England and Ireland for proof.

To use therefore a little more Mr Baxter's words for Chelsey College, which he
urges indeed for another thing. I leave it therefore to the Judgment of all
men that are not asleep in their security, and utterly unacquainted with the
advantages and vigilancies of Papists, whether this design of restoring and
endowing Chelsey College, according to the first wisdom of it, for the defense
of our Church Articles and oppugnation of the Adversaries, be not altogether of
Christ, of the Angel of the New Covenant, having discovered it unto our eyes,
and caused us to see this fountain, for our selected and choice men to draw
water out of the Well of Salvation, Genesis 21. 19. as the strong men of David out
of the well of Bethlehem, 2 Samuel 23. 16. with Joy, for the establishing of the
hearts of the Saints in the true grace, that they be sound in the faith, and so
be able and furnished (when need is) to convince the gainsayers, and that the
simple at length may be able to confound even the Scribes and the wise of the
world, who beat their brains with the deceivableness of that unrighteousness,
to build, or rather daube up, the Mystery of Iniquity, the deceivableness of
unrighteousness.

Thus have I at large related the nature and Condition of Chelsey College, the
nature of the Causes, form, uses, and ends of prudence, for happiness to our
Church, if we can receive it, and the condition for the present of it in its
impediments and obstructions; so that if it be not now religiously looked unto,
it must and will be everlastingly forlorn and lost, and such an opportunity
never more can be hoped for. And this I have related as principal and princely
Bezaliels have meditated and designed it, as a well-drawn and wrought fair
piece of Arras, and a Pattern to be made up accordingly, and as it were from
God, in the words of Ezekiel, Chap. 40. 4. Son of man, behold with thine eyes,
and hear with thine ears, and set thy heart upon all that I shall show thee:
for to the intent that I might show them, am I sent unto you.

Wherein you have not only a Synopsis and clear declaration of a Tower of
Ophel, a Church Garrison; but also motives pregnant and powerful enough of
Archbishop Abbott's, or one of the Fellows, even flexanimous to hearten and
help onward the Affair: 1. From the Papists and Jesuits their industry and
lavishing of gold, for defense of their Idolatry and Antichristianism; 2ly,
From the necessity (as they account it) to uphold the Mystery of Iniquity, and
from the necessity for us also to work counter unto them; 3ly, From the danger
that our Church and Cause may be in, if we provide not in time; 4ly, From the
excellency of being valiant for the Truth; 5ly. From the honor of Christ and
his Church, and our King and Country; 6ly, From the reproach which otherwise
will redound unto us; 7ly, Besides the suffering of the Abomination of
Desolation suddenly to overspread us, and so the adversaries to work their
pleasure upon men's souls, and have occasion to upbraid us, saying, Why is there
a price in the hand of foolish English- men to get wisdom, and they have no
heart to lay it out for wisdom?

So that after all this Remonstrance about the matter, and heads of the motives
so faithfully enforced and improved, there needs no more inculcating of them,
but only praying to remember and consider what has been so carefully and
conscionably urged; and the Lord give us understanding in all things. Only may
I humbly crave leave to urge in fine, what we have found, and what was not
considered, and what the Spirit advertiseth the Church of Philadelphia, Rev. 3.
10. Because thou have kept the word of my patience (that is, as the Apostle
does paraphrase 1 These. 1. 3. the work of faith, the labor of love, the
patience of hope, for all these are jointly to be engaged in the work)
therefore I will keep thee from the hour of Temptation, which shall come upon
all the world, to try them that dwell upon the face of the Earth; that is, to
try their Faith, to try their Love, to try their Hope: their Faith, whether it
work by Love; their Love, whether it be sincere and zealous for the Truth;
their Hope, whether it endure unto the end in patience, Heb. 6. 10, 11, 12.
rejoicing in hope, patient in tribulation: and out of faith, hope and love,
laying out themselves for this College, leaving the success, prospering and
blessing to the Lord Christ. And this the rather, if our expectation be
according to the fifth-Monarchy men's persuasion, which is not an Heresy, and
so not to be condemned, but to be looked for, but to be endeavored after, but
to be prayed for, that Christ his second coming, in bringing and setting up his
Kingdom, may so appear. And, in a sort, is not this hour of temptation come
upon us of England? and has it not been even for no less then forty years
almost trying our Faith, whether we will and do (...) for it; our Love and
Charity, whether we will contribute any thing liberally to maintain the
Champions of our Faith, whether we will cast this sure anchor in the most holy
place, Heb. 6. 19.? knowing and believing this most certainly, that, (as Mr
Archer expresses, in his Forerunner of Christ's personal Reign on earth, page
50. and 55. and Mr Mede, Rev. 11. 7. his opinion is) that Popery shall yet
again, for a while, universally prevail in those Countries and Nations out of
which it has been expelled. Mr Chr. Cartwright's Preface to the Gloriosum
Certamen. And therefore ought we not of England to advance this College? thus
to prepare to give the head of the Dragon his last deadly wound? that the
Prince of Peace may set up his Scepter of peace, and be the Solomon of peace,
in governing his Saints in all the blessings of Peace and beauties of holiness?
that we may seek, and love to have, and keep the saving Truth in love and
peace, Zach. 8. 19. But as one says, Si nos iri perditum vult Dominus Jesus,
h^c^tamen solamini erit, nos nihil omisisse virtutis ad eluctandum ruinam; as
the two Witnesses in sackcloth, or rather as becomes a Courageous soldier
stantem in bellow mori, in hope of a most glorious resurrection; like that
which the Roman Florus speaks of the holding out the last siege of Carthage, Vt
morsus morientium sunt maxim mortiferi; sic plus negotii fuit cum semiruta
quam cum integra Carthagine: or as it is said of Sampson, Judge. 16. 30. the
dead which he slew at his death were more then they which he slew in his
lifetime. And then the hope of everlasting rest after all our labors, shall
sweeten all our labors, ease our torments, mitigate our sorrows, comfort our
hearts that they fail not in their labor, nor faint in their travail, nor
sink under their burden, nor fall under their Crosses, nor dye for sorrow of
their wound; but may say, I have fought the good fight, and finished my course,
and kept the faith, 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8. Henceforth the spirit has said, we shall
be pillars (Rev. 3. 12.) in the Temple of our God.

Finally, may I humbly add a word of the probable means of (as it were)
buoying up this Ship of the sunk College, to be rigged and to ride again as a
Pretorian ship, in its haven; with respect to his most Gracious Majesty, and
the Great Wisdoms of his Council and Parliament: because it is said expressly,
that Kings shall be nursing Fathers and Queens nursing Mothers to the Church,
Esaias 49. 23. Whatsoever the penury may seem to be in regard of the late great
losses and exhaustings, because of the sweeping tempests, that have left (as it
were) nothing, or little good; yet is it not the word of the Lord by Haggai,
The silver is mine, and the gold is mine (says the Lord of hosts?) So that if
it please Almighty God to stir up, and put into the Kings Majesty's heart an
heroic care and resolution to set about the advancing and restoring of this
ruinous College, by taking the Course which his Royal Grandfather did, viz.
granting forthwith his Letters Patents once again, generally all over England,
for a Collection of three years to be made; and that the Archbishops Graces
would be earnest with the Bishops of their Dioceses to solicit their
particular Ministers; and that the Peers of the Upper house and the Burgesses
of the Commons house would by their Munificence be exemplary Leaders unto the
Collective body; more respectively, the new Bishops, revived and restored (as
men of God) to their Sees and dignities, to act as Intelligences and Angels of
the Churches in their own Spheres, though possible their Sees are much
impaired, as having had the Line of Ahab upon them, and Plummet of Samaria: Yet
if they shall meditate liberal things, Esaias 32. 8. or devise liberal things,
and out of their grave and gracious wisdoms prompt and promote unto the Kings
Majesty a more probable way of wisdom then at first was projected, and become
also not only exhortative but exemplary, to their power, for so important,
godly, and necessary a work, especially the most Reverend Fathers, Canterbury,
Winchester, London, Lincoln, York, Durham, etc. This may do much, and much
contribute toward the speedy adorning and advancement of the College to its
due perfection, and placing it in its sphere of activity, yea and to the
settling of it, to become a pattern and president for Imitation to foreign
Protestant Churches also in Christendom, not yet in the Popes Captivity and
dungeon of darkness, of his Mystery of Iniquity and deceivableness of
unrighteousness. And if the late Archbishop Laud could have imagined that such
Wolves and Monsters of Heresy, upon his being put to death, would have been in
such readiness, like Serpents and Toads and venomous creeping, noxious beasts,
at the root of the stately Palm Tree of our Church, in readiness, I say,
thronging with their Fry, whose word was, Viam inveniam aut faciam, to crawle
up even so all over the fruitful branches of this Palm (for the shepherd
being smitten, how would the sheep be scattered?) how would he have roused up
and awakened himself as the Cock, who with his wings clappeth himself, to have
been most vigilant over them? especially when Dr Featley (being assigned the
Provost of Chelsey College by Dr Sutcliffe his studious and solicitous
obtaining of him, and resigning all his Authority and power unto him)
solicited Bishop Laud (at London House) to favor and further the College,
when the Church looked upon him as a son upon his Father and Patriot, because
of his fair opportunity, by his high advancement, for the greatest affairs of
the Church, which King Charles the First was pleased to grace and entrust him
withal. How would he have known and remembered, that it was incumbent upon him
to have served (...) as well as (...), and have looked upon Chelsey College as
a grand business of Christ's, as well as to be so zealous for the re-edifying
of Paul's; and not have daunted Dr Featley's suit with that short hasty word,
Cui bono? as Pilate once seemed to have done to Christ, What is Truth? His eye,
with his heart, being so immoveably fixed upon the repairing of the dead and
decaying walls of Paul's Church, not in the interim providently eying and spying
the mischiefs, Calamities, Chaos of Heresies, Sects and Schisms, by Satan's
Panurgy, and by the madness of the people, to be drawing in upon us, like the
Trojan Horse, for want of that public armature, sword and spear of the spirit,
the spiritual sword of God's Word in the mouths of his more select Ministers,
those living stones of his spiritual Tower of Armory. Could, I say, his Graces
wisdom (I mean Archbishop Laud's, who was omni laud dignus) have commanded his
heart to have beheld and heeded the Angelical face of Chelsey College Project,
as Dr Featley presented it unto him, and on a time did it more fully and freely
at Fulham, when he was better at leisure; had not the Importunity of Paul's
still been too clamorous in his ears, for expediting it, how would he not
(doubtless) have blessed Dr Featley, and blessed his Counsel, and blessed God,
who filled his heart to lay before him indeed the summum bonum of Chelsey
College, as David did bless Abigail? So that (as I said) though that Church,
that Carnal Church, (carnal, I say, in comparison of this Chelsey College its
pure spiritual consideration and intention) the specious repairing whereof
could not be without immense charge, did much dazzle the Archbishops eyes; yet
the apprehension and contemplation of future spiritual fruit and advantage from
right qualified persons in Chelsey College had it been entertained in his
heart, how might it make his Soul now living under the Altar, though the
Vasculum of his precious body be laid in the dust, yet (I say) how might it
make his Soul say, and sigh, and still wish, Me mortuo, me occiso, seu mactato,
floreat Collegium Chelcianum? Much more therefore, how may it move the present
Archbishop, Dr Juxton, with his Brethren, to say, yea labor and endeavor it,
Imo nobis quasi a mortuis resuscitatis, una nobiscum revirescat in aternum
Collegium Chelcianum? And therefore we will give no sleep to our eyes, nor
slumber to our eyelids, until we have obtained this Chelsey College to be set
upon its own Basis, and to be the place for the Lord to dwell amongst us, as
between the Cherubims, and for the most honorable and glorious service of his
most sanctifying and saving Truth, so to prepare the way of the Lord, and to
make his paths straight, that our, Lord and great Master when he comes may
find us thus doing. most diligently with all our best prudence and piety
advancing his precious work, for his Glory, and the sovereign soul-good of his
people.

And though I prudently confess, and most humbly acknowledge, that non est meae
tenuitatis dictare viris tantis, and tam rerum sapientiam Divinam pariter ac
gloriam spectantium perquam sagacissimis: yet may I (with craving of pardon)
say, that if the present Archbishop his Grace (as being the last and only man
that was, at the dying of King Charles on the Scaffold, privy to the Counsel
and bosom of his Majesty's Royal heart, and to many desires of his not yet
uttered) if he shall think good, yea if God command him to acquaint his
blessedly-succeeding Majesty (so as it may be no prejudice any way unto him)
with a convenient way for settling a determined certain revenue on this
College, then (I say) the Affair may easily, speedily, and happily be promoted,
and no prejudice done to, or complaint made by any man: but rather, by the
secret blessing of the Lord in his acceptance, it may be made to emerge in
Glory. Yet with all most prudent and provident Caution, that in case the
Members thereof so amply provided for, should not answer the trust which they
are sworn unto, and the Articles of Unity, Love and Truth which they are
engaged in, but suffer their fountain to be defiled, and their waters (like
those of Jericho) at length to become bitter; that then all Indulgences,
Privileges, Provision, return to the King and State. For, O the sacred
Covetousness, with the Envy and hate that Satan may possess the hearts of the
Adversaries with, the Ecclesia malignantium, especially against Christ and his
Cause, even to corrupt and to cause prevarication in the best and most blessed
things, to cause even them to be the more doubly and dreadfully cursed!
according to my comparison which I have before hinted of snakes, toads and
vipers crawling at and corrupting the Royal root of the Palm Tree. But Absit
omen!

But I hope the Kings Majesty will see not only great reason for it, but
gracious Religion flourishing in it too (which overbalances all carnal
respects) and find that God will, as he well can, multiply his seed of Royal
Munificence thus sown, an hundred fold into his bosom, and heap upon and load
him in lieu thereof with Riches and Honor and Obedience and hearty love of his
Subjects, so as to make him the Joy and delight of mankind, and as the man of
his right hand, by multiplying still more Riches and Honor upon him, as he did
to Jehosaphat the son of Asa, who walked in the first ways of David, and
abhorred Baalim. The like his Majesty does, and has resolved to do; for which
God has established the Kingdom in his hand, by inclining the hearts of
Parliaments and Citizens to bring presents unto him in earnest thereof. I say,
Riches and Honor shall be multiplied upon him, for those that honor God, God
will honor, especially, that in the midst of their deep poverty meditate
liberal things, and study to abound unto rich liberality, 2 Cor. 8. 2. Esaias 32.
8. and Esaias 30. 15. In returning and rest ye shall be saved. But Esaias 7. 9. If
ye will not believe -- but Absit omen!

If then, men being moved by God's spirit shall cheerfully and readily lay out
themselves for this College, they shall not repent of this good deed, but find
profit by it; as the widows oil and flower was multiplied by her contributing
to the Prophet. And he that ministers seed to the sower, both minister bread
for your food, and multiply your seed sown, and increase the fruits of your
Righteousness, 2 Cor. 9. 10. Especially if there be withal a cheerfulness of
heart; as in sowing our seed in hope, how gladly with full hands do we
distribute it, and what rich return does the Earth recompense us again withal?
As oil therefore which flows of its own accord from the Olives fatness, without
pressing, is much more excellent and precious, and for many medicaments more
useful then that which is forced by pressing: so a prompt, voluntary and
cheerful Contribution, without any importunate begging, is most grateful to
God, and most rich for reward. But for the work faithfully done to the end, O
how rich and blessed a reward is there!

The promised and hoped effects from this College when first constituted,
formed and manned, having its provision of maintenance to sustain it, a Library
and revenue for helps to it, let me set forth, First, in Beza's Emblem, and
next in Zachary the Prophets.

First, Beza's, which is a vast Circle, made up of intwined Serpents, all
langued and armed, every way facing the Assailants, about the immense body of a
Cerastes, whereof these are, as it were, the lifeguard: which Orb or Circle
is the same with one Ecumenical Bishop, an Arch old Serpent, with an erected
most formidable Head and neck, bearing a triple Crown upon it, but having an
hand above it with an armed sword, to smite at and cut off the head at his
time. The Emblem speaks thus.

Hi Colubris Colubri (Crist as tollente Ceraste)
Contexti pariter, sinuosa volumina quorum
Dextra secat, Gladium Coeli quae vibrat ab Arce,
Quos signant, rogitas? satis and re and nomixe notos:
Quos Satan armavit; Justi quem numinis ira
Terrarum exitio funesto excivit ab Orco.
Ast hominis tandem sortem miseratus acerbam,
Exterto Verbi Christus nunc dissecat Ense.
Which speaks thus;

Cerastes (lo!) that serpent fell and horned,
With his proud head in hellish wrath and scorn
Exalted, against Heights to hiss suborned,
His immense body how it is adorned
With Adders, Snakes, capt, mitred, cowl'd, and bald,
Which so in order have about him crawled?
Which Monster yet, an arm with sword from high
At his mad head and Circle does let fly.
If any ask, what means all this? it is plain,
That it is Hells rabble, which unto man's bane
(God's wrath permitting) Satan does excite,
To bring upon the world an hell-black night.
But mercy moving God to help man's Case,
With his mouths sword he smites the Monsters face.
Zachary's Emblem of the Repairs, Zach. 1. 18, 19.
Lo! whilst that Rome thus sets and sinks in night,
Sion shall rise, Christ's Church shine and be bright.
Four Carpenters in grace the Lord adorns,
Of hellish Heresy to fray the horns.
Which four fierce horns are Heresies and Factions,
Base State-defamings, bitter Church-distractions:
With the sad issue, as the Fiend expects,
To blast our Churches face with his infects.
Whilst Christ Church shines in the perstringing beams,
To cloud Rome's Synagogue in tragic schemes.
And the four Carpenters are Truth, Grace, Love,
With Unity, for blessing from above;
The Cage of unclean birds who may dispell,
Raising a Temple in which Christ may dwell;
Consterning Adversaries perilous,
Because Immanuel, God so with us.
This to effect, God workmen send to do it;
We'll bless his Name, Zach. 1. 20 and 4. 7.
and then cry Grace, grace to it.
FINIS.
CATALOGUE of Books sold by J. Bourn, at the South entrance of the
Royal Exchange.
LEx Mercatoria, or the ancient Law-Merchant, divided into three parts,
according to the escential parts of traffic, by Gerard Mulins Merchant. fol.

The Merchants Mirror, or directions for the better ordering and keeping of his
accounts by way of Debtor and Creditor after the Italian manner, by Richard
Dafforne Accomptant, 3d edition. fol.

The Accomptants Closet, directions for keeping Accounts after a new method, by
Abraham Liset Accomptant. fol.

Several pieces of the Reverend Dr Daniel Featley against the Papists and
against the Anabaptists.

An Abridgment of Dr Preston's works; an excellent practical piece. 8o.

Bp Downam's Exposition on the Lord's Prayer with a Tract on Practical praying
in 4o. Also a Treatise against Lying, by the same Author.

Eliptical Dyalling; and a Treatise demonstrating the use of a Ruler; both
written by Mr Samuel Foster late Professor of Astronomy in Gresham College. 4o.

The Survey of London; containing the Original, Increase, Modern Estate and
Government of the famous City, etc. by John Stow. fol.

The Surgeons Mate, or military and domestic Surgery discovering
faithfully and plainly the order and method of a Surgeons Chest, by John
Woodal Master in Surgery. fol.


