A SHORT VIEW OF THE Chief Points IN CONTROVERSY Between the REFORMED CHURCHES
And the CHURCH of ROME.

IN Two LETTERS to the Duke of Bouillon, upon his turning PAPIST.

Written by the Reverend PETER DV MOVLIN, Professor of Divinity in the
University of Sedan.

Newly translated out of the FRENCH Copy, which was never Printed.

LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Took, at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard 1680.

To the Honorable Sir NORTON KNATCHBVL, Knight and Baronet.
Honorable Sir,
THese Letters written fifty years ago to reduce the Duke of Bouillon to the
Protestant Religion which he had forsaken, never were put to the Press, for
Fear of provoking that great Lord to confute them with Arguments of Power,
against which those of Truth and Learning too often cannot stand. That they now
come out in English, the Church of England is obliged, Sir, to you, who having
by your diligent Search made your self Owner of a fair Manuscript of the same,
were pleased to bestow it upon me, the Authors Son; adding your Request, which
to me is a Command, that I would translate it into English, and give it to the
Public. I have now obeyed your Order, which I could not have done in a more
seasonable Conjuncture, and I cannot in Duty but return this Translation to the
bountiful Giver of the Original. Sir, you have by your excellent Labors
already published, shown to the World how well you can match hearty Piety with
eminent Learning. Now you are pleased to give another Instance of your
Affection to both, by procuring the setting forth these following Treatises.
Short indeed they are, but as compact with the Sinews of Reason and Learning,
as any that ever came from the Study of that strong Champion of Gods Cause. May
God be glorified by it, his Truth asserted, his Opposers converted, and your
Zeal for Gods Truth and Glory be rewarded by God, and imitated by men. So
prays

SIR, Your true Honourer, and most humble Servant. PETER DU MOULIN.

THE FIRST EPISTLE.
MY LORD,
UPON hearing the Report that you purpose to change your Religion, I continued
a long time doubtful whether I should write to Your Grace about it. For, being
hardly persuaded that such a thought could come into your mind, I was afraid to
be offensive to Your Grace by my Mistrust. But now, seeing that Report to
continue and increase, I could hold no longer from imparting my thoughts to
Your Grace upon that Subject, being inferior to none in Fidelity and Affection
to your Service.

You were instructed, My Lord, from your Infancy, by an Excellent Father, and a
Virtuous Mother, in a Religion, of which you have learned to fear God, and
serve him according to his Word. In that Religion, if you had met with some
Scruple, you ought, at the least, to have heard both the Parties, and not have
taken counsel only of the Adversaries. This is plain tempting of God, who
being thereby justly provoked, blinds the Spirit of those that seek occasions
to turn from his Service.

Had Your Grace done me that Honor to acquaint me with your Doubts, I might
have easily showed you, that the Roman Religion is altogether contrary to the
Word of God. That they celebrate every day a propitiatory Sacrifice for the
Redemption of Souls, other than the Death of our Lord Jesus Christ. That the
Communion of the Cup, expressly commanded in Scripture, is denied to the Laity.
That the People say Prayers to God which they do not understand, and the
Public Service is performed in a Language unknown to them, contrary to the
express Prohibition of the Apostle. 1 Cor. 14.16.
That the Trinity is represented in carved Stone and Picture, and the Adoration
of Images is enjoined by many Popes and new Councels, contrary to Gods express
Prohibition in the Second Commandment; Which was taken away from the Law of God
in the Offices and Breviaries, that the People might not see it. That Bones and
Relics of Saints are adored. That by the Doctrine of their Purgatory God is
made to burn the Souls of his Children for Sins fully pardoned, and for which
Jesus Christ has wholly satisfied, and that not to mend the Sinners, but to
satisfy his Justice. That the Pope, without any Authority from the Word of
God, takes upon him to be Successor to St. Peter in the Apostleship, and in
the Primacy over the Universal Church. To defend which Primacy, Epistles and
Decretals of the Ancient Bishops of Rome were forged, and many Books and
supposititious Passages, the falsehood whereof we show by invincible Proofs.

In Decrees, Councels, Canons, and Principal Authors of the Roman Church, the
Pope is called God, and the Divine Majesty, having all Power in Heaven and
Earth: By which Power he fetches Souls out of Purgatory, puts such as he
pleases in the List of the Saints by Canonizing them, gives Pardons of Sins
of two or three thousand years, gives and takes away Kingdoms, dispenses
with Oaths made unto God, dissolveth Marriages lawfully contracted, boasting
that he cannot err in the Faith, and that he has Power to add new Articles to
the Creed, to be Judge above Scripture, and to alter that which God has
instituted in his Word. Of these I could bring to Your Grace a thousand Proofs,
drawn from the Decrees and Councels of Popes, and from Public Experience.

The Pope boasts that he has a Treasure in which he lays up all the
Overplus of the Penitential Works of the Saints, and distributeth them unto
others by his Indulgences, and makes multitudes to travel two or three hundred
Leagues to get the Remission of their Sins, which is offered to them at home
gratis by the Doctrine of the Gospel. If a Rich man dies, who has given any
thing to the Church, he has many private Masses, Obits, and Suffrages for his
Money. But never any private Mass is sung for a Beggar, or one that has given
nothing.

In the Roman Church, departed Saints are prayed to, of whom Holy Scripture
says, that they know not the Hearts of men, and whose Invocation has neither
Command nor Example, nor Promise in the Word of God.

I am told that Your Grace has given ear to Capucins, who have for their
Patron and Author of their Order St. Francis; whose Life, if you had read, as
our Adversaries themselves have published it, you might think that it was
purposely written to defame him. There you may find how he preached unto Birds;
that being stark naked, he embraced a Woman made of Snow to repress his Heats;
that he took up again the Lice that fell down from his Garments, and many the
like Feats. These Capucins, as other Monks, boast that they do Works of
Supererogation, that is, better and more perfect Works than God has commanded
in his Law; For which therefore they look for a degree of Glory in Paradise
above other Saints, who had attained to no greater Perfection than to fulfill
the Law of God perfectly, who thereby have not got any greater Reward than
Eternal Life.

If by the Doctrine of the Roman Church you are obliged to get Eternal Life by
your Merits, instead of putting your whole trust in Gods Mercy, through Jesus
Christ, you shall never enjoy any Peace of Conscience, seeing that the most
righteous Persons have great Defects, and stand in need of Gods Pardon. Good
works indeed are necessary to Salvation, not from any merit in them, but as the
only means prescribed by God to attain the the Kingdom of Heaven.

One of the great Diseases of the Roman Church is, that a Sinner, after he has
confessed his Sins to a Priest, receives from him the Pardon of them: A Sinner
forgiveth another Sinner Offenses committed against God; as if a Felon did
forgive another Felon Crimes committed against the King. Thereby a man makes
himself a Judge in Gods Cause. A Priest takes upon him to be Judge of Sins
which he knows not, for he knows not the Thoughts and the Affections of the
Heart, in which Sin does chiefly consist. Neither does he know the truth of the
Sinners Repentance, without which there is no Pardon. Indeed faithful Pastors
have received of Christ the Power to remit Sins, as touching the Ecclesiastical
Penalty and Censure of the Church, and to reconcile the Sinner excluded from
the Communion, to the Church: But you would be much disappointed if you thought
that the Pardon given you by a Priest does exempt you from answering for your
Actions before Gods Judgment Seat. For when the King forgives a Felon, he does
not exempt him from being judged by that great Judge.

Can a man that fears God, and to whom God has left some liberty of
Judgment, read without horror the Cauteles and Rubricks of the Mass in the
beginning of the Missal which the Priest has upon the Altar? Whereby Provision
is made against the inconveniences that may happen to the Consecrated Host,
when it happens that Mice have gnawn the Mass-God, or when a Beast has
devoured it, or when the Wind has carried it away, or when the Priest or a
sick person has vomited it. Can ye find in your heart to worship a God that
may be stolen, or eaten by Beasts, or blown away by the Wind, and that being
fallen cannot raise himself? How many times does Scripture say, That Jesus
Christ gave Bread to his Disciples, and that we break and eat Bread in the
Lords Supper? Luke 22.19, 20.
That Bread is called the Body of Christ, as it is in remembrance of him. In
the same manner, as in the next line the Cup is called the New Testament,
because it is the Sign and the Memorial of it; Therefore the Apostles did not
worship it. The Roman Church holds that Jesus Christ did communicate in the
Holy Eucharist with his Disciples. All Parties agree that it follows from the
Doctrine of that Church that Jesus Christ did eat himself, and had his Head and
his Feet in his Mouth. The Gospel tells us, that in that Holy Action the Devil
entered into Judas: Can ye believe that Jesus Christ and the Devil entered
together into him?

To strengthen these Errors, the sixth Chapter of St. John's Gospel is
impertinently alleged, in which the Lord Jesus speaks of giving his Flesh to
eat; for Pope Innocent the III, and after him a multitude of Doctors have
determined, that in that Chapter the Eucharist is not meant at all, and that
these words of giving his Flesh to eat, must be understood of a Spiritual
eating by Faith. There Jesus Christ speaks to the Capernaites, to whom he
promises to give his Flesh for their meat, but he never gave them the
Eucharist. He speaks to them of a manner of Eating necessary to Salvation, and
without which none can be saved, saying, John 6.53.
Except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of man there is no Life in you. Now many
are saved without receiving the Eucharist, as the converted Thief, crucified
with Christ, and John the Baptist, and many Martyrs. And Jesus Christ
declares, that by Eating and Drinking he understands Believing, when he says,
v. 35.
He that comes to me shall never hunger, and he that believes on me shall
never thirst. Wherefore he warns them, v. 63.
that the words which he said unto them, were Spirit and Life.

It is acknowledged by all, that many Priests of the Roman Church are
ill-Livers; yet it is the Doctrine of that Church, that a Priest, who has been
wallowing all Night in a Debauch, has the power in the Morning to make a God
with five words, and has him in his power. I must also humbly beseech your
Grace to consider, that the Council of Trent declares it to be the Tenet of
the Roman Church, generally believed, that Sacraments are Null if the Priest
has no Intention to Consecrate; which Intention is presumed but by Conjecture,
and none can be certain of it, so that the People adore an Host not knowing
whether it be consecrated, which is an Adoration at a venture. Neither can any
in the Roman Church be certain whether he be baptized, for none knows the
Intention of him that baptizeth, nor that of him that gave him Orders.

These things, my Lord, I touch summarily, of which the Proofs are easy, but
too long for a Letter. To disguise these Truths unto Your Grace; I am told,
that you have been persuaded to read the Invectives of Barklay, in which
Scripture is hardly alleged; and Gualtiers Chronicle, which is but a web of
false passages of some supposititious Books (which are not received by the
Learned of the Roman Church) or Calumnies imputed unto us, and such things as
we never thought on.

If, upon those false Passages and Calumnies Your Grace had been pleased to
consult with some of our Side, expert in such Matters, they would have made you
see evidently the falsehood of them. The like I say of some passages of Fathers
showed unto Your Grace, most of them taken out of forged Writings, whose
falsehood is acknowledged by our Adversaries. We have Fathers only as they were
copied out of Manuscripts that were found in Monasteries, written by Monks, who
have falsified them, and whose false dealing is discovered by the diversity of
the Copies, of which I could show you many Instances, if I had the Honor to
converse with Your Grace about that Subject. But God has not permitted our
Adversaries to bring to an end that Enterprise of corrupting all the Fathers;
for numberless Passages are found in them which bear witness unto the Truth:
For which the Doctors of the Roman Church blame them very often, and give them
many ill words.

But, because that Discourse might grow too to great a length, I do only refer
Your Grace to a Paper by it self a Which die Reader shall find in the second
Chapter of this Authors Anatomy of the Mass.
Comparison of the Lords Supper with the Mass, that you may know what horrible
alteration was made in the Lords Institution, and that you may know that by
going to Mass you cannot be saved. You (I say) My Lord, who have been favored
with so many Blessings of God, who have had an Holy and Virtuous Education, and
have a thousand Obligations to your Illustrious Lady Mother, whose days are
likely now to be shortened with anguish and sorrow.

God has given to Your Grace in this City Sedan.
a Faithful People, heartily devoted to your Service, which have built your
Town, and fortified it with their hard Labor, and have not been sparing of
their Lives and means to defend this State when it was in danger. They are a
People whom God has gathered from many places and sheltered under your shadow,
committing them to your keeping. The Subsistence of this little State of yours,
compassed about with Mighty States, depends, next to God, upon the Fidelity of
the Inhabitants, and their Love to their Sovereign. Think you what
Heartbreaking Sorrow it will be to that poor People, when they see Your Grace
going to Mass. What Dissipation, what Desolation shall you see ere long in your
City, when the Holy Scripture shall be banished from your House? when, instead
of the pure Service of God, the Service of Images shall be established, Beads,
Agnus Dei's, and sprinklings of Holy Water? When, instead of a Few Pastors, you
shall have Herds of Friars sowing Discord continually among your Subjects? When
Ecclesiastical Goods shall be no more in your disposing, and the Roman Clergy
must have again that which your Predecessors had justly taken from them,
whereby your Revenues shall suffer a great Diminution? When all the
Ecclesiastical and Matrimonial Causes shall be no more under the Jurisdiction
of your Officers, but must be tried at Chalons or Rheims, so that you shall be
no more Master at home? When instead of Subjects, altogether depending upon
your Authority, you shall have Jesuits and Capucins about you, having a strict
Intelligence with those of Bruxels, whence Jealousies and Fears will arise
greatly noisome to your State.

I could represent to Your Grace many Considerations to make you apprehend that
by this Action you will ruin your Affairs, even in this World, and lose the
Love of those that have been your principal Honor and Support, that hereby you
will pull up the roots of your Reputation, Honor and Greatness, fill with
Grief and Confusion your dearest Relations, and draw upon you the Contempt of
Persons of both Religions. For even the greatest men of the Roman Church in
France, that govern themselves by Humane Prudence, say, that you take your
Measures amiss, and cannot believe that ever you will take that Resolution.

But the worst consequence of it is, that thereby you will lose your Soul. For
you have a great Account to give unto God, who knows the Hearts, who is just
and terrible, and will not dally with those that dally with him. I have poured
forth, and pour still for your Grace Prayers before God, and Sighs without
number; neither am I without hope that God will be merciful unto you. One thing
at least, My Lord, let me crave at your hands, that if you have any Scruples
and Doubts about your Religion, you will be pleased to defer your final
Resolution, till being come to this Town, you may hear the two Parties, and
till we may speak to some Doctors of the Roman Church in your Presence. And I
may be bold to promise to Your Grace to make you acknowledge that you have been
possessed with Calumnies against us, that both the Tenets of the Roman Church,
and Ours, have been misrepresented to Your Grace, and that Gaultiers Passages
are false and forged. This, if I cannot obtain of Your Grace by my most humble
Request, yet so much comfort at least I shall have, that I ^ave discharged my
Conscience. But if I be so unfortunate as to lose your Grace's Favor for
speaking the truth to you; it will be well for me that I have but few days to
live in this World, which I will pass away in sorrow, though in hope to have them
ended by Death, when it shall please God to receive me into his rest. And what
Sorrow soever may exercise me in my Life, I will never leave praying for your
Prosperity and Salvation, as resolved to be as long as I live,

My Lord, Your Grace's most humble, etc.

A SECOND LETTER OF Dr. DV MOVLIN TO THE DUKE of BOVILLON,
In Answer to a Letter of the Duke's to his Sister Mademoiselle de Bouillon.
MY LORD,
MAdemoiselle de Bouillon, your Sister, has done me the Honor to impart unto
me Your Grace's Letters to her about the Causes that disquiet your Conscience.
Upon which, I hope that your Goodness will not take it ill that I make some
Reflections, and try whether God will make Use of me to contribute something
toward the Quiet of your Soul, and to turn you from the way which I see you
take, contrary to the Doctrine of the Gospel.

You begin, by expressing your Design not to separate your self from my Lady
Duchess your Wife neither in this World nor in the other: Whereby you declare,
that you had resolved to be of your Ladies Religion, before you knew whether it
was good or evil, and that your Enquiries about Matters of Religion were made
after you had formed that Design, and taken that Resolution. Concerning which I
could say many things, but Respect stops me, being unwilling to be offensive to
Your Grace.

You say next, that you have not sought the Grounds of the Religion of My Lady
Duchess any where but in the Holy Scripture. And yet in your whole Letter you
allegde not any one Text of it.

You say next, that it is a point in controversy which are the Holy
Scriptures; in which Question we have great Advantages: For the Books of Tobit,
Judith, Maccabees, etc. are Books not extant in the Hebrew, which is the
Original Tongue of the Scriptures of the Old Testament. Jesus Christ and his
Apostles cite the Books of Moses, the Psalms, the Prophets, etc. but never cite
any of those Apocryphal Books. The Jewish Church before Christ's coming never
did acknowledge those Books As we learn of Josephus and Philo.
. And those Books are stuffed with Fables, as I have fully showed in my Book
against Cardinal du Perron. Book 1. chap. 61.
And whereas you appeal for the grounds of your Religion to the Fathers, we
have for us the Council of Laodicea, Melito, Origin, Eusebius, Athanasius,
Cyril of Jerusalem, Gregory Nazianzen, Amphilochius, Epiphanius, Tertullian,
Hierom, Ruffin, Hilary, Philastrius, Gregory I. Bishop of Rome, and many more,
all which to allege might be tedious to your Grace: Yet, if you shall command
it, I will send you a full List of them.

St. Austin in this Point does contradict himself; and the Third Council of
Carthage, which is objected to us, is otherwise in the Greek Copies than in the
Latin.

Of the Interpretation of Scripture.
You add, that there is a Controversy about the Interpretation of Scripture.
The Pope and the Roman Church boast themselves to be the infallible
Interpreters, and Sovereign Judges of the Sense of it. Yet the Roman Church
never made any Interpretation of Scripture which was generally approved. We
have only Comments of Doctors, who disagree among themselves. Truly the Church
of Rome intends not to make Scripture plainly understood, since she hides it
from the People, and will not have it to be read, and has forbidden the
Translation of it into the vulgar Tongues. What Interpretation can we expect
from the Pope, who boasts that he can change the Commandments of God, and
says that Scripture is subject unto him?

Be pleased my Lord, especially to consider, whether it be just and reasonable
that the Pope should be Judge in his own Cause, and whether the Roman Church
can be the Sovereign Judge of her own Duty; and whether in this Question,
whether the Roman Church be a Sovereign Judge in points of Faith, the Roman
Church her Self can be the Judge.

To give you some Instances of this, Jesus Christ says to St. Peter, Mat.
16.18.19.
and to all his Apostles, Whatsoever thou shall bind on Earth, shall be bound
in Heaven etc. Upon which Text the Roman Prelate groundeth his Primacy. In
Conscience is it just, that he should be acknowledged the Sovereign and
infallible Judge and Interpreter of those Texts upon which he groundeth his
Empire? For who can doubt but that he will give Judgment on his own side; as
indeed by his Interpretations he has laid up for himself greater Riches than
that of the greatest Kings, and has built to himself an earthly Empire. See
then how he interprets that Text. Because Christ has said, Whatsoever thou
shall loose on Earth; the Pope pretends he may also loose those under the
Earth, drawing Souls out of Purgatory. And whereas Jesus Christ in that Text
speaks only of loosing Sinners, that are bound with Ecclesiastical Censures,
the Pope from that Text assumes unto himself the Power of loosing Subjects from
the Obedience sworn unto their Princes, of dispensing with Oaths, of freeing
Children from the Obedience due to their Fathers, and of dissolving Marriages
lawfully contracted. And whereas Christ gave to all his Disciples that loosing
Power, the Pope has reserved unto himself many Cases, in which none but
himself can give Absolution. Besides, he so interprets that Text, as if all
that is said unto St. Peter was said unto the Pope, of which yet the Scripture
says nothing, and gives to St. Peter no Successor in his Primacy or in his
Apostleship.

Your self, My Lord, may judge whether the Pope, who has forbidden Marriage
unto Bishops, can be a good Interpreter of the words of the Apostle, 1 Timothy
3.2, 3.
, A Bishop must be the Husband of one Wife, having his children subject in all
gravity. Whether the Pope having taken away the Cup of the Lords Supper from
the Laity, can be a good Interpreter of these words of Christ, Drink ye all of
it. Whether the Pope and the Roman Church, which by Canons of Councels command
the Adoration of Images, can be good Interpreters of the Second Commandment
which forbids it. Whether the Pope, who makes Ordinances for public
Brothel-houses at Rome, can be a good Interpreter of Gods Commandment, Thou
shall not commit Adultery. Whether the Pope, who forbids Flesh and other Meats,
can be a good Interpreter of the Apostles Precept, Whatsoever is set before
you, eat, asking no question for Conscience sake. Whether the Roman Church,
which in the Council of Trent defines, that Coveting is no sin, be a good
Interpreter of the Commandment, Thou shall not covet. Whether the Pope, who
brings into the public Service a Language not understood by the People, can be
a good Interpreter of the fourteenth Chapter of the first Epistle to the
Corinthians, where it is so many times forbidden to pray and speak in the
Church in an unknown Tongue. Whether Pope John XXIII, who denied the
Immortality of the Soul, and for that Crime and many more was condemned by the
Council of Constance, could have been a good Interpreter of those Texts of
Scripture which speak of Eternal Life.

For your part, My Lord, you take another course. For, without speaking of the
Authority of the Roman Church, which acknowledges no Judge but the Pope, you
say that you have found in the Fathers of the five first Centuries, the
Religion which you seem resolved to embrace. Wherein you resist openly the
Roman Church, which admits not the Fathers for her Judges, and condemn them
very often of Error, Ignorance, and Heresy.

Then you contradict the very Fathers, who in a thousand places refuse to be
believed or received for Judges, and send the Reader continually to the Holy
Scripture. Hardly shall you find many Texts of Scripture wherein the Fathers
agree about the Interpretation. You may be pleased therefore to consider, that
you undertake a Journey in a way where you see no Light. They are Greek and
Latin Fathers which you never read, and where you can get no Information for
your Judgment. A man that has nothing else to do, needs to spend ten years in
study before he can get some mediocrity of knowledge in them; and the words
which they use are taken now in a quite different sense. How can you know
whether the Passages brought to you be faithfully alleged? How can you know
whether the Books whence they are taken be not supposititious? Of which the
Multitude is incredible. But after all, If the Verdict of the Fathers be
received, the Roman Church must be cast, and it will appear that their Religion
is but New. Since the Roman Church and the Pope boast that they can alter the
Commandments of God, and make new Articles of Faith, even in that they have a
new Religion.

Now you may ask, Who then shall be the Interpreter? Who can give us the true
Sense of Scripture? I answer, that since the Question here is of an Interpreter
that cannot err, and who shall always infallibly find out the true Sense? there
is no such in being. God has not in any place of his Word bestowed that Gift
of Infallible Interpretation upon the Roman Church, no more than upon the Greek
or the Syrian. There is no need of such an Interpreter; for things necessary to
Salvation are so clearly set down in Scripture, that they need no
Interpretation. Must we have an Interpreter to know that God has created the
World, that we must love God with all our heart, that the Son of God is dead
for us? Now, I say, that all the Points necessary to Salvation are to be found
in Scripture, in terms as clear as these.

The Interpretations used by the Pastors of our Churches, are taken from the
Scripture it self, so they are not the Interpreters; it is God that expounds
himself. For Example; When they expound these words, This is my Body; they take
the Interpretation from Jesus Christ himself, who says, that it is a
Commemoration of him, and from three Evangelists, who say with one accord, that
Jesus Christ has given Bread to his Disciples; and from the words of Christ,
that he drunk the Fruit of the Vine, we expound his other words, this is my
Blood. We expound also these words of Christ, This is my Body, from St. Paul's
words, who (1 Cor. 11.) says four times, that we eat Bread in the Lords
Supper, and that we break Bread. Certainly, that Apostle gives a clear
Exposition of Christ's words, This is my Body, and this is my Blood, saying, (1
Cor. 10.16.) The Cup of Blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the
Blood of Christ? The Bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the Body
of Christ?

We allege also those Texts that say, that Jesus Christ is no more in this
World; that the Heaven does contain him; that Christ is like unto us in all
things, sin only excepted; and that by consequent he has not a Body dispersed
in a Million of several places at once, and enclosed whole in every Crum of the
Host, and in every Drop of the Chalice.

Likewise, when Jesus says, Do this in remembrance of me; We expound not these
words as the Council of Trent does, which puts this Sense upon them, I do
constitute you to be Priests, to sacrifice my Body really under the species of
Bread and Wine but we bring the Interpretation which St. Paul adds (1 Cor.
11.26.) For as often as you eat this Bread and drink this Cup, ye do show the
Lords Death.

Consider also, that there is great Difference between a Judgment of Authority,
and a Judgment of Discretion. With this last we judge of Meats by the Taste,
without giving Laws to any. And it is so, that not only Pastors but also every
one of the People, may and does judge of the true Doctrine. And it is so that
St. Paul will have the Corinthians to judge of his Doctrine (1 Cor. 10.15.) I
speak as to wise men, judge ye what I say.

Of that matter and of the Interpretation of Scripture, I have written a Book
purposely, which I have dedicated to your Grace, and which was presented to you
by Monsieur de Cabrilles from me. I asked your Grace at Liege, whether you had
received it. Your Answer was, that you knew not what was in it: for you have
labored to strengthen your self with Reasons against us, but would not take
Notice how we answer them; and have conversed much with our Adversaries, but
hid your self from your Servants, who might have cleared your Mind about their
Objections, and armed you with Answers.

Of the Condemnation of Heretics.
Your Grace says farther, that you have desired to see whether the ancient
Heretics were condemned by Persons of our Religion, and whether one man be
found in all Antiquity that had the same Religion as we, in all Points, These
Condemnations of Heretics were made by men sound in the Faith, that were of
the same Religion as we in all points, who have condemned many Errors now
received in the Roman Church.

The Council of Laodicea approved by many Universal Councels which were held
since, rejects the Books of Judith, Tobit, Maccabees, and other Apochryphal
Books.

The Eliberin Council held about the year of the Lord 305 has made this Canon,
It is decreed, that there shall be no Picture in the Church, that the things
that are adored (or served) be not painted upon Walls. The Councels that have
commanded the Adoration of Images are later by 4 or 5 hundred years.

In the first Nicen Council, the Marriage of the Pastors of the Church was
approved, upon the Remonstrance of Paphnutius. Such is the fourth Canon of the
Council of Gangra, If any makes a Difference of a married Priest, as if he
ought not to participate of the Oblation when he does administer, let him be
Anathema.

This is the XXXV Canon of the Council of Laodicea, Christians must not forsake
the Church of God, and go to serve Angels, and gather Congregations. If any
them be found applying himself to that secret Idolatry, let him be Anathema,
because he has forsaken the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God.

About the year of the Lord 399, a Council was held at Carthage, of which this
is the 23 Canon, When Service is made at the Altar, the Prayer must always be
address't to the Father. The present Roman Church contradicts that Canon, for
in their Service they have Prayers addressed unto Saints.

This is the 25 Canon of the same Council, In the Divine Service, let nothing
be offered, but the Body and Blood of the Lord, that is, Bread and Wine mingled
with Water.

The 16 Canon of the IV Council of Carthage, absolutely forbids swearing by the
Creatures. To this the Catechism of the Council of Trent is contrary, which
approves swearing by Relics.

The 10 Canon of that Council of Carthage says. Mulier baptizare non presumat,
Let not a Woman presume to baptize. The Practice of the Roman Church is
contrary to that.

The Milenitan Council where St. Austin was present, and of which he has made
the Canons, forbids Appeals from Africa to Rome, in these Words, It is
declared, That if the Priests or other Clerks in such Causes, as they shall
have, shall complain of the Judgment of their Bishops, the Bishops shall hear
them: But he that will appeal beyond the Seas, let him not be admitted to the
Communion by any living in Africa.

In the VI Council of Carthage, there is a long Epstle of the Council, to
Celestin Bishop of Rome, who, by a new Usurpation, would draw to himself the
Appeals of the Bishops of Africa; whereby the Fathers of the Council beseech
him to receive no more Appeals from their Country, forbidding him to send any
more of his Legates, or to use any more forged Canons to raise his Dignity, and
bring Worldly Pride into the Church of Christ. Therefore Baronius, and
Bellarmin, and Cotton, Jesuits, condemn that Council.

In the Council of Chalcedon, held in the Year of the Lord 451, the Legates of
the Bishop of Rome pretending to the Primacy, and bringing forth a forged Canon
of Nicea, labored to hinder the Bishop of Constantinople from being equal with
the Bishop of Rome, against which, the Council made this Canon. The Fathers,
with good reason, have given Prerogatives to the Sea of Ancient Rome, because
she was the Imperial City. And the hundred and fifty Bishops of the first
Council of Constantinople, moved with the like consideration, have attributed
to the most holy See of New Rome, which is Constantinople, equal Privileges;
judging with good reason, that the City honored with the Empire and the
Senate, and which has the same Prerogatives as the Ancient Rome Imperial,
ought to be magnified as much as [Rome] it self in Ecclesiastical things.

The Popes of our time and their Advocates condemn that Council, not only
because it equalleth the Bishop of Constantinople with that of Rome, but
chiefly because it groundeth the preeminence of the Bishop of Rome upon the
Dignity of the City, because Rome is the Capital City of the Empire, and not
upon the Succession in the Apostleship of St. Peter. For the Fathers of that
Council do not acknowledge him in that Quality.

The Council of Aurange condemns the Merits in the 12th Canon, saying, God
loves us, according as we shall be by his Grace, and not such as we shall be
through our Merits.

In the Year of Our Lord 549, Reparatus Bishop of Cathage called a Synod, in
which Vigilius Bishop of Rome was anathematized as an Heretic Eutychian: And
Honorius Bishop of Rome was condemned by the VI and the VII Universal Councils,
as an Heretic Monothelite. In the VI Council of Constantinople, assembled
again in the Palace of Trulle, in the 17 and the 77 Canon, the Church of Rome
is expressly, and by name condemned, and is commanded to hinder no more the
cohabitation of Priests with their Wives, and to Fast no more on the Lords Day,
upon pain of Deposition, or Excommunication. Whence it appears by the way,
that the Greek and Eastern Church, in which that Council was celebrated, in
which that Council was celebrated, was not subject to the Roman Church, since
she prescribed Laws to her.

In the Year 754, a Council composed of 338 Bishops, was held at
Constantinople, in which it was decreed, that Images should be removed out of
Churches, and the worship of them was forbidden. There also the Bread of the
Eucharist is called the Image, and the Figure of the Body of Jesus Christ.

But in the Year 787 the Empress Irene assembled another Council against that
Council at Nicea, in which Images were set up again, and the Worship of them
was commanded upon Pain of Anathema. But in the year 794, the Emperor Charles
the Great, caused that Council of Nicea to be condemned by another Council
assembled at Frankford, although he knew, that Pope Adrian was of a contrary
Opinion, and had defended that Council of Nicea by an express Book.

This is, My Lord, the Condemnation of Errors about our Controversies, which I
find in the ancient Councils. Neither could I find any ancient Council, which
(in matters of Faith) condemns the Doctrine that we profess. For the Chronicle
of Gaultier, (which was showed to your Grace,) represents things falsely, and
does not agree with other Authors of his Religion, who justify us against most
of his Calumnies.

I am ready to undergo any Punishment, if in the 500 years, which your Grace
mentions, one only man be found, that had a Religion any whit like the present
Religion of the Roman Church. In the ancient Church the public Service was
celebrated in the vulgar Tongue understood by the People. The Laity received
the Communion in the two kinds. The reading of Scripture was not prohibited to
the People. The Church did not believe Purgatory. Before the year 370 of the
Lord, no Tract is found of Invocation of Saints. There was no Mention of Roman
Indulgences, nor of the Treasure of the Church, in which the Pope has laid up
the Overplus of the penal Works, and Satisfactions of Saints and Monks, which
he distributes among the People by his Indulgences. In those days they made no
Images of God. They worshipped not the Images of Saints. They adored not the
consecrated Host with Worship of Latria. They spoke not of Accidents without a
Subject. They believed not, that Mice could gnaw the Body of Christ, or that it
could be blown away be the Wind, or stole or devoured by Beasts, as we are
taught in the Beginning of the Missal.

In those days, the Bishops of Asia, Africa, Egypt, Graece, etc. took no Oath
of Allegiance to the Roman Bishop in their Ordination, and took no Letters of
Investiture from him. In those Days they believed not that Jesus Christ had
eaten his own Body in the Communion. They believed not, that it was in the
Priests Power to create his Creator. The Pope did not style himself God and the
Divine Majesty. He boasted not, that he could not err, and that he was the
Sovereign Judge of Controversies. He drew no Souls out of Purgatory. He took
not upon him the Power of adding to the Creed. He canonized no Saints. He gave
no Pardons of two or three hundred years. He dispensed not with Vows and Oaths.
He dispensed no with Vows and Oaths. He neither gave nor took away Kingdoms. He
put no Kingdom in Interdict.

In those days, the Blessed Virgin Mary was not called the Queen of Heaven, and
the Lady of the World. The Bishop of Rome did not bestow several Offices upon
Saints, charging one to look over such a Country, another to such a Disease,
another to such a Trade. They spoke not in those days of Franciscan Friars, nor
of Dominicans, nor of Capucins, nor of Jesuits, nor of Beads, Rosaries, Agnus
Dei, and the like Commodities. In a Word, the Roman Religion is a Religion
spick and span new, and an horrible defacing of the ancient Religion taught by
Christ and his Apostles.

If Your Grace has such a great Desire to be instructed about Antiquity, you
may desire one of those that take upon them to instruct you, to give you but
one Example upon any of the forementioned Points. I am sure that they will
never undertake it, it being utterly impossible.

I could show to Your Grace, that all these Inventions were devised to serve
the Gain and Ambition of the Pope and his Clergy. But I will pass to that which
Your Grace adds.

Of the Pope's Primacy.
From thence you pass to the Pope's Primacy, and speak thus; I sought to be
informed, whether all the Western Churches had not always acknowledged the
Bishop of Rome to be the Primate and the Head of the visible Church,
established by our Lord for the Conduct of the same; and seeing the Protestants
were so far from rejecting the first five Centuries, that they often both in
their Sermons and Books, quote and produce the Fathers that writ in those Ages.
I thought the shortest way for my Information would be to see what were the
Sentiments of those Fathers in the controverted Points.

Truly my Lord, that short way which you say you have taken, is of an infinite
Length, and indeed there is no end of it. It would have been a far shorter way
to have asked of the ablest men of the Roman Church, whether it may be found in
Gods Word, that God has established the Pope Successor of St. Peter in his
Apostleship, and in his Primacy over the Universal Church. They would have
freely confessed unto you, that the Holy Scripture says nothing of it, and that
it is a Tradition about which we have no Commandment of God.

I observe also, that you speak only of the Western Churches, whence I gather,
that he who suggested these things to your Grace, knows that the Eastern and
the African Church never acknowledged the Bishop of Rome in that Quality and
Character. Now those Churches were then greater than the Western, as also they
are ancienter. Now by the Councils approved both by the Western and the Eastern
Churches, which I have already alleged to your Grace, the Pride of the Bishop
of Rome, who began then to lift up himself is censured.

And though you had proved that the Western have always acknowledged the Pope
as Head of the Church, it avails nothing, unless it be proved also, that his
Primacy then consisted in doing those things which he does now. Did he then
boast that he could not err? Did he vaunt himself as Sovereign Judge of the
Sense and Interpretation of Scripture? Did he give Indulgences? Did he draw
Souls out of Purgatory? Did he give and take away Kingdom? Did he call himself
God? Did he boast that he has Power to add unto the Creed? For in vain do we
dispute about Titles, when the things are different.

I would also beseech you Grace to see whether you be not abused; for indeed
many Passages in the Fathers are found, which say that the Bishop of Rome is
Successor to St. Peter: But they speak of the Succession in the Charge of
Bishop of the City of Rome, not in the Apostleship, or in the Primacy over the
Universal Church. And it is very remarkable, that all the Examples of the Popes
Authority brought out of Antiquity, are within the Limits of the Roman Empire.
And that it cannot be found for above a thousand years after our Saviors time,
that the Bishops of Rome did intermeddle with the Affairs of Churches without
the Roman Empire, as of the Persian, Armenian, and Indian Churches. In all that
time he never gave them any Laws, he never received any Appeal from them.

And that you may see what was the Face of the ancient Church in that Point, I
will lay down before your Grace some Examples according to the Order of the
Ages.

For the first Age we find that St. Peter writ his last Epistle being near his
Death, as he says himself in the first Chapter; and then, or never it was time
for him to say, now my Death is at Hand, but I leave you for my Successor the
Bishop of Rome, to whom I will have the Universal Church be subject; but of
that he says nothing, nor takes any of those Titles upon him which the Pope
now attributes unto himself. St. Peter being dead, if there had been any
Question about choosing a Head for the Universal Church in his Room, no Doubt
but that some Apostle as St. James or St. John must have succeeded him; for St.
John outlived St. Peter about thirty years, but no such thing was done. In the
same. Age lived Dionysius Areopagite, to whom are ascribed by them of the Roman
Church, the Books of Ecclesiastical Hierarchy. Reason required that he should
speak of the Sovereign Hierarch, who now is called the Pope. Yet he speaks
never a word of him, he describes all the Ecclesiastical Offices and Degrees,
making no Mention of the Head of the Church, for he did not acknowledge any.

We find by the Ecclesiastical History, that in that Age and long after, the
Bishop of Rome, was elected by the Suffrages of the Clegy of that Diocesan
Church, with the Consent of their People; An evident Proof that they believed
not in those days, that the Bishop of Rome was Head of the Universal Church.
For had he been so, the Universal Church must have contributed to his Election;
the People of Rome having no right to give a Head to the Church of all the
World.

That Age did swarm with Heresies, which the Bishop of Rome did not condemn,
nor had any Cognizance of them. None that we read of were condemned by any
Council for not obeying the Bishop of Rome, and refusing to be judged by him.
Our Adversaries themselves do not allege any thing from the Roman Church of
that Age, but only some false decretal Epistles of the Popes, which Baronius
and Bellarmine, and Binnius and many others, acknowledge to be forged.

In the second Century our Adversaries find nothing for the Popes Primacy. Only
toward the end of that Age, upon the Question about the Day of the Celebration
of Easter, Victor Bishop of Rome, separated himself from the Communion of
diverse of the Oriental Churches, because they precisely observed the 14th day
of the Moon of March for the day of Easter. For which Action, Victor was
sharply taken up by other Bishops, and particularly by Irenaeus, as Eusebius
witnesses in the V Book, and 25 Chapter of his History.

The third Age affords us many Examples to the contrary. In the year of our
Lord 217 Agrippinus Bishop of Carthage assembled a Council in Africa, in which
it was resolved and defined, that the Baptism of Heretics was no Baptism. This
was against the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, and whether of the two was in
the Right it is not material; It is enough that thereby it appears, that the
Church of Africa was not then subject to that of Rome.

In the year of our Lord 256 Cyprian Successor of Agrippinus began to defend
his Predecessors Doctrine. There being then a Discord between Cornelius Bishop
of Rome and one Novatianus, whereby the Church of Rome was in Trouble, Cyprian
sent two Legates to Rome, to compose the Difference, thereby taking as much
Authority over the Church of Rome, as the Church of Rome use to exercise in the
like Cases. In all his Epistles to Cornelius, he gives him no other Title but
that of Brother, and acknowledges him not for his Superior.

The Contention about rebaptizing of Heretics grew hot between him, and
Stephen Bishop of Rome, even to downright ill Words. In the Epistle to
Pompeius, which is the 74, Cyprian calls Stephen the Champion of Heretics.
proud, ignorant, imprudent, an Enemy to Christians, preferring Falsehood before
Truth, and Antichrist before Christ.

Moreover, he assembled a Council of 87 African Bishops, who condemned Stephen
Bishop of Rome and his Doctrine, and that in Terms worse than Cyprian had given
him. About the same time St. Firmilianus Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia, a
man of great Authority also, bitterly reviled Stephen. From these things it
sufficiently appears, that these Bishops were far from thinking themselves
subject to the Bishop of Rome.

In that Age our Adversaries find nothing for the Pope's Primacy; no Appeals to
him from Churches, either far or near; no Laws given to the Universal Church;
only some forged Decretal Epistles of the Bishops of Rome, of those times are
produced, whose falsehood is acknowledged by the most Learned of the Roman
Writers. In those Epistles the Pope is made to speak as a Master, having power
over all the Emperors and Bishops of the World; Whereas the Bishops of Rome
then confined the exercise of their Power to their own Diocese; not presuming
to give Laws to any other Churches, much less to their Temporal Governors.

Of those three first Ages, Pope Pius the Second in his Epistle to Martin
Mayer, which is the 188. speaks thus, Every one then lived for himself, and
little Reverence was deferred to the Roman Church.

In the year of our Lord 312. the Emperor Constantine being converted to the
Christian Religion, appointed Judges in the Donatists Case, Melchiades Bishop
of Rome being one of them. But the Donatists having complained of his Judgment,
the Emperor commanded that their Cause should be judged again by the Synod of
Arles, who had power to confirm or disannul the Judgment of Melchiades, and his
Fellow-Judges.

Under that Emperor, the Christian Church being delivered from Persecutions, a
new Order and Constitution was made over all the Roman Empire, to which
Sylvester Bishop of Rome was not called. His Legend says untruly, that he
baptized Constantine, and healed him of a Leprosy; but upon that groundless
Fable was built the Donation of Constantine, by which the Emperor is pretended
to have given unto the Pope one half of his Empire.

The same Emperor, in the year 325. assembled a General Council out of the
whole Empire, in which Sylvester did not preside, but Hozius Bishop of Corduba
in Spain, of whom our Adversaries falsely say, that he presided in that Council
as the Pope's Legate: A thing repugnant to the Testimony of Eusebius,
Theodoret, and Sozomen, and to the Acts of the Nicene Council, in which Hozius
signed the first without styling himself the Pope's Legate; and after him Vitus
and Vincentius Deputies of the Bishop of Rome.

To the Emperor Constantine succeeded his Son Constantius, who favoring the
Arrians, banished Liberius Bishop of Rome, and gave him five hundred Crowns to
maintain him in his Exile. But Liberius, to be restored to his Bishopric,
joined with the Arrians, and subscribed their Confession, in their Assembly at
Sirmium.

In the year 381. the Emperor Theodosius called a General Council at
Constantinople, to which Damasus Bishop of Rome came not, nor sent any Legate
to it; that Council being assembled without his consent. In that Council
Heresies were condemned, and the Order of the Patriarchs was altered, without
asking the Advice of Damasus. Yet that Council is one of the first four
Ecumenical Councils.

About the same time, Ambrose Bishop of Milan refused to administer the
Communion to the Emperor Theodosius, for a Murder committed by his Guards at
Thessalonica. Ambrose did this without taking the Advice of Damasus Bishop of
Rome, his Neighbor. Such an action in our days would be High Treason against
the Pope. For it is one of the Fundamental Laws of the Roman Church, that Kings
cannot be bound by Censures, or excommunicated but by the Pope's Order.

That I may not gather here a greater number of Examples, I have alleged
before many Councils that have condemned Popes of Heresy, and have forbidden
them to send Legates, and receive Appeals from Foreign Churches.

The first Bishop of Rome (that I read of) who took upon him to govern the
Church as Successor of St. Peter, was Leo the First, about the year of our Lord
450. For before him the Preeminence which was claimed by the Roman Bishops, was
grounded only upon some mistaken or falsified Canons of Councils; and those in
Consideration of the dignity of the City, which was the chief City of the
Empire: For out of the Roman Empire the Bishops of Rome claimed no Superiority.

Some Passages are found, true or false, in which the Bishops of Rome are
styled the first Bishops of the whole World, and Presidents over the Universal
Church: But the Reason of it was, that the Ancients called the Roman Emperors,
Governors and Masters of the World, and it is frequent in their Writings to
call the Empire Orbis Romanus, the Roman World. The Truth of this is evident,
because the same Titles are many times given to the other Patriarchs, or chief
Bishops of the Roman Empire, viz. To the Bishop of Constantinople, to him of
Antioch, and to him of Alexandria, who are also called the Heads and Sovereigns
of all; and are said to have the Care of all the Churches. Thus Gregory
Nazianzen in his Oration upon Athanasius says, That the Charge of the People
of Alexandria was committed unto him, which is as much as if one said the
Government of all the World. And in the same place he says, that Athanasius
gave Laws unto all the World.

Basil says, that Meletius Bishop of Antioch, Basil. Ep: 50.
did preside over the whole Body of the Church. Theodoret in his Book of
Heresies, in the Chapter where he speaks of Nestorius Bishop of Constantinople,
calls him also the Bishop (...) of the whole habitable World. Wherefore also
the Patriarch of Constantinople is called the Ecumenical or Universal Bishop
in the Councils of that Age.

For this Rule was constituted among the Patriarchs of the Roman Empire, that
each of them was to take Care of all the Churches of the whole Roman Empire:
but that Power was never extended beyond the Limits of the Roman Empire. Yea,
some Passages are found in which that general Dignity is attributed unto all
Bishops that were eminent in Holiness; as Basil says to Ambrose, Idem ep. 55.
that God had raised him to the Dignity of the Apostles. And Sidonius calls
Lupus Bishop of Troyes, Sidon. lib. 6. ep. 1.
the Bishop of Bishops, and the first Prelate of all the World. In those times
all Bishops were called Popes.

For the Popes Primacy Your Grace alleges St. Hierom, who writing to Damasus,
and acknowledging no other Preeminence than that of Jesus Christ, said, I am in
Communion with thy Beatitude, that is, with St. Peter's Chair.

I see nothing there that favors the Popes Primacy over the Universal
Church. For (as I mentioned before) the Bishops of Rome were held St. Peter's
Successors in his Government over the Roman Church; which Government they held
to have been founded by St. Peter, and I would not dispute about that. But they
were not held Successors of St. Peter's Apostleship, nor of his Primacy. Saying
to a man, I am of thy Communion, is not acknowledging him Head of the Universal
Church. So much many be said to any Bishop that is sound in the Faith; yea, to
any true Believer we may say, that we must be of his Communion, and that he
that gathers not with him, is a Scatterer. There were then held to be three
Chairs of St. Peter, one at Rome, another in Alexandria, another in Antioch.
The Bishops of these Cities styled themselves Successors of St. Peter in the
Government of those Churches, not in the Apostleship. And there were always
Piques and Quarrels between those three Sees. Gregory the First, Bishop of
Rome, in the 37 Epistle of his VI Book, says that those three Chairs are but
one See, upon which three Bishops are sitting, and he acknowledges them his
Equals, and that it belongs not to him to command them.

But they that showed to Your Grace that Authority of St. Hierom, had more Wit
than to show you other Passages of his, in which he debaseth very much the
Bishop of Rome, and gives no good Character of the Roman Church of his Age. In
his Epistle to Euagrius he says; In what part soever a man is a Bishop,
whether it be at Rome, or at Agobio, whether at Constantinople or Regio, they
have the same Dignity and Authority; Power and Wealth, or Meanness and Poverty,
do not make one greater or lower than another. By their Place they are all
Successors of the Apostles. And because some alleged the Example of the Roman
Church for preferring the Deacon before the Priest, he answers, Why do
thou allege to me the Custom of one City? showing that that was not to be a
Rule to the Universal Church.

His Custom is to call Rome Babylon, and the Harlot, and to exhort devout
Persons to come out of her. And in his Preface upon the Book of Didymus of the
Holy Ghost, he speaks thus, When I was in Babylon, and was an Inhabitant of the
Harlot clad in Purple, and lived after the Laws of the Roman Citizens, I would
prate somewhat about the Holy Ghost, and dedicate my Work to the Bishop of the
City. But behold that Pot which is seen in Jeremiah after the Staff on the
North-side, begins to boil, and the Senate of the Pharisees begins to cry out,
meaning by the Senate of the Pharisees, the Ecclesiastical Roman Senate.

And in the Epistle to Marcella under the name of Paula and Eustochium,
exhorting Marcella to come out of Rome, and to retire to Bethlehem, I esteem
(says he) that this place of Bethlehem is holier than the Tarpeian Rock,
(meaning the Roman Capitol) which having so often been struck with Lightning
from Heaven, shows that it is displeasing unto God. Read St. John's
Revelation, and see what is foretold of the Hatlot clad with Purple, and of the
Blasphemy written on her forehead, and of the seven Mountains, and of the many
Waters; fly from her my People, and be not Partaker of her Sins, least you
receive of her Plagues: It is fallen, it is fallen, etc. But being gone from
Rome into Syria, and living there in perpetual Quarrels with the Clergy of that
Country, he was constrained to have Recourse unto his old Master Damasus (for
he had been his Secretary) and to write to him those kind Letters which you
allege.

After Hierom you bring St. Austin in these words, Shall we doubt whether we
must rest in the Churches Lap, which by Succession has always had Sovereign
Authority in the Apostolic Chair? That Passage is found in the Book de
utilitate credendi, in the 17 Chapter, but otherwise set down than Your Grace
alleges. Disputing against the Manicheans, with whom Scripture had no
Authority, he uses humane and probable Proofs to exhort men to embrace the
Christian Religion. He says then, We seeing such a great Assistance of God,
and so great Proficiency and Improvement advance, shall we doubt to enter into
the Lap of that Church, [not the Roman, but Catholic Church] which (even to
the Confession of Mankind) from the Apostolic See, by the Successions of
Bishops, while the Heretics in vain barked about her, etc. has arrived at the
height of Authority [that is, to be the established Religion.]

In this Passage St. Austin neither mentions nor appears to have thought of
the Roman Church. And although the Chair of Rome had been named in it, yet this
would avail nothing for the Primacy of the Bishop of Rome over the Universal
Church. For the Primacy of the Apostolic Chairs is attributed by the Ancients
no less to the Church of Alexandria, of Antioch, of Jerusalem, etc. than to the
Church of Rome. Sozomen speaks thus of the Council of Nice, Soz. hist. lib. 1.
c. 16.
There met among the Bishops that held Apostolic Sees, Macarius Bishop of
Jerusalem, Eustathius Bishop of Antioch upon the River Orontes, and Alexander
near the Mareotid Marshes. And again, idem 4.24.
of the Ephesine Council, Cyrillus Prelate of the Apostolic See, meaning
Jerusalem. Ruffinus in the second Book, chap. 21. In Alexandria Timothy, in
Jerusalem John, restored the Apostolic Sees. Theodoret in the fifth Book of
his History chap. 9. calls Antioch the most ancient Church and wholly
Apostolic. St. Austin in his 162 Epistle, speaks of the Apostolic Sees in the
plural, saying, that Cecilian might have reserved his Cause to the Judgment of
the Apostolic Sees. We have alleged Basil before, saying that St. Ambrose
Bishop of Milan had the Apostolic Pre-eminence, and Hierom saying, that all
Bishops are Successors of the Apostles. Sidonius in the first Epistle of the 6.
Book, says that Lupus Bishop of Troyes had already set nine times five years
in the Apostolic See.

They do then abuse your Grace, that make you believe that Austin speaks only
of the Apostolic See of the Roman Bishop, seeing that the Primacy of the
Apostolic See, belonged to so many other Bishops. And though in that place St.
Austin had spoken of the Bishop of Rome only, he had not thereby excluded the
other Bishops from the same Dignity. He that says the King of France enjoys
the Royal Preeminence, does not thereby deny to the Kings of England and Spain
their Authority in their own Countries.

Here it is observable, that St. Austin was never subject to the Bishop of
Rome, that he never took an Oath of Fidelity to him, that when he was admitted
Bishop, he took no Letters of Investiture from him, and paid him no Annates for
his Entry. He was one of those that made the Canons of the Milevitan Council,
which forbad the Appeals from Africa to Rome; and one of those that made that
Remonstrance to Celestin Bishop of Rome, that he should for the time to come
abstain from sending Legates into Africa, and meddling with their Businesses, and
using Supposititious Canons to advance his Authority. The Bishops of Africa
were of the same Faith with the Bishop of Rome, and spoke to him in respectful
Terms, because of the Dignity of the Imperial City, and because they believed
that St. Peter died at Rome, and had founded that Chair among many others. But
if the Bishops of Rome had taken upon them the Title of God, and boasted that
they could not err; if they had taken upon them to canonize Saints, to give
Indulgences, to draw Souls out of Purgatory, to alter the Commandments of God,
and to add unto the Creed; those African Bishops would have bestowed their
Censures upon him as freely as they did upon any other who fell into Heresy.

Of the Sacrifice of the Mass.
For the Sacrifice of the Mass, Your Grace alleges two Passages out of St.
Austin. The one says, That the Catholic Faith suffers not that the Sacrifice
of the Body and Blood of the Lord be offered for those that are not baptized.
In the other, speaking of his dead Mother, he says, that the Sacrifice of our
Ransom was offered for her, when her Body was upon the Brink of the Grave.

There is nothing more easy than to deceive one that will be deceived, and
has no Knowledge in the Fathers. St. Austin declares his Mind upon this point
very often, and tells us that the Eucharist is called the Sacrifice of the Body
and Blood of Jesus Christ, because it is the Sign and Figure of his Body and
Blood; and that the Signs are ordinarily called by the Names of the things
which they represent. Thus in his Epist. 23 to Boniface, Has not Christ been
once sacrificed in himself? And yet he is sacrificed unto the People in a
sacred Sign; and he does not lie, who being asked, answers, that he is
sacrificed. For if the Sacraments had not some Likeness to the things of which
they are Sacraments, they could not be Sacraments. Now by Reaof that Likeness
they take often the name of the very things.

Add to this the Canon, De consecr. did. 2. cap. 48.
i. e. the Roman Code of Canon Law. The Immolation of the Flesh, which is done
by the hands of the Priest is called the Passion, the Death, and the crucifying
of Jesus Christ, not in Truth, but by a significant Mystery.

This is then the Sense of these places of St. Austin; that the Eucharist is
the Sacrifice of the same Price, because it is the Sign and the Sacrament of
it, and because the Signs take commonly the name of the thing signified; as the
same Father says, St. Aug. quaest. 55. in Levit. Idem contra Adimant. c. 12.
Theod. dialog. 1.
The signifying thing uses to take the name of the thing signified. And the
Lord has made no Difficulty to say, This is my Body, when he gave the Sign of
his Body. And Theodoret expounding these words, This is my Body, says, that
the Lord has given to the Sign the name of his Body. And Tertullian, Tertul.
contr. Marc. 4.40.
This is my Body, that is, the Sign of my Body. Indeed the Eucharist is called
a Sacrifice of our Ransom, in the same manner, as in the Institution of the
Sacrament, the Bread is called the Body of Christ; and in the same manner as
the Cup is called the New Testament, because it is the Sacrament and Memorial
of the same; for neither the Cup nor that which is in it is a Testament. St.
Austin knew that Jesus Christ has wholly paid our Ransom on the Cross, and
that there is no other Ransom but the Death of Jesus Christ to redeem us: now
the Eucharist is not the Death of Jesus Christ. And if to apply the Sacrifice
of the Cross unto us, we must sacrifice Jesus Christ again; by the same Reason
to apply the Death of Jesus Christ unto us, we must put him to Death again.

But what can we ask more, since our Adversaries confess that Jesus Christ did
not offer himself in Sacrifice in the Eucharist, and put that Sacrifice among
the unwritten Traditions? So much Bellarmine confesses in the first Book of
the Mass, Chap. 27. Quinta. The Oblation (says he) which is made after the
Consecration belongs to the Integrity of the Sacrifice, but not to the
Essence of it; which is proved, because the Lord did not make that Oblation nor
the Sacrifice at the first. And both Baronius and the Jesuit Salmeron put the
Mass and the Sacrifice of the same among the unwritten Traditions.

As for the Passage you allege out of the Catechisms of Cyrill of Jerusalem, I
need say no more but that the Book which you quote is supposititious, whose
Style is far different from that of the other beforegoing. God has permitted
that an evident Sign of Forgery should be in that Book; the Author exhorts
his Hearers, that they be no more Spectators of the Combats of Gladiators of
the Amphitheater, and of the Horse-races in the Hippodrome: But since Jerusalem
was Christian, there has been no Spectacles in the Amphitheater or Hippodrome.
Gesner in his Bibliotheca says, that he has seen those Catechisms in the
Library of Ausburg, under the name of John of Constantinople.

Of the Invocation of Saints.
For the Invocation of Saints, Your Grace alleges St. Ambrose in the Book of
Widows, where he says, That we must pray to the Angels that have the keeping
of us, and to the Saints and Martyrs, of whom we may expect Assistance. St.
Ambrose writ that Book when he was a new Christian, but he changed his Language
after that time: for in his Oration for Theodosius, written long after, he
says Thou alone, O Lord, must be called upon and prayed to. And Mary was the
Temple of God, St. Ambr. l. 3. c. 12. de Sp. Sanct.
but she was not God; wherefore we must worship God alone who wrought in that
Temple. And a little before, We read, that we must not worship any but God, for
it is written, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou
serve.

The Comment upon the Epistle to the Romans ascribed to Ambrose, upon the first
Chapter says, Address is made to the King by Colonels and Governors, because
the King is a man and knows not to whom he ought to commit the Administration
of the State; but to get Gods Favor who is ignorant of nothing, (for he
knows what men are deserving) there is no need of any ones Suffrage to help
us, but of a devout Spirit. And upon Colos. 1. Christ holds the Primacy in all
things; wherefore if any believe that he must have Devotion for some Element,
or for some of the Angels and Powers, let him know that he is in an Error.

Chrysostom in his first Sermon of Penitence, speaks thus, God must be prayed
to without an Intercessor. And upon Heb. 1. in his third Homily, Why do you
look up to Angels, gaping after them? They are Servants to the Son of God, sent
to several places in your behalf. And in the eighteenth Homily upon the Epistle
to the Romans, toward the end, To whom will thou have Recourse? Whose Help
will thou implore? Will thou call upon Abraham? But he cannot hear thee. Will thou call upon those Virgins? But they will give thee none of their Oil. Will thou call upon thy Father or thy Grandfather? but none of them, though never
so holy, has Power to alter that Judgment. These things being considered, thou
must venerate him, and pray to him alone, who has Power to blot out that
Obligation, and to put out that Flame.

St. Austin says, S. Aug. Enchir. c. 3.
Of God alone we must ask the Good which we hope to do, or hope to obtain by
our good Works. And in the Book of the Quantity of the Soul, 34 chap. God alone
must be served by the Soul, for he alone is the Maker of it. And in the last
Chapter of the Book of the true Religion. Let the Worship of dead men be none
of our Religion; for if they have lived godly, they are not so disposed to seek
such Honors: but they would have us worship him, by whose Illumination they
rejoice that we are Partners of their Dignity. We must therefore honor them by
way of Imitation, and not worship them on the account of Religion. And he
speaks thus to God, Idem l. confess. c. 42.
Whom can I find to reconcile me with thee? Must I address my self to Angels?
By what Prayers? By what Sacraments? Many have tried these ways. and are fallen
to the Desire of curious Visions, and have deserved to be deceived.

Tertullian in the thirtieth Chapter of his Apologetick, speaks thus, I cannot
ask these things of any but him of whom I know that I shall obtain them. For it
is he only that grants them, and I am he that have a Right to obtain them,
being his Servant that call upon him alone.

Likewise Origin against Celsus, the eighth Book says, Above all things, we
must pray to none but God and his only Son. Ignatius who lived near the time of
the Apostles, says in the Epistle to the Philadelphians, You Virgins have none
but Jesus Christ, and the Father of Jesus Christ in your Prayers. Clemens
Alexandrinus speaks thus, Cl. Alexand. l. 11. Strom.
There being none but one only that is truly good, which is God, both we and
the Angels pray to him alone. And so Athanasius. It is manifest (says he) that
the Patriarch Jacob in his Prayer joined none with God, but him that is his
Word; Athan. Orat. 4. cont. Arian.
because it is he only, that manifests the Father unto us.

By a notorious Falsehood, among the Works of this Father, was foisted a Book of
the Mother of God, where she is called the Queen of Heaven, and Christians are
commanded to adore her. But Bellarmine in his Book of Ecclesiastical Writers,
and Banonius in the year 48. 19 and 20. acknowledges the Book to be
supposititious. By the like Forgery in St. Austin's Book of the Spirit and the
Soul, there is a Prayer to the Saints inserted, but in the same Book Boethius is
quoted, who was not born when Augustine dyed, an evident Proof that the book is
falsely attributed to him.

There is a Book of the same Father, Of the Care that must be had of the Dead,
which is truly his, but corrupted and falsified in many places: For he is made
to speak of Prayers to Saints departed as good and laudable; yet he says
there, that the departed Saints know nothing of all that the Living do; and
that if it were otherwise, his good and holy Mother would not have forsaken
him. Then he adds, The Spirits of the deceased are in a place where they see
nothing of all that is done, or that happens to men in this Life. And a
little after. It must be acknowledged that the dead know not that which is done
here, while it is a doing, but they know it afterward by them that dye and
come to them. Was St. Austin so much overseen as to teach that those must be
called upon by us who understand us not, nor know what is done here below,
unless some dye, and perhaps afterward bring them News of it?

This Advantage we have in this point, that our Adversaries acknowledge, that
there is no Commandment of God for the Invocation of Saints, and that the Holy
Scripture says nothing of it: And that under the Old Testament, that is, for
the space of four thousand years, the Church used no Invocation of them. All
the Prayers in Scripture are addressed unto God alone, and therefore we have no
Assurance or Encouragement to call upon the Saints, which we can ground upon
the Word of God. Is it not enough for us to have the Son of God for our
Intercessor, who tells us, None comes to the Father but by me, John 14. For how
can we pray with Faith and Assurance to those who discern not the Prayers of
the Heart? For Scripture tells us that God alone knows the Hearts of men. 2 Chronicles. 6.30.

I might say, that in the Roman Church many Saints are prayed to that never
were in the World, and others whose Holiness is very dubious, and whose Lives
were very bad. Three hundred and seventy years past in the Christian Church
without any Invocation of Saints. The first that used it was Gregory Nazianzen,
who yet invocating the Souls of Constantius, (who was an Arian) of Athanasius,
and of Basil, added this Clause, If thou understand me, and If the Dead have
any Sense: But the Invocation of Saints was not received till a long time after
in the Public Service.

All these things considered, My Lord, I cannot wonder enough that Your Grace
chooses rather to be ruled by one Passage of St. Ambrose, which perhaps is
forged, than by the Word of God, and the Church of the first Ages after Christ.
For would you subscribe to all that St. Ambrose says? In the first book of
Virgins he says, that the Angels fell by lying with Women. In his Speech upon
Gratian and Valentinian, and upon the first Psalm, he says, that some rise
again sooner than others. And in his Oration of the Faith of Resurrection, he
makes three sorts of Resurrection; the first of the Patriarchs and Apostles,
the second of the Gentiles converted to the Faith, the third of those that come
from the South and the North. In his first Book of Offices chap. 50. he
condemns second Marriages. In the first Book of the Holy Ghost, he teaches
that the Baptism in the name of the Holy Ghost alone, without naming the Father
and the Son, is valid. In the tenth Sermon upon the 118 Psalm, he says that
the Damned which are in Hell, shall in the end be saved, when the time of their
Punishment is fulfilled.

The Roman Church believes not with Ambrose, that all Saints shall be burnt
with the material Fire of the day of Judgment, as we shall see hereafter.
Neither does the Roman Church believe with Ambrose, that Melchisedeck was Jesus
Christ himself. Many Pages might be filled with the like Errors of this
Father, whose Authority you value more than that of God speaking in the Holy
Scriptures.

Of Prayer for the Dead, and of Purgatory.
Your Grace ends your Allegations of Fathers with Theodoret and Austin. The
first of which is alleged to say, We believe that there is a Fire of
Purgatory, in which Souls are purged like Gold in the Furnace. The other says,
He that will not till his Field, shall be chastised in this World, and after
his Death shall be punished in the Fire of Hell, or in that of Purgatory. And
adds, that he has made a whole Book of the Prayers for the Dead, and that
the whole Antiquity has so practiced it.

They that have helped you with these Passages have miserably abused your
Grace. It is true, that all the ancient Church prayed for the Dead, but in a
manner which the Roman Church condemns, and holds to be ridiculous and
erroneous. Not one Passage can be found in the genuine Works of any Father, by
which it can appear, that he prayed for the Dead, to draw them out of
Purgatory. Could Your Grace have the Patience to. read St. Austins Book of the
Care to be taken of the Dead, you would find that there is not one Word of
Purgatory in the whole Book.

The Christian Church in the III and IV Ages after Christ, prayed for the
Saints, for the Apostles, and Martyrs. The public Form of those Prayers is
found in the eighth Book of the Apostolic Constitutions of Clement, in the
eighteenth Chapter. We offer unto thee for all the Faithful which have been
pleasing unto thee from the Beginning of the World, Patriarchs, Prophets,
Righteous, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors. The same is to be found in the Book
of Ecclesiastic Hierarchy, that goes under the name of Dionysius; and in
Epiphanius, where he treats of the Heresy of Arius. All consent, that none
can imagine that these Prayers for the Saints, were to draw them out of
Purgatory.

St. Austin who writ in the Beginning of the fifth Century, was the first that
said it was doing Injury to a Martyr to pray for him.

It further appears, that the ancient Church had not belief of this Doctrine,
in that they prayed for the Souls that slept peaceably; which Prayer to this
day remains in the Roman Mass, in which the Priest prays for the dead in
these Words; Remember Lord thy Servants and Handmaids which are gone before us
with the Sign of Faith, and which are sleeping in a quiet Sleep. It is evident,
That this Prayer was made in a time when the Belief of Purgatory was not yet
received, for those that are burning (perhaps for many Ages) in a Fire seven
times hotter than Hell, do not sleep with a quiet Sleep.

If you ask me why they prayed for the dead, whom they held not to be in any
Torment, it will be no hard Matter to give you Satisfaction. First they asked
that the Dead Person for whom they prayed might rise again to Salvation in the
last day. Such was the Prayer of Judas Maccabaeus, 2 Mac. 12. v. 43 and 44.
Doing therein (says the Author) very well and honestly, in that he was
mindful of the Resurrection. For if he had not hoped that they that were slain
should have risen again, it had been superfluous and vain to pray for the Dead.
By the Judgment of that Author, the Prayer made for the dead in the Roman
Church, is superfluous and vain, since it is not made for their Resurrection.
That this was in old time the intent of the Roman Church when they prayed for
the Dead, it appears by the Prayers which are used still in the Mass for the
Dead, of which these are the Words; We beseech thee Lord to absolve the Souls
of thy Servants from all Bonds of Sin, that in the Glory of the Resurrection,
being risen again, they may breath among the elected Saints. Thus Ambrose
prays for the Soul of Theodosius, and yet he says, that he is received into
Christ's Tabernacles in the heavenly Jerusalem. And St. Austin prays for the
Soul of his Mother Monica, which is among the Saints, and whom St. Austin
believes to be enjoying heavenly Blessedness.

Another Opinion was rife among the Ancients, That some Souls should rise
sooner than other Souls, and that many Sins were to be expiated by the Delay of
the Resurrection. Tertullian toward the end of his Book of the Soul, makes the
Suffering of Souls after Death, even for the least Sins to consist in that
Delay. In the Book of Monogamy, chap. 10. he will have a Widow to pray for her
deceased Husband, and that she may keep him Company in the first Resurrection.
The like Prayer Ambrose makes for Gratian and Valentinian, I beseech thee O
Supreme God, that thou will raise up again, more early, these most beloved
young men. Here is then a second end, for which the Ancients prayed for the
dead.

They had one end more. It was an Opinion generally held by the Fathers, that
in the day of Judgment, after men are risen again they shall not enter into
Paradise before they have been sindged and purged by the Fire of the day of
Judgment, some more, some less, as they have more or less sinned. This is the
Purgatory Fire of the Ancients, of which their Books are full. Through that
fire they make all the Saints to pass, even the Virgin Mary. Lactantius lib. 7.
cap. 21. declares thus his Opinion, which was then the general, When God has
judged the Just, he will try them by fire, and those whose Sins are very
considerable either in Weight or number, shall be sindged and lightly burnt by
the Fire. Thus Hillary upon St. Matthew, Hilar. in Mat. Canon. 2.
To them that are baptized with Holy Ghost, it remains yet to be perfected by
the fire of Judgment. And in the part Gimel upon the 119 Psalm, This
Purification is reserved for us after the Baptism of Water, which must
sanctify us by the coming of the Holy Ghost, and refine us by the Fire of
Judgment?

Again, Do we wish for the day of Judgment, in which we must pass through that
unwearied Fire, and undergo those grievous Pains, to expiate the Soul of her
Sins? And he makes the Virgin Mary go through that Fire, If (says he) even
that Virgin which has conceived God must undergo the Severity of that
Judgment, who will dare to desire to be judged by God?

St. Ambrose also says, that all the Prophets and Apostles must in that day be
purged by that Fire. In the 20 Sermon upon the 118 Psalm. All must pass through
the Flames, even John the Evangelist, whom the Lord loved, even Peter. And upon
the 36 Psalm. The Sons of Levi shall be purged by Fire, Ezekiel, Daniel, etc.
Observe that he says, they shall be; whence it appears, that he speaks of a
Fire which is not yet. St. Austin is express for it in the 16 Book of the City
of God, chap. 24. By this Fire is understood the day of Judgment, which shall
separate the Carnal, some to be saved by the Fire, some to be condemned to the
Fire. And in the 25 Chap. of the 20 Book, By that which was said it seems to be
evident, that in that Judgment there will be some Purgatory Pains; And the
Title of the chapter says expressly, that he speaks of the Fire of the last
Judgment. After the Purgation by that Fire, he holds that the Sentence of the
last Judgment shall be pronounced, in the 21 Book chap. 16.

Of that Purgation by Fire speak Irenaeus, Basil, Gregory Nazianzen, Gregory
Nyssen, and Hierom. It is of that Fire, My Lord, that Theodoret and Austin
speak in the places which you allege. And it is one of the grounds, why the
Ancients prayed for the dead. For that St. Austin believed that Souls going out
of the Body, went straight either into Paradise or into Hell, and that there is
no middle or third place called Purgatory: it is clear by these Passages, in
the 18 Sermon of the words of the Apostle, There are two Habitations, the one
of the eternal Kingdom, the other of the eternal Fire. And in the 232 Sermon,
which is against Drunkenness. Let none deceive himself, my Brethren, for there
are two places and no third. He that has not merited with Christ, shall perish
without doubt with the Devil. And in the first Book of the merit of Sins and of
Pardon, chapter 28. There is no middle place, so that he that dwells not with
Christ, can be any where else than with the Devil. The fifth Book of the
Hypognosticks speaks thus, The Catholic Faith grounded upon Divine Authority,
is, that the first place is the Kingdom of Heaven, and the second is Hell. We
believe no third place, and find none in the holy Scriptures. In the Book of
the Vanity of the World, chap. 1. Know ye that when the Soul separates from the
Body, it is at the same Instant placed in Paradise for its good Works, or cast
down into the Gulf of Hell for its Sins.

I could bring Your Grace Passages by hundreds out of the Fathers, which
express that the Souls of the godly are presently after Death carried into
Paradise or into Hell. I will content my self with one or two.

Cyprian in the Book against Demetrian speaks thus, This temporal Life being
ended, we are sequestered either in the Habitation of Death, or in that of
eternal Life. And in the same place, When men are gone from hence, there is no
place left for Penitence, no Fruit, no effect of Satisfaction, and in Death it
self they pass to Immortality.

The Fathers were so far from believing that Souls were burnt in Purgatory,
that many of them believed not that the Souls could be tormented without the
Bodies. Thus Tertullian in the 48 Chap. of his Apologetick, The Soul (says he)
cannot suffer without solid Matter, that is, without Flesh And Gregory in the
Oration of the Lords Resurrection, The Fire can never work upon the separate
Soul, and Darkness cannot be grievous to it, because it has no Eyes. Ambrose
in the first book of Penitence Chap. 17. The Soul without the Body, and the
Body without the Soul, cannot be Partakers of Punishment or Reward.

Chrysostom in the 39 Homily upon the first Epistle to the Corinthians. The
Soul without the Flesh shall not receive her hiden Goods, as likewise she shall
not be punished without the Flesh.

The Truth is so strong on our side, that many of our Adversaries freely
confess that the Fathers speak little or not at all of Purgatory. Navarrus the
Popes Penitentiary, in the beginning of the year of Jubilee, says, No Orthodox
doubts that there is a Purgatory. Yet the Ancients make no mention of it, or
very seldom, and that he says after Roffensis, otherwise the Cardinal of
Rochester, whom he alleges.

Alphonsus de Castro one of the Doctors of the Council of Trent, in his eight
Book against Heresies, upon the Word Indulgentia, speaks thus. In the ancient
Writers, the mention of the Transubstantiation of the Body of Christ is very
rare, of the Procession of the Holy Ghost more rare yet, of the Purgatory they
make almost no mention at all, especially the Greek Authors; as also to this
day the Greeks have not believed Purgatory.

One may see in the Dialogues of Gregory the First, That Satan in his time was
brewing that Mystery by Visions and Apparitions of Souls, some of which said
that they purged themselves at the Smoke of Baths, others in the Wind, others
in Rivers; and this was already in the year of our Lord 595.

But the Popes that came after, found out another kind of Purgatory wonderfully
gainful, whereby they have heaped up to themselves and their Clergy infinite
Riches. For the Pope by Bulls and Indulgences fetches Souls out of Purgatory
at the Suit of those that will come to his Price to buy them, and particular
Masses, whose number is infinite, are bought very dear, and none of them is
sung with particular Application to beggars or those that have given nothing.

Yet they hold one Age to be exempted from Purgatory, for (say they) when Jesus
Christ comes to judge the World, then all that live in the World shall be
exempted from that Torment. In the mean while, one may wonder that whilst Jesus
Christ is interceding for the Souls that are burning in that Fire (for he
intercedeth for all the faithful) those Souls come not out by this
Intercession, but by the Popes Indulgence.

By all that has been said here, Your Grace may perceive how much you are
mistaken in the Fathers, and indeed, by your manner of alleging them, it is
easy to see that you have not read them; but that some ignorant men furnish
you with Passages, which have quite another Sense than that which they put upon
them. If forsaking what you know from the holy Scripture, which (as St. Paul
says) is able to make us wise upon Salvation, you take those things upon Trust
which others tell you out of the Fathers, and if you greedily embrace all that
shall be presented unto you of this kind, you will find enough to help your
Resolution, not to be separated neither in this World, nor in the other, from
my Lady, your Duchess. You say that you would know the Grounds of her
Religion, whilst her Grace did not trouble her self to know the Grounds of
yours.

My Lord, how could that Thought come into your Mind, to believe Purgatory upon
two or three Passages of Fathers distored from their right Sense; and to shut
your Eyes against all that the Word of God speaks against it? Apoc. 14.13.
Out of that good Word you might have learned, that Blessed are they that dye
in the Lord, that they rest from their Labors, and that their Works follow
them; Isa. 57.1. and 2.
that when the righteous dies he shall enter into Peace: that we must make to
our selves Friends by Alms, Luke 16.9.
which when we fail, may recieve us into everlasting Habitations. That Jesus
Christ said to the repenting Thief crucified with him, Luke 23.43.
This day thou shall be with me in Paradise. And yet by the Doctrine of the
Roman Church, he had need of great Purgation. 1 John. 1.7.
That the Blood of Jesus Christ the Son of God, cleanses us from all Sin. This
is our true Purgatory, God who is all just and all good, would he take two
Payments for the same Debt, when the first Payment which is the death of Christ
is sufficient? would he delight to torment his Children for many Ages in an
internal fire, for Sins which he has freely pardoned, as we learn of St. Paul,
Ephesians. 4.32. Col. 2.13.
that God for Christ's sake has forgiven us all our Trespasses?

Every Father that chastises his Children, unless he be altogether unnatural,
does it to make them better; but the Roman Church will have God to burn his
Children, not to make them more righteous (for by their Doctrine they are
perfectly righteous before they enter into Purgatory) but to content himself,
and satisfy his Justice. Let them find if they can, one example in Scripture
of any Soul that was sent to Purgatory.

It is very considerable that in the Levitical Law there are Sacrifices
prescribed for all sorts of Sin and Pollution, even of Leprosy and the
touching of a dead body; but that law prescribes no Sacrifice for the dead, nor
any Service for their Relief, yea, Deuteronomy. 26.12, and 14.
it opposes it plainly; for he that brought unto the Temple or Sanctuary his
first Fruits, Tithes and Offerings, to give Thanks unto God for his Income, and
all the Crop of the Year, was commanded to protest that he had not taken away
ought thereof for any unclean use, nor given ought thereof for the dead.

All these things, My Lord, drawn out of the Word of God, any founded upon the
Nature of the Gospel, which the Son of God has brought you from Heaven, are
they not better than some Passages of the Fathers, which you allege contrary
to their Intention, and which say things that the Roman Church approves not.

How comes it to pass, My Lord, that since your Marriage you have taken another
Rule for your Religion than the Word of God? You will be guided by the Fathers;
but the Fathers send you back to the Scripture, and will not have you to rest
upon their Authority, acknowledging that they themselves are subject to Error.
And for such the Roman Church does acknowledge them, and in a thousand things
find fault with them. Certainly the Holy Scripture without the help of men's
Glosses has light enough of its own to lead us to Salvation.

O! My Lord, it is dangerous to dally with God, and to bow the rule of his Word
to the Will of another. As for My Lady Duchess your wife, I wonder not, that
being nursed in that Persuasion that her Religion is good, she does her utmost
to draw you to it, thinking thereby to do Service to God. Having no Instruction
in the Word of God, her Grace does that which she thinks to be good; and I hope
that God finally will be merciful to her. But you, My Lord, who have been
carefully instructed in the Word of God, in whose Family God had planted his
Covenant, whom God has blessed with so many effects of his Assistance, cannot
but have a dreadful Account to give unto God.

I could allege ti Your Grace the memory of my Lord your Father, whom God had
endowed with an incomparable Capacity; the Sorrow of your Lady Mother, whose
Death you hasten by your Change; the Anguish of your nearest Relations, and of
all your Servants and Subjects, whom you fill with Confusion; and the
Inconvenience to your Affairs, which you do your self acknowledge. I choose
rather to exhort your Grace in the name of God, and as your most humble and
faithful Servant, that you take pity of your own Soul; and that at least you
delay the taking of that final Resolution, till your Return unto this your
Town, and till I may endeavor to show to those Doctors in your Presence, that
they abuse your Grace with those Passages of the Fathers, wherewith they have
armed you. But I am sure they dare not appear before me to maintain those
things which they infuse into your mind. You have been many years harkning to
them alone, without asking any of our Counsel or Assistance. Grant us at least,
that we may have some days to answer them.

I make no Doubt, but that by speaking thus, I may loose both your Graces and
your Ladies Favor. But having but few days to live, I commit to God all that
may come of it, and will endeavor to discharge my duty with a good Conscience.
Which I will always do without any Diminution of the Respect and Obedience
which I owe to your Grace, and without intermitting my continual prayers to God
for Your Grace, and for my Lady Duchess, as being,

My Lord, Your Graces most humble and most obedient Servant. PETER DU MOULIN.

FINIS.

