depiction of friar Behold they come to you in sheeps clothing touch me not for
I am holier then thou Having a form of godlisness Printed for James
Collins*1671



THE MONK'S HOOD PULLED OFF; OR, THE CAPVCIN FRIAR DESCRIBED.

In Two Parts.

Translated out of French.

LONDON, Printed for James Collins, at the Sign of the Kings Arms in Ludgate
street. MDCLXXI.

To the Right Honorable Anthony Lord Ashley, Baron St Giles, Chancellor of
his Majesty's Receipt of Exchequer, one of the Commissioners for the Treasury,
and one of the Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, etc.
My Lord,
I Know it is the common errand of all Dedications, to beg Protection, but I Will
be singular; for the truth is, I might justly be reputed very unmannerly, if I
should presume to entitle your Lordship to the Patronage of a controversy,
without your consent (though, withal, I dare affirm your Lordship, would not be
ashamed to own the Protestant Interest upon any just occasion) All my business
is to entreat your Lordship to accept this small Piece, as a Testimony of my
real gratitude for your many Favors. And because God has given me an
opportunity of publishing my thankfulness; I must let the world know how great
my obligation is, (which I hope I may do, without any offense, either to your
Lordship, or the Papists) to which purpose, I suppose, it will be enough to
say, that your Lordship never denied me your favor, when I begged it, and that
it has been freely conferred without the least inducement on my part; which
circumstance renders it truly noble, and consequently suitable to your
Lordships quality. Now to obtain your Lordships acceptance of this poor
Present, I shall use no other motive or argument, than to assure your Lordship,
that it is tendered with an unfeigned respect and good will; and that though it
be but a trifle (its design being only to give your Lordship an hours
Divertisement) yet it is all the return I am able to make your Lordship, for
the many Talents I owe you. But you know (My Lord) our Savior tells us that
the poor Widow that cast two Mites into the Treasury, cast in more then all the
rich men, because they cast in of their abundance; but she of her penury, cast
in all her Living. And by the same rule, having presented your Lordship with
all I have, there was never (for ought I know) so great a a Present made you,
as these two Mites, humbly cast into your Lordships Treasury, by (My Lord)

Your Lordships Most obliged, and therefore most Devoted Servant.

THE TRANSLATOR TO THE READER.
ANNO 1665. The former of these two small Tracts (composed by the Great Du
Moulin of France) was made English, and Published; and the other Written by Mr.
Clovet, once a famous Capucin) coming since accidentally to my hands, and
finding it designed as a suppliment to complete the description of the Capucin,
immediately resolved to English it likewise, and now Present them both to your
view. You will not I suppose think this publication unseasonable, if you
consider the growth of Popery in England, which is so great, that it is now
become the Mode to turn Papist. Of the dangerous censequences whereof, how
sensible his Majesty, and his two Houses of Parliament are, we may guess, by
the late address for putting a stop to this growth, and his Majesty's Gracious
Proclamation to that end. What the Principles of the Romanists are in reference
to heretical (that is Protestant) Princes and Governors, and what their
Practices have been, I need not mention, they are sufficiently known to the
world. But because they talk much of their Loyalty to King Charles the First, of
ever Blessed Memory; during our unnatural intestine War (which I think is, the
only instance they can allege) they must give me leave to say, that it was not
their Principles that made them Loyal. I am sure their Holy Father and their
Church teach them otherwise, and The Earl of Derby, in his vindication of the
Church of England, against Papists and Quakers.
an eminent Peer of this Realm, thinks he has demonstrated the necessity, or
interest made them, chose the Kings Party; and if so, they have great cause to
boast of their Loyalty. As for the Articles of their Faith made at Trent, if
you will take the pains to examine them by the rule of God's Word, perhaps you
will find that they have as much reason to brag of their Creed as of their
Loyalty. As for the Papal Government, though it be termed Ecclesiastical, yet
(the Court having swallowed the Church) you will find it merely, or chiefly
Political. Lastly, if you examine their worthy Discipline and Ceremonies,
compared with the Lives and Heresies of their Popes and Clergy, you will, I
suppose, without much difficulty conclude, that they have as little cause to be
proud of their Popes Government, Discipline, Worship, Church and Churchmen, as
of their Creed or Loyalty. As for their Monks, you will know what they are,
when you have perused this little Book; So that I shall only add, that if
Piety consists in wild, impertinent, absurd, and ridiculous actions, they are
the greatest Saints that ever lived upon earth, and in the next rank
Mountebanks, Morrice-Dancers, Jack-Puddings, Bedlams, and such like deserve to
be placed. In a word, whether the terms of Rebel, Traitor, Heretic and
Phanatick, which the Romanists do so confidently and liberally bestow on all
sorts of people that are not of their own gang; may not with as much justice be
retorted on themselves, even by the most extravagant Sectary; is left to the
decision of every intelligent impartial Reader.

The Authors Preface.
SOme new Guests being come to this Town, who are rare examples of modesty, and
sincerity, common civility requires that we should present them with something,
which may prove useful and serviceable to them. Now I cannot think of a fitter
Present, for persons of a sublime profession, and extraordinary sanctity, then
to present them with a description of their Original, and the continuation, and
progress of their virtues. For although Father Joseph in his book against my
Three Sermons, calls me Fool, Cheat, and an Impostor, yet the Rule of Charity
requires us to render good for evil. Besides, we must not judge of persons by
one single action: neither must we under pretense, that this Reverend Father
has his fits of passions, conceal his virtues; especially, that Capucin-like
goodness of his, when in his Sermon at the Gallows, to comfort a Whore who was
to be executed; he calls her sister; and why might he not call whores his
sisters, seeing venerable Francis, the Patron of the Capucins, called the
Magpies, Grasshoppers, and Swallows his sisters? With the like Prudence he
exhorts this poor condemned person, whose name was Margaret, to recommend her
Soul to St. Margaret, which is a Saint that never was in the world, and is
placed in Heaven without having ever been upon Earth. After which proofs of his
rare wit, he condemns us all to Hell, to keep him company. Wherefore he will
not be offended, I suppose, if an acknowledgment of so charitable an office, I
address to him this small Treatise, wherein he will see the Original of his
Order, and the illustrious actions of the Capucins, whose perfections the
Apostles could not attain unto. The Reader will here find very pleasant
extravagances and Follies more then enough to make a Saint of (the word Saint
having changed its signification in this blessed age:) For now adays if a man
would attain unto a Seraphique, and supereminent sanctity, he must first be out
of his wits.

The ensuing Narrative would afford sufficient subject for laughter, did it not
afford much more subject for sorrow and compassion. For a man cannot see
without great grief, the Christian Religion quite disfigured, and poor people
fed with empty shows in stead of true and holy doctrines.

The God of mercy take pity on so many poor people so grossly abused; and stir
up his zeal, and wonted compassions to deliver so many Souls ensnared by a
counterfeit holiness: to whom the Holy Scriptures are a book altogether
unknown, and sealed with more then seven seals.

My design in this Treatise is not to offend these Fathers, but to instruct
them, and to show them how far distant they are from true holiness, also to
demonstrate to them, that in aspiring to a degree of glory above Abraham,
Moses, and other such petty Saints, who never did works of supererogation, they
take the course to come behind the meanest: and that some crimes are more
tolerable then their sanctity. The Lord open their eyes, that they may see it
is a dangerous thing to mock him, and that they have to do with a terrible
Judge, who cannot be deceived, who searches the heart, and from whom nothing
is hid.

THE MONK'S HOOD PULLED OFF; OR, THE CAPVCIN FRIAR Described.
PART I.
CHAP. I. Of the Monastic Profession in General.
THE Monks do generally profess works of Supererogation, that is, to do more
good works, and more perfect, than those which God commands in his Law; that
is, they profess to do works more excellent then to love, and serve God with
all their heart, and with all their strength; for it is that which God commands
in his Law. Therefore they serve God with more than all their strength; they
are more virtuous than God would have them to be. Moreover they would make us
believe, that by their profession of austerity, and severe Discipline, they do
more satisfactory works, and suffer more punishment than their sins deserve,
and that the overplus serves for others. For the Pope gathers this overplus
into the Church-treasury, and distributes it to people by his indulgencies.

By these works of supererogation, the Monks pretend to attain unto a
supereminent degree of celestial glory, far above those small Saints who
contented themselves to fulfill the Law of God, without doing any more. This
degree of glory is called by the Doctors Aureolo. To which degree Abraham,
Jacob, Samuel, David, etc. have not attained; for they never did works of
supererogation.

CHAP. II. Of the Begging Friars, and their Vows; and of the difference 'twixt
them, and the Jesuits.
THere are four sorts of Begging Friars, viz. The Minors (called in France,
Cordeliers) the Preachers (who are also called Jacobins, and Dominicans) the
Carmelites, and the Augustines. They bind themselves by vow to three things.
They vow poverty, so that they possess nothing in particular, although they
abound in common. Also they vow never to Marry. This they call the vow of
Chastity, as if there could be no chastity in a married estate. The third vow,
is the vow of Obedience, whereby they oblige themselves (not to keep the Laws
of God, but) most exactly to observe the Rule of that Saint who is their
Patron, and the Constitutions of their Order, and to obey the commands of the
Guardian, or Superior of their Convent, and to obey the General of their
Order, and above all the Pope.

The Jesuits beg not, and reject the austerities of the Minors, and will not be
called Monks. They are well shod, warmly clad, and Ribaden ex vita Ignatii,
lib. 3.
lie on good beds. And they that are called Fathers (who are the chief of their
College) have their Table furnished with the choicest meats. They labor with
very great industry to gather wealth, although Ignatius Loyola, their Founder,
did beg. They vow never to marry. But their chief vow, and which they observe
most strictly, is the vow of blind obedience, whereby they are obliged to obey
their Superior in all that is commanded, without enquiring whether the thing
be good, or evil: for they will always have it pre-supposed that the thing is
good. This obedience has cost many Kings and Princes their lives,
particularly, that excellent Prince, William of Nassaw, Prince of Orange,
Grandfather to the Duke of Bovillon, who was killed at Delft by Balthazar
Gerard of the Franck County, excited thereunto by the Jesuits of Treves. His
process and examination are to be seen at Delft in Holland.

They say indeed, that we must do nothing contrary to the commands of God; but
they permit not those who are commanded by the Superior, to examine whether
his command be conformable to the commands of God. For (as Pope Julius the
third, in the Bull which Ribadenera inserts in the life of Ignatius, says)
Christum in Praeposito praesentem, agnoscant. They acknowledge Jesus Christ to
be present in the person of the Superior.

The Capucins are more moderate; for they oblige themselves to obey their
Superior in all things except sin. For example; if the Superior should commend
a Capucin to plant Cole-worts with the leaves downward, and the root upward, or
to lick up the spittle of another Capucin, or to plant a straw, and to water it
until it grows, the Monk is bound to obey these commands, such actions being
most proper to try the obedience of the Minors.

CHAP. III. Of the Excellence, and Prerogatives of each Order of the Begging
Friars.
EAch Order of the begging Monks has some Privileges and Prerogatives to
render it commendable. The Carmelites have this privilege above the other
Orders, that they remain in Purgatory but until the next Saturday after their
death.

St. Antonin, who has written the life of St. Dominick, the Patron of the
Preaching Friars, tells us, that St. Dominick being once in a trance, saw the
Heavens open, and a multitude of Monks in celestial glory, but saw not one of
his own Order amongst them, whereupon this blessed Saint wept bitterly. But
Jesus Christ comforted him, by showing him a multitude of Jacobin Friars that
were hid under the Virgin Mary's Coats.

Not one of any other Order ever had this honor. It is observable that this
Antonin, Archbishop of Florence, was Canonized by Pope Clement the 7th An. Dom.
1523. and that in the Bull of Canonization the said Pope approvs of, and
authorizeth the Doctrine of this Antonin, and gives great Indulgences to those
who shall visit his relics. The same is recited by Theodorick in the life of
Saint Dominick, as Surius reports.

But the Minors surpass all the other Orders in the greatness of their
Indulgences, granted by the Popes to St. Francis's Order. Read a Book,
entitled, The treasure Printed at Rouen by Tho. Dare in the Jews's street,
near the Palace, 1614.
of the Indulgences of St. Francis 's Cord; and you shall find these words in
p. 119. Item, every day until the Nativity of our Lady, there is eight hundred
sixty five thousand, and one hundred sixty two years, and one hundred days of
indulgence, and a remission of the third part of sins, granted to diverse
Churches. The Jesuits laugh at this, and care not to obtain of the Pope such
Indulgences.

Pope Sixtus 5. Anno 1586. on This may be seen in the book of the Indulgences
of the fraternity of the Cord, Printed at Paris by John le Bouc, at St.
Hillarys Mount.
May 7. granted to those of the fraternity of St. Francis's Cord, who shall say
five Pater nosters, and as many Ave Mary's, on Palm-Saturday, and on the Feast
of St. John the Evangelist; and that before Porta Latina, the pardon of all
their sins, and power to free one soul out of Purgatory. And these privileges
are confirmed by the Letters Patents of the same Pope; dated at St. Marks, Aug.
9. 1587.

But the most memorable Indulgence, is that which (as the Rosary of Bernardin
says) St. Francis obtained for the Church of Sancta Maria Angelorum, called
Portiancula in the City of Assise (viz.) that all they who shall go into that
Church, shall receive the remission Francis was born in this City, which is in
the Duchy of Spoleta.
of all their sins. However, Jesus Christ would not grant this to St. Francis,
but on condition that he should get a confirmation of this Indulgence from the
Pope.

This also is one of the Prerogatives of St. Francis's Order, and Antonin. in
vita Dominici, c. 1 sect. 1. Statum regularem sub Didaco Episcopo apprehendit
ut alterum baptismum.
of St. Dominick's Order, that the habit of St. Francis, or St. Dominick is as
good as a second Baptism, and that by virtue of this habit, all our sins past
are cancelled. And this is the reason why many Princes and persons of quality
on their deathbeds have been clad in the habit of a Cordelier, or Capucin,
that their sins may be pardoned.

Of all the Patrons of the Monastic Orders, no one is exalted to so high a
degree of celestial glory, as St. Francis; for he is placed in the highest
degree of Angelical glory.) The Church of Rome makes nine Orders of Angels
differing in glory. The highest Order, is that of the Seraphins. The second is
the Order of the Cherubins, etc. But Saint Francis is placed in the Order of
the Seraphins, above the Cherubins, Th. 2. 2. q. ult. art. 3. and in 4. sent.
did. 4. q. 3. art. 3. sect. ad tertium. Bell. lib. de Monachis. c. 8. sect.
denique Eman. Sa. Aphor. in verb. Religio sex alae. eorum sunt sex perfectiones
quibus ornatus fuit beatus Franciscus
as St. Antonin tells us in the life of St. Francis, in the first Chapter;
where he says, that those words of the 18 Psalm, He rode upon the Cherubins,
and did fly upon the wings of the winds, are spoken not only of Jesus Christ,
but may also be applied to St. Francis, who is exalted above the Cherubins. And
in the same Chapter, he says, that the six wings of the Seraphins, are the six
perfections wherewith St. Francis was adorned. In this high decree of Glory, he
sees eight Classes of Angels, and all the Saints far beneath himself.

St. Bonaventure, a General of St. Francis's Order, and a Cardinal, says the
like, as I shall show you hereafter.

Pope Nicolas 3. in the Decretal, Exiit qui Seminal says, that when Jesus
Christ speaks of the fourth De Verborum signif. in Aliud mite Cor, and docile,
terra bona suscepit, hoc est fratrum Minorum religio.
part of the seed which fell on good ground; by this good fourth part, is
meant, the Religion of the Minors.

In the same place, this Pope, commending the poverty and perfection of St.
Francis, observes he had no bag; and that he finds not those actions of
infirmity Christus egit etiam infima, sicut interdum ut in fuga patet, and in
loculis.
which were in Jesus Christ, who had two actions of infirmity (viz.) he had a
bag and he fled. In these two things Holy Francis surmounted Jesus Christ.

CHAP. IV. Of the words Minor and Minime; and of the observation of the whole
Rule.
THE Monks of St. Francis's Order, are called Minors, that is to say, Less than
others, in token of Humility. But there is sprung up another Order of Monks,
whereof St. Francis of Paula, a Calabrian, is Patron, and Author. This Saint
lived in the time of Lewis 11. who dyed Anno Domini, 1483. The Monks of this
Order not thinking it humility enough to be called Minors, call themselves
Minimes; that is to say, Least of all. The Life of these Monks is altogether
Quadragesimal, that is, a continual Lent: By virtue of this Title, they pretend
a right to begging, because Jesus Christ, in the 10. of Matthew says,
Whosoever shall give to drink to one of the least of these, or to one of these
Minimes, a cup of cold water only, shall not lose his reward. However, this
hinders them not from receiving an Alms of Wine, although Jesus Christ speaks
of cold water only.

It is observable, that in the Mass of the said St. Francis of Paula, which is
celebrated on the second of April; the Priests reads aloud this verse of the
Gospel: Quod uni ex Minimis fecistis, mihi fecistis. Alleluja. What you have
done to one of these Minimes, you have done it to me. For they pre-suppose that
Jesus Christ will speak of them in the day of the General Judgment. This Mass,
which is peculiar to the Order of the Minimes, they have caused to be Printed.

But to return to the Friars Minors, there are diverse sorts of them (viz.) the
Observantines, the Recollects, the Capucins, etc. There was a time when the
Cordeliers only were in request; but afterterward these Cordeliers giving
themselves liberty in diverse things, and dispencing with themselves from the
entire observation of St. Francis's Rule, and of diverse constitutions of the
Order; the Capucins sprung up, who now adays have the esteem and admiration of
the people, professing to observe the Rule entirely, although they do it not.
For the Rule of St. Francis commands the Friars Minors to labor with their
hands, which command the Capucins observe not.

CHAP V. Of the Austerity, and Discipline of the Capucins: and first of their
Habits.
THE Capucins go barefoot, and bare-legg'd, only they wear Sandals, or
Apostolical shoes, which are nothing else but soles of shoes so tied over the
feet, that the feet appear. They wear only a Gown and a sharp pointed hood: the
other sorts of Friars Minors wear a round hood in form of a Child's Biggin.

They wear no shirts, only they have drawers, which they let down when they
whip themselves. To wear two garments, or to have stockings and shoes, or to
be girt with a leather girdle, and not with a cord, is counted a mortal sin.
And yet the Legends of St. Francis, written by Saint Bonaventure, St. Antonine,
and Jacobus de Voraigne, say that St. Francis did sometimes wear stockings and
shoes, and was girt with a leather girdle.

In this Cord the Capucins knit great knots for an Ornament. All this is done
in Humility, and there is great merit in it.

They never put off their cloths, except it be to take the vermin out of them,
or to patch them. Yea, they will in Humility put patches on a new garment.
Their garments consists of three pieces, in honor of the Trinity: To be clad
in the habit does as much good as Baptism: I have seen in the Houses of
Princes, and Gentlemen of quality, little Children of six or seven years old
clad in Capucins Habit. Mothers do this, to imprint on their Children hearts a
love and reverence to the Order of St. Francis. If a Capucin should die without
his Cord, he would be esteemed to have dyed without St. Francis's Habit, and an
evil censure would be past upon him.

CHAP. VI. Diverse Austerities, and Observations of the Capucins, as well those
to which they are obliged by their Rule, and by the Constitutions of their
Order, as those to which they oblige themselves by voluntary devotion.
BY the constitutions of the Minor Friars, to ride on Horseback, except in case
of sickness, or urgent necessity, is a mortal sin; although St. Francis did
often ride upon an Ass.

It is also a mortal sin for a Monk to have in particular, and without the
Superior's knowledge, any thing worth above thirty pence: and if he should die
without revealing it to the Superior, he is deprived of Ecclesiastical burial.
You may see this in the Declarations of the Rule.

They are not permitted to be Godfathers, nor to present a child to Baptism:
this they account scandalous, and St. Francis's Rule forbids it.

It is an ordinary custom among the Capucins, to send to women in travel,
little pieces of St. Francis's wood, or to cause them to swallow the powder of
it in some holy water, to facilitate their delivery. This St. Francis's wood,
is the wood of a great Oak, which was once the staff which he used when he
walked abroad. This staff (out of reverence) he would not carry into the
Church, but pitching it into the ground at the Church-door, it took root, and
became a great tree.

In the Choire of the Capucins Churches, there stands a vessel full of sand, or
lime, into which they spit. Diverse Capucins who have left the Order, and have
been eyewitnesses, do assure me that they have seen some Capucins lick up the
spittle, which (through heedlesness) has fallen beside the vessel, and in
mortification to swallow it. This is accounted a great virtue. They have also
seen the Superior command some Monks to lick up the spittle of the rest, in
Humility and Mortification.

It is a frequent custom among the Capucins, to prick themselves; and with
their blood to sign vows to the Virgin Mary, and to carry the papers whereon
these vows are written, about with them. This is taken for grand devotion.

They lie in their clothes upon boards, and a little straw, over which there is
a linen cloth spread, and nailed to the boards.

They make three Lents: two by necessity of precept, and the third by voluntary
devotion. This St. Francis's Rule teaches them. Also they fast twelve days
before Whitsontide; and on all Bonaven. apud Surium, page 34.
the Vigils of the Virgin, of the Apostles, and of the Saints of their Order.
Antonin. page 722.


They give to whom they please, certain Letters, which they call Letters of
Filiation, authorized by the Pope, whereby they give to those who have them, as
great a share of all their austerities, penances, fasts, whippings, etc. as if
they were members of their Order. So that a Merchant or a Gentleman, by virtue
of these Letters of Filiation, has as really a part in their merits and
satisfactions, as if they were his own; for so they say God will have it, and
that he takes this for payment.

They never go out of the Convent, without asking leave of the Superior on
their knees.

The young Monks dare not speak to the elder, but on their knees; and when they
have spoken they make a very low bow.

The Capucins give to people little tickets, wherein the name of Jesus is
written, to cure the Ague or Fever. Herein they differ from the Augustine
Monks, who give a little loaf without leaven on St. Nicholas Talentin's day,
who was a Saint of their Order. They suppose that these loaves have a great
virtue against diseases.

Their Constitutions forbid them to shave themselves; but they are permitted to
trim themselves with Scissars. And they dare not keep a Razor in their
Convents, except it be to scarifie their shoulders after the use of
Cupping-glasses.

By the same Constitutions they are forbidden the use of Spices; and to beg
Eggs, and Cheese.

CHAP. VII. Of the Whippings of the Capucins.
BY the Constitutions of the Order, the Capucins whip themselves three times a
week, at two a Clock after midnight; (viz.) a two after Sunday night, after
Tuesday night, and after Thursday night. In the Winter they whip themselves, at
half an hour past five in the evening, for fear of too great a cold in the
night. They whip themselves Bonav vita Francisci, page 38. Antonin. 3 part
Chro. tit. 24. c. 2. sect. 1. Quod vir Dei sentiens vest deposita, chorda
durissima se ver ber abat dicens, Eja frater asisie, etc.
on the back and buttocks.

This they do in imitation of St. Francis, of whom St. Bonaventure, and St.
Antonine write, that that being one day tickled with carnal temptations, he
lasht himself very severely with his Cord, saying thus to himself: Eja frater
asine, decet te manner, and sic subire flagellum; that is, Go to, brother Ass,
thou must stay, and be whipped thus. Ibi. Sed cum tentatio nequaquam discederet,
for as exiens cunt hyems esset in magnam nivis congeriem se nudum immersit, etc.
Antonin. tit. 24. c. 2. sect. 1.
But his temptations continued for all this; and therefore to subdue them, he
stripped himself stark naked, and plunged himself over head and ears in the snow,
and made seven snow-balls, saying, The biggest is thy Wife, and these two are
thy two Daughters, etc. The same is recited by Jacobes de Voraigne, in his
Legend of Saint Francis. And St. Antonine says, that he often plunged himself
in a place full of ice and snow, usque ad illiciti motus recessum, that is,
until the immodest motion of his secret parts ceased.

Besides this whipping, and the torments which St. Francis inflicted Antonin.
c. 1. Sustinuit multa flagella a daemonibus etc.
on his own body; the Devils whipped him often, and very rudely: but the blessed
Saint gave demonstrations, that he received all this with joy. Bonaventure
says, that one day the Devils beat him so sorely, that they left him half dead.

But to return to the whipping Bona. apud Surium. p. 40. and 41. Damones verber
atum sominecems relinquunt.
of the Capucins, before they begin this pleasant exercise, each one prepares
himself for it, and with his whip drives his fellow to a convenient distance
from him, for fear of striking him. Being all ready, the Superior knocks with
his hand on a bench, and presently all the candles are blown out, and he that
wears the cope that week, begins to sing the Psalm, Miserere, and they all
follow, whipping themselves while they sing. Then they sing, De Prosundis, then
the ancient Salve Regina; and then the ancient, Christus factus est obediens
pro nobis. During all this singing (which lasts about half an hour) the
whipping continues in such sort, that the blood trickles down. And they make a
terrible noise with their whips. The singing being ended, the Superior knocks
his seat with his foot, and so the whipping cease.

This discipline is very terrible; for many times you shall see the place all
bloody: and in great Convents where there are 60. or 80. Capucins; there is
such a noise of Monks singing with open mouth, and making their whips clack,
that you would think the house were falling. This whipping is a just action,
for these Fathers deserve it well.

In the holy week they use this discipline every day; but they redouble it on
Good Friday; for on that day, instead of one Miserere, they sing three; and the
whipping continues all the while.

On the Vigiles of the feasts of our Lady, and of the other solemn feasts; and
on ever Friday of the month of March, they whip themselves in the Dining Room
before dinner. But this whipping lasts no longer, than while they are singing
of one Miserere; which is the 51 Psalm, which ends in vitulos: Hence comes the
proverb, to be whipped from Miserere unto vitulos. This whipping, which is
milder, and shorter then at other times; is exercised on the shoulders only,
and not on the buttocks.

This being ended, they eat bread and pottage upon their knees, in honor of
the Virgin Mary. Their night whippings are exercised on their buttocks; but the
day whippings on the shoulders only.

In the morning these poor Capucins go abroad to beg, with carved buttocks, and
embroidered backs, carrying a Wallet on the shoulder. They beg from door to
door; one gives them Bread, another a shoulder of Mutton, another a leg of a
Capon, another puts some Wine into their Bottle, which is very large, and of a
great capacity.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Penances of the Capucins.
THE Penances of the Capucins for punishing a fault, are imposed in the
Dining Room; which place serves also for a Chapterhouse.

In this place, before dinner, the Monks, on their knees, wait for the
Superior, or Guardian; who being come, the most ancient of those who are to
receive Penance, puts off his Garment from his shoulders, clasps his hands, and
holds down his head, as low as his knees; accusing himself of sins committed
against the Constitutions. They do not accuse themselves for want of a firm
affiance in the promises of the Gospel: but ordinarily those things which the
penitent confesses, are trifles; for, he confesses either that he has talked
too loud, or walked too fast, or gazed about too much; or has scratcht himself
while he was at prayers, or has broken an earthen pot, or the like. This
confession they call the fault. Then come the rest, and make such another
confession.

As these confessions are absurd, so are the Penances imposed by the Superior
on the penitent as ridiculous. He that is accused in the Chapter House, to have
broken silence, is condemned to take a short staff in his mouth, and to hold it
betwixt his teeth until the Superior say to him, It is enough. In Italian, he
says, Basta. Sometimes they have a long pole, which five or six of them hold
between their teeth, and so walk up and down with it while the others are at
dinner, who must take heed that they do not laugh.

If any one has whipped himself too gently, he is condemned to whip himself
publicly upon the shoulders with a Fox-tail in the presence of those that are
at dinner.

If any one has talked too much, he is condemned to draw a Cross on the ground
with his tongue.

Sometimes for a Penance, they make a Monk eat with a Cat in the same dish. And
others are made to suck a flint dipped in vinegar.

Others rise from their knees to drink, and as often as they drink, they say to
their brethren who are at dinner, before they drink; Brother, pray to God for
poor brother Linotte, or for brother Tribouleus, or for poor brother
Griboville, etc. For they are obliged to take ridiculous names in humility, to
render themselves contemptible. After this, they drink by permission, with very
great modesty.

If any one be accused of being too spruce and finical, a bucket of water is
brought him to view himself in, or they present him with the backside of a
kettle for a looking-glass.

They who have slept at prayers, are made to lie down in the presence of those
that are at Table, and to snore, as if they were asleep.

If any one breaks a cup, or bottle, or a drying pan, he is made to carry it
about hanging on his neck for a Penance.

CHAP. IX. Some extravagant actions, in which the Capucins place holiness.
Diverse Capucins who have left the Convent, have confessed to me, that although
they were accounted the most zealous amongst them, yet they had much ado to
forbear laughing at some extravagant actions, in which the Capucins place
holiness.

These things following are practiced amongst them, (viz.) To view themselves
in a Fryingpan. To make a cross with the tongue in the ashes. To comb the beard
with a rake. To chop off the beard on a block with a hatchet. To stand upon one
leg in the midst of the Dining Room. To kiss the feet of all those who are at
dinner. To make a Monk dance before them all. To make him fence. To blindfold
him with a dirty clout. To go about upon all four like a beast. To carry about
on the head a basket like a headpiece. To put upon the nose a pair of
spectacles made of felt. To ride about upon a stick like a child, etc. But the
absurdest Penance of all is; when the Superior commands a Monk, who having
filled his belly, leaves some part of his dinner behind him, to eat it up all;
so that he must break his belly in humility and mortification.

In the life of St. Felix de Cantalice, (an Alms-begger at Rome, Canonized by
the Pope, about 16 or 17 years ago) this is put amongst his virtuous actions,
that being at Rome, in the street, he met Philip de Neri; Founder of the
Priests of the Oratory, and made him drink off his bottle; and that Philip, in
requital, put his hat on Felix his head: Whereupon the Children in the street
cried out, Fra Felice a un capello. Thus did these Saints by a great
selfdenyal, mutually communicate their holiness to each other.

In the Chronicles of St. Francis's Order, it is recorded, that Friar
Juniperus, (who is Canonized for a Saint) boiled a Hen with her guts, feathers
and all. And that being in a certain Castle, he left his dung in the bed where
he lay. Another Friar Minor, named Jacobo, in humility, leapt into a house of
office.

CHAP. X. Of the names, which the Capucins take, when they enter in this
Profession.
WHen the Capucins enter into the Order, after the year of Probation, they take
another name then that which they had given them at their Baptism: For (as I
have already said) St. Francis's habit is accounted another Baptism. One is
called Hilary, another Joseph, another Basil, etc. Some of them take Sublime
and Celestial names. One is called Father Angel, another Father Archangel,
another Father Spirit, another Father Cherubin, another Father Seraphin, etc.
which names are very unsuitable to the profession of Humility. To be a Friar
Minor, that is, to be the least, and yet to be an Archangel, are things
altogether inconsistent. Besides the nature of their vow is to do works of
Supererogation: but the Angels do no such works, for they content themselves
with obeying the commands of God.

Those who say the Capucins are called Angels, because they imitate the Angels,
in that they marry not, nor receive money, do great wrong to the Order of these
Monks; for by the same reason they may be said to imitate the Devils, because
they neither marry, nor possess wealth any more than the Angels.

It is a mockery to say, that they are called Angels and Seraphins, because
they take the Angels and Seraphins for their Patrons, and Protectors: For by
the same reason a married woman, who has taken the Virgin Mary for her
Patroness, may be called the Virgin Mary; And he who takes God for his
Protector, may be called God. But since the Capucins have St. Francis for their
Protector, who is (as they say) of the Order of the Seraphins, and exalted
above the eight Orders of Angels; what need have they to take the Angels for
their Patrons? Besides, they who choose Angels, or Saints for their Patrons,
choose one certain Angel, or Saint for their Patron; and not the Angels and
Saints in general.

CHAP. XI. The form of making their Vow.
WHen a Capucin will enter into Order, after the year of probation, he is
admitted to make the vow, which is done in the presence of the Superior, and
his brethren, in these terms: I A. B. do Vow, and Promise to God the Father
Almighty, and to the Blessed Virgin Mary, to the Blessed Apostles, Peter and
Paul, to the Blessed St. Francis my Patron, and to you my Father, to observe
the Rule of the Friars Minors, living in Poverty, Obedience, and Chastity. He
that receives this Vow Answers, And I, if thou observe it, do promise thee, in
the name of God, life eternal.

CHAP. XII. Some Obervations upon this Vow.
Diverse things are remarkable in this vow, which being rightly understood, we
shall find, that many abuses yea, impieties, are therein covered with the cloak
of Religion.

In the first place, this vow is made to God the Father, to the Virgin Mary, to
Saints, and to the Superior of the Convent, without making any mention at all
of Jesus Christ.

In the second place, he who makes this vow to Saints departed, pre-supposeth
that those Saints do see him; and that they know the intention of his heart.
This is contrary to the Holy Scripture, ^^^ch says, that the dead have no more
a portion for ever in any thing that is done under the Sun, Ec. 9. 6. And that
God only knows the hearts of the Children of Men, 2 Chr. 6. 30.

This vow is repugnant to all the examples contained in the Holy Scriptures,
wherein there is no vow made to creatures, but to God only; as God himself
commands, in Psalm. 50. 14. Offer unto God thanksgiving, and pay thy vows unto
the most High. Here Sacrifices and vows are linked together, as things equally
due unto God. But the Church of Rome holds, that we must offer Sacrifices to
God only. Ergo.

But that in the holy Scripture not one example is to be found of vows made to
Saints. Bellarmine freely confesses in his Book, De cultu Sanctorum, Chapter
9. in these words; When the Holy Scriptures were written, the custom of making
vows to Saints was not begun. The same Jesuit, in the same Chapter says, that
a vow is an action of Religion due to God only; even as swearing, and
sacrificing are; as appears by the Holy Scriptures. These are his own words.
Thomas Aquinas, the Thomas 2. 2. quest. 28. Art. 5.
Prince of Schoolmen, says the same. A vow (says he) is to be made to God
only; but a promise may be made to a man. And in the same place; A Vow is an
action of Religion, or Divine Worship. Wherefore Cardinal Cajetan, in his notes
upon this place of Thomas, to defend vows made to Saints; says, that the
Saints are Gods, and that vows are made to them; ut sunt Diiper
participationem, as they are Gods by participation. The same says Bellarmine,
in the aforementioned Chapter. A vow belongs not to the Saints, but only as
they are Gods by participation. But we are certain that the Saints who reign
with Christ are such, Ergo, etc. According to what Pope Gregory 2. says, in
his Epistle to the Emperor Leo, viz.) that all the Kingdoms of the West, own
St, Peter for a God upon Earth.

But these Doctors consider not, that if a vow be a worship of Latria, and due
to God only; and that if we make vows to Saints, because they are Gods by
participation; it follows that we give to Saints the worship of Latria by
participation.

Also they consider not, that by the same reason it may be said, that the
Superior, or Guardian, who receives this vow, is God too by participation. For
when the Friar Minor has said, I vow unto God, and to the Virgin, and to the
Saints; he adds, and to you my Father; vowing to the Guardian in the same terms
in which he vows to the Saints, and to God. This needs not seem strange; for in
the Church of Rome, the Priests are called Gods and Creators of their Creator,
having a Divine power, yea, a power over Jesus Christ. Mr. Best, a famous
Preacher, in his book of the Priestly-Office, Chap. 3. says, The Priesthood
and the Deity have I know not what of common, and are almost of an equal
Grandeur, for they have the same power. Item. Seeing that the Priesthood is
equal to the Deity, and that all Priests are are Gods, therefore it far exceeds
the Kingly Office; and Priests are much more than Kings. And a little after he
says, that God obeys the Priests as often as they pronounce the words of
consecration. A Sorbonist named Petrus Aurelius, has lately written a book
with the approbation, and by the authority of the College of Sorbon, which
refutes a Treatise of the Jesuits, entitled, Spongia; and in the 75 page this
Aurelius says, Data est Sacerdotibus potestas Christum, hoc est Deum ipsum
producendi, that is, A power is given to Priests to produce Christ, that is to
say God himself. He adds, that the power of the Priests has in it a certain
emulation of the eternal operations, whereby the Divine persons are produced.

Gabriel Biel, famous among Qui creavit me (si fas est dicere) dedit mihi
creare se; and qui creavit me creatur mediante me.
the Schoolmen, in his first Lesson upon the Canon of the Mass, speaks thus;
The Priest has great power over both the bodies of Christ. That is, over the
Church, and over the consecration host, which he calls God. And in his fourth
Lesson; Whoever saw the like? He that created me (if I may so speak) has given
me power to create him. And he that created me without my help, is created by
my means.

This manner of speech is not new. For Anno 1097. Urban II. Simeon Dunelmensis
lib. 2. Chr. Vigner. in his Ecclesiastical History, p. 300.
called a Council at Rome, against the Emperor Henry IV. and all other secular
Princes who should claim a right to the investiture of Bishops and Abbots, and
to the Collations of Benifices, and Prebends, alleging that it is an
abominable thing that those hands which create God, should be obliged to so
much ignominy, as to do homage to those hands which night and day are defiled
with filthy and dishonest touches. Wherefore you must not wonder, if a Monk
that is admitted into the Order, make a vow to the Superior, who is a Priest;
and gives him that honor, which belongs to the worship of Latria, seeing the
Priests are called Gods, and Creators of their Creator, and that they have a
power over Jesus Christ.

To these testimonies of the Doctors of the Romish Church who say, that a vow
belongs to the worship of Latria and ought to be made to God only; we must add
the testimony of that Jesuit, Cardinal Tolet. in Book 4. Of the institution of
Priests, Chapter 17. A vow is a promise made to God by a deliberate purpose and
will. By these things it appears, that a vow made to Saints, or to a Superior
of a Convent, is pure Idolatry; for thereby that honor which is due to God
only, is communicated to the creature.

Our adversaries cannot escape by saying, that in vowing to Saints they vow
mediatley to God; for the worship of Latria ought not to be given to the
creature either mediately, or immediately. In all worship of Latria we must
address our selves to God directly. The Monk that makes this vow, addresseth
himself to God directly by saying, I vow to Almighty God, etc. Having thus
addressed himself to God directly; what need is there that he should afterward
address himself to him mediately, and by oblique ways? It is certain, that he
who says to his Superior, or Guardian, I vow to you my Father, speaks not to
God, and by these words vows not to God. Consider the words of this vow, and
you shall find, that a Monk who is admitted into the order, speaks to God, to
the Saints, and to his Superior in the same terms, and vows no two different
manners.

But when Bellarmine confesses that the custom of making Vows to Saints, was
not begun when the holy Scriptures were written, he should have mentioned the
time when it began, and not have cheated the Reader with false allegations, as
his usual manner is. For he alleges these words of Eusebius in his 13. book
of Evangelical preparation, Chap. 7. Honoring the soldiers of true Piety as
the friends of God; we come to their Monuments, and make Vows to them; Which
passage is false, and altogether forged.

He also alleges Theodoret in his 8. Book against the Greeks, which book is
falsely attributed to Theodoret. In one point Bellarmine, besides his error,
discovers his ignorance in the Greek tongue, in not knowing that the Greeks
have no proper word to express the Word Vow: And the Latin Interpreter, to
whom Bellarmine trusts, has falsely translated Votorum rei dona persolvunt;
Which words are not in the Greek Text of the book attributed to Theodoret.

It is in honor of the Pope, that the Monks vow to St. Peter, and St. Paul,
and not to St. John, and St. James: for they make the two former the Founders
of the Church of Rome.

The things to which this Monk obliges himself, are poverty, chastity, and
obedience. Of poverty I shall speak hereafter. As for chastity, the Jesuit
Emanuel Sa, in his Aphorisms upon the word votum, says, tha the vow of
Priesthood, is not a vow of chastity, and that the Bishop can dispense with it:
Whereupon we demand, whether a Monk or a Priest that commits fornication, does
not violate the vow of Chastity, and whether by this Vow he does not oblige
him-himself not to commit fornication. If he does not oblige himself to it, he
shows that he will not be obliged by vow to obey the command of God, which
says, Thou shall not commit Aclultery: But by this vow he only obliges
himself to abstain from a thing which God permits, and not from that which he
forbids. But if this Monk by vowing chastity, does vow not to commit
fornication, it is evident that by committing fornication, he violates his vow,
and and besides he transgresses the command of God, which obliges us much
more than any voluntary vow. So that he commits two evils, (viz.) He breaks his
vow, and violates the Law of God. Why then, when a Monk or Priest marries for
fear of violating the Law of God, by committing fornication, is he accounted to
have committed a greater sin, than when he commits fornication? Why then is not
a Priest that commits fornication, made irregular, and incapable of the
Priesthood; but if he marries, is presently degraded, yea, and declared
punishable with death? To this they answer, that it is because he has broken
his vow, and yet he remains unpunished, and cease not to sing Mass for all
that. For the commands of God do not bind so strongly, as voluntary vows do,
which are made without; yea, contrary to the word of God, which says, If they
cannot contain, let them Marry. And to avoid Fornication, let every man have
his own wife, and let every woman have her own husband, 1 Cor. 7.

But that a Priest who commits Fornication, yea has diverse Concubines, is not
thereby rendered irregular, and incapable of the Priesthood; not only experience
shows (examples of this being numberless) but we have also the determination of
Pope Innocent III. Thereupon in the first Book of the Decretals, in the twelfth
Title, in the Chapter Quia circa, His words are these, Thou desire to be
instructed by the Apostolic See, Whether Priests that have diverse Concubines,
ought to be counted bigamous. To which we think fit to answer, that seeing they
have not incurred the irregularity of bigamy; thou may dispense with their
exceeding of the Priestly Office, they being stained only with simple
fornication. But for marrying of one wife, according to the Apostles Rule, a
Priest is degraded, yea punished with Navarr. in caput ad inferendam. 23.
quest. 2. De defensione proximi
death.

But, which is much more, one that is a notorious Sodomite, is not made
irregular, but may sing Mass for all that: as Navarre, the most knowing of all
the Canonists, and the Popes Penitentiary teaches: A man (says he) does not
incur irregularity, but for the cases specified in the Law, of which number
Sodomy is none. And this he proves by the Authority of Pope Innocent. And he
adds, that in Italy, (which is more troubled with this. evil, than it should
be) they demand no dispensation for it.

In fine, how binding soever the vow of not marrying may be, yet the Pope can
dispense with it, and may permit a man to marry contrary to his vow. Emanuel Sa
in the same place says, that the Bishops may also dispense with this vow, and
permit a man to marry.

Methinks also to vow to Saint Peter never to marry, is to preten'd to be wiser
than he; for he was a married man. It is just as if one should say to him, I do
vow to thee not to follow thy example. I do promise to be wiser and holier then
thou.

It is evident, that he who burns with filthy lusts, and yet vows never to
marry, does like a sick person that says to God, Lord, I am sick, but I promise
thee that I will not make use of the remedies which thou offerest me, and have
ordained in thy word, for I will be wiser than thou.

CHAP XIII. The Impiety of the Superiors Answer.
IF there be Superstition and impiety in this Vow, whereby a Monk vows to the
Creature, and obliges himself to things which God commands not; yea, to things
which he forbids: there is no less in the Answer, which the Superior or
Guardian makes him, saying; And I, if thou keep this vow, do promise thee, in
Gods name, life Eternal.

These words duly considered, will make a man tremble; For one that is neither
sent, nor authorized by the King, comes to a man, and says, I have order from
the King to promise you such a Preferment, if you do such a thing; is a Cheat,
and a perfidious person, and deserves to be punished, because he speaks without
order, and without being sent by the King. But the Superior, who makes this
promise to the new Monk in God's name; cannot show his Commission or Warrant
from God for the making of this promise. He abuses the poor Monk, by making
him believe that he is sent by God to make him this promise in Gods name,
(viz.) That if he lives in beggary, if he never marries, and if he be obedient
to the Guardian of his Convent, he shall have Eternal life. For, these three
things, are things which God commands not in his Word, and to which he has
made no Promise; yea, these are observations whereby God is more often offended
then served: These are things which a Heathen, or Hypocrite may do. But to
serve God according to his Word, and to believe in Jesus Christ as he is
proposed to us in the Gospel; are things to which God has promised Eternal
life, and cannot be done by any, but by those that are the true Children of
God: These are things, for which the Superior should say, (not I promise thee,
but) God promises thee Eternal life. For a man ought not to promise that which
he cannot give.

CHAP. XIV. That Corporal Austerities, and Whippings, and tormenting of the
body, are not marks of Holiness.
HE is very much deceived, who takes the severity and torments which a man
inflicts on his body, for proofs or signs of Holiness. The Apostle St. Paul, 1 Timothy 4. says, Bodily exercise profits little; but godliness is profitable
unto all things; having the promise of the life that now is, and of that which
is to come. All that the Capucins do, is nothing, in comparison of what Baal's
Priests did: for they did cut and mangle 1 King. 18. 28.
their bodies with knives, and imbrued themselves in blood, for the service of
their Idol. There are Mohammedan Monks called Dervis, who live very austerely,
and do even roast their bodies upon the hot scalding sands; and with buckles
and rings of Iron, make themselves incapable for generation. The Cynick
Philosophers did beg: Diogenes lay in the street in a tub, having no other
household stuff then a wooden dish; and yet he brake that too, when he
considered that Nature had given him one in the hollow of his hand. Read
Apulejus, his eighth Book of the Milesians; and you will there see the
description of the Priests of the Syrian Goddess, who did cut and slash their
bodies. He describes one of those Priests, that did whip himself with a whip
full of knots (being armed with obstinacy Arrepto flagro indidem se multi modis
mulctatictibus. Avidis amimis corradentes omnia, and in sacculos huic quaestui
de industria praeparatos, farcientes. (...).
against the smart of the strokes) until the blood streamed down his body.
Moreover, he adds, That when these Priests had done whipping themselves, they
went about a begging, and one gave them a piece of Money, another Wine, another
Cheese, etc. which Alms they put into Wallets. In a word, the description which
he gives of these mad Priests, does very much resemble the lives of the
Capucins. Lucian in his Book, entitled The Ass, describes these Priests after
the very same manner.

It is a grand abuse to make Piety consist in things wherein Christians may be
excelled by Heathens. There is a proud humility, which despises it self, that
it may be valued by others. The Apostles, and their Disciples, did not live so:
In a simple and ordinary habit, and manner of life, they lived soberly, and
labored in the work which God had committed to them. They were famous, not for
their extravagant and hideous apparel, not for whipping themselves, not for
eating pottage on their knees, etc. but for their zeal, and holiness of life.

CHAP. XV. That the Austerities, and Humilities of the Capucins are full of
Hypocrisy.
WE may easily know what to think of the Abstinences Whippings, and Humilities
of the Capucins, (viz.) that in the midst of their Austerities they discover
their pride. And of this I Will give you some examples.

Before the Capucins begin their Lents (for they have three Lents) they feast
and make merry for a whole week; during which time, there is no frolic or
jovial act, which they omit. Some of them sing Songs of good fellowship, others
sing Amorous, or Love-Songs, others show Hocus Pocus tricks: others stand upon
their heads, or act the Tumbler or Juggler, etc. In fine, every one does such
things as he had learned before he was a Monk.

In great Towns there be few Capucins but have their superstitiously devout
women who furnish them with all sorts of dainties, as Sweetmeats, Comfits,
Gellies, etc. So that some Capucins have more choice of dainties in their
Cells, then Ladies have in their Closets.

When a Capucin comes from abroad, warm linen clothes are put on his body, his
feet are washed with sweet herbs; and when they are wiped with warm Napkins,
every one comes and kisseth them.

Many of the old Monks, who are called Fathers of Importance, are so careful of
their health, that they have a cook for themselves in particular (who is always
a Monk) a Grom of the Chamber, and an Apothecary, who follow them from Convent
to Convent. You shall see very few of these Fathers of importance sick, but
they are very impatient if they want but the least trifle, and then all the
Town is ransackt from one end to the other, to find what they would have. The
Nuns furnish them with Sweetmeats, the Ladies with rare broths and gellies,
the Gentlemen of the Country with wild-fowl, the Merchants and other Townsmen
with Shamblesmeat; and the wine which they ordinarily drink, is the best that
is to be had. Those Capucins, who to save their Souls, have left the Order; do
protest they have learned of us how to fast; and that when they were Capucins,
they fed more highly, and lived more pleasantly, and plentifully.

In great Convents of Capucins, such as are at Paris, and Roven, a most furious
ambition and envy discovers it self: For, to obtain the least preferment in the
Convent, and to supplant their competitors, they have their creatures, who cry
them up every where, and rail on those that aspire to the same Office; whence
great disorders do oftentimes arise; for Princes do more patienly bear
contempts and injuries then the Capucins. And at the Tables of Dukes,
Marquesses, and Earls, the Capucins suffer themselves to be placed at the upper
end.

Their pride appears in this, that they profess works of supererogation; that
is to say, better works then God commands; so that God may say to a Capucin, I
would not have thee so holy.

The same spirit of pride appears in their calling themselves Angels,
Archangels, Spirits, Seraphins, and Cherubins. It appears also by the unworthy
submissions which the principal Capucins require of the inferior, who never
speak to the Superiors, but on their knees; which Superiors command them very
base things, as to lick up the others spittle, etc.

It cannot be said, that they wear a barbarous and extravagant habit in
humility and mortification; For, he that will subdue his Flesh, may do it as
well under a common habit; he may under a usual habit wear a hair-shirt, and
may whip himself secretly as often as he pleases, and without any ones
knowledge: But this wild habit, differing from that of other men, serves only
to be looked upon, and admired; for people gaze upon and admire nothing but
what is extraordinary.

To this we may add, that he who makes profession of simplicity and humility in
his conversation, should not be vain in his discourses, nor too wantonly nice
and delicate in his words, for fear of his belying his Profession by his
Language.

I speak this because of Father Joseph, a Capucin; who in his new Book shows,
that he has made a great provision of Elegancies. As when he calls St. John,
The Secretary of Love to the Son of God. And of Transubstantiation, he says,
that it is Love's Masterpiece. And speaking to us, he says, That when God
shall have brought us into his Wine-cellar, there to taste the excess of his
love, we shall not find it so difficult to believe; That Jesus Christ did eat
himself, and that together with Christ's body the Devil entered into Judas. With
the like grace, supposing the words of St. Philip to the Eunuch, too weak and
impertinent, as they are set down in the eighth Chapter of the Acts, he
introduces him speaking thus: Sir, will it please you that I presume to ask
you a question, with all due respect? To which he makes the Eunuch answer with
the like civility, I pray oblige me so much as to come into this Coach. Note
also, that the very first word of this Book is a mistake, beginning thus; The
Apostle St. Philip; For this Philip was not an Apostle. With the like vanity he
talks of Preaching in a Ruff, and in a Band, and of yellow and green
Gentlewomen; and he brings in speaking I know not what Courtier, who praises
and extolleth him to his face, saying, That Father Joseph speaks very
gracefully, and that all the Catholics have been very much comforted by his
Sermons, and do admire the force and clearness of his Reasons.

CHAP. XVI. Of the pleasant Process betwixt the Capucins and Recollects, about
the Tip of their Hoods. Also of Masses in Red, Green, and Violet.
THE pride of the Minor Friars did never more clearly appear, then in the
quarrel which they had, and have to this day, with the Recollects, who are also
of St Francis's Order. When we speak of a Process about nothing, we say, it is
a Process about the point of a needle; but the Process of these Minor Friars
has been about the point or tip of their hood.

We must know, that the Cordeliers, who brag as well as the Capucins, that they
wear Saint Francis's Habit, differ from the Capucins in wearing a round Hood,
and laugh at the Capucins and Recollects for wearing a sharppointed Hood,
calling it in derision, Made like a Pyramid, in which they put such things as
they sell by retail.
A Grocers Paper. Betwixt these Capucins and Recollects, there began, a few
years since, a great Process in the Court of Rome. The Capucins complained,
That the Recollects wore their Hood too long; and that thereby they would make
themselves equal to the Capucins in Holiness. That by reason of this long
point, being equal in length to that of the Capucins, many are deceived, taking
a Recollect for a Capucin, and so give him as much honor; although the
Recollects are not to be compared to the Capucins for holiness, and merit of
Conversation. And therefore they requested, that by the Decree of his Holiness,
the Recollects might be condemned to shorten the point of their Hood.

The Recollects, on the other side, maintained, and do so still maintain, that
they are not inferior to the Capucins in holiness, and perfection; and that it
is no dishonor to the Capucins, if sometimes a Recollect be taken for a
Capucin, or a Capucin for a Recollect.

This process has caused great stirs, and has much troubled these two Orders,
and divided the Prelates of Rome into contrary factions. And it was pleasant to
hear the contests of these Minor Friars. The Capucin said to the Recollect,
What! thou would be equal to us in holiness: Thou art so ambitious, as that
thou would be taken for a Capucin. But the Recollect, being witty in biting
jests, said, Thou think that holiness consists in wearing a long Vt prius
dictum est.
Grocers Paper. Thou think by thy pride to put the Holy Ghost into a long
Through which they strain their iususions when they make syrrups* it is a long
sharppointed bag.
Apothecaries bag. The holiness of you Capucins appears in this, viz. That for
eight days before Lent, you show tricks of Legerdemain, and play the Tumblers,
etc. Thus did these Saints dispute, quarrelling which of them, by their pride,
should carry away the prize of humility.

But the Cordiliers, who wear a round hood like a child's biggin, took great
pleasure in beholding this strife, and laughed at them both: For they say, that
the hood of the old pictures and statues of St. Francis has not a long point;
And they say, that their round hood, made in form of a child's biggin, is
conformable to what our Savior says in the 18. Chap. of St. Matthew, Except
ye become as little Children, ye cannot C^ss. lib. 1. cap. 4.
enter into the Kingdom of God. Cassian says the same of the Anchorites,
living in the deserts of Egypt, that they wear a hood in imitation of the
simplicity and innocence of Children, according to that which is written in the
131 Psalm, I am not haughty, but am even as a Child weaned from his Mother.

Nevertheless, St. Hierom speaks against this hood, and laughs at it: for
observe what he says of it, in his Epistle to Eustochium; There are some
(says he) who wear a hair-shirt, and making themselves Cucullis sabrefactis ut
ad infantiam redeam, imitantur noctuas and bubones.
hoods, to resemble children, they are like Owls, and buzzards. Afterward he
adds, Shun those whom thou see have a goat's beard, a black cloak, and that
go with their feet naked, being hardened with the cold: All these things are
marks of the devil. When they have intruded themselves into great men's houses,
they deceive silly women laden with sin, and counterfeit a dejected gravity.
This is a very fair lesson for the Capucins.

But to return to this great process: the Capucins did at last obtain sentence
in their favor; for they had on their side one of the Popes near kinsmen, who
was a Capucin. By this sentence of the Pope, the Recollects were condemned to
shorten the tip of their hood: but they openly protested, that they would not
obey this sentence, saying, That they would rather dissolve their Order, and
relinquish all, then acquiesce in this sentence. Wherefore yet to this day, in
despite of the Pope, they wear their hood of the same length as before. Of
this hood, as of the rest of the habit of the Regular Monks, it is observable,
that it is not lawful for a Monk to make the least change, no more then in the
colors of the Mass; For it is not lawful to sing Mass in a red habit, on those
days on which it is appointed to be sung in a green habit; nor to be sung in a
black habit, on those days on which it is appointed to to be sung in a violet
habit: The rules in this case are very strict, and are placed at the beginning
of Page 328.
the Mass Book.

But Father Joseph wrongs us in his new book, by endeavoring to prove that the
like things are done amongst us, objecting against me, that I wear a Ruff, and
that as there are Masses in Green, Violet, etc. so it may be said, amongst us
there are Sermons in a Ruff, and Sermons in a Band, Sermons in a Gown, and
Sermons in a Cloak: for this Minor Friar knows well enough, that we have no
rules to oblige us to wear a Ruff or a Band, as the Church of Rome has
inviolable laws concerning Masses in green, red, and violet. It is to be
supposed that when St. Peter, and St. Paul were in a gay humor, they sang Mass
in a green habit. My design in mentioning the colors of Masses so strictly
enjoined, is to show, that false Religions having corrupted the true doctrine,
do endeavor to color this wickedness with a multitude of ceremonies, and
external observations, in which great mysteries are pretended: So our
Adversaries having destroyed the body of true piety, pay the people with
variety of colors.

CHAP. XVII. How St. Francis obtained of Pope Innocent the Third, the
approbation of his Rule.
FRancis (when he was but a private person, little known, and followed by none;
moreover being esteemed out of his wits by his fellow citizens, who threw dirt
at him, and also by his Father, named Peter Bernardo, who did beat him, and
kept him prisoner a long time,) composed a Rule, and some laws, to the
observance whereof he would oblige those who would believe him, promising them
life eternal.

But because this Rule could not be received without the Popes approbation, and
authority; he went to Pope Innocent the III. to beg the confirmation of Matthew
Paris, an English Monk, Superstitious in the highest degree, and an admirer of
St. Francis, in his History of the life of Henry the III. says, that the said
Saint Francis presented himself to Pope Innocent the III. sitting in Conclave,
Page 237.
and gave him his Rule in writing, entreating him to authorize it by his
approbation: but Pope Innocent taking notice of St. Francis's bad clothes, his
dirty and contemptible countenance, his long beard, and the black hair of his
eyebrows hanging down over his eyes, despised him, and said to him, Go
brother, and wallow in the dirt with the Swine, for thou art more like them,
than like a man. Which words, as soon as Francis heard, he bowed himself very
low, and in obedience to the command of his Holiness, went and wallowed with
Swine in a puddle; wherein he tumbled so long, that he was covered with dirt,
from head to foot; and in this pickle he came again, and presented himself to
the Pope, saying, My Lord, I have done what you commanded me; Whereat the Pope
being very much astonished, and admiring his great obedience, granted his
request, and approved St. Francis's Rule which is observed at this day by the
Capucins, and the other Minor Friars, with a grand obedience. This approbation
was granted, Anno Domini 1212. as St. Bonaventure and St. Antonine testify.
And this approbation was again confirmed by Pope Honorius, successor to
Innocent.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Humility, and incomparable patience of St. Francis; and of
his most notable actions.
Diverse have written the life and actions of St. Francis. Vincent in his
Mirror of History, writes it at large. Matthew Paris, an English Monk, in the
life of Henry the Third, describes the actions of St. Francis, and sets down
his Rule. These two Historians wrote about thirty years after St. Francis's
death. Jacobus Voraigne has written his Legend. This Psalter of Bonaventure,
was printed at Paris by Claude Chaplet, in Saint James's street at the sign of
the Unicorn, Anno, 1601.
We have also the Chronicles of St. Francis, upon the same subject. But the
Authors of greatest authority are first St. Bonaventure, a Capucin of St.
Francis's Order, and a Cardinal, who wrote about forty years after Saint
Francis's death. This Bonaventure, the Church of Rome places amongst her
Saints, and Principal Doctors. This is that Saint Bonaventure, who composed the
Psalter of the Virgin Mary, containing one hundred and fifty Psalms, which are
nothing else but the hundred and fifty Psalms of David, out of which
Bonaventure has taken the word God, and has put the word Virgin in its stead;
for example, he thus begins the 109 Psalm, (which according to the Hebrew, is
the 110.) The Lord said unto our Lady, sit thou at my right hand, etc. And in
Psalm. 90. instead of, He that dwells in the secret place of the most High, he
has put; He that dwells in the help of the Mother of God. And in the 129
Psalm. Out of the depths have I cried unto thee, O our Lady, hear my voice. And
so throughout the Psalms. By this means the true honor which all Christians
owe to the holy, and blessed Virgin, turns to her reproach, by transforming her
into an Idol, and by putting her in the place of God. This is that Saint
Bonaventure, to whom the Capucin Joseph would have us give credit, and would
have us believe that description of Saint Francis's life, which he gives us.
Besides this St. Bonaventure, we have St. Antonine, Archbishop of Florence,
Canonized by Pope Clement the seventh, Anno Domini. 1523. with the approbation
of his Doctrine, and great Indulgences granted to those who shall visit his
Sepulcher. I speak this, because no body may think that such passages as I
shall quote out of these Authors, are things, which the Church of Rome believes
not; or that I have invented them; or that they are forged by persons of small
authority. I allege such Saints as are prayed unto, and adored in the Church
of Rome.

Saint Francis his Father was named Peter Bernardo, A Citizen of Assise, in the
Duchy of Spolete in Italy.

Saint Francis's name, when he was young, was John Bernardo, This Life, written
by St. Bonaventure, you may find in Surius, in the month of October, p. 30.
but he changed his name, and would be called Francis, because he spoke French
when he was moved by the Holy Ghost to utter the praises of God; as Bonaventure
tells us, in the life of St. Francis.

When he was but young, and a Lay-person, he demonstrated a grand Humility,
even to the kissing of Lepers: and one day alighting from his horse to kiss a
Leper, it was revealed unto him, that this Leper was Jesus Christ.

His fellow-Citizens seeing him a greasy and dirty fellow, and that he did
wild and extravagant actions, judged him to be out of his wits; and running
after him, threw stones at him, and covered him all over with dirt. Which when
his Father saw, he fetched him home, and kept him shut up a long time, whipping
him cruelly, as mad folk are whipped for their cure. But his Mother taking pity
on him, did, in the absence of her Husband, set him at liberty.

When his Father returned home, he brought him before the Bishop, and made him
disclaim his right of Inheritance: To which Francis very willingly consented;
yea, pulling off his Breeches, and the rest of his clothes, he made himself
stark naked, being (as St. Bonaventure says) drunk with the Holy Ghost. Then
he said to his Father, Hitherto I have called thee my Father; but henceforward
I will say, Our Father which art in Heaven. Antonine reports the same in the
Life of St. Francis.

Being thus naked, he went into a Spittle where Lepers were kept, and tended
them, kissing their feet, and wiping and kissing their sores with an admirable
devotion, as Saint Bonaventure tells us.

In those days St Francis wore shoes, and walked with a staff, and girded
himself with a leathergirdle: But afterward, judging this equipage excessive,
and too delicate, he left his shoes and his staff, and in humility girded
himself with a Cord.

Being tempted with unchaste desires, he plunged himself over head and ears in
a ditch full of ice. And one day, the Devil having breathed on him, he felt the
fire of carnal lust kindled within him: Whereupon this blessed Saint stripped
himself stark naked, and whipped himself terribly with his Cord, saying, Eja
srater asine, decet te manner, and sic subire flagellum; that is, Go to,
Brother Ass, thou must stay and be whipped thus. Antonine and Jacobus de Voragine
report the same.

The hard ground was his ordinary bed, and a stone his pillow. But one day, by
reason of a pain in his head, taking a feather-pillow, and reposing himself
thereupon, the Devil got into it, and extremely troubled his brain, and
disturbed his devotion: At which St. Francis being incensed, took hold of the
pillow, and threw away both it and the Devil.

Finding that his carnal concupiscence continued, he ran to his garden, and
gathering a great heap of snow, he plunged himself in it over head and ears,
stark naked, as Saint Bonaventure says. But Saint Antonine says, that he
plunged himself in it only so high as his privities. Then he made seven
snow-balls, saying of one, This is my Mother; and of another, This is my
Daughter, etc. whereupon the Devil went away very much ashamed.

He presented his Rule to Pope Innocent the Third; who for a while rejected it,
and some of the Cardinals opposed it, saying, That it proposed novelties, and
things impossible to be done: But at last, St. Francis wallowing in the mire
with Swine, as aforesaid, obtained his request.

Sometimes he had a mind to hear himself reviled; and to this purpose he once
said to a Monk, Bonavent. p. 39. Legenda Antonin. p. 725. Legenda.
Rail on me. Which strict command, the Monk not daring to disobey, said to him,
Thou art an idle lazy Lubber, a Mercinary fellow, an ignorant sot, and a
worthless rascal. Whereat St. Francis greatly rejoicing, answered, God bless
thee my Son; for what thou have said is very true.

One day he had a mind to feed Bonavent. p. 39.
better then ordinary; for which Antonin. p. 726.
resolving to make satisfaction, as having committed a great sin, he caused
himself to be dragged to the Gallows, with a halter about his neck, and his
body naked, only he had a pair of Drawers on; and there standing on a great
stone, he confessed that he was a glutton, a flesh-eater, and most worthy of
scorn and contempt. St. Antonine says, that a Monk went before him, crying
aloud, Friends behold this Glutton, this eater of Pullets flesh, which he has
eaten secretly without our knowledge.

The Devils whipped him so cruelly, that they left him half-dead. Bonavent. page
41. The Legend says the same.
And one day a multitude of Devils running on the top of his house with a
horrible noise, he called to them with a sweet and pleasing voice, entreating
them to come down, and to beat and torment him; saying to them, Come and avenge
me of my adversary, which is my flesh.

Not being content with the torments Legend. page 72.
the Devils inflicted on him, he whipped himself cruelly, taking delight in this
exercise. And once. he hid himself in a Cave a whole month, without any ones
knowledge, as St. Antonine testifies.

St. Antonine and the Legend put page 721. Antonin. Tit. 24 c. 1 s. 2.
this amongst the proofs of Saint Francis's holiness; That being once at dinner
at an honest man's house, a Capon of seven years old was brought to the table,
and that he sent a leg of this Capon for an Alms to a poor Passenger, who One
that believes amiss. Legenda Antonin. page 725. Bonavent.
was a miscreant, and a perverse fellow. But the next day, when St. Francis was
in the Pulpit Preaching, this miscreant, thinking to jeer St. Francis, said to
the people; I will show you what sort of meat Francis uses to feed on: and
then going to show the people the Capons leg, he found it turned into Fish;
whereupon this miscreant was much confounded.

When any one gave him roastmeat, Antonin. page 726.
he dragged it through the ashes, or laid it a soaking in cold water, for fear
of breaking his Vow of poverty and abstinence. An invention which Jesus Christ
and his Apostles, when they were eating the Passover, did not think of.

Saint Antonine says, that St. Antonin. in vit a S. Francisci. page 723.
Francis divided his Disciples into three Companies; whereof two spent their
time in contemplation, and the third action. This third sort of Monks were
called Pinzocgori, and were permitted to marry.

Some Greek Monks having prepared Legenda Jacobi de Voraigne. Antonin. p. 724.
a dinner for him, when he came to the house, and saw clean linen and glasses
on the table, he presently got to the door, and ran out into the street, where
meeting a beggar who had a very bad hat, he took this hat, and putting it on
his own head, sat down at the door of the house begging.

Being weary, he got up upon an Ass: but having with him one Legenda Jacobi de
Voraigne Antonin. in vit a Francisci.
Leonard a Monk, who was on foot, this Leonard grumbled at it; which St.
Francis perceiving, alighted from the Ass, and said to Leonard; Brother get up
upon the Ass, for thou art of a better Faniily than I.

He honored Priests so much, that he said, If I should meet together Legenda
Antonin.
on the way a Priest, and a Saint that came down from Heaven, I would first go
and kiss the Priest's hands, and would say to the Saint, stay thou there a
while.

In humility he Preached to the The Legend and Antonin. p. 726. and 727.
birds, and being once in a Castle called Albian, while he was preaching to the
people, a multitude of Bonavent. p. 44. and 50.
Swallows flockt about him; which by their singing hindered the people from
hearing him: Whereupon turning to the Swallows, he said Sisters, ye have talked
enough, now it is high time for me to speak. At which words the Swallows
Bonavent. page 44.
were silent until the Sermon was ended. And pitying a Hare, which suffered it
self to be taken, he said to it, Brother Hare, why did thou suffer thy self
to be so deceived? A live Tench was Antonin. p. 727.
presented to him, on which taking Bonavent. page 44.
pity, he threw it again into the The Legend.
River. Hearing a Grasshopper sing, he said to it, Sing sister, Grasshopper,
Bonavent. p. 44.
and praise the Creator with rejoicing.

Being in the Church of St. Mary, called Portiuncula, some body gave him a
sheep, to which he gave instructions; and the sheep in obedience to him,
presently fell a bleeting, while the Monks were singing in the Choir; and this
creature did very humbly kneel down, when the host was held up. Whereupon
Surius puts in the Margin, O that heretics would learn henceforward to adore
the Encharist!

Traveling through the Marquisate of Ancona, he met on his Antonin. p. 727.
way a Country-fellow, carrying two Lambs to Market to sell them, which did
bleat most pitifully; whereupon St. Francis, being touched with brotherly
compassion, said to the Country-fellow, Why do thou torment my Brethren so?
The Country man answered, I carry them to the Market to sell them to some body
that will eat them. Then the holy man said to him, God forbid; rather take the
cloak which I have on my shoulders. So he gave him his cloak, and saved the
lives of his brethren, which he carried away on his shoulders with a brotherly
Charity.

Remembering that it is written Antonin. p. 727.
in the two and twentieth Psalm, I am a worm and no man, he would not suffer a
worm to be trodden upon.

One of his Monks having spoken somewhat roughly to a poor man, he commanded
him to strip himself, and to go stark naked before this poor man, and to kiss
his feet.

He was very devoutly present Antonin. in vita Francisci, cap. 2. sect. 6.
Bonavent. page 47.
at a Christmas midnight Mass, to which, according to the Custom of the
Church of Rome in those days, and used still in some places, an Ox, and an Ass
were led, and hay was carried for them.

It is observable, that Bonaventure says, that Francis had no page 48.
learning, nor knowledge of the Holy Scriptures, acquired either by study or
instruction from others; but that by the irradiation of the eternal splendor,
he penetrated even to the very bottom of the Holy Scripture. Hence it is, that
in his Rule he alleges Scripture so dexterously, and pertinently, as we shall
see anon.

At last brother Francis dyed, having acted a Comedy both before God and man.

CHAP. XIX. The great rewards which St. Francis received for his humility: And
of his marks.
A Humility so profound, and of so great a merit, was not Page 728.
unrewarded. St. Antonine, in the life of St. Francis, reports, That the people
did run after him, and did tear his clothes in pieces, every one striving to
carry away a piece, believing that these rags were of great virtue, and a
proper means for salvation; so that the people left him half naked.

Bonaventure says, That a certain holy man had a vision, wherein it seemed to
him, that a golden cross came out of Saint Francis's mouth, whose top touched
Heaven, and its two arms reached unto the ends of the Earth.

In the seventh Chapter of the Revelation St. John, speaks thus; I saw another
Angel ascending from the East, having the seal of the living God. St.
Bonaventure, in the life of St. Francis, says, That we must believe that
without doubt this Bonavent. Page 31.
Angel is St. Francis: these are his words; I saw (says John in the
Revelation) another Angel ascending from the East, having the seal of the
living God. Whence we gather, by an infalliable says, that this messenger of
God, beloved of Christ, to be imitated by us, and admired by the world, is that
servant of God, Francis.

The same Bonaventure says, that a certain, holy, and devout man, Page 40.
being once in St. Francis company, fell into a trance, and saw in Heaven
diverse seats, amongst which he saw one more Magnificently adorned then the
rest, glittering with precious stones, and very glorious: And as this holy man
was wondering for whom this seat was prepared, a voice came to him from Heaven,
saying, This was the seat of one of the lapsed Angels, and is kept for the most
humble Francis.

The Legend says the same: and we have already seen, that this was the seat of
one of the Apostate Seraphins; and that by this exaltation the most humble
Francis is placed above the Archangels, and above the Cherubins, and
consequently above all the Saints, except the Virgin Mary, who is called the
Queen of Heaven.

All that have written the life, and actions of Saint Francis, say, That about
two years before his death, God intending to recompense the humility and merits
of St. Francis, sent a Seraphin to him; which lying upon him cross-wise,
imprinted on his hands and feet the marks of the wounds of Jesus Christ.

After his death, there was a great stir and contest about these marks: Some
laughed at it, and said, that if St. Francis had really received from God the
marks of the wounds of Jesus Christ, every one must needs have seen them,
during the space of those two years, seeing he went with his feet naked, and
wore no gloves; but that none ever saw them, save one Friar, named Elias, who
saw them but once, and that by chance too. Antonin. Tit. 24. Cap. 2. Sect. 8.
Solus hoc frater Elias casu utcunque prospicere meruit.
They said also, that the miracles of Jesus Christ, and his Apostles, served to
some good purpose, viz. to cure diseases, to give ease and deliverance to the
afflicted, to raise the dead, etc. but that the marks of these wounds do no
cure at all, and are good for nothing. That it is not credible that God would
imprint these marks on a mortal body, which was soon after to putrify, by
which putrefaction these marks had been defaced. Moreover, that although these
marks had been really imprinted; yet it is a thing which the Devil, or men may
easily counterfeit. That the Apostles, who had more worth in them then St.
Francis, never had these marks.

But the Pope interposed, and in recompense of the services which brother
Francis had done him, (for he was a great defender of the Popes) Canonized him,
and put him in the Catalogue of the the Saints. This Canonization was, Anno
Domini, 1228. Moreover, Pope Alexander the Fourth, Anno Domini, 1254.
understanding that St. Francis was on Mount Alverno, when he received the
impression of these wounds, took this occasion to augment his Revenue: For he
declared, that all the Ecclesiastical Lands and Goods in that Mountain did
belong to the Pope, and were directly and immediately subject to the Church
Antonin. Cap. 2. Sect. 10.
of Rome. Moreover, he did personally cite, and adjourn those who had
maliciously defaced the marks of the Image of St. Francis, which was at Gennes,
in the Church of Saint Mary de Vignes.

About twenty six years since, Pope Nicholas the Fourth, sent Bulls to all the
Churches under the Papal jurisdiction, certifying Antonin: Page 720.
the truth of St. Francis's marks (though diverse, who were hard of belief,
laughed at it:) since which time, the memory of St. Francis's marks is sacred
in the Church of Rome, which (as Antonine says) observes the Feast of St.
Francis's marks; which honor is not done to the marks of Jesus Christ.

When I consider these things, I cannot enough wonder at the blindness of those
that give credit to things so full of absurdities and impostures: It seems as
if the adorers of St. Francis had invented them on purpose to dishonor and
mock him; for no man, who has any common sense left him, will do such things
as are attributed to St. Francis; who played the madman, that he might be
counted a Saint; and, as much as in him lay, kept himself from the usual and
ordinary actions of mankind, that he might be admired, viz. To draw roasted
flesh through the ashes; to wallow in the dirt with Swine; to tumble in the
Snow; to give instruction to Animals, and to call them his brethren and
Sisters, are things which cannot be done by a man that is in his right senses.

And herein we must admire the just effects of Gods displeasure, who has
revenged the contempt of his Word contained in the Holy Scriptures; for in
those days, and in the following Ages, the the Holy Scripture was a Book
sealed, and altogether unknown to the people: Nothing was then talked of, but
Images, lying Wonders, Croisades, Indulgencies, Adoration of Relics, and the
power of the Pope was then at the height, and absurd and feigned Legends were
the ordinary subject of Sermons. Wherefore God bebeing provoked, struck the
people with the spirit of giddiness, and with a horrible blindness, which grew
thicker and thicker, until God took the Candle of his Word from under the
Bushel, and exposed to view the Holy Scriptures.

CHAP. XX. That under the Cloak of Humility, Saint Francis hid an unparalle'ld
pride.
WHosoever shall rightly consider the actions of St. Francis, shall under the
Cloak of Humility discover an unparalled pride.

In the beginning of the Legend written by Jacobus de Voraigne, it is reported,
That Francis being prisoner with diverse other persons, he only was merry, and
all the rest were sad. And being asked what was the cause of his mirth, he
answered; Ideo me exultare noveritis, quia adhuc sanctus per totum seculum
adorabar, that is, Know, that I rejoice, because I shall be adored for a Saint
throughout the World. To desire to be adored is the highest degree of pride:
None of the Apostles desired this honor. Cornelius the Centurion, who was a
man fearing God, knew that there is but one God, which he continually invoked;
he knew well enough that St. Peter was not the Creator of the world: but being
seized with reverence, he would have given him some inferior adoration; for
which Saint Peter rebuked him, saying, Stand up, I my self also am a man, Act.
10. 26. St. John seized with fear, would have adored the Angel that talked with
him, as you may see in the one and twentieth Chapter of the Revelation; But the
Angel rebuked him, saying, See thou do it not, for I am thy fellow servants;
worship God. He knew well enough that this Angel was not God; for the same
Angel had told him so before, in Chap 19. of the same Book. Is it not therefore
an impious folly, for a man to live the life of a beggar, that he may be adored
after his death?

The Rule of St. Francis, which speaks with an absolute authority, demonstrates
the pride of him that composed it. For who gave brother Francis, (who was of
the meanest of the people, and without any charge either Ecclesiastical or
Civil) power to compose Laws different from the laws of God, and to make
ordinances which oblige men upon pain of damnation? Who gave him power to
command with absolute authority? For see how he speaks in his Rule. Per
obedientiam injungo Ministris; I enjoin Ministers by their obedience. And he
concludes his Rule with these words, That it is not lawful for any man to
infringe this Rule, or by rash boldness to contradict it. That if any one shall
presume to make such an attempt, let him know, that he shall incur the
displeasure of Almighty God, and of the Blessed Apostles, Peter and Paul.

I demand how we can be assured that God would have us, upon pain of incurring
his displeasure, entirely observe Francis his Rule, and that God would be angry
with a Minor Friar, who instead of a Cord, should gird himself with a
leather-girdle, or should receive money, or would not wear patcht clothes, or
would wear a shirt, or should (whether he be a Capucin or a Lay Cordelier) say
less then seventy six Paters in one day? What can be said more against
Murderers, Adulterers, and Blasphemers, than to say, that they incur the
indignation of Almighty God? Has not weak and sinful man enough to do to obey
the commands of God, without having heavy burdens imposed on him in things
unnecessary, and which God requires not, and then to be made believe, that he
who does in the least transgress these laws, invented by man, does incur the
indignation of God?

It is observable, that many of those who are rigid observers of those humane
laws, and oblige others to be so too, do very easily dispense with the Laws of
God; and are far from loving God with all their hearts, and their neighbors as
themselves.

But Superstition prevails more than Religion. And hence it is, that in the
Convents of Monks, there are envies, factions, and continual emulations,
besides other vices.

But how did this Francis know, that a Monk who observes not his Rule, incurs
the indignation of St. Peter and St. Paul? Had he spoken with them? Did they
declare and promise that they would be avengers and enemies to all those that
should contemn the Rule of the Minor Friars? We have the Epistles of those
excellent Apostles, Peter and Paul, which (without comparison) are better then
Saint Francis's Rule, and yet they do not declare themselves avengers of the
contempt of their doctrines.

They do not say, that he who shall violate their precepts, shall incur their
indignation. Wherefore it appears, that this venerable Francis assumes an
authority over the Apostles, whom he would oblige to be angry for his sake, and
to undertake his quarrel. But it is not credible, that the Apostles, who enjoy
celestial glory, will concern themselves for the observation of the rules of
Monks, especially seeing they themselves were no Monks, and that their lives
were as much unlike the lives of the Capucins, as Heaven is distant from Earth;
Also because there were no Convents of Monks in the Apostles days, nor in many
ages after.

Methinks it is enough to have God our enemy: If a man incurs the indignation
of God, the indignation of these two Apostles will not render him the more
miserable. In vain therefore does Francis, after he has denounced against the
Minor Friars, who shall disobey his Rule, the Indignation of God, threaten them
with the indignation of St. Peter, and Saint Paul, who are pre-supposed (though
without proof, and contrary to the word of God) to know the heart, and to see
all that is done here below.

Also we would fain know, why Francis threatens the Monks with the indignation
of St. Peter, and St. Paul, only? And why not with the indignation of St. John,
and St. James? but perhaps he believed, that they have less credit in Heaven,
or that they are less choleric.

It is very observable, that Francis composed his Rule (wherein he gives laws,
and commands with authority) when he was but a Lay man, and a private person,
and a long time before the Pope approved it: And although he was of the meanest
rank of people, and without any office or dignity, yet he speaks magisterially.

To the Rule of St. Francis, is added his Testament, wherein he speaks with
full power and authority, saying, Firmiter volo quod fratres laborent de
laboritio, and praecipio firmiter fratribus per obedientiam, etc. That is, I do
strictly charge, and do firmly, and absolutely command the Friars by their
obedience, etc. He pre-supposeth, that obedience is due to him, and that his
commands ought to be firm and inviolable. Kings speak not with more authority.

CHAP. XXI. Some Laws and Ordinances contained in St. Erancis 's Rule.
FRancis his Rule begins with these words:

The Rule and Life of the Minor Friars, is as follows, viz. to observe the Holy
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ in these things, viz. in living Obediently,
Chastely, and without Poverty.

These words are very remarkable; for they do not oblige the Monks to
acknowledge Jesus Christ to be the eternal Son of God, and the Savior and
Redeemer of the world, not to be charitable and liberal to the poor, nor to be
at peace with their neighbors, nor to do to others what they would have done
to themselves, nor diligently to read the Holy Scripture, and to be instructed
in the Doctrine of Salvation, which are things expressly cantained in the Gospel
of Jesus Christ, and recommended by the Apostles: But this Rule obliges the
Minor Friars, to observe the Gospel in things which the Gospel of Jesus Christ
commands not; for you cannot find, that the Gospel of Christ forbids any one to
marry; on the contrary, Jesus Christ, by the mouth of his Apostle, commands
those who cannot contain, to marry, and St. Peter was married. Jesus Christ
forbids us not to possess any thing in particular, nor does he command us to
live in beggary by the sweat of other men's brows. He commands not to make a Vow
of Obedience to a Guardian, or Abbot, or Superior of a Monastery; for in the
days of Jesus Christ there were no such people, nor in many Ages after. Can
there be a more manifest mockery, then to oblige men by Vow to obey the Gospel
in such things whereof the Gospel makes not the least mention, and some whereof
are contrary to the Gospel?

But if these things are commanded in the Gospel, (as this Rule falsely
pre-supposeth) why then does the Pope dispense with this Vow, by permitting
Monks to marry? However, he seldom gives this permission, except to persons of
great Quality.

In the second Chapter of the same Rule, you shall find these words: Let those
who are received Monks, have a Cloak with a Hood, and (if they will) another
without a Hood. Also, let those wear shoes, who are constrained by necessity
so to do. Likewise, let all the Friars wear poor and base clothes, which they
may patch with pieces of sackcloth, and such other stuff, and shall have the
blessing of God with it.

Must not that man be out of his wits, who thinks, that the patching of old
clothes can bring down the blessing of God upon any one? And seeing the
Capucins clothes are of woollen-cloth, St. Francis did very improperly ordain,
that they should be patched with sackcloth.

In the same Chapter of this Rule, mention is made of three Lents, viz. the
Lent before Easter, another from All Saints day, till Christmas, and the other
from the day of the Epiphany, till the Lent before Easter. So that there are
five Months of Lent: The two first are necessarily enjoined, but the third is
left to every ones liberty.

In this same Chapter, the Minor Friars are forbidden to ride on Horseback,
except in case of extreme necessity. Also they are commanded, when they enter
into any house, to eat whatsoever is set before them. By this Rule, they may
eat flesh in Lent.

They are likewise forbidden, in the same Chapter, to receive money, either
personally, or by Proxy: For Pope Nicholas has already told us, that to have
a Bag, and Money, as Jesus Christ and his Apostles had, is an action of
infirmity: but St. Francis, who had neither Bag nor Money, attained unto
greater perfection.

In the fifth Chapter of the same Rule, Francis commands his Monks to labor
with their hands, if they are able: But in his Testament he speaks more
precisely; for he says, that he himself did labor with his hands; and he
adds, I do likewise expressly command all the other Monks to labor.

This Command is not observed now a days; for the Capucins and Cordeliers, who
understand a Trade, had rather live in idle beggary by other men's labor: And
thus they daily break their Vow, and transgress their Rule.

But above all, are remarkable the words of the Tenth Chapter of this Rule,
which are these; Let not the Friars trouble themselves to teach those to read,
who cannot read; but above all things let them desire the Spirit of God.

St. Francis says this, because some Monks are very ignorant, and cannot read.
Some such there are now adays, but not so many as there were in St. Francis's
time; whose opinion it is, That no body needs trouble himself to teach them to
read, that so they may be instructed in the Holy Scriptures; he had rather they
should remain ignorant: Only he would have them desire the Holy Ghost; not
considering, that God gives this Spirit to those who are instructed in his
Word: For, to desire the Holy Spirit, and yet to neglect the ordinary means,
whereby the Holy Spirit works in the hearts of men, is to shut the door against
him, while we desire him; it is just as if a man should desire to have a Bell
rung, without having the Clapper of it moved.

These are the Commands of Francis, who is exalted above the Cherubins that
stand before the Throne of God; to the observation of which Commands, he
promises Life Eternal; and by the transgression of them, a man incurs the
indignation of God; and of the Apostles, Peter and Paul; but not of St. Philip
and St. Luke. Moreover, here are better and more excellent things proposed,
then those which God commands in his Law, viz. Works of Supererogation, which
merit a supereminent degree of Glory, far above the ordinary sort of Saints,
who contented themselves with doing what God commands.

To this Rule are added the Constitutions of the Order; (whereof I have already
spoken) which the Capucins observe more exactly, and with greater obedience,
then they do the Law of God, and Doctrine of the Gospel.

CHAP. XXII. That the Holy Scripture is falsified and wrested in the Rule of
Saint Francis.
WE have heard before, that St. Bonaventure says, That Saint Francis had not
any science acquired by study; but that he had received the knowledge of the
Holy Scriptures by divine inspiration. Whether this be true or not, will appear
by the passages of Scripture, which Francis alleges in his Rule.

In the second Chapter, he strictly forbids the Minor Friars to forsake the
Order, but will have them continue in it as long as they live: And that they
ought so to do, he proves by a passage of St. Luke, in his Ninth Chapter, Verse
62. where Jesus Christ speaks thus, No man having put his hand to the plough,
and looking back, is fit for the Kingdom God. The connection of this passage
with the preceding Verses, shows, that by him who puts his hand to the plough,
and looks back, is meant such a one whom Jesus Christ having sent to Preach the
Gospel, and having undertaken that charge, does afterward leave it to serve
his wordly occasions. Our Lord speaks not of him who has vowed never to marry,
and to wear no shirt, and to live by begging, and to observe humane Rules and
Traditions, which ensnare men in unclean lusts, and which are given to God for
better works then those commanded in his Law, as if man would make him a
debtor. In a word, to forsake the the service of Jesus Christ, and to
transgress the Rule of Francis, is, in his opinion, one and the same thing.

In the Ninth Chapter of the same Rule, St. Francis commands the Monks to be
brief in their Sermons, Quia verbum abbreviatum fecit Dominus super terram;
that is, Because the Lord made his word short upon earth: Which is a passage
taken from the Tenth Chapter of Isaiah, ver. 23. and from the Epistle of St.
Paul to the Romans, Chap. 9. ver. 28. where is no mention at all made of
Sermons or words which men pronounce with their mouths; but of Gods judgments
and punishments, which he hasteneth, and will speedily bring upon men. The
divine inspiration given to Saint Francis did not (it seems) teach him, that as
well in the Old at New Testament, Verbum is very (...).
often taken for Res or Negotium; as in Exodus, Chap. 2. ver. 14. and and Chap.
9. Verse. 5. and 6. and in 1 Samuel Chap. 1. ver. 4. and Chap. 2. ver. 6. and in
St. Luke, Chap. 1. ver. 37. and Chap. 2. ver. 15. and often elsewhere.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Poverty, and Riches.
FRancis made profession to be a great lover of Poverty, and commonly called it
his Mistress. In his Rule he speaks thus to his Monks; It is this sublimity of
most losty poverty (my dear brethren) which makes you heirs, and Kings of the
Kingdom of Heaven, and exalts you in virtues, who are poor in substance: And
thereupon he forbids them to possess any thing of all that is under the Sun.

He himself put this Rule in practice. For having a competent estate, he left
it all: yea, he left his breeches, and the rest of his clothes, and went about
stark naked.

As for Poverty in general, many take delight in praising it; yea, those very
persons who shun it; And to extol it, they say that Jesus Christ was poor: but
that serves rather to show that poverty is an evil; for Jesus Christ came into
the World to bear our infirmities, and to sustain our sorrows.

Bellarmine, in the 45. Chapter of his Book of the Monks, says, that Jesus
Chirst was a beggar. To the titles of the Son of God, the Redeemer, the Word,
the Wisdom of the Father, nothing was wanting to complete his praises, but to
call him beggar: But a man cannot properly be said to be a beggar for living by
the help and assistance of another.

We may judge of the nature of riches, and poverty of this, viz. that God is
infinitely rich, and that the Devil is the poorest of all creatures. Jesus
Christ says, that it is better to give, then to receive; intimating thereby,
that it is better for a man to give what he has, then to ask what he has not;
For he that gives, imitates God, who gives always, but receives never.
Liberality is always better then indigence: It is more commendable to give,
than to receive an Alms. And certainly, he that blames riches as evil in their
own nature, blames God, who is the Author of them, and distributes them as it
pleases him. God oftentimes exhorts his people of Israel to piety, by the
promises of temporal good things. And Solomon asking of him Wisdom only, he
gave him riches also without parallel. Saint James indeed says, that God has
chosen the poor; but he adds, that are rich in Faith. For the happiness of
these Poor consists not in their being poor, but in their being rich in Faith.
Thus must we understand what Jesus Christ says in the sixth Chapter of St.
Luke, Blessed be ye poor. For that which makes a poor man happy, is not his
poverty, but the manner of supporting his poverty. There be rich men that are
very virtuous; and poor men that are very wicked, whom poverty excites to
Theft, Murder, Perjury, etc. And therefore Agur, in the Thirtieth Chapter of
the Proverbs, desires of God, not to send him poverty. The Soul of poor Lazarus
is carried by Angels into the bosom of rich Abraham. So that the poor and rich
are put together, to teach us, that rich as well as poor are received into the
Kingdom of God, if they fear and serve him according to his word.

It is true indeed, that riches do corrupt many, and serve only to puff them up
with pride, to inflame their lusts, and to divert their hearts from trusting in
God, to trust in their riches. And this is the reason why Jesus Christ says it
is hard for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of God: But this evil proceeds
not from riches, but from those that abuse them, into whose lap riches falling
are corrupted, as a Crown is defiled that falls into a puddle, and in whose
hands the goods of this world are like a sword in the hands of a madman. We
must not believe that Jesus Christ in the 16th. Chapter of St. Luke, calls
riches unrighteous, because there is any unrighteousness in the possession of
them, or because they are gotten by unrighteous means, but because they are
either provocations, or instruments of unrighteousness, to those that are
destitute of the fear of God.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the vow of Poverty, and of idle begging: Also of works, and
satisfactions of supererogation.
THere are two sorts of Poverty: one which God sends, and another to which men
do voluntarily devote themselves without Gods sending it unto them. The former
is an affliction, the other is a direct profession, which some choose, as
supposing it of great merit, and a work of supererogation. There be some poor,
whom God has reduced to a low estate, wherein they get a slender livelihood by
the labor of their hands: who, if they be contented with their conditions, and
by serving God with a pure Consciscience, do aspire to better riches, viz, the
Heavenly, they are happy, and beloved of God, and truly rich. There be others,
whom God bereaves of their estates for the profession of the Gospel, who,
although they have not purposely drawn poverty on themselves, yet, if they bear
this yoke patiently and joyfully, esteeming it an honor to bear the Cross of
Christ, their Poverty may be said to be voluntary, because they voluntarily
follow the call of God. Of these Jesus Christ speaks in the ninth Chapter of
Saint Matthew, who have left Father, Mother, Wife and Children, or Lands for
his sake; God having reduced them to such a necessity, that they cannot keep
their estates without forsaking the profession of the Gospel. In this case, we
must lay down our very lives to save our Souls; and must be prodigal of our
estate to be nigardly of our salvation.

But there is an affected poverty, which some embrace by vow, and without any
necessity, or God's obliging of them thereunto; who may keep their estates with
a good conscience, but yet had rather leave them to live by other men's
estates, and had rather beg than work. This poverty is a yoke which God
imposes not on them, but they impose it on themselves. They bear not Christ's
Cross, but their own. They leave the exercise of charity, upon pretense of
humility and patience. It may be said, that they they are like the fowls of the
Air, for they sow not, neither do they reap, and yet their Father the Pope,
feeds them plentifully: for we see, that those who have vowed Poverty, are fat
and plump; and though they are poor in particular, yet are they rich in common.
They get more by begging, then the common people do by working. Many turn Monks
in spite, or to shake off the yoke of their parents, or in a Melancholy and
desperate humor, or to defraud their creditors, who press hard upon them; or
because they will not take pains to work, or have not wherewith to subsist at
home. They turn beggars, that they may not be poor. They are poor by vow, for
fear of being so by necessity. Wherefore Bellarmine speaks very gracefully,
when he says, That to these begging Lib de Monachis cap. 46. s. secunda.
Monks belongs that saying of Jesus Christ, in the Nineteenth Chapter of Saint
Matthew, Centuplum accipiet, etc. That is, He shall receive an hundred fold,
and shall inherit eternal life.

But when our adversaries call begging a work of supererogation, they do
thereby acknowledge, that God commands it not. The Prophets, and the Apostles
never vowed poverty, neither were they beggars. Those of them who were poor,
were not so by vow, but by necessity, which God Joh. 21. 3.
imposed on them. The Apostles Joh. 19. 27.
had their Fishing Vessels after our Phil. 4. 16.
Lords Resurrection; And St. John had his house. St. Paul received with
thankfulness the relief which the Philippians sent him: Being at Corinth, he
got his living by making of Tents, choosing rather to work, then to beg; For he
well knew, that begging is a shameful thing, and that it makes men both idle
and impudent. He that leaves his own estate, to eat another man's bread, has no
reason to say to God, Give us this day our daily bread; For God might answer
him, I gave thee wherewith to buy bread, but thou have despised it; And now by
thy begging, thou take from them that are really poor, those Alms which are
due to them.

And so far is begging from being a work of supererogation, and better then
what God commands in his Law, that, on the contrary, Omnino non erit indigiens
and mendicus inter vos.
God will have us prevent it as much as we can, saying in Deuteronomy. Chap. 15. verse
4. To the end that there may be no poor among you. The Hebrew word signifies a
Beggar, (...)
and the Vulgar Translation so renders it. Not that it is a sin to beg, when a
man has no other way of subsistence: But God commands the rich so to relieve
the poor, that they may not be constrained to beg.

The Scripture often speaks of begging as an evil, and a punishment, yea, a
curse. In the 37. Psalm, David says, I have been young, and now am old, yet
have I not seen the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging bread. And in 109
Psalm, he makes this imprecation, Let his Children be Vagabonds, and beg. He
speaks indeed of involuntary poverty; but there is no likelihood, that that
which is a curse to some, can be a blessing to others; and that which to one is
a grievous affliction, can be to another a holy Profession.

As for examples, we have already seen the description which Lucian and
Apuleius give of the Priests of the Syrian goddess, who did whip themselves,
and beg. To which we shall add the Massalian Heretics, of whom Fpiphanius
Epiphan. Haeret. 80: Cap. 3.
says, they went about begging, as not having wherewith to subsist, neither
possessing any thing.

Examine Antiquity, and try if you can find so much as one example of Monks
that made begging a Profession. There was no no such thing as a Profession of
beggary; for above twelve hundred years after the Nativity of our Lord. Camus,
Bishop of Bellay, who is yet living, has written a great book of the labors
of Monks; in the Preface whereof you shall find these words; The ulcer of
idleness is crept into Monasteries, under the name of holy and meritorious
beggary. His whole book is employed to prove that Monks should be obliged to
labor with their hands, especially those that do not Preach, nor have any
other painful employment in the Church: so far is he from placing beggary
amongst those pieces of perfection, whereby God is made a debtor to man. And
this Prelate's book bears in its front the Approbation of the Doctors of the
faculty of Theology at Paris. St. Augustine has written a book, De opere
Monachorum, wherein he obliges them to labor. Epiphanius teaches the same,
in the Heresy of the Massalians: where, he says, that in all the Monasteries
of Egypt, the Monks did labor with their hands, even as Bees do labor to make
honey and wax. In those days the Monks were poor Hermits, living in deserts,
laboring with their hands to get their living, and carrying their workmanship
to the neighboring Towns to sell, bought bread with the money: They did not
beg the approbation of their Rule from the Bishop of Rome, for they were not
subject to him: In a word, they were not at all like the Monks now adays. The
same Epiphanius, in the same book, condemns those that live an idle life, and
making a profession of beging, get their bread at rich men's tables.

But to complete their wickedness, the mendicant Friars make begging a work of
supererogation, that is, better than what God commands in his Law, and
consequently, better than to love God with all our hearts, and our neighbor as
our selves. God commands us to serve him with all our strength, so that the
Monks serve God with more than all their strength, which is impossible.
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Samuel, David, etc. never did works of supererogation.
The perfection of the Angels consists in obeying God, and not in doing more
than he commands. Jesus Christ himself came into the world only to do the will
of his Father, and not to do more then his will. Ask the most devout Capucin,
if he never commits sin; and he will tell you, that he is a poor linner: How do
these things agree? they do not that which God commands, and yet will do more
then he commands! They fail in necessary things, and yet strive to do things
unnecessary, and which God requires not! They do not what they ought, and do
what they ought not! They are more holy than God would have them to be!

That man is crack-braind, who exercises liberality when he has not wherewith
to pay his debts; If this be so in reference to men, how much more in reference
to God? It is an extreme pride, to endeavor to give God overplus, and more
then we owe him.

In a word, I would know whether the Monks, when they do works of
supererogation, do the will of God, or their own will. If they do the will of
God, they are obliged thereunto, and do what they ought: But if, by doing
better things then those which God commands, they do their own will; it follows
that their will is better than the will of God.

Out of this same shop of pride, come those superabundant satisfactions,
whereby the Monks would make us believe, that they suffer more punishment, and
do more penance, then their sins deserve, and that the Pope gathers this
overplus into his Treasury, and distributes it by his Indulgences as payment
for the sins of others. The Monks believe, that by whiping themselves, by
fasting and going barefoot, they expiate the sins of others; Wherefore
Bellarmine Bell. lib. 1. de Indul. r. 4. s. sex.
says, that the Saints are, in some sense, our Redeemers. The Legends of Saint
Antonine, say, that Saint Dominick, a grand emulator of the holiness of St.
Francis, lasht himself three times a day with an iron chain, viz. Once for his
own sins, which were very small, once for the sins of the living, and once for
the sins of those Souls which are in Purgatory, who (no doubt) received much
ease thereby. And it is this same Saint, that once had mercy on the Devil: For
the Devil having transformed himself into a Sparrow, and Saint Dominick
catching him, contented himself only with pulling off the feathers from his
head, whereas it was in his power to have wrung off his neck.

By these things God is blasphemed: For such things are attributed to God,
which if a man should do, he would be accounted either wicked, or mad. For,
what Judge would not be accounted unjust, or out of his wits, who should let a
malefactor go, because his neighbor has whipped himself for him? But things
which are ridiculous in civil society, are esteemed good in Religion; as if a
man must lose common sense to augment piety.

All this abuse proceeds from this, viz. that men, utterly destitute of the
knowledge of the Holy Scriptures (which are to them a book sealed, and
altogether unknown) seek other satisfactions, and other payments for sin, then
the death and passion of Jesus Christ. For seeing Jesus Christ has fully
satisfied Gods justice, to what purpose are other satisfactions presented to
him? Is not this to accuse God of injustice, to pretend that he takes two
payments for one debt, when the first is sufficient? Is it not to dishonor
that most perfect satisfaction, which Jesus Christ has accomplished for us, to
join it with the whipings and austerities of Monks, which is just as if a man
should mingle coals and diamonds together? For Pope Clement the VI. in his
Extravagant Vnigenitus, says, that the merits of the Virgin Mary, and of the
other Saints, do help to complete the treasure of the benefits of Jesus Christ;
giving us to understand, that the benefits of Jesus Christ make but bare
measure; but that the addition of the Saints merits makes heaped measure, and
is an addition to the merits of Jesus Christ. And for this reason, the Priest
in the Mass prays for salvation, not only through the Saints intercession, but
also through their merits.

The Lord God take pity on so many poor people involved in so many abuses, and
discover the deceit of those, who being themselves notorious sinners, do yet by
a proud humility think to expiate the sins of others.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Fraternity of the Cord. Printed at Rouen by Tho. Dare, in
the Jews street, near the Palace, Anno 1614
An Extract of a Book, entitled, The Treasure of the Indulgencies of St.
Francis's Cord, Translated out of Italian into French: And of the Canonization
of St. Francis, and Ignatius de Loyola.
THE Faaternity of St. Francis's Cord, is a Society of superstitiously devout
people, both Men and Women, and as well Clergymen as Laymen: Into which
Fraternity they who enter, are obliged to certain Observations, and for a Badge
of the Fraternity wear a Cord, in imitation of the Cord which St. Francis wore,
and do participate of all the Merits and Satisfactions of those of the said
Fraternity. They who have the least of merit, do, for all that, as really
partake of the merits of the others, as if they were their own: They lend their
merits to each other; and he that is asleep, or at dinner, participates of the
merits of him that whips himself, or of him that turns over the consecrated
Beads of his Chaplet seven times.

The Fraternity of St. Francis's Cord, has great Privileges, and the Popes
have granted it great Indulgences. These privileges have been set down in
writing by diverse, but especially by Antonio Brugneto, an Italian Observantin
Monk, whose very words in the 104. page, are these; The most glorious Father
Francis, a little before his death, obtained of God the Creator three
Privileges, as the defunct Pope Gregory reports them from St. Francis his own
mouth, viz.

The first is, That as the number of Monks should increase, so should all
things necessary be provided for them by the Divine Providence.

The second, That whosoever shall wear the Habit of his Order, shall not dye
unfortunately.

The third, That whosoever shall persecute the Religion of his Order, his days
shall be short, and his end miserable.

Moreover, the most glorious Father Francis, a little before his death,
revealed to a certain Monk (who is worthy of credit) that he had obtained three
other Privileges of our Creator, when he appeared to him in the likeness of a
Seraphin, and left the impression of the holy Marks on him.

The first is, That the profession of his Monks should continue until the end
of the world.

The second, That whosoever shall live well in his Order, shall live a long
time in it.

The third, That whosoever shall heartily love his Order, how great a sinner he
be, shall find mercy from God, if so be he turns from his evil ways.



The same Author in the 109. page, has these words:

First, Pope Clement the Fourth has granted to those men, who on their
Deathbeds shall desire to be clad in the Habit of St. Francis his Order; and
to those women who shall desire to be clad in the Habit of of St. Clare, and to
be buried in it, the pardon of the third part of their sins.

This same Indulgence was granted them by Pope Nicholas the Third, and by Pope
Urban the Fifth.

Moreover, Pope Leo, the Tenth, confirming the said Concessions, adds by way of
overplus, That they who should die in this Habit of St. Francis, or St. Clare,
and should be buried therein, should have a plenary Indulgence for all their
sins.

And in the 95. page; Moreover, on Olive-Saturday, on the Feast of St. John the
Evangelist, and on the other Feast of St. John Porta-Latina (Pope Sixtus the
Fifth) he has granted to those of the Fraternity, who shall on such days
rehearse the seven Penitentiary Psalms, the redemption of one Soul out of
Purgatory.

As for the Indulgence granted (as the Minor Friars say) by Jesus Christ, and
the Virgin Mary, and confirmed by the Pope at Nostre Dame des Anges, called
Portiuncula; the Rosary of Bernardin, and the aforesaid book of the Indulgences
of the Cord, and the Chronicle of St. Francis, say, that St. Francis would not
have the Pope's Bull for confirmation of the said Indulgence: For (says he) I
have the glorious Virgin, and Jesus Christ for Notaries, and the Angels for
Witnesses. This Indulgence is to be had on the second day of August, whereby
every one who has been confessed, and is contrite, and shall then go into the
Church of Nostre Dame des Anges, shall obtain a plenty a plenary absolution
both of sin, and punishment. If this same person should go into any other
Church, with the like or greater contrition he should not have the same
Indulgence. It is worth our notice, that St. Francis obtained this Indulgence
of Pope Honorius, by presenting him with three red Roses in the Winter.

But Pope Sixtus the Fifth, who was a Cordelier, has abundantly heaped up
Indulgences, plenary, more plenary, and most plenary, (as they Phrase it) on
the Order of the Minor Friars, and upon the Fraternity of St. Francis's Cord.

But of all these Indulgences, of three or four hundred thousand years, the
Jesuits make little reckoning, and have never much troubled themselves about
procuring any of them from the Pope; esteeming their own Order, although barren
in pardons, and Indulgences, better then that of the Minor Friars.

However, in one respect the Cordeliers, and Capucins surpass the Jesuits,
(viz.) in that St. Francis was Canonized by the Pope immediately after his
death, without the least difficulty: But as for Ignatius Loyola, the Founder
and Patron of the Jesuits, who dyed, Anno Domini, 1556. the Jesuits were above
seventy years soliciting in the Court of Rome, to obtain from the Pope, that he
might be put into the number of the Saints; and at last, with great difficulty,
obtained his Canonization, seventy years after his death. So long did the
sanctity of Ignatius hang in suspense; which, no doubt, was the cause of great
trouble, and perplexity to him. However this future Saint, during all this
waiting, received some consolation; For, some years before his Canonization he
was Beatified, which is a forerunner of Canonization.

At last the Pope having received more clear and certain proofs of the holiness
of Ignatius, put him into the Catalogue of the Saints, and ordained that he
should be invoked in the Church of Rome; which had not been lawful during those
seventy years that past betwixt Ignatius his death and Canonization.

But as in the Chapels, and Colleges of the Jesuits you shall see few Images
of St. Francss; so in the Convents, and Churches of the Capucins, it is a very
rare thing to see the image of St. Ignatius: For the Capucins believe, that St.
Francis has more credit in the Court of Heaven, and that he is exalted above
the Cherubins.

The Author to the Readers.
A Few days since a little Book, Entitled, The Capucin, composed by Mr. Du
Moulin, coming to my view, and having read it exactly, I find nothing in it,
but what is true, and practiced among the Capucins. But knowing that diverse
particulars might be added, which that good man was ignorant of, I thought he
would not take it amiss, if by way of Appendix to his Book, I should publish
this small Journal, that so nothing might be wanting to complete the
description of the Capucin. The things which I have added, are so well known
amongst them, that they cannot be denied; Besides, no man can speak with so
much confidence, as I may, having been of their Order, and employed in their
Affairs above twenty years.

THE MONK'S HOOD PULLED OFF; OR, THE CAPVCIN FRIAR Described.
PART II.
CHAP. I. The Capucins Journal.
THE Capucins boast, that of all the Religious Orders of the Romish Church,
theirs is the most austere and perfect. The Carthusians did formerly dispute
this honor with them; but since the Jesuits are started up, who contend with
them both, and would take this honor from them by force, for they will give
place to none in point of perfection. And they have reason for it, having
amongst them all those advantages by whole Sale, which the rest have only by
Retail, viz.

They beg with the Mendicants, receive Rents with the Bishops, Benefices with
the Abbots, Privileges with the Monks; they eat good Fish with the
Carthusians, Flesh with the Capucin's, wild In Fowl with the Gentry. great
houses short Masses are said.
They say short Masses, as great Men's Chaplains do; are clad like Popes, feed
like Lords, and lie delicately. They are Jacobins in the Pulpit, Carmelites in
the Kitchen, but never Cordeliers in the Choire. They are Confessors to Kings,
and of late are become Chaplains to Princes, and great Ladies. They govern both
men and women, gather wealth on all hands; and if you would give a Jesuit his
right name, you must call him Omnis homo. However, the Capucin's have gained
the esteem of the people, and do exceed all the other Monks in rigor and
austerity.

Their day begins at midnight, a little before which time, he that warns them
to rise, goes the round by their chamber doors with a kind of Cymbal, which
they call a Tarrabas, being like those Instruments of Wood, with which those of
the Romish Communion are called to their Churches three days before Easter,
when the Bells are silent.

At this noise the sleeping Friars rouse, rub their ears, shake off their
fleas, and go into the Choire to sing Matines. They that would be dispensed
with, need only say to this officer, Brother I am indisposed, pass on further.
When Matines are ended, having invoked all the Saints in Paradise, both Males
and Females; they begin to whip themselves after the manner mentioned in the
8th Chapter of the Capucin. Many make more noise then they have hurt, others
strike against the benches to spare their buttocks; and all this while they
sing with open mouth the 51 Psalm, Have mercy on this poor Sinner, etc. There
be some that make themselves bleed in good earnest, and with much whipping
harden the leather of their buttocks, like that of a Postillion's Coat; for
these poor people think they shall go to Heaven the sooner for their much
whiping themselves.

The whips which they use, are called Disciplines; some are made of small iron
chains, and some of small cords full of knots; at the end of which some of them
put iron rowels. These whips consist, some of five strings, in honor of the
five wounds of Jesus Christ; and some of seven to punish the seven mortal sins.

After these skirmishes, the Superior blesses them all, and then they dispose
themselves to make that Prayer which they call mental; and that they may
recollect themselves the better, the windows are shut. Many of them make it, as
Saint Peter in the Garden; They fall asleep.
Simon sleep thou? This Prayer must continue an hour, and then they go to a
great fire; about which they make a thousand frisks, and cut as many capers.
Some turn their back to the fire, others their side. Some draw their Hoods over
their face, others put a Handkerchief over their eyes; and all this while they
rehearse in two Choirs the office of the Virgin for those that gave them the
wood.

When they are well warmed, they go to sleep till six a clock in Winter, and
five in Summer: a little before the clock strikes, they are awakened by the
strokes of a club on their chamber-doors, and then they return into the Choire
to sing Certain Offices.
First and Third, and after that the Conventual Mass The ordinary Mass of the
Monastery.
for the good friends of the Monastery.

After these spiritual exercises, they betake themselves to corporal ones. The
Cooks prepare in the Kitchen, the Gardners go to work in the Garden. Some go to
their Studies, some fetch a walk, some make crosses for the rest, some make
relics for their devout Clients, and some pass the time in talking, etc.

About half an hour after nine, the Bell rings Times for certain Offices.
Sixth and Ninth, after which offices they give some strokes on a broken
Pick-ax instead of a Bell; which is done in zeal to poverty; at the noise of
these blows on the spade, they all go into the Dining Room, and one after the
other kiss the ground, and then stand in order waiting for the Superior.

Mundays, Wednesdays, and Fridays, having kissed the ground, they attend on their
knees the coming of the Superior, who having likewise kissed the ground, turns
about to the rest. Then the eldest of them puts off his cloak in respect,
clasps his hands, hangs down his head on his knees, and says, Benedicite,
Father I confess my fault, I am an unhappy wretch, I have broken a Platter;
another says, I am worse then a Devil, I have broken a Cup; another, I am a
block-head, I was like to have burnt the Monastery. Such things as these they
confess, as Mr. du Moulin has observed Vide du Moulin.
in the 8th Chapter of the Capucin.

To these childish confessions, are enjoined on the very same place, Penances
sutably ridiculous, to which I add these following.

They make him that has Sung too low in the Choir, to put the Coverlet of his
bed on his back, like a Cope, and a staff in his hand like the Chanter of the
Chapter; and as he walks along by the Tables, he sings the Magnificat with
false notes.

If any one be too spruce or finical, (as many affect to be; witness he that
caused such hairs of his eyebrows and beard, as he called supernumerary, to be
plucked out; for he cut his hairs by tale, and his beard by the rule or compass)
they make him kiss the Pothangers, or the bottom of a Kettle. Diverse go to him
to complement him, calling him Sir; and then (to make him handsome and brave)
they load him with Dish-clouts, and flap him on the Chaps with a wet cloth, as
you would do to a Jack-pudding.

I have known a Master of the Novices to enjoin a Novice, as a penance, to sing
a merry Song, called Madelonnette. Another has commanded them all to pass over
the belly of one that lay flat on his back; and every one as he passed over
him, said, Burst, burst thou proud Cockscomb.

Another, who caused a Novice to be whipped in the Garden, in the sight of Women
and Maids, that looked over the wall; being told of it, replied, They would fain
see the Females whipped.
What care we though the Females see our shoulders, since we give them good
example.

It is a very rude and uncivil penance, when a poor Capucin has emptied his
pot of Wine at Table; the Superior commands another to be brought him. For
this is to publish his infirmity It is a sign he loves good wine.
and what that is, the rest are able to guess by the greatness of his thirst.

If any one brags of his gentility, or talks in Courtly terms, or walks
loftily, three persons are appointed to follow him as he walks up and down,
whilst the rest are at Table; and two Halbertiers march before him with
Pick-Axes on their shoulders, crying, Room, Room, for the Gentleman.

If any one makes a noise as he walks, he is tied hand and foot like a Calf
that is carried to Market, and lies so upon the place till dinner be ended; or
else he is made gallop up and down the room upon all four like a beast.

Going one day to a certain Monastery, I went into the Diningroom, and in the
place where they do penance, I saw one busily endeavoring to bite an Apple,
which hung from the roof by a thread; and asking what that poor Friar had done,
I was told that he had eaten his Pottage too hot, and that this Apple was given
him to stay his stomach while his broth did cool.

Another for breaking silence, was made to hold a dead man's bone in his mouth,
for the space of an hour at the Church door, to be seen by those that went in.

A certain poor Friar that was one of the Servants, coming one day very hot out
of the Kitchen, presently takes off his pot of wine; which the Superior
observing, made him show the bottom of his empty pot, and to say aloud,
Brethren, I pray do me the favor to fetch my Drawers for my pot, for you see
it shows its breech.

When any one has spoken too insolently to his fellow, he is made to go
barefoot, bare-headed, with his hands claspt, and a great rope about his neck;
and falling on his knees, he kisseth the feet of all the rest, saying, Brethren
pray to God for a poor Toad.

He that has too stately a gate, is made to walk up and down, whilst the rest
are at dinner, with his arms a Kembow, a Basket on his head, and a lath by his
side, made like a Sword; saying to them all, one after another; Brother what
do thou think? am I not very brave?

I have known a Superior so uncivil, as to command a young Novice who smelt to
his bread, to dine on the seat of a Privy.

And now we are speaking of Novices; it is a rent which they pay every Friday,
before they sit down at Table, to whip themselves whilst the 51 Psalm is sung,
and to speak to no body but on their knees, nor to rise again before they have
kissed the ground.

When these follies are ended, and having all dined, the Superior gives a
signal by striking with his knife on a goblet. Whereupon they all rise, and
take away, and (having given thanks) go to the Altar, where every one says
three Paters for those who gave them their Dinner; after which they walk in the
garden.

About Two of the Clock, the Keeper of the Vestry (or Sexton) strikes sive
times on the broken Pick-Axe; this is called Silence, at the sound whereof they
all go to sleep for an hour; and this is called the preparation for the mental
prayer, which in Summer they make at noon.

At Two of the Clock they sing Vespers; at which time, most commonly, there are
many vacant places, for some are walking in the Garden, others making visits in
the Town, others a begging; and it is a great chance if some be not absent.

At Four a Clock they ring the The last evening Service.
Completorium, after which, they make about forty Prayers to the Virgin Mary;
and then they make again the mental prayer for an hour.

In the Winter they whip themselves as soon as this Prayer is ended, instead of
doing it in the night, to avoid the severity of the cold.

One of the greatest Earls in France, being once, by chance in a Monastery, and
hearing the great noise they made, thought the Heavens were falling, and
receiving withal a lash on the chaps with a whip, cried out for help; which at
that time put a stop to their exercise.

One of them being wont to whip himself too severely, the Superior caused his
Discipline (which is a kind of whip) to be taken from him. But this good Friar
loved whipping so well, that he went and presented his buttocks to his
companions, and begging some lashes of them, he said, Brother do me the
kindness, etc.

They go out from thence merrily to Supper (which is not interrupted with
Penances, as their dinner is) and then they go to discourse by a good fire.
Some tell the news of the Town, others read Gazetts; and every man takes the
liberty to talk, except the Superior (from the occasion of a spark of fire
falling on his foot) commands them to say some Prayers for the Souls in
Purgatory.

About Seven a Clock, the devoutest of them go to examine their Consciences
before the Altar; after which the Superior sings some Prayers; which being
ended, they all stretch out their arms cross-wise, and say Five Paters; then
one of them kissing his hand, presents him with the brush dipped in Holy Water,
which he sprinkles on their heads, to wash away their Venial sins. After this
every one kisseth the ground, and says, Benedicite, and so they go to lie down
until the Alarm calls them to Matines.

CHAP. II. Some particular Superstitions practiced by the Capucins.
IT is a lamentable thing to observe whither Superstition leads these poor
Souls, that take not the precepts of the Gospel for the rule of their devotion.

There are some Capucins that think they do God very good service by whipping
themselves every day, as soon as they awake; and that if they whip themselves
before the Communion, it is a good preparation thereunto.

I have read in the memorials of one of their Generals, that a certain Capucin,
named Amboine Corse, wore a Coat of Maile next his body, and girt it so close,
that his flesh came through it; insomuch, that it was incorporated into his
skin; also that this same man did wear Drawers of Hogsskin, and that (the
length of them being half cut) entered into his Hairs.
flesh; and at last he came to such a degree of Superstition, that he would eat
but five raw Beans a day in Summer, and five Chacenuts in Winter, and drank
nothing but Water. His design (says the General) was to try how far humane
nature could go in suffering (he might have said, in tempting God.)

Some of them lie on the bare Boards, with a Faggot for their Pillow, and sleep
with a Cross in their hand.

A certain Capucin that was wont to stretch out his arms (Crosswise) two hours
every day, being sick and weak, would not let fall his languishing arms; and
asking him to what purpose that Devotion served, he answered me, that he did it
in imitation of Saint Paul; who said, That he was Crucified with Jesus Christ.

I have known some that would bow a hundred times every day before an Image of
the Virgin Mary, and at each time kiss the feet of the Image.

Some gather Flowers and make Nosegays, wherein they put but five sorts of
flowers, in honor of the five letters of the name Maria. I have seen certain
of them having a Nosegay of Gilliflowers in their hand, present it to the nose
of an Image of the Virgin Mary; and kneeling down said, I salute thee, Mary;
and repeated it sixty three times, in honor of the sixty three years, which
they say the Virgin Mary lived upon Earth.

I have known some go four Leagues fasting, to present the Virgin Mary with a
Crown of flowers, which they put on the head of her Image.

Another pricking himself, signed a vow to the Virgin Mary with his blood; and
as he turned about, seeing a great gobbet of rotten phlegm, which some body had
newly spit, he lickt it up in honor of the said Virgin.

One of their Stewards were wont to present Fruit to the Friars, with sublime
intentions, viz. Sometimes he would present a slice of a Melon to each of them,
in honor of the Deity; sometimes two in honor of the two Natures of Christ.
Sometimes three Apples in honor of the three Persons; sometimes four Pears in
honor of the four Evangelists; seven Apricocks in despite to the seven mortal
sins; eight Figs in favor of the eight Beatitudes; nine Apples in memory of
the nine Choire of Angels; ten Chasenuts in thinking on the ten Commandments;
and oftentimes twelve in memory of the twelve Apostles.

I have known some carry about with them their sins, written in a skin of
Parchment; which they sowed to the inside of their cloths, just against the
heart; and this they did in imitation of David, who says in the 51 Psalm, My
sin is ever before me.

Another had the reputation of a Saint for whipping himself every night, and
for whipping the steps of the Altar; with intention to whip the shoes of the
little Jesus.

Friar Jacopon had the inwards of an Ox hanging in his Chamber; wherein the
worms bred, and he used to bite it sometimes to mortify his appetite.

Some think it a great piece of Devotion to sleep upon a dead man's skull;
others to whip themselves with a handful of Nettles; another is admired in the
Chronicles of their Order, for sitting on one end of a plank, and weighing up
and down with a Child on the other end, in the midst of the Town, and
continuing so to do, until the Magistrates came and saluted him for a Saint.

I knew one so fervent, that in zeal to the Gospel, which makes mention of
Eunuchs, that made themselves Eunuchs for the Kingdom of God; acted the part of
a Surgeon on himself; and the pieces becarried on a Trencher to the Suing
periours Chamber, he ordered that the two brethren should be buried in the
Churchyard, waiting for the resurrection. This poor fool was within a hands
breadth of death; falling down in a swound at the foot of the block, on which
he had gelt himself.

I knew another, who to moderate his humors, rolled his buttocks on burning
coals.

This was reputed sanctity by some, but folly by the Gardener; because the
Coleworts were used to cure the bladders which he had on his breech.

I have known some so scrupulous, that they would have thought themselves in
the estate of damnation, if they had read but six lines of the Gospel of Saint
John, translated into the vulgar tongue.

I shall wave many other practices of this kind, to deplore the misery of these
poor men transported with zeal, but not according to knowledge. If there be any
Piety in the Romish Church, it is, doubtless, amongst them; but seeing their
sanctity is mixed with so much extravagance, it is not to be imitated; for
Bodily exercise profits little, but godliness is profitable unto all things;
having promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come.

CHAP. III. The Habits of the Capucins.
THE Habit of the Capucins consists in three things, viz. in that great
exterior habit which is seen in little drawers, which they call Murandes; and
in the cord which must be of hair, or flax, and must have three knots. The
first knot signifies Chastity, the second Poverty, and that which beats on
their feet, signifies Obedience. If any one to shorten his cord, makes a fourth
knot, they call it blame and self-will.

The Cloak and Sandales are not of the essence of their Habit, neither can they
wear them but by the Popes dispensation.

The rule of the Capucins permits them to wear another Habit underneath, but
that has no Hood. It reaches to the neck only; and he that wears it, cannot
wear a Cloak. This sort of Habit is called Tunica; it is made of a soft and
gentle cloth, and he that should wear it with a Hood, and should not leave off
his Cloak, would be censured guilty of a mortal sin.

Whereupon there arose, one day a great dispute amongst them, whether this
Tunica, with a Hood, might be worn without sin. To this answer was made, that
for the avoiding of sin, it should be sown at the neck and end of the Sleeves
to the other Habit; and then it would be but one Habit: A resolution both
subtle and charitable, which draws a Soul out of Hell with a needle full of
thread.

Diverse of them wear large napkins on their back and stomach, and you may
easily perceive it by looking at their neck. But they that do this should also
put Napkins on the outside of their cloths, in imitation of St. Francis, who
having put a Foxes skin with inside his clothes to warm his stomach; caused
another to be sown on the outside, that he might not be thought an Hypocrite.

I have seen some of the Capucins cloaks made of the lists of cloth, and their
clothes made of little shreds sowed together; but they that wore them were
prouder than a Spaniard with his Cloak.

CHAP. IV. The Begging of the Capucins.
IN some Monasteries in France, there are 120 Monks, and in many other 80. and
60. The expenses of these Monasteries (in reference both to back and belly,
with necessaries as well for the Church, as Offices of the Household) amount to
above 35000, or 40000 livers yearly. So that you must conclude their Wallet
would be very large, if what is put into it were sufficient to defray so great
an expense. But see how they order their business.

The chief of the Town give them weekly some twenty pounds of flesh, some
twelve pounds, some more, some less, which they give these Beggars.
Questors order to take of their Butchers. And you may guess what quantity of
flesh is brought into each Monastery in a week, there being very few persons of
note who do not give them some.

On Saturdays, most commonly, you may see at several times of the day, Butchers
going to the Monastery, laden with meat without each others knowledge; and
sometimes the Kitchen is so full, that it would serve to furnish a Butchers
stall.

To these Alms in specie, are added pecuniary Alms, given by the Nobility and
Gentry of the Country. The Capucins dare not make use of these pecuniary Alms,
until the intention of the donor be fully declared.

The Questor who takes a pride in furnishing the Kitchen well, takes with him
some crafty fellows to receive this money, who when they receive it, cause the
donor to say, that it is to feed the poor Friars; for if the donor had only
said in general it is for the necessities of the Monastery, that money could
not have been made use of for the Kitchen. Hence it comes to pass, that the
money which comes from the Country, and that which is given for Masses,
Sermons, and other exercises, is employed most commonly for the refreshment of
the poor Friars; for the Benefactors cause those very words to be used to those
to whom the Alms is given, which the parties themselves desire.

There is such an abundance of bread given to some Monasteries, that they
cannot use it all, but the Questor knows how to work a kind of miracle, so that
nothing is lost: For when any one of those that are wont to give bread, is
about to give his Alms, the Questor begins to bless God for the care he has of
the poor Friars, and testisies, by his refusal, that he has no need of it at
present. Then he is asked what it is that he wants. He dares not say he wants
flesh, for their Constitutions forbid them to ask flesh in its proper species,
except it be for the Sick: But he declares that the most part give them Bread;
and that man lives not by Bread only, and gives so many hints, that at last the
Benefactor, knowing his meaning, gives him flesh.

The Bread which they take of the Baker is of the finest sort, and sometimes it
so much abounds, that I have seen (besides what was used) above 160 dozen of
Bread remaining in a Monastery at the years end.

In the time of Vintage they beg Wine; they receive it by bottles at the house,
and buy it at Fairs by the Cask with the Pecuniary Alms. That which is given to
the Questor in bottles, they cast into a Tun with ripe Grapes and old Wine to
make it strong. It is true that the Superiors have forbidden any more than two
or three Casks to be received into the Cellar of the Monastery at a time, for
fear of committing an offense against poverty; but when that is drunk, they
cause more to be brought in, which is kept for a reserve by some good friend to
the Monastery.

They beg Wool at the time of of Sheep-shearing; and that they may get the
more, they send out four Troops of Capucins, who traverse the whole Country.
That Sheep is very cunning that can escape without leaving some of its locks
behind it: So that some Monasteries have 1200 l. of Wool yearly; others 800 l.
and in some Monasteries they make cloth.

They beg Butter at the same time; and to get the more, they send Beasts laden
with empty pots, some greater, some less, of which every one takes according to
their devotion; and when they are full, lead them back to the Monastery,
whither has been brought some years, 4 or 5000 l. according to the goodness of
the season.

Some Monasteries have liberty to cut Wood in the Kings Forests, and the
Gentry of the Country supply them, if they want more: But they go a shorter way
to work; for on the first great cold, when it Snows or Hails much, they send
some abroad to beg Wood, with a Cart attending them. They go bare as high as
the knees, and there is no body but contributes something, when he sees their
legs bare and red with cold. This way only furnishes them with Wood enough for
the whole year.

These Beggars spare no body. If any one makes Linen, they have their share.
If a Cow or an Ox be killed in Harvest, the skin is appointed to make Sandales
for the Capucins. The Chandlers give them Candles, the Druguists Spices, etc.
At Fairs they go from shop to shop, and there are few (besides those that sell
Whistles, and Puppets) but give them part of what they sell. He that should see
the Questors private Magazine, would find there more accommodation then in the
best furnished Boats. There is in some Monasteries greater store of
Apothecaries Wares, than in any shop in the Town, also I have seen diverse
Cart-loads of all sorts of Chemical Vessels and Engines.

He that should curiously survey the Monasteries of these good Fathers, would
find some of them worth above 100000 Crowns, and some of them above 120000. and
I have told you how you may guess at their ways of getting so much. So that I
dare assure you not one of them has found the Philosophers Stone, though many
have taken great pains in seeking it.

Sometimes they make a very remarkable begging, viz. of Gentlemen's Coats and
Gowns, to cloth their Altars. I have seen in diverse places Gentlewomens Damask
Coats serve to cover Jesus Christ, who (they say) is in the Sacrament. But it
is a very uncivil charity to uncover the back-sides of Women, to cover Jesus
Christ.

CHAP. V. The Visitations of their Provincials.
IT is the duty of Provincials to visit the Monasteries of their Provinces at
least once a year. The Provincial gives notice eight days before his arrival at
any Monastery. At his entrance the Porter gives an extraordinary Signal to
assemble all the Friars in the room, where the common fire is kept, whither the
Prelate goes. Being sure every one kisseth his hand kneeling, and some kiss his
feet; and then having kissed the ground in his presence, they prepare to treat
him.

The Officers having their Sleeves turned up to the elbow, begin with his
shoulders, which they rub with warm linen cloths. If he sweats, they rub him
over again and again, and then apply two large warm napkins to his body.

After this they wash his feet with Roses, and other sweet flowers and herbs;
and when they are well soakt, they wipe them with warm Napkins, which are
employed about him by dozens. They that wash his feet do it bare-headed on
their knees; and when they have done, each of them kisseth one of his feet, and
hold them until the rest of the Friars have kissed them; then they conduct him to
the fire whilst they do the like (though somewhat more slightly) to his two
companions.

The Steward is there attending, and presents him with Bread and Wine; and
having warmed himself, he is conducted to a Chamber, where he lies down on a
bed. Perfumes of diverse sorts are there smoking, heaps of flowers lie on the
table, or on the flowr, and great Nose-gays recreate his eyes, and so we leave
him to repose himself for a while.

When he has taken his rest for an hour, they bring up his meat; if they have
any good bit, it is for the Father Provincial. I have counted sometimes a dozen
dishes before him, and three bottles of Wine, each of a different sort. His
companions are served with as many dishes; for each of them eats apart, though
they sit at the same Table. The second course is not omitted; Cakes, Tarts, and
Cream, are served up one after the other. They end their Meals with Sweetmeats,
and Spanish Wine to comfort their Stomach.

Having ended his repast, he takes a walk with the Superior of the Monastery;
who on this occasion, gives either good or bad characters of his Subjects,
according to the condition of his affairs, and the order which he pretends is
established in his Monastery.

The next day the Provincial causes five blows to be given on the broken
Pick-Axe, to assemble the Friars in the Diningroom; where, being arrived, he
signifies the occasion of his coming; and in a kind of Sermon exhorts them to
Abstinence, Sobriety, and Austerity of life; and appoints to every one in
particular, a time of coming to him at his Chamber. And this they call the
Visitation.

The Visitation is thus; They all go one after the other, and carry to the
Provincial their whole equipage, viz. Whip, Breviary, Rule, Chaplet, Cross,
Relics, Agnus Dei, Books, etc. Being come to the door of the Chamber, they
take off their Cloaks, and go in barefoot. As soon as they enter, they kiss
the ground, and stay there bareheaded on their knees, whilst this Prelate lies
stretched on a Couch, or sits leaning on a Cushion. He examines him that enters;
first, concerning his own particular businesses, and then concerning the
affairs of the Monastery. Whereupon letting loose their nature, they accuse
each other with much passion. The Provincial writes all down in his Table Book,
and having made the sign of the Cross with his thumb, on the forehead of the
Friar, he dismisseth him for that time.

When they have all, thus made, their appearance, he assigns a convenient hour
to return to the Dining Room to make his Exhortation. His Text is most commonly
suitable to the complaints he has received; which he aggrevates and exhorts
them to amendment; and having ended his discourse, he says aloud, Confess your
faults.

At which words they all leave their places, and putting off their Cloaks, fall
on their knees, accusing themselves as before. Then he represents to each one
his faults in particular, and enjoins them Penances. Some he enjoins to whip
themselves thrice, some twice, and some once. Such a one is to fast three
Fridays with bread and water; and another to kiss the feet of all the Friars.
All that are Priests, he enjoins to say a Mass of the Holy Ghost, and the
Clerks to say a Chaplet of our Lady at his intention.

If any one has offended in a reserved case, he must declare it to the
Provincial; if any one has committed an extraordinary crime, he is cast into
Prison by way of Provision, until a decree pass against him in the next
Provincial Assembly.

Having all thus accused themselves, and received their Penances, they say
their Consiteor. After which, this Prelate puts on his Spectacles, takes a Book
in his hand, and pronounces with a loud voice (by the power, which he says,
he has received from the Pope) the remission of all cases reserved; and not
reserved of all censures, excommunications, suspentions, interducts, etc. Then
he disposes himself for his Dinner; after which, he departs for another
Monastery. This is the important employment of this great Father throughout the
year, some few days excepted in the depth of Winter.

At his departure from the Monastery, they all attend him on their knees at the
gate, where, at his coming, they present him with the Holy water; which he
sprinkles on their faces; and then having all kissed the ground, he bids them
farewell.

This Prelate has commonly two companions, whereof one serves him as a
Secretary (but is called his fellow Counselor) the other carries his Baggage;
and this has four Pouches or Pockets in this Cloak, and one in each Sleeve;
wherein he carries the Provincials Records with some pieces of fine Serge to be
applied to his body, if he should be cold; and fine Linen to wipe him, if he
should sweat; some Ten bottles of Wine (whereof one of Spanish Wine) to prevent
Faintness; and some Bread; and roasted Fowls, which are given him to fortify
him in his journey.

A certain Provincial being once in the Country on a Festival day, had the
devotion to say Mass, and the Friar has carried the baggage, laying down his
Cloak, partly out of reverence, and partly to ease himself. Whilst he was thus
communicating (as they do every Holiday) a Greyhound-bitch drew a roasted leg
of Mutton out of one of the Pockets, and carried it away in her mouth, throw
the midst of the people; who till then never knew that the Capucins had made
a Cupboard of his Cloak. I leave you to judge whether this poor Friar did not
communicate with distraction.

CHAP. VI. The Prisons of the Capucins.
THE most perfect man upon earth is subject to failings; and sin deserves
punishment, according to the degree of its excess: wherefore these good Fathers
(besides the aforementioned Penances) have their Prisons likewise to chastise
Delinquents.

These Prisons are of two sorts, some are high, and some low. The high Prisons
are Chambers with Grated windows, and pad-lockt-doors, not differing from other
Chambers.

The low Prisons are 'twixt four strong walls, garnished with pieces of wood;
the light comes in, only through a high small grated window, out of the
Prisoners reach. All their housholdstuff is a Straw-bed, and a Straw-cover for
the Privy.

Some are there five years, some four, etc. according to the greatness of their
crime. But such Prisons most commonly serve only for those that run away from
the Monastery, whom they call Apostates; whether they return voluntarily, or
are taken by force.

Some years since they took a poor wretch that had run away from the Monastery;
and having bound him, they put him naked into a bundle made of Straw; and were
carrying him from Picardy to Paris; but he escaped at Amiens, and ran into a
Court of guard, where having taken him, they again put him into Prison, where
he fell distracted, and so dyed.

I knew one condemned to perpetual Imprisonment; he had a chain about his
middle, and manacles on his hands. He had no other bed, than the block to which
he was chained; neither had he any food, save bread and water thrice a week;
but the truth is, his crime deserved death.

These Prisoners come not out till the time be expired; they hear Mass through
a hole at the door, and never speak without leave; they communicate at a little
window. The knife which is given them at their meals is broken: they have no
other Table then the floor, except they will eat on the seat of the Privy. They
have no Hood to their Habit, but are allowed such a one to cover their head, as
the people of Bearn wear; and for a Girdle, a very weak list of cloth, for
fear, least if they had their cord, some inconvenience might happen.

To these Imprisonments, some other Penances are added, viz. Some are let out
Fridays to whip themselves publicly; others have their bread and drink by
measure, etc. If any one strikes his Jailer, they strip him, and whip him with
a witness.

These Prisons serve not only for Criminals, but also for Distracted Persons,
who are whipped often to bring them to their senses. On a certain time, one of
these Mad Men being got out of his Dungeon, went strait to the Pulpit, where
one was to Preach; and sitting with his naked breech on the edge of the Pulpit,
threw himself down; and falling on a Gentlewoman, had like to have broken her
neck. This happened upon one of their most solemn Festival days.

CHAP. VII. The Recreations of the Capucins.
THere is no cord but will break, if it continues too long stretched; and
therefore these Fathers let themselves loose thrice a year, to prepare for the
austerities of Lent.

Before any Lent begins (for they have three or four in the year) they have
eight days at each time, which they call days of Recreation. This Recreation
begins with good cheer, their table being better furnished than at other times.
Veal and Mutton are then too hard to be digested; Turkies, Capons, Hares,
Rabbets, Pullets, Pigeons, Woodcocks, Larks, etc. are there to be found
according to the season. I have often seen a Pullet, a Pie, a Tart, and some
Sugared Fritters at each man's Trencher. On Fishdays they have Oysters in the
shell to whet their Stomachs, nor is there any lack of the best Wines.
Sometimes they have had such excess of Provision, that they have been forced to
throw away many Plates of it, to fatten the root of a Tree, instead of giving
it to the Poor; for this Charity would be accounted scandalous amongst them;
and would make those that should hear of it, think they had too much plenty,
and consequently it would make their Benefactors hold their hands.

In these days there is no reading, every one talks freely at Table; they drink
one to another; they break jests round the Table; they have their Marrow-bones,
make Salmigondies dress the Hares head A la mode; they drink supernaculum, and
sometimes have a merry Song with it.

Sometimes after their Meals, they act the Jack-Pudding, show Hocus Pocus, and
Judgling Tricks; and do all the rest mentioned by Mr. Du Moulin, in his 15
Chapter; To which I add, that they sometimes disguise themselves like
Court-beggers, acting all sorts of postures. Sometimes such Comedies are turned
into Tragedies; but they that act them being absolved, the next day, by an
extraordinary and public Absolution. I shall not mention particulars, but
leave them in the rank of sins pardoned.

After these Divertisements, the Signal is given for the signing of Grace, and
then they omit nothing which they can invent to make themselves merry, viz.
There Is your Choire of Music, and the most delicate Court-airs Sung. Here they
are Playing at Draughts, and Chess; at another place they are Fencing. Some
play at Hop-Frog, some show Tumblers-Tricks; some go a Mumming, etc. But they
that are of a cold constitution, sit by the fire chearing their hearts with
good Wine. In a word, there is not so much noise in any Tavern in France, as in
these Monasteries, at such times of Recreation.

It is observable, that on All Saints day, when the Vigiles for the dead are
over, whilst others are every where weeping; and cause the Bells to be Rung,
and Prayers to be made for their Deceased Kinsfolk. The Capucins are engaged in
these Recreations, so that, who can imagine they believe the Doctrine of the
Purgatory?

In their Recreations on Twelfthday-eve (which they call the Epiphany) they
divide a Cake, and he to whose lot the Bean falls, is King. His quality makes
him sit by the Superior; and then he is crowned with a Parchboard Crown, which
they put on the top of his Hood. After that he creates his several Officers,
not omiting his Fool; and every time he drinks, they sing musically, the King
drinks.

Leagues are sometimes made against these Kings, which trouble their State and
the whole Monastery. Sometimes their most generous Soldiers have been up to
the ears in Fire; witness, that brisk Lay-Fryar, who endeavoring to throw a
Squib over a door, let fall his Candle into a dish of powder that he had in his
hand, which singed his Beard and his Chops, and made him in this burning heat,
leap into the Fountain, crying out with open mouth, Sancte Faelix ora pro nobis.

But this Prayer did not keep his face from being plastered up for above a
fortnight, in such sort, he could not breath but through a reed, or quill.

I shall not mention their Danceing, with Songs, (as the Song (My little Brown
Mistress you kill me, etc. seeing they are prohibited; but some Balls are not
disliked, when any lovers of Balls are in the Monastery.

I shall content my self with what has been said, for the discovery of the
secret practices of the Capucins; and I have not done this with a design to
offend them, but only to put a stop to the opinion of those that would make
them pass for Angels, and not for Men. However, I declare that of all the Monks
of the Romish Church, these are the most honest and civil, and of the best
extraction. Now if their zeal deserves reproach, it is because it is without
knowledge. If they exceed in their Recreations, it is because they have them but
seldom, and therefore they study to make use of their time of mirth, whilst
they have it. I pray God illuminate their minds with his Knowledge, (by
bringing them out of that darkness, into which their birth, and the opinion of
their imaginary Holiness has plagued them) and translate them into his
marvelous light.

FINIS.

