(...) Catastrophe AND Adieu to EAST INDIA: OR, A General and Particular
PROTEST Framed there, at Goa in Febr. 1644. For and against the English
East India Company.

Their Governor Deputy, Court of Committees, and Adventurers in ENGLAND. AND
Their Presidents, Agents, Commanders and Factors in East India aforesaid. WITH
A previous, conscious, and short Introduction, and Conclusion, resell
impertinent and frivolous Allegations, and dispell the clouds of (...) and
sophistical Objections, that the naked Truth may plainly appear to every
impartial, candid, and unleavened apprehension and judgment, concerning that
5000 li. in question ^olating to the abovesaid parties, with the issues and
events thereof, both General and Particular, as formerly in Print, Entitled,
Strange News from the Indies, is partly expressed, viz.

To all whom it may concern, J. D. wishes pure, and perfect wisdom and
knowledge with a clear and right understanding, and (...) all things.

(...) Printed by R. I., 1652.

Mr. Courtens Catastrophe and Adieu to EAST INDIA: OR, A general and
particular Protest framed there, at Goa in Febr. 1644.
FOr so it came to pass that when all possible, fair and speedy means had
been used by Mr. Courtens Agents and Factors in East India (as may appear by
their several Messengers,) with Letters, and Protests directed and sent to
Robert Bowen Master, Francis Day Agent, and their Accomplices at Madrassapatan
by land, (and intentions and preparation of Ship Loyalty by Sea) to require and
demand the Gold and Gunnes, Note that Cex had never any command of the Gold
after he brought it aboard at Madagascar, and upon demand delivered it in
charge to Bowen.
which the said Bowen, had formerly aboard his Ship Endeavor taken in charge
between Madagascar and Joanna Islands conditionally to assist Thomas Cox (late
Master of a Ship called the Little-William) Tho. Hill his Purser, and the rest
of their company in the transport thereof, according to their Orders and
Consignments, and not otherwise.

And the said Cox, Hill, and Company arriving together with the said Bowen at
Madrassapatan aforesaid, the second day of July, 1644. very diligently (as by
oath and otherwise plainly appears.) Demanded the foresaid Gold and Guns of
the said Fr. Day. etc. having received it ashore from the said Bowen, whom the
said Cox and Hill urged with his promises when he first took Charge thereof,
insomuch that within three or four days after their foresaid arrival, the
said Cox and Hill received a flat and positive denial (as sundry ways also
appears) with threats and hard language from the said Day, and the rest, to
this, or like effect, saying, Could not the said Cox, Hill, and Company, be
contented to have their own lives for a prey, being now in their power, for
have we not told you, that if we could not have had it by fair means, we would
have had it by foul means, or by force; And will you still be so importunate,
and impudent to demand that which you shall never have, were it as much more
(neither could their necessity spare it as is evident by Hills Affidavit)
therefore take warning, and let us hear no more of demanding, lest we give it
you with a witness, viz. thrust you out of our Fort, and so peradventure you
may be knocked in the head, or have your throat cut, for it would be no hard
matter to overtake you, and then take what follows, but it shall never be put
to that issue, seeing now your Gold, and you are inconsistent; For have we not
told you sufficient to inform you better. that we have Power and Commissions
from our Imployers in England, to have taken your Ship as well as your Gold,
etc. wheresoever met at Sea, and not to assist you with a piece of bread to
save you from perishing either by Sea, or Land, therefore take warning, advice
and resolve upon some other way etc.

Then the said Cox and Hill, etc: apprehending plainly their present condition
and strickt durance, being so proscribed and confounded in themselves with
their unexpected and severe, but downright dealing, and Hills ^nce.
insomuch that then the said Cox and Hill, etc. plainly perceived themselves
(upon the matter) lame, numbe, and dumb, and could not be suffered either to
go, write, or speak, to attain, discover, or make themselves, and their
present condition known to any of Mr. Courtens Factors or Factories in India or
elsewhere, although Rabagg (being one thereof) and situate in their direct,
and not half way to Surrat, where the Companies Factors had speedy
intelligence, and afterward news thereof came from thence to Goa by accident.

Now the said Cox and Hill and Company (apprehending truly how they were
ensnared and inthrauled, Cox and Hills ^yes opened
and that all their endeavors by Sea, and Land were prevented, and their Gold
coined, and converted to the companies use by the said Day, and the rest)
desisted further to proceed with the Junke or Hoye Master, with whom they had
agreed for 40 li. Sterling, or 160. Rials of eight Spanish (as the said Hill
related) to transport them to Acheen whither they were consigned (being a
common and frequent passage thence with little, or no danger) also they ceased
to solicit the English Freeman at Madrassapatan, to travel for Rabagg,
Carwar, or Goa by Land, wherein (though easily he could and would) yet he durst
not assist them, saying the displeasure of the said Day thereby, would be his
utter undoing; as the said Hill in his Affidavit further affirms.

Then the said Cox and Hill, thought it not amiss (being past all hopes of
receiving it) to get from the said Day, Cox and Hill consult.
and his Counselors some acknowledgement thereof, lest the said Day or Bouen,
etc. should dispose or keep all, or any part of the same to their own use, and
not bring it to the Companies Account, as is usual there in reprisals
(whereunto this at present was not much different) and as peradventure it was
the year foregoing, being Anno 1643, with that 40000 li. or thereabouts said
to be taken from Mamula Croe, King of Cannanore, and other Mallabar Merchants
(that I verily believe never did them hurt) and it is questionable whether one
half thereof ever came to the Companies Cash, so might this, etc.

Therefore the said Cox and Hill resolved (or was by some advised, or
instructed) to supplicate and request the said Francis Day and his assistants,
that they would be pleased to confess and acknowledge that he, and they had
the said Gold and Guns in their possession, and that the East India Company,
their Imployers, Cox and Hills first request
might be answerable for the same to Mr. Courten in England, with English
Interest according to forbearance, or to that effect, which would have been
about 5 s. sterling, each Riall of eight here in England? But that request the
said Day and Council would not consent to, being (as they said) very
unreasonable, and so it was indeed? for every Barbary Duccat is there worth
about two Rials of eight Spanish, and every Riall of eight transmitted thence
(by Book, Nov. An. 1645.
or otherwise) for England, is worth about 10 s. here, and so valued (as
reported) in the said Companies policies of Insurance, but transmitted from
Madrassapatan or Mesulapatan to Bantam, and so for England (the same course
which the said Day then took) every Riall of eight Spanish, is worth 13 s. or
14 s. at least in England, Unreasonable-nesserests upon Days part, etc.
and so every Barbary Duccat accordingly double, and that sometimes in less
then twelve months, and without trouble; but in the course of Trade (free from
disaster) as great or greater advantage might be expected. And it is very
certain, that the want thereof at Acheen (whither it was consigned)
constrained Mr. Courtens Factors there to borrow great sums of money at 6:
per cent. per month, Acheen interest
which is 72. per cent. per an. (the common Interest of that Port) until their
stock was much consumed, and their remaining goods and Jewels were (upon some
difference) seized and sold either by the said Companies Factors there, or by
themselves here, (as credibly reported) thus much for that unreasonable request
which was at least 100 li. per cen. loss, as to Mr. Courten.

Another and last address or request to the said Day and Council, was made by
the said Cox and Hill, 6. July 1644. (but four days after their arrival at
Madrassapatan) which argued in the said Cox and Hill abundance of care and
diligence, as they had likewise formerly expressed, and this Request was to this
effect, or in these very words, viz.

Cox second and last Request, or Petition.
That what Gold and Guns the said Cox had delivered the said Bowen aboard the
Ship Endeavor, and which has safely arrived to your hands, That you would
please to continue it in your protection, and refer the satisfaction thereof
unto your honorable Imployers, and the worshipful William Courten Esquire Because
we know not how to secure it from our own men, nor dispose to any of the
Factories of William Courten Esquire, whose servants here subscribe.

Tho. Cox. Tho. Hill.


Answer.
Your Request we confess to be now somewhat rational, Therefore shall continue
the Gold in our custody: And we promise in our next Advices for Europe to
acknowledge our possession thereof to our honorable Imployers.

Francis Day. Hen. Greenvil. Tho. Travel.


Days etc. depravity.
It is hereby easily apprehended what errors and absurdities are incident to men
of covetous, cruel, and corrupt principles, and depraved consciences, and
especially from this double, false, (I will not say forged) put; because we
know not how to secure, etc. Nor dispose, etc.

Cox and Hills sincerity.
For they that had formerly expressed so much honesty, care, and industry 500.
Leagues in their Longboat to attain Madagascar, and nine Months patient
attendance and vigilance (in so dangerous a place) to secure the same, and
their company of men being ten to one then (if they had in the least inclined
to mutiny) and free from fear of any Nation whatsoever, and near unto
Mosambique, and sundry other Portugal Plantations upon the Coast of Soffala,
where neither English, Dutch, Moors, or Mallabars (save a few Arabbs) have any
frequent commerce or correspondence, and whither they might have gone with
little or no danger, and found good entertainment, etc. And now at
Madrassapatan and Mesulapatan,' places very eminent for general Commerce, and
Civil Government, and where it is impossible to find any refuge for such
Malefactors, for to the Moors and Indians, Christians are now an abomination
in point of domesticke entertainment, and cohabitation, as the Israelites of
old were to the Egyptians, therefore they would not entertain them (especially
being altogether strangers, and not understanding their language.)

And as for the Dutch or Portugal (with whom having then either friendship, or
free commerce) they neither could nor would in any wise protect them, therefore
of necessity they must sail into the Moon to find security, else no where. A
Simile or Allusion.
And this to me seems to run pat and parallel with that of the High Priest and
Elders to the Watchmen-souldiers recorded in holy Writ, which was also a forged
and false putt, put into their mouths, viz. Say ye that while we slept, his
Disciples came by night and stole him away, and then let us alone with the
Governor, etc. Even so this, the one as full of ridiculous falsities and
absurdities, as the other, for circumstance, for both by Sea and Land there was
variety either by safe custody or other conveyance thence, Mr. Courtens Factors
having then a ship in continual readiness to attend the same, but all in
vain; And the said Hill in England did blush, and was ashamed thereof, Hills
modesty and honesty.
and utterly disclaimed it upon discourse, and so altogether omitted and waved
it in his Affidavit as false and feigned, and doubtless Coxe would have done
the same if either by word or writing he could be brought to the Test. Thus
much for the Circumstance, etc.

But now to the substance of the foresaid Rational Request (as Day and the
rest terms it) viz. An acknowledgement of possession, A pretended reference
very unreasonable.
and reference for satisfaction, etc. Now I suppose a positive denial, or
denials upon all and every demand or demands whatsoever, are by the Premises
clearly confirmed, therefore I haste (as the said Day did) for England with
Cox, and Hill in his company, but Cox dyed by the way, and Hill in England
obscured himself, and Day very likely discovered the same to his honorable
Imployers, whereof Mr. Courten, or some for him (having notice of the passage)
prosecutes that reference for satisfaction with the said East India Company,
and brought it likewise to a forced conclusion, A forced conclusion.
viz. they acknowledged the said Gold and Gunnes, and promised to pay the
principal again in India, Provided (as was credibly reported) Mr. Courten
would procure an Order of Parliament for the transport of about 5000 li. in
Rials of Eight Spanish, the better to enable their Factors in India to make
payment thereof, Com. Order.
which was drawn into an Order made by the Governor and Court of Committees
for the East India Company, and a Copy thereof sent Mr. Courten, who speedily
procured an Order of Parliament accordingly, and (to remove all obstacles,
Parl. Order.
) entered it into the Custom House (as reported) but it either came too soon,
or too late, or some pretense or other prevented, that nothing was effected,
until Attachments afterward came thick and threefold upon it, and then it
was pretended they could not safely pay it to any, because they expected the
Statute to issue continually, and then they would pay it to the Commissioners
thereof willingly, because they could best give them a firm discharge, but how
the case is now between them, concerns me little, therefore with them I leave
it; And will sum up the result of the Premises, which at best amounts but to
this, viz.

Bowens taking the Men, Moneys and Gunnes in charge aboard, and delivering them
to Day etc. a shore, being both armed, with the Companies cruel and
unreasonable Commissions (as themselves said) to justify their wicked actions.
Then Cox, Hill, etc. their frequent demands thereof to Day, etc. urging Bowen
with his promises, Bowen excuses himself, alleging the power now ashore in
Day etc. and Day plainly denies to restore or deliver the same to Cox, Hill,
etc. but with rough and hard language (and other indirect dealing) so
terrifies, proscribes, restraines, prevents, and over-awes them, that at length
they are feign to beg and accept of a bare acknowledgement thereof from the
said Day, etc. (rather then nothing) with a promise of reference for
satisfaction in England from his Imployers (in a manner) what and when they
please; so Day forthwith coins, and converts the Gold to the Companies use to
pay their debts and interest there, and the like; and suddenly takes shipping
and removes out of reach to Bantam, then for England, and disposes so of the
men, and their papers at pleasure, that but one of seventeene (and he
accidentally) ever yet appeared, that ever I heard of, and that one so
appearing makes good all this (upon the matter) in his sparing Affidavit, and
much more in his discourse: Thus far Day, Bowen, etc. at Madrassapatan in
India, etc.

Then in England Mr. Courten (poor oppressed Gentleman) solicites the Company
for the same, they promise to pay the principal 5000 li. again in India, but
upon a very doubtful condition, yet the same condition, Mr. Courten glad of
any thing. Comp^.sailer.
was speedily and punctually performed on Mr. Courtens part, but the Company
failed on their part, and made no satisfaction, and this about six or seven
years ago, and so rests ever since, and so will I a little while, having
already followed the gold at the very heels, first from England to India, then
from India to England again, and not overtaken it: And now having rested my
self a little, I will pass again into India to know what is become of Ship
Loyalty being in pursuit of Bowen to Persia, still to continue the said Demand,
presenting you (in the interim) with the copy or substance of the forementioned
Protest, with two Letters to the President of Surrat ushering the same, which I
most humbly refer to the perusal and ponder of every grave and judicious
soul to consider, whose genuine dialect shall be their own expounders, and
are as follows, viz.

Two Letters.
To the Worshipful Francis Brittan President and Council at Surrat in
East India, these present.
Gentlemen,
TO you that are employed at Surrat for the Honorable East India Company (as
formerly to Madrassapatan) we are constrained to direct these lines, giving you
thereby to understand of our extreme sufferings, by reason of some
discourteous dealings by some of yours in the same Employment (especially at
Madrassapatan aforesaid) the passage was known to you long ago (as we are
credibly informed) and since to us by accident. It is concerning Mr. Tho. Coxe
(late Commander of the Little William) Tho. Hill, etc. and the Cargo, about
5000 li. Sterling belonging to William Courten Esquire (our worthy Imployer)
consigned to us, or other his Factories or Factors here in India, etc. We have
already endeavored what we could, and addressed our several expresses to your
foresaid Port of Madrassapatan, with much expense and loss of time, and (we
fear) of life of a young Gentleman not yet heard of, employed by us merely
upon the same occasion. Wherefore we entreat, that which we hope you in reason
and equity cannot deny, viz. (our own moneys) we and none else in these parts
having any just power to dispose of the same. We intended likewise to send to
Bantam to the Companies President and Council there, but understanding by
Dutch report at the Bar of Goa, that they were gone and removed both thence,
and from Macasser, but when, or whither they related not. Wherefore conceiving
no other course at present so proper as to make our addresses unto you, well
hoping that the justness of our request or demand (term it how you please)
will so far prevail as that we may receive full and speedy satisfaction in
the premises without further delay or trouble.

In confidence therefore of your respect to your own reputation, honor of
your employment, and the remembrance of those small courtesies (as we conceive
them) from us formely received, you will not add further damage to what we
have (for want of the premises) already sustained, But will oblige us,

Your loving Friends, Jo. Farren, Jo. Darel, Tho. Billidge Abr. Hunt.
Goa 26. December. 1644.
To the Worshipful Francis Brittan, and Council, these present. In Surrat
East India.
Mr. Francis Brittan, etc.
OUr first and last to you bearing date 26. December. 1644. still. veter. We hope
is safely come to your hands (although hitherto received no answer) whose
contents to us appears so just they can receive no denial, and delay (where
able) is summa injuria. If the case had been contrary, we should have thought
our selves accursed (with respect to Divinity as Christians) to have denied or
neglected such a small courtesy in humanity, whether to Jews, Turks, or
Infidels: Assuredly you know the passage (we favor you in the term) and the
person that completed the same, Mr. Francis Day; It was contrived in England
(as we understand) and effected at Madrassapatan: The injury being so palpable,
makes our expressions the more patheticall, and the rather because we find it
accompanied in all parts and places, with aspersions, detractions, and
damageable defamations which with us works this good effect, viz. A diligent
inquiry into the actions of our Imployer, and our selves, and can find no
ground at all for any these discourtesies (that imputation of Cob and Eyres,
before authority being fully cleared, and fairly vindicated after sundry years
search, though a few minutes were (before the same Authority) found too much on
the contrary part.) By touching upon this string, you may plainly perceive our
ignorance deserves information, as well as our desires, or demands, present
satisfaction to prevent further and future proceedings.

A foundation laid in blood may as well expect prosperity, as a Trade
maintained or managed by violence or iniquity. We are not yet so happy as to
have the knowledge of our Error, wherein justly to accuse our selves toward
you, or your Imployers in this Query, (What evil have we done) if lawful
living be allowed?

Therefore in all due obedience and humility, to all just and equal Orders,
and Laws, proceeding from Authority, we rest in hope you will recollect your
actions, and satisfy our just desires, that brotherly love may begin, where
wanting, and begun, continue. In expectation whereof we rest

Your loving Friends, Jo. F, Jo. D. Th. B. Abr. H.
Goa 11. Jan. 1644.
The Protest
KNow all men by these presents whom it may concern, That whereas William
Courten of London Esquire, and other Adventurers by virtue of his Majesty's
Letters under his Royal Signature, and Privy Signet, bearing date the 20. day
of December: 1635. As also of his Leters Patents under the Great Seal of England,
bearing date the first day of June, 1637. was thereby licensed to trade into
sundry parts of East India, and elsewhere, as by the said Letters and Patents,
more at large appears.

And thereby also enjoined with the East India Company (then trading into some
of those parts and places of East India or elsewhere aforesaid) equally to
observe the Ordinances, Conditions, and Limitations therein specified, which he
the said William Courten Esquire, and Adventurers, and his, or their Agents,
Factors, and servants on their parts have hitherto kept and observed And
whereas the now East India Adventurers, their Governor, or Governors, Deputy
or Deputies, and other their Committees in England. As also their President or
Presidents, Agent or Agents, or other their Commanders Factors, or servants in
East India, or parts adjacent aforesaid, have by their misdoings there,
committed diverse and sundry outrages, and Actions tending greatly to the
dishonor of God, and inevitable danger and damage of their brethren
(especially of the said William Courten Esquire, and other his Partners, and
Adventurers in England aforesaid;) And likewise of all other his Agent or
Agents, Factors, and Servants in East India, or parts adjacent aforesaid,
whether by Sea or Land, in the Employment of the said William Courten Esquire,
and his said Partners and Adventurers; Viz. (inter alias) the said Companies
Ships, called the Seahorse, Robert Tindal Commander, and Tho. Brittan
Merchant. Also their Ship called the Hind, William Broadbenth Commander, and
William Thurston Merchant (with others belonging to the said East India
Adventurers) violently taking and surprising in the month of May 1643. sundry,
and some very rich Vessel or Vessels, near, or upon the Coast of Mallabar in
East India aforesaid, belonging to Mamula Croe King of that Country (and other
great men, and Merchants there inhabiting) destroying, and drowning their men
without mercy, thereby indamaging and preventing the said William Courten
Esquire, and Adventurers, and all other his, or their Agents, Factors and
Servants in East India aforesaid, in their accustomed Ports and places of
Trade, situate in, or near the Government, or Jurisdiction of Mamula Croe
aforesaid. Thereby also mightily incensing, exasperating, and provoking sundry
Kings, Princes, and Governors, not only to molest, and imprison, but also to
kill, burn, and destroy all and every the servants houses and ships (whether
by Sea, or Land) belonging to the said William Courten Esquire, and other
Adventurers; And to threaten revenge, and utterly to raze their Fortifications
down to the ground (especially at Carwar) compelling us thereby to fortify
the same for the safeguard of our lives, and desist from our lawful course of
Commerce (being in continual danger) and to stand upon our guard, consuming
much of our Imployers estates in raising of Fortifications, and procuring other
necessaries for our present security and subsistence, without any profit, or
hopes of advantage.

Also the said East India now Adventurers, their Ships, Factors and Servants
(contrary to the contents of the foresaid Letters and Patent) frequenting
sundry years bypast, and still the Ports and places of Trade properly
belonging to the said William Courten Esquire, etc Adventurers, as Rajapore,
Acheen, and others, to his and their exceeding prejudice, and damage of the
whole Employment.

Furthermore, Whereas Thomas Cox of Redderiffe, Mariner, late Master of Ship
William, and Thomas Hill Factor, and others in the said Ship belonging to the
said William Courten Esquire and other Adventurers, and consigned to some of
his, or their Ports or places aforesaid, which said Ship was cast away about an
hundred and forty Leagues to the Eastward of Cape bona Esperranza, all the
men, and moneys therein saved (being about 5000 li. sterling) all, or most part
thereof, in Barbary gold, and two brass Gunnes. The said Tho. Cox, Tho. Hill
Company, and Cargoe, sailing thence in their long boat about five hundred
Leagues, and arriving safe in Augustine Baye at Madagascar Island as by their
Letters may appear. In which said Baye shortly after first arrived a ship
belonging to the said East India Adventurers, called the Endeavor (Robert
Bowen Commander) In which said ship the said Tho. Cox, Tho. Hill, Company, and
Cargoe (about 5000 li. sterling, and two brass Gunnes as aforesaid) obtained
passage to Madrassapatan, a Factory upon the Coast of Choromandel belonging to
the said East India Adventurers, and there safely arrived the second day of
July, 1644. The said Tho. Cox, Tho. Hill, and Company, intending thence to
repair to some of the Ports or Factories, belonging to the said William
Courten Esquire, etc. Adventurers, as by Letters under the hands of the said
Cox and Hill, may appear, which said Ports and Factories being not twenty
days journey on foot by land from Madrassapatan aforesaid, Francis Day there
then Agent for the said East India Adventurers, and Thomas Ivy succeeding the
said Francis in Port and place aforesaid.

But so it is that the said men, Tho. Cox, Tho. Hill, etc. and the said moneys
about 5000 li. sterling, and Guns aforesaid, or both, are by the said
East India Adventurers their Governor, Deputy, or Committees in England, or by
the said Robert Bowen, Francis Day, Tho. Ivy, and their assistants, or else by
their President, or Presidents, Agent, or Agents, or other their Commanders,
and Factors, in East India aforesaid (or some of them) detained and kept,
transported, or conveyed, and so prevented personally to appear, or by writing
to make themselves known to be living, to any the Agents, Factors, or Servants
belonging to the said William Courten Esquire, and Adventurers being in their
employment in East India, or parts adjacent aforesaid, and the said moneys
about 5000 li. sterling, by the foresaid parties (or some of them) detained,
and denied to be paid unto the said William Courten Esquire, and Adventurers,
or to his, or their Agent, or Agents, Factor, or Factors, or other his, or
their servant, or servants in East India, or parts adjacent aforesaid (although
with great hazard and cost solicited and demanded) as by good testimony may
fully appear, to the incredible damage, and disparagement of the said William
Courten Esquire, etc. Adventurers, and their whole employment; And to the daily
hazard and indangering the lives and liberties of some, or all his, or their
Agents, Factors, or servants in East India, or parts adjacent, aforesaid, some
having already thereby endured long imprisonment, etc.

Wherefore in consideration of the premises, respecting our Imployers and
Employment, and sensible apprehension of our own distresses which they, or we
already have, or hereafter may suffer, procured as aforesaid. We John Farren
Agent and Council, principally and chiefly in the name, and on the behalf of
William Courten Esquire aforesaid, our Imployer; and all other Adventurers with
him in general; As also for our selves, and all other servants in the same
employment, our lives, liberties, or what else ours in particular, and in the
presence of sufficient witnesses, Do make, Protest against you William
Cockaine Governor, Protest.
William Methwold Deputy, or whosoever Governor, or Deputy for the time being;
As also your Assistants, or Court of Committees for the time being, and all
others whom it may concern in England. Likewise against you Robert Bowen,
Francis Day, and Tho. Ivy aforesaid, and your Assistants and Counselors. And
lastly, Against you Francis Brittan President at Surrat, Ralph Cartwright
President at Bantam, or whosoever President or Presidents there for the time
being for the said East India Adventurers: And all other President, or
Presidents, Agent, or Agents, Counselors, Commanders, Factors, or Assistants,
in East India, or parts adjacent, as aforesaid, now, or late in the service or
employment of the said Governor or Governors, Deputy or Deputies, and Court
of Committees aforesaid. And against them, and you jointly and severally, now,
or late in the service or employment of the whole Company of East India
Adventurers or Merchants aforesaid, (with reference and submission now, and
hereafter, here, and elsewhere to the proper right and interest of our
Imployer, and Imployers, save our lives and liberties, or what else peculiarly
ours.) That whatsoever loss or damage, or other distress, the said William
Courten Esquire, and other Adventurers with him, or any of them, or any other,
his, or their Agent or Agents, Factor or Factors, servant, or servants in
East India, or parts adjacent, aforesaid, have already suffered, or hereafter
shall suffer in body, goods, or name, by the actions or misdoings of the said
Governor or Governors, Deputy, or Deputies, Committee or Committees in
England, or by your President, or Presidents, Agent or Agents, Commander, or
Commanders, or other your Factors and servants in East India, or parts adjacent
aforesaid, in time and place convenient shall be required, at all, or any, and
every your hands, either by Appeal to the Right Honorable his Majesty's
highest Court of Parliament, now or late at Westminster assembled, or any other
Court or Courts of Justice or Equity thereon depending, as the justness and
truth of the cause shall deserve. And in the absence of Council learned in the
Law, and of a public Notary, or other Instrument ordained for that purpose.
We the said John Farren, Agent, and Council, have made this Protest, and sent
a true Copy thereof unto you William Cockayne Governor, William Methwolde
Deputy, and Court of Committees, or whosoever Governor, Deputy, or Committees
for the time being in England. Likewise to you Francis Brittan President at
Surrat, or whosoever President there for the time being: And to all other
President or Presidents, Agent, or Agents, Commanders, Factors, or Servants,
whom it may concern in East India or parts adjacent aforesaid, in the service
and employment of the now East India Adventurers, commonly called the Old
East India Company.

Witnessed and subscribed by us, John Farren, Agent, and Council aforesaid,
lest you or they, or any of you, or them, should plead ignorance, or excuse in
the Premises.

Being again arrived in India, Factors, etc. distressed.
about January 1644. I found Mr. Courtens Factors and affairs in a very
woeful, sad, distracted, and languishing condition (merely occasioned as
aforesaid) and all their Letters and Protests Southward to Madrassapatan, etc.
returned null, and void of all hopes of any receipt or satisfaction as formerly
expressed. Likewise their forementioned Letters to the said Companies President
at Surrat North-wards, had no better success: And then the foresaid Jo Farren
Agent, and other Mr. Courtens Factors residing under the Portugals protection
at Goa, for fear of the enraged Mallabars (as some of them alleged) still
threatening Carwar (Mr. Courtens chief Factory) and all his ships by sea,
Mallabars feared.
and Factories by land upon their borders, having a Fleet of Frigots about
sixty sail in number (carrying about seventy or eighty men in each Frigot)
coasting to and again (as was credibly reported) for that very purpose; A
Fleet of Frigots.
So the foresaid Ship Loyalty (fitted for close fight) was continued to
prosecute and pursue the said Robert Bowen (Master of the said Ship Endeavor)
for Persia still to demand of him the foresaid Gold, Bowen still pursued.
Guns, and Men, which he had formerly taken into his charge, but the said Bowen
hastened thence to Surrat (as way afterward reported) as Day formerly to
Bantam, so both escaped her.

Then in Febr. 1644. the said John Farren, Destruction apprehended and expected.
and Council apprehending nothing but a constant damage, and inevitable
destruction thereupon to follow (being thus prevented of their supplies from
England (and of sending four or five Ships lading home that year upon Mr.
Courtens proper account) were thereby constrained to sell off two or three
hundred Tuns of lading (prepared for England) at great loss, and to consume
their stocks of English Cloth, and other Commodities in their several
Factories to maintain themselves and ships in idleness and demourage, and pay
contracted Customs, and dead freights, with little or no profit at all from
any employment. And in this distress, Mr. Courtens said Agent, John Farren and
Council (when all their hopes and endeavors failed) before sufficient
witnesses, The occasion of the Protest.
drew the foregoing Protest, and by the first convenient coveyance of their
own, viz. in October following, sent the same for England in the ship Tho. and
John, William Far Master with two or three Copies thereof, sealed and
witnessed, which were all upon arrival, about the 28. of May, 1646. delivered
Mr. Courten, or his virtuous, honorable, and distressed Lady, and one of the
said sealed Copies shortly after, upon one of their Court days was sent to the
said East India Company, and Court of Committees, then sitting (as was credibly
affirmed) and another of the said Copies afterward (upon this, and other
occasions) was read and pleaded by Council, learned in the Law about March
1646,/1647. at the Bar of the House of Lords in the presence of the aforesaid
East India Governor, Deputy, and many other of the Committees and Adventurers
of the said East India Company, according to the appeal and purport thereof,
but came to no conclusion. Ship Loyalties demourage.


So that it came to pass afterward in India, that the said ship Loyalty after
ten or twelve months demourage at three hundred pound per month, returned
again from Persia for India, and so upon dead freight for England, insomuch
that the very charge and damage of that one ship only, employed as aforesaid,
in the pursuit, and prosecution of the demanding of the said men, Gold and
Guns, amounted to above three thousand pound, besides five hundred pound, or
thereabouts in charges for provisions, Charge of demanding 3600 li. etc.
and other necessary supplies from Mr. Courtens Factories in India, and besides
an hundred and thirty, or a hundred a forty pound charges for demanding by
Land, so that the full charge of demanding the same by Sea and Land, amounts to
above three thousand six hundred pounds, as by particulars in Print my also
plainly appear.

And (as I am credibly informed) the owners of that one only ship Loyalty) (by
virtue of their Charter part) makes good an account or demand (for dead freight
and other damages) of full twelve thousand pound to the Commissioners appointed
for Mr. Courtens estate. And having then six or seven ships more in India (some
bigger, some lesser) and all, or most of them (save the Great-William) either
sold, or lost in the Country, or returned empty (as to Mr. Courten, Above 50000
l. damage.
chiefly by reason of the premises) the whole damage and loss whereof in two
or three years, must needs amount to much above fifty thousand pounds, Above
100000 l. damage.
and in less then five or six years to much above a hundred thousand pounds,
besides the utter loss, ruin and destruction of Trade, Factories, and
Plantations, thereby razing the very foundations thereof, as well that of
Madagascar (the greatest of all known Islands) as there st, which began
(though somewhat unadvisedly seated) to poise and sway the balance of petty
Kings there, upon any occasion of difference, being invited to their
assistance, which for want of supplies and intercourse of shipping (prevented
as aforesaid) likewise perished in the same general destruction, as in a
former Treatise, Entitled, Strange News from the Indies, may more fully and
plainly appear.

And this general destruction was sealed and confirmed irrecoverably* (as to
Mr. Courten) upon return of his reputed seven sixteenths in Partner-ship of the
foresaid ship Great-William to Ligorne, the principal, and proceed, whereof
was estimated by some well-knowing men, at near fifteen thousand pounds,
which proved but five thousand pounds, and that left in the foresaid Companies
Factors hands, at Ligorne, aforesaid, and the same so disposed, and ordered
there, that Mr. Courten could have no power thereof in any convenient time,
which wholly prevented all hopes of recruit.

Thus have you the plain truth of the strange and various passages concerning
the foresaid five thousand pounds, briefly and impartially communicated, with
the sad issues and events thereof, all, or most from sight and experience,
which cannot deceive.

This short Narrative is wholly lamentable (almost incredible) to consider (in
the serious apprehension of some) that such grave, rich, civil, religious
seeming wise men, should be so very cruel, and unreasonable, or rather so
exceedingly injurious and unnatural to their brethren, and friends in
particular, and to this Nation or Land of their Nativity in general. If this
Commonwealth pleased to take cognizance thereof;

And so I conclude, Mr. Courtens Catastrophe and Adieu to East India.
Per J. D.
Mar. 2. 1651
FINIS.

