THE ANATOMY OF THE MASS.

Wherein is showed by the Holy Scriptures, and by the testimony of the Ancient
Church, that the MASS is contrary unto the Word of God, and far from the way
of Salvation.

By PETER du MOVLIN, Doctor and Professor in Divinity.

And Translated into English, By JAM: MOUNTAIN.

LONDON Printed by J. B. for Humphrey Robinson, and are to be sold at his Shop,
at the Sign of the three Pigeons in Paul's Churchyard. 1641.

Imprimatur, Tho: Wykes R. P. Episc.

Land. Capell. Domest.

TO The Right Honorable and most Illustrious Lords: The Earl of Bedford. The
Earl of Hartford. The Earl of Essex. The Earl of Warwick. The Viscount Say
and Seal. The Viscount Savile. Lord Wharton. Lord Brook.

RIGHT HONORABLE,
GOD having been pleased not to suffer my heart to be much enamoured with
worldly preferments and imployes of that nature, whereby I have possessed my
soul in quietness and enjoyed more liberty: In acknowledgement of that favor
and being persuaded withal that God has not weaned me from these pleasures
for to sit still and to be idle: my chief study has been, according to my
poor ability, to busy my mind and to apply my heart to spiritual things,
which might both better my self and others, and make me (if not so rich and so
considerable in this life, yet (I am sure) through God his free mercy) rich and
eminent enough in the life to come. Wherefore, in the prosecution of that holy
resolution, after several Works of this nature which by Gods providence I have
given to the public in the French tongue, and which (I may say it truly and
without vanity) have not been without fruit: It has pleased the same divine
Wisdom to put into my heart to give unto this Pious Nation, this little Work
in their own language. And forasmuch as your Honors are of the eminentest of
the kingdom, and of the mainest and principal Pillars, which, under your most
Pious and most Gracious Sovereign, uphold both this Church and Common wealth:
and furthermore, seeing also that all the eyes of this flourishing Nation
(grounded upon that assured knowledge it has of your fervent Love to GOD,
Loyalty to your PRINCE, and tender affection to your Country) are now fixed
upon you as upon so many Moses standing in the gap between them and Gods
threatening judgments: I have thought my self bound in duty (having so fair
an opportunity as this is) to crowd among the rest into your presence, and to
show as well as others, this public and true testimony of my most humble
respects, in presenting first with all humility this poor labor of mine unto
your Honors, jointly: being unwilling (so long as I find diverse presidents of
the like dedications) to divide and separate those whom GOD and the KING have
joined together: beseeching you to accept of it; to vouchsafe it your
Patronage, and to bear in its forefront your Honorable Names. I presume that
for the Author his sake, your Honors will not deny me that favor. And the
rather, because it tends to the same end that ye aim at, to wit Gods Glory,
and the furtherance of True Religion. For, Most Illustrious Lords, I have been
an eyewitness above this eighteen years, of that Constant Zeal and Exemplary
Piety which is so resplendent in your Honors. And oftentimes being ravished in
admiration to see such extraordinary gifts and graces in such great Persons,
notwithstanding the corruption of the times: I have blessed God heartily for
it, and prayed his Divine Majesty to power more and more upon your Lordships,
the dew of his heavenly graces unto the end. And indeed, Right Honorable, to
conclude this in a word, I can attest upon mine own knowledge of that eighteen
years standing: that although your Honors do live here among men, your
conversation has been for the most part with God; neglecting no means (for
all your great and weighty occasions) to wait and attend upon his service, in
his holy Courts and Sanctuaries. But alas, all that I can say in that behalf,
is but as a drop of water thrown into the vast Ocean. And therefore, Right
Honorable, I must crave leave to say no more: and ask pardon that I have said
so little, and so far short of what your Honors deserve.

As for the Author and Work, I should say something too, if he and his Works
were not better known than I can express, Yet I will say this by the way;
that he has been, is, (and long may he be) one of the Worthiest and most
powerful Instruments in Gods hand for the conversion of Souls, destruction of
Babel, and rearing up of Bethel; as this Age has afforded. And for this
particular Work of his, it shall suffice me to say (to give it the highest
commendation I can) that it is Peter du Moulins.

Finally, Right Honorable, I should say something also touching my self:
which shall be only to beseech again your Lordships to be pleased to Pardon
the boldness of a poor stranger, in dedicating this small book, and first
fruits of his (that have seen the light in the English tongue) unto your
Honors: excuse the defects that may be found in the same, (though I hope you
shall find it faithfully translated, and free from any gross barbarismes in
the Language:) and to attribute that excess of temeritie, to the excess of
the honor I bear unto your Lordships: for whom I shall never cease to call
upon God for an increase of Honor and long Prosperity here on Earth, until
that being full of days, and having finished your course in his fear, ye
receive that Crown of glory which is laid up for you in Heaven.

And so, fearing to be too tedious and troublesome unto your Honors: I humbly
take my leave and rest,

Most Renowned Lords Your most humble and most devoted servant. JAM: MOVNTAINE

A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS.
FIRST BOOK.
Chap. 1. THe Institution of the holy Supper, by our Lord Jesus Christ, as it
is contained in the first Epistle of the Apostle Saint Paul to the Corinthians,
Chapter 11. page 1. Chap. II. Four and thirty contrarieties between the holy
Supper and the Mass. And how far the Church of Rome is departed from the
institution of the Lord. page 3. Chap. III. How the change in the Lords
Institution, has changed the nature of the Sacrament. And that in the Mass
there is no consecration. 24. Chap. IV. That by altering the Lords Institution,
the Roman Church has changed the nature of Christ. 26. Chap. V. Of Maldonat
his audaciousnesse in giving Saint Paul and Saint Luke the lie: and in
correcting Saint Matthew and Mark: And of the fruit of the Vine. 30. Chap. VI.
How much Christ is dishonored by this Doctrine. And of the character
indelible: And of the power of creating ones Creator. 35. Chap. VII. That the
very words of the Mass are contrary to Transubstantiation. 41. Chap. VIII.
Recrimination of our Adversaries. 43. Chap. IX. Causes why the Pope admits
not of any alteration in the Mass, and will not conform himself to the Lords
Institution. 45. Chap. X. Places wherein the Doctors and Councels of the Roman
Church maintain, that the Pope and the Church of Rome are not subject to the
Scripture, and have greater authority than the Scripture, and may make void
and abolish the Commandments of God. 46. Chap. XI. That our Exposition of
these words This is my body, is conformable to the Scripture and to the nature
of Sacraments, and approved by the ancient Fathers, and confirmed by our
Adversaries. 55. Chap. XII. That our adversaries, to avoid a clear and
natural figure, forge a multitude of harsh and unusual ones, and speak but
in figurative tearm^^. And of Berengarius his confession. 63. Chap. XIII. Of
the Ascension of the Lord, and of his absence: and of that our Adversaries say,
that in the Sacrament he is Sacramentally present. 68. Chap. XIV. Confession of
our Adversaries, acknowledging that Transubstantiation is not grounded in the
Scriptures. That the Primitive Church did consecrate by the Prayer, and not by
these words, This is my body. 76. Chap. XV. Of the adoration of the Sacrament.
The opinion of the Roman Church. 82. Chap. XVI. Examen of the Adora^^^n (...)
Sacrament by the word of God. That the ancient Christians did not worship the
Sacrament. 88. Chap. XVII. Of the Priests intention, without which the Roman
Church believes no consecration, nor Transubstantiation is mad ^6. Chap.
XVIII. That our Adversaries, in this matter, entangle themselves into
absurdities and insoluble contradictions. 104 Chap. XIX. Of accidents without a
subject. Places of Fathers. 117. Chap. XX. Answers to some examples brought out
of the Scriptures by our Adversaries. for to prove that the body of Christ has
been sometimes in two several places. 122. Chap. XXI. Of the dignity of
Priests. And that our Adversaries debase and vilify the utility and ^fficacy
of M^sses, and make them unprofitable for the remission of sins. And of the
traffic of Masses. 126 Chap. XXII. That the Roman Religion is a new Religion,
and forged for the Popes profit and of the Clergies. 138. Chap. XXIII. Answer
to the question made unto us by our Adversaries, Where was your Religion before
Calvin. 146. Chap, XXIV. That our Adversaries do reject the Fathers, and
speak of them with contempt. 161 Chap. XXV. Of the corruption and
falsification of the Fathers Works: and of the difficulty to understand them.
169. Chap. XXVI. Places of the Fathers, contrary to Transubstantiation, and to
the manducation of the body of Christ by the corporal mouth. 175. Chap. XXVII.
Confirmation of the same, by the custom of the Ancient Church. 197. Chap.
XXVIII. Explanation of the places of the Fathers, th t say that in the
Eucharist we eat the body and blood of Christ, and that the bread is changed
into the body of Christ, and is made Christ's body. Specially of Ambrose,
Hilary, and Chrysostom. That the Fathers do speak of several kinds of body
and blood of Christ. 200. Chap. XXIX. That diverse ancient Fathers have believed
a mystical Union of the Godhead of Christ with the bread of the Sacrament. 212.
Chap. XXX. P^rticular opinion of Saint Austin, and of Fulgen^^u^, and of
Innocent the third. 226. Chap. XXXI. That the Church of Rome condemning the
Imp^^^^tion, is f^llen her self into an error a thousand times more
pernicious, by Transubstantiation. And of the Adoration of the accidents of the
bread. 228. Chap. XXXII. That the Sacrifice of the Mass was not instituted by
Christ. Confesssion of our Adversaries. 231. Chap. XXXIII. That the Sacrifice
of the Mass agrees neither with Scripture nor with reason. 235 Chap. XXXIV. In
what sense the holy Supper may be called a Sacrifice. Of Melchisedeks
sacrifice. And of the Oblation whereof Malachy speaks. 243. Chap. XXXV. In
what sense the Fathers have called the Eucharist a sacrifice. 247.
The Second Book. OF THE MANDUCATION of the Body of Christ.
Chap. I. OF two sorts of manducation of Christ's flesh, to wit, the spiritual
and corporal: and which is the best. 253. Chap. II. That in the sixth of Saint
John, the Lord speaks not of the Sacrament of the Eucharist, nor of the
manducation of his flesh by the mouth of the body. 260. Chap. III. That the
Roman Church, by this doctrine, depriveth the People of salvation. 269. Chap.
IV. That the Principal Doctors of the Roman Church, yea the Popes themselves,
do agree with us in this point: and hold that in the sixth of Saint John
nothing is spoken but of the spiritual manducation; and that those that
contradict them, do speak with incertitude. 274. Chap. V. Reasons of our
Adversaries for t^ prove that in the sixth Chapter of Saint John it is spoken of
the Manducation by the mouth of the body. 280. Chap. VI. Testimonies of the
Fathers. 285. Chap. VII. Impiety of Salmeron the Jesuit, and of Peter Charron.
And of Bellarmins four men enclosed in one suit of clothes. That by this
doctrine, Christ has not a true body in the Sacrament. 292. Chap. VIII. Of the
progress of this abuse, and by what means Satan bath established the
Transubstantiation. 298. Chap. IX. Of the judgment which the Doctors of the
Roman Church do make touching the apparitions, whereby a little Child, or a
morsel of flesh has appeared at the Mass in the hands of the Priest, and
touching Christ's blood that is kept in Relics. 312. Chap. X. Of the
corruption of the Papal Sea in the Ages wherein this error was most advanced.
317. Chap. XI. Of the oppression of England. How Reli^ion passed out of England
into Bohemia. Of Wicklef. Of John Huz, and of Hierome of Prague. Of the
Council of Constance. Of Zisca and Procopius, and of their Victories. 323.
Chap. XII. The Confession of Cyril Patriarch of Consta tinople, now living,
touching the Sacrament of the Eucharist. 324.
ERRATA.
Page 5. Line 3. Read any. p. 10. l. 1. What is in the Margent must be in the
Text. p. 11. l. 5. r. of this bread. p. 28. l. 2. r. nor stirred. and line 11.
r. Savior. p. 68. l. 8. r. sensibly. p. 69. l. 11. r. chap. 17. 11. p. 70. l.
23. r. Word. p. 76. l. 15. r. Doctor. p. 79. l. 15. r. Church. p. 105. l. 10 r.
as if I should say. p. 121. l. 23. r. of miraculous. p. 136. l, 18. put a full
point after fourefold. p. 145. l. 20. r. benefit. p. 152. from the 14 line to
the 27 should be Italica. p. 157. l. 2. r. year 1512. p. 177. l. 21. r.
remained. p. 178. l. 25. r. For the old Passover. p. 182. l. 1. r. Father. p.
186. l. 2. r. invisible. p. 187. l. 9. r. Brethren. p. 194. l. 2. r, should be
made. p. 200. l. 12. r. three sorts. p. 223. l. 10. r. those of Ambrose. p.
233. l. 17. r. acknowledges. p. 244. l. 7. r. allege. p. 248 l. 12. r
perfecting. and l. 23. r. sacrificed. p. 250. l. 28. and. 30. r. gifts. p. 253.
Chap. 1. r. Of the two sorts, etc. p. 282. l. 22. r. of this chapter. p. 287.
l. 5. the word even, must be put in the next line, and read, that even, etc.

CYPRIAN IN HIS LXIII. EPISTLE TO CAECILIVS,. 7. SPEAKING OF THE EVCHARISTICALL
CVP.
The holy Apostle teaches that we must no manner of way swerve or depart from
that which is commanded us in the Gospel, and that the Disciples ought to
practice and do the same things which the Master has done and taught.

And in the XI.
If Christ must be heard alone, we ought not to regard what others before us
have thought fitting to be done, but what Christ, who is before all, has done
first. For we must not follow the custom of man, but the will of God.

The Commentary upon the first to the Corinth. attributed to Saint Ambrose in
the XI Chapter.
The Apostle says that that man is unworthy of the Lord, which celebrates this
mystery otherwise than it was celebrated by him. For that man cannot be
devout, which presumes to do otherwise than it was given us by the author.

THE ANATOMY OF THE MASS. FIRST BOOK.
CHAP. I.
THe Institution of the holy Supper by Christ Jesus, as it is contained in the
first Epistle of the Apostle Saint Paul to the Corinthians Chap. 11.

23 I have received of the Lord that which also I delivered unto you; that the
Lord Jesus the same night in which he was betrayed, took bread;

24 And when he had given thanks, he brake it and said, Take, eat: This is
my body, which is broken for you: this do in remembrance of me.

25 After the same manner also he took the cup when he had supped, saying,
This cup is the New Testament in my blood: This do ye as often as you drink it,
in remembrance of me.

26 For as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do show the
Lords death till he come.

27 Wherefore, whosoever shall eat thi^ bread, and drink this cup of the Lord
unworthily, shall be guilty of the body an^ blood of the Lord.

28 Let a man therefore examine himself, and so let him ea^e of that bread,
an^ drink of that cup.

29 For he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation
to himself, not discerning the Lords body.

Saint Matthew in the 26 Chap. and 29 Verse, adds these words of the Lord.
But I say unto you, I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the Vine
until that day when I drink it new with you in my Fathers Kingdom.

And in the 27 verse he testifies that Christ presenting the cup to his
Disciples, said, Drink ye all of it.

CHAP. II. Four and thirty contrarieties between the Lords holy Supper and the
Mass; and how far the Church of Rome is departed from the Institution of the
Lord.
NOne can deny but that our Lord Jesus did institute the holy Supper aright and
as it ought: And it were an impiety to find fault with his institution.
Therefore the shortest way, yea the only means to end all our differences,
would be to come back to Christ's institution, and to speak as he spoke, and to
do as he did. That is the thing which we desire and beg with so much
earnestness, and whereunto the Church of Rome can by no means agree. For the
Council of Trent in the XXII Session denounces Anathema on all those that
shall say that in the Canon of the Mass there is any error. Yet nevertheless
it is evident that the Mass is nothing else but a changing and a disfiguring
of the Lords Institution. Whereof we will give some examples.

1. Christ instituting the holy Supper among his Disciples, spoke in a known
and intelligible tongue to the assistants. On the contrary, the Priest in the
Mass speaks in a tongue which the people understand not.

2. Christ presenting the Cup to his Disciples, said, Drink ye all of it. And
St. Paul in the 1 to the Cor. Chap. 11. verse. 28. bids the people of Corinth to
drink of the cup, saying, Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of
that bread, and drink of that cup. And in the 10. Chap. 17. Verse, We are all
partakers of one bread, and of one cup: according to the Version of the Roman
Church, solely authorized by the Council of Trent.

3. Christ in celebrating the Eucharist, spoke not of sacrificing his body, and
made no offering unto God his Father. On the contrary, the Priest in the Mass
pretends to sacrifice Christ's body, and offers him up to God in sacrifice
propitiatory for the quick and for the dead, without a warrant, and without
Gods command.

4. Christ in the holy Supper made no elevation of the host, as likewise the
Apostle worshipped not the Sacrament, but sat still at the Table. On the
contrary, the Priest in the Mass lifts up the host, and makes the people to
worship it.

5. Christ did not cause any bones nor relics of Saints to be put under the
sacred table, and did not ask of God the remission of sins through the
merits of those Saints whose relics were under the table. On the contrary,
the Priest in the Mass, kissing the Altar, speaks thus to God, Oramus te,
Domine, per merita Sanctorum tuorum, quorum reliquiae hic sunt, and omnium
Sanctorum; ut indulgere digneris omnia peccata mea
We pray thee, Lord, through the merits of thy Saints, whose relics are here,
that thou will vouchsafe to pardon me all my sins.

6. Christ said to his Apostles, Take, eat. On the contrary, in the Roman
Church, a great number of private Masses are said, at the intention of such as
pay for them, without communicants and without assistants, in which the Priest
says, Take, eat: but there is no body either for to take or for to eat. Yea
even in public Masses, the Priest oftentimes eats and drinks alone.

7. Three Evangelists, viz. S. Matthew. in the 26 chapter, S. Mark in the 14.
Chap. and S. Luke in the 22. and S. Paul in the eleventh chapter of the first
to the Corinthians, testify that Christ gave bread to his Disciples, saying,
He took bread, and brake it, and gave it. Now the Sacrament is not given but
after the consecration. Christ therefore gave bread after the consecration. And
Saint Paul, 1 to the Corinth. Chap. 11. Verse 26.27. and 28. says three
several times that we eat bread. And in the 10 Chap. Verse 16. he says that
we break bread. And in the 20 Chap. of the Acts, Verse 7. it is said that the
Disciples came together to break bread. On the contrary, the Church of Rome
teaches, that in the Eucharist no bread is eaten, and that the bread is not
broken: but that which the Priest breaks in the Mass, is the body of Christ,
which nevertheless cannot be broken.

8. Christ giving that bread, said, This is my body, declaring that the bread
that he gave, was his body. On the contrary, the Roman Church teaches that
the bread is not the body of Christ: But that the bread is no more bread: and
that it is transubstantiated into Christ's body, Now how the bread is Christ's
body, himself teaches it, when he adds that it is his commemoration. Even as
in the next line following he says that the Cup is the New Testament, because
it is the sign and commemoration of it: according to the style of the
Scripture, that gives to the signs and memorials the name of the thing which
they do signify and represent.

9. Christ called that which was in the cup the fruit of the Vine, saying, I
will drink no more of this fruit of the Vine. On the contrary, the Church of
Rome teaches that that which is in the cup, is not the fruit of the Vine, but
blood. And says that in the Cup is not only the very blood of Christ, but
also that his Body, and his Soul and his Divinity is there: and that the Body
is whole in every drop of the Chalice. Whereupon it follows (and the Roman
Church believes it so) that Christ drank his flesh, and swallowed down his
own soul and body, and ate himself, and had his head in his mouth.

10. The Evangelists do record that Christ having taken bread, blessed it. But
according to the Church of Romes doctrine, which abolisheth the substance of
the bread in the Eucharist, Christ did not bless the bread; for, to destroy a
thing and reduce it to naught, is not to bless it.

11. Christ distributing the bread and breaking it, spoke in the present tense,
saying, (...) quod frangitur.
This is my body which is broken for you. Whereby it appears that by his
body, he meant the Sacrament or commemoration of his body. For Christ's natural
body cannot be broken. To shun the force of this argument, the Latin Version of
the Roman Church has corrupted this place, and in stead of these words, Which
is broken for you, has turned Which shall be delivered for you, 1. Cor.
11.14. Quod pro vobis tradetur.
putting delivering for breaking, and the future for the present. And indeed
our Adversaries are mightily pestered to tell us what it is that the Priest
breaks in the Mass. Does he break bread? But they say that it is no more
bread. Does he break Christ's body? But it cannot be broken, and they
themselves say that it is whole and entire in the least crum of the host, as
big and as large as it was upon the cross. Does he break the Accidents of
bread which most fraudulously they call species, viz. the taste, the color,
and roundnesse of the host? But these things cannot be broken. Can a man make
pieces of taste, or of whiteness? None but bodies can be broken.

12. The Apostle Saint Paul conforming himself to the Lords institution, says
in the 10 chapter of the 1^ to the Corinthians, 16 Verse, that the bread which
we break, is the communion of the body of Christ. The Church of Rome gain
says and contradicts every word of this sentence. The Apostle says that it
is bread. The Church of Rome on the contrary says that it is not bread. The
Apostle says that it is bread which we break. On the contrary, the Church of
Rome says, that it is flesh which we do not break. The Apostle says that
this bread is the communion of the body of Christ. On the contrary, the Church
of of Rome says, that this bread is Christ's body it self. Behold then a
clear and a plain exposition of these words, This is my body: given by the
Apostle, to wit, The bread which I break, is the communion of my body, and not
that which the Church of Rome gives, viz. That which is under these species,
is transubstantiated into my body.

13. It is very considerable that the same Apostle, in the same chapter and 21
verse, makes an opposition between the Lords table and the table of devils,
saving, Ye cannot be partakers of the Lords table and of the table of Devils.
The reason of the opposition shows plainly, that as to be partaker of the
table of Devils, is not to eat Devils But to be partaker of the meat
consec^ated to Devils.
: So to be partaker of Christ's Table, is not to ea^ Christ, but to be partaker
of the mea^ consecrated by Christ, in remembrane of Christ and of his death.

14. Christ in distributing the brea^ and the cup, said, Do this in
remembran^^ of me. These words show manifestly tha^ the Priest makes not
Christ in the Mass, and sacrifices him not. For it is impossible to make
Christ in remembrance of Christ. It is impossible to sacrifice Christ in
remembrance of Christ. Can a man build a house in remembrance of that house?
Did Aaron sacrifice a Lamb in remembrance of that Lamb? Besides that the
remembrance is but of things absent and past, as Saint Austin says upon the 37
Psalm, Nemo recordatur nisi quod in praesentia non est positum: No remembrance
can be had but of things that are not present. The council of Trent declares
indeed that Christ by these words, Do this, commanded that he should be
sacrificed in the Mass: But besides that Christ cannot be sacrificed in
remembrance of Christ, the Apostle Saint Paul presently after these words, Do
this in remembrance of me, adds the explication, saying, For as often as ye
eat of this bread, and drink of this cup, ye do show the Lords death till he
come. Will we therefore know what is to Do this? Saint Paul teaches us that
it is to eat this bread and drink of this cup, for to show and declare the
remembrance of Christ his death.

15. Our Lord Jesus brake the bread before he pronounced the words which they
call the words of consecration. He took the bread, and blessed it, and brake
it, and gave it, saying, This is my body which is broken for you. Whereby it
follows by the doctrine of the Roman Church, that he brake bread
unconsecrated and untransubstantiated. On the contrary, in the Roman Church the
Priest breaks the host after the words of consecration: to the end the people
may believe that he breaks and sacrifices the very body of Christ. Our
adversaries then confess that the Priest breaks an other thing than Christ
brake.

Some, for to arm themselves against the Apostle, which says that the bread
that we break, is the communion of the body of Christ, tell us that Saint Paul
says that we break bread, because that when he did minister this holy
Sacrament, he did break before he consecrated, following Christ's example, and
consequentl^ did break unconsecrated bread. Br^^ those that speak so,
contradict the R^man Church, which does not belee^^ that the fraction of the
unconsecrated bread, is the communion of the body of Christ.

16. The same Apostle, 1. Cor. 11.28. says, Let a man examine himself, and s^
let him eat OF this bread: Which is the same kind of speech used by Christ,
saying Bibite ex eo omnes, (...).
Drink ye all OF it. The Apostle commands us to eat OF this bread: that is
to say, to take every one his part and portion of it: and Christ saying Drink
ye all of it, bids the Communicants to take their share of the cup. This manner
of speaking is become absurd in the Roman Church, who by this bread, understand
Christ himself. For they would esteem that man to be mad, or a mocker, that
should say that we eat every one his portion of Christ body.

17. Christ presenting the cup to his Disciples, said in the present tense that
it was his blood which is shed for many. Where manifestly he speaks of a
Sacramental, and not of a real effusion. For our adversaries confess that in
the Mass the blood of Christ is not shed out of the body, and goes not out of
the Veins. He therefore speaks of a Sacramental effusion, which is
respective to the real effusion made upon the cross. We ask then, whether the
Priest in the Mass drinks that blood of Christ which came out of his side
and wounds upon the cross. If they answer that the Priest drinks not that
blood of the Lord which issued forth of his body upon the cross, but that
blood which remained in the body, and is there still: thereby they confess
that the Priest drinks not the same blood which Christ will have us to drink.
For he commands us expressly to drink the blood shed for us. But if they
answer, that the Priest drinks the same blood which the Lord shed upon the
cross, then they presuppose rashly, and without word of God, that that blood
which came out of the Lords body, is gotten in again. All this abuse comes for
lack of considering that in the holy Supper, Christ's body is represented unto
us, and presented to our faith, as suffering, and broken, and dying, and dead
for us, and his blood as shed and issued out of his body. Whereas on the
contrary, the Roman Church has a conceit, that she receive the spiritual and
glorious body of Christ and his blood enclosed within the body and within the
veins.

18. The Apostle Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 1^ And Saint Luke chap. 22. record the
Christ said, This cup is the New Testame^ in my blood. If by this word of cup
the blood must be understood, the sense (...) these words shall be, This blood
is the New Testament in my blood. By that means, lo here two kinds of blood
of Christ, whereof the one shall be within the other.

19. Christ in celebrating the holy Supper, said, Do this in remembrance of
me. And Saint Paul has told us here above, that in earing this bread we do
show his death. On the contrary, the Priest in the Mass says, that he
celebrateth, In the first place, the remembrance of the Virgin Mary; saying,
Communicantes and memoriam venerantes in primis gloriosae semperque Virginis
Mariae: Communicating and solemnizing in the first place the remembrance of the
glorious Virgin Mary, leaving Christ behind. As Gabriel Biell says in the 32
Lesson of the Canon of the Mass, First and principally the remembrance is made
of the most blessed Virgin Mary, because (says he) she is the most safe
sanctuary of our calamities, and has been the administratrix and dispensatrix
of this sacrifice, and all the reason of our hope.

20. In the whole institution of the Eucharist, there is no mention made of the
Saints, neither is there any command to pray unto Saints: No word of the
intercession of Angels. On the contrary, the Priest in the Confiteor of the
Mass, prays Michael the Archangel, and John the Baptist, and all the Saints,
to pray for him. There are some Masses in which the Letany is rehearsed, which
is but a long chain of prayers unto Saints. In the Mass, they bless the
Encense through the intercession of Michael the Archangell. The Priest asks of
God, that he would be pleased to command his Angel to take the consecrated
host, and to carry it up to heaven. And for an excess of abuses, at the
offertory of the Mass, the Priest says he makes that oblation in honor of
the Virgin Mary and of the Saints: As if the holy Supper were instituted in
honor of the creatures. That, truly, is to put the creatures above Christ. As
when a man gives alms in Gods honor, he presupposes that God is more
excellent than the Alme.

21. S. John in the 13 chapter, and 2 verse, witnesses, that in the action o^
the holy Supper, the Devil entered into Judas. But our adversaries, with mos^ of
the Fathers, hold, that Judas was pertaker of the Eucharist, with the rest o^
the Disciples. They will therefore tha^ both Christ and the Devil have entre^
together into Judas. So they give unto Christ a very unsuitable companion; and
truly, the Son of God, and the Devil, had been very ill lodged together.

22. We agree in this point with ou^ adversaries, that Christ ate and drank
with his Disciples, and was partaker of the holy Sacrament. He shows it
himself sufficiently, when after he had delivered the cup, he said, I will
drink no more of this fruit of the Vine. Whereby it follows, that after the
doctrine of the Roman Church, Christ did eat himself, and swallowed his own
body and soul, and had his whole body in his mouth, and in his stomach. By
this means Christ's passible body, devoured the impassible body. Whereupon it
were good to know, what Christ's body did within the body of Christ, and how
Christ's soul could enter into Christ's body, seeing that it was in already. And
since that that which contains, and that which is contained, are several
things, and that nothing contains it self: by this doctrine it is evident
that they make Christ to have two bodies, the one of which was contained within
the other. And since that to eat ones self, is a more admirable thing than the
Creation of the World, it is not credible that Christ did eat himself, without
some great profit should come thereby for our salvation. Yet our adversaries
produce none at al.

For to prop so extravagant a doctrine, and which exposes the Christian
Religion to laughter, our adversaries allege a place out of S. Austin upon the
33 Psalm. where he says, that in this Sacrament, Christ did carry himself in his
own hands But Austin says not only that he did carry himself in his own hands:
But he says, Ipse se portabat quodam mode cum diceret, Hoc est corpus meum: he
did carry himself in a manner when he said, This is my body. So a man that
carries his own picture in his hands, carries himself in a manner. Even as it
would be a senseless speech to say that the Moon is the Moon in a manner: so
i^ that which Christ carried in his hands, was his true body, it would be a
foolish thing to say that it was his body in some kind. For concerning the
sense of these words, This is my body, S. Austin expounds them plainly enough
in the 12 chapter against Adimantus, saying, The Lord made no difficulty to
say, This is my body, when he gave the sign of his body.

23 Christ our Lord was sitting at the table, his face turned toward the
Assistants. Whereas the Priest, in the Mass, stands before an Altar, turning
hi^ tail to the people.

24 Christ gave to every one of the assistants, a piece of the bread he had
broken with his hands, which bread his Disciples received with their own hands
As also in the ancient Church both me^ and women received with their hand the
Sacrament under both kinds: The contrary of all that is practiced in the Mass,
in which the Priest chops into the mouths of the Communicants cound wafer
unbroken. If a woman ha^ touched with her hand, I do not say the host, but
only the clothes, or the patine, or the chalice, that would be thought a
heinous offense, and a profanation of sacred things.

25 Our Lord Jesus instituted this Sacrament for the remission of sins, Mar.
26.28 1. Cor. 11.16.
and for to show his death. But in the Roman Church they sing Masses for the
easing of sick people, for preserving of the vines from a white frost, for the
healing of a horse, etc. In all these the priest makes a gain. For that man at
whose intention the Mass is said, is to pay for it.

26 The Apostle S. Paul 1. Cor. 11.12. calls this Sacrament, the Lords
Supper. Whereof we find but of one sort. But the Roman Church has invented a
thousand sorts of Masses. There is the Mass of the Holy Ghost. The Mass of S.
Giles. That of Linus Pope. That of S. Francis, etc. There are amongst other
Masses, that of S. Catherine, and that of S. Margaret, which are Saints that
never were in the World, no more than S. Vrsula, S. Longis, S. Christopher, and
many others, which they have placed in heaven, though they were never upon
earth. Item there are Loud Masses and Low Masses. Great Masses and Small
Masses. Dry Masses. Episcopal Masses. Masses in White, and others in Green,
and others in Violet color.

27 Christ in the holy Supper made no prayer for the dead. On the contrary
there is in the Mass a prayer for the dead, Qui dormiunt in somno pacis.
by which the Priest prays for the deceased which sleep in the sleep of
peace. A thing which is to be carefully observed. For it shows that when this
prayer was added to the Mass, they did not then believe the Purgatory. For
those that burn for many ages in a hott burning Furnace, sleep not peaceably.

28. Item, the confession which the Priest makes at the Mass, in the
Confiteor, is very far from the Lords institution. For in it the Priest
confesses his finnes unto God, and to the Virgin Mary, and to John the
Baptist, and to Peter and Paul, and to all the Saints. None is there left out
but Christ.

29. In the Mass of the Friday before Easter, they worship the image of the
Cross with the highest adoration, called by them Latria, which is due to God
alone, saying, Behold the wood of the Cross, Come, let us worship. There
likewise is sung the Antheme which says, We do worship thy Cross O Lord. And
speaking to the Cross, Faithful Cross, the only noble among the trees, etc.
That is to speak to an senseless thing, and which understands not.

30. Upon the Altar there be Images, as also in all places of the Churches,
that are commanded to be worshipped, under the penalty of a curse, by the
second council of Nice, and by the council of Constantinople, which they
term the Eighth general Council, and by many Popes, and generally taught by
the Jesuits.

31. Christ celebrated the holy Supper with all simplicity. But the Priests of
the Roman Church, sing Mass with allegorical habits, and full of mysteries,
with a thousand turns and undecent gesticulations, unbeseeming the holiness
of that action. They busy the eyes of the people, because their ears are of
no use unto them.

32. In the Canon of the Mass there is an evident untruth. For the Priest
says, that the Lord when he had taken the Chalice into his hands, said, This
is the Chalice of my blood of the new and eternal Testament mystery of the
Faith. Contrary to the testimony of the Evangelists, in which these words are
not to be found. Pope Innocent in the chapter Cum Marthae de celebratione
Missarum, says, that the Church holds that from the Tradition. Which he will
have men to believe, though it be contrary unto the Gospel.

33. All that Christ said, in celebrating this Sacrament, he pronounced it with
a loud and intelligible Voice; he did not mutter in secret the words which are
called the words of consecration, as the now Roman Church does, which in this
point as in many others, differs from the Greek and Eastern Churches, which
pronounce the words of consecration with a loud voice. The Pope Innocent the
third, in the third book of the Mysteries of the Mass, chapter first: And
Durant in the fourth Book of his Rationals, Chap. 35. renders the reason of
this change: To wit, that one day it came to pass that certain Shepherds
having learned the words of consecration, pronounced them upon the bread of
their ordinary meal, which was instantly turned into flesh; Wherewith God
being angry, sent down fire from heaven that consumed them. Nevertheless,
they vary in the recital of this fable, and do not tell where, and when that
came to pass, neither do they bring any witness, nor do agree one with
another in the relation of that story.

34. After that the Disciples of the Lord had taken the Sacrament, Christ did
not command that the remainders of the bread should be locked up in a box, and
kept for to be carried in pomp up and down the streets, as the Roman Church
does on Corpus Christi-day, and in its Octaves. Binius Notis in Concilia in
vita Vrbani IV. Idque ex Molane and Petro Premonstrate^si. Vide Scrarium de
Proceslib. 2. c. 9. and Epistolam Vrbani IV. ad Evan.
This holy day was instituted by Pope Vrbanus the fourth, in the year of our
Lord 1264. as Pope Clement the fifth his successor does testify in the third
book of his Clementines. Tit. 16. where Vrbans Epistle by which he did
institute this holy day, is inserted, wherein he says he was moved so to do
By a Revelation made unto some Catholic persons. By which Catholic persons
he means a Nun of Leodium called Eva, whom he had known when he was
Archdeacon of the same place. This woman said that God had revealed unto her
that he did not like well that every Saint had his holy day, and he none.
Nevertheless, this feast had been extinguished, if Clement the fifth had not
instituted it again some Forty years after.

CHAP. III. How the change in the Lords institution, has changed the nature of
the Sacrament. And that in the Mass there is no consecration.
THis change, and so horrible a depravation of the institution of the Lord,
has wholly abolished the nature of the Sacrament. For Sacraments are sacred
signs. Not only the Ancient, but also all the Doctors of the Roman Church do
define the Sacrament after that manner, saying that Sacramentum est sacrum
signum. So in Baptism, water is the sign, and Christ's blood is the thing
signified. And in the holy Supper, the bread and the wine are the signs, but
the body and blood of Christ are the things signified. Even therefore, as if
the water were taken away from Baptism, it would be no more a Sacrament nor
Baptism: so the Eucharist in the Roman Church is no more a Sacrament, since
the signs, to wit the bread and wine are abolished: in stead of which they put
Christ's natural body and blood, which they call the Sacrament. Wherefore the
Council of Trent ordains that the Sacrament be worshipped. Ses. XIII. chap.
5.
By this means Christ in the Mass is the figure and the sign of himself,
Bellav. lib. 2. de Euchar. cap. 24 Christus sui ipsus sigura fuit.
as Bellarmine with the rest teaches: as if one should say that a man is the
picture of himself.

Moreover, the Sacraments are not instituted for to make Christ come down to
us, but to lift up our hearts to him. Nor for to eat Christ with our teeth,
but to feed our souls and strengthen our faith.

Again, by Transubstantiation the consecration of the Sacrament is destroyed:
and there is nothing in the Mass that is consecrated. The bread is not
consecrated: for they hold that the bread is no more bread. Christ's body is not
consecrated; for Christ cannot be consecrated by men. Neither can the accidents
of bread and wine be consecrated. For lines, colors, and taste, are not the
offering which is pretended to be offered unto God. Therefore there being
nothing consecrated, there is no consecration: and there being no consecration,
there is no Sacrament.

CHAP. IV. That by altering the Lords Institution, the Roman Church has
changed the nature of Christ.
THis change is gone so far, that Christ's humane nature, by
Transubstantiation, is wholly destroyed and abolished. For the Scripture
speaking of Christ's humane nature, says, that he is like unto us in all
things, Heb. 2.17. etc. 4.15.
sin excepted. But the Roman Church gives unto Christ a body that is nothing
like ours. Whence follows, that he is no more our brother: so that all the
glory of the faithful which consists in having a brother who is the
eternal Son of God, is altogether abolished.

For the Church of Rome forgeth unto Christ a body, which is in many several
places at one and the same time: which is in Heaven and upon several Altars,
but not in the space that is between. From whence follows, that Christ's body
is separated from it self, and far from it self, and higher and ower than
it self. There is no less aburdity in willing that an humane body ^e at the
same time in several remote places, than to will that a man, in one and the
self same moment, be in two several years, and so be young and old at once,
and outlive himself.

The same doctrine gives unto Christ an humane body, which is whole in every
crumme of the Host, and has his head and his feet in one and the self same
place, and both his eyes under one point. Can a man say that a body whose parts
are not one out of the other, and differ not in situation, and which takes and
fills no place, and is more spiritual than the very spirits themselves, is a
true humane body? And for that cause the priests of the Roman Church shave or
keep short the beard of their upper lips. For that Church believes that if a
Priest should dip his mustachoe in the chalice, the whole body of Christ would
remain hanged at every hair thereof.

The same doctrine forgeth unto Christ two bodies of a contrary nature, and
unto which are attributed contradictory things. For the body of Christ which
was at the table celebrating the Eucharist, did speak and stir his hands:
But he that was in the mouths and stoma^^ of the Apostles, neither spoke not
sti^^ his hands. The soul of Christ as he at the table, was in anguish: but
t^^ which was in the Apostles mouth, su^^red no grief. Christ after he was
ri^^ from the table and entered into the gard^^ did sweat great drops of blood:
but that was in the Apostles stomachs, did (...) sweat drops of blood. Which of
the two is our Saviors? Or if it be the sat Christ, how is he contrary to
himself?

Furthermore, by this doctrine, (...) whole history of Christ's life is made^^
diculous, and turned into a fable. F^^ if Christ's body may be in several
remo^^ places at once, it may be said that whil^^ he was in the Virgins womb,
peradventure he was in other wombes: And the whilst he was upon the Cross, he
walked in Spain. From thence also follows, that all the journies that Christ
made to and fro, going and commin^ from Galilea to Judea, were to no purpose.
For why did he go from Galilea to Judea, if he might be in both places at one
and the same time, and be found it Judea, without budging from Galilea?

What? (say they) is not God omnipotent for to do this? I answer that God
without question could do all these things if he would. But I say, It is
impossible that God should will such things. For he is no liar, and cannot
contradict himself. But it were to contradict himself, if he would that at
one and the same time a man should speak and not speak, stir and not
stir, suffer and not suffer, and be far and remote, and divided from
himself. He will have Christ's body to be a true humane body. God will not have
a thing so absurd and contradictory, whereby they will that in the Host there
be accidents without a subject, Innoc. III. lib. 4. de myster. Missa. cap. 11.
Est enim hic color and sapor, quantitas and qualitas, cum nihil alterutro sit
coloratum aut sapidum, quantum aut qua^^.
and (as Pope Innocent the third teaches) that there be in the host
greatness and nothing great, color and nothing colored. As if one should
suppose an eclipse of the Sun without a Sun, a halting of a leg and no
leg, a sickness without a sick-man. Besides, the omnipotency of God is not
the rule of our faith, but his Will. By that means, a man might maintain all
the fables of the Alcoran, saying that God is powerful so to do. Join to
this, that God does nothing but wisely. Therefore he will never have Christ to
be subject to sinful men, now that he is glorified, and be exposed to (...)
disgraces and ignominy which the make him suffer every day, whereof sh^^ be
spoken hereafter.

CHAP. V. Of Maldonats audaciousnesse (...) giving Saint Paul and Sai^ Luke the
lie: and in correcti^^ Saint Matthew and Saint Mar^ And touching the fruit of
the Vine.
OF all the words which the Lo^^ used in the Institution of the E^charist, none
gaul and vex our Adversaries more, than those which he pronounced in
delivering the cup, saying This Cup is the New Testament: and thos^ by which he
calls that which was i^ the cup, the fruit of the Vine. For they are forced
(as we shall see heareafter^ to acknowledge in these words, Th^^ Cup is the New
Testament, a figure like unto that which is in these words, This is my Body:
and confess that it is the sign and remembrance of it. Besides that to
presuppose that Christ called his blood the fruit of the Vine, is out of all
likelihood.

Against these words of the Lord, This Cup is the New Testament, related by
Saint Luke and Saint Paul, Maldonat the Jesuit is mad and furious, and
stirred up with an audaciousnesse full of impiety, and speaks of these two
organs of Gods Spirit, as of two liars that have not related the Lords words
according to the truth: And will have men to give credit to the testimony of
Saint Matthew, which says This is my blood: and not to the words of Saint Luke
and Saint Paul which witness that the Lord said, This cup is the New
Testament. Here be his words upon the 28 Verse of the 26 chapter of Saint
Matthew: Nec multis opus est verbis. Nego Christum haee verba dix^sse. Cum enim
Matthaeus qui aderat, and Mar^us qui ex Matthaeo didicerat, scribant Christum
his verbis sanguinem suum tradidesse, Hic est sanguis men's novi Testamenti,
aequum est credere Matthaei pot^us and Marci, qua Iucae and Pauli verbis usum
esse, etc.
There needs not many words. I deny that Christ said these words: For seeing
that Matthew which was present, and Mark that had learned it of Matthew, writ
that Christ gave his blood in these words, This is my blood of the New
Testament, it is reasonable to believe that Christ did rather use the words of
Matthew and Mark, than those of Luke and Paul. And a little after, maintaining
that Christ's inten^^ was to give his own blood, he speaks of Saint Luke and
of Saint Paul as no having well conceived Christ's meaning saying, Luke and Paul
seem to speake^ such sort, as if Christ had chiefly aimed: this, viz. to
declare that he gave the No Testament rather than his blood. And little after;
Though we should feign an^ suppose that Christ spoke as it is written i^ Luke
and Paul, etc.

Truly this presumption is intolerable, to dare contradict thus an Evangelist
and an Apostle, Luke and Pau^ saying, I deny that Christ spoke these word^ And
to make himself a Judge of the fidelity of the Apostles, saying, this man is
more credible than that man, an^ deem that for to excuse Saint Luke an^ Saint
Paul, one must feign and presuppose that which is not.

Every man that has any remnant o^ modesty and fear of God, shall rathe^
believe that all the Evangelists and Apostles are to be believed alike, and
that all have spoken the truth. For i^ we believe that they have reported some
thing falsely, all the rest of the Scripture becomes suspect and uncertain
And though we should grant that Saint Luke and Saint Paul have brought some
alteration in the words of the Lord, yet were we bound to believe that they
were moved by the holy Spirit to speak after that manner, for to clear and
illustrate Christ's words, and turn the minds of men from gross thoughts, and
take away from the spirit of error the occasion of forging a Transubstantiation.

This Jesuit having thus abused Saint Paul and Saint Luke, a little after,
upon these words I will drink no more of this fruit of the Vine, cleaves to
Saint Luke his side against Saint Mark and Saint Matthew, and Maldonat. in 26.
Matthew. verse 29. Haec verba quae Matthaeus. and Marcus referunt, Christum de
calice dixisse, non de co calice dixit, quo sangu nem suum dedit, sed de coqui
in coena agni Paschalis a patre familias inter accumbentes distribui solebat,
(...)
will have Christ to have said these words, I will drink no more of this fruit
of the Vine, of the cup of the Passover, against the testimony of Matthew and
Mark, who report that Christ said these words upon the cup of the holy Supper.
Wherein indeed he makes Christ a liar. For after the Pascall cup, he drank
the cup of the Eucharist, wherein there was wine. The Lord had spoken against
the truth, if in drinking in the cup of the Pascall Lamb, he had said he would
drink wine no more, seeing he drank of it a little after. Add to this that
Saint Matthew and Saint Mark make not any mention of the Pascall cup: and
consequently call not the fruit of the Vine that which was in a cup whereof
they spoke not.

In this, Maldonat has the Antiquity, Popes, Councels, and the Jesuits
themselves against him, which maintain that these words I will drink no more
of this fruit of the Vine, ought to be understood of the cup of the holy
Supper. Saint Cyprian in the 63 Epistle, The Lord said, Dico vobis, non biham a
modo etc. Qua in part invenimus calicem mixtum suisse quem Dominus obtulit
Apostolis, and^ v^nu suisse quod sanguine suum dixit.
I say unto you, I will drink no more henceforth of this creature of the Vine,
until that day when I drink it new with you in my Fathers Kingdom. Wherein
we find that it was a mingled cup which the Lord offered, and that which he
called his blood was wine.

The Council of Worms in the fourth chapter. Apud Iuonem part 3. fol. 65.
V^nu^ suit in red^ptionis nostrae mysterio, cum d^xit, Non b^b^m de genimine,
etc.
It was wine in the mystery of our redemption, when the Lord said, I will
drink^ no more of the fruit of the Vine.

Pope Innocent the third, in the fourth book of the Mysteries of the Mass,
Chapter 27. Quod autem vinum in calice consecraverit, patet ex co quod ipse
subjunxit, non biba a mod^ etc.
Now that it was wine which Christ consecrated in the Chalice, it appears by
that which he adds, I will drink no more of the fruit of this Vine.

The Catechism of the Council of Trent, in the Chapter of the Sacrament of
the Eucharist: Salvatore^ vino in hujus Sacramenti institutione usil esse
Catholica Eccl^sia semper docuit.
The Catholic Church has always taught, that our Savior used Wine in the
institution of this Sacrament, seeing that himself said, I will drink no more
of this fruit of the Vine.

Salmeron the Jesuit, in the IX Tome in the fourteenth Treatise, holds the
same; and the Jesuit Vasquez upon the third part of Thomas, Tome III. in the
Dispute 196 chap. 4. Ego existimo verba illa, Non bibam, etc. Christun^ dixisse
de calice san^ guinis sui.
I think Christ said these words, I will drink no more of this fruit of the
Vine, of the chalice of his blood, and proves his saying by the Fathers.

CHAP. VI. How much Christ is dishonored by this Doctrine. And of the
character indelible: And of the power of creating ones Creator.
THe very cauteles of the Mass do sufficiently discover the abuse, and makes
every man that loves Christ shake with horror: At the end of the old editions
of the Roman Decree, are added many penitential Canons, whereof the nine and
thirtieth is such: Quando mus corrodit aut comedit corpus Christi.
When a mouse eats or gnaweth the body of Christ, for the penance in this
case, look^ for the second distinction of the Consecration, toward the end.

In the new Masse-Booke reviewed and amended by the Popes authority, there is
in the beginning a treatise of the defects that happen in the Mass, where
these rules are found in the third chapter: De defectibus circa Massam occu^
etibus, cap. 3.. 7. Si host a consecrata dispareat v^^ casie aliquo, ut venlo,
aut miraculo, velab liquo a^^mali accepta, and acqueat repe^eri, tunc alterra
consecretur ab ^o loco incipiendo, Qu^ pridie, etc.
If the consecrated host vanish away by some accident, as if it be carried
away with the wind or by some miracle: or eaten up by some beast, and cannot
be found, then let another be consecrated, beginning again about the place of
the Mass, Qui pridie, etc. And in the tenth chapter: Cap. 10. Si musca vel
aranea ceciderit in calicem, and non fuerit Sacerdoti nausea, nee ullum
periculum ^^meat, sumat cum sangu^ne.
If a Fly or Spider fall into the chalice, and that the Priests Stomach rise
not against, and fear not any danger thereby, let him swallow the Fly or
Spider with the blood. And in the same Chapter: Cap. 10. 11. Si in hieme
congelat^^ sanguis in calice, involvatur calix pannis calefact^s.
If in winter the blood do freeze in the chalice, let the chalice be wrapped
up in ho^ clothes. Note these words, If the blood do freeze. Whilst Christ is
full of glory in heaven, they thaw him here upon earth. Let them tell us what
body or what substance is frozen in the chalice: For all Ice is a body.

But above all is to be noted, that which is found in the same Chapter: Cap.
10.. 14. Si Sacerdos evomat Eucharistiam, si species integrae appareant,
reverenter sumantur, nisi nausea siat. Tunc enim species consecratae caute
separentur, and in loto sacro reponantur.
If the Priest vomit up the Eucharist, and that the species appear whole, they
must be chewd again with reverence: unless the stomach should loath them. For
then the consecrated species must be carefully severed, and put into a sacred
place, and after that be cast into the reliquary or shrine wherein relics are
kept.

Pope Innocent the third in the fourth Book of the Mysteries of the Mass,
Chapter 16, moves a very important question. He asks that if a flux or
looseness takes a Priest that has nothing in his stomach but consecrated
hosts, what is the matter that comes out of his body? Of which difficulty the
Pope rids himself wisely, saying with the Apostle: Be not wiser than it
behooveth, but be wise unto sobriety.

By these things it appears that God, stirred up with anger against men that
have rejected his word, has stricken them with giddines. For who would ever
have thought that Christian men would have come to that point as to worship a
God which may be stolen, or carried away with the wind, so that one may say
God is lost. A God that may be gnawed by mice, and devoured by brute beasts. A
God that is wrapped in the midst of vomiting and spuing, and that must be
eaten and chewed again. A God who being fallen down cannot rise up again: Of
whom their Doctors Vasquez in 3 partem Thamae Tomo 3. ^^sp. 191. cap. 3. Neque
agere* neque pati po^est corpus Christi prout est in hoc Sacramento, corpo^ea
action neque passione.
say, that under the host he cannot open his eyes, nor stir his hands: and
that he is neither lieing, sitting, nor standing.

Our Adversaries do answer that when Mice have gnawed or carried away the
consecrated host, or that a beast has devoured it, Christ suffers no pain
nor hurt thereby. But they cannot deny but that Christ there by is exposed to
laughter, and suffers a greater ignominy than that of the Cross. To be eaten
by beasts and vomited up, and wrapped among vomiting and spuing, is a thing
more shameful than to be crucified. The Turks and Pagans will say, Is that the
God of the Christians that could not defend himself against Mice, and which is
devoured by Dogs? Certain it is, that God would never make the glorious body of
his Son to be subject to so many ignominies, without it were very beneficial
and useful unto the Church. And yet our Adversaries cannot tell us what good
it does to our Salvation that Christ should be thus carried away by a mouse, or
devoured by brute beasts.

Cardinal Tolet the Jesuit, in the second Book of the Institution of Priests,
chapter 25. says, Potest consecrare Sacerdos multos cophinos panis and vini
dolium.
The Priests can consecrate many baskets of bread, and a Tun of wine. If he
can consecrate one Tun, he may also consecrate two, yea ten or twenty, and
so may turn into blood all the Wine of a Market.

Whereupon it is necessary to know that the Church of Rome holds, that by
conferring of the order of Priesthood, an Indelible character is engraven into
the Soul of the Priest, So that the Pope himself cannot blot it out: And that
a Priest degraded for Heresy, or other crime, may consecrate and
transubstantiate bread into flesh, and wine into blood, by virtue of that
character remaining in him, though the function of his office be interdicted
unto him. By that means, a Priest that has forsaken the Roman Religion, yea a
Priest Vasquez Tomo Ill. in 3. parte^ Thomae Disp. 171. Cap. 3. Cum constet
Sacerdo^bus co^missam fuisse potestatem consecrandi, ita ut licet consecrare
velit in malum usum, nempe pro veneficijs and incantationibus, consceratio
little effectum haberet.
Sorcerer and Magician, may transubstantiate whole tuns of wine into blood, and
make Christ's blood to be carried up and down in pints and bottles over all the
taverns and tippling houses of a town: which is truly to make Christ the sport
of Magicians and drunkards, and expose him to great ignominy.

By the same doctrine Christ is in the power of Priests, who make him, and pin
him up, and walk him, and may if they will, cast him into the fire: As Gabriel
Biel a famous Doctor says, in the first Lesson upon the Canon of the Mass:
Biel Lect. 1. in Canonem Missae. Super utrumque corpus Christi Sacerdos
insignes habet potesiates.
The Priest has great power over the one and the other body of Christ, that is
to say, over the Church, and over the consecrated host. Whereupon he adds:
Quis hujus rei ^nd^t similia? Qui creavit me (si fas est dicere) dedit mihi
creare se. E^ qui creavit me, creatur mediante me.
Who ever saw things like unto this? He that has created me (if I may say so)
has given me to create him; And he that has created me without me, is
created by my means. Thus Priests do create Christ in the Mass, and make
Christ who is made already: As if one should beget a man already born.

CHAP. VII. That the very words of the Mass are contrary to Transubstantiation.
IN the midst of this alteration of the Lords Institution, God has permitted
that in the Mass some clauses should remain, which manifestly condemn the
Transubstantiation. For a great part of the Canon of the Mass are prayers,
which have been added when they did not yet believe the Transubstantiation. As
when the Priest, having before him the consecrated host, says, Osserimus
praeclarae ^uae Majestati de tuis domis and datis hostiam puram.
We offer to thine excellent Majesty of thy gifts and presents a pure host.
By these gifts, they understand at this day Christ himself. Surely, never a
man in his right sense called Christ gifts and presents in the plural: But
that agrees very well with the bread and wine.

The Priest goes on, saying, Supra quae propitio a^ sereno vuliu respicere
digneris, and accepta habere, sicut accepta habere d gnatus es munera pueri tui
justi Abel.
Upon which things vouchsafe to look with a cheerful eye. Is it not a jest
to call Christ these things? and for a full measure of abuse, to ask of God
that he may look upon Christ with a gracious eye: as if Christ had need of our
recommendation?

Moreover, the Priest demands of God afterward, that he would be pleased to
have these gifts and presents as acceptable, as he had acceptable the presents
of Abel. That is to say, that Christ may be as acceptable unto God, as the
beasts sacrificed by Abel. This prayer is good being said upon the bread and
the wine, but being said upon Christ, it is altogether blasphemous.

Chiefly, this is evident, in that the Priest looking upon the consecrated
host and the chalice, says, that Per Christum Dominum nostrum, per quem haec
omnia, Domine, semper bona creas, sanctificas, vivificas, henedicis.
by Christ our Lord, God creates always for us these good things, sanctifies
them, and vivifies them. Can Christ be called these good things? Does God
create and vivifie Christ always? And since God creates these things through
Jesus Christ, as the Mass says, it is certain these things are not Christ.
But all that agrees very well with the bread and wine.

We must not omit that Christ giveing the bread to his Disciples, said simply,
Take, Eat,: But in the Canon of the Mass there is, Accipite and manducate ex
hoc omnes: Take and eat all of it. Whosoever added these words E X HOC, lie
did not believe that in the Eucharist the Lords body was really eaten by the
mouth of the body. For to eat of that, is to eat a part thereof, and not all.
Which cannot be said of Christ's natural body.

CHAP. VIII. Recrimination of our Adversaries.
THe Prophet Elisha accused the Israelites of Idolatry, and of forsaking Gods
Covenant. They out of revenge called him bald-pate, which was a reproach
nothing belonging to the doctrine. We stand upon the like terms with our
Adversaries. We accuse the Roman Church to have brough in Idolatry in the
Mass, worshipping of the Sacrament, and a Sacrifice of Christ's body, which
Christ has not instituted: To have taken away from the people the half of the
Sacrament: To have changed the nature of the Sacrament yea of Christ himself:
which are thing of importance, and altogether essential to the Eucharist and
to Christian Religion. But they, out of recrimination, tell us, that we have
likewise changed many things in the Lords Institutution. For (say they) ye
solemniz^ the Supper in the morning: but Christ instituted it after Supper. Ye
celebrate it in a Temple: but Christ did celebrate it in an upper Chamber. Ye
receive women to the Communion: But when Christ instituted the Eucharist, there
were none but men. Things, whereof the two first are indifferent, and all three
not only are not of the essence of that Sacrament, but even make no part of
that action.

To this objection, Christ affords us an answer. For he said, Do this in
remembrance of me. He said not Do this in such a place, nor at such an
hour, nor with such a Sex or such persons: But he said, Do this, commanding
us to do as he has done, and to imitate his action. Christ did not exclude
women. If any had been there present, worthy to be partakers of the holy
Supper, he would not have rejected them.

CHAP. IX. Causes why the Pope admits not of any alteration in the Mass,
and will not conform himself to the Lords Institution.
THough the abuse be so apparent, yet the Church of Rome and the Pope will not
let go their hold, and suffer any change or alteration to be made in the
Mass. The cause of that is easy to be known. For if the Church of Rome
should yield to the least alteration, it would overthrow the three Maxims that
are the basis whereon all Popery is grounded, whereof the first is, that the
Church of Rome cannot err: the second, that the Pope and Church of Rome are
not subject to the holy Scripture, and have greater authority than the holy
Scripture: the third, that the Pope and Church of Rome have power to change
Gods Commandemens, and make new Articles of Faith. All which things are seen
not one by practice, in that all the doctrine (...) the Roman Church is
contrary to the holy Scripture, but also by example of Popish Councels, and
open profe^sion of the principal Doctors of tha^ Church: whereof I will
allege so^^ places in the next chapter.

CHAP. X. Places wherein the Doctors and Councels of the Roman Church maintain,
that the Pope and the Church of Rome are not subject to the Scripture, and have
greater authority than the Scripture, an^ may make void and abolish the
Commandments of God.
THe Romish Decree and its Glosse^ are all stuffed with this brave maxim, Can.
Lect. Did. 34. in Gloss. Papa dispensat contra Apostolum. Innec. III.
D^creta^^le Concessione Prae^end. Tu. 8. c p. Propos^^t. Secundum plenitudine^
potestatis de jure possumus supra jus dispensare. El thy Glossa, Nam contra
Apostolum dispensat. Ite^ contra vetus Testamentum. El Glossa Canonis sut
quidam, Cause. 25. quaest. 1. Papa dispensat in Evangelio interpreta^do ipsum.
that the Pope may dispense against the Apostle, and against the Old Testament,
and may dispense with the Law, as being above the Law: And that he may dispense
against the Gospel in giving interpretation to it.

In the first book of the Decretals of Gregory the 9. Title 7. at the Chapter
Quanto personam, the Pope Innocent the third says, that the Pope, on earth,
holds not the place of a mere man, but of a very God. And thereupon the
Gloss of the Doctors says: The Pope of nothing can make something: And a
sentence that is of no value, he can make it to be some thing: Because in the
thing that he wills, his will stands him in stead of reason: And no man
says to him, Wherefore do thou do that? For he may dispense above the Law,
and make of injustice Justice.

Thomas Aquinas, whom the Pope has Sainted, says: Thom. 2.2 quaest. 1. art.
10. Ad solam authoritatem summi Pontificis pertinet nova editio Symboli.
A new edition of a Creed, belongs solely to the Popes authority. The same is
defined by the Council of Florence in the last Session, to wit, that the Pope
may add to the Creed. That is one of the crimes for which Luther was
anathematised by Pope Leo the tenth, viz. because he had taught, Bulla exurge
Leonis X. subjecta Concilio Lateranensi, inter errores Luther^ h^oresertur.
Certum est in manu Ecclesiae aut Papae prorsus no^ esse statuere articulos
sidei.
That it is not in the power of the Pope and of the Roman Church, to establish
any Articles of faith: as is to be seen in the Bull added to the last Council
of Lateran.

The Cardinal du Perron in his book against the King of Great Britain has a
chapter 2 Book, Observat. 3 Cap. 3.
whose title is such Of the Churches authority, in changing (...) things
contained in the Scriptures.

Vasquez the Jesuit in the third To^^ upon the third part of Thomas, Disput^
216. speaking of this Commandemen^ of the Lord, Drink ye all of it, says
Vasquez (...) 3. T^om. Tomo. 3. Disput. 216 number. 60. Licet concederemus hoc
suisse Apostoloru^ praeceptum, nihilominus Ecclesia and su^mus Pontifex
potuerunt illud justis de cansis abrogare, etc.
Though even we should grant that the was a Commandment of the Apostles yet
the Church and the sovereign Bish^^ might abolish it upon good grounds. (...)
the Apostles power to make Laws, was n^^ greater than the power of the Church
an^ of the Pope.

Salmeron the Jesuit in the second Prolegom. Non miru^ si Scriptura Ecclesiae
dei quae spiriti^ habet, subijcitur.
It is no wonder if the Scripture be subject to the Church, which has the
Spirit. The same man in the ninth Tome and 13 Treatise, * disputing of the
change and alteration in the form of the Sacrament, speaks thus: We are no
wa^ tied to imitate Christ in all things,. Ad illud. Nequaqua^ astr^ng^mur in
omnibus Christum, imitari, n^si in honis moribus.
except in good manners. By that, he teachet^ we are not bound to imitate
Christ in the Sacraments, nor in the communion under one kind, nor in that he
celebrated the holy Supper in a known tongue, nor in the doctrine of Pargatory,
not In the Sacrifice of the Mass, etc. For these things concern not manners.

The same, in the first Prolegom. Ecclesiae authoritas antiquior and dignior
authoritate Scripturae.
The Churches authority is more ancient and more worthy, than the authority of
the Scriptures. That, truly, is to say that men are above God. For it is God
that speaks in the holy Scriptures. Can a man say without impiety that the
Church of Israel was above the Law, which God had written in two tables? Are
Subjects above the Laws? Is not the Pope subject to the Law of God?

The same Jesuit says, that the Salm. Tomo XIII. part 3. Disp. 6. Esl ergo.
Doctrina fidei admittit additionem in essent ialibus.
Christian Religion admits still of some additions in things essential.
Whence follows that Christian Religion is not yet perfect, since that
essential Articles may be added thereunto.

John Almain, a Sorbonist, in his Book of the Ecclesiastical and Temporal
power, chapter 12. Papa potest d^spensare in illis quae sunt lege Dei prohibita.
The Pope may dispense in things that are forbidden by Gods Law: and alleadges
thereupon Panormitanus and Angelus.

Andradius in the second Book of the Defense of the Tridentine Faith: Romanos
Pontifices multa desini^ndo quae ante latit^bant, symbolum fidei augere
consuev^sse.
The Roman Bishops in defining many things that were bidden before, are
accustomed to enlarge the Creed. And in the same place: Liquet minime cos
errasse qui dicunt Romans Pontifices posse nonnunquam in legibus dispensare a
Paulo and a quatuor primis Concilijs.
It appears those haven^ erred which say that the Roman Bishop may some times
dispense from obeying the Laws of the Apostle Saint Paul and the four first
Councels. Item: Minime vero majores nostri relig one and pietate excellentes
Apostolori^ haec and quam plurim ^alia decret a resigere in animum induxissent,
nifi intell^xissent, etc.
Our Ances^ers, excellent men in Piety, have canceled and abrogated many of the
Apostle Decrees.

Cardinal Bellarmin in the fourth Book de Pontif. chapter 5. If the Pep^^
should err in commanding the vices, an forb^dding virtues, the Church were
bou^^ to believe that vices be good, and virtues bad, unless she would sin
against her own conscience.

The same Cardinal in the 31 chapter against Barklay, In a good sense Christ
gave to Peter (that is to say to the Pope) the power to do that that which is
sin be not sin, and that which is no^ sin to be sin.

The Romish Decree in the fortieth Distinction, Canon Si Papa, has these
words: Si Papa suae and fraternae salutis n^gligens deprehenditur, etc.
nihilominus innumer abiles pes pulos caterva^^m secum ducit prano mancipio
gehennoe (...) ipso plagis multis in aeternum vapulaturos. Hujus culpa ^stic
redarguere praesu^^t murtalium nullus, quia cuncto^ ^pse judicaturus a nemiae
est judicandus, nisi sit a sid^ a^^^ius.
If the Pope being careless of his own Salvation and of the Salvation of his
brethren, leads by troops with him, first slave of hell fire, innumerable
peoples to be tormented with him with many plagues eternally, none dares
reprove him of his faults. Because that he that is to be Judge of all men, is
to be judged of none: Except he do swerve from the Faith.

Stapleton an English Doctor, in the second Book of the authority of the
Scripture, chapter 11. Dixi and dico non ta^ ipsius fidei regulam in se esse
Scripturam, qua^ ipsarum Scripturarum regula^ esse sidem Ecclesiae.
I have said, and say still, that the Church is the rule of the Scripture. By
this reckoning, Sinners shall rule God, and shall be masters of his word.

Lindan in the Index of the Chapters of the fifth Book of his Panoplia: The
Church by the will of God is not tied to the Scriptures. For he, and the rest
with him, will have the Church bound to the Tradition of the Church, that is to
say to the Laws which she gives to her self. Now by the Church they
understand always the Roman Church, and by the Roman Church the Pope.

Costerus the Jesuit in his Enchiridion, Chapter 1. calls the Tradition of
the Roman Church a second kind of Scripture, and says, that Hujus Scripturae
praestant^a multis partibus superat Scripturas quas nobis in membranis
Apostol^re l^querunt.
the excellency of this Scripture goes fam^ beyoud the Scriptures which the
Apostles left unto us written in parchements.

Gregory de Valentia the Jesuit, it the fourth Book of his Analysis, chapter
2. Scriptura sacram non esse judicem omnium controversiarum sidei probatur.
The Scripture is not the Judge if controversies. And in the third Chapter.
Probatur secundo Scripturam non esse sufficientem sideiregulam.
The Scripture is no sufficient rule of Faith. And in the fourth Chapter.
Scripturam ar^^no De^ judicio esse velut lapidem ossensionis, and in
tentationem pedibus insipientium, ut quive lint ea sola niti, sa^^^lime
impingant and errent.
The Scripture by the secret judgment of God, is (...) stumbling block, and a
temptation to the fe^^ of fools, to the end that those which will rely upon it
alone, may easily stumble and swerve from the way. Wherefore after he has
withdrawn us from the holy Scriptures, in the seventh Book he s^nds us back to
the Pope, saying, Pont^fea Romanus ipse est in quo authoritas illa residot quae
in Ecclesia extal adjudicandum de omnibus omnino controversi^s.
The Roman Bishop is he in whom resideth that authority of judging wholly of
all the controversies of Faith. According as Andradius says in the first book
of the Defense of the Tridentin Faith, Our faith is contained and sub sisteth
by the Popes faith, and all men's Salvation depends on his authority.

The same Jesuit in his first book of the Sacrifice of the Mass, Chapter
forty, finding no proofs in the Scriptures whereon to ground the Sacrifice of
the Mass, says, that Si maxim hic cultus non esse^ institutus a Deo,
concluditamen abastis non possit alum non esse legit imum, cumid ad bon tatem
cultus and sacrificij minime requiratur.
If this worship or Service were not instituted of God: Yet these men could not
draw from thence this conclusion, that it is not lawful. For that ( viz. to be
instituted by God) is in no wise required for to make a worship or a Sacrifice
to be good. And in his second book: At ego supra and alias saepius ostendi
praeceptum Dernon requir^ ad honitatem cul^us.
Here above and often elsewhere I have showed, that for the goodness of a
worship or service, Gods commandemem is not required.

For these causes, in the fourth Tome of his Commentaries, he affirms that
Greg. de Val. Tomo IV. D^sp. 6. qu. 8. Punct. 5.. 10. Et certe quaedam
posterioribus temporibus rectius instituta esse, quam ^^tio se haberent.
there are some things which in the latter times are better ordained than they
were at the beginning. For he supposes that the Church now is better
instructed than it was in the Apostles time.

Of this power which the Roman Church takes upon her self, to change,
cancel, and make void the commandments of the Lord, we have a remarkable
example in the Council of Constance, kept in the year 1416. which is the
first Council that took away the Cup from the people. That Council
acknowledges in the 13 Session, that Christ instituted the Eucharist under
both kinds, and that in the Primitive Church the people received the Cup. Yet
withal it dare say, Cum in nonnull is mundi partibus quidam temerarie asserere
praesum^nt populum Christia number debere Sacramentum Eucharistie sub utraqu panis
and v^ni spec^e suscipere. ^^an^ concupis^entia quam aliquando Apostolus
piccatum app^llat, s^n^^a Sy (...) Cathal (...) ^^^peccatum appellari quod
(...) and prop^^^ (...) p^c^^^u^^ sit.
that in some parts of the World some dare affirm rashly, that the Christian
people ought to take the Eucharist under both kinds: as if it were a temerity
to follow Christ's example. And ordaining that henceforth the people shall
receive the species of the bread only, will have this custom to be held as a
Law, which it is not lawful to reprove or change. Finally this Council
concludes, that those which obstinately affirm the contrary, ^ught to be
d^iven out as Heretics, and grievously punished.

With the like audacity the Council of Trent in the 5 Session b^ speaking of
the concupiseence forbidden in Gods Law, which Saint Paul in the seventh
Chapter to the Romans calls sin, declares and defines that concupiscence
is no sin in those that are regenerate, that is to say baptized: and that
Saint Paul spoke neither truly nor properly. Whence will follow that a baptized
person may without sin cover his neighbors wife: but in an unbaptised person
it is a sin.

Now, let every unpartiall Reader judge, with what reason our Adversaries call
our Religion a new Religion, seeing they do declare themselves that they may
change the Commandments of God, add to the Creed, and make a new Religion, and
that in the Mass they are not tied to the Lords Institution.

CHAP. XI. That our Exposition of these words This is my body, is conformable
to the Scripture and to the nature of Sacraments, and approved by the Ancient
Fathers, and confirmed by our Adversaries.
THe interpretation that we give of these words, This is my body, is the same
which Christ himself gives in the same place, viz. that it is his
commemoration. And the same which Saint Paul gives in the 10 chapter of the
first to the Corinthians. The bread which we break, is the communion of the
body of Christ. The Sacrament being a figure, there is nothing more sit than to
make use of a figure, drawn from the nature of the action, by which the name
of the thing siguified, is given to the sign. Even as in the seventeenth of
Genesis the Sacrament of Circumcision is called the Covenant of God, (...) in
17. Genis. Pactum hoc loco sumitur pro signo pacti. Em^a. Sa, Prim^ed^tio, e^^
Notis, Pactum id est s^num pacti.
because it was the sign and remembrance of it. So in the twelfth of Exodus,
the Sacrament of the Pascall Lamb, is called the Passe-over, because it was a
memorial of the Passover of the Augell sparing the houses of the Israclites.

And Saint Paul 1. Corinthians. 10. speaking of the Rock which gusht out waters in
the Wilderness, says that this Rock was Christ, because it was the sigure of
Christ. As Austin says in the Eighteenth Book of the City of God, Chapter 48.
D^^tum (...) A^^s^^^^, p^^ra Ga^ Christus, quia (...) ^lla (...) quaho^ d^^^^m
est, (...) ^^^abat (...).
the Apostle says, the Rock was Christ, because that Rock did signisie
Christ. And in the 57 question upon the Leviticus: The thing which signifies,
is wont to bear the name of the thing signified, as it is written, Seven ears
of corn are seven years, and seven kine are seven years, and many such like
things. Hine est quod dictu^ est Petra crat Christus. Non enim dixit, petra
signisicabat Christum, sedtanqu^^ hoc esse^* quod utique per substantiam non
hoc erat, sed per sign^ficationem.
Thence comes what is said, that the Rock was Christ. he did not say the Rock
signifies Christ, but as if it were that which it was not in substance, but
only by signification. Pope Innocent the third, in the fourth Book of the
Mysteries of the Mass, chapter 7. says, Petra erat Christus, id est,
significabat Christum. The Rock was Christ, that is to say, did signify
Christ. And Aquinas in the Exposition of this Epistle: Petra erat Christus, non
per substantiu^, sed per sig nificatione.
The Rock was Christ, not in substance, but by signification. Lombardus in his
Commentary upon this Chapter, B bebant de petra spirituali, s^^^et quae
Christum sign sic^^ bat.
They did drink of the Rock which signified Christ. Which thing is confirmed by
that word Was. For Bellarmin that does invert these words, and translateth
Christ was the Rock, seems to imply that Christ was then the Rock, but is not
now.

And the same Apostle to the Romans, Chapter 6.4. says, We are buried in
Christ's death by Baptism, because Baptisine signifies to us, that our sins
are as buried with Christ, and that we are to be made conformable to (...)
death.

And without extending my self further upon this: Christ giving the Cur said,
This Cup is the New Testament i^ my blood. Wherein there is two figures as
Salmeron the Jesuit says truly Salm. Tomo IX. Tra. XV. page 98. and 99.
Subest in his verhis duplex Motonymia: prima qua contmens ponitur pro contento,
id est poculum sive calix pro vino, co quod vinum in ipso continetur. Altera
est qua contentum in poctelo, id est sanguis sub specie vin, soedus vel
Testamentum diatur Novum, cum sit ejus symbolum propter s^^cies.
There is (says he) a double Metonymie, by which the continent is put for the
thing contained, that is to say, the Cup for the wine contained therein: the
other, that that which is contained in the Chalice, i^^ called the Covenant or
Testament, for that it is the symbol or sign of it because of the species.
And a little after. Idem ibidem page 100 Dicitur sanguis Novum Test^mentum
sicut circumcisio dicitur foedus, quia illud foedus representar.
The blood i^ called the New Testament, as the Circumcision is called the
Covenant, because it represents that Covenant. And Thomas Aquinas in his
Commentary upon the eleventh chapter of the first to the Corinthians: Hic calix
est N. T. in meo sanguint, quasi dicat, Per id quod in b^c^a^^ce conti^^ur,
comm^^^ ratur N. T. etc.
This Cup is the New Testament in my blood, as if be did say, By that which is
contained in this cup, is made a commemoration of the New Testament, which was
confirmed by Christ's blood. And Emanuel Sa the Jesuit, in the first edition of
his notes upon the first to the Corinthians, Chapter 11. says that the word IS
implies as much as contains or signifies.

This manner of speaking is ordinary, to say a mourning suite, because it is a
sign of mourning, and a celestial Sphere, for the figure of a heavenly
Sphere: And in showing of Mappes, to say This is France, and that is Spain.
And to be lodged at the Eagle, or at the Swan, for the sign of the Eagle or of
the Swan. So does Saint Austin say in the fifty seventh question upon
Leviticus, The thing which signifies, is wont to be called by the name of the
thing signified. And Theodoret in the first Dialogue, speaking of these words
This is my body, says, that the Lord gave unto the sign the name of his body.
And Tertullian in his fourth Book against Macion, chapter 40. He made it to be
his body, saying, This is my body, that is to say the sigure of my body. Saint
Austin in the 23 Epistle to Bonis^ce, is very express: If Sacraments had not
some resemblance of the things whereof they be Sacraments, they would be no
Sacraments. But because of this resemblance, they take very often the name of
the things themselves. Even then as the Sacrament of Christ's body, is in a
manne^ the body of Christ: so the Sacrament of faith, to wit Baptism, is
faith. Note that he says that the Sacrament of Christ's body is the body of
Christ, after the same manner as Baptism is faith.

Therefore our Adversaries say very ignorantly, that figures elsewhere are
receiveable; but in the Articles of faith and institution of a Sacrament,
figures are no way convenient or agreeable. For we have produced many examples
of figures in the institution of Sacraments: and they themselves acknowledge
two figures in these words, This Cup is the New Testament. And touching the
Articles of faith, the Creed says that Christ sits at the right hand of
God, which is a figurative kind of speech; for God has no right hand. The wh
le Gospel is comprised under th^se words, Jesus is the Lamb of G d: and all
Popery is grounded upon these word, Upon this Rock will ^^uild my Church, and I
will give thee the keeps of the kingdom of heaven, which he all figurative
words.

And it is to be observed that when Christ instituted this holy Sacrament, he
spoke in the Jewish language, which is a dialect of the Syrian tongue, saying
(...) pro cadavere. 1. Sam. 17.46. Amos. 6.3. Es. 14.19. 2. Paral. 20.24. Genesis
15.11 Number. 19.29.
H^n in pagri, that is to say, This my dead body, supplying the word IS, after
the manner of the Hebrews and Syrians. He did then say to his Disciples, that
he gave them his dead body. Which could not be true but in taking it
figuratively: For the body of Christ was not dead when he did institute this
Sacrament. But it is very true in the sense that we take it, to wit, that the
bread which he did break, and give to his Disciples, was the figure or
remembrance of his body, dead for us. For we have showed already, that in the
holy Supper Christ's body is presented to our faith, not as glorious and
spiritual, but as broken, and dying, and dead for us. This is confirmed in
that in the Evangelists, this word (...), which signifies body, is in most
places taken for a dead body: As in the 17 of Saint Luke Verse 37. (...) etc.
Wheresoever the body is, thither will the Engles be g^thered together. (...).
And M^tthew. 27.52. * Many bodies of Saints which slept, arose. And Mark 14.8.
(...), to anoint the body. For the proper word in Greek for to signify a dead
body, is (...). It Is true that in the Syriack Testament, the word Peger is taken
sometimes for a living body: But it is not credible that Christ took this word
in an other sense than it is taken in the Old Testament, where it signifies
always a dead body.

Neither is it to be omitted that Saint Paul calls oftentimes the Church Christ's
body, Ephesians. 1.23. and Chapter. 5.23. If then from these words, This is my
body, they will infer that the bread is transubstantiated into Christ's body:
by the like reason when the Scripture says that the Church is the body of
Christ, it may be inferred that the Church is transubstantiated into Christ's
body.

CHAP. XII. That our Adversaries, to avoid a clear and natural figure, forge
a multitude of harsh and unusuaall ones, and speak but in figurative terms.
And of Berengarius his confession.
Our Adversaries, who make a show to be enemies to Figures, forge nevertheless
a great number of absurd and violent figures, and turn all into figures.

When Christ says This is my body, by This, they understand an individuum
Vagum, or that which is under these species; without determining any thing.
Others interpret the word IS, by shall be or shall become. For they say that
the Transubstantiation is not made or effected, till the words be pronounced.

When the Evangelists say that the Lord gave bread, by this word bread, they
understand flesh. And we have heard them confess that these word This cup is
the New Testament in my bloe^ are figurative.

By their doctrine, which puts (...) body into the cup, Christ giving (...)
cup, might have said This is my body and had spoken truly, if we belee^ them.

Christ called that which he dran^ in the Eucharist, the fruit of the Vi^^ But
our Adversaries by the fruit (...) the Vine, will have the blood to be
understood.

By these words Do this, they understand Sacrifice me; but the words
following, Do this in remembrance of (...) do refute that interpretation. For
it (...) impossible to Sacrifice Christ in remembrance of Christ.

We shall see anon that when i^ the 6 of Saint John, Verse 53. Christ says,
Except ye drink my blood, ye ha^^ no life in you: our adversaries, least
th^^ should be accused of taking the li^^ from the Lay people, in depriving
the^ of the cup, by the word drinking, they understand eating. And that when
Christ says, I leave the World, and am (...) more in the world, they add this
tail to it, to wit, by my visible presence.

We have seen before, that the Apostle says four several times, that in the
Lords Supper, we break bread and eat bread. To shun the force of these words,
they wrest them into figures, saying that it is not bread that we eat: But
that figuratively Christ's body is called bread, because it seems to be so.
Which thing they know to be false: for Christ's body never seemed to be bread.
Item they say that it is called bread, because it was bread before the
consecration. Which also is false. For the Lords body was never bread. To such
figures, Rhethorick affords no name.

They bring indeed for example, Moses Rod, which is still called a rod after it
was turned into a Serpent: and the water of the wedding of Cana, John 2.
which is still called water after it was turned into wine. Which are examples
making against them. For of that rod it is expressly said, that it was turned
into a Serpent, Exodus 4.3. And of that water it is said in express terms that
it was turned into wine, John 2.9. But of the bread of the holy Supper, it is
not said that it was converted into flesh. Of this Serpent one might have truly
said that it was once a rod: and of this wine, that it was once water, because
it was the same matter clothed with another form. But of Christ's body it
cannot be said truly that ever it was bread. The matter or substance of the
body of Christ, is not the matter of the bread. For Christ's body is not made of
bread, and was never bread.

Others say, that the Apostle says not, When ye eat bread, but when ye eat
of this bread, understanding by the pronoune This, a spiritual and heavenly
bread. But they consider not that the Apostle in the first to the Corinthians,
Chapter 10, says not THIS BREAD: but the bread that we break. And Saint Luke
in the 20 of the Acts, 7 Verse. The Disciples came together to break bread.
There, their Philosophy fayles them. They must also learn that when the
Scripture takes this word Bread in a spiritual sense, it is never opposed to
the cup: because that when the question is of a spiritual food, to eat and
to drink are but one and the same thing. But Saint Paul opposes this bread to
that cup, saying, Let every man eat of this bread, and drink of this ^up.

That if any one consider exactly all the terms which our Adversaries use in
this matter, he shall perceive that they be unintelligible figures. They say
that the Priest breaks the host, and that this host is the body of Christ,
which nevertheless cannot be broken. They say they lift up God, but God cannot
be lifted up. They say the consecrated host is round: And that Christ's body is
in the consecrated host. Whence will follow in good Logic, that the body of
Christ is round. Which, nevertheless, they do not believe. They grant both
propositions, and deny the conclusion. Which is against common sense.

And when they speak of drinking the cup, by drinking, they understand a
swallowing down of flesh and bones, and the Soul of Christ with his Divinity.
This confession of Berengarius is to be found in the 2 Distinction of the
Consecration at the Cano^. Ego Berengarius.


The Roman Council under Nieholas the second, prescribed to Berengarius a
form of abjuration of his doctrine, in the most exquisite and formal terms
that ever they could devise. These terms are, that he protests to stand and
keep himself close to the doctrine of the Pope and Church of Rome, to wit,
that the bread and the wine which are upon the Altar, are not only the
Sacrament but also the very body and blood of Christ. Words that must be taken
in a quite contrary sense: For the Church of Rome believes not that the bread
is the true body of Christ. Item they make him say that Christ's body is
sensibly handled by the Priest, and is broken and crushed with the teeth of
the faithful. But the Doctors Gloss notes in the margent these words.
Except thou understandst aright Berengarius his words, thou shall fall into a
greater herisie than Berengarius did. It is the property of untruth, to
entangle it self with figures, and not to understand it self.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Ascension of the Lord and of his absence: and of that our
Adversaries say, that in the Sacrament he is Sacrmentally present.
ABove all things the Glosses and figures of our Adversaries are intolerable,
when as they wrest the places of Scripture wherein mention is made of Christ's
Ascension and of his departure out of this world.

The Lord in the 12 Chapter of Saint John, 8 Verse, says, The poor ye have
always, but me ye have not always. And in the 14 Chapter, 3 Verse. If I go,
I will come again, speaking of his return at the day of judgment. And in the
chapter 17.10. speaking of his Ascension near at hand, as if it were past, he
says, Now I am no more in the World. Saint Peter in the third Chapter of the
Acts of the Apostles, says, Heaven must contain him, until the times of the
restitution of all things, which is the day of judgment.

All these words are as many lies, if we believe the Transubstantiation. For in
these places Christ says that he has left the world, and is no more in the
world, and that we shall not have him always. But if we believe the
Transubstantiation, we must say Christ has not left the world, but is much
more present than he was before his ascension. For then he was but in one place
at once upon earth, but now they will have him to be present upon a million of
Altars, in boxes, and in bellies.

And for to conclude that place of Saint Peter which says, that Heaven must
contain him until the day of restitution: the Latin version of the Roman
Church has put, Heaven must receive him, as if when S. Peter said these words,
Christ was not yet ascended. And it is false that heaven does receive Christ
continually until the day of Judgment. The Lovain Doctors, which have
translated the Bible into French, have acknowledged the same: wherefore they
have turned faithfully, Who^ heaven must contain. And Emanud S^ the Jesuit, in
his Notes upon this place, Recipere, id est, receptum continere. To receive,
that is to say, to contain him after he be received. Christ then must be
contained in heaven, and not be still upon earth.

They rid themselves as ill out of the other places. They say, that when Christ
says, He leaves the world and is no more in the world, it must be understood
concerning his visible presence. So they make without word of God, 2 sorts of
Christ's presence, the one visible, the other invisible. And make Christ say, I
go away, but I will remain invisibly: I leave you, but my body shall be
always with you. Now in conscience, could a man that had Christ's body and
soul in his mouth, say that Christ is not present, under color that he sees
him not? By the same reason one may say, that a man has no soul, because it
is invisible, and that a man has left the town, when he lies hid in it.

What more? Christ himself in the 13. of Saint Mark, 21. verse, warnes us
that there will come a time in which they shall say unto us, Lo, here is
Christ, or lo he is there: and forbids us to believe it. And in the 24.
chapter of Saint Matthew, he adds: If any man shall say unto you, he is in
the closets or in the cup-boards, (for the Greek word (...), signifies that)
believe it not. Truly he speaks evidently of the places wherein they shall
say that Christ is hidden. And speaks in the plural (...), in closets, as of
a Christ which shall be thought to be in several places at once.

But Christ refuteth plainly all these shifts and evasions of our Adversaries,
when as to comfort his Disciples, sorrowful for his departure, he promises
them to send them the Comforter, John 14.16.26. and chap. 15.26.
which is the Holy Ghost. According to the doctrine of the Church of Rome, he
should have said, I go away, but that shall not hinder me from being present
in your mouths, and in your stomachs, and I shall (...) more present unto you
than I am now. H^ says not a word of all that unto them but comforting them
for his departure he promises them his holy Spirit.

Saint Paul in the second to the Corinthians, chap. 5.8. says, We are willing
rather to be absent from the body, and to be present with the Lord. And to the
Philippians, chap. 1.23. My desire is to depart and to be with Christ. Had this
Apostle lost his wi^s? For according to the Popish doctrine he should have
said, I am already with Christ, I do carry him in my hands, I have him in my
stomach.

S. Austin upon that is very express, in his 50. Treatise upon S. John, where
he says: According to the Maj stie of the Lord, according to his unspeak ^^^e
and in^isi^^e grace is accomplished that which he said, I will be with you at
all times till the consummation of the world. But according to his flesh which
the world bath taken, and is he is horn of the Virgin, etc. he said, Ye shall
not have me always. And in the first Treatise upon the first of John, Ipsum
jam (...), sed side conting^re.
We can no more handle him with our hands, now that he sits in heaven, but
well may we touch him by faith. He speaks to the Priests of these times, who
brag to have Christ in their hands. And in the 78. Treatise upon S. John, A
quibus homo abscedebat, Deus non recedebat.
Christ was going away as being a man, and withdrew not himself as he is God,
And in the 30 Treatise, Corpus Domini^n quo resurrexit, in uno loco esse
oportet, veritas ejus ub^que dis^ fusa est.
The Lords body in which he is risen, must be in one place only, but his truth
is spread every where. There is in the Latin, in uno loco esse oportet, and
not, in uno loco esse potest, according to the new editions falsified.
Gratia^nus Did. 2. de Conse^^: C^n^prim. Iuo 2. part^ Decreti c 18. Lombard.
lib. 4. Sentent.
Gratian, Ivo Carmitensis, Lombard, Thomas, Gabriel Biel, and the old editions
of Saint Austin have oportet. Reason also requires it. For it would be
repugnant to common sense to say, that the body of Christ may be in one place:
as if one should say, that the Sun may be in one place, it were to say that
it may be in no place.

Cyril of Alexandria in his eleventh book upon Saint John, chap. 3. D^st. 10.
A. Thomas 3. part su^^mae qu. 75. art. 1. Gabr el Biel Lell. 39. in Canonem M
ss^. E^st abest corpore, Patri pro nobis apparens ac a dextris ejus sedens,
habitat tamen in Sanct is per Spiritum.
Though he be absent in body, appearing for us before his Father, and sitting
at his right hand, he dwells in his Saints through his Spirit. He supplyeth
the want of his corporal presence by giving his Spirit, and nor in keeping
himself hidden under the accidents of bread.

The Eutychian heretics spoke as our Adversaries do. For they said, th^^
Christ's body is present on earth, as well as in heaven, by an invisible
presence. Against whom, whither Vigil, or Gelasius Pope has written five
Books, in the first whereof he speaks thus: Vigil. l. 1. Dei silius secundum
humanitatem suam recessit a nobis. Secundum divinitate^ sua^ alt nobis, Ecce
sum vobiscum usque ad consummationem saeculi.
The Son of God according to his humanity, has left us, and withdrawn
himself from us. But according to his divinity he says unto us, I will be
with you till the consummation of the world. And in the 4 Book: Lib. 4. Quando
in terra fuit, non erat utique in coelo: Et nunc quia in coelo est, non est
utique in terra.
When Christ's flesh was upon earth, it was not in Heaven, and now that it is in
Heaven, it is not on earth. Even as Vigilius, saying that when Christ's flesh
was upon earth, it was not in heaven, understood it was not in heaven neither
visibly nor invisibly. So when he says, that now it is no more on earth, he
means it is not there, neither visibly nor invisibly. That if he meant or
understood that Christ's flesh is present unto us invisibly, then would he plead
the Eutychians cause, for that was their opinion.

To be short, the Apostle to the Ephesians, chap. 3.17. says, that Christ
dwells in our hearts by faith, and not in our stomachs in the midst of meat.

When we ask of them after what manner the body of Christ is present in the
Sacrament, they answer, that it is not present there circumscriptively, as wine
is enclosed in a tun or caske, nor definitively, as immateriall spirits: But
that it is Sacramentally present. This answer truly is ridiculous. For, to say
that Christ is in the Sacrament sacramentally present, is a thing as absurd as
to say that a man which is in a Temple, is there Templarily present, and he
that is in a Coach, is present in it Coacharily. Moreover, it is certain that
by this answer they come to be of our side. For they say themselves that this
word, Sacrament, signifies a sacred sign. Therefore to be present
sacramentally, signifies no other thing, but to be present significatively,
and by figure and representation.

CHAP. XIV. Confession of our Adversaries, acknowledging that
Transubstantiation is not grounded in the Scriptures. That the Primitive Church
did consecrate by the prayer, and not by these words, This is my body.
THe most learned of the Roman Church ground their Transubstantiation not upon
these words, This is my body, but upon the authority of the Church of Rome,
which, as they hold cannot err.

Scotus, which is termed the subtle Do^tor, upon the fourth of the Sentences
Did. 11. quest, 3. says: There is no place (...) be found in the Scripture,
that may wi hout the determination of the Church, compell^ man to believe the
Transubstantiation. Upon which place, Cardinal Bellarmine in his 3. book of
the Eucharist chap. 23. speaks thus: Secundo dicit non extare lo^u^ ullu^
Scripturae tam expressu^^, ut sine declara ^^ne Eccles^^ ^^^dent^^ coga^
Trasubstant ^^^ionem admitt^^^. Et id non est omat^^ improhahile. Nam et si
Scriptura quam (...) supra ad dux^^^, videatur nobis (...) ^^^ra, ut possi^^
(...) non prote^^^um^ tamen an (...) sit merito dubitar^ po^est, cum (...) n^s
doctissi^^ and acurat ^^^mi, qual^s impr^^^ Scotus (...), ^^^trarium sentiant.
Sc tus says that there is no place in the Scripture so express, as to
compel evidently without the declaration of the Church, to receive the
Transubstantiation. And that is not altogether improbable. For although the
Scripture that we have alleged, seem to us so plain that it may compel a
man not proud or insolent, yet nevertheless it may justly be doubted whether
it be so or no, seeing the most acute and learned men, such especially as
Scotus was, are of a contrary opinion. And in the same place he tells us, that
Scotus says, that Transubstantiation was not an article of faith before the
Council of Lateran, held Anno 1215.

For that cause Vasquez. the Jesuit upon the 3. part of Thomas, Disp: 180.
chap. 5. having represented the opinion of Scotus, who says, Scotus docet
potuisse servari veritatem verborum consecrationis, etiamsi in Eucharistia
maneret substantia panis and v ni.
that the truth of the words of consecration might have been preserved, though
the substance of the bread and wine had remained in the Eucharist, (to whom
also Durand joyneth himself) blames Bellarmine without naming him, for
saying, that the opinion of Scotus is probable, and accuses him of halting on
both sides. We see Videas aliquos Theologiae Professores nostriceporis qui in
utra^que parte^ al qua^tulum clau, di^a^tes non putant improhahile id quod
Scotus de verhis consecrationis dixit.
(says he) certain professors in Divinity in our times, who halting a little
on both sides, do not esteem improbable that which Scotus has said touching
the words of consecration.

Of that number of learned and acute men, was Cardinal Cajetan, who in hi^
notes upon Thomas, speaks thus: Cajetanus in 3. Thomae q. 75. art. 1. Alterum
quod Evangelium non explicavit express, ab Ecclesia accepimus, scile
conversionem panis in corpus Christi.
The other point which the Gospel expounds n^^ expressly, we have received it
from the Church to wit, the conversion of the bread into the body of Christ.

Item. Conversio non explicate habetur i^ Evangelio. The conversion (of the
bread) is not to be found explicitly in the Gospel.

The Cardinal de Alliaco, Petr. de Alliaco in 4. Sent. q. 6. art. 2. Patet
quod ille modus est possibilis, nec repugnat rationi, nec authoritati Bibliae:
immo est sacilior ad intelligendum, and rationabilior quam aliquis aliorum.
It appears that this manner which supposes that the substance of bread
remains still, is possible, neither is it contrary to reason, nor to the
authority of the Bible, but is more easy to conceive, and more reasonable. And
for this cause he is checked by Vasquez the Jesuit in the 3 Tome upon the 3
part of Thomas, Disp: 180. cap: 5. And in that same place he says that Durand
followed the opinion of Scotus upon the 4. of the Sentences, Disp. 11. quest. 2.

Gabriel Biel in the 40 lesson upon the Canon of the Mass: Biel Lect. 40.
Quomodo ibi sit Christi corpus, an per conversionem a^icujus in ipsum, an sine
conversione incipiat esse corpus Christi cum pane, manentibus substantia and
accidentibus panis, non invenitur expressumin canone Bibliae.
How the body of Christ is there, whether it be by conversion of ^^me thing
into it, or whether without conver^ion Christ's body begins to be there with
the bread, the substance and the accidents remaining, it is not expressed in
the Canon of the Bible. And even there: That has been proved by the authority
of the Church and of the Saints, for that cannot be proved by reason.

The same Sed cur hunc intellectum difficilem Sancti dicere and Ecclesia
determinarre elegerunt, cum scripturae possint exponi and salvari secundum
intellectum facilem de hoc articulo.
in the 41 lesson asks, Why the Saints and the Church have chosen to say and
determine that that should be understood in so difficult a manner: seeing the
Scriptures may be expounded and kept in their soundness, in a manner easy to
be understood. To this he answers, that the Church has determined it so,
meaning by the Church, not the Syrian, nor the Greek or Ethiopian, but the
Roman Church only.

Salmeron the Jesuit in the thirteenth Treatise of the ninth Tome, expounding
these words This is my body, speaks thus: Secunda. Prosecto illis verbis
nequaquam conversio significatur ex vi verborum. Alias qui diceret Hoc est
corpus meum, demonstrando suum corpus, significaret conversionem alicujus rei
in suum corpus.
Certainly these words do not signify that any conversion be made, by the
force of the words. Otherwise he that should say this is my body, in showing
his own body, would signify that some thing is converted into his body. And
he insistes very much upon this, that these words This is my body, are
declarative or significative of the thing which is, and not effective of that
which is not.

Wherefore the same Jesuit, in the same Treatise, Inno. 3. ^ib 4. de Myster.
Missa cap. 6. Sane dic^ potesi quod Christus v^rtute divina confe^^t, and
posl^^ forma expressit, etc. Et cap. 17. Ab hajus quaestonis laqueo sae^le se
absolvit qui d^cit, quod Chr^stus tunc conscit cum hened c^t.
joins himself to the opinion of Pope Innocent the third, a who in the fourth
book of the Mysteries of the Mass, Chapters 6. and 17 teaches that Christ
made not the conversion of the bread by these words H^est corpus meum, but by
his divine power, and by the blessing that had preceded. For he will have the
pronouncing of these words to have another virtue at this day in the mouths of
Priests, than they had in the mouth of Christ. Which opinion of Innocent the
third, is followed by Innocent the fourth, his Successor, and by multitudes of
Doctors, which Salmeron produces Porio page 82.
in the same Treatise.

It is credible that these Popes and Doctors were moved to teach that Christ
did not consecrate by these words This is my body, but by the prayer (...)
blessing he made before, because the Fathers say the same, and that such was
the belief of the ancient Church. Justin Martyr (...).
calls that which we receive in the Eucharist a food consecrated by the
prayer of the Word, that is to say Christ. Saint Austin in the third book of
the Trinity; Chapter 4. speaking of that which we receive in the Sacrament,
says that it is taken of the fruits of the earth, and prece mystica
consecratum, and is consecrated by the mystical prayer. (...).
Origin in his eight book against Celsus: * We eat loaves of bread which by
the prayer are made one body, which is some holy thing. Ireneus in his fourth
Book, Chapter 34. Qui est a terra panis percip ^is vocationem De^, jam non est
panis commun^s, sed Eucharisi^a.
The bread receiving the invocation of God, is no more common bread, but
Eucharist. Basil in the first book of the holy Ghost, 27 Chapter, calls the
words of consecration (...), the words of invocation. Isido us in the sixth
book of Origines, in the Chapter de Officij^: S^^^^fic^ii di^tum quasi sacrii
sa^^^m, qu^^ ece m^sti a consecratur in me^^^^ ^^m pro (...) is dom^nuae
passion v.
The Sacrifice is so called, as if one should say a sacred deed, because it is
consecrated by the mystical prayer in remembrance of the Passion which the
Lord s^ffeced for us. Yet at this day the Greek Churches consecrate by the
prayer, as Bellarmin acknowledges in the fourth Book of the Eucharist,
Chapter Habemus.
12. See the Canon Corpus in the second distinction of the consecration.

By this it is as clear as the light, that the Ancient Fathers did not believe
that by these words This is my body, any conversion of the bread was made.

CHAP. XV. Of the Adoration of the Sacrament. The opinion of the Roman Church.
THe Roman Church having deified the Sacrament, has consequently obliged her
self to worship it with the highest adoration which is due to God alone. By
this means a wafer of bread has taken Gods place, and is called God, and is
worshipped as God. They speak of lifting up God in the Mass, and of Gods
feast ( viz, Corpus Christ^ day) and of carrying God to a sick^ body. Phrases
that are not to be found in the holy Scriptures, and unheard off in the
Ancient Christian Church.

The Council of Trent in the thirteenth Session, Chapter 5. speaks thu^
There remains no doubt but that all faithful Christian people ought to give
the worship of L^tria, nullus dubu andi locus relinquitur, qu^n omnes Christi
sideles latriae cultum qui vero Deo debetur, huic sanctissimo Sacramento in
veneratione adhibeant.
which is due to the true God, to this holy Sacrament in the veneration. Now by
this word Sacrament, they understand the body of Christ with the species or
accidents. For by this word Sacrament, our Adversaries never understand Christ
Jesus out of the species. This Council then ordains that the species of the
bread and wine shall be worshipped with sovereign adoration.

The practice does verify what I say. For the people worshipping the
consecrated host, divide not their mind into two Adorations, and worship not
the body of Christ with one kind of Adoration, and the species of the bread
with an other: but carry their whole devotion to worship with sovereign
adoration, the host they have before their eyes.

Bellarmin teaches as much in his fourth Book of the E charist, Chapter 29.
Sed haec. Cultu latriae dici^ mus per se and proprie Christis esse adorandu,
and eam adera^^one ad symbola (...) ^i^m panis and v^nt per^nere, qua^^nus
^ppre (...) dun^ur (...) au^um ^um ipso Christo qu^m con^^nent.
We say that Christ, For se and proprie, is to be worshipped with the ad^ration
of Latria, and that this adoration belongs also to the signs or symboles of
the bread and wine, in as much as they are conceived or considered, as being
one with Christ himself, whom they contain. And says, it was just so that
Christ's garments were worshipped with the same adoration that Christ was. For
(says he) they did not pull off his clothes for (...) worship him.

For he proposes this for an infallibl^ Maxim, that be that worshippeth
so^^thing, worshippeth also all the things th^^ are conj^yned to it. Bell lib.
de Imaginibus cap. 25 Qui adoral ea omnia quae cum ipso conjuncta sunt.
That is to say that h^ that worshippeth the Images, worships also the Cobwebs
that are upon them: And that he that worshippeth the Pope, worshippeth also his
Breeche^ and his shirt. He will have then the roundnesse, whiteness, length,
breadth and taste of the host, to be worshippe^ with the same adoration that
God i^ worshipped with, because these accident and Christ are but one.

Vasquez the Jesuit says the same in his second Book of Adoration. Disp. 9.
Chapter 1. Quae absolute d^^^tur adorari adorat one latriae, cum tamen per
accidens cii d vinitate conjunlla colantur.
Christ's humanity (says he) and the Eucharist are worshipped absolutely with
the adoration of Latria, albeit that being enjoined by accident with the
Godhead, a worship is given to the^ And that we may know that the accidents
of the bread, that is to say the breadth, length, color and savor of the
bread are worshipped with the same adoration that Christ is worshipped: he
adds, Accidentia panis and vini cum existat non propria exisient^a sed
ex^stentia corpor^s and sanguinis Christi, opt^^^ possiil simul sub cundem
cultum adorat onis cad^re queadmodum humanitas Christi ejusque divinitas ^odem
motu adorationis coluntur.
The accidents of the bread and wine, because they exist not by their proper
existence, but by the existence of the body and blood of Christ, may very well
receive the same honor of adoration together with the body and blood of
Christ: even as Ch^sts humanity and his Divinity are worshipped with one and
the same motion of adoration.

This Idolatry is prodigious, by which the color and roundnesse of the bread
are worshipped with the same adoration that God is worshipped with. The
Egyptians did seem to have attained to the highest degree of Idolatry when
they did worship Cats, Onions, and Storkes. But this Idolatry, in worshipping
the accidents of the bread, goes far beyond them: For these things they
worshipped, were substances and things really existing: But these accidents
without a subject, are imaginary things, and which indeed are nothing. The
folly of those Egyptians would have been much greater, if they had worshipped
the color and the length, and the faces or lowering of a Cat, without
worshipping the Cat. Add moreover that they did not worship beasts and plants
as the Sovereign God: but as having in them some sparks of the Divinity. But
the Roman Church worshippeth the accidents of bread without bread, with a
Sovereign adoration, and which only belongs to God.

And mark the doctrine of this Jesuit, who says with approbation of the
Examinators prefixed in the forefront of his book, that the accidents of the
bread do exist in Christ after the same manner as the humanity of Christ has
no proper subsistence, but subsisteth in the divine nature. This truly is to
unite and conjoyne the roundnesse and color of the bread with Christ with a
personal union.

And as errors are linked together an^ cleave one to an other, it is certain
that the accidents of the bread are no^ more straightly conjoined with Christ,
than Christ with these accidents. And by consequent even as because of this
imaginary union of the body of Christ with the accidents of the bread, the
things which befall these accidents, are also attributed unto the body of
Christ, of which they say, it is carried, and lifted up, and walked up and
down, and stolen away, and eaten by mice, and vomited up, and devoured by a
beast: So by the same reason because of the same union, they must say that the
roundnesse and whiteness of the bread are the Son of God, and are borne of
the Virgin, and are just and without origiginall sin.

In all this truly the Roman Church shows her self idolatrous in the last
degree. It is a bog or quagmire of abuses, and an abyssus or a gulf of
seduction wherein Satan has plunged men: God punishing in his just anger the
contempt of his word, which is become an unknown Book among the people. For
it is just that those that have lost Piety, should loose also the common sense.

CHAP. XVI. Examen of the Adoration of the Sacrament by the word of God. That
the Ancient Christians did not worship the Sacrament.
IF the Scriptures had with our Adversaries any authority, this controversy
would soon be decided.

Every action that concerns Gods Service, and specially Adoration, is to be
done in Faith, and not with doubts and conjectures, as Saint James says,
Chapter first: Let him ask in Faith nothing wavering: And Saint Paul, Romans 14.
says that whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin. And the same Apostle to the
Hebrews, Chapter 11. It is impossible without Faith to please God. Now it is
impossible that the people of the Roman Church should worship the host of the
Mass^ in faith: Because God has not commanded it in his word. For as Saint
Paul says, Romans 1^. Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God.

In general we have the Lords commandment saying, Thou shall worship the Lord
thy God, and him only shall thou serve. He speaks of the Sovereign God,
Creator and Governor of the World, and not of a God made with words, that is
made of bread, subject to falling, to be vomited up, and stolen away.
Certainly, to worship such a god as that, is to violate the Commandment of the
Law, which says: Thou shall have no other God before me.

In vain do they answer that Christ ought to be worshipped, since he is God:
For, besides that they presuppose that which is not, to wit, that this bread is
transubstantiated into the body of Christ, they declare themselves that in this
Sacrament Christ's body is not only worshipped: but also the roundnesse,
color, and savor of the bread.

That if any religious worship were to be given to this Sacrament, some trace
of it would be found in the Institution of the holy Supper, and some
commandment of the Lord: But neither trace nor appearance of that is to be
found. But rather we see that the Apostles sat at the table during this
action, as it appears by what is said i^ Saint John 13.12. that Christ after
h^ had taken his garments, he sat down again. During which repast Saint John
was leaning on Jesus bosom, Verse 23. And Saint Paul relating the Institution
of the Lord, says: I have received of the Lord that which I delivered unto
you. Since then he does not speak of any adoration of the Sacrament, it is
certain he had not received it of the Lord, and believed not that the Church
was obliged to worship the Sacrament.

The ordinary shift of our Adversaries, is to say that the Apostles worshipped
not the consecrated host, because they had Christ every day with them, and
must have been continually kneeling before him.

I answer that to eat Christ with their teeth, and receive him in their
mouths, and sacrifice him in sacrifice propitiatory, are actions which were
new to the Apostles, and which necessarily required Adoration. Every Sacrifice
is performed in the worshipping of him to whom the Sacrifice is offered up.
These things so extraordinary and admirable (if they were true) did well
deserve an extraordinary veneration. Specially in the first Institution which
was to serve for a rule unto the Church, and a pattern to conform her self
unto.

And since our Adversaries will have Christ in the holy Supper to have eaten
himself, he might by the same reason worship himself, and bow the knee
before himself, which is a very merry and recreative conception, and suitable
unto Transubstantiation.

Whereupon we give our Adversaries the choice. Will they have Christ to have
adored the consecrated host? But it would follow from thence, according to
their doctrine, that Christ had worshipped his own self, and that he was
holyer than himself. And it is certain that he that worshippeth, and he that
is worshipped, are two persons. Will they have Christ not to have worshipped
the consecrated host? But it will follow from thence that the Apostles,
neither then, nor since, never worshipped it. For Christ saying unto them, Do
this, commanded them to do as he had done.

That if the Lord would have had the Apostles to have worshipped the Sacrament
he would have made an elevation of the host, as was observed in all Sacrifices,
for to bind the sacrificers and the assistants to the adoration. A thing
nevertheless which Christ did not do: for he offered up nothing to his
Father. He did not say, Father receive this oblation: But said to his Apostles,
Take, Eat.

Even in the very time of Tertullian and of Cyprian (as we shall see hereafter)
the custom of diverse Christians, both men and women, was to carry into their
houses the sacred bread they had received in the Church, to wrap it up in a
cloth, and to lock it up at home in a chest or cupbord. A manifest proof they
worshipped not the Sacrament. For would they have permitted a woman to take God
with her hand, put him up in her pocket, and keep him locked up close at home?

Would the Christians have upbraided the Pagans that they worshipped Statues
that could not move themselves, See Arnob. lib. 6. and Lactantius lib. 2. cap.
2.
nor rise when they were fallen, nor breathe, subject to rust, wherein mice
make their nests, etc. if the Pagans might have upbraided them the same, and
tell them that they worshipped an host that could not breath, nor rise up when
it is fallen, nor open its eyes, nor stretch out its hands; that may be stolen
by men, and eaten by mice, and will grow mouldie, etc?

Durst Theodoret have said in the 55 question upon Genesis, (...).
that it is an extreme folly to worship that which one eats, if the
Christians of his time had worshipped the Sacrament before they are it? It is
this error above all others that keeps the Pagans from embracing the
Christian Religion, as Averroes testifies; of whom Salmeron the Jesuit cites
these words out of the 12 book of his Metaphysickes. Salmeron Tomo 9. Tract.
18. S. Ca lvi nus.
Quoniam Christiani Deum suum quem adorant, manducant, sit anima mea cum
Philosophis. Since Christians eat the God they worship, let my soul be with
the Philosophers.

The ancientest form of celebrating the Eucharist in the Christian Church, is
that which is described about the later end of the second Apology of Justin
Martyr, wherein no mention is made of any adoration: No more than in that which
is extant in the book of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy of Denis, who is
surnamed Areopagite.

There are some places in the Fathers that say that Christ is worshipped in the
Eucharist: but that makes nothing to this purpose. For the Father also and the
Holy Ghost ought to b^^ worshipped in the Eucharist. It is one thing to worship
Christ in the action of the Sacrament, and another thing to worship the
Sacrament. Yet notwithstanding, the third Council of Carthage in the 23 Canon,
forbids one to address his prayer to the Son in the Eucharist, in these
words: When any one assists at the Altar, Cum ad altar a^^^statur, semper ad
l'atrem der gatur oral^o.
let his prayer always be directed to the Father. If then they had worshipped
the consecrated host, doubtless it would not have been forforbidden to
invocate it.

There be also in Ancient Fathers some Oratorie Apostropho's, wherein they
speak to the water of Baptism, Ambros. in Lu^am cap 10. O qua qua Sa^^am^utum
Ch^^st esse ^^^ru^sti.
and to the bread and wine of the Eucharist: but that makes nothing for the
adoration neither of the water nor of the bread. So the Scripture speaks often
to heaven, to the Earth, to the Sea, to the Mountains; yet none can infer
from thence that they must be worshipped.

Of Theodoret, who in his 2. Dialogue says, that the signs are worshipped,
^^all be spoken hereafter. There is in the Greek (...), which cannot be
understood of the sovereign adoration, ^^eing he speaks of the signs or
Sym^^les, which cannot be worshipped reli^^ously, and with the worship of
Latria, without manifest Idolatry. In the Greek copies of the Affrican codex,
Aurelius Bishop of Carthage, is often called (...): Abraham worshippeth, or
rather pro^^rateth himself before the Sons of Heth, Genes: 23. verse. 7. and
12. And Jacob does the same to his brother Esau, Gen: 33.3. and David to
Jonathan. 1. Sam: 20.41. Whom nevertheless Abraham, and Jacob, and David
esteemed not to be Gods: Tertullian against Hermogenes, chap. 22. says, that
he worshippeth the plenitude of the Scriptures. Austiu in the 164 Epistle to
Emeritus, Baptismum Christi ubique veneramur: We worship every where the
Baptism of Christ. Such n^^^n^r of speeches ought to be understood according
to the subject or matter in hand.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Priests intention, without which the Roman Church beleeve^
no consecration, nor Transubstantiation is made.
THe Roman Church holds, that (...) the Priest has not intention to
consecrate, and to do what the Church does, there is no consecration or
Transubstantiation made. It is thus defined and determined by Pope Eugenius the
4. in the instruction of the Armenians, which is at the end of the Council of
Florence: And by the Council of Tren^ in the 7. Session, Canon 11. in these
words: Si quis dixerit in Ministris dum Sacramenta consic^unt, and conferunt,
non requiri intention, saltem faciend^ quod Ecclesia sa^it, ^^ath^ma sit.
If any one say that the intentiont^ do at least what the Church does, is not
requisite in the Ministers, let him be accursed.

The Sacrament then being of no value, if the Priests intention be not to
consecrate, it is impossible for the people to be assured that the consecration
was made. For they know not what the intention and thought of the Priest was:
only they presume it by conjecture. God only knows the hearts of men, 2. Chron.
6.30. The adoration therefore of the Host, is a conjecturall adoration, and
which is done at all adventure, since no man is assured of the Priests
intention, without which the Sacrament is of no value. Bellarmin confesses it
ingenuously in his third Book of Justification, chap. 8. Dicent. Neque potest
quis esse certus certitudine fidei se percipere verum Sacramentum, cum
Sacramentu^ non consiciatur sine intention Ministri, and intentionem alterius
nemo videre possit.
No man (says he) can be certain by the certitude of faith that he receives a
true Sacrament, because it depends upon the intention of the Minister: And none
can see another man's intention. And truly this Cardinal has reason to say
that none can be certain of it: for there are Priests that are Magitians, and
there are examples of Priests convicted and punished for having consecrated in
the name of the Devil. Even very lately there was one put to death at Loudun,
accused of Magic by the Vrsulina Nuns that were possessed with the Devil.
There be Priests Atheists and profane, that scoff and jest at every thing they
do in the Church. I have known diverse Priests, who being converted to the
true Religion, did confess to have sung Masses for many years together
against their intention, and detesting in their hearts what they did, and asked
forgiveness of God for that they had fought so long against their own
consciences. In all these Masses then no consecration was made.

By the same doctrine it appears that the Priest does not know whether he b^ a
Priest or no. For he knows not what the intention of his Ordinator was* Whence
follows that all the Masses he sings, and all the absolutions he gives,
remain in suspense, and no man knows whether they be of any force or value
Peradventure this Priest received the order of Priesthood of a Bishop that had
intention, but this Bishop perhaps received his Orders of another Bishop that
had no intention. And so mounting upwards, the uncertaintie increases and
multiplies it self ad infinitum. Gabri^ Biel acknowledges the same in his
Epitomie of the Canon of the Mass: Null^s ^elebrans potest evidenter scice se
esse Sacer dotem, quia non potest c^^^ ^^nter s^^re ^e sore baptizatu, aut
leg^^^m^ ordinatum.
No Priest (says he) that celebrateth, can know evidently whether he be a
Priest: for he cannot know evidently whether he be baptized, or whether he has
received the Ordination lawfully.

The Church then under the Old Testament had a great advantage over the
Christian Church; for then the Salvation of Children depended not upon the
intention of those that circumcised them, but on the only grace of God, and
upon his Covenant, which is a stay infinitely more firm than the intention of
men.

Pope Adrian the 6. Adrian. 6. Quodlib. Sect. 10. Supposito 2. Fol. 70.
Consilium Constantiense excusa^ simplices adora^tes hostiam non consecratam,
quia tacit implicatur conditio, si consecratio sit recte facta. Et paulo post,
Si sic adoret, Adoro te situ es Christus. Consideration. 6.
after the council of Constance, excuses the simple people that worshippeth
the unconsecrated Host, which they think to be consecrated, saying, the Host
is not worshipped but with this condition, to wit, if the consecration be made
as it ought, in saying, Adoro te situes Christus: I worship thee if thou be
Christ. As saying: I know not whether thou be Christ, or whether thou be not
Christ; but howsoever, and at all adventure, I adore thee if thou be Christ.

Gerson in his Treatise of the Examen of Doctrines, Tome 1. moves an objection
drawn out of Bonaventure, touching the worshipping of the Eucharist which is
thought to be consecrated though it be not. His answer after Bonaventure is
such: Objicit idem Bonaventura de adoratione Eucharistiae quandoque non
consecratae in manibus Sacer dotis. Respondet casum communem esse, qui semper
implicitam habet conditionem vel presuppositionem, quod Sacerdos secerit
secundum debitum Ecclesiae ritum.
It is an ordinary ease which always carries this condition or implicit
presupposition, that the Priest has done as ought to be done in the Church,
which condition needs not to be expressed in the adoration. Nevertheless this
adoration frees it self from being a sin, because it is the custom of the
faithful: whereof we have an example in the worshipping of Images. These
Doctors will have the Host and Images of Saints to be worshipped upon these
conditions, viz: if the consecration was duly made, and if those Images be
Images of true Saints, and if those Saints hear us: Which be things that one
must guess at piously, and be contented with conjectures, and be saved by
custom. As if a wife doubting whether he that has lien with her, were her
husband or no, should say unto him, I have received you, but under this
presupposition, that you are my husband: I have indeed lien with you, but it
was under this condition, if you were my husband. The faith of the saithfull is
not grounded upon conjectures, it worships not a conjecturall God, not knowing
whether he be a God or no God.

The force of this intention is so great, that Vasquez the Jesuit says,
Vasquez in 3 part. Thomae Tomo 3. D^sp. 171. number. 17. Constat Sacerdotibus
co^missam fuisse potestatem consecrandi, ^ta ut si vellent co^secrare in malu^
usu^, nempe pro venefi^^^s and incantationibus co^secratio little effectum
ha^eret.
It is most certain that the power of consecrating was committed unto Priests,
so that if they would consecrate to a bad use, viz: as for poysonings, or
enchantments, the consceration never thelesse should have its effect. By this
means Christ shall be in the power of a Magician, and shall become the sport
or pastime of the Devil. Would God have given unto Priests a power against God
himself, which he will not take from them when they employ it in the service
of the Devil?

But upon this intention men's consciences are marvelously confounded and
troubled, and their Doctors know not at what pass they be. For if a Priest
has before him a great houshold-loafe, and his intention is but to consecrate
one half of it, without cutting it into two pieces: how shall a man discern
Christ's body which is in that bread, from the unconsecrated bread? And if the
Priest has before him a dozen of wafer cakes, and his intention is but to
consecrate ten of them, if these Hosts come to be mingled together, how shall
he discern the consecrated ones from those that are not consecrated? How shall
he discern his God from the wafers of common bread? Is it possible that Christ
did not leave unto Christians any means to know with certainty whether his
body be present under the species, or whether it be not: lest they should
pollute themselves with Idolatry?

Upon this adoration it must be observed, that the Council of Trent Sess. 13.
^ap. 5.
ordains that the Sacrament be worshipped. Now all the Doctors with an
unanimous consent, after Saint Austin, define that this word Sacrament,
signifies a sacred sign. This Council then ordains that the sign be
worshipped. That if by the sacred sign Christ himself must be understood,
Christ shall be the sign and the figure of himself, as Bellarmin S Produ^^in^.
says in the 24. chapter of his second Book of the Eucharist: I Would Christus
sui upsius figura suit.
The same Christ was the figure of himself.

In this point of adoration, God in his just judgment has given our
adversaries over into a reprobate sense. For when the Host is fallen into some
filthy place, or is vomited up through drunkenness, they worship it thus
defiled, as Vasquez teaches in his 3 Tome, upon the 3 part of Thomas, Disput.
195. chap. 5. Vasq. 3. Tom. in 3. partem Thomae Disp. 195. cap. 5. Hoc est co^
tracom^^^nem sensum Ecclesiae, quae species (...) loco soralido eru^ ras,
tanqua^ verum Sacramentum veneraretur.
That is (says he) the common opinion of the Church, which would worship as a
true Sacrament the species taken ou^ of a filthy place, or vomited up again by
a brute beast: for there is no reason to say that Christ's body ozaseth to be
under them before they be corrupted. And in the same Cap. 43.
place he teaches, that if a dumb creature has eaten the consecrated Hosts,
and drunken the consecrated cup, this beast shall grow fat with them, and may
be made drunk with it, and its belly shall swell. It will then be drunk with
accidents, and farten with roundnesses and lines.

The words of this Jesuit, in the beginning of the 4 chapter of the same
Dispute, are such: A^^^dere po^est ut animal quod species Sacramenti sumpsit,
non m^nus nutriatur quam si panem and vinum non cons^^rati^ manducet. Immo
(...) aceidere potest ut animal inebrictur, and venture ^jus disteda^tur.
It may come to pass that a beast that has eaten the species of the
Sacrament, shall not be less nourished with the^ then if it bad eaten bread
and wine not consecrated: yea it may fall out that this beast may be made drunk
therewith, and her belly stretch and swell. To be short, by this doctrine that
beast may burst for having eaten God.

For to avoid this ignominy and preserve Christ from these inconveniences,
certain Doctors of the Roman Church, and namely Bonaventure have esteemed that
so soon as a beast has devoured the consecrated Host, or that it has been
cast into the dirt or in a privy, Christ's body with draws himself, and the
substance of the bread returns by a second transubstantiation no less
admirable than the first. But Pope Vasquez in 3 part. Thomae Disp. 195. cap 5.
Gregory the eleventh Verum Greg. 11. in Directorie Inquisitorum 2. p. 4.10.
damnavit asserentes sub hostia cons^^rata, projecta in lutum, aut locum
sordidum, non manner corpus Christi.
in his Directorie of Inquisitors, part. 2. quest. 20. condemns this opinion:
and that conformably to the opinion of Thomas, and of Scotus, and of the
Jesuits, who hold generally that the body of Christ is taken really by a
beast, and that mice may carry it away.

CHAP. XVIII. That our Adversaries in this matter entangle themselves into
absurdities, and insoluble contradictions.
IT is hard to believe a man that believes not his own self, and that
contradicts himself, and heaps up together so many absurdities, that it
seems he is afraid other men should believe him. This maxim is true without
exception, that two things contradictorie cannot both be true. Our Adversaries
themselves confess that it passes the omnipotency of God, and that he
cannot do that a thing be and be not at one and the fame time: that Caesar be
a man indeed and not be a reasonable creature. That a round sigure be square
whilst it is round.

Against this rule do our adversaries offend, destroying the definition of
things, and affirming things which are ^ncompatible, and heaping together in
this matter a thousand absurdities, whereof we will specify some.

1 They say that in the Mass the Priest with 5 words makes the body of Christ,
which nevertheless was already before the Priest made it. They speak as if
should say, that whilst Philip is at Paris, some body makes him at Rome. To
make a thing which is already, and to destroy a thing which is not, are like
absurdities.

2 If a man be in this chamber who was not in it the day before, it must needs
follow that either he came thither from elsewhere, or was borne in it. But in
the Mass they say that Christ is not there before the consecration, and that
after the consecration he is there, and yet that he came not thither: It
follows then that he was borne there, or freshly formed, though he was already
before.

3 They say that the Species of the bread and wine (for they speak after that
manner) contain the body of Christ, and yet contain it not, for it is in
heaven. This is a ridiculous contradiction, to will that a body be out of that
which contains it, for thence will follow tha^ the thing which contains it,
containe^ it not.

4 They say that the Lords body with all its bigness and length is contained
i^ the least crumme of the Host, and in the least drop of the chalice, so that
if the point of a pin were dipped in the consecrated cup, the Lords body would
be whole in that drop that should hang (...) the end of the pin. Whence
follows that the contained is greater tha^ the continent, as if one should
say that (...) crown which is in a purse, is bigger than the purse, and that
the Earth is bigger than heaven that compasses it about.

5 They give to the body of Christ (...) length without extent, that is to say,
(...) length without length, since all i^ length is under one point that has
no^ length.

6 They say that Christ's body is in this place, but not locally, as if a man
should say, it is white, but not whitely. They say that the body of the Lord i^
present, but not corporally, but rather spiritually. But for a body to be
spiritually present, is a thing no less absurd, than for a spirit to be
corporal-present.

7 They will have Christ's body in the crament to be long and large, and yet
hold no space. How is that possible, ^^ce that length and breadth are spaces.

8 They say that Christ's body in the crament is present not circumscrip^ely,
that is to say, not bounded or en^^osed of any place. Yet what they de^^ of the
whole, they confess it of every ^^verall part of the body. For they cannot
deny but that in the Lords body the ^aines are enclosed, and circumscribed
^ithin the scull, and that his heart is en^^osed and limited within the
pericardi^n, and the lungs within the breast or ^^est, since they say that it
is a true humane body.

9 They say that the consecrated host (...) Christ, and that the Priest
breaks the Host, and yet breaks not Christ. They ^ay that Christ's blood is
shed in the Mass, and yet budges not, and comes not out of the veins. But all
effusion is a motion: how can then Christ's blood be shed without motion?

10 They say that the Priest drinks Christ's body and soul under the species
of the wine. By that means they make Christ's body liquid. For although the^
say that the Priest drinks the Lords bo^^ under the species of the wine: yet
under these species it does not lose its soliditi^^.

11 They say that Christ did eat himself, and swallowed up his own body
Whence it follows that he had at the same time his mouth in his head, and his
head in his mouth, and that the whole was enclosed in one part, whereas part
are comprised in the whole. A man should be esteemed mad that would say that
the scabberd is within the blade of the sword, and the purse within a crown.
And all this without being able to tell us what benefit comes to us, that
Christ should have eaten himself. The absurdity redoubles in that that Christ
eating, was infirm and passible, speaking, and moving, and fitting: But Christ
that was eaten by Christ, was impassible and without infirmity, neither
speaking, nor moving, fitting, lying* nor standing. By this means Christ
passible has devoured the impassible: And Christ did eat himself, not such
as he was, but such as he was not.

12 It is true that things contradictory may agree in one and the same subject
in several times, or in several parts, or in several respects, that is to
say, in com^aring this thing with several things Arist. l. 1. Elenchorie c. 5.
whereas we say, code* respectu, says, (...) ad idem: and gives for example of
diverse respects, that one and the same number may be the double and nor the
double being compared to diverse numbers.
. ^or example a man may be young and old (...) several times: be white in one
part of ^s body, and black in the other. He ^ay be tall and little, poor and
rich (...) several respects, that is to say, in ^omparing him with several
persons. ^ee may be tall in comparison of a ^^warfe, little in comparison of a
Gi^^nt, rich in comparison of a beggar, and poor in comparison of Seneca, or
Lucullus. But here they attribute unto Christ contradictory things at one and
the same time, not in several parts, and without comparing him with any other
but himself. They will have him at one and the same time to have been the
contained and the continent, speaking and moving in the Eucharist, and neither
speaking nor moving in the mouths of the Apostles, having a length without
length, an extent without a space.

13. They say that as God may do that one and the same body be whole and
entire in several remote places, and so be far and separated from himself,
that is to say that he be one, and not be one: So likewise God can make that
two bodies hold but one place, by penetration of dimensions, as they prattle in
their Schools: That is to say that God can make that a vessel that holds a
pint, without making it bigger or larger, may contain two pintes yea three,
yea ten, yea a thousand, yea a million, and so ad infinitum: So th^^ this
pint shall contain the whole Se^ without being made bigger, and without the
water of the Sea being any wh^^ diminished. Yea by this doctrine th^^ whole
World without diminishing o^ its bigness, may be enclosed in one grai^ of
wheat.

14. Philosophy by a thousand reasons proves that it is impossible that there
be any Vacuum in the World, and our Adversaries teach it so in their Schools,
and with good reason. By Vacuum is understood a space of place which is not
filled with any substance a place that is full of nothing. Ye^ notwithstanding,
the Roman Church, by Transubstantiation puts a Vacuum in the consecrated cup.
They say that this chalice is full, but they cannot tell with what body it is
filled up. It is not full of wine: For they hold it is no more wine. It is not
full of the body of Christ: for they hold that Christ's body in the Eucharist
fills no place. As for the accidents they are not a body. So no bodily
substance shall be found that fills the chalice.

15. It is not to be imagined but that when Christ did break the bread to his
Disciples, some crummes thereof fell upon the table: and some residue of that
sacred bread was left behind. Now according to the Church of Romes doctrine, in
every one of these pieces of bread, Christ's body was whole and entire.
Whereupon we ask if when Christ (after he was risen from the table) swate
drops of blood, that body of the Lord which was under these crummes, swate also
drops of blood? Item if when Christ was put upon the Cross, that body which
was under these crumbs, or under the residues of that sacred bread was likewise
crucified under the species of the bread? For if it was not crucified under
these species of the bread, behold there was 2 Christ's, the one crucified, the
other not crucified. Or if under those species Christ's body was crucified, they
must also put under the same species the Cross, and the Soldiers that
crucified him. For to be crucified without a cross is a thing unconceivable,
and a plain contradiction.

16. This body also which was under the residue of the consecrated bread, mu^^
of necessity either be living or deal when the Lords body was in the
Sepulcher: If living, behold there was two bodies of Christ at one and the same
time, whereof the one was dead, the other living. Or if that body which was in
these crummes, suffered death under those species, there was a body* of Christ
which suffered death without being put to the cross, and without the Soldiers
touched it.

17. That if whilst the body of the Lord was dead, any of his Disciples had
celebrated the Eucharist, if he had offered a living body, it would not have
been the same body that was in the Sepulcher. Or if by pronou^cing the words
of consecration he had turned the bread into a dead body, he had not offered a
Sacrifice: For a dead body is not an acceptable Sacrifice. These difficulties
would deserve well to consult the Papal Oracle: or some decision of the Sorbon.

18. From the same Doctrine follows, that when in the Procession on Corpus
Christi day two consecrated hosts meet one another and pass by one an other,
Christ incounters himself, and goes to meet with his own self. And it is to
be presumed that these Hosts know one another, and make one to another a
mutual salutation, and that if one should come to fall, the other that is not
fallen, would look upon that which is fallen, with great compassion.

19. This is one of the best of all, and wherein the Romish Doctors entangle
themselves most and trouble their brains exceedingly. A time was that they
disputed in the Church of Rome whether it be in Gods power to make that one
body be circumscriptively in two or in many several places. As for example,
whether God can make that Philip be at Paris and at Rome at one and the same
time, contained and limited by two several remote places. But now they hold
with a general consent that it is possible. Among those that have written in
these our times, I know none but Vasquez that is of another opinion. This thing
admitted to be so, it will follow that if Philip be at Rome in the water, and
in the fire at Paris, he shall be both wet and burned at once. If one of his
arms be cut off at Paris, he shall have but one arm at Paris, but at Rome he
shall have two. If he be killed at Paris, he shall be dead at Paris, and living
at Rome: and perhaps coming from Rome to Paris, he shall find himself to be
dead, not knowing of it before, and shall assist at his own funerals. Perhaps
that Philip of Paris will come to Rome to see himself, and being arrived
there, shall not find himself there because he absented himself from Rome.
That if both of them set forth on the way for to meet one another, one and the
same man shall go to meet himself. And having met with himself, how shall
their noses jumble themselves into one? How shall a man turn his back to his
own self? That if Philip does feast at Paris and fast at Rome, one and the
self same man shall be both full and empty, fat and lean at the same time.
That if Philip meet with himself upon the way, and that Philip embrace
Philip, it is evident they shall be two. For every conjunction is at least
between two diverse things.

20. That if the body of one and the same man may be in a thousand several
places at one and the same time, it may be also in a hundred thousand places,
and if in a hundred thousand, so likewise in a Million, and so still in
augmenting: so that at last one man's body shall be able to fill up the whole
world. Indeed, the plurality of places and the Vbiquity comes all to one. The
difference between the Church of Rome and those that put Christ's body
everywhere, is only in this: the one say this body is everywhere, and the
other say it may be everywhere. Truly the Roman Church has no reason to
contend with the Vbiquitaries about a thing which she believes to be possible.

21. The point in Mathematics is no quantity, and has no magnitude, and is
indivisible: To put therefore one and the same point in two diverse remote
places, is to divide the point and to separate it from it self. That is the
thing our Adversaries do, putting one body in two several places. For
example, if Philip may be at Paris and at Rome at one and the same time, the
point that is in the midst of the apple of his eye, is the same point as well at
Rome as at Paris, and yet it is far from it self, and separated and divided
from it self.

22. And since Angelical Spirits are but in one only place definitively,
those that put the Lords body in several places at once, make it more
spiritual than the very Spirits themselves, and divide it from it self.

23. There is impiety mingled with that. For after the Priest has eaten the
host, they hold that Christ's body is in the Priests stomach until the species
by disgestion be destroyed. After then that those species be destroyed, the
Lords body is no more there, and yet is not gone out of it: (for these Doctors
say it cannot move it self locally.) Whereupon it must follow of necessity
that this body of Christ which was in the Priests stomach, is turned into
nothing. And our Adversaries cannot tell us whither he is gone, nor what is
become of him.

CHAP. XIX. Of accidents without a subject: places of Fathers.
THe accidents without a subject which they put in the consecrated Host, are
another swarm of ridiculous absurdities and mere contradictions. For what is
there more incompatible than this, Arist. l. 6. Metaph. cap. 1. Loquens de
accidentibus. (...).
to wit, that Accidentia non accidunt, as if one said, Albentia non albent,
that the speakers speak not: and to forge qualities which qualify nothing:
color and nothing colored, a length and nothing long, a roundnesse and
nothing round: as if one should forge a sight without an eye, a sickness
without a sick body, a halting without a leg, an Eclipse of the Moon
without a Moon. So they put in the Host a taste of bread, a color of bread,
a roundnesse of bread without bread. And as Pope Innocent the third says in
his 4 Book of the Mysteries of the Mass, chap. 11. Est enim hic color and
sapor, cum nihil alterutro sit coloratum, aut sapidu^, quantum aut quale.
There is here color and savor, quantity and quality, though there be here
nothing savory, nothing colored, nothing that has quantity or quality. In
sum, God has so created substances, and accidents, that as a created
substance cannot be without accidents, so accidents cannot be without a
substance: These things be so relative one to another, as to separate them, is
as if one should put a Father without a Son, or a Son without a Father.

This error casts our Adversaries headlong into many others. For if the Host
become dirtie, being fallen into the mire, lo there are accidents that carry a
substance: and whereas the substance is the subject of accidents, here on the
contrary, accidents are the subject of the substance.

None can deny but that Ice is a substance: when then the consecrated cup
freezeth, they will have the accidents alone to be frozen, and so the accidents
are become a Substance by a new kind of Transubstantiation, no less prodigious
than the first, and which never thelesse avails nothing to our salvation.
Unless they will have Christ's body to be frozen.

That if the Hosts grow mouldie, behold there are lines, a whiteness, a
length, a roundnesse mouldie. If one warm the consecrated cup so that it
smoke, behold accidents which produce a Substance. If (as Thom. 3. part. q.
77. art. 3. Sensu deprehenditur hostias consecratas putrefieri and corrumpt. Et
art. 5. Ex speciebus sacrimentalib. generantur vermes, si corrodantur.
Thomas and Suarez in 3 Thomae disput. 57. s. 3. Constat ex hostus consecratis
vermes generari.
Suarez acknowledge) worms breed in the consecrated host, we must say that
accidents have engendered a substance, and that Soul-lesse accidents have
produced an animated Substance: and all that without being able to tell what
profit the faithful reap thereby.

The histories written by our adversaries testify, that Pope Platina in
Victore 3. and Clement. 5. Naucler. Gener. 4. Aventinus lib. 7. page 598.
Stella, Fasciculus temporum.
Victorinus the 3 was impoysoned in the chalice of the Mass. And that Henry
the 7 Emperor was served just so in taking the Host. Henricus Archiepisc
Eboracensis, cum divina celebraret mysteria, hausto in ipso calice, ut aiunt,
vener obiit.
Matthew Paris, in the year 1154. relates the like of Henry Archbishop of
York. Then it was said with horror, God is impoysoned. It is likely that for
to avoid this inconvenience, they make the essay to the Pope, and taste it
before him at the Mass, as they do at his ordinary meals. That if the
accidents only are impoysoned, besides the absurdity of impoysoning a length,
breadth, and color, where there is nothing long, nothing broad, nor nothing
colored, this ignominy is done to Christ Jesus, that by his presence he could
not t^move away the poison: and that his body served of a vehicle to the
poison, and that being given for the salvation of the soul, it serves to
bring death and destruction to the body.

The Fathers impugn this error plainly and expressly. Nyss. exam. emero. page
13. (...).
Gregory of Nysse, in his work of six days. The figure is not without body.
Toll ipsa corpora qualitatibus corporum, non erit ubisint^ ideo necesse est ut
non sint. Et paulo post. Si moles ipsa corporis penitus auf^rater, qualitates
ejus non erit ubisint.
S. Austin in his 57 Epistle to Dardanus, Take away the bodies from the
qualities of bodies, they shall be no more, and therefore it is necessary they
be not. And a little after, If the mass of the body be wholly taken away, its
qualities shall be no more. The same in his 2 book of Soliloquies: I'lud vero
quod interrogast quis concesserit, ut quod in subjecto est mameat ipso
intereunte subfecto?
Who can yield to that thou have demanded of me, that that which is in the
subject, may remain after the subject is abolished?

Briefly, in all the Fathers you shall not find one that says that in the
Eucharist the accidents remain without a Subject. That if they had be leeved
it, doubtless when they said that an accident is never without a subject, they
would have brought this exception taken from the Sacrament.

Moreover S. Austin in his 3 book of ^he Trinity, chap. 10. says openly that
^n the Eucharist there is no miracle wrought. The bread (says he) made for
^his use, is eaten when the Sacrament is re^eived: but because these things are
known unto men, by reason they are made by men, Haec henorem habere possunt ut
religiosa, stuporem autem habere ut mira non possunt.
(...) they may well be honored as religious: but cannot be admired as
miraculous. In the 3 Tome of this good Doctor there are 3 books Of the
marvelous things of the Scriptures, wherein he speaks nothing of
Transubstantiation, nor of the Eucharist.

And those that talk here of Miracle, understand not what a miracle is. A
Miracle is a sensible and a visible effect of the power of God, against or
above the course of nature, to the end he may make his virtue known unto men.
But in the Mass there is nothing seen miraculous. None can boast without
lying, that ever he saw the Transubstantiation made. We do not deny but God may
do all these things, if he would. But we say it is impossible that he would
have such things to come to pass. For he will be no liar, nor will contradict
himself, nor tie and submit his omnipotency to mers imagination, who employ
it in ridiculous things, and forging of Chymera'^ and castles in the air.

CHAP. XX, Answers to some examples brought out of the Scriptures by our
adversaries for to prove that the body of Christ has been sometimes in two
several places.
TO cloak this abuse, they say that as God has made that sometimes two bodies
have filled and occupied but one place, so he can make that one and the same
body be in several places at once: and thereupon they allege for example that
Christ entered in at the doors shut, John 20.19. and consequently did penetrate
the wood of the doors. But they falsify the Scripture. S. John says not that
Christ entered in at the doors shut, but that he entered in when the doors
were shut. (...).
It may be that he went in by some other place than by the ^ore. It may be that
the wood of the door, or the stones of the wall yielded into him, the creature
yielding and o^eying the Creator, as Hieron. ad Pammach. adv. Joh. Ierosol.
Deum transire per clausam portam, and creatu^ ram cedere creatori.
Hierome says, God went in at the door shut, the creature having yielded to
the Creator. By saying that he entered in at the door shut, he meant the door
yielded to him, or that ^ee opened it at his coming in. So if I say, a muddie
brook runs through a clear water, I mean it marred it as it went through.
But the best is always to stick close to the holy Scriptures.

Again, they allege to the same purpose, that Christ's body coming out of the
Sepulcher, passed through the stone that stopped the mouth of the Sepulcher,
without taking away or removing the stone. Matthew. 28.2. But this place is
likewise alleged falsely: For Saint Matthew in the very same place says the
clean contrary. There was (says he) a great Earthquake: For the Angel of the
Lord descended from heaven, and came, and (...)
rolled back the stone from the door of the Sepulcher. And Mark, chap. 16.4.
says the same. Thom. 1. Council. Edition. Golonan. 1567. page 814. Revoluto
monimenti lapide, tertio die caro resurrexit.
Leo the first Bishop of Rome, in his 95 Epistle to Leo Augustus, acknowledges
it, saying that in the third day the flesh of the Lord arose again, the stone
of the monument being rolls back.

In vain do they allege that Christ walked upon the waters. For what i^ that
to prove that his body may be in several places at one and the same time* He
that walks upon the waters, is not for that far from himself. If Christ by
his divine power* has made the waters firm under his feet, or sustained his
body that it might not sink, he has not for that placed his body in several
places, nor changed the nature of his body. If I keep up and uphold with my
hand a stone above the water, that changes not the nature of the stone, and
does not take from it its weight and heaviness.

For to prove that the body of the Lord has been sometimes in two several
places at once, they allege the 23 chapter of the Acts, verse 11. where it is
said, (...).
That the night following, the Lord stood by Paul: from whence they do
infer that Christ's body being in heaven, stood nevertheless by Saint Paul on
earth. In speaking thus, they presuppose without proof that the Lord of whom
is spoken in this place, is Christ only, and not God simply without
distinction of persons. Yea even in re^^raining this word, LORD, to Christ's
person, there is nothing in that place that obliges us to understand this of
the body of Christ, rather then of his divine nature and virtue. Might not ^he
son of God speak and make himself sensible to Saint Paul by his divine
virtue, without a local and bodily approach? The Greek word (...), Act. 12.7.
and Luc. 2.9. (...) Act. 23.27. (...).
whereof Saint Luke makes use, signifies not only to stand by one, but also
to come upon him unlooked for, to relieve and succor him, and make him feel
his favor, as may be seen Acts 12.7. Luke 2.9. Acts 23.27. In all these
places the Greek word signifies to come upon unlooked for. Now the Roman
Church does not believe that Christ comes unto the Sacrament, but believes that
he is made in it.

CHAP. XXI. Of the dignity of Priests. And that our Adversaries debase and
vilisie the utilitie and efficacy o^ Masses, and make them unprofitable for
the remission of sins. And of the traffic of Masses.
THe Doctors of the Roman Church do speak of the Eucharist as of the highest
mystery of Christian Religion, and extol with such big terms the power of
priests in making Christ with a few words, that they call them Gods and
Creators of their Creator, having a power above the blessed Virgin Mary, and
above all the Angels, who cannot make Christ, because he is made already. So
says Gabriel Biel in his 4 lesson upon the Canon of the Mass. Ad Sacerdotii
authoritatem Angeli coelorum cives no^ audent aspira^e.
The Angels, Citizens of Heaven, dare not aspire to the authority of
Priesthood. And a little after: Transgrediendo perinde agmina Angetorum, ad
ipsam eoeli Reg^na^, and mundi Dom nam veniamus. Haec etsi in gratiae
pl^nitudine ^^^aturas supergrediatur, universas, Hierarch^s tamen cedit it
commissi mysterii executione.
Passing by the bands of Angels, let us come to the Queen of Heaven and Lady
of the World. The same, though in pleni^^de of grace she goes beyond all the
crea^ures, yet she yields to the Hierarchs of ^he Church, (he calls the Priests
so) in the ^xecution of the Mystery committed unto ^^em. And it is in the same
lesson where ^e says, that Christ in incarnate and made ^^esh in the hands of
Priests, as in the Vir^ins womb, and that Priests do create their Creator,
and have power over the ^ody of Christ.

Peter de Besse in his Book of the Royal Priesthood, chapter 2. speaks thus,
Saint Peter adds that all Priests are Kings, in token whereof they wear the
crown. And in the 3 chapter: The Priesthood and the Godhead are in some things
to be paralleled, and are almost of equal greatness, since they have equal
power, Matthew. 16. and 18. Again, Seeing that the Priesthood walks hand in
hand with the Godhead, and that Priests are Gods: it goes far beyond the
kingly authority, and Priests are far above Kings. And in the same place, he
calls them Masters of Kings, surpassing as much in dignity the royal office,
as the Soul surpasses the body. Which he has taken out of Baron. annal. An.
57.. 31. At vero long praestare sacerdotes regibus ar^ gumento quo utitur
plane significat. Et paulo post, Regem sacris ministris minorem gerere ordine^
certum est. And shows it by the example of S. Martin, who made a Priest drink
before the Emperor, at the Emperor his own table.
Baronius. He adds: Incredible things (says he) but yet true, that the power
of Priests is so great, and their excellency so noble, that heaven depends on
them. Item in the same place comparing the Priests with Josuah, at whose Prayer
the Sun stood still, he says: Josuah stopped but the Sun, but these (to
wit the Priests) stay Christ being in heaven, in the midst of an Altar. The
creature obeyed to the first, but the Creator obeyes to these last: The Sun
to the one, and God to the other, as often as they pronounce the sacred words.
To be short, he concludes that whatsoever God is in heaven, the Priest is the
same on earth. And all that with the approbation of the Faculty of Divinity at
Paris, prefixed in the front of the Book.

It is good to know that England having been a long time without a Bishop
subject to the Pope, the English Papists complained lately they had no body to
confer them the Orders, and to minister unto them the confirmation, without
which the Canons say that a man cannot be wholly a Christian. Unto whose desire
Vrhan now reigning being willing to satisfy, sent them a titular Bishop which
he has called Bishop of Calcedon. But the Jesuits, that are in possession of
ruling and governing among the English Papists, would not receive that Bishop,
saying that Confirmation is not necessary, and that the Baptismall Unction may
supply the want of Episcopal Crisome and that a Church may be without a
Bishop. Against whom the Sorbonne of Paris did cast some Censures, calling
their doctrine heretical and scandalous. Of which censures these Jesuits made
a laughing stock, in a Book full of bitterness, which they have titled
Spongia. For to refute this Spongia, the Sorbonne made use of the pen of a
Sorbonist called Petrus Aurelius. In whose Book printed at Paris by Charles
Morell, I find these words in the page 175. The Bishops have the power to
produce Christ, Anno. 1634.
that is to say, God himself, etc. Which virtue is in a manner infinite, and
equivalent not only to the fecunditie of the Virgin Mother of God, inasmuch as
the Virgin-Priests procreate upon the Altar the same God whom the Virgin
procreated first in her most holy womb: But als^ has some ^^^ulation with the
eternal operationes by which the divine persons are produced, and with the
eternal generation, by which the F^^ther produces with his divine mouth the
same Word which the Priests produce with their sacred mouths. And gathers from
thence, that the power of Priests surpasses very far all the Angelical
power. And in the page 177. he says that Priests do perfect and accomplish
the Redemption of mankind. And in the page 187. he says that the power of
Priests is most like unto the Divine power, and that they have power over the
real body of Christ, and over his mystical body which is the Church: and that
with the Approbation of the Sorbon set in the front of the Book.

Long before, Pope Urban the second, Simeon Dunelmensis. lib. ^. Chron. Vignier
in his Ecclesiastiall History page 310.
in the year 1097. called a Council at Rome against the Emperor Henry the
fourth, in which he did thunder against earthly Princes who challenged to
themselves the investiture of Benefices, alleging it is a thing abominable
that the hands of those which create God their Creator by their Character,
should be bound to this ignominy to be as drudges or servants to the hands
that are night and day polluted with filthy and dishonest attractations. If
these things be true, reason requires that so great a power has not been
given unto Priests without great necessity, and without some great profit
should come thereby unto the Christian Church, and that so many wonders as our
Adversaries pile up in the Eucharist, be greatly useful and profitable to the
faithful. Yet when we come to examine what the fruit is that comes from
Transubstantiation and from the Sacrifice of the Mass, we find they reduce it
almost to nothing, and make the Mass almost needless and unprofitable.

That appears as clear as the day, by comparing it with Baptism. For in
Baptism there is no Transubstantiation made. After these words I baptize thee
in the name of the Father, etc. the water remains in its own nature, and is
not turned into blood. Yet notwithstanding, according to the doctrine of the
Roman Church, Baptism is a thousand times more profitable and beneficial, and
of a more excellent nature, For in the Roman Church they hold Baptism with
water absolutely necessary to Salvation. But as for the Eucharist, our
Adversaries hold that many are saved without being partakers thereof: as
appears by the example of John the Baptist, and of the Theife crucified with
Christ our Lord, and of many faithful people that dye without having partaked
thereof, specially of those which the Ancient Church did call Catechumenes.

Secondly our Adversaries say, that by Baptism not only original sin is
pardoned, but even wholly taken away, so that those which are Baptized, have no
more original sin, nor nothing (to speak properly) that may be called
sin. But concerning the Eucharist, the Roman Church does not believe that it
wipes away the vices, nor vicious customs in such sort as it may be said that
all those which are made partakers of the Eucharist, be without pride, or
without covetouesnesse, or without lascivious lusts.

The principal is, that our Adversaries teach that by Baptism is remitted and
abolished all the guilt and punishment, both eternal and temporal, of all the
sins as well venial as mortal, committed before Baptism. But as for the
Eucharist, they say it avails but against venial I sins, which they make to
be so light, that a man needs not so much as to have and contrition or
repentance for them. Vasquez the Jesuit: Vasquez Tomo III. in 3 parte^ Thomae
Disp. 179. cap 3. number. 26. Rudes non deb^nt hude ar t^^ulum seire, neque
virtutem hujus Sacrament^, prou^are^^ ad remit^^dum v^^ia l^^, qui^ haec
^^^issi^ non est ad s^lutem ne^essar^^.
The rude and vulgar sort ought not to know the particular virtue of this
Sacrament in remitting venial sins, for that remission is not necessary unto
salvation. And the Catechism of the Council of Trent, in the chapter of the
Sacrament of the Eucharist: Catechis. Trident. Remitt^ Eucharisti^i. and
condonari leviora peccat a quae venialia dici solent, no^ est quod dubitar^
debeat
It must not be doubted but by the Eucharist, light sins, which are called
venial, are remitted and forgiven, which remission Vasquez told us just now
not to be necessary. Bellarmin in the seventeenth Chapter of his fourth Book
of the Eucharist, puts this among Luthers errors, to have said that the
first effect of this Sacrament is the remission of mortal sins. And about
the end of the same Chapter: The whole question is reduced to this article,
Whether the Sacrament of the Eucharist do confer the forgiveness of mortal
sins wherewith a man's conscience is charged, or else (for it comes all to
one) if for to receive the Communion worthily, it be required that a man's
conscience be not charged with any mortal sin: For all Catholics teach that
the Eucharist remits not such sins wherewith a man's conscience is laden, and
therefore it is requisite they should be purged before. And in the beginning of
the eighteenth Chapter: In this chapter it is not taught that the Eucharist be
instituted for the remission of sins, but only for to preserve spiritual
life.

And though even these Doctors were not so express upon this subject, Yet the
practice of the Roman Church shows evidently that the Eucharist and the Mass
availes nothing for the remission of sins. For he that will receive the
communion, must be confessed before, and after confession he receives of the
Priest the absolution and forgiveness of all his sins. Whereupon it
follows, that when a little after he receives the host, there is nothing at
all to be pardoned: and that the Eucharist is a plaster for a healed wound,
and a remedy for a disease which is not.

Of how small efficacy likewise the Sacrifice of the Mass is in the Roman
Church, appears in that they sing or say ten thousand Masses for to draw one
Soul out of Purgatory, and yet after so many Masses, they doubt still whether
that Soul be in Heaven, and are still uncertain of its condition.

They Sacrifice in private Masses the body of Christ in a corner of a Church,
for the easing of a sick body, or for the curing of a horse; but it falls out
very often that both man and horse dye, and that the Priest has created his
Creator and Sacrificed Christ for naught. Whence arises a great occasion of
doubting whether Masses serve for drawing of Souls out of Purgatory. For if
Masses cannot obtain so small a thing, what assurance have we they shall
obtain a greater? seeing that no Soul comes out of that Country for to
thank those who in causing Masses to be said, have eased it with their money.
For these private Masses are paid by such as cause them to be said at their
intention. The Priest in his Memento names none of those for whom nothing was
given. Of particular Masses for the Soul of a Beggar, there is no speech of
it. Therefore Gabriel Biel in his 25 Lesson upon the Canon of the Mass, warnes
the Testators Attendere debent haec testat^res, ut non desidibus and
torpe^tibus aut alias minus timoratis executiones suarum studeant committere
voluntatum, ne per executionis negligentia^ dum non siunt quae ordinarunt
suffragijs preventur, etc.
that bequeath any thing to the Church for the easing of their Souls, to choose
faithful executors, least their Souls be frustrated of the Suffrages of the
Church, for lack of payment. That is to say, that Masses are not said if they
be not paid for before hand.

And seeing that our Adversaries hold with us that our Savior Christ, sitting
at the right hand of God, makes request for all the faithful: it follows that
he makes request also for the Souls that are in Purgatory. If they of me out
of that fire through his Intercession, Masses are unprofitable. But if they
come not out; who will believe that a Mass or a Papal Indulgence can do that
which Christ's Intercession has not done?

This is a Maxim received among the Romish Doctors, that a Eman. Sa Aphotism.
verbo Miss^^. Si missapro mulus offer^tur non tan^undom singulis prodesse^, ac
si pro allis solis offerretur. Sylocsier, Navorrus, Tolerus, Suarez, Scotus.
Mass said for three or four persons that join and pay for it together, is
not so available and profitable unto them, as if every one should cause a Mass
to be said for himself alone. By this means the gain increases three or
four fold Emanuel Sa the Jesuit, in his Aphorisms, gives this rule full of
great equity: Idem Ibidem. cus datur certa peeunae summa pro M^ssis a
sed^^endas potest alios pro^^minore pretuo conducere qua adjuvent, (...)
reliquit fibs relinere.
That if a Priest has received a sum of money for to say a certain number
of Masses, be may hire other Priests that will say them at a lower rate, and
keep to himself the rest of the money.

And it is mavelous and strange, that Priests, which are thought to have the
power to make a God with a few words, and to carry Christ every day shut up in
a Pixe or Box, and in their stomaks, are in the mean while in such contempt,
and that the Country Priests are the reproach and the very dregs of the people:
And that a Cardinal Deacon, who has no power to make Christ, should equal in
magnificence the Kings of the Earth, whilst a wretched Priest is tippling in an
Alehouse, and of his singing of Masses makes his only living. Who when he
makes Christ in a private Mass for two or three groats, may justly say with
Judas, What will you give me and I will deliver him unto you? Men boast to give
or deliver God unto others, and cannot give Salvation. And our Adversaries
confess, that there are some Priests damned: Whereupon it will follow, that a
man which has carried God so many times, is himself carried away by the
Devil.

CHAP. XXII. That the Roman Religion is a new Religion, and forged for the
Popes profit and of the Clergy.
AFter that our Adversaries have utterly changed and wholly disfigured the
Christian Religion, it becomes them very ill to accuse us of noveltie. For
indeed the Roman Religion is a garment patched with new pieces, and a heap or
pile of doctrines invented and added from age to age, beaten upon the anvile of
Ambition and covetousness. We are ready to undergo all kinds of punishments,
if in the five hundred years after Christ, (and we might descend lower) one man
be found, that had and professed a Religion coming any thing near to the
Roman Religion as it is at this day. Can they find one Church in all the
Antiquity, wherein the Concilij Consta^. sess. XIII. Quod in primitiva Ecclesia
hujusmodi Sacramenrum recipiretur a sidelibus sub utraque specie.
people was deprived of the communion of the Cup? Has the Ancient Church
forbidden unto the people the reading of the holy Scriptures? Did he believe
the fire of Purgatory? Was there then any speech of Roman Gabriel Biel, lect.
57 in can. Missae: Dicendum quod ante tempora beati Greg. modicus vel nullus
fuit usus indulgen tiarum. Vid. Caiet. tract. de Indulgent. cap. 2. and
Navarrum Tom. 3. Comment. de Jubil. and Indulg. septimo Notabili, Art. 5. and 6.
Indulgences, and of the Treasure of the Church, in which the Pope gathers up
the Superabundance of Satisfactions and penal works of Saints and Monk^, and
distributes them to others by his Indulgences? Did they make in those days any
Images of God and of the Trinity, in stone or in painting? Did men worship the
Images of Saints? Was there then any Penitents that whipped themselves in
public, not only for their own sins, but also to satisfy for the sins
of other men? Did the Bishops of Asia, Egypt, Africa, etc. swear allegiance
to the Bishop of Rome, or did they take from him their Letters of Investure?

Was the public Service read in an unknown tongue to the people? Did the
Bishop of Rome then call himself a God? Did he cause himself to be
worshipped? Did he give Pardons of two or three hundred thousand years? Did he
depose Kings, and brag of his power to give and take away their Kingdoms? Had
he power to dispense of Oaths and Vows? And to disjoyne Marriages lawfully
contracted, under color of Monachall^ profession? Did they then speak of
Beads, Rosaries, blessed Grains, Agnus Dei? etc. The like I say of the title
they give to the Virgin Mary, of Queen of Heaven and Lady of the World: and of
the several Offices they give unto Saints, to the one the charge over such a
Country, to the other over such a Disease, to another over such and such a
trade. As also the power that Priests take upon them to give the absolution,
and forgive sins in the quality of Judges, is a new thing, and of the dregs
of the latter ages. Item Private Masses without Communicants and without
assistants, said at the Intention of those that pay for them, are a thing
whereof no trace is to be found in all Antiquity. As also the tax of the
Papal Chauncerie, wherein the Absolutions for Cap. de absolut o^ibus.
Absolutio pro co qui interfecit patrem, matrem, gros. 7 Absolut io pro eo qui
falsificavit litteras Apostolicas, grossos 15.
Murder, for Parricide, Inceste, Perjury, are taxed at a certain rate of
money. So many groats, or so many Ducats for a man that has killed his Father:
so much for him that has lain with his Mother. A Roman Jesuit called Silvester
Petra sancta wrote lately a Book against me, wherein he teaches us a thing
which we knew not before. He says in the thirteenth Chapter, that during the
time of Advent and Lent, the Pope permits not a man in Rome to pass the whole
night in a bawdy house: that would be thought (...) violating of the holiness
of Lent. Wherefore in those days of devotion, it is only permitted to pass
the whole day and a part of the night in the Bawdy House. Can such Laws be
found in the Ancient Church? Briefly, it is a very new Religion, and a heap of
doctrines and Laws, unheard off in all Antiquity, expressly invented for
gain, and for the raising of the Popes Empire, and building up that Monarchy
which was not in the first ages of the Church: And for to keep the People in
ignorance, least they should discover these Mysteries.

For example, Indulgences, Priv^^^ Masses, Masses and S^ffrage^ (...) dead, are
very lucrative (...) to the Pope and (...) Auricul^^ (...) the (...) Conscien^^
(...) jection. (...) is not giv^^ (...) and satis^^^ (...) Monks, serve to
fill up that Spiritual Treasure of the Pope, whereof he carries the keys,
distributing these satisfactions to the people by his Indulgences, so lucrative
and profitable to the Pope and his Clergy. By Absolutions the Priests make
themselves Judges of Souls, and Judges in Gods cause. In reserving to
themselves and unto Kings the communion of the Cup, they make themselves
companions unto Kings, and exalt themselves above the People. By the single
life of Bishops, and other Clergy men, the Pope keeps the Ecclesiastical
goods from being wasted and consumed, and from being diverted and turned to the
relief and enriching of the Children. In painting God the Father dressed like
a Pope, they plant this opinion in the mind of the People, that the Pope is
like unto God, and that God makes great account of the Pope, since he borrowes
his habit. By Canonizing of Saints, the Pope makes the People to worship his
grooms, and gives the title of Saint for a recompense of Services. By the
Sacrament of Penance, the Pope and his Priests usurp the power of imposing
corporal and pecuniary punishments, Thus caused he Henry the second of England
to be whipped by a troop of Monks. As is to be seen in Matthew. Paris, and in
West monasteriensis
so far as to cause Kings to ^e whipped. By the Service in the Latin ^ongue he
entertaines the People in ^gnorance, and giving them his tongue, planteth in
the midst of them a mark of his Empire. He gives them the Roman Language for
to came and inure them to the Roman Religion. The Popes power to unthrone
Kings, makes him King of Kings, and exalts him on an Empire above all the
Greatness that is in the World. Images, which are called ignorant men's Books,
accustom the People to forget, and be without the Scriptures, which in those
Countries where the inquisition reigns, is a Book altogether unknown among
the People. By Transubstantiation, Priests make Christ, and have him in their
own power. By Holy Days that the Pope ordaines, he rules the Civil
Government, causing the Shops to be shut up, and the Seats of Justice and of
the Kings Counsel to cease. When the Merchants shop shuts, the Clergie-mens
shop opens. For then do the People go to gain Pardons (as they term it)
and visit Relics, and always the Basin is by. By the distinction of meats
and fasting days, the Pope rules the Markets, and bellies, and Kitchins, and
Kings and Peoples tables. And the more prohibitions there is, the oftener come
they to the Pope and to the Prelates for to have dispensations. The Pope has
made of Matrimony a Sacrament, that he might take away from the civil
Magistrates and Judges Secular the right of judging of such causes; for it
belongs to the Church to judge of Sacraments.

By Dispensations in degrees of consanguinity which in the Word of God hinders
the Marriage, the Pope makes that the Children of Princes (for such
dispensations are given but to Great ones) are obliged to defend the Popes
Authority, if they will be held for legitimate. By Annates or first fruits of
Benefices, and the sale of Archiepiscopall Cloakes, the Pope makes an
incredible gain. And there is such a Cloak, for which he draws above
threescore thousand Ducats. By the power which the Pope assumes to himself to
change the Commandments of God, and to dispense of Vows and Oaths made unto
God, he exalts himself above God. For he that can free and exempt men from
obeying God and being faithful to him, must be greater than God.

The Invocation of Saints, the Adoration of Relics, and the Miracles which
are said to be wrought at those Relics, serve to build up many Churches and
Monasteries, which are as so many props to the Papal Domination. In sum, all
the subtilty and policy in the World has been brought therein. Never was there
any Empire built with so much craft and cunning. The doctrine which teaches
that Christ Jesus by his death has delivered us from the guilt and punishment
of sins before Baptism: but as for the sins committed after Baptism, that
we must bear the punishment for them, either in this life, or in Purgatory:
has clipped Christ's benefice for to make place unto their traffic, and for to
give credit to their Indulgences, and Masses for the dead. In a word, they make
profit of all: Death it self is tributary to the Roman Clergy.

CHAP. XXIII. Answer to the Question made unto us by our Adversaries, Where was
your Religion before Calvin.
THis demand which every foot is made unto us by our Adversaries, viz. Show us
where your Religion was before Calvin, is altogether injust and deceitful. For
to keep us from examining the Roman Religion by the holy Scripture, they amuse
us with humane Histories. For this is not a question of Divinity, but of
History, wherein God has not commanded us to be learned and skillful that we
may be saved: But has commanded us to be instructed in his Word. At the day
of judgment, God shall not ask us whether we have believed as they did
believe before Calvin: but Saint Paul tells us that God shall judge us according
to his Gospel, and that men shall be judged by the Law of God, Romans 2.12. and
16, That if for to be saved it were necessary to know the History of the ages
before Calvin, mounting upwards from Calvin, to the Apostles time, hardly one
Christian of a thousand could be saved.

That if the question be touching Histories, it is certain we must begin by
the Ancientest, and that it belongs to our Adversaries to show where their
Religion was in the time of the Apostles, before they speak of the time before
Calvin. There they are at a stand and driven to a nonplus, and not being able
to show their Religion in the Apostles writings, they send us back to an
unwritten word, which depends on the Popes Authority, whom they make judge in
his own cause; and make the Church of Rome the Sovereign Judge of her own
proper duty.

The principal is, that the Christian Church is subject to the Laws and to
the practice of the Church of the Apostles time, and not to the example of what
was done before Calvin. Of whom they speak as of the Inventer of our Religion,
because he exhorted us to believe the holy Scriptures. For Calvin gave us not
any Laws. We speak not of him in our Sermons, we ground not our selves upon
his authority, we do not say of him what the Church of Rome says of the Pope,
to wit that he could not err. We do not call our selves Calvinists, as our
Adversaries acknowledge themselves to be Papists, and make glory of that title,
as Certe nullo sublimiori gloriae titulo exornare, nec certius, eos esse
Catholicos, demonstrare potuissent, quam eos nuncupare Romanos atque Papistas.
Cardinal Baronius does, in his Martyrologie at the 16 of October, where he
says that a man cannot be adorned with a higher degree of glory than to be
called a Papist. So that after his account the title of Papist is of as much
worth as the name of a Christian.

This demand is so much the more absurd, as it is made unto us. For when they
ask of us where our Religion was before Calvin, they presuppose that the
Orthodoxe Church ought to be visible in all ages: Which the Scripture says
not, but foretells us of great revolts and false Doctors that shall teach men to
abstain from Marriage and from meats which God has created for to be
received with thanksgiving, 1. Timoth. 4.3. It foretells us that all the Earth
ravished in admiration, shall go after the Beast, Revel. 13, 3. and that when
Christ shall come, hardly shall he find faith on the earth, Luke 18.8. 2. These.
2. Revel. 17.
It tells us of the Son of perdition that shall be called God, and shall do
wonders: and of the great harlot clothed with scarlet, who sits in the
City with seven hills, that reigns over the Kings of the earth, which
seduceth Kings and makes them drunk, and is made drunk with the blood of the
Saints and Faithful. It tells us in the twelfth of the Revelation that wings
are given to the Church for to fly into the Wilderness, and live there hidden
for a time. It warnes us that the broad way where the throng of Peoples
passes, leads into perdition.

Which things afford us another consideration. That is if a Cutpurse asks
him whom he has robbed of his purse, Where is thy Purse? This thief adds
scoffing and derision to his theft. So the Pope, who since so many ages has
persecuted to the uttermost the Church of God, and endeavored to abolish it,
adds to this violence this derision and scoffing, when he asks, Where was
your Religion at that time? For it were rather his part to inform us where he
had put her himself, and to what pass he had reduced her.

In the mean while, though we are not bound to answer to such an absurd and
injust a demand, and which does not at all concern Religion, and being
propounded by men whose Religion is new, and that have swerved from the Ancient
Christian Religion, and who even say that the Pope may add unto the Creed new
Articles of Faith: Yet we say that it is four or five hundred years ago since
the Pope persecuteth with fire and sword the Faithful ones, whereof there was
a great number in France, in the Low countries, England, Germany, Bohemia, and
Hungaria, to whom our Adversaries gave odious nicknames, calling them
Valdenses, Albigenses, Sodomites, Picards, etc. And fathering upon them many
impious and abominable doctrines f^rre from their belief. Of whom were
Massacred in few months by one Domi^ick, Author of the Order of the Jacobins,
above two hundred thousand in Languedoe and Gasconie, in Pope Innocent the
third his time. Of these faithful people we have the Confession agreeable to
ours, written in their own Language: a residue of which People remains still
in Bohemia, Hungaria, Moravia, and in the Valleys of Angrogne, Luzerne, Peruse,
Saint Martin, Pragela, Merindoles, and Cabrieres which Churches have joined
themselves to ours, so soon as it pleased God to display in France and the
neighboring Countries, the Banner of his Gospel. And the sudden alteration
that happened in Luthers time, showed that Europe was full of People that knew
the truth, and groaned after a Reformation, which the Pope promised always,
but would never suffer it to come to execution.

And for to specify some thing touching the age immediately before Calvin:
Aeneas Sylvius, who in the year 1458. attained to the Popedom, was a capital
enemy to the faithful (of whom in his time Bohemia and Hungaria, and the
neighboring Countries were full) and was a firebrand of war for to provoke
the Emperors and Popes to persecute them. Wherefore his testimony in this
point is the more worthy of credit. This man in his 130 Epistle, describes his
journey to Tabor, a City in Bohemia, and the Religion of the Inhabitants, and
the Conferences he had with them. Their sect (says he) is pestilentious and
abominable, and worthy of the uttermost punishment. They will not admit the
Church of Rome to have the Primacy, nor that the Clergy should have any thing
in propriety. They pull down the Images of God and of his Saints. They deny
Purgatory. They hold that the Prayers of Saints which reign with Christ,
avail nothing unto men. They observe no holy day but the Lords day and Easter.
Contemn fasting and the Canonical Prayers. They give the Eucharist under the
kinds of bread and wine, even to little Children and to mad men. When they
consecrate the Sacrament, they say nothing but the Lords Prayer, and the words
of Consecration. They change no habits and take not any ornaments. Yea some of
them are so mad as to hold that the very body of Christ is not in the
Sacrament of the Altar, but that it is only the representation thereof: being
wandering Sactators of Berengarius unconverted. Among the Sacraments of the
Church they admit the Baptism, and the Eucharist, and Marriage, and Orders.
But as for the Sacrament of Penance, they make little account of it. But of
Confirmation and extreme Unction, they make no reckoning at all. They are very
opposite to the Religions of Monks, and affirm they be diabolical
Inventions. They use mere Water in Baptism. They have no holy Water. They me
not consecrate their Churchyards. They bury their dead in the fields and with
^easts, as also they deserve it, etc. And ^ee adds that the Emperor, in
stead of destroying them, granted unto them safety and liberty. But he should
have added to this, that the Emperor Sigismond having by arms assaulted and
scuffled with them, lost there many Battles. For which cause he did let them
rest in peace. In this discourse Aeneas has chopped and thrust in some
calumniations; as when he says they give the Eucharist to mad men and to
Infants, and bury their dead with beasts. Things very absurd, and that never
were. As for the rest, all our Religion almost is seen in it.

Hungaria at the same time was full of Faithful people holding the same
belief. They presented to the King Vladislaus, in the year of our Lord 1508.
their Confession of faith, conformable to ours, defending themselves against an
Austin Friar that had accused them to the King of many errors, namely, for that
they did not obey the Pope, called not upon Saints, denied Purgatory, received
the Communion in both kinds, and rejected Transubstantiation. Upon which last
point, they speak thus: This Friar writes that the bread and wine in their
natural substance are changed into the body and blood of Christ, This
Confession is to be found in Fascioulo rerum expetendarum.
and are changed into Christ God and man, so that nothing of the substance of
the bread and wine remains, but that the only accidents are merely upheld
by miracle. This Confession of faith has no foundation in the Lord Christ
Jesus his words, who never spoke one word of the conversion of the substance.
And a little after, By that is manifested that the Primitive Church had this
Belief, and has confessed it, and has not erred, and did not bow at this
Sacrament. For in that time they received the Sacrament sitting, and reserved
nothing of it, and carried none of it out of the house, etc.

About the same time, in the year 1520. Calvin being yet very young, the
Faithful of Provence presented to the Parliament of Aix their Confession of
Faith, conformable to ours. Upon the point of the Sacrament, they speak thus:
We are not entangled with any errors or heresies condemned by the Ancient
Church, and we hold the documents and instructions approved by the true Faith.
And as for the Sacraments particularly, we have the Sacraments in honor, and
believe that they be testimonies and signs by which Gods grace is confirmed
and assured in our consciences. For which cause we believe that Baptism is a
sign whereby the purgation that we obtain by the blood of Jesus Christ, is
corroborated, in such sort that it is the true washing of Regeneration and
renovation. The Lords Supper is the sign under which the true Communion of his
body and blood is given unto us. And these poor Churches were the remainder of
the horrible Persecutions exercised by the space of three or four hundred
years, by Kings and Princes at the instigation of Popes. Which Churches they
had defamed with horrible heresies, accusing them to be Manicheans, and enemies
of Marriage: even as they accuse us now to be enemies unto the Saints and the
blessed Virgin, and to believe that good works are not necessary to salvation,
and that we make God Author of sin.

A few years before, under the reign of good King Lewis the XII. who was
called the Father of the People, happed a memorable thing which Carolus
Molinaeus a famous Jurisconsulte recites in his Book of the French Monarchy.
He says that certain Cardinals and Prelates did go about to stir up and
incite this good King to destroy and exterminate the Inhabitants of Cabrieres
and Merindoles in Provence, saying they were Sorcerers, Incestuous persons,
heretics, condemned already by the Apostolic Sea. But this King answered that
he would condemn no body to death without hearing both sides, and be fully
acquainted with the cause. And that for that end he sent one Adam Fumee, a
Master of Request, and John Parin a Jacobin Friar, his Confessor, for to
transport themselves into the place where they lived, and be informed of their
Religion. Which they did, and reported to the King, that among these men they
had found no Images, nor any ^race or vestige of any ornaments of Masses or
Papal Ceremonies. That they had found nothing touching Magical Arts,
whoredoms and other crimes laid upon them. The King understanding this, cried
out with a loud voice, and swore that those people were better Christians than
he and his people, and confirmed their privileges and immunities. That fell
out about the year 1412. Calvin scarce being borne.

Pope Julius the second, made wars against this King: But the King defeated
his Army, and the Emperors, near the City of Ravenna: Assembled a Council
at Piso against the Pope: Caused money to be coined with this Inscription
round about. PERDAM BABYLONIS NOMEN, as Thuanus relates in the first Book of
his History.

But under the reign of King Francis the first, Successor unto Lewis the
twelfth, these poor Churches of Provence suffered hard and rude persecutions
and Massacres. Nevertheless, they subsist yet at this day, and Thuanus in the
sixth Book of his History, speaks of their Religion: He says that these
Valdenses (for he terms them so) did say that the Church of Rome had
departed from the faith of Christ Jesus, and was become Babylon, and the great
Whore whereof is spoken in the Revelation: That none ought to obey the Pope nor
his Prelates: That Monachall life was a sink of the Church, and an Infernal
thing: That the fi^^^ of Rurgatorie, the Mass, the Dedicati^ of Churches, the
Service of Saints, as Suffrages for the dead, were invention^ Satan. Then he
adds: To these (...) and principal heads of their doctrine, (...) thens were
falsely added, touching Muriage, the Resurrection, the state an^ condition of
the dead, and touch^^ meats.

The same Author in the 27 Book speaks of the Churches of the Valsies of the
Alps, which he says to be descended from the ancient Valdeuses, which have
yet at this very day a Religion altogether conformable to ourt and says that
in the year 1560 they presented their Confession of Faith unto those whom the
Duke of Savoye their Lord had sent them, by which they declared that they stuck
fast and adheared to the ancient doctrine contained in the Old and New
Testament, and to the Apostles Creed, and to the four first General Councels,
and that for the rule of a good life they kept themselves close to the run
Commandments of the the Law. That they taught to live chastely, soberly, and
justly, and to yield obedience unto Princes and Magistrates. That nevertheless
they rejected Sacrifice of the Mass, the ^^^rament of Penance, Auricular
Con^^sion, humane Traditions, Prayers for the dead, but cleaved to the holy
Scrip^^es. Which things they said to have ^^eived not from Calvin, but from
Christ and his Apostles: For the strait ^^ssages and steep places of the Alps
^^d preserved them from the persecuti^^s of the Pope and his Ministers.

And at this very day also, the Church of Ethiopia, which contains 17 great
^^ovinces, agrees with us in the fun^amentall points of Faith, though she ^ave
some small superstitions. For she ^eleeveth not Purgatory, nor
Transub^antiation. She makes no elevation for Adoration of the Host. Is not
subject to the Pope. Knows nor what Indulgences mean, nor private Masses.
Celebrateth the divine Service in the Ethiopian tongue. Gives the Communion to
the People under both kinds. Worships no Images. Has but one Table or Altar
in the Church. Has Monks, but they are Muried, and earne their living by the
work of their hands. Baptiseth not the male Children till forty days after
this (...) and the females after threes^^^ days: an assured sign that she
believes not (...) Baptism of Water to be necessary u^^ Salvation. These
things are seen (...) the History of Francis Alvarez, a P^^tugall Monk, who
lived six yeare^^ the Court of the great Neguz Empert^^ of Ethiopia.

The Ethiopian Churches are cal^^niously and falsely accused to be Eutichians.
True it is they be subje^^ to the Patriarch of Alexandria is who (...) an
Eutichian. But that subjection i^^^ in the doctrine, but only in that (...)
said Patriarch has the right of no^^^ nation of the Abuna or chief Pr^late of
the Ethiopians when the Se^^voide.

The Greek Church more ancient tha^ the Roman, and of whom the Chu^^^ of Rome
received the Christian Religion, does not acknowledge the Pope rejects his
Laws, knows not wha^ his Indulgences are. Believes neithe^ the Purgatory,
nor the Transubstantiation. Celebrateth the divine Service in the Greek
tongue. Has her Priests married. Has no Liturgies or Private Masses, and
comes a greatdeale nearer to our Religion than to the Romish.

And this I say, not that we ground our selves upon any of these examples, ^or
would be authorized thereby. For ^^e do ground our selves only upon the word
of God, and of his blessed Apostles, contained in the holy Scripture, unto
which the Pope braggeth not to be subject, and does not acknowledge it for
Judge, In a word, we must stand firm upon this: To wit, that our Adversaries
must show us where their Religion was in the time of the Apostles, before we
do show them where our Religion was before Cal^in.

CHAP. XXIV. That our Adversaries reject the Fathers, and speak of them with
contempt.
Our Adversaries being pressed by the holy Scripture, are wont to have recourse
to the Fathers, whom never thelesse they receive not for Judges, and
acknowledge in them a multitude of errors, and speak of them with great
contempt.

Denis Petau, a Jesuit, in his Notes upon Epiphanius page Multa sunt a
sactissims Patribus, praeapucque a Chrysostomo in Homiliss aspersa, quae si ad
exactae veritatis regulam accommodare volueris, boni sesus mania videbuntur.
244, speaks thus. In the most holy Fathers, and chiefly in Chrysostom his
Homilies, are dispersed many things, which if thore would accommodate to the
rule of truth, shall be found to be void of sense.

Cardinal Baronius in his Annals in the year 34.. 213. Sancti^^mos Patres in
interpretatione Scripturae non semper in omnibus Catholica sequ^^ur ^^desia.
The Catholic Church does not follow always the most holy Fathers in the
interpretation of the Scripture, Consulti^^ d^^ndu pu^a^^^ H^eronymum, (sit
amen ille ipse est) ut humana sert infirmi^as memoria lapsum.
And in the. 185. Hierome has erred for lack of memory. And in the year 31..
24. he checks Saint Austin for not understanding well these words of the Lord,
Thou art Peter, etc. And in the year 60.. 20. he is vexed against Theodoret,
because he rejected the service of Angels grounded upon a place of Saint Paul,
Colos. 2. Ex his videas haud feliciter (ej^s pace dictum sit) Theodoretum
assecutum esse Paul's verborum sensum.
By this (says he) it may he seen that Theodoret (with his good leave) did
not well apprehend the Apostles meanning. And in the veare 369.. 24. Hilary had
also his defects.

Alphonsus a Castro in his first Book of Heresies, Chapter 7. Sanctoru^
Patrumsetent^^e saepe invicem repugnant.
Oftentimes the opinions of the Fathers are repugnant one to the other.

Melchior Canus in his seventh Book of common places Chapter 3. Nu^. 2. Cu^
Sanctorum quisque, his duntax at exceptis qui libros Canonicos eduderunt,
humano spiritu locutus suerit, and aliqua^do vel in co ^rrarit quod ad sidem
pertinere posteademonstratum est, etc.
Seeing there is none of the Saints, except only those that have written the
Canonical Books, but have spoken by the spirit of man, and sometimes erred in
that which afterward was known to belong to the Faith: It is evident that
from such an authority none can build a certain and assured Faith. And
thereupon he produces for an example, the errors of many Fathers, so far as
to say that against the ordinary course of nature they bring forth monsters.

Sixtus Senensis in the Preface upon the fifth Book of his Bibliotheca: Pris^i
illi Ecclisia^il Magistr^ nonnib^l interdum a proposito veritatis scopo
aberraverunt.
These ancient Masters of the Churches of have some times swerved from the
scope of the truth at which they aimed. And in the same place: In libris
sancterum Doctorum quos authentica legit Ecclesia, nonnunquam ^^uni antur
quaedam pravavel haeretica.
In the Books of the holy Doctors, whose authority is read in the Church, are
found sometimes things wicked and heretical: and he speaks this after
Anselme in his Commentaries upon the second to the Corinthians.

Maldonat the Jesuit upon the sixth of Saint John, checking Saint Austin for
not well conceiving in what sense Christ calls himself the bread, says, 81.
Hoc d^co persuasum me habere D. August^num, si nostra fuisset aetate, long
aliter sensurum fuisse. Et S. 71. Hanc interpretatione^ multo magis probo quam
illam Augustin^.
I am persuaded that if Austin had lived in ou^ days, he would have been of
an other opinion. And in the same place: I do approve of this interpretation
much more than that of Austins.

Cardinal Cajetan in the beginning of his Commentaries upon Genefis: Nullus
detestelur novum sacrae Scripturae sensum, ex hoc quod dissonat a prescis
Do^^oribus. Non enim all^gavit Deus exposi^^onem Scripturarum p^is^orum
Doctorum sensibus.
Let none detest a new sense of the Scripture, under color it disagreeth from
the ancient Doctors. For God has not tied the Expesition of the Scriptures to
the sense or opinions of the ancient Doctors.

Andradius in his second Book of the defense of the Faith of Trent: Vt
Augustinum, Basilium, etc. taceam, quorum non semper sumus opinionibus add^^^.
I say nothing of Austin, Basil, Athanasius, both Cyrils, Chrysostom, and
Epiphanius, to whose opinions we are not always tied.

Pererius the Jesuit, in his eighth Book upon Genesis, Disp. 1. Pudet dicere
quae de optim^^ scriptoribus hoc loco dictur^^, s^^m, adco sunt non modo fa^sa,
sed pudead^ and abs^^d^
I am ashamed to tell what I must say here against the best writers, so much
do they say things not one^^ false, but also shameful and absurd. Now the
Fathers whom he means, are Justin Martyr, Ireneus, Tertullian, Clemens
Alexandrinus, Cyprian, Ambrose, Lactantius, Eusebaus, Sulpitius Severus.

Salmeron the Jesuit in the eight Prolegomene: Page 85 Quisque Patrum diverse
ab alio unum locum exponit, immo etiam unus and idem vario modo.
Every Father expounds one place of the Scripture otherwise than the rest,
yea one and the same Father expounds it in several fashions. And in the third
Prolegomene, page 13. he brings many examples of Fathers which contradict
themselves.

The same man in the 51 Disput. upon the Epistle to the Romans, acknowledges
that the Fathers generally are against him in the point of the Conception of
the Virgin Mary. Whereupon he shifts off thus; Contra hanc quam objectant
multitudinem, respondemus ex verbo Dei, Exodus 23. In judicio, plurimorum non
acquiosces sententiae, ut devies a vero.
Against this multitude objected against us, we answer by the Word of God,
Exodus 23. Thou shall not yield in judgment to the opinion of many, Ego (ut
ingenue fatear) plus uni summo Pontifici crediderim in his quae sidci mysteria
tangunt, quam mill Augustinis, Hieronymis, Gregorijs.
for to decline from the truth.

Cornelius Mus Bishop of Bitonto, upon the 14 chapter of the Epistle to the
Romans: I would give more credit (to confess it ingenuously) to one Pope,
than to a thousand Austine, a thousand Hieromes, a thousand Gregory's.

I should never make an end if I would produce all the places wherein our
Adversaries abuse the Fathers, and accuse them of error, or of untruth, or of
ignorance: and have reason in some things, in others not. Chrysostom. honul. 45. in
Matthew. and 21. in Iohannem.
Chrysostom accuses often the Virgin Many of mbition, temeritie, and
importunity. Justin. Deal. in T ^ph. Cle. 6. Strom.
Justin Martyr and Clemens Alexandrinus say, that God created the Sun and the
Moon, that the Gentiles might worship them, least they should be without
Religion. See Ireneus in his 5. Book.
Justin, Ireneus, Lactantius, Ambrose, Tertullian, and many others, were
Chiliastes, holding a Reign of Christ that is to endure one thousand years in
feastings and carnal delights. L^b 1. de Spir^tu Sancto. c. 2.
Ambrose teaches that Baptism conferred in the name of the Holy Ghost,
without naming the Father or the Son, is good and warrantable. Austin has
condemned the Children dead without Baptism, to the eternal flames. Cyprian
taught the Rebaptization of Heretics, and assembled a Council, in which he
did condemn the doctrine of the Roman Church. Lib, 10. de Trinitate. and in
Psalm. 68, and 138. and in Psalm. 118. litera Gimel.
Hilary taught that our Savior Christ suffered no pain at his death: And that
the Virgin Mary is to be purged by the fire of the last judgment. Hier. lib.
1. and 2. in Iovinianii, and saepe alibi.
Saint Hierome calls Marriage an ignominy, ^he end whereof is death, and the
persons married, Vessels unto dishonor. Hier. i^^ Epist. ad Titum c. 1.
He taught also that Bishops and Priests are equal by divine right. Whereupon
Bellarmin in his first Book de Pontif. chap. 8. says: This opinion is false
and must be refuted in its due place. Gregory of Nice in the first Oration of
the Lords Resurrection, teaches that when Christ instituted the Eucharist, his
body was already dead, and that his Soul was in hell. For which he is censured
by the Jesuit Salmeron, saying: Salm Tomo XI. Tract. 7. de modo resurr.
Christi page 49. Cujus in verbis continentur multa non satis in Ecclesia
recepta.
In these words of Gregory there are many things which the Church does not
approve off. Clemens Alexandrinus teaches that the Pagans were saved by
Philosophy. Tertullian makes God to be corporal. Clement the first, Bishop of
Rome, in a Decretall Epistle, will have goods and women to be common. In the
ninth Tome of Baronius Annals, there is an Epistle of Pope Gregory the second,
wherein he declares that it is not lawful to paint out God the Father: But
Baronius Postea usu venisse ut pingatur in Ecclesia Deus, etc.
notes in the margent, that the Church now has ordained of it otherwise.

Six hundred and thirty Bishops decreed at the Council of Chalcedone, that the
Bishop of Constantinople should be equal in all things to the Bishop of Rome.
The Milevitan Council where Saint Austin was present, and framed the Canons of
it, forbids upon paint of a curse, to appeal beyond the Sea, that is to say
to appeal out of Africa to Rome.

The sixth Council of Carthage confirms the same prohibition, and writes to
Celestin Bishop of Rome long Letters which are inserted in the Council, wherein
the Council warnes him to take heed henceforth from receiving any appeals out
of Africa, and not to send them his Legates any more; not make use any more of
supposed Canons for to advance his authority, and not to bring in worldly pride
into the Church. In all these things and in a thousand others more, the Roman
Church condemns the Fathers, and makes no reckoning of their authority.
Whence appears that it is to no purpose that our Adversaries in certain
questions allege the Fathers unto us, seeing themselves reject them, and
subject them to the Judgment of the Pope and Church of Rome.

CHAP XXV. Of the corruption and falsification of the Fathers writings: and of
the difficulty to understand them.
IN the Allegation of Fathers about our Controversies we have this
disadvantage, that we have them but by the hands of our own Adversaries. For
all the impressions that have been made of them, were made upon the Manuscripts
found in Monasteries, written by Monks, who had fair opportunity to clip and
alter them at their pleasure, and set old titles upon new Books made and
composed by themselves. It is a hard case to one of the parties that goes to
Law, when he can make use of no other writings but of such as his own Adverse
party furnishes him with, who has thrusted in such clauses as seemed good
unto him. But it is come to pass through the Providence of God, that the most
part of these falsifications are so gross and so palpable, that we have not
had much pains to discover the falsity of many places and false Works, which
are in so great number, that if they were taken away, the Fathers Works would
be found diminished of a third part. Those among our Adversaries that are well
read in the Fathers, acknowledge the same with us, and pass condemnation in
this point. Read Sixtus Senensis about the end of his fourth Book, and the
Book of Cardinal Bellarmin Of Ecclesiastical Writers, where he has put the
Catalogue of the Fathers Works. There shall ye wonder to see the multitude of
Books, which he says to be doubtful or manifestly counterfeit. Which causes
men to doubt of the other Works, whose falsitie is not easily found out.

For the discovering of these falsities, we have been helped by the Catalogue
of the Works of Ancient Writers, which Photius, Patriarch of Constantinople,
who wrote about the year of our Lord 878. has put into his Library. And by
Gennadius, a Priest of Marseilles, that wrote a Book of the Illustrious men,
about the year of our Lord 492. Item by the diversity of style. Item by
certain places of the Fathers, which are alleged by Ivo, Gratian,
Burchardus, Lombard, Thomas and others, quite otherwise than they be found in
the editions printed in this last age. Item by other places of the same Fathers
which say the contrary: so that one and the same Father is oftentimes found to
contrary himself.

Even as the ninth Age was the Age wherein the Decretals of the ancient Bishops
of Rome were forged, under the name of one Isidorus Mercator, which was falsely
framed for the grounding of the Papal Monarchy, which with might and maine was
a building in that Age: So the eleventh Age, in which Berengarius, Archdeacon
of Angiers, withstood and impugned stoutly and vigorously the opinion of the
real presence and Transubstantiation, was the Age wherein were forged sundry
works in the behalf of that error, and diverse clauses were chopped into the Books
of the ancient Fathers. Of this false coin is the Book attributed to Bellar.
lib. de Script. Eccles. Sixtus Senensis sub sinem libriquart.
Cyprian, of the Lords Supper, which all the learned of the Roman Church
acknowledge not to be of his making. And the Cathecheses Mystagogicall of Cyril
of Jerusalem. The Catecheses of Gregory of Nysse are indeed his, but horribly
corrupted and full of errors, which the Roman Church approves not. There is
mention made there of one Severus an Heretic, who is posterior to this Gregory
above 150. years.

Of these falsifications and diverse others, we have entreated more at large in
the Book against Cardinal du Perron. He that should take away from the works of
Cyprian, Ambrose, Hierome, Austin and Athanasius, the counterfeit Books, should
diminish the writings of these Fathers more than of a third part.

Wherefore after so many falsities discovered, when our adversaries object us
some place of a Father, we might very justly desire them to proveunto us that
that place was not added or depraved by some falsifier as well as so many
others. By all manner of reasons, if in an writing brought in justice there be
found but one falsification, the whole instrument loses all its force and is
rejected.

There is another difficulty that deceives such men as are not well seen in
antiquity, to wit, that the words used in old time, have now changed their
signification. In the Fathers are found these words, of Pope, of Sacrifice, of
Oblation, of Purging fire, of Indulgence, of Station, of Species, of Monk, of
Penance; but quite in another sense than these words are taken at this day.

Notwithstanding these difficulties and disadvantages, whereby our adversaries
strive to prevail against us, we refuse not for all that to buckle with the^.
For what falsifications soever were made in the Books of Ancient writers, yet
in them remains still so many express and formal places against
Transubstantiation, that of the collection of them, a man might make a great
volume. We have produced above 500 in the Book of the Novelty of Popery; and
Mr le Faucheur, and Mr Aubertin have labored lately, and taken pains about
this subject with a ^ost exact diligence and full of great learning. Here we
will content our selves to produce some few places for a taste, yet with this
protestation, that I do not allege the Fathers for to be a stay to our cause,
which is sufficiently propped and established upon the Word of God. Go^ does
not beg the testimonies of men. H^^ word is as strong alone, as being
a^companied with humane testimon^ To go about to defend it with the
testimonies of men subject to errou^ is as if a man would lighten the Sun^^
with a Candle. But we do alleadg^ the Fathers for to defend their honor,
because that against their ^^tent, our Adversaries make them Advocates of a bad
cause: And for (...) condescend and yield some thing to the disease of this
froward age, wherein the holy Scripture has lost its power and efficacy, and
which armeth it self with human testimonies against the Word of God.

CHAP. XXVI. Places of the Fathers contrary to Transubstantiation, and to the
manducation of the body of Christ by the corporal mouth.
TErtullian in his fourth Book against Marcion chapter, 40. disputing against
the Marcionites that denied Christ ^o have a true humane body, speaks ^hus:
Acceptum panem and distributum discipulis corpus suu^ illum fecit, dicendo, Hoc
est corpus meum, id est figura corporis mei. Figura autem non fuisset, nisi
veritatis esset corpus.
Christ when he had taken the bread and distributed it to his disciples, made
it ^o be his body, saying, This is my body, that is to say the figure of my
body. But it were not a figure, unless it were a true body. His reason is,
because men represent not by figure the things that are not.

And in the third Book, chapter 19. Panem suum corpus appellans, ut and b^^c
jam eu^, intellig^^ corporis sui figuram pa^i dedisse.
Christ called the bread his body, that thereby thou might understand that
he gave to the bread to be the figure of his body.

Origin upon the fifteenth Chapter of Saint Matthew, speaking of that which the
Faithful receive by the corporal mouth in the Eucharist: Quod si quicquid
ingreditur in os, in ve^^e abit, and in s^cessum ^jicitur, and ille cibus qui
sanctificatur per verbit Dei, perque obsecrat^one^, juxta id quod habet
materialein ventrem a^^^ and in secessu^ emit^itur, etc. ^^t haecquidem
de^ypico symboluoque ^orpore.
If every thing that enters into the mouth, goes into the belly, and is sent
into the prity* this food which is sanctified by the Word of God and by the
Prayer, as it is material, g^^ into the belly, and is sent into the privy. And
a little after, And thus much be said touching the typical and symbolicall
body of Christ. Upon this place Cardinal du Perron writing against du Plessi^,
makes many exclamations against Origin, and calls him origin of all errors,
and cries out, Shut y^^ ears Christian people, as if men did read with their
cares. What Cardinal d^ Perron says, that Theophilus Patriarck of Alexandria
did condemn Origin for speaking so, is false, and shall never be found.

Theodoret in his first Dialogue titled the Unchangeable, speaking of these
words, This is my body, says, (...).
The Lord has honored the visible signs with the appellation of his body and
blood, not having changed their nature, but having added grace (...) nature.

A little before, he had said, The Lord gave to the sign the name of his body.

And in the second Dialogue termed the Non confuse, The divine mysteries are
signs of the true body. And a little after, he introduces an Eutychian
Heretic maintaining Transubstantiation. To whom he answers in these words,
Thou art o^^ght by the nets that thou have woven. For even after the
consecration, the mystical signs do not change their own nature, (...).
For they remain in their former Substance, Form and Figure. And in the same
Dialogue, Tell me then, the signs that are offered unto God, what signs are
they of? The answer is, Of the Lords body and blood.

In the Books of Sacraments attributed to S. Ambrose, in the fourth Book, cha.
5. We have a clause of the public form used in the Eucharist, in these words,
Dixit Sacerdos, Fac nobis hanc oblationem asscriptam, rationabile^,
acceptabile^, quod est figura corporis and sanguinis Domini nostri Jesus
Christi.
Grant that this oblation be imputed unto us, as acceptable, reasonable, which
is the FIGVRE of the body and blood of Christ Jesus our Lord. Which cannot be
understood of the unconsecrated bread, for it is not an acceptable oblation for
our sins. This clause is retained in the Mass, except this word, Figure, which
they have taken away.

Eusebius in his 12 Book of the Demonstration, chap. 8. (...).
We have been instructed to celebrate at the table, according to the laws of
the New Testament, by the signs of the body and blood, the remembrance of this
Sacrifice. And in the eight Book, after he had said that Christ delivered to
his Disciples the signs or symboles of his dispensation, he adds (...)
Commanding to celebrate the Image or figure of his own Body.

Euphraemius Patriarck of Antioch* Ex Bibliothe. Phocii p. 415. editionis
Augustanae. (...), etc.
Christ's body which the Faithful receive, loses not its sensible substance,
and is not divided from intelligible grace. So Baptism being wholly made
spiritual and one, does retain the property of its sensible substance, t^ wit
water, and yet loses not that which it is made. This place is very forcible;
for he calls the bread Christ's body, and acknowledges not therein any
conversion of substance, and teaches that in the Eucharist there is no more
conversion of substance than in Baptism where the water remains always water.

Gregory Nazianzen in his 2. Oration of the Passover speaks thus of the
participation of the Eucharist: (...).
We shall indeed be partakers of the Passover in figure, though more evidently
than in the old Pass over: For the Passover (I dare say) w^^ a more dark
figure of a figure.

And the same Father in his Oration in the Praise of his Sister Gorgonia,
commends her devotion, in that having received with her own hand the
Sacrament, she carried back home a parcel of (...) (...). etc.
If (says he) her hand had shut up us in treasure any thing of the signs or
a^^itypes (...) the body or of the blood of the Lord, she minded it with her
tears.

Euphraemius Deacon of Edissa: Ad eos, qui Filii Dei naturam scrutari volunt.
Inspice diligenter, quomodo sumens in manibus pane^, benedix it ac fregil in
figuram immaculati corporis, etc.
Behold ^iligently how the Lord after he had taken ^e bread in his bands,
blessed it, and brake it, (...) figure of his immaculat body, and blessed ^e
cup in figure of his precious blood, and gave to his Disciples.

The imperfect work upon S. Matthew ^^tributed to Chrysostom, in the 11
Ho^ily, speaking of those that employ the ^^cred vessels, as Plates and
Chalices, to ^ofane uses: Si haec vasa sanctificata ad privatos usus transfer
^periculosum est, in quibus non est verum corpus Christ's, sed ^^sterium
corporis ejus continetur, quanto magis vasa corporis ^^stri? etc.
If it be so dangerous a thing (...) transport to private uses the sacred
vessels ^herein Christ's body is not, but where the my^ry of his body is
contained, how much more ^^e vessels of our bodies which God has pre^red to
himse fe for to dwell in them? Note ^at he does nor say that the body of
christ was not in these vessels, but that it not in them, that it may not be
thought ^e speaks of the vessels of Salomons ^emple.

(...)The same Fathers upon the third Psalm: Dominus Iudam adh^buit ad c^nviv
um ^n quo corporis and sangumis su^ siguram discipul^s commondav^t and tradid t.
The Lord admit^ed Judas (...) the banquet, in which he recommended an^ gave to
his disciples the figure of his b^^^ and blood.

The same, in his third Book of Ch^^stian Doctrine, Chapter 16. When (...)
Lord says, N si manducaveritis (inquit) carn^m si^i^ hom nis and ^iberitis
sanguinem, non habebi it is vitam in vobis; facinus vel flag tium v^detur jubere.
F^gura ergo est praecipiens passions Dominicae esse communicandum and suaviter
atque utiliter is memo^^ recondendum quod ^aro ejus pro^obis crucifixa and
vul^^^ rata sit.
Except ye eat the flesh of (...) Son of man and drink his blood, ye have
no life in you, he seems to command a wi^ked thing or hai^us offense. It is
therefore a figure, that commands to communicate to the Passion of the Lord,
and to pu^ sweetly and profitably into our memory that his flesh was crucified
and wound^^ for us. Note that Saint Austin says no^ only that these words
Exce t ye e^^ etc. are figurative. But al^o expoun^ unto us the sense and
meaning of th^^ figure, saying, that it signifies we m^^ meditate with
pleasure and profi^ that Christ is dead for us. Which (...) an exposition our
Adversaries appro^^ not.

The same Author in the first Treatise upon the first Epistle of Saint John
Dominus consolans nos, qui ipsum jam in coelo sedentem manu contrectare non
possumus sed side contingere.
The Lord comfort us, we that can handle him no more with our hands, but
touch him by Faith.

And in the 53 Sermon of the words of the Lord: Pene quidem Sacramentum omnes
corpus ejus dicunt.
All almost do call the body of Christ that which is the sacred sign of it:
Words that are very considerable.

And in the 27 Treatise upon Saint John: Illi put abant cum erogaturii corpus
suii, ille a^dixit se ascensurum in coelum utique integrumcum viderit^s silium
ho minis ascendentem, ubi erat prius, certe vel tunc videbitis, quia non co
modo quo putatis, erogat corpus suum. Certe vel tunc intelliget is quod ejus
gratia non consumitur morsibus.
The Capernaites thought he should distribute his body unto them; but he said
unto them he would ascend into heaven whole indeed. When ye see the Son of
man ascend where he was before, certainly, then at least, you shall see that he
gives not his body as you esteem. Verily then shall ye understand that his
grace is not consumed with biting.

Chiefly that place of the same Father upon the 98 Psalm, seems to me very
express, where expounding these words of the Lord, Except ye eat the flesh of
the Son of man, ye have no life in you, he brings in the Lord speaking
thus: Spirital ter intelligite quod locutus sum. Non hoc corpus quod videt is
manducaturi ^s^^s, and bibituri illum songuinem quem fusuri sunt qui me cru
cisigent. Sacramentum aliquod vobis commondavi, spiritaliter intellectum
viv^ficabit vos.
Understand spirituallie what I have said unto you, ye shall not eat this
body that you see, Qui non manet ^n christo, and ^u quo ^non manet Christus*
pro: culdubio n^c mandu^^t spiritaliter earnem ejus nec bibit ejus sanguinem,
lcet carnalter and visic biliter premat dentibus Sacramentum corporis et
sanguinis Christ.
nor d ink that blood which shall be shed by those that shall crucify me. I
have commended a sacred sign unto you, which being understood spiritually,
shall vivifie you.

According to our Adversaries doctrine, both good and bad take the Lords body
in the Eucharist. For many be partakers of the Sacrament without Faith and
hypocri^ically. Such nevertheless, do swallow the consecrated host and (if
we believe our Adversaries) eat truly and really the body of Christ Jesus.
Saint Austin impugneth that opinion, and maintains that the wicked eat but
the signs, and receive not Christ. In the 26 Treatise upon Saint John. Sent.
339 Qu^ discordat a Christo, non carne ejus manducat nec sanguinem bibat,
etiamsi tantae rei Sacramentum ad judicium suae praesumtionis quotidie
indifferenter accipiat.
Whosoever dwells not is Christ, and in whom Christ dwells not, for a
certain he eats not his flesh spiritually, and drinks not his blood,
though he presses carnally and visibly with his teeth the sacred signs of
Christ's body and blood.

And in the Book of Sentences of Saint Austin collected by Prosper: h
Whosoever discordeth with Christ, eats not the flesh of Christ, and drinks
not his blood, though he take every day indifferently the sacred sign of so
great a thing, to the condemnation of his own presumption.

And in the 25 Chapter of the 21. Book Of the City of God, Non dicendum, cum
manducare corpus Christi qui in corpore Christi non est.
It must not be said that he who is not in the body of Christ, eats the body
of Christ. And there he brings in Christ saying, Qui non in me manet, et in
quo ego no maneo, non se dicat aut existimet manducare corpus meum, etc.
He that abides not in me, and in whom I abide not, let not him say nor think
that be eats my body or drinks my blood. Therefore those do not abide in
Christ, that are not the members of Christ.

Saint Hierome says the same, upon the last Chapter of Esaiah: Dum non sunt
sancti corpore et spiritu, non comedunt carnem Icsu, neque bibunt sangumem.
Whilst they are not holy in body and spirit, they eat not the flesh of
Jesus, and drink not that blood whereof he speaks himself, Whosoever eats
my flesh, etc.

Let no man wonder that I have turned this word, Sacrament, in Saint Austin, by
a sacred sign: seeing that he himself expounds it so in the fifth Epistle
to Marcellinus: Signa cum ad res divinas pertinent, Sacramenta appellantur.
The signs, when they belong to divine things, are called Sacraments. And in
the tenth Book of the City of God, Chapter 5. Sacrificium visibile est
invisibilis Sacrificij Sacramentum, id est sacrum signum.
The visible Sacrifice is a Sacrament of the invible Sacrifice, that is to say,
a sacred sign. And against the adversary of the Law and the Prophets, 2
Book, Chapter 9. Sacramenta, id est sacra signa. The Sacraments, that is to
say, the sacred signs. It is the definition given by Lombard in the first
Distinction of the fourth Book, Tit. 3. Sacramentum est sacrae rei signum.
Bellarmin himself in his first Book of Sacraments, Sacramentum nomem
genericium significat signum rei sacrie vel arcanae.
Chapter 7. and 11. The word Sacrament signifies a sign of a sacred or secret
thing.

In one thing principally it appears how far Saint Austin was from
believing Transubstantiation: In that in these words This is my body, by this
word Body he understands the Church. At the end of Fulgentius his Works, who
was Austins disciple, there is a Sermon of Austins which maliciously they have
plucked out of his Works, and that had been lost, if Fulgentius and Beda had
not preserved it. Here then be the very words of Austin: Aug. ^o Sermon. ad
infantes. Quod vidistis, panis est et calix, quod vobis etiam oculi ^estri
re^untiant; quod aute sides vestra ^ostulat in^truenda, ^anis est ^orpus
Christi.
What ye have seen, is bread and wine, as your eyes show unto you; but
according to the instruction that your Faith demands, the bread is the body
of Christ, and the Cup is his blood. Bellarmin in his first Book of the
Eucharist, Chapter 1. acknowledges that these words This bread is Christ's
body, cannot be true if they be not taken figuratively. But let us learn how
Saint Austin will have the bread to be the body of Christ. He says then,
Quomodo est panis corpus ejus and calix, vel quod habet calix, quomodo est
sanguis ejus? Ista fraires, ideo dicuntur Sacramenta, quia in eis al^ud
vidotur, aliud intelligitur. Quod videtur, formam habet corporalem: quod
intelligitur fructu habet spiritalem. Corpus ergo Christi sivis intelligere,
audi Apostolum dicentem fidelibus, Vos estis corpus Christ et membra, etc.
How is the bread his body? and how is the Cup his blood? These things Bethren,
are called Sacraments, because in them one thing is seen, and another is
understood. What is seen, has a corporal form: What is meant, has a
spiritual fruit. If then thou will understand what the body of Christ is,
hear the Apostle saying to the Faithful, Ye are Christ's body and his members.
If ye be therefore Christ's body and members, your mystery is set on the table
of the Lord, etc. He gives the same exposition in the 26 Treatise upon Saint
John. By this m^ate, and by this drink, the Lord will have to be understood
the society and fellowship of his body and of his members, to wit the holy
Church of the Predestinate.

And in the Roman Canon, in the a Distinction of the Consecration at the Canon
Hoc est: Coelestis anis, qui ^hristi caro (...), suo modo ^ocatur ^rpus
^hristi, cum (...) vera sit ^cramentii ^rporis ^hristi illi^s: videli^t quod
^alpabile, ^ortale in ^uce posi^m est. t^b. Glos. ^oeleste Sa^amentum ^uod vere
^praesen^t Christi ^rnemdici^r corpus ^hristi, sed ^aproprie, crum dici^r suo
mo^^sed non ^iveritate, sed significante mysterio. Vt sit sensus, vocatur
Christ corpus, id est significatur.
The heavenly bread which is the flesh of Christ, is after its manner called
the body of Christ, although to speak truly it be the sacred sign of Christ's
body, to wit of that which being visible, palpable, mortal, was put upon the
Cross. And thereupon the Gloss of the Doctors has these words, which truly
are excellent: The heavenly Sacrament that represents truly the flesh of
Christ, is called the body of Christ, but improperly, for it is thus called
after its manner, but not according to the truth of the thing, but by a
significant mystery. So that the sense is, that it is called the body of
Christ, that is to say, that it is signified.

S. Cyprian in his 63 Epistle will have in the sacred Cup water to be mingled
with the wine. His reason is because that as the wine is the blood of Christ,
so the water is the People: and that the People ought not to be divided from
Christ.. 9. Quando in Calice vino aqua ^iscetur, Christo populus adunatur, etc.
Sivinum tantum quis ^crat, sanguis Christi inc pit esse sine nobis: si veroaqua
sit sola, ^ebs incipit esse sinc Christo.
If (says he) any one offers nothing but wine, Christ's blood begins to
be without us, but if the water be alone, the people begins to be without
Christ. Whereby it follows, that as Cyprian did not believe that the water
was transubstantiated into the people: so did he not believe that the wine was
transubstantiated into the body of Christ.

And in the same Epistle: Vinum fuit quod sanguiuem suii dixit.
That which Christ called his blood, was wine. And in the 76 Epistle: Dominus
corpus suii pane^ vocat de multorii granorum adunation^ congestum.
The Lord called his body the bread, compounded with the gathering together of
many grains.

We have a Treatise of the two natures of Christ, against Nestorius and
Eutyches, made by Pope Gelasius, who wrote about the year of our Lord 495.
There, is this sentence to be found, which vexes and grieves mightily our
Adversaries: Certe Sacramenta quae sumimus corporis and sanguinis Christi,
divina res est: propter quod and per eade^ divinae effiscimur consortes
naturae, and tame^ esse non desinit substa^tia panis and vini. Et certe image
and similitudo corporis et sanguinis Christi in action mysteriorum celebra^tur.
Certainly the Sacraments that we take of the body and blood of Christ, are a
divine thing, for which cause also by them we are made partakers of the divine
nature, and yet the substance or nature of the bread and wine cease not to
be. And verily the Image and similitude of the body and blood of Christ, is
celebrated in the action of the mysteries. Note that he disputed against the
Eutychians, who held that the substance of the body of Christ was passed and
changed into the substance of the divine nature. The controversy was not about
the conversion of the accidents, but of the Substance, which Gelasius
maintains to remain in the body of the Lord, as the substance of the bread
remains in the Sacrament. Now, no man can doubt but that this Book be of
Gelasius Bishop of Rome, Hoc etiam eatae me^orie Papa Gelasius, etc. in co ^bro
quem ^emoratus ^^ntistes ^onscripsit ^dversus e^^ qui in (...) omino Ie^ duarum
at urarum ^olunt indi^^a^ credere ^ritatem. Quomodo ^cend t in ^^lum, nisi ^^ia
localis verus est ^mo? aut ^omodo a^st fidel^^s sui^^nisi ^^a idem ^mensus
(...) ^rus d^us?
seeing that Fulgentius who lived in Gelasius time, alleges it * in his Book
to Fe^randus the Deacon, in the 2 proposition: and attributes it to the Pope
Gelasius.

Fulgentius, Disciple to S. Austin, in his second Book to Trasimondus, chap.
17. a How is Christ ascended into Heaven, but because he is in a place, and a
man indeed? Or how is he present to his Faithful ones, but because he is
infinite and a God indeed?

Again, in his Book of the Faith to Peter the Deacon, chap. 19. Cu^ nunc id est
tempore nov Testamenti cum Pa^e et Sp Sancto, cum quibs illi est una divini^as,
sacrificium ^ais et ^^ni^n side et charit^te sancta Ecclesia Catholica per
uversum or^^^ ^e^rae offerre non cessat, etc.
The holy Catholic Church which is over all the world now, that is to say
under the New Testament, cease not to offer unto Christ Jesus, with the
Father and the holy Ghost with whom he is one and the same Godhead, a Sacrifice
of bread and wine, in Faith and Charity. For in those ca^n ill oblations [of
the Old Tetestament] there was a figure of Christ's flesh, which he was to offer
for our sins, being without sin. But in the sacrifice [of the Eucharist] is
made an action of thankesgiving, and a remembrance of the flesh of Christ which
he offered for us, and of the blood that himself, who is God, has shed for
us. Besides this, that he calls the Holy Supper a remembrance, and a
Sacrifice of bread and wine: it is very remarkable that he says, that this
Sacrifice of bread and wine is offered unto Christ Jesus. Whereby it appears
that this Sacrifice is not Christ himself: for Christ is not Sacrificed unto
Christ.

Facundus an Affrican Bishop, who wrote about the year of our Lord 550 in the
defense of three heads or points of the Council of Chalcedon: Potest
Sacramentum adoptionis adoptio nu^cupari, sangu^ne^ dicimus, no^ quod proprie
corpu^ ejus sit panis, and poculum sanguis: sed quod in se mysterium corporis
ejus sanguinisque contineant, etc.
The Sacrament of Adoption [to wit Baptisme] may be called the Adoption, even
as we call the Sacrament of his body and blood which is in the bread and in the
consecrated Cup, his body and blood: Not that, to speak properly, the bread is
his body, and the Cup his blood: But because they contain in them the mystery
of his body and blood. This Book of Facundus, drawn out of the Vatiean Library,
was published by Jacobus Sirmoudus a Jesuit, who for this cause was suspected.
And I hear he has been in trouble about it.

Turrian. li. 1. de Eucharist. c. 18.. Ad illud. Vasq. in 3. part. Thomae Tomo
3. Dis. 180. c. 9 page 107. Greg, de Val. lib. de Trans. c. 7. Sicut enim
antequam sactificetur panis, pane^ nominamus: divina aute^ illum sanclificante
gratia, incdiante Sacerdote, liberatus quide^ est ab appellatione panis, and
^lignus habi^us est Dominici corporis appellatione, etiamsi natura panis in co
remansit.
Turrianus and Vasquez, and Gregory of Valentia, Jesuits, object unto
themselves a place of Chrysostom in his Epistle to Caesarius: which Epistle
also is in Biblioth. Patr. Printed at Colen, anno 1618 in the 8 Tome. That
place is such: Before the bread be sanctified, we coll is bread: But the divine
grace sanctifying it by the means of the Priest, it is freed indeed from the
appellation of bread, and is honored with the name of the body of the Lord,
though the nature of bread remain in it. These Jesuits answer that this place
is not of John Chrysostom, but of another John of Constantinople. Which they
say without proof. Yet it matters not, for it suffices they acknowledge that
place to be of an ancient Author.

The 8 Books of Apostolical Constitutions attributed to Clement the first.
Bishop of Rome, are not of him: Nevertheless these Books are ancient, and
there is much good to be learned in them. In the 5 Book, chap. 16. it is said,
that Cum ver^ anttypa mysteria pretiosi Corporis and sanguinis sui nobis
tradidisset.
Christ having given the figurative mysteries of his body and blood, went to
the mount of Olives. And in the 7 Book, chap. 26. Etiam agimus gratias tibi,
Pater, pro pretioso sanguine Jesus Christi qui effusu^ est pro nobis, et pro
pretioso corpore cujus haec Antitypa perficimus.
We give thee thanks for the precious blood of Christ, which was shed for us,
and for the precious body, whereof we perform the signs by his command, for
to show forth his death.

There would never be an end if we should gather up all the places of the
ancient Fathers, wherein they say that that which we receive in the Eucharist
is bread, and that the bread and wine are Signs, Symboles, Figures and
Antitypes of the body and blood of the Lord: I will add but two Canons of a
Council, which are very formal.

The 24 Canon of the III Council of Carthage is such: (...).
Let nothing be offered in the sacred service but the body and blood of the
Lord, (as also the Lord has ordained it) that is to say, nothing but bread and
wine mingled with water. The same Canon is found repeated in the very same
words in the Council of Trull, in the Canon 32, as well in the Greeck as in the
Latin Copies. Upon which Canon, Ba^samon makes this Commentary: The two and
thirtieth Canon of the Council of Trull has ordained very at large, (...).
that the nonbloody Sacrifice was made with bread and wine mingled with water,
because that the bread is the figure of the body of the Lord, and the wine the
figure of his blood. Here is then above two hundred Bishops gathered in a
Council, that interpret these words, the body and blood of Christ, by the
bread and wine mingled with water.

The same Council in the 23 Canon ordains, that when a man officiates at the
Altar, the Prayer must always be directed to the Father. Whence appears
manifestly that then they worshipped not the Sacrament, seeing that the Council
forbids when men assist at the Altar, to address their Prayers to Christ.
If this host be Christ, it must be worshipped, and by consequent invocated.

And that it may appear how lately this opinion of Transubstantiation was
received: in the Tome de Divinis officiis, which is in Biblioth. P atr. we have
an Epistle of that Great Emperor Carolus Magnus, where he says, Cum adaltare
assistitur, semper ad Patrem d rigatur oration.
Christ supping with his Disciples, brake bread, and gave them likewise the
Cup, in figure of his body and blood. This Epistle happily might be written
about the year of our Lord 800.

Walefridus Strabo, who wrote about the year 850, in his Book of
Ecclesiastical things, chap. 16. Christus coenando cii discipulis panem
fregit, and calicem pariter cis dedit in figuram corporis and sanguinis sui. In
coena quam ante traditione^ sua^ ultima^ cum discipulis habu t post Paschae
veteris solemnia corporis et sa^guinis sui Sacrame^ta in panis et vini
substae^tia cisde^ discipulis suis tradidit, et ea in co^memoratione^
sanctissimae suae passionis celebrare perdocuit.
The Lord, at the last Supper he made with his Disciples before he was betrayed,
after he had made an end of the solemnity of the ancient Passover, gave to his
Disciples the sacred signs of his body and blood in the SVBSTANCE of the bread
and wine, and taught them to celebrate them in remembrance of his most holy
Passion.

Rupertus Abbot of Deutsch, near Colen, who lived in the year 1112. and whose
works are yet extant, has condemned Transubstantiation, and taught that the
Substance of bread remains after the Consecration. Here are his words upon
the 12 chap. of Exodus: Rup. Tuitiensis in Exo. 12. Sicut Christus hum^na
naturam nec mutav^^, nec destru^^^, sed assumpsit, ita in Sacrame^to, nec
destruit, nec mutat substantia^ panis and vini, sed assumit in unitatem,
cororis et sanguinis sui.
Even as Christ neither changed nor destroyed the humane nature, but joined
himself to it: So in the Sacrament he neither destroys nor changes the
substance of the bread and wine, but joyneth himself to it in the unity of his
body and blood. This place of Rupertus is alleged by Salmeron in the 16
Treatise of the IX. Tome,. Ruit, and Bellarmin in his Book of Ecclesiastical
Writers, alleadg^s out of him many such like places, and blames him for it.

To so many places that say, that the substance of the bread remains after
the Consecration, our Adversaries do reply, that by the word of Substance, the
Fathers understand the Accidents. As it is a great absurdity by the word of
Accidents, to understand the Substance: So is it as great an absurdity by the
word of Substance to understand Accidents. If it may be lawful for them to
wrest the Fathers thus, and when they say a thing is white, understand that
they mean black: never will there be any thing clear, nor sure. Certainly, if
by this word Substance, the Fathers had understood the Accidents, they would
have said the Substances in the plural. For Accidents are many: Among which
our Adversaries must choose one, that may be called a Substance. But Theodoret
in his second Dialogue, saying that the bread after the Consecration remains
in its former substance, form, and figure, refuteth this evasion. For he
distinguishes expressly the Substance from the Accidents.

Now, as this error of the bodily presence of ^hrists body under the species of
the bread, began to be set on broach: Bertram a Priest, in Charles the Bald his
time, about the year of our Lord 870. made a Book against that abuse, which
Book is yet extant. For which cause also Bellarmin in his first Book of the
Eucharist, chap. 1. places him among the Heretics. But Bertram, all his life
time, lived with credit and honor, and was never reprooved for it.

CHAP. XXVII. Confirmation of the same, by the customs of the ancient Church.
THis truth is confirmed by the ancient customs different from what is done in
the Mass at this day, and incompatible with Transubstantiation. For in the
ancient Church, Service was said in a known tongue. Every one received the
Communion in both kinds.

The people offered upon the table abundance of bread and wine, and not round
and light wafers. Cypr. Sermon. de Lapsis. Eusebius. Histor. lib. 7. c. 9. Theod.
Histor. lib. 5. cap. 18. Nazianz. Orat. de Gorgonia.
The people, as well men as women, received the Sacrament with their hand, and
many carried it home a long with them. Hesychius lib. 2. in Lev. c. 8. Ivo 2
part. 2 de Sacr. c. 59. Burch. l. 5. c. 12.
The residues of the sacred bread that remained upon the table after the
Communion, were either burned, or Evag^. l. 4 cap. 36.
given unto little children coming from School, or carried into the Priests
houses, for to be eaten there. Than were there no private Masses. Nor no Corpus
Christi day. The consecrated Host was not carried in procession. Amb^l de
Viduis. Oportet eam [Viduam] primo carere variarum illecebris voluptatu^,
vitare internum corporis animiq, la^guore^, ut corpus and sanguinem Christi
ministret.
Ambrose in his Book of Widows, says that the Widows were employed in the
administration of the Sacrament. Editionis Parisiensis anno 1624 colu^. 161.
Virgo postqua^ co^municavit, reservet de ipsa co^munione unde i^sque ad diem
octavum communicet.
In the Roman Order which is in Bibliotheca Patrum, these words are to be
found: Let the Virgin receive the Communion after the Mass is ended, and after
she has received, let her reserve of the Communion sufficiently for to
communie the eight days together. Had they then believed the
Transubstantiation, they would never have given unto maids the Sacrament to
keep so long a time.

Certain it is the ancient Church worshipped not the Sacrament. There may be
found indeed some places of the Fathers that say that in the Eucharist we
worship Christ: But it is one thing to worship Christ in the action of the
Sacrament, and another thing to worship the Sacrament. The Father and the holy
Ghost in the Eucharist are also worshipped.

In vain do they allege some ancient Fathers that speak of the elevation of
the Sacrament. For the elevation infers not necessarily adoration: seeing
that in Moses Law the Priest Exodus 29 24. Leviti^. 8.27. and 29. Number. 5.25
waved the breast and shoulder of the offering, and a handful of the first
fruits, without worshipping these things. Moreover, that elevation was nothing
like to the elevation of the Host which the Priest makes now a days over his
head, turning his back to the people, and ringing a little Bell. But then after
the Priest had uncovered the bread and wine, he took the Platter or Dish with
both his hands, and lift it up for to show it unto the people, and that even
before the words which are called of Consecration.

CHA. XXVIII. Explanation of the places of the Fathers that say that in the
Eucharist we eat the body and blood of Christ, and that the bread is changed
into the body of Christ, and is made Christ's body. Specially of Ambrose,
Hilary, and Chrysostom. That the Fathers speak of several kinds of body and
blood of Christ.
THe holy Scripture speaks of two sorts of body of Christ. Namely, of the
natural body of Christ, which he took in the womb of the Virgin M^ry, and of
his mystical body, which is the Church, and of his Sacramental or commemorative
body, which is the bread of the holy Supper: as we have showed already.

The Fathers following the style of the Scripture, besides Christ's mystical
body which is the Church, speak of two bodies of Christ, to wit, of his
natural body, and of his Symbolicall and Sacramental body: of which body they
speak as of a divine thing and full of Mysteries: and of a Spiritual flesh,
which is made by the i^effable power of God, by the means and for the causes
which I shall relate hereafter. Likewise also they make two kinds of blood of
Christ; the one natural, the other mystical and Divine, which we receive in
the Sacrament.

Clemens Alexandrinus in his second Book of the Pedagogue, chap. 2. (...).
There is two sorts of blood of Christ, the one is his carnal blood by which
we are redeemed from corruption. The other is Spiritual, to wit, that by which
we are anointed: and that is to drink the blood of Jesus, to be partaker of
the Lords incorruption.

Saint Hierome upon the Epistle to the Ephesians: Ex Hieron, in Epist. ad
Ephesians. ca^ ^. Did. 2. de Conse. Can. Dupliciter. Dupliciter intelligitur caro
Christivel spiritualis illa atque divima de qua ipse a^t, Caro meaverc est
cibus, vel caro quae crucifixa est, and sanguinis qui militis effusus est
lanced.
Christ's flesh is meant or understood in two manners, either that spiritual
and divine flesh of which he says himself, My flesh is meat indeed. Or else
that flesh that was crucified, and that blood which was shed by the spear of
the Soldier. This place is alleged in the Roman D^cree in the second
Distinction of the Consecration, at the Camon Dupliciter.

And in the same Distinction at the Canon De hac quidem hostia, quae in
commemorationem mirabiliter sit, edere licet. De illa vero quam Christus in ara
crucis abtulit secundum se nulli edere licet.
De hac, the same Father is alleged upon Leviticus, in these words. It is
indeed lawful to eat of this host, which is made admirably in remembrance of
Christ. But it is not lawful in it self for any one to eat of that which he
offered on the Altar of the Cross.

And in the same place, at the Canon Corpus, taken out of Saint Austin: Corpus
and sauguinem Christi dicimus illud quod de fructibus terrae acceptum and prece
mystica consecratum, etc.
We do call body and blood of Christ, that which being taken of the fruits of
the earth, is consecrated by the mystical prayer. Certainly, a body of Christ
taken of the fruits of the earth, is not the body of Christ crucified for us.

Tertullian in the sixth chapter of his Book of Prayer: Panis est Sermo Dei
vivi, qui desc^ndit de coelis. Tum quod and corpus ejus in pane censetur. Hoc
est corpus m^um.
The bread is the word of the living God which is descended from heaven. Item
the body that is holden to be in the bread: This is my body.

Ensebius of Cesarea in his third Book of Ecclesiastical Divinity, Chapter
12. (...).
The Lord spoke not of the flesh which he took, but of his mystical body and
blood.

Saint Austin calls very often that which we receive in the holy Supper, the
body of Christ. But that we may not think that that which we receive by the
corporal mouth is that body of the Lord which was crucified for us, he
brings in Christ saying unto us, Ye shall not eat this body that you see,
In Psalm. 98. Non hoc corpus quod videtis manducaturiestis, neque bibituri illis
sanguinem que^ fusuri sunt qui me crucifigent, Sacrament um aliquod vobis
co^mendavi, spiritualiter intellectum vivificabit vos.
and shall not drink the blood shed by those that shall crucify me. What
then? I have (says he) recommended a Sacrament un^^ you, which being taken
Spiritually, shall quicken and vivifie you.

Saint Ambrose in his Commentary upon Saint Luke, makes a plain diffe^ance
between these two kinds of body of Christ, expounding the words of the Lord,
Luke 17. Wheresoever the body is, ^hither will the Eagles be gathered
together. First he says that by the body may be understood the dead body of
Christ, and by the Eagles which are about it, Mary wife to Cleophas, and Mary
Magdalen, and Mary mother of the Lord: then he adds, There is also that body
^f whom it is said, My flesh is meat indeed.

Pope Innocent the third in the fourth Book of the Mysteries of the Mass,
Chapter 36. distinguishes in express terms these two kinds of flesh or
body of Christ, saying, The form of the bread comprehends both the one and
the other flesh of Christ, to wit, the true, and the mystical.

Salmeron the Jesuit in his fifteenth Treatise of the IX Tome, gathers the
same distinction of two sorts of blood of Christ, out of the Book of the Lords
Supper attributed to Saint Cyprian. Why (says he) in the Law it was forbidden
to eat blood, and it is commanded in the Gospel: Cyprian teaches it
excellently well in his Book of the Lords Supper. For in the abstinence of
that blood is designed the Spiritual and reasonable life, far from brutish
manners. Bibimus vero de Christi sanguine humane pariter ac divino, ut
intelligamus per ejus gustum ad eternae ac divinae vitae participium nos
vocatos.
Now we drink of Christ's blood, both of that which is humane, and of that
which is divine. To the end we may understand that intasting of him we are
called to the participation of eternal and divine life.

We have in the former Chapter alleged Eupbraemius calling the bread of the
Eucharist the body of Christ, and yet saying that that body loses not the
Substance of bread. And the Canon Hoc est in the second Distinction of the
Consecration, drawn out of Saint Austin, saying, that the bread which is the
flesh of Christ, is after its manner called the body of Christ, though indeed
it is the sacred sign of the body of Christ. And Saint Austin, The Lord made
no difficulty to say, This is my body, when he gave the sign of his body.
And Theodoret likewise, saying, The Lord has given to the sign the name of
his body. And Origin, calling the bread of the Supper a figurative body of
Christ.

The same appears more clear than the very day, in that the Fathers which
say that in the Eucharist we eat Christ's body, attribute unto this body things
which cannot agree with the natural body of Christ borne of the Virgin Mary,
and crucified for us. Saint Cyprian Domiun^ corpus sui^ pane^ vocat^ de
multor^^ granorum adunatione congestum.
in his 76 Epistle says: The Lord calls the bread his body which is made and
composed of many grains. And in the 63 Epistle, Nec corpus Domini potest esse
sarina sola, aut aqua sola, insi utrumque adunatum fucrit, etc.
The Lords body cannot be of the flower alone, or of the water alone, except
both the one and the other be kneaded and conjoined together. Certainly, this
body of Christ composed of many grains and kneaded with water, cannot be the
body of Christ crucified for us.

Justin in his second Apology, says: (...).
The Deacons do give to every one of those that are present to participate,
bread and wine and water, whereupon thankesgivings have been said. Then he
adds, that this bread is the body of Christ. But he shows manifestly that
this body of Christ, is not that which was crucified for us, in that he says
(...).
it is a meat wherewith ou^ flesh and blood are fed by the transmutation. He
speaks of the change made by the disgestion. For our bodies are not fed of,
or with the body crucified for us, that body is not changed into our flesh and
blood. For, that Justin believed not the Transubstantiation, he shows it
sufficiently in the Dialogue against Tryphonius, saying, (...), etc. (...), etc.
The oblation of fine flower was a figure of the bread of the Euch^rist, which
our Lord Jesus has ordained to be made in remembrance of his Passion.

Ireneus in his first Book says the same, Eu^n cal^cem. qui est cre tura,
suum corpus confirmavit ex quo nostra auget cor^ora.
The Lord has affirmed that the Cup, which is a creature wherewith be makes
our bodies grow, is his body. Would Ireneus have lost his wit so far, as to
believe that our bodies grow and are fed with the crucified body of the Lord,
and with the blood shed upon the Cross, which did not return into his body?

The same distinction of two sorts of body of Christ, in the writings of the
ancient Fathers, appears in that they do speak of the pieces of the body
of Christ, and of the residues of the body of Christ that remain after the
Communion: Which cannot agree with Christ's natural body crucified for us, that
cannot be broken in pieces, and whereof there can be no residue. Pope Gelasius
in the Canon Comperimus, second Distinction of the Consecration. Comperimus
quod quidam sumpta ta^tum modo corporis sacri portione a calice sacrati cruoris
abstineant.
We have learned that some having taken one part of the body of Christ,
abstain from the cup, which thing he calls a sacrilege. And Evagrius the
Historian in his fourth Book, Chapter 36. (...).
The ancient custom of the royal City requires, that when many Pieces of the
immaculate body of Christ remain, children not yet in age to be corrupted,
going to School, be called for to eat them. How could one give pieces of the
natural body of Christ, who sits at the right hand of God? What likelihood
is there to give to a troop of little children the residues of the body of
Christ? Would not that be esteemed at this day in the Roman Church, an
horrible profanation?

Wherefore it is a thing very frequent in the Fathers to say, that Panis est
Corpus Christi, The bread is Christ's body. And we have heard Saint Austin here
above speak so. Words, which if they were taken or understood of the natural
body of Christ, would be false. For the bread is not the body that was
crucified for us.

It is therefore unjustly done by our Adversaries to expose unto the View, with
great noise and rumor, some place^ out of the Books of Sacraments attributed
to Saint Ambrose, and out of the Book of the Lords Supper attributed to
Cyprian, wherein is said that the bread, after the words of Consecration,
becomes and is made Christ's bodie^ since we do show by so many proof^^ that
they speak of another body that of that which was borne of the Virgin Marie,
and that was crucified, a^ we will show yet more clearly hereafter.

For, that the Author of these Book^ attributed to Saint Ambrose, has believed
that after the Consecration the bread is bread still: he shows it plainly when
he says, Lib. 4. de Sacrament. cap. 4.
Let us therefore establis^ this, to wit, how that which is bread, may be
Christ's body. And a little after, Si tanta vis in Sermon Domini Jesus, ut
inciperent esse quae no^ erant, qua^to magis operatorius est ut sint quae
erant, et in aliud commutentur.
If there be such power and virtue in the word of the Lord Jesus, as to make
that things which were not, begin to be: how much more shall he make that the
things which were, be, and be changed into other things? This excellent place,
which says that the things which were, are still, that is to say, that that
which was bread, is bread still, is found thus alleged by Lombard, in his
fourth Book of Sentences, Distinction 10. And by Thomas in the third part of
his Sum, question 78. Art. 4. And by Gratian in the second Distinction of the
Consecration at the Canon Panis est; And by Gabr. lect. 40. in Can. Missae
Alger. de Sacram. corp. lib. 2. cap. 7 Ivo Car. 2. Part. cap 7. Et Iodocus
Coccius Tom. 2. lib. 6. page 621.
Gabriel Biel, and Alger, and Ivo Carnutensis, and Jodocus Coccius: and not
according to the new editions of Ambrose, in which these words, Sint quae
erant, are left out. Such falsifications are frequent in the new editions.

Some places may be found indeed whe^ein some Fathers say, that the bread of
the Eucharist is the body of the Lord crucified for us. But that must be
understood after the some manner as Christ said of the bread that it was his
body, and that the Cup is the New Testament, because it is the Sacrament or
remembrance of it.

They do object a place of Saint Hilarie out of his eighth Book of the
Trinity, where he says, De veritate carnis and saguinis no^ relictus est
ambigendi locus. Nunc enim and ^psius Do^mi professione, and side nostra vere
caro est and vere sanguis. Et hac accepta atque hausta essiciunt ut and nos in
Christo and Christus in nobis sit.
Of the truth of the flesh and blood, there is no doubt. For at this day, both
by the profession of the Lord and by our Faith, it is flesh indeed, and blood
indeed: and these things taken and swallowed down, cause us to be in Christ
and Christ in us.

First of all it is a great abuse to urge Saint Hilary, who in this point of
the nature of Christ's body had an error that destroys the whole Christian
Religion: For Hilar. lib. 10. de Trinitate In quem quanvis aut idlus incideret,
aut vulnus descenderet, etc. afferrent quide^ haec impetu^ passionis, non tamen
dolore^ passionis inferrent, ut telu^ aliquod aut aquam perforans, aut ignem
compungens aut era vulnerans. Et paulo post, Virtus corpo^is sine sensu poenae
vim poenae in se desaevientis excepit.
he teaches that Christ in his Passion suffered no manner of pain at all, and
that the stripes they gave him, were as if they had pierced the air or the
fire with a dart. Secondly, it appears that Hilary speaks of the Spiritual
manducation. For by it alone are we in Christ, and Christ in us. Thirdly, when
Hilarie says there remains no place to doubt of the truth of the flesh and
blood of the Lord, he does not mean it must not be doubted but that in the
Eucharist we cate truly the natural flesh of Christ by the mouth of the body:
But he says that we must not doubt but Christ had a true flesh and a true
blood: For he disputes against certain Heretics that destroyed the truth of
his human nature.

For as touching the Mystagogicall Catecheses attributed to Cyril of Jerusalem,
which are objected against us, where it is said that we must not believe our
senses telling us that it is bread: it is certain that those Catecheses are
supposed and falsely attributed to Cyril. For the Style of them is very
different from those 18 Catecheses of Cyril that precedes them, which are cited
by Theodoret, and by Gelasius, and by Damascen: but these last are never
alleged by any one. In the first Catechese, there is an evident mark of
falsity. (...), etc.
For he disswadeth his hearers from frequenting the Amphitheater where the
Gladiators chases and combats were made against wild beasts, and the Hippod
omus or Circus, that is to say the Park or Place where horses races and
combats were exercised. For then were no such buildings nor spectacles in
Jerusalem, nor never were any since Jerusalem was Christian.

And concerning Chrysostomes hyperbolical amplifications, saying that the Altar
streams with blood, that we fasten our teeth in his flesh, that we put ou^
fingers in his wounds and suck the blood of them, and that a Seraphin brings
unto us a burning coal with a pair of tongs, they be outlashing words that
savor of a declamation, and which our Adversaries themselves do not believe.

CHAP. XXIX. That diverse Ancient Fathers have believed a mystical Union of the
Godhead of Christ with the bread of the Sacrament.
Nevertheless, I cannot deny but that many Fathers have had an opinion, which
with good reason is rejected by the Roman Church of these days. They teach
that as Christ's divine nature has united it self personally unto his humane
nature, so the same divine nature, by virtue of the Consecration, is united to
the bread of the Eucharist, by an union, though not personal and
hypostaticall, yet mystical, divine, and ineffable, by which the bread
remaining bread, is made the body of Christ. For they use this comparison,
taken from the personal union of the two natures of Christ, for to show how
the bread is the body of Christ: This opinion has no foundation in the
Scripture. Yet I dare say, it is an error no way prejudicial to Christian
Religion. For that opinion changes not the nature of Christ, and destroys not
his humanity. Neither does it destroy the nature of the Sacrament, since they
did believe that the bread changes not its substance. Whence also they
worshipped not the Sacrament, neither did fall into Idolatry. To be short, it
was an innocent error, serving to augment and increase the peoples respect and
reverence to the holy Sacrament, which for that cause they call terrible and
wonderful.

In the mean while we have in that a most evident proof that these Fathers
did not believe the Transubstantiation. For as they believed not that by the
union of Christ's divinity with his humanity, the human nature was
transubstantiated, or his body abolished: so did not they believe that by this
mystical and divine union of the Godhead of Christ with the bread, the bread
should be destroyed, and turned into another substance.

By this doctrine the bread of the Eucharist is the body of Christ in two
manners: the one because of that mystical union of the bread with Christ,
after the same sort as Jesus Christ man is called the Son of God; because of
the personal union with the Son of God: The other, because this bread is the
sacred sign and remembrance of Christ's body, as it is usual to give to the
signs the name of that which they do signify. For this second consideration
they say that the bread of the Eucharist is the body which was borne of the
Virgin, and crucified for us. For as touching the first Consideration, it is
certain that this bread which they say is made Christ's body by that mystical
union, is another body of Christ than that which was crucified for us. For to
effect such a transmittation, they interpose the Omnipotency of God. For it
must be a divine power for to cause that the bread remaining bread, be so
straightly united to the Godhead of Christ, as to become the body of Christ.

Now, that these Fathers do hold that this mystical body of Christ is another
body than that which was crucified for us, though it be the same in
signification, we prooved it just now by a multitude of places of Fathers,
wherein they say that Christ has two sorts of flesh, and that we may very well
eat of that flesh or mystical body which is taken in the Sacrament, but no
manner of way eat the flesh that was crucified for us.

The first Father that ever made use of the personal union of the two natures
of Christ for to show how the bread is made the body of Christ, not by
Transubstantiation, but by the mysterious union of the Godhead of Christ with
the bread, is Justin Martyr, about the end of his second Apology, where he
speaks thus: We do not take these things as common bread: but after the
same manner as Christ our Savior was incarnate and made flesh and blood for
our salvation, so we have been taught that the meat whereon thankesgivings
have been rendered by the prayer of the Word, whereby our flesh is nourished by
By this transmutation he understands the change of the bread which is made
in the stoach for the nounishment of our bodies.
transmutation, is the body and blood of Christ Jesus. Now that Justin believed
that this meat is bread still, and has not lost its substance, he shows it
when he says that our bodies are fed with it. And by that which he says in
that very place, that the Deacons give to all them that are present to
participate, the bread and wine, whereupon graces have been said.

The Author likewise of the Catechesticall prayer attributed to Gregory of
Nysse, uses the same comparison. I show this falsity in my book against
Cardinal du Perron, lib. 7. cap. 22. Namely in that he speaks of one Severus,
an Heritick, which came above a hundred years after the death of this Gregory.
The body (says he) was changed into a divine dignity by the inhabitation of
the Word God. With good reason then also now I believe that the bread,
sanctified by the word of God, is changed into the body of God the Word. If
this comparison be good, as the body of Christ was not transubstantiated by the
inhabitation of the Godhead: no more likewise is the bread transubstantiated by
the consecration which is made at the Sacrament.

Hilary speaks just so in the eighth Book of the Trinity: Sivere Verbum caro
factum est, and nos Verbum carnem cibo Dominico sumimus.
If the Word was truly made flesh, and we also in the meat of the Lord do
take the Word flesh.

Gratian in his second distinction of the Consecration, Can. hoc est. Hoc est
quod dicimus, etc. Si ut Christi persona constat ex Deo and homine, cum ipse
Christus verus sit Deus and verus sit homo.
alleges a place of Austin, drawn from the Sentences of Prosper, in these
words, The Sacrifice of the Church is composed of two things, to wit of the
Sacrament, and of the thing of the Sacriment; hat is to say of the body of
Christ, after the same manner as Christ's person is composed of God and man. For
Christ is very God and very man.

Ireneus has an opinion by himself. For he says Quomodo constab^t cis eum
panem in quo gratiae actae sunt, corpus esse Domini sui and calicem sanguinem
ejus, si non ipsum fabricatoris mu^di filium dicunt.i. verbum ejus, per quod
lignu^ fruct^fica^, defluunt fontes, and dat terra primo quid^m foenum deinde
spicas.
that the bread is the body of Christ, because Christ is the Creator of all
things, esteeming that the whole world in respect of God, is what the body of
man is to his Soul. Which was the opinion and belief of Plato, of Cicero, of
Virgil, and of all the Platonic School, that bore the sway in Ireneus his
time.

Such was the belief of the Author of the Book of the Lords supper,
attributed to Saint Cyprian. That Author speaks thus: Pan^s ste communis in
carnem and sangumem mutatus, procurat vitam and incrementum corporibus,
ideoque, ex consueto rerum effectu fidei nostrae adjutamsirmit as sensibil
argumento, edocta est visibilibus Sacramentis inesse vitae aeternae effectum.
The common bread being changed into flesh, and into blood, brings ^ife and
growth unto the body. And therefore the infirmity of our flesh being helped by
the accustomed effect, is taught by a sensible proof, that in the visible
Sacraments there is an effect of eternal life. When he says that the common
bread is turned into flesh, and into blood, he does not mean that it is turned
into the flesh and blood of Christ, but into our flesh and blood by disgestion;
for he adds that this bread nourishes our bodies and makes them to grow;
and all the current of the speech shows that. But a little after he adds
some words whereupon our Adversaries do triumph and glory, for lack of
understanding what this Authors belief was. Panis que^ Dominus discipulis
porrigebat, non effigy, sed natura mutatus omnipotentia Verbi factus est caro.
Et sicut in persona Christi humanitas videbatur, et latebat d vinitas, ita
Sacramento visibili ineffabiliter divina se infudit essentia.
The bread (says he) that the Lord gave to his Disciples, being changed, not
in show, but in nature, is made flesh by the omnipotency of the Word. But in
the words following, he shows that this conversion of the bread into the
flesh of Christ, is made, not by Transubstantiation, but by an union of the
Godhead of Christ with the bread, like unto the union of Christ's divine nature
with his humane nature: For he added immediately after, And even as in ^he
person of Christ, his humanity was ^eene, but his divinity was hidden, so the
Panis itaque hic azymus, cibus verus and sincerus per speciem and Sacramentum
nos tactu sanctificat.
divine essence is infused in the visible Sacrament by an unspeakable manner.
There is nothing more express, nor more contrary unto Transubstantiation. For
according to this Authors belief, even as Christ's divine nature did not
transubstantiate his Manhood, but made it to be the flesh of the Son of God: So
the divine Essence which he says to be infused in the bread of the Sacrament,
makes it to become Christ's body, without being Transubstantiated. Wherefore a
litlte after, he says, that that which we receive in the Sacrament, Caro quae
Verbu^ Dei Patris assu^psit in utero virginali n un tate suae personae, et
panis qui consecratur in Ecclesia, unum corpus sunt. Divinit atisenim plenitudo
quae fuit in illa, replet et istum pa^em.
is unleavened bread, which sanctifies us by touching it: acknowledging that
it is bread still.

Bellarmin in the 15 chap. of his third Book of the Eucharist, alleges Saint
Remigius, that wrote about the year of our Lord 520 in these words, a The
flesh which the Word of God the Father took in the Virgins womb in unity of
person, and the bread that is consecrated in the Church, are one and the
selfsame body. For the plenitude of the divinity which was in that flesh,
fills also this bread. Bellarmin adds that Haimo held the same language,
and that Gelasius and Theodorets words that we have alleged above, may be
fitted to this opinion.

The Author our Adversaries allege with more ostentation, is Damascene, whom
they rank among the Saints. This man may be termed the Lombard of the
Grecians, because he is the first among the Grecians that handled divinity in
Philosophical terms: And is the first that wrote for the adoration of
Images. Now, he did write about the year of our Lord 740. This man in his 4
Book of the Orthodox Faith, chap. 14. extends himself upon this matter, and
will have the bread (...)
to be changed into the body of the Lord, not by transubstantiation, but by
(...).
Assumption and union with the divinity, like unto the union of Christ's
divinity with his humanity. Because (says he) (...).
that it is the custom to eat bread, and to drink wine and water, the Lord
has conjoined his divinity to these things, and has made them to be his body
and blood. And a little after, (...).
If thou inquirest in what manner that is done, let it suffice thee to
understand that it is done by the holy Spirit, after the same manner as the
Lord has made himself to himself and in himself, a flesh taken of the holy
Mother of God by the holy Ghost. And a little after, he says that the bread
and wine (...).
is the body of Christ Deified. Chiefly he is very express in that he adds:
(...).
The bread of the Communion is not mere bread, but it is conjoined to the
Divinity. But still he acknowledges that it is bread, saying, the bread is the
body of Christ, and calling it the bread of the Communion: And a little after,
The loaves of proposition did figurate this bread. Item, The broad is the first
fruits of the future bread. And a little after, We partake all of one bread.
Only he has this of particular to himself, that he will not have the bread to
be called the figure of Christ's body, rejecting that kind of speech, usual
and ordinary in the Fathers that have written before him.

It appears likewise in that he will have the Sacrament to be honored, but
not to be worshipped. (...).
Let us (says he) honor it with purity corporal and spiritual; and will have
it to be received with the hands set in form of a Cross. For then it was not
as yet the custom to chop it into the mouths of Communicants.

Rupertus was imbrued with the same opinion, Rupertus Tuitiensis in Exodus c.
12. Sicut Christus humanam natural nec mutavit, nee destruxitysed assumpsit, it
a in Sacrameto, nec destruit, nec mutat sub. stantiam panis et vini, sed
assumit in unitatemcorporis et s^ngumis sui.
Even as Christ (says he) did neither change nor destroy the humane nature,
but joined himself unto it: So in the Sacrament he neither destroys nor
changes the substance of the bread and wine, but joyneth himself unto it in
the unity of his body and blood. For which cause also Bellarmin places him
among the Impanators.

This doctrine does no whit agree with the ubiquity. For they did put this
union of Christ with the bread, in the Sacrament only, which brings no manner
of change to the natural body of Christ. But these Fathers make two bodies of
Christ: the one his natural body, which is but in Heaven, the other the bread
of the Sacrament, which they make to be Christ's body two manner of ways: to
wit because it is united to the divinity of Christ by an union like unto the
hypostaticall union of the two natures of Christ, and because it is a sign,
figure, and symbol of Christ's natural body: according as the signs are wont
to be called by the name of that which they do signify and represent. Whence
also they say sometimes that that bread is the body of Christ, borne of the
Virgin, and crucified for us.

Whosoever shall apprehend this aright, shall have a key in their hand for to
enter into the knowledge and intelligence of the Fathers, and for to come out
of all difficulties. It is the solution of the places of Cyril that are
objected against us, and of those and Ambrose out of the Book of Sacraments.
For indeed the Author of the Books of Sacraments was one of these Impanators,
since that he holds that by the unspeakable virtue of God, the bread becomes
the body of Christ, and yet remains bread still, as we have prooved, and
alleged the form of the service of that time, where it was said, Ambros. li.
4. de Sacram. c. 5. Fac nobis hanc oblationem aseriptam, rata^, rationabilem,
acceptabilem, quod est siguracorporis Christi.
That the oblation we offer, is the Figure of the body of Christ. And in the 4
chap, Let us establish this, to wit, how THAT WHICH IS BREAD, may be the body
of Christ. And a little after, he says that the bread and the wine are still
what they were, and yet are changed into the body and blood of the Lord. We
must not wonder if for to work this change in the bread of the Sacrament, he
imployeth the Omnipotency of God, and his unexpressable virtue in changing
things. For indeed if that union he conceives, were true, it were an
unspeakable and incomprehensible work, and wherein human reason is stark blind.

Because of this mystical union which is near unto the personal union,
Cyrill of Alexandria says, that this body of Christ received into our bodies,
makes them susceptible and capable of the Resurrection. Which truly is an
abuse. For by the same reason the participation of the Sacrament should keep us
from dying. The Faithful of the Old Testament, and John the Baptiste, and the
Theife crucified with Christ, and an ininfinit number of Martyrs, that were
never partakers of this Sacrament, are no less capable of the Resurrection.

From that impanation sprung up that custom by which in old time many
particular persons carried away the Eucharist into their own houses, and kept
it locked up in a chest or cupboord, as Gregor. Nazianz. Oratione de sorore
Gorgonia.
Gorgonia did, who was sister to Gregory Nazimzen. Which shows on the one
side that they did give unto that bread something more than to be the figure
and sign of Christ body. And on the other side that shows also that they did
not believe the Transubstantiation. For they would never have put Christ's
natural body into a woman's hand, for to keep it locked up in a cupboord.

From the same opinion proceeded that which Satyrus Ambros. Oratione de obitu
fratris Satyri.
did, who was S Ambroses brother, and yet unbaptized Who being upon the Sea in
danger of shipwreck, caused the Eucharist to be given him, and hanged it about
his neck, and then threw himself into the sea, for to save himself by
swimming. An evident proof they believed that in this Sacrament there was some
secret virtue, and that nevertheless they believed not this bread to be the
natural body of Christ, crucified for us. For they would never have given it
to an unbaptized person for to hang it about his neck, and cast it with him
into the Sea.

Neither is it to be omitted that the Fathers never speak of the species of
the bread in the plural, but only in the singular, because that by the sp^cies
of the bread, they understand the substance of the bread, which is one. But our
Adversaries, which deprave the Fathers terms as well as their doctrine, speak
of species of the bread in the plural, because that by the species of the
bread, they understand accidents without a subject, which are many. Which is a
new doctrine, and a phrase or kind or speech altogether unusual, not only in
Philosophers, but also in the Fathers, and in all Antiquity.

CHAP. XXX. Particular opinion of Saint Austen and of Fulgentius, and of
Innocent the third.
Austen, and Fulgentius his disciple, take sometimes these words, This is my
body, in a sense patricular to themselves. For besides this exposition which is
very frequent in S. Austin, namely, that the Lord called the bread his body,
because it is the sigure and sign of his body: in some places he will have in
these words THIS is my body, that by this word, body, the Church be understood.
For in his Sermon to Children, which is to be found at the end of Fulgentius
his Works, he speaks thus: These things are called Sacraments, because in
them one thing is seen, and another understood, etc. If then thou will know
what the body of Christ is, hear the Apostle saying, Ye are the body and
members of Christ. And in the 26 Treatise upon S. John, By this meant, and by
this drink, the Lord will have the fellowship of his body and of his members
to be understood, to wit, the holy Church of the Predestinat.

Pope Innocent the third holds the same doctrine: For in his 4 Book of the
mysteries of the Mass, he says, that Christ has two bodies, to wit his
natural body, which he took of the Virgin, and which was crucified, and his
mystical body, viz. the Church. Then he adds: Mysticum corpus co^editur
spiritualiter, id est, in fide sub specie pan^s.
The mystical body is eaten spiritually, that is to say in faith under the
species of the bread.

By all the premises it is plain and evident, that he who forsaking the
Scriptures, takes the Fathers for his address or direction, intangleth
himself into marveilous difficulties, and casts himself into darkness, and
in a labyrinth without issue. And that a man must be well read in them, and
observe and heed them very exactly, for to attain to an indifferent knowledge
of them. That if any one reads them carefully, and with an unpreoccupated
mind, though he meets with many errors in them, and small agreement among
themselves: Yet he shall find them so far from the doctrine of the Roman
Church, as the heavens are from the earth.

CHAP. XXXI. That the Church of Rome condemning the Impanation, is fallen her
self into an error a thousand times more pernitiou^, by Transubstantiation.
And of the Adoration of the accidents of the bread.
WE have showed that many Fathers have believed that the divinity of the Lord
is joined to the bread of the Eucharist, by an union coming near unto the
personal union that is between the two natures of Christ. The
Transubstantiation, is an imitation of this doctrine, but in the worse: For
whereas these Fathers conjoyne the Godhead of Christ with the substance of the
bread The Church of Rome conjoyneth Christ with the accidents of bread, with a
more strait union than that which those Impanators did put between the
divinity of the Lord, and the bread of the Eucharist.

For the ancient Fathers esteemed not that because of the union of Christ with
the substance of the bread, the bread should be worshipped. But the Roman
Church by reason of the union of Christ's body with the accidents of the bread,
worshippeth these accidents, that is to say, the roundnesse, whiteness,
favor, and breadth of the Host, with the same adoration that Christ's body is
worshipped with. Bellar. 13 cap 5. Nullus dubtandi locus r l ^qu tur quin (...)
Ch^ sti sideles latr^^ cult^^ qu^^^^^ Deo d^b^tur, (...) S^nit ssimo Sacramento
ma en^ratione adbibeant.
The Council of Trente in the XIII. Session, ordains upon pain of a curse,
that the Sacrament shall be worshipped with divine adoration, called Latria.
Now by the Sacrament, the Council understands the body of Christ with the
species or accidents. Of which abuse has been spoken before.

It is therefore very wrongfully that the Church of Rome condemns those that
have put a mystical and unspeakable union between the Godhead of Christ and
the bread of the Sacrament, since our Adversaries themselves bring in another,
a thousand times more absurd and more pernicious, between Christ and the
Accidents of bread. More absurd, I say: For the union of two substances may
easily be conceived; But to unite a substance with the accidents of another
substance, as if one should put the Moon under the accidents of a horse, is a
thing and a conceit which passes all the imaginations of hypocondriaks, and
which cannot fall into the mind of any man that has not interdicted to
himself the use of reason. Add moreover that this doctrine destroys the
nature of the Sacrament, and the humanity of Christ, as we have prooved: and
binds men to worship a piece of bread with divine adoration. Things, which
the ancient Church never believed nor practiced.

It seems that Satan, when he tempted Christ in the Wilderness, was a
projecting this doctrine, and making an essay or trial of it. For promising
unto Christ imaginary kingdoms, he proposed unto him accidents without a
subject. And in speaking to him of turning stones into bread, he spoke to him
of a Transubstantiation.

CHAP. XXXII. That the Sacrifice of the Mass was not instituted by Christ.
Confession of our Adversaries.
IN the holy Scripture, the holy Supper is not called a Sacrifice. Christ in
instituting this Sacrament, offered nor presented nothing to his Father, but
only to his Disciples, saying, Take, eat. He made no elevation of the Host.
The Apostles worshipped not the Sacrament. In a word, there did not pass in
it, any of the actions necessarily required in a Sacrifice properly so called.
Bellarmin acknowledges it freely, saying, Bellar. l. 1. de Missa c. 27.. 5.
Oblati^ quae sequitur consecrationem, ad integritatem sacrificii pertinet, non
ad essentiam. Quod non ad essent iam probatur, tamex co quod Dominus eam
oblationem non adbibuit, immo nec Apostoll in principio, ur ex Gregorio
demonstratum est.
The oblation which is after the Consecration, belongs to the integrity of
the Sacrifice, but is not of its essence: which is prooved in that the Lord
made not this oblation, nor the Apostles themselves at the beginning, as we
have demonstrated it out of Gregory. A confession very notable: by which this
Cardinal will have Christ and his Apostles to have made a Sacrifice without
offering any thing: that is to say, that in the Eucharist he offered not
himself in Sacrifice: But now the Church of Rome offers Christ Jesus in
Sacrifice, against Christ's example, and the example of his Apostles.

Salmeron Jesuit, in the XIII. Tome and first Book of Commentaries upon the
Epistles of S. Paul, Part 2. Disp. 8. 5 Opus. Et. Post^^mo. and. Porro.
makes an enumeration of the unwritten Traditions, and puts in their rank the
Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, that is to say the Papal Monarchy, and the service
of Images, and the Mass, and the manner of Sacrificing. And the Tradition,
that Christ made a Sacrifice in bread and wine. And here are the reasons why he
thinks it was not expedient those things should be written, or taught by word
of mouth. Part. 3. Disp. 8.. Quinto Tradit. Stultum est omnia ab Apostolis
scripta putare, vel omnia ab eis trad ta fulsse. Et in injuriam vergerel
agent^s and revelantis Spi^itus. Et insuave esset naturae nostrae quae omnia
simul non capit.
It is (says he) a foolish thing to think the Apostles have written all, or
given all by Tradition: That would turn to injury against the holy host,
acting and revealing. And it would be a thing uncouth unto nature, which
comprehends not all things at once. And there he gives a particular reason
wherefore these. Quinto opus. Haec literis consignari minime debuerant, ut
servaretur praeceptum Christ^, Nolite dare sanctum cambus.
things were not to be written, to wit, that Christ's Commandment might be kept,
Give not that which is holy unto dogs If we believe this Doctor, the doctrine
of the Birth and Passion of our Savior was given unto dogs: for it was Gods
will it should be set down in writing. By these Dogs he means the People
and the Princes.

Cardinal Baron. Annal. ad annum 53.. 13.
Baronius makes the same confession, and acknwledgeth ingenuously that the
Sacrifice of the Eucharist is an unwritten Tradition, and whereof, by
consequent, no mention is made in the Gospel.

And Gregory of Valentia a Jesuit, in the 4 chap of his first Book of the
Mass: Si maxim ille cultus a Deo institutus non esset, concludi tamen ab
istis non posset non esse legitimum, cum id ad bonitatem cultus minime
requiratur.
Even though this service or worship [of the Masse] had not been instituted by
God, yet these men could not conclude that it is not lawful, for we have
showed that that [to wit to be commanded of God] is not necessarily required,
for to make that a service be good.

All these Doctors speaking thus, condemn tacitly the Council of Trente, who
in the XXII. Session, chapter 1. declares and defines, that by these words,
Do this in remembrance of me, the Lord established the Priesthood of the New
Testament. Words which M^tthew and Mark would not have omitted, if by them the
Lord had instituted the Sacrifice and the Priesthood of the New Testament.

CHAP. XXXIII. That the Sacrifice of the Mass agrees neither with Scripture
nor with reason.
1. THe two third parts of Saint Paul's Epistle to the Hebrews are employed in
speaking both of the Sacrifice, and of the Priesthood of the Christian Church,
where nevertheless no mention is made at all of the Eucharist, nor of any
other Sacrifice of redemption than the death of Christ our Lord.

2. Moreover, in many places, namely about the end of the ninth Chapter, the
Apostle says, As it is appointed unto men once to dye, so Christ was once
offered for to take away our sins. Teaching us, that as man dies but once,
and that the death of men is not reiterated, neither bloodily nor unbloodily:
so the Sacrifice by which Christ offered himself for our sins, receives no
iteration. And in the tenth Chapter, two several times, he says in express
terms that Christ has offered Vnicam oblationem, one only Sacrifice, and
then sat him down on the right hand of God.

3. For since Christ's death is a price, and a sufficient Sacrifice for our
redemption; there is no more need of another Sacrifice of redemption. That if
for applying unto our s lves Christ's Sacrifice he must he sacrificed again, by
the same reason for to apply his death unto our selves, he must be put to death
again. Christ and his death is applied unto us by the fraction of the bread,
1. Cor. 10.16. And by Baptism, Galat. 3.27. And by that Faith whereby Saint
Paul says that he dwells in our hearts, Ephesians 3.17. but not in
sacrificing him.

4. But how should Christ in the Mass satisfy for our sins, seeing he is no
more in that condition of satisfying, nor of suffering for us? But only in the
state of interceding and impetrating for us, as Bellarmin confesses. Bellar.
li. 2. de Missa cap. 1.. Secundo Christus nunc nec mererince s^^isfacere
potest, sed tantum in petrare. I gitur impetratio propria est hujus sacrificij
vis and effi^^^^ia.
Christ (says he) cannot now merit nor satisfy, but only impetrate. Wherefore
the proper virtue and efficacy of this Sacrifice is to impetrate; not
therefore to redeem and satisfy. Now for to impetrate, Christ's intercession
whereby he makes request for us, sitting at the right hand of his Father, Romans
8.33. is sufficient, without being needful to sacrifice him.

5. Wherefore the Pastors of the Chritian Church, are never called Priests in
the Scripture, for to distinguish them from the people. But all the faithful
are called Priests by Saint Peter in his first E^istle, Chap. 2.9. And by Saint
John, Revelation 1.6. He has made ^s Kings and Priests unto God and his Father,

6. The Apostle Saint Paul to the Ephesians 4.11. makes a denumeration of the
Offices which Christ, ascending up to heaven, left here to his Church. And he
gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists: and some Pastors
and Teachers, Of Priests and Sacrificers he speaks not one word. No more than
in the first to Timothy, and in the Epistle to Titus, where he describes the
duty of Priests (whom he calls also Bishops) and of Deacons, without making
any mention of this Priesthood.

7. It is evident that to be a Sacrificer, is a thing more excellent than to be
Sacrificed. So Aaron was more excellent than the beasts that he offered: Not
only because he was a man, and had these Sacrifices in his power: but also
because these Lambs and Bullocks were figures of Christ, as he was a man, who
was to die for us: but Aaron represented Christ, as he was God, offering his
body in Sacrifice to his Father for our finnes. Priests therefore boasting
themselves of sacrificing Christ, advance themselves above Christ.

8. In all Sacrifices the thing sacrificed and offered unto God, must be
destroyed and killed. But in the Mass Christ is not destroyed and suffers
nothing there. Therefore in the Mass Christ is not sacrificed. To say that in
the Mass Christ's sacramental being is destroyed, is a pure mockery. For
Christ has but one being, to wit his natural being. And this word of
Sacramental being, is as much as a significative being, which is a Chymera o^
fond conceit. The principal is that in the Mass they pretend to sacrifice
Christ for our redemption. But the Sacramental or significative being of the
Lord is not the price of our redemption, and is not sacrificed for us. That if
the Sacrifice be made when the species of the bread and wine are destroyed, we
must say that the Sacrifice is made in the stomach of the Priest some hours
after the Mass is ended: for there must be some time for to destroy the
species by the disgestion.

9. Furthermore in all Sacrifices the thing sacrificed must be Consecrated,
and in every Sacrifice there must be some Consecration. But in the Mass there
is nothing consecrated. Not the bread, for they hold it is no more bread. Not
Christ's body, for men cannot consecrate him: It is he that consecrateth us. Not
the accidents of bread: For they be not offered to God in Sacrifice: otherwise
the Mass would be a Sacrifice of accidents, of color, of savor, of lines, and
superficies.

10. Our Adversaries never find themselves more puzzled, than when they are put
to find in the institution of this Sacrament, some action wherein this
Sacrifice does consist by which they pretend that the consecrated Host is
sacrificed to God in propitiatory Sacrifice. Does this Sacrifice consist in the
words whereby the Priest presents the body of Christ unto God, and prays him
to have that offering acceptable? But we have seen in the foregoing Chapter
that our Adversaries do confess, tha^ Christ made not God his Father. Does
this Sacrifice confist in the fraction of the bread? But that is impossible;
for Christ brake the bread before he uttered the words of Consecration,
therefore he brake no consecrated Host. And when the Priest lets the Host
fall whole into the Chalice without breaking it, the Mass leaves not for that
to be called a Sacrisice, as Bellarmin Bellar. lib 1. de Missa. cap. 27.. 60.
Si forte panis consecratus in calicem decidat, non solet fragi, sedrelinquitur
ita int^grum usque ad sumptione^, nec tamen sacrific um irritum, aut
essentialiter immutanri creditur. Add quod hac caeromonia Dommus non v detur
esse usus.
acknowledges. Perhaps they will say the Sacrifice consists in the
manducation: But that cannot be. For eating is not sacrificing. That if eating
be sacrificing, every one of the People shall be a sacrificing Priest: and the
Peoples mouths shall be as many Altars. Under Moses Law in all the sacrifices,
after which the people did ^ate of the things sacrificed, the sacred feast was
made some hours after the Sacrifice was ended. Neither can the Sacrifice
consist in the pronouncing of the words of Consecration: For by these words
This is my body, the Priest off^reth nothing to God. But every Sacrifice is an
offering made unto God. Furthermore, in every Sacrifice, he that sacrifices,
addresseth himself to God, but these words are addressed to the broad. Which
is more, we have seen hereabove the Confession of our Adversaries,
acknowledging that in all this action Christ offered nothing to God. Therefore
he made no Sacrifice.

11. It is to be noted that in the Roman Church the Order of Priesthood is a
Sacrament, whose it stitution they will have to be found in the Institution of
the Eucharist, when the Lord said, Do this, as if Christ by one and the same
words had instituted two Sacraments. With as much absurdity, as if one would
needs find the Institution of Marriage or of Extreme Unction in the
institution of Baptism. That if these words, Do this in remembrance of me,
be the formal and express words whereby Christ conferred the Order of
Priesthood, how comes it to pass that the Bishops, when they d^e conserre that
Order in the Ember weeks, make no mention of these words at all?

12. Our Adversaries put two sorts of Sacrifice. The one bloody, the other
unbloody, which they call the Sacrifice of Melchisedek, and which they say to
be far more excellent that the blooddy sacrifice, and will have the Mass to
be the Sacrifice after the Order of Melchisedek. Whence follows that the
Mass is more excellent than Christ's death, which is a bloody Sacrifice. It is
great wonder then that the Apostle to the Hebrews speaking so at large of the
Priesthood of Melchisedek, makes not any mention at all of Mass, nor of
Eucharist.

13. But how is it they by these words Do this in remembrance of me, Christ
should command men to sacrifice him in the Mass, since it is impossible to
sacrifice Christ in remembrance of Christ? seeing also that Saint Paul
immediately after these words, adds the explication of them, saying, For as
often as ye cate this bread and drink this cup, ye do show the Lords death,
1. Cor. 11. He teaches us that to Do this, is to eat bread and drink the cup
in remembrance of the Lords death.

Here therefore every man that seare^ God, and loves the Lord Jesus, shall
consider what a crime it is for moratal men and sinners to intrude and take
upon themselves to Sacrifice the Eternal Son of God to his Father, and to
be Priests after the Order of Melchisedek, without charge and without
commission.

CHAP. XXXIIII. In what sense the holy Supper may be called a Sacrifice. Of
Melchisedeks Sacrifice. And of the Oblation whereof Malachy speaks.
THe holy Scripture calls our Alms, our Prayers, our Praises and
Thankesgivings, and generally what worship soever we render unto God,
Sacrifices. In this sense the holy Supper may be called a Sacrifice. For the
question between us and our Adversaries, is not whether the Eucharist may be
cal^ed a Sacrifiee: But whether it be truly and properly a Sacrifice of
redemption, and whether the Priests in the Mass sacrifice the body of Christ
really and truly for the sins of the quick and of the dead.

Touching that, our Adversaries bring no manner of proof out of the new
Testament, wherein nevertheless the institution of this Sacrifice should
appear. Only they all eadge out of the Old Testament the example of
Melchisedek, who as they say sacrificed bread and wine. Genesis 14.18. Which they
produce falsely for that place says no such thing. Melchisedek brought out
bread and wine to Abraham for to refresh his wearie^ troops, but offered not
bread and wine to Abraham in Sacrifice. The very Bibl^ of the Roman Church has
proferens, and not offerens. Nevertheless we will suppose that place to be
faithfully alleged. For if the Mass be the Sacrifice o^ Melchisedek, it will
follow that the Mass is a Sacrifice of bread and wine and not of slesh and
bones and blood From thence it follows also that the Mass is not a Sacrifice
of redemption. For bread and wine offered up in Sacrified cannot be the price
of our redemption. It were an abuse to think that Melchisedek has sacrificed
bread for the redemption of any one. The propitiatory sacrifices, under the Old
Testament, were made by the death of the victime: and no propitiation was made
without shedding of blood, says the Apostle, Heb. 9. ^2. In sum, it is to
speak against the comm^n sense, to argue thus: Melchisedek offered bread and
wins: Therefore the Priest sacrifices the Lords body and blood.

They object likewise a place of Malachy, chap. 1. wherein God promises that
in every place, Incense shall be offered unto his Name, and a pure offering.
Which is a Prophecy of the calling of the Gentiles, whereby God foretells that
among the ^^tions, and acceptable service shall be offered unto him. Of the
Sacrifice of the Lords body: he speaks nothing of it. The novelty of this
service is, that it shall be made among all Nations, whereas in Malachies time
^it was but made in the Jewish Nation.

They say also that the Passover of the Old Testament was a Sacrifice, and by
consequent that the Lords Supper, that succeeded thereunto, must be Sacrifice.
They speak with as much reason, as if I should say that the night must be
clear, because it succeeds to the day which is bright and clear, and that
old Age is strong and lusty, seeing it succeeds to young Age which is strong,
and lusty. The succession of one thing unto another, brings commonly great
alterations. Add to this that our Adversaries will not have the Mass to be
such a Sacrifice as that Passover was. For the Passover was not offered by
the Priests, and was not made upon the Altar of the Temple: it was a
domestical sacrifice which particular men made at home in their own houses; As
it appears by the Passover which Christ did celebrate among his Disciples,
in which no Priest was employed. And even though by this example our
Adversaries had prooved that the Eucharist is a Sacrifice: yet there would
remain for them to prove that in this Sacrifice Christ's body is really
sacrificed.

CHAP. XXXV. In what sense the Fathers have called the Eucharist a Sacrifice.
THe ancient Fathers endeavoring to draw the Heathen unto the Christian Faith,
who esteemed there is no Religion without sacrifice, and the Jews whose
Religion under the Old Testament did chiefly consist in Sacrifices, have called
the holy Supper a Sacrifice, and the Sacred Table an Altar, and those that
serve at it, Levites.

But they show sufficiently how they call the holy Supper a Sacrifice, since
they call it Eucharist, that is to say Thankesgiving, and not a Sacrifice of
Propitiation. Saint Austin calls it indeed the Sacrifice of our price in the
ninth Book of Confessions, chapter 12. But we have produced a multitude of
places out of the same Father, that say, that in matter of Sacraments the
signs are wont to take the name of the things signified. That this is the
sense and meaning of the Fathers when they speak thus, appears in that they
call also the Eucharist Christ's death. As Cyprian in his 63 Epistle, Passlo est
Domi^ sacr^fi^um quod offe^imus.
The Lords Passion is the Sacrifice we do offer. And Chrysostom in the 21
Homily upon the Acts of the Apostles, (...).
Whilst this death is a perfeciting, and this dreadful Sacrifice, and these
ineffable mysteries. And so the Canon Hoc est, in the 2 Distin^tion of the
Consecration, Vocatur ipsa immolatio c^^n^s quae Sacer^dot^s manibus sit
Chr^sti passio, m^rs, crucafixio, non r^^ veritate, sed significante mysterio.
The immolation of Christ's flesh which is made by the hands of the Priest, is
called the Passion, Death, and Crucifixion of Christ, not according to the
truth, but by a significant mystery.

Austin in his 23 Epistle to Bonifacius: Was not Christ once sacrificed in
himself? and yet he is sacrificed to the People in a sacred sign. And in his
10 Book of the City of God, chap: 5. Sacrificium visibile invisibilis
Sacrific^i Sacramentumid est sacrum sign^m.
The visible Sacrifice is a Sacrament, that is to say a sacred sign of the
invisible Sacrifice. And a little after, Illud quod ab omnibus appellatur
Sacrificiu^, est signum very sacrificii.
That which men do call Sacrifice, is a sign of the rue Sacr fice. Note that
he says, that men do call it a Sacrifice, acknowledging tacitly the holy
Scripture does not call it so. We have then in these places of S. Austin, a
clear exposicion of this place wherein he calls the Eucharist the Sacrifice
of our price.

The sixth Book of Apostolical Constitutions of Clemens, chap. 23 Pro
sacrificio crue^to rationale and incruentum ac mysticum sacrificium instituit,
quod in mortem Domini per symbola corporis et sangumis sui celebratur.
The Lord instead of a bloody Sac^^fice has instituted a reasonable, and
unbloody, and mystical Sacrifice, which is celebrated in consideration of the
Lords death by the signs of his body and blood.

In the 4. Book of Sacraments attributed to S. Ambrose, chap. 5. we have these
words of the ancient Service: Fac nobis hanc oblationem ascriptam, rationabile
acceptabilem, quod est sigura corporis and sanguinis Domini.
Grant that this oblation be imputed unto us as reasonable, acceptable, which
is the FIGVRE of the body and blood of the Lord. The succeeding ages have razed
out the word Figure.

Procopius Gazaeus upon the 49. chap. of Genesis, Christ gave to his Disciples
the Image, or Figure, and Type of his body and blood, receiving no more the
bloody Sacrifices of the Law.

Eusebius in the 10 chapter of his first Book of the Evangelicall
Demonstration, (...).
The Lord having offered a Sacrifice and an excellent victime unto his Father
for the salvation of us all, has appointed us to offer continually the
remembrance of it instead of a Sacrifice.

And in the same place, (...).
We have received the remembrance of this Sacrifice for to celebrate it at his
own table, by the signs of his Body and Blood, according to the institution of
the New Testament.

In a word, the Fathers are full of such places. Wherefore in the Eucharist
they put no difference between the Sacrament and the Sacrifice. But to speak
properly, there is such difference between a Sacrifice and a Sacrament, as
between giving and receiving: For in a Sacrifice we offer unto God, but in a
Sacrament we receive from God. The Fathers do not make this distinction. For,
by reason the Sacrament is a sign and a figure of the Sacrifice, they call the
Sacrament a Sacrifice.

This kind of speaking, to call the Lords Supper a Sacrifice, had its beginning
from the offerings and gifts, which in old time the people offered upon the
sacred table before the Communion, which gifts were commonly called Sacrifices
and Oblations. Cyprian in his Sermon of Alms, Locuples and Dives, Dominicum
celebrare te credis, quae sorbonum non respuis, quae in Dominicu^ sine
sacrificio venis, quae part^m de sacrificio quod pauper ob^ulit sumis.
chides a rich woman that had brought no Sacrifice, and yet took her part of
the Sacrifices the poor had brought. And in the 21 Distinction at the Canon
Cleros, Hypod acon oblatioues in ^eplo Domini (...) side^bus sus^^p^^nt, and
L^vitis superpon^ das altari bu^d^serat.
Let the Subdeacons in the Lords Temple receive the Oblations of the Faithful,
and carry them to the Levites, that they may put them upon the Altars. Which
manner of speech remains yet at this day in the Mass, wherein the Priest
before the Consecration, says, Receive, Lord, thi^ immaculate Host, etc. as is
acknowledged by Bellarmin in his first Book of the Mass, chapter 27. And he
prooves it by Ire^eus, who in the 4 Book, chap. 32. says, we offer unto God a
Sacrifice of his creatures, that is to say, bread and wine: And that, even
before the Consecration.

In that therefore, the Fathers have said nothing but what is agreeable and
conformable unto the Faith. Yet nevertheless the abuse that has followed
thereon a longtime after, is unto us an excellent example that the safest way
is to cleave to the Apostles language, and not to depart from the style of the
holy Scripture.

THE SECOND BOOK. OF The Manducation of the Body of Christ.
CHAP. I. Of two sorts of manducation of Christ's flesh, to wit, Spiritual and
Corporal, and which is the best.
MEtaphors are similies contracted and reduced to a word. So we say feeding
for teaching, and to flourish for to be in prosperity, and we call Pride a
swelling, and truth a light. We say of a childs tongue, that it is untied, and
of his wit, that it is displayed.

These Metaphors, besides the ornament, have some utility. For they propose an
Image of the things whereof we speak, and make them more intelligible by a
tacit comparison. Specially, it is a thing very usual and frequent, to
express the functions and qualities of the soul, by terms borrowed from the
actions and corporal qualities. So we say that Envy fretteth, that love
burns, that Covetousness is a thirst of money, and that hope is a tickling
or soothing.

The holy Scripture is full of such manner of speeches, wherein nothing is more
frequent than to speak of good instructions as of meats and drinks, and of the
Graces of God, as of a water that quensheth the thirst, and of the desire of
these graces as of a hunger and thirst. So in the 9 of Proverbes the supreme
Wisdom says, Come, eat of my bread, and drink of the wine which I have
mingled. And David in the 36 Psalm says, God makes us drink in the river of
his pleasures. And in the 34 Psalm, O taste and see that the Lord is good. And
Jeremy in the 15 chap. Thy words were found, and I did presently eat them. And
God himself in the 55 of Isay^h, inviteth the thirsty to drink of the waters.
And that it may be understood he speaks of a spiritual drink, he adds,
Incline your care, and your soul shall live. According to this kind of speech
S. Peter in his 1 Epistle, chap. 2, exhorts us to desire the milk of
intelligence, to wit the Word of God. And S. Paul in the first to the
Corinthians, chap. 3. says he has given them milk, and not solid meat. Christ
our Lord is he that has used very often such metaphors, taken from corporal
meats and drinks. He says in the 4. chap. of S. John, that his meat is to do
his Fathers will. And in the same chap. he promises to give water, whereof
whosoever shall drink, shall never thirst. And in the chap. 7.37. If any man
thirst, let him come unto me, and drink. And in the 5. chapter of S. Matthew,
Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness.

With such manner of figurative speeches is woven and interlaced a great part
of the 6 chap. of S. John, where the Lord speaking to the Capernaites,
promises to give them the bread of Heaven, and says that his flesh is meat
indeed, and his blood is drink indeed. Two occasions moved him to speak so.
For the Jews of Capernaum making him inferior to Moses, and objecting unto him,
as by reproach of impotency, that Moses had given unto the Jews the Manna which
they call the bread of Heaven: the Lord from thence takes occasion to tell them
he would give them another bread descended from Heaven, far better than the
Manna, to wit himself, come down from Heaven for to be the food of souls,
and for to vivifie them. The other cause that moved him to speak in figured
terms, is that he was speaking unto ungrateful and rebellious Jews, ^o whom
S. Ma^th^w says, he spoke not wi^h ^t a par^ble, Matthew. 13.34

Here our Adversaries acknowledge with us, that there is a manner of eating the
body of Christ which is spiritual, and which is done not by the corporal
mo^th, but by the Faith in Christ Jesus, in whom we find our life and
spiritual food. The Council of Trente in the XIII Session, chap. 8. teaches
the same, saying: Some eat this bread, only spiritually and by a lively Faith.

But besides this spiritual manducation, the Church of Rome forgeth to her
self a corporal manducation, whereby the Faithful in the Eucharist do chew
and eat with their very teeth the body of our Savior Christ, and take it with
the corporal mouth, and make him to enter into their stomachs, and do call
this a real and true manducation, for to oppose it to the spiritual
manducation, whereof they speak very often with contempt, as of a picture and
of a thing which consists only in imagination. The Council of Trente intimates
so much tacitly, saying, there be some that eat this bread only spiritually,
as if it were a small thing in comparison of the real eating of it by the
mouth of the body.

Yet nevertheless when we press them a little, they are forced to avow that
the spiritual manducation is a great deal better: and that the corporal
manducation, which they maintain and defend so stiflly and with so much
ardour, is a small thing in regard of the spiritual. For they confess that
many are saved without partaking of the Eucharist, but that none are saved
without believing in Christ. And that many eat the Sacrament, which
nevertheless do perish eternally: but that whosoever eats Christ's flesh
spiritually and with true Faith, shall have eternal salvation, according to
the Lords saying in the third chap. of S. John, that whosoever believes on
him, shall not perish, but have eternal life. Which is more, our Adversaries
do acknowledge with us, that the manducation of the Sacrament, without the
spiritual manducation by Faith, is not only unprofitable, but even turns into
condemnation: and that it is profitable and useful, but for, and because of
the spiritual manducation. But the spiritual manducation, by it self alone,
and without the corporal manducation, leaves not to be profitable, and always
necessary to salvation. The manducation of the Sacrament, by the mouth of the
body, is common both to good and bad, and hypocrites partake thereof as well as
the true Faithful: yea our Adversaries hold, that beasts may eat Christ's
body, and that Mice do carry away sometimes the body of the Lord: But the
spiritual manducation, is proper and peculiar to Gods Children, and none but
the true Faithful can be partakers thereof. Christ in the 15 of S. Matthew,
says: that which goes into the mouth, defiles not a man: whence follows that
neither can it sanctify a man.

In this, S. Austin is far from that language which the Roman Church holds
now a days, who acknowledges no other true and real manducation of Christ's
body, than that which is made by the bodily mouth in the Eucharist. For this
holy man on the contrary, holds that there is no other true and real
manducation of Christ's body, but the spiritual: and that that which is done in
the Sacrament by the mouth of the body, is not a true manducation. He teaches
it in his 21 book of the City of God, chap. 25. Dominus ostendit quid sit non
Sacramento tenus sed (...) veracorpus Christi manducare.
The Lord (says he) shows what it is to eat the body of Christ, not in
Sacrament only, but in truth. And in the same place, Non solo Sacrame^to, sed
re ve^^ mandu^^verunt corpus Christi.
They have eaten the body of Christ, not only in Sacrament, but also truly and
indeed. To this holy Doctor, Thomas joins himself in this point, in his 7
lesson upon the 6 of S. John, where speaking of him that eats spiritually the
body of Christ, he says, Hic est ille, qui non Sacramental^^er tantum sed re
ver^ corpus Christ mandu^at.
It is that man that eats the body of Christ, not only Sacramentally, but
also in truth.

CHAP. II. That in the 6 Chapter of S. John the Lord speaks not of the
Sacrament of the Eucharist, nor of the manducation of his flesh by the mouth of
the body.
BY the corporal manducation, we understand the manducation of the bread and
wine, which Christ has honored with the title of his body and blood, because
they are the Sacrament and remembrance of the same. But our Adversaries pretend
to eat really the body of Christ with their mouth, and to make him pass into
their stomach: and for to prop this so gross and Capernaitish manducation,
they allege the sixth of Saint John, where Christ says that he is the bread
come down from Heaven, and promises to give his flesh to eat.

1. For to believe that, a man must of purpose put out his own eyes, and give
the Son of God the lie: For all this d^scourse is addressed and spoken to the
Jews of Capernaum, to whom he promises to give his flesh to eat. If by
these words he had promised to give them the Eucharist, he would have
deceived them: for he never administered nor presented the holy Supper unto them.

2. That appears by the time wherein the Lord held this discourse. It was
when the holy Supper was not as yet instituted: no, nor till about two years
after. How could the Lords Disciples have understood that he spoke of the
Eucharist unto them, which was not, and whereof he had never spoken before?

3. Where is there in all this discourse of the Lord the least mention of a
Table, or of a Chalice; or of a Supper, or of a Fraction of Bread, or of a
distribution of the Sacrament among many? In sum, of any of the actions
wherein the administration of this Sacrament does consist?

4. It is to be noted that Christ speaks often in the present tense. John
6.33 and chap 35 and 14.
He does not say, I shall be the bread come down from heaven: and I shall be
the bread of life. But, I am the bread came down from heaven: and, I am the
bread of life. And, He that eats my flesh, has ete na^l life. He was then
the bread of life before the holy Supper was instituted, and might have been
eaten then, and was the sood of the Soul, when the holy Supper had as yet no
being.

5. Now that by eating and drinking the Lord means to believe and to trust in
him, and thereby to be nourished and vivified: he shows it himself, saying in
the 35 Verse, I am the bread of life; be that comes to me, shall never
hunger; and he that believes on me, shall never thirst. Who sees not that in
this place, believing is put for drinking, since by believing the thirst is
quenched? And as by that word of coming he speaks of a spiritual coming:
so by that word, drinking, he means and understands a kind of spiritual
drinking.

6. And when the Lord says in the 47. and 48 Verse, He that believes in me,
has eternal life: I am the bread of life: who sees not that this bread is
taken in and by believing? For Christ shows how he is the bread of life, to
wit because he that believes on him, has eternal life.

7. The very words whereupon our Adversaries ground themselves most, are those
which make most against them. In the 53 Verse the Lord says, Except ye eat
the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you.
There it is evident he speaks of a manducation necessary unto salvation, and
without which none can be saved. He speaks not therefore of the manducation
of the Sacrament by the mouth of the body, seeing that without it so many are
saved. Now to say that this corporal manducation is necessary, not indeed, but
in vow and desire, is to come near our belief, and reduce that necessity to
the spiritual manducation. Moreover, to say that none are saved without
desiring to be partakers of the holy Communion, is to exclude from salvation,
John the Baptist, and the good Theife crucified with the Lord, who never
participated thereof, neither in deed nor in vow. And we might bring many
examples of Pagans and Idolaters, Read the Homily of the 40 (...) ma^^yrs i^
(...).
who by hearing of the words of the Martyrs, were converted at the same
instant, and put to death at that very hour, without any body ever having told
them of this Sacrament, and consequently without having made any vow at all to
be made partakers thereof. Yea many have suffered martyrdom without being
Baptized, and by consequent very far from disposing themselves to receive
the Eucharist.

8. The same appears by that which Christ adds in the 54 Verse. He that
eats my flesh, has eternal life. He speaks not of the manducation of the
Sacrament: For many that eat it, have not eternal life. Their ordinary
evasion is, that Christ speaks of him that eats his flesh worthily. Wherein
appears how strong the truth is on our side. For according to our belief,
the Lords words are true without any addition. But our Adversaries do add
some glosses for to escape and save themselves. Which addition they make of
their own head, without the Word of God. One may well eat the bread
unworthily, as Saint Paul says, 1. Cor. 11. Whosoever eats this bread
unworthily. But it is impossible to eat the Lords flesh unworthily, since to
eat is to believe, as we have showed. A man cannot believe in Christ
unworthily, no more than to love God unworthily: since that in believing in
Christ, and in loving of God, consists all our dignity. Cardinal Cajetan
observes the same, upon the sixth of Saint John, saying, Christ does not say,
He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood worthily, but he that eats and
drinks: to the end we may understand that he speaks of a meat and of a
drink that has no need of modifieation, etc. It appears then plainly that
this speech is not to be understood literally, and that the Lord speaks not
of eating and drinking the Sacrament, but of believing, and of feeding
spiritually by faith in his death.

9. The Lord adds in the 56 Verse, He that eats my flesh and drinks my
blood, dwells in me and I in him. Words that decide this question: For they
would be false if they should be taken and understood of the manducation of the
Sacrament: it being a thing most certain that profane men and hypocrites which
receive the Sacrament, dwell not in Christ, nor Christ in them. Now to dwell in
Christ, is to be conjoined to him with an union constant and continual and
mutual between Christ and the believer. As Cornelius Jansenius, Bishop of
Gant, Concord. Evang. ca. 59. Quiedit carnem meam and hibit meum sanguinem, in
me manet, and ego in co: hoc est indivulse and intime mihi coujungitur, and ego
illi.
teaches very well. He (says he) that eats my flesh and drinks my blood,
dwells in me, and I in him: that is to say, he is conjoined unto me
inseparably and intimately, and I to him: and proves it by other places of
Saint John in his first Epistle, 4.16. He that dwells in love, dwells in
God, and God in him. And in the same place, Hereby we know that we dwell in
him, and he in us, because he has given us of his Spirit. And in the third
Chapter, 24. Verse, he says, that he that keeps his Commandments, dwells
in him, and be in him. From whence he inserreth that also in this 6 Chapter of
Saint John, the Lord speaks of a kind of eating, which is proper unto those
that have a faith working through charity, and not of a corporal manducation,
whereof wicked men are partakers.

10. That if for to make Christ to dwell in us, he must be eaten by the mouth
of the body: Christ by the same reason must eat us, that we may dwell in him.

11. Christ, for to divert and turn away our minds from carnal thoughts,
adds in the 63 Verse, The f^est profits nothing, It is the Spirit that
quickneth. Since that by the spirit he means his Spirit whereby he
regenerateth us, by the flesh also he understands his human body: Whereof he
says that it profits nothing, to wit, being taken after that manner as the
Capernaites did imagine themselves. What would it profit a man to have in his
stomach the head and feet of Christ Jesus, whether he do swallow him by
pieces and parcels, or do swallow him whole? For the absurdity is a like.

12. Christ adds, The words that I have spoken unto you, are spirit and life,
that is to say, are spiritual and quickening. They are not quickening but to
them that understand them spiritually, and that imagine not a carnal and
corporal manducation. So teaches Saint Austin in his 27 Treatise upon Saint
John. He demands, Quid est, spiritus and vita sunt? Responder. Spirit aliter
intelligenda sunt. Intellexisti spiritaliter? spiritus and v^^a sunt. Int
ellexisti carnal^ter? ^tiam si^ spiritus and v^^a sunt, sed tibi non sunt.
What means, these words are spirit and life? His answer is, That they must
be under stood spiritually. Have thou understood them spiritually? They are
spirit and life unto thee. Have thou understood them carnally? In this manner
they be also spirit and life, but not unto thee.

13. And upon that the Capernaites and some of the Lords Disciples were
scandelized, and said that these words were an hard saying, he says unto them,
Illi putabant cum erogaturum corpus suum, ille autem dixit se ascensurum in
coelum, utique integrum. Cum videritis Fill um hominis ascendentem ubicral
prius, certe vel tune videbitis, quia non co modo quo putatis crogat corpus
suum. Certe vel tun^ intelligetis, quta gratia ejus non consumitur morsibus,
What and if ye shall see then the Son of man ascend where he was before?
Which words Saint Austin in the same Treatise explaineth thus, What means
that? Thereby he resolves that which had moved them. They thought he would
give them his body, but he says unto them that he would ascend up to heaven,
to wit, whole and entire. When ye have seen the son of man ascending where
he was before, certainly then at le^st shall ye see that he gives not his
body as ye think. Then at the least shall ye understand that his grace is not
consumed with biting.

CHAP. III. That the Roman Church, by this doctrine, depriveth the People of
Salvation.
THat which grieves our Adversaries most, in all this discourse of the lord, is
this clause of the 53 Verse, Ve^ily I say unto you, Except ye eat the flesh ^f
the son of man, and drink his blood, ^e have no life in you. For if by these
words Christ do speak of the parti^ipation of the Sacrament, it follows that
the People of the Roman Church, whom they have deprived of the cup, shall have
no life, and are lost eternally: ^or they drink not Christ's blood. To say, as
Bellarmin does, that the People ^akes the blood in the Host, is to say ^ust
nothing. For Christ commands ^ot only to take his blood, but also commands
to drink it. If he speaks of the Sacrament, he commands men not only to
be partakers of his blood, but also declares the kind and manner how he will
have them to participate thereof; for, to drink, is the kind and manner of
participating thereof. Briefly, he commands to drink But to eat a dry Host
or wafer, is no^ to drink. That if to eat, is to drink the Priest drinks
twice in the Mass once in taking the Host, and another time in taking the
Cup. Unto which the common sense contradicts: and Pop^^ Innocent the third
too, in his fourt Book of the Mysteries of the Mass Chapter. 21. Neither is
the blood drun^ (says he) under the species of the bread nor the body eaten
under the species of t^^ wine. Here then our Adversaries do forge an absurd
figure, whereby to drin^ signifies to eat. Everywhere else the do
distinguish eating from drinking but here they confound them as if the were all
one. Indeed to eat and (...) drink, taken in a spiritual sense, signifies
one and the same thing. B^^ when the question is of the Sacram^^ of the
Eucharist, and of eating the bread, and drinking the Chalice, t^ eat and to
drink are different thing* That if to eat the Host, be to drink so to drink
the Cup, shall be to ea^^ the Cup. And if drinking be take figuratively, why
not also the word eating?

Here the truth is so strong, that Vasquez the Jesuit sticks not to dispute
with might and maine against Bellarmin, who says that the Lord commands only
the perception of his blood, but not the manner of participating thereunto.
Vasquez in III. partem, Tomo 3. Disp. 206 number 50. Hoc respo^ sum mihi non proba
tur, quia verba Domini non tantum reseruntur ad rem sumpt am. sed ad modum
sume^ d^eam. Nam manducare and bibere, si verba proprie usurpentur, ^^^tois
species cor venire non possunt; neque enim sanguis sub specie panis bib^
dicitur: sicut neque corpus sub specie vini manducari, ut optime notat
Innocent. III lib. 4. de Mysteriis Missae, qu mvis sum^ dicatur. Christus autem
praecipit ut bibamus.
I do not approve (says he) of this answer, because the words of the Lord have
not only reference unto the thing that is taken, but to the manner of taking
it. For to eat, and to drink, if the words be taken properly, cannot agree
with any species whatsoever. For the blood is not said to be drunk under the
species of the bread, no more than the body is eaten under the species of the
wino, as Innocent the third observes very well in his 4 Book chap. 21.

And he adds a thing very considerable, to wit, that from this answer of
Bellarmin, who will have this word, drinking, to be taken improperly, it will
follow that in the whole chapter there shall not be a word spoken of the Cup.

Salmeron another Jesuit, is of the same opinion, saying, Salmer. Tom. 9.
Tract 24. Quinon bibit, non bibit sanguinam, ^eet carne^ et sanguine si^mat.
that he that drinks not, drinks not the blood, though he do take the flesh
and blood.

But the same Jesuits that contest against their own fellows, bring no better
things themselves. They say that when Christ said, Except ye drink my blood,
ye have no life in you, he binds the people to drink the Cup, and that they
drink it indeed, in as much as the Priest drinks for the people, and
represents the whole Church when he drinks. By this reason, the People
might as well forbear eating, and be contented that the Priest should eat for
them. For the commandment for eating, in this place, is not more express than
that of drinking. By the same means* when Christ commands the People to
believe in him, the people may dispense themselves from believing in Christ,
saying, it suffices that the Priest believe for others, for he represents
the whole Church: In a word, it is an impious temerity and presumption to add
out of ones own authority unto the words of the Lord, whole clauses, yea
absurd clauses, as if Christ had said, Except ye drink my blood your own
selves, or by another, ye shall have no life in you.

With the like license they say that when Christ said, Except ye eat my flesh
AND drink my blood, this AND must be turned into OR, and that Christ's meaning
was to have said, Except ye eat my flesh, or drink my blood. If it may be
lawful to change thus the words of the Lord, there is no law in the Scripture
from which a man may not dispense himself. When the Law of God commands one to
love God and his Neighbor, one may by the same reason say, that the Law
means that one must love God or his Neighbor: And when the Law says Honor
thy Father and thy Mother, it means that one must honor his Father or his
Mother, and that it is enough to honor either of them. Add withal that by
this depravation of the Lords Words, it follows that the people may drink the
Cup without eating the Host, since it suffices to do either of them.

CHAP. IV. That the principal Doctors of the Roman Church, yea the Popes
themselves do agree with us in this point: and hold that in the 6. of S. John
nothing is spoken but of the spiritual Manducation, and that those that
contradict them, do speak with incertitude.
IN this controversy we have the Popes for us, and a great multitude of the
Romish Doctors, who hold with us that in the 6 of S. John, it is not spoken of
the Eucharist nor of eating our Savior Christ by the mouth of the body, but
that Christ speaks of the spiritual manducation by Faith in Christ's death.
Such is the opinion of Pope Innocent the III, and of Pius II, called Aeneas
Sylvius before he came to the Papacy. Item Bonave^. in 4. Did* 9 art 1* q. ^.
Cajet. in 6. Iohannis. Cafa^us epist. 7. ad Bohomos. Petrus de Alliaco an 4.
Sentent. q. 2. art. 3. Durant. Ra^^^nali divinor. Offic. lib. 4. c. 41. n. 40.
Linda^^rs Panopliae l. 4. c. ^8. Tapper. in expli^. anti^ulo^^m 15. Lovanensium
Iansen. Concord. c. 5^. Feru^in 26. Ma^^h (...) and 6 I^h^nnis Valdensis Tomo 2
de Sacram. c. 91 I lessel^^d* communjone sub uttraque specie.
of Bonaventure, C^jetan, Cusanus, De Alliaco, Cardinals, Item of Durandus
Episcopus Mimatensis, Gabriel Biel, Hessel one of the Doctors of the Council
of Trente, Lindanus, Ruardus Tapperu^, Iansenius Bishop of Gand, Ferus a Divine
of Maguntia, Valdensis, and many others. Among others, Gabriel Biel in his 36
Lesson upon the Canon of the Mass, says, that the Doctors hold with a common
consent that in the 6 of S^^ohn no mention is made but of the spiritual
manducation. But for brevity sake it shall suffice to produce the places of the
two forenamed Popes.

Pope Innocent 3. in the 14. chap* of his fourth Book of the Mysteries of the
Mass has these words: De spirituali manducatione Dominus ait, Nisi
manducaveritis carnem sili^ homenis, et b^beritis ejus sanguinem, etc. H^c modo
corpus Christi soli boni comedunt.
The Lord speaks of the spiritual manducation, saying, Except ye eat the
flesh of the Son of man and drink his blood, ye have no life in you. In this
manner, the good only do eat the body of Christ.

A learned Pope is a very rare thing. Yet of Pius II. one may say that he was
one of the learndest of his age. The same Pius in his 130 Epistle to Cardinal
Carviall, disputing against the Bohemians, speaks thus: Sed non est in
Evangel^o Ioha^nis sensu^ quem sibi as^r^bitis. Non hibit to Sacrament alis
ib^prae scribitur* s^d spirit ^alis insinu^atur.
The sense of the Gospel of John is not such as you ascribe unto it. For there
it is not commanded to drink at the Sacrament: But a manner of spiritual
drinking is taught. And a little after, The Lord by these words declares in
that place the secret mysteries of the spiritual drink, and not of the
carnal, when he says, It is the Spirit that quickneth, the flesh profits
nothing: and again, The words that I speak unto you, they are spirit and they
are life. Will thou know openly that the Evangelist speaks of the spiritual
manducation which is made by Faith? Consider that what the Lord says in the
words HE THAT EATS AND DRINKS, are words of the present tense and not of
the future. At that very instant therefore that the Lord was speaking, there
were some that did eat him, and drink him. And yet the Lord had not suffered
as yet, neither was the Sacrament instituted.

Thomas Aquinas, termed the Angelical Doctor, was a great worshipper of
Popes; Thom. Opusculo 21. c. 10. Dominus utitur in Ioh^nne quadam
interrog^tione importuna* ter quaerens a suo successore, beato Petro, quod si
ipsum d^^^git, gregem pascat.
so far as to accuse Christ of importunity, for asking his Vicar Peter thrice,
Love thou me? For which likewise the Pope canonized him and made him a Saint
after his death. This man, though a great defender of Transubstantiation, yet
nevertheless upon this point of the manducation whereof Christ speaks in the
6 of S. John, speaks thus in his 7 Lesson upon these words, Except ye eat my
flesh, ye have no life in you. Sihae^ sententia referatur ad spiritualem
manducationem, nullam dubitationem habet sententia, etc. Sivero ad
Sacrame^tal^m, dubi^^ habet quod dicitur.
If this (says he) be referred to the spiritual manducation, this sentence is
without all doubt. For that man eats spiritually the flesh of Christ and
drinks his blood, that is partaker of the unity of the Church, which is
effected through love, etc. But if that has reference to the Sacramental
manducation, there is some doubt in that which is said; Except ye eat my
flesh, ye have no life in you.

But in this latter age the greatest part of the Romish Doctors, especially the
Jesuits, have forsaken this opinion, generally received in the Church of Rome
in former Ages, and have contemned the authority of the fore-alleadged Popes.
Their opinion is, that in the 51 verse of the 6 chap. of S. John, Christ
begins to speak of the Sacramental manducation which is made by the
corporal mouth: but that whatsoever is said before, is to be understood of the
spiritual manducation. As when Christ says in the 33, 35, and 50 verses that
he is the bread come down from heaven. And that he is the bread of Life. And
that whosoever believes on him, shall never thirst. And that he is the bread
come down from heaven, whereof whosoever eats, he shall not die. In all
these places they grant that it is spoken of a manner of eating and drinking
that is spiritual, and will have nothing there to be spoken of the bread of
the Encharist, but do take all these words figuratively. A doctrine truly full
of absurdity, and which destroys and overthrows it self. For what boldness
is it to forge in the sequel or prosecution of one and the same discourse, two
kinds of manducation, and by a Master-like authority, to will that one part of
the chapter be understood figuratively, and the other simply, since they all be
the same kind of speeches, and that the same exposition may be brought both to
the one and to the other?

The Council of Trente was mightily pestered about that; for after this matter
had been tossed a long time and disputed upon at the Council, the Prelates
seeing the new Doctors were contrary unto the old, yea even to the Popes, and
that the new ones besides did not agree among themselves, would determine
nothing therein, and lest the thing undecided, as Salmeron the Jesuit, who was
present at that Council, does testify. The Synod Salmer. Tom. 8. Tract. 23.
Etsi notuerit Synodus nininatius illo tempore decernere, quis esset maxim
proprius and germanus verborum illorum Christi sensus apud Iohannem, propter
varias sanctorum Patrum et Doctorum interpretationes in utramque partem
allatas, etc.
(says he) would not then determine namely which is the properest and natural
sense of these words of Christ in S. John. because of the variety of
Interpretations of the holy Fathers and Doctors that were brought on both
sides. Yet it was there principally, that the infallible perfection of the Pope
and of the Council should have been displayed, being a matter of so great
importance. And yet to this very day the Popes have determined nothing upon
that, nor condemned those that are of a contrary mind to the Jesuits.

CHAP. V. Reasons of our Adversaries for to prove that in the sixth chap. of
Saint John it is spoken of the manducation by the mouth of the Body.
BUt let us see how the Doctors of this Age dispute against their Popes,
Cardinals and Prelates, and go about to prove that in the 6 of S. John is
spoken of the manducation by the mouth of the body in the Eucharist.

1. They say that Christ sp aketh in the future, saying, The bread that I will
give, as speaking of a manducation that was not yet. I answer that he speaks
also in the present, saying, I am the bread come down from Heaven. And he that
eats thereof, shall not die. They themselves would laugh, if from that the
Lord says in the future, Whosoever shall believe and shall be Baptized, shall
be saved, I should infer that before Christ spoke these words, none believed,
none were Baptized, none were saved. Moreover, when Christ speaks in the
future, saying, The bread that I will give, he has regard to his future death,
which is the true food of our Souls.

2. They say also that if this sixth chapter of S. John were not taken and
understood of the manducation by the mouth of the body: it would follow that S.
John did not speak at all of the Eucharist. Stapleton, one of the most furious
Adversaries, answers for us: S. John (says he) Stapl. Promptuar. Cathol. Sermon.
1. Hebdom. Sanctae. Johannes de tertia and Euchar stica coena nihil quidem
scribit, eo quod caeteri tres Evangelistae ante cum eam plene descripsissent.
writes nothing of the Eucharisticall Supper, because the other three
Evangelists had fully written of it before. S. John wrote long after the other
Evangelists, and did only insist upon such things as the others had omitted. He
did not put in his Gospel the history of the Lords Conception and Birth, nor of
his Temptation in the Wilderness, nor of his Baptism, nor of his
Transfiguration in the Mount

3. They add that Christ does distinguish the eating from drinking, for to
design the two species of the Eucharist. To that I answer, that Christ speaks
of eating and drinking, for to give us to understand that we have in him and
in his death a full and entire spiritual nourishment. In the 55 chap. of
Isaiah, 1. v. God inviteth the hungry and the thirsty to cate and to drink. And
in the 22 of S. Luke, 30 ver. Christ says: I appoint unto you a Kingdom, as
my Father has appointed unto me, that ye may eat and drink at my table in my
Kingdom. In these places, our Adversaries do acknowledge that to eat and to
drink, signifies one and the same thing, and that they are taken in a
spiritual sense.

4. But (say they) it is neither fitting nor convenient that Christ should have
used so many figures, and spoken in such dark terms, when he might have
spoken plainly. We have already showed that Christ's ordinary use was to
speak unto the Jews by figures and similitudes, and that the Capernaites,
objecting unto him the bread of Heaven given by Moses, gave him occasion to
speak so. That if our adversaries do so much dislike figures Why do they say
that from the 27 verse this chap. to the 51. the Lord speaks of the spiritual
manducation, and uses figurative words? Why will they have that when Christ
said, Except ye drink my blood: by drinking, he understa^deth eating? That if
the question be touching the difficulty, is there any thing in the World harder
to conceive and to believe, than this doctrine, whereby they will have Christ
to have eaten his own flesh, and that an human body be whole and entire in
every crum of the host, and be remote and divided from it self, and that a
Priest should make a God with a few words, and that this god must run the
risque and be subject to be eaten by Rats and Mice, and carried away by the
wind?

5. Yet (say they) Christ said, My flesh is me at indeed. Now, this word truly
or indeed, excludes all figure: For they esteem that figurative words are not
true. If it be so, why do they themselves put in so many figures? Why will they
have this word, bread, to be taken figuratively, and the word drinking, to
signify eating? They must then say that when Christ in the 15 of S. John, 1
ver. said, I am the true Vine, he spoke falsely: or else they must needs grant
that this word, true, excluds not the figure. So in the 8 to the Heb. 2. v. the
Apostle calls Paradise the true Tabernacle. It is a common thing to say that
God is the true Sun of the Soul, and that evil examples are truly the plague
and contagion of the mind. All that in figurative terms, and yet true, and
wherein the word true excludes not the figure.

6. What they do add, is not a whit better. Christ (say they) used an oath,
saying, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of
man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you. But it is not convenient (say
they) to use figures in an oath. What will they say then to these places,
Verily verily, I say unto you, that he that enters not by the door into the
sheepfold, the same is a theife and a robber, John 10.1. And a little after,
Verily, verily, I say unto you, that I am the door of the sheep. And in S.
Matthew. 18.18. Verily I say unto you, that whatsoever ye shall bind on earth,
shall be bound in Heaven. And John 3.5. Verily verily, I say unto you, Except a
man be borne of the water and of the spirit, etc. Where we have the same oath
with figurative words. What more? the same verse which they allege, Verily
verily, I say unto you, Except ye ea^e my flesh and drink my blood, ye have no
life in you, is the same verse in which they will have drinking to signify
eating. And in the same chap. ver. 32. Christ calls himself the true bread:
wherein our Adversa^ies do acknowledge a figure. To let pass that the word
Amen is not an oath, but a simple and strong assirmation.

CHAP. VI. Testimonies of the Fathers.
IT is good upon this point to hear the ancient Fathers. S. Austin shall march
in the fore front. In his Book of Christian Doctrine, chap. 16. Nisi manducaver
it is (inquit) carnem filii hominis, etc sacinus vel slagitium videtur juhere.
Figura ergo est, praecipiens passioni Domin^ esse communicandum, and suaviter
at que utilter recondendum in memoria quodpro nobis caro ejus crucif^a a el vul
nerata sit.
When the Lord says, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink
his blood, ye have no life in your selves, it seems that he commands some
great crime or heinous offense. It is then, a figure, that commandes to
communicate unto the Lords P^ssion, and sweetly and profitably to put in
remembrance that Christ's flesh was crucified and wounded for us. Our
Adversaries, to clear themselves and avoid the force of this place, do make
long discourses, and sinde there are figures in these words, Except ye eat,
etc. To wit that in the Eucharist, Christ's body is not eaten by peece-meales as
the flesh of the Shambles. But they come not near the point. For Saint Austin
says not only that it is a figure, but he declares also how that figure is to
be taken and expounded; to wit, that to eat Christ's flesh, is to meditare and
call to remembrance with delight, that Christ his flesh was crucified for us.
Which is an exposition our Adversaries do not allow.

The same Father upon the 98 Psalm. Under stand spiritually wh^t I have said
unto you, Ye shall not eat this body that ye see, and shall not drink that
blood that shall be shed by those that shall crucify m^ I have commended unto
you a sacred figne which being under slood spiritually, shall quicken and
vivisie you.

We have in this Father a long exposition of the sixth Chapter of Saint John in
the 25.26. and 27 Treatise upon Saint John: In the 25 Tracta^ he says, Vi quid
paras det^s el vetrem? creed el madu^asti.
This (viz. to believe) is to eat the meat that perishes not. Why do that
make ready thy teeth and thy belly? Believe, and thou have eaten. And in the 26
Treatise, Credere in eum, hoc est manducare panem vivu^. Qu^ credit i^ cu^
manducal, inv^sibiliter sag^natur, quia el invisibiliter renascitur.
To believe in him, is to eat the living bread. He that believes in him,
eats him; he is fed invisibly, because he is regenerated invisibly. And in
the same place, Hu^c it aque cibu^ et pot (...) societatem vult intell^^i
corpor^^ et membrorum su^^um quod est sanila Ecclesia in praedestinatis, etc.
By this meat and drink Christ will have to be understood the society of his
body and members, which is the Church of the Predestinate. This Father was so
far from believing that Christ was eaten even by the mouth of the body, that by
this meat he will have the Church to be understood. Whence also he adds,
Hoeveraciter non praestat nisi iste cibus and potus qui cos a^ quibus sumitur,
immortales and incorruptibiles sacit, i^ societas ipsa Sanctorum, etc.
This meat and drink which makes such as do take it, immortal and
incorruptible, is the fellowshippe of Saints where there shall be peace and
perfect unity.

And in the same place, Hoc est ergo mandu^^^al lamescam and b^bere ill
^mpotum^^ C^^^sto^^^^ manner, and ilum man^^nt^^in se habere de per hae^ qui
non ma^^ in Chrisio, and in qu^ nor man^^ Chrisia, and in quo nor man^ Ch^^sl^^
proc^^dn^no nec manducat spiratal^ter ^^nem ^jus, a^c b^h^^ ejus s^ngu^n^n,
luet carnalae^ and ^^sil^lu^^ pr^^^^ doel^bus Sacra^^^^ is^^^ corpo^ is and
sang^^^^^ Ch^^s^i.
That, therefore, is to eat this meat and to drink this drink, to dwell in
Christ and to have him dwelling in us. And therefore he that dwells not in
Christ, and in whom Christ dwells not, doublesse he eats not spiritually his
flesh and drinks not his blood, how be it that carnally and visibly he
presfeth with his teeth the sacred sign of Christ's body and blood. In sum,
in three long Treatises containing many pages, wherein this good Doctor
expounds the sixth Chapter of Saint John, there is not one word of eating by
the mouth of the body the Lords flesh crucified for us. Which exposition was so
disliked by Cardinal du Perron, that he speaks contemptibly of these
Tractates of Saint Austin upon Saint John, In his Book against the King of
Great Britain. In the Treatise of the Eucharist
saying that they be popular Sermons made before all kinds of persons, to whom
he would not declare openly the Churches belief.

Tertullian in the 37 Chapter of his Book of the Resurrection, expounding
these words, The flesh profits nothing: The sense (says he) must be
addressed according to the subject whereof he speaks. Quia durum and
intolerabilem existimaverunt sermonem ejus. quasi vere carnem suam illis
edendam determ^nasset ut in spiritu dispone ret statum salutis, oraemisit,
Spiritus est qu^ vivificat. Tum add t, Caro non prode^t qui^quam; ad
vivificandum s^ili et
For because they esteemed his words to be harsh and intolerable, as though he
had determined to give them truly his flesh to eat that he might render
spiritual the state of salvation, he said before, It is the spirit that
quickneth: Then he adds, The flesh profits nothing, to wit for to vivifie.

And there again, Quia and sermo caro c^at factus, proinde m causam vitae
appetendus, and devor^nd^s audau, et ^uminandus intellectu, et fide digerendus.
The word was made flesh, and by consequent, for to have life, it must be
desired, and devoured by the ear, and ruminated by the understanding, and
disgested by faith.

And a little after, The Lord had a little before declared that his flesh is the
heavenly bread, Vrgens usquequaque per allegoria^ necessarioru^ pabuloru^
memoriam Paetru^, etc.
urging altogether by allegory taken from necessary meats the remembrance of
the Fathers.

Clemens Alexandrinus in his second Book De Pedagogo, Chapter 6. k He said,
eat my flesh and drink my blood, propoundiog by an allegoric the evidence of
the faith, and the drink of the promise.

And a little after, Si secundum literam sequeris hoc ips^ra quod ^^^^um est,
Nisi manducaveritis carnem meam et biberitis sanguta^^ ^^um, hoec litera occid
t.
He calls the holy Spirit flesh by a^^egory. For the flesh was created by
him, and the blood signifies the Word.

Origene upon the Leviticus, in the seventh Book: (...).
Know that these things written in the divine volumes, are figures, and
understand them as spiritual, and not as carnal. For if you receive them as
carnal, they hurt you in stead of nourrishing you. For in the Gospells there
is a letter which kills him that observes not the things that are spoken
spiritually. (...).
For if thou take according to the letter that which is said, Except ye eat
my flesh and drink my blood, that letter kills.

The Commentary upon the Psalms, attributed to Saint Hierome, upon the 44
Psalm. Quando dic^t, Qui non manducaverit carnem meam et biberit sanguinem me
um, licet in myster^o possit intel ligi, tamen verius corpus Christi et sanguis
ejus sermo Scripturarum est.
When the Lord says, He that eats not my flesh, etc. though that may be
understood in mystery, yet to speak more truly, the body and blood of Christ
is the word of the Scriptures, and the heavenly doctrine. And a little after,
Corpus et sanguis ejus in auribus nostris fund tur.
The flesh and blood of Christ is powered into our ears.

It is true that some places may be found in ancient Fathers that apply and
fit the words of the sixth Chapter of Saint John to the Eucharist, because the
manducation of the Sacrament serves to help the spiritual manducation, and
there is some analogy between these two. Add moreover that we have proved
already by a multitude of places of Ancient Fathers, that when they say that in
the Eucharist we eat the flesh or the body of Christ, they mean to speak of
another flesh and another body than that which was crucified for us, which is
called Christ's body because of the mystical union of the bread with Christ,
and because the signs take the name of the things signified.

Upon this, the words of Pope Pius the second, are notable in his 130 Epistle.
Sed nec ^overi debetis, quod nonnulli Doctores de communione Sacramentali
loquentes, ill amque populo suadentes Iohannis verba recipient. Neque enim
propterca illius loci vel talis verns est es proprius intellectus, sed ex
quadam similitudi^e consonantique ratione, trahitur inde magis sensus quam
ducitur etc.
Ye must not wonder (says he) if some Doctors speaking of the Sacramental
communion, and counselling it unto the People, do employ Saint John his words.
For it does not follow from thence that it be the true and proper sense of
that place, but by some resemblance and agreeable reason, this sense is rather
drawn than led. And it is lawful for the Doctors, speaking after the manner
of Orators, to use sometimes figures and translations, so that often times,
speaking of the sign, they pass unto the thing signified.

CHAP. VII. Impiety of Salmeron the Jesuit, and of Peter Charron. And of
Bellarmins four men enclosed in one suit of clothes. That by this doctrine,
Christ has not a true body in the Sacrament.
Superstition and Atheism are very near neighbors, and the one leads unto
the other. For frantic superstition intangles the mind with extravagant
conceits, that expose Religion to laughter, and make men to think that
Religion is a shop of fables, and a mere imagination. Whence it comes to pass
that those that take upon them to defend Superstition, let go very often
certain words of impiety, whereby they profane the mysteries, and scoff at
their own Religion under color of defending it.

Salmeron the Jesuit, and Doctor Charron gives us an example thereof. This
Jesuit in the IX Tome and 26 Treatise, for to represent the manner and the end
for which Christ gives us his flesh to eat, Sub finem Tractatus.
says that Christ has done as men do, who for to kindle and inflame a woman
with love, do give her an amorous potion or morsel, and that just so Christ
in the Eucharist gives to his Church Panis bucellam sancte benedictam and
incantatam, a morsel of bread holily blessed and ENCHANTED for to transport
her with his love.

Charron has followed him, but with an addition that declares what are the
ingredients of those philters or amorous potions, to wit that there enters in
them something of the substance of the Lover, which substance is a thing not
fit to be named. In his eighth Discourse of the Eucharist, after he has said
that God comes down in the form of bread and wine: and that to dance for to
serve God, is less strange then what is done in the Mass: a little after, he
declares how Christ communitates himself unto men in the Eucharist, to wit,
that he allures and intices them with a dainty and delicious bit. Love (says
he) is so ingenious and inventive, that for to win and allure the heart and
will of others it has found out a device to employ enchanted morsels, philters
and amorous potious, and to make them to be taken and drunk by those of whom
one desires to be loved, in which morsells or potions enters some thing of the
Lover or Suitor. Thus it seems that God for to draw and allure unto himself
the heart and love of the Church, would present a bit or potion made of his
substance in this Sacrament, the philter and amorous drink of all Christians,
the dainty and delicious bit for to draw and allure them unto himself.
Doubtless this man jeasted and intended to make the world laugh, for he could
not expect that men should believe him.

I know not whither Bellarmin did mock or jest, Bellar. lib. 3. de Euchar. cap
7 (...) ad tertiu^ Potest fie^i ut redigatur ad locum unitatis, ^t a ut quatuor
homines occupent locum unius hominis.
when for to prove that a body may be in several places at once, he says
that it is possible that four men hold no more place than one of the four
alone, and that all four fill up but one place. Take me a man clothed with a
suit of clothes that sits close and is made just to his body, Bellarmin says
it is possible for these four men to be contained in the same suit of clothes,
without being made larger, and the men never a whit the less. If that be
possible for four, it is also possible for ten, yea for a hundred, yea for a
thousand: so that all the men of the World shall be contained in a single
doublet. But if of these four men in this little doublet, one be sitting, the
other lying, and the other standing: If one of-them embrace the other, and by
consequent is out of the other, they shall not be in one and the same place. If
they speak together and look one upon another, the one shall be the object of
the others eyes, and therefore shall not be in one and the self same place.
Truly I think this Jesuit, propounding such things, and shutting up a whole
Commonwealth in a doublet, had a mind to deride his own Religion. For by the
same reason a man may have both his eyes in one place, and not different of
sitnation. Bellar. lib. 1. de Euchar. c. 2. Tertia. Christus in Eucharistia non
habet modum existend^ corporum, sed potius spirit^u^, cum sit totus in qualibe^
part.
By this means a man shall have two eyes, and shall have but one. And the
parts of an humane body shall not be distinct, and the one shall not be out of
the other. This our Adversaries do by their Transubstantiation: as Bellarmin
acknowledges, saying that in the Eucharist Christ does not exist after the
manner of bodies: but rather after the manner of Spirits, since he is whole in
every part.

It is false likewise, that according to the doctrine of the Church of Rome,
Christ's body be in the Eucharist after the manner of Spirits. For when an
Angel is present in any place, he is not present in a thousand others several
places and is not far from himself and divided from himself, a^ they will
have Christ's body to be in a million of several places at one and the same
time.

The same Jesuit in the third Book and fifth chapter says,. Ad haec.
Substantia fius quanti ^ate ca^o d^ci non potese.
that a Substance without qantity cannot be termed flesh. Whereupon it
follows that Christ's body under the Host is not flesh, for there is no
quantity, since it is whole under every point that has no quantity. Besides
that the quantity of a body is a continued quantity. But Christ's body in the
Host is not one in continuity with that which is in Heaven sitting at the right
hand of God the Father, since he is far and remote from it.

Again, he says in the same place, Quid est corpus, nisi extent^o (...)
longitudinem, latitudinem, and prosunditat^m?
That a body is nothing else but an extension in length, breath, and depth.
Therefore in the Sacrament there is no true body of Christ, since it has no
extension, no length, breadth and depth: As he says himself in the second
chapter of his first Book, Christ's body in the Eucharist has no extension.

I have wondered many times, seeing that our Adversaries hold that Christ
municants until the species be destroyed and consumed by the disgestion, why
they do not give them hard bread and not of easy disgestion, that they might
have Christ in them a longer time, rather then to give them such light Hosts or
wafers, which are presently turned into a Chylus and disgested in an instant.

CHAP. VIII. Of the progress of this abuse, and by what means Satan has
established the Transubstantiation.
UPon this matter, the opinions of men began to vary in the eight Age, wherein
the controversy touching the adoration of Images was in its hight and force.
For Satan at the same time did labor and busy himself to introduce and bring
into the Church these two sorts of Idolatry.

In the year of our Lord 754, the Emperor Constantin, son to Lisaurus, called
a Council of his whole Empire at Constantinople, where 330 Bishops were
present, that condemned the adoration of Images. Among other reasons that they
bring, they exhort the people to be contented with those Images that Christ had
instituted, having given in the holy Supper the bread and wine for Images and
Figures of his body and blood. And speaking of the Eucharisticall bread, they
say, Ecce vivificantis ill^^s corpor^^s Imaginem.
Behold the image of this quickening body that is honorably presented. And a
little after, The Lord commanded to set [upon the table] that image altogether
chosen, to wit the substance of the bread, least Idolatry should creep in if it
were represented in an humane form.

But few years after, the Empire being fallen into the hands of Irenea, an
Idolatrous woman, and who did put out the eyes of her own son, and ravished the
Empire from him: this monster called another Council at Nice, in the year 787.
where she caused Images to be re-established, and the worshipping of them to be
commanded under pain of a curse. There likewise were condemned as abominable,
these foresaid clauses of the former Council, whereby the bread and wine are
called Images of the Lords body and blood. And it is the same Council that
declares, that Images are equivalent and of as much worth as the Gospel: and
that an Image is better than Prayer: And that Angels are corporal: And that he
that has the least doubt whither Images must be worshipped, is accursed. For
certainly the spirit of Satan reigned in that pernicious Council. Wherefore
also Charles the Great, who lived then, called another Council at Fran^kford,
anno Domini 794, in which that Council of Nice was condemned as erroneous, by
a general consent: notwithstanding that Pope Adrian had approved that
Council, and made a Treatise in defense of it.

Whilst Satan bestirred himself thus in the East parts: the Roman Bishops on
their side did labor in the West parts. For they did well perceive that these
two things, to wit the adoration of the Sacrament, and the adoration of Images,
would be of great use, and would serve much for the strengthening of their
Empire, and increasing of the dignity of the Romish Clergy. For the Pope taking
out of the way the holy Scriptures from the eyes of the People, hat^^given them
Images, which they call Ignorant men's Books, busying the eyes of the people,
whilst he conveyed away the Word of God from them. And the opinion of the real
presence of Christ's body in the Eucharist, exalts the dignity and power of
Priests, so far as to be able to make God with words, and to have Christ in
their own power.

This abuse, beginning to creep in France, King Charles the Bald, about the
year 870, made a commandment unto one Bertram a Priest, and as learned a man
as these times did afford, to compose and write a Book of this matter: which
Book we have yet whole and ^xtant at this day, wherein he maintains the true
doctrine, and withstands stoutly and vigourously that opinion of the real
presence of the body of Christ under the species of the bread. For of
Transubstantiation there was yet no speech of it. For which cause also
Bellarmin in his first Book of tee Sacrament of the Eucharist, first chap. puts
this Bertram amongst the Heretics. Who not withstanding, in his time, lived
with honor, and was neither troubled, nor received any rebuke or reprehension
upon this subject. Of the same opinion were John Scotus and Drutmarus, and
others of the same time. And I make no doubt but many others with them have
defended the same cause in writing: But the following ages, in which error
prevailed, have abolished their writings, and it is marvel how this Book of
Bertram could escape thus.

The tenth and eleventh Ages, are the Ages wherein this error did strengthen it
self most, in which nevertheless God left not himself without testimony. For
Bruno Bishop of Angiers, and after him (but more vigorously) Berengarius, his
Archdeacon, taught and maintained openly that the bread and wine of the
Eucharist were not the body of Christ, but the figure and remembrance of it:
Sigebert. ad annum 1051.
This Berangarius began to show himself about the year of our Lord 1050.
Against whom Pope Victorius 2. caused a Council to be gathered at Tours about
the year 1055 and four years after, Nicholas II. cited him to Rome to the
Council assembled for that effect, where Berengarius was forced to condemn his
own doctrine, and submit himself to the Popes will. By the reading of that
Council, it appears that ^here were in it many others of the same opinion of
Berengarius. And Leo Leo Hostiensis Chr^. Cassinensi li. 3. c. 35. E que cum
nullus valeret resistere. Alberi^us ^de^ evo^ntur.
Hostiensis records that none of those that were there present, could resist
Berengarius. The form of the abjuration prescribed unto him, is to be found in
the Collections of the Decrees made by Ivo Carnutensis, and by Gratian, which
form is set down in absurd terms, and which the Church of Rome her self
believes not. For they make him say, Can. Ego Berengar. Did. 2. de consecr.
that the bread is the true body of Christ, and that Christ's body is truly and
sensibly handled and bruised by the teeth of the Faithful. But Berengarius
being rid out of the hands of that Council and returned back into France,
protested against the violence offered unto him, and continued to teach the
same doctrine till the year 1088. in which he died. Upon his tomb,
Hildebertus, Hild. Epitaphio Berengar. apud Malmesburiensem. Quem modo miratur
semper mirabil^ter orbis. Il^e Berengarius non obiturus obit. Quem sacrae fidei
fastigia summa tenentem, etc. Vide Baron. ad ann 1088. 21.
who after was Bishop of Man's, made an honorable Epitaphe, wherein he terms
him the Prop and Support of the Church, the hope and the glory of the Clergy.
And France, Germany, Italy and England, were full of people that embraced his
doctrine, as William Malmesbury testifies in the 3. Book of his English
History. All France (says he) was full of his doctrine. And Matthew of
Westminst^r in the year 1087 Eodem tempore Berengarius Turonensis in haereticam
lapsus pravitatem, omnes. Gallos, Italos, Anglos, suis jam pene corruperat
pravitatibus.
Berengarius of Tours being fallen into heresy, had corrupted by his
depravations almost all the French, Italians, and English.

Platina in the life of John XV. speaks thus of Berengarius, It is certain that
Odius Bishop of Clugni and Berengarius of Tours, men famous and renowned for
doctrine and holiness, were in great esteem in that time. Add to this, that
Berengarius distributed all his means to the poor, and betook himself to
get his living with the labor of his hands. Guit alias Berengarius istevir
bonus, plenes eleemosynis, et humilitate, magnorum possessione^, qui omnia
^^usi^spauperum ^dispersit, etc.
Antoninus Archbishop of Florence, whom the Pope has canonized and made a
Saint, gives him this testimony in the 2 Tome of his Chronicles, Tit. 16. 20.
This Berengarius was otherwise a good man, full of Alms deeds, and humility,
and having great, possessions and riches, which he distributed to the poor,
and would have no woman to come before his eyes.

About the latter end of Berengarius his life, lived Gregory the seventh, who
entered into the Papacy in the year of our Lord 1073. called Hildebrand before
he was Pope. This Gregory was suspected to incline to Berengarius his opinion.
Sigonius in his 9 Book of the reign of Italy, in the year 1080, records
that the Bishops of Germany assembled at Brixina in Bavaria, did call this
Gregory V^terem haeretici Berengari^ discipulum, an old disciple of Berengarius
the heretic, accusing him of calling into question the Apostolical Faith,
touching the body and blood of the Lord. And this agrees with Cardinal Benno,
Archpriest of the Cardinals who was very inward and familiar with the said
Gregory, and who wrote his life: wherein he says that Gregory appointed a
fast to three Cardinals, to the end God might show whither of the two, to wit
Berengarius of the Church of Rome had the rightest opinion. And there he
relates that John Bishop of Port in a Sermon at S. Peter's Church, did declare
in presence both of Clergy and People, that Gregory, for to obtain some divine
answer, had in the presence of the Cardinals cast the holy Sacrament into the
fire.

Berengarius being dead* he had many successors that maintained the same
doctrine even to the time of Petru^ de Valdo, of the City of Lions, whose
disciples were named by their enemies, Valdenses and Albigenses: Of whose
Religion and Confession of Faith, conformable to ours, Fasciculus rerum
expet^ndaru^ fol. 95. Indocus C^^cius Tom. H. lib. 6. de Euchar. fol. 602.
has been spoken before in the 21 chapter of the first Book, and showed that
their Churches remain, even unto our times.

Furthermore, John Wickl^f in England, in the year 1390. taught the same. Of
whose doctrine contained in eighteen Articles, here is the first, That the
substance of the bread remains after the Consecration, and ceases not to be
bread.

Against the Faithful that professed this doctrine, the Pope stirred up Kings
and Princes, and caused an incredible butchery to be made of them, preaching
the Croisadoe against them, whereby he gave the same spiritual graces unto
those that should massacre them, as to those that went into Syria against the
Sarasens, for to reconquer Christ's Sepulcher, to whom he gave the remission of
all their sins, and a degree of glory above the ordinary, as may be seen in
the Bull of Innocent the third, placed at the end of the Council of Lateran.
The Earl of Montfort, having with him one Dominicke, author of the Order of
the Jacobins, with an army of these crossed ones, did massacre in a few months
above two hundred thousand of them.

And for to strengthen and fortify this abuse, there was no speech in those
times but of miracles, coined of purpose, tending to the worshipping of Images,
and establishing of the real presence of Christ's body in the Eucharist. They
gave out to the people that such an Image had sweated blood, that another had
nodded his head. That a wooden Crucifix pricked in the side, had cast blood.
This fable is recited by Fulgoslib. 1. c. 6. And by Nauclerus Gener. 44
That to an Image of the Virgin Mary's, brought from Damascus, breasts of flesh
were grown upon the wood. That in such a place the Host had appeared in the
form of a child, and an Angel by it, that did hacke him to pieces. That an
Host, pricked by a Jew, had gushed out blood: and being cast into a great
cauldron or kittle, was turned into a man, as is to be seen yet at this day in
Paris represented upon the forefront or porche of the Church of the Billetes.
The life of Saint Anthony of Padoua says, that he presented the consecrated
Host to an Ass, which presently left eating of his Oats and worshipped the
Host. Albertu Krantzius Metropol. lib. 1. ca. 9.
Wedekindus a Saxon Prince saw a child thrust into the mouth of the
Communicants. Paschasius Rathertus de corpore and sangnine Domini c. 14. Guil.
Mal. mesbur. l. 3. cap 27.
An Angel did present Christ in the Mass unto a Priest called Pleg^ls, in the
shape or form of a child, which he kissed and embraced with great courage.
(...) A little Jewish boy coming by chance into the Church as he was playing,
saw upon the Altar a little boy that was minced and cut into small pieces, and
thrust by small lumps into the mouths of the Communicants. Thomas
Cantipratensis in his second Book of Miracles, Chapter 40, says that at
Doway, in the year 1260. the consecrated host being fallen to the ground,
rised up again of it self, and pearched it self upon the cloth wherewith the
Priest did wipe his hands, in the shape or form of a fine little boy, who
instantly became a tall man, having a crown of thorns upon his head, and two
drops of blood running down from his forehead on both sides of his nose.
Jodoeus Coccius collected about one hundred of such miracles. Iodoeus Coccius
Thesaur. Tom. II. lib. 6. de Eucharistia.
For in Berengarius his time such miracles were very rise and frequent. Matthew
Paris an English Historian, in the year of the Lord, 1247 relates that the
Templers of the holy land sent to Henry the third King of England, a little
Crystal bottle full of the true blood of our Savior Christ that he shed upon
the Cross, which Cristall bottle that silly King carried upon his nose to
Westminster Church in Procession a foot, clothed with an old sle^velesse gown.
Salmeron the Jesuit in the XI Tome and fifth Treatise, page 35. says that at
Rome in the Church of Lateran there is some of Christ's blood kept. Item in the
Church of Saint Maximin at Rome, which Marie Magdalen gathered up at the foot
of the Cross. There was also at Rochelle some kept, as the same Jesuit says
in the same place.

Sigonius in his fourth Book of the reign of Italy, Forte sa^guinis ex
imagine cruc^fi^^ Salvatoris in syria effusi portio delata Ma^tuam fuerat, etc.
Carolus Leonem Pontisicem per literas obsecravit ut accurate horum miracul^rum
v^ritatem vellet explorare and compertam sibi significare. Ob id Leo Roma
^g^^ss^s Mantuam ven^t, and re cogn^ta, ad C ro^tum ser psit.
says that in the year 804. was brought out of Syria to Mantua, a portion of
the blood that ran out of the Image of a Crucifix, which did many miracles. And
that the fame of it being come to Charles the Great, he entreated by letters
Pope Leo, to enquire of the truth of the matter: And that the said Pope having
known and perceived the truth of the thing, wrote to Charle-maine touching the
same. And in the eighth Book, in the year 1048. he says that the inhabitants
of Mantua having forgotten this blood, and knowing no more what it was, this
blood began again to do miracles. Vasquez the Jesuit upon the 76 question
of the third Part of Th^mas, Art. 8.
says that yet at this day there is in Spain some of Christ's blood kept in
Relics.

Thus the darkness grew thick, and the mystery of iniquity strengthened it
self daily more and more, the kings having no knowledge at all of the holy
Scripture, and trembling under the Popes thunderbolts and excommunications, and
pouring abundance of wealth and riches into the bosom of the Clergy for the
easing of their souls after death.

And for a full measure of mischief, new Orders of Mendicant Friars did spring
up, namely the Franciscans and Dominicans, whereof Francis Assisias in Italy,
and Dominick Calarogensis in Spain were the first Founders, in the year of
our Lord 1216. and 1223. An incredible multitude of these Monks were dilated
and sp^ead over all the regions of the Popes Empire, who made use of them as of
so many torches and trumpets for to provoke and encourage Princes to the
persecution of the faithful. And it was the said Monks that h^ve coined and
forged the School Divinity, all bristled with pricks, and twisted about with
subtilties, much like unto the Cray-fish in which there is much picking, but
little to eat. It is from this Divinity that subtle distinctions are drawn,
wherewith they cover themselves against the truth. A^istotle is alleged there
a great deal oftener than the Apostle Saint Paul. Thus it behooved the mystery
of iniquity should advance it self.

At the birth of these begging Friars, Innocent the third, in the year 1215.
called a Council at Rome in the Lateran Church, in which the word of
Transubstantiation, not as yet received by any definition in the Roman Church,
was established by an express Canon, and authority of Council.

CHAP. IX. Of the Judgment which the Doctors of the Roman Church do make
touching the apparitions, whereby a little Child, or a morsel of flesh has
appeared at the Mass in the hands of the Priest, and touching Christ's blood
that is kept in Relics.
A Long time has been that if one had doubted that a child, or a p^^ce of
flesh that had appeared in a Pri^st^ hand, were not truly Christ, and that
Christ's blood that was kept in relics, was not truly his blood, it would
have been an heresy deserving the fire, and a manifest impiety. The People
did flock together for to worship this blood. Therefore Guitmondus in his third
book of the Sacrament, and Paschasius in his Book of the body and blood of
the Lord; Chapter 14. and I^docus C^c^ius in his Collection of the places of
the Fathers, and many others, do make use of these miraculous apparitions, for
to prove Christ's real presence in the Eucharist.

Thomas Aquinas Thom 3. part. q. 76. Art. 8. Tali apparitione facta eadem
reverentia exhibetur e^, quod apparet, quae etiam primo exhibebatur; quod
quidem non sieret si v^re non esset ibi Christu^ cu reverentiam latria
exhibemus.
in the third part of his Sum, question. 76. Art. 8. finds himself mightily
pestred upon this point: For though he teaches that that which appears thus
miraculously, ought to be worshipped with the adoration of Latria, as Christ,
and that Christ is there present: yet withal he esteems that sometimes these
apparitions are not true, but only in appearance, especially when the same
thing appears but to some and not to all. For which cause, C jetan in his
Annotations upon this place of A^uinas, departes from his opinion touching the
Adoration, Cajetan* in Notis. Si quaeratur qua adoratione venerandus esset
hujusmadi sanguis miraculosus: dicendum ^d^m esse judicium de ^pso and de vest
Christi.
and will have this blood or flesh that appears sometimes in the Mass^, to be
worshi^ped, not as Christ: but as Christ's garment, which is an inferior
adoration.

But the Jesuit Vasquez, goes more plainly to work, in his 193 Disput. here
be his words. Vasquez in 76. q. tertiae par. Thomae artic. 8. Disp. 193. cap.
2. Respondeo neque apparere carnem Christi, neque alterius, quae re vera caro
sit, sed carnis solum essigiem, ut dixit S. Thomas, etc. Quod a. simplices
decipiantur et credant ibi esse carnem Christi divisibili et cruento modo,
parum refert: haec enim deceptio instructione vera Doctorum corrigenda est
I answer that that which appears, is not the flesh of Christ, nor of any
other that be truly flesh, but that it is only an effigies or appearance of
flesh, as Saint Thomas says. And as touching the simple that are deceived, and
believe that Christ's flesh is there in a manner di^isible and bloody, it
matters not much. For that deception ought to be corrected by the true
instruction of the Doctors.

Gabriel Biel, a famous Doctor, in his 51 Lesson upon the Canon of the Potest
fieri divina permissione illusione daemonis ad decipiendum incautos.
Mass, goes further, and says that such appariritions of flesh and blood may
be done by illusion of the devil for to deceive the simple, God permitting it
thus. And he brings an example of it: To wit that in the Country of Thuringe
in the City of Ysennae in a Convent of Minorite Friars, Apparuit quidam in
specie Angel particulam apparenter porrigens, Apparuit stultus ora sumens de
manu porrigentis apparentem bostiae particulam: et continuo a diabolo obsessus
est et graviter vexatus.
a certain man in the likeness of an Angel appeared to a Lay Brother
preparing himself to the communion, who chopped into his mouth piece of flesh,
which so soon (...) he had swallowed, he was posse^^^^ and grievously
tormented by the devil.

And truly, those that esteem that Christ appears truly upon the Altar in
the form of a child or of a piece of flesh, and worship it, are very much
puzzled. For the Roman Church does acknowledge but two sorts of Christ's real
presence, the one natural and visible after which he conversed with his
Disciples here on earth: the other Sacramental under the accidents of bread.
But when these things do appear (yea if ever they do appear) Christ is
neither present in the one, nor in the other manner. For he appears neither
under his own proper accidents, nor under the accidents of the bread. And it
shall behoove one to believe that Christ is a child upon the Altar: Or that a
perfect man is under the accidents of a child. That if it be only a piece of
flesh, we ask whether this piece of flesh be whole Christ: Or if it be but a
part of his body, whether this portion or piece of fl sh was taken out of the
Arm or out of the Leg.

These things serve to make us to know how powerful ^e seduction of Satan
has been, and with ^ow much horrible darkness he did envelope (...) in the
Ages wherein this monster of Transubstantiation was formed. This latter age has
been ashamed of it: for now we see no more the People run to Mantua, or to the
Billettes Church at Paris for to worship the flesh and the blood of Christ that
are there kept in relics. The French Pilgrim^ passing by Mantua for to go to
Rome, stay there no more. They pass the Pyrenean Mountains for to visit the
supposed relics of Saint James: but do not go into those places of Spain
where Christ's blood is kept. That blood of Christ sent from Syria to King Henry
the third of England, whereof I have spoken in the former Chapter, that
putrified in a few days, lost instantly its credit, and there was no more
speech of it.

CHAP. X. OF the corruption of the Papal Sea in the Ages wherein this error
was most advanced.
IN the Eighth and Ninth Ages, were cast the first foundations of
Transubstantiation; nevertheless it was not yet then establish d by Laws: and
I cannot find that ever any man was molested for that subj ct. But in the
Tenth and Eleventh Ages, the Popes labored to hatch that monster, and to
establish it with authority. But God branded these two ages with infamous
blemishes and disgraces. For as vices agree well with errors, the Popes of
those times led such an infamous life, that hardly the like is to be found in
all Pagan histories, and that Chair was filled with horrible confusions.

Since Pope Formosus who in the year 890. attained to the Popedom by
violating the oath he had taken never to accept of it, and whose dead body was
dragged ignominiously up and down the City of Rome and cast into the Tiber by
his Successors: For the space of a hundred and fifty years, yea of two hundred
years, we see nothing in histories but of Popes murderers, Popes Adulterers,
necromanticall Popes, perjured Popes, Popes intruded by force or by money,
creatures of the Earls of Toscane, that werer then powerful in Italy, and of
the harlot Theodora and of her daughters Marozia and Theodora, that reigned a
long time in Rome, and made and unmade Popes at their pleasure.

Of which time the Carmelite Friar, Author of Fasciulus Temporum, makes this
lamentation: Heu, heu, heu, Dom^ne Deus, quomodo obscuratum est aurum, mutatus
est color opt mus? O tempus pessimum! in quo defecit sanctus, et diminutae sunt
veritates a siliis hominum.
Alas, Alas, Alas, Lord God, how is the gold obscured and its good color
changed? O most wicked time in which the holy one is fallen away, and truth
diminished among the sons of men. And Cardinal Baronius after a long
recital of the vilanios of the Papal Sea in those times, he poures out these
complaints, Baron. An. 912.. 8. Que tunc facies Ecclesiae Romonae? quam
soedissima? cum Romae domi iarentur potenti^ ma (...) sordidissime meretr^ces,
quaru^ arbitrio inutaretur seeds. etc. et ^^truderentur in sedem Petr^c^rum
amasii Pseudopontifices.
What was then the face of the Roman Church and how foul, when most powerful
and most filthy whores ruled and governed in Rome, by whose will the Seas were
changed, and Bishoprics given away! And that which is horrible and not to be
related, their Lovers, false Popes, were thrust in violently in Peter's Chair.
And Genebrard, a great worshipper of Popes, speaks of the same time, in the
year 901. of his Chronicle, in these terms: In that alone this age was
unfortunate, that for the space almost of one hundred and fifty years, about
fifty Popes have wholly fallen away from the virtue of their predecessors,
being rather Apotacticall or Apostaticall, than Apostolical. Sigonius puts two
hundred years in.

In the year of our Lord 931. John the eleventh, came to the Popedom. He was
Bastard to Pope Sergius begotten on the body of the whore Marozia. Whereupon
Baronius says, The Roman Church suffered her self to be so vilanously
oppressed by such a monster.

After him, there was many Popes that were creatures of the fornamed whores,
even to John the XII. who in the year of our Lord 955. attained to the Papacy
at eighteen years old, whom Baronius abhorres as an execrable monster.
Luirprandus and Fascicu us Temporum, say, Luirprand. lib. 6. cap. 11. Sigeber.
ad annum 963. Antoninus Chroni. Temo 11. Tract. 16. 16.
that this John being in bed with some bodies wife, was so beaten by the Devil
that he died of it. This Pope made Children Bishops, drank to the Devil, when
he played at dice he invocated Jupiter and Venus, and conferred the sacred
Orders in a stable.

Then, many Popes did play at thrust out, and cruelly persecuted one another,
the Papacy was exposed to sale, and vices were there up to the roof. France,
though in an age full of darkness, was moved with it, and called a Council
at Rheims under the reign of Hugh Capet, whose Acts we have extant. In that
Council, Arnulphus Bishop of Orleans, who presided there, speaks thus: O
lugenda Roma, quae nostris major^bus clara patrum luminap rotulisti, nostris
temporibus monstrosas tenebras futuris saeculis famosas effudisti! Quid hunc
Reverendi Patres in sublimi solio residentem, vest purpurea and aurea
radi^^em, quid hunc esse censet^s? Nim^rum si charitate destitu tu^, solaque
scientia inslatur and extollitur, Antichrissus est in solio Dei residens, etc.
O lamentable Rome, which in the time of our Ancestors have brought forth
bright shining lights, but now h^st powered out such monstrous darknesses, that
shall be infamous to future ages! And a little after, What think ye, Reverend
Fathers, that the Pape is sitting upon a high throne, glistering in a robe of
searlet and gold? If he has no charity, if he do exalt himself being puffed
up with science alone, he is the Autichrist sitting on Gods throne. Then he
adds, that the Citle of Rome is exposed to sale, and that Antichrist is near,
and that the mystery of iniquity goes forward.

In the year 984. In Baronius it is the year 985.
as Sigonius relates in the beginning of his seventh Book of the Reign of
Italy, Bonifacius, who made himself to be called John the fifteenth, having
put to death two Popes, usurped the Papacy by violence and by money. Baronius
calls him a Thief and a Robber, and that had not one hair of a true Bishop.
Genebrard, in the year 1007, speaks thus of all the Popes of that time. The
Popes (says he) of this time being intruded by the Emperors rather than
elected, were monsters. Thus the lawful succession has been troubled, as of
old under the Synagogue in the time of the Kings Antiochi.

In the year 1033. Benedict the ninth being but ten years old, was created
Pope by the faction of his Father the Count of Tuscula. Petrus Damianus in his
Epistle to Nicolas the second, and Platina, and Fasciculus Temporum, and
Baronius, describe this Pope like a monster. Then three Popes held the Papacy,
of who^ Platina speaks thus, Platina in Gregor. 6. Henricus II. in Italiam cum
magno exercitu veniens, h^hita Synodo, cu^ Beredictum IX Sy^vestrum III. Gregor
um VI. t^nqua^ tria teterrima monstra se abdicare magistratu coegisset.
Henry the second being entered into Italy with a mighty Army, and having
called a Council, constrained Benedict the ninth, Sylvester the third, and
Gregory the sixth, as three horrible monsters, to forsake the magistrature.
That was done in the year of our Lord 1044. when the contention touching the
conversion of the bread into the body of the Lord was in its strength, and
Bere^garius in great credit in France and in the neighboring countries for his
learning and good life.

The discreet Reader and lover of the truth, shall weigh and ponder these things
in his mind, and say in himself, Is it credible that God would have used such
wicked instruments for to defend his heavenly truth? Could any good thing
spring from such wicked Popes? Are not those such Ages as Satan desires for
to bring forth monsters in, and in the mids of so thick a darkness to bring in
Idolatry?

CHAP. XI. Of the oppression of England. How Religion passed out of England
into Bohemia. Of Wicklef. John Huz, and Hierome of Prague. Of the Council of
Constance. Of Zisca and Procopius, and of their Victories.
I Hope the Reader shall not dislike to take here a short view of the History
of the troubles which happened in Bohemia about Religion, a little before God
made the light of his Gospel to shine again in France, England, Germany,
Switserland and the Low Countries. For in it may be seen a lively Image of
Satan, and of the power of God.

Of all Countries subject to the Papal Empire, Math. Pa^is in Henrico. I. An.
1171.
England suffered the hardest and most shameful servitude. That slavery
increased especially under the reign of Henry the second, and of John and
Henry the third. In the year 1171. King Henry the second for to expiate the
crime whereof he was accused, namely to have caused the murder of Thomas
Archbishop of Canterbury, was whipped upon his naked flesh by a multitude of
Monks, some giving him three stripes and some five. With the like
effeminatnesse that King yielded up to the Pope the Investures of Benefices,
which the Kings his predecessors had possessed till that time.

That King being dead in the year 1189. had for Successor Richard his son, and
after him John, a King brutish and furious, who made some attempts to recover
the Investures which his Father had yielded up to the Pope. But being hated and
contemned of his subjects, Pope Innocent the third had a fair way to handle
him ill. He did declare him to have lost the right of his Kingdom, dispensed
his subjects from their Oath of allegiance, a thing never seen nor heard of
before in England, caused Divine Service to cease throughout all the Kingdom,
and Churches and Church yards to be shut up: Which continued by the space of
six years and a half. He also excommunicated the King, and gave the Kingdom
of England to Philip Augustus King of France, upon condition to Conquer the
same at his own peril and fortune: and that for the remission of his own
sins.

That constrained King John to yield up his Kingdom to the Pope, and to bind
himself to do homage unto him for his crown. So he made himself the Popes
vassal, and England became Saint Peter's patrimony. And a Patent with a golden
seal was made and framed, by which the King did oblige himself and his
successors for ever, to pay yearly unto the Pope a thousand marks in gold, in
sign of subjection, besides Saint Peter's moneys that were paid by polle. Unto
which that poor King was forced to add an Oath, whereby he swore that he
was induced so to do without constraint and of his own accord, and by the
motion of the holy Spirit: and that for the remission of his sins.

Under this slaverie died this King in the year of our Lord 1216. to whom
succeeded Henry the third, who did put his Crown at the Legates feet, one
knee upon the ground, doing homage unto him for his Kingdom.

Then did the Pope begin to send his Legates, who skimmed England of money by
a thousand kinds of devices. The Orders of the Franciscans and Jacobins were
newly instituted. The same Friars preached the Croisado, whereby the Pope
promised the remission of all sins, and a degree of glory in heaven above
the common sort, to all those which being armed, would make the v^w to go to
the holy I and f^r the recovering of Christ's Sepulcher, possessed by the
Sarras^ons. At these Predications every one c^ossed himself with a cross upon
the shoulder, and a great multitude of Gentry and people sold and mo^gaged
their Lands and estates for the charges of that Journey. But as they were armed
and furnished for the journey, another Legate would come that dispensed the
English from their vow, and gave them the same graces and Indulgences without
b^dgeing from their own houses, provided they would give to the Pope as much
money as was necessary to have been spent in their journey. By these means
this Legate gathered huge sums of money. And that money was employed by the
Pope for to conquer the Cities and Provinces which the Emperor had in Italy.
Thus did the Pope enlarge his limits.

Never a year came over head but hungry Italians came over into England with
new Commissions to raise moneys, with power to excommunicate all such as would
refuse, and put the Churches into interdict. What good horses soever there
were, or curious household stuff, or fine wares in shops, were conveyed away
without paying for, and carried into Italy. The Exactors took up the tithes of
the corn yet unsowen. The Italians possessed in England the best Benefices.
The Pope called England his garden of pleasure and his bottomless treasure.
Whereupon great clamours arose among the People. The Nobles said: Matthew. Paris
page 267. Marxidiribaldi.
These are the successors of Constantine, and not of Peter. O shameful thing!
rascally ruffians that know not what arms and honor is, will domineere over
all the World by their excommunications. Matthew Paris page 423.
The Monks in the Country did say, The Daughter of Sion is become a brazen
faced Whore, and without shame at all, through the just judgment of him, who
because of the sins of the People makes an Hypocrite to reign, and a Tyrant to
govern and rule. But all these clamours were unprofitable and without effect,
because the holy Scripture was a Book then altogether unknown amongst the
English people. They spoke of nothing but of Miracles, and of Images, and of
Pilgrimages, and of Relics: Until such time as an English Doctor and
Preacher named John Wicklef, fell to preaching and writing openly against the
Pope, and against the Mass, about the year of our Lord 1370. He was listened
unto with great applause, and was able to have caused a great alteration in
England, if the King would have given way to it. Of this oppression in England,
Matthew Paris and Westmonasteriensis, English Monks that lived in those days,
wrote strange and prodigious things.

Now as John Wicklef was a teaching, Aencae Sylvii Hist. Bohem.
it fell out that a Bohemian Gentleman, who was a student of Oxford, did taste
and relish wicklefs Doctrine, and coppied out his Books, which he carried
over into his own Country, and imparted them to John Huz, a famous Preacher,
to whom Wenceslans King of Bohemia, brother to Sigismond Emperor, had
committed the government of the School of Prague, renowned at that time.

This John Huz, overcome by the evidence of Wickless reasons, fell a preaching
his doctrine, and being a vehement and persuasive man, he drew after him a
great number of People. To whom Hierome of Prague did adjoyne himself, who
surpassed John Huz in eloquence and learning. There came also out of Germany
one Petrus Dresdensis, and one Jacobellus that spoke with vehemency against
Transubstantiation, and against the Communion under the only species of the
bread.

For to appease these stirs and commotions, the Archbishop of Prague, called
Subinco Cepus, caused Wicklefs Books publicly to be burned, and drove out
John Huz from Prague: But seeing the number of those that he called heretics
did increase daily, he himself fled into Hongaria toward Sigismond: and John
Huz returned back to Prague.

Then Benedict the thirteenth, and Gregory the twelfth, excommunicated one
another, the one having his seat at Auignon, and the other at Rome. A Council
was kept at Pisa in the year 1409. in which they created a third Pope, to wit,
Alexander the fifth, who dying shortly after John XXIII. succeeded him. So
there was then three Popes all at once, and there was no body in all the Church
of Rome but was excommunicated by some one of these Popes.

This John had war against Ladislaus King of Naples: and for to strengthen
and fortify himself against him, he sent Preachers abroad over all the
Countries of his obedience to preach the Croisadoe, whereby he promised the
forgiveness of all sins to all those that would take up Arms against
Ladislaus for the defense of the Church.

This Indulgence being published at Prague, many of the people began to say
aloud and openly, that it was indeed the language of Antichrist, that promised
salvation to those that should spill the Christian blood. At which the
Magistrate of Prague being angry, he laid hands on some of them and clapped
them up into prison. But the people gathered themselves together and demanded
of the Magistrate the release of these prisoners: who fearing an uproare,
appeased the people with mild words, promising that no harm or wrong should
be done unto them: But so soon as this multitude was separated, the Magistrate
caused these prisoners to be stabbed with a dagger or pomard in the prison: So
that the blood ran out in such abundance that it streamed into the very street.
At the sight of that blood the people being provoked to wrath and fury, they
caused the Prison doors to be opened unto them, and conveyed away the dead
corpses, and carried them from Church to Church, crying aloude, These are the
faithful ones that have exposed their bodies f^r the Covenant of God. The King
did consider these things without being much moved at it.

But the Emperor Sigismond desiring to remedy the disorders of the Papacy,
and by the same means to pacify the troubles of Bohemia, did in such sort by
his going and coming and bestirring himself too and fro, that a Council was
called and kept at Constance, a City of Suaube in Germany, in the year 1414.
wherein the three forenamed Popes were degraded; of especially John XXIII. for
having (among other things laid to his charge) Conc^l. Constant S^ss. X I.
maintained openly and obstinately that the souls of men die as the souls of
beasts; and that there is neither Heaven nor Hell.

In these three Popes room was chosen in the Council Martin the fifth, to
whom the Emperor Sigismund kneeled down before the whole Council, kissed his
feet, and worshipped him. This Martin sent some Ambassadors to Constantinople,
to whom he gave instructions that begin thus: Sactissimus et bea^issimus, qui
bahet coele^te arbitri^m, qui est Dominus in ^erris, suc^essor Petri, Christus
De^ini, Domi^us uni^ersi, Regu^ ^ater, orbis ^umen, etc.
The most holy and most blessed, who has the heavenly Empire, who is Lord on
Earth, successor of S. Peter, the Christ of the Lord, the Master of the
Universal World, the Father of Kings, the Light of the World, the most high
and Sovereign Bishop, Martin by the divine providence, commands unto Master
Anthony Masson, etc. These instructions are inserted in the Council of Siena,
held a little after, Printed at Paris in the year 1612.

At the same Council of Constance John Huz and Hierome of Prague were called
for to confer of their doctrine: they showed some unwillingnesse to meet
thither, fearing some ill usage. But the Emperor assured them, and gave them,
by the advice of the Council, a large safe conduct, whereby he did promise
they should receive no harm there, but might with all liberty and freedom
propound their reasons, and after that return home in all safety.

Grounded upon the Emperors faith and promise, they resorted to the Council
and propounded their reasons. They spoke chiefly of the Communion under both
kinds. But the Fathers of the Council, perceiving they would not yield to that
which was enjoined unto them, concluded that they should be burned alive. The
Emperor made some difficulty in it, saying he had obliged his faith unto them,
and that they came under his promise. Thereupon, that the Emperors conscience
might be at quiet, This Canon by which is defined that one is not bound to keep
faith with heretics, is to be seen in the 19 Session of the Council of
Co^stance.
the Council framed a Canon, wherein is declared and defined, that faith must
not be kept unto heretics, after men have done what they can for to convert
them; and that a Prince is not bound to keep what he has promised them. This
Sentence being pronounced to John Huz, he appealed to Christ Jesus.

They were then executed publicly. And Aeneas Sylvius, who afterward was Pope,
and made himself to be called Pius the second, speaks thus of them in the 36
chapter of his History of Bohemia; Pertulerunt ambo constanti animo nece^, and
quasi ad epulas invitati ad incendium properaru^t, nullam emittentes vocem quae
m seri animi esset indicium. Vbi ardere coeperunt, hymnum cecinere, etc.
Both of them suffered death with a constant courage, and made haste to go to
the fire, as if they had been invited to a feast, without he^ring any word come
from them that showed or testified any sorrowfulness of mind. When they
began to burn, they fell a singing of an Hymn, which could hardly be
hindered by the violence and noise of the flames. No Philosopher ever suffered
death with such magnanimity as these endured burning. Then he alleges an
Epistle of Poggius, a Florentine, that describes the death of Hierome of
Prague, who was put to death some days after John Huz. In that Epistle Poggius
speaks as one that was present at the examination and death of the said
Hierome. I confess (says he) I never saw any body, who in a cause altogether
criminal, came nearer the eloquence of the Ancients. It was an admirable thing
to sie with what words, what eloquence, what arguments, what countenance, what
confidence, he answered his Adversaries, and that too, after he had been
three hundred and forty days in a deep and stinking dungeon. Then he relates
afterward how a list of heresies that were laid to his charge, was read unto
him, and that upon every head or point he answered in such sort, as he did
show they were calumnies laid upon him, saying he believed nothing of all that.
And being brought to the place of punishment, and compassed round about with
faggots and straw, he fell a singing of an Hymn or Psalm. The Executioner
drawing near for to kindle the fire hehind him, he said unto him, Friend, come
near, put the fire here before me, for if I did fear the fire, I would not
be here. The ashes of these Martyrs were cast into the Lake of Constance, for
to abolish the memory of them.

In this Council was framed a Canon, Sessio^ XII.
whereby those are declared heretics, and punishable by the secular power, who
for conforming themselves unto Christ and unto the Ancient Church, will have
the people to receive the Sacrament under both kinds.

There also was condemned Wicklefs doctrine, to whom in that Council are
falsely attributed impious doctrines, and which never came into his mind. For
example, That God ought to obey the Devil. That a Prince is no lawful master,
while he is in a mortal sin. And that it belongs to the people to chastise
their Lords.

In the like manner was handled John Huz, whose doctrine was condemned by the
Council of Constance, Sess. XV. Artic. 19. Dixerant se audivisse quod Johannes
Hus dixisset, quod indulgentiae Papae and ^ip^scopi no^ valent nisi Deus
indulgeat.
in the fifteenth Session. To whom also they did impute things far from his
belief. Some witnesses presented themselves that testified they had heard him
say, That the Pardons of the Pope, and of the Bishop, are nothing worth,
unless God do forgive: That was one of the crimes for which he was burned.
For that venerable Council has judged that the Pope may forgive sins
whether God will or no, and that Gods consent is not necessarily required for
to make that the Popes and Bishops Indulgences be of force and validity.

This news of John Huz his death, and of Hierome of Prague, brought into
Bohemia, did pierce the heart of the Bohemians that were called Hussites, with
exceeding grief. Histor. Bohemicae cap. 56.
The King seeing their number increase daily more and more, granted them
Churches in Prague for their meetings. Aeneas Sylvius says, that the people
moved with anger, pulled down some Monasteries and Churches both within and
without the City. Namely, near Tabor, where thirty thousand persons did
celebrate in the midst of a field the holy Communion under both kinds.

The King Wencestaus being dead, the Kingdom of Bohemia fell to Sigismund his
brother, Emperor and King of Hungaria. Whereupon great fear did seize the
people of Bohemia, because of his great power, and that against his oath, and
violating the safe conduct he had given to John Hux and to Hierome of Prague,
he caused them to be burned at Constance.

But a Bohemian Gentleman called Zisca, that had lost an eye in the wars, a
man incomparable for vigor of body and mind, exhorted them not to be
disscouraged. And it fell out at the same time, that Sigismund under took
war against the Turk in Hungaria, with an indifferent bad success.

That gave leisure to the people order their businesses. The Queen, widow to
Wenceslaus, levied some troops for to fall upon this people, and hinder their
increasing. Sigismund sent Lievtenants to govern the Country, and set things
into good order again, in whose hands Zisca did surrender and remit Pelzina
and Plesta, Cap. 39.
and other places whereof he had gotten possession. For his desire was to obey
the Emperor, and he sought all means to give him content. But there came
Letters from the Emperor, whereby he did declare that his will and pleasure
was that the Churches granted to the Bohemians called Hussites, should be
taken from them, and their Religion interdicted. And they had good advice that
Sigismonds intention was to destroy them. Whereat the People being afraid,
looked for nothing but for a total ruin: and their enemies being become more
vigorous, began to oppress them. Which things moved Zisca to take Arms, and
think upon his defense. With a few forces be obtained many victories against
the Queen, having none but foot forces of small experience, and little
exercised in war.

Then came Sigismond into Bohemia with a mighty Army, resolved to destroy this
people: Besieged Prague, wherein Zisea was, who in many sallies defeated the
most part of Sigismonds army: made him raise the Siege, and took many towns
by the very terror of his name. As he was besieging Vissegrad, the Emperor
came at unawares for to make him raise the siege, having with him thirty
thousand Horse, and all the Nobility of Mordvia. But Zisea defeated him, and
obtained upon him a great victory. And a little after, Sigismond having for
the third time prepared a mighty Army, lost a third Battle, by which he was
constrained to leave Bohemia, full of shame and confusion.

A little after Zisea besieging a town, Cap. 44.
received a shot of an arrow in the eye, so that of blind of an eye as he
was, he became blind of both. But that hindered him not from leading and
conducting his troops, and giving many combats, being victorious every where.

But the Emperor being irritated and angry, came back again into Bohemia,
bringing along with him two powerful Armies, the one out of Germany, and the
other out of Hungaria, which like an overflowing torrent, overwhelmed all
Bohemia: Took some towns, and made great ravage. But Zisea, though blind and
having but a few men, drew directly toward the Emperors Army, and defeated
him with a great defeat, took Bag and Baggage and all things belonging to the
Army, and pursued him a whole days Journey. Pio a Florentine had brought out
of Hungaria fifteen thousand horse, who passing upon a frozen River for to
save themselves, the Ice breaking under them, were all drowned in the River

Furthermore, Zisca with his victorious Army went out of Bohemia, and entered
into Moravia, and passed into Austria, and came to succor the faithful that
were oppressed there. To him did adjoyne himself a Moravian gentleman named
Procopius, exceeding valiant, and an imitator of the virtue of Zisea, who
caused the Emperor Sigismund to raise the siege before Ju^emberg in Moravia,
which he had besieged. A great Battle was given between Zisea and the
Emperors troops near Ausck, upon the River of Elbe, where a great quantity
of the Germane Centry were killed on the Emperors side. Who, pulled down and
confounded with so many losses, resolved at last to seek after Zisca his love
and friendship, promising him the General Lievetenancy of the whole Kingdom,
and all kind of Advantages. Zisea gave ear thereunto, and took his journey
for to go meet the Emperor; but he fell sick by the way and dyed, being
very old, and blind. Aeneas Sylvius says, that when he was a dying, he gave
counsel to his people to make a Drum of his skin after his death, Cap. 46.
assuring them that at the sound of that Drum, his enemies would fly away.

Zisea being dead, Procopius succeeded him in the conduct of a part of the
troops, against whom Pope Martin the fifth set all Germanic in Arms, and sent
into Bohemia three mighty Armies, commanded by the Dukes of Saxe, the Marquess
of Brandenbourg, and the Archbishop of Trivers. These three Armies joined
themselves together. But so soon as the Bohemians did appear, such terror
and fear seized upon the Imperial Armies, that they presently fled without
staying for the enemy: forsaking all their baggage and munitions of war. But
the Cardinal Julian, sent by the Pope, stirred up the Emperor Sigismond to
make a greater effort than any of the former. Aeneas Sylvius says there was in
his Army forty thousand Horse besides the Foot. This Cardinal entered into
Bohemia, where he committed many unheard off cruelties, killing both women and
children* But at the very first noise and rumor that came of the Bohemians
approach, such a terrible fear took this huge Army, that every one threw his
arms down for to fly away more nimbly, and left their carriage and munitions
of war to the enemy.

The Cardinal having escaped this danger, came to Basile for to preside at the
Council that the Pope Eugenius the fourth had assembled there, in the year of
our Lord, 1431.

Now we have made this recital, not for to approve Zisea his actions, nor the
commotions of peoples taking arms against their Sovaraigne for to avoid
persecution and Martyrdom; For the truth of the Gospel is not established by
these means; Christ Jesus calls us to bear the cross after him; The blood
of Martyrs has more efficacy for to increase the Church and spread the doctrine
of the Gospel, than Battles; But I have represented this history, for to be an
example of Gods justice, punishing the disloyalty of Sigismond, who against his
faith and promise burned alive two faithful Martyrs, God having made use of
weak and contemptible persons for to make him lose above two hundred thousand
men, and cover him with shame and confusion.

CHAP. XII. The Confession of Cyril Patriarch of Constantinople, now living,
touching the Sacrament of the Eucharist.
THis Prelate, in the seventeenth Article of his Confession, altogether
conformable to the Doctrine of our Churches, after he has recited the
Institution of the holy Supper as it is found in the Gospel, adds: That is
the simple, true, and lawful Institution of this admirable Sacrament, in the
administration whereof we do confess and believe the true and firm presence
of the Lord Christ Jesus: Yet that presence which faith offers and makes
present unto us: but not that which Transubstantiation vainly invented, does
teach: For we believe that the faithful, in the holy Supper, do eat the
body of Christ Jesus our Lord, not incrushing and breaking it sensibly, and
destroying it with our teeth, in the participation: But in partaking thereof by
the sense of the soul. For the body of Christ is not that which is taken and
seen in the Sacrament with the eyes, but that which Faith having taken
spiritually makes it present and communicates it unto us. Therefore it is (...)
that we eat it, and are made partakers of it, if we do believe: But if we
believe not, we fall away from all the benefit of the Sacrament. By the same
reason we believe that to drink the Cup in the Sacrament, is to drink indeed
the blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, after the same manner as has been said
concerning the body. For the Lawgiver made the same commandment touching his
blood, as he did touching his body. Which precept must not be mutilated,
according to every ones fancy and humor: But the tradition that has been
prescribed unto us, must be kept sound and entire. When therefore in the
Sacrament we have partaked worthily, and communicated entirely with the body
and blood of Christ, we make this profession, that we are already reconciled
and united to our head, and made one and the self same body, with a firm hope
that we shall be his coheires in his Kingdom.

Here is the Original in Greek.
(...).

FINIS.

