A VINDICATION OF THE SINCERITY OF THE Protestant Religion In the Point of
Obedience to SOVEREIGNES.

Opposed To the Doctrine of Rebellion, authorized and practiced by the Pope and
the Jesuits.

In Answer to a Jesuitical Libel, Entitled PHILANAX ANGLICVS

By PETER DU MOULIN, D. D. Canon of Christ-Church Canterbury, one of His
Majesty's Chaplains.

LONDON, Printed by I. Redmayne, for John Crook, at the Ship in St Paul's
Churchyard. 1664.

Imprimatur

Ex Aedib. Lambeth. Nov. 19. 1663. Geo. Stradling, S. T. P. Rever. in Christo
Pat. Dom. Gilb. Archiep. Cant. a Sacr. Domest.

To the Most Reverend Father in God, GILBERT, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury his
GRACE, Primate of all England and Metropolitan, my most Honored Diocesan and
Visitor.
My LORD,
AN Adversary of the Truth, and therefore Yours, has lately offered to your
Grace the same abuse as the Roman Soldiers did to the Lord Jesus. For as they
arrayed him in Royal Scarlet, bowed the Knee before him, and said to him, Hail
King of the Jews; but at the same time spit upon him, and smote him on the
head: This enemy, who is also a Roman Soldier, clotheth your Grace with high
praises, and makes a profound obeisance to your Place and Merits in an Epistle
Dedicatory; But by the same Epistle he puts under your Graces Protection a
charge of Rebellion against our Catholic Orthodox Church, and an Apology for
the Doctrine of the Jesuits. This is stroaking and striking together. No blame
is so disgraceful as such praises. So did the Devil call Christ the Son of the
living God, to disgrace him by his Testimony, and make him to be taken for one
of his Confederates. The man never appearing to own his work, seems to
acknowledge, that neither his person nor his work deserves the notice of the
world. Yet I thought it necessary to let the world know what a cheat is put
upon the Readers by this child of darkness, who being altogether unknown to
your Grace (as your self were pleased to express unto me) bears himself for
your ancient Acquaintance, and claims your Patronage, while he disgraceth your
Person, and revileth your Doctrine. Neither does the Libel, being but an
ignorant scolding, deserve an answer; but that the man recompenceth his shallow
learning with his superlative malice, making use of this conjuncture, when the
minds of loyal subjects are exulcerated by their late and long sufferings by
rebellious Zelots under pretense of Religion, to make the sufferers to fall out
with Religion it self.

These are the depths of Satan, who knows perfectly how to steer the spirits by
the Rudder of their most sensible Interesses, and at this time labors to drown
the too remiss sense of holy Belief, in the quick resentments of personal
oppression. Blessed be God that he is come short of his aim in this attempt;
and that this Libeller by his Imposture has only stirred the just indignation
of good Christians, in whom the interess of Gods truth and glory takes place
before all personal concernments. Himself might have bin an example of that
just severity which he commends in your Grace, if he had been as bold to
Present the Book, as audacious to Dedicate it to so great a Patron. I cannot
but have recourse unto the same Patron which he has chosen for his untruths,
to protect the confutation of them: Knowing, that the Vindication of the Truth,
is in its right place, being put under your Graces protection; in whose shadow
the Church rejoices, as of the gracious Patron of Piety and Virtue, the
Incourager of Goodness, the Maintainer of the Orthodox Faith; and in that
respect, the right Arm of the great Defender of the same. That your Government
may be blessed unto the Church, and Prosperous and Honorable unto your Self,
is the fervent prayer

My LORD, Of Your GRACES Most dutiful and humblest Servant, PETER DU MOULIN

To the Roman Catholics of His Majesty's Dominions.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
THe Adversary against whom I appear having laid a Charge of Rebellion against
a sort of Protestants in his Title page, has in his Book brought the
generality of Protestants under that Indictment. I will not imitate his
unsincerity, by laying that charge proper to the Court of Rome, and the
Jesuits, upon all the Roman Catholics, knowing the Loyalty of many of them,
with whose acquaintance I am honored, and making use in this Treatise of the
Testimony of great Persons, and whole Courts and Societies of the Roman
profession, against the precepts of Disloyalty enjoined by the Roman Court, and
acted by the Jesuits. For to these only I profess that my present opposition
is limited. Only I will be here your humble Suitor, That since the Pope is
called by Cardinal Bellarmine, The Epist. ad Blackwell*
Head of the Faith, and Praefat. ad lib. de summo Pontisice.
The Fundamental Stone of Sion, you be pleased to consider seriously, how
taking the Popes sense and authority for the foundation of your Faith in this
point, can consist with that Honor and Loyalty which you harbor in your
generous Breasts: And how you that venture your lives so freely for the Defense
of your King, can acknowledge the power which the Pope assumeth of disposing of
the Crowns and Lives of Kings, and absolving you from the duty of your
Allegience when he thinks good. Certainly, when you have weighed this in the
Balance of Conscience and sound Judgment, you shall find your selves hedged
in within this Dilemma, Either to cease to be good subjects, or to acknowledge
that the Pope can err, even when he speaks and makes Decrees from his Chair.
Of which Truth if you be once persuaded, your way is open to know more Truth.
That our faith may be settled upon that Truth which makes us free, we must call
upon the Joh. 8. 32.
assistance of the God of Truth, and prepare for it a meek, docible, and
unprejudiced spirit; which are qualities altogether remote from the furious and
contumelious Adversary whom I take in hand in this Treatise. Yet since they are
not opprobrious terms, but clear proofs that are most offensive to the accused,
I cannot deny that I have been more offensive to him, then he to the
Protestants. God govern his Catholic Church with the Spirit of Truth and
Peace, and convert with his blessings those that curse us. So prays

My Lords and Gentlemen, Your most humble servant in the Lord Jesus. our Common
Savior, Peter Du Moulin.

Preface.
The Design, Style, and Genius of that Libel. Observations upon the Epistle
and Prefaces.

THe licentiousness of the Press has long since beaten me to that patience to
let others speak, contenting my self to think; Looking upon the eagerness of
some men to confute all untruths that appear abroad, as a relick of
Knight-Errantry, which obliged the Knights to redress all the wrongs that were
done in the world. But my patience was overcome by the bold and pernicious
untruths vented in a Libel, tending to no less then the rooting out of
Protestants out of all States of the world, as Rebels by their very Religion,
and the Bane of all Governments. The whole Work is purum putum mendacium, right
mettle of untruth in the main substance. The Title is false, for it picks a
quarrel with the Presbyterians only, whereas the Book declares open war to all
the Protestants under heaven. The pretense false; for the Author pretends to
undertake that task out of love to the King, whereas he works the Kings ruin
by calumnies against his true Subjects, and by maintaining the Jesuits, the
sworn enemies of his Crown and State. The face he puts on, is false many ways;
for he pretends in his Epistle and Prefaces to publish the Book of a dead man,
whereas the uniformity, or rather deformity of the affected broken Style, and
Billings-gate language, in the Epistle, Prefaces, and body of the Book, shows
all that false coin to have been stamped in the same base Mint. The Author is
produced as a Priest of the Church of England; whereas he speaks as a Priest of
the Church of Rome. The Publisher calls himself Bellamy, whereas he is a false
Friend, and a true Enemy, and most like it is, that no such man as he names
himself, is to be found: For such Vizards are borrowed by these children of
darkness, A wrong Name, A contrary Profession, A dead man that speaks out of
his Grave; three Vizards one over another; lies upon lies in the Porch; a right
Entry into a Shop of Lies.

But how much falsehood is in the Epistle? Was Bellamy or the pretended dead
Author well acquainted with that venerable Prelate to whom the Book is
dedicated? Did Bellamy ever present the Book to his Lordship? Did he choose him
for his Patron, and stroke him with deserved praises, to honor him, or to
betray him, and make him odious, as a Patron of Popery, and Protector of
Jesuits? And lastly, the accusations laid against the several Protestants,
even these that are true, if any be, are they not falsely imputed to the
generality of the party? And are not most of the alleged passages out of their
writings maimed, detorted, or plainly forged?

O God of Truth, who love Truth in the inward parts, and look with
piercing judicial eyes into the bottom of crafty projects through all the
coverings of hypocrisy; Is thy Truth to be defended with Falsehood? What
followship has the simplicity of thy Gospel with this heap of multiplied
Impostures? And how can the zeal of Religion put a man that has some sense of
Ingenuity, upon such false and crooked ways? Well, I see my self engaged to
fight with wild Beasts, as St Paul did at Ephesus. Let God arise, and let his
enemies be scattered. Let them also that hate him, flee before him.

I did not see the Book but after the second Edition, eight months after its
first appearing; And though I had seen it before, I would have made no haste to
appear upon the lists against this Adversary, but expected of the Secular Power
a more substantial, and indeed the right Confutation. But what! the smalness of
the Libel, and the Libeller, kept them hitherto from the Censure of Authority:
For those that stand in high places, can hardly discern such strawes below: But
we that stand below, may look nearer, and see poison in a straw; and ought to
represent unto our Superiors the mischievousness of this small, yet dangerous
thing.

Dangerous I say, not for the strength of reason, nor for the bitterness
neither; for the very extremity of malice in that Book makes it weak in reason,
as it is the natural effect of pride and choler to enervate the judgment, and
take reason off the hooks. But that which makes the Book dangerous, is the
unparalleled boldness and presumptuousness of the attempt. Could we believe,
but that we see it, that in England, where the Law gives no Toleration to the
Romish Religion, a Papist durst appear in Print, with his and his Printers name
to the Book, to tax not only the Protestant Reformers, but the very Reformation
of Rebellion and High Treason? Put among Luthers crimes, That he preached
against the Tyranny and Superiority Page 73. and 74.
of the Bishop of Rome, and persuaded the people not to render him any
Obedience. Call the Reformation the New Gospel, Excuse Mariana, and justify
the Jesuits, against those that charge them with the Doctrine of King-killing;
Cry down Protestants, as persons not to be trusted with any part of the
Government of the State, or suffered to live in any Commonwealth; Bestow upon
them the most contumelious terms that he could devise, Traitors, Diabolical,
Cockatrices, Infernal Spirits, are the mildest words that he gives them.

It is a silly color to his malice to name them always In his pa, 109. his
vizard falls down and he says openly, These rebel doctrines are backed by the
generality of those that call themselves Protestants. page 71.
Protestants of Integrity, as if he meant a different sort from other
Protestants; whereas under that name he persecuteth all the Reformed Christians
of Europe, following them from Country to Country. And although he durst not
so openly rail against the English Reformers, yet can he not abstain to tax
them of Rebellion under Queen Mary, saying most falsely, That there was more
Rebellions in her poor five years, then in the forty four of Queen Elizabeth;
thereby to show, that the Roman Catholics are the far more loyal subjects.

But that which goes beyond all examples of the most superlative impudence,
that most virulent Libel against the Protestants of Integrity, which is the
Religion professed in England, he makes bold to recommend to the Protection of
that Eminent and Virtuous Prelate, now our most Reverend Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, then the second Ecclesiastical Person of all the Province, and
President of the Convocation.

I pray Sir Philopapa (for Philanax Anglicus is too good a Title for you) do
you know who you speak to? Do you think what you say? Do you remember where you
are? In qua tandem Civitate Catilina, arbitraris te vivere? Do you think you
are at Rome or Madrid, where you may bring, as you do, all Protessants to the
Inquisition? Or do you hope that our loyal Clergy will mistake you for one of
their side, because you rail against Knox and Buchanan, and make some
profession of Obedience, and declame against the late rebellion? And when they
know you once for the man you are, do you presume that you can make them forget
what Sovereigne you are sworn unto, and what power the Pope claims over all
Kingdoms, and what particular Title he pretends to England and Ireland?

Certainly Sir Philopapa (for the Pope is the King you love, and whose Interest
you promote among our Kings Subjects) I hope you shall find that your loud
cries at my Lords Grace of Canterbury's door, for the putting down of all
Protestants of Integrity, will prove as improper and unseasonable, as if you
proclaimed at the Court gates the Ordinance of the Rebels Parliament for
putting down Monarchy; and that you shall be helped with some personal interest
to increase your hatred against the Protestants of Integrity: for such shall
you find the Kings Majesty, his Council, his Parliament, the pious Fathers of
the Church, and the wise Judges of the Land. Could you not content your self to
enjoy quietly your Sovereigns Clemency and forbearance, but you must defame in
Print all that are not of your gang, which are no less then the King and the
State? From their Justice nothing can secure you but your obscurity. But while
you take an order that your person may lie undiscovered, I will make bold to
discover some of your Impostures: All I cannot, neither is it material; for all
that I need to do to provide an antidote against your poison, is to do two
things: The one, to wipe off the aspersions of Rebellion which you cast upon
the holy Doctrine of the Protestant Churches. The other, to bring to the Bar
the true Rebels; which will be no recrimination, but asserting the Pope in his
ancient known possession, of being the grand Patron and Architect of Rebellion
of subjects against their Sovereignes, and the especial directer of high
Treason against the Kings of England.

Before I look to the body of his Book, something must be said of his Epistle
and Prefaces. His Epistle is addressed to no less then the Right Reverend
Father in God, Gilbert Lord Bishop of London, and Dean of His Majesty's Chapel
Royal, since deservedly promoted to the highest Dignity of the Church of
England. A great Honor to his Book* How far the great Patron which he chooses
is honored with that Dedication, and the due praises which he pays unto him,
is obvious to any ordinary understanding. Praise at the best is (...), but a
light gift to a wise man. And since praise Seneca* Sit tibi tam turpe laudari a
turpibus quam si lauderis ob turpia.
has its price from the praiser, that eminent Prelate is little obliged to
this Gentleman's praises, who justifies in his Book what he is, and what he
aims at. It is praising him with a vengeance, to take him for a Protector of
his mischievous attempt.

(...). He has more obliged our* late most Reverend Archbishop Juxon, now a
glorious Saint in heaven, whom he has not spared to blame, though he does not
name him, but he points at him with his finger: And then tells My Lord of
London, From all these vanities, your Lordships known Innocence and Piety has
always defended you; scientifically inferring, that Innocence and Piety is
inconsistent with the Character which he had given of that great Prelate. Could
this Epistles be so senseless as to expect thanks from a Bishop of London, for
raising his commendation upon the disgrace of his Metropolitan? What needed he
to go so far out of his subject to bring in that malicious exception? For the
blame of the one adds nothing to the praise of the other. Does he not show his
hatred against Protestant Prelates, which he could not but express, even when
he took one of them for his Patron? And no wonder that a Jesuit should malign
an Archbishop of Canterbury, seeing the Jesuits had no greater enemies then
those that sat in that See. That which he finds amiss in that rarely
accomplished Prelate, is commended in him by wise men, his laudable curiosity,
fit for a great Naturalist, as he was; to keep several sorts of Animals about
his house, as Aristotle did before him: Their Nature and Inclinations he would
observe with a judicious eye, and speak of them pertinently and delightfully.
Of these Natural Lectures he was pleased to make me hearer several times, and
to employ me to find him Books of that subject. So serious were his
Recreations, when he would unbend, among those whom he honored with his
Discourses and Table, after his great Employments about the Government of
Church and State.

As that great person's known Piety and Innocence cannot be blasted by such a
weak enemy as this Jesuit, so it needs not be defended by such a weak Champion
as I am. His admired Virtue shines in an Orb elevated far above the reach of
the barking of envy; and if he needed the approbation of any under God, he had
a Royal Testimony, when his late Majesty, our glorious Saint and Martyr had so
much confidence in his Piety and Innocence, and together in his Wisdom and
Courage, that of all his Divines he chose him for his second, when he was to
encounter the terrors of a violent and ignominious death: And by the excellent
use which he made of his godly counsel in the retirement of his last devotions,
he ended his combats in a victorious death over all his enemies spiritual and
temporal, and yielded his great soul unto God with joy and comfort. For one
thing this Jesuit and his confreres had great reason to hate that godly
Prelate; That after His Majesty had spoken many divine words upon the Scaffold,
he put him in mind to make a profession of his Religion; which he did, and
professed before God and the world, that he dyed a Protestant according to the
Religion established by Law in the Church of England. A profession which gave
great discontent to the Papists and the Fanatics, for both wished that he had
dyed a Papist indeed.

It is known with what calmness of spirit, prudence, and magnanimity, that
virtuous Prelate went through the trials which he was put to after the Kings
death; for he was as wise as a serpent, though as harmless as a dove: And among
his many Virtues, he was a great Master of two, which seldom meet together, a
singular and Moses-like meekness, and an invincible constancy. They that have
known him moderating in the University, and have seen him since acting in the
greatest businesses of the Kingdom, admire the readiness and solidity of his
judgment, fitted alike for speculation and action, and in both excellent. His
dexterity and patience, overcoming the most difficult affairs. His sincerity in
declaring himself without Complements, and his fidelity in keeping his promises
without wavering, were very remote from the imputation of vanity, which this
enemy would fasten upon the reputation of that truly great and good man. I
cannot leave, I cannot part from the mention of him, without that reverend and
affectionate expression of the Jews when they speak of their virtuous friends
departed, (...) Let his memory be blessed, for so his soul is in heaven, for
all the good he has done in earth to so many, and to me for one, for to his
Graces goodness, next to God, I owe the greatest part of my well-being.

To return to our Adversary; Many things in his Epistle and Preface show him to
be an Adversary indeed to the whole Protestant party, and a sworn slave to the
Court of Rome. But as he takes no pains to prove any thing, but that all
Protestants are Rebels by their Religion, I will not take the pains to disprove
any thing else.

All his Preface is verba and voces; Moralities far from his purpose,
interlarded with invectives without ground. For who are those that will do no
good works for fear of meriting by them? And where are those Protestants among
whom dullness and heaviness of spirit is taken up as a practice? A character
more befitting Monastical devotion. God fetches light out of darkness; but it
is the Devils work to fetch darkness out of light. This man labors to do the
same, Sententias loquitur carnifex. But he goes untowardly to work: For he
pulls his doctrines by the hair to bring them to his uses. It seems the man had
made some petty declamations when he was a Grammar Scholar, in a broken boyish
style, made up of a thousand stolen shreds: And now, lest these pieces of wit
should perish, he brings them in by head and shoulders to decide controversies
in points not controverted. For to his silly commendations of devotion and
humility, one may say as that King to him that would commend Hector in his
presence, Quis vero illas vituperat? What need you speak for these Virtues,
when no body speaks against them? And what are these declamations to the matter
in hand?

To give a taste of his learning in Greek, he translates (...) an eloquent
Oration.

He calls St. Austin the Oracle of the Latin Church; But he never belonged to
it, but to the African.

And for a taste of his wit and eloquence, barking at the Moon, he says to be
the Divinity of Dogs.

This is of the same kind, The blessed eyes of Bats they have to mock at the
greatest lights. But if the Bats mocked at the great light, they would outface
it, whereas they hide themselves from it.

One more of these impertinencies out of the body of the book. He gives these
commendations to our late page 57. and 58.
excellent King, a Prince as wise as Apollo, valiant There wanted no more but
animo prudens, ut Homerus; as it is upon the Tomb of Richard the 11.
as Achilles, virtuous as Socrates, pious as Aeneas, and beautiful as an
Amazon. O brave boy! Well declamed for a Scholar of the second Form! See what
comes by being bred in the Colleges of the Jesuits of Flanders; for such a
gallant strain of Oratory could never have been learned in the Schools of
Westminster or Eaton. Yet methinks the first and the last of these
comparisons, have a reach quite beyond common sense. Will he call holy King
Charles a Prince as wise as Apollo? It is a fit parallel for Julian the
Apostate. Had he no better comparison for that Saint then a Pagan God and a
Devil, who by reason of the uncertainty of his Oracles, was called (...)
crooked and winding: How does that fit such a pattern of Christian and Royal
ingenuity, so sincere in his words, so real in his actions? The last parallel
is as incongruous as the first, He calls the King as beautiful as an Amazon.
Where has this Antiquary found those viragines the Amazons with their right
breast burnt, set out as Paragons of beauty? And though they had been such, Is
a woman's beauty fit to express the majestical presence of a King? How do these
two comparisons suit with the subject, and one with another?

Velut aegri somnia vanae
Finguntur species, ut nec pes nec caput uni
Reddatur formae.
This writer affords more occasions to make sport with him by his ignorance,
but more by his blind choler; then which there is nothing that disarmeth a man
more, and exposes him more to be a laughing stock. Such another Pierochol and
Cacafuego I never met with, His style is a continual casting of firebrands, and
firing of Granado's to scatter among the Protestants in all the corners of the
world. What would become of the Ship of this Church, if these men ruled upon
the Deck, and were masters of the Stern and the Sayls, seeing they are so
swaggering now they lie under the Hatches?

Let the Author of the book keep himself there for me, and remain unknown. The
publisher will not acknowledge himself to be the Father, but only the
Godfather; although the Epistle, Preface, and Book, look like three brats of
one venture. We need not question who is the father, since the godfather
answers for the child.

Neither is it more material to search into the occasion of the writing of the
book, which he says to be a Letter from a Protestant of integrity, in answer
to a letter from a person of quality. These letters I never saw: But if that
Protestant of integrity will have the Presbyterians conformable to the Church
of England in Ecclesiastics, as the Epistle seems to intimate, we are of his
mind; neither is any more required of the Presbyterians for the blessed work
of concord, and for the comfort of their Protestant brethren, and their own.

The Title of Philanax Anglicus, whereby the Author makes a profession to love
the King, is his passport into the patience of the Reader: And he makes of it a
Fort, under the shelter of which he thinks he may boldly shoot upon whom he
pleases to take for his mark. But what advantage this lover of the King
allows to him, is much like the gift of Juglers; his Majesty may hold it
fast, and find nothing in his hand, as we shall see afterward.

A Vindication of the Protestant Religion in the point of obedience to
Sovereigns; opposed to the doctrine of Rebellion, authorized and practiced by
the Pope and the Jesuits. In answer to a Jesuitical Libel, entitled, Philanax
Anglicus.
CHAPTER I. Of the Objections out of the Books of Protestant Writers.
THe Book of this Adversary consisting of stale Objections, which have been a
thousand times answered, would put me and any man that would answer him to the
unavoidable necessity of saying over many things that were said before; but
that all his Objections may be reduced into one, and therefore one answer will
serve for them all.

For from the beginning to the end, he objects unto us some passages out of
Protestant Writers which savor of disobedience, as he dresseth them, and some
faults in that kind of those that have embraced the Protestant party: whence
he infers, That both the Doctrine and the Practice of Reformed Religion is
Rebellion. He labors especially to pick faults in the first Reformers; but
coming short of his end, he quarrelleth with others that came long since the
Reformation.

But though he had brought the Reformers to plead guilty, he has done nothing
against us; For to all these allegations we answer, that our Belief depends not
upon the doctrine of any particular person or persons, much less upon their
actions. But that to know the true belief of our Churches, one must look upon
their public Confessions of Faith.

The Law was received by the disposition of Angels, says St. Steven, Act. 7.
53. and so was the Gospel. But those whom God used to draw his Church out of
the abuses of Popery were not Angels but men, whom we hold not to have been
infallible. Wherefore if one allege to the English Churches some hard Sayings
of persons that had a hand in the Reformation, to the Germane Churches of
Luther, to the Helvetian of Zwinglius; they will answer, They were men. They
are not the Pillars of our Faith. Since those men have laid open the Holy
Scripture before us which was shut up before, it is no more for their word that
we believe, for our selves have seen the saving Truth of God, and upon that we
are built.

But that the faults of men may not be employed or received to give a prejudice
against the Doctrine of God, I desire all judicious and sober minded to
consider, that in the midst of the Romish darkness it was not to be expected
that the saving light of Gods truth, and the Apostolical Government of the
Church should be discovered upon a sudden by any man, completely and with all
its parts. As Rome was not built in one day, no more was Sion. Many were great
helpers toward the knowledge of the truth, who were themselves very short of
it, and nevertheless ought to be reverently remembered by us for doing more then
was to be expected in that Age. Such were the Waldenses; such was Wiclef, such
was John Hus, men too severely censured by some of us as not thoroughly
principled in many points of Religion. But how much truth did they discover?
How much saving Doctrine did they bring forth? What lasting seeds of
Reformation did they sow, which lying buried for some Ages, sprung forth, and
had a happy growth to a greater perfection in the age of our Fathers? Truly,
although the announcing of the Gospel by the Angels be called the Dayspring
from on high, because that light Luke 1. 78.
at Christ's coming brake forth as it were from the Meridian, not from the
Horizon, and was full at its very rising; we are not to expect at every return
of that light after a long night that there shall be no difference between
break of Day and Noon. No; the Truth is compared 2 Pet. (...). (...).
unto a Light shining in a dark place until the day dawn and the Day-Starr
arise. In these last Ages of the world, after a long darkness, the Sun of Truth
did rise by little and little. It shone at the first with much fogg about it
and cast long shades. And we have reason to acknowledge with thankfulness and
admiration, that among those shades so much saving Light did shine as
enlightened the understanding and comforted the conscience with the mystery of
Gods reconciliation with men in Jesus Christ through faith and repentance,
which is the main substance of Religion. For Grace as Nature* begins with the
noble parts, which are perfectioned long before the outward be finished.

Although I reverence very much the memory of those that were raised by God to
discover the errors of the Court of Rome, I will not justify their errors,
if they had any, nor all the words and writings of them that came after, and
brought their Work to a greater perfection. To compass that great work among
the highest contradiction, and against the current of custom, if men of stout
spirits (and there was need of such) had let fall from their mouth or pen some
less reverend expressions then duty required concerning the superior powers
that opposed them, none needs wonder at it, and yet none needs to justify it,
and we are very far from it. But though they had spoken treason, it casts no
blur upon our profession, which is expressed in our public confessions. Neither
do we acknowledge any private man to be the warrant of our faith.

I may then save my labor in examining whether our Adversary has faithfully
alleged the writings of Protestant Divines, and truly represented their
opinions, since their opinions are not our rule. And yet so much we will say
for them, that those very men whose opinions their Adversaries misrepresent
unto the world, were the Writers and Composers of those Confessions of Faith
which were subscribed unto, and acknowledged by the National Churches as the
public Declarations of their belief. Which Confessions are so full and
pregnant in asserting the obedience of subjects unto their Sovereigns (as I
will demonstrate, God willing, in the third Chapter of this Treatise) that the
greatest Adversaries find little to say against it. And our Adversary (to whom
his Party owes this commendation, that he has carefully collected and
epitomized all the objections made against us about the point of Obedience)
passes by our Confessions of faith as being without the reach of his
exceptions. Only he nibbleth a little at the 39. Article of the French
Confession, which is this; We affirm that Laws are to be obeyed, tributes to be
paid, and the yoke of subjection to be born, although the Magistrates be
infidels. Thus far excellent well, says the Adversary, but that which follows
spoils all in his opinion. The Sovereign Empire of God remaining always
entire, Why? here is a gallant latitude (says he) for disobedience and
rebellion. But no such latitude is left by the Article. All that good reason
can infer out of it, is, that we must obey the Magistrates as long as we may do
it without disobeying God. There is great difference between not obeying and
rebelling.

I see nothing else bearing the stamp of public consent of any National Church
among Protestants that this man excepts against in the point of obedience. For
his invective against the Geneva Bible, is a wilful mistake. Some English
exiles at Geneva printed there a Bible; An Edition justly discredited by a Note
in the Margin, 2 Chronicles. 5. 16. upon that Asa put by his mother Maacha from the
government for her idolatry. And the annotation says, that he should not only
have deposed her, but killed her. Which impious Paradox this Gentleman imputes
to the whole Congregation of those Protestants of integrity, as he calls us,
because, says he, their holy Geneva Bible is admitted by their whole Kirk;
which we deny. No English Translation of the Bible is authentical to be read in
Churches, but that which was made by the commandment of King JAMES of glorious
memory. Neither was that Geneva Bible translated or received by public
authority. Neither is Geneva more to be taxed for it, then London for printing
the wicked libel which I am now confuting, both being printed without License.
That, Note, put in by some Fanatic, is rejected by all Protestants, and the
generality must not be charged with a private man's folly.

Although I answer not for any private man, yet that the Reader may judge what
credit he may give to this Gentleman's allegations. I have set down here a
sample Page 82, and 83.
of his unsincerity in his alleging of Luther. He sets down three passages
taken, as he says, out of Luther's I made use of the Edition of Iena An. 1600
tom. 2. omnium operum D. Mart. Lutheri,
Treatise De Captivitate Babylonica Ecclesiae. The first cap. De Sacramento
Baptismi. Ab omnibus hominum legibus exempti sumus liberate Christiana nobis
per Baptismum donata; that is, We are freed from all humane Laws by the
Christian liberty given to us by Baptism.

I may confidently affirm that these words are not to be found either in that
Chapter, or in the whole Treatise. And if the Reader will be so inquisitive as
to look upon the place, he shall find it so. There Luther complains of the
ceremonies wherewith the Pope has clogged the Sacrament of Baptism, and
maintains that neither Bishop, nor Pope, nor Angel has power to impose such
humane additions upon the conscience of Christians to be obeyed as Laws. And
yet if they be imposed he will have Christians to bear with them, keeping still
to themselves that liberty of conscience to remember, that such things are
wrongfully imposed, and taking heed either to justify the tyranny, or to
murmr against it. This is the sense of the whole discourse of Luther. But he
says no where that the Christian liberty given to us by Baptism, exempts us
from the Laws of men. This is a mere fiction.

So is his second allegation out of the same book, cap. de Matrimonio. Scio
nullam Remp. Legibus feliciter administrari. He makes Luther say, I know that
no State is happily governed by Laws: but there is not one word of that in the
whole Chapter of Matrimony, nor in the whole Treatise.

And Luthers opinion was as far from that Tenet as the East is from the West,
and the Pope and his Conclave from Christ and his Apostles. Shall we wonder
that the Pope alters the words of Scripture making the Text say, she shall
bruise thy heel, in stead of he, to transfer the victory of Christ over the
Devil unto Christ's Mother; or that he gives to Scripture a contrary sense,
turning Feed my sheep into Depose Kings, and dispose of Kingdoms? when such men
as our Adversary take upon them to forge what words and sense they will, and to
father them upon whom they please?

Quid Domini facient audent cum talia fures?

The third allegation is out of the Chapter de Ordine in the same Treatise; the
words, as our Adversary recites them, are these, Turpe enim est, and iniquiter
servile Christianum hominem qui liber est aliis quam coelestibus and divinis
legibus subjectum esse; that is, It is a foul thing, and wickedly servile, that
a Christian man who is free, should be subject to any other but the divine and
heavenly laws. But this Gentleman, or he from whom he has borrowed these
allegations, has basely corrupted and falsified this passage, putting legibus
in stead of traditionibus, which alters the sense altogether, and changes the
question: for Luther disputes against imposing unnecessary traditions in
Religion, as necessary to salvation, and would not have a Christian to subject
himself in that kind to any tradition, but such as are divine and heavenly. But
this corrupter represents him as refusing subjection to civil laws and temporal
powers. Can there be a more ungodly and odious imposture? And how does this
man's inference follow upon Luther's discourse? So that it is most plain (says
he) that it was not Luther' s design only to pull down Monarchy, but all other
kinds of civil Government, and to extirpate all humane laws. Certainly that
inference depends no more upon Luther's discourse, then the new stars of
Galilee upon the Aphorisms of Hippocrates.

It is a good sport to see how incensed this Gentleman is against Luther for
exhorting Kings and Princes to fall upon the Pope and his Cardinals, and to
fulfill the Prophecy of Rev. 17. That the Kings of the earth shall strip the
great harlot naked, devour her self, and burn her with fire. Which he
exagerates as high treason, because he acknowledges the Pope for his
Sovereign, and the King of kings, whom none can resist or call to account
without incurring the crime of Rebellion.

For his other allegations against Luther, he shall not have the luck to be
believed upon his word, after I have laid open his infidelity in that kind. He
that has leisure or curiosity enough, may search the places and examine
whether they be true or false, neither of which concerns us. Yet a judicious
view of the affairs of Germany at that time, and of the nature of Sovereignty
and Subjection in the Empire, of which I intend to say something in the next
Chapter, which will make his hardest expressions to seem less strange.

It is certain that he writ against King Henry the VIII. most slovenly. Yet
observe, that Henry the VIII. was not his King. That he said nothing against
the obedience due to him by his subjects, and that he made amends to the King
since, and cried Peccavi. He was then less to blame then the Jesuit Sander,
who called Sander. lib. de Schismate Anglicano.
the same King (his natural Prince) another Mahomet, the root of sin, and a
most impious and sacrilegious Tyrant, and Queen Elizabeth Lupam Anglicanam, the
English wolf-bitch, and made them no amends for it.

This testimony cannot be denied to Luther, that he opposed rebellion most
vigorously; as it may be seen Sleidan. lib. 5. ad an. 1525. Id. lib. 14. ad an.
1542.
in his Epistle to the Boors that rose in arms, and by his Sermon in the Camp,
both pregnant for the obedience of subjects to their Princes; of which Sleidan
gives a faithful account, a better Author then our Adversary, or Cochlaeus
Luther's enemy.

The first and greatest instrument of the Helvetian Reformation was Zuinglius,
out of whose books the Adversary picks some passages to exhort the Switzers and
Germans to defend their Religion against the Emperor. If there had been no
quarrel of Religion at that time, yet he would have exhorted them to stand for
their liberties against the Emperor. For the Switzers having shaken off the
yoke of the Empire two hundred years before. It is no marvel that Zuinglius was
not careful to exhort his Countrymen and neighbors to obedience to the
Emperor, the perpetual underminer of the State which he lived in.

Observe that the Authors that write of the power of Princes, and of the duty
of subjects, determine it according to the form of the States in which they
live: and so no wonder that Zuinglius a Switzer acknowledges no successive
power, but conceives all Princes to be eligible and deposable by the
Commonwealth. And that Calvin and Beza living in an Aristocratical State,
showed also in their Writings more inclination toward that kind of Government.
So the German and Italian Writers are for a mixed and much limited Government.
The English and French for Monarchy, with certain Laws. And if the Turks and
Muscovites could make Books, they* would write for the Despotical and
unlimitted power.

Our Adversary lays a heavy charge upon Melanchton, that he should say that
the inferior Magistrates Page 105. Melancton in Epit. Moral. Philos. Id. in
lib. de Consil. Evangelicis.
may cut the throats of the superior, and all this for reforming Religion: for
which he refers us to two of his Books, without quoting the particular
place; much like the direction of the Goodwifes Letter, To my Husband dwelling
at the wars. But no such thing shall be found in all Melanchton's Works.
Neither is it suitable to the spirit of that wise and meek man.

For Calvin, by reason of his Aristocratical Doctrine about the Tribunitian
power of the tres ordines regni over the King: I would leave him for such as he
is; but that it is my proper business at this time to discover the imposture of
my Adversary, and he has committed a signal one against Calvin, whom he has
served just as he did Luther before. For he brings him upon the Stage,

-- Lacerum crudeliter ora,
Ora manusque ambas. --
as he did the other, miserably torn and disfigured.

Speaking of oaths which bind us to observe and obey Page 103.
the King, he says, that to all oaths of this nature Mr. Calvin from his high
Cathedral and Consistorial Tribunal gives this absolution; Quibuscunque hujus
Evangelii lux affulget, etc. ab omnibus laqueis and juramentis absolvitur. I
cannot make good English of false Latin, of which Calvin is not guilty, but it
is as familiar with this Gentleman as false Doctrine. His meaning is to make
Calvin say, that when a man is enlightened with the Gospel of Geneva, he is
free from all oaths to his Sovereign; for it is of all oaths of that nature
that he makes Mr. Calvin to give absolution. But there is a swarm of
corruptions in that allegation. The words of Calvin are these. Quibuscunque
ergo Calvin. l. 4. Inst. c. 13. sect. 21. Qui ex Monachismo ad honestum aliquod
vivendi genus concedunt, fractae fidei and perjurii graviter accusantur, quod
vinculum (ut vulgo creditur) insolubile quo erant Deo and Ecclesiae obligati
abruperint. At ego nullum fuisse vinculum dico, ubi quod homo confirmat Deus
abrogat. Deinde ut demus fuisse obligatos quu^ ignoratione Dei and errore
impliciti venerentur nunc postqua^ veritatis notiti^ sunt illuminati, simul
Christi gratia liberos esse dico. Nam si tantam efficaciam habet crux Christi
ut a Legis divinae maledictione qua vincti detinebamur nos absolvat, quanto
magis ab extraneis vinculis (quae nihil sunt quam captiosa Satanae retia) nos
eruet. Quibuscunque ergo Christus luce Evangelii sui affulget, non dubium est
quin ab omnibus eos laqueis expediat quibus se per superstitionem induerant.
Christus Evangelii sui luce affulget, non dubium est quin ab omnibus eos
laqueis expediat quibus se per superstitionem induerant; that is, As many then
as Christ illuminateth with the light of his Gospel, no doubt but he sets them
free from the suares into which they had engaged themselves by superstition.
Without insisting upon all the words which he changes, or adds, or leaves
out. He alters Calvin's question, whose discourse I have therefore set in the
Margin, that the Reader may see that he speaks of Monastical vows, which he
affirms to be void, when by the light of the Gospel they appear to be contrary
to the Christian liberty purchased by Christ unto his Church. Whereas this
Gentleman makes use of that passage to make Calvin absolve subjects of their
allegiance to their Sovereigns. Where is conscience? Where is sincerity? Will
Jesuits use such pious frauds to make proselytes? Habeat jam Roma pudorem.

I cannot pardon this Gentleman his prevarication about Calvin, though I should
make a digression for it; for is it not good sport to see him defend Calvin
when he takes upon him to defame him? For having accused Calvin of Delicacy and
Epicureisme in his behavior, he brings for a witness Florimond de Remond, a
Gentleman Page 7.
of quality, who has left us (says he) the lively image of him. And when upon
that I would see what Florimundus Raymundus Historiae de nativ. Haer. etc. lib.
7. cap. 10.
lively image Florimond de Remond left us of him, I found that he gives this
account of his life. Calvin from his youth did macerate his body with fasting;
whither it was to preserve his health, and by that abstinence dissipate the
fumes of meagrom wherewith he was afflicted, or that he might thereby be the
more free to write, study, and exercise his memory. The truth is, that hardly
could a man be found that equalled Calvin in laboriousness. For twenty three
years that he lived at Geneva, he preached every day, and many times twice upon
Sundays: every week he made public lessons of Divinity, and every Friday he
was present at the Colloquy or Conference of Pastors which they call
Congregation. The rest of his time he employed in writing Books, or answering
letters of diverse persons.

Well, Sir Jesuit, do you tax Calvin of Epicureisme after your confreres, and
bring convincing proofs against it? What discipline must ye expect from your
Superiors at Douay for thus betraying their cause? It is well if you can escape
the Chamber of Meditations. In the mean while all those serpentine Geneva
Rabbis, that conquering Legion of the right cockatrice kind, against These are
his words Page 48, and 49.
whom you rail so emphatically, will give you thanks for your real help.

The Adversary having done with Calvin, falls upon Beza, a man for whom I am
less partial then for any of the Reformed Divines, herein heir of my Reverend
Fathers dislike of him for dashing the fair hopes of agreement in Religion in
the Colloquy of Poissy by his immoderate behavior. But to lay a charge upon
Beza's Doctrine about the point of the authority of Kings, and obedience of
subjects, he should have taken allegations out of Beza's undoubted Writings,
not out of pieces without name, ascribed to him by his enemies. Such is
Eusebius Philadelphus: Such is the treatise de jure Magistratus, which this
very Adversary says to be ascribed by some to Hottoman. Such is also Junius
Brutus; concerning whom we stand to the Oracle of our English Solomon King
JAMES in his Defense of the right of Kings against Cardinal Perron. Junius
Brutus, when he objects unto us, is an unknown Author, and perhaps some of the
Roman Church has made it to make Protestants odious unto Princes. The
conjectures of that great King are more certain then the affirmations of the
Jesuits.

As for Beza's siding with the Princes of the blood that were in arms against
the Court, which our Adversary objects unto him, and proves it by some letters
of his, and the testimony of Baldwin his enemy; the quality of that charge
depends upon the nature of that quarrel, of which something must be said before
he and I part.

For Paraeus, we are against him about the point of obedience as much as our
Adversary. His son seeing what Philip. Paraeus Append. ad Romans 13. Loquitur D.
parens meus cum Politicis and Iurisconsultis non de Rege absoluta potestate
induto, sed sub condition admisso. Page 23.
general opposition his Doctrine found among the Protestants, and that the Book
was burnt in England by authority, made this excuse for his father, Valeat
quantum valere potest; My father speaks with the Politics and Iurisconsults,
not of a King invested with absolute power, but admitted upon conditions.
Paraeus considerd not how the world was abroad, but how it was in his country.

The Adversary quarrelleth also with Gracerus, but has nothing else to say
against him, but that he is against the Antichrist. Coercenda gladio est
Antichristi ambitio, which he expounds thus, That Antichristian ambition is to
be cut off with the sword, that is, all Princes and Prelates. It seems the man
takes part with Antichrist since he taxes Gracerus for being against him. But
that Gracerus would cut off Princes and Prelates because he would repress the
ambition of Antichrist, is a great inconsequence. Observe this Gentleman's
learning, the Verb coercere signifies repress, which is a modest term of
Gracerus. But our Adversary translates it cut off; showing himself to be as
great a scholar in Latin, as he approved himself to be in Greek, when he
translated (...), an eloquent Oration. And that his head is much like that upon
a clipped sixpence, it is a little head without letters.

His objection of the rebellious Maxims of some Scots, Page 47, and seq.
as Knox and Buchanan, is now stale and out of season, since they have been
generally condemned and exploded by Protestants both on this and the other side
of Rivet. Castiga. Not. in Epist. ad Balsac. cap. 13. number. 14. sub finem.
the sea. The judgment of the learned Rivet to this purpose is ingenuous and
prudent, that these things must be imputed to the hot and audacious brains of
the Scots, then heated again by persecution. Let me add, that when the
persecution was pretty well overcome, they were kept in their heat by sharp
contention. There being then a Royal Bastard, who pretending that his Father
had once a design to make him King, followed that design very close, yet
closely, raising all the troubles he could against the Kings Widow, and his
legitimate Heir: for which the difference of Religion happening about that
time, gave him fair play; for all his ambitious projects were cloaked with the
furtherance of the cause of the Gospel. This was the man that countenanced that
divinity of rebellion.

Which that it may not be imputed to the Religion, I desire all judicious heads
maturely to ponder Dr. Rivet's wise observation; That the Scots of a hundred
and five Kings, which they reckon till Queen Mary, had deposed three, expelled
five, and killed thirty five. I demand then whether all those excesses must be
imputed to the doctrine and zeal of Religion. If so, let the Roman Catholics
look how they shall defend their Religion which then was prevalent. But if that
must be imputed to the bold and stirring Genius of the Nation, why shall the
troubles risen under the Queen Regent of Scotland and her daughter Mary be
ascribed to Religion, and Reformation, supposed the cause, not the occasion, by
the managing of crafty self-seeking men, of the distempers of the State, and
the intemperance of pens? Yea, it shall be found, as Dr. Rivet observes, (and
we find it now) that the light of the Evangelical truth did very much mitigate
the fierceness of the Nation; and that those disorders, as turbulent as they
were, are not comparable to those that were in former times in Scotland: which
as we are too ingenuous to ascribe to the Religion of those days, the Papists
ought to show the like ingenuity about the excesses of wits and swords since
the coming of the Reformation.

It were to no purpose to follow all the objections of this Gentleman out of
Protestant Writers; since whether they be well or ill alleged, our belief is
not engaged in their ill opinions, nor our reputation concerned in the wrong
done to them by perverse and unfaithful allegations. I have discovered so many
of them, that the Reader may well mistrust his other citations. If all were as
they are represented, they are but so many Doctors opinions strengthened with
no approbation of persons authorized for it. And to speak after our Most
Excellent King JAMES in his Defense of the right of Kings. I would not defend
all that some private men could say. It is enough that in our Religion there is
no rule to be found that prescribes rebellion, nor any thing that dispenses
subjects from the oath of their allegiance, nor any of our Churches that
receive that abominable doctrine.

This is spoken with a Royal brevity, and an imperious weight, which both
confutes all objections in that kind, and together silently retorts upon the
Roman Catholics, that among them they have rules that prescribe rebellion, and
an authority dispensing from the oath of allegiance, and that their Church is
commanded to receive that abominable doctrine.

Blessed be God, our doctrine about the point of obedience never gave yet
jealousy to Kings, though of contrary Religion. Whereas the Sovereign Courts
of the same Princes have expelled the Jesuits for teaching and practicing the
murder of Kings, and condemned the Popes Bulls to be torn for sowing rebellion
among the people. Is it not a matter for no less patience then that of God, to
see those that teach rebellion by the public express laws of the head of
their Church, now to charge our Churches with rebellion for some words of
private men, either falsely imputed unto them, or disallowed by the generality
of the Protestant Churches? Is it for him that has cut the purse to cry, stop
the thief? Must the Doctors of high treason lay an action of rebellion against
us, in effect because we will not be rebels with them, and acknowledge a King
above our King? for when all is said, that is the ground of the quarrel, and we
can buy our peace with them at no other rate. But before I lay the charge
against them, at which I long to be, I must make an end of answering the charge
which they lay against us.

CHAP. II. Whether the Reformation of Religion ought to be charged with
Rebellion. Reflections upon the actions of the Protestant party.
THe Charge of Rebellion which the Adversary lays against us, consists in
two things, The Doctrine of our Divines and the actions of our party,
especially in the beginnings of the Reformation. I have answered the first part
of the Charge, and showed that either the Charge is false, or it is nothing to
us, because we have no dependence upon the Authors charged with it. To which I
will add but this; That if as much pains was taken to set forth all that those
very men have written for obedience, as this Gentleman has taken to make them
speak treason, it would be far more in bulk, and more home, then all that the
Roman Catholics have written or dare write of that subject.

page 72. Azor. Moral. Instit. part 1. lib. 8. cap. 13. Eos omnes qui erant
haeretico aliqua ratione obstricti jurisjurandi seu fidelitatis feu alterius
pactionis and promissionis liberari.
Our Adversary charge Luther, the first Instrument in Gods hands for the work
of Reformation in Germany, that he was the great Grandfather of the prodigious
Doctrines against the State, Dignity, and Persons of Kings and Princes. Why?
Did he rebel against his Princes? Did he stir rebellion in other Princes
States? Did he teach, as the Jesuit Azorius did since, that all that were tied
with any bond of oath or fidelity, or any other paction or promise to an
Heretic, were freed of it? Then, if ever, it was the right time for him to
preach that doctrine, if he had approved of it, when Commons and Corporations
embraced the Reformation, many of them without the Princes consent. Nay, he did
always labor most earnestly and successfully to put down rebellions when any
arose. What was then his rebellion? Marry, he preached against the tyranny and
superiority of the Bishop of Rome, says our Adversary, and persuaded page 73,
and 74.
the people not to render to him any obedience. This was the rebellion, the
most horrid of all rebellions in the eyes of Jesuits. I enter not into the
question of the Popes superiority. My Adversary keeping himself to matters of
fact, I must keep my self to it also.

Luther was a man of an invincible spirit; one that spared neither King nor
Pope, when the Truth of God which he announced was opposed: And in his
expressions he was (...), one that spoke down right without mincing. Yet as
stout as he was, I find that he behaved himself with great modesty and patience
with the Pope for a great while: And in all his Addresses to him for redress of
the horrible abuses reigning in the Church, he used a Christian humility and
submission to the Popes pleasure, if his Holiness would have hearkened to
conscience and reason, and remembered the duty of his place. But when the Pope
and the great Clergy of Germany used him with the utmost scorn and inhumanity,
he paid them in the same coin. The Pope burnt his Theses, and he burnt the
Popes Decretals in the market place; and writ against the highest of the Roman
Clergy in high terms, a crime much exaggerated by our Adversary. This is all
the rebellion (if they call it so) that either Luther or the beginning of the
Reformation can be charged with. For the Reformation was embraced by many
Princes and Imperial Cities so freely and so quietly, that the Adversary could
find no ground to object any other rebellion unto them but that against the
Bishop of Rome, who in effect was neither their Bishop nor their Prince.

So that which our Adversary (after others) objects against Luther, That he
exhorted the Emperor, Kings page 74. Luther in Sylvestriu^ Pruratem. Si sures
surca, si latrones gladio, si haereticos igne plectimus, cur non magis istos
magistros perditionis, hos Cardinales, hos Papas, and totam istam Romanae
Sodomae colluviem quae Ecclesiam Dei sine fine corrumpit, omnibus armis
impetimus?
and Princes to fall upon the Pope and Cardinals, and all the filth of the
Roman Sodom, is nothing to the question in hand. For there Luther speaks not of
any insurrection of subjects against their lawful Sovereign, but of the
justice which the Princes of Christian Provinces ought to exercise against the
Tyrants and Corruptors of the Church. He had tried all means of Piety, Charity,
Equity, and Reason. When all would not serve, and that the Pope and the
Cardinals would neither reform the Church nor themselves, nor admit of an
Appeal to the Council for that great Work, then Luther brake out into these
words: Mihi vero videtur, si ita pergat furor Romanistarum, nullum esse
reliquum remedium quam ut Imperator, Reges and Principes vi and armis accincti,
aggrediantur has pestes Orbis terrarum, remque non jam verbis sed ferro
decernant. That is, It is my opinion, if the fury of the Romanists continue,
that there is no remedy remaining but that the Emperor, Kings, and Princes who
are furnished with force and arms, should take these plagues of the world in
hand, and decide the quarrel no more with words but with the sword. And then
follow the words written in our margent which are a continuation of his
exhortation to the Higher Powers to make use against them of the sword of
Justice. This is better then to set on private men to stab them, or stir the
rabble to fall upon them according to the maxims and practice of the Jesuits.
But Luther went the right way to work, when he exhorted those to whom God had
committed the power of the sword, to make use of it to repress the tyranny and
oppression both spiritual and civil used in their Dominions by a foreign
usurped power; and the rather, because the Emperor and the Princes had been
very earnest with the Pope to remove by his Pastoral care all the causes of
complaint.

It is objected against Luther and his party, that they entered into a
Confederacy of defensive arms at Smalcald; that Luther himself made a book
contra duo Mandata Caesaris, against two Edicts of the Emperor* And that in
his book de bello contra Turcas, he denied the Emperor to be the Head of the
Christian Commonwealth: But to judge aright of that Confederacy, and of the
opinions of the German Divines and Lawyers about the Emperors Rights, and of
the Wars of that Age between the Emperor and the Princes of the Empire, we
must consider the constitution of the Empire of Germany. And to that end look
to their Magna Charta which is Bulla aurea made under the Emperor CHARLES IV.
and Capitulatio Melchior Goladast Tom. 3. page 424. Quod si nos ipsi (inquit
Imperator) quod absit, aut quisquam Successorum nostrorum, quod non speramus,
processu temporis aliquo huic nostrae statutioni aut ordinationi contravenire
voluerit aut eam retractare, aut alio quoris modo violare praesumpserit,
praesentium literarum authoritate and potestatis regiae plenitudine ex certa
Majestatis nostrae scientia, nec non cum consensu and beneplacito praefatorum
sacri Romani Imperii principum Electorum in robur perpetuae firmitatis
sancivimus, ex tunc tam ipsi Electores quam caeteri Principes, Ecclesiastici
and Saeculares, Praelati, Comites, Barons, Nobiles, and Communitates sacri
nostri Imperii, universi ac singuli, praesentes and suturi, licitum habeant
sine Rebellionis aut Infidelitatis crimine resistendi ac contradicendi nobis
and Successoribus nostris Romanorum Regibus vel Imperatoribus in perpetuam
libertatem.
Caesarea anno 1356. Whereby, if the Emperor or the King of the Romans violate
any of the Rights of the Subject established by that Capitulation, It is
declared to be lawful for the Electors, Princes, Prelates, Nobles, and
Commons, either jointly or severally, to resist them without crime of Rebellion
or Infidelity.

Three hundred and fifty years before that, a German Pope Gregory V. had
brought in the Institution of the Electors, as the Centuriators of Magdeburg
report. But Aventinus and Onuphrius more credibly make it of later date, after
the death of Frederick II. whom Pope Innocent IV. had persecuted to death; and
the Empire being much weakened by the loss of that great Emperor, to weaken him
more yet, either Innocent IV. or his Successor Alexander III. procured seven
perpetual Electors, whose Interest should be to keep always the Emperors low
to keep themselves high. Since that time the Emperors Authority in many parts
of Germany is little more then a title, and a respect without power; for the
Electors may both elect and depose him. They and the other Princes of the
Empire govern their Signories, and pay nothing to him but homage. And the
Cities called Imperial are they that have the greatest exemptions from the
Imperial Laws. Wherefore the exclamations of the Adversaries about the
resistance of the Elector of Saxony, with other Princes of the Empire, and some
Imperial Cities against the Emperor, and about the words of German Divines or
Jurists to that purpose; are very ignorantly or maliciously urged as
rebellious; for neither the words nor the actions of those Germans ought to be
weighed in the balance of the duty of other subjects to their absolute
Sovereignes.

Luther who was always very rigid for the subjection of every soul to the
higher powers, and had written a book expressly of that subject, had much ado to
be persuaded to consent to a confederacy of defensive arms against the
Emperor; who being set on by the Court of Rome, oppressed the liberties of
Germany; and to suppress the growing Reformation took more cognizance of cases
belonging to the jurisdiction of the Princes, and cities of the Empire, then he
was allowed by the authentical capitulations, till* the learned in the Law
satisfied him about the Statutes of his Country, and his reason and conscience
showed him, that the Apostle commanding Christians to submit themselves to
every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, requires of them an obedience
proportioned to the constitutions of the States, of which they are members. Of
that consultation Sleidan gives this account.

Before they made the confederacy, Sleidan. Hist. lib. 8. ad an. 1531.
Priusquam soedus iniretur, in consilium adhibiti sunt, non Iurisconsulti modo,
sed Theologi quoque. Lutherus enim semper docuerat Magistratui non esse
resistendum; and exstabat ejus ea de re libellus. Cum autem in hac
deliberatione periti juris docerent legibus esse permissum resistere
nonnunquam, and nunc in eum casum de quo leges inter alia mentionem faciunt rem
esse deductam ostenderent, Lutherus ingenue profitetur se nescivisse hoc
licere: Et quia leges Politicas Evangelium non impugnat aut aboleat, uti semper
docuerit. Deinde quoniam hoc tempore tam dubio tamque formidoloso multa possint
accidere, sic ut non modo jus ipsum sed conscientiae quoque vis atque
necessitas arma nobis porrigat, defensionis causa foedus iniri posse dicit,
five Caesar ipse, sive quis alius forte bellum ejus nomine saciat.
they called to counsel, not only Jurists, but Divines also. For Luther had
taught always that the Magistrate must not be resisted, and a book of his
concerning that subject was extant. But when in that consultation the learned
in law showed that it was permitted by the laws to resist sometimes, and
demonstrated that at that time their business was come to that very case, of
which the laws make mention among other things; Luther did ingeniously profess
that he knew not that it was lawful: And because the Gospel does not impugn
or abolish the Politic laws, as he had always taught. Also because, the time
being so perilous and full of terror, many things might happen which would
put the arms in our hands, not only by the prescript of the law, but by the
force of conscience and necessity, he declared his opinion, that a defensive
League might justly be made whether the Emperor himself, or any other in his
name should make war against us. While they were thus met at Smalcald, the
Emperor sent letters to them, not to condemn or dissolve their meeting, as a
King of England or France would have done, for he knew that by the laws they
might meet to look to their common interest without him, yea and against him.
But to charge the Protestants to send help against the Turk, who was advancing
with a great army toward Germany. The Protestants answered, that because the
Emperor would grant them no peace at home, nor suspension of the decree of
confiscation against their estates for their Religion, and that they were in
daily expectation of proscription and hostile dealing from him, they could not
cut off their own sinews, and lay themselves open to his hostility to help him
against a foreign enemy. But if he would make all fiscal proceedings for the
matter of Religion to surcease till the time of the promised Council, and grant
them peace and safety at home, they would not only assist him against the Turk
with all their power, but serve him in all the public interests to which their
duty bound them. And this is that confeder^ (...) which the Adversary cries
down as the ^p^ (...) ^rn of Rebellion from that time to our days, how (...)
the equitable Reader judge.

If it be objected, that this abridging of the Emperors power was wrongfully
got from him, I will grant it: It was jus quod coepit ab injuria; a right that
began by wrong; yet confirmed by the Emperors with authentical Charters, and
strengthened by long prescription. The Emperor may thank the Popefor it, who
having an ancient jealousy of the Imperial rights in Italy, and not able to
suffer any King of the Romans, but themselves, have powerfully labored for
many ages to break the Emperors power every where. And it was by their
practices, that the constitution of the Electors and the Golden Bull was made,
and those great immunities given to the Princes of the Empire and Imperial
Cities, whereby the Emperor is remained a manacled Prince; so unable in most
parts of the Empire to stretch his hands upon the meanest persons that trouble
him, that he could never so much as secure Luther a poor Monk, though urged to
it by the most powerful and irresistible solicitations of the Court of Rome;
but Luther continued till death (about thirty years) destroying the Popes
interests in Germany, and all parts of Europe, and neither Pope nor Caesar
could touch him. Wonderful are the ways of Gods justice, that the Pope by
fomenting factions in the Empire, and breaking the Emperors power, did prepare
safety and facility for his enemies in the following ages, to make that great
breach in his Kingdom, and give that mortal wound to his power, of which it
shall bleed till it dye of it.

Against the Helvetian Reformation the Adversary says nothing, only he
arrayeth Zuinglius in a swaggering Page 3.
swash buckler habit, as if he had wrought Reformation with sword and buckler;
yet it was made quietly the preaching of the Gospel, and began at Zurick in the
year 1522. When Zuinglius was censured by the Bishop Sleidan.
of Constance his Ordinary for oppressing the Romish errors, he set sorth
Theses containing his doctrine, and the Senate of Zurick called together all
the Clergy of the Canton to confer about Religion, and requested the Bishop to
be present, or send some authorized by him. The Bishop sent Johannes Faber his
Vicar General, in whose presence the Consul invited all the assistants, if they
had any thing to oppose unto the Theses of Zuinglius that they would speak. And
Zuinglius having addressed the same invitation to the Vicar in particular, the
Vicar answered, that treating of Controversies was not fit for that place, and
that it belonged to the Council which should assemble shortly. After that many
words had past between them, when none appeared that had any thing to oppose,
the Senate made an Edict, that in all their dominions the Gospel should be
purely taught out of the Books of the Old and New Testament, and that humane
traditions should be banished. This was obeyed, and Reformation was established
without either sword or buckler. Neither do I read that Zuinglius was in arms
till eleven years after that five Gantons of contrary Religion suddenly invaded
that of Zurick, and put Zurick* men to a necessary but disorderly defense, in
which Zuinglius was slain. The Switzers had cantoned themselves in the year
1315. which was 200* years before the Reformation. Were I as unsincere as my
Adversary, I should charge the Roman Religion which then reigned with that
change of State.

From Zuinglius the Adversary passes to Calvin as the head of the French
Reformation, wherein he shows his great ignorance; for the Reformed Religion
was spread in France twenty years before Calvin was settled in Geneva, and well
nigh as soon as in Germany. The beginning of which must not be ascribed to one
Hugo, whom our Adversary knowsnot, nor any body else. But the truth is, that it
was in France long before it was in Germany, ever since the errors and tyranny
of the Court of Rome began to be opposed by the Valdenses, whose relics after
long persecutions by fire and sword, remained in the Vale of Cabrieres and
Marindol in Provence. It was from thence that Reformation was propagated,
encouraged by the happy progresses of Luther and Zuinglius. Wherefore the Popes
creatures perceiving whence that blow came upon the Roman Court, never left
soliciting Francis the I. of France, till they got an Edict for the
extirpating of them, which was executed with the utmost rigor.

And it was not for Religion that they were thus butchered, but merely to make
a sacrifice to the pride and cruelty of Rome. For as for their doctrine that
excellent King Lewis the XII. liked it so well, that to some that represented
it to him, and would incense him against them. He answered, that they were
better Christians then he and his Kingdom.

This was then the true Origin of the Reformation of France, the doctrine of
the Valdenses preserved in the relics of their descent: a doctrine
perfectioned since into a more Orthodox Confession conformable to the
Confessions of other Protestant Churches. So Calvin had no hand in that
Reformation, and no more had he with that of Geneva, or in turning that State
into an Aristocracy, as this Adversary upbraids him.

My business being to vindicate Reformation from the charge of rebellion, I
must take from the Reformers of Geneva that aspersion, that they expelled their
Bishop, and that they altered the constitution of that State, and both these
ascribed unto Calvin. It is a tradition received in England for a current and
undoubted truth. And upon that ground many fine and judicious inferences are
built. But it is like the stories of the Phoenix, and the singing of Swans
before their death, never the truer for the curious similies and ingenious
moralities that have Epistola Benedicti. Turretini ad Scultetum in Annal.
reformationis An. 1529.
been spun out of that stuff. What credit can we give to Histories of things
happened in the Indies two thousand years ago, if in things done to lately, and
so near us, gross mistakes go for uncontrollable truths? I say it is utterly
false thar Calvin was one of the planters of Reformed Religion at Geneva. False
also that he or the Reformers of Geneva turned their Bishop out of doors. And
false also that the Bishop went away upon the quarrel of Religion. Farel,
Froment, and Viret were they that wrought under God the conversion of the City
by their Sermons, and by a public conference with the Friars and Clergy of
Geneva, there being then no Bishop in that Town, who was fled eight months
before, seeing his conspiracy discovered, to oppress the liberties of the
City, by the help of the Duke of Savoy, for which his Secretary was hanged,
after he was gone; the said Bishop being hated before, for the rape of a
Virgin, and many adulteries with Citizens Wives. And it is most to be noted,
that they who after his flight See the book entitled, A view of the
Government, etc. by John Durel.
reformed the Civil Government, were strong Papists, and mainly opposed the
Reformation of Religion. To which something like was seen in England, not far
from that time: For the same English Bishops that most earnestly served Henry
the VIII. to make him acknowledged the Supreme Head of the Church of England,
Tonstal. Gardener. Bonner etc.
were afterward the greatest opposers of the Work of Reformation, and the
fiercest persecutors of the Protestants.

That the Church Discipline of Geneva was constituted without a bishop, is a
matter of another nature: Their Successors that continue it so to this day, are
of age, let them speak for themselves. It is enough for my present purpose,
that I have vindicated the Introduction of Reformation into that State, from
the crime of rebellion.

As long as their Bishop lived, they could not have another, and durst not
receive him, being manifestly convicted of selling the Cities liberty to the
Duke of Savoy: And when the Bishop died, they had used themselves to live
without a Bishop.

The first proof of our Adversary to indite the French Reformation of
rebellion, is the enterprise of Amboise An. 1560. But the Protestant Religion
had subsisted already forty years in France under the cross: And the
Professors of the same, though numerous, had never fought for their Religion,
but by their constancy in asserting the truth and suffering for it.

The enterprise of Amboise was a (...) quarrel of State, not of Religion; and
^^and^^ the Leader was a man most averse from the Protestant Religion: The
quarrel was this, King Francis the II. being about sixteen years of age, and
younger in understanding then years, was altogether governed by some Lords of
the House of Guise, then looked upon as strangers, and the Princes of the blood
were excluded from the businesses of State. These excluded Princes plotted to
surprise the Court at Amboise, and remove strangers from about the Kings
person, thinking themselves sufficiently warranted by their quality and
interest; that plot was cried Thuan. Hist lib. 24. Nullos ex conjuratis
convictos fuisse alicujus molitionis in Regemaut Reginam, sed tantu^ in exteros
sui in Aula tyrannice omnia administrabant nempe Guisianos.
down as rebellious, because it did not take effect; and being discovered, the
House of Guise did not fail to make it a matter of High Treason: although the
great Thuanus depose for the conspirators, that, None of them was convicted of
any attempt against the King and Queen, but only against strangers, who
governed all things about the Court in a tyrannical way. Who so knows the
interests of the Princes of the blood in France, will never call that attempt
treason. And if they could do so much by the right of their birth, their right
was never the worse for their being Protestants.

Francis II. being dead soon after, and his Successor Charles the IX. being
under age, the Princes of the blood had more right then before, to claim the
management of the public affairs, being entrusted with them by the Laws of the
Kingdom in the Kings minority, at least in conjunction with the Queen Mother.
And being excluded from it again they raised an Army to recover their right.
That right is not considered at all by Jesuits, that take upon them now a
hundred years after to censure their actions, but these Princes and their
followers are represented only as Heretics and Rebels that made War against
their Sovereigne.

After the King was out of minority, the Princes and their party, seeing that
the King was much incensed against them, and was of a dangerous and implacable
nature, durst not come near him; and the frequent Massacres, made them keep
themselves in a posture of defense, and repel force by force.

To be rid of them at once, the King used that famous and unparallelled
treachery of a feigned peace with the Protestants, sealed with the Marriage of
his Sister with the Head of their party, the first Prince of the blood next to
his Brothers, Henry King of Navarre; and having invited them to the Wedding, he
slew them in their beds. The number of the slain in cold blood on St.
Bartholomew's Day and since, within the space of three months, amounted to
about a hundred thousand. An action publicly commended by the Pope, and the
Murderers rewarded with many spiritual graces by his Holiness.

That the relics of the party after that general execution, took defensive
arms, as it is not to be commended, it is not to be wondered at neither: Men are
not Angels, and there is nothing more natural, then to strive for life.

The House of Guise having formed the League pretended for the destruction of
Heresy, but intended (...) them for the pulling down of the Royal House; King
Henry the III. perceiving this too late, made ^^e of Henry King of Navarre,
then the apparent Heir of the Crown, and of his Protestants Army, to oppose the
League.

That King being stabbed by a Monk soon after, the Head of the Protestant party
became lawful King, and his Protestant Army the Royal Army: yet their arms then
though never so just, were as much condemned by the Pope as before, and as much
taxed of rebellion. But that praise cannot be denied to their arms, that by
them, as Gods chief instruments, the rebellion of the League was defeated, and
the lawful King preserved, raised, and settled upon his Throne, whilst the
Jesuited Zealots expressed their zeal of religion, by attempting to stab him, and
were too good Catholics, to be good Subjects.

Since our Adversary alleges the words of King James of blessed and glorious
memory, and sets himself forth under the name of Philanax, a Lover of the King,
he must in duty stand to the judgment of that great and judicious King. This
Sentence his Majesty pronounces of that cause which this enemy calls a
Defense of the Right of Kings.
most unanswerable rebellion, page 14. I never knew yet (says the King) that
the French Protestants took arms against their King. In the first troubles they
stood only upon their defense. Before they took arms they were burnt and
massacred every where; and the quarrel did not begin for Religion, but because
when King Francis the II. was under age, they had been the refuge of the
Princes of the blood expelled from the Court, even of the Grandfather of the
King now reigning, and of that of the Prince of Conde, who knew not where to
take sanctuary: For which the present King has reason to wish them well. It
shall not be found that they made any other war, nay, is it not true that
King Henry the III. sent armies against them, to destroy them; and yet they ran
to his help, as soon as they saw him in danger? Is it not true that they saved
his life at Tours, and delivered him from an extreme peril? Is it not true that
they never forsook neither him nor his Successor, in the midst of the revolt
and rebellion of most part of the Kingdom, raised by the Pope and the greatest
part of his Clergy? Is it not true that they have assisted him in all his
battails, and helped much to raise the Crown again, which was ready to fall? Is
it not true that they which persecuted the late King (Henry the II.) enjoy this
day the fruits of the services done by the Protestants? who are now maligned
not for controversies of Religion, but because that if their advice was
followed, the Crown of the French Kings should no more depend on the Pope,
there would be no Frenchman in France, that is not the Kings Subject; there
would be no appeal to Rome of beneficial and matrimonial causes, and the
Kingdom should be no more tributary, under color of Annats, and the like
impositions. Even Cardinal Perron clears them from that imputation (of
rebellion) when he says that the doctrine of the deposition of Kings by the
Pope was received in France till Calvin: He does then silently acknowledge that
Kings were ill served before, and that those whom he calls heretics, having
brought forth the Holy Scripture to the public sight, have made the Right of
Kings known, which was oppressed before. Such a judgment is of great weight,
coming from a wise King, who was truly informed of the businesses of his
neighbors: Certainly, si perito in art sua credendum est: If a skilful Artist
must be believed, when he speaks within the compass of his Art, none can
decide better what rebellion is, and what is not, then a great Monarch, jealous
of the Royal Authority, skilled in the duty of Subjects, and one that had a
long struggling with rebellious spirits.

This Sentence was pronounced by his Majesty in the year 1615, when France had
peace at home and abroad.

Two years after they had the like testimony of their fidelity from their own
King, by a Letter of his Majesty written to their Deputies assembled in a Synod
at Vitre, in these terms: Nous avons receu bien volontiers les nouuelles
assurances and protestations que vous nous auez faites de vostre fidelite and
obeissance* En laquelle persistans comme vous devez and que vous auez sait par
le pass, vous pouuez aussi estre assurez que nous aurons toussours soin de
vous maintenir and conserver en tous les avantages qui vous ont este accordez.
These Letters were printed and published with other Declarations.
We have received with good satisfaction, the new assurances and protestations
which you have made unto us of your fidelity and obedience: In the which if you
persist as you ought and as you have done before, you may also be assured, that
we shall always have a care to maintain and preserve you in all the advantages
which have been granted unto you. These Letrers bear the Date of May 29. 1617.
from Paris.

Cardinal d'Ossat speaking to Cardinal Aldobrandin, Nephew to Clement the VIII.
about the execrable murder attempted by John Chastel against Henry the IV. of
France, told him, that if Sil y avoit lieu a de tells assassinats ce seroit aux
Heretics a les purchasser and executer, qu'il a quittez and abandonnez and
qui avoyent a se craindre de luy and toutesois ils n'ont rien attente contre
luy ni contre aucun de cinq de nos Roys ses predecesseurs quelque boucherie que
leurs Majestez ayent fait desdits Huguenots. Card. d'Ossat. Epist. 8. a Mr. de
Velleroy, *Ian. 25. 1595. page 77.
such attempts were allowable, they were more proper to execute for the
Heretics (so he is pleased to call the Protestants) whom the King has left
and forsaken, and who have reason to stand in fear of him: and yet they never
attempted any such thing, neither against him, nor against any of the Kings,
his predecessors, what slaughter soever they have made of the said Hugenots.

But the greatest testimony of their fidelity, is that famous Edict of Nantes,
which was expressly made to reward them with privileges, for their constant
adhering to their King, in the long calamities of France.

Seeing then that the French Protestants were acknowledged good Subjects by
their Sovereigne, and have deserved by their signal loyalty and long services
to the Crown, those few privileges which they hardly enjoy; it is evident how
unjust the extraordinary expostulation is, That the Roman Catholics have not
the public allowed exercise of Religion in England, as the Protestants have in
France. There is great reason for that differing dealing. The French
Protestants have deserved that liberty and more, by their constant fidelity and
valor, having maintained their King with their purses, and defended him with
their swords, so many years, against the Jesuitical party, who had made a
League with strangers to keep him from the Crown, and take away his life. It is
known that the Grandfather of the King now reigning, was set upon the Throne by
the swords of his Protestant Subjects: Let the Jesuitical party of England show
the like service to their Sovereigne, whereby they deserve the like recompense.
What care did they take of the preservation of their Sovereigns lives, Queen
Elizabeth and King James? How did they defend their Crowns against the claim
and invasion of strangers? Did they further or hinder the return of our
gracious King now reigning? If some few Roman Catholics have fought for our
glorious King and Martyr Charles the I. their whole party fares the better by
it now, and finds the King a grateful Prince, remembering good deeds, and
forgetting injuries: Then the difference of their doctrine in point of
Government, ought to make a great difference in the allowance of the public
exercise of their Religion. The Jesuited Catholics acknowledge another
Sovereigne over their King, both for the Spiritual and the Temporal, a
foreign power, which can dispense them of their Allegiance to him. The
Protestants acknowledge no Sovereigne above their King, and give no jealousy
by their doctrine to the Roman Catholic Princes and States under which they
live, as the Jesuits have done, even to Roman Catholics, by whom they have
been expelled out of their Dominions, as Teachers of a doctrine tending to
rebellion.

Of the troubles that followed, who so will give an impartial judgment, must
look upon the condition of the French Protestants since King Henry IV. bought
his peace with the party of the League by the change of his Religion. That King
seeing himself obliged to provide for the safety of his Protestant subjects, by
whose arms and long service he had been preserved in his adversities, and
finally placed upon the Royal Seat, gave them some places of strength in
several Provinces of the Kingdom for certain years; and by an Edict (called
the Edict of Nantes) the free enjoying of their estates, and the open exercise
of their Religion, with some limitation of places.

Of the privileges granted them by that Edict, there were many infractions,
especially since the death of Henry the IV. who both by his authority, and
together by his ancient interest in the Protestant party, kept all quiet, and
preserved them from those wrongs to which the weakest are always obnoxious.

The term being expired of the grant of those places, King Lewis the XIII.
renewed it for four or five years, after which he would have them out of their
hands. That they were to be restored upon the Kings demand, was the opinion of
grave Protestants, the severest exactors of the obedience of subjects to the
Sovereign; of my Reverend Father especially, who being eminent and respected in
the party, was a principal means to keep the Protestant Churches on this side
Loire in peace and in duty to their King, for which his Majesty sent him a
considerable sum of money, which he refused to take, saying, that he could be
loyal to his King without being bought.

But the necessity of their keeping those places, seemed to be justified by the
reason of the first grant, which was to preserve them from the violence of
their bitter enemies; for (said they) if so many places of safety could not
keep us safe from their insolence, what will become of us when we shall lie
naked of all defense, and exposed to the will of that party which used us
before like sheep appointed to the slaughter?

Upon those terms they were when the Assembly of The Assembly of Rochel was not
an Ecclesiastic but* a Politic Assembly, for those two sorts of Assemblies
they were allowed to keep, but now the Ecclesiastic only is allowed.
Rochel being once licenced by their King, and since forbidden, sat against
his will, and took order for a defensive war. Whereupon, my Reverend Father
returning from the National Synod of Alais, of which he had been President,
writ a Letter to them, which I insert here as very pertinent to my purpose.

Gentlemen,
I do not write to you to power my sorrows into your bosom, or to entertain you
with my private crosses: upon that I need no comforter, accounting it a great
honor, that in the public affliction of the Church, God would have me to
march in the front. And I would account it a great happiness if all the storm
should light on my head, so that I were the only sufferer, and the Church of
God should enjoy peace and prosperity. A more smarting care has moved me to
write to you, and forced me to go beyond my nature, which was always averse
from meddling with public businesses, and from moving out of the sphere of my
proper calling. For seeing the general body of the Church in eminent danger,
and upon the brink of a dismal precipice, it was not possible for me to keep
silence. Nay, I cannot be silent in this urgent necessity, without drawing upon
me the guilt of insensibility and Cruelty toward the Church of God. And I am
full of hope that while I deliver my mind to you about public businesses, my
domestic affliction will free me from jealousies in your opinion. And if I be
not believed, at least I shall be excused. Indeed it does not become me to take
upon me to give counsel to an assembly of persons chosen out of the whole
Kingdom to bear the burden of the public affairs in a time so full of
difficulties; yet I think it useful for you to be truly informed what the
sense is, and what the disposition of our Churches None could have a more
particular knowledge of it, then he who was lately come from the National Synod
in the South of France, where he made it his business to observe the posture
of the affairs of the Protestants.
by persons that have a particular knowledge of it.

The question being then, whether you ought to separate your Assembly to obey
his Majesty, or keep together to give order to the affairs of the Churches, I
am obliged to tell you, that the general desire of our Churches is, that it may
please God to continue our peace in our obedience to his Majesty. And that
seeing the King resolved to make himself obeyed by the force of his arms, they
trust, that you will do your best to avoid that storm, and rather yield unto
necessity, then to engage them in a war which most certainly will ruin most
part of our Churches, and will bring us into a trouble, of which we see the
beginning, but can see no end. By obeying the King you shall take away the
pretense used by those that set his Majesty on to persecute us: and if we must
be persecuted, all that fear God desire that it may be for the profession of
the Gospel, and that our persecution may truly be the cross of Christ. In one
word, I can assure you, Gentlemen, that the greatest and best part of our
Churches wishes for your separation, if it may be with the safety of your
persons: yea, that many of the Roman Church desiring the public peace, are
continually about us, beseeching and exhorting us that we do not by casting our
selves headlong, involve them in the same ruin.

Hereupon I need not represent unto you how terribly and generally our poor
flocks are frighted and dismayed, casting their eyes upon you, as persons that
may procure their rest, and by yielding to the present necessity, blow away the
storm hanging over their heads. Many already have forsaken the land, many have
forsaken their Religion; whence you may judge what dissipation is like to
follow, if this exasperation go on further.

No more do I need to recommend unto you to have a tender care of the
preservation of our poor Churches, knowing that you would choose death, rather
then to draw that reproach upon you, that you have hastened the persecution of
the Church, and destroyed that which the zeal of our Fathers have planted, and
that you have put this State in confusion.

I am not ignorant, that many reasons are alleged to persuade you to continue
your Assembly, they tell you that the King has granted it; but for that grant
of his Majesty you can show no Warrant, nor any written Declaration, without
which all promises are but words in the air: for Kings believe they have power
to forbid that which they have permitted, and to revoke that which they have
granted, when they judge it expedient for the good of their affairs. Neither is
there any of you, after he has sent his servant, or given him leave to go to
some place, that thinks not that he has power to call him back. Sovereign
Princes especially, are very unwilling to keep their promises, when they have
been extorted.

Also great number of grievances and contraventions to the Kings Edicts are
represented unto you, which complaints, to our great grief, are too true. But
that I may not urge that we have given occasion to many of those evils our own
selves, the difficulty lies not in representing our griefs, but in finding the
remedies. Consider then whether the subsistence of your Assembly can heal all
these sores; whether your sitting can give a shelter to our Churches, provide
all things necessary for a war where the parties are so unequal, raise forces,
and make a stock to pay them; Whether all the good that your sitting can
produce can countervail the dissipation of so many Churches which lie open to
the wrath of their enemies: Whether when they are fallen you can raise them
again: Whether in the evident division that is amongus, you are able to rally
the scattered parts of that divided body, which if it were well united, yet
would be too weak to stand upon the defensive.

Pardon me, Gentlemen, if I tell you that you shall not find all our
Protestants inclined to obey your resolutions; and that the fire being kindled
all about you, shall remain helpless beholders of the ruin which you have
drawn on our heads. Neither can it be unknown to you, that many of the best
quality among us, and best able to defend us, openly blame your actions,
holding and professing, that suffering for this cause is not suffering for the
cause of God. These making no resistance, and opening the gates of their
places, or joining their arms with the Kings, you may easily judge what loss
and what weakening of the party that will be. How many of our Nobility will
forsake y^u, some out of treachery, some out of weakness? Even they who in an
Assembly are most vehement in their votes, and to And so it proved.
show themselves zealous, are altogether for violent ways, are very often they
that will revolt and betray their brethren. They bring our distressed Churches
to the hottest danger, and there leave them, going away after they have set the
house on fire.

If there be once fighting or besieging of our towns, whatsoever the issue may
be of the combat or the siege, all that while it will be hard to keep the
people animated against us, from falling upon our Churches, which have neither
retreat nor defense. And what order soever the Magistrates of contrary Religion
take about it, they shall never be able to compass it.

I might also represent unto you many reasons out of the state of our Churches,
both within and without the Kingdom, to show you that this stirring of yours
is altogether unseasonable, and that you set sail against wind and tide. But
you are clear-sighted enough to see it, and to consider in what posture your
neighbors are, and from whence you may look for help; whether among you the
virtue and the concord, and the quality of the heads is grown or diminisht.
Certainly this is not the time when the troubling of this pool can heal our
diseases. And certain it is, that if any thing can help so much weakness, it
must be the zeal of Religion, which in the time of our fathers has upholden
us, when we had less strength, and more virtue. But in this cause you shall
find that zeal languishing, because most of our people believe that this evil
might have been avoided without breach of conscience. Be ye sure that there
will be always disunion among us, every time that we shall stir for civil
causes, and not directly for the cause of the Gospel.

Against that it is objected, that our enemies have determined our ruin; that
they undermine us by little and little; that it is better to begin now, then to
stay longer. Truly that man should be void of common sense, that doubted of
their ill will. And yet when I call to mind our several losses, as that of
Lectoure, Privas, and Bearn, I find that we ourselves have contributed to
them, and it is no wonder that our enemies take no care to remedy our faults,
and that they join with us to do us harm. But hence it follows, not that we
throw the helve after the hatchet, and set our house on fire our selves,
because others are resolved to burn it, or take in hand to remedy particular
losses by means weak to redress them, but strong and certain to ruin the
general. God, who has so many times diverted the counsels taken for our ruin,
has neither lost his power, nor altered his will. We shall find him the same
still, if we have the grace to wait for his assistance, not casting our selves
headlong by our impatience, or setting our mind obstinately upon
impossibilities. Take this for certain, that although our enemies seek our
ruin, they will never undertake it openly, without some pretense, other and
better then that of Religion, which we must not give them. For if we keep our
selves in the obedience which subjects owe to their Sovereign, you shall see,
that while our enemies hope in vain that we shall make our selves guilty by
some disobedience. God will give them some other work, and afford us occasions
to show to his Majesty that we are a body useful to this State, and put him in
mind of the signal services that our Churches have done to the late King of
glorious memory. But if we are so unfortunate, that while we keep our selves in
our duty, the calumnies of our enemies prevail, at least we shall get this
satisfaction, that we have kept all the right on our side, and made it appear,
that we love the peace of the State.

Notwithstanding all this, Gentlemen, you may and ought to take order for the
safety of your persons. For whereas his Majesty and his Counsel have said
often, that if you separate your selves, he will let our Churches enjoy peace,
and the benefit of his Edicts, it is not reasonable that your separation be
done with the peril of your persons. And whenever you petition for your safe
dissolution, I trust it will be easily obtained, if you make possible requests,
and such, as the misery of the time, and the present necessity can bear. In the
mean while you may advise before you part, what should be done, if
notwithstanding your separation, we should be oppressed, that order your prudence
may find, and it is not my part to suggest it unto you.

If by propounding these things unto you, I have exceeded the limits of
discretion, you will be pleased to impute it to my zeal for the good and
preservation of the Church. And if this advice of mine is rejected, as unworthy
of your consideration, this comfort I shall have, that I have discharged my
conscience, and retiring my self into some foreign Country, there I will end
those few days which I have yet to live, lamenting the loss of the Church, and
the destruction of the Temple, for the building whereof I have labored with
much more courage and fidelity then success. The Lord turn away his wrath from
us, direct your Assembly, and preserve your persons. I rest, etc.

From Sedan, Feb. 12. 1621.

When this Letter was read in the Assembly, some arose immediately and left it:
others continued to sit, and by their sitting turned these warnings into
prophecies. This Epistle will give to the judicious Reader an insight into the
affairs of that time and State; and together into the present question, which
is altogether of fact, whether and how far the French Protestants may be taxed
of disobedience against their Sovereign. For it is justified by this relation,
that when some of them resisted, they had the greatest temptation to it that a
just fear can present unto flesh and blood; and yet that even then they were
disavowed by the best and the most of their Church, and exhorted to their duty
by their Divines, which in points of conscience are the representative persons
of a party when they are solemnly met; and this was the sense of the National
Synod, of which this eminent Divine was President but two months before.

Here every wise and charitable Christian should lay David's doctrine to heart,
Psalm. 41. 1. (...) Blessed is he that considers with intelligence and judgment
him that is in a low condition. It is easy for us that enjoy prosperity under
a gracious King, to determine the point of passive obedience: not so for them
that groan under the sad burden of the Cross. Christian equity ought to pity
those that are exposed to the sad counsels of terror and despair.

I am not without suspicion, that when those places of safety were granted to
them by Henry the IV. their enemies in the Kings Counsel suggested or furthered
that grant for their undoing in the time to come; for they might well foresee,
that on the one side a wise King would not suffer long such a disease in his
own bowels as a party of his subjects armed with places of security against
him: and that on the other side, the party so secured, would not part with that
security for their Religion, Liberties, and Lives, without committing such
actions as would make them obnoxious to their Sovereigns anger, and their ruin.

Three or four years after the rendition of all those places to the King, the
Duke of Montmorancy raised a party against him in Languedock, of which he was
Governor, hoping to find the Protestants which are numerous there, prepared
subjects for an insurrection; yet neither his solicitations, nor the resentment
of their sufferings could move them to assist him. But they joined universally
with the King, and did rare service in a battle where that Duke was defeated
and taken, and with him a Jesuited Bishop. And it is to be noted, that old
Marshal de la Force a Protestant, that hardly escaped the Massacre of St.
Bartholomew, was one of the chief Commanders of the Kings Army.

The Adversary gives a touch of the wars, begun in Germany, Bohemia, and
Hungary in the year 1619. of which he imputes the whole cause to the
Protestants. I undertake not to justify their errors; I say only, that whosoever
had looked with an ordinary judgment upon the face of those Countries, as they
were then divided and balanced between the Papist and the Protestant party,
might have foretold without a spirit of prophecy, that they should not enjoy a
long peace, there being so many free spirits animated to liberty and revenge by
the severity of the superstitious house of Austria toward their Protestant
subjects.

If Bethlem Gabor was a prodigious man, and a demi-Turk, as this man makes him,
it is nothing to us: as Religion justifies no man's faults, no man's faults can
condemn Religion. The notion under which I fancy that man, is, that of a
cannon-shot without bullet, which makes a great and short crack, and no effect.
All that the Adversary says of his dealing with the Turk, shows, that the
Protestants of Hungary were so oppressed by the Emperor, that they wished
themselves the Turks subjects. I pray God they do not so still, and with them
the other Protestants belonging to the Emperors hereditary Countries, seeing
their brethren that live under the Turk enjoy the freedom of their Religion.
The same reason might make the Protestants of the Empire slow to contribute
toward the war against the Turk; yet I hear they are as forward as any. It is
not declaiming against them (as the Adversary does) but using them like
Christians that will make them join heartily with the Emperor in that war. The
Spanish branch of the house of Austria has lost great part of Netherlands by
the inflexibleness of Philip the II. of Spain, to grant liberty of Religion to
his Protestant subjects. Let the German branch of Austria which uses the like
hardness, take heed of the like loss.

The Reformation of Religion in the United Provinces, is that upon which the
Adversary triumphs most, it being very apparent, to his thinking, that they
brought it in by shaking the Yoke of the King of Spain. But there is great
difference between reforming and establishing the Reformation. The first was
done by the Word, the second by the Sword, and the first forty years before the
second. The Reformed Religion was spread over the Seventeen Provinces many
years, before there was any thought of making an Union against the Spaniard;
neither was that Union made upon the score of Religion, but of State, for
maintaining their Franchises against the oppression of Spain; as it was
sufficiently justified, by their choosing of Francis Duke of Alenson, a Roman
Catholic, for their Prince; An. 1583.
which they would never have done, if the Union had ever marched under the
notion of Religion, as our Adversary page 32.
affirms, or if the Protestants had been the greater number. And that
Religion was not that which knit the party, and that there was no such thing in
the Articles, it appeared again when some Provinces forsook the Union, because
the Prince of Orange had put Religion among the causes of their defensive
War. If then the Union was unjust, the injustice must not be cast upon
Religion, since it was not made upon that interest; and if it was just, it
could not become unjust, by the accession of the interest of Religion, to the
other interests. So that which way soever the Adversary takes it, the Roman
Catholics bear an equal share with the Protestants, in the right and wrong of
the cause; Flanders and Brabant were as guilty as Holland and Zealand: The
difference is, that Flanders and Brabant were beaten to obedience by the Duke
of Parma, but Holland and Zealand proved too strong for him. The World beholds
with amazement the success of that Union, that these little Provinces should
bring their Prince to be their suppliant, that he might be allowed to quit his
right over them, and acknowledge them Free States, yea and to justify their
arms. It is that success, not their guilt, that makes our Adversary so
vehement against them; for ill Gamesters will be angry, when they are loosers.

Whether it be out of wilfulness or ignorance, this Gentleman mis-represents
that business, speaking of the King of Spain, as of an absolute Sovereigne of
the Low Countries, and of the people, as of mere Subjects. Philip the II. was
not their King, but their Count. But I have said something of that in my Clamor
Regii Sanguinis ad Caelum.
it is besides my business, to inquire how the rights of Sovereignty were
divided between the Prince and the People, which ought to be known before the
case be stated.

If the cause of Religion made the quarrel irreconcilable, Philip the II. may
thank himself for it. Strada the great friend of the Spaniard, tells us that
the Great Council of Spain represented to the King, that unless he granted
liberty of conscience to his Subjects of the Netherlands, the Country would be
lost, and the War perpetual; whereupon the King fell on his knees before a
Crucifix, and vowed that he would choose to lose his Dominions, rather then to
permit heresy, so he called the Protestant Religion. If many years after they
were offered to be secured for their Religion, as our Adversary says (which I
never heard before) it was page 39.
too late. It is an unequitable motion, and more advantageous for the Roman
party than ours, that excesses happening by the ordinary course of humane
businesses be not imputed to Religion. Oppression will make subjects to shake
off the yoke: And the prosperity of their defection keeps them from returning
to their former subjection.

From Holland the Adversary saileth into Scotland, and objects to us the Maxims
of Knox and Buchanan, and the disorders of that time. Of which I have said
enough in the Chapter before.

Of the Work of Reformation in England, and the public actions of that age
upon that interest, he speaks very scornfully; saying, that the Sect of Wicleff
lay page 71.
strangled in the cradle till King Edward the VI. his days, when some ends of
it were taken up again, and set out with more ostentation then ever, in that
Princes minority: and what rare effects of obedience were by that means
produced in Queen Mary's time, who brought them up again to the test, may be
easily read in our Chronicles. Wherein it is plain, that in the poor five years
of her Reign there was de facto more open and violent opposition and rebellion,
made by her own subjects, then Queen Elizabeth had in forty five years; or any
Prince before or since the Wicleffian doctrine, till the same smothered fire
broke out at last in good King Charles his time, to his utter ruin, and the
shaking of the very foundation of his Monarchy. Is this spoken like a most
observant Son, and in every honest man's esteem a pious, reverend, and learned
Priest of the Church of England, as this Author is termed in the Publishers
Epistle to the Reader? Certainly a Son and a Priest of the Church of England
would never have derived from Wickleff, but from the Holy Scripture, the
Religion of the Church his Mother; nor ascribed to her Religion the cause of
the late horrid rebellion. We see what a Son and Priest of the Church he is,
the tree is known by his fruit. What better figs can be gathered from such a
thorn? What better grapes from such a bramble? And what is that doctrine of
Wickliffe which he imputes to the Protestants, to the English especially?
Impios nullum dominium habere, That the ungodly page 70.
can have no right of dominion: Was that the doctrine set out with ostentation
in Edward the VI. his days? Or was any of the Protestants found tainted with
that doctrine, when Queen Mary burnt them, which this man calls bringing them
to the test? Sure it was not upon that ground that some oppositions were made
against that Queen. It is a wonder that she met with no more, considering how
her Father had declared by Act of Parliament her Mothers Marriage unlawful, and
her self incapable of the Crown, and had miserably encumbered the Title and
Succession of his Children.

That there was more open and violent opposition against her in her five years
reign from her own Subjects, then Queen Elizabeth had in forty five years, it
is, because they that went to question her Title, went to work plainly above
board; but no secret Jesuitical conspiracies to stabbe or poison her, as
against Queen Elizabeth.

The means she made to reduce her dissenting subjects in Religion, when they
made no opposition against her, was to make bon-fires of them. Three hundred of
those burnt-offerings she sacrificed unto God: A far greater number in her
poor five years, then that of the Popish Martyrs of disobedience, since the
death of that Queen, now above a hundred years. For no Papist was executed for
his Religion, all for disobeying the Laws of the Land, and many of them for
High Treason.

It is known that Queen Mary got the Crown by the assistance of the
Protestants of Suffolk, and what recompense she gave them for it. And, whereas
no fewer then eight rebellions did rise in Henry the VIII. his days, I find
not that the Protestants had a hand in any of them. All were raised by Papists;
and upon the score of Popery.

The principal color of our Adversaries malice is his detestation of the late
rebellion of England, and the execrable Murder committed in the sacred Person
of our gracious Sovereigne. Upon this he makes several Panegyricks, which are
very ill sorted with his Apology for Mariana, and justifying of the Jesuits
doctrine: Especially seeing that those actions were copied out upon their
principles. Felicia tempora quae te Moribus admorunt. Belike the curious pens
of the wise Statesmen and learned Scholars of England, had need to be supplied
by the boyish theames of a petty Novice of Doway, to learn the duty of
Subjects, and to abhor the guiltiness of rebellion.

The venom that lies under that oratory of invectives, is that all the
mischief is imputed to the Protestants of Integrity, a term which he uses like
a stirrupleather, longer or shorter, according to his occasions, yet always
treacherously to cast the faults of some particular person, or some heretical
Sect upon the generality of the Protestants. But let him know, that the King,
the Church, and the State, are Protestants of Integrity: and that the
parricides and troublers of our Israel will never give him thanks for calling
them Protestants: Also that we acknowledge them not for such, unless it be
upon a new score, because they protest against the Kings power and the duty of
their obedience.

When Jesuits or their Scholars, (as this Gentleman is) charge our Fanatics
with High Treason, they do but act that which they had prepared to do, if the
Powder Plot had taken. For they had a Declaration ready to indite the
Protestants of that Treason. For these men would story the just clamor against
them for their doctrine of rebellion and parricide, by laying the same charge
with loud words upon others.

We have great reason to call upon the Justice of God and Men to condemn the
unsincerity of this clamor. With what face or conscience can the Jesuits pass
a hard Sentence upon the late Rebels and Kingkillers, seeing that these furious
Zealots have neither taught nor done any thing in that horrible defection, but
what they had learned of the Jesuits? For what do they blame them for?

Is it for teaching that the Sovereigne Power lies in the Commons, and that
they may alter the Government of a State? Did they not learn Bellarm. de
Laicis, lib. 3. cap. 6. Potestas immediate est tanquam in subjecto in tota
multitudine, and si causa legitima adsit potest multitudo mutare regnum in
Aristocratiam, aut Democratiam, and e contrary.
that of Bellarmine? The Power (says he) is in the whole multitude, as in its
subject, and if there be a lawful cause for it, the multitude may alter the
Royal State into an Aristocracy, or Democracy, and so on the contrary.

Is it for saying that the people makes the King, and may unmake him, and
retains still the habit of power? Did they not learn of the same Bellarmine,
that, In the Kingdoms of Bellarm. de Council. lib. 2. cap. 19. In regnis
hominum potestas Regis est a populo, quia populus facit Regem. Ibid. cap. 19.
sect ad alteram. In Rebusp. temporalibus si Rex degeneret in tyrannum, licet
caput sit Regni, tamen a populo potest deponi and eligi alius. Et Recogn. lib.
de Laicis sect. Addo experientiam laudat Navarrum qui non dubitat affirmare
nunquam populum ita potestatem suam in Regem transfer quin illam sibi in
habitu retineat; ut in certis quibusdam casibus etiam actu recipere possit.
men, the Kings power is from the people, because the people makes the King.
And in temporal Commonwealths, if the King degenerate into a Tyrant, though he
be the Head of the Kingdom, he may be deposed by the people, and another
elected. And does he not praise Navarrus for saying, that the people never so
transfer their power to the King, but they retain it in the habit; so that in
some cases they may resume it.

Is it for saying that the Commonwealth may take defensive arms against the
King, and expel him? The Jesuit Suarez taught them that doctrine. Suarez
Defens Fid lib. 6. c. 19. sect. 17. Resp. ex sola rei natura spectatam prout
fuit apud Gentiles and nunc est inter Ethnicos habet potestatem se desendendi a
Tyranno Rege. and sect. 15. Si Rex legitimus tyrannice gubernat and regno
nullum aliud sit remedium nisi Regem expellere and deponere, poterit Resp. tota
publico and communi consensu civitatem and procerum Regem deponere.
The Commonwealth (says he) considered in her mere nature, and as it was
among the Gentiles, and as it is now among the Pagans, has the power to defend
her self against a Tyrant. If a lawful King govern tyrannically, and that
there be no other remedy for the Kingdom but to expel and depose the King, the
whole Commonwealth by the public and common consent of the Cities and the
Peers, may depose the King.

Or do the Jesuits inveigh against them for making a formal and aggressive
War against the King? They have no reason for it, seeing that the Jesuit
Mariana has set them down the whole course which they have followed. The
readiest Mariana lib. 6. de Rege, cap. 6. page 59. and 60. Expedita maxim and
tuta via est si publici conventus facultas detur communi consensu quid
statuendum sit deliberare, fixum ratumque habere quod communi sententia
steterit. Monendus in primis Princeps erit atque ad sanitatem revocandus, etc.
Qui si medicinam respuat, neque spes ulla sanitatis relinquatur, sententia
pronuntiata licebit Reip, ejus imperium detrectare primum, and quoniam bellum
necessario concitabitur, ejus defendendi consilia explicare, expedire arma,
pecunias in belli sumptus imperare populis: and si res feret neque aliter se
Resp. tueri possit, eodem defensionis jure, ac vero potiori authoritate and
propria Principem public hostem declaratum ferro perimere.
and the safest way (says he) if the people may meet in a public Assembly, is
to deliberate by common consent what is to be done, and then to keep inviolably
that which is agreed on by common consent. The Prince must first be admonish't
and exhorted to mend: But if he refuse the remedy, and there be no hope of his
mending, the sentence being once pronounced (against him) it will be lawful for
the Commonwealth to refuse to obey him. And because a War must necessarily
follow, the counsels how to maintain it must be set down, arms must be quickly
provided, and taxes laid upon the people, to bear the expenses of the War.
And if it be requisite, and the Commonwealth cannot otherwise maintain it
self, it shall be lawful, both by the right of defense, and more by the
Authority proper (to the people) to declare publicly the King to be the common
enemy, and then kill him with the sword.

Do the Jesuits look with horror upon that Court of Justice erected to try
the King? Let them remember that they had Mariana's warrant for it. That the
Commonwealth from which the Royal Power has its original, may when the case
requires Mariana Ibid. Certe a Rep. unde ortum habet regia potestas rebus
exigentibus Regem in jus vocari posse, and si sanitatem respuat Principatu
spoliari. Neque ita in Principem jura potestatis transtulit ut non sibi majorem
reservarit potestatem.
it, bring the King to judgment; and if he refuse to mend, deprive him of his
Sovereignty: For the Commonwealth has not so transferred the right of power
unto the Prince, but it has reserved a greater power to it self.

And why does our Adversary, an earnest defender of the Jesuits, exclaim so
much against the abominable parricide acted upon our Sacred Sovereigne, seeing
that the people which made War against him, held him to be a Tyrant, and
Lessius lib. 2. de Iustitia and Iure cap. 9. dubio 4. scribit. Verum Principem
qui tyrannus est ratione administrationis non posse a privatis interimi quamdiu
manet Princeps, -- primum a Repub. vel comitiis Regni vel alio habente
authoritatem esse deponendum, and hostem declarandum, ut in ipsius personam
liceat quicquam attentare.
it is the current opinion of the Jesuits, that a tyrant may be killed by any
private man. A true Prince (says Lessius) who is a tyrant by reason of his
administration, cannot be killed by a private person as long as he remains a
Prince, -- but he must first be deposed and declared enemy by the
Commonwealth, or the Parliament of the Kingdom, or some other, having
Authority, that it may be lawful to attempt any Suarez contra Regem Mag. Brit.
lib. 6. cap. 4. sect. 14. Post sententiam lutam domnino privatur regno ita ut
non possit justo titulo illud possidere; ergo ex tunc poterit tanquam tyrannus
tractari and consequenter a quocunque privato poterit intersici.
thing against his person. And Suarez says to the same purpose, that after the
Sentence given (against a King) he is altogether deprived of his Kingdom, so
that he can no more possess it with a just title. Wherefore from thenceforth
he may be used like a tyrant, and killed by any private person.

Neither ought the Jesuits to find fault with the public thanksgiving for
murdering the King, and making of the thirtieth of January a Thanksgiving Day,
seeing that the Jesuits of Paris showed the way for that to the Rebels in
England, for in the time of the French League, they made Solemn Thanksgivings
for the murdering of their King, as Pope Sixtus the V. did since at Rome, with
a vehement oration, in which he applies a Prophecy of the Incarnation of the
Son of God unto that Kings Murder.

So much the late Rebels of England have learned of you, Fathers Jesuits, and
no reason have you to chide your Scholars for following your doctrine and
example; how far you are yet before them, I will show before I have done with
you. For they do not make the crown of their Kings obnoxious to be kicked down
by the Pope, and have learned no further of your maxims, then will serve them
to kill the King, and keep the crown for themselves. And by their gross dealing
with their King, beheading him upon a Scaffold, whereby they have spun a halter
for their own necks, they have showed themselves not skilled in the mysteries
of King-killing, set forth by your Mariana, who to put a King to death with
less danger to the Actours, Mariana lib. 1. cap. 7. Hoc temperamento uti in hac
quidem disputatione licebit, si non ipse qui perimitur venenum haurire cogitur
quo intimis medullis concepto pereat: sed exterius ab alio adhibeatur, nihil
adjuvante co qui perin* endus est. Nimirum cum tanta vis est veneni in sella
eo, autveste delibuta, ut vim interficiendi habeat. Qua art a Mauris Regibus
invenio saepe alios Principes mislis donis, vest pretiosa, linteis, armis,
ephippiis, suisse oppressos.
then to stab him, will have him taken away by poison. Yet so merciful he is
to such a King, that least he should be accessory to his own death, by taking
the poison himself in his meat or drink, he will have a strong and subtle
poison put in a garment or saddle, which may spread its mortiferous quality
into his body. And for that he propounds the example of Moore Kings, who have
killed their enemies with poisoned presents. These Jesuitical curiosities about
a murder are too fine for our Northern Fanatics; but for going so far with
you as they have done, you have reason to cherish them.

When the businesses of the late bad times are once ripe for an history, and
time the bringer of truth has discovered the mysteries of iniquity, and the
depths of Satan which have wrought so much crime and mischief, it will be
found, that the late rebellion was raised and fostered by the arts of the Court
of Rome. That Jesuits professed themselves Independent, as not depending on
the Church of England; and Fifth-Monarchy-men, that they might pull down the
English Monarchy, and that in the Committees, for the destruction of the King
and the Church, they had their spies and their agents. The Roman Priest and
Confessor is known, who when he saw the fatal stroke given to our Holy King
and Martyr, flourished with his sword, and said, Now the greatest enemy that we
had in the world is gone.

When the news of that horrible execution came to Roan, a Protestant Gentleman
of good credit was present in a great company of Jesuited persons: where after
great expressions of joy, the gravest of the company, to whom all gave ear,
spoke much after this sort: The King of England at his Marriage had promised
Which is most false.
us the re-establishing of the Catholic Religion in England; and when he
delayed to fulfill his promise, we summoned him from time to time to perform
it: We came so far as to tell him, that if he would not do it, we should be
forced to take those courses which would bring him to his destruction. We have
given him lawful warning, and when no warning would serve, we have kept our
word to him, since he would not keep his word to us.

That grave Rabbis sentence agrees with this certain intelligence which shall
be justified whenever Authority will require it: That the year before the
Kings death, a select number of English Jesuits were sent from their whole
party in England; first to Paris, to consult with the Faculty of Sorbon, then
altogether Jesuited; to whom they put this question in writing: That seeing the
State of England was in a likely posture to change Government, whether it was
lawful for the Catholics to work that change, for the advancing and securing
of the Catholic Cause in England, by making away the King, whom there was no
hope to turn from his heresy? Which was answered affirmatively. After which
the same persons went to Rome, where the same question being propounded and
debated, it was concluded by the Pope and his Council, that it was both lawful
and expedient for the Catholics to promote that alteration of State. What
followed that Consultation and Sentence, all the World knows, and how the
Jesuits went to work, God knows; and Time the bringer forth of truth, will
let us know. But when the horrible parricide committed in the Kings Sacred
Person, was so universally cried down as the greatest villainy that had been
committed in many ages, the Pope commanded all the papers about that question
to be gathered and burnt: In obedience to which order, a Roman Catholic in
Paris was demanded a Copy which he had of those papers; but the Gentleman who
had had time to consider and detest the wickedness of that project, refused to
give it, and showed it to a Protestant friend of his; and related to him the
whole carriage of this negotiation, with great abhorrency of the practices of
the Jesuits.

In pursuance of that Order from Rome, for the pulling down both the Monarch
and the Monarchy of England, many Jesuits came over, who took several shapes,
to go about their work, but most of them took party in the Army. About thirty
of them were met by a Protestant Gentleman, between Roan and Diepe, to whom
they said (taking him for one of their party) that they were going into
England, and would take Arms in the Independent Army, and endeavor to be
Agitators.

A Protestant Lady living in Paris in the time of our late calamities, was
persuaded by a Jesuit going in scarlet, to turn Roman Catholic: When the
dismal news of the Kings Murder came to Paris, this Lady, as all other good
English Subjects, was most deeply afflicted with it. And when this Scarlet
Divine came to see her, and found her melting in tears, about that heavy and
common disaster; he told her with a smiling countenance, that she had no reason
to lament, but rather to rejoice, seeing that the Catholics were rid of their
greatest enemy, and that the Catholic Cause was much furthered by his death.
Upon which the Lady in great anger put the man down the stairs: saying, If that
be your Religion, I have done with you for ever. And God has given her the
grace to make her word good hitherto.

Many intelligent Travelers can tell of the great joy among the English
Convents and Seminaries, about the Kings death, as having overcome their enemy,
and done their main work for their settlement in England; of which they made
themselves so sure, that the Benedictins were in great care that the Jesuits
should not get their land: and the English Nuns were contending who should be
Abbesses in England.

An understanding Gentleman visiting the English Friars of Dunkirke, put them
upon the discourse of the Kings death, and to pump out their sense about it,
said that the Jesuits had labored very much, to compass that great work: To
which they answered, that the Jesuits would engrosse to themselves the glory
of all great and good works, and of this among others works; whereas they had
labored as diligently and effectually for it as they. So there was striving
for the glory of that achievement, and the Friars showed themselves as much
Jesuited as the Jesuits.

In the height of Olivers Tyranny, Thomas White Gentleman, a Priest, and a
right Jesuit in all his principles about obedience, set out a Book entitled,
the Grounds of Obedience and Government: Wherein he page 122.
maintains that, If the people by any circumstance be devolved to the State of
Anarchy, their promise made (to their expelled Governor) binds no more. That
the people is remitted by the evil managing or insufficiency of their
Governor, to the force of Nature to provide for themselves, and not bound by
any promise made to their Governor. page 123, and 124.
That the Magistrate by his miscarriages abdicateth himself from being a
Magistrate, and proves a Brigand or Robber instead of a Defender. That word
Defender he writes with a great D. that the Reader may take notice whom he
means.

If the Magistrate (says he) have truly deserved to be page 133.
dispossessed, or if he be rationally doubted, that he has deserved it, and he
be actually out of possession. In the former case, it is certain the subject
has no Obligation to hazard for his restitution, but rather to hinder it: For
since it is the common good that both the Magistrate and the Subject are to aim
at, and clearly out of what is expressed, it is the common harm to admit again of
such a Magistrate, every one to his power is bound to resist him. The next case
is, page 135.
if he be innocent, and wrongfully deposed, nay let us add, One who had
governed well, and deserved much of the Commonwealth, yet is he totally
dispossessed: And so that it is plain in these circumstances, It were better
for the Common good to stay as they are, then to venture the restoring him,
because of the public hazard.

And not to set down all his words, and follow his style, which is affectedly
intricate and obscure, he maintains that a dispossessed Prince, whether by
right or wrong, is obliged absolutely to renounce all Right and page 136.
Claim to Government; and if he does not, he is worse then an Infidel.

He tells us, That Pope Urban the VIII. published a page 151.
Decision, That after five years quiet possession of an Estate, the Church was
not bound to take notice whether the Title were lawful or no, but acknowledge
the Possessor in Ecclesiastical business.

That when the peoples good stands on the Possessors side, page 154.
then clearly he begins to gain right and power. That when the people think
themselves well, they manifestly consent to the present Government. Besides
(says he) who can answer they shall be better by the return of the
dispossessed party? Surely by common presumption the gainer is like to defend
them better then he who lost it. He comes so far as to conclude, That if the
old Magistrate offer to return, he must be repulsed by force of Arms. His
reasoning is this: What if an open enemy should come; could page 1^7.
or ought the subjects join against him with their new Magistrate? If not, the
whole Public must perish: If they may, then their case is the same against
their old Magistrate, since his right stood upon the common Peace; and that
transferred from him to his Rival by the Title of quiet possession.

This was the Philosophy of that contemplative Gentleman, when the King lived
in exile, and Oliver sat on the Throne. Having so well deserved of the King,
he was not long since highly recommended to His Majesty, by a man of great
Note: But the King who has a Royal Insight into persons and businesses, stopped
him with this short answer, No more of that, I know what man he is.

Father Bret was of M. Whites opinion, for the Castle of Jersey being
surrendered after that resistance which for the length of standing out, and the
height of Valor, shall be memorable in all ages: When the Gentlemen who had
defended it were pressed to take the Engagement, contrary to the Articles of
their Rendition: That goodly Divine was very earnest with them at St Malo to
take it; maintaining, That they were not to acknowledge any Supreme but the
prevailing power.

When his Majesty cast himself upon the Spaniard, the Jesuitical party thought
they had him sure enough from ever returning: But God disappointed their hopes,
and deceived our fears by his miraculous mercy: For it was the Lords doing, and
it is mavelous in our eyes, that he escaped out of those hands.

I cannot leave un-observed, That in the height of the late Tyranny, two heads
of the Gunpowder Traitors that were set up upon the House of Lords, were taken
down; not by the high winds, but by the same zeal which had plotted that
Treason, and with the leave of Traitors of another feather. We may hear in time
that those holy Relics are shrined up in gold, and are working miracles.

CHAP. III The Doctrine of the Protestant Churches about the Obedience of
Subjects to the Higher Powers, as it is set down in the Public Confessions of
the several National Churches.
TO ease the search of those that would know what the Protestant Churches hold
in the point of obedience to the Magistrate: And that some picked periods out of
private Authors unfaithfully alleged by their Adversaries be not taken for the
Doctrine of their party, I have set down here their public Confessions in that
point. For whether some of those allegations be true or false, their word must
not be taken for the opinion of their Church, before that of the General
Confession.

The Augustan Confession.
Article XVI. sub finem. CHristiani necessario debent obedire praesentibus
Magistratibus ac legibus, nisi quum jubent peccare. Tunc enim wagis debent
obedire Deo quam hominibus. Act. 4.

Article XVI. sub finem. CHristians must necessarily obey the present
Magistrates and Laws, but when they command to sin. For then they must obey
God rather then men. Act. 4.

The French Confession.
Article XXXIX DEus gladium in Magistratuum manus tradidit reprimendis ni mirum
delictis, non modo contra secundam Tabulam sed etiam contra primam commissis.
Oportet igitur propter illum hujus ordinis authorem non tantum pati ut ii
dominentur, quos ille nobis praefecit, sed etiam omni honor and reverentia eos
prosequi, tanquam ejus Legatos and Ministros ad legitimum and sanctum munus
obeundum ab ipso designa^os.

Article XXXIX GOd has put the sword in the Magistrates hands to repress
offenses, not only against the Second Table, but also against the First. We
ought therefore for his sake, who is the Author of this order, not only to
suffer those to govern whom God has set over us, but also yield to them
honor and all respect, as to his Lieutenants and Ministers, appointed by him
to bear a lawful and holy Office.

Article XL. Affirmamus ergo parendum esse legibus and statutis, solvenda
tributa and reliqua onera perferenda; subjectionis deniqne jugum voluntary
tolerandum, etiamsi infidelis fuerint Magistratus, dummodo Dei summum imperium
integrum and illibatum maneat.

Article XL. We maintain then that we ought to obey laws and statutes, pay
tributes, and bear other burdens of subjection, and undergo the yoke with a
good will, although the Magistrates should be Infidels, so that Gods Sovereigne
Authority remain entire and inviolate.

The Belgic Confession.
CVncti homines cujuscumque sint vel dignitatis, vel conditionis, vel status,
legitimis Magistratibus subjiei debent, illisque vectigalia ac pendere, and eis
in omnibus obsequi ac obedire quae verbo Dei non repugnant: preces etiam pro
eis fundere ut eos Deus in omnibus ipsorum actionibus dirigere dignetur, nos
vero vitam tranquillam and quietam sub ipsis cum omni pietate and honestate
ducere possimus.

ALl men of what dignity quality or state soever they be, must subject
themselves unto the lawful Magistrates, pay unto them imposts and tributes, and
please and obey them in all things that are not repugnant unto the Word of God:
Also pray for them, that God be pleased to direct them in all their actions,
and that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life under them, in all piety and
honesty.

The Helvetick Confessions.
SIcut Deus salutem populi sui operari vult per Magistratum quem mundo veluti
patrem dedit, ita subditi omnes hoc Dei beneficium in Magistratu agnoscere
jubentur. Honorent ergo and revereantur Magistratum tanquam Dei Ministrum.
Ament eum, faveant ei, and orent pro illo tanquam pro patre. Obediant item
omnibus ejus justis and aequis mandatis. Denique pendant vectigalia atque
tributa, and quae alia hujus generis debita sunt, fideliter atque libenter. Et
fi salus publica patriae and justitia requirat, and Magistratus ex necessitate
bellum suscipiat, deponant etiam vitam and fundant sanguinem pro salute publica
Magistratusque, and quidem in Dei nomine, libenter, fortiter and alacriter. Qui
enim Magistratui se opponit iram gravem Dei in se provocat.

AS God will work the safety of his people by the Magistrate, whom he has
given to the World as a Father, so all subjects are commanded to acknowledge
that benefit in the Magistrate. Let them honor and reverence the Magistrate as
the Minister of God. Let them love and assist him, and pray for him as their
Father. Let them obey him in all his just and equitable commands. And let them
pay all imposts and tributes, and all other dues of that kind, faithfully and
willingly. And if the public safety of the Country and Justice require it,
and that the Magistrate undertake a War by necessity; let them also lay down
their lives, and spill their blood for the good of the public and of the
Magistrate, and that in the Name of God; willingly, valiantly, and cheerfully.
For he that opposes himself to the Magistrate, provokes the heavy wrath of
God upon himself.

The Bohemian Confession.
UNiversi and singuli in omnibus quae Deo tantum non sunt contraria eminenti
potestati subjectionem praestent; primum Regiae Majestati, postea omnibus
Magistratibus and qui cum potestate sunt, in quibuscunque muneribus sint
collocati, sive ipsi per se boni viri sint sive mali; itemque omnibus
Administris and Legatis horum, and ut eos revereantur, colant, and quaecunque
eis jure debentur ea omnia ut praestent, etiam honorem eis tributum, vectigal,
similia alia ad quae pendenda obligantur ut praestent and pendant.

LEt all every one yield subjection in all things that are no ways contrary to
God, unto the higher power; first to the Kings Majesty, and next to all
Magistrates, and those that are in Authority, in what Offices soever they be
placed, whether the men be good or bad; as also to all their Officers and
Deputies. And let them defer unto them all honor, and perform all things
which are due unto them by right; let them pay unto them also the homage,
imposts, tribute, and the like, which they are obliged to pay and perform.

The Saxonick Confession.
MAgistratui Politico subditi debent obedientiam sicut Paulus (docet) Romans 13.
Non solum propter iram id est metu poenae corporalis, qua afficiuntur
contumaces ab ipsis Magistratibus sed etiam propter conscientiam, id est
contumacia est peccatum offendens Deum and avellens conscientiam a Deo.

SUbjects owe obedience to the Politic Magistrate, as St. Paul teaches Romans
13 not only for wrath, that is for fear of the corporal punishment which the
Magistrates inflict upon the disobedient, but also for conscience sake; that
is, disobedience is a sin offending God, and separating the conscience from
God.

The Suevick Confession.
NOstri Ecclesiastae obedientiae quae exhibetur Magistratibus inter primi
ordinis bona opera locum dederunt, docentes hoc unumquemque studiosius sese
accommodare publicis legibus quo sincerior fuerit Christianus, fideque ditior.
Juxta docent fungi Magistratu munus esse sacratissimum quod quidem homini
contingere possit. Vnde and factum sit quod qui gerunt publicam potestatem Dii
in Scripturis vocentur.

OUr Divines have placed the obedience which is done to the Magistrates, among
the good works of the first rank, teaching that the more a Christian is sincere
and rich in faith, the more careful ought he to be to subject himself unto the
public Laws. They likewise teach that to be a Magistrate, is the most Sacred
Office that a man may have. Whence also it comes, that they that bear a
public Authoriry, are called Gods in the Scriptures.

After all these, the English Confession shall speak last, to give the
Sentence; as the Apostle St. James spoke the last in the Synod of the Apostles
at Jerusalem, because he was the Bishop.

Article XXXVII. Of the Civil Magistrate.
THe Kings Majesty has the chief power in this Realm of England, and other
his Dominions, unto whom the chief Government of all Estates of this Realm,
whether they be Ecclesiastical or Civil, in all Causes, does appertain: And it
is not, nor ought to be subject to any foreign Jurisdiction.

Where we attribute to the Kings Majesty the chief Government, by which Titles
we understand the minds of some slanderous persons are offended, we give not to
our Princes the Ministering either of Gods Word, or of the Sacraments, the which
thing the Injunctions also set forth by Elizabeth Our Queen, do most plainly
testify; but that only Prerogative which we see to have been given always to
all Godly Princes in Holy Scripture, by God himself, that is, that they should
rule all Estates and Degrees committed to their Charge by God, whether they be
Ecclesiastical or Temporal, and restraiz with the Civil Sword the stubborn and
evil doers.

The Bishop of Rome has no Jurisdiction in this Realm of England.

The Laws of the Realm may punish Christian men with death, for heinous and
grievous crimes.

It is lawful for Christian men, at the Commandment of the Magistrate, to wear
weapons, and serve in the Wars.

The XXXV. Article appoints Homilies against Rebellion to be read in Churches.
The summary of these Homilies, and the whole drift of them, is contained First
part page 2. of the first Homily against wilful disobedience and rebellion.
in these words, In reading of the holy Scriptures we shall find in very many
and almost infinite places, as well of the Old Testament as of the New; That
Kings and Princes, as well the evil as the good, do reign by Gods Ordinance,
and that subjects are bound to obey them. And that Doctrine of the Church of
England, which is that of the Word of God, is fully demonstrated in these godly
Homilies, published and enjoined to be read in Churches by Royal Authority.

CHAP. IV. Proving by the Bulls and Decrees of Popes, That the Doctrine of the
Roman Court in the point of Obedience to Sovereignes, is a Doctrine of
Rebellion.
HItherto we have stood upon the Defensive, and have with no great labor wiped
off the false and foul aspersions of Rebellion cast upon the Doctrine of the
Protestant Churches: Let us try whether we can use the Sword as well as the
Buckler. And we will use no other then the Popes own Sword; For as David said
of Goliah's sword, There is none like that, give it me: In this Combat the
enemies sword is the right weapon, none like it. The Adversary to disgrace our
Doctrine, has objected to us some passages of our Authors, most of them false
or wrested, and some actions of persons of the Protestant party. But though he
had proved all these to be true, he had done no harm to our Doctrine, which is
not built upon private opinions, or upon private or public actions. He should
have taken our Confessions in hand, and Indicted them of rebellious Tenets, if
he could have found any: Or finding none, he should have given glory to God,
and confessed the Truth of God with us.

But if I bring him the Bulls of his Popes, and their Decrees, can he escape as
we do, when he urges us with maxims of Buchanan or Goodman? Can he say, The
Pope speaks Treason, and prescribes Rebellion, as we say of these men; and my
faith is not tied to his authority? Can he as freely go off from the Popes
judgment, as we do from the best of our party, when their Tenet is represented
to us aberring from the rule of Gods Word, and dissenting from the Articles of
Religion, consented unto by the Provincial Convocations of the Church? We will
then object to him and his party that which they cannot disown, unless they
disown their Faith and Religion, since their Faith and Religion depend upon the
Popes Decrees; and that so strongly, and with such a spirit of delusion, that
the most pestilent opinions pass with them for Evangelical Truths, and the most
abominable actions for patterns of Holiness, if they be once marked with that
stamp; according to Bellarmines sentence, which no Romanist has yet disallowed
for any thing I know. If the Pope did Bellarm. lib. 4. de Pontifice, ca. 5. Si
Papa erraret in praecipiendo vitia, vel prohibendo virtutes, teneretur Ecclesia
credere vitia esse bona, and virtutes malas, nisi vellet contra conscientiam
loqui. Idem cap. 31. in Barklaium. In bono sensu dedit Christus Petro
potestatem faciendi de peccato non peccatum, and de non peccato peccatum.
err in commanding vices, or prohibiting virtues, the Church should be obliged
to believe that vices are good, and virtues evil, unless she would speak
against Conscience. And to the same purpose he affirms, That in good sense
Christ has given to St. Peter the power to make sin to be no sin, and that
which is no sin, to be sin. And he takes it for granted, That the power which
Christ has given to St. Peter, he has ipso facto given it to the Pope his
Successor. If then we prove that sedition, rebellion, and murder of Kings, is
justified, promoted, yea and commanded by that Head of their Faith, the Papists
must either approve it as good and holy, or cease to be Papists, and learn to
have the Faith of the Lord Jesus Christ the Lord of glory, without respect of
persons.

Since the Roman Church stands much upon her Antiquity, we will begin by the
ancientest example of approving the murder of Kings that can be charged Ann.
Chr. 611.
upon the Roman See. It is that of Gregory the I. who hearing that Phocas had
slain the Emperor Mauritius his Liege Lord, having first killed his children
before his face, and that he had invaded the Empire, writ a gratulatory Epistle
to that monster, where these words are found. We are glad that the benignity
Greg. 1. lib. 11. Epist. 36. Benignitatem pietatis vestrae ad Imperiale
fastigium pervenisse gaudemus: Laetentur Coeli, and exultet Terra, and de
benignis actibus vestris universae Reip. populus hilarescat.
of your Piety has attained to the Imperial Dignity: Let the heavens rojoyce,
and let the Earth be glad, and let the people of the whole Commonwealth be
joyful for your gracious deeds.

The next example shall be that of Gregory the II. who rebelled against his
Sovereigne, the Emperor Ann. Chr. 726.
Leo Isaurus, and made Rome and the Roman Duchy do the same: And while the
Emperor was sore afflicted with the wars of the Saracens in the East, he made
himself Lord of that part of his Masters Dominions in Italy; for which Sigonius
gives an admirable Sigonius Hist. de Regno Italiae, lib. 3. Ita Roma
Romanusque Ducatus a Graecis ad Romanum Pontificem propter nesandam eorum
haeresim impietatemque pervenit.
reason. That Rome and the Roman Duchy were lost by the Grecians, and got by
the Pope of Rome, by reason of their wicked heresy. A strange kind of penance
from a Pastor, to turn the sinner out of his house, and possess himself of it.
That wicked heresy of Leo Isaurus was, That he prohibited the adoration of
Images, and pulled them down every where: For that Heresy and Impiety, the
holy Father Gregory the II. imposed this penance upon the Emperor; He made him
lose his Estate, and himself seized upon it. This is the beginning of the Popes
Temporal Principality. This is the Title whereby he holds Rome and the
Territory of it to this day; even plain Rebellion, and Tyrannical Invasion of
his Sovereigns Estate and Dominion.

The next Successor of Gregory the II. was Gregory the III. of whom Platina
writes thus. This Pope as soon as he attained to the Papal Platina in Greg.
III. Hic statim ubi Pontificatum iniit Cleri Romani consensu Leonem tertium
Imperatorem Constantinopolitanum Imperio simul and communione Fidelium private,
quod sanctas Imagines e sacris aedibus abrasisset.
Degree, by the consent of the Roman Clergy, deprived Leo the III. Emperor of
Constantinople, both of his Empire, and of the Communion of the faithful,
because he had swept away the holy Images out of the Churches. Observe that
Platina that writ about the year 1472. at Rome, speaks according to the great
interest of that time and place, which was, That an Emperor excommunicated,
was ipso facto deprived of his Empire: Whereas the Popes that lived 700 years
before, either had not that ambition, or wanted the courage to depose
Emperors. But the Popes that reigned two or three hundred years ago, made that
power of deposing Princes, as ancient as they could by their Historians.

The same must be said of the pretended deposition of Chilperick King of France
by Pope Zachary, the next Successor of Gregory the III. Cardinal Perron sets
forth that example to fright Kings, in his Oration before the three States of
France, and says that the Pope absolved the people of France from their
Allegiance to that King, for which he alleges the testimony of two new
Authors, Paulus Aemilius and Du Tillet. But Ado Bishop of Vienna in his
Chronicle says, That the French by the counsel of Ambassadors, and of Pope
Zachary, established Pepin their King. And Trithemius in his Abridgement of
Annals speaks thus: Chilperick King of the French, is put out from the
Kingdom, as incapable to reign, by the common consent of the great persons of
the Kingdom, Pope Zachary giving them counsel.

But although the Champions of the Court of Rome ascribe to these ancient Popes
that power which they never exercised or pretended to. That assertion of theirs
is very favorable to my purpose, which is to show that the Roman Court is, and
delights to be the Troubler of Christendom by that usurpation of deposing
Kings, and absolving Subjects from their Allegiance: For the more they strive
for it, and labor to root it in Antiquity, the more they show the stirring of
Rebellions to be essential and original unto their wicked Throne.

After Zachary followed Stephen the II. who set on Pepin to expel the Exarchs
out of Italy, and obtained Platina.
of him the Exarchat for himself, though belonging to the Emperor of
Constantinople his true Sovereigne: So there was both Rebellion and Robbery in
that proceeding. Wherein he followed the steps of Gregory the II. who thirty
years before had robbed the Emperor his Master of the City of Rome, and the
Roman Duchy.

Yet in these Dominions the Emperors of the West, (which then begun again)
kept the Imperial power. Platina in vita Eugenii II. Lotharius in Italiam
veniens Magistratum delegit qui populo Romano jus diceret.
Platina affirms, That when Lothary came into Italy, he chose Magistrates to
judge the people of Rome: For in the partage between the sons of Lewis the
Meek, Italy and Rome fell to the share of Lothary the eldest. But above all,
the testimony of Sigonius is express, who speaking of the posture of Italy in
the year 973. says, That the Pope kept Rome, Ravenna, and the Sigonius de
Regno Italiae, lib. 7. ann. 973. Pontifex Romam, Ravennam, and ditiones
reliquas tenebat authoritate magis quam imperio: quod Civitates Pontificem ut
Reip. Principem, Regem vero ut summum Dominum intuerentur, atque ei tributa
obsequiaque praeberent.
rest of his Territories, rather by Authority then Sovereignty; because the
Cities looked upon the Pope as a Prince of the Commonwealth, but upon the King
as their Sovereign Lord, and to him they paid Tribute, and yielded Obedience.
It appears by the Histories of Volaterranus, Blondus, and Sabellicus, that it
is but about two hundred years since the Pope is absolute Master in Rome. And
for the Spiritual It was about the year 800.
power, Sigonius affirms, That Pope Hadrian the I. yielded to the Emperor
Charlemagne, the power of ordering the Church, and electing the Pope, which was
so approved by Pope Leo the VIII. eightscore years after, that Sigonius de reg.
Ital. ad an. 963. Non sine causa Adrianum I. Carolo magno tribuisse ut
Ecclesiam ordinaret, and Pontificem eligeret. Platina in Paschalis I. Paschalis
nulla interposita Imperatoris authoritate Pontisex creatur: Hanc ob rem ubi
Pontificatum iniit statim Legatos ad Ludovicum misit, qui ejus rei culpam omnem
in Clerum and populum rejicerent, quod ab his vi coactus esset pontisicium
munus obire. Accepta hac satisfactione Ludovicus respondit populo and Clero,
majorum instituta and pacta servanda esse, caverent ne dein ceps Majestatem lae
derent.
he said that it was not without cause that Hadrian the first had done so.

Yet Pope Paschalis the I. got into the Roman See without the Emperors
Authority and consent, (as his Predecessor Stephen the IV. had done before him)
and then sent to Lewis the Meek to purge himself, and cast the fault upon the
importunity of the Clergy and the people. The Emperor accepted the excuse,
but said withal, That the Clergy and the people should no more offend the
Emperors Majesty in that sort. Let it be then remembered, that the Popes power
is an usurpation, first upon the Emperors of the East, and since upon those of
the West; that it be not found strange that his power having begun by Rebellion
and Usurpation, is maintained in the following ages by answerable means, and
lives by the same elements of which it was composed. This also will give an
evidence to the judicious Reader of the true cause why the Popes had such a
long and pertinacious quarrel with the Emperors, and thundered continually upon
them with Excommunications, created to them enemies, and tore the Empire with
Factions; even that they might strip the Emperor of all his right in Italy,
make themselves independent both for the Spiritual and the Temporal, and raise
their greatness upon the fall of the Empire. So the many examples which I
shall bring of excommunicating and deposing of Emperors, and absolving their
subjects from their Allegiance, shall lay a double guilt of rebellion upon the
Popes, both as commanding rebellion abroad, and practicing rebellion at home
against their lawful Sovereigns.

The first Pope that offered to excommunicate the King of France, was Gregory
the IV. who joined with Sigebert. An. 832.
the Sons of Lewis the meek, who had conspired against their Father. But the
French Bishops threatened to excommunicate him, so he desisted.

The first Pope that attempted to draw his spiritual Sword against the
Emperor, was that honest man Gregory Anno circiter. 1080.
the VII, called before Hildebrand, who excommunicated the Emperor Henry the
IV, but deposed him before. The Empire he translated to Rudolph Platina in
Greg. VII. Imperatorem ipsum anathemate notavit, privatum prius omni Regia
administratione.
Duke of Suevia. But you must understand that though he gave him the Empire, he
did not deliver it. For Rudolph was slain in battle by the Emperor. Rome was
taken by the Emperor, and Gregory died for grief. The last words of Rudolph
are notable: Seeing his hand cut off, he Marianus Scotus. Sigebertus.
Vspergensis,
said to the Bishops that had made him take arms. You see my hand which I had
lift up to God with an Oath of fidelity to my Sovereigne, now punished for
fighting traitorously against him by your instigation. It seems that the Popes
command could not clear his conscience of the crime of rebellion.

Urban the II. did also excommunicate and persecute Platira. Sigebertus.
that worthy Emperor Henry the IV. This is that Urban who made that Urban II.
Causa 15. q. 6. Can. Iuratos. Iuratos milites Hugoni Comitine ipsi quandiu
excommunicatus est serviant prohibemus.
goodly Decree, That an Oath made to an excommunicated person, must not be
kept. The quarrel which made these Popes excommunicate the Emperor was about
collation of Benefices.

Pope Paschal the II. who succeeded Urban, made that Emperors Son to take
arms against his Father. Aventinus. ^ttho Frisengensis.
And that ungracious Son was such an obedient Son to his Holiness, that he
gave battle to his Father: Who being overcome, and in his enemies hands, was
deposed in a Synod held at Mentz, by the Popes command to that purpose, and the
Crown and other Imperial ornaments, were taken violently from him by three
Bishops, of Mentz, of Collen, and of Worms, and given to his Son Henry the V.
The old Emperor being soon after dead for grief, the Pope would not suffer his
Son to bury him, but he lay five years unburied. These are the holy actions
of him that cannot err, and has all right shrined up in the closet of Platina
in Paulo II.
his breast.

It is worth relating how that Paschal sped by these wicked acts. The new
Emperor came to Rome to be crowned by him. There the quarrel was renewed about
collation of Benefices. And because the people Baronius An. Chr. 1111.
of Rome rose in a mutiny against him, he made a great slaughter of them, and
took his Holiness prisoner; using Jacobs words, I will not let thee go, till
thou have given me thy blessing. That blessing was the yielding of the
Collation of Benefices, which Paschal granted Observe that the Roman Church
has altered her belief in that point, for they hold now that the body of
Christ in the Sacrament cannot be divided.
and confirmed it by Oath. But he revoked that Grant as soon as he was free
again, although the Oath was taken by the Altar, where Paschal dividing the
Host between the Emperor and him; used these words, which Baronius relates:
Sicubi pars haec vivifici corporis divisa est, ita divisus sit a regno Christi
qui pactum hoc violare tentaverit. As this part of the vivifying body is
divided, so let him be divided from Christ's Kingdom, that will go about to
break this Covenant. But what! the Pope absolveth others from their Oath, much
more himself, when he lists.

This horrible action of a Son giving battle to his Father, and keeping him
prisoner till he die, through hardness and anguish, is highly commended by
Baronius. Why? the Son did it in obedience to the Pope, who would not pardon
his Father, no not after his death. These are Baronius his words; In this
action, the Son is no more to be condemned, Baron. loco citato. Nihil habes in
quo damnes filium, magis quam si insanienti surentique pius filius vincula
injiciat patri. Quis negare potest summum suisse hoc pietatis genus?
then if a pious Son should bind his Father, who is fallen mad. And again, Who
can deny that it was the highest kind of piety, to have showed himself cruel in
this case? Here is rebellion in the height, of a subject against his
Sovereigne: Here is a most horrible parricide, of a Son armed against his
Father: both commanded by the Pope, and at his command executed. And both
praised and recommended by a Jesuit and a famous Cardinal, as a pattern for
posterity.

Calixtus the II. his next Successor but one, excommunicated Henry the V. and
forced him to compound.

How the Pope could be so bold abroad, being so Frinsingensis, Platina.
weak at home, it is a wonder to me; for the Romans rebelled against Innocent
the II. and created a Magistrate which they called Patritius, to whom they
deferred the Government, whereby they broke his heart, and made him die for
sorrow. And when Pope Lucius the II. went about to put down that new
Magistrate, he was answered, that the Senate would recover that right which the
Popes had invaded by the help of Charlemayne. Lucius called upon the Emperor
Conrad for help, who either could not, or would not help him. Lucius raises
Soldiers, and assaults the Capitol, but in that assault he was so bepelted
with stones, that he died few days after.

And although Pope Eugenius the II. came to some composition with the Romans,
yet both he and his Successors, Anastasius the IV. and Hadrian the IV. were
kept under by them, and Hadrian was in the end forced to fly from Rome. Yet
the same Hadrian suffered the Emperor Frederick the I. to hold his Stirrup,
and quarrelled Helmodi Chron. lib. 1. cap. 81.
with him for taking the left instead of the right.

That brave Emperor was more coursly used yet by the next Pope Alexander the
III. who trod upon his neck when he stooped to kiss his Holinesses Foot, using
these words of the Psalm 91. Thou shall tread upon the Lion and Adder, the
young Lion and the Dragon shall thou trample underfeet.

And when the Emperor said, Non tibi sed Petro, This submission I do not to
thee, but to Peter; the Pope treading upon him again, said, Et mihi and Petro,
Both to me and to Peter.

Such was that Popes humility. So did he obey Saint Peter's command. Submit your
selves to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake. The Pope had before
excommunicated Frederick; and when he came to submit and reconcile himself unto
the Pope, his Holiness gave him this welcome.

This so memorable passage, so known and so odious to all the World, is left
out for shame by Platina and his Commentator Onuphrius. And all that Platina
says of that meeting is, that Frederick kissed the Popes feet in Platina in
Alexandro III.
the Porch of Saint Mark of Venice, and then they went together to the great
Altar. But it is attested by twenty Historians alleged by Hieronymo Bardo in
his Historia Navalis. The great Jurisconsult Duarenus lib. 1. de sacris
Ecclesiae Ministeriis, cap. 2.
Duarenus relates it with great detestation of so great a pride and tyranny.
For which Joseph Stevan Joseph Stevan. Epist. ad Gregor. XIII. de osculo pedum
Papae. Iure meritoque in Religionis and Ecclesiae infensissimum hostem
Fredericum Barbarossam, non ut in salem insatuatum quem jubet Christus pedibus
proterere sed potius ut horrendam belluam calcibus insultavit.
who writ at Rome to Gregory the XIII. of kissing the Popes feet, checks
Duarenus, saying that Pope Alexander the III. trod the Emperor Frederick under
foot, not only as salt which has lost its savor, but as an horrible wild
beast. And Otho Frisingensis both relates it and commends it, Otho Frising.
lib. 5. cap. 14. Quod sactum summis liberum est sacerdotibus, cum Principum
tyrannidem, aut violatam fidem aut Ecclesiae imminutam dignitatem vident.
and says, That the Popes have the power to do so much, when they see the
tyranny of Princes, or that faith is violated, or the dignity of the Church
imbezelled. So though the History were not as it is, most undoubtedly true, the
approving and exalting of the fact in the Court of Rome makes that Court as
guilty, as if it had been done. But it was done, and as bad was done by other
Popes.

Pope Celestin the III. gave Constantia a Nun in marriage to the Emperor
Henry the VI. and gave him for her dowry the Kingdom of both the Sicilies,
upon Platina Uspergensis.
condition he should expel Tancred, who was possessed of the Kingdom. Hence a
bloody War between Henry the VI. and Tancred. It is ordinary to the Pope to
give that which is none of his. When the Pope gives a Kingdom from a Prince
that enjoys it, he commands together the people to resist him, making a sport
to spill their blood, and damn their souls.

Baronius commends very much that Popes behavior Annal. Roger. an. 1191.
Sedebat Dominus Papa in Cathedra Pontificali tenens coronam auream inter pedes
suos; and Imperator inclinato capite recepit coronam, and imperator similiter
de pedibus Domini Papae: Dominus autem Papa statim percussit cum pede suo
coronam Imperatoris, and dejecit eam in terram, significans quod ipse
potestatem ejiciendi eum ab Imperio habet, si ille demeruerit.
in the Crowning of the Emperor Henry the VI. and his Wife, thus related in
the Annalls of Rogerius. The Pope was sitting in his pontifical chair holding
an Imperial golden Crown between his feet; and the Emperor bowing his head,
received the Crown, and the Empress likewise by the feet of the Pope. And the
Pope presently hit the Emperors Crown, and kicked it down to the ground,
thereby signifying that he had power to cast him down from the Empire if he
deserved it. Baronius having related this, amplifieth it with this morality

Baron. Tom. 12. Anno 1191. sect. 10. Ut fixum menti [ Caesaris] haereret,
nempe dare, custodire, conservare, and auserre, si causa exigeret, imperium
esse in voluntate Romani Pontificis, ejusmodi voluit commenere eum exemplo.
That it might remain fixed in the Emperors mind, that it lies in the Popes
pleasure to give, keep, preserve, and take away the Empire if there be cause
for it, he would admonish him with such an example.

Could the Devil have set up pride to a higher pin? to put the Emperors Crown
at his feet, as a footstool for him to tread upon; put the Crown on the
Emperors head with his feet, as an office too low for his hands: and then with
his foot kicked it down, as having a quarrel against the Imperial Crown, and
together a contempt for it. This and the treading upon the Emperors neck were
significant ceremonies with a witness. And what more effectual course could
have been taken to raise rebellion in all the States of Christendom, then thus
to blast the respect of Majesty? For thereby all Nations were taught, that
their Princes were not Sovereigns, but the Popes Vassalls and Liegemen: That
themselves were not their Kings Subjects, but the Popes, who could kick down
their Crowns when he listed; and that when that supreme Head shall command it,
the Feet, that is the inferior Members of the State, must make Foot-balls of
the Crowns of Emperors and Kings.

After Celestin the III. came Innocent the III. as proud, but more active then
he. England has reason to remember this Pope. For he excommunicated King John,
deposed him, absolved his Subjects from their allegiance to him, and cast an
Interdict upon England, which lasted six years. All which time no Divine
Service was said in the Kingdom, but in some privileged places, no Sacrament
was administered, and no corpse buried in Consecrated Ground. The Kingdom of
England he gave to Philip August of France, if he could take it; and that by a
formal order, thus related by Matthew Paris; The Pope by the counsel Matthew.
Paris in vita Reg. Johan. Papa ex consilio Cardinalium, Episcoporum, and
aliorum vivorum prudentium, sententialiter definivit ut Rex a solio
deponeretur. Ad hujus quoque sententiae executionem scripsit Dominus Papa
potentissimo Regi Francorum Philippo, quatenus in remissionem peccatorum suorum
hunc laborem assumeret.
of the Cardinals, Bishops, and other prudent men gave a definitive sentence,
that the King should be put down from his Throne: For the execution of that
Sentence, the Pope writ to the most potent King of the French, Philip, that for
the remission of his sins he should take that labor upon him. A new way for
that King to get the remission of his sins, to invade his neighbors estate. As
in the age of our Fathers Pope Sixtus the V. gave nine years of true indulgence
to all the French that would bear Arms against their King Henry the III. Thus
the remission of sins purchased by the blood of the Son of God, and presented
by his Gospel to all that repent and believe, is by the Pope given as a reward
of Invasion and Rebellion.

Matthew Paris writes, that, The Pope having gotten the Kingdom of England to
himself (to his thinking) sent to Philip August, to enjoin him to be reconciled
with King John, else he would put France to Interdict. Philip answered, that he
feared not his sentence, and that it belonged not to the Church of Rome to
pronounce a sentence against the King of France.

It is a long and a sad story, how King John was persecuted by Pope Innocent
the III. his Barons made to rise against him, his Neighbors to fall upon him,
his Clergy to revile him, and his people to despise him; till that unlucky King
was brought to such an extremity, that to buy his peace he gave his Kingdom to
the Pope, and yet could not get his peace that way. The Gold which he laid at
the Legates feet in sign of subjection, the Legate trod under his feet in scorn,
yet took it in his hand after, so great was his clemency.

What a cruel tyranny did the following Popes exercise over his Son Henry the
III. in his long and unfortunate Reign, insulting over his weakness and
superstition? How licentiously did these Wolves tear and raven in England,
while the public cry of the oppressed Matthew. Paris in vitae Hen. III.
people represented unto the King, that his Kingdom was become like a Vine,
whose fence is pulled down, and rooted out by the wild Bear.

These Histories which make the usurpations of the Roman Court to be abhorred,
yet are set forth by the Jesuit Petra Sancta as examples for all Princes; And
Petra Sancta Not. in Epist. ad Balzac.
he would have all Kings to imitate King John and Henry the III. of England in
their subjection to the Pope. He could not have chosen more frequent examples
to dehort them from it, considering the gulf of miseries which they sunk into,
by their stooping under the Popes tyranny. But they have more reason to follow
the example of the next King, brave Edward the I. who recovered his own and his
Kingdoms liberty, by expelling all the Roman Exactours out of England; and by
his contempt of Rome reigned peaceably and glorious. For the Pope, who in the
Reigns of his Father and Grandfather was thundering continually, and cudgelling
both King and people, never spoke a word against this stout King.

Pope Innocent the III. played with his Spiritual Sword in Germany as well as
in England, for he excommunicated the Emperor Otho the IV. Platina in Innocent
III. Otho iram Pontificis in se concitavit a quo and anathemate notatur and
Imperii titulis privatur.
and deprived him of the titles of the Empire, as Platina speaks warily, for
Popes cannot take away Kingdoms, but only deny to acknowledge the titles.

The Emperor Frederick the II. was worse used by the Popes, though much
deserving of the Roman See, to which he had given the County of Fundi. For he
was excommunicated and deposed by Pope Honorius the III. and again by Gregory
the IX. for that Monster Platina.
of pride and greediness, when the Emperor was gone on his errand into
Palaestina, anathematized him, raised him enemies in Germany, by his preaching
Friars, Matthew. Paris in Vita Hen. III. Reg. Angl. Vspergensis. Trithemius
and taking advantage of his absence, sent an army into Appulia, and seized
upon the Emperors Lands. Twice he showed himself reconciled with the Emperor,
and twice again broke with him, and excommunicated him; but with ill success
to himself: For by all these Excommunications and Depositions the Emperor
thrived; who after a long patience fell upon the Pope; made his Interdicts laid
upon the Empire, to be hissed out; and so distressed the Pope by his armies,
that he died for wrath and sorrow.

The same Emperor was also excommunicated and Platina. Matthew. Paris.
persecuted by Pope Innocent the IV. And when after the Emperors death, the
arms of his Son prospered in Italy, he gave the Kingdom of Sicily to Richard
brother to Henry the III. of England; Richard not acquainted with the Popes
giving of Kingdoms, asks that the Forts and the Treasure and Hostages be
given to him. Herein wiser (if he had stayed there) then others, who accept
that which the Pope cannot deliver.

I will pass by many Popes that came after, who sent their Excommunications no
further then the Kingdom of Naples and Sicily, and filled Italy with factions,
that they might fish in troubled waters: Let us fix our contemplation a little
upon that high pattern of Pontifical virtues, Boniface the VIII. upon whom
Platina bestows this Character. That Boniface Platina in Bonifacio.
Bonifacius ille qui Imperatoribus, Regibus, Principibus, Nationibus, Populis,
terrorem potius quam religionem injicere conabatur; Quique dare regna and
auferre, pellere homines ac reducere, pro arbitrio conabatur; aurum undique
conquisitum plus quam dici potest sitiens.
who studied to give terror rather then religion, unto Emperors, Kings,
Princes, and Nations, and labored to give and take away Kingdoms, drive men
away, and bring them again, according to his pleasure. One that was thirsty of
goods scraped up from all places, more then can be expressed.

The passages between him and the French King Philip the Fair, are known, yet
perhaps not to all. This is the History in short: This Pope having a grudge
against him about the Collation of Benefices, and desiring to pick a quarrel,
sent to him the Bishop of Pamiers, Stella. Histoire de France.
to command him to undertake an expedition to the Holy Land, and to threaten
him if he refused. The Bishop did that errand so malapertly, that the King
offended, committed him to prison. The Pope angry, demanded the Bishop again,
and had him; and sent this Letter to the King. Fear God, and keep his
Commandments, We will have thee to know that thou art our Subject, both for
the Spiritual and the Temporal. That no Collation of Benefices and Prebends
belongs to thee. And if thou have the custody of any of them that are vacant,
we will have thee to reserve the fruits for their Successors. And if thou have
granted any (Benefices) We declare all such Collations null, and as far as they
are executed de facto, We revoke them. Those that believe otherwise, we hold
them for Heretics. These goodly Letters being brought to Paris by a Legate,
were plucked from him by the Kings Council and Judges, and cast into the fire by
the Earl of Artois. And to them the King returned this Answer, Philip by the
Grace of God, King of the French, to Boniface, calling himself Sovereign
Pontife; but little greeting, or rather none at all. Let thy most egregious
folly know that in temporal things we are subject to no man. That the Collation
of Churches and Prebends belongs unto us by Royal Right, and converting the
same to our use, during the vacancy. That the Collation by us made, and to be
made, shall be valid; and that in virtue of the same, we will courageously
defend the possessors. Those that hold otherwise, We hold to be idiots, and
bereaved of their sense.

The Pope enraged excommunicates the King, but none durst be the publisher or
bearer of that Bull. The King assembleth at paris his Knights, Barons, and
Prelates, and asks them of whom they hold their Lordships, and the temporal
of their Ecclesiastical preferments. All answer that they hold them of the
King, not of the Pope, whom they charge with heresy and many crimes, The Pope
assembleth a General Council (as Platina calls it) though it was gathered out
of few Platina.
Countries) and by a Decree of that Council, depriveth Philip of his Kingdom,
and gives it to the Emperor Albert; and labors to arm Germany and
Netherlands against France. But that vigorous King sent Nogaret into Italy, who
by the help of Sciarra Columna, whose Family Boniface had cruelly oppressed, got
two hundred horse, and surprised the Pope at Anagnia, whom they mounted upon a
poor jade, and brought him prisoner to Rome, where he was so ill beloved, that
no body stirred to rescue him. With this adversity his proud heart was broken,
and he died five and thirty days after.

Benedict the XI. who was elected in his place, absolved Philip presently. And
his Successor Clement the V. to that Absolution added a complemental Bull, in
which Philip is exalted as a pious and religious Prince, As it may be seen
Extravagante Meruit.
and well deserving of the Church; as it may be seen Extravagante Meruit. For
the Popes easily pardon the sins of those whom they fear. Truly that virtuous
King has left a fair lesson to posterity, by what ways the favor of that
Holy See ought to be purchased and preserved. And since Lewis the XIV. now
reigning is taking the like course with the Pope, he is like to be in time the
favorite of his Holiness, and to obtain from him another Bull meruit;
declaring how well that eldest Son of the Church has deserved from the Church
his Mother.

Pope John XXIII. angry that Ludovicus Bavarus had taken upon him the
administration of the Empire, before Platina Hieronymus Marius.
he got his leave, refused to crown him, though many times desired by him. The
Emperor did nothing the less continue his power and imperial care both in
Germany and Italy, and going to Rome (the Pope then sitting at Avignon) was
crowned by the joint consent of Clergy, Nobles, and People. Upon which he was
excommunicated and deprived of the Empire as far as words could do it, by this
Pope. And the same Sentence was confirmed against the Emperor, by the
Successor of John, Benedict the XII.

Clement the VI. who came next after, was more inclement then his predecessors,
in persecuting Ludovicus Bavarus. For he excommunicated all the Bishops that
Nauclerus.
adhered to him; and set Bulls at the doors of all the Churches, to raise
rebellion against him. And when the Emperor would submit to him, and sue for
peace, he required such conditions of him, as neither he, nor the Princes of
the Empire, would or could yield unto, as that he should depose himself, put
all his Estate, and his own Sons in the Popes power, and promise to undertake
no more any thing, without the Popes leave. These conditions being rejected by
the Emperor, Clement charged the Electors to elect another. Which when the
Archbishop of Ments refused to do, representing the Emperors innocence, he
deprived him of his Archbishopric, and of his Electoral dignity. The other
Electors corrupted with money by John King of Bohemia, elected his Son Charles
King of the Romans, whom Clement approved; whence great and bloody Wars
followed, and the Emperor Ludovicus Bavarus, was taken away by poison by
Clements means, as some Authors write.

That Election of Charles the IV. was the breaking Fasciculus temp. Volatterran
of the back of the Empire, which the Popes had been long laboring for. For
this Charles, that he might be elected Emperor, pawned the tributes of the
Empire to the Electors. And the Electors made him swear that he would never
disengage that pawn. Then they made him make that authentical Capitulation,
which I have produced in my first Chapter. The Empire being thus weakened, and
losing the Tributes, which are the sinews of War, was disabled from
resisting the Turk, who has since wasted the Christian Provinces with little
opposition, and has destroyed so many Churches, or turned them into Moskites.
For all these distractions, the Church and the Empire may thank the Sea of
Rome, which had a hand in all the Negotiations of the Princes of Germany and
Italy; and whose Authority acted always for the depression of the Emperor.
Neither could all these conditions, so hurtful to the Imperial Dignity, and the
public subsistence, have past into standing laws, if the Pope had not promoted
them, or if he would have showed himself against them.

Since this Pope Clement the VI. for about fifty or threescore years, I find
not that the Popes had many irons in the fire out of the limits of Italy, the
Papal power being much broken with Schisms. So that the Popes instead of
fulminating Bulls against Emperors and Kings, courted its several Monarchs of
Christendom, to take their party against their Anti-popes.

Benedict the XIII. in the year 1408. being incensed Theodoricus a Niem in
nemore unionis.
against Charles the VI. of France, for inhibiting the exactions of the Papal
Court, sent a Bull of Excommunication against the King and his Princes. The
University Somnium Viridarii*
of Paris required that the Bull should be torn, and that Pope Benedict, (whom
they called Peter de Luna) should be declared Heretic, Schismatic, and
disturber of peace: Which was done. The Bull was torn by Sentence of the
Court. And two Bullists, bearers Carolus Molinaeus contra parvas datas, relates
that Sentence of the Court.
of that Bull, made that which they call Honorable amends, upon the Palace
stairs, then were carried in two dung carts, arrayed in Jerkins of course
linen cloth painted, with paper Miters on their head, the trumpets sounding
before them, and the common people howting upon them, and abusing them. So
little account did they make of the roaring of the Popes Bulls.

For a hundred years after Benedict the XIII. I find not that the Popes made
use of their spiritual Sword against any Prince out of Italy and Sicily; partly
by reason of Schisms, when that Roman Beast had many heads; partly by reason
of the Councils occasioned by these Schisms. For they had three Councils in
less than forty years, at Constance, at Basil, and at Florence; and the first
and second of them took upon them to depose Popes, and gave credit to that
dangerous opinion, so odious to the Court of Rome, that the Council is above
the Pope. This kept the Popes for a time in some order and respect to the
Princes of Christendom, but for some wrangling about pragmatick sanctions,
which grew not so high as to War or Excommunication.

But in recompense, Julius the II. raised wars and tumults, as much as would
serve for a hundred years. He drew both his Swords against several Princes and
States of Christendom; especially against that excellent King Lewis the XII.
of France. For having drawn him into Italy for his ends, he makes a League
O^^phrius Paul. ^^^^us.
to drive him out; excommunicates him, and puts his Kingdom to Interdict.
Excommunicates the Venetians, gives their dominions to any that will take
them. Drives the Bentivogli out of Bononia; exposes their houses to pillage:
Excommunicates the Duke of Ferrara, and invades his Country by Arms; goes to
War in person. Makes the English, the Spaniards, and the Switzers, to fall
upon the French; takes many Imperial Cities. Excommunicates the King of
Navarre, and gives his Kingdom to the King of Arragon, who upon that invades
and takes it: And this is all the title that the Spaniard has to Navarre,
which he keeps to this day. So much blood was shed in Christendom by the
means of that plague of mankind Pope Julius the II. that it is thought that he
was the death of two hundred thousand Christians, in seven years time.

In a Synod of the Gallican Church at Tours, it was Nicol. Cilles in Vita
Ludov. XIII. Thuan. lib. 1.
declared that the Pope has no power to make war against a Christian Prince;
and if he do so, that the Prince has power to invade the Popes Territories.
This the King signifies to Julius, and cites him to answer to a General
Council, which both the Emperor and he had called to be held at Lions. The
Council was held there, but soon removed to Pisa; where the Council cited
Julius to appear; and he not appearing, was condemned as an Incendiary,
unworthy to sit at the Helm of the Church, and declared deprived of the Papal
Dignity. There also Lewis coined golden Crowns with this Motto, Perdam nomen
Babylonis. I will destroy the name of Babylon. For it is observable, that all
that have quarrelled with the Sea of Rome these thirteen hundred years, have
called it Babylon, and Saint Hierom ad Marcellam.
Hierome was he that began.

We cannot charge the Successor of Iulins, Leo the X. to have stirred Wars
abroad; he loved too much his ease at home for that. But I could not pass by
him, for indeed his memory is precious to all Protestants, for giving occasion
to the Reformation by his Indulgences. And he is worthy to be recorded for his
sentence spoken to his Secretary Cardinal Bembo, Quantum nobis Crispinus.
nostrisque ea de Christo fabula profuerit satis est omnibus saeculis notum, an
anxiome of too high a nature to be Englished.

After him came next but one Clement the VII. the Fomenter of the quarrel
between the Emperor and the French, joining sometimes to the one, sometimes to
the other, and playing false with both, whereby he gave occasion to the taking
and sacking of Rome. The thundering of this Pope, and of his Successor Iovius.
Paul the III. against Henry the VIII. did him no harm, but to themselves, and
to the Roman See very much.

Of the following Popes till Pius the V. the Protestants have much to say, as
of men that sought their own pleasure, and wrought their ruin. Hence so much
blood split in horrible Massacres. But these are besides my subject, which is
to make the Popes to appear Authors of rebellion.

But now in a good time we are come to Pius the V. that Pope whom the English
Protestants have most reason to remember. For without admonition or citation
Cambdens Hist of Qu. Elizabeth.
premised, he pronounced a sentence of anathema against that blessed and
glorious Queen Elizabeth, to raise rebellion in the Kingdom against her
Authority and Life, and caused the same to be published and set up upon the
Palace Gate of the Bishop of London: the Title was this; A sentence
declaratory of our holy Lord Micolaus Sanderus de schismate Anglicano, lib. 3.
Pope Pius against Elizabeth Queen of England, and the Heretics adhering unto
her, Wherein her Subjects are declared absolved from the Oath of Allegiance,
and every thing due unto her whatsoever; and those which from thenceforth obey
her, are innodated with the anathema. In that Bull Pope Pius having first
styled himself Servant of Servants, declares that God has made the Bishop of
Rome Prince over all people, and all Kingdoms, to pluck up, destroy, scatter,
consume, plant, and build. Then he calls Elizabeth the pretended Queen of
England, the servant of wickedness. And having declared her crimes, which are
to have taken upon her self that supremacy which his Holiness pretended to, and
to have established the true Catholic Orthodox Religion in her Kingdoms, he
does thunder out this seditious Decree against her and all her loyal Subjects.
We do out of the fullness of our Apostolic power declare the aforesaid
Elizabeth, being an Heretic, and a favourer of Heretics, and her adherents in
the matters aforesaid, to have incurred the sentence of anathema, and to be cut
off from the unity of the body of Christ. And moreover we do declare her to be
deprived of her pretended Title to the Kingdom aforesaid, and of all Dominion,
Dignity, and Privilege whatsoever. And also the Nobility, Subjects, and People
of the said Kingdom, and all other which have in any sort sworn unto her, to
be for ever absolved from any such Oath, and all manner of duty of Dominion,
Allegiance, and Obedience, as we also do by authority of these presents absolve
them, and do deprive the same Elizabeth of her pretended Title to the Kingdom,
and all other things abovesaid. And we do command and interdict all and every
the Noblemen, Subjects, People, and others aforesaid, that they presume not to
obey her, or her Monitions, Mandates, and Laws: And those which shall do to the
contrary, we do innodate with the like sentence of anathema.

This Bull was the fire and the roaring of the Canon, and the bullet came forth
immediately; which was the rebellion in the North, for which Chapino Vitelli
was sent into England from the Duke of Alva, under pretense of compounding some
controversies about commerce. And Nicholas Morton was sent from the Pope to
knit the rebellion. Which he did, denouncing from his Master, that Queen
Elizabeth was an Heretic, and thereby had forfeited to the Pope all her
dominion and power. At the same time a rebellion broke out in Ireland, kindled
or blown by a Spaniard, Iuan Mendoza. And when the Rebels of England were
defeated, they found refuge among the Papist Rebels of Scotland, who set up
again the English rebellion. All these in vain, by the gracious assistance of
God to poor England, as if his compassion had been stirred up by his jealousy,
after that the Pope had declared himself so insolently, Prince over all People,
and all Kingdoms, to pluck up, destroy, scatter, consume, plant, and build. And
God would show, that to himself, not to the Pope, belongs the Kingdom, and
the Power, and the Glory for ever.

Neither did Pius the V. fight only by Bulls, but at the same time that the
Bull was published, he laid down a hundred thousand Crowns to raise the
rebellion, and promised fifty thousand more, yea, and to bear the whole charge
of the War. That money was distributed by one Ridolpho. And how active that
Pope was to stir Spain, France, and Netherlands against the Queen, and to put
her Kingdom in combustion, is related by Hieronymo Catena, an Author of great
credit at Rome in his life of Pius the V.

Gregory the XIII. succeeded Pius the V. in all his plots against England. He
gave to Thomas Stukely, an English Rebel, a Commission to help the Rebels of
Ireland, and get that Kingdom for the Bastard-Son of his Holiness, James
Boncompagnon; and gave him the command of eight hundred Italians to join with
King Sebastian of Portugal, who had engaged his word to the Pope to serve him
with his whole power against Queen Elizabeth, and had raised a great Army for
that expedition. But when Stukely came to Sebastian, he found him possessed
with a new project to help a Moor King of Fez, against another King who kept
him out of possession, and to get the Kingdom from them both. To that War he
invited Stukely, promising that presently after that work done (which he
represented to him most easy) they should go together to the War against
England and Ireland. So they sailed over into Africa, where Sebastian and his
whole Army were destroyed; and with him Stukely and the Popes Italian Soldiers
were cut in pieces. A deliverance of England ever to be remembered with praise
and admiration. So let thine enemies perish, O Lord.

This Pope had a great hand in that unparallelled villainy wrought by the
marriage of Henry King of Navarra, with the Sister of Charles the IX. of
France. A marriage which Pius the V. would never consent unto, by reason of
their difference in Religion. But when his Successor Gregory the XIII. was told
by the Cardinal of Lorrain, that this marriage was intended as a trap to
destroy Henry and his Protestant party, he presently gave his dispensation for
the celebrating of it, and encouraged the design. The horrible massacre which
attended the jollity of that marriage, was received at Thuanus.
Rome with triumphant expressions of public joy. And Cardinal Vrsin was sent
Legate into France, to praise the Kings piety and wisdom in that great action,
and to bestow blessings and spiritual graces upon the King and the Actors of
that fearful Tragedy. The Court of Rome might well praise what themselves had
procured, if not contrived; and truly the plot has an Italian garb, and looks
not like a production of the French soil.

Not long after this Pope sent to Henry the III. of France and to his people
Indulgences for millions of years, which were to be obtained by making
processions to four Churches in Paris, and by being zealous and diligent in the
extirpation of heresies, that is (in his style) to extermine the Protestants.

The male line of the Kings of Portugal being extinct, this Pope laid a claim
to the Kingdom, as depending from the holy See, and would have the Nation to
have taken Arms for him against the heirs from the females: But his claim was
hissed out with great scorn.

In the year 1580. this Pope sent an Italian called San Iosepho with some
Italian Troops into Ireland, to join with the Irish Rebels. When they were
demanded by a message from the Lord Deputy who they were, and what they came
for, they answered, Some that they were sent by the most holy Father the Pope,
and some from the Catholic King of Spain, to whom the Pope had given Ireland,
because Queen Elizabeth had justly forfeited her Title to Ireland by her
heresy. A doctrine which at the same time was preached in England and Ireland
by Jesuits and other Seminary Priests; with great boldness and vehemence: till
the Queen and her Council perceiving what danger the State was running into by
these men's activeness and impunity, Campian and some others sent by the Pope on
that errand were apprehended. And being examined, they obstinately defended the
Popes authority over the Queen, and maintained that she was no Queen, as being
lawfully deposed by the Pope; upon which they were condemned and executed. That
Crown of Martyrdom the Pope procured to his Confessors. And the greater the
number is of those Martyrs that the Papists muster, the more they exaggerate
the Popes cruelty to his truest Vassalls. For could the Pope expect, that
persons sent to persuade the people to dispossess and kill their Sovereign,
should have other dealing from the hand of Justice.

The principal Article of the late Papal Creed is, that which Pius the V. sets
forth in his Bull against the Queen, that God has made the Bishop of Rome
Prince over all people and all Kingdoms. But the English Papists are taught
that besides that general right over all Kingdoms, the Pope has a peculiar
right over England and Ireland as his proper Dominions. This is Bellarmins
doctrine which he has made bold to maintain unto King James himself. The King
Bellarm. lib. cui Titulus Tortus page 19. Rex Anglorum duplici jure subjectus
est Papae, uno communi omnibus Christianis ratione Apostolicae potestatis quae
in omnes extenditur, juxta illud. Ps. 44. Constitues eos Principes super omnem
terram: Altero proprio, ratione recti dominii.
of England (says he) is subject to the Pope by double right. The one by
reason of his Apostolic power, which extends over all men, according to that
(Charter) Ps. 44. Thou shall establish them Princes over all the earth. The
other proper, by a right dominion. Then he pleads that England and Ireland
are the Churches dominions, the Pope the direct Lord, and the King his Vassal.
This then being become an Article of Religion, in which the English Papists are
instructed; and this in consequence, that if the Pope disallow the King, he is
no more King of England, but an Usurper, and must be used accordingly: Let any
man judge, who has some equity and freedom of judgment left, whether a
prudent Prince and Council of State, ought to suffer such an instruction to be
given to the people. Truly the more Religion is pretended for that doctrine,
and the practice of Rebellion obtruded as a commandment of the Church, the
more it concerns the loyal Magistrate to oppose it vigorously.

Pope Sixtus the V. to favor the enterprise of Philip the II. upon England,
renewed the Excommunication of Queen Elizabeth, pronounced by Pius the V.
deprived her ( verbo tenus) of her Kingdom, absolved her subjects from all
Allegiance to her, and published a Croisada against her, as against the Turk,
giving plenary Indulgence to all that would make war against her. But the
Popes Curses provoked Gods blessings upon the Queen, who might say as David,
when Shimei cursed him; The Lord will requite me good for his cursing this day.
All the storms raised against England, were blown over without harm. The great
preparations of Spain served only to disable it, and secure England. And the
many attempts against the Queens life upon that Bull, contributed to her
safety, by manifesting to the World the wickedness of Rome, and the pernicious
effects of the Roman principles. For which I might produce the Examinations and
Confessions of many that suffered for attempting to murder the Queen, but I
will bring but one for all. William Parry acknowledged that he had promised at
Rome to kill the Queen, about which he was most troubled in his conscience,
till he lighted upon Dr. Allens book, which taught that Princes excommunicate
for heresy, were to be deprived of Kingdom and life: Which book (says he)
did vehemently excite me to prosecute my attempt.

This Popes Excommunications had more effect in France, for after that he had
excommunicated King Henry the III. and absolved his subjects from all
Allegiance to him; in consequence of that Bull many of the French rebelled
against their King, and he wasslain upon that account, by a Dominican Friar.
Which when this Pope heard, he commended the action highly, in a full
Consistory at Rome, and forbad that any funeral rites should be celebrated for
him. Which funeral rites (usually celebrated at Rome for departed Princes)
consisting most in prayer for their souls, it appears that his Holiness was
not contented that he had slain that King by his Bull, but would also damn his
soul.

Gregory the XIV. excommunicated by his Bulls Henry the IV. of France,
forbidding all Peers, Nobles, Cities and Commons, to yield him obedience, and
declaring him incapable of the Crown, as an Heretic and relapse. But that Bull
was by the Court of Parliament, then sitting at Tours, condemned to be torn and
burnt by the Hangman.

Clement the VIII. did the same over again, and excommunicated Henry: The Bull
was condemned as the other, to be burnt by the hand of the Hangman* But the
effect of these Bulls appeared by the attempts against the Kings life, which
soon after followed; first by a woman, next by Peter Barriere, and again by
John Chastel; all denying him to be King, because he was not absolved by the
Pope. Neither did the effects of these Bulls cease, after that the King was
absolved by his Holiness: For by them the King got his death. Ravilliac who
killed him, could allege them when he was examined; and say that the King was
an Heretic in his heart, and deserved to be slain, as an enemy of the Church.

Paul the V. was as turbulent as his predecessors, as he showed it in his
insolent and impertinent quarrel with the Venetians, because they had stopped by
Edict the giving of Lands to the Church, whereby the State lost many tributes
and services. He threatened them of Excommunication, if they did not recall that
Law. And upon their maintaining of it, he excommunicated them, and put their
State in Interdict. But it took no effect, for none of their Clergy would or
durst obey it; the Jesuits only excepted, who therefore were expelled out of
their dominions. They condemned the Popes Bull by Edict, and forbad the
bringing of it into their Territory, upon pain of hanging: Neither did they
give any satisfaction to the Pope, when the business came to an Arbitrament:
but forced him to make amends to himself, and to come to their terms.

In the beginning of this Popes reign, was detected that Treason, not to be
matched in any age for cruelty and depth of villainy, the Gunpowder-plot, to have
destroyed in one blow the King, the Parliament, the Judges of the Land, and all
the flower and strength of the Kingdom of England. This horrid Treason was the
effect of the several Bulls of the Pope before the Reign of our gracious King
James of glorious memory; who coming into his Kingdom of England, found it
lying under a Papal Interdict; and himself excluded from the Crown, by a Bull
sent into England, a little before the death of Queen Elizabeth, whereby all
that are not Roman Catholics, are declared incapable of, and excluded from the
Succession: of which his Majesty complains in his Apology. And that Bull was
produced in the Indictment of the Jesuit Garnet, as the principal motive of
the Gunpowder Treason.

This gave occasion to the Oath of Supremacy, set forth by the King and his
Parliament then sitting, for the security of his Majesty's Life and Dignity;
wherein it is required of all to whom it is administered, to acknowledge his
Majesty to be the lawful King of the Realms of England, Scotland and Ireland;
and that the Pope has no right to depose him of his Kingdoms, or dispense his
Subjects from their obedience to him. Also that they abhor as impious and
heretical, this doctrine, That Princes excommunicated by the Pope, may justly
be deposed or slain by their own Subjects.

This Oath being presented to the Roman Catholics, some of them made no
difficulty to take it, among others, Blackwell the Archpriest. Whereupon the
Pope sent Apostolical Letters into England, declaring that Dated Sept. 22. 1606.
this Oath could not be taken with a safe conscience, and exhorting the English
to suffer all kinds of torments, and death it self, rather then to offend Gods
Majesty by such an Oath. To imitate the constancy of other English Martyrs. To
have their loins girt about with virtue, to put on the Breast Plate of
righteousness, and take the Buckler of Faith. He tells them that God who has
begun in them that good work, will perfect it, and will not suffer them to be
Orphans, etc. And he injoyneth them to observe diligently the precepts
contained in the Letters which Clement the VIII. his predecessor had written a
little before to Mr. George Archpriest of England. By which Letters all
Princes of a Religion contrary to the Roman, are excluded from the Crown of
England.

These Letters whereby the English were exhorted to be Martyrs of the Popes
Sovereignty in England, and to make it an Article of their faith, which they
must sign with their blood, that the Pope has power to depose Princes, and
expose them to be expelled and slain by their own subjects, did not receive
that entertainment which he expected among the English of his Religion: For
some rejected them as supposititious, and forged by the Heretics, to draw
persecution upon them, and kindle their Kings wrath against them, he being
already justly provoked to revenge by the late conspiracy. The Pope hearing of
this, sends other, and more express letters Dated Aug. 23. 1607.
into England, to expostulate with the Roman Catholics; saying That he wondered
at their doubting of the truth of the Apostolic letters, to dispense
themselves upon that pretense from obeying his commandments: And therefore he
declares, That those Letters were written by himself, not only motu proprio
and ex certa scientia, by his own motion and certain knowledge, but also after
a long and grave deliberation, enjoining them again to obey those Letters,
because such is his pleasure.

To these letters which set up rebellion with a high hand, as an Article of the
Roman Faith, were joined letters of Cardinal Bellarmine to Blackwell the
Archpriest, wherein he chides him bitterly for taking the Oath, which under
color of modifications, had no other end, but to transport the Popes authority
to a Successor of Henry the VIII. And by the examples of his Predecessors, he
exhorts him to defend the Popes primacy, whom he calls The Head of the
Faith.

Of this Oath thus prohibited by the Pope, and cried down by Bellarmine, the
Jesuit Becanus says, That both of them [the Pope and Bellarmine] Beean. de
dissidio Anglic. Vterque negat salva conscientia praestari posse hoc juramentum
quia abnegarent fi-Catholicam.
deny that it may be taken with a safe Conscience; because by taking it, the
Catholic Faith is denied.

Is it then an Article of the Catholic Roman faith, that Princes
excommunicated by the Pope, are ipso facto deposed, and their subjects absolved
from all obedience and fidelity to them? It is directly, though not believed
but by few: You have that fundamental Law authentically pronounced by Gregory
the VII. and it is made a Canon of the Roman Church. By Apostolical Causa 15.
Qu. 5. cap. Nos Sanctorum. Eos qui excommunicatis fidelitate, aut Sacramento
constricti sunt Apostolica authoritate a juramento absolvivimus, and ne sibi
fidem observent omnibus modis prohibemus.
authority we absolve from their oath, all them that are bound by fidelity or
oath to excommunicate persons, and by means we forbid them to keep faith unto
such persons. I would ask the Roman Catholics, Seriously do you believe this?
And are you ready to seal that faith with your obedience or sufferings upon
occasions? If you believe and will maintain it, you are not good subjects, but
dangerous persons in the State. If you deny faith and obedience to that Papal
Decree, you are not good Roman Catholics; for if you were, you would
acknowledge the Pope the Head of the Faith, with Bellarmine, and that the Pope
cannot err in his Canons, and that it is in the Popes power to make Articles
of faith, according to the determination of the Council of Trent. Now the Pope
has made this an Article of your faith, the denying of it an heresy, and the
resisting of it a crime punished in the persons of Kings by the deprivation of
Kingdom and life.

Open your eyes, Christian souls, that are so much blinded as to pin your faith
upon the Popes Decrees; And reading in your own Authors the histories of the
Popes behavior which I have here represented, acknowledge that those Decrees
for many hundred years have been the powerful stirrers of rebellion in
Christendom, and the ambition of Popes the first Intelligence that sets the
great Orb of sedition on going.

After that the Popes have thus commanded and wrought rebellion by express
Decrees, and filled the Christian world with fire and blood these five or six
hundred years, have the Jesuits the face, when we object this against the Head
of their Faith, to object unto us in exchange some passages out of books either
false, or disowned by us, if true: And the defensive Arms of a few persons,
living under the Cross, and driven by themselves upon the brink of despair? The
evil which men of our Religion have said or done, we condemn freely and openly.
Let the Romanists condemn also so many Decrees of the Popes which have been the
Incentives of war, and brands of rebellion: But that they cannot, as long as
they remain Papists, sworn to approve all that the Pope says or does.

The difference between the faults of the Pope and those of Protestants about
the point of obedience, is this; That disobedience with us is a crime, but with
him it is a Law. We punish rebels, but the Pope rewards them. We say to rebels
after St Paul, That they that So did Sixtus the V. of which before.
resist the higher powers, shall receive to themselves damnation. But the Pope
promises eternal life to make subjects rebel against their King. We abhor the
murderers of Kings, but the Pope sets them on by his excommunications, and
after the murder committed, makes panegyricks on their praise.

Can the Romanists produce among us a Priest that has made himself a Temporal
Prince by robbing his Master of his land, who has kicked down the Emperors
crown, trodden upon his neck with his foot, deposed him from his Kingdom, made
his son rise in Arms against him, absolved his subjects from their obedience,
and given his Dominions to another; One that makes himself the absolute
disposer of Kingdoms, and Master of the Universe? Such a Priest is no where to
be found but at Rome.

After this true account of so many Emperors and Kings deposed and killed, and
so much rebellion, slaughter, and desolation wrought in Christendom by the
Papal excommunications and factions; let the conscionable Reader, who is not
altogether ignorant in modern History, judge what truth there is in our
Adversaries assertion, That in this last Century of years there have been page
93.
more Princes deposed and murdered for their Religion by those Protestants of
Integrity, then have been in all the others since Christ's time by the Popes
excommunications, or the attempts and means of Roman Catholics. He should have
set down a list of those Princes deposed and murdered by Protestants, and for
their Religion. For my part I have heard of none. Indeed Charles the I. our
holy King and Martyr, suffered for his Religion: and the Adversary may take
that one for many, because he was (...), worth alone many Princes. But they
that murdered him were not Protestants, they disavow that name; And it was for
the Protestant Religion that he suffered.

But since he speaks of the means and attempts made by Roman Catholics against
Princes, he shall hear a little more of them.

CHAP. V. The Adversaries Defense of the Jesuits examined. Their Doctrine and
Attempts against the Crown and life of Kings.
THe Adversary who is commended in the Epistle to the Reader, as a most
observant Son of the Church of England, takes upon him the defense of the
Jesuit Mariana, so infamous for his doctrine of killing of Kings, and says
three things about that.

The one is, That he handles that matter only problematically. page 94.
But the Court of Parliament of Paris, composed of grave heads, did not
understand it so, when they condemned his book to the fire. Neither does he
speak of the murder of Henry the III. of France problematically, when he
exalts the murderer in these words. Making a show of delivering Mariana lib.
1. de Rege and Regis Iustitutione, cap. 6. Specie litteras in manus tradendi
cultro quem herbis noxiis medicatum manu tegebat supra vesicam altum vulnus
inflixit. Insignem animi confidentiam! Facinus memorabile -- Caeso Rege ingens
sibi nomen fecit.
letters [to the King] he gave him a deep wound above the bladder with a
poisoned knife which he hid in his hand. O admirable confidence of mind! O
memorable action! by killing the King, he got to himself a great name, And in
the same place he taxes the Kings servants, who presently killed that
murderer, of cruelty and barbarousness.

The second answer for Mariana is, That the question was not for killing of
Kings, but for killing of Tyrants. page 94.
This man shows himself a right scholar of the Jesuits, for this is their
distinction. But if a King deposed by the Pope keeps his Kingdom in spite of
him, they account him no more a King, but a Tyrant. And whereas there are two
sorts of Tyrants, some by usurpation, which they call Tyrannos in Titulo,
Tyrants in the Title; some Tyrants by administration; the Jesuits hold, That a
lawful King when he is once deposed by Suarez desens. lib. 6. cap. 5. Incipit
esse Tyrannus in Titulo quia non est legitimus Rex,
the Pope, begins to be a Tyrant in his Title, because he is no more a lawful
King. And being thus become a Tyrant, it is by their doctrine lawful to kill
him. Therefore Henry the IV. of France, whom no body durst have called King at
Rome before his absolution, was so often assaulted by murderers at that time,
because he was accounted a Tyrant as long as he reigned without the Popes
approbation. Upon that account Bellarmine says, That the Bellarm. in
Barklaium, cap. 3. Non permitto tibi (inquit Papa) ut regi non pareas, quod
esset contra jus divinum, sed sacio ut ille qui tibi Rex erat non sit sibi
deinceps Rex.
Pope deposing a King, does not permit the people to disobey their King, but he
makes him that was their King, to be their King no more.

The third answer is, that the whole order of Jesuits disavowes Marian's
position, and have categorically determined the contrary. But why then did the
same General of the Jesuits, who disavowed it when destruction was hanging
over the head of his Order, approve and license it before? For the Book was
approved by Aqua viva General of the Jesuits, and Stephanus Hoyeda Visitor of
their Society in the Province of Toledo. And theapprobation mentions that
Quippe approbatus prius a viris doctis and gravibus ex eodem ordine.
other Jesuits had approved it before.

The Adversary brings some allegations out of Books of Jesuits that disown
that position, that it is lawful to attempt against the life of a Prince. The
Jesuit Eudemono-Johannes had made those allegations ready for him. He makes
Tolet say in his Summary, lib. 5. cap. 6. that it is not lawful to attempt
against the life of a Prince, though he never so much abuse his Power, and that
is flat heresy to maintain the contrary. But these are Tolets words in the
alleged Tolet Sum. lib. 5. cap. 6. Tyrannum administratione qui quidem habet
verum titulum sed tyrannice tractat subditos non licet absque publicae
authoritate occidere.
place, That, It is not lawful to kill with out public authority a Tyrant by
admistration, who has indeed a just Title, but uses his Subjects
tyrannycally. Now what public authority does he mean, but that of the Pope?
And that is meant also by Suarez Defens. full. lib. 6. cap. 4. Dicimus Principem
propter tyrannicum regimen vel propter quaecunque crimina non posse ab aliquo
privata authoritate occidi.
Suarez, who says, That a Prince may not be killed by any out of private
authority for his Tyrannical Government, or for any crime whatsoever. He will
have a public authority for it, which is that of the Popes. For both
Bellarmine and Becan maintain, Bellarm lib. 5. de Romano Pontif. cap. 8. Becan
lib. de controversia Anglicana. Jojada Pontifex prius privavit Athaliam regno
deinde vita. Et paulo post, Quicquid potestatis and jurisdictionis permissum
fuit Pontifici in Veteri Testamento, hoc etiam in Novo promissum est illi.
that the Pope has the same right over Kings, as Jehojada had over Athalia.
Now Jehojada the high Priest (says he) first deprived Athalia of her Kingdom,
and next of her life. And a little after, All the power and jurisdiction that
was granted to the high Priest in the Old Testament, is promised to him also in
the New. This is then that authority without which they will not have a King
killed, and by which he may be killed, even the Popes authority.

Our Jesuit alleges Salmeron, expounding the 13. Chapter to the Romans,
Where (says he) he refers the act of Ehud against King Eglon to Gods
express commandment. That Is granted. But hear him further. It is not lawful
for a private Salmeron in Romans 13. Disp. 5. Non licet privato propria
authoritate Tyrannum interficere, maxim si in pacifica possessione sit and
armatus satellitio regnet.
person to kill a Tyrant by his own authority, especially if he be in quiet
possession and reign armed with Guards about him. All the security which he
gives to Kings, whom the Pope will call them Tyrants, is, that no man by his
private authority can kill him; but by the public authority, which is that of
the Pope, any man may. And he gives a good warning to such Kings to keep a
strong guard about their persons, without which a Jesuit will soon find it
lawful to kill them.

Gregorius de Valentia alleged by the Adveasary, Greg. de Valent. part 2. q.
64.
says indeed, It is no way permitted, for a man to attempt upon the life of
his Prince, albeit he abuse his authority: But he adds, If it be not done by
public judgment. Now that public judgment is either that of the State, or
of the Pope, or of the General of the Jesuits. But let us hear the same
Gregory speak more home. Temporal domination and superiority over Greg. de
Valen. Tom. 3. disputationum in Thomamdis. 1. q. 12. pan. 2 Dominatio
temporalis and superioritas in subditos per sententiam Papae potest omnino
adimi haereticis. Ratio est quia si possunt privari vita multo magis omnibus
bonis, and per consequens omni superioritate in alios.
Subjects, may by the Popes sentence be taken away from Heretics. The reason
is, that if they can be deprived of life, much more of all goods, and by
consequence of all superiority over others; taking it for granted and
presupposed that Kings may be deprived of life by the Popes Authority.

Bellarmin alleged by the Adversary, may have declared his opinion as the
other Jesuits, that a King must not be deposed and slain by private authority;
then it may be done by public authority. And we have showed before that
Bellarmin allows the same authority to the Pope over Kings, as Jehoiada had
over Athalia, whom he deposedand killed; but he speaks more plainly, when
Bellarm. sub nomine Matthew. Torti* page 84. and 85. Edit. Colon. Ultus est Deus
Christum suum dum per alium sacratum virum alioqui militiae imperitum and
inermem regem eundem non manifesto divinae providentiae miraculo interfecit.
he commends the murder committed by a Monk against the person of Henry the
III. of France, and calls the Murderer Sacratum Virum, a sacred person. It
seems then he had forgotten himself, Idem contra Barckl. cap. 7. Non pertinet
ad Monachos aut alios Ecclesiasticos viros caedes facere multo minus per
insidias Reges occidere; Neque summi Pontisices consueverunt ista ratione Reges
coercere. Mos est primum pattern corrigere, deinde per censuram Ecclesiasticam
sacramentorum communione privare. Denique subditos eorum a juramento
fidelitatis absolvere, eosque dignitate atque authoritate regia privare:
Executio ad alios pertinet.
when he would not have Ecclesiastical men to kill Kings with their own hands,
but to stand to the method that the Pope observes. Which is first to admonish
Kings fatherly, Then deprive them of the Communion of the Sacraments by
Ecclesiastical censures. Finally to absolve their subjects from the Oath of
their Allegiance, and if needs be, deprive them of the Royal Authority. The
execution belongs to others.

The Adversary also alleges Lessius in his book de Scientia and Jure, he
means de Justitia. It seems the man had heard of the book, but never seen
it. But for that mistake, his quotation is right Lessius de Iustitia and Iure,
lib. 2. cap. 9. dubio 4. Talis non potest a privatis interimi quandiu manet
Princeps, etc.
. In that place speaking of such a King as is not a tyrant by usurpation, but
by administration, he says, Such a Prince cannot be slain by private persons,
as long as he remains a Prince. Which is altogether against the security of
Kings lives: For the Popes Decrees and the writings of the Jesuits having so
many times determined that a Prince deposed by the Pope, is no more a Prince,
but a private person; this goodly Aphorism of Lessius exposes the lives of
all Kings deposed or excommunicated to the attempts of all private men Idem
Ibid. dubio 11. Princeps non potest a subdito interfici nisi forte ob
necessariam vitae suae desensionem.
. He allows also a subject to kill his Prince in the defense of his own life,
contrary to the Evangelical precept of not resisting the higher Dub. 12. Si
tantum excrescat tyrannis ut non videatur amplius tolerabilis nec ullum aliud
remedium supersit, primum a Rep. vel comitiis regni vel alio habente
authoritatem esse deponendum and hostem declarandum ut in ipsius personam
liceat quicquam attentare. Tunc enim desinit esse Princeps.
powers. And that you may know him to be like his confreres in treasonable
doctrine. He concludes that question thus: If the tyranny grows to that
point, that it seem not to be tolerated any more, and that there be no remedy;
He must first be deposed by the Commonwealth, or the States of the Kingdom; or
by another that has authority; and declared an enemy, that it may be lawful to
attempt any thing against his person. What is that other person that has
authority over King, Commonwealth and States? It must be one that belongs not
to the State, else he should be a subject, and could not pretend to that
authority of deposing the King, and exposing his life to all attempts. And what
other person pretends to that authority, but the Pope.

He alleges also Azorius in his Moral Institution, but does not quote any
place. This is his doctrine, All that were bound to an heretic in any Azorius
hist. Moral. part 1. lib. 8* cap. 13. Eos omnes qui erant haeretico aliqua
ratione obstrict jusjurandi seu fidelitatis seu alterius pactionis liberari --
Absolutos se noverint a debito fidelitatis Domini, and totius obsequii
quicunque lapsis manifesto in haeresin aliquo pacto quacunque firmitate
tenebantur astricti.
manner, whether with oath or fidelity, or any other paction. Let them know
that they are absolved from all debt of fidelity or obedience, etc. The Pope
may take away or give a King for just causes, and then the people may obey the
Pope as their superior, who has sovereigne power both upon the King and
Kingdom. If Idem Ibid. part 2. lib. 11. cap. 5. - A Romano Pontifice Rex au,
fertur vel datur justis de causis and tunc populus tanquam superiori Romano
Pontifici parere debet -- Habet in Regem and regnum summam potestatem.
he has sovereigne power over them, he has power of life and death.

And whereas this Gentleman alleges Gretzer as one that confuteth all
Mariana's grounds, I find that he defends them all in that very place which he
quoteth. We are not such dastards (says Gretzer-Vespertilio
Haereticopoliticus, page 159. Tam timidi and trepidi non sumus ut asserere
palam vereamur Romanum Pontificem posse si necessitas exigat subditos
Catholicos solvere juramento fidelitatis, si Princeps tyrannice illos tractet.
he) as to fear openly to affirm that the Pope of Rome may, if necessity so
require, free his Catholic subjects from their oath of fidelity, if their
Sovereigne handle them tyrannically. Yea he takes openly Mariana's cause,
saying, page 160. that Mariana is wrongfully traduced, for writing that it is
lawful to kill any Prince that disobeyeth the Pope; since he maintains that a
lawful Prince who disobeyeth the Pope, notwithstanding ought not to be made
away by any private man, if sentence be not pronounced against him. And he that
must pronounce that Sentence is the Pope. He complains also that Mariana is
unjustly accused for affirming that a tyrant ought to be poisoned; seeing he
Idem page 162. Ne tyannum quidem primi vel secundi generis etiam post
judiciariam contra illum latam sententiam veneno licite tollis, si Tyrannus
ipsemet venenum illud sumere and sibi applicare debeat.
maintains the contrary; affirming that a tyrant cannot lawfully be made away
by poison, if himself take it, and apply it to himself. Which cannot be
avoided, when his meat and drink is poisoned. So in the end he agrees with
Mariana, whose words I have produced in my second Chapter, and is content that
a tyrant be poisoned, so that he takes not the poison himself. Is not that
straining the gnat, and swallowing the camel? These holy murderers make
nothing of killing a King, only they are scrupulous about the circumstance.

Thus I have showed what those Jesuits say, which this Gentleman alleges:
All but Serarius and Richeome, which I have not by me, no more then he that
quoteth them. And I have made it plain, that they all consent with Mariana, and
speak the same language.

But what! he tells us that the opinion of Mariana was condemned by a
Provincial Congregation of the Jesuits; and that condemnation ratified by the
General of the Jesuits Claudius Aquaviva. So it was, with shame enough, to
Aquaviva and his confreres, who had approved and licenced it before. But see
what that condemnation comes to, the Jesuits seeing their Sect made odious by
the writings of Mariana, Suarez, Vasquez, and others, and more by the
murdering of Kings, by persons died with their principles, made Ne quisquam
scripto vel sermon doceat licitum esse cuicunque personae, quocunque
praetextu, tyrannidis Reges aut Principes occidere.
an order among themselves, whereby they forbad to write or teach that doctrine
any more. The words of the Ratification are those, That none teach by writing
or speaking, that it is lawful for any person, or upon any pretense of Tyranny,
to kill Kings and Princes.

Was it not time, think ye, to forbid teaching so any more, when they had been
expelled for it out of France, and made the objects of the public execration?
But how gross is their fraud in that order! Do they forbid their Society to
believe so? By no means, but to teach so. Neither will they have it lawful for
any person to kill Kings, but to such as are commissioned for it. Neither will
they have the execution done upon any pretense of tyranny, but only upon the
definitive Sentence of the Pope or the States. And how are the lives of Kings
and Princes more secure then before by their declaring that it is not lawful to
kill Kings and Princes, seeing that in their account they are no more Kings and
Princes, when they are once excommunicated and deposed by the Pope?

The Adversary alleges also the Council of Constance, which condemns the
doctrine of killing tyrants as erroneous. But if this Gentleman be a true
Papist, and hold that the Pope is Mariana lib. 2. cas. 6. p. 62. Id decretum
Romano Pontifici Martino V. probatum non invenio, non Eugenio* aut
successoribus quorum consensu Conciliorum Ecclesiasticorum sanctitas stat
praesertim quod non sine Ecclesiae motu tricipiti Pontificum dissidio de summo
Pontificatu contendentium celebratum fuisse scimus.
above the Council, he shall make nothing of that Councils Authority, seeing
that it is not liked by the Popes; for we learn of Mariana, that neither Martin
the V. then elected, nor Eugenius nor his Successors approve it, and he
disgraceth it as assembled in a tumultuous time, when there were three Popes
reigning together.

But the truth is, That the Decree of that Council is rather against the
safety of Kings. For the case propounded to the Council by Gerson, was not
about the murder of Sovereigne Princes, but about the killing of a great
Officer of the Crown who rules tyrannically, and exalts himself above his
King: for John Duke of Burgundy who had killed Lewis Duke of Orleans, pretended
him to have been a Tyrant in that kind. If then such Tyrants be declared
inviolable persons by the Council, the Council by its authority guards them
against the attempts of loyal subjects, and strengthens them against their
King.

Suarez goes another way to work to elude the authority Suarez in Keg. Mag.
Brit. lib. 6. cap. 4. sect. 20. Vbileget Rex in Concilio Constantiensi
particulam illam, Principis per Papam excommunicati vel deprivati? aut illam
per suos subditos aut alios quoscunque.
of that Decree, saying to our Most Excellent King James, That the Council of
Constance forbids not the killing of a King excommunicated by the Pope; for
indeed that was not the case agitated in the Council.

And now we are upon Suarez, we will set down here one of his golden sentences
to this purpose. If (says he) under the word of Excommunication Ejusdem lib.
cap. 6. sect. 24. Si sub voce excommunicationis comprehendatur depositio and
diffidatio quae per sententiam cononicam interdum fit, sic veritatem continere
illam propositionem Regem excommunicatum impune deponi vel occidi quibuscunque
posse.
you comprehend deposition and devesting a Prince of his right, which sometimes
is done by a canonical sentence, then there is truth in that proposition, that
a King excommunicated may be deposed or slain by any persons whatsoever
impunedly.

The Adversary concludes his justification of the Jesuits, by alleging the
Decree of Sorbon against the doctrine of King-killing, and the Arrest of the
Parliament of Paris against the book of Mariana. What style must be given to
this man's confidence? Could he presume so much upon the Readers ignorance, as
to bring that for the Jesuits which is most against them? Who knows not that
the Decree of Sorbon was directly made against the Jesuits, as the assertors
of the doctrine of King-killing? Who knows not that the Arrest of Parliament
which condemns Mariana's book to the fire, blasteth expressly the doctrine and
the sect of the Jesuits? If he say that he brings that to clear the Roman
Religion, he changes the question, for he had undertaken to defend the
Jesuits. And these allegations are for us, who desire to show to the world,
that many Professors of the Roman Religion abhor these principles, overcome by
the evidence of honest truth; and therefore are not true Papists, since their
belief is not ruled by the Head of the Roman Faith in the point which most
nearly concerns his power and grandeur. This Gentleman might be ashamed to
allege the Sorbon, if he knows what Decree was made by them Apr. 4. 1626.
against the book of the Jesuit Santarel, and the Jesuitical doctrine of
King-killing: A Decree confirmed the 8. of May following by the University of
Paris.

After these Allegations wherewith this Gentleman cuts the throat of his cause
with his own sword, Judge page 96.
ye what reason he has to cry up, By this time I hope the tempest is pretty
well laid. But he must have a little more of that tempest about his ears: And
having so marred his own market, and given me occasion to lay open the iniquity
of his sect, he must labor once more to satisfy diverse of his good friends
whom he has found ibid.
scandalized at the Fathers of the Society, for protecting so villainous and
treasonable a Thesis.

If now I bring upon the scaffold some more of their most notorious expressions
and actions, they may not blame me, as I do them, for charging the whole party
with the faults of particulars: For whereas this Gentleman charge the
generality of the Protestants with the opinions of Knox and Paraeus, I charge
not all the Roman Catholics with these villainous doctrines and actions, but
only the Court of Rome, and the Jesuits. These two I put together, for all
that the Jesuits have taught or done to promote rebellion and high Treason was
undertaken to advance the Court of Rome, and by a particular influence from
that Court, whose especial favorites and most devoted champions they are.

Since this Gentleman stands upon the sentence of the Court of Parliament of
Paris, let him hear that great man Achilles de Harlay, the first President of
that Venerable Court; who, when King Henry the IV. of France, after long
solicitations of the Court of Rome, was persuaded to recall the Jesuits
banished before out of the Kingdom, made an Oration to dissuade him from it.
That Oration is related by Thuanus another President of that Court, who was
then present. There that virtuous Achilles represents to the King the doctrine
of the Jesuits, which is, That the Pope Thuanus Hist. lib. 130. ad ann. 1604.
Iesuitae docent. Pontisicem jus habere Reges extra communionem Ecclesiae
ponandi; excommunicatum Regem tyrannum esse, and subditos impune contra eum
insurgere. Ipsorum unumquemque qui vel minoribus Ecclesiae Ordinibus sit
initiatus quodcunque crimen admiserit in laesae Majestatis crimen non posse
incidere, quippe qui minime sint amplius Regis subditi nec jurisdictioni ejus
subjecti. Ita Ecclesiasticos per eorum doctrinam a seculari potestate eximi,
and Manus cruentas licere impune Regibus sacro-sanctis afferre. Hoc eos libris
editis asserere.
has that right to put Kings out of the communion of the Church; that an
excommunicate King is a tyrant, and that his subjects may impunedly rise
against him. That every one of those that have but one of the least Orders of
the Church, cannot be guilty of Treason, what crime soever he commit; because
Clergymen are no more the Kings subjects, nor under his jurisdiction: So that
Ecclesiastic persons are by their doctrine exempted from the secular powers,
and may impunedly fall upon their Kings with their sanguinary hands. This they
affirm in their published books. That grave Judge spoke that upon good ground;
for the books of the Jesuits insist much upon the exemption of Clerks from
Temporal Jurisdictions. Whence the Jesuit Emanuel Sa draws this conclusion,
That Emanuel Sa in Aphorismis tit. Clericus. Rebellio* Clerici adversus
Principem, non est crimen lesae Majestatis, quia Principi non est subditus.
the Rebellion of a Clergyman against the Prince, is not Treason, because he
is not the Princes subject. Which words are omitted in the Edition of Paris,
but they remain in that of Collen, and in that of Antwerp. For that reason
Bellarmine finds great fault with those that slew the Monk who had murdered
Henry the III. of France, (as I alleged before) because they had slain
sacratum virum, a consecracred man. A more sacred man in his opinion, and more
inviolable then the Sacred Majesty of a King. The murder of that great Prince,
the Venerable Harlay represented unto the King, and how it was Thuanus* ibid.
exalted as a holy Act by the Jesuit Guignard, who had writ a book in the
commendation of the murderer. And puts his Majesty in mind of the Attempt
made upon his person by Peter Barriere suborned by the Jesuit Varade.

He might also have put him in mind of John Chastel Thuanus
a Scholar of the Jesuits, who hit him in the mouth, and struck out one of his
teeth, intending to have cut his throat. In his examination he confessed that
he being guilty of a great crime, was kept prisoner by the Jesuits in the
chamber of Meditations, where after they had long terrified his soul, they
propounded to him a way to Iessen his torments in hell which he had deserved by
his crimes; and that was to kill the King, which the miserable youth promised
and attempted.

Upon this the College of the Jesuits was searched, and many persons seized
on, among which was found a book in the praise of James Clement the murderer
of Henry the III. written by the Jesuit Guignard, as himself confessed,
containing many arguments and reasons to prove that it was lawful and just to
kill Henry the III. together with many inductions and incitements to make away
his Successor, who was Henry the IV. then reigning. The Theams given to young
Scholars, were found to be about killing of Tyrants, with praises of the
attempt, and exhortations to it. And it was found, that after that Paris was
reduced to the Kings obedience, the Masters of the Forms had forbidden their
scholars to pray for the King.

The year before, Barriere being examined, had confessed that the Jesuit
Varade, Rector of the College of the Jesuits, had incited and adjured him
upon the Sacrament of Confession, and the Communion of the Lords Body, to kill
the King; assuring him, that Thuanus.
if he suffered for it, he should obtain the Crown of Martyrdom. Upon all
these evidences Upon that Pyramide the Jesuits were called Homines norae and
maleficae superstitionis, qui Remp. turbabant, quorum instinctu piacularis
adolescens dirum facinus instituerat.
the Jesuits were expelled out of France by Arrest of the Court of Parliament,
and a Pyramid erected with inscriptions declaring their expulsion and the
causes of it, for a memorial of perpetual execration to posterity.

Ten years after, they returned from their exile, the same men, corrupting the
youth, and working rebellion; till in the end they got what they would have,
even the Kings heart, which they keep in their principal house la Flesche,
after he had been stabbed by Ravaillac, a wretch, who in his examination and
confession showed sufficiently by whose instructions he was persuaded to that
parricidial act, for he gave this reason why he did it, because the King would
make War unto God, in as King James defense of the right of Kings.
much as he prepared war against the Pope, and that the Pope was God, which
is the plain doctrine of the Jesuits. And being inquired whether he had ever
confessed his design to any, he named the Jesuit Aubigny, and that he had
showed him the Knife: Which when Aubigny denied, Ravaillac maintained it to him
before his Judges.

To favor the design of killing that great King, and prepare the World for it,
four months before he was murdered, the Arrest of the Court of Parliament of
Paris Note this.
against John Chastel, who had attempted to murder him, was censured and
forbidden to be read by an Act of the Consistory at Rome, and together the
History of Thuanus for relating too plainly that horrid action, and the part
which the Jesuits had in it. By the same Consistorial Act a Book of Mariana
was censured; not that which approves the murdering of Kings. The Court of
Rome was not so unkind as to disgrace a work which does their work; but another
Book which treats of Coins. Certainly had they disliked that notorious Book
condemned to the fire by the Court of Parliament of Paris, they would not have
forgotten to censure it while they were in hand with Mariana.

As soon as Henry the IV. was stricken, the College of the Jesuits was
environed with a Guard, the Magistrate and the people looking upon them as the
Doctors and Contrivers of high Treason. And presently they were sued by the
University of Paris, as corrupters of the youth, and teachers of treasonable
doctrine. Peter Marteliere a famous Advocate pleaded for the University, and
maintained that in the Confession of Ravaillac evident marks were found of the
Doctrine of the Jesuits. The Jesuits were cast, and commanded to shut up
their College, and not to teach Scholars any more. The Kings Council
required their expulsion, but they had friends about the Queen Regent, and were
suffered to stay; and in time recovered also the liberty to teach.

Five years before that Kings death, it was a famous History how Father Cotton
a Jesuit and his Confessor Thuanus* Hist. lib. 123. ad an. 1604.
had written in a paper some questions which he had propounded to a Maid, who
was said to be possessed with a Devil who told strange things. Among other
things about which he would be resolved, these were some, What should be the
issue of the conversion of Monsieur de Laval, and of the enterprises against
Geneva, and the continuance of Heresy, and of the estate of Mademoiselle
Acarie, and of the life of the King. Which last question is a matter capital by
the Laws, for which Tertullian gives the same reason that an Tertul.
Apologet. Qui de salute Principis vel summa Reip. Mathematicos ariolos,
aruspices, Vaticinatores consulit, cum co qui responderit capite punitur. Cui
autem opus est scrutari super Caesaris salute nisi a quo adversus illum aliquid
cogitatur, aut post illam speratur and sustinetur.
English Lawyer would give, because it is imagining the Kings death. This paper
he had laid in a Book which he had promised to Monsieur Gillot a Councellor of
the Great Chamber, and through oversight he gave that paper with the Book.

Two years after this Monsieur de la Force, Viceroy of Bearn and Navarre, by
the intelligences which he had from Spain, by reason of his neighborhood unto
it, was advertised that a Spaniard of such a stature, of such a hair, and in
such apparel, departed such a day from Barcelona, to go into France with
intendment to make away the King by poison or other means. This Spaniard came
to Paris, and addressed himself to Father Cotton, who brought him unto the
King, and gave great commendations of him. A while after came the Letters of
Monsieur de la Force, giving warning to his Majesty against that Spaniard, with
the foresaid description. The King showed the Letters to Father Cotton, and
commanded him to bring back again that Spaniard. But Cotton returning a good
while after, told the King that he could not find the man, and that he was gone.

Not a year before the Kings death, Cotton writ unto a Provincial of Spain,
diverse things which the King had revealed unto him in confession: Which
treachery being discovered, Cotton was in disgrace for six months, and then
was forgiven. But he did not forgive the King, who was stabbed soon after. A
few days after the young King being importuned by him, put him off with this
gird, I will tell you nothing, for you will write it into Spain, as you did my
Fathers Confession.

Half a year after the Kings death the Court of Parliament seeing evidently,
that the murder of the King, and that of his next Predecessor, were the
productions of the doctrine of the Jesuits, condemned the Book of Bellarmine
against Barklay, as containing a false and execrable proposition, which tends
to the overthrowing of the Powers ordained and established by God, inciting
Subjects to rebellion, and withdrawing them from the authority of Princes, to
plot against their Lives and Kingdoms, and trouble the public peace and
tranquillity.

I have spoken before of the Decree of the Theological Santarellus de Haeresi
and Schismate
Faculty of Paris, against the Book of the Jesuit Santarel, confirmed by the
judgment of the University in May 1626. The same Book had been condemned by
the Court of Parliament of Paris Martii 13. of the same year to be burnt. And
because the Book was printed at Rome by permission of the Superiors, and with
the approbation of Mutins Vitelescus General of the Jesuits, and Master of the
Sacred Palace, the Jesuits of Paris were sent for by the Court and demanded,
Whereas their General had approved that Book, and declared his opinion, that
the contents of it were certain and good, whether they believed as he did. They
answered, that Since their General lived at Rome, he could not but approve that
which the Court of Rome approves. What do you believe then? said the Court;
The clean contrary, said the Jesuits. And what should ye do if you were at
Rome? As they do at Rome, said they. To which some of the Court answered, What
then! Have these men one conscience at Rome, and another at Paris? God keep us
from such Confessors.

The same Court sent for Father Cotton, and commanded him to confute the Book
of Santarell. Cotton being put to a sad dilemma, either to offend the Pope his
Master, and his General and the whole Society; or to answer an Indictment of
high Treason, freed himself by a sudden death, being in perfect health before;
or some of his Society took that pains for him. It seems that the Court were
more peremptory with him, then King Henry the IV. who showed him once that Book
of Mariana, which since was condemned to the fire, and commanded him to confute
it. But he gave some ill excuse to the King, who pressed him no further about
it.

About the same time that this great Prince was slain by the faction of the
Jesuits, the Prince of Transylvania was in the same danger by them. So much is
certified by Letters of the Baron of Zerotin, May 2. 1610. that a Jesuit
persuaded a Lord of Transylvania in whose house he lived, to kill the Prince.
But the Prince having discovered the Plot, killed the Conspiratours, and the
Jesuit the Author of the conspiracy.

This Jesuit was taken tardy, and had not the luck of many of his Confreres,
who frame the plots, and look standing out of the reach of the blows, the
acting of the desperate attempts upon which they have cast others. Yet there
was a Scottish Jesuit of the College of Clermont in Paris, his name Alexander
Hayes, who was so zealous, as to wish openly, and that often, that King Henry
the IV. would pass by his College, that he might throw himself down upon him
from the window and break his neck. But by that cross caper he might be sure
to break his own. For these words, and for teaching openly, that it was good to
dissemble and perform obedience in show for a while, he was condemned by
Sentence of the Court to perpetual banishment, and (if ever he returned) to be
hanged without any other form of arraignment.

Now if from their feats in foreign Countries, we look to their doings in
England, what troubles they have stirred, and what mischiefs they have plotted
continually against this State, now above a hundred years. We are at a loss in
that prodigious heap of iniquity. They have afforded matter to large Volumes of
History, and the labor of the worthy writers, need not to be seconded by mine.
And when the Jesuit Eudemono-Iohannes in his Apologetick for Garnet, would
excuse or deny the treasons wrought under the pretense of a Catholic zeal, the
truth of them was asserted by the R. Reverend and Learned Robert Abbot Bishop
of In his Antilogia.
Salisbury, out of the public Acts and Records of Courts, and out of the very
books of Adversaries, Blu^t and Watson. How many attempts were made against the
life of the Blessed Queen Elizabeth? And in what treason was there a Jesuit
wanting? Parry, Cullen, Williams, York, Squire, Hesket, Lopez, Babington, with
his associates, and how many more? All were assisted and prompted by Jesuits,
as the judicial examinations will justify.

And now we speak of Babington and his associates, I find two brothers
Bellamy's, both apprehended for hiding them, after they were openly proclaimed
traitors, in their house near Harrowhill, where they were kept ten days, and
clothed in rustical habits. There they were all taken and thence carried to
prison, where one of the Bellamies strangled himself, the other was executed
with the conspirators; his name Hierome Bellamy. From which of the two brothers
our Adversary Thomas Bellamy is descended, and whether from either or neither,
himself best knows. But it seems by his behavior, that the crime of hiding and
disguising traitors runs in the blood: For what is his covering of the
parricidial doctrine of Jesuits with falfe constructions, but hiding and
disguising traitors; whose doctrine is declared treasonable by sundry Acts of
Parliament? Let him take warning by the crime and the ill success of these men
of his name, and apply to himself that Sentence of Tully, which he misapplyeth
to the Protestants of Integrity. Mirror te Antoni quorum facta imitere little
exitus non pertimescere. Since you imitate the actions of men of your name, Sir
Bellamy, I wonder you are not frighted, with thinking of their ends.

The Devil and the Jesuits having been so often disappointed of their attempts
against England, in the end contrived the foulest plot that ingenious cruelty
did in any age imagine; the Gunpowder-Treason, which shall be to the Worlds
end, the wonder of succeeding ages, and the shame of ours. This was the godly
product of the English Seminaries abroad, and the Roman education. It is easy
to judge that the plotters of it had been bred long in another Climate then the
middle air of England; for it looks like one of the feats of Caesar Borgia.
Non nostri generis monstrum nec sanguinis. Of that attempt to cut off King and
Kingdom with one blow, none could be capable, but such as had many years
breathed the same air where he reigned, who wished that the Romans had but one
neck, that he might cut it off with one stroke. But a Jesuit is capable of
devising, and the Romish zeal of executing any mischief, though never so
prodigious, to promote the Papal interest. And they have law for it, even the
Roman Decree, the Oracle of the Pope himself. We do not account them for Causa
23. qu. 5. Can. Excommunicatorum. Non enim eos homicidas arbitramur quos
adversus excommunicatos zelo Catholicae Matris Ecclesiae ardentes aliquos eorum
trucidasse configerit.
murderers (says his Holiness) who burning with the zeal of our Catholic
Mother the Church against exmunicate persons, shall happen to kill some of
them. Now England was lying under many excommnnications, when the
Gunpowder-Treason was plotted, and lies under them still, for they never were
repealed.

Truly so far we must excuse Campian, Garnet, Hall, Hamond, and other Jesuits,
who have plotted or encouraged rebellions and treasons in England. They have
done no more then they were commanded or allowed by the Pope. And here I must
be a suitor to all the conscionable Roman Catholieks, who abhor these wicked
ways, to acknowledge ingenuously that the Actors were grounded upon the
fundamental Laws of the Court of Rome. And that the Pope the Head of their
Faith, is he that commands by his Canons and Bulls the slaughter of those that
displease him, the breach of faith, the deposing of Kings, and the rebellion of
the people, as I have sufficiently demonstrated before. If after that they
adhere to the other points of the Roman Religion, upon this main ground of the
Roman Faith, That the Pope cannot err, they blind themselves wilfully, and
building their faith upon an unsafe ground, they may come short of the end of
their faith, the salvation of their souls.

This power of deposing Kings, and exposing them to the attempts of their
enemies, so peremptorily assumed by the Pope, and so boldly executed by his
zealous agents, ought to be grounded upon some proof out of holy Writ. In all
the passages which I have alleged out of Jesuits books, I find but two of
those proofs.

The one of Bellarmine, who proves Bellarm. lib. cui Titulus Tortus, p. 19.
Rex Anglorum subjectus est Papae jus omnibus Christiadis communi, ratione
Apostolicae potestatis juxta illud Ps. 4. 4. Constitues eos Principes super
omnem terram.
that the King of England is subject unto the Pope by a right common to all
Christians, by reason of the Apostolic power; according to this Text, Psalm.
44. Thou shall make them Princes over all the earth. In that Psalm, which with
us is the 45. this promise is made to the Kings Spouse, which is the Church,
the Spouse of Christ our King; Instead of thy Fathers house shall be thy
children, whom thou may make Princes over all the earth. Answerably to that
we learn Rev. 1. 6. That God has made us Kings and Priests unto God our
Father. That blessing then (to be understood and fulfilled in Gods good time)
belongs to all the true children of the Church. The engrossing of it to the
Pope alone, to the exclusion of all Christians, is a bold, and indeed a
ridiculous enclosing of Commons without any warrant.

Suarez brings a proof of the like validity. After that horrid assertion
alleged before, that after that a Prince is excommunicated, he may be
dispossessed or slain by any persons whatsoever. He prevents the objection out
of Romans 13. 1. Let every soul Suarez adversus sect Anglic lib. 6. c. 6. sect.
24. (...) Paulus his verbis Omnis anima potestatibus sublimioribus subdi. a sit
Romans 13 nunquam addidit, etiam potestatibus excommunicatis vel deprvatis a Papa
omnes subditisint.
be subject to the higher Powers, and says that the Apostle never added, Let
all be subject also to the Powers excommunicated and deprived by the Pope. A
recreative proof which would make but a poor enthymema. The Apostle adds not,
that we must be subject also to the higher Powers deprived by the Turk; Ergo if
the Great Turk pronounce a sentence of deprivation against a Christian Prince,
the Subjects of that Prince are free from their allegiance, and may dispossess
and kill him when they think good.

But what! These proofs are as concluding as those that the Popes themselves
bring to prove their power, Nicholaus 1. Epist. ad Michael Imp. Constant. Petro
specialiter ostensum est ut ea mactaret and manducaret Illi soli jussum est ur
rete plenum piscibus ad littus traheret.
as when Pope Nicholas the I. proves the Papal power, because it was said to
Saint Peter, Kill and eat; and because to him alone was granted that power to
draw a Net full of Fishes to Land.

Likewise Bonifacius the VIII. proves his primacy Bonifac. VIII. Extravag.
Vnam Sanctam.
and Sovereignty, because it is written, that in the beginning God created
heaven and earth. Joseph's Coat of many colors, and the Head of Holofernes
would have been as pertinent to prove the Popes Temporal and Spiritual power.
Yet see how resolutely and syllogistically his Holiness concludes upon those
premises; Wherefore we declare, say, define, and pronounce, that it is of
necessity of salvation to be subject to the Roman Prelate.

After these scientifical proofs of the Popes power to dispose of the Crowns
and Lives of Princes, Who should make any more doubt of it! Who would not in
the strength of these reasons venture his life to dethrone Heretic Kings, and
spill their hearts blood for a sacrifice of sweet savor unto his Holiness!

CHAP. VI. Some Assertions of the Libeller are examined.
AFter I have vindicated the Protestant Religion from the aspersion of
Rebellion, and laid that charge in its proper place, I have done my main
business. And now partly out of compassion, partly out of contempt, I will pass
by most of the untruths of this Libeller, which are well nigh as many as his
lines, contenting my self to have disproved two of page 109.
them. The one, That the Rebel-doctrines are backed by the generality of them
that call themselves Protestants. But I have proved the contrary by their
public Confessions.

This plain dealing of his is toward the latter end of his Book: He durst not
have spoken so in the beginning. But he must amuse the Reader a great while
with railing against the Presbyterians, or the Protestants of Integrity, before
he charge the generality of the Protestants with rebellion. Besides, he might
hope tha few would have the patience to read his book so far.

This is worse. In this Century of years (says he) there have been more
Princes deposed and murdered for their Religion by these Protestants of
Integrity, then have been in all the others since Christ's time by the Popes
excommunications, or the attempts and means of the Roman Catholics.

It is not easy to determine whether malice or ignorance be prevalent in that
assertion. I have showed by unreproachable testimonies, that the Popes have
filled Christendom with sedition and rebellion for many centuries of years;
and what the Jesuits have been acting undet them in this last Century. To
which since the Libeller confines himself, it had been no hard task to name
those many Kings deposed and murdered by the Protestants so lately, if the
assertion had any truth in it.

When did a Protestant Minister thrust his knife into his Sovereignes body, as
the Monk James Clement did to his King Henry the III. and as the Jesuit
Campian would have done to his Sovereigne Queen Elizabeth? When did a Minister
instruct any to kill his King, as the Jesuits did Parry, the Jesuit Walpole,
Edward Squire, The Jesuit Holt, Patrick, Cullen, York, and Williams; The
Jesuit Parsons, Heskec to tempt the Earl of Darby to rebellion? Or as the
Jesuit Varade instructed Barriere to kill Henry the IV. of France, and the
whole College of the Jesuits John Chasiell: Or what Protestant, either of the
Clergy or Laity was known to have made an attempt against the life of his
Sovereigne? For the late English Traitors who brought their most excellent
Sovereigne to the Scaffold, are no more Protestants then they are Papists, and
are Jesuits in the point of obedience.

When this Libeller called the Ministers of Scotland rare Saltpeter men, fit
for fireworks, and to prepare matter to blow up both Church and State, Did he
remember that he gave them the right style belonging to the Jesuits Garnet,
Hall, Hammond, Gerard and Greenville? For these were Saltpeter-men with a
witness; and without metaphor, prepared matter to blow up Church and State.

Was it ever put to the charge of a Protestant Divine, Chaplain to his Prince,
that he recommended to him a man sent by his enemies to make him away? Or that
he made questions to the Devil about his life? Or that he sent word to his
enemies of such things as he had revealed unto him to ease his Conscience, as
the Jesuit Cotton did? Or did ever our Divines blow the doctrine of
King-killing into ignorant souls, as the Jesuits did to Ravaillac; who being
most rude, and a very Brute in all other points of Religion, was found by his
examiners exquisitely skilful in all the evasions and distinctions of the
Jesuits about that horrible doctrine? Or did any convicted Traitor depose that
he had declared his purpose to a Minister, and showed him the knife for the
execution, as Ravaillac maintained to Father Aubigni before his Judges? Some
such charges which might be justified by Records of Courts, and Judicial
proceedings, this Accuser would have brought, if there had been any; and we are
sure that he would not have spared us. If ever any man deserved to be sued upon
an Action of Slander, it is this Libeller; for thus slandering the generality
of the Protestants, and the State, of which he is a Subject. But I fear that if
a Pursuivant were sent for him, he would return and answer, Non est inventus.

As for his saying, That the doctrine of Rome, with the page 110.
opinions and practices of all its Doctors, are (as he has showed) quite
contrary to rebellion, and all that is said against that Church in this
particular is mere calumnly. Let the world judge whether he has showed what he
says, and whether is more credible, his saying, or my proving. Yet because he
stands for the Roman Church, I desire my Reader to take notice, that in this
point of obedience, my quarrel has been with the Court, not with the Church of
Rome; between which I conceive as much difference, as between the Wind and the
Sea. The Church might be quiet enough from storms of rebellion, did not the
boisterous wind of sedition make it foam, blown from the Court of Rome by its
agents the Jesuits.

After that the Libeller had railed against us, he falls upon a common place of
loyalty, and brings some texts of S. Austin, taken out of Protestant books made
by our Reverend Divines against the late Rebels. For that he is not acquainted
with S. Austin, he shows it by the commendation he gives him, calling him the
most ancient page 119.
and learned Father of the Christian Church. S. Austin deserves a better
commendation, but he is neither the most ancient, nor the most learned of the
Fathers. Most of those whom the Church calls Fathers, were before him, for he
dyed in the fifth Century; And as for Learning, Origin and Hierome were far
beyond him. Could the English Seminaries pitch upon no abler Champion to fight
against us then this raw soldier? A more passionate and less reasonable Writer
I never met with. His style is a perpetual barking, and biting too, but without
teeth. I could lay up a great heap of his untruths, ignorances, and
impertinencies, if I would make such a wilde-goose-chase as to follow him in
all his false turns: But both my Readers and I have better businesses then to
heap up dung, or search all the Impostures of a Novice of the Jesuits.

For the end, he brings some rules of Law concerning the nature of the English
Monarchy; which if he had studied well, he had never taken upon him to defend
the doctrine of the Jesuits, which is inconsistent with them: For they allow
not that which he affirms; That the Monarchy of England can do no homage,
having no superior; and that the Crown of England is independent, and his jura
Regalia are holden of no Lord but the Lord of heaven. Bellarmine says the
clean contrary, and makes the Pope Sovereigne of England by double right, as we
heard before. Yet this Scholar of the Jesuits may give Bellarmines sense to
that assertion, that the Crown of England is independent; for holding with his
Masters, that the Crown of England belongs to the Pope, he will say also that
it is independent, and owes homage to none but God; meaning, that the Pope,
the right Sovereigne, owes homage for it to none but God. The man being
evidently a Scholar of the Jesuits, cannot but be instructed in the doctrine
of equivocations, about which Tolet Tolet, lib. 4. Instruct. Sacerd. cap. 21.
Aliquando uti licet aequivocatione, and decipere audientem, ut cum Iudex petit
juramentum ab aliquo ut dicat crimen vel proprium vel alienum si omnino est
occultum, and jurare cogatur, utatur aequivocatione puta, Nescio, intelligendo
intra se, ut dicam tibi vel simile. Et lib. 5. c. 38. and lib. 4. c. 21, 22.
gives large instructions in his book of the Instruction of Priests, saying
expressly, That it is lawful sometimes to use equivocations, and to deceive the
hearer. And Sanchez tells us in what case it is lawful to equivocate: There is
a just cause (says he) to Sanch. oper. Mor. l. 3. c. 6. number. 19. Causa jure
utendi his amphibologiis est, quoties id necessarium aut utile est ad salutem
corporis honorem, tes familiares tuendas
use these equivocations, whenever it is necessary or useful for the
preservation of body, honor or estate. Since then the sect and Religion of the
Jesuits, which subjecteth the Crown of England unto the Pope, cannot subsist
in England without palliating that criminal doctrine with equivocation: They
find it necessary for the preservation of body, honor, and estate, to profess
that the Monarchy of England can do no homage, having no superior; and that
the Crown of England is independent: but to whom that independent Crown
belongs, that they will reserve in their thoughts. Or if they say they will be
true to the King, they will by the King understand the Pope, or the King of
Spain, to whom the Pope gave the Kingdom of England fourscore years ago, and
never recalled that gift since.

Wherefore if this Gentleman appear in Print again, or any of his confreres for
him about this point of obedience, we must desire him to speak more home,
before he can justify himself to be a true Philanax Anglicus, and a good
English subject of his Majesty. To that end let him declare that he
acknowledges the following Articles as true and just, and is ready to
subscribe unto them.

I. The Kings Most Excellent Majesty Charles the II. has no superior on
Earth, de jure, in the Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and other
His Majesty's Dominions.

II. All Roman Catholics born in these His Majesty's Dominions, are his
subjects, de jure, and of none else, although they have taken the Orders of the
Church of Rome, or have a General of some Religion to whom they have sworn
obedience.

III. The Doctrine of Cardinal Bellarmine is false, that the King of England is
subject to the Pope by double right, besides his pretended subjection in
matters spiritual.

IV. The Pope has no power to deprive Kings of their Kingdoms, or any way to
dispose of their Crowns or their Lives.

V. The Pope cannot absolve the subjects of His Majesty King Charles the II. or
of any of His Successors, from the Oath of their Allegiance. Neither are they
now absolved from it by any precedent Decree from the Popes.

VI. A King declared heretic or excommunicate by the Pope, is not thereby
disabled from exercising his Kingly jurisdiction.

VII. The excommunicating or depriving of a King by the Pope, does not exempt
that Kings natural subjects from the duty of their Allegiance.

VIII. King John had no power to give his Kingdom to the Pope, without the
consent of his Peers and Commons: Neither is that Contract of any validity.

IX. A Priest having learned in Confession a Conspiracy against the Kings life,
ought to discover it to the King or his Council.

X. The Peers and Commons of England, and other His Majesty's Dominions, have
no power to judge their King, much less to depose him, or put him to death, or
to choose another King, or to alter the Government of the State.

He that will refuse to subscribe these Articles, and openly profess his
consent unto them, cannot justify his love and fidelity to the King, and is
altogether unfit to charge the Protestants with rebellious tenets. Vacuum culpa
esse decet qui in alium paratus est dicere. He that is in an error cannot
justify himself but by forsaking it. That yiedling is glorious; and to be
overcome by the truth is a great victory. Without such a justification, lessons
of loyalty given by a Jesuit are unsuitable, and of as little effect as a
Lecture of Chastity preached by an allowed Curtizan of Rome.

JOH. VIII. (...)
CAROLE qui Latias arts and fulmina bruta,
Et Capitolini contemnis Vejovis iras,
Macte manumissus coelesti lumine Princeps,
Lumine Romuleas tibi dispellente tenebras,
Assertamque sacro capiti firmante coronam.
Dum trepidi Reges and sancti luminis orbi
Serva Quirinali submittunt colla tyranno,
Tu liber specta stantes ad fraena Monarchas
Stratorum officio, succollantesque cathedrae
Augustos lixas, mox flexo poplite curvos
Turpia purpureo libantes oscula socco.
Erige tu curvos rectus; fratresque doceto
Quos Regum Pater agnoscit Natosque Deosque,
Quam male prostituat divum Rex sanctus honorem
Tarpeiam lambens crepidam; solosque pudendum
Excussisse jugum, libertatique litasse,
Gnaviter amplexos coelestia lumina Reges.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 8. line 17. Galileo. p. 9. l. 5. put out which. p. 11. in the margent, l.
10. tenerentur, p. 19. l. 12. matter. p. 24. l. 14. Popes. p. 26. l. 10. by the
preaching. l. 12. oppressing. l. opposing. p. 30. l. ult. Francis the II, p.
31. l. 7. Jesuits. p. 33. l. 20. Henry the IV. l. 22. because* p. 3^. l. ^4.
the ordinary. l. 13. any of five Kings. p. 49. l. 28. unequitable. l.
equitable. p. 53. l. 13. stony the just. p, 87. l. 13. frequent. l. pregnant.
p. 113. l. 24. Pope. p. 115. in the margent, 1. 6. non sine manibus. p. 124. l.
put out persons, put letters. p. 128. l. 25. Mutius. p. 137. l. 26. depose.


