Heraclitus, OR Man's Looking-glass AND SVRVEY OF LIFE.

Written in French by Peter du Moulin, and Translated into English, By Sir H.
L' Estr.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Seile, over against St. Dunstans Church in
Fleetstreet, 1652.

To the Reader.
IT is now above 40 years since I translaed this piece out of French, and laid
it by in loose papers, intending to have published and exposed the same to
common Test; but soon after I understood that I was prevented by another
labor that stepped into the Press before me: nevertheless, because the other is
now antiquated and forgotten; and that upon my review, I may happily have
phrased the Authors meaning more aptly to the modern mode and acceptance of
the English tongue, for Non verbum verbo curabit redaere fidus
Interpres --
A just translatour must not strive to follow the Author word for word, but to
speak his sense to the most life of the others Language; and because the moment
of this subject cannot be too often inculcated (as the Great Doctor of the
Gentiles says, It grieves me not to write the same things, for you it is sure)
and that this book is no other than a perfect Map of Man, and Anatomy of all
ages; A Nosce teipsim, which is the highest Pitch, and hardest Lesson of all
humane Learning; An Universal Dyall, which (though made in France) yet serves
(without any Astronomicall reduction) for all Meridians, and shows how the
minutes of man's life pass away from the first rising to the last setting
thereof, and even from Solomon upon his golden Throne, to Job scraping himself
with Potsheards upon the ash-heap; for Statutum est omnibus mori, what man is
he that shall not see death? (as David said it, and saw it) and after that
comes Judgment to Heaven or Hell for ever. For these reasons I have awakened
these lines out of their Lethargy, and caused them to speak after so long
silence to a people that never more needed good Counsel, and is ripe for the
sharpest severity and sickle of Gods Judgment. Let us therefore continually
watch, that neither the World, the Flesh, or the Devil plunder us of the
richest Jewel of our Souls (which cost the greateest price that ever was) but
study daily, how and why we came hither, what we do here, whither we go, and in
this minute, moment, mite, and mote of time (while it is called to day) to work
out our salvation (before the evil day coms when, of all the cumber and cares
of Honor, profit, and the dunghill Comparatively.
delights of this World) we shall say I have no pleasure in them, and shall
fall under the fearful and final doom of eternal Sequestration both of Body
and Soul. Now to quicken the appetite of Meditation herein, let us to all our
thoughts, words, and actions, set this for Centinell, Vidit, Venit, Deus. God
Sees and Comes.

H. L'Estr.

To the illustrious Princess Mademoiselle Anne de Rohan.
Madam,
THis Book that fights against Vanity is justly yours, because you have
overcome it; we sight against it in words, you overcome it in actions; actions
so much better than words, as health is better than Physic, and Victory than
the Battle. Your name alone in the front of my Book shall give me my lesson,
for if I will paint out Vices with my pen, your life is a pattern of opposite
Virtues: Nay to speak truly, you teach me what to write, for when I would
picture out vices, I set before me the contrary of that which I behold and
admire in you, To have often the word of God in your hand, but more often in
your mouth; To be daily praying; To be adorned with modesty without art; To
open the hand to the afflicted, and shut the ear against vices; To be freely
religious without scruple (which makes Christian wisdom affected austerity) are
virtues which the greatness of your family makes more remarkable, and the
corruption of this age more admirable; an age wherein vices are manners,
wherein profane vanity and vilany become Nature, and turn into complexion;
amidst all this darkness you shine as a Candle in the night. I know well your
modesty likes not this discourse, but the public utility requires it, that
all may know what esteem we make of virtue, and that vices which come up of
themselves, and grow without watering, may find argument from you either to
amend or condemn them; this is also an honor to us, that the sacred seed
which we sow falls upon so good a ground, and proves so fruitful, and that
there are examples among us, showing the difference btwixt true Godliness, and
that superstitious devotion which thinks to amuse God with gestures, and binds
it self strictly to certain numbers of reiterated words, and reduces Religion
to the singers end.

Having now Madam so many just causes to present this book unto you, yet I
durst never undertake it, had not you commanded it. I am not stuffed with
ornaments according to the distasteful humor of this age; I cannot ruffle it
out in swelling terms, and fullblown bubbles of words, which are for none but
brave spirits; I cannot talk of Barricadoes of vices, or Scaladoes of virtues,
nor call Jesus Christ the Daulphin of heaven; As Father Cotton in his printed
Meditations.
I do not compose prayers upon a Fan or a Nosegay; I am content to speak
French, and aim at nothing but to be understood, and in deciphring vices to
plant in men's minds the contempt of the World, and the love of God; in low
terms I discourse of high matters, and paint out light with a coal; a fault
which partly may be imputed to mine own dullness, partly to my tossed and
troubled condition; It is not easy to study among gunshot, nor to mount the
spirits high, when a thousand things interpose and pluck them down again and
stop their flight: But the same your goodness which moved you to persuade me to
write, will persuade you to bear with my imperfections, considering also that
at the first it was not my purpose this writing should come abroad, and
therefore I bestowed less care to dress it: Now that it is come forth by your
command, you shall receive it from the hand of him who prays to God for the
greatness and prosperity of your thrice Noble Family (which God has honored
with his sacred Covenant) and from him whose chief ambition is ever to obey
you, and while he lives to be

Your most Humble, and Dutiful Servant, P. d. M.

MEDITATION UPON THE VANITY AND MISERY OF Man's Life.
THe distracted diversity of the affairs of this World mangles our time in an
hundred thousand pieces; every business snatcheth away some part of our life;
No time is ours but that which we steal from our selves, robbing some hours to
examine our selves apart, and confer with God; there is work enough to be
found in these solitary Meditations: But the first work to be considered of is
the vanity and misery of our life, not to perplex us for it, but to prepare us
to leave it: None aspires as he ought to the life to come, but he that
despises the present. None despises the present, but he that has thoroughly
known it; None can thoroughly know it, but by beholding it a far off, and by
withdrawing the heart, and removing the affections aside; for worldly pleasures
nigh at hand dazzle and distract the judgment.

Now if we would enquire of any that has trod this path, Solomon in the
beginning of his Ecclesiastes entering into this Meditation cries out Vanity of
Vanities all is Vanity

This great Prince, who had riches without parallel, peace without trouble,
honor without envy; who was obeyed of his Subjects, admired of his Neighbors;
whose reign of 80 years gave him full scope to satisfy his mind in buildings,
in multitude of horses, in all sorts of Studies and Sciences; whose Spirit
trave^led through the whole course of Nature, having written of Plants from the
Cedar to the Hyssope; yet when he had done, considering how much these sweets
were mixed with gall, how little stedfastness in all these things, how small
contentment in all this travail, concludes thus of all his labors, all is
Vanity and Vexation of Spirit

He had learned this lesson of his Father, before he was taught by his own
experience; for David in the 39 Psalm says Man walks in a vain shadow, and
disquieteth himself in vain, he heapeth up riches and cannot tell who shall
gather them.

Now after so excellent presidents let us enter into this Meditation, and
taking the Razour from their hand, let us Anatomize our selves.

There is no argument of greater moment than that which treats of Vanity, it is
an high contemplation to discourse of our own business, for then man despising
himself mounts above himself; this Vanity, mixed with Misery must be considered
threefold.

First, In the Nature of Man.

Secondly, In his Actions.

Thirdly, In his thoughts and desires.

Vanity in the Nature of Man.
First, Birth.
To take Man from his beginning, the Noblest of all Men (be he the Son of an
Emperor) is formed betwixt the Urine and Ordure, nourished with the most
impure blood of all, might easily be crushed by the least fall of the Mother,
or smoothered with the stink of a candle snuff.

His Birth is shameful, for no woman would be openly delivered; on the other
side it is a glory to kill a man, and Duels bring men into reputation. Thus it
is a shame to bring a Man into the world, and a glory to send him out; a plain
proof that the life of a Man is an evil, since it is a shame to give it, and
an honor to take it away.

We see also he begins his life with tears, and when he is born he cannot help
himself, but crawles for some years in his own filth, whereas other creatures
as soon as they come forth fall upon their feet, and run after their food as
soon as they are out of the shell, Man is born under the necessity of
maintaining his life with the sweat of his brows, when all other Creatures find
their cloth laid; only man has need of clothing, He that is Lord of all the
World is ashamed to be seen, and therefore clads himself in the spoil of
another.

Man alone is subject to more diseases than all the Beasts together; they are
not hurt with Dewes, nor bleed at the Nose, though they hang it always
downward to the ground, they know not what Rheumes mean, the Stone, Tertian, or
Quotidian Agues; Man only knows these differences, and feels them: those
Beasts that are more domestical, are more diseasefull than others, as infected
by Contagion.

Man indeed has Reason above Beasts, but he devises therewith how to torment
himself, and strains the uttermost of his wit about painful and pernicious
Projects; to be subtle in suits of Law, to entangle himself in other men's
business, when he is glutted and full, to raise up an artificial stomach, and
a desire to drink, without thirst; and I know not how it comes to pass, but we
are more sensible of Evil than Good, and troubles fret us more than all
pleasures can content us: scarce any one finds a general health, but ach in
the teeth, or pain in the fingers end torments us; a drop of gall bitters a sea
of sweet, and how much hapiness does one affliction countervail?

Vanity of Man in his Actions.
Man being born thus poor and miserable, Childhood.
what a while it is before he can guide himself? how long and laborious his
Instruction? what a while he trembles under the Masters awe to learn vain
words, and knowledge, that will deceive him? and in the end of all this travel,
who sees not a froward humor, and a despightfull perversity; and in a Child all
the vices of a man, as in a seed or kernel? the only way to quiet a Child, is
to beat another before him: if any touch but one of his toys, he flings away
the rest for anger; the love and liking which they bear to their Babies, are
plain seeds of Idolatry, and such are the Children of the best Parents. A grain
of Corn, though never so clean dressed, makes straw when it springs again. He
that is circumcized begets a Child with a foreskin on; thus we are driven to
acknowledge, in the frowardness of our own Children, the picture of our own
corruption.

After Childhood comes Youth, Youth.
which is a brisque humor, a rash heat, that runs into all riot, rushes
headlong into dangers* and rejects all admonitions: Oh! what a number perish in
that way? how many in this age are poisoned with sensuality, which lulls them
in the lap to strangle them? treacherous Dallilah, that dallyes with them, to
betray them to the Devil, an enemy far worse than the Philistims; those
pleasures are Golden Pills, which hide their bitter under their beauty; and
like fresh Rivers that lose their pleasant relish in saltness, and drown their
sweetness in the Sea.

Godliness cannot live under so dainty a dominion; the knowledge of God (which
comes from Heaven) will not be subject to the Belly, nor dwell in Swine; that
lodging is fittest for the Devil, who (by the sufferance of our Savior) entered
into the Swine, and ran them headlong into the Sea. The Devil feeds the
prodigal Children with these husks of pleasure, instead of the bread of life,
which is the Word of God.

This heat a little cooled with years, Manhood.
and man grown ripe, now see what other Vanities follow him less boisterous,
but more sullen and obstinate; Then come Cares chained together, domestical
vexations, thoughts of a Family, troubles of suit, travells of a painful Trade
to get maintenance for Children, who suck away all the substance, and to
receive at length nothing but Reproach and Ingratitude.

These Evils make men ever distaste the present, and rely upon the future;
always traveling to get a good, which flies from us, and being gotten, it
melts in our hands, and vanishes away; if kept it contents us not, it helps
not our fear, nor quenches our thirst; this Evil looks many ways.

There are many men who hazard their life to get their living, Covetousness.
and miss the End to obtain the Means, as he that sells his Sword to buy a
Scabberd, or his Horse for Hay, and again, to get money, and not therewith to
serve his turn, but rather to serve his money; to have Goods as one has an
Ague, which rather gets the sick Man, than he, It; or like the Dog in the
Manger which eats not the Hay, but grinns if another come near it: Wretched
people, who live poor to die rich, who covet most when they are most in years,
that is, make greatest provision when they are at the end of their journey: He
that fears God to dismantle himself of so great a mischief, will consider with
himself what the price and value of Riches are, and will thus reason; The Devil
offers these, but he never offers Piety, or the knowledge of God; God shows
what account he makes of Riches, when he gives them most abundantly to the
Wicked, into whose bosom they fall, as a Purse in to a privy. Our Savior
shows what account he made of money, when he gave Judas his Purse, but to his
blessed Apostles he gave his Holy Spirit; had he thought riches the true Good,
sure he would have provided enough for himself; but he had not where to rest
his head; he honored poverty by his own example, and the Lord and Sovereign of
the World, would have nothing in the World, to teach us to contemn the World; A
little wealth serves to live well, and less to dye well; 1 Timothy 6.
Godliness is great gain if a man be content with that he has; Naked we came
into the World, and naked we shall go out. Quiet poverty, is better than
troublesome Riches, yet such is the silly nature of man, that he had rather
fetch water from a raging and violent stream, with hazard and peril, than from
a small Brook or rivulet with ease and safety; To get a mass of money with
danger and disquiet, rather than a small sum with peace and security; and at
the end, he shall be nothing the more satisfied, nay still further off, and
thinks all is lost that he gets not; and this greediness is always mixed with
Envy; If he happen to lose his goods (as Solomon says, Riches takes to her
wings, and flees away) it is as much as if he lost his senses; for to rob and
spoil a covetous man, is as it were to flea him; and to take away his money, is
to pluck out his heart, because he sets his heart all upon his money. The Godly
man when he considers these things, will say with the Wise Man, This is
Vanity and Vexation of Spirit. Amb^tion.


To this Vanity we may resemble that of many persons who extremely toil
themselves to get honor and greatness; In this throng of people which press to
get up. Those behind would fain tred down those before; threequarters of them
are enfo^ced to stay behind with anger and despite* those that have got to the
top of honor pluck the Ladder after them, lest others should get up by it, and
when they are gotten to the top, then they show their tricks, like Apes got
upon an House or a Tree, making faces at those that are below, and set the
people on gazing and gaping on them; for there, their weakness best appears,
and their vices are most in view. Add also, that in this height they meet with
more cares than before; Trees shake most at the top; Pinacles of high Towers
are oftenest struck with Tempest and Lightning; we sleep worst upon the richest
and embroydered Beds; we are in most danger of poison at the fullest Feasts:
but you never heard of any poisoned in a wooden dish; after innocent labor,
sleep is sweet upon a lock of Straw; This is also Vanity and Vexation of the
Spirit. Courtiers life.


This Vanity, joined with a like corruption, appears especially in the Court,
where prime Slavery goes under the color of Greatness and Golden Shackles are
counted a Noble Imprisonment; He that lives there, must make account to be
always masked; to play twenty several parts in one hour; to have a number of
Servants, but never a Friend; there, Innocence is called Silliness, and a
simple Affirmation is a sign there is no such matter; Two hate one another,
and both know it, yet each strives to seem to serve the other first, who shall
begin, and who shall be last; and with these complements they make an
Interlude: Envy is never to seek for, but ever in fashion there, either to
supplant, prevent, or to nibble at one another, and no means but by slavery to
avoid it; debauched tricks, and beastliness among Courtiers, become Laws, and
turn into complexion. One had need have more Faith than a grain of Mustard seed
to keep himself there from Corruption; as Ravens build on high Trees, so the
Devil nestles among great ones, and there he hatcheth and discloseth his Young,
which are Vices, because there they are better seen, and show themselves with
Authority; There you shall meet with some that kill one another in bravery,
upon the construction of a word; a plain proof that their Life is little worth,
which they set at so low a rate, but these brave Ladds would be soon gone if
they were to suffer for Gods Cause: Sure it would ask a number of those
Gallants to make one true Evangelical Martyr. Alas! how wretchedly do they
understand the true point of Honor: This is also an Evil Travel, and an
extreme Vanity.

To this also we may add the Vanity of the other Sex; Vanity of Women.
For the greatest part of Women are vain, not only through frailty and
example, but by express profession.

All their study is to set up Vanity, and upon that they are in Emulation with
one another; for amidst all this worldly glory and luster, you shall see some
women swallowed up of pleasures, slaves to other Fashions and Faces, who out of
daintiness have almost lost the use of their Feet with mincing, who bestow a
quarter of their Life to make them ready; who buy their hair, borrow their
face, make Idols of their bodies, yet torture them again by a just judgment;
who know nothing, yet study to speak well; who look in the Glass a thousand
times a day, and call a Counsel about an hair. Poor Souls! who changing the
color of their hair, and raising themselves upon their Chappins, would make
Christ believe he did not well understand himself, when he said, Mar. 5. 27. 6.
36.
Man cannot make an hair white or black, or add one cubit to his stature. If a
man could sum up all the time that a dainty Lady bestows in dressing of her
self all her life time, it would prove a dozen years; such Curiosity is next to
Slavery: But who would bestow so much to any good end or purpose? How comes it
to pass, that clothes (which were given because of Sin) are now turned into
Sin? that man makes that a matter of glory, which God gave to cover his
shame? that an argument of humility should now become a matter of pride? There
is nothing more opposite to the zeal of Gods glory, than this loose Vanity:
Could a Woman that wears a pair of prodigious Chappins, fly into another
Country for the cause of Religion? Could so delicate a skin endure the cold and
hard Prison for the testimony of the Gospel? She that cannot endure the heat
of the Sun, because of her painting, could she abide the Faggot for Gods Word?
you see how we prepare for sufferings, what Apprentises we are for Martyrdom?
Solomon saw none of this in his time, and the Vanity of Vanities whereof he
speaks, comes far short of the Vanity of our Age.

But now behold another kind of Vanity wherein men toil themselves, Pleadings
at Law.
a bawling, roaring and tumultuous Vanity, which is armed with stings, and
covered with subtilty, which bestows the greatest part of the time in
br^bbles, and pleads up and down by rote; Go but into Guild Hall, or Court of
Assizes, you will wonder at the confused turmoyl, and the Arts of Cozenage,
such toylsom trotting up and down, The Author intends nothing of Judges.
such a dustie eagerness, and you will truly say, in all this crowd of Lawyers
(who sometime speak all at once) not any one once names God, unless it be in an
Oath.

There, while two devour one another in suit, a third man runs away with the
prey, and the charges surmount the principal. What a world of people live upon
the wickedness of other men? What a number should fast, if others (who worrie
one another) should lay their malice aside? Mee-thinks when God looks down upon
this brawling and confused throng of Lawyers, and their followers, they appear
like Ants upon a Molehill, which stir pell mell up and down without order or
reason; This is also an Evil Travel, a Vanity, and Vexation of Spirit.

Some will confess that these things are true, but will say, yet there are some
honest studies in the World, some commendable knowledge, and many Civil and
Religious virtues which cannot be comprehended under this Vanity, but are
worthy of praise: yet even in this, the Vanity of man principally appears; for
if the best of our actions be vain, how much more the Vanities themselves. Let
us begin with Arts and Sciences.

Now a days Understanding consists in the Knowledge of Tongues* Skill of
Languages.
the Learned busy themselves to know what the Women of Rome spoke 2000 years
since, what Apparel the Romans did wear, in what ceremony Stage-play's were
beheld then among the people, and to new furbish over, and refine certain
Latin or Greek words, which Antiquity has long buried in darkness; this is to
rake a Dunghill with a Scepter, and to make our Understanding (that should
command) a Drudge to a base Occupation; as if a man should make all his Meal of
Sawces; the knowledge of these things is good to season, but not to nourish.
Some again hunt after words in their old age, when they should have the things;
many learn their Grammar with Spectacles, they study to speak true Latin, and
are barbarous in their own tongue, and their whole life a continual
Incongruity.

Philosophy and the Arts as they are somewhat higher, Arts and Philosophy.
so they are somewhat harder, as the Pine Apples upon the top of the Tree: many
fall that climb for them, many when they have got them break their teeth with
cracking; as they teach to know more, so they perplex more; He that increases
Knowledge (says Solomon) increases Sorrow. 1 Eccl. 18.
Ignorance has some commodity; and when all is done, this Knowledge goes not
far: For no Man by Philosophy can clearly tell the nature of a Fly, or an
Herb, much less of himself; our Spirits travel every where, and yet we are
strangers at home, we would know all, but do nothing, for (to speak properly)
our study is no labor, but a curious la^iness which tires it self, and goes
not forward, like Squirrells in a cage, which turn up and down, and think they
go apace, when they are still where they were; we learn little with great
labor, and that little makes us little the better, nay, many times worse; a
drop or dram of divine Knowledge is more worth than all humane whatsoever.

To what purpose does an Attorney follow another man's cause, when himself is at
suit with God? To what end does a Physician undertake to judge of another
health, if he does duly observe the pulse of his own Conscience? What are we
the better to know by History what was done a great while since, and know not
what to do now? or by Astronomy to learn the motions and influences of the
Heavens, and know not how to come thither?

Others undertake long voyages, to have many Hosts and few Friends; they
promise to learn much, but return more Fools than they went, as if they had
dropped their Wits by the way, and having painfully trod over a great deal of
ground, at length Death tumbles them into it, as Flies that are so long busy
with the flame, that at last they rush in, and when they have surveyed so much
ground, a handful will cover them. Those are bewitched with this Vanity, who
go long Pilgrimages to some Saint to have Children, and when they are come
home, they find some officious Neighbor has eased them of the care, This is
also Vanity and Vexation of the Spirit.

It may be our Civil Virtues have some more substance in them, Civil Virtues.
but therein Vanity displayes it self most, because many of those Virtues are
but Vices Brats: Choler whets on Valor; Cowardice makes a Man advised and
wary; Ambition, Avarice, and Envy, are spurs to Study and Industry; fear of
disgrace and defamation, makes many Women Chaste; niggardness makes many
moderate, others, necessity; friendships are contracted either for profit or
pleasure; whereof the first is a Frippery, the last a Market.

Religion it self is often used to serve our covetousness; many follow Christ
in the Wilderness for bread, this is to make the Understanding a slave to the
Belly, and the Prince and Commander of all Virtues, a Servant to the basest of
Vices: Nay, I know not which is worst, to forsake Christ, or to follow him for
gain; to serve Christ for money, or the Devil for nothing; unless we do God
less injury to forsake Christ, than to follow him to do him injury, and to
make him a Servant to our Avarice. If these be our Virtues, what shall our
Vices be? and what Virtues can these be that thus dance after the Devils pipe?
This is also Vanity, and a vexatious Corruption.

This makes some men, Solitary life.
(when they consider that Vanity has over-spred all Worldly things, that Vice
and Wickedness have infected all estates and conditions of men, to the intent
to wind themselves out and get away) confine themselves to Deserts and a
perpetual solitude, there to remain in extreme silence, and to speak with none
but God and themselves; and though this solitary humor in diverse proceed from
a savage disposition, in others from a weakness, and spirit not capable of the
society of men; in others, from an ambitious desire to be noted for some
extraordinary profession, because they could not be seen enough in the Common
Crowd; in others, from anger and despite, that they have so long tired
themselves in striving against the stream, and to be crossed in every thing; So
I doubt not but there are some who purposely withdraw themselves, and take upon
them this solitary condition, to get out of the crowd of Vices, and to serve
God with more liberty; but even these are deceived, and when they think to go
out of the World at one door, they come in at another: for griefs of mind,
perplexed thoughts, lumpish laziness, windy Hypochondriacall Melancholy,
despair, presumption, and self-admiration steal insensibly into the mind under
a profession of extraordinary Sanctity, which pines the spirits of the
peevishly arrogant, and of peremptory devotion, which degenerates oftentimes
into folly or brutishness.

The Solitary Man has none to comfort him in his heaviness, and having none to
compare withal, thinks himself the most excellent: then also inordinate
desires multiply upon him, for Man ever thinks that best that is furthest off.
So St. Jerome in the midst of the Wilderness, In his Epto Eustoch.
and in abstinent solitude, yet burnt with incontinent affections, and his mind
ran most on dancing with Maids, and when the Devil followed Christ into the
Wilderness, he thought that the fittest place for temptation and if the Devil
set upon the Son of God in the Desert, what Monk or Cloysterer thinks to go
free? The safest way is to go out of the World, not with feet, but affections,
and first to keep the World from nestling in our hearts or near us, lest when
we go out of the World we carry it with us; for as a Man may be Worldly and
Wicked, though he make a show to live out of the world, so he may leave the
World and yet never come in the Wilderness, and live among a multitude as if he
were alone, and even in a Court or Palace behold the evil travel of men, and
have no share with them, and where the greatest talk is, there to talk with
himself alone and confer with God; and to employ himself to the edifying of the
Church, to direct those right that are wrong, and to bring them again into the
way to Heaven, and by no means to hide the talent in the ground, and to lop
himself off (as an unprofitable branch) from the Body of Civil Society, thus
the Apostles did, and all those lights who brought so great glory to the
Church, and yet shine after their death.

I know that Aristotle spoke true in the first of his Poli^. that he that is
disposed to Solitariness is either of a divine, or a base spirit, as much as to
say, He forsakes the company of men, either because his Virtues are above them,
or he inferior and not worthy to come among them; But I say, that he that
loves Solitude because he excells others in Virtue, or Knowledge, ought to
subdue himself, and to descend (by humility and gentleness) to others
imperfections, bestowing himself every way in word and action to the good of
the Church and Commonwealth.

For what are all our perfections, but poor shadows and obscure traces of the
perfection of Christ? yet he became like unto men, and conversed among men,
that he might save men: From all which I gather this conclusion, That if it be
a Vanity to forsake the World, then much more to follow it, and if Vices (with
all their mischiefs) nestle in the Deserts, much more in the common crowd:
Surely if Vanity be thus found every where, we may well say, All is Vanity and
Vexation of Spirit.

Now, Old Age.
while Man busies himself about all his vain travel, while he thrusts time
forward with the Shoulders, every day begins a-fresh to rise up, and lie down
again, to fill and empty his belly like a Sponge, and goes round like a
Mill-horse in the circle of of the same tedious occupations, Behold old Age
comes stealing on, which yet but a few attain unto; Every one desires to come
to it, and when they are at it they wish it farther off: This is as it were the
sink and setlings of man's life, the worst of all to the Worldly, and the best
to the Godly; then are Worldly men more way-ward than ever, then they grow
fearful and froward, and (to speak truly) weak in Judgment* for we cannot
properly call that humor wisdom, which is any way irksome, nor want of power,
Sobriety; an old Man does not leave pleasures, but they leave him; he
complains without cause, that the Fashions and Manners of Men are changed into
worse; it is himself that is altered: when he was young, every thing pleased
him, though never so had, when he is old, nothing can please him, though never
so good; like a Man in a Wherry, who thinks the shore moves, when it is himself.
It is also a fault of old age to talk much, because they can do little,
therefore they think it is their part to teach young Men, and to tell of old
matters done a great while ago; So toward the declining of a State (as of the
Roman Empire) much talk but little actions. In the Worlds old age, many
curious Disputes, but little piety and solid Religion. Old Age is covetous, and
worldy cares then come a fresh, every thing grows gray and withered save only
Vice. The old Man the Apostle so often speaks of, grows not old to the World,
but is then in his prime; he sees Death at hand, and holds Life but like an Eel
by the tail, yet he devises long-breathed plots, and gathers and heaps up
riches together, as if Death were a great way off; then is Man loath to leave
his Life when it is least worth, and little left but Lees: He never thinks of
Death, though his Age gives him warning of it and every gray hair serves for a
Summons: Nay, Death oftentimes takes an earnest of him, by the loss of an Arm,
or an Eye, or a Leg, to put him in mind that shortly after he will have the
rest. Again, old Men are besotted with the World through long custom and
acquaintance, and are loath to leave it, though they find no good in it; This is
also a Vanity and Vexation of the Spirit.

At the end of all this tedious and unprofitable travel Death comes, Death.
which takes every man away before he knows how to live in the World, much
less to leave it; most men go out of the World, before they consider why they
came in; they would fain adjourn time, but Death will not listen to any
composition; His feet are of Wool, but his hands of Iron; he comes stealing
in, but what he lays hold of he never lets go. Man makes as slow have thither
as he can. If a Ship split 100 Leagues from Land, every one swims as well as he
can* not so much to save himself from drowning, as to set the clock a little
back for some minutes, and persuade Death to give Nature a little longer time
to pay the debt; this every one sees, and yet none can resolve himself; The
very remembrance of Death or Funerals, or the reading of an Epitaph, makes the
hair stand right up, and daunts and frights us; We picture Death stern and
starved; It mingles our compassion with horror when we think of any that late
glistred in gold and glory, now crawling full of Worms, and intolerably
stinking, while his Heir laughs in his sleeve, and enjoyes the fruit of that
labor which himself never could; and in the midst of all this dust and dirt
Ambition thrusts up the head, and Pride nestles in he very Coffin; for they
make sumptuous Sepulchers, speaking Stones, stately Styles, upon a Tomb stuck
full of lies, that they which go by may say, Here lies a fair Stone and a foul
Body, Surely this is a Vanity of Vanities, and an extreme Vanity.

But all these are but Roses to the Thorns that follow, Hell.
for the most irksom vanities and traveil of his temporal Life, are pleasant
in respect of the torments of eternal death, which is the common Inn and End
of most men: That is the broad way that leads to damnation, few men find the
narrow way to salvation. Matt^: 7. 13.


Death comes to make a Press for (...), and enrolls great and small, wise and
foolish, rich and poor, and some too that go for Saints, and mask under a
fine cloak of hypocrisy, as if they meant to steal to Hell without any noise,
or trouble by the way.

Hell is all Fire, yet there is nothing but darkness, where Souls live to be
always dying, but never dead; where they burn, but are never consumed;
complain, but are not pitied; are afflicted, but never repent; where the
torment has neither end nor measure.

There wicked Dives (who denied Lazarus a crumme of bread,) now begs but one
drop of water, though all the Rivers in the World cannot quench his thirst: But
if those fatherly rods wherewith God chastises his Children have brought some
of them to the brink of the pit of Desperation, and to curse the day of their
Birth (as Job, Job 3. 1.
and Jeremy did) how shall his enemies endure the Flails of his Indignation?
Jer. 15. 10*
It is a fearful thing (says the Apostle) to fall into the hands of the
living God* Hebr. 1^.
and hear also what he says in his anger, Deuteronomy. 32. If I lift up my hand to
Heaven, and say I live for ever, If I whet my glittering Sword, and mine hand
take hold of Judgment, I will execute Judgment on mine enemies, and will reward
them that hate me.

Blessed be God, who has delivered us from this fierce wrath and furnace, by
his Son Jesus Christ, who, as S. Paul says, Gal: 3. 13.
was made a curse for us, Peter 1. 2.
and has called us from darkness to his mavelous light: God grant that we
may never know what that torment means, and study to learn no more than may
serve to keep us in his fear, and to make us acknowledge the greatness of his
savor, and the excellency of our redemption in Christ Jesus his Son, blessed
for ever.

This precedent Discourse has led us along through all ages and ordinary
conditions of humane life, God blasteth man's purposes.
and in our whole travel and survey we have found nothing but Vanity and
Vexation of Spirit, which more manifestly appears, if we consider the guidance
and providence of God, who from the highest Heavens looks down upon our
actions, not as an idle spectator, but as a sage conductor and just Judge: He
derides from aloft the plots of great men, he blasts their devices, he
confounds the tongues and spirits of the re-builders of Babel, bruises the
mighty ones, breaks Scepters into shivers, and all to make man know that he is
but dust, his wisdom ignorance, that he may learn to contemn the World, to
transplant his hopes from Earth to Heaven, and having seen some of the
brightest beams of earthly glory (which like a flash of lightning is soon gone)
He may never say with Peter, Lu: 9. 33.
It is good for us to be here, let us make us Tabernacles; Blessed is he who
has seen enough of this worldly Vanity, and is drawn nearer to God, that when
the storm comes he may be in the Haven, and under Gods wing and protection as
under a safe shelter, he may behold the downfall of the wicked, the staggering
of their purposes, the silliness of their hopes, and the effects of Gods
Judgment. Hereof the Prophet David cries out in the 92d Psalm, O Lord how
glorious are thy works, and thy thoughts are very deep, An unwise man does not
well consider this, and a fool does not understand it, when the ungodly are
green as the grass, and when all the workers of wickedness do flourish, then
shall they be destroyed for ever. And herein we are also to observe, that this
Psalm is a Song of the Sabbathday, to teach us that this Meditation requires a
settled and sequestered mind, that gets out of the crowd of worldy thoughts to
enter into Gods house, suitable to that in the 72d Psalm, where he professes,
That he was grieved at the prosperity of the wicked, and that it vexed him to
the heart, until he went into the Sanctuary of God, then he considered the end
of those men: For to know the summum bonum, and to un-mask this imaginanary
happiness of the World, we must not go to the Philosophers school, and less
believe common judgment, but we must go into Gods house, and there enquire
what manner of Goods they be which God does ordinarily bestow, and what he
reserves for his own Children; how uncertain worldly happiness is, in respect
of the certainties of Gods promises, with what easy and insensible chains the
Devil hales men into Hell; how he triumphs over those that triumph most in this
World, and think they stand sure, when they are at the point of downfall.

So also he considers the vainglory of men; Vain glory of men.
One glories in his strength, yet a Bull is stronger; Another of his beauty,
which is but a superficial Dye that covers the bones and the brain, things in
themselves loathsome and hideous to be seen, and age will spoil and mar it
all, or perhaps sickness before age comes. Another glories in his Honors and
Dignity, but he is ever full of pensiveness and fear, and never enjoyes any
quiet; and imprisoned in his own perplexities, and so tied to the top, as he
can hardly come down without breaking his neck: Another glories that he is the
bravest Drunkard of all his fellows, but i^ his Belly hold more than theirs,
an hogshead holds more than his Belly. All this is Vanity and Vilany, both
alike.

These are General Vanity and Misery, The misery of certain conditions of men
and people.
common to all Men, and that is the fruit of Sin. Besides these, there are some
Men examples of extreme wretchedness; what a number of Beggars lie in the
streets? how many Slaves in the Galleys? what a sort of Hirelings and
Mercenaries? the hundred part of Men devour the rest, and the weakest are Meat
for the strongest.

Among the Turks and Pagans (which are above three quarters of the world) Men
are sold like Horses, he that buys them notes their countenance, looks in
their mouth, tries the muscles of their arms and legs; the Great Princes have
thousands of Slaves kept in Chains to work in the Sugars, or in the Mines, or
in the Gallyes, a misery more insufferable than death.

Some people have night six months together, who live in Caves through
extremity of cold, and have no heat but what they get by cruelty.

Others again continually scorched with the Sun upon their naked sands, which
are barren of fruits, and fruitful of wild Beasts and Serpents; our climate is
as natures garden to those intemperatures; God gives us more of his blessings,
and we him the least thanks; and there is no where so great poverty and misery,
as where such abundance of blessings are so plentifully showred down, and yet
so ill handled and requited.

Vanity in the thoughts, desires, and judgments of Men.
All that which is already said is but a rough draught, or the first traces to
represent superficially the vanity and misery of our nature, and the actions of
men; we will now consider their thoughts. David in the 94th. Psalm says thus,
God knows the thoughts of man that they are but vain.

If a man could at night gather together all the thoughts which have run
through his fancy in the day, he would wonder and be amassed at their number and
vanity, much more at their folly; Painters antic works come nothing near them.

One locks himself into his study, where he resolves to study very hard, but
when he is in he does nothing else but tell the quarrels of his window, Sutton.
or (like Domitian) hunts after flies:

Another walks up and down sad and solitary, and begins to rave in his own
thoughts what he would do if he were a King; or if he had a million of Crowns
how bravely he would spend them; or thinking of his domestic business, linkes
together a chain of long hopes, and by little and little becomes exceeding rich
in his own waking dream, and when he comes to himself and sees his own poverty,
he flings away and bites the lip at it.

Nay even in the times of preaching and prayer, when God speaks to us, or we to
him, our minds wander up and down; and if our best actions be thus besmeared,
and mixed with vanity, how much more our idle and unprofitable hours?

These foolish thoughts accompanied with vain desires and ignorance suitable,
turmoyl, and toss so the spirits of Man, that he can never rest.

When man is in his brown study then he gathers and heaps together all the
evils that ever befell him, he frets and fumes at the present, falls to
calculate what is to come, and more than ever shall happen, he changes
doubtful fears for certain miseries; Fear makes many miserable before they
come at it; many dye out of fear to dye; every day has affliction enough of
its own; who can ever be quiet in himself, that continually sets before him all
the evils past, and to come, the one by memory, the other by fear?

This natural restlesness makes a man toss and tumble up and down, as a sick
man is ever changing his Bed, and ever worse at last, and finds no rest but
when he is weary of stirring; he carries the evil allwaies about him, and is
never the better for removing: Nay I verily believe that if God had set man
betwixt good and bad to take his choice (and to cut out of the whole cloth) he
would choose the bad, he is so blind in judgment; or if the good, he would make
it bad, his nature is so perverse; if God sent him no evil, he would provide
some for himself; if his own evil could not vex him, he would be grieved at
another good, for envy frets him more than affliction.

Hence it comes that men are always coveting, but they know not what, they are
hot in desire, but cold in performance, like a bird that would fly, and can
flutter but with one wing, nay they are often distracted with a desire of
contrarieties.

One complains that his wife is dead, another that his wife will not dye; one
grieves for the loss of his children, another that his children are so lewd as
he counts them, all lost; one tired with foreign business commends home-peace,
and like Saul had rather lie hidden among the baggage than show himself abroad
to preferment another that is out of public ^mployment breaks his neck in
climing for it; 1 Samuel 10. 22.
every thing m^kes the best show but that which we have; nothing pleases us so
much as that we cannot get; we like nothing so well as another loss; we laugh
to see another man fall, but never laugh to see him rise again.

But alas in this vanity of our thoughts, Weakness and Ignorance.
and variety of our affections, we show great weakness of Spirit, for the face
and fashion of things move us more than the things themselves.

One sees a tragedy acted which he knows to be but a fable, and nothing
concerns him, yet he cries for pity, but for his own miseries never sheds a
tear.

Another hangs himself with despair, who at the same time would have run away
as fast as he could if another had offered to run him through with a sword; the
difference is this, the last comes with a horror and fear, the first is felt
before it is seen.

Opinion moves more than the things; Many eat they know not what, but find they
like it, and being told what it is, straight it goes against their stomachs,
and they cast it up again.

Others are more afraid of Mouse or a Toad than of a Sword; sure our conceits
are often moved and transported with very childish toys and fancies.

Again (but I cannot give the reason of it) sometimes a man studies to cozen
himself; one tells a tale which he knows to be false, yet he tells it so often,
and with that assurance, that at length he believes it is true.

Some husband knows his wife but hard-favoured and a blowse, yet when he sees
her sophisticated and painted he begins to think her fair, and she her self too
begins to think she is well-favoured and beautiful.

What a number there are that believe a religion because they will believe it?
who strive against their own knowledge, and whose Conscience tells them thus,
Me thinks that seems absurd, and agrees not with Scripture, but I will have it
so, and I will think it so too; this is to have Faith in a string, and not
subject Will to Religion, but Religion to Will.

Above all things man's judgment shows it self weakest in religion, for outward
actions demonstrate what is inwardly apprehended of the service of God; in
matters of news, we give more credit to one eyewitness than the report of a
Country, but in religion we are carried with the common opinion, and love to
follow the fashion, and to go with the crowd; when a man puts out money he will
be as sure as he can to lend to honest and sufficient men, and to take good
security, but in matters of Conscience he nere looks farther than to the
priest; I will now show you some damnable trifles of reverend estimation.

1 To clad pictures of men in silk and gold, when the poor goes naked who is
the picture of God.

2 To put off the hat at the name of Jesus, but never at the name of Christ.

3 To carry a flaring Cross upon the belly, when the belly is the enemy of the
Cross of Christ.

4 Going to a Bawdy House, or returning from some ill act, to rumble over the
beads.

5 To kneel as well before the empty Pix, when the Priest comes from a sick
man, as if it were full.

6 To adore the Host in the Pix, and not as well to adore it in the stomach of
him that received it.

7 To make his Creator with a few words, and then to eat him.

8 To revell and riot one day in Shrovetide; and the next day to be very grave
and reserved.

9 To employ some blessed Beads for the remission of sins.

10 When a great man dies to bestow a mourning gown upon our Lady that (...)
may bear a part of the sorrow.

11 To Whip ones self openly thereby to please God, and bring a Soul out of
Purgatory.

12 In honor of Saints to burn Candels at Noon.

These and many more such toys man has devised in his own brain, and God must
not dislike them; Nay he goes so far as he bestows the Offices in Paradise, he
makes one a Patron of one Country, another a Physician for one disease, another
for another, as if the Ants should dispose the affairs of a Kingdom, all this
(to say no worse) is a vanity and an extreme want of understanding.

We who have only the word of God for our rule are not exempted, for we mingle
our one folly, and vanities, with the sacred verities of Gods word.

In Civil actions when we need advise we go to our friends, but in matters of
religion we consult only with our own sense and inordinate desires, which are
our domestique enemies.

If a man owe us money we had rather have the money than his word; In matters
concerning God it is quite otherwise: For the Gospel is the obligation whereby
God promises salvation to us, sealed with the blood of his own Son, yet we had
rather keep the obligation, than be paid the debt when we die, and then we
would fain give a longer day.

One tells a childish weakness in Honorius the Emperor, Zonaras.
who made so much of a Hen, (which he called Roma) that when it was told him
that Roma was lost, Alas! (said he with a sigh) Roma was here even now. Sir,
says one to him, we talk not of a Hen, but your City Roma, taken and sacked by
Alaric the Goth; when the Emperor heard that, he was prettily cheered again, as
esteeming that loss far more tolerable.

Such is our weakness, we give none leave to meddle with our money, but we give
any man leave to draw us to Vice, to seduce us with Error, and to poison our
Souls: I will proceed, and show more of the like.

None are so fond as to refuse to take Physic but of a man of excellent
language; Yet many refuse to hear a Preacher of the Gospel unless he be
eloquent, and the Gospel is the Souls Physic; were it not a brutish madness in
a Malefactor to refuse a Pardon, because it is not Rhetorically penned? and why
may not the Word of God please well enough, although It be not flourished over,
and trimmed with the graces of art, since it is the Letters Patents of Grace
and Pardon, and the doctrine of our reconciliation with God; As if we should
like our Fathers rod best when it is tied with silk? this is a peevish vanity,
and a childish humor.

It is strange to observe how vain, absurd, and foolish our Judgment is of
others, and in the esteem or dis-esteem of our selves.

If we talk of burdens, he is best, that bears most; if of injuries, he that
will bear none; so we change strength and valor into weakness and impatience.

In matters of Ornament, we judge not of the Blade by the beauty of the
Scabbard, nor of an Horse by his fine Bridle or Saddle; why then do we esteem
of a man by his good or bad clothes? If we salute a man for his Apparel, we
might as well complement with the Stuff in the Shop: why are we so considerate
in slight matters, and so inconsiderate in our judgment of matters of moment.

We esteem well of a Merchant or Auditor, that is ready and exact in accounts,
though he live so as he can give God no good account of his life; one orders
his garden and grounds handsomely, and himself lies rude, wast and out of all
order.

We are no less vain and childish in our fears; Vain fears.
for even as little Children play with fire and burn themselves, and are afraid
as soon as their Father comes suddenly upon them; so men play with pleasures
(because they glister and look gay) till at length they hurt themselves. As
Children are afraid of their Father, when he comes to them with a vizard on, we
are frighted when God comes suddenly upon us under the mask of afflictions,
sickness, or death.

Man also forges to himself dangerous or foolish fears; One fears that his Wife
likes another better than himself, and hunts and seeks for that he would not
find, and perhaps the Wife grows angry, and revenges herself, by doing as much
as he feared.

Another fears he shall never rise to Honor, and does somewhat to bring him to
the Gallows, and to blot his memory with perpetual infamy.

Another fears he shall never have money enough, at last he finds the way to
get it, and dies before he tastes the pleasure of it.

Another fears to die a Batchelour, but God sends him a Wife that makes him
more miserable than he was before.

And when I consider the wisdom of the World, Vain Wisdom.
I find it like the labor of Moles, who dig cunningly under ground, but dare
not look out to the Sun; for we have many fine slights in worldly matters,
sell, (...) bargain, and to undermine one another, but let me see him that is
best seen in all these things, and bring him before the Sunshine of Gods Word,
and the Brightness of the Gospel, and then he is stark blind, and will be so
still; and though he forecasts what future changes and chances shall be in the
State, yet he sees not how nigh at hand his own destruction is, and though he
can talk and discourse of matters of State, yet he is but the Devils slave; and
this weak-sighted knowledge dares contest with God, and the folly of the
children of darkness with the wisdom of the Father of lights; and man's prudence
with Gods providence: for the wicked cover themselves with silence, subtilty,
and dissembling, like little children, who think they are hid, when they shut
their eyes; and that no body sees them, because they see no body; but God sees
them all bare and naked, better than they see themselves. God who is not only
all hand (as holding and guiding all) but also all Eye, (as seeing or searching
all things) he sees through the thickest substance, and darkness is light unto
him, and therefore the Royal Prophet Ps. 94. justly taxes this sottish wisdom,
Take heed ye unwise among the people, ye fools when will you understand, he
that planted the ear, shall not be hear? or he that made the eye, shall not he
see? In this place the Prophet calls them unwise, not the fools that run mad up
and down the streets, not the Idiots, not the gross common people, but the
great Politicians, who manage all their matters so smoothly, as if they thought
to hide themselves from the All-seeing wisdom of God, or to dazzle the eyes of
his providence; but as those are the fiercest Fevers that have the coldest Fit
at first, so that is the most desperate folly that is vizarded with wisdom and
greatest discretion.

Thus the Godly man must observe the actions and affections of men, and
consider all the unprofitable travel of this life, and accordingly frame his
Meditation.

There are two sorts of people in the life of man, as there is in a Fair; Some
come to buy and sell, others only to look about; He that fears God is but a
looker on; he comes not to buy or sell, but only to observe the works of God,
and the actions of men, that when he sees the glitter of vain curiosities,
which men expose to view, he may say, Oh! what a number of things there are in
this world, that I have no need of? but if (while he be thus looking about) he
happen to get some hurt, or be justled, or have his purse cut, (that is, if he
be troubled, or afflicted) he will presently be gone, and remembering that he is
but a stranger in this world, he will set forward toward his own Country, his
home in the Heavens, aiming always (as the Apostle says) toward the mark of
the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. Phil. 3. 14.
If the world contemn him, he contemns that contempt, knowing himself to be
better than the world, and called to a better hope, he will esteem lightly of
the promises of the World, and the business thereof base and tedious; and like
Mary in the 10th of Luke, he will choose the better part, which cannot be taken
from him; concluding all his Meditations of Vanity, as Solomon did in the end
of his Ecclesiastes, The End of all is this, Fear God, and keep his
Commandments, for this is the whole duty of, Man.

After this Meditation we must rest our selves upon those two Maxims and
Propositions which are the two Sanctuaries of Religion, the first, That to love
God we must contemn the world; the second, that to contemn the world we must be
think our selves of our own worth and dignity, and the excellency of our
vocation.

The first Maxim is taken out of the Epistle of St. John, John 16. 11.
Love not the world, nor the things of the world; If any love the world, the
love of God is not in him, for all that which is in the world, as the lust of
the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the father
but is of the world, and the world passes away, etc. Nothing drives us further
from the love of God than the love of the world, for the Scripture calls the
world the Kingdom of Satan; and as the Moon has no light but by opposition to
the Sun, so our Souls are in darkness but when we look unto God; So again it
follows, that as the Moon has no light in the shadow of the earth, Luke 16. 8.
so our Souls lose their light (as the Scripture calls us Children of light)
when they are obscured and eclipsed with the love of earthly things, Ephesians. 1. 8.
as worldly cares and covetousness, which we ought to tread under our feet,
like the Church in the Revelation, Rev. 12.
which has the Moon under her Feet, that is tramples upon all the unchangeable
unsteadiness of these sublunary things. And as Christ would have the penny paid
for Tribute to Caesar because it bare his Image, so we must give our selves to
God because we bear his Image; the misery is this, we often deface the Image,
and batter it against the ground, bemiring our selves with base thoughts and
dirty desires.

Therefore to the end we may contemn the world, and all the World can promise
or do for us, we must come to the second point, which is to know the worth and
excellency of Godly men; for when men by Fox-friendship and cruel subtilty
would entice a godly man to do ill, and to sin against God and his own
Conscience, then let him look into himself and thus Argue; I that am a child of
God, of heavenly parentage, one of the firstborn, whose names are written in
heaven, shall I value the promises of the world any thing worth, which (if they
were certain) yet they are too mean for me? Win a Kings Son with apples? tempt
the Son of the great Prince of Heaven with money to offend his Father? and like
Esau sell his birthright for a Mess of potage? I will never do it, God will
never suffer me to be so hood-winked; He is not worthy of Christ that does not
think the world unworthy of him; was not the world made for the Godlies sake?
and will not God destroy it again, and provide an house far more glorious for
us, and a more beautiful heaven than that we now behold, which is indeed too
mean for the dignity of Gods children? thou that fear God, and have faith in
his Son, I would have thee know, that it is thou that upholdest the world, and
for whose sake the wicked are yet suffered to live; so far are Gods enemies
indebted to thee. And God suffers the world to continue for the Elects sake,
whereof some are mixed with the wicked, others are not yet born, and (as it is
in the 6th of the Revelation) God stays until the number of our Brethren be
fulfilled; and that is one of the causes why our Savior calls his disciples
the Salt of the Earth, Mat. 5. 31.
as a small part among men that preserves the rest, and retards the
dissolution; God continuing the Bad for the Goods sake, that the bad may profit
at the example of the Good, and by that means be driven to fear God, and trust
in his promises; this being the excellency of Gods children, they must esteem
of the pleasures, riches, and glory of the world but as trifles, and like the
painted Kingdoms which the Devil offered Christ.

When men look down from the top of the Alps to the plains below them, the
greatest Towns would seem no better than little Cabins, how much would they
seem far less to be seen from Heaven? The Godly man must think he is in Heaven,
and look down upon earth from thence* he will still keep his heart above, and
thence beholding the Palaces of Princes they will seem to him little Ant-hills:
and the tumultuous tossing up and down of Nations as the swarming of Bees, when
they are disquieted, and then well observing what is most remarkable, eminent
and conspicuous upon earth, he will say, Vanity of Vanities, all is Vary.

This blessed magnanimity shall nothing hinder Christian humility, for we
acknowledge our selves unworthy, but are made worthy by Christ Jesus; If
repentance cast us down, faith sets us up again; If of our selves we be
nothing, yet through God and his Fatherly love unto us we are made something;
thus the Godly quite differ from the worldlings, the last lifts up his
Pharisaicall eyes to heaven, but his heart is on earth, and set upon lust and
covetousness, the first looks always downward in humility like the Publican
who durst not look up to Heaven, Lu. 18. 31.
yet by faith and hope has his heart there, he contemns the world not for the
love of himself, but for the love of God.

Wickedness that now reigns.

This is not all, for if we contemn the world for the love of God, it will at
last make us hate the world, when (besides the misery and vanity thereof,) we
see the damnable wickedness that reigns, and stands in defiance with God; when
(besides the vanity that is set to open sale) we are to consider the villainy
that is kept close, Treasons, Murders, Adulteries, committed in secret, and
when we consider the viols of the wrath and curse of God poured out generally
upon all men; For when we will enter into a due consideration of the world, we
must set it before us all at once, and behold it together, and then at one
glance run over all the people of the world, among which a number are Pagans,
who worship the Devil, and that not in Ignorance (not knowing what they do) but
in express profession: the East-Indians build him Temples, and do him all
service; The West-Indians are commonly tortured and tormented with wicked
Spirits; in most parts of the North they make a sport to be War wolfs, and it
becomes a tolerable custom; Witcherie is also a common profession there;
there the Devil domineers without contradiction.

In the flourshing Country (where the Apostles so happily planted the Gospel)
the Churches are turned into Mosquees, and Temples of Idolatry.

In the West, the outward face of the Church is become an earthly Monarchy,
and great Money-banks are set in the place where Gods house was once seated.

Amongst all these so many sundry and several Nations, the Jews are
scattered, who blasphemed, and persecuted Christ while he lived, and have
continued to do him all wrong ever since he died.

In the Country from whence the Decretals come, (and which rules Religion at
this day) Bawdy-houses are common, and Sodomy grown a fashion, and yet the
decision of the doubts of Faith must be coined in the place of all this villainy.

The other part of the world who serve God truly, are but an handful, who have
much a do to live in so bad an air, who are upon earth as Fishes out of the
water; the remainders of Massacres, and as scattered shivers of a broken ship.
Yet for all this (even among this small number of people picked out of the rest
of the world) evil increases, and spreds like a Canker or Gangrene, Quarrels,
Vanity, Excess in apparel, Ambition, (which lavishly lays out) Covetousness
(which Idly locks up) infect a part of Gods flock, God ill served in
households, cold charity, neglect of Gods word, to be short, a Contagion of
Vices by the unwearied Industry of our Adversary, which is a step to
superstition, from Vices we pass to error, and from corporal to spiritual
whoredom; If then God be so ill served where he is so well known, what will he
be in other parts of the world? If vices lodge in the Pulpit how much more in
the Porch and in the house of the wicked? therefore Christ calls the Devil
fitly the Prince of the World, and St. Peter justly cries out in the 2d. of the
Acts, Save your selves from this froward generation, for Satan lies in wait,
seeking whom he may devour; this Age is infectious, vices stick fast,
temptations are powerful, our enemies strong, and subtle, our selves weak and
simple, the way to heaven straight and ragged, few there are (says Christ)
that find it, and many that have found it cannot keep it, but having known the
truth forsake it again, and return to their vomit, let us therefore take heed
of the world, and keep our selves from so dangerous a place, let us pass by it
(as Strangers) leaving the world and leaning to God; we are never truly at
rest, but when we rest wholly upon God and his promises: Heaven is in
continual motion and that is the place of our rest; and on the other side the
earth does always rest, and that is the place of our agitation; Dyalls and
Clocks follow the motion of the heaven, but the faith of the Godly imitates the
rest above the heavens, for that teaches us to set our rest upupon God;
Ulisses liked better the smoke of his own house than the fire of another, yea
how much more liked he his own fire than another smoke? we are strangers here,
this is none of our house, our house is in heaven, shall we then prefer the
smoke of our strange habitation in another Country, and the darkness of the
earth, before the fire of our own house, and the glory of our own home which is
the Kingdom of Heaven?

This is the Kingdom of Satan, that the Kingdom of God, this a vale of Tears,
that the top of all bliss, here we sow in sorrow, there we shall reap in joy;
here we see the Suns light through two little holes, which we call Eyes, there
we shall see Gods light on all sides as if we were all Eye, Then when God shall
be all in all, to whom be Honor and Glory for evermore.

Amen.
A GLIMPSE OF THE DIVINE MAJESTY From the Cleft of the ROCK, Exodus 33. 22.
1 BEginning without beginning, End without end. 2 End of beginnings, B^ginning
of all ends. 3 First Mover, never moved nor m^ving, yet all is motion. 4
Self-sufficient, All-efficient. 5 Whose fiat is fit, He spoke the word and it
was done. 6 A Circle whose Center is every where, and Circumference no where. 7
To whom all things are excentrique, he concentrique, with all things. 8 Ever
green, never growing, 9 Swift without motion. 10 Continual without time. 11 To
whom whatever was and shall be Is 12 now, What Is, was (and ever shall be)
present before him. 13 Sees all, unseen of any. 14. All without parts. 15 Good
without quality 16 Great without quantity. 17 Unchangeable, yet changes all. 18
A Loadstone without variation. 19 A Ship that swifter than thought sails the
compass of All without any compass at all. 20 A bottomless sea, always flowing
without reflux. 21 An overrunning spring emptying himself into himself 22
Filling all, and full of all. 23 A Sun that never rises nor sets, always in
Meridian. 24 Whose beams are his works, whose light is his glory. 25 Is of
himself, in himself, every where. 26 Above us, in us, beneath us, yet
inaccessible. 27 Wills our best will. 28 Whose would is could, whose will is
Act. 29 Day without night. 30 Learning without Letters. 31 Knowledge without
defect. 32 Wealth without want. 33 Glory without envy. 34 Pleasure without
pain. 35 Joy without grief. 36 Enough without choice. 37 Satiety without
fulness, 38 Peace without trouble. 39 Triumphs without war. 40 Is all things,
yet above and besides us, 41 Known only to us, that he is only known to
himself.
O how amiable are thy dwellings thou Lord of Hosts. Psalm. 34. 1.


Immortal, Immutable, Infinite, Invisible, Invincible, Incomprehensible,
Almighty, All-sufficient, Merciful, Liberal, Bountiful, Pure, Wise, Free,
Just, Great, Good, Glorious, Gracious, Sole, Single, and the Same, or every of
these not in Denomination but Abstract, and but One yet numberless.

These are a part of his ways, Job. 26. 14.
but how little a portion do we hear of him who held back the face of his
throne, and spreds his clouds over it.

The deeper that we dive in this Abyss,
The more we know the less of what he is.
Vaetacentibus de te quoniam Loquaces muti sunt.
Woe to silence Lord of Hosts,
When they are dumb that praise thee most.
FINIS.

