Strange News from the Indies: OR, East India Passages further discovered.

August in Jubilee, 1650. A Jove principium.

He has showed thee O man, what is good: And what the Lord does require of
thee: Su^ely to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God;
But,
Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily, therefore
the heart of the sons of men are fully set in them to do evil.
As some peradventure upon serious perusal and ponder, may apprehend from this
brief, uncouth, and unpollished Discourse; partly discovering

The Manner, and Tenor of East-India-Trade hitherto: Together, with part of
The woeful, and sad sufferings of William Courten Esquire, etc.

Written for Information, Confirmation, and Confutation: By a constant
Well-willer, and continual sufferer for Truth, and public good. J. D.

Therein imploring and intimating to all in Authority, and others, for speedy
Justice; And a right understanding in judgment and practice, and by
principles, and grounded reasons, pointing at a foundation, and regulation of
that hitherto much abused East-India-Trade, so vast, spacious, necessary, and
of extraordinary high concernment to enrich, and advance Kingdoms, and
Commonwealths, being the Trade of trades, the Magazeen of Merchandizers, the
honor of Nations, and the glory of this world, etc.

E:C: mrk:
G C E

Piety, Policy par pari
Generalis vicarius Dei in terris No 666 Blasphe^y Generalis Comitatis East
indiae, No 659 Monopoly
vtru^: horu^ Whether barres^ better, Wisd. (...) Apoc. c. 13. v. ult.



LONDON, Printed for Stephen Bowtel, at the Bible in Popes-Head-Alley. 1652.

To all public spirits, and sincere lovers of Truth. More particularly, To the
Honorable Henry Darley Esquire a Member of Parliament, and Council of State.
SIR,
UPon second thoughts, and better advice and consideration, I have altered my
resolution; and the general and particular discharge of my duty, and
conscience, now prompts me to present you with this Tragical Discourse (being
part of the fruits of my 31. years East India experience and observation) and
the rather, because of your known ability and alacrity to public good; as
also your serious and often observation of some late passages in relation to
the principal suffering subject thereof, (this Commonwealth excepted) whose
case and cause seems to cry aloud to heaven and earth for Justice and
Judgment, saying, (Care ye not that we perish?) When will it once be, That
judgment shall run as a river, and righteousness as a mighty stream: And
although a good foundation of East India Trade was also intended and laid by
that Mirror of Merchandizers (and so then an incomparable Commonwealths-man)
Sir William Courten Knight, deceased: As appears by his unparalleld Expeditions
to the West, as well as the East Indies (the chiefest desirable Trophies of
this whole universe, to advance and enrich a Nation) yet withal to consider
how in his life time, himself was unjustly dispossessed of the one by the late
King, and his Courtiers, or Favorites: And since how William Courten Esquire,
his son, has likewise been as unjustly oppressed in the other, by the government
of an illegal Patent (derived from the same power) to his utter undoing,
administers matter of astonishment (yea even to very heathens in my knowledge)
Because Justice and Judgment between man and man, is not executed speedily.
But lest by my silence I should become accessory to his and others sufferings
therefore I tender the disposal of the sequel to your most serious and judicious
wisdom and discretion: You may please to perceive with me, that I could have
put it in another dress, of a deeper dye, and withal hold the rules of truth
and sobriety; but I choose rather to prejudice many by a modest forbearance,
then offend any by harsh and unpleasing expressions, conceiving here is matter
sufficient to convince the oppressors of the errors of their ways, if they
consider (intr. al.) but their last destruction of trade and supplies, and so
of the Plantation, and discoveries of Madagascar, and adjacent Islands Assada,
and the rest, which is now become their first and only foundation, and best
hopes of the present Traders, in order to advance themselves, and this
Commonwealth, from the hidden ruin, and remaining basis of the abovesaid
parties, as long since they were plainly and truly informed: And I am
persuaded Heaven will not always suffer Earth, injurious Earth thus to pass
unregarded, unrewarded, but in his due time stir up some in highest Authority,
of approved Excellency and Eminency (that knows and remembers they bear not the
sword for naught) to question and determine the whole matter, and forthwith
order the securing of Carwar, for advance of Trade, and good of this
Commonwealth.

And seeing the principal matters and passages in difference are extrinsecall
and extrajudiciall, and so (humbly conceived improper for, and remediless here
by any Court of Justice or equity (much less for any Commission thence
proceeding) because his just right and propriety to Trade, Factories, and
Plantations in both Indies, are things in Nature and Eminency co-essentiall and
consubstantiall to, and with the being, and well-being of a Commonwealth (and
so to be accounted) being rather honors and emolluments only proper to the
Crown and Dignity of a Nation for protection, defense, and preservation; and
in no wise (as formerly) to be referred to the neglect, or weak endeavors of
an Incorporation, or particular person for oppression, loss, and destruction,
as sundry instances in this ensuing Tract may sufficiently evince: But in this
(as in all other) I most humbly submit to better judgments. And seeing
moreover, that both the father and the son (at so dear a rate) have opened a
door, and prescribed a way for Trade to perpetuity (which no other would, or
could do) whereby this Nation in time may become the Mirror and Terror of
Kingdoms and Countries, therefore I well hope such deserts (in point of justice
and equity, as well as encouragement to others) will not always lie in the
dust, but be had in high and honorable esteem and remembrance by the most wise,
prudent, and best affected, and rewarded accordingly; Which doubtless will be
well pleasing to God, and great rejoicing to good people, and so procure
Heavens blessing upon all your designs, ever accompanying such acts of Justice
and Mercy: And these are the prayers, and persuasions, hopes, and earnest
desires of him who willingly remains, Sir,

Your very humble Servant, John Darell.

Mr. Courten's voluntary and free tender to his Creditors, the 25th. of Febr.
1645.
Worthy Sirs:
MY great losses and misfortunes, heightened by the calamities of the times,
being too eminently known unto all, (and especially to you my Creditors) who at
present are most unhappily become Sufferers with me therein, though much
against my will. Yet to the end (that though I perish) you might not be too
great loosers by me, my earnest desire is; That you will be pleased to take my
languishing, and almost ruined condition into your serious consideration, and
that for the remedying thereof, you will be pleased to take my estate into your
care and custodies, to prevent the total ruin thereof, and therein the
absolute loss of your Debts, which I hope by Gods blessing, and your
assistance may yet be preserved, if you will vouchsafe to concur with me in
the managing and preservation thereof, either in the way I have offered in
assigning my estate into your hands, for the good of my Creditors, and for
payment of my just Debts; or if you shall dislike that way, in any other way or
means you shall direct, that may conduce to that purpose, which is the chiefest
aim I have, as shall appear unto you, and all the world if you shall please to
accept thereof, and afford your assistance therein.

What I have suffered already in the perplexity of my soul, since my Fathers
death, for the effecting thereof, God only yet knows; but I hope my real
dealing shall in some measure make it manifest unto you also, if by your
favors I may have opportunity so to do. And whereas you may be jealous that
the ship William (wherein I have interest) that is gone to Ligorne, was sent
thither out of some intent to defraud my Creditors of my estate therein,
toward the payment of their just Debts; That I may take off that scruple, I
do hereby protest I have no such intention, nor never had, but am and will be
willing that my estate therein, shall be assigned to you toward the payment of
my just Debts, and that if you will afford me your assistance therein, you
shall have a clear discovery thereof, and of all other my estate in the world;
And not only so, but shall have my utmost assistance in the getting in the
same, wherein you shall find me act the part of a faithful Servant, and
prefer my Creditors just satisfaction before my own subsistence, or the
being of those that are most near and dear unto me, and in granting this
favor, you shall ever oblige

Your Debtor and Servant, William Courten.

To the Right Worshipful Ja. Winstanley, Geo. Cotton' Tho. Bales, Esquires,
and others, Commissioners and Ingagers concerning (his much honored friend,
and late Imployer) Will. Courten Esquire.
Gentlemen,
IT seems pleasing to Providence, and present Authority, to dispose and entrust
you with the mannagement of the strangely distracted estate of Mr. Courten; (A
matter of moment, and high concernment as well to the Commonwealth in general,
as himself and Creditors in particular (as Mr. Courtens foregoing Copy of his
proffer to his Creditors, and this ensuing Tract will partly discover) but so
intricated, entangled and invested (if not alienated and inverted) that it
cannot quickly and easily be apprehended or discerned, what a difficult and
uncouth business you have undertaken: But as formerly, so now, my love to
truth, and respect to the justness and integrity of his cause, and proceedings
(as yet I apprehend them) has moved me to compose this following Discourse,
and to the utmost of my ability to inform and possess you and others, of the
true state and condition of some foreign and late transactions thereto
appertaining (things not frequent in your ordinary practice) lest you or others
should be perplexed with suits, or surprised, and circumvented by future
Contracts, Concessions, or Conclusions: And this I thought necessary in
discharge of my duty, and a good conscience, whether public or private, and
very material and pertinent to sundry persons, and present occasions, as
hereafter more at large appears. And so I humbly refer, and submit my further
service, and this sequel to your judicious considerations to command and
conceive thereof, as God and your own discretions can best direct you.

John Darell.

This ensuing General Discourse brancheth it self in substance (inter alia)
into these following particulars. viz.

The Content's partly these.
1 THat as the foundation and Government of Dutch East India Trade, and English
East India Traffic are diverse or contrary, so are their successes, even to
admiration, which alone would require a large Volume. 2. That in all
Revolutions of Trade, and Times: Infancy, State, and Declination, and since
depredations and detentions, China, Portugal, Mallabar, and Madagascar, have
much supported their Trade and Shipping. 3. That by neglect of China and Japan,
the Spice Islands, Plea National.
and Ormus, with Cashmee Castle, and Customs, with neglect and destruction of
Plantations, etc. Trade was lost, Treasure (elsewhere procurable) hence
abundantly exhausted; general Adventurers undone, or much impoverished, and
Commonwealth thereby abused, and so hitherto continued. 4 That the expedition
of Sir William Courten (if supported) was excellent, Honorable, and profitable
to East India Company, and Commonwealth, but very unkindly requited hitherto,
by both injuries and delays, as hereafter plentifully declared, being thereby
damnified per English, about 150000. li. As by the Charge, Affidavit, and that
cruel, and unreasonable (I say not Hellish Agreement) appears, etc. This
Agreement was discovered from India, anno 1642. and mightily confirmed there,
annis 1643. and 1644. by Actions, Commissions, Orders, Injunctions,
Expressions, Detentions, Massacres, and Depredations, etc. 5 That from the said
Expedition, etc. Mr. Courten may justly claim personal and peculiar interest
and propriety, Plea personal.
(sufficient to employ three or four Ships of good burden yearly) from
Dabull, all along the Coast of Mallabar to Cape Cannereene; also Acheen
Factory, Ballasore, and China Trade, others there conceived at best ( Ballasore
excepted) either interlopers, intruders, supplanters, or oppressors, till
differences (long depending) by Authority be determined, etc. 6 That two joint
Stocks at least (well regulated) are absolutely necessary, and a foundation
free from Bloud-guiltinesse might better be laid, and so expect better success
then formerly, as by the three Principles, Carwar considerations, and other
ways may plainly be demonstrated. 7 That the new Modellers (the old Companies
nowbest directors) had their induction and instruction from Mr. Courten, and
others in relation to him and the Commonwealth, but their unkind
retributions, and preventions of further and future discoveries, and
informations for general good, deserves a particular Discourse. Concluding the
Premises with a peremptory (but pertinent and patheticall Letter) intended
principally for present securing Carwar, for the recovery and advance of that
Trade, and good of this Commonwealth, etc. Closing up all with a general
Assertion, and particular application of Mr. Courtens interest, and propriety
in and to the East and West Indies, etc.
East-India-Trade first discovered by the ENGLISH.
WHen famous Sir Francis Drake (after his return from the South seas Anno
1580.) had here divulged his discovery and treaty there with the King of
Ternatte, Anno 1580.
and his Orankaies or Nobles (being one of the principal Spice-Islands of
Molucca, Banda or Amboyna, (the only known places of the world for Nutmegs,
Cloves and Mace, Plea National.
and a principal foundation of East India, and all other Trade) thereupon some
years after, a vigilant foreseeing neighbor Dutch-Nation (who, like wise
Merchants, and careful parents, providing for childrens portions and
posterity) took the opportunity of advantage of the negligent and
inconsiderate English, then and after, altogether for the present:) And the
said foreign Nation after some years spent in discovery, to gain a right
understanding thereof, at last prosecuted their East India voyages with one
only joint stock of about 600000 li. in a National, free and regulated way,
and therewith in forty years gained almost the whole Europian Trade of
East India aforesaid, Dutch stock 600000. li. An. 1602.
even to admiration in point of power, honor and profit, so that (communibus
annis) 1400000 li. or thereabouts, is conceived returned for Holland (being but
the superfluity of their stock of India) besides employment of two hundred, or
two hundred and fifty sail of Ships, equal now in burden to four or five
hundred of ours, having thereby also gotten and built there, about thirty
impregnable Cities, Towns and Castles, Dutch-gain, Englands-losse.
besides Conquest and Command of about 30000 miles coasting (with Inland-trade)
viz. from the coasts of China, Japan, and Phillippeen Islands Northwards, all
along to Cape bon Esperanze Southwards, the whole contents of the Old-
East India Companies Patent or Monopoly.

Whereas the English being, and for some years continuing in particular
running-voyages (only to enrich a few) were afterward reduced to a general
joint stock, Contrary Constitutions.
or destructive Monopoly of a different or contrary Constitution and Government
to the foresaid Dutch or Neighbour-Nation, as might be showed in sundry
particulars, and so has produced different and contrary effects, as appears at
this day by the said Companies mis-imploying or mis-spending since in one joint
stock about 1600000 li. in several joint stocks above 3600000 li. thereby much
impoverishing the Nation and Natives by transporting much Bulloigne,
English-stocks 3600000 li.
and native coin (elsewhere procurable) only enriching a few at home and
abroad in office and employment; and (which is wonderful) notwithstanding all
this time and treasure, hitherto not provided in India with one port, or place
of their own for a Rendezvouze, or so much as to secure a Ship or Pinnace;
Company no Rendezvouze.
but it is not the Authors intention to make search or scrutiny at this time
into this mystery, whether proceeding from reason prevaricated by the
particular interests and profits of the Governing-party here, or rather from
Deity offended, by the cruel and unreasonable intentions and actions of those
in office and authority, both here and elsewhere, belonging to the said
Company; for to dip my pen in blood's (from the Old Companies first Adam's at
Japan, to Mr. Courtens last Adam at Madagascar or Acheen) would be a sad theme:
Adam Cx. Adam Cm.
And to speak of unparalleld injuries and oppressiors is no pleasing story, yet
duty and necessity (with due respect to truth and sobriety) at present enjoins
me (according to my promise in the Frontispeece) to declare somewhat of my long
and laborious observation and experience of that hitherto abused
East-India-Trade (rather Traffic) as also of the woeful and sad sufferings
therein, of William Courten Esquire, his friends and creditors, which are very
many and great; only for orders sake reducing the same to three Terminations
or Revolutions, Infancy, State, and Declination, therefore ad rem, briefly thus:

The English being thus improvident, and careless of Cities and Castles ready
built, Ormus etc. neglected. Plea National.
and the Royalties and Customs thereof (though of extraordinary value and
consequence, and properly belonging to the Crown and Dignity of this
Commonwealth) and the Dutch Shipping and Trade there, to the Northward (as
formerly to the Southward) more and more increasing; and Portugal depredations
(whereof the Company had taken good store) failing; Trade decaying from 161^ to
1634.
then fell the English Traffic there also into a deep and languishing
consumption, insomuch that their Actions or Adventures were frequently sold
here from party to party, for many years together at 30. 35. and 40. per cent.
loss, some much more, others undone, and so continued decaying a long time
without any hope of recovery; and about An. 1632. And since, some transactions
were said to be again in agitation between the Dutch on the one party, Quer.
Mr. Boneal, and Mr. Boswel the Kings Agent and state of Spice-Islands.
and the late King and the English East India Company on the other party,
concerning their claim or interest in or to any the foresaid Spice-Islands in
relation to the Crown of England (then said to be comprimized for 80000 li.
(including the said Companies houses, and stores burnt at Jacquetra by the
Dutch Aug. 1628. valued by protest then at 200000. Rials of eight Spanish) but
the said King and Company not agreeing upon shares (as reported) the moneys yet
remain with the Dutch, Houses and stores burnt, and K. demands 30000 li.
but what was then and there positively acted is best known to themselves, and
whether beneficial, or rather much prejudicial to this Commonwealth? J. H.
for it is certainly reported from men of experience in those parts, that since
that time the Dutch have assumed the sole and whole propriety of all the
foresaid Spice-Islands to themselves, prohibiting the English upon penalty and
forfeiture of ship and goods, life, limb and liberty, A. 1623. trade lost
valued at 100000 li. per An.
not to come there with any their shipping, which said loss of Trade by
knowing men (viis and modis) is valued at 100000 li. per annum consequence, to
this Commonwealth.

The aforesaid East India Company having thus lost their trade by undervaluing
and neglecting those Islands and Ormus, etc. An. 1623. as formerly expressed, and
so brought their coasting and posting Traffic into such a condition, that
general Adventurers were altogether discouraged, and themselves (I mean those
in office and authority, (who only were gainers as aforesaid) still craftily
crying up that trade, and laboring as for life, pretending want of freedom,
liberty, and other immunities and privileges in Customs and Imposts, with an
unlimited arbitrary power over all Adventurers, and an absolute restraint of
the whole Nation, Bad government destroys Trade.
which could have no other issue (save as formerly) to damnifie and destroy our
own, and enrich all others with the riches and dignities of those vast and
glorious Kingdoms and Countries, not considering; or at least not discovering
the main and sole causes of these their so unprofitable practices, Good and bad
government.
proceeds merely and clearly from their unprincipled and general bad
government; and this truth is manifest and apparent, by their exporting hence
our own coin of gold, silver, half Crowns, and Plate (melted or unmelted,
Quer. the reasons.
as well as foreigne; in as great quantities to maintain a Traffic of 100.
or 150000 li. per annum, as the Dutch to maintain a Trade of 2000000 li. per
an. or more, which requires serious consideration and reformation.

Sir William Courten's Expedition.
WHilst East India affairs were in this low, languishing and desperate
condition, it so happened, that the late King and Council were (by travelers
and men of experience) truly informed thereof, An. 1634. and 1635.
and expected some rational proposalls from the said Company, to recover and
revive the same, but finding none satisfactory (for grounded and accustomed
errors are neither easily removed, nor willingly acknowledged) and withal
considering the damage National, of at least 4. or 500000 li. in England and
Ireland, in the exportation of our Native, and importation of East India
commodities (besides employment and improvement of stock and shipping, Reasons
for Sir Will. Courtens undertakings.
a great honor and safety to this Nation;) These and other like good
considerations moved the said late King and Council, to admit of another
Company to plant and trade in such places only where the old Company were not,
or did not trade, and there at their discretion to settle Factories and plant
Collonies after the Dutch manner (and intended practice of the new modelers
from that example) the one not to interloop, intrude or entrench upon, Sir
Williams Patent legal, the Companies not.
or into the Ports and places of the other, as by Letters Patent, or otherwise
may plainly appear.

The late King and Council having thus equally and prudently resolved and
ordered this weighty affair, Sir William Courten (a most eminent Merchant and
excellent Commonwealths-man) was conceived fittest to undertake and manage the
same; and to that end having entertained Merchants and Commanders of good
abilities, and long experience there, fitted and set out, An. 1635. five or six
sail of Ships richly provided, and so set sail for East India, and arrived at
Goa (the chief Portugal City there, intending to settle from Dabull in the
Decan-Country (once sacked by the Companies ship Exchange) and so all along
that, Sir Williams propriety and foundation.
and the coast of Mallabar to Cape Commereen or Cannereen, where they settled
Factories, contracted Customs, purchased and bought Ports and places for
Trade; and from thence sailed to Acheen, so to China, and intended for Japan,
and afterward for Madagascar and other places; and this was the principal
groundwork and foundation of that most excellent, honorable, just and
necessary undertaking; indeed a business both then and now too weighty for any
particular man, or society, and (rebus sic stantibus) only fit for the
cognizance or encouragement of the Representative of this whole Nation,
East-India-trade National.
or others by their appointment in regard of foreigne and domestic opposition,
as hereafter expressed.

Sir William Courten aforesaid had no sooner dis-speeded the said ships from
the Downs, but he fell sick and dyed, Sir Williams adventure 150000 li.
having therein (as reported) upon his particular account, an adventure of
about 150000 li. and the voyage was no sooner entered, but all manner of
devices and oppositions both at home and abroad were used and practiced to
prevent, obstruct, Dutch and English Devices.
damnifie and utterly destroy their designs, both by Dutch and English; and
for the better understanding thereof, somewhat to each party for distinction
sake, and first to the Duch because of their distance.

THe Dutch seriously weighing and pondring that the principles and purposes of
this Expedition were much like their own, altogether tended to revive and
advance a Trade to perpetuity, (especially in opening and establishing a China
and Japan trade, Dutch apprehensions upon good reasons.
whereto the old Company would never be persuaded neither to trade with the
Mallabars as aforesaid) therefore the Dutch (lest their honors and profits
should thereby be impared and diminished) watched and spied out their designs
at Goa and coast of Mallabar aforesaid, and upon the very first proceedings of
Captain John Weddall with the foresaid Fleet, from Goa aforesaid, and so
through the straights of Malacca, and in their passage to and again from China
aforesaid, upon their lawful employments, Dutch Commission fire and sword.
were sundry times encountered and molested by the Dutch; and at last (having a
Commission from Here van Deeman (as I take it) the General of Jaccatra alias
Battavia) to fire or sink them, unless they would come under their command
and submit to their mercy, or deliver them the Portugals and their goods
aboard, valued about 200000 li. But Captain Richard Swanley (Commander of Ship
Son) and his Company were unwilling to fight in defense of the Portugals and
their goods (because from them they had received many injuries and affronts in
Chinae) whereat Captain Weddal was much enraged, but Captain Swanley advised
Captain Weddal to open the box Numb. 8. with instructions from England
concerning Portugal, wherein they found power was given them to seize any
Portugals, Dutch and English Commanders transactions.
and their goods for the Crown of England in case they suffered any damage by
them, and then Captain Weddal seized upon the goods accordingly, so Captain
Swanley and his company were satisfied and resolved upon that account to hazard
their lives in defense thereof, and the Son being of best force, having six
and thirty Guns mounted, weighed anchor and went a head the Dragon to receive
the first encounter, then Captain Swanley went aboard the Dutch Commandoor, and
acquainted him with their resolutions and grounds thereof, whereat the said
Commandoor and Company was much incensed, but thereupon refrained engagement,
and desired a copy of their Orders and Instructions to keep his head on his
shoulders (as he said) when he returned to Jaccatra (which peradventure was
granted conditionally to prosecute to purpose the year following) and so in a
grumbling threatening manner suffered them to pass; but still observed their
motion, and Captain Weddal afterward refused Captain Swanleys advice, which was
to make good that seizure, and bring those goods for England, but contrarily
Captain Weddal (according to his particular contract in China) landed the said
Portugals and their goods in India; Dutch reasons for revenge.
Then the Dutch finding themselves thus deluded by a device, doubtless
resolved upon an opportunity for a revenge, so the Ship Son being laden, set
sail that year from the coast of Mallabar for England: but the Dragon and
Katherine having a rich stock, and not lading to their desires staid another
year, Capt. William Swanleys test.
when being expected home, it was then credibly and positively reported in
Holland (by some that came from India) that they had sunk, or that the said
Ships Dragon and Katherine were sunk, which (taken at best) they could not have
told, unless they had known it, because it was never yet known or heard that
two Ships either Dutch or English did ever perish together by casualty or
tempest, to or from India aforesaid. Two ships never perished together from
India
And their very silence herein, is a sufficient argument of their full revenge,
and satisfaction to those that have spent some years amongst them at Jacquetra,
and acquainted with their lofty and insolent carriage toward, and their rigid
and austere government over the inconsiderable brabling pedling English (as
they term and value them) besides it was also reported that some of the said
Ships goods marked with Mr. Courtens mark, T. L.
were afterward sold at Acheen, and the common rumor in India and elsewhere,
by several Nations were, That the Dutch waylaid them with a Fleet (as some
affirmed) consisting of nine sail, viz. six Ships, T. W.
and three Yaughes or Pinnaces (whereof Ship Amsterdam was Admiral) and so
meeting with them of Zealoan (whereof John Tyson a Skipper was afterward made
King by the General Jaccatra, Zealoan the only Synamond Island. Jo. Tyson K.
of Zealoan. Dragon and Katherine w^tched at Cocheen, then waylaid and sunk.
Uncharitable silence.
as appeared by his warrants) invited Captain Weddal aboard (as some said) and
then took occasion to quarrel, and so to pillage and sink them, not saving a
man alive, and that diverse, the old Companies servants in India have both heard
and related sundry such probable reports to that purpose, howsoever here an
uncharitable silence and reservation, or rather fear to offend others, and so
prejudice themselves, makes them beware.

This great loss valued about 140000 li. occasioned diverse years to pass, ere
another voyage for China by William Courten Esquire (Son and Executor to the
aforesaid William) was undertaken, which was An. 1643. in Ship Bon Esperange,
Ship Bon Esprange taken by Dutch.
which said ship was fraighted from Goa aforesaid for China and passing through
the straights of Mallacca upon her lawful employment, as aforesaid, met
likewise with another Dutch Fleet, and was by them summoned as aforesaid, to go
in there under their command, else their Commission was to sink or burn, kill
or slay, and so upon refusal to go in, the said Ship was violently assaulted,
the Master and others slain, and at last taken and made reprisall, and carried
into Malacca, and all the men living, made prisoners, and the English (by their
own relation) more basely esteemed and used by the Dutch, then the Portugals
their reputed enemies, Common report at Malacca.
and as these men did frequently report afterward at Bantam and elsewhere,
that it was a common speech in Malacca, that the two foresaid Ships Dragon and
Katherine were sunk by the Dutch, and that some Dutch themselves said unto
them, they did well to yield when they did, else they should have fared like
the Dragon, and Katherines Company.

And Captain Jeremiah Blackman in his return from China, Captain Blackman
escaped, and affronted in China.
in ship William, nearly escaped the like danger, having lately suffered at
China sundry affronts and prejudices, both from Dutch, and the old Companies
servants, aspersing them for Roundheads, and declaring themselves Royalists,
and Cavaliers, and so gained the affection of the Portugals, and Chinaes, as
the Merchant of the said ship William reported in India.

There has been also further considerable discoveries here in England, and
(inter alia) of an imbroidered Girdle with silver buckles, John Stratford in
Southwarke test.
belonging to Mr. John Dawbney Surgeon of the said ship Katherine, and
known to be alive and well in the said ship, setting sail for England from
the coast of Mallabar, which said very Girdle of certain knowledge, both of
the buckles and imbroidery, a Dutch Saylor or seaman in Southwarke was seen to
wear, and the party was fully resolved to apprehend him upon suspicion, but
dissuaded by friends and acquaintance, but could not be so satisfied, but went
to the said Dutchman, and demanded how, Jo Dawbnies girdle.
where, and when he came by the said Girlde? the Dutchman at first seemed
angry, and asked the reason of his inquiry; he replied, because that was his
friends Girdle, which he resolved, and so declared here to his friends and
himself, before his going for India, never to sell or give away the same; at
last the Dutchman confessed he had it in India, The Dutchmans confession.
the said party (as he said) did then think in his very heart that the said
Dutchman, and one or two more with him, were some of their Murderers, and
after that time saw him no more; only acquainted the East India Company, or
some of their Servants therewith (not knowing Mr. Courten) but being by them
slighted, suffered it so to pass (as himself said) and would justify upon
Oath if thereunto lawfully called, with much more to that purpose; but what
need I hold a Candle to the Sun? C. W. S. M. T. L.


Moreover, the aforesaid Captain Jeremiah Blackman, Cap. J. B. threatened.
Commander of the ship William, was likewise in the said Streights, in her
lawful Voyage to China, by another Dutch Fleet strongly threatened with sinking,
or burning, unless he would submit as aforesaid, and showed him their
Commission to that very purpose, but the said Dutch (though more ships in
number) viewing and seeing her every way well fitted and manned for defense,
durst not attempt, but suffered her to pass, and notwithstanding the discreet
answers of C. B. aforesaid to their Messages, having neither Portugal, or
Portugalls goods, yet by Letters, threats, and other ways they thought to
disturb and prevent him in his China Trade as aforesaid, Ship William waylaid.
and upon his return (as was reported) waylaid him with a greater Fleet of
seven, or nine sail, but met not with him, the reason was, (as most conceived)
that the Dutch supposed, that the fear of them might cause Cap. B. to keep a
good distance from the coast of Malacca, and peradventure to pass through the
streights of Sundie, but the Dutch failed of that hope, for the said ship came
as near the coast of Malacca as possible they could, and passed fair by the
rode, and so through the streights without interruption, or sight of any Dutch
ships, which was much admired by the Dutch at Acheen. East India Companies
subjection.
But shortly after this two of the old Companies ships returning together the
same Voyage from China, were encountered by some of the foresaid Dutch fleet,
and (according to custom) without resistance submitted to their Summons, and
went in under their command at Malacca, to pay what duties, and receive what
further admonitions and instructions the Dutch there would please to lay upon
them, and so probably ever since, they (as formerly elsewhere) deserted those
China Voyages; or became their tributaries, whereby at pleasure the Dutch can
now prevent all hopes of future Trade into any those Southern parts, unless
some remedy or course be taken here in England to prevent their practices; the
consideration hereof, together with some particular grudge against Captain
Weddall at the siedge of Cales may sufficiently evince the truth of the
premises, Com. Wilbrand at Goa. The true and pretended causes of Dutch
proceedings*
and that the true cause was the fear of competition in that Trade, and not
their difference with the Portugal, as they pretended.

Object. But many object, and say, It is impossible to conceal such an horrid
and merciless act of sinking and drowning, etc. thereto thus.

Those who have had their education at home, Several judgments.
may possibly in truth have some such slender apprehensions, and deceitful
judgments in a charitable construction, yet if such would but seriously
consider what cruel plots and projects have secretly, and abundantly been
lately acted in our own and neighbor Nations, might thence receive sufficient
information and satisfaction. But others from observation and experience
abroad, thinks it as strange on the contrary, that so much testimony upon so
little inquiry should so evidently appear, Amboyna action.
the least whereof being more then the greatest, or all the Indiciaes in that
horrid Amboyna action* besides, better to inform their judgments, I will
instance, or parallel it with a passage at Jaccatra in India, Anno 1628. and it
was thus:

January, 1627. Jaccatr. 1627.
the English removing then from Jaccatra aforesaid to Bantam, but leaving their
houses with goods and stores to a great value, as by Invoyce, and protest under
others and my own hands then and afterward appeared, which said houses, etc.
in August, Houses, etc. burnt. Aug. 1628.
1628. were fired and burnt by the aforesaid Dutch, (and the walls afterward
laid even with the ground) and by them reported to be done by the Javaes their
enemies, which report (notwithstanding many thousand inhabitants there (most
knowing the same) was never in India contradicted, or the truth thereof ever
yet published or confessed by any of them to this day that ever I heard of,
which plainly shows it much more easy to conceal the destruction of the
Dragon, and Katherine, which with the foresaid ship Bonsperanz, and Hen.
Bonadventure, Dutch damages valued at 200000. l.
at Mauritius Island, may amount in value to about 200000. li.

Furthermore, it was never yet known (as formerly expressed) that two ships,
neither English nor Dutch perished together, either going to, Two ships never
perished together.
or coming from India, since their first Trading thither to this present,
though much weaker in substance, or of longer continuance in the Country, etc.
Thus far the Dutch.

But least foreign Adversaries (as their actions and expressions plainly
demonstrate) should not fully effect their desires, let us look back again to
the beginning of this so honest and honorable undertaking, The Old East India
Company, etc.
and with as much truth and plainness as may be, briefly touch, or point at
the practice and proceedings of our own Nation and Neighbors, more
particularly the Old East India Company, and some others, which may much
confirm and seal the truth of the Premises, viz.

It has been too apparent from the beginning how strongly and strangely the
said East India Company have endeavored by all means at home and abroad,
continually to oppose, obstruct, damnifie, East India Company Ship Land.
and prevent the lawful proceedings of the said Sir William Courten deceased,
and William Courten Esquire his son for at or before the arrival of the said Fleet
in India, a contract was made with the Viceroy of Goa by the said Companies
President, and thereupon a ship freighted thence for China by the Portugals, to
anticipate or prejudice the said design, being the first English ship ever
sent thither by the said Company, and that upon freight, as having neither
moneys nor goods of their own but good store of private trade, W.M.P. E.H.C.
and the said President afterward homeward bound at Madagascar received diverse
courtesies from the Commander of Mr. Courtens ship William, outward bound (as
credibly reported) promising a fair and friendly requital for the same by his
letter to the said Viceroy, but the purport thereof (as was said) was of a
contrary tenor, and of such dangerous consequence (if it had been delivered)
that it might have hazarded the surpriz all of the ship and goods, or promoted
some difference or distaste either from the Portugals or Malabars, Foundation
for Trade.
where Mr. Courtens Factors (with extraordinary charges had purchased, and
settled diverse Factories for accommodation of Trade to perpetuity as aforesaid.

Likewise at home Mr. Courten was often molested with sundry frivolous
complaints, and diverse prejudicial, Mauritius prevented. Also Madagascar. E.
Southamton, E. Arundel.
and vexatious informations at Councel-board before this Parliament, as when
the Plantations of Mauritius and Madagascar were prevented, and so left for the
Dutch, and since at several Committees, too tedious to relate, whose example
incited the said Company, and their Factors to a far greater care then formerly
in the management and enlargement of their Trade; Insomuch that this advantage
thereupon to them shortly accrued, that whereas their actions or adventures,
were formerly sold for many years together, at 30, 35, Trade advanced. Mr. G.C.
or 40. per cent. loss, or more, as aforesaid; on the contrary, upon, or
presently after this Expedition, they yielded 30, 35, or 40. per cent. profit,
or more (as some of themselves reported) yet for all this, the said Company
desisted not from prosecuting year after year, Ships relieved, moneys lent, men
redeemed etc. Brightwel Jo. etc. Hen. Watkings sacrificed.
although Mr. Courten, and his Commanders, and Factors, had sundry ways and
times required their cruel injuries with manifold and diverse extraordinary
courtesies, as relieving their ships with provisions, their Factors with
moneys, and redeeming sundry times their men with large sums from the
miserablest Mallabar Captivity that ever was heard of, (as in the said men's
expressions is lamentably declared) some of them lying ten or twelve months
together in most sad distress, conceiving the Turkish slavery, a Paradise o
their doleful Captivity; and to aggravate their misery, those that suffered
most were taken (not in the Companies service by their own relation) but
employed by their Presidents, and others in private trade from Port to Port,
being therein (to use their own language) the Companies Competitors and to
scrue their afflictions to the height, The Companies competitors. P. W.
the then President of Surrat (by whom they were principally employed) would
neither relieve them himself, nor appoint any other, nor afford them their own
wages and debts, due from the said Company for their ransom or subsistence, no
nor so much as any the least comfort at all either in word or writing, as by
their own most grievous, woeful, and patheticall expressions to Mr. Courtens
Factors, may more largely appear.

But lest these and like practices should not fully effect their purposes, I
will give you a hint of their more cruel and desperate courses, Com. cruel
resolutions.
(if we may believe the free and friendly expression of one of their own
Factors) upon good testimony taken at Rabagg in India 4. May 1644. and
afterward made good in England upon oath in Chancery, 23. Feb. 1646, as
follows verbatim.

The Agreement.
Rabagg 4. Marcii 1644.
THese are to certify all whom it may concern, That in October 1642. I
underwritten R.H. being in company with Mr. J. S. (then a servant to Esquire
Courten) at the Cardinals-Hat near the Royal Exchange in London, drinking after
Exchange-time as usually; there came into our company diverse other Merchants,
all unknown to me (I believe not to Dtt. S.) one of which was (as by his
discourse) sometimes Factor in East India for the Old Company, and then lately
come from thence, who relating the several passages and dangers he had passed
in his voyage out, and home, and my self replying, That I was upon Dtt.
design in service of the Worshipful William Courten Esquire (whose days God
make ever happy) his the said Factors reply was; As a friend I tell it you,
proceed not in that employment, for it is most dangerous, because the said Old
East India Company, and the Dutch have Agreed together to injure the Esquire either
at Cape-good-hope, or where else they shall meet with his ships to the effect
of sinking, burning, or taking: All which, I the aforesaid R.H. do affirm to
be true, as heard in the place aforesaid, and by Oath will confirm the same,
when thereunto lawfully called.

In witness whereof I have hereunto set my hand the day and year above
written. R. H.
Jurat. de veritat.

permiss. 23. die Feb. 1646. J. P.



This Affidavit made good since upon Oath in Chancery, need no Commentary, for
it speaks very plain and fully to the whole business, neither can any other
construction be made thereof, as proceeding from any particular Interest, or
by-respects, but a friendly admonition of a known truth, as both before and
after by the said agreement of the said parties, an their several actions
plainly appeared.

For the said East India Company proceeded, May 1643. Comp. 2 ships Heart and
Hind.
and took occasion in May 1643. being (the year following) to visit the coast
of Mallabar with two of their ships, and there found at Anchor (in the road of
Cannanore) two Vessels, a greater, and a lesser, belonging to Mamula Croe, or
Mahmet d' Croe (King of Cannanore aforesaid) and other merchants, with whom Mr.
Courtens Factors had good trade and correspondence, Mahmet de Croe K. of
Cannan. etc.
having a Factory sometime there, and another at Batticalla, not far from
thence, which a costly building of his own. The said two ships belonging to the
said Mahmet de Croe, being very rich in treasure of gold and silver, Mallabar
depredations, 30 or 40000 li. 1 vessel 500 tun burden.
and newly come from the Red Sea, were then and there both violently seized on
by the Companies said two ships, and so made reprisall, killing and drowning
some hundreds of their men, without mercy (as was reported) and took from them
in treasure, thirty or forty thousand pound Sterling, the most whereof belonged
to Mamula Croe aforesaid, which act not only caused the loss of those
Factories, Trade, and friendly correspondence in those parts; M^hmerd' Groes
demands
but to this day the said Mamula Croe etc. demands the said loss, with damages
from Mr. Courtens Factors, then threatening them with utter destruction both by
Sea and Land, if they made not speedy satisfaction, as by several
attestations, and other expressions did plainly appear.

Moreover, it was by the said Mallabars alleged, That because the Companies
Factors, and Factories were at such a distance, therefore they could not attain
their right from them; but from Mr. Courtens (living near or amongst them they
might, Mallabars plea.
saying further, that England is said to be a place of Justice, where Mr.
Courten may obtain full right from the Company, but how far they are mistaken
hitherto, both in that, and the following five thousand pound principal, which
prejudiced M. Courten above forty thousand pound in one year) I leave to those
in Authority, Mr. Courtens damage.
and others, whom it may concern to judge and consider.

And least this should not be a sufficient provocation, Comp. ship Hopewel E. L
Master.
in January following, another of the said Companies ships seconded the said
cruelties, with other Massacres upon poor people in country Boats, R. W.
attest. Dutch entered Mallabar, etc.
trading too and fro upon the said coast of Mallabar, as by another Attest may
also appear; whereby they have constrained the Mallabars to desire the Dutch
to reside at Cannanore, and protect them against the English, thereby hazarding
the loss of that Trade, to the further great prejudice of this Commonwealth,
the Dutch never there before, Carwar now in danger.
but now seated near Carwar will also endanger that which is one, and all the
places enjoyed by any English in India, fit for a Randezvouz.

In further prosecution of the foresaid Agreement, or Covenant, Combination, or
Conspiracy, about two years after, viz. in May, 1644. Ship little William.
it so happened at Madagascar that R. B. Master of the said Companies ship
Endeavor subtly, and surreptitiously got possession of about 5000. li. value
in Barbary gold, and two brass Guns, with seventeen men, all saved by their
great industry out of the ship Little William cast away beyond Cape bon
Esperanze, going to India upon Mr. Courtens employment, R. B. and F. D. moneys
detained, demanded by messengers, letters, protests, etc.
which said B. etc. partly by false reports, and partly by fair promises,
pretending then, and afterward at all times and places convenient, he would
assist them in the transport thereof to some of Mr. Courtens Factories in
India, or else to Acheen, whither they were consigned; but being possessed
thereof, intended nothing less, but delivered the same at Madrassapatan to F.
D. etc. the said Companies chief Agent there, and by them the same is detained
to this day, though often and lawfully demanded in India, with much
earnestness and extraordinary hazard, and exceeding great charge by Sea and
Land, as appears by many several Letters, Protests, Messengers, etc. the said
Companies Factors always concealing the same in India for many months
together, Extraordinary charges and concealments of men and moneys.
both men and moneys from the knowledge of all Mr. Courtens Factors (though but
fifteen days journey by a Foot-post, and upon the same continent, and
converted the said moneys to their own use (for it seems they much wanted
supplies) and they so ordered and disposed of the men, that but one of all the
said seventeen ever yet appeared to tell any tales or tidings to Mr. Courten,
or any his Factors, either in India or England that ever I heard of, T. H.
Factor.
no not so much as any word or writing from any one of them, though it be
reported that T. C. Mr. of the said ship William, T, C. no writings
(who had the principal charge thereof) dyed in one of the said Companies
ships homeward bound; therefore let the judicious reader compare and consider
all circumstances, and then conclude how far this concealment comes short of
that of the Dragon and Katherine aforesaid, This concealment compared with
Dragon and Kitherine.
and how much inferior for cruelty and damage.

The forementioned party (one of the seventeen) sundry years after being
accidentally heard of, an found out in London (his Conscience seeming to accuse
him) being Purser and Factor of the said ship William, in Office next to the
aforesaid C. an perceiving Mr. Courten in a condition not to prosecute in Law,
was very unwilling to make any relation thereof, T. H. unwillingnesse.
but afterward was constrained thereto by an Order from the House of Lords,
and confirmed the same in Chancery, which he said was done very sparingly; and
further said, that if he should have spoken his knowledge therein freely, it
would have been a great shame and disgrace to the said Company, Their bondage
at Madrassapaton.
and that he could make such a discovery of that passage at Madrassapatan, how
they were kept in durance, and that the said D. etc. would not suffer them to
go from Acheen with their Gold, etc. although they had agreed with a Country
Vessel or Junke at 40. l. for their passage or transport, neither would they be
suffered to write, or travel by Land to Mr. Courtens Factories, but were
forced to submit to their pleasure, and be at their dispose, and the like,
being all seventeen strangers in India, and never there before, etc. The said
parties sparing Relation and Affidavit is as follows.

To the Right Honorable the Lords assembled in Parliament. The humble and true
Attestation of T. H. Factor, concerning East India passages, relating to 5000.
l.in controversy between William Courten Esquire and the old East India Company.
THe 7th. of May, 1644. Ship Endeavor belonging to the East India Company
arrived in Augustine Bay, upon the Island of St. Laurence, at which time was
resident upon the same place seventeen persons of Esquire Courtens, which through
shipwreck had then lived there almost ninemoneths; At the arriving of the
foresaid Endeavor, my self and six more went aboard at the same time, the Mr.
R. B. and the Merchant, H. O. were going ashore, upon our coming they stayed a
little, enquiring of us our disaster and then went away. After which some of
our company discoursing with theirs, revealed concerning the saying of the
Barbary Gold, which news was sent ashore to the foresaid Master, and Merchant,
who presently returned aboard to have further knowledge, and then went ashore
again to visit our Master, T. C. unto whom they proferred passage with all
his Company, and what we had unto Joanna, or their Factorie in India, and that
we might have from thence conveyance for our Gold unto the Esquires Factories
per bills of Exchange, or carried over land. And they further informed us, that
we might expect ships out of England, but there was small hopes, for they had
been a long time ready, but were stopped by the Parliament, that our Master
Esquire Courten was failing.

Upon these resolutions our Master accepted of their loves for passage to
Joanna; After we had been at sea some five days, Two months after M. Courtens
ship arrived there.
the Master and Merchant of ship Endeavor desired of T. C. to see the Gold,
and know the quantity, and likewise to peruse his Invoyce, and his Bill of
lading, or else they would take no charge of the Gold; The Gold taken in charge.
which desire was granted by the said T. C. who produce the Gold, with Bill of
lading and Invoyce, the which they looked on and coppied out, the Gold they
weighed with rials of 8. and sealed them up together in baggs, and put it into
one of their Masters chests of money.

Before we came to Joanna, False suggestions, Joanna very healthful, test. 22.
Companies men.
the Master and Merchant persuaded T. C. not remain on Joanna, because there
was never any of our English that once lay ashore that lived, and that upon
arrival at their Factory we should be accomodated with any thing for our
further passage; which persuasion T. C. received.

In our passage from Joanna to Madrassapatan, R. B. Master of the said ship
Endeavor, Further enticements.
brought out his Commission upon the quarter deck, and read it openly in the
hearing of the said T. C. and diverse others of the said C. his Company, wherein
the term Interloper was often recited, and being read, he the said R. B.
demanded of the said T. C. to see his Commission, which was only Orders,
Companies Commissions scandal. and large.
and Instructions, by virtue of Letters Patents, whereof the said B. took a
Copy; and the said R. B. then told the said T. C. that by virtue of his
Commission, if he had met him at sea he had power to take him.

The second of July we arrived at one of the Companies Factories in
Madrassapatan, where being ashore, T. C. requested the Companies Agent and
Factors, That according to their informations and promise, that they would
assist us for the transporting of the said Gold, either by bill of Exchange, or
conveyance over Land unto some of the Esquires Factories; the which they
denied, Master D. positive and often denials.
answering, that the Country was up in arms, and there was no safe passages.
We then requested the Agent and Council to give us his Pass, and let us have
Servants and Guides, and we would travel with it, or else to make it over by
bills of Exchange; his answer again was, That he would not, and that if we
would have our Gold, Companies Agreement and Commissions suitable.
that we should presently be gone out of their Fort, for they were bound by
Commission from their Imployers from assisting us, if we were in need, with so
much as a piece of bread; And he would not say he would send any after us, but
we should take what followed.

We also asked an Englishman (that had been formerly their Servant, but then a
Freeman) that if he would entertain us, and the Gold in his house securely,
Pe^fect durance with the gold.
and procure us a Convoy to pass over-land, we would give him a large
recompense; his answer was. That he did not dare to do any such thing, for by
the English there he should be forced to fly, and lose all he had.

Moreover, H. O. Merchant of the Endeavor, related unto me, T. H. That they
would never have gone from Augustine Bay without the Gold for if they had not
had it by fair means, per fas, aut nefas.
they would have took it perforce; whereby I conceive we might have continued
upon the Island for all them, if there had been no Gold.

Moreover, after our arrival at Madrassapatan aforesaid, it was credibly
reported (and I do verily believe it true) That that Factory was in very great
want of supplies, the Factors disposing there formerly of their Gold chains,
and Silver buttons, to supply their great necessities; As further also appeared
in their journall Letter, A. ending 5 August, 1644. haying the said Gold
therein entered, and then ballansing their Accounts, there was paid then to
account of interest, 4095. Pagothies. Quick conversion.


T. H,
April 13. 1647. Postscript.
All or most of the Gold mentioned herein, as Duccats, Knobs, and Bars, were
melted and quoyned into Pagodies, the coin current of Madrassapatan aforesaid,
before my coming thence.

T. H.


T. H. abovesaid makes Oath, that the contents of this Attestation are in
substance true.

Jurat. 15. April, 1647. R. A.



The said T. H. was formerly sworn at the L. Bar.

This Affidavit (though very short and sparing, according to the Parties own
expression) is no whit unsuitable to the foregoing Agreement, for C. and H. and
all the 17. Strange stories.
being never before in India, were made believe strange things; as first, No
ships would come that year, Mr. Courtens ship Loyalty coming thither about
two months after; Jo. M. Captain at Lisbone with Rupert.
That Joanna was such a very dangerous place, whereas about two months after,
twenty two men of the said Companies were left ashore there by I. M. alias Mac
O Neal, commander of their ship John. Ship Tho. and John.
Now called Sir J. M. one of Prince R. chief Captains, late at Lisbone in
Portugal, which said twenty two men were all (save one) sound and well,
shortly after taken thence by one of Mr. Courtens ships, and carried for India,
but the Gold was the maine business, for after B. and O. had taken it in
charge, it was never more after delivered to C. nor any of the rest, but
possitively by D. and the rest upon all occasions and demands denied, B.
alleging his power to take the ship, much more the Gold; and D. allenging
their Commissions not to save any of Mr. Courtens people from perishing, with
so much as a piece of bread; Cruel Commissions.
O strange cruelty!

But from the Premises it is evident, that this gold belonged properly to Mr.
Courten, and was absolutely by him intended for the supply and relief of his
Trade at Acheen, and in India, The Golds proprietor.
and his plantation and discovery of Madagascar, Assada, and the rest, but the
damage sustained by the denial, and unjust detaining thereof, is almost
incredible, and not easily apprehended, for that very year 1644. Loss
incredible.
it prevented the return of four ships at least (to my knowledge) two from
India, and two or three from Acheen, all upon Mr. Courtens own account, also
caused the sail of about 300. tuns of goods at 40. per cent. loss, likewise a
dead Charge of Customs and Factors, Trade and Plantation destroyed.
Factories at Carwar, Raiapoore, Rabagg, Goa, Acheen and elsewhere for diverse
years together to a very great Sum, and utterly destroyed the Plantation of
Madagascar by preventing recourse of shipping with supplies, with many more
damages and sad inconveniences (besides loss of trade ever since) so that
(computat. computand.) 100000 li. 100000 li. personal loss, besides National.
will not make good the personal and real loss and damnification thereof to
Mr. Courten ( ult. National) as by this following Charge, and the particulars
therein expressed may plainly appear.

Dragon and Katherine, Dutch and English damnifications.
and other Dutch damnifications added, will amount the whole loss to 300000 li.

The Charge.
The East India Company, Old, or New, or both, together with their Factors, now
or late in East India aforesaid, (especially R. B. Master, and H. O. Merchant
of their Ship Endeavor, and F. D. their Agent at Madrassapatan, and the rest,
are truly Chargeable, and duly Responsible for principal, and damage (by
their misdoings in India aforesaid) To William Courten Esquire, Son and
Executor to Sir William Courten Knight, deceased, viz.

TO sundry sorts of Barbary- Gold valued at 9000 Barbary Duccats, May 24 1644.
which upon demand at Sea were delivered aboard the said Companies ship
Endeavor, by T.C. late Master, and T. H. late Factour of the Ship
Little-William of London, be longing to the abovesaid William Courten Esquire,
to the said R. B. Master, and Hen. O. Merchant; and by them taken in Charge in,
or about the 24. of May, 1644. And by the said Rob. and Hen. weighed with Rials
of eight Spanish, weighing Rials of eight 1544. and one quarter, which with two
Brasse-guns (and interest and insurance added) amounted at least to 5000 li.
sterling. All which the said B. and O. delivered to F. D. the said Companies
Agent there at Madrassapatan, etc. which the said D. etc. denied upon all
demands, detaining and converting the same to the said Companies use: The
proceed whereof was thence to Bantam, then to Jambee, and again to Bantam (all
duties deducted) would amount at least to 60. per cent. profit, which makes
8000 li. and thence to England, cent. per cent. (ult. Interest ever since)
amounts to 16000 li. 0 s. To charge of a Patamar or Footpost, about forty days
travel to and again to demand the same, 2 li. 18 s. To charges also of Wall L.
Factor, horse and three men about six months, or 180. days at Rials Eight one
and half per die. is 67 li. 10 s. principal; to demand and protest for
denying and detaining the same, which according to custom there by account, or
the said Companies policies here by Insurance at 10 s. per Rial of Eight
amounts to 135 li. 10 s. To fourteen days demourage of Ship Loyalty in Raiapore
river to prepare against the Mallabars 150 li. afterward eighteen days at Goa
150 li. to attend for intelligence, and prepare for Acheen, and Madrassapatan
to demand the same, and upon intelligence afterward sent to Persia principally
for the same occasion, and to meet there the said ship Endeavor, reported gone
thither, and for other provisions and charges with Governors, Merchants, and
others to obtain a freight. 600 li. 0 s. To ten months more provisions for the
said ships voyage, rialls of eight 800. at 10 s. per riall is 400 li. 10 s. To
dead freight and demourage (ultr. breach of Covenant) demanded by the Owners,
12000 li. 0 s. To five months and thirteen days demourage of ship Tho. and Jo.
at 180 li. per month is, 978 li. 0 s. To provisions for the said ship, rials of
eight 400. at 10 s. per riall is, 200 li. 10 s. To loss in sail of 1260
Candees, Feb. 27. 1644.
Saltpeter, to Capt. Jer. Blackman (with other charges) at two and a half
Pagothies great, per Candee, is page 3150. valued per piece rial of eight 1 and
3 quarters, is rials 5512 and a half at 10 s. per riall, is, 2756. li. 5 s. To
Customs of Raiapore contracted with Mastapha Con. at 2500. page gr. per an.
for six years loss is, 6555 li. 10 s. To Pishcashes or gifts to the said
Mastapha Con. and other Creditors to pacify them rials of eight 400. is, 200
li. 0 s. To charges of Factors and Factories at 2500 li. per an. prevented
employment ever since, 15000 li. 0 s. To charges of three ships to plant
Madagascar; Sun, James, Hester, destroyed for want of supplies. 12000 li. 0 s.
To ship James sold for want of trade. 3000 li. 0 s. To dead freight, and other
damages per ship Sun. 5000 li. 0 s. To constant watch and Fortification of
Carwar against Mallabars, thereto provoked by the said East India Companies
massacres, and depredations upon that coast. 500 li. 0 s. Summa Total. 75329
li. 3 s.
Further Assertions, and probable Suggestions. viz.
The loss of China- Trade, and 10000 Rials of Eight left there formerly much
prevented by them, and now at last wholly disappointed. To 2000 Rials of Eight,
returned thence by Captain Blackman, and left at Acheen, with Trade, Jewels,
and Goods there seized by the said Companies Factors, and lost to an unknown
value. To Ship Abigail, likewise consigned thither, and lost for want of
supplies. To Ship Friendship, likewise then consigned thither, but in like
manner disappointed and lost. To 1000 li. per an. for seven years proffered for
Raiapore, with Upland-trade, Harrapore Rab^gg, and Vizrapore. R. H.
To 7000 Pagothies great at Carwar (ultr. building, fortifying, and other great
and continual charges, conceived above 20000 li.) the only Port of hopes and
consequence in possession of English, now in great danger to be lost to the
Dutch or others, which will set a higher value upon it, then the inconsiderate
English, as in my following Carwar considerations, I have more at large
expressed, but I hope speedy care will be taken for to secure the same.
Add hereto.
The loss of Henry Bonaventure (laden homeward bound) upon Mauritius Island,
and most of the ship and goods there saved by the Dutch. The ship Bon Esperanza
taken by the Dutch in the straight of Malacca bound for China, and then
(computat. computand.) principal and damage. The feet of this particular
Charge, English and Dutch, will probably bear the whole body, and carry the
Account to, or above the whole, or first Adventure, viz. 150000 li. (ultr.
Dragon, and Katherine, and Propriety excluded.) Summa Total. 150000 li. ultr.
etc.
Lastly, Mr. Courtens new Association.
Mr. Courten by the foresaid mis-doings and oppression was so weakened in his
estate, that (for the better support of his trade) about Anno 1642. he was
constrained thereby as well as by advice of friends) to associate with Mr. M.
T. Capt. J. B. and others adventurers (who were altogether strangers in that
trade, Their practice.
but made such use of his necessity (as appeared by the sequel at home and
abroad) whether by clandestine, private, and prejudicial Contracts, and
Covenants made with himself at home (which plainly demonstrates Mr. Courten a
mere Gentleman, and no Merchant) or by compliance with his Agent or chief
Factor then in India, Jo. F. government.
Mr. Joh. F. a man howsoever otherwise able) yet of very corrupt principles and
practices, and his government (being altogether a stranger there) proved
exceeding damageable to his imployer (though very beneficial to himself, as
might largely be demonstrated but whether by the one, or the other, or however
else seems impertinent to this Discourse; only this by the way, That when his
Agents and Factors in India presumed they had, 20000 li. or thereabouts
supposed, sent home in sundry ships
or might have sent from thence, An. 1645. and 1646. (either upon Mr. Courtens
own account, or in partnership 7/16 in sundry ships, or bottomes, viz. the
Great-William, the Tho. and Jo. ship Hester, and ship Sun, etc.) an estate of
or near twenty thousand pounds, or upwards, proved but about five thousand
pound, 5000 li. left at Livorne. Mr. Courten supplanted.
and that left at Livorne by the said Cap. J. B. in the hand of the East India
Companies Agent there (as reported) and by him long detained, which with the
Premises has wholly interrupted and supplanted him in the course of his Trade,
and supplies of his Factories and Plantations in India, and much prevented the
payment of debts both here and there, as also the Customs of Raiapore
contracted with Mustapha Con. to whom the said Joh. F. (with extraordinary
charge to his imployer) went to Vizapore An. 1645. Raiapoor Customs 1125 li.
per an
purposely (when all supplies failed) to conclude and take off the dead charge
of contracted Customs of 2500. page gr. per an. which is about 1125 l. per an.
English, but what was done therein, is to me altogether unknown and uncertain,
only gather from common report, that the said Mustapha Con. and his governor
at Raiapore (or others in their stead) still requires the same from the present
Traders (the Old and New East India Company from whence peradventure they may
pretend themselves Creditors, Plea for the same
notwithstanding they have wholly deprived and disabled him at home, and abroad
of all supplies and payments, yet peradventure he must be pretended a great
Debtor to the present Traders for the same.

Thus you have the conclusion and sad Catastrophe of William Courten Esquire,
and his East India Trade, Mr. Courten's Catastrophe. His friends inconstancy,
his destruction their best foundation.
together with diverse of the passages, transactions, and Mysteries thereto
appertaining, formerly by himself and others freely and frequently
communicated to his foresaid Associates, and supposed Friends, now by them
transferred to his professed Adversaries, whose printiples and practices therein
hitherto never declared them good Common-wealths-men, but rather contrary; but
now proceeding upon another's principles and foundation, better things may be
expected.

YEt further for information;
Informations, consideration, and reasons.
If neither the consideration of the good success and government of foreign
Nations, nor fifty years sad and woeful trial of our own Nation, nor the
general forbearance of those of experience (and enricht at home and abroad by
that employment) to adventure in their joint Stock, nor the unwillingnesse of
the former Mannagers (though most incompetent) to resign to others, (for
errors accustomed, as aforesaid, are not easily removed) nor the abasing and
villifying of our own Natives, and native Commodities under one Buyer, and
Exporter, nor the advancing and enriching of Foreigners, and foreign
Commodities under one Seller and Importer, nor the prevention of the increase
and employment of abundance of Ships, Mariners, and Merchandizers, nor the
general prevention of Arts, Industries, and Manufactures, many by restraint
forced (contrary to their affections and abilities) to some unpleasing
homebred employments, with many other Moral respects; Moral and religious
considerations.
yet in a religious consideration and observation, those that believe History
and Mystery, Divine and Humane to be inseparable, cooperating concomitants in
the course of Gods providence, to accomplish the Decree, and the good pleasure
of his Will revealed in his Word, either for weal or woe, (whether to Person,
Nation, Society, or Incorporation) will plainly perceive, that the supine
neglect of Plantations, relating to the great work of Creation, Creation, and
Redemption.
likewise the neglect of Evangelicall injunctions, and dispensations by Gospel
promulgations, and propagations, relating to the glorious work of Redemption,
are transgressions of a high provocation; and who knows but for this very
cause, Heavy Judgments.
Heaven may be justly offended? then must earth of necessity be punished, and
so the judgments and designs of worldly wise men infatuated, and blasted, and
thus this Commonwealth already becomes frustrated, Commonwealth prevented, 8.
or 1000000. li. per annum.
and prevented of a probable possibility (compared with the Dutch) of profit
and advance at least 8. or 1000000. li. per annum, besides Honors, and other
Emoluments unconceiveable; And (according to the Emblem and Motto in the
Frontispeece) Whither the deviation of this Company in point of Policy, The
Emblem displayed.
or the Aberration of the Papacy in point of Piety be of greater extent and
transcendencie, is a Riddle for me too high to reach; I cannot read: but surely
both their days are numbered, and ere long their years will be expired; but I
would not willingly enter into a Controversy (being sensible of my own
insufficiency) but rather humbly submit, Whither one, two, or no joint Stocks
best.
and commit the same to the grave judgments of those at the Helm, and in
Authority, whether one or two joint Stocks, or none (save regulated Societies,
or Associations for East India Trade, are most requisite and necessary to
advance, and enrich this Commonwealth) though former experience here clearly
evinceth to all (if joint Stock must be continued) two better then one, and
that for many good reasons? But if the Commonwealth of Ireland be included,
Ireland considerable.
then doubtless without dispute, upon undeniable grounds, two at least will be
of absolute necessity, and in the apprehension of some of experience, a second
constitution may have a far better foundation (in this worst time of Trade)
then the former, and so expect better success; for to some of observation and
judgment, A foundation laid in blood shall not prosper.
it rests yet very doubtful (for I must neither dawb nor dissemble) whether
this be not laid deep in blood and Oppression, as the premises partly
discovers; besides much more may be said to that particular, wherein I will be
sparing.

But seeing this Discourse has led us thus far, let us proceed a little
further, A good foundation and constitution. New doctrine to the old Company.
and consider that a good foundation and constituion ought to be laid and
framed, on, and upon the best principles, and grounded upon the best reasons;
which doctrine of Trade, however new to the Old East India Company (who for
their time therein ought to be Teachers) because opposite or diverse from their
general Government and concluding it il hitherto; yet it shall also be so true
and rational, for Information, For information, confirmation, and confutation.
Confirmation, and Confutation, that (I hope) 'twill (in knowing judgments)
hardly admit any opposition or contradiction, and shall be briefly included in
two or three lines, Three East India Principles.
being Principles or Positions gathered from serious, long, and laborious
consideration, observation and experience, English, Dutch, and Portugal, for
the good of this Commonwealth, as follows, viz.

Three East India Principles, (i.e.)
1. THat none resident in England can govern East India Trade, but in a known
way of prejudice to general Adventurers. 2. That none resident in India (under
a foreign Government) can manage that Trade, but greatly dishonor and
damnifie this Commonwealth. 3. That no place or places, now possessed by any
English there much considerable [save Carwar] one of Mr. Courtens Factories.
With the two first, relating to the Company, I will not meddle further, till
they find opposition.

With the last, more particularly relating to Mr Courten, I will a little
expatiate in some Carwar considerations, to illustrate the same.

Some Carwar Considerations demonstrating the same last Principle, viz.
THat it is the free purchase and possession of Sir William Courten, with a
great sum of money many years since. That it is built, fortified, and
maintained ever since, with extraordinary care and coast, and that it is most
commodiously situated for Road, Bay, River, and ground, for a general
Randezvouz to and fro all parts of India, for order and regulation.
Note that all these particulars are of absolute necessity, besides, the
capacity of the place will contain a Coliony, or Hantation of 10000. people,
more apt and fit for employment there, upon every occasion by Sea and Land,
then from England in many years can be attained.

And I am very confident if the Dutch once possess it, as they have often
desired, Dutch valuation of Carwar.
that 100000 li. ready money will not redeem it out of their hands.

And in point of Government, it is most necessary for a general Court of
Merchants, not only for disposing, ordering, and regulating, but also for
preventing private and other inconveniences in Trade, without the
unconceiveable damage of delay, and in that equipage much prevent those
continual disturbances, injuries, and oppressions from Christians and Heathens
hitherto sustained.

Likewise it will secure and secret both persons, and all sorts and quantities
of Commodities, from force, or notice of the Natives, with great advantage to
the Adventures, which in the course of the old Company never was, or can be
done, either at Surrat, or Bantam, their Meteropolitan Factories, and prevent a
loss in sale of goods (besides Customs) of 10. or 12. per cent. at least,
which under a foreign government cannot be avoided.

Furthermore, there is store of Timber to build Vessels, with one half of the
charge usual at Surrat, also up the river at Cadran, and thereabouts only, is
that admirable Timber of Teca, for Planke and Sheathing under water, a singular
preservative against that common ship-destroying water-worme.

It is also the only Pepper Coast from Cape bon Esperanze, to Cape Commereen,
or Cannereen, and the only known coast in the world for Cardamomes, or Grains
of Paradize, (a general Commodity,) with many more accommodations for trade and
shipping for the benefit of Adventurers, too tedious to relate.

Moreover, it is situate near Salset, a pleasant and fertile place (about a
Counties compass, inhabited by Portugal, Cannereen Christians, living under
oppression, being willing and of power to free themselves, and desirous the
English were in a capacity to protect them, which (well peopled) in case of
Controversy, would curb and control as well the Portugal, as others, and
the only means to become there and elsewhere checkmate with the Dutch, who are
now become Lords, and Protectors over all India, by the Companies submission,
neglect, and general bad Government. Much more might be said in point of
propriety, and otherwise if occasion present.

IF one of Mr. Courtens Factories so well situated, purchased, Carwar cost and
consequence.
planted, fortified, and defended (with the charge at least of 20000. li.
hitherto) with all or more adjuncts and accommodations then formerly expressed)
can be of such high consequence and concernment in relation to that Trade, as
indeed it is; and if all the Companies Factories in India put together, cannot
afford scarce any one of these particulars, either for situation or
accommodation, as indeed they cannot; Dutch can disturb when they-please.
for the Dutch can disturb the Nations, and so displace them at pleasure; then
of necessity it must be concluded of more value then any, or all possessed there
by any other English whatsoever. New Modellers warned to prevent loss of
Carwar. The Authors letter.
And that it might be made known to the Company, and new Modellers to be so in
deed, and in truth, and to prevent the loss thereof, I thought it not amiss
(intr. alias) to certify so much in writing in December, 1649. delivered Mr.
M. T. and by him said to be communicated to the Mandareen, or Governor, etc.
of the said Company, and for these ten or twelve years by past, I have not
been sparing, His pains and charge.
or penurious either of my pains, or papers, at my own cost and charge, but
rather prodigal and superfluous (though to my exceeding great prejudice) to
inform and beget a true, His damage.
and right understanding of this Trade of Trades (for the good of this
Commonwealth) both amongst the Nobility, Gentry, Commonalty, His damage.
Nobility, Gentry, Commonalty.
as (amongst many others) may appear by a large Paper-booke, left with that
worthy Patriot Sir H. M. some years since, Sir H. M. above three years since.
Mr. M. T. etc. inductions and instructions. Best Judgments and Principles. An
admonition. Want of experience, or will may prejudice.
and were Novices therein, and from whence Mr. Courten, and others relating to
him (and not by revelation or experience of one Voyage) they had such
informations and instructions in the knowledge and mysteries of that Trade,
that they are and may taken for the best present judgments of that Society,
because of their Principles, yet (for a common good) let them not presume too
much thereupon, for it will surely come to pass, that many former
trans-actions of that Trade with other Nations, or our own, may come in
controversy, where want of experience and knowledge in some, may command their
silence, and want of will in others for shame, or by-respects of damage, or
dishenour, may cause forbearance; and so a good Cause and the Commonwealth may
suffer, for want of men of integrity, and ability, The Authors grievance.
hitherto neglected, and slighted; and as on the one side by violence, so on
the other by their close and subtle dealing (supposed thereby much to disable
Mr. Courten to pay wages, 5000. li. caused travel, that the Statute, etc.
and debts to his Factors, which rests upon their own conscience, discoveries,
and so the disposing of that 5000. li. at Livornia, being a special motive to
his travel and absence, and that principal Plea for the Statute issuing. But
I make too great a digression.

Yet it comes into my mind, that it will be very necessary first to answer
some Objections that may be made by some, in behalf of the foresaid Company.
viz.

Some will here Object, and say, You bring strange and uncouth things to us
indeed, which we scarce ever heard of, the East India Company we know in City,
Court, Westminster Hall have abundantly exclaimed, and enveyed against Mr.
Courten publicly, Another objection.
and frequently before the late King, and this present Parliament, by pleadings
and printings, exhibited to Lords, Commons, and sundry Committees, etc. and
elsewhere; if you can, lets know the matter.

It Is very true, they have so indeed, and all about interloping Trade, Part of
their 5. Argument.
and depardations, which depradations they are bound to make good (as
themselves say in their six smooth printed Arguments) and if to make good
others depradations, then surely much more their own; But their actions
hitherto are altogether contrary to their expressions, and they proceed to
instance their smart thereby, as it lies in the latter end of their fifth
Argument (as I remember) saying, C. and E. in the red Sea, and Capt. W. in
China, and at Mesulapatan, etc.

The deepest waters commonly make least noise; well, but to matter of Fact, C.
and E. Matter of fact.
viz. C. and E. in the Red Sea, etc. This C. and E. it seems by Mr. Endimion
Porter, the late Queen and others, purchased a Patent under the Great-Seal of
England for a Red Sea voyage, being there, it is probable they took and robbed
some Moors Vessels or Junks, trading thither from India; that done. C. and E.
went to Molalah (one of four Maiotto-Islands near Madagascar as reported) to
trim and victual; and so in the interim, the complaint came by the Moors from
the Red Sea, to India, Comp. Pr. arrested.
and procured an Arrest upon the Companies President there, (as it was
afterward related in England) thereupon the said President dis-speeded the
said Companies ship Discovery from Surrat (Mr. J. P. Commander) who arriving at
Molalah aforesaid, Jo. P. surprised C. and E.
found and seized upon the said C. and E. and their ship or ships, as they were
triming and refreshing there, and so served them as they had done the Moors,
took from them what they had (making prize of them) brought all their stolen
goods to the foresaid President for the said East India Company, and (if we may
believe the report of one well knowing the passage) the Company got thereby ten
or twelve thousand pound, Mr. T.K.
and made no satisfaction to the Moors, but whether they did or no, what is
all this to Mr. Courten, more then to the Man in the Moon? that they should
(even against common reason) so continually and violently urge it, to the great
damage and dishonor of Mr. Courten; Com. plea unreasonable and absurd.
for if those Moors had been Mallabars (who likewise traded thither) then Mr.
Courten had furthered a design for his own destruction, which is absurd to
imagine? Principles confirmed from themselves.
But this clearly confirms my principles from themselves in that particular of
living under a foreign government, what inconveniences, damage and dishonor
they are subject to continually without remedy, as well under heathens as
Christians? Besides, it was ordinary twenty or thirty years ago (when the said
Company had more power and credit in India then I suppose now they have) for
the Presidents of Surrat (when their ships (according to the season) were gone
thence) to be not only imprisoned, but Chawbuckt or Strapte, Mr. T. K. M. R.
twice Presidents imprisoned, etc.
or sore threatened, for their own depredations, or other misdemeanors, or
disgust given to the Moors when there was no C. or E. in that Country,
witness Mr. K. (now, or late of their Committee) who was twice President
there, likewise Mr. R. and others, therefore this President (if there had been
no C. and E.) must not look to escape better then his predecessors; this only
would have been the difference he would have borne it with silence as the rest
did, but these frivolous and unreasonable clamours too plainly demonstrate some
other cause, which they are not willing to express in plain terms, Comp.
discoveries an evil eye A mystery. All factories recalled.
which could be no other then an evil eye at his India Trade, and that
likewise they might have prevented if there had not been some mystery therein;
A mystery. All factories recalled.
for when Mr. Courten presently after his fathers death (it seems) recalls all
his Fathers Factories in Europe, Asia, Africa, and America, (only this of
East India) and of this an overture or proffer (with considerable loss) was
made, when the voyage was but newly begun, East India Trade proferred.
and exceeding hopeful; but that proffer was refused (by report) upon very
unreasonable terms, for causes best known to themselves, and which I leave to
others to imagine, as to that Company, Dutch design of Dr. and Ka. known or
suspected. Mr. Courten never intended a Merchant.
but as to Mr. Courten, I will give this note upon it, That in the least
(thereby it appears) he intended not to be a Merchant, his education being far
otherwise, but thereto merely constrained by an accidental Executorship, as by
his present revocation of all trade, and endeavoring this, plainly appeared.

But as concerning the Presidents at Surrat, if they have escaped better of late
years then formerly; The Moors apprehensions of the industrious English.
truly the best reason that can be rendered thereof, is the Expedition of Sir
William Courten, for the Moors at Surrat then perceiving that the industrious
English could find trade enough elsewhere, would use them with more civility,
lest they should be deprived of them, and their money, other reason I know none.

But I well remember this very particular of C. and E. was vehemently urged by
Mr. G. (then the Companies Council, Mr. G. Council late K etc. 10 December. 1639.
and Cities Recorder) before the late King, and a full Councel-board the tenth
of December, 1639. when the said Company prevented the Earls of A. and S.
their planting Mauritius and Madagascar Islands (no little discourtesie to this
Commonwealth) and the said G. and Company still pressing earnestly this
business of C. and E. against Mr. Courten; The Dutch presently possessed
Mauritius wholly, and settled upon Madagascar. The late Kings testimony.
The King then suddenly rose up, and spoke to the said Company thus: Gentlemen,
I pray let me hear no more of it, and what you have suffered by it, I will see
it satisfied some other way; but for Mr. Courten to my knowledge he had nothing
to do with it: yet notwithstanding this testimony, the search and view of
accounts, and what other satisfaction could be desired, they still persisted by
troops (having Baals odds, and Demetriu's advantage) to solicit Parliament
and Committees with the same continually for many years together, Baals Odds.
and never could prove any thing, being impossible in relation to Mr. Courtens
depredations, and for that very cause of depredations ('it was reported) Sir
William Courten would never adventure with the said Company, Sir Will. Courtens
reason.
but I rather think his judgment did therein direct him (being an
extraordinary industrious and judicious Merchant) perceiving the said Company
in no rational or thriving way of management, or government.

But it so came to pass afterward, Comp. depredations.
that Mr. Courten was admitted by a Committee to prove the said Companies
depredations (which was by some conceived an extraordinary courtesy) but the
first witness was no sooner entered upon discovery, but was presently
silenced, and suffered to proceed no further, and therefore formerly whosoever
solely appeared to oppose them, must first be sure of Micaiah's cause and
confidence, Micaiah and Paul.
and Paul's persuasion and full assurance, as it was long since with Mr. R. S.
(before he was a Parliament man in opposition to Sir H. G. Sir N. C. Mr. R. S.
now an hon. Member of State. Pop Con. Sir H.V. senior
Mr. C. Mr. M. (and the rest of that then Royal Company not a few) who pleaded
boldly and judiciously before a Committee in the inner Chequer Chamber (Sir
H.V. senior Chareman) who very discreetly noting the advantage of odds, gave
him good encouragement in the prohibition of their uncivil interruption. C.
and E. ended.
And thus much concerning C. and E. shall suffice.

NOw to proceed viz. And Captain W. in China, Cap. W. in China, part of their
fifth Argument.
and at Mesulapatan, etc. Here Is news indeed! Cap. W. in China! for he was the
first Englishman in China that ever traded upon English account. But if you
will know the reason in good earnest, why both Dutch and English so rage and
envy thereat, you will find it to be this, The fear of damage, by competition,
in the one, Dutch and English true reasons, not their pretended difference with
the Portugals. Dutch Doubts.
and of shame and dishonor in the other: For if ever the English attain a
China and Japan Trade (which will be very difficult now) and all, or part of
their right in the Spice Islands, and elsewhere, as Ormus etc. (all hitherto
with incredible prejudice neglected) and then the same managed with discretion,
the Dutch will soon find and feel a diminution of their present wealth and
glory?

And as for the English; Eng fear, and shame. Sir Will. Courtens new doctrine
and expample.
What a shame and dishonor to them after-forty or fifty years experience, to
be taught the principle of East India Trade by one never there? (as indeed they
were then by Sir William Courten) and at present by Mr. T. and the new
Modellers proceeding upon the very same grounds and principles) and that in one
voyage, First return clear first Advent.
if his design had not been envied and maligned (and the Dragon and Katherine
come home as well as the Sun) would probably have more then cleared the first
adventure of 150000 li. and have left a considerable stock and foundation of
Trade for posterity, Comp. then no foundation. Fort St. George built since by
A. C.
far better then the Companies, then having no foundation with all their
expense of time, and vast stocks of National treasure, the like never known in
Europe; And for these reasons principally it highly concerned both parties to
endeavor and agree his ruin.

The Dutch being very well content with the Companies subjection, The Dutch
content with Comp. rraffick.
and poasting Traffic, because they can disturb the Natives, then accounting
them their enemies, and so out them at pleasure, when, and where they list, by
prohibiting the English all trade and traffic with them upon pain of
confiscation of ship and goods, Eng. outed at pleasure.
which the Company must not disobey, as formerly expressed.

Well: Cap. W. from China passes the Dutch Pikes through the straights of
Malacca with much ado, Cap. W. at Mesulapatan.
as aforesaid, and came to Masulapatan upon the Coast of Chormandel, being
there, the Companies Factors (contrary to their Commissions and Orders, yet in
self-love) seemed very well pleased with their coming thither, and after some
complements, The Comp. necessiry.
the said Factors discovered at last their present necessities (the chief
motive to their pretended courtesy) and made it their request to Capt. W. to
borrow of him one thousand pounds, Cap. W. courtesy.
alleging that their expected supplies failed, and so their Factories on that
Coast were in great want; hereupon Capt. W. courteously supplies them with one
thousand pounds, 1000 li. borrowed.
and this was all the mischief that hitherto I ever heard he did them, at
least maintaining their credits (if not preserving their lives.)

BUt this, and many more has been requited the clean contrary way, Comp.
contrary requitals.
as plentifully appears by this Discourse; and whether this 1000 li. was paid
again to Captain W. or any other for Mr. Courten, I certainly know not; but
this I know, that one of the said Companies Factors late in India, Mr. E. K.
was credibly reported to deliver himself in these, or the like words openly
and plainly, viz. That if he list, 1000 li. debt doubtful.
he could make it appear how the East India Company did owe Mr. Courten 1000
li. (besides the 5000 li. formerly mentioned, which surely was conceived to be
meant of this foresaid thousand pounds being unpaid.

And thus you have the reasons and causes (in my apprehension) of those their
long and lamentable outcries, Reasons and causes frivolous.
and insupportable prejudices and smartings (as themselves term them) and if
any other can hereafter be discovered then what is formerly expressed, I hope
'twill be no hard task to see them truly and fully answered, unless by
mentioning and adjoining therewith, Sir K. D. assault of the Venetians in the
Road of Scandaroone, Sir K. D. if imputed, the Author excused.
if they lay that to Mr. Courtens charge, truly then Mr. Courten himself, or
some other for him, must come and see that imputation answered, and removed,
for I cannot therein say any thing on his behalf, therefore I must be excused.

But I have made my digression far greater then I expected, Too long
digression. The Authors resolution.
now I come to the Letter formerly promised, whose long silence (receiving no
answer) put me into a muse, and at last I resolved to give summons to my
treacherous memory, to try whether or no I had writ that briefly, or in a
Mystery, which I could not explain more largely, as in this confused
discourse, or history; and now follows the said Letter verbatim, which was
principally intended to secure Carwar for future advance of Trade.

The Letter, i. e.
SIR, or SIRS:
THe product of former Discourses runs into this result; That whereas the
East India Company (and their Accomplices, and Adherents) have sundry ways and
times sadly manifested, their great dislike of that just and legal expedition
of Sir William Courten Knight deceased, as by the woeful experience of William
Courten Esquire his Son, Friends, Creditors, and faithful Factors and Planters
plainly appears.

Yet if any Christian remorse or consideration may conduce for a speedy
atonement for advance of Trade, and encouragement of the intended
subscription, and removal of all obstacles, and animosities possible for the
better clearing a way for the new Model to pass into an Act, whose frame and
foundation (for ought yet appearing (save the Authority and Coin of the
Commons of England) seems plainly to be laid upon the hidden and remaining
Basis of the abovesaid Sir William, and his Son, etc. in the ruin and
destruction of their Trade, Shipping, Factors, Factories, and Plantation of
Madagascar by the Parties abovesaid, done, and procured as in due time may be
demonstrated.

And seeing nothing now remains to the Proprietor (or other wel-willers to
that Trade on his behalf (save Carwar) howsoever slighted or neglected by
ignorant, inconsiderate English, and present undertakers; yet I am confident,
(and that upon good grounds) if the Dutch get possession (as they have often
desired) and as ('it is said) they have already Cannanore, (for they are wise,
and discreet Merchants indeed) 100000. li. ready money (as formerly often
expressed) will not regaine it out of their hands, seeing it is of more
consequence then all places possessed in India by any other English whatsoever at
present; And if so, as in truth it is, then it highly concerns the new
Modellers speedily to secure the same for recovery of that Trade (if possible)
and for the good of this Commonwealth, seeing the Proprietor, and all others
by their former and present proceedings, are now wholly and altogether
prevented to supply the same.

But as hitherto, so now, that nothing may be wanting on the Plaintiffes part
(if it will not be thought presumption in a mean and private person, a common
wel-willer) of himself to make an Overture by way of Proposal, which
doubtless would be well pleasing both to God and good men (if agreed upon)
especially to the foresaid Company, whether New or Old (if rightly understood)
the said party further presuming in time convenient, to procure the consent of
the foresaid Plaintiff, and other parties therein concerned, though the sum
proposed be not a fifth, or rather a tenth part of the damage sustained; As by
particulars, (besides blood, and other prejudice to the Commonwealth (as he
conceives) may be made plainly to appear. Therefore thus:

It is well known that about 5000. li. and two brass Guns, beyond Cape bon
Esperanze were surreptitiously got, and upon all demands there denied, and (as
it is said) coined and converted (in their great necessity) to their own use;
which said sum and Guns there so unjustly detained (with interest and insurance
here added) would amount in all this time (considered either in course of Trade
from Madrasapatan to Bantam, so to Jambee, then again for Bantam, so for
England, several returns without disaster, or considered according to
interest of Dutch-Battavia, or Achen Factory, whether it was consigned) would I
say amount to 20000. li. and upwards, etc. which sum, the one moyetie
forthwith for India to discharge the debts there (and by that employment
contracted) to the Natives, for the honor of the Nation, and freedom of
Trade; And to others, whose faithfulness is approved in that employment; The
other moyetie toward satisfaction of Creditors here in England in time
convenient, and so all differences of damages dye, and all parties acquiesse,
the one in their cruel, unreasonable, and uncharitable spoil, whose case can
be no better: The other in his sad and unparalleld sufferings, whose condition
can be no worse.

Sir, You may perceive the premises points at sundry particular persons, and
things of concernment, and therein your self not the least in regard of former
passages and first engagement, and you may conceive what content, or profit, a
happy or speedy atonement might procure to each particular (especially the
East India Company, the new Modellers, and Commonwealth, (if duly considered,
all which) I refer to your more serious thoughts to move therein, as God and
your own conscience can best direct you; let not the truth offend you:

London 25 of December 1649. Delivered Mr. T. Exc. 28. Dtt. Your humble Servant
I. D.


This melancholy Letter implicitly, is the sum or substance of most of this
Discourse, in relation to the East India Company, and present Traders (the
proposal and proceed of that 5000 li. excepted) and was principally intended
for the preservation of Carwar for the good of this Commonwealth, as formerly
expressed.

And seeing I have likewise intimated something concerning the Island of
Barbados, etc. in the West Indies, I shall attend the pleasure of Authority or
others, to deliver the best of my knowledge therein: In the mean time I will
close, and conclude both, in this general Assertion, and particular
Application thus:

Assertion.
THat no Lord, or Commoner, or society of Commoners, in or out of England, has
so good (if any) real and personal claim, Right and Propriety, in, or to the
East India, Mallabar, Acheen, and China Trade, etc. or in or to the Island of
Barbado's, etc. in the West Indies, as Mr. Courten, or others in his behalf.

The Epilogue.
THus far, Sir, I have labored (alone) in the discharge of this my duty, with
as much plainness and perspicuity as I can, to inform your self, and others
of the truth of the Premises: And if any doubt or scruple should be made,
touching any part or parcel thereof, I question not but the same may be
satisfied.

I had my Induction here into this work the foresaid 10. December. 1639. at
Councell-table (long before I knew, or was known to Mr. Courten) where, and
when I perceived (from the principal person there present) that public
affairs ran too much upon the by as of particular profit or interest (the bane
of all Commonwealths proceedings:) And what pains and attendance has been
given therein upon all occasions, is partly known to diverse Lords and
Gentlemen, as well as your self, gaining my labor for my travel.

Besides, I am very sensible what * Great loss and hazards, and marvailous
deliverances, I hope for good.
prejudice I have sustained thereby, both from the East India Company, and
others therein concerned: And yet truth (which is strongest) has hitherto
exceedingly appeared in my weakness, and against such mighty oppositions, and
has almost accomplished my aims, and the hopes of my desires (the reward of
my pains) which was, and is, To see the East India Trade (of such high
concernment) a State, and Commonwealths business; and willingly will give my
further attendance therein (if thereto required according to that small talent
of knowledge and experience God has given me.

And so now I commit this Discourse wholly to your further care and
consideration, to move therein as your wisdom and judgment can best direct
you, and so henceforth possess my self with patience, and in rest, and
confidence, in believing attend (if peradventure) after a sad and gloomy night
of sorrow and adversity, a glad and joyful morning of redress and prosperity,
will arise upon that deep, distressed, and oppressed family. And in this
expectation resolve to abide, Sir,

Your very humble Servant, John Darell.

FINIS.
Errata's.
Page 5. line 25. read tending, p. 7. l. 15. r. of, l. 25. r. Sir, p. 20. l. 5.
r. factors and, p. 30. l. 8. r. and discoveries, l. 10. r. 2 principal.

Imprimatur

19. June 1651. Nath. Brent.


