A True Relation OF The grievous handling of WILLIAM SUMMERS OF NOTTINGHAM,
Being possessed with a Devil. SHOWING How he was first taken, and how
lamentably from time to time he was tormented and afflicted.

Published by John Darrel, Minister of the Word of God.



Printed at London by Tho. Harper. 1641.

The History of William Summers.
WIlliam Summers of Nottingham, son in law to Robert Cowper of the said
town, and by trade of life a Musician, about 8. or 9. years past, as he
journeyed from Bellyn in the County of Wigorne, (where he then dwelt with one
M. Anthony Brackenbery) to Bramsgrove, a market town in that shire,
accompanied with an old woman dwelling in the said Bellyn, found an hat with a
copper band: the woman requiring the same, he gave her the hat, though
unwillingly, but the band he utterly refused to give, supposing it to be of
gold: whereupon she threatening him, said, That it had been as good for him to
have given it her. After this, in the night he saw a strange light in the
chamber where he lay, which cast him into a great fear, and thus he continued
frighted for a time. Shortly after M. Brackenbery his master removed to Holme,
near to Newark upon Trent, in the County of Nottingham, being there sent about
his masters business unto Newark, in the way as he went thither, he was
suddenly thrown into a ditch, some 8. yards distant from the high way wherein
he went; after he had lain there a certain time, he got up and went forward in
his journey, but by that he had gone a very little way further, he was taken
again and cast into a thorn bush about 60. yards distant from the high way:
but how he came into it or the ditch he knew not. In these two places he lay
for the space of some 4. hours, as he perceived after by the time of the day.
Notwithstanding this let, to Newark he went, when in his return he drew near
Holme he began to be sick: from sickness he came to carry himself after that
strange manner by fits, that his master supposed him to play the counterfeit,
and thereupon he whipped him. But notwithstanding all the whipping was used
(which he felt not at all) he continued after that same manner, and was more
strangely handled every day then other; at length it well appeared to be some
strange visitation and hand of God, whereupon his master procured one in the
Ministry to come to him, he being for the space of 3. weeks or thereabouts a
continual trouble, and his master not knowing by what means to procure his
amendment, sent him accompanied with 3. persons to Nottingham to his mother,
being then a widow: whilst he was at Holme he heard something say unto him,
that upon such a day he would leave him, and not come to him (so far as I
remember he said) until the end of 6. years. Now after he had been 5.
weeks at Nottingham afflicted after his accustomed and strange manner, and
that the said appointed day was come, he indeed amended in the judgment of
man, and so continued: inso much that shortly after he was bound prentice to
one Thomas Porter of Nottingham, a Weaver and Musician; who after gave over his
trade of weaving, and betook himself wholly to the other, from whom the said
William Summers did twice run away.

His foresaid master Thomas Porter sent him to Walton in Darbishire, the now
dwelling house of Sir William Bows, to a sister of his wifes there named Mary
Milwood. In his going thither there met him in Blackwell Moore at a deep
coale-pit hard by the high way side, an old woman (as he thought) who asked him
where he dwelt, and whither he was going, without any more words. About a mile
and half further (he having gone forward a journying pace without stay) she
met him again, and passed by him without any words. The next day he returning
from Walton homewards, she met him at the aforesaid pit, and asked him how he
did? saying further, I must have a penny from thee. He answered, that he had no
money. Thou have (quoth she) Mary Milwood gave thee 2. pence, I will have a
penny of it or I will throw thee into this pit, and break thy neck. Hereupon
for fear, she giving him 2. pence, he gave her 3. pence which indeed had bin
given him by the said Mary. After this she put her hand to a bag she had about
her, and taking thence a piece of bread with butter spread on it, bad him eat
it. He refusing, she threatened him again to throw him into the pit and break
his neck if he would not eat it. Whereupon (greatly against his will, and for
fear) he did eat it, and in the eating it seemed as sweet as any honey. She
said moreover unto him, Do thou not know Katherine Wright? No, qooth he. She
is my neighbor (said she) and she and I will come to Nottingham one of these
days, and see how thou do. Then a cat (as the boy thought) leapt up into
her bosom, the which she embraced, and with her arms claspt it unto her, and
thus they parted each from other.

The said Summers (being at Nottingham in the house of his master Thomas
Porter) did use such strange and idle kind of gestures, in laughing, dancing,
and such like light behavior, that he was suspected to be mad: sundry times he
refused all kind of meat for a long space together, in so much as he did
seem thereby to pine away: sometimes he shaked as if he had had an ague:
there was heard a strange noise or flapping from within his body: he was often
seen to gather himself on a round heap under his bed clothes, and being so
gathered to bounce up a good height from the bed: also to beat his head and
other parts of his body against the ground and bedstead, in such earnest
manner, and so violently, that the beholders did fear that thereby he would
have spoiled himself, if they had not by strong hand restrained him, and yet
thereby received he no hurt at all. In most of his fits he did swell in his
body, and in some of them did so greatly exceed therein, as he seemed to be
twice so big as his natural body. Often also was he seen to have a certain
variable swelling or lump to a great bigness, swiftly running up and down
between the flesh and skin, through all the parts of his body: and many
times when that swelling was, these or the like words were heard out of his
mouth, I will go out at his eyes, or ears, or toes: at which speeches the
said swelling evidently appearing i^ such parts, did immediately remove and
vanish away. This swelling did not only run from eye to eye* from cheek to
cheek, and up and down along still in the body, but besides being now in the
one leg, presently it would be in the other, and so of the arms in like
manner: and look in which arm or leg it stayed (as often it did for a
certain space) the same member was inflexible and exceedingly heavy, as it had
been so much iron. Thus it went with him, though not in all, yet in many of
his fits, wherein over and besides these things, he was strangely handled, for
suddenly (if he were standing when the fit came) he would be cast headlong upon
the ground, or fall down, drawing then his lips awry, gnashing with his teeth,
wallowing and foaming. In sundry of his fits he did utter so strange and
fearful schrieking as cannot be uttered by man's power, and was of such
strength as sometimes 4. or 5 men, though they had much advantage against him
by binding of him to a chair, yet could they not rule him: and in showing that
strength he was not perceived to pant or blow, no more then if he had not
strained nor strugled at all. Sometimes he cried extremely, so as tears came
from him in great abundance: presently after he would laugh aloud and shrill,
his mouth being shut close. And being demanded concerning those accidents, he
protested he knew of no such matter, neither felt he any pain. Moreover, he
was oftentimes cast into the fire, some bare part of his body also lying in the
fire, and yet was not burned; and sometimes cast violently against the ground,
and against the wall or posts of the house, without any hurt of his body, and
did many ways seek to destroy himself; by reason whereof they were driven to
take away his knife, girdle, garters, etc. yea with the sheet of his bed he
had like to have strangled himself. Whereupon, as also through the increasing
of his fits, they were constrained to watch him continually, even day and
night. His behavior generally toward all that came, was very pleasant, most
impudent also and shameless, with much uncleanness. His speeches were usually
vain, delivered in very sc^ffing manner and many times filthy and unclean,
very unfit once to be named, or blasphemous, swearing most fearfully, using one
bloody oath after another: sometimes saying, I am God, and sometimes, There is
no GOD.

Being moved to say the Lords Prayer, when he came to these words, Lead us not
into temptation, he would say, Lead us into temptation: Diverse fond speeches
did he use to interrupt them that prayed for him. Many strange speeches also
were uttered by him, not in his own name, but as spoken by an evil spirit
possessing him: upon occasion of some question or speech used by some in their
simplicity and ignorance: as, That his D^m^ had sent him, that his name was
L^^ye, that he was King, that he was Prince of darkness. You think I have no
power of him, yet I can use his tongue, his teeth, lips, hands, legs, his
body and all parts of him. And as the spirit named each part, he used it. And
this speech with the action was very common: Was I (said he to one John Wiggin)
never in heaven? Yea, quoth he, but God for thy pride threw thee down into
hell, there to remain. One John Sherwood charging him to tell who sent him
thither, he answered, a woman. He charged him again to tell where she dwelt:
he answered, in Worcestershire. Whether is she living or dead? Dead said he.
Wherefore did she send thee? For a hat and hatband. Then the boy, when the fit
was done, was questioned with concerning these things: where unto he returned
for answer, that which is set down in the beginning of this story, which he
had concealed until that time. Hereunto I might add certain direct answers
he made in Latin to those speeches which in Latin were used unto him: a
little Greek he also spoke, being ignorant in those languages, altogether in
the one, and understanding little or nothing in the other.

In going thus with the boy, I was importuned in his behalf, first by two
letters, after by another from the Mayor, and thereupon I went unto him. At
when and about the time I condescended to go, (being 14. miles off him) he
spoke thereof to them which were about him: So when I was come to Nottingham,
he instantly told the same, and foretold my coming unto him when I drew near
the house, as he had also foretold M. Aldridge (the Preacher of the Town) his
coming at sundry times.

Toward that evening I came, he seemed to be si^ke, and his sickness greatly
to increase upon him, so as they feared he would have dyed, or had been dead:
for he lay an hour with his face and hands black, cold as ice, no breath
being perceived to come from him. Whereupon I was no sooner light, but tidings
hereof was brought to me by one of the neighbor women Ioane Pie by name, who
came purposely from him to signify the same unto me. To whom I answered, that
was the mere act or operation of the Devil, and that the boy was nothing
less then either dead, or in danger thereof. Forthwith with her I went to him,
whom we found very lively, and in one of his accustomed Fits, many being
present with him.

My speech I carried for a season doubtfully; but after a while perceiving how
it was with him, I did assure him that he was possessed, and had in that body
of his a Devil, and withal did so frame the words of my mouth, as might best
serve to prepare and stir him up to a spiritual fight against Satan, or
resistance of him in faith. This evening he acted many sins by signs and
gestures, most lively representing and shadowing them out unto us: as namely,
brawling, quarrelling, fighting, swearing, robbing by the high ways, picking
and cutting of purses, burglary, whoredom, pride both in men and women,
hypocrisy, sluggishnesse in hearing the Word, drunkenness, gluttony, also
dancing with the toys thereto belonging, the manner of anticke dances, the
games of dicing and carding, the abuse of the viole, with other instruments. At
the end of sundry of these he laughed exceedingly, diverse times clapping his
hands on his thighs for joy: And at the end of some of them, as killing and
stealing, he showed how he brought them to the gallows, making a sign
thereof. During this time, which continued about an hour, as he was
altogether silent, so was he most active, though his eyes were closed; and in
many things he did, there was great and necessary use of sight. In a word,
these things were in such lively and orient colors painted out (as I may say)
unto us that were present, being to the number of some sixty, that I for my
own part, (and I am persuaded the rest of the beholders are of my mind) do
verily think, that it is not in the skill and power of man to do the like.
Whilst we were recommending him and his grievous estate to the Lord, and
entreating his Majesty in his behalf, he uttered these words: I must be gone.

The next day being the Lords day, I came not at him until about 3 a clock in
the afternoon, (finding company with him) at which time I used some speech,
wherein I endeavored to prepare both him and his masters family, as also his
parents (whom that judgment principally concerns) unto the holy exercise the
day after to be performed. Toward evening much people resorted to the house,
then some words of exhortation were used by my self, for the sanctifying of so
many of us, whose spirits God should stir up, to join in that solemn service
and worship of God to be performed on the day following. As the night and day
before he had little or no rest from Satan afflicting him: so this evening, and
all the night long, he handled him more extremely then before. At this time
among other things the spirit retorted his tongue into his throat, and this he
did often, whereupon many looked with a candle into his mouth, where they could
see no tongue nor part of it, only in his throat they beheld the root thereof,
he uttered often these words, For corn, for corn, with a few more thereunto
appertaining, noting the unsatiable desire of gain, or raising the price of
corn in corn men. This night was spent by some well disposed people, in
reading and praying. This evening I requested the Minister of that
Congregation, M. Aldridge, M. Aldred, and M. Halam, Pastors of two several
towns near acjoyning unto Nottingham, to join with me on the morrow in the
ministration of the Word and Prayer: whereunto they condescended. And this I
did the rather, that thereby I might proclaim and make known unto all men,
that as I have no special or greater gift herein then the rest of my brethren:
so neither do I arrogate or challenge any such thing to my self.

In the morning many of us were assembled together in the next convenient and
seemly room to the place of his abode. The boy was brought with strange and
fearful scrikings, by six or seven strong men, who had all of them enough
ado to bring him, and laid him on a couch in the midst of us. M. Aldridge
began, and after prayer proceeded to the interpretation of the 4. of Hosea, the
two first verses. When he had finished, my self entreated of that story set
down in the 9 of Mark, from verse 14. until the 30. where the father bringing
his possessed child to Christ to be cured, had him healed accordingly. All
this day he was continually vexed and tormented by Satan, having little no rest
at all, so as the same for vexation by the spirit, far exceeded any of the
days before. His torments in his fits were most grievous and fearful to
behold, wherein his body being swelled, was tossed up and down. In these fits
his strength was very great, so as being held down with five strong men, he
did notwithstanding all their strength, against their wills, rise and stand
upright on his feet. He was also continually torn in very fearful manner,
and disfigured in his face; wherein sometimes his lips were drawn awry, now to
the one side, now to the other. Sometimes his face and neck distorted to the
right and to the left hand, yea sometimes writhen to his back. Sometimes he
thrust out his tongue very far and big, and sometimes turned backwards into
his throat, gaping so wide that we might afar off perceive it. Now he
gnashed, with his teeth, now he fomed like to the Horse or Boar, roaping down
to his breast, notwithstanding there was one purposely standing by with a
cloth ever and anon to wipe it away* Not to say any thing of his fearful
staring with his eyes, and incredible gaping.

This day, notwithstanding he was so held, as is aforesaid, he went about to
have choked and so destroyed himself: speeches he used none, save once in a
great voice, Corn. And when I applied that speech of our Savior, All things
are possible to him that believes; he used these words, Thou lie. Diverse
times he scriked or cried aloud in a strange and supernatural manner:
sometimes he roared fearfully like a Bear, and cried like a swine.

Toward the evening, as I was treating of these words, Then the spirit cried
and rent him sore, and came out, and he was as one dead, insomuch that many
said he is dead. The boy was rent*sore indeed, cried, and that aloud. Then the
people which were present, as men astonished, and wi^h the grievous sight, and
(...) unspeakeable, affected in the bowels of compassion toward him, breaking
then hitherto continued silence, cried out all at once, as it were with one
voice unto the Lord, to have mercy upon him: and within a quarter of an hour
(they and he still crying alowd) he held down on a bed by 5 men, and offering
as though he would have vomited, was on the sudden violently cast, and his body
there with turned, so as his face lay downwards to the ground, and at the beds
feet, and his back upward, with his feet on the beds head; and thus be lay as
if he had been dead for a season. Thus we have heard not only how it went with
Summers (...) the time of his possession, and at and little before his
dispossession, but also how and by what means I came unto him, and being
there, carried my self in thi^ present action.

FINIS.

