THE Dublin Scuffle: BEING A CHALLENGE SENT BY John Dunton, Citizen of London,
TO Patrick Campbel, Bookseller in Dublin. Together with the small Skirmishes of
Bills and Advertisements.

To which is Added, The Billet Doux, sent him by a Citizens Wife in Dublin,
Tempting him to Lewdness* WITH His Answers to Her.

ALSO Some Account of his Conversation in Ireland, Intermixed with particular
Characters of the most Eminent Persons he Conversed with in that Kingdom; but
more especially in the City of Dublin.

In several Letters to the Spectators of this Scuffle; With a Poem on the whole
Encounter.

I wear my Pen as others do their Sword. -- Oldham. London, (Printed for the
Author) and are to be Sold by A. Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane,
and by the Booksellers in Dublin. 1699.

To the Honorable Colonel BUTLER, A MEMBER of the House of Commons in Ireland.
Honored and Worthy Sir,
THE Generous Encouragement, which you were pleased to give to all my Auctions
of Books, and the Extraordinary and Unmerited Kindnesses I received at your
Hands, when in Ireland, embolden me to trouble you with this Dedication.

I confess it may justly seem unworthy of the Acceptance of a Person of so
Great Honor and Endowments, as you are known to be: Nor can any thing less
than your own Goodness, find an Excuse for this Presumption: But having had
such large Experience of the Excellency of your Temper, and of the Greatness of
your Soul, I should be unjust to your Character, if I did not publicly own,
that you measure the Tokens of Gratitude by the Affection of your Friend, and
not by the Value of the thing presented.

Give me leave then, Worthy Sir, to inscribe your Name to the following Sheets,
as a Great Patron of Learning, and a Generous Friend to an injured Stranger,
who came to promote the Interest of Learning in your Country.

The Kindness you were pleased to Vouchsafe^unto me, and the Concern you
expressed for my Welfare, persuade me that you will not disdain to be my Patron
in defending my self in Print in England, seeing I could not have the
opportunity of doing it in Ireland.

I must indeed own that your Character and Courage Entitles you to be the
Champion of such as are engaged in a more Masculine Quarrel than the Scuffle
betwixt Patrick Campbel, and my self. Yet you know Sir, that the Greatest
Captains, after the Campaign is over, do sometimes divert themselves by seeing
a Mockfight on the Stage. This, Sir, has something more in it, as being a real
piece of Injustice first committed, and then defended by my Adversary, who has
armed himself with Impudence and Malice, and manages his Attacks by Fraud and
Forgery; as I have made sufficiently clear in the following Sheets.

I confess, Sir, the Entertainment you will meet with here, is not answerable
to that Hospitable and Generous Treatment I was honored with at your House;
and that I am not capable of gratifying your Curiosity with such excellent
pieces of my own drawing, as you were pleased to feast my Eyes with, when I
beheld with wonder, the effects of your happy Pencil! Yet, Sir, I dare say,
that I present you here with an ORIGINAL; which, though drawn by an unskilful
Hand, has something very surprising in it; such Features, such a mixture of
Hypocrisy and double dealing covered over with a false Varnish of Religion,
that I question much, Whether Patrick may not pass for a Judas Redivivus? And
were my Pen able to keep pace with your Pencil; or had I the Art of tempering
my Colors, drawing the Features to the Life, and observing due Proportion, I
doubt very much, Whether Africa could show any such Monster, as I should here
present to the public View?

But, Worthy Sir, I must beg your Pardon for daring to offend the Eye of such a
Curious Artist as your self, with such a deformed piece. It were indeed
unpardonable, did I not know that by one Glance of the Eye upon your own
Perfections and Eminent Virtues, you will immediately race out those foul
Idea's which the fight of Patrick may impress upon your Imagination. Contraries
exposed to the View at one and the same time, do mightily illustrate one
another; and therefore when you see his Picture, and reflect upon your own, you
will find great Cause to bless him who has made the distinction. Pardon me
Sir, I don't think your Virtues need any such foyl to set them off; for they
are such, as when compared with those which render the Enjoyers of them Amiable
in the Eyes of Mankind, will undoubtedly give you the Preference amongst
Thousands; but I must break off, lest my Affection should offer Violence to
your Modesty; and lest it should be said, I only commend my self in extolling
my Patron: I must indeed own that the Honor of your Friendship is one of those
things that I value my self most upon, and esteem my self happy in some measure
by Patricks Enmity, which gives me this Opportunity of letting the World know,
that Colonel Butler is my Friend: Or, if that be a Degradation to you, that
you are an Encourager of Learning, and a Protector of those that Endeavor to
promote it.

I shall add no more, but beg your Pardon for prefixing your Name to such a
Trifle. You know Sir, that how meanly soever it be performed, it was absolutely
necessary for the defense of my Reputation, which Patrick Campbell has so
unjustly endeavored to destroy; and seeing it is usual with Authors to atone
for their own Defects, by choosing an Honorable Patron, I hope Sir, you will
indulge me the same Liberty. May you Live long, to be an Ornament to your
Country, and the Object of His highest Esteem, who is,

Honored Sir, Your much Obliged, and Most Obedient Servant, JOHN DVNTON.
London, Feb. 20. School/9
TO THE SPECTATORS OF THE Dublin Scuffle.
Gentlemen,
IT may be justly expected I should give some Account of the Reason of this
Undertaking; which is in short, to Vindicate my Reputation from the Malice of
some of my own Profession, who have unjustly endeavored to bespatter me. I
need not say much as to my Conversati^n at Home; those who have dealt with me,
will allow the fairness of my Dealing in way of Trade. It Is true, some
Reflections have been thrown upon me about the 2d. Spira, and the multitude of
things I have Printed; both which are here accounted for, and I think I may
make bold to say, that my Adversaries are fairly di^^rm'd.

As to my Scuffle with Patrick Campbel, (a Dublin Bookseller) I found my self
obliged to publish all the Circumstances of it to the World, that I might not
be wanting to my own Reputation on that Head. Here the Reader will find I have
acted fairly and above board; and that I don't depend either upon my own
Evidence or Judgment in the Matt^r; therefore I have here made it plain, that I
have the Testimony of Persons of the greatest Figure in Church and State in
Ireland, for my Conduct there; which I hope will be sufficient to stop the
Mouths of all Cavillers.

The Second Part of my Book is Entitled (what it really was) A Billet Doux sent
me by a Citizens Wife in Dublin; with my Answers to her. And as LUST was her
Master-Sin, so in my First and Second Letter I check her Impudence; and then
prescribe Remedies for her Disease: And in my Third Letter I tell her the way
how she and her Husband ( whom she ^alls Argus) may yet be happy in Wedlock.

Gentlemen, by this attempt of Dorind^ (at a time when I was scuffling with
Campbel) you may see I was condemned to fight with Beasts of both Sexes; though
I am apt to think (as my London Correspondent observed) that 'twas a Trap of
Patrick's laying; and that he had a mind to try what he could do by Women,
since he durst not face me himself, or Answer my Challenge in Print: and
therefore I publish Dorinda's Billet with my Dublin Scuffle, as it seems to be
part of it.

Had I been caught in the Snare (as my ingenious Friend further observes)
there is no reason to doubt but Patrick would have blazed it on the Housetop.
It Is true, the Billet was really sent me, (and my Answer directed to St.
Lawrence's Coffee-house on Cork-hill, where it lies still for any thing I know
to the contrary) but would it save my Life, I could not tell who sent it, nor
could I ever guess at the Author; but I know my Innocence* and therefore am not
afraid or ashamed that the World should see Dorinda's Billet, and what an Enemy
I was to her Assignation, which is writ as if she were acquainted with me, the
better to allure or fright me to her wanton Arms.

As to the Third Part of my Book, which I call my Conversation in Ireland,
'twas necessary to add it to my Scuffle with Campbel, and the Irish Dorinda,
that the World might see (by my Method of Living in that Country) what little
reason I gave Patrick, to sucffle with me; or to the Irish Dorinda, to tempt me
to her lewd Embraces.

This Account of my Conversation was really sent in a Letter to a Lady of High
Birth; and the Answer to it is a Letter of her own Writing; but who she is, I
having promised to conceal her Name, ^ven R^cks and Gibbets should not squeez^
it from me: Though, would she honor me so far, as to let me tell who she is, it
would add greatly to the sale of my Book, and perhaps occasion several
Impressions* But this is a Favor I cannot expect. However, to make my
Conversation as agreeable as I well could, I Have intermixed it with particular
Characters of the most Eminent Persons I conversed with in the Kingdom of
Ireland; but more especially in the City of Dublin: And if in these Characters
I Have been too lavish in any one's Praise, or have described some Persons what
they should be, rather than what they are, it is excusable sure; for who knows
but these, by seeing how charming Virtue would make 'em, may endeavor to
practice it?

Gentlemen, If these ben't Re^sons sufficient for publishing my Conversation in
Ireland, I might add one more; and that is, -- I publish it to please my self;
Why may not I have my Humor, as well as others? I promised my Summer Rambles
for the Diversion of the Gentlemen in Ireland, who encouraged my Auctions; and
this Conversation is a part of 'em: And, Gentlemen, if that Honorable Lady to
whom it is directed (or your selves) do but cast a favorable Eve upon it, I
have my end: And, who knows what success I may have? For the World is at
present much upon the search after Voyages and Travels; to which Rambles being
something akin, they are I hope coming in fashion too; and I may be allowed to
offer at something of that Nature, since I have crossed the Sea half a dozen
times; visited America, and been four Months together on the Ocean.

Sir William Cornwallis says of Montaign's Essays, That it was the likeliest
Book to advance Wisdom, because the Authors own Experience is the chiefest
Argument in it: And indeed, should every Man write an History of his Life,
comprehending as well his Vices as Virtues, and have them with simplicity
related; how useful would this prove to the Public! But this may rather be
wished for, than expected, since Men have ever preferred their own private
Reputation before the real good of themselves or others. But now, if contrary
to the mode of such Travelers as lose their Thoughts in the open Air where
they were conceived, I have with more Diligence registered mine: It was out of
no Opinion they deserve a longer Life, but to prevent Idleness. The chief thing
I seek in publishing this Dublin Scuffle and Conversation in Ireland (next to
clearing my Innocence with respect to Campbel, Dorinda, and other Enemies) is
by my Pen to find Employment for a Spirit that would break the Vessel, had it
nothing to work upon. To those that are angry at my frequent Digressions, I
answer here (with the ingenious Montaign) that Constancy is not so absolutely
necessary in Authors as in Husbands; and for my own part, when I have my Pen in
my Hand, and Subject in my Head, I look upon my self as mounted my Horse to
ride a Journey; wherein, although I design to reach such a Town by Night, yet
will I not deny my self the Satisfaction of going a Mile or two out of the way,
to gratify my Senses with some new and diverting Prospect. Now he that is of
this rambling humor, perhaps will be pleased with my Conversation, (which is
little else than a hasty digression from one thing to another.) However* in
this I have (as I said before) the honor to imitate the Great Montaign, whose
Umbrage is sufficient to protect me against any one age of Critics; and it is
well it is so, for, Gentlemen, I am very sensible that it is safer to make 50
Challenges at Sword and Buckler, long Sword and Quarter-staff, than to play one
Author's Prize on the Bookseller's Stall; for the one draws but Blood, but by
the other a Man is drawn and quartered. To appear in Print is worse than
hanging; for the Torture of the Halter is but an Hour or so; but he that lies
on the Rack in Print, has his Flesh torn off by the Teeth of Envy and Calumny,
though he meant no body no harm. Nay, some of my Brethren themselves are turned
Demi-Criticks, and call every thing Stuff, that has not their own Name to it.
There Is P. C. T. F. and two or three more ill-natured Fops, if an Angel should
send a Copy to Phil -- they would call it Stuff, except they had a share in it.
But I shall meet with them elsewhere; and would have these ill-natured Critics
take notice, that I wear my Pen as others do their Sword, and for that same end
too; and don't care one Rush whether thy approve or condemn what I write. It is
not their Judgment that I value, and therefore think it below my Regard, any
otherwise than to vindicate my self from their Calumnies.

Thus Gentlemen, have I given ye a distinct Account of the Three Parts of my
Dublin Scuffle, with the true Reasons for my publishing of it. As to the Two
Letters and Verses that lead the Van, they came to me with no other Direction
than, For John Dunton; at the Raven in Iewen-street; and I think I can do no
less in point of Gratitude and Civility to their Authors, than to print 'em as
an Introduction to my Scuffle, with this Assurance, That you have 'em in the
very Dress they came to me in. The Letters and Verses will I presume speak for
themselves; but for my own Performance I shall say nothing. I must own you have
hitherto used me with much Civility, which makes me the less apprehensive of
any danger now; but come what will, I Am resolved to stand to your Courtesy,
and shall always acknowledge the former Obligations you have laid upon,

Your Humble Servant, John Dunton.
London, February ^0. School/9
A POEM ON THE Dublin Scuffle.
I Hope (Sir) you will not esteem it an uncivil Address, if I put you in mind
of the Scuffle you promised us; I can tell you that we are all in mighty pain
for it; and truly, unless you speedily deliver us, shall be apt to conclude you
have given up the cause. You cannot imagine what advantage the Scotchman makes
of the Interval; I met him accidentally the other Day at your Friend Dick's,
where his chief business was to traduce and revile you, and indeed, I believe
he had went on with his show, if I had not started the Scuffle in your
Vindication; When I told him, we expected it here in a Month, I found it stung
him to the very Soul; he put himself instantly into his Natural Posture of
Rubbing and Scratching, and in my Conscience made as many wry Faces, as he used
to do formerly at the Buckling on of his Pack; and verily, I was not wanting to
give him now and then a lift.

But after all, you must send it away with the utmost expedition; all your
Friends, Nay, the whole Town earnestly expect it from you, and truly in my
Judgment you cannot come off of it now, without a manifest Injury both to your
Interest and Reputation.

And here is poor Dorinda too; What can you imagine She thinks of the Matter?
I Will warrant you he^ Polse bears very high upon the Point? Who she is, we
cannot learn. But most People that understand Dublin, believe her to be a (...)
that our City Dames resent the thing so very ill, that if they should once find
her out, I would not be in her Coat for his whole Pack; and for Niff Naff
himself too, if after all they should find that he had any singer in the
Contrivance, he had best be sure to keep a strong Padlock upon his Trouses.

Well, but I have sent you a few Irish Rhymes too, which you may either commit
to the Flames, or some empty place in your Book, as you shall think 'em worthy.
You know Irelands but a barren Country for such sort of Commodities; however,
Sign-Post Painting may serve to put you in mind of your Friends, as well as the
best; and if it does but that, 'twill be a sufficient Satisfaction to

Dublin Feb. 6. School/9, Yours, Farewell, T. B.

TO Mr. John Dunton, UPON HIS Dublin Scuffle.
MY Friend, could I but let thee see
How much I love and value thee,
I Am sure thou would reckon this Offense
At worst, a kind Impertinence.
I know thy Learning and thy Parts,
Thy Knowledge in the Noblest Arts;
Thy CONVERSATION and thy Wit,
Speak thee for my Advice unfit;
But what of that, true Friendship still
Attones for every other ill.
Believe me then, in this hard Scuffle,
Poor John, Thou seem, confined to ruffle,
Not only with the Scotch Man's Pride,
But other Knaves and Fools beside.
He that is forced to draw his Pen,
Must fight with Beasts in shapes of Men.
They Will pointed Censures at him dart,
Which though they cannot reach his Heart,
Will reach his better part, his Fame,
And wound him deep in his good Name.
Thou Wilt find too late, this Paper War
Is worse, even than Intestine Iar.
But be it so, or be it not,
You must go on, this scurvy Scot
Has broke the Peace, and the proud Loon
Insults, unless you take him down.
Besides, thou have a safe defense,
I mean thy Truth and Innocence.
Thy Honesty will be thy Guard,
And thy Fair Dealing thy Reward.
It Is true, the Wretch of Skinner Row
Is for thy Pen too base and low;
And so is false Dorinda too,
A subject far too mean for you:
And so is Dick, but what of that,
Here Is Wild and I, and honest Pat,
Nay, all the Town, but two or three,
Speak well, and justly value thee:
So you are engaged for different ends,
To right thy self, and please thy Friends.
T. B.
The Second Letter TO Mr. John Dunton, UPON HIS Dublin Scuffle.
WHY John, here is Nif^ Na^^
Would make a Man laugh,
To see how he sets up his Back.
I Will tell thee by the by,
It Is mounted as high
As when formerly guirded to the Pack.
I protest he is half mad,
Is not that very sad?
And swears by his Namesake, St. Patrick,
When thy Scuffle comes over
He Will meet it a Shore,
And in spite of 'em all play it a Trick.
You know he is a SCOT,
And then what is he not?
Why every thing now but a Peddler.
But He Is got into the Row,
How he came there we know,
Yet I hate the repute of a Medler.
Then prithee good John,
With thy Scuffle go on,
It Is you that must humble the Loon;
What the De'el would he have,
All Dublin his Slave,
And encroach all the business of the Town.
No, no, Mr. SCOT,
Excuse us in that,
We know you too well for the future.
Is this your pretense
Of Conscience and Sense,
To use honest John like a Jew Sir?
And DICK too I Will tell thee,
What e're had befell thee,
Thou had better have kept to thy Word;
And for Mrs. Dorinda,
Whom we cannot find a --
John values her not of a T --
No! he is too well weighed
To be fooled or betrayed
By a Knave, or a Jilt in disguise.
I Will tell thee but that,
'Twill be better for PAT,
And make thee hereafter more wise.
To Let his Room over his Head,
I Would have first wanted Bread
Before I Would have pleasur'd the Loon.
The more ( Dick) I think on it,
The more you still stink on it,
And grow nauseous all over the Town.
To conclude, honest Dutton,
Never value't a Button,
Thy Candor, Fair-dealing, and Sense,
Have placed you too high,
For such Insects to fly,
And will still be thy Guard and Defense.
Here Is Wild's thy True Friend,
Whom even Interest cannot bend
To forfeit thy Love or thy Trust.
He Will tell thee the Town
Does in general own
That all thy Proposals were Just.
Though the Peddler and Whore
And one or two more,
Attempt to surprise and trapan thee.
The rest are all thine,
Both the Lay and Divine.
With all the true Friendship that can be.
SIR,
I Presume you will not believe I am so much an Ape, to be fond of the deformed
Brat I here send you; You see I have not set my Name to it; which perhaps may
occasion Campbel, etc. to make Reflections. To be plain with him, I have no
manner of apprehension of him, or any of his Party; my only concern is, that
when you come to peruse it, you will think it unworthy of the meanest place in
your Book; and then I Am confident, both in point of Wisdom and Interest, I
ought to keep my self concealed. In short, I am one of those that by your Fair
and Genteel Dealing, you have solemnly engaged to your Friendship; and one of
those too, that earnestly expect your SCUFFLE. As for my Name, etc. If the
Scotchman insists upon it, when you think fit, he shall know it: And withal, be
further satisfied with what Sincerity I am,


Dublin Feb. 10. School/9. Yours, S. M.

THE Dublin-Scuffle, etc.
LETTER I.
SIR,
IN the History of my Irish-Travels, I am come so far as to speak of the
Auction I made in Dublin, which I fear will end in a sort of Scuffle,
(something like your Counter-scuffle in London) But that you may have the
better Idea of this Rambling Project, and of Patrick Campbel, the Chief
Adversary I have yet met with; I here send it in the Words 'twas Published.

An Account of the Three Auctions to be held in the City of Dublin: In a Letter
to the Wise, Learned, and Studious Gentlemen in the Kingdom of Ireland, but
more especially to those in the City of Dublin.
Gentlemen,
THough the Summer be a Time for Rambling, and the Season of the Year invite
all Men abroad, that love to see Foreign Countries, yet 'twas not this alone,
but the good Acceptance the way of Sale by Auction has met with from all Lovers
of Books, that encouraged me to bring to this Kingdom of Ireland, a General
Collection of the most valuable Pieces in Divinity, History, Philosophy, Law,
Physic, Mathematics, Horsemanship, Merchandise, Limning, Military Discipline,
Heraldry, Music, Fortification, Fireworks, Husbandry, Gardening, Romances,
Novels, Poems, Plays, Bibles and School-Books, that have been Printed in
England since the Dreadful Fire in London in 1666, to this present Time.

In this General Collection you will find that many a good Book has lain asleep,
as not being known, and when a Book is not Published, it cannot be nourished by
the favorable Acceptance of the World: I might Instance in Mr. Turner's
History of the Remarkable Providence which have happened in this Age, of which
there is near a Thousand disposed of in London, and scarce Twenty of 'em Sold
in Ireland, though by viewing the Contents of this Work (which are given Gratis
at Dick's Coffee-House in Skinner-Row) 'twill evidently appear there is not a
more useful Book.

Now Gentlemen, as Books are the best Furniture in a House, so I see no Reason
why others with my self, should not think their Variety the most excusable
Prodigality; and therefore as the good success Auctions have met with, with my
Natural Love to Traveling (as appears by my Venture of this Nature to
New England, Holland, and other Parts, in the Year 1686.) put me upon this
Undertaking, so I hope you will give it encouragement in some proportion to my
great Expense in Purchasing and bringing over so large a Collection; and
indeed, Gentlemen, as this Sale is designed for your Profit, as well as my own,
so it seems of right to Challenge your Protection, which if it receives, I
shall not value what some little prejudiced People can do to discourage it: I
design by this no Reflection on my Brethren in this City, for to do 'em
Justice, they acted generously, and gave me all the Countenance I could expect
(all save Patrick Campbell, who grins at my Undertaking.) Though had they not,
Learning and Knowledge are such real things, they need no other props to
support them, but what is cut out of themselves; and a better Medium to effect
it, than by reading Books, I know not. And though there be a Complaint that the
World seems oppressed with Books, yet do we daily want them; if it were not so,
what is the Reason that many of great Estates can hardly make their Minds or
Thoughts stretch to a Geometrical Measuring of their own Lands? but surely he
that has Money in his Pockets, and will starve his Brains, (when so many new
and valuable Pieces are brought to his Door) deserves to be posted; for what
can a Man's Rusty Bags afford him, to the Profits and Treasures of Books? Plato
was accounted a Wise Man, and we find it Recorded of him See Mr. Stanleys
Philosophy.
that he thought it a rich Purchase when he bought three Books of Philosophy
belonging to Philolaus, a Pythagorean in Sicily, though at an incredible Rate;
and that Atlas of Learning, that Orthodox Scholar, See Mr. Leigh (...)
Archbish. Usher, (whose Name makes Ireland Famous, as 'twas the Birthplace of
so great a Man) He it was that sent to Samaria for sundry Copies of the
Samaritan Pentateuch; and with a dear Purchase it was also that he brought the
Syriack Bible with other Books from Syria. It Is Recorded that Solomon's Library
was the Feather in the Plume of his Glorious Enjoyments, a part whereof he
thought was the choicest Present he could make to the Queen of Sheba, for the
Recompense of her great pains in Traveling to Profit her self, and Honor him;
and seeing the Variety of Books (says the Ingenious Burton) he must needs be a
Block that is affected with none. King James the First, when he saw the Oxford
Library, wished that if it ever happened that he should be a Prisoner, that
there he might be kept, and that those C^ained Books might be his Fellows, and
the Chains his Fetters: And who will not say that Good Books and Good Company,
are the very Epitomy of Heaven? In a Word, there is nothing comparable to the
purchase of Knowledge, and whenever Men begin to taste it, they will say, I
speak Truth with a Witness.

Gentlemen, Having said thus much of Auctions, Learning, and the Collection of
Books I have brought into this Kingdom, I would have no Man displeased if he
finds not all he expected in my First Catalogue, for if he has Patience, his
Expectation will be fully Answered: But the great Variety of Books I have
brought over, have rendered it impossible to have 'em all Bound time enough for
my first Sale. I have therefore divided 'em into Three Auctions* The first of
which will begin July 7th, School. Neither can I exceed that Time, my design
being to take Scotland, France and Italy, etc. in my way home, and to be in
London by next Christmas.

There will be a Distinct Catalogue for every Auction, and when Printed (of
which Public Notice shall be given) will be delivered Gratis at Dick's
Coffee-House, (the Place of Sale) and at the Coffee-Houses in Limerick, Corh,
Kilkenny, Clonmel, Wexford, Gal^^y, and other Places, so that those that live
at a distance may send their Commissions to their Relations in Dublin, or to my
Friend Mr. Richard Wild, and they shall have their Orders faithfully Executed;
for as this Country is obliged to his Universal Knowledge in Books, for the
goodness of this Collection, so to his Care and Fidelity (my Health calling me
to Wexford to drink the Waters) is committed the Charge of the whole
Undertaking, And I think I need add no more, for though it has been Customary to
Usher in Undertakings of this Nature, with insignificant and tedious
Commendations, which served only to tire the Readers Patience, and stagger his
Belief, and may perhaps be expected now upon a Collection which might justly
Challenge the Precedence of what has ever been Exposed to Sale in Ireland; yet
being resolved to proceed in quite contrary Methods to what has been formerly
used; I Will manage the whole with that Candor and Sincerity, as shall leave no
room for Exception: For as Gentlemen come here supposing to buy a Pennyworth,
so I do assure 'em I think it unjust to advance the Rate upon 'em by any
Vnderhand-Bidding: And for every Penny I get that way, I will restore a Pound;
neither did I suffer any of my scarce and valuable Pieces to be culled out from
the rest (though importuned thereto by several Gentlemen, and Booksellers) that
all might have equal Treatment, and the greater Reason to attend my Auctions.
And I am very willing that the Ingenious and Learned should be their own Judges
in this matter, not doubting but upon an Impartial view of my Three Catalogues
(of which this is the first) they will find not only such Variety of New Books
as were never before in Ireland (and scarce ones no where else to be purchased)
but such Curiosities in Manuscripts and Pamphlets (of all sorts) as will be
sufficient to invite them to exert a Generosity, as may further Encourage

Dublin June 24. School. Your Humble Servant, John Dunton.


SIR,

IF you will give me your Thoughts upon this Auction, the Conditions of Sale, and
the Scuffle I Am like to be engaged in, on the Account of this Undertaking, I
shall own it as a Mark of your Friendship: Write as supposing me still on the
Road; I am yet on my Summers Ramble, and to Morrow (having met with agreeable
Company) shall set out for the Boyn, Kilkenny, Galway, etc. In order to view
the Cabins, Customs, and Manners of the Wild Irish -- Direct your Answer to be
left with my worthy Friend Dr. Wood, at his House in Kilkenny, for I design to
make him a Visit when I leave Dublin. Pray Sir write by the first Post, for I
intend your Answer shall come into my Summer-Ramble, for my Method, different
from other Travelers, is to get Remarks upon all I see, but Sixpence Once,
Twice, This is the second Letter I sent you, since I came to Ireland.
and the next Word is to assure you, that I am

Your very Humble Servant, John Dunton.

Remarks on my First Letter.
SIR,
I Have received the Kindness of yours, by which I perceive that neither
distance of Place, multiplicity of Business, nor variety of Diversions, and
some times Distractions, are able to divert the stream of solid Friendship, but
that you have still a Minute to spare in remembrance of your old Acquaintance.

I am glad to find you have Encouragement to go on with your generous
Undertaking of imparting to Ireland so many valuable Pieces of Learning. I
don't know why some of 'em may not be accounted Phoenixes, as being revived
since the Fire of London, or rather sprung up from its Ashes.

Time was when Ireland was famous for Learning, and hence it came to be said of
a certain Great Man, whose Name does not now occur to me.

Ivit ad Hibernos Sophia mirabile claros. But I am afraid the Case is much
altered since. Slavery and Popery have had so long and universal a Possession
of that Country, that the Spirits of the Native (or Wild Irish at least) are
much degenerated, so that we may now apply to them as a proper Reverse,
Vervecam in Patria crassoque sub aere Nati.

If your Design may be any way subservient to restore Learning among them, you
will have Cause to value your self upon it while you Live.

But my Friend, I perceive by your Fears of a SCUFFLE, that you will find it
more difficult to Conquer their Prejudices, at least of some of them, than
Richard Strongbow found it to make a Conquest of their Nation; but I hope you
are so much a Philosopher as to prepare your self beforehand for cross
Emergents, that you don't lose Courage on their approach.

Never was there that Great or Good Design yet in the World which did not meet
with Opposition, and if yours happen to be singular in this Respect, it will be
as remarkable a Passage, as many that are recorded in the Irish Story.

You know I am no pretender to the Spirit of Prophecy, but methinks I foresee a
Storm coming upon you. My Reason is this, Whatever the Honesty of your Design,
and the fairness of your way of dealing may be, and which I persuade my self
the Irish Climate will never be able to alter; yet you must expect that those
of your own Calling will look upon you as an Interloper, or perhaps a
Fore-staller and Ingrosser: If you can Convey Learning to Ireland through their
Channels, so as there may be some Gold-Dust left for themselves at the Bottom,
you may perhaps 'scape pretty well; but if otherwise, I am much mistaken if you
don't experimentally find the falsehood of that old saying, That Ireland
entertains no venomous Creature.

I cannot but applaud your Honesty in promising not to advance the Prices upon
Gentlemen that come to buy, by Underhand Bidding. To do otherwise, is not only
to Act two different Parts with the Satyr in the Fable, but according to the
Northern Proverb, To Play both the Thief and the Merchant, and I wish you had
left more of that sort of Honesty amongst some of your Brethren at home. We
have not so much of it our selves, as to send such a Cargo of it at once to our
Neighbors; the worst I shall wish those Gentlemen, who practice the contrary
Method, is, that they may never have any other Buyers, but their own Underhand
Bidders, for that is the likeliest way to reform them.

But though I am Confident you will be as good as your Promise in this Matter,
yet all your Honesty will not be Armor of Proof against a Weapon you have put
into the Hands of your Enemies, which is, that you Promise a Pennyworth to
those that will buy at your Auction.

The Proposal is indeed as charitable as that of Selling below the Market-price
to the starving Poor, but you know those who practice this Method, have as many
Curses from the Ingrossers of Corn, as Blessings from the Starvlings whom they
save from Death.

Learning, I do verily believe, runs low in Ireland, generally speaking; and no
wonder it should, when they have not Books at moderate Rates, and therefore
your bountiful Design to the Public, will not be able to atone for the Injury
which some Persons will be ready to apprehend from you in their Private
Affairs. If you Sell a better Pennyworth than they, you must expect their
Envy; and the Consequence of that, is all that is unjust and mischievous.

But let none of these Things discourage you, go on with your good Design of
dispersing those Books in Ireland, that are fitted for their Instruction and
Diversion; Profit and Pleasure ought to go Hand in Hand.

I would not frighten you, by representing only the black side of the Cloud. I
hope you will meet with some fair weather; try if you can invite the Muses in
your Summers-Ramble, to make a visit once more to the Irish Par^assus, and to
disperse the Liberal Arts amongst the Kerns. What Pity is it, that a People who
are generally so fair of Body, should not have better Means to cultivate their
Souls.

You are very well furnished with proper Materials for so good a Work, if they
fall into charitable Hands.

You are accustomed to Rambling, to use your own Term, though some would have
the Ambition to call it Traveling; and if as other Travelers do generally
drop Money in those Countries which they visit, you drop Learning too, it will
be a double Advantage.

I must take leave to dissent from one of your Propositions, That Books are the
best Furniture in a House, and I believe you will be of my Mind too, when you
know what it is; and I will tell it you frankly, that I think a Good Wife is
better; but both of 'em do well together. I could the more readily have
pardoned your Mistake, if you had not known the Truth of what I say, by both
sides of Experience, but of this enough. It would seem by you that Solomon
thought them equal, seeing he presented the Queen of Sheba with part of his
Library, for if we may believe ^rester John, she was one of his Concubines,
that passed for a sort of Wife in those Days, and from their Bed it is he
pretends to derive his own Original. This must needs Enhance the Value of Books
(and the Stationers Trade) seeing they were the noblest Present that the wisest
of Princes could think on, to make to the wisest of Queens.

Had that Prince happened to live when Printing was Invented, he had certainly
been a great Incourager of the Booksellers-Trade -- He who knew the sweets of
Wisdom and Understanding, and pressed others so earnestly to the pursuit of it,
would have thought himself very Happy in such a proper and easy Method of
acquiring and diffusing it.

Yet such is the unhappy Genius of too many in this Age, that they Care not how
empty their Brains be, so they can but Stuff their Bags, or their Bellies --
Covetousness and Sensuality are equally Enemies to Learning. The Miser laughs
at those, who spend their Time and Strength in search of the
Philosophers-Stone, the Grand Elixir, and Auram Potabile, whilst he has the
Aurum Potabile under a sure Guard of Locks and Bars. The Sensualist does in the
same manner Ridicule those, who Abridge themselves of Sleep and other
Conveniences, in the pursuit of Knowledge. He thinks the best Ornament for the
Head is a fine Hatt and a flanting Wigg; a good Complexion owing to the
Bottle, is preferrable in his Sense, to a Pale Face, the usual Reward of Study.
He had rather be taught how to cut Capers with his Heels, than enabled to Judge
betwixt Truth and Error with his Head.

These are some of the principal Reasons, why Learning makes so little progress
amongst many, who by Providence and Nature are furnish'd' with Opportunity and
Ability to acquire it.

Your Instances of the value put upon Books, by Plato, Archbishop Usher, and
King James I, are pertinently brought in, and may they be as perfectly copied.
Knowledge is without doubt, the most valuable of all sublunary Treasures.
Solomon was certainly of that Opinion, when he said, that a poor and wise Child
was better than an old and a foolish King. Wisdom had something more Charming
in his Eyes than any thing the Crown and Scepter could afford; whence we may
rationally infer, that Solomon would have preferred the Industry of those that
should have brought him a Cargo of good Books, to the Industry of his Richest
Merchants, that brought him Gold and Silver from the Indies, which some Modern
Authors understand by Ophir.

The Thoughts of this may be enough to support you against the Cavils of those,
who may happen to oppose you. Seeing the Native result of your Voyage to
Ireland, is to make good Books common there at a moderate Rate, for which
others would exact upon their Customers.

I shall conclude this long Letter with this one Remark, That your Fancy soars
too high, and your Mind is too nimble for your Body. To talk of completing
your Ramble in Ireland, to visit Scotland, France, and Italy, and to be in
London by Christmas next, is somewhat too much for Pegasus himself; for you
have known him sometimes play the Jade. I find you are already obliged to go to
Wexford for your Health, whence I am afraid you will be induced to alter your
Project. For if your Body will not keep pace with your Mind, you must send your
Thoughts upon the Ramble, and spare the Carcass: However I approve of your
return to London by Christmas, for at that Time we have generally as good
Cheer in England, as you will find any where else.

Give me leave to add one Word, as to your Conditions of Sale. If the
Conditions of your Chapmen be as Fair, you have Reason to expect all possible
Encouragement; but I am afraid you will find Solomon's Observation hold as true
in Ireland as in other Kingdoms, where the Buyers do usually say of the
Merchandise, It is naught, it is naught, but when they have once got it into
their Possession, they will be sure to boast of their Pennyworth. I have no
more to add, but pray you to make haste Home, and in the mean Time fortify
your self against the Distemper of the Country, by its own natural Product, I
mean a good Freeze Coat, lined with Vsquebaugh: but don't linger too long,
least our minced Pyes be all eat before you get over, for I look upon them to
be a more proper Cordial for a true English Stomach. But I shall exceed the
bounds of a Letter, and therefore without any further Ceremony, subscribe my
self,

Your Friend and Servant, etc.

The Second Letter.
My Worthy Friend,
I Have received Yours, with your Thoughts of my Dublin Auction, and of the
Conditions of Sale, for which I return you hearty Thanks. I have already found
that your Conjectures of Envy's attending my Design, were too well grounded,
and have reaped some Benefit by your Advice. Therefore I have here sent you an
Account of an unhappy Scuffle betwixt me and a Dublin-Bookseller. That you may
the better be possessed of the whole Matter, I have here sent you the Copies of
the Letters and Proceedings that have yet passed on this Occasion, and hope you
will oblige me with the Favor of your Thoughts upon this, as you did upon my
former. This Scuffle was first occasioned by his taking my Auction-Room over my
Head, which obliged me to Publish the following Reasons for my Removal to
another, directed to the Gentlemen of Dublin.

The Reasons for my Removal to Patt's Coffee-House.
Gentlemen,
I Have drawn up, some Reasons for my Removal to Patt's Coffee-House, which I
had sent to the Press, where they were Composed and the Letters set, but the
Printer being overawed by Mr. Campbel, refused to Print them. But Gentlemen,
if Money will purchase the Printing of them elsewhere, you shall have them in
Print to morrow Morning, or otherwise in writing at Patt's Coffee-House in
High Street.

John Dunton.
Gentlemen,
The above Lines wore Printed before my Catalogue for November the seventh, and
owned as a Truth by my Printer, in Dublin (in the Presence of Mr. George Larkin
and Mr. Richard Wild) who then declared, that Mr. Campbel threatened to Arrest
him, and his Partner, and to take away all his Work then in the House, if he
went on with the Printing of my Reasons for removing to Patt's. Gentlemen,
Patricks frighting Printers with Actions, ( and by this way Locking up the
Press) is I confess a pretty way of answering my Charge against him, and
sufficiently shows his Guilt; but I am so far from being frighted with Bug^ears
of that Nature, having a just Cause to defend, that at the same Hour he enters
one Action, I Will enter two, and pursue it further then he is aware of; and
though my Printer had not Soul brave enough to Work off at the Press what was
Composed in his House (for my Letter annexed was directed to him) yet other
Printers in Dublin, being satisfied with the Truth of my Charge, assured me in
the Presence of Mr. Larkin, that they would have Printed it with all their
Hearts, had they done my former Work; however Gentlemen, I here present you in
Writing with what I design to Publish, with this Promise to the Printers of
Dublin, that were afraid to Print the following Paper; that whatever they shall
Print against me, I will take no Advantage against them for it, provided
they will declare the Author; and if I cannot have the Liberty of the Press here,
as I can in London, (though for every Sheet Printed in this Scuffle, I Will give a
double Price,) I Will Answer what my Adversary shall Print every Day in
Manuscript with my Name to it, and leave it at Patt's Coffee-House.




An Account of my Third Auction in Dublin, to be held at Patt's Coffee-House,
over against St. Michael's Church in High Street, on Monday November 7th, School,
with my Reasons for removing thither.
In a second Letter to those Gentlemen, who have bought Books at my two former
Auctions.
Gentlemen,
THis present Monday being November the seventh, at Three of the Clock in the
Afternoon, will begin my Third Auction at Patt's Coffee-House in High Street.
It Is true, I fully designed that this Third A^ction, as well as my First and
Second, should have been Sold at Dick's Coffee-House in Skinner-R^w, for I had
agreed with Dick for his Back Room as long as my Sale lasted, and though I
never released the Bargain (as Dick himself has owned at the Ram in the
Presence of diverse Persons) any further, then by telling him, that I did not
doubt, to have done in a few Days, which I only said, to show my readiness to
quit his Room as soon as possible I could; but Dick catching at these Words, and
one Patrick Campbel designing himself to keep an Auction of Books there, and
thinking that the Room where Gentlemen had found such fair Usage in my Auction,
would give a Reputation to his, takes it over my Head, (and Mr. Wild's too, as
he had the Promise on it, when my Sale was done) Pressing Dick to the Bargain by
those moving Arguments of a double Price, or going to another Place, and easy
Dick (though otherwise I hope Honest) finding that 'twas the Law of Auctions,
that he who bids most is the Buyer, even lets the Room to Patrick, at the Time
when 'twas actually mine, without being so fair as to cry Ten Shillings Once,
Note, Ten Shillings a Week, was as much more as I had agreed with Dick for.
Ten Shillings Twice, either to my self, or to Mr. Wild, to whom he promised
the Refusal. Gentlemen, This was odd Treatment, but because my stay in Dublin
will not permit me, to do my self Justice, I chose rather to quit my Right, then
contend for it; but had Dick considered how far the Rules of Civility to me, and
Gratitude to Mr. Wild, should have swayed with him, (Mr. Wild not only being
the Proprietor of the Shelves, that stood in the Room, but also the first that
brought an Auction thither, that had kept several there, and was the means of
bringing Mr. Thornton's formerly, and mine now) I say had Dick reflected on
these Things, his Eyes had been Proof against the double Price (that Dick in
his Letter tells me, Patrick had agreed to give him) and the Scot might have
gang'd with his Pack of Bewks to another Place.

I shall be glad to see Patrick acquit himself, but I much doubt it, when I
consider, the dark usage I had in Turner (of which more hereafter) and the
l'orty Shillings I had of him, was a second Part to the same Tune: You must
know, Gentlemen, he ^ragg'd of lending me Forty Shillings, when I first came to
Dublin, thinking I suppose, to lessen my Credit with Printers, Stationers, and
Binders, not knowing how forward they were to serve me (that so my Venture
might sl^^p in quiet, till this Geud Man had culled out my best Books, which I
judge he thought ( if the Binders were made Infidels) he should have for a
Song, and the rest, Gentlemen, you know might have been serviceable to your
Ladies under Minced Pyes; in this you see the very Soul of Patrick; for he
could not but know, that I had not a drop of Mechanic Blood in my whole Body (
my self being the fourth John Dunton in a Lineal Descent from the Tribe of
Levi) that I could bow low, but could never creep to any Thing; that I was born
to a good Estate in Land, and had made it treble by a late Marriage; that I had
brought a venture of Books to Dublin (of near Ten Tun) which could not yield
less then 1500 l. and 200 l. more could I approve of Setters; and he as well
knew that if I wanted an 100 l. (for the King's Customs, and other Charges,
etc.) that I could have it at a Words speaking, from Mr. Lum, a Parliament Man:
But for all this, he talked so loud of his Forty Shillings, (though then he
owed me a greater Sum, and to this Hour is not out of my Debt) that the sound
of it reached to England, and Mr. Wild^, who was then in London, sent me word,
he admired I should want Forty Shillings, when a Bill had been sent me of Forty
Pound.

Gentlemen, By what I have mentioned, you see what the Scotchman ITCH'D to be
at; and to add to his Favors, he now takes my Room over my Head; which I must
tell him, resembles a Man I once met in my Travels, who Sold the same Book with
two different Titles, Turning Hodder into Cocker, Cumpstey into Whaley, etc.
(according as his Customer wanted) with as much Dexterity as the Suttler in
King James's Camp, who drew Ale out of one end of the Barrel, and Beer at the
other. Nothing that is said here, is designed as a Reflection on any other of my
Brethren in this City, for to do 'em Justice (as I said in my first Letter)
they acted generously, and gave me all the Countenance I could expect; all save
Niff-Naff (the Proud Loon of Skinner-Row) who formerly Grin'd, and now Barks at
my Undertaking. But when I came to Ireland, I expected to fight with Beasts at
Ephesus; and if he proceeds as he has begun, we shall Scuffle in earnest; but
if we do (as good Luck is) such is the Impenetrability of Innocence, and my
just Undertaking, that he can do me no Harm: For I bless God, my Name and
Reputation stands much above him, but he Labors ( though it is yet in Private)
to bespatter me all he can; nay Gentlemen, so ^oul and nauseous is the Venom he
spits at me, that it is easy to think that Nature spoiled him in the making,
and set his Mouth at the wrong end; certainly, there must be a corrupted and
putrified Soul within, whence (as my Friends tell me) there daily steams out so
much odious and stinking Breath. It Is true, Gentlemen, he calls himself the even
Mon of Coonshence; but I am afraid to tell you, what Persuasion he is of,
seeing he has so very little either of Justice or Humanity, but at present he is
the Chief, if not the only Enemy I have; His Private Slanders (the more
Impudent, as given at a Time when he owed me Money) are too notorious to need
my Answer, but may teach us this, that we should Judge of all Men's Religion by
their Charity, and that to believe one Report in Twenty, is to give a very
large Allowance.

I might next ask Patrick a few Questions (for Modern Athens As you will find
in the History of the Athenian Society, Printed for Jam. Dowl^y.
owes it is Rise to my Doubts and Fears) about Campbel (alias Ure) and a certain
Organist ( his Tenant for one Night) I should next dragg Patrick to Waterford,
and show him Mr. Hearts House, and here I could ask very odd Questions: And now
my Hand's in at asking of Questions, I Will ask Patrick how he rested on Sunday
Night? For he was visiting the Press by seven on Monday Morning, sent his Spies
by eight, and his honest Drudges were on the Stool of Repentance by nine, and
by ten (with Cap in Hand) were at downright asking my Pardon for Composing
Reasons they durst not Print; this again makes me ask, Whether Campbel did not
privately see my Reasons before they went to the Press, and a Printed Copy of
them after it was told me the Title was distributed? And whether he did not pay
the Printers for Composing them, they being so willing, if I Would suppress this
Paper, to excuse me in that Matter? And if so, upon the whole, Whether the two
Printers, and Patrick, ben't Three?

Gentlemen, being fallen amongst Printers, I shall ask a Question or two about
the Dublin-Booksellers; as, Are they a forgiving Company? (for they are so in
London) and can they Pardon a kneeling Patrick, for some little Lie in way of
Trade? and which he has owned to 'em; sure they may, when he is a Saint of their
own Country; I have more Questions to ask, and from thence could descend to
others Particulars; but I Will spare Patrick for his late Justice, in detecting
the Thieves that robbed my Warehouse; and if I knew of one more Virtue he had,
I Would proclaim it on the Housetop, and to make it the more observed, I would
afterward blaze it in the London-Gazette: For Gentlemen, as I Am a true Friend
where I take a Fancy, so Patrick shall find me as fair an Enemy; sure I am, did
Gentlemen know my great Charge in Removing to Patt's, the Folio's, and Buyers,
which I lost upon that Occasion, they would say I treat Patrick with a World of
tenderness; all that I Have said yet, is but self-Defence; and though this Feud
should end with a bloody Nose (for Dick suspects it began with one) yet I Will
still be so just to Patrick, as not to belie the Devil. Gentlemen, to convince
you of this, I Will venture at no Buts nor Hints of Things, (Buts and Hints, when
they are no more, are the worst sort of Murdering a Man) but what I can (and
will when he answers this) prove at length, on which I Will bestow a few
Annotations, as a Key to the darker Passages.

Thus Gentlemen have I given you the Reasons for my Removal to Patt's, wherein
I have advanced nothing relating to Dick, or the even, alias only, Mon of
Coonshence, ( as the Geud Man at the Bible has called himself) but what I Will
Prove, and Reply to every Day, if there be Occasion.

Gentlemen, Though I have been thus thrust out of my Room to make way for St.
Patrick and his Auction; I hope, you will allow me to say something of my own,
though your general Acknowledgment of the fair Dealing you had in it, seems to
render this Work unnecessary; for you all know, I begun my Sale on a just
Foundation, did not interfere with any Man's Auction (there was none mentioned
in Dublin till I came) nor did I take any Man's Room over his Head; or had I
innocently done such a thing as that, upon Notice given by the injured Person,
( such as Patrick has had over and over) I Would have flung up the Bargain at first
Word: And I may speak the freer in this Matter, as it is a Thing I have done in
London; and as I begun my Auction on a just Foundation in Dublin, so the Books
I sold were as fairly bought in London; I took Advantage of no Man's Ignorance,
as Mr. Wild knows, in getting in the whole Venture; of this he can give you
several Instances, but that of Mr. Sh -- n might suffice for all; and as my
Books were honestly bought, and the Sale begun on a right Foundation, so I have
had a Blessing on the Undertaking; and though I fight with Beasts at Ephesus,
whilst I Have a Cordial in my own Breast, I shall fear nothing; the Truth is, I
was ever more afraid of my Self then of all the World, a Man cannot fly from
himself (every Man carries an Executioner in his own Breast) so that a Man's
Conscience (in some Sense) is the only Friend or Enemy he has in the World.

Gentlemen, had I begun my Auctions ( or carried them on) by other Means then
is here mentioned, I should own it a piece of Impudence to desire your Company
a third Time; or had I pretended Conscience to you, and yet played the Knave
with Dick -- (for I did not take his Room from Week to Week, as he falsely
Asserts, but for as long as my Sale lasted, as several Witnesses will Depose
upon Oath) 'twou'd have shown you at first glance what Candor you were to have
in my Three Auctions; but to Rob Peter to P^y Paul, is a Doctrine I never
practiced, and scarce know what it is called; and would you have a Name for it,
you must send to the even Mon of Co^nshence; but though I am able to stand the
Test with the same Allowance that every Man would wish for himself under the
like Circumstance, as to my Auctions here, and the whole Trading Part of my
Life. yet I have Enemies as well as other Men (two of a Trade, can never agree)
and you would wonder if I had not, for I have Printed Six Hundred Books, writ
by Authors of different Judgments, and it is strange if in drawing upon one
another, the Bookseller (a sort of Second in such Duels) should always'scap^
without any Wound; but though I have Enemies, they are only those that never
knew me, or never heard what I had to say for my self.

Or else such narrow Souls as are wholly guided by self-interest. Of all that
have Traded with me (though for many Thousands) I know not of one Enemy I have in
the whole World, save Patrick Campbell at the Bible in Skinner-Row, and a piece
of Trash that I smell beyond the Herring Pond: And to the immortal Glory of the
Stationer's Company, I know but two more such in London, and not one of them
Lives in St. Paul's Churchyard, or at the Bible and Three Crowns; but
Gentlemen, if I find out more, you shall know the Names their Godfathers gave
them; but 'twill be Time enough to descend to Particulars when I leave Ireland,
and then I Will surely do it, in a Farewell Letter to those Gentlemen, that Buy
what they will not Pay for.

Now Gentlemen, if my Friend Campbell thinks himself injured by these
Reflections, the Press is open, to him I mean, but not to me (as he has ordered
it) But if I have a clear Stage, I desire no Quarter from him, for I have yet
so much by me; which will keep Cold, as would make a PEDLAR Sweat, or as stout
a Man as the great Campbell. But Gentlemen, Conscience makes Cowards of us all,
and for that Reason Campbell will scarce give you the Diversion of a Paper War.
No, Patrick is a great Man, and to scorn my Charge (as in Yesterdays Flying
Post) is the easiest way to Answer it; the truly Valiant dare face their
Danger, but I doubt my Enemy will not meet me with any Weapon but his old one of
Niff-Naff, for fear his Defense in Print, should move me to new Discoveries, or
to fall to Writing of Ears; but if he hangs out his Flag of Defiance, and dares
answer this, let him do it while I Am here, and subscribe it with his right
Name, as I will my Reply with John Dunton; for it is a pitiful Cowardice that
strikes a Man in the dark, or like T. W. bites a Man by the Heel, and then like
a Serpent creeps into his Hole again, for want of Courage to abet his Actions.
I never in my whole Life was the first Agressor in any Quarrel, but when I am
justly provoked, I wear my Pen as others do their Sword; and if Campbell
Replies to this, I Will Answer his Charge, De Die in Diem, till I have worn my
Pen to the stumps.

What though I lose the Day, yet I aim high;
And to dare something, is some Victory.
Though Patrick can fright the Printers that Live by him, yet I do assure him,
(As I tell Dorinda in my Answer to her Billet Doux) till he is Virtuous I cannot
Love him, and it is not in my Nature to fear any Thing; neither will I forget
him, nor the Brass in Copper-Alley, in the History of my Summers Ramble, which
will be a Crown Bound, and shall be sent to Dublin in few Weeks. When we have
thus Box'd it out, We'll Kiss (as the Gentlemen of Ireland do) wash our Selves,
shake Hands and Part.

But whither does my just Resentment carry me? Yet Gentlemen, I hope you will
Pardon it, for when at any Time I go out of the Way, it is rather upon the
Account of License than oversight; there be Pieces in Plutarch, as well as in
Dunton, where he forgets his Theme; besides I Am the more excusable, as I told
you I loved Rambling, and should visit Scotland in my way home, and you see I Am
as good as my Word.

Gentlemen, I shall only add, that the Candid Treatment you have found in my
Two Auctions, I hope will invite you this Afternoon to visit my Third, and to
engage you to it, you will find daily in my Printed Bills that I have yet
diverse good Books, as Doctor Barrow's Works, Josephus History in English,
Rawleigh the best Editiion, Milton's Political Works, and many others I have not
Time to mention.

You will also find, I have several Excellent Law Books in all Volumes, such as
the Irish Statutes in Folio, and the Year Books of the best Edition, etc.

I have also in this Third Auction, A Collection of scarce Pamphlets on most
Subjects, and when my Catalogue of Manuscripts is Published (it containing
great variety of Curious Subjects never yet in Print) I shall not doubt the
Company of ingenuous Persons, but this being my last Sale for the Year, School.
and my Time of Imbarquing for London being very soon, I can allow but Two Days
after the Auction is ended, for the taking away what you Buy in it.

To Conclude, I told you in my first Letter that I thought it unjust to advance
the Rate upon you by any Underhand Bidding, and for every Penny I got that
way, I Would restore a Pound; which was not said to serve a turn, for I have been
true to my Word, as a Worthy Member of the House of Commons (who has been a
great Encourager of my Auction) has done me the Honor to Declare; and as
honest Dobbs, a considerable Buyer, and all the Servants attending my Auction,
can Testify; but surely Gentlemen, the Buyer should be Just as well as the
Seller, and if you consider the vast Charge I am at to serve you ( with such an
Auction of New Books as never was sold in Ireland) you will be as forward to
Pay me, as I am to subscribe my Self,

Dublin, NOV. 5th. School. Your very humble Servant, John Dunton.


To the end the foregoing Letter might be forthwith Printed, I sent it to the
Person, who Printed my Auction-Bills, with this Letter, (viz.)
To the Printer.
SIR,
FInding a Necessity of vindicating my self, against the ill usage of Mr.
Patrick Campbell, and Mr. Richard Pue, I send this Second Letter (giving an
Account of my Third Auction) for you to Print; you see I have Subscribed my
Name to it, and will own it in the Face of the Sun; and if Mr. Campbell be a
generous Enemy, he will be no more angry at your Printing this, then I shall be
if you Print his Answer; nor will I ever give you any Trouble upon that
Account, how scandalous and false soever the Things may be, that you shall
Print against me, provided you will be ready to testify who is the Author; but
if you have not Soul brave enough to assist a Stranger in a Just Cause, especially
one who has been so great a Benefactor to your Art both in England and Ireland,
in the last of which, I have been none of the worst of Customers to you, I
shall then be obliged to take other Measures to right my self: But hoping you
will not give me that unnecessary Trouble, I shall only add, that I am

Your hearty Friend, John Dunton.


SIR,
THus I have given you a true and impartial Account of my Dublin Scuffle, on
which I desire such Remarks as you were pleased to oblige me with on my former.
I know you will deal freely with me, and therefore shall accept your Reproof
for any Thing wherein you think I am faulty, as kindly as your Approbation when
you think I have Right on my side; for you know I was never a Slave to my own
Judgment, but have always desired the Opinion of those whose Thoughts I valued.
I am,

Yours to Command, John Dunton.


Remarks upon the Second Letter.
SIR,
I Am sorry that I have happened to be too true a Prophet. I told you in my
Last, that I foresaw you would meet with Opposition, and that too from those of
your own Way of Business, but I could scarcely have thought that any Man who
calls himself a Christian, would have attempted it in such a mean and
scandalous Method.

Your Adversary may perhaps have read the Ten Commandment; but it would seem he
has altogether forgot the Last, or at least to put it in Practice; seeing he
had so little Conscience as fraudulently to take your Auction-Room over your
Head. Perhaps he may think 'twas but a just Reprizal to over-bid you, on
pretense that you had under-sold him, which though it had been so, is contrary
to the Law of Christianity, which forbids Rewarding Evil for Evil. But I don't
see the least pretense he had for it. You were not the first that set up an
Auction in Dublin, and it seems Patrick Campbel resolved you should not be the
last, seeing he followed your Example, and slily bought you out of your Room,
but had that been disposed of by way of Auction too, I am apt to think, you
would have been able to Cope with him, either for Purse, or in offering a fair
Price.

By what I can perceive, your Adversaries Courage and Christianity are both of
a Piece. He was resolved to fight you, but that he might assure himself of the
Victory, he would first disarm you, or at least make sure of the longest
Weapon. Like another Guy Faux, he undermined your Auction-house; and then, like
an Almanzor, he Huffs and Braves you.

Truth did never yet of it is own Accord affect a lurking-Hole, but has always
Courage enough to stand the Test. Had Patrick's Practice been open and fair, He
would never have hindered it is being Published in Print. There were other
Methods to be taken for vindicating his Fame, than threatening your Printers,
and out-bidding you there too: Had you advanced any Falsehoods, the Law was
open; but Patrick thought it safer to Silence the Press. Every Cock is stout on
his own Dunghill, Patrick Claims a Privilege to Crow at Dublin, but he cannot
hinder you to Answer him at London, so as you may be heard beyond St. George's
Channel; and I am apt to think he will take no great Pleasure in hearing the
Story related.

I am glad to find you retain your Courage, and are not to be frighted into any
thing that is Sneaking by your Adversaries big Looks or Words. Your natural
Temper ^ffords you Strength enough to bear up against greater Attacks than
those; and if it want a Support, you know it is to be found in him who always
Patronizes a Just Cause. Though you be now at a distance from your
well-furnish'd Closet, there is no want of proper Helps in your present
Auction-Room. Brooks's Remedies against Satan's Devices, may be a proper Book
for you to consult on this Occasion. I am glad to hear that my former, has
contributed any thing to fortify you against this Encounter. I am of Opinion,
your Adversary will have no occasion to Triumph, when he casts up his Accounts,
either with his own Conscience (if it be his Custom to keep a fair Reckoning
there) or when he comes to count his Gains by his Envious Auction, which
fastens the brand of foul Guilt upon him. But it seems Patrick has a Mind to be
the sole Bookseller and Auctioneer in Dublin, at what Rate soever.

I am much surpised at the meanness of his Temper in talking of lending you
Forty Shillings, which to be sure he knew you could not want, when you brought
such a Cargo of Books with you, though you had not had a good Estate in England
to depend upon. I question very much, whether Patrick's Estate be able to
balance yours, and I am satisfied he cannot be a better Husband than you are
known to be; nor more Industrious in his Calling; but Malice and Covetousness
in one Man, (and indeed they are seldom to be found asunder) are enough to
transform him into a Monster, and by your Character of Patrick, I can form no
other Idea of him, but that he is one of the worst sort. His Pretensions to
Conscience on the one Hand, and making no Conscience of depriving you of your
Auction-Room, and bespattering your Reputation on the other, are very becoming
a Man who can sell one Book for two, under different Titles. So that Patrick it
seems is a Saint on one side, and a Devil on the other; and can show himself in
various Shapes, as occasion requires: I am Glad you were aware of his Tricks,
and did not suffer him to Gull your Library, though there is no doubt, his
disappointment in that, is one of the Chief Causes of the base Treatment you
meet with at his Hands.

I am very well pleased, that the other Dublin-Booksellers behaved themselves
with more Candor and Generosity toward you, and that the whole Mass was not
corrupted by Patrick's Envy.

The Questions you propose to him, and the odd hints you give of his Practice,
I hope are founded upon good Information: otherwise, I would not advise you to
Publish them; lest they be thought Envious, and may detract from your own
Reputation, instead of painting him in his true Colors; but if the Things be
known, and that the divulging of 'em are necessary for your own Vindication, I
have the less to say against it. It is fit an Hypocrite should be discovered to
the World, that he may be rendered incapable of deceiving more.

I cannot however approve of your National Reflections, for you know there are
Good and Bad in all Countries; and it may perhaps be ill resented, if ever you
should attempt an Auction at Edinburgh, as you seem to Design.

It Is true, you have Provocation enough from Patrick to display his Personal
Faults, for I perceive he is not so open hearted as you are, but works like a
Mole under Ground, and undermines you with very much Art. Were his Industry and
Management rightly applied, he would deserve a Commendation; but as it is
otherwise, the more Industrious and Dexterous he is, the more he discovers his
Wickedness. Your commending him when he does well, gives an Air of Ingenuity
and Truth to the whole of your Accusation; and I am verily persuaded, that if
any part of it be a Lie, it is none of your making -- And seeing you offer to
prove the Truth of every Thing, if Patrick dares to contradict it, I must needs
say, it is a fair offer, but inauspicious for Patrick; for go which way it will,
he is like to come off with the Loss. If he does not Answer you, he seems to own
the Truth of your Charge; so that were he of my Temper, he would rather Venture
to try it out with you, for he can but come off with loss at last.

I am glad you have so many Witnesses to prove the fairness of your
Proceedings, for they are as many to fasten the Guilt upon Patrick and Dick;
and therefore I plainly see through the Reason of Patrick's unwillingness to
engage you in Print; he is better at the short Dagger of Calumny and Reproach
behind your Back, than at fair Weapons Face to Face; he is for underhand Buying,
and underhand Fighting: Yet he may remember, that Guy Faux was at last blown up
by his own dark Lanthorn.

I must Confess, that your having Printed so many Books as you mention, is very
extraordinary; and it had been a Miracle, if you could have escaped without
Reflections from one or other upon that very Account; and therefore you have
Reason to bear with the common Fate of those of your Trade, who Print for
Authors of different Judgments; wherein you have scarcely had a common Share,
for I dare venture to say it, that there are few of the Calling, but have more
Enemies than your self. I never heard of any you had before, and therefore you
have Reason to boast, if you have but one or two in Three Kingdoms.

I must needs approve your Design of Printing your Defense when you come to
England, since Patrick it seems has the sole Privilege of the Press in
Ireland; but if you do, be sure to keep within due bounds, and don't make use
of all the Advantage, which the goodness of your Cause puts in your Hand,
though I think you have little need of this Caution; you have promised your
Adversary generous Treatment, and I never yet knew you worse than your Word.

If Patrick don't Reply, it must be because he cannot, for that Advertisement
which you mention of his in the Flying Post, is sufficient to show that he
would if he could; and if that be the Issue, then you have Reason to Crow over
him in England, as he Insulted you in Ireland. But one Thing I would advise you
against, be not two Voluminous. There are but few, who will be at the Pains to
read a large Relation of a particular Quarrel; and therefore, I would advise
you to set Bounds to your Fancy. Your Credit is well enough Established in
England, and I don't find that you have done any Thing to lessen it in Ireland,
so that a short Defense will serve. Nay I am of Opinion, that a plain Narrative
of Matter of Fact, will be Apology enough for your Self, and Punishment enough
for Patrick Campbel.

The Copy of your Letter to the Printer, is so fair and generous, that nothing
can be said more, to prove that your Adversary has neither Candor nor Courage;
if he don't allow the Printer to accept your offer; but by what I can guess of
the Man's Temper, you are neither to expect that, nor any thing else that is
fair from him* and therefore a Victory over such an Adversary is scarce worth
the contending for.

I am, Sir, Yours, etc.

The Third Letter.
SIR,
YOUR Remarks upon my Dublin-Scufflle, hitherto have been so Impartial, that it
encourages me to proceed in my giving you the remaining part of this Encounter;
I have proceeded so far, as to give you a hint of our first Scuffle at Dick's
Coffee-House, and my Reasons for removing to Patt's: I shall now proceed to
tell you, That the next day after I went to Patt's, I Printed the following
Advertisement, that so the Citizens of Dublin might know of my Removal, and my
Reasons for it: The Advertisement was this, viz.

Gentlemen,
THe Reasons for Removing my Third Auction to Patt's Coffee-House, had been
Published Yesterday, had not Mr. Patrick Campbell over-awed the Printer, by
Threatening to take away his Work, and Arrest him into the Bargain, in case he
proceeded to Print off what was Composed at his House. The said Reasons, fairly
writ on a Sheet of Royal Paper, may be seen by any Gentleman that pleases, with
my Name Subscribed to it, at Patt's Coffee-House, this Afternoon at Three of
the Clock.

John Dunton.


This Advertisement was no sooner Published, but the English Packet Arrived; and
that day, in the Flying Post, my Adversary Publish^d the following Reflections,
which I shall insert here, that the World may see he has a fair Enemy, and that
I do him all the justice I can.

His Reflections were these, viz.

WHEREAS it is Published by Mr. Richard Wild in Mr. John Dunton's
Advertisement of the Second of November, that the Auction-Room was taken over
his Head. -- This is to inform all Persons, That the said Report is False and
Malicious; for Mr. Wild was not the Person that did take the House; and Mr.
Dunton, who took it, had it only from week to week, and gave me Notice, in the
beginning of October, That he would have done within the said Month; and I can
certify, That Mr. Campbell, who has now taken the said Room, was very Cautious
and well informed, That he did not take it over another Man's Head: and, now
says, he Scorns Mr. Dunton's Reflections, and shall neither give him, nor Mr.
Wild, any other Answer.

Richard P^e.


SIR,

I was no sooner made acquainted, that my Enemy had Published the above
mentioned Reflections, but I went to Patt's Coffee-House, and there writ the
following Answer.

A Brief Answer to some Lying and standalous Reflections, Published by Richard
Pue, in the Reprinted Flying Post, November 7. School.
WHEREAS in the Flying Post Reprinted at Dublin, and Published November the 7th
School. There is a Lying Advertisement, subscribed by Rich. Pue. (who is made the
Cats Foot by Patrick Campbell) without either Sense or Coherence, which runs
thus: Whereas it is Published by Mr. Richard Wild, in Mr. John Dunton 's
Advertisement of the second of November, That the Auction-Room was taken over
his Head, etc. This indeed Mr. Wild has not only Published, but is ready to
prove by several Witnesses, as he has already done to Mr. Pue's Face: To this
Mr. Pue (according to his usual Modesty) answers, That the Report is False and
Malicious, for Mr. Wild is not the Person that did take the House: Mr. Wild
never said he did; nor had Dick wronged me (if he had also added (when his Hand
was in) nor Mr. Dunton neither; for I took only the Auction-Room: But this is
either according to Dick's Understanding; or else one of Patrick's Jesuitical
Equivocations to creep out at: The Sense of which is, That the Auction-Room was
not taken over Mr. Wilde's Head, because he is not the Person that took the
House: Now where the Coherence of this is, he that knows can tell. But though
Mr. Wild did not take the House, yet Mr. Pue promised him the Refusal of the
Auction-Room, when my Auction was done, which Dick has not only owned, but told
Mr. Campbel as much. To this Dick very wisely says nothing, because he has
nothing to the Purpose to say. As to my self, he tells two Notorious Untruths:
One is, That I took his Auction-Room only from Week to Week; whereas I took it
during the whole Time of the Sale of my Three Auctions, paying 5 s. per Week
while I kept it. This I can prove by two Witnesses upon Oath. The other Untruth
is, That I gave him notice the beginning of October, that I should have done by
the end of that Month; whereas he himself, not long since, confessed before
several Witnesses, That I took it during the whole Sale of my Auctions, and
that I never Released him. This he did so lately, he cannot forget it: And he
that will put his Name to so Notorious a Lie, and know it to be so, (which is
Dick's Case,) may well be supposed to scruple nothing. -- As to what he says of
Patrick's being so Cautious of taking the Room over my Head, it is like a Man's
asking his. Fellow whether he be a Thief. And for his saying, that Campbel
scorns my Reflections; I believe it is the wisest Course he can take; for I am
sure it is far easier to scorn 'em, then answer 'em. But though he scorus 'em,
Understanding Men will see what weight, as well as what Truth there is in 'em:
To whose Impartial Judgment I submit 'em. But I shall add no more here, but
^efer all Gentlemen to Patt's Coffee-House in High Street, where my Reasons for
Removing thither) are to be seen fairly writ in Two Sheets of Royal ^aper.

John Du^ton.


SIR,

After (I had Published this) Answer, to Mr. Pue's Reflections, Mr. Wild being
therein abused as well as my self, thought it proper to Publish the following
Lines, viz.

Whereas R. Pue. has Yesterday by the Instigation of (...) Neighbor Mr.
Campbel, Published in the Reprinted Flying P^st, a Notorious False
Advertisement, that the Auction-Room at Dick's was not taken over my Head. I do
by these Certify, That I can prove by several Witnesses that I had Dick's
solemn Promises of the Refusal of the said Room as soon as Mr. Dunton had done
with it: And the Reasons for such his Promises were, for that I was the
Proprietor of the Shelves then standing in his Room, and that I had kept
several of my own Auctions, and brought Mr. Thornton's and Mr. Dunton's thither.

Richard Wild.


Thus Sir, have I fairly stated the Controversy 'tween Patrick Campbel (his
Tool Dick) and my Self, but least you should think me too Partial in my own
Cause, as you have heard what my Self, and Mr. Wild have to say for our selves
(for engaging in this Scuffle) so I Will next insert the Testimony of Three
Persons (and you know Sir, a Threefold Cord is Eccles. 4. 11.
not easily broken) further confirming the Truth of what I have said.

Nov. 24. School.
WE the Persons whose Names are hereunto Subscribed, do hereby Attest and
Declare, that about the beginning of this Month of November, Richard Pue did
publicly own in our hearing, that Mr. Dunton never released him of the
Agreement he first made with him, which Agreement was, That Mr. Dunton should
have the Auction-Room as long as he had occasion for it, paying 5. s. per Weak.

Subscribed in the Presence of Math. Gu^ne Samuel Lucas. Patrick Tracy. Heneage
Price George Larkin William Robinson.


Thus Sir, have I given you a further Account of my Scuffle with Patrick
Campbel, on which your Impartial Thoughts are desired by.

Your obliged Friend and Servant, John Dunton.
Remarks on my Third Letter.
SIR,
I Am Glad if my Remarks be any way pleasing or useful to you, and shall answer
your Desire in sending you my Thoughts upon your further Scuffling with Patrick
and Dick. Your Advertisement upon your Removal to Patt's Coffee-House; was
Necessary and Just, and Patrick's preventing your Publishing your Reasons in
Print, according to his usual sly Manner, is Argument enough to prove that he
durst not refer his Cause to the Determination of the Public; and indeed I do
not wonder at it, for Injustice may well be ashamed to show its Face. Besides,
it seems its Patrick's Character, to work like a Mole under Ground; for though
he Loves to Act Unjustly, he does not Love to Appear so. It Is the Nature of a
Hypocrite to wear a Rough Garment to deceive.

It was the next, and the only Course left you, to Publish your Advertisement,
that Patrick might a little appear in his Colors, and in the mean Time to
Publish your Reasons in Writing, was an Argument of true English Courage, to
Face your Adversary with such Weapons as you could come at, when your Cowardly
Adversary had deprived you of any other, because he knew he durst not engage
you on Equal Terms.

His Publishing a Reflection upon you in the Reprinted Flying Post, was another
Effect of his dastardly Temper, seeing he would not allow you the same Liberty;
and therefore Mr. Wilde's Advertisement against Campbel and Dick was very
proper and necessary; nothing could more effectually vindicate your Honesty,
and prove your Adversaries falsehood, and unfair way of Dealing; and I doubt
not, but the Public would take it, as a sufficient Proof of it.

Your own Answer too was highly necessary, and in my Opinion very pertinent:
You therein expose Patricks and Dicks Hypocritical Equivocations to the Life,
and seeing Mr. Wild seconded the Truth of your Assertions, by his
Advertisement, and that you so boldly offer to prove the Truth of what you
Assert in yours, its next to proving Patrick a Liar on Record.

I am far from questioning the Truth of what you have from Time to Time
informed me of as to the Dublin Scuffle, and should have believed it on your
own Assertion. I have not known you so long, but that I am very well satisfied,
you were never taken for a Liar at home, and I have no Reason to think you have
changed your Temper by going to Ireland. However, your Prudence and Caution is
commendable to have your Proceedings well attested, for that is certainly the
best way to stop the Mouths of your Cavilling Adversaries. I am,

SIR, Your assured Friend and Servant.

The Fourth Letter.
SIR,
I Have now proceeded to give you the History of the Dublin Scuffle, so far as
the small Skirmishes of Bills and Advertisements. I am next to tell you, what
the Learned Gentlemen of Ireland (who were Spectators of this Scuffle) thought
of the Encounter: And to set this matter in the Truer Light, I shall here
insert the Letter I sent by Mr. Wild, To the Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of
Clogher; with the Answer his Lordship was pleased to send me. I had not
presumed to have Published the Bishops Answer, but his Lordship is a Person of
very Great Honor, and Strickt Justice (as I hint in my Farewell Letter) and
will be the sooner inclined to pardon a Presumption, which is so absolutely
Necessary to the Vindication of my Innocence.

My Letter to the Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of Clogher, in Dublin,
December the 17th School. May it Please Your Lordship!
I AM Sorry I had not the Honor, to be in my Auction-Room this Morning, when
your Lordship was there, that I might have returned my Humble Thanks, for that
Great Encouragement your Lordship has given to my Book-Adventure, as Mr. Wild
informs me: Had I met with none but such Generous Buyers as your Lordship and
the rest of the Clergy of Ireland, my Undertaking had been more Fortunate: For,
My Lord, I have had Great Injustice from some Persons who have bought what they
will not Pay for; and in particular, from one Campbell, who attempted to Murder
my Reputation; and not contented with that piece of Revenge ( for my
endeavoring to serve this Country with Books) he afterward, takes my
Auction-Room over mine and Mr. Wild 's head; and whilst I was in it, declares,
I had Setters; though I assured the Buyer; That for every Penny I got that
Unlawful Way, I Would restore a Pound: My Lord, I own it my Duty, to forgive
Injuries; but Campbell justifies this Vile Treatment; and therefore, My Lord, I
am obliged to Publish this Dublin Scuffle, to justify my own Innocence; and to
bring him, if possible (according to the Scotch Phrase) to the stool of
Repentance. I am pleased, to hear your Lordship is not angry at my Intention
herein; and as the Speaker of the House of Commons, has done me the Honor, to
desire a sight of my first Draught, in Manuscript; so your Lordship has
likewise been pleased to Honor me, by desiring a sight of the same, in Print;
which as it obliges me to Publish nothing but real Truth; so it encourages me
to hope, That the Publishing my Dublin Scuffle, will bring Campbell to a sense
of his Error. I have only to beg your Lordship's Pardon for this Presumption,
and to assure your Lordship, that I am,

Your Lordship's most Obliged and very Humble Servant. John Dunton.


The Bishop of Clogher's Answer to the Foregoing Letter.
December 17th. School. Mr. Dunton!
I Received your Letter, and am extremely well Satisfied of your Justice and
Fair Dealing in your Late Auction, and of the Fidelity of Mr. Wild, whom you
Employed: You shall always have this Testimony, from

Your Humble Servant, St. Geo: Clogher.


SIR,

YOUR Remarks upon this Honorable Testimony of the Bishop of Clogher, relating
to my SCUFFLE with Patrick Campbell, will further Oblige.

Your Humble Servant, John Dunton.

Remarks on my Fourth Letter.
SIR,
I Was sufficiently Satisfied by your Last, that your Justice, in relation to
the Controversy betwixt Patrick Campbell, and your Self, was undeniable; and
therefore the further Testimonies which you have now sent me of it, are ex
Superabandanti; but I confess, the Quality of 'em is such, that you ought not
to have omitted them; especially when you had seemingly transgressed the Rules
of Good Breeding so far, as to trouble such an Eminent Person as the Lord
Bishop of Clogher, with a Letter on that Subject.

It was indeed a necessary Piece of Gratitude, and an Acknowledgment due to the
Bishop's Character and Personal Merit, to return his Lordship Thanks for the
Encouragement he had given to your Auction, and it was no less than Justice to
the Clergy of Ireland, to own their Generous Deportment, and the Countenance
they gave to your Undertaking; but I cannot altogether approve of your
troubling that Great Prelate, who has the Charge of so many Weighty Affairs
upon his Shoulders, with such a Minute Affair as you Scuffle with Patrick
Campbel.

But seeing his Lordship was so kind as to take your Presumption in good part,
and has been so condescending as to give you such a generous Testimony of the
Fairness of your dealing in your Auction: I cannot but admire the Excellency of
his Lordships Temper, and applaud your successful boldness.

You and your Friend Mr. Wild have Reason to Value your selves upon the
Testimony of a Person of so great Worth, which to be sure will give a
Reputation to your Management with all Men of Sense and Honor; for I cannot
but think, that the Testimony of a Bishop and Privy Counselor, will
infinitely outweigh the Calumnies of a Pedlar turned Bookseller, and his Tool
a Coffee-man. Besides, the Reputation which his Lordship has for his Learning
and Piety, makes it evident, that he looked upon your Design as very
subservient to the Interest of Learning in that Kingdom; seeing he gave so much
Encouragement to it.

What you say of bringing Patrick to the Stool of Repentance, has something of
an Impropriety in it, except you suppose him to have been Cock-Baud to your
Dorinda, for that Penance is not (as I am informed) enjoined in his Country
upon any but those who are guilty of Uncleanness -- But perhaps, because
Patrick may have a Dorinda, which he may Love as himself; you may think that he
ought to mount the Stool of Repentance for her Billet Douxes. If this be your
meaning, I wish you had let it alone, for I am afraid if that Custom should
take Place, it might bring a great many of your Acquaintance in England to
stand in a White Sheet for the Faults of their She-Friends; and I know you are
so good natured, that you would not willingly wish them so much harm.

It Is true, that you for your own Part have been happier than many. Your first
Wifes Virtue put Her beyond the reach of Suspicion, and that of your second is
Vnattackable; but though you and they have been mutually happy in one another,
so that you had no occasion for a She-Friend, yet you ought to consider that
there are many of your Acquaintance that have not had so good a Fate.

However, as to your Adversary Patrick, whether he deserve the Stool of
Repentance for his own personal Crimes or not, I know not; but this I am sure
of, that if the Character given of him be true, he deserves an Advancement of
as Public a Nature, and something like the other too; for as the Stool of
Repentance in his Country is raised so high, that the Criminal who is placed
upon it may be seen by all that are in the Church; he seems to deserve to be
elevated above his Brethren in a Public Marketplace, with a Hole for his
Head, and one for each Hand, and to have the Title Page of Hodder transformed
into Cocker, etc. Nailed over his Head.

But to return to your Scuffle. Your imparting that Affair to the Lord Bishop
of Clogher, and the Speaker of the House of Commons, seems to be a very good
Imprimatur; but at the same Time, it is incumbent upon you to take Care, that
there be nothing in it, too mean to deserve such a License, and that may be
unfit for one of your Business and Reputation to divulge; for though, I doubt
not, but you will keep Religiously to Truth; yet you know that all the Truth is
not to be spoken at all Times, and somethings may be too Trifling to deserve
the View of the Public; therefore peruse every Thing carefully before it be
Printed off. You see I make use of my wonted Freedom with you, as becomes one
who is

SIR, Your Cordial Friend.

The Fifth Letter.
SIR,
I Am still Scuffling with Patrick Campbel; but such is the Advantage of a Just
Cause, that my Auction prospers maugre all the Malice and Venom he spits at
that and me. The first Auction I made (after my Removal to Patt's Coffee-House)
was still crowded with generous Buyers; and notwithstanding the Opposition I
meet from Campbel, I have now proceeded so far in the disposing my whole
Venture, as to come to what I call (the word Auction being worn Threadbare) my
Farewell Sale. That I may give you the better Idea of these Proceedings, and set
the Dublin-Scuffle in a yet clearer Light; I here send you the Account of this
Farewell Sale, with the Attestation concerning my Self, and my Three Auctions,
which are now ended. This further Account of the Dublin-Scuffle, you will find in
my Third Letter, to those worthy Gentlemen that were Encouragers of my
Undertaking; which Letter was Entitled,

The Farewel-Sale at Patt's Coffee-House.
[And is as follows, viz.]
Gentlemen,
THough my Three Auctions are now ended, I have yet Variety of Books left, so I
design to try your generous Bidding a Fourth Time, which I Will call my Farewell
Sale. It shall begin the following Monday at Three in the Afternoon at Patt's
Coffee-House in High Street, and shall end December the first, neither will I
exceed that, resolving (God-willing) to Embark for London December 5th. It Is
true I have Books enough to continue the Sale much longer, but Native Country
has Charms in it, and I am very desirous to be at home: And therefore December
5th, I shall bid you all Farewell: for though when my Fourth Sale is over, I
shall still have Quantities left, yet all that is then remaining I Will lump to
the Booksellers of Dublin (to whom you must give higher Rates, of which the
Sale of the French Book of Martyrs, is a late Instance) or if we cannot agree,
the same Ship that brought 'em hither, will be able to carry 'em back.

The Conditions of this last Sale are, That whatever is bought till Thursday
Night, be all paid the following Friday; and for what has been bought in my
Three past Auctions, it is expected they should be all fetched away by Saturday
the 26th Instant: In order to which, constant Attendance shall be given at
Patt's Coffee-House; from eight in the Morning till eight at Night.

Gentlemen, I promised you in my last Catalogue, The Dublin-Scuffle -- And the
History of my Summers Ramble, and I Will be as good as my word, (for I^ll Print
'em as soon as I get to London) and send 'em to Patt's Coffee-House in
High Street, except Patrick will Publicly own the Public Injury he did me,
and then I will even forgive Patrick Campbel, and forget his Taking my Room
over my Head (though it is Thought I Am an Hundred Pounds the worse for it,
considering the Goods and Buyers I lost on that occasion) but if he has not the
Grace to ask my Pardon (for the notorious Injuries he did me) I Pray God
forgive him and Dick too, and in return I hope they will wish me a Boon-Voyage,
in regard they will be rid of one durst tell 'em the Truth, and afterward send
it to Patt's Coffee-House in Red-Letters. And seeing they dare not answer my
Broadside whilst I am in Dublin, (and whenever they do, I Will reply to 'em,
though as far as Rome,) that they might not wrong me after I am gone, some of
my Friends, that best know me, have voluntarily Subscribed the following
Attestation.


The Attestation.
WE whose Names are hereunto Subscribed, being all of us Present at Mr. John
Dunton's Three Auctions in Dublin, and having seen the Management thereof every
Day; do hereby Attest, That as all was carried on and Managed with the greatest
Candor and Sincerity imaginable, by Mr. Dunton, so the generality of those
Gentlemen that bought his Books, have acknowledged in our hearing, That they
had all the fair Dealing that they could desire: And we can more particularly
affirm, That Mr. Dunton's Demeanor during his whole Auctions, has been such,
as has given Content to all Gentlemen there: For whereas in other Auctions it
is common to have Setters to raise the value of the Books, in Mr. Dunton's
Auction we are sure there was none, from the beginning to the end: Mr. Dunton
having absolutely declared against it, as not fair nor honest. And we do
further Attest, to our certain Knowledge, That in all his Concernments, with
the Printers, Stationers, Binders, and others (which was very considerable) he
paid every one, not only to a Penny, but even to a single Halfpenny, so very
exact and scrupulous he was of wronging them. And as to the several Places
where the said Mr. Dunton lodged, he not only paid his Quarters according to
Agreement, but likewise gratified 'em for any Trouble that was extraordinary,
by Sickness, or otherwise. And that in all his said Lodgings, his way of Living
was so inoffensive and blameless, that he was (as Caesar would have had his
Wife) not only free from blame, but from all Suspicion of it. And as to the
Controversy he has had with Mr. Patrick Campbel, we do hereby Attest, That Mr.
Campbel was altogether the Aggressor; for though Mr. Campbel had used Mr.
Dunton very Barbarously at his first coming over, yet Mr. Dunton took no notice
of it, till Campbel had Taken his Auction-Room over his Head, by offering a
double Price (as Dick the Coffee-man alleged in our hearing) and yet even then
Mr. Dunton was so fair, as to offer to close his Auctions in one Weeks Time
more, provided he might tarry in it so long, though he had then Two Hundred
Pounds ^orth of Books to Sell, and that he would Lump the Remainder; which
Campbel absolutely refused. And notwithstanding such his refusal, yet we do
Attest, That Mr. Dunton has been so favorable to the said Campbel, that he has
not related those ill Things of him which he might have done; and which he was
urged by several Persons to do. Nor is there any thing Mr. Dunton has said of
him, but what to our Knowledge he has diverse Witnesses to prove it, if there be
occasion.

Dublin, Nov. 23. School. Subscribed in the Presence of
Fra. Lee, Matthew. Gunne, Matthew Read, Samuel Lucas, Richard Wild, Heneage
Price, George Larkin, William Robinson.



Gentlemen,
THe foregoing Attestation is Printed Word for Word as my Friends brought it to
me, and is Subscribed by Four Persons of known Integrity, and signed in the
Presence of Four more; which I hope will fully convince you that I am (as I
said in my last Catalogue)

Dublin, Nov. 2^. School. Your very Faithful, and very humble Servant, John
Dunton.


THus (Sir) you find I am come to the Conclusion of my Three Auctions, wherein
I have related my Scuffle with Patrick Campbel, with as much Sincerity and
Candor as I would have done were I now leaving the World; but whether I have
done so or no, is left to your Remarks, which I desire by the first Post, by
which you will further oblige,

Your Hearty Friend and Servant, John Dunton.

Remarks on my Fifth Letter.
SIR,
I Am sorry to find that Patrick is not yet reduced to Reason, though I think
there is no great Cause to wonder at it, for I am apt to think his Reason and
Religion, are much of a Piece. I am glad however, that his Malice proves
Toothless, or that at best it is worn to the stumps. It is but just, that
dishonesty should be unsuccessful, though many Times we see the Allwise
Providence order it otherwise, for a while at least.

Your Farewell Sale demonstrates your Courage and Honesty, in that you durst
Appeal to the Public, and Patricks own Conscience, for the Justice of your
Cause. The offer you made him of suppressing your designed Narrative or
Character of him, if he would publicly own the Injury he did you, is highly
Generous; considering how much you had been a loser by it. There are few Men,
but would have demanded Restitution as well as Repentance, but I don't find
that Patrick is so good a Christian as to offer you either; and therefore, I
think no Man can justly blame you for exposing him in his own Colors to the
View of the World, according to your Promise: But be sure to keep a steady
Hand; for though I am of Opinion, you can scarcely miss such ugly and course
Features; yet, you know the Proverb, Give the Devil his due, includes a good
Lesson of Morality in it, and therefore, I hope you will represent him no worse
than he really is. I must needs also tell you, that unless you be satisfied in
your own Conscience, that it is necessary to do this for the Defense of your
own Reputation, you will run a great hazard of breaking the Ninth Commandment.

The Proposals you make to your Buyers in your Farewell Sale, are Just and
Reasonable, and a Proof at the same time that you designed no Injury to your
Brethren the Booksellers by your Auction, seeing you are willing to let them
have Lumping Penny-worths at Last, that they may be Sharers in the Profit of
your Book-Adventure, as well as others.

As to the Attestation of your Friends, it was kind in them to offer it, and
necessary for you to have it. I question much whether Patrick can produce the
like Behavior in any Respect.

Your Precaution in this Matter is very commendable, for you have thereby in my
Opinion stopped the Mouths of all Cavillers, as to every Part of your
Conversation, since you arrived in Dublin; and in London, your just and
scrupulous way of dea^ing, sets you above De^^action: Or (...) worst, a
generous (...) minds not the yelping of every little Cur. I am glad to find,
that the Ill Treatment you have met with from others, has not inspired you with
the same unjust Sentiments toward them. And that it is fully proved by this
Attestation, that Patrick was the first Aggressor, and took your Room over your
Head; and therefore, I think that the Publishing of this, and some other of the
most remarkable Passages of Patrick's Injustice, were enough to blacken him,
and to vindicate you in the Eyes of all Honest Men, without your putting your
self to the trouble and expense of a Voluminous detail of Particulars, which
few can Purchase; besides, Patrick is not a Man of that Character, that his
Life will be much Regarded, though it had been writ by Plutarch himself; and
therefore, it will be your Wisdom and Interest to be Brief. I am,

SIR, Your Friend and Servant.

The Sixth Letter.
SIR,
IN the History of the Dublin Scuffle, I am come so far, as to acquaint you (in
spite of all the Opposition made against me by Patrick Campbel) that I was got
to the Conclusion of my Three Auctions and Farewell Sale. I have had many a
weary step ( as well as the Impudence of Campbel, to Cope with) in the
disposing of this Venture; but (through God's Blessing on my Undertaking) I am
now come near the winding up of my bottom in this Country; for Yesterday I
Published a Paper, which I called -- The Packing Penny, (a new Phrase to invite
Company) -- Sir, As this Paper has some Relation to Patrick Campbel, it is fit I
should send you a Copy of it, that nothing relating to my Scuffle with him
might 'scape your Censure -- This Paper was my Fifth Letter to those Gentlemen
that attended my Auctions, and was Entitled,

The Packing Penny.
[And is as follows, viz.]
Gentlemen,
THough my Three Auctions and Farewell Sale are now ended, yet I have still
quantities of Books left, which (for a Packing-Penny) I Will Sell at very
Reasonable Rates; (the Sale to begin Tuesday December the 13th in the Morning,
and to end the same Evening.) Gentlemen, I shall not sell these remaining Books by
way of Auction, but at such easy Rates as shall be agreed upon between Mr.
Wild and the Buyer. It Is true, when I consider, I had no Setter in any of my
Four Sales, I could not have thought that any would have been so Unjust as to
Buy what they will not Pay for; but I was mistaken! But (to the Honor of the
Tribe of Levi) no Clergyman in Ireland has treated me in this Manner: I
mention this, that the World may see I designed no Reflection on those Learned
Gentlemen, in my Advertisement of July the 9th, for though the Enemies of my
Undertaking wrested my Words to that purpose, yet nothing was ever further from
my Thoughts; for besides that I my self have the Honor to be the Son of a
Clergyman (who as a Poet See the Poem dedicated to the Sons of the Clergy on
their Annual Feast in 1682.
says -- Do all breathe something more then common Air) -- I dare boldly
assert, that no Man in this Kingdom has an higher esteem of that Sacred Order
than my self. But as in this I have done Justice to the Clergy of Ireland, so I
resolve to do some to my self; and whatever Notions some YOUNG CASVISTS may
have of refusing to fetch what others ( whom they out-bid) would have honestly
paid for; yet they shall find I dare call a Spade a Spade, if they live to read
The History of my Summers Ramble, etc. or, The Dublin-Scuffle, which I finished
in this Country (at the Barbarous Provocation of Patrick Campbel) and will
Publish as soon as I get to London.

And here Gentlemen, I cannot forbear telling you (a second Time) that
notwithstanding I have with an excessive Charge brought over the best
Collection of valuable Books that ever was exposed in this Kingdom, and have
treated both in my Catalogues, and otherwise, my Brethren in this City, and the
rest of Mankind, with the greatest Respect and Civility; and been so just to
them, as not in the least to employ any Setter (in any of my Four Sales) but
wholly to submit my large Venture to the Mercy, Candor, and Generosity of the
Bidders: Yet after all this Fair Play for their Money, I understand, such has
been the Practice of some Persons (from some of whom better usage might be
expected, considering their Character in the World) as maliciously and
ignorantly to discourage those Worthy Gentlemen and Clergymen that were
disposed to furnish themselves with Good Books. Gentlemen, this usage is
unbecoming any thing of a Christian, especially, etc. who by his setting up for
a Banterer, contrary to Christianity, spoils his Neighbors fair Market; making
good what Solomon so long ago observed, It is naught, it is naught, says the
Buyer, but when he is gone, he boasts. This is therefore to give Notice to
the World, That as I Act upon the Fairest and Justest Bottom that can be, in
this last Sale, which I call the Packing Penny, so I am resolved to vindicate
my Proceedings; and in order thereunto, if I can have but good Proof, that
either without Doors, but more especially at my Sale, of any Persons, that
shall take the Liberty to spoil my Market; I am resolved to bring Actions of
Damage against those Persons that shall be guilty of such Notorious Actions.

Gentlemen, I shall only add, That as I never reflected on Patrick Campbel, or
any Man in my whole Life, without a just Provocation ( as I am ready to prove
whilst I am in Dublin;) So I must acquit all the Persons concerned in my
Auctions, of having any hand in any thing I Published here, it being (as the
Scuffle is) writ with my own Hand, and Subscribed by

Gentlemen, Dublin, December. 12th. School. Your most Obliged and very Humble
Servant. John Dunton.
All Gentlemen are desired to take Notice, That what is Bought at this Sale, is
to be delivered and paid for at the same Time.




SIR,

THis Packing Penny was no sooner taken, and the remaining Books Sold in the
Lump to Honest Gun (for about an Hundred Pound) but Mr. Wild Published the
following Advertisement, further proving my Charge against Dick and Campbel. It
also gives an Account of an Auction, he designs on his own Account, as soon as
I leave Ireland.

Mr. Wilde's Advertisement was this, viz.
MY Friend Mr. Dunton's Three Auctions, Farewell Sale, and Packing Penny, ending
this Night; I thought fit to give Notice to all the Lovers of Learning, That I
design (God willing) within a few Days after Mr. Dunton's departure, to Expose
by Auction a considerable Parcel of good Books of my own, at Patt's
Coffee-House in High Street, where I now am, by reason of Dick the Coffee-Man's
(contrary to Solemn Promises before Witnesses, as well as all the Bonds of
Gratitude) Letting the Room I had, to Mr. Campbel over my Head; and though Mr.
Campbel thinks to excuse himself by laying the Sole Fault upon Dick; yet
Casuists will inform him, that He who either by his Threats of taking the Great
Room at the Dukes-Head Tavern, or by the mighty Allurement of a Double Rate, as
Dick has under his Hand Asserted, shall Tempt or Corrupt a Person that is not
Proof against a base Temptation; is as much, if not more to blame, than the
Person so Corrupted.

R. Wild.


Thus Sir, have I sent you an Account of the Packing Penny, (it relating to the
Dublin Scuffle) and also Mr. Wilde's Opinion of Campbel and Pue (on which I
desire your Thoughts) I formerly sent you those others Papers, wherein the
Scuffle 'tween John Dunton, and Patrick Campbel is any ways hinted at; all
which Papers ( save my Reasons for removing to Patt's) were Printed in Dublin;
but what I have further to send you relating to this Scuffle, is what the
Printers of Dublin durst not meddle with; but I suppose, when I get to London,
the Printers there (at Three Hundred Miles distance) will be no more afraid of
Patrick then I am, though now on the Spot with him. I have only to add, that I
am

Your very humble Servant, John Dunton.

Remarks on my Sixth Letter.
SIR,
I Have received yours with the Account of your Packing Penny, and the
Continuance of the Scuffle betwixt Patrick and you. I perceive you are a couple
of good Game-Cocks, and know no when to give over; its Pity you are not both in
England, the Gown-men that frequent Westminster Hall, would find a way to make
a Penny of you, and for any thing I know, might Sell you by Auction too; for I
am apt to think you would weary them at last, if Money did not make them Proof
against the Fatigue.

I perceive Patricks Malice is very keen, and your Resentments are not without
a tolerable Edge, and therefore would advise you to beware of cutting your own
Fingers. Be sure to summon up all your Patience, for I perceive you have need
on it; don't let Patrick's Injustice provoke you to indecencies of Passion, for
that may be a snare laid to gain an Advantage against you, either by an Action
at Law, or blemishing your Reputation.

I approve your Diligence and Ingenuity in promoting the Sale of your Books,
but am sorry you have met with such as Buy and don't Pay. I am glad to find
however, that though you had so much unfair dealing from others, you have found
the Clergy Just in their Bargains, and that you vindicate your self from having
reflected upon them in your Advertisement of July 9th. This is a Time, when
every Man, that has any value for the Christian Religion, should be very tender
in his Reflections on the Clergy; and indeed rather Conceal their real Faults,
than proclaim them on the House-tops; and much less utter groundless
Suspicions* against them. You are obliged particularly both by Parentage, and
the Profession of Religion you make, to be very careful in this Matter; and
therefore, I am glad to find you so sensible of your Duty in this Respect --
The old Barbarous Verse of Presbyteri nati raro solent esse Beati, is as far
from Truth as good Latin: Though those who are Enemies to the Order, may please
themselves with the Reflection, the common Experience of Mankind demonstrates
the falsehood of it; for if the number of Clergymens Children be compared with
those of others, and their Morals, Religion, and Success in the World, laid in
the Balance with those of the Children of other Ranks of Men, it will appear
to have been a mere Forgery of those who were against the Marriage of Priests
of Old; and licked up and improved by such, who if not professed, are at least
Crafty underhand Enemies to the Christian Religion.

I wish from my Heart that all Clergymen themselves took more Care to obviate
this Reflection, by a careful looking after their own Practice, and their
Childrens Education; and then the Injustice of it would be more apparent. And I
am sorry to find, that tho the Irish Clergy have been just to their Bargains,
that yet any one of 'em should have taken indirect Measures to injure you in
your Auctions, but they are earthen Vessels as well as others. Therefore I
would advise you not to be sharp in your Resentments upon them. Some of your
Books might perhaps be disrelishing to them, but that was their fault. Your
design was to serve the Interest of Learning in general, and not to please
every Man's humor, which you knew was impossible.

You Vindication of those concerned in your Auctions from having any share in
what you Printed against Campbel, is generous and just -- and no less can be
said of Mr. Wilde's Advertisement' concerning the design of an Auction of his
own, and publicly avowing Patrick's Injustice to you, which makes it so
notorious, that I think there is the less need of your Printing much more about
it. I am

SIR, Your Humble Servant.

The Seventh Letter.
WEll Sir, I Will tell ye News; my Adversary Campbel has now sent a Trumpeter ( a
few equivocating Lines) with a Parley, or rather with Articles of Peace; but I
fear his Message is rather to sham off a Debt he owes me, then any Design to be
reconciled. However, I here send you a Copy of his Letter (for I Will keep the
Original) that you may the better Judge of the Proposals he makes -- [His
Letter is as follows, viz.]

December 9th. School. Mr. Dunton,
YE have begun to dun me, though I find you to be in my Debt, and easily able
to make it appear; as for any Letters ye have under my Hand, I will not give
you one Farthing to burn it: For I will own what is Just and Right, though not
under my Hand; I have no mind either to Write or Print my self a Liar, as some
Men has done. But I shall be pleased very well to meet you, either before a
Magistrate, or any other creditable Citizen; and what is thought Just, I will
perform on my Part; I do not intend to render Railing for Railing, and am sure
have rendered you Good for Evil, and shall continue to be Just to every Man; and
for your Justice, your self may boast of it, as much as ye will, but other Men
must believe as they find: I shall only add, Evil to them that Evil thinks.

Pa. Campbel.


My Answer to Campbel's Proposals.
Dublin, December 10th School. Mr. Campbel,
I Received yours, which is still the second Part to the same Tune; for instead
of being Penitent for the great Injuries you did me, you do but Justify your
self; so that you are the Railer, and not I; neither have I Writ or Printed any
thing against you, but plain Matter of Fact, and dressed in softer Terms then you
deserve: And as to my being in your Debt, it is all Patrick Campbel, I mean a
piece of Nonsense; for you are certainly in mine, if Four Pound be more then
Forty Shillings. However, I Will meet you if you please before a Magistrate ( for
I Am so much for strict Justice, I would talk with you there about Hodder) or
where else you please -- I shall Name Thursday Night, at seven of the Clock at
the Keys in High Street, and shall bring a Friend with me, and I am willing you
should do the like; but I tell you beforehand, you must resolve upon a Printed
Confession of the Public Injuries you have done me, or you will dearly repent,
your abusing

John Dunton.


SIR,

Thus have I sent (what must needs surprise ye) Patricks* Proposals about a
Peace, with my Answer to him; I shall send you more of his ill Practices by
next Post; but at present, your Thoughts upon the Parley, is what is desired by

Yours to Command, John Dunton.

Remarks on my Seventh Letter.
SIR,
I Have received yours with the Copy of Mr. Campbel's Letter, proposing a
Meeting and Reference.

Sir, This Proposal of Campbel's is cunning and Picquant enough, and
demonstrates what I always thought, that he is a Crafty Intriguing Man. It
carries an Air of Religion and Ingenuity at first view; but by the Railing mixed
throughout, and the Reslecting Conclusion, he does not seem ever to have
designed any Meeting with you; for if he had, there is Reason to think he would
have proposed it in fairer Terms, and not have aggravated Matters to incense
you, if he had designed an Amicable Accommodation.

This may partly justify the sharpness of your Reply, and serving him in his
own Coin, by proposing such Terms of Agreement as you might reasonably think he
would never comply with: For I find nothing less would serve your turn than
Public Repentance; and he tells you plainly, that he was not willing either^
to Print or Write himself a Liar. So that it was impossible to reconcile you.
This, if Patrick be conscious of his Guilt, argues an obstinacy inconsistent
with Christianity. Yet I cannot wholly approve your Conduct, nor Policy in your
Reply. Had you accepted of a Meeting without any thing of ripping up Sores, or
telling him the Preliminaries; you might possibly have had either an
opportunity of bringing him to a Sense of his Fault, or of having further
Evidence against him; and indeed I see nothing that can excuse your oversight
in this Matter, but that Letter to Mr. Wild giving an Account of Patricks
further ill Practices against you, which you Promise to send me. I am

Your Hearty Friend, etc.

The Eighth Letter.
SIR,
I Am now to acquaint ye, that Campbel's Proposal ( about a Treaty of Peace)
was all Trick and Delusion; for notwithstanding his seeming desire of Meeting
before a Magistrate, or any other creditable Citizen, and my readiness to
comply with his Motion herein, yet he never once came to the Keys in
High Street, the Place appointed to Meet at, but I was there my self, according
to Promise, as Mr. Servant (his own Binder) and several others, can testify;
so that our Dublin Scuffle continues still, and if Campbel remains as obstinate
as he is at present, for any thing I can yet see, 'twill be left to our
Posterity to Fight it out. And that as I formerly sent you the Sentiments of
the Clergy of Ireland upon this Encounter; so I shall now send you an Account
of what the Citizens of Dublin (the daily Spectators of this Scuffle) think of
it, and of Campbel's Proposal to me about a Peace, and this cannot be better
done than by inserting here a Letter directed

To Mr. Richard Wi^^e at Patt's Coffee-House in High Street.
Which Letter was this following, viz. December 16th.
SIR,
NOw Campbel finds Mr. Dunton's Reputation above his reach, like himself he
would fain put to Reference the Ruin he intended; but if Mr. Dunton does not
compel him to public Acknowledgement, he will hereafter repent it; for in the
first Place, he did not only incense all that he had opportunity against him,
but forbid all his Auction, telling that h^ employed Foster and others as
Setters, which he would prove by Weir, and in the next Place, he made a Faction
against him, because he was an Englishman; and he took all Mr. Dunton's Papers
to Council and advised on them with Intention to prosecute him at Law, and
getting no Encouragement, he proceeds this way, which I hope Mr. Dunton, does
not take to proceed from -- a Prick of -- nor from Friendship, but merely for
want of -- I will say no more, that Gentleman having Justice to vindicate
himself, as well as Sense to know Campbel, whose best word was, You were all
Rogues; I shall say no more, but assure you that I have been a good Customer,
and have given all Encouragement to you, and am Mr. Dunton's and your real
Friend.


SIR,

THough you see by this Letter (directed to Mr. Wild) what Opinion the
Citizens of Dublin have of the Treatment I have from Campbel, and of his
Proposal of his being Friends with me; yet seeing Peace is a desirable Thing
(if to be had upon Honorable Terms) I desire your Sentiments upon this Letter
to Mr. Wild; and how you would advise me to Act in this Critical Iuncture; your
speedy Answer will greatly oblige,

Your very Humble Servant, John Dunton.

Remarks on my Eighth Letter.
SIR,
I Have received (by the last Post) the further Account you promised me of
Patrick's ill Practices, his deceitful Dealing with you about a Peace, and the
Letter to Mr. Wild, giving the Sentiments of the Citizens of Dublin upon this
Scuffle: I must say, the Writer of this Letter is much your Friend, and if you
be sure of the credibility of the Informer; I see no Reason why you should not
Publish it, but you ought to be exactly careful in enquiring, whether the
Writer of it can be relied upon; and if you be satisfied in that, Publish it
with all the Corroborating Evidence you can, for there is nothing can be more
effectual to prove the Justice of your Cause, and the Baseness of your
Adversary.

I am the rather indeed inclined to believe it, because it corresponds with the
Preceding Part of your own Information, and is confirmed by his declining to
meet you according to appointment; for Truth is always bold, and never seeks
Corners; as it is evident Patrick has done all along. I add no more, but
referring you to the Direction of the Almighty, who knows the Justice of your
Cause, I am

SIR, Yours,

The Ninth Letter.
SIR,
I formerly told you of Patrick's sending a Trumpeter, with Proposals of Peace,
and how he served me on that Account, you have also had the Sentiments of the
Citizens of Dublin, with respect to my Scuffle with him, and his seeming
willingness to make an end on it; but though I met at the Place appointed, he
never appeared (as I formerly sent you Word) yet he has the impudence to give
out that I refuse to meet him, which I no sooner heard of, but I sent the
following Letters, the one directed

To Mr. Thomas Servant a Binder in Golden-Lane, And the other directed,

To Mr. Patrick Campbel, at the Bible in Skinner-Row.

My Letter to Mr. Servant, was in these Words, viz.
December 20th. School. Honest Thomas,
I writ the following Letter, with a design to send it to Patrick Campbel, just
as I was going to limbark; but hearing he reports I refused to meet him, (which
he durst not do, but that he thinks I am Shipped off) I desire that you would
read the following ^ines, that you may see his Baseness, for your self, was
present where he refused to meet me, and can testify to what I write. As soon
as you have read my Letter, deliver it with your own Hand; for if Patrick
should still fly me, it is designed as (...) Farewell to him. You know Sir,
(though you are his chief Binder, and would favor his cause as much as
possible) that I offered to make you the sole Judge of the Debt he owes me; but
for the Slander, and taking the Room over my Head, it was a public Injury; and
( though I forgive it my self,) the World expects a public Acknowledgment of the
Injuries he has done to

Your hearty Friend and Servant, John Dunton.


My Farewell Letter to Patrick Campbel.
Mr. Campbel,
Though I have one foot in the Boat, in order' to Embark for England, yet I here
send a Messenger to tell you, I Will wait an hour (to shake Hands with you) if
you will confess the Wrongs you did, or there were any hopes of your Penitence:
And is not it strange, that Patrick Campbel, who is so Religious, as to say
Grace over a dish of Coffee, should have no Qualms after slandering his
Neighbor, or refusing to pay his debts? I say debts, for I sent your Account
fairly stated (and proved you owe me a round Sum) without receiving your Answer
to it. Then with what Face, (but you supposed I was Shipped off) could you tell
Bently, I was your Debtor, and refused to meet you before a Magistrate, or at
the Keys in High Street, where I waited for you above an Hour? But though you
durst not appear then, I Am now waiting in the Boat for you, in hopes you will
appear at last, and to engage you to it, (if you will ask Pardon) I Will even here
receive you with open Arms. It Is true, you have given great Provocation, and
had I not been tender of you, I had long since sent you the Length of my Sword,
or as you're beneath my Notice, some Porter to have broke your Pate. Sir, put
on your Sword, ( if it be not in trouble) and let me see your Face; for your
private slandering is very sordid, and I am sure deserves to be soundly
drubb'd^; for by backbiting of me you still sneak your Head out of the Collar,
and I am hurt by I don't know who. It Is true, 'twas Palmer's Saying, the
Martyr, That no Man ought to be counted Valiant, but such as contemn Injuries:
I confess, I am not so humble as this comes to, yet I forgive Patrick with all
my Heart; but Sir, I think it my duty to Print the Scuffle you engaged me in;
for you justify your barbarous Treatment, so that to forget and forgive you
too, will but encourage, you to abuse others, or perhaps my self again, for
such tenderness: For save a -- from the Gallows, and he will cut your Throat. But
for all this, I Will burn the Scuffle, if you will come hither, and shake hands,
and tell the World (when I am gone) that you did abuse me, but are sorry for
it. It Is reported of St. K^therine, That she sucked the envenomed Wounds of a
Fellow who had impudently wronged her: I don't pretend to such flights as
these; but if you will come to the Boat ( and remember it is the last Offer) and
own your Errors, I Will be more your Friend than ever I was your Enemy: And
though Pickance (the Master of the Diamond) waits for his Ships Crow, yet if
you will do me Justice, I Will return to Dublin a second time, to drink your
Health, (in the first place) and another to honest Gun, Servant, Bently, and
the rest of our Learned Brethren; and by coming thus to Confession, you will
cease being a Trouble to your Friends, and a scandal to your self: But if you
will not repent, as a wounded Roman said upon a set Challenge, the Scuffle must
appear, and shall be followed (if you dare answer it) with the History of your
Life, from the hour the Parson Christened you, to (mark you me that) the very
hour you Christened your self; and pray remember that one blot many times
stains a whole Generation: But my Scuffle is just, and without your public
Repentance, I resolve to Publish it; for truly, St. Patrick, I have a greater
Regard to my Honor than my Life: And though my Arms should fail me to fight,
(they are the words of this Noble Roman) yet my Heart still encourages me to
dye in Vindication of a good Name.

And so Patrick, Farewell; for you don't appear, and our Ship is under Sail; but
if you repent at last, ( and I Will press you to it in the Dublin Scuffle) I hope
we shall meet in Heaven, but scarce in Ireland, whilst you are afraid of,

Dublin, December. 20th. School. John Dunton.


SIR,

ABout three hours after I had sent the aforegoing Message to Honest Thomas,
and my farewell Letter to Patrick, he sends me ( by Order from Campbel) the
following Letter.

SIR,
I was with Mr. Campbel last Night, and told him (as you desired) that you
would meet him when, and where he pleased, etc. His Answer was, That he was
ready to meet you at any time or place, and that if you bring one Citizen with
you, he will bring another; therefore, if you please, you may let (...) know
your Mind, as to Time, Place, and Person; and if this will any way contribute
toward your Peace and Friendship, it will be very satisfactory to

December. 20th. School. Your Humble Servant, Tho. Servant.


I no sooner received this Letter from Mr. Servant, but I sent Mr. Robinson to
him with the following Answer,

Mr. Servant,
SInce my writing a Note to you, and my farewell Letter to Campbel, I received
yours, intimating Mr. Campbel will now meet me; I am glad to hear it with all
my Heart, and I do again resolve to meet him at the Keys in High Street, at
five in the Af^^^noon; (though he disappointed me once (...) very Place) and will
only bring one Citizen with me, for that is enough with a good Cause; but as for
Patrick, if he will, he may bring forty, or if he pleases, the whole City.


Sir, could you have thought that Campbel would now have bantred me a second
time, but so it was, (for having a bad Cause, he durst not appear, as Mr.
Fisher, the Earl of Meath's Chaplain, and Mr. ton the King'^ Stationer) can
testify. However, I thought it proper, (whilst on the Spot) to send him the
following Note, viz.

Mr. Campbel,
I Am now at the Keys, and you send word you will not come, though I came
hither by your own appointment, and this is the second time you had notice I
was willing to Treat with you. Sir, I have given you liberty of bringing forty
men, or a whole City, against my self, and but one more, and he too of your own
Trade; but I have other business to do, than to wait long for an Enemy that
dares not face me. However, I have several to Witness, I came to meet you (as
you desired) this Night, and you refuse coming, so that now I shall put my Debt
into a Lawyer's. Hands, and for your other Treatment, the World shall know it;
for I Will dance (...) more after ye, but will wait here (...) Hour longer to
prove my Charge; (...) give you Time to match Mr. Thornton. I am

December. 20th. School. Your abused Friend, John Dunton.


SIR,

YOur Thoughts upon this New Parley, Mr. Servants Mediation, my Farewell Letter
to Campbel; and his refusing to meet this second Time (though 'twas an
Appointment of his own making) is earnestly desired by

Your Humble Servant, John Dunton.

Remarks on my Ninth Letter.
SIR,
I Have received yours, with the Account of a New Parley offered by Patrick,
Mr. Servant' s Mediation, your Farewell Letter to him, and of his disappointing
you again, though the Appointment was of his own making. I must needs tell you,
that were you as much surfeited with the Scuffle, as I am with hearing of it,
you would have given over long e're now. I don't think it worth your while to
buy Patrick's Confession at so dear a Rate, as to take so much Pains for it. If
he were truly sensible of his fault, you need not dun him to Repentance, and
how great soever his Hypoerisie may be in other Instances, I don't find he has
a mind to play the Hypocrite in this, that is, so much as to feign a Repentance.

You have, I think, over-done it, in soliciting him so much; nor do I think
his Public Confession, considering how you have Uncharacterized him, would be
much for your Advantage. To be commended or slandered by a false Tongue, is
much the same thing, for they that know a Liar will believe him in neither. You
have done well however to follow Peace as much as you could, and it was Prudent
to have so many Witnesses of your having kept your Appointment, and made such
fair Proff^rs of Reconciliation; but I perceive Patrick's Resentments are
become downright Rancor, and that the sore is so much Fester'd, that there is
no hopes of Cure. Take care that you your self don't learn to be froward, by
conversing with the froward. Be sure to keep a calm and even Temper within your
own Breast, that you have not raging Waves to deal with, within as well as
without, when you Cross the Main. You have sufficiently proved him to be an ill
Man, and his declining to meet you, and to offer what he could say in his own
Defense, seems to be a Tacit acknowledgment of the Guilt -- Nay, I may say a
direct proclaiming it on the House-Tops, seeing he durst not refer the Trial of
his Debt to his own Friend -- and refused to come to a hearing, though so often
and so publicly invited to it. All I have more to add is, that you have come
off Conqueror, have choked Patrick with one Lie upon the back of another, and
that if he were not Case-hardened, he must needs have had qualms of Conscience
before now, but those I am afraid are reserved to another time, and for his
greater Punishment. In the mean time, let me again advise you, to make a
discrect use of your Victory, don't discover your own Weakness in triumphing
over a Conquered Enemy, and publish no Minute-Circumstances, but such only as
tend to Vindicate your own Reputation; which may be reduced to a narrow
Compass, and the shorter the better. I am,

SIR, Yours.

The Tenth Letter.
SIR,
YOU had in my last an Account of the Pains Mr. Servant took to reconcile
Patrick and I, I also sent ye my Farwel-letter to Campbel occasioned by his
False report that I durst not meet him. I next told ye of a Second Parley I had
with him, and his Reason for not coming to the Keys in High Street, tho 'twas a
place of his own appointment. I likewise sent you a Letter Mr. Wild received;
wherein, as I formerly gave you the Sentiments of some Clergymen upon my
Scuffle with Patrick; so you there saw the Opinion of the Citizens of Dublin
upon this Encounter; having proceeded thus far in the History of the Dublin
Wrangle, This Letter is, to conclude the Scuffle so far as I was concerned with
Patrick. But the Dublin-Scuffle did not end here, for I had no sooner silenc't
the Scotch Loon, but I was Attackt by other Enemies (perhaps some that were set
on by Patrick; for being foiled himself, he was willing still to be gnashing
his Teeth) who these new Enemies were, you shall know in my next Letter, and
when you have answered that, I Will send ye a Copy of my Last-Farewel to my
Friends in Dublin, that stood by me in every Skirmish, and in this (as I
formerly promised) I shall Point at my worst Enemies; I mean those that snarl'd
at the second Spira, have been very zealous to cut my Throat ( for Private
slandering is of that Nature) or which is worse, have Bought what they will not
pay for: And with this Farewell (to both Friends and Enemies) I design to
conclude my Scuffle; and you will say it is Time, for Patrick is now Sick on it,
and calls out for help; I mean having done me what Mischief he can himself, he
is now setting the Lawyers a Scuffling too, and next Term John Dunton and
Patrick Campbel are to be the Grand Scuffle (in the four Courts) amongst the
Lawyers. But Sir, I as little fear his Law, as he minds the Gospel; and to
convince ye of this, I no sooner heard that Patrick had a Warrant for me, and
was resolved to turn our Paper-War into a Lawsuit, but I sent to his Printer
the following Letter,

['Twas directed thus, viz.]
To Mr. Brent Printer in Skinner-Row.
SIR,
IF you find Patrick Campbel has a mind still to continue our Scuffle by going
to Law, Print the following-Advertisement in my next Catalogue; but if he is
sensible of the Damage he did me, you may (if you please) commit it (...)
Flames, but as for the Printed Scuffle he has forced me to, it can be suppressed
on no other Terms, but his owning in Print the Public Injury he did me, and if
he will own this in the Flying Post, I Will be as forward to forgive him, as ^e was
to do me all the mischief he could; but a Public Injury must have a Public
Repentance -- I have only to add, that I am

Nov. 26. School. Your Friend and Servant. John Dunton.


The Advertisement I desired the Printer to Publish, was this following, viz.
WHereas a Report was spread about Town, as if Patrick Campbel had a design to
expose himself by prosecuting of me, for Publishing several Papers, showing the
Injuries done me by his taking my Auction-Room over my Head, etc. -- This is to
give Notice (to condescend to the Words of Dick the Coffee-man) that the same
seems False and Malicious; for I no sooner heard that Patrick had a mind to
continue Scuffling, but I (...) my self to his Printer (Mr. Brent) to desire
him to tell Patrick that if he had any thing to say to me, I was come to his
House on purpose to Answer him; but Campbel never appeared, but sent Word he
knew my Lodgings, and would send to me when he thought convenient; so that I
believe he has a better (...) match to Print Cocker and Whalely, then to run the
hazard of two. Indictments; and besides that, an Action of five Hundred Pound
Damage for defaming my self and Auction, and another Action for the Moneys he
yet owes me,

John Dunton.


SIR,

I Sent the forgoing Letter and Advertisement to Mr. Brent, by my Friend Mr.
George Larkin, who was present with me when I sent Mr. Campbel Word, I was then
at Mr. Powels, ready to obey his Warrant (for hearing he had a Warrant, I was
zealous to have it Executed) and to make good my Charge against him; but
Campbel durst not appear; but notwithstanding that, and the frequent Overtures
I made of meeting him at other Places (as Mr. Servant and others are able to
testify) he tells Dick (as thinking I was now Embarked) that at the Arrival of
next Post, he intended to Write against me; hearing by Chance of this, I sent
him ( though under Sail) the following Letter.

Dated from on Board the Diamond, Owner Pickance Master, Monday December. 26th.
School. at Ten in the Morning. Mr. Campbel,
I Am told you received my Farewell Letter, inviting you to give me a Meeting to
the last Minute I staid in Ireland; but you never appeared, and I not going at
the Time I expected, to show I had no Malice against Dick, I went to bid him
Farewell; and he generously tells me, That at the Arrival of the next Post, (
that is, when I am gone, and you think I shall not hear your Abuses) you Design to
Write against me, not considering that all the Town will fling Dirt in your
Eyes, (to use the Words of a Gentleman who heard of it) for slandering an
Innocent Person, who when he was present, you durst not look in the Face. Sir,
If you abuse me in this sneaking manner, though your Clandestine way of
Scribbling shows the badness of your Cause, and what little Regard will be
given to it: Yet for all that, least my Silence should make you wise in your
own Conceit; I will take Solomon's Counsel, and Answer you according to your
Folly, and that before I Publish the Scuffle you have engaged me in. Sir, In
the Dublin Scuffle, if I am treated in this Cowardly Manner, shall be Printed a
Key to explain what is meant by Cocker, Cumpstey, and the darker Passages: To
which shall be added, a true Copy, (which I have by me) of what the Booksellers
of Dublin Charge you with: And if you have Courage to Answer this, you may
expect a Rejoinder, including the Ludicrous Passages of your whole Life: (For I
have Materials enough for that Purpose) neither is the Account you sent in
Answer to the Debt you owe me, less false or ridiculous than your other
Actions; for you make your self Debtor but for three Turners, when I can
produce a Letter under your Hand, declaring you owe for seven; does my great
Civility ( ungrateful Man as you are) of taking two of them back again,
discharge you of the other two?

Thus have I fairly told you what I will do, and what the World will say, if
you belie me after I am gone: And have as fairly answered the Account you sent
me: Wherein my Lawyer shall prove ( since you durst not meet me whilst I was
here) that you are still about Forty Shillings in my Debt. When your Cowardly
Reflections appear, I have ordered this to be Printed; but have yet to tell
you, That I can still forgive you ( when I see you Penitent.) And so farewell,
tho I am

Your Abused Friend, John Dunton.


SIR,

CAmpbel was no sooner informed, that I was certainly gone for England, but he
had the Impudence ( according to what he told Dick) to Print the following
Advertisement, notwithstanding my sending the foregoing Letter, and his
constant refusing to meet me --

The Advertisement Campbel Printed; as soon as I left Ireland, was this
following, viz.
MR. Ioh Dunton having Published several scurrrilous Lybels against me these 2
Month past; I have taken no notic^ of them, till last Week I sent both by Writ
and a Friend, that I was ready and willing to meet him, either before a
Magistrate, or any honest Gent. or creditabel Citizen; and if after a fair
hearing of both Parties, it should apear that I did him wrong, I would submit:
And if it apear, that I have not wronged him, it must necessarily follow, that
he hes don me match wrong: First; in averring that I took the Auction-Room over
his Hend, which I affirm to be a falls impudent Lie: And nixt, in setting upe in
his long Lybel in the Cofee-Hoase, that I owe him several Pounds, whereas it
shall easily apear, that he is in my Debt. The desired Meeting he refused, and
I declare my self ready to give said Meeting upon the Terms abav; that is,
either before a Magistrate, or any creditabel Gentleman or Citizen; but I do not
think the Crew that Mr. Dunton ordinarily Converses with, sit to bring any such
into their Company.

Patrick Campbel.


SIR,

BY this Advertisement (Published after I left Ireland) you may observe Three
Things. First, Patrick's Noble Education, how finely he Writes and Spells, for
I have not altered a Letter from the Copy my Friend sent me.

Secondly, His great Cowardice, in not daring to Publish this till I left
Dublin.

And Thirdly, His great Honesty in handing privately to the World a Paper,
filled with nothing but Lies (as I have proved already, so need not do it
again) but as base as he was in Printing such notorious Lies, when I was n't or
the Spot to disprove 'em, yet I must own to his Honor ( for he has not a
Virtue, but I blaze it abroad with greater Pleasure then I do his Vices) that
he did not Publish 'em openly, but only caused three of 'em to be Printed off,
to show to some particular Friends, or perhaps (as my Friend observes) to his
Beautiful Wife, to convince her she had Married a Wit.

Thus Sir, having sent you the remaining Part of the Scuffle 'tween Patrick and
I (and all I shall send ye about Camp^el) your Thoughts as formerly are desired
by

Your Obliged Friend and Servant, John Dunton.

Remarks on my Tenth Letter.
SIR,
I Am Sorry that you are still haunted with Serpents in Ireland, where the
World has always thought there were none. It seems Patrick is a Man of
Interest as well as Intrigue, when you are no sooner rid of one of his familiar
Spirits, but you are straight ways attacked by another; Patrick has gnash'd his
Teeth, as you word it, so long, that I wonder his Grinders are not worn to the
stumps by this Time. You tell me you design speedily to conclude your Scuffle,
which is very well, but I am sure it had been much better you had never begun
it, or at least that you had given it over sooner. You say, that he now
threatens you with the Law, which if he do, you are like to be a good Booty to
the Gentlemen of the Long Robe, and I dare say, they will not turn you out for
Wranglers so long as the Cash holds; and therefore I hope Patrick and you will
be both better advised. I do believe it is only a Copy of his Countenance, for
he will be as unwilling to be Exposed before the Bench, as to come to the Stool
of Repentance, and in that Sense I doubt not but its true, that you fear his
Law as little as he Minds the Gospel. It Is unhappy for Patrick, that he fell
upon such an Adversary, as is ready to Answer him at all Weapons. I must needs
commend your Courage, though perhaps it had been more Prudent, and some will
say more Chirstian too, if you had rather put up the Wrong, for there is a great
deal of Truth in that North-Countrey saying, That its the second Blow makes the
Fray. However your own Conscience is the best Judge of your Circumstances, and
to that I leave you, as to this Matter; but thus far I think I may venture to
say, that it is no ill Policy in you to make Patrick sensible of the Advantages
you have against him, that way too; if he have a mind to change the Scene. It
was both Generous and Christian to offer a personal Conference, and to stand
the Test of his Warrant with which he threatened you and his declining it, is an
Argument of his being highly defective in both Respects.

Your Letter to him from on Board, I think (all things considered) was needful
enough, and I perceive your Pen was nothing blunted, notwithstanding you had
wrote so much; your Threats are terrible, like those of an Almanzor, and I
perceive you had a mind to convince Patrick of the Truth of what you have
formerly asserted, that you Wear your Pen as others do their Sword; all that I
can say to you further on the Matter, is this, That seeing you are engaged, be
sure either to give over, or else let your Thrusts be ^ome, and your Blows
keen; for Boxing and Caning is Porters way of Fighting, and I would not have
Booksellers do any thing that may forseit their Right to the Title of Gentlemen.

Thus have I sent Remarks upon Patricks pretended Warrant, your Answer to it,
and the Letter you sent him whilst under Sail, I shall next add (for I now
Answer two of your Letters together) that I perceive by yours on the Road, that
you have left a Correspondent behind you in Dublin to observe Patricks Motions;
by the Account you give me of his Printing, and not Publishing his
Advertisement, I perceive your Letter from on Board, had some, though not all
the desired Effect upon him. His Printing after you were gone, is a clear Proof
of his Cowardice, his uttering such manifest Untruths, is the like of his
Falsehood, and his forbearing to Publish them seems to argue his being Conscious
of his own Guilt. Whatever Proof it might be to convince his Beautiful Wife she
had Married a Wit, it could be none that she had Married either a Wife or an
Honest Man. As to your Remark on his Education, that might have been spared,
perhaps, it was none of his Fault that it was not better, and therefore he
ought not to be upbraided with it, except it proceeded from his own neglect.
His Malice is indeed very remarkable, in designing to Publish such a false
Libel against you, and particularly in reflecting upon those you ordinarily
Conversed with, for it appears plain enough by what I have heard from you
before, that you had the Honor to Converse with those that were far above
Patricks Merit, as being some of the greatest Note in Church and State, but any
Excuse is better than none. I am glad however, that your Scuffle with Patrick
is ended at last, both for your sake and my own, for to be plain with you I
have enough of it, and I am sure, whether you think so or not, you have too
much. I am

SIR, Yours.

The Eleventh Letter.
SIR,
I Told ye in my last from Chester, I had done Scuffling with Patrick Campbel;
but sure enough I am still fighting with Beasts at Ephesus: For no sooner was
my Scuffle with Patrick a little over, but I was surrounded on every side.

First, F -- (a meager sort of an Animal) threatens a Token ( in English a
Warrant) to fright me to a Compliance with unreasonable Rates for Binding; but
F -- saw he was in the Wrong-Box, and found it his Interest to be Friends with
me.

I was no sooner delivered from this Impertinence, but a Young Stripling
summons me before the Lord Mayor of Dublin; he could not but think he was too
rash, and therefore had no stomach to argue before a Magistrate; So honest
Servant (a true Lover of Peace) gets us both to the Bull in Nicholas-street,
where the Lad saw his Error, and we parted Friends; and I Will say that for TOM
-- That though he is a little hasty, yet he is a very honest Fellow, was very
faithful in the Post I set him, and ( writing an Extraordinary hand) it is fit
for a good place, which he cannot miss of in Dublin, for he might be trusted
with untold Gold.

But I must leave Nelson to speak of the Brass in Copper-Alley, who is another
Beast I am yet to fight with; This Fellow serves me with a Token (I told ye the
English of it before) and before the Lord Mayor I must go, I was more ready to
go then he was to have me, for there needed nothing to plead for me, but the
bare stateing my Case; when his Lordship heard my Defense, he did me the Honor
to say (Mr. Wild being then present) that I had made my Adversary a very just
Proposal -- My Proposal was, that one of his own Trade, and one concerned in
the same Agreement, should end the Controversy; so that all that Brass got by
his Token was to be hissed at by Honest Men, and to be thought (if it could be)
a little more Impudent then heretofore; Sir, you will find his Picture in the
following Letters; but more at large (excepts he Repents) in my Summer-Ramble
--

I next encountr'd a Female Devil (a Woman, a thing in Petticoats) her
Contrivance was to C -- d her. Husband; and to tempt me to this Wickedness, she
sends me a Billet Doux, (a Copy of which you shall have hereafter) and calls
her self Dorinda, had her Billet taken Effect, her Smiles had been more fatal
than Patricks Frowns; but God preserved me in this Temptation.

I was no sooner delivered from this Siren, but a Grave Ancient Don (...) claim
to a Quarto Manuscript that I purchased of Mr. Daniel, but this Scuffle was
very short, for I no sooner Discoursed him, but he honestly owns before Mr. A
-- (a giddy, talking, bauling Fellow) my just right to the Copy, and so we
parted (Friends) over a Dish of Coffee.

There were other Beasts I contended with, as the M -- of H -- the K -- of, and
the D -- of, but I pass 'em by, 'till I hear how they carry themselves.

Thus Sir, have I given ye a further Account of my Dublin Enemies, and the
Scuffles I had with 'em; in my next expect a Copy of my last Farewell to
Ireland, and with that Farewell I Will conclude Scuffling in this Country -- In
the mean time I desire your Thoughts on these New Encounters, by which you will
further oblige,

Your Humble Servant, John Dunton.

Remarks on my Eleventh Letter.
SIR;
I Was in hopes that when your Scuffle with Patrick was over, you should have
had no Body else to Scuffle with, but either your own Shadow or Don Quixots
Windmill, but it seems your Adversaries are of Hydra's breed; no sooner is one
Head cut off, but two spring up in its stead. Had Richard Strong^ow met with
such obstinate and unwearied Opposition from the Irish, for any thing I know
Ireland had remained unconquered to this Day. I perceive however, that Patrick
was t^^ Giant with the hundred Hands, and having foiled him, it was scarcely
worth your while to draw upon the rest, the Grumbling of a Mastiff is enough to
quell snarling Curs at any Time; if he do but turn his Head, they will be sure
to turn their Tail, and so I perceive it fared with your other little
Adversaries, and therefore they deserve no further Regard neither from you nor
me. Nor were they worth your mentioning, but that you had thereby an
opportunity of my Lord Mayor of Dublin 's approving the fairness of your
Proceedings, and perhaps Patrick foresaw the like as to the Controversy
betwixt you and him, and therefore he would never appear with you before a
Magistrate.

I had almost forgot the dangerous Assault made upon you by the Siren, which to
a Man of a Knight-Errant-like-Temper, is the hardest thing in the World to
resist; and therefore, I never admired the Heroes so much for spurning up Oaks
with their Feet, and blowing down Castles with their Breath, as for resisting
the Attacks of the Phyllis's and Dorinda's. Its well you're Married, else such
a Character as this might perhaps give the Fair Sex a bad Impression of you as
a hard hearted Man, the Consequences of which would be, that you were not
likely to find theirs very soft. But you are out of the Power of such a
Temptation, and therefore there is now no danger on that Head; o^ if there were,
you have a Golden Shower at command, which would Conquer a Danae her self;
though you had no personal Merit. Thus Sir, I leave you to Glory in your
Conquest, and Dorinda to fret at her Disappointment; when I see her Billet
Doux, I shall be more able to Judge, whether she were a formidable Enemy or
not. But don't Publish your Conquest all at a Time, lest your Name be made use
of in future Ages to frighten peevish Bantlings into a better Humor, for its
too too much for one Man thus to Triumph over the Irish Men, Women, and
Children all at once. I am

SIR, Yours.

The Twelfth Letter.
SIR,
I Sent you Word (by the last Post) how Campbel and I parted when I left
Ireland, I have also told ye of other Enemies, who continued Scuffling after
Patrick had done his worst -- I shall now (as I promised) send ye a Copy of my
-- Last Farewell to my Friends in Dublin, that stood by me in every Skirmish,
and here (likewise) I shall Point at my worst Enemies; I mean those that have
sharl'd at the second Spira, have been very Zealous to cut my Throat ( for
Private-slandering is of that Nature) or which is worse, have bought what they
will not pay for, and with this Farewell (to both Friends and Enemies) I shall
conclude the Dublin Scuffle. I don't doubt, but in this Farewell, I shall say
something that will vex the Guilty, yet I find it necessary for my Reputation,
and (Sir, you will find) I fear nothing in Defense of that: It Is true I cannot
fight my way in Tropes and Figures; but Truth needs no Varnish (it shines
brightest in its Native Dress) and therefore in this Retreat (which is the most
difficult Part of War) I face all my Enemies at once; and, if I could not spell
my Name, I Would venture at 'em; for I Would rather be thought a poor Scribe then a
Coward, as you will find by the following Lines; which I call

MY Last Farewell To my Acquaintance in DUBLIN Whether Friends, or Enemies.
[And is as follows, viz.]
Gentlemen,
HAving now Sold the Venture of Books I brought into this Country (maugre all
the Opposition I met with from Patrick Campbel and other Enemies) and being to
Embark an Hour hence for England, I send this as my Last Farewell to my
Acquaintance in Ireland (whether Friends or Enemies) and with this shall
conclude the Dublin Scuffle.

Gentlemen!

I Told you in my First Letter, That I had brought into this Kingdom, A General
Collection of the most Valuable Books, Printed in England, since the Fire in
London in 66. to this very time; to which, I told you, was added, -- Great
Variety of Scarce Books. -- A Collection of Pamphlets, in all Volumns: -- And a
Parcel of Manuscripts, never yet in Print; and that I have made good my word,
is acknowledged, by all that have seen my Catalogues, and Printed Bills of
evedays Sale, for near Six Months. Neither can it be thought that the Gentlemen
of Ireland, who are owned to be very ingenious, would give one Thousand Five
Hundred Pound for a Parcel of TRASH (as my Venture was called by some selfish
People, of which more anon) except -- Bibles -- Common Prayer Books -- Pools
Annotations -- Clarks Bible -- Hammond on the New Testament -- Book of Martyrs
the best Edition -- Duty of Man's Works -- Dupins Ecclesiastical History --
Josephus the best -- Rawleighs History of the World -- Heylins Cosmography in
Folio -- Eusebius the best Edition -- Bakers Chronicle -- Stanleys Lives --
Cambdens Brittania -- Terryls History -- Lock of Humane Understanding --
L'Estranges Aesop -- Seneca's Morals -- Cambridge Concordance -- The Great
Historical Dictionary -- Greoads Dictionary -- Littletons Dictionary --
Gouldmans Dictionary -- Coals Dictionary -- Screvelius Lexicon -- Speeds Maps
-- Mordens Geography -- The Irish Statutes -- Cook upon Littleton -- Wingates
Abridgment -- Ben Johnsons Works -- Shakespears Works -- Beaumont and Fletchers
Works -- Cowleys Works -- Oldhams Works -- Drydens Works -- Congreves Works --
Westleys Life of Christ -- Prince Arthur -- Judge Hales Works -- Mr. Boils
Works -- And the Works of Archbishop Usher Archbishop Tillotson -- Bishop
Tailor -- Bishop Patrick -- Bishop Sprat -- Bishop Barlow -- Bishop Fowler --
Bishop Wilkins -- Bishop Stillingfleet -- Bishop Burnet -- Bishop Kidder -- Dr.
Barrow -- Dr. Sherlock -- Dr. Scot -- Dr. Horneck -- Dr. South -- Dr. Wake --
Dr. Lucas -- Dr. Claget -- Mr. Norris -- Mr. Edwards -- Mr. Dorington -- Dr.
Amesley -- Dr. Bates -- Dr. M^^ton -- Mr. Charnock -- Mr. How -- Mr. Alsop --
Mr. Clarkson -- Mr. Williams -- Mr. Mead -- Mr. Baxter -- Mr. Flavel -- Mr.
Boyce -- Mr. Showers -- Mr. Rogers -- Mr. Calamy -- and such like, may be
reckoned into that Number --

And Gentlemen, as I have fully answered your Expectations, as to the Goodness
and Variety of the Books that I brought over, so I find you are all pleased
with the Candor you had in the Sale, you may remember I told you I thought it
a sort of Picking your Pocket, (as you came to my Auctions supposing to buy a
Pennyworth) to advance the Rate upon you by any underhand Bidding; and to show
this was not to serve a Turn: I again declare (though I Am leaving Ireland) that
for every Penny I got that way I Will restore a Pound. But the Dignity of Truth
is lost by much Protessing, so I Will say no more to prove my Innocence, for it is
what you all believe.

And Gentlemen, as you have been all satisfied with the Part I acted in this
Matter; so I hope you have been all pleased with the Genteel Treatment, you had
from Mr. Wild throughout the whole Sale -- The Truth is, he has shown a
matchless Command over his Passions under very great Provocations, and
therefore it is (my Design in these Adventures being to please the Buyer and my
Self too) that I have engaged him in a second Auction I design for Scotland,
and were I to make a Third as far as Rome (as who knows but I may, for I design
to see his Holiness) Mr. Richard Wild should be the sole Manager, not only as
his Universal Knowledge in Books renders him fit for it, but as I have found
his Condour and Diligence to be as great as his Knowledge -- And Gentlemen, as
Mr. Wild has treated you with the greatest Respect imaginable, so I hope he
has done you as much Justice as he has me, in the whole Management.

And I hope you have been as much pleased with my Book-keeper Mr. Price, as to
his great Fidelity in prizing what you bought, as I have been with his
accounting with me for all the Money^ received; or if you can prove any Mistake
(for no Man's Infallible) I shall be forward to have it recti^^ed, though never
so much to my Loss --

And as Mr. Wild, Mr. Price, and my Self, have labored to give you Content,
so I hope so much as Honest Rohinson -- Trushy James -- and my very Porter
Bacon ( who brought the Bill of every Days Sale to your Doors) have not been
wanting in their respective Place. In a word, I suppose you are all Content,
for we all endeavored to make you so, but for all my Care in these
Particulars, I find I have some Enemies; but (Gentlemen) my Comfort is As I
told you in my second Letter.
that I have no Enemy that is acquainted with me, or has Bought a Book in my
Three Auctions; 'twas said of a Bookseller lately Dead, that he had no Enemies
but those that kn^w him; but I Thank God, if I have any Friends, they are
chiefly those that have dealt with me. But I find it is impossible to please
all, for though Mr. Wild and my Self managed the whole Affair (from the first
Minute I proposed it to him, to the last Book he Sold in Dublin) with that
Sincerity, as we thought had left no room for Exception; not so much as a Penny
was said in the Auction (if any doubt arose from whom 'twas received) but I
gave it the Poor, for fear I had received more than my Due. But for all this
scrupulous Care, there was a certain Person beyond the Herring-Pond, and in
Dublin too (for they Ecchoed to one another) that whispered about, that I had
brought you nothing but a Parcel of TRASH. And that the Auctioneer was a Grand
Sharper. Gentlemen, it is a pitiful Cowardice (as I told Campbel) that strikes a
Man in the Dark, but I suppose you know who I mean by the Littleness of his
Soul, for all such Books that he has not a Hand in, he calls not fit to wipe
his B -- ch, and a Copy from Heaven would be a foolish Paper with him, if T. F.
were not the Bookseller. -- strange how far Ignorance, Self-Interest and Pride
will carry Men, especially Men that rise from nothing, or come of Mechanic
Parents -- It Is true, I could take a singular Pleasure in forgiveing this
sneaking Fellow, there is such a noble-Pride attends this generous Conquest of
an Enemy, as far surpasses the celebrated sweetness of Revenge. And this made
Judge Hales say, He thanked God, he had learnt to forget Injuries; and I wish I
could say the same (for I hate to gratify my Passion the common Way (and
because T. F. has acted the Part of a mean Spirit, I must do so or worse by
giving Scope to my Rage) but though I had rather suffer a thousand wrongs then
offer one, yet for all that, when a Man persists in a base Practice, he ought
to be jerk'd in hopes of a Reformation, and T. F. the most of any I know in
London; for how often has he called -- The Heads of Agreement (Assented to by
the United Ministers) -- The Morning Ex^rcises (Published by my Reverend Father
in Law, Dr. Annesley) -- The French Book of Marty^s (Published by Order of Queen
Mary, and was the only Book she ever gave Her Royal Hand to) -- Mal^ranches
search after Truth, (so much commended by the Learned Mr. Norris, in his Advice
to his Children. -- Mr. Coke's Detection of the Court and State of England (of
which large work there is Three Editions) -- The Works of the Lord Delamere
(Published by consent of the now Earl of Warrington) -- Dr. Burthoggs Essay on
Reason, and the Nature of Spirits (Dedicated to Mr. Lock.) -- The Tigurine
Liturgy (Published by the Approbation of six Learned Prelates) -- Bp. Barlows
Remains (Published from his Lordships Original Papers) by Sir Peter Pet, Knight.
Advocate General for the Kingdom of Ireland. -- Mr. Baxter's Life, in Folio
(written with his own hand) -- The Life of that Charitable Divine Mr. Thomas
Brand. -- The Life and Death of Mr. John Elliot, the First Preach^^ of the
Gospel to the Indians in America (of which there is three Editions) -- The
Bloody Assizes, Containing the Trials and Dying Speeches of those that Dyed in
the West (of which there is four Editions) -- Sermons on the whole Parable of
Dives and Lazarus, by Joseph Stevens, Late Lecturer of C^^pplegate and Lothbury
Churches -- The Tragedies of Sin, by Mr. Iay, Rector of Chinner. -- Mr.
Williams Gospel Truth (of which there is three Editions.) -- Mackenzye's
Narrative of the Seige of Derry. -- Mr. Boyses Answer to Bishop King (First
Printed in Dublin, and then in London) -- Mr. Showers Mourners Companion. --
Mr. Rogers Practical Discourses -- The Poems writ by the Pindarlek Lady -- And
the Athenian Gazzet (which has been continued to 20 Volumns, and is so much
Valued in Dublin, that the Sale of that Book alone has come to an Hundred Pound)

Gentlemen, I should prove Tedious, or I would enlarge, for these ben't the
Fifth Part of those Valuable Pieces I Print; and to which, to show his parts (
or rather ^is Envy) he gives the Title of -- Mere, Stuff, Perfect Trash: Sweet
Rhetoric! ( Gentlemen) which, with something will keep Cold, has made his
Conscience as black as his Sign.

I was likewise Treated in this manner, by another Critic, near Hatton-Garden,
who though he struts like a Turky-Cock at a Red Pettycoat, wipes his mouth in
London, and is very saucy to every Book that he don't Print himself; yet his
Sin has found him out in Dublin; and it is very remarkable, that I my self
should first discover it, whom he has most abused of any man in London; but
he is quiet enough at present, and if he Repents, I can forgive; but if he stir
hand or foot against this small Revenge, the World shall know ( as Proud as he
is) who has abused ^he name of a late Peer, by a Notorious Sham-Title. --
Gentlemen, such, and only such as these, are my Enemies, and this is the
Undermining Treatment I have had from 'em.

But though there be Little Souls in the World that have great Dealings; yet, I
find, the Gentlemen of Ireland, have more Honor then to ^e-lye their Senses,
or to call that Stuff or Trash, which they find to be Solid Diet -- I am sure,
in proportion to the Great Number of Books I have Printed, no Man has Printed
less Trash then my self: I am sure, T. F. has not, if you take in his Black
Lists, his false Titlcs, his Printing other Men's Copies, and new Vamping of Old
Books -- But Gentlemen, It Is losing of Time to speak in praise of my Bookish
Venture (or to talk more of my Enemies Trash) Seeing a As is hint^^l in the
Acct. of my Conversation, in Ireland.
Worthy Member of the House of Commons, did me the Honor to say, That I had
been ( ^by this Undertaking) a Great Benefactor to this Country; and no longer
than yesterday, a Clergyman told Mr. Penny (an English Gentleman) That I had
done more Service to Learning, by my Three Auctions, than any one single Man
that had come into Ireland these hundred years. -- I speak not this out of
Ostentation, but to rectify the (...) opinions, who judge Men by what they hear
from the Scandalous Tongues of their selfish prejudiced Enemies: But, though
Boasting is none of my Talent, yet I must say, That my Venture has been
serviceable to this Country, is not only the Sentiment of one or two, but of
all I meet with; and therefore it is I am desired, by some of the best Quality,
To make an Annual Auction of Books in Dublin; but my Ramble to Scotland will
hinder this; or if it don't, I Will still promise, You shall have no Setter in my
Auctions, and as Good Books as now. -- Not that I pret^^d to be more Infallible
than other People; and of Six Hundred Books, I have Printed ( as I said in my
second Letter) it would be strange if all should be alike Good: But though in my
Vnthinking Age, I have Printed something I wish I had never seen ( though of
600, I know but of six I am angry at) yet where I have erred, it is from Heaven,
and not from Man, that I heartily ask Forgiveness: I confess 'twas a Noble
Saying of the Great Mountaigne, after he had finished his Rambles, That were ^e
to live over his Life again, he would Live exactly as he ^ad done: I neither,
says he, complain of the past, nor do I fear the future. I cannot say so, for
tho I am but turned of my 30th year, and have always devoted my Time and
Rambles to the knowledge of Countries, Books, and Men; yet were I to correct
the Errata's of my short Life, I would quite after the Press -- Would Time
(...) my Age again to the first thread, What another man would I be? but as
willing as I am to confess this, yet where I have Erred with Respect to
Printing, I must cast the fault into the great heap of Humane Error; for seeing
we digress in all the ways of our Lives, yea, seeing the Life of man is nothing
else but digression, I may the better be excused, and the rather, as I am truly
grieved when any good Man is displeased; not that I ever Printed a Book in my
whole Life, but what I had a just end in the Publication. But if others will not
think so, I cannot help it; not but I must own, That having Printed a great many
Books (and not reading through the twentieth part of what I Print) some Errors
have 'scap'd my hand; but this is my Misfortune, and not my Crime; and ill
success ruins the merit of a good meaning; however the way to Amendment is
never out of date. -- Repentance is a Plank, we (Book-Merchants) have still
left, on which we may swim to shore; and having Erred, the Nobles^ thing we can
do, is to own it. He that Repents, is well near Innocent. -- Diogenes, seeing a
Lad sneaking out of a Bawdy House, bid him Hold up his head, for he need not be
ashamed of coming out, but of going in. I could even forgive Patrick Campbel,
if I saw him a True Penitent; such a Penitent, as the Thief who robbed me in
Dublin, who begging my Pardon; I scarce suffered him to kneel for it, but as
readily gave it, as he was to ask it.

Thus Gentlemen, you see ( at our last parting) that though I am no more perfect
than other Folks, yet that I don't deserve that ill Usage I had from T. F. in
London, or Patrick Campbel in Dublin; and ( by the Grace of God) for the future
will deserve it less; for as I grow in years, I alter my opinion of things;
when I now Print a Book, I put on my Graver Spectacles, and consult as well
with my Judgment as Interest: When I first began to Print, I had then seen but
the outside of the World and Men, and conceived them according to their
Appearing Glister.

You know, Gentlemen, Youth are Rash and Heedless, green Heads are very ill
Judges of the Productions of the Mind: The first Glance is apt to deceive and
surprise; Novelties have Charms that are very taking, but a little* Leisure and
Consideration discovers the Imposture; those false Lights are dispelled upon a
serious Review, and second Thoughts are wiser than the first, and this is my
very Case. But though I am no more Infallible then other People, yet I have
ever had that regard to Justice, that I never Printed any Man's Copy, or stole
his Author by Private Slanders; and though I have Printed six hundred Books, I
never Printed a new Title to an old Book, nor never damned any Man's Book,
because I must Buy it with ready Money; and I ever thought it as base Injustice
to run upon another's Project, neither did I ever murder any Man's Name ( with
saying he Printed this or that) the more cunningly to praise my self, and who
ever will prove one single Instance of this in all the Books I have Printed (a
Jolly Company for the small Time I have Traded) I Will own my self of as Poor a
Spirit as those are (be they who they will) that Practice what I here condemn
-- And I as little like under-selling others to get Chapmen. I believe T. F.
will own (though a great Offender in this Kind) that I keep my Copies as
punctal as any Man; Mr. Wild knows in all the Notes I made for Dublin, that I
put the same Price to every Man, and would any Bookseller be at the Pains to
compare all my Notes together (though I exchanged with all the Trade) for every
Penny he finds charged more to himself then to other Men, he shall have five
Pound Reward, and a Thousand Thanks into the Bargain for rectifying a Mistake I
never designed. Then pray Gentlemen (for I am now speaking to the Booksellers
of Dublin) no more Reflections (as if I injured the Trade by Auctions) for is
it not your own Case? There Is few Eminent Booksellers, but have traded this
Wholesale way* is that a Crime in me, which is seen in your daily Practice? --
If I have a Fancy to Travel a Year or so, and after that to live a studious and
retired Life (as I have done several Years) what harm do I do in selling my
Stock, and making of Auctions without Setters? For my own Part, I have enough
to bear my Charge to the Grave (for thither Gentlemen we are all going) and am
contriving now to Live for my Self, as well as for other People -- Cowley.
I would have business, but exempt from strife -- and therefore, it is I have
done with Shops, the hurry of 'em are apt to ingross our Thoughts, and I Am loath
to venture Eternity upon my last Breath; to what Purpose should I covet much?

I really Pity those that ( like the Dog in a Wheel) toil to Roast Meat for
others Eating. Abraham, see how he begins to possess the World! by no Land,
Pasture, or Arable Lordship, the first Thing is a Grave. The Reverend Mr.
Stevens (Author of the Sermons on Dives and Lazarus) gave Order for the making
his Coffin I ^ad it from his ow^ Mouth.
in perfect Health: I desire to follow such Examples as these; and therefore,
instead of loosing Time in a Shop, I Would now, in a quiet Retreat from the World,
be studying what good I may do to my Friends with what I have, and how little a
Time I may Live to enjoy it; being troubled with the The Stone.
Distemper my Father dyed of. I take my last leave ( at I now do of Dublin) of
every Place I depart from? And that is the Reason I now follow the World with
such Indifference, as if 'twas no Matter whether I over-took it or no. But
though I Am come from behind the Counter, yet methinks a Man out of Business,
like a rotten Tree, only cumbers the Ground, so I will not altogether desert
Printing, or that Learned Trade, which my Father so much approved of, whilst
there is an Author in London, or a Pen in the World; but (with Submission to
better Judgments) I think it is a great madness to be laying new Foundations of
Life, when I am half way through it. And they methinks deserve my Pity,
Who for it can endure the Stings,
The Crowd, and Bu^, and Murmurings,
Of this great Hive, the City -- Cowley.
So that being tired with Galloping after the World, I Will walk now with a Horse
in my Hand, and who ever sees my House ( and Green Prospects before and behind
it) will own it is suited to this Purpose^ And here Gentlemen, don't let us
mistake one another (at Parting) or think I prescribe my Method of Living as a
Rule for others to walk by. No! He that takes me for a Guide in this (or in any
thing else) may perhaps fall Mat.15. 14.
into the ditch, for I must confess that if he alone is a Wise Man, who has a
clear and certain Knowledge of Things; then I am excluded, for I mistake every
thing. I feel a Mountain of Ignorance on my Understanding, which I struggle
under, but cannot remove. I dwell in the outside of things; do what I can,
Circumstances do always so uneven the Scales, that I cannot Balance things
aright; when I weigh the Conditions of Men, ( whether Friends, or Enemies) if I
come near them, I am within a Circle, and am strait-ways as if conjured from
giving a true Verdict; these things are best seen at a distance, when I have
sometimes given a right Sentence, a new Relation, or some other Event, has
stepped in, and violently blindfolded me. Again, when I have beheld a worldling
as full of Earth as a Worm, one that loads himself with thick Clay, that walks
in the Sunshine daily, and never enquires who has lighted him that glorious
Candle; as goes rooting as if he were a Mole in Humane Shape, and Cannibal-like
devours poor Men's Flesh; when I had clearly seen, I confidently affirmed his
Gold to be dross, and himself beauti^ied with all his Pomp, to be but a Jade in
Trappings; when I had made use of him, as an occasion of admiring Divine
Providence for sparing such a monstrous Hog; yea, when I had Outlawed him, as
one altogether unworthy of Protection; yet how has the tender of some few
Courtesies (or a bare pretense to a Reconcil^ation, as in the Case of Campbel)
been ready to make me reverse it, has not only stopped my Mouth, but muddied
my sounder Judgment of him; so that now I have had enough to do to see the
fault, through my Friend, my very Iudgeing Faculty has been somewhat bribed to
spare the Sin, least I should fall too foul upon the subject of it; and how
have I found out a weak Brain, a strong Temptation, or something or other to
extenuate the Offense. Yea, an intent of assaying the World my self, has
disposed me to the pondering, yea, almost to the Entertainment of his
Principles, and a Resolution of returning again to the hurries of a Shop; and
some possibility of arriving at his height, has been such a Powdermine, that
I have been well nigh blown up in mine own Trenches; and my Affections have
been like a NAVY in a Storm at Sea, hardly kept together. I therefore thought
the best Prospecetive to see the World in its genuine and proper State, was a
great distance from it. A Man must play the Cunning Astronomer, who when he
would gaze a Star, gets not on the Top of a Pyramid, but descends some deep Pit
for so the Visual Spirits are kept together, thus a Man should look, as a wise
man, just before him. Earthly things are a very Mist; before a Man comes at it,
he may see the Dimensions of a Fog, and perhaps look over it, but when once
invellopt and clouded within it, his sight is limited to a small extent.
Gentlemen, such thoughts as these made me retreat to that Countrey-like Seat
where (after Scuffling a while in Dublin) I Am now going to live again; which
being still and private, and suited to a studious Life, is (next to my Wife)
the only thing on Earth I Love --

Gentlemen, having (largely) shown you, why I leave the Hurries of Dublin, and
given my Reasons for a Private Life when I return home; having also told ye my
Thoughts of Shop-keeping, and of the several Copies I Printed, perhaps my
Enemies will expect here (being fallen amongst Books) that I say something of the
Second Spira, for though it is a Book quite forgot, yet my Innocence is such
(with respect to the Printing of it) that I dare bring it again on the Stage;
and the rather still, as my Dublin Enemies (and some in London) have snarl'd at
it with so much Fury.

As to this Second Spira, which my Enemies so nibble at, perhaps the Publishing
of that Relation was one of the most Innocent Actions of my whole Life;
Gentlemen to prove this, I Will lead you step by step into this Affair, so far as
I was concerned in it -- This Narrative was put into my hands about December. 26.
1692. by the Methodizer of it, who assured me, that he received the Memoirs
that composed it, from a Divine of the Church of England, and as a Confirmation
of this, he delivered into my Hands a Letter and Preface, which are Printed in
the said Book (both which he said was sent to him by the Divine that visited
the Sick Man) wherein the Divine says. That having examined the Piece now it is
perfected, with the Original Notes and Papers which he drew himself, he finds
the Substance and Material Part very faithfully done; he further adds, I dare
affirm, that there is nothing material left out, nor is there any Interpolations
which are not genuine -- And in his Letter to the Methodizer, he begins thus,
Sir, I had yours with the Manuscript, and having compared it with the Memoires
I took, I think you have done me, and the Case of that miserable Gentleman, a
Rigid Justice -- My way being made thus plain by these Attestations given me by
a Gentleman I had long known to be a Person of Integrity, I procured Mr. Bohuns
License to the Book (which I have still by me.) After the Book was Published;
several Clergymen and others inquiring of me the Truth of the Relation, I went
with them my self to the Methodizer of it (for so he had ordered me to do, if
any one inquired about the Truth of it) who gave 'em al^ ( as he owns in his
Preface to this Book) the very same account he had given me, and they thereupon
did me that Justice as to acquit me of any unfair dealing in the Case, and the
same thing has been also done by the Methodizer himself in the Third, Fourth,
Fifth, and Sixth Editions of this Book; so that I need add no more on my own
Account, for what can appear fairer? But that no doubt may remain as to my
Innocence in this Matter, I further (and solemnly) declare in the Presence of
God* the searcher of all Hearts) that I never thought of the Second Spira till
'twas brought to me, and that 'twas all ( every Page, Line and Syllable of it)
delivered to me as a True Narrative. And it is worth Remark (as it shows the
Generosity of the London- Booksellers) that but three of 'em quarreled with
this Book, and the first was that very Person who (as I can prove) offered to
be Partner in it; and that too, after his going with me to the Methodizer, by
which he could know no more of Spira then I did, so that it is clear if I have
Printed a False Spira (as I hope not) that it is no more than an older Man would
have done, upon the same Informations which I received.

But to do this Bookseller Justice, there were several Divines ( as well as he
and I) that believed the Truth of the Second Spira (from the Account the
Methodizer gave of it) I could name two that ( from the Pulpit) advised their
Hearers to read it -- It Is true, this Bookseller tells you, he afterward
altered his mind (what the Divines did, I cannot say) but what of that? This no
ways affects me, for he would fain have been concerned at first ( and to tempt
me to it, promises a Preface to recommend the Book) and I could see no more
into Futurity then he, and therefore I fell a blushing, (for his sake, not for
my own) to hear him Rail at the Book -- Gentlemen I really thought it Second
Spira had wanted a Champion, this had been the very Man, he was so zealous for
a share in it; but I rejecting the offers he made, instead of being the last
[as I might expect] he was the first Public Enemy it met with.

And the next to him was a Man who leers under his Hat, and may now see his Sin
in his Punishment, in those ^ashes Mr. Mather gives him, in p. 68. But I will not
Name the Book or Passage, for [when I remember how abusive he was] I think it
revenge enough to forgive him.

A Third Slanderer of Second Spira [and is all I met with amongst Booksellers]
was a Gentleman-Stationer, who had no grudge against me or the Book, yet had
the Conscience to send it to -- to serve a Turn* I would explain my self, (for
here we are Bout-Ship, as we shall cry by and by at Sea) but that, He Is below
himself, that is not above an Injury, or at least the Ingratitude of a little
Fellow. I am thus particular in telling the Enemies to Second Spira, and in
Defending my Printing of it, that the World may see what a vile thing
Slandering is, (especially the Private Slanderer.) The thing is True, but pray
say nothing you had it from me, is a Wound can never be Cured, -- It Is Stabbing
a Man behind, and is the worst sort of Murder, as it leaves no room for
Defense.

And this has been my Fate, for I verily think, were all the Lies that were
told about Second Spira, Printed in one Book, 'twould scarc^ be Printed in Two
Years. -- But I am willing now ( for I have bore long) to be out of the
Slanderers Debt, and I hope what I here affirm will give Satisfaction to all
the World.

For Gentlemen, you see my Innocence as to this Book, and how much I suffered
(when formerly railed at for Publishing of it) by the malice of some, and
ignorance of others; and therefore I thought it proper now to set Spira in a
True Light, for I cannot run every where to answer Slanderers, especially my
Dublin Enemies (for I Am now leaving of 'em) and these have treated (both Spira
and) me without the least mixture of Candor, tho Archbishop Tillotson tells
'em, in p. 515. in his works, That if there were any need that a Man should be
Evil spoken of, it is but fair and equal that his good and bad Qualities should
be mentioned together, otherwise he may be strangely misrepres^nted, and an
indeferent Man may be made a Monster. -- They (co^tinues this Great Prelate)
that will observe nothing in a Good Man but his failings and infirmities, may
make a shift to ren^^ a very Wise and Good Man (and I never pretended to be
either) very Despicable. -- If one should heap together all the Passionate
Speeches, all the Froward and Imprudent Actions of the Best Man, all that he
had said or done amiss in his whole Life, and present it all at one view,
concealing his Wisdom and Virtues, the Man in this disguise, would look like a
Madman or a Fury; and yet if his Life were ^airly Represented, and just in the
same manner it was led; and his many and great Virtues set over against his
failings and infirmities, he would appear to all the World to be an Admirable
and Excellent Person. But (adds this learned Author) How many and great soever
any Man's ill Qualities are, it is but just, that with all this heavy load of
faults; he should have the due praise of the few real Virtues that are in him.
-- Herbert says, He that will but one side hear,
Though he judge right, is no good Iusticer.


One would have thought this distich; with the foregoing passage of Archbishop
Tillotson, were enough to cure Ce^suring, and to have inclined the Readers of
the Second Spira, to have been more charitable to the Publisher of it, for if I
had not One Good Quality to mention with my Bad (as Bishop Tillotson advises)
yet they were wholly ignorant of me, and could not tell ( did they give me a
hearing) but I might clear my Innocence, and having now done it, I expect they
receant their old Reslections, and revive that Opinion they had of me before
the publishing of this Book. -- The Reason why I expect this Generous Treatment
(and am thus positive in the Account I give of the Second Spira) is because I
write this, as if I made an Affidavit before a Master in Chancery. For Livy*
the Famous Historian, says, That he that writes a Lie for Truth, is the
greatest of Perjured Persons, and his Reason is, because he imposes upon
Generations to come; and this makes me yet think that the Second Spira is a
true Narrative: For ^an't there been as strange Concealments (Who'd have
thought that Overbury's Murder would have come to light 5 years after 'twas
done) and I believe the Methodizer, a Man of that Honor and Virtue, that had
he the least suspicion, that I S, (the Divine which he says gave him the Notes)
had imposed upon him, he would soon Publish the same to the World, and as a
Christian ought, own his Error in being imposed upon. -- This is what I believe
of the Methodizer; and as for my own share, my Innocence is such (as I have
here shown by running through all the steps of the Publication) that if I find
Second Spira a Lie (though 'twere Ten Year hence) I Would be the first should tell
it; and be as zealous for Printing the Methodizers Recantation. But till such
Discovery is made, I shall still believe it as much the true Spira, as his in
Newgate-Street, who to show the honesty of his little Soul, calls his Book the
True Spira, that mine might be thought a False One, or as is the Relation of
Francis Spira, whence this Second Spira has its name. -- Now Gentlemen, what I
have here said of the Second Spira, being what I am able to swear to, upon all
the Bibles in the Kings Dominions, and if my Credit appears hitherto Unspotted
and Free, and not stained with Base Little and Dishonorable Actions, I hope
(to use the words of the Methodizer) I shall have that common Charity in this
Affair, which every one would be unwilling to be denied, were he in my
circumstances; and you cannot go to a Binder, Printer, or Stationer, in Dublin,
or London either, (for I owe ^ot one of them a Brass Farthing) but you may have
full satisfaction upon this last head. But if after all I have here said, there
is any one yet so base, as to reflect upon the Methodizer of the Second Spira,
or upon my self, for Printing that Dismal Narrative, I have only to tell 'em,
That I as little matter, as I deserve, their uncharitable Censures. --
Gentlemen, I shall only add, (as to Second Spira) that the Methodizer never saw
this Apology for Printing of it; for Truth is ever the same: And having said
nothing but what I can prove at large, I thought it a greater proof of my
Innocence, to Publish it without his knowledge: Neither could I have consulted
him, if I would, for he lives 300 Miles from Dublin; and I do declare, in the
Presence of God, Angels and Men, that I writ this Defense of Spira and Farewell
Letter, with my own hand, whilst I lived with Mr. Cawley in that City, and that
in the presence of Mr. Larkin, who is now going for England with me, and I hope
you will wish us a Boon Voyage. -- And I think Gentlemen, my not consulting with
the Methodizer in this matter, is enough of it self, (had I omitted all that I
said before) to show my Innocence as to Second Spira, concerning which, I have
said nothing but what I would say, were I now taking my last leave of the
World, and the Irish Voyage, on which I am just entering, is near a kin to that
long and awful Journey. -- But so much for the Second Spira, of which I Sold
about 20000, and when the Gentleman is known, I believe I shall treble the
Number.

Thus Gentlemen, having in this Farewell further accounted for the Dublin
Scuffle, -- For the Venture I brought to Ireland, -- For the Auctions I made in
it, -- For the Candor you had from me with respect to Setters -- For Mr.
Wilde's generous management -- For my Book-keepers great Fidelity -- For my
Servants of an Inferior Station -- For the Notes I made with the London
Booksellers -- For the Hurries of Dublin -- For my Private Living in
Iewen-street -- For my Aversion to Shop-keeping -- For the several ^opies I
Printed [and in particular for the Second Spira -- And for an Annual Auction in
Dublin [which I told ye was proposed to me] and Gentlemen, I must tell ye, if
any thing put me upon it, it is my great Desire to bring Patrick to a Sense of
his Error, and the fair Dealing I had from other^. And h^^e I Will take my leave
[a while] of the Generous Buyers, to give

A farewell To those that have BOUGHT, what they will not PAY for.
ANd truly Gentlemen (for it is of the Non-Pay-masters I Am now taking my leave)
if you will not be (...), I Will persuade you to it, and to that Purpose I Have agreed
in the Lump (for I Am now leaving Ireland, and shall relapse into no more Duns)
with an Honest Lawyer (yes a^ Honest Lawyer) and Two Bailiffs, who will fear
nothing in the just Execution of their Office -- Gentlemen, could I stay in
Dublin, I Would give as much time as you would desire, but I have been long from my
Native Country, have a House and Servants to look after, and which is more,
an^ daily expected by a Young and Obliging Wife; and Gentlemen, were your own
Case, a Day under such a Circumstance would seem an Age. The^ pray be Honest in
a few Days, that even Lawyers and Bailiffs may be kind to ye. I suppose none
have been so unjust to Buy what they could not pay for. And pray let me ask you
a Sober Question, Is it reasonable I should have Justice? Make my case your
own, and you will say, It is; for my Venture was Bought and Sold at a Great
Expense, ( and without Setters too) and which is yet heavier upon me, you have
bought what others would have honestly paid for; neither do I serve your City
of Dublin as you have served me, for of 400 ^ etc. I have Expended in it, with
Printers, Stationers, Binders, and the Servants concerned in my Three Auctions,
etc. I have Receipts from all I have dealt with, to a very half penny; or if
any Binder (or other Person) have injured himself, by forgetting any thing, or
by mistakes, in summing up his Bill (though it be but the worth of a Farthing)
if he discovers it Ten Years hence, I Will pay it my self, if I am then Living,
or in case of my Death, my Heir shall do it, or forfeit my whole Estate. --

And as I have been just to Meum and Tuum in this City, so I was ever as true
to another Reputation as to my own: I never struck at any Man's Fame in Dublin
(or in any part of the World) till he fell to Murdring mine; even Patrick
Campbell (tho the most Barbarous Fellow I ever met with) did not hear from me
till he took my Room over my head.

And now Gentlemen (I mean you that are still in my Debt) I leave you to think
upon these things, whilst I return again to the Generous Buyers: And here
Gentlemen, It Is my duty to tell you, That as I ill resent the Bad Usage. I have
from the Non-pay-masters, so I can never enough acknowledge your Honest
Dealing; you have strictly observed the Golden Rule, Of doing as you would be
done by, and I doubt not but the Books you have fairly bought, will be a
blessing to you and your Children after you. -- When some came to my Auction
with Naught, Naught, Pro. 20. 24.
you never sided with 'em, or belied your Conscience to save Six Pence. You
never bid, but in some proportion to the worth of a Book: You knew I had no
Setters, and therefore acted a Nobler Justice than to bid as if a Book were
stolen.

In a word, You all acted so Honorably, both in your Bidding and Paying for
Books (especially the Noble Colonel) as if, Like mere Conquerers over
Covetousness, and such mean beggarly Vices, you had a mind to shame the other
Buyers into Gratitude, for the Charge I was at to serve 'em. Gentlemen, by this
Treatment, I have been able to see, how much of Heaven can live upon Earth; and
surely Men of such Just Principles, as I found you of, need but dye to be in
that Blessed Place. Men of so great a Soul, seem only lent to the City of
Dublin, as a universal Pattern for others to imitate.

Gentlemen, If in my next Ramble, I meet with such Men as you, Men so refined
from all mixture of our grosser Elements, Men so spirituali^ed before their
time, I shall Ramble to Scotland to good purpose, and despise the Proverb of a
Rolling-stone.

I would here (this being My Last Farewell) descend to particular Characters of
some of the chief Encouragers of My Three Auctions. --

And here I should first acknowledge, my Great Obligations to the Right
Reverend the Bishop of Clogher (who was mentioned before, in p. 50.) this
Learned Prelate, was a Generous Encourager of my Undertaking; He is a Person of
Great Worth, Knowledge and Humility, and by his ^ard Study and Travels, has to
so great a degree improved his own Extraordinary Parts, that soon after the
Thirtieth Year of his Age (which is the year of Quallification for that Office)
he was made Provost of Trinity College in Dublin, a place of great Honor and
Trust; where he so well acquitted himself, that in a little time he was
Constituted Bishop of Clogher, and soon after that, for his great
Accomplishments, was made One of His Majesty's Privy Counselors for the
Kingdom of Ireland. I might mention his great knowledge of the Tongues and most
Sciences, but the bare relating the Public Stations he is in, are sufficient
demonstrations of the Reasons of his deserved Promotions, and of the great
Honor he did me by personally encouraging my undertaking, and therefore I hope
his Lordship will pardon me for presuming to mention him in this Farewell; for
I should think my self very ungrateful, should I leave Ireland without making
this public acknowledgement of the Favors I received from him. His Lordships
Name is St. George Ash.

I should likewise in this Farewell, take my leave of the Reverend Mr. John
Jones, the most Eminent Schoolmaster in all Ireland; he has sent many
Scholars to the University of Dublin, and I don't wonder he is so Accomplished;
for he is a man of so great a Soul, that I found he was seldom out-bid in my
Auction for any Book he had a mind to. He Is a very Studious Person, and does
not (like some Authors) lose his time by being busy about nothing; nor make so
poor a use of the World, as to Hug and Embrace it: I shall ever acknowledge the
Generous Encouragement he gave my Auctions. In the short Conferen^e I had with
him, I found him to be a Person of great Piety, and of a most sweet
Disposition; He is free from Vice, if ever any Man was, because he has no
occasion to use it, and is above those Ends that make men wicked. In a word,
Mr. Jones is a Person of great Worth, Learning, and Humility; Lives Universally
beloved, and: his Conversation is coveted by all that have the happiness to
know him.

But I take leave of the Reverend Mr. Jones, that I may next shed a few Tears
on the Grave of the most ingenious Mr. Davis; for though he is dead and gone, the
service he did my Auction shall live as long as I can Write or Read, he was
Famous for a Schoolmaster, and so Eminent for Preaching, that his death was
lamented by all that knew him; and I may truly say of him, Vixit post Funera
Virtus -- I had not the happiness of once hearing this Extraordinary Preacher,
and I cannot say I ever saw him; but I am told (by one that knew him well) that
if I have erred in his Character, it is that I have said too little -- But though
I cannot do justice to his Personal Merits (being wholly a stranger to him) yet
Mr. Wild tells me, he was a true Friend to my Undertaking, and therefore at
leaving Dublin, I ought to strew some Flowers on his Hearse, and thank his very
Ashes for the kindness he did his unknown Admirer.

Leaving this Good Man asleep in his Grave, I shall next take leave of the
Reverend and truly Pious Dr. John Stearn, Minister of St. Nicholas-Church; He
is a most Excellent Preacher, and as good a Liver; This worthy Divine was my
Friend, not only in buying diverse Books for his own use, but also in buying
for others, and so far was he from that ungenerous Temper (not to call it
worse) of depriving me of Reasonable Rates, that he would assure the Bidders
such and such Books were good, and a Pennyworth at such and such Rates, as he
informed them of; neither was his Generous-Bidding for Books, all the Favor I
received from him: I would go on with this Gentleman's Character, but that he is
too humble to hear it mentioned, besides it is very improper to tire my Friends
at a parting Visit. I shall therefore here take leave of this Reverend Doctor,
and next step to the College, where I have so many Farewels to make, that I
don't know where to begin, nor where to end; for I should here pay my
acknowledgments to the Reverend Dr. Loyd, Dr. Ha^^, Mr. Gilbert, Mr. Bawldwin,
Mr. Young, etc. These and several other Fellows of the College of Dublin, did
as their occasions served, generously Encourage my Auction, as did diverse
others of inferior Rank in the College, to whom I here give my Parting thanks.

I might, had I time, take my leave of many more Worthy Clergymen that were
Encouragers of my Auction, such as the Reverend Dean Trench, Dean Sing,
Archdeacon Handcock, Dr. Bolton, Mr. Marsh, Mr. Hemsworth, Mr. Burridge, Mr.
Lucas, Mr. Aspin, Mr. Moul^ns, Mr. Drury Mr. Vivian.

And here I would in a particular manner take my leave of Dean Francis; for I
wanted (till now) an opportunity to thank him for the Encouragement he gave my
Auctions: He makes an eminent Figure in the Church of Ireland, and is too Great
for me to attempt his Character, but if any man does not know him, let him go
every Sunday morning to St. Michaels in High Street, Acts. 24. 25.
where he will hear, as Mr. Larkin and I did upon that Text, And Foelix Trembled;
as much clear Reason Scripture, and Divinity, as ever was yet delivered in a
Pulpit. And those that go to this Church in the afternoon, will find the same
entertainment by my Learned Friend the Reverend Mr. Searl, the present
Lecturer. But to proceed to the Character of Dean Francis: His Piety is as
Remarkable as his Preaching, and his Charity as remarkable as either. Mr.
Feltham says, A good Tongue never wanted Ears to hear it; for my own share, I
must say, that morning Mr. Larkin and I heard the Dean, he preached in so
refined a manner, that I could have heard him with pleasure till night, and my
Friend (as I found by the Remarks he made on the Sermon) could gladly have
heard him as long as I. I would enlarge in the Dean's Character, but that he
was a Generous Buyer, and (as the case stands) I think it proper to say little
of the great Benefactors; so I shall leave the Dean (with humble thanks for the
Favors he did me) to pay a Visit and Farewell to my true Friend, and great
Benefactor, the Reverend Mr. Searl; he was a frequent Buyer at my Auction,
which I did not forget to acknowledge both at my Auction, and afterward at the
Curragh, where (in my Ramble to Kilkenney) I had the good Luck to meet him, I
had now and then the happiness of spending a few agreeable minutes in this
Gentleman's Company, which I thought no ordinary Blessing, as he was a Person of
a truly Humble and Affable carriage -- As to his Preaching, it is Plain, Pure,
and Edifying, and generally without-book: The last Sermon I heard in Ireland,
was Preached by the Reverend Mr. Searle, upon these Words, Luke 2.^1.
For unto you is born this day in the City of David a Savior, which is Christ
the Lord, and I thought it the most Practical and awakening Discourse I ever
heard in my Life. He succeeded Mr. Davis (whose death I mentioned before) and
is no ways inferior to him, either for good Preaching or virtuous Living. In a
word, I have such an Idea of the Piety and Moderation of this eminent Divine,
that I could dwell on his Character for ever; but ( I must remember) Pickanc^
is ready to Sail, and I have other Visits to make, and so Worthy Sir, Adieu.

For I am now going to take my leave of the Reverend Mr. Row, a Country
Minister, a Pious Humble Man, and great Encourager of my Book-Adventure. I
ha'nt the happiness to be known to this Generous Buy^r so I Will take my leave
with this short acknowledgment --

And my next Farewell shall be to the Reverend Mr. Fisher (Chaplain to the Right
Honorable the Earl of Mead) this Gentleman was a great Encourager of my
Auction, by which means I had the happiness of enjoying his Company often; we
were together that very time when Patrick Campbel refused to meet me at the
Keys in High street. The Satisfaction I received in Mr. Fishers company,
obliges me to attempt his Character. He is all that is delightful in
Conversation, so easy company, and so far from all constraint, that it is a real
pleasure to talk with him; he is a Person of a sweet natural Temper, one that is
never out of Humor, and I must say, I found his Friendship to be ever equal
and the same -- In a word, it is a Virtue to know him, and a glimpse of Heaven
to hear him Preach: But dear Sir Adieu, for the wind is Fair, and I must be
gone; but I leave your Company with as much regret as ever I did any Earthly
Blessing.

Having taken my leave of the Clergy, my next Visits must be to the Layety; and
these must be very short, for fear the Ship should Sail before I finish my
Letter.

And here I shall first take my leave of the Honorable Colonel Butler, a
Member of Parliament, He is a great Lover of Books, and was a constant and
generous Encourager of all my Auctions. His Affability, Candor, and
extraordinary Sense; but more especially his ingenuity in Painting to the Life,
is beyond what I ever saw ( in my whole Life) but at his House, and in his
Person. It Is to this Honorable Gentleman I Dedicate my Dublin Scuffle, where
(and in my Visit to him) you have his Character more at large, so with a short
Farewell to the Noble Colonel,

I shall next pass on to own my great Obligations to Mr. Lum -- Gradon Esquire
Councellor Reading, and diverse other Members of the Honorable House of
Commons, who were great Encouragers of my Undertaking, and in this Farewell I
return 'em my Humble thanks.

Neither can I in this place forget the many Favors I received from that
Worthy Gentleman, Christopher Usher Esquire. (a Relation of that Famous Prelate
Arch Bishop Usher) He Is a Person of True Piety, solid Judgment, and Great
Estate, and God has given him a Heart to do good with it in his Life Time, for
he is very Eminent for his Great Charity, and a Vast Encourager of Learning; he
laid out several Pounds at my Auction, and almost daily honored me with his
Presence at my Sale. I could write a Folio in this Gentleman's Praise, but he is
as Humble as he is Rich; so I shall not enlarge, lest I offend his Modesty: But
this hint is enough to show how worthy he is of that Great Name he bears; and
therefore however he may resent this Public Farewell (considering his Great
Humility) yet I could not think of leaving Ireland without paying my thanks to
him, not only as he was my Friend, but one of my Chief Benefactors.

I should also ( before I Embarke) pay my Acknowledgements to Sir Henry
Tichbourn, Robert Stopford Es^abque; Captain Acghmooty, Mr. Recorder of Dublin
(an Eminent Counselor) Stephen Ludlow Esquire one of the Six Clerks, to Mr.
Justice Coot of the Kings Bench, a Person of great Piety, Lives universally
Beloved, and justly merits the Honor he enjoys: He was pleased to cause
several Books to be bought for him at my Sale. And here I cannot omit to add to
the rest of my Benefactors ( in this Farewell) Mr. Baron Ecling, a Person of
Great Honor, and of a Greatness of Soul beyond most that I ever heard of: He
is such an Universal Lover of Books, that very few, if any, shall escape him,
whatever they cost: He has a very Large and Curious Library, yet as inquisitive
still after Rarities, as if he had none: He is a most Noble Encourager of the
Book-selling-Trade, and whenever he dies, the Stationers of England and Ireland
will have a great loss, besides what the Public will sustain thereby.

I fear if I write on, I shall lose my Passage, but Gentlemen, you see by my
unwillingness to leave Ireland, how I resent your Generous Treatment. But
should, I t^ke my leave of all my Friends of the Laiety, that were kind to me
and my Auction, I should swell this Farewell beyond bounds. However, tho I
Scribble till the Ship is gone, I will not forget, at parting, to give my thanks
to my True and Generous Friend Mr. Robert Jey: He was one of those that gave me
a Farewell Treat in Essex Street, and was my True Friend from first to last, and
the chief Person I advised with in Dublin, under any Difficulty: He is a real
lover of Learni^^, as appeared by what he bought at my Auction, Extremely Civil
and Obliging in his Conversation; and a Man of that Great Integrity ( and of
such quick dispatch in Business) that had I a Thousand Causes, they should all
be entrusted in his hands. I would enlarge in his Character* but that I shall
meet him again in the Account I design to give of my Conversation in Ireland.

I have also many Thanks to return to Captain Simon Annion, Mr. Rath. Jones,
Mr. Sholdham, Mr. Cuppage, Mr. John Smith, Mr. Moss, Mr. Williamson, Mr. George
Osborn, Mr. Bonny, Mr. Samuel Martin, and diverse other Eminent Atornies, who
were great Encouragers of my Undertaking.

Neither can I think of leaving Dublin, before I have taken my leave of my
Three Printers, Mr. Brent, Mr. Powel, and Mr. Brocas, for they come into the
number of my Benefactors; and I Am told, bought several Books in my Auction;
besides to forget these, would be a little unkind, not only as they served me
(once) at a Pinch, but as they Printed my daily Catalogues: and 'twas only by
their Presses, that I could now and then Thunder at Patrick Campbel, and defy
all my Enemies; so that, at shaking hands, sheer Gratitude obliges me to give
each of these Printers a particular Character.

And I shall first begin with Mr. Brent, who, I think, is the Oldest Partner,
He Is a Scrupulou^ Honest, Conscientious Man, and I do think, a True Nathaniel,
he is perfect Innocence, yet a Man of Letters; he knows no harm, and therefore
contrives none: And by his frequent attempts to make Campbel and I Friends,
it is clear, he never promoted the Dublin-Scuffle, tho the Printing of it would
have furnished him with daily work; so that he is what we may truly call a
Religious Printer, (and I was going to say) he hates Vice, almost as-much by
Nature as Grace; and this I think is his True Character.

As to Mr. Pow^l (the second Partner) His Person is Handsome ( I don't know
whether he knows it or no) and his mind has as many Charms: He Is the very Life
and Spirit of the Company where he comes, and it is impossible to be sad if he
sets upon it: He Is a Man of a great deal of Wit and Sense (and I hope of as
much Hone^^y) and his Repartees are so Quaint, Apposite and Genteel, it is a
pleasure to observe how handsomely be acquits himself; in the mean time, he is
neither Scurrilous nor Profane, but a Good Man, and a Good Printer, as well as
a good Companion.

I come next to Honest Brocas, the third Partner, and with him (if he is
returned from Holland) take leave of my Three Printers.

Mr. Brocas is much of a Gentleman, he gave me a Noble Welcome to Dublin, and
never grew less Obliging: He Is one that loves his Friend as his Life (nay, he
values Mr. Wild beyond it) and I may say, without offense to the Printers of
Dublin, that no Man in the Universe, better understands the Noble Art and
Mystery of Printing, than John Brocas in Skinner Row; and as a threefold Cord
is not easily broken, so Mr. Brent, Mr. Mr. Powel, Mr. Brocas, it is my Advice
tee ye all (at parting) that you never divide your Interests: For what would
you have? Your House is a mere Paradise: Oh Spacious Dwelling!

A Garden in a Paradise, would be
But a too mean Periphrasis of thee.
And Gentlemen, as your House is Airy, Great and Noble (and the Top
Printing House in all Dublin) so if you keep together, Copies so Crowd in (
from Patrick Campbel, etc.) you will soon be Aldermen of Dublin, and in time
arrive to the Honor of Lord Mayor; and what a charming Figure will the
Beautiful Powel make, when attended with Sword and Mace, Surrounded with
Aldermen, Bedeckt with Jewels, and Glittering with a Gold Chain. --

But I don't know when to have done, I see, so Gentlemen Printers, farewell tee
ye all Three; but when I come to Dublin with another Cargo of Books, 'twill be
in Company with Mr. Larkin, and then expect my Custom again, and to find us
both at the Dolphin.

And this (though he is going with me) brings me in the last place, to own my
Great Obligations to my Most Ingenious Friend, Mr. George Larkin, whose Noble
Treatment at his own house, and Great Readiness to Serve me at all hours, and
upon all occasions, from the first minute I saw Dublin, to the last hour I
staid in it, shall be kindly acknowledged to my dying day. -- But I cannot
enlarge, for Mr. Larkin is come to tell me, the Ship is going to Sail, which
makes me Tremble, for though I Have crossed the Ocean often, yet I still dread the
Irish Sea; but my comfort is, Mr. Larkin (like a true Friend) still ventures
his Life with me, and I can never dye in better Company.

Thus have I paid my thanks where I think it due, and given a Farewell to all my
Friends, and as I took my Leave, have Characterized my Benefactors, concerning
whom, I have said nothing but the real Truth; and Gentlemen, I have often
wished, there were no such thing as a Complement in the World, and therefore I
flatter no Man in these Characters; I have no occasion to do it (for my
Auction's ended, and I Am leaving Ireland) besides I was not born to creep,
neither is it agreeable to my Temper of mind; but a Man may be grateful sure,
without being of a mean Spirit.

But perhaps my Enemies will say, I Am thus large in Praising my Friends, that
my Scuffle may Sell the better. I do declare, this is all as false, as what
they said about Second Spira, etc. for I don't write this Farewell, or the
Dublin-Scuffle, to get a Penny, my Circumstances set me above it (the Athenians
long since told you, my Raven was gone to Roost) neither do I publish it out of
Vain Glory, to be talked of when I Am gone; for as Cowley says, I Would Live
unthought of, and unheard of Dye: and my aversion to Shops (and Private
Dwelling in Iewin-street) proves I Am of this humor; but I Publish it purely to
do justice to my self (in the first place) and then to my Dublin Enemies; and
(lastly) that the World may see How Generous my Friends were; and who knows,
but my Enemies, by seeing other Men's Virtue, ( and how charming it makes 'em
look) may endeavor to practice it; but whether they do or no, I must declare
the Honest Dealings I had from 'em, is that alone which has put me in the head
of a Second Auction, so that as soon as I get to London, I shall fall to
Printing several Copies in order to Furnish out a New Venture, with which I
shall march directly for Scotland, and when I return from thence, having
cleared with all the World ( for as to my As is hinted in the A^cou^ of my
Conversation.
Morals I am, or should be an Honest Man) I Will Embark for France, Italy, etc.
but more of this in -- My Summer Ramble, or History of my Travels through Ten
Kingdoms, etc. (of which I have seen four) Scotland, France and Italy make it
seven; and when I have crossed the Hellespont (where poor Leander was drowned)
Greece, China and the Holy Land, are the other three I am bound too, and
perhaps (when my hand's in) I may step thence to the Indies; for I Am a true
Lover of Travels, and when I am once mounted, care not whether I meet the Sun
at his Rising or going down, provided only I may but Ramble: But as much as I
love Traveling, I love pleasing my Wife better, and were I now entered the
City of Rome (as far as it is, and as much as I desire to see it) her least
Impatience to see me, should hurry me back before I had seen any thing; or if
she is so obliging as to let me gratify my Curiosity, Ten Months will be the
longest time I can live from her, and having seen the foresaid places in that
time, I Will return to the Raven in Iewin-street; for though it is good to Travel
abroad, it is best to dye in the Arms of a kind Wife: But Shops are of small
Account (as I formerly hinted) and I hope to get more by Traveling abroad,
then by staying at home. Then if Valeria consents (for without that I Will not
stir an inch) I Will soon be on this Grand Ramble; and when I Return, for I go
for Profit, a^ well as Pleasure, ( I mean for subject matter to write on) will
fall to Printing as much as ever.

Gentlemen, This Long Ramble will be Ten Volumns, of a Crown each; the first of
which, will be Published in few weeks, and will contain my Am^rican Travels. --
The Second, My Trip to the Low Countries. -- The Third, My Ramble to Ireland,
wherein you will find the History of my Sea-Voyage, the Conversation on the Road,
at the Inns and Towns I staid at, with particular Characters of Men and Women,
and almost every thing I saw or conversed with, but more especially in the City
of Dublin, where Two Hundred See more of this, in the Account of my
Conversation.
Persons will see their Pictures, that at present, little expect it. The
Non-Paymasters too, shall have a share in the History; neither will I forget
the Extortion of Copper-Alley, nor my Geud Friend at the Bible in Skinner-Row.

This Ramble (through Ten Kingdoms) will contain about a Thousand Letters,
which I Will write in my Travels, and send 'em to my Friends in England; I shall
intermix 'em with Characters of Men and Women, etc. (according to the method in
my Ramble to Ireland) and hope I shall receive Remarks upon what I see by those
to whom I direct my Letters, and I desire they will treat me with the same
freedom as my Correspondent does in the Dublin-Scuffle. --

Gentlemen, This Rambling Project owes its Rise to something I found in the
Athenian Mercury, which being an Invention of my own that has pleased the Age
(for 'twas continued to Twenty Volumns) I hope the same by this, for 'twill be
as Pleasant a Maggot, and I Will endeavor to make it as Useful. --

Gentlemen, If you ask me, How I can think of Rambling thus, having lately
Married a Second Wife? To this I answer, I am Married indeed, -- but it is to
One (to use the words of my first Wife) Who knows it her Prudence and Duty, to
study my humor, in every thing (I mean every thing that en't sinful) and
finding I am for Traveling ( to show the height of her Love) is as willing I
should see Europe, as Eliza was I should see America; so that, you see
Gentlemen, neither my First, nor my Second Wife, have been She-Clogs, See
Aus^i^'s Confessions.
as St. Austin called his Spouse; they were both pleased as it pleases me, with
my Rambling Humor, then to be sure (this Temper is so Obliging) as soon as my
Eye is satisfied with seeing, I Will hasten home to the Dear Valeria, Run to meet
her with Devouring Arms; and then Live, and (if possible) dye together -- It Is
true, the Man in the Gospel had married a Wife, and he could not leave her, but
he was not born to Ramble, or he must have pursued his Destiny: Sure I am, if
any thing could keep me at home, it is a Tender Wife, such a one as I NOW enjoy;
for there is such an Union between us, that we seem but as Two Souls
Transformed into One; and I must say, Were her mighty Tenderness known to the
World, it would once more bring into Fashion Women's Loving and Trusting their
Husbands. But though Love is strong as Death, and every good Man loves his Wife
as himself, yet I cannot think of being confined in a Narrower Study than the
whole World. He is Truly a Scholar who is versed in the Volume of the Universe,
who does not so much Read of Nature, as Study Nature her Self. Who'd have
thought I could ever have left Eliza? For there was an even Thread of
Endearment run through all we Said or Did: I may truly say, For the Fifteen
years we lived together, there never passed an Angry Look: But (as Kind as she
was) I could not think of growing Old in the Consines of one City, and
therefore in Eighty Six I Embarked for America, Holland, and other Parts: But
though we parted a while, 'twas by Free Consent of FATHER and WIFE, as my Coming
now to Ireland, was by Consent of Mother and Daughter: I found then that the
Arms of Love were long enough to reach from London to the West Indies; and to
encourage me to Ramble now, they are as long as ever: What tho Scotland, France
and Italy, etc. part our Bodies, yet we have Souls to be sure, and whilst they
can meet and caress, we may enjoy each other, were we the length of the Map a
sunder: So, that you see, Gentlemen, though I have Married a Second Wife, yet
that I Love her never the less for Rambling, but (were it possible) a great deal
more, for Distance endears Love, and Absence makes it thrive.

If a Wife don't give me some proof of her Love (for Fine Words are but painted
Babies to play with) how shall I know she loves me at all? And can she give me
a greater Test, then by telling of me, in a Thousand Endearing Letters, That to
be out of her sight, is to be still the more in her mind? When I was in
New England, I sent Eliza, Sixty Letters by one Ship, as you will find in my
Ramble thither.

Were Valeria and I always together, these (sort of) Endearments were wholly
lost, and we to seek (for want of a Touchstone) whether we Loved in earnest.
So that I think to Ramble, is the best way to endear a Wife, and to try her
Love, if she has any, which is so rare a thing (since Women have married for
Money) that for my own share, I Would Ramble as far as Chin^, to be convinced of
the least Scruple. It Is true, for a Wife to say, as Eliza did, My Dear, I
Rejoice I am able to serve thee, and as long as I have it, it is all thine (and
we had been still happy, had we lost all, but one another) this indeed is very
Obliging, and shows she loves me in earnest; but still there is something in
Rambling beyond this; for this is no more (if her Husband he Sober) then Richer
for Poorer, obliges her to; but for a Spouse to cry, Travel as far as you
please, and stay as long as you will, for Absence shall never divide us; is a
higher flight abundantly, as it shows she can part with her very Husband (Ten
times Dearer to a Good Wife than her Money) when it tends to his Satisfaction.
-- Since to Ramble then from my Second Wife, is the best way to express my
Love, and Endears like any thing; I say, considering this, I Will soon be on my
Scotch Ramble; and if I Return Rich in Valeria's opinion, tho St. Andrew Frown
as much as St. Patrick, I shall think I make a Good Voyage on it.

Thus Gentlemen, have I fairly proved, That Absence Endears a Wife, if she is
good for any thing, and that Rambling becomes a Duty to him that is well
Married: A Duty? Ay! Sure enough! For Valeria and I improve our Separation to
better use than if we had been together; for by Absence, we better fill, and
farther extend the possession of our Lives, in being parted; She Lives,
Rejoices and Sees for me, and I for her, as plainly (for we are still but two
Souls in the same Body) as if I had my self been there -- And I must say that
of Eliza too, We did not pretend Affection, and carry on two Interests; Her
sympathy with me in all the Distresses of my Life (both at Sea and Land) make
her Virtues shine with the greater Luster, a^ Stars in the darkest Night; and
assure the World, she loved me, not my Fortunes; like the Glowworm ( that
Emblem of True Friendship) She shined to me, even in the Dark: She has been
almost ready to wish us Unfortunate, that she might give me the greater Test of
her Love. My Head, no sooner ak'd, but her Heart felt it; and had I fallen Sick
(in her Dying Hour) She Would even then have crawled up stairs to have s^en me; and
to requite her Love (for a kind Wife makes a kind Husband) I Would have parted with
Garment after Garment; stripped my self to my very Skin; yea, Mortgaged my very
Flesh, to have served her. -- And indeed all our Distresses of Body and Mind,
were so equally divided, that all hers were mine, and all mine were hers; we
remembered we were One Flesh, and therefore were no more offended with the
Words, Failings or Wants, of each other, than we would have been, had they been
our own; had we Loved at a less Rate, our Pretenses to Love had been mere
Banter: True Conjugal Love, is a step above House or Land! Neither durst I have
married, had I loved Eliza less than my Self. But as True and Great as our
Endearments were, I found I could love as well Absent as Present; and therefore
I as little scrupled the Leaving Eliza, as I now do the Kind Valeria. --

Gentlemen, I had not troubled you with such soft Tender Things, but to let you
see my Rambling Now, (as well as Formerly) is the Effect of Choice and not
Disgust. If you doubt this, Read the Character Printed for J. Harris at the
Harrow in Little Britain
of my First Wife, and you will find it confirmed with her last Breath.

Then, Gentlemen, cease wondering that I can Talk of Rambling so soon after
Marrying a Second Wife. For you see (by the Happiness I enjoy in her) that he
that is born under a Rambling Planet, all that he does to Fix him at Home, does
but Hasten his Travels Abroad. -- I found it thus when Eliza, lived, and the
case is the same now: For tho I am married again, and that to a Wife of whom I
may say, That She fully Understands and Practices all the Duties of a Tender
Wife; so that she seems to be Eliza still in a New Edition, more Correct and
Enlarged; or rather my First Wife in a New Frame: For I have only changed the
Person, but not the Virtues. -- But for all this present Happiness, being born
to Travel, I am ever and anon Talking of Ships, The Marriner's Compass, and
Going to Sea, and cannot be easy an hour together, without thinking of some
far Country. If 'twere not thus, I had never left Mother, Daughter, House and
Home, to Ramble I knew not whither, and to see I know not what. Surely in the
Winding Chambers of Nature, I even then lay Forming Ideas of Long' Voyages and
New Worlds: For ever since I came into Being, to Ramble has been as Natural to
me as Eating. --

Thus (at parting) have I Set my Self in a True Light; have Thanked my Friends
for their many Favors, and am pretty even with all my Enemies; but more
especially with P. Campbel, T. F. and the Foes to the Second Spira, etc. And
now if T. F. or any one else thinks himself injured in This Scuffle, I must
tell him, as I did Patrick, That the Press is Open. Gentlemen, If you would know
who I mean by this T. F. I shall answer this, by asking, Who do you mean by I
N. take thee M. in the Form of Matrimony? I mean no body but he that shows his
Guilt by Wincing; and whoever that Person be, I Will Reply to him (as I told
Campbel) de die in diem, till I wear my Pen to the Stumps, It Is true, Patrick
Refused to Answer my Broad Side, (I mean my Second Letter in the
Dublin-Scuffle) as knowing his own Guilt: And I suppose BRASS will have more
Wit than to have his Life Exposed: But if he has more Courage than Patrick had,
and will Answer this with his Name to it, I shall Treat him as a Generous
Enemy. But if Brass (or any one else) offers to murder my Reputation in a
private manner, I shall smell (as I did before) whence the Malice springs, and
will do my self Justice on Patrick Campbel, and the Wanton Fop of Copper-Alley,
and on a certain Person who boasts (for it is only such are my Enemies) he has
lain with several Lewd Women: Gentlemen, The Hints I have by me on These Heads,
are large enough for a Second Part of the Dublin-Scuffle; which I resolve to
Publish, if they slander me when I am gone, or offer to cleanse their hands by
laying their vile Practices at my Door, which I am clear of, so much as in
thought; Neither could they brand me with an ill thing, for the 9 Months I
lived in Dublin; for I dared 'em to it again and again, and they durst not say
Black was my Eye: but when I am shipped off, and gone too far to disprove their
Lies, then to invalidate my Charge against 'em, they will perhaps call me
Drunkard, Swearer, Sheep-stealer, Whore-master, Murderer, and what not? For how
far will Revenge carry men? But my comfort is, they may as well call me
R^inoceros, as any one of the foresaid Monsters; for they can no more prove me
one than the other: And therefore whatever Lies they spread, or Lewd Wretches may
be tempted to swear; and some Evidence ( especially Irish) will swear through
an Inch board; as was seen in the Case of the Earl of Shaftsbury, and at other
Trials, yet I defy the worst their Revenge can utter, provided I have a fair
hearing; but that I shall never have, for they durst not (but in private)
slander me whilst I staid, and when, Gentlemen, I Am gone, rather than want
something to charge me with, they will make that exact Justice I did ye all, pass
for a piece of Hypocrisy. But if that be White and Innocent too, then will
they go near to indict my very Care and my Caution, and make my very flying
Temptations to be (tho but superficially) Criminal. But if my Conversation be
Fair and Honest, (the Account of which shall be added to the Dublin-Scuffle)
then will they venture to dive into the very Recesses of my Soul, for it may be
there may skulk some naughty Thought, which Patricks People will not fail to
produce as Evidence against me --

Gentlemen, of this Temper I found my Enemies in the Dublin-Scuffle, and this
is the Treatment I expect from 'em as sooon as I am under Sail, but they know
Mr. Wild is a^ Honest Man, and ready on the Spot to Defend my Innocence, and
therefore they will scarce abuse me, but behind the Curtain; But if my Reputation
is Murdered by a Person who conceals himself, I shall value it as little as I
do Patricks Malice, for let the World judge of Abuses which the Authors are not
able to prove, and are ashamed to own. However, Gentlemen, though I Am leaving
Ireland, I still dare these sneaking Badgers to do their worst, and to prove
I Am in good earnest, I do in this last Farwell offer 5 l. to any that will and
can honestly swear to any thing my Enemies say that will bear an Action; for if
it touches my good Name, the Law is open, and tho it cost me 500 l. the Lawyers
shall pursue the Slanderer with the utmost Rigor; for tho an Honest Reputation
is preferable to all the World, yet I ought to own my self Guilty of every
thing that wounds my Name, that I dare not prosecute.

Thus (Gentlemen) you see I am prepared, for the worst that Patrick (and all
his Scoundrels) can say against me, but having told 'em the Truth, I must
expect as abusive Dirt as their foul hands are able to fling, but the most
false and ridiculous things they can say or invent, will not at all surprise me;
for I know it is easy to dress up even an Apostle in a Fools Coat, and to laugh
at him: I don't presume to have better luck than the Great SHERLOCK, and
several Eminent Divines who are yet living, who, tho Men of Great Piety and
Learning could not pass through the World without a SLANDER, or a WEASEL
nibling at their Reputation, and therefore Gentlemen, had I not known my
Innocence, (except what I do Penance for in these sheets) I should not have
Scuffled with them; But if they will let me have fair play, when I am gone, S^^
nothing but what they found -- Put their Names to what they Write, and Publish
nothing but what they will prove (for Accusations make no Man a Criminal) I defy
all my Enemies, from the Man in Buff, down to the Black-Rose; which (tho the
best Flower in all the Garden, yet) when it spreads its Leaf, and begins to
swell with Conceit and Pride, it loses it is Fragrancy, and shall be respected
accordingly -- Thus as I began, so I end my Farwell with a Defyance to all my
Enemies --

But Gentlemen, I have tired ye all; So I come now to [ the last Becken of
Farwel] Then Honest Wild, Dear Wainright, Generous Dell, Handsome Powel, Easy
Dick, Friend Dobbs, (and all my other Friends) Farwell, Farwell for ever, for the
Wind is fair, ( Geo. Larkin and Price are already in the Boat) and I have but
time to tell you that I am (as you found me all along)

Dublin, Dec. 26. School. being Monday 8 in the Morning. Your very Faithful, and
very Humble Servant, John Dunton.


The Answer to my Twelfth Letter, being Remarks on my Farwell to Dublin.
SIR;
I Have received so many of Your Letters concerning your Irish Adventures, that
one more will make them up a Baker's Dozen: By your last, I perceive you are
like a True Game Cock, being once Engaged, there is no Dis-engaging you again.
You are so much flushed with your Victories in Ireland, that I perceive you
breathe nothing but Dreadful Threats against your Enemies in England, enough to
make them either run away, or meet you on the Road with Terms of Submission;
which (you look so big) I am afraid must be no less, than to submit to the Will
of the Conqueror, and Surrender on Discretion: And to be free with you, I
think 'twill be their Best Way; and if I knew them, would send them Penny-Post
Letters a piece to persuade them to it. You need not make any Apology for not
fig^ting your Way in Tropes and Figures, for your Flights are so Extraordinary,
that I do believe they can be reduced under any of the Rules of our Common
Rhetoric. To make a handsome Retreat, is one of the best Accomplishments in a
Good Captain; but I don't perceive yours to be any thing of that nature: To me,
it looks more like the Sounding of a New Charge; and by your Way of Marching to
the Field, I can almost Assure you of the Victory, without giving my self the
Trouble of Consulting the Entrails of Birds or Beasts.

But now to your Last Farwell to your Acquaintance in Dublin, whether Friends or
Enemies.

Your very first Line is a Cordial to the former, and a Corrosive to the
latter. You have Sold your Venture of Books; then Patrick, I perceive, has
Scuffled with you to little Purpose. If this be the first Note of your Retreat,
I can scarcely imagine what other you can make use of for a Triumph; but this I
impute to your Modesty.

As to the Catalogue of Your Books, which you think fit to exhibit, to show the
World they were not Trash, as your Enemies maliciously alleged them to be, I
am of Opinion you might have saved your self the Labor. Those that Bought them
did not Think them so; Else they Reflected upon Themselves, more than your
Enemies did upon You: And as for Booksellers who called them by that Name, it
would have passd well enough under the Notion of the no less True, than Common
Saying, viz. That Two of a Trade can never Agre^: -- And as to Others, your
Catalogue is no Vindication: For there are Men in the World who will 'call the
first and best Book in your Catalogue, Trash; I mean the Bible: And therefore
well may others be so called: Nor indeed is there any thing more usual amongst
depraved Men, than so undervalue what does not agree with their own private
Sentiments, or what they have not an Interest in themselves.

But admitting, that in your Venture, there might be some Trash; I would ^ain
know, what Bookseller there is, who has none in his Shop; yea, ^r what
Gentleman or Divine is without it in his Clos^t. If Authors have Trash in their
Heads, the World must endure the Penance to have it in their Houses and Hands,
so that the Reflection is General; and I question very much, whether any, or
all of your Enemies, are Masters of so many Good Books as were in your Venture?
And whether there be not more Trash, in the Best of their Shops, than you
carried to Ireland?

For the Fairness of your Dealing, in not employing Setters, and making use of
Trusty Servants; it is proper, that you make your Appeal to the Public in your
Last Farewell: But I am afraid, you have been too particular in that matter,
which can scarcely admit of any excuse, but that it shows the Goodness of your
Nature; that not so much as an Honest Porter shall miss his due praise from
you. As to Mr. Wild, I perceive, according to your Character, he is a Second
Millington; so that if you were happy in his Assistance, he was happy in your
Justice. Your design of going to Scotland, I cannot say much to; that Country
has labored under discouragements, as to Learning, for many Years, tho it does
not want its proportion of Learned Men; and some of them you know, as the Lord
Bishop of Salisbury, to name no more, make a great Figure in the World, on that
Account: But as I am informed, by the constant intercourse they have with
London and Holland, they are pretty well furnished with Books; and what they
buy, is generally of the Best Sort; so that if you go thither, you must have an
Auction well picked, for those that buy Books there, are either the Chief of
the Gentry, who are generally Men of Good Breeding, or the Richest of their
Clergy, with whom every thing will not go down, that is greedily coveted by the
Wits here. -- And besides, there are so many of their own Booksellers, that
come hither yearly, that I question if you will find your account in going
thither, except you can afford Extraordinary Pennyworths.

You talk, I perceive, of going to Rome; I hope you don't design to carry
English Books there, if you do, you are likely to find a very discouraging
Market; and for Latin Books, such as they value, the Continent can furnish them
cheaper than our Island: But if you will go, Reserve all the Trash and Stuff
you can g^t, for that Auction; the worst that the London Booksellers Shops
contains, is good enough for the Wh^re of Rome.

Having done with Patrick, and the rest of the Scufflers in Dublin, I perceive
you now whet your Pen against T. F. and others of the same kidney in London;
It Is but Just that you should make Reprisals upon one to his Face, who has been
so Cowardly as to Attaque you behind your Back Envy they say looks Pale, and
that seems to be so much of T. F's quality, that I am afraid all your
Rhetoric will not be able to make him blush, yet I am confident that upon Reading
what you say of him, he must needs have some Stings within, or else his Case is
worse than was that of either the first or second Spira.

The great Number of Books you have Printed, may very well be allowed in part
of an Apology for some Trash, and I question whether any of your Adversaries
have printed as many Good Books, in proportion, as you have done. Your
Ingenuous Confession, that you don't approve of all you have Printed, ought
also to be allowed as another part of your defense, and I think the practice of
some of the Trade (to print what they can get a Penny by) may very well be
allowed to Complete it, as far as the Case will admit of a defense; and
therefore whatever Rigid Casuists may do, it ill becomes Booksellers to hit
any such thing in your Teeth: Let him that is without Guilt in that Respect,
throw the first stone at you. But I find T. F. is not the Man that must begin,
you have by a just Providence hit a Blot in his Escutchion; by which, I
suppose, you have him at Command, and can Charge him with a downright Cheat
upon the World, if he be not so wise as (with Merry-Andrew on the Stage) to Eat
his Pudding and hold his Tongue. What you say as to your General Practice in
the Way of Dealing, I conceive, to be so Universally known, that few will offer
to contradict you; Nor can any Man in Justice upbraid, or be angry with you,
for disposing your Stock to the best advantage, by Auction or otherwise: These
are but Snarles, and the ordinary effects of Envy in ill Men, who Grudge to see
others thrive better than themselves.

I come now to your second Spira, whereof you have given such a full and
Satisfactory Account, that I am of opinion, no thinking Man can hence forward
Entertain an ill thought of you upon that Head. If it be a forgery, it is none
of your making, or contrivance, nor is there a Bookseller in Town would have
Refused the Copy upon the Like Information. As to that Person who dealt so
Basely with you, and exclaimed against the Book, tho he was so Eager to be a
sharer in it, your Reproof is so sharp and pungent, and yet so true and just,
that if he have any Resentments within his breast, or were ever accustomed to
Reflect upon his own ways, I should not much wonder that he became a true
Subject for a second Spira himself, if he allowed his own Conscience a free
Parley; All that I can say further is this, that you have laid it fairly at the
Methodizers Door, and that of I. S. the Divine, who gave him the Information,
if they will not Vindicate themselves, you were not in that obliged to bear them
Company. The Defense of your self on this Head, was certainly Necessary, and
you have performed it so well, that were any Friend of mine engaged in a Combat
of the like Nature, I could not tell where to recommend him to a better Second
than your self: You needed not have been at the trouble of such an
Asseveration, that this Defense is the product of your own Pen, for I am
satisfied every body that knows you, will be ready enough to believe it.

SIR,

I am sorry that to the ill Treatment you have met with from Patrick Campbel,
you should have that of other unjust Men added, who have Bought what they will not
Pay for; It is but just the Bu^^s and they should reckon when you are gone,
seeing they would not come to an account with your self: I am glad however that
they cannot plead your own Example as a President, and that no Man can charge
you with any thing you have not paid for: Honesty is always Uniform, and the
same in Ireland as in England, and therefore it is that the Provocations you
have met with, have not been able to make any change upon you, or to influence
you to return Evil for Evil.

Your Grateful Remembrance of your Friends that encouraged your Auctions, does
in my opinion, bespeak more of the Justice of your Temper, than of your
digestedness of thought. It had been sufficient to have named some of the most
Eminent, and to have included the rest with an etc. Neither do I know how some
of them may take it, to have their Characters published in this method; Modesty
is a tender quality, and will soon be offended: The kindness of your heart must
be your best Apology, and to such as know you, it will be excuse enough; but
you ought to have remembered, that there is something else in the old Proverb of
Killing with Kindness, than a mee^ Pleasing: It cannot however be supposed,
that you have any sordid design in these Encomiums, now that your Auctions are
over, and that your next Ramble is designed elsewhere, and therefore all that
can be said for it is this, That whereas some Men are troubled with an
Overflowing of the Gall, you are troubled with the contrary Distemper, if the
saying be true, that jecore Amamus. It may perhaps, be ill taken by those of
the Higher sort of your Friends, that you should join so many of an Inferior
Rank, as sharers with them in your Valedictory Elogiums; but I see no great
Reason for it: No Man can live without the Services of the meanest Vulgar, and
therefore Justice obliges us to owe no Man any thing but Love. But it seems,
you have a mind to Supererrogate, and to owe none of that neither, but to pay
it all before hand, or on sight: I must confess, that for my own share, I never
could think there was any thing of Barbarity or want of Cultivation in that
Good Nature of some of the Indians, which Travelers ridicule them for, viz.
That they will not only enquire, after the Welfare of their Friends and their
Families, but very kindly ask, how their Horses and their Dogs do; which in my
opinion, includes this principle of Natural Justice in it, That we ought to be
Grateful to all sorts of Creatures, that yield us Lawful Profit or Pleasure:
And thus I bid Farewell, to your Farewell to all your Dublin Friends.

I come next to your Project of Rambling, as to which I must tell you, That you
have Rambled more with your head in one Year, than you will be able to do with
your Heels in seven; therefore would advise you to make use of the Curb a
little, and not to be altogether on the Spur. You say, Your Raven was gone to
Roost, a pretty while ago; and I know no reason why his Master should Ramble.
But if the sight of four Kingdoms, and the Marrying of two Wives, be not enough
to qualify this Rambling Humor, you must rectify your Geography a little
better, and not Talk of Crossing the Hellespont to see Greece, for you must
either Sail by Greece, or travel through it, before you can come at the
Hellespont, except you design to take a round, and to repay the Czar his Visit;
or if you be for a nearer cut, Sail down the Danube, and fall into the
Black-Sea.

Methinks, the Good Entertainment you boast of at home, should entice you to
stay there; If Valeria's Arms be so Charming, She shall, if she take my advice,
transform them into Chains, and hold you so fast, that you shall not have leave
to stir; if Love will not oblige her to it, I am resolved that Fear shall; And
therefore Valeria, for it is to you that I now address my self, Don't trust the
Raven too often abroad; You know that Noah 's when once sent out, never came in
again; and for any thing I perceive, yours has a great mind to be following
his; it was beyond the Hellespont where that was let loose, and I don't know,
if yours once pass the Dardanelles, but they may meet, and so ramble on, and
never think of returning to their Roost again; Noah 's has none to return to,
except it be an old rotten piece of the Ark on the Mountains of Arrarat, or as
some say, of Armenia; and I am satisfied, the Raven in Jewin-street has better
quarters: If nothing else will prevail with him to stay and roost there, tell
him, That Noah 's Raven feeds upon Carrion; and you know very well, by his
rejecting Dorinda's Billet Doux, that he hates such entertainment.

But now I return again to your Husband, and must tell him, He exposes your
Virtue too much, first, by Rambling from you; and then by giving such a High
Commendation of you, as were enough, but that you are beyond the reach of
Temptation, to endanger you, or at least, to make you run Lucretia 's Fate. --
Wherefore Sir, Let me tell you, that as some will charge you with impertinence
in troubling the World with an account of your Happiness in two Wives
successfully, when there are so many Thousands, that to their grief, can never
say, they were happy in one; if any misfortune should befall you on that
account, you must blame your own Imprudence for it. -- Had Tarquin never heard
any thing of Lucretia's Virtue and Beauty, he would never have tempted her; and
therefore my advice to you is, To stay at home and guard your Treasure, and
don't both Fare well, and cry Roast Meat too. Remember the Old Saying, Sed
tacitus Pasci si posset Corvus Haberet,
Plus dapis et vixce multo minus invidiaeque.


I am Sir,

Your Faithful Friend, etc.

Advertisement.
The Three following Letters in the Billet Doux, which are called the Eleventh,
Twelfth and Thirteenth Letters, are Mis-Printed, and ought to have been Printed
the Thirteenth, Fourteenth and Fifteenth Letters.

THE BILLET DOUX, Sent by a Citizens-Wife IN DUBLIN Tempting Me to LEUDNESS:
With my ANSWERS to Her.

EPHESIANS. V. xii. It is a shame even to speak of those Things which are done of
them in Secret.

LONDON: Printed by George Larkin, Jun. (for the Author) and are to be Sold by
A. Baldwin near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane, and by the Booksellers in
Dublin, 1699.

The Eleventh Letter.
SIR,
I Formerly gave you an Account of my Scuffle with Patrick Campbel, who is none
of the best of Men; and now shall entertain you with a surprising Adventure
that has befallen me with a Lewd Woman. 'Twas a Billet Doux* sent me by a
Citizens Wife in Dublin (as I judge by a Passage in it) both Enticing and
Threatening me to her wanton Embraces. Your Remarks on this, as on my former
Letters, will add to all the Obligations which you have already laid upon,

SIR, Your very much obliged Servant, John Dunton.


The Billet was directed thus, To Mr. John Dunton at the Auction-House at
Dick's Coffee-House in Skinner-Row.
[And is as follows, viz.]
SVre Philaret, you are not always guilty of disrespect to your Friends; cannot
you be more punctual to an Assignation; I can assure you, I was punctual both
to Place and Time, and waited more than two Hours in hopes of your Happy
Arrival; but when I found my Expectations frustrated, and my self only Banter'd
and Abused, and forced to Retreat without so much as the bare Aspect of what I
so longed for; none but one in my Circumstance is able to imagine the various
Passions that moved me: Fear, Hope, Love, Revenge, all acted their several
Parts, and so passed off the Stage; only Love remained to plead Excuses for
you. Some of them so frivolous, that I am ashamed to mention them, only to tell
you ( that senceless as they were) they had Power enough to prevail with one
willing to believe ( though against Sense or Reason) any Things that pleads in
Philaret's Favor; ^ome I went, where I attend your Answer, and am longing with
Impatience, till I see what Excuses ( the false) Philaret can frame for
himself, for so the present Passion styles him; though that Sentiment too was
over before I had finished the Sentence; and I could almost find in my Heart to
burn my Letter; but that I should not have time to write another, before the
watchful Argus would inspect into my Privacies; then I was about to blot it
out, only that I feared would spoil the Phiz of my Billet; so I resolved to let
it stand as a mark of my Courage, that I dare a^ sometimes adventure to think
Philaret false; yea, and that I was once bold enough to let you know it; --
Well Philaret, I shall one Day be even with you, and it may be, you may Repent
when it may be too late to retrieve the slight Value you have had for the most
sincere and cordial Friendship laid at your Feet, by

Sept. 2. School. Your ever faithful, Dorinda.
POSTSCRIPT.
DIrect your Answer to me, to be left at that which was St. Lawrences
Coffee-House on Cork-hill, under the borrowed Name of Captain John Seamore, and
I will order it to be called for by one that will safely deliver it to*

Your own ( Dorinda) if you please.




The First Answer to the Citizens-Wife.
SEpt. 5th. School. -- I Received a Letter subscribed Dorinda, but am wholly a
Stranger both to your Person and Meaning -- your two Hours -- your Time and
Place -- are Arabic to me, who approve of no Assignations but what are Just;
and therefore it is very certain your Letter was wrong directed, and should have
gone to some of your Lewd Companions, who in your Drink ( for there are such
Monsters as drunken Women) or by the likeness of Garb, you mistook for me -- or
perhaps you're some Suburb Impudence, who would abuse an Honest Man in hopes of
getting a Penny to conceal your Slanders. If this is your Design (as I am told
it is usual with common Strumpets) you are as much mistaken in my Humor, as you
are in my Person, and therefore go about your Business; for till you're
Virtuous I cannot Love ye, and it is not in my Nature to fear any Thing. But you
say you will be even with me, if I fly your Lewd Embraces, and that (if I don't
meet you) I shall repent when 'twill be too late, the slight Value I have for
you: but (I Thank God) my Virtue is Proof against all your Charms, and my
Innocence such, as I challenge you to do your worst. But though the Repentance
you threaten, no ways affects me, yet if you carry on your Jest farther, 'twill
be fatal to Mr. S --, as he is the only Person in Dublin, that knows me by the
Name of Philaret, and must expect (upon the least Occasion) to bear the scandal
of being your Friend -- As to your Care in concealing your Leudness ( for you
say you're afraid of your watchful Argus) it no ways obliges me, I should more
rejoice to hear that such a wanton (as your Billet shows you to be) had broke
the Devils Fetters, and was kneeling to her Husband for Pardon; though if he
denies it* you have no Reason to Pout; for if Citizens Wives will C -- d their
Husbands, and invent new Fashions (and frisking Strains) of Disobedience, which
their Holy Ancestors (and for ought we find in the Word) even the worst of
Women abhorred; why should not their Husbands, either send 'em to the House of
Correction, or suit 'em with new Forms of Discipline: To what end else are they
to dwell with 'em as Men of Knowledge? Does this Knowledge, think ye, import
nothing but Pusillanimity and Patience? Is the Husband God's Vicegerent for
nothing? And can he not be a Saint, unless a Fool too? But though the cold
Water your Leudness has ^lung upon Argus Affection is enough to extinguish it,
yet the way to Amendment is never out of date; and who knows, if you prove as
kind a Wife as you have been to the contrary, but Argus may be yet Happy. But
he is Flesh and Blood as well as you, and therefore, except of a Wanton you
become Chaste, he were better Travel than live with a W -- r; if you think of
Amendment, fling your self at your Husbands Feet; Tears in your Eyes may carry
the Cause, where a Husband is Judge? Without this, you do but dissemble with
God and Man, neither can Argus think you Repent, till you discover your Lewd
Haunts, and the Names of those that have defiled his Bed; to act thus, is to
shake Hands with your Master Sin ( which I find is Lust) and in some measure to
repair the Damage you have done to Religion by your Whorish Intreagues. As this
will prove your Sincerity, so 'twill make Argus forget your former Leudness,
and if he is a generous Husband, never to mention 'em more. And Argus, if she
thus repents, prithee receive her again -- for what know thou, O Husband,
whether thou shall save thy Wife? 1 Cor. 7. 16.
Neither are these ungrateful Reflections ( my own Dorinda, as you call your
self) for there is no Faith in Sin, and I ought to slight a Friendship which
cannot be true, and would end in the Ruin of Soul and Body; Then go and Sin no
more, John 8.11.
ben't dilatory in these Matters ('it is ill vent'ring. Eternity upon your last
Breath) nor suffer your Aversion to Argus to spread abroad, for a Quarrel
Concealed, is half Cured -- I have only to add, That I wish you Chaste, and
better Eyes for the Future, and then Argus and you will fall a Loving again;
and remember at Parting, it is your Penitence, and nothing else, can set you
right in the Opinion of, etc.


Thus Sir, I have given you a faithful Account of this New Temptation, with
which I have been Assaulted; and of my Reply to this Female Aggressor; I desire
you to use your accustomed Freedom with me in your Remarks, which shall always
be taken in good Part, by

Sir, Your very humble Servant, John Dunton.

Remarks on the Billet Doux, and I. D's Letter in Answer to it.
My Good Friend,
YOUR Last, with the Billet Doux, is more surprising to me, than any thing that
happened in your Encounter with Patrick Campbel. I cannot but bewail the
hardness of your Fate, that you should be condemned to Fight with Beasts of
both Sexes: I find Ireland cannot boast of her being free from the Seed of the
Serpent, whatever she may say as to her having none of those Creatures in
Specie; and were I to choose, I should rather desire to Inhabit amongst Adders,
than Lewd Women: Happy would it be for Ireland, if she could make an exchange
of the one for the other; but so long as the Popish Clergy are suffered to
Nestle in such Numbers there, it is in vain to hope for it: Rome may well be
called the Mother of Harlots, when it is the Practice of her Sons, to make as
many such as ever they can.

I did not think however, that the Art of writing Billet Douxes, had been so
well understood in Ireland: Your Dorinda seems to be so very expert in her
Trade, That I fancy (if there be any thing of Reality in it, that is to say, if
there be not Masculine Knavery and Malice at the bottom of it) She must be some
Abdicated Retainer to our London Play Houses; or perhaps, the Offcast of some
Dead or Reformed Officer, who having no pay himself, is not able to retain her:
Nay, for any thing that I know, She may be the Captain of Kirk 's Troop of
Twenty Five, that they say, he had in that Country, when so many of the Late
King James's Atheists were sent to fight against their Brethren the Papists;
for I can hardly think, a She-Cit of Dublin, so well versed in Ovid de Art
Amandi, as your Dorinda seems to be.

It Is true I might Fancy, it were some Green Sickness Nun, that had gone a
Catter-wawling from her Nunnery, but then it comes into my mind, that they are
sufficiently provided by the Monks and Friars; for you have heard, it was an
Observation of Henry the 4 th of France, many years ago, That the Nunnery was
the Barn, and the Monks the Thrashers.

Then give me leave to add one Conjecture more, Perhaps it might have been a
Trap of Patrick's laying, and that he had a mind to try what he could do by
Women, since he was not able to deal with you by Wit.

Had you been caught in the Snare, there would have been subject of Triumph,
and there is no reason to doubt but he would have Trumpeted your Fame. This
cannot be accounted Uncharitable, if I understand the true Character of the
Man, for he that makes so bold with the last of the Ten Commandments (as it
appears Patrick has done) cannot be supposed to have any great value for the
other Nine: But be that how it will, I applaud your Conduct, and think you
acted the part of an Honest Man, in returning such a Sharp and Pertinent
Answer; and the part of a Prudent Man, in doing it with those Precautions: You
know I never Preach up Merit, and therefore you will not be offended if I tell
you, That it was but your Duty: I am not unsensible, what many Men in your
Circumstances would have pleaded in Excuse of complying with such a Proffer;
but you knew the danger of yielding to the Passion either of Revenge or Lust;
none but Weak Men and Fools, are Slaves to those Tyrannical Masters. Besides
the Reward of a Good Conscience, your Courage in this Affair, will enhaunce
your Value to your Family at Home, or at least, it ought to do so, if they be
not condemned to perpetual Ingratitude.

I am the more Confirmed in my Thoughts, that it was a Snare laid for your
Reputation, when I consider your way of carrying your self, the plainness of
your Habit, and the influence which your Illness and late Scuffle must needs
have had upon your outside; and especially, that the Letter was directed to
your Auction-Room, for if the design had taken, then there would have been
ground for Patrick to have Libelled you in the Irish Flying Post, and to have
called it an Assignation-Room for Strumpets, instead of an Auction-Room for
Books; which would have effectually hindered any Man's frequenting it, who had
but the least value for his Reputation. This is all I shall say at present, and
conclude with my hearty Wishes, that you may still continue a Conqueror over
your own Passions, as well as over your unjust Enemies. I am

SIR, Your Sincere Friend and Well-wisher.

The Twelfth Letter.
SIR,
YOU are so very obliging and happy in your Remarks, and Advice, that I make
bold to trouble you again with my second Letter to the Irish Dorinda. I thought
it my Duty not to let Her pass without a severer Reproof, the Copy of which I
here send you, to satisfy you how abominable such Crimes are in my Eyes, and
that I took the most effectual Method I could to prevent a second Attempt of
that Nature upon me. I am what I always was,

SIR, Your very humble and much obliged Servant, John Dunton.

To Dorinda.
I Hope you have received my First, which because I think not severe enough, I
send you a Second. You see I reject your Courtship, as I would shake off a
Toad, or a Snake that should Crawl upon me; for I look upon your Poison to be
worse than theirs. Yet because I would not be altogether ungrateful, for that
which you proffered me under the Notion of a Kindness, I send you, as a
suitable present, a Treatise of Fornication, and a Book called God's Judgments
against Whoredom, both which were Printed for me. I recommend them to your
serious Perusal, they may through God's Assistance be instrumental to Reform
you, and at the same time to satisfy you that you mistook your Man, when you
directed your Billet Doux to me. Yet I know not but there may be a Providence
in it, for you see my Auction affords proper Remedies for your Distemper; and I
am so generous as to send you them Gratis. You must Pardon me however, if in my
Applications I do something resemble the Quack; that is to say, if I prescribe
Physic without seeing the Patient; because I remember Solomon says, Go not by
the Door of the Harlot, less she entice thee; that none but Fools follow such,
and that the Way to her House is the Way to Hell and Death. That the Mouth of a
strange Woman is a deep Pit, and that none but those who are abhorred of the
Lord shall fall into it.

I wish you would be at the Pains to Read the fifth and seventh Chapters of the
Proverbs. You who are Ladies of Pleasure, use to Converse much with your
Looking-Glass, and I will assure you, that there is the best Mirror you can
make use of, it will exactly show you all your Spots and Patches.

I doubt not, but you are troubled with all the Infectious Distempers that
attend those of your Trade; and seeing the best way to cure Ulcers is to Lance
them well, read this Treatise of Fornication, it may prove of Sovereign use; or
if you find it makes your Wounds smart too much, apply the softer Remedy of the
Book of God's Judgments against Whoredom, which being Historical may please you
better perhaps, and be no less Effectual for working your Cure. To make the
Packet complete, I likewise send you another Medicine, called Concubinage and
Polygamy displayed, which is an Answer to a Parson, one Mr. Butler, who fell
out with his Wife, and in with his Maid, and therefore mustered up all the
Arguments he could in Defense of the more Genteel Practice of keeping Misses.
Which you will here find solidly answered and condemned, but much more your own
abominable Practice, which seems by your Letter to be that of a common
Prostitute, or next a kin to it.

I would offer a few Arguments, if it were possible to reclaim you, and
therefore would pray you to consider that Uncleanness dishonours your Body,
makes you despicable in the Eyes of all Men, nay even of those that haunt you,
so that your usual Reward is an infamous Name, Loathsome Diseases, Extreme
Poverty, and an End suitable to such a vile way of Living.

Then it damns your Soul, makes you incapable of receiving any good Advice,
destroys the Peace of your Family, if you have any, brings a Scandal and
Disgrace upon your Children, reflects shame upon your Relations, and makes you
to be abhorred by all Civil Company.

It is against Reason, for it destroys all Property, brings a spurious Issue
into Families, hinders the Propagation of Mankind, debases Humane Nature, makes
you more Vile than the Brute Beasts.

It is against Charity, not only, because of the Discord it occasions in
Families, but also because the Children of Whoredom are many Times murdered,
and continually neglected, either in their Maintenance or Education, which is
destructive both to their Souls and Bodies, and upon this Account it was as
severely punished by the Canon Law as Murder.

It is against all the Rules of Christianity -- There being nothing more
severely Censured in the Scriptures than Fornication and Adultery; Persons who
continue in those Practices, being therein declared unfit for the Communion of
the Church here, and of the Saints hereafter; and liable to Everlasting
Damnation: This is so plain, that I shall not trouble you with quoting Texts,
for you can turn your Eye no where, but you will find what I say to be true,
that the Holy Ghost Threatens Gods Judgments upon Whoremongers and Adulterers,
and that they shall not inherit the Kingdom of Heaven.

We see by Experience, that they who give themselves up to this Sin are very
seldom, if ever, reclaimed; but go on in their Wickedness till they become Vile
in the Eyes of all the World, hateful to Heaven and Earth, and fit only to be
Fuel for Hell.

God in his Just Judgment gives such Persons up for the most part to hardness
of (...)* a Reprobate Mind, Vile Affections, and to work all Uncleanness with
Greediness; so that instead of being ^it Temples for the Holy Ghost to dwell
in, they become Dens for Legions of Unclean Spirits; and how often does it
appear upon the Trials of (...), Thieves, and Murderers, that the^r falling
into this Sin of Uncleanness, has been the first occasion of their committing
those other Crimes, which bring them to fatal Ends.

It were easy to fill a Volume with Topics against this Crying and Reigning
Sin; but your Temper is such, that I can scarcely believe you will have
Patience to read those short hints I here send you. Yet Charity obliges me to
give you this Reproof, though it be no other than to cast Pearls before S^ine.

I have cleared my own Conscience by improving this Opportunity, and if you do
not Reform upon this fair Warning, Remember that it will be a dreadful Witness
against you at the Last Day, however slight you may make of it now.

If you have a Husband, your Guilt is still the Greater; as being aggravated
with Perj^ry, and the odious Crime of Ingratitude: Nay, perhaps may be attended
in Time with Murder of your self, Husband or Children; you entail a Disgrace
upon your Posterity, and fill your Relations with Shame: -- The very Name of a
Stu^^ipet, being as offensive to the Ears of every Modest Person, as the sight
of a Dead Carcass, t^^o of the dearest and nearest Kindred, is to our Eyes, or
the Scent of it to our Nose.

But for all these known Consequences of a Whorish Life, yet there is more
Wantons in Dublin, besides Dorinda; nay ho^ common and barefaced (as I hinted
elsewhere) is this Vice grown? -- For there is my Lord -- L -- declares, he
could Love his Wife above all Women in the World, if she were not his Wife. The
Duke of -- is of the same Mind; and the George and Garter little better. Sir
Charles -- follows his Example; and most have a Tang of this Rambling Fancy. --
Where is the Man (except my self) that is not a C -- d? Or the Woman that so
Tempers her self in her Behavior with Men, as if Virtue had settled her self
in her Looks and Eyes ^ I profess* (when I have excepted Three or Four Persons)
I know not where to find her. We were wont to say, It was a wise Child that
knew his own Father, but now we may say, It is a wise Father that knows his own
Child. Men and Women as familiarly go into a Chamber, to (...) one another on a
Feather-bed, as into a Tavern, to be merry with Wine. She that does not Dance
so lofty, that you may see her Silken Garters, and learn to forget Shame, is no
Body. Who would think to find Hercules, the only Worthy of his Time, stooping
to the Meanness of being a Servant to Omphale, and in the quality of a Wench
working at the Rock and Spindle? Or to see Mark Anthony lose the World for a
Cleopatra, a Woman, a thing in Petticoats? But would Flesh and Blood listen to
Prove. 22. 14. and remember, that the Child often proves the Picture of the
Lover, and discovers it (Blessed Conclusion of stolen sweets) they would never
invade the Right of another. This Vice, was formerly punished with Death:
Abimelech made it Death to the Men of Gerar, to meddle with the Wife of Isaac;
and Judah Condemned Tha^ar for her Adulterous, Conception; the Egyptian Law was
to cut off the Nose of the Adulteress, and the offending Part of the Adulterer.
The Locrians put out both the Adulterers Eyes. The Sermai (as Tacitus reports)
placed the Adulteress amidst her Kindred Naked, and caused her Husband to beat
her with Clubs through the City; and the Cumani caused the Woman to Ride upon
an Ass Naked, and hooted at, and for ever after called her (in scorn) ^ Rider
upon the Ass: And here in England (which Argus must needs know, and therefore
(Dorinda) make no more Assignations) it is common for Whores to be Whipped, or to
do Penance in a White Sheet; and in Scotland they are put into (what they
call) the Stool of Repentance -- But, Dorinda, besides the shame that attends
Whoring, you will find ( if you dare read the Duty of Man, P. 21 8.) That to
accept your Offer, is to do Argus many and high Injustices, for it is first the
Robbing him of that which of all other Things, he should count most precious,
the Love and Fidelity of his Wife; nor is this all, but it is further ingulfing
him ( if ever he come to discern it) in that most tormenting Passion of
Jealousy, which is called the Rage of a Man. It is yet further bringing upon
him the Name of a (...). and though (as this Author observes) it is very
Unjust, he should fall under Reproach only because he is injured; yet unless
the World could be (...) molded, it will certainly be his Lot. Besides
Dorinda, if you C -- d Argus, it is a Robbery (as this Author further observes)
^ in the usual Sense of the Word; for perhaps, it may be the thrusting in the
Child of the Adulterer into his Family, to share both in the Maintenance and
Portions of his own Children; and this is an errand Theft. First, In respect of
the Man, who surely intends not the Providing for another Man's Child; and then
in respect of the Children, who are by that Means defrauded of so much as that
goes away with. And therefore, whosoever has this Circumstance of the Sin to
repent of, cannot do it effectually without Restoring to the Family, as much as
he has by that means robbed it of.

Thus ( Dorinda) having briefly shown the Shame, and many ill Consequences that
attend the gratifying your wanton Appetite: I would next give you Directions
(would you Listen to 'em) how to mortify your Carnal Desires, for Lust (as I
said in my first Letter) seems to be your Master-sin -- It Is true, there are
Persons that seek to justify their Commission of this Sin, by the
impossibility of their abst^ining from its Commission; but surely, the Apostle
Paul would not enjoin the Corinthians, to flee Fornication, if it were a Thing
Persons cannot flee; the Plea of cannot is a mere Pretense; the most
passionately Amorous can contain for a Time, upon Promise of enjoying the Woman
he desires; and cannot he then if he will, conta^n for always* when better
Pleasures and Enjoyments are assured to him, upon his Con^^nency* unto all
Eternity.

And now ( Dorinda) having answered the Pretense of Impossibility of your being
Chaste: I shall next proceed to such Directions, which if minded, will keep you
Honest.

I own Directions of this Nature are so common a Theme, that it is impossible to
avoid treading in the steps of other Writers, but I judge you Ladies of
Pleasure, don't Love long Harangues; I shall therefore say in little, what
others have mo^e largely insisted upon.

First, Then in order to the Flying Adultery, suppress the first Desires of
Uncleanness that do arise in your Heart. It Is easier ( Dorinda) to deal with a
Spark, (...) with a Flame; to crush an Egg, than kill a Cockatrice: The
beginning of a Temptation is the Time to show your greatest Valor and
Vigilance in.

Secondly, Hold no Dispute against (...) Temptations to Uncleanness: To Dispute
with it, is the way to be overcome by it, hear the Temptation but speak for it
self, and before you are aware* it insinuates it self into the Bosom of you,
and is in your Heart before you can think it got into your Head; with an unseen
Fire and insensible Power, it melts you into softness, and dissolves you into
yielding: I say ( Dorinda) give it no Consideration, but run away from it, as
Joseph did from his Tempting Mistress. Had our great Grandmother Eve done so at
first with the Devils Temptation, had she given no Ear to his Words, set no Eye
upon the Fruit, held no Dispute with him, but turned her self, and gone away
from him* she had not been the Mother of so much Sin and Misery, as she has
been to her Posterity.

Thirdly, Avoid all Things that may externally provoke to Lust, as Conversation
with Men that are Lewd, etc. Dorinda, if you touch pitch you will be defiled;
Men's Arts to seduce are powerful and prevailing, their Blandishments delicate
and melting, their Words are charming* their Looks enchanting, their Kisses
killing, and their Glances are Darts to destroy; there is Pitch and Birdlime in
their Lips and Fingers, and Itch of amorousness of Skin all over; you may
(Dorinda) as well hug a Flame without being burnt, as to admit a Lewd Man
within your Embraces, and not be all on Fire with the heat of Lust.

To put many Things together for brevity sake, avoid the speaking of any wanton
Words, and if possible the hearing of any spoken; and be sure write no more
Billet Douxes, also the reading of any lascivious Books or Verses, also the
beholding of any impure Sights, either of shameful Parts or Actions themselves,
or the Pictures of them: Avoid also the being a Spectator of any wanton Plays
or Shows, Balls, or Dances, or other lascivious Revels, which by the garish
Dresses, amorous Words, and wanton Gestures used therein, do not only instruct,
but stir up to Uncleanness. These Things ( Dorinda) are the great and common
Bane of Modesty.

Fourthly, Fly those Vices and subdue those Passions which incline you to Lust,
such as Drunkenness (for alas it is now become a Feminine Vice) Gluttony,
Covetousness, Idleness, and Curiosity.

In the first Place shun Drunkenness, for though the Eye stirs up Lust, it is
Drunkenness sets it on Fire; there is but one step (Dorinda) from excessive
Wine to unlawful Lust. Lot's Daughters made their Father drunk with Wine, and
the next News you hear of him is, that in his Drunkenness he lay with his own
Daughters.

Again Dorinda, if you would live a Chaste, Modest Life, you must not Eat to
excess; Iesurun waxed Fat and Kicked, that is, waxed wanton upon his high
Feeding; so Ier. 5. 8. They were as fed Horses, in the Morning every one
Neighed after his Neighbors Wife -- It is very difficult to Feed high, and
Live chastely; then ( Dorinda) avoid not only the use of all lustful Food, but
all extravagant Feeding on any Meat.

Thirdly, Don't be too much in Love with Money, It Is the Root of all Evil, (1 Timothy 6. 10.) There Is a huge Power in Riches to corrupt Chastity, few Women (if
^ut a little amorous) are Proof against the blaze of Gold -- How many Women in
Dublin (and in London too) prostitute their Bodies to all Comers, perhaps for a
beggarly 2 s. 6 d. Yea (and which is a shame to speak) how many Men are there,
that for the Love of Money do as it were let themselves out to hire for
Stallions to satisfy the Lust of some Women; I suppose ye have heard of G --
n, if therefore you're willing to Reform, and to live chastely, you must fly
Covetousness.

Again, I Would advise you to avoid Idleness, for Lust (as Bishop Tailor observes)
usually creeps in at those Emptinesses where the Soul is Vnimployed, and the
Body at Ease; and above all Idleness, the Idleness of the Bed and Couch is most
hurtful; the soft Bed is the Mother of wanton Thoughts -- The Time when David
fell a lusting after Bathsheba was in the Evening, after he had been lolling on
his Bed, 1 Samuel 11. 2. And therefore ( Dorinda) if you would live honest, you must
avoid Idleness.

In the next Place, I would advise ye (if you would live chastely) to make a
Covenant with your Eyes; have a chaste Eye and a Hand* ^or it is all one (says
Bishop Tailor) with what Part of the Body we commit Adultery; what though I
have rejected to C -- d Argus, yet if I let my Eye loose, and enjoy the Lust of
that, I am an Adulterer; for our Savior says -- Look not upon a Woman to Lust
after her; the Eye is a great Inflamer of Lust; we read of Eyes full of
Adultery (2 Pet. 2. 14.) Ioseph's Mistress first cast her Eye upon Joseph, and
then she said Lie with me, Genesis 39. 7. Beauty is a dangerous Thing, therefore
when you see a Handsome Man (especially at Church, if you ever go there) take
heed of Eying him too much, stare not upon him; you may as well face a
Basilisk, as a pretty Face.

Now Dorinda, these Directions, if carefully heeded, will be a means to keep
you Chaste and Honest, but if you find 'em ineffectual (for I Would fain have you a
true Penitent) then,

Fifthly, Mortif^e your Body, in order to the subduing of your Flesh; and to
this Purpose Fast often, and that a considerable Time; take away Diet and
Drink, the fuel of L^st, and the heat of it will abate, and the Fire of it
goes out: In the Fas^s we read of kept by the Saints in Scripture, they did
neither Eat nor Drink, that is, hot until Night, and that which they took then,
was very little, and of mean quality, a bit of Bread and a draught of Water. In
this Case take Meat like Medicines, no more then needs must; to keep you alive
and preserve ye in Health. Thus ( Dorinda) by often forbearing to Eat at all,
and a mean Diet when you do Eat, you will have little mind to be Writing of
Billet Dou^es, for thin ordinary Food will starve your Lust, and bring the
Flesh ( that Enemy of yours) (like a Town p^ned out with a long Seige) to your
own Terms. But ( Dorinda) if the Rebel Lust still haunts your Mind, then use
some sharpness to him, cause him to smart either by Praying in painful Postures
( as on hard Stones, with bare Knees) or else by wearing Sackcloth, or Hair S
-- cks upon your Flesh, or by Scourging your Body with the Rod or Whip. This is
a Course Saint Paul took with himself, (1 Cor. 9. 27.) I keep under my Body,
and bring into Subjection -- St. Bernard.
One for this end tumbled himself among Thorns; another burned his Face and
Hands; a third run sharp Prickles up his Fingers between the Flesh and the
Nails; and ( Dorinda) it is much better to Afflict your self for a while, than
be lashed by Satan forever in Hell.

Sixthly, Meditate on those Things, as may by poring on them curb your Lust;
and here, Dorinda,

First, Consider the falls of those who have miscarried in this way, as of Jane
Shore, Creswel, Nel G -- n, etc. Women famous in their Generations for Wit and
Beauty; and yet see ( Dorinda) to what weakness of Body, and poorness of Spirit
they were brought to by this Sin.

Secondly, Consider the Constancy of others that have continued Chaste,
notwithstanding their Temptations to Uncleanness; the most remarkable one that
I can think-of, is that of Joseph, Recorded in Genesis 39. 7, to 13. He was
tempted to it by his Mistress, who had some Power to command him, and many ways
to oblige him, yet he consented not. He was tempted to it, not by Looks and
Glances, Hints and Intimations, (any of which were enough with too many in
these our Days, to draw them to it) but with downright Words, she plainly and
boldly said to him, Lie with me; and yet he consented not. He was tempted to it
by her, not once or twice only, (for Trial of him, as might be thought) but
many times, to show she was in earnest; she was often at it with him, tempting
him, she spoke to Joseph day by day, and yet he consented not. He was tempted
to it by her, not at unseasonable times only, while Company was at home,
whereby they might be discovered and descryed, but at a time of greatest
seasonableness and opportunity, when he might act the thing with greatest
Secrecy and Security, when he had business to do within the House, and there
was none of the Men of the House there within; and yet he consented not. He was
tempted to it by her, not only by winning Speech, but by enforcing Action; she
not only used Speech to him, but laid hands on him, she caught him by his
Garment, saying, Lie with me, and yet he consented not. Here ( Dorinda) is an
Example of Constancy and Chastity worthy of your Imitation. Not much unlike was
that which St. Hiero^e Reports of a Son of a King of Nicomedia, who being
tempted upon Flowers, and a perfumed Bed whereon he was tied, by an impure
Curtesan with all the Arts, and Circumstances of Luxury, lest the ease of his
posture should abuse him to a yielding to her Temptations, bit off his Tongue,
and spit it in her Face. Dorinda, if such Chaste Examples as these be made
familiar to your Mind by frequen^ Meditation on them, they will help you toward
the Victory over Uncleanness.

Thirdly, Bethink with thy self a while ( Dorinda) when thou art under
Temptation to Uncleanness, what a business that Face is, which thou so doatest
upon, and the Consideration thereof, will very much allay thy heat, and cool
thy desire, and even dash thee out of Countenance. For there is nothing
certainly that so much mastereth the desire of the Flesh, as to think what that
which one loves, is, after once it be dead. And the Experience hereof, we have
in that Hermit, who understanding that a Woman, whom he was too too much
enamoured on, was Dead, went by Night to her Grave, and having opened it, with
the Lap of his Mantle wiped away some of the filth of the dead Corpse, being
half rotten, and when afterward he found himself possessed with any unlawful
desires, he laid abroad his foul and stinking Mantle, and said thus to himself;
Go to now, see what it is that thou do desire, and take thy fill of it. By
which means his heat was cooled, and his Lust quenched.

Then Seventhly, Dorinda, consider that you cannot Act this Sin, but there will
be Eyes upon you.

First, The Eye of God is upon you, The Eyes of the Lord are in every Place, as
Solomon tells us, Prove. 15. 3. beholding the Evil and the Good ^ no possibility
of escaping his sight, if ye should attempt the committing of any such Fact.
And who that has seriously considered of this, could ever have the Confidence
to do any such thing?

In a Fury, or for some politic Purpose, such a like thing as this may be
acted in the presence of a Man; as it once happened in Alexandria, where a
Tarlaquin transported with beastly Fury, ran at a Woman as she came out of the
Stove, threw her on the ground, and notwithstanding all the Resistance she
made, had carnal Knowledge of her in the presence of many Spectators. And so we
read in a Sam. 16. 22. how to make the breach irreparable between Absalom and
his Father David. Absalom spread a Tent upon the Top of the House, and went in
unto his Fathers Concubines in the sight of all Israel.

Yet generally in Men that have not utterly defaced all the common Notices of
God, which Nature's hand has written in the Heart of Man, Secrecy for Time,
and for Place, is sought out for the acting of this Sin. Nay, Dorinda her self
(as Lewd as she is) would scarce commit Adultery in the view, even of those
Pimps and B^llies who are the most instrumental to her Debaucheries.

Now surely, Dorinda, if the Eye of Man be not to be endured in the Commission
of this Sin, much less should you be able to endure the Eye of God upon you.
This Consideration was effectual to Preserve Paphnutius, who being wearied with
the Solicitations of a tempting Dali^ah, at last consented to the Act,
provided it might be committed where they might not be seen. Whereupon being
brought into one Room, he alleged they might be seen from this Place, and in
another, that they might be seen in that Place; and still found some Exception
upon that account; but at last being brought into such a Place where could be
no Reason for such a Plea, yet he alleged, that it was not so Secret, but that
the Eye of God would be upon them even there, and that unless his Eye too, as
well as all others, could be shut out, he durst ^ot do it; by which means he
not only preserved his Integrity, but converted a Harlot.

Secondly, Beside the Eye of God upon you, who is to be your Judge, you have
the D^vil with you, who does mean to be your Accuser. The Devil is Pimp-General
to the World; not a piece of filthiness Dorinda ever commits, but he is as one
at it by his Enticements to it. He finds and furnishes with fuel for Lust. And
as he knows all ye do now, so he will tell all ye have done hereafter; where,
and when, and with whom you have played the Whore.

Thirdly, Besides the Eyes of all without you, there is (Dorinda) the Eye of
your Conscience within you, which will also be one Day a Thousand Witnesses
against you. In Consideration whereof, doubtless it was, that Pythagoras gave
that good and wise Counsel of his, That no Man should commit any filthiness
either with another, or alone by himself (which Self-pollution is a sort of
potential Murder) and that above all others, he should stand in awe of
himself; that is, dread and fear his own Conscience (as I formerly hinted to
Patrick Campbel.)

Now Dorinda, if the following these Directions, don't Cure your raging Lust;
then in the Eighth Place, when you are tempted to Uncleanness, seriously think
on what is behind, viz. Death, Judgment, Heaven, and Hell; and the serious
Thought of any one of these, is enough to extinguish the Flames of Lust.
Dorinda, Death is behind Thee. Thou can not live for ever here, thou must
dye; and you know not how soon; perhaps it may be in the very Act of thy
Uncleanness; and how dismal, Dorinda, would your Condition be, if that should
befall you? What can befall a Person more dreadful, than to be caught, and cut
off by Death, in the very Act of Sin?

But, secondly, Not Death only, but Judgment also is behind. Dorinda, thou must
not only Dye, but be judged too for thy Uncleanness after Death: For
Whoremongers to endure the Eye of God upon you. This Consideration was
effectual to Preserve Paphnutius, who being wearied with the Solicitations of
a tempting Dalilah, at last consented to the Act, provided it might be
committed where they might not be seen. Whereupon being brought into one Room,
he alleged they might be seen from this Place, and in another, that they might
be seen in that Place; and still found some Exception upon that account; but at
last being brought into such a Place where could be no Reason for such a Plea,
yet he alleged, that it was not so Secret, but that the Eye of God would be
upon them even there* and that unless his Eye too, as well as all others, could
be shut out, he durst not do it; by which means he not only preserved his
Integrity, but converted a Harlot.

Secondly, Beside the Eye of God upon you, who is to be your Judge, you have
the Devil with you, who does mean to be your Accuser^ The Devil is Pimp-General
to the World; not a piece of filthiness Dorinda ever commits, but he is as one
at it by his Enticements to it. He finds and furnishes with fuel for Lust. And
as he knows all ye do now, so he will tell all ye have done hereafter; where,
and when, and with whom you have played the Whore.

Thirdly, Besides the Eyes of all without you, there is (Dorinda) the Eye of
your Conscience within you, which will also be one Day a Thousand Witnesses
against you. In Consideration whereof, doubtless it was, that Pythagoras gave
that good and wise Counsel of his, That no Man should commit any filthiness
either with another, or alone by himself (which Self-pollution is a sort of
potential Murder) and that above all others, he should stand in awe of
himself; that is, dread and fear, his own Conscience (as I formerly hinted to
Patrick Campbel.)

Now Dorinda, if the following these Directions, don't Cure your raging Lust;
then in the Eighth Place, when you are tempted to Uncleanness, seriously think
on what is behind, viz. Death, Judgment, Heaven, and Hell; and the serious
Thought of any one of these, is enough to extinguish the Flames of Lust.
Dorinda, Death is behind Thee. Thou can not live for ever here, thou must
dye; and you know not how soon; perhaps it may be in the very Act of thy
Uncleanness; and how dismal, Dorinda, would your Condition be, if that should
befall you? What can befall a Person more dreadful, than to be caught, and cut
off by Death, in the very Act of Sin?

But, secondly, Not Death only, but Judgment also is behind. Dorinda, thou must
not only Dye, but be judged too for thy Uncleanness after Death: For
Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge, Heb. 13. 4.

Then again, There is Heaven behind, a State of Pleasure, Joy and Happiness,
beyond all that the World, has or ever had. -- Then ( Dorinda) if at any Time
you are tempted to Uncleanness, Iay, Shall I, for a bru^tish Pleasure lose my
Heaven? Lose my Happiness? Can the Company of all the Men in the World (had I
the Enjoyment of them all) countervail the loss of Heaven.

And Lastly, Dorinda, There is Hell behind. And who are to be turned into this
burning Lake? Why, the Wicked, and amongst the rest, Adulterers, and suchlike
Desilers of the Image of God, and Members of Christ, and Temples of the Holy
Ghost.

Then ( Dorinda) argue with they self, and say, What shall I go to Hell for a
Bill^t Doux? Have I a mind to be damned for an Assignation? Shall I plunge my
self into Fire and Brimstone, there to lie and roar to all Eternity, for the
little short nasty Pleasure, which is had in the Embraces of a Lewd Person?
Thus ( Dorinda) at any Time, when you come under the Temptations of Lust, call
to mind Death, Judgment, Heaven, and Hell, and you will (by God's Grace) be so
wrought on in that Meditation, that you will both fly the Acts, and detest the
Thought of Uncleanness.

And how Dorinda, you may perhaps upbraid all this as a Sermon, as is usual for
the Libertines of the Age to do. I shall not be much concerned at it, if it
happen to be so. I think no shame to own that, I am descended from the Tribe of
Levi by Four successive Generations, and was likewise Allied to it by my first
Marriage, wherein never was any Man more happy. They that Honor God, will
Honor his Ambassadors; and they that despise them, despise him, as they do his
Message; but at the last Hour you will change your Mind, and wish to die the
Death of the Righteous, though you never cared to imitate their Life.

Break off then from your Sins in Tim^, by a true Repentance and cordial
Reformation; learn to entertain pure and chaste Flames of Devotion in your
Soul, and they will quickly extinguish those brutish Lusts that hurry you
headlong to Pordition; which if the Almighty grant you Grace to do, you will
be sensible that you were not mistaken in making Application to me as your
Friend; though you were very much out in the Method, and as much disappointed
in the Manner. I add no more, but that I do as earnestly wish your Conversion
as I hate your Vice, and if this may be any way conducive toward it, I shall
think my self Happy in a good Improvement of the first Billet Do^x that ever
was put into my Hand; and that though you were Wicked, that you were not
unhappy in sending it. Farewell Dorinda.

Remarks on J. D's. Second Letter to the Citizens-Wife.
SIR,
I Have perused your second Letter to the Irish Dorinda, and am of Opinion she
never met with such returns to her Courtship before. It Is not probable, that
she will trouble Philaret any more with her Billet Douxes, and it were to be
wished she never troubled any Body else with them. You have done your Part to
cure her Distemper, but that Disease in the Soul is too often like the Gout in
the Body: Opprobrium Medicorum.

You have however discharged your Duty, be the Event what it will. I cannot
well tell what you could have said more, for you have touched on most of the
Ordinary Topics; if what you have said do but reach a Conviction, she will not
grudge to read the Treatises you have recommended to Her; to which I wish you
had added Mr. Carr's Antidote against Lust, it is also a Book of your own
Printing; and will further inform her Judgment, and convince her of the
vileness of her Practice.

I am glad that you have left behind you in Dublin such Proofs of your fair way
of dealing, and of your Justice to the Marriage. Bed; had all who have gone
hence showed the Irish such good Example; it would have rendered the English
Conquest of that Country more Universal and Effectual, than ever our Arms have
yet done.

I have nothing else to say, but that perhaps, when this Billet Doux comes to
see the Public, the Reality of it may be Questioned; not that your Person and
Purse might not have been as tempting as those of others, who have frequent
Adventures of this sort; but because of ill natured Suspicion amongst those of
your own Trade, and the too frequent Abuses of that Kind, which some few of 'em
have put upon the Public; and indeed had I not seen the Original, and been
satisfied from the probability of the Circumstances; as the Place to which
'twas directed, the credible Witnesses, who saw you send your Answer, and your
own Affirmation; I should have suspected the Truth of it my self.

Your Design of putting it in Print, I cannot disapprove; it (shows your
Innocence and) will not only prevent those wanton Ladies from making you any
more their Confident, but may deter others from the like Practices, lest they
should have the same Fate, and it must needs be a Picquant Rebuke to the loose
Dorinda, to see her Billet Doux exposed to Public View. For though she Lives
under Covert, it may happen some way or other to point her out, as it is but
Just it should. I am

SIR, Your very Humble Servant,

The Thirteenth Letter.
SIR,
HAving troubled you with Dorinda's Billet Doux, and my former two Letters to
Her, and received your Remarks upon them, which were very much to my
Satisfaction; I give you the Trouble of one more, which you will oblige me to
peruse, and to give me your Thoughts upon it with your usual Freedom.

[The Letter is as follows, viz.]
Dorinda.
IN my first Letter, I checked your Impudence for contriving to C -- d Argus --
In my second Letter, I sent you Rules for Chastity; and having received no
Answer to either of these Letters: I conclude you are ashamed of your Billet
Doux, and are willing to be Reformed. If these Conjectures are Right, 'twill be
proper in the next place to say what I can to set Argus and you a Loving again;
and here I shall Write nothing but my own Experience, to which I Will add Rules
for Dorinda and Argus to live by, which may (if Dorinda's a true Penitent)
maked^em yet a ^appy Pair.

I shall begin these Rules, with telling Dorinda, Woe are taught from Scripture,
that -- Marriage is honorable in all Men, so is not a single Life; in some it
is a Snare, and a Trouble in the Flesh, a Prison of unruly Desires, which is
attempted daily to be broken; A single Life^ is never commanded, but in some
Cases Marriage is; for he that ( like Dorinda) cannot contain, must Marry; and
he that can contain, is not tied to a single Life, but may Marry very lawfully:
Marriage was ordained by God, instituted in Paradise; was the relief of a
natural Necessity, and the first Blessing from God himself: He gave to Man not
a Friend, but a Wife, that is a Friend and a Wife too. It is the Seininary of
the Church, and daily bring forth Sons and Daughters unto God. Our Blessed
Lord, though he was born of a Maiden, yet she was Veiled under the cover of
Marriage, and she was Married to -- A WIDDOWER -- for Joseph, the supposed
Father of our Lord, had Children by a former Wife. The first Miracle that ever
Jesus did, was to do Honor to a Wedding -- Marriage was in the World before
Sin, and has been in all Ages of the World the greatest Antidote against it,
and although Sin has sowr'd Marriage, and stuck the Man's Head with Cares, and
the Woman's Bed with Sorrow in the Production of Children, yet these are but
throws of Life and Glory; and she shall be saved in Childbearing, if she be
found in Faith and Righteousness. -- So that Marriage is the proper Scene of
Piety and Patience, of the Duty of Parents, and the Charity of Relatives; here
Kindness is expanded, and Love is united, and made firm as a Center -- Marriage
is the Nursery of Heaven, the Virgin sends Prayers to God, but she carries but
one Soul to him; but the state of Marriage fills up the Numbers of the Elect,
and has in it the Labor of Love, the Delicacies of Friendship, the Blessing
of Society, and the Union of Hands and Hearts.

And as Marriage is the Nursery of Heaven, so it is the Mother of the World; it
preserves Kingdoms, fills Cities, Churches, and Heaven it self. -- Thus (
Dorinda) have I shown that the state you are entered into, is Divine in its
Institution -- Sacred in its Union -- Holy in the Mystery -- Honorable in its
Appellative -- Religious in its Employments -- It is Advantage to the Societies
of Men, and Holiness to the Lord, and is certainly preferable to a single Life.

But Dorinda, as happy a State as Marriage is, Argus and you will be ever
disappointed in it, if it ben't entirely conducted, and overruled by Religion:
None are Happy in Marriage, but those that invite Christ to the Wedding, this
you did not do, as is clear by your Billet Doux; but I write to you now, as
supposing you a True Penitent, so shall adventure to give ye Rules, for your
Happy-Living in a Married-state. The Rules I shall Name, shall be only those
that relate to Argus and you, in Conjunction, I an't so foolish to think, that
all the Duty lies on the Weaker-Vessel, 1 Pet. 3. ^.
or so Barbarous to expect the Wife should prove obliging, except the Husband
be so too -- the Obligation is mutual; -- and therefore prescribe nothing (in
the following Rules) that I think too bitter for Argus's swallow --

Before I give any Rules I premise this, that ^is the Duty of all that intend
to Marry, seriously to read the Form of Matrimony, least when they come to the
Church, they Answer there to what they had not considered beforehand, and then
no wonder if they don't Practice a Duty of a larger extent then they
apprehended. But to proceed to the Rules, that Argus and you must walk by, if
you would be yet happy in your Married-state.

And the first is, that once a Week you read, and digest the 5th of the
Ephesians, from the 22d verse to the end of the Chapter -- All Scripture is
given for your Instruction; and sure I am, all that Marry before they Love at
the rate here described, commit a very great Sin, and cannot expect the Blessing
of God on their Marriage. -- It Is the Blessing of God Crowns the Wedding, and
they that Marry without it (be they never so Rich) are but two tied together to
make one mother miserable. All that intend to Wed, would do well to consider,
that they who enter into the State of Marriage cast a Dye of the greatest
Contingency; and yet of the greatest Interest in the World, next to the last
throw for Eternity -- Life, or Death, Felicity or a lasting Sorrow, are in the
Power of Marriage -- A Woman indeed ventures most, for she has no Sanctuary to
retire to from an Evil Husband; she must dwell upon her Sorrow, and hatch the
Eggs which her own Folly or Infelicity has produced; and she is more under it,
because her Tormentor has a Warrant of Prerogative; and the Woman may complain
to God as Subjects do of Tyrant Princes; but otherwise she has no Appeal in
the Causes of Unkindness. And though the Man (who Marries a Shrew, or such a
Wanton as Dorinda was) can run from many Hours of his Sadness, yet he must
return to it again, and when he sits among his Neighbors, he members the Viper
that lies in his Bosom, and he sighs deeply, as well he may.

It is the unhappy chance of many Men, finding great Inconveniences in a single
Life, to rush into Marriage, in hopes to remove their Troubles, and there they
enter into Fetters, as the Staggs in the Greek Epigram, and are bound to Sorrow
by the Cords of a Man's, or Woman's Peevishness; and the worst of the Evil is,
they are to thank their own Follies, for they fell into the Snare by entering
an improper Way; Christ and the Church were no Ingredients in their Choice; but
as the Indian Women enter into Folly for the Price of an Elephant, and think
their Crime warrantable; so many choose for a Rich-Fortune ( like Eriphyle the
Argive, prefer Gold before a good Man) and show themselves to be less than
Money by over-valuing That, to all the Content and Happiness of Life; but I
Bless God, I an't of this sordid Temper, for I don't (nor never did) think,
that the Happiness of a Man's Life, consists in the Abundance of what he
possesses; but in Gods giving him a Heart to make a Sober-use of what he lends
him (I say lends him) for we are all Stewards to the Great Lord of Heaven and
Earth.

And Dorinda, as He, or She, deserve to be disappointed that Marry for Money,
so as very ^ Fool is he, that chooses for Beauty; who chooses for one (as a Wit
express it) whose Eyes are Witty, and her Soul Sonsual. It is an ill Band of
Affections to tie two Hearts together, by a little Thread of Red and White.
These Dorinda will Love no longer, but till the next Ague comes, and are Fond
of each other but at the Chance of Fancy, or the Smallpox, or Childbearing,
or Care, or Time, or any thing that can destroy a pretty Fl^wer.

But it is the basest of all, when Lust is the Paranymph and solicites the
Suit, makes the Contract, and joins the Hands. This Dorinda was your own Case,
and is commonly the Effect of the former Folly; according to the Proverb -- At
first for his fair Checks and comely Beard, the Beast is taken for a Lion, but
at last he is turned to a Dragon, or a Leopard, or a Swine. That which at first
is Beauty on the Face, may prove Lust in the Manners. He, or She, that looks
too curiously upon the Beauty of the Body, looks too low, has Flesh and
Corruption in his Heart, and is judged Sensual and Earthly in his Desires. Sure
I am, no Marriage will prove Happy, that is not Blessed with Religious
Affections.

Another Thing in which I conceive Dorinda and Argus to be equally concerned
(if they would be Happy in Wed-lock) is, To avoid as much as possible all Offenses
of each other in the beginning of their new Honey-Moon (for so I may call it,
Dorinda having run astray) every little Thing can blast an Infant-Blossom, and
an unkind Word or careless Carriage, is apt to give the Alarm at the beginning
of this Union -- People generally at first are watchful, and observant, careful
and inquisitive, and even the smaller failures of Chance or Weakness, are then
Interpreted as want of Love, and usually affright the unexperienced Man, or
Woman, who make unequal Conjectures, and Fancy mighty Sorrows by the
Proportions of any new and early Unkindness -- Plutarch compares a new Marriage
to a Vessel before the Hoops are on, every little thing dissolves the Union of
its Parts, but when the Joints are stiffen'd, and the whole tied together by a
firm compliance, and proportionate bending, it is then hardly dissolved without
Violence or Burning: In like manner ( Dorinda) when once the Hearts of a Man
and Wife are endeared and hardened by a mutual Confidence, Compliance and
Experience (longer then Artifice or Pretense can last) I word it so, for
Infirmities do not manifest themselves in the first Scenes, but in the
Succession of a long Society, there is then no great Danger; and there are many
things Past, and some things Present, which will dash all little Unkindnesses
in Pieces.

And therefore ( Dorinda) in the next Place, I think Argus and you should be
very careful (at your first Reconcilation especially) to stifle all little
Differences, and to cut them down as fast as they spring up; for if they are
suffered to grow, they render the Society troublesome by their Numbers, and the
Affections become loose by an habitual Uneasiness -- Some People are more vexed
with a Fly, then with a Wound; nor can Reason be always upon the Guard, in the
frequent little Accidents of a Family, but trifling Troubles, if often
repeated, will be apt to render you restless, and betray you to Passion; and at
last to beget an indifferency, if not a Disgust and Aversation.

Lastly, Dorinda, if you would ( be happy in Marriage and would) have Argus Love ye
again, be extremely watchful against all curious Distinctions of -- Mine and
Thine -- for this has caused all the Laws, Suits, and Wars in the World. Let
them who have but one Person, have also but one Interest; for when either of
them begins to impropriate, it is like a Swelling in the Flesh, which draws
more then its share, and what it ^eeds on turns to a Bile, and a Sore. Dorinda
you shine by your Husbands Honor, and will certainly be darkened if he suffer
an Eclipse; and therefore it is your Interest, as well as Duty (if Argus be kind
and loving) to contribute to his case and welfare; the Use and Employment of
what Man and Wife possess, should be common to both their Necessities, and in
this there is no other Difference of Right, but that the Man has the
Dispensation of all, and may (as a late Author expresses it) keep it from his
Wife, as a Governor of a Town may keep it from the right Owner; he has the
Power, but not Right to do so.

But ( Dorinda) you have nothing to fear here, for if Argus be a kind Husband,
you may do with him what ye List; or if Argus Rules, it is because you would
obey, and in so obeying you Rule as much as he; for my own share, I have been
Married twice, and was ever so much for a mutual Endearment (and against the
vile Distinctions of Mine and Thine, that I could never approve, except there
were Reason for it) of keeping of two Purses: No! She that keeps my Heart,
shall keep my Purse -- Two Keys to a Till, supposes a distrust on one side or
other; and sure I am, Distrust is the Bane of Love: And Dorinda, when it once
appears (but I hope you will never more give occasion for it); farewell to the
Comforts of Matrimony. 'Twas such a Trust as this, I reposed in my first Wife;
and therefore she loved me to that Degree, that I judged it my Duty to settle
her presently in all I had (for 'twas she, and not her Fortune I Married,) that
I might give at the Rate I loved her; nay, I was so desirous to requite her
Tenderness, that I was scarce contented with giving all; but grudged (as I once
told her) my Fun^ral Expenses, my very Shroud and Grave, that I might add to
her Future Store -- Dorinda, I need not press ye to believe this, for Men in
their Last-Wills appear just as they are, they here grow open and plain
hearted, and dare not depart with their Hands to a Lie; and as this was my
Carriage to my First Wife, so it is no more than I owe to This, or if possible,
a greater Tenderness.

Thus, Dorinda, have I shown ye (from my own Experience) how Argus and you may
fall a loveing again, and be yet happy in a Married-state; and if ye follow the
Rules I have sent ye, I shall think my Labor very well bestowed.

And now Dorinda, having brought ye to Argus, I leave ye in his tender Arms,
where ( and not in the Arms of other Men) you should desire to Live and Dye.

I shall only add, I don't desire your Answer, either to this or my other
Letters, for you see by my way of Writing, it is your Reformation is all that is
desired by

Your Faithful Adviser, etc. And so Farewell.


Thus Sir, I have Entertained Dorinda, which I hope may have some good Effect
upon her; if not, I have discharged my self of what I thought was Incumbent
upon me in this Case. I am

SIR, Yours, etc. John Dunton.

Remarks on J. D's Third Letter to the Citizens-Wife.
SIR,
I Have received your Third to Dorinda, who I suppose will scarcely thank you
for your Good Advice; if she bestow the Perusal upon it, which I much doubt. In
my Opinion you have over-done the Matter, your first was enough, your second by
Consequince too much, and your third must needs be superfluous. I am satisfied,
Dorinda is of my mind, so that there is two to one against you. As many Men, and
as few Reproofs as can be, suits Women of her Temper best. Did her Husband know
you, I am certain he would think you deserved a Pair of Gloves, and a Wedding
Dinner, better than the Parson that Joined him and his unfaithful Dorinda in
the Bands of Matrimony; for I am satisfied, he did not read her a Lecture so
long by one half; and If I say, not half so much to the Purpose neither, there
are People in the World will vouch for the Truth of it.

I think the Method you took with Dorinda very Genuine and Natural, first to
lay before her the Wickedness of defiling the Marriage Bed, and then to
endeavor to possess her with honorable Thoughts of it. But I am of the mind,
she will give an equal Ear to both, that is to say, she will not hear one Word
of either. If her Husband had been an Argus as you suppose, I cannot see how she
could have found out a Place, secret enough to write her Billet Doux in; and I
am verily of Opinion, except he be one of those whom Iuvenal calls Doctus
spectare Lacunar, he must needs think the Peacecks Tail a much finer Ornament
than the Rams-Head; but perhaps he finds it to be true, what Aesop says, that
it is easier to take a Bag of Fleas set them a Grazing all day, and gather them
into their Bag at night again, than to keep Guard over an Unchaste Woman; and
being over-watch'd, his Hundred Eyes fell asleep all at once, and so Dorinda
took the opportunity of making a Sally.

If your Third Letter have so much Influence, as to create in her a better
Opinion of her Husband, and make her more faithful to his Bed; then he may
sleep securely with Two Hundred Eyes, if he had them, and I am sure, it is no
fault of yours, if it does not.

I shall not trouble you with long Remarks upon your Letter, only your hint of
Ioseph's having been a Widdower, when he was Espoused to the Virgin; puts me in
the Head to ask you this Question, Whether his Hose which they show at Aix la
Chappelle, be of the first or second Wives making? And in which of their Times
it was he gave the Hem, when Playing the Carpenter, which the Church of Rome
has got pent up in a Bottle, as a precious Relick?

I Congratulate the Happiness of your Wife in so Chaste an Husband; nor do I
see how she can be quits with you by less than an Ocean of Love and Respect.
She had best spit in her Hand and take fast hold, for if she should drop, you
have magnified Widdowers so much in the Person of Joseph, that all the Virgins
in the Town can do no less than proffer themselves to you to call out one of
their number for your Third. Yet I am not willing to think that any thing of
this is at the bottom of your Plot, I hope you are no such designing Man. I
shall take my leave of you, and heartily Wish, that every Dorinda may meet with
such a Philaret. And that all the good Women in the City, had such Husbands as
your self. I am.

SIR, Yours.

SOME ACCOUNT OF MY Conversation IN IRELAND. In a LETTER TO AN Honorable Lady.
WITH Her Answer to it.

LONDON: Printed (for the Author,) and are to be Sold by A Baldwin, near the
Oxford. Arms in Warwick Lane, and by the Booksellers in Dublin 1699.

Some Account of my Conversation in Ireland: In a Letter to an Honorable Lady,
etc.
Madam,
I AM extremely satisfied to have the Honor of knowing you so well, as to know
that you hate to be Flattered; and so hope you will not think me guilty of that
Crime, when I profess to you, That I esteem the Favor of having a
Correspondence with you, to be One of the Chiefest Blessings of my Life. And
therefore I ought to take all Opportunities to show my self worthy of it: which
I could not be, should I suffer my Reputation to be Attacked, without Defending
it: And having met with some Unhandsome Treatment, from a Person in Dublin, to
whom I never offered the Least Injury, (unless he thinks telling him the Truth
to be such) I am willing to have my CAUSE TRIED AT YOUR BAR; who, as you will
not Favor the Guilty, so neither will you Condemn the Innocent. And whether I
am such or not, THE PRECEDING SCVFFLE will give you the clearest Idea. But
since no Man's Profession will Justify him, without a Correspondent Practice,
I have designed this Letter to give you some account of my CONVERSATION (or
Method of Living) whilst I was in Ireland.

The occasion of my first going into this Kingdom, is so well known, and
manifestly lawful, that I shall not so much as hint at it in this place: But
how my Conversation has been, while I resided there, is the task that lies now
upon me to set forth in a true Light; which I will do with such sincerity, that
I will even dissect my Breast to you; and at the same time make (not only Your
Ladyship, but) the WHOLE WORLD my Confessor: But still, with this Restriction,
as far as my frail Nature and weak Memory will permit me; and where that is
defective, if any where Invention has supplied it, I hope you will excuse it. For
Madam, you will find (at least they will that are touched in the following Pages)
that Whatsoever of ^iction I bring in,
It Is so like Truth, it seems at least a kin.


Madam, this ACCOUNT OF MY CONVERSATION was all writ in hasse; and most of it
at Pat's Coffee-house in Dublin, as People were dinning my Ears with News, or
some Query's about my Auction: So that if neither Method nor Style is what
might be expected from me (when I address to you) I hope to make some amends in
my Summer Ramble, which I shall dedica^e to your Ladyship, as an acknowledgment
of the Honor you did me, in corresponding with me whilst in Ireland; and for
your attempts since to quiet my Mind upon the loss of one of my best Friends (
for I may call D -- e so, (...) high Birth, Virtue, Wit, and Constancy, can
entitle to that Character.) But to proceed to the ACCOUNT OF MY CONVERSATION.

This Madam, ( for Methods sake) will best be comprehended under Two General
Heads; viz. The Discharge of my Duty toward God, and toward Man: These two
contain the whole of a Christian: And if ^ take the Great Apostle of the
Gentiles for my Guide. I hope I shall not wander out of my way: For he has
declared, this was his care, to keep a Conscience void of offense both toward
God, and toward Man.

The first of these Heads, which respects God, comprehends all the Duties of
Religion; which is a thing in this Age admits of so many several Modes and
Forms, that without some further Explanation, it is difficult to know what is
meant by it. For a Man can now no sooner speak of Religion, but the next
question is, Pray what Religion are you of ^ I need not tell you, Madam, That
Religion in general, is a sense of our Duty to God, and the W^rship we owe to
him, according to the best of our Understandings, in order to the obtaining of
a blessed Immortality. And this likewise consists in two parts; First, in its
Principles; and Secondly, in putting those Principles in Practice; For
Principles without Practice, ^each Men^ to be Hypocrites, but never make 'em
Christians. They may indeed by a Profession of Religion, deceive others; but
without the Practice of it, they more fatally deceive themselves. I will
therefore, Madam, in the first place, show you what my Principles are, and then
give you an Account of what my Practice was in Dublin.

If then you ask me (Madam) what Persuasion I (...) of? My Answer is, I am that
which the Disciples were called at Antioch; that is, I am a Christian: a
Follower of Christ, a Servant of God, the Wor^d^ Master, and my own Man. I do
not think Religion to consist so much in Nam^s as Things: Christ's Church is
not limited to any Nation or Party; but extends to all Places, is propagated in
all Ages, and contains all saving Truth; and in this Since is Universal or
Cath^lick; and therefore I love a Good Man, of whatever Profession; or by what
Name (...) Title soever he is distinguished. A good Navigator can sail with any
Wind; and why should not a Christian be as dextrous to improve all
Opportunities that may facilitate his passage to the heavenly Ca^^an? The
various lines that are made from different parts of the Circumference, may all
tend to one and the same Center. I have a large Charity, and exercis^ it to all
in whom I see Goodness and Virtue show it self, whatever their particular
Persuasions are. And conformable to this Opinion, was my Practice in Dublin.
One Sunday I heard Dr. Stern, another Mr. Sinclare, a third Mr. Searl, a fourth
Mr. Boyse, a fifth Mr. Weld, a sixth the Anabaptist in Francis-street. And when
William Penn came thither, I went with the crowd to hear him: For when I think
of George Keith in London, and William Dobbs in Dublin (Two Persons of Great
Sense, and as strict Justice) I must think that some Quakers are Christians;
and, for ought I know, we contend with 'em about Words, while we think the same
thing: Sure I am, their Celebrated Light within, is what we call the Dictates
of Conscience; and if we could but get 'em to Baptism and the Lord's Supper, we
should begin to call 'em Brethren. And thus you see, by my going one Sunday to
one Persuasion, and a second to another, that I can go to Heaven with any Wind,
and with any Name; and shall think it an happiness to go into Canaan, tho it
were through a Red Sea.

(Madam,) It Is true I was born to travel, and am now pursuing my Destiny: but
if I wander the Length of the Map, and never see you here, yet I hope we shall
meet in Heaven at last: What tho we di^fer in our Way thither? (I hope we
pardon one another). Men go to China both by the Streights and by the Cape. The
Good Men of Ireland (such as Bishop King, and Mr. Boyse) perhaps, contend about
words, when they heartily think the same thing. But whatever the Opinions of
others are in Polemical Matters, yet as to my self, I dare boldly say, I am, or
should be, an Honest Man; for Virtue is my Business; my Writing is my
Recreation: ( which made Iris say, she would bury me with a Pen in my Hand.) God is
my Father, the Church my Mother, (I need not say this or that Church, if I am
sound in the (...) Points) the Saints my Brethren, and all that need (...) my
Friends; and I am likewise too, a Friend to my self, for shall I have it, and
want Necessaries? Wh^ though I am now in a far Country, yet I have in my self
(as Randolph says) an Houshold-government; and where e're I go, do intend to
live, Lord of my self, accountable to none,
But to my Conscience, and my God alone.


Now, Madam, give me leave to say, however Romantic some may think this to be,
That I have found (notwithstanding my many Infirmities) more Peace and
Satisfaction in the discharge of a good Conscience, than in all the Pleasures
this World can give.

In the next place, Madam, I shall give you a short Diary of my Practice in
Ireland, with respect to Religion; but I will first give you a Relation of a
Rencounter I had with a sort of Atheist I met in Dublin.

I need not tell ye, Madam, That Atheism and Irreligion abounds every where, (
for your last Letter suggested as much) and the cause is apparent; for when Men
have given themselves up so long to the Conduct of their own Lusts, that they
have Reason to fear the Justice of God due to 'em for their Sins, they would
fain hope to secure themselves, by denying his Being: I cannot say this Lewd
Fellow I met in Dublin, absolutely denied the Being of a God; (and I much
question whether there be a professed Atheist in the World;) yet I may say his
Discourses (as well as his manner of living) had so much of Atheism in 'em, as
they made me tremble: I will not insert his Atheistical Discourses, for they are
better forgot than published; but I Will send you some of the Arguments I used to
refute his Atheistical Notions: Whether they satisfied him or not, I cannot say,
for he made little reply: I am sure my design was good; but whether I argued as
I ought, I leave you, Madam, to judge; what I advanced, was to this Effect, viz.

There are two ways for us to attain to the Knowledge of God, (or a First
Principle) by whom the World was made; the one is Natural, the other,
Supernatural: That which I call Supernatural, I what God has revealed in his
Word, wherein he has given us the clearest Idea of himself, as he by whom all
things were made: But because they who deny the Being of a God, do generally
make a scoff as his Word, I will only insist upon that which is Natural. Nature
informs us that there was a Sovereign Being, the Author and Preserver of all
things: This Truth I can see with my Eyes: when I either behold the Earth, view
the Heavens, or reflect upon my self: When I see such things as are not made
but by a Superior Cause, I am obliged to acknowledge and adore a Being which
cannot be made, and which made all things else. When I consider my self, I am
sure that I could not be without a beginning; therefore it follows, That a
Person like me, could not give me to be; and by consequence, this puts me upon
seeking out a First Being; who having had no Beginning, must be the Original of
all other things. When my Reason conducts me to this First Principle, I
conclud^ evidently that this Being cannot be limited, because Limits suppose a
Necessity of Production and Dependence: And if unlimited, it must be a
Sovereign and Incomprehensible Being: And this prevents all curious Enquirers
from comprehending what God is; For who can define that which is Unlimited, or
comprehend that which is Incomprehensible: One must be blind indeed, to be
ignorant of a First Principle; but one must be infinite, like him, to be able
to speak exactly of him: For the most that can be said by us, though it may
perhaps content the Curious, yet it can never satisfy the Rational Soul.

This, Madam, was the Substance of what I spoke on that Occasion; which, as I
said before, I leave to your Censure. And to be yet more free with you, I have
those awful Thoughts of the Divine Being, that I would never think of him, but
with the most profound Veneration; and therefore always choose to think of him
rather in the Abstract, than the Concrete; for if I think him Good, my finit^
thought is ready to terminate that Good in a conceived Subject; and if I
conceive him Great, my bounded Con^^^t is apt to ^ast him into a comprehensible
Figure; I would therefore conceive him a diffused Goodness without Quality, and
represent him an ^ncomprehensible Greatness without Quantity -- And therefore I
choos^ (as Mr. Ellis advises) to sh^^ all gross Representations of God, or
^ikening him so much (...) in my Thought, to any Creature; I am not to Worship
him after my own Conceit or Fancy, but according to the Rules he has giv^n in
his Word. -- And to speak my Thoughts of Religion in a few Words, I look upon
that to be the best Religion, which is pure and peaceable, and tak^s no
pleasure in the Expense of Blood; whose Principles are consonant to the Word of
God; and which takes most from the Creature, and gives most to the Creator:
This is that Religion which I assure my self is the Right, which I will
endeavor to practice while I Live, and rely on when I Die.

And this brings me to (what I promisd) an Account of my Practice in Dublin;
which I will give you in the Form of a Diary.

I freely acknowledge, Madam, That the Sacred Oracles of the Old and New
Testaments, do sufficiently instruct us in the Performance of all those Duties
which God requires of us. But tho the Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments
are the very Word of God, which holy Men of God spoke and wrote as they were
moved by the Holy Ghost, and contain all things necessary to salvation, and are
the standing Sealed Rule of Faith and Life; yet I believe that every one has
some particular Mode of his own, by which he steers the Course of his
Devotions; especially as to what he performs in his Closet.

But to proceed to my Diary: And here I shall first acquaint you how I spend
Saturday.

Saturday is usually a Day of Hurry and Business, with the generality of Men*
and as the same winds up the Week, so do People their Affairs: But for my own
part, I confess, I never affect multiplicity of Business on that Day; but on
the contrary, have frequently shunned it, though I have observed it has often
fallen to my share upon these Days to have a great deal; for last Saturday I
was so taken up with Adjusting some Controversies that did arise concerning the
Affairs of my Auction, that I had hardly leisure to take my Dinner; however
they were terminated so much the more to my satisfaction, by how much all
Parties were brought to acquiesce in my determination. By this you see, Madam,
I am no Sabbatarian; but for those that are, I am so far from having any hard
Thoughts of them, that I both pity and respect them; for I can never believe
it is an Error of Wilfulness, but of Ignorance only in them: and whereas I do
understand diverse of them, at least, make a Conscience of keeping both Days,
because they would be sure to be right; I think I have just reason to honor
them for it, and cannot choose but think much better of them, than those who
totally deny the Morality of the Sabbath day.

I confess, Madam, I do not remember to have read any thing material concerning
the Controversy about the said Days, and that I am as much at a loss to know
certainly when our Christian Sabbath begins, when there is such a variation in
the Site of Places and Countries; and that now we experimentally find, where
it is Day in one place, it is Night in another. And, Madam, as I know of no
Person living, with whom I can so well satisfy my Scruples, and inform my
Understanding than your self, who are so well skilled both in Polemical and
Practical Divinity, so I humbly request your Sentiments in this Case, promising
to make your Practice my own.

But, Madam, having told you how I spend Saturday, I am next to inform you how
I spend the Sabbath: For in the Practice of Religion, I look upon the
Sanctifying of the Lord's Day, to be a principal part. Judge Hales recommends
to his Children a very strict Observation of the Lord's Day; and tells 'em,
That he had always found that his Worldly Affairs thrived either more or less,
(the following Week) as he had kept the Sabbath. And therefore on Sunday I
usually took leave of my Bed sooner than on other Days; and strive to dismiss
as much as I can, all Worldly Affairs out of my Thoughts; tho I have found 'em,
I acknowledge, (like the Flies that spoil the Apothecaries Ointment) (...) most
unseasonably thrusting themselves in.

The Public Worship of God, being the principal Duty of this Day, I made it my
Practice to bow my Knees before my Maker in private, before I went thither, and
there beg his Blessing on the Public Ordinances; and previous thereto, have
used to read some Portion of the Holy Scriptures; being told therein, that
every thing is Sanctified by the Word of God, and Prayer; which is so much the
Advantage of a Christian, that I always thought, never Prayer rightly made, was
made unheard, or heard ungranted: And I believe that Prayer is rightly made,
which is made to God in the Name of Christ, in Faith, and offered up with
Humility.

When I come to the House of God, ( I mean the place of his Worship, whether it
be a Church, or a Meeting House) I always keep my self uncovered whilst I
continue there: For as Holiness becomes his House, so does a Behavior mixed
with Reverence and Godly Fear, in all that wait upon him. And therefore during
the Time of Prayer* I either Kneel or Stand up, (believing the humblest Posture
to be best, when I am invocating the Majesty of Heaven) and fixing my Eyes
upwards, I endeavor to apply every part of God's Worship to my own Conscience,
and the present State of my own Soul.

I love those Sermons best, that check my Conscience for Sin, and cheer it with
applying Gods Mercy; beginning with the Law, and ending with the Gospel;
searching the Wound first, and pouring in the Oil of Consolation afterward:
And those I reckon the worst Preachers, that sooth M^n up in their Sins;
persuading Men they are good Christians, when they don't know what it is to be
Born again.

Yet I don't love to be Pragmatical, in censuring of Ministers; I endeavor,
like the Industrious Be to suck Honey from the Flowers of Devotion; and not
like the Spider, to convert what was intended for Nourishment, into Poison. If
any thing drops from the Pulpit, which I think not so pertinent, I cover it
with the Mantl^ of Love, and strive to remember that which is better: For as
the Divine Herbert observes; If the Person be dull, God Preaches to the
Hearers, a Lecture of Patience.

In the Singing of Psalms, I labor more to have my Soul inflamed with Love and
Zeal, than to have my Spirits cheered either by the Harmony of Voices, or sound
of the Organ; and could heartily wish that Sternhold and Hopkins's Psalms
(tho'well enough 150 Years ago) were now removed, and Mr. Tate's Translation
put in their place. -- As to the Receiving the Holy Sacrament, it has ever been
my Opinion, that whoever participates of that Solemn Ordinance ( lest he Eats
and Drinks Damnation) should retire himself from the World for a Day at least,
(...) by a strict recollection of his Actions, and serious examination of his
own Life ( attended with Fasting and Prayer) endeavor so to prepare himself,
that he may come as a Worthy Receiver to the Tab^e of the Lord, that so by the
Strength he receives by that Spiritual Viaticum, he may be enabled to run with
Pa^ience the Race that is set before him: and therein ( through the Assistance
of Divine Grace) so to run as to obtain the Prize.

After the Public Duties of the Day are over, I return to my Chamber, and
enter into my Closet, spending some time therein, in Meditating on what I have
heard, and in reiterated Addresses to the Throne of Grace, to follow it with
his Blessing: Well knowing, that tho Paul may Plant, and Apollo Water, yet it
is God that teaches me to profit. And if in the Evening (as sometimes there
does) a Friend comes to visit me; I spend my time with him in discoursing on
Divine things; whereby our Hearts are warmed, and our Affections stirred up to
praise God for his Goodness; and hereby find the Benefit of the Communion of
Saints, which is too much neglected, though an Article of the Creed. Sure I am
all the Members of the Mystical Body of Christ, have Fellowship with the Father
and Son, by one Holy Spirit; with A^gels in their Love, Care and Ministries,
with the Saints in Heaven in their Love and Prayers, and with one another in
the same Faith, Hope, Word and Sacrament; and therefore should often confer
about Heavenly things, holding the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace.

The Operations of the Mind being in their own Nature much more fatigueing than
the Labors of the Body; it is my usual Custom on Sunday Night, to go somewhat
sooner to Bed than ordinary: However, I durst not adventure to go and compose
my self to such a rest as so much resembles Death it self (and from which many
have awaked in Eternity) without recommending my self to the Care and
Protection of the Almighty; and to this I have endeavored always to have the
greater regard, since besides the Divine Authority, which plainly injoyns it,
it is a Duty so clearly manifested even by the light of Nature, that it is a
wonder almost that any should neglect it. I hope you do not, Madam, take this
as either Dictating or Reproving, when it is never meant so by me, who have
justly entertained quite other Conceptions of you; and am so far from supposing
my self* Pattern in any respect for your Imitation, that I should think my self
in danger of running into the notion of a Perfectionist, if I could but come
near you.

This Madam, is the Method in which I would spend the Sabbath; and is what I
have endeavored to practice; though I must own, to my shame, with so much
weakness, and so many Infirmit^es, that it seems rather an Account of what I
ought to do, than of what I have done: For though it is my Duty to watch narrowly
over my Heart, Affections, and Thoughts, and all my Outward Actions, and in a
more particular manner should look upon the Sanctifying of the Lord's Day to be
a Principal part of Religion, yet I must own I have not been so careful as I
ought, to Sanctify the Lord in my Heart on that Day, or perform some Duties
that were incumbent upon me. I have not made (...) my Fear and my Dread, as I
ought; but have indulged my self in Sloth, spoken my own Words, and thought my
own Thoughts, contrary to God's Holy Will and Commandment.

I must also accuse my self of being too negligent (...) Preparing my self to
attend upon God in his Solemn and Public Appointments, rushing often into his
Presence without that due Preparation which he requires.

Neither have I behaved my self in his House with that Fear and Reverence as I
ought, nor heard God's Word with that Attention, which so Awful a Message
called for; nor improved it to my Spiritual Nourishment, as I ought to have
done.

I am also sensible, that I have been more ready to ^ind fault with the
Minister, than to obey the Message he has brought; and have not spoken of other
Men and their Affairs, with that Care, Charity, and A^^ection, as I should have
done, but rather have discovered their Defects.

I likewise acknowledge, That in singing of Psalms, I have not sung with that
Grace in my Heart which God's Word requires; and have had my Ears more tickled
with the Harmony of the Music, than my Soul inflamed with Zeal to sing the
Praises of God.

I do also confess, I have not had such Sorrow and Repentance for my Sins past,
as I ou^^t; nor have used such Diligence in the daily Examining of my
Conscience, and Amendment of my Life, as I should have done.

I have also reason to be humbled, that I have not offered up my Prayers unto God,
with ala^^ity and fervor of Spirit as I should have done, but have been often
Distracted, Slothful, and Cold in my Devotions.

I also acknowledge I have been Proud and Vainglorious in my Words and Actions.

I have not thought so humbly of my self, as I should have done; nor kept my
Senses in the House of God, with that care as became a Christian, especially my
Eyes and my Ears.

For all which, and many more Errors of my Life, which through Neglect and
Inadvertency, may have escaped my Cognizance, I humbly beg Pardon and
Forgiveness of the Father of Mercies.

Thus (Madam) with the Pelican, have I dissected my Heart, to show you where
the Defects of Humanity reside.

I have here (as I told you before) made the whole World (but principally your
self) my Confessor: I will only add as to this Point, That if my Tongue and
Heart agree not in this Confession, my Confession will be of no value; he that
confesses with his Tongue, and wants Confession in his Heart, is either a vain
Man, or an Hypocrite; and he that confes^es with his Heart, and wants it in his
Tongue, is either Proud or Timorous.

Madam, having given you some Account how I endeavored to spend the Sabbath in
Dublin, I shall (...) inform y^ how I spent my time on the Weekdays.

I have told you (in the Account I gave you of spending Sunday) that 'twas my
Practice to go to Bed sooner on those Nights than at other times. I shall
further add, That I am no sooner lain down on Sunday Night, but I compose my
self to rest, being so far from being terrified with Apparitions, Spectrums,
and the like, as I have heard some have been; who for that very Reason, durst
never lie alone; that I humbly Adore the Majesty of Heaven for it, I fear
nothing but God and Sin.

When I awake, I am transported to find my self so sprightly every way; which
made me often wonder, what an excellent thing Sleep was; considering it as an
inestimable Jewel; for an hour of which, if a Tyrant laid down his Crown, he
should not be able to purchase it* That it was that Golden Chain which tied
Health and our Bodies together; and that while sleeping, none complained of
Pains, Wants, Cares, or Captivities. And that though the Story of Endymion's
Nap for Threescore and Fifteen Years, and then awaking as lively as if he had
slept but six hours, be in it self but a mere Fable, yet the Moral is good, and
plainly indicates the Necessity and Usefulness of Rest to our Natures, as
instituted by the God of Nature Himself.

But to proceed in my Journal. In the Morning, as soon as the Cinque Ports are
open, I send up some Private Ejaculations to Heaven, giving God thanks* that my
Eyes are open to see the Light of another Day. After this I get up, and make my
most Solemn Addresses to the Divine Majesty; remembrin^ Randolph's Words.

First Worship God; He that forgets to Pray,
Bids not himself Good Morrow, nor Good Day.
In these sorts of Duties it has been my con^^ant Practice to be rather short
and fervent, than long and indifferent. And as we ought to make use of every
Just and Proper Motive to excite us to (...) Duty, I will humbly say, I have
been the, mo^^ constant in my practic^ of this Morning-Duty, as principally out
of a sense of my bounden Duty toward God, so also from a consideration of the
Example of a Person of Honor (I mean the late Lord Delamere) who has left it
upon Record to his Children, That whenever he happened, which was very seldom, to
omit his Duty in this Kind, tho upon never so urgent an occasion, he always
found some cross Interruptions and disappointments in (...) business of that
day.

Being now, Madam, to Sally out into the City, under a n^cessity of making my
self more particularly known, in respect to the affairs I went about, I will
presume to suppose you might be inquisitive to understand what sort of Fig^re
(...) proper for me to make. As to my Clothes, I confess I was never
overcurious, affecting always to appear more plain and cleanly, than gay and
fini^al. The first Suit of Apparel that ever mortal man wore, came neither from
the Mercer's Shop, nor the Merchant's Warehouse; and yet Adam's Bill would have
been sooner taken, than a Knight's Bond now. The Silk^Worms had something else
to do in those days, than to set up Looms, to become Free of the Weavers. Our
old Grandsire's Breeches were not worth near the Value of K. Stephen's Hose,
that cost but a poor Noble; Adams Holy Day Suit being made of no better Stuff
than plain Fig Leaves sowed together, and Ev^^ best Gown of the same piece.
However, it was both necessary and convenient I should rather appear above than
below my Quality; and as such I adventured to visit my Auction-Room.

In the various Emergencies of each day, I send up Ejaculatory Prayers to the
God of all my Mercies, for his Direction, Blessing, and Conduct, as the matter
does require, and as God has Commanded, who has bid me in all my Ways
acknowledge him, and has gra^iously promised to direct my Paths.

In the Summertime, I rose early in the Morning, and walked abroad into the
Fields, finding those occasional Meditations (that such a walk presented me
with Subjects for) proper to raise my Devotion to a greater Fervor; the Beauty
of the Creation, leading me by insensible steps to the Adoration of the Great
Creator; the Source and Fountain of all Excellencies. My walking along the
Strand (a Mile from Dublin) gave me a pleasant prospect of the Sea, whose
rolling Waves put me in mind of the Power of Omnipotence, who commands both the
Winds and the Sea, saying, hitherto shall thou come, but no further.

Leaving the Strand, I walked up a Hill into the Fields, by the side of
Ballibaugh-lane (which I thought one of the best Prospects about Dublin) having
Heaven, Earth, and Sea, in view at the same Moment, it represented to my
thoughts the exceeding swiftness of spiritual Bodies, which (though far from
Infinite, yet) have a motion quicker than the Eye, and swifter than our
Thoughts. Thus by the things I have seen, I have been led into the
Contemplation of unseen things.

After about an hours Meditations in this Nature, my usual way was to return to
my Chamber, unless a previous Appointment to meet any one about Business,
hindered me. For though I had given the Conduct of my Auctions to Mr. Wild
(who faithfully discharged the Trust I reposed in him) yet was I not so freed
from Business my self, as not to have Applications made to me, both by the
Binders, and other Persons.

After some time being in my Chamber, and having taken some Refreshment, I went
to Dick's in Skinner-Row; where, after calling for a Dish of Coffee, my
Questions were, Where Is Darby? (he is Dick's Servant, but as honest a Lad as
lives in Dublin^ Is there a Packet come from England? And that which prompted
me to that Enquiry, was, That I then had hopes of hearing from my Wife;
distance and absence having so endeared her to me, that I was never well but
when I was writing to her, or hearing from her. But if a Packet came, and there
was no Letter for me, it struck me into such a Melancholy (for fear Valeria
was ill) that I could hardly reconcile my self to a good Humor all that day.

Madam, perhaps this will make you ask how long* I have been absent from her?
Why Madam, not above a Month, but am fallen already to telling the Minutes, and
can scarce live at this cruel distance.

Methinks Madam, I could pass through an Army of Beauties untoucht for one
Glimpse of the Dear Valeria (for so I design to call her) It Is she I Love ( for
why should n't I) above Beauty, Wealth, and those Gaudy Trifles that dazzle the
Eyes of others: Neither can S -- nor the worst of her Enemies, lessen my
Opinion of her. Might I talk of her Piety (for she is too modest to hear it
mentioned) I Would affirm she is so great a Scripturist that her Memory is a sort of
Concordance, and the only one I have occasion for: And for the rest of her
Life, it is nothing else but Devotion -- And, which yet inhances her Value, she
puts me not off with a common Friendship. It Is true, an indifferent Love would
ha'e been good enough for the Man that would Court her with the blaze of Gold;
to the Fop that has nothing but Honor or Beauty ( that very Jest when found in
a Man) to plead for him; I loved her for better Reasons, and therefore ask for
a nearer Intimacy, a more lasting Happiness; Sense is enough, where Senses only
Woo;
But Reasoning Lovers must have Reason too:
No wonder if the Body quickly cloy,
But Minds are infinit^, and like themselves enjoy.


A Woman of Sense (and such I find Val^ria) is a noble Prize, had she nothing
but the Treasure of her Mind. All the World is pictured in a Soul* I am sure
it is so, and that she acts new Charms in every thing. Then Madam, if you ever
Marry, (and would be happy in Wedlock) Marry for pure Love, for Valeria and I
shall then be upon the square with ye, for we can love more in one day, than
others do in all their Lives. She that marries a Husband on this Foundation,
will be still finding new Charms either in his Words or Looks; for my own
share, I do assert, whilst dignified sparks seek Diversion from their Misses,
and devote their Lives to the idle pursuit of a Hound or a Hawk, I thank God my
Fancy is not so rambling, but I can confine it to One Dear Charmer, to whom (if
she loves like me) I Will prove the most kind and tender thing in the World. In a
word, I bend all the Faculties and Powers of my Body and Mind, to please and
serve her; all I have, or can command, shall lie at her Feet; neither do I love
at so cold a rate, as to desire any of the Goods of Fortune, but for her sake;
and this loving Humor (as Iris found in the like case) will not only last for a
day, or a year, but to the end of her Life; then what shall I do for a sight of
Valeria? but it cannot be had, so that I am now constrained to have recourse to
Philosophy, though it can supply me with no other Remedies but Patience; and
the thoughts of this made me still duller than I was before; but as dull as it
made me, before I left the Coffee-house for (though Love has led me out of the
way*) I don't forget I am still at Dicks. I looked upon the Bill I published
for that Morning; then read what public Papers came from England in the last
Packet; and from thence, my Stomach (the most infallible sort of Clock) having
chim'd all in, I went to Dinner; which was usually at a Cooks shop, a Widows in
Crane-lane, whom I always found very ready to please me, and reasonable in her
Demands; a thing which few of the Dublin Cooks are guilty of; for though both
Flesh and Fish are sold cheap in their Markets, yet a Man may dine cheaper at a
Cook^ in London, I perceive in these Ordinaries, if a Man makes a Noise, laughs
in fashion, and has a grim Face^ to promise Quarreling, he shall be much
observed; but though this was none of my Talent, yet when I was set down to
Dinner, I looked as big, and eat as confidently as any of 'em all. When we had
filled our Bellies, we all began to talk; and made as great a noise as Dover
Court, for every Man was willing to say something, though 'twas nothing to the
purpose, rather than be thought to have nothing to say. I had but very bad
sauce to my Dinner this day; but that Madam, mistake me not, did not arise from
the fault of the Cook where I was, but the Company; there being in a manner
nothing that was serious among 'em; ones Talk was so lewd, as if he had lived
in a Brothel-house; another was Profaneness all over, nothing could be heard
from him, but Railleries (if I may call them so) against serious Godliness; one
while in Jest, then again in Earnest; and sometimes, to show his Wit ( as I may
well suppose) with an intermixture of both. Others there were, who seemingly
little believed either Heaven or Hell, to reward or punish; or a Supreme and
Righteous God and Judge of all; yet made no bones of calling the Dreadful and
O^^ipotent Being for a Witness to every ^rivolous, and I may say, many a false
thing; for he that makes no Conscience of Swearing, will, in my Opinion, make
less of Lying; and it may well (if yet it be not) be made a Proverb, A Common
Swe^^^r a Common Ly^r. Of all the Vices that are but too too rise among the
Children of Men, this of (...) Swearing is certainly the most unaccou^^^ble one
of any; something may be said for Lying, as that it is profitable; for Drinking,
that it is for the good Company; of W^oreing, that it is natural for Kind (...)
propagate its Kind, etc. But for Swearing, what (...) any Man say? even nothing
as all. Upon a ^ild (...) with one of the Sparks about the usefulness (...)
was, that it adorned his (...) a pass is the World (...) things terminate? But
(...) (which consisted chiefly in Noise and Nonsense) was quickly at an end.
For Dinner being ended, away went every one, according as his Business or his
Humor led him: Some to the College, some to the Playhouse, others to Court, a
few to their Shops, and Dunton to his Auction: When I came there, my first Word
usually was, Where Is Wild? What Sale last Night? Call Price. Sir, here is your
Account ready cast up; Thirty Pounds received, and here is the discharge on it.
Call Nelson, call Robinson, call James, call Bacon. Are the Bills Printed? And
were they dispersed at the Coffee houses, College, and Tho^sel? Thus, Madam,
you see I was a Man of Business; and that my Province was, to have a general
Inspection over all my Servants; and to stir them up to their Duty with the
utmost Application.

When I had spent about an hours time at my Auction, and had seen every one in
their proper Post, I* either went to visit a Friend, with whom sometimes I
walked into the Fields; or else went home to my lodging, and spent my time in
my Chamber, either in Reading Montaigns Essays (for it is a Book I value at a
great rate) or else in Writing to my Friends in England. And after the shadows
of the Evening have put a period to the Day, I used to make a trip to my
Auction, and crowd my self among the Gentlemen that went thither to buy
Pennyworths; and so could, unobserved, observe how things went. And here, to do
'em Justice, I observed that several Gentlemen bid like themselves, and as
those that understood the Worth and Value of the Books they bid for. And others
as much betrayed their Ignorance, and took no other Measures for their bidding,
but from the bulk of the Book, if 'twas large (whatever the worth on it was)
they bid accordingly. And yet, to do these Right, if they had but paid for what
they had so bought, I have no reason to complain of 'em. Others there were,
that in their bidding took their Measures from what they heard another bid
before 'em; and two of these happening to meet together, would strive so to
out-bid each other, that they would sometimes raise but an indifferent Book to
a good Price: And these ( provided still they paid for 'em) were very honest
Chapmen, and helped out those that went too often at an under Rate. But
whatsoever any bid, 'twas their own Act and Deed; for I must do my self that
Justice, to assert that I had none of those unworthy ways that have been used
in some other Auctions. I had not one Setter (to advance the Price, and draw on
unwary Bidders) in any of my five Sales. For howsoever I may have been aspersed
in that particular, by Patrick Campbel, I have that Satisfaction in my self of
my Sincerity and Innocence herein, as is beyond the Testimony of a thousand
Witnesses.

Having diverted my self a while, with seeing of the various Humors of the
Bidders in my Auction, I went away as unperceived as I came thither, and thence
retired into my Chamber; where, having spent some time in Meditation, I make it
my endeavor to recollect the Actions of the Day, and mak^ a scrutiny into my
Heart, to see what pec^ant Humors have exerted themselves there; ( being
jealous of my self, that I have not been so much upon my Watch as I ought to
have been) and having-thus examined how things stand, I strive by an humble
Confession of what I find my self guilty of, and a hearty sorrow for it, to
reconcile my self to my offended Maker, and so strike a Tally in the Exchequer
of Heaven (as an ingenious Author expresses it) for my quietus est, before I
close my Eyes, that I may leave no Burden on my Conscience. And after my
Addresses to Heaven, by way of Confession, etc. my Bed is the next place, where
I know no more of my self till seven next Morning, (so strange is the Nature of
sound Sleep) than if I had never been; at which hour I usually digest the
future business of the day: Yet, Madam, as sound as I sleep, I dream often. You
know, Madam, Thought must be active, but I take little heed in the Morning,
what the Visions of the Night have been (unless that Night when I dream of D --
ne'^ appearing to me) and much less care to remember them; but my Experience
teaches me, that the overnight Thoughts come fresh upon me the next day; and
how to digest and settle them, was the Morning business; the main whereof, next
after my Mornings Devotion, was to answer those Letters I had received from
England. My Custom always is, to begin with that of my Wife's, and then to
proceed to D -- ne's, and then to my other Relations and (...), as near as I
can, in due order o^ Place and Affection. I seal them in the same manner, only
I retain that of my Wife's to be the first perused, and last closed.

Thus, Madam, I have given you a brief, but true Account of my general Method
of Living: And by such Steps as these (through the help of Divine Grace) I
strive to climb to Heaven; and sometimes find my Soul upon the Wing thither,
before I am aware. There is, methinks, no Object in the World that is more
delightful, than when in a Star-light-night, I survey the spangled Canopy of
Heaven; for if my Mind happen to be overcast with Melancholy, when I look up
and view the glittering Firmament, and hope in a short time to soar above those
starry Regions, methinks I breath already the Air of a New World; and all those
black Vapors that overwhelmed my Soul, are fled in an instant: I then scorn
this Transitory World, and all its fading Pleasures, considering the Vanity of
the one, and the Emptiness of the other.

T^us still my Soul moves upwards, as all the heavenly Bodies do: But yet, as
those Bodies are often snatched away to the West, by the rapid motion of the
Primum Mobile; so by those Epidemical Infirmities incident to human Nature, I
am often turned a clean contrary course; though my Soul still persists in her
proper Motion. And I have often occasion to be angry with my self, when I
consider, That whereas my bountiful Creator intended my Body (tho'a lump of
Clay) should be a Temple of his Holy Spirit, my corrupt Affections should turn
it so often to a Bedlam, and my Excesses to an Hospital. But as my Sin troubles
me, so my trouble for Sin comforts me: And I believe there is less danger in
committing the Sin I delight in, than in delighting in the Sin I have
committed. In a word, Madam, I have experienced that the way to God is by my
self; and the way to my self is by my own Corruptions: If I baulk this way, I
err; If I travel by the Creatures, I wander: For the Motion of the Heavens will
give my Soul no Rest, nor will the Virtue of Herbs increase mine; the height of
all Philosophy, both Natu^^^^ and Moral, being to know my self; and the end of
this Knowledge, is to know God, the knowledge of whom, is the Perfection of
Love; God being our chiefest good, and the Enjoyment of him our highest
Happiness.

And now, Madam, having given you a Specimen of my way of Living in Dublin,
both on the Sabbath; and on the Week days. I come in the next place to give you
a Iournal of my Conversation, with respect to the Occurrences I met with here;
by which you may see what little occasion I gave for the Dubli^ Scuffle; or to
the false Dorinda to tempt me to her lewd Embraces.

It was in April when I came to Dublin, and near Eleven a Clock at Night when I
landed; so that it was with some difficulty that I got a Lodging for that
Night; for which I own my self beholding to Mrs. Lisle (the Widow) at the
Dukes-head Tavern in Castle-street, the first Place I drank at in Ireland. I
have always the Unhappiness of being sick at Sea, which, though it be very
irksome to bear, yet I find this good in it, that it endears the sense of God's
Goodness to me when I come to Land, and makes me the more thankful for my
Preservation. Which having performed as well as the Fatigue I had been under
would permit, I betook my self to my Chamber, and slept that Night without
Rocking; though in the Morning both my Bed and Chamber seemed to me to have the
same motion that my fluctuating Cabin had, the day before. Being got up the
next Morning, I again renewed my Thanks to God, for my Preservation at Sea, and
safe arrival at Dublin. And now being dressed as it were in Print, (for my
business now was to see and be seen) I marched very methodically out of my
Lodgings with two ( I cannot say a pair of) Gloves in one hand, and a Cane in
the other; and it is not long since I had done sowing my wild Oats; and now I am
earnestly hunting after Gaup-seed. You would smile, Madam, if you had the
Picture of your quondam friend at the black Raven, like an overgrown Oaf newly
come to Town, staring and gazing at all the Signs, and every thing else in the
Str^ets; pacing out their length, and enquiring ever and anon, What call ye
this Street? Who dwells in you great House? Whose fine Coach is that? For thus
I rambled through every Street, Alley, and corner of this spacious Town, as
you will find at large in my Summer Travels, where 200 Persons will see their
Pictures, that at present little expect it; but I leave 'em here, to tell ye
the first visit I made in Dublin, was to Not. Gun. a Bookseller in
^ssex-street, to whom I was directed by my Friend, Mr. Richard Wild, (whom I
had left behind me in London) This Son of a Gun gave me a hearty Welcome; and,
to do him Justice, he is as honest a Man as the World affords; and is so
esteemed by all that know him. He is a firm adherer to the established
Government, and a declared Enemy to Popery and Slavery: So far from
dissembling, that he knows not how to go about it; and will speak his Mind, how
much soever it may be to his Prejudice. He understands Stenography as well as
Bookbinding; and he himself is a sort of a Shorthand Character; for he is a
little Fellow, but one that contains a great deal. And as he is a most
incomparable Writer of Shorthand, so he speaks it as well as writes it: and to
complete his Character, He is a constant Shopkeeper, without earnest Business
calls him to the Drumcondrah. This Gun was a constant and generous bidder at my
Auctions, where he bought a great quantity of Books, which he as honestly paid
for

At Mr. Gun's Shop, I met with Mr. (...), another Bookseller, but his principal
Business is Binding; whom I afterward employed considerably: He is a very
honest Man, but has met with Misfortunes in the World, by thinking some others
as honest as himself, who did not prove so. I asked Mr. Bently, whether there
was not some Eminence in the City, from whence I might survey it? He told me
there was; and that from the top of the Tholsel, the whole City might be seen;
so we went to the Tholsel, where we ascended about half a score Stairs from the
Street, which brought us into a spacious Ro^m, supported by great Pillars, and
flagg'd (as they term it here) with free Stone, with open Banisters on each
side toward the Street; its figure is rather an oblong than a square: This is
the Place they call the Change, where the Merchants meet every day, as on the
Royal Exchange in London. In a corner, at the South-East part, is a Court of
Judicature, where they keep their public Sessions for the City. Having viewed
the lower part, we went up a large pair of Stairs into a public Room, which
had a large Balconey looking into Skinner Row; and from this Balcony I spoke
with my Friend Mr. Geo. Larkin, who was then at Mr. Ray 's Printing House
over against it. He no sooner saw me, but came over to congratulate my safe
arrival, expressing himself very joyful to see me; and I was as glad as he, we
having a long time had a kindness for each other, and conversed by Letter, even
when I was in America. Having said so much of him, you will not wonder, Madam, if
I send ye an Epitomy of his Character, (intending to do it more largely in my
Summer Ramble) He is of a midling Stature, somewhat gross, of a Sanguine
Complexion, and a hail Constitution both of Body and Mind; and (which I admire
where ever I find it) he is of an even Temper, not elated when Fortune Smiles,
nor cast down with her Frowns; and though his Stars have not been very
propitious to him, with respect to his outward Circumstances, (he having had
great Losses) yet he has born all with such a presence of Mind, as showed his
Losses to be the effect of his Misfortunes, and not his Faults. His
Conversation is extremely diverting, and what he says is always to the purpose:
He is a particular Votary of the Muses; and I have seen some of his Poems that
cannot be equaled: But there is one thing more peculiar to him, which is, That
whatever he does, is upon the Account Civil.

I went up with my Friends (Madam) to the top of the Th^lsel, and there had a
View of the whole City; but a Storm that then arose, took from us much of the
Pleasure of the Prospect: But of that, and the spacious Chambers over the
Change, where the For so the chief Magistrate of the City is styled there, as
well as in London.
Lord Mayor and Aldermen meet, and other Curiosities which I saw there, as also
o^ the Government of the City, ( by the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Assemblies) I
shall give a more particular Account in my Summer Ramble. But this I will say
here, (Madam) That of all the Cities in the Kings Dominions, Dublin (next to
London) does justly claim the Precedence.

'Twas at the Tholsel I met Mr. Dell, a Person whose Understanding and generous
Temper, set him above the common Rate of Men, and show him to be every way a
Gentleman; I could not but love him for these Qualifications, but much more as
he was an old Acquaintance of my Honored Mother-in-law; and Madam, you cannot
blame me for this, as she treats me with that Tenderness, that I think her my
own Mother Revived, and I find shall love her as much. Mr. Dell showed me a
most particular Respect at our first Meeting, and continued his Favors to the
last Minute I staid in Ireland, being one of those that were so obliging as to
see me a Shipboard.

From the Tholsel, Mr. Dell, Mr. Bently, and I, were going to the Tavern, but
Mr. Larkin, by the way, would have me go into Dick's Coffee-house, where I had
been advised by Mr. Wild, to keep my Auctions: I readily agreed to his Motion,
and went up, saw it, and liked it, as proper for my Purpose; Dick showing me
all the Civility I could desire: And I must say this of Dick, (notwithstanding
our after Quarrel) That he is a Witty and Ingenious Man, makes the best Coffee
in Dublin; and is very Civil and Obliging to all his Customers; of an open and
generous Nature; has a peculiar Knack at Bantering, and will make Rhymes to any
thing: He Is of a cheerful facetious Temper, and generally speaking fair in his
Dealing: And had not Patrick assaulted him with the Temptation of a double
Price, he and I should never have quarreled; and yet for all that, I must do
him the Justice to say, he carried it civilly to me to the very last; and was
so kind as to come (with my Friend Mr. Dell) to give me a Farewell when I left
Ireland; thus much for Dick: As for his Wife, I shall say this, She Is an
Industrious Woman, hand^om enough, one that knows her Duty to her Husband, and
how to respect her Customers; and in a word, is what a Wife ought to be; and I
must own, though her Husband and I scuffled, she treated me always with much
(...).

From Dicks we went to the Tavern, where having ^rank a Bottle or two (and
related the Fatigues of my Dublin Voyage) we parted, and went each to our
several Lodgings. In my way home I was attackt by an impudent (...), who
desired me to bestow a Glass of Wine upon her; I made her no other Answer, than
that the House of Correction stood not far off; at which she scower'd away with
all the Heels she could make, seeming as much scared, as if she had been in the
most eminent danger of losing her Chastity; when perhaps she could scarce
remember the time when she had it. I hope, Madam, you do not esteem any thing I
have said here, to be designed for the magnifying of my own Virtues; it is
practicable enough for a man to make his Reputation clear and not sin; and
assure your self, I am not unsensible that self-Praise is a most odious thing
in any, and I shall ever account it much more so in my self: However it be,
Madam, all my Mistakes are entirely submitted to you, who are the best Judge of
'em.

The next day I removed to more convenient Quarters, and delivered some Letters
which I had brought from London. This day Mr. Dell gave me a meeting at Dicks;
from whence we went to the Castle, the Place of Residence for the Chief
Governors; by Mr. Dell's Interest I had here a view of the Lord Galway's
Bedchamber, and other (...) Apartments, but I wave 'em here, designing to
speak of 'em in my Summer Ramble; however, I Will here attempt his Lordships
Character, and hope my honest Intention herein will something atone for my
great Defects; and the rather still, as his Lordships Merits are above a
Dryden's or a Cowley's Pen. I own it is a bold Undertaking, to offer at the
Character of one of the greatest Men which our Age has produced, especially for
one who has not the Honor of being personally known to him; however, though I
cannot perform this Great Task as it ought to be, yet I Will endeavor at
something so like him, that any one at first glance may say 'twas meant for the
Earl of Galway, one of the present Lords Justices for the Kingdom of Ireland.
Then to proceed (though with a trembling Hand) to his Lordships Character.

The first thing then which is remarkable in him, is* He is a Person of strict
Morals, and extraordinary Piety. His Lordship is advanced to the Honors he now
enjoys, by his great Humility and Personal Merits. The Noble Blood that has
filled his Veins, has not swelled his Heart: He is as humble as he is great; he
seems set by Heaven on such a conspicuous Place, (as is that of being Lord
Justice of Ireland) on purpose to guide the People into the Paths of Love and
Obedience to their God and King. In a word, he uses such an obliging mien to
all, as if he thought the only thing valuable in Greatness, is the power it
gives to oblige. I would go on with his Lordship's Character, but (as I said
before) I find my self unable for this Task; so that (Madam) I shall next
proceed (for his Lordship's Character leads me to it) to give some short
Account of the present State of the Kingdom, according to my best Information,
though you may wonder that Dunton should trouble his Head with Politics; but
since such is the Custom of Travelers* Why may not I thrust my self into the
Herd?

The Present Governors are, Their Excellencies the Lord Marquess of Winchester,
the Earl of Galway, and the Lord Villers, now Earl of Jersey; (his Lordship has
never been here with this Character, though he be n^med in the Commission;) and
the present Government is so well administered by those two Noble Lords, that I
have not heard one man repine at them since I came to Dublin. They have
Officers belonging to the Household, such as Steward and Comptrouler; who on
Sta^e-days carry White Rods as the Ensigns of their Office: When they go to
Church, the Streets, from the Castle-gate, to the Church-door, as also the
great Isle of the Church, to the foot of the Stairs by which they ascend to the
Place where they sit, are lined with Soldiers; they are preceeded by the
Pursivants of the Council Chamger, two Maces, (and on State-days) by the King,
and Pursivant at Arms, their Chaplains, and Gentlemen of the Household, with
Pages and Footmen bare-headed: When they alight from their Coach, (in which
commonly the Lord Chancellor, and one of the Prime Nobility sit with 'em) the
Sword of State is delivered to some Lord to carry before 'em; and in the like
manner they return back to the Castle, where the several Courses at dinner are
ushered in by Kettle-drums and Trumpets. I forgot to tell you (Madam) that in
these Cavalcades the Coach in which they ride is attended by a small Squadron
of Horse; after which follow a long Train of Coaches that belong to the several
Lords and Gentlemen who attend 'em.

Having given ye this short Account of the Chief Governors, I shall next
proceed to mention something of the Estate of the Church, which in all its
Canons are not the same with that of England; not that they differ from it in
any points of Religion, but only in some Circumstances of Government; which by
a Convocation which has been sometimes held here, may be altered as the present
Exigencies require: It consists of two Houses, viz. The Upper in which the
Bishops, and the lower where the Inferior Clergy sit; but they have not thought
it needful to call one since his present Majesty's Accession to the Crown. The
most Reverend the Archbishops are four, viz. Dr. Michael Boil, Lord
Archbishop of Armagh, and Primate of all Ireland. Dr. Narcissus Marsh, Lord
Archbishop of Dublin, Primate of Ireland. Dr. William Palliser, Lord
Archbishop of Cashell; and Dr. John Vesey, Lord Archbishop of Tuam. And the
Suffragants are eighteen in Number, of this Number Three are of his Majesty's
Privy Council, viz. The Bishops of Mead, Kildare, and Clogher, as also the two
Primates. To give you a short Character of them, take this, what has been told
me by some Judicious Persons, of as well Dissenters as others, That they are
Men of such Learning, Moderation, and Piety, that this church had never a
better Class of Bishops to govern it.

The Dissenters in Ireland are a very considerable People, as well for their
Number as Wealth; and all unanimous in an hearty Zeal for our present happy
Government. (And indeed, since my coming hither, I have not heard of any one
Iacobite in the whole Kingdom.) They have several Meeting Houses, large and
conveniently ordered within; and these are supplied with Sober and Pious
Teachers; among whom I think the Reverend Mr. Boyse may justly be named as the
Chief; one, wh^ by continual and hard Study every Day, fits himself with new
Acquisitions toward the happy discharging of his Pastoral Care; which he
expresses with so much Meekness, and force of Persuasion, as make him at once
mightily beloved and followed. And one thing this Kingdom is extremely happy
in, That both Persuasions do so well agree, toward promoting the common good,
as more cannot well be desired; a great Advancer of which Union, is Mr. Weld, a
Person of Sobriety, Learning, and solid Judgment, and much admired and followed
for his Preaching.

The Quakers are here in great Numbers also, as one might easily perceive that
would have considered the mighty Throngs of them which crowded about their
Great speaker and Champion, William Pen, when he came hither to hold forth. I
cannot hear of any Learned Men among them, though some of them are very
Wealthy, and but few of them poor; they can make use of the Carnal Sword, as
well as those who pretend more to it; as you will believe by this Story of one
among them, whose Name I forget; who, in the late War, when the Rapparees came
toward Edenderry, near the Bogg of Allen, in the Kings County, he, among other
of the Militia, went forth to engage them, and put them all to the run, except
those who were killed in the Action; among them lay one whom the Quaker thought
he had killed, and rifled his Pockets; but some Months after, when a great
number of them burnt Colonel Purefoy's House, about three Miles from Edenderry,
these brisk Sparks took, the Alarm, and making as considerable a body as they
could, marched to Purefoys-place, where they found many of the Irish, who had
made themselves drunk with the Colonels strong Beer, fast asleep in the
Ditches; the Quaker, who never was backward in such Attempts, finds the same
Fellow whom he thought he had formerly killed, half tipsie, and in his Arms; he
called him by his Name, saying, Verily I thought I had of late slain thee? but
now find my Mistake; wherefore I purpose to make sure work, and hinder thee
from Rising any more; and so immediately knocked him down with a Poll-Ax which
he used always instead of a Sword; and then cut off his Head. Poor Teig never
offered at any Resistance, nor endeavored to save himself by flight, but stood
to die like a Fool.

Our Red Lettered Gentlemen were never under such Circumstances here, as now;
for all their Bishops and Regular Clergy are banished by Act of Parliament,
which makes it Death to find any of them returned again. So that now they are
wholly depending on the Seculars, and every Parish is allowed his Priest; but
when he dies, there being none to Ordain a new one, it must remain without; and
this will be the State of the whole Kingdom in a little time, when the present
set of Priests shall be extinct. They have also another Law, That no Papist
shall keep a School, nor any one Native of a Foreign Education be admitted to
dwell in the Kingdom; so that by these Acts I think it will appear plain
enough, that the Romish Religion is on its last Legs in Ireland; and the
present Romanists who survive their Priests, must conform to the Protestant
Religion, or live and die without the Exercise of their own. I do not pretend
to make my Judgment upon these Methods; but I think the next Age will have few
People inclinable to any more Rebellions against England; and some of the
Papist Lords have put their Children to be Educated in the Protestant Faith;
and several Gentlemen have lately abjured the Romish.

These Ghostly Fathers were to render themselves on the first day of May for
Transportation at Dublin, Cork, etc. where their Names were entered with the
Magistrate of the Town; ye may guess at the Lamentations which were made at
parting with such precious Jewels; and Masses were said, and Money begged for
them, besides what the People voluntarily gave without asking. One old Friar,
called Father Kereen, who had been a famous Exorcist, and excellent good at
helping ^attle that were overlooked or bewitched, (for some of the vulgar are
so superstitious to believe this) made sale of good store of Holy Water, which
had helped to cast out Devils; and of several other consecrated Trinckams, by
which it was said he acquired such a Sum of Money, as might suffice for his
support all his days; and such were the Tricks played by many of them on their
going into Exile, as leaving Holy Tokens, and taking Catalogues of their
Acquaintances Names, to pray for them all the Days of their Life. Now these
Kindnesses deserved some returns, which they never failed of; though whether
they are as good as their words in remembering them, I leave to their own
Breasts. Before I leave this account of the State of Religion in Ireland, I
shall acquaint you with the manner of exorcising their Demoniacks (though for
my part I think the Devil is in the presumptuous Priest, rather than the
melancholy Person) and you may judge how sit such Persons are for honest
Society.

The Exorcist, before he goes to work, ought by way of a preparative, to
confess his Sins, and receive the Eucharist; then he begins the Operation with
some short Prayers, and ties the ends of the violet colored Stole that he
wears, about the Demoniacks Neck; who, if outrageous, must be tied Hand and
Foot; then crossing him, and the bystanders, they go to Prayer, and read the 53
Psalm, and after a Prayer or two more, he thus speaks to the Devil: I command
thee thou unclean Spirit, whoever thou art, and all thy Companions, that do
possess this Servant of God, That by the Mystery of the Incarnation, Passion,
Resurrection, and Ascension of our Lord I. C. by the sending the Holy Ghost,
and the coming of our Lord to Judgment, thou tell me thy Name, and the day and
hour of thy Exit, with some sign; and that thou obey me the unworth^ Minister
of God in all things; and that thou offend not this Creature of God, or any of
the Bystanders in their Persons or Goods. Then he crosses himself, and the
Demoniack on the Forehead, Mouth, and Breast, and reads some Gospel, as that
of the First of St. John, the 16 th of Mark, or the 10 th of Luke; then falling
to Prayer, he begs to be enabled to cast forth this cruel Devil; then lapping
the Stole about the possessed Parties Neck, and fortifying him with the Sign of
the Gross, he lays his Right Hand on the Patients Head, and cries out, Behold
the Cross of the Lord! (which he shows him) Fly from it ye adverse Parties: The
Lion of the Tribe of Judah, the Root of David has overcome: Then to Prayer
again he goes, and begins a new Exorcism, saying, I exorcise thee, most foul
Spirit, every Incursion of the Adversary, every Phantasm, and every Legion, in
the Name of our Lord J. C. to fly from, and be eradicated out of this Image of
God: He commands thee, who bid thee be plunged from the highest Heavens, into
the lower parts of the Earth: He whom the Sea, Winds and Tempests obey,
commands thee. Then when this does not serve turn, he falls to scold the Devil
after this manner, Hear therefore, and fear, thou Satan, Enemy of the Faith,
and all Mankind; thou Introducer of Death, and Destroyer of Life, Decliner of
Justice, Root of all Evils, Fomenter of Vices, Seducer of Men, Betrayer of
Nations, Promoter of Envy, Source of Avarice, Cause of Discord, and Exciter of
Sorrow, Why do thou stay? Why do thou resist, when thou know the Lord
Christ can destroy all thy Power? Fear him who was sacrificed in Isaac, sold in
Joseph, ^^ain in the Lamb, crucified in Man, and at last triumphed over Hell.
Then he makes the following Cross in the Forehead of the Possessed; Be gone you
in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Give way to
the Holy Spirit by this ^ sign of the Cross of our Lord J. C. Then they go to
Prayers; and after them another Exorcism is used like the former, wherein he
calls the Devil many hard Names, and tells him of all the Rogueries he has ever
committed, and bids him be gone for shame, since all his Tricks are discovered.

Madam, I would e^large in giving a more particular account of the present
Condition of the Church and State in this Kingdom of Ireland, (for as I was a
little curious in this matter, so I have met with such Ingenious Company since
I came here, as have been able to satisfy my Curiosity in these Matters;) but
my Observations on the State of Ireland being more properly a part of my Summer
Ramble, than what relates to my Conversation in Dublin, I shall drop it here,
and proceed to what is more properly Conversation; my Design in this Letter (as
I said at first) being rather to tell ye how I lived in Ireland, than to tell
ye what I saw or observed there. And in the Account of my Conversation, with
respect to the Occurrences I met with there (for that is the Subject I am still
upon) I am next to tell ye, that having seen the Castle, and other Rarities, I
was the next Sunday for going to Church (the Place where the Lords Justices
usually go) and accordingly thither I went in Company with Mr. Larkin. After we
had seen the State in which the Government rides to Church (which indeed is
very splendid, as I hinted before) we crowded into the Church, where I
endeavored to compose my self in the most serious manner I could, to attend
the Service of God performed there. I do not pretend to retain whole Sermons by
heart, but can have a satisfied Conscience in keeping only in my Memory, a
remarkable passage or two that suits best to the then Edification of my Soul;
much less then, Madam, shall I offer to describe this place of Divine Worship,
or Descant upon the Auditory: but as it is most natural for Mankind, upon the
presenting of fresh Objects, to view them at least in a transient manner; I
found it so with my self here, notwithstanding the Injunctions of God, and my
own Conscience, to keep close to my Devotion; but pardon me Madam, if I am
necessitated to declare, I did not behold one tolerable Face among all those
that are distinguished by the Name of the Fair Sex: So that here I can truly
say, They were no Temptation to me; and that I had no occasion to make a
Covenant with my ^yes: But for my self, I could have been heartily content they
had had a certain place of Worship from the Men, assigned them in the Assembly,
as the Eastern Churches have, but for what reason I know not. But this Liberty
(Madam) that I took to gaze, and make Reflections, was only while they were
singing an Anthem, with Vocal and Instrumental Music, there being two pair of
Organs in Christ-Church; of which one is a very noble one. But when the
Minister ascended the Pulpit, I heard him with great Attention and Delight: He
was a Dignitary of the Church, but his Name has slipped my Memory. Retiring home
from hence with what convenient speed the Infirmity of my Body would permit me,
I dined in my Lodging with my Landlord H -- a Jolley Man in his natural Temper,
but not very serious in matters of Religion; I made my Repast as short as I
could, (as is usual with me upon such days) and withdrew into my Chamber, where
I spent the remainder of the day in such Acts of Devotion and Meditation as
were usual with me; but I had some more particular Impressions upon my Spirits
concer^ing the Divine Goodness toward me, in respect to the now state of my
Health, That I h^d been enabled to go once again to the House of God: And I
will own, to the Glory of the Divine Name, that some touches in the Sermon I
had heard that day concerning Thankfulness for Mercies received, were very
helpful to me in the course of this Evenings Devotion.

The next Week I went to see Patrick Campbel, to whom (by his Order) I had sent
several of Mr. Turner's History. He treated me well enough the first time I saw
him, giving me my Mornings Draught, and telling me I was welcome to Dublin: But
I said nothing then of the Books I sent him, nor he to me; which I thought
somewhat strange. The second time I went to him, which was the Week following;
after the usual How-dee's were over, I expected he should have took some notice
to me of the Books; which he not doing, I took notice of 'em to him; and then
it was I perceived he had a Natural Aversion to Honesty; for he began to
shuffle at the very mention of 'em. However, resolving to be easy with him, I
took my leave of him for that time. The third time I saw him, he shuffl'd about
my Books at that rate, that a Stranger in his Shop (to whom I offered to refer
my Cause) resented it: And from that time forward (only for demanding my own,
and telling him how unfairly he dealt by me) he became my Enemy. This, Madam,
being the Person with whom I had the preceding Scuffle; if by this you don't
sufficiently see his Character, give me leave to give it you? which I will do
impartially, and without any respect to the Controversy I had with him.

He is, of Stature, rather Tall than otherwise; his Hair reddish, his Speech
very broad, like his Country; no Scholar, but of good Natural Parts; very
covetous, and extremely proud: He had a very mean beginning (for which no man
ought to blame him, for he could n't help it himself, and consequently 'twas
none of his fault) but his intolerable Pride makes it necessary that he be
often put in mind on it. I have heard some Persons say, that had dealings with
him, That they had rather speak to the Lord Mayor about Business, than Patrick
Campbel; and that he would not look for so much respect. He cares not to part
with Money, and where he can s^uffle he will: He is of Vespasian's Mind, and
thinks no Gain is unsavory. What good parts he has, he uses ill, employing 'em
for the most part to circumvent his Neighbor. (Of which his taking my Room
over my Head is an undeniable Instance.) He understands the Doctrine of
Equivocation as well as a Jesuit; and their Honesties are much alike, only the
Jesuits are the fairer Dealers. He pretends extremely to Religion, and has got
many a Penny by the Bargain: He Will commonly say Grace over a Choppin of Ale,
and at the same time be contriving* how to overreach you: Candor, and Fair
Dealing, are things he often mentions (as a cover for the opposite Vices) but
never cares to make use of 'em, unless sometimes to draw in a greater Booty.

This, Madam, is a part of his Character, which should I draw out at length, it
would make a Pack too big for a Pedlar; but having thus accidentally stumbled
upon his Original 'twill be Wisdom to leave him where he was first found. Which
yet I am unwilling to do, till I have acquainted you, Madam, that I have enough
by me, to confirm every tittle of this Character, without referring to any
thing relating to my self; for I have the History of his ^ife sen^ me from
Dublin since I came over, even from the time he sold Thread-laces in Glascow,
by the Name of Patrick Ure, to the time that Patrick Campbel begged Pardon of
the Company in Dublin, for his pretty Experiment of turning Hodder into ^o^ker,
etc. And this attested by several Eminent Persons in that City, among whom Mr.
Thornton, the King's Stationer, is one. But having told him I Will be a generous
Enemy, I intend this History of his Life shall be kept secret, unless he shall
(hereafter) provoke me to publish it.

From Patrick Campbel I rambled to the Ing^nious Mr. Ray's who is both Printer
and Bookseller, and the best situated of any Man in Dublin; and thence back to
honest Ware's witty, Shaw's and grave Mr. Foster's; who, as they all deserve an
honourabl^ Character (which for brevity sake, I here omit) so I shall give it
'em in my Summer Ramble.

Having left Mr. Ray, I rambled to Castle-street, where Vulcan with his wooden
Leg startled me with the creeking of it, for I took it for the Crep^^us Ossium
which I have heard some of our Physicians speak of; however, I was honestly
treated by him, and will do him justice in my Summer Ramble.

Some time after this, seeing the Squire of Alsatia in a Play-Bill, to be
Acted, I had a great Mind to see it; for there being so many Alsatians in
Dublin, I thought it could not choose but be acted to the Life: And so having
done my Business (for I always m^ke Recreation wait upon Business* I went to
the Playhouse, which Place you know, Madam, is free for all Comers, and ^ives
Entertainment as well to the Broom man, as the greatest Peer: And therefore
having got my Ticket, I made a shift to crowd into the Pit, where I made my
Honors to Mad^m (...) (who I was amazed to find at the Play-^ouse) and to two
or three other Ladies that I happened to know; my next Adventure there was, to
give a Hem to the China Orange Wench; and to give her her own rate for her
Oranges; for you know, Madam, it is below a Gentlemen (and as such I passd in
the Crowd) to stand hagling like a Citizen's Wife. I found, Madam, the Dublin
Playhouse to be a place very contrary to its owners; for they on their
outsides make the best show: But this is very ordinary in its outward
appearance, but looks much better on the inside, with its Stage, Pit, Boxes,
two Galleries, Lettices, and Music Loft; though I must confess, that even
these, li^e other false Beaut^es, receive a Luster from their Lamps and
Candles: It stands in a durty Street, called Smock-Alley; which I think is no
unfit Name for a Place where such great Opportunities are given for making of
lewd Bargains: Hither I came dressed (though I say it) tollerably well; though not so
much to be seen, as to see the Follies of the Age; for however the Theater be
applauded by a Modern Gentleman, for the Representation of those things which
so mightily promote Virtue, Religion, and Monarchical Government; for my part,
I thought Vice, which fundamentally destroys all those things, is here, as well
as in other Theaters, so charmingly discovered, as to make Men rather love than
abhor it; like the Judge, who, on the Bench, discovering, the Arts of some
Cow-stealers, to disguise their Beasts by altering the Figure of their Horns,
taught a poor fellow the Trick, who putting it in Practice, was brought to the
Gallows; However, to give the Devil his due, there are some Actors here,
particularly Mr. Ashbury, Mr. Husbands, Mr. Wilks, Mr. Hescot, Mr. Norris, Mr.
Buckly, Mr. Longmore, Mrs. Smith, Mrs. Schooling, no way inferior to those in
London; nor are the Spectators, by what I saw, one degree less in Vanity and
Foppery, than those in another Place.

For the Play, Madam, I need say nothing, it is so well known; 'twas pretty to
see the Squire choused out of so fair an Estate with so little ready Rino: Yet
the Diversion was not so great, but that the Crowd made me more uneasy; a
thing I ever abominated, and for the most part made it my Business to shun all
my days; in a word, no Church I was in while at Dublin, could I discern to be
half so crowded as this Place. I cannot tell indeed how it would have been, had
they played on Sunday, as they do in Popish Countries, and particularly at
Rome; where a Stranger once observed, all the People suddenly ran out of the
Playhouse into the Church, as fast as they could, which made him at first
think it was a most Religious Place; but when he came to hear the Friar Preach,
his Words, Actions, and other Gestures were so Comical, that his Wonder ceased;
for he thought all the Actors and Players in Christendom were a Fool to him.

After spending three or four hours in the Playhouse, to see a few Men and
Women make Fools of themselves, I returned home to my Chamber, and could scarce
be reconciled to my self, to think how foolishly I had wasted that time which
might have been spent to better purpose.

Madam, I should next acquaint you with a prodigious Storm which happened in
Dublin about the latter end of July; it might indeed be more properly called a
Hurricane than a Storm: It strangely surpised me, though its fury continued
not above six hours; there was hardly a House in the City, where it had not
left some visible Marks of its Rage (especially in Christ-Church-lane:) So that
it was mo^e safe being in the Fields, than in the City at that time; the oldest
Men alive could never remember any thing so terrible as this Storm. But to give
an account of the Mischief it did, would be too great a Digression, I shall
therefore reserve it for my Summer Ramble; as I shall also a Comical
Entertainment made at Kells in the County of Mead, by one Captain Bryan O
Brogan, Son to Philip O Brogan, Prince of Cavan.

Soon after this Great Storm, the Duke of Ormond landed at Dublin, and from
thence went to his House at Kilkenny, where (in my Summer Ramble) I saw his
Grace, and had a sight of the Castle, and other Rarities, by the Interest of
Dr. Wood, whose great Civilities I acknowledge in the following Pages. About
this time the Dublin Players, with all their Appurtinances, stroled down to
Kilkenny; after which 'twas reported in Dublin, that one Wilks, one of the best
Actors, had played his last part, being killed in a Duel; this Report was so
far believed, that an Ingenious Person writ an Elegy Which Elegy I Will insert in
my Summer Ramble.
upon him, which was Printed, and publicly Sold. This News of his Death was
talked with such Assurance, that though Mr. Wilks soon after came to Dublin and
showed himself alive, they would hardly believe him. The ground of this Report
(as I was told) arose from this* That a Countryman seeing a Tragedy acted in
Kilkenny, wherein Mr. Wilks acted the part of one that was to be killed,
thought it was real, and so reported it.

I might next mention the sudden Deaths of the Dublin Sheriffs; the Tragical
Story of a Person that was killed by a fall from his Horse; and the dismal
Accident of a Child's firing a Garret ( with himself in it) with Gunpowder; but
should I relate half the Occurrences I met in Dublin, I should swell this
Letter beyond measure, so I reserve 'em all for my Summer Ramble; and shall
next proceed (that I may render the account of my Conversation the more
complete) to give a particular Account of the Vis^ts I made in Dublin; for,
Madam, as it is an Observation, That a Man may be known by his Company, so I
think it is not incongruous to believe that an Idea of his Conversation may be
taken from the Persons to whom, and the Occasions on which he makes his Visits.

And here (Madam) I must first acquaint ye, that soon after my coming to
Dublin, Mr. Norman the Bookseller sent one Mr. Rogerson, to invite me to his
House; when I came thither, I ^ound his Business was to propose the buying of
the Venture I had brought over; in which, though we agreed not, he treated me
very kindly, showing me all his House, and therein his Picture, done so much to
the Life, that even Ze^xes or Apelles could scarce exceed it.

From his House he had me to his Garden, which though not very large, is to be
much admired for the curiousness of the Knots, and variety of choice Flowers
that are in it; he ^eing an excellent Florist, and well acquainted with all the
variegated Tapistry of Nature, in the several Seasons of the year. Mr. Norman
has this peculiar to himself, that whatever he has in his Garden, is the most
excellent of its kind: He has a Room adjoining to this Earthly Paradise, to
shelter his more tender Plants and Flowers from the Insults of Winter-storms.
From hence he carried me to a large Warehouse, where he had a large Auction,
preparing, as he said, for Sale; though I heard nothing more of it while I
staid in Dublin.

Madam, should I give ye this Gentleman's Character, I must say, He Is a little
squat Man, that loves to live well, and has a Spouse who understands preparing
good things as well as the best Lady in Ireland; he has a hole too much in his
Nose, which I have heard was occasioned by a Brass Pin in his Nurses Wastcoat;
which when he was nuzling for the Diddy, happened to run in it; and for want of a
skilful hand to dress it, the hole remains to this day, and yet without
disfiguring his Face.

Before I proceed to the next Visit, give me leave, Madam, being fallen ( a
second time) among my Brethren, to spend a few Lines about 'em, among the many
I trouble you with concerning other People; they are not a Corporation of
themselves, but mixed with Cutlers, and Painter-stainers; and their present
Master is Mr. Norman, whose Character I here send ye; with this Addition, that
he never opposed my Auction.

Nor must I (Madam) forget the extraordinary Civility of the King's Printer,
Mr. Andrew Crook, Who is a worthy and generous Gentleman, whose Word and
Meaning never shake hands and part, but always go together: He is one that is
as far from doing other Men an Injury, as he is from desiring to be injured;
and though his Circumstances are not so great, yet his Soul is as large, as if
he were a Prince, and scorns as much to do an unworthy Action. He is a great
Lover of Printing, and has a great Respect for all that are related to that
Noble Mystery.

Having paid my Respects to the King's Printer, I went next to Mr. Thornton,
the King's Stationer, of whom I shall say in short, He Is a very obliging
Person, has sense enough for a Privy-Counsellor, and good Nature enough for a
Primitive Christian. He treated me when I came to Dublin, with a Bottle of
Excellent Claret; and if I live to publish my Summer Ramble, Patrick Campbel
shall know (though he was afraid to meet him at the Keys in High Street) there
is not a better Neighbor, nor an honester Man in Dublin.

As I passed from the King's Stationer, I met with an honest Gentleman, with
whom I was formerly acquainted in London; 'twas my worthy Friend Dr. Smith, of
College-green near Dublin; his Character is above my Pen, yet I may venture to
say, He is a Man of extraordinary Sense; and the only Physician I durst commit
the Care of my Health to, in the whole Country: He invited me to his House, and
when I came, gave me a hearty Welcome; and for his Treat, though 'twas very
Genteel, yet nothing seemed so agreeable to me, as the Doctors Company,

I went next to Brides-street, to pay my Respects to Mr. Wallis (a Member of
Parliament) and his Lady, with whom I had the Honor to be acquainted (at
Tunbridge) some years ago; I shall ever acknowledge the generous Reception I
met with here, neither can I forget to characterize his extraordinary
Kinswoman, whose Wit and Beauty set her above the rest of the fair Sex, as
having nothing in her but what bears witness to the Perfection of her Mind and
Body Saint like she looks, a Siren if she sing;
Her Eyes are Stars, her Mind is every thing.


I would say something too of that ingenious Gentleman who is Tutor to Mr.
Wallis's Children; for I found (in some Discourses I had with him) That his
Learning and Knowledge had out-strip'd his years; but he is too modest to bear
the Character he justly merits; and to speak of him by halfs, is what I cannot
approve of; so I Will wave his Character with only saying, The Conversation I
found here, was the most agreeable of any I met in Dublin.

Durst I here attempt Mr. Wallis's Character, I might say of him (as was said
of the Lord Russel) That he is one of the best of Sons, the best of Fathers, the
best of Husbands, the best of Masters, the best of Friends, and the best of
Christians; and his Lady is no ways inferior to him for Virtue, Wit, and
Generosity. And her Kinswoman, Madam More (not she that I spoke of before, but
one I had the Honor to know at Tunbridge) is so like her in these Qualities,
that were their Faces alike too, you could not distinguish one from the other.

In some Conferences I had with Mr. Wallis about my Welsh Travels, I told him I
found the following Epitaph on a Tombstone in Conway-Church, which for the
Remarkableness of it, I inserted in my Journal; 'twas this, Here lies Nicholas
Hooks of Conway, Gent. the One and Fortieth Child of his Father, William Hooks,
Esquire by his Wife Alice; and Father of Twenty Seven Children himself: Which was a
matchless Instance of a fruitful Family. To which Mr. Wallis replied, He heard
there had been a Troop in Ireland, wherein, one Mother had Two and Twenty of
her own Children listed. Having taken my leave of Mr. Wallis, his Lady, and the
rest of his Family, my next Visit was to Sir Henry Ingoldsby, a Member of the
Privy Council in Ireland, and a Gentleman of near Ninety Years: When I came to
his House, I sent up my Name, and Sir Henry ordered his Gentleman to bring me
into a private apartment where he was: When I entered the Room, Sir Henry
received me in a courteous manner; I told him I presumed to wait upon him, to
enquire whether my Reverend Father, Mr. John Dunton, was not once his Chaplain?
and that if he was, it must be Forty years ago. Sir Henry did not at first
remember it; but sending to his Lady, she sent word that she did call to mind
such a Person; but 'twas added, my Father did not live in the House, but used
to come often to it. I then asked Sir Henry, Whether one Mrs. Marry Hall did
not live with him when my Father was in Ireland? for that in my Father's Will,
was this Expression, Item, I bequeath unto Mrs. Mary Hall, servant to Sir Henry
Ingoldsby when I was in Ireland, Five Pounds, if ever demanded, or she be not
dead, for her friendly Offices to me, during a great sickness I had in that
Kingdom. I told Sir Henry, I was not put upon this Enquiry by the Executrix,
but that Providence having brought me to Ireland, ( though Twenty Years after my
Fathers Death) I could not be satisfied without enquiring whether this Mary
Hall were alive or dead: To which Sir Henry did me the Honor to reply, It was
a Great piece of Justice in me, if I had no Advantage in it my self: To which I
returned, I had not, any farther than to see to the Execution of my Father's
Will. But as to this Mary Hall, Sir Henry told me, he supposed she died at
Limerick, she marrying thither from his House, to a Rich, but ill-natured Man,
which soon ended her Days.

Pardon me (Madam) for the digression of this Story: I had some Hesitation in
my own Breast about making this Enquiry; I was not satisfied that Conscience
obliged me to it; but not being satisfied without doing it, I did it; and it
yet appearing to me a moot Case, because I was none of the Executor, I leave it
to your Determination, Whether I could be under any Obligation in that case or
no? This Discourse being ended, I gave Sir Henry an Account of the Reason of my
coming for Ireland; with which he was so well pleased, that he promised to give
me and my Auction, all the Encouragement he could; for which I returned him my
humble Thanks, and so took my leave of Sir Henry for that time.

Madam, I dare not presume to give Sir Henry's Character; to describe so great
a Man would be a Theme big enough for my Ingenious Friend, Mr. Charles
Wormington, (a Person of great Modesty and Worth, and perhaps, the most
Ingenious Poet in all Ireland;) but though I shall not presume to Characterise this
ancient Knight, yet I shall say (what every one does) That he has the Repute of
a Person of Great Honor and Probity; and of that great Judgment and Experience
in Affairs of State, as renders him worthy of the Dignity of a Privy.
Counselor which he has been for many years; and though he is now arrived to
Fourscore, ( Psalm. 90: 10.
Ten more than the Age of Man) yet he enjoys his Health and Strength to
Admiration; which shows him to have been a Person of great Temperance, and
perhaps (on this Account) he has no Equal in Ireland, or it may be, in the
whole World.

But to proceed in my Rambles: Having taken my leave of Sir Henry Ingoldsby, in
my way home, I met with Lieutenant Downing, my former Fellow Traveller to New
England. You can hardly imagine, Madam, how agreeable a thing it is to meet
with an old Friend in a Foreign Country: It was some thousands of Miles off,
that we were last together; and we were equally surpised to meet each other
here: There was in his Company at that time, Captain Annesly, Son to the late
Earl of Anglesey, to whom I had the Honor to be related by my First Wife. We
stayed not long in the Street, but went to drink at the Widow Lisles in
Castle-street: whither (...) to go, out of a Principle of Gratitude, hers being
the first House that received me in Dublin: After a Health to the King, (and
some others of our Friends in England) we talked over our New England This
American Ramble is now ready for the Press.
Ramble: After this I told the Lieutenant of my Brother Aanesley's Death; at
which he was highly concerned. This Discourse being ended, Captain Annesley
told me, That the Earl his Father, had writ an Excellent History of Ireland;
but it was in such hands as he believed would strip it of some of its choicest
Remarks; and (Madam) this is likely enough; for there are some Men in the
World, which are afraid of following Truth too close, lest it should dash out
their own Teeth. I then told Captain Annesley. I had Printed his Father's
Memoirs; (the Copy of which I purchased of Sir Peter Pett) and he could not but
think 'em genuine, because of that great Amity which was be tween the Eail his
Father, and Sir Peter Pett.

To give ye (Madam) the Captains Character, He is a most accomplished
Gentleman; not (as a Wit Observes) that thin sort of Animal that flutters from
Tavern to Playhouse, and back again all his Life; made up with Wig and Cravat,
without one dram of Thought in his Composition; but a Person made up of Solid
Worth, as Grave as he is Witty; Brave and Generous, and shows by his humble and
courteous Carriage, that he is, and was born, a Gentleman: And for the
Lieutenant, (my old Fellow-Traveller) I must say he has much Address, and as
great a Presence of Mind, as was ever seen; he is most agreeable Company, and
perhaps the best Friend I had in America.

After three hours spent in this Conversation, I went to Visit Captain Townley
and his Lady; as also one Madam Congreve; who were all three my
Fellow-Travellers in the Coach from London to Chester: The Captain is a Person
of Great Honor and Worth; and so is his Lady; but of these I shall say more in
my Summer Ramble; but more particularly of Madam Congreve.

In my way home I called upon Mr. (...), and his Wife (styled, The most
Ingenious) Who, though she has Enemies, perhaps as little deserves 'em, as any
Woman in Dublin;and though I should get hatred by saying this, yet my way is, to
do as I Would by done by, and to speak as I find; but having Charactarized the most
Ingenious, it is fit next, that I speak of her Lord and Master; He Is a very
honest sober Man, and one of that great Modesty, that I heard he went Forty
Miles to demand a Debt, which yet he was so civil and courteous as not to ask
for when he came there. But it grew late, so leaving this loving Couple at
their Fine Embroidery,

I went next to pay a Visit to Mr. Lum in Castle-street, (a Member of
Parliament) and one of the chief Bankers in Dublin, whom I made use of, to
remit my Moneys to London: He is a Person of great Integrity, has a good
Estate, and is punctually just and honest in his Dealings. And to complete his
Character, He Is a Gentleman of Extraordinary Sense, which he has the Happiness
of being able to express in words, as manly and apposite as the Sense included
under them. He treated me with much Candor and Respect, as long as I stayed in
Ireland. His chief Manager of his Business Mr. Purefoy, was also very obllging,
and ready to serve me upon all Occasions.

Captain Davis, who was also a Member of the House of Commons, gave me a most
obliging Welcome to Dublin, at the Garter-Tavern in Castle-street: If I should
attempt this Gentleman's Character, it would be to his Prejudice; for all that
I can say, will come far short of what ought to be said, For Sense, Wit, and
good Humor, there is but few can equal, and nono that exceed him; and all these
Qualities are accompanied with great Humility. Madam, I had first the honor or
being acquainted with this Gentleman at Tunbridge Wells (the same year Mr.
Wallis, his Lady, and Madam More, drank these Mineral Waters) and this
occasioned the repeating of what Conversation we had formerly had at Tunbridge;
from this we fell to Discourse of the Customs and Manners of the Irish; the
Captain told me, they were naturally a very generous People, and so kind to
Strangers, that they would go Twenty Miles to set a Man in the right way; and
if he happened to be benighted, they would give him the best Entertainment they
had, and even lie out of their own Beds to accommodate him. To this piece of
Generosity I might add (what was told me by a another Person) that they will
likewise offer him the convenience of a Bedfellow, in case they have a Daughter
capable of serving him: But (Madam) I will not be answerable for the Truth of
this, which I only relate as what has been told me; and should it be true, my
Opinion is, they carry their Generosity a little too far. In my further
Conversation with Captain Davis. I asked him what Eminent Writers they had in
Ireland, and especially whether any of the Fair Sex? To which he replied, they
had a very celebrated Female Poet (one Mrs. Tailor) who had writ her own Life
to a Wonder, when but Ten Years of Age. Madam, I thought these Remarkable
Passages worth noting down in my Iournal; but nothing did so much affect me as
a Piece of Ansiquity that the Captain told me he had seen with his own Eyes. He
had seen a Woman very perfect in all her Senses ( excepting Hearing) who said
she was under Laundress to Queen Elizabeth's chief Laundress, and he told me he
believed her to be 130 years old, which for a Woman (naturally subject to more
Infirmities than Men) I think to be very extraordinary; and I believe your
Ladyship, will be of my Opinion. I had the Honor of enjoying the Captains
useful and most pleasant Company for about two Hours, when Night coming on we
parted.

The day following (in the Afternoon) I went to see my Ingenious Friend, Mr.
Thwaits, his Person is the very Picture of Mr. Dangerfield, to whom (madam) he
is so very like, both in Person and Address ( Oh what would I give for such a
near Resemblunce of Iris and D -- ne!) that I may well affirm, If you have seen
one, you have seen the other: And having said this, I need not tell you what an
Extraordinary Man he is: Mr. Thwaits is a Gentleman of a very obliging Tempet,
and I believe is as generous to Strangers as any Man in Dublin; he may, without
Complement, be called an accomplished Person; he can do almost every thing, and
it is hard to say, what he does with the greatest Grace. And as to-Wit, I was
really afraid to hold any Argument with him, for I found he could say what he
would, and prove what he said; and in this too, he resembles the Ingenious
Dangerfield. In this alone Mr. Thwaits has the Advantage, That his whole Life
has been so unblemished, even Envy her self cannot fix a Blot upon him. His Lady
is an Extraordinary Person, worthy of such a Husband; and they both gave me a
very generous Welcome, worthy of themselves. In our Conversation, I affirmed,
That a Good Wife generally, if not always, makes a good Husband; which is
undoubtedly matter of Fact: For though we suppose the Husband to be the worst of
Men, and one that abuses his Wife in a villainous manner; yet his Spouse, if she
be a good Wife, by her meek and patient suffering under such Abuses, cannot but
some time or other ( as long as he is a Man) be overcome by the Patience of his
Wife, and at last be brought to compassionate her Wrongs; and in time this
Compassion may turn him to the ways of Virtue: But then she must be as well a
good Wife, as a good Woman; for there are many Pious Women that are far from
being good Wives. She must be one that is of a good Humor, and always appear so
to her Husband; and if in time this does not make a Husband better, he ought to
be herded with the Brutes, and not reckoned amongst humane Creatures. And yet
after all (Madam) I am afraid that some such Brutes there are in the World; but
this will make nothing at all against my Assertion, because there is no general
Rule, but admits of some Exceptions.

My next Visit was to the Lady Sands, (Mr. Thwaits Sister) I had the honor to
meet her first at Mr. Shaws (a Bookseller on Corkhill) where she invited me to
her House (here I had the good luck to meet my ingenious Friend Mr. Thwaits a
second time) My Lady Sands is a Person of great Piety, and extraordinary Sense;
and I found in those few Minutes I had the Honor to enjoy her Company, that
her Husband is as happy in a tender, disereet and obliging Wife, as any
Gentleman in the Kingdom of Ireland. In this Visit I had the Favor of some
Discourse with her eldest Daughter, whose Beauty, Virtue, and good Humor is
equal to that of the best Ladies in Dublin. The Lady Sands, Husband is Mr.
Clarksgn. Son to Mr. David Clarkson, the late Nonconformist, so deservedly
famous for his learned Works. This Gentleman I was formerly acquainted with,
and if I don't mistake, he was in New England in that very year that I rambled
thither; but though we had been old Acquaintance, I mist him in this Visit, and
never had the Happiness to see him, whilst I was in Ireland. At taking my leave
of my Lady Sands she was pleased to send Recommendations by me to her
Mother-in-Law, now in England.

From my Lady Sands House I went directly to my Auction, and in my way thither
I met the Ingenious Mr. Wright, an Ensign in the Army, but a Person of great
Perfections, both of Body and Mind. Madam, this Gentleman reconciles the Lion
and the Lamb exactly; for being a Commission Officer, in the Field he seems
made only for War, and any where else for nothing but Love. He is naturally
brisk and gay, yet one of a very compassionate Temper; and I see by him that
Pity never looks so bright as when it shines in Steel: But why do I praise
particular Virtues, when he excells in all? He does nothing but what looks very
handsome, and there is a Charm in the meanest, and something most bewitchingly
pleasant in the most indefensible of his Actions. He was much surprizd to see
me in Ireland; for he was Brother to one that had been my Apprentice, which was
the Original of our Acquaintance: We met again by appointment that Night at the
Tavern, with one Mr. Young, a Gentleman of the College, and another Gentleman
to me unknown. The Ensign told me, he had that day the Honor of Dining with
her Grace, the Duchess of Ormond, which led us to discourse of the matchless
Virtues of that Noble Lady, and other Subjects which I now forget. Mr. Young
also obliged me so far, as to settle a particular Friendship with me; and I
wish I deserved the Honor he did me in that matter; for he is a Gentleman of
great Humility, and I believe ( if I may judge by those few Minutes I spent in
his Conversation) never read of a Virtue, which he did not forthwith put into
Practice. One part of our Conversation related to the Ensign, who though the
Possessor of so many Excellencies, yet continues a single Man, which gave us
occasion to wonder, that none of the Dublin Ladies had engrossed so rich, a
Treasure to themselves. We had appointed another Meeting before I went away, to
drink my Boon Voyage; but Wind and Tide (which stays for no Man) hurried me
away; so I was disappointed of my intended Happiness, and forced to be so rude
as to leave Dublin, without taking leave of some other Friends.

Having left the Ensign (and my new Friend Mr. Young) I went next to pay my
Respects to the Reverend Mr. John Boyse, whose ingenious Answer to Bishop King,
and several others of his curious Composures, have so justly recommended his
Learning and Piety to the World. Madam, I have already sent you this Gentleman's
Character, and shall speak further of him in my Summer Ramble. He gave great
Encouragement to my Auction, as well for my own sake (as he was pleased to tell
me) as for my Reverend Father-in-law, Dr. Annesley's. He is now Preaching on
the Four last Things: His Subject was Heaven, when (Mr. Larkin, and) I heard
him; and he Preached in such an extraordinary manner on that Subject, as if
(with St. Paul) he had been in the Third Heaven himself, and was returned to
relate what he had seen.

I next Visited Mr. Sinclare, another Nonconformist Minister, in Dublin. He is
a most affectionate Preacher, and a Person of a sweet Disposition, and
extremely obliging: He gave me a hearty welcome to his House, having been
before acquainted with me at Bristol. Some Discourses we had about Persecution,
occasioned him to tell me, that a Nonconformist Meeting was suppressed at Gallway
by the Magistrates there, whilst a Popish Meeting was suffered to be kept
unmolested. He spoke very honorably of my Father-in-law, Dr. Annesley: And
promised me, if I came again, I should have all the Encouragement that he could
give me. I heard him preach on the 30 th of September, on Mark 9. 24. about
Faith, on which he made an Excellent Sermon.

Nor was my Happiness less in being acquainted with Mr. Emlyn, who is Mr.
Boyse's Assistant. I met this Gentleman several times at my Auction; so that I
find he was one of my Benefactors. He Is a very solid, rational, judicious
Divine, and lives the Doctrine he Preaches. I heard his Sermon to the Society
for Reformation, at New-Row, on 1 Samuel 2. 30. This Sermon is since Printed, and
I wish (Madam) I could send it to ye; for some that have read it, say a better
Sermon was never published.

As to the Reverend Mr. Nathaniel Weld, though I had no Personal Acquaintance
with him, yet I went several times with Mr. Larkin to hear him; once more
particularly, when he preached on the 130 th Psalm, about Forgiveness; his
whole Sermon was very excellent, but I took more particular Notice of the
following Passages; We live upon Forgiveness every day: What Joy would
Forgiveness make in the black Regions! The Devils nover had the offer of a
Savior; but we are still in the Land of Hope.

Madam, I have already given you a short Character of this Pious, Learned, and
Excellent Preacher, and shall say no more of him here, but in my Summer Ramble
I shall give his and his Brethrens Characters at large; for, Madam, to confess
the truth ( though I go now and then to hear a Divine of the Church of England,
as I told ye before) yet that I more frequently hear the Dissenting Ministers:
I don't know how your Ladyship will relish this? for I don't remember in any
Discourses we had in Dublin (where I had first the Honor of being known to
you) that you ever mentioned your going to any Meeting; but whatever your
Practice or thoughts are in this respect,I must acquaint you, that I practice
nothing that I think unlawful; and am very willing (when your Ladyship has
answered those Twelve Hundred uncommon diverting Subjects that I intend to send
ye in so many distinct Letters) to defend my Practice in this matter; for
(Madam) there are but Thirty Nine Articles of the Church of England, and the
Presbyterians (who are a Religious and Conscientious People) approve of Thirty
Six of 'em, and the rest are (justly) called indifferent; so that (Madam) if
hereafter you will give me leave to write to ye on this Subject, I shall
endeavor to prove (in several Letters) that my going now and then to a Meeting
is no unnecessary Separation, or any departing from the True Church. (For such
I esteem the Church of England.)

Madam, having visited the Nonconformists, my next Ramble was to Mr. Harman, a
young Gentleman, and Son to Colonel Harman, (a Member of the House of
Commons.) In this Visit, my Friend Mr. Larkin was with me; where, after mutual
Salutations, (and sitting down by a good Fire) we fell into a pleasant Chat,
first of Antipathles in Nature; and here Mr. Harman told us a Story of a
Gentleman that bought a Muff; This Person had a natural Antipathy against Cats,
and therefore desired the Furrier, who sold him the Muff, that it should not be
lined with any Cat-skin; which the Furrier (who lived in Essex-street) assured
him it was not; upon this the Gentleman bought it, and designed to wear it
home, but by that this he came to Crane-lane (which was not above a Bow-shot
from the Furriers) the Gentleman fell into a Swoon, and was taken up for dead;
but upon the taking away the Muff, he came to himself again; but fell into a
great Rage against the Furrier, threatening to kill him; which he having notice
of, got out of the way.

Mr. Harman's Discourse being ended, I next told the Story of my Aversion to
Cheese when I was young; and how my Father's causing me to eat it unknown, had
like to have killed me; which Aversion notwithstanding, I afterward overcame;
and now love Cheese as well as any Man. We then discoursed of the Antipathy that
Cats have to Men; and of their taking away Men's Breath when asleep, with other
things to that purpose: This led us to talk of Sympathy, and the Wonders
thereof; and more particularly of Sir Kenelm Dighy's Sympathetical Powder, and
the great Cures wrought by it. From hence we fell to talk of a third Wonder in
Nature, viz. Men's walking in their Sleep; of which Mr. Larkin gave a memorable
Relation of a House supposed to be haunted; which was only occasioned by one of
the Gentleman's Daughters, who walked in her Sleep every Night; which was at
last discovered by a Stranger's having Courage enough to lie in the Room said
to be haunted: This naturally led us in the fourth place, to talk of
Apparitions; and here Mr. Harman asked me what I thought of a Spectrum's
assuming a Humane Shape? I assured him they might; and to confirm this, told
him the Story of one Joseph Chambers, who appeard to This Mary Gossam is still
living.
Mary Gossam (with whom I was well acquainted) in that very Nightcap which she
put upon his Head when she had laid him out.

This Story of Chambers appearing after his Death, led Mr, Larkin to tell
another of an Apparision he had seen in Staffordshire in his Youth, which he
thought had been a living Woman, till he saw it vanish; adding, That he looked
upon the denying of Spirits, and their appearing to Persons after Death, to be
the next degree to Atheism.

After about two hours spent in such agreeable Conversation, we took our leave
of Mr. Harman, Who is a Gentleman of a fine Presence, and of a most sweet and
affable Temper. He is now in the Bloom and Beauty of his Youth; and his great
Ingenuity and close Application to his Study, do justly render him the growing
hopes of his Father's Family, and may in time to come, render him an Ornament
to the College.

I am afraid, Madam, I shall tire you with this tedious Relation of my Visits;
but I hope your Goodness will pardon me; for it is necessary to be thus
particular, that I may silence the lying Tongue of Patrick Campbel, who has had
the Impudence to say, That I kept Company in Dublin, with none but a Kennel of
Scoundrels: Whereas you see (by the Visits I made) That I was not acquainted
with one Scoundrel in Dublin, except himself, and the Brass in Copper-Allcy.

This naturally brings me to acquaint your Ladyship, That among those I
Employed to bind up Books for my Auction, I had to do with one that I call
Brass, a Man poor and Proud, unacquainted with Honor or good Manners; to
supply the want of which, he is well furnished with Conceit and Impudence.
Being thus qualified, he was looked upon by St. Patrick as a fit Tool for him;
and accordly chosen for his Auctioneer, though he knew not how to read the
Title of a Latin Book. But the Gentlemen of Dublin, who had been genteely
treated with Wit and Sense at my Auction by Mr. Wild, could not bear with the
gross Ignorance of a Brass Hammer; so that Patrick was forced to discard him in
a Weeks time, and put a better Man Mr. Shaw of Cork-hill.
in his Place. This Brass knowing the necessity I was under of having my Books
bound in order to sale, resolves to make me pay a rate for Binding, not only
beyond what was given in London, but even beyond what was given by the
Booksellers of Dublin: I found, Madam, I was in his hands, and remembered the
Proverb, That he that is in a Boat with the Devil, must land where he can. There
was a Necessity of having my Books bound, and I was forced to comply with his
unreasonable Rates. How this consisted with Justice and Equity, I leave you to
judge; but those were things Brass never troubled his Head about; for when he
brought me in his Bill, he over-charg'd even his own unreasonable Agreement,
which I refused to pay; but offered to refer it to one Mr. Servant (a Binder in
Goldenlane) with whom I had made the same agreement as I did with him; but
Servant being a very honest man, Brass, refused to have the thing decided by
him, because then he was sure 'twould go against him: And therefore this Fellow
(who for his Impudence I call the Brass in Copper-Alley) serves me with a Token
from the Lord Mayor, to appear before him, which I accordingly did; (as I
formerly hinted in p. 104. of the Dublin Scuffle) and having told his Lordship
what I had offered, he was pleased to say, It was a very fair Proposal I made
him, and so dismissed us both, which was all he got by his Two-penny Token.

Having done with this Scoundrel (to use St. Patrick's Phrase) I will next give
you an Abstract of Mr. Servant's Character, who, though of the same Function,
is the direct Antipodes to the Brass of Copper-Alley; this being as eminent for
Honesty, fair Dealing, Truth, and Justice, as the other is for Pride, Conceit,
and Ignorance. But Mr. Servant's Reputation does not need a Foil to set it off:
For he is well known in Dublin to be all that I here say. But I shall add to
the good Character he has already, that I never met with a more scrupu^ous, or
conscientious Man in my whole Life; he is punctual to his word in the smallest
matters, and one that manages all his Affairs with Discretion: Courteous and
affable in his Conversation, and ready to do every one what good he can. In
short, his Life is the Exemplar of a Christians Practice. But leaving Thomas,
etc. hard at work, (for he is a very industrious Man)

My next Visit shall be to Mr. Iey, and Eminent Lawyer in Dublin. He was a
Benefactor to my Auction, and my very sincere Friend: And to say the Truth,
whatever the Lawyers are in other Countries, yet in Ireland they are the best
Gentlemen and the best Christians.

From hence, to close the Evening, I went to take a Dish at Patt's, who is a
fair-condition'd Man, and very obliging to all his Customers: Loving to do
business without making a noise on it. 'Twas here I sometimes met with Mr.
Pitts, an honest and ingenious Attorney, a Man of good Worth, and unblemished
in his Reputation, Madam, he talks finely (dresses his Thoughts in curious
Language) and has good Nature in his very Looks; he is a true lover of the
present Government, and a brave Assertor of English Liberties, in opposition to
Popery and Slavery. I would say more of the ingenious Pitts, but that I shall
meet him again in my Summer Ramble.

Madam, just as I left Patts, I met with my worthy and ingenious Friend, Dr.
Wood, Physician in Kilkenny, with whom, and Dr. Smith. I spent some agreeable
Hours, of which expect a fuller Account in the conclusion of this Letter; and
also in my Summer Ramble, where you will also meet the Discourse I had with a
Gentleman about the Earl of Meath's Hunting Pigg, which will be very diverting.

And now Madam, as your several Directions to me informed you of the changing
of my Lodgings, so I think it proper here to give you my Reasons for so doing.

My first Lodging was at a Counselors in Wine-Tavern-street, who being in some
danger of overtaking the Law (for he had out-ran his own Practice) left his
House, and as it is supposed, the Kingdom too. Yet I must say, 'As to his
Conversation, he is a Gentleman; (though under a Cloud) and sings (I Will find It Is
a Line in a New Song.
out a kinder, a better than she, beyond any Man in Christendom:) and as for
his Lady, she deserves the following Character; She Is discreet and witty, the
best of Wives; and I hear, has the Name for being a Beauty; it is true, I never
thought her so, but I am no Judge I find; for she is bright and fair; and those
that admire a R -- d Color, cry, there is no Sun but in her Eyes; but as famous
as she is for Beauty, I must own, while I lived with her, I saw nothing but
what was Modest and Honorable; and I shall ever have some Kindness for
Counselor H -- as he was the occasion of my being acquainted with my worthy
Friend, Mr. William Wainwright; who, though he lives a Batcheler, is a Person of
strict Modesty, and has the symptoms of a good Christian; for he is sincere in
what he says, and is as Religious in all his Actions; and to crown his
Character, he is a Person of great Humility, and of a most sweet natural Temper;
and (Madam) I must say, there is no Virtue I Would wish in a Friend, but I find it
in William Wain-wright. He was the first Acquaintance I had in Dublin; and we
were so little weary of one another, that he was one of those that saw me a
Shipboard (when I left Ireland) though to the hazard of his Life, for I sailed in
a sort of a Storm.

And as I thank H -- for bringing me acquainted with this worthy Gentleman, so
I Am obliged to him for the favor he did me in first making me known tot he
virtuous and ingenious Mrs. Edwards, whose Character (Madam) I shall here give
you.

She Is a Country Gentlewoman, of admirable Perfections of Body and Mind; modest
to the highest degree, and of a most agreeable Conversation; with which, for my
own part, I was very much delighted; and I am ready to flatter my self, mine
was not altogether ungrateful to her; and how can you blame me (Madam) to think
thus, since a Lady of your Quality has not disdained to grant me the honor of
a Correspondence with you.

Apelles, the famous Painter of Greece, when he was to draw any curious
Picture, would have several celebrated Beauties before him, that he might draw
an Eye from this, a Mouth from that, and a Mien from the other, etc. Had Mrs.
Edwards lived in the time of Apelles, he need not have hunted about for
Beauties, for he had found 'em all in this virtuous Person; so I Will descend
(for my general Character don't set her in a full Light) to a more particular
Description of her.

And I Will begin first with her Face, which is neither oval nor long; her Hair
is black, or near it (and then I need no^ tell ye it is charming.) As to her
Eyebrows, they are a great Ornament to her Face, and look as exact as if the
Hand of Art and Nature had been at Work. Excellently well proportioned is her
Nose, not sharp nor big; but gives a noble Air to her Face. Her Mouth little
and pretty; her Lips of a charming Red; And do like to the Twins of Cupid's
Mother,
still kiss, because in love with one another.


Her Teeth are even and well set, and look as white as Snow. Her Eyes (her
tempting Eyes) full of fire and briskness, and tempered with an attractive
languishing. As to her Neck and Breasts they are the best sized that ever you
saw, and of a dazzling whiteness, as well as her Arms and Hands As to her Body,
it is small, and of a curious shape, and is supported with handsome Legs, as I do
believe (for I never saw 'em.) As to her Stature, she is of a little pitch; and
is so neat, so free, so disengaged, that there is few like her; (save Rachel
Seaton, whose Picture she is) and Mr. -- who unsuccessfully attempted her
Chastity, swears at her Virtue, and often wishes she had fewer Charms. She has
a noble Air in her Walk, and has the Dress, Looks, and Behavior of a
Gentlewoman; and wants nothing but a Fortune to make her so: In a word, she has
something so distingushing in her whole Person, that when she was single (for
you will hear by and by she is married) she more distressed her Husband's Liberty,
than others did with all their Art, and more curious Dresses; so much for her
Person.

As to her Mind, which is the Charm of Charms (you know Madam, I ever thought
so) she is Pious, but not a jot reserved; and has more Devotion in her Heart
than Eyes. As to her Wit and Singing, it so strangely surpised me that day she
went with the Counselor to Malhide (which Adventure you will have in my Summer
Ramble) that I am hardly yet come to my self; for I could not conceive how a
Female could have (in that mean Cabin At Bally Many.
where she dwells) all the Politeness and Accomplishments of a Court. As to her
Heart I can say nothing, and it is not sit I should; but (Madam) this I Will say
(by being a Platonic Lover; for I am the same in Dublin as I was in London)
she allows me all the Liberty I ask, or Virtue will give, which cannot be much;
for I have a Wife of my own, that is (far) more charming in my Eye, and one I
love above all the World; besides, I am by Nature as cold as Ice, and I believe
(If I may trust my Eyes and Ears) that she is Chaste, so much as in Thought. And
as she is very Innocent, so of consequence very Charitable, and speaks ill of
nothing. Madam, she has other extraordinary Qualities I could tell you of, (for
this is but a hasty draught of this Excellent Person) but here is enough to show
what Mrs. Edwards really is, and what all her Sex should be.

And now Madam, who'd think that a Person of such Virtue, should have any
Enemies? But as Dryden says, The Butt of Envy still is Excellence; and she is
not without slander, though (I had almost said) she as little deserve, it as
Virtue it self; but the very Reflections she meets with (as well as her real
Virtues) do but add further to her good^ Character; for it is none but
Scoundrels (I mean such as would corrupt her Virtue and cannot) that give her an
ill word; she is proof against the blaze of Gold: Then no wonder if a Town-Bull
(such a one as A -- S --) should abuse that Virtue he cannot debauch: Such as
these reflect on a Woman, not because she is lewd, but because they find her too
Spiritual (too Platonic) for their Embraces; it is this, like Esop's Fox, makes
'em cry, the Grapes are sower. But the bad word of a lewd Person is the best
Encomium a Virtuous Woman can have; for it is by the Judgment of Sober People
that a Reputation stands or falls; and by all such Mrs. Edwards was highly
valued. I am told, that noless a Person than the Countess of Mead, honored
her with a tender Friendship: The Lady Davis, and Madam Gilbert do the same;
and she is as kindly received in Mr. Usher's Family: Mr. Meegee and his Wife
(Persons of great Piety) scarce covet any other Company. Mrs. Brown at the
Currow has a particular Friendship for her; Mrs. Persons, Mrs. Ware, Mrs.
Ryley, have the like; and wherever she boards, they are scarce easy a minute
without her. Then Madam, I shall not ask your Pardon (or Valeria's either) for my
giving this tender Character of Mrs. Edwards; for as you are both Virtuous
Persons, you would surely be angry with me, should I forbear praising what so much
deserves it. Besides, I am mistaken in both of ye, if your great Innocence
don't set you above suspicion; ('it is only guilty People are Jealous;) or if it
don't (to tell you the plain truth) my Innocence is too great to need my
concealing my Thought of her; and the rather still, as her Husband has said (in
the presenceof Mr. Larkin) that had he ever been Jealous ofher (as he never was
in his whole Life) yet that he should now believe her Virtuous, for my having a
good Opinion of her; which I don't speak out of Ostentation, but to show her
Innocence, and my own too. Thus (Madam) you see, by my Character of Mrs.
Edwards, that my Virtue is safe enough; for though she is a Woman (a thing in
Petticoate) yet my Love is all Platomak, to all, except Valarid. (So Angels
Love, and all the rest is dross.) Really Madam, I am such an Enemy to running
astray, that I heathily wish Adultery were Death; and that it were b^r^ing in
the Hand, so much as to kin another Man's wife: But there is no Sex in Souls;
and I think it a Duty to admire Virtue where e're, I find it; then surely none
but Scoundrels. (I mean such as are Lewd themselves) and so cannot help
suspecting of others, will censure a Friendship, where the Body has nothing to
do; but if any are so vile as to nibble at this Character, they may go about
their business; for, Madam, I have not an Acquanitance in the whole World
(except your self, and the dear Valeria) but may find enough in his own Breast
to damp his consuring me, or that virtuous Person whose Character I here send
ye.

You see (Madam) by these words, that I am a great Enemy to Complements; nay, I
often wish (as Valeria says) that there were no such thing in the World; and
when I am dead and gone, I would willingly come again to contrdict any one that
reports me otherwise than I am, though he did it to Honor me.

Madam, having given ye the true Character of Mrs. Edwards, perhaps you will be
desirous to know who it is that is blessed with so great Treasure; which obliges
me to give ye the following Character of Mr. Edwards: He is a Person of an
indifferent Stature, neither tall, nor short; and though no Pretender to any
extraordinary Perfections, is far from being contemptible: He has a Martial
Countenance, and a Mind like it, and will turn his back to no man in a just
Cause, nor receive an Affront from any. He has not indeed the Politeness of a
Courtier, but an honest bluntness, that better becomes him: His only fault is,
he has been formerly unkind to his Wife; but he has made her part of amends,
both in a just acknowledgment, and by an extraordinary fondness since; upon
which she has been so generous to forgive him; and he takes it so very kindly,
that they are now as happy a Couple as any that live in Ireland.

Having left the Counselors House, (where I came, acquainted with Mr.
Wainwright, and Mrs. Edwards, whose Characters I have here sent ye) I retreated
for a little Air and Solitude, to Arbo^r-hill (a mile from Dublin) to the House
of one Mr. Thomas Orson, who with his Wife (an ancient couple) seem to be like
Adam and Eve in Paradise; he employing himself in his Garden (where I have a
Nosegay every Morning, my Landlady finding I admire Flowers) and she within
doors in making of Milk-water, of which she distills very large quantities. I
think my self obliged to let 'em live as long as this Paper holds, in Gratitude
for those Parental Tendernesses they showed me when I languish'd with the
Bloody Flux; (which seized me in this House.) Neither were they less kind in
curing a bite given me by a One of the Beasts I fought at Ephesus.
Great Mastiff^ who had one night torn me to pieces, had not the drawing my
Sword balked his Attempt.

Madam, the Reason of my coming to this Country-Seat, was my great
Indisposition of Body, and being tired with the Hurries of Dublin; I have in my
Dublin Scuffle given ye my thoughts of a Private Life, for I am as great an
Admirer of it, as your Ladyship is of Gardens; and I suppose you will not blame me
for it; for the three first Men in the World were a Gardener, a Plowman, and a
Grasier; even the Great Cowley, that had known what Cities, Universities, and
Courts could afford, broke through all the intanglements of it; and which was
harder, a vast Praise; and retired to a solitary Cottage near Barn-Elms, where
his Garden was his Pleasure, and he his own Gardener; whence he gives us this
following Doctrine of Retirement; and may (as William Pen says) serve for an
Account how well he was pleased in his change. The first Work (says he) that a
man must do to make himself capable of the good of Solitude, is the very
Eradication of all Lusts; for how is it possible for a man to enjoy himself,
while his Affections are tied to things without himself. The First Minister of
State has not so much business in Public, as a wise Man has in Private; if
the one have little leisure to be alone, the other has less leisure to be in
Company; the one has but part of the Affairs of one Nation, the other all the
Works of God and Nature under his Consideration. There is no saying shocks me
so much, as that which I hear very often, That a man does not know how to pass
his Time: 'Twou'd have been but ill spoken by Methusalem in the Nine Hundred
Sixty Ninth Year of his Life; the meaning of all this is no more than that
vulgar saying, Been qui latuit, been vixit; He has lived well, who has lain
well hidden; which if it be a truth, the World is sufficiently deceived; for my
part I think it is; and that the pleasantest condition of Life is in Incognito:
What a brave Privilege it is to be free from all Noise and Nonsense; from all
envying, or being envyed; from receiving and paying all kind of Ceremonies: our
Senses here are feasted with the, clear and genuine Taste of their Objects,
which are all sophisticated in Courts and Cities. Charles V. Emperor of
Germany, after conquering four Kingdoms, etc. resigned up all his Pomp to other
Hands, and betook himself to his Retirement, leaving this Testimony behind him,
concerning the Life he spent in that little time of his retreat from the World,
That the sincere study of the Christian Religion had in it such Ioys and
Sweetness, as Courts were Strangers to.

Thus Madam have I sent you the true Reason for my leaving Counselor H --, and
betaking my self to a Private Life; wherein, not only Antiquity pleads for me,
but the Example of Cowley, and the best and greatest Men of the Age.

And Madam, as I am charmed with a private Life, and with every day a green
Prospect, so there is a dainty one adjoining (Mr. Orson's House) my present
Quarters; where I often wander up and down to think of you, and the Dear
Valeria. I told you before, 'twas my fortune to Travel; and even in Dublin it
self, I am not without my Rambles: One I make to represent Drapers Garden: The
other Stepney Fields: Another St. James's Park: And when I pass through Skinner
Row (where the Scuffle was) methinks I am in Cheapside, and shall soon be at
the Raven in Iewin-street, the only House on Earth As is hinted in the Dublin
Scuffle.
I love, Pray Madam let me know if it stands in the old place; it is a mighty
Pleasure for us Travelers, to hear how Matters go in England. But as much as
I love the Raven, I thought my self very happy at Mr. Orson's (I mean as happy
as I could be without Valeria.) But how uncertain are worldly Comforts? For I
had not (Madam) sojourned many days at Mr. Orson's House, but I fell sick (as I
said before) of the Bloody Flux, the usual distemper of the Country, and many
times fatal; so that I might have just Apprehensions of a speedy dissolution of
my Earthly Frame, I being at best of no strong Constitution: To say I had no
fear of Death at all upon me under these Circumstances, would savor more of an
hardened insensibility of Heart, and Pagan ignorance, than the Piety and
Consideration of a Christian; but herein an enumeration of the particulars of
my past Life was presented to me, and things appeared with very different
Aspects, but yet not so frightful, but that through the Divine Goodness, I had
hopes left of the Remission of all my Sins, upon the sole Account of my
Savior's Merits; but I dare not be so presumptuous, as to say, my Faith
amounted to an assurance of my Eternal Salvation: Yet I may say, I began more
seriously than ever, to consider what I was; whence I came; and whether I was
going? For (Madam) as I said before, a near prospect of Death makes the World,
and all things in it, appear with a quite different face from what it did. The
belief I should now dye, made me to think why I lived; where I should be
buried, and what would become of me after Death? I now began to review the
whole Course of my Life; and whether, if Time would See my farewell to Dublin.
unweave my Life again to the first thread, I would live just as I had done?
Ah! Madam, the fashion of the World passes away; and a sickbed presently
convinces us of the Vanity of Riches, Honors, Pleasures; How mean and
contemptible do these things appear in the Eyes of a dying Man? They cannot help
us to a good Conscience; give a Minutes ease, or save from the Grave: Sure I
am, whilst my Distemper lasted, would any one have given me the whole World, I
could have thought of nothing but the Terrors of Death, the certainty of
Judgment, the Glories of Heaven, the Torments of Hell, the Comforts of a good
Conscience; and what I must do to be saved, with the necessity of a good Life;
and (...) through Mercy I am now recovered, I hope to the end of my Life, I
shall think of the World just as I did when I thought I was leaving it; and to
this end I desire Death may be much in my ^houghts, and the remaining, part of
my Life a continual Preparation for it. We read of one, that every time he
heard the Clock, cried, well, now I have one hour less to live. I wish I could
imitate this good Man; however, I will look upon every day as if it were my
last; that so when Death comes in earnest, I may be ready and willing to dye;
and after Death I doubt not but my Body will rise again; I will therefore no
longer spend my Hours in pampering of that which will be food for Worms. But I
will not, Madam, enter upon all the Conceptions and Idea's I had in this
Sickness, of the future World; some of 'em being perhaps more the fancy of my
own Brain, than any true Representation of the thing it self: But it having
pleased Almighty God to make my Illness of a short Duration, I shall from the
more Melancholy Scene of Death, pass to the more pleasing Actions of Life; and
take the liberty to acquaint ye, that I now began to visit my Friends, and to
take some innocent Diversion abroad: But (Madam) no Pleasure is lasting with me
(I find;) for I had not been long recovered, and able to walk abroad, but I was
hurried from my Dublin Paradise; (I mean Mr. Orson's House) for Mr. Wild (who
managed my Auction) being just now arrived from London, I was forced to remove
to Mr. Landers's in Capel-street, that I might be nearer my Business; Mr.
Landers's Character resembles that of old Jacob, being a plain, but sincere
hearted Man; and his Wife as good a Landlady, and one of the best of Nurses for
an infirm Person, which was then my Condition; nor must I forget honest Kate,
their Servant, whose Readiness and Care to please me, supplied her want of
Understanding (Point-work.)

But that my Condition in my Absence from Valeria, might truly resemble that of
a Pilgrim, who is continually in motion, I was forced to remove yet nearer my
Auction, upon the Information I received of my Porter's being turned Thief; so
that from Landers's House I removed to Mr. Cawley's, at the Tennis-Court in
Wine-Tavern-street. Mr. Cawley is a very humble and agreeable Person, civil and
obliging to all his Lodgers; and I must say (to do him right) to me in a very
particular manner; and so was his Wife also, who is a very ingenious, discreet,
and prudent Person; and both of 'em expressed an uncommon concern at my parting
with them, which was not until I came for England: Nor must I forget my
Kinswoman Iuggee (as I used to call her) who was their trusty Servant.

Thus Madam, I have briefly given you an Account of the Reasons and Causes I
had for my several Removes from one Lodging to another; and how happy I was in
meeting with kind Landlords. And were I in England again (and I cast longing
looks that way evry day) I Would say more in their Praise; but oh this cruel
distance! well, had I the same advantage of speed to send unto you at this time
in this place, as they have from Scandaroon, when, upon the coming in of any
Ship into Harbor, they use to send their Letters by Pigeons to Aleppo, and
other Places; I say (Madam) had I such an airy Postilion, I Would send ye these
Occurrences more at large.

Madam, If you should ask me, which I liked best of my four Lodgings, my Answer
is, I looked upon 'em all as Places I must quickly leave, which made 'em all
indifferent to me; but could I have enjoyed Valeria there, I should have given
the Preference to Mr. Orson's, his curious Gardens being very delightful, and
his House a ( private) Country-Seat.

Thus Madam, I have given you a brief Account of my way of Living in Dublin;
with which (had I had Valeria's ('batying Company) I should have thought my
self very happy; for through the Divine Goodness (bating my first fit of
Sickness) I enjoyed a competent measure of Health; those other Indispositions I
sometimes met with, served only as Memento's, to put me in mind of preparing
for another W^rld; and even under them, I was cheerful and well contented;
having (tho, not exempt from humane Infirmities) no guilt of any wilful Sin
lying on my Conscience; so that all troublesome Thoughts were banished from my
Breast, and I passed away my Life with great Delight.

And now being pretty well, I had a mind to ramble into the Country for a
little Conversation among the Irish (of which more anon) and to view the
Cabins, Manners, and Customs, etc. of the dear Joys; but the Company I met in
Dublin was so agreeable, I could not presently leave it; and which made it yet
the more delightful (after my Recovery) I sometimes conversed with Counselor
Kairns, Counselor Stevens, Mr. Bourn, Mr. Bosworth, Mr. Crawcroft, Men eminent
for Piety, Wisdom, Learning, and all other Virtues; by whose Conversation I
improved my own Understanding; and found that the knowledge of my own
Ignorance, was a great step toward being a good Proficient in the School of
Wisdom.

When I could not have such Company, I gave my self to Reading some useful Book
or other (the Bible having always the preference) and afterward to writing my
American Travels, and Summer Ramble, both which I begun and finished in Ireland.

I enjoyed also (especially when I lay at Mr. Orson's) the Pleasure of walking
in a delightful Garden, well furnished with the most curious Herbs and Flowers;
whose various Colors delighted my Eye, and their Fragrancy my Smell: Besides
which, I had the Satisfaction of a lovely Prospect; Southwards, toward the
City of Dublin, I had the silent Murmurs of the River Lyffee in my way;
Westward I had a full view of Kilmanum Hospital, which at that distance (being
seated on the summit of a Hill) was a very agreeable Prospect. To the
Northwards (or rather the Northwest) I had the pleasant sight of a Village
called Kabragh, which was pretty near; and at a greater distance, the fine Town
of Finglass, seated on a Hill, where I had a noble Prospect of the Sea, and of
all the Ships in the Harbor of Dublin.

Sometimes I would walk down from my Lodging to the Riverside, which was not a
Mile from it, where the pleasant Rills of running Water were extreme delightful.

At other times I would walk through those green Meadows from the end of
Stony-batter to the Ka^ragh, which is a Village about a Mile from my Lodging,
full of stately Trees, which gives a pleasing shade, and delightful Prospect.
From whence, as I came back, I had the Sea and Harbor directly in my View.

And sometimes, Madam, I walk to Chappel-Izod, to visit the Lord Clonuff, who
is President of the Illustrious House of Cabinteelee, and confers Honors as
freely as a Prince, though with more Ceremony than those of the Round-Table:
During the time of my last being there, he created no less than Four Noblemen,
of which the Duke of Fr^om was one; the Marquess of Swan-Castle carrying the
Sword, and assisting at the Ceremony; but more of this in my Summer Ramble,
where you will have the History of my Lord Clonuff at large, with a merry Account
of the Original of the House of Cabinteeiee, and the Honors the President has
conferred; with an exact List of the Nobility created by the said President.

Sometimes I would for my Diversion, ride out a few Miles, either to Santry,
Swords, or Mallahide; a Place as Eminent as Billinsgaie for Peoples going to
eat Oysters there: And that which made these little Iourneys more delightful,
was, that I had now, though at a distance, the Sea within my view, which I like
well enough on shore, but not on board, for I am always sick on the Ocean.

Sometimes I walk along the Strand, up to Clantarff, which when the Tide is in,
is very pleasant; and the next day perhaps I take a Ramble to Donnibroe^,
Dumcondrah, Repharnum, Palmerstown, and whither else my Fancy leads me.

And sometimes I went to the Dublin BowlingGreen (perhaps the finest in Europe)
either to divert my self by Playing, or look on those that did; where I have
seen the Gentlemen screwing their Bodies in^ o more Antic Postures than
Prote^s ever knew; as if they thought the Bowl would run that way they screwed
their Bodies; and many times would curse it when it did not. And while I thus
looked on, I could not but reflect how like the Jack is to the World, which
most men covet with the greatest Earnestness, but very few obtain. And when
sometimes I saw a Bowl ( played by a skilful hand) lie very near her, it has in
one small Moment, by the unlucky knock of a succeeding Bowl, lain at the
greatest distance from it; and others have in the some instance, been laid by
the Jack, that never thought of it: just so it is with the things of the World;
some that with Toil and Industry have gotten an Estate, by one or other
unforeseen Disaster, have in a Moment lost it all; when some perhaps that never
expected it, by the same Accident that quite undid the other, were made Rich.
So sickle are Riches, which as the Wise Man tells us, Make Prove. 23. 5
themselves Wings, and fly away.

At other times, I have gone further off, and visited some of the Irish Cities;
and the first I rambled to, was Kilkenny, where I was introduced to the
Acquaintance of my worthy and ingenious Friend, Dr. Wood, by the following
Letter, written by an Eminent Person in Dublin, and which I Will insert here, not
out of vain Glory, (for the Praises he gives me, shows that his Love had
blinded his Judgment) but that your Ladyship might the better see (by that
Inquisitive Temper which he found in me) what variety you are like to have in
my Summer Ramble.

The Letter I deliverd to Dr. Wood (from my Friend in Dublin) was this
following, viz.
Dear Doctor,
THE Bearer hereof, Mr. Dunton, is my Friend, (and as such you will look upon
him, as a very good and honest Gentlem^n) he goes to your Town to look about
him, and see the place for some days; I pray oblige me so far as to let him
have your Assistance to see the Castle, and such other things as his Curiosity
leads him to, for he is an inquisitive Person, and a Man not un^it for Travel:
All the Favors you do him, shall be thankfully acknowledged as done to

Dublin, September. 12. School. Your Humble Servant, etc.


This Letter had that Effect, that Dr. Wood and his Lady gave me a hearty
Welcome, and afterward brought me into the Company of several Gentlemen of
Worth and Quality. I came to Kilkenny on Friday Night; and the next Morning the
Doctor carried me to view the Castle, (the noble Seat of the Duke of Ormond) of
which I shall give a most particular Account in my Summer Ramble. And indeed
the Alcove Chamber and Dutchesses Closet, etc. will deserve a large
Description; but leaving these Noble Apartments, I shall next proceed to tell
your Ladyship, That adjoining to these Lodgings is a great Window, that gave us
a view of a Private Garden of Pleasure, I think finer than the Privy-Garden in
White Hall, or any Walk I had ever seen: Being hugely pleased with this
pleasant Prospect, the Doctor had me up one pair of Stairs, where on the left
hand was the Room where the Duke of Ormond Dines; 'twas high Roof d, very
large, and hung all round with Gilded Leather; the Table-Cloth was laying as we
enterd the Room; and I do think the curious foldings of the Damask Napkins, and
pretty Nick Nacks that adorned the Table (had I time) were worth a particular
Description; and the Plate for the Dinner was not less remarkable; there were
Three Silver Tankards embellished with curious Figures, and so very large, that
I believe, would his Grace have given me one of 'em, I could scarce have
dragged it to my Lodging; there were two Silver Salvers, as large and noble,
and a Voider made of Silver, big enough to contain all, as I perceived it did.
Leaving this Noble Dineing-room, (for what is Dinner or Plate either, to a Man
that has no right to it) we ascended two pair of Stairs, which brought us into a
Noble Gallery, which, for length, variety of gilded Chairs, and the curious
Pictures that adorn it, has no equal in the Three Kingdoms, and perhaps not in
Europe; so that this Castle may properly be called the Elisium of Ireland: And
were not the Duke and Duchess better principled than to forget Heaven for the
sake of a perishing Glory, they would little think of Mansions heteafter, who have
such a Paradise at present to live in. But to return to the Description of this
Noble Gallery: The first thing I saw remarkable in it (and indeed the Top-Glory
of all the rest) was the Picture of the Duchess of Ormond; the Face was
finished, but the other parts wanted more of the Painter's Art; but I must say
that of her Grace's Picture, that were all the Beauties in the World lost, it
might be found again in this Painted Face; though that too, is as much outdone
by theOriginal, as a real Flame exceeds that of a painted one. There is also a
design of drawing the Dukes ^icture, and when both are finished, Dr. Wood told
me they are designed to adorn the Th^lsel (a sort of Exchange;) to which will
be added the Pictures of all those that have been Mayors of Kilkenny. The next
Picture I saw remark (...), was the (...) Strafford, frowning (like a mere
Nero) on the Messenge^ that brought him ill News from the Parliament. By him
hung the Duchess of Modena's Picture (late Queen of England;) and next to her
stands the late King James, drawn like a Man afrighted; so that I told the
Doctor, I judged the Painter designed to draw him just as he looked when he
fled from the Boyn. Near King James's Picture hangs the Picture of an old
Usurer, telling Money, and a Jew by him, which (considering the Moral of it) is
pretty enough to behold.

Here is also the Picture of that chaste Prince, Charles 1. who (if you will take
his word on the Scaffold) never straid from his Queen, in Thought, Word, or
Deed; and next to him (if I don't mistake) hangs H -- that lustful Queen: Here
is also the Picture of Charles the Second, that Royal Libertine; but the Queen
Dowager I did not see. There were great variety of other Pictures, but I
reserve the rest for my Summer Ramble. But (Madam) I cannot forbear telling ye
at present, That at the West end of the Gallery, stood the several Ages of Man,
perhaps the finest draught that the World has seen. On the left side of the
Room hangs the Picture of Vandike, as drawn by himself; (and a curious thing it
is) and a little below him is a Scotch Lord, drawn in that Garb he hunts, or
goes to visit the Clanns. And I must not forget to tell ye, that on the South
side of the Gallery, hangs two Royal Buds, Charles the Second, drawn when he
was four years old; ( Ah Charles! What Innocence did thou outlive?) and
James the Second, in hanging-sleeves; and it had been well for England, and
himself too, if he had put off his Body with his little Coat, and so exchanged
one Heaven for another. I should next proceed to describe the Pictures of the
Duke of Ormond's Family, for in this Gallery, and in Dunmors House, (which I Will
describe in my Summer Ramble) hang all the Progenitors of this Noble Duke; but
to mention these in that manner I ought, would require an Age. So (Madam) I
must lead you out of the Gallery (though with a sad Heart, to leave such a
pleasant Place) and next describe the Bowling-Green adjoining to this Princely
Seat; it is an exact Square, and fine enough for a Duke to bowl on; nay, Church
and State were here at Rub, rub, rub, and a good cast; for when the Dr. and I
come to the Green, the Duke was then ftinging the first Bowl; next troul'd the
Bishop of -- Colonel R -- with about four inferior Clergy; at paying our Bows
to the Duke, he gave us the honor of his Hat in a very obliging manner; and
here I Would attempt his Grace's Character, had not the Ingenious Cibbers In his
Poem published at the Duke' s landing in Ireland.
done it before me; but I may venture to add to what he has said in the Duke's
Praise, That the most he has said of him, is the least of what he merits; for
the Duke is a Man of a truly brave and noble Spirit, and lives in the World
like one that is much above it,

After making our Devoirs to the Duke, the Dr. and I left the Bowling-Green,
and went next to see the Garden adjoining to the Castle, which (though gone to
decay) is now repairing by a young Gardener from England, and will in few years
be as pleasant as the Spring-Garden near Fox-hall. Having seen what Rarities
the Castle, Garden, and Town afforded, the Dr. and I parted over a Glass
of^laret; and in the Afternoon, I rambled to Dunmore (another Seat of the Duke
of Ormond's) and is the finest House in Ireland: On some of the Floors of this
House, I told Twenty Four Rooms; the Staircase that leads to 'em, is hung with
curious Landskips, and is so very large, that Twenty Men might walk abreast;
had the House but another Branch, it would be a perfect H. but without this
additional Beauty, perhaps it may boast of more Rooms than are to be found in
some whole Towns: Leaving this Noble Seat, (after Peggy Corkran had showed me
all the Rarities in it) I returned that Night to Kilkenny; and from thence, the
following Monday, took a New Ramble to view the Boyn, and the ancient Town of
Droheda; and whither I went afterward, you shall know in my Summer Ramble. But
Madam, I ask your Pardon, for I was going to leave Kilkenny before I had told
ye of the chief Raritie^ said to be in it; which are, that in this Town there
is Fire without Smoke,
Water without Mud,
Air without Fogg.
I searched into this Report, and found it a real Truth; and that the Fourth
Element, of Earth, was also as pure.

I would here describe the Town of Kilkenny, and give a particular Character of
Mr. Mukins, the present Mayor, of Mr. Philips, the Mayor Elect, the Recorder,
Aldermen, and Common Council-men, and several other remarkable things and
Persons in this Place: I would also mention the odd Adventure of a Lieutenant
that traveled with me to Kilkenny; neither would I omit to give you the heads
of a remarkable Sermon I heard in St. Kenny Church, where an Eminent Prelate
told us, That look into all Divisions of Religion, as those of Rome and Geneva,
etc. and you will find (as they are against Monarchy) that they have left the
good Manners to the poor Church of England. Madam, I humbly conceive this
Passage will deserve Remarks (by a better Pen than mine) as will several other
not able strokes this good Bishop entertained his Auditory with; but though they
are noted down in my Iournal, yet I reserve the rest for my Summer Ramble, lest
they make my Letter too voluminous.

So (Madam) at present I take my leave of Kilkenny, with only telling ye that
Morning I left it, Dr. Wood writ an Answer to the Letter I brought him from my
Dublin Friend, which I Will insert here, as it further shows how Courteous the
Dr. is to Strangers, and to me in particular.

The Doctor's Answer to the Letter I brought him from Dublin.
Dear Sir,
I Received yours by Mr. Dunton, whose stay here is so short, that I have not
been able to show him what Civility I would, especially being every day hurried
with Country Business? I hope to step to Dublin in a little time, and to have
the opportunity of drinking a Glass of Wine with you and him; mean while a
Letter now and then would be acceptable to me, when your leisure will permit. I
wish you all Happiness, and am,

SIR, Your Affectionate Servant, NATH. WOOD.


And so good Doctor (with Thanks for all your Favors) I bid you and your
Ingenious Lady, Farewell.

Thus (Madam) you see, by taking notice of Castles, Gardens, Antiquities,
Pictures, Public Fabrics, the Rarities in Nature, and the Civility I meet in
my generous Friends, that ( where e're I go) I still learn somewhat worthy of
my Knowledge; neither do I in such Rambles omit any thing that may instruct or
delight me; and am much pleased with beholding the Beauty and Situation of
Places. Neither did I (in this Country Ramble) meet with any Allay to my
Pleasures by the dullness or decay of my Senses, for I found them all in their
perfect Vigor; besides, I found Traveling got me a Stomach, which made me eat
even courser fare with a better Appetite, though I saw little of that here, for
the Kilkenny Claret is the best in Ireland; and the Doctor's Treats were still
rich and noble.

Madam, having said so much of Dr. Wood's Civilities to me, perhaps you will
expect I should send you the Doctor's Character; which I Will do, and his Ladies
too, that you may see how happy I was in their Conversation; Dr. Wood, like
Luke the Evangelist, Col. 4. 14.
is the beloved Physician in these Parts; and he really Merits that great
Respect which the People give him; he is a complete Gentleman; very kind to
Strangers, and obliging to the last degree; and I do think (if I may believe my
Eyes) He Is the happiest Man (except my self) that ever entered into a married
State. Madam, I own a kind Wife often makes an obliging Husband of one that
would otherwise be very indifferent; but this is not the Doctor's case; for
he is a Man of that sweet Temper, that the worst of Wives would be kind to him;
but he has met with one of the best; Then how happy is this Couple, that seem
to rival one another in Kindness? This, Madam, will raise your Curiosity to
know a little more of his Lady, but I dare not attempt her Character; but this
I Will say, Prove. 31. 27.
She looks well to the ways of her Household, and speaks not a foolish word;
and her Thoughts are so new, so particular, that they raised my wonder to a
great height. In the several Visits I made the Doctor (of which more in my
Summer Ramble) I could scarce speak for admiring at every thing she said or
did. I Am sure, Madam, if you did but know her, you would love Ireland (though it is a
course Place) purely for her sake. But, Madam, the Coach stays for me; so
having left the Doctor and his good Lady, suppose me now on the Road for
Dublin; and in my return thither, I was blessed with extraordinary Company; they
were these following, viz. a French Brigadeer, who gave largely to all the Poo^
on the Road, and I think had the Soul of an Emperor; for he treated all the way
from Kilkenny to Dublin; and had he spoke a Language we had understood. I doubt
not but our Minds had fared as well as our Bodies.

I.
Sure there is some wondrous Joy in doing good;
Immortal Joy! that suffers no allay from fears,
Nor dreads the Tyranny of Years:
By none but its Possessors to be understood;
Else where is the Gain in being great?
Kings would indeed be Victims of the State;
What can the Poets humble Praise
What can the Poets humble Bays
(We Poets often our Bays allow
Transplanted to the Hero's Brow,)
Add to the Victor's Happiness?
What do the Scepter, Crown, and Ball,
Rattles for infant Royalty to play withal,
But serve to adorn the Baby-dress
Of one poor Coronation day,
To make the Pageant gay:
A three hours scene of empty Pride,
And then the ^oys are thrown aside.
II.
But the delight of doing good,
Is fixed like fate among the Stars,
And deify'd in Verse;
It Is the best Gem in Roya^ty;
The great distinguisher of Blood;
Parent of Valor, and of Fame,
Which makes a Godhead of a Name,
And is Cotemporary to Eternity.
This made the ancient Romans to afford
To Valor, and to Virtue, the same word;
To show, the Paths of both must be together trod,
Before the Hero can commence a God.
Madam, having dedicated this Poem to the Memory of this great and generous Man
(whose Bounty we lived upon) I proceed to acquaint ye, we had also in Company,
a French Major, a Gentleman of good Sense, but a little passionate.

Our third Companion was Iohny Ferguson, a very pleasant Fellow, and one that
did great Feats at the Boyn. These three (with my self) were all the Men that
were in the Coach; but we were not without a She-Companion, I mean the virtuous
Mrs. Hawksworth, who may pass for a Wit; and if ever I go to Constantinople, it
shall be on purpose to visit her Ingenious Son; and I must say, if he takes
after his Mother, he will scarce meet his Fellow, though he should girdle the World.

The Time in such Company flew too fast, and I began to wish the way to Dublin
had been much longer. In our way home, we had debates concerning the Spider's
Webb, The curious work in a Turtles Nest, The Government of Bees, The love of a
Spaniel-Dog to his Master, and upon other Subjects; but I wave them here,
designing all our Disputes in the Coach shall be part of my Summer Ramble.

I was no sooner come home, and had given some necessary Orders about my
Auction, but I rambled to Drogheda, and paid a Visit to the famous Boyn, so
memorable for the Victory King William there obtained over the Irish, though
they were Five to One; and that nothing might 'scape my View, that was worth
seeing in Drogheda, Mr. VVilde sent (by me) the following Letter.

To Mr. James Iackson, Son to Alderman Iackson in Drogheda.
Mr. Jackson,
MR. Dunton being willing to see your Famous Town, and the River Boyn, where
King William passed over, I desire you will help him to an Horse, and either go
with him your self, or prevail with some Friend of yours to go, that knows
Matters and Things; I would also have him go into a This Currough is a Boat
made of such light Materials, that a Man may pass over the Boyn in it, and then
wind it up so, as to carry it in his Hand.
Currough, that he may carry his Boat on his Arm afterward, I am,

Your Humble Servant, Richard Wild.


That Morning I rid to Drogheda, the Air was sweet and kind, the Fields were
Trim and Neat, the Sun benign and cherishing, and from every thing I met, I
received a Civility; and which added still to my Happiness, I went in Company
with the Minister of the Newry: He Is a Divine of great Learning and Worth,
speaks admirably, and inspired a Soul into all our Company; and in my Summer
Ramble I Will attempt his Character at large. He treated me that Night with a
noble Supper; not for any thing he found in me, but (as he expressed it) for
the sake of my being the Son of a Clergyman: When I had taken leave of this
Generous Parson, I went to lodge with one Mr. Watson, an Apothecary in
Drogheda; I was hugely pleased with my new Quarters, for my Landlady (though a
Roman Catholic) was a very obliging, generous Woman; and for Mr. Watson, I
don't think there is an honester Man in Drogheda; I found him excellent Company,
and a very ingenious Man: His Wit is ductile and pliable to all Inventions (as
well as to that of the Glister-pipe) from a Pin to a Pillar, nothing was so
small but his Skill could work; nothing so great, but his Industry could
Atchieve: After I had conversed a while with my new Landlord, I went to
Alderman Iackson's to deliver Mr. Wild's Letter; before I came to Drogheda, Mr.
Wild told me what a courteous Person Mr. Iackson was; and when I came to his
Father's House, He received me in such an obliging Manner, that his Favors did
transcend Report, as much as they exceeded my Desert. Madam, this Gentleman
resolves to live a Bachelor, which I could not but wonder at; for doubtless
Nature meant him a Conqueror over all hearts, when she gave him such Sense, and
such Beauty: (for he is a very handsome Man:) His Wit sparkles as well as his
Eyes; and his Discourse charms as well as his Beauty; and I found by a little
talking with him, that his Mind is none of those narrow ones, who know one
thing, and are ignorant of a thousand; but on the contrary, it is so very
large, that although it cannot be said Iackson knew every thing equally well, yet
it is most certain, he can give an excellent Account of all things; but though
his Soul is enriched with every Virtue, yet I thought the most remarkable thing
in him, was his great Humility, and readiness to serve a Stranger (for I might
pass as such, having never seen him, but a minute or two in London.) Madam,
meeting with such a Friend as this, you may well think I could never enough
enjoy him; so leaving his Father's House, we went together to a Place in
Drogheda, where we fell into Company with several Gentlemen, and particularly
with Mr. Singleton. He Is a young Sprigg of Divinity, and might have stayed at 2 Samuel 10. 15.
Jericho till his Beard was grown; but when he speaks, it is off hand (as they
call it here) so that Nature seems to have made a Present to him, of whatever a
long Study and Meditation gives out by degrees to others: He preached in
Drogheda Church upon this Text. And Genesis 27. 27.
Jacob was a plain Man, dwelling in Tents; and I think 'twas the most ingenious
Sermon I ever heard. But my Design here is only to hint at things; so I leave
this young Divine, that I may come to acknowledge the generous Treatment I met
in Drogheda, from Mr. Kelsey (for I don't forget the Token he sent by me to his
Friend, Sir Thomas Montgomery.) This Gentleman has a great deal of Wit, and
(which is rare in witty People) is Mast^r over himself; walks according to the
Rules of Virtue, as the hours pass by the degrees of the Sun; and being made of
good humor, his Life is a perpetual Harmony; and by consequence is a great
Blessing to his Wife and Children, if he has any. After Mr. Kelsey had given me
a particular Relation of the Boyn Fight, and we had drank a Health to his
Friend in England, Mr. Iackson carried me to visit the famous Walker (the
ingenious Translater of Epictetus.) He Is an universal Scholar; and I do
believe, were all the Learning in Ireland lost, it might be found again in this
worthy Person; and he is as Pious as he is Learned: He prefers Conscience before
Riches, Virtue above Honor; he desires not to be Great, but to do good; and
is so very exact in all he says, that his words are Decrees of Wisdom. When we
came to this Gentleman's House, his Scholars were acting Henry IV. and a Latin
Play out of Terence; they were all Ingenious Lads, and performed their parts to
a wonder; but one Ellwood (who acted Falstaff) bore away the Bell from the
whole School. But Thieves! Thieves! (but no wonder, for I Am still in Ireland)
for I had no sooner left Mr. Walker's School, but I lost my Cane, and a Silver
Box. But (Madam) as Thievish as Drogheda is, I cannot but think with pleasure of
Ireland, as 'twas there I had the honor to be first known to your Ladyship.
But more particularly I love Drogheda; where, for two days, the Tears I shed
for the matchless D -- ne, would not suffer me to walk abroad. Madam, 'twas
here your Advice was so very seasonable, and went so far toward drying up all
my Tears. But though I Have reason to love Drogheda, as 'twas the Town where I
gri^ev'd so much for D -- ne; and as 'twas here I was blessed with your kind
Correction for my weeping more than became me; yet after all, Drogheda is a
Thievish Place; and had I but stayed a Week in it (as I could scarce forbear,
Iackson, and Kelsy were so obliging) I had surely been reduced to Primitive
Innocence; so I left Drogheda in a sort of fright, after I had seen the Mayor
(who is so clear in his Trust, that his Virtues shine to Dublin, and from
thence to London) the Aldermen, the Primates House, and the Mount that gave me
a sight of the Boyn, that fatal place to the Popish Army. So Dear Iackson
farewell, till I see thee again in London; where thou shall be (tho^ not so
nobly treated, yet) as welcome to me, as I was to you in Drogheda. And (Madam)
the Truth is, he that confers on me Favors so generously as Mr. Iackson did,
steals me from my self, and in one and the same Act, makes me his Vassal, and
himself my King. When I receive a Favor from any Man, till I have repaid it,
my Mind (as Feltham says) is a Prisoner; and till a Ransom be paid by a like
return, I Am kept in Fetters, and constrained to love, to serve, and to be
ready, as the Conqueror desires it.

Madam, I stayed but three days in Drogheda, and am now returned to Dublin,
where I hear from England the sad News of the death of my Owl ('it is the Bird of
Athens) and has been peering for Mice in my House and Garden for three years;
so out of mere love to this old Servant, I fell to write an Essay in Praise of
an Owl, and have spent about twenty sheets in telling the Virtues of poor
Madge. A Learned Author writ in Praise of Barrenness; the Great Erasmus writ in
Praise of Folly, and a late Writer has wasted a great deal of Paper in Praise
of a Cows-Tail; and I could not see why I might not follow such Examples, and
endeavor to Praise my Owl. I confess Madam, this Subject is not grave enough
for your perusal; or if it was, I Would write an Elegy on poor Madge, and send that
and his Character for your Reflections; but this is a hint by the by, neither
will I presume to be thus merry without your leave. But (Madam) I had scarce
finished my Owls Character (which would take up a Month to transcribe fair) but
my old rambling Maggot began to crawl, and bite afresh; upon which I
immediately grew as fickle and wavering, as if I had drank Liquor distilled
from a Woman's Brains; and nothing would satisfy me now, till I was on another
Ramble; and the next I took was to Ballimany, to see the Curragh, and the
running for the King's Plate. Madam, by this speedy Rambling again, you see the
toil of keeping Accounts, was a Labor too tedious for my Mercurial Brains.

Being now resolved for a new Adventure, on Tuesday, September 11. I took a
Coach to one Gents, a Mile out of Town, where my Horse waited for me; and here
my Stars threw me upon good Company; (one of which they called Climene;) we set
out for Ballimany with the early Sun, yet we had his Company but a little
while; for just as we had his Company but a little while; for just as we got to
the Fox and Geese ('it is a House your Ladyship has heard me speak of) he
withdrew into an Apartment behind a Cloud, so that the day now grew very
unpleasant; but our Company was so agreeable, that bad Weather was little
minded.

As soon as we had left the Fox and Geese, Climene gave us a pleasant Account
of the silly raving of a certain Female, whose Character expect in my Summer
Ramble: This Relation occasioned a Conference about scolding Wives, and
Dueking-stools, which lasted till we came to Racool, where we treated Climene
with a Bottle of Cider ( for we all thought a Pot in our Pate was a Mile in our
way;) having refreshed our selves in this little Town, on we rambled for
Ballimany, diverting our selves on the Road with what we had seen and heard in
Dublin; and at last we fell to discourse of Innocence, and the great Chastity
of the brave Lucretia; we had no sooner entered on this Discourse, but a sure
Emblem of Chastity (an old man of forescore) limps out of his little House
(which I Am sure he might carry on his Back) to beg our Charity; not (Madam)
but we had Charity, but having no Pence about us, we dismissed this venerable
Beggar with a promise of being kind as we came back.

The next Spectacle we were entertained with, was the Sign of a Church; I call
it so, for 'twas only a Steeple standing like a May Pole, without any Prop, but
a tall Pillar, and which to us (at a great distance) seemed little bigger than
the Spire it supported; we could not but wonder at the humor of these People,
that they should fancy only a Steeple without the necessary Appartenance of
Vestry, Pulpit, or Chancel? but the next Person we met, told us, 'twas not the
fault of the Parish, but plainly the Devils Malice to the Preaching of God's
Word; for as fast as the Building went on by day, the Devil carried it away by
night. I then asked, Why the Steeple had better luck than the other parts of
the Church? To this he replied, that the Parish formerly had been very wicked;
and that Heaven permitted the Steeple should be left standing, to upbraid the
Inhabitants. Madam, if what this Fellow said was true (for we thought it a
piece of banter,) this Steeple is high enough to be a warning to the
Neighboring Villages.

Being hugely pleased with this Fellows Answer, we jogged on to the Naas; we
had here staid for a Dinner, could we have persuaded our selves to have lost the
sight of a diverting Passage then in view; 'twas a brace of dear Ioys, that had
tied two loaded Horses to an old Hedge, whilst they formally unstrip, and
without Fear, or Wit, fall to lousing 'emselves; Climene, who could be Witty
when, and on whom she pleased, bid 'em be careful that they did not over-stock
the Ground.

I could not but laugh at this lousi^ sight; but these being common in Ireland,
we left the consideration of this Adventure, to discourse of the Prospects then
in sight; for now, let us turn to the right, or the left hand, we had a
charming View of the Country; not but a sight of Climene was beyond all we saw
(for^she's a perfect Beauty;) yet (for variety sake) we would now and then look
about us.

Madam, being now come to the Lissee (which all pass that go to the Curragh,)
that River was swelled so high, that poor Leander (as one in our Company called
himself) was forced to cross it with his Climene.
Hero behind him. I don't know what Information Climene received from her
Friend Leander, but she was pleased to tell me, she understood I had a mighty
passion for my first Wife, and that she was a Person deserved it; she then
inquired, Whether I loved any before her? I told her I did. She then asked, Who
the Person was? I told her 'twas one Rachel -- who was so very Beautiful, that
a Venus might have been formed out of her Person; and yet her Wit did far
exceed her Beauty. Having said so much, Climene asked me a hundred Questions
about Rachel; as, Whether she was Rich? What were her Parents? How we came to
part? And whether I continued to love her after I Married Eliza? I told her I
did not; but could not but own I took a mighty Pleasure in Rachel's Company
before I knew Eliza (though after I knew her, I scarce loved any thing else;) and
because Rachel admired Poetry, I made my Courtship to the Muses too, that I
might be the more grateful to her; and, Madam (can ye believe it,) I had the
good fortune to write something in Rachel's Praise, which met with a kind
Reception; I first presented 'em to her (and she being tickled with my
Commendations) showed 'em to her Scotch Friends, and others; for Clara now (for
so I called her,) pretended to out-doe me in Tenderness. But (Madam) these
Poetic Essays had an effect different from what I intended; for I designed by
'em, only to make my own Addresses to her the more acceptable; but she, by
showing 'em abroad, got the name of a Wit (and having acquired a Reputation
beyond what she had before,) began to value her self at a higher Rate, and to
treat me with Disdain; I will not so blind with gazing on her Face, or charmed so
much with her Witty Letters, but I could see with what Contempt she treated me;
and seeing, could not but resent it to that degree, that I thought it my Duty
to humble her; and in order to it, I sent her the following Lines;

I.
Know Clara, since you are grown so proud,
'Twas I that gave thee thy Renown;
Thou Would else in the forgotten Crowd
Of Common Beauties lived unknown,
Had not my Verse exhaled thy Name,
And impt it with the Plumes of Fame.
II.
That killing Power is none of Thine:
I gave it to thy Voice, thy Eyes:
Thy Sweets, thy Graces, all are mine;
Thou art my Star, shin'st in my Skies:
Then dart not from thy borrowed Sphere,
Lightning on him that placed thee there.
III.
Treat me then with Disdain no more,
Lest what I made, I Uncreate;
Let Fools thy Mystic Forms adore;
I know thee in thy Mortal State:
Wise Poets that wrapped Truth in Tales,
Knew her themselves through all her Vails.
How Clara resented this Poem, I never asked, for her Pride had given me enough
of her ( Pride was never yet found in a noble Nature, or Humility in an
unworthy Mind,) and so I left her; and I appeal to you, Madam, Whether I had
not reason to slight her? As for Climene (my Fellow Traveller) she gave her
Judgment in my Favor; and (Madam) I want to know whose part you will take; for
this is the Wit I so often mentioned to D -- ne; and it is your Judgment (alone)
that can determine whether I did well or ill.

As we walked along, Leander would now and then put in a word against Clara's
Inconstancy; but Wells (another of our Fellow Travelers) could not hear the
Story without railing at the whole Sex; upon which Climene banter'd 'em both.
This urged 'em again to ask Climene, How many whineing, Slaves she had murdered
her self (for she was very handsome, and very Witty) but (Madam) neither
Climene, nor any of the Company, would come to Confession.

In such Discourses as these, we passed away the melancholy day, 'till we came
to Ballimany (our intended Quarters.) It Is a small Village of poor Cabins, and
an old Castle, of which there is abundance in Ireland, built, it is said, by
the Danes, long before the coming of the English into it; they are square
strong Buildings of Stone, with a small Door, and stone Stairs, and Windows
like Spikeholes, purposely for strength; for as the Danes enlarged their
Frontiers, they built these Castles on them as curbs to the Neighboring Irish.

Madam, I have often had occasion in some of my Letters, to mention these
Cabbins, or Huts, but now take the description of them; They build them by
putting two forked sticks of such length as they intend the height of the
Building, and at such distance as they design its length; if they design it
large, they place three or four such forks into the Ground, and on them they
lay other long sticks, which are the ridge Timber; then they raise the Wall,
which they make of Clay and Straw tempered with Water, and this they call Mudd;
when the Wall is raised to a sufficient height, which perhaps is four foot,
then they lay other small sticks, with one end on the ridge piece, and the
other on the Wall; these they wattle with small hazels, and then cover them
with straw, or course Grass, without any Chimneys; so that when the Fire is
lighted, the smoke will come through the Thatch, so that you would think the
Cabin were on fire: Another sort of their Cabbins is made by laying one end of
the stick upon the bank of a Ditch, and the other upon a little bit of a mudd
Wall; and then, when it is wattled, they cover it with Heath-straw, or scraws of
Earth; and into this miserable Place will half a dozen poor Creatures creep for
shelter and Lodging; but their Beds are upon such a firm Foundation, that
nothing but an Earthquake can move them: Instead of Feathers or Flocks, they
they use Rushes or Straw, which serves them without changing. Sheets they never
provide, and to tell the naked Truth, unless they can purchase a poor Cadow,
which is not often, they ligg together like Adam and Eve before the Fall, not a
Rag to cover them, but themselves; which may be one reason why they so
multiply; each little Hut being full of Children. They seldom have any
Partitions or several Rooms; but sleep in common with their Swine and Poultrey;
and for second or third Story, you may look long enough e're you find any. But
as the Building of Versailes are so very Magnificent, as not capable of such a
description that may give a just Idea of them; so these, in the other extreme,
are so very wretched things, that perhaps the Pen of the noblest Architect
would be very defective in describing them. Behind one of their Cabbins lies
the Garden, a piece of Ground sometimes of half an Acre, or an Acre, and in
this is the Turf-stack, their Corn, perhaps two or three hundred sheaves of
Oats, and as much Pease, the rest of the Ground is full of their dearly beloved
Potatoes, and a few Cabbages, which the solitary Calf of the Family, that is
here pent from its Dam, never suffers to come to Perfection. Madam, I should
more exactly have described their Dwellings or Cabbi^s, if I durst have
adventured oft'ner into 'em; or could have staid in 'em (for Lice and Smoke)
when I was there.

But to proceed in my Rambles: Next Morning early, without regarding any
Ceremony, we made our Visit to a Popish Father, who was just up, and wiping his
Eyes; the Weather was very fair, and we stayed at the door ( which had a little
green Field before it) until the Room within was swept to receive us; the Dew
lay in pretty Spangles on the Grass, made by refraction of the Sun Beams: I had
a mind to try the Father's Philosophy, and enquired what the Dew was? He told
me, 'Twas a Wapor that fell upon the Ground in the Night Sheason, and that the
Sun drawed it up again in the Day; but Climene told him it was an old and
vulgar Notion, and exploded by the newest Philosophers, who were of Opinion, it
might be either the m^isture which the Horses of the Sun shake from off their
Mains, when they were put into his Chariot rising out of the Sea* or that it
might be Thetis's Chamber-Maids had emptied Phoebus* Pot as soon as he was up;
or lastly, and that more probably, it was the sweat of the Grass and Herbs
condensed by the cold of the Evening Air. Her Notions made us all laugh, and
the Priest swore by St. Patrick's Hand, she was as Witty as she was Pretty; and
put some other Complements on her, the best of which were much beneath what she
truly deserves. The House was now ready, and the Maid came to call us in, where
we broke our Fast, and prevailed with Father A -- to accompany us to Kildare,
where we were going to be Merry; his Palfrey was presently sadled, and we
mounted; we soon came to the Curragh, so much^noised here. It is a very large
Plain, covered in most Places with Heath; it is said to be five and twenty
Miles round; this is the New Market of Ireland, where the Horse-Races are run,
and also Hunting Matches made, there being here great store of Hares, and more
game for Hawking, all which are carefully preserved: They have a Tradition (I
fancy 'twas taken from the Story of Dido's purchasing so much Ground as she
could surround with an Ox-hide, on which she built Carthage) That St. Bridget,
the great Saint of Kildare, begged as much Land from one of the Irish Kings,
for a common Pasture, as she could environ with her Frize Mantle; the Prince
laughed at her, and bid her take it; she cut her Mantle into so many small
shreds, as when tacked together by their ends, surrounded all this Curragh or
Downs.

Kildare is an ordinary Country-Town, not near so good as the Naas, though it
gives a Name to the County, and is an Episcopal see, though but of small
Revenues; and is now therefore united to the Deanery of Christ-Church, which is
the King's Royal Chapel in Dublin, as the Bishopric of Rochester is to the
Deanery of Westminster in England. It has in it the Cathedral Church, with two
or three Inns, and those very sorry ones; it has two Fairs yearly, and a weekly
Market, and sends two Burgesses to the Parliament; yet after all, it is but a
poor Place, not lying in any Road, and not having any Trade belonging to it;
there are some shops with Hops, Iron, Salt, and Tobacco, and the Merchant not
worth Forty Pound. This County gives the Title of Earl to one of the Family of
the Fitzgeralds, formerly called Geraldines, who came over into Ireland among
the first Adventurers in Henry the I^'s. Reig^; and is now the First Earl here,
as Oxford is with you; here we dined on a Dish of large Trouts, and with some
Bottles of Wine, made our selves merry; when we took Horse our Landlord told us
we must accept of a Dugh-a-Durras from him, which is a drink at the door; he
had a Bottle of Brandy under his Arm, and a little wooden Cup, with which he
presented each of us a Dram; from hence we went about two Miles backward
toward the Kings Country, to view the Earl of Kildare's Chair; It is an old
Castle built on the side of an Hill, which over-looks all the Neighboring
Country I was told it was built by some of the Earls of Kildare, as a Watch
Tower, for which purpose it was very well placed.

From hence we had a lovely Prospect toward the North, of a noble Vale, part
of which was covered with Corn, and part with Cattle, with some Woods; among
which were seen some Houses of good bulk and show, raising their Heads; beyond
these were Hills, on which stood several great Houses, a fine River ran through
the V^lley; on another side the greatest part of the Curragh lay open to our
View, which indeed is a noble Plain.

After we had satisfied our Eyes with staring about, we steered our Course
toward the Bogg of Allen; which, though it be the greatest in Ireland, yet never
was so famous as in the last Rebellion, where the Rapparees (who are a loose
undisciplined People) had their Rendezvous when they designed any Mischief on
the Country, to the number of five or six hundred, and where they easily hid
themselves when pursued; for as I am informed, this Bogg is near fifty Miles
long, with many Woods in it, and some Islands of very good and profitable Land;
as the Island of Allea, which they say is worth eight hundred Pounds per Annum.

Madam, His Majesty, for Encouragement to breed large and serviceable Horses in
this Kingdom, has been pleased to give an hundred Pounds per Annum out of his
Treasury here, to buy a Plate, which they run for at the Curragh in September;
the Horses that run, are to carry twelve Stone each; and therefore there are
several fine Horses kept hereabouts for the Race, in Stables built on purpose.
There is another Race yearly ran here, in March or April, for a Pla^e of an
hundred Guinea's; which are advanced by the Subscription of several Gentlemen,
and the Course is four measured Miles.

Madam, on Thursday the 13 th of September, was the day of the Race this Year
for the King's-Plate. There was a vast concourse of People to see it, from all
parts of the Kingdom. My Lord Galway (one of the Lords Justices) was present at
the Race, and other Persons of great Quality. I met on the Curragh (where the
Race was run) with my worthy Friend, Mr. Searl, whose Character you have in my
Dublin Farewell, and several others that I knew in Dublin; after the Race was
over, our Company rid to Ballimany; at this Village is a little thatched House,
like one of our English Country Houses, built by the Earl of Mead, After we
had seen all the Rooms in this Noble Man's thatcht House (which I design to
describe in my Summer Ramble) we left Ballimany, and did'd that day at the
Naas, and reached Dublin about nine in the Evening.

But (Madam) if the Predictions of Astrologers be true, such Men as I am, are
very Mercurial Folks, I mean the Planet, not the Mineral: For (Madam) you that
know me, will believe I never had any great occasion for it; I had not been
long in Dublin before the Itch of Rambling broke out again upon me, though I
once thought the Fatigue of my Curragh-Ramble would have abated the sharpness
of it, as effectually as Brimstone and Butter does that in the Skin; but what is
bread in the Bone, will never out of the Flesh; and I among the other Sons of
Adam, am in a literal Sense born to great Travels; and some People are surely
so much delighted with the Variety of change, that like other Epicureans, they
will purchase the fancied Pleasure through thousands of Difficulties that
attend the acquisition: Not impertinent to this, is what I remember to have
read in the celebrated Mr. Boil, of one who was born blind, because of the
adhesion of her Eyelids; and her Parents living far in the Country, from any
Physicians or Surgeons, thought her Mallady incurable, until the time she was
about Eighteen years old; when, being called to London about some business
likely to require a long Attendance, he brought his blind Daughter, with the
rest of his Family, to Town; where the Union of her Eyelids being separated by
a Surgeon's Lancet, she immediately perceived a thousand pleasing Objects; she
beheld every Minute, new things with Admiration; and not satisfied with seeing,
as soon as she could conveniently go abroad, she was every day on the Ramble,
as if she intended to make up for the losses she suffered by her former
darkness: and when she became acquainted with the Objects of the Town, she
begged leave to roam about the Country, not without Expressions of some
Inclinations to satisfy her Eyes with a view of all the World could afford
her. Of this Girls Humor my Landlord found me; for now (after I had settled the
Affairs of my Auction) I traveled East, West, North, and South; and (Madam)
should I tell ye what Irish Cities, Towns, and Villages I ^ext saw, I should
lead you such a Wild-goose Chase, I should tire ye quite, but not my self, for
I am never weary with traveling. But (as much as I love rambling) I have just
now received a Letter from Valeria (crowded with desires to see me) which will
shorten my Ramble, some thousand Miles. I Will see but Europe, Asia, Africa,
America, or so, dat is all, and be in London by Plato's year; not but I Am a
huge lover of Travels, and would gladly view the Globe Celestial too (as I
told the ingenious D -- ne) before I return; I mean climb so high as to hang my
Hat upon one horn of the Moon, and touch the North Pole with my Middle Finger.
But (seeing you admire I ramble thus) let me go down from the Moon a little, to
tell your Ladyship, that had you but seen Italy, (and those other Countries I
am bound to) you would rather envy then pity my rambling Fate.

Alas! Madam, to change my Bed, troubled not me, for I could sleep contentedly
in America, Ireland, Wales, etc. or in any place; for if I had the hardest
Lodging, I could dream of my Valeria with as much Satisfaction, as if I had
been sleeping on a Bed of Down; and when I awake, I please my self with
thinking that in a little time I shall see her again: And wherever I ramble,
I Am still content, for there is a wheel within a wheel, and nothing comes to
pass by chance.

As to my very Auctions, if things went prosperously: there, I looked upon it
as an effect of Divine Favor, and returned God the Praise; if otherwise, it
put me on Examining my self, and humbling of my Soul before my Maker; and I
look on all cross Accidents as Trials of my Patience. And indeed, still upon
self-Reflections, I rather wonderd that things went so well, than found my self
concerned they went no better.

When Patrick took my Auction Room over my Head, it was for him that I was
troubled most; that he should deal so barbarously with one that never gave him
any cause for it; I was well satisfied in my own Innocence, and thought I was
concerned to make the World so, by letting of 'em know the Truth (...) things;
and then to leave the issue to that Wise Providence that best knows how to
order all things for his Glory and my Good.

You may suppose perhaps (Madam) there are no Beggars in Dublin, since I have
all this while been so silent, and said nothing of Almsgiving; but assure your
self (Madam) to the contray; for to the best of my knowledge, I never saw them
so thick any where else, in the whole course of my Life; and how to carry my
self in respect to these Wretches, has been a matter which often disturbed me;
to give unto all, is impossible; for a Man then must be richer than Croesus;
and not to give at all, is Unchristian; but the main Difficulty lies in the
right distribution* and to relieve those who are most necessitous; but who can
know this? For I have heard Bishop Hall say (he that was Bishop of Oxford) that
once walking through Moorfields, a Beggar followed him with great
Importunities, and desired him for Christ's sake to give him something, for he
was ready to starve; the Bishop (not thinking him a fit Object for Charity)
told him, if he refused to give him any thing, he believed he would Curse him; no,
said the Beggar, indeed Sir I will not; well then, said the Bishop, I Will try thee
for once; upon which the Beggar fell a Cursing and Swearing at him like a very
Devil. -- Madam, when I meet with such vile Beggars as these, I serve 'em as
the Bishop did; but I am (Madam) if I don't flatter my self, naturally
Compassionate, easily affected with the Miseries of other Men in any kind, but
much more when I see old Age go a Begging; and it is such that have been the
principal Objects of my Charity; and next to them, the Blind. I never conceive
the Beggar-man the more necessitous, by being the more importunate and
querilous; and of this sort no Man, I believe, has been attended with a much
greater Train: Indeed I have heard your old Eleemosinaries, who have been
trained up to the Trade from their younger years, (as I am satisfied many have
been, both in England and Ireland) can, by long Experience, and constant
Observation, readily distinguish, even in a Crowd of Men, a compassionate Face;
and will single him out, as I may say, to be the Object of their Importunities.
But after all, Madam, in matters of the distributions of Charity, the right
hand is not to know what the left does.

And now, Madam, having given you some Account of my Conversation in Ireland
(both in City and Country) and also given ye some HINTS of my several Rambles
in it, and what I observed in 'em. Perhaps you may think by this time, I have
seen enough of Ireland, to be able to give your Ladyship some general Character
of it: I confess, Madam, I am very bad at Descriptions, but a general Character
of the Dear Ioys being what I formerly promised the ingenious D -- ne, I shall
now send it to you (her other self) and hope your Goodness will be as willing
to pardon all my Mistakes in it, as hers would have been, had she lived to have
read what I here send ye. Then give me leave to tell ye in Rhyme, Off in the
Seas, and downfall of the Skies,
With Water compassed round, a Nation lies;
Which on the utmost Western Ocean hurled,
Fixes the Ne Plus ultra of the World.
Water the Bowels of this Land does clog,
Which the weak Sun converts into a Bogg.
The Sun, whose great and generous Influence
Does Life and Warmth to every Place dispense,
Overcome by the innate Venom of this Air,
Cannot draw it it but, but leaves the Poison there;
So true is what the Natives vainly boast,
No Poisonous thing lives on the Irish Coast;
Because their Air is with worse Poison filled;
So has a Toad been by a Spider killed.


Perhaps (Madam) you may think I am too Poetical, and may expect a more
particular Account of the Country and People where my Conversation at present
lies; so I shall now proceed to a Prose-Character of the Dear Ioys: And here I
shall give ye a g^^^pse of the C^untry; or, as it were, a general view of my
Irish Rambles. And, as an Irishman is a living Jest, 'twill be merry and
pleasant; but a little Mirth must be forgiven to a Traveller, who has little
else to keep him alive. -- Then to proceed to the Prose-Character of Poor
Teague; and here I must first acquaint ye, That the Gentleman who trip'd lately
to Ireland, calls it the Watering-Pot of the Planets; and the French have named
it, Le Pott de Chamber du Diable, the Devil's Piss-pot; seldom dry, but often
running over, as if the Heavens were a wounded Eye, perpetually weeping over
it. It Is said there is but one good thing in Ireland, and that is, the Wind, as
it is generally Westerly, and sits fair to carry one out of it; which makes good
the old saying, It Is an ill Wind blows no good.

Some of their Chief Cities are tolerably good, but most of them more Populous
than Rich ( Dublin excepted) for though they are thronged like Hives, yet being
for the most part Thieves and Drones, they rather diminish than increase their
Stock; and were it not for the honest English, and Strangers amongst them, I am
persuaded in process of time, they would be all starved; so that of all the Places
I have yet seen, give me Ireland to wonder at; for my part, I think it is a sort
of White Friars at large, and Dublin the Mint to it; here is nothing but
Roguery; in every street you pass, you will either meet with some highway
Tailor, or some Errant unsatisfied Pugg, that drinks nothing but wicked Sack.
But at Dublin they have a Recorder, (who at present is Mr. Handcock) who,
besides the Reputation that he has for his Knowledge of the Laws, has also
acquired that of a courageous and just Magistrate, impartially putting them in
Execution against lewd and wicked People, without regard to any degree of
Quality or Riches; Instances of which are frequently seen in his punishing
Swearers with Two Shillings for each Oath, according to a New Act of
Parliament; and setting insolvent Persons in the Stocks; and many of the
stroling courteous Ladies of the Town have, by his Orders, been forced to
expose their Lilly-white Skins down to the waste at a Carts tail; by which he
is become, at once, the fear and hatred of the Lewd, and Love and Satisfaction
of Sober Persons. Both Churchmen and Dissenters are joined in this noble work
of exposing Vice, and all little enough; for though Whores are whipped every
Sessions, (I saw seven but yesterday capering before the Beadle) yet the
Prostitutes here are such very Prostitutes, that I heard Mr. Y -- say ( an old
Fornicator in this City) that though he had spent his Estate on a Whore in
Dublin, that his Rival no sooner appeared, but she clung to the best Chapman.
In this case (to use a Term in my Auction Catalogue) he that bids most is the
Buyer; and if any difference arise, which the Gallants cannot decide, Miss lies
with both, rather then lose a Customer. So that you see Madam, such things as
Chastity, Wit, and good Nature, are only heard of here; such Virtues as
Temperance, Modesty, and strict Justice, (which your Ladyship possesses in so
high a degree) have the same Credit with the Beaus of Ireland, which the
Travels of Mandevil find with us. I do not hereby design any thing of the true
Gentry, or Nobility, amongst whom there are Persons of as great Valor as fair
Estates, as good Literatur^ and Breeding, and as Eminent* Virtues, as in any of
the most Polite Countries. But really, Madam, if you go into the Country, (as
far as Galway) they are as bad, if not ten times worse, then I relate 'em; for
the Men here even steal into the World (lying hickle-de pickle-dey, they are
half Bastards) and ever after Thieving is as natural to 'em as eating; and for
this Reason there is scarce a Town without a Pillory in it; Bellimany has one or
two; Carlow has two or three (I think the strongest I saw in Ireland) Kilkenny
I think as many; 'twas here I lost my Ring, my Gloves, and my very Comb; and
when I charge 'em with it, they cry, the Devil burn 'em, if they are Thieves;
and swear by Chreest and Shaim Patrick, that they never saw it. Madam, I
suppose you have heard of Irish Evidence? and I must say, a Carted Bawd is a
Saint to 'em. I lay at Kilkenny but four Nights, but here is such a Den of
Pickpockets, that I think the Thieves in Drogheda are Saints to 'em.

I saw in my Ramble to Kilkenny, that Enclosures are very rare amongst them;
much of their Land is reserved for Grazing and Pasturage; and there, indeed,
the Grass being very sweet, and holding a constant verdure, it is (as a late
Author observes) in many places so indented with Purling Brooks and Streams,
that their Meadows look like a new Green-Carpet bordered or fringed with the
purest Silver; yet Hay is a rarity amongst them, and would cost them more pains
than they can well afford, toward the making of it; therefore they seldom or
never trouble their Heads or Hands about it. And then for their Arrable Ground
(as the same Author observes) it lies most commonly as much neglected and
unmanured as the sandy Deserts of Arabia, or a ranting young Gallant's old
Bedridden Spouse.

Their Women generally are very little beholding to Nature for their Beauty,
and less to Art; one may safely swear, they use no Painting, or such like
Auxlliary Aids of Fucusses, being so averse to that kind of Curiosity; (though
they have as much need thereof as any I ever yet beheld) that one would think
they never had their Faces washed in their whole Lives.

As to their misshapen Legs (as a witty Gentleman expressed it) I Will lay them
aside, and next talk of their Courtships.

Amorous they are as Doves, but not altogether so chaste as Turtles, desiring
as much to be billing, and very frequently bringing forth Twins. as the others
hatch young ones by Pairs. There needs no great Ceremony or Courtship, for they
generally yield at first Summons.

The Men, as Birds of the same Nest and Feather, differ only in the Sex, not in
their good Humor and Conditions.

Bonny-Clabber and Mulahaan, alias sour Milk, and Choak-Cheese, with a Dish of
Potatoes boiled, is their general, Entertainment* to which add an Oa^cake, and
it compleats their Bill of Fare, unless they intend to show their excessive
Prodigality, and tempt your Appetite with an Egg extraordinary.

Thus Madam, have I given you a brief, but general Character of Ireland, which
I have intermixed with what I found by the Dear Ioys, and what I say of these, I
send to you as the Character of the better sort of ^eagues; for as for the Wild
Irish, What are they, but a Generation of Vermin? they have Impudence enough to
louse in the Highway. I have seen six Men at it together, and a Mile farther,
as many Women at the same sport; and what is yet more shameless, the Women were
half naked. It Is true, in the Infant Age, when the Innocence of Men did not
blush to show all that Nature gave 'em (indeed because they did no more then
that taught 'em) I should not have wondered at such sights; but considering the
Removes we are now from Adam, I could not but blush for 'em. If you peep into
forty Cabins ( they are as spacious as our English Hogsties, As was hinted
before, in p. 390.
but not so clean) you will scarce find a Woman with a Sm -- k to her Back, or a
Pettycoat can touch her Knee; and of Ten Children (for they are full of Brats,
for the reason I formerly hinted) not one has a shoe to his foot; and when one
laughs at their Nakedness ( as who can forbear that is flesh and blood) they
cry, fie! fie! English Mon, you see nothing but what ish her own. And these
Irish Parents are as proud as they are naked; and rather then dishonor (as
they call it) their Sons with a Trade, they suffer 'em to beg for their daily
bread; and for themselves, they are so lazy, that those of 'em that are not
Thieves (and of that number is scarce one in a thousand) they live by the
drudgery of their poor Wives.

But however careless they be of the Living, they are mightily concerned for
the Dead, having a Custom, of howling when they carry any one to Burial; and
screaming over their Graves, not like other Christians, but like People without
Hope: and sooner than this shall be omitted, they do hire a whole Herd of these
Crocodils to accompany the Corpse; who with their counterfeit Tears and Sighs,
and confused Clamor and Noise, do seem heartily to bemoan the departed Friend;
though all this is with no more concern and reality, than an Actor on the
Theater for the feigned Death of his Dearest in a Tragedy. Instead of a Funeral
Oration, they bawl out these or the like querulous Lamentations, O hone! O
hone! Dear Joy, why did thou dye and leave us? Had thou not Pigs and a
Potato Garden? Had thou not some Sheep and a Cow, Oat-cake, and good
vsquebaugh to comfort thy Heart, and put Mirth upon thy Friends? Then,
wherefore would thou leave this good World, and thy poor Wife and Children? O
hone! O hone! with much more such stuff; to all which, Dear Joy, lending but a
deaf Ear, sleeps on till Doomesday; while home they go to Drink, and drown the
present Sorrow; till the Melancholy fit comes upon them afresh, and then they
resort to the Grave, and bedew it again with Tears; repeating and howling their
O hones with as much deep Sense and Sorrow as before.

They have many other extravagant Customs daily practiced at their Weddings and
Christnings; but I reserve these for my Summer Ramble* so I Will conclude their
Character with only saying, They are a nest of disarmed, lewd, lousie, lazy
Rebels, that have a Will, though not the Power, to cut our Throats.

I should next speak of their Priests (fit Shepherds for such Wolves) but you will
meet 'em often in my Malhide Ramble, with my Conferences with 'em; so I Will drop
'em here; but will send ye a further Account of my Summer Ramble by the next
Post: For, Madam, my Mind is always with you, and my Dear Friends in England,
though at present I am in the Country of Wrath and Vengeance; but my Ink is too
clean for a further Description. Yet Madam, if you would see the Picture of Poor
Teague more at large, I Would refer you to a Book called, The Description of
Ireland, that Ingenious Author being the Person I so often quote in this
Character of the Dear Ioys. Thus (Madam) by what I ha'e said, you see what an
excellent Country Ireland is for a young Traveller to be first seasoned in; for
let him but view it as much as I did, and I dare undertake he shall love all
the rest of the World much better ever after, except Scotland and France; of
which more when I get thither.

If you ask, Why I stay in such a vile Country? Why, Madam, he that is in a Boat
with the Devil, must land where, and as soon as he can; however, I Will stay till
you answer this; and then, Hoa! for Scotland, France, Italy, and next the
Hellespont; (for my Geography is now rectified by my learned Friend;) and it is
very likely the length of my Ramble will exceed the size of my Hourglass:
However, -- All may have,
If they dare try a glorious Life or Grave.
Herb. Chapter Porch.


And (if I hear Valeria's well) I care not whether I meet the Sun at his
Rising, or at his going See more of this in the Dublin Scuffle. p. 142.
down. All Places are alike distant from Heaven; and that a Man's Country where
he can meet a Friend. Thus Madam, (when it is my Duty) you see I can ramble in
earnest.

Madam, having now dispatched the Character of the Dear Ioys, and troubled you
with a thousand other Impertinencies, (that I may still keep within the bounds
of my Conversation) I Will proceed in the last place, to give you an account of
the parting Visits I made when I left Ireland, and with those conclude this
long and tedious Letter.

Madam, in these parting Visits, I had the Happiness of being accompanied by my
two Friends, Mr. Wild, and Mr. Larkin; I have already given you a brief
Character of Mr. Larkin; and it would be unjust not to give you Mr. VVilde's,
who has deserved so good a one from me, by his faithful managing my Auction.
Mr. VVilde (Madam) was born a Gentleman, being descended from an Ancient Family
in Herefordshire, and brought up to learning till he was fit for the
University; but his Inclination leading him rather to a Trade, he was bound an
Apprentice to George Sawbridge, Esquire the greatest Bookseller that has been in
England for many years, as may sufficiently appear by the Estate he left behind
him; for (besides that he was Chosen Sheriff of London, and paid his Fine) he
left behind him four Daughters, who had each of 'em for their Portions, Ten
Thousand Pound apiece; and you may easily imagine, Madam, that serving a Master
who drove so great a Trade, he could not fail of understanding Books, without
he was greatly wanting to himself: Which he was so far from being, that I need
not make any scruple to a^^irm, That there are very few Booksellers in England
(if any) that understand Books better then Richard VVilde: Nor does his
Diligence and Industry come short of his Knowledge; for he is indefatigably
Industrious in the dispatch of Business; of which his managing my Auction, is a
sufficient Proof: He far exceeded even my Expectation, and gave the Buyers too,
such great Content, that had I not seen, I could hardly have believed it. Nor
does his Talent lie in knowing Books only, but he knows Men as well too; and
has the Honor to be personally known to very many of the Nobility and Gentry
of the first Rank, both in England and Ireland; and there is scarce a Bookseller
in Dublin but has a Kindness for him. If any thing hates him, it is the Fair
Sex, for his living so long a Bachelor; but they might excuse him, for he is
too busy to think of Love, and too honest to Marry for Money; and I believe
scorns to creep (for it is beneath a Man to whine like a Dog in a Halter) to the
greatest Fortune in Dublin; not but Wild is of a courteous affable Nature, and
very obliging to all he has to do withal; and it is visible by his Carriage, he
was bred (as well as born) a Gentleman. He had a good Estate to begin the World
with, but has met with Losses; yet when his Stars were the most unkind (as was
confessed in my hearing by his raving Enemy) he was still as honest as ever; and
being always just in his Dealings, he now, like the Sun (just come from behind
a Cloud) shines brighter and fairer then ever: Some Men are only Just whilst
the World smiles; but when it frowns, they act such little Tricks, as renders
their Virtue suspected. But VVilde ever preserved his Integrity, and is the
same good Man under all Events; and as he was ever just in his Dealings, so I
must say his Universal Knowledge in Books render him a fit Companion for the
best Gentleman; and his great Sobriety, a fit Companion for the nicest
Christian; and to add to his Reputation, Where^s a greater VVilliamite in the
three Kingdoms, then Richard VVilde? Madam, he has done such Eminent Service to
the present Government, that he cannot in time but meet with an ample Reward;
and it is but just to think he should be preferred, for he is a true lover of his
Majesty, and the present Government; and a strenuous Asserter of the Rights and
Liberties of the People, and the Protestant Religion, in opposition to Popery
and Slavery; and this he has been from his Youth; insomuch that for showing his
Zeal in these things, even while he was an Apprentice, the Tories and Iacobites
(by way of derision) called him Protestant Dick. And by his Management of my
Auction, he has given, both to my self and others, such a Specimen of his
Judgment, and great Fidelity, that the Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of
Clogher has done him the Honor (in his Letter to me) to tell me he is
extremely satisfied As may be seen in p. 52. of the Dublin Scuffle.
in Mr. Wilde's Fidelity. I do assure you, Madam, I am so well satisfied in his
Conduct herein, that were I to keep an Auction as far as Rome it self, Mr.
Wild should be the sole Manager. But tho Mr. VVilde really merits the
Character I here give him, yet he being one whom I conversed so much with in
Dublin (which my Inclination would have led me to, if my Business had not) he
also is one of St. Patrick's Kennel of Scoundrels; by which you may also know
what to think of St. Patrick, whose Characters run counter to the Sentiments of
all honest Gentlemen. And yet even in this Patrick is true to himself, and
hereby declares he hates Honesty and Ingenuity, wherever he finds it.

But Madam, I fear you will think me too long in my Character of Mr. Wild; and
I fear so too, with respect to your Ladyship; though as to himself, I have not
yet done him that Justice he deserves from me; and therefore must remain in his
Debt, till I publish my Summer Ramble.

But I Will now proceed to the Account of my parting Visits; the first of which,
was rather an Invitation, than a Visit; to the House of Dr. Phoenix, who
invited my self and three of my Friends, to wit, Mr. Wild, Mr. Larkin, and Mr.
Price, to Dinner. He lives in that part of the City which is called St. Thomas
Court; and is a peculiar Liberty belonging to the Earl of Mead: We found the
Doctor Discoursing with the Dean of Killalloo, who Dined with us: At our first
coming, the Doctor saluted us all in a very obliging manner; but was pleased to
pay me a most particular Respect, in regard (as he expressed it) that I had so
much obliged the Nation in general, and himself in particular, by bringing so
large a Collection of valuable Books into the Kingdom.

After this first greeting, the Doctor had us into his Laboratory, and there
showed us his Stills, and several great Curiosities. Before Dinner we had some
Conversation with the Dean about the Power of Imagination; and the Dean told us
he knew a Man at Barnet, near London, about Forty years ago, that professed to
have a constant Converse with the Dead; affirming, that while he was
discoursing with others, he was at the same time conversing with the Dead. This
Man would utter many strange Expressions of his Discourses with dead People,
and pretended by this Converse, to tell things done at that Moment a vast
distance off, which afterward, upon Enquiry, proved true. But Dinner then
coming up, put an end to our Conversation, and found us other Business to do,
then to talk of melancholy People.

After Dinner, the Doctor's Lady told us this Remarkable Story: That some years
since, having been delivered of a fine Girl, two Ladies that were then the
Doctor's Patients, desired the Baptising of the Child might be deferred till
they were able to go abroad, because they had a mind to stand Gossip^ to it.
But the two Ladies not being well enough to go abroad, so soon as they thought
at first, a Months time was passed since the Birth of the Child, all which time
it remained unchristen'd. But one day, as the Doctor's Lady was in her Chamber,
looking for something which she wanted in a Press, on a sudden she cast her
Eyes back, and saw sitting down in a Chair, an Uncle of hers, which had been
dead several years; at which being somewhat surpised, she a^k'd him how he
did? And he, on the contrary, asked her, What was the reason she did not
christen the Child? She told him it was because her Husband promised two Ladies
should be Gossips to it, and they were both yet indisposed, and could not come.
The Spectrum then called her to come to him, which she accordingly did, and he
embraced her in his Arms, and kissed her naked Bosom, which she said she felt
extreme cold: He then asked, her where her Husband was? And she told him where.
After which, he charged her to let the Child be christened the next day at three
a Clock (...) ^he Afternoon; and then went away, she knew not how. When the
Doctor came home, his Lady told him what she had seen, and desired the Child
might be Christened, according to the Charge given by the Spectrum; but the
Doctor was Unbelieving, and still resolved to defer it till the two Ladies
could come to be Gossips. But the time prefixed by the Spectrum being past, and
the Child not Christened, that Night the Bed-Cloaths were attempted to be
pulled off, she crying out to the Doctor for help, who pulled the Clothes up
with all his Strength, and had much ado to keep 'em on, his Wife in the mean
time crying out grievously that somebody pinched her. And the next Morning,
viewing of her Body, they found she was pinched black and blue in several
places. This did not yet prevail with the Doctor, to have his Child Christened
till the two Ladies could come to be Gossips. But a day or two after, when the
Doctor was again abroad, and his Lady alone in her Chamber, there appeared to
her another Spectrum in the likeness of her Aunt (who had been dead near 20
years before) with a Coffin in her hand, and a bloody Child in the Coffin,
asking her in a threatening manner, Why the Child was not Christened? She replied
( as she had done to her Uncle before) that her Husband delayed it on the
Account of two Gossips which could not yet come. Whereto the Spectrum (with a
stern Countenance) said, Let there be no more such idle Excuses, but Christen
the Child to Morrow, or it shall be worse for you, and so disappeared. The Lady
all in Tears tells the Doctor of the Threatening of this She-Spectrum, and
prevails with him to have it Christened the next day; and in three days after,
the Child was over-lay'd by the Nurse, and brought home in a Coffin all bloody,
exactly like that which was shown her by the last Spectrum. The Doctor
confirmed that part of the Story which related to him; and as to the Spectrums,
his Lady aver'd before my self, Mr. Wild, Mr. Larkin, who was present at these
Relations, is now living in Hand-Ally in Bishops-gate-street.
Mr. Larkin, and Mr. Price, that what she related, was nothing but Truth. The
Doctor (after the Story was ended) made this Inference from it, That the
Baptizing of Infants was an Ordinance of God, or else it had not been so much
in^ul^ated by two Persons or Spirits risen from the Dead. But my Friend Mr.
Larkin replied to the Doctor, that he was of a quite contrary Opinion, and said
it was a great Argument against Infant Baptism, that the Devil was so earnest
to have it done. And when they both referred the Matter to the Dean, he put it
off, by saying. We had some Discourse before Dinner of the Power of
Imagination, and this seems to be some of the Effects on it.

After this Discourse was ended, Dr. Phoenix caused a Robbin-red-breast (which
he had in a Cage) to be brought into the Dining Room; where it entertained us
whilst at Dinner, with singing and talking many pleasant things; as sweet Lady,
Is the Packet come? What News from England? and several such Expressions which
the Doctor's Lady had taught it. The smalness of this Bird renders its talking
the more remarkable; and perhaps Madam, this Robin-red-breast is one of the
greatest Rarities in Ireland, if not in the whole World; and I believe Dr.
Phoenix thinks so; for (as small as this Bird is) he told me he would not sell it
for 20 Guinea's; and I do think, were it sold to the worth of its pleasant
Chat, 'twou'd yield a thousand.

After I had stayed the utmost Limits that my Time would allow me, I took my
leave of the Dean, and then returning the Doctor and his Lady Thanks for their
Kindness (both to my self and my Friends) we took our leave; the Doctor wishing
me a boon Voyage to England, and a good Journey to London. But the Doctor is a
worthy Person, and I cannot leave his House (...) I have given Character of him;
besides, his Civilities to (...) so many and gr^^, that not to acknowledg^
(...) (in a just Character of him) would be very (...); for he was a great
Encourager of my Auction, and a very generous Bidder. But to proceed to his
Character, Dr. Phoenix is a little Jolly black Man, but so very conscientious,
that he is as ready to serve the Poor for nothing, as the Rich for Money. His
great Skill in Physic has made him famous; and which renders him the more
Eminent, his Prescriptions are generally successful, and his Aurum Potabile
never fails. His wise Advice has rescued more languishing Patients from the
Jaws of Death, then Quacks have sent to those dark Regions; and on that score
Death declares himself a mortal Enemy to Dr. Phoenix; whereas Death claims a
Relation to mere Pretenders to Physic, as being both of one Occupation, viz.
That of killing Men. But tho his great Success makes Patients throng to him,
yet is he a modest, humble, and very good Man, as appears by this; at his first
coming to a sick Man, he persuades him to put his trust in God, the Fountain of
Health. The want of such seriousness has caused the bad success of many
Physicians; for they that will not acknowledge God in their Applications, God
will not acknowledge them in that Success which they might otherwise expect. I
would be larger in the Doctor's Character, but after all, must come short of
it; so will add no more about him, but shall now attempt his Ladys Character,
of whom I might say many pretty things; but (Madam) I fear I shall tire you;
however, I say 'em all in little, by only telling your Ladyship, that the
Person I Would here describe, is Doctor Phoenix's Wife, I say, Madam, it is Praise
enough to say, she is Dr. Phoenix's Wife, and that she merits so good a
Husband. Then let the learned World debate as long as they please about the
Nonsuch Bird, this Lady proves (by her great Virtues) that in Dublin (if no
where else) is to be seen a She-Phoenix.

Leaving Dr. Phoenix's House, our next Visit was to the College of Dublin,
where several worthy Gentlemen ( both Fellows and others) had been great
Benefactors to my Auction: When we came to the College, we went first to my
Friend Mr. Young's Chamber; but he not being at home, we went to see the
Library, which is over the Scholars Lodgings the length of one of the
Quadrangles; and contains a great many choice Books of great Value,
particularly one, the largest I ever saw for breadth; 'twas an Herbal,
containing the lively Portraictures of all sorts of Trees, Plants, Herbs, and
Flowers: By this Herbal lay a small Book, containing about 64 Pages in a Sheet,
to make it look like the Giant and the Dwarf. There also (since I have
mentioned a Giant) we saw lying on a Table, the thighbone of a Giant,) or at
least, of some monstrous overgrown Man, for the Thigh Bone was as long as my
Leg and Thigh; which is kept there as a convincing Demonstration of the vast
bigness which some humane Bodies have in former times arrived to. We were next
showed by Mr. Griffith, a Master of Art (for he it was that showed us these
Curiosities) the Skin of one Ridley, a notorious Tory, which had been long ago
Executed; he had been begged for an Anatomy; and being flayed, his Skin was
tanned, and stuffed with Straw; in this passive state he was assaulted by some
Mice and Rats, not sneakingly behind his Back, but boldly before his Face,
which they so much further Mortified, even after Death, as to eat it up; which
loss has since been supplied by tanning the Face of one Geoghagan, a Bopish
Priest, executed about six years ago, for stealing; which said Face is put in
the place of Ridley's.

At the East End of this Library, on the right hand, is a Chamber called the
Countess of Baths Library, filled with many handsome Folios, and other Books,
in Dutch Binding, guilt, with the Earls Arms impressed upon them; for he had been
sometime of this House; on the left hand, opposite to this Room, is another
Chamber, in which I saw a great many Manuscripts, Medals, and other Curiosities.

At the West End of the Library, there is a Division made by a kind of
wooden-Latice-work, containing about thirty p^ces, full of choice and curious
Books, which was the Library of that great Man, Archbishop Usher, Primate of
Armagh, whose Learning, and Exemplary Piety has justly made him the Ornament
not only of that College (of which he was the first Scholar that ever was
entered in it, and the first who took degrees) but of the whole Hibernian
Nation. At the upper end of this part of the Library, hangs at full length, the
Picture of Dr. Chalon^r, who was the first Provost of the College, and a Person
Eminent for Learning and Virtue. His Picture is likewise at the Entrance into
the Library; and his Body lies in a stately Tomb made of Alabaster. At the West
end of the Chapel. Near Dr. Chaloner's Picture (if I don't mistake) hangs a
new Skeleton of a Man, made up and given by Dr. Gwither, a Physician of careful
and happy Practice, of great Integrity, Learning, and sound Judgment, as may be
seen by those Treatises of his, that are inserted in some late Philosophical
Transactions. Thus (Madam) have I given ye a brief Account of the Library,
which at present is but an ordinary Pile of Building, and cannot be
distinguished on the outside; but I hear they design the building of a New
Library: And I am told, the Hoose of Commons in Ireland have voted 3000 l.
toward carrying it on.

After having seen the Library, we went to visit Mr. Minshul, (whose Father I
knew in Chester) Mr. Minshul has been Student in the College for some time, and
is a very sober, ingenious Youth; and I do think is descended from one of the
most courteous Men in Europe. (I mean Mr. John Minshul, Bookseller in Chester.)
After a short stay in this Gentleman's Chamber, we were led by one Theophilus,
(a good natured sensible Fellow) to see the New-house, now building for the
Provost; which when finished, will be very noble and magnificent.

After this, Theophilus showed us the Gardens belonging to the College, which
were very pleasant and entertaining. Here was a Sun-Dyal, on which might be
seen what a Clock it was in most parts of the World. This Dyal was placed upon
the top of a Stone, representing a Pile of Books. And not far from this was
another Sun-Dyal set in Box, of a very large compass, the Gnomoh of it being
very near as big as a Barber's Poll. Leaving this pleasant Garden, we ascended
several steps, which brought us into a curious Walk, where we had a Prospect to
the West of the City, and to the East of the Sea and Harbor* On the South we
could see the Mountains of Wicklow, and on the North, the River Liff^e, which
runs by the side of the College. Madam, having now (and at other times)
thoroughly surveyed the College, I shall here attempt to give your Ladyship a
very particular Account of it; it is called Trinity College, and is the sole
University of Ireland; it consists of three Squares, the outward being as large
as both the inner* one of which, of modern building, has not Chambers on every
side, the other has; on the South side of which stands the Library, the whole
length of the Square. I shall say nothing of the Library here (having already
said something of it) so I proceed to tell ye, Madam, tha^ the Hall and
Butteries run the same range with the Library, and separates the two inner
squares; it is an old building, as also the Regent^house which from a Gallery
looks into the Chapel, which has been of late years enlarged, being before too
little for the number of Scholars, which are now, with the Fellows, etc.
reckoned about 340; they have a Garden for the Fellows, and another for the
Provost, both neatly kept; as also a Bowling green, and large Parks for the
Students to walk and exercise in. The Foundation consists of a Provost (who at
present is the Reverend Dr. Georg^ Brown, a Gentleman bred in this House since
a Youth, when he was first entered, and one in whom they all count themselves
very happy; for he is an Excellent Governor, and a Person of great Piety,
Learning, and Moderation) seven Senior Fellows, of whom two are Doctors in
Divinity; eight Iuniors, to which one is lately added by -- and seventy
Scholars; their public Commencements are at Shrovetide, and the first Tuesday
after the eighth of July. Their Chancellor is his Grace the Duke of Ormond;
since the death of the Right Reverend the late Bishop of Mead, they have had
no Vice Chancellor, only pro re nata. The University was founded by Queen
Elizabeth, and by her and her Successors largely endowed, and many munificent
Gifts and Legacies since made by several other well-disposed Persons; all whose
Names, together with their Gifts, are read publicly in the Chapel every
Trinity Sunday in the Afternoon, as a grateful acknowledgement to the Memory of
their Benefactors; and on the 9th of January, 1693. (which completed a Century
from the Foundation of the College) they celebrated their first secular day,
when the Provost, See his Character in my farewell to Dublin.
Dr. Ash, now Bishop of Clogher, Preached, and made a notable Entertainment for
the Lords Justices, Privy Council, Lord Mayor and Aldermen of Dublin. The
Sermon Preached by the Provost, was on the Subject of the Foundation of the
College, and his Text was, Mat. xxvi. xiii. Verily I say unto you, Wheresoever
this Gospel shall be Preached in the whole World, there shall also this that
this Woman has done, be told for a Memorial of her; which in this Sermon the
Provost applied to Queen Elizabeth, the Foundress of the College: The Sermon
was Learned and Ingenious, and afterward Printed by Mr. Ray, and dedicated to
the Lords Justices, who at that time were, the Lord Henry Capel, Sir Cyril
Wiche, and William Duncomb, Esquire In the Afternoon, there was several Orations in
Latin spoke by the Scholar^, in Praise of Queen Elizabeth, and the succeeding
Princes: And an Ode made by Mr. Tate (the Poet Laureat) who was bred up in this
College. Part of the Ode was this following;

I.
Great Parent, hail! all hail to thee;
Who have the last Distress survived,
To see this Joyful day arrived;
The Muses second Jubilee.
II.
Another Century commencing,
No decay in thee can trace,
Time, with his own Law dispensing,
Adds new Charms to every Grace,
That adorned thy youthful Face.
III.
After Wars Alarms repeated,
And a Circling Age completed,
Numerous offspring thou do raise,
Such as to Juverna's Praise,
Shall Liffee make as proud a Name,
As that o, Isis or of Cham.
IV.
Awful Matron, take thy Seat
To celebrate this Festival;
The Learned Assembly well to treat,
Blessed Eliza's Days Re call:
The Wonders o^ her Reign Recount,
In (...) that Phoeous may surmount,
Songs for P^oe^us to repeat.
She it was that did at first inspire,
And tune the mute Hibernian Lyre.
V.
Succeeding Princes next recite,
With never dying Verse requite
Those Favors they did shower:
It Is this alone can do ^em Right;
To save 'em from Oblivion's Night,
Is only in the Muses Power.
VI.
But chiefly recommend to Fame,
MARIA, and Great WILLIAM's Name,
Whose isle to Him her Freedom owes:
And surely no Hibernian Muse
Can her Restorers ^raise refuse,
While Boyn and Shannon flows.
After this Ode had been sung by the Principal Gentlemen of the Kingdom, there
was a very diverting Speech made in English by the Terra Filius. The Night
concluded with Illuminations, not only in the College, but in other Places.
Madam* this day being to be observed but once in an hundred years, was the
Reason why I troubled your Ladyship with this Account.

H^ving Re^arded Theophilus for his readiness to show us the Gardens, and we
took our leave of the College; and from thence I went (Mr. W^lde and Mr. ^arkin
^eing still with me) to take my leave of the Honorable Colonel Butler of St.
Stephen' s Green, to whom I was greatly obliged, both as he was a great
Encou^ager of my, Auction, and as I had all along his Countenance and Favor in
it, especially when there was some Persons that had a mind to (...) and banter
my Auction; but by this worthy Gentleman's appearing against 'em, and resenting
the Affront as done to himself, they quickly cried Pecav^. Madam, it would be
too great Presumption in me to attempt this Gentleman's Character, for I should
but dim the luster of his brighter Virtues, by all that I could write. But the
noble Favors I received from Colonel Butler, oblige me to a public
Acknowledgment; though all I can say of him, will be like losser Maps of the
large world, ( where every Prick sets down some ample Shire, and every Point's
a City.) His brave and generous Soul is so well known, that it is but wasting of
time to tell it; then where can I begin, or where shall I end? Should I s^eak
of his Learning, I might c^ll him the Mec^enus oo I^eland; for the B^oks he
buys do by their number sufficiently declare his Love to Learning; (...) by
their Value and intrinsic Worth, the va^^ness of his Judgment: Neither is he
less remarkable for his affable Carriage, his sweet and obl^ging Disposition,
his large Charity, his singular Humility, Justice, Temperance, and Moderation;
and I do believe his noble Seize in the Art o^ (...) has no parallel in
the Kingdom of Ireland. Madam, I would proceed in the Colonels Charect^r* but
I fear his Great Modesty will make ^im think I say too much, tho I am very sure
all that know him will think I say too little

When we came to the Colonels House he received me (and my two Friends) in a
most ^^^iging manner; after our first Salutations, ^he had us ^^to his
Dinning-room, hung round with curious P^ctures, all of his own drawing; some of
which were King Edward the vith* the Lady Jane Gray, the two Charles's, King
William and Queen Mary, with others which I now forgot: When we were all
seated, the Colonel told me he took my coming to see him very kindly, and that
if he came to London, he would do himself the Honor of repaying my Visit. We
next fell to discourse of the Auctions I made in Dublin, and here the Colonel
was pleased to say: I had been a great Benefactor to the Kingdom of Ireland, by
bringing into it so large a quantity of good Books. I thanked him for the
Honor he did me by that Expression; and further added, that if all my Buyers,
had been so generous as himself, my Venture had been very fortunate. This
Discourse about my Auction, naturally led us to talk of Patrick Campbel (the
grand Enemy to it) and after I had told the Colonel what Treatment I had from
Campbel, he said I had just Reason to vindicate my self; and that he believed
there never was a fairer Auction then mine, or a better Auctioneer then Mr.
Wild; and therefore, Madam, I dedicate the Dublin-Scuffle to Colonel Butler,
as a generous Protector of an injured Stranger: Upon the taking my leave of the
Colonel, he expressed himself very sorry that I was leaving the Country, and
said, If ever I returned with a second Venture, he would Encourage it all he
could; for this I returned him my humble Thanks, confessing my unworthiness of
those many Favors I had received from him. Then taking my final leave, he gave
me that endearing Salutation, which is the great Expression of kindness among
the Gentlemen of Ireland; after this tender Favor, he honored me so far, as
to s^y, he should be wishing for Westerly Winds (for my sake) till he heard I
was landed; and so with wishing (Mr. Larkin and my self) a good Voyage, we
parted well satis^y'd in the Honor done us by the noble Colonel.

Madam, I told ye that Colonel Butler was very remarkable for his great
Humility, and generous Temper; and you see by his obliging Expressions to
Persons so much below him, how much he merits that no^le Character of being
humble; I call it so, as Pride lessens (or rather disgraces) Men of the highest
Rank, as much or more then it does others; and therefore it is, though Colonel
Butler is very eminent for every Virtue, yet if he excells in one more then
another, it is in his Great Humility; which further appears by his inviting me
often to see him, and (if I may be so proud to use his own Expression) in being
pleased with my Conve^ sation.

Having left the Collonel's House, we all three returned to our several
^^dgings. In our way thither, we went to take our leaves of the Reverend Mr.
Searl (at his House in Brides Alley) and of my worthy Friend Mr. Jones (as his
House in great Ship-street) but neither of 'em were at home; however, I had the
happiness of seeing Mr. Iones's Sister (a Person Eminent for her great Piety)
with whom I left a million of Thanks for all the Favors I received from him.
And here I parted with my two Friends (Mr. VVild and Mr. Larkin) and the next
day (it being the last for taking of Farewells) every one went as his Humor and
Fancy led him. And the first Ramble I took this Morning, was to take my
Farewell of Rings-End (where I had two or three good Friends) it is about a Mile
from Dublin, and is a little Harbor like your Graves-End in England; I had
very agreeable Company to Rings End, and was noblely treated at the Kings Head;
after an hours stay in this dear Place (as all Port-Towns generally are) I took
my leave of Trench, VVelsted, and two or three more Friends, and now looked
toward Dublin; but how to come at it, we no more knew then the Fox at the
Grapes; for though we saw a large strand, yet 'twas not to be walked over,
because of a pretty rapid Stream, which must be crossed; we inquired for a
Coach, and found no such thing was to be had here, unless by accident; but was
informed that we might have a Rings-End Carr, which upon my desire was called,
and we got upon it, not into it* It is a perfect Car with two Wheels, and
toward the back of it, a seat is raised cross ways, long enough to hold three
People; the Cushion we had was made of Patch-work, but of such course kind of
stuff, that we fancied the Boy had stolen some poor Beggars Coat for a
covering; between me and the Hor^e, upon the cross bars of the Carr, stood our
Charioteer, who presently set his Horse into a Gallop, which so jolted our
sides, though upon a smooth strand, that we were in Purgatory until we got off at
Lazy-hill, where I paid 4 d. for our fair of a Miles riding, and almost as
pleased as the young Gentleman that drove the Chariot of the Sun would have
been, to be rid of his Seat; however they are a great Convenience, and a Man
may go to Rings-End from Dublin, or from hence thither, with a Load of Goods,
for a Gro^t; and we were told, there are an hundred and more plying hereabouts,
that one can hardly be disappointed.

I parted with my Fellow Traveller in Essex-street, and from thence I went to
take my leave of my honest Barber, Mat. Read upon Cork-hill; and because I
found him a generous Lad, I will not leave him without a Character; He is a Man
willing to please, and the most genteel Barber I saw in Dublin, and therefore I
became his quarterly Customer; but as ready as he is to humor his Friends, yet
is he brisk and gay, and the worst made for a Dissembler of any Man in the
World; he is generous and frank, and speaks whatever he thinks, which made me
have a kindness for him; and 'twas not lost, for he treated me every quarterly
Payment, and was obliging to the last, being one of those dozen Men that
feasted me in Essex street, the Friday before I left Dublin; and that witnessed
to the Attestation concerning my Conversation. He has Wit enough, a great deal
of good Humor, and (though a Barber) Owner of as much Generosity as any Man in
Ireland. And if ever I visit Dublin again, Mat. Read (or in case of his Death)
his Heir and Successor, is the only Barber for me. And as for his Spouse (tho
her Face is full of Pock-holes, yet she is a pretty litt^e humored Creature,
and smiles at every word.

Having shook hand with honest Matt. I went next through Copper Alley to
Skinner-Row, for a parting glimpse of Brass and Patrick Campbel; for though they
had treated me ill (and that is the Reason why none but they, and (...) old
Usurer, have a block Cha^acter in the Dublin Scuffle) yet I had good Nature
enough (though not to discourse, yet) just to see 'em when I left Dublin. From
paying this silent farewell, I went to the Th^lsel, where I saw An Apo^hecary
in (...) Row.
Mr* Quin the present Lord Mayor for the City of ^ublin. Perhap^ Madam, you will
wonder that I should send ye so many Characters, and have yet omitted to send
the Character of a Person in such an Eminent Station; but the Reason was, I
stayed to be thoroughly informed, before I attempted the Character of my Lord
Mayor: But Madam, I am now able to give ye his true Character; and the least I
can say of his Lordship is, He Is a Person of great Justice and Integrity (as I
found in the Sea more of this in the Dublin Scuffle.
hearing I had before him) a courageous ^agistrate, and a true lover of his
King and Country; and has the love of all good Men: But there is no need of any
more then reading the Flying P^st of Feb. 16. 1699. to know him as well as it
he stood before us; for there it is said, Dublin Feb. 7. Our Citizens are
mightily pleased with the Lord Mayor, on the account of his Proceedings against
the Bakers, and relieving the Poor from their Oppressions; a Congratulatory
Poem has been lately Printed and presented to him; on this occasion: Thus far
the Flying Post, in which you see that Courage and Justice I told ye was so
Eminent in him. But this faithful discharge of his great Trust, is what the
Citizens of Dublin might expect from him; for Prudence and Piety have visibly
sh^^'d through all the Actions of his Life; and it is not Honor or Power alters
the Temper of a good Man; and therefore it is, since he has been chosen Lord
Mayor of the City of Dublin, that his Conduct is such, that he is not only a
Pattern fit to be imitated by all that shall hereafter succeed him, but in many
things 'twill be difficult for any to resemble him; and therefore no wonder the
Citizens of Dublin have fixed him in so large a Sphere of doing good; a private
Post was not large enough for the service Heaven designed by this active
Magistrate; nor a As was said of my Reverend Father-in-law, Dr. Annosly.
Hi^ high enough for the notice of one so Exemplary; and to render him the more
complete, 'this brave Soul of his has the happiness to live in a very beautiful
Tenement; and't had been pity i^ should have lived in any other. But I shall
stop here, for I had not the Honor to be personally known to his Lordship; so
I shall leave the Thol^e^ without any other Farewell then what I have given in
this Character; and from hence shall step to the Bull in Nicholas-street, to
take my leave of one who is called (what she really is) The Flower of Dublin;
no Citizen's Wife is demurer then this Person, as I found at the first
greeting* nor draws in her Mouth with a chaster Simper, and yet a virtuous good
Woman, and very obliging to all her Customers; and I left her, with some
regret: And next rambled to Cow-lane, to take my leave of the Lady Swancastle,
who is deservedly famous for her great Love to her Husband. Madam, a good Wife
is a good thing, and rarely to be found, said the wisest of mere Men; and we
have reason to believe him the rather, because (as In his History of Providence.
Mr. Turner says) The first Man, Adam, the strong Sampson, the Philosopher
Socrates, and many others, have been either overreach'd, or afflicted with
Women: But as many bad Wives as there are in the World, I do assure ye, Madam,
my Lady Swancastle is none of 'em; for she is an Honor to her Sex, and a
Comfort and Crown to her Husband; and perhaps the most generous Person to her
Friends in the World; of which, the noble Cordial she gave me that hour I left
Dublin (and many other Favors I received from her) do abundantly testify; and
though her Lord and she are Ancient, yet they Live as they have lived; still to
each other now;
And use those Names they did when they first knew.
Still the same Smiles within their Cheeks be read,
-- As were at first.
And may the day never come to see a change;
Let neither Time nor Age ever make 'em strange:
And as you first met, may you ever be,
George a young Man, and Chrit. a Girl to Thee.
What George, though you should seem like N^stor, old?
And Chrit* more years had, then Cumana told;
Times Snow you must not see, though it appears:
It Is good to ^now your ^ge, not count your years.


Madam, leaving this good Lady under much Grief, (for her Lord is going to Sea
with me) my next Visit was to Mr. Hamer, who (as well as my Lord Swancastle)
has met with a Suitable Wife, and both being of a sweet Temper, they live as
loving as t^o. Turtles; they lately gave me a splendid Treat, and with them I
eat my 'Twas then my Lord Swancastle gave me a noble Apple* if I could have
kept it; of which I have a pleasant Story to tell in my Summer Ramble.
Christmas Dinner; and therefore 'twas when I gave my To Mr. Bourn, Mr. Gee,
Mr. D^bbs, Mr. Servant, Mr. Dell, Mr. Penny, Mr. Tracy, ( alias Pat*) Mr.
Wild, Mr. Larkin, Mr. ^rice, and Mr. Robinson.
Farewell Supper, I thought it proper to invite Mr. Hamer and his Wife, as a
slender acknow^edgment of the Favors I received from 'em.

From Mr. Hamer's House I asked into Church-street, to take my leave of The
only Apothecary I made use of in Dublin.
Mr. Constantine, but ^ad not the happiness to see him; (perhaps he was not
returned from England) however, Madam, I shall here give ye his In return for
the Visits he made me, during my Illness.
Character; and seeing I did not see him, I desire it may pass as my Farewell
to him; and the least I can say of Mr. Constantine is, that He Is a very
conscientious Man; I speak this from my own Experience; for when I sent for the
Bill of the Physic I had of him, I found it the most reasonable I ever met
with (except Who in his Bill of 501. (for Physic given to my first Wife) used
me so very honestly, that I could not desire him to 'bate a farthing.
Mr. Crows, an Apothecary in Leaden-hall-street;) and just such ^ fair Dealer
is ^ r. Constantine; and which adds further to his Reputation, he is a Man that
thoroughly understands his Trade; he is as intimate with Willis and Harvey (at
least with their Works) as ever I was with Richard Wild; and is as well
acquainted with the London Dispensatory, as I am with my own Name. He is so
conversant with the great Variety of Nature, that not a Drug or Simple escapes
his Knowledge; their Power and Virtues are known so well to M^. Constantine,
that he need not practice new Experiments upon his Patients, except it be in
desperate Cases, when Death must be expel d by Death. This also is
Praiseworthy in him, that to the Poor he always prescribes cheap, but wholesome
Medicines, not curing them of a Consumption in their Bodies, and sending it
i^to their Purses; nor yet directing them to the East Indies to look for Drugs,
when they may have far better out of their Gardens. And which is admi^able in
him, when he Visits a Patient, his Presence is a sort of Cord^ al, for he is one
of a cheerful Temper; and sure I am, that Man is actually dying, that e'n't
revived to hear hun talk; he never speaks but it is to the purpose; and no Man
ever clothed his Words in sweeter Epithites. The Estate he has got by his
great Practice, has already prefer^'d him to be Sheriff of Dublin; and I don't
doubt but a few years will prefer him to the Honor of Lord May^r; and why not,
since one of the same Profession now fills the Chair?

Madam, I might enlarge in this ^entleman's Character, but this is my last
Visiting day, and the Farewells I Have yet to make, will not allow it; but they that
would know Mr. Constantine further, may see a living Picture of him every day
in the Person of Mr. chambers; who, as he is his Brother by Trade, so equals
him (if any Man ever did) in all the Virtues of an accomplished Apothecary. But
the Sun had now strid the Horizon, so I stayed but a minute in Crane lane, and
next posted to Mr. Suda^s in Fishamble-street; I was often invited to come
hither, but cou^ d not do it till this day; when I came to Sudal's, I found his
Wife was a Kinswoman of Mr. Doolittles A No^conformist Minister in London.
, and one that I knew in London. Mr. Sudal is but a little Man in his Person,
but I see (by the Treat he gave me) that a great and generous Soul may dwell in
a little Tenement. And the least I can say of ^rs. Sudal is, she is an excellent
Housewife, has a great deal of ready Wit; and though taller then her spouse by
the H^ad and ^houlders, is other^ise a suitable Wife; but I think Mr. Sudal
deserves her, for he is a mighty obliging Husband, and very remarkable for the
punctual Performance of his Promise. It Is true, his Trade and Customers oblige
him more to time then other Dealers; but he is punctual more from a Principle
of Conscience then Interest; and indeed ^udal, if I belie ye here, I should
scarce think you a Christian. For as the Author of the Duty of Man says, p.
227. That sort of Debt which is brought upon a Man by his own voluntary
Promise, cannot without great Injustice be withheld; and he that dies in
such an Act of Injustice ( if this Author be in the right) dies in a state of
Damnation: For continues this Author, When a Promise is made, it is now the
^ans right; and then it is no matter by what means it came to be so. Therefore
we see David makes it part of the Description of a Just Man. Psalm. 15. 4. that
he keeps his Promise; yea, though they were made to his own disadvantage. And
surely he is utterly unfit to ascend to that Holy Hill there spoken of, either
as that signifies the Church here, or Heaven hereafter, that does not
punctually observe this part of Justi^e. Thus far the Duty of Man. And I find
Mr. ^udal'^ Life is conformable to the Notions of that great Man. And Mad^m,
this part of Justice ( I mean that of keeping of Promises) being likewise
agreeable to my own Sentiments, I could not but have an Esteem for him; I stayed
with him five hours, much of which time was spent in talking of Madam D -- and
the haughty Rachel (that Rachel I mentioned before) but at five I bid 'em
adieu; and next went to High street, to take my leave of an old Vs^rer. I wish
I could say any good of him, but I profess I cannot; so I think it proper to
conceal his Name. When I came to his House, I told Scrape all, I came to bid
him farewell; but this As Cowley calls the Miser.
Rich-poor-Man had not the Soul to ask me to eat or drink; so that I must say
(at parting) Mr. L is a Beggar of a fair Estate. I may say of his Wealth, as of
other Men's Prodigality, that it has brought him to this; another that knows the
right use of 200 ^. shall live (creditably, and) to b^^ter purpose then he with
his 10000 l. every ^ccession of a fresh 100 l. bates him so much of his
allowance, and brings him a degree nearer starving. Nay, Madam, I am told (by
Mr. Larkin that has known him long) that he is so very Covetous, that he had
been starved long since, had it not been for the free use of other Men's Tables.
It Is said Covetousness is the only Sin that grows young as Men gr^w old; and I
found it verified in this Wretch; who, tho^ worth 10000 l. the Clothes he had
on when I came to see him* were never young in the Memory of any; and he has
been known by 'em longer then his Face. Madam* for my part I am heartily
concerned for the poor Heir which will have the Estate; for the old Miser never
gave Alms in his whole Life, or did a generous Action; and every one thinks
^twill never prosper, but be rather as great a Curse to the Heir, as it is to
the present Possessor. Yet, to give the Devil his due, he is a^ charitable to
his Neighbor, as he is to himself; and rather then go to a Doctor (Mr. Larkin
says he is sure) he would dye to save Charges. He has but one Kinsman, who was
forced to wander to London to get Bread. He might have married a great Fortune,
would this Miser have drawn his Purse-strings; but he would do nothing for him
while he lived, though 500 l. given or ^ent him in his Lifetime, would have done
his Cousin more service then Ten Thousand after his Death. But I should starve
should I stay here, so I leave Sir Miser, to take my leave of a more generous
Friend; I mean the Ingenious Dr. Whaley (a great Benefactor to my three
Auctions.) When I came to the Doctor's House, I found he was gone out, perhaps
in search after Patrick Campbel, for put^ing of his Title to Cumpsty's
Almanac; but if Camphel would ask pardon, I believe the Doctor would soon
forgive him, for Doctor Whaley is a Man of a noble Spirit, and justly merits
the Esteem he has with ingenious Men. His Almanac bears the Bell from all the
rest in Ireland. I was very desirous to have seen the Doctor at leaving Dublin
(to thank him for all his Favors) but missing of him, I next rambled to Mr.
Carter's in Fishamble-street; I had but just time to bid Carter adieu, but will
say at parting, He Is a genteel honest Printer, is like to marry a Beauty, I
heartily wish him Courage, for faint Heart never won fair Lady; and he cannot
but conquer, for he is a witty Man, and charms a thousand ways; Having shook
hands with Mr. Carter, I went next to visit my Friend Sparlin in Damas-street,
He Is a very ingenious Man, and blessed with an excellent Wife^ He was gone to the
Custom-house, so I mist taking my leave of him, for which I was heartily sorty,
for he was my Fellow Traveller to Malhide, and I wanted to thank him for old
Favors, but 'twas not my luck to meet him at home; so I rambled next to the
Keys in High Street, where I met (by appointment) with Jacob Milner, and his
Man Shepherd. As to Jacob, he is a well-^^t handsome Man, and I shall treat him
civilly in my Summer Ramble, provided he grows humble, is very respectful to
Mr. Wild, and tells Camphel of his great Sin in Printing Hodder's Arithmetic
with Cocker's Title, and so exit Jacob to make way for his Man Shepherd, of
whom I shall only say, Trim Tram; for he bought Books at my Auction, and I
found him an honest Fellow, and there is an end on it. Having taken my leave of
Mr. Shepherd, and his good Master, I went to spend half an hour with Mr.
Corbury and his good Wife, who are very obliging Persons, and I shall ever love
'em (and one day requite 'em) for their great tenderness to one of my best
Friends. But the day spends, and I have other Farewells to make, so my next
Business was to take my leave of my three Landlords, Mr. Orson, Mr. Landers,
and Mr. Cawley. As I went along, I happened to meet with Mrs. Maxfield (a very
sensible good Woman) she was going (perhaps) to the Four-Courts to hear a Trial
she had there depending; she hurried so fast after her Lawyer, that I had but
just time to bid her adieu, and to send a tender Farewell to her virtuous
Daughter.

Having left Mother Maxfield, I stopped no where, 'till I came to my three
Landlords; I have already sent their Characters, and shall only add, that after
a little wringing of hands, and some Tears at parting, I took my final leave of
each; and in my way home I (unexpectedly) met with the ingenious Climene, my
Fellow-Traveller to Ballimany; we walked together to Mr. Larkins, and there
parted. As we went along, we had a (...) of a remarkable black Man, she told me
'twas Dr. Proby; she gave him a mighty Character for his great success in
curing the Stone; for his Skill in Surgery, and readiness to serve the Poor.
But I had not the happiness to be known to him, so I prevented her speaking to
him, being here met by my Servant Robinson (as true a hearted Man as lives) and
by his dear Spouse, who has brought me a Pidgion Pie (I had almost said) large
enough to victual a single Cabin to the East Indies. Having taken my leave of
this happy couple, IN should next enquire for the Gentleman with a red Face,
honest Doctor Robinson (I mean him who makes so noted a Figure in the Dublin
Custom-house.) He Is a very agreeable Friend, punctual to his great Trust, yet
very obliging; had I a minute to spare, we'd shake hands over a glas^ of
Claret; and from him I should step to the Post House, to take my leave of Mr.
Shepherd, He Is a very generous good Man, and I should in Justice give him a
Farewell Bottle; but I am tired with my days Ramble, and the Sun has got on his
Nightcap, and if I don't hasten, will be gone to his bed before I am got to my
Chamber. But I engag^d Mr. Wild to make an Apology to Dr. Robinson, and Mr.
Shepherd, and to present 'em in my Name, with a Farewell-Token. This Saturday
night concluded my Dublin-Farewells, and if the Wind be fair on Monday, I shall
embark with Owner Pickance, and then farewell to the Kingdom in general (
farewell As is hinted in the Dublin Scuffle.
for ever) and when I get to London, I Will fall to Printing this Account of my
Conversation, and also my Scuffle with Patrick Campbel, for it is expected in
Dublin, as appears by a Letter directed to Mr. Larkin, which begins thus; viz.

SIR,
WE, or many of us here, would be glad, The Dublin Scuffle was out, which Dick
Pue says he will buy one of, and chain to his Table, that the sale may be
spoiled by every body's reading it for a Penny a piece, and THAT he shall get.
I am sorry therefore, he is not like to have a severer lash then I am afraid he
will, without it be suhjoyn'd in a Postscript; for Dick and I now are two, and
for want of yours, made a Dublin Scuffle of our own the other Night. Thus far the
Letter to Mr. Larkin: And an hour ago, I received my self, a Letter from Sir
Hackney (I call him so as he is Campbel's Tool) wondering the Dublin Scuffle is
not yet out; but withal, threatening I know not what, if I omit the inserting
some of his own Maggots: It Is true, Madam, such a Scoundrel as this is scarce
worth my notice; yet I would tell ye his Name, but that he is ashamed on it
himself, and has turned it into a Bog-house; but to show this hectoring Tool
how much I defy him, and all his Abettors, I Will here insert the Character of
Robin Boghouse, (for so he calls himself.)

His Face is full of a certain briskness, The Character of Robin Bog-house.
though mixed with an Air a little malicious and unpleasant; he has a large stock
of Ill Nature, Pride, and Wit, in which lies his chiefest Excellency, though a
very unenvied one. His Face is made of Brass, and his Tongue tip'd with Lies
(for there was not a true word in all his Letter;) yet as lewd as that and his
Tongue is, they are the two best Accomplishments he has; I find in his Letter
he has not a dram of tenderness for his best Friends (I mean those that pay him
for Scribbling;) for I guess by his Letter, he is going to expose one of 'em for
buying and selling a Whore, a second for having a Bastard; a third, for being
shamefully Hen-peckt; a fourth, for being a Town-Bull, and a fifth, All these
I^ ll prove in a second part of the Dublin Scuffle, if I hear any more of him.
for putting a Cheat on the World. But no wonder he abuses the Men, for he is so
unmannerly, as to revile even the fair Sex; he lately called a Lady Whore, for
no other Reason (as it is supposed) but because she would not give him a Nights
Lodging: Then where shall a Man find him, for he slanders every body; and
Proteus like, appears in all manner of shapes; sometimes he calls himself a
Student of Trinity College near Dublin; at other times a Knight. Errant, and fights
every thing; and the next moment owns himself a poor Labourer, and desires his
Wife would make him a C -- d in mere Charity to his hungry Belly; for he, good
Man! is willing to hold the door (even to his own Flesh and Blood) invent Lies,
slander innocent Virgins, swear through an Inch board, and do any thing rather
then starve; so that if two Irish Justices and my self ben't mistaken, Alias T.
D.
Robin Bog-house will dye looking through an Hempen Casement; or, if he will
kneel low enough for it, perhaps he may come off (for I Will stand his Friend
when I see him penitent) with being only whipped at the Garts A --. And as to
his Wife, though she is a vertuoas Woman, yet I Would advise the honest Cits of
Dublin, never to go to Refarnum with her, for Robin is so lewd (himself) that
he thinks no man travels with her, but makes him a C^d.


Now if Bog-house is not the Person I here describe, yet if he that is, will
answer this Character fairly, I mean put his Name to it (as I shall do in my
reply to him, for I hate a Coward) I Will answer his Letters every Post; and if
Patrick Campbel will petition for it, he shall be my Bookseller, and his
opposite Neighbor the Printer of this Skirmish.

Thus Madam, having sent ye the History of my Conversation in Ireland, and some
hints of my Summer Ramble (from the time I landed, to the Sunday I left it;)
and having also as truly related how I came to be engaged in a Dublin Scuffle,
and why the said SCVFFLE is so much desired by Dick Pu^, and his Cousin
Boghouse: Perhaps you will expect my Remarks on the Impatience of these two, till
my Scuffle arrives in Dublin.

Then first as to Dick Pue; I cannot find by the Letter sent Mr. Larkin, whether
he so impatiently desires my Scuffle, that he may spoil the Sale on it, by
chaining (...) to his Table, or THAT (to use the Word in Mr. Larkin's Letter)
he may get a Penny by Peoples reading it; but I rather incline to this last
Opinion, for Dick hopes by the many Pence he shall get by it, that he might
reimburse himself of that Money he paid (for some Body) for Secret Service, and
I know to whom, and what Sum, and so shall the World too, except he will bring
Boghouse to light, that the World may know the Man that Begets Actaeon's; and
that is all I shall say at present concerning Dick, or his Dear Cousin.

And now (Madam) having in this Letter sent ye the Characters of almost every
thing I conversed with in Ireland, I hope you will pardon me if (in the last
place) I allow my self a Character amongst the rest: It Is true, Cowley says,
The Voyage Life is longest made at Home; however from that small Acquaintance I
have with my self, I may venture to say, As to my BIRTH, I account it no small
Honor that I descended from the Tribe of Levi; and, I find an Ingenious Author
of this Opinion, who says, I reck'n See the Character of a good Woman, p. 125.
Printed for John Harris.
it amongst the Felicities of my Life, to have been a Prophets Son, nor would I
leave a Pulpit for a Throne: To be Ambassadors of Jesus, is matter of Glory,
and if you have Faith to believe a Poet, Their Childern, See the Poem dedicated
to the Sons of the Clergy.
Do all breath something more than common Air.

And Mr. Robbinson is of this Opinion, or would scarce have set on the great
See the Sermon He Printed on 2 Kings 4. 38.
Pot for the Sons of the Prophets. Then I Am honored as much (to use the words
of the same Author) in having a Minister for my Father, as if he had been a
Lord; and this Happiness was continued to me a great while, for my Mr. John
Dunton.
Reverend Father was Rector of In the County of Bucks.
Aston ^linton for twenty years; and those Principles he instilled into me in
that Town, do (as my Lord Russel says in the like case) still hang about me,
and I hope will (as they did him) give me comfort in my dying Moments. My
Father designed me at first for an Oxford Scholar, but afterward changing his
Mind, in my fifteenth year he placed me out with an Eminent Citizen in London,
whose kind Instructions and great care of my Welfare, I shall ever
acknowledge. From this Account of my Birth and Education, I proceed ( for I
consider I am not writing my Life, but Character) to a description of my
Person, which is So, So; However, two of the Fair Sex have been tempted to take
it for better for worse; (a black Man is a Pearl in a Fair Woman's Eye) and if
you will believe the dying words of the first, and living Testimony of my present
Wife, never repented their Bargain.

Having given ye an odd Account of my Person, I shall next tell ye with what
Soul it is acted. Truly Madam, this House of mine is filled with a Rambling
Tenant (I mean a Spirit that would break See my Preface to the Spectators of
the Dublin Scuffle.
the Vessel, had it nothing to work upon) and being born to travel, I am ever
pursuing my Destiny; so that you may truly call me, a Citizen of London, and of
all the World; (for I Have seen America, and design to see Europe, Asia, and
Africa) yet where ever I come, I love to be guest at, not known, and to see the
World unseen; and for this very Reason am projecting a Correspondence with your
Ladyship, which I Will call the Art of living incognito; and another I Will call
the Character of my living Acquaintance (perhaps 5000 in number) wherein I Will
spare neither Saint nor Sinner that I ever talked with; no, though (like a Rich
Criminal) he would buy off his Name with a Purse of Guineas. It Is true, it is common
to write the Character of those that are dead, but the writing the History of
living Men, is a Project never attempted before; but if every Man would attempt
something of this Nature (I mean write the History As is hinted in my Preface
to the Dublin Scuffle.
of his Life, comprehending as well his Vices as Virtues) we should begin to
know one another a little: But whether they will or not, I have here led the
way, and will pursue it till I have Uncharacterized all my Acquaintance. So that
you see, Madam, though Rambling is part of my Character, yet, that both my Eyes
are never at once from home, but that one keeps House, and observes the Actions
of Men, while the other romes abroad for Intelligence. But Rambling having an
ill Name, perhaps your Ladyship would willingly know something more about my
Religion. Madam, it is the very same you find in the Account of my Conversation;
and let my Enemies say what they please, I Will never alter it, for I never
matter Abuses (when I cannot avoid 'em;) and therefore it is in the midst of
Reflections my Countenance never changes, for I know whom I have trusted, and
whether Death can lead me; and being not so sure I shall die, as that I shall
be restored, I outface Death with the Thoughts of my Resurrection: If I am
found dead upon the spot, what matters it? For not being able to govern Events,
I endeavor to govern my self; (and sure I am, it is the greatest of Dominions
to Rule ones Self, and Passions;) I am advanced already so far in this rare
Art, that I hope I may say, just Censures I deserve not; unjust I contemn: (and
notwithstanding the sneaking Treatment I had from Campbel) I never judge any
Man unheard, nor never will. I Am amazed to find the Pretenders to Religion so
much guilty of this Sin; but I thank God Censoriousness has ever been my
Aversion; for I observe not one Report in fifty is This is evident by the
harsh. Reflections (I lately found in the London-Spy) on Three Eminent Traders,
who are as much noted for their just and honorable Dealings, as they are for
that Great Estate and Trade God has blessed 'em with.
true, and therefore believe every man honest till I find him otherwise: Most
men are led by either Prejudice, Interest, or some Byend, and therefore in
matters of slander, I believe no Man's Eyes nor Ears, but my own: Neither do I
listen to Backbiters, but esteem 'em worse then the Men they would blacken; or if I
find any Man as bad as described, if I see him penitent, I never divulge his
Crime; and that was the Reason I took such pains to bring Campbel to a sense of
his Error; which had I effected, the Dublin Scuffle had never appeared. And as
I take a pleasure to cover the faults of my worst Enemies (when I see 'em
penitent,) so I take as much delight to blazon their Virtues; and that is the
reason so many in Ireland have my good Character. Virtue is so charming a
thing, that the Ancients were wont to say, Could Men see it with bodily Eyes,
they would fall down and worship it; I cannot tell what fine Notions our Forefathers
had of Virtue, yet sure I am, Virtue is a sort of Prodigy in our times; so that
where ever I find it, I cannot refrain from admiring it, and to write a
Character of the Person who I think possesses it; and though I design a service
to others by so doing, yet if I lose my end, I shall rest content; for I have
this peculiar to my self, that I was never much concerned ( except for the
Deaths of Eliza and D -- ne) for the things that I cannot help, for I do all I
can to prevent a Grievance, and then I acquiesce in the Divine Pleasure. Yet
does not my pretense to Religion make me a jot precise (and this I learnt from
the Dear Eliza.) I value no Man for his starched Looks, or supercilious
Gravity; or for being a Churchman* Presbyterian, Independent, etc. provided
he is sound in the main points wherein all good Men are agreed; and therefore
it is I have little Charity for censorious Men, be they of what Party they will.
But Madam, though I Am thus easy in my Conversation, yet if justly provoked, I
can be angry enough, but it is over in half a Minute; and I am not sooner in a
Flame, then I am reconciled; yet I never flatter any Man, bu^ value my self for
being a blunt Fellow. It Is true, your Ladyship once satyriz'd me with the Name
of a Poet (for it is the same thing as if you would call me Beggar; even famous As
Oldham tells us in his Poems.
Butler was forced to die, and be interred on Tick,) and say all my tender
Expressions proceed more from the Brain and Fancy, then my Heart. But (Madam)
as much as I love Rhiming, yet there is four or five in the World (of which your
Ladyship is one, and the Ingenious Now living at From in Somersetshire.
Hamlen another) that I respect without the least mixture of Poetry; and I
appeal to your selves for the Truth of this part of my Character, for you both
know I have but one Heart, and that lies open to fight; and were it not for
Discretion, I never think ought whereof I Would avoid a Witness; and therefore it is
strange I Have one Friend in the World, for Folks don't love to hear of their
Faults; and I'se downright, and call a spade a spade: I also own I Am very rash
in my Action^, and scarce ever did any thing (save taking two Women for better
for worse) but I repented of one time or other. I have a great deal of Mercury
in my natural Temper, for which I must have allowance (or shall appear but an
odd Christian) but the best Men are the most Charitable, and no man ( if he
considers himself) will blame that in me which I cannot help; perhaps I shall be
blamed for this open Confession, but having an honest design in every thing I
do, I publish that to the World, which others would keep as a secret; and for
this Reason I creep to no body, but by daring to tell the Truth, do often lose
a Friend for the sake of a Jest; but bating but this Fault, though I say it my
self, I Am as fit to make a Friend as any Man I know, for my Bosom is my Friends
Closet, where he may safely lock up all his Complaints, his Doubts, and Cares,
and look how he leaves, so he finds 'em. The Dead, the Absent, the Innocent,
and he that trusts me, I never deceive or slander; ( to these I owe a nobler
Justice) and am so sensible of another's Injuries, that when my Friend is
stricken, I cry out. I was never forward in contracting of Friendships, but
where I once love, I never hate, no not for a Crime, any longer then till
Pardon is asked; and if my Friend falls to decay, I Am even ready to rejoice ( I
ask his Pardon) that I have an Opportunity to convince him I loved in earnest;
and though 'twere impossible he should ever requite me, while I have any thing,
my Friend shall have all; nay, I have this peculiar to my self, that I love a
Friend better for being Poor, Miserable, or Despised; True Friendship, like the
Rose, flourishes best amongst Thorns; and my Hopes are so strong, that they can
insult over the greatest Discouragement that lies in the way of serving my
Friend: And therefore I Would rather serve my The several hundred Pounds I Have paid
for others, sufficiently proves this.
Friend, then barely pretend to it, for I hate a noise where there is no
Performance. I never do that to my Friend, that I cannot be content he should do
to me; and therefore loving at this warm rate, it is but just I slight what
loves not so much as my self.

So much for my Birth, Education, Person, Temper of Mind, Religion, and
Friendship. As to my Dealings with Men, my Word is my Parchment, and my Yea my
Oath, which I will not violate for Fear or Gain; and this is one Reason why I
never eat my Promise, or say* this I saw not, but this I said, In 600 Books I
ha'e Printed, I never swerved from the Price agreed on, or made any Printer
call twice for his Money; (which Practice I learnt from my honored Master) nor
did I ever print any Man's Copy, or purchase his Author by out-bidding; and my
way of Traffic is all above board, for I betray the Faults of what I sell. I
have twenty times in Dublin restored the over-seen Gain of a mistaken
Reckoning; and ( being haunted with a scrupulous Mind) have often paid a Sum
over twice, for fear of doing wrong; and this even Dick Pue will own, if he has
any justice left. But what Justice can I expect, when the Malice of some Men is
so deep, and their Capacities so shallow, as to believe a Criminal in his own
Case, to the Prejudice of an Innocent Man? But they that will judge me by the
malicious Tongues of my prejudiced Enemies, are ^itter for a place in Bedlam,
then to live amongst honest People, for honest Men there are in the World; and
therefore I appeal to Mr. Wild in Dublin, to Mr. Wilkins in New England, to Mr.
Darker in London, and all that have traded with me, for the Truth of this
scrupulous Justice. But as scrupulous as I am in Trade, I was never wanting to
my Belly, nor a Wretch to my Back; and am the same Enemy to Prodigality, as I
am to a sneaking Temper; and I think I am right (in this part of my Character;)
for Solomon says, Eccles. 2.24. There is nothing better for a Man, then that he
should eat and drink, and that he should make his Soul enjoy good in his
Labor. But though I pity the Man, Eccles. 6. 2. To whom God has given Riches,
and not the Power to eat thereof, but a Stranger eats it; yet of the two
extremes, I think it much better to live beneath, then above my Estate; for I
had rather want then borrow, and beg then not pay. And though I ha'e Printed Of
which see ^ further Account in my Farewell Letter to the City of Dublin.
600 Books, I never Printed a New Title to an old Book, nor never undervalued a
Copy, because I did not Print it my self; and I ever thought it as base
Injustice to run upon another's Project; neither did I ever murder any Man's
Name, with saying, he Printed this or that, the more cunningly to praise my
self; and I as little like underselling others, to get Chapmen. To sum up my
Character in few words: I love Rambling, don't love Fighting; love Valeria,
don't love Money; love my Friend, don't fear nor hate my Enemy: Love
Fair-draling; Had rather be called Fool then Knave. Let People laugh, while I
win. Can be secret if trusted. Am owed more then I owe; and can pay more then
that; make my Word as good as my Bond. Will Not do a foul thing, and bid the World
go (...). Now whatever your Ladyship thinks (or my Enemies may say against me)
all that know me will own this is the True Character of John Dunton; or at
least, it is the Character of what I should As was hinted concerning some other
Characters in this Book.
be. I write not this out of vain Glory, but as a necessary Vindication of my
Life and Actions, against the Abuses of Patrick Campbel. But perhaps your
Ladyship will say, I live by ill Neighbors, that I praise my self: To this I
Answer, I see little in this Character that adds much to my Praise; or if I
did, I should spoil it, with telling your Ladyship that my Faults are so many
to my few Virtues (if I have any) that I Am ready to own my self the worst of
Men; and do often cry out with the Publican, Luke 18.13. God be merciful to me
a Sinner. However (Madam) If I have been too kind to my self in this present
Character, if your Ladyship (in your Remarks on it) will honor me so far as to
take your Pencil, and draw me just as I am, (for this Conversation sets me in a
true light,)^ I Will Print the Character you give me, though 'twere a Satyr upon my
whole Life; for I know you are just, and will write nothing but what you think;
and I so little value the Praises of others, that I Will Print it just as you
send it; and if the exposing my Faults will make others avoid 'em, I shall
reckon the Publishing of 'em amongst the chief Blessings of my Life: And if,
when your Hand's in at Characters, you will send me your own, 'twou'd direct my
Pen in my writing tee ye, and be the best Rule (next the Bible) that I could
live by. But Madam, if I find (by your Character) you're as fallible as other
Ladies, I Will be as severe upon it (in our future Correspondence) as I desire
you would now be upon mine; which ( if I know any thing of my self) is so far from
being Romantic, that I appeal to my own Conscience for the Truth of my whole
Character; and here Conscience will stand my Friend: Nay, in some Sense, a
Man's Conscience is the only Friend or Enemy he has in the World, for a Man
cannot fly from himself (as I hinted in the Dublin Scuffle) and therefore must
be as great a Fool as Knave, if he turns Argus (alias Traitor) to his own
Person; but I am so little guilty of this Madness, that I think Argus a base
Animal to suppress Letters, merely to carry on a Correspondence of his own with
the same Person; for, notwithstanding Bogland b^asts of no venomous thing, such
a Serpent there is in Ireland, or else I am wrong informed: But he is a ^ly
inv^sible Tool, and I almost despair of catching him; but that I may do all I
can to discover him, I Will fall to write, A search after Argus. I hear of him in
London by the Bristol Packet, again in Dublin (by Dorinda's Billet;) and
perhaps shall see him in Scotland; but shall scarce catch him (except at Rome,)
in a Jesuits Habit. But if I miss him at Rome, I Will take Shipping for St.
Helena, (for he resembles a Cousin of mine that was born there) but like was
never the same; so I Will leave this Island, and rather then search in vain, I Will
ramble next to Helicon, to enquire of Madam Laureat (the Western Nightingale)
who justly wears the Bays, and has no equal on Earth, but your Ladyship; and I
am apt to think I shall meet him here, for when Herma lays her hands to the
Spinnet, or charms with her heavenly Tongue, the very Angels sit and listen to
her Song; and what cannot a Lady discover, that can becken to Angels to give her
Intelligence. But suppose Herma can give no Account of Argus, yet this Ramble
may bless the rest, for she is my Friend more then in words; and if I meet her,
will wish me a great Deal of Diversion in my Travels; and (being a generous
Lady) will contribute toward 'em.

I Will next enquire of Mr. Read (the Barber I before described) for he will dine
with me to Morrow in Iewin-street, and then I shall hear of Argus, for Mat. has
been viewing Holland, and some say, had a glimpse of Argus in Amsterdam; and
not unlikely, for his Manners show him a Dutchman. If I gain no Intelligence
here, I Will send to Lucas in Crane-lane, for he is a Man very inquisitive; and
being a grateful Person, if he hear of Argus, will let me know it by the first
Post. But my search is still after Argus, and rather then not find him, I Will
next ramble to S^mon, for he is a generous good Man, and if he knows such a
WRETCH as Argus, I Am sure will bring him out; or at least, direct me to an old
Gentlewoman (a Grave, Pious, Ingenious Lady) who knows Argus by Numb. 3. and is
the only Person that can discover him: But if I enquire for Argus here, perhaps
this old Lady will think him a DRY SUBJECT, and never CONSENT to the Favor I
ask; (no, though I WHINE like a Dog in a As was hinted in Mr. Wilde's
Ch^Character, p. 405.
Halter;) but this Matron need not fret her self, for it is beneath my As was
observed by one that had Reason to know.
Spirit to court ( a young, much less) an old Woman in vain: Besides, Rosinante
will soon be sadled, and poor Sancho knows the way to the Bath, and if I desire
it, will go with m^ round the World; I mean still, in search after Argus, whom
I Will find if possible; but as Scoggin said (when he until'd the ridge of a
House to seek for a Gold Watch) I must as well look where he is not, as where
he is; and therefore in my further search after Argus, I Will next step to my
Friend Ignotus, and from him to the learned Fido, for they are two generous
Levites, and would never conceal my Enemy. If I miss him here (as I judge I
shall) I Will next ramble to a certain Frenchman, and ask if he knows Argus, for
Argus says he is intimate with him; But what I get of Monsieur, must be by way
of Petition, for Argus says he is a desperate Blade, and I have no fancy to a
broken P^te. If Monsieur will give no Account of Argus, I Will next step to the
^ost-house; for some say this invisible Fox gets his Bread by sorting (and
intercepting) of Letters: But if I can have no Account of him here, I Will ride
Post to all the Gibbets in Christendom, as the fittest Place for a Man that
betrays his Trust; and if I miss of him here, I Will conclude the Story of ARGUS
was but a Poetical Fiction, or that the Devil is run away with him.

Madam, I have now finished the Account of my Conversation in Ireland, (to
which I Have added my search after Argus, the only Serpent thought to be in it,)
which perhaps your Ladyship will think as true as the Story of Bevis, or the
Travels of Tom. Coriat; for how can this hang together, that this Letter should
be writ at Patts Coffee-house (as I at first hinted) when part of it seems to
be writ to your Ladyship in Dublin after my arrival at London; and part of it
from Dublin, whilst you were in England; and perhaps Madam, the World will be
as much puzzled to find out how I could at the same time mention the last things
I did in Ireland, as well as the first, and all this in one Letter. How can
this come right? except you're a Man of Art, and can reconcile plain
Contradictions.

This Madam, is easily reconciled, if your Lady-shiy pleases to remember, that
though it is Printed as one continued Letter, yet it was sent to you in several;
( as were also your Ladyships Answers;) and though this be enough to atone for
the seeming Contradictions, yet I may further add, it is 'nt to be thought, that
a Man that e'nt quite distracted, would quote so many Eminent Persons (and some
of the first Rank) to countenan^e that which they could contradict; and as this
alone is enough to prove the Truth of part of my Conversation: So the Additions
I made to it since I came to London (upon a further Recollection) reconcile all
the seeming Contradictions in it: For might I not write a great part of it at
Patts Coffee-house in Dublin, and send it to your Ladyship at your return to
London (with a desire you would enquire after the state of my House in
Iewin-street;) and is it not equally as probable, that when ever your Ladyship
went back to Dublin, I should tell ye, upon my Arrival in London, of the last
things I did in Ireland, with the Names of the Persons that hazarded their
Lives to see me a Shipboard.

Thus Madam, though unacquainted with the subtle distinctions of Art, yet by the
Clue of Truth, I have led your Ladyship out of those Labyrinths in which my
Irish Conversation (Printed in one tedious Letter) might seem to involve ye.

But (Madam) I fear I have tired you quite, and yet could scarce avoid being
thus tedious; for since I was As I said in the beginning of this Letter.
resolved to have my Cause tried at your Bar, 'twas necessary to give you a
full Account of my Conversation; that so, by putting things in the clearest
Light, you might be the better able to Judge me aright. And having done this, I
shall conclude with this Request to your Ladyship, That you would now Read, Try,
Judge, and speak as you find: And whatever your Sentence be, you will thereby
oblige,

MADAM, Your Ladyship's Most Humble, and most Obedient Servant, JOHN DVNTON.
London, April 20. 1699.
REMARKS ON MY Conversation IN IRELAND.

BY AN Honorable Lady.

LONDON: Printed, and are to be Sold by A. Baldwin, near the Oxford Arms in
Warwick lane, and by the Booksellers in Dublin. 1699.

REMARKS ON MY Conversation IN Ireland, etc.
SIR,
I Should think my self very happy, though much beyond my Expectation, could I
deserve the great esteem you set upon my Correspondence: I confess, as Charity
and Compassion first begun it, finding you overwhelmed with Sorrow for the loss
of your Friend; so your taking it in so good part, obliges me to continue any
Service I am capable of doing you.

I am so great a Stranger to you, and all your Concerns, I cannot so much as
judge whether there is any real Cause for your taking such Pains for the
Vindicating of your Reputation: However, I will take this Occasion you offer
me, to tell you my Thoughts of your Opinions aad Practice.

Your general Desinition of Religion, to my Apprehension, is as exact as can be
comprehended in so few words; and your universal Charity a very commendable
Virtue; but your care of keeping a Conscience void of Offense toward God, and
toward Man, is not so exactly performed: Your going to hear the Nouconformists
Preach, must certainly give Offense to the Church of England, and perhaps to
God as well. Our Savior Christ says, Woe to the World, because of Offenses;
and sure, an unnecessary Separation from a Church that teaches nothing contrary
to the true Faith, is the highest Offense that can be given or taken. I shall
not undertake to justify their Carriage to the Dissenters, I fear too much the
ill Effects of it; but whatever personal Miscarriages has appeared, it cannot
be charged upon the Doctrine of the Church of England, it puts no check to our
living as pure and conscionably as any Quaker can pretend to do; and must allow
'em a tender regard to their Consciences, if they call that the Light within
'em; but let 'em remember our Savior's Caveat to have a care that the Light
within 'em be not Darkness; it has one Character of the Prince of Darkness,
which is Pride, the exalting ones self, and despising others. I think the
Pharisee came little short of all the good Works the Quakers pretend to; yet
the humble Sinner was rather Justified. All separation casts a blot upon the
Church from which we depart, which we ought not to do, be the Pretense never so
plausible. I know nothing could justify our separation from the Church of
Rome, but her Defsection to Idolatry, and making her Errors the Conditions of
her Communion. All the Faults and Miscarriages of the Churchmen, should be the
Subject of our Humiliation, for they are the tokens of God's Displeasure; and
we add to our Punishment, in making them a means of an uncharitable Division
amongst Christian Brethren; and those that do so, deservedly cut themselves off
from the common Charity, being Instruments of the greatest Mischief: I mean the
Teachers, not the Persons misled; those have a title to our Pity and
Commiseration. I am sorry their Reputation for Preaching prevails with so many
to go to hear 'em; they do not consider what St. Paul said to those that were
some for Paul, some for Cephas, and some for Apollos; nay, some were for
Christ, yet in that strise they were all Carnal; besides, it gives the greatest
Advantage to the Enemies of the reformed Churches to put themselves into the
shapes of such Teachers to delude us, and keep up those Factions and
Animosities, by which they take occasion to scorn and despise our Church and
Reformation, and strengthen Men's Prejudices against it.

I am as much persuaded as you, that Religion does not consist in Names or
Things; and that Christ's Church is not limited to any Nation or Party. Our
Savior tells us, we shall all be taught of God, whose infinite and miraculous
Power extends to all Nations in the World, often inlightning them in the midst
of Darkness; but where he has set Lights in his Church, and appointed visible
means of Salvation, there to despise 'em, and choose to stray into Bypath,
makes us unworthy of the Blessing we enjoy, and liable to the Judgment of
falling into Snares and Temptations.

I think your Arguments against the Atheist, are as convincing as could be
found out; and your abstracted Notion of the Divine Being is very good, and
suits exactly with what I have read in a Treatise written by Albertus Magnus.
Your behavior at public Assemblies, and your Care and Reverence for the
Sacrament, are very commendable Marks of Piety and Devotion; and indeed, with
that Qualification carried with us, no Message from God but will be welcome,
though from the Mouth of very weak or unworthy Messengers. I am much pleased with
your Thoughts of the Communion of Saints, and could wish the World had a freer
Enjoyment of it.

I highly approve your Care for the Sabbath, but am surpised you should refer
your self to me in so great a point. I will tell ye my Thoughts, and not lead
you out of the way, if I can help it: All the Authors I have ever read agree,
that the Observation of the Sabbath is partly Moral, and partly Ceremonial,
that we should worship and adore that great God that gave us Being, at a
certain time allotted for it, the light of Nature tells us; and therefore, that
a seventh part of our time should be set apart for a solemn and public Worship
of God, is purely Moral; the Cerimonial part is the choice of the day. We find
God chose the last day of the Week for a Memorial of the Creation finished in
six days; but not so strictly confined to the remembrance of the Creation, but
also of the Israelites deliverance out of Egypt, a Type of our Salvation by
Christ, as may be seen in the 5 th of Deuteronomy; with good reason therefore
is it now kept in memory of the last and greatest benefit, the accomplishment
of our Redemption, and on that account changed to the first day of the Week,
upon which day our Redemption was finished by our Savior's rising from the
Dead; this change was made in the Apostle's time, as appears by their so often
meeting on the first day of the Week, recorded in the Scripture, and that they
had our Savior's Countenance and Authority for it, by his appearing so often
to 'em in their Assembly on that day. I think one need not be so scrupulous
about the day, but submit to the decision of the Church, who probably fetched
it from the Practice of the Apostles. Our Savior tells us the Sabbath was made
for Man, and not Man for the Sabbath; and it is of more moment to observe the
Duties of the day, then to be able to answer all Objections and Contentions,
that ill designing Persons can raise against it. That we dedicate a seventh day
to God's Service, according to his own appointment, and upon the first day of
the Week, in memory of the great Work of our Redemption finished upon that day,
is satisfactory enough to me; and if I sincerely perform the Duties of the day,
I make no question of Gods Acceptance. For the resting from bodily Labor so
strictly enjoined to the Jews, I take to be partly abolished with the other
Ceremonies, only retaining so much as is necessary to support the Solemnity of
the Day. I think none can be too strict in consecrating to God that day as
totally as our Frail Natures will permit; and tho we cannot be all the day
(besides the public Service) taken up in Prayers and Meditation, we may do
well to keep our selves out of the way of the World, which will soon quench the
Flame our Divine Exercises have kindled; but there were nothing like the
Conversation of Heavenly minded Persons, when we can have such; and there are
Works of Mercy and Compassion very proper for that day, which may raise our
Minds to Love and Praises to God, for making us Instruments in his hand for the
good of any body. In a word, the best Instructor in the Duties of the Lord's
Day, is Love; which will make us do all with diligence and delight, by which I
may suppose you are animated to what you do, or desire to do, on that blessed
day.

I agree with you, that the Duty of Prayer is manifest even by the Light of
Nature. That Supreme Being, that made us, can only preserve us, and to him we
must apply for our well-being; but Christians, that are dedicated to God in
Baptism, should take care to sanctify all the Actions of their Lives by Prayer,
and never do that thing they dare not beg God's blessing upon: If we did impute
to God the happy success of all our Labors, we could not be so wanting to our
selves, as to neglect that great Favor and Privilege of a Christian, of
representing all our Wants and Necessities to God, and engaging his Care and
Providence in our behalf, of beging his holy Spirit, which he has promised to
those that as it; which will lead us into all Truth; teaching us to ^^cuse and
condemn our selves for sin and then engage us to the Duty of thankfulness; and
here I know no^ where to begin or make an end, Innumerable are the Mercies we
daily receive, and sufficient to employ all the moments of our Life in the
Contemplation of them, and were our Hearts truly thankful, nothing could be
wanting to keep us close to our Duties, both to God and our Neighbor; whatever
different ways and modes we find of expressing it. I dare be bold to pronounce
That Person a true Child of God, that in a deep sense o his own unworthiness
looks upon all the mercies he enjoys, as the favor and bounty of heaven, for
which he can never be sufficiently thankful. And I do not know a stronger
Foundation to build any Persons Conversion upon, for if they are born of
Christian Parents, when they consider that Blessing and Privilege which
Thousands want, it must needs engage 'em in his Service who has dealt so
Lovingly with 'em; But if an Alien from the Church of God, should by some great
Providence meet with the opportunity of being instructed in the says, how can
he choose but look upon this good Providence as the effect of Gods Merciful
kindness to him, and work a more kindly Obedience, then all the Terrors of
Hell. I confess, the threats of Hell, is a way I am little acquainted with, yet
must own, We cannot know Gods Mercy in its full extent, without knowing to the
full the miseries from which it has redeemed us. But this works naturally upon
our Love, and turns it into such a fear as works again by Love, and makes our
obedience cheerful and free, yet I shall not pretend to censure those that
perhaps experience teaches to use harsher methods; but I bless God for his more
tender dealing with me, for I am persuaded those Conflicts and Temptations so
many find upon their Deathbeds, are the effects of those horrors their
teachers infuse into 'em; for I may say with thankfulness, I never saw any one
in that condition, of all my Friends that I have Buried. And I make no doubt,
but the subtilty of the Devil is never wanting to make his advantage of our
Fears, Scruples and Superstitions, when he terrifies us with Apparitions and
Spectrums; It is certainly a great Happiness to be free from the fears of 'em,
for which you have just cause to bless God, and I can speak it by Experience,
Those Ominous Presages of Persons, Deaths, or Misfortunes, never happened to
me, nor many of my Relations; Who all held a Principle against Superstition, or
any observation of such things.

Your humble and uncommon Confession of your own Frailties, is what we must all
own as well as you, if we choose good Principles for our Conduct; it is all the
Virtue we can pretend to, the exact Performance depends upon many things not in
our Power.

Your neglect and disregard of dressing, and fine Clothes, suits the Temper and
Inclination of the Wise, and Men of Business; it is a weakness even in Women,
but a great Folly in Men; and a true conjecture may be often made of the
Intellects of both Sexes by their Dress.

You have a strange Happiness for a Man of Business, to have so much liesure
for Divine Contemplation in the Fields, and other pleasant Places, whereby you
furnish your Mind with Pious Ejaculations, which serves you upon occasion to
obtain Gods Direction, Blessing and Conduct in your Affairs; it is then the
Business goes pleasantly on, when the success is perfectly resignd to God.

It Is pity your great Love to your Wife should make you so uneasy, that all
your Philosophy could hardly furnish you with Patience enough to support a
Months Absence. Your excessive loving Temper, which I perceive you do not take
for a weakness, but a Perfection, gives you much reason to applaud your great
Success in your choice of two Wives successively of so much Merit.

Though you seem so surprised at the (...) Company you dined with, I assure my
self those M^n (...) the Model of their Conversation from London, with a little
addition of their own Native Vanity, unless they are much altered from what I
knew 'em I take 'em generally to be all acted by a Romantic Honor, and every
Man of what Rank or Quality soever, takes upon him as much as he can, the Mien
and Equipage, Living and Eating of the Nobility, especially of those that come
from England: Even Swearing and Profaneness they mistake for great Virtues,
when observed in Men of that Rank, without considering that the Vice of
Swearing springs from a base and vulgar Education; who, wanting Language to
express the vehemence of their Passions, have contracted an ill habit of
supplying the want of Truth and Eloquence with Oaths. If Persons of Quality
ever give so barbarous an Example, it is when they are lea^t themselves; either
transported with Pride, Passion, or Wine: But whoever they are that do it, they
show a very shallow Capacity, and weak Apprehension of the dreadful Majesty of
God; and however he may perhaps please himself with his own Conceit of his Wit
and Parts, he may be Justly branded with the Name of Fool; which Solomon wisely
gives to all that fear not God.

Your often returns from Bnsiness to Retirement, was a Privilege of being a
Stranger, and far from your Family and Relations. I cannot be Judge of the
Pleasure you found in Montaigns Essays, having never read it. I heard it once
commended by a Man in Reputation for Wit, but not so much for Virtue, which
moved my Curiosity the less; and having all I desire in the Port Royal, I
confine my self to a very few Books. I envy not your Trip to your Auction: I
have had some of that Pleasure of observing Bidders for Books upon my own
Account, but wanting your Skill, came far short of your Satisfaction.

Your Recollection of your Actions, how hard soever to others, is very ^asie to
you, who remember so exactly all you say and do: If you as strictly observe the
Motives from whence they spring, and view your Actions in a true Light, such a
Method of Examination constantly used, will bring you to all the Perfection
attainable in this Life. The Divine Contemplation you have so ready upon the
sight of every proper Object, must needs dispel (as you own) all melancholy
Vapors; for the aspiring of the Soul to Heaven, brings Heaven to it; and by
that Light shall best discern its own Defects, and Gods Perfections; and in a
manner transform it into Joy and Love.

You give the Characters of several honest Men, and one good Wife, I suppose
you take 'em for some of the Rarities of that City; the Places you describe are
unknown to me; I never took the pains to see 'em, and if I had, perhaps my own
Observation would have come short of your pleasant Description. I am, little
fond of pleasing my sight; wherever I live, my House and Garden limits my
Curiosity; which is the Reason I am as much a Stranger to Ireland, as those
that never were there.

I am much delighted with the Account you give of the Church and State; and am
perfectly persuaded my Lord Galway justly deserves the high Character you give
him in every respect; and sure much of the present Happiness of that Kingdom is
owing to his wise Conduct, and great Example of Virtue and Piety; to my
knowledge there is nothing like it for those People there, who live by no Rule
but Imitation; and the severest Laws would have much less effect on 'em, then
his obliging Condesention. I wonder what is become of all the Iacobites? There
are some for certain, but not so barefaced perhaps in such a Government, as to
be noted of Strangers.

It Is also matter of great Joy, to hear the Bishops and Clergy perform their
parts with so much Charity and Condesention to the Dissenters, as gives 'em
occasion to commend their Moderation and Piety: It were much to be wished, that
all our unhappy Differences might be consumed in Flames of Charity; and
Ireland, as much as it has been despised, might have the honor to set us that
great Example; then, as that good Prelate, Bishop Hall advised, we should have
Peace with all but Rome and Hell.

It Is observable, there are no Places where Care is so effectually taken to
suppress Popery, as where they abound most, and are best known; which may be
the reason that in Ireland they have in that point outdone us here. It would
be a great Pleasure to me, to think as you do, that the Romish Religion were on
its last Legs in Ireland; and sure nothing is more likely to produce that
effect, then those Methods they have taken; or which would better secure the
Rebellion of that Kingdom, beyond all the suppressing Laws; for while there are
Papists to improve every failing or miscarriage in the Rulers, and every defect
or weakness in the Capacities of the People, to the raising such appearances to
delude 'em, as may serve to the promoting their own Interest and Religion,
nothing can be expected but Rebellion and Mischief; but they who have the ART
OF LIVING INCOGNITO, How is it possible to be sure they are rid of 'em, as hard
to know as their great Patron, the Devil, when transformed into an Angel of
Light? No, I have no hopes from the rigor of any Laws made against 'em; all my
hopes is, that as that adulterous Church has lived so long, she is now grown
old and ugly, the time is coming, that all her Lovers will hate her, tear her
Flesh, and burn her City with Fire; all things seem to be preparing for her
Execution, notwithstanding the French Kings Persecution; and who knows but the
Pope's mournful Iubilee may not be a Prognostication of it.

That old Father Kereen, I believe I have heard of; there was such an one lived
at Athlone, who used to say he could lay a Spirit for seven year, and then
again for seven more; though I am of Opinion they are never wanting to contrive
some Impostor, when necessary to show their Power, and to delude the People,
and keep up their Credulity and Superstition: Yet I believe as well, that they
are able to do it, when ever there is any real Occasion for it, they are many
of 'em Men of much Thought and Retirement, only designd for the promoting the
Kingdom of Satan; he cannot deny his Assistance for the carrying on his own
Work, and no question teaches 'em the way he will be dealt with; it is a great
Happiness for the poor People to be rid of such Ghostly Fathers, their
Superstition once cured, may probably secure 'em from those Miseries.

The Church you went to where there was Music, gives much opportunity of
gazing; the Mind having the least part in that Service of all the rest, it
seems to me you should have had more reason to have yielded to the Eastern
Custom of separating the Women from the Men, had the Women appeared more
beautiful, since that and soft Music might have discomposed your Temper for
the Sermon. For my part, I think Women's Devotions are as much distracted with
gazing at one another, observing how they look, and how they dress, that I
could wish some Habit were appointed to be worn in Religious Assemblies, that
would give us all the same Air, that neither Beauty nor Quality could be
distinguished: I mean only those that sit in Pews and Galleries; for the
ordinary sort, there is less danger, they will not make it their Pride to dress,
if Quality don't.

I easily credit you, and believe 'twas more then a Fancy, that you saw nothing
handsome in all the Female Faces; I have observed in many Churches of late
years, the same thing; and wonder for what reason all Beauty should be fled out
of the World, unless it be for the ill treatment it finds here; and truly Women
make a pretty good shift without it, taking upon 'em the part that once
belonged to Men; and obtain by flattery and cajoling, what Beauty used to do by
Conquest; but I confess Beauty and Charming are two things with me; there is a
gracefulness in Mien and Motion, proceeding from the Mind, and makes the whole
Aspect charming, without the help of Complexion and Feature; Virtue makes the
truest Beauty, and the softest Charms for the best and wisest Persons.

I am of Opinion, as you insinuate, that Memory is not the chief Qualification
for profitable hearing of Sermons, as it is a means God has appointed to
instruct us as from himself, to observe what touches us in particular is all
the concern we have in it; when God speaks to the Heart, we cannot but remember
and take notice of it.

The Character of your Antagonist has given a very natural Description of Pride
and Meanness, two things nearer related then the World imagines, which is often
brought to the first, but always takes Authority to despise and reproach the
latter; but Experience shows us Pride never prospers and augments so much as in
Persons of mean Quality, or small parts, raised to great Honor or Riches; and
Sordidness often comes into the Society, but serves only to make Pride the more
hated, no body gaining by it; thus loaded with so many ill Qualities, he must
needs act as he did; it is the part of a generous Enemy to conceal his History;
and of a good Christian, to let nothing provoke you to expose it, unless the
good of the Public require it.

It Is no surprise to hear so many of the Players in Dublin are no way inferior
to those in London; 'twas never the temper of Ireland to let any Country
out-doe 'em in Vanity and Idleness, two things that will secure a Player from
starving; and where they find their Interest, their Company is never wanted, as
appears in their posting to Kilkenny, as it seems they did. That Gentleman must
needs be very soft and effeminate, that must be taught Virtue and Religion so
charmingly as in the Theater; but for all their constant attendance there, I
fear such Gentlemen are much Strangers to those Virtues they pretend to learn
there; and have as little use for 'em as for their time they waste and throw
away with so much care and diligence.

I think that Gentleman had a great deal of time to spare, that was so curious
in his Garden; it is a very innocent delight one takes in the Products of
Nature, but excessive Curiosity transforms that Pleasure into a vexatious Care
and Labor; and had his Visiters been all of the Temper of Diogenes, and had
disappointed him of Applause and Admiration, 'twould have showed him his
Mistake in making that an Entertainment for the Mind, which is more proper for
the Pleasure and Recreation of the Body, that takes no less delight in Woods
and Fields, where Art's a Stranger.

The Characters you give your Brethren (as you call 'em) would make one think
there were something in that Calling inclined Men to Goodness; you remark so
many commendable Qualities in 'em, but nothing is so charming as the ^dea I
have of the Lady you have so admirably Characterized in distick; one could not
wish for greater Perfection, or of any other kind then those you have
described. I wish the Tutor, with all his Learning, be not tempted to think his
Happiness resembles so much the Ioys of Heaven, as may make him too well
contented with his earthly Tabernacle; and perhaps the Lady may owe the last
Perfection in her Character to his Conversation; so that the Family may well be
agreeable to the degree you speak of, the Master and Mistress being also
Persons of so much Merit.

The remarkable Fruitfulness of Mr. Hook is considerable, but the two and
twenty Brothers listed in Ireland as much; many Children are not only
Blessings, but may be observed to be given most commonly to good People that
have not repined at 'em, but been thankful for 'em; and where they live to Men
and Women's Estate, are very often Persons of Piety and Virtue; the necessity
they find of yielding and complying with one another in their Youth, forms in
'em such a habit of self-denial, as fits 'em to receive other good Impressions
in their riper Age, if their Parents care is not wanting.

'Twas a very generous Care you took to pay your Father's Legacy; it could not
concern your Conscience, not being Executor; but showed a very great and kind
Respect to your Father's Memo^y; but that remorse of Conscience so many feel
for the wrongs they do in the case of Money, is in my Opinion, a sort o^
Indication, that Money is generally taken for our chief Good; there are
Injuries we commit against others daily, without regret, which often amount to
as great Wrongs, for which our Conscience never troubles us.

Sir Peter Pet did the World, as well as his Friend, a Service, in preserving
his Memoirs; it seems we should otherwise have lost such Truths, some Persons
were afraid of.

That dignifyed Woman, called the most Ingenious, must needs have Enemies of
her own Sex, though you think perhaps she don't deserve 'em; it is Crime enough to
be distinguished by any good quality; her greatest Crime that appears to me, is
her suffering her Husband to be so much a stranger to his own Modesty, that he
should take such a Journey so ill appointed for his Business.

Dublin is very happy in a Banker, such a one as you describe, punctual, just,
and honest in his Dealings; and it may be, he has something of the natural
Generosity of his Country added to it, which made him so ready to serve you as
a Stranger.

I more admire then envy the celebrated female Poet, she must be so much under
the dominion of Fancy; I cannot endure any kind of Slavery; and all the fineness
of Poetry can never make up for the unruliness of Fancy, when indulged, which
Poets must allow; to have ones Thoughts sober and regular, is a happiness of
much value to me.

That Aged Woman you discoursed of, was a great Prodigy, if her Understanding
and Judgment had been as strong and lasting as her Senses, her Experience might
have given us much Instruction.

I fancy it was a very pleasing surprise, to find a Person that perfectly
resembled one you thought so accomplished; one of the Persons you wished to
see; so near a resemblance of, I never saw; but for the other, her Beauty was
superlative before the Small Pox; but after that, she had not many Equals; but
never expect to find in this Age, her sort of Beauty, which consisted so much
in Majesty and Grandeur.

Mr. Dangerfield I uever saw, and can have no Notion of the Gentleman's
Perfections from him; but your Character makes him very fine; and I suppose his
Ladies Virtues put you in mind of Wives making good Husbands: I have seen great
alteration in Men's Tempers, from the Conversations of their Wives, and for the
worse, as often as for the better; but to the making a good Husband, no doubt
Meekness and Patience are the best Ingredients, with the addition of some
cunning and flattery, and will go much further in that business, then Piety and
Charity, unless, Prays and Tears are allowed to be of any force.

The Gentleman you describe, besides his Bravery and Courage, his being so full
of Love and Pity, may be the chief reason of his not Marrying, in Love and
Compassion to himself, declining a Condition of so much toil and trouble, and
in pity to the Lady, whose share must be more then double to his.

I am very apt to believe the Nonconformists may be in themselves the worthy
Men you represent 'em; but wish I could discover what good end they propose to
themselves in Preaching? If to convince us of the Errors of our Church, will
not Writing do that as well, if it is an Error we are ignorant of? But should
it be one we know, and for Interest, or other reasons, maintain it, there is
small hopes then of our Conviction; yet it must be a very considerable Error
that will justify their public Preaching, to draw Persons off from our
Church; but the difference between us is not so great, if the Presbyterians
approve 36 of our Articles, the other three had better be made a Sacrifice to
Peace and Unity, then give our Enemies so much Advantage against us by our
Divisions; but perhaps they design by their Excellent Preaching, to draw so
many to their Party as may fright the Church of England into a compliance with
'em; if such a thing should happen, one cannot commend the means they used to
accomplish it, so far remote from Peace and Charity; they seem purely humane,
and if God should draw from such ways his own Glory, yet who knows how their
Presumption may be chastised? At the same time God has better ways of his own,
if we could patiently wait and rely on him; when we go about 10 mend things,
we with our Pride and Perverseness make 'em worse; of which the last Civil War
in England is a great Instance. Had we as much Humility and Charity, as we have
the contrary, which every attempt of ^ccommodating has hitherto increased, we
would study to find out the means of Peace and Union, and think no yielding on
either side, too much for the Purchase of such a Blessing; which if you know a
greater, and can prove in your defense of your Practice, any Motive more
considerable for going to Meetings, then I allege for keeping to the Church of
England, whatever Faults can be imputed to her, I must yield; for then I shall
be as much afraid of your Arguments, as you were of the Gentleman that could
say what he pleased, and prove what he said.

I cannot but admire at your curing your self of an Antipathy! What can be too
strong for such a Power? I cannot think but you might as well hinder the
Operation of Sympathy, and create in your self an Aversion to the Fair Sex,
when you find occasion for it.

If Mary Gossam had pulled off the Nightcap, she might have been sure it was
the same Cap it looked like; but I am apt to think it had as Airy a Substance
as the Man that wore it; no doubt the Devil has had that Power in all Ages, and
for his own designs frequently does it, when God permits; taking upon him the
Persons of all, both good and bad; and for discovery of Murders, and such
things that seem to cross his general design of doing Mischief; but he that can
speak Truth with intent to deceive, can do what seems good to serve his own
ends: And as you threaten to return from the dead to do Justice to your
Reputation, I shall wish you long Life, for fear the Devil should take
advantage from what you say, and come and Vindicate your Reputation to me, but
I hope I shall dye first.

I should have expected from your Experience, a more moderate reception of your
Adversary's Slanders; we should not stay till we are informed, but take it for
granted, there are Persons that belie, and speak ill of us; What is there
surprising in that, which is the common treatment the World gives and takes? It
had been strange a man of his Character should show any Civility, as he thought
you his Enemy; when he showed so little at first, when he might hope to make
you his Friend! That other Man you had reason to thank, for giving you the
opportunity to clear your self to my Lord Mayor, which was public enough for
the Worlds notice; and succes, enough afterward, to meet with an honest Binder
in his place.

But it is the greatest wonder to me, you should come off so well with that
beautiful Country Gentlewoman! If she had had no Beauty, her agreeable
Conversation and Modesty, with a little complaisance for you, had been charm
sufficient to engage you; but that you could trust your self to contemplate
every particular Beauty, both of Body and Mind, is daring to astonishment, in a
Man that values himself upon his Virtue! But you will say, her Virtue
abundantly secured you; how great soever that was, her Courage seems no less,
in exposing her self to the danger of pleasing.

Though Beauty is no great matter in its self, yet the Price the World sets upon
it, should make it of some value to the Owners. What made Solomon find out so
contemptible a comparison for a fair Woman without Discretion, but to show us
that whoever is possessed of such a Treasure, should esteem it at the rate
others do; which is agreeable to common sense? What could one think of a Person
that should walk the Streets, and go to Markets and Fairs dressed up in Jewels
to a great Value? Should one not tax her Discretion, or think she had some
strange design in it, to make a trial how many Enemies she should meet? which
would be almost as many as saw her; some designing her mischief to get her
Jewels, others jeering and exposing her in all places for her folly; for Beauty
much resembles Jewels in this, that though they are the chiefest bravery of
Nature, they are of the least use; so one may be very happy without Beauty; but
when one is possessed of such a Treasure, it ought to be secured by Modesty,
and a discreet value of it, and not carelessly exposed to pleasing, but only
upon just occasion: But a married Woman with such a careless Conduct, making no
distinction, is as ridiculous as a waiting Woman would be, who had her Lady's
Jewels in her keeping, and should lend 'em to the Milk-women to dress up their
Pails for dancing.

My design in all this, is to prove there would be no occasion for a Man's
defending so hotly, either his own, or that Lady's Virtue, who had a true
esteem of her Beauty, whether in her own, or her Husband's Possession; for I am
truly moved with Compassion for this incompa^able Person you propose for a
Pattern to our whole Sex, to find she lies under the misfortune of Slander and
En^y; and though she has the support of those sober Ladies that honors her with
their Friendship, it is of little force to take off Slander, since there is a
Charity much in vogue, that forbids distinguishing any but what are notoriously
bad, which in this refined Age are very few that appear so; her Husband had
been her best support, had he believed her Virtuous upon his own Judgment, and
not upon the Opinion of another; I fear your Judgment was not generally prized
at that rate.

However, I cannot but applaud your happy retreat to the cool Country Air, after
so much heat (though you carried a Disease with ye) since there you found a Cure;
there is none knows the Pleasures of Gardens and Retirement, like those that
have lived in the hurry of the World; for that, like other Pleasures, must be
set off by its contrary.

The very same Doctrine Mr. Cowley teaches for Retirement, I establish for
Friendship; which never is right, or can be lasting without it; for till we
have cast of those restless Thoughts of pleasing the World, and our vain
Passions to Persons ^o disposed, the Rules of Friendship are as severe as
School-Instructions to Boys, with their Heads full of Play; who are no less
blind to all the Pleasures and Advantages of it: But how must that Mind be
elevated, that in Retirement can be every thing to its self? Sure the
Admonition, Instruction, and variety of Thoughts a Friend would yield us,
should infinitely add to the Perfection of such a Life? And though living
Incognito from being seen and known to the s^^^eless World, is a Privilege to
be wished; yet to be deprived of the Society of the Virtuous and Religious, is
to cut our selves off from the chief Pleasure that give us a taste of Heaven
upon Earth; with the opportunity of a delightful Improvement of every Moment of
our time spent in their Conversation.

Nor can I think that great Emperor, Charles the 5 th. could have boasted half
that sweetness he found in his change of Life, had he wholly retired from the
Conversation of the Divine Valdesso; but you must ever be a Stranger to the
true Pleasures of Retirement, as much as you pretend to love it, you carry such
a busy Mind about with you, and crowd your Thoughts with Fields, Gardens,
Parks, your House, and absent Friends. How could you take any thought for a
House left in the Conduct of such a Wise? It Is only extravagant and disorderly
Wives, that turn the House out of the Windows in their Husband's absence.

No question you were as much in Valeria's Thoughts though she might not dream in
so much danger. You might well expect Death in a Distemper so often fatal; and
the Thoughts you had from that Expectation, I believe has taught you
Experience, and showed you how much you were deceived in your hope, that to the
end of your Life you should think of the World just as you^ did then when you
thought you was leaving it. And did you flatter your self to think, if time
would unweave your Life again to the first Thread, you would mend your Conduct?
You are now convinced of the Vanity of that Presumption, not having had Death,
and the continual Preparations for it, so much in your Thoughts, as you then
promised your self. This is judging others by my self, if it is rash and false,
I beg your Pardon.

I confess I always looked upon Sickness as the greatest of all temporal Evils;
and Health the most considerable of earthly Blessing; What can discompose the
Mind like Pain and Sickness? One may find a Remedy for all other Misfortunes,
by resolving all into the Will of God, which ^rders nothing to befall us but
for good; but no Re^ign^tion ^ver so great can hinder the Sympathy the So^l has
with the Body; that in those occasions our Thoughts have little Power to
entertain any Thought but Patience per force: If therefore the Tho^ghts of
Death and Judgment, Heaven and Hell are necessary to reflect on, it is when we
are in Health; Sickness discomposes all serious Thoughts; for my self, I would
have nothing to do at that time, but to resign my self with all the Patience I
could muster up, equally accepting release either by Death or Recovery, which
of 'em God pleases to appoint me; and nothing makes us so ready and willing to
die, as a comfortable assurance of our Salvation, which will stand us then in
more stead then any reflection on our past Life, though never so good, or the
most s^^ious Repentance we can then exercise. Nor can I think it a Presumption,
because not built on our own Performances, but upon the Promises of God. If it
is possible to judge of the truth of any Divine Grace, it is possible to know
they are his chosen to whom he gives it, How can the Holy spirit witness with
our Spirits, that we are the Children of God, if we are Strangers to what ^e
witnesses? All Divine Graces are the Earnest of our Eternal Inheritance they
are the Gifts of God, which he never withdraws, for his Gifts are without
Repentance: Nor is Assurance a particular favor to some, but to all his
chosen, that are careful to try themselves, and their Graces; and for those
that fear Assurance should make 'em Libertines, they would find the contrary if
they had it; for it is not the fancy of having, but the real Possession of true
Grace creates Assurance, which will be seen and known by its Effects, as a Tree
by its Fruits; and no such motive to lead a heavenly Life on Earth, as a firm
Assurance in the Exercise of Divine Graces, that we are consigned to a glorious
Immortality in Heaven, so remote from the Changes and Uncertainties in this
Life; though perhaps in some sort, a necessary quality for the imperfect
Pleasures this World affords us.

A little longer Enjoyment* of your Earthly Paradise in the Country, would have
put you upon the search of Business in Town, only upon account of Variety, and
the Idea of it now you are snatched from it, has more of Pleasure in it, then a
longer Enjoyment would have given you.

I perceive we are obliged to your Inquisitiveness and Curiosity; (a Character
you give your self;) for leading you to so many different Places, which
furnished your Table Book with Remarks which we shall see in Perfection in your
Summer Rambles; and above all, the fine History of Lord Clonuff, of whom I
never heard till now.

You had a very uncommon and particular Happinest you had reason to prize, in
meeting in your ordinary Conversation, five Persons Eminent for Piety, Wisdom,
Learning, and all other Virtues; and I agree with you, that the best
Consolation in the want of such Company, is Reading, especially the Bible, what
ever Opinion the generality of the World has of it, if read without Pride and
Curiosity. An humble Spirit that reads and lays it up in their Minds, finds a
time, by Gods special Favor and Blessing, to understand and apply it to
'emselves, for their Comfort and Direction in proper times and occasions.

Following your Fancy led you to a great deal of Variety, but the Bowling-green
above all, has Charms for me; I think it no improper Recreation for Ladies; and
where Men, who are desirous to Civilize themselves in Ladies Companies, might
partake with them there. The only difficulty is, there are very few
Bowling-greens in private Families, they are so chargable to keep; and all
public Meetings for Diversion, soon grows scandalous in this corrupt Age.

The Pleasures of Kilkenny, so magnificent as you describe, might give one the
Idea of a Paradise, were not one Principle, Felicity, wanting, of not being
able to contain a great Mind. You say the Owner lives like one that is much
above it; so he may say, as a great Favorite in the Court of Ahasuerus, What
does all this avail me?

And truly by the Company he had a Bowls with him, I am apt to think there
were others also as soon satisfied, and had enough of his Paradise; they are
all Pleasures for the Eye, which is never satisfied with seeing, but by change
of Objects is in perpetual search of a Felicity, which always come^ far short
of our Expectations. The Novelty once over, there is an end of the Enjoyment.

Sure the Natives of that Place where the four Elements are so pure, must needs
have a more refined Nature. I shall observe with more exactnes^, the Character
of those Persons, when I come to 'em; and indeed you find so many things to
admire, in a Country where others think every thing deserves to be despised;
makes me believe the Perfection lies in your self, that knows how to extract
out of every Subject, all the Virtues it contains; that temper fits you for a
Traveller, whose design is Observation; and truly, the Contemplation of
Perfection is pleasanter than of Faults and Defects; that mere self-love is
enough to persuade us, while we fix our Thoughts upon the first, to overlook
the latter.

And that Lady, whose full Character you reserve for another Place* I own would
reconcile me to any Country and Circumstance, that would give me the
opportunity of Edifying in her Conversation.

That great and generous Brigadeer, who treated all so nobly, shows the
largeness of a French-man's Soul, when out of the slavery of his own Country,
and under the benign influence of a Lord Gallway. Your Poem was deservedly
dedicated to him, I shall spare my Remarks upon it; I don't pretend to judge of
Wit, but shall leave it to its Peers.

One cannot but look upon those miserable Cabins you describe, as the just
desert of Sloth and Idleness; and by their manner of living in 'em, one might
believe St. Paul's Injunctions had been observed in the severest sense, that
because they did not work, they had been denied the Food of their Souls, as
well as Bodies. It Is a severe reflection upon us, to suffer those that are, or
should be Christians, to live just under our Noses, in as ill a manner as the
worst of Heathens.

I cannot blame you for leaving those sad Objects for Kildare, if you designed
Mirth, for which that other Place was very unfit; the Country must needs be
fine, whatever the Town is. St. Bridget did not set her self to cut and sow for
what was not worth her P^^ns. I have observed no Places so pleasant as those
that have been chosen heretofore for Abbeys and Priories. You was in the right
to take the Old Father with you, those Men serve much to make up a ^est. My
Lord Kildare had well placed his Chair, in respect to the Curraugh; which
however pleasant of it self, is much heightened by remembrance of the pleasant
rancou^ters at the Horse-Races.

I know not whether the Predictions of Astrologers be true; but I know a Man
may make 'em true if he pleases, and too often does so; if you like to b^
Mercurial, 'twill be hard to fix you; the Girl that upon opening her Eyes was
saluted, with so much Novelty, was moderat^, in respect to your boundless
Curiosity; you take in all Object, by wholesale, which you are forced to dress
and refine in your Fancy, before you can expose 'em to the view of others less
fond of 'em. I never had, I assure you, so fine an Idea of Italy, as to desire
to see it; it is a Place too full of artifice and cunning for my simple Genius.
I must own, I rather pity then envy your rambling Fate; were I in that
Distemper, I knew a way to cure it; but there is no prescribing to you, till you
are willing.

The Satisfaction of your Travels not disturbing your sleep, is in my Opinion,
no great matter; 'twere something if you could never sleep nor dream of
Valeria, or desire to see her without it; and what great Miracle to be content
with Pleasures of your own choosing? You might better boast of a contented
Spirit, if you could be content to stay at home, and never travel, but upon
just occasion.

You take the right way of reflecting upon your good or bad Successes; that
truth once established. That nothing comes to pass by chance, sets us above all
difficulties, but excludes not our Care and Providence for the accomplishment
of ^ur designs, only moderates us, and makes us indifferent as to the success:
Cross Accidents may well be looked upon as Trials of our Patience, especially
in small and common things; but the more considerable Misfortunes have higher
ends, which we should make it our business to find out. I know Gods ways are
unsearchable to us in themselves, but those that concern us in particular, are
Lessons he sets us to learn, which we must be careful not to overlook; and I
think the most general Language all Afflictions and Misfortunes speak, may be
interpreted, Calls to Humility; as Pride is the root of all Evils, Humility
must be the proper Remedy; but in occasions where no Remedy can be found, we
may jus^^y say, Shall we receive from Power Divine,
Life's Sweets, and at his Griefs repine?
From both, his Tribute let him raise;
From these, our Patience; and from that, our Praise.


Your trouble for Patrick's Fault more then your own Injury, was very
charitable, but upon a wrong Foundation; for his Fault had not been less but
greater, had it been the resentment of an Injury; for then it had been Spite,
Malice, and Revenge; whereas it might be now a little heady Pride and
Insolence, to see how far his Money or Interest would go, and how far he could
have his humor; there are many will venture disobliging their Neighbors, much
less Strangers, for as trifling Considerations; therefore if you clear your
Innocence, he must appear less Criminal, and by consequence ye do him a
Kindness with your self.

It Is much to be admired, your courteous Gentleman, so full of Charms, could
resist the Glory of Conquest, if he found the Ladies laid down their Arms; but
his great Humility made him a Stranger to such Thoughts, and procured him the
Happiness of living a Bachelor, by which he was worthy of Honor; if, like the
Widows St. Paul mentions, he was a Bachelor indeed, and designed it for a good
end; but if his Motive was Self-love and Liberty, he, like the Widows that live
in Pleasure, is dead while he lives; every one is a Debtor to the Public, and
of that Married Persons do best discharge themselves, as heads of Families, and
on that Account great Benefactors to their Country: But those that the
Providence of God exempts from the Toils and Troubles of a married State, must
consider they were not made for themselves; but, as they have opportunity, must
sacrifice their Time and Fortunes to do good, and make themselves Sharers in
the Labor Man is condemned to.

I believe the young Divine is perfectly the Man you represent him, by the Text
he chose; Young Men have something extraordinary in 'em, when they are so
remote from the Ambition natural to that Age and Function, who seldom content
themselves with less then the deepest Points, and highest Rhetoric, to show
their Learning in; a PLAIN MAN, ^o little suits their Style or Humor, they
think it would degrade 'em, and spoil their Preferment, to take notice of such,
either in, or out of their Sermons.

But of all your Friends, who you thought you could never enjoy enough, I
prefer the Man that carried the decrees of Wisdom in his Mouth; he might well
be a Blessing to his Wife and Children, if he had any; for such a Man is a
Blessing to all that know him; there is no miscarrying in his Company: Where
wise Counsel is so ready, I applaud the Happiness of his Scholars, and wish 'em
better Employment then acting Plays; which I suppose was but in order to the
better and more re^l sort of acting they would arrive at in time. I wonder what
Remedy his WISDOM prescribed you for your loss? I take it 'twas in his House
you cried out Thieves. I am ready to think, the occasion you took to love
Drogheda, was by his Advice; it is only Wisdom can make one take Pleasure in
Tears and Grief; unless the Comfort you took to find you had such strength to
recover with such weak Remedies, as of my prescribing, might outweigh the rest
of your Troubles.

I cannot Imagine what you mean by Primitive Innocence you was so frighted at;
unless it was parting with all your Substance ( as the Primitive Christians did
in Charity) to requite the Kindne^s of your Friends? I perceive he that
generously confers Favors upon you, loosens the tie you have to your self by
love, and rivals you in the glory of Generosity, which is your Mistress; and
till you have outdone your Rival, and regained the Victory, you appear to your
self like a Slave in Fetters; but if, to recover your Liberty, you should leave
your self as bare as they in Primitive Innocence, it would nothing resemble it,
proceeding as it does, from another Cause, and for another end.

There Is nothing extraordinary in a Poet, or one of much Fancy; who, to show
his Art, gives the Ornaments of high Perfections to very mean Objects; but in
you it might be also the effect of that Gratitude and Generosity you so abound
with, that occasioned so large a Character of your Owl. I don't question, but
if it should want Gravity to recommend it to my Reflections, it does not want
Wit to make it agreeable and proper for Diversion; you have my leave to be as
merry as you please: I apprehend it necessary to those of your Complexion, but
you know I am under an Obligation not to --

Since the MAGGOT takes you so often, your Stars are very kind to make you
always so happy in Conversation with your Companions in travel; and above all,
with a Female Wit and Beauty, who helped you out so well with your Remarks; but
sure nothing could be better than the Remark the Man made upon the Steeple that
stood when the Church could not; we never want Divine Warnings, were we so wise
to make a right use of 'em.

Your Female Companion wanted not the Curiosity of a perfect Woman, no more
than the Charms of perfect Beauty; but if her Wit was as perfect (...) all the
rest, she might choose that inquisitive way as the most sure to oblige you, and
make the Conversation the more agreeable between you.

I cannot much condemn Clara, If she could (...) in her heart to outdo you in
Tenderness; I think it a laudable Ambition to outdo you in Wit too* and it may
be she feared to be defective, if she did not value her self upon it, as Wits
often do, especially upon the sudden Accession of the unexpected Honor
received by it; and as humbling as your Verses were, it is like they rather
increased her Pride (...) find a Man of so much Sense, so much concerned, (...)
her; and if you value my Judgment, I think you had as much reason to slight her
when she out-did you in Tenderness, as when she out-did her self in Pride and
Contempt of you.

I might suppose there were no Beggars in Ireland, from your making no Remarks
of the Charity, amongst those Persons whose many other Vertu^^ you mention, as
well as from your saying nothing in particular of the Beggars; for I am
satisfied, it is the false notion of the Charitable, that makes so many Beggars,
when they think themselves obliged to give to all that ask, from our Savior's
Command; they are not so ready to take notice, that he adds, and from him that
would borrow of thee, turn thou not away; the World abounds not much with that
kind of Charity: To my apprehension, our Savior intended that Precept to show
us the charitable Disposition a Christian ought to have, both to give or lend,
upon occasion; but not to make our selves and Charity a Prey to those that make
it their Trade to cheat and abuse both the one and the other: There is nothing
would do Charity more right, then a Law that should forbid relieving Beggars at
Random, merely to be rid of their Noise and Clamor; and ways found out to
employ the Charity of well-disposed Persons, to the good and benefit of the
Town and Country where they live; that the truly Poor may find Persons to apply
to for Relief, who both knows them and their Wants: Such a Law, and the careful
Execution of it, would deserve the Parliaments Care, as much perhaps, as any
other they can pretend to bless the Nation with; and thus the public Charity
secured, there is more liberty for the private, of which the charitable Persons
themselves takes so slight account, their left hand scarce knows what their
right hand does, so many and various are the occasions of Charity they are
engaged in, consisting in many different ways of doing good, as in lending
Money or Goods, and not exacting the Payment where the Persons are not in a
Condition to pay; in forgiving Wrongs and Injuries, concealing and bearing with
Infirmities; in Advice, and Admonishing; in a word, in every thing in which we
can assist ones Neighbor, though with some difficulty and hardship to ones self.

Your Character of Ireland in Verse, is very fine and just, but I shall shorten
my Reflections upon your Prose Character, it is not a Subject I love to dwell
upon; perhaps the moisture of the Air may contribute much to their phlegm and
sloth; but I suppose it is the contempt in which the Government holds 'em, that
is the cause of their brutality; sure if it were thought worth their Pains,
they are as capable of being civilized as the other barbarous Nations who have
been brought to Christianity. You talk of Priests for their Conductors, sure
they must have been Priests of Dan, that had so well instructed those People;
for I perceive the best among 'em, that live in Cities, excel only in
fashionable Villainies.

I am inclined to think your Friend Wild deserves to the full, all the Glories
of his Character, both as to his Virtues, and natural Endowments; to be as you
affirm of him, the same good Man in all Events, and a fit Companion for the
nicest Christian; ad^ to this his great Love to the present Government. These
are all Virtues of no common size; yet it is very possible he may fail of that
Reward you expect for him in time, and meet a more ample Reward in a Place
where Time shall have nothing to do; nor can he lose by that, even in this
World, for Virtue is its own Reward and End.

It Is a surprising Character you give of Doctor Phoenix! I know not whether
such another will spring out of his Ashes? To be modest and humble, ascribing
all his Success to God, and to impart his Skill to the Poor for Charity, are
Virtues the generality of our Physicians are Strangers to; and though they
pretend to rail at Quacks, they have both one aim; which is more at their
Patients Purses, and their own Fame and Reputations, than the Health and
Recovery the sick Party gives their Money for.

Though I acknowledge the force of Imagination to be very great, I cannot conceive
how two such Persons should be so transported, as one to fancy the Story, and
the other the Circumstances to support it; nor, is there any thing incredible
in the whole Relation, attested by two such Persons as you represent 'em: The
Lady's Courage was the most surprising part of the Story; but I confess it
would neither confirm or destroy the Doctrine of Baptizing Children with me, as
I believe it was the Devil; what he teaches is of little weight, his Policies
are so refined, it is hard to guess at his Designs; but to be sure, his intent
is always to deceive; and then most certainly, when he most contradict* his own
Interest. I wonder at the Dean's so slightly imputing it to the force of
Imagination, unless he is of the same Mind with a Minister I once discoursed
with; who denied the Devils Power to possess any Persons: Notwithstanding many
Instances I alleged out of the New Testament, he affirmed all those were only
Lunatic^s. I was much surpised at such an audaciousness against such plain
Scripture! Could I find the like for Souls entering into Bodies after they have
cast 'em off, I should not generally impute all Apparitions to the Devil, as I
do. Not that I believe they enter into Bodies to appear in, but that we only
are deceived with the appearance of a Body; for in this case the Persons had
been dead so long, their Bodies must needs be corrupted. I believe as well, in
some special occasions, God sends his Angels still, as he did formerly, in
humane Shapes, to warn or protect his Servants from some dangers; but not to
take upon 'em the Persons of the Dead, to teach or confirm any point of Faith
or Doctrine; I never found any thing in Scripture to countenance such an
Opinion. If Imagination had such a Power over the Lady as the Dean pretended to
think, to save his giving Sentence in a case so difficult; (though who knows but
he did believe so in reality?) that pretty Robin had been a subject proper to
delude her, having Qualities so much above his kind. I wish, when the Bird
dies, the Devil don't take its shape, and visit the Lady again, she gave him so
kind an Entertainment in the Person of her Uncle.

Libraries appear much greater in the Eyes of the World, in my Opinion, then
indeed they are; we think we have a great Treasure there of the Thoughts of
Men, but the multitude of those Thoughts shows the weakness of 'em. What need
so much be said? If they were all agreed upon the Truth, one Demonstration
would reduce all the rest to silence, and bring Knowledge to a much narrower
Compass. I take that to be the Curse that belonged to the Soul of Man; that as
his Body was condemned to labor, and the Earth at the same time to bring forth
Thorns and Thistles, so his Mind should have a continual thirst and desire
after Knowledge, and be constantly deceived with appearances. Yet what can be
more proper to humble Man for his first Presumption, when it brings him at last
to see and acknowledge his own Weakness and Ignorance, and to find, after all
his Pains in humane Learning, there is no true Knowledge but that which David
found in the study of Gods Law, which made him wiser than the Aged?

I hope you will not be startled at this stupendous temerity of a foolish
Woman; it is my sense, which I have your leave to own upon every occasion you
give me; and I find some countenance to this Opinion in the first Volume of the
Port Royal.

But whatever I think of the vast Curiosity of Books and Libraries, I am no
Enemy to the Studious; for I allow fine Buildings and Gardens cannot be better
bestowed, than on such; the labors of the Mind require that Pleasure; it goes
as far as any thing that is humane, toward the inspiring great and noble
Thoughts; the Body cannot be denied such innocent Pleasure, while the hardship
of Study debars it of so many other.

The Dyal placed on the Pile of Books, perfectly shows us the boundless
Curiosity of humane Knowledge; it was labor in vain; not that he could not do
what he proposed; But for what good was it? He did it because he could do it,
and that the World should know so much; like those that make it the only end of
their Study, to be reputed Learned.

It must be a great and magnificent Iubilee that is celebrated but once in a 100
years: It Is remarkable* That there never was a Crowned Head, that ever had
those Honors done to their Memories, as that blessed Queen has had: No length
of time can deface the Memory of her good Deeds, so strong and lasting above
all her Ancestors; it shows us plainly, That God accomplishes the greatest
things by the weakest means, that to him alone we may ascribe the Glory; and no
question but so she (...) in an eminent degree, she had so great Suc^ess in all
her Enterprises. Mr. Tat^'s Ode, I believe, was very pleasing, when finely
sung; he is a little dark in his Praise of the succeeding Princes; should the
World last another Age, nothing could deprive the 9 th of January of such
another joyful Iubilee, unless some universal Blessing, transcendent to all we
have yet enjoyed.

In your Character of Colonel Butler, there is nothing wanting to a very
accomplished Person; and perhaps the innocent Recreation he allowed himself, of
Painting in the intervals of his Study, as it contributed a great deal of
Pleasure, so much of his Virtue might be owing to that happy Genius that filled
up his vacant Hours, and gave him neither Leisure nor Inclination to seek the
occasions of diverting in Places of Vice and Idleness.

I perceive the Art of Painting is affected amongst the Gentlemen in that
Country; your Friend D -- ne had her Picture drawn by a Gentleman in Ireland,
but he was no great Artist then, he may be improved since.

The Collonel's Humility you admired so much, is very often the effect of a
Great and Noble Education, that, whatever there is within, fails not to appear
outwardly humble and obliging; wisely considering, nothing shocks the
generality of the World, so much as Pride; but to you it might be a particular
mark of Respect, you having obliged his learned Temper in so many Circumstances.

I wish the Lord Mayors of England would emulate those in Ireland, and by their
good Deeds furnish matter to the News Letters of Applause, and our Poets would
not be outdone by the Irish in Congratulatory Poems. I confess, I think it
strange, that as they are generally rich Men, and have so great opportunity of
doing good, and whatever trouble it gives 'em, it is but for one year, that they
should not use all their effort to reform, as much as possible, all the Abuses
in the City, of which they themselves might reap the benefit so many years
after; with the Prayers, Applause, and Blessings of all the Persons concerned.
And why they should not every one exceed his Successor, by the Experience he
might get from the others Failings, no reason can be given; unless, because
they are rich Men, who have been so used to draw all Fish to their own Nets,
they can think of nothing else but mere Lord Mayors, and Justices of the Peace.
Such in their Offices as they ought, they have it much in their Power to give
this Kingdom a very different Face from what it now has.

I perceive you are much taken up with the Observation of the Men's Wives you
took your leave of, never failing, whatever haste you had, to inform your self
of all their good Qualities. I wonder what could make you think of reckoning up
the bad ones, when you met with none but good? You might from your own
Experience and Observation, almost believe there was no such thing as a bad
Wife in the World.

I think you are a little singular in your love and esteem of Apothecaries,
there is few has your Inclination or Reason for it; they are to most Persons,
like their Physic, more toothsome than wholesome.

You lay great stress, and not without Reason, upon performing of Promises; but
I see no reason why that should be more damnable than other Sins as
mischievous; if the Person promised with a design to deceive, never intending
to perform it, it is a great and presumptuous Sin; but Repentance is the Remedy
for that, as well as the least Sin, which is no less dangerous without it; as
also when a Person promises, and for their Interest forbears Performance,
because it is to their own Injury, it is not safe to live or die in such a Sin
of Self-love and Injustice; nothing can secure 'em but Repentance, and only
such a one as repairs the Injury. But it is possible to make a Promise with a
full intent to perform, yet afterward want the Power; or the Promise may be of
such a Nature, that not performing may be rather an Advantage than Injury to
the Person engaged to; both these cases lessens the Crime, and makes it rather
a Misfortune to have promised, then a Sin not to perform; which would make one
almost afraid to engage in any Promise.

Sure no Persons deserve ones pity like the poor Misers; there is much of
Constitution in it, and which improves much by a long habit of scraping; though
they see and know their fault, they can no more cure it, than an old inveterate
Disease, when one goes the wrong way about it: For this is their Case, They
think all the World (...) 'em, because they wish to have their Bags; without
considering, they as much despise 'em for their way of living. No bo^^ would be
condemned to Riches upon such terms, but those of their own Temper: But sure
it is not impossible for the (...) to enjoy those Riches with Comfart, if he
uses 'em as all Riches ought to be used, (...) no other Portion of 'em to
himself, then his Condit^^n requires, and make himself Steward to the Poor for
all the rest; this will sancti^ie one part ^o himself, and give him the blessed
opportunity of doing with the other part a great deal of good.

You was well advised, not to discompose your Temper with the Thoughts of your
Enemies, till you had taken leave of your Friends; and if you had left 'em out
of your Thoughts still, it had been no great harm: But you think their Crimes
deserve Chastisement; and the Justice you owe to your Reputation, obliges to
the exposing such Men.

What need you ask Pardon for your own Character amongst the rest? It had been
an unpardonable Fault, to pretend to know every one you conversed with a few
Moments, and not know your self, with whom you have conversed so long: Besides,
it is using them as you use your (...); and, that you did not remark their
Faults, as you have your own, is, that they concealed 'em from you.

There Is great Reason for laying the Foundation of your chief Perfection upon
your descent from the Tribe of Levi; for according to St. Paul, they are, or
should be, the Men that Rule their own Houses well, having their Children in
Subjection with all Gravity; for though Grace comes not by descent, yet by a
sober and virtuous Education, the Enemies of Grace are so far disarmed, that
when it pleases God to send it, it must needs have the better Reception; a long
habit of Submission and Self-denial, will qualify 'em to act more readily to
Gods Glory, than those that are over-loaded with the evil Customs and
Corruptions of the World.

I cannot think but it is the happy Success of being so agreeable to both your
Wives, makes you so in love with the State of Marriage, so inconsistent with
your great love and fancied Destiny to Travel; of which I think with you, that
the chief Pleasure is, of seeing the World unseen; not being known, but guest
at. I fancy therefore, the Project you design to call The Art of Living
Incognito, will be very pleasant; but to publish the Characters of your Living
Acquaintance, will be a great and difficult Task, especially for you that are
so very scrupulous of doing the least Injustice; many Persons Words, Looks, and
Actions, belie their Hearts; and without an infallible Rule, of which I know
nothing, you will at least be thought to err, there being no means to prove the
contrary; and though you should incline to the most charitable side, Truth is the
same in both, and there is the same Injustice to commend as discommend, where
they don't deserve it; besides the danger of creating amongst your Acquaintance
much Envy and Uncharitableness, there must appear in all your Words and
Actions, an excessive Charity, and exact Justice, to take off any suspicion of
your being acted by Prejudice or Partiality: If any thing can secure you, it
must be the Persons being all Living, to whom you must answer for any wrong you
do 'em; and from those you commend, your Pardon is secured against all
Accusers, but only Truth, which condemns if injured: But sure, the Characters
of the Living are much to be preferred before those of the Dead; we see
plainly, ^ow little Truth their Characters contain. How are all the good Deeds
of the Virtuous heightened, one would think there were nothing of Sin or
Infirmity in 'em? And for the Vicious, their Cr^mes are exagerated, they scarce
allow 'em the least degree of humane Virtues: But if the World were as much in
love with Truth, as it were to be wished, there might be good use of such
Characters; and Persons would as willingly see the Pictures of their Minds, as
of their Faces, and be as fond of making 'em worth the drawing.

But to find Persons willing themselves to publish and expose their own Faults
and Infirmities, we may expect in the next Age, if it brings the Reign of
Charity according to Monsieur Iurie^; and hardly till then, though you set the
Example; but for Vices, they are too monstrous and deformed, to dare the
exposing themselves in a full Light; for which I thank 'em, for I hate the
sight of 'em.

I perceive you think you have many Enemies upon account of Religion, because
you favor no particular Party; it is certain, in any Place where there are many
Factions and Divisions, none are so generally hated as those that carry fair
with all, and take part with none; and that^s all the many Names and
Distinctions in Religion are good for, to make Fe^ds and Animosities, and by
that means one knows from whence they come, having none of the Effect and Power
of that Religion that comes from above, which is first Pure, and then
Peaceable. Sincerity and Charity is the surest Mark of Christian Religion.
'Twere much to be wished, all the reformed Churches were united in the Spirit
of Charity; then, and not till then, we may expect the Enlargement of Christ's
Kingdom; while at this day so many falls from us to Atheism, seeing so much of
self-interest, and the spirit of the World, in the strictest and most formal
Professors amongst us; and it is to them a Temptation to believe there is
nothing but secular Interest in that which we call Religion, in which there is
so much Contention to raise themselves one above another in Riches and Honor;
this is what many sees and laments, and wishes they themselves may see before
it is too late.

They can be but mere Pretenders to Religion, that allow themselves lightly to
censure or judge any one; for both Charity and Humility forbids such a
Practice; we see our own depraved Nature in every bodies Faults, which ought to
humble us with Sorrow for 'em, as if they were our own; and that will prevent,
if we have the least charitable concern for others, our being pleased or
desirous to see Faults, and divulge those we cannot choose but see; for no Faults
can in Charity be exposed, that has the least pretense to Infirmity: Your
carriage therefore to your Adversary, was exceeding Christian and charitable,
and make his Faults such as deserved to be exposed as a foil to Virtue, if it
needed any, which I scorn to think; for I am an equal Rival with you in the
love of Virtue, as it appears only to my Mind; but were it to be seen with
bodily Eyes, I fear I should come far behind you. It Is a very laudable design
you carry on, of recommending Virtue, by giving such noble and pleasant Ideas
of it in the Characters you make; and sure it cannot want Success in all
respects; there must certainly be some Persons 'twill prevail upon; as in St.
Cicelies Ode, See what Glory can persuade
Those that are for Glory made,


May be here applied to Virtue; but whatever is the Fate, you are always happy,
while so resigned to the Divine Pleasure: An easy and contented Temper is a
great Blessing. But why should you value your self for being a blunt Fellow?
Cannot every one be master of that Virtue, if they like it? And why disdain ye
the Name of a Poet, only for being Poor? Is there such Virtue in being Rich?
What reason can be assigned for such an inevitable Fate, unless it is the Effect
of Fancy; which, as it raises their Thoughts and Expressions far above the
Truth, so it raises themselves in Imagination, to the Condition of Angels, that
need nothing; which makes 'em take care for nothing, till it is too late? Or,
perhaps Divine Providence will not trust such Men with a Talent of Riches, who
so idly throw away their Talent of Time, which is far more precious.

Yet after all, you seem to own you treat your Friends with Distinction, some
from the Brain, and others from the Heart; but it is not easy to judge of this
part of your Character, though I dare affirm you never deceive others, till you
have first deceived your self. I believe it is very hard, and must be the work
of time, exactly to determine this distinction; yet one would think a Heart
that lies open, could not fail to be known, both to it self, and others; but
according to the Italian Proverb, He that builds his House in the Street, it is
either too high, or too low. So a Man that should have no better means of
knowing himself, than what he may get from the Light and Testimony of others,
may be as much a Stranger to what he truly is, as the Men in great Power and
Riches, that feed upon Flattery, as well of their own, as others, must needs
frame an Idea of themselves, very different from what they really are.

Though it is nothing strange the generality of the World should not court your
Friendship, in respect to your love to Truth, and speaking freely of Persons
Faults; but it would be very strange, if that Person should not have one Friend
in the World, that has one of the best Qualifications for it. To have ones
Faults truly and sincerely told one by ones Friend in Charity, is an advantage
nothing in this World can equal; and of great value to those that understand
it, and is what you have the most reason, of any one, to prize; for if any
thing fix your Mercury, cure your Rashness, and save your repenting of every
thing you do, it must be the Light and Counsel of a Friend. I cannot hinder my
self from thinking, that your never repenting of taking two Women for better
for worse, was the Effect of a very good and wise Friend's Counsel; what else
could make you do a thing so extraordinary, when so contrary to your natural
Practice? But to take a little from this great Miracle, perhap^ ^our knowing
'twas good not to repent, made you fancy you did not.

And yet after all, you must pardon me, if I don't think you as fit to make a
Friend as any Man; for he that is a single Man, and chooses to be so, is fitter;
For what must your Wife do, ^^en you give all to your Friend? And a Man more
moderately qualified, is fitter; for he may be suited in the Temper of a
Friend; but where can you be matched in Fidelity, Compassion, and Generosity?
You may expect that return of Love and Gratitude; (for who can choose but love
such Qualities?) But yet the Love that you describe, which Crimes cannot deface,
is as transcendent as all the rest; and if you think it just to slight what
loves not as much as your self, I wish you may, it is pity you should not; but I
fear you never will be suited with a Friend. I cannot blame your not being
forward in contracting Friendships, it is so uncertain how they may prove; but
to a long and tried Fidelity, I own all to be due that you propose in your
Friendship.

The exactness of your Rules in Traffic and Dealings, is of very good Example;
there are few lay that stress upon it they ought; there is more of Religion in
it than is generally considered, while their Thoughts are taken up with the
love of Gain. You have a great Happiness in sitting so loose from the love of
Money, and yet retain so just a value for it, as to make the proper use of it.

I don't see you have commended your self so much in your Character as needs
either Apology or Pardon; the Glory you assume in point of Friendship, you have
only in Speculation, no^ Practice; it is not what you are, but what you should
be, whenever you engage with a Friend deserves it. Nor shall I make any Apology
for disappointing you of the Satyr you expected; though I think I have in many
particulars, drawn you just as you appear to me in this Light; and since I have
thus (...) endeavored to serve you, I hope I may be excused from writing my
own Character; the publishing ones own Faults, is not a common Virtue; it is the
fate of Novelty to please or displease extremely; let me see the Event
therefore, before I take the Example. I leave you in pursuit of Argus,
supposing him a common Enemy, which justifies the Pains you take to find him;
and upon the whole Matter, as far as I am informed by this Account of your
Conversation, if my SENTENCE is of any value, I judge it must be a very
malignant Temper, or a great Interest and Self-love, could make any Man your
Enemy. And thus Concludes

Your, etc.

FINIS.

