The ART of Living Incognito.

BEING A Thousand LETTERS On as Many Uncommon Subjects.

Written by JOHN DUNTON, During his Retreat from the World.

And sent to that HONORABLE LADY To whom he Addressed His Conversation in
Ireland: With her Answer to each Letter.

PART I.

To be continued till the whole Correspondent, is finished.

Then if One Mortal Two such Grants might have,
From Private Life, I Would steal into my Grave. -- Cowley.
London, Printed (for the Author) and are to be Sold by A. Baldwin' near the
Oxford Arms in Warwick Lane. 1700. Price Stitch^ 1 s.

The Dedication. To that Honorable Lady to whom the following Letters were
directed.
MADAM,
T^O I know you take no great Pleasure in Addresses of this Nature, yet, by an
happy Experience I can say it, Pardoning of Faults is not uneasy to you;
especially those that cannot be avoided: This is of that Nature: for what Man
could forbear writing a Thousand Letters, after you had engaged your self to
answer 'em? And where could I think to find so Illustrious a Patron, to give
'em Credit and Esteem, in such an Age as this, so over-charg'd with Wit and
Sense? What if the World's a Stranger to your Rank and Person? It knows in your
Thoughts what sufficiently declares your strict Alliance to Virtue; and nothing
can take your Title to support it, but must have some Pretensions to
instructing in the Laws of Virtue.

I confess you are a Lady of a particular Genius: for those that see you, know
little of your Mind; and the World you communicate your Thoughts to, neither
see nor know your Person: Nay, some believe you have no real Being but in my
Brain. I am obliged to 'em for thinking me such a Man of Art, that can divide
my Principles; for it is apparent those I act by, are very different from those
I make use of to correct and reprove my Actions; Yet all this while (say these
Men) the Title of Honorable Lady is but a Fiction I amuse the World with. I
know your Ladyship is unconcerned what is thought of it; I am not: but would be
thought a Man of Truth; and, if I knew how, would fain convince 'em of their
Mistake; but if only Seeing is Believing with 'em, I can never do it; that sort
of Conviction I shall never have in my power; and if they will not believe upon
the Credit of an Honest Man, I can go no farther.

Thus you see, Madam, how much I value Truth; what else could make me decline
the Glory of owning your Thoughts, which I have ever had in Admiration, since I
had the Honor to know 'em. 'Twas in your Thoughts I discerned the Charms of
Solitude, which soon inspired me with the Resolution of Living Incognito,
proposing to my self the most intimate pleasure this World can give; but now,
by an unhappy Fate, must make it my Retreat, and both live and die so.

It Is to you, Madam, I must be indebted for all the Pleasures I shall find in
Retirement, and shall never be weary of presenting you with Uariety of
Thoughts: Your Reflections will give 'em such Beau'ty and Luster, none will be
able to resist the Wi^e Instructions they carry in 'em, how mean so ever the
thoughts are that gave 'em their first Rise

I shall only add, This Whole Correspondence will be contained in about 200
Parts (at 12 d. each) In which I solemnly declare, I Will have no Assistance (by
Writing, whatever I have from Books) from any one of my former Authors; For
seeing I have a Thousand Magots swarming in my Brain (for this Art of Incognito
will consist just of that Number of Subjects) I Am willing now that the World
may see the Magots of my own begetting: for, as Randolph says, -- If I a Poem
leave, that Poem is my Son -- which I don't speak out of Ostentation, but that
the World may see, after Printing so many Magots of others writing, I Am now (by
Imitation) become one my self. And as these Thousand Magots (or the Art of
Living Incognito, for they are Synonimous Terms) will be published in 200 Parts,
(and at so easy a Price, that the Poorest may purchase 'em): So Ten of 'em will
be finished by Lady Day, and the rest with what speed I can; which I hint as a
Piece of ^ews to my Honest Printers, and my other Friends that I use to employ.
But, Madam, tho in this Undertaking I fall upon Subjects, that (by reason of
their Uncommonness) may be thought Magotty, yet if I insert any thing not
agreeable to Sound Doctrine, it is your Province to find it out; and tho your
Good Nature is as ready to forgive Faults, as your Wit is able to find 'em, yet
pray (Madam) tell me my Errors, Mistakes and Omissions, not with the Tongue of
a Courtier, but with the Severity of a True Friend: And since the Art of Living
Incognito is your own, by so many Titles to it, refuse it not the Honor of
your Protection, but suffer this Oblation from,

MADAM, Your Ladyships most Humble, and most Obedient Servant, John Dunton.

The Art of Living Incognito.
LETTER 1.
Of Living Incognito.

Madam,
I Acquainted you p. 433.
in the account I sent of my Conversation, in Ireland, that I was contriving a
Correspondence with your Ladyship which I Would call the The Art of Living
Incognito; for, as others Squander away their Time in Public Hurries, and in
rambling from one Vanity to another; I choose rather to retire to a Solitary
Village (Blessed with a Neighboring Grove, a Purling-Stream, two Cuckoos, and
one Nightingale) and here under the Covert of a spreading Tree, I intend to
devote the remaining part of my Time, To study my self; (for as Cowley says,
The Voyage Life is longest made at home) but more especially the works of
Creation and Providence, etc. And this on purpose to Correct, and Confess the
Errors of my past Life; which if I do, 'twill evidently appear, Been qui latuit
been vixit, he has lived well, who has lain well (or so) hidden; and
therefore I call this Retreat the Art of living Incognito, so few Persons
devoting the latter part of their Time to write and publish the Errors of the
former.

But let others Act as they please, I ever thought it dangerous for a Man to
Dye in a hurry; Men involved in Trade cannot so soon prepare for a better
State, as Men retired from the World may* I have ever pitied those Men, whose
necess^ous Employment, and Fortune has put them under an obligation of making
even See the Guardians Instruction. P. 5.
at one time, the Accounts of this World and the next; I therefore resolve to
narrow my thoughts, and take the advantage which Exp^rience gives, of thinking
strictly, and reviewing my Life, and being freed from fancy (which cheated me
in my Younger Years) to consider how far the Rules I have gone by, how specious
soever to others, and pleasant to my self, may be consistent with a severe
expectation of an Account above, where Pleasure, Interest, and Passion must
disappear. For this reason I Am now retired to a private Cell, for it is only
here, I can shape a true measure of my self; learn the contempt of what
hitherto I have admired; humble my Soul for my many failings, and warm my
Devotions by the expectation of a wiser and better State.

Madam, This is a large Province I Am entering upon, yet I shall tie my self to
no method, any further than making every Letter a distinct Subject; but shall
be very glad if now and then you will propose a Subject your self: For the
Character you writ of your self, your Essay on Friendship, and on the Miseries
of Human Life, etc. are so very instructive, that I desire they may come into
our first Part (for the Project will be 200 in all) and I Will Answer 'em as so
many Letters; and if Variety has a Charm in it, I hope we shall please some
Body. I know an Undertaking of this Nature, is liable to Cavils, and there are
a sort of Men in the World, who love to show their wit in making Exception
against every thing but the Product of their own Brain, and therefore their
Objections are not to be regarded; however I Will endeavor to Treat of Subjects
that are most Surprising; and what I Write, shall be still submited to your
Censure, and Published with this Title, viz.

The Art of Living Incognito: Being a thousand Letters (on as many uncommon
Subjects) Written by John Dunton during his Retreat from the World, and sent to
that Honorable Lady to whom he addressed his Conversation in Ireland, with her
Answer to each Letter.

Madam,

I have here given ye a clear Idea of my Art of Living Incognito, and what I
design by it, and if the Subjects I intend to choose, have Magic enough in 'em
to procure your Remarks, I shall think my self highly Honored, not only as I
shall thereby think I am continued in your, Friendship, but as you're able to
rectifye all my Errors, which doubtless (in so large an Undertaking) will be
very many; however I Will venture to tell ye my Naked Thoughts on every Subject I
Treat of. And my first shall be,

Of Living Incognito.
The Art of Living Incognito is of great Antiquity; 'twas first Practiced in
Paradise; Adam and Eve even there hid themselves amongst the Trees Genesis 3. 8.
of the Garden: And if we look further into Scripture, we see Moses in the
Mount, and with the People, with a different face; open to God, veiled to them.
God would not always have us show our brightness to the world, in some Cases he
loves our Talent in a Napkin, lapt up, and hid; and therefore, though John Dunton
(in Anagram) is Hid unto none, yet I Will attempt to live hid unto all; and my
comfort is, though I live never so Private, he knows me, that will (if I serve
him) bring me Heaven; others, if they commend me, there is all; and it may be to
my cost: So I Will fly all Company, for, why should I lose Heaven for good words?
So much for the Old Testament; (as to living Incognito.) And if we^ ^ok into
the New, we shall find the End of all our Saviors Miracles, for the most part
was, See you tell no Man: It is one Lesson, even in Religion it self, not to be
seen; and yet not precisely, not to be seen, but not therefore to do well, to
be seen; our commendations must be to do, and not say; or if we say any thing,
say we are unprofitable Servants; so that living Incognito, is not only a Duty
(in some Cases) but has many Blessings attend it. And further to recommend it
to our Practice, Dr. Fuller tells us 'twas an ART learnt, in the first Century;
Retirement was in the Primitive Church, to save themselves from the heat of
Persecution; they were now, (says Dr. Fuller) always alone, yet always in the
Company of good Thoughts. King Agis one Day requested the Oracle of Apollo, to
tell him who was the happiest Man in the World, who answered, One Aglaion,
beknown of the Gods, and unknown of Men; and making search for him throughout
all Greece, found at length that it was a poor Man in Arcadia, who 60 Years Old
never went from home, keeping himself, with his only Labor in his Garden. Livy.
Had King Agis asked me the same Question, I had answered to the same purpose;
and therefore it is part of my Character, See the Account of my Conversation in
Ireland P. 433.
To love to be guessed at, not known; and to see the World, unseen. Then

Come, For so I Will presume to call you throughout our whole Correspondence.
Sabina, come away,
Don't your Joy and mine delay;
But to make 'em both complete,
Come and taste of my Retreat.
To Invite ye to it consider, nothing can carry ye so near to God and Heaven,
as a voluntary Retreat from the World: The mind of Man, when disintangled from
Riches, etc. can walk beyond the sight of the Eye, and though in a Cloud can lift
us into Heaven while we live (though we lived in in a Dungeon) I know the hurry
of Farewell to Dublin, p 119.
Business is apt to ingross our thoughts: And therefore it is I Am come from
behind the Counter. Instead of losing Time in a Shop, I do now in a Quiet
Retreat, learn to despise the World. I think it is a Great Madness to be laying
new foundations of Life, when I Am half way through it.

And they, methinks, deserve my Pity,
Who for it can endure the Stings,
The Crowd and Buz, and Murmurings,
Of this Great Hive the City -- Cowley --
By living private, we shun a world of unfortunate Engagements. -- We have
nothing to resist in a Cell, but a few wandering thoughts; nor nothing to seek
after, but to be happy. There we are free from public ^ders and private
Makebates, unenvied in every thing but happiness: And it is impossible to steal
that from us, when we have nothing else to do, but to keep it. So that methinks
in my Cell, I Am learning to live for my self as well as for other People. A
learned Divine could say to a Lady that asked him what Life was, That to live,
is still to live with her, so I may say, That to live is ever to live
Incognito. Methinks I had scarce a being till my Raven went to Roost; I mean,
'till it left the Hurries of Stocks-Market, for the solitude of ^ewen street;
and this was but the first step to Happiness neither; for though 'twas private,
yet 'twas still in the City of London, which I Have now left, that by living
still more Incognito, I might live indeed; and having in this last Retreat met
with a good Land Lady, we live like Adam and Eve in Paradise; She employing her
self in her Garden, and I in admiring where l've bin wandering all my Days; for
I was never Great, nor Happy 'till now: Most Princes are of this opinion, or
they would never study to conceal themselves, -- We see, even Ambassadors that
represent the Persons of Kings, d'spatch their affairs Incognito. Nay, Emperors
themselves think it makes 'em greater sometimes to appear unknown -- The Great
Czar of Muscovy first appeared in England in that manner: scarce a Gazet but
tells of s^e Prince arrived Incognito: The Savoy Ambassador arrived so ^sterday.

King Henry the Second, after his return fr^ Conquering Ireland, both out of
fondness, and for securing (...) Succession, he caused his Eldest Son Henry and
his Wife Margaret, Daughter of the French King, to be solemnly Crowned in his
presence, at two several times; in the last of which, he for that Day lived
Incognito; I mean for that Day he concealed his being King of England, by
waiting as a Servant upon his Son, while he sat at the Table; which young
Henry did little regard, boasting, That his Father did not hereby dishon^ur
himself, since he was only the Son of an Empress, whereas himself was Son both
of a King and Queen: which Proud Speech mightily displeased his Father, who
thought he had done his Son no small Honor by waiting on him, as a King
Incognito.

The Story of King James the First, Riding to his Nobles behind a Miller, (who
took him for a poor Farmer) is sufficiently known -- Neither was Charles the
2d. less frequent in these Adventures: How often, dressed in a mean habit, would
he straggle to a poor Cottage, to inquire, if the owner ever saw the King, and
what he thought of his Government? (Madam) I suppose you have heard how his
winding up the Jack, in a dirty Frock, saved his Life; and those that consider
his preservation in an Oaken Tree, will own there is (if in any thing) An Art
in living Incognito -- And therefore I am so far from envying even Kings and
Princes in their Pomp and Grandeur, that I pity 'em as Royal Slaves, or as Men
that are never easy, but when now and then they retreat from the World, and
conceal themselves for a Glimps of Happiness. So that I Am much happier in my
present obscurity, than he that sits on a Throne, or that is galloping after the
World, for these have scarce an hour they can call their own, (and that hour is
filled with cares.) But,

Nothing looks in my Retreat,
Discontented, or Unsweet;
True it is Private, and you know,
Love and Friendship should be so;
Solitude dissolves the Mind,
Makes it pleasant, free, and kind.
But the Pleasures you have known,
I mean those in London Town,
These, Sabina, you will Confess,
Fears and Dangers, make 'em less;
Crowds, Diseases, Feuds, and Noise,
Render 'em imperfect Joys.
But in Shades and Silence given,
Every Extacy is Heaven.
Whoever (in this Retreat) sees my Rural Pipe, my Shady Grove, Hedge of
Hony-Suckles. Fruitful Garden, Hive of Bees, and little-Cell, with my Contempt
of Honors, Riches, Pleasures, etc. will own it is impossible I should be
Happier, except in Heaven, or in the Company of a kind Wife; and that my
Retreat might want no Perfection,

Nature makes Arbours here, and every Tree,
Disposes all it is Boughs to favor me --
Here warbling Birds in Airy Raptures Sing
Their glad Pindaricks to the welcome Spring,
The Valleys too, here Eccho's do repeat,
Here gentle Winds, do moderate Summers Heat;
Clear is the Air, and Verdant is the Grass,
My Couch of Flowers, the Streams my Looking-Glass.
If you ask me how I spend my time, in a Place where I Am seldom seen, and
scarce known to a Dog or a Cat? I answer, -- I begin the rising Day with
Prayer, and spend the rest of the time either in writing tee ye, or reading the
Port Royal (the Book you so (...) commend,) when I Am weary with this Exercise
(for a little Change) I walk to St. Vincent's Rocks; here I sit for an Hour or
so, blessing my self, that I Am clear of London; having left Honor to Madmen,
and Riches to Knaves and Fools, I fall to laughing at both. But if I happen to
be grieved at any thing, (for Iris and Daphne can never be forgot) I tune my
Distresses to the Widowed Turtle, and she Records my Woes with her own; or if
this fails to give me relief, I call to some Kind Echo to help me to grieve
the faster; or if I find no comfort in Tears, I need but think of you, and then
be my sorrows what they will, I sit like Patience smiling at Grief, and fancy I
am still Happy -- So that if I live Incognito (and have but the use of my
thoughts) I can never be wretched. I Am sure I reap more pleasure in my Retreat
from the World, than the French Ladies do in the Streets of Paris. Or if it
happens that I am weary of being alone (if he can be so, that enjoys himself)
it is but Riding a Mile or two or at furthest to Southborrow-Grove, and I Am
strait in the Meadows, amongst wholesome Girls making of Hay, and that is
enjoyment enough for one that is afraid of Peticoats. When I Am tired with these
sights, Itye my Horse to a Tree, and take a Nap under the Shade of it, and when
the Cuckcoo awakes me (if I Am thirsty,)

For wholesome Drink, I don't go far to look,
Each Spring's my Tap, my Barrel is each Brook,
Where I do quaff and to it again by fits,
And yet (Dear Madam) never hurt my Wits;
For why it is Beer of Grandam Natures Brewing,
And very seldom sets her guests a Spewing;
To which sweet Bubb I Am kindly welcome still;
Good Entertainment, though the Cheer were Ill.
In this manner do I spend my Solitude; and If I ben't wanting to my self, thus
living Incognito might soon sit me for Heaven; for those Stars, which have
least Circuit, are nearest the Pole; and Men who are least perplexed with
Business, are commonly nearest to God; which sufficiently recommends a Life of
retirement. Besides this, to live Incognito, is to follow the Example both of
learned and Great Men. Lotharius the Emperor resigned his Crown, and spent the
remainder of his Life in a Solitary place. This way of living is so much
esteemed by the Wits, that we find the Gardens of Adonis, Alcinous Hesperides,
were Subjects for the finest Poets. The Pleasure Lucanus had in this World, was
nothing else but a little Garden, and when he dyed he commanded his Grave to be
made in it; and Dioclesian left his Empire to turn Gardener, Even the Poet
Cowley As I hinted in my Conversation in Ireland p. 365
that had known what Cities, Universities and Courts could afford, broke
through all the Intanglements of it, and which was harder, a vast Praise, and
retired to a Solitary Cottage near Barn* Elms; where his Garden was his
Pleasure, and he his own Gardener -- Timon of Athens was so given to
solitariness, that he hated the company of all Men, and therefore was called
Misanthropos; he used and employed all his skill to persuade his Countrymen to
shorten their Lives having set up Gibbets in a Field, which he bought for them
that were disposed to Hang themselves. Plutarch.
Fabius the Consul was so little for being known, that in 70 Years which he
lived, departed not once from his Village of Regio to go to Messana, which was
but two Miles off, by Water; and Apollonius Traveled over three parts of the
World to conser with ingenions Men, and being returned, he gave his Riches to
his poor Kindred, and lived ever after a Solitary Life -- Democritus plucked
out his Eyes because the pleasures of this World should not draw him from
Contemplation. -- St. Bernard got all his knowledge in the Woods and Fields. --
Ierom forsook all the World to live Incognito; -- Croesus after the Death of
his Son, did the same, and so did Hiero a Tyrant of Syracuse.

Among Even the Mahometans there are many Vetaries they call D^rveeses, who
relinquish the World, and spend all their Days following in solitude and
retiredness, expecting a Recompense (as they say, and are very well content to
suffer and wait for it) in that better Life. Those very sharp and very strict
Penances, which many of this People for the present voluntarily undergo, far
exceed all those the Romanists boast of; for instance, there are some who live
alone upon the tops of Hills (which are clothed or covered with Trees, and
stand remote from any Company) and there spend the whole time of their
following lives in Contemplation, stirring not at all from the places they
first six on, but ad requisita naturae, crying out continually in these or the
like Expressions, Alla Achabar, etc. that is, God Almighty look upon me, I love
thee, I love not the World, but I love thee, and I do all this for thy sake,
look upon me, God Almighty.

These, after they thus retire, never suffer the Razor or Scissars to come
again upon their Heads, and they let their Nails grow like unto Birds Claws, as
it was written of Nebuchadnezzar. Dan. 4. When he was driven out from the
society of men.

This People after their retirement, will choose rather to famish, than to stir
from their Cells: and therefore they are relieved by the Charity of others, who
take care to send them some very mean Covering for their Bodies (for it must be
such, otherwise they will not accept of it) when they stand in need thereof;
and something for their bodily sustenance, which must be of their courser Food,
otherwise they will not take it; and no more of that at one time, than what is
sufficient for the present support of nature.

Neither is the Incognito Life of the famous Nostedamus less remarkable, than
the affected solitude of the Derveeses, of which take the following account.
Some Leagues from Aix (says the Author of the Historical Voyages) stands a
Borough, called Sallon where Nostredamus so Famous for his Predictions, was
Born, and interred in the Church of the Francis^an Grey-Fryers, his Tomb being
half withithe Church, and half without. The Monk that showed it us (says, this
Author) told us that Nostredamus himself had ordered it to be Erected after
that manner: for that finding the World to be so corrupt as it is, he was
desirous to leave it in singular manner. For that having raised his Tomb to
Man's height, he caused himself to be enclosed therein while he was living,
after he had made Provision of Oil for his Lamp, Pens, Ink and Paper, and
pronounced a Curse upon him, that should open it before such a time, which by
the Calculation of the Friar, was to expire at the beginning of the Eighteenth
Age. I cannot tell (says this Voyager) whether Nostredamus repented or no; but
I am sure he was in an Ill condition, if he let his Lamp go out before he had
finished what he had to write. We also read that Hyginus, after he was made
Bishop; took such a Fancy to Live Incognito, that he retired to a Cave, where
he hid himself; 'twas here he writ an Epistle, touching God, and the Inearation
of the Son of God.

But the Men are not Singular in their Love to a Private life, for we find some
Ladies too, as well as the Men, have delighted to live Incognito -- Elizabeth
(commonly called Ioan-Cromwel) the Wife of Oliver Cromwell, chose rather to be a
great Person Incognito (if you will believe the Author of her Life) then to live
in that State and Degree, which her Husbands Grandeur allowed of. It Is true
(says this Author) she kept one Coach, but to avoid Pomp, her Coachman served
her for Caterer, Butler, Cup Bearer and Gentleman Usher -- Her Daughter and She
often went alone into the Country, and there See a further Account of her
private Life in the Book called Elizabeth the Wife of the late Usurper.
would spend whole Days in riding in a Sequestered Caroach, so that she seemed
to affect the Seythian Fashion, who dwelt in Carts and Wagons, and have no
other Habitations. -- She was also the same Recluse in her Habit, rather
Harnessing her self in the Defense of her Clothes, than allowing her self the
loose and open Bravery thereof; and her Hood, till her Face was seen in her
Highnesses Glass, was ^apt on like a Head Piece, without the Arr of ^nsconcing
and entrenching it double and single in Redoubts, and Horn works -- In sine,
she was Cap-a-pe like a Baggage Lady, and was out of her Element in her
Vieinity to the Court and City: She never ca^'d to be seen, and was never easy
but when she lived Inoogni'o And even of Animals, Some live a Solilitary Life,
as the Hare the Pelican, and the Swan; the last of which is Merry at her Death.
-- So (...) the wisest both of Men and Bruits have still preferred a Private
Life to a Public; and the reason See my Irish Conversation. P. 365.
why, a Private Life is preferable to all others, is, because the first
Minister of State has not so much Business in Public, as a Wise Man has in
Private; the one has but part of the affairs of one Nation, the other all the
Works of God and Nature, under his consideration. And therefore 'twas, Scipio
was never less alone, than when he had no Company. Tully when he was thought to
be Idle, Studied most -- And Mison the Philosopher (that he might Study
himself) lived altogether a Solitary Life; when one by chance met him laughing
to himself, and demanding the cause why he laughed having no Company? Answered.
Even therefore do I laugh, because I have no Company with me. I might heap up
Instances of this Nature, but here is enough to show I ben't singular in
desiring to live unknown; certainly, Madam, the pleasantest and most profitable
condiition of Life is to live Incognito. This we find further verified in
Charles V. Emperor of Germany; for after conquering Four Kingdoms, he resigned
up all his Pomp to other Hands, and betook himself to his Retirement; leaving
this Testimony behind him, concerning the Life he spent in the little time of
his retreat from the World, That the sincere study of the Christian Religion,
had in it such Ioys and Sweetness as Courts were Strangers to. And to show to
the World that his resigning his Crown, was the result of Mature Thoughts, upon
transferring his Kingdoms to his Son, he made this following Speech: Other
Princes (says he) leave their Crowns to their Children only at the instant See
a Book called Curia Politiae, p. 1.
when they Dye; that is, when they are not fit to wear the Diadem any longer;
but as for me, I was never willing that Death shoa'd make this Present to my
Son, but rather that he should receive and hold this Blessing from me; and as I
was a means to make him live, so (before I Dyed) I would be a means to make him
reign, and thereby oblige him to me, more entirely. This Speech was no sooner
ended, but he Retreated to a Private House at Bruxelles, and thence he
descended to an humble Hermitage, where he lived about 3 Years, and died.
Certainly it is as brave a thing to quit Crowns and Scepters as to gain and
conquer'em; Though of the Two, I should think it is easier to resign a Crown than
to wear it; and therefore Queen Elizabeth was used to say, If any Man knew the
weight of a Crown, he would not take it up, if it lay in his way. Certainly a
Private Life is the most happy, as it is freed from all Noise and Nonsense,
from all envying, or being envyed. Besides, my Senses, in my Private Retreat,
are feasted with the clear and genuine taste of their Objects, which are all
Sophisticated in Courts and Cities. I now live where I can safely think my
Hours away, and I am heartily sorry I did not Retreat sooner, for I Am weary of
this Villainous World, and the Foolish Impertinences of my own Sex; a wretched
Circle they move in of Vanity and Hurry. But now I am freed from all, and
nothing but the Smiles of Valeria my present Wife.
(whose Sense as well as Sex, affords a more reasonable and Calmer Joy,) could
ever Reconcile me again to London. But why should I despair of seeing her here?
For she is only for a Spiritual Friendship: And I do ass^re her, the Grove
where I daily walk, is profaned by no unholy Love; and so very private, that
it is hardly seen in a Year.

Then 'twere Sweet, 'twere wondrous Sweet,
Could I and Dear Valeria meet,
In this Lonesome Shady Grove,
Full of Friendship, full of Love.
Oh! what Tender things we would say,
Whilst the Minutes flew away.
But I talk of Impossibilities! However; I Will Carve her Name on every Tree, and
Dream of her every Night; yes, I will, Sabina; for Conjugal Love may be very
Passionate: Besides I don't retire from the World that my Thoughts might be
idle, (for the Mind of Man is ever thinking) and if I must think of something,
can it be better employed, then in thinking of her who should Study to make me
Good, and keep me Innocent?

Besides (Madam) a Private Retreat from the World is the only place, where to
Practice your Good Advice, and to live to learn well how to Dye; so that I am
better pleased with living Incognito, (if it does not abate your Friendship)
than they that glitter in the Courts of Kings. -- Thus (Sabina) have I bid the
World good night, before my time to go to Bed; as 'twere on purpose to make a
Trial, of your Friendship; for all Men adore the Rising Sun, but few, or scarce
any, have any Love for his Setting; however, this is my present Case, and I Am
so well pleased with it,

That if one Mortal. Two such Grants might have,
From Private Life, I Would Steal into my Grave;
I Would Live unthought of, and unheard of, Dye;
And grudge Mankind my very Memory, -- Cowley.
But after all I can Write of a Private Life, perhaps you will say, That
Solitariness is a Trespass against the Nature of Man; and God, when he made all
things, saw it was not good for Man to be alone.

Then he who Lives, and makes no Man partaker,
Usurps himself, and closely Robs his Maker.
To this I Answer, -- -- could Man have lived still in Innocence, and Women
would cease tempting, surely nothing had bin so good as a Female Companion,
(for as to the Men, I have nothing to say to 'em,) but since Women have proved
the Devil too, or rather worse, I think it is better to fly 'em all (all save
the Dear Veria) as Joseph did his tempting Mistess: Had our Grandmother Eve
done so at first, She had not bin the Mother of so much Sin and Misery as she
has bin to her Posterity. --

I could say more for Living Incognito (which is the Art I am now learning) but
have tired you and my self too; so shall only add, Your Answer to this Letter
is impatiently desired by,

Your Ladyships most Humble and most Obedient Servant, JOHN DUNTON.

The LADY's Answer to my first LETTER.
SIR,
IF Living Incognito is an Art, it is of Nature's teaching; for it is very
natural for those that are neither pleased with the World, nor the World with
them, to retire from it; which was the case with the Primitive Christians: They
lived amongst the Heathen, that had a very different sense of things from them;
they could not speak their Thoughts, they were so generally disapproved and
condemned; and being sensible their Habits of Virtue were yet but weak, not
thoroughly confirmed by Time and Experience, their Love and Zeal was only
strong, which made 'em fly from the contagion of ill Example and Temptation, as
well as from the fury of Persecution; which was made the easier, by that
contempt they had for Riches, Honor and Pleasure: For I believe at first,
neither Pride, Ambition, or Vainglory, had the least share in so singular and
remarkable a way of Living, as in Caves and Deserts, whatever it may have had
since: But to prevent the imputing our safety to any care and contrivance of
our own, we have seen that which was so innocently designed at first, in tract
of time became the source of all the Superstition, with which the World has
since that time so much abounded. Could they have secured to themselves good
Thoughts, as Dr. Fuller presumed they always had, their Retreat must needs have
been happy: But St. Jerome found it not so well; for in the midst of his
macerating Mortifications, his Imagination brought him a Troop of beautiful
Maids in a Dance, as he himself relates. Then what can stop the current of evil
Thoughts, that follows us in solitude, notwithstanding all our care to get out
of their reach?

That Man the Oracle pronounced happy, had that advantage of having always been
a poor Gardener, honestly employed in getting his Living; so that he had no
temptation to contest with, from without or within; and all the World is agreed
upon the innocent pleasure a Garden gives; he was therefore certainly happy:
But whether the happiest in the World, is a great question; since 'twas
impossible for him to taste and understand his happiness so perfectly, as one
that had experienced another way of Living, and whose Repentance for his passed
Follies might equal his Innocence, and so exceed his Happiness.

I am no stranger to the Pleasures of the retired Life you invite to; I know
and taste it to the full, it is what I have always courted ever since I was at
my own dispose, and which I now am perfectly possessed of, and find in it all
those advantages you mention of subliming ones Thoughts, and setting them above
the World; sure all thinking Persons will study to disintangle themselves from
those ensnaring Delights, as well as from the Cares and Troubles that attend
'em; to which Design, no Age ever gave so fair Advantage: For to love Pleasure
and Conversation, at this time, and in this Town, is to dote upon Crimes and
Folly and if a retreat from it, is Life, according to your estimation; it is
Death to stay in it, according to mine. I wonder whether that Learned Divine
you speak of, has the Art of answering all hard Questions, with the same Ease
he answered that Lady; I wish I knew how she understood him; he seemed to me to
question what is Life, to make answer a young Lady, by which I understand he
meant his own Chief Good; he ought to have added, what was Life to the Lady.

I take the love of Liberty to be taught by Nature, and is that which occasions
the Sallies Kings and Men of Quality make sometimes, for a little ease of the
burden their Place and Quality condemns to, whilst Incognito they taste the
pleasure of Liberty, and may perceive all the Power, Honor and Riches, and all
the Pleasures, the World studies for 'em, and heaps upon 'em; makes up a very
imperfect Happiness; whilst all their Words and Actions are under such
restraint; nay, their very Thoughts and Affections are tied to Rules and
Reasons of State, not merely for the discharge of their Place and Dignity, but
to please others, that others may be pleased with their Greatness; all which is
a violence to Nature, and could never be supported by any that had leisure to
think; unles^ by some great Mind, like our present King, that willingly
sacrifice themselves and all that is dear to 'em, for the Blessing and
Happiness of more Kingdoms than their own.

But it is enough for such ordinary Minds as yours and mine, to put our selves
into a safe retreat, and after the Example of the finest Poets, the wisest
Philosophers, the greatest Saints and Holy Fathers, learn to live with, and
endure ones self; and to show our selves as wise as those, that willingly
undergo any thing for the purchase of Riches; we for the purchase of Time, as
precious to the full, choose to live Incognito, where Time is our own, and none
either borrows or robs us of it; and the only place where we can redeem that
Time we have lost or misspent. This were enough, bating the pleasure, to
justify the choice of Solitude; but the Testimony of a great and wise Emperor
must not be slighted; his Mind looked great, that could think nothing less than
an Imperial Crown, a fit Present for his Son; yet could support it self without
it: And what could look more nise, than in his Retirement, to set himself to
the study of the Christian Religion, and so truly and experimentally declare
the pleasure he found in it, to be that which Courts, and the great Pretenders
to Pleasure, were strangers to; and if there needs any thing more to recommend
it, it is that the Body may share in the Pleasures of this Retirement; while the
Fancy and Imagination, and all other Senses, are entertained in Fields and
Gardens, with more Innocent Objects, than in Courts and Cities.

I know not how your Living in a Private Retreat, to learn well how to Die,
should lessen my Friendship; it rather qualifies you better to be my Friend: I
have no other business in the World but to die, and it is only for that end I
value Friendship, that one may mutually assist each other in this great ^ork:
Your Retirement from the World, does not lessen you in my esteem, therefore in
no trial of my Friendship, but makes you more worthy of it.

Nor can I object against Solitude, because Man was at first made for Society:
Since Man is now so fallen from his first Perfection, he is scarce a reasonable
Creature, or sit Company for Brutes; and for Women, though aspiring to the
excellency of Angels, are arrived no higher than to the state of Evil Spirits,
to prove Tempters, the cause and occasion of all the wickedness the World
abounds with, all which may well acquit us from the Laws of Society, and give
us leave to make the best of so sad a Condition, and learn the Art of Living
Incognito. I am,

Your etc.

LETTER II.
In Praise of Poverty.

Madam,
MY Art of Living Incognito, having been honored with your Approbation, I am
encouraged to pursue my Project of writing on a Thousand Subjects; for this is
to Live Incognito to good purpose, and to show to the World how Solitude may be
Improved. In this Undertaking (as I hinted in my first Letter) I shall tie my
self to no Method, so think it needless to make an Apology that my Second
Letter is a brief Essay

In Praise of Poverty.

Sir Walter Ranleigh, in a Letter to his Wife, after his Condemna^ion, has
these words, If you can Live free from Want, care for no more, for the rest is
but a Vanity. A little Meat suffices to nourish us, a poor Bed (without Rich
Curtains) will serve to repose us, and a little Cottage may well defend us,
both from the extremity of Heat, and bitterness of Cold. I could wish with all
my heart, that every man would set before the Eyes of his Understanding, the
Two Principal Extremities of this Life, and that he would likewise consider, in
what Poverty we are born, and depart again out of this World. Naked we first
entered into this vain world, and naked must we again leave it: Is it not then a
Stupendius Folly, knowing for certain that we are born very poor, and must also
die without carrying any thing with us; to torment our selves so much for the
Loss of our Goods? It is observed that there is this noble and magnanimous
Spirit in the Eagle, that when she is in want, and greatly suffers hunger, that
she scorns to pout, and make a noise, and a clamor, as other Birds will do,
but rests her self satisfied, If I have it not now, I shall have it hereafter
-- And none can be unhappy, who,
Amongst all his ^lls, a Time does know,
Tho never so ill, when he shall not be so. --


The greatest Misfortunes become tolerable in Time: the Sentiment we have of
them is lost, and vanishes away. Poverty, Shame, Diseases, the Moral Essays
Vol. 1. p. 27.
loss of our being abandoned by Friends, Parents, Children, gives us Blows
whose smart lasts not long; the Agitation they give us, by degrees grows less,
till it quite ^ases: Nay, Zeno was wont to say, That the goods of the World did
more hurt then good; which was the cause that made Crates the Thebane, passing
one day from his country of Athens, to follow the study of Philosophy, to
throw all the Gold and Silver he had about him into the Sea, imagining, that
Virtue and Riches could never consist together: Men of the Greatest Sense have
generally dyed Poor: Valerius, Agrippa, etc. as also the good Aris^ides, dyed
so poor, that they were fain by Alms to be buried.

Great Butler's Muse the same ill Treatment had,
Whose Verse shall Live for ever to upbraid
The ungrateful World that left such Worth unpaid.
The Bard at summing up his mis spent days,
Found nothing left but Poverty and Praise;
Of all his Gain by Verse, he could not save
Enough to purchase Flannel and a Grave.
Reduced to want, he in due time fell sick,
Was fain to die, and be interred on Tick.
I might also instance in Epaminondas, King of The^es, in whose Rich House and
Palace was found but one poor Straw-bed, or base Mattress to put in his
Inventory.

What, (says St. Chrysostom,) does distinguish Angels from Men, but that they
are not needy, as we are? And it is ever observed, that Men's Desires increase
with their Riches; and consequently, they that have most, are the most needy;
and therefore the Poor, who have the least in the World, come nearest to
Angels, and those are the furthest off, who need the most. -- He who needs
(says this Father in another place) many things, is a Slave to many things, is
himself the Servant of his Servants, and depends more on them, than they on him
-- So that the increase of worldly Goods and Honors, being but the Increase of
our slavery and dependence, reduces us to a more real and effective misery. --
What has the Bravest of Mortals to glory in? Is it Greatness? Who can be Great
on so small a Round as this Earth, and bounded with so short a course of Time?
How like is that to Castles built in the Air, or to Giants, Modeled (for a
Sport of Snow) which at the better Looks of the Sun, do melt away? But for all
this (says the ambitious man) were I to choose my Station, I Would be a King at
least. How full of Charms is it to imitate the Divine Original of Beings, to
see whole Kingdoms Croutching to me, to be encompassed with bare Heads, where
e're I go; to have the power of Exalting one, and Debasing another, of
disposing of Life and Death; and, in short, to be an Earthly God?

To this I answer, There appears to me a greater happiness in an unenvyed
Cottage, than in the Noisy Crowds of Flatterers. Little does the Plebcian know
how heavy a Crown weighs, how great the Trust is, and how hard to be managed;
It Is the Court that is full of Ambition. Bribes, Treachery, etc. The Watch must
be kept so strictly, that there is no time to act Virtuously. But in the retired
Solitudes of Poverty, one Fourth of our Temptations are lost; the uneasiness of
the Flesh, causes a search after the Quiet of the Mind. I mentioned in my last,
Charles V. Dioclesian, and several others, who laid by their Scepters for
Spades; and I might here tell you how happy the change was --

But 'twill be again objected, That the Rich have many Friends, but few (if
any) caress the Poor. I shall therefore be thought to be half mad, to write
thus in Praise of Poverty, which is Universally despised, but without any good
Reason; for abundance of this World is a Clog to the Christian Pilgrim: With
what difficulty do those that have Riches enter into the Kingdom of Heaven? --
I hear Israel praying in Egypt, quarrelling in the Wilderness; when they were
at their Brick-Kilns, they would be at their Devotion; and no sooner are they
at ease, but they are wrangling for their Flesh Pots. I dare say, many a man
had not been so wicked, if he had but been Poor. It is the saying of a Great
Divine, That Solomon's Riches did him more hurt than his Wisdom did him good.
Affliction and Want do that many times, which fair means cannot; Wealth, like
Knowledge, puffs up, when Poverty makes men flock to Christ. It Is the Poor
receive the Gospel; then how much better is Poverty than Riches, if it carries
me to Heaven? Who would not be a Lazarus for a Day, that he might sit in
Abraham's Bosom for ever? Poverty is despised, but it is the best Physic: I
know not whether Prosperity have lost, or Adversity recovered more: None prays
so heartily for his daily Bread as he that wants it: Misery, like Ionah's Fish,
sends them to their Prayers, that never thought of God under their Gourd. It is
pity fair Weather should do any harm: Yet it is often seen Riches makes many
forget those Friends which Want would make cro^h to. -- But Man cannot be so
much above Man, as that the difference should Legitimate his Scorn (Diogenes
Tub was a poor House, and yet Alexander would come thither to talk with him.)
Then how welcome should that State be which keeps us humble, and brings us
acquainted with God? Who would pursue the World, when Poverty makes us happy?
Alas! Madam, This World is a Liar, and he will find it so, that (like you and
Philaret) does not retreat from it. But tho Men would come to Heaven, yet they
do not like this way; they like well of Lazarus in Abraham's Bosom, but not at
Dives Door. But alas! Riches, like the Rose, are sweet, but prickly; the Honey
does not counter vail the Sting, they end in Vexation; and, like Judas, while
they Kiss, they Petray. Riches, like their Master, are full of Deceit, promise
what they have not. How many have I seen in London, that by much Toil have
gotten a vast Estate, that at last have envied the Quiet Rest and Merry Meals
of their Laborers? Diogenes laying his money at his head, a Thief was very
busy to steal it from him, which troubled him so much, that he could take no
rest; so at last, rather than he would deprive himself of his sweet sleep, he
threw it to him, saying, Take it to thee, thou Wretch, that I may take my Rest.
And I think he was much in the right: My Companion in my present Solitude is
much of Diogenes Temper, for he has parted with all he has, and is now (being
P^or) happy in no bodies Opinion but his own. There is no True Rich Man but the
Contented, nor truly Poor but the Cov^tous. If we can but make the best of our
own, and think our selves well, even when others think not so, we are happy
persons. Socrates passing through the Market, cries out, How much is here I do
not need? Nature is content with little, Grace with less. Poverty lies in
Opinion. The Characterizer of Mr. Pym, p. 4. tells us of a Noble Man, who once
acted the Beggar's part in a Comedy, and ever after persuaded himself to be in
his whole Life what he had Personated on the Stage for one hour. -- So that
it is clear, Opinion is the Rate of things. What is needful, is soon provided;
and Enough is as good as a Feast. I am worth what I do not want. My Occasions
being supplied with but 500. l. what could I do with more? I will not look at
what I have, but what I deserve; and I shall never think my own (...)another's
too much.

It is a greater Misery to desire Much, than to have No ^ing. The Rich are ever
envied, but (tho it is hard) it is safe to be contented with a little. Nay, were
we so contented, we are happy with Nothing, or with a small Pitrance.

Content is all we aim at, with our Store;
And having that, with Little, what needs more? --
The Poor of B -- r Village (where I now live) are as well pleased with their
Hempen S^cks (for the Parish allows no better) as your fine Ladies, whose
delicate Skins are covered with Lawn. -- Contentation is a Blessing, not
Wealth. True Riches consist not in having much, but in not desiring more. Some
think they have not enough, if they have not all. Thus have I seen some Beasts,
not knowing when they were well, burst with feeding.

Did not Diogenes well perceive this, being not illuminated with any other
knowledge, than only that which Nature taught him: When he chose such a kind of
life, which (I think) is unknown to no man, whereby he made himself equal, and
fellow (as it were) with Fortune? Surely, his Estate was most happy, and yet
had he neither Money, Possessions, Medows, Gardens, or Houses; neither would he
that Alexander should bestow any on him. For, as the History notes, Alexander
came one day to behold him as a wonder, and said unto him, Diogenes, behold, I
am ready to supply thy need, because I see thee Poor. Diogenes thus boldly
answered him: I pray thee which of us two seems to be most indigent or needy?
I, who have nothing but my Mantle and my Wallet, neither do desire any more; or
thou, who not contented with thy Fathers Kingdom, do offer thy self to so
many dangers, only through desire thou have to rule; and that desire is so
great, as it seems the whole World will scarce content it? Certainly,
whosoever judges the state of Diogenes unhappy; by like reason may repute
himself most unhappy: perceiving the poor man to be pleased, and himself never
satisfied: The things of this World, are in a manner but Apparitions; not so
indeed: why then do we so labor to abound, and not rather to be content? But
some Men are in such haste to be Rich, that they do not climb, but vault into
Preferment at a Leap: I know not their slight, I mistrust their quickness; few
Men were ever Great and Good in an Instant; all the harm I wish these is, that
their early rising do them no harm; but what does their Wealth signify, seeing
Earth is but our Road to Heaven, and Riches such mean things, that like High
way Fruit, they are common to all -- Besides, what will it profit a man to gain
the whole world, and lose his Soul? I will grudge no Man Riches, if he has 'em
(as most have) upon those Terms. It shall suffice me there is another World to
come, and that mine (if I follow Sabina's Advice) shall begin when this is
ended. -- I will be content to want this for a while, that I may enjoy that
other for ever. What is Dives the better to out shine Lazarus, and at last die
and be damned? The good Man takes his God as he does his Wife, for Richer for
Poorer, in sickness and in health: We may not always judge of God's Favor by
his Bounty; I am but a Novice in Religion, if I think I can be God's Son, and
miserable. A Rich Court is a goodly sight, but he that looks up to Heaven, will
not care for the World. All the Afflictions of this World cannot answer the
Joys of that other. Then where is the Damage in being poor? For as Fortune is
not my Landlady, so I fear not her displeasure; and, which still adds to the
Happiness of a Poor Condition, if I posses nothing, my Account is the less. But
to the Disgrace of Riches, it is hard in Prosperity for Men to remember
themselves, and what they have received of God; we are apt to forget what we
have been, when we are changed for the better. Pharoah's Butler has forgot he
was a Prisoner. It is too true that too many love God for their own sakes,
either they are poor, and would be raised, or they are sick and would be
healed; and like Beggars, no sooner are they served, but they are gone -- I
could tell ye (Madam) of a Miser worth Hundreds, that never did a Generous Act,
but promised mighty things if he arrived to such an Estate. If I had his Wealth
(as I am Heir to it) and do no more good, I shall add to my Condemnation,
together with my Store: I will therefore study rather to use my little well,
than to increase it -- God is therefore bountiful to us, that we might be so to
others: He alone has the true use of Wealth, that receives it only to disburse
it.

Dionysius the Elder, entering into his Son's Lodging, and beholding there
great store of Rich Jewels and Gold, said unto him, My Son, I did not give thee
these Riches to use in this sort, but to impart them to thy Friends. But so few
spend their Riches as they ought, that I think Poverty preferrable to Wealth;
and the rather, as Poverty comes not from the East, nor from the West, but from
God himself. He has said to every Man, Rule thou hare, or work thou there, be
this, or thus: Then why do Men grudge at their Wants, when it is not Chance,
but Providence? It is less praise to be Rich, than to be able to despise the
world; the less I have here, the more I have to come. No Lazarus would change
states with that Dives, who if he might but live again, would be Lazarus to
choose: Then who'd make haste to be Rich? I hear Israel child, not for eating,
but for laying up their Manna. -- If Prosperity make me fond of Life, or afraid
of dying, it had been better for me, if it had not been so well. It Is true,
when Fortune smiles upon a Man, his Relations that shunned his Company when it
frowned upon him, flock to him again, as if he were come from a strange
Country, to welcome him home; they now offer their Services, with a thousand
Protestations of the sincerest Friendship to him, whom a little before they
denied to have a drop of their Blood in his Veins. But tho the only thing Men
are valued for, is their Money, yet a Moderate Fortune is the only thing to be
wished and prayed for in this World, lest we be either tempted to Wantonness,
through a too great Plenty; or pressed into Despair by the Sting of a pinching
Necessity. I will pray therefore with Agur, Lord, give me neither Wealth nor
Poverty, but a Mean; or if Wealth, Grace to employ it; If Poverty, Patience to
endure it: If I Am Poor and Honest, I can ne^e be unhappy; for then God is my
Father, the Angels are my fellows, Heaven is my Inheritance, and what can I ask
more, save to be in that blessed place, where Riches have no Wings, and every
Lazarut wears a Crown. -- And as in Heaven the Poorest Man is a King, so on
Earth they are so dear to God, that Solomon tells us, He that mocketh the Poor,
reproacheth his Maker; and, which would make one in love with Poverty, they
that have least, are freest from Cares. The Poor are in no danger from Plots,
or robbing -- The moneyless Traveller can sing before a Thief; Neither is he
that is as poor as Job, in any danger of starying; for in most Churches they
have that Respect for the Needy, that it is writ in Capital Letters, (as in
Cripplegate Church) -- Pray remember the Poor -- And Heaven it self has taken
that care of 'em, that in Cases of Wrong, Restitution must be made to the Poor,
where the right Owner is dead; and to encourage the Rich to be Kind, nothing
makes their Names shine so much as Charity.

Salvian says, that Christ himself is Mendicorum maximus, the greatest Beggar
in the world, as one that shareth in all his Saints necessities, and will never
forget the charitable person. Cicero could say, That to be rich, is not to
possess much, but to use much. And Seneca could rebuke them that so studied, to
increase their wealth; that they forgot to use it. I have read of one Evagrius
a rich man, that lying upon his Deathbed, being importuned by Synesius a pious
Bishop; to give something to charitable uses, he yielded at last to give three
hundred Pounds; but first took Bond of the Bishop that it should be repayed him
in another world before he had been one day dead. He is said to have appeared
to the Bishop, delivering in the Bond cancelled, as thereby acknowledging what
was promised was made good, according to that promise.

What we give to the Poor, we secure from the Thief; but what we with hold from
his Necessity, a Thief possesses. God's Exchequer is the Poor Man's Box; when
we strike a Tally, he becomes our Debtor. Faelix the Fifth, being demanded,
whether he kept any Hounds? he brought them that asked him to a place where a
great company of poor people sat down together at Dinner, saying, Behold,
these are my Hounds, which I feed daily, with the which I hope to hunt for the
Kingdom of Heaven. St. Chrysostom was a rare Spokes-man for the Almighty's Box
(such are the Poor) when he said, That God commanded Alms, not so much for the
Poors sake, as the good of the Rich: -- Another calls Charity to the Poor, An
Art the most thriving of all Arts. Nay, the Almighty often makes present
payment (knowing how hardly he can get Credit from our Insidelity) and even in
Temporals. Thy bread cast upon the Waters, makes better than Fast India
Voyages. -- But if the Rich should be hard hearted, the Poor have Law on their
side, and can force the Parish (where they were born) to keep 'em. -- And if
they happen to be Kin to Estates, and han't Moneys to claim their Right, yet
they can sue in Forma-Pauperis; and if the Lawyers were honest, I don't see but
the Poor are the most likely to carry the Day, as their Necessities plead, as
well as the Lawyer, and the Justice of their Cause -- Or if they are bauk'd in
a Just Suit, the worst that can be said, is, -- There goes a Poor (injured)
Honest Man, which is more Honorable than to have it said, -- There goes a Rich
Knave. But suppose they had no Advocate, yet at worst they can beg for their
daily Bread, and then when they sleep, Heaven is their Canopy, and Mother Earth
their Pillow. Beggars, more than others, seem to be the peculiar Care of
Providence. Then who'd be a King, when a Beggar Lives so well? or if all
support for their bodies fail, to stand their ground, and look to Heaven for a
handful of supply, speaks their Faith: At a Lions Den, or a fiery Furnace, not
to turn our back, is a Commendation worthy a Prophet. -- When our Savior would
put to silence the distrusters of his Time, he points them to the Lillies of
the Field, (not of the Garden; which are dug and dung'd) but of the Field,
which have no Gardener but the Sun, no watering Pots but the Clouds; and your
Heavenly Father (says he) clothes these. -- Then who'd be afraid of Poverty,
that has such a merciful Father to go to? -- It Is true, the Poor are Slaves to
the Rich, and their words little regarded. We read of a Poor Wise Man, that by
his Wisdom delivered a City; yet no Man remembered that Poor Man. Yet this Text
adds to the Honor of Poverty, as it makes it the Touchstone to try a Friend.
-- A Friend in need is a Friend indeed. -- And there be some (tho very few)
that have Souls brave enough to own a Friend in a Prison. A Friend loves at
all times, and Prove. 17. 17.
a Brother is born for Adversity. -- -- For my own share, (for I Will speak the
Truth, tho to my own praise) I never loved a Friend the worse for being either
poor, miserable, or See more to this effect in my Irish Conversation, p.
despised. --

Thus have I made it out, (to the praise of Poverty) that Earth is a place of
Penance, and that Brown Bread and the Gospel is 'Twas a saying of Pious Dod.
good Fare. Earth is a place of Toil and Labor, and men go not to work in
their best Clothes. Men should do well to furnish their Insides a little
better, and let the Body shift. I never heard any man blamed for his Rags, but
I hear it upbraided to one, that he went in Purple. -- I might further add, to
the Honor of Poverty, That the Savior of the World was born in a Stable; and
tho the Foxes had Holes, and the Birds of the Air had Nests, yet the Son of Man
had not where to lay his Head. In the Poor we Moral Essays, Vol. 1, p. 145.
Honor the Poverty of Jesus Christ, his Humilimility in those that are Humble,
and his sufferances in the Afflicted.

Thus (Madam) have I sent ye my Thoughts of Poverty which tho writ in a
solitary Grove, yet have something in 'em that I hope will please ye; and if
they do (tho my Notions are some of 'em New) no man will ever censure 'em; or
if any presume to dislike what you approve of, I shall not value it, whilst you
permit me the Honor of subscribing my self,

Your most Devoted Friend and Servant JOHN DUNTON.

The LADY's Answer to my Second LETTER.
SIR,
I Confess I have, as well as you, observed, that Poverty is much despised: I
have known some Persons, tho Pretenders to Religion, speak with more Contempt
of those they knew to be Poor, than of those that were by all detested for
their Vices; yet I cannot but think it worth ones w^le to be poor, were it only
for the advantage of knowing ones self and others. A Friend is not known in
Prosperity, nor can an Enemy be hid in Adversity. I never fail to set a mark
upon those despisers of Poverty, as very blind and ignorant of the Blessings of
the Gospel; Even many of them that are Teachers of it, have seemed to overlook
that great Lesson our Savior teaches of dependence upon God, and the danger of
Riches, upon the sole account of trusting to 'em. I own it is the best thing
this World can pretend to, yet like it self as full of Cares, Troubles, and
Vexations, and is given to the Children of this World as their Proper Portion;
for they are capable of no better; and because God will be Debtor to none,
those Corrupt and Imperfect Services they render him, shall be rewarded with
such Corruptable and Imperfect Blessings as Riches can procure 'em.

There Is hardly any instance can be given of their ever making any person more
Religious and Devout, more indifferent, and weaned from the World, more humble
and resigned to God, both in obeying and suffering his Will. These are the
Virtues attending Poverty, which are carefully entertained by all such as
aspire to those Perfections.

All the Virtue Riches pretends to, is the making choice of some Persons, to
bless, as they believe, with their Riches, when they die, and perhaps impart
some of their Superfluity, while they Live, to some miserable people, whom they
esteem so for being Poor, with intent to make 'em their slaves.

But whatever Usage the World gives one for being Poor, it matters not, nor
lessens the Blessing at all: We set a greater value upon the World than it
deserves, to rate ones happiness by their Esteem. But whether they will allow
it or no, to bear Poverty as one ought, deserves Honor, and it is better to
deserve it than to have it.

Not to be dejected with Poverty, and the Contempt it lies under, shows a Right
Judgment of the World, and the things of it, and speaks a Great Mind, supported
with Nobler Objects; not so weak or Childish, to be uneasy in the want of Toys
and Trifles; for so one may call all those Superfluities that are thought
necessary to purchase Esteem and Respect in this vain world. God knows our True
and Real Necessities, and never fails to furnish such as rely upon him; his
Liberal hand makes all Rich whom he blesses: Even in Poverty, when he gives us
Grace to seek the Kingdom of Heaven, that one Blessing adds all the rest; and
what can give us better Means and Opportunity for that, then Poverty? For by
cuting off all Excess, it makes us Wise, Moderate, and Sober; it brings us to
Thinking and Consideration, etc. And then concludes in Humilation and
Thankfulness, which God will do us the Honor to accept, and that Crowns all.

But such Advantages are rarely found in Riches, it is possible with God
sometimes to make 'em Blessings; but with Men it is impossible, especially to
those that seeks and desires 'em. But compare 'em both together in their worst
Capacity, Riches does more mischief than Poverty; and it is only for the Love of
Riches when Poverty does any mischief at all. So that I perfectly agree with
you in your thoughts of Poverty, which I prefer much before Riches, both in
their best and worst use And after Death, pray tell me what has the Rich to
boast of more than the Poor? For Alexander seeing Diogenes tumbling among dead
Bones, asked him what he sought? To whom the other answered, that which I
cannot find, the difference between the Rich and the Poor. I am,

Your, etc.

LETTER III.
Of the (Athenian) Itch.

Madam,
I Might inform you how studious I have been from my Youth, and how curious to
know more than's Revealed: But when I read what mighty things some men promise
themselves, and what braggings and boastings when they have discovered any
thing; it makes me conclude, that God will never give a Blessing to such a
violent pursuit after Knowledge, that will not keep within its bounds: Even
Cutting for the Stone in the Kidneys, was once practiced with good success, but
is now, and ever since Gallen's Time, lost and forgotten; and the same thing we
may say of other Curious Discoveries. But as fruitless as our Curiosity is,
it is now become a general Distemper. For Dr. Wild See his Poem on the New
Parliament.
says, We all are seized with the Athenian Itch. And in the Book called, The
Visions of the Soul, P. 118.
you have these words, Mr. Dunton, and Mr. Smith, the Coffee-man, desire to
know, whether there be any Cure for the Athenian Itch. I quote this Passage and
Book, to show there is such a Distemper (tho 'twas never mentioned by any
Physician.) Athenian Mercury, Vol. 1. Numb. 1.
All Ages (as if Athens had been the Original) have been Curieus in their
Enquiries; Curiosity it self is so much a part of Nature, that it is seldom laid
aside till the whole Frame is dissolved: Yet some few recover; (of which I Am
one Instance); for my Living Incognito has quite cured my Athenian Itch.

I mean that vain desire of knowing more then is revealed, which Saint Paul
blames in the Athenians of old.) -- Thou bring Acts. 16. V. 20, 21, 22.
certain strange things to our Ears, (said these Athenians to Paul,). We would
know therefore what these things mean. -- These Athenians spent their Time in
nothing else but in vain Disquisitions. -- Paul seeing this, stood up in the
midst of Mars-hill, and said, Ye Men of Athens, I perceive that in all things
ye are too Superstitious, etc. I need say little to prove I Am cured of this
Itch; my forsaking London, and all Company, plainly shows it. -- Or if I was
never so curious, where could I be Resolved? If now I Would be asking Questions, it
must be of Solitary Groves, of speechless Birds, and a Poor Landlady, that
scarce knows her Right Hand from her Left. -- But it matters not; for when
Athens had done answering Questions, there was a stop put to my Curiosity, and
my Cell has so finished my Cure, that I now Itch after Nothing: I am well
contented with knowing no more (relating either to this World, or the next) but
what I can learn from -- The Holy Bible, -- The Port Royal, -- and your
Ingenious Letters. And seeing these limit my Curiosity, I may boldly write --

Of the Athenian Itch. --
The Athenian Itch is a catching Distemper; it is not only in one or two
Houses, but it spreads every where. And it is observed, that as the bodily. Itch
chiefly lies in the hands, (and therefore we usually say, our fingers itch to
do such a thing) so the Athenian Itch chiefly affects the Ear; and it is no
small Misfortune that this Mental Itch should lie more in the Ears than in any
other part of the Body. -- For the Ears are the Doors of the Soul; without
these we were but Artificial Creatures, Men only in show: Hence we know, we
discourse, we believe, we learn to speak to God, and hear God speak to us;
without these we could not speak, nor know, nor understand. In a word, by these
(under God) we are what we are -- Then e'nt it pity such useful Organs should
be defiled with the Athenian Distemper? But so, it is, and I scarce know a Man
but has itching Ears: I was pestered with this Itch for 5 years my self,
(witness the Athenian Mercury, which continued for that time); but being cured,
I would do my best to cure others, more especially those Nice Querists that my
Athenian Mercury has any ways infected. But I undertake the Cure of these Men
with small hopes of Success; for tho with common things Men are little
affected, (while Moses does only what the Magicians can, he is slighted), yet
Men are taken with something that is not ordinary. All Samaria will run out to
see a Man can tell them all that ever they did; and I doubt whether the
Apostles drew not more after their Miracles, than their Doctrine; when they
begin to heal, and cast out Devils once, Simon Magus will be one too: But this
Athenian Itch is Destructive to Soul and Body; when Adam would better his
knowledge, he lost his dwelling in Paradise; and when those Builders of Babel
would mend their Dwelling they lost their knowledge. The Itch of finding the
Philosophers Stone, or of being great, or pointed at, how many has it undone?
For my share, I will never more care to be, or to know that which I know shall
repent me: What Honor is it to James the Second that he was once King? or to
me (in my Private Cell) that I have once been Somebody? It Is clear that in some
Cases, and some things, a Man may know too much. It is not good to be prying
into the Privy Councels of God, St. Austin being asked what God did before he
made the World, Answered, He was making a Hell for such Curious Inquirers. --
Thus dealt Demaratus with a Curious and Importunate Fellow that had oftentimes
asked of him, Who was the honestest man in Sparta? He that resembles thee
least, quoth he unto him. -- The Answer also of an Egyptian was not unsitly
made to one that sk'd him, What he carried there folded? It is wrapped up (quoth
he) because thou should not know what it is? A vain Curiosity is hateful and
greatly to be blamed in every one. -- The Example of Socrates is very
memorable, and to be imitated, who being demanded, What the World was?
Answered, That since be had any Judgment, he gave himself to seek out the True
Knowledge of Himself, which yet he could never find -- But so soon as he had
attained thereunto, then he would seek for other things that would do him no
Service or Pleasure. -- And Aristotle burned with such a desire of Curiosity,
in understanding the Causes of Natural Things, that because he could not know
and conceive the Cause and Nature of the Flowing and Ebbing of the Sea, flung
himself into it. And I liny the Elder, whilst he was overcurious in searching
out the Cause of the Burning Aetna, was burned therein --

There are others also no less hurtful, who have been such Curious Inquisitors
of the Causes of all Natural Things, that through frivolous and unprofitable
Questions, they have fallen into that Impiety, as to seek for another beginning
of all things than God; whereupon this Proverb arose -- Of Three Physicians,
one Atheist. --

Neither are they less to be blamed, who hearken and enquire so curiously after
other men's Faults and Imperfections. This Cariosity (says Plutarch) is commonly
joined which Envy and Evil-speaking, and is by that Excellent Philosopher
compared to Adultery, which may be called a Curious Enquiry after another
Bodies pleasure. If there be any One Imperfection in a Stock or Kindred; if any
Infamy, Fault, Error, or Evil Government in a House, it is the Delight of
Curious Folks to learn that thoroughly, that they may sport themselves, and tell
long Stories of them; by that means using their Memory for a Loathsome Register
of other Men's Vices; and yet neither see or know any Fault of their own. And
therefore Diogenes beholding one of his Scholars in a public place, talking
very earnestly with a Young Man that was thought to be Le^d, demanded what Talk
they had? To whom the Scholar answered, That the other rehearsed unto him a
Notable Trick of Youth, which his Brother had played the Night before. Then
Diogenes said to them both, My will and pleasure is, that each of you have 40
Stripes with a Whip, within the Amphitheatre; thou (quoth he to his Scholar)
for giving Ear unto him, and he for the Folly related; because a Philosopher
deserves as much for hearkening to Folly recited, as does the Vagabond that
rehearses it. -- And certainly to shun all Curious Enquiry into others
Imperfections, is the way more diligently to look into our own; but this is
little considered; for as fatal as a Vain Curiosity has proved to Several, (as
you will hear anon).

Yet still methinks we fain would be
Catching at the Forbidden Tree;
We would be like the Deity. -- Cowley.
There Is nothing the Nature of Man is more desirous of, than Knowledge; he
pursues it to a Fault, and will fly even to Hell it self to advance it. -- I
doubt whether some men's overboldness with the hidden things of God, have not
made them an accursed thing to them; and pressing before their Time, or Leave,
into the Holy of Holies, have barred themselves from ever coming thither at
all. It Is true, God Almighty could send one frow the Dead, to reveal to us
those things we are so Curious to Know: But from God's Power, to argue it is his
Will, is no good Logic in the School of Heaven: He does what ever he pleases
both in Heaven above, and in the Earth below; and what he pleases to reveal to
us, we know; and what he has not so revealed, are Secrets locked up in his own
Eternal Counsel, which it is a bold and presumptuous Curiosity for any Creature
to Enquire into. -- There is no doubt but he can make as many Worlds as there
are Stars in Heaven, if it pleases him; but that he has done so, he has not yet
revealed, nor is it therefore our Duty to enquire. -- Why should we call for
Light, where God will have none, and make Windows into Heaven? I will admire
God in Himself, and be content to know him no farther than in his Word. Where
this Light leaves me, I will leave enquiring, and boast of my Ignorance. To be
wise unto Sobriety, is an Excellent Rule, prescribed us by the Apostle; and the
Reason (says (a) Mr. Turner) is obvious enough to any Man of competent In his
History of Providence.
Sense and Brains; For Adam, by an affectation of Knowing more than was
necessary, came to know more than was comfortable; and an insatiate Desire of
Wisdom (adds this Author) is certainly a Symptom of the hereditary Disease
derived to us from him.

The First of Men from hence derived his Fall,
He sought for Secrets, and found Death withal.
Secrets are unfit Objects for our Eyes,
They blind, us in beholding; he that tries.
To handle water, the more hard he strains,
And gripes his Hand, the Less his Hand retains.
That Mind that is troubled with the pleasing Itch,
Of knowing Secrets, having flown a pitch
Beyond it self, the higher it ascends,
And strives to know, the Less it apprehends. (...)
God has set us bounds to all our Disquisitions, and if we do not keep within
compass, we forfeit our Faculties, and expose our selves to all the Dangers;
that are out of ken; whatever we do let us do prudently, and have a Regard to
some good end: For whatsoever is more than this, is more than is Needful, Safe,
or Honorable. -- Surely no Man will doubt this, that observes what Divine
Judgments have fallen upon some that would have known more then they should; I
could heap up Instances of this Nature, but shall only Relate the Judgments
that befell the Curiosity of an Officer, that came to Mr. Perreauds* house. --
Dr. Dee. -- Mr. Kelly. -- John Faustus, -- and a young man in London. --

I begin with the Officer -- who was a Papist belonging to a Court of Justice.
-- This Man came out of Curiosity to Mr. Perreauds House, and hearing that the
Devil foretold future things there, and some Secrets, he would needs Question
him about many Matters; but Mr. Perreaud desired him to forbear, Representing
to him both the Sin and the Danger of it: The Lawyer rejected his Counsel with
Scorn, bidding him Teach his own Flock, and let him have the Government of
himself; and so proceeded to propound several Questions to the Devil, as about
absent Friends, Private Business, News, and State Affairs; unto all which the
Devil answered him; and then added, Now, Sir, I have told you all that you have
desired of me, I must tell you next what you demanded not, That at this very
time, you are propounding these Questions to the Devil, such a Man, (whom he
Named) is Debauching your Wife; and then he further disovered many secret and
foul Practices of the Lawyer. Neither was this all; for in conclusion, the
Devil told him, Now, Sir, let me correct you for being so bold as to Question
with the Devil; you should have taken the Ministers safe Counsel. -- Then upon
a sudden the whole Company saw the Lawyer drawn by the Arm into the midst of
the Room, where the Devil whirled him about, and gave him many Turns, with
great swiftness, touching the ground only with his Toe, and then threw him down
upon the Floor with great violence; and being taken up, and carried to his
house, he lay sick and distracted a long Ses the Narrative of the Devil of
Mascon.
time.

The Curiosity of Dr. Dee was also severely punished, This man was an Excellent
Scholar, and Mathematician, of the University of Oxford; he was desirous of a
great deal of Knowledge; (which was commendable enough) but making it his
Prayer to God to make him wiser than the rest of Mankind, he was, by the Divine
Judgment, given over to strong Delusions, and sadly imposed upon by the
Apparition of Evil Spirits, under the disguise of good Angels, who promised to
help him to the Philosophers Stone; but never left him till they had drein'd
him of what Wealth he had; so that he died very poor, and every way miserable.
AllMen (adds my Author) may take warning by this Example, how they put
themselves out of the protection of Almighty God, either by unlawful Wishes, or
by seeking to Devils, Witches, Conjurers, Astrologers, Fortune Tellers, and Dr.
M. Casaubon's Relat. of Dr. Dee's Actions with Spirits. Pr.
the like. --

I should next relate the Judgment that fell upon Edward Kelly, for prying too
far. Secret things belong to God; and therefore (said one of the Fathers) where
the Scripture has not a mouth to speak, we should not have an Ear to hear; but
this Curious Wretch forgetting this, Consults with the Devil; he would rather go to
Hell for Knowledge, than be ignorant of any thing. --

But see the Event of this Vain-Curiosity; for (Dr. Casaubon tells us, that)
clambering over a Wall in his own house, in Prague, (which bears his Name to
this day) he fell down from the Battlements, broke his Legs, and so bruised his
Body, that he dyed in a few days. --

Then again there was John Faustus must needs study the Black-Art, that he
might Know more than others; and that he might never be puzzled with Nice
Questions, it is said, he led about with him an Evil Spirit, in the likeness of
a Dog, to consult with, as occasion offered. But for all his Familiar Devil,
Divine Vengeance followed his Curiosity; for coming into an Inn in the Dukedom
of Wittenburg, he sat very sad, and when his host demanded the cause thereof,
he answered, that he would not have him affrighted, if he heard a Noise, and
shaking of the house that Night; which happened according to his own Prediction;
for in the Morning he was found dead by his bedside, with his Neck wrung
behind him, and the house where he lay beaten down VVanly, Hist. Man.
to the ground.

Neither must I forget to mention the Bold Curiosity of that Young Man Mr.
Baxter mentions. -- There is (says Mr. Baxter) now in London, a Youth, the Son
of a very Godly Conforming Minister, who reading a Book of that Art called
Conjuration, coming to the Words and Actions which that Book said would cause
the Devil to appear, was presently desirous to see him. He came (says he) to
me in Terror, having before opened his Case to a Parish Minister, and affirmed
to me that the Devil had appeared to him, and solicited him with a Knife to cut
his Throat; and told him he must do it suddenly, for he would stay no longer.
Mr. Baxter told him how safe he was, if he repented (of his Vain Curiosity),
but never heard of him more. --

(...) might enlarge, but here be Instances enough to check our Vain Curiosity,
and to show how ill those Men succeed, that to be cured of the Athenian Itch,
go to the Devil for Brimstone. -- Sure I am, to give way to Vain Curiosities,
will disquiet our Minds, but will never amend 'em. -- Yet we have a wicked
Custom in London, of Gentlemen's studying the Controversies for Ornament, not
taking them to Heart, nor handling them with that Reverence they ought; but
Nice Points have never been my study: I never put my Sickle into the Divines
Harvest, but leave Disputations to those whom God has marked for his Ministry:
Or, suppose (which was never known) I should Itch but Once to try how pleasing
Sin would be, yet at Adam's Price I should buy this Painted Apple, and thereby
lose that Paradise of Innocence, and sweet Serenity of Mind which before I
enjoyed; and therefore, that I may check this Curious Temper in others, as well
as my self, when ever I meet with those that are too inquisitive, I never
answer One of their Questions; for I have observed, that your Open Ears are
Open Mouthed, and they that are craving to hear, are apt to tell.

The Ambassadors of the King of Persia were at Athens invited to a Feast,
whereat also Plutarch's Morals, p. 506.
were present diverse Philosophers, who to improve the Conversation, discoursed
of many things both for and against; amongst whom was Zeno, who being observed
to to sit Silent all the while, the Ambassadors pleasantly demanded what they
should say of him to the King their Master: Nothing (said he) farther than
this, That you saw at Athens an Old Man who knew how to hold his Tongue. -- And
Metellus, the Roman General, being once asked by a Young Centurion, what Design
he had now in hand? He told him, That if he thought his own Shirt was privy to
any part of his Counsel, he would immediately pluck it off, and burn it. --
That I may imitate these Grave Examples, I never desire to know much of another
Man's Estate, nor impart much of my own. -- Never any Man repented him of
(being satisfied with plain Truths, and of) saying nothing. --

Then Sabina, weary not your self with Scruples, and Empty Niceties in
Divinity, but leave them to the Learned Dens; for I have shown, (in the
Instance of Dr. Dee and others) that these would not be Ignorant of God's
Secrets; as if it were a matter of nothing to be saved, unless we also know
what God will have unknown. -- For my own share, I think that sufficient which
God has thought enough for me to know* and do only seek to know what is just
necessary to salvation, what that is, is couch't in a few words; Eccl. 12. v.
13.
Fear God, and keep his Commandments, is the whole Du y of Man; and therefore
King James was much in the right, when he told us, Disputations were the Scab
of the Church: It Is Practical Divinity that must bring us to Heaven. When Dr. S
-- h and Dr. S -- k have vented, and banded all their subti^ty, each against
other, many Pious Men will judge it no other than a Witty Scolding. --

As Curious as our Wits are, which of 'em can tell me what my Soul is (except
in Terms more dark than those by which I know it already) and how it acts in a
separate State? Where Is the Divine can unriddle the Doctrine o^ the Trinity,
Resurrection and Incarnation of the Son of God? He that is Just in his
Dealings, and practices those plain Truths delivered by a Dod or a Preston,
lives as if he out-knew our greatest Disputants. -- The Jews proceeding this
way, infinitely takes me who as often as they fell upon any difficult place in
Scripture, would say, -- We know that Elias will come, and tell us all things.
But Dr. Brown has a better way of Resolving Doubts, and therefore I make his
Religio Medici my Pocket-Companion. -- The Physic he prescribes for the
Athenian Itch, is a certain Cure, and which shows him a good Christian, (tho
Physician to Charles 2.) he does not make the way to Heaven more difficult than
it really is. But when I meet with Doubts, that neither he, nor the Divine, can
decide I have recourse to this sure Decider of all Differences, -- Dominus
Dixit, -- and that makes me easy; for my Cell has cured my Vain Curiosity, and
I am satisfied with a Plain Trath. --

But these Busy Wits that Itch to propound Acute Questions, are fitly compared
to the Sun in March, who then exhales Humors, but dissolves them not. Were
their Positions only frivolous, they were more tolerable; but they commonly end
in horrid Blasphemy. -- Laurentius Valla hearing a Cardinal dispute sublimely
of God. and his Subordinate Spirits, said to his. Companion, And I could
produce too, such Keen Arguments against my Christ; but I spare so Great a
Majesty. -- And some of late years, whose Curiosity and Wit has not led to such
Blasphemy, yet have been so Foolhardy, as to presume to be more of the Cabinet
Counsel of God Almighty, than the Angels themselves (by whose Ministry, some
say, he created the World). These have pointed at the precise Time of the
World's Dissolution; others have been so curious as to find out the Ancient
Place of Paradise, (there was lately a Book published on that Subject) and what
sort of Fruit that was which Eve gave to her Husband. But these Curious
Observations, like our small Watches, not one in an hundred goes true. And how
should they? for Man's proper place is the Earth; if he is raised up into the
Air, he is disordered; in the Water he drowns, in the Fire he burns; the
Spirit's place is the Body, which soaring above the Matter, afflicts and
destroys it self. -- When a Soul shall proceed in Matters of Religion by
Politic Ways, and suffer it self to be pleased with Curiosity, which
incessantly moves it to draw the Curtain of Holy Mysteries, to see what passes
in Heaven; such Spirits are Weak and Ignorant, since they fail in the first
Rule of Wisdom, which discovers to us, that it is an absolute Folly to be
desirous to measure things Divine by the Rule of Sense and Humane Experience.
-- The Wit and Mind of Man, if it works upon Matter (which is the
Contemplation of the Creatures of God) it works according to the Stuff, and
is limited thereby: but if it works upon it self, as the Spider works upon
his Web, then it is endless, and brings forth indeed Gobwebs of Learning,
admirable for the fineness of the Thread, but of no substance nor profit. --
Oh, Athenian Itch, to what daring Height does thy Disease carry Men! But, Uain
Curiose, (with Sabina's leave) a word in thy Ear:

Like Prometheus, filch no Sacred Fire,
Lest Eagles gripe thee; let thy proud desire
Suit with thy Fortunes. Curious Minds that shall
Mount up with Phaeton, shall have Phaeton's Fall.
He that knows enough for Practice, and yet spends his time in search after
more Knowledge; it is a labor and search like unto his, who not contented with
a known and safe Ford, will presume to pass over the greatest River, in all
parts, where he is ignorant of the depths; for so does the one lose his Life,
and the other his Understanding; even as that man, who not contenting himself
with the abundant Light of the Sunbeams, but seeking with his Eyes to pierce
through the Brightness thereof, even unto the midst of the Circle of the Body,
must questionless become blind; so falls it out for the most part to those
who go about too curiously to enquire after that which is not lawful to be
known. We behold the Sun, and enjoy its Light as long as we look toward it but
tenderly and circumspectly; -- We warm our selves safely whilst we stand near
the Fire, but if we seek to outface the one, or enter into the other, we
forthwith become blind or burnt. --

-- -- So odorous Flowers,
Being held too near the Censor of our Sense,
Render not pure, nor so sincere their Powers,
As being held a little distance thence. --
In a word, it is ill dancing for Nimble Wits on the Precipices of Dangerous
Doctrines; for tho they escape by their Agility, others (encouraged by their
Examples) may be brought to destruction. --

To leave the Curiosity of our Town Wits and Conjurers, (those Junior Devils,
that wear the Impostor's Badge) I Will next visit the Philosopher; and his
Curiosity is such, that he has no sooner read a Leaf in Seneca. but he would be a
Privy Counselor to the Stars, a Member of the Athenian Society, a Resolver of
all Questions. And now, Physics and Metaphysics, have at ye. Oh, how he loves
to search into the Secrets of Nature! But which of 'em all can tell me the
Longitude at Sea, or the Reason of the Flux and Reflux of that unquiet Element?
-- It Is true, Cowley tells us, Philosophers are so very curious, that

Nature's great Works no distance can obscure,
No smallness her near Objects can secure;
They Have taught the Curious Sight to press
Into the privatest Recess
Of her Interceptable Littleness;
They Have learned to read her smallest Hand,
And have begun her deepest sense to understand.
Fie! fie! Cowley! Why do you bauter these Philosophers thus? For you're very
sensible the more they know, the more Ignorant they know they are. -- But now I
think on it, Dissimulation is State Policy, and Poets set out themselves as
Aristotle did his Books, not to be understood at first sight. -- You must own,
Mr. Cowley (tho you flat er these Virtuoso's) that even Diogenes, Crates,
peer'd not far into the Secrets of Nature, and that our Modern Philosophers,
such as Discartes, Legrand, etc. knew as little as they. Nay, there is the Royal
Society (tho composed of the best, and most Knowing Men in the World) cannot
tell us why the Loadstone always turns to the North? Why a Lion trembles at the
sight of a Cock? Even the great Basil was puzzled about the Body of a little
Pismire. No, Madam, as Curious as the Philosophers are, they have not yet
attained a perfect Understanding of the smallest Flower, See my Essay on
knowing our friends in Heaven, p. 34.
and why the Grass should rather be Green than Red? They Will affirm, That an
Ague is Witchcraft, that Air is but Water rarefied, that there is another World
of Men and Creatures, with Cities and Towns in the Moon; That the Sun is lost;
for it is but a Cleft in the Lower Heavens, through which the Light of the
Highest shines. -- Oh senseless Curiosity for Men to waste their Time in such
i^lle Dreams: Or could these Magi prove what they say, yet still they Live in
the Dark; For what is all they know (by their most curious Searches) compared
with what they know not? -- They have, perhaps, Artificial Cunning, but how
many Curiosities be framed by the least Creatures in Nature, unto which the
Industry of the most Curious Virtuoso's does not attain? But I Will leave 'em in
a fond Pursuit of they know not what.

And next, step to the Chemist, to see how modest I shall find him. -- Modest!
he is more curious than the former, and to as little purpose. -- He has already
melted many a fair Manor, in Crucibles, and turned them into Smoke, and all to
cure the Itch in his working Brain; he has near ruined himself and Family, yet
grows more Curious at every new disappointment; he cannot rest with the Wit he
has so dearly bought. -- No! -- he will make Nature ashamed of her long Sleep;
when Art, who is but a Step Dame, shall do more the she, in her best Love to
Mankind ever could. Oh brave Chemist! Well, sure Self-conceitedness is the Sin
in Fashion: it is a hard matter not to think well of our selves: For He, (yes
He!) can extract the Souls of all things by his Art, call all the Virtues and
Miracles of the Sun into a Temperate Furnace, teach Dull Nature what her own
Forces are. -- He Is sure there i^ the Rich Peru, -- the Golden Mines, -- Great
Solomon's Ophir. -- But Solomon was sailing to it Three Years, yet he will reach
it in Three Months, ay, in Three Days; for he will never sleep till he has this
Art of Angels, this Divine Secret (the Philosophers Stone); for he thinks it
Tradition, comes not from Men, but Spirits. What a Mess of Vain Curiosity, (I
might add) of utter Impossibility, i^ this?. But no more than Every Chymia in
London pretends to. -- Yet surely to Alchimy this Right is due, -- that it may
be compared to the Husbandman, whereof Aesop makes the Fable, that when he
died, told unto his Sons, that he had left unto them Gold buried under Ground
in his Vineyard; and they dug all the Ground, and Gold they found none; but
by reason of digging and stirring the Mold about the Ro^ts of their Vines, they
had a good Vintage the Year following: So assuredly the search and stir to make
Gold, has brought to light a great number of good and useful Experiments, if
Men could be contented with 'em; but they are not; but would still know more,
that is their Sin: And it still finds 'em out, as is evident by the Punishment
they always have in being disappointed of that Pearl they sold all they had to
purchase. -- Oh, Egregious Folly! for Men to spend their Moneys in such Idle
Disquisitions. But some Men think nothing out of their Reach. I shall instance
in those that built, or would have built, the Tower of Babel, whose Top might
reach to Heaven: It is not likely they could be so simple, as to think really
they should reach to Heaven by it; they might think they should be some what
nearer perchance; and however, get a name among men in after Ages, that they
that built such a Tower, were somewhat above men. But confusion was their
reward.

And as to the Art of flying, I have no reason to be against it, if
discoverable by humane industry; I have reaped the pleasures of it in my dreams
more then once; and I thought no pleasure comparable to it, though but in a
dream. Yet I doubt it may have somewhat of the Babylonish presumption in the
eyes of God; and that such high curiosities are so far from being useful, that
they may be dangerous. --

Madam, I might go on in quest after Longitude, Diving Engines, the Perpetual
Motion, and all Projectors, by what Name or Title soever dignified or
distinguished, but their Number's endless; so I Will search no longer, nor spend
any more Time in such Vain Speculations, les^ unawares I should be guilty of
that Vain Curiosity, which my Cell has cured; and that I ha'been all this while
reprehending. Not but amongst the vast Numbers of Projectors, some of their
Maggots have taken, yet I do say, the only valuable Projection that ever I met
with, was that of the Penny-Post, invented by that Worthy and Ingenious Citizen
Mr. Dockwra; and this I own, is of that use to the City of London, that he
ought to be had in Everlasting Remembrance.

Thus have I briefly opened the Nature of the Athenian Itch, (an Itch much
worse than that of the Body) and prescribed the best Physic I know to cure it;
and by the Blessing of God it may prove effectual. The only Men I despair to
cure, are the Poor Chemists, and the London-Projectors; and these will reap no
benefit by these Prescriptions; but if they will forsake their Idle Whimseys for
Two Days, and come to my Private Cell; (yes, Gentlemen, a Private Cell; for
'twas my Cure) I Will direct 'em to something (a strong Gibbet, or a place in
Bedlam) that may abate their Distemper; but a thorough Cure cannot be expected;
for their Athenian Itch is different from others; and is so much a part of
their Souls, that it is odds if it does not follow 'em to the other World. Or if
there be a possibility of their Cure on Earth, it must be by never leaving my
Cell when they come to it, or by proving to 'em there is nothing New; f^r whilst
they think there is, they will be itching after it. -- However, it has been a
Blessing to me. But (to end with Cowley):

Whilst this hard Truth I teach, methinks I see
The Monster London, laugh at me.
'I should at thee too, Foolish City,
'If it were fit to laugh at Misery;
'But thy Estate I pity!
'Let but the wicked Men from out thee go,
'And all the Fools that crow'd thee so;
'Even thou who do thy Millions boast,
'A Village less than Islington will grow;
'A Solitude almost.
Madam -- you see, be my Subject what it will, my Letters still, begin and end
with my Private Cell; and indeed I Am so charmed with Solitude, that I shall
never think my self Private enough till I Am said in my Grave, and covered with
that Tombstone I Have designed for it, and shall describe hereafter. Besides, I
came hither to learn -- The Art of Living Incognito; and can I come to
Perfection (in this Art) without making a daily progress, and catching at every
thing that may forward me in it? By this you see how much I am,

Your most Obedient Friend, and very Humble Servant, JOHN DUNTON.

The LADY's Answer to my Third LETTER.
SIR,
IT IS very welcome News to hear you have got so much good by your Living
Incognito, as the Cure of such a Dangerous and Epidemical Disease. 'Twas a very
proper Means you chose to seek your Cure in Retirement. We carry in our Natures
the Cause of our Disease, and all we meet with in the World, serves to inflame
it; for many things are the Cause of much Evil, but Pride is the cause of all,
with which human nature is sufficiently furnished to produce Curiosity in
Women, no less than Men; but because Beauty is the Perfection of Women, and
gives 'em that Charming, Proud Title of the Fair Sex, their tkoughts are
generally employed to maintain that Glory, with perpetual Recourse to Art,
where Nature fails 'em. This is the ordininary Effect of Pride in Women, but a
vain Curiosity very often carries 'em beyond the proper Glorys of their own
Sex, they can undergo all the Fatigues of a strong robust Body in Military
Employments, and any Masculine Exercises, merely for the pleasure of sending
Fame to her Trumpet, and making them the Subject of Discourse: But when they
apply to Learning, it is purely the Pride of Curiosity inspires 'em; ^or of what
use is it to 'em, when they have i^? They charge themselves with an unnecessary
Burden they ought to be ashamed of, according to the Port Royal. But this
shows they can think two thoughts, but not three: They think it is good to know
what that Learning is Men make such boast of, and value themselves so much
upon, and that the way must be by entering into such Studies as may inform 'em,
and there they stop; for their thoughts reach not so far as the Consequence:
They le^ that shi^ or it self; whatever it is. It can^'t fail to make 'em
talked on, and that is enough

But Pride works Curiosity, as Naturally in Men, and with more advantage,
because all Human Knowledge leads to it, and is supported by it: for more
Studies are undertaken upon account of Curiosity, than or the usefulness of
Knowledge, as appears in their deep search for Notions and Speculations, so New
and Wbimsical, which are every day brought ^o Ligh^, with design to strike all
the World with (...) of the^r great ^bilities; and so it does, for some admire
'em as Men of great Parts; and others aamire how Pride and Curiosity could find
the way to ma^e such Fools of 'em. Religion receives no better usage from these
Men of deep and curious Learning; they make it all Human Knowledge, and know no
other use of it, but to distinguish 'em from the more illiterate and Heathenish
part of the World, or to show their Part, in Controversy against a^l Opinions
in Religion, but their own. Nay, so^e are so kind as to make us a New Model of
Religion, so plain and easy, there needs no Controversy at all about it. But
this is to have Religion in the Head, not in the Heart; for there Humility lays
the first Foundation: Knowledge puffs up, but Charity edifieth, and teaches
us Humility: we are never right till then. Religion is not Knowledge, but
Experience, the greatest Abaser of high thoughts. They mistake themselves that
think by any Discourses, never so Acute, to inspire us with Religion; they may
as well pretend to teach us, to hear, taste, or see. No: we shall all be taught
of God, if we keep to his Order, and humbly submit to the Laws he has set us;
his ways of teaching are Infinite, like himself. It Is he that teaches us in the
Example of Doctor Dee, There Is no reaching to Heaven by a Ladder of Pride, and
that the deepest and most refined Human Learning brings us not to the true
Knowledge of God, as he seemed to insinuate in his Preface to Euclide: I pity
him, and hope God found another way to teach him, then what he chose for
himself when Transported with so great a Love to Knowledge.

The other Three were great Examples of Apostasy, and also those that seek to
such to know their Fortunes, or use Charms, may be esteemed so in a lower
degree, because they do it with more ignorance and simplicity; it being a
depraved and wicked Custom the World connives at, one cannot imagine why. But the
Constancy of the Poor Chymist's is much to be pitied, who make themselves
Martyrs to their own Conceitedness: We are taught Moderation by their example;
for it is either excess of Riches, or excess of Glory, they pursue; and are
nobly rewarded with excess of Poverty, and Contempt.

These are all dreadful Effects of that unhappy Disease, the Curiosity of our
first Parents contracted and Transmitted to all their Posterity. If living
Incognito, has taken away the Cause or the Effect, you have Reason to rejoice
in your own Happiness, and charitably to recommend it to others.

But tho Curiosity was never my Discease, as is seen in the Picture I make of
my Self, (and which perhaps I may send you hereafter) I have had many of
another sort; I can reckon up Seven: But by Living Incognito, they are much
lessened if not quite c^ed. I am willing to take your charitable Example,
discovering the Nature of the Diseases and their Remedies, which I can give you
more at large if you know any Persons they may be useful to.

I had a quality of repenting of every thing I did that answered not my
Expectation; but now I find to be happy, one must repent of nothing but sin.

I was troubled with an Importunate desire, of having all the Useless and
Impertinent things that are thought necessary for our comfort and ^upport in
this Life; but now I know there is nothing can support and ^omfort us, or is
worth desiring but Gods Favor.

I used to have recourse in all my Disappointments to vain hopes; and when one
design fell, I raised another, and still prop'd 'em up with ^pe; which in the
end I found so deceitful, I now renounce 'em all, ^d hope for nothing but
Heaven.

I have been often Transported with Joy at what happened to my ^lf and Friends,
supposing it for our good; when the event has proved ^ite contrary: This has
showed me how weak our ^ight and Judg^ents are; and to be sure to be in the
right, is to rejoice in nothing but ^ods Glory.

I was much carried to the Love of Pleasure, tho it never gave me ^ue
Satisfaction; I never found the Pleasure I proposed so certain as ^e pains that
went to procuring it; so that I found it surest to take ^leasure in nothing but
the good success of ones Labor.

I have had very busy thoughts, and been much taken up, with study^g ways of
exalting my self, and making a considerable figure in ^e World, and now find by
Experience they only are truly Conside^able, that study nothing but the good of
others.

My want of Courage has Subjected me to many vain fears, which ^ade me uneasy,
but prevented no mischiefs; But I perceive a deceitful ^eart the Source of all
Evils, that now I fear nothing but my own ^eceitful heart: Thus you see what is
got by Living Incognito, it is there one finds both Health and Pleasure. I am,

Your, etc

LETTER IV.
Proving -- There is nothing New under the Sun.

Madam,
SInce you honor me so much to permit me to entertain you weekly, (or oftener)
with Accounts of what Progress I make in -- The Art of Living Incognito. -- I
shall be so free as to tell ye, I suppose you expect that part of this Art
should be discoveries of something New. -- For Nature is so much pleased with
diversity (as it seems a kind of Novelty,) that she has imprinted a desire of
it in all things here below. This I proved in my Essay on the Athenian Itch,
which will never be quite cured till Men are possessed There is nothing New;
for whilst there is, they will be Itching after it. Then seeing I told your
Ladyship that my Art of Living Incognito would consist of a Thousand uncommon
(which looks as if my meaning was NEW Subjects); for fear you should apprehend
me in that sense, it is time now, that I tell ye that by Uncommon, I did not
mean NEW, but only Subjects that were Curious, or very rarely handled. -- No
Madam, it had been a great Presumption in me to have pretended to any thing
New, when Solomon tells us. -- There is nothing NEW under the Sun. Eccl. 1. 9.



And Dr. Winter adds, Nor in the Moon neither, (a Picture of this Mutable
World) of whose increase, tho we have every Year NEW Ones a full dozen, Yet all
is but the Old One over and over. Even that which we call the New Year, is no
more than the old one run out, and turned up again like an hour glass to run
out, the same Spring, Summer, Autumn, Winter, Months and Days, as before.

The Sun returns every morning to the same place he came from, with like
form, and self-same substance -- The Days and Nights pass by course, and ever
continue of like Essence. -- The Fields are every year deek'd with the same
Flowers, like pleasant Herbs, and the very same Accidents yearly. Nothing is
the Object of our Senses, but what is ordinary and familiar: We see nothing
strange and New: what we do to day, that we do to morrow, and every day. What
Men call a Discovery is a mere Banter upon our Understanding: For my Lord Bacon
in his Book of Aphorisms proves, that which we call New and Upstart, to be the
truest Antiquity. -- And the Sage Commonwealth of the Lycians heretofore
ordained, That all those who should propose any Novelty in matter of Law,
should deliver it in public with an Halter about their Necks, to the end, that
if their Propositions were not found to be good and profitable, the Authors
thereof should be strangled in the place. -- The Ancients held it ominous to
pretend to any New Form, even of Matters of Indifferency. When Darius had
altered the Fashion of his Sword, which used to be Persian, into the form of
Macedonian, (in the year immediately before the fought with Alexander) the
Chaldees, or South-sayers, prophesied, That into what Fashion Darius had
altered his Sword, so Time would reduce his State; and that the Persian Glory
was drawing unto her last Period, by subjecting her self unto the Sovereign of
Macedon: Which Prediction was soon confirmed by the next years Conquest. -- And
as the Ancients held it ominous to pretend to any New Form, so it is as clear in
the Instance I gave in the Sun, Moon, etc. and other parts of the Creation.
That Thnigs here below seem NEW to many; and are so miscalled; which in
themselves are Old, and known so, to sounder Judgments.

It Is true Mr. T -- -- tells us (in his Treatise of Preexistence) that
Philosophy it self had never been improved, had it not been for NEW Opinions.
Nay, the very Mob (since the War with France) are turned Athenians too, and you
can scarce meet a Porter in the Street, but he will question ye, -- What NEWS?
And some take as much pleasure to spread (what they call) News, as others do to
hear it. R. B. in his book of Extraordinary Adventures, tells us of a Barber,
who kept Shop at the end of the Suburbs, called, Pyreum in Athens, he had no
sooner heard of the great discomfiture of the Athenians in Sicily, from a
certain Slave fled from thence out of the Field, but leaving his Shop at six
and sevens, he ran directly into the City to carry the Tidings fresh and new,

For fear some other might the Honor win,
And he too late, or second should come in.
Now upon reporting these unwellcome Tidings, there was a great stir within the
City; the People assembled to the Market Place, search was made for the Author
of this Rumor. Hereupon the Barber was haled before the Body of the People, and
being examined hereof, he knew not so much as the Name of the Party from whom
he had heard the News: Upon which, the whole Assembly were so moved to Anger,
that they cried, Away with the Villain, set the Rascal upon the Rack; have him
to the Wheel, who had devised this Story of his own fingers ends. -- The Wheel
of Torture was brought, and the Barber was tormented upon it. In the mean
while, there came certain News of that Defeat, and thereupon the Assembly broke
up, leaving the Barber racked out at length upon the Wheel, till it was late in
the Evening, at which time he was let loose; yet was no sooner at liberty, but
he must enquire. News of the Executioner, what he had heard abroad of the
General Nicias, and in what manner he was slain. --

So that Men have such a hankering after Novelties, that they would even die to see
something New; and this Itch after News, is become as General as it is
Fallacious. -- The Poor Tailor, that works in a Carret, can scarce forbear
leaving his Goose, to run to a Coffee-house, to ask if the Pope be recovered? A
constant Companion to this House, going in all haste for a Midwife, or to save
the Life of a Friend was dying, must call in, and drink at least two Dishes of
Coffee, and smoke his Pipe, that he may know how the World goes abroad, let it
go how it will at home. -- Oh what precious Time do the London Coffee-houses
devour? and therefore, it is Dr. Wild tells us, News and New Things do the
whole World bewitch.


But, by your leave Dr. you may be mistaken; for all are not born, or live in
Athens, tho, (to their shame) most are sick of the Athenian Dise^se, in a
desire to hear and seek News; which they never find: For, Doctor, I shall prove
anon, there is no such thing; neither do they reflect upon what they hear; for
they seek only News, for News sake, and make it their business to go to the
Wits By Covent Garden
C ffee-house, to Dicks, to Ionathan's to Bridge's, to Ioe's, to Smith's, to
pick up News, and then to report it to the next they meet, and to be sure it
loses nothing by carrying. -- But there are some that were never tainted with
this Athenian Itch. -- I have heard my Father often say, he never was at a
Coffee-house in his whole Life. But he is the only Instance of that kind that I
ever knew; yet I cant think him a New Instance; for doubtless there be Men of
the same Principle. There be no Humane Actions that we see now a days, but what
have been practiced in times past: Yet I must own, that before the War, the
Coffee-house was a place whither people only came, after Toping all day, to
purchase at the expense of their last Penny, the Repute of Sober Companions
(for Coffee is a Sober Liquor); but now they are the Congress of Rome, Venice,
Spain, Geneva, Amsterdam, and are flockt to by all, as the Mint of
Intelligence. --

Hither the Idle Vulgar come and go,
Carrying a Thousand Rumors to and fro;
With stale Reports some listening Ea s do fill;
Some coin fresh Tales, in words that vary still;
Lies mixed with Truth, all in the Telling grows,
And each Relator adds to what he knows.
All Acts of Heaven and Earth it boldly views,
And through the spacious World enquires for NEWS.
The Coffee-house (where News is so much inquired for) is no better than a
Nursery for training up the smaller Fry of Virtuosi, in confident tatling. But
en't it strange that any should be so mad as to run from Coffee house to
Coffee-house, to pick up News, when in reality there is no such thing? For what
has the Name of News, which (like the Athenians of old) they so Itch after, is
no other (as my Poem shows) than newly augmented Lies; Relations so^nd
diversely, as the Air of Affection carries them, and sometimes in a whole Volley
of News, we shall not find one true Report; and therefore 'twas the Advice of a
Father to his Son, Let the greatest part of the News thou hear, be the least
part of what thou believe, lest the greatest part of what thou believe, be
the least part of what is true: And where Lies are admitted for News, the
Father of Lies will not easily be excluded. -- Perhaps what they miscall News,
may have some Ground of Truth for its beginning; but being tossed from one to
another, it is buried and lost in the multitude of New Additions, and there is
nothing we can warrant for Pure News. -- --

But then you will object, Those Additions are New. No: Madam, Terrence tells ye
the contrary, by saying, Nihil est jam Dictum quod non Dictum sit Prius:
Nothing is spoken now, but what has been said in former times: And that
Philosopher Renaudots tells us -- our very thoughts, tho they be innumerable
yet if they were Registered, would be all found ancient. -- Thento what purpose
do we hunt for News? Tis'true those Papers that pretend to News, tell us
sometimes of a Kings being beheaded (and what is King James's Abdication, but a
Parallel Case?) -- of an Earl's Cutting his own Throat, and then flinging the
Razor out of the Window; -- of the penitent Death of some great Lord; -- of a
Bloody Fight; -- of a Lover hanging himself; -- of a Virgin Ravished; -- of a
Wise Alderman; -- and now and then of a Woman C -- ding her Husband, etc. But
these (tho Real Truths) are no New Things, but what we have seen over and over.
-- Not but I must own, if there were a New Thing under the Sun, the Author of
the Flying Post would find it out: But he is an honest Gentleman, and writes
nothing but Truth; and Truth is always the same; and if his Papers be always
the same, what News can there be in them? -- Or say, his Papers were all
Invention (which comes neare^l to News, of any thing that is not so) yet still
they were void of News; for Invention is nothing else (for the most part) but a
Simple Imitation in Deeds or Words. -- So that the Flying Post, -- Post-Man --
and Post-Boy, do Weekly labor in vain; for all their Pretense to News, is no
better than an Old Design, to enrich the Bookseller, which I don't tell as a
Piece of News; but as a thing acknowledged by every Hawker. -- -- But tho we
are disappointed of News where we most expect it, yet whoever is troubled with
Impertinent Fancies, or would hear ridiculous Story, ^e need but step to the
Coffee-house, and here the several Humors of the pretended News-mongers, is
worth Remark.

One begins ye the Story of a Sea Fight; and tho he never was so far as
Wapping, yet having Pyrated the Names of Ships and Captains, he tells you
Wonders; that he waded up to the middle in Blood on the Quarter Deck, and never
thought Serenade to his Mistress so charming as the Bullets Whistling; how he
stopped a Man of War of the Enemies, under full Sail, till she was boarded with
his Single Arm, instead of Grapling Irons; and then concludes with railing at
the Conduct of some Great Officers (which he never heard of till last Week) and
protests, had they taken his Advice, not a Soul had 'scap'd 'em.

He has no sooner done, but another begins Remarks -- upon the London Gazette;
-- and here he nicknames the Spanish -- Towns, etc. and enquires, whether
Madrid and Barcelona be Turks or Saracens? -- Stilo Novo; he interprets some
Warlike Engine invented by the Duke of Savoy to confound Catinat; -- and for
Hungary, etc- he believes it to be a place where people are ready to starve. --
Neither is any thing more common than to see one of these News Hunters spend
half an hour in searching the Map for Counterscarp, and Brigadeer, -- not
doubting but to find them there, as well as Venice, Rome and Amsterdam, etc.

Another relates to ye all the Counsels of the French Court; the German Diet,
the Roman Conclave; and those of Portugal, Spain and China, are as well known
to him as his right hand; and this Gibberish is list'ned to with as great
attention as Orpheus's Beasts did to his charming Music. --

Then a Fourth stands up, and (he pretending to be a Traveller) tells the
Company, That in his late Voyage to Ophir (tho no body knows where it is) the
Master of his Vessel, filled his Ship; with 300 Tun of Gold, in one night --
This tickles the Auditors! so on he goes to tell 'em, that from thence he went
to the Iubilee, from whence, (after Kissing the Pope's Toe) he went to Venice,
to see the Carnival; and here he met with the Harlot Tom-Coryat Tom-Coryat
gives a Pleasant Character of her in his Book, he entitles Crudities.
married, lay with her one Night, and Swares he thinks her a very demure piece
of Impudence. -- Being weary of Italy, (Perhaps) he tells us in the next Place
he Traveled to the Indies, (I have a Brother there, I hope he did not meet him)
where he viewed the Chambers of the Rising Sun, learnt the number of his
Horses, and their several Names -- His Eyes being not yet satisfied, he Rambles
next to Persia where he shook Hands with the Great Mogul, Prester John, and lay
3 Nights with the King of Bantam -- From thence (being resolved to out-Ramble
Drake) he took Shipping for the Holy Land, but that being now overgrown with
Superstition, he staid there but two Nights, and then Embarked for New England,
where he fairly kissed an Indian Queen (a mighty matter! and so did I in the
year 86) and dined with 200 Sachems. At length As is hinted in my American
Rambles, which I Will Publish when I return for London.
being quite tired he Embarked for England, but took Tartary in his way home,
where he got a Hair from the Great Chams Beard, and to Convince ye, Gentlemen
all, this is no Lie, here it is. --

The Traveller having told 'em all that he saw (and a great deal more,) an Old
Beef Eater falls to rubbing their Itching Ears. He pretends to discover all the
Secrets of the Cabinet Counsel; He knows all the affairs of White Hall to a
Cows-Thumb, and (which is a thing I never minded) which Lady is Painted, and
which not

Before his Discourse is ended, perhaps comes in a Fresh News-Hunter -- Begins,
Gentlemen have you heard any thing of a strange Whale now at Greenwich? Have
any of ye seen the Great ^zar of Muscovy, who they say is Landed Incognito? Or
which of ye have seen the Second Sampson that carrys 20 Hundred weight on his
Shoulders, out draws all the Horses in Town, and will Snap a sunder a Cable
Rope as if 'twere Sewing-Thread? If these Queries are slighted, his next words
are -- What do ye think Gentlemen of the New Design (or an Act of Parliament)
to make Usurers Charitable, and Misses forsake their Gallants?

By this time an Old-Toast that had been fast asleep with his Hat over his Face
(For there is (a) always some shame in being Burdened with an useless Knowledge)
Moral Essays Vol. 2. p. 178.
a wakes, and having 500 Inventions dancing in his Noddle, resolves he will not be
out-lyed, so tells 'em their News is nothing to his -- He has an Advice-Boat on
the Stocks that shall go to Riga and come back again in Three Hours. A Trick to
march under Water, by which he will Sink all the French Fleet as it lies at
Anchor, and which (Gentlemen) is beyond this, I Have just now found a way to
catch Sun Beams for making the Ladys New Fashioned Towers, that Poets may no
more be Damned for telling Lies about their Curles and Tresses.

Thus (Madam) you see there is nothing New at the Coffee-House (and I shall
prove anon, nor any where else) and what stuff that is which they tell for
N^ws. Men come to Coffee-houses purely to vent their strange and wild Conceits,
and an Opinion how Foolish or fond soever, here receives Entertainment. You Will
believe this, when I tell your Ladyship that in the time of Monmouths Invasion,
I stepped to a Coffee-House, where I found several asking for News? Gentlemen,
said I, I can tell you what is very Surprising: -- Come, let us have it, said
one: -- Nay, tell it, said another. -- Why, it is this, The West is strangely
Victorious, and I am told but an hour ago, -- The Duke of Monmouth is to be
made Prince George. Oh strange! said one It Is no more than I expected, said
another. Nay, said a third, I did not doubt but he would be our Deliverer. -- And,
to add to the Jest, it is no New Thing to the West Countrymen, to say, the Duke
of Monmouth is yet alive. One would have thought this Report, That the Duke of
Monmouth was to be made Prince George, had been News; for tho Dr. Burnet tells
us of In his Travels to Italy, p. 246.
Two Nuns being changed into Men; yet I never before heard of one Man's being
transformed to another: Tho had it been true, it had been no News; for I doubt
not but those skilled in Natural History can give Instances of it. But this was
a Fable, and the Moral to it is this. --

That there is no News, nor New Thing, and that the News we so Itch after, is
nothing but Satan's Policy to abuse our Ears in hearing, our Tongues in
speaking, and our Hearts in believing Lies, to disable us from discerning the
Truth. -- So much for News in Prose; and King James the First said, he would never
believe any News in Verse, since the hearing See his Apothegms, p. 14.
of a Ballad made of the Bp. of Spalata, touching his being a Martyr, etc.

But perhaps you will say, Tho the Coffee house, Weekly Papers, and Men's Humors,
have nothing New, yet search further, and you will find Novelties. -- What think
ye of the Athenian Mercury? Was n't that a New Project? Was n't a Pretense to
Answer all Nice Questions, and Cases of Conscience, (yet so as the Querist
might never be known) a New Attempt? Was it ever practiced in England, Holland,
France, Germany, etc.) till you set it a Foot under the Title of the Athenian
Mercury? If not, 'twas a New Project, and (being yours) will ye disown a Brat
of your own begetting? --

To this I answer, -- Tho the Athenian Society had their first Meeting in my
Brain, and the First Athenian Mercury was Partly my own Composure, yet I en't
so vain as to think the Athenian Mercury was a New Project. It Is true, the
answering any Reasonable Question, which should be proposed, was a thing of
such a Nature as all the Ingenious appeared highly pleased with; nor has the
Esteem and Success it met in the world, given me much Reason to repent of this
Undertaking; for 'twas a Whim that pleased the Ladies (who honored it with
several Poems), and was continued to Twenty Volumes: but is far from being a
New Project; for don't we read some thing like it in the Queen of Shebah, who 1
Kings c. 10. v. 1, 3.
hearing of the Fame of Solomon, came to prove him with hard Questions; and her
Questions, however Nice and Curious, (to use the Phrase in my Athenian Title)
were all told her by Solomon; Neither was there any thing hid from the King,
which he told her not. -- And as I took the Subject from the Queen of Shebah,
so I took the Title from the Old Athenians St. Paul speaks of, who spent Acts
17. 21.
their time in nothing else, but in asking of Questions, and reporting what
they thought was New. -- And if Arts and Inventions flourisht at Athens, whilst
they were unknown in England, yet you see (in that One Instance of the Athenian
Mercury) they were afterward to appear in their Time, yea, the Mysteries of
Salvation were always -- in Intellectu Divino ('it is an Affront to English it to
a Lady of your Sense) which made our Savior say -- That Abraham had seen him.
And this is the Sense wherein it is true -- There is nothing New under the Sun.
-- --


Then en't it odd, that the Athenians (being Men of Learning) should tax. St.
Paul for being a setter forth of strange Acts 17. v. 18, 19.
Gods, and a Broacher of New Doctrine; when Solomon, who was many Hundred Years
before St. Paul, pronounces of his own Times, That there was not then, nor
should ever be, any New Thing? How much more then is it true in our Time, being
so many years after him? -- Thus have I proved there is Nothing New. Or (Madam)
if ye think I have not, I might further consider the Formae Substantialis, as
Renaudots calls 'em, and we shall find there is not One of that sort New, not
only in its Species, but even in its Individual Qualities, which indeed appear
New to our Senses, but yet are not so for all that: as the Shape of a Marble
Statue was in the Stone, not only in possibility, but also in Act, before the
Graver made it appear to our Eyes, by taking away that which was superfluous,
and hindered us from seeing it. It Is a saying, there is but One Good Wife in
the World, and every Man enjoys her (or, in other words, if he that is married
could see another Good Wife besides his own, he would see something would be
thought New) but it is not because it is so, but because it seems so; other
Wives, as good, or better than ours, never coming to our Knowledge. -- Much
less likely is it that New Diseases should be produced, as some have believed,
imagining that the Ancients were not Curious enough to describe all those of
their Times, or their Successors diligent enough to examine their Writings, to
find them there. That Diseases, some Hundred years ago, were the very same as
they are now, is evident in that One Distemper the French Pox, -- which tho
charged to Monsieur's Account, as a New Disease of his own begetting, yet it is
easily proved, by Sennerius, and other Authors, that 'twas found at Naples many
hundred years before 'twas called the French Disease; and I could as easily
prove it had not its Rise at Naples, but was frequent in other Places, before
it was heard of there. -- So that (as I said before) many things appear New
which are not so, if we look into 'em. -- Thus Printing, and Guns, which we
believe were invented within these 200 years, are found to have been in use
among the Chinese above a Thousand Years ago. -- A like Instance we have in
the London-Lotteries (and that established by Act of Parliament) which some
will tell ye were never heard of till the English Wits set 'em on foot; tho
it is not a month since I heard an Italian say, these Lotteries were practiced
in Uenice many years before they were mentioned in London.

And so again for the Penny-Post: some assert 'twas a New Invention of W -- s,
when he never once dreamed of such a thing, till that Ingenious and Industrious
Citizen Mr. -- Dockwra, As I hinted in my last Letter.
had first proposed it to the World: and I shall ever think the Citizens of
London owe him a signal Mark of their Favor, for the Service he has done to
them and their Childrens Children, on that account: For my own part, whenever
the present Chamberlain Dies, had I a Thousand Hands he should have 'em all for
his Advancement to that Honor, and that out of a sense of the Great Service he
has done, (even we, as a Member of that City) in bringing the Penny-Post to
Perfection. -- But yet (Madam) to keep to my Text, I don't think the Penny-Post
is a New Project. For what can the Man do that comes after the King, but that
which has been already done? And I don't doubt but the Penny-Post is practiced
in some far Country, but I must own (to Mr. Dockwra's Honor) I could never
learn when nor where.

Finding nothing New amongst the Men, I Will next Visit the Ladys, for they Love
to be gazed upon, and for that Reason, if there is anything-New to be sure they
have it, but if you will believe a Poet, --

-- They Have nothing New (not scarce their Faces,)
Every Woman is the same. --
Though I Am the softest Creature in Nature, yet am I bad Company for Ladys, for
they will sit a whole day in talking of nothing but the Newest-Fashions, (and how
much they are admired by this Bean and the other Bea^) -- How can I have patience
to hear this, when I Am positive there is nothing New. And when they ask me when
I saw any New Play, I bluntly tell 'em, There Is (...) such thing; For you know
Madam (and so would they, if they^d look into Old Authors) that D -- n stole
from Shakespeare, and Shakespeare from Ben-Iohnson, and they all so steal from
one another, that there is no Wit in any Play, but what we had 50 Years ago --
But though there is nothing New in Play^, yet one would think there were
Something-New in ^a is Dresses, (they dress in such a Towering manner) but if
you Examine their Wardrobe, you will find what they call New-Fashions, are but Old
Fashions revived, for Fashion brought in Silks and Velvets at one Time, and
Fashion brought in Russets and Grays at another. -- Fashion brought in d^ep
Ruffes and Shallow-Ruffs, Thick Ruffs and Thin Ruffs, Double-Ruffs and no
Ruffs. Fashion brought in the Tunick and Vest, the Broad kneed Breeches, the
Narrow brim'd Hat, the Shoulder knot, the Top knot, etc. But these are so far
from being N^w, that they are Fashions that have been several times out and in,
and in and out, and so will succeed each other (perhaps) to the End of Time. --
This we see verified in the Vardingale; for Fashion brought in the Vardingale
and carried out the Vardingale, and has again revived the Vardingale from
Death, and placed it behind, like a Rudder or Stern, to the body; in some so
big, that the Vessel is scarce able to bear it. -- So much as the wearing of
Top-knots, which is thought to be a New-Fashion, was practiced of old; this
Monumental Pride, or High-Building of Head-Gear is not of a New Invention, as
Men take it to be, but of an old Edition; for Iuvenal in his Sixth Satyr, makes
mention of them. -- Tot premit ordinibus, etc.

Such Rows of Curls pressed on each other lie,
She builds her Head so many stories high,
That look on her before, and you would swear
Hectors Tall-Wife Andromache, she were;
Behind a Pigmey, so that not her Waste,
But Head seems in the middle to be placed:
And as Top-knots are an Old Fashion, so is Women's wearing the Breeches, (as
much as it is wondered at) a custom as old as the fall of Man, it is no new thing
to see Women Fight, and Rave, and to forget Obedience to their tender Husbands;
not but there was a Time in England when Men wore the Breeches, and debarred
Women of that gadding Liberty which they now take; but Eve got the Start of
Adam in sinning, and ever since for a Woman to wear the Breeches is no new
thing. If you will not believe it on my words, read Mr. Turners History of
Providence, and there you will find (in Chap. 51.) That the first Man Adam, the
Righteous Lot, the Faithful Abraham, the Meek Moses, the strong Sampson, the
Wise Solomon, the Zealous Peter, the Philosopher Socrates, the Orator Cicero,
were all either overreached or overpowered with Women. -- So that it is no
New-thing for Women to wear the Breechees. And tho one would think it a New
Thing, it is none, to find some of the Fair Sex First at making of Love; or (as
you express In your Remarks on my Con versation in Ire land, p. 514.
it, taking upon 'em the part that once belonged to Men. Neither are She-Wi^s
any New Thing. I know one can Resolve the Nicest Points in Divinity (you must
pardon me if I mean your Ladyship) another that understands and teaches
Algebra, (and is a Young Midwife into the Bargain) a Third that understands
Latin -- and a Fourth, called Philomela, who has taken the Name See the Preface
to my Wi^e's Funeral Sermon.
of the Nightingale, and her Notes are as sweet as the Voice of that is
Musical: And for the Dear D -- ne (that is dead and gone) she was an Angel dre^
in Flesh and Blood; yet she stooped so low as to honor me with a constant
Friendship; and I may say her Witty Letters were the only thing that kept me
alive in Ireland. But She Wits Flourish't in former Ages as well as now. So
that I visit the Ladies to as little purpose as I do the Men, for there is
nothing new in Petticoats, and I think (Madam) it is as clear as the Sun,
There Is nothing New under it. And since I believed this, I Have laid aside my
Grand Ramble, for to what purpose should I Travel, when the whole World has
nothing to show me, can be called New. And you have heard this was Solomon's
opinion, who was one of the Wisest of mere Men; and well has he said. There is
nothing New under the Sun, because (as Dr. Winter observes) Things Subject to
Mutation are every Minute growing old: Until at last they be no more. The State
of Glory and Blessed Eternity is above the Brightness of the Sun. But the Starry
Heavens come far short of it; They wax old as does Psalm. 102. 26. 2 Pet. 3. 10.
a Garment, and they shall pass away. -- There is indeed a Day of Renovation
coming; When he who of old made out of nothing all New things in the World;
shall out of a ruined old World, worse than nothing, make Rev. 21. 5.
all things New. But this will be a work above the Sun: And till then, There is
nothing New. Yet we see nothing pleases the deluded World but the Name and
thought of Novelties. -- The Devil and his Vile Instruments cry up their
deluding Trash for New, as Women do their Oysters, when as they stink of Age.
Custom is a Great Matter. -- New England, New York, and New Market, (which has
been built this Hundred Year) is like to be so called to the Worlds end. --
Cunning Salesmen give a sudden Turn to an old Coat, and then sell it for a New
Garment, and thus we are tricked out of our Money. Thus old forsaken Errors are
become new cried up Lights; and the Quakers thee and thou, and way of Cheating
by selling Goods -- at a word -- is no more then we find in the Gnostici and
Carpocratists, and the Enthusiasts of former Ages. -- Impostors are no New
thing. Theudas the Sorcerer made himself a Second Moses; neither is it any New
thing for these false Prophets to lead Silly-Women Captive. -- Montanas who
called himself the Holy Ghost, had two such the Angels; Priscilla and
Maximilla; and so dearly did they Love, that he and Madam Maximilla both hanged
themselves. Or if we look amongst the Iacobites, (we shall still despair of any
thing New,) for it is no new-thing for Men to pack Iuries to serve a Turn, to
deliver up Charters, to fell their Country, to Murmur after a Great
Deliverance, or to refuse taking the Oaths till a good Deanery Greases the
Passage. -- All this is no New-thing, Diverse Hundred of Years since, The
Christian Governor of the Castle of Turk Histo.
Abydus, was himself and Castle betrayed into the hands of the Turks by his own
Daughter; and an Hundred and Forty Years before that, Aleppo, the strongest
City of the Christians in those parts, was betrayed to the Turk by the
Governor. -- To swear and forswear, and to play at fast and loose with a Crown
(as a late Author observes) is no New-thing. Neither is it any new thing for
Men to Cheat, Slander, Duel, Whore; and to pick a Pocket under the Gallows, is
a Custom as old as Tyburn. -- Neither is it a New thing to see a Man accuse
himself (for a Guilty Conscience e'nt easy without it,) or for Men of a mean
Birth to grow Proud, if they grow Rich, and to forget their Duty both to God
and Man. This is but Shakespeare, and Ben Johnson brought again upon the Stage:
And now I talk of Poets, I may venture to say it is no new thing to see Poets
Starve. -- (Oldham could scarce pay for his Garret and a Sundays Dinner,) and
for the Famous Butler (as I hinted in my Second Letter,) he was kept so Poor,
that he was fore't to dye and be interred on Tick -- But it is no new-thing to
see Poets build Castles, in the Air; and I Am sure it is no new thing to see a
Chimist * As is hinted in my last Letter.
spend his Estate in searching after the Philosophers Stone. --

And lastly, to see Men of Piety and Sense slighted, and Fools and Idle Persons
regarded, is no New Thing -- For Merits and good Service to be starved in the
Poor, for high Crimes to be Pardoned and Dignified in the Rich; and in a word,
for plainhearted Men neither to be Patiently heard, nor at all believed, is no
New Thing -- Madam shall I stop here? For you see the further I search, the
less hopes I have of finding any Thing New?

But perhaps you will say -- Here Is a long Harangue to prove there is nothing
New, when at the same time your retreat from London disproves all ye ha* said
-- Surely this is a New Thing; that I. D. -- should leave a House surrounded
with 3 Gardens, (Gardens, the things he so much delights in) a Flourishing
Trade, a Religious Wife (and one that he doats upon) a rich Mother in Law,
tender Relations, and abundance of Loving Friends for no o'her end then to live
in a Poor Cell to learn the Art of Living Incognito. -- Madam, this is neither
new nor strange; have NOT I proved in my first Letter, that by retreating, thus, I
do but follow the example of several great Men? -- But that which makes me the
most in Love with Living Incognito, is your own Example; for (in your Answer to
my first Letter), you say you know and taste it to the full, and that it is a
Life you have courted e're since ye were at your own dispose.

When you consider this, you will own my leaving of London for a poor Cell is no
new thing; nor a jot, to be wondered at -- But still you will be ready to say,
tho* there is nothing New in this private adventure, yet surely it is a New thing
for a Bookseller to turn Author! -- To this I answer, My Raven As was formerly
hinted in the Athenian Mercury.
is gone to Roost, and I write purely for my own diversion, so cannot properly
be called an Author, the word being generally taken in a Mercenary Sense and
therefore don't wonder to find your Ladyship so angry with me at my offering to
make you a Present. Were Bishop such a one -- and Dr. such a one, of your Noble
Temper, you would scarce find a Bookseller that was not an Alderman -- However, let
me write for what end I please, there is nothing New in my leaving the Counter
to turn Author -- have not we Bookseller-Authors glittering in the Term.
Catalogue. -- I could name several. -- As first there is D. N. he is not only a
Great Casuist, but I Am told has been Author of several Books, amongst which --
The Protestants Resolution, showing his Reasons why he will not be a Papist --
is said to be one -- and I wish your Ladyship had the Book, for I don't doubt
but you would like it so well as to give several Thousands away.

Not far from hence lives a Bookseller-Poet, (which is no Novelty neither, for
there is Poet Larkin -- Poet Kirkman, Poet Harris, and many other
Bookselle-rPoet;) this Bard is a Poet Born -- He Is too Modest to, let me name
him, but I Have read his Poems, and (If I e'nt Partial to my Brother-Author;)
would he Print 'em, you would think him Cowley revived -- But I don't wonder that
an humble Man should avoid Praise; but I do admire that I.-S-y; (that
wou'd-be-Wit) never turned Author; for he had the most conceit, and the least
Reason for it, of any Man I ever knew in my Life -- And 'twou'd be no New Thing
to hear Patrick-Campbell say as much of me for writing -- The Dublin Scuffle,
and my Essay on Knowing our Friends in Heaven. However some Men of Great
Quality and Wit have given these Books the Reading, and it is no new Thing for
an Author, whose Books sell, to Print on 'till he ruins the Bookseller, and
therefore (Madam,) provide your self with a Hogs-Head of Ink, and a Million of
Pens, for my Art of Living Incognito shall be continued to a Thousand Letters
(as is hinted in my Dedioation to your Ladyship) and by that time they are all
Printed, I hope I shall have the Honor to see your Ladyship (if it be but half
an Hour) to talk 'ore the Virtues of that Dear Friend who was the first
occasion of our Correspondence --

And thus you see my turning Author is no more a Novelty then all the rest, and
that there is nothing New, let us go East, West, North or South; and I Am sure
you will own it is no new Thing for me to be tedious, so I Will stop here, having
satisfied my self there is nothing New; but I believe, not your Ladyship, for
there is an Expression in your Remarks on my Conversation in Ireland, that
proves you of another Opinion. In p. 544 you say -- It Is the Fate of Novelty to
please or displease extremely -- And again in p. 525. you have this Expression
-- But the Novelty once over, there is an end of the Enjoyment -- Which plainly
intimates -- you think there is something New; If that is your Opinion, I must
expect to be disproved in all I have said on this Subject; but 'till then, I
shall retain my Opinion that the Art of living Incognito cannot consist of
anything New, and that if you expect Novelties, you will be disappointed; so I
shall not Apologize for entertaining ye with old Thoughts and old Expressions, for
(I have proved) there is nothing new under the Sun. If there be any thing New,
it is Valeria; and she is or may be so if she prefers my Esteem to the World:
But loving at this rate my self, I shall ever think that an Old Love that
Flames not so high as mine; but except Valeria, there is nothing New; and as
there is nothing new, I have in that proved my self to to be,

Your Old Friend and Servant, JOHN DUNTON.

The LADY's Answer to my Fourth LETTER.
SIR,
YOU do me a great Favor in giving me a right apprehension of what I must
expect in those Thousand, not New but Uncommon Subjects you have chosen to
write upon, and have taken some Pains to free me from the Vulgar Error of
expecting new things, which Solomon Affirms the World can never show, which yet
Experience seems to contradict, and shall be my Business to reconcile, since
you have given me that Libert; and I think may be done without much difficulty,
if we consider, when Solomon says there is nothing new under the Sun, he meant
it only with respect to the Sinful and depraved Tempers and Inclinations of
Men, which would be always the same, producing the same Mischiefs and
Calamities in the World; this Experience has abundantly confirmed, for
instance, the Fine Houses and Palaces every where Built, with such Magnificent
Pride to make themselves a Name, is but the same design that set to Work the
Builders of Babel; nor do these find any New Success; the Fate of their
Posterity, for all their great design, is the same with those of Babel, to be
scattered abroad upon the Face of the Earth.

And before that, when Men were distinguished and called the Sons of God,
because they began to call on the Name of the Lord, yet when they saw the
Daughters of the Men of the World that they were Fair, they took 'em Wives of
all, whom they Chose, which provoked God, (foreseeing the wickedness it would
engage 'em in, and that the 'thoughts and Imaginations of their Hearts were
only Evil continually) to bring a deluge upon the Earth to destroy 'em.

Now the same Corruption of Nature works in this Generation, they take those
Women that please 'em, and have no more regard then those of old to any thing
else; and one sees all the World over the sad and dreadful effects of the Evil
Thoughts and Imaginations of their Hearts, which will improve continually,
'till the great Conslagration, unless God in his Wisdom have prepared some
other Cure for 'em.

And now that we find all our Cities abound in Wickedness, we must not look for
any new or strange cause of it; it is the same that caused the Sin of Sodom;
Pride; fullness of Bread, and abundance of Idleness was in her and in her
Daughters, says the Prophet Ezekiel, So we see there is nothing new in Sin, or
the Fruits and Effects of it, nor any new Device for Building Happiness upon
the weak and frail foundation of Corrupt Nature, which Solomon at that time was
Essaying to do and upon the fullest Trial that ever was or could be made, he
pronounced, that all the Experience he had gotten, served only to convince him
that Happiness could never spring from Sinful Nature, which never did, nor ever
could, produce any thing but Vanity and Vexation of Spirit.

But I see not how Solomon in saying there was nothing New under the Sun, could
possibly extend it so far as to Arts and Sciences; for there were some
Generations passed (as Scripture testifies) before there were Harps and Organs,
or those that could handle 'em, or any that could work in Brass and Iron, 'till
Lamech's two Wives brought him two Sons, who instructed in those Arts; and for
the work of the Taber nacle, God is said to inspire two Men with Wisdom,
Understanding and Knowledge, to Devise cunning Works in Silver, and Gold, and
Brass; those things must needs have been New that were never known 'till that
Generation; and who could say there was nothing new, with respect to Arts and
Sciences with less reason then Solomon, who sat himself upon a Throne of so new
an Invention; the Scripture affirming there was none like it in any Kingdom:
And that which is said to dispirit the Queen of Sheba, was the wonderful
Novelty she observed in the Economy of that Great and Wise King, who cannot be
thought, after all this, to deny that Arts and Sciences may be New, else what
must become of the Foundation the Port Royal has laid, upon the supposit on of
new Arts and Inventions, to p^ove the existence of God, and that the World is
not Eternal? They say, and with great reason too, there are some Inventions so
beneficial to the World, that it is impossible that being once known, they could
ever be lost or laid aside, as the Invention of Printing, of the Sea Card, Guns
and Mills, which for certain some Ages past the World was Ignorant of, and
therefore must be the new I^ventions of later Ages; and by this they prove the
World it self was New some Thousand years since; for had it been from Eternity,
things so obvious and easy must needs have been found out long before; it
binders not but that many things are thought New, only for having been so long
disused that they are out of remembrance; and it is Happy for us, in some
respect, because thereby it gives us all that can be called Pleasure in the
whole Universe; for we see the defects of what we are thoroughly acquainted
with, but we are pleasingly deluded with great Expectations from every thing
that is New: and I am sorry you should ever give the World so just an occasion
to quarrel with you for taking away their Soul, their Life, their all; yet if
you can make good your promise, and present 'em with new Subjects, such as are
curious and very rarely handled, you will make 'em ample amends; for a thing so
much beyond their expectation will be esteemed equal to a Novelty, and as to
all those Projects and Inventions from which you have been so studious to take
off the dear reputation of new, that perhaps chiefly recommended them at first,
but since found so necessary for the gratif^ing of their sinful and depraved
Appetites, they are too considerable for you to blast, yet are they the Fruits
and Effects of Sin, so nothing new according to Solomon; but many things not
new to all, are so to those who are strangers to the World, and have but little
experience, which i^ my Case.

For Booksellers to turn Authors, is News to me, but no surprise; it is hard to
think how they should forbear writing, having filled their Heads with so much
reading; and of all Men they may best be allowed to be Poets, which is the
readiest vent for abundance of thoughts; so that, 'twere strange if Booksellers
were not more learned then other Traders, for they have all the Utensils of
Learning about them, living by Learning; though it is often seen, it is worth
runs more into their Pockets then Heads; however it is certain, that Men of this
Profession have greater opportunities then others for improving their
Understandings in Languages, History, Divinity, etc.

The Book you mention, I should once have thought it great Charity to disperse,
but now I think there is little danger of the Papists making many Proselites any
where; I expect that Church should lose every day and not gain.

But what can be said to your retirement from so many advantages to a lonely
Cell, living Incognito, in order to writing, purely for your own Diversion? If
you have proved by many Examples it is no new thing, which should I grant you, I
cannot allow it not a Jot to be wondered at, for nothing can be more surprising
then such a sudden and unaccountable change, as from having your Head and Fancy
running to the farthest part of the Earth, and your Eyes never satisfied with
seeing, you should like a Moroco Mounted upon a Barb, give a sudden check to
your Passionate Love to Rambleng, in its highest career, and confine your self
to a lonely Cell: Sure Hope has represen^ed to your Fancy some excessive fine
Prospect of learning the Art of Living Incognito, which must be New, for I
believe you never was before under such an Enchantment; I Will go no farther,
therefore, for an Instance then your Self, to find a proof of something new,
after all the Pains you take to prove the contrary, and yet the method you take
to procure this mighty Happiness you expect, is to me more new and strange,
that knowing as you do, how easy it is for an Authorwhose Book sells to write
on till he ruins the Bookseller, you should lay such a Project of writing so
many Letters, and choose a Person to help you so proper for such a purpose of
ruining the Bookseller, especially if I must bepaid too for doing mischief;
which plainly shows you have some new and Ill design against the World. But
I Will take no Pay for such Services, and this again is something new; so that
there needs no more to convince you of your mistaking the sense of Solomon, I
shall add no more, but conclude.

Your, etc.

From my Cell January 18th. 1699.
LETTER V.
Being a Defense of Speedy Marrying after the Death of a good Wife.

Madam,
I Have now made so great a Progress in the Art of Living Incognito, as that I
Live so now whether I will or no; not that I like it the better, that I must
now do that for my Safety, which at first I designed for my Pleasure; but this
Necessity, added to my Natural Inclination to a Private Life, will have that
good Effect as to perfect me in the Art of Living Incognito; seeing it is likely
Now to be my Daily Study to the End of my Life, But for what Reasons I Refer
you to my Printed Case; and as Dismal as that is, seeing I Married a Second
Time in hopes to be as happy as I was at first, the Subject of this Letter
shall be

Defense of Speedy Marrying after the Death of a good Wife.

One would think (Madam) my being Banished to a Private Cell should raise in my
Breast an Aversion to your Sex, (by Reason my Dear would not prevent it) yet I
see nothing can change my nature; for the Thoughts of the good Wife I lately
Buried, and that kind one, I yet hope to find in Valeria, fills me with an
Extraordinary Opinion of Marriage, and truly (Madam) your Displeasure at this,
has strangely Mis-lead your Friendship, if it makes you angry with me for being
such a Loving-Creature. -- Sure, Sabina, you were not in Earnest when (after
the Death of my first Wife) you reflected on my design of speedy Marrying again
-- That Widdower only loved at first as he ought, who Marries again as soon as
(decently) he can; it is a known Truth, those love their first Wives best, who
Marry soonest (there is a Remarkable instance of this now at Hackney) neither is
it rational to think they would run Headlong into a State of Life, wherein they
had been unfortunate; alas, Madam, a good Wife at first does but whet ones
Appetite the more for another, and make; one even languish for a second part to
the same Tune -- A good Wife is but Woman in Body alone, and a Woman with a
wise Soul is the fittest Companion for Man, otherwise God would have given him a
Friend rather than a Wife; but we find even in Paradise twon't good for Man to
be alone, and that even then a she-Companion was the meetest helper. If Man in
Innocence needed a Help, Solace, and Comfort, and Marriage was all these, how
deficient were our (now miserable) Lives without it? For besides that it
doubles Ioys and divides Griefs, it creates new and unthought-of Contenments.
So that I admire Marriage is so unfashionable, and that you and others are so
backwards to it, for it not only includes all the Sweets of Life, but he that
has a Wife which Loves him, has two Selfs, and possesses all his Faculties
double, his Hands, his Eyes, and Mind, he can at once leave Faithful at home,
and carry Faithful abroad -- Cato was so taken with Marriage, that he would have no
Widower live a month single; and he did not stick to maintain that it was more
Honorable to be a good Husband then a great Senator -- Madam, when you're
blaming of hasty Matches, you quite forget, that when Ieptha's Daughter Dyed,
they mourned for that she Dyed a Maid; and the truth is, though we we find many
Enemies to speedy Marriage, yet it is rare to find an Enemy to the use on it, and
I don't wonder at this, for both Sexes made but Man at first, so that Marriage
perfects Creation by restoring our lost Rib. Surely He, (I will not say she) was
made Imperfect that is not tending to Propagation -- Now all are concerned here
(even Sabina herself, if she is Flesh and Bloood) and consequently should Marry
as soon as they can; for to have an honest Remedy at Hand, and yet to seek out
forbidden Cures, is a Phrensy that deserves more then a Chain and a Dark Room.
But though speedy Marriage be often a Duty, yet let generous minds beware in
their haste of Marrying Poor, for though they care the least for Wealth, yet
they will be most galled with the want of it; for my own share, my Flesh is not
over Malicious toward sweet meats, yet (should I lose Valeria) I Would soon Marry
again, for the defense of a good Custom, a great deal of Love, and a little
Money -- Nay, Madam, think what you please (of this speedy Marrying,) to
something I must dedicate my self: for my Dear in her parting with me, seems to
take away even the substance of my Soul along with her, and certainly I laid up
my chief Treasure (whatever you may think of my Marrying so hastily) in the
Frail and Sickly Life of that Tender Wife -- But now she is gone, I must not
weep as one without hope; for she is as happy as Heaven can make her, and I as
Earth can make me; if Valeria for my sake, and her own good, would despise the
World. --

These were the Reasons why I Married so soon after the Death of my first Wife,
and made me think Time lost 'till I went about it; for (Madam) the Soul is
framed of such an active Nature, that it is impossible, but it must assume
something to it self to delight in; we seldom find any without Peculiar Delight
in some Peculiar thing; and mine consists in carressing a Virtuous Wife. But
though something I must Like and Love, yet nothing so Violently as to undo my
self with wanting it; yet will never love a Wife so little (should I Marry 50)
as that she shall not Command the All of an honest Man; and what would they
have more? -- Confess, Sabina, should not these considerations weigh down all
the Formalities that a Customary Practice can possibly impose? Besides, Gather
your Rose-Buds whilst you may, is an old Song, and Nature having denied me
Children (those tender Pledges of conjugal Love) it could be no Crime in me to
prevent the work of Time, and Marry as soon as I could, for fear of Staying
'till Time were past -- -- It Is true, Children are the poorest way of
Immortalizing as may be, and as Natural to a Beggar as a Prince: yet for all
that, I shall be very Proud of getting an Heir to Sampsill (when it is
consistent with doing Justice,) and of being a Father, tho 'twere but for one
Day. Not that I Am in Post-haste; but if pure Love can make a Woman Kind, I hope
(with Valeria's leave) to be happy a second time in a Married State, and can
never be so in any other. But Valeria sure is Dead, (for I have not received a
Line from her since we parted in Iewen-street) or were she not, had I all the
World it should be hers; for tho I Am treated with the greatest Indifference,
methinks I can n'ere be kind enough to those I Love. -- (But to digress no
longer) So much I was pleased with my first Marriage, and so unlikely to forget
that Dear Half that is Dead, that I may truly say all the time I lived without
her I was as 'twere in a Dream; and I don't doubt, should I Marry a third time,
but I shall (as I did at first) find more Pleasure in Possession, than I now do
in expectation -- Then can you blame my hasty Marrying, seeing when I Married,
my own Venus was supposed (and so she will prove at length) all that is excellent
in Woman kind; for what has the whole Sex more then in one alon^ that is kind
and loving? and so I Will think the Person I Marry, were she made of Adamant --
Then Sabina, acknowledge your Error in Censuring my hasty Marriage; You
know*not what -- Charms there are in a Virtuous Spouse, what a Mine of
pleasure, what sprightly Life and Vigor did Iris give to all my Thoughts, Looks
and Actions, how many new satisfactions in every thing she did! How did I even
live in her Dying Breath! If you doubt this, read her LIFE, and you will find it
so -- Now (whilst I was a Widdower) thought I with my self, why might not some
of these Virtues revive in a second Wife? how ever, Hit or Miss; Luck's all;
and who'd not hastily venture for such a Prize, except (as some have thought)
all Female Excellence is fled with Iris; and I should think so too, were
Valeria Dead, who has Charms enough, but her Bags hide 'em --

I might urge mo^e in defense of a hasty Marriage, as the Inclination of Black
Men -- the Benefit in a Wives going to Market, (for I never knew, nor could Buy
a Joint of Meat) -- The want of a Mistress to rule the Kitchen (for I never
presume to direct there) to order about Tarts, Puddings, Wines and Kickshaws,
and I had almost forgot the Cream of the Jest, the pleasure of a warm Bedfellow;
but I Will not enlarge as not doubting but what is said (...) has fairly proved
that every Widdowerought to Wed as soon as he can, and that my Marrying again
(five Months after my Wife dyed) was no slight to her Memory: SLIGHT! no I
assure your Ladyship, 'twas to fulfill her DYING REQUEST; 'twas the desire of
my Dear her self, that after her Death I Would speedily Marry again (such regard
had she to my future happiness) and I could not deny such a Wife any thing,
especially her last Request on her Death -- Bed; that was uttered with a
tenderness that will n'ere be equaled; to sl^ght this Request, would be to
forget her, which is the Crime you charge me wi^h, and of which you will ever
acquit me when you read the following EPITAPH (now Ingra^'d on the Tomb erected
to her Dear Memory,) (viz.)

Here Lies all that was Mortal of ELIZABETH, first Wife of JOHN DUNTON, Citizen
and Stationer of London, who departed this Life, May 28th, 1697.

Sacred Urn, with whom we Trust!
This Dear Pile of Sacred Dust;
Know thy Charge, and safely Guard,
'Till Death's Brazen Gate's Unbarr'd;
'Till the Angel bi^s it Rise,
And Remove to Paradise.
A Wife Obliging, Tender, Wise,
A Friend to comfort and Advise;
Virtue Mild as Zephirs Breath,
Piety which smiled in Death;
Such a Wife and such a Friend,
All Lament and all Commend.
But with EATING CARES oppressed,
He who knew and loved her best,
Who her LOYAL HEART did share,
He who reigned unrivaled there,
And no Truce to Sighs will give,
'Till he Dye with her to Live. I have desired in my Will to be Buri^d in the
same Grave.

Or if more we would comprize,
The Name I called her, by before our Marriage.
Here int^rr'd Fair Iris lies.
Thus (Madam) you see I Am so far from slighting the Memory of my Dear Iris (by
my hasty Marrying) that to her very Ashes I keep a Body pure and Troth
inviolable, and that Separation can have no place in our Union, which is too
great to be exampled; and as I owe this respect to the Memory of my first Wife,
so it is no more (when she proves as kind,) than I Will pay to this, or if
possible, a greater Tenderness; for I ever thought he never loved who ever
makes retreat. -- Sabina are you yet reconciled to my HASTY MARRIAGE? If not, I
must be forced to 'tell ye, that no other Amusement but Marriage could have
saved my Life, and you 'ent my Friend if you would have me, dye when there were
Remedies at hand! -- Alas I no sooner thought of my Dear Departed (and I hardly
thought of any thing else 'till I had a NEW Wife to divert the Melancholy,) but
I even pind aw'ay; but (thought I) should I get HER LIKENESS AGAIN, that then
Iris would live with me still, though but in Effigy; and such a RESEMBLANCE of
her must save my Life, or nothing; truly Madam, 'twas thus with me, and I MUST
BE SHACKLED AGAIN, OR DYE FOR IT -- What the success has been, you will see in my
PRINTED CASE, but how happy I am yet to be, time must discover: However should
Wife, Mother, and all my Friends either continue or grow unkind, yet I have
this comfort left, that by A SELF-ABNEGATION, and dis-sociation from the World,
I shall be United to Him, who is so much above all I ever had, or the World can
give, as he is all I can wish to have; and certainly he only is the DIVINE
HERMIT, who by not loving the World, leaves it whilst he lives in it; excluding
himself as well from the S^n, as the Society of Men, and by Acting thus, he
CONQUERS BY RETREATING, and thereby shows he is not altogether beholding to
Solitude for the Glory of his Virtue -- I have only to add, That your speedy
Answer, will be Impatiently desired by,

Your Obedient Friend, and very Humble Servant, JOHN DUNTON.

The LADY's Answer to my Fifth Letter.
SIR,
I AM very sorry so Unhappy a Necessity should come to take from you the Glory
of Constancy; for I am persuaded you would have perfected your Art of Living
Incognito, without Constraint, and showed your self as constant to what you
first chose for your Pleasure, and the Improvement of your Thoughts, as you do
now to Marriage, in your defense of it, after all the Ill Treatment you have so
lately received from it, which, as you well observe, might have created an
Aversion to the whole Sex, in a Man of a Less Loving Temper: but you still
dream of finding out some way of making Valeria a Kind and Loving Wife.

Small hopes, it is true, attends your mighty Care;
But of all Passions, Love does last despair.
And indeed I should be very defective in my Friendship, were I resolved to
blame your Loving Temper since it is that alone enables you to bear your
Misfortunes with any Tolerable Fase, hoping still to Charm Valeria with your
Love, and at last rival the Bags I wish it may ever do you so much good. I
confess what I observe in those Loving Tempers, can never bring me to Ambition
such a happiness as they possess with all their Enjoyments, in a World so full
of changes and uncertainties, and in one of the frailest things in the World, a
Woman, so Composed of Vanity and Inconstancy. Yet notwithstanding I must own
(what will partly Justify your Extraordinary Opinion of Marriage); That
Friendship never is in that Perfection as between Man and Wife; and that a
Woman with a Wise Soul, is the fittest Companion for a Man: Nay if there be but
one WISE SOUL between 'em, so it be but known to 'em which it is that has it,
it is well enough; the very Union makes 'em happy, and useful to each other.
CALO was much in the right to say, It was more Honorable to be a Good Husband
than a Great Senator? For it is always better to be Good than Great; but was not
so extremely rig't in not allowwing A MONTHS TIME for single Liberty. The Man
that can obtain the Reputation of a good Husband in such an Age as this, is
worthy of double honor; for he must have a strange Art of Conduct, not only
for the Governing his Wife, but of what ever Governs her; and it is twenty to
one he gets the Reputation of an ill Husband for his pains, rather than a good
one, let him deal never so gently, unless the virtue lie in some Measure on the
Woman's side, of cheerfully submiting to his Government; therefore by Cato's
good leave, there is no doing any thing well in haste, the World is not so
mightily stocked with Women of that Virtue, that a Man cannot choose but light on
'em in a Months time; they were more scarce than so in Solomon's time, much
more in this Corrupt Age; yet so far I yield, as to allow it a great Argument
of Love to your first Wife, your Impatience to be yoked again; but must beg
your pardon if I deal plainly with you, and tell you such a sudden Engagment
after her Death, looked as if you had not the Exact Estimate of her Singulr
Virtue; you did not impute the Sole cause of your Felicity to a thing so rarely
found in Women, as Solomon affirms, but thought it went in common with the fair
Sex. I also fear you imputed a little too much to your self, and thought your
Love and Tenderness, most needs indear you to any Woman. Some such Mistake made
you so fearless in such a Hazzardous Attempt. but tho I blamed your hasty
Marriage, when I was a stranger to your many reasons for it, yet am I far from
thinking i^ any slight to the Memory of your first Wife; I really believe you
esteemed it the only means to comfort you for the loss of her, and am very Glad
whatever has happened since, it proved at that time, such a Cordial as saved
your Life. But in all this, I see no cause to applaud your LOVING TEMPER, that
forces you to dedicate your self to something, when there is nothing Permanent
under Heaven, and must therefore leave you, and carry away the very Substance
of your Soul, that cannot be easy without it is peculiar delight, which consists
in caressing a Virtuous Wife that is hardly to be found: So that your Felicity
is Composed of so many difficulties, it must come samewhat near a Miracle that
makes you happy; and all owing to your being such a Loving Creature.

But be it as it will, when SPEEDY MARRIAGE becomes a duty (for then God calls
us to that state of Life) we have nothing to consider, but how to make a virtue
of Necessity, and choose, as near as we can, for Piety and Goodness, rather then
trouble our selves with the fears of Poverty. A Man is not the less Generous
for having little to give; but shows his Generosity as much in envying no Body,
but being satisfied with his Portion in this Life: For the greater the Mind is,
with the less it is content; and whatever the World may think, the Poor serve
the Public in Marrying, as much as the Rich. Should none Marry but the
Wealthy, with what a Race of Pride and insolence would it fill the World? All
Arts and Ingenuity Spring from Necessity; and Poverty may be truly said to be
the source of all Virtue; and those that make so ill use of it as to commit
such Outrages, as brings 'em often to untimely ends, would have made no better
use of Riches, if they had had 'em; and it is only our corrupt Nature turns
Sovereign Medicines into Poison.

And now I shall Freely own, I am convinced of my Error, in censuring your
hasty Marriage; tho I cannot admit of all your Arguments for Marriage in
general. I am convinced some Persons Tempers and Inclinations are so perfectly
opposite, as plainly shows Providence never designed '^m for it; and for such
to marry, merely to please the World, and avoid Reproach, would be the greatest
Sin and Folly imaginable, in despising the highest Gift and Privilege Heaven
could bestow on Mortals, while here on Earth; which is enough to justify
those that neither seek nor desire Marriage: yet ought they to think it their
Duty to serve the Public, and not live only for themselves; Nay they are
obliged to do the more, as having the Liberty of choosing so many several ways
of doing it.

It had been happy for the World, if so great a Patron and Votary to Marriage,
as you, had not met with such a discouragement; a little time will discover for
whom to chastisement was designed. I hope it will never come to that, of
Mother, Wife, and all your Friends forsaking yoo. I can answer for one; tho in
the way you propose to your self, you may perhaps find more comfort then in the
greatest kindnes^ any Friend can show you; and this is past a Doubt with me;
for I really believe it, who am,

Your, etc.

From my Cell, January 28th. 1699.
LETTER VI.
Proving it is a Happiness to be in Debt.

Madam,
IN my last Letter I acquainted your Ladyship that I had made a considerable
Progress in the Art of Living incognito, and that I was now obliged to live s^
whether I would o^ no: I was ever in love wi^ A PRIVATE LIFE; (...) '^is my
misfortune now, (and the only thing in the World that ^bles me) that my
obl^gations to some People, drive me as much as my own inclinations, to a
lonesome-Cell Madam, you will admire at this, for you see by my See my Printed
Case. p. 7.
PRINTED CASE, that all I owe in the World is scarce 250 Pounds; which I must
think is a TRIFLING SUM, as it is not the 15th part Lands are worth (if you take
in present Possessions and Reversions) and of what my
(...) scarce the tenth part of what my Wife, (an only Child) has a Title to,
at her Mothers Death, and which she cannot enjoy without me; for I wish I could
see that Man that dares keep her from me, when I send for her. which I shall at
Midsummer, if not Sooner
But for all this Plenty on both sides, at present I have a little occasion for
Money; yet neither she nor her Mother will permit me to take up the Small SUM I
want. So that it is clear though we Solemnly took each other for RICHER FOR See
the Reflectione on my Printed Case. p. 2.
POORER, that nothing but Money parts us; and this is evident by her saying,
(as I can prove by a dozen Witnesses,) that she had been a miserable Woman, had
she Married any Man but my self. But I had only such fair words, whilst they
cost her nothing: however, my comfort is, a little Time will work my
Deliverance without her; but in the mean time I am pinched (as I Am forced to
trespass on my, generous Friends,) but seeing every Man is willing to make his
present Circumstance as easy as he o^n (that I may make a Virtue of Necessity,
as well as others) this Subject of this Letter shall be,

An Essay proving it is a Happiness to be in Debt.

You see, Madam, by this Assertion, it is a very strange case, which can find no
Advocate what is it that fancy cannot put a varnish on? A porson'd Pill may be
gilded over, as well as that which is wholesome. Favorinus long ago wrote in
the commendation of a Quartan Ague; the soul Disease has not wanted a Pen to
excuse and commend it: others have made a very bad Wise the Subject of their
Commendation, because (they say) She brings a Man to Repentance. But, of all
barren Subjects that have been yet writ upon, this of proving it is a Happiness
to be in Debt, I judge will be most surprising. I own at present I Live
Incognito that I may be rendered incapable of contracting any more Debts: yet I
shall endeavor to prove it is a Happiness to be in Debt. It Is true for my own
part, I Would rather sell my Coat from my Back, than owe any thing; and therefore
in 15 YEARS TRADING, I never set any Man call twice for Money: and it is my
Advice to every Citizen, (that is in Debt) that he pays every Man his own, the
he ^ares himself not worth a Great; or it he compounds to pay a patt.
nevertheless let him resolve to satisfy all to the full, if his endeavors, and
God's Blessing, ever again inables him. If our Citizen Acts thus -- By
suffering he shall Conquer. The Romans overcame sitting still, it is a comfort
to remember Job's beginning and ending: Tribulation refines the Understanding.
Hannibal deservedly boasted of himself, Age, Prosperity, and Adversity have so
Instructed me, that I had rather follow Reason than Fortune. He had never
attdin'd this pitch of discomment, ^ad for his decliming Fortines obliged him
to surmount all difficulties by his Conduct. The Rich Chabot would be
Symboliz'd by a Ball with this Inscription -- Being Smitten, I Rise higher --
Men in prosperity are seldom Religious. But no Whip is more likely to reform
the unfortunate, or gives a shrewder Las^, than the Labells of a Bond, or
Obligation with a Noverint Universi. He therefore, and only he gets by his
breaking, who is more humble, pitiful, mortified, given to Pryer, etc. Thus
Madam, having first told you my Noti^s of justice. I hope I may now, without
offense to those few I Am engaged to -- -- Prove, it is a Happiness to be in
Debt, and most live as if they belseved as much -- For to run in Debt ouw
adays, is the Fashion, from the Lord to the Cobbler: it is become a saying, he
Pays like Quality: that is, he is Dun-Proof; and thinks it a mean thing to pay
his Debts: and this is not only the Practice of some Rich Men, (for the
greatest part are of a Nobler Principle,) but also of the poorer Gentry. Mr.
Marshal of B -- mer told me yesterday of a Gentleman that dropped 25. 6d. as he
was mounting his Horse, the Hostler stooped for it, and would sain have given
it him, Prithee (Friend) take it, said the Gentleman, for 'twan't worth my
stooping for, when at the same time he owed more then he was worth; sure such
as these think it is a Happiness to be in Debt, or th^y'd never be thus
Prodigal! But I wonder how they can sleep in quiet that are thus injurious to
others; and I find Augustus Caesar of the same mind, for hearing it talked in
his Court what a huge Sum of Money a certain Knight in Rome ov^ed at his Death,
and that all his Goods were to be Sold to make Payment of his D^bts; Commanded
the Master of his WARDROBE to buy for him that BED wherein this Knight used to
lie, for (says he) if I cannot Sleep soundly in that Bed wherein he could
Sleep, that owed so much, then surely I shall Sleep in none -- But some han't
been so forward to run in Debt, but others have been as forward to punish their
Injustice -- The Debt being confessed (amongst the Romans) Thirty Days were
allowed the Debtor for the payment of the Money. The Money not paid, the Debtor
was delivered up as a Servant to his Creditor; he was sometimes cast into
Prison, and unless the Creditor were in the mean time compounded with; he
remained Threescore Days in Prison, and Three Market Days being brought before
the Judge, the Debt was Solemnly proclaimed, and upon the third Market Day, he
was either Sold to Foreigners for a Slave, or else was Punished by Death, each
Ceditor being suffered if he would, to cut a piece of his Dead Body instead of
payment Roman Antiquities.
-- -- Asychis made as odd a Law against bad Debtors as this, 'twas that the
Dead Bodies should be in the Creditors keeping, 'till the Debt were paid; and
I Am told, it is common in England to Arrest the Corpse of a Debtor as it is
carrying to the Grave.

But one would admire that Men (that stand in need of mercy themselves) should
be thus sharp upon their poor Debtors. For in the whole Course and Frame of
Nature, we see that nothing is made for it self, but each has a Bond of Duty,
of Use, or of Service, by which it is Indebted to others. The SUN by his
splendour to enlighten all the World, by his warmth, and heat i^ cherish and
comfort each living and vegetable Creature -- Yea, even Man (the Lord of the
Creation) is so framed of God, that not only his Country, his Parents, and his
Friends, claim a share in him, but he is also indebted to his Hound and to his
Ox, the one for Hunting for his pleasure, and the other for laboring for his
profit; and therefore a good Man is merciful to his Beast. His Judgment, Wit,
Discretion, he has them for others as much as for himself; and as to his
WEALTH he has not a Penny but what he is accountable for. But such is the mystery
of this Stewardship (where even GOD himself is Debtor, and Mail Creditor; for
is it not said, He that has pity on the Poor lends unto the Lord, and that
which he has given will be pay him again, Prove. 19. 17.) That present payment
is the least and worst, the Lender owes more then the Receiver; the Poor
(whose Prayers are he^rd) bestowing more then he receives; and his Box is more
the Rich Man's Treasury than his own! Then would we have a Policy on Heaven (of
our uncertain Riches) we must make the Poor our Insurers? Sure I am, ev^ry Man
stands in need of this Advice; seeing had he the Riches of Solomon (whose
Wealth was so Great that it would puzzle our Accomplants to find New Names for
Sums) of all we may say as he said of the Ax Head that fell off to Elijah the
Prophet (2. Kings 6. 5.) Alas Master, it is but borrowed. Do ^ou Oua^ such a
one rich (says Seneca) because of his, ^ich Sumpter Horse, or because he has a
Plow going in every Province, or for his large Account-Book, o^ such large
Possessions near, the City? When you have said all, he is Poor: But you will
say why? Why because ^e owes all; unless you make a difference between
borrowing from Men and from Providence. --

Then let not him that has lost an Estate Mourn, for another lost it before he
had it: perchance if he had not lost it now, it had lost him for ever, and
therefore in such a Case as this, let us rather think what we have escaped then
lost -- And what we Owe, rather than what we are

Even Kings owe Protection to their Loyal Subjects and their Subjects of all
Ranks, owe Allegiance to their Sovereign Lord -- Our Lands and Lives (if we are
Loyal) are the Kings, and nothing can we call our own but Death. --

Then again let us look into our selves and see how our constitutive parts are
Debtors each to other -- The Soul does quicken and give Life to the Body, and
the Body like an Automaton (as one expresses it) does move and carry it self
and the Soul. --

Again if we Survey Man in his parts, the Eye sees for the Foot, the Foot
stands for the Hand, the Hand touches for the Mouth, the Mouth tastes for
the Stomach, the Stomach eats for the whole Body, the Body repayeth again
that Nutriment, which it has received to all the parts, discharging the
Retriments by the Port Esquiline, and all this (as an Eminent Physician
observes) in so comely an Order and by a Law so certain, and in so due a time,
as if Nature had rather Man should not have been at all, then not to be a
Debtor in every part of him.

The ALCHIMISIS who promise to themselves to turn Tin into Silver, and Copper
into Gold, how will they be transported out of themselves with Joy, if they
should but see a happy issue of their attempt? How much more a Creditor when he
shall recover a desperate Debt? It is like the Joy of a Father that receives
his lost Child.

Again, He that is in Debt, has this great Privilege above other Men, that
his Creditors pour out Hearty Prayers for him; they wish that he may Live,
Thrive, Prosper and grow Rich; and all for their own Advantage; They seem to be
careful for their Debtors, that they may not lose the many Hundreds they owe
them. Witness those usurers of Rochel, who when they heard that the Interest of
Money was fallen, went and hanged themselves for Grief, and truly (Madam,) I
cannot altogether blame 'em, for most Men owe not only there Learning to their
Plenty, but likewise their Virtue and their Honesty: For how many Thousands
live now in the World in great Reputation for their Honest and Just Dealings
with all Mankind, who if they were put to their Shifts, as others as Honestly
inclined are, would soon lose their Reputation, ^ea, turn Rogues and Knaves
too, as the Vulgar think and generally calt such as are not able to pay their
Debts? I question not but Want and self Preservation, (for Hunger will break
through Stone Walls) would put some of them upon those very hard Shifts, they
now blame so much in others: But for all they are so often put to their Shifts,
I must say this, to the HONOR OF DEBTORS, that they have a great Influence
over their Creditors, they become in a manner, their Landlords, to whom they
Cringe, Kneel, as if they did owe them all Imaginable Services; and are as
Ambitious of their Debtors Favors, as they who in King Charles's Reign did
carress the Royal-Misses to attain the Lives of their Condemned Friends, or
some Place at Court. --

Without DEBT, AND LOAN, the Fabric of the World will be dis-jointed and fall
asunder into its first Chaos: I might first Instance, in what it owes for
Drink: For (as Cowly tells us)

The Thirsty Earth soaks up the Rain,
And Drinks, and gapes for Drink again;
The Plants such in the Earth, and are
^
The Sea it self, which one would think
Should have but little need of Drink,
Drinks Ten Thousand Rivers up,
So filled that they over flow the Cup.
The busy Sun (and one would guess
By's Drunken fiery Face no less)
Drinks up the Sea; and when h'as done,
The Moon and Stars drink up the Sun.
They drink, and dance by their own Light,
They drink, and Revel all the Night.
Nothing in Nature's sober found;
But an ETERNAL HEALTH goes Round.
And if the World Runs thus in Debt for Bubb, what does it owe for its other
Supports? Or rather, what does it not owe? For, first, the Beauty of the Stars,
what would it be but Vastness, and Deformity, if the Sun did not lend 'em
Light? The Earth would remain unfruitful, if it did not borrow Refreshing Dews
from the Watery Signs and Planets. The Summer is pleasant, and promises great
hopes of Plenty; but it is, because it takes up much upon Trust from the
Friendly and Seasonable Temperament of the Elements. And, to say the Truth,
there is NOTHING GOOD, or GREAT in the World, but that it BORROWS something
from others, to make it Great, or lends to another to make it Good. --

The ELEMENTS, who are linked together by a League of Association, and by their
symbolizing Qualities, do Barter, and Truck, Borrow and Lend one to another, as
being (as 'twere) the ROYAL EXCHANGE OF NATURE; They are by this Traffic and
Intercourse, the very LIFE AND NOURISHMENT of all Sublunary Bodies.

Well, If it be such A HAPPINESS TO BE IN DEBT, and every thing lives under a
Necessity of owing something, -- Then farewell Diogenes, thou SURLY CLOWN; for
who ever lived more like a Souc'd Mackarel, amongst Men, barrelling up thy self
in a Tub like a Kegg of Sturgeon, and this because thou had not Soul enough
to treat thy Friends, or to live in Debt.

I also bid farewell to Coke, Littleton, Shephard, etc. and other Lawyers, and
Molestors of Causes, who accounted as their (surviving Brethren do to this day)
being in Debt a very great Evil. --

I also pity Zem's Weakness, who blushed to borrow: -- Crates Pride, for
scorning to be Trusted; -- and do as much despise that POET LAUREAT, who
forfeited his WREATH OF BAYS (rather than owe a Farthing) and afterward made
Prayers to his Purse to supply his Wants; tho (as I Have proved) IT IS A HAPPINESS
TO BE IN DEBT. -- But let Men that either will not, or cannot be Trusted, a^ as
they please: for my own share, whilst I live, I am willing to live in Debt. --
IN DEBT to the Creator of all things, for his so Curiously framing me in my
Mothers Womb Psalm. 139. 13. 15. In Debt to Christ, for hopes of a blessed
Resurrection; and as I owe, so I will be ever ready to lose my Life for my
Countries Service. -- I will owe Duty and Respect to my Wife's Mother, and shall
pay it when she an swers my Just Request. -- And for my FEW CREDITORS, when
I Have paid them (and they may depend on what I promise in my Printed Case) yet I
shall ever owe them my hearty Prayers, and a Thankful Acknowledgment for their
Kind Forbearance. They are so generous to consider that he that owes Money,
and cannot pay it, is an Agent for Sorrow: and it is my Duty to remember that he
that has it and will not pay* it, is a Steward for the Devil. -- Then I don't
see why any Man should be uneasy, for I Have promised (after I see the Issue of
this Year) to sell even my self to the skin, rather than any Man shall lose a
(...), which they will not, (If they can have Patience) but will be paid their
Principal, and Interest upon Interest, if demanded. I will also owe, and be
ever paying Love and Tenderness to my present Wife, and a Hearty Reconciliation
when ever she Desires it. -- And ere long I shall pay my GREAT DEBT UNTO NATURE
which is the most Difficult Debt I have left to pay, and for that Reason I Am
still Learning THE ART OF LIVING INCOGNITO; For as Philositratus lived Seven
Years in his Tomb to acquaint himself with Death; So I shall pray that my
Private Life may have the same Effect. -- But wherever I end my Days, whether
in a Cell or in a Public Station, I shall there render my Spirit into the
Hands of God, and bequeath my Body to be buried (by those I shall make my
Heirs) in the New-Burying place, and in the same Grave with my first Wife,
where we shall both pay THAT DEBT WE OWE TO THE WORMS (and be still happy
together, if a senceless happyness can be called so,) and after the Worms are
satisfied. I hope (at the General R^ection,) we shall both Rise together, and
know and Love one another for ever, in the presence of that God, to whom we owe
all we have and ^e. -- Neither has my Living in a Cell banished the Remembrance
of what I owe your Ladyship for your Ingenious Remarks on the Letters, I send
ye ('it is to you, Madam, I Am Indebted for all the Pleasures I shall find in
Retirement); Which I here Acknowledge with this Assurance, that the Respect
Iowe your Ladyship, shall be as Immortal as the Soul of,

Your most Indebted Friend And Servant, JOHN DUNTON.

The LADY'S Answer to my Sixth Letter.
SIR,
I Am apt to think the World must needs be surprised that any Person should
have the Courage to advance any thing in favor of Debtors, the most abject
Creatures in the World; that very few, while they pity and relieve 'em, but at
the same ^me, have a great de^ of contempt for 'em. So little reflection is
made upon the wise disposal of Providence, who has made us all Debtors, not
having the least right to the ^rest Blessing upon Earth; for what was given at
our Creation, was forfeited by Rebellion; and we are therefore indebted to
God's infinite Mercy, for all we have, Especially when we have received an
ample Portion in this Life, and never suffered want: such Persons are so deeply
indebted, that if they pay no part to those God has constituted to be his
Receivers, they may Perhaps be paying it to all Eternity; but such Debtors
command respect, wheree^er they come; for their Money is every ones Aim; it
answer^ all things; yet I see not why the Poor Debtor may not find something in
his condition to be esteemed for; since God, who permits it, has a good design
in it for the teaching us many necessary Truths; it is the only Glass that shows
us the true Image of our selves, and the Vain Delusions of the World.

How long do we live in the Mistake, that we are Born only for our selves* and
what do we study more than to be, or to seem to be great, and considerable;
that so we may obtain Friends, respect, and applycation, and all that flatters
our Imaginations: but at last meeting with disapointments, we then perceive
there is no Living with out dependence, being forced to seek the help and
assistance of others. But miserable is their case, who applye^ to the rich,
who is tender mercies are not unlike the Ancient ROMANS, ^ou mention: Those Laws
must needs have an admirable effect of promoting Sordidness and Self-interest;
for the basest crime could not be more severely punished, no^ meet with a more
fatal mischief then to find any one so Cruelly unkind, at tolay the Foundation
of a Man's Misfortune and Slavery, by lending him Money: 'twere much kinder to
^ave him to Starve in his necessity. The Makers of such Laws we may be sure
would stick at nothing, that might secure 'em from those s^re Penalties; by
which one may guess at their integrity, in Aiming so exactly at the Poor, who
perhaps bears an honester mind to Pay their Debts, were it in their Power, than
many of the Rich, who are of^n so puffed up with Pride and insolence, they
frequently neglect to Pay their D^BTS, thinking all the World depends upon 'em
and are their Slaves. Sure no Laws could be severe enough for such, if there
could be found men of sufficient Courage and Integrits to put 'em in execution

There are so many innocent ways of contracting Debts, it is much to be admired
Men could be so Ignorant of the Condition of Human Life, as to insult over the
misfortunes of others, and not think 'emselves as liable to 'em. But this is
the privilege Adversity carries with it, to give in Experience of our own
Imbecility, and the many changes we are subjected to in this Life; which brings
us to the pursuit of a more lassing Happiness in another World, and to
Retirement from this, in which we find full leisure for useful Thoughts and
Reflections upon our passed mis^es: The Debtor now sees plainly there is not a
weaker Threatner, nor stronger Flatterer then Fortune, while the World was his
Friend, he had the same Partial Affection for it as most persons usually have
for those that loves 'em, but the Treatment Debtors receive from it, soon opens
their Eyes to see the change their Fortune makes in it; and can with Hannibal,
resolve to follow a better Guide, that will deal more truly with 'em, and
convince 'em of the HAPPYNESS OF POOR DEBTORS that cannot Pay: For the World
takes so many ways of payment by exposing 'em to the Public in all ma^r of ill
reflections, will they have given their Pride and Malice more then full
Satisfaction for the want of their Money, that at last they make themselves
their Debtors no less, though in another kind, which such an Adversity will teach
'em that Humlity to bear, and the Charity to forgive, and t^'s a blessed
condition that brings 'em acquainted with two such Graces. And this condition
is no les^ Friend to true. Mortification, which till we have attained, our Soul
is not in a right State, for it is like a Man Hen-Peck'd by his Wife, the Body
domineers over the Soul, and ^gages it in all the Follies that Cha^m its Br^ish
Senses, and so ranverses all Peace and Order, till the Soul assumes its
Authority by Subjecting the Body, which is so hard to do, though the Happiness of
this Life and the Next depends upon it, One may well esteem it, the height of
Felicity to be many condition that facilitates it; And in this consists the
Debtors Privilege, the World accounts all Favo^ lost upon him, and so
with^raws all Temptations, and his necessitous Fortune ours off all E^ess from
his dep^ed Appetites, and the Devil will then leave him as he did Job, (...) he
had no Accomplices left to assist him* and so a Debtor see^ his The Great
Enemies Conquered by his Patient Suffering.

This may be every Debtors Case that Studies to gain by his Afflictions the
Improvement of his Virtues, rather than give up himself to base and wicked
compliance with the Rich and Powerful, or r^ing into vain Presumptuous
Projects, in hopes of a more speedy relief; when by waiting upon God, and using
only such mean as he appoints, he may expect a Blessed End of his troubles in
this Life* or if he patiently submits to Gods Will, (...) full as ^appy for
(...) is uneasy to think others should suffer upon his acc^unt; yet if he
spares what is possible from himself, using all the means in his power, God will
not be wanting either to assist him to pay, or to support his Creditors under
the loss.

This in general may be said of the Happiness of being in Debt; nor does the
oddness of your CASE, exclude you from any of the Privileges that poor Debtors
enjoy, tho your Prospect is not so desperate as theirs; but no DEPENDENCE can
be fixed on in this (...) certain World, therefore must wait the issue. In the
mean time, I perceive you study to pay with thanks and grateful
acknowledgments, what ever you owe, or think you owe and your mistake GIVES ME
A SHARE, though I know nothing of any such ^retence I can have: therefore to own
it, would be very unconscionable and unbecoming*

Your, etc.

POSTSCRIPT.
WHilst I was finishing the last Sheet of this Book, my Ingenious Friend Mr.
GEORGE LARKIN Senjor, sent me the following Lines, Entitled

An Acrostick to his Worthy and much Esteemed Friend, Mr. JOHN DUNTON Upon his
Art of Living Incognito.

J ^ognito to Live's an ART indeed:
O Happy's he that can therein succeed!
H e only knows how to Command his Fate;
N othing can make that Man Unfortunate.
D oing to A^ what you would have done to You,
U sing the World, yet bidding it Adieu:
N ot to be Seen, yet every thing to See:
T his sure to Live Incognito: must be!
O Happy Life! of which I only know,
(...)can live ^er than Incognito.
(...) ^d if thou do this A^ Pursue,
(...) thy ^cholar be, and learn it too.
FINIS.
(...) Written by JOHN DUNTON.
1. THE Second Part of the Art of living Incognito, will speedily go to the
Press, (if this First meets with Encouragement) and contains the following
Letters, viz. (...) (...). Of every Thing. Letter 8. Dun^ represented as Dead
and Buried, on an Essay upon his own Funeral. Letter 9. A Morning's thought, on
these Words. The time of Singing of Birds is come Latter. 10. ^d to my Summer
Friends, Letter 11. In Praise of Sore-Eyes. Letter 12. On the Riding made for
Women that beat their Husbands. Letter 13. An Essay upon dead Men's Shoes.
Letter 14. On the Royal Sport of Co^ Fighting. Letter 15. In Praise of the
Tooth. Ach. Letter 16. The Character of that HONORABLE LADY to whom these
Letters were sent. 17. Of Bargaining for a Wife, or an Essay upon Jointure^.
Letter 18. Of being asked in the Church, with the Answers that have been given
to this Question, Do any of you know cause or ^st Impediment why these two
Persons should not be joined together in Holy (...) Letter ^9. (...) the doing
Penance in a White Sheet. (...) other Uncom^ (...) To each of these Letters
(which are all written (...) (...) LAD^ has returned a particular Answer, which
is (...) to each Letter. Price. Stitched (...).

2. An Essay proving we shall know our Frie^ in (...), occasioned by the Death
of my First Wife and dedicated to her (...) S^ in a (...) to a Reveren^ Divine.
The (...) Edition is ready for the^ (...) 6^.

3. The Dublin (...), with some account of my (...) In several Letters to the
Spectators Price bo^ (...).

4. The Case of John (...) Citizen of (...) with respect to his Mother in Law
M^ (...) Nichol^ of (...) ^ans, and her only Child Sarah Dunton; with the just
Reasons (...) leaving her. In a Letter (...) Mr. Georgee Larkin Senior. To
which (...) his Letter to his Wife Price (...) 3^

Reflections on Mr. Duntons leaving his Wife, in a Letter to himself, (...)
(...) All (5) sold by A. Baldwin, near the Oxford (...) in Warwick Lane.

THE SECOND PART Of the ART of Living Incognito.

OR, DUNTON Represented as Dead and Buried, In an ESSAY upon his own FUNERAL.

To which is added, His Essay upon every Thing.

Being a Continuation of the Thousand Letters on as many Uncommon Subjects,
Written by JOHN DUNTON, during his Retreat from the World; and sent to that
Honorable Lady, to whom he addressed His Conversation in Ireland. With her
Ladyships Answer to each Letter.

To be continued 'till the whole Correspondence is finished.

Man, ere he is aware,
Has put together a Solemnity;
And dressed his Hearse while he has Breath,
As yet to spare:
Yet, Lord, instruct us so to die,
That all these Dyings may be Life in Death -- Herbert.
LONDON, Printed (for the Author) and are to be sold by A. (...) the Oxford
Arms in Warwick Lane; of whom is to be had the First and Second Parts Price of
each 1 s.

THE SECOND PART Of the ART of Living Incognito.
From my Cell, April 10. 1700.
LETTER VII.
Of every Thing.

Madam,
MY First Part of the Art of living Incognito, having met with a kind Reception
(except from FOPPS, who to show their Wat, See my First Part of the Art of
living Incognito. p. 2.
rail at every thing but the Product of their own Brain) This has encouraged me
to Publish a Second Part: For, seeing 'was Sabina that first inspir^d me with
the Resolution of living Incognito: I now intend to proceed to the writing the
Thousand Letters that must go to the perfecting of this ART, except your
Lady-ship should grow weary of the Correspondence; or if you should, my Project
would be still Incognito; for I Am not so vain as to think that any thing but
your Ladyships Remarks could have given my Letters a Reputation in the World;
and without that, tho I should still have studied, yet should no longer have
Printed -- the Art of living Incognito -- But could I doubt of that kind
Reception it has met with, when your Ladyship was pleased to say In your Letter
dared Ap. 10.
That the World is much deluded with Appearances; but if you are the Person
that has raised their Expectation, they will not grudge a Shilling to satisfy it;
but if their Envy is only raised, they will content themselves with laughing at
your presumptuous pretension (of writing on a Thousand uncommon Subjects)
without ever reading it, and spend some Wit upon the Lady concerned in it: But
whoever buys it with indifference, and so reads it, will, I believe, find
what is worth his Money, and commend it.

Soul of my Muse, I thank thee; and in that, A short Poem dedicated to the
Honorable Lady.

I pay the humble Tribute of my Fate:
How have thou Crowned my Head? O what Divine
Raptures inspired, beyond the powerful Nine?
I will not call Rome's Caesar's back again,
To show their Triumphs; one is in my Brain
Great as all theirs; and circl'd with thy BAYS,
My thoughts take Empire over all Land, and Seas;
Against subtle Lightning and fierce Thunder stroke,
I shall be safer than Augustus OAK,
With double Guard of Laurel, and made free
From Age, look fresh still as my Daphnian-Tree,
And Printing still my Son and Heir shall be.
Critics shall dread my Looks, no Slander dare
To approach my Books; whilst your Idea's there.
Great Patroness of Cells, I could create
New Worlds methinks for thee; and in a State
As Free as Innocence, shame all Poets Wit,
Could climb no higher than Elyzium; yet,
Where they but build cool Arbors Shades and Groves,
Teach Brooks to murmur Songs, (...) please their Loves:
We will have other Flights, erect new Things,
To call the Envy up of Queens and Kings.
Museus, Homer, and the sacred rest,
Whom the World thinks in their own Ashes blessed,
Shall live again, and only having wrote
Our Friendship, wish their other Songs forgot;
And themselves too, but that our LETTERS must,
In spite of Time and Death, quicken their Dust:
What cannot I command? What can a Thought
Be ambitious of, thus wreathed, but shall be brought?
By Virtue of your Charms, I will undo
The Year, and at our pleasure make one New.
All Spring is Blooming Paradise, but when
You List, shall with one Frown wither again.
Astrologers leave poreing in the Skies,
Expect all Fate from fair Sabina's Eyes.
Thus ex^asy'd with me, scorn other Starr,
Admire, and think it Heaven where we two are.
For he that learns to live Incognito,
Now lives in Heaven, if quitting Earth be so.
Madam, I have dedicated this short Poem to your Ladyship as a Poor
Acknowledgment for your generous Remarks on my First Part of the Art of Living
Incognito, and as a Defiance to all Critics, I was willing the World should
know your Opinion of what I A defiance to all Critticks.
Publish, as believing none will presume to dislike what you approve of; or if
they do, I shall not value it, so^ prefer your single Judgment to all others;
and therefore it is the Honor of your Friendship, is one of those things that I
value my self most upon -- Then seeing the Art of Living Incognito, has such an
Ingenious and Honorable Lady to Protect and Defend it, I shall not doubt but this
Second Bart will be as well received as the FIRST; however, your consenting to
my Printing of it, is a sufficient Warrant for its Publication. And I don't
doubt, after treating of every Ching in this Letter, but to say something in my
next, (which will be an Essay (...) my own Funeral) which shall justify my
Resolution to Live and Die in a private Cell. M^ Resolution to live and die in
a private Cell,


Whilst all the World is in an hurry, busied here and there with Vanity and
Vexation, whilst few or none almost are looking after their Future State;
whilst most thus mistake their Happiness, I shall endeavor to find it in a
lonesome Cell which (in my next) I shall prove an Emblem of Death, and I must
needs love it as it is a Place where I have nothing to do but to prepare for
Heaven.

But though I live Incognito, as I Am charmed with a quiet Life (and partly as I
am obliged to Privacy) For the Reasons tention'd (...) my last (...).
Yet I have no such Pique to the World, (I mean that GREAT WORLD, through which
I am passing) but that I Am willing to give your Ladyship an Account what I
formerly I observed in it; and I shall think I Am still advancing in the Art of
living Incognito, if in this Letter I treat -- Of every thing -- I mean --
every thing, that affected me in my Cursory View of the GREAT ^ections (...)
every ^ing that ^fected me (...) my cur^ view of ^e Word.
WORLD. I call it a Cursory View as I hurried so fast through it, to that
private Cell where I now live.

Perhaps you will admire (Sabina) that the World should now take up my Thoughts,
when it is my Happiness and Wish to be freed from it. To this I Answer, it must
be confessed, That to avoid the Noise and Turbulency of the World (the more
quietly and undisturbed to look into our selves) has been the Practice of the
most Discreet and Eminent Men; even the famous Virgil composed his Matchless
Georgicks in a Grot or Cave. But though a Hermit's Life be the most desirable,
yet I shall now prove that something may be learnt even from Courts and Cities,
and every thing we see in Public.

Before I begin my Remarks on the World, I shall give this Description of it.
The World is the perfect and entire composition of all Things, and the true
Image and admirable workman-ship of the Godhead, the greatness whereof is
Incomprehensible; and What the World is.
yet limited, being also adorned with all Bodies, and kinds of Creatures which
are in Nature.

The Great God having made this Great World, he was pleased to draw a Map of it
in the Dast; and so he (...) Crea^on of A^ and (...).
formed ADAM, and out of him EVE, the Work of the sixth Day, and a Compendium
of the Labors of the other Five.

More Servants wait on Man,
Than he will take notice of; in every Path,
He treads down that which does befriend him;
When Sickness makes him pale and Won.
Oh mighty Love! Man is one World, and has
Another to attend him.
Since then my God thou have
So brave a Palace built; Oh dwell in it,
That it may dwell with thee at last,
'Till then, afford us so much Wit;
That as the World serves us, we may serve thee,
And both thy Servants be. -- Herbert.
But my Subject now is only of every Thing in the Great World, for I reserve
the little walking WORLD to be considered hereafter. It Is the Great World What
Heaven is.
I Am now to behold. And the first Thing I shall observe in it is, the Heaven
and the Stars. Oh what a fine Book is Heaven for mortal Man to Study! By
Heavens I mean not the Supreme Imperial part, not the Seat of the Blessed,
which is out of sight, but the outward and visible Parts of the heavenly Orbs.

Here all the extended Sky.
Is but one Galaxie;
It Is all so bright, and gay
And the Joint-Eyes of Night make up a perfect Day.
Every Star is a fair Letter of the Almighty's Power, and is a firm Essence in
Heaven, giving Light. If you What a Star is.
ask what this Heaven is. I answer, It Is as it were a vaulted Body made of
water thin like a Skin and movable -- And here I must own that when I view the
whirling-Heavens, and revolve their natural and violent motions -- when I
observe the wandering Stars not fail to accomplish a certain course, to keep
such exactness in their Irregularities, that a Prognosticator will give us a
Prediction of the most Shadowed Eccypses in the clearest Sunshine, -- when I
see the ^^^ble Spheres The Har^^^^ of the ^pheres.
Dancing their unerring Rounds, I easily assent to their Harmony so much
disputed. Blessed Lord, when I consider thy Heavens, the work of thy Fingers,
the Moon and the Stars which thou have ordained; I must say with David, What is
Man that thou art mindful of him, and the Son of Man that thou visitest him?
If it be asked how David (a) Ps. 83. 4.
in surveying the Heavens comes to mention the Moon and Stars and omit the
Sun, the other being but his (...); shining with that exhibition of Light,
which the Bounty of the Sun alots them -- To this I answer; This was David's
Night Meditation, when the Sun departing to the other World, left the lesser
Lights only visible in Heaven, and as the Sky is best beheld by Day in the
Glory thereof, so it is best surveyed by, Night, in the variety of the same --
Night was made for Man to rest in; but when I cannot sleep, may I with this
Psamist entertain my waking with good thoughts; not to use them as Optum, to
invite my corrupt Nature to Slumber, but to bolt out bad Thoughts, which
otherwise would possess my Soul.

Again when I view the Firmament (the Orb of the movable What the Firmament i^.
Heaven) while mine Eye is terminared with it, I admire without a limit, when I
behold the curious Colors in it, and the variety of Blazon; and then again,
consider my self a Poor Creature, and yet in Chief to the rest; By observing
this I have wondered to Extacy, and conclude that my Tongue was made for nothing
more then to dwell on the Praises of that Glory that owns this Coat-Armor.

The Sun is the Spring of Light, an always burning What the Sun is.
Torch, or a Universal Candle that serves the whole World to Work and Walk by.

Then twinkling Tapors of the Night,
That poorly Satisfy our Eyes,
More by your Number then your Light;
Like common People of the Skies;
What are ye, when the SUN does rise!
When with a dazled-Eye I look upon this Radiant-Sun (the brightest of all
Wandering Stars, and the Fountain of Light and Heat) when I view this Enlivening
Flanet, and find him roll in the ^odiack as in a Wheel, when I note how he
screws the Heavens in the Ecliptic, how well he knows his Regresses; having
touched either (...), I assure my self there is a HAND that w^elds this useful
Instrument, and trims this Lamp unto the World: The Psalmist tells us expressly,
He appointed the Moon for Seasons, and the Sun knows his going down -- Ps.
104. 19


Slight those who say amidst their sickly Healths,
Thou liv'st by Rule; what does not so, but Man?
Houses are built by Rule, and Commonwealths;
Entice the trusty Sun if that you can,
From his Ecliptic line, beck'n the Sky;
Who lives by Rule then, keeps good Company. -- Herbert.
Again, When I consider the Circuit of the Earth, that The Earth small if
compared with the Aetherial Orbs.
it is more then one and Twenty Thousand Miles, yet of no Moment in respect of
the Heavens, this constrains me to acknowledge the great Immensity of the
Artherial Orbs -- Great Immeensity, did I say? why the Sun alone is much bigger
then the Earth; Nay, we have more then probable conjectures from its Paralax,
and the Earths Piramidal-Shadow, that it exceeds it in Magnitude above one
Hundred and Sixty Times; when I consider this, and that Sol-Apogeus is distant
from me more then Eleven Hundred Semi-diameters of the ^erestial Globe, yet no
higher then the midst of the Planets; when I consider this, and what small
proportion it bears to the expanded Skies, I am lost in the wideness of the 8th
Sphere, and will say, Certainly, If a Creature could sill our Capacious Spirit,
I had found it -- Were I merely Ethnic, the beholding the Sun alone would
drive me to a Metaphysicall-Search; the Power, and Glory evident in this would
sorce me to proclaim an Athiest the greatest Dunce in Nature; Advice to th^se
that are or w^u'd be A^sts.
for he is one who denies the Light, and upon the first assent of his
Irrational thoughts, (...) all his Senses -- Then you that are, or would be
Atheists, often view the Bright Eye of the World (the Glorious Sun for by the
Light hereof (if you on it blind) you may see The being of a God; for what is
the whole World but the Explanation of a Deity? But if nothing reforms you, but
you will still be Atheists, (that you may sin securely) you run your selves into
Praemunire, out of Protection and will be undeceived by the Flames of Hell; and
perhaps sooner, for the Atheist dreads that Deity he does deny. We see this
verified in that Great Commander (Mr. Terry speaks See Terry's Voyage to the
East Indies. p. 414.
of,) who was a professed Atheist, yet a Man of approved Valor: But upon a time
he sitting in dalliance with one of his Women, she plucked an Hair from his
Breast (which grew about his Nipple) in Wantonness, without the least thought
of doing him hurt. But the little wound, that small Instrument of Death made,
presently began to Fester, and in short-time after, became a Canker incurable;
when he saw that he must dye, he uttered these words viz.

Who would not have thought but that I, who have The dying Sp^ch of an Atheist
been so long bred a Soldier, should have dyed in the Face of mine Enemy,
either by a Sword, or a Lance, or an Arrow, or a Bullet, or by some such
Instrument of Death: But now (tho too late) I am forced to confess that there
is a Great God above, whose Majesty I have ever despised, that needs no bigger
Lance than an Hair to Kill an Atheist, or a despiser of his Majesty; and so
(desiring that those his last Words might be told unto the King his Master)
died --

Till Sin, into the World had made a Breach,
Death was not heard of: Ever since in Each
Poor Human Mortal it does Couchant lie,
The Kernel of a Grape, kills one; a Fly
Another choaks; by a corrupted Breath
of Air one dies; and others have* found Death
In a small bit of Meat; or by a Corn,
Too closely cut, or by a Prick of Thorn
When Death comes armed with God's Imperial Word,
An Hair can pierce as deep as sharpest Sword.
Such Reflections as these I made upon viewing the Sun, (...), and ^tars, etc.
and when I was weary (...) looking upwards (as he soon is that lives in a
Hurry) I would (...) a Walk into my Garden, to visit Madg; I have writ an
Essarupon this Owl, of near twenty Sheets, to which is annexed the Eleg^ I writ
in Ireland, upon the News of his Death.
('it is the Bird of Athens) or to please my senses with the curiousness of the
Knots, ^or variety of Flowers that were in it.

God the first Garden made, and the first City, Cain. And indeed where does the
Wisdom and Power of God shine in a more bright and sweet Reflection than in a
Garden? which Cowly was so in love with, that he tells us; A small House and a
large Garden (with moderate Conveniences joined to them) is all he desires in
this World.

Nor does this Happy Place only dispense,
Such various Pleasures to the Sense;
Here Health it sel^ does live,
That Salt of Life, which does to all a Relish give;
Here fragrant Beauties still are seen;
It Is only here an Ever-Green.
No Man possesses more private Happiness in a Garden than I have done; for I
was once such a Lover of Gardens, that when I could steal time from behind the
Counter, I made it my business to be well acquainted The Pleasures of a Garden.
with all the variegated Capes^ry of Nature in the several Seasons of the Year.
But I find no Pleasure is of long continuance with me, for I had not applied my
self to the Study of Gardens above five Years, but I was banished my little
Eden, and the Flowers that cost me a great deal, are now exposed to the mercy
of Catorpillars.

Farewell dear Flowers; sweetly your Time ye spent,
Fit, while ye lived, for Smell or Ornament;
And after Death for Cures.
I follow straight without Complaint or Grief,
Since if my Scent be good, I care not if
It be as short as yours. -- Herbert.
How uncertain are Worldly Comforts? for being banished from the Black-Raven,
(the most pleasant House How uncertain are worldly Comforts.
I ever dwelt in) I am now so far from taking Pleasure in GARDENS, etc. That
I Am like a Man fallen out with the World. Fortune has denied me something, I am
fallin out with the World.
and I take pet and will be miserable in spite -- In plainer English, I Have
sent for my Dear Spouse, and I shall not be so Rich as my Honored Mother, 'till I
have Published the whole Art of Living Incognito.
she refuses to come 'till I Am as Rich as her Mother, which will scarce be
'till I have published the whole Art of living Incognito. So that nothing
pleases me now, except some deep Tragedy. A Charnel-House covered with Sculls
-- A gloomy Vale wrapped with unpleasant Yews -- Or some dark Cell cut out by
Nature's skill, and whose Entrance is environed with thick Trees (like to that
where I now live) In a Word, I Am so peevish grown, since Nothing pleases me no,
but some deep Tragedy, etc.
I find I cannot Out-rival the Baggs, that I can scarce bear to see my own
Brother Merry; and wonder what Men can find to laugh at; for my own share, I
think I shall never more draw my Lips to a Smile, but I en't so I shall never
Out-Rival the Baggs.
morose neither, but still I can love a Garden, but none pleases me NOW, but
what is the v^ry Picture of Melancholy. My First Garden. was a little Eden. my
Second, the very Picture of Melancholy.


1.
Fain would I have a Plat of Ground,
Which the Sun should never see,
Nor by wanton Lover found;
That alone my Garden be.
2
No Curious Flowers would I crave,
To tempt my smelling or my Eye:
A little Hearts Ease, if I have
Place a fa^ing TULIP by.
3.
My Counterfeit will best appear
In the Violets drooping Head,
On which a Melancholy Tear,
The Discontented Morn has shed.
4.
MY TIME be withered, let no ROSE
Her perfumed Bosom show;
And the Sweet-Brier when it blows,
No embracing Wood-bine know.
5.
Weave a pretty Roof of Willow,
On each side the Black-Thorn Spring;
Raise a Bank, where for my Pillow,
Wormwood, Rue, and Poppies bring.
6.
No Bird sing here unless my Soul;
Would Hear sad Phy^omels Disgrace;
The TURTLE shall awake the OWL,
To join her Melancholy BASE.
7.
Here let no Man find me out;
Or if CHANCE shall bring out hither,
I Will be secure, when round about
I mote it, with my Eyes foul Weather.
8.
Thus let me Sigh my Heart away,
At last to one as sad as I.
I Will give my GARDEN that he may
By my Example, Love and Die.
And so much for my little EDEN -- and that Melancholy-Garden where Valeria's
Jointure has sent me to digg -- I shall now proceed to the Observations I made
in my cursory view of the Word. After I was tired with my Two Gardens (except
'twas Post-Night, or I had some Author to visit) I would next take a Turn to
Stepney, (a) Observations in a Walk to Stepney, etc.
Hackney, or my beloved Hamstead; and now as I went along, I would conceive the
World a Building, the Earth a Floor, spread wi^ a Green Carpet-Co^g, the (...)
a Roo^ (...) with exquisite Ornam^nts; such Thoughts as the^e d^d m^ke me
revere the Wisdom of the (...) Arch^t. When (in these (...) ^ks) I obser^'d
such magni^ence in the Outward Court, I presently concluded the ^tum (...) was
beyond description. A^, Madam! we live here in the very bottom o^ Nature, and
think little who or what are on the Top o^ the Context; methinks I have
something of it by ^ting glances, but it vanishes, and I never catch it!

Thu^ you see (Madam) what Meditations the World affords, when I consider it as
a B^g, the Earth as a Floor, and the ^ns as ^he (...) ^o it.

When in longer Walks, I have considerd the World as a Cable spread; I have
ob^erv'd satisfaction ^or every (...) for (...) ^se.
Sense, dished out in Proper-Objects.

For us the Winds do blow,
The Earth does rest, H^aven-move, and Fountains flow;
Nothing we see but m^ans our good,
As our Delight, or as our Treasure:
The wh^le is either our Cupboard of Fo^d,
Or Cabinet of Pleasure. -- Herber^.
What Orient Colors are brought in to please the EYE; to delight the EAR; what
Melody is enclosed in The Music (...) be found in Grove^.
the Breasts of Birds, so well instructed in Song, that every Grove becomes a
Quire? What silken sof^ness have we for the touch -- What Cates and tasteful
Viands for the dantiest Palats? What Odoriferous Scents? What perfumed Airs to
seast the other Sense? What abundance of sweetness is bound up in the small
Volume of a Flower? I read no less then a Deity in the Few Folios of a Damask
Rose -- Thus Ble^ed Lord, thy World is a Table spread! and every thing in it
looks up to thee for their daily Food.

Thy Cupha^rd serves the (...); the Meat is se^,
Where all may reach, no Beast but knows his Feed:
Birds teach us hawking, Fishes have their Net:
The great prey on the less, they on some Weed.
Nothing ingender'd does prevent his Meat;
^es have their Cable spread, e're they appear:
Some Creatures have in VVinter what to eat;
Others do sleep, and envy not their Cheer.
And as thy House is full, so I adore
Thy curious Art in Marshalling thy Goods:
The Hills with Health abound, the Vales with store;
The South with Marble; North with Furrs and VVoods.
(Herbert.
By the many Sights, (...) observe in these several Walks, I conclude that
Nature has not left my Soul Objectless, but there is somewhere a Truth for my
Understanding, and Goodness for my Will.

Again, my Heart it Elated above the ordinary Level of Admiration; when I
perceive this Sublunary-world top full of Things; as contrary as Fire and
Water, Earth This sublunary. World is top full of Things as contrary as Fire
and Water, etc.
and Air, yet to subsist by one another; when I see this, (and which is yet
stranger, when I see them peaceably cohabit in the same Subject) I cannot but
attribute their ACCORD to a Sovereign Arm and Guidance.

When on a Promontory I fix my Foot on firm Earth, while mine Eye lancheth out
into the Main, and see the Billows come wallowing one in the Neck of another,
as if they naturally encouraged themselves to an universal Deluge, yet when
they foam and make a noise as unkennel'd: I may soon observe them at the end of
their Chain; or if the Tempest should rage so long, A Storm described.
that the tossing Seas should touch the Sky, and every Puff should blow up a
Grave, yet as these Storms are of Nah. 1. 3, 4. Ps. 148. 8.
Gods sending, so they are subject to his Government. The Lord has his way in
the whirlwind; and the stormy Wind fulfils his word.

Tempests are calm to thee, they know thy Hand,
And hold it fast, as Children do their Fathers,
Which cry and follow. Thou have made poor Sand
Check the Proud Sea, even when it ^wells and gathers?
(Herbert.
While the Ocean swells it self into Alps of Water, and the Brow of it is so
surrow'd with Rage, that every VVave threatens to write me among the Dead,
suddenly all is cut off with a dash: When I behold this diffusive Element
stand upon an Heap, sure there is some Hitherto and no further; that it hears
in its loudest Roarings, and this is Gates and Bars to it. When The
Reciprocation of the Water^.
I look upon the R^ciprocation of the Waters, I feel a Springtide of Thoughts
at the highest flow within me, and go beyond the MOON to find a Cause.

It Is true, some attribute the Ebbing and Flowing of the S^a, to certain
subterranean Fires, whose Matter is near a kin to the Matter of the MOON; and
therefore according to her Motion, there continue their Times of burning; and
burning they make the Sea so to boil, as that it is a Tide or High Water, but
going out, the ^es in the bottom of (...) Sea.
Sea sinks again; but these Fires in the bottom of the Sea are but mere
Conjecture; for the Flux and Re flux of the Sea is a great Secret of Nature,
and gives us therefore principal occasion to magnify the Power of God, whose
Name only is excellent, and whose Power above Heaven and Earth: With what
amazement have I viewed the swelling Main! They that go down to the Sea in
Ships, that do B^siness in great Waters -- These see Psalm. 107. 23.
the Works of the Lord, and his Wonders in the Deep. Who can enough admire the
Providence of God to Sea men!

The Sea, which seems to stop the Traveller,
Is by a Ship the speed^er Passage made;
The Winds, who think they rule the Marener,
Are ruled by him, and taught to serve his Trade.
Again when I look upon the Use of the Sea; I conceive great Mercy and Wisdom,
in placing of it: -- Those Heavenly-Buckets that pour out refreshing Refres^ing
Showers. whence they come.
Showers on the parched Soil, are dipped in this Cister^, and it is as the
Liver to the Body, fil^s the Ground with irriguous Veins; thus we see --

Each thing is full of Duty.
Waters united, are our Navigation;
Distinguished, our Habitation
Below, our Drink; above, our ^eat:
Both are our Cleanliness. Has one such Beauty,
Then how are all things neat.
Again, when I see the Earth once every Day mu^e The Night described
it self in 'its own Shadow, and that the Dark may not be Irksome our busy Eyes
are as often closed by a Law of Rest which upon Pain of Death we may not long
infringe, and how orderly do we go to sleep?

The Stars have us to bed;
Night draws the Curtain, which the Sun withdraws:
Music and Light attendour Head.
All things unto our Fleshare kind
In their Descent and Being; to our Mind
In their Assent and cause -- Herbert
That Sleep (which refreshes Nature) may be thus defined -- It Is the resting of
the feeling Faculty: the Sleep how caused.
Cause is a cooling of the Brain by a pleasant abounding Vapor, breathing
forth of the Stomach, and ascending to the Brain -- when that Vapor is conco^
and turned into Spirits the Heat returns, and the Senses recovering W^ing
(...)* how caused.
their former Function, cause waking.

The Affections of Sleep are Dreams -- If it is asked Drea^s.
what they are, I answer -- A Dream is an inward Act of the Mind, the Body
sleeping: and the quieter that Sleep What they be.
is, the easier be Dreams; but if Sleep be unquier, then the Mind is troubled
--

The U^iety of Dreams is according to the diverse constitution There variety.
of the Body -- the clear and pleasant Dreams are when the Spirits of the
Brain, which the Soul uses to imagine with, are most pure and thin, as toward
Morning, when Concoction is perfected. But Troublesome Dreams are when the
Spirits be thick and impure. All Natural Dreams are by Images, either before
proffered to Memory, or conceived by Temperature alone, or by some Influence
from the Stars, as some think. But I shall say no more upon this head,
designing my 40th Letter shall treat of the Sentiments of the Soul in Infancy.
Dreams, Trances, Dotage etc.

Thus we see NIGHT serves us for a Curtain; and Half our Life runs out in a
Sleepy Vacation of Senses.
that whether we Sleep, Wake, or Dream, the half of the Term of our Life runs
out in a Sleepy-Uacation of Senses; and is most pleasureable, tho least
delightsome Blessed Lord!

How finely do thou Times, and Seasons Spin,
And make a Twist checkered with Night and Day!
Which a^ it lengthens, Winds, and Winds us in,
As Bowls go on; but turning all the way. -- Herbert.
In this I adore a S^pream Wisdom! The withering Grass likewise is no less
beholding to the Night then The Heavenly L^beck (...) the^ (...) their may be a
Growth in Vegtables.
our heavy Heads; for now the Heavenly-Limb^ks do distill the^r chearing
Influences, that there may be a Growth in Uegetables; the Nightly Moisture
^gles it self with the Heat by Day; But while I stand admiring thus. C^thius
Aurem Velli^, here is one within tells me, I need not go fish for Wonders in
the Deep, or camb the height of Heaven, for Heaven; for my self is a^ amazing
wonder.

Indeed when I reflect on the Structure of my Body, Meditations on the
structure of my own body.
I see it is not ordinary; I see it is erect, when other Creatures Grovel; I
have a Privilege of looking up, when the rest stand motto'd by the Poet with.
A Pronaque cum sp^ant etc. Os Homini sublime dedit etc.

Is there a more exact Work then our Head? here all The S^ keep their Rendivouz
in the Head
the Senses keep their Rende^ouz, lie Leaguer to give Intelligence; if an
Object that carrys any Color with it comes; the Eye notes it immediately; If
it makes a noise, the Ear catches it, and so of the rest.

Man is all Symmetry,
Full of Proportions, one Limb to another,
And all to all the World besides:
Each part may call the ^arthest Brother:
For Head with Foot has private Amity,
And both with Moons, and Tides.
We see MAN is a Creature that has Reason, and What Man is and the manner of
his Generation.
as he is most excellent, so has he a more perfect shape in Body than others.
Physicians tell us, His Members are formed, and begin to appear distinctly,
about the Six and twentieth Day. And they are all perfect in Males at 30 Days,
and in Females at 36 Days. About this time, the Child begins to live, and to
feel. The Male is moved in the Third Month, but the Females in the Fourth
Month: then it is nourished and increased till the Ninth Month when it is Grown
great, it is brought forth. This is the forming, and procreating of Man, for
whose sake all other Creatures were made. Then what a wonder in Nature is Man!
and where ever we Ramble, we find the Wonder the greater by the diversity of
Faces we see in Public, in Ten Millions of Faces there are not two alike, or
not so alike but they are easily known one from to'ther; and their ^aices are
different as their Faces.

'Tho the Face of the Creation has 'its variations of Senses o^ward.
Prospect and Beauty, by the alternate Intermixtures of Land and Waters; of
Woods, and Feilds, Meadows and Pastures; God here mounting a Hill, and there
sinking a Vale, and yonder levelling a pleasant Plain; designedly to render the
whole more delectable. and ravishing to the Eyes of Men ((...) they see his
wonders in the Land of the Living) -- ye^ has he no where given us more
admirable expre^ons of his infinite Power and Wisdom, than in the (...) ^brick
of Man's Body, wherein he has contriv^d to Sum up all the Perfections of the
Greater, that lie here and there scattered about; nor, is it possible for the
Heart of Man to adore enough the Tran^ of his Divine hand in the Perfections
that he bears about him. But amongst them all, (omitting the curtous Contexture
of the whole Frame) to survey only the A Brief Survey of Glories of the Face
and of the Admirable Graces that God has lodged in (...) Feature of it.
Glories of the Face, and the admirable Graces that God has ^odged in each
Feature of it; and then to remember how many Millions of them have passed
through his Hands already, flourished out with a perfect diversity of
appearance; every one (as I hinted before) discernably varying from all the
rest in different Feature and ^ein; and yet every one excellently agreeing with
all, in the same Identity of Aspect. All this variegated-Work miracusously
performed within the compass of a Span, to let us see what a God can do, when
(as the Wise Potter) he turns his Wheel, and molds Nature into infinite Ideas
and Forms.

The several Senses in Man are also Matter of Wonder, Senses Outward.
These are Outward or Inward. The Outward only perceiving. Things persent: And
every one of these have their Proper Subject.

The Sense in the whole Body is TOUCHING; This Touching
is a Sense by means of Flesh, full of Sinews, apprehending Tactil Qualities.
His Instrument is Flesh, full of Sinews, or rather a Nerve, like a Hair,
dispersed thoughout the whole Body

Senses of certain parts are more or less Noble. The Seeing
Nobler are Seeing and Hearing whose means are the Water and A^ Sight, by the
Eye, perceives bright and colored Things: the Subject where of is Light, etc,
his Instrument is the Nerv-Optick, which from the Brain comes to the Eyes.

Hearing is a Sense perceiving Sounds; his Instrument, is a little Skin in the
lowest winding or turning of the Ear, dry and full of Holes: The Skin is
double, one Hearing.
below which covers a little Bone, like an Anvile; another above, containing
a little Bone, as it were a small Mallet. The upper stricken by the Sounds,
strikes the Lower, and stirs up the Spirits in the Nerves to perceive the
sound.

The more Ignoble Senses are Casting and Smelling; Tasting apprehends Tastes.
His Instrument is -- a Nerve stretched like a Net, upon the Flesh of the
Tongue, which is full of little Pores. His means is a Temperate Tasting.
Salt Humor, which if it do exceed the just quantity, it does not exactly
perceive Tastes; but if it be altogether consumed, no Tastes are perceived --

Smelling judges qualities fit for Smell: His Instrument is the Entrance into
the first Ventricle, covered with a Smelling.
small Skin; the dryer it is, the quicker of Smell, as in Dogs and Vultures;
but Man, for the moistness of his Brain, has but a dull Smell.

Were there no more in MAN then these five outward Senses to be wondered at;
well might David say he was wonderfully Senses inward.
made, and curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the Earth Ps. 139. 15.
But besides these Five outward Senses, (to raise our Wonder yet a little
higher) there are inward Senses, which, beside Things presently offered, do
know Forms of many absent Things -- By these, the Creature does not only
perceive, but also understands that which he does perceive. These have their
Seat in the Brain; they are either Conceiving or Preserving; Conceiving
exercises Conceiving.
his Faculty by discerning, or more fully judging; it is called common Sense,
and the other is Fantasy. Common Sense more fully distinguishes sensible
Things; his instrument is the former Ventricle of the Brain, made by dryness
fit to receive. Thantasie is an inward Sense more diligently examining the
Forms of Things: This is the Thought and Judgment of Creatures; his Place is
the middle part of the Brain, being, through dryness, apt to retain --

The preserving Sense is Memory, which according to the Constitution of the
Brain, is better or worse. It is weaker in a moist Brain than in a dry Brain.
^is Instrument Preserving.
is the hinder part of the Brain.

Memory calling back Images preserved in former time, is called Remembrance;
but this is not without the Use Remembrance.
of Reason, and therefore is only attributed to Man.

I would next say something of the Wonders found in the Brain, whence Tears
proceed by the Angles of the Eyes, (and Tears proceed from the Brain.
the greater the Flesh of those Angles be, so much more plentiful be Tears) but
(Sabina) should I enlarge you will take me for some Quick-Doctor, who confounds
his Auditors with his learned Nonsense. However, the Structure of Man's Body,
etc. being what took up much of my Thoughts when I lived in public: I cannot
leave this Subject 'till I have said something of his breathing Parts, which
(next to the EYE) I take to be one of the greatest Wonders in the Body of Man.

The Principal Parts of breathing are in the Breast; being either Lights o
Heart; wherefore these being touched, The breathing Parts.
breathing is immediately hurt; and such Wounds be deadly: The Lungs are a
spongious and thin Part, soft, and like Foam of congealed Blood, declining
something to the Right-side. Breath is brought into the Lights by a rough
Artery k^it to the Root of the Tongue: This Artery is a long Channel made of
many Gristle-Rings on a Row, which ends in the Lights. If any thing falls
into the hollowness of this, the Breath is hindered, and there is danger to be
Choked; but this is a Nice Subject, I shall therefore treat of it more at
large in an Essay upon my own Death.

Thus having told your Ladyship what I discovered in the Celestial Bodies, and
likewise what I observed under the Sun (but more especially) with respect to
the Wonders ^f the Beasts, Fishes and Birds, but just mentioned, and why.
Deep. The Tapestry of Nature -- And the curious Frame of the Body of Man, etc.
I should next proceed (if I'^e treat of every thing) to what Remarks I made
upon Beast^, Fishes, and Birds, (more especially on the OWL, on whom I have
written As is hinted before.
a large Essay) but I am forced to drop these Subjects with just naming of 'em;
for when I remember THAT whereby I observe all this, I am so nonpluss'd I can
go no further. If you ask me any Question about it? I will say it is some
strange Divine Thing, but what, I well know not; it is The Soul is some strange
Divine Thing.
called a SOUL; a most active Being, I Am sure it is; it is ever grinding; if
you rake it up in the Ashes of a Sleep, it will glow in a Dream: It is fixed in
the Orb of the Body, but raises it self further then the Sun: It will pierce
the most solid Substance; rests not in a few Objects, tho a single one
sometimes may, like a Glass, collect its Beams to a Flame. O the Soul that can
drag the past and future Times to the Bar of present Consideration! that will
in the most retired Cell, discourse to me of various Matters: This
Cosmographical Spirit that can show me the Heavens and the Earth as in
Landscape, in the darkest Room! Oh It can show me the Heaven and the Earth, as
in Land ^ip. in the darkest Room.
the swiftness of its motion! it will beat against East and West (like a Bean
in a Bladder) with less noise and more nimbleness, which made Randolph say,

And when I walk abroad, Fancy shall be,
My skil^ful Coachman, and shall hurry me
Through Heaven and Earth, and Neptune's watery Plain,
And in a Moment bring me back again.
This nimble Soul forgets (sometimes) it is espoused to It forgts s^metimes that
it is espoused to Flesh and Blood.
Flesh and Blood; it now leans so far without my Windows (by Reason of the
STONE, and other Distempers) that another Blast will puff it out, and freeze up
the Casements.

Oh! i^ thou stayest still; why must I stay?
My God, what is this World to me?
This World of Woe? Hence all ye Clouds away,
Away; I must get up and see --
Then l^se this Frame, this Knot of Man unty,
(...) f^ee Soul may use her Wing,
Which now is pinioned with Mortality;
As an entangl'd hampered thing.
What have I left. that I should s^ay and Groan?
The most of ^e to clean'^ is fled:
My Thoughts and ^ys are all packt up and gone.
And so t^ir old Acquaintance ^lead.
By musing on the Nature and Excellency of my own Soul it leads me to consider
the SWAY I bear in the World; and here I observe all the visible Creation to
bow down to me. The Sun, Moon, and Stars -- wait The Nature and Excellency of
^e Soul, lea^s me to consider the sway I bear in the World
upon me, but what shall all this fill my Life with Pride, as my Mind with
Wonder? Neither can any thing I have heard or seen in my Fellow Creatures, (who
are proud of being Rational though their Reason is but the Perspective Glass,
through which they behold their Misery) warrant my giving them Black Characters
-- No (Sabina) I find too much in my own Breast, to damp my censuring others,
and have as little Reason to be pust up with Conceit: With Conceit! of what
should I be proud of, for my Head is as full of Whimseys as if it kept open
House for all the Maggots in Nature -- yet excuse me too! for I don't see but
others (only they have more Wit to conceal 'em) have as many Maggots as John
Dunton: And therefore Maggots in every Brain.
it is Mr. Herbert tells us --.

Man builds a House, which quickly down must go,
As if a Whirlwind blew,
And crushed the Buildings: And its partly true,
His Mind is so.
O what a sight were Man, if his Attires
Did alter with his Mind!
And like a Dolphin's Skin, his Clothes combined
With his Desires!
Surely, if each one saw another Heart,
There would be no Commerce,
No Sale or Bargain pass: All would disperse,
Andliv apart.
But suppose I could see nothing greater (or more Maggotty) then my self to
arrogate my Service, yet were I far from being Absolute; nor dare I think my
self mine own Man; My Hands and Shoulders tell ^e I was born to labor.
for my Hands and Shoulders, and other parts, are a Lecture to me for the
labor of my Body -- And my station here minds me, that I must be busied in
Contemplation; for I look on the Earth as a Green Bank recovered from the
Waters for me to stand on unmovedly, while I behold the tossing Seas and
turning Spheres, and all things else in agitation. Now to be tasked in this
manner, denotes my condition to be that of a Servant. I further know my
subjection My great Ignorance.
by my Ignorance, I cannot so much as give an Account of my own Being; how I
was brought hither, I have it not in my own knowledge; if those about me had
combined, it had been more easy to have made me believe an Eternity of my
self, a part ante, than the Atheist a part post -- That I had a Beginning is
but delivered me I was lighted I know not how no^ when.
by Tradition, confirmed by the Motions of accretion and diminution in my self,
and Example in others, for I was LIGHTED I know not how, nor when.

Again, In the Administration of Things, their Order is not from any Law of
mine, and I might well be called Esop's foolish Fly; should I think my self
able to make the very Bsop's foolish Fly.
Dust that made me; now while I ponder on these Things, and a thousand more
that I see in the World, I look for something greater than it. It seems to me
unreasonable, That a Work so Absolute and Uniform, should want an Efficient; I
dare not with Empedocles, sit shuffling in a dusty The wise Administration of
Things, lead us to the Consideration of an Immense Being.
CELL, 'till I have made a World of Atoms. But I will resolvedly say, such wise
Position and Administration of Things here, was never Casual, so I search, and
wonder, and tremble; for I find my-self not far from that Immense Being that I
thus grope after; and (sure I am) if a Light was brought into the Room, I
should see my self in the everlasting Arms of a Father or an Enemy.

These things I read by the Hierogliphicks of the Creatures in the A. B. C. of
Nature, for so I Will call the Book of Morks, compared to that of the Word of
later Edition, and of more Perfection: This is the unmasking of the others
Frontispiece; this leads me, and refers them, to an ALMIGHTY GOD, here
manifested in his several Subsistences and Attributes; I have it here in plain
Words, What was but pointed at in the other.

Behold this little Uolume here enrold,
It Is the Almighty's Present to the World.
Hearken Earth, Earth, Each senseless thing can hear
His Maker's Thunder, though it want an Ear.
Gods Word* is senior to his Work, ^y rather,
If rightly weighd, the World may call it Father;
God spoke, 'twas done: This great Foundation,
Was but the Makers Exhalation,
Breathed out in speaking. The least work of Man,
Is better then his Word; but if we scan
God's Word aright, his Works far short do fall:
The Word is God, the Works are; Creature's all:
The sundry pieces of this general Frame,
Are dimmer Letters, all which spell the same
Eternal Word. But these cannot express,
His Greatness with such easy Readiness,
And therefore yield. For Heaven shall pass away,
The Sun, the Moon, the Stars, shall all obey.
To light one general Boon-Fire; but his WORD,
His Builder up, his all destroying Sword;
Yet still survives, no jot of that can die,
Each Tittle measures Immortality.
Once more, this mighty Word his People greets,
Thus lapp'd, and thus swathed up in Paper-sheets.
Read here Gods Image with a Zealous Eye,
The Legihle and Written Deity.
But I Will not undertake to unfold its Excellency; for to speak of every Thing
in this Book, requires a better Why the Holy Bible is the chief Book we should
study.
Pen than mine; however, this I shall say of it, He that Questions its Worth,
instead of an Answer, shall be deservedly blamed, as neglectful of reading the
Holy Scripture.

When I have weighed the Premises, I am troubled My Resolutions to read it
often.
that I have so truanted formerly, and cannot but now resolve to put my self
with more diligence upon this Spiritual Literature*

Thus having mentioned the Characters of SUN, MOON, HEAVEN, and EARTH, (and the
other Creatures) I shall be able to put them together, and make them spell
Infinite Wisdom and Power, as much as boundless Mercy. From the Earth, I learn
to contemplate, from the Heavens, I learn to add Motion and Practice to my
Speculation -- When I see how the dead Earth and Water serve the Vegetive, and
they the Sensitive, and they the Rational Creatures: What spiritual use we
should make of every Thing we see in the World.
And when I see how this subordination keeps every thing entire, let me hence
also learn Duty, let me remember, though I am exalted above all these, yet there
is a higher than the highest, to whom I am in all humbleness to stoop, as they
to me. And if my Ox knows his Owner, and my Ass his Masters Crib, let them
teach me to know him from whom I have received All, and to whom I owe all. And
Lastly, When I see the largeness and capacity of my own Soul; I will learn to
decline the small and narrow Creature, and search after an Object able to
better it, able to fill it.

And as I should make this spiritual use of every thing I see in the World,
which I call the Book of Works; so likewise, that I may be more skilled in
God's other Book, I shall desire to meditate in it Day and Night; to use it on
all occasions, as a Medicine for every Disease.

If I am in doubt, I will make it my Counselor; if in Affliction, I will make
this sure and tried Word my support; if I am in Darkness, and see no Light,
here I Will stay my self; when I see my Ignorance, I will esteem A Cure for every
Disease both of Soul and Body.
this able to give Understanding to the Simple; when I would lance my Soul, I
will make use of this Two edged Sword; when it is fit to be healed again, why
this is Balm from Gilead: If I am Poor, I will take pains for this Treasure,
more worth than much fine Gold; Pearls and Rubies are not to be compared with
it; by this I may learn Godliness, which is great Gain. If I am Rich, this Book
will plentifully show me, that a Man's Wealth does not consist in the Abundance
which he possesses, and that Riches have Wings: If Sorrow takes hold of me,
the sweet Consolations here are as Health to the Navel, and as Marrow to the
Bones. If Trouble be general; I have here direction where to rest at Noon.

Oh Book, infinite sweetness! let my Heart,
Suck every Letter, and a honey gain;
Precious for any grief in any part,
To clear the Breast, to molifie all Pain.
Thou art all Health, Health, thriving 'till it make
A full Eternity; thou art a Mass
Of strange Delights, where we may wish and take:
Ladies, look here; this is the Only Glass
That mends the Lookers Eyes; this is the Well
That washes what it shows; who can endear
Thy praise too much? thou art Heavens Leiger here,
Working against the States of Death and Hell.
Thou art Ioys handsel; Heaven lies flat in thee, The way to be happy, when the
wholeworld is dissolved.

Subject to every Mounters bended Knee. -- Herbert.
In a Word, If I would leave that which I feel slipping away and perishing, and
repose my self upon My treating of every Thing has been a Wild-goose chase
through Heaven, Earth and Seas, etc.
what is firm and lasting, Let me relinquish each worldly Confidence, and rest
upon this Word, which shall stand unshaken upon the Ruins of Heaven and Earth.

Thus (Madam) have I led you a Wild Goose-Chase, through Heaven, Earth, and
Seas, etc. I would rummage the World further, but that I observe he that has
the Ostentation or Vanity to be too much known to the World, is in great danger
of being unacquainted with himself; and The danger of being unacquainted with
our selves.
therefore having considered every Thing I saw in Public, (which was wont to
employ my Thoughts) I shall retreat again from this Great World, to my quiet
Cell, where I Will dissect my Breast, and write an Essay of the Lesser My Retreat
from this great World to my private Cell.
World, my self; and when I have so well surveyed this little piece of Earth,
that I have left no part undiscovered, I shall next represent my self as Dead
and Buried, in an My own Grave to be the Subject of the next Letter.
Essay upon my own Grave, etc. Where I shall lie Incognito, 'till the
Resurrection. And when the Dead awake, I shall then be

Your known Friend, and Servant, JOHN DVNTON.

The LADY's Answer to my Seventh LETTER.
SIR,
IF instead of living, you were buried Incognito, I could expect no account of
your observations; but if you live, you must needs think; and the obscurity of
your Cell, can be no impediment to your contemplating the great and busy World
at such a distance, tho only, upon what your memory furnishes; for from thence
those thoughts may be produced in order and method, which were at first
obtruded on you in hurry and confusion: It Is now, and not till now, you are in
capacity to prove that something may be learnt even from Courts and Cities; and
every thing* we see in Public: For the noise and turmoile of the World, is no
Friend to reflection. Virgil found it so, and so do all thinking Men; in so
much that Retirement from the World, seems to stamp a Character of Wisdom upon
those that can bear any Inconvenience better than the interruption of their
Thoughts. Yet the very aspect of thinking, is so unacceptable to the gay World;
that according to Monsieur Scuderie, Those that have better things to think of,
than what they intend to speak, ought to remain in their Closets, and not to
trouble the company with their silence; and yet perhaps their best Thoughts
might be lost, should they venture to impart 'em so at random, as the Company
shall be disposed to take 'em; but when composed in Solitude, and after
Printed, though they are designed for none but those that like and approve 'em;
they may with great pleasure satisfy the passions and malignant humors of such
as dislike 'em; that all must own themselves mutually obliged; those that
present the Subject for remarks; and those, who like the Bees in their Cells,
convert 'em into useful Reflections.

The great and little World, as they are the Noblest Objects you could choose
for Contemplation, so your Esteem and Love of this Exercise appears by the
Exactness of your Observations upon them; for besides Man, the epitomy of the
great World, the visible Heavens and Earth, alone, are full of the Majesty of
Gods Glory, and might sufficiently convince an Atheist; for as you well
observe, the whole World is but the Explanation of a Deity; it is possible a Man
with some defect of Mind, like that of Blindness in the Body, may have but weak
Conjectures of what appears a perfect Demonstration to others; but should such
a one take upon him to Dispute against a Deity, 'twould be a presumption like
that of a Blind-mans going about to prove there is neither Light nor Sun,
because he cannot see 'em; for the same Reason the Atheist therefore may well be
silent; for he that does not conclude there is a God by Contemplation of the
Universe, one must conclude has some defect in his Understanding or Will,* that
spoils his Judgment; for without Speech or Language, the Heavens declare the
Glory of God; their sound is gone out into all Lands, and their words unto the
ends of the World. Then who can pretend they have not heard enough to convince
their Understanding? The fault must needs lie in the Will. A Fool may say in
his Heart there is no God, when at the same time his Understanding tells him
there is; he speaks as he would have it, but thinks as he fears; and truly
Atheism is one of those stupendous Wonders which would astonish much, but that
it Ioses the Horror by being so common; Nay, it is so Familiar to us, it passes
unobserved: We little perceive the Practical Atheism we are all Guilty of, when
we are so solicitous to please the World, and never ask our selves the question
whether we can serve God and Mammon; in that case we say in our Hearts, There
is no God; that is, our sinful Affections and Appetites persuades us to think
there it none; or at least not such a one as deserves our highest Love and Care
to please; As also in any temptation of Profit, or Advantage, shall easily put
a stop to our Proceedings: But all the Threatenings of the Great God of Heaven
cannot stop us in any sinful Action that is attended with Credit and Applause,
as too many are; which is an Established Atheism, set up by Custom, if we cannot
say by Law; But you have taken the properest way to Destroy this Monster by
penetrating, with such exactness all the Uarious and Wonderful Works of God;
both the Pleasure and Advantage of such Contemplations are unspeakable;
therefore it is as much for our Benefit as for Gods Glory, the Scriptures were
given us, that by them we might learn to observe and acknowledge his mighty
Acts, and distinguish his Divine Providence from the Actions of sinful Man, who
never fails to show his Sin and Frailty on all occasions, where God leaves him
to Act alone; and certainly there is a kind of Atheism in that general
disrespect to Gods Providence, observable in the World; so few are sensible
from whom they must expect the success of their Enterprises; they Esteem some
Persons very Lucky, others they term Unfortunate, according to what befalls
'em, adverse or prosperous; Nay, even great and remarkable Providence are
Esteemed Accidents; or if any cause assigned them, it is such as is purely
humane, without the least relation to God.

Thus we live without God in the World, and if we have but either Riches,
Friends in Power, or our own Wits to trust to, we say in our hearts, there is
no God; that is, we are not concerned whether there is or no; we think we can
enjoy the World without him. But how much happier are those who are the great
Observers of Gods Providence, so that all That comes to pass in the World,
serves for their Instruction? For as they acknowledge them to proceed from Gods
Order and Determination, they are of the same Use to us with the Holy
Scriptures, to perfect and encourage us in all Good Works, when we are certain
of the Truth of them, which may be discovered by their agreement with the
Written Word; for were they as infallibly true, and we could have the same
certainty of what is reported of Things done, and Acted in the World, nothing
could excuse us from the same Reverence and Respect for 'em; for we know we
shall be all taught of God, and we know his Providence has been of Old, and is
still, his most usual way of teaching, as it falls under the Observation of the
meanest Capacities; and great effects may be seen of a true sense of Gods
Power, Mercy, and Goodness; amongst such Persons as have had neither Time nor
Opportunity of other Instructions: I can speak it of my own knowledge, I have
seen more sighs of true Faith, Hope, and Charity, and a reverent sense of God,
in the Discourse and Actions of the Vulgar, such as Farmers and Day-Labourers
in the Country, whose outward teaching has chiefly been the Experience and
Observation of the Providence of God to themselves and Neighbors; though by the
Learned so despised, as if for want of Knowledge, they were little better than
Brutes: I wish I could see 'em mightily surpassed by the Lives and Discourses
of those from whom we have reason to expect much more, as living under the
means of Instruction, from their daily attendance at Church, of which the
greatest part are WOMEN; but of too many of 'em, so little Virtue appears in
their Conduct, one might take 'em for the silly Women St. Paul describes, laden
with Sin; led away with diverse Lusts; ever learning, and never able to come to
the knowledge of the Truth: It Is to be feared they trust too much to teaching,
and think themselves Religious and Devout, for only using the Means of being
so; 'twere good if those People could be taught, that the faithful discharge of
their Duty and Calling, would be a better Service to God; and then from a
strict observation of his Providence, great Lessons might be learnt of
Patience, Humility and Charity, and every Christian Virtue they shall need to
be adorned with.

But those Men that have the advantage of natural and acquired Parts, are
accountable for the Glory they owe to God, from the Contemplation of his WORKS,
which are great, sought out of all those that take pleasure therein: His Works
are worthy to be praised and had in Honor; even so much a^ Man is able to
comprehend of 'em is enough to discover, by the invisible Things of God, his
eternal Power and Godhead; this was manifest to the very Heathen, besides his
infinite Love and Bounty to us Christians; from which Fountain springs all the
Wonders you present me, whereof you make such pious Uses; and indeed I cannot
enough admire, how it is possible so many Naturalists should ever be able to
make such Advances in this Study, and not learn from the uncertainty and
difficulties they find in 'em, to set the highest value upon the next Life,
where the desire of Knowledge shall be fully satisfied; for as God in his
Wisdom and Goodness, has given to all our Senses suitable Objects; our thirst
after Knowledge and Happiness must necessarily from the same Goodness, meet
with the fullest satisfaction in Heaven; for on Earth we are far from any
Capacity of enjoying such Blessings as Truth and Goodness in its full
Perfection. Every Days Experience, convinces us of the Mistakes those curious
Minds continually make by an unsuccessful and presumptious search into Nature,
which they can never fathom; but for the present they are f^d to appease their
eager and unquiet Thoughts, with Dreams and Shadows, while they quite lose the
true end of Contemplation, which should lead us to our own chief good, the
Knowledge and Love of the Divine Perfections; therefore an humble and modest
Enquiry into the nature of God's wonderful Works, might, by this means, prove
useful Spectacles, always ready at hand, through which his glory would reflect,
to keep us in perpetual Praise and Admiration of his Wisdom, Power and
Goodness, to us poor sinful Mortals in this life; and make us sigh after that
more full and perfect measure of intellectual Knowledge we shall find in
Heaven, where we shall then read all those Riddles we are now so puzl'd with.
That strange divine Thing, the Soul, you so pleasantly describe, will have the
happiness to know, and be known, both which it wants now; for did we but know
the Dignity of that Divine Guest, we would treat it with more Respect, than to
employ all our Care and Thoughts to serve and content the Body, to the Injury
and Disparagement of the Soul; for 't^s certain, that Soul which knows its true
rank, keeps the Body in subjection, and suffers none to rule and govern it, but
God who made it; nor is it of the Bodies childish Appetite, to take Delight in
sensual Pleasures, it values only Heavenly Food, of which it is amply furnished
in the Holy Scriptures, and of a far more delightful Relish than can be found
in any Humane Science. The Royal Prophet David found it so, which filled his
Psalms with such high Elogiums of the Law of God, where he found his Hearts
Desire; and as it was his chiefest Business and Concern, not only by continual
Exercise in it Day and Night, to perfect his own Delight, so he earnestly
recommends it to others, as that which would give 'em the Wisdom of the Aged,
and make them wiser than their Enemies; and never rests 'till he has made it
plain, that the Word of God is the only Remedy for all the Miseries of Humane
Life; consider therefore what a Treasure you have got in your Resolution of
putting your self with more diligence upon this Spiritual Literature, where you
will not only See, but Taste the Divine Goodness; after which, the study of the
Great World, and your self, the Little World, or whatever serves for Matter of
Contemplation, will all be referred to the glory of God, as its ultimate end;
which will increase your Joy and Happiness, in that Day when you shall awake
from the Dead, and may perhaps be KNOWN, amongst the rest, to

Your etc.

Dunton Represented AS DEAD and BURIED, IN An Essay upon his own Funeral.
From my Cell, April 30. 1700.
LETTER VIII.
Madam,
IN my Sixth Letter, I acquainted your Ladyship, That though God had blessed me
with a competent Fortune, yet that I was A Cell the best place to resine our
Thoughts.
straightened at present; and that as long as I continued so, a Private Cell was
the best Place to resine my Thoughts, and to preserve my Liberty: -- But can I
doubt my Liberty, when I am only a Prisoner to my Wifes Iointure? That Minute
she pulls off the Shackles, I Will receive her as a Dutiful Wife; but can she be
so whilst she refuses to make me easy? When all that is desired is but 500
Pound (out It Is an Emblem of Death.
of 6000 l.) and that to pay off a Debt which she knew of before Marriage. She
tells me In the Letters she sent me since we parted.
indeed, That she loves me as her own Soul; and that she and I are one; and if
so, (to use her own Expression) she should not let her Member suffer in the
midst of a good Estate, in which she has but her bare Life, and that neither,
'till I am Dead and Buried (not in Effigy, but) in good Earnest. But Valeria
(like some other Wives) thinking all the Duty lies on the Man's side, will not
release a Foot of her Jointure; so that at present I do as 'twere want what I
possess; however I the less admire ^me Wives ^ink all ^e Duty ^es on the ^an's
side.
at my Change of Fortune, when I consider the Divine Providence uses Men, here
below, as Counters in a Reckoning, which now stand for Pence, and straightways
for Crowns: Some all the time of their Lives are buried in a deep Night; we
neither know their Entrance into the World, nor their Passage out (except by a
Sprig of Rosemary, if their Estate will bear it) and if we know them by a
Title, it is by that of their Miseries. But if the World be such a perfect
Lottery,

Give me the pliant Mind, whose gentle measure
Complies and suits with all Estates;
Which can let loose to a Crown, and yet with Pleasure;
Take up within a Cloyster's Gates. -- Herbert.
This is my Case 'till Valeria smiles; till then, I Am confined to my little
Cell, where turning over in my Remembrance, all that could further afflict or
torment me; I was brought at last to think on the last of all dreadful Terrible
Things, DEATH. And ^hy I ^hou'd not ^dmire at ^y change ^f Fortune.
seeing my present Dwelling and Circumstance, is so very private, as to be an
Emblem of Death: I think I cannot make a better Advance in the Art of living
Incognito, then by making this Subject -- An Essay on my own Funeral, etc. --

Whilst I lived in Ireland, my Friend Mr. Larkin brought me acquainted with a
Gentleman, who in his perfect Health sent for Of an Irish Gentleman, who in his
perfect Health, sent for a Sexton to ring his Knell.
the Sexton to ring his Knell, being asked the Reason, he replied, because he
was DEAD; that is, (said he) in a Civil Sense, I am Dead (though I walk about)
for my Money is gone, and I were as good be out of the World; this seems to be
my Case, yet it is not this DEATH I Am writing of; but though it is not, yet we see
by this Man, who would have his Knell rung whilst he was living, that some Men
have more Brains than they can be quiet with, and the Death of such, if not a
Triumph, yet (as Feltham observes) is a repose to themselves, and to those who
were their Acquaintance.

Those also that grudge themselves the Conveniences of Life, may be said to be
DEAD (whilst they are yet breathing) as much as Every Miser is a dead Man.
the 'foresaid Gentleman; for the one is starved for the want of Money, and the
other is starved with his Abundance; and in this Sense each Miser is Dead; like
a Dog in a Wheel, he toils to roast Meat for others eating, and therefore might
properly write an Essay on his own Funeral. Tho if he should, he now makes his
Will against his Will; settles his Estate, assures all for the World; and at
last, sends for a Preacher, who finds him unfitting for God or the World.
Sickness and Death I see are Bold and Impartial Sergeants; the World and Wealth
are but poor Bail upon Deaths Arrests; all Means are nothing when God strikes.
--

Yet when a Rich Man is sick, what resorting is there to his House, by Kindred,
Friends and Neighbors? He wants not for Company, Counsel, or Help; when as an
honest Poor Man may lie long enough under a tedious Sickness, and have no such
Visitants --

But my Funeral Essay is intended for neither of these Persons; My desig^ in
wri^ting an Essay on my own Funeral.
for what I design is only an Essay on my Dead Body, (and what will happen to
it) and I would here, by laying my self out for Dead, learn to dye at my own
Funeral.

I cannot find this Subject was ever handled before; for 'tho some have seen
themselves buried in Pomp, as I shall show anon, It Is a Subject that was never
writ of before.
yet no Man ('till now) 'ere writ An Essay on his own Funeral; neither has --
Any courteous Ghosts told this great Secrecy.
What it is they are, and we must be -- Mr. Norris.


I have never met any one of those Milions of Souls, that have past into the
other World, to learn from 'em what Death is; and therefore pnthe reresenting
my self Dead and buried nothing can be expected but mere conjecture.
in the representing my self Dead and Buried when I am yet alive you can expect
nothing but mere Conjecture; However I Will close my Eyes on this vain World, and
dress out my Hearse in the best manner I can: I went Yesterday to Stepny-Church
to to view the Graves of others, the better to prepare my Mind to write this
Essay on my own Funeral; I spent about Five Hours among the Tombs; which though
it be a Melancholy sight, yet has something in it proper to instruct the
Living; In walking through What we may learn, by walking through a Churchyard,
and by Viewing of Dead Men's Sculls.
a Churchyard (especially that of Stepny and Chiswick) we see a great number
of Dead-mens-Sculls arranged one in Pile upon another, which puts us in mind of
the Vanity and Arrogance wherewith other while they have bin filled. We need
but walk through a Church yard to see what is this Foolish Animal, Man. Here we
see what we Magnify; what we call a King, a Duke, a Lord, even a little Warm
and Walking Earth, that will be Ashes soon; we came into the World crying and
squalling and We consume our Lives in drivling Infancy, in Ignorance Sleep, etc.
so much of our Time's consumed in drivling Infancy, in Ignorance, Sleep,
Disease, Trouble, that the remainder is not worth the being reared to; we see
in walking through a Church yard how Time laughs us out of Greatness, and shuts
up our wide designs in a Dark Narrow Room. Then what Midness is the Pomp, the
Noise, Time shuts up our wids designs in a Dark Narrow-Room.
the Splendor the Frantic Glory of this Foolish Life; we makeour selves
Fools, to disport our selves, and vary a Thousand antic ugly shapes of Folly
and Madness; These fill up the Scenes and Empty Spaces of our Lives. Folly and
Madness fill up the Empty Spaces of our Lives.
The Thoughts of this, one would think, should abate our Pride and sensual
Affections, for why should I be so Vain to Pride my self in outward Pomp, and
Bravery; who within a few Hours may be a Dead Corpse carried in Procession --
Methinks the Sight of a Funeral should humble the Proudest Man; or Proud Man,
that thou may be humbled, The Sight of a Funeral should humble the
Proudestman.


Go to the dull Churchyard and see,
Those Hillocks of Mortality?
Where Proudest Man is only Found;
By a small swelling of the Ground,
Here Crowds of Rich Bodies are made
Slaves to the Pick Ax and the Spade;
Dig but a Foot or two to make
A cold Bed for thy Dead Friends sake,
It Is odds, but in that Scantling Boom,
Thou robbst some Great Man of his Tomb
And in thy Delving Smit'st upon
His Shin-Bone, or his Cranion -- Some make a huge Noise in the World to have
the Honor to fill out a more Splendid Epitaph.

Such Lessons as these we may learn by viewing the Tombs of those who make a
huge Noise in the World, that they may have the Honor to fill out a more
Splendid Epitaph -- And as a walk through a Church yard shows us the Uanity and
End of all Worldly Grandeur, so it also shows us That Death is as Common as
it is Ungrateful. Infants, as well as Men, daily can direct us in it; Witness
every Churchyard, where are to be seen Graves of all Sizes. In every
Churchyard are to be seen Graves of all Sizes.


This Treasury of Death Survey.
Where Young and Old like Tribute pay.
See what Acquaintance thou can Spy
Amongst those Skulls; I prithee try:
Man of Science, prithee show:
Thy Darling Child, or Aged Foe.
Mankind by thee alone are read:
And know thou nothing of the Dead?
No surely, nothing at all! for Alexander seeing Diogenes tumbling among Dead
Bones, asked him what he sought? To whom the other Diogenes Tumbling among
Dead-Bones.
Answered, that which I cannot find. The difference between the Rich and the
Poor -- And as there be Graves of all Qualities and Sizes, so who can see 'em
covered with Green Turf and withering Grass and forget he must die?

Before we come into the Church we are presented with these Sights; A 7th part
of our Time is set a part to put us in mind of dying.
as if unfit to hear Gods Word, until we are put in mind of Death; and this we
are enjoined once in Seven Days, as if it 7th part of our Time were to be set
apart, to put us in mind of dying -- And happy are those Christians whom the
sight of Funerals and Graves Rings a Peal in their Ears, of their own
Dissolution, which (by most) is so little remembered, that it is become a saying,
I thought no more on it then of my Dying Day; which though a wicked Expression,
yet I fear there is a great deal of Truth in it, for my self must Confess, --
That Living in a Country Uillage, where a Burial was a Rarity, I never thought
of Death, it was so seldom presented unto me; coming to London, where there is
plenty of Funerals (so that Coffins and Corpse in the Grave Observations upon
the Funerals in Country Villages, and upon those in London.
justle for Elbow-Room, for so they do both at Stepney and Chiswick, and every
Churchyard in this Populous Town) I Slighted and neglected Death, because
grown an Object so constant, and Common -- How soul is my Stomach to turn all
Food into bad Humors? Funerals neither few nor frequent, work effectually on
me; London is a Library of Mortality: Volumes of all Sorts and sizes, Rich and
Poor, Infants, Children, Youth etc. daily dye -- I see there is more required
to make a good Scholar, than only the having of many Books. Lord, I therefore
wish, that thou will be my Schoolmaster, and teach me to Number my Days, that
I may apply my Heart unto Wisdom:

Thus Madam have I shown, what we may learn in a Churchyard (where you will see
me buried 'ete my Letter is finished) It teaches us the Vanity and End of all
Worldly Grandeur. -- What little A Churchyard gives me hints about my own
Death, and fair warning to prepare for it.
reason (such Worms as I) have to be Proud? -- That Death is the Fate of all
that come into this World (from the Man of 60 to the Infant that is just born)
And in this Particular it reminds me of my own Death and the consequence of it,
and therefore A walk to^a Churchyard, I thought the most likely thing to
prepare my Mind to write an Essay on my own Funeral -- And as a Churchyard
gives me hints about my own Death, (and fair warning to prepare for it) so it
also shows us the Folly of murmuring; that we are Mortal Creatures; for should
I complain, that there shall be a Time, in the which I shall not be, I may as
well repent that there was a Time in the which I was not; and so be greived
that I am We have to Reason to murmur that we are mortal Creatures
no^ Old as Adam had bin had he lived to this present Year 1700; for not to
have been 4000 Years before this Moment, is as much to be deplored as not to be
4000 Years after it: we know (something) what Death is by the Thought of that
Time and Estate of our selves which was 'ere we were; our Nephews have the same
Reason to ^ex (...) yes that, they (...) not ^ung in our Days, which we have
(...), that we shall not be old in theirs; they who so re-went us, did give
place unto us, and shall we grieve to give room to them who come after us? And
I Am apt to think, there is nothing in Death it self that can afright us; it is
only Fancy gives Death those hidious Shapes we think him in; it is the Saying of
one, I fear not to be dead, yet am afraid to dye; 'tho I don't see why we
should be afraid of Death, (but as it is the inlet to What Life is. --
Eternity) for Death is no more than a soft and easy Nothing. -- Should you ask
me then what is Life? I Would answer with Crates, who being asked this Question,
said nothing, but turned him round and vanished, and 'twas judged a proper
Answer Life's nothing but a dull repetition, What Death is. --
a vain fantastic Dream, and there is an end on it -- But what ever it is to
live, sure I am (if you credit Seneca) it is no more to dye It Is only Fancygives
Death those hideous Shapes we think him in. -- --
than to be born; we felt no pain coming into the World, nor shall we in the
Act of leaving it.

Death is but a ceasing to be what we were before we were, we are kindled and
put out, to cease to be, and not to begin to be, is the same thing. I have met
with one arguing thus. Death which is accounted the most dreadful of all Evils,
is nothing to us, (says he) because while we are in being, Death is not yet
present; so that it neither concerns us as living nor dead; Epicurus in
Gassend. Synt.
for while we are alive, it has not touched us, when we are dead, we are not.
So that we look upon Death with our Eyes, not with our Reason, or we should
find a certain Sweetness in Mortality, for that Essay on knowing our Friends in
Heaven p. 87.
can be no loss which can never be mist or desired again. But let Death be what
it will, it is certain it is less troublesome than Sleep, for in Sleep, I may,
have disquieting Pains, or Dreams, and yet I fear not going to bed. For Sleep
gives us a sip of Joy, but Death the full draught. This is my Notion what DEATH
is, but I cannot be sure I 'ent mistaken, for my writing of my own Funeral shows
I Am yet alive, or were I laid in my Grave, I should know as little what Death
is as I do now, for dying deprives us of knowing what we are doing or what
other state we are commenceing. It Is a leap in the dark, not knowing where we
shall light, as Mr. Hobbs told his inquisitive Friend when he was going to dye.
But 'tho I know so little what Death is, there have been Men, that have tried
even in Death it self to relish and taste it, but (as I said before) there are
none of them come back to tell us the News -- Canius Julius endeavored to make
Trial what Death was that he might come again to acquaint his Friends with it.
--
-- No one was ever, known to make,
Who once in Death's cold Arms a Nap did take. Lucret. Lib. 3.


Canius Julius being condemned by that Beast Caligula, as he was going to
receive the stroke of the Executioner, was asked by a Philosopher well Canius
(said he) where about is your Soul now? what is she doing? what are you
thinking of? Iwas thinking ((...) and the faculties of my mind settled and fixed,
to try if in this short and quick instant of Death I could perceive the motion
of the Soul when she starts from the Body, and what this passage is, and
whether she has any resentment of the separation, that I may afterward come
again to acquaint my Fr^ends with it. But we don't read that Canius, after he
was put to death, ever came to life again to acquaint his Friends what Death
was. But 'tho he did not there be those that have, for my self had once the
Curiosity to visit two certain Persons, one had been hanged, and the other
drowned, and both of them very miraculously brought to Life again. I asked Of
two men that came to Life again after they had bin hanged and drowned, with an
account of what they felt in their dying.
what Thoughts they had, and what Pains they were sensible of? The Person that
was hanged, said, He expected some sort of a strange change, but knew not what;
but the pangs of Death were not so intolerable as some sharp Diseases; nay he
could not be positive whether he felt any other pain than what his fears
exacted: He added, that he grew senseless by little and little, and at the
first his Eyes represented a brisk shining red sort of Fire, which grew paler
and paler, till at length it turned into a black; after which he thought no
more, but insensibly acted the part of one that falls asleep, not knowing how,
nor when. The other gave me almost the same Account, and both were dead
(apparently) for a considerable Time. These Instances are very satisfactory in
cases of violent Death; and for a natural Death, I cannot but think it much
easier; diseases make a conquest of Life by Essay on knowing our Friends in
Heaven p. 88.
little and little, therefore the strife must be less where the in equality of
power is greater.

However, by these instances we see there is a certain way by which some Men
make trial what Death is; but I never expect to know it, 'till I make the
Experiment. But I do believe, if there be any evil in Death, it would appear to
be for that Pain and Torment which we apprehend to arise on the breaking of
those straight-bands which keep the Soul and Body together. But that the S^ght,
Hearing, Smell^ng, Taste, leave us without Pain, and unawares, we know most
certainly; and why should we not The Sight, Hearing, Sm^lling, Taste, leave us
without Pain, and why should we not believe the same of Feeling. --
believe the same of Feeling? But 'tho we can have no perfect Notion of Death,
yet this we are sure, that Death is a profound sleep in which Nature lets it
self fail insensibly, when she is tired with the disquiets of this Life. It is
a Cessation of all those Services which the Soul renders to the Flesh. This is
Death (as near as I can judge of it) And if Death be no more then this, I
shall not shed one Tear at the Thoughts of my own Death, though I have shed many at
the Death of others. I think the Thracians were much in the right, to weep when
a Child was born, and to rejoice when it dyed. We also read that Lodowick
Co^tusius, a Lawyer of Padua, forbid to his Relations Tears and Lamentations by
his Will, and desired that he might have Harpers Pipers, and all sorts of
Music at his Funeral, who should partly go before partly follow the Corpse,
leaving to every one of them a small sum of Money. His Bier he ordered to be
carried by 12 Virgins that being clad in Green were to sing all t^ way such
songs as Mirth brought to their remembrance; leaving to each a certain sum of
Money instead of a Dowry. Thus was he buried in the Church of St. Sophia in
Padua, accompanied with a hundred Attendants, together with all the A Lawyers
merry Funeral.
Clergy of the City (excepting those that wore Black) for such by his Will, he
forbid his Funeral; as it were, turning his Funeral Rites into a
Marriage-Ceremony. I cannot say how far such rejoicing as this is proper for a
Funeral occasion, but this I declare, when I am once dead, I would not have my
Friends lay it to heart. But however they may carry it toward my Dead-body,
it is a comfort to me that I have no slavish Fears of Death. --

I can be contented (when I Am fairly dead) to undergo the tedious conversation
of Worms and Serpents, those greedy Tenants of the Grave, who will never be
satisfied, till they have eat up the Ground-Landlord. By which it appears that
The end of all other Creatures is less deformed than that of Man. -- -- We must
not live in Sin, if we would not be afraid of Death.
Plants, in their Death, retain some pleasing smell of their Bodies -- The
little Rose buryes her self in her natural sweetness and Carnation Color; only
man's dead-Carkass is good for nothing but to feed Worms, and the Worms (^re
long) will feed sweetly on me. -- But though after my Skin, Worms destroy this
Body, yet in my flesh shall I see God; so that I am not solicitous how, or when
I shall make my Exit, provided my Soul be happy, and my Body buried in that
manner I shall anon describe, and therefore it is I Am writing -- An Essay on my
own Funeral -- The Worms will feed sweetly on me, Job. 24. 20. J b. 19. 26. why
I am not terrified with the dismal knels the Blocks and Herses that attend
Funerals.
that I may bid farewell to the World before I leave it, that being in it, the
World may see I would not be of it. -- I would willingly set all things in
order before Death comes; for the' I am not much terrified with the Solitude
and Darkness of Graves, (as they resemble my present Cell) nor with the Dismal
Knell^, the Blacks and Hearses, etc. that attends Funerals; yet I must
acknowledge, Death is a serious thing; for when a Man dies, he takes his solemn
Leave of one World and g^es into another, where he never was yet, to receive
his final Doom. The Dread of this made Oldham cry out in his last Sickness,
Even I, who thought I could have been merry, in sight of my Coffin, and drunk a
Health with the Se^ton in my own Grave, now tremble at the least Envoy of the
King of Terrors; to see but the shaking of my Glass, makes me turn pale, and
fear is like to prevent, and do the Work of my Distemper. It Is strange to see
Men of such great Curiosity, so afraid of dying, for who would not be content
to be a kind of Nothing for a Moment, to be within one Instant of a Spirit, and
soaring through Oldham's Sunday-Thought in sickness p. 59.
Regions he never saw, and yet is curious to behold. -- But Conscience makes
Cowards of us all; This made Lewis 2. so afraid of Death, that when he was
sick, he forbid any Man to speak of Death in his Court. -- The wicked Liver
ventures Eternity upon his last breath, and therefore Death (which lets him
into it,) appears so ghastly. -- But the Rays of the setting Sun are the
fairest; and I desire to live in such a constant preparation for Death, that my
life may not set Reflections on a Death^ed Repentance.
in a Cloud, as they generally do, that crowd up Repentance into so narrow a
room as a sickbed. Solomon says, Man goes to his long bome; short
preparation will not fit so long a Journey. O let me not have my Oil to buy,
when I am to burn it; they dreadfully mistake themselves that think a Man can
live a Life of Holiness, when he is just a dying; and therefore when I come to
d^e, I would have nothing to do but to dye. For now I discover a Falacy whereby
I have long d^eived my self, which is this, I I desired to begin my Repentance
from my Birthday.
have desired to begin my amendment from my Birthday, or from the first Day of
(...) Year, or from some eminent Festival, that so my Repentance might bear
some remarkable Date; but when those days were come, I have adjourned my
Amendment to some other time. Thus whilst I ^on'd not agree with my self when
to start, I have almost I a^journed my amendment to some other time
lost the running of the Race. I am resolved thus to befool my self no longer,
I see no time like to day. Grant, O Lord, that to day I may hear thy Voice. And
if this day be obscure in the Calendar, and remarkable in it self for nothing
else, give me to make it memorable in my Soul, by now beginning the Reformation
of my Life. Not that I allow my self in any known sin (none but an Atheist can
do that) But Bishop ^her tells us, the best Man living does enough in the day
to bring I Will delay (...) no longer.
^im on his K^s at Night; and therefore I Would now be more concerned for my Soul
then eye^, for having, loyter'd too much in my way to Heaven, I have no^ a long
Race to run by a s^ B^h, a great way to go by a s^ing Sun. Yet I hope I should
(...) wholly despair if I (...) but one moment left to repen^.
I should not wholly despair, if I had but one moment left to repent in; for
tho our Lord says it is harder for a Rich-man ^o enter into Heaven then for a
Camel to pass through a Needles Eye; but yet he tells us, it is not Impossible
for all that, and it is as hard for an old ^inner to enter into Heaven a for a
Rich-man, and doubtless very hard for a Death bed, or momentary Repentance to
obtain Salvation; because it is extremely dubious whether it can be real but
yet, it is not Impossible; for, we see the Thief on the Cross was saved with one
single act of it, exerted a moment 'Iis as hard for an old sinner to enter into
Heaven as a Rich-man
before he dyed; that Example indeed is but one; but yet it shows us there may
be, and is sometimes more, or else that Example would be to no purpose; and as
it evidences on one side, that Continuation in sin is extreme dangerous, so on
the other, it demonstrates that Despair is still more so, and never to be
entertained even at our latest Breath, for our Lord has declared at whatsoever
time a sinner shall repent, he will receive him. But I would have no Man put
off his Repentance, From this Minute I bid s^rewel to Covetousness, Pride,
Ambition, etc.
because God is merciful; for he that puts off his Re^entance to another Day,
as he has one day the less to repent in, so he has the loss Inclination for
such a work; he that defers Repentance to a Death bed, it is a Thousand to one
if he repents at all: for besides, his aversion to such a work, his distemper
may seize his Brain, or he may dye suddenly, and for that Reason I^ not run the
hazard of a Deathbed Repentance, but do from this Minute bid farewell, to
(...), Pride, Ambition. etc. and all my beloved Sins, that so I may die with a
good Conscience, and My Reason for making my Will.
have nothing to trouble me when I Am leaving the World. And in order to this, I
have made my Will, bequeathed my Soul into the hands of a Merciful God: And
have (as you will bear anon) given orders about my Funeral.

And thus your Lady (...) s^s, what a Melancholy thing it is for a Man to I Am
here burying my self in Effigy. --
Write of his own Death, especially if he^ in Health, and strength; for
methinks now I Am as 'twere Burying my self in (...), I mean attending my own
Corpse to the Grave. -- It Is the last Office of love (...) a Friend: and sure I
am, I can follow the Corpse of none (except Valeria) that I love better. I live
now where the The weekly Bill of Mortality never less than 200. in the most
Healthful-Times --
Bells can scarce solemnize the Funeral of any Person, but that I knew him, or
knew that he was my Neighbor; and when these Bells tell me, that now one, and
now another is buried, must not I acknowledge, that they have the Correction
due to me, and paid (...) Debt that I owe. In the most healthful Times, Two
hundred and upwards w^ (...) constant weekly Tribute paid to Mortality in
London. A large Bill (...) it must be dis^ged: Can one City spend according to
this weekly rate, and not be Bank^ of People? At leastwise must not my Shot be
called for to make up the Reckoning? Seven Young Men yearly taken out of Athens
to be devoured by the Monster Minotaur.


When only Seven young (...), and those chosen by (...), were but yearly taken
out of Athens, to be devoured by the Monster Minotaur, the whole City was in a
constant fright; Children for themselves, and Parents for their Children; yea,
their escaping of the first, was but an introduction to the next Tears Lottery.

Were the Dwellers and Lodgers in London-weekly to cast Lots, who should make
up this 200, how would every one be afrighted? Now None regard it, my security
concludes the before said Number will consist of Infants and Old-Folk; Few Men
of middle-Age, and amidst them surely not my self: But oh is not this putting
the Evil-day far from me, the ready way to bring it the nearest to me? The Lot
is Weekly drawn (tho not by me) for me; I am therefore concerned seriously to
provide, left that Death's Prize prove my Blank; for the Were the Dwellers. in
London weekly to cast Lotts who should makeup the Bill of Mortality, they would
be all afrighted.
Bells tell me (as I hinted-before) that now one, and now another is buried;
and must not I acknowledge, that they have the Correction due to me, and paid
the Debt that I owe? --

1.
Hark! how chimes the Passing Bell!
There Is no Music to a Knell;
All the other Sounds we hear,
Flatter, and but Cheat our Ear
2.
This does put us still in mind,
That our Flesh must be resigned;
And a general silence made,
The World be Tenant to a Shade.
3.
This Bell calls our Holy Groan.
A loud Echo to this Tone;
He that on his Pillow lies,
Half Embalmed before he Dies;
Carries (like a Sheep) his Life
To meet the Sacrificers Knife.
And for Eternity is pressed,
Sad Bell-weather to the rest.
But is this Sound a Passing Bell?
Then to Eternity farewell!
Poor Soul, whose doom one Hour shall show,
Eternal Bliss, or Endless Woe!
If Virtues Laws thou have despised,
How would that Virtue now be prized!
Or say, thou did in our loose Age,
On her forsaken side engage;
Would thou the dear Remembrance now,
For the Worlds Monarchy fore-go?
What other Medicine can thou (...),
T'asswage the FEVER in thy Mind?
Now, 'waken'd Conscience speaks at large,
And Envious Fiends enhance the Charge!
Let the Bold Atheist now draw near,
And try thy drooping Heart to cheer:
His briskest Wine and Wit to thee,
Will now alike insipid be.
In Deaths arrest, the Hector's Sword,
As little Service can afford;
Who hopes for rescue here, will fail,
And the grim Sergeant takes no Bail.
Once hearing one of these Passing-Bells Ring, I prayed that the Sick-man might
have, through Christ. (...) safe Voyage to his long Home. Afterward The
Tolling of the Bell has, through mistake, made me Pray for Persons that were
departed this life.
I understood that the Party was Dead some Hours before; and it seems in some
Places of London, the tolling of the Bell is but a Preface of course to the
ringing it out.

Bells are better silent than thus telling Lies. What is this, but giving a
false Alarm to Men's Devotions, to make them to be ready armed with their
Prayers, for the assistance of such who have already fought the good fight, and
gotten the Conquest? Not to say, that Men's Charity herein may be suspected of
Superstition in praying for the Dead; However my Heart thus poured out, was not
spilt on the Ground. My Prayers too late ^o do him good, came soon enough to
speak my good will. What I freely tendered, God took according to the Integrity
of my Intention. The Party I hope is in Abraham's, Men's Charity herein may be
suspected of Superstition in praying for the Dead.
Bosom, and my Prayers are returned into my own -- But 'tho sometimes the Bells
mis^ad my Devotion, and I may pray perhaps for a Dead-Neighbour, yet
Passing-Bells are of great use; for --

The PASSING BELL ringing, calls me into God's Church, to hear and learn, and
to pray for the departing Soul; the Grave being dug, warns me to prepare for
Sickness and Death; and passing by the Tombs of my dead Friends; puts me in
mind that e're long I must come to 'em. Having these frequent warnings of my
own Death, I often think with my self, What Use we should make of the
Passing Bell.
what Disease I would be best contented to die of; none please me. The Stone,
the Cholick, terrible as expected, intolerable when felt. The Palsy is Death
before Death. The Consumption a flattering Disease, cozening Men into hope of
long life at the last Gasp. Some Sicknesses besot, others enrage Men, some are
too swift, and others too slow.

If I could as easily decline Diseases as I could dislike 'em, I should be
Immortal. But away with these Thoughts. The Mark must not choose what Arrow will
be shot against it. What God sends, I must receive. -- May I not be so curious
to know what Weapon shall wound me, as careful to provide the Plaster of
Patience against it! And surely I shall need Patience on a Sick Bed; for if I Am
seized with a Fever, I fear I shall rave and rage, Oh whither What Disease I
would be best contented to die of.
will my Mind sail, when Distempers shall steer it? Whither will my Fancy run,
when Diseases shall ride it? My Tongue, which of it self is a Fire, (Jam. 3.
6.) sure will be a Wildfire, when the Furnace of my Mouth is made seven times
hotter with a burning Fever. But Lord, 'tho I should talk idly to my own
shame, let me not talk wickedly to thy Dishonor. Teach me the Art of Patience
whilst I am well, and give me the use of it when I am sick. Commonly that
Sickness seizes Men which they least suspect.
In that day, either lighten my Burden, or strengthen my Back: Make me, who so
often in my Health have discovered my Weakness, presuming on my own strength,
to be strong in sickness when* I solely rely on thy assistance -- But tho I
mention a Fever, at it is a Distemper I most dread, yet it is a great Question
whether that Disease be to end (...) Days. For it is commonly seen, That
Sickness seizes on Men, which they least suspect. He that expects to be burnt
with a Fever may be drowned with a Dropsy; and she that fears to be Seeing
there, be many. Ways out of the, World, I bless God that I can die but once.
swelled with a Tympany, may be ^el'd with a Consumption. I might mention a
thousand other Diseases, which unexpectedly may seize upon us. Then seeing
there be so many Ways out of the World, and but one into it; I bless my God
that (...) die but once, and once I must know what that CHANGE means --

For in vain we take Momp^er-Air
In hopes to leave the Thoughts of (...) there.
And as I must die, so, If I don't mistake the Disease, I shall die of, (for I
expect to die of the Stone) my weary Pilgrimage on Earth is almost finished; so
that my own Funeral is a proper Subject to employ my Thoughts, and Men of a
stronger My own Funeral is a proper Subject to Employ my Thoughts
Body then I (^till they get a Lease of their Lives) will do well to consider,
That they have no continuing City here.

Then, Heal^hful Man, why should thou take such care!
To lengthen out thy Live's short Calendar;
Each Dropping Season, and each Flower does cry,
Fool, as I fade and wither, thou must die.
The beating of thy Pulse, when thou art well,
Is but the tolling of thy Passing Bell.
Night is thy Hearse, whose Sable-Canopy,
Covers alike Deceased Day and thee:
And all those weeping Dews which nightly fall,
Are but as Tears shed for thy Funeral.
Thus you see, (Madam) that Death no more spares the Strong and Heathful, then
he that is always sickl^, but that we are all Pilgrims and Strangers o^ Earth,
as our Fathers were before us -- On this Condition came we into the World, that
we should leave it again, and therefore Anaxagoras having word Bona's saying
upon the hearing of a Clock strike.
brought him his only Son was dead, his Answer was, I know he was born to die.
And BONA every time he heard the Clock strike, would say, Now I have one Hour
less to live: I cannot say Death is so often in my thoughts, that I should cry
every Hour, I am so much nearer the Grave; yet I may say a^ often as I view the
Hourglass, and consider the swiftness of Time, that I desire to ^ie Tears with
her Grains of Sands, that I might daily lament, that I Have lived to no better
purpose, and am so little affected with the Death of others. And as the
consideration of the Death of others should remind me of my own, so I hope a
sight of my GRAVE will make Riches (and what else I have doted on) to appear in
their own Nature as things of nothing, in comparison of those above; and as I
go still Riches, Plays, Beauty, etc. have their value from our estimation of
'em.
nearer, the nearer, they seem unpleasanter; (the Fashion of this World (...)
away^) And I now perceive that Riches, Paintings, Jewels, Songs, Plays, Beauty,
etc. had their value to me, merely from mine own Estimation, which now I begin
to take off, and look more intently on them. They begin to vanish like Castles
in the Clouds, which are not there indeed, but in our Imagination only --

And, as the Thoughts of my Death, should wean me from this World: so I
perceive that the Egyptians found that the Sight of a Funeral was of great
efficacy to this purpose, and therefore at Rich-Mens-Banquets, one went round
about A piece of Timber wrought like the Carcass of a dead Man, attended with a
Train of Mourners.
the Table with a piece of Timber, wrought like the Carcass of a dead Man,
attended with a Train of Mourners, and he spoke thus. Oh (...) that eat so
^avourly, behold this Image, for even so shall ye shortly become. 'Till we have
thus conquered the fear of Death, every spectacle of Mortality terrifies us;
into what a Dump did the sight of Cyrus^ Tomb strike the Mind of the great
Alexander: But thus to fear Death, is always to live in the pangs of Death; for
most true it is, Fear is more Pain than Pain; there is no (...) in Death it
self, like those in the Way, or Prologue to it. Then considering the Miseries
of Humane Life, I wonder any should be afraid of Death* it is said of (...), a
Man of great Integrity, that he gave one the option of Life or Death, who told
him he had (...) The sight of Cyrus his Tomb terrified the Mind of the great
Alexander.
die again than live again, and certainly (as Frederick the Emperor was wont
to say) The best thing in the World could happen to a Man, is to have a good
going out of it. I believe he spoke as he thought, for the wearied Man desires
the Bed, the languishing Man ^he Grave both would fain be at rest. I find this
verified in my own Person: for being always followed with one Disease or other,
I am so Zealous for a Passage out of this World, that I now take my leave of
every Place I depart from, and think of nothing but dying: I have already
purchased a Grave, where I intend to be buried, and took upon it the only sure
Possession I have in this World: Of one who being put to his choice, would
rather die than live.
World, All that I (...) of thee living, is a Grave when I Am dead; neither
would I ((...) '^is the Bed where my Iris Sleeps) exchange it for the Manor of
Sampsil. In this I follow the Example of Father Abraham, for see how he
begins to possess the World, by no Land, ^asture, or Arable Lordship; the
First Thing is a Grave; he was so far from coveting this World, that he minded
nothing but the purchase of a Burying-place, and that he might not be
disappointed of it, he paid down the Money demanded of the Seller, current
Money among the Merchants. Why I purchased a Grave. and would not exchange it
for the Manor of Sampsil. Of an Irish Bp. that would be buried near the Gallows.
Most Men (says Dr Fuller) have been careful for the decent Interment of their
(...); few are of the Mind of Arbagastus an Irish Saint, and Bishop of Spires,
who would be buried near the Gallows, in imitation of our Savior, whose Grave
was on Mount Calvary, near the place of Execution. Yet after all, it must be
confessed, to want a Grave is the Cruelty of the Livine, not the Misery of the
Dead. An English Gentleman not long since did lie on his Deathbed in Spain,
and the Jesuits did flock about him to pervert him to their Religion; all was
in vain, their last Argument was, If you will not turn Roman Catholic, then
your Body shall be unburied; then (Answered he) I Will stink, and so turned his
Head and died. Thus Love, if not to the Dead, to the Living, will make him, if
not a Grave, a Hole, and it was the Beggars Epitaph.

Naked I lived, but being Dead,
Now behold I Am covered.
Let us be careful to provide rest for our Souls, for our Bodies (when Dead) A
Gentleman threatened to be unburied if he would not turn Roman Catholic. The
Beggars Epitaph.
will provide Rest for themselves.

Having proceeded so far toward my own Funeral, as to secure six foot of
Ground (if the Grave-maker don't cheat me) and having shaken Hands with my
Friends and this v^in World.

Being approacht thus near toward my End, methinks now all my Worldly Cares
are drawing to their Period, and 'twont be long before I shall reach that happy
Shore where Iris is already landed. Seeing then I am falling toward mine
Harbor (and for a sight of her who died praying for my Eternal Welfare)
methinks I even long 'till Death has wafted me to those bright Regions* where
she is. If I e^t mistaken, I could rejoice to see the Bearers that must carry
me to her Grave, and should triumph (could the Dead speak) when I Am tumbled
into it. It even now sweetens the Thoughts of Heaven to me, to think I shall
one day see her there; which if I do, With what Ardours shall we then caress
one another! with what Transports of Divine Affection shall we mutually
embrace, Essay on knowning our Friends. in Heaven. p. 16.
and vent those Innocent Flames which had so long lain smoothering in the
Grave! How passionately Rhetorical and Elegant, will our Expressions be, when
our tender Sentiments, which Death had frozen up, when he congealed our Blood,
shall now be thawed again in the warm Airs of Paradise. Like Men that have
escaped a common Ship wreck, and swim safe to the Shore, shall we there
congratulate each other with Joy and Wonder. What Extafies I should be in, upon
seeing Iris again.


Then how pleased am I to think my Ashes will shortly be mingled with her^, who
loved me more than her own Life! For it reioiced Iris to think she should die
first, and that she should live in me so long as I lived. And when we dyed,
'twas our mutual de^te to sleep together in the same Grave, where (as she
expressed it) we shall be still happy together, if a senseless Happiness can be
called so. -- My Body cannot Death, the Journey to her, is dark and melan. choly.
fail of being Happy, if it sleeps with Iris!

And for my (...), I wish it no other Felicity, when she has shaken off these
Rags of Flesh, than to ascend to her, and to enjoy the same Bliss. Then cast
off this ROBE of CLAY, my Soul, and fly to overtake her; it is true, DEATH, the
Journey to her, is. Dark and Melancholy, but it is a Comfort to think that the He
forgets that he can die who complains of misery.
first Day of our Jubilee is DEATH: He forgets that, he can die, who complains
of Misery. And therefore one petitioning NERO that he might be executed, his
Answer was, Man, why art thou not dead already, when Death is in thy own Power?
We are in the Power of no Calamity while Death is in our own. Death is the Cure
of all Diseases -- Thus (Madam) you see what Improvement I make of my DEATH and
FUNERAL, and that I do what I can to secure a GRAVE; for why should I be
unwilling to go to that Bed which my Blessed Lord has perfumed with his own
Body, and is now become the Dormitories of the Saints.

1.
Then thou-that have conversed with God and Death,
In Speculation, shall thy Breath
Unwillingly expire into his Hand,
That comes to fetch it by Command
From God that made thee? Art thou loath to be
Possessed of thy Felicity,
Because thy Guide looks pale, and must
Convey thy Flesh to Dust?
Though that to Worms converted be,
What is all this to thee?
2.
Thou shall not Feel Death's Sting, but instant have
Full Ioys and Triumph over the Grave:
Where thy long-lov'd Companion flesh, shall rest,
Until it ^e refined, new dressed
For thy next Wearing in that Holy Place,
That Heaven, where thou shall Face to Face,
With Saints and Angels, daily see
Thy God, and ever be
Replenished with Celestial Bliss:
Oh my Soul, think still on this. --
when I am in my Grave, my own Worms, like the false Servants of The Grave is
the Dormitories of the Saints.
some great Men, shall devour me; yet when my poor Corpse is mixed with common
Dust, it shall sleep safely with the Dear Eliza. Then grant, O Lord, that as I
am thus laid in my Grave by thy Sergeant Death, so I may be raised again by the
quickening Power of thy Sons Resurrection, and be conducted by one of thy
glorious Messengers to the Gates of Heaven.

In this manner do I ponder on my Death and FUNERAL. But whether I consider Why
I ought to prepare for a speedy death.
my own Funeral, or the Funeral of others, I have Reason to prepare for a
speedy DEATH, and the Consequence of it: 'Twas Plato's Opinion, That the
Wise-man's Life was the Meditation of Death. But Man, in his Travails often
measures his Grave, yet is forgetful of His End; seven Foot is his Demension,
yet most Men live in that security, as if that small scantling had a perpetual
extention: But that my DEATH may not seem further off than-indeed it is, I will
daily expect it; 'it were madness to think I should never arrive at that to
which I am every minute going. Every Thought I have is a Sand running out of
the Glass of Life. Then surely he is dead already that does not look for Death.
How stupid are we to think so little of DYING, when not only the DEATH of men,
but every thing else dies, to show us the Way.

Sweet Day so cool, so calm, so bright,
The ^ridal of the Earth and Sky,
The Dew shall weep thy fall to Night;
For thou must die.
Sweet Rose, whose hue angry and brave,
Bids the rash Gazer wipe his Bye.
Thy Root is ever in its Grave,
And thou must die.
Sweet Spring, full of sweet Days and Roses,
A Box where Sweets compacted lie,
My Music shows ye have your Closes,
And all must die. There may be News of my Funeral before I can finish my Essay
upon it.

Only a sweet and Virtuous Soul,
Like seasoned Timber never gives;
But tho the whole World turn to Coal,
Then chiefly lives. -- Herbert.
Besides the warning I have of my own DEATH, in the death of every thing I meet
abroad; that I might want no warning when I go to SLEEP (which is a Death in
Scripture is compared to Sleep.
kind of dying too): What is my BED, but as it were a Passing Bell to remember
me every four and twenty Hours of my Mortality, and that the Grave must
speedily be my Bed, a Clod my Pillow, and the Mold and Worms my Covering.

When I put off my Shirt, it puts me in mind of my Winding Sheet and last My
Night-Prayer, etc may be resembl'd to making my Will.
Shroud, that must cover me when I sleep under ground. Death in Scripture is
compared to Sleep. Well then may my Night Prayer be resembled to making my
Will. I will be careful not to die intestate; as also not to defer my
Will-making, 'till I am not compos mentis, 'till the Lethargy of drowsiness
seizes upon me; but being in perfect Memory, I bequeath my Soul to God; the
rather, because I am sure the Devil will accuse me when sleeping. Oh the
advantage of Spirits above Bodies! If our Clay Cottage be not cooled with Rest,
the Roof falls The Devil will accuse me when sleeping.
a Fire. Satan has no such need: The Night is his fittest time, Rev. 12. 10.
Thus Man's Vacation is the Terms for the Beasts of the Forest, they move most
whilst he lies quiet in his Bed. Lest therefore, whilst sleeping, I be
Outlawed for want of appearance to Satan's Charge, I commit my Cause to him,
who An Appearance to Satan's Charge. Lying along is an improper Posture for
Piety.
neither slumbers nor sleeps: Answer for me, oh my God. I would not by this
Expression be so understood as if I might defer my Night Prayer 'till I Am in
Bed. This lying along is an improper posture for Piety Indeed there is no
Contrivance of our Body, but some good Man in Scripture has hanfel'd it with
Prayer, The Publican standing, Job sitting, Hezekiah lying on his Bed, Elijah,
with his Face between his Legs; but of all Postures, give me St. Paul's. For
this cause I bow my Knees to the Father of my Lord Jesus Christ. Knees when
they may, they must be hended. I have read a Copy of a grant of liberty from
Queen Mary to Henry Ratcliff Earl of Sussex, giving him leave to wear a Night
Cap or Coif in her Majesty's presence, counted a great Favor because of his
Infirmity: Job. 18. 1 Kings 28. 42. Ephesians. 3. 14. Weavers Fun. Mon. p. 63.
I know in case of necessity, God would graciously accept my Devotion, bound
down in a sick-dressing; but now whilst I am in perfect Health, it is
inexcusable; Christ commanded some to take up their Bed, in token of their full
Recovery; my Laziness may suspect least thus my Bed taking me up, prove a
presage of my ensuing Sickness. Then Blessed Lord, pardon the former Idleness
of my Night-Devotion, and I will never more offend thee in the same kind. In
case of Necessity, God will accept my Devotion bound down in a Sick-Dressing.
And thus my Bed, my Sleep, and every thing else, proclaims Death is on his
March toward me. And, seeing my Sand runs faster than my Ink, your Ladyship
may have News of my Funeral before I can finish this Essay upon it. --

How soon does Man decay!
When Clothes are taken from a Chest of Sweets,
To swadle Infants, whose young Breath,
Scarce knows the way:
Those Clouts are little Winding-sheets,
Which do consign and send them unto Death.
When Boys go first to Bed,
They step into their voluntary Graves;
Sleep binds them fast, only their Breath
Makes them not dead:
Successive Nights like rolling Waves,
Convey them quickly, who are bound for Death.
When Youth is frank and free,
And calls for Music, while his Veins do swell,
All Day exchanging Mirth and Breath,
In Company;
That Music summons to the Knel,
Which shall befriend him at the House of Death.
When Man grows staid and wise,
Getting a House and Home, where he may move,
Within the Circle of his Breath,
Schooling his Eyes;
That dumb Enclosure makes Love,
Unto the COFFIN that attends his death.
When Age grows lo^ and weak,
Marking his Grave, and thawing every Year,
'Till all do melt and drown his Breath,
When he would speak:
A Chair or Litter shows the Bier,
Which shall convey him to the House of Death.
Man, e're he is aware,
Has put together a Solemnity,
And dressed his Hearse, while he has Breath, I Am here ringing my own
Passing Bell. That It Is impossible for a man to write of his own Funeral whilst
he is living.

As yet to spare:
Yet Lord, instruct us so to die,
That all these Dyings may be life in Death. -- -- Herbert.
Or had I not these Warnings of Death (in the several Stages of Life) yet I
have such a Crazy Body, as daily puts me in mind of my Grave; and I Am now (by
writing an Essay upon my own Funeral) as 'twere ringing my own Passing Bell.

But perhaps you will say, How can you write of your own Funeral when you are yet
alive? And were you dead, you would be less able to handle your Pen, as much at you
love scribbling. --

Why, Madam, I am dead; but don't be frighted that I appear again in this White
Sheet: For tho I Am dead -- It Is thus dead; I was born seemingly dead I was born
seemingly dead.
(it was thought I was lugg'd out of my natural CELL into my Grave) and I could
have been content had I had no more than the Register or Sexton, to tell the
World that I had ever been. However I may venture to say that from the first
laying of these Mudd-Walls in my conception, they have moldred away, and the
whole course of Life is but an active Death; nay, every Meal we eat, is as it
were a Ransom from one Death, and lays up for another; and while we think The
whole Course of Life is but an active Death.
a Thought, we die, for the Clock strikes, and reckons on our Portion of
Eternity; nay, we even form our Words with the Breath of our Nostrils, and we
have the less time to live (wan't we dead already) Eor every word we speak: I
say it again, wa n't we dead already, for Anaxagoras undertook to prove what
(...) we call Life is actual Death, and that what we call Death is Life --

And as I am dead, (as dead as I Have here described) so if I take a view of my
My Father, Mother, etc. and most of my Friends are dead.
Generation and Friends about me (tho I enjoy them a while) I find at last they
follow the necessity of their Generation, and are finally removed, some by Age,
some by Sickness, and some by casualty; what, a Bubble! what, a nothing! What a
wink of Life is Man! Most of my Friends are gone, and all by Death: My Father
is gone in one Friend my Mother in another, Dear Ben in another Daphne, (the
MATCHLESS DAPHNE) in another; Harris in another Showden in another, and S.
Darker in another, the Delight of mine Eyes, the pleasure of my Ears, the
Fellow of my Bed. -- The Servants of my House, my old School-fellows, are
either all gone, or much impaired.

Time was their Race, but newly was begun,
Whose Glass is run.
They on the Troubled Sea were heretofore,
'Tho now on Shore.
And it is not long before it will be said,
Of me as it is of them, Alas he is dead. --
Now when I consider the Diminution I daily suffer in this kind, methinks I
stand (as Aaron once did in the Camp) betwixt the Living and the Dead; and
while I reflect on my self, I find I so participate of both, that I am indeed
but half alive and half dead, for half my Body (by reason* of the Stone, etc)
is dead, and has already taken Seizin of the Grave for me: And (as I hinted
before) I Am half alive and half dead.
Five Parts of my Relations are dead the Companion also, and Fellows of my
Apprentiship, are gone before: So that if I would adhere to the greater number
(as Many so in Factions) I must repair to the Dead, if I en't with 'em already;
for my Habitation (My own Body) moulders apace, and the very top and Cover (my
THATCH above) turns Color, grows Gray, and withers. But though my Friends are
dead, (and I Am dying apace my self) yet I am so much My Body moulders. apace.
the same with my Reverend Father (which I dare not say of the other Persons I
have here mentioned) that he cannot die whilst I am alive.

THE youthful Blood that beat the winding Maze
Within your Veins, gave length unto my Days;
The active Heat distilled a crimson Dew
Through those warm Limbecks, and made Me of you:
That to such full proportion I am grown,
People do still Me for Your Figure own:
Then since I have derived a part from Thee.
Thou can not dye, whilst Thou have part in Me.
Thus Sabina, having given you some general thoughts on my Death and Funeral, I
shall next, lay my self out for Dead (for I Am now supposing what will I Am now
laying my self out for Dead.
happen one time or other) -- And now when my Breath is gone, my Eyes closed,
the Bell tolled, and my Body coffined up for the Grave, where would I have my
Soul, whether in Heaven, or in Hell? -- Sure not in Hell, least I should want
Lazarus to cool my Tongue, but in Heaven where there be Rivers of Pleasures,
etc. --

I thus descend to a particular Application of Death to my self, for the common
No fight so ter^ible as to see a man breathing his last.
sounds of Death-post's through our Ears without any stop, whereas the seeing a
Dead Friend, the Spectacle thereof by a self Application Inns even in our
Hearts. Much more then should the Representation of our own Deaths affect us,
for there is no sight more Terrible then to see a Man breathing his last, but --

It must be done (my Soul) though it is a strange
A dismal and mysterious change,
When thou shall leave this Tenement of Clay,
And to an unknown Some-where wing away;
When Time shall be Eternity, and thou (how.
Shall be thou know not what, and live thou know not
When Life's close Knot, by Writ from Destiny,
Disease shall cut, or Age untye;
When after some delays, some dying strife,
The Soul stands shivering on the ridge of Life;
With what a dreadful curiosity
Does she lanch out into the Sea of vast Eternity. -- Norris
My Soul and Body (Two old Friends) being now parting, methinks I see how The
parting of Soul and Body.
my Mind would fain utter it self and cannot, for Respiration, or Breathing, is
thus performed -- The outward Air is drawn in by the vocal Artery, and sent by
the mediation of the Midriffe to the Lungs, which dilating themselves as a pair
of Bellows, reciprocally fetch it in, and send it out to the Heart to cool it:
and from thence, now being ho^, convey it again, still taking in fresh; but How
the Body is encoldned to a Fashionable Clay.
these Organs being now quite disabled, the Spirits shrink inward, and retire
to the vanquished Heart, as if like Sons pressed from an Indulgent-Father, they
would come for a sad Farewell, while that in the mean time pants with
afrighting pangs, and the hands and feet, being the most remote from it, are by
degrees encoldned to a Fashionable Clay, as if Death crept in at the Nails and
by an insensible surprise suffocated the invirond Heart. Curiously did thou
make me (says David) in the lowest parts of the Earth; but now to see those
Elements which compounded made the Body, to see them thus divided, and the Man
dissolved, is a rueful fight --

And now methinks I see all my Friends like conduits dropping Tears about me,
while I neither know my wants, nor they my cure. -- Nay now my very Doctor
(though the most able Physician I know in London) stands as one that ga^es at a
Comet, which he can reach with nothing but his Eye alone. -- To see The Doctor
knows not what to prescribe.
all this happen to one whose Conversation has endeared him to us, is very
dreadful: -- Oh the Pangs I felt when Iris was breathing her last! for even
then she lay uttering such Expressions as these. I Will love thee as long as I
live -- Thou art a dear Child to me -- I pray God bless my Dear Yok-fellow, and
give him Grace -- I pray thoe give him grace to live so here, as he may live
What Is meant by a Lightning before Death.
with thee hereafter. -- And all this she uttered at the Time when she was
actualy dying -- Which we found to be a Lightning before Death; it is observed of
sick Persons, that a little before they die their Pains leave them, and their
Understanding and Memory retuns to them; as a Candle just before it goes out,
gives a great Blaze. This is what is called a Lightning before Death, Iris had
a kind of Draught presented to her of those He^venly j^ she was going to
possess.
And this was Iris Case; for though she was now within a few Minutes of breathing
her last; yet it is clear by the Prayer she then made, that she was very
sensible of what she said, even so sensible, that she was now in joyful
Raptures, and expressed a kind of impatience till she was dissolved. And why,
because she spiritually saw what she could not utter; doubtless she had a kind
of Draught presented to her by her Guardian Angel, of those Heavenly Joys she
was almost ready to enter in possession of, and therefore she now prayed more
earnestly than ever, and even longs 'till she is conveyed by Angels into
Abraham's Bosom, which was now in a little time; for she had no sooner ended
her Prayer, but DEATH seizes upon her: Thus --

DEATH that on Humane Flesh does use to feed,
With Time and Sickness, two bold Thieves, agreed
To rob a House, and e're the Break of Day,
To steal the Treasure of POOR JOHN, away;
Siekness took foot, but time went on apace.
DEATH came behind; all come unto the Place.
TIME stays without, Sickness would fain begin;
DEATH watched a time, and after was let in,
For Sickness faint, when he should stop her Breath,
DEATH stole upon her, Sickness suffered Death:
DEATH had no sooner fixed his Dart into her,
But Hue and Cries pursue the Murderer;
The Noise was heard, and TIME ran fast away,
Sickness no longer had the Heart to stay. Death could not surprise Iris.

DEATH, with his Prey strait hid him underground,
Not since by any living Creature found.
And now the PALE Murderer has done his worst, but it is my Comfort to think, he
could not surprise Iris, as Theevishly as he stole upon her, for she She had
assurance of Heaven. Iris loved me and not my Fortunes, and God blessed our
marriage. We took each other for Richer for Poorer.
was Ripe for Heaven, and had long expected him, which made her often say, Were
my Work now to do, I were undone forever -- Madam you may think me tedious on
this Head; but I cannot think so my self, for Iris loved me, and thought her
Heart not enough to give me, and as she loved me and not my Fortunes, so God
blessed our Marriage accordingly; for there was an even Thread of Endearment run
through all we said or did, for the Fifteen Years we livd together, there never
past one angry Word -- No disappointments (tho we met with many) did ever
lessen this growing Affection. Iris could not bear to see me dejected, and
heard of my Losses with only saying, God will provide. She never railed at
Providence, as they do who abuse their Friends for not being successful. We
took each other -- For Richer for Poorer; and therefore all our distresses of
Body and Mind were so equally divided, that all hers were mine and all mine
were hers; and tho Death has now stole her from me, yet such a kind and
generous Wife can die but half, Whilst I Am preserved -- And as for my present
Spouse, tho she has been so Hungry as to fall in Love with her Jointure, Ir^s
can die but half whilst I am preservd.
yet I still think, could she love as I do, she would have no other Wish but me; I
inser this from my former Experience, for when Iris and I were thoroughly
Indear'd by a mutual confidence, compliance, and long Experience of each others
Love, No Jointure could part us; and had we lost all the World (but one
another) Had we lost all but one another we had still bin happy
we had still been happy. I Am sure had she enjoyed 'em, (or my occasions
required 'em) she would have dealt out Kingdoms to me without tiring -- Her
Sympathy with me in all the Distresses of my Life, makes her Virtues shine with
the greater Luster, as Stars in the darkest Night -- Like the Gloe-Worm (the
Emblem of true Friendship) she still shined to me in the Dark; and though this
concern for me was no more than her Duty, yet to requite her Love I made her my
sole Executrix, that I might give at the rate I loved her, and was scarce
contented with giving all -- I made Iris my sole Executrix, and shall be as
kind to Valeria when she grows oblieging. Valeria falls in love with her
Jointure. Iris leads me from the Description of my own Death. I Am loath to give
her the last Beck'n of Farewell.
And I Will be as kind to Valeria (when like Iris) she thinks my Ease and Credit
preferable to House and Land. But whether does Iris lead me from the
description of my own Death? But, Madam, you can excuse it, for it is to show
how loath I am to give her the last beck'n of Farewell. The best of Wives, and
my truest Friend is but part of her Character, and I cannot part with such a
Treasure in post-haste -- Part! bless me! how it sounds? The very Word is as
Dagger thrust into my Heart; and now it comes to the push, I cannot bear the
Thoughts on it.

That very Voice that did her Sickness tell,
Struck like a Midnight Chime or Knell:
At every Sound,
I took into my Sense a Wound.
It Is true, we first came together to help and prepare one another for Death,
but now Death has snatched her from me; I am fainting away, methinks I feel
already the Terments to which a Heart is exposed that loses what it loves. Thus
the loving Hota followed her Husband to the Grave, laid him in a s^ately Tomb,
and then for Nine Days together, she would neither Eat nor Drink, whereof she
dyed, and was buried (as she had ordered in her last Will) by the side of her
beloved Husband.

He first deceased; she for a few Days tried
To live without him; lik d it not, and died.
1.
Thus let me weep, weep out mine Eyes
Upon the Tomb where Iris lies
Embalmed and enshrined.
Let not my Senses lead me home,
And leave dear Iris in the Tomb.
Why should I stay behind? We came together to prepare one another for Death.
The sight of her, Dead Body makes me faint away. Iris as happy as Heaven can
make her.

2.
What Hope have I of Life or Bliss,
Under so dire a Fate as this?
What Is Man without a Heart?
There was but one 'twixt she and
And that away from me did flee, (me,
When hence she did depart.
3.
And though the life of Sense I kept,
'Twere better in the Urn I slept;
For sleeping there, I rest.
And then my Heart and I should be
Cemented in tranquillity;
And both for ever blessed.
But tho I Have Reason thus to grieve for my Dear Iris (except Valeria would make
me happy by despising the World). Yet I would not weep as one without hope. For
the time is short, and therefore it remains that they that have Wives be as
though they had none. And they that Weep as though they wept not -- For the
Fashion of this World passes away -- David fasted and Prayed for his Sick Son,
that his Life might be prolonged. But when he was dead, this Consideration
comforted him. I shall go to him, but he shall not return to me, 2 Samuel 12 13.
And this likewise should comfort me under the loss of Iris, to think she is
gone to Heaven and that if I die in Christ, I shall go to her, but this she
could not do but by dying, which makes me the easier forgive Death for the
Treasure he has stole from me, and my next comfort to her being in Heaven, is
to think in what a triumphant Iris Triumphant Death is like the putting out of
a prefum'd Candle. --
manner she went thither --. In a painful Sickness of near Forty Weeks, she
never once repined at it, but would still say God had dealt tenderly with her,
and that she was wholly resigned to his Will. Then certainly the Death of such
a Good Wife is like the putting out of a Wax-perfum'd Candle, she in some
measure) recompenses the loss of Life with the sweet Odor she leaves behind
her.

-- All must to their cold Graves;
But the Religious Actions of the Just
Smell sweet, in Death, and Blossom in the Dust.
In a Word, Iris both in her Life and Death was like a Rose in June, which (tho
dead and dry) preserves a pleasing Sweetness, and for that Reason Her Life was
a continued Act of Piety.
was strewed by the Ancients upon their Kindred's Graves -- 'Twas but
reasonable to think that a Life which was one continued Act of Piety should
have a joyful and happy ending. --

And as Iris dyed in this Triumphant manner, and with uttering such Expressions
as I have here mentioned, So I desire I may expire with these Words:

ETernal and everliving God, I Am now drawing near the Gates of Death, and which
is infinitely more terrible, the Bar of thy Judgment; oh Lord when I consider
this, my My last Prayer.
Flesh trembles for fear of thee and my Heart is wounded within me. But one
deep calls upon another, the depth of my misery upon the depth of thy mercy,
Lord save now, or I perish eternally. -- Lord one day is with thee as a
Thousand Years, oh let thy mighty Spirit work in me, now in this my last Hour,
whatsoever thou see wanting to fit me for thy Mercy and Acceptance; and then
though I walk through the valley of the shadow of Death, I will fear no Evil. --
There is but one step between me and Eternity; then blessed Jesus have Mercy on
me, Pardon the Sins of my whole Life, O let not my Sun go down upon thy Wrath,
but seal my Pardon before I go hence and be seen no more. -- Dear Lord I
neither desire, nor expect of thee Life or Death, may it be done unto me
according to thy Will: But since Death is my passage into thy Presence, suffer
not the Thoughts of it to be terrible unto me. -- I cannot without some
Reluctance think of leaving my Friends and Relations, and forever shutting my
Eyes upon that World where I now live (To go into a World where I never was)
but though the Light is pleasant, and a joyful thing it is to behold the Sun, yet
let it abundantly content me, oh Lord, that whether waking or Sleeping, dead or
alive I shall be always thine, though thou should break all my Bones and from
Day even till Night with pining Sickness and Aches make an end of me, yet let
me be dumb and not open my Mouth, because it is thy doing; suffer me not to
whisper to my self what is the reason the Lord will deal thus with me; help me
rather to consider what my Sins have deserved, and what a poor Derivative thing
I am. -- What a mere dependant upon thee -- Lord I came into the World on thy
Errand, and I live only upon thy allowance. Then let the consideration of thy
Majesty and Glory swallow up all those petty Interests of my own which I create
to my self, and help me oh Lord in every Passage of my Life and Death to say
thy will be done. -- If it be thy will I shall dye now, receive my Spirit; and
although I come In the Evening, at the very last of all, grant unto me that I may
receive Eternal-Rest. Blessed Lord as soon as ever the Chain of my mortality is
broke, let me take Wing and fly to thee. -- Grant that sincerely reahing my
Hands to thee from that Moment which is the upper Step of the Ladder of my
Life, next to Heaven, thou may reach forth thy hand and receive me. -- And
when my Breath is gone, grant oh Lord, that I may see and know her again, who
dyed praying for my Everlasting-Happiness, Into thy hand, Lord, I resign my
Body and Soul. -- Blessed Savior receive my Spirit -- even so come, Lord
Jesus, come quickly. Amen. I shall go to Iris, but she shall not return to me


I would have these words be my last breath 'till my Lips fail, and my Tongue
cleaves to the roof of my Mouth for as the Sun shines brightest at his
setting, so should Man at his departing. -- It is the evening crowns the day.

And now the Fatal Hour is come in which I must
Resign to Dust,
This borrowed Flesh, whose Burden tires,
My Soul as it aspires;
Oh what a frail and undone Thing
Is Man, when his best Part is taking Wing?
But quake not, Oh my Soul! for Rest; thou wilt find
This Pisgah Mount! thy Canaan lies behind:
Look back and see the Worlds thin gaudy-Toys!
Look on, and see the Crown of all thy Joys!
For such a Place is worthy to be sought,
Or were there none, yet Heaven's a pleasant Thought.
Nor for my bright Conductors will I stay,
But lead Heavens flaming Ministers the way,
In their known Passage to Eternal Day.
Where the blessed CLIMES of Light will not seem fair,
Unless I meet my dear Redeemer there;
Unless I see my shining Saviors Face,
And grasp all Heaven in his sweet Embrace.
When the trembling Soul has Heaven thus in sight
Oh with what Joy and ravishing Delight! --
She spreads her Wings, and bids this World good Night.
Thus have I represented in what manner my Soul will leave that Body where it
now dwells. -- And have also considered in the Death of Iris, with what
tranquillity, and peace of conscience a Soul sequested from the World, takes
her farewell of Earth.

Whilst thus I musing lay, to my Bed side
(Attired in all his Mourning Pride)
The King of Terrors came.
Awful his Looks, But not deformed and grim;
(He Is no such Goblin as we fancy him)
Scarce we our selves so civilized and tame!
Unknown the Doom assigned me in this change,
'Tho justly I might fear Heavens worse Revenge;
Yet with my present Griefs redrest,
With curious Thoughts of unknown Worlds possessed,
Enflamed with Thirst of Liberty,
Long lovd, but never enjoyed by me,
I su'd for leave the fatal Gulf to pass.
My vital Sand is almost run, The Peace of Conscience with which a Soul
(sequestered from the-World) ta kes her Farewell of Earth. A meditation upon the
fight of a Deadman.

And Death (said I) will strike anon.
Then to dull Life I bid a long Farewell;
And stretched for flight -- But as the last grains fell
Death failed my flattered hopes, and turned the Glass.
But though my Soul and Body en't yet parted, yet I have conversed too long with
the World already, so that now I Will suppose my self a dead Man: At the Sight
whereof (were I living) I would thus meditate:

Teach me (O Lord) so to number my Days, that, I may apply my Heart unto
Wisdom, for I see by this dead Friend here lying before me, we soon pass away
and are gone -- All Flesh I see (in this Instance) is Grass, and the Beauty of
it as the flower of the Field -- Thou (oh God) have determined the number of my
Days which I cannot pass. -- And I see here in my dead Friend, what will follow
the Separation of my Soul and Body. -- As long as this Tabernacle lodged the
Soul of my Friend, it was sensible, active, could hear, ^ee, speak or move; but
now that Guest is driven forth, there is nothing in it but breeds my abhorence,
so that I now see all Confidence in Man is vain, and that I shall soon become
I Have said nothing of the manner of my Dying, but what I Have observed in the
Death of others.
as Pale and Wan, at this Dead-Corpse, which I here behold with Terror and
Amazement -- And Lord help me to consider, that as this Body is dead without
the Soul, so both Soul and Body without Grace --

So much for the supposed manner of my Dying, and for those useful Thoughts,
that a Sight of my Dead-Corpse might afford; in which I Have advanced nothing but
what I Have observed in the Death of others, (especially of my dear Iris)

My Breath being gone, I Will next suppose my self. Laid out for ^ead -- I Am now
Stripped and Dressed in a Shroud.
and now the Cry of the House is -- Bury the Dead out of my Sight --

Being now Stripped and Dressed in a Shroud, great Care is taken by my Executor,
(for I know he will be punctual to observe my Will) that my Body be kept veiled
and secret, and not exposed to curious Eyes; neither should Cyrus would have no
Man stare in his Face after his Death.
the Dishonours wrought upon the Face by the Changes of Death, be star'd upon
by imperti^ent Persons -- When Cyrus was Dying, he called his Sons and Friends
to take their leave of him, to touch his Hand, to see him the last time, and
gave in Charge, that when he had put his Veil over his Face, No Man spou'd
uncover it -- And Epiphanius's Body was res^d from inquisitive Eyes by a
Miracle -- But nothing A sight of my Dead-Body should affect my Relations.
of this will disturb the Dead, but a sight of my Dead-Body should affect the
Living -- Then now all my Friends, (if you ben't d^wn'd in Tears) come and
observe what a Change is here -- What a Change indeed! For my trembling Soul
being fled, Lo how the Successors Valeria makes a shift to cry for my Death.
of Sin do trample upon these Mud-walls, and demolish my House of Clay! -- This
dismal sight, one would think, should squeeze out a few Tears, if not from my
Heir, (who has Signed, Sealed, and delivered, and is hasty to Bury me) yet
surely it will from the Dear Valeria, for tho some Wives Bury their Husbands
only with a sow'r Visage, Masked over with Dissimulation, contracting (like the
Ephesian Matron) second Marriages, before they have worn out their Mourning
Garments. But Valeria may pass for a better Wife: For --

When her dear Spouse's last Departure's nigh,
See where this Fubbs has made a shift to cry;
But I Am Box'd up (the Parli'ment be thanked,
Whose Act has made my Rhyme) in Woollen Blanket.
Being laid in my Coffin, come hither Valeria, and view me a little. The
Chinesses always before they Bury their Dead, (if he was a Married Man) bring
him to his Wife, that so she might first Kiss him, and bid him Farewell; when
you have done this, prithee Valeria gaze upon me, see in A good Iointure
signifies nothing to a Dead Wife.
my Dead Phiz, what Comfort you will have of your Iointure, (which you once
kept to my Ruin) when you come to this? For prid^ee try the Experiment -- If
you should put a B^g of Guineas into my Hand, I should let it fall -- or could
you give me Samp^, 'twoud be too heavy to carry to the other World, for don't
you see that my Eyes are closed, and I observe nothing? -- Then Valeria, view
me well, u^ver my Face again; (for A Dead Husband is worth observing.
a dead Husband is worth observing) and you will find the Luminaries of my Body,
which used to shine with a living Brightness, like the Gelly of a sl^g Meteor,
lie now ^tombed in Darkness; and that ruddy Hue which gave the Name of Flesh to
this whited Earth, has either changed its Color or its Place -- In a Word --
my Head, Arms, Body, Legs, etc. have now left their Motion, and lie as still as
a Wife could wish, who loves nothing of her Husband, but the Iointure he has
left her. No wonder then, she refused to come when I sent for her, but has
reserved all her Love for my dead Body; which perhaps she will wash with a Tear
or two, as it looks kind, and will cost her nothing; neither need she make any
use of an Onion, for it is observed of Widows, they have Tears at command --.

-- -- See where
The Treasure of my Bosom does appear,
Now coming to my Corpse with her drow'd Eyes,
For Iointure brings her where her Husband dies,
To whose pale Relick she devoutly Pays
Obedience, real as her Love, and Brays
With many Tears, till quite dissolved in them,
She SEEMS contrived into a Walking-Sream,
As Destiny had meant her to descend
From Rivers only, but to serve this end.
Next, let my Sisters drop their pious-Rain,
Larkin and Kenswell too, will Weep in vain;
For none can soften my stiff Clay ag^in,
Whilst my Eye thus amazedly wonders over my Dead Body, methinks I In the
supposed View of my dead Body, I behold other Men's Fate as well as my own.
view in it other Men's Fate as well as my own -- Then blessed Lord, let me Die
daily, that when Death shall be swallowed up in Victory, and the numberless
Atoms of my Dust shall by thy Almighty Power be new molded into a Body, my
Soul may make a re-entry, and be both glorified together.

Death we do now behold thee gay and glad
As at Doomsday,
When Souls shall wear their new Array,
And all thy Bones with Beauty shall be clad.
Therefore we can go Die as Sleep, and trust
Half that we have,
Unto an an honest faithful Grave;
Making our Pillows either Down or Dust -- Herbert. My Corruption belongs to
the maintaining of of the Order of the Universe.

I lie merrily down in my Bed, though I expect to rise again to resume the
Burden of all my Frears, Hopes and Griefs, (the constant Attendants of my
Life) and yet look Sadly and mournfully upon the Grave, (though my Corruption
belongs to the maintaining of the Order of the Universe) but why should I be
afraid of Corruption, seeing at my next Rising, much It Is a great wonder how a
little Dustresolv'd into Elements, should become a living Body, but I no ways
doubt of the Resurrection. My Soul and Body now seem at once laid out.
^ayer clad than before, I shall awake to Immortality and endless Joy? With the
Eye of Reason I can look through the Glory of the World, and behold Vanity and
Oblivion; with the Eye of faith I can look through Oblivion and Corruption it
self, and behold Glory and Eternity. It Is indeed a Wonder how a little Dust
resolved into Elements, should become a living Body again. But I no ways doubt
of the Resurrection, for I Am sure that my Redeemer lives, and though after my
skin Worms destroy this Body, yet in my F^esh shall I see God -- Then let the
Body rise in what manner it will, I Am ravished to think what a bright and serene
Morning the Resurrection will prove, after the long Night of Death, and the
languishing Slumbers of the Grave --.

My Soul being fled (I know not how nor where) and my Body left as a ghastly
Spectacle to my Wife and Friends -- Methinks now my Soul and Body too seem at
once laid out --. Some think they shall Die presently if they make their Will.


So that having proceeded so far toward my Funeral as -- To purchase a Grave
-- To suppose the manner of my Dying -- And to describe what a frightful
Spectacle Death will make me -- 'twill be proper next to give some Account of
my UUill -- For I never was of their Opinion, who think they must Die presently
if their UUill be made, and so neglect it till it Why I made my Will in a time
of Health.
be too late.

A Sickbed is no proper place to disturb our Brains about Worldly Matters, I
therefore made my Will when I was best able -- -- A Scotch Lord having sent
for a Clerk to make his Will, began to him thus, (after Of a Will made by a
Scotch Lord We should avoid all unjust Partialities in the making our Wills.
the common Preface) Imprimis, I bequeath my Soul to God -- To which his Clerk
made Answer very seriously -- But what if he wonnot take it, mon? -- -- With
what temper of Spirit this was spoken I know not, but sure I am, it is a point
that deserves a serious Thoughtfulness and Gravity of Mind -- And particularly
we should avoid all unjust Partialities, which are oftentimes very ill Grounded.

But to proceed in the Account of my Will -- My Nurse and Uisitan^s having
declared me Dead, methinks I see my Executor, (whose Character My Executor
sending in all haste to the Persons concerned in my Will.
you shall have anon) sending in all haste to the Persons concerned in (...)
W^ll; for the Will of the Dead should be punctually observed, for to these we
owe a nobler Justice than to other Men, as they are unable to right themselves
It is the bravest thing in the World, to do an Act of Kindness to him whom we
shall never see again, but yet has deserved it of us, and to whom we would do
it if he were present; and unless we do so, our Charity To fulfill the Request
of the Dead, is the noblest Friendship we canshew
is Mercenary, and our Friendships are direct Merchandise; but what we do to
the Dead, (or to the Living for their sakes) is Gratitude and Virtue for
Virtue's sake, and the Noblest Friendship we can show: Such a Generous Person I
have made my Executor, so that all concerned, will have speedy notice of my
Death --

And now methinks I see all my Friends assembled about me, some to weep, News
being sent of my Death, my Relations come to my Cell in Hopes of a good Legacy.
but most rejoicing in Hopes of a good Legacy; but because they may see the
Vanity in waiting for Dead-mens-Shoes, I Will now suppose my Executor Reading to
them the following Lines, which are,

-- A Breviate of my last Will --

IN the Name of God, Amen -- I John Dunton, Citizen and Stationer of London,
and late of St. Giles Cripplegate Parish, in the County of Middlesex, being
through Mercy, in Health of Body and Mind, do make this my last Will and
Testament --. A Breviate of my last will.


And first out of Choice, (and not as it is matter of Form) I commit my Soul
into the Hands of God, trusting through the Merits of Jesus Christ to be
accepted with him -- I commit my Soul into the Hands of God.


My Body I Bequeath to the Dust, in hopes of a Glorious Resurrection; but with
this Charge to my Executor, that he sees it Buried in the same Grave with my
first Wife, for there (as she expressed it) we shall be still Happy together, if
a senseless Happiness can be (...) --

As to the World, though I never loved it, yet I have taken that Care in the I
Bequeath my Body to the Dust.
disposing of what I have, as to give it to one that will keep open House for
God and his poor Servants; I mean to one that has Sense enough to enjoy I have
made a person heir to my Estate that has sense enough to enjoy it, and Piety
enough to be Charitable,
it, and Piety enough to be Charitable, and for that Reason I thought my self
obliged in Conscience to give it all from the presumprive Heir and his scraping
Friend, finding by sad Experience the more he has, the more he cove^s; so that
if his Wealth increases at the rate it has done hitherto, he will starve himself
and his whole Family; and therefore to add my Estate to his, would be (in some
sort) to hasten his Death; but that they might not think I forget 'em, I
bequeath to 'em that Text, -- And the Covetous which the Lord abhors -- to
reflect on as long as they live --. I Am My presumtive heir would starve himself
should his Wealth increase.
very Cordial in this Advice, for Men in their last Wills appear open and plain
Hearted, they dare not dye revenging of Injuries, no! when they think they
shall dye, their Eyes are open, and their Judgments unbiast. In some sense
Peath's the truest Friend, for Death will not flatter, but deals plainly with
us, and as Men dare not dye with a Lie in their Mouths (nor in Malice with any)
so they should be careful that they do not leave their Death's the truest
friend.
Friends quarrelling for their Estates, but take such care in their Wills that
their Lands and Possessions may know their Owners after their Deaths; We should
take care not to leave our Friends quarreling for our Estates when we are Dead.
and that mine may do so, of what I shall leave behind me, I make this
following Disposal, all my just Debts being first paid, (and-by Debts, I mean
whatever shall be proved to be so after my Decease, or whatever my Executor,
hereafter named, can by diligent searching find out that I owe) I bequeath the
following Legacies to Graffham, From, Chesham, Aston, Missenden, Iver,
New-street --. And here I presume so far as to give your Ladyship Mourning, and
a Ring with this Inscription, In remembrance of Daphne and Philaret. What I
mean by my debts
To my most esteemed and eternal Friend, Mr. George Larkin, Sen. who I am sure
will be a True Mourner at my Funeral, I give not only Mourning Legacies
bequeathed to Graffham, From, etc.
(which will soon wear out) but also a Ring with this Motto, Thy love to me was
wonderful, passing the Love of Women; I also give him, as a farther Testimony
of our Inviolable Friendship, what is not here expressed --. To that Generous
and Uirtous Person whose tender care of me in my To the honorable Lady.
Sickness has (through the Divine Blessing) more than once saved my Life, I
give, etc. as a grateful Token of that seasonable Care, wherewith I was
assisted in my greatest Extremity --. I have also remembered my obliging To
George Larkin, Sen.
and diligent Friends Mr. George Kenswel and his Wife, for that great Fidelity
and Readiness to serve me, which they have expressed upon all To the Person that
took care of me in my Sickness.
occasions --. Neither have I forgot my Cousin Elizabeth Johnson for that
matchless Tenderness she showed to my first Wife, during her Sickness of near
40 Weeks continuance --. To my only Brother Mr. Lake Dunton, and to my Sisters
Sarah, Mary, and Elizabeth, I have been more To George Kenswel and his Wife.
kind than perhaps they expect --. I next bequeath to the generous Lutwich,
(and to my two Sisters D -- ld and I -- th) such a Legacy as shows I have been
obliged --. To the Reverend S -- T -- I give Twenty Pounds to To Elizab.
Johnson.
Preach my funeral Sermon that Day, I am Buried, upon this Text, They shall lie
down alike in the Dust, and the Worms shall cover them --. To my To my only
Brother and my; Sisters.
faithful Friend Mr. Richard Wild, the sole manager of all the Auctions I made
in Dublin, I bequeath, etc. as an acknowledgment of the extraordinary Services
he did me in that Kingdom. To my ancient Landlord Mr. Wilkins of Diversother
Legacies.
Boston in New England, I also be queath, etc. as a requital for his great
Civilities to me and my Servant Palmer. I also give to my tried Friends the
Booksellers, Printers and Stationers of London, 105. each, to buy 'em a Ring
with this Inscription, Speak evil of no Man. And to my Summer Friends I give
all my Gratitude, Mentioned in my Printed Case p. 1.
for I find they need it, and that they may hereafter do as they would be done by,
I bequeath to 'em all that Readiness with which I served 'em, both with my
Person and Cash, when no body else would; but least their change of Fortune
(for they keep their Coach) should make 'em My Legacy to my Summer Friends.
forget this, it is my desire that the Letters they formerly sent me be returned
to 'em, that they may see how Black Ingratitude is, for they now deny to have
received those Favors which (in these Letters) they declare they could never
requite. When I meet 'em they scarce know me. The Remembrance of old Favors
should live even in the blows of Injury.
One of these is so Haughty that if I meet him by accident, (for Summer Friends
never visit but when the Sun shines) he scarce knows me, or if he stoops so low
as to give me a Nod, he does it in such a manner as shows he forgets how deeply
I engaged for him at a time when SOME BODY would not, and his other Friends
made too small a Figure to serve him. -- It Is true, to a generous mind the
Remembrance of old Favors would live even in the blows of Injury, but do an
ungrateful Person 99 Kindnesses, and refuse him the Hundredth (for so I did,
being provoked to it) and he thinks you cancel all your former Obligations;
such Monsters, when they are obliged beyond a possibility of Requital, their
way is to unmake, (or to lessen) those Favors they cannot requite, and to abuse
their very Benefactors -- such Friends as these My Summer Friends compared to a
fawning Spaniel.
act like a fawning Spanniel, who when he gets out of the River shakes off that
very Water (alias Magots) which supported him --. And I don't doubt but others
of this mean Spirit have been ready to blame me for publishing my private Case;
but their dislike of my Conduct makes me the more approve I could never creep
for Interest.
on it. I could never creep for Interest, and Men of greater Sense and Honesty
both advised to it, and judged it the best thing I could do for my quiet; and I
have found it so, and therefore I shall never repent of any thing I did in that
Publication, but for ever own my Obligations to those that promoted Page 2. We
should requite the least courtesy we receive.
it; then if the Reflecter on my Case says true, that I Am a Man of so grateful
a Temper that I study to requite the least Courtesy from mere Strangers, etc.
surely I cannot leave a better Legacy to my Summer Friends then to bequeath my
Gratitude amongst 'em. To that worthy and Ingenious Gentleman Mr. G -- R --, I
give, etc. or in case of his Death, I give this sum to his Wife; or if she
dies, to his Son; or in case of his Death, to his nearest of Kin, for the
generous Favors Mr. R -- has done me shall never be forgot whilst I have a
Penny in the World, or he has a Relation alive. To the Members of the Athenian
Society (as 'twas my darling Project) I bequeath Mourning --. To the
Nightingale I give my Constancy, Platonic Letters, and contempt of Grandeur
--. I next give to the Poor where I was born the sum of --. And to the Parish
where I dye as much --. I My Legacy to the reverend Divine that married me.
also give to that Reverend Divine that Married me 10^. to Preach (and
afterward Print) a Sermon against Covetousness --. To the sweet Town of St.
Albans I bequeath all my Printed Cases that shall be left unsold at the time of
my Death; I bequeath 'em to this Town, as herein is a true State of my Case,
with respect to Madam Jane Nicholas and her only Child Sarah To the sweet Town
of St. Albans.
Dunton, with an Answer to all the Lies that either Revenge, Malice or
Coverousness can spit at me (in any of the three Kingdoms) neither is there one
Line in this Printed Case but what I Would assert to be true were I More Legacies.
now dying; and therefore I cannot understand Valeria's Policy in not sparing
500 l. out of 6000 l. seeing I do resolve, if she will be happy, it shall only
be with her Husband, for I married her for Richer for Poorer, and as we
embarked in the same COURT-SHIP, so I do assure her we'll Sink or Swim
together. But Solomon tell us there is a time to embrace, and a time to refrain
from embracing, and therefore though the Law is Eloquent, and There Is a time to
embrace, and a time to refrain fromembracing.
will persuade her to Live with me, yet till I see a fair opportunity, I shall not
turn my Addresses into a Legal-Courtship, for I had rather that kind methods
should melt her into Love and Tenderness. However my Wife is my proper Goods,
and I Will Pound that Man (whoever he is) that offers to steal her from me, or
that endeavors by any Device (or by flattering her Mother) My Wife is my
proper Goods.
to defraud me of that which she solemnly promised me before marriage, for as
it is a Promise in Writing, it is as much a Debt in the Court of Conscience (and
in the Court of Chancery too) as if I had a Bond or Mortgage A promise in
writing is a debt in the Court of Conscience, and in the Court of Chancery too.
to secure it to me. And as I am able to prove such a Promise in Writing, so I
can also prove (by a letter under her Artornies Hands) that she was fully
satisfied with my Estate. But why should we give Money to promote the La^? It
would be more like Christians to give it to promote the Gospel. Besides if I
had Ualeria's Company (and a small matter to make me easy) I have all I desire,
and when she sends me the same Message, yil run to meet her with open Arms; she
shall then even Rule me (and all I have) by her voluntary and ready obedience.
But the Bags The Attorneys Letter gave satisfaction about my Estate.
lie so high in her way at present, that she cannot get over 'em; but when she
falls to dispersing this gilded Rubbish, all misunderstanding will be then
removed; and the same Hour I hear the News, the Bells of St. Albans shall Ring
as loud for our Reconciliation, as ever they did for our first Marriage;
neither shall the Poor of that Town be forgot, that so Heaven may Valeria's
Company is all I desire.
continue us a happy Couple. But this is News that I don't expect, and
therefore I bequeath all my Printed Cases (except the Case should be alte^'d)
to my old Friends of St. Albans, that by comparing the Truth with those many
The Bags lie so high in her way that she cannot get over 'em.
Lies they have heard, they may defend the Cause of an inju^'d Stranger, who
did not come till he was sent for, and therefore it is fit he should have civil
Treatment -- --

And in the last Place, I give to the Dear Valeria, (my present Wife) A Ring
with this Inscription -- Set your Affections on things above; The Bells of St.
Albans shall ring as loud for our Reconciliation, as ever they did for our
first Marriage.
for seeing she talks so much of going to her God, (instead of giving her Money
to Adore and Worship) I freely bequeath her to God who gave her. It Is true she
has a Rich Mother, and I might justly bequeath her to her, (for the Reasons
mentioned in my Printed Case) and I have a President for the leaving her Mother
such a Legacy as this, for we read Endamidas dying Poor, left his Aged Mother
to Aretaeus, and his young Daughter to Charixenus, two Rich Friends of his; the
one to be maintained 'till she dyed, and the other 'till she Married; and the
Heirs as soon as they heard of this Will, came forth, and accepted those things
that were given in Charge. But suppose I had no such President as this to
bestow her Daughter upon her, yet one would think I could not leave her a
better Legacy than her own Child; but seeing she will not part with her Bags now,
she will less do it when I am Dead, and therefore (out of pure Love) I choose
rather to bequeath her to God who gave her; and though I en't like to be Buried
with ^er Legacies.
her -- her precious Dust being to Feast the St. Al^ns worms, (in the Abbey
Church where her Father hes) and not the Phanatick-worms, of the
New-Burying-place, yet I hope she will there rest in Peace, and hearafter meet me
in Heaven -- But if she grows so obliging, as to deliver me from my Present
Grievance, that I may (HONESTLY) have Issue by her, to it I would leave 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. and I pray God see it executed according to my Will -- And for
her self, were she thus kind, I would turn her Iointure into a Deed of Gift,
(which would double the value of it) and make it the Study of my whole Life to
please her.

Having in these Legacies endeavored to satisfy my self, my Friends, and my
dear Spouse. It is farther my Will, That for the Payment of these Debts and
Legacies, (If my present Wife happen to survive me) that The growth of my Woods
will Pay all I owe in 5 Years time.
my Executor Sell my Woods, and the Reversion of my Estate, as soon as ever I
am Buried; but in case I survive her, I Will pay 'em my self in a Weeks time. But
if neither of our Deaths happen, let no Man question his Money; for the Growth
of my Woods in about five Years Time will pay all I owe, (what I owe not being
the fifteenth Part of what my Estate is worth) -- No Debts in my Shop-Books to
be received, etc.


It Is farther my Will, that no Debts in any of my Shop-books be received from
any Person that is not fully satisfied he owes me what he is charged with; I
insert this, that no neglects of crossing Accounts (though I hope there is none)
may be an Injury to any Man --

It Is also my Will, that all the Promises I ever made (provided they are My
Promises to be all performed
fully proved) be as punctually performed by my Executor, as if the Persons to
whom they were made, had 'em under my Hand and Seal -- So much for my Debts and
Legacies -- My Body not to be Buried till the 7th day after my Decease.


As to my Funeral and Grave, etc. It Is my Will that the 7th Day after my
Decease, (and not before, my own Mother coming to Life that Day she was to be
Buried) my Executor see me nailed down in an Elm-Coffin, such a one as was made
for my first Wife -- My Reverend Father (Mr. John Dunton) in his last Will,
speaking concerning his Funeral, My Father's Funeral.
says, It Is his Desire that his Funeral might not be performed 'till seven Days
after his Decease; which Request was occasioned, (as I hinted before) by his
first Wives lying seemingly Dead for 3 Days, and afterward coming My Mothers
seeming Death.
to Life again, to the Admiration of all that saw her -- This was also a Custom
among the Romans, to keep the Body 7 Days unburyed, Washing the Corpse every
Day with hot Vinegar, and sometimes with Oil, that if the Body were only in a
Slumber, and not quite ^ead, it might by these hot Causes be revived --

After being kept Seven-Days unburyed, it is my desire that my Body be conveyed
in a decent Manner to -- where I desire Mr. -- should Preach my Funeral Sermon
for the Benefit of my surviving Friends -- The Custom of Preaching Funeral
Sermons very Ancient.


This Custom of Preaching Funeral-Sermons is very old, and of great use, for
Dr. Tailor tells us, that anciently the Friends of the Dead used to make
Funeral-Orations, and the Custom descended, but in the Channel of Time it
mingled it self in the Veins of the Earth through which it passed, And now a
Days Men that Die are commended at a Price, and the Measure of their Legacy is
the degree of their Virtue -- But these things I Would have nothing said of me at
my Funeral, but my Abhorrence of Covetousness and Backbiting.
ought not to be, and therefore it is my Desire, that nothing be said of me, (so
many are my Sins and Infirmities) save my Abhorrence of Covetousness -- and of
Backbiting; as for Covetousness, I ever thought it a Beggarly-Vice, and I find
it is its own Tormentor, For the Miser having all things, yet has nothing --

And I Am as great an Enemy to Backbiting; not one Report in 40 is true, and
therefore in Cases of Slander, I believe no Man's Eves nor Ears but my own: If
I find any Man Censorious, I have done with him, for it is my way, to judge of
all Men's Religion by their Charity -- I observe that Prejudice and
Misinformation has Murdered the Reputation of many Innocent Persons, and for
that Reason, I never judge any Man unheard; I never Judge any man unheard.
and those that do, I think 'em worse than the Man they would Blacken; as will
appear by some late Instances, which shall be mentioned in my Funeral Sermon,
or else be inserted in my History of those modern-Divines, that have been
branded with Crimes of which they have been wholly I Am writing a History of
those Modern Divines that have been branded with Crimes of which they have been
wholly Innocent.
Innocent; and as I Will Publish nothing (in this History) but what I Will prove,
So Grant, Oh Lord! that no Man may turn that to an occasion of uncharitableness
toward me, which I designed for his good, or was necessary for my own. Neither
let any Man Censure me for anything but what be sees in me; and Lord thou
know I have not the least Cause to be proud of that- I speak not this as I
value the Praises of any Man -- No! I would willingly come again from the other
World to give any one the Lie, that reported me otherwise than I was, though he
did it to honor me -- And as I abominate Flattery, so I as little fear the
worst Enemies I have; for though they may strike me in the Dark (and then like a
Serpent creep into their hole again, for want of Courage to abet their Actions)
yet I challenge them all to prove black is my Eye, with respect to I challenge
my worst Enemies to prove me guilty of any immoral Practice.
UUomen, A varice, Drunkenness Injustice, or any other immoral Practices; not
but that single Life I Am forced to will make People the more Censorious, and
some (that have been in the Oven) will be raising Lies of me perhaps, as well
as of better Men; but by the Grace of God, I shall endeavor to live so, as I
may have a Conscience void of Offense, both toward God and toward Man: It Is a
comfort that Accusations make no Man a Criminal; or if they Accusations make no
man a Criminal.
did, an innocent Life would make me easy under all Aspersions, for they are
generally raised by the leuder sort. A Backbiting Tongue is a sure sign of a
Whore-master. I could tell you of one that Stole his Wife. (the worst sort of
Theft) and of others that have had Bastards, that have been the first in
slandering A Backbiting Tongue is a sign of a whore-master.
their Neighbor; and I observe, that most Slanderes owe their rise to the fair
Se^, but this is none of their Fault, but the Fault of the Men, who make it
their Sport to abuse that Virtue they cannot Debauch. Lampoons and Libels, so
much in Fashion in this witty Age, are a ready way to murder any Most Slanders
owe their rise to the FairSex.
Persons Reputation; and indeed, (as a late Author observes) The Nature of true
Virtue is commonly such, that as the Flame ever has its Smoke, and the Body its
Shadow, so the Brightness of Virtue never shines, but has Disdain or Envy
waiting upon it --

Some Men are so vile, that when no merit of Fortune can make 'em hope Some men
are so vile that when they cannot enjoy the Bodies of those Beauties they are
charmed with, will yet lie with their Reputations.
to enjoy the Bodies of those Beauties they are Charmed with; they will yet lie
with their Reputations. and make their Fames suffer -- And though to such Women,
Innocence is the safest Armor, (for just Heaven will never for sake the
Innocent) yet this Ieud Revenge is a double Uillany, for certainly UUomen are
necessary Evils; from our Cradle to our Grave we are wrapped in a Circle of
Obligations to 'em. (my Divine Pylades was of this Opinion, or had never sent
so often to his Doctress) And I am sure, such a Mortal as I (who am helpless at
best) and often so afllicted with the Store, etc. that I can neither go nor
stand, cannot, Live without their Assistance; which if they are Uertuous they will
never deny me; for I Am so great an Enemy to running astray, that I heartily
Women are necessary Evils.
wish Adultery were Death. But whether does Covetousness and a Slandering
Tongue lead me? But they are two Ui^es that my Soul loathes (as will be thewn to
my Funeral Sermon) so that my Zeal against them is the more excuseable --.

After this Funeral Sermon (or rather Sermon against Slandering) is My Body
next to be carried to the New burying-place.
Preached, it is my request that my Body be carried to the New Bu^ying Place,
there to lie in the same Grave with my first Wife, and upon her Coffin, if it
can be found; and it is my Will, that no others be Buried with us, save my
Executor, and that Dissenting Minister who is to Preach my Funeral Sermon --
For (...) it is good to enjoy the Godly while they Live, so it is not amiss to be
Buried with them after Death. The old Prophet's Bones escaped a Burning, by
being Buried with the other Prophets; and the My Soul is fled where I shall
know Iris again.
Man that was tumbled into the Grave of Elisha, was rovived by Virtue of his
Bones.

As my Body will now Sleep in the same Grave with my first Wife, etc. So I hope
through the Merits of my blessed Savior, my Soul will be now fled, where I
shall find, and know her again, for I don't question but This is largly proved
in my Essay on knowing our Friends in Heaven.
we shall know our Friends in Heaven, (Wise and Learned Men of all Ages, and
several Scriptures plainly show it) And as we are to be Buried together, so
it is my Desire that my, Executor purchase a marble Tomb, (for when Valeria Dies
he may well afford it) not exceeding 50 l. and cause the following
Superscription to be Engraved upon it.

Here lies (Sleeping together) John Dunton, Citizen, and Stationer of London,
and Elizabeth his first Wife -- She departed this Life, Friday, May 28th 1697
-- And he, etc. And being the last that Dyed, his Will was (as they had
promised each other in their Life time) to be Buried with her in the same
Grave, and that on this Tombstone. should be Engraved the following Lines.

I Am come to Bed, having lost my Pen and Sight,
To Sleep with Iris in her Cell this Night;
And leaving all for her, will never take
Another Farewell, 'till our Ashes wake.
Dr. Brown indeed tells us at his Death, He intends to take a total Remarks on
my Tombstone.
Adieu of the World, not caring for a Monument, History, or Epitaph, not so
much as the bare Memory of his Name to be found any where, but in the universal
Register of God -- This Superscription on my Diogenes desired to be Buried with
a Staff in his Hand to fright away the Crows.
Tomb shows I'ent for taking such a Farewell as this -- Nor am I so Cinical as
to approve the Testament of Diogenes, who willed his Friend to Bury him with a
Staff in his Hand to Fright away the Crows. No! I am for an Epitaph, and such
an Epitaph as may show to my Friends, how much I can value a Wife that loves
me; and indeed the Driginal of Epitaphs is owing to this Loving Temper -- For
the first Epitaph The first Epitaph which was put upon Tombs, was that of the
Fair Rachel.
which was put upon Tombs, was that of the Fair Rachel, as is partly remarkt
from Scripture, (for it is said, Rachel dyed, and was Buried in the way to
Ephrath, and Jacob set a Pillar upon her Grave) and Boohartus assures us it was
a Pyramid which Jacob erected, sustained upon a dozen precious Stones, with
this Inscription --

Here lies Fair Rachel It shows the great Care Jacob took to preserve her
Memory.

Composed of nothing but
Beauty and Love.
A Grave is but a plain Suit, but a Rich Monument is one Embroidered, and
therefore in the erecting such a noble Pillar as this, we see the great care
Jacob had to preserve the Memory of his dear Rachel; and I hope none will think
me either Vain or Prodigal, if I endeavor (so far as I am able) to imitate
such a kind Husband; however a Marble Tomb is the only Legacy I bequeath to my
self, and my ground Bedfellow; and I expect we have A Marble Tomb is the Legacy
I bequeath to my self.
Justice done us. Not that I so much insist upon the Epitaph of my own Writing;
for if my Friends please, they may scratch it out, and Grave in the room of it
these Words, viz.

To these whom Death again did Wed,
Their Grave's their second Marriage Bed;
For though the Hand of Fate could Force
'Twixt Soul and Body a Divorce,
It could not sunder Man and Wife
When they both lived but one Life.
Peace good Reader, do not Weep;
Peace, the Lovers are asleep.
They, sweet Turtles, folded lie
In the last knot Love could tie;
And though they lie as they were Dead,
Their Pillow Stone, their Sheets of Lead;
Pillow hard, and Sheets not warm,
Love made the Bed, they will take no harm;
Let them Sleep, let them Sleep on,
'Till this Stormy Night be gone,
And The Eternal Morrow dawn,
Then the Curtains will be drawn,
And they wake into that Light
Whose Day shall never end in Night.
I Am so desirous of having this Tomb (and Epitaph) erected as a Memorial of our
happy Marriage, that had I Moneys to spare, I Would see it done in my Life time, A
good Memory the best Monument.
hereby to prevent the negligence of Heirs, and to remind me of my own
Mortality -- But after all the care we can take to preserve the Ashes of our
Dead Friends; it must be acknowledged, That a good Memory is the best Monument;
My Debts and Legacies being first paid the rest of my Estate I give to my
Executor.
others are subject to casualty, and we know that the Pyramids themselves,
doting with Age, have forgotten the names of their Founders --.

Thus having given instructions about my Funeral and Grave, etc. and bequeathed
what Legacies I think sit, all the rest of my Estate, both Personal and Real,
(my Debts and Funeral Expenses being first paid) I do hereby give, to my
Executor, who your Ladyship will know by the following Character, He Is a Person
truly Religious --, sincere in his Conversation --, wise in his own The
Character of my Executor.
Business --, loving to my Relations --, very Charitable --, and I Am sure will
accomplish the whole intent of my Testament --. These are the Legacies I have
bequeathed to my Friends, which some that have mist of their Expectation may
perhaps say are like those in the Spanish Friar, where Sir Flash, having left
many Legacies, and his Executor asking where Of a Man who bequeathed more than
he was worth.
he should have 'em to pay, he answered, Even where he pleased, for he was
better able to find 'em than himself --. But whoever thinks so with respect to
me, will find themselves mistaken, for as great a strait, as Valeria's Jointure
has put me to, my Death will soon open a way to an Estate, (besides the
Reversions, which in time may double what I now enjoy, (that will not only
satisfy my few Creditors, but more than pay all the Lega^ies I have here
bequeathed --. And therefore -- But I shall tire you with the Repetition of an
odd Will, which I had not inserted but to humble those that desire my Death.
This is my last Will till I make another.


Having given your Ladyship a Breviate of my last Will, I Will return again to my
dead Body (for I Am still supposing my self unbury'd.)

My Will being read to my friends, and all things agreed upon in order to my
Funeral, next see the greedy Nurses sighting for my Shirt and Clothes, My
greedy Nurses fighting for my Shirt and Cloths, and Relations scuffling for
what is left.
and my hasty Relations scuffling for what is left.

Keep the King's Peace! as soon as Phil. is Dead
They for his Money quarrel round his Bed.
Fight Nurse, fight Lads, Sirs make a Ring about,
Even let 'em have fair Play, and Cuff it out.
Having lain the time I desired, there is no fear of my living again (as my
There Is no fear of my living again. My Friends have now leave to bury me.
Mother did) then honest GEORGE, Nail me down, and bury me, for the Mourners
are come (the Claret is drunk) and here stands Azariah Reynholds ready to dress
out the funeral Procession; and that nothing may be wanting on this sad
occasion, here is Weeping Dev'ral (my old Servant) coming with the Pall, the
Bier and the six Bearers to carry me to Church, and from thence to the Grave.
Azariah Reynholds stands ready to dress out the Funeral.


See where my Friends surround my private Urne,
Where all my kind Relations fondly Mourn,
And When the solemn Bell does sadly call, Weeping Dev'ral comes with the Fall,
Bier, and Bearers.

The drooping Pomp attends my Funeral.
Now I from Fortunes store can only have
A narrow Coffin, and a scanty Grave.
However, I am as Rich in my Coffin as a dead Monarch --, Death I Am as Rich in
my Coffin as a dead Monarch. A small parcel of Earth will contain th^se who
asp^re to the po^ession of the whole World.
makes us equal with Kings --. In the Grave the Spade may challenge equality
with the Scepter -- A winding Sheet, Coffin and Grave, is all that the Greatest
Possess when they leave the World -- Philip King of Macedon walking by the
Seaside, got a fall, and after he was risen, perceiving the Impression of his
Body upon the Sand -- Good God! said he, what a small parcel of Earth will
contain us, who aspire to the possession of the whole World --. This great
Monarch, after many and great Victories, at length he fell not only into his
Bed, but into his Tomb, contented with a small Cossin; Peter Alphonsus reports
that several Philosophers flocked together, and variously discanted upon the
King's Death, one there was that said, Behold now four Yards of Ground is
enough for him whom the spacious Earth could not comprehend before --. Several
Philosophers discanting upon the Death of the great Alexander.
Another added, Yesterday could Alexander save whom he pleased from Death, to
Day he cannot free himself --. Another viewing the Golden Coffin; Yesterday,
said he, Alexander heaped up a Treasure of Gold; now Gold makes a Treasure of
Alexander --. Thus miserable and wretched is Man (the very greatest of Men) in
their last Exit --; I might prove it by more Instances; but for Brevity sake
I Will name no more than the Bier of Ablavius, Constantines Speech to Ablavius
concerning his Riches.
who being an insatiable devourer of Gold, Constantine the Great, takes him by
the Hand, and said, Ablavius, Though thou had all the Riches in the World, yet
after thou art dead, a Place, or Chest no bigger than this which I have here
marked out, must contain thee; if so large a piece of Ground do come to thy Lot
--. Constantine was a Prophet; for Ablavius being cut in bits (the Saladine had
nothing but a black Shirt to attend him to the Grave.
next Hour) had not a piece left big enough to be buried: The great Saladine
observing this, ordered that before his Corpse a Black Cloth should be carried
on the top of a Spear, and this proclaimed (with sound of Trumpet, in the midst
of his Army) Saladine Conqueror of the East had nothing left him but this
black Shirt to attend him to the Grave.

The Brags of Life are but a Nine Days Wonder;
And after Death the Fumes that spring
From private Bodies make as big a Thunder,
As those which rise from a huge King.
Only the Chronicle is lost; and yet
Better by Worms be all once spent,
Than to have Hellish Moths still gnaw and fret, Most Kings have Died a violent
Death.

Thy Name in Books which may not rent. -- Herbert.
The highest place is most obnoxious to Variation, the Sun is never so near
Caesar's chair of State was his Deathbed.
a declension as in the Vertical Meridian. May I not say many, yea most that
have been Sceptered in the World, have been wrapped out of it violently, as if
they perished by Fassination from the many ambitious Eyes that dart Crassus
could scarce obtain a Shrowed to cover his Nakedness.
upon 'em --. Julius Caesar, that he may be woefully miserable, his Chair of
State shall be his Deathbed; where he feels no fewer than 23 Wounds, and sees
Brutus among the Conspirators --. Crassus, for all his Bags, shall be slain,
and scarce obtain a Shroud to cover his Nakedness; and so shall the valiant
Pompey, Sirnam'd the Great, who though he got an old Shirt for a Winding Sheet,
Deaths of Roman Emperors.
yet he could not be supplied with Funeral-fire enough to consume his Body --.
Lamentable was the Death of Mark Anthony, and many other Emperors among the
Romans --. Lewis the gentle, afflicted with Amurath's Grave.
3 Rebel Sons, grieves to Death, and has now no more to possess than just his
length and breadth in the Earth; and we find Charles the Great, Bajazet had
scarce a Coffin to bury him.
without Love or Honor, House or Bread, at his End --. I might name many
others; if you peruse Turkey a little, you shall find the mighty Amurath thrown
down from the top of Victory, and a Grave is now all his Riches --. You may see
the renowned Bajazet, who had hovered aloft like a Royal Eagle, mewed up in an
Iron Cage; and the way to Darius and Alexander were both snatched away by
unnatural Deaths.
go out of the World was so blocked up to him, that he was forced to beat out
his Brains against the Grates, to invent a Death which was followed with so
mean a Funeral, that he had scarce a Coffin to bury him, and but two Persons to
carry him to his Grave --. And what better Fate had Darius, and Alexander,
(Heads of the Second and Third Monarchy) for see how they knocked one against
another, and both snatched away unnaturally; I. Dunton is as frail and mortal
as the greatest King alive.
and how little do they now possess, of those many Kingdoms they were striving
for? -- I abound too much in these Examples, yet I must not pass by the
Monarchs of the World, without their due Observance; for though Kings be no
Examples for private Men, as they be Kings; yet (as they are Men) they be,
especially as they are mortal Men, and must dye like others; Whilst I Am viewing
the Graves of Rich Men, I forget that I Am carrying to my own.
and therefore I hold it no Presumption to say, I am as frail and mortal as the
greatest King alive. Thus have I proved that Death makes us equal with Kings,
and that I Am as Rich in my Coffin as a dead Monarch --. But whilst I Am viewing
the Graves of these great Men, I shall forget I Am going to my own; so it is time
now (the Sermon being ended) to suppose me carrying to the new Burying-place,
where being brought to my Grave, (I I Am now brought to my own Grave.
call it mine as I have paid for it) the Parson declares,

Forasmuch as it has pleased Almighty God, of his great Mercy, to take unto
himself the Soul of our dear Brother, here departed, we therefore commit his
Body to the Ground; Earth to Earth, Ashes to Ashes, Dust to Dust, in sure The
words used at the Burial of the Dead.
and certain Hope of the Resurrection to Eternal Life --.

The Church in her Funerals of the Dead, used to sing Psalms, and to give
Thanks for the delivery of the Soul from the Evils of this Life. I think The
Church in her Funerals of the Dead, used to Sing Psalms, and to give Thanks for
the Delivery of the Soul from the Evils of this Life.
this a seasonable Devotion; for Phil. now is cured of all Diseases, and lies
lovingly in the Bosom of his Mother Earth, where my divided Parts (in a few
Years) will revel in their loosned Motions, which had before been crowded
together in my sickly Composure; and thus you see (in my fleeting Life and
Burial) that

Our Entrance and our Exit seem to meet,
Our Swaddling Bands almost our Winding Sheet;
Poor Man! from Mother Earth does just arise,
Then looks abroad, returns again, and Dies.
Some Sixty Years, perhaps, with much ado, Phil. lies lovingly in the Bosom of
his Mother Earth.

He has prolonged his tedious Life unto;
Then under Griefs, and Cares, he sinks away,
His Carcass mouldring into native Clay.
And now (methinks) I see the Bearers laying my Corpse as near to The Bearers
laying my Corpse as near to the Bones of Iris as possible.
the Bones of Iris as possible; and I suppose your Ladyship will not blame me for
this part of my Will, for Dr. Brown applauds those Tempers that desire to Sleep
in the Urns of their Fathers, and strive to go the nearest way to Corruption --
'Twas the late Request of a great Divine, to lie by his Wife in Shore-ditch,
and for that Reason he was Bu^yed there -- Sr. Nathaniel Barnardiston in his
last Will, desires his Executors, that the Sea knowing our Friends in Heaven.
p. 54.
Bones of his father might be dug out of the Earth (where they were Buried)
and laid by his own Body in a new Vault he ordered them to Erect for the same
purpose; that though he could not Live with his Father as Sir Nathaniel
Barnardiston and the Lady I. -- desire both to be Buried with their Father.
long as he would have desired, yet he designed their Bodies should lie
together 'till the Resurrection -- The Lady I. -- made the same Request, with
respect to her Worthy Father; and her Funeral Sermon tells us, They lay down
alike in the Dust. Neither is this fond Love any great Rarity, for we read,
that in some Part of the Indies, a Father of a Family being Dead, the Law of
the Country ordains, that he be put in an Equipage for the other World; and
that such things as had been most dear unto him should be Burned with him. The
best beloved of his Wives Dresseth In the Indies the Wives will be Burnt with
their Husbands.
her self more Richly, and with more care for Death, than she had done for her
Wedding-Feast, the whole Kindred in Festival Garments, Conduct her Solemnly to
the Flaming-Pile, and there she suffers her self to be Burnt with Ceremony with
her Husband -- I am more desirous to be Buried with Iris, than these Indians
were to be Burnt with their Husbands, and I hope we shall rest in the same
Grave 'till the Resurrection --

Here we must rest; and where else should we rest?
Is not a Man's own House (to Sleep in) best?
If this be all our House; they are to blame,
That Brag of the Great Houses whence they came.
What is my Father's House? And what am I?
My Father's House is Earth, where I must lie:
And I, a Worm; no Man, that fit no Room,
'Till (like a Worm) I crawl into my Tomb:
This is my dwelling, this is my truest Home,
A House of Clay, best sits a Guest of Lome;
Nay, it is my House, for I perceive, I have
In all my Life, never dwelt out of a Grave.
The Womb was (first) my Grave; whence since I rose,
My Body (Grave like) does my Soul enclose.
That Body (like a Corpse with Sheets over spread)
Dying each Night, lies Buried in my Bed;
Over which, my spreading Testers large extent,
Born with Carved Antiques makes my Monument,
And over my Head (perchance) such things may stand,
When I am quite run out in Dust and Sand.
My close-low-Builded Chamber, to my Eye,
Shows like a little Chapel; where I lie.
While at my Window, pretty Birds do Ring
My Knell, and with their Notes, my Obiits Sing.
Thus when the Day's vain Toil, my Soul has wearied,
I, in my Body, Bed, and House, lie Buried.
Then have I little cause to fear my Tomb,
When this (wherein I live) my Grave's become.
So that a Grave, and six Foot of Ground, is all I can call my own; some ^ome
Athenian-Friend ^ay perhaps scatter ^me Lines ^n my Hearse, and Mourning ^ay
attend ^y Funeral, ^ut nothing will tarry with me ^t my Grave.
Athenian-Friend perhaps on my Hearse will scatter some Lines, and strew the
Cloth with Rhyme, Painting (perchance) may Guild some Flag or Banner, and Stick
it on my Coffin, Music may Sing my Dirge, and tell the Mourners I loved that
Art, but when all is over, nothing will tarry with me but my Grave -- --

And it is most just; for here I did receive them,
I found them when I came, and here I leave them.
Neither the Things I want, and others have
Accompany their Owners to the Grave,
Will Beauty go? Will Strength in Death appear?
Will Honor or Proud Riches tarry there?
They all say no; for let grim Death draw near,
Beauty looks Pale, and Strength does faint for Fear.
There Is little Wealth or Pride in naked Bones,
And Honor sits on Cushions, not cold Stones.
Nay ask our Friends, that when we are in Health,
Would Die for Love of us (or for our Wealth)
Mark what they set their Hands to; view it well,
[Your Friend till Death] but once dead, Fare you well.
So that we are scarce sure of a Grave, or were we sure of that, it is all (...)
Grave is ^ll that we ^an call our ^wn.
we can call our own, for observe of a Man new Dead; this was his Wife (says
one) that was his Land -- This was his Brother -- That was He is a Wretch that
will not part with the world when it lies in his way to Heaven.
his Building -- This was his Garden -- And thus they talk awhile of what WAS
HIS -- but if we go to the Churchyard, where his Body lies, it is said, this IS
HIS GRAVE, and not his Friends; so that when we are Dead, we are sure of
something, but it is only a Grave. Then what a Wretch is he, that will not part
with the World, when it lies in his way to Heaven, for he can neither carry it
with him, or use above six foot on it when he is Dead, or scarce so much, for
the Chimistry of Cardan Misers gripe at all the World, but it slips through their
Fingers, and leaves nothing but Dust.
found but six Dunces of Dust in the Ashes of a Calcined Body -- We brought
nothing into this World, and can carry nothing out; but Worldlings never
consider this, and therefore like Men that clasp at Spirits, they catch nothing
but Air; they gripe at all the World to satisfy their Avarice, but it slips
through their Fingers, and leaves nothing but Dust. But as great a Vanity as
this is, we find Covetousness to be the only Sin, grows young, as Men grow old.
Old Men have their Coverousness natural to 'em, their Blood is cak'd and cold,
and Nature as it grows again toward Old Men have their Covetousness Natural to
'em
Earth, is fashioned for the Journey, dull and heavy -- The nearer Death we
grow in Years, the more scraping we are; and this Sneaking-Vice Drowns not till
we Sink; and I don't wonder at it, for Dying-men will grasp at all they see;
while they see any thing, but when their Senses fail, Covetousness is the only
Sin grows Young as Men grow Old.
then Farewell Riches, the World's too heavy, then they let it fall. Though we
were misery all our Days, yet when we expire, we spread our Palms, and let the
World slip by; but when every thing else is gone, the Grave remains: And in
this Cell I shall lie hid (with Iris) till the Resurrection.

Lie still where thou art John, for the quiet o'th'Nation,
Nor can thou stir more, without slat Conjuration.
Being now laid to sleep with my Dear, -- a Marble-Tomb was to be our Blankets,
(for Tombs are the Clothes of the Dead) but we shall get Iris and Phil. being
laid to sleep, they want the Marble for their Blankets.
no Cold if we wait for 'em. However, as I lived and died in a Cell, so to show
I Would be still Incognito, I Will here Write my Epitaph, and then, (as one expresses
it) If no Man goes to Bed 'till he Dies, nor 'wakes 'till the Resurrection --
Goodnight to ye here, and Good Morrow hereafter.

Dunton's Epitaph on himself.
HEre lies his Dust, who chiefly aimed to know Dunton's Epitaph on himself.

Himself; and chose to Live Incognito:
He was so great a Master of that Art,
He understands it now in every Part;
But though 'twas Solitude he did so prize,
He has it least, whilst in this Cell he lies;
For whilst deprived, my dearest Life, of thee,
The World was all an Hermitage to me;
But mixed with Iris, naught can lonesome be
My Name inquire not, for thou must not know,
For Phil. desired, when he from hence did go,
That he might allways lie Incognito.
Thus Man goes to his long home, and the Mourners go about the Man goes to his
long home.
streets --

Ring the Bells, -- for Dunton is Dead and Buried, that is, as Mr. Uincent's
Friends make a PULPIT of his Grave, (for on his Tombstone are Ring the Bells
for Dunton is Dead and Buried.
these Words,

Immortal Souls to benefit and save,
I thus have made a Pulpit of my Grave.
So I have endeavored to make An Essay on my own Funeral, which I have been
only burying my self in Effigy.
being a Representation of what will be done when I Am Dead, (whereas I Am yet
alive) it is excusable if I have followed their Examples who fill their Maps
with Fancies of their own Brains --, But though I have been only burying my self
in Effigy; yet having a longing desire to be happy with Iris (which When I dye
in earnest, I hope the thoughts of my Death and Funeral will be no more
terrible to me than it is now in Speculation.
I cannot be but by dying) it is no matter how soon my Dying Solemnity were over;
and when I come to dye in earnest, I hope the thoughts of my Death and Funeral
will be no more terrible to me then it is now in Speculation. 'Twas said
Philostratus lived Seven Years in his own Tomb, that he might be acquainted
with it. That Death may become thus Familiar to me, I Will walk every Day with
Joseph a turn or two in my Garden with Death, and (with Herbet) as often dress
out my own Hearse --. I would be so well acquainted with Death as (impatiently)
to desire it; not that I would dye of an Appoplexy, by a private Stab, or any
sudden Death --. From sudden Philostratus lived 7 Years in his Tomb.
Death good Lord deliver me; for whenever I dye, I would have so much notice,
that I may leave nothing behind me that I should take to Heaven with me; not
that I would be delivered from sudden Death, in respect of it self; Of sudden
Death.
for I care not how short my passage be, so it be safe. Never any weary
Traveller complained that he came too soon to his Journies end; but I would not
have a sudden Death, so as to be surpised beforo I Am summoned: However The
Divine Herbert dressed out his own Hearse.
dye I would, and as pleasant a sight as Valeria may think my funeral, I did
not care how soon she saw it as here described, for then she will have more (I
cannot say enough) of the World, and I Am sick on it, and would fain change I
would leave nothing behind me that I should take to Heaven with me.
it for Heaven --. It Is true the Manor of Sampsil is a fine sight, but he
that looks up to Heaven will not care for the World --. Oh how amiable are thy
Tabernacles O Lord of Hosts! One Day in thy Courts is better than a Thousand; I
had rather be a Doorkeeper in the House of God, than live any longer in this
vile World; there is nothing in it but Vanity, Disappointments, and black
Ingratitude; then oh that I was stripped into a naked Spirit; and set My
Passionate Desire to be stripped into a naked Spirit.
ashore in a better World! --

Why lingrest thou, bright Lamp of Heaven? Why
Do thy Steeds tread so slowly on? must I
Be forced to live, when I desire to dye?
Lash thou those lasie Iades, drive with full speed,
And end my slow paced Days, that I may feed
With Joy on him, for whom my Heart does Bleed.
Post, blessed Jesus! Come Lord, flee away,
And turn this Night into the brightest Day,
By thine approach; come, Lord, and do not stay.
Take thou Doves Wings, or give Doves Wings to me,
That I may leave this World, and come to thee,
And ever in thy glorious Presence be.
I like not this bile World, it is mere Dross;
Thou only art pure Gold, then sure it is loss,
To be without the Throne to enjoy a Cross.
What though I must pass through the Gates of Death?
It is to come to thee that gav'st me Breath;
And thou art better (Lord) than Dunghill Earth.
When shall I come? Lord, tell me, tell me when;
What must I tarry Threestore Years and Ten?
My thirsty Soul cannot hold out till then.
Come, dearest Savior, come, unlock this Cage
Of sinful Flesh, lovingly stop the Rage
Of my Desires; and thou my Pilgrimage.
Thus have I finished the Essay on my own Funeral, and have proved (to I have
now finished the Essay on my Funeral.
your Ladyship) that my Cell being an Emblem of Death, is the fittest place to
prepare for Heaven. To get ready for Death and the Grave, is a matter of great
Consequence, and no place so fit for it as a Cell, where there is no
interruption --. I don't wonder that every Man commends Timon for his No place
so fit to prepare for Death as a Cell.
hating of Men; for we find so much danger in being in Company, that even Adam
could not live one Day in it, and live Innocent; the first News we hear of him,
after Eve was Associate to him, was that he had forfeited his Native Purity;
for having met with a Female, she strait seduced him; Adam could not live one
day in Company and live innocent.
And what follows? Why now, he must return to that ground out of which he was
taken --. Then being born to dye -- I love my Cell, as 'twill transmit me to
the Darkness, and Oblivion of the Grave, and remind me of my own Funeral. --.
Neither is this describing my own Funeral without a President; for we read of
several that have Buried themselves in Effigy, Being born to dye I love my
Cell.
and have learned to dye at their own Funerals. The Emperor Adrian entr'd into
his Empire by the Port of his Tomb, he Celebrates himself his own Funerals, and
is led in Triumph to his Sepuchre. Several that have buried themselves in
Effigy.


Now w^ the Peoples Expectation high,
For wonted Pomp, and glittering Chivalry:
But lo! their Emperor does invite 'em all,
Not to a Show, but to his Funeral.
This was self Victory, and deserves more
Than all the Conquests he had won before. The Emperor Adrian Celebrates
himself his own Funeral.

Proud Spirits, be ye Spectators of this Funeral Pomp, which this great Monarch
Adrian Celebrates to Day: He invites the Heaven and the Earth to his Exequies,
since in their view he accompanies his Portraid Skeleton unto the Tomb, his
Body conducts thither its Shadow, the Original the painted Figure, Charles the
5th, Maximilian, the Emperor of the East, and several others have done the
like.
till a Metamorphosis be made both of one and the other -- Oh glorious Action!
where Garlands of Cypress dispute the Pre-eminence with Laurel and Palm! But
Adrian is not the only Person that has been buried in Essigie, for Charles the
Fifth, long before the Resignation of his Empire, caused a Sepulcher to be made
him, with all its funeral Furniture, which was privately carried about with him
wherever he went. Maximilian the Emperor did the same, and would often follow
his Coffin to the Grave in a Solemn Manner. We also read that John Patriarch of
Alexandria, while he was Living, and in Health, caused his Monument to be
Built. but not to be Finished, for this Reason, that upon solemn Days, when he
performed Divine-Service, he might be put in mind by some of the Clergy in
these Words -- Sir your Monument is yet unfinished, command it to be finished,
for to Morrow you're to Celebrate your own Funeral. When the Emperrour of the
East was newly chosen, no Person had Liberty to speak to him before the
Stone-Cutter had showed him several sorts of Marble, Genebald, Bp of Laudanum,
lay in a Bed made like a Coffin. The Study of Virtue is the best Preparation
for Death.
and asked him of which his Majesty would be pleased to have his Monument made.
And many others in perfect Health, have thus attended their own Funerals --
Genebald, Bp. of Laudanum, lay in a Bed made like a Coffin, for 7 Years
together; and ^da, a Woman of great Piety, long before her Death, caused her
Coffin to be made, which twice a Day she filled with Bread and Meat, and gave
to the Poor. And certainly the Study of Virtue is the best Preparation for
Death. But we need not look into Ancient Times for Persons that have provided
for their own funerals, when our present Age abounds with so many Instances of
this Nature -- I shall first Instance in the Reverend Mr. Baxter, (who Dates
most of his Books from the Brink of the Grave). Being in Mr. Baxter drew up his
own Funeral Sermon.
my Quarters, (says this Pious Divine) far from home, but so extreme
Languishing, by the sudden loss of about a Gallon of Blood, and having no
Acquaintance about me, nor any Book but my Bible, and Living in continual
Expectation of Death, I bent my Thoughts on my everlasting Rest; and because my
Memory through extreme Weakness was imperfect, I took my Pen In his Book called
The Saints everlasting Rest.
and began to draw up my own funeral Sermon, or some Helps for my own
Meditations of Heaven, to sweeten both the rest of my Life, and my Death -- I
could next tell your Ladyship of a Gentleman, who Marked all his Plate with a
Death's Head -- My own Mother would often visit that Grave where she desired to
the Buried -- Mr. Thorp being in Debt, Other late Instances of Pious-men, who
have kept their Coffins by 'em.
retreats to the Mint, where he falls to Writing a Poem on himself, which he
calls a Living-Clegy, and invites all his Creditors to his Funeral, to lament
his Death. I have no Reason to do this, for I have taken that care, that if any
come to my Funeral that I Am obliged to, they may have Cause rather to lament
the loss of my Life, than any thing they can lose by me -- Mr. Stephens of
Lothbury, kept his Coffin by him several Years -- Mrs. Parry of Monmouth, did
the same -- and so did Mrs. Collins, 'till Mr. Thorp's Living-Esegy.
her Husband was Buried in it -- I don't pretend to live up to these Examples,
but I Have already purchased a ^rave, and in these Sheets I Am following my Hearse
to it, and I hope this Essay on my Funeral, will remind Mr. Stephens kept a
Memento of Death in his own House.
me of Death, when I Am most Tempted to forget it; but that I may not, I shall
every Day my self make funeral Processions, I mean, visit in Meditation every
Hour my Grave. There is no fooling with Life when it is once turned beyond
Thirty, and therefore I would now D^lly Celebrate my own Funeral, and invite to
my Exequies Ambition, Avarice, and all other I would now daily Celebrate my own
Funeral.
Passions wherewith I may be attainted, to the end that I may be a Conqueror
even by my own proper Defeat: For when a Man yields to the Meditation of Death;
then Reason commands Sense; all obey to this Apprehension of Frailty. Pleasures
by little and little abandon us, the Sweets of Life seem Sour, and we can find
no other quiet, but in the Hope Before Death and the Funeral, no Man is Happy.
of that glorious Life to come. 'Twas the Saying of a great Man, Before Death
and the funeral, no Man is happy. But that I may Die in Peace, it is requisite
that I Die daily. Philip of Macedon, gave a Boy a Pension every Morning, to say
to him --. Philip remember thou art a Man. My Purse will not allow of a Daily
Monitor, but I hope this Essay on my Why God would have me ignorant of my last
Hour.
funeral will serve me as well to bear Death in Mind, as if Philp's-Deaths-Dead
were set before me -- But God would have me ignorant of my last Hour, that
suspecting it always, I might always be ready; and where can I get ready, if
not in a Cell, where are few Temptations to Sin and Vanity? And therefore I Will
never leave it, but like the silly-Grashopper, Live and Die, (and perhaps be
Buried) in the same Ground -- But however my Body is disposed of, I shall still
be

Your Friend INCOGNITO.

The Ladys Answer to my Eight Letter.
Sir,
I Can easily believe you are the First that ever Writ an Essay upon their own
Funeral, for our Dissolution is no inviting Subject; it has but a Melancholy
Aspect, even when it is looked upon as the only Remedy of the Afflicted. But,
How bitter are the Thoughts of Death to those that Live at Ease? Which if you
Consider, you may well conclude, had Valeria's Kindness been such as you would
have had it, you had never enjoyed the Blessing you do now, of Contemplating
the Miseries of this Life; till in Ransacking your Memory for all that could
possibly any more afflict or torment you, you light upon Death as the last and
most dreadful of all terrible Things; which being once fixed in your Mind, sets
you out of the reach of all Temptations. In this she makes it appear, she loves
you as well at least, if not better, than her own Soul, that she affords you a
Happiness she denies her self; and chooses to leave you to the full Enjoyment of
it, without robbing you of the least Share. But if you are Serious in the
Thoughts of Death, 'twill do you more good than all her Smiles, however you may
prize 'em.

The Gentleman that thought he was as good as Dead when his Money was gone,
might have some cause to think himself really Dead, tho he walked about,
perceiving the Fear every ones Countenance discovered at the sight of him, the
Case of most Persons in his Circumstance; therefore never be surpised at his
having more Brains than he could be quiet with, for were your Case his in one
respect, it might be so perhaps in the other; every one is not able to hear the
Contempt of the World. Though if well considered, when we answer the Designs of
Providence, it should be all one to us, whether we stand for a Penny or a
Crown; for in God's Account we are equally as useful and acceptable: And I am
persuaded, there has been many great Saints, very little seen or known in the
World, and whose only Share in it has been but Obscurity and Contempt; and
truly speaking, what are we the better for so large a share of earthly
Enjoyments, that shall both disorder our Minds and Bodies that we cannot discern
our true Interest, but place our Happiness in catching at departing shadows,
while we forget we are all born subjects of Death, and begin to die from the
first moment of our Life. And it is no matter how soon one is discharged of a
Debt one must certainly pay. And were our Life never so long, to think in time
we should have enough of living, is a great mistake; for at Fourscore Years and
we shall think our lives short, and our past Enjoyments extremely imperfect;
and any one that dies at Twenty can do no more: That in general, Death is
saluted with the same shy Air, whenever he claims the debt they are not willing
to pay; as well those he has long forborne, as those he deals with more
severely. Yet methinks aged. Person's Experience, and some sort of good Nature
and Compassion, might prevail with 'em willingly to make room for others; that
by their Deaths young Persons, to whom they leave their Places, may have the
opportunity of making the same Experiment they have done of the Emptiness of
all humane Ioys, which is best known and believed by dear bought Experience,
and never till then can they be freed from the Tyranny of Vainhopes and wild
Ambition, the Disease of Youth.

I confess I cannot but wonder at the vain curiosity of the Philosophers, who
set themselves so much to know exactly, in the last Minute of their Life, what
Being Death has, which is none at all. The most that can be seen of Death is by
its Operation on our Bodies in this Life; our total Dissolution is but the last
stroke, not much differing from the rest, nor perhaps the most painful; we know
enough of it to make us hate the thoughts of it, as of a Molancholy Subject;
and if ever we are brought to love it, it is certain it must be by looking
beyond it.

For it is to the consideration of that happy change of Life, to which Death
brings us, that we are obliged for all our Ease and Comfort in this Life, and
from the hopes that in Death, the Soul shall be set at Liberty, and be
triumphant over that Enemy which had so long insulted, and with the sight and
feeling of his Tyranny kept it in bondage and slavish fear. There Is nothing in
this World that is not under his Dominion; his Character is stamped on every
thing, which makes 'em change, corrupt, and die, that we are tired with such
perpetual Alterations; tho'it should sometimes supply the place of a comfort to
one that has no better; for if a mere change will mend their Condition, they
are sure of that Relief, since nothing remains in the same state, all tends to
a Dissolution; the Heavens wax old as does a Garment, and shall be changed;
nay, Death it self must shortly yield to Destruction; and till then, the worst
it can do is but to change us for the better.

It Is much to be admired, there should be any Pretenders to the making a
Divorce between Death and Sin, that the same Persons that abhor the Sight o^
Thoughts of Death, should take Sin into their Embraces; for what is so sure to
let in Death as Sin? For it is not only the Wages of Sin but it is natural Issue;
and one may say, it is the only good thing Sin ever brought forth; for we have
many Advantages by Death, since every degree of Death, in the Body, adds to the
Life and Vigor of any Soul that is not already dead in Sin; and in the total
Dissolution of the Body, the Soul is freed from any more sinning, and all the
sufferings of this Life; a Condition much to be desired, by all but those that
are so blind to take their Misery for their Happiness, and door upon this
present Life; and such there are, and ever was, of whom St. Austin in amazement
speaks, when he says, At what cost and labor do Men endeavor to prolong their
Labors, and by how many frights to fly Death, to the end they may be able to
fear it for the longer time.

It Is true, since Death was at first laid on Man as a penalty, it must be
allowed to be that which Nature in it self abhors; but God, whose very
Punishments are the effects of his Mercy and Goodness, has ordained it to be
the means to procure our Happiness, both to wean our Affections from too much
love of this Life, and also to bring us to the possession of a better; which if
truly understood, would more than overcome our natural aversion; it would make
us long to be dissolved, at least willing to die at our appointed time; for
those that believe, and hope for a glorious Resurrection, should they regret in
Death the loss of their Bodies, 'twould look like the impertinent Folly of one
that should lament the loss of the Egg that was become a Chicken; for sure it
is, for us to desire to be always what we are, is to oppose the perfection of
our Natures, and speaks us degenerated to the lowest degree of Brutality. Could
we obtain a true Judgment of our selves, we should (like the Man you mention)
think it more Eligible to end than begin our Life again; and it is a great sign
we have never labored for Heaven and Happiness, when we are not weary enough
to wish for Rest, but like Children that pass their Day in trifling Follies are
never weary, but must be forced to Bed, or else deluded to it by a false hope;
some such deceits are found for cheating Men as much as Children, and often
sends 'em to rest before they think on it; though were they not as insensible as
Death it self can make 'em, they could scarce think of any thing else amongst
the many Monitors the World affords us; but yet I wonder how you can think it
an easy matter to humble the preposterous Pride of Man; it is not the sight of
a Funeral can do it, nor yet your humbling Uerses; he carefully secures his
Pride from all Assaults while he lives, and charges it to carry it to his
Grave, so dearly he loves it as his best Companion, without which, all worldly
Enjoyments would be insipid, and give him more pain than pleasure, for Pride is
the chief Ingredient in all our Pleasures to make 'em desirable; and for that
reason they do well to keep the thoughts of Death at an humble distance from
their Pride, for Death's the greatest Enemy it can encounter, which first or
last will get the Victory; for how many Persons are in Mourning half their Life
time for the Death of Pride? Those who lament the loss of Youth, the loss of
Beauty, or of Grandeur, it is all but Funeral sorrow for the loss of Pride, the
dear Companion of Beauty, Youth and Grandeur, which is gone before 'em; but if
that will satisfy 'em, they shall soon follow. This we must needs observe in
the Death of our Friends and Relations, who once enjoyed this Life as much as
we do, yet could not baffle Death, but were forced to yield to his Summons,
which are so Arbitrary, we have no Rule to take our Measures by to prevent
surprise; it is therefore best to be always ready to entertain Death's
Harbingers, and make every thing our Monitor, and almost all we see and
converse with, are naturally disposed to do us that courtesy, would we give
leave; for there is so much truth in what you call an Active Death, that more
of Death than Life appears in the imperfection of all humane Actions.

For Example, Your ringing your Passing Bell --, your laying your self out --,
speaking your last Words --, describing your Looks --, and your Spouses
Sentiments upon your Death and sight of you -- are very like the Dream of those
that are under the Image and Similitude of Death, and probably like Dreams may
come to pass by contrarys: For the Circumstances of your Death may differ so
much from what you make account of, that it may not permit you to Pray that
Prayer you have prepared for obtaining the blessing to see and know again your
Spouse in Heaven; but let not this fright you, for you may yet have this
comfort, If it is none of the Joys that belongs to Heaven, you will be happy
without it; but if it is the common Blessing belongs to all beatified Spirits,
you will not want it. Nor can I see the least reason to count our Death, because
it is strange, a dismal and mysterious Change; for what should we fear, since
there is no being unhappy in God's Hands? Had he never discovered to us the Joys
of another Life, we have tasted so much of his Goodness in this, as may well
assure us there is nothing to expect but Happiness wherever he sends us, for
Death, Sin and Misery, was no portion of his providing, 'twas of our own
procuring by Rebelion; therefore it is no matter what we are, nor whether we go,
if we can leave Sin behind us.

How Beautiful were we made at first, to enjoy an earthly Paradise, till
Rebellion and Sin changed all into misery and deformity? But now how glorious
shall we be made at the Resurrection, to fit us for a heavenly Life, where we
are out of all possibility of any change, for we are in no danger to forfeit
that Life, since all the Conditions we hold it by are already fulfilled for us?
You may well think what a bright and serene Morning the Resurrection will make,
and long for it at a great rate, therefore to be provided for your happy Change
is your chief care; when you are once about to die, you will not stay to be asked
the least Question about your Funeral, or disposing your Estate, for you have
not only made your Will, but ordered every Circumstance of your funeral. The
Care and Fondness you show for your Epitaph, and the rich Monument you bequeath
your self, may very justly be imputed to your loving temper; for had Iris been
still alive, you had never had such hot Thoughts and Concern for your cold
Grave, where you are laid in your Imagination with a Pleasure not inferior to
Kings; and to assert your title to that Privilege, can prove your self as
frail and mortal as the greatest Monarch alive.

But though you might think it necessary to make some Friendship and Acquaintance
with Death before you fall into his Hands, I cannot see so much use of the
Contemplation of your Funeral; for to me it is a care I shall never charge my
Thoughts with, but as I live and die Incognito, so I would be buried; and so
would you, I Am persuaded, were it not to show your Friends how much you valued
a Wife that loved you; but having such a President as Jacob, you cannot be
thought vain or prodigal, if like him you erect a Monument in Memory of your
fair Wife and happy Marriage; for it is an imperfect Felicity, according to the
World, that is but little known or talked of.

I am secured from mistaking the Person of your Executor by the Character you
give him, there are so few comes near that resemblance; from whom you may well
promise your self a speedy performance of your Will. But how sluggish must that
Virtue be, that such an Encomium as you have made upon the Fidelity of a Friend
in that occasion, could not animate with Life and Spirits to put every thing in
execution for the Love and Honor of his deceased Friend?

I cannot disapprove your Sentiment, that it is the truest Charity to your
Presumptive Heir, rather to leave him a necessary Instruction to Reflect upon
and do him good, than your Estate, that will do him harm; and the Character you
give the Person you leave it to, will extremely justify your choice. Your
other Legacies are very generous; and in particular to me, who have done
nothing for you equal to so kind a Concern; but it seems to be your design to
exceed all Persons Deserts.

I wish that be all; for your leaving the Athenians and me Mourning, looks as
if you were resolved to engross to your self the sole advantage of living and
dying Incognito; and had sound out the way to discover us to the World; for now
we are not known but guessed at; for wherever Wit and Modesty appears in one
Person, he is presently suspected for one of the Athenians, and perhaps some
Woman may be supposed to be the honorable Lady, if she is once discovered to
abound in her own Sense, which are marks so near the Truth, there needs no more
than putting on Mourning for a Friend, when all the Town knows you are dead, to
make a perfect discovery of those Persons who had lived till then unknown; but
I Am more inclined to impute it to the great ^aste you made to have all your
Business and dying Solemnity over, tha^ you might the sooner satisfy your
longing desire to be happy with I^is; which may very well excuse your oversight
of the danger your Kindness exposed us to.

But I am to seek for the Reason of your giving so much for the Preaching your
Funeral Sermon, when you have but two Virtues to be commended, and which in
reality are none; for what Virtue is there in abhorring Covetousness and
Backbiting, when all your Sufferings are owing to those two Vices? It Is but too
Natural, and far from a Virtue, to hate your Enemies, which they both are, for
the one keeps you from paying your Debts, the other makes you pass for a
Hypocrite: However the Minister is not to deserve his Legacy for the
Commendations he gives you, but you are satisfied if a Sermon is Preached for
the Benefit of your surviving Friends, which is all it can pretend to, when
it is the best performed; nor is any thing more designed in the Highest Elogiums
that are given to any Persons Virtues, it is but to recommend 'em to our
Imitation with the more advantage; and as Humble and Modest as it looks in many
Persons that decline the having funeral Sermons for fear there should be some
mistaken Honor paid to their reputed Virtues, I see but little Reason for it:
If in our Lifetime We must let our Light shine, that Men may see our good
Works, notwithstanding the Danger it may prove to our ^ailty, then why at our
Funerals may not God have the Glory of our good Works, and our Friends the
Benefit of having our Virtue proposed to their Imitation, with all the just
Praise it deserves, for the better prevailing? And as it is the most proper
occasion for Instruction, it is pity any Consideration should disappoint it.

I am of Opinion you might have spared your Ring and Inscription to Valeria,
for should she follow your Counsel, it would deprive her of all the
Satisfaction she should take in her Iointure, when it fell to her, for at
present it is only the Hopes of it that makes her cheerfully undergo all the
Misfortunes relating to herself, and her Dear Spouse, whose Absence she is
forced to bear, having no means to redress this Ill but by a greater, for she
likes her Iointure just as it is, and had rather endure any Misery, than ever
consent to make it better or worse.

Knowing this as you do, let me tell you it is a little unkind, to order the
cutting down the Woods, which will not only alter but deform the Beauty of it,
and she may come to repent all the Sorrows she has endured for the Love of it.
But perhaps you will say, you are as scrupulous of paying your Debts, a^ she of
not breaking her Vow, and she cannot in Conscience but commend you for it; all
this alleged of both sides, it seems to put it more in her Power than yours to
procure a Remedy, and it is a little strange; since, She adheres so strictly to
her Church, as not willing to have a Grave out of their Bosom, she should not
have the Benefit of their Counsel in that difficult Affair, but is left to her
self to suffer so much Misery, for want of a right Judgment, in the Case of a
rash and unlawful Vow; therefore you need take no more concern, if things
remain in the same State they are now, till you Die; you cannot oblige her more,
than to leave her to her Iointure.

You are very kind to your Summer friends, and give 'em great Gifts, were they
not accompanied with so many Reproaches; all thing considered, you have no such
Reason, it is possible to make so good a use of their Ingratitude as may turn
more (...) Advantage, than all the Services of your tried Friends; for they are
(...) only Persons can teach us to abhor in our selves, what we see so odious
(...) them; for to reflect upon our own Ingratitude to God, how humble and
modest should it make us in exacting Gratitude to us poor sinful More, who
never think how much we are indebted to God's Favor and Goo^, for all the
means he gives us of helping others; and we ought to estee^ the Services we do
'em, as special Blessings Heaven bestows upon us, and rec^on 'em as good
Offices which those Persons have done us, in procuring us those Favors; nor
can their want of Ackowledgment do us the least Injury, for if you look into
your self, to see with what Mind you served 'em, and find you had no Worldly
respects in it, but was carried to it by a Ch^itable sense of their Wants, and
respect to your Duty, they then by there Ingratitude, turn you over to God for
your Reward; and how much better is that then the best of their
Acknowledgments; but if your sole aim had been to (...) 'em to you, that they
might repay you in the same Coin* how well you deserve to lose so vain a
Reward; but should it have been a fawning and pretended Affection that deluded
you, (a Misfortune Men of your Loving and Charitable Temper are most liable
(...)) you have ample amends made you, by showing you the World is ^l'd with
false Appearance^, and it is a Folly to rely on humane Com^ts, for Change of
fortune changes friends, for the most part: All you have to regret is, that
your Pains and Cost should be so far lost, as that the Kindness you intended
should be turned to an Injury, by making 'em Guilty of so black a Crime; yet
could you once put 'em into possession of the good Qualities you Bequeath 'em,
many might have cause to thank you, and none will ever after be troubled with
your (...).

But what ever your Thoughts are, in my Opinion you have less reason to expect
all should approve, than to be surpised that some should blame the Publishing
your private Case; who ever appeals to the World, must resolve to stand the
shock of many a harsh Judgment; and though it looks like Vindicating our selves,
the Event makes it quite another thing; 't^s much more like a Design to find
out an infallible way to be truly humbled for all our Faults and Fra^lties,
they will find so many Chastilers amongst the Rash, the Envious, and the
Impertinent, as will make 'em know themselves; but if you your self judge you
have done well in Publishing your Case, as also your Friends who know your
Reasons for so doing, what need you heed the Judgment of those who can only
judge by the Success, not knowing, but guessing at your Motives for it.

But if some Persons shall declaim against the Pains you* have taken to Bury
your self, and say, it is a meet Whim, they must then look upon the Presidents
you have brought of so many great and good Men, that have thought it necessary
to fortify 'em against the Fear of Death, which the soft Pleasures of their
Condition is apt to represent as the greatest of all Evils. But this is not
your Case, you are sick of this Life, and are impatient for a Change; but for
all that* in this treacherous and deceitful World, you think it is good to be
provided of a funeral Essay, to remind you of Death, least some the or other*
you may be T^mpted to forget it; as you see others, who are so taken up with
observing your Faults after you are Dead and Buried in your Cell, which in
Charity they ought to cover, but true Mortification is insensible, which
Happiness I wish yo^ -- Wh^ a^ your etc.

FINIS.

