The K: of Englands Subjects in India Massacred and Tortured by the Hollander


A True and Compendious NARRATION; OR (Second Part of AMBOYNEY) OF Sundry
Notorious or Remarkable Injuries, Insolences, and Acts of Hostility which the
HOLLANDERS Have Exercised from time to time against THE ENGLISH NATION in the
East Indies, etc.

And Particularly, Of the total Plundering and Sinking of the Dragon and
Katherine Both Ships and Men.

With Undeniable and Convincing Proofs for Evidencing the Truth thereof, and
Satisfaction of the Reader.

By a Person of long Observation and Experience; Employed First and Last in the
Affairs of the Indies, Fifty Years, (to wit) from Sr. Walter Rawleigh, his last
Voyage, 1615. To this Present Year, 1665. By I. D.

LONDON, Printed by T. Mabb, for Nathaniel Brook, at the Angel in Cornhill
near the Royal Exchange, 1665.

TO ALL Loyal and True-Hearted Subjects TO THEIR KING and COUNTRY.
Much Honored Readers,
HERE I Present to your View and Serious Consideration, a strange and
Unpollished (but True) Discourse, consisting of several Particulars of great
Consequence and Concernment; And although strange and somewhat Obstruce, yet
very necessary (as I humbly conceive) at this present time truly and
undoubtedly to be rightly understood, in regard the Subjects of this, and
questionless of all other Nations in Europe and else where, that hears so many
false and frivilous Reports of the Dutch; Accompanied with such Insolent,
Ridiculous, and Uncivil Expressions and Interludes; Boastings. Threatenings and
Aspersions of the Hollanders, concerning this their (long-practized and
intended) Cruel, Inhumane and Ungrateful War with England; and little Knowing
or Imagining the first Rise and Foundation thereof; which now according to my
Weak Judgment (but long Observation and Experience) I intend (God willing)
really and briefly to declare, and discover, sufficiently to satisfy any
Reasonable or upright Reader, as by this following Tract from time to time, may
Gradually be observed.

And I humbly conceive that (without presumption) I may confidently affirm,
that whatsoever Prince or Potentate, in or out of Europe, that shall Hear and
Rightly understand the real Truth and Ground of this Holland War, herein so
plainly and punctually Expressed and Remonstrated, and yet will give any
countenance thereto, or compliance therewith; will in conclusion see his own
Error, when he finds and apprehends himself an Enemy to his own Honor and
Grandeur, as well as to his Subjects Just Freedom and Liberty, in point of
Trade and Traffic.

And so most earnestly and heartily desiring and imploring all happiness and
good success to the Land of my Nativity, and to every Individual person
therein that loves the Truth in Sincerity: I do most willingly and freely refer
the Contents hereof to the Grave and Judicious Consideration of the more wise
and discreet Reader; to whose better Judgment, I do most willingly and readily
submit and subscribe,

John Darell.
Postscript.
The Adventurers Names, Ann. 1635. Sir William Courteen, Knight, and William
Courteen his only son; Endimion Porter, Cap John Weddall, Thomas Kynastone,
Nathaniel Mountney, and Samuel Bonnell, all Adventurers in the Dragon and
Katherine, etc.



THE PREFACE, OR INTRODUCTION.
In the prosecution of this uneouth and obstruse discourse, and scrutinous
discovery, I must of necessity plain the way before me by a long and tedious
perambulation of foreign and domestic passages, that by the tract thereof,
the discreet Reader may more easily apprehend how to discern and distinguish by
demonstrative and plain reasons, the hidden truth acted in the East Indies,
from all those surmised and pretended mists of error and ignorance, wherein it
is clouded and Inveloped briefly thus; viz.

The Tract, or Explanation.
WHen famous Sir Francis Drake, Anno 1^80. Sir Francis Drakes discovery, 1580.
had passed the Straits of Magelline, and arived at Ternatto (one of the
Mollucca^s or Benda, or rather Amboyna Islands, because by that di^eful name
they are best known to the English) and intending to return thither again three
years after, but other occasions prevented him.

The Dutch 1595 the English about the same time.
Then the Dutch, Anno 1595. prosecuting the said discovery set forth Fleet after
Fleet, and the English shortly after them and both of them discovering and
arriving at the aforesaid Islands, and other places in the South Seas, as
China, Iapan, etc. but made their Rendevouz upon Iava major, the English at
^antum (a place formerly possessed and walled about with bricks by the Portuguez,
but the Natives had expelled them:) the Dutch at Iaccatra, The English
rendevouz at Bantum, the Dutch at Iaccatra.
a small Village of Fishermen with a little Fort taken by the Dutch from the
Natives and afterward taken by Sir Thomas Dale from the Dutch, Sir Thomas
Dales civility to the Dutch.
whom the Natives demanded to be their prisoners, but Sir Thomas aforesaid
would not deliver a Christian into a Heathens hand, and thereupon gave the
Dutch again possession of the Fort, and bid them fight for their lives, and
left them; which now is become a Famous and Metropolitan City called ^attavia,
or new Holland; But the two Nations English and Dutch did Diametrically differ
in their constitutions and forms of Government, Their constitution in
Government quite different.
and of management, the one here, the other there, from whence proceeded
different successes even to admiration, as at this day appears.

Not long after this there grew quarrels and contentions between them
concerning some of the said Islands of Amboyna, War and contention began,
aforesaid, which by the affections of the Natives, and Proprietors thereof to
the English, were legally surrendered to the said English for the King and Crown
of England, A real resignanation to the Kings Majesty and Crown of England of
4. or 5. of those Islands and Inhabitants.
and confirmed by way of livery, and seizin the said Natives, delivering to the
said English a Turf or Clod of their said Earth, and some of their Fruits
thereupon growing, in testimony of their solemn, and serious, voluntary, and
free resignation of the said Natives themselves, and all their said Lawful and
Hereditary Islands and possessions therein into the protection and subjection
of the King and Crown of England aforesaid. And as I was informed from some
English, to whom they were so surrendered and delivered, the said Islands were
these, viz Polloroon, Lantore, Seran, Nero, Cobo or Cambello; English Amboyna
Islands, Pollaroon, Lantore, Seran, Nero, Cobo, or Cambello.
but the Dutch having Fortified themselves at Amboyna aforesaid and elsewhere,
would not endure it, but warred, destroyed, and massacred both English and
Natives, as well as Spaniards and Portugals, Dutch war begun.
which continued there and at Bantum many years together, notwithstanding
sundry overtures of Treaties and Debates here and in Holland, All Treaties
nulled.
Anno. 1613. and 1615. but all to no purpose because the Dutch prevailed still
in India more and more until they had taken there most of the said Islands,
and twelve Ships, with about eight hundred men, and disposed of them as they
pleased; the Fort or Castle of Seran aforesaid being the last which was held
and defended by the English and Natives one and twenty days, but the Dutch came
with great force and beat away the Natives from assisting the English, and then
they were constrained to abandon it and aboard in May 1615. which gave the
Dutch great encouragement, Bartholomew Churchman, and the English beaten out by
the Dutch.
and fair hopes of attaining their proposed end, to gain the riches, honor,
and dominion of the whole vast trade of India to themselves, still observing
the same rule, knowing thereby how to expel the English from all places in
India of profit by degrees at their pleasure; The Dutch design and end.
And so in the Prince of Auraunge his name, going on then conquering, and to
conquer in the South-seas, as now they do in the North-seas, as Mallabar,
Cothen, Goa, India, Persia, Arabia, Red Sea, etc.

But the aforesaid sad news coming into England caused a treaty here with the
States of Holland, Anno, 1619. Another treaty 1619. no better then Treason.
and there upon an agreement made for some small sum of 80. or 100000 l. ready
money to lose 2 or 300000 l. per annum, For 80. or 100000 l. the English lost
300000 l. per annum.
dreyned ever since out of his Majesty's Dominions, for Nutmegs, Cloves and
Mace, and now for Cinnamon also, wherein the English East India company did
contract as I was informed (without consent of King or Parliament) as well for
the foresaid Amboyna Islands, surrendered and appropriated as aforesaid; as for
the Fruits thereof, Nuts, Cloves, and Mace, etc.

Engl. stock of 1600000 l. circumvented and destroyed by the Dutch mas^acres
and injuries.
And thereupon a mighty joint stock of 15 or 1600000 l. was here speedily
procured, wherewith the English at home (especially Grocers) hoped for wonders
in concluding 2/3 parts thereof to the Dutch and ^/^ part thereof to the
English, and to pay there further in ready money 1/3 part of their charges of
fortifying; which the Dutch thereupon having power in their own hands, knew
very well how to make use of such a blind bargain (as it proved afterward;)
for thereupon the Dutch went on vigorously with their Fortifications for
themselves, The Dutch insolent and peremptory accounts, and present pay.

The English submits, being conquered, so now either subdue or submit, which
God forbid.


making them both many and strong, and raised their accounts to such an
unreasonable height (as they did afterward^ to the King of Zeloan in another
case) and to be paid forthwith without examination, delay, or abatement (as the
said company can best declare;) insomuch as is conceived by some, that the said
1/3 part in ready money, did bear the whole charge, both of Fortifying and
Shipping to fetch rack rice, and course clouts from Mesulapatam, Siam, etc.
making five or six for one, at least in the profits thereof to pay the workmen,
so that in few years thereby, and maintaining a Fleet of defense, and the like;
the aforesaid great stock was much shattered and consumed, and (as some do
verily believe) 800000 l. of the 1600000 l. never returned into England upon a
profitable account, which exceedingly advanced the Dutch designs.

And during all the aforesaid Treaties they ceased not by hostile actions to
subjugate the English more and more: for Anno 1620. Nothwithstanding the
treaties 1619. in 1620. the Dutch seized two English Ships.
(upon some pretense) they made prize of two English ships, the Bear and Star
(carrying tidings of peace, having freed a Dutch ship in their way to India
upon that account) and used much severity to the said English, and confiscated
ships and goods. General John Coon of Battavia; General John Coo^e said then he
would clear India of all English men.

In order thereto he d^barred them from China; observe that well.


saying that he would not leave an English man in India before he had done as
Vantrump of late (though contrary to his own judgment) would sweep the narrow
seas.

This done, then they forced the English Factors from Iapan, and so cleared and
debarred the English for ever after for having any Trade or Commerce either
with China, (observe that well) abounding with Gold, Musk, Civet, and Pearl (as
some report) silk of all sorts wrought and raw, Cloth of gold and silver,
Purselane or China dishes, Lignum Alloes, China roots, and many other rich
commodities.

Also from Iapan abounding with silver and Bulloine more then sufficient to
furnish both Dutch and English in their East India Trade and Traffic, Then
drove them from Iapan.
though the Dutch (I suppose) amount to 3000000 l. and the English to 150000 l.
per annum, returning for Holland, communibus aliis 14 or 1600000 l. but this
year 1664. The Dutch return 1664. reported 4000000 l. or more.
(as a Dutchman reported to me) in their eleven Ships were valued at 4000000 l.
or more.

But the Dutch in India not yet contented with this limitation of the English,
viz not to look into the South-seas beyond Amboyna, The Dutch suffer no Ship to
sail beyond Amboyna.
upon pain of confiscation of Ship and Goods, or utter destruction: the
foresaid General Coon (as conceived) having contrived the Amboyna Massacre Anno
1621. came for Holland to palliate the same by friends and bribes, Genesis John
Coone for Holland, and then the A^boyna Massacre put in execution.
or frivolous, or false pretenses, and left Senior Carpenter General at
Battavia and General Spealte at Amboyna, to see it put in execution, Anno 1622.
which was done very exquisitely and fully, and so abandoned the English thence
to Macass^r a Celebe Island where they could have but what small quantity of
Cloves and Mace, the Molajans or Celebeans could procure by stealth from the
said Islands of Amboyna.

John the Italian his employment.
But that continued not many years neither, but the Dutch by degrees did
intercept and prevent the same; and to that purpose was employed one John an
Italian, and others by the General of Battavia with commissions for that
design; and the said Italian being become a Burgher at Battavia aforesaid, who
upon some occasion (to me unknown) commenced a suit against President, Hawley
and his Council, English President, and council demurres.
which they conceived by the aforesaid Treaty, Anno 1619. they were not bound
to answer; yet notwithstanding the Dutch there proceeded to judgment, and gave
the said Italians 6000 Rials of Eight Spanish, for damage^, and the aforesaid
General Carpenter sent the Captain of the Castle one Adrian, The Captain of the
Castle with Musketeers, Halberts, and Blacksmiths, etc.
who came with a File of Musque^eers, Halberts, and two Blacksmiths with
Instruments, and caused the English warehouse to be forced open, and so much
money in che^ts to be carried away from thence as satisfied the foresaid
Judgment, whereupon President Hawley and Council aforesaid, sent a protest to
the Dutch General and Council aforesaid against their proceedings by Mr. Io
Cartwright an English Factor there; Mr. John Cartwright threatened with another
Massacre.
but the Dutch General aforesaid, would not receive it, but commanded him to
carry it back again quietly, lest they should serve them as they did the
English at Amboyna; and it had certainly been done if the Dutch had known then
what came to pass shortly after; for General Coon not long after his arrival at
Battavia from Holland, Genesis Coones arrival, 1628.

The raising of customs caused a war.


raised the Iavaes customs from 10 to 20. per cent. whereupon the Iavaes made
war upon the Dutch which they undoubtedly would have charged upon the English,
The English gone in time, 162^.
as Combinators, and Instigators thereof. But their removing to Pantum, Anno
1627. prevented it, for the Iavaes came by land with 20000 men, and by sea with
60 or 70. Prows, Anno 1628 with about 60 or 70. men a piece; and next year with
about 40 or 50000. men by land, and all to little purpose; Gene. Coone sent to
the English to abandon their houses.
although at first they assaulted the Castle, and killed six or seven Dutch men
therein, and knocked at the Generals chamber door, (as reported) but were
presently ^orced to fly into the woods, and thereupon the General sent to us
English (being but two) to lodge on the other side of the River, lest in the
night the watch taking us ^or Iavaes should shoot us, which we did. But I
having no mind to sleep, and walking in my chamber in view of the said English
houses, The English Houses fir^d 1628. Aug. 26.
about ten a clock that night I saw two men, the one seeming to me a Dutch
Skipper, the other a Moor or Las^ar with long poles and reeds, or Cajans
fastened thereon^ go from house to house setting them a fire, which were
quickly consumed to ashe^, being built and covered with combustible stuff, and
the day following, the Dutch searched and carried away what remained unburnt,
as Sword blades, etc. and all the Brick wall compassing the said houses were
forthwith pulled down and laid flat with the ground; And thereupon the English
President and Council at Bantum, Another protest for 200000. Rials of eight
Spanish.
made another protest of damages for 200000 l. Rials of Eight Spanish (as true
related) but what the issue thereof was, is su^ely best known to the English
East India company, and the two foresaid English going afterward to the Dutch
General to crave passage for Bantum in their ships (amongst other discourse he
took occasion to s^y that the English knew of the Iavaes coming, Genesis John
Coones hopes.
but they did well to be gone; he said moreover, that the English would not
suffer them to go through the narrow seas, but about Scotland, but he hoped ere
long they would go through whither the English would or no: ^ronice quo ad Engl.

Realiter quo ad Dutch.


And said moreover that our Masters were like their Masters, they would have
all the world, but will not afford the means to get it.

Gen Coone styled Captain of 12. Castles, and Commander of all the Seas in the
world, 1628.
And the King of Ternatte aforesaid, (one of the Amboyna Islands) sending some
of his Orankaies, or Noblemen Anno 1627. upon some message to the Dutch general
aforesaid, gave him the title of captain of twelve Castles, and Commander of
all the seas in the world.

17 Eminent Iavaes massacred, imprisoned, and pillaged.
But the said General (like enough) ruminating how to revenge himself both of
the English and Iavaes, Anno 1632. (the ship Dolphin) one of the English
companies ships, Mr. Thomas Proad commander, having taken in^o his ship at
Iapara seventeen eminent Iavaes to transport them to the red sea and setting
sail from thence toward Bantum, when he came thwart Battavia rode a Dutch
ship, boarded him, and entered, killd and took prisoners, the said Iavaes, and
took all their Jewels, Gold, and Treasure they could find, supposing thereby,
so to incense and exasperate the Iavaes against the English either to fall upon
them violently, The Dutch project against the English.
or expel them from their Factories of Bantam, and Iapara, and Iambe that the
Dutch might shut them out of the streights of Sundie as well as Molacca, and
that is it they long for, etc.

Observat. I.
Observation I.
To ponder and consider the Dutch Tyranny
By pondering and well considering the premises, the discreet. Reader may truly
perceive and understand to what a transcendent height of sovereignty, power and
opulency the said Dutch East India commonwealth had attained 36 years ago, The
Dutch East India commonwealth.
where neither English nor French, Dane, Swead nor Iannesses, as well as
Portugals and Spaniards (but English and Portugals especially have suffered by
them exceedingly and cruelly:) I say not any of the foresaid Nations, nor any
others under Heaven (not there inhabiting) durst then look or sail into their
foresaid south seas (as they term and challenge them) but all Nations must be
subject to seizure, and confiscation of men, ships, and Goods, to that insolent
and a^bitrary Government, notwithstanding any Treaty or Cont^act made here with
the States of Holland to the contrary, All Treat^es contemned, and used as nets
and snares.
which are but nets and sna^es to delude the English; for in India they neither
are nor have been regarded; thereby the Dutch as former and later experience
does suffi^iently evince, having always their Ships ready to seize and command,
for there has been seen and told in Battavia rode at one time together, riding
at Anchor 130 fall great and small, from 3 or 400 Tun burden, 130 ships in
Battavia Rode, by Captain William Swanley.
to 13 or 1400 Tun burden; and as they have done in the south sea^, now they
proceed in like sort in the North seas, having lately taken Cocheen Town and
Castle from the Portugals upon the coast of Mallabar and Connanoze, Cocheen
Town and Castle taken by the Dutch from the Portugals, 1662.
and other Ports and places where Esquire Courteen had most of his Factories, Esquire
Courteens factories.
and so commanding from Mallabar to Detanne, India, Persia, Arabia, Red sea,
Soffala, Mosambique, Mombassa, all along to Cabo de bona Esperanza, ten
thousand leagues coasting, Cape bon Esper. K. James proclaimed 1620. now under
the Dutch command of ten thousand Leagues coasting.
where they have now a brave plantation; notwithstanding Anno 1620. Captain
Andrew Shilling, Captain Richard Blithe, Captain John Swan, and Captain
Christopher Brown, commanders of Ships, London, Heart Ro-buck and Eagle, with
Trumpets, Drums, and English colors; then proclaimed King James (of blessed
memory) King thereof, gathering a great heap of stone^, and left there for a
Monument of remembrance. But now the two aforesaid Dutch companies of East and
West Indies, are met together, How the two Dutch Companies meet.
in hopes also to command from North to South, and so to cross all the subjects
of Emperors, Kings, Princes, and Potentates of the whole Universe (save only
the Narrow Seas of England, which is their chief stumbling block.

Observe. 2.
Observation II.
The Readers observations of Treaties and Treasons.
From whence the discreet Reader may further gather this truth from the
Premises; That all or most of the Dutch Treaties (especially those relating
the East-Indies^ their Darling Diana) are either Clandestine Treasons or
prepensed prejudicial Policies, to abuse and circumvent Kingdoms and Nations
to reduce them to reason (as they term it) which reason of theirs will never be
satisfied until they have subjected the trade and treasure of all Countries and
Nations upon earth, to their unlimited East India arbitrary Government, The
Dutch Arbitrary Government.
to bring and fetch, rule and rate, all commodities bought or sold, at their
pleasure and price; and then to put in practice that design and project which
they were hammering at their Town of Pollicatte, A Dutch Project.
upon the coast of Mesulapatum, Anno 1628. harkning but to hear the word from
Battavia (as there they reported) which was, viz. First, to sack and plunder
the rich Town of Mesulapatam, The Dutch Project in 1628.
and then to destroy all their Vessels and Boats upon that coast: And it should
have been done had not a brabling pedling Nation (meaning the English) stood in
their way to receive some profit thereby, as well as themselves; and
peradventure they have used this policy already in their south-seas of
Amboyna, China, Iapan, etc. from whence they might send for Holland such a
large return this year 1664, of 4000000 l. (as some report) much more has and
might have been said concerning this Subject: But I must remember my promise
and follow the question propounded more closely, and succinctly.

The English Companies supine Error^ and Ignorance
Now the English East India company (as I conceive, but themselves can best
discover^) having advanced 5000000 l. or more in several joynt-stocks, and
purchased no place to secure men, ships, or goods; and the Dutch but one sacred
stock (as they term it) of 600000 l Anno 1602. The Dutch cruel diligence.
And the English Factors and Servants in India as aforesaid being so tossed,
tortured, and ejected out of their best Factories and Foundations of trade; And
his Majesty highly abused and deluded in his just right and title to 4 or 5. of
the said Islands of Amboyna as formerly expressed; His Majesty's Right to Castles
and Customs.
Also to half of the customs of Persia, as well as to the Towns and Castles of
Ormus and Cashme, Ormus and Persian Castles and Customs.
which the Dutch hitherto by their power refuses to pay, though justly due, as
by agreement with the Persian may appear, which is of very great consequence:
And by these great abuses aforesaid and otherways much of the said 1600000 l.
national stock was spent and consumed in and about the Fortifications there,
which in reason ought to add much to the Interest of the English there, and to
be expected from the benefit of the Fruits thereof, for the time elapsed, To
require an Account of damages sustained during the time elapsed.
which would amount to an exceeding great sum: And in Justice and Equity ought
to be required and satisfied by the usurpers, and wrongful possessors thereof.

Thus the said company being reduced to such a sad condition of Commerce losing
in their principal adventurers some 30. some 40 per cent some more. The English
East India Companies sad condition.

His late Majesty's excellent wisdom and redress.

His late Majesty's Honor and respect.

Sir William Curteen's adventure in particular 80000 l.


But upon their addresses to his late Majesty (of ever blessed memory) a remedy
was speedily provided, And a new company of adventurers instituted and ordained
wherein his said late Majesty was pleased so far to express his interest
therein, and affection thereto, as appears by admitting them to wear his own
colors constantly, and honoring the said company with a royal Signet
engraven with three Crowns and a Lion Passant, whereof Sir William Courteen
(that famous Merchant) was appointed Governor and Director by his Majesty and
Council, adventuring therein for his own particular ( inter alium) 80000 l. and
the said company was constituted and ordained by his said Majesty and Council
in the best and most legal way and form that ever yet in England was invented
(which the Dutch quickly apprehended) and with so much wisdom, The Dutch
foresight in the loss and danger of their Trade.
discretion, reason, moderation, and modification, in the limitation and
prescription of all parties and interests without injuring or encroaching one
on the other being in strange and remote Countries and places where the English
had no Factories or Correspondence of Commerce, and with as much prudence and
respect as any reasonable man could expect, desire, or require. And the said
Sir William and adventurers, Anno 1635. speedily equipped and set forth to sea
6. ships viz the Dragon, 6 Ships set forth 1635.
Captain John Weddal Commander and Admiral, the Sun, Captain Richard Swanley
Commander and Viceadmiral; the Katharine, Captain John Carter Commander and
Rear-admiral; the Planter, Captain Edward Hall Commander; the Anne and
Discovery: But shortly after their departure from the Downs, the said Sir
William fell ^ick and died; and the said ships proceeded and arrived in India
purchasing Ports and places for Commerce, and Customs, and for Fortifications,
and rendevouze to secure the same; Arriving in India, purchased and settled
Factories and Fortifications.
which the old Company heretofore never did.

And by this expedition, in the very first and second year, the said old
Companies losses in their adventures aforesaid, returned with so much profit
increasing also their ships from 1, or 2 per An. to 3,4, or 5 per Ann. and also
affording the said Company many several courtesies, relieving their ships with
necessaries, Great advantage thereby to the English- East India Company.
and their men from the miserable Mallabar Captivity that ever yet was known
(save the matchless Massacre at Amboyna;) and yet this Company (as Counselor
Chute pleaded for Esquire Courteen, at the Bar of the Lords house, Anno 1647.
(did very modestly term them) proved afterward in many respects exceedingly
ungrateful and injurious, Councelor Chu^es leading^ ^gain^^ the Company for
50000l. dammag^s, now much more.
where I must leave them and hasten my search, after the Dragon, Sun, and
Katherine aforesaid.

The Subject, Matter, or Conclusion.
ANd finding them pursuing their honest and lawful Employments, but passing
through the Straights of Mallacca for China (a Town and Castle taken by the
Dutch from the Portugals, Mallacca ever f^ce, till the^ Dutch to^k it from the
Por^ugals but never after.
and ever till then free for the English to pass) the said ships were there
presently encountered and commanded by four or five Dutch ships to go into
Mallacca aforesaid; Sr. William Court^en^ ships the e encountered, and
threatened.
but having no business there they refused, the said Dutch then threatened to
^ink or burn by their sides, but they would force them in; yet the said Dutch
doubting their own Strength suffered them to pass but with terrible Menaces and
Threats, that they would have a better account at their Return: And when the
said English with much perplexity and trouble from sundry Nations as well as
the Dutch, had finished their Affairs in China aforesaid, they returned back
again through the aforesaid Straights of Malacca, and then they were encountered
again with a greater power of Dutch ships double manned, and by them sternly
commanded to go into Mallacca and speak with their Governor: Sr. William
Cour^^^n^ ships again there encountered, and s^re threatened to sink or burn
them, so commanded by Commission.
Captain Weddal and the rest English, still denying to obey their command, then
the said Dutch showed their Commission, which was either to bring them in by
force, or to deliver them, the Portugals and their goods who were many and of
great value, by estimation worth 200000l. or to sink or burn by their sides,
and thereupon their time being limited, and a glass turned for the English to
give their answer: The glass turned to give their answer.
Then Captain Weddal called a Consultation, and debated with his Captains and
chief Officers what they should do, wherein were different Opinions; for some
were for Fighting the Dutch forthwith, as Captain Weddal and his men;
Difference in opinions, amongst the English Commanders, at last agreed.
Others for delivering up the Portugals and their Goods, holding it neither
Valor nor Wisdom to venture their Lives for them, from whom they had received
many Injuries and Abuses, as Captain Richard Swanley aforesaid Vice Admiral and
his men, whereat Captain Weddal aforesaid was exceedingly moved, and thereupon
gave Captain Swanley some reproachful and uncivil language, as Coward, and the
like: But Captain Weddal falling into a calmer temper, Captain Swanley moved
him to call for the Black box, November 8. wherein were instructions from the
Kings Majesty concerning the Portugals, Black box, No. 8th. His late Majesty's
Order concerning the Portugals.
and there they found to this, or the like effect, viz: That if they hapened to
receive any prejudice, or damage from the Portugals, to take their remedy by
what means they could get it. Then Captain Swanley aforesaid, moved Captain
Weddal aforesaid further, and said; that if he Captain Weddal would really
seize the Portugals as prisoners, and their goods confiscated to the King of
England for the injuries and abuses they had received from the said Portugals;
Captain Weddal should then see and find, Captain Weddal's seizure of the
Portugals and Goods.
that neither himself nor his men would prove Cowards, but would freely and
willingly spend their dearest blood in that Quarrel, and fight it out to death
to the last man. To which motion, Captain Weddal readily and speedily
condiscended and made seizure accordingly. Then Captain Swanley in the ship Sun
(being of greatest force) weighed Anchor, Captain Richard Swanleys Declaration
and Message to the Dutch Commander of their Resolution.
and went and rid a head the Admiral, purposely to receive the first Assault of
the Dutch; and before the glass was out, Captain Swanley carried this their
Resolution and Ground of the Quarrel, and Declared the same to the Dutch
Commander (being one of his old acquaintance at Amboyna) at the hearing of
which Message and Resolution, the said Dutch Commander was much troubled,
fretting and fuming, and tearing his hair; saying, he had no instructions in
that case, but must go in again for new, and that he was sure to lose his head
when he came to Battavia, The Dutch Commander much discontented, fea^ing his
head.
because he did neither burn, nor sink, nor bring them into Mallacca, and so
going in for new and further Instructions, came out no more: And the Dragon,
Sun, and Katherine, proceeded and came to Goa, and there landed all the said
Portugals and their Goods, Captain Weddal at Goa, landed the Portugals and
Goods.
according to agreement made with them at Maccao in China (but contrary to that
pretended seizure, and Captain Swanleys expectation) and the said Captain
Swanley in the said Ship Sun, came that year home and arrived safe in England,
but the Dragon and Katherine staid in India until the next year to complete
their lading.

But when the Dutch (observing the Motion of the Dragon and Katherine)
understood plainly, The Dutch thereby so enraged and exasperated, sought how to
be revenged.
that by the foresaid pretended seizure, they were merely deluded and
disappointed, both of their prey and purpose, doubtless they were exceedingly
exasperated and enraged; And it was not their Commanders head that would
assuage or satisfy their Constant and Frequent Bloody and Cruel Malice and
Revenge (as former and latter experience plainly remonstrates) but when the
aforesaid Dutch^ Commander came to Battavia, The Scene altered, and the
Commanders head off^ no p^ice to appease their Malice.
the Scene was altered, and a new device framed to destroy them altogether,
and not suffer any to live to bring back the said tidings of their Destruction.

FOr, in, or about the Year, 1637. upon a War or Difference between the King of
Coelon and the Portugals there Inhabiting; The Hollanders Vpperland States of
their United Provinces of Battavia, Amboynia, Tewan, etc. neglecting no
opportunity to advance their foresaid designs of Conquest and Trade Complied
with, and assi^ted the for^said King against the said Por^ugals (being very
ancient in^abitants there) and undoubtedly it was that very same Fleet going
upon that occasion to Coelon ( before the Dragon and Catherine set sail for
England) that extinguished, and most barbarously destroyed both those two ^hips
and Men, according to the several Relations of English, Portugals, and Dutch,
etc. And that done; Then the said Fleet proceeded upon their design at Coelon
aforesaid, where in few years after, they conquered and vanquished the foresaid
Portugals both by Sea and Land, and took and surpised all thrir ships and
goods (with their chief Town or City of Collombo and the rest) with all their
Castles, Fortifications and Houses or Towns, with all the Good^ and Treasure;
Ordinance, Ammunition and Appurtinances, therein and thereto belonging, and so
quickly possessed and dispatched the Riches and Subjects of two Eminent Kings in
Europe out of their way; and the third, the King of the said Island and his
Subjects escaped not altogether free; For (by good report) when the said King
desired to know their demands for their assi^tance, and the same being
produced, the said King was thereat much amazed and said, that he and all his
Subjects were not worth the one half or quarter of what the said Hollanders
demanded, (notwithstanding the exceeding great plunder and booty taken from the
English and Portugals aforesaid? And so the said King being altogether unable
to sati^fie their said demands in any reasonable measure (and to be rid of
them, as he once well hoped, but they never intended) Therefore the said King
was constrained and necessitated to Submi^t, and to suffer the said Hollanders
to enjoy all the Portugals Towns and Castles aforesaid with, etc. ut supra; and
what other Ports or places upon his said Islands they desired: And further to
permit and suffer the foresaid Hollanders States, to conferr a Kings Ship upon
the said John Tyson, as an extraordinary Reward and Recompense for all his good
services, according to the usual construction of Holland and Dutch Reason?
Supposing thereby, to Declare and Proclaim to all Kings, Emperors, and
Princes, beyond Cape bona Esperanza and to their Subjects; That as they the
Holland Upperlander States aforesaid, had power there to destroy and set up
Kings at their pleasure; so had their Masters in their Neatherlands the like
power; or more over all Kings and Emperors in Europe, and ^o th^reby thinking
to free themselves from that aspersion, which many Heathens seemed long since
justly to lay upon them, (to wit,) That they were some Rude, Brutish, Boarosh,
Uncivil, and Barbarous people, and of low esteem in Europe? Because they had no
King. And thus, Per fas aut nefas they intend ^ if possible) to build their
Babel as high as Heaven. But I must here, Ponere Obicem, and give you a True
and Perfect Copy of Quondam Skipper Now Dutch President, and Hollands King John
Tyson, one of his Warrants to his Subjects, within the Verge of his Command and
Jurisdiction.

A true translation of one of his Warrants by Geo. Gawton Merchant, which came
to my hands at Goa in India, 7. Nov. Stilo Veter, 1664.
John Tyson President for the Dutch at Gallee in Coelon.
THe Chief of the people of Gampa, with the rest dwellers; Let them come and
obey the Hollands King, and bring the other Duragos or Dwellers of the
Neighboring Aldees or Towns; and the Challes or Inhabitants of Urngampala, and
of Galleluja and Hivitiania, and all other Challees or Inhabitants, Subjects to
the Corlo or Governor of Allicuer, and the Captain of Gampan withal; And in
case all these people eannot come, Let him appear before the King; For so is
the Kings command.

The seven Corlos or Commanders are already at Ningumbo.

Concerning the loss of the Dragon and Katherine.
Out of the Book of Resolutions at Goa, in the Instruction given to Io.
Dursenon his Persia Voyage written by John Darett.
ALso if you happen to meet with the ship Hopewell (Mr. Edward Lock or
whosoever Commander) enquire diligently of six Dutchmen taken Aboard the said
ship, at her last being at Cocheen; who can make certain relation concerning
the Dragon and Katherine, their sinking between the Islands of Coylon and
Mauritius by seven Dutch Vessels or Ships, (as we are informed) whereof the
Ship called Amsterdam was Admiral; 21. November 1644. in Goa.

London, 9th. of June, 1641.
FRancis Day says, That from Mesulapatam, he came to Surratt; and coming
before Goa, was forced to strike by the Hollanders; and a Boat from the Ship
Amboyna, came aboard to have a discharge, how that they received no injury from
the Hollanders; which discharge, was written twice before it could be to their
likeing. And amongst the Boats Crew, there was an English man who told to the
Purser of the Expedition (as three or four men come home by the Crispine can
witness) It is well you struck, for all the guns aboard were primed, and the
Lynstocks ready, waiting for the word to give fire and would have sunk you, and
God knows what is become of Captain Weddal, which words being spoken he was
called away by the Commander into the boat. These persons present:

William Courteen, Fr. Day, Isaac Saxby, and D. G. (i. e.) David Goubard.

John Carter came home in the Crispine, and afterward in the Bon Esperanza
tells the same words as Francis Day abovesaid.

London 25th January, 1641.
A Board the Hester at Blackwal, present. William Courteen, John Rushout,
Captain Robert Moulton, Anthony Robert, one of the Queens Musitions, Edward
Kinpe, John Bening, Thomas Gent. and D. G. (i. e.) David Goubard.

Was told by William Tailor Masters Mate, and confirmed by Robert Hogg Master
of the Hester.

THat William Tailor aforesaid, going a shore at Cocheen with William Gorley,
the Governor of the Town and Castle, demanded, or asked him (among other
things) whether the General (meaning Captain Weddal was arrived in England with
his two Ships, to which they answered, he was not; And do you know (said the
Governor) what is become of those two Ships? They said they knew not; then
said he, you must know that they were sunk by the Hollanders about Ceylon; They
asked how he knew this; To which he answered, here are passed through this Town
two slaves which were taken by the Hollanders, and made an escape from them at
Ceylon, which two slaves have reported the same for a certain truth to all the
Inhabitants of Cocheen; The said two slaves were then gone for Goa or India,
etc.

More particulars they neglected to enquire after, because that Mr. Gurley nor
none of our people would believe it to be probable.

They also asked what Hollanders should have sunk or taken them. Answer was
made, The Fleet which lay before Goa of twelve sail in their way home to
Jaccatra, whereof was General one of the Holland Ships lying before Goa was the
ship Trevere.

Sir John Hubbard writes to his Friends in London, that he has advice out of
Holland, that Captain Weddall was sunk in the East Indies by the Hollanders.

John Bening Mr. of the Planter, heard Mr. Mountney say, Captain Weddalls two
ships were worth, 150000l. in England besides his own goods, 20000l. very near.

One Lawrence a Dane who came home from the Streights with Mr. Lucas, told to
the Wife of James Clarke, tailor in the Dragon; That he was at the sinking or
Taking of the Dragon and Katherine, by seven Holland Ships.

Robert Hogg tells of one which was at Plynmouth a Hollander, and was before at
the sinking of Captain Weddall, he was with Mr. Tuchburn.

Captain Swanley tells of one James Burdett which had a Letter from India^
which makes mention of the very same report by a slave, which made escape from
the Hollanders.

Anno 1644.
AT the return of Thomas Lamberton, William Page, Thomas Newman and others
taken in the Bon-Esperanza going to China, and brought prisoners into Mallacca
with ten wounded men which lay there in the Hospital, where they found a
Scotch-man lying sick, who upon his dying told the aforesaid men of the
Bon-Esperanze, that he could not dye before he had declared that he was at the
taking of the Dragon and Katherine, which were going from India unto the Cape
Bon-Esperanza by seven Holland Ships which coming in fare by Captain Weddall
they pretended to be bound home, and invited him with Captain Carter and both
the Mountneys aboard; where having feasted together, so was Captain Weddall and
his Friends brought upon the Deck, and told they must into the Sea, whereupon
more words past; and they were bound back to back and thrown into the sea,
those of the Dragon and Katherine seeing the same fit^ed themselves to fight,
but were taken, and their Ships Robbed, and then with (all the men remaining
alive) bored and let sink in the Sea; he told that the same Fleet came to
Mallacca, afterward where much was hid; the rest of the common men was sent
for the Moluccoes, and that well known by many in Mallacca, but durst not speak
of it, The said Lamberton and others asked the Lieutenant of the Town about the
same; but he answered, that upon their lives they should not speak of such
things.

A Declaration of some News seeming probable, of the Dragon and Katherine of
Esquire Courteens; Captain John Weddall, and Captain John Carter Commanders.
From the Mouth of Boat-swain Went; John Thomas, Hinton Quondam, Chyrurgion of
the Ship Bon-Esperanza employed in the service of the Worshipful Esquire
Courteen, Anno 1644. in the Month of August, being by sinister occasion at
Johanna, in the Ship Hopewell of the old Companies, at which time also was the
Crispine and Dolphin of the old Companies there, as also the Loyalty Mr. John
Durson Commander, belonging to the Esquire Courteen, had this following
Relation of the Destruction of the Dragon and Katherine, by the Dutch as
follows.
THe said Boat-swain Went, Boat-swain of the good ship Dolphin, Mr. Thomas
Proud Master in the said Ship, 1643. upon some employment went from Surratte
to the Southward, viz. To Cocheen a Portugal Town, where (upon what occasion I
know not) having some conference with a servant of the Governors of Cocheen
concerning the Dutch. The man told him of a fight made off of Ceylon between
the Dutch and English, viz. Two English Ships and seven Dutch Ships, the
English Ships named the Dragon and Katherine, both which the Dutch overcame,
sinking the one and forcing the other a shore, so eagerly prosecuting them,
that some of the English having escaped drowning and got a shore, the Dutch in
their Boats hasted a shore likewise and cut them all off. Now no doubt but the
Dutch have projects enough to conceal this Villainy; but if this Relation be
true, Gods wonderful power is evident in the Discovery, for this servant to the
Governor was in the Dutch Ships at that time in their service, when they
fought and following the English a shore (he being one among the Dutch) made
escape to the Portugals and in time came to serve the Governor of Cocheen.
This is the Relation that I heard Boat-swain Went Relate, and indeed I went
aboard purposely to inquire of him about that business: I desired to have the
Relation under the Boat-swains hand, but I could not obtain it, by reason
partly of ^is unwillingness, and partly the shortness of our time, for they
suddenly set sail from Joanna, Also the Boat-swain said the Governor of
Cocheen ^nows of the matter, and upon inquiry (if he pleases can produce you
his Servant if living; if not, he himself is able to give satisfaction. Was
under written, Thomas Hinton. DUarte, de figueiredo de Mello Secretario de sua
Majestrade do estado da India, Certifico que assistindo na Ilha de Ceylon soube
por algus Prisoneires Olandeses, que se tomarao coms as duas naes do Capt.
Guadel que hia da China Para Inglaterra, as tomarao o^ Olandeses no Cabo da
Boa-Esperanca and as meterao ambas apique; Is^o he o que me constor de ditos
dos dites Prisoneires, Secutarto.

Goa a 22 de April de 1647. Duarte defigueiredo de Mello.


I Edward De Figueirdo de Mello Secretario to his Majesty of the State of
India, do Certify, that being in Commission in the Island of Ceylon; I came to
know by some Prisoners of the Hollanders, that they met with two Ships of
Captain Weddals, which were going from China for England, and that the
Hollanders took them toward the Cape of Bon-Esperanza and sunk them both. This
is what appears unto me by the Relations of the said Prisoners.

Goa 22. April. Anno 1647. Was underwritten, Duarte defigueiredo de Mello.




FOr when the said Dutch Commander doubted the cutting off his Head; in stead
thereof they furnish him (as credibly reported) with seven Sail of proper
Ships, Seven Sail set out to look after the Dragon and Katherine.
four greater, three lesser; the Ship Amsterdam about 1400. Tun burden being
Admiral: No doubt but with strict Injunctions utterly to destroy the said two
Ships, Dragon and Katherine and so preserve his Head on his Shoulders, which it
seems by manifold reports and Instances he performed very Fully and Effectually
lying in wait ^or them with his said Fleet, hovering too and again about
Caeloan the only Cinnamon Island in the world, taken by the Dutch from the
Portugals and Natives, whereof John Tyson a Dutch man, John Tyson the Holland^
King at Caeloan.
(first a Scullion, (or some such thing) then a Skipper, and at best a
Commander) was made King as by his Warrants appeared, Anno. 1644. Eter. forab,
26. or 28. years, etc. and knowing well what course the said two Ships Dragon
and Katherine would steer for England, having sufficient Intelligence and Spies
abroad to observe their motion, and to bring them word when and at what time
they set sail from Goa and the Coast of Mallabar, whom the said Dutch Fleet
unhapily discovered, The Dutch Fleet with the Dragon and Katherine.
and hailing one to the other, who and whether bound according to the manner of
the Sea; Captain Weddall answered of White Hall for England, as by his Colors
appeared? The Dutch answered of Battavia, homward bound for Holland, and so
seemed glad of one another company, and as commonly reported in India, they
kept company some reasonable time until they had them at sea far enough from
any Land. And when the Dutch saw their opportunity, they invited Captain
Weddall and Captain Carter with their chief Officers, in friendly manner aboard
their Admiral, The Dutch their friendly invitation of Captain Weddal etc. aboard
the Ship Amsterdam aforesaid. And when they had eaten and drank sufficiently,
the Dutch suddenly clapped a guard upon them, and Seized, Pillaged and sunk the
said two Ships Dragon and Katherine, The Dutch seizing, Pill^g^ng and Sinking
the two Ships, binding all the men back to back, throwing them overboard; and
this was the certain end of the Dragon and Katherine.
wearing the King of Englands Colors, and bound the English back to back and
threw them all over board (as in India and else where frequently reported) and
this was the final and dismal conclusion and confusion of the aforesaid two
Ships, Dragon and Katherine, valued at 180000l. besides their Commanders,
Merchants and others, men of great Quality and Reputation, who doubtless had
very great estates therein.

Ship Bon. Esperanza afterward taken.
Afterward the Ship Bona-Esperanza in the same Employment, and in the said
Straights of Mallacca, was there violently assaulted by the said Dutch, killing
and wounding the Master and many others, but the Portugal Passengers calling
for Quarter, the ship was enterd and seized on by the Dutch, Some of the Dutch
entering, said they did well to yield when they did, else they had gone after
the Dragon and Katherine aforesaid.
some of them saying to the Chyrurgion and other English in the said ship, viz.
They did well to yield when they did, else they had gone after the Dragon and
Katherine, and Carrying the English Prisoners a shore, towing his Majesty's
Colors at their Boat stern (as reported.) A Scotch man a shore lying very
sick, very earnestly, desired to speak with some of the English; A sick Scotch
man did declare the Fact to several English men.
And it was to inform them, that he was in that sad action of the Dragon and
Katherine, and his conscience therefore was exceedingly troubled and afterward
died.

Then the Great William, Captain Jeremiah Blackman Commander upon the same
Employment, Captain Jeremiah Blackman very narrowly escaped the like by an
unexpected course.
and in the said Streights of Mallacca was likewise assaulted and sore
threatened by the said Dutch, but doubting their own strength, he passed them
going to China, but they waylaid his return with seven Ships, they supposing
and expecting that for fear he would have gon^ through the Streights of Sundie
at the Souther most end of Sumatra and so to catch or tole him to sea without
ken of land as they did the Dr^gon and Katherine, and pretend themselves a
homeward-bound Fleet; and when they had seen their opportunity if not to carry
him to Battavia, confiscate Ship and goods which had been as great courtesy as
he could expect from them, or else to have sent him and his Company to seek the
Dragon and Katherine in the bottom of the sea, And this was the end of the
Dragon and Katherine, without any other cause, then presuming to sail in their
South Se^^,
for presuming to sail in their South-seas without their leave; but he steering
an unexpected courfe, by, or near the Shore in sight of Mallacca happily
escaped them.

Now to conclude and finish this Disquisition concerning the Dragon and
Katherine, and to discover the plac^ into which they are sent, and the parties
who sent them; our next and l^st work is to produ^e our Indi^^^^^ and proofs
that it is so really and indeed, Now they are discovered, n^xt to o^r proofs,
etc. which are far more and better then in such a case would be expected or
Imag^ned.
wherein it is well hoped that better evidence will be asse^ted and produced,
th^n in such a case could well be expected or required.

Some plain and pertinem Indi^i^es and Proofs, concerning the destruction of
the Dragon and Katherine.
I.
THe diligent observation of the constant Series of the Dutch in the Insolent
actions, and cruel proceedings of their States General in their East India
Vpperlands and United Provinces of Amboy^^ and Buttavia ( Alias, New Holland)
and in their continued Prosecution of English and Portugals; Portugals and
English con^pa^ed to sheep or Ja^-cauls, driven to and fro by the Dutch Lions
and Tigers.
Abinitio, driving them (like Sheep or Jac-cauls by their high and mighty
power) out of all profitable places of Trade as aforesaid, in order by degrees
to expel them out of India, not daring to look beyond Cape Bon-Esperanza. The
constant and insolent actions of their Vpperlands States of Am^oyna and
Battavia:

And by Affi^avit thereof made before John Pa^e a Master ^n Chancery 23. of
F^b. 1646.

Bartholmew Church man, and^.


As also their contempt and de^ision of all Treaties and Agreements made with
their States of the Netherlands concerning any matter or thing beyond the said
^ape, as may appear not only by their neglect of all former Treaties, and
Waring and Wronging there, while treating here (as I conceive) at this instant
with the King of Bantum, merely to drive the English out of their Pepper Trade
at Iambee; but also it appears by their General I. Coones expression, Anno.
1^20. to the Commanders and Company of the English Companies; two Ships, Bear
and S^ar^, saying, that they would not leave an English man in India before
they had done; And Anno, 1628. When the said Coon was st^led by the King of
Ternatte Captain of Twelve Castles, and Commander of all the Sea^ in the World.
And afterward two English men craving passage for ^a^tum? He the said General
^oon replied, and said, the English would not suffer them to go through the
N^rrow Se^s, etc. But he hoped ere long to go through whether the English would
or no, etc. as by Remonstrance appears^ and said moreover, that the English
East India Company like theirs, would have all the World, but not afford them
the means to get it, etc.

II.
That long before the Amboy^a Massacre, they had debarred the English from
having any Commerce with China, Iapan, or Phillipeen Islands the Spaniards.
Their debaring and obstructing all Nations, for trading into those seas upon
Confiscation.
And ever after that Massacre, not to sail b^yond the Celeeb Islands, or
Macasser upon confiscation of ships and goods, and incurring their further
displeasure; wherefore some English knowing this, and that the Dutch were in
good earnest for their own advantage, for it was 4. or 500000l^ per an. profit
to them, and 2. or 300000l, per annum loss to the English ever since, by
loosing his Majesty's Right (and Merchant^ Trade) therefore refused to go that
Voyage with Capt. John Carter Commander of the Katherine, for this very Cause
and Danger, els^ very willingly would have accepted of the Motion.

III.
That Rebellious and wicked agreement made in India, Their agreement, and
resolve in India to destroy, as by Affidavit etc. ut supra.
(and afterward Printed by Authority in England, and Affidavit upon O^th
likewise made before a Master in Chancery) between the Dutch and English,
utterly to destroy that exceeding hopeful Employment of Sr. William Courte^^
Knight. William Courteen Esquire his Son^ and the rest Adventurers into East India,
by Seizing, Sinking, Burning, or otherwise; wherein the Dutch diligence was
very remarkable in all the said Esquires Ships that went for China, All ships
going that way questioned, sunk, or taken.
for certainly the Dragon and Katherine suffered as aforesaid, and the Ship
Bon-Esperanza also, and the Sun and Great William very narrowly escaped;
neither was the said English at home or abroad, altogether idle as in time
convenient may further be declared.

IV.
Capt. Richard Swanley to Io. Darell, August 1647. upon Exchange London.
The Relation of Captain Richard Swanley concerning that last passage of Seizure
of Portugals and their Goods in the Streights of Mallacca, whereby the said
Dutch were so enraged and exasperated, that they hunted violently to destroy
the said Dragon and Katherine as the said Captain feared, as by the aforesaid
Relation more largely appears.

V.
Capt. William Swanley's Relation to the said John Darr^ll^ upon Exchange
London.
The Relation of Captain William Swanley, who being in Holland, Anno 1638. when
the Dutch East India Fleet arrived; and the said Dragon and Katherine was then
expected: As the said Captain was drinking with a Friend, there several Dutch
men doing the like, and only a slight thin Deal board between them, some other
Dutch men enquired; What news of Captain Weddall? They answered that he was
sunk and Drowned. The said Captain hearing this, presently desired to be
satisfied more fully; therefore he went to those Dutch men newly come from
India and enquired of them, but they were very shie and would not discover it
any further; only they told him they heard it was so, and that it is all one,
for none but their own Country men could tell them so, and it will admit of
no other construction, but that it was so indeed; which amounts to a plain
discovery by their own open and free Confession for the one or the other, must
actually be present actors in the said Destruction.

VI.
The Relation of John Stratford a Cord-wainer in Southwark (and Kinsman to Mr.
Daube^ey Chyrurgeon of the aforesaid Ship Katherine) and for whom the said
Stratford had caused to be made, The Relation of John Stratford, to the said
John Darell and others.
an Imbroidred Girdle with Silver Buckles; which Girdle the said Chyrurgion,
promised never to part with for love or money. And this said Chyrurgeon was
well and in good health, when the Dragon and Katherine aforesaid set sail for
England (as the men in the Ship Mary coming then from India aforesaid report.)
But afterward the said John Stratford saw two Dutch men in Southwark, going
from one Goldsmiths shop to another upon their occasions, and espied one of
the said Dutch men to have or wear the very same Girdle, and enquired of the
said Dutch man, how he came by the said Girdle, and where he had it? for said
Stratford, I know it very well; The said Dutch man somewhat abashed at the
question, at last told him he had it in India; I thought so replied the said
Stratford, you are one of the Rogues that sunk the Dragon and Katherine. And
the said Stratford intended to have had him before a Justice, but his Wife and
other Friends diswaded him; then came he to the Secretary of the East India
Company Richard Swinglehurst (not knowing Esquire Courteen) who laughed at the
news (as the said Stratford related;) and so that discovery rested for further
prosecution.

VII.
The Relation of Senior Lues Rib^ro, Senior Lues Ribero at Goa in India, to
John Farren, John Darell and others.
an Eminent Portugal Merchant at Goa, who said that a Gentleman and friend of
his (which lay then ^ick in one of their Castles) who told Again Farren, if he
would send to him, he could make a perfect discovery of the said Ships: and
likewise one Thomas a Must^zoe who s^rved the Portugal Governor of Coucheen,
who was also in that action; besides the common relations of Moors, Gentues
and Mallabars; but what the said Agent ^^rr^n did therein is to be unknown, for
I was then upon occasion sent to Rabagge, and afterward for England.

VIII.
Tho. Hi^ton's Relation at Island Ioanna and Goa to Io. Darell, 1644.
The Relation of Thom^^ H^^ton Chyrurgion of the ship Bona-Esparanza and others
therein, who said that when the Dutch entered and had possession of their said
ship; some of the Dutch sailors said to the said Hi^ton and others; They did
well to yield as they did, else they had gone after the Dragon and Katherine;
and moreover a Bootch man when they were in Malacca being there very sick, and
was in that action desired earnestly to speak with some English man, who told
them (as they said) that his Conscience was much troubled, because he was in
that sad action and destruction of the said Dragon and Katherine.

IX.
Mr. Newman's Relation to John Darell.
Memerandum, 12. December, 1664. Master Newman said in the Custom House
London, that one came to Mr. Gurley and himself (being Dutch Prisoners at
Malacca) and desired that some English men ^ould go to speak with a sick man
there; for the said sick, earnestly desired it: so Mr. Gurley and Mr. Newman
sent Thomas Lamberton and some others, who returned this Message from the said
sick man, that his Conscience troubling him, and that he sent for them to tell
them that he was at the sinking of the Dragon and Katherine by the Dutch, and
that the said Dutch bound all the English back to back and threw them
overboard, according to the Relation of Mr. Hinton Chyrurgion, Richard White
and others, etc.

X.
The Relation of Richard White an English man at Goa s^^ving the Portugals;
Richard Whi^^'s Relation at Goa 21. June 1644. to John Farr^n, John Darell, etc.

Factors.


who said, that (...) me^ wi^h ^ight Dutch men upon the Coast of India, and
seven of them con^^ssed to him they were in the Dutch Fleet that destroyed the
Dragon and Katharine, and that there were Nine Ships in Number, Six Greater,
Three lesser, whereof the Ship Amsterd^m about 1400. T^^s Burden w^^ Admiral,
and pretended them selves a hom^w^rd bound Fl^et for Holland. And Captain (...)
and Captain Carter with some of their (...), being invi^ed ^bo^rd the said
Admiral after a pret^nded friendly Entertainment; the said Dutch, S^i^^d
^illaged, and Sunk the said ships Dragon and (...), and bound the men back to
back, and (...) the men all overboard, and this was (...) about Forty Leagues
from the Island Zeloan as the said Dutch men related.

XI.
It is the opinion of some, Some are very confident thereof upon good reason.
that the English Presidents of Suratt, Mr. Methwould, Mr. Fremblin, and Mr.
Britain, and other their Factors there^ could all, or most of them have made a
clear discovery thereof (as well as one of them, Mr. John (...)) but being
co^^ceived to ^e combi^^^ (...) with the said Dutch in the general destruction,
and seeming well pleased ^herewith^ therefore an uncharitable silence did
possess them, whose case even now might be th^^ own (if God and the Kings
Majesty prevent it not) but the (...) adventurers are sure to suffer mo^^; and
^^^ing that formerly through their great ignorance and ^upi^e, and
inconsiderate Government, and Management of that weighty Affair of such High
Concernment and Consequence; so it is, that they (of Merchants) have been
doubtless the greatest Friends and Promoters of the said Dutch designs, English
^ast India Company, the greatest friends and enemies.
and consequently the greatest enemies to the Land of their Nativity, as his
late Majesty of ever Blessed Memory, seemed excellently to apprehend in the
Preface of his Majesty's Pattent under the Great Seal of England, made to Sr.
William Courteen and the rest adventurers therein.

But I presume that the least of these Indicia's and Proof^, (being all of them
Voluntary and Free) are of greater Force and Efficacy, in the Judgment of any
understanding and upright Reader.

The least Indicia or Proof, greater then all at Amboyna.
Then the greatest or all those empty and pretended cruel, and extorted
Indiciaes, and proofs produced and alleged by the Dutch in their proceedings
against His Majesty's Subjects, whether the innocent English or Natives at
Amboyna or elsewhere.

Further Reasons to satisfy the Reader, and refell Objections.
Reason, I.
THat it was never known before this (that ever I heard of) that ever two ships
together English or Dutch, going or coming to or from India, perished by stress
of Winds or Weather.

Reason, II.
Further Reasons.
That there was eight Ships or Pinnaces more lost at Sea belonging to that
Expedition, yet not a word or relation of any one of them to sail by such
Destruction.

Reason, III.
That it was more Impossible or Improbable by Land, to conceal the burning of
the English Houses and Stores at Battavia in sight of Ten Thousand people, and
not one of them since discovering the same (that ever I heard of,) then to
conceal the sinking of the Dragon and Katarine.

Rex and Regina Beati.
ALL these Indiciaes and Proofs seems Superfluous and needless; seeing the
Dutch Combinations, Dutch constant practices, considered all these proofs and
reason seems superfluous.
Actions, and constant Obstructions, their Combinations, Hostile Seizures, and
Bloody Depredations are fully evident, and good and sufficient proofs of the
Premises.

The Lading of the Dragon and Katherine, for the Adventurers only estimated,
180000l. The loss of Trade, Factories, Plantations, for the Adventurers only
estimated at, 120000l. The loss of particular Persons in two Ships, being men
of quality and good Estates, --
For Murders, Massacrees and Loss and Destruction of Trade to Posterity, being
only matters of State, are most humbly left to His Majesty and others under
Him, in Highest Power and Authority.

Some special Annotations further to explain the Premises, (viz.)
THat this East India War and Dutch Design, began about Cocheen in India,
lately taken by the Dutch from the Portugals: Also the Dutch new Waring against
Bantum, to drive the English from thence and from their chief Pepper trade at
Iambe, and so shut them clear out both of the Streights of Sundye and Mallacca.

Dutch War now ^ageth not so much as formerly for want of prey to feed upon;
having long since destroyed both the power and profit of English and Portugal,
to the exceeding enriching of their Netherlands or old Holland by the one, and
of their Vpperlands or new Holland by the other, to such a high and
transcendent degree of Pride, Riches, and Power, insomuch that the lading of
their Eleven Ships this year, 1664. from their foresaid new Holland, home to
old Holland; some of their own Nation reported to be worth 4000000l. or more
15. or 1600000. being formerly their usual annual return.

Dutch now having made an absolute Conquest of all the South-East Seas of Asia
and Africa (half of the whole Universe from Iapan and China, to Cape
Bon-Esperanza Thirty Thousand miles Coasting, and reduced the Subjects of at
least Thirty Emperors, Kings, Princes, and Governors, to the Dictates and
Rules of their own Arbitrary Power and Protection, without any Dispute or
Contradiction; And all this in the Prince of Aurange his Name. Prince of
Aurange.


Now they treen about the foresaid Cape and meeting Neatherlands, West India
Company (with whom uniting and combining together) endeavor to carry on and
propogate the said old War and design into Europe and America (the other half
of the whole Universe) with Confidence and Assurance of like success. And
Subtly and Slily striking at the root and main obstacle, viz. The Command of
the English Narrow Seas; having already (as themselves and others conceive) the
Command of all the Seas in the World besides: And thereupon they frame a
causless Contest and Demand concerning some injuries and damages (as they
pretend) lately done upon the Coast of Guinnie and Cabo Verde; wherein they are
proved to be the first and only trespasses: But by the blessing of the
Almighty upon the Vigilence, Care, and Prudence of His now Majesty, their
secret design is at present put to a stand, they being peradventure in further
Expectation of a large supply from their Vpperlands of Forty or Fifty Tall
Ships of inestimable value by April or May next; and in the mean time use some
Delatory, Pretenses, or Treaties.

But seeing His Majesty, with the happy concurrence York, and Lord High Admiral
of all His Majesty's Forces by Sea) with the Unanimous Assistance of a
Wonderful, Discreet, and Loyal High Court of Parliament Representing the whole
Nation; May apprehend great Hopes and Encouragement in this so Transcendent and
Mighty Undertaking, against such Powerful and Politic Universal Enemies
(especially of England;) and who may compare their Conquests by Sea, with the
Great Turk by Land, and allow him Ten foot for One. I say to reduce this People
to Right Reason, is only the work of the Almighty, and of the King of Great
Britain, his Instrumental and most Valiant Vicegerent; no other King or Prince
under Heaven, being sufficient in apprehension to Weild their Weapons, and to
dispute this most Noble and Just Cause with them at Sea; and to this end, A
Voice seems to be heard from Heaven, in His Majesty's most Glorious and
Triumphant Restoration, without one drop of Bloodshed: To Question and
Chastize these Rebellious, Ungrateful, and Cruel People for all their Actions
and Misdemenours in India, where blood has touched blood continually.

Paulus Grobnerus ex Misnia, in his Sericum Mundi Filium, sent to His Majesty's
most Famous Predecessor and Nursing Mother, to these forgetful and ungrateful
people, (Queen Elizabeth of ever blessed Memory) 1574. seems as it were to
point with his Finger at these very time^, and His Majesty's Person; saying as
I take it, Page 273. Et sic a Carolo Carolus Magnus, sit Regnans qui Magno
Successum, and fortund Septentrionalibus populis suis dominabitur and
faeliciter Class sua, etc.

Dutch-Vplands, of all former Debates and Treatie^, yea, and of Kings to, (as
appears by Skipper Tyson their Hollands King of Celoan) I conceive are Null and
Vold; and by the Dutch Netherlands only used, as Nets and Snares hitherto to
gain Advantage of all Kings and Nations, to acccomplish their afo^esaid Design.

Therefore when Time seems convenient, Reason and Justice may require
Reparation, and Satisfaction for all their former old Injuries and Damages,
before new Debates or Treaties, can in equity well be admitted, viz.

First Restitution and Reposition of His Majesty's and Subjects Right to those
four or five Amboyna Islands, In Statu Quo, and the Damages thereof for forty
two years by past; And his Majesty's Interest in the Fortifications of their
other Amb^yna ^slands, built with a good part of the English National great
Joint stock of 1600000l. with free trade to Iapan, China, ^^illipeenes, and
elsewhere in the South Seas; for otherwise the Dutch will eat out all Nations in
India with those Commodities; which said Damage and Loss (besides blood) cannot
be estimated less Viis and modis, then 300000l. per annum, dreyned out of His
Majesty's Kingdoms yearly for those Commodities; as Mercers, Grocers,
Drugsters, Potters, and other Tradesmen, can best discover with Battavia
interest at 5. per Cent, per month, etc.

Also the Dutch ha^f Customs of their vast trade into Persia for 40 years by
past, they being strangers and never in the Gulf, before that Agreement made
between the Persian and the English, which may be reasonably estimated at 30.
or 40000l. per annum, or more.

Then the old East India Company and other, for Damages done since etc.

Likewise, Sr. William Courteen and Adventurers with him for their four ships,
viz. ship Bon Esperanza, Hen-Bonadventure, Dragon and Katherine, and utter loss
and destruction of all their Trade, Factories, Plantations, and Fortifications
in India; the Damages and Losses, whereof in knowing Judgments, cannot be
estimated in all so little as 300000l.

And whosoever makes any doubt or dispute concerning the Dutch, their certain
destruction of the Dragon and Katherine aforesaid; me thinks the consideration
of their own designs, constant and bloody actions and practices, frequent
threatenings, combinations, and commissions, to sink or burn; to any rational
man, may seem evidence sufficient to prove the fact, especially appearing so
plainly to proceed from prepensed malice, and revenge.

But being seconded by a multitude of voluntary and free Indiciaes, Relations,
Predictions to prove, and combinations to destroy, from very sufficient
witnesses of English, Portugals, and Dutch themselves; besides Mores, Gentues,
and Mallabarrs, all which may seem superfluous, etc.

Therefore, whosoever will not believe these truths, neither would they
(without doubt) believe if one should rise from the dead and depth of the sea,
to declare and justify the same unto them.

All which, in every particular matter and thing therein, are most humbly
referred to the far more Wise, and Judicious, to do, and to determine, as in
their more Excellent Wisdoms and Judgments, seems most meet and convenient.

Vivat Rex, Carolus Magnus.
The Authors Attestation.
THus having Freed and Discharged my Conscience and Duty toward God and Man,
without Favor or Affection, in this Plain and Impartial Declaration of my long
and serious observation and experience, of the various passages therein
expressed; being altogether for Sum and Substance, what I have both heard and
seen, and do verily believe the same to be really the truth, and nothing but
the truth, faithfully collected and asserted, and will make good the same upon
Oath, when thereunto lawfully called. And so I do most humbly committ the Care
and Consideration thereof, to those whom it more Nearly or Publicly Concerns,
to move and to do therein for Relief and Redress as Occasion and Opportunity
shall Present; and procure a Remedy and Reparation from the Transgressors,
according to the Righteous Rules of Justice and Equity.

FINIS.

