A SHORT VIEW OF THE Late Troubles IN ENGLAND; Briefly setting forth, Their
RISE, GROWTH, and TRAGICAL CONCLUSION. As also, some Parallel thereof with the
BARONS-WARS in the time of King HENRY III. But chiefly with that in France,
called the HOLY LEAGUE, in the Reign of HENRY III. and HENRY IV. late Kings of
that Realm.

To which is added A Perfect Narrative of the Treaty at Uxbridge in an. 1644.



OXFORD Printed at the THEATER for MOSES PIT at the Angel in St. Paul's
Churchyard, London. MDCLXXXI.

Carolus Primus D. G. Anglia Scotia Francia et Hibernia Rex F. D.


THE PREFACE.
THat all Rebellions did ever begin with the fairest Pretenses for Reforming of
somewhat amiss in the Government, is a Truth so clear, that there needs no
manifestation thereof from Examples. Nor were they ever observed to have
greater success, than when the Colors for Religion did openly appear in the
Van of their armed Forces; most men being desirous to have it really thought
(how bad and vile soever their practices are) that zeal to God's glory, is no
small part of their aim. Which gilded bait has been usually held forth to
allure the Vulgar, by those, whose ends and designs were nothing else, than to
get into power, and so to possess themselves of the Estates and Fortunes of
their more opulent Neighbors.

Should I look far backwards for discovery of the first source and fountain,
whence that viperous brood, which not long since has so miserably infested
these Kingdoms, did spring, of whose unparalled practices the ensuing
Narrative does specially take notice; I must ascend to the times of Moses and
Aaron (the one the supreme Magistrate, the other the chief Priest): Corah,
Dathan, and Abiran, then rising up, and taking upon themselves an authority
equal with those chosen servants of God; and saying that all the Congregation
was Holy. In like manner afterward when Absalom the rebellious son of David
rose up against his father, there was a demure face of Godliness put on, of a
solemn vow to be performed to God at Hebron; and large promises of reformation
of all abuses in Government were made by the unnatural usurper.

This sort of practice continued in the Jewish Church till the time of the
Gospel, as is conspicuous enough from the words of our blessed Savior, where
he speaks of the Scribes and Pharisees; that they did outwardly appear
righteous unto men, but within were full of Hypocrisy and Guile; devouring
Widows houses; and for a pretense making long Prayers: Our Lord in the xith and
xvith Chapter of St. Luke, making likewise a farther Description of them. St.
Paul also in his Epistle to Timothy, plainly foretelling us, that such should
again spring up in the last times Men (says he) who shall be Lovers of
themselves, covetous, boasters, proud etc. Traitorous, heady, high-minded etc.
having a form of Godliness, but denying the power thereof.

Now, that the offspring of these, did more or less infest the world throughout
all aftertimes, would be no difficult thing to manifest, were it here
necessary or convenient; In the time of heathen persecution of Christianity,
rose up Novatian the father of the Cathari or Puritans; to whom may be added
Donatus and his followers, who confined Godliness to themselves; and religion
to Africa their country. After the settlement of the Church in Christian
Emperors, appeared Aerius the first inventor of Presbytery; which tho it seemed
a long time dead, has been of late raked out of its ashes, and made to trouble
and set on fire the Western Church.

As to the usual practices of the men of this sect, there is nothing more
clear, than that Religion, nay the Reformation thereof to its purity, has bin
the thing which they have ever cried up: and that meekness, sanctity and the
power of Godliness, are the Cloaks in which they have always at first showed
themselves; by which plausible devices, they have captivated thousands. But it
is no less evident, that having by this means got power into their hands;
destruction of civil Government, Rapine, Spoil, and the greatest mischeifs
imaginable, have bin the woeful effects of those their Specious pretenses;
whereby they have really verified that expression of our Savior; viz. that
they were of their father the Devil, and the Works of him they should do.

But to come nearer my present business.

That the Actions of our late times, chiefly from the year 1637 till 1660, can
be easily forgotten; or that there is any need of reviving the memory of them
to this present Age, it is not to be imagined. Nevertheless, for their sakes,
who are ignorant of the means and preparations made in order to those grand
Exploits, then done: and that Posterity may have a short view thereof, I have
adventured upon the publishing of this Discourse which was long since compiled.
Wherein I first deduce our late Troubles in England, and other his Majesty's
Realms, from the principles of those persons; who, about an hundred and fifty
years before, under the same Hypocritical pretenses, did greivously infest
Germany. And, having finished that Narrative as particularly and fully as I
may; afterward manifest, that the original project of our chief Contrivers
here, was to reduce the King to Necessities; and thereby to expose him to the
use of such extraordinary ways of Supply, as might most conduce to the raising
of discontent amongst all his good Subjects. Which they did, by engaging first
his father in a war for the Palatinate, and their failing to assist him,
notwithstanding their most solemn promises.

As also by planting Schismatical Lectures in most corporateTowns, and populous
places throughout the Realm; so to poison the people with Antimonarchical
principles.

In the next place I shall take notice of the rise and progress of the late
troubles in Scotland, which were the Prologue to these of ours.

Then of the Scottish Invasion, which occasioned the unhappy long Parliament,
and likewise of some proceedings in that Parliament, before the predominant
party therein did put themselves in Arms.

After this I shall point at the dissolution of the Presbyterian power, and
growth of the Independent, whereupon ensued the nefarious murder of King
Charles the first: and after that, such confusions, as made way for the happy
Restoration of our present Sovereign King Charles the second.

Which being done, I shall make some observations upon their first fair and
smooth pretenses, set forth in several Declarations and Remonstrances, by which
the too credulous people were miserably deluded, and drawn from their due
Allegiance.

And lastly give some brief Account of those Actings by the Rebellious Barons
here, in the time of King Henry the third, which had most resemblance with the
practices of these our pretended Reformers. As also show how exact a parallel
these great Masters in mischief have held with those of the Holy League in
France: whose Rebellion terminated, in some sort as ours did, in the Murder of
their King.

What falls within my own cognizance, I deliver with mine own words: what is
beyond my knowledge, in the words of my Authors; most of which I have quoted;
the rest being taken from the common Mercuries, and other public-licensed
Narratives of the chiefest occurrences in those times.

If the Reader think it disproportionat that so particular an account is given
of the counsels and proceedings leading to the Rebellion; but one more brief of
the transactions in it: He may be pleased to know that the Author being not a
military man, was more enabled to relate what past in counsel than in the
field. The Diary part until the year 1646, was composed at Oxford, in the time
of the late troubles, before that Garrison of his Majesty was rendered up to
General Fairfax, as the Original copy will apparently show; which has bin seen
and read by several persons of great honor and credit, many years since, who
are yet living, and upon occasion, if need be, will assert the same. Which
original was a good while since, with little variation transcribed for the
Press; and has now for many months been out of the Author's hands, and far
distant from him, in order to the publishing thereof; so that he has wanted
opportunity to review, piece by piece what he had written; or correct the
errors which in so long a work must needs escape; for which the Readers candor
is desired.

If the Reflections on what is past, are sometimes severe, let it be imputed to
the just indignation conceived against those men, who under specious pretenses
masked the most black designs; and an abhorrence of those proceedings which
embroiled the nation in a civil war; perfidious in its rise, bloody in its
prosecution, fatal in its end, and which to this day proves mischievous in its
consequents.

When the subjects of this miserable Kingdom had murdered the defender both of
us and of our faith; and driven away his children, Princes and Nobles, into
strange lands; bidding them, as David speaks on a like occasion, go serve other
Gods; the divine vengeance gave us the natural product of this sin of ours,
several of our Princes and great men, returning back corrupted in their
principles, and tainted with the religion, wherewith they long converst. And in
like manner, when men had for a long time falsely cried out of the intentions
to bring in Popery, thereby the more easily to destroy the Protestant Religion
by Law established; the same divine justice has permitted the whole Protestant
Religion, to be now under the greatest danger imaginable, by the real plots,
and execrable machinations of Papists among us at this day; who, both in this
and our sister Kingdoms, by Combinations among themselves, and by fomenting
divisions among us, have gone very far toward the ruin of our Church, and
subversion of the State; and say of both, there there, so would we have it;
down with them, down with them even to the ground. But that alpowerful God, who
by miracle so lately restored unto us our Religion and our Laws, will as we
hope and earnestly pray, preserve them still against the joint attemts of
Popery on the one hand, and Fanaticism on the other; and make his Jerusalem a
praise in the earth. In which prayer all true Protestants; and, what is
commensurat thereto, all loyal Subjects, will join their suffrage and say, Amen.

A Short View of the Late Troubles IN ENGLAND.
CHAP. I.
THE chief design of this ensuing Discourse being to show the mischievous
fruits of Hypocrisy; which is, under the color of Sanctity to act any sort of
wickedness: And that these great pretenders to Godliness were they who have
been the chief disturbers of our blessed peace; I shall observe, that upon the
departure, long since, of most of the Subjects of this Realm from the Church of
Rome, by reason of its apparent corruptions; there were some, who did unhappily
infuse into sundry well meaning people, a bad opinion of our Reformation. These
were men of proud and peevish Spirits, who had not light enough in themselves
to discern the truth, because they wanted learning to search into Antiquities;
nor knowledge to trace those of that Church in the paths by which they had
deviated from the Doctrine of Christ and his holy Apostles; and so (by reason
thereof) ran from one extremity to another. Thus sleighting the authority of
the learned and pious Reformers, who showed the Errors of the Romish Church,
such a liberty to the private Spirit, was at that time by them allowed, as at
last, when the giddy multitude became in that sort deluded by those their false
Teachers, every Brainsick person stamped the Seal of God's Spirit upon his own
false and erroneous conceits.

Which false Teachers, among other their Artifices to captivate the Vulgar, and
to beget a disaffection in them to that reverend Ecclesiastical Discipline
which was then established, have cunningly suggested to them, that all the
Reformed Churches in foreign parts, do utterly dislike thereof, as too much
favoring of the Romish polutions. And by this subtle insinuation, tho most
notoriously false, See a view of the Government and public Worship of God in
the Churches beyond Sea; by Dr. Durell. impr. Land. 1662.
have so far prevailed upon their Proselytes, that they do not only refuse to
communicate with us in our Divine Offices; but in that, and whatever else their
own vain fancies do prompt them, are become disobedient and refractory to the
superior powers which God has ordained.

They who would know more of these things, may repair unto the Relations of
such learned men, as have written of our Reformation, and make their own
observations thereon; as also upon what I shall further say in this Historical
Work, whereunto I refer them; beginning with the Anabaptists of Germany, from
an Author Guy de Bres contre Perreur des Anabaptists. p. 5.
of good credit.

They had always in their mouths (says he) those great things, Charity, Faith,
the true Fear of God, the Cross, the Mortification of the Flesh. All their
exhortations were to set light of the things in this world; to account Riches
and Honors vanity.

They were solicitous of men of Fasts, Ib. p. 118, 119, 120.
and to often meditations on Heavenly things. Wherever they found men, in Diet,
Attire, Furniture of House, or any other way observers of Civility and decent
Order; such they reported as being carnally and earthly minded.

They so much affected to cross the ordinary custom in every thing, Ib. p. 177.
that when other men used to put on better attire, they would be sure openly to
show themselves abroad in worse.

The ordinary names of the days of the week, they thought it a kind of
profaneness to use; and therefore accustomed themselves, to make no other
distinction than by numbers.

From this they proceeded unto public Reformation; first Ecclesiastical, and
then Civil. Touching the former, they boldly vouched, that themselves only had
the Truth, which thing, upon peril of their lives, they would at all times
defend; and that since the Apostles lived, the same was never before in all
points sincerely taught. Wherefore, that things might be brought again to that
integrity which Jesus Christ by his word requires, they began to control the
Ministers of the Gospel, for attributing so much force and virtue unto the
Scriptures of God read; whereas the Truth (said they) was, that when the word
is said to engender faith in the Heart, and to convert the soul of man, or to
work any such spiritual divine effect, these speeches are not thereunto
appliable, as it is read and preached; but as it is engrafted in us by the
power of the Holy Ghost, opening the eyes of our understanding, and so
revealing the Mysteries of God.

No marvel was it, Ib. p. 27.
to see them every day broach some new thing, not heard of before; for they
interpreted that restless levity, to be their growing to spiritual perfection,
and their proceeding from faith to faith.

But the differences amongst them, Ib. p. 65, and 66.
growing by this means in a manner infinite, there was scarcely found any one
of them, the forge of whose Brain was not possessed with some special Mystery.
Whereupon, although their mutual contentions were most fiercely prosecuted
amongst themselves, yet when they came to defend the Cause, common to them all,
against the adversaries of their faction, they had ways to lick one another
whole; the founder in his own persuasion, excusing the Dear Brethren, who were
not so far enlightened.

Their own Ministers they highly magnifyed, Ib. p. 71.
as men whose Vocation was from God: Ib. p. 124.
but their manner was to term others Disdainful Scribes and Pharisees; to
account their calling a humane Creature, and to detain the people, as much as
might be from hearing them.

The custom of using Godfathers and Godmothers at Christenings, Ib. p. 748.
they scorned: and hated conformity to the Church, Ib. p. 122.
in observing those solemn Festivals which others did; in as much as Antichrist
(they said) was the first Inventor of them.

The pretended end of their civil Reformation was, that Christ might have
dominion over all; that no other might reign over Christian men but He^and for
this cause, they labored with all their might in overturning the Seats of
Magistracy.

Certain it is, Ib. p. 40.
that these men at first, were only pityed in their error; Ib. p. 6.
the great Humility, Zeal, and Devotion, which appeared to be in them, being in
all men's opinion, a pledge of their harmless meaning. Whereupon Luther made
request unto Frederick Duke of Saxony; that within his dominion they might be
favorably dealt with and spared; for that (their error excepted) they seemed
otherwise right good men. By means of which toleration, they gathered strength,
much more than was fafe for the State of the Commonwealth, wherein they lived.
For they had their secret meetings in Corners, and Assemblies in the night, the
people flocking unto them by thousands.

Nor were the means, Ib. p. 420.
whereby they both allured and retained so great multitudes ineffectual; viz.
First, a wonderful show of Zeal toward God. Secondly, an hatred of Sin, and a
singular love of Integrity. Lastly, a cunning slight which they had to stroke
and smooth up the minds of their followers; as well by appropriating unto them
all the favorable titles, the good words, and the gracious promises in
Scripture; as by casting the contrary always on the heads of such as were
severed from that retinue.

And in all these things, Ib. p. 27.
being fully persuaded, that what they did, it was in obedience to the will of
God, and that all men should do the like; there remained after speculation,
practice, whereby the whole frame thereunto (if it were possible) might be
squared.

But seeing that this could not be done without mighty opposition and
resistance against it: Ib. p. 6.
therefore to strengthen themselves, they secretly entered into a League of
Association; concluding, that as Israel was delivered out of the Egypt of the
worlds servile thraldom, to sin and superstition. As Israel was to root out
the Idolatrous nations, and to plant instead of them, a people which feared
God. So the same Lords good will and pleasure was now, that these new
Israelites, should under the conduct of other Ioshuas, Sampsons and Gedeons,
perform a work no less miraculous, in casting out violently the wicked from the
Earth, and establishing the kingdom of Christ with perfect Liberty.

But these men in whose mouths at the first sounded nothing but mortification
of the flesh, were come at the length, to think they might lawfully have their
six or seven wives apiece. They who at the first, thought judgment and justice
it self to be merciless cruelty; accounted at the length, their own hands
sanctified with being imbrued in Christian blood. They who at first were wont
to beat down all Dominion, and to urge against poor Constables, Kings of
Nations; had at the length, both Consuls and Kings of their own erection
amongst themselves. Finally, they who could not brook at first, that any man
should seek, no not by law the recovery of his goods injuriously taken, or
withheld from him; were grown at the last to think they could not offer unto
God more acceptable sacrifice, then by turning their adversaries clean out of
House and Home; and by enriching themselves with all kind of spoil and pillage.

For a further Character of them, An. 1525. Sleidans Comment. lib. 5. f. 55. a.
b.
Sleidan tells us; that Muncer, by his new Doctrine, touching goods to be in
common, Ib. f. 56. b.
incited the Boores of Franconia and Turingen, to undertake the Holy-war (as he
called it) against their Princes; telling them, that he was commanded of God to
destroy all wicked Princes, and substitute new ones in their places; and that
they were called indeed Princes, but were Tyrants. Moreover, that they would
not restore unto the people their liberty; nor permit them to have the true
Religion and service of God: exhorting them rather to dye then to allow their
wickedness, and suffer the Doctrine of the Gospel to be taken from them; and
therefore to play the men, and gratify God, in destroying such unprofitable
people.

Likewise, Ib. 59. b.
that this their great zeal toward God, and outward humility, got them in the
beginning many followers; for their demands were, first, that they might choose
them such Ministers, as should preach Gods word sincerely, without any mixture
of men's traditions. Secondly, that thenceforth they would pay no Tithes, but of
Corn only; and the same to be distributed by the discretion of good men; partly
to the Ministers of the Church; partly upon the poor; and partly upon common
affairs. Thirdly, that they had till that time, been unworthily kept in Bonds,
considering how they were all made free in the blood of Christ. Fourthly, that
they refused not to have a Magistrate, knowing that he is ordained of God, and
would obey him in all honest things; but could not abide to be any longer
bound, unless it were showed reasonable by the testimony of Scripture. Fifthly,
Ib. f. 63. a.
that in all their Letters, which they wrote to provoke and allure others to
their fellowship; they made their boast that they took up arms by Gods
Commandment; and for a certain love and zeal to the Commonwealth, to the intent
the Doctrine of the Gospel might be set forth, augmented, and maintained. And
sixthly, that Truth, Equity, and honest living might reign and flourish: as
also, that they might so provide for them and theirs, that ^henceforth they
should not be oppressed with any violence.

And that when they had thus, at few words, declared the cause of their
enterprise, they would then command their Neighbors to arm, and come unto them
immediately, and help them: If not, then would they threaten to come upon them,
with all their force. But, having gotten the power and Arms into their hands,
they committed diverse horrid outrages; Ib. f. 64. b. and 65. a.
insomuch as Luther exhorted all men, that they would come to destroy them as
wicked Thieves and parricides, in like case as they would come to quench a
common fire; having most shamefully broken their faith to their Princes; taken
other men's goods by force, and cloak all this abomination and wickedness, with
the cover of Christianity: which (says he) is the vilest and unworthiest thing
that can be imagined.

In Suevia and Franconia about forty thousand Pesants took Arms; robbed a great
part of the Nobility, plundered many Towns and Castles, Muncer being their
chief Captain: so that the Princes of the Empire, Albert Count of Mansfeild,
John Duke of Saxony, and his Cosen George, Philip the Lantgrave of Hesse, and
Henry Duke of Brunswick, were necessitated to raise what power they could; and
having offered them pardon upon submission, and delivering up their principal
Leaders, Sleidans Com. f. 57.
which was refused; marched against them. But Muncer preparing for Battle,
encouraged his followers; crying out to them to take their weapons, and fight
stoutly against their Enemies, singing * a Song, Thus did the Rebels here in
England at the last Battle of Newbery 27. Oct. 1644.
whereby they called for help of the Holy Ghost. The success of which Battle
was, that the Rebels at the first onset, were soon put in disorder, and above
five thousand slain on the place: and that Muncer fled and hid himself: but
being found and brought to the Princes, was (with his fellow Phifer) beheaded
at Mulhuse.

And about the year 1535, An. 1535.
John of Leyden (a Tailor by trade, and of this Tribe) preaching the Doctrine
of Rebaptization, so much infected the inferior sort of people, by the means of
private Conventicles, that his followers grew numerous, and exercised violence
against those that were not of their Sect. At last robbing their adversaries,
and gathering together in great Troops, they possessed themselves of the
strongest part of the City of Munster; declaring, that all such as were not
rebaptized, ought to be accounted Pagans and Infidels, and to be killed. His
Companions were Rosman and Cnipperdoling, who gathered together to that City
great numbers of the base sort of people: and seeing their strength, chose new
Senators of their own Sect, Sleidan ut supra lib. 1. f. 131. b.
making Cnipperdoling the chief; who taught that the People might put down
their Magistrate. And albeit that the Apostles had no commandment to usurp any
jurisdiction: yet such as were their Ministers of the Church, ought to take
upon them the right of the Sword, and by force to establish a new Commonwealth.
Hereupon they spoiled the Suburbs, and burnt the Churches; so that the Bishop
of Munster (who was Lord of the City, and forced out) beseiged them; the
neighbor Princes giving assistance: which seige continuing long, the famine
grew to be such, as that the beseiged miserably perished in great numbers: and
at length the beseigers forcing their entrance by assault, slew many, took the
Ringleaders; and having put them to death, hanged their Bodies in several
Cages of Iron on the highest Towers of that City. Thus far Sleidan.

It is not unworthy observation, that diverse of these German Phanatiques, to
the end they might at that time be the better known to those of their own Sect,
did cut their hair round, as Petrus Crinitus (an Author of good credit) in his
Book de Bello Rusticano Tom. 3. page 209. averreth. Agmen tonsile a rotunde
detonsis capitibus.
From which example, there is no doubt but that these of ours took their
pattern, whence they were generally called Roundheads.

Concerning these men, the testimony likewise of Mr. John Calvin, may (I
presume) be here not unfitly produced; as well for other respects, as for that
he lived in that time.

Olim Calvin's Comment on the Psalms f. 330. Psalm. 71. verse 14.
Fanatici homines (says he) ut sibi applauderent in sua inscitia, jactabant,
Davidis exemplo, spernandas esse omnes literas, sicut hodie Anabaptistae; non
alio praetextu se pro spiritualibus venditant, nisi quod omnis scientiae sint
expertes. Brainsick men, in times past, would take example from David, to
despise all learning, as now our Anabaptists; who only hold themselves inspired
with gifts because they are ignorant of all literature. And he adds, Calvin
advers. Anabap. Art. 2.
Cum sub specie studii perfectionis, imperfectionem nullam tolerare possumus,
aut in corpore, aut in membris Ecclesiae, tunc Diabolum nos tumescere superbia
and hypocrist seducere moneamur. Whereas under the color of a desire of
perfection, we can tolerate no imperfection, either in the body or the members
of the Church; then may we be admonished, that it is the Devil which pusseth us
up with pride, and seduceth us with hypocrisy. And in another place he further
says, Quia nulla specie illustriori seduci possunt miseri Christiani etc.
Because silly Christians, who with a zeal to follow God, cannot by any more
notable show be seduced, then when the word of God is pretended; the
Anabaptists (against whom we write) have that evermore in their mouths, and
always talk of it.

There is an undoubted Tradition, that upon the suppressing of this pernicious
Sect in Germany, many of them fled into the Netherlands; and that thence ^^70
Ships laden with some, got into Scotland, where they first propagated their
mischievous Principles. Which within a short time spreading hither, have not a
little endangered the utter ruin of Church and State. For that they soon after
arrived here to a considerable increase, it may very well be concluded, from
what the same person has expressed, in an Epistle of his, Calvin. Epist. p. 67.
written to Edward Duke of Somerset, then Protector to King Edward the sixth,
in these words: Amplissime domine, Audio esse duo seditiosorum genera, etc.
Sir, I hear there are two sorts of seditious men among you, who lift up the
head against the King, and state of the Kingdom; the one are a sort of
Giddy-headed men, who promote their sedition under the name of the Gospel. The
other are so hardened in the superstitions of Antichrist, that they cannot
endure a revulsion of them; and both these must be restrained by the revenging
Sword, which the Lord has put into your hand; since they rise up not only
against the King, but against God himself, who has placed the King in his
Royal Throne, and made you Protector of his person, and his Royal Majesty.

CHAP. II.
ANd, as this evil Generation, became at that time first transplanted hither,
upon the dissipating of those German Sectaries; so had it shortly afterward,
much furtherance in its growth from some persons of more able parts, and of no
mean quality; who having embraced the Reformation here, in the time of King
Edward the sixth; to avoid the storm in Queen Mary's Reign, fled beyond Sea:
where having formed sundry congregations (as at Francfort, Strasburg, Geneva,
and other places) they devised such new models of Discipline (but all of them
more or less favoring of those Tenets) as upon their return, after the death
of that Queen, not a few both of the Clergy and Laity, were unhappily tainted
therewith. And at length, through the countenance of some chief Ministers
Dudley Earl of Leicester, and Secretary Walsingham.
of State, who then seemed to favor them for certain private respects, became
dangerous Enemies, not only to the Doctrine and Discipline of this Church, but
to the very temporal Government of the Realm, as by their heterodox opinions,
which they boldly promoted and spread under the specious Title and name of the
Gospel, will evidently appear: of which I have here thought fit, The principles
of the Puritans. R. A. Conf. of Brow. p. 113. Corda Angl. prop. 16. Barrow
Disc. p. 236.
out of their own Books and Writings to give a Taste.

Lay men may teach to get Faith.

Lay men may preach to Congregations, to exercise their abilities.

Every member of the Church has power to examine the manner of administering
the Sacrament.

That to have a Liturgy, Barrow Ref. p. 244.
or form of prayer, is to have another Gospel.

Some Protestants are of opinion, Christ on his Throne f. 67.
that Ordinances cannot be performed but by a Prelate, or at least by Ministers
only, without whose Imposition of Hands it were no Ordination, as if it did
confer such an order: whereas the prime and proper conferring of this Order, is
by Christ himself, inwardly calling and gifting a man for the work of the
Ministry.

To the people belongs the laying on of Hands, Prelacy misery f. 7.
as a token of their approbation, and confirmation of him that is chosen.

Archbishops and Bishops are superfluous members of the Body of Christ. Ha'y'
any work etc. p. 14. 15. 20. 21.
They are unlawful, false, and bastardly Governors of the Church: they are the
ordinances of the Devil; Also Mart. Marprel. in his Epistle to the terrible
priests. Sion's plea. 155.
yea they are petty-Popes, petty-Antichrists, Bishops of the Devil, and
incarnate Devils.

If the Hierarchy be not removed, and the Scepter of Christ's Kingdom, namely
his own Discipline advanced, there can be no healing of the sore.

If the Parliament do not abrogate the government of Bishops, Supplic. an. 29.
Eliz. p. 25 Bancroft f. 50.
they shall betray God, the Truth, and the whole Kingdom.

Though the Parliament be for Bishops; Unlawfulness of unlimited Prelacy f. 12.
Bancroft f. 169.
yet all the Godly and Religious will be against them.

If the Brethren cannot obtain their wills by Suit, nor Dispute, the multitude
and people must work the feat.

Reformation of Religion belongs to the Commonalty. Knox to the Commonalty f.
49. 50. T. Cartw. lib. 2. p. 48.


Christian Sovereigns ought not to be called Heads under Christ, of the
particular invisible Churches within their dominion.

They ought not to meddle with the making of Laws, Ib. lib. 1. p. 192.
Orders, and Ceremonies for the Church.

The people may well enough be without Kings; Covenanters Inform. for
Defensive. Arg. 3.
for there was none till Cain's days. These therefore being their Principles;
that their continued Practices have been suitable thereto, is not unknown to
many; viz. to subject all Princes and Governors to their own Rule and
Authority: and in ordine ad Spiritualia, to determine in temporal matters.

Hence I shall proceed a little farther, and out of their own Writings, make
manifest, what a noise they have made, that their Discipline, founded on these
Principles, might be firmly settled.

The establishing the Presbytery (says T. Cartwright) is the full placing of
Christ in his Kingdom. Lib. 1. p. 3.


The Presbyterian Discipline is the Scepter of Christ, swaying his own House
according to his hearts desire: Sion's plea.
the Soul; the Chief Commander in the Camp Royal.

Huic Disciplinae omnes orbis Principes and Monarchas, Travers de Discipl.
Eccl. p. 142.
fasces suas submittere, and parere necesse est. There is a necessity that all
Princes and Monarchs should submit their Scepters, and obey this Discipline.

This Discipline ought to be set up, Exhort. to Engl. p. 91, 92.
and all Princes ought to submit themselves under the yoke of it. Yea what
Prince, King, or Emperor shall disanul the same, he is to be reputed God's
Enemy; and to be held unworthy to reign above the people.

This Discipline is no small part of the Gospel: T. Cartw. lib. 1. p. 6. and 48.
it is the substance of it.

This Discipline is the Gospel of the kingdom of God.

They that reject this Discipline, Knox Exhort. p. 35. 43.
refuse to have Christ reign over them; T. Cartw. p. 220.
and deny him in effect to be their King, or their Lord.

This Discipline is the eternal Council of God. Epist. before the Supplic. 2.
Eliz.


If any refuse to have the Lord Jesus set up as Lord ( i. e. to submit to this
Discipline) let him be Anathema Maranatha. Christ on his Throne f. 76.


Aut hoc, Sion's plea. f. 340. and 244.
aut nihil is their Ensign. They who hinder Discipline, bring the Estate at
length to an extremely desperate point. None but Enemies to Christ are Enemies
to this Government.

Strike neither at great nor small, Ib. f. 240.
but at those troublers of Israel. Smite that Hazael in the fifth rib. Yea, if
Father or Mother stand in the way, away with them. Down with the colors of the
Dragon. Advance the standard of Christ.

Those mine Enemies, Title page to Sion's plea.
who would not that I should reign over them, bring hither and slay them before
me.

Strike the Basilic vein. Sion's plea f. 262.
Nothing but this will cure the Pleurisy of our State.

And Gibson threatened King James; Bancroft's Surv. f. 28.
that, as Jeroboam, he should be rooted out and conclude his race, if he
maintained Bishops.

Which dangerous positions being thus maintained by this sort of men,
occasioned Mr. Perkins (an eminent Divine of those times) thus to express;

There is in England (says he) a Schismatical, Treatise of applying Gods word
to the conscience. p. ult.
and indiscreet Company, that would seem to cry out for Discipline. Their whole
talk is of it; and yet, they neither know it, nor will be reformed by it. They
are full of pride, thinking themselves to be full when they are empty; to have
all knowledge, when they are ignorant, and had need to be catechized. The poison
of aspes is under their Lips. They refuse not to speak evil of the blessed
servants of God.

And, as the German Sectaries, upon the Principles before mentioned, did act in
those parts: so did the Scots upon those Documents they had received, Knox app.
28. 30.
chiesly from John Knox; who told his Countrymen in print, that the Nobility
and Commonalty ought to reform Religion: and in that case might remove from
Honors, and punish such as God has commanded, of what estate, condition, or
honor what soever.

Hereupon, A. D. 1557.
taking an Oath of confederacy and Subscription, under hands, to some agreement
for a Reformation; much strength was added thereunto by the Sacrilegious,
hoping thereby to swallow up the Church-Revenues. Next, A. D. 1558.
without the authority of Sovereignty, or knowledge of it, those Confederates
prescribed orders for Reformation of Religion, Knox Hist. p. 217, 218.
to be observed and practiced throughout the whole Kingdom. Then preached
against the Queen-Regent and Parliament; and wrote to the Bishops and Clergy,
that except they did desist from dealing against them, Ib. p. 275, and 276.
they would with all force and power, execute just vengeance and punishment
upon them; likewise begin the same war, which God commanded Israel to execute
against the Cananites. And lastly, Ib. p. 372. 378.
arriving at the highest pitch of Rebellion, they deposed their Queen.

By that which has been said, it is no less apparent, what those
Disciplinarians in Queen Elizabeth's days, did also aim at, had their Power
been answerable to their Wills. Whereof she was not ignorant, as may appear by
her Speech at the dissolving that Parliament an. 1585 (the 27 th. of her reign)
wherein, taking notice of them, she pronounced them dangerous to Kingly rule;
Stow's Annal. Holingsh. Chr. p. 1396.
every man according to his own censure, making a doom of the validity, and
privity of his Princes Government, with a common veil and cover of God's word.
Whereunto I shall add what Sergeant Puckering, being Speaker of the House of
Commons in the Parliament held the next ensuing year ( viz. 28. Eliz.) did by
that Queen's direction then express.

And specially you are commanded by her Majesty, ( says he) to take heed, that
none ear be given, or time afforded to the wearysome solicitations of those
that commonly be called Puritans wherewithal the late Parliaments have been
exceedingly importuned. Which sort of men, whilst (in the giddiness of their
Spirits) they labor and strive to advance a new Eldership; they do nothing
else but disturb the good people of the Church and Commonwealth; which is as
well grounded, for the body of Religion it self, and as well guided for the
Discipline, as any Realm that professes the Truth. And the same thing is
already made good to the World, by many the Writings of Godly and Learned men;
neither answered, nor answerable, by any of these new fangled Resiners. And as
the present case stands, it may be doubted, whether they, or the Jesuits do
offer more danger, or be more speedily to be repressed. For albeit the Jesuits
do impoyson the hearts of her Majesty's Subjects, under a pretext of
Conscience, to withdraw them from the obedience due to her Majesty; yet do they
the same but closely, and only in privy corners. But these men do both publish
in their printed Books, and teach in all their Conventicles sundry opinions;
not only dangerous to the well settled Estate, and policy of this Realm, by
putting a pyke, between the Clergy and the Laity, but also much derogatory to
her sacred Majesty and her Crown, as well by the diminution of her ancient and
lawful Revenues, and by denying her Highnesses Prerogative and Supremacy, as by
offering peril to her Majesty's safety in her own Kingdom. In all which things,
howsoever in many other points, they pretend to be at war with the
Popish-Jesuits; yet by this Separation of themselves from the unity of their
Fellow Subjects, and by abasing the sacred Authority and Majesty of their
Prince, they do but join and concur with the Jusuits, in opening the door, and
preparing the way to the Spanish Invasion, that is threatened against the Realm.
And shall conclude, with what is most judiciously observed by the worthy Author
Mr. Isaac Walton.
of the History of the sometime Famous and Reverend Hooker's life. So that
these very men, says he (speaking of the Puritans in that Queen's time) that
began with tender and meek Petitions, proceeded to Admonitions; then to
satirical Remonstrances: and at last, having numbered who was not, and who was
for their Cause, they got a supposed certainty of so great a party, that they
durst threaten, first the Bishops; then the Queen and Parliament. To all which
they were secretly encouraged by the Earl of Leicester, then in great favor
with her Majesty, and the reputed Cherisher and Patron-General of these
pretenders to tenderness of conscience; his design being, by their means, to
bring such an odium upon the Bishops as to prooure an alienation of their
Lands, and a large portion of them for himself. Which avaritious desire had so
blinded his reason, that his ambition and greedy hopes, had almost put him into
a present possession of Lambeth- House.

That Queen therefore had not only a vigilant Eye upon them, Copping and
Thacker hanged at St. Edmunsbury; an. 1583, for publishing Pamphlets written by
Brown against the Book of Common Prayer.
but a strict hand, as these seditious Pamphleters; Vdall, Barrow, Greenwood,
Studley, Billots, Bowdler, Copping, Thacker, Penri, and others deservedly felt.

But, upon the coming in of King James, they began to raise unto themselves
better hopes of countenance and favor; being so confident of his Indulgence,
that within few weeks after his entrance here, they took the boldness to
present him with a Petition against the Government and Liturgy established in
the Church of England. Penri hanged an. 1593 for his libellous Book called
Mart. Marprelate.
Whereupon his Majesty, who well knew the temper of that Sect (though he was
abundantly satisfied with what he found here settled) did with great prudence by
his Royal Proclamation, appoint an Assembly of diverse select Divines, such as
could best represent the desires of these dissenting men, A. D. 1603.
Conference at Hampton Court.
as others, to meet at Hampton Court upon the twelfth of January following;
where Dr. Reynolds, and Dr. Sparks of Oxford, and Mr. Knewstubs, and Mr.
Chaderton of Cambridge, appeared on their behalfs, and freely hearing
whatsoever could be objected by the weak Brethren (as they were then modesty
styled) he clearly discerned that all the Exceptions which they made, were no
other than frivolous scruples of indiscreet men, and so convinced every one of
them thereupon, that they went away amply satisfied; promising thenceforth, not
only full obedience to the Government and Liturgy; but Dr. Sparks wrote a Book
to persuade all others thereunto.

Nevertheless, notwithstanding this, the Mystery of Iniquity worked on still in
the Hearts of other busy-headed Disciplinarians: many of which, though they
received Ordination from the Bishops, Subscribed, took Oaths, and outwardly
seemed to conform, stuck not, underhand, to use all the arts and devices of
cunning Impostors, to bring the people by degrees into an utter dislike of the
Ecclesiastical Government, the better to sit them for some desperate Rebellion,
whenever there should be any fair opportunity. To which end their practice
was, in their officiating, ever to omit some portions of the Liturgy, and to
read the remainder with but little reverence all; whereby they might by
degrees, beget an opinion in their auditory, that the service of God did
consist merely in the Sermon, and those long-winded prayers immediately
preceding and following it, which be expressly opposite to a special Canon Canon
55.
established by Act of Parliament in 1. Iac. Which Prayers, (if they be worthy
of that name) they are not ashamed to say, are uttered by the immediate
direction of Gods Holy Spirit; though therein, they have oftimes, not only
taken the liberty to deprave the Government in Church and State, by diverse sub^l
expressions; but made such a seeming show of Zeal therein, by altering their
Countenances, and changing their Voices into an affected tone; using therein
many absurd and unmannerly expressions; that one Colonel John Frye, a member of
the then Parliament.
of their own Fraternity, after he became farther reformed by an
Independentlight, could not forbear, but cried out against them, in a certain
Book, entitled The Clergy in their Colors, printed at London an. 1651. page
33. l. 17. in these words; I cannot let pass one observation; and that is the
strange posture these men put themselves into, when they begin their Prayers,
before their Sermons. Whether the Fools and Knaves in Stage Plays took their
pattern from these men, or these from them, I cannot determine, etc. What wrye
Mouths, Squint Eyes, and Screwed faces do they make? And page 41. l. 3. Again,
how like a company of Conjurers do they mumble cut the beginning of their
Prayers, that the people may not bear them: and when artificially they have
raised their voices, what a pulling do they make.

But that which afforded them no little advantage, was that horrid Gunpowder
Plot, which happened in the third year of King James; being hatched by those
fiery-spirited men of the Romish-perswasion, whom the bloudy-minded Jesuits had
influenced for that most wicked practice. For, after this, to terrify the
people with the Church of Rome, their Sermons were little less than
Declamations against the Papists; aiming thereby to represent them formidable
and odious; insinuating to the world, that all the fear of danger was from
those of that Religion; whilst they themselves, in the mean time, did
insensibly poison the people with such other unfound Doctrines, as became at
length the fountain of this late unparalled Rebellion, which terminated in
the execrable Murder of our late gracious King: and would have put a Period to
this famous and long flourishing Monarchy, had not almighty God of his great
mercy miraculously prevented it.

But how far the Principles of these Holy Reformers do differ, from the most
rigid of the Romish profession, against whom they have so long and loudly
clamoured, these ensuing observations will briefly manifest.

The Jesuits Tenets.
In Regnis Hominum potestas Regis est a populo, Bellarm. de Council. lib. 2.
cap. 19.
quia populus facit Regem. In the Kingdoms of men, the power of the King is
from the People.

Potestas immediate est, Bellarm. de Cleric. lib. 3. p. 6.
tanquam in subjecto, in tota multitudine: and si causa legitima adsit, potest
multitudo mutare Regnum in Aristocratiam and Democratiam. The power is
immediately, as in the subject, in the multitude; and if there be lawful cause,
the multitude may change the Kingdom into an Aristocracy, or Democracy.

De side certum est, Philopat. 2. p. 109.
quemcunque Principem Christianum, si a Religione Catholica de flexerit, and
alios avocare voluerit, excidere statim omni potestate and dignitate; idque
ante prolatam Papae sententiam, posseque and debere subditos, si vires habeant,
istiusmodi Haereticum, and Hominum Christianorum dominatu ejicere. It is
certainly a matter of Faith, that whatsoever Christian Prince shall depart from
the Catholic Religion, and shall withdraw others; does immediately fall from
all power and dignity, even before the Popes sentence given; and that the
Subjects may and should (if they have strength) cast forth such an Heretic,
from the dominion of Christian men.

Talis, consensu omnium, potest, Bellarm. lib. 3. de Pont. cap. 7.
imo debet privari suo dominio. Si hoc priscis temporibus minus factum sit;
causa est, quia deerant vires. Such a King, by the consent of all may, yea
ought to be deprived of his dominion. If this in old time was not done, the
cause was, for that they had not strength.

Non dissimulandum esse, Mariana lib. 2. de Reg. cap. 6. p. 59.
etc. This is not to be dissembled; that it is the most expedient and safe way,
if a public meeting may be granted, to deliberate what shall be done by common
consent. First of all the Prince is to be admonished, and to be brought to his
wits again, etc. If he reject the Medicine, and no hope of his recovery be
lest; when the Sentence is passed upon him, the Commonwealth may first refuse
his command. And because of necessity, there will be a stirring up for war,
they may unfold their Councils for defense thereof; and show, that it is
expedient to have weapons, and to command the people to advance moneys for the
charge of the Wars. And if the matter will suffer, and the Commonwealth cannot
otherwise defend it self, with the same right of defense, but with a better
authority and peculiar of their own -- Principem public Hostem declaratum,
ferro perimere. They may kill the Prince, he being publicly declared an Enemy.

The Presbyterian Tenets.
Populo jus est, Gilby lib. de Obedientia p. 25. and 105. Buchanan de jure
Regni apud Scotos. p. 61.
ut Imperium cui velit deferat. The people may confer the Government on whom
they please.

Without the Prince, Barrow refut. p. 169.
the people may reform and must not tarry for the Magistrate.

Not Kings and Magistrates only, Knox App. f. 30.
ought to punish crimes against God; Goodman. p. 185.
but the whole body of the people, and every member of the same to his ability
must revenge the injury done to God.

If Princes be Tyrants against God, Knox to Engl. and Scotl. p. 78.
and his Truth, their Subjects are free from their Oath of Obedience.

Subjects do promise obedience, Goodman p. 190.
that the Magistrate might help them; which if he do not, they are discharged
of obedience.

Evil Princes ought to be deposed, Goodman p. 144. 145.
and inferior Magistrates ought chiefly to do it.

Subjects must withstand wicked Princes; Ibid. 43. 57. 72.
they must take up Arms against them.

God has appointed the Nobility to bridle the inordinate appetite of Princes;
Knox Hist. p. 343.
and in so doing they cannot be accused as Resisters of Authority.

Judges ought to summon Princes before them, Goodman p. 111. in obedience.
for their crimes, and proceed against them as against all other offenders.

When Magistrates cease to do their duties, Ib. p. 185.
God gives the Sword into the peoples hands.

Let every Soul be subject to Superiors. Buchan. de jure Regni etc. p. 50. and
56.
Paul (says he) wrote this in the Infancy of the Church. There were but few
Christians then; not many of them rich, or of ability, so as they were not ripe
for such a purpose. As if a man should write to such Christians as are under
the Turk; in substance poor; in courage feeble; in strength unarmed; in number
few, and generally subject to all kinds of injuries; would not he write as Paul
did? So as the Apostle did respect the men he wrote unto; and his words ought
not to be extended to the body, or people of a Commonwealth, or whole City.

If Paul were alive, Ib. p. 57.
and did see wicked Kings reigning in Christian Commonwealths, Paul would say,
that he accounted no such for Magistrates; he would forbid all men for speaking
to them, and from keeping them company. He would leave them to their Subjects
to be punished: neither would he blame them, if they accounted no such longer
for their Kings.

They may kill wicked Princes, Engl. compl. against the Canons.
as Monsters and cruel beasts.

And if neither the Magistrate nor the people do their office, Goodman p. 99.
in deposing or killing them; Buchanan, ut supra.
then the Minister must excommunicate such a King.

Any Minister may do it against the greatest Prince. Knox Hist. f. 78.


A private man, Goodman p. 110.
having some special inward notion, may kill a Tyrant.

In other things also, were it not for brevity, the like parallel might be made
in what those of the Romish Persuasion, and the Presbyterians do hold; as that
the Office of Priests and Bishops is one and the same, as is judiciously
observed by the learned Author of the History of the Reformation of the Church
of England, printed at London 1679, page 366, whereunto I refer my Reader.

CHAP. III.
And having thus demonstrated, that the Principles, by which this sort of men
be unhappily guided, are most dangerous and destructive to civil Government; I
now descend to those their Arts and Devices; whereof, by the help and influence
of a most subtle, corrupt, and schismatical party in Parliament, they made
use, in order to the raising this late nefarious Rebellion: the consequence
whereof; viz. the extirpating of Monarchy here, was in their design long
before; however it may be thought by some, that Necessity and Despair, put them
upon that blod Exigent, after they had gone farther, than they thought they
could (by any outward reconciliation or pardon) be safe: for if need were,
sufficient and undoubted testimony might yet be produced, who did hear a
principal Actor Col. Purefoy, one of their Council of State.
in this late woeful Tragedy about a twelvemonth after the barbarous murder of
King Charles the First, express these words; I bless God, that I have now lived
to see the ruin of Monarchy, and that I have been instrumental in it: for I do
here acknowledge that it has been in my design ever since I was at Geneva,
which is now thirty eight years.

Of these the first, Their Practice for reducing the King to Necessities.
and indeed most fatal Artifices, was the reducing his Majesty to Necessities,
to the end he might be enforced to betake himself unto such extraordinary means
for supply, as would certainly attract the odium of his Subjects. For
accomplishing whereof, that war, wherein King James became engaged on the
behalf of his daughter and her children, An. 1619. 17. Jac.
for recovery of the Palatinate, gave them a seasonable opportunity; the Story
whereof, I shall briefly here set down.

Upon Rushw. Hist. Coll. impr. Land. 1659. p. 11. F.
the death of the Emperor Matthias (8. Aug. An. 1619. 17 Iac.) Ferdinand his
Brother (adopted by Matthias in his life time) was elected Emperor, and
crowned 19 September. following. Which Election the Bohemians disclaiming, they
chose for their King Frederick Count Palatine of the Rhine. Who thereupon by
his Letters to King James (whose daughter he had married) acquaints him
therewith, craving his advice as to his reception thereof. Howbeit, before King
James his answer could come to his hand (which was utterly dissuasory) he had
accepted Ib. p. 12.
their choice. Whereof King James hearing, in no little perplexity disavow'd E.
F.
the act, and would never style him by that Title.

That this unhappy business proved most destructive to the Count Palatine, An.
1620. 18. Jac.
will immediately appear. For the Emperor Ferdinand, became so highly irritated
thereat; that he soon after published a Proscription Ib. p. 14.
against him; proclaimed him guilty of High Treason; and declared his
resolution to prosecute him as a public Enemy of the Empire: and accordingly,
Ib. p. 15. E.
sent Marquess Spinola with numerous Forces to invade the Palatinate; as also
Buquoy and D. Balthazar into Bohemia; who with a powerful Army gave him Battle
Ib. p. 17. A.
near to the City of Prague, upon the eighth of November An. 1620, utterly
routed the Bohemians and forced that new King, with his Queen to flee the
Country.

The Report whereof arriving soon after in England, An. 1620.
caused King James to advise Ib. E.
with the Lords of his Council upon the 13 th of January following, for
recovery and protection of the Palatinate, it being the ancient Inheritance of
his Son in Law, and his Children. Whereupon thirty thousand Pounds was
forthwith sent to the Princes of the Union, for their assistance therein: and
in order to farther help, A Parliament called 30 Jan. 18 Jac.
a Parliament called to sit at Westminster upon the 30 th of the same month of
January. At which Convention the King acquainting the two Houses with what had
happened; farther represented unto them, that he had already treated a Peace in
this business: but Persuasions without power, being (as he said) of little
effect; he told them, that he thought it fit to provide an Army against the
Summer following; and desired them therefore to think upon his Necessities.

Which Parliament having sat about four months and done little in this matter;
An. 1621^ 19. Jac. Ib. p. 35.
the King considering of a Recess for a time, in regard of the season that
might cause Infection; represented to them, by the Lord Treasurer, his purpose
to adjourn them. Whereat the Commons growing displeased, they desired the Lords
to join with them in petitioning against it: the King therefore taking much
exception thereupon, judging it derogatory to his Prerogative (it being in his
sole power, to call, and adjourn, Ib. p. 36.
and dissolve Parliaments;) they thereupon, for satisfaction of his Majesty,
published a Declaration, wherein they signified unto him; that, in case his
endeavors by a Treaty, could not effect the restitution of the Palatinate,
upon signification of his pleasure in Parliament, they should be ready to the
utmost of their powers, both with their lives and fortunes to assist him; so
as, by the Divine help of Almighty God, he might be able to do that with his
Sword, which by a peaceable course could not be effected.

After this the Parliament was adjourned from the fourth of June until the
twentieth of November; Ib. p. 39. D
at which time of meeting again (the King being absent for lack of health) the
Lord Keeper told them, that unless they took farther resolutions, and were
expeditious, the Army in the Palatinate would fall to the ground. Ib. p. 40. A.
The Lord Treasurer also acquainting them, how empty the King's Coffers were;
and that his Majesty had assisted the Palatine, and Princes of the Union with
great Sums, which had so exhausted his Treasure, that he was much in debt:
Also, that notwithstanding the King had declared for War, he pursued Peace; B.
and resolved therefore to close with Spain, hoping by that Alliance to heal
the breach.

Which Speech of the Lord Treasurer tending to Peace, Ib. C.
so startled the House of Commons (wherein the Puritan was predominant) that
they soon after drew up a Remonstrance to his Majesty, wherein representing
Religion to be in danger, by the growth of Popery, they incited him to take his
Sword into his Hand, for the aid of those of our Religion in foreign parts;
and that the bent of this War might be against that Prince, whose Armies and
Treasures had maintained the War in the Palatinate. Signifying, that they had
given him one Subsidy, ^. Dec. Ib. 43. E.
for the present Relief of the Palatinate.

But in this Remonstrance there being also diverse things which the King
esteemed to tend unto his high dishonor, and to trench upon his
Prerogative-royal; he forbad them farther to entermeddle concerning his
Government, and deep affairs of State; and particularly with the match of his
Son with a Daughter of Spain.

Certain it is, Ib. 52. E.
that the Parliament made little have, in the offering of that, for which they
were chiefly called together; viz. the giving to the King considerable aid, for
relief of the Palatinate in so much as the Lord Digby then took occasion to put
the Peers in mind thereof; and that it was to that end they were summoned
thither; reporting the present distress of that Country and danger thereto by
the Duke of Bavaria: as also, that the Army of Count Mansfeild, which came in
for defense thereof, if not speedily supplied, was like to desert that service.

But, instead of hasting such Relief, Christmas approaching, and the King upon
the nineteenth of December, 19. Dec. Ib. p. 53.
giving a Commission for their Adjournment till the eighth of February
following; the house of Commons made a Protestation, wherein they declared for
sundry Privileges: of which his Majesty in a Speech Dec. 30.
at the Council Table upon the thirtieth of that month took notice, that it was
unduly gained, late at night, when not a third part of the House was present;
and penned in such ambiguous and general words, as might serve for future times
to invade most of the Rights and Prerogatives annexed to the Imperial Crown.

And, discerning that some Parliament men, who had a great influence upon the
House, rather hindered that good progress, which he expected they would have
made, toward the recovery of the Palatinate, then furthered the giving of
money in order thereto; did by unanimous consent of his whole Council, dissolve
that Parliament by Proclamation, Parliament dissolved 6. Jan. Ib. p. 56.
upon the sixth of January following.

And seeing his hopes of raising moneys by Parliament to be thus frustrate,
they first endeavored the restitution of the Palatinate, by all good means of
Treaty, both with the Emperor and King of Spain. Ib. p. 61.
Which not succeeding, he caused Letters to be written by the Lords of the
Council to the Justices of the Courts at Westminster; and likewise to the
Sheriffs of the several Counties, and Justices of Peace throughout England; as
also to the Mayors and Bailiffs of Towns-Corporate, to raise moneys by a
Benevolent contribution for recovery thereof by force; Ib. p. 114.
yet still pursued the Spanish match, in hope to gain it thereby.

But after many subtle delays made by the Spaniard, An. 1623. 21. Jac.
that match being not like to take effect, His Majesty sent the Lord Kensington
into France, to try whether a match might there speed: Another Parliament
called Ib. p. 115.
which was well accepted. Whereupon the King called another Parliament; which
began 19 Febr. 1623. At which time he acquainted them with the ill success of
that dilatory Treaty, in order to the match with Spain; and desired their
advice, on the behalf of his Son the Count-Palatine, and his Children.

In answer to which they signified, Ib. p. 128. B.
that the said Treaty, both for the Marriage and the Palatinate, could not
longer be continued with the honor of his Majesty, the safety of his People,
welfare of his Children and Posterity; and assurance of his ancient Allies and
Confederates.

Whereunto the King replied; Ib. 129. D.
that he should be loath without necessity to imbroil himself in war. And
manifesting to them his wants, for the support of a war, desired their advice:
offering, that, Ib. 131. A.
in case he took a resolution, by such their advice to enter into a war, they
themselves by their own Deputies, should have the disposal of the moneys.

Hereupon the Parliament tendered three Subsidies and three Fifteens, Ib. 135. C.
to break off both the Treaties; viz. that of the match with Spain, and that
concerning the Palatinate, Ib. 136. A.
desiring his Majesty that he would be confidently assured they would never
fail in a Parliamentary-way, to assist him in so royal a design.

But the King esteeming that too little, Ib. 137. A.
demanded five Subsidies, and two Fifteeens for every Subsidy, toward the
support of that war; and one Subsidy and two Fifteens yearly till his debts
were paid. Nevertheless told them, that he would be content to quit that
demand for his own debts, in case they gave six Subsidies and twelve Fifteens
for the war: Ib. 138. B.
declaring his resolution to dissolve the Treaties (whereupon Bonefires were
made in London, Ib. 139. A.
and the Bells rang for joy.) And farther told them, that he did assure
himself, they would make good what they had said; and, that what they had
advised him unto, they would assist him in, with their Wisdom and Council, as
also with Forces, if need required.

Shortly after which, Ib. p. 156. D. An. 1624. 22. Jac.
Count Mansfeild arriving in England, twelve thousand Foot, with two hundred
Horse, were raised to go under his Command, for recovery of the Palatinate; and
in August following, the match with France was concluded.

But this hopeful Army under Count Mansfeild (consisting of twelve Regiments)
was by tedious stay on Shipboard, Ib. 158. E.
so infected with the Pestilence, that scarce a third part thereof came safe to
Land: a third part likewise mouldring away, so that the design came to nothing.

And upon the seven and twentieth of March following, An. 1625. Ib. p. 159. C.
The Death of King James.
King James departed this life. Unto whom King Charles the first succeeded: who
resolving to pursue the recovery of the Palatinate, upon the grounds of those
great promises so made by the Parliament to his Father, did, Ib. p. 172. B.
in the beginning of May next ensuing, issue out Warrants, for the levying of
Soldiers, to be employed in that Expedition; whereof eight thousand to
rendezvous at Plymouth, one thousand at Hull, to be transported into the
Netherlands, for the service of the United Provinces; and two thousand returned
thence, for his Majesty's present service.

And having married a Daughter of France, who arrived at London upon the
sixteenth of June, The first Parliament of King Charles the first. 18. Junii.
Ib. p. 174.
he began his Parliament at Westminster within two days following. Where, in
his Speech to both Houses, he put them in mind, how they had engaged his Father
in the war, for the Palatinate; earnestly pressing their speedy assistance. And
the Lord Keeper added, Ib. p. 175. C. and 176. C.
that the principal cause of calling that Parliament (besides the beholding his
Subjects faces) was to mind them of the great Engagement for the recovery of
the Palatinate, imposed on his Majesty by the King his Father, and by
themselves, who thereupon brake off the two Treaties with Spain: as also to let
them understand, that the Subsidies granted by the preceding Parliament, with
much more of the King's own Revenue, were already spent in the following
Treaties and Alliances, upon the Armies sent into the Low Countries, and in
repairing of the Forts, with the Fortifying of Ireland; all which did meet in
one center, the Palatinate, whereof the Account was ready.

Hereupon the Houses presenting the King with two Subsidies, Ib. p. 178. A.
the Lord Conway (then one of the Secretaries of State) signified his Majesty's
gracious acceptance thereof: yet told them, that the necessity of the present
affairs, were not therein satisfied, and therefore required their farther
Councils; Reminding them, that the late King was provoked beyond his nature, to
undertake a war for recovery of his Childrens ancient Patrimony; the charges
whereof did appear by computation to amount unto seven hundred thousand Pounds
a year; viz. in supporting the Netherlands; in preventing the Emperor's design
of concluding with the Princes of Germany, for utter excluding the Palsgrave;
and levying an Army under Count Mansfeild. Farther representing to them, that
the Kings of Denmark and Sweden, and Princes of Germany had levied another.
That France, Savoy, and Venice, joined together for a war of diversion; and,
that to uphold the Netherlands, the charges of Mansfeild's and Denmark's Army
must yet continue.

But the Plague increasing sore in London, Ib. p. 178. E
occasioned some delay in their Proceedings, by an Adjournment to Oxford: at
which place they met the first of August following. Where, on the fourth of
that month, his Majesty in a speech to both Houses did again put them in mind,
Ib. p. 181. A.
of their engaging his Father in that war, for recovery of the Palatinate, upon
promise of their assistance in a Parliamentary-way; and that they themselves
then appointed a Council of war, and Treasurers. He also acquainted them with
the expense of the three Subsidies, and three Fifteens then given. And further
expressed, that he had thus reassembled them upon the death of his royal
Father, to receive their farther advice and aid for proceeding in that, wherein
by their Councils his Father was engaged; as also that they had granted unto
him two Subsidies, then ungathered, which were far short of setting forth the
Navy at that time preparing.

And the Lord Conway and Secretary Cook, Ib. p. 182. A.
did then more particularly declare unto the House of Commons, the state of
Affairs, as they at that time stood; manifesting that much more then the two
Subsidies, already given, though not paid, had been disbursed. Moreover, that
the Fleet was then at Sea, hastening to their Rendezvous, the Army at Plymouth,
expecting their Commanders; his Majesty's Honor, Religion, and the Kingdoms
safety engaged. That the King had certain advice of his Enemies intentions to
infest his dominions in Ireland, and the English Coasts; and of their increase
of Shipping in all parts: as also, that the present charge of his Army and
Navy, did amount to above four hundred thousand Pounds. The Lord Treasurer
likewise representing to them the late Kings debts;

Viz. To the City of London 120000l. besides Interest.

For Denmark and the Palatinate 150000l.

For his Wardrobe 40000 l. All which did then lie upon his Majesty.

And that his then Majesty was indebted to the City of London 20000l.

That he had laid out upon his Navy 20000 l.

For Count Mansfeild 20000l.

For Mourning and his Father's Funeral Expenses 42000 l.

For Expenses concerning the Queen 40000 l.

And that the pay of the Navy, during the time intended, for that present
Expedition, with the setting forth thereof, would amount to 300000 l.

But the Commons, Ib. p. 183. F.
instead of that calm and temperate Consideration of the present Exigencies,
which his Majesty expected, fell into very high debates; and alleged, that the
Treasure was misimploy'd; that evil Councils guided the King's designs; that
his Necessities grew by improvidence; that they had need to petition the King
for a straight hand and better Council to manage his affairs: and that, though
a former Parliament did engage the King in a war; yet (if things were managed
by contrary designs, and the Treasure misimploy'd) that Parliament was not
bound by another Parliament to be carried blindfold in designs not guided by
second Councils; Adding, that it was not usual to grant Subsidies upon
Subsidies, in one Parliament, and no grievance redressed.

Notwithstanding which objections, Ib. p. 194. B.
it was earnestly pressed by some Members of the House, that two Subsidies and
two Fifteens might be given; his Majesty's Honor, and the Necessity of Affairs
requiring it; as it then appeared out of Considerations, which had been
frequently represented. But these motives little availed; for, instead of
hearkening thereto, the Commons then published a plausible Declaration; Ib. E.
wherein they solemnly protested and vowed, before God and the world, with one
Heart and Voice, that they were all resolved, and did thereby declare, that
they would ever continue most loyal and obedient Subjects to their most
gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles: and that they would be ready, in
convenient time, and in a Parliamentary-way, freely and dutifully to do their
utmost endeavors, to discover and reform the Abuses and Grievances of the
Realm and State; and, in like sort to afford all necessary Supply to his most
excellent Majesty upon his present, and all other his just Occasions and
Designs.

The King therefore plainly perceiving, Ib. p. 195. A.
that the House did not incline to any Supply: and that in their debates they
reflected upon some great persons near unto him, dissolved that Parliament upon
the twelfth of August. Parliament dissolved. Ib. E.
Which done, he resolved that the Fleet should speedily put to Sea; and entered
forthwith into a League with the United Provinces against the Emperor and King
of Spain, for restoring of the Liberties of Germany. But being in great and
present Want of moneys, Moneys borrowed by Privy Seal.
he issued out Letters, under his Privy Seal, for borrowing to supply those
Necessities; The second Parliament of King Charles the First. 6. Februarii.
and summoned another Parliament to meet upon the sixth of February ensuing,
which was four days after his solemn Coronation.

Soon after the sitting of which Parliament, the Earl of Pembroke, at a
Conference of both Houses, represented how the affairs of Christendom stood,
before the breach of the Treaties with Spain; and how at that present: as also
the condition of the Palatinate; and likewise the King of Denmark's engagement
in the quarrel, with the forwardness of the Swedes, and contract with the
Hollander; and that the Fruits of all these would be lost, unless a speedy
Supply were resolved on.

But notwithstanding all this, Ib. p. 218. E.
the Commons still delayed the giving of any Supply; which occasioned the King,
by a Letter to the Speaker, to press them again thereunto, and to remind them
of their promises: withal assuring them, that he would willingly apply fit and
seasonable remedies, to such just Grievances as they should present unto him,
in a dutiful and mannerly way, without throwing an ill odor upon the present
Government, or upon the Government of his Father. Ib. p. 220. A.
Unto which Letter, they made a specious general answer; intimateing, that they
really intended him Supply: and accordingly voted three Subsidies, and three
Fifteens, but gave them not.

Not long after this, His Majesty, by the mouth of the Lord Keeper, took notice
to the House of Commons, of a seditious expression, made by Mr. Clement Coke,
one of their members; as also of Dr. Turner's unparliamentary carriage in
reference to the Duke of Buckingham: likewise of suffering his Council of State
to be censured and traduced in their House, by persons whose Years and
Education could not judge of things: that foreign business had been
entertained in the House, to the hindrance and disadvantage of his Majesty's
Negotiations: yea that upon the first day of his Inauguration, they suffered
his Council, Governors, and Servants, to be paralleled with the times of most
Exception: that their Committees had also presumed to examine the Letters of
his Secretaries of State; nay his Majesty's own Letters; and sent a general
Warrant to his Signet Office, commanding his Officers there, not only to
produce and show the Records, but their Books, and private Notes, which they
made for his Majesty's service. Next he told them, that they had been made
acquainted with the greatness of his Majesty's affairs, both at home and
abroad, with the strong preparations of the Enemy: with the Importance of
upholding his Allies; strengthening, and securing, both England, and Ireland;
besides the encountering and annoying the Enemy, by a powerful Fleet at Sea, and
the charge of all. And, that this being calculated unto them, they had
professed unto his Majesty, by the mouth of their Speaker, their carefulness to
support the Cause, wherein he and his Allies were justly engaged. Then he
reminded them of their unanimous consent, and real intention, formerly
expressed to supply him in such a measure, as should make him safe at home and
feared abroad; and, that in the dispatch thereof, they would use such
diligence, as his pressing and present Occasions did require. And he observed,
that in two days only of twelve, that business was thought of; and not begun,
till by a Message his Majesty did put them in mind of it, whilst their
Inquisition, against his direction, proceeded day by day. And, for the Supply
intended, he told them, the measure thereof was so little; that instead of
making him safe at home, and feared abroad, it would both expose him to danger
and disesteem; in regard, that without better help, his Allies must presently
disband, and leave him alone to bear the fury of a provoked and powerful enemy;
besides the manner of it, which was dishonorable and full of distrust; viz.
that the Bill was not to come into the House, till their Grievances were both
preferred and answered.

And his Majesty himself then farther added, Ib. p. 229. A.
he must put them in mind, that in the time of his blessed Father, they did by
their Council and Persuasion prevail both with his Father and himself, to break
off the Treaties beforementioned; and told them, that now they had all things
according to their wishes, and that he was so far engaged, they thought there
was no retreat; now they began to set the Dice on him; saying moreover, that it
was not a Parliamentary-way; nor a way to deal with their King.

And to this the Duke of Buckingham, Ib. p. 230. B.
by his Majesty's Command, farther affirmed; that if his Majesty should accept
of a less sum then would suffice, it would deceive their Expectations,
disappoint his Allies, and consume the Treasure of the Kingdom: whereas, if
they would give largely now, the business being at the Crisis, it would come so
seasonably, as that it might give a turn to the affairs of Christendom: wishing
them therefore to enlarge it, but left the augmentation to themselves. And, to
the end the load might not lie on the poorest; told them, his Majesty did
likewise wish, that they who were the abettors and counselors of this war,
would take a greater part of the burden to themselves.

Nevertheless all this moved them very little; An. 1625.
insomuch as the King, by a Letter to the Speaker of the House of Commons
(dated upon the ninth of June 9 Junii.
following) hoping to quicken them the better, did put them in mind, how often
and earnestly he had pressed them for speeding that Aid, which they intended
for his great and weighty affairs; telling them, the time they themselves had
prefixed, was so far spent ( viz. the last day of that month) that unless it
were presently concluded, it would neither bring him money, nor credit. And,
that if it were farther deferred, it would be of little use; he being daily
advertised from all parts, of the great preparations by the Enemy really to
assail him: and moreover, that he held it necessary by those his Letters, to
give them his last and final admonition; as also to let them know, that he
should account all further Delays and Excuses, to be express Denials: and
therefore did will and require them, to bring in their Subsidy-Bill, to be
passed without delay, or condition. Adding, that, if by their denial or delay,
any thing of ill consequence should fall out, either at home or abroad; he
should take God to witness, that he had done his part to prevent it, by calling
his people together, to advise with them; and opening to them the weight of his
occasions; as also by requiring their timely help and assistance in those
Actions, wherein he stood engaged by their Council.

But, instead of any satisfactory return unto this his Royal Letter, Ib. p.
402. B.
wherein he had earnestly pressed unto them, the speedy and necessary
consideration of his present Exigencies; they made what haste they could, to
perfect a Remonstrance against the Duke of Buckingham; and concerning Tonnage
and Poundage, taken by the King, since the death of his Father, without consent
of Parliament. Which was no sooner finished, but they had intimation, that the
King would dissolve the Parliament; whereupon they forthwith ordered, that
every Member of their House should have a Copy of that Remonstrance. Ib. p.
403. D.


The Parliament being therefore dissolved by Commission, upon the fifteenth of
June, The second Parliament of K. Charles I. dissolved. 15. Junii.
his Majesty did presently set forth a Declaration, manifesting the reasons he
had for dissolving thereof; as also of the former Parliament: whereby he did
clearly publish to the world, how he became engaged in a war with a potent
Enemy, upon his Father's death; and that he was enforced thereto, for the
necessary defense of himself and his Dominions; as also for the support of his
Friends and Allies; recovering the patrimony of his Sister, and her Children,
and maintenance of the true Religion. Moreover, that he was invited thereto,
and encouraged therein, by the advice of both Houses of Parliament; and by
their large Promises and Protestations to his Father, to give him full and
real assistance in those Enterprises, which were of so great importance to
this Realm; and to the general peace and safety of all his Friends and Allies:
but, that instead of making performance of those their undertakings, he found
them so slow and full of delays and diversions, that no fruit came thereof. And
farther added; that tho he had by his Letters, bearing date the ninth of June,
pressed them earnestly therein, with a clear and gracious manifest of his
resolutions, they never so much as admitted one Reading to the Bill of
Subsidies; but instead thereof prepared and voted a Remonstrance, which they
intended to prefer unto him; containing (tho palliated with glosing terms) as
well many dishonorable Aspersions upon himself, and upon the memory of his
deceased Father, as dilatory Excuses for their not proceeding with the
Subsidies. Adding thereto also colored conditions, crossing thereby his
direction. All which his Majesty plainly understanding; and esteeming the same
to be a denial of the promised Supply: finding likewise withal, that no
admonition could move, nor reasons or presumptions prevail, the time being so
far spent, as that they had put an impossibility upon themselves to perform
their Promises; upon mature advice, he dissolved the Parliament, as has been
already observed.

Being therefore thus exposed to extreme Necessities, An. 1626. 2 Car. 1. Ib.
p. 419. B. C A Loan of money required by the K.
he was constrained to require a Loan of money from the Nobility, the City of
London, and others: as also to lay a Charge upon the Ports and Maritime Towns,
Ship Money required.
for the furnishing certain numbers of Ships, for the guarding of the Coasts
against attempts from Spain or Flanders; and likewise upon the Counties
adjoining, to contribute thereto.

After which he issued out Privy-Seals unto several persons, Privy Seals. Ib.
p. 420.
for borrowing of money; and to others proposed a Benevolence, A Benevolence
proposed.
according to the proportion of four Subsidies and three Fifteens, which were
by the late Parliament resolved on, to have been given to the King; setting
forth a Declaration, to manifest the reasons of his requiring that Loan. Ib. p.
422.
Soon after which, he sent away six thousand Foot-Soldiers, under the command
of Sir Charles Morgan, and others, for the service of the United Provinces.

Moreover, to heighten and increase these his wants, An. 1626. Short View of
the Life of K.^ Charles, impr. Land. 1658. p. 46.
about this time a most unlucky occasion happened, which (in short) was this;
that the French Priests, and Domestics of that Nation, which came into England
with the Queen, were grown so insolent, and had put so many affronts upon the
King; that (as the French King had sent back all the Spanish Courtiers, which
his Queen brought with her) his Majesty was forced to send them home. But that
King, not looking on this Example, and knowing upon what ill terms our King
stood, both at home and abroad; first seized on all the Merchants Ships which
lay in the River of Bourdeaux, and then brake out into open war; so that the
King was constrained to make use of those Forces against the French, which were
designed to have been used against the Spaniard, and to comply with the desire
of the Rochellers, who humbly sued for his protection and defense: but the
Fleet set forth for that purpose, being encountered with great Tempests, was
forced to return, without doing any thing farther, then showing his Majesty's
good will, and readiness to assist them.

CHAP. IV.
BUT the next year the King, An. 1627. Rushw. Coll. p. 428. E.
having made new Preparations for a war with France, to manifest what ground he
had for it, declared, that the House of Austria (conspiring the ruin of all
those of the Reformed Religion through Christendom, as he said plainly appeared
in the wars of Germany) had such an influence upon the Council of France, as to
prevail with the French to obstruct the landing of Count Mansfield's Army, p.
429.
contrary to promise, with whom they should have joined Forces for the relief
of the Palatinate, and the German Princes; the failure wherein proved the ruin
of that Army, the greatest part whereof perished. Furthermore, that having by
his mediation prevailed for a Peace between the French King and his Protestant
Subjects; and engaged his Word, that the Protestants should observe the
Articles of Agreement: nevertheless the King of France, contrary to those
Articles, blocked up their Towns, Garrisons, and Forts, committing many spoils
upon them, though they had done nothing in violation of the Edict of Peace.

Whereupon the Duke of Buckingham, in order to the relief of the Palatinate,
being made Admiral, and Commander in Chief of the Landforces, on the 27th of
June 27 Junii.
set out from Portsmouth (the Fleet consisting of an hundred Sail, whereof ten
were of the King's Royal Navy, Ib. F.
having aboard six or seven thousand Land-Soldiers) and toward the later end
of July appeared before Rochel. Where, attempting to gain the Isle of Rhee,
which lay before that Town, and imbarr'd their Trade, his unskilful conduct
therein was such, that he was forced to a retreat 8 Nov.
, with the loss of many valiant men, and not a little of his Honor; the more
full relation of which ill success I refer to our Historians. Ib. p. 469.


This Expedition proving thus unhappy, Life of King Charles by Dr. Perenchef
impr. Land. 1676.
his Majesty's necessitous condition forced him to pawn much of his Lands to
the City of London for an hundred and twenty thousand pounds, which he then
borrowed; and also to borrow thirty thousand pounds more of the East India
Company. But all this, being not sufficient to support the charge of the Fleet;
notwithstanding these former great discouragements, still hoping by a
Parliament to obtain some reasonable Supply, in these his pressing Necessities;
An. 1627. 3 Car. I. Rushw. Coll. p. 480. C. The third Parliament of K. Charles
I. 17 Martii.
he called another Parliament, to begin on the seventeenth of March next
following. At the meeting whereof he told them, None there but knew, that
common danger was the cause of that Parliament, and Supply at that time the
Chief end thereof. Likewise, that if to maintain their own advices; and, as the
case then stood, for the following thereof, the true Religion, Laws and
Liberties of this State, and the just defense of its true Friends and Allies,
were not sufficient; then no Eloquence of men and Angels could prevail; Ib. p.
481. D.
the particular dangers being laid open by the Lord Keeper.

Hereupon Ib. p. 531. B.
(after some time spent in debate of these things) five Subsidies were voted,
and the Petition of Right assented to by his Majesty. After which the
Parliament was first prorogued from the 26th of June 26 Junii 1628.
till the 20th of October. And then, by Proclamation, till the 20th of January.
Ib. p. 644. B. Ib. D.
At which meeting the Clergy also gave the King as many Subsidies.

In the interim of which Prorogation, the Duke of Buckingham, Short View of the
Life of K. Charles. p. 26.
who had formerly been the Darling of that Parliament, which made use of him to
King James for breaking the match with Spain, being now grown odious, and in
this Parliament represented to be the chief cause of all their Grievances; not
only by reason of the losses at the Isle of Rhee, but for many other respects,
as in the Annals of that time may at large be seen; hoping as well to regain
the honor he lost in the last year's attempt in that Isle, as a better opinion
of the People; designed another Expedition to Rochel. In order whereunto, being
Commander of the Royal Fleet, ready to set sail from Portsmouth, he was there
desperately murdered by one John Felton (a discontented Officer of the last
years Army) upon the 23d of August; Rushw. Coll. p. 647. C.
who gave no other reason for that his barbarous and bloody Act, then that the
Duke had been declared an Enemy to the Commonwealth, in a Remonstrance tendered
to the King by the House of Commons in the former Session. But I proceed,
notwithstanding this fair show of an hopeful accordance; Ib. p. 651. C.
there were not a few turbulent-spirited men, both in the Parliament and
elsewhere, who sought all advantages for breaking thereof; diverse Merchants
refusing to pay Tonnage and Poundage, in regard it had not been granted to the
King by a special Act since the death of his Royal Father King James. Ib. p.
656. C.
Whereupon his Majesty first sent for those Merchants to the Council Table; and
after, by a Speech to both Houses, told them he expected they should pass the
Bill for it. But instead of complying therein, the Commons published a
Declaration concerning Religion; alleging, that they must prefer it before all
other business. Whereupon the King, whose urgent Necessities, for want of the
Supply expected, pressed hard upon them; An. 1628.
issuing out a special Commission Febr.
, for taking of Tonnage and Poundage. Ib. p. 670. F.
Against which the Commons not only protested, but some of their Members
behaved themselves therein so disobediently and seditiously, to the contempt of
his Regal authority; Short view of the life of K. Charles p. 53.
that fearing they should be dissolved before they had vented their own
passions in that particular, they locked the doors of the House of Commons, kept
the Key, and held the Speaker by strong hand in his Chair, till they had
thundered out their Anathema's; not only against such as should dare to levy
it, but against those who should willingly pay it. The News whereof, being
thereupon brought forthwith to the King, he did, upon the second of March, The
third Parliament of King Charles the first dissolved. 2. Martii.
by Proclamation dissolve that Parliament: And about a week following coming to
the House, declared, that he did not impute those Disasters to the whole House
of Commons, knowing that there were amongst them many religious, grave, and
well-minded men: Rushw. Coll. p. 672. A.
but that the sincerer, and better part of the House, were overborn by the
practices and clamours of the other: who, careless of their duties, and taking
advantage of the times, and his Necessities, did enforce him to break off that
meeting. Which, had it been answered with like duty on their parts, as it was
invited and begun with love on his, might have proved happy and glorious, both
to himself and the whole Nation. And farther added, that he did thus declare
the manifold causes he had to dissolve that Parliament; that all the world
might see, how much they had forgotten their former engagements, at the
entrance into the war, themselves being the Perswaders of it; promising to make
him feared by his Enemies, and esteemed by his Friends: and how they had turned
the Necessities grown by that war, to enforce him to yield to conditions
incompatible with Monarchy.

CHAP. V.
THe ends in reducing his Majesty to Necessities, being by those means thus
unhappily accomplished, and the King thereby exposed to some extraordinary ways
of Supply ( viz. Loanes, Benevolences, Ship Money etc.) their next work was to
possess the people with an opinion, that these were but the beginnings of
farther and greater oppressions; by which his purpose was; first by degrees to
weaken them in their Estates; and then to bring upon them no less a vassalage,
than that of the French Pesant. And, not only so, but to endanger their souls,
by enthralling them to the Superstitions of the Church of Rome. To which
purpose, under a seeming Devout and Holy pretense, to advance and promote the
Preaching of the Gospel, Planting Schismatical Lecturers.
they got in a number of Lecturers into most of the Corporate Towns, and
populous places of this Realm (according to the pattern Hist. of the
Presbyterians by Dr. Heylin. p. 11. and 12.
of Geneva) especially into the City of London; whom they maintained by
Voluntary contributions, to the end Hist. of the life and death of Archbish.
Laud. p. 9. Buying in impropriate Tithes for their support.
they might be engaged to preach such Doctrine, as should (upon occasion)
prepare the People for any disloyal attempt, and dispose them to Rebellion when
opportunity served.

And for the better support of these Boutefeus, they purchased Ib. p. 211. 212.
in diverse Impropriate Tithes; constituting Feoffees, some of the Clergy, some
Lawyers, some Citizens (all of the Puritan Party) under color of redeeming the
Lord's Portion out of Lay hands (as the Phrase then was.) By which subtle
Practice, they gained many large sums in order thereto, from sundry
well-meaning People; especially such as lay on their Deathbeds; who being thus
incited to this seeming glorious work, saw nothing at all of the main design,
which was underhand driven on by the Grand Contrivers. Besides this, they
likewise cunningly wrought, that such as were of their Party, might by one
means or other be made Heads of some Houses in the Universities; as they did in
Emanuel College, and Catherine Hall in Cambridge; New-Inne, and Magdalen Hall
in Oxford. And for an essay of those whom under color of Preaching the Gospel,
in sundry parts of the Realm, they determined to make instrumental for carrying
on the work, they set up a Morning-Lecture at St. Antholines-Church in London;
where (as Probationers for that purpose) they first made trial of their
abilities; which place was the grand Nursery, whence most of the Seditious
Preachers were after sent abroad throughout all England, to poison the People
with their Antimonarchical Principles. These being the men, who first began to
infuse into their Auditors a disaffection to the Church Discipline established
by Law, pretending it to savor of Popery: and after a breach made therein,
then to cry out against miscarriages in Government. So that having in a short
time weaned the People from kneeling at Prayers, and bearing part in the
public Service of God by their mutual Responses, as the Liturgy directs; they
then cried down those reverend Set-forms of Devotion, which were enjoined by
the Law: and by degrees using them to long-winded ex tempore Prayers, of their
own indigested composure (which they called Praying by the Spirit (at length
insinuated to them, that the Liturgy by Law established was no other than the
Mass translated into English, and a thing utterly nauseous to God Almighty: by
which means multitudes deserted the Public Prayers of the Church in diverse
places, where the Incumbents continued regular, and forbore to come there,
until the Psalm preceding the Sermon began. So that in the end, the decent and
pious Order, in serving God, according to the Laws, not only became by little
and little wholly antiquated; but such of the Clergy, as making any conscience
of their Subscriptions, and Oaths of Canonical obedience, observed the Rule;
were frequently scandalized with Innovation in Religion, and inclination to
Popery; few regarding any thing but the Sermons, and those tedious ex tempore
Prayers of the Preacher in order thereto: Ib. p. 311, 312.
placing all Religion in being present at those wild and frothy Exercises,
though they slept when they came there, or little regarded what was said.

In which Prayers (if I may so call them) it was no wonder to hear them, The
absurdity and ill effects of them.
cunningly to insinuate that, which might put the people into a jealousy of the
King, and the inferior Magistrate; by praying against this or that miscarriage;
of which, by their subtle expressions they would have their auditory believe
them to be guilty, in point of Government, or personal demeanor. Nor were
those their Sermons, for the most part, other than vain and frivolous
declamations against Popery, wherewith they affrighted the more ignorant sort
of people; as if that were the only thing which would endanger their souls,
enslave their consciences, and utterly ruin them in their temporal estates. By
which slight, in drawing their thoughts from what was really the grand danger,
they led them blindfold into those mists of error and ignorance, wherein they
became afterward miserably shakled, and were made Slaves to those Grand
Contrivers; who, at length, by these devices, got the full power of the Sword
into their hands; verifying therein that Prophetical expression of the
venerable and judicious Hooker, in that excellent Preface to his Books of
Ecclesiastical Policy; viz. after the Puritans have first resolved, that
attempts for Discipline are lawful; it will follow in the next place to be
disputed, what may be attempted against Superiors.

In further order to which malevolent design for the utter extirpation of
Monarchy, being not ignorant in what high esteem the memory of the same Mr.
Hooker was with all pious and learned men, for those five Books of
Ecclesiastical Policy, made public in his life time: and having heard that
there were three more written by him upon the same subject; which under color
of a desire to search after his death, for some Writings in his Study, were by
certain Clergymen who stood disaffected to the Discipline of the Church,
unhappily lurch'd away: they did at length gain those very Books into their
hands; and not long after the beginning of this late unparalled Rebellion,
for the better accomplishing their long studied ends, most shamefully corrupted
them in sundry places, omitting diverse passages which were unsuitable to their
purposes; and instead thereof inserting what they thought might give
countenance to their present evil practices: amongst which was this, in
terminis, that, though the King were singulis major, yet he was universis
minor; and having so done, caused them to be published in Print. By which
fallacy, diverse well meaning people were miserably captivated and drawn to
their Party. And, at length were not ashamed, in that Treaty which they had
with his Majesty in the Isle of Wight, to vouch the authority of this venerable
man, in derogation of his Supremacy, and to place the Sovereign power in the
People; that great Antimonarchist, William late Vicount Say and Sele, being the
person who boldly urged it. Whereunto the good King answered; that though those
three Books, were not allowed to be Mr. Hookers; yet he would admit them so to
be, and consent to what his Lordship endeavored to prove out of them, in case
he would assent to the judgment of Mr. Hooker, declared in the other five
Books, which were unquestionably His.

But as to these their indirect dealings, in thus corrupting the works of that
excellent man; (whose memory for his profound learning, singular piety, and
most exemplary life will be ever precious to succeeding ages) and his necessary
vindication therein; I shall, for more full satisfaction to my Reader, refer
him to that seasonable Historical discourse, lately compiled and published,
with great judgment and integrity, by that much deserving person Mr. Isaac
Walton, containing a perfect Narrative of the life and death of this right
worthy person.

Of which I hold it necessary, that special notice should be taken; by reason
that since the happy Restoration of our present Sovereign K. Charles II. Dr.
Gawden, then Bishop of Exeter, upon the reprinting those five genuine Books of
Mr. Hooker, together with the other pretended three; taking upon him to write a
Preface to the whole; and therein to give an account of Mr. Hooker's life; has
not only, with great confidence, used diverse Arguments to satisfy the world,
that those three Books were penned by Mr. Hooker (notwithstanding those
poisonous assertions against the Regal power, which are to be found therein)
but much misreported him, in the Narrative of his life; representing him to
have been a single man, with many other gross mistakes; as whosoever compares it
with Mr. Walton's History of him, may easily see.

Moreover, well knowing, that the City of London, in respect of its Riches and
Populousness, must be the principal stage for this Tragic-Action; there was no
small care taken for fitting all places of Authority therein, especially the
Common Council, with such active men as might advance this blessed work.
Wherein, having made a fair and succesful progress; but discerning, that the
Sword must at length be made use of; they then began to frequent the
Artillery-yard, and to be diligent Practisers of military Discipline: Their
practicing of military Discipline.
in which they grew in a short time so great Proficients, that most of the
chief Officers in that School, were men of that stamp, and got into their hands
the best and choicest Arms.

And, that they might make the more secure progress in this their long studied
design; they laid the Scene at first in Scotland, the Subjects of that Realm
being most tainted with Presbytery: so that in case this their contrivance
should speed there, they might the more boldly adventure upon the like here.

The first thing therefore, His Majesty's Declaration printed at London, An.
1639. p. 6.
that was made use of, toward their Masterpiece in Scotland, was an exception
(or rather cavil) by diverse eminent persons in that Kingdom, at his Majesty's
Revocation of such things, as had been passed away in prejudice of that Crown
(especially by some of his Progenitors in their minorities) though not without
example. This, being advised by those, that were then his Majesty's
Privy-Councellers and Officers of State in that Realm (whose late Actions have
sufficiently manifested what effect they desired it should produce). did
accordingly occasion much repining by diverse principal persons, Ib. p. 7.
who thereupon infused into his Subjects a distaste of his Government. And,
though the King was pleased to wave his interest therein; and to remit as well
the Equity, as rigor of the Laws in that point, the Malcontents would not be
satisfied, but still endeavored to work a disaffection in the people thereto.

And whereas his Majesty out of his pious care of the Clergy, Ib. p. 9.
who had been much oppressed by the Laity, that paid Tithes, being pleased to
grant out Commissions in their behalf; had so good issue therein, as that both
Parties were abundantly satisfied; the maintenance of the Clergy being thereby
improved, and the Laity freed from a dangerous dependence upon Subjects: yet
the Nobility and Lay-Patrons, fretting privately for being robbed, as they
conceived, of the dependence of the Clergy and Laity, bent their envy against
the Bishops, under pretense that they were the principal causers thereof.

To quiet therefore these discontents, in the year 1633, An. 1633.
his Majesty made a progress into Scotland, and was there crowned (having not
been personally there, till then, since the death of his Royal Father) at which
time he also held a Parliament in that Realm; wherein great suggestions were
made of fears, that dangerous Innovations in Religion would be attempted, as
also instead of acceptance of an Act for Ratification of all other Acts,
concerning the Religion professed and established, it was dissented to by
diverse of the after-chiefest Covenanters. And, no sooner was he returned back
into England, but that infinite Libels were dispersed abroad, to impoyson the
People with his Majesty's proceedings at that Parliament. Of which Libellers
(amongst others) the Lord Balmerino was found guilty by his Peers; and
accordingly should have received sentence of death for it: nevertheless,
through his Majesty's goodness, was not only pardoned, but enlarged, and
afterward became an eminent Covenanter.

Which Insolency of the Scots did not a little animate and encourage the
Puritan-faction here, An. 1634.
who loudly declaimed against the Discipline of the Church, as it then by Law
stood established: and to beget a greater contempt thereof in the generality of
the people, represented it to be superstitious, and like to usher in Popery:
dispersing many scandalous, seditious, and libellous Pamphlets to that purpose:
infusing likewise into them strange apprehensions, that their Liberty and
Property were in no little danger: and the better to give color to their
pretended fears of these approaching Evils, they took ready hold of this
following occasion.

The Sovereignty of the Brittish-Seas, by ancient right justly appertaining to
the Crown of England, having not only been invaded by the Dutch, but their bold
usupation therein openly justified by certain public Writings; the King, with
the advice of his Council-learned, did, about the same time, issue out certain
Writs, directed as well to all the Inland Counties, The Inland parts charged
with Ships for defense of the Realm.
as to the respective Port-Towns, according to the example of his Royal
Progenitors, to set out a certain number of Ships, furnished with Mariners,
Ammunition, Victual, and all other necessaries for defense of the Realm. By
which means he did not only assert and recover that dominion on the Sea, which
really belonged to this Kingdom, but much improved Trade and Commerce, whereby
the generality of his Subjects were not a little enriched.

But this just and rational practice, some of the malevolent Members of his
former Parliaments, and others of that stamp, under pretense of standing up for
the Rights and Properties of the Subjects, did stubbornly oppose, though his
Majesty had the clear and unanimous opinion of all the grave and learned Judges
of his Courts in Westminster Hall, under their hands, to justify those his
Proceedings: Nevertheless, waving any arbitrary power, he freely gave leave,
that the Case should be solemnly debated in the Exchequer-Chamber. Which being
publikly done after diverse solid Arguments thereon; no less then ten of those
twelve Judges fully declared their opinion for the Legality thereof; Sr. George
Crook, and Sr. Richard Hulton only dissenting, though they had formerly
subscribed thereto.

This as to the Civil Liberties, and what (as has been before observed) of the
great noise made every where touching the fear of Popery, was it whereof not
only the factious people here took great advantage, A usual mask for evil
designs. Hist. of Archbishop Laud's life. etc.
but those of that leven in Scotland; who thereupon began to set on foot a
contrivance, whereby they might have the color of Religion* to help on their
work. Whereunto the rise they took, p. 92. 93. Multitudo, ubi religione capta
est, potius vatibus quam Ducibus suis paret. Curtius lib. 4. An. 1637. The
Service Book sent into Scotland.
was a pretended apprehension, that the Liturgy sent to them in an. 1637, was a
mere Popish Service Book, and purposely designed to introduce the Romish
worship into both Kingdoms. From the ground of which seeming jealousies, they
fell foul upon the Bishops; under color, that they were the framers thereof,
and the chief Instruments for obtruding it upon them.

To clear them therefore of this most impious scandal, I shall here briefly
represent to the world, what that so much defamed Liturgy was, and on what
occasion it was sent into that Realm.

King James after he came to enjoy the Crown of England, King Charles his large
Declaration. p. 16.
well observing the Decency and Uniformity of God's worship here, and the
Deformity thereof in his own native Kingdom, where no set, or public form of
Prayer was used, but oftimes seditious expressions, girding at Sovereignty and
Authority, and stuffed with false Reports; upon his Progress into Scotland an.
1616, an Assembly being then held at Aberdene, he proposed to that Convention a
public Liturgy, to be used in that Realm. Which pious motion, being then and
there well approved of, a Liturgy was accordingly framed, and in all points
properly fitted for that Kirk; Ib. p. 17.
and after his return into England, conveyed to him, where it was viewed by
some of his Scottish Subjects: yet not sent thither whilst that King lived.

Being thus composed, his Son and Successor K. Charles, after a review thereof,
finding it in substance, the same with the English Liturgy, which his Majesty
in point of prudence declined to recommend unto them, lest they might cavil
thereat, under color, that it would be looked upon as a badge of Dependency
upon the Church of England, Ib. p. 18. and 19.
then sent it to the Lords of the Privy Council of that Realm, by their advice
to be publicly read, without the least suspicion of any dislike thereof, in
regard it did so little differ from the English Liturgy, Ib. p. 19.
wherewith his Scottish Subjects of all sorts were well acquainted, by reason
of their frequent resort to his Majesty's own Chapel, and many other Churches
in this Realm, where it was constantly used; as also in his Royal Chapel at
Haly-Rood-House (whereunto the Nobility, Bishops, Judges, Gentry, and people of
all degrees did usually come), Cathedrals of Scotland, and University of St.
Andrews: Ib. p. 22.
and not only so, but commended in the Sermons of some of their after principal
Covenanters, especially Mr. Rollock.

But Rebellion being the close and underhand design of these great Pretenders
to Godliness; whereby, in case they did prosper, they might swallow up the
Possessions of the Crown and Church, with the Estates of all his Majesty's
loyal Subjects; the contrivance was so laid, that the Common people should be
possessed with an opinion, that the King having married a Popish Queen, did
resolve to introduce the Romish Religion first into Scotland, and afterward
into the rest of his dominions; and to that end, first to settle this Liturgy
there, it being privately whispered, that it was the very Mass translated into
their Language. Which so far incensed the vulgar; that upon the reading
thereof, Ib. p. 23, 24, 25. 23 Julii. 1637.
in the great Church at Edenborough, upon the 23 d of July the same year (1637)
they made such a tumult, as that the Dean, who read it, and many other persons
of note, had much ado to escape thence with their lives.

Which uproar was so barbarous, Tumults at Edenborough, by reason of the
Service Book.
that the day following, the Lords of the Council there, set forth a
Proclamation* in dislike thereof. And, the Magistrates of Edenborough to make
up the Pageant) sent Letters into England to the Archbishop of Canterbury, Ib.
p. 26, and 27.
desiring him to recommend to the King's Majesty their zeal and forwardness,
for settling the peaceable practice thereof. Neither would any man of note, then
seem to own that Tumult; Ib. p. 31.
but attributed it to the Rogues and base multitude, except the zealous
Kirkmen, who cried it up in their Pulpits, and magnifyed them for the most
heroical Sparks, that ever God inspired, and raised up, in this last age of the
world; and for their happy Mouths and Hands; which God was pleased to honor
that day, with the beginning of their new Blessed Reformation, and occasioning
their celestial Covenant (as they called it) that their memorial should be
eternal, and all succeeding generations should call them blessed.

After this (about the end of Harvest) began a tumultuous conflux of the
Nobility, Gentry, Ministers, and others at Edenborough, from all parts of the
Kingdom: howbeit, as yet the principal persons in authority there, seemed to
stand right enough in their loyalty (so that his Majesty the less feared the
ensuing mischeifs) the more to prevent any suspicion thereof, 17. Oct. 1637.
set forth three Proclamations.

First, that nothing should be treated of at the Council Table there, about
Church-business, till they saw the times and meeting of his Majesty's Subjects
more quiet and peaceable. 1638.
The Second, for removing the Session ( or Term) from Edenborough to Lithgow,
for fear of present danger. The third, for burning a seditious Book, dispersed
in derogation of the Ecclesiastical Government in England.

But these Proclamations were for little else then show; Ib. p. 35. 18. Oct.
the Tumults increasing; so that the next day, the Bishop of Galoway, and the
Lord chief Justice of that Kingdom, were assaulted by the multitude, and the
Lords beset in the Council-house; the people, in their clamorous noises,
crying, God defend all those, Ib. p. 37.
who will defend God's cause; and God confound the Service Book, and all the
maintainers thereof. And so great were their outrages, that they pulled down
the Lord Treasurer; took his Hat, Cloak, and White-Staff from him; and set upon
the Provost, as he was entering his own House.

These with the like were the beginnings to their intended glorious work of
Reformation (as they called it) which they (...) God even to a miracle had so
graciously prospered in their Hands. In which last Tumults none were more
forward than two of those, who were lately Bailiffs of Edenborough, and had
subscribed the beforementioned Letters to the Archbishop of Canterbury.

Subsequent to which Tumults, Ib. p. 41.
two Petitions were presented to the Lord Chancellor and Council against the
Service Book: the first in the name of all the Men, Women, Children and
Servants of Edenborough; the second by the Noblemen, Gentlemen, Ministers and
Burgesses: suggestions being made to the people of the King's inclination to
Popery.

Of which stirs in Scotland, Ib. p. 47.
the King having advertisement, he sent over the Earl of Roxborough (Lord
Privy Seal) into that Kingdom. Whereupon a Proclamation 19. Febr. 1638.
was set forth there, by his Majesty's appointment, for dispersing of the
dangerous multitudes got together at Sterlyn. But against this Proclamation the
Earl of Hume, and Lord Lindsey, with many others of all ranks, made a
Protestation; which Protestation they published at Lithgow, and afterward at
Edenborough, forcing the Heralds that proclaimed the same, to stay and hear
the Protestation against it.

So that, it is observable, that the first Tumult was by the name of Rascals and
Scum of the people. Ib. p. 40.
The second by the best sort of Citizens: and the third by the Nobility,
Gentry, and Magistrates.

After which Protestation, Tables of Advice erected.
they erected public Tables of Advice and Council, for ordering the affairs of
that Kingdom, in contempt of his Majesty's authority; entering into a formal
Combination, which they called a Covenant against all that should oppose them.
The first Covenant by the Scots.
Which Covenant, Mr. Andrew Cant, in his Sermon at Galsgow, told the people, he
was sent to them with, by a Commission from Christ, to bid them Subscribe; it
being Christ's contract; and that he himself came, as a wooer to them, for the
Bridegroom; and called upon them to come to be hand-fasted, by subscribing that
contract. Adding, that he would not depart the Town, till he got all the names
of those who should refuse to subscribe that Contract, of whom he promised to
complain to his Master.

The King therefore hearing of the increase of those troubles, His Majesty's
Declaration. Ib. p. 40.
sent over the Marquess of Hamilton, with Commission Dated at Windsor 20 May
1638. The Marq. of Hamilton sent into Scotland, to appease the people there.
for composure of them. Who, on the sixth of June following arrived at
Dalkeith; where the Lords of his Majesty's Council of that Kingdom, were then
assembled for safety (as 'twas pretended) in regard of the combustions at
Edenborough, which daily increased.

But the chief of the Covenanters grew daily more violent in their courses;
increased the meetings of their Tables; subdivided them into several
Committees; augmented their Provisions of Arms; and infusing fears and
jealousies into the people, by seditious Sermons; caused Edenborough-Castle to
be girt with strong Guards; hindered all persons to go to the Marquess, to treat
or speak with him in the business for which he was sent; giving out, that there
was a Plot to blow them up with Gunpowder, if they should go to Dalkeith; and
received in two Ships-lading with Arms and Ammunition at that time.

Whereupon, Ib. p. 85. 86.
at the request of the Citizens of Edenborough, the Marquess took his journey
from Dalkeith to Haly-Rood-House. But, before he got thither, the Covenanters
meeting him on the way, with multitudes that made great Exclamations against
Popery and Bishops; required a General Assembly of the Church, and then a
Parliament; justifying their Covenant, as being more available and useful to
them (as they said) than all the Laws and Acts of Parliament, which had been
enacted in that Kingdom since the time of Fergus, the first King thereof. The
Peoples fury also growing more hot than ever, Ib. p. 88.
new Guards were clapped upon the Castle of Edenborough; the Pulpits rung of
Libellous Sermons and Prayers: yea so insolent they were, that they sent a
Prohibition against reading the English-Service in the King's peculiar Chapel,
where the Marquess (his Majesty's Commissioner) and the Council were to be.

Which Tumults (as 'twas said) occasioning the Marquess to go back to Dalkeith;
the Covenanters sent Letters to every one of his Majesty's Council, requiring
their Subscription to the Covenant. And, understanding, that the Marquess did
resolve to publish a Declaration of his Majesty's forwardness, to maintain the
Religion professed in that Kingdom, and his aversness to Popery; dissuaded him,
as he tendered the King's honor, his own safety, and peace of the Public from
doing it.

But not withstanding these arguments, Ib. p. 96. 28. Junii.
the Marquess did cause his Majesty's Proclamation to be published by Heralds,
at the Market-Cross in Edenborough; declaring his resolution to maintain the
true Protestant-Christian-Religion. And for farther clearing of scruples,
assured them; that he would neither then, nor thenceforth press the practice of
the Canons and Service Book, otherwise than in such a fair and legal way, as
should satisfy his loving Subjects, that he neither intended Innovation in
Religion, or Laws; warning all his good people to beware of disobedience.

But all this no whit sufficed them; for in open affront thereto, they caused
multitudes of people to fill the streets (especially near the Cross) in an
hostile equipage; with Pistols and Swords out of their Belts; giving out, that
if this Proclamation were hearkened unto, it would bring undoubted ruin to
their Religion, Laws, and Liberties: and upon a Scaffold (erected for that
purpose) they mounted, with a Rebellious Protestation, in defense of their
Covenant, which they published openly: concluding that if his Majesty would not
allow their proceedings, they themselves would call a General Assembly;
justifying all their doings to be most necessary, and an orderly means,
agreeable to the Laws and practice of that Church and Kingdom.

Whereupon the Marquess returning into England, Ib. p. 110. and 111.
to acquaint the King with what had passed; resolving to be back again before
the Fifth of August with new instructions; they in his absence informed the
People, that he was well satisfied with their Covenant. Against which calumny,
upon his return, he published a Manifesto in Print. And having direction from
his Majesty to indict an Assembly; sent to diverse of the principal Covenanters,
concerning some Propositions to be resolved upon before the meeting thereof.
But this Message was received with so much choler and contempt; that they
blazed it abroad for a proposition, tending to the utter ruin of the Laws and
Liberties of that Church and Kingdom.

Which much startling the Marquess, he told them of his resolution to go back
into England, and that he could not concur with them: but that he had power to
grant them a new Assembly; which he could not conceive to be free, if they
should bring in every man to have a voice, whom they had a mind to. And
accordingly went again into England. Where having acquainted the King with what
had happened, he returned. Howbeit, before he came back, the Covenanters
(contrary to promise) had elected Commissioners for the Assembly.

Upon which his Return, 22 Sept.
he delivered to his Majesty's Council at Haly-Rood-House, Letters concerning
the Confession of faith of the date at Edenborough Ian. 28. 1580; and signed by
King James. But the Covenanters hereupon gave out to the people, that the News
brought by the Marquess, did tend to the utter subversion of their Religion and
Liberties: also that there was a new Covenant to be set on foot by the King, to
destroy theirs; and that if now they resisted not, all was lost that they had
already done. Nevertheless the Marquess caused his Majesty's Declaration and
Confession of Faith (ut supra) to be published at the Market-Cross in
Edenborough: Ib. p. 137.
and at the same time, not only a Proclamation for indicting a General Assembly
at Glasgow the one and twentieth of November ensuing; Ib. p. 147.
but an Act of the Lords of the Council, requiring all his Majesty's Subjects,
to subscribe the said Confession of Faith, and Band annexed. Which Declaration
contained a grant for redress of all the particular Grievances, desired in
their Supplications, Remonstrances, Protestations, Declarations etc. and
besides all this, their own Confession of Faith (the ground, as they pretended
of their Covenant) renewed and established.

But the principal Covenanters having possessed the People with a prejudicate
opinion of this gracious Declaration (before they heard it) as destructive to
the Laws and Liberties of that Church and Kingdom; Ib. p. 156.
erected a large Scaffold near the Cross, where the same was to be published;
at which diverse Earls, Lords, Gentlemen, and others, with their Swords in their
Hands, and Hats on their Heads, stood jeering and laughing, during the time of
the same Declaration: and it being ended, with Insolent and Rebellious
behavior, assisted one Archibald Iohnston, in the publishing a most wicked and
treasonable Protestation; wherein they invoked God's holy name, as a witness to
many notorious falsehoods; attributing Infallibility to their Rebellious
Covenant: affirming, that it was approved from Heaven with rare and undeniable
instances. And the next Sunday after, all the Pulpits rang with bitter
invectives and Declamations against his Majesty's Declaration; branding it with
the depth and policy of Satan.

Nevertheless, this Declaration and Confession of Faith, so sent by his Majesty
was very well received in all places, except such whereunto the Covenanters
from their Tables had prepared their Emissaries to dissuade the acknowledgment
of it; witness the Letter sent to the Marquess, dated 24 Sept. 24 Sept.
from the Provost, Bailiffs, and Council of Glasgow, and the Ministers there.
And the Assembly at Glasgow being thus indicted, they cunningly contrived, Ib.
p. 188, and 189.
that the Commissioners, Ib. p. 195.
should be elected of the most rigidand fanatic spirits that were; the
Principal Covenanters persuading the People, that the King intended no
performance of what he promised in his last Proclamation; no not the Assembly
it self; but to gain time until he were ready for their ruin: sending likewise
for all their party, to flock to 13. Oct.
Edenborough, as if then there had been greater danger than ever; Ib. p. 197.
increasing also their Guards about the Castle; their Preachers publishing in
the Pulpits; that whosoever subscribed his Majesty's Confession and Covenant,
were perjured Villains.

Moreover they caused a most false, Ib. p. 208.
odious, and scandalous Libel, to be drawn up against the Archbishops and
Bishops; and exhibiting it to the Presbytery of Edenborough, Ib. p. 210.
procured it to be publicly read in the Pulpits. Whereupon the Archbishops and
Bishops were cited by the Presbytery of Edenborough, to appear before the
General Assembly, Ib. p. 226.
to be holden at Glasgow 21 Nov. following. And the more to infatuate the
giddy-headed multitude, they set up such another Impostor, as the Holy Maid* of
Kent in King Henry the Eighth's time was, An. 1534. 25. H. 8. Holinsh. p. 936.
937.
viz. one Michelson's daughter, said to have been long distracted by Fits, and
then pretended to be inspired with Divination; who was cried up for raving
against the Bishops, in her mad Fits; Rollock (one of their fiercest
Presbyters) giving out, that God spoke through her; her expressions being, Ib.
p. 228.
that it was revealed unto her from God, that their Covenant was approved from
Heaven.

And soon after this, Ib. p. 229. and 230.
they indicted an Assembly, by their own authority upon the one and twentieth
of November following. But upon knowledge that the Lord Marquess (his Majesty's
Commissioner) was resolved to hold the Assembly at the time and place appointed
by the King's Proclamation, they altered their purpose, and sent out Papers for
a General meeting at Edenborough upon the twelfth of November; and to stay
there, till they were to go to Glasgow on Saturday the seventeenth of that
month.

Which meeting (according to the King's Proclamation) being very great; after
his Majesty's Commission read, the Marquess exhorted them to a peaceable and
moderate carriage; giving some touch of the disorders that had passed.
Whereunto answer being made by a Nobleman (a Lay Elder) that they had given his
Grace satisfaction for all their proceedings, they went on to the choice of a
Moderator, without the approbation and consent of his Majesty's Commissioner;
appointing for that purpose Mr. Alexander Henderson (the most rigid Covenanter)
Against whom, when the Marquess protested, such was their heady and exorbitant
carriage; that, by the hands of Doctor Hamilton, they presented to the Marquess
a a Declinator and Protestation against his proceedings, in the name of the
Bishops. Nay so formidable they soon after grew, as that the University of
Aberdene, Ib. p. 224.
having been threatened with the loss of their lives, for writing against the
Covenant, durst not send any of their Professors to that Assembly. 28. Oct.
And on the eight and twentieth of October a calumnious Libel against the
Bishops was read in all the Churches of Edenborough; Ib. p. 248.
one Gibson (in the Assembly) thundering out a verbal Protestation; that they
would pursue their Libel against the Bishops, so long as they had lives and
fortunes.

Which Assembly was formed of Ministers (Commissioners to it) chosen by Lay
Elders, Ib. p. 264.
the Lay Elders themselves being likewise present in it (...) course so much
distasted by several parts of the Kin^^^^, that they thereupon made
Protestations against (...) proceedings; diverse of which were read at the
instance of his Majesty's Commissioner: but the Lord Lowdon hindered the reading
of that from Glasgow. And, as their Elections were wholly undue, so were their
Actions in the Assembly; all being carried by faction, and clancular
contrivances, Ib. p. 281, 282, 283.
as appeared by their own Private Papers of Instructions (some whereof were
discovered by the Marquess) neither was any freedom of debate therein, but what
tended to the advancement of their evil designs.

The Marquess therefore showing a dislike to those their sinister dealings, Ib.
p. 287. 27 Nov.
departed from the Assembly at Glasgow. Whereupon the Covenanters protested
against all that he had said and done there, as his Majesty's Commissioner. And
at the same instant the Lord Areskyn, and three other mean persons, came and
begged to be admitted into their blessed Covenant. Which offer (though of
purpose contrived) was made so good use of by the Moderator, that he desired it
might be admired as God's approbation and Sealing of their proceedings. And it
being put to the question whether they should adhere to their Protestation, and
continue the Assembly, notwithstanding the King's Commissioners departure, it
was voted (by most) affirmatively. Secondly, whether the Assembly, though
dissolved by his Majesty's Commissioner, was competent judge against the
Bishops, and whether they would go on in their Trial; it passed also
affirmatively, nemine contradicente.

And now, Ib. p. 290. 29. Nov.
no sooner was the Marquess thus departed, having caused his Majesty's
Proclamation to be published by Heralds, The Assembly at Glasgow dissolved.
at the Market-Cross in Glasgow, for dissolving the Assembly; but that Mr.
Archibald Iohnston (the then Clerk to the Assembly) made a scandalous
Protestation against it. Ib. p. 294. Ib. p. 317.
After which all things were transacted by some few packed Committees of the
most fierce Covenanters, which sat till the thirtieth of December following.
Which Committees, amongst other of their Acts declared six general Assemblies
to be Null and void, whereof two were then in force by several Acts of
Parliament; and diverse Acts of the other four, confirmed by Parliament. They
condemned likewise, all the Arminian Tenets (as they called them) without
defining what those Tenets were. They also deprived all the Archbishops and
Bishops of that Realm; Episcopal Government abolished in Scotland. Ib. p. 319.
excommunicating many of them, without examining any one witness to prove, no
nor offering to produce any to testify ought against them. And next declared
Episcopal Government to be inconsistent with the Laws of that Church and
Kingdom; abolishing it for ever, though it then stood confirmed by many Acts
both of Parliament and Assemblies. They also deprived diverse Ministers for
Arminianisme, without ever questioning them for what Tenets or opinions they
held.

Moreover, toward the end of their Assembly, they divided themselves into
several Committees; which after their rising, should see all their Acts put in
execution. And, at the conclusion of all, the Moderator gave God thanks for
their good success, congratulating the Nobility for their great pains; giving
thanks also to the Earl of Argyle for his Presence and Council. Which Earl, in
a long Speech, then excused his late declaring himself; yet protesting, that he
was always set that way, though he delayed to profess it, so long as he found
his close carriage might advantage their Cause, but now he must openly adjoyn
himself to their Society, or prove a Knave, as he said.

Hereupon the Marquess (his Majesty's Commissioner) resolving to ask the King's
leave to return for England, came first to Edenborough, where he found strong
Guards put upon the Castle, and the people much abused by false Reports; viz.
that his Majesty had made good nothing at all, which was contained in his
Declaration at Edenborough upon the two and twentieth of September last; Ib. p.
366.
whereupon he caused a Proclamation 18 Dec.
to be published in his Majesty's name, at the Marketcross there, containing
the sum of his whole proceedings at Glasgow. Ib. p. 375.
Which being encountered with a blustering and undutiful Protestation, in the
name of the general Assembly of the Kirk of Scotland, and published at the same
time and place, he returned into England.

Then the Faction proceeded to levy Soldiers, Ib. p. 402.
impose Taxes; and requiring obedience to their Acts, menaced the Refusers;
raised diverse Fortifications in that Kingdom; blocked up his Majesty's Castles
and Forts; and took the Castle of Edenborough; procuring their Preachers
seditiously to teach the People, that there was a Necessity of bearing Arms
against his Majesty under pain of Perjury and Damnation; and caused such an
infamous Ballad to be sung up and down against the Bishops; as that, in hatred
of them, the people called a Dog with black and white spots, a Bishop as he
went in the Streets.

Moreover they procured diverse Libels to be scattered in England, for
justification of their rebellious courses, and defamation of Ecclesiastical
Government; inciting his Majesty's Subjects in this Realm, to attemt the like
Rebellion here: refusing to admit such to the Communion, who had not subscribed
their Covenant; and preaching that the Non-subscribers were Atheists. Ib. p.
404.
Nay one of them, in his Sermon exhorted the people never to give over, till
they had the King in their power, and then he should see what good Subjects
they were. Others preached, that the Service Book was framed at foam. These and
many other groundless scandals and falsehoods, to amuse the People, they
published in their Pulpits (which they called the Chairs of truth.) And to
hasten on the Peoples Insurrection, endeavored to persuade them, that his
Majesty intended an Invasion of that Kingdom, and to make it a Province; as
also to despoil them of their Laws and Liberties, and to give them new Laws, as
if they were a conquered Nation. And having thus prepared the People and fitted
themselves with all Provisions for war, The Scots put themselves in Arms.
they put themselves in Arms, and marched to the Frontiers of England,
pretending they came as Petitioners.

The King therefore discerning the danger, The King raised an Army, whereof he
made the Earl of Arundel General. 27 Martii, 1639.
raised a gallant Army, whereof he made Thomas Earl of Arundel his General; and
on the seven and twentieth of March set forwards toward Scotland; having with
him the flower of his English-Nobility and Gentry, whose cheerfulness then to
serve him was very great. Yet was the Earl of Essex at that time his
Lieutenant General, and the Earl of Holland General of the Horse (so much was
his Majesty then mistaken in their affections to him, who did afterward
sufficiently discover themselves) And advancing with his Army, 28 Maii, at the
Birks.
encamped four miles West from Barwick.

What correspondence was then held, betwixt the Scots, and diverse of the great
ones, then in his Majesty's Camp (considering also who were of his Bedchamber)
may easily be guest by the consequences. Certain it is, that diverse of them
grew cool in the business: so that, after the Scots had, The King's
Declaration, since the Pacification in the Camp near Barwick. p. 3. and 4.
by a formal Petition expressed; that they falling down at his Majesty's feet,
did most humbly supplicate him, to appoint some of the Kingdom of England, to
hear by some of them, their humble desires: his Majesty assented thereunto; and
after several meetings thereupon, and their demands presented in writing,
professed; that it was their grief that his Majesty had been provoked to wrath
against them, his most humble and loving Subjects: and that it should be their
delight, upon his gracious assurance of the preservation of their Religion and
Laws, to give example to all others, of all civil and temporal obedience, which
could be required of loyal Subjects.

To which his Majesty answered, that if their desires were only the enjoying of
their Religion and Liberties, according to the Ecclesiastical and Civil Laws of
his Kingdom of Scotland; he did not only agree to the same, but should always
protect them to the utmost of his power; they yielding him in the mean time,
such civil and temporal obedience, as could be justly required of loyal
Subjects.

Upon this Petition therefore, Ib. p. 17.
Articles of Pacification were concluded 17 Junii. Articles of Pacification
with the Scots.
on at Barwick; whereby his Majesty was contented not only to confirm
whatsoever his Commissioner had promised in his name; but that all
Ecclesiastical matters, should be determined by the Assemblies of the Kirk.
Likewise matters Civil by the Parliament, and other inferior Judicatories
established by Law.

Moreover, that for settling the distractions of that Kingdom, he was willing to
grant a free general Assembly, to be kept at Edenborough the sixth of August
ensuing; and after that a Parliament the twentieth of August; for ratifying
what should be concluded in the Assembly; being graciously pleased to declare,
that upon disbanding of their Forces, dissolving all their pretended Tables;
restoring his Forts, Castles, and Ammunition etc. To his good Subjects their
Liberties, Lands, Goods etc. detained since the late pretended general
Assembly; he would recall his Fleet; retire his Landforces; and make
restitution to them of their Ships, and Goods arrested etc.

Which Agreement was entertained by them, with so much outward acceptance; that
by the Subscriptions of the chiefest of them, it was promised, they would ever,
in all things carry themselves like humble, loyal, and obedient Subjects. But,
instead of performance of their parts, at the very publishing 20 Junii
the Articles in their Camp, a Protestation was made, dishonorable to his
Majesty's Government, to the further encouraging of the People in their
disobedient and mutinous ways. And at the same time, they delivered into the
hands of some of the English Nobility, and spread among others, a scandalous
Paper, entitled, Some conditions of his Majesty's Treaty with his Subjects of
Scotland; wherein were contained such untruths and seditious positions, and so
contrary to what was concluded in the Articles of Pacification; that, howsoever
they pretended a desire of peace, yet they intended nothing less; and instead
of disbanding their Forces within forty eight hours, after publication of those
Articles; they kept great parts of them together, and held in pay almost all
their Officers; continuing their unlawful meetings and conventicles, to the
great vexation and trouble of all such his Majesty's good Subjects, as did not
adhere to their rebellious Covenant, and Act of the pretended Assembly at
Glasgow keeping up all their Fortifications. Yea such was the fury of the
People (animated by that Protestation, with diverse scandalous Papers, and
seditious Sermons) that they deterred his Majesty's good Subjects, from going
to their dwellings; threatening them with loss of their lives, if they repaired
to their own Houses; laboring also to pervert them in the choice of the
Commissioners for the general Assembly appointed; by anticipating their voices,
in making them swear to, and subscribe the approbation of the same Assembly at
Glasgow, Ib. p. 17.
and Acts thereof; deterring others from repairing thereto. So that, by these
new disorders, the peace and quiet of his Subjects, was greatly disturbed
(great Insolences being offered to the Earl of Kinnowl, his Majesty's high
Treasurer; as also to Sir James Hamilton Justicegeneral, and other his
Majesty's Counselors and good Subjects) so that the King sorbore to come to
Edenborough; such of his Loyal Subjects as attended his Person, and adhered to
him, being branded by them with the vile aspersion of Traitors to God and their
Country, and threatened to be proceeded against with censures accordingly. And
lastly, shaking off all respect due to sacred Majesty, protested, that all
members of the Colleges of Justice and Leiges, were not to attend the Session;
and that all Acts, Decrees, and Sentences therein past against any of them,
should be null, Ib. p. 19.
void and ineffectual; contrary to the King's express Warrant for the
down-sitting thereof, and the heavy damage of his good Subjects, who were
thereby frustrated of Justice.

And having laid these insolent and seditious foundations for a Parliament, Ib.
p. 20
it could not be expected, but that the structure must be full of confusion (as
indeed it proved) their Actions, and demands favoring of nothing but
undutifulness and disloyalty: for they stuck not to deny to his Majesty the
most essential, and inherent Prerogatives of his Crown; striving by all means
to change and alter the constitutions of the Parliament, and frame of
Government. Likewise to restrain his power in point of coinage, custody of
Castles, grants of Honor, and Commissions-Justiciary, or Lieutenancy.

And his Majesty by his Commission, 2 Julii.
having allowed them the liberty of convening and meeting, until a certain day,
for distributing of their pretended charges, amongst such as should willingly
condescend thereunto; they did not only, without Warrant, continue their
Conventicles and Tables, since that Commission expired, 20 Julii.
contrary to the positive Laws of that Kingdom, the Act of Pacification, and
their own acknowledgment in petitioning for the aforesaid Commission; but
urged, that all those his good Subjects, who adhered to him in defense of his
Royal authority, against their rebellious commotions, should be made equal (if
not more liable) to the defraying of their pretended charges. Which might imply
his Majesty's countenance and justification of all their Rebellions and
Treasons. Ib. p. 30.


The King therefore discerning their persistance in such unsufferable demands,
returned to England, August.
signifying to the Earl of Traquier ( his Commissioner) that it did evidently
appear unto him, that their aim was not now for Religion, as they always
pretended, but rather the alteration of the Government of that Kingdom, and
withal the total overthrow of Royal authority: November.
commanding his said Commissioner to prorogate the parliament, till the second
of June, next following.

Notwithstanding which Prorogation, they continued their sitting at
Edenborough; and sent their Deputies Earl of Dumfermelyn.
over into this Kingdom, to make Remonstrance of their doing, (without knowledge
of his Commissioner.) Whereupon his Majesty's Commissioner came over, Lord
Lowdon.
and acquainting him with those Insolences; also by his command, relating 5
Dec.
them at his Council Board; the King there proposed to the consideration of the
Lords then present; Ib. p. 41.
whether it were not more sit to reduce them to their duty by force, than give
way to their demands, so much prejudicial to his Honor and safety. Which being
unanimously voted in the affirmative, his Majesty resolved to call a Parliament
soon after.

In which Interim the Scots lost no time, but making fair pretenses by their
Remonstrance, 18. Dec.
protested against this Act of Prorogation; and declared, that the same was
contrary to the Constitutions and practice of all precedent Parliaments;
contrary to the liberties of that Kingdom, and repugnant to the Articles of the
late Pacification; and that it was ineffectual and of no force to hinder their
proceedings; professing, that it was never their intention to deny his Majesty
any part of that civil and temporal obedience, which is due to all Kings from
their Subjects, and from them to their dread Sovereign, after a more special
manner; but merely to preserve their Religion and Liberties of the Kingdom: and
that whatsoever course they should take, it should be no imputation to them,
being constrained thereto, for best securing that Kirk and Kingdom from the
Extremity of confusion and misery: taking God and man to witness, that they
would be free of all outrages, and Insolences that should be committed in the
mean time.

And then they began again to levy and raise Forces in several parts of the
Realm in great numbers; Scots raise more forces.
excercised, trained, and assigned them a Rendezvous; as also a day to be in
readiness to march; making Provisions of Artillery, Jan. 1639. Act. 34.
Ammunition, and Arms in great quantities, from foreign parts; laying Taxes
and Impositions of ten marks in every hundred, upon all the Subjects of that
Kingdom, according to their several Revenues, for support of their Rebellion;
exacting the same with the greatest rigor that could be imagined; spreading
sundry Papers and Pamphlets scandalous to the King's proceedings; blocked up
the Castle of Edenborough, and fortified diverse places; imprisoned the Earl of
Southeske (one of his Majesty's Privy Council there) and sundry others of
quality, for not adhering to them in their Rebellious courses: endeavoring to
settle Intelligencers in parts Beyond Sea; and practicing to let in foreign
power; inclining rather to prostitute themselves to a foreign Government, and
different in Religion, than yield obedience and conformity to his Majesty their
natural Sovereign; Ib. p. 57.
as appears by their Addresses, and Letter to the French King.

By what has been said, it appearing, that the first glimpse of this grand and
destructive Rebellion showed it self at Edenborough upon the three and
twentieth of July, an. 1637; the scum of the people then taking fire at the
reading of that Service Book, which was sent over by his late Majesty (of
blessed memory) as a proper Liturgy for the Church of Scotland, and most nearly
suting with this of England. Forasmuch, therefore, as from those Sparks the
ensuing flames arose; which from and after that time continued burning, for the
space of many years, until they had overspread, and much wasted the chief parts
of this great Isle: to make the Bishops of both Kingdoms odious, there are not
a few, who either out of malice to their sacred function, or ignorance as to
matter of fact, have imputed the original of all this mischief unto them, as
the first Authors or procurers of that Book, which they would have believed to
be the first rise thereof.

To the end therefore, that those reverend persons (soon after ruined, and
since dead) may be fully vindicated from being primarily instrumental therein
(though had they so been, no person of upright judgment could justly have
blamed them from endeavoring an uniformity in the service of God in both
Kingdoms.) I shall desire my Reader to cast his eye upon that faithful
Narrative, The King's Declaration printed at Land. 1639.
written by the command of our late Sovereign King Charles the first (and
corrected throughout with his own hand, as many yet living can testify;)
whereby he will clearly discern; that the then Lords of the Privy Council of
Scotland, were the men, who advised the King to commend a Service Book, to be
received and used in all the Churches of that Realm, of which there was no
little want, every man being left to his own giddy fancy.

Now, whether this advice of those Lords was not with purpose to trepan his
Majesty to do that; which (as they resolved to order the business) should
occasion a tumultuous Insurrection by the rabble, whence their grand Design of
raising a general flame of war might ensue, let the Reader judge, Ib. p. 8.
when he looks back upon their discontents upon his Majesty's Revocation of
such things as had been passed away, in prejudice of that Crown, especially by
some of his Progenitors in their minorities (though not without advice of those
who were then his Privy-Councellors in that Realm) as has been already
observed. And withal consider what combinations were driven on diverse years
before, betwixt the most considerable persons of the Puritan-party in England,
and the Grand-Contrivers there; Mr. Knightley's house in Northamptonshire,
being the chief place, where that restless faction had their frequent meetings:
whence Sir Henry Vane junior.
a Gentleman Preface to the Memoires of the lives of James and William D. of
Hamilton. Impr. Land. 1677.
of quality was sent into Scotland (afterward a great Parliament Man here:)
who residing there for some time before the troubles broke out, represented to
those which had the chief Interest there, that the business of the Ship Money
and Habeas Corpus, with diverse other things, whereof there was much noise made
afterward, had so irritated the greatest part of the English Nation; that if
they made sure work at home, they needed not to fear any thing from England.

Moreover how earnestly and eagerly, after that Tumult at Edenborough was so
raised, all sorts of people took advantage thereof; the Kirkmen laying about
them in their Pulpits, so that the Citizens, Gentry and Nobles speedily put
themselves in Arms; entering into a rebellious Confederacy, called the
Covenant. And lastly, that when his Majesty most graciously offered to recall
the Service Book (which was the great business at which they seemed to take
offense) they were no whit lenified. It will be visible enough to any person of
judgment, who does not wilfully shut his Eyes, that the hatching of this
Rebellion, was of a much elder date than that Service Book.

But I now return to England.

CHAP. VI.
HIs Majesty thus seeing his danger from Scotland; and hoping of help from his
English Subjects, resolved of calling a Parliament here. But, no sooner were
Writs out for that purpose, than that the Schismatical Party used all possible
endeavor to strengthen their side, by choosing of their own faction, for
Knights and Burgesses. And to accomplish the same, spared for no pains in
packing of Voices, and making parties (wherein their Seditious Pulpit-men
bestir'd themselves to purpose:) 1640.
such being then their fury, that those meetings for Elections appeared more
like riotous tumults, than orderly conventions: nevertheless, the Nation was
not then so generally tainted, but that many good men were chosen.

Which Parliament An. 1640. 13 Apr. The Short Parliament called.
began at Westminster upon the thirteenth day of April; wherein his Majesty
declared to both Houses the indignities received from his Scottish Subjects; and
to suppress their Rebellion, proposed a Supply of twelve Subsidies; in lieu
whereof he was content to forbear Ship Money, than which nothing seemed so
grievous.

Had not that Parliament been broke by the subtle artifices of the
Grand-Contrivers in the immediate Rebellion; no doubt but all those miseries,
which were thereby soon after brought upon this Realm, might have been easily
prevented: and that the breach thereof was wrought by them, is plain enough.
For Sir Henry Vane Senior, a member of the House of Commons at that time (and
one of his Majesty's principal Secretaries of State) having by the King's
appointment, moved for a Supply of twelve Subsidies; yet with power to stoop to
eight: when he saw an inclination in the House tending thereto (first by a
Proposal of four, then five, nay six were mentioned, and the motion not
disliked) told them peremptorily; that it was in vain for them to think of less
than twelve, in regard he knew, under that number would not be accepted.

And, having by that sinister dealing kept such distance betwixt his Majesty
and his good Subjects, was by some other of the faction so seconded, with a
hideous representation of their Grievances, together with dangerous Innovations
in Religion, and fears of introducing Superstition; besides certain motions as
did (not without cause) put strange apprehensions in the Queen of peril to her
person (or at least some others very near unto her) that his Majesty was
constrained to dissolve that Parliament. The Short Parliament dissolved. 5 Maii.
And taking consideration of the Scots rebellious Insolences, which every day
increased, proposed the business of money to his Privy Council, who contributed
a considerable sum to his aid; his domestic-Servants and Officers making good
addition thereto. The Earl of Strafford Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, speedily
hasting into that Kingdom; where he called a Parliament, raised an Army of
eight thousand men, with money to maintain them, and within the space of six
weeks returned into England.

That the meeting of these Members of Parliament from all parts of the Realm
(being many of them men of turbulent Spirits, and principles totally
Antimonarchical) gave opportunity for those contrivances which afterward were
put in Action, there is nothing more sure. For in the first place, they took
care to infuse Fears and Iealousies into the people every where, that the
Government was then designed to be Arbitrary, and Popery like to be introduced:
to promote which Scandals many seditious Preachers took no small pains in their
Pulpits; especially in and about London. Whereupon several tumultuous meetings
were made in diverse parts of the Suburbs; and a Paper set up in the night, at
the old Exchange, animating the Apprentices to sack Lambeth House. 9 Maii.
Which took such effect, that two nights following, it was beset 11 Maii.
with above five hundred of the rascal multitude, and an attemt made thereon,
though without success; some of them being taken and imprisoned in Southwark.

But here they rested not; for within a few nights after, they broke open the
White-Lion, and King's Bench Prisons, and let out their fellows.

The Scots also, 11 Julii. Ad. 38.
having made such preparations for a second Rebellion, continued likewise their
Parliament, according to the Fundamental Laws (as their phrase was) having
enacted a Band, to be subscribed by all men before the first of September, to
maintain it to be a free and lawful Parliament: whereupon they formed another
Army: and knowing certainly what store of well-wishers they had in this
Kingdom: as also how easy the work was like to be made, through the subtle
contrivances of the factious party here, from whom they were sufficiently
instructed and animated by private Invitations and large promises; invaded this
Realm, passing 17. Aug. The first Invasion of the Scots.
the Twede at Barwick.

But the King being slow to believe what they designed, was not so forward as
to encounter them upon the Borders; his Army (which he raised that Summer)
lying, at that time about New Castle, of which the Earl of Northumberland was
made General; who (alleging himself to be then ill in health) staid in London.
His Majesty therefore having certain advertisement, that the Scots were ready
to enter Northumberland, intended to have made the Earl of Strafford General;
who declined it, out of an honored respect to the Earl of Northumberland: but,
being much pressed, in regard of this present occasion, desired to serve, as
Lieutenant general under him, and had his Commission 18 Aug.
accordingly.

On Thursday the twentieth of Aug. the King set forwards from London, toward
the North, and on Monday following, the Earl of Strafford (having in that short
time fitted himself for his journey) posted from London by Coaches; and
arriving at York the Wednesday after (though then much troubled with the Stone)
rode to Topcliffe on Friday. 28 Aug.


At that time the Lord Conway was General of the Horse, and at Newcastle, with
the Army. Where, by reason of the General's and Lieutenant-General's absence he
had the chief command thereof: but made such slender resistance, that the Scots
forced their passage over the River of Tine at Newburne, that very Friday, and
entered Newcastle without opposition; himself then retreating with the Army
toward York, and in some confusion.

And now that the Scots had thus possessed themselves of Newcastle, they began
to strengthen that place, and bring all those Northern-parts under
contribution. Which strange passages made most men amazed; scarce any man
knowing whom to trust or speak freely to. Much labor (indeed) there was, to
make the people believe, that all this did work for their good, and that the
Scots were their surest friends; this being the certain way to have a
Parliament, and that the undoubted cure of all things amiss, both in Church and
State. And (truly) such a burden was Ship Money then esteemed to be, and some
few other extraordinary Impositions (so wanton were many grown, being surfeited
with that plenty which long peace had produced) that the Scots then had, not a
few well-wishers in all parts of this Realm, their piety and goodness being so
cried up by the whole Puritan-party.

His Majesty therefore in this difficult Labyrinth, took resolution to summon a
meeting of the Peers at York (a course which had anciently been used; A grand
Council of the Peers at York. 24 Sept.
especially when exigencies were so great, that the Convention of a Parliament
could not be staid for); and at the meeting of this grand Council, represented
to them the present danger of this Invasion; with desire of their advice,
touching the maintenance of his Army, as not safe to be disbanded, whilst the
Scotish-Forces were on foot: as also what course was fittest to be taken to get
them out. Whereupon, without long deliberating, a Treaty was determined on, and
for that end sixteen of the Lords then present, were assigned on the King's
part, to meet with Eleven of the Scots; with power to compose and conclude all
differences.

Whereunto the Scots assented; upon condition, that the King should first
revoke his Proclamation, whereby he had declared them Traitors. COMMISSIONERS
Of the English these,
Francis Earl of Bedford. William Earl of Hertford. Robert Earl of Essex.
William Earl of Salisbury. Robert Earl of Warwick. John Earl of Bristol. Henry
Earl of Holland. Thomas Earl of Berkshire. Philip Lord Wharton. William Lord
Paget. Edward Lord Kymbolton. Robert Lord Brook. John Lord Paulet. Edw. L.
Howard of Escrick. Thomas Lord Savile. Francis Lord Dunsmore.
Of the Scots these,
John Earl of Rothess. Chapter Earl of Dumfermeling. John Lord Lowdon. Sir Patrick
Hepburne of Waughtone. Sir Will. Douglas of Cavers. William Drummond of
Riccarton. John Smith Bailiff of Edenborough. Alexand, Wedderburn, Clerk of
Dundee. Hugh Kennedy Burgess of Air. Alexander Henderson. Archibald Iohnstone.


Which Treaty began at Rippon upon the ninth of October; 9. Oct. Treaty at
Rippon.
but what good effect it was like to produce, we now plainly see, Eleven of
those sixteen English Lords, which were chosen on his Majesty's part, being
afterward Actors or Assisters in the late war against him.

The first demand there made by the Scots Commissioners, being no less then
forty thousand pounds a month, for maintenanne of their Army, during the
Treaty. Which tho not directly granted, was so far yielded to; as that the
Assessment imposed by them, upon the County of Northumberland, Bishopric of
Durham, and Town of Newcastle, should stand good, for the raising of Eight
hundred and fifty pounds a day allowance, for the space of two months, to begin
upon the sixteenth of that instant October. And that there should be a
cessation of Arms; the Scots Army to be confined on the North part the River
Tese, and the English to the South thereof.

CHAP. VII.
WHich footing thus gotten by the Scots in the North, gave no small
encouragement to their well-wishers in the South; especially in London; who, in
contemplation also of the ensuing Parliament (which by his Majesty was summoned
to meet upon the third of November following) were not a little animated in
diverse bold Enterprises: for scandalous papers and Libels, were frequently
thrown in the streets, against the Bishops. Yea so bold were the multitude
grown (by the example of the Scots in an. 1637, and through the incitation of
many Citizens and others of note, who would not then show themselves) that on
the 22th of October, a rabble of no less than Two thousand Brownists, and the
like Sectaries, entered St. Paul's Cathedral, where the high Commission Court
then sat; tore down all the Benches, and cried out, No Bishop, No High
Commission.

To the consideration of which Parliament (begun on the third of November
accordingly) did the King represent the safety and security of this Realm; The
long Parliament began. 3. No.
earnestly desiring, that care might be speedily taken for riddance of the
Scots, which had thus invaded the North; and to satisfy their just Grievances,
promised his hearty concurrence; desiring that his Army might not be suffered
to disband, for want of pay, before the Rebels (for so he then called the
Scots) were put out: And that they would lay aside all suspicions, to the end
it might become a happy Parliament; resolving to cast himself wholly upon the
love and affection of his English Subjects.

But the house of Commons (consisting of the same, Will. Lenthal of Lincolns
Inn being Speaker.
or persons worse affected then those in April before (the prevalent party
purging the House of diverse persons, whom they concieved would not comply with
their destructive enterprises: for such, they either finding fault with their
Elections, or making them criminals, as to some public Grievances, though
others of a deeper guilt were not touched, whose offenses might make them
obnoxious to their power, or obsequious to their designs] went slowly on with
what his Majesty had proposed to them: for the busy-party (who were the great
Actors in the ensuing Tragedy) then fell to contrivance about the
accomplishment of their long desired work. To which purpose the Treaty at
Rippon was soon after removed to Westminster; to the end, that there they might
have the Scots Commissioners at hand, and the power of the Londoners to assist
them; for it had been impossible, without the conjunction and help of the
Prevalent and factious party in that City ever to have accomplished the ruin
of the established Government, and destruction of the King, as they afterward
did. In order whereunto, the first step they made, was the entertaining 9 Nov.
Petitions of Grievances from all parts of the Realm; which made such a noise,
as if the Subjects of England had suffered under the greatest slavery and
oppression, that had ever been heard of: and (being devised and framed by
themselves) were received with such great acceptance, as that the People began
to show no small expressions of Joy in their new Reformers. Who to win them the
more, besides the Impeachment 11 Nov. The Earl of Strafford impeached of
Treason.
of the Earl of Strafford (which was within two days following) whom they had
made sufficiently odious, by representing him to be one of the greatest causes
of their oppressions, and an especial Enemy to Parliaments, expelled 13 Nov.
diverse Projectors and Monopolists out of the House of Commons; impeached 18
Dec.
the Archbishop of Canterbury; the Bishop 19 Dec.
of Ely, and Lord Keeper 21 Dec.
(Finch) for Treason against the State: having in order thereto, by libellous
Pamphlets and Pictures rendered them hateful to the People; Damned that hideous
Grievance of Ship Money by vote 14 Jan.
; Passed a Bill 5 Febr.
for a Triennial Parliament; as also impeached 11 Febr.
Justice Berkley of High Treason, for his activeness in the business of
Ship Money. And to try how safely they might adventure to strike at the
established Government of the Church, which might make the easier way for ruin
of the State, they brought 28 Nov.
Pryn, Burton, and Bastwick in triumph to London (who had been censured in the
Star Chamber, for Libels against the Hierarchy) countenancing a Petition,
exhibited 11 Dec.
to them by Alderman Penington, against Episcopacy and Church Discipline. Yet,
that there might be no doubt of their zeal, and dutiful affection to the King,
they sent 15 Dec.
a Message to his Majesty to desire leave that they might advance and settle
his Revenue; offering 16 Dec.
to make him the richest King in Christendom.

And having thus gained a strong confidence with the people, what blessed
Patriots they were like to be; that they might also seem as zealous for God's
cause, they exhibited a Remonstrance 29 Jan.
(in the name of both Houses) to his Majesty, grounded upon diverse Petitions
(which they had subtly procured from all parts of the Realm) of the increase
of Popery. Also, that the danger thereof might the more amaze the world, they
then began to open their Cabinet of Plots and Conspiracies; four of the House
of Commons imparting to the Lords, a a discovery 10 Febr.
of an horrid design by many thousands of Papists, in England, Ireland, and
Wales.

Moreover, because of the great complaint of Innovation in Religion, increase
of Popery, and growth of Superstition, they appointed 11 Febr.
Commissioners for removing Rails from about all Communion-Tables throughout
the Realm.

Likewise, 1641.
to the end that the Bishops might the better attend their Spiritual functions,
they voted, 10. Martii.
that none of them should have voice in Parliament, nor meddle in temporal
affairs. And to assure the Scots, whose Army they, as yet, thought not fit to
part with, till their work was brought to more maturity, they gave 2. Febr.
them three hundred thousand pounds, toward a supply of their losses and
Necessities. Which signal favor got them the style of Brethren, and thanks
from the Scotish-Commissioners; who seemed so tender of our good, that they
desired 16. Martii.
the Treaty might be accelerated, and the Kingdom eased of the burden of the
two Armies, by their returning home.

The next thing wherewith they went in hand, Trial of the E. of Strafford.
was the Trial of the Earl of Strafford (for 'twas resolved he must be cut off,
being a person of such integrity to the King, and known abilities.) To which
purpose, having prepared Westminster Hall with Scaffolds, they began 22. Martii.
his trial upon the two and twentieth of March, where they charged 23. Martii.
An. 1641.
him with subverting the Fundamental Laws of England and Ireland; with
threatening 3. Apr.
to root the Scotch Nation out of Ireland; with procuring 5. Apr.
his Majesty to dissolve the last Parliament: as also with betraying 7. Apr.
Newcastle, and the King's Army to the Scots

And, after many days labor to prove him guilty of Treason, by the Law; and
failing thereof, they brought 19. Apr.
in a special Bill, to attaint him; wherein they took care to insert a special
Clause, that it should not be drawn into President; thereby to secure
themselves from a return of that Injustice upon any of them, which they acted
on him. Which Bill was twice read and voted in one day. What course they took
with those that concurred not with them in passing thereof, and other their
practices, I shall briefly mention when I come to their apparent violation of
the Privileges of Parliament. How multitudes, out of the City, were brought
down to the Parliament House, to cry for Justice: Also with what difficulty his
Majesty passed that Bill (though importuned by the Earl's own Letter, out of
hope his death might have satisfied those blood-thirsty men) I spare to
mention; but on the twelfth of May, they cut 12. Maii
off his Head on Tower Hill.

Which strange and unjust way of proceeding, driven on by those who stood least
affected to the Doctrine and Discipline of our Church, caused many to fear that
which afterward came to pass. Left therefore the People (whom under the most
specious pretenses they were to captivate) should have the least suspicion of
hazard to the Service of God, as it stood here established; they cunningly
insinuated to the world, that by means of a Jesuitical Party the Protestant
Religion was in no small danger; and therefore as zealous Champions for the
same, framed a formal Protestation for its sure defense, as it then stood
established in the Church of England, both in Doctrine and Discipline; which
for farther satisfaction they caused to be solemnly taken 3 Maii
by every Member of Parliament; and not only so, but by a special Order made it
public by the Press, and sent it to several Counties of this Realm.

But their grand work being to get the Militia into their power, by which means
whatever else they had a mind to, might be accomplished, as an Introduction
thereunto, Pretended Plots and Conspiracies.
diverse strange Plots and Conspiracies were talked of. Which Plots, not only
stood them in stead, to amuse and put fears into the people, (who by a most
implicit faith, did then believe that all they acted was for their good) but to
countenance those many unreasonable demands they made from his Majesty; so that
under the shadow of them, they might go through with any thing. And therefore
it will not be amiss to view by what degrees they themselves, with these
devices, proceeded toward the obtaining those their desired ends.

The first of these that they broached, was a conspiracy 5 Maii.
by diverse in the House of Commons, to bring in a French Army; unto which the
Irish and English should be joined. Whereupon a vote was passed, 7 Maii.
that new Fortifications should be raised at Portsmouth and the Cinqueports;
and order taken, that one Lord, and two of the Commons (viz. the Lord
Kymbolton, Sir Walter Earl, and Sir Philip Stapleton) should be forthwith
dispatched thither.

About the same time also they sent 10 Maii.
some of their Members to Lambeth- House, to search for Ammunition and Arms; as
also about the Parliament House, for fear of any Plot. Which pretended fear was
much countenanced by a Letter directed to the Lady Shelley (and produced 12
Maii.
by Mr. Pym) discovering a design to destroy --

Then was there a Report 13 Maii.
in the House of what a Jesuit should say of some great design against this
Kingdom. As also of a Letter from Calais of many Frenchmen coming for England:
and of another 14 Maii.
Jesuits speech of firing the Parliament House. Again of French intended 17
Maii.
to land here. And, within a short space after, Mr. Nathaniel Fienes made
report 17 Junii.
to the Houses; that a Plot to seize the Tower was newly discovered; as also to
send over the Irish Army; and for delivery of Portsmouth to the French and
Papists; for assistance wherein the Bishops were to raise a thousand Horse. And
shortly after Mr. Henry Percie, Mr. Iermyn, Sir John Sucklyn, and Mr. Davenant
were voted 24 Julii.
guilty of another Plot, to bring up the Army, and force the Parliament: which
wrought to purpose, by putting terrible Fears and Iealousies into the People.

And to make up all, a Letter 16 Aug.
from the Earl of Holland was read, of new practices against the State.
Whereupon, at a conference of both Houses, a select Committee was appointed to
advise of putting the Kingdom into a Posture of Defense. Posture of Defense.
Which being done, the next artifice they used was to perpetuate the
Parliament; to the end that the name of that might the more plausibly carry
them through in this grand work. To effect this therefore, they pretended that
the great Sums of Money, which the Scots were to have, could not suddenly be
raised; and that being to be borrowed for their present riddance, Lenders would
hardly be found, unless they saw a certain way to secure their moneys, which
the danger of dissolving this Parliament would hazard. Bill for perpetuating
the Parliament.
Whereupon they brought 7 Maii.
in a Bill to prevent the adjourning or dissolving there of without the consent
of both Houses. And to carry on the people with all assurance of their future
happiness, and freedom from oppression, by Courts of Arbitrary Jurisdiction,
they voted 9 Junii.
and sent up certain Bills, for suppressing the Courts of High Commission, and
Star Chamber, and regulating the Council Table: as also for bounding the
Forests; preventing vexatious proceedings concerning Knighthood, and regulating
the Clerk of the Market; besides that of Tonnage and Poundage.

All which his Majesty out of his abundant goodness; expecting that these
unparalled Acts of grace, would have obliged them in a stronger bond of
dutiful Allegiance, was pleased to pass, before his going into Scotland. And,
as a witness to the candor of his intentions, admitted Lord Say sworn Master of
the Wards 17 Maii.
diverse Lords, then most popular; but since great Actors in this woeful Tragedy,
to be of his Privy Council, conferring on three of them great Offices of
Honor, Trust, Earl of Leicester made Deputy of Ireland
and Benefit.

And now, supposing that he had given them as great a measure of content, as
their hearts could desire; he took his journey into Scotland on the tenth of
August, 19 Maii Earl of Essex made Lord Chamberlain 29 Julii.
there to establish the peace of that Realm, in settling whatsoever should be
thought meet for the happiness thereof. Oliver St. John made Solicitor
General. The King went into Scotland.
About which time the Armies were disbanded, 2 Aug.
that had been so long delayed, though the continuance of them was no less
charge than 80000 l. a month; their work before being not brought forward
enough: Some of the leading-members Will. Strode.
, in plain terms declaring; that yet they could not spare them, the sons of
Zerviah being too strong.

But no sooner was the King gone, than that the turbulent Spirits in the House
of Commons set to work, in framing a bitter Remonstrance of the general
Grievances of the Kingdom, to make his Majesty's Government seem odious to his
Subjects; which was ordered 12 Aug.
to be brought into the House. Whereupon grew great debates and disputes, which
lasted from three of the clock afternoon, the whole night following, and till
ten of the Clock on the morrow. But, at length, many, who disliked and opposed
it; partly by reason of their age, of infirmity of Body, being wearied out, and
departing; others through sloth or timorousness leaving the House, it was voted
by some few voices; diverse of the factious party being fetched out of their Beds
to assist.

This Remonstrance being a compendium of all the mistakes and misfortunes, The
grand. Remonstrance.
that had happened since the beginning of his Majesty's reign to that hour;
objected to him the Actions of some, and the Thoughts of others; reproacht him
with such things of which he never knew, and reviled him to his people;
complained also of the House of Peers, and ascribed all the Acts of Grace
already passed in that Parliament, to their own wisdom in procuring; with
intimation of their despair in settling the distractions of the Kingdom, by
reason of the power of a malignant-party, and want of concurrence by the House
of Peers, wherein so many Bishops and malignant Lords then sat.

This being done, their next work was to get the whole command of the Militia;
which being had, nothing afterward could be difficult to them. For the better
effecting thereof, they therefore had again recourse to those shadows of
Conspiracies and Plots, which had stood them in good stead before. The first 19
Oct.
of them being a new pretended Treason by the Earl of Craford and others,
against the Marquess of Hamilton, then in Scotland, and other Peers of that
Realm; this being signified by Letters from their Committee in Scotland, dated
14 Oct. Whereupon, that the like here might be prevented, orders were directed
to the Sheriffs of London, Middlesex and Surrey, for settling strong Guards of
armed-men in places of moment.

Likewise the whole Trayned-Band of Westminster was brought into the
Palace-Yard, on the morrow; and there attended all that day; giving this reason
for that order; viz. Because the mischeivous designs and conspiracies lately
discovered in Scotland, against some principal and great men there, by some of
the Popish-faction, gives just occasion to suspect, that they may maintain
correspondency here, and practice the like in this Realm.

In like manner the same Trayn-Band of Westminster was brought 20 Oct.
into the Palace-Yard on the morrow, and attended all that day until the Houses
rose. And the next day following Mr. Pym made a large Speech, 31 Oct. Alderman
Penington and others, made a Committee for setting up Preaching Ministers. 19
Dec. A. 1640.
at a conference, to lay open the Conspiracy.

Neither wanted they the Pulpits to advance their designs; their Lecturers in
several parts (being men neither of learning nor conscience) insinuating to the
People all those falsehoods and scandals, which might work in them a dislike
toward his Majesty; depraving the conformable-Clergy; charging them with
Revolt from the Protestant Religion, with purpose to introduce Popery: Dr.
Downing.
one of them preaching to the Brotherhood in the Artillery-Garden, expressing;
that for the defense of Religion and Reformation of the Church, it was lawful
to take up Arms against the King. As a preparative whereunto, a Bill Exact Col.
p. 543.
was brought into the House, for putting all the Forts and Castles, and the
whole Militia of the Kingdom into such hands as they might confide in.

CHAP. VIII.
IN this time the Rebellion in Ireland breaking 23 Oct. The Rebellion in
Ireland.
forth, it will not be improper to say somewhat thereof: wherein, though I
shall not charge our grand Conspirators here with having any hand, as to matter
of council or contrivance with the Ringleaders of that barbarous Insurrection:
yet can I not at all excuse them from giving great occasion for it, and not
without suspicion of Design, if all be true that I have seen in a brief
discourse thereof published in print in an. 1644. Which I shall leave to the
better judgment of such as then lived, and well observed the Actions of those
times.

The substance of which Narrative is this; viz. That the Irish being a people
born and bred in the Romish Religion, which they did glory to have derived from
their Ancestors for no less than Thirteen hundred years, and wherein they had
connivence ever since the Reformation, it could not be imagined, when they saw
such a Storm approach them, by the harsh proceedings of the Parliament, then
sitting at Westminster against those of their profession in England, who were
daily cavill'd withal; charged with sundry forged Conspiracies and Plots, to
render them odious and distastful to the world; the wardship and education of
their children voted 22 Junii.
to the disposal of others, their votes 3 Julii.
as Peers in Parliament endangered, and the large Progress made in England and
Scotland toward the extirpation of the Protestant Religion, as it then stood
established by Law in both Realms, under which they had enjoyed their estates,
though upon certain penalties, with the charge whereof they were well
acquainted; but they had cause enough to fear, that their own misery was not
far off; especially discerning, that the Insolency of the Scots did daily
increase toward them, whose large footing in their Kingdom, having an
inveterate hatred toward the Natives, might endanger their shouldring them
out. Considering likewise the frequent Reports Sir William Parsons, one of the
Lords ^ustices in that Kingdom, and Sir Adam Loftus Vice-Treasurer there
(persons experimentally known to have much adhered to, and furthered the
designs of these Rebellious contrivers in England) that an Army of a thousand
Scots was to arrive in Ireland, to force the Catholics to change their
Religion; and that Ireland could never do well without a Rebellion, to the end
the remnant of the Natives might be extirpated: wagers being laid at the
general Assizes, by diverse of them that within one year no Catholic should be
left in Ireland.
given out in that Kingdom to extirpate their Religion and Nation: as also,
that Orders were made by the Houses of Parliament in England, incroaching upon
their privileges of Parliament in Ireland; and that their Committee, after
nine months attendance on his Majesty (who was graciously pleased to hear their
grievances) being referred to the Houses of Parliament here (upon his departure
from London toward Scotland 10 Aug. 1641) was constrained to return without
any redress, through the prevalency of some leading Members; who before had
(all they could) misinterpreted to his Majesty the proceedings and Actions of
the Parliament in Ireland.

It was therefore not a little feared by some, that those provocations were
purposely exercised to exasperate the Irish to take up Arms; that so, under
color of suppressing them as Rebels, they might be utterly destroyed and
eradicated. Nor was it without suspicion by others, considering how eagerly
that Act for confiscation of their Lands was prosecuted by those Members at
Westminiter at the very beginning of that Insurrection: Also how his Majesty's
going over in person, after the same brake out, was hindered (which in
probability might have quenched that flame.) Moreover, how they engrossed that
war into their own hands, thereby to have the power to employ any forces raised
or levied for it, to assist in pursuance of their design upon this Kingdom, as
they should see cause, as was evident See his Majesty's Answer to the two
Papers concerning Ireland, printed with the full and perfect Narrative of the
Treaty at Uxbridge. p. 212.
by those under the command of the Lord Wharton and others, which were in the
Battle of Kineton against the King. And lastly, how averse they were to any
peace or cessation with them, though never so necessary, as appears by those
earnest and bitter incitements See the full Relation of the Treaty at Uxbridge.
p. 133. and 136.
used by their Commissioners in the Treaty at Uxbridge, for the prosecution of
that war.

It is likewise farther to be noted, that these high provocations, met with a
concurrent opportunity of those eight thousand disbanded Irish, not permitted
to be transported into Spain, and other parts, though desired by that King's
Ambassador, and assented to by his Majesty;) who, being out of employment, were
ready for any desperate enterprise: As also with the want of a Lieutenant in
that Kingdom, by reason that the Earl of Strafford was so cut off, who had kept
them in such exact obedience.

And lastly, what an Example they had from their Neighbors the Scots, who sped
so well by their own Insurrection; that they, not only obtained their full
demands, even to the introducing a new Religion, and new moulding the whole
form of their Government, both in Church and State: but when they rebelliously
invaded England with an Army, were treated as good Subjects, had three hundred
thousand Pounds given them, with an Act of Pacification and Oblivion to boot.

Whereunto I shall add what a late Writer, in his Short view Impr. Londan 1658.
p. 86.
of the life and reign of King Charles the First, has expressed.

Of this Rebellion says he; for it must be called a Rebellion in the Irish,
though not in the Scots; the King gives present notice to the Houses of
Parliament, requiring their Counsel and assistance for the extinguishing of
that flame, before it had consumed and wasted that Kingdom. But neither the
Necessity of the Protestants there nor the King's importunity here could
persuade them to levy one man toward the suppression of those Rebels, till the
King had disclaimed his power of pressing Soldiers by an Act of Parliament,
and thereby laid himself open to such acts of violence as were then hammering
against him. Which having done, they put an Army of Scots (their most assured
friends) into the Northern parts of Ireland, delivering up into their hands the
strong Town and Port of Carick-Fergus, one of the chief Keys of that Kingdom;
and afterward sent a small Body of English to preserve the South. Which
English Forces, having done notable service there against the Rebels, were kept
so short, both in respect of pay and other necessaries, by the Houses of
Parliament (who had made use of the money raised for the relief of Ireland to
maintain a war against their King) that they were forced to come to a
Cessation, and cheerfully returned home again to assist the King in that just
war, which he had undertaken for his own defense.

CHAP. IX.
BUT notwithstanding all these instances, forbearing to give any censure
therein, I shall now proceed, and trace them in farther practices for
accomplishing their designed ends; and give instance in the Militia; for
obtaining whereof I find my self best guided by their feigned Plots and
Conspiracies; the first of which was Mr. Pym's Letter, delivered 25 Oct.
to him at the Parliament House, by a Porter (from a pretended Gentleman on
Horseback, in a gray Coat) which having in it a contagious Plaster, taken from
a Plague Sore; the Letter it self also, being full of invectives against Mr.
Pym, gave occasion for publishing of a Pamphlet, entitled, The discovery of a
damnable Treason, by a contagious Plaster, etc. and afterward of a Report 30
Oct.
to the House, made by Mr. Pym; that there were diverse Posts, come several
by-ways from Scotland; and that the Papists had many meetings in H^ntshire.

Moreover, within few days following, one John Davis discovered 12 Nov.
to the House, that the Earl of Worcester had large Stables under ground, at
Ragland-Castle, and a number of Light Horse in them; likewise Arms for an
hundred and forty Horse and two thousand men, whereof seven hundred were then
in pay; and Ammunition proportionable. And one Thomas Beale, of
White-Cross-Street, declaring, 14 Nov.
, that he heard some, who were walking late in Moor-fields, discourse of their
intentions to murder certain Members of the Parliament, and amongst others Mr.
Pym; order was presently given, that the Lords, and some other Members, should
have part of the Trained-Band of Middlesex, to conduct them to their Lodgings
that night.

Also the next day, upon the discovery of another Plot to kill some Noblemen
(of which, one who lay in a ditch pretended to hear two Gentlemen speak) it was
ordered 15 Nov.
that the Earl of Worcester's House and Sir Basil Brooks House should be
guarded; all Papists disarmed; Soldiers raised with speed, to secure the Isle
of Wight; and two Lords appointed to raise Forces; one beyond, ^rent, and the
other on this side ^rent. And within five days after this, there was a
discovery of 20 Nov.
another conspiracy by the Papists in Cheshire; viz. that certain of them were
in Arms, at the Lord Chomley's House, and had attempted the surprizal of
Chester. But advertisement being given, that the King was upon his journey from
Scotland, and would be at London within three days, the hunting after any
farther discovery of Plots was for awhile laid aside; and that scandalous
Remonstrance Exact Coll. p. 1.
beforementioned (which was brought in the twelfth of August) was read 22 N^.
again in the House. Against the passing and publishing whereof, many worthy
Gentlemen freely expressed their minds: Nevertheless, after long dispute and
much ado, the factious party prevailed; partly by tyring out some (for they
sat up all night) and partly by promises or threats to others; insomuch as it
was carried by Eleven voices. So that, though there was the greatest show of
gladness by the Citizens of this his Majesty's arrival; as that solemn
reception 25 Nov. The King returned from Scotland.
of him by the Lord Mayor and Aldermen on Horsback, did import, who feasted him
with the Queen and Prince at Guild Hall, the Companies all standing in their
Liveries, to congratulate his safe coming home, as he rode through the streets;
yet had he little joy thereof: for instead of that happy progress which he
expected that the Parliament had made in the great affairs of the Kingdom,
during his absence; he found the people not a little disturbed with strange
apprehensions; and Guards set upon the Houses of Parliament. Which so
astonished him, that he forthwith sent 26 Nov.
to the Lords, desiring, that for the prevention of farther jealousies and
fears, the Train'd-Bands might be discharged.

But no sooner did those Citizens take notice of that Message, then that great
numbers of them, in person, offered 27 Nov.
to attend the House of Parliament in their Arms. Nay so forward thenceforth
were they upon all occasions to act their parts, for hastening that general
confusion, which soon after ensued; that on 29 Nov.
Monday following, a multitude of them made a hubbub in Westminster Hall,
crying, Down with Antichrist and the Bishops; adding, that if they could not
then be heard, they would have a greater number next day to back them. And so
they had; 30 Nov. 1 Dec.
many of them coming tumultuously to the doors of the Parliament House, crying
No Bishops, and calling them the limbs of Antichrist.

And, on the same day, to accompany so good a work, they presented to the King
by the hands of the Earl of Holland, their grand Remonstrance Exact. Coll. p.
22.
of the Grievances of the Kingdom (which had been ordered to be brought into
the House the twelfth of August past) thereby to blast all those gracious
condescentions which they had obtained from him before. Whereunto his Majesty
soon after made a full and clear Answer; and published his Royal Declaration
thereupon, for the satisfaction of all his good Subjects, to the end they might
not be deluded by those undutiful, false, and scandalous aspersions cast upon
his Government by that malicious Libel.

And soon after, for the better prevention of any more such dangerous tumults
and uproars, at or near the Houses of Parliament, he directed his special Writ,
according to the Statute, unto the Sheriffs of London, to place a Guard at
Westminster. But the House of Commons deeming this Guard, thus legally placed
by the King, no way conducing to their Design, presently voted it to be a
breach of their privileges, and an offense of an high nature; and thereupon,
not only ordered, that the said Watch should be discharged; but that the
Justices of Middlesex, for their obedience to his Majesty's commands herein,
should be questioned; whereupon Justice Long was committed 11 Dec.
to the Tower.

That there was a most factious party in the City of London, which were great
Instruments in raising the ensuing Rebellion, is plain enough. Nor is it less
observable, that they acted their parts therein, by color of Authority; viz.
by outing all the Common Council, which were men of worth, and bringing men of
desperate fortunes in their rooms. Wherein they had such furtherance, by the
help of the multitude (who aimed at their own advantage by any change of
Government) that they then introduced Fowkes --, Ryley the Boddies-maker,
Perkins the Lord Says Tailor, Normington the Cutler, Mills the Brick-layer,
and diverse other such mean fellows; instead of Mr. Drake, Mr. Roger Clarke, Sir
George Bynion, Mr. Roger Gardner, and several other worthy Citizens, whose
loyalty, they well knew, could not be corrupted. These being the principal
agents in all the Tumults; which stood them in much stead for accomplishing of
their chiefest aims. And therefore plain it was to be seen what design they
had, when they urged the passing of the Bill for not Adjourning or Dissolving
of that Parliament without their own consents, having such a party in the City
to back them upon all occasions.

Having thus dissolved the Guard, so appointed by his Majesty, there came 15
Dec.
another Tumult of the Citizens to Westminster. Whereupon some Members of the
House of Commons, making complaint of the danger, whereunto they were subject
by those riotous people; and how that already they had been assaulted, and evil
entreated by them, at the very door of the House; desired, that some course
might be taken, for restraining and punishing them for the same. But instead
thereof, diverse spoke in justification of them, and commended their affections;
saying, they must not discourage their friends, this being a time to make use
of them all. And Mr. Pym added Exact. Coll. p. 532.
, God forbid, that the House of Commons should proceed in any sort to
dishearten the people, for obtaining their just desires in such a way. 19 Dec.
And accordingly, there was a paper delivered by some or other, to the Minister
that preached at Christ-Church, the Sunday following; desiring, that Prayer
might be made to God to assist the Apprentices with strength to root out
Superstition, and to extirpate the Innovations of the Bishops and Clergy.

After which matters were every day carried with a more high hand than before;
the Tumultuous people having as apparent countenance from the House, as before
they had private encouragement. Insomuch as the Lord Mayor of London came 26
Dec.
to Whitehall, and acquainted the King, that he discerned, if Sir Thomas
Lunsford, whom he had newly made Lieutenant of the Tower, were not removed, the
Apprentices would rise and pull him out. So that his Majesty to prevent such an
insurrection, took the Keys from Sir Thomas Lunsford, and constituted Sir
Thomas Byron in his room; with whom the factious Spirits were as ill satisfied,
tho they knew not well what to object against him; till at last Lieutenant
Hooker, the Aquavitae-man, and Nicholson the Chandler, complained in the
Common Council; that since Sir John Byron came to be Lieutenant of the Tower,
the Mint (to the great prejudice and dishonor of the Kingdom) stood still.

Yea, so insolent were these tumultuous people grown; that upon the Kings
Proclamation 27 Dec.
, grounded upon a Penal Law, to dissipate them; in contempt thereof they came
28 Dec.
early the next morning in greater numbers than ever, diverse of them being
armed with Swords and Halberts; and toward the evening assaulted the great
Church at Westminster, threatening to pull it down: So that the Bishops
thenceforth thought it not safe for themselves to come any more to the House.
The News whereof so pleased those unruly people; that on the morrow they came
again 29 Dec.
, crying No Bishops, notwithstanding another Proclamation issued out by the
King to restrain them. And in their return making a stand before Whitehall,
said Exact. Coll. p. 533.
, that they would have no more Porter's Lodge there, but would speak with the
King when they pleased.

Which rebellious uproar caused his Majesty forthwith to place a Guard, for his
own safety, at the Court-gates. But the main cry of danger was by the House of
Commons, as if they themselves had been the only men in peril of their lives;
and therefore to make the greater show of their own fears, they ordered 31 Dec.
, that Halberts should be brought into their House, for defense of the Members;
and then they made a noise of new discoveries of farther dangerous
conspiracies; one by a Letter 31 Dec.
from France, intimating great intelligence held betwixt England and Rome, and
no small likelihood of dreadful plots in agitation against this Kingdom. Also
of another Letter, at the same time, found in a Jesuit's Study, of great
troubles which should befall this Realm. And, the more to amuse the people,
they adjourned to sit in a Committee at Guild Hall, to draw up a Remonstrance
of the many dangers this Kingdom had undergone, within the space of three
years. Where being met, another Letter (pretended to be brought from Italy) was
read, discovering diverse Plots by the Papists here. Whereupon they considered
about drawing up of another Remonstrance 1 Jan.
, laying open the peril of the Spanish Fleet; the coming over of the
Queen Mother; the Pope's Nuncio; as also several other Plots in agitation by
the Jesuits and a Romish-party.

Which subtle practices being set on foot by some particular persons of both
Houses, through whose influence, chiefly, others were guided; caused his
Majesty out of a desire to prevent the ensuing calamities, which he clearly
foresaw, must by these means inevitably follow, to demand 4 Jan. See the
Articles against them. Exact. Coll. p. 34.
the persons of the Lord Kymbolton, and five of the House of Commons, viz.
Denzill Hollies Esquire. Sir Arthur Haslerig Baronet, John Pym, John Hampden, and
William Strode Esquiers, and to charge them with High Treason; who having
private notice thereof, kept out of the way.

But of this action they made such an advantage (tho no person then came within
the doors of the House, except the King himself, and the Count Palatine, his
Nephew) having so sure a party in the City to assist them; that some of the
House of Commons took the boldness, the same day to come and discharge his
Majesty's Guards at White Hall; and the Houses to 7 Jan.
adjourn themselves, and to sit in a grand Committee at Guild Hall in London.
Where infusing fears into the people, that the King had a design of actual
violence upon the City, the Sheriffs of London refused to publish his Majesty's
Proclamation for apprehending those persons.

And to make farther experiment of the City's readiness to afford them their
best assistance, upon occasion; they caused a false Alarm 8 Jan.
, that the King, with fifteen hundred Horse, was coming in the night to
surprise London. Which report wrought so effectually, that no less than forty
thousand of the inhabitants put themselves in Arms, at an instant; the women
also providing scalding water to throw upon the Cavaliers, bringing out Forms,
Stools, and empty Tubs into the Streets, to hinder the Horse.

CHAP. X.
HAving thus craftily represented this just endeavor of his Majesty for
bringing these Members to a legal trial (who had private shelter at that time
in the City of London) to be so hideous, as if it had been for a general
massacre; they speedily raised an insurrection of many thousand of the
Citizens; The King, with the Queen, Prince and D. of York left White Hall and
went to Hampton Court. 10 Jan.
whom (together with a numerous rabble of Mariners and other desperate people)
they brought 11 Jan. 12 Jan. The King went to Windsor Castle.
armed to Westminster on the Tuesday next following, both by land and water,
with diverse Sakers, and murdering Guns, in long Boats: and in that sort, with
Protestations in their Hats, and on their Pikes, conducted the Lord Kymbolton,
and the rest of those Members, to the Parliament House.

And what intention some of them had to the person of the King, had he then
been at White Hall, may easily be guessed, by their rude and desperate entrance
thereinto then made; had not he (upon private adververtisement of their
purpose) removed to Hampton Court, the precedent Evening.

Unto which Insurrection, to give the fairer countenance, they had by their
Emissaries sent into the Counties of Buckingham, Hartford, and Kent; whence
they procured no small numbers; which came the same day to the Houses of
Parliament with petitions ready framed, on the behalf of the Lord Kymbolton,
and the five Members. At which time they produced two Letters, pretended to
come from a Romish hand, intimating much mischief designed against the Houses
and City.

And that these Countrymen might upon their return home, put their neighbors
into strange apprehensions of danger; there was at that time 12 Jan.
a report made in the House, that the Lord Digby and Colonel Lunsford, were
about Kingston upon Thames, with three or four hnndred Horse. Whereupon order
was given, that the Sheriffs of Surrey, Berkshire, and Hantshire should raise
the Posse Comitatus of those Counties, to stand upon their Guard, and apprehend
them; as also, that Skippon, Serjeant-Major of the City Trained-Bands, should
forthwith have the command of certain Guards for to be set upon the Tower of
London.

There is nothing more certain, then that this business concerning the Lord
Kymbolton and the five Members (as 'twas managed) much promoted their grand
design. For having by their many pretended plots, and other devices, prepared
the people with strange apprehensions of fears; and finding that they had won
the Country, as well as the City, to an implicit belief of their being such
blessed Patriots as never had been before; they then brought forth a most
infamous Declaration (...)
, hatched at their former meetings in the City; wherein they did imply, that his
Majesty (when he came to the Houses, to demand the five Members) had a purpose
to have cut all their throats; and therefore they Exact. (...) p. 4^
declared his coming thither, to be a traitorous design against the King and
Parliament; and that his Proclamation issued out for their apprehension, was
false, scandalous, and illegal; as also, that it was lawful for all men to
harbor them; and that whosoever did so, should be under the protection and
privilege of Parliament.

The King therefore, standing not a little amazed at these many and great
distractions, which threatened inevitable mischief to the whole Realm; tho he
had, by a Message Ib. p. 49.
to both Houses, of the twelfth of January, for full satisfaction to all that
might doubt, that his accusation of those Members was not agreeable to the
privileges of Parliament; nevertheless intimated, that he would for the
present wave his proceedings against them; and that when the minds of men were
more composed, he would go on in an unquestionable way: assuring his parliment,
that upon all occasions he would be as careful of their Privileges, as of his
Life and Crown. And by another Message Ib. p. 51.
two days after, farther assured them, that in case any doubt of his breach of
their Privileges did remain; he would be willing to clear it, and assure
those, by any reasonable way, that his Parliament should advise him to do.
Likewise, in farther manifestation of his earnest and incessant desires, for
preventing those calamities which he then saw approaching, by reason of these
distractions, he did by a gracious Message Ib. p. 54.
, of the twentieth of the same month, propose to both Houses, that they would
with all speed, fall into a serious consideration of those particulars which
they themselves should hold necessary, as well for the upholding, and
maintaining his just Regal Authority, and settling his Revenue; as for the
present and future establishment of their privileges, the free and quiet
enjoying of their estates and fortunes, the liberties of their persons; the
security of the true Religion then professed in the Church of England; and the
settling of Ceremonies, in such a manner as might take away all just offenses.
Which when they should have disgested, and composed into one entire Body; that
so himself and they might be able to make the more clear judgment of them; it
should then appear, by what he would do, how far he had been from intending, or
designing any of those things, which the too great fears and jealousies of some
persons did seem to apprehend; and how ready he would be to equal and exceed
the greatest Examples of the most indulgent Princes in their acts of Grace, and
favor to their People.

Notwithstanding all which, upon that very twentieth of January, having
received Letters from Sir John Hotham; signifying 20 Jan.
, that he had raised Soldiers by their Order, for the keeping of Hull, but was
refused entrance thereinto by the Mayor; they forthwith sent another Order to
command his reception, though the Earl of Newcastle had required admittance
thither, to take charge of that place, and the Magazine there, by his Majesty's
authority. Nay, so diligent were they now to lose no time; that they procured
the Essex-men to deliver a Petition to them; setting forth their fears and
jealousies; with desire, that the Tower of London might be committed to safe
hands; the Arms of the Trained Bands trusted with approved persons; and the
Privilege of Parliament asserted.

Likewise another from Colchester against Bishops, and for liberty of
Conscience; desiring that Church Discipline might be established according to
the word of God, and their Town better fortified.

And well knowing how fair a countenance these Petitions (thus framed by
themselves) carried, to further their designs; they caused more, from 24 Jan.
Devon. Somersetshire, Middlesex, and Hartfordshire, for putting the Kingdom
into a posture of Defense, Posture of Defense.
and the Forts into safe hands; excluding Bishops, Popish Lords, etc. As also
another from 25 Jan.
the City of London; signifying their inability to lend an hundred thousand
pounds (desired by the Houses) for the service of Ireland; by reason that the
Cinque Ports were not put into safe hands; the Kingdom not put into a posture
of Defense; the Lieutenant of the Tower not removed; Privileges of Parliament
not vindicated; Delinquents not punished; and the Bishops and Popish Lords not
put out of the House of Peers. Whereupon, it being the same day voted, that the
Cinque Ports should be secured; and the Tower of London put into such hands as
the Parliament might confide in; the very next day 26 Jan.
, they brought down the Apprentices and Seamen with the like Petition for
putting the whole Kingdom into a Posture.

And being now resolved (as by their votes, and the drift of these Petitions is
manifest) to hasten the Militia totally into their own power; to the end they
might the more plausibly effect their design therein; they exhibited to his
Majesty a Petition 26 Jan.
; desiring, that the Tower of London, with the other principal Forts, and whole
Militia of the Kingdom, might be put into the hands of such persons, as should
be by them recommended; suggesting withal; that Exact Coll. p. 59.
without this sure ground of safety and confidence, which he should hereby
raise unto them, they could not be enabled to discharge their duties, in the
considering of those important things, proposed to them by him in his Message
of the 20th of January: Nor be so freed from fears and jealousies, as with
cheerfulness to proceed, laying a sure foundation of Honor, Greatness, and
Glory to him and his Royal Posterity; and of Happiness and prosperity to his
Subjects, throughout all his Dominions.

The chief color and pretense, given out to the people, for this Posture of
Defense, being this, that without the power thereof, in their own hands, to
maintain the good Laws enacted; there was no expectation, but that they would
be made fruitless to them, by the prevalency of evil Counselors, and a
malignant Party.

Whereunto his Majesty answered 28 Jan. Exact Coll. p. 60.
; that, though the nomination of those, to whom the custody of the Forts, and
Castles were to be committed, was an inseparable flower of his Crown: yet, that
he would leave them to the Justice of his Parliament, if through
misinformation, he had conferred such trust upon any undeserving person. And
that when any particular course, for ordering the Militia should be digested by
his Parliament, and proposed to him; he would return such an answer as should
be agreeable to his honor, and the safety of his people: conjuring them not to
be transported with Jealousies.

To this indeed they replied 29. Jan.
, that they acknowledged it as a principal and inseparable flower of his Crown,
to dispose the command of the Forts and Castles of the Kingdom: and that, by
Law, the Militia was subject to no command but his authority, and what is
lawfully derived from him.

But, within two days following, a Petition being brought 31 Jan.
into the House from Suffolk, calling upon them to put the kingdom into a
Posture: and another from many thousands of poor Tradesmen in London (as they
styled it) urging the like; alleging a great decay of Trade, whereby they
wanted Bread; and that they believed not any cause thereof to be in the House
of Commons, but by reason of the Bishops and Popish Lords, voting in the House
of Peers: it was earnestly moved at a Conference (by Mr. Hollies) that the
Lords would no longer delay, but now join with them, to petition his Majesty
that the Kingdom might be put into a Posture. By which device, the Lords, who
refused to join with them in their Petition of the six and twentieth of
January, were now so brought about that they did 2 Febr.
it.

And to the end they might not want more popular countenance for their grand
work, which was now in such forwardness; they got more Petitions from several
parts, for putting the Kingdom into a Posture. One from 4 Febr.
the women about London; another from 5 Febr.
Northamptonshire; a third from 7 Febr.
Kent, which was brought by five or six thousand, that rode through the City in
ranks to the Parliament House. Whereby they gave the Lords thanks for
concurring with the Commons in the Bill against the Bishop's votes, and putting
the Kingdom into a Posture of Defense; desiring them to go on with the Commons
in a thorough Reformation in Religion; and to remove evil Counselors. The like
had they from the Counties 9 and 10 Febr.
of York, Oxford, and Lincoln.

So that, having laid such a foundation, The King went from Windsor to
Hampton Court. 9. Feb. 10 Febr.
by ensnaring the people with their own Petitions; they made an order to enable
some of the Aldermen and Common Council of London, with Sergeant Major Skippon,
to regulate the Militia of the City; Thence to Grenewich. 11 Febr. from
Grenewich to Rochester.
voting new Lords-Lieutenants throughout the several Counties of England and
Wales. And to blow up the people into a perfect Rebellion, they appointed 12
Febr.
weekly Lectures to be generally set up; which was accordingly performed by the
most seditious and turbulent Spirits, that could be found: procuring more
Petitions, by multitudes of people from sundry parts; 12 Febr. The King went
from Rochester to Canterbury.
setting forth great grievances: and desiring that the factious party (for so
they called the most loyal of the Nobility) might be expelled the House of
Peers. Also, that the Divine Worship of God might be no longer profaned; and
that they might be better furnished with Arms to oppose foreign power. Such
also came from 12 Febr.
Wales, Ipswich, Warwickshire, and Sussex 16 Febr.
; the Sheriff of that County, and at least fifteen hundred on Horseback,
accompanying him therewith.

And least the pretended great dangers (for prevention whereof all this stir
was made) should be forgot, a Letter from 21 Febr.
Lancashire was produced; discovering dangerous Plots by the Papists in that
County; viz. the finding of ten Barrels of powder, to make Balls of Wildfire,
wherewith to burn diverse chief Towns in this Realm. Whereupon another Petition
was dispatched 22 Febr.
to his Majesty (then at Dover) for ordering the Militia. Whereby they desired
Exact Coll. p. 81.
such a speedy Answer, as might raise in them a confidence (to use their own
words) that they should not be exposed to the practices of those, 23 Febr. The
Queen with the Princess Mary, her daughter, embarked for Holland at Dover.
whose endeavors were to kindle that combustion in England, which they had in
so great a measure effected in Ireland; and which nothing could do (as they
said) but the granting that Petition. Which Petition, together with an
Ordinance 25 Febr. the King returned to Canterbury.
of both Houses, setting forth, a most dangerous and desperate design upon the
House of Commons; and many discoveries, importing fears of rebellious
Insurrections by Papists, and other ill affected persons in this Kingdom, they
then exhibited.

Whose answer Exact Coll. p. 88. 26 Febr. From Canterbury the King came to
Grenewich.
thereunto being; that, for the City of London, and other Corporations, which
by any ancient Charters, had power of ordering the Militia, he conceived it
unfit to alter their government: 28 Febr. Thence to Theobalds.
but, that he could not consent to the indefinite time, propounded for this
Posture. Exact Coll. p. 90.


Whereupon they forthwith voted 28 Febr. Exact Coll. p. 95.
this Answer to be a flat denial; and that his Majesty's advisers thereto were
Enemies to the State, and mischeivous Projectors against the defense of the
Kingdom. Also, that this denial was of such dangerous consequence, that it
would hazard the peace and safety of all his Kingdoms, unless some speedy
remedy were applied by the Parliament. And immediately dispatched another
Petition 1 Martii. Exact Coll. p. 92.
to his Majesty (then at Theobalds) wherein they protested, that if he did not
speedily pass his assent to the satisfaction of their desires, they should be
enforced, by authority of both Houses, to dispose thereof; and that they did
accordingly so resolve to do.

Farther voting 2 Martii. Exact Coll. p. 96.
, that the Kingdom should be forthwith put into a Posture of defense, by
Authority of both Houses; that the Navy should be speedily rigged: and a
Declaration Exact Coll. p. 97.
of their just Fears and Jealousies speedily drawn up, with the grounds of
their former votes, for putting the Kingdom into a Posture, by authority of
both Houses, to clear the Parliament of all mistrusts.

And to carry out all this, under color of the Peoples desires, New Petitions
were brought from several Counties; viz. one from 2 Martii. 3 Martii the King
went from Theobalds to Royston.
Staffordsh. pretending such dread of the Papists rising there, that every man
was constrained to stand upon his Guard, not daring to go to Church unarmed.
Others from 3 Martii.
Worcestersh. Berksh. Norfolk, Norwich, Lynne, Royston, Salop 4 Martii.
: all of them earnestly desiring this Posture of Defense. 7 Martii.


And the very next day 5 Martii. Ordinance for the Militia.
, the Ordinance for ordering the Militia of the Kingdom, by authority of both
Houses (sent to his Majesty 22 Febr.) was assented to by the Lords; and
thereupon new Lieutenants were assigned throughout all England and Wales. 7
Martii. The King went from Royston to Newmarket.


And, having in a grand Committee at Merchant-Taylers Hall, 14 Martii. Thence
to Huntendon.
contrived the Declaration (mentioned in their Votes of March the second)
wherein they made a very great noise of a design to alter Religion in this
Kingdom, and that the wars with Scotland and Ireland were framed to that end;
they presented the same to his Majesty at 9 Martii. Exact Coll. p. 97.
Newmarket within few days after; voting 15 Martii. The K. went to Stanford. 15
Martii.
the King's Commissions of Lieutenancies in the several Counties illegal: as
also, that there was an urgent and inevitable Necessity, for putting his
Majesty's Subjects into a Exact Coll. p. 112.
Posture of Defense: and, that the Ordinances of both Houses for the Militia,
being obliging to the People, ought to be obeyed by the Fundamental Laws of
this Kingdom. And lastly, that the Earl of Warwick, should be appointed
Vice Admiral of his Majesty's Ships.

And having now, 16 Martii. the K. went from Stanford to Grantham.
by these their exorbitant courses, together with the Tumults, so much
endangered his Majesty's Royal person, that he was forced for safety of
himself, and the Prince, to retire into the North; they voted 16 Martii. Exact.
Coll. p. 114. 17 Martii the K. went from Grantham to Newark. 18 Martii thence
to Doncaster.
, that they would go on with their former Votes concerning the Militia. Also,
that when the Lords and Commons in Parliament should declare what the Laws of
the Land be; to Question it, was a high breach of the Privilege of Parliament.

After this, within few days, they sent a Petition 23 Martii. Exact Coll. p.
123.
to York (which was there presented to his Majesty by the Lord Willoughby of
Parham, and others) wherein they alleged, that his Majesty's denial to their
petition for disposing the Militia, was a great hinderance to their other
proceedings; and justified the Tumults at Westminster by taxing his Majesty
with denial of such a Guard to them, as they might confide in; aspersing his
Government, for many continued Acts of violation of Laws, etc.

And to keep the people still awake, by allarming them with new dangers, they
caused Letters to be read 18 Martii. 19 Martii. The King went from Doncaster to
York.
in the House (which were said to come from Amsterdam;) intimating intelligence
from Denmark, of a great Army, ready prepared there, to be transported for
England, and to land at Hull upon some dangerous enterprise.

The like Letter pretended to come from Newmarket, then produced, and another
from France. Whereupon, having received a Petition from the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, and Common Council of London, in which great Thanks was given to the
House, for ordering the Militia of the City, as they had done; with their
resolutions therein signified to obey the same: As also 21 Martii.
another from the Cinque Ports, desiring that those places might be strongly
guarded and fortified, and the Kingdom put into a Posture; they ordered, that
every of his Majesty's Forts, and Castles, should be presently fortified with
an Hundred men of the Trained Bands, next adjoining to them; and ten pieces of
Ordinance to each place. Also, that no Forces should be admitted into Hull,
without the consent of the Lords and Commons; and that 22 Martii.
Instructions should be sent thither for the farther fortifying of that place.

Likewise, upon another pretended discovery, made by one Mr. Cartwright and the
Speaker of the House of Commons; that they were advertised by Letters from
France, of an Army preparing there, to come for England or Ireland; the Lords
sent a message 25 Martii.
to the Commons, to let them know, that they had designed the Earl of Warwick
Vice Admiral of the Fleet. Whereupon both Houses joined in a Message Exact
Coll. p. 129.
to the King, to inform him of the grounds and reasons of their sending out
that Earl as Vice Admiral, without his Majesty's consent.

The King therefore discerning, that they had got the Royal Navy into their
hands, thought it high time to make sure of his Magazine, which had been laid
up at Hull, about two years before (part for the service of Ireland, and the
rest for the security of the North) and accordingly rode from York thither, for
the disposal thereof: But, when he came to the Gates of that Town, Sir John
Hotham (a member of the House of Commons, being a confiding man, with the
factious party there; and by their contrivance, got privately thither with
Soldiers) refused The King denied entrance into Hull. 23 Apr.
, him entrance; affirming, that in so doing, he had the authority of Parliament
to bear him out. For which insolent act he was declared traitorous by his
Majesty, and by a special Message 24 Apr. Exact Coll. p. 152.
, so signified to both Houses; with demand of Justice against him, according to
the Laws. But, instead thereof, they forthwith not only published a bold
Declaration 28 Apr. Exact Coll. p. 160. and 162.
, with Votes and order of assistance, in the name of both Houses of Parliament,
justifying Hotham therein: but sent down the Earl of Stanford, and Lord
Willoughby of Parham, with four of the House of Commons, as a Committee to
assist Sir. John Hotham there; voting, that his Majesty's declaring Sir John
Hotham Traitor, was an high breach of the Privilege of Parliament, against the
Liberty of the Subject, and Laws of the Land.

And now, that by their feigned Fears and Jealousies, with other subtle
devices, they had sufficiently amused the people, and possessed themselves of
the Royal Navy, Forts, Ports, and Magazine; and, within a few days following
set forth a Declaration 5. M^ii. Exact Coll. p. 171.
signifying their purpose to put in execution their Ordinance for the Militia;
they answered 9 Maii. Exact Coli. p. 179.
that Message from his Majesty (of the 24 th of April) touching Hotham, 1642.
with sundry foul aspersions; taxing him with harkening to wicked Counsels,
which had practiced to put the Kingdom into a combustion: and again, justifying
Sir John Hotham; expressed their intentions to settle the Militia according to
their Ordinance, for suppressing the wicked and malignant Party; desiring his
Majesty's return to be near his Parliament.

And, as the Citizens of London (out of their ambition to be a free State) were
the first and chief Instruments to set forward this grand work: so, in this of
the Militia, they gave example to all other parts of the Kingdom, executing 10
Maii.
the same in Finsbury-feilds with twelve thousand men in Arms, ordered by
Sergeant Major General Skyppon, the members of both Houses being present, to
give countenance thereto; who thereupon voted 12 Maii. Exact Coll. p. 190. 191.
that having showed so much obedience to the Ordinance of Parliament concerning
the Militia, they had done it according to the Laws of the land; and that they
should have the assistance of both Houses of Parliament against any, that might
oppose or molest them therein.

CHAP. XI.
ABout this time therefore, the King discerning no small danger to his person,
by reason of these hostile preparations and Actions (having not any Guard, but
with a thin retinue residing at York) and withal observing, that in most parts
of the Kingdom, the schismatical Party, under color of putting themselves into
a Posture of Defense, had provided Arms; as also trained and exercised
themselves, contrary to the Laws of the land, sent Exact Coll. p. 191.
his Summons to the Gentry of Yorkshire, to attend him at York. Where being met
12 Maii.
, he showed them diverse reasons, why he conceived it fit to have a Guard for
his own Person, desiring their assistance therein. Whereupon most of them
yiedling cheerful obedience; he signified to them by his Letters 16 Maii. Exact
Coll. p. 132.
; that he should take it well, if they would personally attend him, in such
sort followed and provided, as they should think fit, for his better safety.

But before the knowledge thereof could possibly come to them at Westminster;
having some private advertisement of what was intended; they published a
Declaration 17 Maii. Exact Coll. p. 193.
, in the name of both Houses of Parliament, setting forth; That it was against
the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom; that any of the Subjects thereof should
be commanded to attend his Majesty at his pleasure, excepting such as were
bound thereto by special service. And, that, if the Trained Bands, or any other
his Majesty's Subject, should upon any pretense be drawn together, in a posture
of war; the Sherifs of such a County ought to raise the power thereof to
suppress them. And, having forthwith voted 19 Maii. Exact Coll. p. 194.
, that the Magazine of each respective Shire in the Realm of England, and
dominion of Wales, should be presently put into the power of such
Lord-Lieutenants of those Counties as the Parliament did confide in; they
published Ib. p. 195.
a Declaration, scandalizing his Majesty's gracious Messages, Answers and
Declarations; taxing him with breach of his word and promises: as also with
continued oppressions and violation of the Laws; countenancing the Rebellion in
Ireland; and with intent to bring up his Northern-Army to awe the Parliament.

And having so done, voted 20 Maii. Exact Coll. p. 259.
, that the King (seduced by wicked Counsel) intended to make war against his
Parliament; who, in all their Consultations and Actions, had proposed no other
end unto themselves, but the care of his Kingdom; and the performance of all
duty and loyalty to his person. Next, that whenever the King makes war upon
the Parliament, it is a breach of the Trust reposed in him by his people,
contrary to his Oath, and tending to the dissolution of this Government; and
that whosoever should serve, or assist him in such wars, were Traitors, by the
Fundamental Laws of this Realm; the very same day sending down the Knights and
Burgesses of Buckinghamshire, by special Order, to see their Ordinance for the
Militia put in execution in that County.

And having proceeded thus far; setting 19 Maii. Exact Coll. p. 213.
also forth another large Remonstrance, in justification of all their
practices; in which they had this bold expression, that now they had brought
their work to such an height, and degree of success, that nothing seemed to be
left in their way, able to hinder the full accomplishment of their desires;
unless God in his justice should send a grievous curse upon them; within three
days following, they sent a Petition to the King, in the name of both Houses,
which was delivered 23 Maii.
to him at York. Wherein they boldly reproacht him, with his many fair
promises, and pretenses; and desired him to disband his Guard, it being a cause
of great jealousy and danger to the whole Kingdom: Otherwise they told him,
that they should employ their care and utmost power to secure the Parliament,
and to preserve the peace and quiet of the Realm. And shortly after, published
26 Maii. Exact Coll. p. 263.
a third Remonstrance, justifying their former Actions; farther reproaching him
in every thing; and challenging the Obligations of his Oath (upon that
ungrammatical construction of quas vulgus digerit) to pass all Bills which they
should tender unto him: About this time also removing 30 Maii.
the Magazine form Hull to the Tower of London.

The King therefore, discerning what preparations they had made, in every
respect, in order to the forming of a rebellious Army; did, by his Royal
Proclamation Exact Coll. p. 391.
, bearing date the xxvijth of May, expressly forbid all and every of his
Subjects belonging to the Trained-Bands, or Militia of this Kingdom, to rise,
march, muster, or exercise, by virtue of any Order or Ordinance of one or both
Houses of Parliament, without consent or warrant from himself, upon pain of
punishment according to the Laws. And plainly discerning, through these their
subtle practices, what advantages they made to themselves, upon the smallest
pretenses; as also by casting Scandals upon all his Actions; he summoned the
Gentlemen and Freeholders of Yorkshire, to come to Heyworth-Moore, upon the
third of June. Where he declared unto 3 Junii. Exact Coll. p. 302.
them, the reason of his re^siding, at that time amongst them; being driven
away from White^Hall by Tumults; with his purpose to maintain the true
Protestant Religion, and Laws, and that the Guard, he there had, for the safety
of his Royal person, consisting of the chief Gentry of that County, and one
Regiment of the Trained Bands, could give no just cause of fears to the people.

But, whilst he was thus zealous to satisfy his good Subjects, of his real
Intentions; the Members at Westminister, (now confident of their own power)
sent Nineteen Propositions sent to the King. 2 Junii. Exact Coll. p. 307.
down a Petition, with Nineteen Propositions, to his Majesty. By which they
demanded no less in effect, than to yield up all his Regal power into their
Hands. Unto which he soon after returned a full and clear Answer Exact Coll. p.
311.
, by the Marquess of Hertford and Earl of Southampton.

To second which Propositions, within four days ensuing, they set forth a bold
Declaration 6 Junii.
, against his Proclamation of the xxvijth of May, affirming it to be void in
Law; and (in opposition thereto,) requiring all Officers to muster, levy, rise,
march and exercise, according to their Ordinance; assuring them, for so doing,
of protection by both Houses of Parliament. And within few days after, sent out
an Order 10 Junii. Exact Coll. p. 339.
, in the name likewise of both Houses, with Proposals, for the bringing in of
Money and Plate; Proposals for bringing in Money and Plate.
as also for providing Horse, Horsemen, and Arms, in pursuance of their solemn
vow and Protestation, for suppressing the Traitorous attempts (as they called
them) of those wicked and malignant Counselors, who sought to engage the King
in a war against his Parliament: and likewise with Instructions for the
Deputy Lieutenants to proceed therein, themselves making Subscriptions
accordingly, the very same day.

Nor were the Lecturing-Preachers, and other of that strain, less active every
where in this desperate (and afterward bloody) Scene; the chief of which,
throughout all England, were then got into London, Westminster, and the Suburbs
of both: it being very well known, both b^ their public Sermons, and sediticus
Pamphlets, what endeavors they sedulously used, to stir up all persons able of
Body, to take up Arms; and others to give aid with their Purses, toward the
advancing that Glorious work (as they called it.) And for the better quickening
the Members of Parliament therein, they forthwith repaired to each man's
particular House, or Lodgings, in and about those Cities, to excite and animate
them thereto, (as some of those Members have since acknowledged;) the drift and
design of those Pulpiteers, therein, being the alteration of Church Government,
and enriching themselves with the lands and possessions of the Bishops and
their Cathedrals, as is very well known. Whose Rebellious documents had such
success; that the Houses of Parliamen, sent down diverse of their most active
Members, to execute their Ordinance for the Militia, in the Counties of
Leicester, 4 Junii.
Lincoln, 6 Junii.
Essex, 7 Junii.
Kent 14 Junii.
etc. Who infused into the people strange fears and apprehensions of very great
dangers, to the end that they might be the better prepared to rise in the
ensuing Rebellion.

But to return to the Propositions, for bringing in of Horse, Money, and Plate.
Of this, so soon as the King had notice, he dispatched a Letter 14 Junii. Exact
Coll. p. 350.
to the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Sheriffs of London: intimating to them; that,
if they should give, or lend any money; or provide or raise any Horse or Arms,
under pretense of a Guard for both Houses, grounded upon those scandalous
votes; by which they had presumed to declare his intention to levy war against
his Parliament; he should look upon it, as the raising of force against
himself, and to be done in malice, and contempt of his authority.

But this came too late: for the Londoners were so forward in their compliance
with these Propositions; that the very same day they brought in great sums of
Money; for which, by a special Order, 11 Junii.
they had public Thanks returned. Which sums, if we may credit one Martin's
Echo. p. 17.
of their own Party, did (with their Plate, Rings etc.) in London, Middlesex,
and Essex, amount to above Eleven millions of pounds; besides vast sums from
the rest of the Counties, and otherwise. So that all the effect his Majesty's
Letter produced, was only an Order, 15 Junii.
in the name of both Houses, that the Deputy Lieutenants, throughout the
Kingdom, should tender Propositions to the several Counties, for raising of
Horse, for the service of the King and Parliament: and soon after that, a
Declaration 21 Junii. Exact Coll. p. 375.
of both Houses was issued out, whereby they justified their raising of Forces;
alleging the same to be for maintenance of the Protestant Religion; the
King's Authority and Person, in his Royal dignity; the free course of Justice;
the Laws of the Land, privilege of Parliament etc. forbidding any Officers
whatsoever, to spread that Paper (for so they styled his Majesty's Letter)
justifying their Votes, that the King intended to levy war against his
Parliament: intimating; that, neither his Majesty's commands nor threats could
withdraw or deter such as were well affected to the public, from contributing
Money, Horse and Plate.

And so indeed it proved; for (as they had deluded the people) large
proportions were daily brough in; the County of Essex contributing twenty seven
thousand pounds, and upwards, and eight hundred Horse; Hertfordshire eight
thousand pounds, and three hundred Horse, etc. as appears by the calculation
thereof, made upon the twentieth of August ensuing.

The King therefore, taking into consideration these their violent practices;
and that they had set up Lieutenants and Deputy Lieutenants in all Counties,
declaring his Commissions of Lieutenancy illegal; Commissions of Array by the
King.
upon mature deliberation and advice (about this time) issued out Commissions
of Array, into all parts of the Realm (which course had been anciently used by
his Royal Progenitors, for prevention of Invasions, or suppressing of any
Insurrections; and approved by diverse Statutes:) and thereupon set forth a
Proclamation, 20 Junii. Exact Coll. p. 372.
informing all his loving Subjects, of the lawfulness and use of them;
commanding their obedience thereunto. Which Commissions the Earl of Derby, in
20 Junii.
Lancashire; the Earl of Huntingdon and Mr. Henry Hastings his Son (afterward
Lord Loughborough) in 22 Junii.
Leicestershire, with others in those Counties, to whom they were directed, did
first put in execution.

But hereupon the Members at Westminster published 1 Julii. Exact Coll. p. 386.
a large Declaration, in the name of both Houses, representing those
Commissions of Array, to be contrary to the Laws of the Land, destructive to
the Liberty and Property of the Subject; yea so full of danger and
inconvenience, that it would bring an heavier yoke of bondage upon them, than
any that had been taken away that Parliament. Their sactious Emissaries,
employed in sundry parts of the Realm, persuading the people, that those
Commissions were to reduce the Estates of all the Yeomanry of England, to ten
pounds a year; and to enslave them beyond expression. And lest those, who were
thus seduced by these their subtle illusions, should receive any satisfaction
from his Majesty's gracious Declarations, whereby the uprightness of his
Actions, and candor of his Intentions might appear; they sent out Orders 4
Julii. Exact Coll. p. 449.
, strictly to prohibit the publishing of them; promising Protection from the
Parliament, to those who should refuse so to do.

Moreover, because the King, out of his great sense of those imminent dangers,
which daily more and more threatened his safety, desired a Subscription 22 Junii.
of those Lords, and other loyal persons, then attending him at York, for
levying Horse in his own defense; as also for safeguard of the two Houses of
Parliament, and the Protestant Religion; they ordered, 5 Julii.
that ten thousand pounds of the money which had been brought in upon the
Propositions, unto Guild Hall, should be forthwith laid out to buy Horses;
Order for the raising of an Army by the Parliament.
and that ten thousand Foot should be speedily raised in London, and the parts
adjacent, to be employed according to the direction of the Parliament. As also,
7 Julii.
that Arms should be taken out of the Tower, for their present occasions, to be
disposed of, by authority of Parliament. Likewise, that the ten thousand men,
so raised, should be forthwith listed under Officers, trained, entered into pay,
and march into any part of the Kingdom, by direction and authority of
Parliament. And of this Army, thus speedily to be raised, they appointed, 12
Julii. Exact Coll. p. 457.
that the Earl of Essex should be General, with whom they voted, that they
would live and dye.

Likewise, to the end that this great affair might yet carry a specious show to
the world, they set forth two more Declarations, Ib. p. 458.
in the name of both Houses. Whereby they pretended their whole endeavor to be
for his Majesty's Honor and Safety, the regaining the ancient Laws, Rights,
and Liberties of the Kingdom, so much invaded; settling the Protestant Religion
in peace and purity, etc. Taxing Ib p. 461.
the King with endeavor of a change in Religion and Government; as also with
breach of his solemn Protestations and Imprecations; and that he had already
begun a war against them, being seduced by Jesuitical Counsel, and Cavaliers,
who had designed all to slavery and confusion; which gave them occasion thus to
raise Forces, for defense of Religion and Laws.

And having given authority to the Earl of Warwick, to command his Majesty's
Navy at Sea; they made an Order 15 Julii.
for him, to take provisions for the same out of the Kings stores at Chatham,
notwithstanding his Majesty's command to the contrary. Likewise for the better
increase of their Army, they made Orders 19 Julii. Exact Coll. p. 476.
for encouragement of Volunteers, within this Kingdom and dominion of Wales, to
exercise and discipline themselves, in a military manner; which promises of the
Authority of both Houses, for their indemnity: As also, that 23 Julii.
the Earl of Essex, should go on, to make all speedy preparation, for the
raising of Forces, according to his Commission; appointing 25 Julii.
Commissioners out of the Common Council of London, to assist him in raising
Volunteers, within that City and the Liberties thereof. And lastly, that a
Declaration 25 Julii.
should be published, to satisfy the people, concerning their proceedings
herein: as also to stir them up, to afford all speedy aid toward the raising
of Forces, upon the Propositions, for the intent aforesaid, and for removing
the evil Counselors from his Majesty.

How forward and active the Londoners were to promote this Rebellion, can
hardly be imagined; people of all sorts pouring out their Treasure, as if it
had been for the most advantageous purchase in the world; thronging in with
their Plate and Rings; and not sparing their very Thimbles and Bodkins. Neither
were they backward in the adventure of their lives; five thousand of them
listing themselves under the Earl of Essex, the next day 26 Julii.
in Moor-Feilds. Which, with the other Volunteers, then in readiness, amounted
to near ten thousand men, being forthwith committed 1 Aug.
to Officers, and distributed into Regiments, were ordered to be daily
exercised, and to have constant pay.

But all these Forces and preparations, were raised and made for the King's
safety, and preservation, as 'twas pretended: though at the same time, certain
Provisions of Wheat and Wine, for his Majesty's own Table, passing by water
toward York, were seized by Sir John Hotham; and that seizure approved of by
the Houses at Westminister, with encouragement 29 Julii.
to do the, like upon occasion.

And, as they took all care to hinder the King's good Subjects, from the sight
of his Declarations, and Proclamations, lest they should continue steadfast in
their old obedience to his Majesty and the Laws (as is evident from their
imprisoning the Lord Mayor of London, as also of the Mayors of Salisbury, and
St. Albans, for the publishing of them, according to their duties) so were they
not slack in spreading and divulging their own; as is apparent from their
frequent dispersing them. And therefore, though they had often vented the like
before: yet now again to remind the people of what was in hand, they set forth
another bitter Declaration; 3 Aug. Exact Coll. p. 491.
whereby they taxed the King with a design to alter the Government, both in
Church and State; and that the time for effecting thereof was then come to
ripeness, as did appear by the preparation of Arms, made by his Majesty (as
they alleged) Scandalizing him, with giving countenance to the Rebellion in
Ireland: and therefore declared, that they were necessitated to take up Arms,
for the defense of all these, which must otherwise perish.

The King therefore observing; that in pursuance of their Votes and
Declarations, they had thus formed a powerful Army; and that they had already
beseig'd the Town of Porstmouth, did set forth a Proclamation 9 Aug. Exact
Coll. p. 503.
declaring the Earl of Essex, and all his adherents, Traitors; with pardon to
such as should return to their obedience within six days. But this gracious
offer was so much contemned, that so soon as it came to their notice, they
published a Declaration, 13 Aug. Exact Coll. p. 508.
in the name of both Houses of Parliament; containing many shameful invectives
against his Majesty, declaring all such to be Traitors, that were Contrivers or
Countenancers of this last Proclamation of August the ninth. And, that if his
Majesty would disband his Forces, abandon those wicked Counselors, and hearken
to the wholesome advice of his great Council, they would endeavor to make him
and his posterity, as great and rich as any Prince, that ever swayed the
Scepter.

CHAP. XII.
BUt what this specious offer meant, the King (by woeful experience) being
sufficiently sensible; and of all other helps, in small hope; published another
Proclamation 12 Aug. Exact Coll. p. 512.
declaring his purpose, to erect his Standardroyal at Notingham, upon the
twentieth of August; requiring the aid and assistance of all his Subjects, on
the North of Trent, and twenty miles Southwards, for suppressing the power of
those Rebels, which were then on their march against him. And therewithal a
Declaration, Ib. p. 514.
setting forth their evil practices, and proceedings from the beginning of that
Parliament.

But the Rebels (for so I shall now call them) having brought their work to
this height; and for their better support therein, having seized on an hundred
thousand pounds, of the money raised by Act of Parliament, for the service of
Ireland: having also deposed Sir Richard Gurney, Lord Mayor of London; as also
committed 12 Aug.
him to the Tower, and by their own authority set 15 Aug.
up another; they sent Forces into several parts of this Realm, viz. into 19
Aug.
Kent, putting them into Cotham-House; as also into the Block-house and Sconces
at Graves-end, and Chatham, together with Dover-Castle.

Into 20 Aug.
Leicestershire they sent the Earl of Stanford, with Horse, Foot, and Canon.
Into Warwickshire the Lord Brook, and others, with six thousand Horse and
Foot; and into 2 Sept.
Dorsetshire the Earl of Bedford, with seven thousand Foot, six hundred Horse,
and fourteen pieces of Canon: and special direction 18 Aug.
into other parts; that their Lieutenants and Deputy Lieutenants, should
speedily execute their Ordinance for the Militia, and declare to all men; that
it had been and should be the endeavor of both Houses of Parliament, to
provide for his Majesty's safety. etc.

But, the more to incense the people, they issued out other Declaration, 20 Aug.
in the name of the Lords and Commons in Parliament; scandalizing Exact Coll.
p. 574. 575.
the King, with laying the foundation of an arbitrary and tyrannical
Government: and, that notwithstanding all his Vows and Protestations, to govern
by Law, which had been dispersed throughout the Kingdom, to blind and deceive
the people (as they alleged) the most mischievous principles of Tyranny, had
been exercised, that ever were invented: with promise to all well affected
persons (as they termed them) that should be prejudiced by the Cavaliers, that
they should have full reparation of their damages, out of the Estates of all
such persons, as had withdrawn themselves to York to serve his Majesty.

The King therefore, seriously weighing the perilous condition, in which
himself and the whole Realm were thus miserably plunged, through the rage and
malice of these desperate men: that he might leave nothing unattemted, for
preventing of those great calamities, which he clearly saw approaching; The
King's Message for Peace,
after he had thus erected his royal Standard, sent 25 Aug. Exact Coll. p. 579.
a Message from Notingham, to those Houses at Westminister, by the Earls of
Southampton, Dorset, and others: whereby he propounded, that for composure of
those unhappy differences, some fit persons might be enabled, to treat on both
sides, in such manner, and with such freedom, as might best tend to an happy
conclusion of them.

But this gracious offer, was received by them, with so much scorn and
insolence (they then having a powerful Army on foot, with plenty of Money, and
other accommodations; and his Majesty destitute of all these) that the
substance of their Answer was, Exact Coll. p. 584.
that if his Majesty would (forsake all his Loyal Subjects, then with him, and)
return to his Parliament, he should find such expressions of their fidelities
and duty; as might assure him, that his safety, Honor and Greatness, was only
to be found in their affections. And immediately published a Declaration, Ib.
p. 585.
setting forth; that the Arms, which they had taken up etc. should not be laid
down, until his Majesty should withdraw his protection from such as had been
voted, by both Houses, to be Delinquents; or that should be so voted; and
should leave them to the justice of the Parliament.

Things being brought to this height, it will not be improper now to take
notice how the Scots did behave themselves toward the King in this unhappy
Juncture, whose gracious condescensions to them, had been such as hardly any
age can parallel. Wherein, it is to be considered, that they could not but
discern what breaches had been made, upon his Majesty, and his just Rights, by
those here, who sat at Westminister, and called themselves the Parliament; as
also to what degree of strength and power they were grown, with the artifices
whereby they attained thereto. Moreover, that though, by a Petition exhibited
to the Lords of his Majesty's Privy Council of that Realm, upon the last of May
an. 1642, they had intimated a desire to shun any just occasion, that might
give offense to their gracious Sovereign (as they then called him) or of
Iealousy to their Brethen of England; and so, seemed to stand only as
Spectators: The Scots send a form of their Kirk-Government to the Parliament at
Westminster.
yet, when they heard, that their Friends in England had put themselves in
Arms, and were so powerful in strength every way, and his Majesty so weak; they
then, not only showed themselves more open; but sent 4 Aug.
a Form of their Kirk-Government to the Parliament at Westminster, as a Pattern
for Reformation; with desire from the Assembly of that Kirk, that the same
might be established here: and a Declaration 26 Aug. Exact Coll. p. 598.
of their affections to the Reformation in Kirk and State. Wherein they
signified their expectation, that England would now bestir themselves, and
extirpate the Prelatical Hierarchy, that the remainder of the work might be the
more easy; offering their assistance for furthering thereof. Of which more anon.

That there was nothing wanting in his Majesty that could be expected from a
most pious and gracious Prince, for prevention of those miseries, which this
turbulent Generation afterward brought upon these Realms, does sufficiently
appear by his sundry pathetick Messages to them, formerly sent. Nevertheless to
acquit himself farther to God and the world; by another Message Another Message
from the King.
of Sept. the eleventh he manifested to them what endeavors he had used by his
many offers, 11 Sept.
but could not obtain any Treaty: And therefore now declared; that, being thus
left to his necessary defense; relying only on the Providence of God, the
justness of his Cause, and the affections of his good people; he should yet
piously remember the blood that was to be spilt in this Quarrel, and cheerfully
embrace a Treaty, when ever they should desire it.

But to this was returned, a most scornful and scandalous Answer; 16 Sept.
taxing him, with committing (by his Soldiers) oppressions, rapines, and
murders upon his good Subjects; saying, that they had offered him all
Security, Honor, Service, Obedience, Support etc. and sought nothing, but that
their Religion, Liberty, Peace of the Kingdom, and Safety of the Parliament
might be secured from the open violence, and cunning practices of a wicked
party, who had long plotted their destruction: upbraiding him, that Irish
Traitors and Rebels were admitted to his presence, grace, and favor: and
telling him, that if he would return to his Parliament without his forces, they
would secure his royal Person, Crown, and Dignity.

Being thus driven to these great Extremities (which was either to submit to
their mercy, and forsake all those his loyal Subjects, who had faithfully
adhered to him; or to expose his royal Person, with that small part of an Army
he then had, to the uncertain chance of war:) and hearing that the Earl of
Essex (the Rebell's General) was gone out of London, in great State, upon the
tenth of September (the chief part of his Army being advanced to Northampton,
King marched from Notingham 13 Sept.
before) he marched from Notingham, toward Shrewsbury, upon the thirteenth of
that month, with what forces he then had; and at the Head of them, near
Wellington, made a solemn Protestation 19 Sept. Exact Coll. p. 614. The King's
Protestation at the head of his Army.
to defend the Protestant Religion, established in the Church of England; to
govern by the known Laws of the Land; that the Liberty and Property of the
Subject might be by them preserved with the same care as his own just rights;
Also to maintain the just Privileges of Parliament: And that he would expect
no aid from any man, nor protection from Heaven, when he, willingly, should
fail in these particulars. Which pious intentions of his, thus declared, were
of no small advantage to him at that time, his Army increasing daily, beyond
expectation.

The Rebels therefore hearing which way the King moved, bent their course
speedily toward him, making their Head-quarter, in and about Worcester, from
the four and twentieth of September, till the nineteenth of October following.
Near to which place (upon their approach) some few Troops of his Majesty's,
under the command of Prince Rupert, most happily defeated 23 Sept.
a far greater number of the Rebel's principal Cavalry; Colonel Sandys, Major
Douglas, and other Commanders (with diverse other) being there At Powickfeild
near Worcester.
slain, six Cornets of Horse taken, and all this, with the loss but of one man.
Which being the first notable encounter, that his Majesty's forces had with
them, and so successful, did not a little amaze most of the Rebels party. Lest
therefore the truth thereof, being divulged, should dishearten their friends in
London, and other remote parts; they, not only caused diverse printed Papers to
be spread about, bragging of it for a special victory: but, that it might gain
the more credit, ordained a public Thanksgiving 27 Sept.
in London, for the same. And to hinder his Majesty from the assistance of his
good Subjects, under one pretense or other (though they had cried out against
his raising an Army, by the help of Papists to destroy the Protestant Religion)
they were not ashamed to make a public Order, 6 Oct.
that, if any Papist would bring in considerable sums to them, upon the
Propositions, it should be accepted of.

As, by these subtle devices, they had raised the flames of Rebellion to this
height; and deprived the King of all visible means here, for the quenching
thereof: so did they use their utmost endeavors, to prevent any help, that
might be obtained for him, from foreign parts; as appears by their negotiation
with the States of the United Provinces; wherein they employed one Walter
Strickland, with a special Declaration to them; complaining of the Prince of
Aurange, Exact Coli. p. 635.
for countenancing the Lord Digby, in his making warlike Provisions in those
parts, for the King's use: and in favor of that Lord, and other wicked
Counselors, and Incendiaries; to have licensed experienced Officers and
Soldiers, to resort into this Kingdom, in aid of his Majesty against the
Parliament. Scandalizing the King also, that his Councils were corrupted by a
Jesuitical faction; and that he had drawn his sword for the destruction of his
people: desiring therefore, that his Majesty might have no manner of Supplies
from thence: and, withal, insinuating, how near a relation there was, betwixt
that model, into which they aimed to cast this Government, and the State of
those Provinces; and that therefore they expected assistance from them.

Nor did they rest here, as is evident from those Instructions which were
brought up by a Committee, to be sent into Holland, for this Mr. Strickland,
upon the 29th of February an. 1643; by which he was to represent to the States
of those Provinces, that the Parliament of England did only strive for
Reformation of that Religion and State they live in: and therefore desired
those States, that they would now afford them their Brotherly assistance, as
they had formerly assisted them. As also, that they would enlarge their union
to other Princes, and lend them some money upon the public faith of both
Kingdoms; and the rather because they made Reformed Churches, the pattern of
their endeavors.

Neither could they be silent at home; but the more to stir up the people,
inculcated 15 Oct. Exact Coll. p. 638.
to them; that the King had raised an Army, by the help of Papists; the corrupt
part of the Clergy; the Delinquent Nobility and Gentry, and some notable
Traitors Beyond Sea: that they had liberty to rob and spoil all sorts of
people; as also to exact Money and Plate from Corporations, by threatening Fire
and Sword to the refusers: that he had hired a Scotchman, to murder Sir John
Hotham: that, by violent oppressions he had exhausted the parts about
Shrewsbury and that the Cavaliers were hungry for the wealth of London, and the
fruitful Counties adjacent: that, if he should prevail, there was no
expectation, but that all would be exposed to the malice and rapine of his
ravenous Soldiers, and all honest and religious men's throats cut. And
therefore, that the means of curing and preventing these dangers, must be by
Loan, and contribution to the Earl of Essex's Army, which was not inferior in
number to the King's; besides better armed, full paid etc. but above all, well
encouraged and instructed in the Cause, by the labor of many Godly, and
painful Divines; and therefore, that all Trained Bands, Volunteers etc. in all
places, should assist the Lord General, etc. Whereunto they added these ensuing
Votes; viz.

1. That such persons, as should not contribute to the charge of the
Commonwealth, in this time of Necessity, should be held sit to be secured and
disarmed.

2. That the Fines, Rents etc. of Archbishops, Bishops, Deans etc. and of such
notorious Delinquents, who had taken up Arms against the Parliament, or had
been active in the Commission of Array, should be sequestered for the use and
service of the Commonwealth.

3. That the King's revenues should be brought into the several Courts, and
other places, where they ought to be paid in; and not issued out until farther
order was taken by both Houses of Parliament.

And to sum up all, they set forth another 22 Oct. Exact Coll. p. 663.
Declaration and Protestation; wherein they did, in the presence of Almighty
God, protest and declare to this Kingdom, and the whole World; that no private
passion, or respect, nor evil intention to his Majesty's person; no design to
the prejudice of his just Honor, and Authority had engaged them to raise
Forces and take up Arms etc. that they had professed their Loyalty by several
Remonstrances; that they had passed by ignominious Slanders etc. that, for the
avoiding of blood, they had directed the Earl of Essex, by himself or others,
to cause an humble Petition, to be delivered to his Majesty to return in peace
to his Parliament; that his Majesty had refused to yield safe conduct for the
delivery thereof; that he was engaged to the Popish-party for suppression and
extirpation of the true Religion, and exposing the wealth of this Kingdom to be
plundered, and spoiled by Cavaliers etc. contrary to his solemn Oaths,
Protestations, and Execrations; and therefore, The first mention of the
Covenant in England.
that they resolved to enter a solemn Oath and Covenant, to defend this Cause,
with the hazard of their lives, against the King's Army. And that they expected
help from the Brethren of Scotland herein. His Majesty therefore, having in a
very short time, and beyond expectation, raised an indifferent Army (though his
wants of many accomodations were very great) finding no means of Peace or
Safety, but by the hazard of Battle, which the Rebels eagerly sought; casting
himself wholly upon the Almighty's providence and protection, began 12 Oct. The
King marched from Shrewsbury,
his march from Shrewsbury, upon the xijth of October. Which was no sooner
known, but that they feircely pursued him, having order, Exact Coll. p. 632.
for that purpose, from the Houses at Westminster, to march against his
Majesty's Army, and fight with them; and to rescue the persons of the King,
Prince, and Duke of York.

So that, on Sunday the xxiijth of October, being in view of the King's forces,
they put their Army in order, near Kineton, Battle of Kineton 23 Oct. Commonly
called Edgehill Battle.
in Warwickshire; and bid his Majesty Battle, by a signal thereof given with
their great Ordinance, wherewith they made five shot at his Army, before any
fire was given on the other part. But then began a sharp encounter, which
continued near three hours. Wherein God so preserved his Majesty; that, instead
of being utterly destroyed by these violent Rebels, who reckoned all their own;
their invincible Army (as they esteemed it) was so bruised and shattered; that
instead of farther pursuing the King, it retreated eight miles backwards, where
the Soldiers secured themselves many days, by the advantage of the River Avon,
under the protection of the Town and Castle of Warwick.

Of which Battle, I purposely omit the Description. Nor shall I herein make any
farther mention of the course of this war (it being a work fit to be handled by
it self, by some more able pen) than in a brief Chronologick way, to point at
the times of the most memorable Battles and Seiges: as also to the Towns,
Castles, and other fortified Places, first possessed, or afterward forcibly
gained by either party. But instead thereof shall observe the wonderful
providence of Almighty God: whereby, notwithstanding these matchless
Conspirators, who had, by so many subtle artifices, arrived to that strength
and power; and made seizure of his Majesty's, Forts, Ports, Navy, Magazine, and
Revenue: (insomuch as the Lord Say, in a public meeting at Oxford, of the
Gentry and others, thither summoned by him, in September preceding; told them,
upon his Honor, that the King had neither Money, Power, nor Credit;) his
Subjects every where, being also not a little tainted with the most
Antimonarchical principles, that by their seditious Preachers, or otherwise,
could possibly be infused into them. Yet, that in the space of two months, he
could be enabled to meet them in open Battle; having no Ammunition, but what
came to him from Foreign parts, through many perilous adventures; the Ports
being blocked up by his own Royal Navy, then under their command: nor having
Arms or Moneys, but what he obtained by extraordinary difficulties. From this
day forward, purposing to make some brief Remarks upon the ensuing practices of
these monstrous men, in carrying on that barbarous war, to the great
devastation and spoil of this late flourishing Kingdom: And to show how
opposite all their Actions were to those plausible pretenses, whereby they did
at first most subtly delude and ensnare a multitude of well-meaning people;
viz. Religion, Laws, Liberty, and property of the Subject; as also Privilege
of Parliament.

CHAP. XIII.
TO the end therefore, that their party might not be disheartened, they always
took care; not only to suppress any bad tidings, but to puff up the people with
strange imaginations of Victories and Conquests, by producing of forged
Letters, counterfeit Messengers, and the like; as was manifest by their
commitment 25 Oct.
of sundry persons to prison, which came from Kineton-Battel, and reported the
very truth of the King's success there; viz. Captain Wilson, Lieutenant Witney,
and Mr. Banks; who were all sent to the Gate-honse, to receive punishment by
Martial-Law. As also, 29 Oct.
one Mr. John Wentworth of Lincolns-Inne, and 1 Nov.
Sir William Fielding Knight; giving 25 Oct.
twenty pounds to one man, by order of the House, who came, and reported, that
most that were killed in the Battle, were of the King's side: and that the Earl
of Essex commanded him to tell his friends; that he, with his own hands,
carried away the King's Standard.

But to undecieve the world, as to the number on both sides slain, (which were
then confidently given out to be five thousand) most certain it is, that upon
strict enquiry from the adjacent Inhabitants, who buried the Bodies, and took
particular notice of the distinct numbers put into each Grave, it appears that
there were not one thousand complete there interred.

As the remaining part of the Parliament-Army, after this Battle, finding not
themselves in a condition to encounter the King again without new Recruits, and
therefore made a fair retreat no less than eight miles backward, (as has been
observed:) so did some of them before the fight, standing doubtful of the
success, forbear to adventure themselves therein; amongst which the afterfamous
Oliver Cromwell was one (if some of the most eminent persons of his own party,
who were in the fight, belly him not) who, being Captain of a Troop of Horse in
the General's Regiment, came not into the Field, but got up into a Steeple
within view of the Battle; and there, discerning by a Prospective-glass the two
Wings of their Horse to be utterly routed, made such have to be gone, that
instead of descending the Stairs by which he came up, he swing'd down by a
Bell-rope, and ran away with his Troop.

The King, soon after, holding a soft march toward Oxford, Banbury-Castle then
garrisoned by the late Earl of Peterborough's Regiment of Foot; and
Broughton-house (the chief Seat of that great Rebel the Lord Sa) yielded 27 Oct.
upon Summons as he passed. But the Rebels, that they might not seem to receive
a foil in this first great Action, the Citizens of London were summoned 27 Oct.
to Guild Hall; where the Earls of Pembroke, and Holland, the Lord Say and
Wharton, with Mr. Strode, made large Speeches to hearten them; telling their
great Victory at Kineton Battle. But the conclusion was, to crown their work
(as their phrase was) by farther and speedy Supplies of Men, Money, and all
other assistance. To which shadow of their victory, to give the better gloss, a
public Order 3 Nov.
was made, that a gratulatory Present of five hundred pounds, should be sent
from the Houses, to the Earl of Essex, for his good service already done in the
war. And lest any of the deluded people should return to their obedience, upon
his Majesty's gracious Proclamation 24 Oct. Exact Coll. p. 673.
of pardon; they ordered that 1 Nov.
those Proclamations should not be published.

But, though all these Rebellious forces were hitherto raised by voluntary
contributions, and free offers of many to engage themselves personally in this
blessed Cause; most of the common sort, being really satisfied, that they
should only go and fetch up the King to his Parliament, out of the hands of his
Evil Counselors, and a few inconsiderable Cavaliers (for by that name they
called all the Royalists) and then return triumphantly, without fighting: this
unexpected brush at Kineton-field, could not silence those, who had lost their
Husbands, Children, and Friends: Seeing therefore their farther Voluntary
assistances came in but slowly; the Houses at Westminster made an Order, 10 Nov.
that all Horses, within the City of London and the Suburbs, and five miles
adjacent, should be speedily pressed for the service of their Army: as also, that
all Horses in the Tower, should be seized on; and no Coaches suffered to be
kept there, except one for the Lieutenant.

And, to puff up their General with such vain apprehensions, as might hearten
him to persist in that his high employment (in regard he was then somewhat
popular) they formed a specious Declaration, 11 Nov. Exact Coll. p. 743.
which they ordered to remain upon Record, in the Books of both Houses of
Parliament, as a mark of Honor to the name and Family of the Earl of Essex,
for the good service he had done to the Commonwealth, in the office of
General, by the hazard of his life in the battle of Kineton.

Likewise, for a firmer union of their forces, they made an Order, in the name
of both Houses; that the Counties of York, Lincoln, Notingham, Derby, Stafford,
Chester, Lancaster, Northumberland, Cumberland, Westmorland, and Duresme, with
the Town and County of Newcastle, should associate themselves, by raising Horse
and Foot, to suppress and subdue the Popish and malignant Party: and that the
Lord Fairfax should command in chief, throughout those Counties.

But his Majesty coming safe to Oxford, after a short stay there, marched
toward London; the noise whereof caused the Members at Westminster to bestir
themselves for preventing his Majesty's coming thither: whereupon all the power
they could raise was sent out, to give him astop; the Earl of Essex, with part
of his Army to Kingston upon Thames, and the Lord Brooke's and Mr. Hamden's
Regiments to Brainford: where the Royalists fell so sharply on them, that they
took five hundred Prisoners, and sunk some of their Ordinance, intending to
march forward on the next 12 Nov.
day. But, having advertisement that Essex had drawn his Forces from Kingston,
and joining with the London-Auxiliaries, lay in his way at Turnham Green, he
chose rather to make a safe retreat, than hazard his Army by a second Battle;
and so by Reading came back to Oxford, where he took up his Winter Quarters,
making it his chief Garrison.

The flame of war beginning thus to spread, each part strove to possess
themselves of what strong Towns and Castles they could; as also to fortify such
other places as might enable them to have command over the parts adjacent: The
gaining whereof, and other Acts of Hostility on each part in places remote, as
also the most considerable transactions of the Members at Westminster (who
calling themselves the Parliament, sat there with strong Guards, to carry on
this Grand Rebellion) being not possibly capable of a perfect Narrative in
punctual order of time: to avoid confusion therefore, I have thought it most
proper to place what is most remarkable, on the military part, at the end of
each years; beginning with this of 1642: in which the war did commence.

To proceed therefore. The Rebels by this time discerning the King to get
ground; partly by the increase of his Forces in sundry Counties; and partly by
undeceiving many well-meaning people, who had been seasoned by diverse
Lecturing-Preachers and other corrupt Clergymen with disloyal principles; and
now doubting the issue without farther help; The Scots invited to their
assistance.
sent 18 Nov.
a Declaration, and Invitation to the Scots, for their assistance; granting
Letters 26 Nov.
of Mart to all Merchants; that would set forth Ships, to guard the Seas; and
to take all Shipping bringing Arms, or other aid from foreign parts to assist
the King; and to detain the same, as their lawful prize.

Furthermore, as London, and the Counties adjacent, gave example to all other
parts of the Realm, in the first raising of this grand Rebellion; so were they
the first over whom their great Masters exercised their power. Nor were the
deluded people elsewhere, (who had likewise given the Reins into these men's
hands for a few fair words) long spared: for upon the xxixth of November there
issued out an Order 29 Nov. Exact Coll. p. 763.
from both Houses, that Committees should be named, throughout all Counties, to
take care for provisions of Victual, for the Army raised by the Parliament; as
also for seizing on Dragoon-Horses, and draught-Horses; and for borrowing of
Money or Plate, to supply the Army upon the public Faith. Which Committees had
thereby power, to send for and take such Provisions, Money, Plate, and Horse,
as the owners did then neglect to bring in.

And having formerly ordered 26 Nov.
, that the King's and Queen's Revenue, coming into the Exchequer should be
detained, and employed for the public service; they seized 29 Nov.
on thirteen hundred Quarters of Corn, which then were in the King's Stores.
Also, for explanation of their former Ordinance, touching the contribution of
Horse, Money, and Plate, upon the Propositions, they ordered that the Refusers
should be distrain'd; and in default of Distresses to be found, their persons
to be imprisoned, and their Families no longer to remain in London,
Westminster, or the Counties adjacent.

Shortly after this, likewise they framed more Ordinances 3 Dec.
of Association for diverse other Counties; constituting 14 Jan.
Commanders in chief of new forces to be levied within those Associations,
beginning with Buckingham, Bedford, Rutland, Northampton, Leicester, Derby,
Notingham, and Huntington; appointing the Lord Gray of Groby (son to the Earl
of Stanford) Sergeant Major General there; planting Garrisons in every Castle
and great Town throughout all those parts.

The like Association 10 Dec. 22 Dec.
for the Shires of Cambridge, Norfolk, Suffolk, Hartford, Essex, part of the
Isle of Ely and City of Norwich; William Lord Gray of Warke, being made
Commander in Chief, throughout all those Counties.

And to put the people in hope, that this charge and trouble should not last
long; they gave out, that his majesty's Forces were utterly broken and
shattered; and read Letters 7 Dec.
in the House, from their General, that he would pursue the King with all
vehemence.

Soon after this also, they made an Ordinance 15 Dec. Exact Coll p. 674.
, for taxing all Malignants, and such as had not contributed upon the
Propositions, for Money, Horse, and Plate, according to their abilities, that
they should pay the Twentyfifth part of their Estates. Under which name of
Malignants, they brought in all that were worth any thing, if within their
reach. But, in this Ordinance, it is to be observed They bind heavy burdens
and grievous to be born, and lay them on men's shoulders; but they themselves
will not move them with one of their fingers. Matthew. 23. v. 4.
, that the Assessors were not to tax any Member of either House.

Neither could their oppressions at home suffice; but they countenanced the
seizing of a Ship, called Santa Clara, out of the Port of Santo Domingo, in the
King of Spain's Dominions, laden with Plate, Cochinele, and other Merchandise
of great value; and by order 27 Dec.
of the House of Commons, set up Bills upon the Exchange for sale thereof. And
that no part of the Realm might be free from their oppressions, they
constituted 4 Jan. Exact Coll. p. 816.
Committees in the Counties of Warwick, Stafford, and City of Coventry, for
associating of those Counties, and planting of Garrisons there: authorizing
them to suppress and disarm Enemies, and persons ill affected: also for raising
Horse, Money, Plate, etc. And soon after that, set forth a new Declaration 7
Jan. Exact Coll. p. 825.
, in the name of both Houses of Parliament; showing the necessity of a present
Subscription of Money, and Plate, for a farther supply of the Army. Suggesting,
that his Majesty's Popish-Army would proceed with Fire and Sword, to root out
their true Religion, and all that professed it; if there were not a good
provision of Treasure to maintain and support the Army raised by the Parliament.

To which new Contributions, (for the better drawing on of others) they
themselves also subscribed. And after ordered 23 Jan.
, that such Citizens, as had refused to pay the twentieth part, should be
removed to several Prisons; viz. Yarmouth, Colchester, Norwich etc. giving
authority 3 Febr. 8 Febr.
, that the Collectors, made by their Ordinance of the xxixth of November, for
Assesments, should have power to break open Chests, Trunks etc. and to sieze
Money, Goods, etc. for satisfaction of their Taxes. And at the same time
appointed a Committee, for sequestring the lands and estates of all such
persons as had assisted the King, in his just defense and preservation,
according to their duty and allegiance; calling it a maintaining a war against
the Parliament.

But all this being as yet not enough, they passed an Ordinance 20 Febr.
to incite the City of London to a free contribution toward the sum of sixty
thousand pounds, for the service of the Army; the Houses declaring; that they
were in good hopes it would be the last money they should have occasion to
desire of the City in that kind. And therefore, that they might be as good as
their words, and not come often to them in a borrowing way, they passed another
Ordinance 23 Febr.
for imposing a Tax for the maintenance of their Army throughout the whole
Kingdom, of Thirty three thousand, three hundred forty eight pounds a week,
whereof ten thousand pounds weekly was assessed upon the City of London,
besides Westminster and the Suburbs.

And to the end that the well affected, who had gone forth in their Army raised
for the defense of the Parliament, Religion, Laws, and Liberties of the
Subjects of England (for those are the words of the Preamble) should be the
better encouraged to continue in their service, they passed another Ordinance 9
Martii.
for assessing of all the Parishes in England to the relief of their maimed
Soldiers, with the Widows, and Fatherless children of such as were or should
be slain on their part.

CHAP. XIV.
I Now come to the military Actings of this present year 1642. In which I find,
that the Marquess of Hertford, and Sir Ralph Hopton Knight of the Bath
(afterward Lord Hopton) had raised considerable forces on the King's behalf in
the West: and that the Earl of Newcastle (afterward Marquess) in the North,
Colonel Charles Cavendish (brother to the Earl of Devonshire:) Spenser Earl of
Northampton, and some other persons of quality had done the like in sundry
other parts; so that with what strength his Majesty himself then had, after the
taking up of his Winter Quarters at Oxford, the Royalists had possessed
themselves of Banbury-Castle in Oxfordshire; of Reading, and Farringdon, with
the Castles of Wallingford and Denington in Berkshire: of Chichester, and
Arundel-Castle in Sussex; of Winchester and Basing-house in Hantshire; of the
Castles of Devises and Wardour in Wiltshire; of the Castle of Sherbourne in
Dorsetshire: of some Port-Towns in Devonshire; of the Castle of Pendennis and
other places in Cornwall; of Taunton and Bridgwater in Somersetshire; of
Sudley-Castle in Glucestershire; of the City of Worcester; of the the Town of
Shrewsbury in Shropshire; of Dudley-Castle and Close of Lichfeild in
Staffordshire; of Ashby de la Zouch in Leicestershire; of the City of Chester;
of Monmouth in Monmouthshire; of Lincoln, and Gaynesborough in Lincolnshire; of
Lynne in Norfolk; of the City of York, and Castle of Pontfract in Yorkshire; of
Latham-house in Lancashire; and of Newcastle in Northumberland.

As also, that by their activeness there were taken from the Rebels before the
entrance of the ensuing year, these following places; viz. Marlborough in 5 Dec.
Wiltshire by the Lord Wilmot (Colonel Ramsey a Scot and five hundred of his
men being there made prisoners) Tadcaster in Yorkshire about the same time;
Liskard, 19 Jan.
and Saltash 22 Jan.
in Cornwall; Belvier-Castle 22 Jan.
in Lincolnshire; Cirencester 2 Febr.
in Gloucestershire; Malmesbury 21 Martii.
in Wiltshire, and Grantham 23 Martii.
in Lincolnshire. Whereunto may be added the safe landing of the Queen (12
Febr.) at Burlington in Yorkshire, with Arms and Ammunition brought from Holland
for his Majesty's service.

On the Rebels part I am also to observe, that besides the Earl of Essex, their
Generalissimo, they had diverse other Petty-Generals; viz. Ferdinando Lord
Fairfax in the North; the Earl of Stanford, and Sir William Waller in the West;
Edward Earl of Manchester, Basil Lord Feilding (eldest son to the Earl of
Denbigh) Colonel Brown the Woodmonger; Sir William Brereton Baronet; Sir John
Gell Knight; Colonel Massey etc. all active men in their respective stations.

As to the places of strength, throughout England (besides the Royal Navy,
given up into their hands by Algernon Earl of Northumberland, whom the King had
made Admiral of his whole Fleet) they had the City and Tower of London; all the
Eastern-Counties, with the Ports and Castles thereto belonging; the strong Town
of Hull in Yorkshire, and in it all his Majesty's Magazine of Arms, Artillery,
and Ammunition prepared for his Scottish Expedition; Manchester in Lancashire --
in Cheshire; Ludlow, Bridg-North, and Wemme in Shropshire; Stafford in
Staffordshire; the Cities of Bristol, and Gloucester; the Towns of Leicester
and Northampton; the City of Coventry, with the Castles of Warwick and
Kenilworth all in Warwickshire; the City of Lincoln; the Towns of Notingham and
Derby; and indeed what not, excepting those places I have mentioned, wherein
the Royalists had first set foot. Besides which, they took by force the City of
Winchester 13 Dec.
; Leedes 22 Jan.
in Yorkshire; the City of Chichester in Sussex about the same time; and
Sudeley-Castle 13 Febr.
in Gloucestershire.

Not much of Action in the Field, or otherwise, can be expected until the
ensuing Spring of the year; so that all I find of note, was only that at
Liskard 19 Jan.
near Bodmin in Cornwall, where Sir Ralph Hopton routed a strong Party of the
Rebels in those parts, and took above twelve hundred Prisoners.

Likewise that attempt upon Litchfield-close in Stafford- shire, made by Robert
Lord Brook, wherein he lost his life; the manner whereof is not a little
remarkable, which (in short) was thus. This Lord being strangely tainted with
fanatic Principles, by the influence of one of his near Relations and some
Schismatical Preachers (though in his own nature a very civil and well homour'd
man) became thereby so great a zealot against the established Discipline of the
Church, that no less than the utter extirpation of Episcopacy, and abolishing
all decent Order in the service of God would satisfy him. To which end he
became the leader of all the power he could raise for the destruction of the
Cathedral of that Diocese of Coventry and Litchfield. In order whereunto, when
he had marched within half a mile of Litchfield, he drew up his Army; and there
devoutly prayed a blessing upon his intended work: withal, earnestly desiring,
that God would by some special Token manifest unto them his approbation of that
their design: which being done, he went on, and planted his great Guns against
the South-East Gate of the Close, himself standing in a Window of a little
House near thereto, 1643.
to direct the Gunners in their purposed Battery: but it so happened, that there
being two persons placed in the Battlements of the chiefest Steeple, to make
shot, with long fouling Guns at the Cannoniers: upon a sudden accident which
occasioned the Soldiers to give a shout, this Lord, coming to the door
(completely harnessed with Plate-Armour cap a pe) was suddenly shot into one of
his Eyes; but the strength of the Bullet so much abated by the glance thereof
on a piece of timber, which supported a Pentiss over the Door, that it only
lodged in his Brains, Whereupon he suddenly fell down dead. Nor is it less
notable, that this accident fell out upon the second day of March, which is the
Festival 2 Martii.
of that sometime famous Bishop St. Chad, to whose memory Offa King of the
Mercians first erected this stately Church and devoutly dedicated it.

The next thing whereof I shall take notice, is; that on the nineteenth day of
the same month of March, was that feirce Skirmish 19 Martii.
at Hopton-Heath, in the same County of Stafford, where the right loyal and
valiant Spenser Earl of Northampton encountering Sir William Brereton and Sir
John Gell, though he had the better of the day (being unhappily fallen from his
Horse amongst Coney-Burrows) was barbarously murdered.

CHAP. XV.
AS to this year's Actions, considering that money is the Sinews of war, the
first thing of note, in order to the gaining thereof, which the Members at
Westminster did, was the sequestring 31 Martii.
of Delinquents (i. e. the Royalists) estates. Scobell's Coll. cap. 4. p. 37.
And finding the poor Country People very weary of the war, and apt to run
away; having also had so much experience of the Cities forwardness in all
things tending to their service: to the intent, that upon any sudden occasion
they might draw out considerable numbers thence, they passed 12 Apr.
an Ordinance, that the Committee for the Militia of London, and the Suburbs,
should raise new Regiments of Volunteers, for the better security thereof. So
likewise for the better support of two other of their Generals; viz. Sir
William Waller and Sir Arthur Haselrig, they passed an Ordinance 25 Apr.
for engaging the Public Faith to such as should lend either Horse, Scobell's
Coll. p. 40.
Men, or Money unto them in that service.

But by this time the private Discontents and repinings, which these large
Exactions caused, beginning to make the great Masters in this Tragic Scene to
doubt a revolt in the people (considering how frequently the King, by sundry
gracious Proclamations of pardon, and all other good means had woed them:) To
carry on the work therefore the more smoothly, they were constrained, after the
example of their Brethren the Scots, to make an Engagement, by a solemn Oath,
for continuing their assistance therein. And in this, as the Citizens of London
(who in all other occasions had been their principal Instruments) did readily
tender their service by Sir Henry Mildmay; who reported to the House, that they
would lend the forty thousand pounds demanded (for now they were borrowing
again) provided, that the Holy League The Holy League and Covenant proposed by
the Londoners.
and Covenant before spoken of, might be made and imposed upon the whole
Kingdom.

And rather than their Blessed Cause (as they called it) should suffer, it was
moved 4 Maii.
by the Sub-Committee at Sadler's Hall in Breadstreet; that all persons, who
were willing to promote their own Safety, should spare one meal weekly, toward
the provision of Horse and Arms, for the new raised Auxiliaries about London.
Also because they found some slackness in the people, to bring in money upon
the Propositions, they appointed 7 Maii.
Committees in the several Counties to tax such for their fifth and twentieth
part, Scob. Coll. p. 41.
as had not contributed or lent accordingly: and passed another Ordinance 10
Maii.
for taking Horses for the service of the Parliament. Scob. Coll. ut supra.


It is not unworthy of note, that this thrifty contrivance for sparing one meal
a week, was the usher to that then formidable Imposition, called Excise, never
before heard of by many thousands in this Kingdom: which the trivers at
Westminster durst not show the people, till they were sufficiently tamed under
the yoke of other Exactions; knowing full well how displeasing it would be to
them. Nay so fearful were they themselves, after they had formed their first
Army, lest the people should apprehend any suspicion thereof (which might then
have endangered a Revolt) that, when it was but whispered by some, what they
foresaw would happen; they made an Order 8 Oct. an. 1642.
in their House of Commons, for punishing such Malignant persons, as had cast
aspersions upon that House, that they intended to assess any man's Pewter, and
lay Excise upon that and other Commodities. But now, that they saw the people,
by degrees, so patiently submit to many other burdens; they began to debate 25
Maii.
, in their House of Commons, how fit and necessary it would be for them to
impose Excise, upon Wine, Beer, Tobacco, and such petty Commodities. Whereupon
Mr. Pym, by his Letter to 30 Maii.
Sir John Hotham, signified; that they had proceeded in the Excise to many
particulars, and intended to go on farther; but that it would be necessary to
use the people to it, by little and little. And because this Ordinance,
beforementioned, for taking Horses, for the service of the Parliament, should
not pinch upon their friends; they passed another 29 Maii.
by which they appointed certain persons to levy such Horses, Scobell's Coll.
p. 41.
for the service of the Parliament; but with special direction, that the Horses
taken from the well affected, should be valued, and repaiment secured upon the
Public faith.

Having thus laid such a sure foundation for the support of more Forces, they
then sent out a Declaration 30 Maii.
to their Lord Lieutenants and Deputy Lieutenants of Kent, Canterbury, and the
Cinqueports; that they should associate and raise an Army of a thousand
Foot-Voluntiers, and one or more Troops of Horse; and to appoint a Major
General, and give Battle to any Forces, not raised by authority of both Houses.

But the Oath, formerly mentioned by Sir Henry Mildmay, being by this time
framed, was now thought fit to be set on foot, as of high concernment to oblige
all those that were well affected, and for the better discovery of other
well-wishers to the Cause: a work therefore of this high consequence, being not
fit to be brought into the world naked; they had a Committee, who made report 6
Junii.
of a treacherous Conspiracy, discovered upon the last day of May (being the
Fast Day) viz. of a pretended design to destroy the Parliament, and well
affected party of the Kingdom; to subject Religion, Laws, and Liberty of the
Subject; to establish Popery, and to set up an arbitrary Government: for
prevention whereof, both Houses and the whole Realm should enter into a solemn
Covenant, The Holy League and Covenant framed.
never to lay down Arms, so long as the Popish-party (for so they called the
King's forces) were on foot; and Papists and Delinquents protected from the
Justice of the Parliament; but to assist the Forces, raised by authority of the
two Houses of Parliament, against the Forces raised by the King.

Which solemn Oath and Covenant, thus drawn up, was then taken And taken by
both Houses 15 Junii.
by both Houses; and within ten days following throughout all the Parishes of
London. And because the poor Country People might, throughout England, be all
caught upon one day; they passed an Order 17 Junii.
of both Houses, that a Public Thanksgiving should be made throughout the whole
Kingdom, on Thursday the thirteenth of July following, for the discovery of the
late Plot; at which time this Oath and Covenant should be tendered to every man,
in the several Parishes.

Also to secure the Pulpit-men the more cordially to them, and to make them the
more active, in stirring up the people, upon all occasions; they made an
Ordinance 12 Junii.
, for calling an Assembly of Divines, Scob. Coll. p. 42.
in order to the setting up of the Presbyterian Government. Ordinance for
calling an Assembly of Divines.
Which Assembly was to consist of ten of the House of Lords, and twenty of the
House of Commons, whose names are therein expressed; and the rest Ministers,
all of the Presbyterian gang, excepting three or four (whom, though for the
more credit of that Convention they nominated, there was little reason to
expect any of their company.) The Preamble of which Ordinance runs thus --
Whereas amongst the infinite blessings of Almighty God upon this Nation, none
is or can be more dear unto us, then the purity of our Religion. And for that,
as yet, many things remain in the Liturgy, Discipline, and Government of the
Church, which do necessarily require a farther and more perfect Reformation,
than as yet has been attained. And whereas it has been declared and resolved,
by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, Episcopal Government
abolished.
that the present Church Government by Archbishops, Bishops, their
Chancellours, Commissaries, Deans, Deans and Chapters, Archdeacons, and other
Eccleastical Officers, depending upon the Hierarchy, is justly offensive and
burdensome to the Kingdom; a great impediment to Reformation, and growth of
Religion, and very prejudicial to the State and Government of this Kingdom; and
that therefore they are resolved, that the same shall be taken away; and that
such a Government shall be settled in the Church, as may be most agreeable to
God's holy word, and most apt to procure and preserve the peace of the Church
at home, and nearer agreement with the Church of Scotland, and other reformed
Churches abroad etc. be it ordained etc.

'Twas no marvail indeed, that they at Westminster bestir'd themselves so hard:
for by this time the success of his Majesty's Armies was such; that he had (by
God's blessing) regained the greatest part of the North and West parts of this
Realm; and did daily so increase in strength; that, to uphold their Cause, they
bethought themselves of calling in their Brethren the Scots for aid. Wherefore,
having prepared a Declaration 4 Julii.
, to discover another dangerous Plot, to extirpate the Protestant Religion in
England, Ireland, and Scotland; they agreed 6 Julii.
, that some of their Members ( viz. the Lork Gray of Wark, Sir William Ayrmia,
and Mr. Darley) should go into Scotland, to desire help from thence; and
prepare Instructions 13 Julii.
for them, with Letters of Credence: with promise that they should have
allowance 15 Julii.
for the charge of such forces, Commissionners sent into Scotland, to invite
the Brethren to their aid.
as they should send; and that the debts they already owed them should be paid
out of the lands of the Papists and Prelatical party, in Northumberland,
Cumberland, and Bishopric of Durham. Which Commissioners did accordingly set
forwards 21 Julii.
upon the xxith of July.

But about this time, the Earl of Essex (their General) made complaint to them
by Letters 10 Julii.
, for want of Horse, Arms etc. and proposed to them a Treaty for peace.
Whereunto answer was soon made, by the resolution 11 Julii.
of their House of Commons (who debated the same) that, by their late Vow and
Covenant they had bound themselves never to lay down Arms, so long as the
Papists (for so they called the King's forces) which were then in Arms against
them, should have protection from the Justice of the Parliament; sending him
word, that they would recruit his Troops according to his desire. And to
complement their Western General (Sir William Waller) whose heartiness to the
Cause, suited so well with theirs, they ordered 12 Julii.
five thousand pounds to be sent down to him, and given as a Largess to his
Soldiers, the more to encourage them in that service.

But the certain charge of their Rebellious Armies did so vastly increase, as
was truly foretold by Mr. Green (Chairman to their Committee for the Navy, upon
the sixth of December before) viz. that the maintenance of the Lord General's
Army, would, for the ensuing year, amount to above a million of Money; that of
the Navy having been two hundred and forty thousand pounds for the year passed;
and that without delay, they must of necessity, settle a round and constant Tax
for maintenance thereof: they therefore passed an Ordinance Ordinance for
Excise.
for Excise, or new Impost; upon Wine, Beer, Ale, Cider, Perry, Raisins, Figs,
Currants, Sugar, Spices, wrought and raw Silks, Furrs, Hats, Laces, Lether,
Linen of all sorts, Thread, Wier etc. and for sweetning its relish with the
people, gave it out, that part of its income should pay Debts, for which the
Public faith was engaged.

Moreover, to raise men as well as money (their Western-Army, being then
destroyed 13 Julii.
at Round-waydown) the Citizens had a meeting at Grocer's Hall, where they made
new Subscriptions 20 Julii.
, to set up Sir William Waller again. For the better furthering whereof, there
were new Petitions 20 Julii.
framed, from London, Westminster and Southwark, and presented to the House of
Commons; that all the Kingdom might rise, as one man, against the Common Enemy:
and that the Parliament would give power to a Committee, to list so many of the
Petitioners, as were willing to go out in their own persons: as also to take
the Subscriptions of others, for the raising a considerable Body of Horse and
Foot: and that the like course might be taken throughout the Kingdom by a
confiding Committee.

In pursuance whereof, both Houses made an Ordinance 24 Julii.
, for raising seven thousand Horse in London, Middlesex, and the Counties
adjacent, to be commanded by the Lord Kymbolton (afterward Earl of Manchester)
and of Eleven hundred Horse, in the Counties of Bedford, Buckingham,
Northampton, and Hertford; to be commanded by Sir John Norwich: In Norfolk and
Suffolk Eleven hundred, by Sir Miles Hobart: in Surrey, Sussex, Southampton and
Berkshire fourteen hundred, by Colonel Richard Norton. And all these, thus to
be raised, to resist the Insolences of the King's Army.

Certain it is, that though the Committee, which were sent to bring in the
Scots, went but lately thither; yet the Brethren there, having had former
advertisements, how great a necessity here was of them; to the end their
Friends should not faint, hasted over a Declaration 27 Julii.
hither: whereby they signified; that whereas the Kingdom of England had a long
time suffered by the Popish, and malignant Counsels about his Majesty; and that
the miseries in England, were but preparations to theirs; they therefore did
resolve to assist the Parliament of England. And high time it was: for their
forces in most parts going by the worst, it put them upon new contrivances
every day. So that Sir William Waller was fain to come 1 Aug.
again to the House, and take the Covenant, a second time, to encourage some,
that had not taken it before.

And though the Committee, which met at Merchant-Taylor's-Hall, for raising the
people of the land as one man, did give direction 3 Aug.
to the Aldermen, and their Deputies in every Ward; with the Ministers,
Common-Council-men and others, to promote the work, as being the last Refuge of
the people (for so they expressed) and no vain bait or allurement: yet saw they
so little fruit of this great endeavor, that they were constrained to effect
that by their power, which they could not do by persuasion: and therefore
ordered 4 Aug.
the raising of two thousand men in Norfolk, Suffolk and Cambridgshire, every
man to have a months pay in his pocket. And for a speedy supply of more, they
passed 10 Aug.
two Ordinances; One, that the Committee for the Militia of London, with the
Deputy-Lieutenant's and Committees of Parliament, in every County throughout
the Kingdom, should have power to raise, levy, and impress such numbers of
Soldiers, as should be appointed by both Houses of Parliament. The other 16
Aug.
for pressing no less than twenty thousand men, with so many Gunners, Trumpets,
and Surgeons, as should be thought fit, for the six associated Counties of
Norfolk, Suffolk, Essex, Cambridg, Hertford, and Huntington, with the City of
Norwich and Isle of Ely, to be raised within the said Counties, for the service
of the Kingdom and Parliament.

And, notwithstanding all this, being in a declining condition, by reason that
their moneys were spent, their men wore out, and no small discontents amongst
themselves; in order to some recruit, they made an explanation Scob. Coll. p.
49. 19 Aug.
of their old Ordinance, for Sequestration of Delinquents, with certain
enlargements; wherein is set forth who were to be reputed Delinquents, over and
besides such as were described in the former Ordinance; with power to examine
upon Oath, for discovery, as also Rewards to Discoverers. And likewise passed
another Ib. p. 52. 25 Aug.
Ordinance (relating to a former) for the speedy raising of a body of Horse,
for the Preservation, Peace, and Safety of the Kingdom, to resist the
Insolences, and outrages, committed by the Soldiers of the King's Army (those
being the words thereof.) By which they farther ordained, that Tenants should
pay the Assesments out of their Landlords estates, and defalk them out of their
Rents. But that which they then chiefly looked on, being the assistance of the
Scots, whereon they principally depended, as their last refuge: to keep up the
hearts of their then drooping party, they made it their business therefore to
cry up loudly, the aid of these their dear Brethren. For which respect, it will
not (I suppose) be impertinent, to make here a short digression in showing by
what means they were dealt with, in order to this their second Invasion.

CHAP. XVI.
AFter the English Committee was arrived in Scotland, Particulars etc.
delivered to the Convention of Estates in Scotland by the English Commissioners
19 Aug.
and had made large promises to the Brethren of an advantageous journey (viz.
the lands of the Church by the extirpation of Episcopacy) the Scots well
resenting so beneficial an offer, did set forth a Proclamation 24 Aug.
, whereby, pretending the King's Person, their Religion, and Privileges of
Parliament to be in no small danger; for preservation of these, they required,
that all persons, in that Realm, of what sort, quality or degree soever,
between sixteen and sixty years of age, should forthwith fit themselves with
forty days Victual, Ammunition, Arms, and all other warlike Provision, under
penalty of confiscation of their whole Estates, and to be punished as Enemies
to Religion, King, and Kingdoms. And, having set forth a plausible Declaration
24 Aug.
, showing the reasons of such their intended assistance to the Parliament of
England, against the Papists and Prelatical party (as they therein expressed)
they passed an Act 26 Aug.
in their convention of Estates, for putting that Kingdom into a Posture of
Defense; naming therein the principal Colonels and Officers, for that purpose.
To accomplish likewise their chief design of enjoying the Church Lands, A new
Covenant framed in Scotland.
they framed a new Oath, called the solemn League and Covenant. Which was
forthwith sent over into England, and read 26 Aug.
in the House of Commons at Westminster; thence to be transmitted to the
Assembly of Divines, for their approbation; and being by them approved, was
remitted 31 Aug.
to the House of Commons.

And, that the grand Contrivers at Westminster might the more ingratiate
themselves with those their Brethren of Scotland, they passed an Ordinance, for
demolishing all Monuments of Superstition and Idolatry (as they entitled it.)
In which was particularized the removal of all Communion-Tables, from the East
end of the Chancels in every Church; as also for taking away the Rails which
defended them; levying the Chancels, where the East part was higher, with
removing of Tapers, Candlesticks and Basins.

For the speedy raising of more Moneys, they likewise passed another Ordinance
4 Sept.
, for fourteen thousand pounds, to furnish one or more Magazines of Arms and
Ammunition; and for raising of Horse etc. Which sum was to be levied within the
Hamlets of the Tower, City of Westminster, Borough of Southwark, and other
places of Middlesex and Surrey, within the lines of Communication.

Hitherto, it was only pretended, that those new Regiments of Volunteers,
raised by the Ordinance of April the xiith, for the better security of the City
of London, should not go out of the Lines of Communication. But, as Mr. Pym in
his Epistle to Sir John Hotham, concerning Excise, wrote; that they must be
used to it by little and little: so now, they began to show them what they must
trust to; and passed another Ordinance 6 Sept.
, to enable the Committee, for the Militia of London, to command forth, one or
more Regiments, of the Trained-Bands, or Auxiliaries, within the Liberties of
London and Westminster, to go forth under the command of Sir William Waller;
and upon occasion to be assistant to the Lord General.

And herein I cannot but observe an excellent expression made to the House of
Commons by Mr. Oliver St. John (sometime his Majesty's Solicitor General, but
then a dear Member and special Contriver in this great work) in answer to Mr.
John Pym: (who seemed to stand strict, for observing the Ordinance of April the
xiith) alleged, that though those men, by that Ordinance raised only for the
defense of the City, were not to go out of the line of Communication: yet now
that they were raised, they (meaning the Parliament) might dispose of them
whether they pleased, without asking their consents.

And, whereas the first Ordinance for Excise, was but only for maintenance of
the Army, and payment of Debts due by the Commonwealth; they passed another 11
Sept.
; wherein was a consideration added, Scob. Coll. p. 54.
for securing of Trade, which occasioned the enlargement thereof, upon such
Commodities, as had not been formerly taxed; besides an alteration of the
rates. Which Commodities were Strong Water, Medicinal-Drugs,
Haberdashers-ware, Vpholsters ware, Salt, Sallets, Soap; all sorts of
Woollen-cloth, Paper, Skins, and Glasses.

Having also thus taught the new Auxiliaries the force of an Ordinance of
Parliament, they passed another 13 Sept.
, for the pressing of five thousand men, in the Cities of London and
Westminster, with the Counties adjacent, to go under the command of Sir William
Waller.

And to hasten on the march of their Brethren the Scots, to their aid and
assistance; the Members of the House of Commons, with great formality, and no
less seeming devotion, entered 25 Sept.
into that unhappy Combination, The solemn League and Covenant (framed in
Scotland) taken by the Members at Westminster. Archbishop Laud's life. p. 510.
called the solemn League and Covenant (so framed in Scotland) in St.
Margarets-Church at Westminster. Which, under the specious veil of Reformation,
was that fatal Engine, whereby not only the Hierarchy in the Church, was by
them soon after destroyed; and the patrimony thereof, with the Lands and
Revenues of the Crown, swallowed up by those pretenders to Godliness; but the
sacred Person of the King, most inhumanly murdered See the Remonstrance of the
Army in order to the King's Trial, dated at St. Albans 16 Nov. 1648.
; and this ancient and long flourishing Monarchy, so far as 'twas in their
power, wholly subverted and destroyed, as to the whole world, is most notorious.

In the Preamble whereunto, they had the confidence to say, that this their
League and Covenant, was according to the commendable practice of these
Kingdoms, and the Example of God's people in other Nations: Whereas, there is
not only no mention of any such things by our Historiographers; nor in the
History of any other Realm, that I have ever seen, excepting that of the Holy
League in France (whereof I shall take farther notice, ere I finish this work:)
but Mr. Philip Nigh (one of their mighty Champions for the Cause, and an
especial assertor of this Covenant) has expressly affirmed Covenant with
Narrative. p. 12.
in print: that it is such an Oath, as for matter, persons, and other
circumstances, the like has not been in any age, or Oath we read of in sacred
or humane stories.

And it is also observable; that whereas in the Preamble, they farther affirm;
that they did it to preserve themselves and their Religion (which must needs be
intended, the known Religion, publicly professed, and by Law established in
the Church of England) from ruin and destruction: they immediately vow to
reform Religion, here in England, according to the pattern of the Kirk of
Scotland, and to extirpate Episcopacy, and all Ecclesiastical Offices depending
thereon: Notwithstanding they knew full well; First, that the King was by his
Coronation Oath, sworn to maintain and defend the Bishops and the Churches
under their charge: Secondly, that all the Clergy of England, had testified
their approbation of Episcopal Government, by personal Subscriptions thereto:
and thirdly, that, by a solemn Protestation, made and framed by themselves, in
that very Parliament; and recommended by them, to be taken by all the people of
England, they had obliged themselves; neither for hope nor fear, or other
respect, to relinquish the true Protestant Religion, expressed in the Doctrine
of the Church of England.

But all this Pageantry, in their thus taking of that solemn League and
Covenant, could not allay the loud clamours of the people, occasioned by the
great pressures, and daily exactions, under which they miserably groaned: the
Members therefore were constrained to betake themselves to another way, for the
easing them; at least in show: and this was by an Ordinance 21
, for selling the King's, Queen's, and Princes revenues, Sept. Scob. Coll. p.
54.
and the arrearages thereof: as also to another 2 Oct.
, for felling and cutting down Woods within sixty miles of London, in all
Forests, Chases, and Parks, belonging to the King or Queen; or any Archbishop,
Bishop, Dean, and Chapter etc. Papist, Delinquent, Malignant etc. to be
disposed of for supply of the City of London.

Which seeming favor, was for no other purpose, than that they might
afterward, bring the greater load upon them, as they did ere long. For within
few days, upon a juggling Report 5 Oct.
made to the House, of a Pope's Bull (translated into English, with a
Declaration upon) it which was pretended to be newly sent into England, for the
more effectual prosecuting of the Catholic war here; a Committee of the House
of Commons, and of the Assembly of Divines, 6 Oct.
came to a Common Hall in London, to consult with the Citizens, for the speedy
raising of an hundred thousand pounds for the advance of the Scottish Army; to
be lent for that service, and repaid when moneys were procured from foreign
parts, upon the public faith of both Kingdoms.

And to obtain more men, as well as money, there issued out another Order 7 Oct.
; that the Committee for the Militia or London, should have power to appoint
six Regiments of their Trained-Bands, and one of their Auxiliaries: as also one
Regiment of Horse and Dragoons, to march out with their Commanders, and join
with the Earl of Essex's Forces. Likewise an Ordinance for the pressing of five
thousand Soldiers more, to be sent to the Islands of Ieresey, and Garnsey,
under the command of the Earl of Warwick; those Trained-Bands being appointed
to meet 18 Oct.
in St. James Fields; and from thence to march unto such place, as the Earl of
Essex, or his Officers should appoint, and in default thereof, their Shops to
be shut up; themselves deprived of Trade, and liable to expulsion out of the
lines of Communication. And about the same time, they passed another Ordinance
9 Oct.
, for assessing the Twenty fifth part, upon all Members of Parliament, Scob.
Coll. p. 57.
who then were, either in the King's Army, or otherwise absent; their estates
to be let, in case of not payment.

And having lately sped so well, upon credit of the public faith, they
adventured again upon the same security; recommending 18 Oct.
to the Counties of Norfolk, Suffolk, Essex, and Lincoln, with the City of
Norwich, the aid of the Lord Fairfax, in Men, Money, Plate, Horse, and
Ammunition; passing an Ordinance for repaiment of what should be lent for the
speedy bringing in of the Scots, to their assistance; and securing it in the
mean time by the beforementioned public faith.

But the reputation of the public faith, was now grown so low, that moneys came
not in, either quick enough, or in such large sums as were expected (it being
left arbitrary to the Creditors what they would lend:) another Ordinance
therefore was passed, for raising the full sum of sixty six thousand, six
hundred, sixty six pounds, thirteen shillings, four pence, within the Cities of
London and Westminster, with the Counties of Hertford, Bedferd, Middlesex,
Essex, Suffolk, Norfolk, Kent, Surrey, Sussex, Cambridg, Isle of Ely,
Huntington, Northampton and Rutland, and the Cities of Norwich and Canterbury,
for the better enabling their Brethren of Scotland, to assist in the
Common-cause of Religion and Liberty.

Which Ordinance had such a succesful effect, that it accelerated the
conclusion of the Treaty at Edenborough, then on foot, betwixt the
Commissioners, sent into Scotland, from the Members sitting at Westminster, and
the Commissioners of the Convention of the Estates of Scotland, Articles of the
Treaty at Edenborough for bringing in the Scots Army.
for aid from their Brethren of that Kingdom; insomuch, as upon the xxixth of
November, the Articles were there signed 29 Nov.
; whereby ( inter alia) in the first place it was agreed, that the Covenant
represented to the Convention of Estates, and general Assembly of Scotland; and
formerly sent to both Houses of the Parliament of England (for by that name,
those members, then sitting at Westminster styled themselves) should be sworn
and subscribed by both Kingdoms, as a most near Tie and Conjunction between
them, for their mutual defense against the Papists, and Prelatical faction, and
their adherents in both Kingdoms; and for pursuance of the ends, expressed in
that Covenant.

And next, that an Army to that purpose should be forthwith levied, consisting
of eighteen thousand foot, two thousand Horse, and one thousand Dragoons
effective; with a suitable Train of Artillery, to be ready at some general
Rendezvous, near the Borders of England, to march into England for the purposes
aforesaid, with all convenient speed; the same Foot and Horse to be well and
completely armed and provided of Victuals, and pay for forty days. In
contemplation of which aid from Scotland; and that those their Brethren might
not want encouragement in that their necessary assistance, Mr. William Strode
made a motion in the House; that all those who would neither contribute, nor
take the Covenant, should have a price put upon them, and be sent to Sea; that
something might be given for them, who would give nothing of themselves.

And shortly after, by other Ordinances 20 Nov.
, the Customs upon all Merchandises were advanced to a tenth part, under
pretense of defending the Towns and Ports of Plymouth, St. Nicolas Isle, with
the Towns of P^ol and Lime, and places adjacent. As also additional Articles 28
Nov.
to the Ordinance for the Excise. Scob. Coll. p. 59.


Besides this, the sum of three thousand pounds a month was assessed 13 Dec.
upon the associated Counties of Norfolk, Suffolk, Cambridgshire, etc. toward
the maintenance of the Lord General's Army. Likewise thirteen hundred pounds,
toward the support of Sir William Waller's Forces, which were raising in Kent.
And about the same time, they made void 25 Dec.
the places and Offices of all Clerks, Scob. Coll. p. 60.
in any of the Courts at Westminster, who had in any sort adhered to the King.

But amongst all their Impositions and Taxes, there was none came in so amply
and insensibly as the Excise; wherewith the vulgar were by that time in some
sort acquainted. And therefore (according to Mr. Pym's principle) the Houses
passed another Ordinance 9 Jan.
, for a new Excise upon Flesh, Scob. Coll. p. 60.
Victuals, and Salt; ever heartning on the people with hopes of ease; and now
most especially, because the Scots Army was ready to march; which was
represented to be so formidable, as that it would put a sudden end to the work.
Which Army (according to a Declaration they then set forth; wherein they did
cast diverse scandals upon his Majesty, and justified that most perfidious
action) invaded this Realm upon the xvth of January, passing the Twede, at
Barwick; notwithstanding their frequent reiterated Oaths See the Letter to his
Majesty from the Lord Chancelour and diverse Lords of that Realm, ^ated at
Eden^^rough 1 Julii. 1643. wherein they promise not (...) raise any ^orces,
without special warrant from the King.
, Promises, and National Covenant; viz. that His Majesty's Declaration to all
his Subjects of Scotland. ^ Jan. 1643.
whenever his Majesty's Honor and Interest should be in danger, they would,
as one man (obliged by the Laws of God and man) apply themselves to his succor
and defense.

CHAP. XVII.
ANd now, The Scots second Invasion

See the Supplication of the Noblemen, Barrons, Burgesses, etc. exhibited to
the Marquess of Hamilton (his Majesty's Commissioner an. 1638. Wherein, by way
of Explication of their National Covenant, they acknowledge, that the
quietness, and stability of their Religion and Kirk depends upon the safety of
the King's Majesty as God's vicegerent.

See the Supplication of the general Assembly at Edenborough 12 Aug. 1639.
Whereby it appears, that the whole Kingdom was sworn with their means and
lives, to stand to the defense of their dread Sovereign, his person and
authority, in every cause which may concern his Majesty's Honor, with their
friends and followers, in quiet manner, or in Arms, as they shall be required
by his Majesty.

See Act 5. of the second Parliament of King Charles, concerning the
ratification of the Covenant; by which, their universal Protestation, and
promise, under a solemn Oath, and Handwriting, upon fearful pains and
execrations is apparent; viz. to defend the King's person and authority, with
their goods, bodies and lives, against all Enemies within the Realm, or
without; as they desire God to be a merciful defender to them, in the day of
their death, and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.

See the Petition presented to his Majesty Jan. 1642, manifesting the promise
of the whole Clergy, in their National Assembly, to keep the people under their
charge, in obedience to his Majesty and to his Laws; confessing it a duty
well-beseeming the Preachers of the Gospel.

See the Petition of the Nobility, Gentry, Buroughs, Ministers and Commons, to
the Lords of his Majesty's Privy Council of that Kingdom; wherein they
acknowledged his Majesty's zeal for maintaining the true Religion: and that to
call in question the same, after so many reiterated professions and
asseverations, could not be but an unchristian distrustfulness, and in them the
height of disloyalty and ingratitude; confessing themselves bound in duty to
God, by whose great name they had sworn to defend and maintain the person,
greatness and authority of their dread Sovereign, as God's Vicegerent, to the
utmost of their power, with their means and lives in every cause, which might
concern his Honor; professing themselves fully satisfied and persuaded of his
Majesty's royal zeal and resolution; and that malice and detraction, could not
prevail to make the least impression in their loyal hearts, of jealousy and
distrust; or their intending any thing to the prejudice of that Brotherly and
blessed conjunction of the two Nations: attesting God (the searcher of all
hearts) of their dutiful intentions toward his Majesty their dread and native
King, strictly bound thereto, by all the ties of Nature, Christianity, and
Gratitude.


that I come to their second Invasion: forasmuch as the main end of this
Narrative is, historically to show the growth and effects of Presbytery in
England, which had its chief rise and production from Scotland; it will not be
improper to take notice; that, though by their first Invasion in an. 1639, they
had not only made way for the setting up that Discipline here: but before their
departure laid a seeming sure foundation, for the firm and perfect
establishment thereof: yet, such was the success that the King had against
those fiery spirited men, that he was then become totally master of the field
throughout the West, and many other parts of this Kingdom; diverse of their
Strongholds being likewise gained; and consequently in a very hopeful way, to
have reduced that perverse Generation to an absolute obedience; with whom no
fair invitation and condescension, on his part (though with all earnestness
frequently sought) could prevail, to make them return to their due allegiance
by kindness and love.

But it so fell out, that this their second Invasion (the first fruit of their
solemn League and Covenant) with so numerous and powerful an Army, raised
chiefly by the influence of their Preachers in that Realm; and brought in with
the Prayers of the Boutefeus here; the Pulpits daily ringing with loud cries
and groans, for hastening the slow feet of their dear Brethren to their aid,
became fatal to his Majesty. For the Marquess of Newcastle who lay then in
Sunderland with his Army, consisting of about 7000 men, which he had raised in
the North, being thereupon constrained to make his retreat toward York, left
all those parts to the rapine and spoil of the Scots.

The Scene being therefore, by this means thus unhappily changed; his Majesty
who foresaw the Cloud approaching) having by Proclamation dated 22 Dec. called
all the Peers of this Realm, which had any sense of Honor, and likewise all
those Members of the House of Commons, that upon the Principles of Loyalty and
duty, had faithfully adhered to him in these his distresses, to attend him at
Oxford, 22 Jan.
upon the xxiith of January; did there represent unto them, this their second
Invasion; desiring their speedy advice and assistance, both what was to be said
or done therein, as well in reference to This, as That Kingdom.

Whereupon, those worthy persons so assembled, notwithstanding they saw, that
many of his Majesty's gracious offers of Treaty for peace, to the Lords and
Commons then sitting at Westminster, had been rejected: and taking into
consideration, that those Lords and Commons, had upon pain of death prohibited
the address of any Letters or Message to them, otherwise than by their General
(the Earl of Essex) they did, by a special Letter, 27 Jan.
bearing date the 27th of the same month of January, recommend unto him, their
most earnest desire, that he would faithfully, and industriously cooperate with
them, in a right sense, of the then past, present, and more threatening future
calamities of this Kingdom; by obtaining that some persons might be appointed,
on either part, and a place agreed on, to treat for such a peace, as might
redeem it from desolation. Which Letter was signed by the Prince, the Duke of
York; as also by forty three Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Vicounts and Barons of
the House of Peers, and cxviii members of the House of Commons there present;
many others, by reason of distance of place, sickness, and employments
elsewhere in his Majesty's service, and for want of timely notice of that
Proclamation of Summons, not being then come thither.

But the effect which this their Letter produced, was; in the first place, to
be cried throughout the Streets of London in scorn, as the Petition of the
Prince and Duke of York for peace: and a mere frivolous answer, or Paper, in
form of a Letter, directed to the Earl of Forth (then General of the King's
forces) wherein was enclosed a printed paper, called a National Covenant of the
Kingdoms of England, and Scotland; and two other Papers; the one called a
Declaration Dated 30 Jan.
of both the Kingdoms, and the other, a Declaration of the Kingdom of Scotland.

In that their General's Letter, it was pretended; that because there was no
address to the two Houses of Parliament, nor acknowledgment of them, it could
not be communicated to them; whereas it was notoriously known, that he did so
far impart it, as that a Committee of theirs advised and framed the answer:
Besides, it plainly appears, by the penning thereof, that they all concurred in
the Resolution therein mentioned; whereby it is clear enough, that this was but
an excuse, or shift, to avoid any Treaty. And what could that printed Covenant,
and two Declarations enclosed, signify; but to show, that before they would
admit of a Treaty, all the Lords and Commons, assembled at Oxford, must join in
that Covenant with them, for the absolute extirpation of Church Government here
(without, nay tho against the King's consent) submit the Lives, Liberties, and
Estates of themselves, and all others, who, according to their allegiance, had
assisted his Majesty, to the mercy of those members, then sitting at
Westminster; as also to admit of, and justify that invasion of the Scots,
according to the plain sense of their Declaration.

But, notwithstanding all this, the Lords and Commons at Oxford, continuing
still sollicitous for an happy peace; for avoiding delay or cavil about Names
or Titles, or descants upon words, humbly besought his Majesty to send
Messengers with Instructions to desire a Treaty for peace. Whereunto he readily
assenting, two persons were by him nominated, and a Letter written to the Earl
of Essex, for their safe conduct. Which Letter had in substance this Answer;
viz. that if they would first agree, that those Lords and Commons sitting a
Westminster were the Parliament, and the King's only Council, that those
Gentlemen should have a safe conduct.

This being therefore taken into consideration, it was thought fit to desire
his Majesty to write his royal Letters to the Earl of Essex himself; and
therein to enclose a Letter, superscribed, To the Lords and Commons of
Parliament assembled at Westminster. 3 Martii.
Which his Majesty accordingly did; and thereby desired, that a convenient
number of fit persons, might be appointed and authorized, to meet with all
convenient speed, at such a place as they should nominate, with an equal number
of fit persons, appointed and authorized by him, to treat of the ways and means
for settling the present distractions of the Kingdom, and procuring a happy
peace.

In answer whereunto, 9 Martii.
they insisted, that themselves (thus sitting at Westminster) were the
Parliament, convened, according to the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom; and
that those loyal persons (members of the Parliament) who were come to his
Majesty at Oxford, according to his royal Proclamation, had deserted their
Trust, and levied war against the Parliament: and in sum, did intimate, that
what they should do herein, must be with the concurrent advice of the
Commissioners for the Kingdom of Scotland, according to their late solemn
League and Covenant; calling his Majesty's earnest endeavors for Peace, but
Professions; and their own feigned pretenses, most real intentions; letting
fall, by way of menace, that his Majesty could not be the least and last
sufferer.

Hitherto, as a consequence of this second Invasion by the Scots, I have given
a brief touch of his Majesty's farther incessant endeavors, for obtaining a
happy peace, with these violent spirited men, by an amicable Treaty. Which
taking no effect by reason they then saw such a likelihood, through the aid and
assistance of those their dear Brethren, to carry all, powerfully before them;
I shall look back a little, and take notice, not only, how their heavy
oppressions upon the people, by many farther grievous Impositions, were carried
on: but how they proceeded in their advancing the Scepter of Jesus Christ, in
this Realm (for so they called their Presbyterian Discipline.) Wherein I
observe, that within six days, next after this their Invasion, the Members at
Westminster passed an Ordinance 22 Jan.
for regulating the University of Cambridge, Scob. Coll. p. 61.
by Edward Earl of Manchester, then their Chancellor (that is to say, for
turning out all loyal persons, from their Headships, and Fellowships, in any of
the Colleges there:) and for removing scandalous Ministers ( id est, all
orthodox men) throughout the several associated Counties of Essex, Norfolk,
Suffolk, Hertford, Cambridge, Huntington and Lincoln.

That the Welsh, also might be the sooner brought under the yoke; they soon
after made another Ordinance 20 Febr.
; whereby they empowered Sir Thomas Middleton Knight, Scob. Coll. ut supra.
to take Subscriptions for raising of Forces in the six Counties of
North Wales; and give the public faith for such moneys as should be raised to
that purpose.

CHAP. XVIII.
HAving thus taken notice of the Transactions in their Parliament at
Westminster, Anno 1643.
I come now (according to my designed method) to the Militarie-business of this
year 1643. In which I find, that the King, having gained ground in the North
and West, his farther success in sundry parts was not unsuitable thereto: for
Sir Hugh Cholmley of Whitby, in Yorkshire, who at first had been a most
confiding man, thought it now time to declare 26. March.
for the King. So likewise did Captain Brown-Bushell, Governor of Scarborough
Castle in that County, who then delivered it up for his Majesty. And, within
few days after, their great Northern Champion Ferdinando Lord Fairfax was
routed 29. March.
by the Earls of Newcastle and Cumberland at Bramhammoore in that County, which
great defeat so startled the Members at Westminster, that they forthwith
solicited the aid of their Brethren the Scots. In the neck of this also Prince
Rupert, upon a sharp encounter near Bermicham (a seditious and populous Town in
Warwick- shire) with a strong party of the Rebels, commanded by Colonel
Greaves, worsted 3. April.
them, with the loss of the Loyal William Earl of Denbigh, who there received
his deaths wound. Soon after that also, another party of them, commanded by
John, son and heir to the famous Sir John Hotham (their trusty Governor of
Hull) was routed near Ancaster in Lincolnshire: And Litchfield- close, which
they had got after the unsuccessfull attempt thereof by the Lord Brook, was
without much ado rendered to Prince Rupert by Lieutenant Colonel Russell.

Subsequent to these I shall only enumerate the rest in order of time;

James Earl of Northampton routed 6. May.
another stout party of them, at Middleton- Cheney in Northampton- shire. And,
about ten days following, Sir Ralph Hopton obtained a clear victory 16. May.
over the Dehonshire and Cornish Rebels at Stratton in Cornwall; the Earl of
Stanford, and Major General Chudleigh, being Commanders in chief of them. In
which Battle were taken seventeen hundred Prisoners, thirteen brass piece of
Ordnance, seventy Barrels of powder, and store of other provisions; by reason
whereof the greatest part of the West, except Plymouth and some other
Port-Towns, was reduced to obedience; and in consideration of this signal
service the said Sir Ralph Hopton soon after ( viz. 4. Sept. 1643.) was
advanced to the dignity of Lord Hopton of Stratton aforesaid.

The next month also ensued Prince Rupert's Victory 18. June.
over the Rebels at Chalgrave-field in Oxfordshire, Commanded by Colonel John
Hampden, who there received his deaths wound; that being the very field wherein
he first put in Execution the Parliaments Ordinance for the Militia of that
County, as a president to the rest of England, and the Earl of Newcastle,
taking 22. June.
Howley- house in Yorkshire soon after, defeated 30. June.
the Lord Fairfax at Adderton Heath in that County.

At the beginning of July likewise, a party of Horse and Dragoons, Commanded by
Colonel Middleton, coming to surprise Sir Charles Lucas in his Quarters, at
Padbury near Buckingham, were by him routed 1. July.
: And the Earl of Newcastle valiantly assaulting Bradford in Yorkshire, took 2.
July.
it by storm, Sir Thomas Fairfax (who was Governor there) fleeing thence by
night; whereupon Hallifax, and Denton- house (Sir Thomas Fairfax his seat) were
quitted by the Rebels.

Burton upon Trent also in Staffordshire, was taken by the Lord Iermyn, upon
the Queens passage from Burlington in Yorkshire toward Oxford. Near which time
was the great fight 5. July.
at Landsdown in Somerset- shire, where the Lord Hopton had the better of the
Rebels, though the Valiant Sir Bevill Grenevill was there slain. The Lord
Wilmot and Earl of Carnarvon, likewise, routed 13. July.
Sir William Waller and Sr. Arthur Haselrigg at Roundwaydown in Wiltshire.

Prince Rupert also, having taken 24. July.
Burleigh- house in Rutland, marched to Bristol, and after a short Siege of that
City, had a surrender 26. July.
thereof from Colonel Nathaniel Fiennes, the then Governor: In the next month
likewise was Dorchester in Dorset- shire rendered 2. Aug.
to the Earl of Carnarvon; and the Isle of Portland reduced 5. Aug.
to His Majesty's obedience.

Hereupon Weymouth, and Melcombe in com. Dorset submitted.

These great successes encouraged the King to come 10. Aug.
before the City of Gloucester the most considerable Garrison in all that part
of the Realm) which so startled the Earls of Bedford and Holand, and the Lord
Paget, that they came 20. Aug.
in to the King; but not long after, being less apprehensive of danger, fell
off again to their own party. Soon after this, Beverley in Yorkshire was taken
28. Aug.
by the Earl of Newcastle; Biddiford^ Appleford, and Barnstaple in com. Devon.
were also rendered 1. and 3. Sept.
The City of Exeter was likewise taken 4. Sept.
by Prince Maurice; and Sir William Waller (one of their active Generals)
routed 6. Sept.
at Winchester.

Near Auburne also in Wiltshire a strong party of them was worsted by 17. Sept.
Prince Rupert: But soon after this, the Earl of Essex, with his whole Army 20.
Sept.
met his Majesty near Newbery in Berkshire; where, after much slaughter,
neither could boast of the victory, though the Earls of Carnarvon, and
Sunderland, with Lucius Viscount Falkland (then one of the Kings principal
Secretaries of State) there lost their lives: the noise whereof did not a
little avail the Rebels, it giving them much reputation with all their party.

In October (the next month) Dertmouth in Devon-shire was rendered 6. Oct.
to Prince Maurice: and shortly after Hawarden-Castle in Flint-shire yielded 4.
December.
to the King's obedience. Arundell-Castle also in Sussex was rendered 9. December.
to the Lord Hopton; Beeston-castle in Cheshire taken 12. December.
Likewise Lapley- house 21. December.
in Staffordshire; Grafton- house 25. December.
in Northamptonshire: and Crew- house 28. December.
in (...) shire.

Toward the end of January also, Sir Thomas fairfax and Colonel Milton were
routed 25. Jan.
by Prince Rupert at Drayton in Shropshire: Hopton 13. Feb.
Castle in Shropshire, and Wardour 18. Feb.
Castle in Wiltshire were likewise taken. And upon the relief 21. Mar.
of Newark in Nottinghamshire, besieged by Sir John Meldrum a Scot with seven
thousand men, Gaynesborough, Lincoln, and Sleford (all in Lincolnshire) were
quitted 21. Mar.
by the Rebels: And 23. March.
Sturton-castle in Staffordshire about this time taken.

These being the most remarkable Actions on the King's part for this year 1643.
I come now to observe what success the Rebels, who were not idle, had the same
year.

In April therefore, the Earl of Essex came 16. April.
before Reading in Berkshire, and soon obtained it by surrender 26. April.
Colonel Feilding being then Governor thereof.

Siege being also laid to Wardour-castle in Wiltshire, it was rendered 8. May.
So likewise was Monmouth in Monmouth- shire: And at Wakefield in Yorkshire,
His Majesty's forces encountering the Rebels, were worsted 21. May.
Soon after which Taunton and Bridgwater (both in Somersetshire) were also
delivered 5. June.
up to them.

But, notwithstanding all this, they were not without their fears; and
therefore dispatched 6. July.
the Lord Gray of Warke, together with Mr. Henry Darley and Sir William Armine
(both trusty Members of their House of Commons) by special order, into
Scotland, earnestly to solicit the dear Brethren of that Realm to their
assistance.

Shortly after this, they took 30. July.
Gaynesborough in Lincolnshire; and attempted 2. Aug.
Basing- house in Hantshire without effect. But in September the Earl of Essex,
with more help from the zealous Londoners, approaching 10. Septem.
Gloucester with a great strength, caused the King to raise the siege which he
had laid to that rebellious place. In the same month also was Lynne in Norfolk
yielded 16. Septem.
to the Earl of Manchester; and shortly after, the City of Lincoln taken 20.
October.
by him forcibly. Arundel-castle in Sussex likewise, in January following
yielded 3. Jan.
to Sir William Waller. Whereupon, being recruited with more forces, he was
constituted Major General of Kent, Surry, Sussex, and Hantshire: But that which
proved to be instar omnium was that grand Invasion of the Scots, which on the
22d. of January crossed 22. Jan.
the River Tine with their numerous Army, The Scots Invasion.
to the assistance of these Rebels: (as has been already observed:) For at
that time all the North of England, beyond Trent, excepting Hull in York-
shire, and some few inconsiderable places, being by the Marquess of Newcastle
(for so he had been lately made) reduced to the King's obedience; as also the
West by Prince Rupert, and Prince Maurice (His Majesty's Nephews) excepting
Poole and Lime in Dorset- shire, and Plymouth in Devonshire; the Members
sitting at Westminster became so startled, that some of the leading-men
prepared for quitting the Realm.

But this great aid from Scotland much revived their drooping Spirits: Anno
1644.
for winter being over, they framed an Ordinance 26. March,
that Sir William Brereton in Cheshire should have authority to take
Subscriptions for raising more forces in that County: Scab. coll. p. 65.
and soon after imposed 8. July.
a new Excise upon Allom, Coperas, Monmouth-caps, Hats of all sorts; Hops,
Saffron, Ibid. p. 73
Starch; all manner of Silks and Stuffs; and on several other commodities made
or growing in England, not formerly charged.

And, having by their many and great grievous Taxes, thus largely provided for
welcoming in the Scots; those their dear Brethren advanced Southwards, and with
the Earl of Manchester laid siege to the City of York. The loss of all the
North, being by this means thus in great peril; and Prince Rupert coming with
the chief of all His Majesty's forces to the relief thereof; he was encountered
2. July.
with the greatest strength that the English Rebels then had, The Battle at
Marstonmoore.
the joint forces under the command of Ferdinando Lord Fairfax and the Earl of
Manchester, with the whole Scottish Army commanded by Leslley, which drew off
from their siege of York: whereupon, in a bloody Battle, fought at
Marston-moore (about four miles from that City) though at first he utterly
routed the Scots and the Earl of Manchester, yet following the chase too far,
presuming the day his own; through the only conduct of Cromwell then
Lieutenant General to Manchester, with a fresh body of Horse, the rest of the
royal Army, after a valiant and ^harp dispute, being much overpowered, was
totally shattered and vanquished: So that he was constrained to quit the field,
and march Southwards with what Horse he had left; exposing York, hopeless of
relief, to the power of the Enemy: which, by reason thereof was 13. July.
delivered up to Cromwell within few days after.

But of this fatal Action the King (then far remote) knowing nothing at
present, (His royal Heart incessantly minding the preservation of his people
from further spoil by the wars,) sent 4. July.
to the Members at Westminster, The King's Message from Evesham.
desiring, as formerly, that they would appoint such and so many persons as
they should think fit, sufficiently authorized by them, to attend him upon
safe conduct given; and there to conclude how all things in question might be
fully settled.

Which gracious Message, though not then regarded (so much were they elated
with that their success at Marston-moore:) yet, after that grand defeat of
their old General (the Earl of Essex) in Cornwall, which happened 1. September.
on the first of September next following; His Majesty then reminding 5.
September. from Tavestoke.
them of that his Message from Evesham; they did vouchsafe, within two months
following, to send 23. Nov.
him certain propositions; but such as did still apparently manifest their
confidence to carry on the work by power, through the aid of the Scots, with
whom they had entered into so firm a combination for assistance by their solemn
League and Covenant: For, by these propositions (amongst others) they had the
boldness to make these following Demands, viz. that the King should swear to
sign that Instrument, called the solemn League and Covenant; adding, according
to the example of His Royal Father of happy memory (for so they had the face to
say; though Mr. Nigh had expressed, that it was such an Oath, as for matter,
persons, and other circumstances, was never in any age before) And, not only
so; but that an Act of Parliament might be passed, for to injoyne the taking of
it, by all His Majesty's Subjects within His three Kingdoms. Next, that a Bill
should be passed, for the utter abolishing of Episcopacy (without which
Government it is well known, that no National Church ever was, since the
Apostles times:) And, that their Ordinance, for the calling and sitting of
their Assembly of Divines, should be confirmed by Act of Parliament. Also, that
an Act should be passed for confirming their Treaty, for bringing in the
Scots-Army into England; and for establishing that their disloyal Declaration,
made by themselves and the Scots, bearing date 30. Ian. 1643. whereby Prince
Rupert and Prince Maurice (His Majesty's Nephews) James Earl of Derby, William
Marquess of Newcastle, John Earl of Bristol, with diverse other of his Nobility;
the Archbishop of Canterbury and Bishop of Ely (then their prisoners) with a
multitude of other worthy persons, both of this Kingdom, and of Scotland, were
excepted as to life, and their estates doomed to pay public Debts.

Likewise, that a great number more (whose names are there expressed) together
with all those Loyal Members of Parliament, which attended his Majesty at
Oxford, should be removed from His Majesty's Councils, and never to come within
the Verge of the Court, but by their permission.

Then, that all Judges, Sergeants, Counselors, Attorneys, Doctors, Advocates
and Proctors, in the Law-common, or Civil, who had adhered to the King, should
be made incapable of any practice, public or private: and all Clergymen
whatsoever, who had also adhered to the King, to be incapable of any preferment
or employment in the Church or Commonwealth.

Moreover, that the Forces by Sea and Land, for the Kingdoms of England and
Scotland should be settled by Act of Parliament in Commissioners nominated by
both their Houses of Parliament: and, that the education and marriage of the
King's children; as also the making Peace or War with any foreign Princes,
should be with the advice and consent or Parliament.

Furthermore; that, by Act of Parliament the Deputy or chief Governor of
Ireland, be nominated by both Houses of Parliament; and in the Intervals of
Parliament by Commissioners, to continue during the pleasure of both Houses.
And that the Lord Chancellor, Lord Keeper, Lord Treasurer, Commissioners of
the great Seal or Treasury, Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, Chancellor of the
Exchequer and Duchy, Secretaries of State, Judges of both Benches, and Barons
of the Exchequer, for the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, should be nominated
by both Houses of Parliament, to continue quamdiu se been gesserint; and in the
Intervals of Parliament by the beforementioned Commissioners. The like for the
Kingdom of Scotland; adding the Justice-general, and in such manner, as the
Estates in Parliament there, should think fit.

Diverse other Propositions also they then sent, no less unreasonable than
these, which, for brevities sake, I omit. So that (in short) the sum of all
was no less than that His Majesty should condescend to the utter destruction
and overthrow of the Religion by Law established in the Church of England,
which he had sworn to maintain; and whereunto all the reverend Clergy of the
Realm had likewise subscribed; sacrifice the Lives and Estates of diverse of his
most faithful subjects to the avarice and ambition of these men; subject all
those loyal persons learned in the Laws Common, and Civil to their malice; Give
up the power of the Sword, totally, into the hands of his greatest Enemies;
therewith, not only to oppress his good subjects at home; but (according to
their own pleasure) to molest and annoy his Friends and Allies abroad; and
prostitute the Education of his dear Children with their disposal in Marriage
to the vile affections and humors of this hypocritical Generation.

That their confidence, likewise, in carrying all before them, with power and
force, through the aid of the Scots, might the more appear; I shall now
represent unto you Presbytery Triumphant, for a while. For within six days
after they had sent these insolent propositions to the King, they voted 26. Nov.
down the reverend Liturgy by Law established in the Church of England. And,
for a farther encouragement to those their dear brethren, on whose assistance
they did so much rely, which emboldened them to make those high demands, they
passed an Ordinance 2. December.
for raising the Sum of sixty six thousand six hundred sixty six pounds, Scob.
Coll. p. 75.
thirteen shillings and four pence, for their supply by way of Loan, from such
persons, as should not voluntarily or proportionably lend, according to their
estates. Which Loan was to be paid out of the Sequestrations of Delinquents.

But to make the more specious ostentation to the world, that all their Actions
wholly tended to the Glory of God, the public good and nothing to their own
private interests; they farther voted, 9. December.
that no member of either House, The self-denying Ordinance.
should during that war, enjoy or execute any office or command, military or
civil, which had been granted or conferred on them by either House; or by any
Authority, derived from either House; and that an Ordinance should be drawn up
accordingly.

Next they passed an Ordinance for the utter abolishing the Pious Liturgy
(commonly called the Book of Common Prayer) The Book of Common Prayer Abolisht.
complied by diverse reverend Divines, (of which some died Martyrs;) and for the
establishing a Directory The Directory Established.
(as they called it) for the worship of God, in the room thereof: whereby every
conceited person was left at liberty, unto his own frothy fancy, in framing
certain Prayers whereunto the Congregation were to say Amen: a thing so absurd
and destructive to the true and real service of God, as that there needs no
observations upon it. And the day following, to glorify their doings the more,
they adorned 4. Jan.
their House of Commons, with that whole suit of Hangings, which were placed in
the Quire of the Collegiate Church at Westminster, and some other taken out of
the King's wardrobe.

And, having proceeded against the Archbishop of Canterbury (whose memory, as
a stout Champion for the Church of England, against her fierce assaylants, the
Romanists on the one side, and Schismatics on the other; and for his many
other great and pious works, much beseeming a person of that place, will be
precious to succeeding ages) by arraigning him before themselves, upon articles
of high Treason (as they called them) wherein they charged him with laboring
to overthrow the Fundamental Laws and Government of this Kingdom; subverting
the Religion established, to set up Papistry and Superstition; they did, by an
Ordinance (passed the very same day with that for abolishing the Book of Common
Prayer) condemn him to suffer death as a Traitor; for the quicker dispatch
whereof, they brought down the Lords to sit with the Commons; and afterward
beheaded 10. Jan. Arch. Bp. of Canterb. beheaded.
him on Tower Hill.

After which they admitted of a Treaty with certain Commissioners nominated by
the King, upon those Propositions, so sent by them; as has been observed.
Which Treaty Treaty at Vxbridge.
being by them limited to twenty days, began at Uxbridge on Thursday the 30th.
of January.

To take notice here, of the particular passages in this treaty, considering
that they are so exactly set forth in print, Impr. Oxon. 1645.
will not be needful. The truth is; that though these Grandees at Westminster,
did then make show to incline unto a happy composure of all things, by that
amicable expedient (to the end, that by this plausible pretense, they might the
more captivate the people) they really intended nothing less; as may appear,
not only by those unjust and insolent demands, whereupon they did so stiffly
insist; which amounted to the uter subversion of the Religion by Law
established; getting the power of the sword into their own hands; and carrying
on the war in Ireland, according to their depraved wills and pleasures: but by
that seditious and impudent Sermon Ibid. p. 31.
, preached in Uxbridge Church, upon the first day of that Treaty (it being the
Market Day there) by Mr. Christopher Love (after executed by themselves on
Tower Hill) who, besides many passages therein, scandalous to the King's
person, and derogatory to his Honor, stirring up the People against the
Treaty, and sharply incensing them against his Majesty's Commissioners, said;
that they came with Hearts full of blood, and that there was as great a
distance betwixt that Treaty and peace, as betwixt Heaven and Hell. For which
malicious expression, though complaint was made, and Justice demanded, no
redress could be had. Besides, when the King's Commissioners desired Ibid. p.
144. and 145.
to treat with them concerning his Majesty's speedy return to Westminster, they
utterly refused so to do, though they had ever given it out to the world, that
the sole reason for raising their Armies was to bring the King to his
Parliament.

CHAP. XIX.
AS to the military passages of this year, the chief on the Kings part were
these. Longford- house in Com. Salop. was rendered 3. Apr.
by the Rebels to Prince Rupert. As also Longe-castle 6. Apr.
in the same County. Likewise Stopport 25. May
in Cheshire.

Lathom- house in Lancashire, being besieged by Sir Thomas Fairfax, was
relieved 27. May
by Prince Rupert: whereupon Leverpoole and Bolton (both in that County) were
soon taken 28. May
by him.

Borstall-house in Oxfordshire taken 12 June.
by Colonel Gage.

Colonel Shuttleworth defeated 20. June
at Blackburn in Lancashire by Prince Rupert.

Sir William Waller with his forces routed 30. June.
at Cropredy-bridge in Oxfordshire, the Earls of Northampton, and Cleveland
being both in that action: And York, after nine weeks siege by the Scots, the
Lord Fairfax and Earl of Manchester assisting them, relieved 3. July.
by Prince Rupert.

In the next month Lestithiel in Cornwall being then taken 15. August.
by the King, the Earl of Essex forfook his Foot, and 1. Septem.
fled in a Cock-boat from Foy to Plymouth with the Lord Roberts; the foot, then
under the command of Major general Skippon, delivering up their Arms,
Ammunition and Artillery, and engaging themselves thenceforth never to bear
Arms against the King. Basing- house also, being again besieged by the Rebels,
was relieved 14. Sept.
by Colonel Gage.

The Earl of Northampton likewise raised 25. October.
the siege of Banbury-Castle, which had continued from the 19th. of July. And
the next month following, the King raised 7. Novem.
the siege of Donington-Castle in Berkshire: as also that 17. Nov.
of Basing.

But as to further success on the King's part, within the compass of this year
1644. I do not find any thing of note, saving the defeat 23 Febr.
given to Colonel Rosseter near Melton- Moubray in Leicestershire, by Sir
Marmaduke Langdale, in his passage from Oxford toward Pontfract: And his
relief 1. March.
of Pontfract-Castle, then besieged by the Lord Fairfax.

I now come to the Actions on the Rebels part in this year 1644. wherein they
had the better of the day: viz. in the Fight 29. March.
at Bramden- Heath, near Ailesford in Hantshire, where Sir William Waller
worsted the Lord Hopton, the Lord John Stuart being there mortally wounded.

In the Battle 2. July.
at Marston-moore, in Yorkshire, the victory was chiefly gained by the valor
and skillful conduct of Cromwell Lieutenant general to the Earl of Manchester
(as has been already observed) with the Earl of Manchester's Horse, in the
left Wing, drawn out of the Eastern association: shortly after which the City
of York was delivered 23. July.
up to him on honorable terms by Sir Thomas Glemham then Governor there: And
in October Newcastle, after a long siege of many months, given 19. October.
up to the Scots.

In which month happened also the second Battle 27. October. The second Battle of
Newbery.
at Newbery in Berkshire; where great slaughter was on both sides. In which it
was observed, that none of the Rebels fought more fiercely, than those, who at
the delivering up their Arms in Cornwall (as has heen already mentioned) did
then engage never more to fight against the King.

Upon the ill success of this Battle (for so the members at Westminster
esteemed it) the Parliament party having double in number to the King) it was
that the Earl of Essex, their General became suspected of carelessness or
discontent: so that much debate happened amongst them concerning that point:
The Independent party therefore, having a design to be rid of him, to make the
more specious ostentation, that all their Actions wholly tended to the Glory of
God, and the public good, and nothing to their private Interest (being then
more predominant than the Presbyterian) prevailed in making a Vote; 9. December.
The self-denying Ordinance.
that no Member of either House, should during that war, enjoy or execute any
office, or command, Military, or Civil, which had been granted or conferred on
them by either House, or by any authority derived from either House, and that
an Ordinance should be drawn up accordingly.

By which device that party did not only lay aside this their great General,
but outed many eminent Presbyterians from diverse beneficial offices, both in
the Treasury, Garrisons, and other considerable employments placing in their
stead those of their own party. Whereupon Sir Thomas Fairfax was constituted
31. Dec.
General of all their forces, and a new modelling of the Army voted, 31. Dec.
but with no small difficulty, the Presbyterians much opposing it; so that the
Independents were necessitated to make use of their old trick in getting
petitions out of several Counties, ere their Ordinance to that purpose could
pass.

In pursuance of which vote, his Commission (but the clause in the solemn
League and Covenant for preservation of his Majesty's person omitted therein)
Sir Thomas Fairfax with great formality received, Col. Oliver Cromwell, though
a member of the House of Commons, being then made his Lieutenant general, with
whom they did specially dispense in that point of Self-denial. Which being
accomplished, and the whole party not a little elated by this second Invasion
of the Scots to their aid, they began to cry Heath's Chron. p. 68.
aloud for Justice upon delinquents: whereupon Sir Alexander Carew, one of the
Knights of the Shire for Cornwall, tasted sharply thereof. For this Sir
Alexander having been a most confiding man, and in that respect constituted
Governor of Plymouth-fort, at length discerning the greatest part of the West
reduced to his Majesty's obedience, began rationally to consult his own safety,
and to make his peace with the King, by the delivering up of that strong hold:
but his intention therein being discovered before the business could be fully
effected, he was condemned to death by a Council of War held at Guild Hall in
London, and on the twenty third of December beheaded Ibid. 23. December.
on Tower Hill, with the very same Ax, by which the noble Earl of Strafford
lost his life. Which notable accident is not fit to pass without a special
remark: Ibid. p. 18.
for most certain it is, that upon voting the Bill in the House of Commons for
putting that great man to death, the most Loyal Sir Bevill Grenevile (the other
Knight for Cornwall) sitting by Sir Alexander, and much abhorring that unjust
procedure against a person, whose life the known Laws of the Land could not
touch, expressed himself thus to Sir Alexander; Pray Sir let it never be said,
that any Member of our County should have a hand in this fatal business; and
therefore pray ye give your vote against the Bill.

To whom Sir Alexander instantly replied; If I were sure to be the next man
that should suffer upon the same Scaffold, with the same Ax, I would give my
consent to the passing of it. How exactly this was verified is sufficiently
known.

Nor is it less worthy of note, that about this time also they reckoned with
their trusty Governor of Hull, Sir John Hothum, and likewise with John his
eldest son, who had been Prisoners in the Tower of London from the month of
July 1643. (though formerly much magnified for refusing to give the King
entrance there, as has been already observed cap. 8.
) whose great crimes were, that when they discerned the Earl of Newcastle
powerful in the North; the Queen also safe landed at Burlinton, with Arms and
Ammunition, and the strength of the Rebels not a little declining in all parts;
and therefore deeming it best to make their peace with the King in time, they
privately treated with the Earl of Newcastle, or his Agents for the delivery up
of that Garrison, but so unwarily as that their design was discovered: whereupon
they had sentence of death passed upon them on the seventh of December, by the
Earl of Manchester and others, then sitting at Guild Hall in London; which was
accordingly executed 1. Jan.
on his son, upon the first of January next ensuing, See the King's observation
thereon in his Eik^n Basilike cap.
and on himself the morrow following: And, not many days after (being thus
flesht with blood) they brought the Archbishop of Canterbury to the same block
10. Jan.
, as has been already observed.

Soon after which (the Tide running swiftly on their side) Anno 1645.
Shrewsbury was surprised by their forces: nothing of moment thenceforth being
acted by the Royallists other than a defeat 22. April.
which Colonel Massey received by Prince Rupert near Ledbury in Herefordshire,
and the taking 31. May.
of Leicester by the King, which proved fatal to him, as we shall see anon, all
going thenceforth to wrack on his Majesty's part.

For, at the very entrance of this year Donington-castle was yielded 25. March.
up to them. Soon after which Cromwell having defeated some of the King's forces
near I^ip-bridg in Oxford- shire, and upon summons got 24. April.
Blechington house; within few weeks after General Fairfax came 22. May.
with his whole Army before Oxford, whereupon Godstow- house was quitted 23.
May.
by the Royallists, Evesham in Worcestershire taken 26. May.
; and Gaunt-house (in Oxfordshire) yieldded 1. June.
up.

All this while Fairfax continuing before Oxford: but hearing that the King was
somewhat considerable after the taking of Leicester, he raised his siege and
marched toward him. Both Armies therefore meeting near Navesby in Northampton-
shire, upon their first encounter 14. June.
the King had the better: but Prince Rupert, having routed the one Wing of the
Rebels Troops, followed the Chase so far, that the Foot being left open to the
other, were by the conduct of Cromwell put into a total confusion: by which
means Fairfax became master of the Field, and regained 18. June.
Leicester within four days.

Whereupon he marched to the Relief of Taunton (in Somersetshire, then besieged
by General Goring) taking 27. June.
Highworth in Wiltshire in his passage.

To accompany these sad misfortunes Carlisle in Cumberland (that great and
strong Garrison) was delivered 28. June.
up to the Scots, after two and forty weeks siege: And General Goring having
Intelligence of Fairfax his advance toward Taunton, drew off, and was worsted
by him near Langport in Somersetshire.

After which nothing but loss and ruin every day ensued, as will appear by
these following instances, which I have thought fit here briefly to enumerate;

Pontfract castle delivered 21. July.
to General Poyntz, after three months siege; that Garrison thence marching to
Newark.

Bridgwater taken 23. July.
by General Fairfax, after his Victory at Langport.

Scarborough likewise, after a long siege by Sir Matthew Boynton, delivered 25.
July
up to him by Sr. Hugh Cholmley, upon honorable conditions.

The City of Bath also, within few days following, was likewise rendered 31.
July.


Soon after this, the Scottish Army marching Southwards (making miserable spoil
in their passage) took Canon- From a Garrison of the King's in Herefordshire)
and then 15. August.
sat down before Hereford. Where having lost many of their men, they drew off,
on the second of September, and returned Northwards.

Sherborne-castle also (which had beed stoutly defended by Sir Jews Dive) was
taken 17. Aug.
by storm; Nunney-castle (in Somersetshire) thereupon yielding to Colonel
Rainsborough.

Whithin few days ensuing, General Fairfax therefore came before 21. Aug.
Bristol; and on the tenth of September had it delivered up to him.

In the next month the King's forces at Rowton- heath in Cheshire received a
great defeat 22. Sept.
wherein the Lord Bernard Stuart lost his life. Hereupon the Lord Digby, with
the remainder of the Horse was sent toward Scotland, there to join with the
Noble Marquess of Montrosse.

The Castle of Devises was soon after taken 26. Sept.
by Cromwell: The Castles likewise of Raby in the Bishopric; Skipton and
Sandall in Yorkshire, were then also delivered 1. Oct.
up.

Basing- house taken 14. Oct.
by Sir Hardres Waller, and Colonel Mountagu, and in it the Marquess of
Winchester, it being his chief seat. Tiverton in Devonshire taken by Fairfax,
Sir Gilbert Talbot being then Governor there.

Hereupon, though it was winter time, the Rebels laid siege to the City of
Exeter at a distance (that being the chiefest place of strength in all the
West) About this time also Fairley-castle in Wiltshire, and Lacock- house were
given up. Likewise Chepstow castle in Monmouth- shire; and Berkley-castle in
Gloucester- shire: The Lord Digby also marching toward Scotland (to join with
Montrosse) was defeated 15. October.
at Sherborne in Yorkshire by Colonel Copley, and Colonel Lilburne; whereupon
he was constrained to flee into the Isle of Man, and thence into Ireland.

Soon after this Bolton castle (in Yorkshire) yielded 5. Nov.
Likewise Beeston 16. Nov.
castle in Cheshire.

Shelford-house also in Notingham-shire was taken by storm, Colonel Stanhope
(son to the Earl of Chesterfield) being Governor of it, and there slain.

Lathom- house in Lancashire, which had stoutly held out two years siege by the
magnanimous Countess of Derby was then likewise rendered 4. December.
The City of Hereford was also surprised 17. December.
by Colonel Birch and Colonel Morgan, by a Stratagem of a counterfeit Constable
coming with Countrymen to break the Ice in the Trenches, having an Ambuscado
near at hand.

Wormleighton- house in Warwickshire burnt 17. Jan.
Dertmouth stormed and taken 19. Jan.
by General Fairfax, Sir Hugh Pallord being then Governor there.

Belvoir castle yielded 2. Feb.
to General Poyntz, Sir Gervase Lucas the Governor and his Officers being
conveyed to Litchfield.

The City of Chester, which had endured a long siege, and thrice attempted to
be relieved, was by the Lord Byron the then Governor yielded 3. Feb.
upon Articles to Sir William Brereton, who commanded in chief, as Major
general in those parts.

Whence he went to Litchfield- close, which also soon after rendered upon the
like Articles.

In the same month of February, Torrington in Devonshire was taken 16. Feb.
by storm; Lanceston 25. Feb.
Saltash 28. Feb.
and Liskard 29. Feb.
(all in Cornwall) quitted. Likewise 3. March.
Mount-Edgcombe, and Foy. Whereupon the Prince, with the Lord Culpeper and
other persons of quality set sail to the Isles of Scilley.

The Lord Hopton therefore discerning no hope of aid, accepted of fair
conditions, and disbanded 14. March.
his Army; St. Maws-castle, being (as a conclusion) given up thereupon. Whence
with the Lord Wentworth he hasted into Scilley.

Hereupon Sir Jacob Astley (created Lord Astley about two years before) with
whom, being an old and expert soldier, the remaining part of the King's foot
forces were left, marching to join with the Horse about Farringdon in
Berkshire; being set 21. March.
upon near Stow on the woulds in Gloucestershire, by Raynsborough, Fleetwood,
and Sir William Brereton was so much overpowered by their conjunct strength;
that he with all his men, after a sharp dispute and some loss were made
Prisoners; this being the last encounter that the Royallists were able to make
with those insolent Rebels. Soon after which the Garrison of Ashby de la Zouch
in Leicester- shire was delivered up by the valiant Lord Loughborough; which
closed up the military Actions for this present year.

CHAP. XX.
I Shall now return to the Grandees at Westminster, and take notice of the
effects, which these their great successes in the Camp, did this year produce
in their Counsels, and further practices: In the observation whereof, I find
that the Presbyterian party thereupon grew so highly elated, that nothing less
was by them Resolved on, than the setting Jesus Christ on his Throne (as their
phrase was) that is to say to make an absolute establishment of their Church
Discipline. As a preparatory whereto, they passed another Ordinance 23. Aug.
Scob. Col. p. 97.
for the public use of their Directory, with a Penalty upon such as should use
the Common Prayer; and forty shillings forfeiture upon every one each time
officiating, that did not use that Directory: as also that all the
Common-Prayer-Books should be carried in, to the Committees of each County, by
them to be disposed of as the Parliament should direct.

The King therefore discerning the increase of his peoples calamities, Message
from the King for peace.
again endeavored to remedy them by renewing his desires of Peace: and to that
end, under his own Royal Hand wrote a Letter 5. December.
to the Speaker of their House of Peers, desiring a safe conduct, for the Duke
of Richmond, and some others, whom he purposed to send with Propositions to the
Members at Westminster, and to the Commissioners there, from the Parliament of
Scotland, for the foundation of a happy and well grounded Peace.

Whereunto obtaining no Answer, he added a second 15. December.
Importuning them earnestly to hearken to that his desire. And having no Answer
to that neither, he sent a third 26. December.
; whereby he offered, upon engagement for his freedom and safety, in going and
returning, to come himself to London, or Westminster, for the space of forty
days, and there to treat personally with them; offering to commit the Militia
of this Realm, unto certain persons, to be nominated by himself and them,
equally, for such a time, and with such powers and limitations, as were
delivered in by a paper, upon the Treaty at Uxbridg.

After which third Message, he received their Answer to his second; which was
the refusal of a safeconduct to the Duke and those other, who were designed to
go; saying that they then had certain Propositions and Bills under
consideration, which they purposed to tender unto his Majesty, for the settling
of a safe and well grounded peace (as they called it) which after agreement
upon them by the Scotch-Commissioners, they resolved to present unto him.

The King not satisfied with this, sent a fourth Message; 29. December.
; whereby he earnestly pressed their embracing his offer for a personal Treaty
with them at Westminster. And after expectance of an Answer thereto, for the
space of full twenty days; and hearing nothing he sent them a fifth Message 15.
Jan.
to the same purpose enlarging his offers, for his People's quiet, in sundry
particulars. But whilst this message was upon the way toward them, came an
answer to his fourth, absolutely negative as to his admittance for coming to
them; still telling him of the Propositions and Bills, which they were
preparing to send.

Which Answer being wholly unsatisfactory, and apparently manifesting their
aversness to peace; he sent a sixth 17. Jan.
Message to them, incessantly importuning their speedy Answer to his former;
and within few days after a seventh, 24. Jan.
, wherein he expressed somewhat in confutation of those frivolous Arguments,
which they had used against his Personal Treaty with them; continuing his
desires thereof.

Certain it is, that as they grew in strength and power, so their Insolence,
which thus prompted them to decline all good expedients for accommodation,
increased more and more. Nevertheless, his Majesty not totally despairing, but
that by farther condescensions, he might move this hard-hearted Generation,
sent unto them his eighth Message 29. Jan.
whereby acquitting himself from having any hand in some passages of the Lord
Herbert of Ragland (then called Earl of Glamorgan) in Ireland; which he well
knew that they would be apt enough to scandalize him with; he offered; that, in
case they would admit him to come to London, in order to a personal Treaty with
them, he would leave the management of the War in Ireland, wholly to
themselves: as also the nomination of the Persons to be entrusted with the
Militia, with such power and limitations, as were expressed in the Paper
delivered by his Commissioners in the Treaty at Uxbridge, for the Term of seven
years, as had been by them desired. Likewise the nomination of the Lord
Admiral, Officers of State, and Judges. And, for Religion, to give liberty,
that all those, who were unwilling to communicate with the Church of England in
the Service already established by Act of Parliament, should not be urged
thereto: provided, that all other Protestants, behaving themselves peaceably
and quietly, in and toward the Civil Government, should have the free exercise
of theirs: tendering also unto them a general Act of Pardon and oblivion.

Which gracious Message, so full of condescension, produced from them, nothing
in effect, but Scorn and Contempt. For though the King caused the Lord Herbert
for that his misdemeanor in Ireland, to be arrested upon suspicion of Treason,
and imprisoned; they traduced his Majesty with under-hand-compliance therein,
affirming, that he had given that Lord a private Commission, with command to
manage it with all secrecy: and that it contained such odious and shameful
things as himself blushed publicly to own, or impart to the Marquess of Ormond
his Lieutenant there. And, whereas he had in his said Message most graciously
tendered them all that the most wicked and guilty persons could desire or wish,
viz. Liberty for their Consciences, safety for their Persons, security for
their Estates, greatness for their desires, and peace to enjoy all, nothing
would be accepted: insomuch, as after a full months expectation of some return
upon those his offers; and hearing nothing; by His ninth Message 26. Feb.
, he pressed them for some Answer; but all to no purpose: For like as a Shadow
pursued, they still fled from him, whereupon, after the stay of one month more,
he sent them His tenth Message 23. March.
: wherein, taking notice of the duty he owed to God, and sense of his peoples
miseries (that no means might be left unattempted, which could conduce to a
safe and well-grounded peace) he offered unto them, that in case he might have
the Faith of both their Houses of Parliament, for the preservation of his
Honor, Person, and Estate; and liberty given to all his faithful Subjects,
who had adhered to him, to go to their own Houses, and there enjoy their
estates peaceably, without compelling to take any Oath, that was not enjoined
by the undoubted Laws of the Kingdom, or other molestation; he would
immediately disband all his Forces, dismantle his Garrisons, return to his two
Houses of Parliament, pass an Act of Oblivion, and free pardon there; and do
whatsoever else they should advise him to, for the good and peace of the
Kingdom.

But these great Masters, who (to captivate the people, before they had got
sufficient power into their hands) had, by their most solemn 22. October. Anno
1642.
Protestations and Declarations, which are published in Print to the world,
professed in the presence of Almighty God, and for the satisfaction of their
consciences, and discharge of that great Trust which lay upon them (as they
then expressed) made their solemn Protestation and Declaration, to this Kingdom
and Nation, and to the whole World; that no private passion or respect; no evil
intention to His Majesty's person; no design to the prejudice of His just
Honor and Authority, engaged them to raise Forces and take up Arms, etc. And
again -- we profess from our very Hearts and Souls, our Loyalty and Obedience
to his Crown; readiness and resolution to defend his Person, and support his
Estate with our Lives and Fortunes, to the utmost of our power, etc. Moreover
-- we profess we desire nothing from his Majesty but that he would return in
peace to his Parliament -- And again, We profess in the sight of Almighty God,
which is the strongest obligation that a Christian, and the most solemn public
Faith which any such State, as a Parliament can give; that we would receive him
with all Honor; yield him all true obedience and subjection, and faithfully
endeavor to defend his person and estate from all danger; and to the utmost of
our power to establish to him and his people all the blessings of a most
glorious and happy reign.

Nevertheless so obdurate were their Hearts, being then raised to an height of
confidence, that they should, by the power of Conquest, utterly destroy him,
that they disdained to vouchsafe him any answer at all thereto.

CHAP. XXI.
THE torrent of Rebellion thus violently Anno 1646.
bearing all down before it, what Garrisons remained were necessitated soon
after also to submit; viz. the port Town of Barnstaple in Devonshire upon 7.
Apr.
the seventh of April, and the Fort there some few days after. Ruthin-castle
also (in Flintshire) then yielded 8. Apr.
to Colonel Mitton: Corfe-castle in Dorset- shire, about the same time being
given up.

The City of Exeter likewise, Sir John Berkley, Knight, (afterward Lord
Berkley of Stratton) being at that time Governor thereof, who delivered it 13.
April.
upon honorable Articles, wherein amongst others, the most loyal Sir John
Stowel Knight of the Bath, was included, though afterward dishonourably and
barbarously used. Soon after which Saint Michael'smount in Cornwall was taken
15. April.
by Colonel Hamond. Dunster 25. April.
castle also in Somerset- shire, and Woodstock- house 26. April.
near Dxford then also submitting.

All the West therefore being thus cleared, except Pendennis- castle, there
could be no less expected than a siege of Oxford.

His Majesty therefore considering, that having used The King's Letter to the
Marquess of Ormond, dated at Oxford 13. Apr. 1646.
all means possible, by his frequent gracious Messages, (wherein he had offered
unto them all they had before desired; and that he expected nothing, but what
themselves, since the beginning of those unhappy wars, had offered, to procure
a personal Treaty with them) for a safe and well grounded peace: And, having,
in stead of a dutiful and peaceable return to those his Messages, received no
Answer at all; or such as argued nothing would satisfy them, but the ruin not
only of himself, his posterity and friends, but even of Monarchy it self.
Considering likewise, that his field-forces were shattered, and reduced to
nothing; his Garrisons almost all lost, or besieged; and that a strong Army,
under the command of Sir Thomas Fairfax (their then General) was advancing
toward Oxford, there to besiege him, together with the Duke of York, All the
great Officers of State, and many other of his most eminent and faithful
Subjects. In this his most sad, and unhappy condition, revolving, whether he
had better cast himself upon the English-Army, or the City of London, or rather
his native Subjects the Scots, who had at that time besieged Newarke upon
Trent, with a great and numerous Army: Having Ibid.
received very good assurance (as he then believed) that himself and all that
did adhere to him, should be safe in their Persons, Honor and Consciences in
the Scotch Army. And that they (the Scots) would really and effectually join
with him, and such other as would come in unto him, and join with them for his
preservation; and would employ their Armies and Forces to assist him to the
procuring of an happy and well-grounded peace, for the good of his said Majesty
and his Kingdoms, in the recovery of his just rights (Necessity being then his
Counselor) he adventured Eikon basiliks.
upon their fidelity, who first began his troubles, trusting that God might
make them a means honorably to compose them: and thereupon went 27. April.
out of Oxford disguised, in the night time, with two persons only
accompanying him; viz. Mr. John Ashburnham (one of the Grooms of his royal
Bedchamber) and one Mr Hudson a Divine, his Guide. From Oxford they first rode
to Henley upon Thames; Thence to Brainford: Thence near to London, and so to
Harrow on the Hill, there being then a general muster of the City forces in
Hide Park, where he was expected, the Earl of Essex being at that time in the
Field, and his Majesty almost persuaded to adventure himself into their hands.
But relying wholly on the Scots, who had promised so fair (as before is
observed) he waved those thoughts, and rode to St. Albans; so to Harborough in
Leicestershire, where he expected the French Monsieur de Montereal.
Agent (who had so treated with the Scots on his behalf as I have already
observed) with some Horse to meet him, and conduct him to Southwell, the then
Head quarters of the Scottish-Army. But missing him there, he thence passed to
Stanford (on the edge of Lincolnshire) and so to Downham in Norfolk: whence Mr.
Hudson was sent to the Agent; and upon his return went directly to Southwel,
where he arrived 5. May.
the 5 th. of May; and put himself into the hands of Alexander Lesley their
General; resolving K. Letter to the M. of Ormund ut supra.
to use his best endeavors, by their assistance, and with the conjunction of
those forces in Scotland, under the Marquess of Montrose, and such of his well
affected Subjects of England, as would rise for him, to procure, if it might
be, an honorable and speedy peace, with those who had hitherto refused to give
ear to any good means tending thereto.

Being thus gone, siege 2. May
was immediately laid to Oxford by General Fairfax, soon after which, several
other places of strength were surrendered by the King's special direction; viz.
Newark, the eleventh 11. May.
of May, which had been besieged by Poyntz and Rosseter (the Scots assisting)
from December before.

The Castle of Banbury likewise, after a siege of ten weeks by Colonel Whalley.

And on the thirteenth of May, the Scots, having not patience to attend the
voluntary surrenders of any more places of strength, began 13. May.
their march toward Newcastle in Northumberland, taking the King along with
them. The King removed to Newcastle upon Tine.
Where being arrived (and quartering their Army thereabouts) they instantly
pressed his Majesty to send Orders to the Marquess of Ormund, in Ireland, and
all other the Governors of his Garrisons in England, to give up all the Towns
and Castles then remaining, to such as should be appointed to receive them for
the Houses of Parliament: Telling him, that otherwise, they neither could, nor
durst continue him in their protection.

To which necessity his Majesty was constrained to submit: but nothing was by
them more earnestly insisted on, than that the Marquess of Montross should lay
down Arms; who, with a small strength at first, had acted in Scotland to
admiration: for, besides many victories of less note, he had twice beaten the
Marquess of Argyle out of the Field; followed him home, and wasted his Country
with Fire and Sword; and vanquished Bayley, one of their best Soldiers: made
himself also Master of the Castle of Edenborough, releasing diverse of his
Friends, who had been seized on, and imprisoned there, when he first took up
Arms. But instead of those Aids which he hoped for, he was unexpectedly set
upon by David Lesley, who was sent from the Scottish Army in England with six
thousand Horse to oppose the farther progress of this most valiant persons
fortune. However, he began to make head again, and was in a way of fair
success, when he received the Kings command to disband; ( viz. 31 May 1647.) To
which he readily conforming, took Ship, and put himself into a voluntary Exile.
After which time of this their perfidious dealing with the King, it is
observable that they never prospered. But I proceed briefly to point out the
times of surrender of the rest of his Majesty's Garrisons.

In the same month May
of May Dudley-castle in Staffordshire was delivered up to Sir William Brereton
by Colonel Leveson: and soon after 1. June.
Carnarvon Town and Castle to Major General Mitton, and Major General Langhorn,
the Lord Byron being then Governor there. Likewise Ludlow 9. June.
(in Shropshire) to Sir William Brereton: and Borstall- house near Oxford.

Oxford it self also soon followed, 24. June.
Sir Thomas Glemham being then Governor: As also Farringdon 24. June.
in Berkshire, Sir George L'isle being Governor.

Next Lichfield- close 16. July.
in Staffordshire: Then the City of Worcester 23. July.
besieged by Colonel Whalley, and Colonel Raynsborough, Colonel Washington
being Governor: Also Wallingford castle 28. July.
Colonel Blague being Governor. Gotherich Castle 31. July.
likewise in Hereford shire and Pendennis-castle in Cornwall, whereof John
Arrundel of Trerise was Governor; Conway Castle in Flintshire being stormed by
Major General Mitton.

In the next month, after a long siege by General Fairfax, Sir Trevor Williams
and Colonel Langhorn, Ragland-castle in Monmouth shire, was yielded 19. Aug.
to them: And soon after the Isles and Castle of Scilly were given up: 16. Sept.
As also 20. October.
the Castles of Denbigh and Holt: Whereupon General Fairfax advanced 11. Nov.
triumphantly toward London.

And on the first of February next following, the Scots, having effectually
received the whole Sum of two hundred thousand pounds, for which they sold the
King, they marched 1. Febr.
over Twede into Scotland.

His Majesty having thus cast himself upon the loyalty of those (touching
whose large professions and protestations to him, The King went from Oxford to
the Scot's Army at Southwell.
I have already taken notice) let us now behold the blessed Fruits of
Presbytery, by the subsequent Practices of these Zelots; which does amply make
good, what King James long since declared Basil. Doron. p. 42.
of that Sect; viz. that no deserts could oblige; nor Oaths, or Promises bind
them. For, notwithstanding those their solemn Oaths and Protestations, they
most perfidiously acted contrary to them; hastening thereby that farther ruin,
which soon afterward befell the Church of England, and at length terminated in
the woeful murder of their native Sovereign, as is notoriously known to the
World, carrying on all this, under the color and veil of their Solemn League
and Covenant.

In order whereunto, the first thing observable, is a plausible Letter 6. May.
perfect Diurnal p. 1166.
directed to the Committee of Estates, at that time residing with the Scotch
Army; wherein they tell them; that their earnest desire, being to keep a right
understanding between the two Kigndomes, did move them, to acquaint them, with
that strange providence, wherewith they were then surprised, together with
their carriage and desires thereupon; and to endeavor to improve his Majesty's
being there, to the best advantage for promoting the work of Uniformity, for
settling of Religion and Righteousness, and attaining of Peace, according to the
League and Covenant, and Treaty, etc. affirming, that they had a Witness from
Heaven; and that there was nothing more in their desires, than in all their
resolutions and proceedings; to adhere to the Covenant and Treaty.

What hopes this specious Letter might give his Majesty for promoting his
earnest endeavors, for such an happy peace, as he desired, is hard to say;
considering what relation it had to the Solemn League and Covenant: but his
former assurances in order to his coming to them (as I have already observed)
being such as they were; he became so confident thereupon; as that, shortly
after, he sent unto the two Houses at Westminster, his xi th. Message 18. May.
, whereby because they had made so great a noise of settling Religion; That,
together with the Militia, and the War of Ireland, being the chief things
insisted on, in their former Propositions; he recomended to them the advice
therein of those Divines in both Kingdoms, whom they had assembled at
Westminster: And for the Militia offered, that he would be content to settle it,
as they themselves proposed in the Treaty at Uxbridge; viz. that all persons,
who should be trusted therewith might be named by the two Houses of Parliament,
for the space of seven years; and after that time, to be regulated as should be
agreed on by his Majesty and his two Houses of Parliament. And touching
Ireland, that he would do whatsoever was possible for him, to give full
satisfaction to them. And that, if those his free offers would not serve; then
he desired, that al such of their Propositions, as were then by them agreed
on, might be speedily sent to him; he being resolved to comply with them in
every thing that might conduce to the happiness of his subjects; and removing
all unhappy differences, which had produced so many sad effects. Farther
offering, that all his forces should be forthwith disbanded; and Oxford with the
remainder of his other Garrisons, rendered into their hands, upon honorable
conditions; and dismantled.

But to this gracious Message (as to his former) they turned a deaf ear; there
being, then, another Game to be played; which was the getting of the King's
person out of the Hands of the Scots; suspecting (as they had cause) that those
their dear Brethren would make no little advantage thereof. Notwithstanding the
Votes perfect Diurnal. p. 1163.
at Westminster, that he should be disposed of, as they should desire and
direct.

Concerning which Votes at Westminster and debates of both Houses thereupon, it
will not be amiss, here to take notice: how they alleged Ibid. p. 1170 and.
1171.
that the Scottish Army in England was theirs; id est, under their pay. Also
that the King ought to be near to his Parliament, whereby they might have
recourse to him, and obtain such things, as should be most necessary for the
Kingdoms. Likewise, that by Covenant they were sworn to preserve the Rights
and Privileges of Parliament: but to detein the King from his Parliament was
altogether inconsistent with the Covenant.

Of which Votes the Scots seemed to take little notice; but in stead thereof,
and for diversion, amused the Members at Westminster with several Letters,
which they caused to be written to them; one 18. Jnue. Ibid. p. 1236.
from the general assembly of the Kingdom of Scotland: wherein they told them;
that their success against the Enemy (id est, the King's Forces) did lay a
strong obligation upon them, to improve the power put into their Hands, for the
advancement of the Kingdom of Christ, and bringing forth the head-stone of his
House: And therefore did earnestly entreat and beseech them in the Bowels of
Christ, to give unto him the glory due to his name, by a timeous establishment
of all his Ordinances in full integrity and power, according to the Covenant,
etc. Saying, that the Searcher of Hearts knew how they desired to keep their
Covenant, etc. concluding with their desires to the Parliament, to endeavor
all the ends of the Covenant.

The other Ib. p. 1237.
to the Assembly of Divines, sitting at Westminster, wherein they expressed
their Thanks for their constant endeavors and labors, in the work of setting
up the Ordinances of Christ; desiring, that they would go on in the sedulous
promoting of that blessed work.

The third Ibid.
was to the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council of the City of London,
which (because it is penned in so divine a style) I have here transcribed.

Right Honorable,
Your late and seasonable Testimony given to the truth of the Gospel; and you
affection to the peace of the Kingdoms, manifested in your humble
Remonstrance, and Petition to the Honorable Houses of Parliament, has so
revived the remembrance of your former faith and zeal, and proclaimed you the
worthy seed of so noble Ancestors in that famous City; as we cannot but
acknowledge with all thankfulness, the Grace of God, bestowed on you, and stir
you up to take notice; how, since you were precious in the Lord's sight, you
have been ever honorable. The Lord has ever loved you; given men for you, and
people for your life. What an honor was it, in the days of old, when the fire
of the Lord was in Sion, and his furnace in your Jerusalem (even in Queen
Mary's days) that there were found in you men that loved not their lives unto
the death. What a glory in aftertimes, when Satan had his Throne, and
Antichrist his seat in the midst of you, that there were still found, not a few
that kept their Garments clear. But the greatest praise of the good hand of God
upon you, has been this; that amidst the many mists of Error and Heresy,
which have risen from the bottomless pit, to bespot the face and darken the
glory of the Church, while the Bride is a making ready for the Lamb, you have
held the Truth, and most piously endeavored the setting of Christ upon his
Throne. We need not remember how zealous you have been in the cause of God; nor
how you have laid out your selves, and estates, in the maintenance thereof; nor
how many acknowledgments of the same you have had from the Honorable Houses;
nor how precious a remembrance will be had of you in after Ages, for your
selling of all to buy the Pearl of price. We only at this time do admire, and
in the inward of our hearts do bless the Lord, for your right and deep
apprehensions of the great and important matters of Christ in his Royal Crown,
and of the Kingdoms in their Union, while the Lord makes offer to bring our
Ship (so much afflicted and tossed with tempest) to the safe harbor of Truth
and Peace. Right memorable is your zeal against Sects and Sectaries; your care
of Reformation, according to the Word of God, and the example of the best
reformed Churches. Your earnest endeavors and noble adventures, for preserving
of the Rights and Privileges of Parliament, and Liberties of the Kingdom,
together with his Majesty's just power and greatness; and your high profession,
that it is not in the power of any humane authority, to discharge or absolve
you, from adhering unto that our solemnly sworn League and Covenant; or to
enforce upon you any sense, contrary to the Letter of the same.

Besides your other good services done to the Lord and us, in strengthening the
hands of the reverend Assembly of Divines, and of our Commissioners in their
asserting the Government of Christ (which, the more it is tried, will be ever
found the more precious Truth) and vindicating the same from the Usurpation of
man, and contempt of the Wicked.

These all, as they are so many testimonies of your piety, loyalty, and
undaunted resolution to stand for Christ; so are they, and shall ever be, so
many obligations upon us your Brethren, to esteem highly of you in the Lord;
and to bear you on our Breasts before him night and day; and to contribute our
best endeavors to improve all opportunities for your encouragement. And now we
beseech you in the Lord (Honorable and well-beloved) go on in this your
strength, and in the power of his might, who has honored you to be faithful.
Stand fast in that Liberty wherewith Christ has made you free: And, in
pursuance of this Truth, we are confident you will never cease to study the
peace and nearer conjunction of the Kingdoms; knowing, that a threefold cord
is not easily broken. Now the Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God even our
Father, who has loved and honored you, and given you everlasting consolation,
and good hope through Grace, comfort your Hearts and stablish you in every good
work.

Subscribed in the name of the general Assembly by Robert Blair Moderator.


Moreover in another Letter 27. June. Weekly Account, number. 29.
from the said Assembly of the Kirk of Scotland, to the Assembly of Divines at
Westminster they told them, how they did congratulate with the Lord's people in
all their successes; and did impatiently desire to have their Brethren here,
and themselves joined nearer to Christ, and to one another in all his
Ordinances, and especially in Presbytereal Government.

But in the neck of these Letters,'it is worthy observation, that the Marquess of
Argyle, and Scottish-Commissioners, delivered a paper 25. June Perfect Diurnal
p. 1219.
to the Members at Westminster, representing the Necessities of their Army;
desiring therefore, that their Quarters in the North might be enlarged, and a
considerable supply of money dispatched to them.

Most certain it is, that though these sanctified men (both English and
Scotch.) did seem to be so firmly united by their grand Combination, called the
solemnleague and Covenant; as that, in humane reason few there were that
thought they could afterward have differed; the gayning of the King's person
into their Hands, began now to make it manifest, that this seeming sacred Tie,
was but a mear juggling device, originally forged and set on foot for the better
carrying on their sacrilegious temporal ends. For, from that very time, however
they concealed themselves, with all the subtilties imaginable, their
animosities against each other did daily increase (as 'twill hereafter appear)
Nevertheless, to make a specious outward show, of their continued accordance;
they agreed together, in sending certain Propositions 25. June. Propositions
sent to the King at Newcastle.
to the King (which they had been no less than eight months in hammering) in
order to a well-grounded Peace, (as their phrase was:) whereunto they required
his Answer within four days.

How monstrous and unreasonable these were, the tenor of them will sufficiently
show, (they being publicly printed) in brief, that he should ratify the
solemn-league and Covenant, abolish Episcopacy; invest the subject with the
power of the Militia; and exempt from pardon several Lords and other
considerable persons, that during the war had adhered to him. Whereunto His
Majesty most piously and prudently made this return; That they importing so
great alterations in Government, both in Church and Kingdom, it was very
difficult to return a particular and positive answer to them, before a full
debate, wherein their necessary explanation, true sense, and reasons of them
were rightly weighted and understood. To which end he desired to come to
London, or any of his Houses thereabouts, upon the public Faith and the
security of the two Houses of Parliament, and Scottish-Commissioners. Where, by
his personal presence, he might not only raise a mutual confidence betwixt
himself and his people; but have those doubts cleared, and those difficulties
explained to him, which he then conceived to be destructive to his just regal
power, in case he should give a full consent to those Propositions, as they
then stood: Engaging himself to give his cheerful assent to all such Bills, as
should be really to the good and peace of his people; and to prefer the
happiness of this Kingdom before his own particular. And, as a farther means
to work a confidence in them of his own sincerity in these things, he offered
again to trust them with his own person: conjuring them, as they were
Christians and Subjects; and as they were men who desired to leave a good name
behind them, so to receive and make use of that his Answer, that all issues of
blood might be stopped, and those unhappy distractions peaceably settled.

But, as his former gracious and frequent offers, so this, could not then find
any acceptance at all with them; by reason that it tended to the composure of
those lamentable distractions, which tended to the utter ruin of the King and
Realm; their aims at first, and continued resolutions still being to share the
spoil, which by their strength and power they had most unjustly got. Nay, in
stead of any kindness or comfort, which he might rationally expect from their
many and most solemn promises and protestations, they perpetually tormented his
pious Soul, with incessant importunities, to take their hypocritical Covenant;
and sent for several of their most rigid Preachers Perfect Diurnal. p. 1233.
, to terrify him with their Kirk-censures upon his refusal thereof.

In which sad and disconsolate condition, I shall for a while leave him; and
take a short view of the transactions, betwixt the Members sitting at
Westminster, and those at Edenborough, with their respective Commissioners.

The principal work being now done, here in England, by the help of the Scots;
the Grandees here (as well as others) began to be weary of their dear Brethren:
and for the sooner riddance of them, passed a Vote, 11. July.
that a Message should be sent to the Scottish Army; that, in regard they were
not useful in this Kingdom, for the present; and that the payment thereof
would be a great burden thereto, they should with all convenient speed, return
into their Country.

But the Scots (never intending to be loosers by their journey hither) knowing
full well how to make the best use of those advantages they then had, gave
their dear Brethren very good words; telling Weekly Account, Number. 29.
them in their answer to the demands made in pursuance of that Vote; that their
earnest desires were, the settling of Religion, and Church Government; which, as
it was the principal ground of their engagement in this Cause, so would the
perfecting of it be their chiefest joy, and Glory of both Kingdoms: it being
the constant resolution of that Kingdom, against all opposition, to strengthen
and cherish the Brotherly kindness between the Kingdoms: and, Peace settled
with Truth, and those things performed by the Honorable Houses, which by
Treaty they were obliged unto, to recall their Army, with as great alacrity, as
they were ready to send the same into England, for the assistance of their
Brethren.

And in another Letter, speaking of the Arrears due to their Army, they had
these words Ibid.
-- This Kingdom lies under the burden of great and vast expense, in raising
and entertaining of Armies; and has with the lives of many precious men, set
their own Houses on fire, to quench the flame of yours. And seeing, by the
seasonable assistance afforded by this Kingdom to you, and by the late
successes wherewith God has blessed your Armies, you are in a great measure
freed of your troubles, and are in a far better capacity to pay the moneys, due
to our Armies in England and Ireland, than you were at any time since the
beginning of these Wars; we demand of the honorable houses, to make payment of
the sums of money duly owing to this Kingdom.

The state of things standing thus, made the Game now to be played betwixt
these great Masters, not a little difficult to each; the chief business of the
then predominant party at Westminster, being to gain the person of the King
into their own hands: and in case he should not (upon the matter) totally quit
his Regal power to them, by taking their Covenant, and assenting to those their
destructive propositions beforementioned; then to keep him close prisoner, and
exercise the same power without him.

And the design of the Scots, not only to use the like Regal-power in
Scotland, but to get a large sum of money to boot: considering, that having the
King in their hands, the Grandees there were able to make their own terms on
the behalf of themselves, as to Riches and Honors. There was therefore no
means unessayed by each, for accomplishing their respective ends: But the
Arguments and debates about this business, continuing no less than six months,
before all things were fully agreed, I shall reserve my observations upon them
till then; and in the mean time take notice of what else did occur that is most
remarkable, in order to the carrying on their main work; and divide the same
into two parts; the one touching their attempts upon the King, in relation to
the Covenant and Propositions: the other toward the advancement of the Scepter
of Jesus Christ; for by that title they called their Presbyterean Doctrine and
Discipline.

As to the first; About the beginning of September, James Duke Hamilton,
Lindsey Earl of Craford, the Earl of Cassiles, and some others, from the
Estates of Scotland, came Perfect Diurnal p. 1303. and 1304.
to Newcastle to the King; and there earnestly solicited him to take the
Covenant, and sign the Propositions. To second which motion, there was a
petition presented to His Majesty from the general Assembly of the Kirk of
Scotland, for Reformation of Religion, according to the Covenant, and
uniformity of Church government; denouncing God's anger upon him, and the
hazard to lose the Hearts of his good subjects, in case he assented not thereto.

Soon after which, Mr. Andrew Cant, Mr. Robert Blayre, and Mr. James Douglass
came Ib. p. 1317.
thither also to press him to the same purpose. To torment him likewise yet
more, one of these violent men (I mean a rigid Presbyterean-preacher) besides
many rude and uncivil expressions Ib. p. 1419.
in his Sermon there before the King; called for the 52. Psalm to be sung by
the congregation, which begins thus -- Why do thou Tyrant boast abroad,
thy wicked works to praise? Whereupon His Majesty instantly stood up, and
called for the 56. Psalm, beginning thus -- Have mercy Lord on me I pray, for
men would me devour: Which the people readily sung, waving the other.

Nay, the fierceness of these Scottish-presbyters against His Sacred Majesty
was such; as that upon certain Proposals Ib. p. 1414. and 1435.
, made to those of them, who were Commissioners from the general Assembly, viz.
If the King shall come into Scotland, and that the Kingdom of England shall
exclude him of the Government there, for his leaving them without granting the
Propositions; Whether or not it would be lawful to that Kingdom to assist him
for the recovery of the Government, he not granting the Propositions,
concerning Religion, and the Covenant, and not giving a satisfactory answer to
the remanent Propositions.

Their Answer.
The Quaere presupposes the King's coming into this Kingdom, which case (for
the reasons expressed in our late warning) we humbly conceive should not be put
into the Question: and therefore desire your Lordships to go about all means
for the present preventing of it, as a matter of most dangerous consequence to
Religion, this Kirk, and Kingdom, and to the King himself and his posterity.

But, if the Question be stated simply, without supposing such a case in these
terms. If the King be excluded from Government in England, for not granting
the propositions concerning Religion and the Covenant; and for not giving a
satisfactory Answer to the remanent propositions; whether, in that case it be
lawful for this Kingdom to assist him, for the Recovery of the Government:
Or, if it be not lawful, being put to it, we cannot but answer, in regard of
the Engagement of this Kingdom, by Covenant and Treaty, Negative.

1. Resolved upon the Question, That the Kingdom of Scotland, shall be
governed as it has been these five years last past; all means being used, that
the King may take the Covenant, and pass the Propositions.

2. Resolved, that the taking of the Scottish Covenant, and passing some of the
Propositions, does not give warrant to assist him against England.

3. Resolved, that upon bare taking the National Covenant, we may not receive
him.

4. Resolved,
that the Clause in the Covenant, for defense of the King's Person, is to be
understood in defense and safety of the Kingdoms.

5. Resolved, that the King shall not execute any power in the Kingdom of
Scotland, until such time, as he has granted the Propositions, concerning
Religion and the Covenant; and given satisfactory answer to both Kingdoms in
the rest of the Propositions, presented to him by both Kingdoms at Newcastle.

6. Resolved, that if His Majesty refuse to pass the Propositions, he shall be
disposed of according to the Covenant and Treaty.

7. Resolved, that the union be friendly kept between the Kingdoms, according
to the Covenant and Treaty.

By what has last been instanced, it is easy enough to be discerned, that
bargain so long in driving on, was by this time concluded, in reference to the
person of the King (I mean the certain price for which the Scots did sell him)
which prompted them so eagerly and frequently to press his taking their
Covenant, and consent to those destructive Propositions, which they well knew,
he could never do, without apparent hazard to his Soul: and that he had
manifestly confuted the Arguments of Mr. Alexander Henderson, whom they brought
to convince him therein. I shall therefore need to say no more of that matter,
then to set down the Quaeres 16. Jan.
, which His Majesty delivered to the Commissioners of Scotland upon their last
importuning him thereto, when they threatened to deliver him up to the
Parliament of England (as they then called those Members at Westminster) in
case of his refusal.

It is a Perfect Diurnal p. 1462.
received opinion by many; that Engagements, Acts, or Promises of a restrained
person, are neither valid, nor obligatory. How true or false this is, I will
not now dispute: but I am sure, if I be not free, I am not fit to answer any of
your Propositions: wherefore you should first resolve me, in what state I
stand, as in relation to freedom, before I can give you any other Answer. The
Reason of this my Question, the Governor can best resolve you. But, if you
object the loss of time, and urgency of it; certainly, in one respect, it
presses none so much as my self, which makes me also think it necessary, that I
be not to seek what to do, when this Garrison shall be surrendered up; to demand
of you, in case I go into Scotland, if I shall be there with Honor, Freedom,
and Safety; or How; being ready to give you a farther and more particular
Answer, so soon as you shall have resolved these two Quaeres.

Whereunto they give this insignificant Answer.
1. To the first, in what state you stand, as in relation to Freedom; the
Parliaments of both Kingdoms have given such orders, and directions, as they
have thought fittest for the safety of your Majesty and the Kingdoms, to the
General and Governor.

2. To your second Quaere, of your going into Scotland; we shall humbly desire,
that we may not be put to give an Answer: but, if your Majesty shall either
deny, or delay your assent to the Propositions; we are in that case to
represent to your Majesty the resolutions of the Parliament of England.

Having now done with their attempts upon His Majesty in reference to the
Covenant and Propositions; I come to their farther Progress for the
establishing of Presbytery. Wherein I am to look back a little.

About the latter end of August, a Bill for Ordination of Ministers, being the
third time read 27. Aug. Perfect Diurnal p. 1293.
in the House of Commons at Westminster, and thence transmitted to the Lords;
not long after they received a Petition Ib. p. 1313. Sept. 15.
from the County of Lancaster, subscribed by twelve thousand hands, for settling
of the Classes in those parts, with the names of such as they had made choice
of, and presented to the House for ordering thereof.

Nor were the Assembly of Divines sitting at Westminster less active; who
having framed a new Confession of Faith, were October. 13. Ibid. p. 1346.
hard at work in adding quotations of Scripture in the Margent of their Copies,
for justification thereof. And that this blessed Presbytereal Government, might
be the more secure from danger the Houses at Westminster passed an Ordinance
Scob. col. p. 99.
not only for abolishing the name, title, and dignity of Archbishops,
Bishops, etc. but nominated Trustees in whom their Lands should be settled.

Likewise, for the fitter moulding this new Confession of Faith, Copies thereof
(purposely printed) were delivered October. 24. Scob. col. p. 1358.
to each Member of both Houses at Westminster, to the end they might consider
of the same, and advise the better therein.

But, notwithstanding all this holy Reformation, there were some, who had not
only the Conscience to adhere unto the Liturgy, established by Law in the
Church of England, in their public service of God; but the Courage to
prosecute those by Indictment, which neglected the reading thereof in their
Parish-Churches. In so much as upon notice of this high presumption, from
Buckinghamshire, an Ordinance was forthwith voted October. 16. Perfect Diurnal p.
1360.
to be brought in, for repealing the Statute which enjoined it. At which time
the House also ordered Ibid.
, that all Malignant Ministers (for so were the Orthodox called) should be
disabled from Preaching, and an Ordinance to be brought in for that purpose.

And, though by an Order Ibid. p. 1364. 28. October.
of the House of Commons, Mr. Sydrach Sympson (one of their Assembly of
Divines, (and an eminent stickler for the Cause) was, for some opinions and
expressions, savouring of Independencie, to have been silenced: yet, by reason
of his zeal to God's Glory (as they termed it) that is to say, his activeness
against Episcopacie, he was exempted from the Rigor of that sentence.

Moreover, as they took care to disable those of the Clergy, which were
Orthodox and Loyal, from preaching any more: so, to encourage all others who
were for their turn, though not at all qualified with learning, they gave
liberty to every bold and schismatical Mechanic to preach, under the notion of
Gifted-men. To which purpose an Ordinance 4. Novem. Ib. p. 1368. b.
was brought in to the House, and read, for approving of such illiterate
persons to be Ministers.

And, that Episcopal Government might never return again, they passed 16. Nov.
Scob. Col. p. 101.
an Ordinance for the sale of all the Lands belonging to the Bishops; with
special instructions Perfect Diurnal. p. 1387.
therein, for the Contractors and Surveyors. Amongst which Instructions, it is
not the least observable; that for the better encouraging of Purchasers, they
should sell them at ten years purchase. Nay, such was their care, to make this
sacrilegious work as plausible to the people as might be; that, besides the
extraordinary pay their Surveyors of those Lands had (viz. 20 s. a day, and
five shillings a day to every Boy that did but carry the end of the
measuring-Chain) they gave special directions, that the Gentry and other
popular-men, residing in those parts where such Lands lay, should be feasted by
the Surveyors (which feasts amounted to no small charge) saying, We must pay
well and hang well

About this time also, there was a Committee appointed 11. Nov. Perfect
Occurrences.
to inquire into the Value of all Churchlivings, in order to the planting of an
able Ministry, as they gave out; whereas in truth, it was to discover which
were the best and fattest Beneficies, to the end, that the principal Champions
for the Cause, might make choice of those for themselves (whereof some had
three a piece, and some four, as is very well known) it being aparent, that
where any small Benefice was, there the Church-dores were shut up. The more to
justify which practice of theirs, I could name an Assembly man, who being told
by an Eminent person, that a certain Church in the West of England, had no
Incumbent; asked what the yearly value of the Benefice did amount unto; and he
answering sifty pounds per annum: the Assembly man replied -- if it be no
better worth, no Godly-man will accept of it.

But notwithstanding all this, the advancement of the Scepter of Jesus Christ
(that is to say, the establishing the Presbyterean-Government by a Law) went
but slowly on, insomuch as the Covenanting Brethren in London, who were daily
agitated with the zealous breath of the Presbyterean Bellows, from the Pulpits
and otherwise; growing hot for the Scotch Discipline, busyed themselves not a
little in getting Hands 5. December. Perfect Diurnal p. 1406.
to a Petition, for prosecuting the ends of the Covenant; and, that Presbytery
might be established. And, for the better speed of that blessed work the latter
part of their new Confession of Faith, being brought in, by the Assembly of
Divines, and read in the House of Commons; it was Ordered that marginal notes
should be forthwith added thereto, to prove every Article by Scripture: and
that the Assembly should also bring in their Answers to the Quaeres of the
House, concerning the Ius divinum of Presbytery.

CHAP. XXII.
BUT oh the fates! Now that after all this formal combining and Covenanting
with the precious Brethren of Scotland; Horse, Arms, Jewels, Plate and Money,
in no small proportion, so frankly offered up to this Dagon of Presbytery, and
a numerous Army poured in from that Nation, to help the Lord against the
mighty: so many dreadful battles fought, so much English-bloud lamentably
spilt, and such a vast Treasure spent, and all to advance the Scepter of Jesus
Christ; nay the top stone of this glorious building ready to be laid on. Now (I
say) the perfect completing of this great and glorious work was so near, that
the main Fabric should begin to totter specially by the unhappy assaults of
their own Godly party; and at last to tumble down; what could be more
deplorable? yet so it happened. I must therefore here begin to change my note:
and, as I have Historically manifested whence that sacred Impe of Presbytery
originally sprung; How 'twas first transplanted hither, what a luxuriant growth
in short time it had; and what glorious fruit it produced. So shall I now
briefly show how, and by what means it fell to decay: and how that prodigious
Monster Anabaptists, Millenaries, Quakers, etc.
of Independencie, creeping up by the body thereof, at length did much overtop
it; and triumphing for a while, at last produced no less direful effects than
what that old stock of Presbytery always did; even the barbarous destruction
of our late gracious King (of ever blessed memory) in his Royal person; after
he had been most inhumanly persecuted, despoiled of his Kingly authority, and
most shamefully made Prisoner by those devout Covenanters.

That Ambition and Avarice were most assuredly the primary causes which incited
this Saint-like Generation to act such horrid things as no age has formerly
seen: and to carry on these their foul designs under the specious veil of
Religion, the Laws of the Land, and Liberty of the subject, has been already
fully manifested. Having therefore, by this subtle stratagem, got the sword,
and consequently the wealth of the Realm into their power: I now come to
observe; how, through the admirable justice of Almighty God upon these grand
Hypocrites; which first kindled the flames of Civil war amongst us; the same
power and wealth, was by the like ravenous brood, now called Independents
(which sprung forth of their own pharisaical loins) soon torn and wrested out
of their greedy Jaws, upon the like principles; and what use they made of it.

By what has been already said, it is sufficiently manifest, how and to what
end the establishment of the Scottish Discipline, was first and principally
aimed at by the Presbyterean party here; but the severity thereof being at
length discerned by some, through a cleerer Light; the new Reformers thought it
most proper, not only to represent to the People, the true face thereof in its
proper shape; but to hold forth unto them an absolute freedom from the
merciless phangs and teeth of that cruel beast, under the notion of
Christian-Liberty; whereby every man might exercise himself in the pretended
service of God, according to what form or order he list, as Independent from
any that could call him to account; which pleasing Doctrine being not a little
grateful to the vulgar, soon obtained so fair an entertainment especially
amongst the soldiery; as that, not only the generallity of the Army and many
of the Garrisons cheerfully embraced it; but most of the people, through out all
parts of the Realm, right willingly inclined thereto.

The Presbyterean-Hedge being therefore thus trodden down; no wonder was it,
that, like scattered Flocks, multitudes were gathered up by other Shepherds
into new Congregations; Anabaptists, Millenaries (or fifth Monarchy-men)
Quakers, etc. each differing from other in diverse material points; but all
centring in opposition to Presbytery; which strange opinions (no less absurd
than various) were so inconsistent with the zealous Disciplinarians (who termed
them Heretical and Blasphemous) that they spared for no pains in endeavoring
to suppress them.

As to the Tenets and practices of these Independent- Libertines, let this one
instance serve for a Taste; one Mr. Gregory (of Colonel Rich his Regiment)
preaching at a Widows house near Northampton; told his Auditors, that he
thought he was obliged to unfold the Scripture, as it was revealed to him:
Likewise, that he hoped to see the Shop-windows open on the Lord's day: Also,
that the Psalms were no Scripture; and, that the Parson of that Parish was a
Minister of Antichrist.

But, notwithstanding this apparent danger to the Disciplinarians, from this
blessed brood of their own hatching, some confidence they yet had of putting a
stop to their farther growth: to that end therefore (as to their former notable
pranks they frequently did) by a special Ordinance 1. Feb. Perfect Diurnal p.
1471.
, they caused a day to be set a part for humbling themselves, and seeking of
God (as they termed it) by fasting and prayer, the preamble whereof I have
thought fit here to insert;

We the Lords and Commons assembled in the Parliament of England, having entered
into a solemn Covenant, to endeavor sincerely, really and constantly, the
Reformation of Religion, in Doctrine, Discipline, and Worship; and the
extirpation of Popery, Superstition, Heresy, Schism, Profaneness, and
whatsoever shall be found contrary to sound Doctrine, and the power of
Godlyness: And, having found the presence of God wonderfully assisting us in
this Cause, especially since our Engagement in pursuance of the said Covenant;
have thought fit (lest we partake in other men's sins, and thereby be in danger
to receive of their plagues) to set forth this our deep sense of the great
dishonor of God, and perilous Condition, that this Kingdom is in, through
the abominable Blasphemies, and damnable Heresies vented and spread abroad
therein; tending to the subversion of the Faith, contempt of the Ministry and
Ordinance of Jesus Christ. And, as we are resolved to employ and improve the
utmost of our power, that nothing be said or done against the Truth, but for
the Truth: So we desire, that both our selves, and the whole Kingdom may be
deeply humbled before the Lord, for that great reproach and contempt, which
has been cast upon his name, and saving Truths; and for that swift
destruction, which we may justly fear will fall upon the immortal Souls of
such, who are or may be drawn away, by giving heed to seducing Spirits. In the
hearty and tender compassion whereof, we the said Lords and Commons do order
and ordain; that Wednesday, being the tenth day of March next be set apart for
a day of public Humiliation, etc.

And to back this their Godly Exercise (forasmuch as their solemn League and
Covenant had effected such great matters otherwise) the House of Peers soon
after voted 8. Febr. Ibid. p. 1479.
an Ordinance to be brought in, for disabling every person whatsoever, from
bearing any office, Civil or Military, that should refuse to take the Covenant.

But that which they deemed above all, not only to get a hand over this
many-headed-Monster (Independencie) but to establish to themselves a lasting
dominion over the persons and Estates of all other people was to gain the
King's person into their power; concerning whom they had been trucking with the
Scots for the space of six months at the least (his Majesty being all that
while at Newcastle upon Tine, and their Army quartered in the Adjacent
Counties) not without some Heart-burnings toward those their dear Brethren,
for keeping him so long, and continuing their Army in this Realm, at so vast a
charge and intolerable a burden to those Northern parts, having had no use
thereof at all, after the render of Newark.

Nor did this deteiner pass without some quick disputes betwixt them; the
Grandees here affirming The Answer of the Commons in Parliament to the Scots
Com. papers Impr. Land. 1646. p. 20.
, and insisting stiffly upon it; that the Kingdom of Scotland had no right of
joint exercise of interest, in disposing the person of the King, in the
Kingdom of England: urging Ib. p. 8.
likewise; that forasmuch as he had deserted his Parliament and People; entered
into, and continued in a bloody and dangerous war against them; had not granted
those Propositions, which by both Kingdoms were sent unto him, as a means of a
safe and well-grounded peace: he was not therefore at present in a condition to
exercise the duties of his place; or be left to go, or reside where and when
himself pleased. Farther objecting, that the Commissioners of Scotland, at a
conference with theirs had declared Ib. p. 8.
, that it would be prejudicial to both Kingdoms for the King to go into
Scotland.

But, after much dispute the Scots in brief told Ib. p. 30.
them; that their Army by the Oath of Allegiance, their Committee of Estates by
their Commission, and their Officers by their Military Oath, ought to defend
the King from harms and prejudices. Often affirming, that the King came to
their Army for shelter and defense. Adding, that Ib. p. 32.
it was the Law and common practice of all Nations, not to deliver the meanest
subject fled to them, though for the greatest crimes: and that, if the meanest
were not to be delivered, how would the world abroad condemn them, for so base
and dishonorable an act, the King having cast himself into their hands.

They likewise said Ib. p. 42.
-- if it be considered, that the Scottish Army was invited and called into
this Kingdom, by both Houses of Parliament in a Treaty for prosecuting the
ends of a solemn League and Covenant; whereof one Article is, to preserve and
defend his Majesty's person; there can remain no doubt concerning this
exercise of that Right and Interest in this Kingdom. And therefore said; it
seemed very strange that when upon invitation they were come into England, as
for other ends, so to defend his Majesty's person, their being in England
should be made use of as an Argument why they should deliver up the person of
the King to be disposed of as both Houses should think fit.

Whereunto the English Commissioners replied; that the Scotch-Army came in
hither as Auxiliaries, under pay; and therefore they ought not to capitulate
herein at all. And that whereas the Scots did so much urge their Obligation by
the Covenant, to preserve and defend the King's person and Authority; they told
Ib. p. 21, 54, and 55.
them that they left out the principal Clause, which was relative viz. in the
preservation and defense of the true Religion and Liberties of the Kingdoms,
without which the other part ought never to be mentioned

But the plain truth is, that all this fencing with Arguments, came at last to
a mere Money-business. For whereas the Grandees at Westminster, by stipulation
Ib. p. 36.
with the Scots for their Expedition into England, had promised to pay them
after the rate of thirty thousand pounds per mensem, so long as they should
have occasion to make use of their Army: and all being done to give Ib. p. 37.
them for the pains, hazard and charges which the said Army should undergo, a
due recompense by way of Brotherly Assistance. Toward the performance of which
agreement, though these Grandees did manifest Ib. p. 63.
; that besides much free Quarter, the Scots-Army had monthly received, nineteen
thousand and seven hundred pounds: and for the last year, ending ultimo
Octobris, seventy two thousand nine hundred seventy two pounds two shillings
and eleven pence, for the Customs and other Impositions upon coals only: the
Brethren nevertheless having then the better end of the staff in their hands,
as being possessed of the King; delivered in unto them an account 18. August.
Perfect Diurnal p. 1281.
of Arrears, besides losses of no less than a Million of money, their free
Quarter reckoned; but with a kind intimation^ that they would accept of a less
sum in gross for a full discharge of all.

Whereupon a Committee being appointed to treat with them thereon, and times of
payment; they then stooped Ib. p. 1282.
to the one half, viz. five hundred thousand pounds, whereof two hundred
thousand pounds to be paid upon the departure of their Army, and the rest
within twelve months.

Much dispute (indeed) they had about this business, yea some high words, but
at length four hundred thousand pounds was the sum agreed 1. Septem. Ib. p.
1282.
on; the one half in hand, upon delivery up of the King. Which sum, without
more ado, stopped the mouths of those Vultures, and put a period to all this hot
contest: All their Oaths and Obligation whereon they had so much insisted,
merely to heighten the price of their Sovereign, being then set aside, as it is
notoriously known.

Being therefore thus sold, and delivered 28. Jan. Perfect Diurnal. p. 1473 and
1474.
to the Earls of Pembroke, Denbigh, and Lord Mountagu of Boughton; Sir James
Harington, Sir John Holand, Sir Walter Earl, Sir John Cook, John Crew Esquire and
Major General Brown (Commissioners from the Members at Westminster) to be
carried to Holdenby-House in Northamptonshire, his Majesty hoped 17. Feb.
that he might have two of his own Chaplains admitted to attend him in this sad
and disconsolate condition (having not one servant of his own about him:) but
that request would not be granted though again seconded 6. March.


Thus did the bonny Scots part with their native King, leaving those Northern
countries miserably beggared by many grievous Taxes imposed on them by their
Army and most lamentable oppressions by Free Quarter. Which burdens were so
heavy, that the Inhabitants of Cleveland, Ib. p. 1361.
by their petition to the Members at Westminster, and Letter therewith sent,
complained that their oppressions were greater than those who suffered by the
Turks, both their persons and Estates; those under the Turk being quit for a
fifth part, whereas they in one year did pay their whole Revenues seven times
over. We are (say Ibid.
they in their Letters) the absolutest slaves that ever was read of: for they
assess us at their pleasures; leavy as they please. If they bid us go, and
ride, none dare refuse. The Kill us in hot blood, beat us in cold, etc. In a
word our stock is already wasted, our little corn we had, ill gotten in, by
reason of the great moisture: we are now thrashing it for the Scots. We are
eating our last bread. Who have been able to get away are gone, etc.

The perfect Diurnal n. 171.
further adds -- The Country puts up many complaints; Bedall, a little Town in
Yorkshire of 57 li. old Rent; and Ayscough, a lesser Village of 42 li. have put
up their several complaints, that they have in less than five months last past,
paid to the Scots Army quartering upon them almost two thousand pounds, besides
former Billettings and Taxes: by which sad sufferings some have left their
Houses, others at the point of leaving theirs also.

L^tters Weekly Account n. 46.
from Richmundshire, did likewise intimate that two Constableries of that
County, the Rent whereof amounted to no more than ninety nine pounds per annum,
were assessed by the Scottish Army, and paid in Free Quarter no less than
nineteen hundred pounds in four months.

But having made such a fair Market of the King; leaving those Countries thus
harrassed, they marched 11. Feb.
back over Tweed, upon the eleventh of February.

Hereupon the Grandees at Westminster, having (to the view of the World)
finished their great work by getting the person of the king into their power,
they employed Phillip Earl of Pembroke, Basil Earl of Denbigh, Edward Lord
Mountagu of Boughton, Sir James Harington, Sir John Holand, and Sir John Cook
Baronets, Sir Walter Earl Knight, John Crew Esquire and Major General Brown (as
already has been observed) to bring his Majesty from Newcastle to Holdenby in
Northampton- shire. Who coming to Newcastle upon the 22. of January; after
their stay there till the last day of that month, they set forwards on the
Journey; and on the sixteenth 16. Feb.
of February got to holdenby; where they kept him under a strict restraint
(Colonel Richard Greaves, a most confiding Presbyterean, having the chief
command of his Guards) not suffering any of his own servants to come near him;
no not so much as one Chaplain for performance of such divine offices as common
charity could not have denied to the greatest criminal, See his observations
thereupon in his Eikon Basilike.
though often and earnestly moved by his Majesty thereto. Which being done,
they thought of nothing more than singing a Requiem to their Souls.

In order whereunto, in the first place they concluded 5. March. Perfect
Diurnal p. 1509 and 1510.
on the new modelling of their Army, lest the tender Independent, who grew up
apace, might otherwise overtop his Presbyterean-parent: and therefore resolved
to cull out those who were not Covenant-proof, and send them for Ireland; there
to encounter as well with hunger and cold as other miseries and hardships of
war: Then to disband others and make a new establishment, consisting of such
only as were pure Covenanters, and firm to the good old Cause.

And next; to the end, that with more plausibility to the people, and security
to themselves, they might have the full sway of all; their drift was, to exto^
the King's consent (he being then their prisoner) (...) this their new designed
Dominion. For the accomplishment whereof (according to their wonted pra^^^ses)
they caused a petition 17. March. Ib. p. 1524.
to be exhibited to the two Houses at Westminster, by the Lord Mayor, Aldermen,
and Common Council of London. Wherein was contained a subtle insinuation of
their desires, that God would bring his Majesty's, Heart, nearer to his chief
and greatest Council (the Parliament) and that he would be persuaded to join
with them in the National League and Covenant, and give satisfaction in the
Propositions, which the Parliaments of both Nations should make unto him, for
the full assurance of his People for the future, and firm establishment of the
Peace and Union of the Kingdoms in Church and Commonwealth.

In which Petition it was also desired, that for security to the Parliament and
City, such as had been in opposition to the Parliament (id est, loyal to the
King) might be removed out of the City, and kept at a distance from his
Majesty's Royal presence. Declaring Ib. p. 1525.
likewise to the whole world, that they still were, and resolved to remain in
their zeal as fervent to the Parliament as ever: And, according to the
Covenant, did next under God rely upon the Wisdom and Justice of the
Parliament, for settlement of their Peace and Prosperity.

And, discerning the Independent-party of the Soldiery beginning to be then
predominant, Anno 1647.
had drawn the Army nearer to the City of London, than the Grandees at
Westminster did well like; it was by them farther petitioned, that the Army
might be forthwith removed, and with all convenient speed disbanded: As also,
that the Court of Common Council might have authority to elect Members for the
Militia of the City, in pursuance of a former Petition of theirs to that
purpose.

Whereupon, after much debate and quick dispute (the Presbyterean-party in the
House being at that time most numerous) it was resolved 27. April. Ib. p. 1569.
, that the whole Army, Horse and Foot should be disbanded; only History of
Independencie p. 33.
five thousand Horse, one thousand Dragoons, and some few Firelocks to be
continued in pay, for the safety of this Kingdom; and some to be sent for
Ireland.

Which vote so awakened the Soldiery, that no less than eight Regiments of
Horse, soon sent up a Counter-Petition 30. April. Perfect Diurnal p. 1572.
to the Parliament, wherein they give reasons why they could not engage, in the
service of Ireland: (for thither 'twas resolved they should go upon their
disbanding) and complained of many scandalous suggestions, which had been
raised against them, and their proceedings: as also, that they saw designs put
upon them, and upon many of the Godly party in the Kingdom. Signifying
likewise, that they could not engage for Ireland, till they were satisfied in
their expectations, and their just desires granted.

But these things, as yet, being not publicly insisted on, nor owned by any
other than the common Soldiers; it was ordered Ibid.
, that Major General Skyppon, Lieutenant General Cromwell, Commissary-General
Ireton, and Colonel Fleetwood, should be speedily sent down to the Army, to
acquaint them, that there should be a considerable sum of money provided for
them, before their disbanding; and that their Accounts should be audited: as
also an Act of Indemnity for all the mischief they had done in the time of
war; it being expected, that this bountiful and gracious offer, would quiet
their stirring Spirits, and incline them to submit tamely to the pleasure of
their great Masters.

And so confident, at that time, were the Presbyterean-party in the two Houses
at Westminster to baffle their Independent offspring, by this artifice of
disbanding the Army; that to make room for them in Ireland, upon their riddance
here, they framed an Ordinance 11. May. Ibid. p. 1584.
, for clearing that Kingdom of those Scottish forces, which were then employed
there, as Auxiliaries against the Irish-Rebels. And soon after, did accordingly
order 25. May. Ib. p. 1601.
, that the Army should be disbanded; beginning first with the General's
Regiment (then at Chelmesford in Essex) and that so many of them as would
engage for Ireland, should be presently taken on, and a fortnights pay advanced
to them, together with two months pay of their arrears. The like for the rest
of the Army, at their respective Rendevouzes.

But whilst these now distinct parties of Godly men, were thus striving for
Masteries; the King, who still was kept at Holdenby, under a most deplorable
restraynt; (and the whole Kingdom under grievous oppressions) finding no sense
at all in them, neither of His, nor his peoples miseries, sent his sixteenth
Message 12. May. The King's 16th. Message.
; wherein, complaining of his disconsolate condition there; his Servants being
denied access to him; none admitted to bring or receive any Letters from him:
nor any other but the Parliaments Commissioners (who were then his Spies as
well as Guardians) to converse with him: by which means he was not Master of
those ordinary Actions, which are the undoubted right of every free-born-man,
how mean soever; and so not qualified to make any concessions, nor give Answers
(as himself did then most rationally observe,) yet so much was he desirous of
peace; that unto those Propositions, which they sent to him at Newcastle, when
he was in custody of the Scots (viz. 25. June An. 1646.) and whereupon he then
gave a general Answer, with desire to be admitted to treat personally with them
at Westminster; that, presuming they might insist upon the same still; he did
then, by this his 16th. Message, as to Religion, offer to confirm the
Presbyterean-government, the Assembly of Divines at Westminster, and the
Directory for three years, being the time required by those Propositions; so
that himself and his Household were not hindered from that order in Gods service,
which they had formerly used. Offering, that a free consultation should be had
with those their Divines at Westminster, twenty of his own nomination being
added thereto; whereby it might be determined what Government in the Church
should be after those three years.

But, as to the Covenant, he told them, that he was not satisfied therein;
desiring, that upon his admission to London, he might be assisted with the
advice of such of his own Chaplains, and other Divines, as he should think fit
to consult with: farther signifying to them; that the Militia by Sea and Land,
in case it were only as a security, for preservation of the peace of his
Kingdom (after due performance of all other Agreements, then to be considered
of) should be, for the space of ten years, in the hands of such persons, as the
two Houses should nominate.

And as to the prosecution of the War in Ireland (other things being agreed)
he would give them satisfaction therein [those being the most material of these
Propositions.]

But, to be short; the guilt of these men, being like that of Cain (greater
than in their own opinion could ever be forgiven) they still cried out, that
His Majesty was averse to peace, and never yet pleased to accept of any tender,
fit for them to make: nor to offer any fit for them to receive. And their
preachers were still taught to pray, that God would incline the King's Heart,
to come to His Parliament.

Leaving His Majesty therefore out of all hopes to obtain any good by these his
earnest and incessant Messages; I now return to the Grandees of the Army, who
had, about this time, a considerable Game to play, (the most active of them
being then become Independent) whose main work was to avoid disbanding; yet not
to be seen therein, in the least manner themselves. To which end, as at the
first beginning of this woeful Rebellion, the rabble and baser sort of people in
Scotland, were piped up by the zealous Kirkmen, to lead on the Dance; the
Gentry next, and Nobility last (as they discerned the way) following after the
same Music: So were the Common-souldiers here taught to appear in opposition
to those Orders of the Parliament; whereupon at 25. May. Ibid. p. 1604.
Bury in Suffolk, in the first place they alleged, that they were at that
time, no less than fifty six weeks pay in arreare; so that the eight weeks pay
voted, was not a considerable part thereof. Next, that no visible security was
given, for what should not then be paid. Thirdly Ib. p. 1605.
that nothing was done for their Vindication: and that having been declared
Enemies, and sent home, they might be proceeded against as Enemies, unless that
Declaration against the Army of March the XIIIth. was recalled: and therefore
they petitioned the General, for a public Rendevouz, whereat their Grievances
might be represented. Whereupon intimation 29. May. Ib. p. 1606.
was given; that, these things considered, there would be a necessity for the
officers compliance with the Soldiers, lest that Rendevouz should otherwise
prove tumultuous, and destructive to the Kingdom.

In which petition; considering the late Order for disbanding, without
redressing their Grievances, or vindicating the Army; or calling such persons
to account, who had been Intenders or Contrivers of their destruction; they
desired, that he would speedily appoint a general Rendevouz, and to use his
utmost endeavor, that they might not be disbanded, before their sad and
pressing greivances were heard and fully redressed.

Which Petition being communicated 30. May. Ib. p. 1608.
by the General to the two Houses at Westminster, did so startle their High and
Mightynesses there; that they forthwith ordered 3. June Ib. p. 1611.
to the common Soldiers, all their Arrears, deducting free Quarter, according
to the usual Rules of the Army. Also, that the subordinate officers should have
the like: and the Commission-officers one months pay more, added to the two
formerly voted. Likewise, that the Declaration against the Army (before
mentioned) should be rased out of the Journals of both Houses, which was done
accordingly. And that there should be an Ordinance drawn up, for their farther
satisfaction, in point of Indemnity, with an Ordinance 5. June. of Ibid.
oblivion to boot.

CHAP. XXIII.
BUT this Psalm of Placebo, then tuned by the Members at Westminster, did no
whit charm the evil Spirit, which was conjured up by the Grandees of the Army
amongst the common Soldiers. Who, well knowing how perfidious those
Ringleaders of the Rebellion had been to their Leige-lord the King; concluded,
that they would approve themselves as faithless to them, when ever it should
lie in their power: And therefore, not daring to trust their fair words; they
forthwith dispatched away a party, of a thousand Horse, to Holdenby, under the
command of one Joyce, a Cornet (but formerly a Godly Tailor) who arriving there
upon Thursday in the night, 3. June. The King taken from Holdenby.
being the third of June; and having secured the Guards, under which the King
was then kept., took away His Majesty the next day, to Ib. p. 1612.
Hinchinbrooke, near Huntington.

Which News so astonished the great men at Westminster; that, having had no
small experience of many signal advantages by their counterfeit Humiliations,
and Mock-fasts, they herein fell to their old practice, in that kind once more;
appointing Wednesday the sixth of June for that purpose; to the end (as their
usual canting expressions were) that God would be pleased to give them one
Heart, and one mind, in carrying on the great work of the Lord.

Whereupon their famous Stephen Marshall (who was Presbyterianorum
ante-signanus) the Bell-wether of that blessed flock; with Mr. Strong and Mr.
Whitakers (zealous men of the same stamp) were then appointed to pray and
preach with the Members, in their own House of Commons, upon that day: the
Lords (according to the example of the Commons) appointing others, 7. June. The
King removed to Childersley.
as devout, to do the like in theirs.

And to court the Soldiers yet more, they passed an additional 7. June. Ib. p.
1620, and Scob. Col. p. 127.
Ordinance to save them harmless by an Act of Oblivion and Pardon, for all
things done in the time of War.

Nay into such a terror were they then stricken; that, in order to the laying
of this evil-Spirit in the Army, (so conjured up by the Independent Grandees
there) they did (according to their old wont) set on foot a Petition 18. June.
Ib. p. 162^.
in the City of London: which being signed by thousands of the
Presbyterean-Heard, was brought to the House of Commons by the Sheriffs,
accompanied by diverse Aldermen and others; desiring that all honorable ways
and means, 9. June. The King removed from Childersley to Newmarket.
might be used for to prevent the farther shedding of blood; and that all just
satisfaction might be given to the Army, and all other Soldiers, who had
adventured their lives for defense of the Parliament and Kingdom. Likewise,
that the Covenant and Agreement of both Nations might be kept; and His
Majesty's royal person preserved and so disposed of, that the Parliaments of
both Kingdoms, might have access unto him, etc.

Whereupon the House Voted, that an Ordinance should be speedily brought in,
according to the desires of the Petitioners. And the same day, they passed a
Declaration, for making void their former Declaration Ibid.
of the xiijth. of March, concerning the Army.

And farther to show, how firm they yet stood to their old
Presbyterean-principles, and the Covenant, in order to a blessed Reformation
(which was for the extirpating the Religion by Law established in the Church of
England) they passed an Ordinance Ibid. and Scob. coll. p. 128.
, entitled An Ordinance for recreation of Scholars, Apprentices, and Servants.
Whereby, abrogating those ancient Festivals of the Nativity of our blessed
Savior, Easter, Whitsontide, and all other Holy Days, which had been (as their
said Ordinance expressed) before that time superstitiously observed; they did,
insted thereof, allow them the second Thursday in every month throughout the
year for their Recreation.

There is nothing more certain, than that at this time, there was so great a
terror upon the Presbyterean-Grandees sitting at Westminster, by reason that
the Army had gotten the person of the King into their hands, that they left no
likely means unessayed to reconcile the two Interests; viz. the Presbyterean,
then predominant in the Parliament, and Independent in the Army, whereof to
give particular instances would be too tedious. Nor is it less true, that
Cromwell (who all this while sitting at Westminster, and by his trusty
confidents called Agitators, actuating the Army) did put them upon all those
practices; and, the more to fool his fellow members, did with the greatest
asseverations imaginable, confidently profess his dislike of the Soldiers
refractoriness: assuring the House, that if he might have leave to go down to
the Army, he would undertake they should submit, and lay down their Arms at the
Parliament door.

Which vain hope did then so far dote most of the Members; that some of them
said publicly; that, having done such glorious things for the Parliament (as a
chief Commander in the Army The Rendevouz of the Army at Triplo-Heath.
) and now, that he would qualify the Soldiers in this their desperate mutiny,
he deserved to have a Statue in Gold.

But, having by this artifice, obtained liberty to get away; when he came to
the Rendevouz 10. June. Perfect Diurnal p. 1623.
, at Triplo-Heath; he did not only approve of all that they had done, but
openly joined Hist. Inde. p. 34.
with them in all their bold Engagements, Declarations, Remonstrances, and
Manifestos; saying to some in private, that now he had got the King into his
Hands, he had the Parliament in his Pocket: but protested his ignorance of the
design; adding Ib. p. 35.
an Execration upon his wife and children, in asseverating thereof.

And, as heretofore the leading-members at Westminster did usually pen
petitions, and send them into the City of London, and elsewhere, to be
subscribed by those of their party, for countenanceing whatsoever they had a
mind to act: so (then) did the Grandees of the Army, not being ignorant what
advantages had formerly been made of those devises viz. one from Perfect
Diurnal p. 1625.
Essex to the General, in the name of the well-affected-People there: desiring,
that in regard of the present unsettled condition of the Kingdom and the
design of many to deprive the subject of their liberty, he would not consent to
the disbanding of the Army, nor any part thereof, until there should be a
general settlement of things in the Kingdom. The like Petitions from Perfect
Diurnal p. 1625.
Norfolk and Suffolk, desiring that there might be no disbanding until the
general grievances were redrest and Justice done.

But see the dreadful horrors and apprehensions, which attend the Consciences
of wicked men in times of distress and danger! No sooner did the Army march
from the parts about Triplo toward St. Albans; but the Presbyterean-Members at
Westminster, and those of that gang in London, fell into such Agonies; that
they forthwith ordered 12. June. Ib. p. 1626.
all the Trayned-Bands in London to be raised upon pain of Death; and strong
Guards to be set about the Line: nay, that all the Citizens should shut up
their Shops. So that whereas formerly his Majesty's incessant Messages to them
for peace, were contemned and laid aside; and when they had bought him of the
Scots, he must not be suffered to come nearer Westminster (where they hatched
all their barbarous contrivances against him) than Holdenby in
Northamptonshire; now they voted his coming to Richmund, and did vouchsafe to
write Letters to him.

But alas, too late; Independencie being then triumphant, and Presbytery
gasping (as you will see by and by) For, in answer to this Vote, it was desired
History of Independencie p. 36.
, that no place might be proposed for his Majesty's residence nearer unto
London, than where they would allow the Quarters of the Army to be. And, not
many days after, a paper 21. June. Perfect Diurnal p. 1612.
was sent to the Houses at Westminster, entitled the Representation of the
Army. In which it was in the first place required, that the Houses should be
speedily purged of such Members as for their Delinquencie (so they were pleased
to term it) or for corruptions, Anno 1647.
or abuse to the State, etc. ought not tosit there. Which terrible news put the
Presbyterean-party upon mustring up all their power; and once for all, to try
what one strong blast could do. Whereupon they Voted that the Army should
remove forty miles from London.

But this vote signified very little: for instead of any obedience thereto, the
Army presently gave order 23. June. Ib. p. 1625. and Hist. of Indep. p. 37. See
the Articles of Impeachment Impr. Land. for G. Whitaker at the blew Anchor in
Cornhil. Anno 1647. 24. June. the King removed from New Market to Royston.
for purging the House, by an impeachment of high Treason of all the most able
and active men, which stood for the Presbyterean-Interest; viz. Denzill
Hollies, Esquire Sir Philip Stapleton, Sir William Jews, Sir John Clotworthy, Sir
William Waller, Sir John Maynard Knights, Major General Massye, John Glyn, Esquire
Recorder of London, Walter Long, Esquire Colonel Edward Harley, and Anthony
Nicholls, Esquire being in number no less than Eleven of their chief Members, who
had from the beginning vigorously born the heat of the day.

Great stickling indeed there was by all their party to have preserved those
men still in that holy conclave: but all would not do; for it was clearly
discerned History of Independencie p. 37.
that by their power in the House, the Ordinance for disbanding the Army did
pass. So that to avoid suspending the whole House, it was thought most fit that
these men should retire. And so they did 26. June. Perfect Diurnal p. 1627.
; it being high time: for the Army did not stick to threaten History of
Independencie p. 37.
to march up to Westminster, if those Members were not suspended; courting the
City of London to sit Neutralls, and let them work their will with the
Parliament.

This indeed was a stroke almost fatal to the Presbyterean: 26. June. the King
removed from Royston to Hatfield.
for it lost them not only all these leading-men, but a far greater number
that staid: some falling off from that side under color of clearer
Illumination: and some others were so much daunted thereat, that they had not
afterward courage enough to hold up their heads as formerly: But upon the
retiring of these Eleven Members, the prosecution of their charge was totally
forborne.

And now that the House was thus purged the greater part of the remaining
Members became most obsequious to the Army; and declared 28. June. Perfect
Diurnal p. 1630.
, that they owned it as their Army, and would make provision for the
maintenance thereof: ordering, that so soon as money could be conveniently
raised, they should be paid equally with those, who had left the Army.

CHAP. XXIV.
HAving thus garbled the House of Commons, 1. July. The King removed from
Hatfield to Windfore.
no wonder it was that the whole Presbyterean-party, every where, became highly
incensed: and the rather for that they had so imprudently slipped their
opportunity of complying with the king in due time. 3. July. Thence to Caversham.
For then (when 'twas too late) they would have gladly joined with any Interest
to work themselves again into some authority. Which being discerned by the
Independents, who then had the King in their Hands; to spoil the
Presbyterean-design, they not only fell to Courting His Majesty with great
civilities and favors (such, indeed as he never enjoyed, since he fled to the
Scots for refuge) admitting 9. July, Ib. p. 1642,
the Duke of Richmond to come and attend him, and two of his own most desired
Chaplains: but the people also, by many printed Hist. of Indepen. p. 38.
Books and Papers, spread over all England; and likewise by the Pulpits,
whereby they stirred up the vulgar to make loud complaints of their pressures
and grievances; and to make addresses to the Army, as their only Saviors; 15.
July. The King removed from Caversham to Maydenhead.
Restorers of their Laws, Liberties and Proprieties; Setlers of Religion, and
Preservers of all just Interests: pretending also to establish the King in his
just Rights and Prerogatives; to uphold the Privilege of Parliament; Thence to
Woburne.
to reform and bring to account all Committees, Sequestrators and others, 22.
July. Thence to Latimers.
who had defiled their fingers with public moneys; and to free the people from
Excise and other Taxes.

Seeing therefore that the work of Reformation was now thus obstructed by the
Seraphick Brethren here, who walked by more new and clear Lights; those in
Scotland grew so highly moved thereat, that they indicted 25. July. Perfect
Occurrences, p. 199.
a public Fast, and solemn day of Humiliation, to be kept throughout the whole
Kirk of that Kingdom; setting forth a Declaration of the Causes moving them
thereunto, the Copy whereof I have thought fit here to insert.

1. -- That, notwithstanding our solemn Engagement in the Covenant; our
Obligations for great and singular mercies, and our many warnings by Judgments
of all sorts: yet, not only do we come far short of that sobriety,
Righteousness, and Holiness, that becomes the Gospel of Jesus Christ: but
ungodliness and worldly lusts abound every where throughout the land, unto the
grieving of the Lord's Spirit, and provoking of the eyes of his glory, and to
make him increase his plagues upon us; and to punish us seven times more,
because we continue to walk contrary unto him.

2. That the Lord's hand is still stretched out against us, in the Judgment of
the Pestilence, which spreads not only in several parts of the Country; but
continues and increases in many of the most eminent Cities of the Kingdom.

3. The great danger that threatens Religion and the work of Reformation, in
these Kingdoms, for the number, power, and policy of the Secretaries in
England; which are like, not only to interupt the progress of uniformity, and
the establishment of the Ordinances of God, in their beauty and perfection; but
to overturn the foundation already laid, and all that has been built
thereupon, with the expense of so much blood and pains.

And therefore we are earnestly to pray to the Lord, that the solemn League and
Covenant may be kept fast and inviolable, notwithstanding all the purposes and
endeavors of open Enemies, and secret underminigs to the contrary.

We are to entreat the Lord, on the behalf of the King's Majesty, that he may
be reconciled to God; and that he may be now furnished with wisdom and
council from above, that he be not involved in new snares, to the endangering
of himself and these Kingdoms; but that his Heart may incline to such
resolutions, as will contribute for settling of Religion and Righteousness.

We are also to entreat the Lord, on the behalf of the Parliament of England;
of the Synod of Divines; and of all such in that Land, as do unfeignedly mind
the work of God; that they may not be discouraged nor swerve in the day of
temptation; but that every of them in their Stations, and according to their
places and callings, may be furnished with Light and Strength from Heaven, for
doing of their duty with faithfulness and zeal.

We are to supplicate for direction to our Committee of Estates, that they may
discern the times, and know what is fitting to be done, for securing our selves
and encouraging our Brethren.

We are to pray for a Spirit of Light, of Love unto our Assembly, that they may
be instrumental in preserving Truth, and advancing Holiness amongst our selves;
and for carrying on the work of God amongst our Neighbors.

That the Lord would pour out upon all sorts of persons, in these Kingdoms, a
Spirit of Grace and Supplication, that it may repent us of all our Iniquities;
and that we may be reconciled unto the Lord; that so all tokens of his wrath
may be removed from amongst us, and he may bless us with the sweet fruits of
Truth and Peace.

It cannot easily be thought, but that the Scots did somewhat more than fast
and pray, considering the desperate condition wherein their
Covenanting-Brethren, especially at Westminster and in London, then stood; and
that the great work of Reformation (as they called it) lay in such hazard. But,
at such a distance what more could soon be expected, than that they should by
the help of the zealous Preachers, earnestly incite the Covenanters in London,
to bestir themselves; and put more courage into those drooping Members, who
(after the late purge) were then left in the House, which (for certain) they
underhand in some sort did; and were like enough, above board, to have done
much more; considering that by an Ordinance Hist. of Ind. p. 40.
of May the 4th. then past, the Militia of that great City was established in
the hands of such persons as were nominated by the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and
Common Council there. To secure themselves therefore against this iminent
danger, the Army were necessitated, by picking a quarrel Ib. p. 39. and p. 40.
with the City, to wrest the Militia out of their hands, and then totally to
cleanse the House at Westminster of the remaining Presbyterean-humour, by a
stronger purge then it formerly had.

In order whereunto, there was a Letter Ibid.
forthwith sent from General Fairfax and the Army, together with a Remonstrance
to the Houses at Westminster, demanding the Militia of the City, to be put into
their Hands. Whereupon the House of Commons tamely and readily voted Ibid.
the repealing of that Ordinance of May the 4th. and presently passed a new
Ordinance, for reviving the old Militia; and transmitted it to the Lords.

Which unexpected change caused the City to meet 24. July. Ib. p. 41.
in Common Council, and to resolve of Petitioning the Parliament again therein,
within two days following. And so they did 26. July. Ib.
by their Sheriffs, and some of the Common Council. But, to second this
Petition there followed them (within three hours) some thousands of
Apprentices, and other stout fellows with another Petition, whereby they
claimed the Militia as the Citie's Birthright by sundry Charters, confirmed in
former Parliaments: for defense whereof they alleged, that they had adventured
their Lives as far as the Army: and thereupon desired, that the Militia might
be put again into the same Hands, in which it was put with the Parliament and
Citie's consent upon the 4th. of May. And this they did in so tumultuous a
fashion, that the Lords (who were then but seven in number) presently granted
it.

And having so done, and sent it to the Commons, slipping out by a postern,
went themselves away by water. But the Commons having no mind to displease the
Army, refused to do the like; and angrily bad the Apprentices to be gone,
intending to rise and adjourn themselves. Which purpose of theirs being
discerned by those youngsters, was by them soon prevented, by shutting up their
doors, and peremptorily requiring their compliance with the Lords. The Commons
therefore seeing themselves in this straight, did at length (with much
unwillingness) yield to the importunity of these their bold Suitors: and, not
only so, but were by them forced to pass a farther vote; which was, that the
King should be admitted to come to London to treat.

But this uproar being made known to the Grandees of the Army, the greatest
advantage imaginable was made thereof. For the confiding Members, being
thereupon sent for to the Army, fled 29. July. Ib. p. 43.
to the Headquarters at Windsore within three days after; the Speaker also
bearing them Company; who, having cousened the State of vast sums of Money, was
threatened with an Impeachment if he did not come with them.

Of the House of Commons that so fled Ibid.
to the Army, the number was said to be above forty: and of the Lords which
came after, the names were these; viz. Perfect Diurnal p. 1686. and 1688.
the Earls of Northumberland, Warwick, Manchester, Salisbury, Kent, Moulgrave,
the Viscount Say and Sele; the Lords Gray of Warke, Wharton and Howard of
Escrick.

Of the House of Lords that stayed, the Lord Willoughby of Parham was made
Speaker.

But of the Commons, there was about one hundred and forty; who coming to the
House, and missing their old Speaker, and the Sergeant at Mace which usually
attended, chose Hist. Indc. ut supra.
Mr. Henry Pelham to be their new Speaker, and another Sergeant to attend him.
Which number being all of the old Covenanting flock, and yet not further
illuminated, proceeded to do and act as a Parliament: first voting Ib. p. 44.
in their old companions, called the Eleven impeached Members. Next, setting up
a Committee of Safety, enabling them to join with the Committee of the
restored City-Militia; and giving them power to list and raise forces, 30.
July. The King removed from Latimers to Stokepogeys.
appoint Commanders and Officers; and issue forth Arms and Ammunition, for
defense of both Houses and the City, against all that should invade them. And,
in the neck of these Votes, came out a Declaration 30. July. The Kingdome's
Intelligences. p. 617.
of the City; which the Lords and Commons, then sitting at Westminster ordered
to be published throughout all England and Wales; wherein (after a large
preamble) they went on thus;

-- We do, in the presence of Almighty-God, profess, that there is nothing in
the world, that we more desire, than that His Majesty may be put and left free,
in such an honorable condition and capacity, as his person may appear to be at
Liberty, to receive and treat upon such Propositions, as shall be presented
unto him from the Parliaments of both Kingdoms: for our Consciences tell us,
that whilst his royal person is environed by an Army, and remains under the
power thereof, we cannot expect that either His Majesty's Princely Heart, can
give that free assent unto those things, which shall be propounded unto him, as
is requisite: or if he do, cannot hope, with good reason, that we and our
posterity shall, without alteration enjoy the same: And therefore we are
resolved; earnestly (yet with humility) to apply our selves to the Parliament,
to this purpose: and hope, that all good Subjects, who are touched with any
sense of that duty and allegiance, which by the Law of God and man, they owe
unto the King, will unanimously join with us therein.

We cannot omit also to declare unto the Kingdom, how we have sadly observed,
since the Eleven accused Members withdrew themselves; and that the Army has
daily grown upon the Parliament; that a great and considerable number of other
Members of the House of Commons, have also retired themselves, to the
endangering of the Kingdom, which never more needed a full Council: And,
therefore, we shall make our speedy address to the honorable House of Commons,
to call in all the Members of their House, residing in the Army, or retired to
their dwellings, by leave of the House or otherwise. And we shall particularly
insist upon the readmission of the Eleven Members, lately driven out of the
House of Commons, by the violent pursuit of the Army, contrary to the sense of
the same House, the Law of the Land, and the Privileges of Parliament: wherein
also we are confident, all good Englishmen, and Lovers of their Country, will
adhere unto them and us, etc.

And we declare, that we sincerely desire an happy and speedy Peace, by the
settlement of true Religion in this Kingdom; by re-establishing His Majesty in
his just Rights and Authority; by upholding all lawful Privileges of a free
Parliament; by maintaining the Fundamental Laws of the Land; by restoring and
securing the Subject unto, and in his just liberty and property; and, by
freeing the long oppressed Kingdom of all Taxes, and enforced free Quarter,
toward the maintenance of an Army, which of a long time has had no visible
Enemy to encounter. And from this Resolution (by the blessing of God) we shall
never recede, for any earthly consideration, or advantage whatsoever.

But whilst the Citizens were thus Declaring, and the Members very busy at
Westminster, the Fugitives (for so they then called them that were fled to the
Army) were not idle at Windsor; for there they sat in consultation with the
Council of War, and signed an Engagement History of Independencie p. 44.
to live and dye with General Fairfax, and the Army under his Command: as also
a Remonstrance, showing the grounds of their intended advance toward London;
Declaring Ib. p. 45.
against the choice of the new Speaker at Westminster; and that, as things then
stood, there was no free-Parliament sitting; being, through the violence done,
on the twenty sixth of July before, wholly suspended: as also, that whatsoever
Orders or Votes, had passed since that time, they should be null and void, and
not at all submitted unto.

With the Army thus marching toward the City, also joined Ibid. The Army
marches toward London.
the Trained Bands of some Countries (viz. Kent, Essex and Surrey) which put
the Covenanting Brethren into such dreadful apprehensions, and pannick fears;
as that they often sent Commissioners to mediate for peace, but could obtain no
other terms, than Ib. p. 46.
that they must desert the Members sitting at Westminster; as also the Eleven,
formerly impeached. Moreover, that they should call in their Declaration, then
newly printed and published; Relinquish the Militia; Deliver up all their
Forts, and Line of Communication to the Army, together with the Tower of
London, and all the Magazines of Arms therein; Disband all their Forces; Turn
all the Reformados out of the Line; withdraw all their Guards from the Houses;
Receive such Guards of Horse and Foot, within the Line, as the Army should
appoint to guard the Houses; Demolish their works; and suffer the whole Army to
march in triumph through the City.

Unto all which they forthwith tamely yielded, as may seem from those poor,
pitiful, abject and slavish Expressions, made by the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and
Common Council, then sent to General Fairfax; in these words Perfect Diurnal.
p. 1689.
-- And, forasmuch as we observe, that the chief cause, which has drawn you
Excellency and your Army thus near the City, is to bring home those noble and
honorable Memebers of both Houses; who, because of the Tumults at Westminster
the twenty sixth past, have retired themselves, to the end they may by you be
placed in safety, and in a free-Parliament at Westminster; we cheerfully and
heartily join with your Excellency therein: and, according as we shall find
directions from your Excellency, they shall find all ports and passes open, to
receive you and them: and also such Guards of two or three Regiments, as you
Excellency shall think fitting for their conduct to the two Houses of
Parliament. And the Parliament being set with Peace and Safety, we shall humbly
submit to their direction, what forces of yours and ours to continue for their
future Guard; in which service we humbly offer the whole strength of this City.

Whereupon on Hounslow- Heath the Army drew 3. Aug. Ib. p. 1688.
up in Batalia, there being present the Earls of Northumberland, Salisbury,
Kent, and Moulgrave; the Viscount Say and Sele; the Lord Gray of Work, the
Lord Howard of Escrick, and Lord Wharton; the Speaker also of the House of
Commons, and about one hundred Members of that House. Where the
Common-Souldiers were taught to make great Shouts; and cry Lords and Commons,
and a free-Parliament.

From whence, upon the sixth of August, the General brought 6. Aug. Hist. of
Ind. p. 46.
the fugitive Members with a strong party to the Parliament House (the two
Pallace-yards being filled with armed Guards, and double Files placed
throughout Westminster Hall, to the stairs of the House of Commons; and so
through the Court of Requests to the Lords House) put the Speakers in their
respective chayrs; and set himself in a Chayr of State: where he had great
Thanks given him by the Speakers of both Houses.

Which being done, a public day of Thanksgiving was appointed for this happy
restoration of them to their old Seats again, Sir Thomas Fairfax voted Ib. p.
47.
Generalissimo of all the Forces and Forts throughout England and Wales, and
Constable of the Tower of London; and the Common-Souldiers one month's
gratuity, besides their pay. And on the next day following, the whole Army
marched 7. Aug. Ibid.
triumphantly through London, with their Train of Artillery, and soon after
demolished Ib. p. 48.
the Lines of Communication, environing that great City.

CHAP. XXV.
AND now that the Fugitive-members were thus brought again to the House, the
chief business was to make null and void all that was acted by those that sat
in their absence. But in debating Ib. p. 49, and 50.
thereof, the Presbytereans held up most stoutly; insisting with great courage
on the validity of them: Insomuch as the Speaker, finding it difficult for the
Fugitives to carry the Votes, by strength of Reason or Number; showed forth a
Letter Ib. and Perfect Diurnal p. 1705. and 1706.
from the General of the Army, accompanied with a Remonstrance, full of high
language, and not without threats against those that sat whilst the two
Speakers were with the Army calling them Pretended Members; and laying to their
charge in general, Treason, Treachery, and breach of Trust: and protesting that
if they should presume to sit, before they had cleared themselves that they did
not give their assents to some certain Votes, they should sit at their peril;
and that he would take them as Prisoners of War, and try them at a Council of
War.

Which Letter, 14. Aug. The King removed from Stokepogeis to Oatlands.
though it did not a little startle the Presbyterean-Members: yet were they
loath to leave the House, having sat there so long as absolute Dictators. In
order therefore to their continuance within those walls, it was earnestly moved
Hist. of Indepen. p. 50.
by some of them, that the Speaker should command a general meeting of the
whole House, upon the next day, and declare that they should be secured from
danger; as also that no more than the ordinary Guards might then attend the
House.

But these motions were violently opposed, with shrewd menaces by the
Independent-Members; the Speaker also declyning to put any Question therein,
and adjourning till the morrow; so that the Presbytereans were left to come
again at their peril. Which hazard of their safety, occasioned a very thin
House the next day, many of that party absenting themselves: and of those which
came, 'twas observed, that some tackt about to the other side, and some sat
mute.

At last a Committee was appointed Ibid.
to bring in an Ordinance of Accommodation (as they called it) but more
properly the Ordinance of Null an Void; which damned all the Votes, Orders,
and Ordinances passed in the House, from the xxvjth. of July (that the
Apprentices forced the Members, then sitting, to vote and do as they required)
until the sixth of August, that those Members, which fled to the Army were
brought in Triumph again to the House. Which Ordinance, within few days, was
passed 2c. August. Ib. p. 52. Scob. coll. p. 128.
. And soon after that, another 23. Aug. Ib. p. 131. 23. Aug. The King removed
from Oatlands to Syon-house, where he dyned; Thence to Hampton Court.
wholesome one, for establishing of well affected Ministers in sequestered
Livings.

But though this Ordinance of Null and Void, was thus passed, the
Independent-party thought not themselves secure enough; and therefore erected
Hist. of Ind. p. 53.
a Committee of Examinations; to enquire into and examine who they were that
had been active in procuring the City Petition, and Engagement to be
subscribed; or instrumental in that force upon the House, on the twenty sixth
of July before mentioned, or in any other endeavor to raise forces.

Which Committee hunted so close after them that had been busy therein, that
Sir John Maynard 7. Septem. Perfect Diurnal p. 1728.
Knt. of the Bath (a Member of the House of Commons James Earl of Suffolk,
Theophilus Earl of Lincoln, James Earl of Middlesex, John Lord Hunsdon, George
Lord Berkley, William Lord Maynard, and Francis Lord Willoughby of Parham were
all of them imp^ached S. Sept. Ib. p. 1729.
of High Treason, in the name of the Commons of England for levying war against
the King, Parliament, and Kingdom; Sir John Maynard being thereupon committed
Ibid.
to the Tower, and the Lords to the custody of the usher with the Black-rod.
And, to the end, that this now predominant-party might the more engage the
Common people, to join with them, upon occasion, Agitators were employed into
several Counties, for getting Subscriptions to Petitions against Tithes;
Enclosures; and Copy-hold-sines which were uncertain.

Being thus entering upon one of the last Scenes in this most woeful Tragedy; I
must look back a little; and, from what has been said, summarily observe;
first that however specious and plausible the Protestations, Vows, and
Declarations of these monstrous men have otherwise been; their chief design
originally was to destroy and extirpate Monarchy, in all His Majesty's Realms
and Dominions. Secondly; that, when by the assistance of the giddy-multitude
(deluded and captivated with many glorious promises) they had got the sway of
all into their Hands; they most traitorously murdered the King in his politic
capacity; setting him totally aside, as to Authority and Rule; and inhumanely
burying him alive, by a severe and barbarous imprisonment, most insolently
took the Reins of Government into their own usurping power.

Next, that as Ambition and Avarice eagerly incited some Grandees of the
faction to shoulder out the rest, from sharing with them in the spoil they had
got; though no less active than themselves, in accomplishing the general ruin:
the like haughty and covetous desires prompted others, to be no less solicitous
for their own temporal advantage. So that, as the Reformation of miscarriages
and corruptions in Government, was at first cried up by the
Presbyterean-Brethren; and nothing in sted thereof exercised but oppression and
destruction: So likewise, under as fair and plausible pretenses, the power was
soon wrested from that seeming Holy Generation, by the more Seraphick-Saints of
the Independent Tribe; who, captivating the Souldierie at last, as the
Presbytereans had done the people at first by their splended allurements, with
an imaginary Happiness; got the King by that means, into their own cruel Hands:
and then subjugating the City of London (which had been both Mother and Nurse
to that Imparallel'd Rebellion) made the remainder of their Task the less
difficult.

And as this grand work was originally begun by the Presbytereans, under the
Popular name of a Blessed-Parliament (by which subtle Enchantment the vulgar
were at first most cunningly abused) and pursued to the utter subversion of the
King's regal power. So was it carried on by the Independent to the last (as by
and by shall be manifested) until it became thoroughly completed in the
horrid murder of his royal person: toward the perpetration of which
prodigious Fact, I shall now briefly show, by what degrees and steps they did
most audaciously proceed.

CHAP. XXVI.
HAving thus subjugated the City, and purged the two Houses at Westminster, (as
is already observed) they then put on a Presbyterean-cloak for a while; and
under that disguise, pretending their desire to make peace with the King,
presented 7. Septem. Perfect Diurnal p. 1727.
him with the same Propositions (in effect) as he had formerly received from
the Grandees at Westminster, when he lay at Newcastle, in custody of the Scots

Whereunto he made answer 9. Sept. Ibid.
that unto some of them he could not consent without violation of his
Conscience and Honor: nor to some others, for that they were disagreeable to
the present condition of affairs as things then stood, and destructive to the
main and principal Interests of the Army, and of all those whose affections
concurred with them: And therefore desired that the Proposals of the Army might
be likewise treated on, in order to the settling of a lasting peace; still
urging his desires of a personal Treaty.

But to this, vouchsafing him no reply at all, they cast off that veil and
proceeded yet farther in brideling the City, by Impeaching 24. Sept. Perfect
Diurnal p. 1748.
the Lord Mayor, diverse Aldermen, and some eminent Citizens, for having an Hand
in the Petition, Engagement, and Force upon the House of Commons upon the
xxvith. of July beforementioned; who were thereupon committed 25. Sept. Ibid.
to the Tower.

About this time also, for the better encouragement of those that had a mind to
buy Bishops Lands, they passed an Ordinance 23. Sept. Scob. coll. p. 133.
whereby the Purchasers were promised to have their Bargains comfirm'd under
the great Seal of England. And to the end that the multitude of Wild-headed
Schismatics (Limbs of this monstrous Independent-Body) whose help they might
need at a desperate pinch, might propagate the more throughout all parts of the
Nation, a Petition 6. Oct. Perfect Diurnal p. 1761.
was framed, and Subscriptions got to it, by many thousands of the Godly-party
in the City of London, and presented to the Houses at Westminster, for sending
of able gifted men (as they called them) though not of the Clergy to preach the
Gospel throughout the whole Kingdom. Whereupon Thanks Ib.
was returned to the Petitioners, by the Houses.

About this time likewise an Ordinance was brought Ib.
in to the House of Commons, for settling the Church Government, in a
Presbyterean-way, with a Clause for tender Consciences, and such as were Godly,
and made Conscience of their ways. Wherein, upon large debate had, it was
resolved Ib. p. 1770.
, that all manner of Sects should partake of this Indulgence, excepting those
of the Church of Rome, and such Ib. p. 1772.
as should make use of the Common Prayer, according to Law established in the
Church of England.

It is not the least observable; that, as at this time the Independent Grandees
were laying the foundation of their own future dominion: So the Presbyterean
Brethren, though then under Hatches, were as busy, as in such a condition was
possible; setting on the old-Covenanters in Scotland to make a loud noise, as
appears by a Letter 6. Nov. Ib. p. 1796.
from their Commissioners (then residing at Westminster) sent to the two Houses
of Parliament, chiefly concerning their Lord and Sovereign the King (for so
they called him) wherein they took notice, that he was still under the power of
the Army; and of the many Professions and Engagements made by the said Houses
to the Kingdom of Scotland; viz. that they would take care of the preservation
of his person, and of his just Power and Greateness, which both Kingdoms had
sworn (as that Letter did import) not to diminish. Also, that they were
Informed of some intentions by the Army, to remove His Majesty from
Hampton Court. And finding that their stability and happiness did so much
depend upon the safety and preservation of his royal person; being resolved
that the alteration of affairs, should never separate them from the duty and
allegiance they did owe unto him; nor from their constant resolution to live in
all loyalty under his Government; they had often shown their earnest desires,
and contributed their utmost endeavors, toward the composure of those unhappy
differences. And, that the Houses at Westminster, having by their Votes of
October the xxvith. intimated unto them their resolution to apply themselves to
His Majesty: as also, that they were preparing Propositions to be tendered to
him; they desired that they might be expedited, and communicated to them; that,
according to their many Engagements, and relations, there might still be a
conjunction of Councils in those things which were for the Common-peace, and
joint Interest of both Kingdoms: And therefore, that for the assisting of
them, in clearing His Majesty's doubts, and for giving mutual satisfaction to
each other; they desired, in the name of the Kingdom of Scotland, that there
might be a Personal Treaty with His Majesty, as the best and readyest means to
obtain the joint desires of both Kingdoms: And, to that end, that the King
might be invited to come to London, with that Honor, Freedom and respect, as
was due to His Majesty; or at least, remain at Hampton Court, and not to be
under the power and restraynt of the Soldiers.

But this project of the Scots for a Personal Treaty, which might in any sort
tend to the good of His Majesty or the people, was then set on foot too late;
the Grandees of the Army, at that time driving on another design, in order to
his absolute destruction; wherein the common Soldiers were to act their parts,
by those pernicious Instruments, called Adjutators: which was by making show to
frame certain Articles, in order for settling the Liberties of the people, and
Interest of the Army; and this to be called the Agreement of the people. The
agreement of the people.


To which end they changed their Guards; putting such upon him as were more
strict, and discharging well nigh all his Servants, whom they had formerly
admitted to wait on him. The tenor of which Instrument, called the Agreement of
the people was to this effect.

1. That there should be a more equal distribution, by Counties, Cities and
Boroughs, for election of their Representatives in Parliament.

2. That the Parliament, then sitting, should be dissolved upon the last day of
September, anno 1648. then next ensuing.

3. That the people might, of course, choose a Parliament for themselves every
two year; and to begin on the first Thursday in April, then next following, and
to end upon the last of September ensuing.

4. That Ib. p. 1799.
the people were thenceforth to be declared the Supream-power, whereunto that,
and all future Representatives should be subordinate and accountable.

This not pleasing the Members at Westminster, was by them voted to be the very
destruction of the Parliament, and fundamental Laws of this Kingdom; But no
less active were they themselves (though in private) in framing an Impeachment
against the King, by the name of Charles Stuart; a Committee being appointed to
collect together all His Majesty's Letters, and other Papers taken at Navesby,
or elsewhere; to the end they might be ready, when the House should have
occasion to use them: Yet all this while Cromwell (who was the very Soul of
that party) did so play the Ambodexter, that he sometimes made show to the
King, how well he was pleased with his late Answer to those Propositions from
the Houses at Westminster, in that he seemed more to approve of the Armies
Proposals, than those from thence: At other, heightning the Grandees there, by
all the subtilties imaginable against His Majesty's Answer: But privately
spurring on the Agitators to the greatest fierceness that might be: yet
whispering to the King such a fear of their unrulyness, as that His Majesty
stood in no little danger to be clandestinely murdered by the Hand of some
hot-spirited Enthusiast.

CHAP. XXVII.
AND here to enlarge a little farther upon this grand Impostor Cromwell (from
the relation of a person of credit, who was at that time a confident of his) I
shall observe; that when the King was on the way from Holdenby with that body
of Horse commanded by Joyce (as before has been observed) the Headquarters of
the Army were at Kenton in Cambridg-shire, about three miles from Newmarket,
where Fairfax the General, being walked out with one of his Officers, having
speedy advertisement thereof, by one that came with all possible have from
thence, he presently returned back to the Town, where he found Cromwell and
Watson a Scoutmaster (immediately come from the Parliament) newly alighted off
their Horses.

To whom imparting the News, Cromwell seeming not a little surprised therewith,
absolutely dissavowed any knowledge thereof: but forthwith concluded with the
General to dispatch a special Messenger presently away, to prevent His
Majesty's being brought to the Army. Whereupon the Messenger, hasting away
with that errand, met the King about two miles from Childerley, and there
acquainting His Majesty that the General and Lieutenant General thought it not
safe, that he should at that time come to Kenton or Newmarket, advised for the
present, that he should lodge at Childerley, where the Lady Cutts then lived,
and had fit accommodation for him. Which being, by His Majesty assented to, he
rested there that night.

Whereupon Fairfax and Cromwell coming thither on the next day, 1647. and
behaving themselves with all obsequiousness to him; he asked them by whose
authority he was thus taken from Holdenby, the Commissioners which were put
there as a Guard upon him, knowing nothing from their Masters at Westminster of
any Order for the same. Whereunto they answered, that it was not by any
direction from either of them; and with no little confidence seemed to dislike
the Action. To whom the King replied; If then you do not hang up Joyce, I will
not believe you; desiring to go to his own House at Newmarket, whereunto they
assented; and using very large expressions of fidelity to him, removed His
Majesty thither, within few days after.

There it was that Cromwell first gave him hopes of his restoration, and that
he would be cordially instrumental therein; and, as an earnest thereof
permitted diverse of his own trusty Servants and Chaplains to come and serve him
in their respective places: All which had been formerly denied him, as well by
those Parliament-Commissioners who were placed over him upon his remove from
Newcastle, as by the Scots for the time he was in their Hands.

After which being carried from place to place (as has been already observed)
he was brought at length to Hampton Court, and continually fed with fair
promises, and great hopes by Cromwell, that he should be restored to his just
rights; Commissary-general Ireton (who had married Cromwell's daughter, and had
the most power with him of any, as is well known) being totally averse to the
Presbyterean-government, which the then predominant party in Parliament had
resolved to set up: Boldly expressing at Colebrooke (but in private) so great
an indignation against it, and such an entire affection to the King, out of a
seeming hearty sense of his patient sufferings and unparalled condiscensions;
that rather than His Majesty should continue thus enslaved by that vile party,
if but five men would join with him, he would adventure his life in order to
his restoration; Cromwell himself, having for the same reasons afterward at
Putney, solemnly professed; that if but ten men would stick to him, he would
hazard his life and fortune for him upon the same score, or words to that
effect.

Being thus at Hampton Court, where the like unreasonable and enslaving
Propositions were brought to him from the Members at Westminster, as he had
received from them when he was at Newcastle and Holdenby, having no small hopes
of his restoration, through the power of Cromwell, who had the greatest
influence on the Army: and being well aware that the predominant party in
Parliament did still aim at the establishing themselves in a perpetual
dominion: as also, that, in order thereto they did resolve so to garble the
Army, according to their own Interest, so that the strength thereof might be
broke in pieces, and a new model set up, consisting of those, who should hold
firm to the Covenant; His Majesty plainly foreseeing how destructive this must
needs be, not only to himself and his royal family, but to Monarchick
government, thought fit in his Answer to those their Proposals, to take care of
the Armies's interest, which he then looked upon as the better friends to
himself and the public.

But before he would fully resolve what Answer to make, called that person to
him from whom I had this relation, (he being a great officer under Cromwell,
and in much esteem with him;) and told him he must resolve him a short
Question; which was, whether he could assure him, that Cromwell was the same in
his Heart to him, as he had by his Tongue so freely and frequently professed
himself to be. At which Question that person being not a little startled; and
fearing the danger of an uncertain and unsafe Answer, entreated respite till
the next day at Noon. Which being given him, he went privily that night to
Cromwell, then in bed at Putney; and acquainting him freely with the occasion
of coming to him at such a time, Cromwell in brief assured him, that he did
really and uprightly intend from his Heart, to perform the same to his utmost,
which he had formerly so often professed to His Majesty that he would do; which
was the full restoring and establishing him in his just and lawful rights:
imprecating, that neither himself, his wife or children might ever prosper, if
he did not perform what he had so promised, in case the Army remained an Army:
and if not they were obliged to fall with him: and that he would stand by him
if there were but ten men besides that would adhere to him, with most bitter
reflections upon that rigid party in Parliament, which by their Presbyterean
principles and practices did merely design to enslave him.

But notwithstanding all this assurance, that person was so cautious, that he
conditioned with Cromwell, that, if any thing should thenceforth happen, which
might hinder the real accomplishment of this his fair design, that His Majesty
might have timely notice thereof, to the end he might endeavor to avoid the
danger, which being assented to, he returned to His Majesty with a cheerful
countenance (not at all suspecting the least to the contrary) and imparted to
him the substance of what had then passed betwixt them. Whereupon the King,
framing his Answer to those Proposals from the Parliament (so brought to him as
abovesaid) sent it by the same person to Cromwell and Ireton to be perused,
with liberty to add or alter what they should think fit. Which being done by
them, and returned to His Majesty, he wrote it a new and sent it to Westminster.

But see now the horrid perfidiousness of Cromwell and Ireton. No sooner was
this candid and gracious Answer from the King Imparted to the House of Commons,
but that both of them appeared with the highest in their bitter invectives
against it. The News whereof being forthwith brought to the King, he called for
the person, who had been so lately with Cromwell, and acquainting him
therewith, sent him back to Cromwell to require a reason thereof. Whose answer
was, that what he had then said in the House of Commons, was to sound the depth
of those virulent humors, wherewith the Presbytereans, whom he knew to be no
friends to the King were possessed with all: But after that time he never came
more to His Majesty.

That person therefore, whom the King had so employed to Cromwell, observing
thus much, made it his chief business to find out the Councils and designs of
the principal Officers of the Army at Putney: and discerning at length how
dangerous they were in reference to His Majesty, gave him private Advertisement
thereof, to the end he might consider which way best to preserve himself.
Whereupon, resolving to get privately from Hampton Court to the City of London,
the same person (so employed as abovesaid) undertook to find him out a secure
lodging there: and, accordingly leaving him, did provide such a one; His
Majesty determining, that so soon as he should get safe thither, to let him
have knowledge thereof.

And now at length, being fully sensible of what he had so long feared: which
was, that notwithstanding his own clear and candid dealing with them in all
respects; and that he did so far rely upon them, that he had strictly
prohibited all those of his faithful subjects, who had served in his Armies,
that they should not join with the Scots, in case they should raise any forces
in order to his pretended restoration, as Cromwell seemed to suspect that they
might (though nothing less would have been the effects thereof, considering
they stuck so close to their solemn League and Covenant:) he was to expect no
better than destruction and ruin to himself and his posterity, and absolute
slavery to all his good Subjects; he caused a Boat to be privately brought to
the Riverside; and upon the eleventh of November, The King went from
Hampton Court toward the Isle of Wight, 11. Novem.
about the beginning of the night, went alone from the Privy-lodgings, through
a Door where no Guard stood, into the Park; and so crossing the Thames landed
at Ditton; where Sir John Berkley (afterward Lord Berkley) Mr. John Ashburnham
and Colonel William Leg (sometime Grooms of his Bedchamber) were placed with
Horses.

But so it happened, that when the King was got on Shore, and had stayed some
time for them, Mr. Ashburnham diswaded him from going to London, and led him
into Hantshire, where His Majesty demanding of him, to what place he intended
to conduct him; he answered into the Isle of Wight, whereof Colonel Hamond was
then Governor, in whom Mr. Ashburnham had no little confidence.

To which His Majesty replied, that he would not adventure himself thither;
unless he might have sufficient assurance, under the Governor's hand, for his
security from any danger; and thereupon sent Mr. Ashburnham and Sir John
Berkley into the Isle, to treat with Hamond to that purpose, staying himself at
Lichfield- house (belonging to the Earl of Southampton) with Colonel Leg, till
they returned: strictly charging them, that they should not let Hamond know
where he was, unless he would give him full assurance under his Hand, for his
freedom, and return thence when he pleased.

But, instead of observing these His Majesty's directions, they came back, and
brought Hamond with them. And being come to Lichfield, went to the King (then
in his Bedchamber) leaving Hamond below, telling His Majesty what they had
done; whereat the King, being not a little amazed, asked them if they had a
promise under Hamond's hand, for his security; and they replying No, but th^^
he would approve himself a man of Honor, He plainly told them, that they had
betrayed him, or words to that purpose, concluding then, that he was no better
than his prisoner.

Which sharp resentment of his condition, (...) them so near, that they offered
to kill Hamond, (...) take some other course for His Majesty's safety. But to
this their vain proposal the King did utterly refuse to assent, rather choosing
to yield up himself a Sacrifice (as he afterward was made) to those
bloudthirsty-men, who had resolved his destruction, and subversion of the
Government, than to be guilty of assenting to take away the life of that one
Rebel in cold blood. And putting himself thereupon into the hands of that
unworthy person, was by him kept in no better condition than a prisoner, until
he was by his consent taken away by the direction of Cromwell, and the rest of
those bloody Regicides, who brought him to the Block, as we shall see anon. But
I return.

At his departure from Hampton Court he left in his withdrawing-room a Letter
directed to the Commissioners which attended him there, to be communicated to
both Houses of Parliament; the effect whereof was to tell them, that he had
with great patience endured a tedious restraint; which he did willingly
undergo, whilst he had any hopes that it might conduce to the peace of the
Kingdoms: but then finding by too certain proofs, that this his continued
patience, would not only turn to his personal ruin, but be of much more
prejudice than furtherance of the public good; he did conceive, that he was
bound, as well by natural as political obligations, to seek his safety, by
retiring himself for some time from the public view both of his friends and
enemies: challenging the judgment of all indifferent men, if he had not just
cause to free himself from the hands of those who did change their Principles
with their condition; earnestly urging, that all just Interests (viz.
Presbyterean, Independent; Army, and Scots) might be heard, together with
himself, with Honor, Freedom, and Safety: and then, that he would instantly
break through that cloud of retirement, and show himself to be really Pater
patriae.

In this Letter of his Majesty's (who unparalled Sufferings had raised his
Observations to an higher pitch than some who have been much magnified for
their Wisdom did ever reach) it is to be noted, that he saw he had just cause
to free himself from the Hands of those who did change their principles with
their condition. Now, lest this his expression should be thought to have
reference merely to the Independents, in whose power he then was; it will not
be amiss to consider that Letter, written by the Commissioners of Scotland unto
the two Houses at Westminster, dated the sixth of November, then past, in
reference to the King; together with that Answer of the Commissioners of the
general Assembly of the Kirk, unto certain Proposals made to them anno 1646.
touching the King's coming into that Realm, upon his exclusion from the
Government in England, in case of his leaving them without taking the Covenant,
he being then at Newcastle, in custody of the dear Brethren of that Realm.

Being thus got away from Hampton Court, he arrived 13. Nov. Perfect Diurnal,
p. 1785.
in the Isle of Wiht upon the thirteenth of November: whence (incessantly
desiring a safe and well-grounded Peace to these Kingdoms) he soon sent another
Message to the Members at Westminster, Another message from the King to the
Houses at Westminster.
wherein, to shorten that Work, he expressed his mind to this effect; viz.
That, conceiving himself to be at much more freedom and security than formerly,
he thought it necessary to offer such Grounds to the two Houses for that
purpose; which, upon due examination of all Interests, might best conduce
thereto. And therefore, as to the abolishing of Archbishops, Bishops, etc. he
could not consent to it, as he was a Christian and a King: first, being
satisfied in his Judgment, that this Order was placed in the Church by the
Apostles themselves; and, that ever since that time, it had continued in all
Christian Churches throughout the World, till this last Century of years: And
in this Church, in all times of Change and Reformation, it had been upheld by
the wisdom of his Ancestors, as the great Preserver of Doctrine, Discipline,
and Order in the Service of God. Next, as a King at his Coronation, that he had
not only taken a solemn Oath: but, that himself and his predecessors, in their
confirmation of the great Charter, had inseperably woven the Right of the
Church into the Liberties of the rest of the Subjects: Nevertheless was
willing, that it should be provided, that the particular Bishops might perform
the several Duties of their Callings, both by their personal Residence, and
frequent Preaching in their Diocese; as also, that they should exercise no Act
of Jurisdiction or Ordination without the consent of the Presbyters; and to
limit their powers, that they might not be grievous to tender Consciences.

Moreover, that he could not consent to the Alienation of the Church Lands, it
being a Sin of the highest Sacrilege; conceiving it also to be a prejudice to
the public good; many of his Subjects having the benefit of renewing Leases at
much easier rates than if those Possessions were in the hands of private men;
besides the discouragement that it would be to all Learning and Industry, when
such eminent Rewards shall be taken away: yet, considering the great distemper
concerning Church Discipline, and that the Presbyterean-Government was then in
practice; to eschew confusion as much as might be, and for satisfaction of the
two Houses of Parliament, was content, that the said Government should be
legally permitted to stand in the same condition it then was for three years:
Provided, that himself and those of his Judgment (or any other, who could not
in Conscience submit thereto) might not be obliged to comply therewith, but
have free practice of their own profession. And that a free Consultation and
Debate might be had with their Divines at Westminster (twenty of his Majesty's
nomination being added to them) whereby it might be determined by his said
Majesty and the two Houses, how the Church Government, after that time, should
be settled, (or sooner, if differences might be agreed) as should be most
agreeable to the Word of God; with full Liberty to all those who should differ
upon conscientious grounds from that settlement. Provided, that it might not be
understood to tolerate those of the Popish-profession; nor to exempt those from
the penalty of the Laws, or tolerate Atheism, or Blasphemy.

2. As to the Militia, though it was undoubtedly the inherent right of the
Crown: yet, to evidence his desire to secure the performance of such Agreement
as should be made in order to a Peace, his Majesty was content, that, during
his whole reign, it should be disposed of by his two Houses of Parliament.

3. As to the Arrears of the Army, that he should concur in any thing that
might be done without violation of his Conscience and Honor.

4. As to the Disposal of the great Offices of State, and Naming of
Privy-Councillers, he offered the disposing of them, for the whole time of his
reign, by the two Houses of Parliament,

5. For the Court of Wards and Liveries, that it should be taken away, so as a
full recompense might be settled on his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors in
perpetuity.

6. That he would consent to the making of all Oaths, Declarations, and
Proclamations, against both or either House of Parliament null and void. So
likewise of all Indictments and other proceedings against any person for
adhering unto them. And that he would pass a general Act of Oblivion.

7. That, for Ireland, he would give satisfaction to them.

8. That as to such Acts and Grants passed under his great Seal since the 22th.
of May, 1642. and confirming such as had been passed under that, made by the
two Houses, he would give satisfaction in what might reasonably be desired.

9. That, for confirmation of all these and whatsoever else might be proposed
by the two Houses; and also of what he should propose on his own part, he did
earnestly desire a personal Treaty at London, with Honor, Freedom and Safety.

10. And that the Proposals of the Army, concerning the Succession of
Parliaments, and their due Elections should be taken into consideration.

11. So likewise that as to what concerned the Kingdom of Scotland, he would
apply himself to give all reasonable satisfaction.

After the sending of this Message by his Majesty, the next thing observable
that happened, was a Petition 1. December. Perfect Diurnal p. 1805.
through the influence of the Presbytereans, presented to the two Houses at
Westminster, by the Common Council of the City of London; acknowledging the
Parliament (for by that Title they then called those Members sitting at
Westminster) to be the Supreme Power in this Kingdom: and (inter alia) praying
that the Covenant might be duly observed.

No wonder then, that his Majesty's gracious Message of November the xvjth.
was so little regarded, as that he had no Answer at all thereto, upon the sixth
of December following, he therefore put them in mind 6. December. Ib. p. 1838.
of it, still pressing for a personal Treaty.

Whereunto, insted of an Answer, they sent him four Bills to be assented unto
by him, as preparatory to a Treaty. The four Dethroning Bills.
These were those four Dethroning Bills, which, if passed into Acts, as they
required, might have saved the labor of a Treaty. Unto which, for Answer, his
Majesty made these most prudent and rational Observations.

1. That the Commissioners of Scotiand had openly protested against them.

2. To allow of that great Seal, made by them, without his authority, before
consideration should be had thereupon in a Treaty, might afterward hazard the
security it self.

3. That these Bills did not only contain the devesting himself of all
Sovereignty, and that without possibility of recovering it, either to Himself,
or his Successors (except by Repeal of them:) but also, making his Concessions
guilty of the greatest Pressures that could be upon his Subjects: as in other
particulars; so by giving an arbitrary and unlimited Power to the two Houses
for ever, to raise and levy Forces for land or sea service, of what persons
(without distinction of quality) and to what numbers they should please, and
likewise for levying money for their Pay.

So that these their Proposals, being thus destructive to Himself and his
Successors, he (in that his Answer) declared; That neither the desire of being
freed from that tedious and irksome condition of life, he had so long suffered,
nor the apprehension of what might befall him, in case they would not afford
him a personal Treaty, should make him change his resolution, of not consenting
to any Act, till the whole Peace were concluded: still earnestly pressing for a
personal Treaty with them.

It being now visible enough, that Independency grew up every day more and
more, the Brethren of Scotland became so sensible thereof; that the Assembly of
Divines of that Kirk, wrote to those sitting at Westminster; passionately
desiring them to adhere unto the Covenant, and constantly to endeavor the
extirpation of Heresy and Schism in the Church of England.

And, to second that, came another Letter to the Members of both Houses sitting
at Westminster, from the Scotish-Commissioners, wherein was enclosed a large
Declaration, in which are these Expressions. -- Ib. p. 1850.
There be some things which properly concern the Kingdom of England, their
Rights, Laws, and Liberties: But there be other matters, which in their own
nature, as being common to both, or by Covenant or Treaty concern both
Kingdoms; wherein, unless we should forget our duty to God, to the King's
Majesty, to our native Kingdom, and to this Nation, our common Concernment and
Interest cannot be denied. For as Scotland was invited and engaged in this War,
upon grounds and reasons of common Interest: so we trust it will not be
offensive, that in making Peace, we claim from the Houses an improvement of the
very same principles, and a performance of the Treaties they have made with us;
that the same measure of conjunction of Interest be given to us, which was had
of us, and promised unto us; wherein the very Law of Nations, and the Rules of
common Equity, does plead for us. Yet, in the application of this Rule, we
shall not stretch our selves beyond our lines, the express condition of our
Solemn League and Covenant, the duty of our Allegiance, and the Treaties and
Declarations between the Kingdoms; which are so many strong Obligations, as all
who have Honor or Conscience must acknowledge should be inviolably observed.

Having laid this, as a most just and solid ground of our proceedings, we shall
speak of the best and most probable means to procure a good agreement with the
King, for settling Religion and a lasting peace: and next to the Propositions
which are to be the foundation of the peace and safety of both Kingdoms. And it
is still our opinion and judgment, that the most equal, fairest and just way,
to obtain a well-grounded Peace, is by a personal Treaty with the King; and
that his Majesty, for that end, be invited to come to London, with Honor,
Freedom, and Safety. And, as it is far from our thoughts and intentions, in
expressing our differences upon the Propositions, to provoke or give offense:
so we trust, that our freedom, in discharge of the trust committed to us,
proceeding from our Zeal to Religion, Loyalty to the King, and Love to Peace,
shall receive a candid interpretation from the honorable Houses; and that they
will, in their Wisedoms, not slight the desires of a Kingdom, who in the time
of England's greatest danger, esteemed no hazard too hard for their assistance;
and are now seeking nothing but the performance of the mutual Obligations,
Declarations and Treaties between the two Kingdoms; and to prevent the danger,
which may ensue upon the violation and breach of so solemn Engagements.

The Houses of Parliament have frequently professed,
that the chief end of their wars was the Reformation and Establishment of
Religion, according to the Covenant: and they have often promised and declared
to the King, and to all the world (not without deep attestations of the name of
God) that no trouble or success, should ever make them wrong or diminish the
power of the Crown, which were the chief motives and arguments that induced
Scotland to engage with them in this war. Let therefore that be given to God,
which is God's, and to Caesar that which is Caesar's; whereby it may be
evident, that you are not unmindfull of the solemn Vows you made to God in the
time of distress, for Reformation of Religion; and it may also really appear,
that the advantages and power, which success has put into your hands, has not
lessened your loyalty to the King. And, according to our many professions and
near relations, let us really and cordially cherish and strengthen the union
between the two Kingdoms, under His Majesty by all pledges of reciprocal
kindness, that so Religion and Righteousness may flourish, and both Kingdoms
languishing under the heavy pressures and calamities of an unnatural war, may
live in peace and plenty.

As we cannot agree to this way of sending those four Bills to His Majesty for
his assent, before any Treaty upon the rest of the Propositions: so we are
extremely unsatisfied with the matter of those new Propositions, lately
communicated unto us, for the reasons expressed in our answer unto them, which
we do herewith deliver unto your Lordships to be presented to both Houses of
Parliament. And we do desire, that they would take the whole business into
their farther consideration, and that there be a personal Treaty, with His
Majesty here at London, upon such Propositions, as shall be agreed upon, with
advice and consent of both Kingdoms, according to the Treaty.

This in general was their Declaration: but the particular desires, which they
exhibited, were these; viz. that the honorable Houses would establish the
solemn League and Covenant; and that His Majesty be desired to give his royal
assent for confirming the same by Act of Parliament. That the settling of
Reformation, and an uniformity in Religion, in the Kingdoms of England and
Ireland, be inserted in the new Propositions: And, in particular, that the
Confession, the Directory for worship, form of Church Government, and
Catechism agreed upon by the Assembly of Divines, be established: That
effectual course be taken by Act of Parliament for the suppressing of
Blasphemy, Heresy and Schism and all scandalous Doctrines, and practices, as
are contrary to the light of Nature, or to the known principles of
Christianity, or the power of Godliness; or which may be destructive to order
and Government; or to the peace of the Church or Kingdom.

That the Ordinances concerning the calling and sitting of the Assembly of
Divines, be desired to be confirmed by Act of Parliament.

That the Proposition, for the confirmation of the Treaties betwixt the two
Kingdoms, and the proceedings betwixt them, be expressed. And that Treaty for
the return of the Scots Army of the date of December. 23. 1646. be inserted
amongst the rest.

That His Majesty's assent be desired to what the two Kingdoms shall agree in
the prosecution of the Articles of the large Treaty, which are not yet
finished: and that all other things be inserted concerning the joint Interest
of both Kingdoms, or the Kingdom of Scotland in particular. That the Armies
in both Kingdoms, which were raised for the preservation of Religion,
and defense of the King's person, may be disbanded, now the war is ended, and
have due satisfaction for their arrears. That speedy releif may be sent to
Ireland: and that an Act of Oblivion may be agreed upon, to be passed in the
Parliaments of both Kingdoms.

That His Majesty be restored to His Rights; and that in the Propositions a
conclusion may be added; promising all real endeavor, that His Majesty may
live in the splendour and glory of his royal progenitors, as beseems his royal
place; that so all differences and troubles may end in a mutual confidence and
rejoicing.

Upon debate of which Message from His Majesty ( Nov. 16.) and of that
Declaration and those Proposals by the Scottish-Commissioners, the House of
Commons passed these following Votes 3. Jan. Perfect Diurnal p. 1865.


1. That no more addresses be made from the Parliament to the King; Vote of no
more Addresses to the King.
nor any Letters or Message received from him.

2. That it should be Treason for any person whatsoever, to deliver any Message
to the King, or receive any Letter or Message from him, without leave from both
Houses of Parliament.

3. That the Members of both Houses, and the Committee of both Kingdoms, had
power to sit and act alone (asformerly the Committee of both Kingdoms had) for
the safety of the Kingdom.

4. And, that a Committee should be nominated to draw up a Declaration to be
published, to satisfy the Kingdom of the reasons of passing these Votes.

To back which Votes, the General and Council of the Army, did put forth a
Declaration 11. Jan.
signifying their Resolutions to adhere to the Houses, for settling and securing
the Parliament and Kingdom, without the King, and against him, or any other,
that should thereafter partake with him. And sent Thanks 15. Jan. Hist. of Ind.
p. 75.
to the House of Commons for those Votes.

To show the people likewise, the Reasons of those four Votes, the Grandees at
Westminster appointed Ib.
a Committee to search into the King's conversation, and errors of his
Government, and to publish them in a Declaration to the World wherein they
objected (as high crimes against him) his father's death, the loss of Rochell,
and the Massacre and Rebellion in Ireland. Which Declaration being printed by
their authority, was afterward ordered 11. Feb.
to be dispersed throughout the whole Kingdom, by the several Members of the
House of Commons, in those Countries and places for which they did serve.

CHAP. XXVIII.
THE King therefore seeing himself thus laid aside, penned a Declaration 18.
Jan.
with his own hand, for the satisfaction of all his people; which, soon after
was made public by the Press. Whereby, representing his sad and most
disconsolate condition, through a long and strict Imprisonment, together with
his earnest endeavors to have composed all things by an happy peace; whereunto
he added most just, clear and undeniable Reasons, why he could not assent to
pass those four dethroning Bills beforementioned: farther showed what usage he
had endured by Colonel Hamond the Governor, in whose custody he then was; most
of his servants being by him discharged, the Guards redoubled, and himself
restrained of that Liberty, which before he had been allowed. Appealing also to
the world, how he had deserved that dealing from his subjects; having
sacrificed to them, for the peace of the Kingdom, all, but what was much more
dear to him than his life; viz. his Conscience and Honor: and, desiring
nothing more than to perform it, in the most proper and usual way; viz. by a
personal Treaty.

Taking notice likewise of the often repeated professions, and Engagements made
to him by the Army, at Newmarket and St. Albans, for asserting his just Rights
in General, by their voted and revoted Proposals, which he had reason to
understand should be the utmost that would be expected from him: yea that in
some things he should be eased. And conlcuded; that, if it were peace they
desired, he had showed the way thereto (being both willing and desirous to
perform his part in it) by a just compliance with all chief Interests.

Was it plenty and Happiness? Those were the inseparable effects of peace. Was
it security? His Majesty who wished that all men would forgive and forget like
him, did offer the Militia for his own time. Was it Liberty of Conscience? He
who wanted it, was most ready to give it. Was it right administration of
Justice? Officers of Trust, were referred to the choice of the two Houses. Was
it frequent Parliaments? He had legally and fully concurred therewith. Was it
the Arrears of the Army? Upon a settlement, he told them that they would be
certainly paid, with much ease; but before that there would be found much
difficulty, if not impossibility in it.

But all this was then to no purpose: for having got the power of the Sword
into their hands, the Voice of an Angel from Heaven, could have been nothing
regarded: for on they went with their great work; In order whereunto a
Pamphlet was published by authority (that is to say licensed by a public
Imprimatur) where the Prophet Ezekiel Ezekiel, cap. 21. verse. 25, 26, and 27.
was produced to discover what they intended -- Thus says the Lord God,
concerning the profane wicked Prince whose day is come, when Iniquity shall
end. Remove the Diadem. Take off the Crown: This shall not be the same. Exalt
him that is low and abase him that is high.

And to cajole the Presbyterean (having formerly secured themselves from the
reach of their Holy Discipline) they passed an Ordinance 29. Jan. Scob. coll.
p. 139.
, for the speedy dividing and settling the several Counties of this Kingdom,
into distinct Classical-Presbyteries, and Congregational Elderships. And,
desiring to seem men of the greatest Sanctity imaginable, they constituted
Weekly Intelligencer. p. 824.
a Committee, for the enumeration of great crying sins; appointing that they
should daily meet, and do their utmost endeavor to suppress them: And passed
another Ordinance 11. Feb. Scob. Col. p. 143.
for suppressing of Stage Plays, and demolishing Play Houses.

But all these devices were merely circumstantial; those which more immediately
tended to the carrying on their grand work, being the chief; viz. the
approbation which the people then had (or seemed to have) of their Votes for no
more Addresses to the King. Toward the obtaining whereof, having been not a
little sollicitous, they employed their most busy Emissaries, and
confiding-friends in all parts of the Realm. Who acted for them so vigourously;
as that, from Launton (a populous corporation in Somersetshire) they had very
great Thanks for the same. So likewise from the Godly-party in Buckinghamshire
9. March. Weekly Intelligencer p. 868. Hist. of Ind. p. 91.
; who also, made large promises to adhere to, and stand by them in the farther
prosecution thereof, to the utmost of their abilities, against all opposers:
desiring, that they would proceed to a speedy settling of the civil Government,
in such a way as might best conduce to the freedom and happiness of this
Nation: and that they would put forth their power, for promoting of Religion
according to the word of God: to give due encouragement to all Godly and able
Ministers; to cast out such as were scandalous, and unfit for the work of the
Ministry: and to be tender of the Consciences of such, whose conversations
were, as becomes the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

For which the Petitioners had not only thanks thereupon rendered unto them,
for their constant affections to the Parliament: but an order was forthwith
made; that the Petition should be printed, to the end that the world might take
notice of the singular affections of the Petitioners; and that they might be an
example for other Counties of the Kingdom.

Which transactions here, Anno 1648.
so awakened the Brethren of Scotland; that seeing no good could be effected by
words, they resolved to dispute the business otherwise, and therefore agreed of
raising an Army. But the general Assembly of that Kirk, endeavoring to oppose
them therein, the estates of Parliament there declared... April. Perfect
Diurnal p. 1978.
, that the breaches of the Covenant and Treaties should be represented, and
reparations sought for the same. Next, that the War which they were to make
with England, should be for strengthening the Union betwixt the two Kingdoms,
and encouraging the Presbytereans and well affected there. Moreover, that they
would declare His Majesty's concessions concerning Religion, not to be
satisfactory. And that whereas Religion had been, and they trusted should be,
the principal end of all their undertakings; so they would be careful, that
the then present question to be stated, should contain security and assurance,
to be had from His Majesty, by his solemn Oath, under his hand and Seal, that
he should, for himself, and for his successors, give his royal assent, to pass
Acts of Parliament, injoyning the League and Covenant; establishing Presbytreal
Government, the Directory for Worship, and Confession of Faith, in all his
Dominions: and that he should never make opposition to any of these, nor
endeavor any change thereof: As also, that this security should be had from
him before his restitution to the exercise of his royal power.

All this notwithstanding, the Kirk was not one jot satisfied: but earnestly
urged Ib. p. 1979.
, that the Parliament should declare against His Majesty's concessions,
positively, without any condition, and presently without delay; they being (as
they expressed) so prejudicial to the Cause and Covenant.

And when they discerned, that Forces were levying throughout that Kingdom,
they so much feared, that His Majesty and his good Subjects might receive any
benefit thereby; that they did put up a large Petition to the Parliament there:
wherein they earnestly desired Ib. p. 1994.
the Lords, as they would answer the contrary at the great day of Judgment,
that they would not proceed so, as to give any encouragement unto the
prelatical or malignant party in England, nor be any grief to the Presbyterean
Party; nor to restore the King, until he had resolved the settlement of
Presbytery, and that what they intended on the King's behalf, might be with
subordination to those ends expressed in the Covenant.

Whereupon the Parliament there, declared Ibid.
, that they would be so far from joining, or associating with the popish,
prelatical, or malignant-party, if they should again rise in Arms, either to
oppose or obstruct all or any of the ends of the Covenant; that, on the
contrary they would oppose, and endeavor to suppress them, as Enemies to the
Cause and Covenant on the other side.

Likewise, that in regard His Majesty's late concessions and offers concerning
Religion, were not satisfactory: and that the principal ends of all the
undertakings of that Nation, had been, and they hoped should be, to see
Religion in the first place settled: and that, as they should endeavor the
rescuing of His Majesty from those, who maliciously carried him away from
Holdenby-House against his own will, and the declared resolutions of both
Kingdoms, and did still detein him close prisoner, to the end he might come,
with honor, freedom and safety, to some of his Houses in or about London,
where both Kingdoms might make their application to him, for settling of
Religion, and a well grounded Peace: So they did resolve, not to put in His
Majesty's hands, or in any other whatsoever, such power, whereby the ends of
the Covenant, or any one of them might be obstructed, or opposed; Religion, or
Presbyterean-Government endangered: but, on the contrary, that before any
Agreement should be made, His Majesty should give assurance, under his solemn
Oath, and under his Hand and Seal; that he should, for himself and his
successors, give his Royal assent and agreement to such Act or Acts of
Parliament, of both, and either Kingdoms respectively, for enjoining the
League and Covenant, and fully establishing Presbyterean-Government, Directory
for Worship, and Confession of Faith in all his Dominions; and that he should
never make opposition to any of these; nor endeavor any thing thereof.

Moreover, that if any war should be made; as it should be on just and
necessary grounds; so did they resolve,
to give the trust and charge of their Armies and Committees to none, but such
as should be, and were of known integrity, and against whom there was no just
cause of exception.

Also, that the Parliament was willing to subscribe, for the grounds of their
undertaking an Oath; wherein, both in the framing of it, and otherwise, they
were willing the Church should have interest, as had been in the like case.
And, that the resolutions of the Parliament thereupon might be the more
effectual, and in regard of the then present condition of affairs, it was their
opinion, that the Kingdom of Scotland should be put in a Posture of Defense,
Posture of Defense.
as it was in the year 1643. And, like as they had drawn that Act of Posture;
which being allowed in Parliament, and sent to the Shires, they thought it fit
time to send their demands to the Parliament of England; and that some descreet
man should be sent with the same, and a limited time appointed for his return
with answer.

I shall not stand here to give instance of such particulars, as further
happened betwixt the Grandees at Westminster, and the Scots, upon this
business: for all those passages were to no other end, than by thus fencing
with each other, to prevent any censure in their respective Actings; and
consequently, to obtain the peoples assistance upon occasion. For in short, the
state of the business stood thus; the Independents of the Army, to gain the
whole and absolute power of rule into their hands, having printed and published
several Declarations, Remonstrances, Manifestos and Proposals; besides
Petitions of their own framing (whereunto they got subscriptions in many
places) insinuating to the people their willingness to redress public
Greivances, to be the Restorers of Peace, the Laws and Liberties of the
Subject; to be setlers of Religion, maintainers of the privileges of
Parliament; Callers to account of all Committees, Sequestrators, Treasurers,
etc. and to be their deliverers from Excise, and other Taxes; but, above all,
preservers of all true Interests; Restorers of the King to his just Rights and
Prerogatives, with Honor, Freedom and Safty to his person; without which, they
professed there could be no settled peace or happiness in this Nation. And, in
pursuance of their undertakings, having made Addresses to His Majesty, with
more tolerable overtures, than any that he could obtain from the Members,
sitting at Westminster; they, after a while, made private proposals to him,
suitable merely to their own Interests, but wholly derogatory to his Regal power,
the Religion established by Law; as also to the Liberties and Properties of the
Subject. Whereunto, when they saw, that the King could not, with his Conscience
and Honor assent, they enterteined new designs against his Person and
Government, History of Independencie part 2. p. 5.
ushering them in by the help of a Levelling-party; who in pursuance thereof,
obtruded clamourous Petitions against any farther Treaty with His Majesty, and
demanded exemplary Justice from the Members at Westminster against him; which,
through the influence that the Army had on them (considering how the Houses had
been garbled) were entertained with Thanks.

Hence was it, that when those Propositions of 13. Nov. anno 1647. were brought
into the House from His Majesty, whereby he pressed them so earnestly for a
personal Treaty, the four Dethroning Bills were sent to him, to be first
signed, before they would admit thereof: And, upon his refusal to yield unto
them; those Destructive Votes, of no more Addresses to him were passed.

The miserable condition of his Majesty, and in him of all his loyal Subjects
being therefore thus evidently seen by most men, who beheld nothing but slavery
and oppression, thenceforth to be their portion; did so awaken them; that from
Essex there came a Petition by many thousands, to the Members at Westminster,
for a personal Treaty with the King, as the most proper means to a well
grounded peace. After that, another from 16. May.
Surrey, a multitude of that County, accompanying it to Westminster. Which
relisht so ill with the Grandees, that they sent the Guards to beat them away;
whereupon diverse were wounded and some slain.

Nor had the Kentish-men better success: for having by their Grand Jury, in the
name of the whole Shire, framed a petition for peace; the Committee of that
County, being jealous, that the people would take Heart thereat, prohibited
History of Independencie part 1. p. 95.
the same, by printed papers, published in all the Churches; branding it to be
seditious and tumultuous; saying, that they would hang up two in every Parish,
that were promoters of it, and sequester the rest.

And, when the people, seeing themselves opposed in that their modest way of
Application, resolved of farther consideration therein, by a general meeting,
and to come armed for their own defense; a party of Horse was first sent in
amongst them; and afterward the whole Army (under the Command of their General
Fairfax,) whereupon some of them fled into Essex, where Sir Charles Lucas and
diverse of that County joined with them; as also the Lord Capell at Colchester,
with some Horse which necessitating the rest, for their own defense to make to
Sandwich and some Castles on the coast thereabouts; the Army advanced after,
slew and took diverse of them prisoners, and sequestered the estates of all that
desired peace; Weever (a hotheaded Independent) having Ib. p. 97.
moved in the House of Commons, that all Kent might be sequestered, because they
had rebelled; and all Essex because they would rebel.

But, notwithstanding the strength of their Army, and severity against those,
who did not submit to their oppressive power; the Scots, having raised an Army,
which was then ready to march into England, in pursuance of the ends of the
Covenant (as has been observed) there were many others in sundry parts of the
Nation, as well Presbytereans as Royalists, discerning no better fruits to
themselves of those successes, which the Independents then had, than oppression
and slavery; boldly made attempts, in order to the rescue of His Majesty out of
their cruel hands, and to free the whole Kingdom from their farther Tyranny.

Of these, the first was by Sir Nicholas Kemish, who got 3. April.
with some forces into Chepstow-castle. The next was that of the valiant Sir
Marmaduke Langdale, who shortly after surprised 30. April.
the strong town of Barwick. After this, Col. Laughorn, Poyer and Powell,
having raised eight thousand men in Pembrokeshire, secured Lenvy-castle, with
the town and castle of Pembroke; and declared 8. May.
in those parts for the settlement of the King and Kingdom. Sir Philip
Musgrave also, upon the like fair hopes, took 25. May.
Carlisse. About the same time 27. May.
likewise, part of the royal Navy (consisting of twenty great Ships of War,
under the command of their Vice Admiral Batten) revolted, and came 27. May.
in to the Prince in Yarmouth road; Pontfrait-castle, being within few days,
after surprised 3. June
. by the Royalists; and the Earl of Holland, with the Lord Francis Villers in
Arms 5. July.
with two thousand men, near Kingston upon Thames.

And to make the expectation more secure, Duke Hamilton, with a powerful Army
of the Scots entering 13. July. The third Invasion of the Scots.
England, published a Declaration, consisting of these heads, 1. That the King
should be brought to London, to treat in person with the two Houses of
Parliament. 2. That all those who had a hand in, or contrived the carrying of
the King from Holdenby, should be condignly punished. 3. That the English Army
should be disbanded. 4. That Presbytery should be settled. 5. And that the
Members of Parliament, which were forcibly secluded from the House, should be
re-seated there.

After which, within few days, Major Lilburne (Brother to John) Governor of
Tinemouth-castle in the Bishopric of Durham, declared 9. Aug.
for the King.

But the fruits of all these fair hopes were soon blasted: for as that Castle
was shortly after stormed by Sir Arthur Haslerig, and Lilburne, with his men
put to the Sword: So was Chepstow-castle by Col. Eure; and Sir Nicholas Kemish
killed in cold blood.

The Earl of Holland also with the Lord Francis Villers were encountered by
Colonel Rich, Major Gibbons and Sir Michael Livesey, totally routed 7. July.
; the Lord Francis Villers slain; the Earl himself pursued to St. Ives in
Huntingdon-shire, and there taken. Laughorne, Poyer and Powell were likewise
defeated by Cromwell and Colonel Horton: And Sir John Owen, who was in Arms
about that time in Northwales, vanquished by Major General Mitton.

The Navy also (brought in by Batten) fell off to the Earl of Warwick: Duke
Hamilton with his Army, being utterly routed 17. Aug
. at Preston in Lancashire, and in his flight at Uttoxeter in Staffordshire,
taken prisoner. Colchester lastly, which had held out with great hardship,
expecting relief from Duke Hamilton, was forced to surrender 27. Aug.
and submit; whereupon Sir Charles Lucas and Sir George L'isle, were
immediately sacrificed to the rage of these merciless men; the Lord Capell made
prisoner, and the Townsmen fined at fourteen thousand pounds.

But those black clouds, before they were thus dispersed, betokening a sudden
storm, put these new Saints, for their more security, upon some desperate
thoughts of taking away the King's life. To which end one Captain Rolfe was
employed 10. June. Ib. p. 104.
by them (as himself did confess) to remove his Majesty out of the way, by
poison; or any other means; forasmuch as it would highly conduce to their
affairs.

Whether it was by Reason that Osburne (a confident of Rolfe's) had discovered
the design; or that, upon more considerate thoughts they took other
resolutions, it is hard to say: but the execution of that murder, was then, at
present, laid aside.

Many were the petitions, at that time, to the Members at Westminster, from
sundry parts; all pressing earnestly for a personal Treaty: yea some of them
from such as they durst hardly displease; as from Ib. p. 110.
the Masters of the Trinity House, Captains of Ships, and Seamen; and another
from 2. July. Ib. p. III.
the City of London.

There is no doubt, but that the Presbyterean-members, were private
well-wishers, if not contrivers of this third Scottish Invasion; though, by the
prevalency of the other faction, a Vote 15. July. Ib. p. 120.
was passed in the House of Commons; that the Scottish-Army, under the command
of Duke Hamilton, were Enemies, and that they should accordingly proceed
against them; In which argument the Independents were so fierce; that, when it
was objected by one, that he thought the Lords would not concur therein; Reply
Ib. p. 130
. was made; That the House of Commons, being the Representative of the people,
had power to act without the Lords, for the peoples safety, in case the Lords
deserted their Trust.

Nevertheless, whether it was the courage that the Presbytereans then took, by
reason of Duke Hamilton's Invasion, and those other disturbances,
beforementioned; or whether it was the doubts the Independents had, of the
dangers which these approaching troubles might produce, it is hard to say: Sure
it is, that after much debate and many Arguments, it was resolved 28. July.
Perf. Diurnal, p. 3003.
That his Majesty in person should be treated with by Commissioners of both
Houses of Parliament in the Isle of Wight, upon the whole matter of the
Propositions at Hampton Court, for settling the peace of the Kingdom* Which
Vote, with other circumstances, did then make such a change in the face of
things, that the City of London began to assume the power of their own Militia,
and listed men; saying Hist. of Indep. p. 123.
they did it by the Law of self Defense, warranted by the Law of God, of
Nature, and of the Land: and by a farther Authority, which would make little
for the advantage of the Parliament to question.

Which so startled the Members at Westminster; that resuming their old
Presbyterean-cloak, they forthwith dispatched Letters 3. Aug. Ib. p. 126.
to the Assembly of the Kirk of Scotland; setting forth what the Parliament had
done in the way of settling peace, reforming the Church and Universities, and
maintaining the Covenant and union betwixt the two Nations; complaining of Duke
Hamilton's Invasion, under color of authority from the Parliament of that
Kingdom.

And though the Brethren of Scotland grounded this their third Invasion upon
the Covenant; the Independent-members at Westminster utterly denied that their
assertion; affirming Ib. p. 128.
stoutly, that the Scots had broke the Covenant therein: yea, that in so doing,
they had set the English at Liberty from it; and that the Covenant was no more
jure divino than Presbytery.

To which was answered by the Presbytereans (for concerning this point there
grew a tough dispute in the House betwixt those two Parties) that the large
Treaty contained the League between the two Nations; so did not the Covenant,
which was a vow made unto God, with their Hands lifted up to Heaven, for the
maintenance and observation of the ends and principles expressed in the
Covenant, from which no power on earth could absolve them. And that, though the
Covenant was not jure divino; yet the keeping of it, after they had taken it,
was jure divino; it being the revealed will of God that they should not offer
unto him the sacrifice of fools, a Covenant to day, and break it to morrow.

But to this some of the more zealous replied; that the Covenant was originally
framed to satisfy the Brethren of Scotland, upon the first bringing in of
their Army hither, to help the Lord against the mighty; without which, the
Scots would not have come in to their assistance: And that work being over,
they were not at all obliged by the Covenant any further; it being to be laid
aside, as an Almanac out of date. And therefore, to strengthen themselves the
more, there were private Listings Ib. p. 124.
of the Schismatics and Antimonarchists, in London. Which did so awaken the
Presbyterean-Saints in that City; that they complained to the House of Commons;
representing the danger thereof: saying, that if the Houses did not give them
leave to look to their safety, they must have recourse to the Law of Nature,
and act in their Militia, without the Houses, in order to self Defense,
allowable by all Laws, and practiced by that very Parliament against the King;
and likewise by Fairfax his Army against the Parliament.


Unto which words, there were such high exceptions taken; that some of the
fiery-spirited Independents replied; Ib. p. 135.
; that the Parliament having fought with the King for the Militia, and gotten
it by the Sword; no other Interest, upon any title whatsoever, should dare to
lay claim to any part of it. Upon which Doctrine they practiced to purpose, as
by and by will appear.

CHAP. XXIX.
THE next thing whereof I am, in order of time to take notice, is that this
fatal and absolute destruction P 17. Aug.
of the Scottish-Army, under the command of Duke Hamilton, by Lieutenant
General Cromwell, at that time Commander of the Parliament's forces ( Fairfax)
having declined to serve against the Brethren) was not by any formal Battle;
but rather a beating up of Quarters, and some slight Skyrmishes: and that it
was then chiefly attributed to the over-confidence which Duke Hamilton had in
the strength of his own Countrymen; exposing those English, which were
Commanded by the truly noble Sir Marmaduke Langdale, to be over powered by the
Enemy; thereby expecting an absolute Conquest through his own puissance; and so
to have reapt the whole honor of restoring the King, if he ever had any such
intent.

So that Cromwell being now triumphant over the whole Scottish-Army (which was
the most formidable of any then on foot against them) and not long after over
those right valiant and loyal persons at Colchester; The Ships also, which
went over to the Prince, falling off again, (as has already been observed) He
became so strangely elated, that nothing then to be done, could give
satisfaction to his ambitious and unlimited desires.

But here, I shall also observe; that notwithstanding the strong factions into
which these men were then divided, had begot a perfect hatred of each to other
(as the many printed pamphlets then spread abroad do sufficiently show:)
Nevertheless, for the utter eradicating of the Religion by Law established in
the Church of England, which themselves had at first (3. May 1641.) solemnly
protested to maintain; about this time, they all agreed together, in framing
an Ordinance 29. Aug. Scob. coll. p. 165.
for the establishing of Presbytery; containing a particular form and order of
Church Government, in their congregational, Classical, Provincial and National
Assemblies: In which the Lay Elders, constituted at that time, in all the
Parishes, throughout the City of London, are expressly nominated; with direction
for the settling of all others, throughout England and Wales, and limitation of
their powers: unto the sharp and rigorous penalties whereof, all conscientious
and orthodox Protestants of the Church of England, were to be subject: but the
Independent brood, (consisting of all sorts of Schismatics and Sectaries)
under the notion of Godly-men, and tender conscienced, to be at liberty.

And now to proceed. As I have already taken notice, that a personal Treaty
Treaty in the Isle of Wight.
with the King, was voted by the Members at Westminster; I shall here observe;
that all things being prepared for the same, it began Perfect Diurnal P^ 2164.
at Newport in the Isle of Wight, upon the 18th. of September; the chief
persons permitted to attend his Majesty there, being these; the Duke of
Richmond, the Marquess of Hertford; the Earl of Lindsey, and Earl of
Southampton, (Gentlemen of his Bedchamber:) the Bishops of London and
Salisbury, Dr. Sheldon, Dr. Hamond, Dr. Oldsworth, Dr. Sanderson, Dr. Turner
and Dr. Heywood Chaplains; Sir Thomas Gardner, Sir Orlando Bridgman, Sir Robert
Holburne, Mr. Gessrey Palmer, Mr. Thomas Cook, and Mr. John Vaughan, Lawyers.

The Members at Westminster employing these; the Earls of Northumberland,
Salisbury, Middlesex, the Viscount Say, the Lord Wenman; Denzil Holles, and
William Pierpont Esquires, Sir Henry Vane junior, Sir Harbotle Grymston, Mr.
Samuel Brown, Sir John Potts, Mr. Crew, Sergeant Glyn, and Mr. Bulkley.

These other Divines, for the King being afterward added; viz. Dr. James Usher
Archbishop of Armagh in Ireland, and Dr. Fern: And for the Parliament; Mr.
Stephen Marshal, Mr. Richard Vines, Mr. Lazarus Seaman, and Mr. Joseph Caryll.

But withal, as it is now most evident to the world, that there was never any
real purpose, on the part of the Grandees at Westminster, that the Treaty,
formerly at Uxbridge, should take any good effect: so was there less
expectation here, the King being then their prisoner, and all his forces come
to nothing: for, though they then gave way to this Treaty; they were, at that
very time, contriving and framing the formality of his absolute destruction; of
which the symptoms were visible enough, during the whole continuance of that
Treaty, by sundry Petitions to the Members at Westminster, all declaming
bitterly against it. Which Petitions (as it is well known) were first framed by
the Grandees themselves, and then sent amongst the people, to be subscribed,
according to their usual practice. In most whereof, it was desired, that all
Delinquents, without exception, might be brought to condign punishment; one
whereof concluding Moderate Intelligencer, n. 16.
thus, from Psalm 149. ver. 6, 7, 8, and 9. Let the high praises of God be in
the mouths of his Saints, and a twofold Sword in their Hands, to execute
vengeance upon the Heathen, and punishment upon the people; to bind their Kings
with chains, and their Nobles with fetters of iron: to execute upon them the
Judgments written; This Honor have all his Saints.

Besides, it is farther to be observed; that after the destruction of this
Scottish-Army at Preston, and the reducing of Colchester, Cromwell went into
Scotland; where he not only laid the plot with the Marquess of Argyle, for the
destruction of the King, and extirpation of Monarchy; but by his help, in the
contrivance of that unparalleled murder; agreed in the formalities conducing
thereto.

And now, as to this Treaty in the Isle of Wight, it is sufficiently known that
it was on His Majesty's part, totally and singly managed by himself, against
all those subtle persons abovementioned; the Houses at Westminster, not
permitting him to have any assistant therein, either Divines or others. Also,
that it was performed by him with so much judgment, gravity, meekness, and
courtesy; as not only much astonished, but made converts of some, that had been
his greatest Enemies, and were then his Antagonists there. Wherein, to manifest
his earnest desires for the peace of those distracted Realms, he was contented
to divest himself, totally in effect of his own Regal power, for life; and to
trust those insatiable men with the exercise thereof; as is apparently to be
seen by the particular Articles, then assented to by him; viz.

1. As to the Militia, he consented thereto, as 'twas required by their
Proposition.

2. For Episcopacy, though he could not consent to the utter abolishing
thereof; yet he offered, that it might be regulated and reduced to the
primative usage; and so settled and continued in the Church: And, in order
thereto, that it might be enacted, that the Bishops should not act without the
Council and assistance of the Presbyters, in the exercises of Ordination and
Jurisdiction: and therefore desired the consent of the Houses in the one, that
he might the more freely give his assent unto the other. Offering to lessen the
extent, or multiply the number of the Diocesses, as should be agreed upon by
both Houses.

3. As to Bishops lands, that he could not consent to the alienation of them;
but offered what he had done before, for satisfaction of the Purchasers and
Contracters (which was for the enjoyment of them for a certain time:) being
therein seconded by the opinion of many Divines (who differ in other things)
that the alienation of them would be no less than Sacrilege.

4. That he would confirm their Ordinance, for the calling and sitting of the
Assembly of Divines.

5. That he would confirm the form of Church Government presented to him, with
the Directory; and repeal those Statutes, which enjoined the use of Common
Prayer: and all this for three years; provided that a consultation should be
had, between the Assembly of Divines, and twenty of His Majesty's nomination
added to them, in the mean time, for the farther settling of the Church, at the
end of those three years; and that Himself and His might have the use of the
Com^^prayer. But, for the new Articles of Religion, His Majesty having not had
time sufficient, as yet, for consideration of so weighty matters, as concern
Faith and Doctrine, desired, that that part of the Proposition might, for the
present be omitted.

6. That he would confirm the Ordinance for ^words^ better observation of the
Lord's day: provided, that ^words^ this Ordinance, and others likewise
presented to hi^ alterations should be made of some expressions in them, which
did reflect on former established Laws; it being therefore necessary, that they
should be penned in other terms.

7. That he would pass an Act; for prevention of saying Mass in Court, or other
places: provided only, that his Queen might have free exercise of her
Religion, for her self and her ordinary servants, according to the Articles of
Marriage, made between the two Crowns, France and England.

8. Lastly, that for the Covenant, he could not in Conscience take it himself,
nor impose it upon others; therefore hoped that it should not be insisted on,
in regard the imposing thereof could not tend to peace; a great part, even of
the Parliaments-party, being utterly persuaded against it: And further, because
all the ends of the Covenant would be obtained, if an agreement were made in
the rest of the Propositions.

These were the chief; referring the rest until his coming to Westminster,
where he might personally advise with his two Houses, and deliver his opinion,
with the reasons thereof, which done; he would leave the whole matter of those
remaining Propositions to the determination of his two Houses.

But, as His Majesty had formerly well observed the humors of these impious
men to be restless; ever altering and changing their Principles with their
success: So did he then find the greatest and most woeful experiment thereof.
For, having, by the defeat of D. Hamilton's Army; the reducing of Colchester,
and subduing the Welsh, in Pembrokeshire, cleared all opposition, which any
could make against them; they then did openly manifest to the world, that
nothing should suffice, but the absolute destruction of the King, and utter
extirpation of Monarchy.

Toward the accomplishing of which execrable design, a prodigious
Remonstrance 16. Nov. Declaration of the Army at St. Albans.
was contrived by Cromwell, and his son Ireton, with some other venemous-minded
officers in the Army, then at St. Albans, and presented to the House of Commons
by Colonel Evre and seven other Officers of the Army, whereby they fiercely
declaymed against any peace at all with the King; and likewise against his
Restoration: demanding, that he should, by a Trial, be brought to Justice. So
likewise against those Members of Parliament, as had been impeached the year
before; and all others that sat, when the Speaker and Members fled to the
Army, that they might be excluded the House: Requiring, that the Soldiers
arrears should be paid out of the King's and Dean and Chapters lands. Moreover,
that a certain term should be prefixed to that present Long-Parliament; as
also a more equal number of persons, as Representatives of the People, to be
thenceforth elected, in whom the supreme power should thereafter reside.

In which Remonstrance, it is not unworthy observation, that they said; whereas
it might be objected, that by the Covenant they were obliged to the
preservation of His Majesty's person and authority; it was with this
restriction; viz. in the preservation of the true Religion, and Liberties of
the Kingdom. So that; considering Religion and the public Interest, were to
be understood the principal and supreme matters engaged for; and of the King's
person and authority, as inferior and subordinate thereto. As also, whereas
the preservation of his person and authority was not consistent with the
preservation of Religion,
and the public Interest; they were therefore, by the Covenant, obliged
against it.

And the better to illustrate this, they instanced the practice of the
Parliament, all along the late wars; which not only opposed his Majesty and
his authority, but really endeavored to kill and destroy both his person and
authority by Bullets and otherwise, in order to the preservation of Religion,
and Liberties of the Kingdom. Which Remonstrance was soon after presented 120.
Nov.
to the House of Commons, and tendered to the consideration of the whole
Kingdom. But three days after, they Treaty (having continued forty days,
whereunto they limited it) ended 27. Nov.


And here it is not improper to take notice; that as they had frequently used
to procure Petitions from sundry places, to countenance the carrying on of any
notable design, which they had in hand: So now, having published this wicked
Remonstrance, they obtained Congratulations from those called the Well-affected
in several parts; to the end that others might be the more danted from any
opposition thereto.

CHAP. XXX.
THIS business of the Treaty being therefore thus over, I come now to the last
Act of this afflicted King's life. A Scene (indeed) of much sorrow, and which
cannot well be represented without great lamentation and the deepest
expressions of sadness, wherein I shall be as brief as well may be; pointing
chiefly at the times of the most notable passages therein; but leaving the
larger Narrative thereof to such of our Historians, as have already, or shall
hereafter set forth the Life and Sufferings of this incomparable Prince.

As an Introduction whereunto, it may be sit enough to observe; that though the
Parliament had been garbled (as before is showed) whereby the Remnant of the
Presbyterians was totally disheartened: Yet did the Invasion from Scotland, and
Risings in other Parts, about that time, put so much Life and Courage into the
drooping Spirits of that Party; as that, having with no little difficulty
carried the Vote for a Treaty; they strugled to their utmost, for such an issue
thereof, that the King might be at some better Liberty, than he was at that
time: and the Administration of his Authority, in the Two Houses, as formerly.
And then, though the Army stood not right to them at present; the Majority, of
Votes might some time or other, so alter the case, as that the sweetness of
Dominion might return to them again.

To second therefore what they had so vigorously begun, discerning that the
Army in pursuance of their late Remonstrance, were on their March toward
London, they Voted Hist. of Indep. part 2.
a Letter to the General, forbidding his nearer approach. Which Vote so
irritated the Souldiary, that immediately they published a sharp Declaration; p.
25. and 26.
therein accusing the Parliament with Breach of Trust, Inconstancy and
Indiscretion; saying that they would appeal from them to the People; threatening
forthwith to advance up to Westminster, and there to do what God should enable
them; and accordingly came up 30. Nov.
to the corner of Hide-park. Where upon it was put to the Question in the
House; whether that approach of the Army were not prejudicial to the Freedom of
Parliament. But into such a terror were the Presbyterian Members then (...),
that they durst not hold up their Heads to give their Votes therein.

Nevertheless, within two days following they took better heart, and set on
foot a debate, 2. Dec.
touching the satisfactoriness of His Majesty's Answer to the Propositions in
the late Treaty. And, though the same day, the General entered Westminster with
Four Regiments of Foot, and Six of Horse, taking up his Head Quarters at
White Hall: and that soon after the King was seized on in his Bedchamber, and
carried Ib. p. 29. 4. Dec. The King taken from the Isle of Wight, and sent to
Hurst-castle.
to Hurst-Castle (a Block-house in the Sea, not far from the Isle of Wight,
where the cold was most sharp, and the Air very unwholesome) as men inslam'd, in
this desperate condition, they again took courage, and held out a stout contest
with the Independant-Party, for the space of a whole day and night together:
And, notwithstanding the many sharp Menaces, which they had from the Swordmen,
on the other side; they then Voted, 6. Dec. Ib. 1. 29.
that the King's Answer to the Propositions from both Houses, was a ground for
them to proceed on, to the settlement of the Kingdoms Peace.

Which put the Army into such a rage, that they forthwith sent a Paper to the
House by Pride and Hewson (two of their Colonels) requiring, that the formerly
impeached Members, together with Major General Brown (whom they charged to
have been an Inviter of Duke Hamilton with the Scottish Army) might be secured,
and brought to Justice. As also, that the Ninety and odd Members, who refused
to Vote against the late Scottish Engagement; and all that Voted for recalling
the Votes of Non-Addresses: and likewise those that Voted for the late Treaty;
and that the King's concessions therein were a ground for the Houses to proceed
to a settlement, should be immediately suspended the House. And that all such
faithful Members, as were innocent of those Votes, should by protestation
acquit themselves from any concurrence in them, to the end they might be
distinguished.

And scorning to make any long stay, for an Answer to that their Paper, they
sent, the next Morning, certain Regiments of Horse and Foot to Westminster, who
setting Guards upon all the Avenues to the Parliament House, seized upon one
and Forty of the Members, then Sitting, viz.

Major General Brown. Mr. John Buckley. Colonel Birch. Mr. Thomas Boughton.
Mr. Francis Buller. Sir John Clotworthy. Mr. Lionel Copley. Mr. John Crew. Sir
Simonds D'ewes, Knight and Baronet. Mr. Drake. Sir Walter Earl. Mr. Nathaniel
Fienes. Mr. Giles Green. Sir. Gilbert Gerard. Sir Herbottle Grimston Knight. Mr.
Francis Gerard. Sir Robert Harley. Knight. Colonel Edward Harley. Sir Anthony Irby.
Mr. John Knightley. Sir. Martin Lyster. Colonel Edward Leigh. Mr. -- Lane. Sir
Samuel Luke. Sir William Jews. Major General Massy. Sir John Merrick. Sir
Richard Onslow. Mr. Henry Pelham. Sir Robert Pie, Knight. Mr. William Pryn. Mr. --
Preistley. Sir Benjamin Rudyard. Mr. William Strode. Sir Thomas Soame. Mr.
Edward Stephens. Mr. John Swinfen. Mr. Charles Vaughan. Sir William Waller. Mr.
William Wheeler. The Lord Wenman. Mr. Clement Walker.
Of whose Names Mr. Hugh Peter's (one of their hotheaded Preachers) came to take
a List; and then conveyed them into their great Victualling-house, near
Westminster Hall, called Hell; where they kept them all night, without any
Beds. Whence, being driven a Prisoners, (through Snow and Rain) by the Guards,
to several Inns in the Strand; the Soldiers upbraided Ib. p. 31.
them in their passage; that they were the men, who had cousened the State of
their Money, and kept back the Armies Pay. Which signal Act happened the very
day, that their great Master, Oliver Cromwell returned from Scotland to Loudon.

And, as they made Prisoners of these, so they denied entrance into the House
unto above one hundred and Sixty more. Whereupon the rest of the Presbyterian
Party, being terrified with this usage of their Fellow Members, declined the
House, leaving 7. Dec.
it to about an hundred and Fifty, who, for the most part, being Officers of
the Army, performed whatsoever the Grandees of that Faction prompted them to
do: This Exclusion of those Members, being called Colonel Pride's Purge.

It is very well known to the world, that throughout the whole course of this
grand Rebellion, it was the usual practice of the Presbyterians, to make great
advantages unto their Party, by frequenting of Sermons, and performance of
other pretended exercises of Religion. Amongst which the strict observance of
such days, as were set apart by their Leaders for Seeking of God (as they
called it) by Fasting and Prayer, and other ways of Humiliation, were not the
least. In which act of deluding the People, they were at length grown to be
such excellent Masters; that, when any transcendent work was to be done, it was
always ushered in, with this sanctified veil; under pretense, that in the
zealous performance of those Duties, they did ask Council of the Lord: and
thereupon, by some more than ordinary Illumination, were directed to proceed in
the business designed.

Which notable example the Independants, deeming fit to be imitated, in order
to their own High and Mighty designs; they kept a Fast 8. Dec.
in the House of Commons, upon the Eighth of December. Where Mr. Stephen
Marshall (formerly the Great Bell-weather of the Presbyterian Flock) Mr.
Carrill and Hugh Peter's Preached that day to them; under pretense of directing
them to humble their Spirits, now that God had so signally appeared to them in
their great Victory over the Scots at Preston, and other eminent manifestations.

Next to which devout work, the remaining Members, that sat after this Grand
Purge, damned Ib. p. 37. and 38.
all the Votes, which the Presbyterians had made, either in reference to the
Treaty, or to their secluded Brethren. And, within few days after, diverse of
the Lords went to the General, to express their good affections to him, and
concurrence with his purposes for the Common God: as also to let his Excellency
know,
that they would wave their Privileges and Titles, in case they should be
found burdensome to the Liberties of the People.

And, as the Lords had thus manifested their obsequiousness to the Army: so did
also the most Godly men of the House of Commons; by subscribing Ib. p. 48* and
49.
a Protestation against the late Treaty with the King, in the Isle of Wight:
but especially against that Vote of 5. Dec. allowing His Majesty's Answer to
the Propositions of Both Houses, to be a ground for them to proceed on for a
Settlement: the names of which worthy Members I have here added.

Philip Lord Lisle. Colonel Boswell. Mr. John Gourdon. The Lord Gray of Groby.
Mr. Peregrine Pelham. Colonel Jones. Colonel Temple. Colonel Ven. Sir Thomas
Maleverer. Sir Thomas Wroth. Sir John Bourcher. Colonel Peter Temple. Mr.
Humphry Edwards. Mr. Thomas Chaloner. Sir Gregory Norton. Michael Old worth.
Augustine Garland. Sir John Danvers. Mr. Dove. Mr. Henry Smith. Mr. Frye. Mr.
Searle. Mr. Nicholas Love. Mr. John Lisle. Colonel Rigby. Mr. Cornelius
Holland. Colonel Ludlow. Gregory Clement. Colonel Purefoy. Colonel Stapeley.
Mr. Dunch. Mr. Cawley. Colonel Downs. Mr. John Carey. Mr. John Blakeston. Mr.
Thomas Scott. Colonel Hutchinson. Sir Henry Mildmay. Sir James Harington.
Colonel Edward Harvey, Alderman Penington. Alderman Atkins. Mr. Daniel
Blagrave. Colonel Moore. Colonel Millington. Mr. Prideaux. Mr. Roger Hill. Mr.
Dennis Bond. Colonel Harrington. Mr. Hodges. Mr. Benjamin Valentine.
The work being therefore thus smoothly carried on, to accomplish their chief
design for murdering the King. The King removed from Hurst-Castle to
Winchester.
they removed 21. Dec.
him from Hurst-Castle to Winchester, and thence to 22. Dec. Thence to Farnham.
Far^ham-Castle in Hantshire.

And that they might effect their business with the greater Formality, they
held a solemn Fast. in St. Margarets Church at Westminster; four of the most
zealous Lords being present thereat; and of the House of Commons at least
Twenty; where their Pulpit Buffoon, Hugh Peter's Preached Ib. p. 49. and 50.
to them of bringing the Children of Israel out of Egyptian Bondage, whereunto
he Paralleled the State of this Kingdom. And the better to show how they should
be brought out of this Bondage; having put his hands before his eyes^ and laid
his head on the Cushion; thence rasing it up again (after a while) he told
them, that he had a Revelation how to do it, which was, by Extirpating of
Monarchy, both here, and in all other places. Thence to Windsor.


In order whereunto they removed 23. Dec.
the King to Windsor-Castle, where it was concluded 27. Dec.
on by his Guards, that all State and Ceremony toward him should thenceforth
be forborne, and his attendants lessened.

At the same time also it was first moved Ib. p. 44.
in the House of Commons, that they should proceed Capitally with the King.
Whereupon Oliver Cromwell stood up and said, Ibid.
that if any man moved this upon design, he should think him the greatest
Traitor in the World: but since Providence and Necessity had cast them upon it,
he should pray God to bless their Councils, though he was not provided, on the
sudden, to give them Council.

But no long after he was: for being a great Pretender to Enthusiasms and
Revelations, he told Life of K. Charles by Dr. Perenchief p. 153.
them, that as the was praying for a Blessing from God on his undertaking to
restore the King to his pristine Majesty, his Tongue cleaved to the roof of his
mouth, that he could not speak one word more; which he took as a return of
Prayer, and that God had rejected him from being King. And to others he did
impudently assert, that it was lawful to circumvent a wicked man with deceit
and fraud.

Whereunto, the very next day 28. Dec. Hist. of Indep. part. 2. p. 55.
Mr. Thomas Scott, brought in the Ordinance for Trial of the King; which was
then read, and recommitted three several times; and the names of the
Commissioners (consisting of some Lords, some of the House of Commons; some
Citizens of London, and some Officers of the Army) added thereto. Which
Ordinance, being soon agreed on, and sent up to the House of Lords, by the Lord
Gray of Groby, was by them rejected.

Whereupon the Commons fell to voting again, and declared, Ibid. p. 56.
That all Members of that House, and others appointed by order of that House, or
Ordinances of both Houses of Parliament, to act in any Ordinance, wherein the
Lords were joined, should be empowered, and enjoined to sit and act, execute in
the said several Committees of themselves; notwithstanding the House of P^^rs
should not join with them therein. Some of then being so fierce against the
Lords for this their refusal; as that they moved for an Impeachment to be
framed against them, for thus favoring the grand Delinquent of England.

And that they might not fall short in imitation of their Parent, the
Presbyterian (which first laid the Foundation of all this mischief) they
brought 29. Dec.
upon the Stage, such another Prophetess, The daughter of one Michelson.
as the Brethren of Scotland, produced, in order to the carrying on their
Blessed work, in An. 1638. (whereof I have then taken notice) viz. a Godly
Woman out of Hereford shire (the News-book of that Week, calls her a Virgin;)
who coming to the General and Council of War at White Hall, said she had a
Revelation from God, whereby she was in^ited to encourage them to go on in
their designs. Of which they made no small advantage, approving thereof, as
most seasonable at that time; and accordingly proceeded: First Voting, 4. Ian.
Ib. p. 56.
that the people were, under God, the Original of all just power: Secondly That
the Commons of England, in Parliament Assembled, being chosen by, and
representing the people, were the supreme power of the Nation: and Thirdly,
that what soever is enacted or declared for Law by the House of Commons,
Assembled in Parliament, has the force of Law.

In pursuance of which monstrous Votes, they framed a bloody Ordinance; 6. Ian.
Ib. p. 57.
whereby they constituted these Persons, whose names I have here inserted; or
any Twenty or more of them, to be Judges, for the Hearing, Trying and Judging
of the Kings Sacred Majesty, which were thereby also constituted and called an
High Court of Justice.

Thomas Lord Fairfax, General of the Army. * Oliver Cromwell Lieutenant General.
Henry Ireton Commissary General. Philip Skipton Major General. *Colonel
Valentine Walton. *Colonel Thomas Harrison. *Colonel Edward Whalley. *Colonel
Thomas Pride. *Colonel Isaac Evre. *Colonel Richard Ingoldsby. *Sir Henry
Mildmay, Knight. Sir Thomas Honywood, Knight. * Thomas Lord Gray. of Groby. Philip Lord
Lisle. * William Visc. Castlemaine. ( aliter Lord Munson.) *Sir John Danvers,
Knight. *Sir Thomas Maleverer. Bar. *Sir John Bourchier, Knight. *Sir James Harrington,
Knight. Sir William Brereton, Bar. * Robert Wallop, Esquire * William Heveningham, Esquire
* Isaac Pennington, Alderman. Thomas Atkins, Alderman. *Colonel Rowland Wilson.
Sir Peter wentworth, Knight of the Bath. *Colonel Henry Martin. *Colonel
William Puresey. Colonel Godfrey Boswell. John Trenchard Esquire *Colonel Matthew
Tomlinson. * John Blakeston, Esquire * Gilbert Millington, Esquire * Miles Corbet, Esquire
*Sir William Constable, Knight. *Colonel Edward Ludlow. Colonel John Lambert.
*Colonel John Hutchenson. Sir Arthur Haselrigg, Bar. *Sir Michael Livescy, Bar.
Richard Soloway, Esquire Humphery Soloway, Esquire *Colonel Robert Tichburne. *Colonel
Owen Roe. Colonel Robert Manwaring. *Colonel Robert Lilburne. *Colonel Adrian
Scrope. *Colonel Richard Deane. *Colonel John Okey. Colonel Robert Overton.
Colonel John Harrison. Colonel John Desborough. *Colonel William Goffe. Colonel
Robert Duckenfeild, * Cornelius Holand, Esquire * John Carue, Esquire Sir William
Armine, Knight. *Colonel John Jones. * Miles Corbet, Esquire * Francis Allen, Esquire
Thomas Lister, Esquire Benjamin Weston, Esquire * Peregrine Pelkam, Esquire John Gourdon,
Esquire Francis Thorpe, Sergeant at Law. Ihon Nutt, Esquire Thomas Chaloner, Esquire
Colonel Algernon Sidney. *Sir Hardres Waller, Knight. *Colonel John Barkstede^ John
Anlaby, Esquire *Colonel John Moore^ Richard Darley, Esquire * William Say, Esquire * John
Alured, Esquire John Fagge, Esquire James Nelthorpe, Esquire Sir William Roberts, Knight.
Colonel Francis Lascels. Colonel Alexander Rigby. * Henry Smith, Esquire Edmund
Wild, Esquire James Chaloner, Esquire Josias Barnes, Esquire Dennis Bond, Esquire * Humphrey
Edwards, Esquire * Gregory Clement, Esquire John Fray, Esquire * Thomas Wogan, Esquire *Sir
Gregory Norton, Knight. * John Bradshaw, Sergeant at Law. *Colonel Edward Harvey.
John Dove, Esquire *Colonel John Venn. John Fouke, Alderman of London. * Thomas
Scott. * Thomas Andrews, Alderman. * William Cauley, Esquire Abraham Burrell, Esquire
*Colonel Anthony Stapeley. Roger Gratwick, Esquire * John Downs, Esquire *Colonel
Thomas Harton. *Colonel Thomas Hamond. *Colonel Geotge Fenwick. Robert
Nicholas, Sergeant at Law. *Colonel John Hewson. Robert Reynolds, Esquire * John
Lisle, Esquire * Nicholas Love, Esquire * V^cent Potter. Sir Gilbert Pickering, Knight.
John Weaver, Esquire John Lenthall, Esquire Sir Edward Bayton, Knight. John Corbet, Esquire
Thomas Blount, Esquire Thomas Boon, Esquire *Augustine Garland, Esquire Augustine Skinner,
Esquire * John Dixwell, Esquire *Colonel George Fleetwood. * Simon Maine, Esquire *Colonel
James Temple. *Colonel Peter Temple. * Daniel Blagrave, Esquire Sir Petter Temple,
Bar. *Colonel Thomas Wait. John Brown, Esquire John Lawry, Esquire * John Bradshaw,
Sergeant at Law named President. Councillers-Assistants to this Court, and to
draw up the Charge against the King. *Doctor Isaac Dorislaw. *Mr. Williams
Steel. *Mr. Ask. *Mr. Cook, Solicitor. *Sergeant Dandy, Sergeant at Arms.
*Mr. Phelps Clerks to the Court. *Mr. Broughton Messengers and Doorkeepers. Mr.
Walford. Mr. Radley. Mr. Pain. Mr. Powell. Mr. Hull. Mr. King, the Crier.
And that these their Sanguinary proceedings might carry the more show of
Authority; upon the Third day 9. Iar.
following, they sent their Sergeant at Arms with his Mace, accompanied by six
Trumpets on Horseback, into Westminster Hall, (great Guards of Soldiers
waiting in the Palace-yards.) Where (in the midst of the Hall) after the
Trumpets had sounded, he made solemn Proclamation, on Horseback; that if any
man had ought to allege against Charles Start, they should repair, the day
following, at Two of the Clock Afternoon, into the Painted Chamber; where the
Committees to receive the same were to Sit.

The like Proclamation he made at the Exchange, and other places in London.

The same day also they Voted, that Writs should no longer run in the King's
Name; and the making of a new Great Seal, with the Arms of England and Ireland
( viz. the Cross and Harp) on the one side, and this Circumscription; viz. The
Great Seal of England. On the other side the Figure of the Parliament and the
Circumscription; In the first year of Freedom, by Gods Blessing restored, 1648.

According to which Proclamation, so made in Westminster Hall, the next day 10.
Ian.
following those High Court of Justice-men sat formally in the Painted
Chamber, to receive Informations from such, whom they had then prepared to come
in for that purpose. For which time, for the space of Nine days, the Grandees
had frequent Meetings, to frame and settle the special order and form for
executing of that their accursed design. The K. removed from Wind^^r to St.
James's.
And, having in the Interim, erected a Bloody Theater at the upper end of
Westminster Hall, which they called The High Court of Justice, they removed 19.
Ian.
His Majesty from Wind^^^^, to St. James's (near Westmi^ster) and upon Saturday
January the Twentieth, made their entrance 20. Ian.
in State into Westminster Hall, Bradshaw the President having a Sword and Mace
carried before him; and for his Guard Twenty Soldiers with Partisans, under
the Command of Colonel Fox the Tinker.

Where, after this Prodigious Monster ( Bradshaw) with the rest of that
Bloody-pack (in all to the number of Seventy two, the rest then declining to
show their Faces in so Horrid an Enterprise, though most of them afterward
avowed the same) were set; and that Hellish Act read, whereby they were
constituted the King's Judges; His Majesty was brought to the Bar by Colonel
Hacker, Guarded with a Company of Halberdeers. In whose passage, it is not
unworthy of note, that Hugh Peter's (one of their wicked Preachers) did set on
diverse of the Soldiers to cry out Justice, Justice, against him, and that one
of them did then Spit in the King's Face.

Which being done, that insolent Bradshaw stood up, and most impudently told
Hist. of Indep. Part. 1. p. 87.
the King (calling him Charles Stuart) that the Commons of England Assembled in
Parliament, being sensible of the great Calamities brought upon this Nation;
and of the Innocent Blood shed (which was referred to him as the Author)
according to that duty which they did owe to God, the Nation, and themselves;
and according to that Power and Fundamental Trust reposed in them by the
People, had Constituted that High Court of Justice, before which he was then
brought; and that he was to hear his Charge, upon which the Court would proceed.

Then Cook their Solicitor, went on, and said, Ib,
that he did accuse Charles Stuart, there present, of High Treason, and
Misdemeanors; and did, in the Name of the Commons of England, desire that the
Charge might be read against him.

Whereupon they caused their most false and Infamous Charge to be read. Which
importing, that he being admitted King of England, and trusted with a limited
Power, for the good and benefit of the People, had Traitorously and Maliciously
levied War against that present Parliament, and the People therein represented;
and caused and procured many Thousands of the Free People of this Nation to be
slain. Concluding, that he did therefore impeach him, as a Tyrant, Traitor,
Murderer, and a public and implacable Enemy to the Commonwealth of England;
Praying, that he might be put to answer the premises; and that such
Proceedings, Examinations, Trials, Sentence and Judgment might be thereupon
had, as should be agreeable to Justice.

I shall not stay here to give instance of the particular expressions then made
by His Majesty unto those Bloodthirsty men. Which were with the greatest
Wisdom, Gravity, and Christian Courage imaginable; considering that they
already are by some Historians, and others, so exactly published to the World:
He absolutely denying and renouncing that their usurped Jurisdiction, and
Authority thus to convent him; and stoutly refusing to submit to their power.
In which he most undauntedly persisted every time he was brought before them,
with incomparable magnanimity of Spirit.

On the Second 21. Ian.
day of their Sitting, they held a Fast at White Hall.

And on the Third day, 22. Ian.
the Scots Commissioners delivered in certain Papers to them, with a
Declaration from the Parliament of Scotland, importing a dislike of those their
Proceedings against His Majesty, but nothing regarded.

After which, to the end that these Barbarous Regicides might the better
consult touching the manner of his Execution, and to perform it with the
greater Ignominy, they respited his Sentence of Death for Four or Five days.
But then, having fully determined thereon, upon Saturday 27. Ian.
the Twenty Seventh of January, they caused Him to be brought before them
again. Where, after a most insolent Speech, made by the same Bradshaw the
President, His Sentence of Death was read; there being then present no less
than Seventy two of those His Bloody Murderers, called Judges, who stood up
and avowed the same, the Names of which I have noted with an Asterism in the
preceding Catalogue.

Which being done, a Public Declaration Ib. p. 108.
was appointed to be drawn against the Proclaiming of Prince Charles, after the
removal of his Father out of this Life; denouncing it to be High Treason for
any one so to do. Likewise, that no person upon Pain of Imprisonment, and such
other punishments as should be thought fit, might speak or divulge any thing
contrary to those their proceedings.

And upon the Morrow, being Sunday, 28. Ian. Ib. p. 109.
some of the Grandees came, and tendered to him a Paper Book, with promise of
Life, and some shadow of Regality, in case he would Subscribe it; which
contained many particulars destructive to the Religion established, to the Laws
of the Land, and to the Liberties and Properties of the People. Whereof one
was, that he should pass an Act, for keeping on Foot their Army during the
pleasure of such, as they should nominate to be entrusted with the Militia;
with power, from time to time, to recruit and continue them, to the Number of
Forty Thousand Horse and Foot, under their present General and Officers, and
that the Council of War, should have power to make choice of new Officers, and
Generals, from time to time, as occasion should happen, and they think fit: as
also to settle a Tax upon the People, by way of Land-rate for supporting the
same Army; to be Collected and levied by the Soldiers themselves. And for the
establishing a Court-Marshal of extraordinary extent. But so soon as His
Majesty had read some few of those Tyrannous Proposals, he threw them aside;
saying, that he would rather become a Sacrifice for his People, than thus
betray their Laws, Liberties, Lives, and Estates, with the Church, the
Commonwealth, and Honor of the Crown, to so intolerable a Bondage of an Armed
Faction.

And such a Sacrifice they really made him, upon the Tuesday following (which
was the Thirtieth 30. Ian. Ib. p. 110.
of January) having (the more to affront and deject him, had it been possible)
built a Scaffold for His Murder, before the Great Gate at White Hall,
whereunto they fixed several Staples of Iron, and prepared Cords, to tie him
down to the Block, had he made any resistance to that Cruel, and Bloody stroke.
To which place they then brought him on Foot, from St. James's attended by
Guards of Soldiers; having filled all the Streets, from Charing Cross to
Westminster, with Troops of Horse, and Companies of Foot.

Whereon, being ascended with the Greatest Christian Magnanimity imaginable; he
told them, that they were in a wrong way to the Kingdoms Peace, their design
being to do it by Conquest, in which God would never prosper them. Farther
declaring to them, that the right way thereto, would be first to give God his
due, by regulating rightfully the Church, in a National Synod, freely called
and freely debating. Secondly the King (his Successor) his due: wherein the
Laws of the Land would sufficiently instruct them. Thirdly the People, theirs;
in such a Government, whereby their Lives and Gods might be most their own.

It was for that (quoth he) I come now hither; for would I have given way to an
Arbitrary sway, to have all Laws changed, according to the power of the Sword,
I needed not to have come here. Telling them farther ( but praying God, it
might not be laid to their Charge) that he was the Peoples Martyr.

And then, most Christianly forgiving all, The King Murdered.
praying for His Enemies, he meekly submitted to the stroke of the Axe. It is
not unworthy of Observation (and therefore, not finding a more proper place for
it, I have thought fit to insert it here.) that some of those most Impious
Regicides, who sat, and gave judgment of Death upon this Blessed Martyr, when,
(after the happy Restoration of our present Sovereign) they were brought to
their Trials for that unparalled Murder; stuck not (in justification of
themselves) to plead, that they were not within the compass of Treason, as it
is declared by the Statute of 25. E. 3. For that, questionless, (said they)
must intend private Persons, Councilling, Compassing, or imagining the Death of
the King: but you know (said they) that the War was first stated by the Lords
and Commons, the Parliament of Enlgand, and by virtue of their Authority was
raised; they pretending by the Laws, that the right of the Militia was in them;
whereupon, accordingly, they raised a Force, making the Earl of Essex General,
and after that Sir (...). This therefore they insisted on for a legal
Authority; because (said they) that this Parliament was called by the King's
Writ, and that the Members thereof were chosen by the People: Adding, that the
Persons which acted under that Authority, ought not therefore to be questioned,
as Persons Guilty; because, if that which they acted
was Treason, then the Lords and Commons in Parliament began the Treason.

Having thus finished their Grand, and long designed work, His Corpse removed
from White Hall to St. James's. I. Feb.
they permitted the Duke of Richmond, the Marquess of Hertford, the Earl of
Southampton, and Earl of Lindsey to Interr his Corpse in the Collegiate Chapel,
within the Castle at (...), refusing him Burial, with his Ancestors in the
Church of Wes^minster, under color of preventing such confluence of People,
Thence to Windsor. 7. Feb.
which out of a superstitious respect might resort to his Grave; reserving that
place, There Buried. 9. Feb.
therein, which had been built by King Henry the Seventh, purposely for the
Sepulture on himself and his Posterity, for the Bones of his chiefest
Murderers. Some of which being afterward, accordingly, there deposited, have
since been Translated, and laid, more properly under the Gallows.

Being thus come to the Period of this incomparable Prince's Life, I may not
omit to take notice; that the time was, when these Monsters of men, did
publicly declare, that they would make his Majesty a Glorious King: which now
we see most truly verifyed, though not as they then seemed to intend it. So
Glorious indeed, as Mortal man never was more.





Thirdly, by his patient enduring the many insolent affronts of this subtle,
false, cruel, and most implacable Generation, in their Barbarous manner of
conventing,

And that no part of true felicity might be wanting to him, they have made him
Glorious in his Memory, throughout of the World, by a Great, Universal and most
durable Fame; and Glorious, by his enjoyment of an Immortal Crown, with the
Blessed Saints, Martyrs, and devout Confessors in the highest Heavens.

CHAP. XXXI.
AND here, having made a mournful stop, for a while, to contemplate the
unspeakable loss of this excellent Prince, Whether the Presbyterians or
Independants were the chief Actors Murdering the King
and the direful actings of these matchless Conspirators; I begin to consider,
that the Presbyterians, may (possibly) take much exceptions at this Historical
Narrative, in regard that by the Life of the King was not taken away by them,
but by that Sect which are usually called Independants.

Whereunto I answer, that, it is not denied, but that he was actually put to
death, by those who (in common discourse) do pass under that name. But whether
the Presbyterians can clear themselves from the Guilt of his Murder, as I know
not how to excuse them; so am I somewhat doubtful thereof.

For in the First place I would ask, whether they were Independent was ever
then heard of?

Next, whether they did not Covenant with the Scots, Presbyterian?

Likewise, whether they, either before, or whilst the King was in their Hands,
did ever make Proposals to him; Discipline was chiefly insisted on?

His Person and His Office? and by the strength of their Armies, Murdered him
in his Politic Capacity, usurping with great boldness, the Power and Authority
thereof?

New Castle, and Holdenby, refusing him the comfort of any one of his own
Chaplains?

Felo de se, in Murdering himself in his Regal capacity, by giving up the
Power of the Sword, into their ambitious Hands: but by endeavoring to extort
his consent, for the Sacrificing the Lands of the Church to their greedy
Appetite; aiming therein, as much as in them lay, at the very ruin of his
Soul, by making him a Robber of God; and thereby pulling upon him all those
heavy Curses, denounced by the Pious Donors of those large Possessions, on the
Violaters of their devout Gifts, which they full well knew, that by his
Coronation Oath, he was strictly obliged to defend.

And, though a more violent and rigid sort of these men, who severed from the
rest, not so much in point of difference in Religion (if I may say they have
any Religion in them at all) as to secular Interest; did get the King out of
their Hands; using him no less Barbarously, and at length did put an end to his
Life by an insolent and cruel Murder of his Royal Person: what was this worse,
than was done to him by the Presbyterian? who most inhumanely tormented him, by
a lingering and disconsolate Imprisonment; wherein he was in perpetual fear of
Murder, by Pistol, Dagger, or Poison. Nay I would ask of any Rational man,
whether the would not rather choose to have an end to the like Miseries, by an
open and Public Death, as His Majesty had, whereby the World might be the more
convinced of his Innocence, and Goodness; than to be so strictly immured in the
merciless hands of such, who might thereby take advantage to divulge what they
list of him.

I cannot deny, but that so soon as this Hellish-Murther was committed, many of
the Presbyterians did loudly declaim against it; seeming as much to wash their
Hands of the Guilt, as Pilate did from the Death of our Blessed Savior. And I
am not ignorant, that whosoever shall, in any sort, charge the Guilt of his
Blood upon them, must expect to be severely censured by all that Party.

Therefore I shall herein refer the decision of this point, to a Person wholly
unconcerned, and without exception; being a Forreigner both by Birth and
Residence, most Eminent for his Learning, throughout the Christian World, and
who had no reason to deliver any partial opinion herein: I mean the late Famous
Claudius Salmasius; who having most judiciously and elegantly Written upon this
Subject, of the King's just Rights, The opinion herein of the Learned Salmasius.
as a Monarch here; and concisely Historiz'd the chief particulars in the late
Rebellion against him, until his Generally deplored Murder: at length, by
reason that the Independants did actually cut off his Head; coming to State the
case rationally, (in brief) lays the main Guilt of his Blood at the
Presbyterians Door, his expression being (in short) this Salam^^^s de^ensio
regia, pro Carolo primo. c. 10. p. 343
Nuncad eam quaestionem pervenimus, qua tractandun est, quinam fuerint
Rebellionis illius, and Condemnationis praecipui autores; quis Anglis, Scotis,
and Hibernis, optimum Regem pessimo facinore abstulit; and tria haec Regna
magnae Insulae, sub uno Rege, quondam florentia and beata, tot ruinis,
stragibus, and incendiis miscuit.

-- Et Ib. p. 353
quinam alii merito Regis occisi crimine notari magis debuere, quam qui vaim ad
eum occidendum munierunt? Illi sunt, qui nefariam illam securim cervicibus ejus
inflixerunt, non alii. Si Latro viatorem per sylvam transeuntem insidiis
exceperit, gladio discinctum, and crumena spoliatum, vestimentis etiam postremo
nudatum, ut plerique faciunt, ad arborem religaverit, and fera silvestris de
nocte super veniens, and miserum sic revinctuns offendens, invaserit,
laniaverit and consumpserit, cui debet ascribi mortis ejus causa Latroni an
Ferae? ille amovit ensem viatori, que se defendere poterat; and insuper,
devinctum, dilacerandum lupis objecit; ergo ille potius titulum hujus caedis
quam bellua feret. Mutatis nominibus haec fabula Presbyterianis convenit, nam
res eadem est. Illi aliquot annis ante, omnibus modis, per varias Petitiones,
jus Regis imninuere, and Authoritatem ejus infringere moliti fucrunt, etc.

-- Scitum est, Ib. p. 468.
and vere dictum a quodam de Secta Independentium, Regem in Carolo primum
perdidisse Presbyterianos: de^inde and Carolum ipsum trucidasse Independentes.
Ita justum Regem and sanctum extinxere Presbyteriani; Carolum vero, virum
probum and pium, non tantum innocentem Independentes condemnarunt. Thus far
Salmasius.

CHAP. XXXII.
AND now, before I proceed farther in this Historical Discourse, there are two
malicious Scandals, wherewith these wicked men, since that execrable Murder of
their Lawful Sovereign, have endeavored to bespot his precious Memory.

The first is, that to color these their most perfidious and Barbarous
dealings, they have not stuck to say, that Cromwell had a real purpose (after
the King was so taken from Holdenby) to restore him to his just Rights (as has
been already observed,) with this condition, that he should wholly rely upon
him, and his Party, and not endeavor to procure any aid from the Scots for
that purpose: But, that after he was brought to Hampton Court, a certain Letter
from the Queen was intercepted by them, and privately opened; the Contents
whereof were, that she did thereby acquaint him, that the Scots were, Raising,
or preparing to Raise an Army in order to his Restoration, or expressions to
that effect. And, that Cromwell, having seen this Letter, and made it up again
so artificially, that no violation of the Seal could appear, conveyed it to the
King, and the next Morning sent Ireton on purpose to His Majesty, to enquire of
him what he knew of any Hostile Preparations then in hand by the Scots to the
purpose aforesaid. Unto whom the King briefly saying, that he did neither know
nor believe any thing thereof, Ireton returned with this answer; and that
thereupon both of them concluding that His Majesty was not to be farther
trusted, they did thenceforth resolve to proceed against him, as has been
already showed.

To the which Story, as to the improbability of it, I reply, that it is very
well known the King was in that open Freedom at Hampton Court, all the time he
remained there, that diverse of his old and Faithful Servants were not only
permitted to attend on His Royal Person, in their respective places, but many
others had the Liberty of Free access to him: So that it is not at all likely,
that any Letter from the Queen should come to him at that time, by other hands
than those who were of known trust.

Besides, what could he expect from the Scots, which might conduce to the
Restoring him to any part of his Regal Authority, without submitting to their
solemn League and Covenant, which they full well knew he could never be
prevailed with to do.

Next, that he had no great reason to conside much in Duke Hamilton's fair
intentions toward him, in case he should have vanquished those men. And lastly,
that it had been no Prudence to depend upon the strength of their Arms,
considering that the Events of War are uncertain; especially, having so much
reason to hope, and believe, that Cromwell and his Party (who had such an
influence upon those Members which then Sat in their Parliament, as on the
Army) would accomplish what he had so solemnly promised; considering also, (in
all Humane reason) it would conduce to his own proper Interest. Thus much as to
the Improbability of any Truth herein.

But now to the Impossibility thereof. Let it be considered, that the Scots
could not foresee any danger toward His Majesty till after he left
Hampton Court, which was upon the Eleventh of November 1647. Nor then, till the
Month of December next following, that they saw the Fur Dethroning Bills, which
through the influence of Cromwell and his Party were sent to him; and the Vote
on the Third of January ensuing, of No more Addresses; Shortly after which he
was made close Prisoner by Colonel Hamond.

Which destructive Bills, and malevolent Votes, was that which in truth alarmed
the Scots, as it did the English in diverse, Parts: who, discerning His Majesty
in this miserable condition, made several attempts in order to his rescue
(though without success, as has been already observed:) who thereupon, and not
till then did constitute In April or May, 1648. Vide Sanderson's Hist. of K.
Charles p. 1071.
a Committee of Danger at (...), (which was previous to any preparation for
Raising an Army) and necessitated them to consider what was without delay to be
done in this great exigent; foreseeing well, that the Tyranny of these
Antimonarchists would, in the end, overwhelm them there, as well as the English
here. Whereupon they resolved to Raise an Army in order thereto.

Besides, most apparent it is, that the King was so ignorant of any
Preparations made by the Scots to that purpose, that, Scots entered England with
a third Army, 13. July, 1648.
until the Month of July 1648. when it was told him, that Duke Hamilton was
entered England with an Army, he was so strangely surprised with the News, that
he suddenly said, Then he is undone.

To pass by this base Fiction therefore, merely devised to give some color for
the perfidiousness of Cromwell, I descend to the next device they had, to
countenance their wicked Actions; which was to detract from his deserved Fame
in another kind.

For discerning, soon after his Death those most Divine Meditations made
public by the Press, and Entitled Icon Basilike, which in his deplorable and
disconsolate soli^udes he had Pathetically put in Writing; whereby his Great
Prudence, Patience, and Piety, in those his woeful Sufferings would be made
openly conspicuous to the World; and not being able to suppress them, (as they
did earnestly endeavor to do) they made it their work to blast them, by their
false and Impudent Reports, that they were none of his own, but composed by
some Royallist to gain a Reputation to his Memory, which they studied by all
malicious projects and practices to suppress, and to that purpose encouraged a
needy Pedagogue, preferring him to the Office of Secretary, to write that
Scandalous Book called (...) being a bitter invective against those his Divine
Meditations.

But to manifest that these were no borrowed wares, but by the Good and
Gracious assistance of Almighty God were totally of his own composure in the
midst of his most sad afflictions; besides the unlikely-hood, that any such
expressions could flow from an Heart not oppressed and grieved with such a weight
of sorrow as his was; I shall make it evident from the Testimony of very
credible persons yet living, that he had begun the Penning of them long before
he went from (...) to the Scots* For the Manuscript it self, written with his
own Hand, being found in his Cabinet, which was taken at ^^vesby Fight, was
restored, to him, after he was brought to Hampton Court, by the hand of Major
Huntington, through the favor of General Fairfax, of whom he obtained it. And,
that whilst he was in the Isle of Wight, it was there seen frequently by Mr.
Thomas Herbert, who then waited on His Majesty in his Bedchamber; as also by
Mr. William Lever, (a Page of the the back Stairs) the Title then prefixed to
it being Suspiria Regalia, who not only read several parts thereof, but saw the
King diverse times writing farther on it.

Which Mr. Herbert (being that Learned Person, who has published his
Observations upon his Travels in Asia) has since the Kings most happy
Restoration, been honored with the Title of Baronet, in Testimony of the
Gracious sense His Majesty has of his dutiful demeanor and perfect sidelity,
in those Perilous times to his dear Father of Blessed Memory. Add hereunto the
Testimony of Mr. Richard Royston a Bookseller at the Angel in (...); who having
in those Rebellious times adventured to Print diverse of His late Majesty's
Declarations, Speeches, and Messages; about the beginning of October 1648. (the
King being then in the Isle of (...)) was sent to by His Majesty to prepare all
things ready for the Printing some Papers which he purposed shortly after to
convey to him. Which was this very Copy, brought to him on the Twenty Third of
December next following, by one Mr. Edward Symmons, a Reverend Divine, who
received it from Dr. Bryan Duppa, then Bishop of Salisbury, and afterward of
Winchester. In the Printing whereof Mr. Royston made such speed, that it was
finished before that dismal Thirtieth of January, that His Majesty's Life was
so taken away, as before is observed.

What I have here instanced to wipe off this soul stain, which the malice of
wicked men have cast upon the Memory of His late Majesty, will be sufficient, I
am sure, to satisfy all such, who through those most venomous Insinuations
have been doubtful herein; and enough to stop the mouths of those vile
Detractors, which are any way favoures of that execrable Murder of their
Lawful Sovereign.

Whose last Legacies of what he had left the night before his Suffering, and
afterward delivered by the hands of Mr. Herbert, were as follows, viz.

To the Prince (our now Gracious King) his Bible, in the Margin whereof he had
with his own hand Written many Annotations. To the Duke of York his large
Ring-Sun-Dial of Silver, which His Majesty much valued, it having been invented
and made by Mounsieur De la mine, an able Mathematician; and who, in a little
Printed Book has showed its excellent use, for resolving many Questions in
Arithmetic; and other rare operations in the Mathematics, to be wrought by it.

To the Princess Elizabeth, his Daughter, the Sermons of the most Learned Dr.
Andrews sometimes Bishop of Winchester; and Archbishop Laud's Book against
Fisher the Jesuit, which he said, would ground her against Popery; with Mr.
Hooker's Ecclesiastical Policy. As also a Paper to be Printed, in which he
asserted Regal Government to have a Divine Right, with Proofs out of sundry
Authors Civil and Sacred.

To his Son the Duke of ^aucester, King James his works, and Dr. Hamond's
Practical Catechism: To the Earl of Lindsey Cassandra; To the Duchess of
Richmund his Gold Watch: And to Mr. Herbert himself the Silver Clock, which
usually hung by his Bedside.

Hereunto it will not seem impertinent, I presume, to add a Catalogue of the
other Books, which His Majesty had with him in this His disconsolate condition;
they being these, Dr. Hamond's other Works; Villalpandus upon Ezekiel, etc.
Sands his Paraphrase upon King David's Psalms; Herbert's Divine Poems: Godfrey
of Bulloign, Written in Italian by Torquato Tasso, and Translated into English
Heroic Verse by Mr. Fairfax (a Poem which His Majesty much commended) as he
did Ariosto by Sir John Harrington a Facetious Poet; Spenser's Fairy Queen, and
the like, for alleviating his Spirits after serious Studies.

Nor can I here omit to tell, that this excellent Prince, with his own hand
Translated that Learned Discourse written in Latin by Dr. Saunderson
(afterward Bishop of Lincol^e) de Iuramentis, which he caused Mr. Herbert and
Mr. Harington to compare with the Original, who found it most accurately done.

Those particulars are such, whereof those who have published much of his Life
and Reign have not taken notice.

To give a Character of his Eminent virtues I shall not need, it being already
so well done by Dr. Pireinchief in the short History which he has published of
his Life; but shall take notice, that his delight in Learning was such, that he
understood Greek, Latin, French, Spanish and Italian Authors in their Original
Languages, which Three last he spoke perfectly; no man being better read in
Histories of all sorts, being able also to Discourse in most Arts and Sciences.

In one of his Books he wrote this Distich of Claudian.

Rebus in adversis facile est contemnere vitam,
Fortiter ille facit, qui miser esse potest.
And out of another Poet, against the Levellers and Antimonar chists then
predominant:

Fallitur egregio quisquis sub principe credit
Servitium. Nunquam libertas gratior extat
Quam sub Rege pio --
Whereunto I shall add, that after Mr. Herbert had much solicited those who
were then in Power, that His Royal Corpse might be Buried in King Henry the
Seventh's Chapel at Westminster, near to the Grave of King James; which they
refused, alleging the danger of much concourse to that place out of a
superstitious respect; they thereupon granted a Warrant to him, bearing Date
the Sixth of February for the Interring thereof at Windsor. Hence it was, that
Mr. Herbert, having often heard His Majesty speak with Great Honor of King
Edward the Fourth, from whom he was descended, he resolved to Bury the Corpse in
that Vault under the Monument of that King (which is betwixt the High Altar and
the North Isle) and gave order for the opening thereof accordingly: but the
Duke of Richmond, Marquess of Hertsord, Earl of Southampton, and Earl of
Lindsey, coming to Windsor to perform their last duty of His Memory, in seeing
His Royal Corpse decently Interred; and walking up the Quire, where they found
by knocking on the Pavement an hollow found, they caused the place to be
opened, it being near to the Seats, and opposite to the Eleventh Stall on the
Sovereign's side; in which were Two Coffins, one very large, of King Henry the
Eighth, the other of Queen Jane his Third Wife, both covered with Velvet;
whereupon they concluded to deposit it there. It was therefore brought down
accordingly out of the King's Lodgings, in the upper Ward of the Castle, into
the Court, the Air being then Serene: but (which is observable) before they
came to the Door of the Chapel, there happened Snow to fall, which covered the
Hearse of Black Velvet, in which it was carried, that it was all White. It
being brought to the Grave, the Reverend Dr. Iuxon Bishop of London, who had
been permitted to wait on His Majesty in the time of His Preparation for Death,
and on the Scaffold, was there ready to have performed the Office of Burial, as
it is prescribed in the Public Liturgy of the Church; but the Governor of the
Castle (Colonel Whitchcot) would not suffer it.

CHAP. XXXIII.
HAVING thus finished what I thought proper to be said in reference to His Late
Majesty King Charles the First, thus destroyed by these great Pretenders to
Godliness (as has been observed;)

I shall now go on with the remainder of this Story, until I come to the most
happy, and Miraculous Restoration of our present Sovereign King Charles the
Second, whom God long preserve, and continually defend from the Infernal Plots,
and subtle Machinations of this dangerous Brood of Cruel men.

Proclamation 30. Ian. Hist. of Indep. part 2. p. 113.
being therefore made in London (and afterward throughout all England
forbidding to Proclaim Prince Charles, the Members remaining in the House of
Commons, passed an Act 1. Febr. Ib. p. 115.
(for thenceforth their Edicts were so called) that such as had assented to the
Vote of December the Fifth, viz. that the King's concessions were a ground for
the House to proceed to a settlement, should not be readmitted to Sit as
Members: As also, that such as were then in the House, and Voted in the
Negative, should first enter their dissent to the said Vote: And that such as
were absent should declare their disapproval before they Sat.

Soon after this, they passed an Act, 3. Febr.
for the setting up of another High Court of Justice, for the Trial of Duke
Hamilton, the Earl of Holand, the Earl of Norwich, Lord Capel, and Sir John
Owen. Which Court, upon the Fifth of February met 5. Febr.
in the Painted-Chamber, and Elected their President: It being then also
debated in the House of Commons, whether they should continue the House of
Lords, as a Court of Judicatory, or Consultatory only. And the day following,
6. Febr.
it being put to the Question, both were carried in the Negative; and farther
Voted; Ib. p. 115. Et Perf. Diurnal. p. 1250.
that the House of Peers in Parliament was Useless and Dangerous, and ought to
be abolished; and that an Act should be brought in for that purpose: as also
that the Peers should not be exempted from Arrests: House of Peers abolished.
but did admit, that they should be capable of being Knights and Burgesses in
Parliament, in case they were elected.

The next thing of Note that happened, was the Proclaiming 5. Febr.
of Prince Charles at Edenborough, in Scotland, to be King of Great Britain,
France, and Ireland (his Royal Father being thus destroyed:) But it is to be
noted, that this Proclamation ran thus -- Whom all the Subjects of his Kingdom,
are bound humbly to obey, maintain, and defend, according to the National
Covenant, betwixt the Two Kingdoms, with their Lives and Goods against all,
deadly, And that before he should be admitted to the exercise of His, Royal
Power, he was to give satisfaction to that Kingdom, in those things that
concerned the security of Religion, the Union betwixt the Kingdoms, and the
Good and Peace of that Kingdom, according to the National Covenant, and the
Solemn League and Covenant.

And for Establishing the Dominion of these Bloody Regicides at We^tmin^^er,
the Members there Sitting went on Vigorously; First Voting the absolute
abolition of the Oaths of Allegiance, and Supremacy. Next in devising and
appointing A new Stamp for Coin. And by Erecting a Council of State,
consisting of Thirty Persons, viz. the Earls of Densigh, Mulgrave, Pembroke,
Salisbury, Lord Gray of Warke, Lord General Fairfax, Lord Gray of Groby, Lord
L'isle (Son to the Earl of Leicester) Lord Chief Justice Rolls, Lord Chief
Justice St. John, Lord Chief Baron Wild, Lord President Bradshaw, Lord General
Cromwell, Major General Skippon, Sir Gilbert Pickering, Sir William Masham, Sir
Arthur Haselrig, Sir James Harrington, Sir Henry Vane, Jun. Sir John Davers,
Sir William Armyn, Sir Henry Mildmay, Sir William Constable, Alderman
Penington, Alderman Wilson, Bulstrode Whitlock, Esquire Henry Martin, Esquire Colonel
Ludlow, Anthony Stepeley, Esquire William Heveningham, Esquire Robert Wallop, Esquire John
Hutchinson, Esquire Dennis Bond, Esquire Alexander Popham, Esquire Valentine Walton, Esquire
Thomas Scot, Esquire William Purefey, Esquire John Jones, Esquire

But the Lord Gray of Warke waving that employment, Mr. John L'isle of
Hantshire, Cornelius Holand, and Luke Robinson were added to this Number, who
were called the Committee of Estates appointed by Parliament.

It is not unworthy of Observation, that as the Scots and this unhappy Long
Parliament, at the beginning of their desperate Practices against the King, did
declare, that their whole Proceedings, then were according to the Fundamental
Laws. So these wicked Regicides, after their Bloody Murder of the King, in
answer to an Embassy from the Dutch, expressed; Moderate Intelligencer. p. 315.
that these their Proceedings against the King, were consistent with the
Fundamental Laws of this Nation of England, which were best known to themselves.

Nor was the project for their new Church Discipline less notable, as may seem
by this following Petition The Armies weekly Intelligencer. p. 33, and 34.
and Advice, which was presented Febr. 16.
to the General of their Army, and the Council of War, by many Christians (as
they called themselves) dispersed abroad, throughout the County of Norfolk, and
City of Norwich, in these words;

-- That your Petitioners acknowledge themselves unspeakably engaged to the God
of Heaven and Earth, for his great Mercy to us, in giving you Hearts to offer
your selves so willingly among the People, in the late Great undertaking of the
Nation, against the Enemies of the Peace thereof, and Blessing your Faithful
endeavors, with such Glorious and wonderful successes; whereby, as the Lord
has put great Honor upon you, Crowning your Valor with Victory, and making
you the Warlike Glory of the World, so has be no less put great Obligations
upon you all, to exalt him that has exalted you, and to lift up his Glory in
the World, where he has given you a name so Great and Glorious, etc. --
Therefore our daily Prayers shall be for your selves, and your Noble Army, that
you may never stumble at the stumbling-stone, nor take the honor to your
selves, that is due to Christ; nor be Instrumental for setting up of a mere
Natural and Worldly Government, like that of Heathen- Rome, Athens, etc. -- To
which end we humbly pray, that your selves would enter into Serious and Grave
consideration, and debate the Particulars in the Papers here humbly offered to
you: and also present them to the Honorably Parliament, that they may be
improved so far, as shall be found agreeable to the will and word of God. Which
done, we doubt not, but God shall have much Glory, the Godly Party shall be
comforted: Natural men (enjoying their Estates) will be at rest also, and much
satisfied, and this Commonwealth will be exalted, to be both an Habitation of
Justice, and Mountain of Holiness; even such a People as God shall Bless.

An humble Advice, concerning the Government of the Kingdom, according to the
former Platform, or Model.

1. That you would stir up Godly Ministers, and People, throughout the Kingdom,
to Associate, or incorporate into Church-Societies; and grant them your special
Favor, Provision and Protection; so shall you be Saints Nursing Fathers.

2. That you would please to satisfy the Godly-dissenting Brethren, both of
Presbytery and Independency (by such ways and means as your Wisdoms shall think
fit) how both their Interests may meet herein, that so they may concur with one
heart in the work.

3. That Sister-Churches over-see such Incorporations, and Imbodyings, that
only such as be of approved Godliness, may have the Right Hand of Fellowship
given to them.

4. That such Churches, where more of them are thus Collected and imbodyed in
any Division, Circuit, Province, etc. may choose and send out some Delegates,
Members, and Officers to Meet in one Sessions, Lesser-Parliament, Presbytery,
or Assembly, for ordering of all such affairs as there occur, according to the
word, if appertaining alone to that division.

5. That all such Churches, and the Members thereof, have voices in Elections
of such as are to sit in General Assemblies, or Church-Parliaments, so often as
occasion is; and those Elected to Sit there as Christ's Officers, and the
Churches Representatives; and to determine all things by the word, as that Law,
which God will exalt alone and make honorable.

6. That you take special care to send out, and encourage Godly Preachers, that
may go into the rest of the Kingdom, to Preach the Gospel; that so, when others
are converted, and the Son of God makes them Free, they may enjoy the former
Freedom with the rest of the Saints.

And in father order to the utter abolishing of Kingly Government, they
appointed all those Antic and most Venerable Regalia, conserved in the
Treasury at Westminster, and chiefly made use of at the Magnificent Coronations
of the Kings of the Realm, and solemn Proceedings to Parliament: And also the
costly Hangings, precious Jewels, with other of the Kings Goods, 18. Febr.
and rich Furniture for his several Princely Palaces, to be sold. And, within
few days following, caused the Heads of James Duke of Hamilton, Henry Earl of
Holand, with that truly Noble Arthur Lord Capel, to be cut off. Touching whose
actings against them, having already made some brief mention, I shall only take
notice of their dealing with Duke Hamilton a little before his Execution, 2.
Hist. of Indep. p. 2. p. 131.
which was that in order to his discovery of such Members of Parliament, and
Citizens of London, as had any Hand in calling him in, Cromwell took a Journey
on purpose, to Windsor, and there flattered him with fair promises of Life: and
though he could get nothing out of him; nevertheless he caused Bradshaw to
carry a favorable countenance toward him upon his Trial in Westminster Hall;
the Lord Gray of Groby, Colonel Wait and Hugh Peter's being likewise employed
to him upon the like Errand: who told him, that they would not much obstruct
him Pretended Plea of Quarter from Lambert, upon Articles: Peter's also
promising him to witness the same for him (though Wait upon his Report to the
House of Commons, of the manner how he took him, had affirmed, that he yielded
at discretion, and that Lambert was not near him.) Nay honest Hugh seemed so
zealous in his behalf, that he Prayed openly for him as his Lord and Patron,
and fed him with no small hopes in case he would impeach those whom they
suspected. But Hamilton, in stead of complying with them therein. (expecting
otherwise to save his Head) did not only offer them an hundred thousand Pounds
for his Life, intimating what Service he would do them in Scotland; but assured
them, that he would join Interests with Argile, and be a Servant to them there.
Whereupon Messengers were sent Post thither, to know Argile's mind; who
resolving, that none should share with him in so Glorious a Work, refused any
conjunction with him. The Wind, therefore, blowing in that Door, Bradshaw used
him more roughly, upon his Farther Trial, than before; and Hugh Peter's
renounced what he had formerly testified; insomuch, as Sentence of Death was
given against him. Nevertheless, that he might still expect Life, and not give
that Glory to God in this his Judgment, and cast Infamy upon them, by a
Christian acknowledgment of his own and Argile's mutual Practices, they soon
cut off his Head.

And immediately after this, they passed an Act, 17. Martii Scob. Coll. p. 7.
for discharging all people from their Allegiance to the late King's Issue, and
abolishing Ibid: p. 8.
the Kingly Office. Likewise for abolishing the House of Peers, as useless and
dangerous: but with favor to some Lords, who had demeaned themselves with
honor, courage and fidelity to the Commonwealth (as the words are) so that
they might be capable of Voting in Parliament, if elected; Philip Earl of
Pembroke, being 16. Apr.
the first, which had the benefit of this Act, being admitted a Commoner in
this new framed Parliament; and the Lord Howard of Escrick the Second. After
whom followed William Earl of Salisbury --

And wisely considering; An. 1649.
that as the Preachers had been their chief Instruments, for infusing such
Principles into the Vulgar sort of People, by their Seditious Lecturing
Sermons, as had at last accomplished their long studied design, for the
abolishing of Monarchical Government: Lest therefore, that by the same Engine,
the like ruin in time, might be brought upon themselves; they ordered, that no
Minister, in the Pulpit, should meddle with any StateMatters; therein pursuing
the practice of the Netherlanders, who had done so before, for the prevention
of mischief to their own Commonwealth.

But now to digress a little; let us here behold what a Brainsick Generation
in a short space of time sprung up from this precious root of Presbytery.

About Hist. of Indep. p. 2. p. 152.
this time, there came Six Soldiers into the Parish Church of Walton upon
Thames, in Surrey, near Twylight in the Evening (Mr. Faucet, the Preacher
there, having not till then ended his Sermon) one of which number with a
Lanthorn in his hand, and a Candle burning in it; and in the other Hand, four
Candles not lighted, desired the Parishoners to stay a while; saying, that he
had a Message from God unto them, and thereupon offered to go up into the
Pulpit. But the people, refusing to give him leave so to do, or to stay in the
Church, he went into the Churchyard, and there told them, that he had a
Vision, wherein he had received a command from God, to declare his will unto
them, which he was to deliver, and they to receive, upon pain of damnation; it
consisting of Five Lights.

1. That the Sabbath was abolisht as unnecessary, Jewish, and merely
Ceremonial; And here (quoth he) I should put out my first Light, but the wind
is so high I cannot kindle it.

2. That Tithes are abolisht, as Jewish and Ceremonial, a great Burden to the
Saints of God, and a discouragement of Industry and Tillage; and here I should
put out my Second Light, etc.

3. That Ministers are abolisht, as Antichristian, and of no longer use, now
Christ himself descends into the hearts of his Saints, and his Spirit
enlighteneth them with Revelations, and Inspirations. And here I should put out
my Third Light, etc.

4. Magistrates are abolished, as useless, now that Christ himself is in purity
of Spirit come among us, and has erected the Kingdom of the Saints upon Earth.
Besides they are Tyrants and Oppressors of the Liberty of the Saints, and tie
them to Laws and Ordinances, mere humane Inventions: And here I should put out
my Fourth Light, etc.

5. Then putting his Hand into his Pocket, and pulling out a little Bible, he
showed it open to the People, saying, Here is a Book you have in great
Veneration, consisting of Two parts, the Old and New Testament: I must tell
you, it is abolished, it contains Beggarly Rudiments, Milk for Babes: but now
Christ is in Glory amongst us, and imparts a farther measure of his Spirit to
his Saints, than this can afford, I am commanded to burn it before your Face.
So taking the Candle out of his Lanthorn, he set fire on it. Then putting out
the Candle he said; and here my Fifth Light is extinguished.

Nay, the stream at that time carried Multitudes, so violently, this way, that
the Soldiers fell to Preaching Ib. p. 153.
in many places; six of them, in one day, exercising their Gifts, in that kind,
at White Hall; in so much, as that Grand Impostor Cromwell, subtly observing
the bent of this Tide, ascended the Pulpit there himself, pretending that he
was called up by the Spirit of God; and standing a good while with his Eyes
lifted up (as it were in a Trance) his Head inclining to one side, he fetched
many deep Groans; spent one hour in his Prayer, and near two in his Sermon. In
which Prayer, his Humility was such; that, in imitation of Moses, he desired
God to take off from his Shoulders the Government of this Mighty People of
England, as being too heavy for him to bear.

And so much did he then pretend to Revelations, and Inspirations; that when
any weighty matter was propounded to him, he usually retired for a quarter of
an hour, or more, and declared what was revealed to him. But to proceed.

About this time they passed an Act, 7. April. Scob. Coll. p. 8.
for supporting of their Military Forces, by imposing a Tax of Ninety thousand
Pound; Per Mensem upon the Kingdom.

And that the people might be totally confounded as to matter of Religion, or
have any regard to Moral Honesty, but wholly guided by those whimsical
Fantasies, which were, by their Ringleaders called the Revelations and
Inspirations of God's Holy Spirit; it was referred 12. April. Ib. p. 156.
to a Committee, to consider of a way for the Raising of Pensions, and
allowances out of Deans and Chapters Lands, to maintain certain Itinerant
Preachers, who were Authorized to go up and down, and spread abroad their
Antimonarchical Doctrine, whereby the Rabble might be set up, and comply with
the Soldiery against the Nobility and Gentry, Clergy, Lawyers, and all orderly
Government. But upon better consideration, fearing that the Liberty, might in
time, overwhelm them with confusion; and give such a countenance to the
Levellers (of whose help they had made no small use, for the King's
Destruction) as would bring upon them inevitable ruin; Cromwell moved Ib. p.
157.
in their Parliament, that the Presbyterian Government might be settled,
promising his endeavors thereto; and that the secured and secluded Members
might be again invited to return into the House.

They likewise employed diverse of their Preachers (of which Mr. Marshal, Mr.
Nigh, Mr. Carrel, Mr. Goodwyn and Hugh Peter's were the chief) to cajole others
of their own Coat, together with the Citizens and expulsed Members, with
certain Discourses and Proposals; telling them, that the Presbyterians did
differ with the King in point of Civil Interest, which was much more
irreconcilable, than the Interest of Church Government, whatsoever show was
made to the contrary: Also, Ib. p. 158.
that it was the Presbyterians who first made War against the late King,
brought him low, and prepared him to receive his deadly blow from the
Independants:
and therefore, that the King would look upon them, as equally Guilty with the
Independants, and endeavor equally to cut them off; their design being thereby
to cast the Presbyterians into utter despair; and so, to bring them in point of
self Preservation, to join with their Interests, for common defense.

And to carry on their work with the more show of Sanctity, they ordered, 19.
April. Ibid.
that a strict Fast should be kept, to humble themselves, and implore God's
Forgiveness, for the Ingratitude of the People, who did not sufficiently
acknowledge, with Thankfulness, Gods Great Mercies upon this Land, in Freeing
them from Monarchy, and bestowing Liberty upon them, by changing Kingly
Government, into a Free State, or Republic.

To sweeten, likewise, the affections of the Vulgar toward them, they made
most specious pretenses of paying all the public Debts, and raising Three
Hundred thousand Pounds for supplying the necessities of the Commonwealth (as
they termed it) without any charge or burden to the people; and to that end
passed an Act 30. April. Scob. Coll. p. 16. Act for sale of Deans and Chapters
Lands*
for abolishing all Deans and Chapters, and for sale of their Lands.

And the better to fortify themselves, and their Usurped Dominion, they framed
another Act, 1. May. Hist. of Indep. p. 2. p. 167.
whereby they declared certain particulars to be Treason, viz.

1. If any man should maliciously affirm their present Government to be
Tyrannical, usurped, or unlawful: or that the Commons in Parliament were not
the Supreme Authority of the Nation; or that should endeavor to alter that
their Government.

2. If any should affirm their Council of State or Parliament to be Tyrannical
or unlawful, or endeavor to Subvert them, or stir up Sedition against them.

3. For any Soldiers of their Army to contrive the death of the General, or
Lieutenant General; or endeavor to Raise Mutinies in the Army; or to Levy War
against the Parliament, or to join with any to Invade England or Ireland, to
Counterfeit their Great Seal, or kill any Member of their Parliament; or any
Judge or Minister of Justice in their duty.

Soon after this, they framed and passed another Act, 19. May. Scob. Coll* p.
30.
declaring England with all the Dominions and Territories thereto belonging, to
be a Free State, and to be Governed by the Representatives of the People in
Parliament, without any King or House of Lords. Which Act was Proclaimed 30.
May. Hist. of Indep. part 2. p. 184. and 185.
in the City of London, by Alderman Andrews then Lord Mayor.

Alderman
Pennington Wollaston Fowkes Kenrick Bide Edmunds Pack Bateman Atkins Viner
Avery Wilson Dethick Foot then attending him.
The Londoners being by that time brought unto so much Vassalage by these
insolent Regicides; as that, in obedience to a Vote, made by their servile
Parliament, they were constrained to invite 7. Iunii. Ib. p. 187.
that wicked Conclave to a Thanksgiving Dinner; whereat all of them were to
rejoice together, for bringing the Grand Delinquent to punishment (that is to
say for the Murder of the King) for the greater honor of that day, the Lord
Mayor met the Speaker, and the other Members of Parliament at Temple Bar: and
there resigning the Sword to him, received it again, and carried it before him
to Christ's Church. Whence, after a Canting Sermon, he conducted them to
Grocers-Hall, and entertained them in the quality of a Free State: the Cooks
having every one of them an Oath to prepare for those Saints, nothing but
wholesome Food.

Being therefore thus seeming firmly settled in their Tyrannical Dominion, they
went on in passing sundry other Acts, in their Pseudo-Parliament, of which the
Ruling Grandees had the chief benefit, viz.

1. To 25. Iunii. Scob. Coll. p. 45.
encourage the Purchasers of Deans and Chapters Lands, by the sale of them at
Ten years Purchase, in case of ready Money; or doubling what was due to those
as should so purchase.

2. Another for 4. Iulii. Ib. p. 46.
the sale of the Goods, and Personal Estate of the King, Queen, and Prince.

3. A Third 16. Iulii. Ib. p. 51.
for sale of the Crown Lands, with particular Instructions to sell them at
Thirteen years purchase.

4. Soon after this they passed another Act, 17. Iulii. Ib. p. 64.
for Coining of new Money; with direction for the form of the stamp to be
thereon.

5. Another, 17. Iulii. Ib. p. 65.
declaring what Offenses should be thenceforth adjudged Treason; viz. to
express or publish their Government to be Tyrannical; or that the Commons in
Parliament were not the Supreme Authority.

6. And for the quicker riddance of Deans and Chapters Lands, they added
farther Power 31. Iulii. Ib. p. 68.
and Instructions to the Trustees for the sale of them.

7. Next, to reward their Bloody President Bradshaw, who gave Judgment of Death
upon the King, they passed another Act, 15. Aug.
for settling Two thousand pounds per annum upon him.

And that there might be a known mark of distinction, betwixt themselves and
others they passed an Act, 2. Ian. Scob. Coll. p. 101. Act for the Engagement.
for the Subscribing an Engagement; whereby every man should promise to be true
and Faithful to the Government then established, without a King or House of
Lords; or in case of refusal to have no benefit of the Laws.

But the Crown Lands, so doomed to be sold, went but slowly off: they therefore
passed another Act 18. Febr. Ibid.
to constitute a Committee to remove obstructions in the sale of them. Nor was
all this sufficient to satisfy their greedy appetites, or was evident enough
from the aim they had to devour all the Gleabe and Tithes throughout the whole
Kingdom. To which purpose they passed an Act, 22. Febr. Ib. p. 104*
whereby they nominated certain Commissioners, to receive and dispose of all
Rents, Issues, and profits of all Rectories, Vicaridges, Donatives, and all
other Ecclesiastical livings; and of all Impropriations and Gleabe-lands, then
under Sequestration; out of which to allow an yearly maintenance, for such as
should be approved of for the work of the Ministry; this act being called An
Act for the better propagating and Preaching the Gospel in Wales: For it was to
extend no farther at present; their Resolutions being to go on as they found
their success in this. Hereupon all the Church-doors in that part of the Realm
being soon shut up; they employed three or four most Impudent Schismatical
Knaves ( viz. Ienkin Jones, Vavasor Powel, and David Gam) to range about in
those Parts as Itinerants, there to Preach to the People, when, where, and what
they pleased, in order to the more firm establishment of their own Tyrannical
Dominion.

The next work was to make sale of the Fee-farm-Rents of the Crown: to which
end they passed an act. 11. Martii. Ib. p. 106.
Also, An. 1650.
for the farther enslaving and terrifying of the People, they passed another
26. Martii. Scob. Coll. p. 111.
for the establishing an High Court of Justice; by which act Commissioners were
named, to hear and determine of all Crimes and Offenses, contrary to the
Articles therein contained. And having built Three Famous new Pinnaces, the
better to spread forth and perpetuate the Memorial of some of their Grandees;
upon the lanching 15. Apr.
of them (which the States went to see) they named one of them the Faithful
Speaker; another the succesful Fairfax; and the Third the Bold President: and
soon after, for the surer obliterating of Monarchy, they Voted 3. Maii.
that the Kings Arms in all places should be pulled down and defaced.

CHAP. XXXIV.
ABOUT this time the Scots (in whose power it once was to have restored the
late King to his Royal Throne; had they been really sensible of that whereof in
their many Declarations they so boasted) seeing the Clouds thicken apace from
England, which threatened the like Slavery to them, as their Presbyterian
Brethren here did then suffer under the power of the Independent Saints;
resolving to adventure an after-Game, for the recovery of their power,
dispatched Hist. of Indep. part 2. p. 14. and 15.
the Lord Libertoun into the Netherlands, unto the young King ( Charles the
Second) by the color of whose Title, they knew full well, that an Army might
easily be Raised: But withal making advantage of his then distressed condition
(instigated and animated by the Presbyterians here) they required that he
should take the Covenant, and likewise submit to their Directory and Catechism,
promising that in so doing, they would admit him to the Throne of that Realm;
endeavor the recovery of his Rights, and assist him in bringing the Murderers
of his Father to condign punishment. Toward the accomplishment of which work,
the Presbyterians here, were also by compact to have acted as opportunity might
best serve.

Unto which dishonorable terms he being over-perswaded, by some greater
Politicians than St. Paul (who prohibited the doing Evil, that Good might come
thereof) against his own judgment, was drawn to assent, and to adventure His
Royal Person into Scotland, for carrying on that work. Whereupon the Scots
having by the help of their Preachers, soon Raised a powerful Host (and for
that reason called the Kirk-Army) as a preamble to that Slavery which they
intended to the King, welcomed him thither with that most inhumane and infamous
Murder, of the best of His Subjects; I mean the most Loyal and truly noble
Marquess of Montross, whom the unhappy event of War had made their Prisoner.

The danger of which Army, so Raised in Scotland, being discerned here; it was
Voted 6. Iunii.
at Westminster, that General Fairfax should forthwith March into that Kingdom,
and quell the Brethren: But he, being either touched in conscience with the
solemn League and Covenant, which had formerly so firmly knit these Brethren in
iniquity together; or rather overawed by some of the Godly Party here; General
Fairfax lays down his Commission.
declined that Service, laying down his Commission. Whereupon that Superlative
Saint Cromwell, being constituted 26. Iunii. Oliver Cromwell made General of the
Army*
General (having taken off the Heads of Mr. Love (one of the fiercest of the
Presbyterian Pulpitmen) and Gybons, another active man for the Cause; the more
to strike a terror into the rest of the Presbyterians here, Marched into
Scotland with no less than sixteen thousand Horse and Foot. Where,
notwithstanding he had at first some hopeful effects of his Expedition, he
became at length reduced to such desperate extremities, that he would gladly
have retreated for the preservation of himself.

In this seeming lost condition, therefore when those proud Presbyterians of
that Realm had in conceit swallowed him up, Almighty God made him the apparent
and signal scourge of that disloyal and most perfidious people, by the utter
overthrow Battle of Dunbar. 3. Sept.
of their great and powerful Army at Dunbar; their word then being for Kirk and
Covenant. As Trophies of which wonderful Victory, the colors then taken, were
soon after hung 21. Sept.
up in Westminster Hall.

It will not (I think) be amiss, before I proceed farther, to observe foam
particulars, which passed by Letters betwixt General Cromwell, and the Governor
of Edenborough-Castle, within a few days after this great Victory at Dunbar;
the Governor objecting; Perf. Diurnall. p. 476. etc.
First that the English had not adhered to their first Principles, nor had been
true to the ends of the Covenant. And Secondly that men of Civil employments
had usurped the calling and employment of the Ministry, to the scandal of the
Reformed Kirks.

To the first of these objections therefore, Cromwell demands of them; whether
their bearing witness to themselves of their adhering to their first
Principles, and ingenuity in presecuting the ends of the Covenant, justifies
them so to have done, because they themselves say so. Adding, that they must
have patience, to have the truth of their Doctrines and Sayings, tried by the
Touchstone of the word of God: and that there be a Liberty and duty of Trial,
there is also a Liberty of Judgment for them that may and ought to try. Which,
if so, then they must give others leave to say and think, that they can appeal
to equal Judges, who they are that have been the truest fulfillers of the most
real and equitable ends of the Covenant. But if those Gentlemen ( quoth Oliver)
who do assume to themselves, to be the infallible Expositors of the Covenant,
as they do (too much to their Auditories) of the Scriptures, account a
different sense and Judgment from their own, to be a breach of the Covenant,
and Heresy; no marvel (quoth he) that they judge of others so authoritatively
and severely: but we (quoth he) have not so learned Christ.

And to the second answered thus; Are you troubled that Christ is Preached? Is
Preaching so inclusive in your Function? Does it scandalize the Reformed Kirks
and Scotland in particular? Is it against the Covenant? Away with the Covenant,
if it be so. I thought the Covenant and these could have been willing, that any
should speak good of the name of Christ: If not it is no Covenant of God's
approving; nor the Kirk (you mention) so much the Spouse of Christ. For a
Conclusion. In answer to the witness of God upon our solemn Appeal, you say you
have not so learned Christ, to hang the equity of your Cause upon events. We
could wish, that blindness had not been upon your Eyes, to all those mavelous
Dispensations which God has wrought lately in England. But did not you
solemnly Appeal and Pray? Did not we do so too? And ought not we and you to
think, with fear and trembling, of the Hand of the Great God, in this Mighty
and strange appearance of his, but can slightly call it an event? Were not both
your and our expectations renewed from time to time, whilst we waited on God,
to see which way he would manifest himself upon our Appeals. And shall we,
after all these our Prayers, Fastings, Tears, Expectations and solemn
Appeals, call these bare Events? The Lord pity you. Surely we fear because it
has been a merciful and gracious deliverance to us.

I beseech you in the Bowels of Christ, search after the mind of the Lord in it
toward you, and we shall help you by our Prayers, that you may find it. For
yet (if we know our Hearts at all) our Bowels do in Christ yearne after the
Godly in Scotland.

It is not unworthy of Observation likewise, that as this signal dissaster to
the Presbyterians, did very much raise the Spirits of the Independent Grandees;
so did it incite them to give all possible encouragement to the rest of that
Party, and to all other Sectaries, of whose help, upon occasion, they might
stand in need. They therefore first passed an Act, 27. Sept.
Entitled An Act for the relief of Religious and peaceable People, from the
rigor of former Acts of Parliament in matter of Religion: amongst which those
of primo and 35o Eliz. which concern the Subjects obedient repairing to Church,
were repealed. And shortly after that, another Act, 22. Nov. Scob. Coll. p. 148.
whereby they directed all proceedings at Law, scil. Writs, Pleadings, Patents,
Books of Reports, and other Law Books to be in English.

Next they imposed 29. Nov. Ib. p. 149.
a Tax of an hundred and twenty Thousand Pounds a Month for the support of
their Army: and not long after passed an Act, 22. Ian. Ib. 151.
declaring that their new Great Seal, Engraven with a Cross and an Harp, with
this Circumscription, The Seal of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of
England, should be the Seal of the Parliament of that Commonwealth, and be
only used by order of Parliament; and that it should be Treason to counterfeit
the same.

Most certain it is, that the late wonderful defeat, which the Scots received
at Dunbar by the English then commanded by Cromwell, did not a little startle
the whole Godly Party in that Nation. For whereas before, though it was through
the advantage they made of the King's Name (whom they had got thither, as has
been already observed) that they raised their Army; it is very well known, that
His Majesty was not permitted to have any hand in the conduct thereof; no not
so much as to be Personally in that part of the Realm, in which it was; lest
his presence should have had any influence thereon, in reference to his own
just Rights; so much did their own guilt of Disloyalty terrify them.

But the case was now altered: For soon after this great overthrow, they sent
to His Majesty, earnestly desiring his presence with them; and to Court him
with the fairer assurance of their fidelity, appointed a certain day for his
Coronation, 1 Ian.
which was accordingly performed with great Solemnity. So that then standing
clear with his best Subjects of that Kingdom, he began to form an Army upon his
own, and their Interest: Yet not without the assistance and Joynt-help Hist. of
Indep. p. 4. p. 20.
of the Kirk-Party there, which in humane reason might have been thought to his
advantage: In the Head whereof he entered 7. Aug.
England at Carlisle upon the Seventh of August; and marched to Worcester 22.
Aug.
without any great opposition. But whether there was any thing of Treachery in
them that then over-perswaded His majesty to make stay there, against his own
judgment: or whether Almighty God would not give his Blessing to the aid of
those who had formerly been so false and perfidious to His Royal Father and
himself, is hard to say. Sure we are, that so great was the confluence, from
most parts of England, to Cromwell's assistance (the Presbyterians then joining
Ib. p. 22.
with him, and diverse of their Preachers, Marching with him in a Military way)
that after a most sharp dispute, at and near that City, being overpowered with
strength and numbers, his Army was totally routed 3. Sept.
and destroyed; himself, and some few others being necessitated to escape by
flight.

It may seem strange (I presume) to some, that I should here touch the
Presbyterians so near the Quick, there being some of opinion; that though the
most rigid of that Sect, were at that time forward against the King: yet, that
His Majesty had many Well-wishers of them in this his adventure. But if I be
herein censured, I desire to know, what this expression, used by those Thirty
six Presbyterian and Independent Ministers, which joined together in a Petition
for respiting the Execution of Mr. Love (one of their own coat, of whom I have
already given some touch) does mean, viz. that in putting him to death, the
hopes and expectations of the Common Enemy, against compliance with whom, he
had made open protestation at his Trial, will be heightened. And, that the
forbearance of so putting him to death, would manifest to the World, that you
(id est the Parliament) do put a difference betwixt those, who offend from
Principles of Enmity against God and his People; and others, who transgress
through the mistakes of an erroneous conscience, in the midst of great and
various changes.

Again, I would gladly know what construction is to be made of those words,
Printed in one of the Newsbooks of that year, viz. The Presbyterians in
Lancashire, and parts adjacent, have not only declaimed against the late
defection in Norfolk; but declared against the Conjunction and Proceedings of
Iockey, and their young King, with Middleton, Ogilby, and the rest of the Royal
Party; and are resolved to adhere to the present Government, and to walk close
and steadfast in the ways of Truth and Holiness.

Here it will not be impertinent (I hope) to make a little pause, and
contemplate the infinite goodness and mercy of God, in so wonderful a
preservation of the King (our present Sovereign) after this fatal ruin of his
Army at Worcester. Who, though pursued and sought for, with all the art and
skill, that these Bloody Regicides, and their whole Party could devise; was
through the signal fidelity of some few persons (of whom certain Narratives of
the particular passages therein, which are already made public, do make
honorable mention) so well secured from their fury; and with such admirable
contrivance and skill conducted, that he Landed safely upon the Fifteenth of
October following at New Haven in France.

And as so strange, and little less than Miraculous a Preservation of His
Majesty's Person, deserves (for a perpetual Thankfulness to God Almighty) to be
specially recorded to Posterity: So does the Memorial of Gods most evident
Judgments upon the Scottish Nation, after their unhappy defection from the
obedience which they did owe to His Royal Father their Native King; levying
diverse Armies; solemnly Covenanting with His English Subjects against him, and
the Established Government* and lastly selling Him for Money, when for his
Safeguard and Protection, he became necessitated to fly from the fury of
these, and to put himself into their Hands. For it is not unknown, that they did
twice Raise their Covenanting Brethren in that Realm, to invade this, in an
Hostile manner; and after much spoil and Rapine made in this (no less than
Three of their Armies being utterly destroyed; the first at Preston in
Lancashire; the Second at Dunbar in Scotland; and the last at Worcester) the
flower of their Youth and most Eminent for Chivalry, were either slain in open
Battle; Famisht and wasted by most cruel and merciless usage in Prison, or
Barbarously sold to Foreign Plantations, there to be Enslaved with perpetual
Servitude.

CHAP. XXXV.
BUT to go on with my Story. Certain it is, that this fatal blow at Worcester
did not only much deject all true hearted and Loyal Persons; but seemed so
firmly to establish this Barbarous Generation, in their Tyrannous sway, that
nothing but a Miracle was ever like to alter the Scene. Therefore the more to
perpetuate their future oppressive Dominion, their next business was, to lessen
and opress the Nobility; and to Flatter the Commonalty into a Slavish
subjection to their Usurped and Rigorous power: To which end they (shortly
after) passed Two Acts 4. Febr. Scob. Coll. p. 178.
in their Grand Convention at Westminster, (called the Parliament) the one
relating to the Nobility; which was to make void all Titles of Honor,
Dignities, or Precedencies, given by the late King. The other a General Pardon,
24. Febr. Ib. p. 179.
in reference to the People; for the first moving, and at length obtaining
whereof, Cromwell himself was known to be the sole Instrument.

All being therefore now in their Power, An. 1652.
and no visible Enemy to disturb their quiet; though at the beginning of their
Rebellion ( Anno 1642.) they highly complemented the Dutch, desiring that the
King might have no manner of Supplies from them, in respect of the near
Relation that was betwixt that Model, into which they themselves then aimed to
cast this Government, and the State of their Provinces; and for that reason,
expected not only their assistance, but a Loan of Money from them upon the
Public Faith (as in the Twelfth Chapter of this Work may more fully appear.)
The case was now altered; For looking upon themselves, after all this wonderful
success as Mighty Potentates in their New Commonwealth and Free State; they
employed Oliver St. John (the Chief Justice of their Court of Common Pleas)
commonly called Cromwell's Dark-Lanthorn, as Ambassador into the Netherlands,
not only to make a firm alliance with the Dutch from the similitude of their
Governments, against all Sovereign Monarchs and Princes; but to weaken the
Interest of the Prince of Orange with them, who had Married the King's Daughter.

Which courteous overture being not at all relisht, was taken in great disdain
by our Grandees here. But the Hogen Mogens on the other side; being the Elder
Commonwealth, strong in Shipping, and expecting to make themselves absolute
Lords of the Worlds Commerce, were resolved not to stoop, by yielding them the
Flag or the old duty of Herring-Fishing. These differences therefore occasioned
a War at Sea with them, which began 19. Iunii. Heath 's Chr. p. 322.
in the Downs this year, on the Nineteenth of June; and was again renewed 16.
Aug. Ibid. p. 323.
the Sixteenth of August, Westwards of the Isle of Wight; in both which the
Dutch had the worst, Sir George Ascue then commanding the English Fleet.

So likewise on 28. Oct^^. Ib. p. 327.
the Twenty eighth of October following, Blake being then Vice Admiral.

But upon another Fight 29. Nov. Ib. p. 329, 330.
with them in the Downs on the Twenty ninth of November ensuing, Blake
received a great defeat, which did not end the dispute: for on the Eighteenth
of February not far from Portland, they had another 18. Febr. Ib. p. 335.
sharp fight, in which both sides received no small loss. As also at 2. Martii.
Ib. p. 336.
Legorne, about the beginning of March, in which the English were worsted.

Leaving therefore the farther Prosecution of these Sea Fights till the next
year, I find, that at home, they better to secure themselves against the
Royallists, the passed a Third Act 29. Sept. Scob. Coll. p. 209.
in their Parliament, for disabling of Delinquents (by which name the
Royallists were called) to bear any Office of Trust, or Power in the
Commonwealth; or to have any Voice or Vote in Election of any Public Officer.

The King's Authority and Friends, being thus absolutely suppressed, and Cromwell
at every turn the chief Agent therein; not only in those his bold adventures
against the scots, but in many other, both here and in Ireland (as though
Victory had been entailed upon his Sword) the time was now come, that he
thought fit to act his own part more nearly; yet still under color of solely
minding the Public. As he had therefore made the Soldiery instrumental for
the ruin of the King, by the influence of his inferior Officers, called
Adjutators; so now did he, again set those active Engines on work, for the
utter confusion of that Impious Iuncto called the Parliament. Which Adjutators
being readily inclinable to any thing of change, objected to the Iuncto, that
they had not approved themselves such worthy Patriots as they expected, but had
sought themselves, and their own peculiar profit. And therefore (as good
Common-wealths-men, and Friends to the Public) required, that they should
suddenly prefix a Period to their Sitting; to the end that the Godly Party, and
good People of the Nation, might thereupon make choice of a more equal
Representative, for the rectifying and amendment of what was still out of order.

But notwithstanding this fair pretense, An. 1653.
the aim of the Soldiers, was by outing those old Saints, to reduce the whole
sway of all under the power of themselves, which made them so earnest and
forward in the work; being fed with those hopes, through the insinuation of
Cromwell. The Iuncto therefore, foreseeing this danger; for preventing thereof,
were neither slack nor unactive: endeavoring first to break the Army by
Disbanding; and in the next place, to spoil their design by delays:
Nevertheless, with much zeal, seemed earnest to retire; affirming, that they
then were in contrivance for a new Representative to succeed them. All which
availed nothing, there being no halting before an Old Cripple: for Cromwell was
not ignorant of what they aimed at; being well assured, that if he let them
alone, his design would be Crossed: and therefore determined without more ado,
to turn them out of Doors.

To which end, having well seasoned the Soldiery for his purpose; and for the
better engratiating himself therewith, taken the Officers into his Council, he
resolved (as 'twas usual with him) to carry on this great work, under the
specious Mask of Religion and pretended Revelations; those standing him in such
stead upon all his attempts, as that there were not a few that really believed,
whatever he undertook could not easily miscarry.

Upon the Twentieth of April therefore, attended with strong Guards, he entered
the Parliament House (with Fleetwood his great Confident) commanding some few
of his attendants to tarry without. Where, without moving his Hat, or going to
any Seat, he first addressed his Speech to the Chief Justice St. John; telling
him, that he then came to do that which grieved him to the very Soul, and what
he had earnestly, with Tears, prayed to God against. Nay, that he had rather be
torn in pieces than do it: But, that there was a Necessity laid upon him
therein, in order to the Glory of God, and the good of this Nation.

Whereunto St. John answered, that he knew not what he meant; but did pray,
that what it was which must be done, might have a happy Issue for the General
Good.

Then Cromwell turning toward the Speaker, told him how long, under color of
Service to the Public, they had sat and acted there: and that in stead
thereof, themselves and their Kindred (Engrossing all places of great profit)
had, upon their own Pride and Luxury, consumed the Wealth of the Land. Which
being said, he gave a stamp with his Foot, and bad them for shame be gone, and
give place to honester men.

Whereupon a Member standing up, and modestly saying that it stood not with
common Justice to cast so general an aspersion upon them all, without any
Proof; he in wrath taking Sir Henry Vane, Junior by the Cloak, said thou art a
Iugling Fellow; and told Allen the Goldsmith, that he had inricht himself by
Cousening the State, for which he should be called to account: and commanded
those of his Guard, who at the signal of that stamp, were entered the Door,
Cromwell turns the Parliament, called the Rump out of Doors.
immediately to turn them out of the House; Colonel Harrison accordingly
pulling the Speaker out of his Chair.

It was observed, that as they went out of the House, he pointed at Harry
Martin and Tom Challoner; and said, Is it fit that such Fellows as these,
should sit to Govern? Men of vicious Lives; the one a noted Whore-Master, and
the other a Drunkard? Nay he boldly upbraided them all, with selling the
Cavaliers Estates by bundles; and said they had kept no Faith with them.

This, as it was one of his greatest Adventures, so was it the most grateful to
the People of all that ever he did; it being no less than the quelling of that
many-headed Monster, which glutted with unmeasurable Rapine, and Innocent
Blood, had been not a little dreadful to the greatest part of Europe.

Having therefore so happily removed this Block, yet still keeping close the
main end of his design, under the shadow of ruling by a Civil Power; after much
pretended seeking of God, he selected certain Persons to manage the same, as a
Council of State, whose Names were as follows,

1. Himself as General of the Army. 2. The Lord L'isle, Son to the Earl of
Leicester. 3. Lieutenant General Fleetwood. 4. Major General Lambert. 5. Major
General Harrison. 6. Major General Desborow. 7. Sir Gilbert Pickering, Knight. 8.
Sir Charles Wolfesley, Bar. 9. Sir Anthony Ashley Couper, Barronet. 10. Sir
James Hope of Scotland. 11. Colonel Hewson of Ireland. 12. Colonel Norton. 13.
Colonel Mountagu. 14. Colonel Benet. 15. Colonel Stapeley. 16. Colonel
Sydenham. 17. Colonel Tomlinson. 18. Colonel Jones. 19. Alderman Tichburne, 20.
Mr. Strickland. 21. Mr. Carey. 22. Mr. Howard. 23. Mr. Broughton. 24. Mr.
Laurence. 25. Mr. Holister. 26. Mr. Comptney. 27. Mr. Major. 28. Mr. St.
Nicholas. 29. Mr. Moyer. 30. Mr. Williams of Wales.
And to the end that there might be the less suspicion of his affecting the
Rule; with the advice of his Officers, he made choice of no less than an
hundred and four Godlymen, unto whom he committed the whole sway of the Realm;
who were accordingly summoned by a special Letter to each of them under his
Hand.

Berks.
Samuel Dunch. Vincent Goddard. Thomas Wood.
Bedf.
Nathaniel Tailor. Edward Cater.
Buck.
George Fleetwood. George Baldwin.
Cambr.
John Sadler. Thomas French. Robert Castle. Samuel Warner.
Chesh.
Robert Duckenfeild. Henry Birkinhead.
Cumb Northumb. Bishopric of Durch. Westmor.
Charles Howard. Robert Fenwick. Henry Dawson. Henry Ogle.
Cor^w.
Robert Benet. Francis Langdon. Anthony Rows. John Bowden.
Derb.
Iervas Benet. Nathaniel Barton.
Devon.
George Monk, one of Lanc* the Generals at Sea. John Carew. Thomas Sanders.
Christopher Martin. James Erisey. Francis Rows. Richard Sweet.
Dorset.
William Sydenham. John Bingham.
Essex.
Ioachim Mathews. Henry Barington. John Brewster. Christopher Earl. Dudley
Temp^er.
Glouc
John Crostes. Wiliam Neast. Robert Holmes.
South.
Richard Norton. Richard major. John Hildesley.
Hertf.
Henry Lawrence* William Reeve.
Heref.
Wroth Rogers. John Herring.
Hunt.
Edward Mountagu* Stephen Phesant.
Kent.
Lord L'isle. Thomas Blount. William Kenrick. William Cullen. Andrew Broughton.
Lanc.
William West. John Sawrey. Robert Cunliss.
Leic.
Henry Danvers. Edward Smith. John Prat.
Linc.
Sir William Brownlow. Richard Cust. Barnabas Bowtell. Humphrey Walcott.
William Thompson.
Midd.
Sir William Roberts. Augustine Wingfeild. Arthur Squib.
Monm.
Philip Jones.
North.
Sir Gilbert Pickering. Thomas Brook.
Norf.
Robert Iermy. Tobias Freze. Ralph Wilmer. Henry King. William Barton.
Not.
John Odingsells. Edward Clud.
Oxon.
Sir Charles Wolseley, Bt. William Draper. Dr. Jonathan Godard.
Rutl.
Edward Horseman.
Salop.
William Boterel. Thomas Baker.
Staff.
George Bellor. John Chetwood.
Suff.
Jacob Caley. Francis Brewster. Robert Dunkon. John Clerk. Edward Plumsted.
Somer.
Robert Blake another of the Generals at Sea. John Pyne. Dennis Hollyster.
Henry Henley.
Surrey.
Samuel Highland. Laurence March.
Suff.
Anthony Stapeley. William Spence. Nathaniel Studdey.
War.
John St. Nicholas. Richard Lucie.
Wilts.
Sir Anth. Ashley Couper, Baronet. Nicholas Green. Thomas Air.
Wigorn.
Richard Salway. John James.
Yorksh.
George Lord Evre. Walter Strickland. Francis Lascells. John Anlaby. Thomas
Dickenson. Thomas St. Nicholas. Roger Cotes. Edward Gill.
Land.
Robert Tichburne. John Ireton. Samuel Moyer. John Langley. John Stone. Henry
Barton. Prais-god Barebone.
Wales.
Bushey Mansell. James Philips. John Williams. Hugh Courtney. Richard Price.
John Brown.
Scotl.
Sir James Hope. Alexander Bredy. John Swinton. William Lockart. Alexander
Jeffreys.
Ireland*
Sir Robert King. Colonel John Hewson. Col. Henry Cromwell. Colonel John Clerk.
Daniel Hutchenson. Vincent Gookin.
Afterward these following were Elected into them.
Lord General Cromwell. Major General Lambert. Major General Harrison, Major
General Desborough. Colonel Matthew Tomlinson.
Of these, many were Illiterate and of mean condition, diverse Fanatic
Sectaries, and of that kind the most busy and mischievous; yet here and there
mixed with confiding men, and such whose Interest was firmly trusted with
Cromwels.

Being thus chosen and sent for, they first met 4. Iul^^.
together in the Council Chamger at White Hall. Whence, after a Grave Speech
made to them by Cromwell; expressing, that he had thus called them together, to
consult of the great affairs of these Three Kingdoms, they adjourned
themselves to the House of Commons at Westminster; and there taking their
places, and chosen Mr. Rows to be their Speaker; admiring the great goodness of
God, that had put it into the Generals Heart, to select them for so great a
work, they Voted themselves to be the Parliament of England, and by that Title
to be known and called.

Having so done, they fell vigorously to work for a thorough Reformation;
Dreaming of nothing less, than that Jesus Christ must shortly Reign with them
here on Earth. To prepare the way therefore to his Personal coming, they
considered of abolishing the Ministerial Function, as favoring (in their
opinion) totally of Popery. Likewise for the taking away of Tithes, as the
Relics of Judaism. Also to abrogate the Old English Laws, as Badges of
Conquest and Norman Slavery. And lastly to suppress the Universities, and all
Schools for Learning, as Heathenish and unnecessary; with all Titles of Honor
and distinctions, as not agreeable to Christianity. All which they had (without
question) soon effected; but that some few of them, of better judgments, gave a
stop to their Frenzy.

But the Court of Chancery they really Voted 5. Aug.
down; and passed an Act 24. Aug. Scob. Coll. p. 236.
for the solemnizing of all Marriages by Justices of Peace, after Publication
made of such purpose in the Church or open Market: and that the Birth (but not
Baptizing) of Children should be thenceforth Registered, which shows of what
Judgment they were in that point.

The Act likewise for Subscribing that Instrument, called the Engagement, which
was passed 2. Ian. An. 1649. they Voted 4. Nov. Ib. p. 268.
unfit to continue, and totally repealed it. And for the Trial of what they
called Treason or High Crimes, they Erected 21. Nov. Ib. p. 272.
a new High Court of Justice.

By which Phrentick doings, having made themselves, as well distasteful, as
ridiculous to the World, their Grand Master ( Cromwell) to ingratiate himself
farther with the People, put a Period 12. Dec.
to their Sitting; the manner whereof was thus.

In the Morning a little sooner than usual (12. Dec.) those of the Members
which were Cromwell's chiefest Confidents, came to the House; where finding then
but few of the Anabaptists, an Eminent Member stood up, and addressing himself
of the Speaker, told him, that he must disburthen himself of some things that
had a long time lain upon his Heart: That he was now to speak to the Esse, or
being, rather than the Been Esse, or well-being of the Commonwealth, which was
ready to sink under them, through the ill management of the power betrusted
with them; and, that for his own part, he must resign his power from whence he
had it; foreseeing clearly that their Waitings and Expectations of ever coming
on the things of public good were more and more disappointed: and so descended
to these particular instances.

1. That they had dealt disingeniously with the Army, in moving, that the
Officers should be treated with to lay down their Pay; and when they could not
effect that, the Bill of Assessments was endeavored to be cast out.

2. That they had not a Spirit to do Justice, which appeared in their Act for
confirming the sale of Sir John Stowells Estate, though he were relieved by the
Court of Articles. And however he was as vile as could be imagined (so was his
expression;) yet he knew not but that man was left to be a Trial upon them,
whether they would do Justice, or not.

3. That they had a Principle amongst them, of destroying and pulling down,
though nothing were set up in the stead; and that this was especially
manifested in their Vote, for removing the Chancery, and total alteration of
the Laws.

4. That though they called their selves a Parliament, yet they Acted most
unlike unto it; and that appeared in their endeavors to destroy propriety, in
attempting to take off the Power of Patrons to present to Church Livings.

5. That they would destroy the Ministry it self, which appeared by their Vote
on Saturday before: and that for these Considerations, they could not satisfy
themselves to sit any longer, and so be guilty of bringing confusion and
desolation upon the Nation. But if any would yet be so hardy as to continue
there, he would say unto them in the words of the Prophet; Ephraim has joined
himself to Idols, let him alone.

This being seconded, and after him pressed earnestly by some others, much
startled the Anabaptists then present, who spoke fiercely against it. Insomuch
as those who had appeard for their Dissolution, fearing, lest by delaying time
in Speeches, more of the Anabaptists might come in and out-Vote them; moved,
that all who were for their Dissolution, should rise and walk out. Whereupon,
the Speaker and diverse other, forthwith went out of the House. But Squib,
Moyer, St. Nicholas, and some more of that Gang (to the number of about Twenty)
sat still, and having placed Mr. Moyer in the Chair, fell to protesting
against what the rest had done; professing, in the presence of the Lord, that
their Call of God to that place, was the Principal Motive that drew them
thither; and that they apprehended their said Call, was chiefly for promoting
the Interest of Jesus Christ. Whereupon they continued there until Colonel
Goffe, with some Musketeers came, and asked them What they sat there for?
Whereunto it was Answered, to seek the Lord: But perceiving what the Issue
thereof was like to be, they (nevertheless) departed, and Subscribed an
Instrument, whereunto some others had set their Hands before, for surrender of
their Power into the Hands of their Master, Cromwell.

Which Instrument, so signed, being brought to His Excellency, he lifted up his
Eyes with seeming great admiration: and at first, with no less modesty faintly
refused it: but at length, after assiduous and importunate suit, earnestly
representing to him the welfare of the Nation; inculcating to him also, how
zealous a Patriot he had ever been for the People, he was at last overcome
(though unwillingly) to receive it.

This Pageant therefore, being thus formally over; the next work was, his
assuming to himself the sole Dominion and Rule: a thing which sew could think
it safe for any of them to aspire unto, considering what had been acted by him
and his Party, utterly to eradicate Monarchique Government. But, as the Common
Watermen, look always the contrary way to that they Row; so did this Grand
Impostor: The contrivance thereof being secretly laid by himself and Major
General Lambert (who had an aim in time, to succeed him in the Government)
Lambert was the man that dealt with the Principal Officers of the Army, to
carry on this design, with all subtilty imaginable.

Whereupon he first told them, how much the Governing by a single Person, would
conduce to the General quiet and advantage of the Public; and next to the
peculiar Interest of each of them in particular, in case it were bounded with
sober limitations, and not to be by the Title of King. For an expedient
therefore, they resolved on the name of Protector; and of a formal Instrument,
wherein should be contained the Rules of his Government.

CHAP. XXXVI.
ALL things being accordingly ready in order thereto, upon the Sixteenth of
December (and about One of the Clock that day) Five Regiments of Foot, and
Three of Horse, were drawn out as a Guard, from White Hall to Westminster Hall:
whereof one ( viz. Colonel Goffs) was placed within the Precincts of the Hall.

This being done, Cromwell, with the Captain of his Guard and some few others,
passed through these Bands of Soldiers to the Door of Westminster Hall. Where
alighting from his Coach, there proceeded, First the City Marshals: Then the
Aldermen of London, in Scarlet: After them the Judges (all except their
Chief Justice Rolls:) Next the Two Keepers of their Great Seal ( Keble and
L'isle:) Then Four Sergeants at Arms, with Maces ( viz. the Parliament Mace,
the City Mace, the Council of State's Mace, and the Lord Keeper's Mace:) After
thses the Lord Mayor's Sword Bearer, with the Cap of Maintenance and Sword (but
the Sword not Erected:) Then the Lord Mayor: And next to him Cromwell himself in
a Black Suit and Cloak Lined with Velvet, Boots, and a Gold Hatband (all bare
headed:) And after him the Principal Officers of the Army, and Council of State.

In which manner they proceeded to the Chancery-Court, where a Rich Chair of
State was set, with a large Cusheon, and Carpets on the Floor.

Being ascended into the court, Cromwell standing before the Chair, with the Two
Keepers and Judges on each hand of him; Major General Lambert declaring to him
the Dissolution of the Parliament, and exigency of the times; did, in the name
of the Army, and of the Three Nations, desire him to accept of the
Protectorship of them. Whereunto he assenting, a large Instrument (extending to
a whole skin of Velome) was read to him, which contained the form of his
Government, and somewhat, called an Oath; at which he lifted up his Right Hand
and Eyes, and assented thereto.

Then did the Lord Mayor present the Sword to him, and the Keepers the Seal.
Both which he delivered back to them respectively. Cromwell made Lord Protector.
This being done, a Common Soldier Seconded with about Twenty more, cried
aloud, God Bless the Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland
and Ireland. After which there was a General shout made by the Soldiers
throughout the Hall, and after a little pause; the like twice more.

Then he went back to White Hall, the Lord Mayor carrying the Sword upright
before him, the Protector having his Hat on. After which (in the Evening) were
several Vollies of small shot, and some great, with Ringing of Bells. The Tenor
of which Instrument, was as follows, viz.

That the Supreme Legislative Authority, The Instrument of Government.
should be in a Single Person and the People in Parliament; but the
Administration thereof to be left to the Lord Protector and to his Council,
whereof the number was not to be above Twenty and One.

That all Charters, Patents, Writs, and Commissions, should be passed by the
Protector: All Power of Magistracy, Honors and Titles to be derived from him.
Likewise the Pardon of all Offenses excepting Treason and Murder. He also to
have the Administration of all things, with the Advice of his Council and
according to the Tenor of this Instrument.

That the Militia, Sitting the Parliament, should be in the disposal of the
Protector and the Parliament; but in the Intervals in the Protector and his
Council. The Power also of making Peace and War with Foreign Princes to be in
the Protector and his Council: but he to have no Authority of Repealing, or
making any Laws without the consent of Parliament.

That the Parliament should be called before the end of Six Months then next
ensuing, and afterward once in Three Years, or oftener if need require; and
that it should not be in the Protector's Power to Dissolve the same for the
First Five Months, without the consent of the House.

That the Number of Members for England, should consist of full Four hundred,
Elected according to an equal distribution: For Scotland Thirty; and for
Ireland the like Number; the number for each County and City to be also assgned.

That the Calling of such Parliament, should be under the Seal of the
Commonwealth, by Writs to the Sheriff in the Protector's Name. But if the
Protector should not call the same within the times limited, the Chancellor
then to do it, under the Penalty of High Treason; and if he should fail
therein, then that the Sheriffs should perform it. And after such Election
should be made, to be transmitted by the Chief Magistrate, by Indenture to the
Chancellor, Signel with his Hand Twenty days before the Sitting of the same
Parliament. Also, if the Sheriff or Mayor should make a false Return, that he
be Fined in Two thousand Marks.

That none should be capable to Elect, who had ever born Arms against the
Parliament, or been Actors in the Irish Rebellion. Nor that any Papist should
ever be capable to give his Voice. And that all Elections against these Rules
should be void, and the transgressors Fined at Two Years value of their
Revenues, and third part of their Goods.

That no Person under the Age of One and twenty years, should be capable of
being Elected; nor any other than of known credit, fearing God, and of good
behavior.

No man likewise to have power of Electing, whose Estate should not be worth
Twenty Pound per annum Sterling.

That the Return of the Persons Elected, should be transmitted by the
Prothonotary in Chancery unto the Council of State, within two days after they
should come to his hands; to the end, that judgment might be made of the
Persons, if any question should arise, touching the lawfulness of the choice.

That Sixty Members should be accounted a Parliament, in case the rest be
absent. Nevertheless, that it should be lawful to the Protector to call a
Parliament, when he should see cause.

That the Bills agreed on in Parliament, should be presented to the Protector,
for his assent thereto: and if he should not give his assent to them within
twenty days, that then they should have the force of Laws without it.

That if any Councellor of State should dye, or be outed of his place, for
corruption in the Intervals of Parliament, the Protector, with the rest of the
Council, to substitute another in his stead.

That a certain annual Tax shouldbe made throughout the There Commonwealths,
for the maintenance of Ten thousand Horse, and Fifteen thousand Foot; which Tax
should also supply the charge of the Navy: and that this rate should not be
lessened, or altered by the Parliament, without the consent of the Protector
and his Council. But if it should not be thought necessary hereafter, that any
Army should be maintained; then whatsoever surplusage of this Tax should be, to
be kept in the Treasury for sudden Emergencies.

That if there might happen to be occasion of making extraordinary choices, and
to Raise new Forces, it should not be done, without consent of Parliament; but
that in the Intervals of Parliament, it should be lawful for the Protector, and
his said Council, both to make new Laws, and raise Moneys for the present
Exigencies.

That all the Lands, Forests, and Jurisdictions, not then sold by the
Parliament, whether they had belonged to the King, Queen, Prince, Bishops, or
any Delinquent whatsoever, should thenceforth remain to the Protector.

That the Office of Protector should thenceforth be Elective; but that none of
the King's Line should be ever capable thereof; and that the Election should
belong to the Council.

That, for the present, Oliver Cromwell should be Protector.

That the great Office of the Commonwealth, viz. Chancellor, Keeper of the
Seal, Governor of Ireland, Admiral, Treasurer; in case they should become void
in Parliament time, to be filled up, by the approbation of Parliament: and in
the Intervals by the like approbation of the Council.

That the Chrisian Religion, as it is contained by Holy Scripture, should be
the Public Profession of the Nation; and that those who were to have the care
thereof, should have their support from the Public; so that it be with some
other more convenient maintenance, and less subject ot envy than by Tithes.

That no man should be by any Fine, or Penalty what soever, forced to comply
with the said public Profession, otherwise than by persuasions and Arguments.

That no man professing Faith in Christ, should be prohibited the Exercise of
his own Religion, so that he disturb not any other: but that neither Popery, or
Prelacy should be permitted the least favor or License; and that all Laws to
the contrary should be void.

That all Agreements made by Parliament should be firm and stable; All Articles
of Peace made with Domestic Enemies made good.

That all Protectors, in their Order, should be obliged by Oath, at their first
taking upon them the Government, by all means to procure the Peace, Welfare,
and quiet of the Commonwealth; by no means to violate the present Agreements:
and lastly to his power to Administer all things, according to the Laws,
Statutes, and Customs of England.

After which solemn Inauguration, he was publicly proclaimed (...).
Protector, First in London; and then throughout all the three Kingdoms.

And now that by this transeendent subtil^y, this egregious Imposter had
cherisht so many Sects of desperate Schismatics in the Army, and elsewhere, by
whose help he first pulled down the Presbyterian, and then Murdered the King;
it was not his least skill so to manage these unruly Spirits, that none of them
by clashing with each other might endanger the public; nor that any of them,
upon occasion, should be unserviceable to his designs. To which end, as well to
balance them equally, as to rule them how he listed, he made choice of the
most active and leading Men, into his Council, by whose Influence he had the
guiding of all the rest of each Faction. The like course he took for the chief
Officers of his Army.

And being thus settled in this his new Dominion, he set forth an Ordinance 19.
Ian. a Scob. coll, p. 277.
declaring what Offenses should be adjudged Treason: And likewise another for
repealing those Acts, and Resolves of Parliament, which had formerly been made
for Subscribing the Engagement; the preamble whereof I have thought fit here to
Insert.

-- Whereas many general and promissory Oaths and Engagements, Act against the
Engagement.
in former times Imposed upon the People of this Nation, have proved Burdens,
and Snares to tender Consciences; and yet have been exacted under several
Penalties, Forfeitures, and Losses. In consideration whereof; and out of a
tenderne^^ of requiring such obligations; be it ordained by his Highness the
Lord Protector, by and with the consent of the Council; that one Act of
Parliament, published in Print 2 Jan. an. 1649. Entitled an Act for
subscribing the Engagement; and certain Orders, entitled Resolves touching the
subscribing an Engagement, etc. And all and every Clause, Branch, Article, and
Sentence in them, etc. be absolutely Repealed, etc.

And being Invited by the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of London, to dine at
Grocers-Hall upon Ashwednesday; to the end he might have the greater Veneration
from the People, it was contrived, that he should Ride through the city in
State to that Feast, which was accordingly performed as follows.

First the several Companies of London, having order to meet at Guild Hall, in
their Liveries, went thence, and placed themselves, according to their
Superiority, in the Streets, from the lower end of Cheapside to Temple Bar,
within Rayles, hung with blew Cloth; the City Banner, and Streamers, belonging
to the respective Companies, being set before them. Then the Lord Mayor, with
his Mace, Sword, and Cap of Maintenance, attended by the Aldermen in Scarlet,
and their GoldChaynes, Rode to Temple Bar. Where, meeting the Protector, with
his Military Train, he delivered up the Sword to him, making a short
congratulatory Speech to his Highness. Which being ended, they proceeded
toward Grocers-Hall, thus.

First the City-Marshal, and some other Officers. The Protectors Riding to
Grocers-Hall in State.
Then six Trumpets. After them his Highness Lifeguard. Then eight Trumpets
more. Next the City Streamers Red and White. Then the Aldermen. After them the
two Shireeves. Next his Highness Heralds, with rich Coats, adorned with the
Commonwealths Arms ( viz. the Cross and Harp) Then the Mace and Cap of
Maintenance. Next the Lord Mayor ( bare-headed) carrying the Sword. After him
two Gentlemen Ushers. Then his Highness the Protector, with twelve Footmen in
Gray Jackets, laced with silver and black-silk Lace. After him Rode Major
General Skyppon, and the rest of the Council. Then the Officers of the Army:
And lastly diverse other, on Horseback and in Coaches.

Being thus come to Grocers-Hall, the Recorder made a Speech to him; letting
him understand, how happy that City did account themselves under his
Government, and likewise in the enjoyment of his presence there with them that
day. Which done, he Knighted the Lord Mayor; and then dined at the midst of a
long Table in the great Hall; the Lord Mayor sitting at some distance on his
Right hand, and his Son Henry on his left: and on each side of them his Council
of State.

But, notwithstanding this great Entertainment; well knowing, that all the
Bloodshed and confusion, which had formerly been; as 'twas chiefly accomplished
by the Pulpits, so by the like means his new established Rule might easily be
shook; he framed another Ordinance, 20. Martij Scob. coll. p. 279.
whereby certain Commissioners were appointed for approbation of public
Preachers; the preamble whereof, with the Names of the reverend Tryers, I have
also added.

-- Whereas, for some times past hitherto, there has not been any certain
course Established, for the supplying vacant places, with able and fit persons
to Preach the Gospel: by reason whereof, not only the Rights, and Titles of
Patrons are prejudiced; but many weak, scandalous, Popish, and ill affected
persons have intruded themselves, or been brought in, to the great grief and
trouble of the good people of this Nation. For remedy, and prevention whereof,
be it Ordained by his Highness the Lord Protector, by and with the consent of
his Council; that every Person, who shall from and after the 25th, day of
March, instant, be presented, chosen, or appointed to any Benefice (formerly
called Benefice with Cure of Souls) or to Preach any public settled Lecture, in
England or Wales, shall, before he be admitted, etc. be Judged and Approved by
the Persons hereafter named, to be a Person, for the Grace of God in him, his
Holy, and unblameable Conversation, as also for his knowledge and utterance,
able and fit to Preach the Gospel; viz.

Francis Rous Esquire Dr. Thomas Goodwyn. Dr. John Owen. Mr. Thankful Owen. Dr.
Arrowsmith. Dr. Tuckney. Dr. Horton. Mr. Joseph Caryll. Mr. Philip Nigh. Mr.
William Carter. Mr. Sidrak Simpson. Mr. William Greenhill. Mr. William Strong.
Mr. Thomas Manton. Mr. Samuel Slater. Mr. William Couper. Mr. Stephen Marshall.
Mr. John Tombs. Mr. Walter Cradok. Mr. Samuel Faircloath. Mr. Hugh Peter's. Mr.
Peter Sterrey. Mr. Samuel Bamford. Mr. Thomas Valentine of Chaford. Mr. Henry
Iesse. Mr. Obediah Sedgwick. Mr. Nicholas Lockyer. Mr. Daniel Dike. Mr. James
Russel. Mr. Nathaniel Campfield. Robert Tichburne Alderman of London. Mark
Hildesley. Thomas Wood. John Sadler. William Goff. Thomas St. Nicholas. William
Packer. Edward Crescet Esquire or any five, or more of them.
Having now ended this year 1653. as to the Principal Transsactions at Home, I
must look back a little, and take notice of our farther Military contests with
the Dutch: wherein I find, that on the second of June, upon another sharp Fight
in Yarmouth rode, 2. Iunij. Heath's hist. p. 344. 345.
they much worsted those Hogen-mogens. so likewife on 31. July. Ibid. p. 346.
et. 347
the last day of July, wherein Van Trump their famous Admiral was slain.

But both parties, at length, growing weary of this chargeable and destructive
War, before the end of this year, a Peace was concluded Ib. p. 357.
betwixt them, though not ratified till April ensuing.

Which Peace with the Dutch, An. 1654.
and the slavish condition, whereunto this Monster Cromwell had brought the
People of these Nations, made him not only much Idolized here, by all his
Party, but somewhat feared abroad: For certain it is, that most of the Princes
of Europe, made application to him; amongst which the French King was the
first, his Ambassador making this Speech to him in the Banqueting House at
White Hall. 28. Martij.


Your most serene Highness has received already some principal assurances of
the King my Master, and of his desire to establish a perfect Correspondency,
between his Dominions and England. His Majesty gives unto your Highness, this
day, some public Demonstration of the same, and sending his Excellency for his
Service, in the quality of Ambassador to your Highness, does plainly show, that
the esteem which his Majesty makes of your Highness, and the Interest of his
People, have more power in his Councils, than many Considerations, that would
be of great concernment to a Prince less affected with the one and the other.
This proceeding, grounded upon such sound principles, and so different from
that which is only guided by Ambition, renders the Friendship of the King my
Master, as much considerable for its firmness, as for the Utility it may
produce: and for that reason it is such eminent esteem, and sought after, by
all the greatest Princes and Powers of the Earth. But his Majesty does
Communicate none to any, with so much Joy and Cheerfulness, as unto those,
whose virtuous deeds, and extraordinary Merits, render them more eminently
Famous than the greatness of their Dominions. His Majesty does acknowledge all
these advantages, wholly to reside in your Highness; and, that Divine
Providence, after so many Troubles and Calamities, could not deal more
favorably with these three Nations, nor cause them to forget their past Misery
with more content and satisfaction, than by submitting them to so just a
Government. And whereas it is not enough, for the completing of their
happiness, to make them enjoy Peace at Home, since it depends no less on a good
correspondency with Neighbour-Nations abroad; the King my Master does not doubt
but to find also the same disposition in your Highness, which his Majesty does
express in those Letters, which his Excellency has Order to present unto your
Highness. After so many Dispositions expressed by his Majesty and your Highness,
toward the accommodation of the two Nations, there is cause to believe, that
their wishes will be soon Accomplished. As for me, I have none greater, than to
be able to serve the King my Master, with the good liking and satisfaction of
your Highness; and that the happiness I have to tender unto your Highness the
first assurances of his Majesty's esteem, may give me occasion to deserve by my
respects, the honor of your Gracious Affection.

Being therefore thus puffed up he (soon after) passed an Act 12. Apr. Scob.
coll. p. 288.
of Grace and Pardon to all Persons of the Scottish Nation, excepting James
late Duke Hamilton, William late Duke Hamilton, John Earl of Crawford-Lindsey,
James Earl of Calender, and many more therein specially named. As also another
Act, Ib. p. 293. Act for making Scotland one Commonwealth with England.
for making Scotland one Commonwealth with England. Whereby it was likewise
Ordained, that thirty Persons of that Nation, should serve in Parliament here,
for Scotland: And, that the People of that Nation should be discharged of their
Allegiance to any Issue of the late King. Also, that Kingship and
Parliamentary-Authority should be there abolished; and the Arms of Scotland
(viz. St. Andrew's Cross) should thenceforth be borne with the Arms of this
Commonwealth. All which being done, he removed 18. Apr. Cromwell first seated
himself at Whitchall.
his Lodgings (which were before at the Cockpit) into those of the late King,
in his Royal Palace at White Hall.

About this time it was, that Colonel Venables, having been employed by
Cromwell to attempt some of the chief Plantations, made by the Spanyard in the
West Indies, Landing his Men in Hispaniola, and expecting with little trouble
to have taken S. Domingo, he received a shameful defeat. 25. Apr. Heath's hist.
p. 370. et 371.
But the next Month he had better success in those Foreign parts: For Ib. p.
371. et 372.
the Spaniards in Iamaco timorously flying before them when they Landed there,
an easy acquisition was made by the English of that large Island, which has
since proved a very prosperous and beneficial Plantation. But to return.

Cromwell by this time being grown very great; to make himself the more
formidable to all his late Majesty's good Subjects (then called Royalists) by
establishing his Dominion upon more Innocent blood; having by the wicked
practices of his Emissaries, trayn'd in some Persons purpose of endeavoring,
their own and the Peoples freedom from his Tyrannous Power; he caused another
bloody Theater to be erected in Westminster Hall, calling it an high-Court of
Justice, where Mr. John Gerard, and Mr. Wowell (two Gentlemen of great Loyalty)
received Sentence 6. July.
of Death; and were accordingly Sacrificed, as a Peace Offering to this Moloch.

For the better maintenance, likewise, and encouragement of
Preaching-Ministers; and for uniting and severing of Parishes, he made another
Act, 2 Sept. Scob. col. p. 353.
which begins thus -- Whereas many Parishes in this Nation, are without the
constant and Powerful Preaching of the Gospel, through want of competent
maintenance, etc.

Also another Ib. p. 357.
for Soldiers, which had served the Commonwealth in the late Wars, being
Apprentices, and not served out their times; and others that had so served the
Commonwealth, who were fit for Trades, should exercise any Trade; that to such
as had served the Parliament and Commonwealth, in England, Scotland, or
Ireland, by the space of four years, at any time since the year 1642. and
before the third of September an. 1651. and not revolted to the Kings-party, or
deserted the service; or that had served two years in the Wars of Scotland, or
Ireland in the Service of the Commonwealth, since the third of September 1651.
and before the first of August 1654.

Likewise a third Act, Ib. p. 366.
appointing Visitors for both Universities. Also, for the Schools of
Westminster, Winchester, Merchant-Tailors-School, and Eaton-Colledge-School.

CHAP. XXXVII.
THEN he called a Parliament to meet at 3. Sept. A Parliament called.
Westminster upon the third of September, and on the day following, went
thither from White Hall in State; the manner thus;

First a Marshall with his Staff.

Then all the Lifeguard, The manner of his proceeding to Parliament.
and his Domestick-Officers, with some well-affected Citizens; viz. his Draper
and other Tradesmen, in rank, three and three (on Foot) bare-headed.

Next, a rich Coach, drawn by six Horses, in the hinder end whereof he himself
sat; the Lord Lambert on his left side, and the Lord Lawrence President of his
Council, on the right; the Lord Strickland and Captain Howard (Captain of his
Lifeguard) walking on Foot.

Then the Lord Claypole Master of his Horse (on Horseback) leading the Horse of
State, with a Rich Saddle, curiously Embroydered with Gold and Pearl.

Next, a War-Horse led, with Pistols at the Saddle.

After this, another rich Coach, wherein sat the Lord Keepers of the Great
Seal, and two Sergeants at Arms, with their Maces.

Then another rich Coach, wherein rode the Secretaries of State.

Thus, with all his Guard of Gray-coats (having new Halberts) and twelve
Footmen in like Liveries, they went to the Abby-Church at Westminster, where
Mr. John Goodwyn Preached: and from thence, on Foot, to the Painted Chamber, the
Lord Lambert carrying the Sword before him. Where, standing by a rich Chair,
set by the Wall, on that side the Room toward the Lord's House, he made a long
speech to them. wherein (using many canting expressions) he told them, they
came that day to settle, not only the Interest of three great Nations, but of
all the Christian-people in the World, he talked likewise very much of Healing,
and Settling; and of the danger by the Levelling party. Also of those, who had
only a form of Godliness, but not the power thereof. He likewise complained of
an Extremity, that (as formerly he said) none having a good Testimony, and who
had received Gifts from Christ might Preach, if not Ordained. That then, on the
other hand, many who were Ordained, had Antichristianism stamped upon their
calling, so that he ought not to Preach, nor be heard. As also, that there was
inveighing against such, as denied Liberty to those, who had earned it with
their Blood; who had gained civil liberty, and Religious also.

Next he touched upon those many honest people (as he called them) whose hearts
were sincere; many of them (as he said) belonging to God; viz. the mistaken
notions of the fifth-Monarchy men; a thing pretending more to Spirituality,
than any thing else affirming that Liberty and Property were not the Badges of
the Kingdom of Christ; who, instead of regulating Laws, would have Laws
subverted, and bring in the Judaical Laws. He told them also of the advantages,
which the common Enemy ( id est the Royalists) did make by those their
divisions. Likewise of the endeavors here by the Emissaries of the Jesuits; of
the decay in their Trade by the War with Portugal, Dutch, and French; and the
remedy applied was that Government, calculated for the Interest of the people;
instancing what Reformation had been aimed at by it; that is to say, the
Reforming the Laws, and putting the administration of them into the hands of
just men. Also to put a stop to every man, who would make himself a Preacher;
and that That work was committed to the trust of persons, both of the
Presbyterian and Independent judgments, of as known ability and integrity, as
any this Nation then had: Men (as he said) who had put such into that great
employment, who had received Gifts from him, that ascended on high, and had
Gifts for the work of the Ministry, and for the edifying of the Body of Christ.
He told them also, that That Government had been instrumental to the calling of
that Parliament, which they saw there that day: Saying it was a free
Parliament. He told them likewise what Peace they had with Neighbor Princes;
and of a people, which were brought out of Egypt, toward the Land of Canam;
but, through unbelief, murmuring and repining; and other temptations and sins,
wherewith God was provoked, they were fain to go back again, and linger many
years in the Wilderness. He also added, that they had cause to take notice, how
that they were not brought into misery, but that a door of Hope was open: And,
that if the Lords blessing and his presence, went along with the management of
affairs, at that meeting, they would be enabled to put the top Stone to their
work, and make the Nation happy. He likewise told them, that they were like to
the people under Circumcision, but raw, their Peace being but newly made: and
that it was one of the great ends of calling that Parliament, that their Ship
of the Commen-wealth might be brought into safe Harbor: persuading them
therefore to a Sweet, Gracious, and holy understanding of one another. And
concluded, that he had not spoke those things to them, as one that assumed to
himself Dominion over them; but as one that did resolve to be a Fellow Servants
with them, to the Interest of those great affairs, and of the people of these
Nations.

And so dismissing them, they went to the House of Commons, and chose William
Lenthall their Speaker.

But, instead of falling to work, as the Protector had directed in his Speech;
so great was the Ambition of those, who had been Members of the late long
Parliament, to get the sole power into their hands again; that after some
private discourses amongst one another, they fell to clandestine plots, for the
pulling down this their great Master, and setting up themselves in their old
Tyrannical Dominion again. To which end they fell to making Speeches in
derogation of the Lord Protector's Authority; pressing earnestly, that those
Members of the good old Parliament (as they called it) which were then, by Gods
providence (as they said) so met together, should forthwith declare for, and
reassume their just and rightful Power.

Which motion, being backed with many plausible Arguments, found at that time
such favorers in the House, that the promoters of it hourly got ground, upon
those of the contrary party. The debate therefore holding on with much
eagerness, and drawing very near to a dangerous issue, did so awaken the
Protector, (who discerned his own certain ruin, if it ever came to the
question; his party in the House, being then too weak for the other) that,
having first sent his Soldiers, to shut up the Parliament doors, and to
signify to the Members, that he would meet them again in the Painted-Chamber;
he came thither accordingly; and with a stern, but troubled Countenance, said;
that at his last being there, he did acquaint them with the Rise of that
Government which had so called him thither, and with the Authority thereof, as
also that he then acknowledged they were a free Parliament. And so you are
(quoth he) whilst you own the Government and Authority, which called you
hither. But, discerning what they drove at, which touched him so near, he
farther, plainly, told them, that he now came to magnify his Office, which
before he had not been apt to do; saying, that if God would not bear it up, let
it sink. Adding also, that if a duty were incumbent on him, to bear his own
testimony unto it (which in modesty he had till then forborne) he was, in some
measure necessitated thereunto.

Then he went on, and affirmed, that he called not himself to that place; but
that his calling was from God, and the people of these Nations; and that his
calling being such, God and the people should take it from him, else he would
not part with it.

To manifest therefore, that such was his Call, he proceeded, and said; that
being a Gentleman by birth, he had been called to several employments in the
Nation! First in Parliament; then in the late Wars. Which being ended by that
great Victory at Worcester; he said, he did hope to have god leave for retiring
to a private life! and begged again and again, to be dismissed of his charge;
calling God above as witness thereto: but expressing, that he could not therein
obtain, what his Soul longed for. And farther added, that he pressed the
Parliament (as a Member) to put a period to themselves, again and again; nay
ten and twenty times over: and said, that he told them, that the Nation loathed
their sitting; and, that, so far as he could discern, that when they were
dissolved, there was no visible repining at it; no not so much as the Barking
of a Dog: Affirming, that they aimed to have perpetuated their sitting to the
Worlds end; and that under their arbitrary power, poor men were driven like
flocks of sheep to confiscation of goods and estates. Also that the seeming
remedy, which those Members then offered, was to have had a succession of
Parliaments always sitting, whereby the Liberties, Interests, and Lives of the
People, should still have been judged by an arbitrary power. Likewise, that the
remedy, by so dissolving them (as they had been) was fitted to the disease:
And, that thereupon, he desiring to see, if a few called together, for some
short space of time, might not put the Nation into some way of certain
settlement; he therefore, called those persons Praise-God Bearbone and his
Fellows.
together, out of the several parts of the Nation; and this he did, that he
might have had an opportunity, to lay down the Power, which was then in his
hands; wherein he appealed to God (as he said) before persons, who knew God,
and what Conscience was; as also what it was to Lie before God. A desire (he
said) sinful enough, he was afraid, to be quit of that Power, which God had
most providentially put into his hands, before he called for it again; and
before those honest ends of their fighting were attained, and settled (he being
by Act of Parliament, General of all the Forces in England, Scotland, and
Ireland.)

But that meeting, not answering the hopes of it, and they bringing him an
Instrument of Resignation of that Authority, so placed upon them (whereof he
professed he knew nothing before it was brought, and tendered to him) he was
then exceedingly to seek what to do, his Power then being (as General of all
the Forces in the three Nations) as boundless as before.

At length therefore, ( as he said) diverse Gentlemen, consulting seriously
together, did frame that model of the then present Government, he being not at
all privy to their Councils; and, having so done, told him, that except he
would undertake the same; Blood and Confusion, for lack of a settlement, would
break in upon them. Yet nevertheless, that notwithstanding this their offer, he
denied it again, and again; till at length, weighing, that it did not put him
into an higher capacity, than he was in before, being also bounded and limited,
as appeared by the Instrument, he then accepted it; instancing the public
formality of that his acceptance, in the great Hall at Westminster, and in the
presence of the then Lord Mayor of London, Aldermen, etc. and diverse Persons of
quality.

Adding, that what he had then expressed, was a Narrative, discovering to them
the series of Providence and Transaction, which had led him into that condition.

Then he went on, and said, that he did not bear witness to himself (being far
from alluding to him that said so) but that he had a cloud of witnesses;
instancing the Officers of the Armies in the three Nations, as appeared by
their respective Remonstrances; and the consent of those persons, that had
somewhat to do in the World, who had been instrumental, by God, to fight down
the Enemies of God and his People, in the three Nations.

Likewise, that for farther witness, he had the City of London, manifested by
their congratulatory Entertainment of him at Grocers-Hall, upon Ashwednesday
1653. And of the Grand-Iuries from several Counties. Also of the Judges, who
received Commissions from him, and all the Justices of Peace in England. Nay
all the People in England ( he said) were his Witnesses, and many in Ireland,
and Scotland. Moreover, all the Shireeves, and all that came in upon Processes
Issued out by the Shireeves, yea the return of Elections to the Clerk of the
Crown, by the Inhabitants of all the Counties, Cities, and Boroughs: and
lastly, themselves, as returned upon those Elections; the Instrument of
Government, being distinctly read at all places of such Elections, wherein was
that special proviso; viz. that the persons so chose, should not have power to
alter the Government, as then settled in one single Person, and a Parliament.

Farther adding; that he was then in possession of the Government, by a good
right from God and Men; and that he did not know, why he might not balance
that providence, as in the sight of God, with any Hereditary-Int'rest, as being
less subject to those cracks and flaws they are commonly incident to, and which
had cost so much Blood.

He told them likewise, what Liberty of Conscience they had by that Government;
and that all the Money of this Nation, would not have tempted men to fight, if
they had not had hopes of Liberty, better than from Episcopacy, or Presbytery.
Concluding, that considering, that this Government was thus owned of God,
approved by men, and testified to, as before has been said; that in relation to
the good of these Nations, and to posterity, he should sooner be willing to be
rolled to his Grave in blood, and buried with Infamy, than to give consent to
the throwing it away. And therefore, that he had caused a stop to their
entrance into the House, till such time as they should subscribe a Recognition
thereof, and did submit thereto. And, that if things were not satisfied, as
were then reasonably demanded, he for his part should do that which becom'd
him, seeking his Council from God.

The truth is, that which principally emboldened him to be thus peremptory with
them was the strength of the Soldiery, which were generally of his side; and
which the adverse party knew full well. So that, of the whole number of those
Members, The Re^^gnition subscribed.
though there was not above sixty, that did at first subscribe the Recognition;
yet the greatest part of the rest, after private consultations together, being
well aware; that by taking their best advantages, upon all occasions within the
House, they might do him more mischief, than they could any way to otherwise;
came in by degrees, and formally signed the same. But, as those, who were his
chief Confidents, did strive all they could to carry on affairs, for his
peculiar Interest, according to the frame of that Government, whereby he was so
advanced to that place and Title: sure it is, that the rest, by those rubs and
obstructions, which they cast in his way, did make all their endeavors totally
fruitless. So that after well near five Months expectance, and nothing at all
done, he was necessitated to dissolve 22. Ian. The Parliament dissolved.
that his first and once hopeful Parliament.

I should here have concluded this years Transactions, but that I cannot omit
to relate a very pregnant Instance, how timely our, now, gracious Sovereign
King Charles the second, did adhere to the Protestant Religion, professed in
the Church of England, even in those days when there was so little hopes to see
it ever restored; the Rebels in this Realm being then so prosperous, that the
greatest Potentates courted their alliance: but even then, so fervent was his
Majesty's zeal thereto; that, by his great and effectual care, he prevented the
perverting of his Brother, the Duke of Gloucester to that of the Church of Rome.

In the relation of which, there are so many considerable circumstances,
whereof very little public notice has been taken; that, contrary to the
designed brevity of this History; I shall give a full account of the same;
partly taken from a Relation Printed at London in an. 1655 and partly from the
certain information of persons of undoubted credit, yet living, who were
present at the transacting thereof.

His Majesty understanding, that there was a firm League very far advanced
betwixt the French King and Oliver Cromwell, withdrew himself this year into
Germany out of France (where, till then, he had ever resided since his happy
and miraculous escape from Wor^ester) and designing to take the Duke of
Gloucester with him, was prevailed with by the Queen, his Mother, to leave him
with her at Paris, upon promise she would not permit any force to be put upon
him, to change his Religion; but that he should be attended by those
Protestant-Servants himself had placed about him, and have free liberty to
resort to the public Service of the Church of England, at the King's Chapel
in Sir Richard Brown's House, then his Majesty's Resident at Paris.

But, about the beginning of November, in this year, the Duke (under pretense
of weaning himself from the company of some young French Gallants, who being in
the same Accademie, were grown into a more familiar conversation with him, than
was thought convenient) was removed to Abbot Mountague's House, at his Abbey
near Potoiso: And, after a few days, Mr. Lovel his Tutor, going to Paris, for
one day only, on business (designedly contrived, as was suspected by Abbot
Mountagu) during his absence, was most vehemently pressed by the Abbot to turn
Roman Catholic with all the motives spiritual or temporal he thought might
prevail upon him, having at that time no Protestant near him, to advise with,
but Mr. Griffin of his Bedchamber (a young Gentleman since dead; but his Fame
for his servent zeal to the Protestant Religion, and faithful service to his
Master, yet living) who deported himself with greater prudence, than could with
reason have been expected, for one of so tender years (assisted only by so
young a second; for both their ages did, but some few years exceed thirty)
replying to their Arguments with great ingenuity, evidencing no little zeal for
his Religion.

For he told the Abbot, he admired how he durst make this attempt upon him,
knowing how the Queen (his Mother) had engaged to the King his Brother, that no
change in his Religion should be endeavored. Also, that for his own part he
was resoly'd not to incur the Kings displeasure, by neglecting the observance
of his command, which was not to listen to any Argument for change of his
Religion. Likewise, that as to the specious proposals of making him a Cardinal,
and promising to advance him to be King of England, he did with indignation and
contempt deride and reject them: complaining withal, how disingeniously he was
dealt with, to be thus assaulted in the absence of his Tutor, whom the King had
placed over him; and who, he doubted not could easily refute all their
Arguments: which in truth, at his return to Ponroise, he did so fully, that it
was thought convenient to remove the Duke back thence to Paris, where he was
permitted to resort to the Kings Chapel, and enjoy the free exercise of his
Religion, though not long. For after some little time, the Queen, his Mother;
did own the attempt made on him, to have been done with her approbation; and
declared she could not but labor to have her Son showed the right way to
Heaven: and though she had promised he should not be forced by her: yet to have
that way proposed to him she thought requisite. And that he might the easier be
prevailed upon, his Protestant Tutor was put from him, and he himself hurryed
out of Paris in such have, that he might be deprived of the Assistance and
Advice of any Protestant, that he could not (though he earnestly begged it)
prevail to stay, till he might get some warmer Clothes; and conveyed to Mr.
Crofts, (afterward Lord Croft's) his House, but under the direction of Abbut
Mountagu; none of his Servants but young Mr. Gryffin being permitted to attend
him.

The News whereof did deeply afflict all the loyal-Protestant Exiles then in
Paris, but no man was more passionately concerned, than that Eminent sufferer
for his loyalty to the Royal Family, and Zeal to the Protestant Religion, the
late Lord Hatton: Who, as soon as he understood how violently this young Prince
was Persecuted for his Religion, he consulted with that famous Confesfor for
the Church of England, Dr. John Cosens, late Bishop of Durham (but at that time
Dean of Peterborough, and Chaplain to his Majesty) then residing in Paris and
drew up what Arguments and Instructions he thought convenient to Fortify the
Duke, in this violent Assault: And, knowing how strictly he was guarded from
the access of any Protestant, his Lordship being by his Lady related to the
Abbot, went to give him a Visit: but his design was soon guessed at: and though
he obtained access to the Duke, he was so carefully watched, that with great
difficulty he did unperceived, convey to him the Instructions he had prepared
for him; yet was forced to Vary his Stratagems to have farther advices from
time to time delivered to him.

But so narrowly was the Duke eyed by the Popish Spies set over him; and the
Priests were all the day long so incessantly torturing him, with their
Pressures to change his Religion, that he had no opportunity to peruse any
Papers sent to him; so that he was constrained to deliver them to his faithful
Servant Gryffin; who in the night time as he lay in his Bedchamber, acquainted
him what the scope of them was. By the advantage of which, through the
Assistance of Almighty God, he did so resolutely withstand all the violent
shocks of his Persecuters; that thereupon they resolved, not only to remove Mr.
Gryffin from him, but to Imprison the Duke in the Jesuits College.

Whereof the King (his Brother) then in Germany, receiving advise, he did
immediately use all possible endeavors for his relief, and sent an Expostulary
Letter to the Queen, his Mother, with Commands to all his most Eminent
Protestant-Subjects, in Paris, to be, to their utmost aiding and Assisting to
him, in this his distress.

Some days before he was to have been removed to the Iesuits-Colledge, Sir
George Ratcliff attempted the delivery of a Letter to him from the King (his
Brother) but though he was admitted to his presence, he could not with Privacy
do it. Whereupon he was necessitated to leave it with Mr. Gryffin to be
conveyed to him.

In which Letter his Majesty minded him of the strict Command he left with him
at his parting, to continue firm in his Religion, as also of the Vanity of
their Motives; the emptiness of their Promises, the last Charge of their dead
Father, which he solemnly gave him, with the entail of his Blessing annexed:
withal telling him, if he suffered himself to be perverted in his Religion, by
any inticements whatsoever; or put himself into the Jesuits-+College, he had
the last Letter he should ever have from him, and must never look to see his
Face again.

As soon as the Duke had, with an unexpressible joy, received this Letter, with
all have possible he transcribed a Copy of it, and forthwith sent it to the
Queen his Mother, begging her leave to come to Paris both upon the account of
those commands of the King, and the News of his Brother, the Duke of York's
being returned from the French Army. But her Majesty was pleased to send him
word she could not cease wishing his so great and eternal good, as the change
of his Religion; to which she would not force him, but advised him to hearken
to what Abbot Mountagu should farther deliver to him; which was, that he should
howsoever be willing to go to the Iesuits-Colledge, where he should have
liberty in all things he could desire: To which it was still designed to have
forced him, had it not been prevented by the arrival of the then Marquess (but
since Duke) of Ormund.

That great and loyal subject attending on his Majesty in Germany, when the
news of this attempt upon the Duke of Gloucester came: perceiving how much his
Majesty was concerned thereat, and how sollicitous he was to rescue him out of
the hands of his Persecutors, proffered to go and fetch him to his Majesty. But
it was objected how great a hazard it would be to his Person in so ill a season
of weather, to take so long and dangerous a journey, just upon the withdrawing
of the Armies into their Winter Quarters; the Soldiers having beset all the
ways, so that no person could pass without much Peril. But that Noble Lord, who
had lost so vast an Estate, and so often most Eminently hazarded his Life in
the Glorious Service he had done the King, and in defense of the Protestant
Religion, was not to be affrighted from any attempt to do the like for the
future: And therefore he the more earnestly pressed his Majesty for his leave
to go, and for his Letters and Instructions to carry with him.

Certainly the concern was of such high consequence, that he or none could
accomplish it: For, had any person of less Authority, Interest, and renown for
his Ability in State Affairs, or Zeal for the Service undertaken it, he had
probably returned re infecta: For had not his Lordship made all possible
expedition, and staid but four days longer before his Arrival at Paris he had
come too late, the Duke had certainly been shut up in the Iesuits-Colledge,
from whence there had been no retriving him: For the French Court had so
zealously espoused this Affair, that his Lordship was necessitated to exert all
his prudence that he might accomplish the business he came about.

As soon as his Lordship was arrived at the Pallace-Royai, he did so
effectually pursue his Instructions, that the Duke had liberty to return to
Paris, and enjoy the free exercise of his Religion; but going sometime after to
the French-Court, both the Queen Mother of France, and Cardinal Mazarine,
pressed him with all the allurements they thought might prevail upon him, to
turn Roman Catholic: Telling him, that they looked on him as a Child of
France, that it was only for his advantage, and the opportunity they should
have thereby of highlyer doing him good, that induced them to move him thereto:
Adding, that since his Father was dead, he ought to obey his Mother in all
things she commanded.

To which (observing the King, his Brother's Instructions,) not to engage in
any dispute; he replied only, in general terms, that he was resolved to obey
his Mother as much as any Son could, and ought to do; and thereby disengaged
himself from any farther pursuit at that time.

But all the allurements of the French-Court, and the severity used toward him
by the Queen his Mother, could not in the least shake his firmness in his
Religion: which her Majesty, with great Indignation perceiving; some few days
after she took him apart; and (as he afterward discovered) beginning with all
sweetness Imaginable, she declared to him how great and tender affection she
had for him, and how much it grieved her, that very love it self should compel
her to proceed now with such seeming severity. She presumed he was weary of it,
and truly she was so too; and for his ease sake, she would shorten his time of
Trial: And therefore, proposing to him all the good she aimed at in this
design; the duty he owed her; and the disability of the King (his Brother) to
maintain him; she commanded him to withdraw himself presently into his Lodging,
and there give one hearing more to Abbot Mountagu: And then, sequestring
himself from any diversion for a while, to ponder seriously what she and he had
said to him; and that night, either send or bring her a full and final answer.

The Duke, upon the first appearance of this intended privacy of his Mother
with him; in the little interim of clearing the Room, he took opportunity of
sending Mr. Gryffin to find out the Marquess of Ormond, and to desire him to
come to him as soon as he returned from the Queen, that he might be advised by
him how to deport himself as occasion should serve: And as soon as he came from
her, according to her command, retired to his Chamber. Whereunto the Abbot
coming before the Marquess of Ormond could be found, after he had at large
expatiated on what the Queen had but briefly hinted to him, he pressed him for
his final Answer. Which the Duke refused to give till he had first consulted
with the Marquess.

Whereupon the Abbot withdrew, desiring to be sent for when the Marquess should
come; which, if not in an hours time, he would return again. though not sent
for.

As soon as the Marquess came, the Duke quickly resolved what answer to make;
but having been so long harassed, was desirous to take a little breath, so that
he neglected sending to the Abbot, and went out of his Lodging into the Court
to divert himself. No sooner was he gone but the Abbot came, and missing him
sought up and down. At last finding him, he severely rebuk't him, for
neglecting his Mothers Commands, and his Instructions which were seriously to
Ponderate on what he had said; and for having not sent for him.

Well Sir, says the Duke, I have seriously considered on all has been said to
me; and my final answer is, I am resolved to continue firm in my Religion. Then
replied the Abbot; I am Commanded from the Queen, your Mother, to tell you,
that she charges you to see her Face no more. At which dismal expression, the
Duke being not a little moved, with great earnestness entreated, that he might,
at least begher parting Blessing, till he could prevail for her Pardon, but
could not obtain it, though he endeavored it again the next Morning, (being
Sunday, before her Majesty went to her Devotions) by the Intercession of his
Brother, the Duke of York; who did, with great tenderness compassionate his
condition, and with much earnestness moved on his behalf.

But the Queen was inexorable to all that spoke in favor of him; nor would she
intimate her pleasure to him by any Person but Abbot Mountague, who again
solicited him; aggravating the Peril of his Mother's displeasure; advising him
at that instant, being the most proper time, as she was going to Mass at her
Monastery, to apply himself to her: For she had proposals to make to him, which
would set his heart at rest, though he could not then name them.

To which the Duke replied, if so I can: For my heart can have no rest but in
the free exercise of my Religion; but I fear her Propositions will not: I am
sure yours never tended to give me any ease or quiet.

At which Instant the Queen passed by in her Coach, going to her Nunnery.
Whereupon the Duke approached toward her, attempting to beg her Blessing, but
was with great Indignation rejected. Whereat, being much discomposed, the Abbot
came up to him, and asked him what it was her Majesty had said to him, which put
him into so great disorder. To which he briefly replied; what she said I may
thank you for Sir; and it is but reason. What my Mother therefore said to me, I
shall say to you; Be sure I see your Face no more; and so turned away from him.

Whereupon the Abbot calling after him, said; Whither are you going good Sir.
To whom the Duke (looking over his shoulder) answered, to Church; and so went
with a sad and dejected Countenance, which did much abate the joy of the
Congregation, who were much pleased to see him accompany his Brother, the Duke
of York thither. But they partook with him in his sorrow, when they understood,
that after Sermon he was to seek where to get a Dinner; for which he must send
to the Cooks, or Fast; for there was a very strict Prohibition given to all the
Officers in his Mothers Court, that they should not furnish him with any
Provisions, or Necessaries.

That Night, after Evening Prayer, he had hopes to enjoy one moment of
satisfaction, by conversing with his Sister, the Princess Henrietta (afterward
Duchess of Orleans) during his Mothers absence. But, as soon as the young
Princess heard the news of his designed Adventure; she was so frighted into
shrieks and tears, that she cried out Oh God my Brother! Oh me my Mother! I am
undone for ever; what shall I do?

Which as soon as the Duke heard, he retired, not being willing his dear Sister
should by her kindness to him purchase her Mothers displeasure. In this
disconsolate condition he went to his Lodging: Where at nine of the Clock at
night, his Groom came to know what he should do with his Horses: For the Queens
Comptroller was come to him with a charge to remove them instantly. Whereupon
the Groom Pleaded it was then too late, and that on the morrow it would be time
enough. But the Comptroller replied, he should then be put out of his place ere
Morning.

The next day the Sheets were taken off his Bed. Finding therefore that he
could not be permitted to stay at the Pallace-Royal, he thought until he could
provide Necessaries for his Journey into Germany, to retire to the House of Mr.
Crofts (afterward Lord Crofts) near Paris; whereof the Queen hearing, she
chekt Mr. Crofts for being willing to receive him; with which he acquainted the
Duke; but submits however to his pleasure.

In this straight the Duke betook himself to the advice of that faithful
Servant to his Family, and zealous Protestant the Lord Hatton, by whose
judicious Instructions he had received much satisfaction, in this his
distressed Condition, who, so soon as the Duke had made known to him, that he
was not only turned out of his Mothers House, but that all persons that had any
dependency on her were forbidden to receive or assist him: His Lordship told
him, if his Highness would please to honor his House with his Presence, he
should there be received with all the dutiful regard that could be paid to
him, by so ancient and faithfully devoted a Servant to his Royal Family; and
with an entertainment as suitable to his Quality, as the remains of that
Fortune he had spent in his Fathers Service would afford.

But this the Duke, out of great modesty, seemed to decline? alleging the
hazard his Lordship might run to, having his Estate again sequestered in
England; and likewise incurring the displeasure of the French Court, as well as
of the Queen his Mother; to be exiled that Realm for his Kindness to him, as he
had been England for his Service to his Father; and perhaps be endangered in
his person by the Rabble, animated by some enraged Papists for thus
disappointing them of making a Proselite of him, as they boasted they had done,
and given public thanks in diverse Churches.

But his Lordship assured him; that, as he had spent the greatest part of his
life and fortune, in the Service of his Highnesses Royal Family, and defense of
the Protestant Religion, he would willingly Sacrifice the remainder of both on
so honorable an occasion as this. With which hearty invitation his Highness
was so pleased, that he took no farther thoughts whither to go, but remained
with his Lordship.

Being thus gone from the Pallace-Royal, the Queen Mother of France came
immediately thither, to try again (as 'twas thought) if she could prevail with
him to change his Religion: And as soon as she came, sent her Son the Duke of
Anjou (afterward of Orleans) to visit him; who returned with the news, that he
was not to be found. But as soon as it was known, that he was at the Lord
Hatton's House, she sent the then Marquess (since Duke) of Plessis (a Person of
such famed parts and abilities, that, in consideration thereof he was made
Governor to the Duke of Anjou to persuade with him to comply with his Mothers
advise: for effecting whereof he exercised all his parts and elocution with
great earnestness; urging, that since the Death of his Father, the Queen his
Mother had the sole Power and Authority over him: Disputing whether (the King)
his Brother, as his Sovereign, had equal Authority to dispose of him.

And the discourse growing somewhat public, the Marquess of Ormund, and the
Lord Hatton (then present) arguing in the Dukes defense; the French Marquess
finding himself overmatch't, in great passion returned without the success
expected at the Pallace-Royal, where the French Queen staid very late till he
came back. Whose report when both Queens heard, they were then fully satisfied
in the Dukes firmness to his Religion; so that after that, no considerable
attempt was made on him, though he continued for near two months very nobly
entertained by the Lord Hatton, until through the Marquess of Ormund's, and his
Lordships Interest, Necessaries could be provided for his going into Germany.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
IT is not to be doubted, but that the Convening of these persons from all
parts of the Nation (considering that diverse of them being Members of the Old
Long Parliament, and eagerly thirsted to obtain their wonted power again,
having, to that end, corrupted a great part of the Army) did not a little
endanger his new-raised Dominion.

But such was his vigilance, that their Plots took no effect. Seeing therefore,
both how, and by whom his Authority had been thus affronted; lest others, in
time, by such examples might be swayed; his next business was to gain some
shadow of being owned by the generality of the people throughout the three
Kingdoms: which by the help of his Emissaries in short time he accomplished;
first from Scotland by Gratulatory Petitions; and next from the Counties and
chief Places throughout England and Ireland.

Which being effected, he then put on the Mask of a most tender and zealous
Patriot, earnestly promoting the performance of Justice; encouraging Virtue,
and discountenancing Vice. And to gain those of the Clergy, who might be most
serviceable to his purpose, he made no small shows of his favors unto them;
yet with a check to the insolency of the Presbyterian, and depressing the
Episcopal and Orthodox. To those also of the Romish persuasion, though he
seemed severe, it is certain enough, that he did somewhat favor them: there
being not any sort of men, to whom he carried not some show of respect, having
an excellent faculty of courting them with some appearance of kidness. But to
captivate those, who were seemingly Religious, he had a singular art of
discoursing with them most Divinely; and not only so, but Praying, Sighing,
Groaning, and sometimes shedding Tears in their presence; yet having a special
vigilance upon all Parties and Interests, which possibly might disturb his
quiet: So that the Royalists, whose generous and active Spirits were ever
prompting (...) our the Kings Restoration, and to (...) a Rising in the West,
were soon (...) some of them were brought to Trial, At Exeter. 18. April.
amd (...) death for the same.

But the lives of these Loyal (...) this subtle Tyrant: for he took advantage
thereby, to cause the Estates of all others of that (...) sat quiet, to be
decimated, except such as by money could free themselves from that great
exaction: And for the strict Levying of that most oppressive Tax, he
constituted 15. October. Major Generals.
fourteen select Major-Generals; each of which had several Counties under his
Jurisdiction; who not only exercised their Authority, in an Arbitrary and
unlimited manner; but at length grew so insolent, that he thought it not fit to
continue them in that power.

And now looking upon himself as an absolure Monarch, An. 1656.
he exercised the Authority of conferring the Honor of Knighthood; first 20.
Sept.
upon the Lord Mayor of (...) And having soon after concluded a League 20. Sept.
(...) France, he went on and Knighted two of his Colonies; Pride 17. Ianu.
and Barksted 19. Ianu.
(the one who had been a Dray-man, the other a seller of Thimbles and Bodkins
of Silver.) And having throughout all parts of England, by underhand practices
(those of his Preaching-Clergy serving him therein to some purpose) made way
for an Election of such Members, for another Parliament, as might best advance
his future ambitious designs, he sent out Writs 10. July.
of Summons for Convening of them accordingly. At which meeting, 17. Sept.
none were permitted to enter the House, which refused to acknowledge and
subscribe to his Authority. Whereupon some being excluded, went back to their
Countries. Cromwels second Parliament called.
But those which sat went stoutly on with the work, having made choice of Sir
Thomas Widdrington to be their Speaker.

That the chief end whereat this proud and subtle Tyrant, at that time drove,
was by the help of this Convention, to be invested with the Title of King, few
there were to whom it was not evident enough, though he cunningly seemed to
look another way. That there might therefore be the less suspicion thereof, the
design was so laid, that the work should be brought about by degrees, and in a
Collateral way. To which end, in the first place as a preparation thereto, they
passed an Act, Scob. Cell. p. 571.
whereby the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses there assembled (for so are the
words) did in the name of all the people of that Commonwealth, fully, clearly,
and absolutely, and for ever disclaim and renounce all Fealty, Homage, or
Allegiance, pretended to be due unto Charles Stuart, Eldest Son of the late
King Charles; James Stuart, etc. or any other Issue or Posterity of the said
King; or any person or persons pretending, or which should pretend Title, by,
from, or under them, or any of them.

And soon after that another Act, Ib. p. 372.
for security of the person of his Highness the Lord Protector, and continuance
of the Nation in Peace and Safety; the preamble whereof begins thus; for
as much as the Prosperity and Safety of this Nation, and the Dommions thereunto
belonging, very much depends, under God, upon the security and preservation
of the person of his Highness, etc. In which Act several offenses were adjudged
Treason; and certain Commissioners for England and Wales therein nominated, for
the Trial of Offenders against the said Act.

Which foundation being so laid, it was by his Friends and Favorers, then
thought high time to discover what they would be at; and accordingly moved,
Alderman Pack a great Excise-Commissioner, the first that moved it. 21. Feb.
that, whereas this Nation had for thirteen hundred years at the least, been
governed by Kings; and though some of them had offended the people; yet that
Title had never been abolished. Also, whereas the Government; by the said
Title, was interwoven with the Laws, and accommodated to the dispositions of
the people; that they should humbly Petition and Advise his Highness to take
upon him the same Title.

Which motion took such effect, that there was an Instrument soon drawn up by
them, The humble Petition and A Advice.
called the Humble Petition and Advice, whereby they besought his Highness so
to do.

Whereunto (that he might not seem to have any knowledge of what they were
about, much less any desire thereof; but be still more and more sought to and
importuned therein) he answered with all show of modesty; that (indeed) those
Arguments which they had used to him, were persuasive, but not compulsive; and
that the Title of Protector might be well accommodated to the Laws.

To which they replied, that the Title ought to be such, as was suitable to the
Laws, and the Laws not be made suitable to the Title; urging the Statutes of 9.
Edw. IV. and 3. Henr. VII. whereby it was provided, that no one should suffer
for bearing Arms on the behalf of him, that was de facto King, though he had no
just right to the Crown. Which Arguments were made use of to him merely for
show, the better to disguise his ambitious aim; as though, without such strong
motives, he could not have been won thereto.

But the plain truth is; that after this business came thus in question, the
Sectaries of all sorts, nay a great part of the Soldiery, showed a vehement
dislike thereof, being privately instigated by Lambert, and some other of the
Principal Officers, who did themselves, upon Cromwels death, expect to have
succeeded him in the Place of Protector; it being Elective, as is manifest from
the Instrument of Government, whereby that Tyrant was at first so Constituted
(whereas had he been advanced to the Title of King, the case might have been
otherwise.) So that this crafty Fox, discerning no small peril to himself by
such divisions, as might thereby arise; especially in the Army, wherein lay his
chief strength and support, thought it the safest way to decline 8. May.
it, and to stick still to 19. May.
that of Protector; yet to have the Government settled in a kind of Monarchic
manner. And so in imitation of that which had formerly been Regal, to have a
House of Peers.

But against that also, there were great and high oppositions: so that, though
it was with much ado agreed, that there should be another House; yet it would
not be allowed the Title of an House of Peers. Whereupon the result was, that
an Act Entitled The Humble Petition and Advice, should pass; whereby they
ordained what Style the chief Magistrate should have; idest, Lord Protector of
the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions and
Territories thereto belonging.

Likewise, that Parliaments consisting of two Houses should be called once in
three years, with qualifications of such as should serve therein. And that the
number of such, as should sit in the other House should be nominated by the
Lord Protector, and approved by the House of Commons. Moreover, that he should
have power to nominate his Successor. And that a Confession of Faith should be
agreed on by his Highness and the Parliament, according to the Rule and Warrant
of the Scriptures. Which Act being presented to him, accordingly, was assented
to, and passed. 25. May. Scob. Col* p. 378. ^. ^.


But that Act being in some sort deficient; about a month following, they
passed another, relating thereto, and called The Explanatory Petition and
Advice. Wherein (inter alia) is this Clause; viz. -- Whereas in the Fourth
Article Public Ministers, or Public Preachers of the Gospel, are disabled to
the Elected to serve in Parliament; it is hereby explained and declared, to
such Ministers and Preachers only, as have maintenance for Preaching, or are
Pastors, or Teachers of Congregations. In which Act is also contained the Oaths
of the Lord Protector, and of his Privy Council; as also the Oaths of the
Members of that Parliament.

Soon after which, he was again, in Westminster Hall (standing under a Rich
State) solemnly invested into his Old Title of Lord Protector, and into the
Government thus new modelled. Where in the presence of the Members of that
Parliament, Sir Thomas Widdrington their Speaker, delivered unto him, in the
name of them all (and as Representatives of all the people in the three
Kingdoms) a Purple Robe, lyned with Ermine; as also a Bible, Sword, Crom^el a
second time Constituted. Protector.
and Scepter, descanting upon each of them, as significant, in some respect.
All which being performed, the Instrument of that new Modelled Government,
called The Humble Petition and Advice, was publicly read. Whereunto assenting,
he was then and there Proclaimed Protector of England, Scotland, and Ireland,
with sound of (...): and afterward in I. July.
the City of London. So likewise at 9. July.
Dublin in Ireland, and 15. July.
Edinburgh in Scotland.

Which new devised Government, so much resembling Monarchy, though the Title
did not suit thereto, did so (...) please the Anabaptists and Fifth-Monarchy
men, that they (...) spired his ruin by a sudden Insurrection: but their (...)
being timely discerned, came at length to nothing. (...) reupon, for prevention
of farther mischief, he committed to Prison, several persons of no small note,
whose power with the Soldiery might otherwise have much endangered his safety;
Viz. Lawson, one of his Admirals at Sea; Harrison, Rich, Danvers, and some
other Colonels. Nay, Lambert himself, being aware, that his hopes of succeeding
him, were then, by that new framed Government frustrated, began to fall off
from him, and to incline to the Fanatics. Which so awakened the Protector,
that he took from him his Commission of Lieutenant General and gave it to
Fleetwood, who by the Marriage of his Daughter, stood more nearly typed to his
Interest.

And that he might the better allure those of the Army, and some other which
were no great friends to him, to conform the more pliantly, to this his new
settled Dominion, he tickled them with the specious Title of Lords, by calling
them to fit in the other House; obliging also many other desperate and mean
persons, which were Officers of the Army, with the like shadows of Honor. The
names of which persons so called were as follows; viz.

Richard Cromwell, his eldest Son. Henry Cromwell, his other Son, then Lord
Deputy of Ireland. Nathaniel Fienes, John Lisle, Lords Commissioners of the
Great Seal. Henry Lawrence, Lord President of his Privy Council. Charles
Fleetwood (his Son in Law.) Robert Earl of Warwick. Edmund Earl of Mulgrave.
Edward Earl of Manchester. William Viscount Say and Sele. John Cleypole (his
other Son in Law, and Master of his Horse.) Philip Lord Lisle, eldest Son to
the Earl of Leicester. Charles Howard of Waworth Castle. Philip Lord Wharton.
Thomas Lord Fauconbridg. John Desborough, Edw. Montagu. Admirals (...) Sea.
George Lord Eure. Bulstrod Whitlock. Sir Gilbert Pickering, Knight. Colonel
William Sydenham. Sir Charles Wolfesley, Baronet. Major General Skippon.
Strickland. Colonel Philip Jones. Richard Hampden. Sir William Strickland.
Francis Rous, Esquire John Fiennes, Esquire An. 1658.
Sir Francis Russell, Baronet. Sir Thomas Honywood, Knight. Sir Arthur Haselrigg,
Baronet. Sir John Hobart. Sir Richard Onslow, Knight. Sir Gilbert Gerard. Sir
William Roberts, Knight. John Glyn, his Chief Justice of the Upper-Bench. Oliver
St. John, his Chief Justice of the Common Pleas. William Pierpont, Esquire John
Jones, Esquire John Crew, Esquire Alexander Popham, Esquire Sir Christoph. Pack, Alderman.
Sir Rob. Tichburne, Alderman. Made Kts. by Cromwell. Edward Whalley, one of his
Major Generals. Sir (...) but (...) sold Thimbles and Bodkins. Sir George
Fleetwood another of his Knights. Sir Thomas Pride, another of his Knights,
formerly a Dray-man. Colonel Richard Ingoldesby. Sir John Heuson, another of
his Knights, formerly a Cobbler. James Berrey, one of his Major Generals,
formerly Clerk to a Forge. Colonel William Goffe. Thomas Cooper. Edmund
Thomas. George Monk, then Commander in Chief of his Forces in Scotland. David
Earl of Cassils in Scotland. Sir William Lockart, another of his Knights. Sir
Archib. Iohnston, a Scotchman. William Steel his Lord Chancelour of Ireland.
The Lord Broghil, Brother to the Earl of Cork in Ireland. Sir Matthew
Tomlinson, another of his Knights.
The Sitting 20. Ianu.
of which House began upon the twentieth of January: at which time likewise
those of the Commons, who had formerly declined to sign the Recognition, were
freely admitted.

But so much were those new Lords despised and scorned by the Honse of Commons;
The Parliament Dissolved. 4. Feb.
that the Protector, finding no advantage by their Sitting, Dissolved that his
Second Parliament.

Which was not more slow in complying with his advancement, than the Royallists
were forward in their contrivances for pulling him down. But so great was his
vigilance, and no less his cost, whereby he had allured some Birds of that
Feather; that the Consultations of his Adversaries, were no sooner had, than
apparently discovered: so that, when ever he pleased, he could take them in his
Net, as he always did, when he thought that examples of severity might be for
his advantage.

It being therefore once more expedient to renew those terrors to the people,
he caused his bloody Theater, called the High-Court of Justice, Another
High-Court of Justice.
to be again erected in Westminster Hall; where for the more formalities sake,
the persons whom he did design for destruction were brought; the one Dr. John
Heuit, a Reverend Divine, the other Sir Henry Slingsby, Knight. a Yorkshire
Gentleman of great Loyalty and Valor; who being charged with High Treason
against his Protectorship; and stoutly denying the Authority of that Tribunal,
had Sentence of death soon passed upon them, which they did accordingly suffer,
2. and 8. Iun.
with great magnanimity; though there was no little endeavor used for to save
their lives: his Daughter Claypole (whose interest otherwise with him was
beyond expression) soliciting for the Doctor with all earnestness that could
be.

But it concerning him at that time, Dunkirk having been besieged by the
English and French; and given up to the French upon Articles, was put into the
hands of the English, 25. June.
so much in point of Policy, to sacrifice some for a terror to others; neither
her incessant Supplication nor Tears could prevail; which brought upon her such
excessive grief of mind; that falling into a sharp fit of sickness; wherein
crying out against him, for Dr. Heuits blood; she dyed with the most bitter
torments imaginable.

Which death of hers was the forerunner to that of this wicked Tyrant: for
soon after a deep Melancholy seized closely upon him: in which the guilt of so
much innocent blood, as he had spilt, might (perhaps) somewhat touch him. But
without doubt that which stuck nearest to him, was his real consideration, that
he could never ascend unto such an height of Sovereignty, as his ambitious
desires had long gaped after. For he plainly saw, that the Anabaptists, and
Fifth-Monarchy men, whom in order to the destruction of his lawful Sovereign,
he had so much cherisht, then were, and were ever like to be, as thorns in his
sides, and blocks in his way thereto. And which is more, that not only
Fleetwood (his Son in Law) whom privately he had designed to be his Successor
in the Government, was an especial friend and favourer of those desperate
Fanatics; but that Desborough, Sir Gilbert Pickering, Colonel Sydenham, and
many other of his Council, were underhand well-wishers to Lambert and his
party, who were known enemies to all Monarchick Rule; and consequently to that,
wherein he had so long aimed to be settled.

Which sorrows and perplexities of his restless mind, meeting with some Natural
infirmities of his Body, struck him into a sharp and Feverish distemper:
whereat his Physicians expressing their thoughts; he told them, that if they
supposed him in a dying condition, they were utterly mistaken, forasmuch as he
had been comforted with Revelations to the contrary. Nay he was farther so
transported with those vain Enthusiasms, and had such brainsick persons about
him (even those of his Chaplains) who were equally possessed with such
giddy-headed conceits; that they foolishly dreamed and fancyed as much: and
told it in public; that having sought God by Prayer, for the prolongation of
his life, they received such assurances of his grant to their Petitions; that
they not only gave out, that he effectually recovered, but kept a solemn
Thanksgiving for the same, at Hampton Court, where he then lay.

Which strange and bold confidence, caused forthwith his removal from thence to
White Hall; where he had not been from that time, many days, but his Physician
alarmed them with his near approaching death. Which so awakened the best of
his Friends, that they soon fell to enquiry, whom he intended for his
Successor. But so little sense had he then of that question, that he made them
an answer no whit to the purpose. Whereupon they asked him, whether it was not
his Son Richard; to which he made them some signs of assent. But farther
enquiring of his last Will and Testament, whereby they presumed that he had
nominated his Successor, he directed them to his Closet, and other places for
search; but all to no purpose, for nothing could be found.

In which discomposure, departing Sept. 3.
this life upon the third of September; to the end that the Government might
not fall to the ground; some few of the Council giving out, that Richard, was
(according to the Instrument) the Person declared, they immediately caused him
to be Proclaimed Protector.

Having thus traced this Monster to his death, which happened on the same day
of the month, whereon he had been twice wonderfully victorious ( viz. at Dunbar
and Worcestrer) it will not be amiss to take notice of somewhat concerning his
Carcass, which was wholly preternatural; viz. that notwithstanding it was
Artificially Embowelled, and Embalmed with Aromatic Odours, wrapped also in
six-fold Cerecloth, and put in a sheet of Lead: with a strong wooden Coffin
over it; yet did it in a short time so strangely ferment, that it burst all in
pieces, and became so noysom, that they were immediately necessitated to commit
it to the Earth, and to celebrate his Funeral with an empty Coffin. Which
solemnity was performed, from Somerset House in the Strand, unto King Henry the
Sevenths Chapel at Westminster, with that Grandeur and State, Nov. 23.
upon the 23. of November following, that it did equalize the greatest and most
glorious of our Kings, amongst which they laid the Corpse of this infamous
Regicide.

CHAP. XXXIX.
HEre should I go on in the path of my Story; but because that reports have
been so various, and uncertain, touching his Parentage, and course of life,
before he became an Actor in this unparalled Rebellion, it will not be
improper to make a short digression; and as briefly as may be, to say something
of both.

That his Extraction by the Fathers side, was from Sir Richard Williams, Knight. a
Gentleman of eminent note, in the Court of King Henry the VIII. and son to
Morgan ap William (a Welchman) by Sister to Thomas Lord Cromwell Earl of Essex,
(the chief Agent in those days, for the dissolution of the Monasteries) is not
to be doubted. Who being by his Uncle preferred to the service of King Henry,
was for that cause (and no other) called Cromwell, as is apparent enough from
Testimonies of credit, however some have fancyed otherwise, which Sir Richard,
thereupon writing himself Cromwell, alias Williams, was then in such Favor and
Grace with the King; that having received the dignity of Knighthood Stows
Survey of Land. p. 494. col. 1.
for his Heroic behavior at a Tilting in 32. Hen. VIII. he had also the great
Abbey of Ramsey, the Nunnery of Hinchinbroke, with the Priories of Sautrey, and
Huntington, given to him upon the disposal of the Monastery Lands. All which he
left unto Sir Henry Cromwell, Knight. his Son and Heir. Who, making Hinchinbroke his
principal Seat (as more pleasantly situate than Ramsey is) left Issue Sir
Oliver Cromwell, made Knight of the Bath at the Coronation of King James; and
Robert Cromwell a younger Son (with some other Children.) Which Robert, though
he was by the countenance of his elder Brother, made a Justice of Peace in
Huntingtonshire, had but a slender Estate; much of his support being a
Brew House in Huntington, chiefly managed by his Wife, who was Sister to Sir
Robert Steward, of the City of Ely, Knight, and by her had Issue this our
famous Oliver, styled Protector of England, Scotland, and Ireland, as has been
observed.

In his Youth he was for some time bred up in the University of Cambridg; where
he made no great proficiency in any kind of Learning: but then and afterward
sorting himself with Drinking-Companions, and the ruder sort of people (being
of a rough and blustering disposition) he had the name of a Royster amongst
most that knew him: and by his exorbitances so wasted his Patrimony; that,
having attempted his Uncle Steward for a supply of his wants, and finding that
by a smooth way of application to him, he could not prevail, he endeavored by
color of Law to lay hold of his Estate, representing him a person not able to
govern it. But therein failing, for lack of better mantenance, his aim was for
New England, purposing there to fix, as is very well known.

Observing therefore, that most of those unquiet Spirits, who were refractory
to the Church Discipline by Law Established here, were the principal persons
which had stored that new Plantation; and that none but such Schismatics were
welcome guests thither: for his better furtherance from those of that gang, and
the fairer acceptance upon his arrival there, through the recommendation of
those Godly Brethren; he forthwith quitted his old Companions, and betook
himself to the acquaintance of the pretended Holy Tribe; most formally canting
in their demure Language and affected tone, and frequenting the Sermons of the
fiercest Boutefeus. Amongst which (as a blessed Convert, in whom they much
gloried) he gained in short time a very high Reputation. So that having better
Natural parts than the most of that Sect, and confidence enough to put forth
himself, upon any fit occasion; he was especially made choice of by those, who
ever endeavored the undermining of Regal Authority, to be their Orator at
Huntington, unto the late Kings Commissiones of Sewers there, in opposition to
His Majesty's most commendable design, for the general drayning of that great
and vast level of the adjacent Fenns. In which adventure, his boldness and
Elocution gained him so much credit; as that, soon after, being necessitated
through his low condition, to quit a Country Farm, which he held at St. Ives,
and betake himself to mean Lodgings in Cambridg, the Schismatical party there,
chose him a Burgess for their Corporation, in that unhappy Long-Parliament,
which began at Westminster upon the third of November, 1640.

Wherein he bestirred himself, with as much violence and heat, as any
Schismatical Bankrupt did in that mischievious Convention; being well aware,
that a general imbroilment of the Kingdom, by an intestine War, might be of
advantange to such necessitous and desperate people. Whereupon, in short time,
he did accordingly obtain his long desired ends: for being one of the first of
those, who put themselves in Arms against the King, he was made a Captain of
Horse in the Earl of Essex's Regiment, and afterward Lieutenant General to the
late Earl of Manchester.

In which service, his great strength of Reason, accompanied with no less
Courage, soon gained him such experience in the Discipline of War; as that
taking strict care for the well Arming of his men, and preventing their
disorder upon any hot pursuit; such success attended him upon all occasions, as
at length gained him the Reputation of a skilful Commander; by reason whereof
he arrived to much higher advancements. Where soon discerning the general
humor of the Soldier, and that many of them were possessed with conceited
Revelations; some expecting a personal Reign of Christ, here on Earth; fancying
themselves the men who were to make way for his coming; and to that purpose
that they were to destroy the wicked and possess their Estates; he chiefly
applied himself to the humor of those desperate Fanatics; and by his subtle
arts in Praying, Preaching, Groaning, and Howling amongst them, got himself no
less Credit than Mahomet, of old, did with his Followers. And so by degrees,
ascending those steps of Command and Power, whereof instance has been given in
the precedent Story, raised himself at last, to the highest pitch of
Sovereignty, as has already been observed.

CHAP. XL.
I Now proceed to Richard his Son (Proclaimed Protector upon his death, as has
been said.) Whose Title was for a while, upheld by some few, and much art used
for perpetuating his Dominion; first by procure Congratulations Hist of Indep.
Part. 4. p. 32.
from all the Soldiery in England, Scotland, and Ireland, Secondly from all
the Independent Congregational-Assemblies; Thirdly from the most eminent of the
London Ministers; as also from the French, Dutch, and Italian Churches; and
lastly from most of the Counties, Cities, and chief Towns in England; all of
them engaging to live and dye with this youngster. In many of which solemn
Congratulatory Addresses, being highly magnified for his Wisdom, nobleness of
mind, and lovely Composition of Body; his Father Oliver was compared to Moses,
Zerubabel, Joshua, Gideon, Elijah; to the Chariots and Horsemen of Israel; to
David, Solomon, and Hezekiah. Likewise to Constantine the Great; and to
whomsoever else that either the Sacred Scripture, or any other History, had
celebrated for their Piety, and Goodness. Insomuch as it was then, by most men
thought, that this their late framed Government might be durable enough,
against the disturbance of any opposers.

But so active and earnest were the Fanatics against it, that they spared not
their utmost industry for the supplanting thereof: And discerning Fleetwood
(then General of the Army) to be very much a friend unto all of their party;
unto him they made addresses for furtherance of their design; speciously
suggesting, that the Office of Protector, being at the disposal of Cromwell, was
to him alone intended, though Richard had been Proclaimed by some few of the
Council.

And to the end that the Soldiers might likewise incline to their side, they
put them on to require the auditing of their Arrears; two pence a week having
been withheld of their pay: and not only so, but to insist upon greater
privileges, as Soldiers, than they had enjoyed in Olivers time; viz. that no
Soldier should be displaced, without consent of the Council of War: no nor
questioned for Murder, Robbery, or any other Offense, otherwise than by the
Law-Military; whereby they were sure to have no little favor. Likewise, that
it should be in the power of the Army, upon all occasions, to make choice of
their General: of all which they had first disputes with this Richard, and
afterward, by their Remonstrances did insist upon boldly.

These perrillous attempts, being therefore discerned by his Highness, Rich.
Cromwels Parliament.
he forthwith summoned a Parliament (according to the tenor of the old
Instrument) which Parliament, was (for its greater honor) to consist of two
Houses; thereby not doubting but to scatter these dangerous clouds; and met
accordingly at Westminster upon the seventh of January. 7. Ian.
But consulting together; instead of complying with his Highnesses designs,
they fell to questioning the Authority of the Other House. Nor did they at all
brook the Irish and Scotch, sent thither as Representatives from each of those
Realms. Nevertheless, after diverse tedious and warm disputes, they were at
length content Ibid. p. 36.
to transact with those, who Sat in that Other House; not excluding such
Peers, who had been faithful to the Parliament, from their privileges of being
summoned as Members thereof, An. 1659.
and that they would receive any Message from them, but by some of those, who
were Members of their own House.

And, to the end they might, by degrees, bring themselves into power, they
attempted the asserting of their Interest in the Militia, by a salvo in their
Vote relating to the Fleet. Moreover, to captivate the people with specious
shows of alleviating their burdens, they made diverse formal Speeches for the
taking away of all Excise: as also of Tonnage and Poundage after the next three
years. Likewise, to make show how tender they were of the peoples Liberties;
they did not only set at large Colonel Overion and others (which had been
committed to Prison by Oliver) without payment of Fees; but questioned the
Lieutenant of the Tower for detaining those persons there. Appointing Ibid.
also a Committee of Inspection for Public Accounts. Which Committee Reported
the Yearly incomes of England, Scotland and Ireland, to be eighteen hundred
sixty eight thousand, seven hundred and seventeen pounds: and the Issues to be
no less than two Millions two hundred and one thousand five hundred and forty
pounds. By which they saw, that three hundred thirty two thousand, eight
hundred twenty three pounds of Debt, incurred Yearly upon them, by the ill
management of that great Revenue; which was treble to what any King of England
ever enjoyed. And further saw, that to maintain the Conquest of Scotland, they
were at the Yearly charge of one hundred sixty three thousand, six hundred and
nineteen pounds, more than the Revenue of that Kingdom did then yield unto them.

Other particulars they then had likewise in hand, all tending to the public
benefit of the Nation; forbearing to give money, beneficial Offices, or rewards
(as formerly had been usual) amongst themselves; by which means the world,
might by degrees, be wrought into a dislike of being Governed by that Military
power, which for so long time had Ruled the Roast: and to restore the general
sway of the Realm to themselves, as the Representative of the People, in whom,
according to the Presbyterian Maxim the whole Sovereign Power virtually was.

Which design, so destructive to the Sword-mens Interest, did not only disturb
their minds, but by doubts and jealousies, at length divided their strength
into Parties and Factions; some of them holding their Councils at Wallingford
House, with the General: others at White Hall with the Protector and his
Confidents. But, in this Fraction, those of Wallingford- House, being much the
more numerous, drew up a bold Representation, April 7.
both to the Protector and the House; which so startled his Highness, that he
forthwith stood April 8.
upon his Guard: and so allarmed the House of Commons, that they thereupon
Voted; April 18. History of Indep. part. 4. p. 37.
That during the Sitting of the Parliament, there should be no General Council,
or meeting of the Officers of the Army, without direction, leave, and Authority
of the Lord Protector, and both Houses of Parliament. And, that no person
should have and continue any Command or Trust, in any of the Armies or Navies
of England, Scotland, or Ireland, or any the Dominions and Territories thereto
belonging, who should refuse to subscribe, that he would not disturb, or
interrupt the free meeting in Parliament, or their freedom in their Debates or
Councils.

And to sweeten the Common-Souldiers, lest they should join with their Officers
in turning them out of Doors (as they had formerly done) added, Ib. p. 38.
that they would presently take into consideration, how to satisfy the Arrears
of the Army, with present pay; and likewise to prepare and Act of Indemnity
for them.

A great Task (indeed) had that Parliament then upon their Hands; viz. the
pleasing of the people, which could no otherwise be, than by alleviating their
heavy burdens; and satisfying the Soldiery by feeding them with money, whereon
they fell seriously to consider. But whilst they were intentive on these
necessary works, the Animosities of the Army. Officers grew higher and higher
against each other; strict Guards being kept by those at White Hall, with the
Protector, against those at Wallingford- House, with the General; the
Protector, in pursuance of the Parliament-Votes, forbidding any further
Convention of those Officers at Wallingford- House. Which prohibition signified
little; for the Wallingford- House-men, being much the more numerous and
sturdy; at length so awed and daunted his Highness, that they obtained his
consent April 22.
to a Commission and Proclamation (ready penned to Dissolve the Parliament,
though he had with great assurance to the Members, promised the contrary.
Whereupon the Usher with the Black Rod, was twice sent Ib. p. 39.
to the House of Commons, by Mr. Nathaniel Fienes Speaker of the Other House,
requiring them to come up. Who being not ignorant upon what errand it was, not
only scorned to stir; but some of them became so courageous, to move, Sir
Arthur Haselrigg.
that the House should declare it High Treason for any person whatsoever, to
put force upon any Members of the House; and that all Votes, Acts, and
Resolutions, passed by any Members of Parliament, when the rest were detained
from, or taken out of the House by force, should be null and void. And finding
themselves so unanimous to their Resolves, Adjourned the House till next Monday
Morning; attending their Speaker, all in fair Order, through Westminster Hall
to his Coach, in the face of the Soldiers, which had then beset both the
Palace-Yards.

CHAP. XLI.
BUT, on Monday 25. April.
morning, all avenues to the House being stopped up by the Soldiers, and
entrance peremptorily denied unto any of the Members; The Protector set aside,
and the Rump of the Long Parliament restored.
the Wallingford-House-Officers (unto whom most of those at White Hall, were by
that time joined) casting off Whalley, Goffe, and Ingoldesby, with some other
of the Protectors chiefest Confidents; and taking in Lambert, Sir Arthur
Haselrigg, Colonel Okey, and some others, who had been set aside by Oliver;
considering with themselves that though they must necessarily govern by a
Military-power; yet the name and shadow of a Parliament would best captivate
the people: forasmuch therefore, as the Members of that Parliament, then so
excluded, could not properly be readmitted, but with much hazard to the
Soldiers Interest, they procured a private Conference 5. May.
with some Members of the Old Long Parliament (formerly turned out by Oliver)
viz. Sir Henry Vane, Sir Arthur Haselrigg, Colonel Ludlow, Colonel Jones,
Thomas Scot, Thomas Chaloner, Major General Lambert and some others, to the
number of about twenty. At which Conference, it being agreed that they should
take in William Lenthal, the Old Speaker, and meet 7. May.
in the House on Saturday the seventh of May; in order thereto, they set forth
this following Declaration; viz.

The Public concernment of this Commonwealth, being, through a vicissitude of
dangers, deliverances, and backslidings of many, brought into that state and
posture, whereon they now stand; and our selves also contributing thereto, by
wandering diverse ways from Righteous and Equal Paths. And, although there has
been many Essays to obviate the dangers, and to settle these Nations in Peace
and Prosperity; yet all have proved ineffectual; the only wise God, in the
course of his providence disappointing all endeavors therein. And also,
observing to our great grief, that the good Spirit, which formerly appeared
amongst us, in the carrying on of this great work, did daily decline, so as the
Good Old Cause it self became a reproach; we have been led to look back, and
examine the cause of the Lord's withdrawing his wonted presence from us, and
where we turned out of the way, that through mercy we might return, and give
him the Glory. And, amongst other things calling to mind, that the Long
Parliament, consisting of the Members there Sitting until the 20 th. of April
1653. were eminent assertors of the Cause, and had a special presence of God
with them, and were signally blessed in that work (the desires of many good
people concurring with ours therein) we judge it our duty to invite the
aforesaid Members, to return to the exercise and discharge of their Trust, as
before the said 20 th. of April 1653. And therefore we do hereby most earnestly
desire the Parliament, consisting of those Members, who continued to Sit from
the year 1648. until the 20 th. of April 1653. to return to the exercise and
discharge of their Trust: and we shall be ready in our places, to yield them,
as becomes us, our utmost assurance to Sit in safety, for the improving present
opportunity, for settling and securing the Peace and Freedom of this
Commonwealth; praying for the presence and blessing of God upon their
endeavors.

Which Declaration was signed 6. May.
by General Fleetwood, and the Council of Officers of the Army.

In order whereunto those Members of the Long-Parliament, came the day
following 7. May.
to the Painted-Chamber: but finding of their designed number (which was forty
and two) that there wanted a couple, they sent Ibid. p. 40.
to the Gaols for a present supply. Where, having the Lord Munson, and Henry
Martin ready at hand (who lay there upon Executions for Debt) with Lisle and
Whitlock from the Chancery-Bench, they advanced Ib. and p. 41.
into the House, with a Mace born before them, their names being as follows;
The names of the Rumpers.


Lord Munson. Henry Martin. Bulstrode Whitlock. Mr. Lisle. Thomas Chaloner.
Alderman Atkins. Alderman Penington. Thomas Scott. Cornelius Holland. Henry
Vane. Mr. Prideaux. Sir. James Harington. Lieutenant General Ludlow. Michael
Oldsworth. Sir Arthur Haselrigg. Mr. Jones. Colonel Purefoy. Colonel White.
Henry Nevil. Mr. Say. Mr. Blagrave. Colonel Bennet. Ib. and p. 41.
Mr. Brewster. Sergeant Wild. John Goodwyn. Mr. Nicholas Lechmore. Augustine
Skynner. Mr. Downs. Mr. Dove. Mr. John Lenthal. Mr. John Saloway. Mr. John
Corbet. Mr. Walton. Gilbert Millington. Mr. Gold. Colonel Sydenham. Colonel
Byngham. Colonel Air. Mr. Smith. Colonel Ingoldesby. Lieutenant General
Fleetwood.
Upon notice of whose Sitting, there being many of the Members of that old
Parliament then walking in Westminster Hall, and more about the City; those in
the Hall consulting together, and thereupon being satisfied, that they had as
good right to sit there again, as those who were gone in before, resolved to
follow them into the House, or at least to attempt it: These being Mr.
Annesley. Sir George Booth. Mr. James Herbert. Mr. William Prynne. Mr. George
Montagu. Mr. John Evelin. The Secluded Members.
Mr. John Herbert. Mr. Gowen. Mr. Evelyn. Mr. Knightley. Mr. Clive. Mr.
Hungerford. Mr. Harvey. Mr. Pack.


Who being come to the Door, after much expostulation with the Guard for their
Privileges of Sitting, were denied entrance. Whereupon, resolving to wait a
fitter opportunity, some of them came again on Monday 9. May.
following; viz. Mr. Annesley, Mr. Prynne, and Mr. Hungerford, and went into
the House.

Which free admittance, causing Mr. Annesley to presume, that the rest might
also come in, he went out again into the Hall to give others notice thereof:
but upon his return found it otherwise. For those, who were met would not go on
with any business, so long as Mr. Prynne did make his stay amongst them, so
that they soon adjourned: and upon their next meeting ordered; Ib. p. 42.
That such persons, formerly Members of that Parliament, who had not sat
therein since the year 1648. and had not subscribed the Engagement, in the Roll
of that House, should not sit there, till farther Order by the Parliament. And
by a general Vote declared, 29. May. Ib. p. 43.
That all such as were to be employed in any place of Trust or Power in the
Commonwealth, should be able for the discharge of such Trust; and that they
should be persons fearing God; and who had given testimony to all the people of
God, of their faithfulness to that Commonwealth, according to the Declaration
of Parliament of May the 7 th. proceeding also in the Election of these (whose
names are here added) Ib. p. 45.
for a Council of State.

Sir Arthur Haselrigg. Sir Henry Vane. Colonel Ludlow. Colonel John Jones.
Colonel Sydenham. Thomas Scott. Major Saloway. General Fleetwood. Sir James
Harrington. Colonel Walton. Mr. Henry Nevil. Mr. Thomas Chaloner. Mr. Downs.
Bulstrod Whitlock. Herbert Mortley. Mr. Sidney. Colonel Thompson. Colonel
Dixwel. Mr. Reynolds. Oliver St. John. Mr. Wallop. All these being Members of
the Old Long Parliament.
Unto which were added
John Bradshaw. Colonel Lambert. Colonel Desborow. Fairfax. Colonel Berry. Sir
Anthony Ashley Couper. Sir Horatio Tounsend. Sir Robert Honywood. Sir Archibald
Iohnston. Josias Berners.
As to the Actings of these old Members, it is not a little observable; that
first they ordered Ib. June.
the sale of all such Houses and Lands, of the late King, the Queen, the
Prince, with Bishops, Deans and Chapters, or other then unsold; and that they
should forthwith be exposed to sale. Also, that such persons on whom any Title
of Honor had been conferred by the said King, should pay those forfeitures for
the same, as had been by their Acts and Ordinances in that case provided, and
bring in their Patents. Amongst which Houses intended for Sale, Somerset House,
in the Strand, was one; the materials whereof to be pulled down and sold, were
valued Ib. p. 49.
at 5545 l. 1 s. 3 d.

And now, having some compassion on their late Lord Protector Richard Cromwell,
so outed of his Sovereignty, as before is observed, they Voted Ib. p. 50.
him an exemption from Arrests, for six months.

Likewise, the more to ingratiate themselves with the people, they passed an
July.
Act of Indemnity; but without benefit to any, who should boggle at
subscribing to a new Engagement against the Government by the single Person,
Kingship, or House of Peers, seizing 2. July.
upon diverse persons, in and about London, and upon Horses and Arms; pretending
Traiterous designs against them by the Royalists; the Preachers, in their
Pulpits crying out in this manner; Ib. p. 53.
viz.

The Lord stir up the hearts of his people to Prayer, and sincere Humiliation,
and fill them with Unanimity and Courage in this evil time: and make the people
to see, whatever fair pretenses may be made use of by the Common Enemy, to get
power into their Hands: yet, should they prevail, no man that has been of a
party against them heretofore; yea no man, that has been a mere Neuter, but
must expect, that his private Estate, as well as the Public Liberty, shall
become a prey to a desperate crew of Ravenous, and Unreasonable men.

Certain it is, that throughout the whole Realm, the people were weary of their
Oppressions; and saw, that notwithstanding these shiftings of the Dominion from
one hand to another, they were no whit eased of their Taxes and Burdens: and
therefore not only the Royalists, but most of the Presbyterians (being then out
of play) to rid themselves of that lingering slavery, did privately engage to
rise: and accordingly began so to do in Cheshire; putting I. August.
themselves under the command of Sir George Boothe Baronet, (a person of a fair
Estate in those parts.) Which so alarmed the old Iuncto sitting at Westminster,
commonly called the Rump (they being the fag-end or Tail of the Long
Parliament) as that they speedily sent down into those parts, what Forces could
soon be got together, under the command of Major General Lambert; publishing a
Proclamation Ib. p. 55.
against them, and their adherents, as Rebels and Traitors; Sir George in the
mean time, causing a Declaration to be Printed, and spread abroad: Whereby
manifesting to the world, that this Iuncto at Westminster, had violated all
Laws of God and men; did profess, that the defense of the Laws and Liberties
was the chief thing, he and those with him aimed at, which would never be
settled by those Self-Seekers at Westminster; and therefore desired a new and
Free Parliament.

But this good design was soon blasted: for Lambert encountering them near to
North-Wiche, so overpowered them with numbers, and more experienced Soldiers,
that he utterly routed 19. Aug.
and dispersed all their strength. Which success so far elated this active
General, that he then thought of nothing more than his own personal
advancement. And to the end that he might the more endear the Soldiers to
himself; not only magnified their merits, by Letters to the Parliament: but
when he had a thousand pounds sent, to buy him a Jewel, in token of their high
esteem of that service, he forthwith distributed it amongst his Common
Soldiers. And in farther order to that his design, under color of seizing all
Arms thereabouts, he subtly got them into his own hands.

All which was no whit dissatisfactory to the Rumpers, who then did not at all
dream of Lamberts design: and therefore having received Letters Ib. p. 57.
September.
out of Scotland, which gave them much assurance of General Monks reality, they
laid their Insurrection in Cheshire, wholly to the Royallists charge; and
forthwith resolved upon an Oath for abjuring the Kings Title, the formality
whereof I have here added;

I. A. B. do hereby declare, The Oath for abjuring the King.
that I renounce the pretended Title of Charles Stuart, and the whole Line of
the late King James; and of every other Person as a single Person, pretending
to the Government of these Nations of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the
Dominions and Territories thereto belonging. And that I will, by the Grace and
Assistance of Almighty God, be true, faithful, and constant to this
Commonwealth, against any King, single Person, and House of Peers, and every
of them: and hereunto I subscribe my name.

And to show how Zealous their Clergy, were generally therein, I shall only
give instance of a precious pack of those in Leicestershire; 9. Septem. Mere.
Polit. N. 586. p. 721.
which personally came out of that County to the Parliament, and presented to
them a Paper, Entitled The humble Representation of diverse well-affected
Ministers of the Gospel, in the County of Leicester whose names are hereunto
subscribed. Which was so well accepted of, that they being called in; one of
them (as the mouth of the rest) addressing himself to the Speaker, said; That,
being all Ministers of the Gospel in the County of Leicester, faithful servants
to the Parliament, and imbarqued in the same bottom with themselves; that some
of them marched along with their Forces to suppress the late Rebellion of Sir
George Boothe, and others: and, that they well knowing how much it concerned
them, with all the true Godly of the Land, to strengthen the Parliaments hands,
in the work of the Lord, were desired by many of their Brethren, Ministers of
the Gospel, in Leicestershire, to tender that their humble Representation, in
their and their own names; with desire that it might be communicated to the
House; the Heads whereof were, as follows.

1. That they did acknowledge it, as the product of Divine Love and Goodness
toward the Nation; that, notwithstanding the many changes of Persons and
Government, a Godly and Preaching-Ministry, had been, and still was
countenanced, protected and maintained by the Parliament: and that the Lord had
been pleased, after so many years interruption, to restore them again to their
places, for the accomplishing of all those just and good things, which they
formerly prosecuted, in order to an happy settlement.

2. That, as in duty bound, they desired, with all thankfulness, to own the
Parliament, under God, as eminent Instruments thereof; looking upon their Piety
and Zeal for God therein; not only as a strong obligation upon their Spirits,
to a more faithful and cheerful discharge of their duties, as Ministers; but
also to adhere to them.

3. That they were the more encouraged thereto, when they reflected upon the
late Votes for encouragement and maintenance of a Preaching-Ministry, and also
for the vindication of their just Rights, as men and Christians.

4. That they doubted not, but the same Divine Hand, which had begun to lay the
foundation of a Righteous settlement of Peace and Truth in this Nation,
continually blasting the counter-designs of the Common Adversaries, would in
due time rear the top cornerstone, to the comfort of all that did with well to
Sion.

5. That they could not but with shame, and bleeding of heart, bewail that
Cloud of darkness, which had lately overspread diverse of their old professed
friends, who at first deeply engaged with them: yet, through that mystery of
Iniquity, which did still work in the Nation, had been misled and caused to
stumble; not only to the hazard of their own Lives and Liberties; but to an
involving this poor Island in confusion and blood; yet the Ruin thereof, if God
had not stepped in for its relief, by blessing the Parliaments Counsels, and
prospering the endeavors of a faithful Army, against the enraged malice of the
old Common Enemy, and the dissatisfactions of such as engaged with them, to
hinder the designed work of easing their Loads, and of settling their
Foundations in Peace, Truth, and Righteousness.

6. That they took themselves bound in duty to let the Parliament know; that
(through mercy) their souls had not entered into the secret of the late
Insurrectors; but that they did profess an utter detestation thereof; and that,
the Lord helping them, they would not cease crying mightily to him, that he
would still pour out upon the Parliament, a Spirit of Wisdom, and of the fear
of the Lord, to carry them on in their work, against all discouragements and
oppositions whatsoever; the names of the Subscribers being these.

John Yaxley, Minister of the Gospel at Kibworth. Samuel Blakesley at Langton.
William Sheffeild at Ibstoke. Maurice Bohem at Halloughton. William Grace at
Reavesby. Richard Muston at Langton. Matthew Clarke at Harborow. Josiah Whiston
at Norton. Benjamin Southwood at Kymcote. Samuel Shaw at Long-Whatton. Thomas
Lawrey at Harborow. Henry Pearce at Claybroke. George Wright at Congeston. Y.
Dixey at Margarets in Leicester. Samuel Smith at Glooreston. George Green at
Thedingworth. William Wilson at Foxton. John Bennet at Winwick. Thomas Smith at
Castle-Dunnington. William Barton at Martins in Leicester. Nicholas Kestyn at
Gumley. John St. Nicolas at Lutterworth. Thomas Langdel at Bowdon Magna.
Richard Drayton at Shangton. Thomas Leadbeter at Hinkley. William Cotton at
Broughton. Henry Watts at Swepston. Ambrose Bent at Ashby-Folvile. John
Shuttlewood at Ravenston. Emanuel Bourne at Waltham. Christopher Wright at
Eastwell. Thomas Ienkings at New Kilworth. John Pitts at Burbage. John Hulls at
Stanton-Wivile. Paul Bulgay. William Black at Suddington. Robert Reding at
Segrave. Samuel Oldershaw at Cole-Orton.
Which Representation being read, they were all called into the House again,
the Speaker telling them; that, upon due consideration thereof, they found in
it a Gospel Spirit, of Meekness, Sincerity and Holiness; and that they had also
considered the Seasonableness of it; and that it expressed, not only on outward
Letter, but an inward Spirit, etc. and so gave them the Thanks of the House.

Soon after this the House appointed a Committee to prepare something in order
to the settling of a Government: for the better support whereof they Established
the laying a Tax of one hundred thousand pounds by the month, besides Excise
and Customs, and the Sequestered Estates of new Delinquents. And, History of
Indep. part 4. p. 59.
that such persons as had been assessed to find Horse and Arms, by virtue of
the Act of Parliament, for settling the Militia; and had not brought in their
Horse and Arms; nor paid in lieu thereof, the sum of money appointed by the
said Act: that every such person and persons, should under the penalty in that
Act mentioned, pay after the rate of Ten pounds for an Horse and Arms, for such
number of Horses and Arms respectively, as they had been charged to find. And
that such person and persons, as had been assessed to find Arms for a
Foot-Souldier, and had not sent in the same, or money in lieu thereof, should
under the penalty in that Act mentioned, pay respectively, for every such
Foot-Arms, such sum of money, as the Commissioners should appoint; not
exceeding twenty five shillings for every such Foot-Arms.

So that it is plain, that money was it they only aimed at, though Horse and
Arms were the pretense.

But amidst these their devices for enriching themselves, Lamberts ambition
began to be suspected; which was no less than to set up himself, through the
interest he then had with the Soldiery (as his old friend Oliver had formerly
done.) Wherefore for prevention of this danger, they resolved to trust him no
longer, with any Command in the Army; but cunningly to withdraw him, that he
might be severed from the Soldiers: and to that end, sent a seeming courteous
invitation, to allure him back to London: of which he accepted, Ib. p. 61.
with as fair a show of Thanks. But this stratagem of the Rumpers succeeded
not: for soon after ensued a Remonstrance 5. October.
from the Army, directed thus,

To the Supreme Authority of these Nations, the Parliament of the Commonwealth
of England, the humble Petition and Proposals of the Officers, under the
Command of the Right Honorable the Lord Lambert, in the late Northern
Expedition.

Which Remonstrance did so much tend to the advantage of the Soldiery, and
asserting their unlimited power; as that the Rumpers forthwith declared, Ib. p.
63.
that to have any more General Officers in the Army, than were already settled
by Parliament, was needless, chargeable, and dangerous to the Commonwealth.

Thus, and in this manner, began the first rise of those differences, and
distractions, which at last so happily shattered these grand Hypocrites into
pieces.

But the Army Officers, having not sufficiently ripened their main design, were
then necessitated to dissemble it for a while: and therefore seeming to lay
aside their overbold proposals; represented to the Parliament, that they would
adhere to their Authority, in opposition to the Common Enemy; and that they
would not at all fail to stand by them, in the settlement of the Commonwealth,
against all disturbances whatsoever.

Which fair expressions did lull the Rumpers into such a seeming security, (the
City also feasting them, at a Thanksgiving Dinner, whereat the Officers of the
Army, were also present) that being totally void of any fear from those
dangers, so lately obvious, they fell upon Sequestring such new Delinquents, as
had at that time appeared in Sir George Booth's Rising: As also settled the
Excise; Revived the Assesment for the Army; neglecting no other means
imaginable for gaining the whole wealth of the Nation into their Ravenous
Clutches.

But the design of the Army, being shortly after ripened; the Officers, which
for a while had cunningly shadowed their purposes, under a plausible disguise,
began again to appear in their proper colors; and presented the House with
such another bold Address, as they had formerly done. Which so startled the
Rumpers, that they gravely declared; Ib. p. 64.
That every Member of the Army, as freemen of England had a right of
Petitioning the Parliament; but withal, thought fit to let them know, that the
Petitioners ought to be very careful, both in the manner, and in the matter of
what they desired, that the way of promoting, and presenting the same, may be
peaceable; and the thing Petitioned for, not tending to the distrubance of the
Commonwealth, nor to the dishonor of the Parliament. And that it was the duty
of Petitioners to submit their desires to the Parliament, and acquiesce in the
judgment thereof.

Nevertheless, doubting (as they might do very well) that the Soldiers, which
so often before, had made themselves Masters of the Parliament, would again
follow the example of Oliver, either in turning them out of Doors, or making
them Hackneys to their ambitious ends; being not ignorant, that, without money
those Swordmen could no way subsist; and that none was like to be so plausibly
raised, as by the name of a Parliament; to the end therefore, that they might
the more insensibly diminish their power, they passed an Act, Ib. p. 65. and 66.
That all Orders, Ordinances, and Acts made by any single Person, and his
Council, or both, or either of them, or otherwise; or by any Assembly, or
Convention, pretending to have Authority of Parliament, from and after the
nineteenth day of April 1653. and before the seventh of May 1659. and which had
not been, or should not be Enacted, Allowed or confirmed by that present
Parliament; should be and were thereby declared, deemed, taken, and adjudged to
be of no force and effect, from and after the said seventh day of May 1659. And
that no person or persons, should after the eleventh of October 1659. Assess,
Levy, Collect, Gather, or Receive any Custom, Impost, Excise, Assesment,
Contribution, Tax, Tallage, or any sum or sums of money, or other Imposition
whatsoever, upon the people of that Commonwealth, without their consent in
Parliament; or as by Law might have been done before the third of November
1640. And that every person offending contrary to that Act, should be, and was
thereby adjudged to be guilty of High Treason, and should forfeit and suffer as
in case of High Treason.

And thinking then, that their whole work was in effect done, they looked upon
themselves as men of such might; that they Voted the Commissions of Lambert,
Desborow, 12. October.
and some other eminent Magnifico's of the Army, null and void; and that they
and every of them should be discharged from their respective Military
employments: Likewise, that the Army should be governed by seven Commissioners
(the most confiding men, you may be sure) viz. Lieutenant General Fleetwood,
Lieutenant General Ludlow, General Monk, Sir Arthur Haselrigg Baronet, Golonel
Valentine Walton, Colonel Herbert Morley, and Colonel Robert Overton, or any
three or more of them, who were to give notice unto Lambert, and the rest, that
they were each of them discharged of their respective Military employments.

Which was no sooner made known to those Swordmen; than that General Lambert
and his party prepared for their defense: on the other side, the Commissioners
for the Rumpers, issuing out Orders suitable to the exigency of their affairs.
Of which Lambert and his followers being made aware, they drew down to
Westminster in an Hostile equipage; where they possessed themselves of the
Palace-Yard, and all avenues leading thereto; 12. October.
having beforehand given out, that they found it absolutely necessaray to
Dissolve the Parliament, for the good of the Nation.

But for the support of that Convention, commonly called the Rump, another part
of the Army, were no less earnest and active; and in opposition to Lambert did
13. October.
at the same time, march thither also; placing themselves in King's-street, and
other parts about Westminster. All which was done betimes in the morning; so
that when Lenthal the Speaker, came in his Coach, according to the usual time,
to sit in the House, though he found his way clear enough through the Soldiers
in King Street, when he came to the Palace-Yard he saw it otherwise, The
Rumpers Excluded.
and therefore made his return.

It was then thought by some, that the Soldiers thus met, would not have
departed so tamely: But Lambert having his ends by shutting out the Rumpers,
both parties retreated quietly, closing again in a seeming friendly manner.

But that there might not be wanting, some shadow of a Civil Power, did wisely
agree 26. October. Ib, p. 69.
upon a Committee of Safety, viz.

General Lambert. Major General Desborow. Bulstrode Whitlock. Colonel Edward
Ludlow. Colonel Sydenham. Major Saloway. Mr. Strickland. Colonel Berrey. Mr.
Lawrence. Sir James Harrington. Alderman Ireton. Sir Archibald Iohnston, Lord
Wareston. Alderman Tichburne. Mr. Henry Brandreth. Mr. Thompson. Colonel
Hewson. Colonel Clarke, Colonel Lilburne. Colonel Bench. Cornelius Holland.
Giving them Authority to call Delinquents to account; to suppress all
Insurrections; to treat with Foreign States and Princes; top raise the Militia
in the several Counties; and to dispose of all places of Trust, with a farther
large and unlimited power; setting also forth a Declaration 27. October. Ib. p.
71.
in Print; entitled A Declaration of the General Council of the Officers of
the Army: whereby they published, that they had lodged the Civil and executive
Power of Government in the Committee of Safety, whom they had obliged to
prepare such a form of Government, as might best suit with a free State,
without a single Person, Kingship, or House of Peers.

CHAP. XLII.
WHerewith whilst they were in hand, came a Letter out of Scotland from General
Monk; importing that himself, and some of the Officers there with him, were
much dissatisfied with their transactions here: and that he had not only
secured diverse strong Holds in that Kingdom, but committed to safe custody
those of his Officers, who were Dissenters from him therein; as also Possessed
himself of the Garrison of Narwocl. Which unexpected Alarm, did not a little
disturb them. Yet on they must, or be overwhelmed with Confusion. They
therefore soon ordered that their Forces in the North, together with some other
Regiments from the Southern-parts of this Realm, should forthwith march to the
Borders of Scotland; and in the mean time sent Colonel Cobbet to Treat with
General Monk; expecting that he by fair words might cajole him.

But Monk then discerning an hopeful way open, to do that which his heart had
long desired to accomplish, secured Cobbert from stirring abroad; being well
aware, that by taking his Liberty, he might either have endangered the
corrupting of his men; or carry back Intelligence of their whole strength and
posture; and thereupon modeled his Army suitable to his own mind; publicly
declaring; That he would assert the Authority of Parliament against all
violence whatsoever.

Which News arriving with the Committee of Safety; presuming that they might
please Monk with the Establishing of a free State, though they disowned the
Parliament for whom he had declared, they culled out seven of their ablest
contrivers, to prepare a Form of Government, to be set up, throughout all the
three Kingdoms, in the Nature of a Commonwealth, or Free State; and sent away
two Colonels, Whalley and Goffe; with Carryl and Barker (two of their
Assembly-men) to Treat with him thereon, for avoiding farther difference; the
Officers of the Army at London, seconding the same with Letters into Scotland;
urging most earnestly a necessity of their Brotherly union.

Monk therefore foreseeing, that delays would destroy them; their Forces not
being able to subsist long without money, ordered Colonel Talbot and Dr.
Clarges (who had been also sent from England to him) to advertise General
Fleetwood, that himself and his Officers had nominated Colonel Wilkes,
Lieutenant Colonel Clobury, and Major Knight, to repair speedily to London; and
to Treat with the like number of Officers there, in order to the concluding of
a firm and steadfast aimity betwixt them: and for the furtherance thereof sent
Letters from himself to that purpose; with promise that his Forces should not
advance any farther.

But the Committee of Safety, not knowing how to trust him, issued out sundry
Commissions, for settling the Militia; which upon fit occasion was to be ready
in a moment. Whereof General Monk, being soon advertised, and that Lambert was
on his march Northwards with thirteen thousand stout men: he dispatcheth away
those his three Messengers, to Treat for a speedy Peace. Which Messengers being
accordingly come 12. Nov. Ib. p. 73. and 74.
to London, the Treaty soon began, and ere long concluded 14. Nov.
in these ensuing Articles; viz.

1. That the pretended Title of Charles Stuart, or any other claiming from that
Family, should be utterly renounced.

2. That the Government of these Nations, should be by a FreeState, or
Commonwealth, and not by a single Person, King, or House of Lords.

3. Thirdly, That a Godly and Learned Ministry should be maintained and
encouraged.

4. That the Universities should be Reformed, and Countenanced, so as that they
might become Nurseries of Piety and Learning.

5. That the Officers and Soldiers, and other persons, on either side, should
be indempnified for what was past, touching their late differences, and all
unkindness betwixt them, buried in perpetual oblivion.

6. That the Officers, who were made Prisoners in Scotland should be forthwith
set at liberty.

7. And that the Armies should be presently disposed of into Quarters: as also
a Committee of nineteen Constituted, whereof nine to make a Quorum, which
should consider of qualifications for succeeding Parliaments.

Which Articles, so by them agreed on, being returned to General Monk. who had
reserved to himself the power of ratifying whatever was to be Treated on; and
that the same should not be of force, till confirmed under his Seal; he
forthwith commanded the coming back of the Commissioners: and to show his
dislike of what they had done, clapped up Colonel Wilkes into Custody, for
exceeding his bounds; and immediately declaring the Treaty to be void, advanced
toward England, having made these following Proposals Ib. p. 76.
to the Nobility and Gentry of Scotland.

First, That they would, during his absence (which would not be long) preserve
and secure the Peace of that Nation. Secondly, That they would supply him with
some men for his undertaking (which he engaged upon his honor, should be to
their satisfaction) and if any troubles should arise, to assist him in the
suppressing thereof. Thirdly, That they would advance and raise what money they
could, beforehand.

Unto which propositions, the Earl of Gleucarne (Chairman of the Assembly)
returned these modest answers. Ib. p. 77.


First, That they could not engage to preserve the Peace of the Country in his
absence, wanting Arms, and so in no condition to do it; but they should, with
all faithfulness (notwithstanding) endeavor it. To the second, that they were
incapable to answer his desires, for the r^^ons aforesaid: neither did they
think it prudent for them to engage in a war; which should it prove unsuccesful
on their part, would be a ruin to them: or, if succesful, they did not
understand, that it would be advantageous, in any measure. Thirdly, That they
were content to levy moneys, and to advance a years Tax beforehand.

With which answer from that Earl, General Monk being well satisfied, he gave
them power, Ib. p. 78.
forthwith to Arm themselves; and until all things were in better readiness,
delaying his march Southwards, made some seeming overtures, to the Committee of
Safety, for a second Treaty.

Whereunto the Committee replied; That they had already transmitted part of a
form of Government, to be Established in these Nations, unto a certain Committee
of the Officers in the Army, by them to be considered. Which Officers, having
thereupon met, had gone through the most of it, with great satisfaction. And
that they were very desirous to have such a Government, as might best preserve
the Liherties of the people, and secure the Cause, wherein they had contended,
as well against Charles Stuart, as any other, that might disturb the Public
Peace; hoping in time, to make it appear, that their Enemies were liars, in
rendering them to the people, to be merely Self-Seekers. And concluding said,
they hoped that the Faith of Gods People, would hold out, and not make have:
and that good men would help them in their Prayers, that God the Lord would
bring forth Righteousness and Truth; and discover and bring to naught the
secret contrivances of all their Adversaries.

About this time Petitions being in hand, Petitions from all parts for a new
and free Parliament.
in sundry parts of the Nation, all tending to the desire of a New and Free
Parliament, gave such high offense unto the Committee of Safety, that they
issued out a solemn Proclamation ult. Nov.
against them, calling them dangerous Papers, and prohibiting their
Subscriptions: also requiring, if offered, to suppress them; causing likewise
the endeavourers of such Subscriptions to be apprehended, as disturbers and
Enemies to Peace. Which distastful restraint caused the peoples greater
earnestness; especially the Londoners, whereupon Colonel Hewson was sent 5. Dec.
with some forces into the City, to awe them: but with little effect, the
Soldiers in all places, being scorned and affornted. Whereat Hewson became so
much enraged, that he murdered some of the Citizens in the streets.

But that which touched them in point of danger more nearly, was the revolt 4.
Dec.
of Portsmouth, whereof Sir Arthur Haselrigg, Colonel Walton, and Herbert
Morley, with the consent of Whetham the Governor, had then possessed themselves:
The news whereof coming to the Ears of the Committee of Safety, they speedily
sent both Horse and Foot, to reduce it. But the people in general, being
impatient till a readmission of the Rump, or to have something else bearing the
name of a Parliament, necessitated the Committee of Safety to declare 10. Dec.
Ib. p. 80.
that a Parliament should be called, and appointed to sit down before^ February
next ensuing: and, that the Parliament, so to be called, should be according to
such qualifications, as then were, or should be agreed upon, and might best
secure the just Rights, Liberties, and Privileges of the people. Taking care,
that when met, there should be no alteration of these Fundamentals; viz. Ib. p.
81.


1. That no Kingship should be excercised in these Nations.

2. That no single person should exercise the Office of chief Magistrate
therein.

3. That an Army should be continued and maintained; and so conducted, that it
might secure the Peace of these Nations: and not be disbanded, nor the Conduct
thereof altered but by consent of the Conservators appointed.

4. That no imposition might be upon the Consciences of them that feared God.

5. That there should be no House of Peers.

6. That the Legislative and Executive power should be distinct, and not in the
same hands.

7. That the Assemblies of Parliament, should be Elected by the people of the
Commonwealth duly qualified.

But to nip these in the bud, came a Declaration from Vice Admiral Lawson, and
his fellows, in the Navy; giving several Reasons of a necessity, for the Old
Long Parliament to sit again. And to second this, came News, that those Forces,
which they had sent to reduce Portsmouth, had forsaken their Commanders, and
were gone in to the Revolters.

Nor were the generality of the people, about that time, less active every
where: some laboring earnestly, that the Rump might sit again: others for
joining all the Secluded Members to them. But the greatest part, and specially
the most sober men, were in their desires wholly for a Full and Free
Parliament; yet could not be heard: for the Rump through the power of the
Soldiery, The Rump readmitted.
was readmitted, 24. December.
and solemnly owned by them, as the Supreme Authority, both here, and in
Ireland. Whereupon, beginning to sit, 26. December.
they disposed of the Tower of London to the custody of Sir Anthony-Ashley
Couper, Mr. Weever and Mr. Berners; and recalled Lambert from his Expedition
against General Monk; (most of whose men were by that time gone in to Monk;
or for want of pay very much dispersed.) And well considering the
tumultuousness of the people, in many parts, and insolency of the Soldiers,
wheresoever they came, they hastened up General Monk, as their chief shelter.
Who having so prudently secured Scotland, General Monk hastened from Scotland.
and dealt privately with Sir Charles Coot, to take the like care of Ireland,
advanced forwards, as fast as he could.

But no sooner were the Rumpers thus got into the House, than that some old
Secluded Members, required, also admittance. Which put them upon this following
Vote; 27. December. Ib. p. 83.
That upon the fifth of January ensuing, the House would take into
consideration, the case of all absent Members; as also how to supply the vacant
places, in order to the filling it up. And that in the mean time it should be
referred to a Committee, to consider of all proceedings, and all Orders and
Cases, touching absent Members, and make their Report thereof, at the same time.

Which Vote did not prove so satisfactory as they expected: for the City being
discontented, made preparations for a Posture of Defense: and in the Country
the Cashiered-Officers, and the depressed Nobility and Gentry courted General
Monk, all along as he marched, incessantly crying out for a Full and Free
Parliament. Whose answer, in substance, was no more than this; viz. that he
would use his best endeavors to persuade unto Reason and Justice; wishing all
persons to acquiesce, in what should be the issue.

Most certain it is, that though the Rump had fair hopes of Monk's firmness
unto them; yet were they not without their jeal^^sies of him: and therefore,
under color of Congrat^^^ing his coming into England, they sent Thomas Scot,
and Luke Robinson, to sound him more nearly. But he deported himself with so
much reservedness and gravity, that they little discerned the real purposes of
his Heart. And when the City of London sent their Sword Bearer to Court him; he
only said; that he was for the Parliament: yet assured them, that when he came
thither, he would satisfy their desires, and the hopes they had of him.
Promising nothing else; that that he would first see all force removed from the
Parliament. Secondly, That the House should be filled: and lastly, That there
should be good provision for future Parliaments. So keeping on a soft pace, he
came at length to St. Albans.

Whatever apprehensions and fancies others then had of his purpose, it is not
to be doubted, but that the Rumpers made all Cocksure for themselves; not only
in the Legislative, but Executive power; and for disposing all places of
Benefit and Trust, so that their sitting without limit, might be perpetuated:
in order thereto, passing this Vote; 5. Ianuar. Ib. p. 85.
viz. Resolved touching absent Members, that the Parliament does adjudg and
declare, that the Members, who stand discharged from Voting or Sitting in year
1648. and 1649. do stand duly discharged by judgment of Parliament, from
sitting as Members of this Parliament, during this Parliament; and that Writs
do issue forth, for electing of new Members in their places.

Appointing that the Oath 2. Ianuar. Oath for abjuring the King taken by
Members of Parliament.
for abjuring the King, and the whole Line of King James, should be taken by
every Member, thenceforth sitting in Parliament: and thereupon grew so
insolent, that they imprisoned diverse persons, for Petitioning to have a Free
Parliament. Which occasioned General Monk to come the sooner to London; and to
take up his Lodging 3. Februar.
at White Hall.

Where having rested about two or three days, he attended the House according
to Order; and modestly giving them an account of his whole undertakings, added;
Ib. p. 86. and 87.
That he deserved not the Thanks, which the House had Ib. p. 86. and 87.
then given him, having done no more than his duty therein: but wished them
rather to praise God for his mercy, desiring them to satisfy the expectations
of the people, in the Establishment of their Laws, Liberties, and Properties:
God having restored them, not so much as that they should seek their own, as
the Public Good. Desiring them in particular, to take away the jealousies men
had of their perpetuity, by putting a period to that their own Session, and
providing orderly for future Parliaments. Wishing them to use the Nobility and
Gentry civilly: and intimating, that it would be their wisdom rather to enlarge
than contract any whit of their Interest. And farther told them, that the fewer
qualifications they did put upon succeeding Parliaments, it would be the
better. Desiring them to be tender in imposing new Oaths ( for he had heard of
the Oath of Abjuration) alleging, that there was more reason to repent of
those already taken, than to take farther new ones. And so warning them to
beware of Cavaliers and Fanatics; commending Scotland to their care, and
assuring them of Ireland, concluded, with some intimation of his thoughts for a
Free State.

Having thus taken his leave of the House, he withdrew to his place in the
Council of State. Where the first thing he found under consideration, was; that
the Citizens of London, being grown somewhat unruly, had stiffly resolved to own
no power, but of a Full and Free Parliament (encouraged thereto, by sundry
Petitions, to that purpose, which they had seen from several Counties) refusing
to pay Taxes, but by consent of such a Parliament. Which put the Rumpers upon
this desperate exigent; viz. either to reduce them to obedience by a strong
hand, or themselves to be reputed but the shadow of Authority.

In order whereunto, they commanded General Monk, to march thither with his
Forces; and to compel them to pay the Assesments. Whereupon he advanced with
speed to Guild Hall, and there made his demand of what the Parliament had
required. Which much dashing the hopes, that the Citizens had otherwise of him,
they modestly answered; that in Magna Charta, confirmed by the Petition of
Right, and ratified by that present Parliament, the day before their forcible
Dissolution; they were to pay no Taxes, but by their consent in Parliament,
which at that present they had not. Yet to avoid the giving him any just
offense, desired farther time to consider thereof.

Which, though the General readily granted; yet he wrote to the House for their
farther direction. Whereupon answer was forthwith returned; that he should in
the first place imprison Colonel Bromefield, Alderman Bludworth, Lieutenant
Colonel Iackson, Major Cox, Colonel Vincent, etc. (some of which number had
attended him from the City, but a little before.) And secondly, that he should
remove their Chains, dig up their Posts, and break down their Gates. 9. Febru.
Which harsh and rough service did at first not a little startle him;
considering it was done, partly to make trial of his patient obedience to them:
and partly to occasion a certain enmity betwixt him and the City, and then to
cast him off, by diminishing his power, as he very well discerned. But,
foreseeing the event, he submitted thereto; which was to enrage the Citizens
thoroughly against the Rump; and that upon the expiring 10. Febru.
of his Commission the next day after; his power would be diminished by the
conjunction of six others with him in equal Command.

Which, being made known by him to his Officers, who looked for a better reward
for their service; concluding that the Rump would shortly lay them aside also,
and perpetuate their own sitting. Having likewise made so sure an experiment of
the Cities temper, which he then knew was positive for their Liberties and
Rights: and concluding thereupon, that he might safely put his confidence in
them; after private discourse had with some of the chief Citizens; he first
wrote his Letters to the Rumpers, wishing them, at last to put a period to
their siting, and make some certain provision for future Parliaments. And
thereupon marching with his Forces into the City, immediately declared for a
Full and Free Parliament. Which raised the hearts of all people so much, that
they expressed their great joy by Bells, Bonefires, and all other testimonies
of joy imaginable.

And having waited a while, for a return to his Letter, and receiving no manner
of Answer thereunto, he procured a Conference with some of the old Secluded
Members. Finding also, that the settlement proposed by the Rumpers was too weak
and slender, to repair the breaches in Government, he resolved to withdraw all
force from the House, and to admit those to sit there, whose tempers were more
moderate; and therefore sending for the Secluded Members to meet him at
white hall, 20. Febr.
he represented unto them, what he then thought best to be done, viz. The
meeting of a Full and Free Parliament; saying that the House should be open
unto them, and wishing them all happy success therein.

Which old Members being by this means met 21. Febr. Ib. p. 93, 94.
together again; they began where they broke off in December. 1648. ratisfying
that Vote then made; The secluded Members readmitted.
viz. That the Concessions of the late King, were a sufficient ground to
proceed on, for settling the Peace of the Kingdom. Whereupon most men took
courage, in hope of an happy deliverance from that miserable slavery, they had
so long endured: and in the next place Voted Monk to be Lord General of all
the Forces in England, Scotland and Ireland. Genesis Monk voted Lord General.
By virtue whereof he soon, with much prudence, disarmed the Fanatics; the
Parliament, in the mean time taking seasonable care to secure the Peace of the
Nation, by two wholesome Acts: the one for the Militia, Anno 1660.
whereby Gentlemen of worth and quality, had opportunity to put themselves in
Arms: The other, by raising money, for the support of such Forces, as might be
necessarily employed for the Public safety. And in order to an happy
Establishing of the Government upon the old Foundation, did ordain, 26. Mar.
Ib. p. 95.
that Writs should issue out, for the meeting of a Full and Free Parliament,
upon the 25. of April, then next following: In the mean time constituting a
Council of State of moderate men; The Long Parliament dissolved.
and so at last put a period to that old and unhappy Convention.

But, notwithstanding all this, the danger was not totally over: for the
Council of State, discerning no little averseness in some Officers of the Army,
and some other turbulent Spirits, to this hopeful settlement; and thereupon
requiring an Engagement from them, of their peaceable demeanor, were
necessitated to imprison some of the most obstinate refusers; amongst which
Lambert was one, and not the least; who finding the Fanatics most eager for
another push, got 11. Apr.
out of Prison, and Headed that Party. Which through the great vigilance of the
General, being seasonably routed 22. Apr.
near Daventre, in Northamptonshire, the chief of them were committed to
several Prisons.

The Parliament, therefore, meeting 1. May.
upon the 25. of April, The new Parliament met 25. Apr.
Sir John Greenvile presented to both Houses, a Declaration from the King (then
at Breda) with certain Letters, bearing date April 4. Which, with great joy,
being openly Read, they presently Voted 3. May.
His Majesty's speedy return to His people; the whole Navy also, soon after,
submitting 8. May.
to His obedience. So that, within very few days following, he was solemnly
Proclaimed, Charles the Second Proclaimed.
in the Cities of London and Westminster; and his Arms set up in all public
places (those formerly erected for the CommonWealth and Oliver, being pulled 9.
May.
down and defaced.) And upon May 25. next following, landed 25. May. He Landed
at Dover.
at Dover. Whence attended by most of the Loyal Nobility and Gentry of this
Realm, he came 29. May. He came into London.
to London upon the 29th. of that Month (being the Anniversary of his Birth)
where, with stately Arches of Triumph, costly Pageants, Bells, various sorts of
excellent Music, Bonefires, and joy inexpressible, he was received; and
proceeded in State, through that great City, to his Royal Palace at White Hall:
the chief and happy Instrument of this, His Majesty's most miraculous
Restoration, without bloodshed, being the abovementioned Colonel George
Monk, a Devonshire Gentleman of an Ancient and Worthy Family (lineally
descended from King Edward the IV, by the Lady Frances, Daughter and Coheir to
Arthur Plantagenet, Vicount Lisle, his Natural Son.) Who having put himself in
Arms for the King, at the Commencement of this grand defection; and so
continuing till, by a second Invasion of the Scots, the Rebels prevailed in
sundry parts, by taking diverse Garrisons, and many of His Majesty's Loyal
Subjects Prisoners, amongst which, it was his hap to be one; he thought it
better to gain his Liberty, by receiving entertainment in their Army, until he
could discern a proper opportunity to do His Majesty service than by so
suffering. Which at last, with no less Prudence than Courage, he most
faithfully performed (as has been observed) and for which he has since that
time been deservedly remunerated, not only with several great and honorable
Titles; (viz. Baron Monk of Powtheridge, Earl of Torington, Duke of Albemarle,
and Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter:) as also made Captain General
of all his Forces, Horse and Foot, throughout his whole Dominions; but with
ample Possessions for the better support of those high Dignities.

A SHORT VIEW OF THE LATE TROUBLES IN ENGLAND.
CHAP. XLIII.
HAving now finished this Narrative, Anno 1641.
with as much brevity as I well could do: whereby it has been fully made
evident, by what Artifices this seeming-Godly Generation did at first get power
into their cruel hands; that is to say, their many specious Declarations, and
solemn promises, for the Defense of the Protestant Religion; the Laws of the
Land; the Liberties of the Subject, and Privileges of Parliament. I shall now
crave leave to make some short Observations thereon; and give most ample
instances of their contrary Actings in every of these; even in those very
times, in which their Dagon of Presbytery was visibly Triumphant. Their Actings
against the Protestant Religion.
And first as to the Protestant Religion.

After they had, under pretense of great danger by a Jesuitical-party, of
destroying the Protestant Religion, framed a protestation 3. May.
for preserving the same, as it was expressed in the Doctrine and Discipline of
the Church of England. Which protestation (the farther to satisfy the People of
their own integrity) was solemnly taken by all the Members, and Ordered 4. May.
to be Printed, and sent down into the several Counties: within few days after,
they made an Explanation 12. May.
thereof; viz. That by the true reformed Protestant Religion, was meant so far
as it was opposite to Popery: and that the said words were not to be extended
to the maintenance of any Form, Discipline, or Government; nor of any Rules, or
Ceremonies of the said Church of England. And, having given themselves such
Latitude, by that their After-explanation ( viz. not to desend the Protestant
Religion, as it stood established by Law, and was expressed in the XXXIX Articles,
but as it was repugnant to Popery, and taught perhaps by all Brownists,
Anabaptists, Familists and other Sectaries, which made way for all that brood
to join with them.) They then Ordered 21. May.
that no Minister should take any Oath at his Induction, but what should be
warranted by Scripture. And soon after fell into debate 25. May.
for the Extirpation of Episcopacie. Then Ordered, 3. May.
that no Service should be Read, nor Psalm sung, in going p^ocession.

Next Voted, 11. May.
that the Government of the Church of England by Archbishops, Bishops, etc. had
been found by long experience, to be a great impediment to the perfect
reformation, and growth of Religion, and very prejudical to the civil
Government of this Kingdom. As also that 15. July.
Archiepiscopal and Episcopal Jurisdiction should be exercised by themselves:
And brought in a Bill, for abolishing the Cross in Baptism, Surpliss, Bowing at
the name of Jesus, standing up at the Gospel, etc. Nevertheless, to set up
Lectures. Likewise, that 3c. July.
whosoever should refuse to take the Protestation, should be held unfit to bear
Office in the Church or Commonwealth; conceiving it to be a true testimony (
for that was their expression) to distinguish the Ephramites, from the
Gileadites.

And within four days after, Voted 3. August.
Thirteen Bishops Delinquents, with desire that they might be impeached, as
Authors of Sedition, for having a hand in the later Canons.

What private Conferences they had, about this time, in order to the
Extirpation of Episcopacy (whereby, for want of Government in the Church, they
might the sooner bring all to confusion) take their own Testimony. Sacred
Synodical Decretal, etc. for the apprehension of young Martin Mar Priest. p. 12.
At an assembly of about an hundred Priests, at Mr. Calamie's a London Priest,
about a Petition against the Bishops; it being insisted on, that Heresies would
farther spread, if Bishops were put down, the Priests thereupon sent for Mr.
Green and Mr. Spenser, of the separate Congregations, to desire them, for a
time, they would suspend their open meetings, and be more private in their
practice; A Felt-maker.
in regard that their public meeting was an obstacle to the suppression of
the Bishops; but afterward they might have free liberty of their practice.
The words were uttered by Mr. Calamine who was afterward to violent against
their toleration.

And to hasten this universal Confusion, they appointed 8. Sept.
the pulling down of Rayles about Communion Tables, and the removing of such
Tables: giving liberty by a special Order to the Inhabitants any where,
throughout the Kingdom, to erect Lectures; whereby Mechanics and
Illiterate-men were set up, to the infinite scandal of Religion, and increase
of Schism.

And, when the House of Lords, discerning these licentious and irreverent
courses, made a public Order, 9. Sep.
enjoying the due observation of the Book of Common Prayer in all Churches,
without alteration; the House of Commons, by means of the prevalent Party
therein, in opposition thereto, and extenuation thereof, declared, that but
Eleven of the Lords assented to that Order; and that Nine refused, ordering 28.
Sept.
that their Declaration therein, should be dispersed and Read, throughout all
the Churches in England.

It can hardly be imagined what strange effects these their practices in the
House of Commons, did in a short time produce; one of their own party then
acknowledging in Print: Martins Echo. p. 6. Where the Presbyterian is set
forth, complaining against the Independent in a Sermon of D Burges, November 5.
1641. p. 60.
That all Government, and Discipline of the Church was laid in her Grave; and
all the putredinous Vermin of bold Schismatics and frantic Sectaries, glory
in her Ashes, making the fall thereof their own rising, to mount the Pulpits,
etc.

And another of them crying out, in these words Ephraim Paget Heresig. p. 41.
-- Alas your poor Church is oppressed, and who lays hand to help; the Plague
of heresy is amongst you; and you have no power to keep the sick from the
whole. The wolves that were wont to lie in the woods are come into your
Sheepfold, and roar in the Holy Congregation. O thou Shepherd of Israel, why
have thou broken down the Hedge of this thy Vineyard, which thy right hand has
planted: the Boar of the wood, and the Wilde-beast of the forest do devour.

Whereupon many good People beginning to whisper their Fears of that which
shortly after happened; these subtle Foxes, to drive their great work with the
less suspicion, in their grand Remonstrance 15. December. Exact. Coll. p. 19.
of the 15th of December, cried out against certain Malignants (as they termed
them) who had infused into the People, that they meant to abolish all
Church Government, and leave every Man to his own fancy for the Service and
Worship of God; absolving them of that obedience, which they owe, under God,
unto His Majesty; acknowledging him to be entrusted with the Eclesiastical Law,
as well as with the Temporal, to Regulate all the Members of the Church of
England, by such Rules of Order and Discipline as are established by
Parliament. And in the same Remonstrance declared, That it was far from their
purpose, or desire, to let loose the golden Reins of Discipline and Government
in the Church, and leave private Persons, or particular Congregations, to take
up what form of Divine-service they pleased; holding it requisite, that there
should be, through the whole Realm, a conformity to that Order, which the Law
enjoins.

But to the end they might bring the work to pass by others; in which they did
not then think fit to show themselves openly (as their Brethren of Scotland had
done) the Tumultuous rabble of Sectaries were (by their contrivance) brought
28. Dec.
to Westminster, and there violently assaulted the great Church, threatening to
pull down the Organs, and Popish Relics; for so they called those stately
Monuments of the Kings and others.

And, Anno 1642.
after His Majesty was driven from London, and that they had got his Navy,
Forts, Magazine, etc. into their hands; they ordered, 9. April. Exact. Coll. p.
135.
that an Assembly of Divines should meet, with whom they might consult, for
settling of the Church Government and Liturgy. Shortly after which a Petition
(pretended to have been brought from Cornwall) was

Read 22. April
in the House of Commons; amongst other things desiring, that the Ceremonies
and Service of the Church might be abolished.

But, notwithstanding all this, left any jealousy of their intentions should so
far prevail, as to stagger the People (whom they had hitherto deluded with
their specious pretenses) especially being then about to raise their Rebellious
Forces; they declared, 26. July.
That their prepararations of Arms was for security of Religion, the safety of
His Majesty's Person, etc.

And having thus formed an Army, the first work wherewith they began, was to
The Cathedral of Canterbury Defaced by Col. Edwyn Sandys. 26. August.
Deface the most Ancient and Chief Cathedral of this Kingdom.

Soon after which, some of their Forces, in their first march from London
toward Worcester, broke open the Church at A^ton, (four miles from London)
defaced whatsoever was decent therein; tore the Bible and Book of
Common Prayer; sticking the leaves of them upon the walls with their Excrements.

And when their whole Army, under the Command of the Earl of Essex, came to 24.
Sept.
Worcester, the first thing they there did, was the Profanation of the
Cathedral; destroying the Organ; breaking in pieces diverse beautiful Windows,
wherein the Foundation of that Church was lively Historified with Painted
Glass, and barbarously Defacing diverse fair Monuments of the Dead. And as if
this were not enough, they brought their Horses into the body of the Church,
keeping fires and Courts of Guard therein, making the Quire and side-isles,
with the Font, the common places, wherein they did their easements of Nature.
Also, to make their wickedness the more complete, they rifled the Library, with
the Records and Evidences of the Church; tore in pieces the Bibles and
Service-books pertaining to the Quire; putting the Surplices and other
Vestments upon their Dragooners, who rode about the streets with them.

Which shameful outrages done by the Soldiers thus early, being much taken
notice of; and observation made of the liberty given to their seditious
Preachers, caused thereupon a general murmur by most People. To cast a mist,
therefore, before their Eyes for a while, the Members fitting at Westminster
published a Declaration, 30. Sept.
wherein they expressed, that though they had Voted the utter eradication of
Episcopacy; yet they intended not to extirpate the Liturgy and Common Prayer;
but so far to Regulate the same,
as might agree with the Truth of Gods word.

To which purpose, and that it might bear a fair semblance of Reformation, they
brought in a Bill 6. Oct.
for an Assembly of Divines; wherein they say; that the Parliament does not
intend wholly to abrogate the Book of Common Prayer and Liturgy.

But, See their Declaration 7. of Ian. 1642. aspe^sing His Majesty with
endeavoring to destroy the Protestant Religion.
notwithstanding all these fine shows, they gave daily Countenance to diverse
libellous Pamphlets; and to all such Schismatical Preachers, as endeavored to
deprave the same; commanding Dr. Duek, See their Declaration 20 of July 1643.
wherein they charge His Majesty with dissembled pretenses and protestations,
for maintaining the true reformed Protestant Religion. And that, without any
touch of Conscience, in defiance of God, he had raised an Army of Papists.
by an Order of the House (dated Aug. 3.) that he should not put by a Minister
from Institution and Induction, though he had scandalized the Liturgy of the
Church; calling the Book of Common Prayer a great Idol. After which it was not
long, e're they went on toward the suppressing thereof; shutting up the
Cathedral of St. Paul, in London, upon Sundays. Yet, that they might not be
suspected in their well-wishes to the Protestant Religion, they Voted, 16. Dec.
that it was the design of the King's Army, to destroy the Protestant Religion,
and to bring in Popery.

All which fair pretenses, and Votes were made by the Members at Westminster,
whilst their Forces in diverse parts went on with such horrid practices, as the
like has not been seen in this Realm, since the Pagan-Danes, upon their
Invasions, exercised their Heathenish Cruelties here; Sr. William Waller (their
Western-General, about this time) entering 16. Dec.
Winchester; where his Soldiers Committed the like barbarous outrages, in that
Cathedral as was done by the E. of Essex's Men at Worcester; tearing likewise
in pieces those Chests of Lead, wherein were enshrined the Bones of diverse
Saxon Kings, Queens, devout Bishops and Confessors: with which they broke in
pieces the Costly Historical Windows there. Besides this, they battered and
Defaced the Brazen Statua's of the King, and that of His Royal Father K. James
(which His Majesty, as a pledge of his Princely favor had given to that
Church) hack't and hewed the Crown on his Head, swearing that they would bring
him back to the Parliament. And, having so done, seized upon the Rich Hangings,
Cusheons, Pulpit-Clothes, and Communion-Plate: spoiling or carrying away
whatsoever else was of Ornament or worth. The like, for the most part, they did
soon 29. Dec.
after, in the Cathedral at Chichester.

Nor was there any place they came to, where they made not the like
devastation. At Sudeley, in Gloucestershire, (the Seat of the Ancient and Noble
Familes of the Lords Sudley and Chandos,) they broke 28. Jan.
down the Monuments; made the Body of the Church a Stable for their Horses, and
the Chancel their Slaughterhouse. To the Pulpit they fastened Pegs, on which
they hanged the Carcasses of Sheep. Of the Communion Table they made a Dresser
or Chopping-board to cut their Meat. Into the Vault, where lay the Bodies of
those Noble Persons, they cast the Guts and Garbage of the Sheep; leaving in
every Corner of the Church their own loathsome Excrements.

At Elvaston, in Derby-shire, (about this time) Sir John Gell's Soldiers
(after their Plunder of the Lady Stanhope's House) demolished a Costly
Monument, newly made for Sir John Stanhope; entered the Vault, wherein many of
his Ancestors lay Interred; and Triumphing over the Dead, thrust their Swords
into the Coffins.

About the beginning of March, another of their Armies entered Lichfield, under
the Conduct of the Lord Brook. Where the Soldiers (notwithstanding that Lord
lost his life in the Assaulting that Cathedral upon St. Chad's Day, to which
Saint it was Dedicated) exercised the like Barbarisms, as were done at
Worcester, in demolishing all the Monuments, pulling down the curious Carved
work; battering in pieces the Costly Windows; and destroying the Evidences and
Records belonging to that Church: which being done, they stabled their Horses
in the Body of it, kept Courts of Guard in the Cross-Ifles; broke up the
Pavement, poluted the Quire with their Excrements; every Day hunted a Cat with
Hounds throughout the Church, delighting themselves in the Echo from the
goodly Vaulted Roof: and to add to their wickedness, brought a Calf into it,
wrapped in Linen; carried it to the Font; Sprinkled it with water; and gave it a
Name in scorn and derision of that Holy Sacrament of Baptism. And when Prince
Rupert recovered that Church by force; Russel the Governor carried away the
Communion Plate, and Linen, with whatsoever else was of value.

About the same time also, the like spoil and profanation was done by Oliver
Cromwell and his followers in Lincoln -Minster: tearing up all that beautiful
Pavement in the upper part of the Quire; watering their Horses at the Font. And
at the same time pulled down two of the Parish-Churches of that Ancient City,
for the better opportunity of their Fortifications.

At Lestithiell Aug. 1644.
also in Cornwall, when the Earl of Essex was there with his Army, one of his
Soldiers brought a Horse into the Church, led him up to the Font; and made
another hold him, whilst he Sprinkled water on his Head, and said; I sign thee
with the sign of the Cross, in token thou shall not be ashamed to fight
against the Roundheads at London, with a deal more of such Balsphemous stuff;
blowing up that Church, with Gunpowder, at their departure.

I pass by the mention of Exeter, Peterborough, Salisbury, Gloucester, and
diverse other fair Cathedrals, besides diverse goodly Callegiate-Churches, with
many of the Chapels in the University of Combridge, which tasted of their
outrages, about that time; being so much Defaced, as that they will remain to
posterity for infamous badges of their barbarous impieties.

And that it may appear that their great Masters the Londoners, did very well
approve of these their doings; they did, by a public Act of Common Council,
Order the pulling down to the ground of that goodly Monument of Christianity,
the Cross in West-Chepe. Whereupon, to make the Fact the more noto^ious, it was
accordingly demolished 3. May.
in die Inventionis S. Crucis, with sound of Trumpets and noise of several
Instruments; as if they had obtained some notable Victory against the Enemies
of the Christian Faith. So that, if we may Credit Ingulphus, Ingulphi Hist. f.
493.^
one of our most Ancient Historiographers; and other Authentic Writers,
touching the Danish-outrages, toward the Christians in this Nation, about the
Year of Christ DCCCLX. who speaking of their Barbarisms at Medeshampsted (now
called Peterborough) says, Ex Epistola Aleuini Highbaldo Lindissarnensi
Episcopo.
-- Altaria omnia suffossa; Antiq. Brit. p. 66. and 67.
Monumenta omnia confracta; -- Vestrae Charitatis familiaritas me multum
letificare solebat: sed versa vice tribulationis calamitas (licet absentens) me
contristuit; quod pagani contaminaverunt Sanctuaria Dei, and fuderunt sanguinem
Sanctorum in circuitu Altaris; Calcaverunt corpora Sanctorum in Templo quasi
sterquiliniuni in platea, etc. Ecce loca sancta a paganis vastatae, Altaria
perjuriis faedata; Monasteria adulteriis violata; Terra sanguine Dominorum and
principum maculata, etc.
Sanctorum Librorum Bibliothecae combusta, etc. And at Crouland, -- Omnia
Sanctorum sepulchra conftracta, and Monumenta omnia, sacraque volumina sua, cum
corporibus Sanctorum combusta, inestimabili dolor omnes consternati sunt;
planctusque and pleatus diutissime suctus est; these wicked Men have come
nothing short of the Example.

But to these pure Reformers, Barnes and Stables are of equal esteem with
Churches and Holy-Oratories; and a Ditch or a Dunghill thought as fit for
Purial, as any Sepulcher, or other place Consecrated for that purpose, for
Testimony whereof, take Sir William Waller's Lieutenant General's word: who,
having received a Message from Sir John Boys, Governor of Dunnington-Castle
for His Majesty; whereby it was signified to him, that the number of the Rebels
Bodies, which were slain in the assault of that Castle, were so many, that he
could not give them Christian-Burial; and therefore out of a Charitable Respect
tendered liberty to take them off, and do it elsewhere; returned answer, 31.
July. 1644.
in these words -- That he conceived no Holiness to be in any place, or Burial;
and that all Earth was fit for that use.

Against which Hethenish Principle, I shall tell you what their own Mr. William
Prynne has said, in his Book, p. 248. and 249.
Entitled, The Antipatby of English Lordly-prelacy. Wherein complaining of
Pandulphus Bishop of Norwich, who persuaded K. John ( as he says) to submit
himself to Stephen Langton Archbishop of Canterbury, and others that had
interdicted the Realm, he cries in these very words -- Let me inform you, that
during the time of this Interdict, all Ecclesiastical Sacraments ceased in
England, except Confession and the Viaticum, in extreme necessity, and the
Baptism of Infants; so as the Bodies of Dead-men, were carried out of Towns
and Villages, and Buried like Dogs in Highways and Ditches, without Prayers,
and the Ministry of Priests. Whereby it is plain, in Mr. Prynns opinion, that
Burial without Prayers, and the Ministry of Priests, is like the Burial of
Dogs. And therefore what Burial this of Sir William Waller's Lieutenant
General, or that which the new Directory, lately established 3. Jan. 1644.
by Ordinance of Parliament ( as they call it) directs, is like, whereat New
Directory. p* 73
no Ceremony shall be used, or any Prayers, or Reading, I leave to any
indifferent judgment.

But to return to our precious Reformers, who were so hardened by the daily
exercise of new outrages; that the Members at Westminster at length, for their
credit, though fit to have a total devastation of whatsoever was comely in the
Church, or decent for the service of God: and this to be done by an Ordinance
for abolishing of superstition, ( for that was the Title of it) viz. that all
representations or sculptures in any Cathedral, Collegiate, or ParishChurch, or
Chapel, or any other place within this Kingdom, shall be defaced, and utterly
demolished: and that all Organs; the frames or cases wherein they stand in all
Churches, and Chapels, shall be utterly defaced: And that the Chancel-ground
of every Church, or Chapel, raised for any Communion Table to stand on, shall
be levelled with the ground: And that no Surplisses, Hoods, or other
superstitious Vestments, shall be any more used within the Realm, etc.

In accomplishment of which Ordinance, Sir Robert Harley (who sat in the chair
of their Committee for Reformation) pulled down June 1644
that curious and Rich Sereen of Copper gilt, belonging to that incomparable
M^nument of K. Henry the Seventh, at Westminster, and sold it to Brasiers and
Mettal-men: entered the King's Chapel at White Hall, dashed in pieces the
Windows, broke down the Communion Table, pulled up the Rails, etc.

And to prevent the future cost on God's House; about that time, six thousand
pounds which had been Collected for the Rebuilding of St. Andrews Church in
Holborn, was seized on by these great Reformers: and four hundred pounds taken
out of the Hospital at Guilford in Surrey (which was the whole stock of their
Treasure) and employed to promote the Rebellion.

After all which to ingratiate themselves with their Brethren the Scots, they
entered into a most strict combination, which they called the National League
and Covenant, devised, and sent from Edenborough (though absolutely repugnant
to their own Declarations 16. Dec. 1641.
and Votes) 30. Sept. 6. Oct. 1642.
to extirpate and overthrow the Religion, and Discipline by Law established in
the Church of England which was done 25. Sep. 1643.
with the greatest formality and outward show of sanctity, that could be
devised, by the Members at Westminster, in the Church of St Margaret at
Westminster that is to say, with groaning, sighing, singing of Psalms, etc. Mr.
White of Dorchester, Mr. Nigh, Alexander Henderson, and others of that seditious
Tribe, then exercising their gifts, in extemporary Prayers, and Preaching.

And, that there might be nothing wanting, to make odious the Orthodox Glergy
of the Realm, and to enrage the People against them (as heretofore the Enemies
of the Gospel did those holy Martyrs, whom they clothed in the Skins of
Wild-beasts, to animate Dogs to worry them) they caused a most Libellous
Pamphlet, The Author M. Iehn White, a Member of the Long Parliament.
against diverse Divines, which endeavored to oppose their wicked practices, to
be Printed and Published, by special Order; 17. Nov. 1643.
Entitled the first Century of scandalous malignant Priests, having, in Order
thereto, shortly after the beginning of that Parliament, founded a Committee,
to enquire after scandalous Ministers: under which Title few of the reverend
and Orthodox Clergy did escape. Which Committee made so speedy a Progress in
their work; that, in short time (as their Chairman Mr. Corbet reported) 17.
May. 1641.
they had got in nine hundred Petitions against such Ministers.

I do here omit to make mention of the particular Imprisonments, Plundrings,
and other oppressions, exercised by them, toward most of our greatest and most
able Divines, it being so notorious to the World: by reason whereof they being
constrained to fly from place to place to save themselves, the service of God,
in most Churches of this Kingdom was totally neglected: Their Doctrine and
Practice.
And shall now descend to a short view of the Doctrine and Practice of their
own Levites, notorious Schismatics, and of so many different Sects (almost) as
Congregations; but patronized by these Men, to advance their Cause; as was
acknowledged That they would dispense with all sorts of Religion, so that they
might freely exercise their own.
by the Lords, Say and Brook; and justified by the Committee of Northampton,
Ian. 16. 1643. who stuck not to declare; That if the Country would not make
better discharge of their Duty, in the defense of Religion, Laws, and Liberties
(for so they termed this unparalleled Rebellion) the Parliament would call in
foreign Nations to assist them.

In Testimony whereof, certain Troopers, of Popish Walloons, lying about Putney
and Kingston, and entertained in the Rebels service; being asked the reason,
why they would serve against the King: answered, that it was all one for Point
of Religion: but only if they served the King, they could not be permitted an
open exercise of their devotions, according to the Church of Rome, which the
two Houses gave them leave to do.

But, as to this Point of assistance from those Walloons, and others of the
Romish-Religion, let us hearken to a witness without exception; viz. Robert
Mentet de Salmonet, by Birth a Scotchman, of good extraction; and a secular
Priest of the Church of Rome; who has, in French, written a well esteemed
History Printed at Paris in Fol. 1661.
of our late civil Wars, and Entitled L'Historie des troubles de la grand
Bretagne. Where, in page 165. after he has given an Account of
Edge-Hill-Fight, he says thus:

Ce qui surprit le plus tout le monde, ce fut qu'on trouua quelques prestres
par my les morts, du cost des Estats. Car encore que dans lours Manifestes ils
appellassent l' Armee du Roy le Armee des Papists, pour la vendre odieuse au
peuple; ils avoient neantmoins deux Compaynies de Walloons, and d'autres
Catholics dans leur Armee, outre qu' ils n' avoient rien oublie pour tascher
d' engager en leur party le chevalier Arthur Aston, Colonel-Catholique de grand
reputation.

Il est uray que le Roy avoit aussi souffret dans son Armee quelques officiers
Catholics, hommes de grande suffisance, and tres bien intentionnez, pour le
bien de l'estat, ainsi les appellat il dans la Declaration qu'il fit publier
apres la Bataille.

That which did the most surprise every body, was; that they found amongst the
dead, of those which were slain on the Parliament side, several Popish-Priests.
For, although in their Declarations, they called the King's Army a Popish-Army,
thereby to render it odious to the People, yet they had in their Army two
Companies of Walloons and other Roman Catholics. Besides, they omitted no
endeavors to engage to their party Sr. Ar. Aston Knight, an eminent Roman
Catholic Commander.

True it is, that the King had permitted to serve him in his Army, some Roman
Catholic Officers, Persons of great Abilities, and not factiously inclined, as
His Majesty expresses in that Manifesto, which he published after the Battle.

So far this French Author, whose Abstract I shall not farther follow, but
rather go on, in the very words of the Declaration Exact Col page 647. Printed
at Land. 1643.
it self. Where his Majesty answering the Pa^liaments urging and pressing that
false and groundless imputation of his favoring, and employing many of that
Religion in his Army, says thus:

For our affection to that Religion, our continual practice, our constant
profession, and several protestations will satisfy all the World; against which
Malice and Treason it self cannot find the least probable objection. We wish
from our heart the Zeal and affection of these Men to the true Protestant
Religion were as apparent as ours. For the employing Men of that Religion, in
our present service in the Army, whosoever considers the hardness and
straights, the malice and fury of these Men have driven us to; their stopping
all passages, and ways, that neither Men or Money might come to us; their
declaring all such to be Traitors, who shall assist us; their entertaining Men
of all Countries, all Religions to serve against us, would not wonder if we had
been very well contented to have received the Service and Assistance of any of
our good Subjects, who had Loyalty enough, (whatsoever their Religion is) to
bring them to our succor.

All Men know the great number of Papists which serve in their Army, Commanders
and others: the great industry they have used to corrupt the loyalty and
affection of all our Subjects of that Religion: the private promises and
undertakings they have made to them; that if they would assist them against us,
all the Laws made in their prejudice should be repealed. Yet, neither the
weakness of our own condition, nor the other Arts used against us, could
prevail with us to invite those of that Religion to come to our succor, or to
recall our Proclamation which forbad them so to do: and we are confident tho we
know of some few, whose eminent Abilities in Command and Conduct, and moderate
and unfactious dispositions, has moved us, in this great necessity, to employ
them in this service) that a far greater number of that Religion, is in the
Army of the Rebeh, than in our own; and we do assure our good Subjects, tho as
we shall always remember the particular Services which particular Men have or
shall, in this exigent of ours perform to us, with that grace and bounty, which
becomes a just Prince: Yet we shall be so far from ever giving the least
countenance or encouragement to that Religion, that we shall always use our
utmost endeavor to suppress it by the execution of those good and wholesome
Laws, already in force aga^^st Papists, and concurring in such farther
remedies, as the Care and Wisdom of us, and both Houses of Parliament shall
think most necessary for the advancement of God's Service.

But I proceed to the practice of their Preachers, one of these Boutefeus, Mr.
Case.
to encourage his Auditors to bring in liberally upon the Propositions, for
Money, Horse, and Plate; upon his administration of the Sacrament, began thus;
All you that have contributed to the Parliament, come and take this Sacrament
to your comfort.

Another Dr. Layton.
brought in a guard of Soldiers (with their Arms) into Lambe^h-Church, in the
time of Divine Service, tore the Book of Common Prayer in pieces; pulled the
Surpliss from the Ministers back; and scoffing at the good People, who were at
their Devotions; said, make an end of your pottage: the Soldiers following him
to the Communion Table, with Tobacco-Pipes in their Mouths, and committing
diverse outrages, to the great terror of the Congregation.

Mr. Simeon Ash, Minister at St. Mary's in Ald^rntanbury ( London) in his
Sermon Preached before the House of Commons, March 30. Anno 1642. that being one
of their solemn Fast-days; after large invectives against the Governors of the
Church, Ceremonies, and the Divine Service by Law established; charged the whole
Ministry of the Church of England, with being blind Seers; Dumb Dogs, which
could not bark; idle drones; misguiding Guides; Schismatical and Heretical Men,
and scandalous. Adding, Impr. Land page 61.
and I humbly commend this to your consideration, whether the Prelatical-party
has not been the Root of all; or at least of almost all these oppressions: and
for my part I cannot expect a complete Deliverance from these and ^^ther like
oppressions, but by the extirpation of that frame. Right Honorable you have
done much, yea very much for our ease already. We are sensible that many heavy
Burdens are taken off our backs, which crushed us grivously heretofore: and
for that relief, which we have received, we bless God, we honor you: and I now
heartily entreat and encourage, the prefecting of that, you have so worthily
begun. When Sidn is set up in beauty adorned, and set up with her watch Tower,
and Officers, then God will be known in our Palaces for refuge.

And that they might have some color of Authority for their sedicious
Doctrine, there came out a Paper April 1643
in Print; signed by Isaac Pennington (their new Lord Mayor, who first entered
upon his Office, with a set speech against the Book of Common Prayer) for a
direction to the Ministers, in and about the City of London, both what to Pray
and what to Preach, in these words; You are required to commend to God in your
Prayers, the Lord General, the whole Army employed in the Parliaments service,
and the design To extirpate Monarchy.
undertaken by them: as also in your Sermons effectually to stir up the People,
to appear in Person, and to join with the Army to stand up for our Religion,
and Liberties, as is desired and expected by the Army, and the Committee for
the Militia in this City.

According to which direction, one of them likened the King to Rehoboam (in
forsaking his old Council) and then inferred, It was but Justice, that the two
Houses should proceed to a new Choice. Another, Mr. (...) land, ^. June 1643.
on their Fast Day at Southampton, used these words in his Prayer, Oh Lord,
thine Honor is now at stake; for now (O Lord) Antichrist has drawn his Sword
against thy Christ; and if our Euemes prevail, thou will lose thine Honor. And
Mr. Cross (a zealous Lecturer) told 6. July.
his Auditory in the Pulpit at St. Mildreds in the Poultry; that if God did not
finish the good work, which he had begun, in the Reformation of the Church, he
would show himself to be the God of confusion, and such a one, as by cunning
Stratagems had contrived the destruction of his own Children. Which Blasphemous
expression was but few days before Sir William Waller's defeat 13. July.
at Roundway-down.

And now, whilst I mention this overthrow, I cannot omit the notice of a
passage somewhat remarkable: which was, that the day of that great and absolute
defeat, the Rebels in Gloucesler, held one of their solemn counterfeit
Thanksgivings, for a feigned Victory, which they pretended (to abuse the
People) that Sir William Waller had at Landsdowne upon the fifth day of the
same Month.

Another of their Lectures in Southampton, prayed thus; Aug.
Bless the King, O Lord, mollify his hard heart, that delights in blood: Open
his Eyes, that he may see, that the blood of the Saints is dear in thy sight.
He is fallen from faith in thee, and become an enemy to thy Church. Is it not
He, that has sinned and done evil indeed? but as for these sheep, what have
they done? Let thme hand, we pray thee, O Lord our God, be on him, and on his
Father's House; but not on thy People, that they should be plagued. And another
blasphemous fellow, Robinson 25. Aug.
in his Prayer there, on their Fast Day, said thus: O God, O God, many are the
hands lift up against us, but there is one God; it is thou they self, O Father,
who do us more mischief then they all.

And for Preaching, observe the Doctrine of one Kendal ( sometime a Coachman,
but afterward Paeacher at Hamsted, in Hartfordshire) upon the 1 Cor. 6^9. know
ye not, that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? First, that
by Kingdom of God, in this place was meant the Kingdom of Christ upon Earth.
Secondly, that England was no true Church. Thirdly, that all the Members of the
Church of England, were Children of wrath. Fourthly, that at the day of
Judgment, Christ would give up all power to his Father; and would himself
become a Subject.

And, such as did not Pray and Preach after this fashion, were cavill'd
withal, expelled, or committed to Prison: as one was by Isaac Pennington (sent
to Newgate) for singing a Malignant Psalm. Another committed to that Prison
which they made of the Lord Peter's House in Aldersgate Street; because, says
his Mittimus, he daily Read most Malignant Chapters.

But to proceed with some other particulars of their Prayers and Sermons: Mr.
Evans Preacher of St. Clements without Temple-Barr, expostulated thus with God;
O Lord, when will thou take a Chair and sit amongst the House of Peers? And
when, O God, when, I say, will thou Vote amongst the Honorable Commons? thine
own Commons, who are so zealous for thine Honor? And in his Sermon before the
Earl of Essex (then their General) on the Fast Day, 29. Sept. 1643.
he thus exhorted the People, Beloved, can you forget the Soldiers? I say the
Soldiers, who have spent their blood for Christ, as Christ did for them; even
their own precious blood in God's cause at Newbery.

And Mr. Colman, in his Exhortation-Sermon to the Army, for taking the
Covenant, told them, That the Covenant was the Parliament's Sword and Buckler.
For when ( said he) the Cavaliers shall see you come Armed with a Covenant,
they will run, run, run from the presence of the Lord of Hosts.

In the behalf of which Covenant Mr. Nigh, in a set Speech told the People, that
as God did swear for the Salvation of Men, and of Kingdoms: So Kingdoms must
now swear for the preservation, and salvation of Kingdoms, to establish, a
Savior Jesus Christ in England. For this it was, that one of the Lord Say 's
Tenants (a Lay-Preacher at Brouton near Banbury) cried out in his Prayer, we
know O Lord, that Abraham made a Covenant, and Moses and David made a Covenant,
and our Savior made a Covenant; but thy Parliaments Covenant is the greatest
of all Covenants.

This it was that ushered in the Scots, for whose Invasions these their
Preachers so much labored; Mr. Bond at the Savoy, telling them in the Pulpit;
that they ought to contribute and Pray, and to do all that they were able, to
bring in their Brethren of Scotland, for the settling of God's cause. I say (
quoth he) this is God's cause: and if our God had any cause, this is it. And if
this be not God's cause then God is no God for me; but the Devil is got up into
Heaven.

Another Preached, Mr. Pearne at St. Dunstans in the West. 24. December.
that Christmas day was a superstitious day; and would (if observed) bring in
Idolatrous Worship. Whereupon the People were commanded to open their Shops
that day.

One Isaac Massy a Lecturer at Uppingham in Rutland, when he was to administer
the Communion at Easter Anno 1644. and had Consecrated the Wine, after his
fashion, smote himself on the Breast, and said to the People, As I am a
faithful sinner Neighbors, this is my Morning's draught, and turning himself
round to them, said here is to you all, and so drank up the whole Cup full.

Which celebration of the Communion, in this manner, puts me in mind of Mr.
Redman, about that time Minister of Cas^te-Dannington in Leicester shire; who,
to thwa^t the Order there in prescribed by the Laws; administered it to his
Parishioners in the Afternoon; and instead of Wine, made use of Ale.

Mr. Corbet also a Lecturer in Gloucester, told July 1644
his Auditory, that nothing had so much deceived the World, as the name of
King; which ( he said) was the ground of all mischiefs to the Church of Christ.

And Mr. Vines (Colonel Purefoy's Chaplain) said in his Prayer, at St.
Clements without Temple Bar, O Lord thou have given us never a Victory this
long while, for all our frequent Fasting. What do thou mean O Lord, to fling
us in the Ditch and there leave us? And Lorkyn, a seditious Lecturer at
Greenwich, in his Prayer, expressing great wonder, that God used to bless his
People by Kings and Princes; concluded with these words; 31. June. 1644.
O Lord, if thou will not bless us with a King, bless us without one.

By which Teachers we may ghess at the Flocks: for instance,

At Great Allhallows in Thames Street when the Parishioners were in the Chancel
receiving Jan. 1644.
the holy Sacrament; an herd of new Brethren came into the Church, and brought
along with them Bief, Mutton, and other Provision for Dinner: and when the
Clarke desired them to be gone, they told him, that the Church was a frce for
them to eat in, as others, and refused to depart, saying, they would stay till
the Communion, and their own Dinner, was ended.

In a Thanksgiving-Sermon Preached before the Members of Parliament 2. Apr. Anno
1646. by Joseph Carril, one of their Assembly of Divines, upon this Text;
Judges Cap. 10. Verse. 11, 12. Did not I deliver you from the Egyptians? He told
his Auditory; Here is nothing but the bare name of Deliverances, and seven in
number; so many have you received from me says the Lord. As if we should write
now; the Battle of Kineton,, one; the Battle of Newbery, two; the Battle of
Chereton-down, three; at Marston-More, four; at Navesby, five; at Langport,
fix; at Torington, seven; and the Disbanding of the late Army in the West,
which may go for many Victories.

Mr. Cradock, Vicar of Nun-Eaton, in Warwickshire, used this expression Sunday
1. Aug. 1647.
in his Prayer; O Lord do not thou stand a Newter; but take one side, that we
may see which it is, that is thy cause. And, at a Fast 22. Dec. 1648.
kept by both Houses of Parliament, at St. Margarets Westminster, Hugh Peter's,
Preaching of bringing the Children out of Egyptian Bondage, to which he
paralleled the state of this Kingdom; to show how they should be brought out
of this Bondage, he put his hands before his Eyes, and laid down his Head for a
space on the Cusheon; and then pretended a Revelation; that it must be by
extirpating of Monarchy, hear, and in all other places.

And now, to close up all, let us here some of Mr. Feake's expressions,
Preaching at Blackfriars, in Anno 1653. when our late great Masters were at
Wars with the Dutch.

-- But you will say, the Dutch will recruit again, Aug. 8.
and the Princes of the World will assist them: for my part I do not see one
Prince or State that offers to help them: but if they should all join, and lay
their Crowns and Scepters together, it is that Christ may cut off their Heads
at a blow, and get himself the more Honor. All the Angels in heaven cannot
make peace between Christ and the World. If the Devil, the Turk, and the
People, should think to compound with Christ, and say, Thou Christ, thou shall
have so many Kingdoms, and let us enjoy the rest quietly: Christ will never do
it; he will have all or none; he will either kill or be killed.

-- Again; I profess Saints we must go lay our heads together, and consult what
we shall ask God next, for he will give us whatsoever we ask, and so he has
done these seven years.

And at Christ-Church, Aug. 11. -- I will never believe ( said he) that this
Navy was made purposely for the breaking of our Neighbors in pieces; and there
an end: we shall at last join together, and do such work for God, as was never
done in the World. We shall carry the Gospel with our Navy up and down to the
Gentiles; and afterward we shall gather home the Jews; out of the Isles first;
for those of them shall first be called, and the Ships of Tharsis shall do it.
Beloved what this Tharsis is, I have made a little search; but I shall enquire
farther. They it seems shall be the first Active; and I am sure there is none
in such forwardness as ours at present. The late Parliament, they set their
hands to the work, then they job'd on again; did a little and then stood still
again. Now we have got a company of Men together, which are indeed Godly Men;
but they are Men of too narrow and low Spirits to do Gods work. You see they
have all this while been lifting at Tithes, and cannot pluck them up for their
lives: God himself must be fain to put to his Hand.

-- We must agree together, to ask something new for Jesus Christ; for we have
enough for our selves already: we have Pence enough; Prosperity enough, and
enough of every thing.

Also at Blackfriars, Aug. 29. -- Diverse of our Friends will say, come let us
sit still now, and we may have a great deal of quiet, and calm: we shall enjoy
our pleasant Orchards, live upon our purchased revenues, and sit under our
Vines, and Fig Trees; only let us be content and stir no farther. Beloved, do
not let us listen to them; but tell them, if they can go no farther, so it is:
for our parts we have a farther word of God, which burns within us like fire,
and bids us go on still. We did not at first believe for King's Lands; nor for
a Manor of Deans and Chapters; but we believed that Jesus Christ should be
set up in his Kingdom.

Again at Blackfriars, Sept. 5. -- O Lord, when shall we hear the sound of
Christ's Horse-heels?

And at Blackfriars, Sept. 11. -- Thou gave a Cup into the hand of England;
and we drank of it. Then thou carried'st it to Scotland, and Ireland, and they
dronk of it. Now thou have carried it to Holland, and they are drinking of it:
Lord carry it also to France, to Spain, and to Rome; and let it never be out of
one or other of their hands, till they drink, and be drunk, and spue; and fall,
and never rise any more:

-- Let us be Active against the Kings and Princes of the Earth, those Limbs
and Claws of the cruel Beast.

In Order to the trayning up of more such Boutefeus; soon after His Majesty's
Garrison of Oxford was delivered up to the Parliaments General, diverse of their
chief Pulpitmen were sent Mense Julii An. 1646 Hist. and Ant. Univer. Oxon p.
367. b.
down to that University, to instill the Principles of Presbytery into the
Students there; as also to initiate them in such long winded Prayers before
Sermon, with the like Canting Terms, as are usually practiced by their own
precise Gang. And, after these seasonable Preparations, employed Ib. p. 370.
371. etc.
a number of confiding Persons (part Clergy, part Lay) as Visitors of the
several Colleges and Halls there; with Authority to any five of them to expel
all those Masters and Fellows, which either refused to take the Solemn League
and Covenant, and Negative Oath, or to submit to that holy Discipline contained
in their new Directory for Worship: by which means they made a clear riddance
of a Multitude of Orthodox Men, whose Learning and Piety had worthily rendered
them of high esteem both here and in Foreign Parts. Ib. p. 379. An. 1648.


The like did they in Cambridge, Committing some to strict Imprisonment.

Of these Famous Preachers, it is not unworthy Observation, that diverse of them
were of the Assembly of Divines, whom Thomas Lord Fairfax (the Parliament's
General) styled the Chariots and Horsemen of Israel.

With the like Countenance also, their Preachers did Preach and Pray, thus they
did Write and Print; Witness their Pamphlets justifying the Mortality of the
Soul, and Doctrine of Divorce, with many others of the like strain: insomuch
that the very Scots themselves began to cry out, as is manifest from those
Papers Published by Authority Oct. 1645. page 20.
exhibited by their Commissioners to the two Houses at Westminster:

-- No Man ( said they) can be so destitute of Sense and Reason, as to think
such an Anarchy and Confusion, as now prevails over the Churches of this
Kingdom, to be the Ordinance of God. No Christian can be so void of knowledge
and Faith, as to imagine such a monstrous deformity to be the beauty and glory
of the Kingdom of Christ on Earth.

Whereunto I shall add the Report of Mr. Thomas Edwards; one of their own
Ministers of the Gospel (as he styles himself) in his Epistle Dedicatory to the
two Houses of Parliament then sitting at Westminster, prefixed before his book
Entitled the Gangrena; containing a Catalogue of many of the Errors, Heresies,
Blasphemies, and pernicious practices of the Sectaries of that time, vented and
acted in England, within the compass of 4 years; viz. from 1642. till 1646.

I am one (says he) who, out of choice and judgment have embarked my self,
with Wife, Children, Estate, and all that is dear to me, in the same Ship with
you, to sink and perish, or to come safe to Land with you; and that in the most
doubtful and difficult times: not only early, in the first beginning of the War
and Troubles, in a Malignant place; among Courtiers, and those who were
Servants, and had Relation to the King, Queen and their Children; pleading your
Cause, justifying your Wars; satis fying many that scrupled. But, when your
affairs were at lowest, and the chance of War against you; and some of the
Grandees and Favorites of these times, were packing up and ready to be gone; I
was then highest and most zealous for you; Preaching, Praying, stirring up the
People to stand for you, by going out in Person, lending of Money: in the
latter, going before them by Example. And as I have been your Honors most
devoted Servant, so am I still yours, and you cannot easily lose me.

Having given thus fair a Character of himself; let us now hear him tell what a
Blessed Reformation they had in so short a time as four Years produced:

-- Things every day ( says he) grow worse and worse, you can hardly conceive
or imagine them so bad as they are. No kind of Blasphemy, Heresy, Disorder, and
Confusion, but it is found among us, or coming in upon us. For we, instead of
Reformation, are grown from one extreme to another; fallen from Scylla to
Charibdis; from Popish Innovations, Superstitions, and prelatical Tyranny, to
damnable Heresies, horrid Blasphemies, Libertinisme, and fearful Anarchy. Our
evils are not removed and cured, but only changed. One disease and Devil has
left us, and another as bad is come in the room. Yea, this last extremity into
which we are fallen, is far more high, violent and dangerous in many respects,
etc. -- Have we not a deformation and worse things come in upon us, than ever
we had before? were any of those Monsters heard of heretofore, which are now
Common among us, and denying the Scriptures, etc. -- You have broken down the
Images of the Trinity, Virgin Mary, Apostles; and we have those, who overthrow
the Doctrine of the Trinity; oppose the Divinity of Christ; speak evil of the
Virgin Mary, and slight the Apostles -- You have cast out the Bishops and their
Officers; and we have many that cast down to the ground all Ministers, in all
the Reformed Churches. You have cast out Ceremonies in the Sacraments, as the
Cross, kneeling at the Lords Supper: And we have many, who cast out the
Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper. You have put down Saints Days; and
we have many, who make nothing at all of the Lords Day, and Fast-days.

You have taken away the superfluous excessive maintenance of Bishops and
Deans; and we have many that take away, and cry down the necessary maintenance
of Ministers. In the Bishops Days we had singing of Psalms taken away in some
places, conceived Prayer, and Preaching; and, in their room, Anthems, stinted
forms, and Reading brought in. And now we have singing of Psalms spoken
against, and cast out of some Churches. Yea, all public Prayer questioned, and
all Ministerial Preaching denied. In the Bishops time, Popish Innovations were
introduced, as bowing at Altars, etc. And now we have Anointing the Sick with
Oil. Then we had Bishopping of Children, now we have Bishopping of Men and
Women, by strange laying on of Hands. -- In the Bishops days we had many
unlea^ned Ministers; and have we not now a company of Jerobam's Priests. In the
Bishops days we had the fourth Commandment taken away: but now we have all the
Ten Commandments at once by the Antinomians; yea all ^aith and the Gospel
denied -- The worst of the Prela^es, in the midst of many Popish,
Arminian-Tenets, and Popish Innovations, held many sound Doctrines, and had
many commendable practices: yea the very Papists hold and keep to many Articles
of faith, and truths of God; have some order amongst them, encourage Learning;
have certain fixed principles of truth, with practices of Devotion, and good
Works: but many of the Sect and Sectaries in our days, deny all Principles of
Religion, are enemies to all holy-duties, Order, Learning, overthrowing all:
being vertiginosi Spiritus, wh^lgigg-Spirits. And the great opinion of an
universal Toleration, tends to the laying all wast, and dissolution of all
Religion, and good manners, etc. -- What swarms are there of all sorts of
illiterate mechanic Preachers; yea of Women, and Boy-Preachers? -- What
liberty of Preaching, Printing of all Errors, or for a Toleration of all; and
against the Directory, Covenant, Monthly-fast, Presbyterial Government, and all
Ordinances of Parliament in reference to Religion? -- These Sectaries have been
growing upon us, ever since the first year of our sitting; and have every year
increased more and more.

And in his Book, from page 18. to page 36. he instances no less than one
hundred seventy six Heretical and Blasphemous Tenets, broacht by the Sectaries
(the Offspring of the Presbyterian) within the compass of the four years, next
and immediately ensuing the Convention of that Long-Parliament.

But, to draw toward the end of this point, touching their Preservation and
Defense of the Protestant Religion, expressed in the Doctrine and Discipline
Established by Law in the Church of England, so much protested, declared, and
voted for, at the first. I shall be bold to observe, after all these Barbarous
and Blasphemous Practices: That, having by their Malicious and Causless
Impeachment of that worthy Pillar of our Church, the late Arch Bishop of
Canterbury, kept him a Prisoner for above four Years; and had nothing against
him, by the Law of the Land, worthy of Imprisonment, much less of Death; these
Blood-thirsty Harpyes, by their own usurped Legislative Power, Condemned 4 Jan.
1644.
him to Death: And the very same day (to accompany that Horrid Fact) damned the
Reverend Liturgy of the Church of England, Establishing a thing called a
Directory instead thereof; and within six days following, Executed 10. Jan.
that Bloody Sentence upon that worthy Prelate; whole Memory and Martyrdom for
the Protestant Religion (as it stood here Established by Law) will be precious
with the best of Men, to all Succeeding Ages.

And having done this, they sent Commissioners, (Scottish and English) to treat
at Uxbridge, with others from his Majesty, concerning Peace. Where, the very
first day of their Meeting, 30. Jan.
they countenanced a Bold and Scandalous Person, Mr. Love, who was not punished
by their Commissioners, though complained of.
to Preach to the People -- that they had no Enemy but the King; adding, that
if they had no truth with their Peace, they should have God to be their Enemy:
Bidding them not dote upon that Treaty? saying, that there was as much distance
between that Treaty and Peace, as between Heaven and Hell: And How can ye hope
for truth, since there are so many Profane Lords; such an Un-preaching and
un-gifted Clergy; so many Erroneous Papists, perverse Bishops; so many Irish
Rebels, who are the chief Assistants at Oxford: I tell you, these Lords come
hither with Hearts full of Blood.

Toward which Blessed Peace (as they called it) a, among other things, to the
absolute Ruin of Monarchy, they there demanded no less than the utter
Extirpation of the Protestant Religion, as it stood Established by Law; with
the Patrimony of the Church to boot, as a Prey to themselves and the Scotts,
who would serve God (if I may fitly call it a Service) in Barnes or Stables, at
a cheaper Rate; which makes me call to mind, that Expression of Sir Walter
Raleigh, in his History Lib. 2. Cap. 5. 1.
of the World: Where, making mention of the Care which Moses had of all things
that concerned the Worship and Service of God; which Care of his all Ages have
in some Degrees imitated: Says thus; it is now so forgotten, and cast away, in
this Superfine Age, by those of the Family; by the Anabaptists, Brownists, and
other Sectaries, as all Cost and Care bestowed and had of the Church, wherein
God is to be Served and Worshipped, is accounted a kind of Popery, and as
proceeding from an Idolatrous Disposition, in so much as time would soon bring
to pass (if it were not resisted) that God would be turned out of Churches into
Barnes, and from thence again into the Fields and Mountains, An. 1642.
and under the Hedges; and the Offices of the Ministry (Robbed of all Dignity
and Respect) be as contemptible as those places: All order, Discipline and
Church Government left to newness of Opinion, and Men's Fancies: Yea, and soon
after, as many kinds of Religion would spring up, as there are Parish-Churches
within England; every Contentious and Ignorant Person, Clothing his Fancy with
the Spirit of God, and his Imagination with the Gift of Revelation: In so much,
as when the truth, which is but one, shall appear to the simple Multitude, no
less variable than contrary to it self, the Faith of Men will soon after dye
away by degrees, and all Religion be held in Scorn and Contempt.

CHAP. XLIV.
FOR the Laws of the Land, with the Liberty and Property of the Subject, Their
Actings against the Laws of the Land, and Liberty of the Subjects.
because the first ought to be a Defense to the latter; let us see what these
great pretended Champions for both, did for their Preservation: Or rather how
manifestly they violated them all, by their unjust Practices.

Was it not for Execution of his Majesty's Legal Writ; grounded upon the
Statute, for Suppressing of Tumults, that Justice Long was Committed 11. Dec.
1641.
to the Tower?

And were not Commands laid upon the Judges of the King's Bench, that they
should not grant any Habeas Corpus (the Ancient Remedy for the Peoples
Security) for such as the Members had Committed to Prison, by their own
Authority? And, did not Mr. Rigby (a beloved Member) move twice, that those
Lords and Gentlemen which were Prisoners (for no cause but being Malignants, as
they termed them) should be sold as Slaves to Argiere, or sent to the new
Plantations in the West Indies, because he had Contracted with two Merchants
for that purpose? Though Mr. Pym himself had (in a Speech in that Parliament)
acknowledged it against the Rules of Justice, that any Man should be
Imprisoned, upon a General Charge, when no Particulars were proved against him.

As these things were most evident, so was their Order 4. July. 1642.
against Publishing the King's Proclamation, contrary to Acts of Parliament
then in Force. Likewise their Barbarous murder of his Majesty's Messenger,
Daniel Kniveton.
for bringing a Legal Writ to the Sheriffs of London, to that purpose: As also
Colonel Nathaniel Fienes his causing 4. Mar. 1642.
the King's Proclamation, concerning Mariners, to be burnt in the open
Marketplace at Bristol, by the Common Hangman (he being then Governor there)
and Imprisoning the Earl of Bristol and Justice Malet, for having an hand in
the Kentish-Petition.

And, notwithstanding the Statute in force against Loanes and Benevolences,
grounded upon the Petition of Right (and that on Magna Charta) which the Lord
Say, Mr. Pym, and Mr. Hampden, once held so Sacred, that, being asked (upon
occasion) in King James his time; why they would not then Contribute to the
King's Necessities by way of Loan? They Answered, that they could be content to
lend, as well as others, but, that they feared to draw upon themselves, that
Curse in Magna-Charta which should be read twice every Year against the
Infringers thereof: Nevertheless, did not these men Commit 12. Oct. 1642.
Mr. Fountain the Lawyer, and diverse others which refused to lend Money for
advancement of their Rebellion? And by a special Order, 23. Jan. 1642.
sent those Loyal Citizens, Sir George Whitmore, Alderman Gurney, Mr. Gardner,
and others, to several Remote Prisons ( viz. Yarmouth, Colchester, Norwich,
etc.) for not submitting to their Lawless and Rigorous Tax of the twentieth
part, for the support of their Rebellious Forces? And give power 3. Febr.
to their Officers, to break open Trunks, to search for Money and Plate, and to
seize 8. Febr.
the same for that purpose; Mr. Strode (one of the five Members) in
Justification of these heavy Oppressions, saying; that it was no more than they
had right to do: 1... Jan. 1643.
And, that every Man in England had trusted his whole Estate to be disposed of,
as the Members of both Houses should think convenient: For if the Members of
both Houses (quoth he) think fitting to seize the Estate of every Man in
England, all the whole Kingdom is bound to submit to them.

And was not their Licentious Boldness such; that Mr. Pym (a single Member)
during a recess of both Houses, by an Order under his own hand, did dispense
with the Act of Parliament, 1. Eliz. for Uniformity of Common Prayer!

And when, upon a motion of the House, that certain Gaolers should be tried by
Marshal Law, by reason of some Prisoners escape; and that it was opposed by
diverse Lawyers as an illegal course, the Gaolers being answerable by the Law,
for the same; was it not Replied;... March 1642.
that they were not to be tied to any Forms of Law; those being to be laid by
at such times as this, when Necessity is the Rule, by which they must guide
their Actions?

What Misery have many Reverend and Orthodox Divines, and others suffered by
long Imprisonment; some sent on Shipboard, and kept under the Deck, lying many
days upon the hard Boards, for no other Offense than their firm Loyalty to the
King, and Constancy in the true Protestant Religion, Established by Law: His
Majesty's Servant, Mr. Alex. Hampden.
coming only to them on a Message for Peace, being likewise so long Imprisoned,
that he dyed therein with hard Usage. How partially Indulgent have they been to
those of their own Rebellious Tribe, is evident from sundry Instances; as that
of Mr. Gryffith (one of their Members) who was made a Captain of Horse, with
Silver Trumpets, and extraordinary Bravery, though he had Ravished the Lady
Sidley, and was by her Accused for so doing: Mr. Lenthall their Speaker, having
also six Thousand Pounds given him, of that Money which had been raised by Act
of Parliament for public Service.

Having therefore thus trampled down the Laws, and made seizure of the Kings
Forts, Towns, Navy, and Magazine, whereby he was divested of all Power, to
protect his good Subjects; no marvel that they deprived him of all other
Authority; declaring 29. Nov. 1642.
his nomination of Sheriffs Illegal; and authorizing his Deputy Lieutenants and
Trained-Bands, to Suppress and Apprehend such Sheriffs, Levying Money for Horse
and Plate; as also the twentieth part, and a vast Weekly Tax by Distresses and
Imprisonment; to say nothing of Sequestrations and Plunders. Add hereunto the
Hanging of those Loyal Persons, 30. May. 1643.
Mr. Yeomans, and Mr. Bourchier, at Bustol; Likewise 5. July 1643.
Mr. Tompkins, and Mr. Chaloner, at London.

And that the Oppressed People might take no benefit of the Law, an Order and
Declaration 10 July. 1643.
was set forth by Authority of both Houses, that the Judges of Assize should
forbear to go their Circuits, as they would answer their Contempt to the
Parliament. Moreover to let the Reins of all Government loose, they discharged
15. Sept. 1643.
all Apprentices from their Masters Service, as would serve in their Rebellious
Armies; Compelling diverse against their Parents good will.

Nor is it less observable; that though by their own Fundamentals; they had
declared; that the Subject was not to be forced unto the Wars, against his
will, except it were by the consent of the King and the Estates in Parliament;
there being an Act in that Parliament passed also to that purpose:
Nevertheless, they frequently pressed great numbers of Men, to serve them in
their Rebellious Armies: And by a special Ordinance,... March. 1644.
gave Power to any three of the Militia of London, to raise and send out Men,
as also to Fine, Imprison, and Execute Martial-Law.

By the like Authority it was, that they raised 24. Mart. ^ 1641. Exact Coll.
p. 121.
vast Sums upon Merchandise, under the name of Tunnage and Poundage, contrary
to an express Act made also that very Parliament. So likewise a new Imposition,
called Excise, upon Victuals and all other Commodities, against which they
themselves had much declaimed. Exact Coll. p. 638.
And to countenance these grand Oppressions, voted, 3. May. 16^3.
that an Ordinance of Parliament was as binding to the Subject as an Act of
Parliament: Thereupon ordaining; 6. May.
that such Persons, as ought to pay any Rents, Debts, etc. due to those, who
are assessed, and refused so to do, should be Discharged against the Landlord
or Creditor.

And at length became so bold, as that their new Lord Mayor ( Isaac
Pennington)) chalenging a Sturgeon, which was taken above London Bridge; and it
being answered, that it belonged to the King, or Lord Admiral; Replied... June.
1643.
you Malignant Rogue, I would have you to know, that there is neither King nor
Admiral, that has any Power in London but my self.

Add thereunto their Ordinance 2. Oct. 1643.
for keeping Michaelmas Term at Westminster, notwithstanding his Majesty's
Proclamation. And another, Constituting Nov. 3.
the Earl of Warwick Governor; and Lord Admiral of all the Islands in America,
Inhabited or Planted by the King's Subjects. Another, 11. Nov.
declaring the King's Broad-Seal Invalid, and Commanding Obedience to all
Writs, etc. to be issued under a new great Seal, made by themselves: And
Sequestring 25. Dec.
all Offices of those Clerks in Westminster Hall, which were with the King: The
authority given to the Earl of Manchester, by another Ordinance,... 20. Jan.
to deprive and displace all Masters and Fellows of Colleges and Halls in
Cambridge; and all other Clergymen within the Association, as he should think
convenient: The Ordinances 2. Sept. 1643.
for seizing the Kings, Queens, and Princes Revenew; for cutting 21. Oct. 164^.
down their Woods: For Commanding 28. Dec. 1643.
all Men to pay nothing to his Majesty, the Queen, and Prince, which was due
and ought to have been paid to them (for those are the words) also the
Commitment of Laughern and Vivian to Colchester-Goal, for denying to pay two
Thousand Pounds, which was due to the Prince from them, though the Receiver was
Plundered of the Money.

And, when it was told Mr. Strode, Chairman to the Committee for raising
Money, that no more Money could be advanced (their Purses having been so
drained already) he Replied, Feb. 1643.
that they must have no denial; for their Money was demanded by the Supreme
Court of Judicature; adding, that those were times of necessity. Another of the
Members,... Apr. 1644.
sticking not to say (shortly after) that if it would advantage their Cause, he
thought it lawful to unvote, whatsoever had passed since the beginning of that
Parliament.

Besides which grievous Impositions upon the Subjects Estates, they stuck not
at the like to their Persons; upon pain of Death, restraining 16. Aug.
all Persons, for going from London to the King or Queen. And for a farther
Testimony of their dealing with the People, in point of their Propriety, take
their Governor of Abington's Answer... Oct. 1644*
( viz. Coll. Brown) to no less than Seven-score poor People which came
thither to him, at one time, wringing their hands, and begging for some small
Pittance, of what he had caused to be taken from them, in the Villages
thereabours (which was no less than all their Goods, even to part of their
wearing Apparel) which was thus (with Tears in his Eyes) -- Alas good People,
it is not in my Power to help you: For if this were done by meet Rudeness of my
Soldiers, I could say something; but you have not lost a Pin, but according to
the Command of both Houses of Parliament, who enjoined us to spare nothing:
Therefore (said he, whispering to one or two of them) if you have any thing
left, it is your best course to Convey it away quickly; for the Parliament has
Commanded me to take all I can carry, and burn up the rest, before the King
comes.

These and the like, as by many Instances might be made apparent, have been
their Practices, in violating the Laws of the Land, with the Liberties and
Properties of the Subject, however Fair and Specious, their Promises were
otherwise, until they had got Power into their hands, being at length not
ashamed to discover their full Intentions, by those Propositions, which they
tendered to His Majesty at Oxford, upon the 23d. of November, 1644. And
whereupon a Treaty was had at Uxbridge. Where it was judiciously observed A
full Relation of the Passages concerning the Treaty. p. 153.
by his Majesty's Commissioners; That, after a War of near three Years, for
which the Defense of the Protestant Religion, the Liberty, and Property of the
Subject, and the Privileges of Parliament, were made the cause and Grounds; in
a Treaty of full twenty days; nor indeed in the whole Propositions, upon which
the Treaty should be; there was nothing offered to be treated on, concerning
the Breach of any Law; or of the Liberty, or Property of the Subject, or
Privilege of Parliament: but only Propositions for the altering a Government
Established by Law; and for the making of new Laws; by which all the old were
or might be Cancelled; there being nothing insisted upon, on the part of his
Majesty's Commissioners, which was not Laws; or denied by them, that the other
demanded as due by Law.

The next and last particular, Their Violating the Privileges of Parliament.
for which they made such great Pretenses, is the Privilege of Parliaments.
Having therefore under that color justified most of their pernicious Actions;
let us take notice how consonant to Justice, Reason, or common Honesty, their
Practices upon this point have been.

Did they not, soon after the beginning of that Unhappy Parliament (without any
president) found 11. Nov. 1640.
a Close-Committee, consisting of eight persons, Anno. 1641.
whereof no less than seven were principal Contrivers of the ensuing Rebellion?
And in the business of the Earl of Strafford, was not their Bill for his
attainder, twice 19. Apr.
read and voted in one day? and fifty-five of the Members Posted, 21. Apr.
for not assenting thereto, whose Names (to their lasting Honor) I have here
added.

1. George Lord Digby. 2. James Lord Compton. 3. Richard Lord Buckhurst. 4. Sr.
Robert Hatton. 5. Sr. Thomas Fanshaw. 6. Sr. Edward Alford. 7. Sr. Nicholas
Slanyng. 8. Sr. Thomas Danby. 9. Sr. George Wentworth. 10. Sr. Peter Wentworth.
11. Sr. Frederick Cornwallis. 12. Sr. William Carnaby. 13. Sr. Richard Wynn.
14. Sr. Gervace Clifton. 15. Sr. William Widdrington. 16. Sr. William Pennyman.
17. Sr. Patricius Curwen. 18. Sr. Richard Lee. 19. Sr. Henry Slingesby. 20. Sr.
William Portman. 21. Mr. Gervase Hollies. 22. Mr. Sidney Godolphin. 23. Mr.
Cook. 24. Mr. Coventrey. 25. Mr. Benjamin Weston. 26. Mr. William Weston. 27.
Mr. Seldom. 28. Mr. Alford. 29. Mr. Llhoyd. 30. Mr. Herbert. 31. Captain Digby.
32. Sergeant Hyde. 33. Mr. Tailor. 34. Mr. Gryffith. 35. Mr. Scowen. 36. Mr.
Bridgman. 37. Mr. Fettiplace. 38. Dr. Turner. 39. Capt. Charles Price. 40. Dr.
Parry, a Civilian. 41. Mr. Arundell. 42. Mr. Newport. 43. Mr. Holburne. 44. Mr.
Noell. 45. Mr. Kirton. 46. Mr. Pollard. 47. Mr. Price. 48. Mr. Trevanion. 49.
Mr. Jane. 50. Mr. Edgcombe. 51. Mr. Chichley. 52. Mr. Mallorey. 53. Mr. Porter.
54. Mr. White (Secretary to the Earl of Dorset) 55. Mr. Philip Warwick.
Likewise, after the Lords had passed their Votes therein; was not their House
called, 29. Apr.
to find out which of them had not given their Votes thereunto? And was not Mr.
Gervase Hollies (Burgess for Grymesby in Lincolnshire) expelled 25 Apr.
the House, for his free Speech against the Scots propositions, for the
altering of our Church Government?

Also the Lord Digby's Speech against the Bill, for the Earl of Strafford's
Attainder, Voted 7. May.
to be burnt by the common Hangman; Mr. Tailor (Burgess of Windsore) Expelled
26. May.
for speaking his mind against the same; and Mr. Geffrey Palmer (Burgess of
Stamford) Committed, 34. Nov.
for speaking against the Printing of that Scandalous Declaration, called the
Grand-Remonstrance.

Were not Multitudes brought down to Westminster, even to the Doors of the
Parliament, (many of them Weaponed) by the Instigation of Captain Venn (then a
Member of the House of Commons) who, by Notes under his hand Solicited them,
in these expressions; That the better sort, were like to be over-powred by the
worser? And did not those tumultuous People cry loud 3. May.
for Justice, against the Earl of Strafford; saying, 29. Nov.
down with the Bishops; aspersing, 15. 27, 28, 29, Dec.
also, diverse of the Peers, by name, for evil and Rotten-hearted Lords?

And, notwithstanding that the Lords by several Messages desired the House of
Commons, to join with them in a Declaration against those Tumults; did not they
refuse or neglect to do it; Mr. Pym plainly saying 10. Dec.
in the House; God forbid we should dishearten our Friends, who came to assist
us?

And when his Majesty by a Legal Writ, upon the Statute, for Suppressing of
Tumults, settled a Guard at Westminster; was it not Voted a Breach of their
Privileges!

Moreover, was not there a Petition 31. Jan.
Exhibited to the House of Commons, in the Name of many Thousands of poor
People, in and about the City of London, taking notice of a Malignant Faction,
which made Abortive all their good Motions: Desiring that those Noble Worthies
of the House of Peers, who concurred with them, in their happy Votes, might be
earnestly desired to join with that Honorable House, and to sit and Vote
together, as one entire Body? And professing, that unless some speedy Remedy
were taken, for the removing of all such Obstacles, as hindered the happy
Progress of their great endeavor, the Petitioners should not rest in
quietness; but should be forced to lay hold on the next Remedy, at hand, to
remove the Disturbers of their Peace. And (Want and Necessity, breaking the
Bounds of Modesty) not to leave any means unessayed for their Relief: Adding;
that the cry of the Poor and Needy, was, that such persons who were the
Obstacles of their peace, and the hinderers of the happy proceedings of that
Parliament, might be forthwith publicly declared, whose removal would put a
period to those Distractions.

Which Petition, being brought up by the House of Commons, unto the Lords at a
conference; a Member of the Commons, (by a Message) pressed the Lords at their
Bar, to join with them in their desire about the Militia, expressing; That if
their desire were not assented to; those Lords, who were willing to concur,
would find some means to make themselves known; that it might be seen who were
against them, to the end they might notify it unto those which sent them.

To proceed: Was not the Duke of Richmond, Voted 27. Jan.
by the Commons, an evil Councellor to his Majesty, one of the Malignant-Party,
and not fit to bear Office or place of Trust; and that consideration should be
had of drawing up a Charge against him; and all this for no other, than moving
in the House of Lords, that the Parliament might be Adjorn'd for six Months.
And Mr. Gamull (Burgess for the City of Chester) told him, that if he left not
the Town speedily, he should be Committed to the Tower, or knocked on the head
by the Soldiers? And when an Order was reported, to be confirmed by the House,
has it not been, only, put to the Question, without any debate thereon; and
publicly said, in the House, to those who have taken Exceptions thereat; that
they were only to Vote, and not to Dispute?

Was not Sir Ralph Hopton Committed 4. Martij.
to the Tower, for speaking against that Declaration of March the Second. Also
Sergeant Hide Voted 4. Aug. 1642.
to be Expelled, and Committed to the Tower, for not Publishing the Order of
the House, as Recorder of Salisbury: And Sir Sidney Montague Expelled 3. Dec.
1642.
the House, for refusing to take the Protestation to Live and Dye with the Earl
of Essex.

Did they not Impeach, and Commit diverse Lords to the Tower, for not Concurring
with them in these their Irrational and most Unjust Doings? And, when it was
moved that they might be Bailed; was it not answered; 4. Aug. 1643.
That there would be no Sitting for them if those Lords were Released, and
Restored to the freedom of their Votes again.

And when the Members of the House of Commons, had upon a solemn Debate, 5.
Aug. 1643.
agreed to join with the Lords, in sending Propositions for Peace to his
Majesty; were there not Printed Papers, the next day, scattered in the Streets,
and fixed upon Posts in public places, in the City and Suburbs; requiring all
Well-Affected persons to rise as one Man, and to come to the House of Commons
next Morning, for that Twenty thousand Irish- Rebels were Landed? And was not
Direction and Information given in the Pulpits, by their Seditious-Preachers;
and in some of those Papers, Expressed; that the Malignant Party had over-Voted
the good; and if not prevented there would be Peace? The Propositions 7. Aug.
for Peace, (the Day before) being carried by twenty nine Voices. Whereupon
multitudes, by the Instigation of Alderman Pennington, came, in a most
tumultuous manner, with Threats and Menaces to diverse of the Members of both
Houses; and said, that their Petition took notice of Propositions, passed by
the Lords for Peace; which, if allowed, would be destructive to Religion, Laws,
and Liberties: many of them telling the Members, that if they had not a good
Answer, they would be there the next Day with double the Number.

Again, when it was moved, 2. Martij.
that the two Sir John Evelins should be Discharged from Prison (being Members
of the House) and thereupon the House dividing LXXI. standing for their
Enlargement, and LXV. against it; were not diverse called out of the
Committee-Chamber, who neither heard the Debate nor Vote; and because the LXXI.
Opposed their entrance; did not the LXV. prohibit the Speaker to pronounce any
Order therein. Lastly, did not the Commons Vote May. 1644.
that the Committee of both Kingdoms should proceed as they did, for three
Months longer; though the Lords refused to consent thereto?

Many more Instances of this nature might be given, but I shall for brevities
sake pass them by, and descend to some; where the Lords, after they had freely
passed their Votes, were, by the prevalent Party in the House of Commons
(contrary to all course and usage in Parliament) constrained to yield unto what
they had, upon free and serious Debate, resolved against.

In the Case of the Bishops, the Lords first Voted, 7. Junij. 1641.
that they should retain their Voices in Parliament.

For taking the Protestation throughout the Kingdom, the Lords first cast 30.
July. 1641.
out the Order. And notwithstanding their Order and Declaration, 9. Sept. 1641.
for the due Observance of the Book of Common Prayer; the Commons made and set
forth a contrary Order 28. Sept. 1641.
thereto; appointing it to be dispersed and published in all the Churches
throughout the Kingdom. Likewise, though the Lords refused 25. Jan. 1641.
to join with the Commons for Petitioning his Majesty that the Cinque Ports
might be secured: Yet 2. Apr. 1642.
were they afterward by terror constrained thereto. So Likewise, though they
refused to join with them in their consent for removing the King's Magazine
from Hull; yet, afterward, through over-awing, did it. And though they
concurred not with them in that case of the Militia; the House of Commons Voted
15. Martij. 1641. Exact Coll. p. 112.
that they did agree therein.

Thus we plainly see, that the Breach of those ancient Privileges, for Freedom
of Debate, and Vote in Parliament, was not made without some difficulty: But
these subtle Men, having by the help of those Tumults from the Londoners,
opened the gap, went afterward smoothly through, with all their unjustifiable
Practices, which in the end brought Confusion, both of Parliament and Kingdom.
So that, by these Devices, having effected whatsoever they had a mind to; they
stuck not to deliver ^ July. 1643.
it, for a Breach of Privilege, that the Lords should dissent to any thing
they had Voted; as is manifest, from that of the New great Scal; wherein the
Lords had the same measure put upon themselves, as they had offered to the
King, in joining with the Commons, to Vote his Majesty's Dissent to the Bills
they tendered to him, a Breach of their Privileges.

CHAP. XLV.
BY what has been already said, I doubt not, but it is apparent enough, that
these great pretended Champions for the Protestant-Religion, Their Aversness to
Peace.
the Laws of the Land; the Liberty of the Subject, and Privileges of
Parliament, made use of those specious pretenses, for no other end, than, to
Captivate the People, and by that means get the Power of the Sword into their
Mercyless Hands.

Now forasmuch as they were not ashamed in the midst of all their Vile
Practices, to cry Exact. coll. p. 587.
out, that they sought nothing, but that Religion, Liberty, and Peace of the
Kingdom should be preserved: Having already showed, how well they regarded
Religion, and the Peoples Liberties; let us see how much they endeavored that
generally wished for Peace.

Did they not order, 1. Nov. 1642.
that the King's Proclamation of Pardon, to all that would lay down Arms, and
return to their Obedience, should not be Proclaimed in London and Westminster?
And, when diverse Citizens met at Guild Hall, to frame a Petition to present to
the Members at Westminster, for Peace; was not there a Troop of Horse sent 8.
Dec.
amongst them; which, with their Swords drawn, and terrible Menaces, caused
them to Disperse, for safeguard of their Lives; And afterward, when a
Committee of the Petitioners, were, by appointment, attending 12. Dec.
the Court of Aldermen and Common Council at Guild Hall; did not more than
Twenty Soldiers rush in amongst them with drawn Swords; Crying, On, on, strike
now or never: Let us destroy these Malignant Dogs, that would have Peace: Let
us cut the Throats of these Popish Rogues: And, accordingly fell upon the
Petitioners in a cruel manner, beating and wounding diverse of them. And, when
the Petitioners (being many) disarmed those Soldiers, and shut up the Hall
Doors, was not there then a Troop of Horse which Discharged their Pistols in,
at them; threatening to kill any that issued out? And, did they not presently
bring two great Guns and plant them against the Doors; so that the Petitioners
were constrained to fly up to the Common Council Chamber for Protection, and
beg for their Lives, to be dismissed with safety. Which being granted, and they
let out; did not many lie in wait for them, with drawn Swords; who pursued them
with bitter Execrations; the Multitude kicking and striking at them, in their
Passage; crying, Hang them, cut their Throats. Whereupon diverse of them were
sore hurt, and some dragged to Prison.

Did not their House of Lords refuse 17. Dec.
a Petition for Peace, from the Inhabitants of Westminster and the Suburbs? And
was not there a Constable Mr. Carr a Harbor.
in Westminster Committed for having a hand in that Petition?

And when His Majesty's Commissioners of Array, in Cheshire, and the
Parliaments Committee, in that County, for Exercising the Militia; out of an
earnest regard, to prevent the Miseries of War in those parts, had made an
Agreement against any farther Hostility, and to preserve the Peace of the
Country; did not they at Westminster make a public Declaration 7. Jan.
against the same, whereby they Renounced that Agreement, as prejudicial and
dangerous to the whole Kingdom, and declared it void? And was not Sir William
Brereton thereupon sent down, in all have, with a Troop of Horse, a Regiment of
Dragoons, and four Field Pieces, for raising new Forces in that County, to
serve the Parliament?

And was not the like Revocation and Disclaymer 4. Oct.
made by those Members at Westminster, against the Agreement in Yorkshire, by
the Earl of Cumberland and others the Commissioners of Array there, for His
Majesty; and the Lord Fairfax and others for the Militia?

Was not Mr. Nicholls and Prideaux (two of their Members) ordered 11. March.
to go down, to break the like Pacification, made by the Gentry and others, in
the Counties of Devon and Cornwail; notwithstanding that the Commissioners had
taken a Solemn Prorestation, and received the Sacrament for Observation thereof?

And, when His Majesty had sent 17. Jan. Exact coll. p. 893.
a Gracious Letter and Declaration to the Sheriffs and City of London, with
Direction that it should be read in their Common Hall; was not there an Order,
26. Jan.
in the Name of both Houses, to forbid their meeting, for to hear it Read? And
div^^s Discharged by Order 27. Jan.
of the Houses, who met accordingly?

Likewise, when His Majesty sent a Message to them for a Treaty, with free
Trade; did not the Members in the House of Commons signify to the Lords, at a
Conference, 13. Martij.
that it would prove destructive to the Liberty of the Subject and to the
Kingdom? And when the Women came 8. Aug. 1643.
in great Numbers to Westminster, to cry for Peace; were they not beaten and
abused, and three of them killed?

Were not there certain Propositions read in their House of Commons, which were
found in Mr. Sal^marsh his Trunk near Hull; First, that all means should be
used to keep the King, and his People from a sudden Union. Secondly to cherish
the War, under the notion of Popery, as the surest means to engage the People.
Thirdly, if the King would not grant their demands, then to root him out of
the Royal Line, and collate the Crown upon some body else?

How hard a matter it was like to be, to obtain Peace from these Men,
therefore, let Stephen Marshall tell you (whom Mr. Case styled a great Teacher
in Israel:) who, being in private conference... March. 1643.
with Obediah Sedgwick, and one Alliston, and asked by Alliston whether it were
possible to end the War by a Treaty?

No, (said he) we will never Treat, unless we may have all granted, which we
formerly demanded. Nay, if the King should grant that now, Merc. Aulic. p. 869.
we should not agree. For, if the King had put down Bishops and Cathedrals at
first, we would have given him all their Lands: But should he do it now, we
would not give him any of their Revenues. For we must have both Church Lands
and Delinquents Estates also; and all little enough to pay the Parliaments
Debts, and Recompense those, who have Suffered for us, and reward such as have
labored in our Cause.

Whosoever, therefore, observes their Demands, by those Propositions, presented
27. Nov. 1644.
to His Majesty at Oxford, and the Passages of the Treaty at Uxbridge
thereupon; will find, that their Commissioners did not much swerve from Mr.
Marshals Principles. And now I mention this Treaty for Peace at Uxbridge; I
cannot but take notice of a Memorable Accident; First, That, whereas the
Buckinghamshire-men, were the first of all the Counties in this Kingdom, that
came in a Tumultuous manner to Westminster, 11 Ian. 1641. with a Petition, on
the behalf of the Lord Kimbolton and the five Members, (which gave Countenance
to the many Exorbitant Practices, that after ensued) and had Thanks returned
them by the two Houses. So were they the first County, that Attempted to
Petition for Peace: But coming 13. Febr. 1644.
toward Uxbridge, in great Numbers, for that purpose; were by Authority of the
Commissioners there, from those at Westminster, met by a Regiment of Horse, and
Forced to return home with their Petition. Sir John Lawrence, one of the
Principal of them, with others, being sent up to Westminster, and Committed to
Prison, for going about to Exhibit such a Malignant Petition, as they called
it.

CHAP. XLVI.
HAVING now done with these Observations; let us see what Resemblance that
great Rebellion of the Barons, The Practices of the Rebellious Barons. temp. H.
3.
above four hundred Years since, had with this. Touching which I shall chiefly
make use of what that Learned Antiquary, Sir Robert Cotton Knight. and Barronet
(who died many Years since) has written thereof, Impr. Land. 1642. 8o.
in that brief discourse of his, Entitled, A short view of the long Reign of
K. Henry the third.

-- No Ib. p. 3.
other disquiet did the State then feel, but such as is Incident in all, Malice
to Authority. Ib. p. 2.
-- The Commons greedy of Liberty, the Nobility of Rule: -- The Ib. p. 4.
greatest in trust for public Affairs being still shot at, by the aspiring of
those, that doom themselves less in Employment, than they are in Merit. -- That
the Surfeit of a long Peace, perchance having let in some abuses, from whence
the Commons (to whom days present, seem ever worst) commend the foregon Ages
they never remembered, and condemn the present, though they know neither the
Disease thereof, nor the Remedy.

-- To Ib. p. 5.
these Idle and usual Humors, fell in some of the Young and Noble Spirits; who
(being as truly ignorant as the rest) first, by sullying the Wisdom of the
present, and greatest Rulers (making each casual mishap their Errors) seem to
decipher each Blemish in Government; and then, by holding certain imaginary and
fantastic Forms of Common Wealths, flatter their own Belief and Ability, that
they can mould any State to these general Rules, which, in particular
Applications, would prove Idle and Gross Absurdities. -- Amongst p. 6.
this Unequal Medley, there were of the Nobility, Richard Earl of Pembroke,
Gloucester, and Hartford, Darlings of the Multitude: Some for the merit of
their Fathers, whose Memories they held Sacred, as Pillars of public Liberty,
and Opposers of encroaching Monarchy. -- These Ib. ^. 7.
by force would effect, what the other did effect by Cunning.

-- The (...) 11.
Lords still frustrate of their Malicious ends, began to sow on these late
grounds of the Peoples Discontents, quaerelas and ambiguos de principe
sermones, and quoque alia turbamenta Vulgi, and Ib. p. 12.
took it up a fashion to endeare and glorify themselves, with the senseless
Multitude, by depraving the King's Discretion and Government.

Neither Ib. p. 18.
was the Church without a busy part in this Tragic Work: For Walter Bishop of
Worcester, and Robert Ipsius consilio tractabat ardua tentabat dubia, finivi^
inchoata. M. Paris. p. 998.
of Lincoln, to whom Mountfort and his Faction praecordialiter adhaerebant,
were far engaged. In such Designs Churchmen are never wanting, and the distaste
of the present Government (as well in the Church as Commonwealth) will ever be
a knot of Strength for such Unquiet Spirits; who as well frame to themselves
some other form of Government than the present in the Church, as in the
Temporal State; as that which with the giddy Multitude wins best Opinion,
and did at this time suit the Peoples Humors, so much distasting the new
Courts of the Clergy, their Pomp, etc.

A Ib. p. 19.
fair Pretext was it to those Factious Bishops, to use their bitter Pens and
Speeches, so far against Religious-Orders, Ceremonies, and State of the Church;
that one of them incurred the Sentence of Excommunication at Rome, and Treason
at home: For he injoined M. parif. p. 998.
the Earl of Leicester, in remissione peccatorum, ut causam illam ( meaning his
Rebellion) usque ad mortem assumeret: Asserens pacem Ecclesiae Anglicanae,
nunquam sine gladio materiali posse firmari. It was not the best Doctrine that
this Man could plant by Liberty or War, when the first Church rose by Fasting
and Prayer. True Piety binds the Subject to desire a good Sovereign; but to
bear with a bad one; and to take up the burden of Princes with a bended Knee;
rather in time so to deserve Abatement, than resist Authority,

To Ib. p. 20.
Suppress these Troubles and supply the King's Extremity, a Parliament Parliam.
Land. Ann. 1255. M. Paris. p. 904.
was called much to the liking of those Lords, who as little meant to Relieve
the King, as they did to quiet the State; their end, at that time, being only
to open at home, the Poverty of their Master; to lessen his Reputation abroad,
and to breath out their own Passions freely, whilst those times of Liberty
permit. Here they began to tell him, he had wronged the Public State, in
taking M. Paris. Ann. 1255. p. 904.
to his Private Election, the Justice, Chancelour and Treasurer, that should be
only by the Common Council of the Realm.

-- They Ib. p. 21.
blame him, etc. to have hurt the Common-Liberty by Non-Obstantes, in his
Patents; to make good Monopolies for private Favorites, etc. And that Sir
Robert Passelew had torn from the Borderers of his Forest, under pretense of
Encroachments or Assarts, great Sums of Money: And therefore they Gualt.
Coventr.
wonder, that he should now demand relief from his so pill'd and poled Commons.

-- Upon Ib. p. 23.
new grant of the great Charter, admittance to his Council of some Persons
Elected by the Commons, etc. They spare him such apittance, as must tie him to
their Devotion for a new supply. Thus Parliaments which before were ever a
Medicine to heal up any Rupture in Princes Fortunes, Reg: Roff: Ioh: de
Wallingf.
are now grown worse than the Malady; says from thence more Malignant Humors
began to Reign in them, than well Composed Tempers.

-- Before Ib. p. 25. Claus. 46. and 47. H. 3. Anno. 1251.
the King would again submit himself, as he had the last Parliament, to so many
strict Enquiries of his Disloyal Subjects, he means to pass through all the
shifts, that extremity and need, with greatness of mind could lay upon him,
etc. Beginning with the Sale of Lands, and then of Jewels. -- And, in the end,
having not means to defray the Diet of his Court, was enforced to break up
House, and with his Queen and Children, cum M. Paris. p. 807.
Abbatibus and Prioribus satis humiliter Hospicia quesivit and prandia.

This Ib. p. 26.
low Ebb gave great assurance to the Rebellious Lords, that they should now at
last, have the Sovereign Power left a Prey to their Ambitious Designs: And to
bring it faster on, they desire nothing more, than to see the King's Extremity
constrain a Parliament: For at such times Princes are ever less than they
should be; Subjects more. To hasten on the time, and adapt the means, there are
sown certain Seditious Orators, that the King's Necessity must repair it self
upon the Fortunes and Blessings of his People; that having nothing of his own
left, he might, and meant to take of other: But Ib. p. 27.
seeing still that Majesty and Right subsist not without means and power; and
himself had of neither so much as would stop the present Breach in his own
wants; or his Subjects Loyalties, he flies to the Bosom of his People for
Relief and Council.

At Oxford An. 1258. M. Paris. p. 970. Insanum Parliamentum. Cokes Instit.
part. 3. p. 2.
they met in Parliament; where his Necessities found so many undutiful demands,
that he was forced to render up, to their Rebellious Will, his Royal Power.

Here Ib. p. 28.
the Commons knowing, that Quum eligere inceperunt, they were loco libertatis,
stood with the King to have the managing of the State, put M. Westminster. 227, and
p. 330, and 331.
to the care of XXIII. (whereof XII. by their Election (whereto they looked
strictly) and the other by him, Nic etiam Rex, qui jam regnando quinquagessimus
extiterat, pro umbra nominis habebatur. M. Westminster. p. 328
who in all things else was left as a Cipher.

-- Dober Ib. p. 29. and 30.
Castle (the Key of the Kingdom) they had furnished (as most of the Forts of
Reputation in the Realm) with Guardians of their own, sworn respectively to
the State: And then, taking the like assurance of all the Sheriffs Bailiffs,
Coroners, and other public Ministers; searching the behavior of many, by
strict Commission upon Oath, to win Opinion in show among the Vulgar, who
groaned under their late Extortions; whereas their end was truly (as it proved)
by displacing the Faithful Subjects of the King, to open a way to their own
Dependents. Thus, changing sole Power into the Rule of many, and those by
popular Election, made the State believe, that by this form of limited Policy,
they had utterly suppressed the Mind of Man for ever Dreaming more upon the
Imaginary Humors of Licentious Sovereignty. But it fell out nothing so: For
now every Man begun to estimate his own Worth, and to hammer his Head on every
design, that might enlarge his Power and Command. Then began the great Men to
rent from the Crown and Regal Seignories all such Royal Suitors as Neighboured
any of their Seats, whereto Ibid. p. 31. Magnas induxerunt Magnates, Regni
super subditos Regis, servitutes and Oppressiones. Rot. 56. H. 3. in Scacc.
they Enforce their Service: And so (as the Record says) ad sectas indebitas,
and servitutes intolerabiles, subditos Regis compulerunt. Thus they made
themselves, of so many Subjects, whilst they lived in Duty, totidem Tyranni (as
the Book of St. Albans says) when they had left their Loyalty.

Montfort, Gloucester, and Spenser ( the Heads of this Rebellious Design)
having by the late Provisions, Provisiones Oxon. Ann. 1258.
drawn to the hands of the XXIV. Tribunes of the People, the entire managing of
the Royal Estate; and finding that Power too much dispersed; to work the end of
their Designs, El^vatis in Anglia XXIV. capitaneis antedictis, ordinatisque sub
ipsis in Regno and curia regia cunctis (...) and ministris, fuerunt eis
Parliamenta continua; sibi Escaetas and wards, ac filiis suis and nepotibus
spectantes, adpatronatum Regis Ecclesias providerunt, etc. M. Westminster. p. 331.
forced the King, again to call a Parliament, where they delivered the
Authority of the XXIV. to themselves, and Created a Triumvirate Ib. p. 336.
(non constituenda Reipublicae causa, as they first pretended) for their own
ends: And so in the interest of some private contented, the public was staid,
but to make a speedier way to one of them (as it ^fatally did) to become
Dictatores perpetuos.

These three Elect nine Counselors; and appoint, M. Westminster. p. 336.
quod tres, ad minus alternatim, semper in Curia sint, to dispose of the
Custody of Castles, and de alijs regni negotijs, the ChiefJustice, Chancellor,
and Treasurer, with all Offices, Majores and Minores, they reserve the choice
of to themselves.

The Ib. p. 33. and 34.
Lords, that had imped their Wings with Eagles Feathers, and liked no gain, but
what was raked out of the Ashes of Monarchy, made head against their Sovereign;
and to mate him the better, called in some French- Forces. Thus the
CommonWealth turned again the Sword into her own Bowels: And, though these Men
were more truly sensible of their own Design than of others Miseries; yet found
they no better pretext for private Interest, than that of the public: And
therefore, at the entry of the War, they cried Liberty; although when they
came near to an end, they never spoke word of it.

At Jews the Armies met. Where the King endeavors a Reconciliation, but in
vain: For Persuasions are ever unprofitable, when Justice is Inferior to Force.
The Sword decides the difference, and gave the King and Prince Prisoners. M.
Paris. p. 996.


The Ib. p. 35.
Person now, as well as the Regal Power, thus in the hands of Montfort and
Gloucester, found neither bound of Security, nor expectation of Liberty, but
what the emulous competition of greatness (which now began to break out between
these mighty Rivals) gave hope of. For Montfort meaning, by engrossing from his
Partner to himself, the Person of the King; and to his Followers the best
Portion of the Spoil; to draw more fruit from this advantage, than it should in
Fellowship yield, dissolved the knot of all their Amity. Thus equal Authority,
with the same Power, is very fatal (we see) to all great Actions: For to fit
Minds to so even a Temper, that they should not have some motions of
Dissenting, is impossible.

The Ib. p. 36.
King now at the Victor's Discretion, suited himself with incomparable Wisdom,
according to the Necessity of the time: Neither did Humility wrong Majesty,
when there was not other means to contain Spirits so Insolent, but Dissembling.

-- Leicester Ib. p. 37.
is become a Darling of the Common Rout, who easily change to every new Master;
but the best durst not Sail along his Fortune, by the Light of his Glory.
Crystal that fairly glistereth does easily break: And as the Ascent of
Usurping Royalty is slippery; so the top is shaking, and the Fast fearful. For
by this time the Imprisoned Prince was escaped, and fast assured of Gloucester,
by the knot of his great Mind and Discontent: And both, with the torn remainder
of the Loyal Army, United, and by speedy March, Arrived unlook't for, near
Evesham, to the Unarmed Troops of the secure Rebels, whom they instantly
Assailed; for it was no fit season to give time, when no time did assure so
much, as Expedition did promise.

Dispenser Ibid. p. 38.
and other Lords of that Faction, made toward the King, with the best speed
for Mercy; but could not break out, being hurried along the Storm with the
giddy Multitude. Public motion depends on the Conduct of Fortune; private on
our carriage. We must beware of running down steep Hills with weighty Bodies;
they once in motion, suo feruntur pondere. Stops are not then voluntary. But
Leicester, at that instant with the King, and out of the storm, might have
escaped, if his Courage and Hope had not made him more resolute by misfortune;
so that he could neither forsake his followers, nor his Ambition. Thus making
adversity the Exercise of his Virtue, he came and fell.

Let us now in the next place observe, what ready Instruments the Londoners
then were to promote that Rebellion of the Barons, with their just recompense
for so doing. And next the Miserable Actors in that Bloody Tragedy.

Matthew of Westminster (a credible Historian of that time) tells us; that after
the King, encompassed with Forces of his Enemies in the Tower of London, was
constrained to yield unto those Ordinances, which were made at Oxford by the
Rebellious Barons: The Queen being very much troubled, endeavored to pass from
the Tower to Windsore-Castle (where the Prince then lay with considerable
Forces) was Interrupted -- Intercepta est a Londinensibus, and ab eisdem
enormiter blasphemata et exclamata jactuque ^apidum and luti subtus ponte
vilissime repulsa. p. 315.
by the Londoners, Reproach't with their Opprobrious Clamours, and basely
driven back, with Stones and Dirt, which they threw at her from London Bridge.

And the same Year, the King returning with his Army from Dover-Castle (which
the Barons held against him) might have Surprised Montfort in Southwarke
(which, doubtless had prevented that deluge of Blood that afterward was spilt)
but that the Londoners with all their Power, came -- Irruerunt Londinenses,
quorum corda habuere Barons valde propitia, cum impetu fortitudinis magnoe,
cathenas frangunt, portas aperi^^t, and ad cum succurrendum catervatim
occurrunt. Ib. p. 317.

-- Contra Leges and Canones, conscientias scismatis and erroris, trahentes
secum, ad sui erroris fomentum, multos pseudo prophetas, lupos rapaces in ovium
vestimentis; contra Christi vicarios, and Christum domini, Regem proprium
murmurantes, non ut spiritus sanctus eloqui, sed ut superioris potestatis
abjectus obloqui dabat illis, M. Westminster. p. 332.


out to his aid, and rescued him.

And having thus link'^ himself with the Rebellious Barons, the same Author
will inform you, what were the Fruits of all their specious Pretenses, for
putting themselves in Arms against their Sovereign; -- Violationes Ib. p. 334.
Ecclesiarum, and depredationes, and macerationes personarum Ecclesiasticarum,
Christianorum and Iudoeorum; coedes and incendia, sine delectu conditionis aut
sexus, oetatis aut ordinis; the Violation of Churches; Robbing and Killing all
manner of Persons, Christians and Jews; Fire and Sword without any distinction,
of Sex, Age, or Order. Nay, so violently Zealous were they, for the Cause; that
in the Battle of Jews, these Londoners, desired -- Instanter supplicarunt, ut
primos ictus Belli habere possint, and eventum rei sub dubio percipere. Anonym.
Abbingd. fol. 119. a.
that they might undergo the first shock of the Fight, and the hazard thereof.
And though it was the King's Unhappiness to lose the day, at that time: Yet got
those Citizens nothing thereby: For the Valiant Prince Edward, charging --
Omnibus it a terrorem incussit, quod illos, quos fuga non eruit, cruentatus and
vibrans gladius iuteremit. M. Westminster. p. 335.
them with extraordinary courage, put them to the Rout, and pursued Anon.
Abbingd. f. 119. b. M. Paris. p. 995.
their Rear diverse Miles.

But, the next Year following, the Scene being changed by the happy overthrow
of all those Barons in the Battle of Evesham, the King (by the Advice of his
Parliament, held at Winchester) seized M. Paris. p. 999.
the Liberties of these Rebellious Citizens, and Committed the chiefest of them
to Prison; whose Redemption afterward raised him no small Sum of Money; and to
awe them the more, demolished their Bulwarks, and fortified the Tower of London
against them.

-- En Virg.
quo discordia Cives preduxit miscros?

Now for Montfort (Earl of Leicester) the principal Actor in this great
Rebellion, his Haughtiness was such, after the Battle of Jews, that having
the King and Prince his Prisoners; he not only seized all their Castles into
his own hands, but disdaining Clare (Earl of Gloucester) by whose Assistance he
become thus powerful, he disposed of the whole Kingdom, according as he listed;
his Sons also Committing many intolerable Outrages: So that Clare (whose
discontents inclined him to return to his Duty) consulting with the Lord
Mortimer, how to pull down the pride of that insolent Rebel, contrived a means,
for the Prince's Enlargement. Which succeeding accordingly (by his clear escape
In Vigilia Trinit. M. Paris. p. 997. n. 50.
from Dereford, to Wigmore-Castle) gave that Life to the rest of the Loyal
Party; that with incredible celerity, they raised a Gallant Army; wherewith
after he had Surprised the Earl of Oxford, and many other of the most eminent
Rebels, with no less than thirteen Banners, at Renelworth; he encountered
Montfort himself, and his whole Army, the next day, Pridic Nonas Aug. Ann. 1265.
near Cvesham; and giving them Battle, suddenly put a Period to their Usurped
Authority. In which fight that great Rebel, with his Eldest Son Henry, being
slain; his Head, Hands, and Feet, were cut M. Paris. p. 958. n. 50.
off by the fury of the Soldiers: And, though his Body, through the Charity of
others, was Buried in the Abbey; the Common People out of high Indignation,
toward him (who had been the Chief Instrument of Mischief to the whole Realm)
dig'd it up, and carried Anon. Abb.
it to a more remote place; esteeming f. 121. b. and 122.
it unworthy of Christian Burial, by Reason it had been so much infected with
the Leprosy of Rebellion.

Neither did the judgment for his Iniquities terminate here; but pursued his
two other Sons, Guy and Simon; who, being escaped out of Prison, got into
France; and there, endeavoring to bring in Foreign Forces, ended M. Westminster. p.
350. and 353.
their Days in Misery.

As for his Accomplices, most of them perished in that Battle at Evesham: And
the rest, excepting one, Johannes fit. Johannis. Anon. Abb. 121. b.
were taken Prisoners, and disherited: M. Westminster. p. 339. and 340.
But afterward, through the King's Special Favor, restored M. Paris. p. 1002.
to their Lands, upon several Fines, according to the Measure of their Offenses.

CHAP. XLVII.
THE Holy League in France, The Parallel of the Holy League in France.
is so exact a Pattern of ours in England, as we have just reason enough to
conceive, that the Contrivers of this Rebellion, did borrow the Plott from
thence. All the main parts, and many of the Material Circumstances, being the
same in both: Only the Scene is changed and the Actors diverse.

The full Story of that League, would require a Volume, having been written at
large by several Authors of note in sundry Languages; viz. By Thuanus in
Latin; by D'aubigny and others in French: But by none better than Caterino
D'avila in Italian, in that unparalleled History of the Civil-Wars of France:
Out of whose relation especially, I shall present to the Reader, a brief view
of so much as concerns our present purpose, without filling the Margin, with
Attestations from other Authors, where they concur with him: And but rarely
making use of them by way of Supplement.

In the draught of this Parallel, I shall endeavor to observe the same method
as in the former: First laying down the Original of that League: Then the
manner, by which the Faction grew to that height of greatness, as they quite
overtop'd and almost trampled upon the Crown. What use they made of this
Usurped Power, quite contrary to their Pretenses: And, lastly, how they fell
from their vast hopes, and failed of their Ambitious ends. As also, by the way
take notice of some such eminent Persons, and Circumstances, as may seem to
have the nearest Resemblance with these of our times.

What has been already observed of the main design of our Covenanters; viz.
That it was long a working under ground, before it appeared in its true shape
of Rebellion. That the first Seeds of it were sown in Queen Elizabeth's time;
grew up in K. James; and came to perfect ripeness in K. Charles his Reign, is
proportionably true of the Holy-League. The first Platform of that, was laid in
the time of K. Charles the Ninth, soon after the Reformation of Religion got
footing in France. It broke out in K. Henry the third's time; and was, at last,
suppressed by K. Henry the Fourth: So that it infested the Reigns of three
Kings, no less than this of ours.

The chief pretended occasion of it, was the defense of Religion; which, the
Ringleaders of that Faction, did (if not conceive themselves, yet) labor to
persuade the People to be in danger of utter Ruin, and Extirpation: And, that,
by reason of some Indulgence and Toleration, Davila. p. 75.
granted by Charles the ninth, and the Queen Mother, and continued by Henry the
third, unto the Huguenots, or Protestants, who were as odious to them, as
Papists were with our Men: though, the truth was those Princes did as entirely
detest the Religion of Protestants, as the most zealous among ours, can do the
Papists: And what they did in favor of them, was merely to preserve the Peace
of the Kingdom.

Before the League was fully hatched, the State of that Kingdom was not much
unlike this of ours, before the late Troubles. Some Grievances there were,
which waited upon it into the World. For besides the Toleration of the
Huguenots, which distasted the Zealots; the Ib. p. 348.
greatness of some new Men at Court, bred an high discontent in diverse of the
Nobility: And the heavy Taxes, Ib. p. 349.
and Impositions upon the Common People, made them generally dissaffected with
the present Government. And this Variety of Malignant Humors rising from
several Springs, all met in the same Stream, and bent their course to the same
common end, Innovation, and Subversion of the Established Government.

A Parliament (for so I shall take leave to call the general Assembly of the
three Estates in France, not according to the modern use of the Word in that
Country from whence this Kingdom borrowed at first, the name and thing, but in
compliance with our own Language) was thought to be a sure Remedy at a pinch
for ^etling the public Distractions. And though such Assemblies had been long
intermitted in that Realm, and the Kings of later time were grown out of love
with them; as conceiving, Ib. p. 43.
that while they, who represent the whole Nation, are convened together with
such Supreme Power, the Royal Authority, in the mean time, remained little
better than suspended. Yet, upon a consultation had with a Council of Peers
(like that of ours at York) and a motion from them to that purpose, Anno. 1560.
Francis the second was content to call a Parliament Ib. p. 51.
at Drleans, which was quietly Dissolved by his Death, before the States had
done any thing, but only showed Ib. p. 52.
their Teeth against the Protestants; taking Ib. p. 57.
a solemn Protestation for Defense of their Religion; and by that excluding all
others from any Vote in that Assembly.

By the like exigence was Henry the third driven to have recourse to the like
Remedy, which proved (indeed) worse than the Disease: For after his Intimation
of a Parliament to Commence at Ib. p. 324. 15. Nov. 1576.
Bloys, the Duke of Guise, and his Allies, laid the Foundation of the League;
who being the most Popular and Powerful Subjects in the Kingdom, sought Ib. p.
325.
by that means to augment their own greatness, and secure the State of
Religion, which was so straightly twisted with their Interests.

This Duke, besides his Ambition, which prompted him sufficiently to those
Turbulent Undertakings, has formerly received some disgust at Court, (not much
unlike that of Philip Earl of Pembroke) for the Keys of the Palace were taken
Ib. p. 71.
from him, and bestowed upon the King of Navarr. With which disgrace he was
extremely vexed; and his Brother the Cardinal much more, though they cunningly
Dissembled, and made a show as if nothing troubled them, but the Toleration of
and connivence at Calvinisme; by that means veiling their own Passions and
Private Interests, with an honest Cloak, and color of Religion. So, by little
and little, the Factious among the great ones were confounded with the
differences in Religion; and instead of Malcontents, and Guisards, they put
on the name of Catholics and Huguenots; Parties, which under color of Piety,
ministered so much the more Pernicious Fuel to all the Succeeding Combustions
and Troubles.

The League was ushered in with Declarations, Remonstrances, and Protestations,
to the same effect, and much in the same Language with this of our Covenanters.
D'aubignie Hist. univerchelle Tom. 2. lib. 3. cap. 3. col. 824.


We the Princes, Noblemen, Gentlemen, and Commons (Parties to that League)
professed Compare with this the Preface to the Covenant in the Declar. of the
Lords and Commons.
that nothing but pure Zeal, and Sincere Devotion, which we bear to the Honor
of God, his Majesty's Service, the Public Peace and Preservation of our Lives
and Estates, together with the Apprehension of our utter Ruin and Destruction,
has necessitated us to this Resolution, which we are constrained to put on;
for which we cannot any way be taxed, or traduced for Suspicion of Disloyalty:
22. Oct. 1642 Exact Coll. p. 663.
Our Councils and Intentions having no other Design, but merely the
Maintenance, and Advancement of the Service of God, Obedience to his Majesty,
and Preservation of his Estate. And, perceiving by what is past, that our
Enemies have not, nor ever had any other aim, but to Establish their Errors in
the Kingdom; to extirpate Religion, and by little and little to undermine the
King's Authority, and totally alter the Government; we can do no less in
discharge of our Honors and Consciences, than withstand the Sinister Designs
of the Supreme Enemies of God, and his Majesty by a common Covenant and
Association; it being Ib. coll. 827.
no more than time, to divert and hinder their Plots and Conspiracies, for all
Faithful and Loyal Subjects to enter into a Holy Union, and Conjunction, which
is now the true and only means left in our Hands by God, for restoring of his
own Service, and Obedience to his Majesty.

The chief Heads of the League, to which they swore, were either altogether, or
in Proportion the same with those in our English Covenants, viz.

1. To Establish Ib. col. 830. Et Davila p. 327.
Religion, the Law and Service of God, in its Pristine State, according to the
form and usage of the Catholic Roman-Church (there, as of the Protestant
Reformed-Church here.)

2. As our Covenanters swore, in the second Article, to extirpate all Popery,
Heresy, etc. So did the Leaugers Renounce Ibid.
and abjure all Errors contrary to their Religion.

3. As our Men, in the third Article, swore to preserve the Rights and
Privileges of the Parliament, and Liberties of the Kingdom; and to preserve
the King's Person and Authority (but with a Reservation) in the Preservation
and Defense of the true Religion, and Liberties of the Kingdon: So did they, to
preserve Henry the third of that Name, and his Successors, the Most Christian
Kings, in the State, Splendor, Authority, Right, Service, and Obedience, which
are due unto him from his Subjects ( but with this Abatement) according as is
contained in certain Articles, which shall be presented unto him in the
Parliament, which at his Coronation be swears to observe; with Protestation to
do nothing contrary to what shall be proposed unto him, and ordained by the
States. As also they swear to Reestablish in all the Counties of the Kingdom,
their Ancient Privileges, Preheminencies and Liberties.

4. As in the fourth Article of the Covenant, our Men Swear the discovery of
all such as have been, or shall be Incendiaries, Malignants, or evil
Instruments by hinding the Reformation, etc. That they may receive condign
Punishment ( not in any ordinary way of Justice, according to the Law of the
Land, but) as the Degrees of their Offenses shall require or deserve: Or ( in
case they neither require not deserve) as the Supreme Iudicatories of both
Kingdoms, or others having Power from them shall think convenient. Just so, the
Leaguers Swear, in case there shall be any hindrance, or Opposition in the
forementioned Particulars ( preservation of Religion, etc.) by whomsoever it
be made, all the Confederates shall employ their Lives and Fortunes, for the
bringing of all such to Punishment; and that either by way of Justice, or of
Arms, without any respect of Persons.

5. The like mutual defense of all that enter into their Covenant, and their
constant Perseverance in it all the Days of their Lives; not to suffer
themselves directly, nor indirectly, to be withdrawn by whatsoever Combination,
Persuasion, or terror, etc. The promoting of it against all Impediments, and
revealing of all Designs to the contrary. Which our Men Swear in the first
Article. Just so the Leaguers protest, Davila p. 328. D'aubignie col. 831 and
832.
tha^, if any of their Confederates shall be molested or troubled, all the rest
shall be bound to Revenge his Cause, against any Person whatsoever; and to
discover whatsoever they shall know Prejudicial to their Association, they
Swear Ib. col. 827.
by Almighty God, and promise upon their Lives and Honors, to continue in this
League, even to their last drop of Blood, and not to depart from it, or go
against it, upon any Command, Pretense, Excuse, or Occasion whatsoever.

6. As ours profess in each Article, to take the Covenant Sincerely, etc. So
each of them Swears, Ib.
that he enters into this Holy League Loyally and Sincerely.

7. As our Men, in the close of the Covenant, did make a general Confession of
their Sins, and Profe^s and Declare, before God and the World, their unfeigned
desire to be bumbled for them, and to amend their Lives in all Duties they owe
to God and Man; and each one to go before another in the example of a real
Conversation; and likewise invite other Christian-Churches to join in the same,
or like Association and Covenant with them. So did the Leaguers in the close of
their Declaration, entreat Davila p. 387.
all Persons, of what condition soever, not yet confederate with them; that
they would favor them, and to their Power assist them in the Execution of so
good and holy a work: Professing they will receive into their Association, all
good Men, that have a Zeal to the Honor of God and his Church, and to the
Welfare and Reputation of Religion. Concluding thus; Ib. p. 388.


Seeing of necessity all our help must come from God, we entreat all good
Catholics, to put themselves in good condition to Godwards, and be Reconciled
to his Divine Majesty by a thorough Reformation of their Lives, so to appease
the Wrath of God, and to call upon him with an upright Conscience, both in
public and private Prayers, and Devotions; to the end that all our Actions may
be referred to the Honor of God and his Glory, who is the Lord of Hosts, and
from whom alone we look for strength, and certain deliverance.

And the Parliament at Bloys, though at the first meeting, it seemed to concur
in the same intentions with the King; yet the effect was nothing less: For it
was an Assembly packt up of Persons dissaffected to the present Government; the
Ib. p. 335.
greatest part of the Commissioners of Shires, being such as had underhand
Subscribed the League, and had given themselves up, to be guided by the
Councils of the Duke of Guise. Besides the Knights or Commissioners of diverse
Counties, and the Burgesses of several Cities, were either not returned, or
neglected to come, or were departed: And therefore the Prince of Conde, when
certain of their Members were sent unto him, with a Message in Writing, as from
the States General, or Parliament, he refused Ib. p. 339.
to open the Letters, or to acknowledge them to be a Parliament; affirming,
that such a Congregation as that, where the Commissioners of so many Cities,
Shires, and Counties were wanting; in which they went about to force Men's
Consciences, to Oppress and Extirpate the Total Line, and Violate the
Prerogative of the Crown of France, to comply with the Humors of some
Strangers, whose Hearts were set on Fire with an unsupportable, and Pernicious
Ambition, could by no means be called a Parliament; being indeed nothing else
but a Conventicle, of a few Suborned Persons, corrupted by the Disturbers of
the public Peace.

If we consider the quality of the Persons engaged in that League, we shall
find them much of the same make with these of ours. They were principally of
two much different sorts; the first, Ib. p. 329. and 367.
for the most part, consisted of Noblemen, and Persons of Quality; such as were
ill satisfied with the Power and greatness of the King's Dominion, and could
not endure to see themselves past by, in the disposal of Preferments, and
Court-Favours; and therefore sided with the Faction, partly out of discontent,
and partly out of hopes of Innovation; thinking, that by putting down the
present, that they should raise their private Fortunes to a better condition;
and at last arrive to the height of their Desires.

The second sort Ib. p. 396.
whereof the League was Composed, were Persons, who for Quality seemed to be
much inferior to the former; but for use and profit were not a whit below them.
For these were they that won the Cities, the common People, and the Tradesmen,
generally over all the Kingdom. These, for the most part, were Men of a free
and good nature, passionately affected to the Catholic Faith, and most
intestine haters of the Huguenots: Some of them believing in good earnest, that
their Religion was in danger of utter Ruin. Other desirous to see the
destruction of Heresy, did not only readily engage themselves in the League in
their own Persons, but contributed their utmost endeavors to draw on the
common People, and to win others to the Faction. With these fell on (as a third
sort) some of the long Robe (Preachers and Lawyers) who, under color of
Religion, did hide either their fickle and inconstant nature, or their
Ambitious, or Covetous Desires of their own Greatness and Preferment.

To which we may add a fourth sort of Men; which were moved, either out of
private Spleen against some Court-Favourites; or were drawn in, to side with
the League merely upon their fair Pretenses; never dreaming that their aims
were against the King or the Government. With which bait some Wise Men were
allured into the snare; among whom Villeroy the chief Secretary of State was
one, and Brissonius Primier President of the Parliament of Paris, another, the
former entering himself one of the League, out Ib. p. 487.
of a private grudge to the Duke D'Espernon, desired the Duke of Guise's
Faction might prevail, that Espernons might be abated; never imagining, nor
could be ever believe, that the League would ever attempt any thing against the
King's Person, but only had an aim to cashiere his Minions, and endeavor to
extirpate the Huguenots. The later, Ib. p. 796.
though he had been at first a principal Instrument for the League, fell off,
when he perceived, that the ends of the Ringleaders were not so sincere for
the public good, as he at first had fancied.

And diverse other there were (as there will be in all Factions where great Men
are engaged) who adhered to that Party; not out of any ends, or Inclinations of
their own, but by reason Ib. p. 518.
of their Alliance with, or dependence on the House of Lorrein, and other chief
Men of the League.

Having thus laid the grounds of their League upon these fair Pretenses to gull
the People, their means of advancing it were such, as our Men have transcribed
from their Copy: Not any thing of moment having been used here, which was
wanting there, to increase their own, and undermine the King's Power and
Authority. They had Ib. p. 385.
their Fears and Iealousies of dangerous Plots against their Persons at home;
Ib. p. 494.
of Designs to seize upon the City of Paris; to overawe them by armed force,
and put an hundred of the chief to Death; of Practices with Foreign Princes
against them and their Religion; and of sudden Invasion intended from abroad.
They had Reports broacht Ib. p. 457.
upon on grounds and Tumults Ib. p. 482. and 367. 379.
raised in the City, upon no other occasion than those Reports. They had their
Preachers (h) to amaze and fright the People out of their Wits, by Strange and
Miraculous Stories, and out of their Allegiance, by traducing and inveighing
against the present Government. They had Ib. p. 349.
their Scandalous Libels and Pictures first Published in the City, and thence
dispersed abroad to Poison the Country.

They neglected no means of courting and winning the Common People, by rubbing
up their sores of new Taxes and Impositions, and promising relief unto them, by
crying Ib. p. 384. See the like of our men. Exact Coll. p. 100. 197. and 259.
up the Fundamental Laws, and Liberties of the Subject, by rendering the King's
Person contemptible, and his Actions Odious in the Eyes of his People, setting
forth Declarations and Remonstrances of the State of the Kingdom, of such a
tenor, as it will be no new thing to Translate what they at Westminster, have
in a manner, already done to my hand.

They wounded the King's Honor, through the sides of his Councellers; they
stained the sincerity of his Professions, and Protestations in point of
Religion; they went about to supplant his just Power and Authority, by their
new and insolent demands (such as those of ours in the Nineteen Propositions.)

Whilst Ib. p. 329.
they seemed to maintain his Authority, they robbed him of it, transferring it
wholly to the head of their League. Ib p. 336.
And though their Parliament (in that point more moderate than ours) waived
that ancient Question, and would not contend about it; viz. Whether the King or
the Estates concerned in Parliament be Superior (a point determinable by the
very form of holding Parliaments, and ever carried by the King in all former
times) yet, they thought fit to Petition the King, that for the more
expedition, and general satisfaction of all differences, he would please to
make choice of a certain number of Judges, such in whom the States might
confide; who, together with XII of their Members, might hear and receive the
several motions from the several Estates: And whatsoever those Judges and XII
Commissioners should jointly agree upon, to have the force and strength of a
Law, without any Power (in the King) to alter or repeal it.

When this would not be granted by the King, upon grave reasons of State, which
we need not here set down; the Heads of the Faction and their Adherents, took
Ib. p. 341. 342.
a new course, to restrain the King's Power, by proposing that the number of
the Kings Council should be limited to XXIV. (the very next number, which our
Lords and Commons, in the second of their Nineteen Propositions, Iunii. 2. 1642.
would limit his Privy Council to; viz. not to exceed XXV.) and they to be
chosen, not by the King, at pleasure, but by every County of the Kingdon.

They required, Ibid. p.
that all Moneys to be raised upon the Subject by way of Subsidy, or Impost,
should be employed for the defense of the Kingdom; and that by all means, at
Free-Parliament should be called 386.
every three years, at the least, with full Power to any Man, to present his
Grievances to the States so Assembled.

They charged Ib. p. 327, 328, and 382.
upon the King his Oath taken at his Coronation; not only to be obliged to
preserve the Ancient Laws, and Liberties of the Subject; but such better Laws
and more Commodious, as should be presented unto him.

Their first grand Remonstrance of the State of the Kingdom, Compare with this
the third Remonstrance, made by the Members at Westminster. Exact. Coll. p. 268.
was cast in the same Mould with that of ours: Which, though it were the
Contrivance but of a few chief Men of the League; yet was it published in the
name Ib. p. 385.
of all the Lords and Commons of France (only signed by the Cardinal of
Bourbon, whom they made a Stale to their Ambition.) [By this they declared, Ib.
p. 382.
that France had been miserably tormented by a Pestiferous Sedition raised for
the Subversion of the ancient Religion of their Forefathers: That Ib. p. 383.
no Remedies had been applied, but such as were more proper for nourishing than
curing the Disease: That the Catholic Religion being in great danger, it was
most necessary to take some speedy prudent course, for prevention of the
imminent ruin thereof: That Agents were sent to practice with the Protestant
Princes of Germany, for Suppressing the Persons of Honest Men, and pulling down
the Catholick-Religion; and an endeavor to destroy the great Men, who had the
principal places of Honor: That Ib. p. 384.
the King's Favors (whose Majesty was and ever should be Sacred to them) and
Government of the State, were engrossed by such, who had drained his Coffers,
and placed Officers in the Exchequer, for their own private advantage: That
though some Rays of hopes appeared by that Assembly of the States General at
Bloys (the ancient Remedy for all Domestick-Wounds) yet, after their great
Labors and Expenses in that meeting, no Fruits were Reaped, by reason of the
evil-Council of those Men, so dissaffected to God, and the good of the
Commonweal: So Ib. p. 385.
that the abuses, which by little and little, at first stole upon them, did
then burst in, like an Impetuous Torrent, ready to overwhelm the Kingdom; the
Church of God being profaned, the Nobility scorned and vilified, and every day
oppressed with Innumerable Grievances, and Illegal Exactions

And, that upon these just Causes and Considerations, they declared; Compare
with this the Answer of the Members at Westminister to his Majesty's Message
XI. Sept. 1642. Exact coll. p. 587.
that they had all sworn and religiously promised to stand upon their Guard,
that the Church of God might be restored to her Honor; the true Christian-
Catholic Religion Established; the Nobility enjoy their Liberty entirely as
they ought; the People relieved, and all new Impositions abolished.

And, that these were the occasions Ib. p. 386.
of their taking up Arms, for rescuing the Kingdom of France from ruin, the
preservation of good Men, and punishment of bad; and for the security of their
own persons; there being no other means left to preserve themselves, Compare
with this the Declaration of the Members at Westminster Aug. 1642. Exact. Coll.
p. 491.
and turn away the Knife from their own Throats; which yet they would not make
use of, if their Estates only were in danger, and the Subversion of Religion,
and State of the Kingdom were not inseparably joined with their own; for the
preservation of which, they should not fear any hazard; concluding, that they
could not choose a more Honorable Grave, than to spend their Lives in so Holy
a Cause; so just a Quarrel in discharge of that Duty and Obligation, which they
owed as good Christians to the Service of God, and as good and Loyal Subjects,
to oppose the Subversion of which the State, must naturally follow the
alteration of Religion. Protesting that they did not take up Arms against the
King their Sovereign Lord; but for the guard and just defense of his Person,
his Life and State, for whom they had promised and sworn to hazard their own
Lives and Fortunes to the last drop of their Blood; and to lay down Arms so
soon as it should please his Majesty to remove the danger, which threatened the
ruin of the Service of God and so many good Men -- Entreating Ib. p. 387.
all that were not Confederate with them, to favor their Designs, Compare with
this their Declarations July. 1642. Exact Coll. p. 464.
and to assist them by their Power, in the Execution of that good and Holy Work.

Exhorting all Towns and Corporations, as they tendered their own preservation,
to judge uprightly of their Intentions; See their Declaration for inviting the
Scotts 7 Nov. 1642.
and to consider what benefit and repose would accrue unto them; and so doing,
to put their hands to that good work: Declaring, that they would not use any
act of Violence, but against such as should oppose them, and by other undue
means favor their Adversaries, which sought to ruin the Church, and Subvert
the State: Assuring every Man, that their Holy-Armies should do no Man any
wrong, or oppression, whether in passing or staying in any place; but should
live orderly, and pay for all they took: Protesting See the like Expressions by
those at Westminster in their Declar^ in Answer to his Majesty's Message Aug.
1642. Exact Coll. p. 585. And the Convenant taken by both Houses 15 Iunij. 1643.
never to lay down Arms, till they had fully Executed all the Premises, but
rather die with a willing Heart; desiring to be Intombed in a Monument,
Consecrated to the last of Frenchmen, who died in Arms, for the Service of God
and their Country.

At which time they were so high in their own Opinions, and their Conceits of
the Peoples Inclinations; that, in this Declaration (as an argument to win
every Man to their Party) they Invited Ib. p. 387.
all, to put to their helping hands to their good Design; which, by the Grace
of God (as they said) could not choose but prosper.

Suitable whereunto, our Men, to affright such from their Loyalty, as they could
not persuade; told Declar. 19. May. 1641. Exact Cool. p. 213.
them, that they had brought their work to such an height and degree of
Success, that nothing seemed to be left in their way, able to hinder the full
accomplishment of their desires, unless God in his Justice should send a
grievous Curse upon them.

And, Ib. p. 388.
as the Leaguers, backing the words of their Remonstrance, with Actions of no
less efficacy, began immediately upon it, to impatronize themselves of many
Cities and Strongholds; partly by underhand Practices, and partly by open
force; Such were Lull and Uerdune (the first Cities in France, that cast out
the Kings Officers, and received the Leaguers) so did ours possess themselves
of Hull and Plymmouch, and other places of Strength, which tended so much to
the advancement of their Design.

When therefore the Leaguers had by these Subtilties wrought the People out of
Opinion with the King; and him out of his Power over his Subjects. When D'avila
p. 381.
he could not with satisfaction to himself, neither join with the Huguenots,
nor give content to the Leaguers; waiting to make use of such Council as time
should Minister unto him, his Affairs going on but a slow pace, he stood rather
to justify himself, than to stop the Progress of the Confederates. And, when he
was assured from all parts, at the same time, of raising Forces, and frequent
meetings of Men in Arms, he did no more than set forth an Edict; 8o. Martij.
1685.
wherein, after the usual Preamble, he protested his earnest desire of the
Public Tranquillity; and, by all good means to provide for the ease of his
People. Compare with this his Majesty's Proclamations of May 27. and June 18.
1642. Exact Coll. p. 301 and 367.
In which, perceiving, that some who were Enemies of their Peace, did labor to
oppose him; He therefore straightly prohibited all Levies, and gathering together
of Soldiers; Commanding that their Leaders should be Apprehended, and
Prosecuted according to Law. By which he gained no more but this; viz. That by
the continuing of their Levies, it did then sufficiently appear who were his
Enemies.

Thus did the Leaguers get the Start of the King, in their warlike Prepations;
and it was long before he could persuade himself to prepare for his Defense:
But being at last necessitated Ib. p. 382.
to make other Provisions (than Proclamations) more suitable to the exigency of
the times; Compare this with his Majesty's Proclamation of Aug. 10. 1642. Exact
Coll. p. 510.
after much doubting, and deliberation, he resolved to resist the force and
practices of the League, as well as he could, without any Intelligence or
Assistance from the Huguenots; hoping that he should be able of himself to curb
them. But scarcely had he begun to put this deliberation in Execution, than
that he discovered the weakness of his Councils, in that of his Forces.

The Lord of Truery had raised for him Ten Thousand Switzers: But the Counties
of Burgundy, Champaine, and Lyouns, being all possessed by them of League,
there was no passing for them that way. The Count of Scomberg was sent to hire
some German-Horse; but in his passage thither, through those Counties, he was
seized on and Committed to Prison by the Duke of Lorrain. Nor did the Kings
business go on much better at home than abroad: The Nobility divided, partly by
reason of their Religion; and partly by ancient Feuds, (newly divided by these
Dissentions,) came but slowly in to the King. The People generally
dissaffected, did not concur to the relief of his wants: The Revenues of the
Crown, not only stopped by noise of War; but purposely Interrupted and seized The
like did the Members at Westminster by several Orders of 21 Ian. and 26 Nov.
1642. and by an Ordinance 21 Sept. 1642.
upon bp the Heads of the Faction, were utterly decayed, so as the Sinews of
War were wanting on all sides to the Kings Party. Those of the League therefore
perceiving with what difficulties the King wrestled; began with great
earnestness to gather Forces, and to put in Execution the Plot they had laid
long before.

The King having, as yet, nothing to oppose them but his Pen, was necessitated
to employ it, in vindication of himself from those Imputations, which were
thrown upon his Government, and in their Manifesto's reflected upon his Person.
To which he published an Answer Ib. p. 390.
wherein, having first informed his People; that though he had several times
heretofore, both by his Letters and Commands; admonished them, not to suffer
themselves to be persuaded or perverted by such as endeavored to raise
Insurrections amongst them, and to draw them into their Party; and, by so doing
to turn them out of the ways of Peace: And had also proferred and promised
Grace and Favor to all such as being already engaged, should return to their
Obedience, after they should truly understand his Intentions: Nevertheless,
with great grief of Heart, perceiving; that notwithstanding his Commands and
Gracious Advertisment, some of his Subjects did not forbear to engage
themselves in that Faction, being drawn into it by several Interests: But the
most of them purely transported and blinded with the fair and specious Colors,
which the Authors of those Seditions put upon their Designs; he thought it a
part of his Duty, for the general benefit of all his Subjects, and in discharge
of his Conscience to God, and Honor to the World, to oppose the clear light of
the Truth to those Artifices of his Adversaries: To the end that his Subjects,
being guided by the clearness of that Light, might in time, and without any
Impediment, discern and know the grounds and ends of those Troubles; and, by
that means avoid the Miseries and Calamities, both public and private, which
were like to grow upon those Commotions.

After this Preface, he proceeds to show the Vanity of their Pretenses, and to
remove the occasions of their Fears and Iealousies.

First in point of Religion, appealing b. p. 391.
to his own constant practice of, and endeavors for the Religion Established;
the dangers and hazards he had undergone for the defense of it: That Ib. p. 393.
he should not refuse to con^ent to any Laws for the securing of it, Compare
with this, his Majesty's Answer to the Petition, which accompanied the grand
Remonstrance Dec. 1641. Exact Coll. p. 23. And his Declaration. Exact Coll. p.
26.
so they were just and possible in themselves, and profitable for his Subjects.
Nor did he refuse any that were offered to him, by the Parliament at Bloys in
favor of it. Nor Ib. p. 392.
did there ever any the least thought enter into his Heart of Countenancing
Heresy in his Dominions.

Secondly, in point of Justice and Defense of the Laws, be showed what he had
done, since his coming to the Crown, in favor of it; what good Laws and
Constitutions he had made, and how desirous he had been that they should be
observed: But, if any default were in the Execution of them, the blame must
rest upon his Officers, not upon him; whose particular care Ib. p. 393.
had been so great for the Rebuilding of those two Pillars, Compare with this
his Majesty's Declar. De. 1641. Exact Coll. p. 25. 26. 27. etc.
Religion and Justice, which the violence of former times had Ib. p. 395.
pulled down, and Levelled with the ground.

He likewise entreated all his Subjects, to open their Eyes, and consider the
dangerous Consequences of these Wars, which would not be ended so soon as they
imagined; and not to stain their Loyalty, by suffering themselves to be made
Instruments of their Countries, ruin to their Enemies advancement.

Thirdly, as touching the disposal of places of Honor, and trust in the
Kingdom, first he stood upon his Prerogative; that, as all his Predecessors, so
he might freely confer such places upon whom he pleased, being not restrained
by any Law to make choice of one more than another: Appealing to the People,
how groundless that Calumny was, when they might see those that most
complained, and were the Authors of those Troubles, Observe this rightly
paralleled in the Earls of Northumb. Essex, Holland, the L. Say, Kimbolton, Sr.
Hen. Vane, Mr. Oliver, St. John, and diverse others.
to be such as had been most preferred by him.

Fourthly, for the Grievances of the People, he professed Ib. p. 396.
he had already begun, and promised his continuance to relieve them.

Fifthly, for the secret Plots and Conspiracies, which the Heads of the Faction
pretended to be laid against their Persons; for preventing whereof they said
they were enforced to take up Arms; his Majesty's known Clemency might
sufficiently secure them from any on his part, who was naturally so far from
all desire of revenge, that no Man living had ever the least cause to complain
of him in that respect, notwithstanding what ever Provocation he had from any.
But very many have had sufficient proof of his natural Bounty, and Mercy:
Therefore his Majesty prayed, and entreated the Heads of that Faction to
Disband their Forces; to relinquish their League, and return to their Duty and
Loyalty; and so doing he promised to receive them into his favor.

But after the King and the Leaguers had for a long time bandied Writing, one
against the other, they so far incensed Ib. p. 397.
each other, that it was now full time, either to come to Action, and not to
multiply any more words. The Ib. p. 398
Forces of the Kingdom, which adhered to the King were very weak; for he had
not time sufficient to ripen his Designs, being prevented by the sagacity and
forwardness of the House of Guise; his own Followers and those of his
Favorites, were divided; sometaking one part, some another: And those which
stood with the Royal Authority, were very cold and slow, their Courages being
much daunted by the bold attempts of the Consederates: Nay some of the King's
own Party, and who had been highly favored and preferred by him, were revolted
Ib. p. 399.
from him to the League. Was not his Majesty thus used by the Earls of
Salisbury Monmouth, Westmorland, the L Coventry and others?


But that which Afflicted the King above all, was his fears of the City of
Parts (a just Parallel of our London) which was indeed the Head of the Kingdom;
but a Head so great and Powerful, that which way soever it inclined, it was
sure to turn the Scales. This City was not only united with the general
League, but had entered into a particular League and Covenant amongst
themselves: And, having secretly provided themselves of Arms, was ready to
revolt upon the first occasion; and if need were to seize upon the Kings
Person, which very much troubled him: For, if he should stay in Paris, he could
not do it without great danger to himself, being liable to every affront from
the inconsiderable headiness of the Multitude: And if he should abandon it, it
was sure to revolt.

To secure his stay there, he was therefore forced to call Ib.
all the Soldiers of his Ordinary Guard to their Colors; and farther made
choice of forty five Gentlemen, in whom he could repose confidence, whom he
maintained at the charge of an hundred Crowns a Month, besides their Expenses
at Court, to attend continually upon his Person: Yet, for all this he lived in
continual Jealousies, and Affliction of Mind, seeing himself upon such an
Headstrong Beast, as was not possible for him to manage: Wherefore he
endeavored all fair means of accommodation with the Leaguers, profering them
all security.

The City of Paris erected Ib. p. 437.
a new Council of Sixteen (as London new-moulded In December. Anno. 1641.
theirs) which were the most interested and affected to the League (according
to the number of Wards in that City) who were to manage all the affairs and
dispose the minds of the People; with whom were joined one of every Mystery in
the City, who made their Addresses to, and received their Orders from the
Sixteen; as well concerning the defense of the City, and Service of the League,
as to counterpiose the Kings Designs.

When there was no hopes of accommodation left with the Leaguers, the King
began Ib. p. 457.
to raise Forces too; and summoned all the Nobility to assist him. Wherein he
met no where with so much Opposition, as from the Turbulent Citizens of Paris,
where the Preachers and Council of Sixteen never ceased to provoke and incense
the People, and raise frequent Tumults in the City, so as the Magistrates was
set light by, and trod under foot, with danger of an open revolt, which those
Men desired and endeavored. Nor did it stand with the present condition of the
King to chastise the Authors of those Tumults, for fear of ministering any
occasion to the City of revolting from him. Whereupon they Multiplied their
Practices with much boldness, which had (doubtless) arrived at that end, which
the Leaguers designed, but that the fear Ib. p. 447.
of the German-Army, and the Kings Protestation, and Oath for defense of
Religion against the Huguenots (which he had solemnly taken upon New Years day
1587.) did contain them within some bounds of Moderation.

The King therefore, having Ib. p.
with great Dexterity and Moderation, many times stilled those Reports, which
had been raised on no grounds; being likewise heartily vexed at the Ringleaders
of those Tumults, but deeply concealing his Passion, left 457.
the Lord Villaclere to be Governor, and the Queen Mother Regent in Paris; and
departed thence about the end of July, 1587.

Thus was that King driven from Paris by the Tumults.

The House of Lorrein (who were the prime Men in the League) puffed up with the
Opinion of their own Power, forgot all Moderation, and spread their Sails to
vast hopes; talked of nothing, but utter extirpation of the Huguenots; of
deposing the King, and thrusting him into a Cloister (as they found in Stories
that King Chilperick, had been served:) of expelling all Favorites from the
Court; sharing the great places of the Kingdom amongst themselves, and
Governing all France as they pleased. And so high were they in their own
Conceits, that their Councils were not bounded, either by Justice, or
Possibility. For supposing all things to be now in their own hands, they
imagined their Merit to be such, as they might lawfully undertake, and their
Power no less, as that they might easily perform, any the highest and most
advantageous achievement what soever.

What was this other, than, as our Men told his Majesty, See their third
Remonstrance Exact Coll. p. 265.
If they should make the highest Precedents of former Parliaments their
Patterns, it would be no Breach of Modesty: To which purpose they caused, or
suffered those Infamous Stories of King Richard the Second's time, to be
Published in Print. Davila p. 481.


When all their Plots were now ripe, and they in readiness for Execution; they
took the very same course, and upon the very same Grounds, as our Men did
actuate their Designs; which was (forsooth) by an Humble Petition. Like the
Petition for the Militia, and the XIX Propositions. Exact Coll. p. 59. and 307.
For they agreed, that the Duke of Guise, and other Lords of the League, should
not immediately set upon the King with open force: But to make a show, as if
the nature of the Affairs themselves, did carry them on to their Designed end,
they should present a Petition, which should contain manydemands, very
advantageous to themselves; and such as would necessitate the King to declare
himself to the full. For if he granted their Requests without more ado, than
they had their end, but if he should hold off, and be unwilling, than he would
give them occasion to make use of their Arms; and to take that from him by
force, which he was not willing to part with of his own accord.

The chief Heads of their Petition (presented to the King, by the Duke of
Guise) after many Preambles and Reasons couched together with a great deal of
cunning, were these; viz. That the King would cordially Ioyn with the League
for Extirpation of the Huguenots [His Majesty join wirh his Parliament, for
defense of Religion] That he would dismiss from his Privy Council, and other
places of Trust and Command; Exact Coll. p. 102.
and from the Court, and their several places, all such Persons as they should
name; such as were suspected by them [Such as they could not confide in,
dissaffected to the Catholic Religion] That Davila p. p. 482.
he would grant the Confederates some places of Strength, wherein they might
place Garrisons for their own security, and those to be maintained at the
charge of the Crown. That an Army should be maintained on the confines of
Lorein, to hinder any Foreign Invasion, and that to be commanded by one of the
confederates [This the Militia See the like demands by the Members at
Westminster in their Propositions Exhibited to his Majesty 23 Nov. 1644.
just] That he would confiscate and cause to be sold, all the Goods of the
Huguenots [Papists and Prelates] and with the price of them, defray the Charges
of the former War, And in their Articles of Treaty at Edenborough 29. Nov. 1643.
and help to maintain the Leaguers for the future.

To this Petition, which was presented to the King, in the beginning of
February, Anno. 1588. A full Relation at the Treaty at Uxbridge. p. 6. and p.
72.
his Majesty was not hasty to return an Answer; nor did the Duke of Guise much
desire it, because the ends of their Demands, were only to make the King
contemptible, and odious to his People, as also suspected as a Favourer of
Heretics: And, in the mean time to give occasion to the League, to rise in
Arms, and Prosecute their Designs, while Fortune smiled upon them.

The Ibid.
Citizens of Paris being led away by their new Council of Sixteen, could no
longer endure the Kings Government; but were full of Scandalous Libels,
politic Discourses, Satirical Verses, and feigned Stories, wounding the Kings
Honor. The Preachers likewise, after their usual manner, but with more
freedom, speaking against the present State of things, filled the Peoples Ears
with new, strange, and miraculous Stories. Which poison being derived from the
City of Paris, as from the Heart, spread abroad into all other parts of the
Kingdom; all Counties being possessed with the like Impressions in favor of
the League, and disadvantage of the King.

The Ib. p. 483.
Duke of Guise, purposing to devive all the Kings Authority upon himself and
his Adherents, applied himself mostly to the Parisians, being informed by the
Sixteen, that the City was at his Devotion, with Twenty Thousand Armed Men,
under Sixteen Commanders of their several Companies, ready for any Employment.
But not confiding in those Commanders, he thought fit to lessen the number, and
sent them five Captains to regulate and Command the Popular Arms; viz. Brissac,
Boisdaufin, Chamois, Escaroles, and Colonel St. Paul; with whom was joined the
Lord of Menevil, as the prime instrument of the Plot.

And, though the King, in his own Person, was a most Rigid Opposer of the
Huguenots, and none more Zealous in his Religion than himself; yet did they
defame him to the People, as a Favourer of Heretics; yea and to Foreign
Princes too; Traducing him (says Thuanus) Hist. Lib. 85. Anno. 1586.
who was otherwise a most intestine Enemy to the Protestant cause, both in
France, and with Foreign Princes, as if what he did for the Peace and Quiet of
his Kingdom, he had done it in favor of the Protestants.

Touching the point of Placing and Displacing Counselors; as their Demands and
Color for them, were alike with our Men's; so was the Kings Answer not much
different.

It Davila. p. 492.
was the public discourse of the Guisards in Paris, that the Kingdom could
never be settled in Peace, nor the Minds of true Catholics at ease, so long as
they saw the Kings Person environed with non-confiding Persons, and of
uncertain resolutions in point of Religion.

The King made answer he was very willing to any thing that might conduce to
the settlement of Religion; and that Ib. p. 493.
he was heartily inclined to the Extirpation of Huguenots; there being no
Prince in Christendom, that more hated, and desired the Suppression of
Heretics, than himself. And, that for those about his Person, they had never
suggested to him any Councils to the contrary: That all Kings had ever enjoyed
the free Liberty of preserving and favoring whom they pleased; and to choose
their Companions according to their own Gust. Were it not so, Compare with this
his Majesty's Answer to the Petition which accompanied the Grand Remonstrance
Dec. 1641. Exact Coll. p. 13. And his Answer to the Petition concerning the
Militia Exact Coll. p. 60.
the liberty of Kings should be chained, and limited to that which private Men
enjoy free, and without restraint; there being no person so mean, but has
Power to live and converse with whom he please, according to his own Genus and
liking. But if it should be proved against his Ministers, that they had in any
thing, demeaned themselves with less Sincerity than they ought, he would be
ready to punish them accordingly, to the quality of their Offense; but would
not Banish them from his Court to humor other Men.

When the King, by reason of the Tumults in Paris, had (as was said) for his
own Security, enlarged the number of his Guard, the Duke of Guise and his
Partisans spread, Davila p. 494. and 495.
a Rumor in the City, that the King had a purpose to put a Hundred and Twenty
of the Principal Catholics to Death, and to put Garrisons in the chief places
of the City, Compare with this that Scandalous Aspersion aganst his Majesty
that he had a design of actual violence upon the City of London. 4 Ian. 1641.
to awe the Citizens; and therefore, that it was necessary for them to stand
upon their Guard.

Upon this Succeeded Ib. p. 501.
the Barricados at Paris, when the King was in a manner wholly in the Duke of
Guises Power: But yet he made a shift to slip away privately, from his Palace
(the Louere) attended only with Sixteen Gentlemen. The Duke not taking care to
prevent the escape, whether Ib. p. 498.
out of Honesty, of which he pretended to be the Protector, or that he desired
to cloak all his Designs with the Mantle of Piety and Religion; or that he
intended nothing more but his own safety, and Reformation of the Government;
promising to himself that all would fall into his Lap, by means of his cunning
Carriage; and that he needed not to make use of open Force; brought the King to
such a low Ebb, that he must of necessity yield up himself to his Disposal, and
condescend to such Conditions as he desired, which he doubted not but would be
approved by the general consent of the People.

The King, being desirous of an accommodation, employed the Queen Mother to
treat with the Duke of Guise; and his Adherents. [Which had the like success as
his Majesty's Message from Nottingham to those at Westminster.]

But the Duke's demands were Ibid. p. 499. and p. 500.
extreme high and Exorbitant, more like an absolute Conqueror, than a Subject;
viz. That the King should declare him his Lieutenant General over all the
Provinces of his Dominions; That a general Assembly of the States should be
called at Paris; and this Authority being then confirmed to him by them, that
the Taxes and Impositions upon the People should be moderated; That, for
removing all suspicion of Innovations, all Forms of Government should be settled
in such a way, as it might not be lawful for the King to make any alteration;
That the Duke D'Espernon, and several other Ministers of State, (as persons
suspected to keep Intelligence with the Heretics, and to be continually
hammering out new Projects,) should be put out of their Places and Commands,
and for ever Banished from the Court; That to remove the Jealousies generally
conceived of too remiss Proceedings against the Heretics, the sole managery
Compare with this, the Propositions to his Majesty's Commissioners at Vxbridge,
concerning the War of Ireland. Full Relation, etc. p. 95.
of that War should be Committed to the Duke; That to take away the suspicion
of any Tyrannical Intentions, or Actions srom the King, he should dismiss See
the like demands by the Members at Westminster. Exact Coll. p. 259. and 465.
his Guard of forty six, and interdict them all [ his Majesty to return to the
Court, and content himself with such an ordinary Guard, as his Predecessors
used to have.]

That Griglion, the Captain of the Guard, should be displaced and another put
in his room, in whom the Catholics could confide: That the forts of Provence
should be consigned to the Duke D'Aumarle, and others to others of the League;
and that the King should deposite in the hands of certain Lords of the League,
six other strong Holds, such as they should nominate, which should be
Garrisoned by them, and have such Governors as were to their liking: That a
convenient Assignment should be made to the Citizens of Paris for reimbursing
the Expenses they had been at: And that the Government of the City should be
conferred upon the Count of Brissac, the Duke of Main made high Admiral, and de
Chatres Ld^ Mareschall.

When the Duke of Guise failed of his Intentions upon the Kings Person (by
reason of his escape) and his Design of obtaining from him, as his Prisoner,
what Conditions he pleased, was by that means crushed, he bent Ib. p. 502.
his thoughts to the securing himself of the Command of the City of Paris. For,
perceiving that he must now go to War with the King; he knew very well, that he
could have no stronger Foundation, than the Power and Assistance of the
Parisians: Therefore to assure himself of the City, he got into his Hands the
Bastile, dispossessing Testate, who held it formerly for the King, but was now
forced to surrender it into the hands of the People, who instantly made the
Duke Governor of it. The Duke therefore, loosing no time, called the People
together in a Common Council, and caused Hector Perose, provost of the
Merchants [a place answerable to that of Lord Mayor of London] to be deposed,
as a dependent on the King; Committed him to the Bastile, and made Capello
Martell to be chosen Ib. p. 503.
Provost in his place; he being a Principal Incendiary among the People, and
chief Minister of the League.

[Just a Pennington for a Gurney.]

The Duke of Guise, seeing the King was got out of the toil, and that he could
not bring his first Design about, endeavored Ib. p. 508.
to make it appear, that it was done with his consent (the King's Escape)
though it happened by his Inadvertence: Therefore, with many fair words and
plausible reasons, laid down in several Writings, both to the King and People
of France, he strove to make them believe, that all his Actions had no other
aim, but the benefit of the Kingdom, Allegiance and Obedience to the King, and
Zeal to the public good: That the Tumults Compare with this the Expression of
the Members at Westminster in their Petition to his Majesty 26. Martij. 1642.
Exact Coll. p. 123.
in Paris were occasioned by the fears of the People, without any consent of
his: That his Intentions were ever most Inclined to Loyalty, and all due
Obedience, desiring nothing, but that Evil Councillers might be removed, and
due care taken for the securing of Religion. And though (says my Author) his
Actions were for the most part, quite contrary to his Professions; yet the
color of Religion was so lively and plausible; he knowing so well how to
demean himself, that the People generally believed him still, a Loyal Subject
to the King; and that all he did was only out of Zeal to Religion, and an
Ardent desire for promoting the public good of the Kingdom.

When things were in this State, there followed the face of an accommodation
betwixt the King and the Leaguers; and for the composing of all differences,
another Parliament was convened at Bloys 16. Oct. 1588. In the Election Ib. p.
118.
of Members to assist at it, though both parts labored to have such chosen, as
were their own dependents, yet those of the League prevailed by much above the
Kings Party: For the Commons being vexed with their pressing Grievances (their
end being mainly to shake off that Burden) did willingly adhere to the Kings
Enemies, who promised and professed an earnest desire of easing the People of
their unsupportable burden by Taxes and Contributions.

In this Parliament all the States took a Solemn Oath or Protestation, Compare
with this the Protestation framed at Westminster. 3 Maij. 1641.
for defense of Religion, with the Kings Person and Authority. Which Oath they
ordered to be taken by all the Subjects of the Kingdom. Notwithstanding all
which Obligations, whereby the Leaguers bound themselves to abandon their
former Practices, and to apply themselves to a sincere obedience of the King:
yet did they not remit any thing of their former Machinations: For not only the
Duke of Guise aspired to obtain the express Title of Lieutenant General (which
he could not before accomplish, though he had the Power) but the rest ceased
not to tamper with the States, that the Government migt be reformed in such a
manner, as that the King should have no share left him in it, but the bare name
and shadow of a Prince; the whole Power to be transferred to this Duke, and his
Dependents of the League.

Nay the very number of the States [which equaliz'd ours in the House of
Commons] engaging themselves in the Interests of the Faction, did contend, and
squable for the same ends with them, without any regard of their so many and
Solemn Oaths, in evident contempt of the Person, Name, and Majesty of the King.

The Ibid. p. 523.
Commons in this Parliament, (notwithstanding they had resolved upon a War with
the Huguenots, which must needs be expensive: Yet) demanded from the King a
moderation of Taxes, and diminution of new Impositions; which [ like that of
Ship-money] amounted to two Millions of Crowns, yearly; as also the Reformation
of many Offices erected about the Customs, and the total abolishing of some
other Grievances. They declared the King of Navarr (who was next Heir to the
Crown) incapable of Inheriting; and Solicited the King to make a new Decree
upon it, unto which they would have him swear, as a Fundamental Law.

After many other Plots and Practices in this Factious Parliament; when
business was now fully ripe, and the Duke of Guise having sufficiently
canvassed and prepared the States, both in general, and particular: Grown now
secure and bold, upon confidence of former Experience, he began to bring his
Plot upon the Stage, of being made Lieutenant General, at the Request and by
the Authority of the Parliament, which was the last end of his present hopes.
But those hopes were quickly frustrate by His untimely Death.

After which his Brother the Duke of Maine took up Arms to Prosecute that
design of the League: And, though the King wrote kind Letters to him; yet were
they of no force, to make him hearken to any Concord: For making himself Head
of the Holy Union, he was by the Parisians declared Lieutenant General, of the
State and Crown of France, with the same authority and power, which is naturally
inherent in the King (abating only the name) which Power was intended to
continue, until the States General should think fit to alter it: Upon the
possession whereof he entered 22. Febr. 1589 Having taken a Solemn Oath to
Protect and defend the Catholic Religion against all Persons whatsoever; to
preserve the Estate belonging to the Crown of France; to defend the Privileges
of the three Estates of Parliament, the Clergy, Nobility, and Commons; to cause
the Laws and Constitutions of the Realm to be observed; and the Authority and
Power of the Courts of Justice.

Having done this, he chose and settled the Council of the Union [ like a close
Committee] consisting of forty the chief and most eminent Persons of the
League, to manage all the most Important Affairs with his Assistance; leaving
still the Government of the City of Paris with the Sixteen. And, as our Men had
their Committies in several Counties, which received Directions from, and sent
Informations to their great Council; So did these of the League ordain,
D'Aubignie Tom. 2. lib. 3. cap. 3. col. 828.
that there should be six, eight, twelve, or more of them, nominated in several
places of the Kingdom, to propose what was fitting to the Council; and, having
received Directions from them, to act accordingly.

Nor has scarce any act of Insolence been Committed by our Men, in which they
might not urge these for an Example. What has been done to Justice Mallet,
taken off the Bench, and Committed to the Tower; the like was done in Paris:
For they, Davilae^ 548.
in a Tumultuous manner, beset the Hall of the Palace, where the Judges than
sat; seized upon Harle and others, whom they deemed to be well affected to the
King, and Committed them Prisoners to the Bastile.

The King (upon like Motives as his Majesty Adjourned the Term from London to
Oxford) adjourned Ib. p. 566.
the Courts of Justice; the Parliament of Paris to Towrs; that of Roan to Cane;
that of Dijon to Chalon.

And, that nothing might be wanting in this Rebellion, which was in that: As
our Men took upon them, to make a new great Seal, ransackt the Kings Palace at
White Hall; seized all his Revenues, Forts, and Magazine into their own hands;
usurped his Authority, and called in a Forreign-Nation (the Scots) to their
Assistance; their Parliament Voting it, and their Preachers being the
Trumpeters of War against the King. So our own Camden tells Annal. Eliz. in An.
1589. p. 557.
us, the Leaguers of France did. -- Populus ubique Magistratibus parere
dedignatus; Regias aedes Lutetiae diripuit. -- Conjurati, novo consilio
instituto, novo Sigillo ad res administrandas confecto, Regiam sibi
authoritatem arrogarunt; munitissima quaeque loca, immo integras Provincias
sibi raptarunt; Regni redditus interceperunt, Auxiliares Hispanos e Belgio
evocarunt, Parliamentis suffragantibus; and Ecclesiasticis Bellum in Regem
ubique buccinantibus.

The Davilae p. 561.
King, after all this, being straightened for Money, and entertaining no Thoughts
but of Peace and Accommodation, procured the Popes Legate to Interpose for that
end; promising to refer all difference to his Holiness. Which when the Legate
moved to the Duke of Maine, he refused to hearken to it; alleging it to be but
a shift of the King to gain time, in regard he found himself at present
unprovided and unarmed. All hopes of accommodation therefore failing; the King
being persuaded, that he had used all means possible on his part, and that not
without descending far below the honor of his person, began to alter his
Opinion: And, to the end Ib. p. 562.
he might not be surprised (without assistance) by the Power of his Enemies;
the urgency of his necessities constraining him perforce to look about for some
Supplies, he began to hearken to an accord with the King of Navarre, a
Professed Protestant.

Certain it is, that in his own Inclination, he was ever averse from such an
accord; his nature being incompatible with all Commerce with the Huguenots. But
there being an evident necessity, Compare with this his Majesty's Answer to the
two Papers concerning Ireland. Full Relation etc. p. 215.
that he could not then do otherwise; all his Councillers, with one voice told
him, he must needs resolve and side with one Party, unless he would stand alone
in the midst of his Potent Enemies; one on one side the Loyre, and the other on
the other side, having possessed themselves of all.

What Moneys, what Friends, what Armies, what Forces had he sufficient to
grapple with such Factions at the same time? It Is clear, which way soever he
could turn himself, he must have one Enemy before his Face, and another behind
his back: His Kingdom also being divided, and Foreign Princes likewise divided
betwixt two Religions; he (a new Example) should have both averse; both Enemies
to him, would he continue in this distraction; without Forces, without Moneys.
While one side Invades one part; another side another part of the Regal
Authority.

He is now, what he was always, afraid of, in the midst of two Violent
Torrents. He did as much as man could do for Peace: He forgot his own Honor to
be reconciled with the Seditious; and gave the Rebels and Despisers of his
Authority that satisfaction which they little deserved. With unheard of
Patience he endured all the Injuries of the People, the Invectives of their
Preachers, the Villainous Insolences of the Factious Commons, and the bold
Decrees of the Sorbon; submitting his Royal Majesty to the inordinate desires
of the Relics of the Guises. He did that which never King before him would
have endured to have done. What could he do more, unless to please the
Spaniards, he would patiently wait, without providing any defense, Was not his
Majesty's Statua abused, both at the Old Exchange in London, and at Winche^ster?
till he, were miserably torn in Pieces by his Enemies; and the like outrages
Committed upon his Person, as had been already done to his Statua's, both in
Paris and Toulouse. It is more then time therefore, that he show he has the
Heart of a Lion; and, making use of the King of Navarr's Assistance -- de
Inimicis suis vind care Inimicos suos, to revenge himself of his Enemies by his
Enemies; this being no new nor unheard of Course. His Brother K Charles many
times, and himself sometimes, when Necessities were less pressing, had made
Peace with the Huguenots. Why should he not, therefore, seek all just means to
restrain the Seditious, to recover his own Power; and now at last to restore
Peace and Rest to his Kingdom?

Upon Ib. p. 563.
this then followed several adverse Declarations of the King's; justifying his
own Proceedings. The like by the Duke of Main in behalf of the League.

After these Instigations of his Councillers, the King beginning to incline to
an accommodation with the King of Navarr, and the Huguenots: Though Ib. p. 564.
all his followers desired that he should not come to an accord with them; yet,
such was the obstinacy of the Duke of Main and the Leaguers, and such the
State of the Realm, by reason of the present Seditions, that none of them could
blame him, though they all abhorred it.

Seeing Ib. p. 565.
therefore, that of necessity he must take up some resolution; and that his
Affairs were in danger of utter ruin, if he did not; he concluded a Truce for
one Year with the King of Navarr, upon these Conditions.

1. That the public Exercise of the Catholic Religion should be restored in
all places under the Command of the Huguenots, without Exception.

2. That the Clergy should be restored to their Means; and the Prisoners which
they had in their hands should be set at Liberty.

3. That the King of Navarr should be obliged to serve him in Person, with four
Thousand Foot and twelve Hundred Horse, wheresoever he should be Commanded.

4. That all Cities, Countries, and places of his Party should observe all the
Laws and Constitutions of the Kingdom, obey the Courts of Justice, and the
Kings Magistrates; and receive such Orders as the King had or should hereafter
give them.

On the other side it was agreed, that the King of Navarr should have the City
of Samur, and keep it as a free pass for him, upon the River Loyre; but be
bound to yield it up again at the Kings Pleasure.

[How fully applicable is this to the Cessation made in Ireland by his
Majesty?]

Hereupon the King set forth a Declaration Ib. p. 567.
against the Duke of Maine and his Adherents, who had caused the Cities to
revolt, and were then up in Arms; intimating to them; that if they did not
return to their Obedience within the space of XV. days, and forbear to trouble
the Realm by making Levies; as also not lay down Arms; they should incurr the
Crime of Rebellion, and all their Goods be Confiscate.

[Like to this was his Majesty's Proclamation Exact Coll. p. 503.
against the Earl of Essex from York 9. Aug. 1642.]

Which Writings were attended with Actions suitable: [ as his Majesty did set on
foot his Commissions of Array] the King granting out Commissions to several
Governors in sundry Provinces, for making of Levies, and drawing the People
together in Arms. Nevertheless he still continued his Inclinations to Peace;
and having Davilae p. 568.
excused the Truce, which he was necessitated to make with the King of Navarr,
and promised to persevere constant in the Catholic Religion; he entreated the
Pope's Nuncio once more to try the Mind of the Duke of Maine; and by
conferring with him in Person, to labor him to an Accommodation; in regard,
that, neither by the Duke of Loreyne's means (to whom he had Written) nor the
Duchess of Nemurs, (who had been employed to that purpose) he could at all
work upon him, to lend the least Ear to any Treaty for Peace.

And to make it evident to the World, how desirous he was to be freed from the
necessity of an accord with the Huguenots; he delivered to the Cardinal, a
Paper, Written with his own Hand, wherein was contained what things he would be
content to grant to them of the League: Offering to make the Prince of Loreyne
Governor of Metz, Tul, and Uerdun; to Marry the Inheritrix of Bullion, with
the Cities of Games and Sedan to the Count of Vaudemont. To the Duke of Main
he was content to yield the Government of the whole Country of Burgundy, with
the nomination of all under-Governours there; and that to pass to his Son after
him. To the young Duke of Guise, the Inheritance of Champaine, St. Desir, and
Rocroy, for Security of his Person; with Thirty Thousand Crowns a Year of
Ecclesiastical Revenue for one of his Brothers: To the Duke of Nevers the
Government of Lions: To the Duke D'Aumarle Saint-Esprit du Rae, for his
security; To make his Brother General of the Foot, with Twenty Thousand Franks
a Year: To the Duke of Elleboef, the Government of Poictiers. To these and
others, diverse large pensions, and preferments; so desirous was he to purchase
his Peace, at any rate.

[ Which Propositions were not much unlike his Majesty's Instructions to his
Commissioners, for the Treaty at Uxbridge, and wrought as little with the
Leaguers]

But this Paper of the King's wrought nothing at all; the Duke of Main,
meeting with the Legate, refusing peremptorily to hearken to any Agreement;
pretending Ib. p. 569.
that he could not accept of any Conditions, without calling all the Estates of
the League, and all the Princes of his Family together, to have their Consent.
Which he said indeed, because he thought himself by much, Superior in force to
the King, and because both the King of Spain, and the Duke of Savoy had
promised to assist him with Men and Money.

The News of the Truce, which the King had made with the King of Navarr no
sooner arrived at Paris; but it is incredible what Malice they thereupon
conceived against him, and all his Followers; what exorbitant Was not the like
done by our Men against his Majesty for Assenting to the Cessation in Ireland?
Demonstrations they made of it; even by their public Ordinances, prohibiting
any Prayers to be used for him, in the Service of the Church, as had been ever
done for all the Kings of France; which the Catholic Church many times, and
Piety allows (particularly on Good Friday) even to Heretics, Idolaters and
Infidels. Nor is it possible to account the innumerable quantity of Libels,
Declarations, and Pamphlets, Printed and Published against him, beyond all
bounds of Reason and Modesty.

To conclude, the noise of Arms did soon drown that of their Libels, and
Seditious Sermons: And many Battails were Fought, in which the King had the
better, and came Victorious before that proud City of Paris: But, in the Seige
of it, he was basely Murdered by Jacques Clement, a Dominican Friar; 1. Aug.
1589.

After this Untimely Death of that King ( Henry the 3 d.) the Crown of France
with its Troubles, descended upon the King of Navarr, Henry the 4 th: Who being
acknowledged Ib. p. 591.
by the Catholic Nobility, in the Camp; they swore Allegiance to him; he
mutually promising Ib. p. 593.
to maintain and defend the Catholic RomanReligion to the utmost of his Power,
and not to endeavor any alteration in it: And likewise to maintain [ the
Privileges of Parliament] the three Estates of France, in their wonted Power,
Privileges, Immunities, Prerogatives, etc. without any prejudice or innovation
whatsoever.

But all this had little Operation on the Leaguers, they persisting in their
wonted Obstinacy and Rebellion, though he omitted not any means to win them to
peace and reconcilement. For first he sent Ib. p. 596*
unto them, that Villeroy might come to Treat with him; but was refused. Then
he employed a private Gentleman to Paris, to whom the Duke of Maine would not
give Audience, but appointed that he should deliver his Message to Villeroy:
Which was, that the King had expressly commanded him, to assure the Duke of his
Majesty's good Inclinations to peace; as also to represent unto him how
necessary it was for the public good; what great account he made of the Dukes
person; how much he desired to make him his Friend; and to have him near at
hand, that he might afford him an honorable share in his favor, suitable to
his Condition. Likewise that the Duke might then lay aside the vain hopes of
seeing the King abandoned by his Subjects, considering in what a good condition
he did at that time stand. Desiring therefore, that he would propose some
Conditions, his Majesty being ready to gratify him in any thing he might.

[ This has somewhat of his Majesty's Letter to the Earl of Essex, at
Lestithiel]

Whereunto, the Sum of the Answer, which the Duke gave Commission to be made,
was [ in this somewhat more civil than that of the Earl of Essex] that he had
no private Quarrel with the King, whom, for his own part, he did highly Honor
and Reverence; but his Religion, and his Conscience would not suffer him to
enter any Treaty with him. For if (quoth he) my Deceased Brethren took up Arms
in the Kings Life time, upon a suspicion of danger: Now that the Necessity is
more urgent, and the danger present, I cannot lay down those Arms, which I
have taken up, without sinning against the Memory of my Deceased Brethren
[Essex might have urged his Father] and my own Conscience, and that Solemn Oath
which I took [the Covenant forsooth] That I engaged my Faith, and Consecrated
my Life to the public Cause, when I accepted the Charge of Lieutenant General
of the State; and that I could not resolve upon any thing without the public
Convention of all of my Party.

Some there were, who urged Ib. p. 597. and 599.
this Duke of Main, to usurp the Title of King of France; but others, on
better grounds dissuaded him.

The Ib. p. 601.
King therefore (in these great Distresses) Summoned a general Convnention of
the Estates, to meet in October, at Tours, (the chief City of his Party) But
his Army mouldring Ib. p. 603.
away (and he with those left him, not above six Thousand Foot, and fourteen
Hundred Horse) retired to Diepe, and there fortifyed. Whereupon the Duke of
Main pursued, Ib. p. 606. and 609.
and put the King in danger; but lost the Opportunity of a Victory; and, at the
Battle of Arches was forced to retreat with loss, though his Forces were
Superior (by much) to the Kings.

Which success Ib. p. 612.
in that Battle (upon the addition of four Thousand English, and a Thousand
Scotts, then sent to Diepe by Queen Elizabeth) so encouraged the King, that he
presently Marched toward Paris, and came before it upon the last of October,
1589. Which unexpected Approach, stroke no small Terror Ib. p. 613.
into the Multitude; especially the Ladies, seeing him come on such a sudden,
ready to assail that proud City; and at a time, when they were persuaded he
would have had enough to do to defend himself: Also; that in regard of the
weakness of his Forces, he would either by that time have been subdued, or
driven out of the Realm. For the Duke of Main, when he went against the King
at Diepe; by way of ostentation of his Forces before the People, writ to Paris;
that, within a few Days, he would either bring the King Prisoner, or force him
to fly into England with shame enough. And now the City not well provided, and
out of hopes of relief, their Minds were full of Fears and Vexation. But, upon
the Duke of Mayne's Approach, the King rose from before Paris, having first
taken the Suburbs and sacked them.

The Convention of Estates thus met Ib. p. 627.
at Tours, put out a Declaration in behalf of the King: And that at Paris
Published another against him. After which contrary Declarations, the Scholars
being as eager to contend for their several Parties, as the Soldiers, there
were published many Ordinances of Parliament; infinite Writings of particular
Men; Decisions of the Sorbon; Letters of the Pope's Legate; Answers of the
Bishops that adhered to the King; and such a number of Books every where
dispersed; that it was a clear case, there was not a Wit in the Kingdom, but
was Employed: Not a Pen but writ in defense of the Reasons of one side or
other; but with so much Obstinacy of Mind in their Arguments; that it was easy
to discern, that the Arms of the Spirit, when they are distorted and misused in
diverse manner, in the Heat and Incogitancy of Wars, are more apt to administer
new Fuel to the Flame, than quench the Fire already beg^n.

At this time the Affairs of the League were in a very tottering condition; the
diversity of Pretensions, and contrary ends of the Confederates much disturbing
the course of their Enterprises; holding not only their Councils, but the
Effects and Actions of their common Interests in suspense. Which, in regard of
the speedy Expedition, and Resolutions of the King, could not admit of delays.

The Ib. p. 6^8.
Duke of Main being Prince of the Faction, and head of the Design (who, by the
Authority of his Person, Prudence of his Government, and experience in
Marshal-matters, bore the chief burden of their Affairs) conceiving that the
reward and fruits of his Pains, did of Justice belong to himself, projected
therefore, either to transfer the Crown upon himself, or upon some of his
House: But in case he could not obtain so much; then, at least, to set it upon
the Head of some such Prince, as might totally and absolutely be beholding to
him for it; being resolved that the Kingdom should not be divided; much less
that it should fall into the Hands of a Foreign Prince.

On the contrary, the King of Spain (who, in the beginning secretly, but now
openly protected and fomented the League, and had of late Years laid out two
Millions in the Service of the Confederates; and was now to contribute vast
Sums of Money, both in public and private, besides his maintaining of Foot and
Horse; seeing, that without his Assistance, which they desired might be great
and strong, not only the main Design was like to come to nothing, but the
League could not long subsist without being Dissolved) thought, more than
reasonable and more than just, that, as the Expenses and Losses were his, so
the Fruits and Benefits should be his also: And therefore, besides an
underhand secret Design of Uniting the Crowns, and gayning that of France to
his Daughter Isabella the Infanta, (whom he had by his Queen Elizabeth, King
Henry the 3 ds. Eldest Sister) he farther endeavored, to get himself publicly
declared Protector of the Crown of France, with Sovereign Power and Authority
to dispose of the Offices of the Crown; to choose the Governors and Captains
of the Army^ to conferr Bishoprics, and to have all the Prerogatives
pertaining to an absolute Prince. All which was demanded, and publicly
Solicited by his Agents Mendoza, Mornea, etc.

But the Citizens of Paris (who perceived well, that the main strength of the
Faction consisted in them; not only in regard of the Multitude of their People,
and Power of the City; but by reason of their continual Contributions, from
whence the Sinews of the War were derived) thought it was come to their share,
to dispose of the Crown: And, being all apay'd with the Duke of Mayne's bad
Success in the Wars [ the same fate which the Earl of Essex had with the
Londoners] Imputing the loss of their Suburbs to his slackness (whom they
called Coward and Block-head p. 741.) and that the City was now in a manner
Besieged, and much straightened for want of Provisions, by reason of his want of
Care, inclined to submit themselves to be ordered by the Spaniards; hoping by
the help of their Forces, to destroy the King's (whose very Name was odious to
them) and to extirpate the Religion of the Huguenots, whereunto they were
naturally Enemies; and, by means of the Spanish^-Gold, to be eased of the
insupportable burden of Contributions: For the King of Spains Ministers bore
them in hand, and went about cunningly with fair Promises, and big Words, both
in public and private, in order to their Assistance.

On Ib. p. 629.
the other side, the Nobility, which took part with the League (in whose hands
were the Arms and Forces of the Kingdom) were much averse from submitting to
the Spanish-Yoke, inclined to the Duke of Main; conforming themselves to his
Pleasure, to be guided by his Authority. But, in this great distraction of the
Kingdom, diverse of them were not without their own particular Designs. And of
such variety of Councils was the League composed; that, by clashing with one
another, they interrupted the course of their Affairs, and abated the heat, by
which they first Conspired in that Band, which seemed to have no other end but
Religion.

The King, therefore, taking advantage of these their Divisions, dismissed the
Marquess of Belin upon his Parole (whom he had taken Prisoner at the Battle of
Arches) with Commission, in his name, to proffer Peace to the Duke of Main;
and to exhort him, as a Prince of an honest and moderate temper, not to assent
to the Pernicious Designs of Foreigners; but, freeing himself from the base
usage of the Vulgar, and cunning of the Spaniard, that he would hearken to an
honest and safe Peace; whereupon, Ib. p. 6^0.
answerable to his Merit and Honor, he should have as great a share in the
Kings Favor as himself could desire.

When the Marquess made this overture to the Duke, the Opinions of the
Councillers about him, were much divided; some favoring it; others declaming
against it: Telling how the War was founded upon the point of Religion, and
therefore nothing must be done in it, without the Popes Approbation: Also, that
the Duke of Main, being not absolute Prince of the League, but only the Head
of his Party, ought not to adventure upon such an Important Action, without the
joint consent of all those that followed that Party, and all the Princes, that
adhered to, or favored the League; who (if they should not follow his
deliberation) might choose another Head, and he be left destitute of the
support of the Catholic Party, to the will of his Enemies. And, that this was
but a trick of the Kings, to work a diffidence in the Dukes Party, and to sow
Divisions and Suspicions amongst the Confederates, though the King might
promise Golden-Mountains, to the end he might dissolve the Union of the League;
yet there was no security; but that so soon as he should be Established King,
in Peace, he would not observe the least Tittle of his promises.

The Duke, therefore, on the one side, by the disdain, which he had conceived
against the Inconstancy, and Impertinency of the Citizens of Paris, and the
want of Money to pay his Soldiers, was troubled much: But above all, the
Subtilty and surliness of the Spaniard vexed him most; who having caused
Seignior de la Mot, the Governor of Gravelin, to come out of Flanders with
their Forces, to the confines of the Kingdom; refused to let him advance one
Foot further, or to issue any Moneys, for the maintenence of the War, unless
the Catholic King was first declared Protector of the Crown of France; with
Authority to dispose of the Principal Dignities, as well Ecclesiastical as
secular, which they called marks of Justice; whereby he desired to have
Dominion and Superiority over the League.

Which demands seemed so Exorbitant unto him; so prejudicial to the Crown, and
so dishonest, that he could not endure to think of them himself: Nor did he
believe, that any one Man of the Confederates, from the Parisians downwards,
would ever condescend to Decree them: Knowing, that this were to put the Bridle
into the King of Spaine's hands, to let him carry all things to such ends, as
he pleased himself [ Nor did the Brethren of Scotland, sell their Assistance at
a much cheaper rate, as is plainly to be seen by their Treaty of the 29th. of
November, 1643. For their advance into England; and their second demands for
their managery of the Government of Ireland]

But, on the other side, his Fears of being abandoned, and left alone; his
distrust of the Kings Sincerity in his Promises, and the Ancient grudge he bore
to him; but especially his hopes of getting the Crown for himself, would not
suffer him to hearken to those overtures, made by the Marquess of Belin, whom
he sent back to his Imprisonment, with some Ambiguous and General Expressions,
and cut off the Negotiation for any Accord.

[So still the King seeks, but the Faction declines all occasions of Peace]

For Ib. p. 662. and 663.
the People of Paris were so far Transported with Zeal to the Cause, by reason
of the continual denunciations from the Pulpits, that there could be no Peace,
or accommodation made, unless they would damn their own Souls; that they were
resolved to endure any thing, rather than to hearken to an Accommodation:
Insomuch as many, who had inconsiderately slipped a Word or two out of their
Mouths, saying, that Accommodation was better than starving, and rather Peace
than a Siege; were, in the Rage and Fury of the People, either publicly
Condemned and Executed; or without more ado, thrown into the River, as damned
Miscreants, Enemies of the Catholic Religion, and infected with the Poison of
Heresy.

It is not unworthy Observation, what Artifices the Heads of that Rebellion
used to abuse the People. During Ib. p. 669.
the Seige of Paris, both the Duke of Main without, and other Lords within the
City, employing all their Art and Industry, in giving out Reports, and
spreading News; sometimes of a strong Power from Flanders, coming to raise the
Seige; sometimes of great Provisions of Victual for Relief of the City;
sometimes of some Accident, in favor of their Party, Letters and Messengers
coming in every day, with a Mixture of true and False Reports together: Which
being Published in their Pulpits, and divulged amongst their Guards, served to
feed the People for a few days.

And Ib. p. 676.
when there were certain Commissioners sent from Paris, to treat with the King
about an Acommodation: Notwithstanding his Majesty's Answer was returned in
Writing, with much sweetness of Language, and proffer of all security and
possible satisfaction, upon return to their Obedience; with Letters, to the
same effect to the Duke of Nemure, and others; exhorting them to Peace, and
assuring them, that they should receive more from his Grace than they could
desire: Yet, upon return of the Commissioners, the Duke of Nemure, and other
great Persons, dissaffected to Peace, would not permit the true Copy of the
Kings Answer to be Published to the People; but caused Reports to be given out,
that the King would not have any Peace, but upon condition of an absolute
Submission; and that the Duke of Main, and other Lords of the League, should
not be included in the Pardon.

The Ibid. p. 733.
King of Spain, therefore, (upon the Duke of Parma's Advice) finding how much
those of the League relied upon his aid, and the necessity thereof, endeavored
to prolong the War: That, by the weariness and weakness of the French, he
might, at length compass those ends upon them, which he saw it was impossible
for him, at first to obtain. Such has been the Policy of the Scots with us.
The Duke of Parma himself also, to win the more upon the People, when he came
into France with his Army in assistance of the Leaguers; considering that the
name of a Spaniard was there odious; strayn'd himself, Anno. 1. 591.
with all possible earnestness of Mind, for to order his Army; Ib. p. 679.
as that his Soldiers should not commit any Outrage or Oppression, nor give
any occasion of offense to the French.

The Ib. p. 701.
War thus Prolonged, and the charge thereof grown heavy, occasioned much
repining in the People against the Duke of Main, notwithstanding all his
Faithful Services and Pains taken for the League; against whom none complained
Ib. 742.
more than the Citizens of Paris; who Accused the Duke of misgovernance, of an
over greediness to keep all things in his own Power, and too much profuseness
of other Men's Means.

With them Concurred Ib. p. 702.
the Ministers of Spain, who liked not to see such a Supreme Power in the hands
of the Duke, of whose Affection to their Designs they had no good Opinion.

Besides these discontents, Brissonius Primier President of the Parliament at
Paris (who had been, at first, a principal Instrument for the League) when he
perceived (as his Friends said) that the ends of the Grandees were not so
sincere for the public good, as he at first had conceived of them; (or as his
Enemies reported;) being corrupted by large proffers made unto him, on behalf
of the King, by some who were Prisoners in the City; or (as it was generally
believed) out of the Levity and Inconstancy of his nature, began to favor the
King's Party; who, taking heart unto them by means of his Protection; making a
considerable Body, began to Plot, how to bring the City to revolt, and to
reduce it to the Kings Obedience. One Brigard. Ib. p. 742.
of which Revolters (who had been a chief Fomenter of the League) being
discovered, for holding Intelligence and Plotting for the King, was, by the
instigation of the Sixteen, hurried to Prison: But whilst they made slow
proceeding to his Trial, he escaped; which so vexed the Sixteen, as that,
supposing the Judges had a hand therein, they furiously raised the People in
Arms; and upon the XV th. of November, beset all the Passes to the Palace of
Justice; seized upon three of the Judges, Brisson, Archier, and Terdiu, hauled
them to Prison; and there, without any Legal Process Strangled them the same
day; Hanged up their Bodies upon the Gallows next Morning; and like Mad Men,
ran about the City, setting Guards in sundry places, with Threats of the like
Cruelty to diverse others.

Upon endeavor to suppress which Uproar, the City Garrison refused to obey;
being so much Devoted to the Councils and Actions of the Sixteen, that
Alexander de Monte said plainly, He would not move against them, who managed
the Cause of God and all good Men with so much sincerity: The Ib. p. 740.
Council of the Sixteen Condemning and Executing many Citizens (whom they
suspected to incline to the Kings Party) in a precipitous manner.

About that time, there being a consultation held at Rens by the chief Heads of
the League, where they Treated long about their Common Interests; though every
one did palliate their diverse Pretenses, and colored their private Designs;
yet was it plain enough, that they would never concur in the same end.

As for the Spaniards, they wholly trusted to their own Power, and the
necessity in which the rest stood of their Assistance: The Popes Nuncio
insisting upon the Majesty of the Apostolic See, and the Foundation of
Religion, which the Pope must dispose. The Duke of Lorreyne stood upon his
credit, as Head of the Family, and pretended that the rest in Modesty must sit
down to him. The Duke of Savoy had an aim at the Compassing of Provence; The
Duke of Mercur at Britain; The Duke of Namurz meant to Cantonize the
Government; The Duke of Main, as Head of the Army and chief of the Faction,
relied upon the Union of the People and assent of the Nobility, who stood well
affected to him. But things being not yet ripe, and every one, proceeding with
great Caution and Secrecy, concealed his own Designs, and made a semblance as
if he were moved with no other Considerations, but of the public good.

The Duke of Main attempted Ib. p. 726.
to Storm Mant, where the Kings Council, many Lords, and Prelates, and chief
Officers of the Crown were, with a less Guard than the Quality of the Persons
and weakness of the place required: To which purpose he brought diverse of the
Citizens of Paris, drew out the Garrisons of Meaux, Dreux, and Pontois; but was
repulst by the Valor of the Lords themselves, and their Families.

President Janin was sent Ib. p. 733.
into Spain, to negotiate with the King of that Realm, in behalf of the
Leaguers, but returned without any resolution: For it was desired in Spain,
that the War should move but a slow pace; that the Duke of Main should not
grow so much in Credit and Authority with his Party.

The Ib. p. 740.
Council of the Sixteen at Paris (to whom the Preachers stuck close) which was
at first the Basis and Groundwork of the League; pretending to carry all
things according to their own liking, demeaned themselves with much partiality
and Passion, proper to a Faction, without any regard to preserve the Rights of
the Crown, or the Honor and Reputation of the French Nation; their only
Studies and whole Endeavors being set upon such things, as might ruin the
King, whom they hated most perfectly, and extinguish both his Name, and all the
Huguenot-Party, so that they might put the Reins of Government into the hands
of such Persons, as would rule all things according to their Humors. But the
Duke of Main, studying how to curb and moderate their turbulent desires,
instituted a Council of State, distinct from that of the Sixteen, consisting of
many Wise and Moderate Men, to counterpoise and restrain the heady courses of
the other: Amongst which were Villeroy, Iannin, etc. Men not tainted with
Spanish Practices, nor the inconsiderate Zeal of the Preachers; which kindled a
great- Heart-burning and emulation betwixt the Council of the State, with the
Parliament at Paris, and Council of the Sixteen, especially some of the Zealots
amongst them.

Thus have we seen the main resemblance of the Holy- League with this of ours,
as to the Original and Prosecution of it; though in the ends of them, they did
somewhat differ.

Apparent it is, that the carriage of the Scotts here, was the very same with
that of the Spaniards there: Their Pretenses the same; viz. Religion, and
Assisting their Brethren; Their private ends the same, the advance of their own
greatness. Which were no sooner fully understood by the French; but even those
which were the Kings greatest Enemies began to detest them; and chose rather to
submit to the just Obedience of their King, than undergo the Spanish-Yoke.

For Ib. p. 747.
when the Council of Spain were resolved to send but small Forces into France,
and to spin out the Wars to their own least cost and most advantage: Hoping, by
that means, to obtain their ends upon the French (who without their help, were
not able to stand against the Kings Forces) which were to procure the Lady
Infanta Isabella of Spain, to be declared Queen of France, in a full Assembly
of the States, which they intended Ib. p. 761.
to force the Duke of Main, to call for that purpose: The Duke perceiving it,
began utterly to disgust them, complaining Ib. p. 792. and 851.
of their niggardly and sparing assistance afforded to the League, and eager
desires of domineering, which had occasioned the loss of all their former
pains; and given the King opportunity of recovering such strength, as that he
was now Superior to them both, in Reputation and Forces: (with much more bitter
Language to the Spanish Ambassadors) he underhand began to Treat Ib. p. 724.
of an accord with the King; yet remitted nothing of his Violence, and pursuit
of his Ambitious ends; but calling an Assembly of the States at Paris, declared
Ib. p. 811. and 821.
himself fully against the King; and Proposed the new Election of another;
hoping the Crown might be conferred upon himself, for his great Actions in the
Wars, Thus did Cromwell here.
none having merited more of the Cause. Yet could he not prevail with those of
his own Family; the Dukes of Lorrein and Guise thinking as highly of themselves
as he. And Ib. p. 862.
when the matter came to be opened in a Close Committee of the chief Leaguers,
before some select Delegates of the three Estates; the Duke of Feria, in a set
Speech, full of Art and Eloqnence, recommended Ib. p. 865.
the Infanta to their Election (a thing which the Spanish Agents had before
Practiced Ib. p. 837.
under hand) with many large proffers of Honor and Reward to those of the
House of Lorrein, and other chief Agents of the League.

Which Proposal sounded so strange in the Ears of the French, generally; that
Ib. p. 161. and 866.
the Bishop of Saintliz (William Rosa) a Man of an harsh Temper and dogged
Eloquence (which he had many Years Exercised against the King and his
Adherents) though a Fiery-Zealous Leaguer, could not endure to hear with
Patience; but instantly said, he now saw the Kings Party was in the right of
it; who had always given out, that they of the League, did nothing but veil
their State-Interests with the Mask of Religion: Which Imputation himself and
his Companions had ever labored to consute out of the Pulpits; and that now it
grieved him to the Heart, to see it confirmed from the Mouths of the
Ambassadors themselves: adding, that hereafter he should learn to know the
Policies of Spain to be no less than those of Navarr; And therefore Entreats
them, for their Honors Sake, and Credit of the Holy-Cause, to desist from all
Thoughts of altering the Fundamental, the Salique-Law of France, by
Transferring the Crown upon a Woman, and Submitting the Kingdom to the Dominion
of a Stranger.

But this Proposal of the Spaniard was resented Ib. p. 867.
with no less Indignation by most of the Members of the State, than by the
Bishop of Saintliz, who scorned that Strangers should rule over them; as if
they were, either so base, as to make themselves instantly Slaves; or so
foolish as not to understand their own Interests. Above all, they of the House
of Lorrein were netled Ib. p. 868.
at it, who thought to have shared the Cake amongst themselves. Yea, the very
People of Paris, being wearied Ib. p. 879.
out with necessities and wants; and having tasted a little of the Sweets of
Peace (by means of a cessation Ib. p. 845.
concluded, during the time of the Treaty at Suren) did impatiently desire an
Accord with the King; and began to threaten the States, unless they would
hearken to an Accommodation: The Spaniards being now grown so odious to the
Parisians, as that their Ambassadors could not peep abroad in the Streets, but
they were entertained with Scoffs and Curses; though, but two Years before,
they were so high in their Books, and gracious in their Eyes, that Ib. p. 743.
they of Paris thought to have yielded the City freely, to be under the
Subjection of the King of Spain.

No sooner was this great Mystery of Spanish Policy and Ambition revealed; and
publicly made known through the Kingdom, and that Assembly of States (which
was Called in Rebellion) Dissolved in Disorder; but that the Cities, which
formerly held for the League, and Governors of the Garrisons made have Ib. p.
901.
to return, by their Obedience, to the King: Meaux led the way; Peron, Pontois,
Orliens, Bruges, Lions, and Aix followed after; and Paris it self was not long
behind. Roan, and Amiens, and the rest came flocking in, and were all received
to Grace.

The Spaniards therefore, when they saw their main Project for the Crown thus
to fayl, had thoughts to reimburse themselves, by getting Possession of as many
strong places, upon the Frontiers of France, as they could, either by Force or
Fraud; La Fera, in Picardy, Capella, Croisill, and Blavet in Brittany, and
Calais, they Surprised. By which means they had so strengthened themselves, as
that the Dukes of Guise and Main (after they had made their Peace with the
King) and other Leaders of the League, were now content to join their Forces,
to beat them out as Enemies, whom they had formerly called in as Friends.

And surely, if our Covenanters had been as truly sensible of the Honor of the
English Nation, and Scottish-Practises, as the French Leaguers were of theirs,
they wanted not as just Provocations on one side from the Scotts, and fair
Invitations on the other from the King to join with him, in delivering this
exhausted and bleeding Kingdom from the Misery which it did at that time
suffer; and from that Slavery, which most good Men feared was at first intended
by the Scotts; who had solemnly sworn See their Solemn Leagus and Covenant.
to subdue this late flourishing Church to the Tyranny of a
Scottish-Presbytery: And, not content with that, demanded, See the full
Relation of the Treaty at Vxbridge p. 209.
in effect the Supreme Command of Ireland to be put into their Hands: As also
to have an equal Ib. p. 206.
share in the Government of England. Which Designs, of that insolency in them,
and dishonor to us, were such, as our Forefathers would not have endured the
mention; and at the Memory whereof, our Posterity will doubtless blush.

And to bring these their ends about, it is very well known, that they made
themselves Masters of the strongest Cities in this Kingdom, upon their own
confines; viz. Barwick, Newcastle, and Carlisle: Out of which, and such other
Footing as they had gained here, how they were got, the Precedent Story does
sufficiently manifest, whereof I shall not give any touch; that of the
Spaniards departure out of France, having no resemblance therewith. For the
King of Spain found, while he was Fighting to gain the Neighbor Kingdom of
France, he had almost lost his own in the Low Countries. Likewise, that neither
his Forces, nor Moneys were sufficient to maintain two such Expensive Wars at
the same time: And that he did not gain so much in France, but the Hollanders,
by occasion of that diversion, got as much of him in Flanders, and therefore
was willing to hearken to a Treaty for Peace: And the French (whose Kingdom was
now miserably wasted by a long Civil War) not unwilling to embrace the motion.
Whereupon a Peace was concluded betwixt those two Crowns at Uervins upon the
second of May, Anno. 1598. Whereby the Spantard was to restore all the Towns he
had taken in the French Dominion, and go away only with Bagg and Baggage.

It is not unworthy of Observation, that in all the several Compositions, which
the Leaguers made with the King, upon their Reconcilement, and in all the
Articles of the Treaty at Uervins, for the general Peace, there is not the
least mention of Religion, or Extirpation of Heresy, though that was the great
Cause, for which they ever pretended to take up Arms: Only they were careful to
preserve their secular Interests; and to secure their Persons and Estates upon
as good Terms as they could: A plain Evidence, that Religion was but the Stale;
Honors and Preferments being the Mark which they aimed at. Yet the
Protestants, whom they had devoted to Destruction in their HolyLeague, fared in
the end never the worse for it: For the King was content to confirm and
Republish in Anno. 1595, the same Edict in favor of them, which Henry the
third had granted in Anno. 1577. and which had been the chief Eyesore to the
Papists, and a ground of their League. Which Edict D'avila p. 943.
he caused to be verified in the Parliament at Paris, where Coquilius, one of
the Judges, formerly a Violent Leaguer, was a special Instrument to further and
facilitate the Publication, and reception of it in the Parliament.

And, and when the Kingdom had some Liberty to Breath and Recover her Senses,
even those that were professed Papists, did not much repine at the Toleration
of Protestants, and enlargement of their Privileges by the Edict of Nantz,
Anno. 1598. Which the Historian Piere Matthew Lib. 2. Narrat. 1. Sect. 4.
relating, labors, in part, to excuse, by discoursing to the Reader -- That
the Common Peace of France, Pressed and almost Oppressed with the Tragical
Impetuosities of Schisms and Divisions, made every thing that was just, to be
thought necessary, and all that was profitable be esteemed just. So that,
seeing the torrent of Religion could not be stopped without a Breach in the
State; that the Disease was inveterate, and a hard matter to remove what was so
deeply settled: That the Restoration of a Church, is the work of God, as well
as the Plantation: Men must be content to do no more than they can, and leave
the Triumph and Conquest of Souls to the Wisdom of God, who only forms and
Reforms the Hearts of Men as he pleasech; and gives the signal to many wandering
Souls, to bring them into the way of Salvation; it being not possible for Men
to impose a necessity upon that, which God has left at Liberty, the
Conscience, which should be as free in a State as Thought.

Where, (going on) he shows, by the continued Practice of former times, that
such Princes, as were well advised, never killed their Subjects to Convert
them; nor wasted their Dominions by War, to inform their Consciences by the
Sword; knowing, that Religion is an Act of Union and Concord, and must be
planted by Instruction; whereas Wars are all for Division and Destruction: And
those, who, in these later times, have mingled Heaven and Earth together, to
compel the Consciences of their Subjects to an Unity in Religion, have, at
last, been fayn to give over, and let them alone; and to reject the advice of
those unskilful Physicians, who prescribe nothing but Antimony, and Letting
Blood, for all Diseases. Then he proves that the accord made with the
Protestants, was both just, necessary, and profitable. The whole Discourse is
not unworthy the consideration of our times; but I shall not trouble the Reader
with Transcribing farther.

Having now dispatched the Holy-League, and made good (I hope) so much as I
undertook; that it was, for the most part, parallel to this of ours: One thing,
only, I have not insisted on; not knowing whether it be convenient to
particularize in it; namely the strange Disasters, and Unfortunate ends, which
befell many Eminent Persons of that League. Like to which our own Story has
afforded us some Examples already, and Posterity may be able to observe more.

To say nothing of any that were Killed in those Wars, on either Party; nor
much of the Tragical ends of many of that Family, who were the first Authors
and constant Upholders of that League; it cannot be forgot, that the Duke of
Guise, and his Brother the Cardinal, were both of them suddenly taken away by
Du Tillet. p. 242.
Treachery, when their hopes were at highest: And the Duke of Nemure (their
Brother by the Mother) Betrayed by one whom he most trusted, Dyed in Despair in
the declining of the League. Likewise, That one of the Duke of Guise his Sons
(a Person of special note for his Valor) was, some Years after the Peace,
miserably torn in pieces by Davila p. 994.
a Canon at Arles, which burst, when he gave Fire to it, Shooting at a Mark.
The Duplex Hist. p. 27.
chief of the Duke of Lorreynes Family, who thought to have gained the Kingdom
of France to his Son from the Father; K. Henry the 4th.
that Son lost all his own Dukedom to the Son. K. Lewis the 13th. Davila p. 629.
The Duke of Merceur, who aimed to have had Brittany, at least, for his share,
Dyed Du Tellet. p. 263.
of the Plague in a Foreign Country, left no Heir Male; so that his whole
Estate came to the Duke of Vendosine with his Daughter much against her Will.
The Count of St. Paul, who had been advanced by the Duke of Main, to the Title
of Marshall of France, was in the time of the League, Stabbed by the young Duke
of Guise, as he came forth of the Church at Remes,. Villiers, the Admiral, was
basely Killed Davila p. 936.
by a Spanish-Souldier, in cold Blood, and his Finger cut off by another for
his Ring. Brisson, the Primier President of the Parliament at Paris, who had
been first most Violent against the King; upon suspicion of complying;
afterward, was, with some others Strangled by the Tumultuous Citizens of
Paris: And the Lord Gomeron, Governor of Han, in Picardy, who sold that place
to the Spaniard, was Beheaded before the Walls of the same Town; a Reward not
much Inferior to that of the two Hothums.

I take no pleasure in reckoning up many of these Instances. He that will seek,
may find more in France; and he that will observe (I do not wish, but fear it)
in time may discover as many in England.

One Observation more, I shall Entreat the Reader to carry home with him, and
then I have done with the Holy-League.

It has already been showed at full; that when the Leaguers first took up
Arms, and bound themselves by Oaths against their King; the pretended grounds
of the one, and the Subject of the other, were nothing but the Defense of the
true Religion, the Laws and Liberties, and Property of the Subject, with many
fair Promises to make the King a Glorious King. Where I cannot choose but
observe, how the Hand of God, by a strange Providence, turned all their Vows
into Prophecies, and their Promises into Predictions; by fulfilling them all,
though in) far different sense from what they intended. By settling the True
Religion, they meant the Roman; but God fulfilled it of the Protestant: And
those Arms, which they Vowed to the Ruin, God Converted to the Advancement of
it; the Protestants of that Kingdom, having upon that occasion obtained, and
ever since enjoyed greater Immunities, and a more free and settled course of the
Profession of their Religion, than ever they had before.

As to the Laws, the Fundamental Laws of France (to speak with the Frenchman)
the Salique-Laws, touching the Succession of the Crown, and Prerogative of the
King, which they intended to alter; they did, in the event, confirm.

And as Henry the third was Advanced to a State of Glory, by the cruel Hands of
Jacques Clement (an Instrument of the League) and Henry the fourth, by Ravilliac
(one Trained up in the same Principles:) So was King Charles the first, by his
bloody Murderers here.

But, as it fell out, consider what a purchase the Glorious Nobility, the
Gallant Gentry, the Rich Citizens, and the Secure Farmer had; when, by siding
with the Leaguers, they Exchanged their Loyalty, and present Peace, which they
enjoyed under the King's Protection, for the aerie hopes of a greater Liberty;
and, if not bettering, at least securing their Estates. Did not the long
continuance of those Wars, so inure the Soldiers to a Military course of Life,
and the People to Patience under Contributions, and Impositions, that the
former could never since be won to lay the Sword out of his Hands; nor the
latter get the Yoke shaken off their Shoulders? Only the Scene is somewhat
altered; for whereas before, their own Country was the Stage of the War; they
have now removed it to their Neighbors: And the Crown of France, by reason of
their many Victories and Successes, is now become justly formidable to a great
part of Europe; whereby the promise of the Leaguers is fully verified, the King
is made Glorious; but how far they so intended; is easy to imagine. And how the
Liberty of the Subject in general, is enhaunted, and their Property Established,
by these Glorious Achievements of the King, when their Yearly Taxes, for
support of his Wars, amount almost (if not altogether) to the value of their
Lands, let the French, if they have any cause, make their boast.

And the People of England may now see, how by tracing them too far in the
forbidden Paths of a conceited Liberty, they not long since fell into the known
Slavery of the French-Pesant: A Misery, which some of them felt but a little;
when, for fear of it, they first Petitioned to be put into a Posture of
Defense; but justly brought upon themselves, by those undue Courses, which they
took to prevent it; God, in his Wisdom thinking it fit, to punish this Nation
by a real Slavery, unto some of their own Fellow. Subjects, for fancying to
themselves an imaginary, under their Lawful Sovereign, as a ground to justify
their Rebellion, when there was no cause for it.

Wherefore I shall now Conclude, with the Words of Sr. Edward Coke, at the end
of this Chapter, Cokes Instit. part. 3. p. 35.
concerning Treason.

-- It appears in the Holy Scriptures, (says he) that Traitors never
prospered, what good soever they pretended, but were most severely, and
exemplarily punished; As Numb. 16. 31, 32. and 27. 3.
Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, by Miracle -- dirupta est terra sub pedibus eorum,
and aperiens os suum, devoravit illos. Athalia Reg. 11. 36.
the Daughter of Amri, interfecta est gladio: Bagatha Esther 6. 2, 3.
and Thara, against Assuerus, appensus est uterque eorum in patibuto. Absolon
Sam. 2. 18. 9. 14.
against David -- suspensus in arbore; and Joab, infixit tres lanceas in cord
ejus. Ahithophel Ib. 17. 23.
with Absolon, against David; -- Suspendio interijt, he Hanged himself.

Abiathar Reg. (2) 21. 26, 27.
the Traiterous High Priest against Solomon; -- Abiathar sacerdoti dixit Rex --
Et quidem vir mortises, sed hodie non interficiam, etc. Ejecit ergo Solomon,
Abiathar, ut non esset Sacerdos.

Shimei Sam. (2) 16. 5, 6. Et Reg. (1) 2. 8. 4. 6.
against David -- gladio interfectus. Zimri Reg. (b) 16. 9. 18.
against Ela, who burnt himself. Theudas Act. Apost. 5. 36, 37.
(qui occisus est, and circiter CCCC. qui credebant ei, dispersi sunt and
redacti ad nihilum) and Judas Galilaeus; ipse perijt, and omnes quotquot
consenserunt ei, dispersi sunt.

Peruse over all our Books, Records, and Histories (says he) and you shall
find a Principle in Law; a Rule in Reason; and a Trial in Experience; that
Treason does ever produce Fatal and Final Destruction to the Offender, and
never attained to the desired end (two incidents inseparable thereunto) and
therefore, let all Men abandon it, as the most Poisonous Bayt of the Devil; and
follow the Precept in Holy Scripture, Prove. 24. 21.
Fear God, Honor the King, and have no Company with the Seditious.

FINIS.
THE INDEX.
A.
ANabaptists of Germany, their Tenets and Progress. Page 2. -- Calvin's
Character of them. 8. -- Dangerous to Church and State. 9. -- Luthers Request
to the Duke of Saxony in favor of them. 4. -- Afterward exhorts all Men to
destroy them. 6. St. Antholin 's Church in London made the grand Nursery of
seditious Preachers. 37. Articles of Pacification with the Scots. 55. Articles
of the Treaty at Edinburgh for bringing in the Scots Army. 131. -- between
General Monk and the Committee of Safety. 480. Articles called [The Agreement
of the People.] 260. Articles assented to by the King at the Treaty at
Uxbridge. 291. Assembly at Glasgow dissolved. 52. The Impious Saving of one of
the Assembly of Divines. 225. Apprentices of London force the House of Commons.
248. Army marches toward London. 251.
B.
BArons War in the time of King Henry the 3d paralleled with that of King
Charles the First. 592. A Benevolence proposed for raising Money. 32. Bishops
voted to have no Voice in Parliament. 68. Booth ( Sir George) his Insurrection.
470. Brook ( Lord) slain. 117. Buckingham ( Duke) his Expedition to the Isle of
Rhee. 33. -- murdered by Felton. 34.
C.
CAnterbury and other Cathedrals defaced. 557. Carew ( Sir Alex.) his ominous
words. 198. -- is beheaded. ibid. Carnarvan ( Earl) slain. 187. Charles I. (
King) pawns his Lands to the City of London. 33. -- is denied entrance into
Hull. 91. -- his Messages to the Parliament for Peace. 102, 103, 134, 237, 268.
-- his Protestation at the Head of his Army. 104. -- goes from Oxford to the
Scots Army. 209. -- is sold by the Scots. 232. -- is brought from Newcastle to
Holdenby. 234. -- his Answer to the four dethroning Bills. 271. -- last Scene
of his Life. 361. -- rejects the Proposals made to him on the Sunday before his
death. 372. -- is murdered. 373. -- his Legacies to his Children and others.
382. -- his Burial. 383. Charles II. (King) his Care, when in Exile, to
preserve the Duke of Gloucester in the Protestant Religion. 429. -- marches from
Scotland to Worcester. 400. -- proclaimed King at London. 488. Cheapside Cross
pulled down. 560. Church Livings, plurality of them allowed by the
Presbyterians. 225. Colchester- Men petition the Parliament against Bishops,
etc. 85. Common Prayer abolished. 193. Commissions of Array. 97.
Common-Council-men turned out. 79. First Covenant by the Scots. 46. Conference
at Hampton Court. 14. Cromwell (Oliver) -- his Extraction and Education. 458. --
his persidious dealing with the King. 261. -- his pretended Revelation. 366. --
his Speech in Parliament. ibid. -- Preaches at White Hall. 391. -- made General
of the Army. 397. -- his Answer to a Letter from the Governor of the Castle of
Edinburgh. 397. -- turns the Rump Parliament out of doors. 405. -- made Lord
Protector. 414. -- The manner of his riding to Grocers-hall in State. 418. --
calls a Parliament. 423. -- The manner of his proceeding to Parliament. ibid.
-- his Speech at the opening the Parliament. 424, 426. -- dissolves his first
Parliament. 429. -- Second Parliament called. 450. -- dissolved. 455. -- his
Death. 457. Cromwell ( Richard) calls a Parliament. 462. -- is set aside, and
the Ramp Parliament restored. 465.
D
DEclaration of the City of London. 250. Declaration of the Scots
Commissioners. 258, 271. Declaration of the Scots for a public Fast. 246. --
of the Committee of Safety. 482. Denbigh ( Earl) slain. 185. Directory
established. 193.
E.
EPiscopal Government abolished in Scotland. 52. -- in England. 122. Earl of
Essex made LientenantGeneral of the Kings Army going against the Scots. 54. --
made Lord Chamberlain. 71. -- made General of the Parliament Forces. 98.
Essex-Men petition to the Parliament in behalf of the King. 282. Excise first
began. 120, 123, 127, 132.
F.
FAlkland (Lucius Visc.) slain. 187. Frederick Count Palatine of the Rhine
elected King of Bohemia. 20. French Ambassador's Speech to Cromwell. 421. French
Holy League paralleled with the Rebellion in England. 600.
G.
GLoucester ( Duke,) the attempts made upon him by the Queen Mother at Paris,
to turn to the Romish Religion. 429. Grenvil ( Sir Bevil) slain. 186. Gurney
Lord Major of London is deposed by the Rebels. 101.
H.
MArquess of Hamilton sent into Scotland to appease the People there. 46. --
his Declaration. 284. -- is beheaded, 388. Haselring ( Sir Arthur) his Motion
in Parliament. 465. Hampden ( Colonel) slain. 186. Hewson kills some of the
Londoners. 482. Conference at Hampton Court. 14. Hewit ( Dr. John) beheaded.
456. Mr. Hookers Books corrupted by the Presbyterians. 38. Hotham ( Sir John)
denies the King entrance into Hull. 91. -- He and his Son beheaded. 99.
Hypocrisy its Fruits. 1.
I.
JAmes (King) enters into a War for the recovery of the Palatinate. 20. -- his
Death. 24. Jesuits Tenets. 16. Independency, its Original. 227. -- Their
Tenets. 281. 409. Instrument of Government read to Cromwell at his inauguration.
414.
K.
KIneton Battle. 108, 109. Kentish Men petition the Parliament in behalf of the
King. 282.
L.
LAmbert routed at Daventry. 487. Lambeth-house beset. 62. Laud Archbishop
beheaded. 194. Holy League and Covenant. 119. 121. Solemn League and covenant.
128. Schismatical Lecturers planted in London and Corporate Towns. 36. --
Buying in Impropriate Tyths for their support. ibid. -- The absurdity and ill
effects of their Doctrine. 38. 95. 392. 469. 565. Leicester's (Earl) may to get
the Bishops Lands. 14. -- made Deputy of Ireland. 71. Representation of the
Ministers of Leichestershire. 471. A Loan required by King Charles I. 31.
Londoners, their forwardness to promote the Rebellion. 99. 119. 123. 234. 286.
584. -- are dejected upon the approach of Fairfax 's Army. 252. Justice Long
committed to the Tower. 79. Certain seditious Expressions in Mr. Love 's Sermon
at Uxbridge. 576.
M.
Battle at Marston-Moor. 189. Five Members of Parliament demanded by the King.
81. General Monk advances toward England. 481. -- his Speech to the Rump
Parliament. 485. -- voted Lord General. 487. -- his Descent, and variable
Fortune. 488 Secluded Members readmitted. 487.
N.
NAmes of the secluded Members. 363. -- of those that subscribed a Protestation
against a Treaty with the King at the Isle of Wight. 365. -- of the Persons
present at the Treaty. 289. -- of the High Court of Justice for Trial of the
King. 367. -- of the Members who assented not to the Bill of Attainder against
the Earl of Strafford. 583. -- of Cromwels Council of State. 406. -- of his
House of Lords. 455. -- of the Rumpers. 467. -- of the secluded Members. ibid.
-- of the Rumper's Council of State. 468. -- of the Committee of Safety. 477.
Navesby Fight. 200. Newbery first Battle. 187. -- second Battle. 197.
O.
OAth for adjuring the King. 471. -- taken by Members of Parliament. 485. Order
for raising an Army by the Parliament. 98. Ordinance for the Militia. 89.
Ordinance for calling an Assembly of Divines. 121. The Self-denying Ordinance.
193. 197. Ordinance for Sale of Bishops Lands. 225. Ordinance for Trial of the
King. 366.
P.
FIrst Parliament of King Charles I. 2^. -- dissolved. 27. Second Parliament
called. ibid. -- dissolved. 31. Third Parliament called. 34. -- dissolved. 35.
The short Parliament called, and dissolved, 61. Long Parliament began. 66. --
dissolved. 487. Bill for perpetuating the Parliament. 70. -- Their Declaration
concerning the Five Members. 83. -- Their insolent Propositions to the King
after their Victory at Marston-Moore. 191. -- Invite the Scots to their
assistance. 112. -- Their Oppressions of the People. 112. 114. 124. 127. 129.
130. 131. 391. 474. House of Peers abolished. 385. 389. Peter's (Hugh) his
Revelation. 365. Petition of the County of Norfolk. 386. -- of Grievances. 66.
-- for putting the Kingdom into a posture of Defense. 85. -- for putting the
Militia into the Hands of the Parliament. 86. -- of the poor Tradesmen in
London. 87. Petitions for a free Parliament suppressed. 482. Popish Priest
slain on the Parliament side at Edgehill Fight. 564. Presbyterian Tenets. 17.
400. -- Arts and Devices to raise Rebellion. 19. -- Their actings against the
Protestant Religion. 554. -- against the Laws of the Land, and Liberty of the
Subject. 577. -- Their Doctrine and Practice. 565. -- Their violating the
Privileges of Parliament. 582. -- Their averseness to Peace. 588. -- Their
practice for reducing the King to necessities. 20. 238. -- Their Protestations
and Declarations. 206. Presbytery triumphant. 193. 203. Plots and Conspiracies
pretended by them. 69. 76. 81. 90. 121. 129. Whether the Presbyterian or
Independent were the chief Actors in the Murder of the King. 375. Proposals of
the Parliament for bringing in Money and Plate. 95, 96. Propositions sent to
the King at New Castle. 217. Prides Purge. 363. Privy- Seals. 27. 32.
Puckering, Speaker of the Commons, his Speech against the Puritans. 13.
Puritans, their Principles. 10. -- and Discipline. 11. -- petition King James
against the Liturgy of the Church of England. 14.
R.
THe Recognition subscribed. 429. The Grand Remonstrance. 71. -- presented to
the King. 78. Captain Rolfe employed by the Parliament to poison the King. 285.
Rumper's Declaration. 466. -- are excluded by Lambert. 477. -- are readmitted.
483.
S.
SAlmatius his Opinion touching the Murder of King Charles. 377. Scots put
themselves in Arms. 54. -- raise more Forces. 58. -- Their first Invasion. 62.
-- Their second Invasion. 189. 132. -- Their third Invasion. 380. -- Their
Letter to the Major, etc. of the City of London. 214. -- Their Answer to the
English Commissioners about delivering up the King. 230. -- Their Letter and
Declaration to the two Houses of Parliament. 258. 271. Great Seal of England
altered. 370. Service Book sent into Scotland. 42. 58. Sheriffs of London
refuse to publish His Majesty's Proclamation. 72. Ship Money required. 32. --
Inland Parts charged therewith. 42. Sir Henry Slingsby beheaded. 456. Spencer
Earl of Northampton slain. 118. Earl of Strafford impeached of Treason. 67. --
his Trial and Death. 68. Star Chamber Court suppressed. 70. Earl of Sunderland
slain. 187.
T.
TReaty in the Isle of Wight. 689. Treaty at Rippon. 65. -- removed to
Westminster. 66. Tumults at Edinburgh, by reason of the Service Book. 44. -- in
St. Paul's Cathedral. 65. -- at Westminster. 78, 79, 82. -- justified by the
Parliament. 90.
V.
VAne ( Sir Henry) being sent into Scotland, incites them to Rebellion. 60. --
his sinister dealing with the King. 61. Virgin of Hereford-shire, her
Revelation. 367. Uxbridge Treaty. 194. 291. 737. Votes of no more Addresses to
the King. 275.
W.
WAlsingham a favourer of the Sectaries. 9. Walton upon Thames, the Sermon of a
Soldier there. 390. Weever an Independent, his Motion in the House of Commons.
283. Winchester Cathedral defaced. Worchester Cathedral defaced. 558.
Y.
YOrk, Grand Council of the Peers there. 64,
A CATALOGUE OF BOOKS Printed at the Theater in Oxford. (With several others)
And sold in London, by Moses Pit at the Angel against the Great North-door of
St. Pauls-Church. 1681.
IN FOLIO.
BIble for Churches with Chronology and an Index.

The English Atlas Vol 1st. containing the description of the North Pole, as
also Muscovy, Poland, Sweden and Denmark.

The second Vol. of the Atlas containing Germany. The third Vol. containing the
17 Provinces both in the Press.

(...) five Pandectae Canonum S. S. Apostolorum and Conciliorum ab Ecclesia
Graeca receptorum, nec non canonicarum S. S. Patrum Epistolarum una cum
Scholiis antiquorum singulis annexis, and Scriptis aliis huc spectantibus,
quorum plurima e Bibliothecae Bodleianae, aliarumque MSS. codicibus nunc primum
edita, reliqua cum iisdem MSS. summa fide and diligentia collata. Totum opus in
duos Tomos divisum, Gul. Beveregius Ecclesiae Angl. Presbyter recensuit,
Prolegomenis munivit, and Annot. auxit.

Catalogus impressorum librorum Bibliothecae Bodleianae in Acad. Oxon.

Historia Universitatis Oxoniensis duobus voluminibus comprehensa. Autore
Antonio a Wood.

Oxonia illustrata, sive omnium celeberrimae istius Universitatis, Collegiorum,
Aularum, etc. Scenographia, per Dav. Loggan.

Plantarum Umbelliferarum distributio nova per tabulas cognationis and
affinitatis, ex libro naturae observata and detecta, Aut. Rob. Morrison, Prof.
Botanico.

The History of Lapland.

Marmora Oxoniensia, ex Arundelianis, Seldenianis, aliisque conslata, etc. cum
notis Lydiati and aliorum.

The Natural History of Oxfordshire, being an Essay toward the Natural
History of England. By R. Plot. L. L. D.

Theatri Oxoniensis Encaenia, sive Comitia Philologica, Iul. 6. Anno 1677.
Celebrata.

Dr. Pocock's Commentary on the Lesser Prophets.

Iamblichus Chalcidensis de Mysteriis Aegyptiorum Graec. Lat. Interpret T.
Gale.

Regis Aelfredi vita, cum Notis.

D. Cypriani opera Notis illustrata. In the Press.

Gualteri Charletoni M. D. Onomasticon Zoicon. Editio secunda, priori long
auctior.

Josephus Gr. Lat. cum notis. in the Press.

Irenaej opera. Gr. Lat.

Provinciale seu constitutiones Angliae, per Guil. Lyndwood.

Hugonis Grotij opera omnia Theologicam in tres Tomos divisa. Land. 1679.

Labbaei Glossaria Latino-Graeca and Graeco-Latina. Paris 1679.

Huetii (Petris Dan) demonstratio Evangelica ad serenis. Delphinum. Paris 1679.

Episcopij (Simonis) Opera Theologica cum hora Hebraicae and Talmudicae in Acta
Apostolorum. 1678.

Monasticon Anglicanum pars secunda and tertia fol. cum figuris.

Websters display of Witchcraft, wherein is affirmed that there are many sorts
of deceivers and Imposters. 1677.

The History of the Council of Trent written by Patre Paolo, translated into
English, to which is added his Life.

The Journal of St. Amor Dr. of Sorbonne, concerning the five famous
propositions.

Johan Scotius de Divisione Naturae now in the Press.

De Ratione ac Jure finiendi controversias Ecclesiae Disputatio Authore Heb.
Thorndike.

Theses Theologicae variis Temporibu^ in Academia Sedanensi editae, and ad
disputandum propositae. Authore Ludovico Le Blanc verbi Divini Ministro and
Theologiae professore. In qua exponitur sententia Doctorum Ecclesiae Romanae,
and Protestantium. 1675. Price 20 s.

Dr. Henry Hammond's Sermons. 1675.

A Table of Ten thousand Square Numbers, by John Pell, D. D. stitcht, 1 s. 6d.

Tuba Sentoro-Phonica, or the Speaking-Trumpet; being an Instrument of
Excellent Use both at Sea and Land; by Sir Samuel Morland. Price of the Book 1
s. of the Instrument 2 l. 5s.

Catalogus Librorum in Regionibus Transmarinis nuper Editorum.

The Commentaries and Life of Julius Caesar, Containing his Wars in Gallia, and
the Civil Wars betwixt him and Pompey, with the Notes of Clement Edmonds. 1677.
16s.

QUARTO.
SEveral English Bibles with the Liturgy, Apocrypha, and Singing Psalms.

Icones and Descriptiones rariorum Plantarum Siciliae, Melitae, Galliae and
Italiae. Autore Paulo Boccone.

Common Prayer.

Theophilus and Philodoxus, 4 controversial dialogues, Of prayer in an unknown
tongue. The half Communion. The worshipping of Images. The Invocation of
Saints. by Gilb. Cole D. D.

The Divine Authority of Scripture, a Sermon by Dr. Allestree.

The Character of the last days, a Sermon by Dr. Fell.

Tractatus Maimonidis de donis Pauperum, cum versione latina and notis Hum.
Prideaux Art. mag. ex Aed. Chr.

Historia Jacobitarum in Aegypto, Lybia, Nubia, Aethiopia tota, and part Cypri
insulae habitantium, per Ios. Abudacnum.

A View and survey of the dangerous errors to Church and State in Mr. Hobbs his
Book entitled Leviathan, by Edward Earl of Clarendon.

Votum pro pace Christiana. Aut. An. Sall D. D.

Benefits of our Savior to Mankind.

A Sermon before the House of Peers Dec. 22d, 1680. by John Lord Bishop of
Oxford.

A discourse of Unequal Glasses.

Archimedes Opera, Apolloni Pergaei Conicorum Liber IIII. Th^odosij Sphaerica,
Methodo novo Illustrata and succincte demonstrata. Per Isaac Barrow.

Lectiones Geometricae per Isaac Barrow.

Apologia pro Ecclesiae patribus adversus Iohannen Dalleum de usu patrum. Auth.
Math. Scrivener.

Beveregii Codex Cannonum Ecclesiae Primitivae vindicatae.

Hereboordi (Adriani) Melitemata Philosophica. Amsterdam. 1680.

Vita selectorum aliquot virorum, qui Doctrina Dignitate aut Pietate
inclaruere. Land. 1681.

History of Tyths, by John Seldom. London 1618.

Ioannis Bonae (Cardinalis) Opera Theologica. 1677. 16 s.

Dr. Pell's Introduction to Algebra. 7s.

Nich. Mercatoris Logarithmo-Technia, sive methodus construendi Logarithmos,
1668. and Iac. Gregorii Exercitationes Geometricae, 1668. 2 s.

Snellii Typhis Batavus, Ludg. Bat. 1624. 5 s.

Dr. Thomas Iacomb, on the Eighth Chapter of the Romans. 8s.

Dr. Wallis Opera Mechanica, 22 s.

Hieronymi Mercurialis de Art Gymnastica Libri sex cum figuris, 1672.

I. Crellii Ethica Aristotelica and Christiana, 16s. Huic Editioni praeter
praefixam Auctoris Vitam, accedit Catechefis Ecclesiarum Polonicarum, a Io.
Crellio, Iona Schlethtingio, M. Ruaro, and A Wissowatio recognita atque
Emendata, Casmop. 1681.

Joan. Binchii Mellificium Theologicum, 16s.

Holy Fast of Lent defended, 1667. 6 d.

A Looking-Glass for all New Converts, 1667. 1 s.

There is newly published two Recantation-Sermons, (Preached at the French
Church in the Savoy) by two Converted Romanists, Mr. De la Motte, late Preacher
of the Order of the Carmelites, and Mr. De Luzanzy, Licentiate in Divinity?
wherein the Corrupt Doctrines of the Church of Rome are laid open and confuted.
Both Printed in French and English.

A Modest Survey of the most material things in a Discourse, called the Naked
Truth, 6d.

Marshal Turenne's Funeral Sermon. 1677.

Ier. Horrocii. Angl. Opusc. Astron. 1673.

An Historical Vindication of the Church of England in Point of Schism, by Sir
To. Twisden.

Dr. Tillotson's Sermons before the King, April 18. 1675.

Dr. Wilkins's Three Sermons before the king, March 7. 1669. and Feb. 7. 1670.

Dr. Io. Tillotson's Rule of Faith. 1676.

IN OCTAVO.
THO. Lydiati Canones Chronologici, nec non series summorum Magistratuum and
Triumphorum Romanorum.

Saul and Samuel at Endor, or the new ways of Salvation and Service, which
usually tempt Men to Rome, and detain them there, truly represented and refuted
by Dan. Brevint. D. D. with the vindication of his Missale Romans the second
Impression.

A Paraphrase and Annotations upon the Epistles of St. Paul to the Romans,
Corinthians and Hebrews.

The Ladies Calling.

The Government of the Tongue.

The Art of contentment.

The Lively Oracles given to us. Or the Christians Birthright and duty in the
custody and use of the Holy Scripture: these four by the Author of the whole
Du^y of Man.

Zenophon, Graec.

A Short Dissertation concerning Free-Schools, beingan Essay toward a History
of the Free-Schools of England, by Christopher Wase of St Mary Hall Oxon.
Superior Beadle of the Civil Law in the same University.

Epic^eti Enchiridion, Cebetis Tabuke, Theophrasti Charact. Gr. L. cum Not.

Par^cbolae, sive excerpta e corpore statutorum Univ. Oxon. etc.

M. Fabii Quintiliani Declamationes undeviginti, cum ejusdem (ut nonnullis
visum) dialogo de causis corrupae Elequentiae, quae omnia notis illustrantur.

Nemesii Philosophi and Episcopi de natura hominis lib. unus, denuo recognitus
and manuscriptorum collatione in integrum restitutus, annotationibusque insuper
illustratus. Graec. Lat.

West Barbary, or a short narrative of the revolutions of the Kingdom of Fez
and Morocco, with an account of the present customs, sacred, civil, and
domestic, by L. Addison.

Homeri ilias, cum Scholiis Didymi Gr.

Theocritus cum Scholiis Graecia.

Su^tonius Tranquillus, cum Notis.

De Ecclesiae Graecae statu hodierno Epist. per Tho. Smith. S. S. Th. Bac.

Gul. Oughtredi opuscula hactenus inedita.

Caii Plinii Caecilii Secundi Epistolae and Oration Panegyrica, cum notis
illustratae.

Rhetores selecti, Gr, Lat, Demetrius Philereus, de Elocutione; Tiberius
Rhetor, de Schematibus Demosthenis; Anonymus Sophista, de Rhetorica; Severi
Alexandrini Ethopoeiae. Demetrium emendavit, reliquos e MSS. edidit and Latin
vertit; omnes Notis illustravit Tho. Gale, Se. Co. M.

(...). Georgii Diaconi Primarii Judicis, atque Scriniorum custodis Pachymerii,
Epitome Logices Aristotel^s.

Reflections upon the Council of Trent, By H. C. de Luzancy, M. A. Chapter Chapter and
Deacon of the Church of England.

Psalterium Gr. Juxta M. S. Alexand. cum verse. Vulg. per Dr. Tho. Gale.

Herodiani Hist. G. L. cum Notis.

Catholica Romanus Pacificus. per Io. Barnes,

Zozomi Historia G. lat.

Common Prayer.

Lucii Caecilii Firmiani Lactantii Liber ad Donatum Confessorum de mortibus
persecutorum cum notis Steph. Baluzii. Oxon. 1681.

Historiae Poeticae scriptores antiqui Apollodorus, etc. Grae lat. cum notae
and Indices necessarii.

Sophocles Grae lat. cum notis.

Gradus ad Parnassum.

A Scriptural Catechism, according to the method observed by the Author of the
Whole Duty of Man, 1676.

How, of delighting in God, and of the Blessedness of the Righteous, Two Vol.

Art of Speaking, by M. du Port Royal. 1676.

A Discourse of Local Motion, undertaking to demonstrate the Laws of Motion,
and withal to prove, that of the seven Rules delivered by Mr. Des Carts on
this Subject he has mistaken Six: Englished out of French, 1671. 1s.

The History of the late Revolution, of the Empire of the Great Mogol, with a
description of the Country, in two Volumes. 7 s.

The History of the Conquest of the Empire of China by the Tartars, 1671. 4s.

Mystery of Iniquity unvailed in a Discourse, wherein is held forth the
opposition of the Doctrine, Worship, and Practices of the Roman Church, to the
Nature, Designs, and Characters of the Christian Faith, by Gilbert Burnet. 1s.

Theod. Turqueti, De Mayerne, De Arthritide, Accesserunt ejusdem Consilia
aliquot Medicinalia, 1s.

A new way of curing the Gout, and Observations and Practices relating to Women
in Travel, 3 s.

Elenchi Motuum Nuperorum in Anglia pars tertia, sive Motus Compositi. Vbi G.
Monchii e Scotia progressus, nec non Aug. Caroli Secundi in Angliam Reditus;
ejusdemque, Regiae Majest. per Decennium gesta fideliter enarrantur, 1676.

Gualteri Needham Disputatio Anatomica de Formato Foetu. 1677. 3 s. 6d.

Buxtorsius's Epitome of his Hebrew Grammar Englished, by John Davis, 1658. 1s.
6d.

The Fortunate Fool, or the Life of Dr. Cenudo, a Spanish Romance, 1670. 2 s.

The Adventures of Mr. T. S. an English Merchant, taken Prisoner by the Turks
of Argiers, with a description of that Kingdom, and the Towns and Places
thereabouts, 1670. 1. s. 6d.

Contemplations on Mortality, 1670. 1 s.

A Discourse written to a Learned Friar, by Mr. Des Fourneillis, showing that
the Systeme of Mr. Des Carts, and particularly his Opinion concerning Brutes,
does contain nothing dangerous; and that all he has written of both, seems to
have been taken out of the first Chapter of Genesis: To which is annexed the
Systeme General of the Cartesian Philosophy, 1. s.

The Relation of a Voyage into Mauritania in Africa, by Roland Frejus of
Marfeilles, by the French King's Order, 1666, to Muley Arxid King of
Taffaletta, etc, with a Letter in Answer to diverse Questions concerning their
Religion, Manners, etc, 1671. 1s. 6d.

A Genuine Explication of the Visions in the Book of Revelation, by A. B.
Peganius. 1671. 2s.

Prodromus to a Dissertation concerning Solids naturally contained within
Solids, laying a foundation for the rendering a rational account, both of the
Frame and the several Changes of the Mass of the Earth, as also the various
Productions of the same. By Nich. Steno, 1671. 1s. 3d.

The Poetical Histories, being a complete Collection of all the Stories
necessary for a perfect understanding of the Greek and Latin Poets, and other
Ancient Authors, written Originally in French, by the Learned Jesuit P.
Galtruchius. Now Englished and Enriched with Observations concerning the Gods
worshipped by our Ancestors in this Island, by the Phoenecians and Syrians in
Asia; with many useful Notes and occasional Proverbs, gathered out of the best
Authors: Unto which are added two Treatises; One of the Curiosities of Old
Rome, and of the difficult Names relating to the Affairs of that City; The
other containing the most remarkable Hieroglyphics of Egypt. The Third
Edition, with Additions. By Marius D. Assigny, B. D. 3 s. 6d.

An Essay about the Origin and Virtues of Gems, by the Honorable Robert
Boil. 1s. 6d. Idem Lat. twelves, 1s.

A Complete Treatise of Chyrurgery, containing Barbetts Chyrurgery. Nindererus
of Diseases Incident to Camps and Fleets: With a Chyrurgion's Chest of
Medicines and Instruments, etc. 6s.

Dr. Lower de cord. Amster. 1671. 3s.

Crowei Elenchi Script. in Scripturam. 3 s. 6d.

Eugelenus de Scorbuto.

Grotii via ad Pacem.

Mr. Boil of Hidden Qualities of the Air against Hobs, and of Attraction by
Suction, 2 s. 6d.

Mr. Boil of Effluviums of fire and flame, and of the previousness of Glass. 3
s.

Memoires of Mr. Des-Ecotais formerly styled in the Church of Rome, The most
Venerable Father Cassianus of Paris, Priest and Preacher of the Order of the
Capucins; or the Motives of his Conversion. In English 2s, In French 2s. In
French and English 4s. All Printed 1677.

Les Memoires De Madame la Princess Marie Mancini Colonne G. Connetable du
Royaume de Naples. 1677.

La vie et les Actions Memorables de Lieut. Amiral Michel de Ruyter, 1677. 5s.

IN DUODECIMO.
(...). Novi testamenti lib. omnes. Accesserunt parallela Scripturae loca, nec
non variantes lectiones ex plus 100 MSS. Cod. and antiquis versionibus
collectae.

De Secretione animal cogitata, Aut. Gilb. Cole. M. D.

H. Grotius de Veritate Relig. Christ.

St. Clementis Epist. Gr. Lat. cum Notis.

Cornelii Nepotis vitae Excellent. Imper. Collat. 4. MSS. recognitae. Accessit
Aristomenis vita, ex Pausania.

Ars Rationis, maxima ex part ad mentem Nominalium. lib. 3.

Guil. Lilii Grammatica Latina, additis subinde observationibus utiliss. ex
Despaut. Alvar. Sanct. Sciop. Voss. Busbeo, and quotque nuper scripsere Gram.
Latinis.

The Education of Young Gentlemen, in two parts.

The Christian Sacrament and Service by way of Discourse, Meditation and
Prayer, upon the nature, parts and blessings of the Holy Communion, by Dan.
Brevint, D. D.

Maximus Tyrius, Gr. Lat.

Willisiu Pharmac. rational. pars 1.

Archimedis Arenarius, and de dimensione circuli, cum Eutocii comment. Gr. Lat.
ex versione, and recens. Dr. Wallis. Prof. Geom. Savil.

M. Iuniani Iustini Historiarum, ex Trogo Pompeio lib. 44. ex Cod. MS.
collatione recogniti.

Catholic Religion maintained in the Church of England, by A. Sall, D. D.

Sallustii Hist. cum Notis.

Antoninus. Gr. Lat.

Faustini Presbiteri Scriptores Seculi quarti and fidei Orthodoxae adversus
Arianos, vindicis accerimi, Opera. 1678.

Elegantiae Poeticae.

Testamentum Latinum.

Senecae Tragediae, cum Notis.

Horatius cum Notis Menellii.

Bibles large Letter.

Testaments several sorts.

Common Prayers of several sorts.

-- Idem in 24^, several sorts.

A brief Explanation of the Church Catechism.

Biblia Francois, 18^.

Voyage d'Italie, de Dalmatie, de Graece et du Levant fait in aux annes, 1675,
et 1676. par Jacob Spoon, D. M. Et George Wheeler Gentlehomme Anglois, 3 Vol.
1678.

Abrege de la Philosophiaede Gassendi en VIII Toms, par F. Bernier Lion, 1678.

A Paradise of Delights, or an Elixir of Comforts offered to Believers, in two
Discourses, the first on Heb. 6. 17, 18. the second on Romans 8. 32. By Robert
Wine. 1s.

Grotii Sophompaneas.

Gronovius in Livium.

Primrose Ars Pharmaceutica.

Schook de Pace.

Suetonius.

Swalve Alcali.

Severini Synopsis Chyrurgiae.

Terentii Flores.

Trelcatii loci Communes.

Balduinus de Calceo and Nigronius de Caliga Veterum. Accesserunt ex and Sept.
^l. Tertulliani, Cl. Salmasii and Alb. Rubenii Scriptis plurima ejusdem
Argumenti, 1667.

Ottonis Tachenii Hyppocrates Chymicus, 1671.

Theodori Kerckringii, D. M. Commentarius in Currum Triumpbalem Antimonii
Basilii Valentini a se latinitate donatum, 1671.

Io. Pincieri M. D. Aenignatum Libri Tres cum solutionibus, 1655.

Francisci Redi Experimenta circa res diversos naturales, speciatim illas quae
ex Indiis adferuntur, 1675.

Aulus Gellius.

Besterfeldus Redivivus.

Herls Wisdoms Tripos.

Wilkins Beauty of Providence.


