THE GREAT LOYALTY OF THE PAPISTS TO K. CHARLES I. (Of Blessed Memory.)

DISCOVERED, By Peter Du Moulin. D. D.

IN HIS VINDICATION OF THE Protestant Religion.

LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCLXXIII.

The Great Loyalty of the PAPISTS to King CHARLES the I. (Of Blessed Memory.)
WHen the businesses of the late bad times are once ripe for an history, and
Time the bringer forth of truth, has discovered the mysteries of Iniquity, and
the depths of Satan which have wrought so much crime and mischief, it will be
found, that the late Rebellion was raised and fostered by the Arts of the Court
of Rome. That Jesuits professed themselves Independent, as not depending on
the Church of England; and Fifth-Monarchy-Men, that they might pull down the
English Monarchy, and that in the Committees, for the destruction of the King
and the Church, they had their Spies and their Agents. The Roman Priest and
Confessor is known, who when he saw the fatal stroke given to our holy King
and Martyr, flourished with his sword, and said; Now the greatest enemy that we
have in the world is gone,

When the news of that horrible execution came to Roan, a Protestant Gentleman
of good credit was present in a great company of Jesuited persons: where after
great expressions of Joy, the gravest of the company, to whom all gave ear,
spoke much after this manner; The King of England at his Marriage had promised
us the re-establishing of the Catholic Religion in England; Which is false.
and when he delayed to fulfill his promise, we summoned him from time to time
to perform it: We came so far as to tell him, that if he would not do it, we
should be forced to take those courses which would bring him to his
destruction. We have given him lawful warning, and when no warning would serve,
we have kept our word to him, since he would not keep his word to us.

That grave Rabbis Sentence agrees with this certain Intelligence which shall
be justified whenever Authority will require it: That the year before the
Kings death, a select number of English Jesuits were sent from their whole
party in England; first to Paris, to consult with the Faculty of Sorbon, then
altogether Jesuited; to whom they put this question in Writing:

That seeing the State of ENGLAND, was in a likely posture to change
Government, whether it was lawful for the Catholics to work that Change, for
the advancing and securing of the Catholic Cause in ENGLAND, by making away
ihe King, whom there was no hope to turn from his Heresy? Which was answered
Affirmatively.
After which the same persons went to Rome, where the same question being
propounded and debated, it was concluded by the Pope and his Council, that it
was both lawful and expedient for the Catholics to promote that alteration of
State. What followed that Consultation and sentence, all the world knows, and
how the Jesuits went to work, God knows; and Time the bringer forth of
Truth, will let us know. But when the horrible Parricide committed on the Kings
sacred Person, was so universally cried down as the greatest Villainy that had
been committed in many ages, the Pope commanded all the papers about that
question to be gathered and burnt; In obedience to which Order, a Roman
Catholic in Paris, was demanded a Copy which he had of those papers; But the
Gentleman who had had time to consider and detest the wickedness of that
project, refused to give it, and showed them to a Protestant friend of his; and
related to him the whole carriage of this negotiation, with great abhorrency of
the practices of the Jesuits,

In pursuance of that Order from Rome, for the pulling down both the Monarch
and the Monarchy of England, many Jesuits came over, who took several shapes
to go about their work, but most of them took party in the Army. About Thirty
of them were met by a Protestant Gentleman between Roan and Diep; to whom they
said (taking him for one of their party) that they were going into England, and
would take Arms in the Independent Army, and endeavor to be Agitators,

A Protestant Lady living in Paris in the time of our late calamities, was
persuaded by a Jesuit going in scarlet, to turn Roman Catholic: When the
dismal news of the Kings Murder came to Paris, this Lady, as all other good
English Subjects, was most deeply afflicted with it. And when this Scarlet
Divine came to see her, and found her melting in tears, about that heavy and
common disaster; he told her with a smiling countenance, that she had no reason
to lament, but rather to rejoice, seeing that the Catholics were rid of their
greatest enemy, and that the Catholic Cause was much furthered by his death.
Upon which the Lady in great anger put the man down the stairs: saying, If that
be your Religion, I have done with you for ever. And God has given her the
grace to make her word good hitherto.

Many intelligent Travelers can tell of the great joy among the English
Convents and Seminaries, about the Kings death, as having overcome their enemy,
and done their main work for their settlement in England; of which they made
themselves so sure, that the Benedictins were in great care that the Jesuits
should not get their Land, and the English Nuns were contending who should be
Abbesses in England.

An understanding Gentleman visiting the Friars of Dunkirk, put them upon the
discourse of the Kings Death, and to pump out their sense about it; said that
the Jesuits had labored very much to compass that great work: To which they
answered, that the Jesuits would engross to themselves the glory of all great
and good works, and of this among other works; whereas they had labored as
diligently and effectually for it, as they. So there was striving for the glory
of that achievement, and the Friars showed themselves as much Jesuited as the
Jesuits.

In the height of Oliver's Tyranny, Thomas White Gentleman, a Priest, and a
right Jesuit in all his Principles about obediene, set out a Book Entitled,
the Grounds of Obedience and Government, Wherein he maintains that, If the
People by any circumstance be devolved to the State of Anarchy, page 122.
their promise made (to their expelled Governor) binds no more. That the
people are remitted by the evil managing and insufficiency of their Governor,
to the force of Nature to provide for themselves, and not bound by any promise
made to their Governor. page 123. and 124,
That the Magistrate by his miscarriages abdicateth himself from being a
Magistrate, and proves a Brigand or Robber instead of a Defender. That word
Defender, he writes with a great D, that the reader may take notice whom he
means.

If the Magistrate (says he) have truly deserved to be dispossessed; or if he
be rationally doubted, page 133.
that he has deserved it, and be actually out of pospossession. In the former
case, it is certain the Subject has no Obligation to hazard for his
restitution, but rather to hinder it: For since it is the common good that both
the Magistrate and the Subject are to aim at, and clearly out of what is
expressed, it is the common harm to admit again of such a Magistrate, every one
to his power is bound to resist him. The next case is, if he be innocent, page
135,
and wrongfully deposed; nay let us add, One who had governed well, and
deserved much of the Commonwealth, yet is he totally dispossessed: And so that
it is plain in these Circumstances, It were better for the Common good to stay
as they are, than to venture the restoring him, because of the public hazard.

And now to set down all his words, and follow his style, which is affectedly
intricate and obscure, he maintains that a dispossessed Prince, whether by
right or wrong, is obliged absolutely to renounce all Right and claim to
Government; and if he does not, page 136.
he is worse then an Infidel.

He tells us, That Pope Urban the VIII. published a Decision, That after five
years quiet possession of an Estate, page 151.
the Church was not bound to take notice whether the Title were lawful or no,
but acknowledge the possessor in Ecclesiastical business.

That when the peoples good stands on the possessors side, then clearly he
begins to gain right and power. That when the people think themselves well,
they manifestly consent to the present Government. page 154.
Besides (says he) who can assure they shall be beter by the return of the
dispossessed party* Surely by common presumption the gainer is like to defend
them better then he who lost it. He comes so far as to conclude; That if the
old Magistrate offer to return, he must be repulsed by force of Arms. His
reasoning is this;

What if an open ene my should come, could or ought the Subjects join against
him with their new Magistrate. page, 157,
If not, the whole public must perish; If they may, then their case is the
same against their old Magistrate, since his right stood upon the common Peace;
and that transferred from him to his Rival by the Title of quiet possession.

This was the Philosophy of that contemplative Gentleman, when the King lived
in Exile, and Oliver sat on the Throne. Having so well deserved of the King,
he was not long since highly recommended to his Majesty, by a man of great
Note. But the King who has a Royal Insight into persons and businesses, stopped
him with this short answer, No more of that, I know what man he is.

Father Bre^ was of M. Whites opinion, for the Castle of Jersey being
surrendered after that resistance which for the length of standing out, and the
height of Valor shall be memorable in all ages: When the Gentlemen who had
defended it were pressed to take the Engagement, contrary to the Articles of
their Rendition: That goodly Divine was very earnest with them at S. Malo to
take it; maintaining, That they were not to acknowledge any Supreme but the
prevailing power.

When his Majesty cast himself upon the Spaniard, the Jesuitical party thought
they had him sure enough from ever returning; but God disappointed their hopes,
and deceived our fears by his miraculous mercy; For it is the Lords doing, and
it is mavelous in our eyes, that he escaped out of those hands.

I cannot leave un-observed, That in the height of the late tyranny, two heads
of the Gunpowder Traitors that were set upon the House of Lords, were taken
down; not by the high winds, but by the same zeal which had had plotted that
Treason, and with the leave of Traitors of another feather. We may hear in time
that those holy Relics are shrined up in gold, and are working miracles.

FINIS.

