THE THEOLOGICAL KEY Of the three first COVENANTS, Made by God with Man, in
the several state of Man; obliging Man to his Law, after a several formal
manner, from the beginning, according to his sacred Decree of Predestination,
Fundamentally declared, according to his sacred WORD and TRUTH.

By David Dunbar, Esquire

This is life eternal, to know thee, the only true God; and Jesus Christ whom
thou have sent, John 17.3. LONDON, Printed in the year, 1646.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
BY the Judicious reading of this small Tractate (fundamentally from the
beginning) the Reader is enabled to make the most powerful objection, against
the word of truth, to vanish with the objecters breath: And to determine of all
the misconceived opinions, concerning universal redemption, universal grace,
falling away totally and finally from grace, original sin, natural
corruption, freedom of will, merit by works, children departing this life
unbaptized, and such like; all proceeding from the mistake of the sacred decree
of Predestination, which is here demonstratively and fundamentally resolved,
from the lowest effect in the supreme cause (so far as is revealed to man in
this life) arising from the three first Covenants made by God with man.

Thine in the Lord, David Dunbar.

The Introduction leading the judicious Reader to the understanding of this
Tractate.
THe perfect essential understanding of God, being infinite (as God in
himself is infinite) and consequently God (in this sense) being
incomprehensible by the finite act of any created understanding, God therefore
is comprehensible by man, by the only light of the word of his several
seventh days rest: as God from the beginning, did manifest himself to man, in
his several state and condition, to be honored and worshipped by man, upon
the seventh day of his law of righteousness. To whose worship, the eternal
blessing of the seventh days rest, is due by the law to man, in the several
state and condition of man.

The reason is, because in the fulfilling of the commanded worship of God, upon
the seventh day of the Law of righteousness: the whole law is necessarily
fulfilled, for the command of the seventh day of the Law of righteousness, is
that command which the Lord does call, the first and greatest Command, to which
the lesser command is like, and necessarily employed, in the great command: For
as by the great Command, the seventh days formal worship of God, is first and
immediately commanded (by the immediate power of the word of the seventh days
rest) commanding all the actions of man proceeding from his love to God, to
worship God upon the seventh day of his law; which is the sum of the first
table of the law: So by the lesser command, all the actions of man proceeding
from his love are commanded to the image of God (to wit) man.

Which twofold command is necessarily fulfilled in the fulfilling of the
commanded formal worship of the seventh day of the law, as God has revealed
himself to man by the word of his several seventh days rest: For as no man
can love God (whom he has not seen) who does not love his image man, whom he
does see. (And in this sense it is said that love is the fulfilling of the
law,) So no man can love Gods image man, but he must love God whose image man
is; and therefore it is said, That he that loves his brother, has fulfilled
the Law.

As in the great Command therefore of the word of every several seventh days
rest of the Law of righteousness the whole Law is necessarily commanded: So in
the fulfilling of the great Command of the seventh days rest, the whole law is
as necessari^^ fulfilled; for if the love of man be defective, either to God or
to his image man; man's worship is no worship. And this is the reason, that all
the Covenants made by God with man from the beginning, are established upon the
immediate command of the word of every several seventh days rest, as God did
manifest himself to man from the beginning to be worshipped by man in the
several state and condition of man; for every several covenant is established
upon the condition of the fulfilling of the command of the word of the seventh
days rest of the law of righteousness, implying the command of the whole law
though after a several formal manner, as God has mafest himself to man in
his several state and condition, by the word of his several seventh days
rest.

Now all the covenants made by God with man from the beginning, being but the
exercite act, of his most sacred and most comfortable eternal decree of
Predestination: By the understanding therefore, of the several Covenants made
by God with man from the beginning; we are led fundamentally, in the knowledge
of God; at God did manifest himself to man from the beginning.

The new Covenant therefore (which is the last Covenant made by God with man)
being established upon the immediate command of the word of the seventh days
rest, of the Evangelicall law of righteousness of faith, which is the Lords
day: upon which blessed day, the Lord by his glorious resurrection, did rest
from his fulfilling of his promise of the blessed seed.

The Lords day therefore, is the last period of the exercite act, of the sacred
decree of Predestination, necessarily implying the exercite act of the whole
decree, so far therefore as is revealed to man in this life.

As for the mystery of the Lords day, after what manner it is the word of the
seventh day of the Evangelicall law of righteousness of faith: it is
demonstrate from the truth of the sacred word immediately in this Tractate, and
set down in the proper place: For the Lords day, must be the true seventh day
of the Evangelicall law of righteousness of faith: or there is no object for the
faith of man, or any law to command man, or any covenant to oblige God to man,
or any blessing by the Lords infinite merit, by his Evangelicall seventh days
rest to man: for it is by the immediate power of the blessing of his infinite
merit, that man and the whole work of the redemption, is continued while there
is day in this life.

By the light therefore of the Lords day (which is the word of the seventh
days rest of the Evangelicall Law of righteousness of faith) we are led
fundamentally, and demonstratively, from the lowest effect, of the sacred
decree of predestination, to the first supreme cause, necessarily implying, the
light of all the Covenants, made by God with man from the beginning: Which
supreme cause is God.

The understanding therefore of the Covenants made by God with man from the
beginning, is the understanding of God, which is called the mystery of God. In
which understanding is eternal life, and therefore the Lord says, this is life
eternal to know thee to be the only true God: The reason is because the word
of promise, whereby God and man are mutually obliged by Covenant: is the
immediate object of faith, without which it is impossible either to know or
please God.

As the fundamental knowledge of God, does arise from the Covenants made by
God with man: So the fundamental knowledge of the Covenants does necessarily
arise, from the light of the word of eve y several seventh days rest, as God
has revealed himself to man from the beginning, in his several state and
condition. For as has been said, upon the immediate command of the word of
every several seventh days rest the several Covenants are established: First
and immediately, obliging man, to the seventh days formal commanded worship;
and in that commanded worship, obliging the obedience of man, to the fulfilling
of the command of the whole Law, without the light therefore of the word of the
seventh days rest, we can never attain to the knowledge of the Covenant.

The word of God therefore (in this sense implying the Covenant established
upon the word of the seventh days rest) is the subject of this small Tractate.
And as God from the beginning did manifest himself after a threefold formal
manner to man, by the word of his several seventh days rest of his Law of
righteousness, ^o from the beginning God did make three several formal
Covenants with man in his several state and condition: Whereby the Law of God
(from the beginning) was formally obliged after a threefold formal several
manner, obliging man in his several state and condition which was likewise,
after a threefold manner. As for the Covenant made with Abraham (that in his
seed all the Nations of the earth should be blessed) it was the same real
Covenant made to Adam after the fall, in the promise of the blessed seed,
though the promise was made after a more particular manner to Abraham after to
be declared.

According to these three Covenants: This small Tractate shall be divided into
three several books containing the fundamental declaration of the three
Covenants made by God with man which are the exercit act, of the sacred decree
of predestination, so far therefore as is revealed to man in this life.

Errata.
Pa^. 1. l. 38. read internally. p. 3. 16. of m^n p. 5. 23. execute. p 7 27
external. p. 8. 3. infer. p. 9. ^3. sustaining. ib. 24. soul. p. 13. 5. ^^e
act. ib. 29 lamp p. 14. 17. ad^e by. p. 28 23. several. p 41. 32 the i^t
rnall. p 42. 14. extend. p. 48 17. might. p. 55. 19. add more. p 57. 10 add^
spiritual. ib. 35. after, and sin add, and in temporal natural death which
followed that sin p. 60. 3. add demonstratiue. ib 6 literal. p. 64 29 after
necessary add spiritual p 65. 14. spiritual. ib. 17. indivisibly. p. 67. 3.
sin. ib 22. he is p. 82. 21 supernaturally. p. 83. 17. read thus, they do
necessarily hate all harers and pe secut^rs of his truth and of. p. 89. 18.
add to p 90. 24. to Adam. p. 93 11 for seed, head. p. 94. 36 add from Abel.
p. 96. 4. add promised ib 14 dele the second of. ib. 24. are p. 97. 2. add^
after rest of God. p. 104. 25. barren works. p. 107. 3. the reason. p. 128. 4.
of the. p. 130. 6 ancient subv rted. p. 132. 23. be likewise. p. 133. 31. be
essentially. p. 147. 7. which is. p. 150. 29. light of. p. 160 ^3. by his. p.
165. 20. is flatly.

The First Book of the Theological Key, etc.
CHAP. I.
Of the real unity of the word of the law of righteousness, written in the
heart of man. Of the word of promise: and of the word of the seventh days
rest: and of the formal difference of each from the other.
WIthout the knowledge of the first Covenant, (established between God and
man, upon the immediate command of the word of the first seventh days rest of
the law of righteousness) there is no rest for the faith of man, to rest
fundamentally upon the immediate object of faith: for without the true light of
this fundamental knowledge, the faith of man is unstable, apt to be carried
away, with the light of error, from the true rock of rest.

For the better informing the judicious Reader, in the true knowledge both of
the first, and likewise of the two last Covenants made by God with man: I do
premit this certain Theological ground, arising immediately from the truth of
the sacred word, most necessarily to be first set down.

The word of God in the Scripture is taken in a twofold sense: first, the word
is taken for the infinite word, infinite power, life, light, righteousness;
necessarily implying the essential power of the natural life of the humane
nature of the word: man the son of God before all time, as he is man the son of
God, begotten of the seed of the woman in time: second person of the glorious
Trinity.

By the word in this sense (before the word was made flesh of the seed of the
woman) heaven, earth, the host of both (to wit man and the creatures) were
created in the beginning of time: and in this sense, the word is incommunicable
to all the creatures created by the word.

Secondly, the word is taken for the image of the infinite power of the life of
righteousness of the word: necessarily implying the image of the power of the
natural life of the humane nature of the word: and in this sense, the word is
called the word of the power of righteousness: and the word in this acception,
is communicate to man, and that after a twofold manner.

First, the word of the power of the life of righteousness (necessarily implying
the power of the natural life of the word) is eternally written in the heart
of man. Secondly, the word of the power of life of righteousness (necessarily
implying the power of the natural life of the word) is objected to the
external senses of man, and by the sound of the word written (as it were) in
the sense of hearing. This power of the word of righteousness, both as it is
internally written in the heart of man, and as it is objected to his external
senses, is twofold.

The first power of the word (as it is internally written in the heart of man)
is the power of the life of righteousness, necessarily implying the power of
the natural life of the word. By the immediate power of the word (thus written
in the heart of man) man is enabled to live the life of righteousness, and the
natural life of man: for without the power of natural life, man can no way
live the life of righteousness: and in this sense it is said, that in him we
live, in him we move, in him we have our being, that is in the word: for by the
immediate power of the word written in the heart of man, (as it is the image of
the infinite word, power, life, and being it self) man does live, move, and
has his being, in his several state and condition. Joh. 1.4.

The second power of the word of righteousness (as the word is internally
written in the heart of man) it is the commanding power of the word. For the
word of righteousness in this sense, is the word of the law of righteousness,
internally commanding the heart of man (which is the center and original of
all the powers of man, as he is man) commanding man to produce the works of
righteousness, according to the law of righteousness, as man (by the first power
of the word written in his heart) is enabled to live the life of righteousness.
For according to that Theological Principle; As God does command the action of
his creature, so before, or in, and with the command, God (in his justice) does
enable his creature, with the power of action to fulfill his command. As the
word of righteousness is objected to the external senses of man, it is taken in
a twofold sense.

First, the word of the power of life of righteousness (necessarily implying the
power of natural life of the word) is taken for the word of promise, whereby
God does covenant with man, to grant the eternal continuation of the life of
righteousness (necessarily implying me natural life of the word to man) as man
is enabled to live that life, by the power of the word written in his heart,
which is called the word of eternal life.

Secondly, as the word of righteousness is objected to the external senses of
man, it is taken for the word of the seventh days rest of the law of
righteous^^s, implying the command of the whole law. And the word of the
seventh days rest of the law, in this sense, has likewise a twofold power.

The first power of the word of the seventh days rest of the law, it is the
power of command: for in this sense the word of God is the command of his law
of righteousness, commanding the obedience of man, by his works of
righteousness, to fulfill the command of his law of righteousness, as man is
enabled to live that life, by the immediate power of the word of the law
written in his heart. And in this sense, Gods word is said to be a law to man.
For all the commands of God, (righteousness it self) by his word, are the
necessary commands of his law of righteousness: and all the commands of the law
of God, are the necessary commands of the word of the seventh days rest of the
law which does necessarily imply the command of the whole law of God. Gods
command therefore to Adam, commanding him to abstain from eating of the fruit
of the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil, was the necessary command of the
word of the first seventh days rest of the law of righteousness

The second power of the word of the seventh days rest, is the power of life
of righteousness, necessarily implying the power of the natural life of the
word: and this power of the word of the seventh days rest, is by the immediate
blessing of the seventh days rest, which is due by the law, to the seventh
days worship and man: necessarily implying, his fulfilling of the whole law,
for the seventh day is blessed for man: and the seventh day is sanctified for
Gods worship by man; by the immediate power of which blessing, of the seventh
days rest, man does rest in the enjoying of the word of promise.

The word of the law therefore written in the heart, and the word of promise,
and the word of the seventh days rest, are really one: for by the word written
in the heart, man does live the life of righteousness: and by the word of
promise, God does promise the eternal continuation of that life: and by the
blessing of the word of the seventh days rest, man does rest in the enjoying
of his life of righteousness: and the word in this threefold sense, is the image
of the righteousness of God, the infinite life of righteousness.

But yet as there is a real unity, in the word written in the heart, in the
word of promise, and in the word of the seventh days rest: so there is a
formal difference. For the word of the Law written in the heart, is formally
the word of the power of life: and the word of promise, is formally the word of
eternal life, whereby the eternal continuance of the power of the word in the
heart is promised: and the word of the seventh days rest, is formally the word
of eternal rest, for by the eternal blessing of the word of the seventh days
rest, man does rest in the enjoying of the word of promise, whereby God does
fulfill his promise to man, and therefore called truth. And this is the reason,
that, as in the word of promise, the covenant is established between God and
man, upon the word of the seventh days rest; the covenant and the word of the
seventh days rest, are really one, but of a formal difference.

The real unity of both, is in this, that the word of promise (which is the
word of eternal life) is by the eternal blessing of the word of the seventh
days rest. And the formal difference of both, is in this, that God and man,
(in the word of promise) are formally and mutually obliged by covenant, but man
is only formally commanded by the word of the seventh days rest, of his law of
righteousness. For God in the word of promise, does bind and obliege himself
to man by covenant, to grant the eternal continuation of the life of
righteousness, which man does enjoy, by the power of the word written in his
heart. And because this eternal continuation of the life of man, is by the
eternal blessing of the word of the seventh days rest, therefore God does
mutually bind and obliege man by his covenant, to fulfill the command of his
seventh days worship (implying the fulfilling of the whole law) after that
formal manner as God has manifested himself, to be worshipped by man, by the
word of his seventh days rest: and this obligement of man by covenant, is both
upon the promise of eternal life, and also upon the promise of eternal death.

By the light of the word therefore of every several seventh days rest; first
we are led in the knowledge of the state and condition of man, with whom the
covenant is made. For the word of the seventh days rest, and the word of the
law written in the heart, (whereby man does live) are really one: Secondly, by
this light we are led in the knowledge of the covenant, which is always really
one, with the word of the seventh days rest. For the word of promise, is
fulfilled by the eternal blessing of the word of the seventh days rest,
whereon the condition of the covenant does depend. Now because, by covenant,
man is bound and obliged to the command of the law of righteousness, both upon
the promise of eternal life, and eternal death, according to the merit of
man: The law of GOD, is therefore said, to have a twofold reward, (to wit) the
blessing of eternal rest to the merit of the obedient, and eternal death to
the merit of the disobedient, which is called the curse of the law; though
eternal death be properly and immediately by the covenant, for the law of God
(in its proper nature) which is the image of his righteousness, does command the
obedience of man only, upon the eternal blessing of the seventh days rest,
and not upon eternal death. And therefore we see, that the curse of the Law, is
not set down in the Decalogue.

But because as the covenant is established upon the immediate command of the
word of the seventh days rest, of the law of righteousness, it is the image
both of the righteousness, and justice of God, rendering to man according to his
merit. For this cause the law commands man, both upon the blessing of the word
of the seventh days rest, and upon the curse of disobedients; and therefore
though by covenant it be left to the freedom of man's election, to live the
life of righteousness, according to the command of the law of righteousness, and
to merit eternal life, by his obedience; or eternal death by his
disobedience: yet as the covenant is established upon the immediate command of
the words of the seventh days rest of the law of righteousness, the obedience
of man is both obliged and commanded, upon the eternal blessing of the seventh
days rest, and upon the inevitable curse of eternal death.

By the light of this Theological infallible ground, (arising from the light
of the truth of the sacred word) the judicious Reader is led in the knowledge
of the three covenants made by God with man; which are linckt together, as it
were, in a chain, as may appear by the subsequent declaration of this
tractat. First therefore of the first covenant made by God with man.

CHAP. II.
Of the created perfection of the intellectual nature of man, and of the
immortality of the soul.
BEcause the first covenant does necessarily presuppose the first estate of
man, with whom the first covenant was made: This first Book therefore shall be
divided into these two parts: The first shall contain the declaration of the
first estate of man. The second shall contain the declaration of the first
covenant.

The first state of man, was the created state of man, the last created of all
creatures; whose creation does presuppose the whole works of the creation,
which is the very first period of the exercit act, of the sacred decree of
predestination; exercit by the infinite essential word immediately.

As for the knowledge of the first estate of man, it must necessarily arise
from the light of the word of the first seventh days rest. For the word of the
first seventh days rest of the law of righteousness, and the word of the law
first written in the heart of man, are of one real life and light. For as the
word of the first seventh days rest of the law of righteousness, was the word
of the eternal rest of righteousness, (by the eternal blessing of the first
seventh days rest) so the word of the law of righteousness, first written in
the heart of man, was the word of the power of the life of righteousness,
necessarily implying the power of the natural life of the word. For by the
immediate power of the word thus written in the heart of man, man was enabled
to live the life of righteousness, and to live the natural life of man in his
first state and condition.

But as man of all creatures, was last created, so man was the ornament,
perfection, and (as it were) the master piece of the works of the creation.
For of all the creatures created by God, the creation of man was the most rare
and curious work. And though it be said, That man was made a little lower then
the Angels (to wit, in the perfection of glory:) yet the perfection of man's
creation was superior to the creation of Angels: for all creatures were either
intellectual or corporal. But that two so strange differing natures, should
be essentially united in the nature of man, it is the wonder of nature it
self. All the creatures therefore being perfectly created, man (the ornament
of the works of the creation) was created in the state of humane perfection.
This created perfection of man, was the perfect life of righteousness,
necessarily implying the perfection of the natural life of man.

This perfection of man did arise from the perfection of the word of the law
first written in the heart of man: for in and with the immediate act of the
creation of man, as the word of the law of righteousness, was spiritually and
immediately written in the soul, essentially united to the heart, so by the
same immediate act of the spiritual writer, the word of the law (as the law is
spiritual) was actually and spiritually enlightened, by the spiritual light of
his holy spirit in the soul of man. By the power of which sanctifying light,
the heart of man (to which the soul is essentially united (was by the same
immediate act) sanctified with the spiritual action of holiness. By the
immediate sanctifying power of the word, thus actually and spiritually
enlightened, man was enabled to live the perfect life of righteousness and
holiness; whereby man was a perfect natural and spiritual man, and the perfect
image of righteousness and holiness. And this was the first state and condition
of man, with whom the first covenant was made by God.

Man therefore (by the perfection of his creation) was of a twofold perfection.
The first was the natural perfection of man: the second was his spiritual
perfection. Of this twofold perfection of man, briefly, so far as concerns
the subject in hand. And first, of the natural perfection of man, and next of
his spiritual perfection.

The natural perfection of man, does consist in the essential union of the
intellectual and sensitive nature of man. First therefore of the created
perfection of the intellectual nature of man, abstractly: and next of the
created perfection of the sensitive nature of man, and of the essential union
of the two natures. The created perfection of the intellectual nature of man,
is in the perfection of the soul of man: and the perfection of the soul, is
from the perfection of the natural power of the life of the word: which the
perfection of the spiritual life of the word, does necessarily imply. For the
word is spiritually and immediately written in the soul of man, as it is the
image of the infinite word, infinite power, perfection, life, light,
righteousness, truth, and eternity it self. By the immediate natural power of
the word, thus immediately written in the soul of man, the soul does live,
move, intellectually; and has its perfect eternal state of intellectual
being, as the word (immediately written in the soul) is perfect and eternal,
the soul of man therefore was created as perfect a true eternal spirit in the
humane sphere, as the Angelical spirit in the Angelical sphere: for both as
they are created spirits (of a simple immateriall substance) do live, move,
intellectually, and have their eternal state of intellectual being, by the
same real power of the word, spiritually written in the intellectual spirit
of both, though after a differing manner. And though the intellectual soul of
man, while it is in the essential union with the sensitive nature, does act by
the mediate, organicall sensitive powers, yet the soul (in its intellectual
operations) does advance it self above all sensitive power, and does exercise
its intellectual operation, without the help of any sensitive organ. And
therefore Aristotle (that true light of all Philosophical truth) does
peremptorily affirm, that it is not to be fained or imagined, that the soul
of man (in its intellectual operations) does use the help of any sensitive
organ, but that is merely independent from any sensitive organ. And
consequently, I do necessarily conclude, that the soul of man is likewise
independent from any sensitive organ in its being. For according to that
Philosophical principle; The manner of the creatures action, does necessarily
follow the creatures being. The intellectual soul of man therefore, being
independent from all sensitive organ, both in being, and in intellectual
operation, the soul of man is separable from all sensitive power, and
consequently immortal. And though, while the soul is in the essential union
of both the natures, the understanding faculty of the soul does depend
objectively upon the sense of fancy, yet the dependence is but an accidence
and not essential. And though Aristotle does affirm (and that most truly)
that in the act of understanding, the species of the eternal object being
received in the understanding, does become one with the understanding, (for in
this union does consist the understanding of the received species) yet this
union is likewise accidental and separable; for otherwise the understanding
should stand always affected, which is repugnant to all Philosophical truth.

Here by the way, the judicious Reader may observe the prerogative of the
soul of man, above all sublunary forms, informing the material composit. For
as all other sublunary forms do arise from the materiality of the composit,
so they do stand and fall with the composit; but though the intellectual
soul of man (which is the first act of man, as he is man) does essentially
inform the sensitive material nature of man: yet the intellectual soul
being every way independent in being, from the sensitive body, and no ways
arising from the materiality thereof, is separable from the sensitive body, and
consequently immortal.

Because the immortality of the soul, is a most concerning fundamental point
of faith, and a maine fundamental point of this tractat, for the Readers more
full satisfaction, I refer the truth of the point from the truth of the
sacred Word.

First, the intellectual soul of man, (humane spirit) is begotten by the
eternal father of spirits: as the father therefore is eternity it self (to
speak with the Schoolmen) both from the part before, and from the part after,
that is without all beginning or ending, excluding all quantitative terms of
time; so humane spirit begotten of the eternal father, is eternal from the
part after. For though the soul of man has its beginning from the eternal
father, yet the soul of man (humane spirit) is without all ending with the
father. This begotten humane spirit by the eternal father, (since the
creation) is by the eternal fathers immediate concurring with the sensitive
body, while as the sensitive body comes to such sensitive perfection in the
womb, as the high elaborate vital spirits of the heart, do appetite the
intellectual information of the soul. For in that point of time, the eternal
father (as he has obliged himself by covenant) does concur, and by the
immediate power of the word does unite the intellectual nature and spirit of
man, elaborate to the vital spirits of the heart: from whence the life of man,
as he is man, is diffused o all the parts and powers of the sensitive body. By
this intellectual information, the infant in the womb, is man, and in the
prefixed time of birth, brought forth man in the world, by man female, the
woman.

Secondly, the intellectual soul of man (humane spirt) is of the same
spheriphicall sphere, with the humane spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ, begotten
of the same eternal Father. The soul of man therefore (humane spirit) is
eternal and immortal.

Thirdly, the Lord himself does affirm, Luke 12.4. That the soul of man
(humane spirit) cannot be killed: and consequently the soul of man is eternal
and immortal.

Fourthly, God is not the God of the dead, but of the living. Mark. 12.27. The
soul of the very reprobate therefore, though eternally tortured in hell, and
ever dying, yet the soul must live in that eternal dying.

Fifthly, the soul of man, by the commanding power of the eternal word
(spiritually and immediately written in the soul) is eternally bound and
obliged to the command of the Law of God, which is eternal: the soul of man
therefore, and the law of God, are necessarily coeviternall one with another.

Sixthly, the twofold reward of the law is eternal, as the law of God is
eternal, which is due by the law to man, according to the merit of man. The
soul of man therefore, by the immediate power of the word of the law written
in the soul of man must be enabled to receive the eternal reward of the law,
according to the merit of man, or the eternity of the reward of the law, and
consequently the law it self must perish, (which is blasphemy to affirm.) And
as in this eternity of the reward of the law, the comfort of the faithful
dep^rting this life does rest: So in this eternity of the reward of the law,
the fearful horror of the reprobate departing this life does arise: for in
the point of the dissolution of the soul of the faithful, from the sensitive
body, (by reason of the eternity of the reward of the law) as the humane spirit
of the faithful in that instant of time is necessarily and actually united to
the mystical head the Lord Jesus Christ, (according to the unseparable union
of the fai^^ of the faithful, to the Lords merit in this life) where the soul
rests, and does actually enjoy all heavenly happiness in the mystical head,
which is the promise of eternal blessing of the word of the Evangelicall
seventh days rest, of the law of righteousness of faith: So in the point of
the dissolution of the humane spirit of the reprobate, from the sensitive body:
the soul of the reprobate in that very instant of time, is as necessarily
united to eternal death, and to the fearful torture of the unquenchable fire
of Gods consuming wrath, which is the promise of the eternal curse of the
Evangelicall law of righteousness of faith, for as there is no intermission of
time either for the actual enjoying of the Kingdom of glory, by the humane
spirit of the faithful, howsoever the faithful does depart this life,
according to our Saviors word, this night shall thou be with me in paradise:
Luke 23.43. So there is no intermission of time for the actual suffering, of
the cursed horrors and tortors of the state of the reprobate, howsoever the
reprobate departs this life, for heaven and Earth must perish, before one jot
or tittle of time of the law do perish. And this is the estate of the
faithful and of the reprobate, howsoever they depart this life, till the great
day, when the soul being reunited to the sensitive body, as the soul and body
of the faithful, is actually glorified by the enjoying of the reward of the
law in the full extent, by an incorruptible crown, of glory: So the soul and
body of the reprobate, are cast down to the eternal unquenchable fire of the
eternal lake.

If the most wicked, were truly instructed, in the immortality of the soul, and
in the necessity of the sustaining, of the fearful tortors of the soul, so
soon as they depart this life; they would not make such have to hasten their
tortors, by laying violent hands on themselves, and to be so easily led with
the Devils temptations; for this misery comes chiefly by ignorance, whereof
the Devil takes such occasion, to lead wretched man so long by his damnable
darkness, till by continuance in sin and wickedness, God give him over to a
reprobate mind. And now to return to the point in hand.

As by the natural power of the life of the word immediately written in the
soul, the soul does live in its intellectual being; So in that life, is the
intellectual light of the soul, whereby the understanding is only produced in
act in the intellectual operations of the soul, for without this light, all
the created light of God, cannot produce the understanding and will, in act, in
the intellectual operations of the soul. And therefore Aristotle does affirm,
that it is as impossible, for the understanding to be produced intellectually
in act, without this pure light; as for the sense of seeing, to be produced
sensitively in act without the light of the Sun, or some material light. And
from this intellectual light of the soul of man, man is said to be an
intellectual creature. And this is that very real light, which Aristole did
ascribe to his intellect agent; for though Arist. was ignorant of the writing
of the word, either in the soul or in the heart of man; yet Aristotle did truly
apprehend both the intellectual light of the word in the soul, and the
rational light of the word literally written in the heart of man. And Arist.
does call his intellect agent, a divine and an eternal light: And consequently
and necessarily Aristotle did acknowledge the intellectual soul of man to be
immortal.

But Aristotle did never affirm, that the intellect agent (contrary to all
Philosophical truth) does enlighten the species of the external sensitive
object, received in the sense of fancy, which miserable assertion of some
ignorant pretended modern natural Philosophers, did beget that damnable
opinion of the mortallity of the soul.

And so much for the created perfection of the intellectual nature of man.
Next of the created perfection of his sensitive nature.

CHAP. III.
Of the created p^^fection of the sensitive nature of man: And of the
essential union of the intellectual and sensitive nature.
THe declaration of the created perfection of the sensitive nature of man, is a
point of no small difficulty; because the sensitive nature of man, is mixed
with the intellectual nature, as man is man intellectual and sensitive; which
created perfection, of the sensitive nature of man, does surmount the
perfection of all the sensitive creatures created by God: for first, though
some sensitive creatures do exceed the sensitive nature of man in the degree
of some particular sense; as the Eagle or Falcon, in the sense of seeing, the
Spaniel or Hound, in the sense of smelling: yet in the complete perfection of
all the internal and external senses; no sensitive creature does come near
the perfection of the sensitive nature of man.

Secondly, all other sensitive creatures (beside man) by the act of the senses,
are said properly to sent the external sensitive object: but man by the act of
his senses is properly said to know the external sensitive object; of which
sensitive knowledge, all other sensitive creatures are incapable.

The declaration therefore, of the sensitive perfection of man, is both
Theological and Philosophical; for though the power of life and light of the
sensitive nature of man (according to the truth of natural Philosophy) do
proceed immediately from the brain; yet that life and light, does proceed
originally from the heart, and from the natural power of the word literally
written in the heart of man, as he is man intellectual and sensitive, the
declaration whereof is proper to the Theolog.

But because we cannot attain to the knowledge of perfection of the sensitive
nature of man (being a mixed nature of the intellectual and sensitive nature)
without the knowledge of the essential union of the intellectual and
sensitive nature of man, which is by the power of the word written in the heart
of man: briefly therefore of this essential union.

As the eternal Father of spirits (by the immediate power of the word) does
unite the intellectual soul humane spirit, to the vital spirits of the heart;
so the twofold power of the life of the word, is written and as it were
imprinted in the heart of man, which is the fountain and original of the life
of man.

The first power of life, is the natural life of the word written in the heart
of man, as it is the image of the eternal life of the infinite word. And this
power of natural life, is diffused from the heart, to all the powers of man,
as he is man intellectual and sensitive.

The second power of the life of the word (written in the heart of man) is the
power of the life of righteousness: and this power of life is diffused from
the heart to all the powers of man proceeding from the will of man, as he is
man intellectual and sensitive; whereby the natural man is enabled with the
power of the life of righteousness to live according to the literal command
of the law; that is, according to the letter of the law of the word of the
seventh days rest, implying the command of the whole law of righteousness.
And as from the power of the word thus written in the heart: man is enabled
with the twofold power of life: so by this twofold power of life, man is
enabled with a twofold power of light, the first is the natural light of man,
the second is the light of righteousness. And therefore it is said, That in it
was life, and that life was the light of man in it, Joh. 1.4. that is in the
word, as it is the power of the image of the infinite word (life and light)
written in the heart of man: First therefore of the natural life and light of
man, as he is a natural man, intellectual and sensitive by the natural power
of the word written in his heart: And next of his life and light of
righteousness.

This natural light proceeding from the natural life of man, is called the
rational light of man: And from this rational light (which is a mixed light)
man is said to be a rational creature. As from the pure intellectual light of
the soul, man is said to be an intellectual creature.

By this rational light (proceeding from the natural life of man, as he is
man intellectual and sensitive) as the natural understanding of man, is
rationally produced in act to understand the species of the external sensitive
object received in the understanding: so his sensitive powers are produced in
act, to know the external sensitive object rationally. And the external light
whereby the external sensitive object is actually enlightened to be
apprehended by the act of the senses of man, is the natural light of the
creatures, created for man, as the light of the Sun, Moon, Stars, the light
of fire, and such like; whereby the sense of seeing is produced rationally in
act. So is found to the sense of hearing, relish to the taste, odor to the
smelling and taction (if I may use the term) to the tactive sense, all arising
from the several nature of the creature, and proportionate to the several
external sense of man; which natural light of the creatures is really one
with the natural light of the words in the heart of man, though of a formal
difference; the one formally natural, the other formally rational. And as the
creatures were created for man; so man and the creatures were continued in the
state of their created perfection, by the immediate blessing of God by his word
of the first seventh days rest of the law of righteousness, while man did
stand in the perfection of his obedience to the commands of God; for it is by
the only immediate blessing of the word of the seventh days rest, that God
does give the influence of his blessing to the natural life and light of man,
and to the creatures created for man, and to the spiritual life and light of
man.

By this rational light, the understanding of man (as he is man intellectual
and sensitive) is rationally produced in act, by the three operations of the
act of the understanding according to Aristotle; the first whereof is the
apprehension of the simple terms of the species, of the external sensitive
object received in the understanding, as the received species does represent
the truth of the sensitive external object. The second, is the compounding of
things inseparable, apprehended in the received species, and the dividing of
things separable. The third is in discurring (and as it were) running from the
things apprehended and known in the received species, to conclude things
unknown. And from this last operation of the understanding, the rational act
of the understanding is called discursive. And the conclusion inferred by this
discursive act; is only probable; and hence does arise the formal difference
of the act of the understanding of man (as he is man intellectual and
sensitive) and of the act of the understanding of man, as he is intellectual:
for the rational discursive act of the understanding, is formally probable;
inferring only a probable conclusion, called Opinion. But the intellectual act
of the understanding, is formally necessary definitive and scientificall,
equal with the perfect demonstration called Science.

But the rational light, whereby the rational and intellectual act of the
understanding is produced in act, is one real act light, though the one (to
wit, the intellectual light) be a pure unmixed light, which is the natural
light of the word, as is immediately written in the soul, and the other a
mixed light, proportionate to the rational act of the understanding, and
senses of man. To make this appear by a familiar example of the Sun.

As the Sun is placed in the midst of the planets, the three superior planets
are enlightened by the pure light of the Sun, whereby they give down the
influence of their several natures to the sublunary creatures. And as the
Sun does pass through the orbs of the three inferior planets through the
region of the fire, and the three regions of the air; the light and heat of
the Sun is mixed, qualified and proportionate to the temper of the several
natures of the sublunary creatures.

As this twofold light therefore of the Sun, is really one; so is the light of
the word, written in the soul and heart of man (which is the image of the
natural life and light of the Son of righteosnesse) really one.

Next of the light of man proceeding from his life of righteousness.

By the literal light of the word in the heart of man (which is the light of
the letter of the Law) the understanding of man (as he is man intellectual
and sensitive) is l terally produced in act, according to the letter of the Law
of righteousness, employed in the command of the word of the seventh days rest
of the Law of God: for the literal light and command of the word of the
seventh days rest, and the literal light and command of the word of the Law
of righteousness, written in the heart of man is one real light and command.
And this light of the word written in the heart of man (as it is the ligh^ of
the word, as the word is a Law to man) is (as it were) a great lump of light,
set upon a table in the heart; enlightening all the species of the external
sensitive objects as they are received in the understanding.

By this great light, first man is enabled by the act of his understanding (as
he is man intellectual and sensitive) to discern and to judge, the species
received in the understanding, by the act of his mediate senses, whether the
sensitive object be apprehended by the senses, enlightened by the light of the
Law; or whether it be apprehended by the act of the senses, enlightened by the
false adultrous light of Satan, whereby Satan does continually betray man to
transgress the Law of God.

Secondly, by this great light (as it is the light of the word commanding man,
really one with the light and command of the word of the seventh days rest of
the law of righteousness) man is enlightened to understand, that he is
commanded to reject the species of the sensitive object, enlightened by the
false adulterous light of Satan (which is always contrary to the command of
the Law) and to apprehend the species enlightened by the light of the Law, at
his pleasure. And this is that great light which is called the light and Law of
conscience.

As by the power of this great literal light in the heart of man (really one
with the literal light of the word of the seventh days rest of the Law) the
understanding of man (as he is man intellectual and sensitive) is literally
and morally produced in act; So by the power of this light, his senses are
literally and cognoscitively produced in act to know the external sensitive
object by the literal sensitive light of the word of the seventh days rest of
the Law of righteousness; for the literal light of the Law (which is by the
sound of the word) does necessarily begin at the external senses. And
therefore (since the fall and redemption of man) faith, which is moral faith,
is said to be the hearing of the word.

But because it is in the freedom of man's election by the act of his senses
(proceeding from the free act of his will) to apprehend the external sensitive
object enlightened by what light soever; therefore God by his Covenant does
only bind and oblige man to live this life of righteousness according to the
literal light of the word of the seventh days rest of the Law of
righteousness. As man is enabled to live the life of righteousness by the
immediate power of the word written in his heart: But God by his Covenant does
not formally command man to live the life of righteousness, but leaves it to
the freedom of man's election by his obedience to the command of the word of
the seventh days rest of the Law either to choose eternal life by his
obedience, or eternal death by his disobedience.

The reason is, because the life of righteousness does immediately proceed
from the act of the will, which is the act of the soul of man, which cannot
be necessitate by any command whatsoever, for the will of the soul is created
with the perfection of such contradictory and specificall freedom, as all the
created powers of God are not able to nec^ssitate or enforce the free act of
the will by any means under the heavens though the act of the will as it is
intellectual and sensitive may be externally coacted) for as the will cannot
be killed; so the will can neither be necessitate by any command. But as the
Covenant is established upon the immediate command of the word of the seventh
days rest of the Law of righteousness; the works of righteousness according
to the Law, are commanded both upon the eternal blessing of the seventh days
rest, and upon the curse of eternal death, the first and immediate command
whereof, (as the seventh day is the great command of the Law) is the seventh
days commanded worship; implying the command of the whole Law, which does both
oblige and command man to worship God in the truth of his promise; for by the
eternal blessing of the seventh days rest, the word of promise is always
fulfilled according to the obedience of man; or by the inflicting of the curse
of eternal death upon the disobedience of man, to the command of his word, his
promise is likewise fulfilled: for it is all one for God not to fulfill his
promise by his Covenant, as to be no God. And this is the first reason of Gods
essential attribute of truth, and that his word (which is his immediate image)
is called truth.

The literal command of the Law arising from the letter of the Law, is called
(by the Theologs) the moral command of the Law; and therefore the word of the
seventh days rest, (implying the command of the whole Law of righteousness)
is called the moral Law of God, obliging and commanding (as it were) the
manners of man to God and to his image man; as the voluntary action of man does
concern God, or his image man; and from this moral denomination of the Law,
the voluntary action of man, whether by his obedience, or disobedience to the
command of the Law, is said to be formally moral, for both are equally the
exercite act of the Law, and to both the reward of the Law is equally due by
the Law, according to the merit of man's obedience, or disobedience to the
command of the Law: from this moral denomination likewise of the Law, the
literal light of the Law is called the moral light of the Law; for a formal
difference between the literal and moral light of the Law (arising immediately
from the letter of the Law) and the spiritual light of the Law, which is the
immediate light of the holy Spirit. And from this moral denomination of the
litterall light of the Law (since the fall, and redemption of man) faith
(arising from the moral light of the Law) is called moral faith, for a
formal difference of moral faith from spiritual faith which does arise from
the immediate spiritual light of the holy Spirit, in the immediate act of
regeneration.

CHAP. IV.
Of the created spiritual perfection of man.
THe intellectual and sensitive nature of man, being thus essentially united
in the heart (by the immediate power of the word) inabling man with the power
of natural life, and with the life of righteousness; God (in and with the
immediate act of the creation of man) did inlighten the word of the Law of
righteousness (spiritually written in the soul of man) with the spiritual
light of his holy Spirit: sanctifying the heart of man (to which the soul is
essentially united) with the spiritual life of holiness.

By the immediate power of this spiritual life and light (really one with the
spiritual light of the word of the first seventh days rest of the Law of
righteousness) Adam was enabled with the perfection of the spiritual
understanding, of the command of the word of the first seventh days rest of
the Law; and to frame his spiritual life of righteousness and holiness,
according to the perfection of the command of the Law, which is the spiritual
command.

By this perfection of spiritual life and light, Adam was the perfect image of
righteousness and holiness, and a perfect spiritual man. And this is the
image of righteousness and holiness, which the Apostle exhorts to be renewed
in the Ephesians and Collossians, which was lost by Adams fall.

Adam therefore being created in this state of natural and spiritual
perfection; the word of the first seventh days rest of the Law of
righteousness (implying the command of the whole Law) was objected to Adams
external senses (by the power of the word of the first seventh days rest)
commanding Adam according to the spiritual light of the word of the first
seventh days rest of the Law (really one with the spiritual light and command
of the word of the Law of righteousness in his heart) to worship God upon the
seventh day of the Law of righteousness. As God did manifest himself by the
word of his first seventh days rest from the works of the creation. And in
that commanded spiritual worship, commanding Adams spiritual obedience (by
his spiritual works of holiness) to fulfill the command of the Law of
righteousness, according to the spiritual light and command of the word of
the first seventh days rest, to whose perfect worship and obedience, the
eternal blessing of the word of the first seventh days rest, was due by the
Law of God.

By this light of the word of the first seventh days rest of God, from the
works of the creation: Adam (by the perfect act of his spiritual
understanding) did perfectly apprehend God, to be the Creator of Heaven, of
earth, of man, of the creatures, and that by the immediate eternal blessing of
the first seventh days rest of God; the world, man, and the creatures, were
continued and preserved in the perfection of their created estate: And upon the
immediate command of the word of the first seventh days rest (implying the
command of the whole law of righteousness) the first Covenant was made with
man, afterward to be declared.

As Adam by the spiritual light of his understanding (really one with the
spiritual light of the word of the seventh days rest) did perfectly
understand God; as God revealed himself to Adam by the word of his first
seventh days rest, (wherein the perfection of Adams understanding of God did
consist,) so Adam by the created perfection of his spiritual action of
holiness, did adequate the perfection of the command of the Law, as Adam was
first obliged to the Law of God; for if Adams spitituall action of holiness,
had not been of equal power with the perfection of the command of the Law,
(which is in the spiritual command) and the first Covenant, being established
upon the immediate command of the word of the first seven days rest of the
Law, both upon the eternal blessing of the first seven days rest, and upon
the curse of eternal death, Adam could never have fulfilled the perfection of
the command of the Law, but must have necessarily fallen under the curse of
eternal death, which had been most high injustice in God, in binding and
obliging (his intellectual creature) man, to a law (upon the curse of eternal
death) above the power of his obedience, by his spiritual action of holiness,
for it was only by Adams spiritual action of holiness, that the law was to be
fulfilled; for though Adam was created with the power of moral action, yet
while Adam stood in his state of perfection, Adams moral action was not
actual; neither could his spiritual action of holiness be called formally
and properly moral; which denomination is extended both to the obedience and
transgression of the Law, as has been formerly declared: Adams moral action
therefore was not actual, till the Law of righteousness was transgressed by
Adam; and then Adams moral action was actual, and formally moral, and
morally evil, and the greatest evil that ever was or can be committed by man.

Now as Adam (by the perfection of his spiritual understanding of the word of
the first seventh days rest of the Law of righteousness) did perfectly
understand God, as God revealed himself to be honored and worshipped by his
rest from the works of the Creation: So Adam by the perfection of his natural
understanding must needs apprehend the being, power, perfection, goodness,
life, light, knowledge, understanding, wisdom in himself and the creatures,
to flow from the infinite perfection of the Creator, whereby Adam was led in
the understanding of the essential Attributes of God, which essential
understanding of God in Adam must be imperfect, God as he is essential being
infinite and incomprehensible; Adams perfect understanding of God therefore was
perfected by the perfection of his spiritual understanding of the word of the
first seventh days rest, as God did manifest himself to man, to be understood
and worshipped by man, for God can no otherwise be comprehended by the act of
the understanding of man or Angel, but after that formal manner that God does
minifest himself, to be understood and worshipped by either.

And so much briefly of the created, natural and spiritual perfection of man,
with whom the first Covenant was made by God, which is the contents of the
first part of the first Book.

Before we come to the second part, an objection must be removed.

CHAP. V.
Of a threefold comparison between the created, natural, and spiritual
perfection of the first Adam, with the natural and spiritual perfection of
the second Adam.
IT is said, That the first Adam was made a living soul, a natural man, and
from the earth earthly, 1 Cor. 15.45, 46, 47.

Adam therefore was not created in the state of natural and spiritual
perfection, neither could he be created the image of righteousness and
holiness, or a true spiritual man. I answer briefly to the Objection.

The Apostle (in these three verses of this chapter) does make a threefold
comparison between the first and second Adam.

The first is in the 45. verse, the sense whereof is this, The first Adam was
made a living soul (to wit, to live the perfect life of righteousness,
necessarily implying the perfection of his natural life,) but the second Adam
was not only made a living soul, but likewise a quickening spirit, where the
power of the natural and spiritual life of the first Adam is compared with
the power of the natural and spiritual life of the second Adam.

The first Adam by the power of his natural and spiritual life, was not able
to quicken himself, or any man else, being dead; but the second Adam by the
power of his natural life, in sustaining the cursed death of the Cross, did
redeem the first Adam, and all men condemned and dead under the curse of the
Law by eternal death in Adam their head; for the transgression of the Law by
Adam, and by the infinite power of his Resurrection from the dead, did raise up
Adam, and all men condemned and dead in Adam their head, quickening and
reconciling all men (by the price of his blood) to the love and favor of God
for that first sin.

The first Adam therefore (notwithstanding of his natural and spiritual
perfection) in respect of the second Adam, may be truly said to be but a living
soul, and not a quickening spirit.

The second comparison is in the 46. verse, where the spiritual perfection of
the first Adam is compared with the spiritual perfection of the second Adam;
the sense of the words is this.

Though the first Adam was created in such spiritual perfection, yet his
spiritual perfection was not essential, but habitual and conditional: But
the spiritual perfection of the second Adam (the Lord Jesus Christ) is
Essential; and therefore the first Adams spiritual perfection in respect of
the second Adams essential perfection, was but the perfection of a natural
man, as the spiritual perfection of the second Adam was the essential
perfection of an essential spiritual man, the eternal Son of God, begot of
the seed of the woman in time.

The third comparison is in the 47. verse, where the humane sensitive nature of
the first Adam is compared with the humane sensitive nature of the second Adam:
The sense of the words is this.

The first Adam as he is man sensitively, was created of earthly principles
immediately, and therefore from the earth earthly; But the second Adam as he is
man sensitively (Christ Jesus the natural Son of God) was begot of the
sanctified seed of the woman immediately, and every way from the heaven
heavenly, in respect of whose humane sensitive nature, the humane sensitive
nature of the first Adam, may be said to be from the earth earthly; for though
the first Adam was created in the state of such natural and spirit perfection,
yet he must have lived eternally upon earth, by covenant.

Here by the way, whereas the Apostle says, that the first man was from the
earth earthly; the words must not be taken in the literal, but in the
spiritual sense, which is this: The first man was from the earth, to wit, as
he is sensitive, for otherwise we conclude the living immortal soul of man to
be from the earth, in which sense the wicked wrests this place to their
eternal damnation.

The Apostle therefore (in this part of the chapter) does not speak simply of
the created natural and spiritual perfection of the first Adam, but
comparatively with the essential, natural, and spiritual perfection of the
Lord Jesus Christ, second person of the glorious Trinity; for otherwise the
first Adam is affirmed by the Apostle himself, to be created after the image
of righteousness and holiness, which is the image of God infinite,
righteousness and holiness, for the created perfection of man was such, as
Moses in the history of the Creation of man, can hardly find words to express
the perfection of his Creation, saying, Let us make man in our own image; let
us make man according to our own likeness: Thus God created man in his Image:
In the Image of God created he them male and female, Genesis 1.26, 27.

Thus having answered the objection, for a close to the first part of the first
Book, we proceed to the second part of this first Book, containing the
declaration of the first Covenant made by God with man.

THE SECOND PART OF THE FIRST BOOK OF THE THEOLOGICAL KEY, Containing the
Declaration of the first Covenant made by God with Man.
CHAP. VI.
Man is placed in Paradise.
GOD (according to his eternal Decree of predestination) having created man,
male and female, in such estate of natural and spiritual perfection. God
blessed man by his word, which was the blessing of his word of his first
seventh days rest of his Law of righteousness; and therefore the word of his
first seven days rest of the Law (implying the command of the whole Law) was
objected to the external senses of man; for as all the commands of God (by his
Word) are the necessary commands of the word of his seventh days rest: So all
the blessing of God by his word, are the necessary influence of his blessing,
in the blessing of the word of his seventh days rest; for by the only
immediate power of that blessing, man is only blessed by God.

God having thus created and blessed man, male and female, God gave man power,
sovereignty and dominion over the earth, over the creatures, next and
immediately to himselfet: And for the higher advancement of man, his immediate
vicegerent on earth) God did plant the glorious garden of Ede^ for man, as a
Palace, suitable to the majesty of such a great Monarch, wherein there was all
manner of Trees, laden with variety of all pleasing fruit, no less delicate to
the taste, odoriferous to the smelling, beautiful to the eye, then wholesome to
the nature of man; upon the boughs whereof, the created Birds of the air
might reside (by their melodious harmony) to congratulate the installment of
their Lord and King: A River likewise falling in its golden channel (for there
was gold) past through the Garden, wherein the created Fishes (sporting
themselves) might show their applause to their Princes arrival.

All manner of Herbs, all manner of beautiful odoriferous Flowers (which could
objectively delight the external senses) no doubt must be in this pleasing
Garden; the species of all which external sensitive objects, did give no small
contentment to man, being created in such actual perfection of natural
understanding, while by variety of such pleasing objects, the understanding of
man must be ravished with variety of contemplation.

In the midst of this glorious Garden, the Tree of life, and the Tree of
Knowledge of good and evil, were placed by God, both named (as it seems by
Moses) from the effect: for as by the virtue of the Tree of life, the nature of
man as he is man, was to be eternally preserved; and therefore our first
parents might then eat thereof at their pleasure.

So by eating of the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil, contrary to the
command of God by his word (which is the command of his Law of righteousness)
the effect of the knowledge of evil (which our first Parents did so affect to
know) was produced by the eating of the forbidden fruit.

This pleasing glorious Garden (for the pleasure and contentment which it did
afford) is commonly called by the name of Paradise, which word our Savior
himself did use, for to express the joy, pleasure and contentment of the
heavenly Paradise.

In this pleasing glorious Garden, God placed man, male and female, created in
the state of natural and spiritual perfection, appointing the natural and
spiritual food for the eternal preservation of the natural and spiritual
life of man, which was then the fruit of Trees of the Garden, whereby the
natural life of man was to be maintained; and for the spiritual food of man,
God gave the word of the first seventh days rest, for in the only true
spiritual understanding of the word of the seventh days rest, as God does
reveal himself, to be known and worshipped by man, is the only true knowledge
of God, which the Lord himself affirms to be eternal life: And this is the
reason that the word of God is called the bread of life, which is really one
with the word of promise, which is the word of eternal life, whereby God does
mutually bind and oblige himself and man by Covenant.

By the only light therefore of the word of the first seventh days rest
(wherein the first Covenant is immediately established) we are necessarily led
to the understanding of the first Covenant: First therefore (briefly) of the
word of the first seventh days rest, and of the necessity thereof to man,
created in the state of natural and spiritual perfection; and next, of the
the first Covenant made by God with man.

CHAP. VII.
Of the word of the first seventh days rest of the Law of Righteousness.
AS by the only light of the word of every several seventh days rest of the
Law of God, in the several state and condition of man, man is led in the
understanding of God, by his word, as God has revealed himself by the word of
his several seventh days rest, to be known and worshipped by man; so by the
only immediate blessing of God, by the word of his seventh days rest, the
state and condition of man and the creatures, created for man are continued.

The word therefore of the first seventh days rest was most necessary to our
first parents, in the state of their created perfection, for these maine
reasons following:

First, though Adam (being created in the state of spiritual perfection) by
the spiritual light of his understanding of the word of the Law, in his heart,
really one with the spiritual light of the word of the first seventh days
rest of the Law: Adam must needs understand, that God was to be worshipped upon
the seventh day of the Law of righteousness; yet without the word of the first
seventh days rest, Adam could never have known the certain first seventh day
of Gods commanded worship.

Secondly, without the word of the first seventh days rest of the law, Adam
could neither have known the formal manner of Gods commanded worship, to have
worshipped God upon the first seventh day of the Law of God; to whose perfect
worship of God the eternal blessing of the first seventh days rest of the
Law, was due by the Law; by which only immediate blessing the created state of
man, and the creatures were continued, while Adam did stand in the perfection
of his Creation.

Thirdly, without the word of the first seventh days rest, no Covenant could
be made by God, to bind himself to man, in the word of his promise, or man to
God, for the word of the seventh days rest, and the word of promise of
eternal life (as has been formerly delivered) are really one: for the word of
promise, whereby God does bind himself by Covenant to the eternal
continuation of the present estate of man, is enjoyed by the eternal blessing
of the word of the seventh days rest.

Fourthly, without the word of the first seventh days rest (which is really
one with the word of promise of eternal life) as there is no covenant to be
made by God with man; so there was neither any object for the faith of man to
rest on, for though the eternal blessing of the word of the first seventh
days rest, was not due by the law immediately to Adams faith, but due by the
Law immediately to the merit of Adams works of righteousness; yet Adams works
of righteousness, did necessarily proceed from his faith, in the promise of
God of the Law of righteousness; for without faith it is impossible for Adam
to have pleased God while he stood in his state of perfection.

Fifthly, without the light of the word of the first seventh days rest, Adam
could never have understood, that God was the Creator and Conservator of man,
the world, and the Creatures created for man, neither could Adam have known the
formal worship of God, whose worship is commanded to be after that formal
manner as he did reveal himself by the word of his first seventh days rest,
according to which formal worship, Adam by the command of the first seventh
days rest of the Law (as it is the great command of the Law, implying the
command of the whole Law) was commanded to worship God upon the first seventh
day of the Law; for Adams solemn perfect worship of God, upon the first seventh
day of the Law, was, as if all the works of the Creation, had fallen down with
Adam to worship God the great Creator; for as Adam was the life, ornament, and
perfection of the works of the Creation, so Adam was the sum and compend of
the works of the Creation; for all the creatures of God are either of an
intellectual or corporeal nature, which were essentially united in the nature
of man.

Sixthly, without the word of the first seventh days rest of the law of
righteousness, to our first parents, there could have been no law of God to
command the obedience of man, to the command of his law, for all the power, of
life, light and command, of every several precept of the whole Law, is
immediately from the power of the word of the seventh days rest, without the
power whereof there is no power of any several precept of the Law, to command
man, or any light for man to know that it is a precept of the Law of God: And
therefore we see, that in the Decalogue (set down to Moses) the word of the
second seventh days rest (then by the name of the Sabbath of the Lord) is
placed in the end of the first Table of the Law, uniting (as it were) both the
Tables to the seventh day of the Law, from whence all the several precepts of
the law receive the power of life, light, and command; much like the last
binding stone of an Arch, whereon the strength and power of the whole Arch does
rely and depend; for as the last binding stone of the Arch being removed, the
whole Arch (as it is an Arch) must fall to the ground; so by the removing of
the immediate command of God, by his word, commanding the whole law in the
seventh day; the whole law, and the eternal blessing of the seventh days
rest, must necessarily fall and perish together, which is necessarily removed,
while as the command of the seventh days worship, is attributed to the
immediate authority and command of man.

The writing of the word of the seventh days rest (as it were in the heart of
the Law) in two Tables of stone to Moses, is the true emblem of the word of
the Law, written in the two Tables of the intellectual and sensitive nature of
man, in the heart of man; for as from the immediate power of the word of the
seventh days rest of the Law, life, light, and power of command is diffused to
all the several precepts of the Law; so from the immediate power of the word
of the Law in the heart of man, life and light is diffused to all the parts and
powers of man, as he is man: And this is the maine reason, that in the command
of the word of the seventh days rest of the law, the whole law is necessarily
commanded, which the Lord calls the great command of the Law, necessarily
implying the lesser command, which is like to the great command.

Seventhly, without the command of the word of the first seventh days rest
(necessarily implying the command of the whole Law) neither Adam, or any man
created in Adam (as he was the created head of all men naturally to descend of
Adam) could have transgressed the Law, Romans 4.15. obliged by the first
Covenant; for where there is no Law, there is no transgression of the Law.

And so much (briefly) for the declaration of the word of the first seventh
days rest, upon the immediate command whereof, the first Covenant was
established between God and man, next to be declared.

CHAP. VIII.
GOD (according to his eternal Decree of predestination) having created man
male and female, in this state of natural and spiritual perfection, advanced
to the high love and favor of God, and to the sovereignty and dominion over
the earth, and over the creatures of the earth: God entered his first Covenant
with Adam, not with Adam, as he was a private person, but with Adam as created
man, the head, root, and original of all men naturally to descend of Adam to
the end of the world; and therefore God (according to his eternal Decree)
intending the Creation of man, said, Let us make man, Genesis 1.26. and not let us
make Adam (to wit) as a private person.

Adam therefore was created in such admirable state of natural and spiritual
perfection, as he was the head of the river of men, naturally to descend and
flow from Adam the head.

The first Covenant therefore was made with Adam, as the created head of all
men naturally to descend of Adam, who were all really created in the same
natural and spiritual perfection, that Adam their head was created; and in
who^ all men were as truly and really bound and obliged in Adam head to the
first Covenant, and to the command of the word of the first seventh days rest
of the law of righteousness, in every respect as Adam their head, though not
actually descended of Adam; for as all men sinned in Adam their head, (to wit)
really, so all men were as really and necessarily bound and obliged to the
command of the word of the first seventh days rest of the Law in Adam their
head, as Adam was, as all men found by experience, and consequently the
natural and spiritual perfection of Adam, the head of all men (whereby he was
enabled to merit eternal life upon earth) was as really, truly, and
necessarily due by Covenant (established upon the immediate command of the Law)
to Adams posterity as they should actually descend of Adam, as to Adam
himself; for as all men were bound to the same real Law in Adam their head;
so in the justice of God, all men as they should naturally descend of Adam,
must be enabled with the like power of obedience with Adam their head.

The first Covenant made by God with man, is set down by Moses, Genesis 2.16, 17.
The word of promise of eternal life, whereby God does bind and oblige
himself and man to his first Covenant, is in the 16. verse, the words are,
Eating, thou shall freely eat of every Tree of the Garden; and consequently,
Adam was to eat of the Tree of life; by eating whereof, Adam as he was created
a natural man, intellectual and sensitive, was to live eternally upon earth;
for by the doubling of the word, eating thou shall eat, is signified an
eternal eating, and by an eternal eating, an eternal living, in the state
and felicity wherein Adam was created.

God therefore in these words does promise to Adam (and to all men created in
Adam naturally to descend of Adam) that his created estate and condition shall
be continued eternally upon earth, which promise was to be fulfilled by God,
and enjoyed by Adam, by the eternal blessing of the word of the first seventh
days rest; for by the only immediate eternal blessing of the word of the
first seventh days rest; Adam, the world, and the creatures created for man,
were to rest eternally upon earth, in the state and condition wherein they were
created; for which cause, God blessed the first seventh day for Adam, and God
sanctified the first seventh day for his perfect worship of the first seventh
day by Adam.

If Adam therefore will have the actual enjoying of the word of promise of
eternal life, Adam must have it by his perfect worship of God upon the first
seventh day of the Law, according to that formal manner that God did manifest
himself to Adam by the word of his first seventh days rest, which is the
condition of the Covenant.

As God therefore in his word of promise of eternal life, does bind and
oblige himself to Adam by his Covenant, so God does mutually bind and oblige
Adam to the formal perfect worship of the first seventh day, that by the
eternal blessing of the word of the first seventh days rest of the Law, Adam
might enjoy the promise.

As God does bind and oblige Adam, by his Covenant, to obedience, the promise
of eternal life by his perfect worship of God upon the first seventh day of
the Law; so God by his first Covenant, in the command of the seventh days
worship (as it is the great command of the Law) does likewise bind and oblige
Adams obedience, to the command of the whole Law of righteousness, upon a
dying death, which is eternal death, ever dying, without all end of dying,
contained in the 17. verse, in these words, But of the Tree of knowledge of
good and evil, thou shall not eat of it; for in the day that thou eatest
thereof, dying thou shall dye, Genesis 2.17. In which words God does bind and
oblige Adams obedience to the command of the whole Law, upon a dying death; for
by the transgression of the command of God of the Law of righteousness by his
word, commanding Adam to abstain from eating of the fruit of the Tree of
knowledge, the whole Law of righteousness is necessarily transgressed; for he
that does offend in one, does offend in all, Jam. 2.10.

By this negative command therefore, (necessarily implying the affirmative
command of the Law) Adams obedience is bound and obliged to the command of the
whole Law of righteousness upon a dying death, which is eternal death.

Now as the promise of eternal life (whereby God does oblige himself and Adam
mutually by his Covenant) was to be enjoyed by the eternal blessing of the
word of the first seventh days rest of the Law, the Covenant does bind and
oblige Adam to the immediate command of the Law; and the Law does formally
command Adam by the immediate power of the word of the first seventh days
rest, implying the command of the whole law, both upon the eternal blessing of
the first seventh days rest, and upon the curse of a dying death, which is
eternal death; and therefore the curse of eternal death, is called the curse
of the Law.

The first Covenant being thus established upon the immediate command of the
word of the first seventh days rest of the Law of righteousness, (implying
the command of the whole Law) between God and Adam (the created head of all men
naturally to descend of Adam to the end of the world:) the first Covenant was
ratified by the Tree of life, and by the Tree of knowledge of good and evil,
placed in the midst of the Garden of Paradise, as the Sacraments of the first
Covenant, made between God and Adam, the created head of all men; that Adam, as
he was man intellectual and sensitive (created in the state of natural and
spiritual perfection advanced to such felicity) by the Tree of life, might
rest secured, of the promise of God by eternal life, upon his perfect
obedience to the command of the Law, commanding him by the power of the word of
the first seventh days rest; so Adam by the Tree of knowledge of good and
evil, might rest as assuredly in the promise of eternal death, upon his
transgression of the command of God, by his word commanding Adam, which was the
necessary command of the word of the first seventh days rest of his Law of
righteousness; for God cannot command man by his word, as his word is the
command of his Law of righteousness, commanding man, but as his word is the
command of the word of the seventh days rest of the Law of righteousness; for
all the commands of God, commanding man by his word (which are the commands of
his Law of righteousness) do retain strength and power of command from the
immediate power of the word of the seventh days rest.

Of this declaration of the first Covenant, I infer the first formal
obligement of the Law of God, obliging man in his state of perfection.

The formal obligement of the Law (obliging man in his several state and
condition) is immediately by the formality of the Covenant, and the formality
of the covenant is by the formal manner, that God does manifest himself to
man by the word of his several seventh days rest of the Law, in the several
state and condition of man, obliging man to the formal worship of the seventh
day, and in the seventh day obliging the obedience of man to the command of the
whole law; by which formal obliged worship of the seventh day, the whole law
employed in the command of the seventh day is formally obliged, obliging and
commanding man (in his several state and condition) to the formal worship of
God, as God by the word of his seventh days rest has manifest himself to
man, both upon the eternal blessing of the word of his seventh days rest, and
upon the curse of eternal death, and in that commanded worship of the seventh
day, commanding the obedience of man to the whole Law.

God therefore by the word of his first seventh days rest of the Law, having
manifest himself to man, God of the Law of righteousness, Creator and
conservator of heaven, of earth, of man, and the creatures; by the first
Covenant, the first seventh days worship was the formal worship of God of the
Law of righteousness Creator and Conservator; by which obliged formal worship
of the first seventh day of the law, the whole law employed in the command of
the first seventh day was formally obliged, obliging and commanding man to the
formal worship of God of the law of righteousness Creator and Conservator,
both upon the eternal blessing of the word of the first seventh days rest,
and upon the curse of eternal death, and in that formal commanded worship of
the first seventh day, commanding the obedience of man, to the command of the
whole Law of God of the Law of righteousness Creator and Conservator of
heaven, earth, man, and the creatures created for man.

By this first formal obligement of the Law of righteousness (obliging man in
his state of perfection) the second and third obligement of the law were
formally distinguished from the first; for the first obligement of the law was
simply the law of righteousness of God the Creator, which is called the simple
formal obligement of the law, because it was without the revelation of the
second person of the Trinity, who was manifest to man by the word of his second
and third seventh days rest, after a general manner, according to which
several manner, the law was formally obliged by two several Covenants,
whereby the first simple formal obligement of the law of righteousness was
determined, and the law of righteousness of faith in God ^he Redeemer actually
established; first by faith in the promise of the blessed ^^ed^ and secondly,
by faith in the Lord Jesus Christ by his fulfiling of the promise, afterward
particularly to be declared.

Of this obligement of man (created in the state of natural and spiritual
perfection) to the first Covenant, established upon the immediate command of
the word of the first seventh days rest of the Law of God: I infer these
even. Theological demonstrative conclusions following.

CHAP. IX.
Seven necessary conclusions inferrent of the obligement of man to the first
Covenant.
1. ADam being created in the state of natural and spiritual perfection, the
head of all men naturally to descend of Adam; all men naturally to descend of
Adam (the body of the head) were all really created in Adam the head, and in
Adam the head really bound and obliged to the first Covenant, though not
actually descended from the head.

2. All men naturally to descend of Adam the head, being bound and obliged to
the Law of God in Adam the head by the first Covenant, Adams obedience and
disobedience to the command of the law of righteousness was as truly really
and necessarily the obedience and disobedience of the body (to wit, the
obedience and disobedience of all men naturally to descend of Adam the head) as
it was the obedience and disobedience of Adam the head, though none were
actually descended from the head: Even as we see the water flowing from a
Conduit, the water flowing from the head, is the same real water which was in
the head, before it did flow from the head, which was the water of the natural
and spiritual life of man, arising from the lively spring of the word of the
law in Adams heart naturally and spiritually enlightened and sanctified; Adam
therefore as he was head, by his transgression of the law, having polluted the
spring in the head it was the necessary real act of his body, in the
correlative respect of the head with the body, and of the body with the head.

3. The transgression of the law of righteousness, obliged by the first
Covenant, was without all hope of mercy known to man or Angel, for all mercy is
in the Lord Jesus Christ, second person of the Trinity, (who according to the
eternal decree of God) was not at first revealed to man, created in such
admirable state of natural and spiritual perfection.

4. By the denial of the first Covenant made by God with man, the truth of God
to man is fundamentally denied, for it is by Gods fulfilling of his promise to
man by his Covenant, that God does manifest himself truth to man.

5. God (according to his eternal decree of predestination) having created
man, male and female, in the natural and spiritual perfection of man, God
could not annihilate man, for so his transeant act had been contradictory to
his imminent act.

6. The first Covenant being established upon the immediate command of the word
of the first seventh days rest of the law of righteousness, and man having
transgressed the Law, God could not annihilate man for his transgression of the
Law of righteousness, for so his justice could never have been satisfied by
man.

7. God and man being mutually bound and obliged by the first Covenant,
established upon the immediate command of the word of the first seventh days
rest of the Law of righteousness, whereby God did bind and oblige himself to
Adam by the eternal blessing of the word of his seventh days rest, to
continue the natural and spiritual perfection of Adam, upon the eternal
continuation of the perfection of Adams obedience; God (without highest in
justice by the breach of his Covenant) could neither withdraw his actual
blessing from Adam (before the law was transgressed by Adam) for so Adam must
necessarily fall under the eternal curse of the law; neither could God by any
act or decree whatsoever necessitate the will of man, to fall under the
fearful eternal curse of the law, by necessitating his free intellectual
creature man, to a ten thousand million of times a worse being than if man
should have had no being at all.

8. The first Covenant being established between God and Adam, and Adam being
left to the freedom of his election by covenant, to stand or fall at his
pleasure or peril, God (without infinite prejudice to his justice) could
neither bar Satan, from tempting of Adam (created in such state of spiritual
perfection) neither could God uphold and support Adam, tempted by the mighty
temptation of Satan, for so the Covenant had not been made with man, but with
God himself.

Against the truth of that which has been here faithfully delivered (arising
from the truth of the sacred word) it is objected, that Adam in his state of
perfection, was neither obliged to the Law of God, or commanded to the seventh
days worship of God, and consequently and necessarily I conclude, First, Adam
in his state of perfection was not obliged to the first Covenant made by God
with man; for the first Covenant is established upon the immediate command of
the word of the first seventh days rest of the Law of righteousness,
necessarily implying the command of the whole Law. Secondly, and consequently,
the first Covenant being denied, the Covenant in the promise of the blessed
seed, and the new Covenant (made with all the nations of the world) is
necessarily denied, which do necessarily and fundamentally depend upon the
first Covenant. Thirdly, there was no law to command man in his state of
perfection, for the Law of God formally commanding Adam, was the word of the
first seventh days rest of the law of righteousness, necessarily implying the
command of the whole law. Fourthly, neither could Adam, or any man created in
Adam, transgress the Law of God, for where there is no law, there is no
transgression of the law, and the seventh day of the law of God being denied,
there is no law of God to command man. Fifthly, and consequently, Christ
suffered the ignominious curse of the Cross in vain for the transgression of
the Law of God by man. Sixthly, by denying of the obligement of man to the
command of the Law of righteousness by the first Covenant, the truth of God is
fundamentally denied. Seventhly, and consequently, by this denial all
Christian faith is rased from the very foundation, for the foundation of all
Christian faith is in the obligement of all men in Adam the head, to the first
Covenant established upon the immediate command of the word of the first
seventh days rest of the law, and upon the transgression of the law by man.

But the objection is proved by two strong Arguments; the first is, that the
formal obligement of the Law, now commanding man, was not suitable to the
perfection of Adam, which is most certain, for neither the formal
prophetical ceremonial obligement of the law, or the formal Evangelicall
obligement of the Law of righteousness of faith, was suitable to Adam in his
state of perfection: But the simple formal obligement of the Law of
righteousness was so suitable to Adams state of perfection, as the objecter,
Adam, and all men created in Adam their head (for the transgression of the Law
of righteousness) were condemned by the law, to the curse of eternal death
and darkness, which nothing could redeem but the sacred Blood of the Son of
God; which the objecter by denying, that Adam (in his state of perfection) was
not bound to the law of God does most unthankfully deny.

The second Argument to prove this fearful objection is this, Adam in his
state of perfection, had no other obligatory precept, but the command of
abstenance from eating of the fruit of the Tree of knowledge, and in the very
terms of this Argument, a flat contradiction is necessarily involved, for this
obligatory precept does necessarily imply the command of the whole Law of
righteousness, as has been formerly declared; for by the transgression of
this obligatory precept, the whole Law of righteousness was necessarily
transgressed; and therefore Adam and all men naturally to descend of Adam (for
the transgression of this obligatory precept) were condemned to the eternal
curse of the law of righteousness.

But of all the fearful blasphemous objections, which was ever objected (by
the devil or man) against the truth of God; this may stand upon record for the
first.

Thus have we finished the first Book of our Theological Key, wherein the
fundamental points of the first Covenant are Theologically and fundamentally
opened, for the foundation of all Christian faith, containing the first part of
the exercit act of the sacred decree of predestination, execute by the infinite
essential word, in the Creation of heaven and the Host thereof, of the earth,
of man, and of the creatures created for man, and in the obligement of man to
the first Covenant, established upon the immediate command of the word of the
first seventh days rest of the law of righteousness.

The Second Book of the Theological Key, Containing the second Covenant made
by God with man.
CHAP. I.
It is contrary to the truth of the sacred Word, to affirm that our first
Parents did fall the same day that they were created.
AS the first Covenant made by God with man, did necessarily presuppose the
perfection of man's creation; so the second Covenant does as necessarily
presuppose the fall of man from the perfection wherein he was created, unto the
eternal curse of the law of righteousness, and the redemption of man from the
eternal curse of the Law, condemned by the first Covenant.

The second Covenant therefore does contain the second part of the exercit act
of the sacred decree of predestination; in the declaration whereof the order
and method set down by Moses, Genesis 3. shall be observed, where first the
transgression of the law by our first parents is set down: Secondly, the
arraignment of our first parents by God for their transgression of the law.
Thirdly, the censure of God upon the arraignment, containing the second
Covenant, according to which method, this second Book shall be divided in
these two parts: In the first part, the fall of man under the eternal curse of
the law shall be briefly declared: In the second part, the arraignment of our
first parents, and the censure of God upon the arraignment shall be set down,
containing the second Covenant, necessarily presupposing the declaration of the
redeemed state of man; first therefore of the fall of man from his created
state of perfection under the eternal curse of the law of righteousness, as
he was obliged by the first Covenant.

In the declaration of the fall of man, two questions may be moved; first it
may be demanded, how long did our first patents continue in their created state
and felicity: Secondly, what could be the efficient cause of the fall of man,
created in such perfection and advanced to such high honor and happiness.

For answer to the first question; though the Scripture does not set down and
determine the precise time of the fall of man, yet there is no ground at all to
imagine, that Adam did fall the same very day wherein he was created, for so
Adam and all men created in Adam must have fallen without the curse of the Law;
for before the seventh day that God did rest from the works of the Creation,
there was neither any formal Law or Covenant to bind or command Adam to the
Law of God, which command was by the only word of the first seventh days rest
of the Law of righteousness, upon the immediate command whereof the first
Covenant was established between God and man.

But the maine reason of this imaginary opinion, stands in this point; to
wit, Eve did, or (at least) might have conceived the sixth day which Eve was
given Adam to wife; hence it is concluded, that if Adam had fallen after Eve had
conceived, the conception had not been liable to Adams sin, because it was
not then in the head, but actually descended from the head; in which case the
Son (in the Justice of God) is not liable to the sin of the Father, for in this
case the soul that sins must dye: To this I answer.

Admit that Eve had conceived the same night which Eve was given to Adam to
wife, yet this conception was not man and the son of Adam until such time as
Eves sensitive conception was brought to such perfection, as the intellectual
information of the soul, the sensitive body was perfect man and the son of
Adam: Before which time, if Adam (the created head of all men naturally to
descend of Adam) had fallen, the posterity of Adam (notwithstanding) must have
necessarily fallen in the head, for God did not make his first Covenant with the
sensitive seed of Adam or Eve, or with the sensitive conception, or with the
sensitive body of man, but with man, Adam the head, and with all men naturally
to descend of Adam the head, as they are men intellectual and sensitiv^,
created in the state of natural and spiritual perfection in Adam the head.

Before such time therefore as Eve had conceived perfect man and the son of
Adam, Adams fall could not have been prevented from being the fall of his
posterity, all which time after the first Covenant was established, our first
parents might have stood before their fall, and yet in all that time Adams fall
must have been the necessary fall of his posterity, till the very instant time
of Eves conception of man, which is by the second conception of woman, while as
the sensitive body (in the womb) is brought to such perfection, as the high
elaborate vital spirits of the heart, do appetite the intellectual form,
humane spirit, to be begot by the eternal Father of spirits, and (by the power
of the word) essentially united to the heart, whereby man is man, and conceived
man by woman, and in the prefixed time of natural birth brought forth perfect
man, by man, female the woman; though Eve in her state of perfection was to
bring forth man, in the image of righteousness and holiness, as in the second
conception, the intellectual soul (essentially united to the heart) was to be
spiritually enlightened and sanctified by God; for otherwise man could never be
enabled to bring forth man in such perfection, as man was created, to fulfill
the command of the Law, by the first Covenant. As God therefore (by his first
Covenant) did bind and oblige Adam, and all men created and bound in Adam, to
his first seventh days commanded worship, and in that commanded worship, to
the obedience of the whole Law, upon the curse of eternal death: So God (in
his Justice) by his first Covenant did oblige himself to enable man to bring
forth man, in such state and perfection as he was created, that God might be
honored and worshipped by the perfect obedience of all men to descend of Adam,
as he was to be worshipped and honored by Adam.

And therefore to conclude my Answer to the first Question, though the
Scripture has not set down the precise time of Adams fall, yet by Covenant
Adams fall must have been the fall of his posterity till Eve had conceived man,
though Adams sin had been his own, and not the sin of his posterity, if
after Eve had conceived, Adam should have fallen. But to affirm, that Adam did
fall the very day which he was created, it is contrary to the truth of the
sacred Word, for so Adam (as has been said) must have fallen without any curse
of the Law: Neither is there so much as any color of humane reason, to
imagine, that man being created in such perfection, and advanced to such a
large extent of honor and felicity, to be Lord over the Earth, and over the
creatures, and yet that this very day man must fall under the fearful
eternal curse of the Law, and be arraigned and censured by God for his
transgressions, before man could have any time or experience so much as to
consider the ex^ent of his advancement and felicity to which he was preferred
by God.

CHAP. II.
The immediate efficient cause of Adams fall was not internal, but external.
THe second question may be moved, What could be the immediate efficient cause
of Adams fall, being created in such estate of natural and spiritual
perfection, advanced to such high honor and felicity, and in such high love
and favor with God? for (as it will appear by the subsequent declaration) of
all the creatures created by God, man was his most dear bel^ved creature,

The efficient cause of Adams fall (by some modern Theologues) is affirmed to
be internal and external. That there was an external efficient cause of
Adams fall, it is most certain, for the external efficient cause of Adams
fall is set down by Moses; but the question of the intrinsecall or internal
efficient cause of Adams fall, whereof there be diverse opinions amongst the
Theologues, for some will have the internal cause of Adams fall to be a
deficient cause; some, Adams abusing of the freedom of his will; some will
have the internal cause a true positive efficient cause, which threefold
internal cause does trench upon the perfection of man's creation; for if any of
the three can be necessarily concluded, Adam must not be created in the state
of spiritual perfection; it does therefore stand us in hand, to remove these
three supposed internal causes of Adams fall, from the perfection of man's
creation, before we come to the declaration of the fall of man; First therefore
to come to the first internal efficient cause, which is thus inferred.

Adam by his fall produced a defective effect; the internal cause therefore of
this defective effect, was defective internally proceeding from Adam: To this I
answer first with the first Philosopher. A deficient cause does put no entity
in being; this effect of Adam therefore (by transgression of the Law of God)
being a true positive effect, must have a true positive and not a deficient
cause. Secondly, I answer Theologically, as this effect of Adam (by
transgression of the Law) was simply a formal moral effect; it was neither
defective, or the internal cause, producing the formal moral effect
defective, which was the will of Adam; but as this formal moral effect was
produced by Adam; contrary to the command of God of the Law of Righteousness
by his word commanding Adam, which was the command of the word of the first
seventh day of the Law of Righteousness; the formal moral effect produced by
Adam (by his contemning of the command of God) was defective morally evil, and
the greatest moral evil defective effect which was ever committed by man, for
it was the moral evil effect of all men created in Adam, naturally to descend
of Adam to the end of the world who were all bound and obliged to the first
Covenant in Adam their head. As the defect therefore of this foul monstrous
evil effect was external (which was the repugnance of the effect, with the
command of the Law of God;) so the cause of the effect was merely external to
Adam, which was the deceiving light of Satan, whereby Adams will was morally
produced in act. The efficient cause therefore of Adams transgression of the
Law, was not any deficient cause, internally proceeding from Adam, but a true
positive ex^ernall efficient cause. As for the second internal cause of Adams
fall (which is affirmed to be Adams abusing of the freedom of his will;) it is
all one to say that Adams will (in his state of perfection) did abuse his will,
and that his perfection did abuse his perfection, for the created perfection of
the will of man is in the free act of his will: Adams will therefore (by his
transgression of the Law of God) did act most freely, without abusing of the
freedom of his will, as it was simply the act of his will; but Adam by the act
of his will in the transgression of the Law of God did too freely abuse the
command of God. The third internal efficient cause of Adams fall, is affirmed
to be the eternal decree of predestination, by the irresistible power whereof,
Adams will (in his state of perfection) is affirmed to be internally and
subjectively necessitate to fall under the fearful eternal curse of the Law
of Righteousness by the first Covenant; for it is peremptorily affirmed by the
Authors and propugnators of this opinion, that God out of his alone mere
pleasure, did decree from all eternity, to elect a certain number of men to
salvation, and to condemn the rest of men to the eternal torments of hell
without all subordinate respect to the creation of man, or to his first
Covenant, obliging the obedience of man to his Law, or to the merit of man by
transgressing of the Law; without respect to his Law (which is the image of the
infinite essential word) or without any respect to the word made flesh of the
seed of the woman in time (and consequently without respect to God himself.)
By the irresistible power of this respectivelesse decree, Adams will (in his
state of perfection) is affirmed to be internally and subjectively necessitate
to fall under the eternal curse of the Law; to the end, that way might be made
for the execution of this fearful decree: But because we must not divert (at
this time) from our subject in hand, the examination of this miserable,
distracting, surmised decree, shall be deferred to the end of the Third Book.
In the mean time, I return to the point.

By the irresistible power of this surmised absolute decree, Adams will in his
state of perfection is affirmed (by the Authors and propugnators of this
opinion) to be subjectively necessitate to fall under the curse of the Law by
the first Covenant, and consequently and necessarily I do conclude, that (by
this assertion) God is made the first author of the first and greatest sin
that ever entered in the world; for by the subjective necessitating of Adams
will (by the pretended absolute decree) his will was inevitably necessitate
both morally and spiritually; for the moral and spiritual act of the will
does necessarily and subjectively depend upon the natural act of the will.
This necessarily inference is attempted (by the propugnators of the absolute
decree) to be taken away by a threefold instance, whereby they do pretend,
that God is freed from any imputation, of being the first author of sin,
notwithstanding that it is affirmed, that Adams will was subjectively
necessitate to fall under the eternal curse of the Law, by the irresistible
power of the absolute surmised decree. The first instance is this.

Though Adams will (in his state of perfection) was subjectively necessitate,
by the absolute decree, to fall under the fearful eternal curse of the Law,
yet Adam did freely act, in his falling: Adam therefore notwithstanding of his
subjective necessitating by the absolute decree, Adam having freedom of
election to stand or fall at his pleasure, the cause of Adams fall is not to be
imputed to Gods decree; and therefore it is a received position amongst the
propugnators of this opinion, that the freedom of the will of man may stand
with internal subjective necessitating, but not with external coaction; and
this position I do contradict, and do peremptorily affirm that the internal
free act of the will of man may stand with external coaction, but no ways
with internal subjective necessitating; for though a man be imprisoned,
chained and fettered, yet the free act of his will is at liberty, to invent and
devise the means to enlarge himself: But the internal free act of the will
being subjectively necessitate, the natural, moral, and spiritual freedom of
man's will, is inevitably necessitate, for (as has been said) the moral and
spiritual act of the will of man does subjectively and necessarily depend upon
the natural act of the will of man; though the spiritual act of the will may
be necessitate without any impeachment at all, either to the freedom of the
natural or moral action of man: As for example, in the state of grace, the
natural man before he be regenerate, being shut up and concluded in spiritual
darkness (called unbeleefe and sin) is dead as he is a spiritual man, without
any spiritual act of his understanding and will; but the natural man, is
alive as he is a redeemed natural man, without any manner of necessitating of
his will, either naturally or morally; for otherwise God (without highest
injustice) could never bind and oblige all the nations of the world to his new
Covenant, upon the merciless curse of the Evangelicall Law of righteousness
of faith, afterward to be more plainly declared.

The second instance whereby God is pretended not to be the first author of
sin, (notwithstanding that Adams will was subjectively necessitate by the
pretended absolute decree) is from a simile of a man riding upon a lame horse:
for though the rider be the efficient cause of the horses going the way which
the horse is directed by the rider; yet the rider is not the cause of the
horses lame going. To this I answer: If the horse be lamed by the rider, the
rider is the efficient cause of the horses lame going: Now the absolute decree
is the rider, and Adam is the lame horse, lamed by the absolute decree; Adams
will therefore being subjectively lamed by the absolute decree, Adam must give
lame obedience to the command of God by his Law. The third instance follows.

CHAP. III.
The positive and permissive power of God proceeding immediately from his
eternal Decree of Predestination, is by the immediate power of the Word.
THe third instance whereby God is pretended to be freed from being the first
author of sin (notwithstanding that Adams will was subjectively necessitate
by the absolute Decree) is pretended to be from the Scripture in these words,
Act. 4.28. Herod, Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles, and the people of Israel
did gather together, and do, what thy hand and council had determined to be
done.

From hence, and such like places of the Scripture, it is concluded: Gods hand
and Council did decree and determine (from all eternity) what was done in the
crucifying of man Christ Jesus the Son of God. Gods hand and Council
therefore (from all eternity) did determine to necessitate Adams will (by his
eternal Decree) which was the cause of Christ's death.

I answer, the inference is fallacious, and therefore for clearing of the
point, it is to be understood, that Gods eternal Decree is the act of his
will: The act of his Will, is either immanent or transeant to his creatures.
The immanent act of his Will is his Council and Decree, and in this sense Gods
Council and Decree is God himself infinite and eternal power, and his Decree
eternal with himself: As the act of his will (by his Council and eternal
Decree) is transeant to his creatures, it is the hand of his power, and his
power is the power of his word of his seventh days rest, as it is the image of
the infinite essential word, power it self; his word therefore is the hand of
his power, whereby the act of his will, by his eternal Council ^^d Decree, is
execute upon earth, for it is by the immediate power of his blessing, by the
word of his several seventh days rest, in the several state and condition of
man, that the word in the heart of man (whereby he lives and moves) is
blessed and continued naturally, morally, and spiritually, and that the
natural life of the creatures created by the word, are preserved.

The word therefore of every several seventh days rest, is the Decree of God
to man; as God has revealed himself to be known and worshipped by man, in the
several state and condition of man; and therefore the several Covenants made
by God with man (in his several state and condition) are established upon the
immediate command of the word of every several seventh days rest.

Adam therefore in his greatest state of perfection, must not exceed the
revealed light of the word of the first seventh days rest, to pry in the
secret Council of God, and to know what God had decreed concerning man.

Now the hand of God by the power of his word, is either positive or
permissive. By the hand of Gods positive power by his word, God does actually
and positively concur with the act of his creature, whereby the decreed act
of his will is execute upon earth. By the permissive power of his word, God
does permit the act of his creature to do what God has decreed to be done, or
he does restrain and divert the act of his creature as it is contrary to that
which God has decreed to be done. Gods permissive power by his word, in this
twofold sense, is either necessary or free. By the necessary permissive power
of his word, God (in his justice) does necessarily permit what he has obliged
himself unto by Covenant, proceeding immediately from his eternal decree:
What God does otherwise permit, God does most freely permit, and in this sense
God is said to be a most free Agent. By the permissive power therefore of his
word, the decreed act of his will is equally execute, as by the positive power
of the word, in which twofold power the providence of God to his creatures does
consist.

God therefore (according to his eternal Council and Decree) having created
man male and female, in such an admirable state of natural and spiritual
perfection, as all the created powers of God were not able to necessitate Adams
will to disobey the command of God by his word, and God having obliged himself
by Covenant to Adam (and to all men created in Adam) to the continuation of the
eternal blessing of the word of the first seventh days rest, upon the
eternal continuation of the perfection of Adams obedience, and to inflict the
eternal curse of the Law (by eternal death) upon Adams disobedience to the
command of his word, (which was the necessary command of the word of the first
seventh days rest) God (without highest injustice by the breach of his
Covenant) could neither restrain Satan from tempting Adam, or support Adam
being tempted by Satan: And this was the hand of Gods necessary permissive
power by his word to permit Satan to tempt Adam, Satan therefore in this
temptation did do but what Gods Council, by the necessary hand of the
permissive power of his word, had decreed and determined to be done; for God by
his eternal Decree (by his Covenant) had barred himself from restraining of
Satan's tempting of Adam, or from supporting of Adam tempted by Satan. So in
like manner, to come to the word of the Scripture, objected by the propugnators
of the absolute Decree: God (according to his Council and Decree from all
eternity) having obliged himself by Covenant in the promise of the blessed
seed (to Adam and to all men condemned to the curse of eternal death in Adam
the head) that man the eternal Son of his love Christ Jesus, should become man
of the seed of the woman in time, and (by his cursed death of the Cross)
redeemed Adam, and all men condemned in Adam, from the curse of the Law for the
sin of Adam: God therefore in his justice by his Covenant, did bar himself
from the restraining of the acts of Satan and of his cruel instruments in the
crucifying of the Lord of life: and this was the hand of the necessary
permissive power of his word, to Herod, Pontius Pilate, to the Gentiles, to the
people of Israel, to Judas, and to the rest of that bloody band, Acts 4.28. who
did nothing in this case but what Gods eternal Council and Decree determined
to be done by the hand of the permissive power of his word: and therefore to
conclude this Point.

As it had been highest presumption in Adam in his state of perfection (by his
contemning of the revealed light of the word of the first seventh days rest)
to have attempted (by any false light) to search into the secret Council of
God, to know what God had decreed concerning man: So it is a most presumptuous
attempt in men of this age, by transcending and contemning the very foundation
of the light of the whole Scripture of God (which is the light of the word of
the first seventh days rest, and of the first Covenant established thereon)
and to obtrude the fearful light of such a miserable absolute decree to the
conscience of man; as to affirm, that God of the Law of Righteousness
(contrary to all righteousness) out of his alone mere pleasure, without all
subordinate respect, did decree to condemn all the world to the eternal
torments of hell, except a certain number of men whom he decreed to elect and
save; and that for the execution of this miserable decree, God did decree (from
all eternity) to necessitate Adams will, by the irresistible power of this
decree, to fall under the eternal curse of the Law, and that without any
respect to his Covenant made with Adam, without any respect to his Law, or to
Adams merit by Adams transgression of the Law. Thus having removed from the
perfection of man's creation the obtruded internal causes of the fall of man, I
come next to the declaration of the true efficient cause of the fall of man, as
it is set down in the sacred Word.

CHAP. IV.
The Angels bound and obliged to the Law of God.
AS Eve the woman man female was first in the transgression, we are to begin
with the declaration of the efficient cause of Eves transgression of the Law of
God, which was merely external.

The external efficient cause of Eves fall was principal and isntrumental:
The principal external efficient cause (as it will appear by the subsequent
declaration) was Satan. The isntrumental efficient cause of Eves
transgression, was, first the Serpent; secondly, the objective fruit of the
Tree of knowledge of good and evil; thirdly, the words of the first Covenant,
Genesis 2.17. (dying thou shall dye) though the two last were but causes by
accident.

The causes inducing Adams fall were these three, and Eve her self, which was
the fourth cause.

Satan therefore, that old crooked Serpent, enemy to God and man, was the
principal efficient external cause of the fall of man, the rest Satan did use
(or rather abuse) for his instruments.

The cause of Satan's betraying of man, was Satan's malice against God, and his
envy to man, advanced to such high honor of dominion over the earth, and over
the creatures of the earth, in such high love and favor of God, from whose
love and glorious presence Satan was disgracefully cast down from the Heavens;
for Satan by the infinite word, being created a most glorious Angelical
spirit, in the height of angelical perfection by the power of the word of the
law actually and spiritually enlightened (as all Angels were created) for by the
immediate power of the word the Angels do live, move, intellectually and
spiritually, and have their intellectual and spiritual being: The Angels
therefore, according to the internal power of the word, were obliged to the
command of the Law of God as well as man; and therefore it is affirmed by the
Apostle, 2 Pet. 2.4. that the Angels sinned, and sin being the transgression
of the Law, the Angels must be obliged to the command of the angelical word of
the Law, and consequently and necessarily, the Angels by the power of the word
(in the justice of God) must be enabled with equal power to fulfill the
command of the Law; for as it may appear by Satan's fall, the Angels are
obliged to the command of the Law, upon the curse of eternal death, for there
is but one real word of the Law of God, obliging all the intellectual
creatures created by the word, though formally differing according to the
differing sphere of the intellectual creature, man in the humane sphere is
formally and humanely obliged to the Law of God; the Angels in the angelical
sphere, formally and angelically, and both eternally obliged.

Now Satan by his proud contempt of God, by his transgression of the Law,
having fallen from the height of his angelical perfection and felicity,
wherein he was created, under the eternal angelical curse of the Law; Satan
was cast down like lightning from heaven to eternal darkness, Luke 10.18.
Ephesians. 6.12. without all hope of redemption, eternally banished from the glorious
presence of God, and from the society of the numberless number of the blessed
Angels, who (according to the eternal Decree of God) do stand in the grace of
their created perfection; by the power of the Resurrection of the word (made
flesh of the seed of the woman) as they were created by the power of the word,
for the Lords infinite merit (by his rest from the fulfilling of his promise of
the blessed Seed) does descend to the Angels, by whose infinite merit the
Angels are conserved in their created estate, as ministering spirits, for the
safety of the Elect.

By reason of this shameful and ignominious disgrace of Satan, by such a high
fall by the angelical curse of the Law, Satan became maliciously desperate
against God: for though Satan (by the angelical curse of the Law) was deprived
of all spiritual understanding and action, yet the angelical intellectual
power of his understanding and action (which is so admirable) did remain, for
by this power Satan works all his mischief against God and man: Satan
therefore being puffed up maliciously against God, and knowing man to be the most
beloved creature of God, and seeing that man should hold such high sovereignty,
and such high favor and esteem with God, (from whose favor Satan had so
disgracefully fallen) This did so aggravate Satan's infelicity, as that his
malicious impatiency did carry him (as it were) headlong in contempt of God, to
work his malice upon innocent man, and to induce man by the transgression of
the Law of God, (by the word of his Law commanding man) to fall into the like
condemnation with himself; for Satan (no doubt) did apprehend, that it was as
impossible for man to be redeemed from the eternal curse of the humane
obligement of the Law, as for himself to be redeemed from the angelical curse
of the Law.

By this means Satan thought to be revenged on God, in the destruction of his
darling man, and to make the whole works of the Creation suffer, in the
destruction of man, who was created the ornament and perfection of the works of
the Creation.

Satan therefore knowing man to be created in such an admirable estate of
natural and spiritual perfection, Satan did excogitate such a mighty
temptation, as was able to shake the perfection of the most perfect
intellectual creature of God, as it is an intellectual creature, which may
well be called the masterpiece of Satan's temptations: in the declaration
whereof, the admirable power of understanding, wisdom, craft, and subtilty of
Satan's temptations may be observed; the declaration whereof shall be discharged
in these four points.

First, Satan's plot and project (by this mighty temptation) shall be declared:
Secondly, the grounds that Satan went upon. Thirdly, Satan's policy whereby
Satan set his project a foot. Fourthly, the words of the Scripture (set down by
Moses) shall be declared, that the plot and project may aris^ naturally from
the words, and from the isntrumental causes of the temptation.

CHAP. V.
Satan's plot and policy whereby he betrayed our first Parents.
THe effect of Satan's project by this mighty temptation, was this in a word,
Satan (by possessing of the Serpent) resolved to suggest to our first parents,
that there was such admirable virtue in the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge of
good and evil, being eaten, as their desire and appetite to eat of the fruit,
should be so highly incensed, as should so darken and obscure their spiritual
light and obliged love to God, as they should greedily graspe the fruit, and
eat thereof; and by eating thereof (contrary to the command of God by his Law)
fall under the eternal curse of the Law.

As for the grounds which Satan went upon to secure his project, they were two
in number; first, Satan did take advantage of the Covenant, for Satan did well
apprehend, that the first Covenant, being established between God and man, God
(in his justice) could neither restrain Satan from tempting of man, or uphold
and bear out man being tempted by the mighty power of Satan's temptation, which
made Satan so audacious to assault man, though created in such spiritual
perfection.

The second ground that Satan went upon, was with equal infallibility with the
former; for Satan (out of his admirable understanding) did well apprehend, that
though man was created in such spiritual perfection, yet that the freedom of
his spiritual love could not determine the free act of his natural love; and
that the natural love of man, being once united to the species of the object
of his greatest perfection, the union is inseparable; for all creatures in
their kind do tend with an irresistible propensity to the object of their
perfection.

Of this Satan did take his second advantage, for by his falls enlightening of
the object of the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge, with such a glorious gl^sse
of seeming virtue and perfection (to wit) that by eating thereof, our first
parents should be equal to God; our first parents were betrayed; for the
natural species of the external sensitive object, must be first apprehended
by the act of the understanding, before it can be either morally or spiritually
apprehended by man.

Satan's policy to set this project a foot, was to bring man in dislike with
God; for this cause, Satan (by possessing of the Serpent) did suggest to our
first parents; first, that if they would but eat of the fruit, which God had
commanded them (under pain of death) not to eat, they should have the
perfection of the understanding both of good and evil, and that this was the
perfection of Gods understanding.

Secondly, and consequently, that according to the perfection of that
understanding, they should be enabled with the freedom of independent action,
which was the perfection of the free act of God, whereby they should be free
from the fear of any dying death, threatened by the Covenant, and in every
respect equal to God.

Thirdly, that God of purpose had commanded them not to eat of the fruit of
the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil, upon the pain of a dying death;
because God did know, that such was the virtue of that fruit, that by eating
thereof, they should become equal to God himself.

This was of purpose suggested by Satan, to incense the love of man (who as yet
knew no evil) so to affect the understanding of evil, as that without the
understanding of evil, man should apprehend his understanding to be
imperfect; and so to affect such freedom of independent action, as he should
be free from any danger of death threatened by the covenant. And now to make all
this arise out of the word of the Scripture, the several passages set down by
Moses, now next to be declared.

CHAP. VI.
The reason that Satan in the Serpent did begin first to tempt Eve, man female
the woman.
SAtan being to enter the lists with man, armed with the perfection of such
natural and spiritual understanding and action, Satan must begin to work
objectively upon the external senses of man or no way, to divert the love of
man from God, who were united in such spiritual love. Now Satan's power to
deceive man, is in the only power of his false deceiving light, which does
always in outward show and appearance, promise a far greater good to man
then the light of the Word of God does promise, whereby the light of the word
is obscured and darkened by Satan's false great light.

Satan therefore to induce man to be in dislike with God by his false deceiving
light, did abuse the light of the Word of God and the Sacramental seal of the
first Covenant: for there was no other sensitive object under the heav^ns
whereby Satan could then betray man by his false deceiving light, but by the
beautiful fruit of the tree of Knowledge, Satan therefore to incense Eves love
and desire to taste of this beautiful fruit, did make choice of the sensitive
Serpent, for his instrument to gloss the fruit with the false great gloss of
his false deceiving light.

Though it be not expressly set down by Moses what manner of sensitive creature
the serpent was, yet by the words of the Text it does manifestly appear that
the Serpent was a most subtle sensitive creature created by God, and in
sensitive apprehension next to man; and (as it shall appear afterward) loving
and conversant with man, and waiting as it were upon Eve, and therefore the
more fit for Satan's instrument. Satan did begin with Eve, and (as it may
appear by the circumstance of temptation) out of Adams hearing; wherein Satan
showed his wisdom, lest he should have had the strong encounter of two
adversaries, both in the state of spiritual perfection.

It is thought that Satan's policy in beginning first with Eve, was because of
her sex, being (as it is conceived) the weaker of the two, though I must say
that there is small reason to conceive that Eve (for her intellectual and
spiritual perfection) was any ways inferior to Adam, both being created in
the like state of natural and spiritual perfection of man, though the one man
male, and the other man female.

But the reason must rather be, that Satan's poisoned cup being presented to
Adam by Eves amorous beautiful hand, the cup might be without all scruple
freely received by Adam, for Eve was created the model of the beauty and glory
of her sex; to whose love, Adams love and affection was most dearly and
intimatly united; and herein was the devils cunning.

First therefore of Satan's tempting of Eve, by his instrument the Serpent, and
next of Eves tempting of Adam seduced by Satan in the Serpent. In Satan's
tempting of Eve by the Serpent, his first policy was by a subtle question, to
induce Eve to conference, to the end that by Eves reply to the Serpent, Eve
might let fall some words by her answer, for Satan to take advantage to work
his foul murdering desire.

The question like Satan himself, was a most subtle question, who for his
winding every way in a man, by the subtilty of his temptation, is called a
Serpent in the Scripture: First, therefore of the question moved by the Serpent
to Eve, and next of Eves answer to the Serpent.

CHAP. VII.
Satan's subtle question to Eve by the Serpent.
SAtan in his subtle question, by the Serpent, does stick to the second
ground of his project, which is the freedom of the love of man to the
external sensitive object, enlightened by whatsoever light: The words of the
question are these ( Genesis 3.1.) Ye, here the Serpent makes a pause, as it
were, by the way of admiration, has God said, ye shall not eat of every Tree
of the Garden: The sense of the words is this, Is it true, or is it possible
that man, whom (it seems) that God has made Lord over the earth and
creatures, should be barred from that freedom which is not denied to the very
sensitive creatures, which at their pleasure freely eat of every pleasing herb
agreeable to their sensitive nature (wherein the whole sensitive pleasure and
contentment of the sensitive creature does consist,) and must man (a creature
both intellectual and sensitive, and the Lord of the creatures) be curbed and
denied the like freedom to eat of what fruit man has a mind to eat of?
Here was a most divellish question to set a woman (as she is a natural woman)
a longing without any further; and who is able to say, that Eve did not then
long, by reason of her first conception, which is the sensitive conception of
woman?

Though the question be cunningly and coveredly moved by the Serpent, yet if we
consider the readiness of Eves apprehension, in her state of perfection, we
shall find that Eve did apprehend the depth of the question, and began to be
sensible both of the restraint of her freedom, and likewise of death threatened
by the Covenant, which two of all things under the heavens are most averse to
the free nature of man, as he is man intellectual and sensitive.

But Eve as yet does modestly contain her self, and Satan in the Serpent was
no less wary; for Satan of purpose did make no mention (by his question) of
death, threatened by the Covenant; for Satan was sure that by the subtilty of
his question, he had given Eve such a blow (being in the state of perfection)
as she should be quickly sensible both of the restraint of her freedom, and of
death threatened by the Covenant, which innocent Eve before that time had no
reason to think of.

Yet for all this, Eve in this Duel at first, like her self, did stoutly
stand to the mark, containing her self within the compass of her moral
sphere, actually and morally, though Eve began to faint spiritually; for the
blow was so dangerous, and touched Eves freedom so near, as in her answer to
the Serpent by uttering the words of the Covenant, Eve fell short, as we shall
hear by the words of her answer to the Serpents question.

CHAP. VIII.
Eves Fall.
THe words of Eves answer to the Serpents question are these, Genesis 3.2. We eat
of the Trees of the Garden, but of the Tree which is in the midst of the
Garden, God has said ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest
ye dye.

In these words, first Eve did give a most clear testimony of her perfect
understanding of God the Creator, by the word of his Law and Covenant; for in
Eves acknowledging of Gods bounty and blessing, in allowing to our first
parents the fruit of the Trees of the Garden (which was by the blessing of the
word of the first seventh days rest of God the Creator) Eve did acknowledge
her immediate dependence, upon the blessing of her gracious Creator by his word.

Secondly, Eve by acknowledging Gods command, by his word commanding our first
parents, to abstain from the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge, upon the pain of
death: Eve did acknowledge the Sovereignty of God the Creator, over man and
man's obliged obedience to God, which is the sum of the first Covenant, in
these words; God has said (whose word is the command of his Law to man) Ye
shall not eat of the fruit of the Tree in the midst of the Garden; that is, of
the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil, whose command we are to obey, lest we
dye (to wit) a dying death, which is eternal death. Though the temptation (by
the subtle question) touched Eves freedom so near, that Eve fell short in
the repeating of the word of the Covenant; for while as the word of the
Covenant was, dying ye shall dye, Eve said to the Serpent, we must not touch
the fruit of the Tree in the midst of the Garden, lest we dye.

Now death was the word, which cunning Satan in the Serpent watched for, that
Eve should let fall; whereat Satan in the Serpent taking advantage, did give a
fresh assault to Eve, most impudently contradicting the word of God by his
Covenant, saying, Ye shall not dye at all; and with a breath, before Eve could
reply, saucy Satan in the Serpent by a most calumnious lie against God, did
second the assault, saying, God does know, that when ye^ eat thereof, (to wit,
of the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge) your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall
be as Gods, knowing good and evil; as if the Serpent should have (most
inpudently and blasphemously) said, God has commanded you of purpose (upon the
pain of death) that ye shall not eat of that fruit; for God does well know,
that if you do eat thereof, the eyes of your understanding shall be
enlightened with the perfection of Gods own understanding, which does consist
in the perfect understanding both of good and evil; and consequently with the
perfection of the imdependent action of God, by means whereof ye shall be
secure from any fear of death threatened by any Covenant, for by this
independent freedom ye shall be equal to God himself.

At which divellish false calumnious suggestion, Eve (out of the perfection of
her natural understanding) did begin to be jealous of God, as envious of such
perfection and felicity to man, whereby man might be equal to God, and that so
easily to be attained unto (to wit) by eating of the fruit of the Tree of
Knowledge, which under the pain of death man must not touch; for Eve must have
apprehended (for any thing she knew) that there was as great virtue in the
fruit of the Tree of Knowledge, (being eaten to produce such perfection) as was
suggested by the Serpent: As there was virtue in the fruit of the Tree of Life,
for the eternal preservation of man, as he is man, whereof Eve was to eat at
her pleasure, which was no small reason for Eve to be induced by the words of
the Serpent, that there was such virtue in the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge;
and now by the gloss of this great false light of Satan, Eves natural love
and desire began to be so incensed, as she was moved to take a review of the
fruit, which Eve had formerly so often past with abstinence, out of her
religious love and fear to the command of her gracious Creator: And having
received the fruit (enlightened by Satan's false suggestion) the goodness,
beauty, and excellency of the fruit, did seem in Eves conceit and
apprehension, to promise no less virtue and perfection then was suggested by
the Serpent, as may appear by her words, So the woman seeing that the fruit
was good for meat, to wit, both of the soul and body by eating thereof to live
eternally; and that it was pleasing to the eyes; that is, to the eyes of the
understanding, and to the eyes of the sensitive body, and therefore to be
desired to get understanding, that is, for the attaining to the perfection of
such understanding as was equal to the understanding of God; and consequently
for attaining to the perfection of such independent action as was equal to the
perfection of such understanding, free from all fear of death threatened by the
Covenant.

Now the species of the sensitive object of the beautiful fruit of the Tree of
knowledge (thus actually and satanically enlightened) being received in Eves
understanding, her incensed natural and moral love and foul desire to eat
of the forbidden fruit (and by eating thereof to be equal to God) arising
(like a great dark cloud, dispersing it self through all the intellectual and
sensitive parts of her soul and body) Eves spiritual light and thankful
obliged love to God, was so quite darkened and obscured, as Eve did greedily and
most unthankfully grasp the fruit, and eat thereof: And no doubt Eve did find
the taste and relish of the fruit answerable to the beauty of the fruit; by
eating whereof, Eve secured her self to become equal to God, by the time that
the suggested power and virtue of the fruit, should by opperation produce the
expected effect.

By the way the Reader may here observe, first the reason that Satan is called
that old serpent in the Scripture, Rev. 20.11. Satan is called a serpent from
the subtilty of his temptations, as he winds in at every external sense of
man by his false deceiving light: And Satan is called the old serpent from this
first temptation of man.

Secondly, the reason may be observed, that Satan is called a liar from the
beginning, Joh. 8.54. for this was the first lie that ever entered in the world,
whereby Satan most impudently and most audaciously did belie the majesty of
God, that Satan might work his malice upon innocent man, for Satan by this
false lie did most trecherously procure the fall of man.

Thirdly, the reason may be observed, wherefore Satan is called the flower of
discord; for by Satan's false suggestion (that man by eating of the fruit of the
Tree of Knowledge should become God) Eve began to fall at variance with God,
for commanding man upon the pain of death not to eat of the fruit of the Tree
of Knowledge: Here a question may be moved: Eve being created in the state of
natural and spiritual perfection, did not Eve perfectly know, that the
Serpent was but a sensitive creature, and that the actual words (uttered by
the Serpent) could not be the serpents words, but that it may be rather
conceived, that Eve by hearing of the Serpent thus speaking as man, might have
been afraid, and run away from the Serpent: To this I answer.

It is without all doubt, that Eve did perfectly know that the Serpent was but
a sensitive creature, and the rather that this creature (which is called the
Serpent) was more conversant with Eve then any other of the sensitive creatures
which shall plainly appear hereafter: And there is no question, but Eve did
perfectly apprehend, that the words were not the natural words of the serpent:
And it is most certain, that Eve could not imagine that the actual words did
proceed from satan in the serpent, of whose bewitching ^emptations Eve before
that time had no manner of experience.

But Eves understanding and judgment (^y her foul incensed love and desire to
eat of the forbidden fruit, that she might be equal to God) was quite darkened
and obscured, such is the power of sin and evil, when it is once conceived
and harbored in the heart of man.

But as for Eves fear of the Serpent thus speaking, Eve in her state of
perfection could fear nothing but God alone, for servile humane fear is since
the fall and redemption of man, arising from the distrustfulnesse and unbeleefe
of man; and yet in this condition of man (under the evangelicall Law of grace)
both men and women (induced by the great promises of Satan's false deceiving
light) are not afraid while Satan (many times) does appear in deformed shapes:
But there was no such deformednesse in this sensitive creature (which is called
the Serpent) for it was a most comely, lovely, handsome, sensitive creature,
waiting as it were upon Eve.

Thus Eve in the confidence of her new expected state and felicity (by the
operation of the virtue of the fruit which she had eaten) joying in her heart,
with what a booty she should present Adam out of her dear love and affection,
that as Adam was owner of her love, so he might be partner of her new expected
transcendent felicity, Eve did take of the fruit and carry to Adam.

CHAP. IX.
Adams Fall.
MOses being to set down the History of the Creation and of the Fathers, in the
small Tractate of Genesis, until his own time, containing the History of
2000. years; though Moses (for brevity) has set down the truth of Adams
fall, without expressing of the several circumstances and conference which
past between Adam and Eve, before Adam did receive and eat of the forbidden
fruit; yet it is not to be imagined, that Adam in the prime of his spiritual
perfection and wisdom (for all his intimate love and affection to Eve) could
be so easily induced by Eve to eat of the forbidden fruit, that of necessity
there must pass some serious discourse between Eve and Adam; for without all
doubt Eve (by her graceful delivery) must acquaint Adam with all that passed
between her and the Serpent, and with the weighty reasons that moved Eve to
eat of the fruit; and with her own confidence, that by eating of the fruit,
she should be equal with God; and it is most certain, that Eve out of the
sincerity of her affection, to have Adam partner of her expected transcendant
felicity (as Adam was the true owner of her lov^ (...) beautiful hand present
the fruit to Adam, using her most p^rsw^^^^ ^^^ions to move Adam to eat of the
fruit; and no question, Eve was the more instant, that both (in time) might
prevent threatened death by the Covenant, which Eve was confident to be
prevented by their mutual eating of the fruit, whereby both were suggested to
be equal to God, and free from all fear and danger of death.

Adam therefore presuming on Eves judgment and wisdom (which he knew to be
equal with his own) by hearing of the suggested virtue of the fruit,
suggested by the Serpent, and confirmed by such apparent reasons, Adam did
begin to be as confident and as much affected with the hopeful expected
felicity, of the suggested virtue of the fruit, as Eve her self, for otherwise
all Adams love to Eve, and all Eves amorous persuasions of Adam, could never
have induced Adam to run upon so desperate a hazard.

Wretched Adam therefore (in confidence by eating of the fruit to be equal to
God himself) did take of the forbidden fruit, and eat thereof, mounting
himself upon the ambitious wings of so near affected Deity, in flying at so
lofty a pitch, till by the glorious splendour thereof, Adams ambitious wings
being scorched, Adam with his posterity (Icarus-like) fell down in the
bottomless sea of Gods eternal wrath, under the fearful curse of the Law,
hopeless, helpless, eternally upon earth; and all by the miserable sting of
the old Serpents darkness ending always in afflictions, though this was the
affliction of afflictions; for as Adams transgression of the command of God of
the Law of Righteousness was the transgression of all men created in Adam (the
head of all men naturally to descend of Adam to the end of the world) whereby
the first Covenant (made between God and man, upon the immediate command of
the word of the first seventh days rest of the Law of Righteousness) was
broken by man: so Adam and all men created and fallen in Adam the head
(according to the first Covenant) were eternally condemned by the Law of
Righteousness to the curse of eternal death, without all hope of mercy or
redemption.

Now though it be manifest (by the Scripture) that by the transgression of one
precept, the whole Law of God is necessarily transgressed, and therefore this
precept of the forbidden fruit, transgressed by Adam, being the necessary
command of the word of the first seventh days rest of the Law of
Righteousness; for as has been formerly declared; the word of God commanding
man, has the only power of command, but as it is employed in the word of the
seventh days rest of the Law, and therefore the curse of the Law of
Righteousness was due by the Law for the transgression of the command; though
I say by the transgression of this one command, the whole Law was transgressed,
yet for the Readers satisfaction, it shall be declared, that by the
transgression of this one command, every several precept of the Decalogue (set
down to Moses) was necessarily transgressed, taking the Law in the simple
formal obligement, without any respect either to the Prophetical or
Evangelicall obligement of the Law.

CHAP. X.
By the transgressing of the command of the forbidden fruit, every Precept of
the Law was transgressed.
FIrst, our first parents being condemned to the eternal curse of the Law, for
the transgression of the command of the forbidden fruit, they were utterly
disabled from the first seventh days commanded worship, whereby the fourth
precept of the first Table was transgressed. Secondly, our first parents, by
following the Serpents advice, and by expecting (by eating of the forbidden
fruit) to become Gods, they had other Gods contrary to the first precept of the
Decalogue. Thirdly, the false deceiving words of the serpent, being imprinted,
and (as it were) graven in the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge, to induce our
first parents to eat of the fruit, was the first graven image of the devils
erection, to which our first parents did bow and bend all the whole powers of
their love and affection, contrary to the second precept of the Decalogue.
Fourthly, by our first parents assenting to the Serpents blasphemous belying of
God, the sacred Name of God was taken in vain, contrary to the third precept
of the first Table in which four precepts is the sum of the first Table of
the Law. Fifthly, by the transgressing of the command of the forbidden fruit,
Adam and Eve did dishonor their parents, contrary to the first precept of the
second Table, whose parents were the blessed Trinity, though the second Person
was not then revealed. Sixthly, Adam by transgressing of the command of the
forbidden fruit did kill all his posterity, by the procuring the curse of
eternal death upon himself and his posterity, contrary to the second precept
of the second Table. Seventhly, our first parents by their spiritual
adulterous whoredom, with their idol of the Devils erection, did commit
adultery contrary to the third precept of the second Table. Eighthly, Adam by
procuring of the curse of the Law against his posterity, did steal away all
the natural and spiritual gifts wherein they were created, which by the first
Covenant were as due to them as to Adam himself, contrary to the fourth
precept of the second Table. Ninthly, by our first parents assenting to the
false calumnious lie of the Serpent against God: our first parents did bear
false witness against God: for the command of the fifth Precept of the second
table, does extend as well to God as to man. Tenthly and lastly, our first
parents by coveting to be Gods, did transgress the last precept of the second
table, whereby every precept of the whole Law was necessarily transgressed by
our first parents. Before we do proceed, an Objection is to be answered.

CHAP. XI.
The Decree of Predistination was not suspendible by Adam though created in the
estate of natural and spiritual perfection.
ADam being created in the state of such natural and spiritual perfection, as
did equal the perfection of the Law, to which he was so necessarily obliged;
it was in the freedom of Adams power, to have resisted Satan's temptation; by
resisting whereof, the Decree of Predestination had been suspended. It is
therefore concluded by the Authors and maintainers of the absolute Decree, that
there was a necessity, that the freedom of Adams will, must be necessitate by
the absolute Decree, to yield to the temptation of Satan, lest the Decree of
Predestination should be suspended.

I answer to the Objection: It is true, that Adam was created in such estate of
natural and spiritual perfection, as did equal the command of the Law; but
this perfection was with equal freedom of natural, moral and spiritual
action, without the determining of the act of the one by the act of the other,
as has been formerly declared. Adam therefore, in respect of his freedom of
election, had the power to be induced, or not induced, by Satan's temptation
before Adam, was tempted by Satan. But Adam love (by Satan's false deceiving
light) being once united, to the external object of the fruit of the tree of
knowledge, Adams fall by eating of the fruit, was irresistible, and that for
this twofold impregnable reason.

First, the external object actually enlightened (by Satan's false light) being
the object of Adams greatest perfection (for Adam by eating of the fruit was
suggested to be equal to God) Adams love, and the object of his greatest
perfection, being actually united: The union was inseparable and unresisted by
any increated or created power: For God had barred himself by covenant, either
from restraining of Satan from tempting Adam, or from bearing up of Adam being
tempted by Satan, neither was there any created power of God that could
separate or necessitate the freedom of Adams natural love from the natural
object, or Adam must not be created man in the state of natural perfection,
whose love must be with all freedom to the natural object.

Secondly, there being nothing under the heavens more averse to the nature of
man, (both as he is an intellectual, and as he is an natural man
intellectual and sensitive) then eternal death (which is the destruction of
the perfection of man;) Adams natural love therefore being united to the
external object, whereby he might avoid eternal death, the union was
inseparable and irresistible.

So long therefore as Satan (by his mighty power) was left at such liberty,
there was small reason to invent any imaginary decree, to necessitate Adams
will to fall under the eternal curse of the Law. Though by this act of Satan
his power was so curbd and limitate, that Satan shall never deceive all men
again at a clap, as we shall hear afterward.

One question does remain to be resolved, which is pressed by many, the question
is this: Could not God have created man with such necessity of spiritual
action, as man could not have been tempted by the mightiest temptation of
Satan, to fall from his obliged love to God? I answer.

It is all one to move this question, as to move the question, whether God
could create another God? For first, no intellectual creature (as it is a
creature) can be created with necessity of spiritual action; for by such
Creation, God must communicate his own spiritual indivisible essence to his
creature; though the action of God is not necessary by nature, as we say of
the fire, (which out of the necessity of its nature) does necessarily burn;
but Gods immanent action is said to be necessary, as he is infinite immutable
and eternal, as by his transeunt action God is said to be a most free Agent.

Secondly, I answer to the Question, that such creation of man by God, with
necessity of spiritual action, had employed a manifest contradiction; for so
man must have been created, dependent by his creation, and independent by his
spiritual action. And so much briefly for the fall of man under the eternal
curse of the Law, which is the contents of the first Part of this second Book.

CHAP. XII.
The redemption of man from the fearful eternal curse of the Law for the
sin of Adam.
WE should next (according to our method) set down the arraignment of our
first parents by God, and the censure of God upon the arraignment containing
the second Covenant.

But because the arraignment, censure, and second covenant, does necessarily
presuppose the redemption of man, from this fearful curse of the Law (to which
Adam, and all men naturally to descend of Adam were eternally condemned): the
redemption of man therefore, is first to be declared: For, though (according to
the eternal decree of God) the actual curse of the Law for the sin of Adam was
never, neither shall it be ever actually inflicted upon Adam, or any man
naturally to descend of Adam; yet so much was neither known to man or Angel
before the Promise of the blessed seed was made to Adam, and to all men
eternally redeemed in Adam the head, by the second covenant. And therefore all
the punishments inflicted by God, by his censure upon our first parents for the
transgression of the Law, were all temporal in this life, while as the curse
of the Law is eternal: For, first, if the curse of the Law had been actually
inflicted by God upon our first parents, as they and their posterity were
actually condemned to the curse, it had been impossible for our first parents
to have answered God upon their arraignment as they did, though their answers
were untowardly enough. For their answers (as we shall find) was as the answer
of a mere natural man, without any manner of spiritual understanding or
action.

Secondly, it had been impossible for God (in this case) to have called our
first parents so mercifully by his Word; but most impossible for God to have
entered any covenant with man, under the actual curse of the Law; in which case
the eternal curse of the Law is merciless: For God can show no mercy to man
condemned to the curse of the Law, without a Mediator to intervene between the
condemnation of man by the Law, and the actual inflicting of the curse. The
redemption of man therefore, from the curse of the Law, is, first, to be
declared before the arraignment of our first parents, before the censure of God
upon the arraignment, and before the second covenant.

The redemption of man from the curse of the Law, for the sin of Adam, is to be
considered after a twofold manner: First, the redemption of man is to be
considered, as it was the promise of God made to Adam, and to all men naturally
to descend of Adam, in the promise of the blessed seed by the second covenant,
which is contained in the rest of this second Book. Secondly, the redemption of
man is to be considered, as the promise of the blessed seed was fulfilled by
the Lord Jesus Christ, upon the day of his resurrection, upon which blessed day
the new covenant was made by God with all the Nations of the world, which is
declared in the third book of this Theological key.

For the better conceiving both of the second Covenant (which is called the old
Covenant) as also of the New Covenant; these three maine fundamental points
are necessarily to be understood.

The first, the eternal Decree of God, whereby the redemption of man was
decreed from all eternity. The second point is the perfection of the redemption
of man, and wherein the perfection of the redemption of man does consist. The
third point is the admirable benefits, arising to all the nations of the world,
by the perfection of the redemption of man, from the curse of the Law for the
sin of Adam.

First, therefore of the eternal Decree of God. God, out of his infinite love
and mercy to man, (in his Son Christ Jesus) upon his eternal prescience of the
inevitable fall of man, by the mighty malicious temptation of Satan, did from
all eternity decree, to predestinate to the cursed Altar of the cross, the only
Son of his love, Christ Jesus, (begot man of the seed of the woman in time, as
he is man, the eternal Son of God, before all time) to redeem man from the
eternal curse of the Law for the sin of Adam, by his cursed death of the
cross; that as Satan in the Serpent did first so maliciously betray the woman,
to procure the fall of man: So by the resurrection of the blessed seed from the
dead, the head of the old Serpent Satan, and his cursed seed (for his malicious
betraying of the woman) should be broke in the great day, to his eternal
confusion: For which cause, first, God decreed from all eternity, to enter his
second covenant with man, in the promise of the blessed seed; that the blessed
seed should rest from the redemption of man from the curse of the Law for the
sin of Adam upon the seventh day of the last Sabbath from end to end; that by
his fulfilling of the whole Law in the seventh day, the whole Law might be
fulfilled, as he did bind and oblige himself to man by covenant; by fulfilling
whereof, the first seventh days eternal rest, (lost by Adams transgression of
the Law) might be due to his merit by the Law, that the eternal blessing of
the next seventh days rest, the redemeed state of man might be continued.

Secondly, God by his eternal decree, did decree to bind and oblige himself to
man, to fulfill the promise of the blessed seed by his resurrection from the
grave, and to enter his new covenant with all the nations of the world.

As God did decree from all eternity to bind and oblige himself to man in the
promise of the blessed seed, by the second covenant: So God decreed from all
eternity, to bind and oblige man, mutually by his second covenant, to believe
in his promise of the blessed seed; both upon the eternal blessing of the word
of the second seventh days rest of the Law of righteousness of faith, and
likewise upon the eternal merciless curse of the law of faith.

The promised redemption of man therefore, in the promise of the blessed seed,
(by the second covenant) was as effectual and actual to Adam, and to all men
naturally to descend of Adam the head, until the promise was fulfilled; as it
was effectual and actual in the fulfilled promise by the new covenant to all
the nations of the world.

Adam therefore, and all men naturally, to descend of Adam, (by the redeemed
word of the Law literally written in the the heart of man) were necessarily
enabled with the power of natural life and light; and with the power of the
life and light of righteousness of faith, to believe morally in the promise of
the blessed seed; as they were obliged by covenant, though by the eternal
Decree of God, Adam and all men redeemed in Adam the head, from the curse of
eternal death and darkness, were shut up and concluded in temporal darkness
called unbelief and sin, till they be regenerate, afterward to be declared:
from this enabling of man, with the life of righteousness of faith to believe
the promise of the blessed seed, the Law of righteousness, was first called the
Law of righteousness of faith; for by the formal obliegement of the Law by the
second covenant, the formal simple obliegement of the Law of righteousness,
was actually determined by the command of the word of the seventh day of the
Law of righteousness of faith in the promise of the blessed seed.

By this decreed work of the redemption of man (by predestinating the Lamb of
God to the cursed altar of the cross for the sin of man) the sacred Decree of
God, does principally take the name to be called, The eternal decree of
Predestination, as from the more noble and excellent part, so far surmounting
the works of the creation, as the sacred blood of the Son of God does surmount
the excellency of all the creatures created by God. And so much for the
eternal Decree of Predestination for the present: Next the perfection of the
redemption of man is to be declared.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the perfection of the redemption of man, from the curse of the Law for the
sin of Adam, by the cursed death of the Son of God, Christ Jesus, as he is man.
AS God by his decree from all eternity did decree (by the cursed death of the
promised blessed seed, made flesh of the seed of the woman) to redeem all men
from the curse of eternal death and darkness (to which all men were eternally
condemned in Adam the head;) So God from all eternity did decree to shut up and
conclude all men redeemed in Adam the head in temporal spiritual darkness
till they be regenerate, which is called unbelief and sin; and therefore it is
said, Romans 11.32. that God did conclude all men in unbelief, (which is
spiritual unbelief, proceeding from that spiritual darkness) that he might
have mercy upon all men, (to wit) by enlightening of that spiritual darkness,
by the grace of spiritual faith in the act of regeneration.

In which two points, the perfection of the redemption of man does consist:
First therefore, of the perfection of the redemption of man from the curse of
eternal death and darkness. And secondly, of the shutting up, and concluding
of all men (redeemed from the curse of eternal death and darkness) in
temporal spiritual darkness (called unbelief and sin) according to the
eternal Decree of God.

The perfection of the redemption of man (condemned to eternal death and
darkness) is by the intervention of the cursed death of the Word made flesh of
the seed of the woman, between man condemned to the curse of the Law, and the
actual inflicting of the curse by God, upon the word of the Law, and life of
righteousness written in the heart of man, whereby man was enabled with the
power of natural life and light, and with the power of the life and light of
righteousness before his fall.

By which intervention of our Savior, by his sustaining of the actual curse
of the Law due to man condemned by the Law: the word of the natural life of
man, and of the life of righteousness (written in the heart of man) and
consequently man is redeemed from the curse of eternal death and darkness, and
by the power of the redeemed word in the heart of the redeemed man: The
natural man is naturally and morally enabled again to live the natural life
of man, and the life of righteousness of faith, to believe first in the
gracious promise of the blessed seed by the old covenant, and now to believe in
the fulfilled promise by the new Covenant.

As Adam therefore, and the Fathers, by the literal light of the Word of the
seventh days rest, of the Law of righteousness of faith (then by the name of
the Sabbath of the Lord, which was really one with the literal light of the
redeemed word, of the Law and life of righteousness of faith in the heart of
man) were morally enabled to believe the promised rest of the blessed seed from
the redemption of man from the curse of the Law; for the sin of Adam upon the
Sabbath, and by the power of the word of righteousness of faith in their heart,
were enabled to bring forth the moral and ceremonial works of faith,
according to the formal command of the Law of faith. So now, by the power of
the redeemed word of the law of Faith (written in the heart of man, really one
with the word of the seventh days rest of the Evangelicall Law of
righteousness of faith) the redeemed natural man is morally enabled to believe
the fulfilled promise of the blessed seed, and to bring forth the moral works
of faith according to the command of the word of the seventh days rest of the
Evangelicall Law of righteousness of faith. And therefore, though the redeemed
natural man, (from the curse of eternal death and darkness) be shut up and
concluded in temporal spiritual darkness (till he be regenerate) and dead, as
he is a spiritual man, without any manner of spiritual understanding or
action, and necessitate to spiritual unbelief; yet the redeemed natural man
is not shut up and concluded in natural and moral darkness, and dead, as he
is a natural man, necessitate to moral unbelief; but by the power of the
redeemed word, written in the heart of man: The natural man is alive, with
freedom of natural and moral grace (by the act of his understanding, will,
and senses) to believe the promise of the blessed seed by the old covenant; and
the fulfilled promise by the new covenant; for the word of the Law of
righteousness of faith (obliged both by the old and new covenant,) is first and
immediately morally commanded, though necessarily implying the spiritual
command, and that as well upon the merciless curse of the Law of Faith, as upon
the eternal blessing of the word of the seventh days rest of the Law of
righteousness of faith.

If the redeemed natural man therefore, were concluded, and necessitate to
moral unbelief, as (by his concluding in spiritual darkness) he is
necessitate to spiritual unbelief: First, it were impossible for the redeemed
natural man to give moral obedience to the command of the Law of faith,
obliged either by the old or new covenant. But more impossible for God (in this
case) to make his old or new covenant with man: For, it were high injustice in
God, to oblige man (redeemed from the curse of the Law for the sin of Adam) to
believe his promise upon the merciless curse of the Law of faith; while the
redeemed natural man (in the mean time) was necessitate, both to moral and
spiritual unbelief.

Secondly, in the free natural and moral act of the understanding, will, and
senses of the redeemed natural man, (which natural and moral act is really
one, though formally differing) the perfection of the redemption of the
natural man (as he is man intellectual and sensitive) does consist; which
being necessitate man is no man.

Thirdly, such moral necessitating of the redeemed will of man, (and
consequently of his external senses) does infer a necessary contradiction in
the act of the redemption of the natural man: for by the literal light of the
redeemed word of the Law and life of righteousness of faith written in his
heart, (really one with the literal light of the word of the seventh days
rest of the Law of righteousness of faith) the natural man is morally enabled
to believe the word preached (for the literal light of the word is in the
sound of the word) and therefore it is said, Romans 10.17. that Faith (which is
moral faith) is by the hearing of the Word. And by the necessitating of the
moral act of the understanding, will, (and consequently of the senses) of the
natural man, he is necessitate to moral unbelief; which is a manifest
contradiction. Hence I infer these seven Theological necessary conclusions:

First, the redeemed natural man, by the redeemed word of the Law, and life of
righteousness of Faith, written in his heart (which is of one real light and
command, with the eternal light and command of the word of the seventh days
rest of the Law of righteousness of Faith) the redeemed natural man, is
morally enabled with the grace of moral faith, to believe the word of promise
(which is really one with the word of the seventh days rest of the Law of
righteousness of Faith:) First, in the promise of the blessed seed (by the old
covenant) and now by faith in the fulfilled promise (by the new covenant) made
with all the nations of the world.

Secondly, and consequently, by the power of the redeemed word of the Law, and
life of righteousness of Faith, (written in the heart of the redeemed natural
man) the natural man is morally enabled to bring forth the works of moral
faith, according to the formal command of the Law of Faith, without any manner
of necessitating of his will, to moral disobedience by the temptation of Satan
or his instruments; for, if either Satan, or any created power of God, could
necessitate the will of the redeemed man to moral disobedience: God in his
justice could never oblige man to the command of his Law, upon the curse of
eternal death, either by the old or new covenant. Though Satan therefore be
necessitate to tempt man, (as shall be declared hereafter) yet Satan with all
his power, must either induce the redeemed natural man, freely and willingly
to disobedience, or no way.

Thirdly, the redeemed natural man, by the power of the light of the word of
the Law, and life of righteousness of faith in his heart, (really one with the
literal light of the word of the seventh days rest of the Law of
righteousness of Faith) is morally enabled to know when he does transgress the
Law of faith, by bringing forth the works of unbelief and unrighteousness by
his actual sins, and to repent him of his actual sins, for fear of the curse
of the Law: For the grace of moral faith, does necessarily presuppose the
grace of moral repentance. And this is the reason that from the promise of the
blessed seed, (throughout the old and new Testament) all men are continually
called upon, to forsake their actual sins and unrighteousness, and by
repentance to turn and reconcile themselves to God; for all natural men (by
the perfection of their redemption) are enabled with the moral grace of
repentance, without any manner of necessitating of their impenitency, by the
power of Satan or his instruments: For the grace of moral repentance, being
necessitate, the grace of moral faith is likewise inevitably necessitate.

Fourthly, the redeemed natural man, being morally enabled with the grace of
moral faith and repentance, without any manner of necessitating of his will to
moral unbelief and impenitency: The grace of spiritual faith is promised (by
the old and new covenant) in God prefixed time, to the continuation of his
moral obedience, by the moral works of faith: For, Mark 13.13. Whosoever
shall continue to the end shall be saved. This end to the natural redeemed
man, is the prefixed time of Gods spiritual calling, by spiritual faith: For
by spiritual faith, the natural redeemed man is saved from the second death,
which is the curse of the Law of righteousness of faith; as (by the cursed
death of Christ Jesus, the Son of God, as he is man) natural man is saved from
the first death, which is the curse of the Law of righteousness for the first
sin of Adam.

Fifthly, though Satan and his wicked instruments, cannot necessitate the will
of the redeemed man, morally to disobedience: yet Satan (by his false deceiving
light) can induce and betray man, (without Gods special concursive grace) to
transgress the Law of righteousness of faith by his works of unbelief and
unrighteousness; and to draw down the evil reward of the Law, by sore
afflictions proceeding from the wrath of God, upon the natural man for his
transgression of the Law. The redeemed natural man therefore (by the power of
the redeemed word of the Law, and life of righteousness of faith in his heart)
is enabled with the moral grace and gift of moral prayer, to call upon the
Lord in the day of affliction and trouble, who has promised to hear the prayer
of the redeemed natural man. And therefore, the Lord says, Psalm. 50.15. Call
upon me in the day of trouble, and I will hear thee; for prayer is one of the
principal works of worship, and a chief work of faith.

Sixthly, the natural and moral blessing of the word of the seventh days
rest of the Law of righteousness of Faith is morally due by the Law to the
redeemed natural man's moral faith, by the immediate power of which blessing,
the natural man's power to produce his moral good works of faith is continued.
Though the good moral action therefore of the redeemed natural man, be
necessary spiritual sin, by reason of his concluding in spiritual darknes^,
which is spiritual unbelief, (for whatsoever is not of spiritual faith, is
necessarily spiritual sin) yet the good moral action of the natural man is
not actual spiritual sin; for so God must be the first author of actual
spiritual sin since the fall, which is blasphemy to affirm: For this
spiritual sin is not by the positive act of the will of man, but from the will
of God, according to his eternal Decree, by concluding man in spiritual
unbelief, which is called sin, for the reasons set down in the Chapter
following. But this spiritual unbelief, (proceeding of the spiritual
darkness) wherein all redeemed men are concluded, is not actual sin: For
actual sin is the transgression of the Law, which is the only sin that
condemns man: For as the Law of righteousness of Faith does command the works
of Faith: So the Law does condemn the works of unbelief, whereby the Law is
transgressed by man; we must therefore distinguish between the good moral
action of the natural man, as it is spiritual sin, for want of spiritual
faith; and the moral evil action of the natural man, which is both actual
moral and actual spiritual sin; for there is but one Law of God (as God is
one) literally and spiriritually commanding man, and consequently the moral
transgression, is a necessary spiritual transgression of the Law. The good
moral action therefore, of the natural man (according to the literal command
of the Law cannot be actual spiritual sin; for the natural man (being shut
up in spiritual darkness) is dead as he is a spiritual man, and therefore the
natural man, as he is a spiritual man, being dead, is freed from the Law of
actual sin: And his moral good action, proceeding from his moral faith,
being without either moral, or spiritual actual sin: The moral blessing of
the word of the seventh days rest of the Law of righteousness of Faith is as
due by the Law to his moral faith, as the spiritual blessing is due by the
Law, to the spiritual faith of the regenerate man: For as the Law is first and
immediately literally commanded; so the blessing of the word of the seventh
days rest, is first immediately due by the Law to moral faith, which must
necessarily precede spiritual Faith in the ordinary calling of God.

Seventhly, though the natural man, do too often stumble and fall by the
temptation of Satan and his instruments; yet he has all the days of this life
to repent him of his actual sins; for the arms of Gods mercy are outstretched
all the days of his life, to embrace the repenting sinner: And therefore is
said, Ezekiel. 18.21, 22. At what time soever a sinner does repent him of his sins
from the bottom of his heart, I will put away all his sins out of my
remembrance: As the natural man therefore, must not despair of Gods mercy in
his Son Christ Jesus, which is the greatest sin that can be committed by man,
proceeding from unbelief; for by desparing in the mercy of God, wretched man
does detract from the infiniteness of the Lords merit: So it is one of the most
fearful sins for wretched man, by continuing in actual sins and wickeness, to
presume on the mercy of God; while by his contemning of the long patience of
God, (leading him so graciously to repentance) God (in his justice) does most
justly give him over to a reprobate mind, that though he has all the days of
this life to repent, yet he cannot repent. And this is the reason that it is
said, Matthew. 12.13. from him that has not, that which he has shall be taken
from him; that is, the grace of moral repentance, which he has by the power
of the redeemed word of the Law and life of righteousness of faith written in
his heart. And now to conclude, the perfection of the redemption of the
natural man, by the cursed death of the Son of God, Christ Jesus, as he is man.

Though the redeemed natural man (according to the eternal decree of God)
Romans 11.31. be shut up, and concluded in spiritual darkness, till he be
regenerate, called unbelief and sin; yet the redeemed natural man by the
immediate power of the word of the Law, life and light of righteousness of
Faith (necessarily implying the power of natural life and light) written in
the heart of the redeemed natural man; the natural man is enabled to live the
natural life of man, and the life of righteousness of faith morally, without
any manner of any necessitating of the act of his understanding, will or
senses, either naturally or morally.

Whosoever therefore does presume to deny the freedom of the will of the
redeemed natural man, either naturally or morally, does necessarily deny the
perfection of the redemption of man, by the cursed death of the eternal Son of
God, Christ Jesus, as he is man.

The eternal death and darkness (to which all men in Adam the head, were
condemned) was prefigurate by the darkness of the first Tabernacle, called the
Holy place, which was made close and dark, without any light at all. And the
redeemed natural life and light of man, and the life and light of
righteousness of faith; to which all men are enabled by the cursed death of
Christ Jesus (the eternal Son of God made flesh of the seed of the woman) was
prefigurate by the loaves upon the Table of shewbread, and by the glorious
lights of the golden Candlestick, placed in the first Tabernacle; for the lamps
of the golden Candlestick were enlightened by the fire of the brazen Altar,
prefigurating the cursed altar of the Cross whereon the Lamb of God was to be
offered. And the fire of the brazen altar, whereby the Holocaust sacrifice of
the Lamb was burned up; did come down from heaven, which did prefigurate the
fiery wrath of God, whereby the Lamb of God was to be burned up upon the cursed
altar of the cross for the sins of man. And so much for the perfection of the
redemption of man condemned to eternal death and darness. Next of the
concluding of all men redeemed in temporal spiritual darkness, called
unbelief and sin.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the concluding of all men redeemed from the curse of eternal death and
darkness, in temporal spiritual darkness, called unbelief and sin.
IN the concluding and shutting up of all men in spiritual darkness and
unbelief, Romans 11.32. and in the spiritual enlightening of that spiritual
darkness, stands the very period of the perfection of the redemption of man;
and therefore it is said, that God did conclude all men in unbelief, that he
might have mercy upon all: For, though God has mercy upon all by the first
grace of moral faith, to which all men are enabled by the immediate power of
the redeemed word of the Law and life of righteousness of faith, written in
the heart of the redeemed man; yet his special mercy is in his second grace,
which is by the enlightening of the spiritual darkness (wherein the redeemed
natural man is shut up) with the spiritual light of the holy Spirit, whereby
the natural man is enabled with the grace of spiritual faith; without this
concluding of man therefore in spiritual darkness, and spiritual unbelief,
which is called sin, it is impossible that any natural man (in the ordinary
calling of God) could be spiritually called by the grace of spiritual faith;
by the only grace whereof man is saved from the second death. By this
spiritual light, inlightening of the darkness of the understanding of man, in
the immediate act of spiritual regeneration, the understanding of the natural
man, is first, spiritually enlightened, to see himself, dead, both in actual
moral, and actual spiritual sin, under the curse of the Law of Faith, which
he could never see before: For though the natural man, before he be
regenerate, cannot sin actually and spiritually, as he is a spiritual man,
(being dead in spiritual darkness) yet the natural man by his moral evil
action, does sin actually, both morally and spiritually; though the natural
man before he be regenerate, cannot know that his moral evil action is a
necessary spiritual transgression of the Law: For, from the first evil moral
action of the natural man (which is a necessary transgression of the Law of
faith) the natural man, till he be regenerate, is condemned by the Law of
Faith, and dead by the Law in actual sin, as he is a natural man, till he be
raised by the grace of spiritual Faith; for all actual sin does begin
morally, by the moral transgression of the Law, which is both a moral and
spiritual transgression, as the Law is morally and spiritually commanded: But
the pardon and remission of actual sin, does begin spiritually by spiritual
faith, until which time the natural man is necessarily dead in actual sin,
though he does not, neither can know, that he is dead in actual sin, till his
spiritual darkness be spiritually enlightened: And therefore the Apostle, Romans
7.9. says, I was once alive without the Law (to wit, while as he knew not the
spiritual command of the Law) but when the command came, (that is, the
spiritual command, which came by the spiritual enlightening of his spiritual
darkness by spiritual faith) sin revived, and I dyed: For, then the Apostle
did see himself dead in actual sin.

All natural men therefore; (before they be regenerate) are dead in actual
sin. And in this sense, our Saviors words are to be conceived, while as he
says, Luke 9, 60. Let the dead go bury their dead. By the spiritual light
therefore, in the immediate act of regeneration: the natural man is
spiritually enlightened, to see himself dead in actual, moral, and spiritual
sin; and ready to sinck in the bottomless sea of Gods fiery wrath for sin,
under the eternal curse of the Law of Faith, while in the mean time, he is led
(by this spiritually light) to lay fast spiritual hold on the Lords infinite
merit; by which spiritual hold, the faith of the natural man proceeding from
his spiritual love, and the Lords merit, by his love to the natural man, are
really spiritually and divisibly one; by which spiritual union, the natural
man is actually and spiritually regenerate, and mystically united to his
mystical head, the Lord Jesus Christ, by whose infinite merit, all the
regenerate man's finite actual sins are covered: For, by this spiritual union,
the Lords merit (by his fulfilling of the Law) is made the regenerate man's
merit by imputation, and imputed to his spiritual faith, whereby the
regenerate man is justified by the Law, by our Saviors fulfilling of the Law:
And by this spiritual union, enabled to live the spiritual life of
righteousness and holiness of faith. And therefore it is said, Romans 1.17. The
just shall live by faith: And this is the faith which is able to remove the
greatest mountain of temptation, even the mountain of natural death it self,
if it stand in the way, and offer to make a breach in his spiritual love from
the truth of the Lords merit.

This spiritual darkness, wherein all men are concluded (by the eternal
Decree of God) is that door which is so shut up by God, as no man can open. And
this spiritual Light (whereby this spiritual darkness is enlightened) is that
key of David (that is, the key of the son of David) by which spiritual key,
the door of the spiritual darkness of man, being once opened, all the devils
darkness, and all the powers of earth and hell, are not able to shut the door
again, totally and finally; though by the devils darkness, the regenerate man
does too often stumble and fall, and foulely fall.

Of this concluding of all men (redeemed from the curse of the eternal
darkness) in temporal spiritual darkness, (called unbelief and sin) two
fundamental points are to be observed. The first is, the prefigurating of this
spiritual darkness, by the darkness of the second Tabernacle. The second is,
the Reason that this spiritual darkness and spiritual unbelief, is called
sin by the Apostle. This spiritual darkness (wherein all men are concluded)
was prefigurate by the darkness of the second Tabernacle, which was called the
Holiest place, wherein there was no light at all, neither any light to be
carried in therein.

In this Tabernacle, the ark of the Covenant was placed, and in the ark, the
word of the two tables of the Law, Heb. 9, 3, 4. the pot of Manna, and Aarons
rod. Upon the ark was the golden crown, the two cherubims with their wings,
covering the Mercy-seat, representing the over-shadowing power of the three
distinct persons of the indivisible Trinity in the generation of the word the
blessed seed, conceived in the womb of the blessed Virgin, afterward more
plainly to be declared: For this covenant was the covenant of the blessed seed,
first made with Adam, and with all men redeemed in Adam the head, shut up in
temporal darkness; which covenant was afwards renewed to Abraham, though after
a more peculiar manner: For God did promise (by his covenant) to Abraham, that
the blessed seed should descend of Abraham's seed, and that in Abraham's seed,
all the nations of the earth should be blessed. For this cause, the Lord did
set down to Moses (descended of Abraham's seed) the pattern of the Tabernacle,
commanding Moses to erect a Tabern^cle, according to that pattern, which was
erected; to the end that the Jews, (the posterity of Abraham) might understand,
that the promise made to Abraham, was really one with the promise made to Adam;
for as the second tabernacle (called the Holiest place) did signify the first
promise made to Adam: So the first tabernacle (called the Holy place) did
prefigurate the fulfilling of the promise made to Abraham, which was to be
fulfilled, before the second tabernacle could be opened, signifying the promise
made to Adam, which promise first made to Adam, was fulfilled by the rending of
the partition wall by our Savious death more fully to be declared in the third
Book.

In this second Tabernacle, Aaron the High Priest, (as he was the figure of the
High Priest after the order of Melchisedeck, the blessed seed) did enter once
ever year, arrayed in a white vesture, besprinckled with the blood of the
sacrifice of the brazen Altar; with a censure of coals taken from the brazen
altar, kindled with the fire which came down from heaven, and with powdered
sweet incense in his hand to be burned upon the coals, when he came into the
Holiest place, that a cloudy sweet fume might ascend between the Mercy-seat and
Aaron. The end of Aarons entering into the Holiest place once every y^er, was to
obtain pardon for his own actual sins, and for the actual sins of the
congregation; to whom, as he was High Priest (and the figure of the High Priest
after the order of Melchisedeck) the pardon of actual sins was given; first to
himself, and in him as he was the High Priest to those, whose actual sins God
decreed from all eternity to pardon and forgive.

Now, though the free grace and mercy of Gods holy Spirit cannot be tied
neither to time, place, or person, by pardoning of actual sin, (for that
spiritual wind, Joh. 3.8. blows when, and where it lists) yet God
according to his decree from all eternity, did decree to grant this grace of
pardon of actual sin at this time to the High Priest (in the behalf of the
congregation) as he was the figure of the High Priest, after the order of
Melchisedeck, for these three weighty Reasons to be precisely understood by all
men.

The first was, that all men might know, that the power to pardon actual sin,
is only and immediately in the High Priest, after the order of Melchisedeck the
blessed seed, as he is God and man, to whom all power in heaven and earth is
given by the Trinity. And this was the reason, that the Scribes and Pharisees
did accuse our Savior for saying, Luke 7.48, 49. Thy sins be forgiven thee, as
if our Savior had spoken blasphemy.

The second Reason is, that the Jews might understand that all their external
sacrifice for sin, all their sin offerings, and all their legal rites and
ceremonies of the ceremonial Law, could not take away their actual sins; and
that the pardon of actual sin is in the only free absolute power of the High
Priest, after the order of Melchisedeck, as he God and man by faith in his only
merit.

The third reason is, that all men might understand, that the pardon of actual
sin, is by the spiritual inlightening of the spiritual darkness of man by
spiritual faith; which was signified by the pardon of actual sin, which past
through the cloud of the sweet incense from the Mercy-seat to Aaron, as he was
High Priest, and the figure of the High Priest, after the order of
Melchisedeck; by the spiritual light of whose holy Spirit, the spiritual
darkness of man is spiritually enlightened by spiritual faith in his merit,
whereby all the actual sins of the regenerate man are covered and freely
pardoned

The second fundamental point to be observed in this concluding of a^ men in
spiritual unbelief, proceeding from this spiritual darkness, is the reason
that this spiritual unbelief is called sin by the Apostle. The immediate cause
of this spiritual unbelief and sin (proceeding from this spiritua^ darkness)
is the eternal decree of God. And this is the sin which is calle^ by the
Theologs) original sin: For a formal difference between actual si^ and this
original sin, which by the eternal decree of God does descen^ from Adam the
redeemed head of man, upon all men naturally descended an^ to descend of Adam,
to the end of the world; to the end that by this sin (and natural death which
followed this sin) all men may know that they are redeemed from the curse of
eternal death and darkness, to which all men were eternally condemned for
Adams first sin (in whom all men transgressed the Law) by the cursed death of
Christ Jesus, the eternal Son of God, as he is man; and therefore it is said,
Romans 5.12. As by one man sin entered in ^he world, and death by sin; and so
death passed upon all men, in whom all have sinned: where this one man, is Adam
in his redeemed estate for his sin which entered in the world, is necessary to
be understood of original sin; which did enter by Adam the redeemed head of
man, and did descend by degrees upon his posterity. And therefore this sin
which entered in the world, must not be taken for Adams first sin: For, first
Adams first sin cannot be said to have entered in the world by degrees; for it
did cease upon Adam and all men at one instant: For it was as really the sin of
all men (transgressors of the Law in Adam the head) as it was the sin of Adam.
Secondly temporal natural death followed this sin, that entered in the world
by this one man, but eternal death followed Adams first sin, from which all
men are re^eemed. The sense therefore of the words is this:

As by Adam the redeemed head of all men, (concluded in original sin)
original sin entered in the world, by descending upon his posterity, and
temporal natural death by that sin, that all men may acknowledge that they
were all transgressors of the Law in Adam their head: So temporal natu^all
death did pass over all men, young and old, male and female from Adam ^o
Moses. In the 14. verse of the 5. Chapter to the Romans, the Apostle does
^ffirm Adam to be the figure of Christ Jesus the second Adam; for Adam was ^he
figure of Christ, in his redeemed estate concluded in spiritual darkness, and
original sin and natural death which followed that sin; where the Apostle
makes a threefold comparison between the first and second Adam, ^he first is in
the 15. verse, the sense of the words is this:

As by the first Adam (in whom all men sinned by his first transgression of ^he
Law) as he is the redeemed head of all men concluded in spiritual dark^esse
and natural death, many are dead, to wit, by natural death: So by the
^pirituall enlightening of the spiritual darkness of man (by the spiritual
light ^f the second Adam) the grace of spiritual faith did abound to many;
whereby many are alive; and in this sense, the 19. verse is to be understood.

The second comparison is in the 16. verse; the sense whereof is this: (...)
was for the one sin of the first Adam against the Law of righteousness, that
all men were eternally condemned, but it is for the remission of many ^ctually
committed against the Law of righteousness of faith; that the faithful are
justified by faith in the second Adams infinite merit.

The third comparison is in the 18. verse, the sense is this: As by the first
Adams first sin against the law of righteousness, all men were condemned to
eternal death; so by the righteousness of the second Adam, by his satisfying
of the transgressed law of righteousness for man, (by his cursed death) the
free gift of his merit came upon all men, to the justification of life, for
that first sin; so that neither Adam, neither any man naturally descended, or
to descend of Adam to the and of the world, shall ever be charged with that
first sin of Adam to condemn man.

Of the concluding of the redeemed natural man in original sin, arising of
the spiritual darkness, and spiritual unbelief: I infer these ten
Theological demonstrative conclusions.
1. The first transgression of the law by Adam (as he was simply obliged to the
law of righteousness) was infinite and merciless, without any revealed mercy.
It was infinite, because the transgression of the law of righteousness is the
contempt of God, as he is God, and the transgression was merciless, because
the second Person, (in whom is only mercy) was not then revealed to Adam.

2. The act of the redemption of man from the eternal curse of the law of
righteousness, being performed by man, Christ Jesus, the eternal Son of God,
begot man of the seed of woman in time; in the justice of God, does equal the
eternity of the curse of the law for the transgression of the law of
righteousness by man.

3. All men created in Adam the head, transgressors of the law in Adam,
condemned to eternal death and darkness, for Adams first sin, are all
redeemed from the eternal curse of the law for that first sin, by the cursed
death of Jesus Christ, the eternal Son of God, as he is man begot of the seed
of the woman. And by the eternal Decree of God, all men in Adam, the redeemed
head of man, are concluded in original sin, and temporal natural death which
followed that sin.

4. It is only for actual sin (by the transgression of the law of
righteousness of faith) for which man is now condemned to the eternal curse
of the law of faith, and that by final contempt and impenitency, for all men
(by the old and new Covenant) have all the days of this life to repent them of
their actual sins.

5. Fifthly, and consequently the child in the womb, actually and
intellectually informed man, and the son of Adam, departing this life, or being
borne, and departing this life, before the child come to actual moral
understanding and action, the child does depart free from actual sin, and a
true Saint in heaven; for the child is redeemed in Adam the head by the sacred
blood of Christ Jesus the eternal Son of God, begot man of the seed of the
woman in time, by whose precious blood all men naturally descended, and to
descend of Adam, the redeemed head of man, are saved from the curse of the law
of the sin of Adam. And therefore our Savior says, Mar. 10.14. Suffer
little children to come unto me, for of such is the Kingdom of heaven.

6. Though original sin does descend upon all men from Adam, the redeemed head
of all men; yet Adams actual sins do not descend upon his posterity: For
(since the fall and redemption of man) the soul that sins must only dye for
the sin, Ezekiel. 18.4. And therefore, while as it is said, I wi^ visit the sins
of the fathers upon the children, unto the third and fourth generation: This
visiting of God must be understood of his temporal visitation by his temporal
judgments in this life, which is a caveat for all parents, to have a care of
their posterity, lest by their evil example, they induce their children to
follow their sin, and so draw down the temporal judgments of God upon their
children in this life.

7. The door of the natural man's spiritual darkness, is only and
immediately opened by the spiritual key of David, enlightening the
understanding of the natural man, with the grace of spiritual faith, in the
act of regeneration. While that door therefore stands open (which all the
created powers of God cannot shut again) though the regenerate man does too
too often stumble and fall, yet the regenerate man can never fall totally and
finally from the grace of spiritual faith.

8. The free pardon of actual sin, is only and immediately by the free mercy
of the Lord Jesus Christ: For by whose immediate spiritual power, spiritual
faith is begot; by his only immediate power actual sin is only pardoned,
which power (since the power of the high Priest is determined) is communicall
to all the created powers of God; for this power is the immediate act of the
holy Spirit.

9. Though Adams good works, (while he stood in the state of created
perfection) did proceed from his spiritual faith, in the promise of God the
Creator; yet the reward and eternal blessing of the word of the first seventh
days rest of the Law of righteousness, was not due (by the Law) immediately,
to Adams faith, but immediately to his works: But the eternal blessing of the
word of the seventh days rest of the Law of righteousness of faith is due by
the Law, immediately to the faith of man, and not immediately to the works of
Faith; though by the Law of faith, the works of faith be as necessarily
commanded to be produced, according to the formal command of the law, as the
faith of man is obliged by covenant, to live the life of righteousness of
faith, as he is enabled by the power of the redeemed word of the law written in
his heart: For, as the commanded worship of the seventh day, is the great
command of the Law, (necessarily implying the lesser command) all the works of
faith are necessarily commanded, as has been formerly and necessarily
demonstrate. All the works of man therefore, be they never so morally good,
according to the literal command of the law, are not able to merit the pardon
of the least actual sin of man, committed against the law of righteousness of
faith, much less able to merit t^^ salvation of man from the second death, but
quite contrary, by the intervention of the presumptuous merit of man, between
his faith, and the Lords merit, his vain faith is utterly destroyed.

10. Though original sin, does descend upon all men redeemed in Adam the
redeemed head of man; yet original sin is no manner of cause of actual sin:
For first, original sin is imm^diately from God, the eternal Father of the
immortal spirit of man, by the essential union of the intellectual spirit of
man to the vital spirits of the heart of the Infant in the womb. So soon
therefore as the Infant is man, and the son of Adam, the child is concluded in
original sin, in Adam the redeemed head of man, and so brought forth man, by
man female the mother.

Secondly, actual sin is from the devil, and neither from God, or from the
parents: for the generation of man, by man, male and female, and the production
and bringing forth of man, by man female, (as it is the natural action of man,
the humane intellectual good creature of God) is a good natural action,
without any actual sin, for it is not the natural, or the voluntary action
of man simply that is sin; but it is the voluntary action of man, as it is
formally moral. And so much for the redemption of man from the curse of the
Law for the sin of Adam, as it does concern both the old and new Covenant.
The redemption of man is the next to be declared, as it does concern the old
Covenant.

CHAP. XV.
Adams arraignment by God for his transgression of the Law of righteousness,
obliged by the first Covenant.
AS the act of the redemption of man from the curse of eternal death and
darkness, does concern the old Covenant, it does necessarily presuppose the
arraignment of our first parents, and the censure of God for their
transgression of the Law, which in the infinite mercy of God, is only
temporal in this life: First, therefore of the arraignment of our first
parents, as it is set down by Moses, so far briefly thereof, and of the
censure, as both do concern the subject in hand. In the araignment of the
parties delinquents for the transgression of the Law, God does begin with the
examination of the last delinquent; but God does begin his censure where the
sin did first begin.

The last delinquent by the transgression of the law of righteousne, obliged by
the first Covenant made by God with man was Adam. God therefore (as may
appear, Genesis 3.9.) does first graciously call Adam by his word, who hearing
the voice of God, hid himself (with Eve) amongst the trees of the garden,
flying from the presence of God, and from his gracious calling by his Word.

How fearful is the voice of God by his Word, calling a sinner to account for
the transgession of his Law, as he is a natural man: For so soon as Satan does
induce the natural man to sin, by the transgression of the command of God by
his Word, as it is his Law commanding man; Satan does persuade the natural man
to fly from the gracious calling of God by his Word; yet God (according to his
eternal purpose) Psalm. 119.176. will find out both Adam and Eve. God
therefore, does first call Adam, saying, Adam, Where art thou? as if the Lord
had not known where Adam was. O infinite mercy of God to man! though man had
lately committed high treason against God; yet God (mercy it self) does call
Adam by his sacred Word graciously to repentance, Who art thou therefore, that
wilt despair of the infinite mercy of God in his Son Christ Jesus, calling
thee so graciously (by his word) to repentance? while Adam, who had committed
the greatest sin that ever was, or can be committed against God by man, was
graciously called by God.

Here a Question may be moved: Was not the sin of our first parents (for their
first transgression of the Law) freely pardoned, by the eternal Decree of God,
by predestinating the only Son of his love, Christ Jesus, as he is man, to the
cursed Altar of the Cross for that first sin, wherefore then does God call
Adam or Eve to repentance for that first sin?

I answer, first, This was more then was known to our first parents, till the
promise of the blessed seed was made. Secondly, all the punishments inflicted
upon our first parents for the transgression of the Law, are only temporal in
this life; and all inflicted by God, to put all men in continual remembrance
of the infinite love and mercy of God, (in his Son Christ Jesus) for the
redemption of man, by the cursed death of his only Son, as he is man; without
whose cursed death, all men must have dyed eternally under the fearful curse
of the Law, by eternal death and darkness: and so to return to Adams
examination. The words set down by Moses, are emphaticall, as if they had been
set down after this manner: Adam, Where art thou? This is strange, that thou
should fly from my presence, who have dealt so graciously with thee; where
it may appear, that God was then conversant with our first parents before
their fall, even by external apparition. Adam by his answer to Gods calling,
(like a natural man) most ungraciously (in stead of the humble acknowledgement
of his horrible fact) does go about to shift his accusation for hiding
himself, by pretending his shame by his nakedness, saying, Genesis 3.10. I was
afraid to come into thy presence, because I was naked. Naked indeed; both
internally, and externally, which is the true effect of sin. Adam and Eve were
both ashamed of their deformed estate, (to which they were brought unto by the
base foil which they received by believing the Serpent) both were sensible of
their misery, but both (as yet) insensible of their sin, which was the cause of
their misery; such is the nature of sin, till the sinner be spiritually called
by God. Now, did Adam and Eve begin to feel the evil, which they did so long
to know, and now was the perfection of our first parents understanding brought
to such a pass, as they knew not which way to begin to cover so much as their
external nakedness, but were fain to make a poor shift, by sewing of figtree
leaves together with strawes, or some such like thing, to cover their deformity.

Here by the way another Question may be moved: What was the reason, that our
first parents were so careful to cover their privy parts, more then any other
part of their bodies?

I answer briefly, because under the name of Adam, (as Adam is the head of all
men, to descend of Adam by natural generation) man, male and female is
comprehended: For, of Adam, as he is man male simply, no man can naturally
descend of Adam by natural generation: And therefore it is said, that God made
man, male and female. Our first parents therefore, by this act, in covering of
the isntrumental parts of generation, do most lively express the shame and
overthrow of their posterity by their first sin, which is a main fundamental
point of faith. I return to Adams answer.

Notwithstanding of Adams ungracious and unthankful answer to God; yet God
will not thus leave Adam. God therefore does press Adam in these words: Genesis
3.12. Who told thee that thou wast naked? And to the end that God might move
Adam to the confession of the fact, God still presses Adam in these words:
Have thou eaten of the fruit which I commanded thee that thou should not eat?
By which words, God, (much like a temporal Judge) who (intending to save a
delinquent, guilty of death by the Law) does teach the guilty what to say for
himself: For, the Question taken affirmatively, is the confession of the fact.

By this Question Adam was so pressed by God; that Adam (in a manner) does
confess the fact; but it was like the confession of a natural man, by adding
sin to sin; for by his confession, most shamefully and unthankfully, first Adam
does charge God, as the cause of his foul transgression; to wit, because God
had given him Eve to wife: Secondly, Adam (for all his love to Eve,) does
charge Eve likewise with the cause of his transgression, hoping (by this means)
to excuse himself, and to make Eve suffer a dying death for his own foul
ambition: where we may observe, that when God by his Word does threaten the
natural man by his judgments for sin, all the dearest pleasures which has
induced him to sin, are blamed as the cause of his sin, hoping thereby to free
himself from wrath, though all in vain; yet God (mercy and patience it self)
does patiently bear with Adams impenitent obstinacy, and next calls Eve.

CHAP. XVI.
Eves arraignment by God for her transgression of the Law.
GOd does in like manner call Eve graciously by his Word to repentance in these
words: Genesis 3.13. And the Lord said to the woman, Wby have thou done this? as
if the words had been set down after this manner by Moses.

Eve, what have thou done? Did not I create thee with such power and
perfection, as that thou should have been a mutual help and comfort to thy
husband; and thou most (ungraciously) art the instrument and means of the ruin
of you both, and of your posterity?

Eve fearing the curse of the Law (by a dying death) to be inflicted both upon
her self and Adam (according to the covenant) does post over the cause of her
transgression upon the Serpent, in hope thereby to have freed her self and Adam
from the curse (notwithstanding of Adams unkind charging of Eve, for being the
cause of his own wilful disobedience) and to have had the curse inflicted upon
the Serpent, who had so maliciously betrayed both her and Adam; where it may
plainly appear, that (as yet) there was no remorse in either of both, for their
horrible sin, notwithstanding of Gods so gracious calling of both by his
immediate Word, but God (mercy and patience it self) does bear patiently with
both: For, God (in his eternal purpose) did decree, to move both to repentance
by another means, afterward to be declared, when we come to the entering of the
second covenant. In the mean time, the judicious Reader may manifestly observe,
that though our first parents (by their answers to God upon their arraignment)
did show themselves like natural men, without any manner of spiritual
understanding or action, being shut up in spiritual darkness, according to
the e^ernall Decree of God; yet by their free answers to God, it does plainly
appear, that though they were condemned to the curse of eternal death and
darkness, yet the curse of the Law was not actually inflicted upon either of
both; for the necessary reasons formerly declared: For, it was for fear of the
curse of a dying death to be actually inflicted upon them (to which they were
so necessarily obliged by the first covenant) that they did so shift and post
over the cause of the horrible fact from one to another. And so much briefly,
for the arraignment of our first parents for their transgression of the Law of
righteousness, as they were simply obliged to the Law by the first covenant.
Next therefore of the censure of God for the transgression of the Law.

CHAP. XVII.
The sensitive creature, called the Serpent, before the curse, did walk upon
legs as other sensitive cattle and beasts of the field.
GOd does pronounce his censure (for the transgression of the Law) upon all the
parties accessory to the transgression; beginning at the first party, where the
cause of the transgression does begin, and so in order to the last party
delinquent. The first party delinquent, which was the first and immedi^te cause
of the transgression of the Law, was the sensitive Serpent. The second was the
old murdering Serpent, Satan. The third party was the woman man female, which
was betrayed by the Serpent. The fourth and last party delinquent, was Adam,
man male. First, therefore of the censure of God upon the Serpent. The censure
of the Serpent is set down by Moses after a twofold manner: First, the censure
is set down as it concerns the Serpent in particular: Secondly, the censure is
set down, as the censure inflicted upon the Serpent does likewise concern the
woman, but after a far differing manner. The censure as it does concern the
Serpent in particular is set down in these words, Genesis 3.13. Because thou have
done this, thou art cursed above all cattle, and above every beast of the
field: Upon thy belly thou shall go, and dust shall thou eat all the days of
thy life. The censure upon the Serpent has a literal and mystical sense.
First of the literal sense: By the literal sense of the censure; the
sensitive Serpent is cursed above all the cattle and beasts of the field: and
first the cause of the curse is set down, and secondly, the curse is pronounced
by God, by his Word. The cause of the curse is, because thou have done this,
that is, because by thy false suggestion, thou have betrayed man to fall under
the curse of the Law.

The curse of the Law is pronounced by God upon the sensitive creature, called
the Serpent, without all calling or examination, which of all judgments is the
most fearful; while the judgment does so suddenly and unexpectedly fall
without all pre-meditation or prevention: As for the reason wherefore God does
thus speak to the Serpent (being an irrational creature) it will appear by the
mystical sense of the censure.

The curse upon the Serpent does divide it self into two branches: The first
is, Upon thy belly shall thou go: The second is, Dust shall thou eat all the
days of thy life. Because the literal sense of the censure upon the Serpent
is plain, we will only answer to a twofold objection arising of the words of
the censure.

The first whereof is this: The Serpent being a sensitive and an irrational
creature, it may be objected, that the Serpent in the justice of God, could not
be liable to the curse of the Law; because the irrational creature cannot be
capable to be obliged to the Law of God.

I answer: The Law of God does spare neither the intellectual sensitive,
animate, or inanimate creature, if the creature do but come instrumentally
within the compass of the transgression of the Law of God.

So the brazen Serpent, which was commanded by God (though the instrument of
saving so many in the Wilderness;) yet, because it was the isntrumental cause
of the people of Isreal's Idolatry, 2 King. 18.4. the brazen Serpent was
commanded to be broken in pieces.

So the golden Calf worshipped by the Israelites, was ground to powder; some
part whereof was cast down the river; some part burned with fire, for being the
isntrumental cause of the people of Isreal's Idolatry; which if all the sins of
man, is most fearful, and most distastefull to God: For, by the sin of
Idolatry, God is necessarily denied to be God; which fearful sin God does
never leave unpunished at some time or other; and so much for answer to the
first objection. The second objection is this:

The curse of the Creator for the transgression of the Law, is the destruction
of the creature, as it is such a creature. Now, before and after the curse is
inflicted upon this sensitive creature, (called the Serpent) it is called by
Moses a Serpent. And the nature of the Serpent, being to go, or craul upon the
belly, and to eat (at the least) for the most part of the dust of the earth:
This censure therefore, inflicted by God upon the Serpent, for being the
isntrumental cause of the transgression of the Law, could be no curse at all.

I answer to the objection, and do affirm, that Moses does call this sensitive
creature, a Serpent, from the effect produced therein, by the immediate curse
of the Law of God, pronounced by the power of his Word. And therefore that this
sensitive creature did walk upon the legs, as other cattle and beasts of the
field, before the curse was pronounced by God, I thus enforce the point: First,
God himself (in pronouncing of the curse) does call this sensitive creature,
one of the cattle and beasts of the field, saying, Genesis 3.13. Cursed art thou
above all the cattle and beasts of the field: The sense of the words is this,
Thou art the only cursed beast of all the number of the cattle and beasts of the
field, amongst whom thou live. This sensitive creature therefore before the
curse, was one of the number of the cattle and beasts of the field. Secondly,
by the power of the curse, this sensitive beast is necessitate to go upon the
belly, and craul. This sensitive beast therefore, (called the Serpent) before
it was cursed by the power of the Word, did not go and craul upon the belly,
but did walk upon the legs, as other sensitive cattle and beasts of the field.
Thirdly, this sensitive creature, (called the Serpent) by the power of the
curse, is necessitate by crauling upon the belly, to eat and feed upon the dust
of the earth. This sensitive creature therefore, before the curse, did not live
by licking up of the dust of the earth, but by walking, as other cattle, did
feed upon the herbs and grass of the field. Fourthly, it is said, that this
sensitive creature (called the Serpent) was, Genesis 3.1. more subtle then any
beast of the field, that is, in sensitive apprehension. This sensitive beast
therefore, according to the subtilty of sensitive apprehension, above all other
cattle and beasts of the field, was created with an organicall sensitive body,
answerable to discharge the internal sensitive perfection, equal (if not
above) the external shape and form of other cattle and beasts of the field.
Fifthly, the enmity inflicted by the censure, between the Serpent and its seed,
and the woman and her seed, does necessarily presuppose a former amity and love
between man and this sensitive creature: For, as this sensitive creature was of
a more nimble and sensitive apprehension, above all the other cattle and beasts
of the field: So it was next to man in sensitive apprehension, and therefore
more conversant with man, then any of the other sensitive creatures; and in all
probability, did wait, as it were, upon Eve, and therefore the more fit
instrument for Satan to work his mischief. Sixthly by the mystical sense of
this curse upon the sensitive creature called the Serpent (whereby it is cast
down from walking upon the legs, to craul upon the belly) the old murdering
Serpent Satan, is so cast down upon the belly of his great power (for the
betraying of man) as he shall never betray all men again with such a high hand,
at one clap, as he did before, more plainly to be declared in the next Chapter.
Seventhly, by the fearful sudden unexpected judgment pronounced by God in his
fierce wrath, as a terrible Judge upon this sensitive creature, in the presence
of our first parents, (amazed at the terror of the curse, and fearing no less,
then their turn next, to have the curse of the Law actually inflicted upon
them) ou^ first parents were moved to repentance, and prepared for the
embracing of the gracious promise of the blessed seed, which was presently
after made by God, whereby the second covenant was entered between God and man.
Lastly, to conclude this point; either there must be a supernatural sensitive
mutation in this sensitive creature, by the curse of the Law (as it was such a
creature, though transcendent to all Philosophical reason) whereby this
sensitive creature was cast down from walking upon the legs, and from eating of
the herbs of the field, to craul upon the ground, and to eat and feed upon the
dust of the earth: or, the plain words of the Scripture must be contradicted.
And so much for the literal sense of the censure of God by the curse of the
Law, as the censure does concern the Serpent in particular: Next of the
mystical sense of the censure.

CHAP. XVIII.
The curse of the Law by the first covenant literally inflicted upon the
sensitive Serpent, is mystically inflicted upon the old Serpent, Satan.
THe curse of the Law literally inflicted upon the sensive Serpent is
mystically inflicted upon the old Serpent Satan, who is called the old Serpent,
Rev. 20.2. from his stinging and killing of man from the beginning. The poison
of his sting is malice: the bait whereby he does bait his sting, is his false
pleasing deceitful light, called Satan's darkness; for by the pleasing light
of his miserable sting, man does greedily swallow the bait, whereby man is
stung to the heart. From the great power of Satan's sting, whereby he did sting
all men to eternal death from the beginning, Satan, Isa. 27.1. is called a
Dragon: Satan, Rev. 20.2. is called the great Leviathan, which devoureth so
many fishes at one mouthfull: Satan from his stinging of all men from the
beginning, is called the Murderer of mankind: From his continual stinging of
man to make them fall by final impenitency under the merciless curse of the
Law of Faith Joh. 8.44. Satan is likewise called a Murderer: Rev. 12.9. Satan
is called the Devil, because Satan having stung man (by inducing man to commit
sin upon sin) Satan does object to wretched man, the severity of Gods justice,
continually accusing man for his sins against God; and the impossibility of
Gods mercy to the multitude of his sins; whereby wretched man, without Gods
preventing mercy, in his Son Christ Jesus, is stung with the sting of despair.
Satan for his stinging of all men by his first blasphemous lie against God,
whereby he betrayed all men, is called, Joh. 8.44. the father of lies: For
lying is the first seed that he sowes amongst men, even in a manner, from the
cradle: From the great power of the false light, wherewith he baits his sting
to deceive man, Satan is called, the Prince of darkness, because by the power
of his great false light, the literal light of the word of the Law, and life
of righteousness written in the heart of man, is obscured and darkened; and in
this sense, Satan is likewise called, 2 Cor. 4.4. God of the earth, from the
multitude of his followers.

As the cause of the curse is first set down, and then the curse of the Law is
literally pronounced upon the sensitive Serpent: So the cause is first
mystically set down to Satan, and then the curse is pronounced upon the old
Serpent Satan. The cause is set down in these words; because thou have done
this; The mystical sense of the words is this: Satan, because thou have done
this, (that is) because thou have been the first cause and author of this
mischief, (to wit) not only of the condemnation of Adam, and of all men
naturally to descend of Adam, to eternal death and darkness, by the curse of
the Law of righteousness, but because thou art likewise the cause of the
cursed death of Christ Jesus, the eternal Son of God, as he is man, in
redeeming of man from the eternal curse of the Law; cursed therefore art thou,
above all the intellectual creatures of God, as thy instrument the Serpent is
cursed above all the cattle and beasts of the field, because thou have done
this. According to the two branches of the curse, literally inflicted upon the
sensitive Serpent: The two branches are mystically inflicted upon Satan in the
Serpent: The first is,

Upon thy belly thou shall go. Mystically Satan must go upon his belly: the
mystical sense of the words is this: Satan, thou art cast down upon the belly
of thy great power, whereby thou did so maliciously betray and deceive the
first Adam, and all men created in Adam the head; so that thou shall never rise
again, Rev. 20.10. (with such a high hand of power) to deceive and betray the
second Adam (to wit) Christ Jesus, and his mystical members. This mystical
sense of the first branch of the curse, inflicted upon Satan, is set down by
the Apostle Jude, chap. 6. to be the eternal chains of darkness, to which
Satan (ever since) is chained, like a Bear to the stake; the compass of which
chain Satan must not pass over, neither do within the compass of that chain,
but what Satan is permitted by God: For, though Satan was cast down from the
heavens like lightning, Luke 10.18. by the curse of the Angelical obligement
of the Law which he did transgress: For, Satan sinned, Satan therefore
transgressed the Law, whereby he was Angelically obliged. Yet Satan's power was
wonderful, until he brought himself within the compass of the curse of the
humane obligement of the Law, by his betraying of innocent man, which is now
pronounced by God upon Satan, whereby Satan's high power is curbed, and himself
confined and chained till the great day; when Satan shall receive his final
judgment, and be cast down in the eternal burning lake, Rev. 20.10. for his
malicious betraying of man: Who, as he did first betray the woman man female,
so by man (the seed of the woman) he shall be condemned in the great day (to
wit) by man, Christ Jesus, and his mystical members, who is the mystical man,
which must break the head of the great Serpent, in the great day, to his
eternal confusion. And this is the reason that Satan did so saucily challenge
our Savior, Mat. 8.29. for tormenting of him before his time. Because our
Savior crossed Satan, by dispossessing of the man possessed with Satan's
malicious spirit.

The second branch of the curse literally inflicted upon the sensitive Serpent,
as the literal curse does concern the Serpent in particular, is mystically
inflicted upon the old Serpent Satan, in these words: Dust shall thou eat all
the days of thy life: By the mystical sense of this branch of the curse;
Satan is necessitate to feed upon the dust of the earth: By the dust of the
earth, the foul dusty stinking sins of man since the fall, is mystically
signified; which Satan must lick up and feed upon, Mich. 7.17. or Satan must
starve himself with his malice, Prove. 14.28. Satan's hunger and thirst
therefore, to make wretched man sin, is one of the chief causes that Satan
goes about continually (like a roaring Lion) 1 Pet. 5.8. seeking whom he may
devour: for Satan is necessitate by the curse, to feed upon the sins of man,
whose insatiable hunger and thirst, (by reason of the necessity of this curse)
is never satisfied. Another cause of Satan's continual going about, seeking
whom he may devour, is Satan's fear, lest too many should be regenerate, and
become mystical members of the mystical man, and become Satan's heavy judges
in the great day: For, the Lord Jesus Christ united to his mystical members,
is the mystical man, by whom Satants head, and the head of his cursed seed, in
the great day, must be finally and eternally broke, to their eternal
confusion. And so much of the censure of God, as it does concern the sensitive
Serpent, and mystically the old Serpent Satan. Next of the censure inflicted
upon the Serpent, as the censure does likewise concern the woman.

CHAP. XIX.
As the censure inflicted upon the Serpent does concern the woman.
THe censure of God upon the Serpent, as it does concern the woman, is set down
by Moses in these words, Genesis 3.15. I will put enmity between thee and the
woman, and between thy seed and her seed; it shall break thy head, and thou
shall bruise his heel.

This censure has likewise a literal and mystical sense, and does divide it
self into three branches: The first is, I will put enmity between thee and the
woman, and between thy seed and her seed: The second is, It shall break thy
head: The third is, Thou shall bruise his heel.

In the three branches of this censure, (as the censure does concern the woman
and her seed) does consist the foundation of all Christian faith from the first
promise of the blessed seed made to Adam: For, in the second branch of this
censure, the second covenant is made by God with man, in the promise of the
blessed seed.

The Declaration therefore of this censure (as it does concern the Serpent and
the woman) shall be discharged in these two points: First, the literal and
mystical sense of the three branches of the censure shall be declared.
Secondly, the second covenant in the promise of the blessed seed, shall be set
down: After the declaration of which two points, the censure of God upon the
two last parties, delinquents, shall be followed, according to the order set
down by Moses. First, therefore of the literal sense of the thee branches of
the censure; and next of the mystall sense: By the literal sense of the first
branch of the censure, a natural enmity and hatred is put between the Serpent
and the woman, who were formerly so loving and conversant one with another,
which enmity and hatred, is put likewise between the seed of both. By reason of
this enmity and hatred, mortal, bloody, irreconcilable wars are stirred up
between the parties. This was a miserable censure inflicted upon the Serpent,
not only to be cast down by the curse from the former estate, to craul so
despicably and loathsomely upon the belly, and to eat the dust of the earth,
but likewise to be so necessitate, (by the curse) to such a base condition, as
neither man or woman can abide the Serpent, who were formerly so loving and
familiar one with another; which hatred (according to the eternal Decree of
God) must continue till the worlds end. This hatred is not only a simple
privation of the former love between this sensitive creature and man, but it is
a positive enmity, accompanied with such a necessitate fear of man in the
Serpent, as if the fire stand in the way (while man does pursue the Serpent,)
the Serpent (to fly the presence of man) will craul through the fire it self.
Though this enmity be inflicted upon the Serpent and its seed as a curse; yet
it is no ways inflicted as a curse upon the woman, or upon her seed, but does
naturally proceed from both to the Serpent, for the Serpents betraying of man,
to fall under the eternal curse of the Law; for whose redemption, the sacred
blood of Christ Jesus (as he is man) was so truly and necessarily shed, though
it be no small cut to man, while man (at whose frown, the most cruel Lion did
most submissively stoop) must now be afraid of the sting of such a base
crauling creature as the Serpent.

The second branch of the censu^e is, It shall break thine head: whereby the
word [it] is to be understood, man the seed of the woman, as shall appear by
the mystical sense of the censure. By the eternal Decree of God therefore,
the seed of the woman must break the head of the Serpent, which is the most
miserable curse of all to the Serpent: For the head (implying the brain) which
is the original of the sensitive powers of the sensitive creature, being broke
and bruised (as it were) in pieces, both the sensitive and vegetative life of
the Serpent, is extinguished in the original, and consequently the venomous
power of the sting of the Serpent, bruised and broken. And by whom? By man the
seed of the woman, and why? because thou have done this. The victory therefore
of this irreconcilable wars, is (by the eternal Decree of God) decreed to
man, the seed of the woman. But though the victory of this bloody
irreconcilable wars, be decreed to the seed of the woman; yet the conquest is
not without some fear and danger, to wit, Thou shall bruise his heel; that is,
the heel of man, the seed of the woman. By the heel, the lowest part of man, as
he is sensitive, is to be understood: for neither the Serpent, or Satan, or any
created power, must enter the soul of man, to sting man, as he is a spiritual
man. The Serpent therefore by its sting, must bruise the natural man, as he is
sensitive, and not as the man is intellectual and a spiritual man. By this
power given to the Serpent, to bruise the heel of man, Numb. 21.8. Eccl. 10 11.
the Serpent is said to bite or sting man the seed of the woman. And though by
the sting of the Serpent (being venomous) the wound by the inflammation of the
sensitive powers (without speedy remedy) does many times prove mortal; yet
such mortality by natural death, is an advantage to the faithful, while
thereby, all the afflictions of this life by the old great Serpents sting, are
determined. And though the Serpent many times (having mortally stung man) by
subtilty and nimblenesse, does escape the deadly wound; yet die the Serpent
must, if not by man naturally descended of Adam, yet by man spiritually begot
of the seed of the woman, by whose sacred blood, the dead, by the Serpents
sting was redeemed, and by whose c^mmand, the blood of man killed, must be
revenged: For, by whom man's blood is shed, the blood of the shedder, (whether
by man, or any sensitive creature) must be shed, according to the Law of God.
And so much for the literal sense of the three branches of the censure,
inflicted upon the sensitive Serpent and its seed, as the censure does concern
the woman and her seed. Next of the mystical sense of the three branches of
the censure.

CHAP. XX.
The mystical sense of the first branch of the censure.
BY the mystical sense of the first branch of this censure; the enmity put
between the sensitive Serpent and the woman, is mystically put between the old
murdering Serpent, and the Church of God, which is the body of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the head of the Church, mystically signified by the woman; For, this
mystical woman is the blessed Virgin. By the seed of the Serpent, is
mystically signified, those whom Satan by the sowing of his seed of enmity
(even in a manner from the cradle) does beget to be haters of the truth of the
word, and persecutors of the Professors of the Word, are called the children
and seed of Satan. By this mystical woman, therefore, to wit, the blessed
Virgin, the redeemed militant Church of God upon earth, is mystically to be
understood: By the seed of the woman, first Christ Jesus the Word: secondly the
children begot of the Word, brought forth by the Church, are mystically
signified. First, those who (by the preaching of the Word) are morally
begotten, by moral faith: And secondly, those whom God, according to his
eternal purpose, does spiritually enlighten by the grace of spiritual faith;
who by their moral and spiritual love, are morally and spiritually united to
their immediate head, the Lord Jesus Christ, the Word and Truth; and by that
moral and spiritual union, members of his body, which is the militant Church
of God upon earth. Though this enmity and hatred be inflicted upon Satan and
his cursed seed, as a curse (whereby they are induced to hate the truth, and to
persecute the possessed of the truth;) yet this enmity is not inflicted upon
the Church, and upon the seed of the Church as a curse: For the Church of God,
as they are members of the Lord Jesus Christ, in whom they live, move, and have
their being, they do hate all the professors of his truth, who are the Church
of God. By this enmity therefore, put between these parties, irreconcilable
mortal and bloody wars, is raised between Satan and his seed, and the Lord
Jesus Christ, the Word of truth, and his members the Church, begot of the seed
of the Word. And from this irreconcilable bloody wars, the Church of God upon
earth, is said to be the militant Church. This enmity and hatred, to which
Satan (by the curse) is necessitate; is not only a simple privation of the
former love and amity between God and Satan, for Satan (as has been formerly
declared) was created a most glorious Angel, in the high love and favor of
God, until such time as Satan (for his foul ambitious sin) was cast down into
a most despicable and disgraceful manner from the heavens, and from his
conversment with the blessed Angels, who are ministering spirits sent out by
God, for the safety of his Church upon earth, against the power of Satan, and
of his seed; and therefore the eternal blessing of the Word of the Lords
Evangelicall seventh days rest, is extended to the blessed Angels, (according
to the eternal Decree of God;) by the immediate power of which blessing, the
blessed Angels do stand in their created perfection. Satan therefore, (by this
enmity) is not only deprived of his former love to God, and to his truth, but
likewise Satan, for his betraying of man by his belying of the truth, Satan is
necessitate by a positive enmity and hatred, to hate the truth, and to
persecute the Professors of the truth; and so are his cursed brood, whom Satan
by the sowing of his seed, begets to be bloody final persecutors of the
Church. Here two Questions may be moved; the first is this: Are all those the
cursed seed of Satan, who are called the children and seed of Satan?

I answer: The seed of Satan is taken in a twofold sense: First, all men, who
are actually sinners, (as they do sin actually) are called the children and
seed of Satan; for actual sin is from the Devil, and of these many (being
stung by Satan's sting of enmity, sweetened by his false deceiving light) are
stirred up to be persecutors of the Church for a time; though afterward they
become pillars of the Church; and such a persecutor was Paul before his
spiritual darkness was spiritually enlightened by spiritual faith.

Secondly, the seed of Satan is taken for those whom Satan (by his bewitching
sting of enmity, sweetened by his false pleasing deceiving darkness) has
induced to such a final hatred of all truth, and of all professors of the
truth, provoking the long patience of God, (leading them so graciously to
repentance) till for their final contempt and impenitency, God in his justice
does justly give them over to a reprobate mind, whereby they do inherit the
curse of their father Satan; and these are the only cursed seed of Satan.

The parties therefore of this irreconcilable mortal bloody wars, is first
Satan, and not only his cursed seed, but likewise all those whom (by his false
deceiving light) Satan has stirred up for a time, to be haters of the truth,
and persecutors of the professors of the truth, who are the Church of God. The
other party of this irreconcilable war, is the Lord Jesus Christ, the Word,
and the seed of the Church, of which sacred seed the moral and mystical
members of his body are begot, who out of their love to their head, (Truth it
self) do necessarily and mortally hate all haters of his truth, and all
persecutors of the professors of his truth.

The second question may be moved; what is the reason that this irreconcilable
enmity and hatred, is put by the Lord, between the parties, whereby his Church
is so continually and so bloodily persecuted and afflicted in this life, by
Satan and his seed; since the Church is more dear to the Lord Jesus Christ then
his own life, (as he is man) was to himself?

I answer: The reason is, first, that the Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified by
the redeemed valor of his militant Church, in his continual preservation
thereof, against the mighty power of Satan and his seed; that the world may
know, that all their labor is in vain. Secondly, that his mystical members
(in their mystical head) may victoriously revenge the blood of man upon Satan
and his cursed seed in the great day, by the final breaking of their head, to
their eternal confusion. Thirdly, that in recompense of their valor (for
their courageous defending of the truth in this life) they may be crowned with
an incorruptible crown of glory in their mystical head in the life to come:
For by the eternal Decree of God, the victory of this irreconcilable war is
decreed to the mystical man, Christ Jesus and his mystical members. The seed
of the woman must break the head of the Serpent, according to the second branch
of the censure, the mystical sense whereof is next to be declared.

CHAP. XXI.
The mystical sense of the second branch of the censure.
BY the mystical sense of this second branch of the censure, the victory of
this irreconcilable war, is decreed to the seed of the woman: For, as by the
false suggestion of Satan, the woman was first deceived by the Serpent; so by
the eternal Decree of God, the head of the old murdering Serpent Satan, and
the head of his cursed seed, shall be broke by the seed of the woman. The
mystical woman therefore, in this branch of the censure, is the blessed
Virgin; and the mystical seed of the Virgin, is the Word, who is promised to
become man of the seed of the woman, by whom the head of the Serpent must be
broke. In this second branch therefore of the censure, the sacred generation,
conception, birth, death, and resurrection, of the Word, as he is man of the
seed of the woman, is necessarily and mystically implied, which is the meaning
and sense of the promise of the blessed seed, mystically set down in this
second branch of the censure. For the better conceiving of this sacred mystery;
first the natural generation of man is necessarily to be considered. The
natural generation of man, is performed, first by the mutual concourse of
man, male and female, in the act of generation, whereby the natural seed of
man male, is received and united to the natural seed of man female in the
womb; by the innate virtue and callidity whereof, the masculine and feminine
potentiall virtue of the united sensitive seed is produced in act in the matter
of the seed, and actually and sensitively conceived and formed. And this is the
first conception of woman, which is the seminall and sensitive conception of
man.

Secondly, the formed sensitive body (fed and nursed by the pure blood of the
woman) being brought to such sensitive perfection, as the high elaborate vital
spirits of the heart, does appetite the intellectual form; the intellectual
soul humane spirit, is essentially united to the vital spirits of the heart of
the Infant in the womb, by the eternal Father of spirits, according to his
covenant; by which immediate essential union, the Infant (in the womb) is man,
and so conceived man by woman. And this is the second conception of woman,
whereby man, as he is man, is conceived in the womb, and in the prefixed time
of natural birth, brough forth man, by man female the woman, without the
natural seed, therefore of man male it is impossible that man can be, either
begot, conceived, or brought forth man by naturalll generation.

To return therefore to this sacred mystery of the generation and conception
of the word, (the promised blessed seed) to be made flesh of the seed of the
woman, by whom the Serpents head is to be broke; which is mystically set down
in the second branch of this censure. First, by the word [It] in this branch of
the censure, the only natural seed of the Virgin, is mystically signified.
Secondly, by this word [It] all natural seed of man male, is excluded from
this sacred generation; and consequently, the sacred overshadowing power of the
most High, is necessarily implied: By which sacred overshadowing act, the
potentiall masculine virtue was communicate and united to the potentiall virtue
of the feminine seed in the womb of the Virgin, and by the innate natural
power and callidity of the womb, the united potentiall masculine and feminine
virtue was produced in act in the matter of the Virgins seed; of which
sanctified seed, that holy thing was conceived, and actually and sensitively
formed. Thirdly, this holy thing so formed, was fed, nursed, and cherished by
the pure natural blood of the Virgin in the womb, which being brought to such
sensitive perfection, as the elaborate vital spirits of the heart of the holy
thing, did appetet the intellectual form: The true spirit of man (begot by the
Father of spirits) essentially united to the divine nature, was indivisibly and
essentially united to the vital spirits of the heart of the holy sensitive
thing: and by the indivisible power of the Trinity, essentially anointed with
the spiritual oil of gladness, Heb. 1.9. and so conceived by the second
conception of the Virgin, and (in the fullness of time) brought forth the
first born Son of the blessed Virgin, and the natural Son of the most High,
the word and the seed of the Church. And thus was the Word made flesh of the
seed of the woman, which was most lively prefigurate by the ark of the covenant
placed in the inner Tabernacle, which was the covenant of the blessed seed,
whereby God did covenant with Adam, (and with all natural men condemned in
Adam the head) that the Word should be born man, of the seed of the woman, by
whose cursed death, Adam, and all men condemned in Adam, should be redeemed
from the eternal curse of the Law for that first sin, which was prefigurate to
the posterity by the Ark of the covenant.

First, by the Ark, the blessed Virgin was prefigurate: by the capacity of the
Ark, the Virgins womb was signified: By the word of the two tables of the
Testimony, the Word conceived in the Virgins womb was signified: By the Pot of
Manna, the eternal life of the Word; and by Aarons Rod, his infinite power,
which were placed severally by the Word in the Ark; signifying the essential
union of the divine nature, to the humane nature of the Word in the womb of the
Virgin: By the two Cherubims (with their outstretched wings overshadowing the
Mercy-seat,) the overshadowing act of the indivisible power of the Trinity in
the sacred generation of the Word of the seed of the Virgin, was most lively
represented: For, by the two cherubims, the distinct persons of the Father and
holy Spirit; and by the Mercy-seat the second person of the Trinity (Mercy it
self) is signified. By which sacred overshadowing act of the indivisible power
of the Trinity, as the Word was first begot man sensitively of the seed of the
Virgin; so the Word was sensitively conceived by the Virgins first
conception; and as the Word (being brought to sensitive perfection in the womb)
by the immediate act of the Father of spirits, (which is the indivisible act of
the Trinity) the holy thing was begot man, essentially united to the divine
nature: So was the Word conceived by the second conception of the Virgin; and
in the fullness of time brought forth, Mat. 1.25. the first born Son of the
Virgin, and the natural Son of the most High; and therefore that holy thing is
called the natural Son of God: For, though the sacred generation of the Word
of the female seed of the Virgin was supernatural; yet the twofold conception
of the Word by the Virgin, the maintaining of the child by her pure blood,
and the bringing forth of the Word so made man of the seed of the Virgin, was
the natural act of the Virgin; and therefore the Word made flesh of the seed
of the woman true man essentially united to the divine nature; and therefore it
is said, Colos. 2.9. that in him the Godhead dwells bodily. Of this gracious
promise of the blessed seed thus prefigurate by the Ark, three main
fundamental points are to be precisely observed: First, the pot of Manna, and
Aarons Rod, placed severally by the Word of the two Tables of the Law in the
Ark, prefigurating the essential union of the divine nature, to the humane
nature of the Word, was to signify to all men, that though the divine and
humane nature of the Word were essentially and indivisibly united; yet, that
this essential union is without any confounding of the two natures, or of
their essential attributes. And therefore, though we may truly say, that the
Word is God and man; yet we cannot say, that the Word is man, as he is God: or,
that he is God, as he is man; neither must we attribute the essential
properties of the divine nature to the human nature of the word, or the
essential attributes of the human nature to the divine nature of the word. The
second point to be observed, is the reason that the Church of God is mystically
signified by the woman; the reason whereof is the twofold natural conception
of the woman, which is (as it were) the emblem of the twofold conception of
the moral and mystical members of the Lord Jesus Christ, which are brought
forth by the Church: For, as the moral conception of the natural man by
moral faith, (by the preaching and sowing of the seed of the Word) does
resemble the seminall and first conception of the woman: So does the spiritual
conception of the regenerate man by the Church, resemble the second conception
of woman: For, though the regenerate man be spiritually enlightened by the
immediate light of the holy Spirit; yet that spiritual light is the spiritual
light of the Word, which is the seed of the Church, and the regenerate man is
enlightened thereby, as he is a member of the Church, which is the body of our
Lord Jesus Christ. The third main fundamental point to be observed in this
gracious promise, is the immediate cause of the Lords love to his militant
Church: For, the immediate sole efficient cause of his love to the Church, is,
the essential union of this divine and humane nature of the Word: As the
immediate cause of this essential union, is the Lords infinite love to all men
eternally condemned to the curse of eternal death for the sin of Adam. Whence
the infinite joy and gladness of the sacred Trinity did arise to rest eternally
upon the essential union, of which essential union and unction, does arise the
Lords love to his Church, by his sacred Word, as his Word (by his love) is the
Image of this essential union: For, as by the literal light of his Word of
the seventh days rest of the Law of righteousness of faith, (proceeding from
his love, which is of one real light with the redeemed word in the heart of
man) the natural man is morally led to the Lords merit: So by the Spiritual
light of the Word, proceeding from his spiritual love, (which is the
spiritual light of his holy Spirit) the regenerate man is spiritually led to
the Lords merit, and spiritually, mystically, and indivisibly united to his
mystical head: For, by this spiritual love, all the regenerate are coupled
and united joint to joint, one to another; and all indivisibly to their
mystical head, whence the spiritual joy and gladness of the regenerate does
arise, which is called the joy of the Holy Ghost; for this spiritual union and
unction is really one in the head and members; but it is essential in the
head, and spiritual in the members, spiritually flowing from the essential
union and unction of the head: and this is the reason that it is said by the
Prophet David, prophesying of this union and unction, Psalm. 45.7. Thou have
anointed him with the oil of gladness above his fellows: Whose fellows, are
his mystical brethren, begotten of the same Father; for both the head and the
members are the sons of God, the head essentially; and therefore the natural
Son of God; the members spiritually, and therefore the spiritual and adopted
sons of God in their mystical head; who are therefore predestinate, to be made
like to his Image, that he might be the first born Son amongst many brethren.
And in this sense our Savior is called, Luke 2.7. The first born Son of the
Virgin, the woman, in respect of his mystical members, who are begot of the
woman, the Church. Though the spiritual joy therefore of the regenerate, does
many times ebb and flow; yet the spiritual love, whereby they are spiritually
united to their mystical head (whence this spiritual joy does arise) is
indivisible in the head and members: It is as impossible therefore, for the
regenerate, to fall totally and finally from the grace of their spiritual love
(whereby they are indivisibly united to their mystical head;) As for the
humane nature of the word, to fall from the divine nature, and alone: For the
essential union of the divine and humane nature of the Word, is the sole
immediate efficient cause of this indivisible union, and must mutually stand
together.

By this spiritual union and unction (whereby the regenerate are indivisibly
united to the truth of the Lords merit) the regenerate man is so armed with the
spiritual valor of patience, as he is enabled to resist the strongest
temptation of the Devil, and of his powerful instruments, and to stand to the
Lords truth, even the loss of his natural life; by which spiritual valor,
the regenerate man does overcome the power of Satan, and of all his cruel crew
in this life: For, this spiritual valor does proceed from the decreed victory
of this irreconcilable bloody war to the seed of the woman: For the seed of
the woman must break the head of the Serpent, and the head of the Serpents
seed; though the victory be not without temporal danger and afflictions, as
may appear by the mystical sense of the third branch of the censure, next to
be declared.

CHAP. XXII.
The mystical sense of the third branch of the censure.
SAtan and his cursed bloody brood, (by the mystical sense of the first branch
of the censure) being necessitate to hate the truth, and the professors of the
truth, (who are the Church of God) and to induce all others (to his power) to
hate and persecute the Church: Satan, first (by the mystical sense of this
third branch of the censure) is limited how far his power shall extend,
mystically signified by the word, Heel, which is the lowest part of man, as he
is man intellectual and sensitive, whereby the sensitive power of man (as he
is man) is signified.

Satan therefore, (by his cursed sting of enmity) has the power to sting and
bite man, as he is a natural man, intellectual and sensitive; but no ways as
he is a spiritual man: For Satan, with all his power, cannot sting the
regenerate man, not so much as to induce him to commit the least actual sin:
For the regenerate man is born of God, 1 John 3.9. and cannot sin, as he is a
spiritual man. And therefore the Apostle Paul, Romans 7.17, 18. does disclaim
his actual sins to be his, (to wit) as he is a spiritual and a regenerate
man; but does attribute his actual sins to his rebellious flesh, as he is a
natural man, and the old man corrupted by Satan, and his wicked instruments,
even in a manner, from the cradle.

Secondly, by the mystical sense of this word [His] Satan, and his cursed
brood, (according to the eternal Decree of God) is permitted: first, to sting
the Word (the blessed seed, made flesh of the seed of the woman) whom that old
murdering blood-hound, and his cursed bloody brood did sting most cruelly, to
the cursed death of the cross. Secondly, by the word [His] Satan and his seed,
is permitted to sting and bite the heel of the Lords mystical members, who are
predestinate to be made like to the Image of their mystical head, that they
may taste of the cup of his afflictions in this life (which our Savior has
drunk of, charged up to the brim for the sins of man) to the end, that his
mystical members may feel the sorrows and afflictions which he did sustain for
man; and that they may testify their redeemed spiritual valor, by their
maintaining of his truth in this life, in recompense whereof, an incorruptible
crown of glory is laid up for them in the life to come. By this, the permissive
decreed power to Satan and his seed, the Church of God has been continually
stung and afflicted, ever since the promise of the blessed seed was made to
man. How soon did that murdering Dragon stir up Cain to murder his innocent
brother Abel; and what fearful effects did follow that murder, while of Cains
wicked race, the world was set in such a fire of all sin, cruelty and
uncleanness, as the whole world was brought to the number of eight persons?
And so has this bloody Hell-hound and his wicked seed, continued ever since,
by stinging the Prophets and Saints of God, before Christ, and since, his
Apostles and Martyrs in all ages. And was there ever greater stinging and
bloody persecutions of the truth, and of the professors of the truth, then
there is in this miserable age?

The regenerate man therefore (while he is in this life,) must resolve to march
under the white and bloody colors of the immaculate Lamb, and to stand to the
defense of the purity of the truth of his mystical head; fight he must, for
Satan the great Dragon, and his bloody brood, are naturally inclined to bite
and sting. The regenerate man therefore must resolve himself both to give, and
many times to take the foil. And though Satan and his wicked crew, (by biting
of his heel) do make him trip, stumble, and fall; yet up he must, and to it
again, for the prize is an incorruptible crown of glory due by covenant to him
that overcomes, Rev. 2.10.11. And though in the conflict the regenerate man be
stung to natural death; yet the prize is his own: For (according to the
eternal decree of God) he must rise again, and in his mystical head revenge
the blood of man upon Satan and his cursed feed, by breaking of their heads to
their eternal confusion; and in recompense of their valor in this life, be
crowned with an incorruptible crown of glory in his mystical head, in the life
to come: For, by the eternal Decree of God, the seed of the woman must break
the head of the Serpent. What I say to the regenerate man, I say likewise to
the natural man, whom God in his mercy has preserved from Satan's overcomming,
to be his cursed seed; and whom God, (in his eternal purpose) has decreed in
his prefixed time to call spiritually, for both are commanded to resist Satan:
For if the natural man (out of the power of his redeemed moral grace) does
but resist Satan twice or thrice: Satan, Jam 4.7. like a coward, will turn
tail, and fly away, as the sensitive Serpent, from the presence of man. Let
the regenerate and and the good natural man therefore look up continually to
the crown that that is laid up for them, and withal remember that he that does
deny the Lords truth totally and finally in this life, Mat. 10.33. the Lord
will deny him before his Father in the great day.

Of the mystical sense of the last branch of this censure, I infer the third
necessary conclusion, that it is impossible for the regenerate man to fall
totally and finally from the grace of his spiritual love, whereby he is
spiritually and indivisibly united to his mystical head: For Satan with all
his power, is not able to make the regenerate man to sin, as he is a spiritual
man; for he is born of God, much less to fall totally and finally from the
grace of his spiritual love, and indivisibly united to the truth of the Lords
merit.

Thus having declared the literal and mystical sense of the censure upon the
sensitive Serpent, and upon the old Serpent Satan, in particular; and also the
literal and mystical sense of the three branches of this censure, as it does
concern the Serpent, and the Serpents seed, and the woman and her seed,
literally and mystically. Before we come to the declaration of the censure upon
the last two delinquents in particular: First, the second covenant,
comprehended in the second branch of this censure, is to be set down according
to the literal and mystical sense.

CHAP. XXIII.
The second covenant in the promise of the blessed seed, entered with Adam the
redeemed head of all men, which is called the old covenant.
IN the opening the second covenant, in the promise of the blessed seed, two
two things are first necessarily to be observed:

First, as the first covenant was made with Adam, as under the name of Adam,
man male, and female, was necessarily comprehended; for so Adam is the head of
all men naturally to descend of Adam: So the second covenant is made with Adam
in his redeemed state (though then unknown to Adam) as under the name of Adam,
both man male, and female, is comprehended; for so Adam is the redeemed head of
all men naturally to descend of Adam.

The second thing to be observed is, that (according to the eternal decree of
God) the redemption of man, (in the promise of the blessed seed) was in every
respect as actual to man in the promise by the second covenant, as after the
promise was fulfilled by the new covenant. To come therefore to the covenant:
God in the majesty of his incensed wrath against the sensitive creature, called
the Serpent, for betraying of man, did, as a terrible Judge, in the presence of
our first parents, by his Word, pronounce the curse of the Law upon this
sensitive creature, so beloved of our first parents; by the immediate power of
whose (all commanding) Word, down falls this sensitive creature, from walking
upon the legs (as other cattle and beasts of field) to craul in a most fearful
despicable and loathsome manner upon the belly, to lick up and feed upon the
dust of the earth. At which unexpected horrible loathsome spectacle, our first
parents fearing their turn next, to have the curse of the Law infl^cted upon
them, (the Serpent being only the instrument of the^r transgression) while ^ur
first parents in this agony of fear to be swallowed up, and drowned in the sea
of Gods fiery wrath; in this mean time, God, according to his eternal decree,
out of his infinite love and mercy to man, in his Son Christ Jesus, made the
gracious unexpected promise to Adam, That the seed of the woman should break
the head of the Serpent, because the Serpent did first betray the woman. And
this is the literal promise, the mystic^ll sense whereof is formerly declared.
The mystical sense therefore of this graci^us promise (that the seed of the
woman shall break the head of the Serpent,) is this: The Word shall be made
flesh of the seed of the woman, that as Satan by the sensitive Serpent did
first deceive the woman, so the old Serpent, Satan's head, shall be broke by
man, the seed of the woman. This gracious promise was to be fulfilled: First,
by the resurrection of the blessed seed (the Word made flesh of the seed of the
woman) from the grave (his last enemy) to the face of the earth, whereby he did
manifest himself God and man, by his rest from the fulfilling of the promise of
the blessed seed. Secondly, by his resurrection from the face of the earth to
the heavens from whence he came; whereby he did manifest himself again by his
infinite power, God and man, from whence he shall return again the second time
in all glory and majesty, united to his mystical members, who is the mystical
man that must break the head of the Serpent Satan, and the seed of his cursed
seed, to their eternal confusion. This last promised rest of the blessed seed
(the Word to be made flesh of the seed of the woman) does necessarily
presuppose and imply his bloody rest in the grave from his cursed death of the
cross, whose merit by his bloody rest, (as he is the eternal Son of God,
begot of the seed of the woman in time) was twofold:

First, by his rest from the cursed death of the cross, our Savior was to
merit the redemption of all men condemned to the curse of the Law of
righteousness for the sin of Adam, whereby all men in Adam their redeemed
head, were saved from the first death.

Secondly, by his bloody rest in the grave upon the seventh day of the Law
(from end to end) by his fulfilling of the Law, in the seventh day (as he
obliged himself to man,) the eternal life and rest of the first seventh day,
lost by Adam, was due by the Law, to his merit, that by faith in his merit, all
redeemed men might rest by faith, till the promise was fulfilled, whereby, as
all faithful redeemed men were saved from the second death, which is the curse
of the Law of righteousness of faith for actual sin: So, by the fulfilling of
the promise of the blessed seed by his resurrection from the grave, all
faithful believers are now saved from the second death, which is the curse of
the Evangelicall Law of righteousness of faith for actual sin: And this is
the mystical sense of this gracious promise which was made to Adam the
redeemed head of man, and to all men naturally to descend of Adam; and was
really fulfilled by the Lord Jesus Christ: The benefit of which gracious
promise was then actually to Adam, and to all men to descend of Adam, though
the promise was to be fulfilled in time: For, by virtue of this promise, the
word of the Law, and life of Righteousness, first written in the heart of man,
was then the redeemed word of the Law of righteousness of faith, whereby Adam
was morally enabled to believe the promise; and by believing in the promised
rest of the blessed seed, to have eternal life. But before the second covenant
can be declared, whereby God does oblige himself and Adam in this gracious
promise; first the word of the seventh days rest must be set down, upon the
immediate command whereof the second covenant was established between God and
man: For, without the light of the word of this seventh days promised rest,
the second covenant can no ways be known; for the knowledge whereof, we must
necessarily understand, that the day wherein this gracious promise was made to
Adam, was the seventh day of the Law, from the creation by moral account, as
man naturally descended of Adam the head, is obliged to the Law of God. And
this does plainly appear by the words of the fourth Precept of the Decalogue
set down to Moses, where it is said: Remember the Sabbath day be kept holy, six
days shall thou labor, and do all thy work; but the seventh day (to wit,
whereby Adam was obliged to the Law of righteousness, by the first covenant in
his state of perfection) is now the promised rest; or Sabbath of the Lord thy
God, to wit, the promised blessed seed, who has promised to rest upon the
Sabbath day in his sacred grave for the redemption of man from the curse of the
Law for the sin of Adam, and to rise from the grave to break the Serpents head,
for the betraying of man to fall under the eternal curse of the Law. The
reason is given: For, in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the sea, and
all that therein is; Wherefore the Lord blessed the seventh day, and hallowed
it: that is to say, as the Lord by his rest from the works of the creation did
bless the first seventh day of his Law for man, and did sanctify the first
seventh day for his worship by man: So from his promised rest from the works of
the redemption of man, the Lord has blessed the Sabbath day for man, and has
sanctified the Sabbath day for his worship by man.

This day therefore, wherein this gracious promise was made, was the seventh
day by moral account from the creation, sanctified by the word of promise,
then by the name of the Sabbath of the Lord to Adam. This gracious promise made
to Adam, being to be performed in time, was formally prophetical, and
consequently the Sabbath day wherein this promise was made, was likewise
formally prophetical: For, by the literal light of the prophetical Sabbath
day, Adams faith was led to rest upon the promised rest of the blessed seed.
And this is the reason that our Savior said, Mat. 11.13, The Law and Prophets
did prophecy to John. For the Law did then prophecy by the Sabbath, which did
necessarily imply the whole Law of righteousness of faith, in the promise of
the blessed seed; where it is to be marked, that the Lord says, that the Law
did prophecy to John, lest the Jews might conceive that the first seventh day
of the Law obliging Adam did prophecy, which did no ways prophecy. Now,
because this promised rest of the blessed seed upon the Sabbath was
prophetical and mystical; therefore for the strenghthening of Adams faith,
and the faith of the Fathers in the promise, the formal worship in the
prophetical Sabbath was commanded to be celebrate by the ceremonial Altar,
prefigurating the cursed Altar of the cross; and by the ceremonial sacrifice
of the altar, prefiguraring the cursed death of the blessed seed; that as Adam
faith, by the ceremonial light of the Altar, and sacrifice, might be led to
the cursed death of the blessed seed: So by the literal light of the
Sabaticall seventh day of the Law of righteousness of faith, Adams faith might
be morally led to the grave of the blessed seed; and from the grave to his
resurrection from the grave, for the breaking of the head of the Serpent: In
which commanded formal worship by the ceremonial altar and sacrifice, all the
rites and ceremonies of the ceremonial Law are implied and immediately
referred to the Altar and sacrifice; as the altar and sacrifice is immediately
referred to the prophetical Sabbath, as it is the great command of the Law,
implying the whole command of the Law of righteousness of faith in the promise
of the blessed seed. Thus having declared the word of the second seventh days
promised rest of the Law of righteousness of faith, upon the immediate command
whereof the second covenant is established; I come next to the declaration of
the second covenant.

God therefore, in this gracious word of promise does first bind and obliged
himself by covenant to Adam the redeemed head of man, and in Adam to all men
naturally to descend of Adam, that the word should be made man of the seed of
the woman, by whom the old Serpents head should be broke, by whose merit (by
his promised rest) Adam should have eternal life. And because this promise of
eternal life was to be enjoyed by the blessing of the seventh days Sabaticall
promised rest; God therefore does mutually bind and oblige Adam the redeemed
head of man, to believe the promise, and by his faithful moral and
ceremonial works of worship, to worship God upon the Sabbath as God did reveal
himself to Adam by his promised Sabaticall seventh days rest; God of the Law
of righteousness of faith, in three distinct persons of the Trinity, Creator
and Redemeer of man. And because Adam (by the redeemed word of the Law and life
of righteousness of faith in his heart) was morally enabled to that formal
commanded moral and ceremonial worship: God does likewise bind Adam the
redeemed head of man, upon the final contempt of his commanded worship to
eternal death; as if the word of the covenant were thus: Whosoever shall
believe in the promise of the blessed seed, shall be saved from the second
death, as by my promised rest from the redemption of man, he is saved from the
first death, whosover shall not believe, shall be condemned. Now, as the
formal commanded worship of the seventh day of the Law of righteousness of
faith is obliged by the second covenant: Adam is commanded to worship God upon
the seventh day of the prophetic^ll Sabbath, by his prophetical and
ceremonial worship of God, as God has revealed himself by his Sabaticall
rest, both upon the eternal blessing of the Sabaticall seventh days promised
rest, and upon the eternal cu^se of the Law of righteousness of faith; in
which commanded formal worship, as the seventh day of the prophetical Sabbath
was then the great command of the Law of faith, all the moral and ceremonial
works of faith are necessarily commanded. To the continuance of man, in which
works of faith (till Gods prefixed time of spiritual calling) the grace of
spiritual faith is promised by covenant: for, Mat. 13.13. Whosoever shall
endure to the end shall be saved, which is the saving of man from the second
death by spiritual faith.

By faith in this promised rest of the blessed seed of Adam, and the Fathers
before Moses, and the Fathers after Moses, till the promise was fulfilled, were
saved: For, the formal moral prophetical and ceremonial obligement of the
Law of righteousness of faith was really and formally one and the same, till
the promise was fulfilled: For, as the moral and ceremonial Law given to
Moses in distinct precepts was necessarily implied in the command of the word
of the seventh day of the prophetical Sabbath to Adam, and to the Fathers
before Moses: So the distinct precepts of the ceremonial Law given to Moses,
were as necessarily implied in the ceremonial command of the altar and
sacrifice, for all the rites and ceremonies of the ceremonial Law, and
immediately referred to the altar and sacrifice, as the command of the
ceremonial altar and sacrifice is immediately referred to the formal
commanded worship of the Sabbath. Hence I infer this necessary conclusion;
Adam and the Fathers before Moses, having the seventh day of the prophetical
Sabbath, implying the command of the whole Law of righteousness of faith in
the promise of the blessed seed, and the ceremonial altar and sacrifice,
implying all the ceremonial Law: Adam and the Fathers before Moses, had the
moral and ceremonial Law, and were thereby as really obliged, as after the
moral and ceremonial Law was given to Moses. And therefore it is said, 1 Cor.
10.3, 4. that the Fathers did eat of the same spiritual bread, and drink of
the same spiritual Rock with us; for that Rock was the blessed seed, to Adam
and the Fathers, which is now to us, the Lord Jesus Christ; and therefore it is
likewise said, that the Evangel was preached to them, to wit, mystically and
prophetically, as it is preached to us clearly and Evangelically. To conclude
the second covenant, called the old covenant, I infer the second formal
obligement of the Law of God by the old covenant.

As, the first word of promise to Adam the created head of man in his state of
perfection, was eternal life, by the rest of the Law of righteousness upon
the first seventh day from the works of the creation: So the second word of
promise to Adam the redeemed head of man, is eternal life by the promised rest
of God of the Law of righteousness of faith, the Redeemer of man, by his
promised rest upon the Sabbath from the works of the redemption.

First therefore, this promised rest of the blessed seed upon the Sabbath,
being formally prophetical; consequently the formal worship of the seventh
day of the prophetical Sabbath, obliged by the second covenant was formally
prophetical; and therefore typically and ceremonially commanded, upon the
performing of which commanded worship by Adam the second covenant is
established.

Secondly, the prophetical Sabbaticall seventh day of the Law, as it is the
great command of the Law, implying the command of the whole Law of
righteousness of faith, being prophetically and ceremonially obliged, the
whole Law of righteousness of faith is prophetically and ceremonially obliged,
commanding Adam first and immediately to the formal prophetical ceremonial
worship of the prophetical Sabbath of the Lord, both upon the eternal
blessing of the Sabbaticall seventh days promised rest to his faithful
worship, and upon the curse of eternal death to his final contempt of that
commanded formal worship, necessarily implying the contempt of the whole Law:
For, as in the commanded worship of the seventh day of the Law, (as it is the
great command of the Law, necessarily implying the lesser command) all the
powers of man, proceeding from his faithful love to God, are necessarily
commanded: So by the final contempt of the formal commanded worship of the
seventh day of the Law, the whole Law is necessarily transgressed. Hence I
infer these two Theological demonstrative conclusions.

First, as necessarily as by the second covenant, the faith of man was obliged
to the faithful prophetical and ceremonial worship of the prophetical
Sabbath; upon the promise of eternal life to his faith, and eternal death to
his infidelity: So the works of faith, whereby the prophetical and ceremonial
worship of the Sabbath was to be performed, were as necessarily commanded by
the command of the seventh day of the prophetical Sabbath, both upon the
eternal blessing of the Sabbaticall seventh days rest of the Law of
righteousness of faith, and upon the eternal curse of the Law of faith.

Secondly, though the prophetical and ceremonial works of faith were
necessarily commanded by the Law; yet the blessing of the eternal promised
rest of the blessed seed, was due by the Law immediately to faith, and not to
the works of faith: The reason is, because it was by the Spirit of faith, that
the merit of the promised rest of the blessed se^d was to be apprehended, and
not by the greatest works of faith, which has no spirit at all. And therefore
the eternal blessing of the seventh days promised rest of the blessed seed,
by the Law of righteousness of faith, was not due by the Law to the greatest
moral or ceremonial works of Adam; but immediately to the merit of man, the
promised blessed seed, by the immediate power of whole redeemed word of the Law
and life of righteousness of faith, written in the heart of Adam: Adam was
morally enabled to believe the promise, and to produce the moral and
ceremonial works of faith, as by the spiritual grace of faith in Gods
prefixed time, Adam was spiritually enabled with the spiritual grace of faith
by the hands of spiritual faith, to apprehend the merit of the blessed seed by
his promised rest; by which spiritual union, Adams faith, and the merit of the
blessed seed were really and indivisibly one, whereby Adam was saved from the
second death, which is the curse of the Law of faith. And so much for the
literal and mystical sense of the second covenant comprehended in the second
branch of the censure, as the censure does concern the woman and her seed. We
proceed therefore next to the censure of God upon the two last delinquents, for
the transgression of the Law of righteousness obliged by the first covenant.

CHAP. XXIV.
The literal sense of the censure in particular upon the woman.
FOr the better conceiving of the censure of God upon the last two delinquents,
for the transgression of the Law of righteousness, by the first covenant, it
is necessarily to be understood, that Adam is said to be the head of man, after
a twofold manner: First, as under the name of Adam, man male and female is
comprehended: For, so Adam is the created head of all men, naturally descended,
and to descend of Adam; and in this sense, as all men are said to have sinned
in Adam, the created head of all men, Romans 5.18. so all men are said to be
redeemed in Adam, the redeemed head of man, from the curse of eternal death
and darkness, by the promised rest of the blessed seed, from the redemption of
man from the curse of the Law, and by the eternal decree of God shut up in
temporal spiritual darkness, called unbelief, and original sin, and
temporal natural death, which followed that sin, which was then (according to
the eternal decree of God) pronounced upon Adam the redeemed head of man, by
the censure of God, in which censure of natural death, all the punishments
inflicted by the censure are comprehended. And therefore in the infinite mercy
of God, all the punishments by this censure pronounced upon man male, and
female, are all temporal in this life, to the end, that all men and women
might be put in continual remembrance of the never to be forgotten love and
mercy of God in his Son Christ Jesus, for the redemption of man, from the
fearful eternal curse of the Law for the sin of Adam, which nothing could
redeem, but the only cursed death of Christ Jesus, the eternal Son of God,
made flesh of the seed of the woman, who therefore as he is man, was made a
curse for man, Gal. 3.13. Secondly, Adam is said to be the head of man, as he
is man male, the head of the woman by matrimonial union; in which sense, Adam
is said to be the head of his wife, the woman; and the woman, the wife, is said
to be the body of her husband.

To proceed therefore with the censure, which is first pronounced upon the
woman; because she was first in the transgression (to wit) before Adam man
male. The censure upon the woman is set down by Moses in these words: Genesis
3.16. I will greatly multiply thy sorrows, and thy conceptions: In sorrow shall
thou bring forth children, and thy desire shall be to thy husband, and he shall
rule over thee. The censure has a literal and mystical sense: First, of the
literal sense of the censure, which is pronounced upon the woman in
particular, as she is the wife and body of her husband. The censure does divide
it self into two branches: to wit, sorrow in conception and childbirth; and
subjection to the husband. First, of the literal sense of the two branches;
and next of the mystical sense: As this sorrow in the infinite mercy of God
(at that time) was not without greatest comfort to women: so it is with no
less comfort to women at this present: For, as (...) in the bringing forth of
children, the promise of the blessed seed, was confirmed to be born of the seed
of the woman; by whose cursed death, the curse of the Law was removed from man;
the benefit whereof our first parents did then actually enjoy, though the
blessed child was afterward to be born, according to the eternal decree of
God. So there is great comfort at this time, (under the Law of Grace) in the
bringing forth of children by women: For the child is brought forth actually
freed from the curse of the Law for the sin of Adam, by the first covenant, and
born a hopeful member of the Lord Jesus Christ. And though it does please God
(many times) to take away the child by temporal death; yet it is no small
comfort to the sorrowful parents, that the child is a glorious Saint in
heaven.

It is said here, I will greatly multiply, (or increase) thy sorrows, because
of the pronounced enmity between the old Serpent Satan and his seed, and the
woman and her seed; of whose continual afflictions the woman is never free,
while she is in this life. And now her sorrows are increased by her conception
and bringing forth of children, which are inflicted upon women, to the end that
the woman in her greatest extremity (by her sorrow in conception and
childbirth) should be put in mind of the eternal sorrows and pains of eternal
death (by the first covenant) from which she was redeemed by the blessed child
then to be born; and now born of the seed of the woman, upon whose merit, Eves
faith may safely rest, as upon a rock, from any fear of the second death, by
the new covenant; In which sense, only the words of the Apostle are to be
conceived, to wit, 1 Timothy 2.15. that women are saved through the bearing of
children; for by the extremity of their pains, they are put to it, to fly to
Christ the only Author of faith, by whose only merit the woman is only saved.
And this likewise is the reason that it is said, John 16.21. that the sorrows
and pains of childbirth are forgotten, because man is brought into the world:
For, it is a great joy and comfort to all men and women, that man is brought
into the world, freed from the eternal curse of the Law for the sin of Adam,
and a hopeful member of the Church of God, and of the Lord Jesus Christ. And
though sorrow and pain in conception and childbirth, be a great weakening to
women, leading to natural death; and though childbirth many times be
accompanied with the loss of natural life to the mother; yet it is with great
advantage to the woman, the child of God, while by the determining of all the
sorrows, crosses and afflictions of this life, she enters to the eternal joys
in the life to come.

It is true, that it does please God to give such strength of nature to diverse
thanklesse women, whereby they are more able to bear this sorrow and pains in
conc^^tion and childbirth, then other women; but for the most part, this sorrow
and pain in childbirth, is fearful, sudden, and dangerous; in so much that
while God does threaten the disobedience of man by his unexpected judgments,
they are expressed by the sudden dangerous unexpected sorrows and pains of
women in childbirth. And though it may be conceived that some women barren and
childlesse are happy in this case, as not being subject to such temporal
danger and hazard; yet, I say, that the fruitfulness of women, does far exceed
the fear of such hazard and danger, for children are the greatest blessings of
God, and a great comfort, both to poor and rich. And though (for the most part)
children too too often prove crosses and afflictions to the parents, stirred up
by the temptations of Satan, and of his wicked instruments, which is a sore
affliction to the parents, yet it is the hand of God in permitting of Satan to
afflict their parents by their children, to put them in mind of their own
disobedience to G^d (their chief Parent) or to their own natural parents, or
for their trial in this life, whereby they are humbled under the hand of God:
For, by afflictions we must enter the Kingdom of heaven. Against this here
delivered, it may be objected: Though man had stood in his state of perfection;
yet woman must have had such sorrow and pains in conception and childbirth; for
they are the inseparable companions of both. I answer, Grief, sorrow and pain,
and sensitive perfection, do mutually plant and subplant one another; for
passion by sorrow and grief, is the immediate cause of most sensitive diseases.
Sorrow and grief therefore, is far from that state of sensitive perfection,
wherein man was created, which was eternal. In which state, if man had
continued, the woman must have had eternal joy and comfort upon earth, without
all sensitive sorrow, pain, or grief, either in conception or childbirth. But,
in the mean time, let it not trouble any married woman, barren of children,
because the Apostle says, that women are saved through childbearing; for the
Apostles meaning is, that the extremity of labor and fear in childbirth, is a
means to move the woman to fly to the Lord by faith, and to rely upon the
Lords merit, to save her from the second death; and, if it be his will, from
the present danger of childbirth; and therefore the Apostle says, 1 Timothy 2.15.
that the woman is saved through bearing of children, if she continue in faith,
love, holiness and modesty, which are the true works of faith, by which faith
she is only saved. Far be it threfore from any woman to conceive that
childbearing is the cause of any woman's safety from eternal death, which is
only and immediately by faith, in the only merit of the Lord of life. Let never
therefore the barrenness of childbearing discourage woman, if she continue in
the fruitful works of faith; for by faith she is only saved. And though she be
denied the bearing of children in this miserable age, while so many of the
children of faithful parents are led away with the crying sins of the times,
and miscarry to the great sorrow and grief of their parents; yet let her not
take her barrenness of children for any reproach: For, though barrenness in
the time of Abraham's posterity, Genesis 30.23. was counted a reproach amongst
women, before our Savior was born: Luke 1.25. Yet the blessed child being
born, all reproach of barrenness of children is taken away from women.

CHAP. XXV.
The second branch of the censure literally pronounced upon the woman, as she
is the body of man her husband.
THe second branch of the censure literally pronounced upon the woman as she is
the body of her husband; is subjection to the husband. Hence I necessarily
infer, that in the state of perfection, before the fall, there was no other
subjection of the wife to the husband, but the endeavoring of the wife in all
mutual love to be led and governed by the husband her head.

This branch of the censure therefore, does stand with as great opposition to
the state of perfection as the former; which does manifestly appear by the
twofold inseparable union of man and wife in the state of perfection, which was
both natural and spiritual; the strictest union that can be conceived by man.
The natural union is set down by Moses in these words, They shall be both one
flesh: For the woman was made of the rib of the man, which is the most solid
and condensate sensitive part of man, as he is sensitive; for the matter of the
bone is of the blood of man: And therefore when Eve was first brought before
Adam, Adam (out of the perfection of his natural understand) affirmed that Eve
was flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone. And therefore called her Man's,
according to the original, affirming her to be man essentially, adding only
the distinction of the sex of man. In which sense, the Apostle does call the
woman man's own flesh. So that if man love his own flesh naturally, he must love
his wife as himself, Ephesians. 5.29. The second union of man and wife in the state
of perfection, was spiritual; for both were equally created in the lively
Image of God, in the indivisible union of mutual spiritual love to
righteousness, far surmounting the most strict union under the heavens.

By this twofold inseparable union of man and wife in the state of perfection,
by matrimonial union; the union was inseparable: And therefore our Savior
speaking of Moses bill of divorcement, Mat. 19.8. told the Jews that Moses did
permit that bill for the hardness of their heart; and that it was not so from
the beginning: For, they were created male and female, whereby the one did
strive to overcome the other by the mutual offices of love. And this was the
greatest subjection of the wise to the husband in the state of perfection,
which was in this twofold union of mutual love. And therefore it is said, Let
no man separate whom God has joined together, to wit, in marriage. This
inseparable union of man and wife in the state of perfection, as it was without
any essential or spiritual real difference; so it was equal, without all
imperious authority, either of natural or spiritual subjection; neither was
it possible to be otherwise: for the natural and spiritual love of both,
being inseparably and indivisibly one, as the love of the head to the body, and
of the body to the head: Man the head could no otherwise command his body, his
wife, but by a sweet pleasing regiment of love, directing his body, as head, in
all natural and spiritual love. And therefore woman was made neither of the
lowest or highest part of man, but of the rib, equal in situation with the
region of the heart. Though this censure therefore was pronounced upon woman,
as she was the body of her husband, for being the instrument to induce her
head, Adam, to the transgression of the Law of God (being first betrayed her
self, by Satan's false deceiving bewitching light;) yet let man love and honor
woman, who was the happy instrument of the greatest blessing that ever came to
man or Angel. And therefore now, in this state of Grace, man is by a more
strict union, obliged to love his wife, then if man had stood in the state of
his created perfection: For, by his first estate, man had been but an earthly
creature; for his perfection must have been eternally upon earth, while as the
woman is the happy instrument that man is advanced, to be crowned with an
incorruptible crown of glory in the kingdom of heaven eternally. And this is
the reason, that the husband, even now in the state of Grace, is to love his
wife as himself; and to express his love, Ephesians. 5.33. by his care in
providing and cherishing his wife, even as he does his own natural life; and
that she may be as dear to him as his natural life. And consequently, to bear
much with the weakness of her sex; for otherwise man must manifest his base
unthankfulness, both to God and to woman, whom God has made the happy
instrument of so great a blessing, never to be forgotten by man. Let no man
therefore think, that the woman is given him to wife to be made his slave; but
to love her as his own natural body: As the wife his body is to love her head,
as a mutual help and comfort to her head, (to her full power) with all
submissive reverence in love to be directed by her head. This subjection
therefore is still in the sweet regiment of love without all usurping imperious
authority or rigorous command.

Here it may be objected: Genesis 3.37. Adam is punished for giving way to his
wifes persuasion, and consequently, Adam had an imperious authority over his
wife, in the state of perfection.

I answer: This Text does necessarily infer an equal and mutual love,
between Adam and Eve, and no ways any imperious authority of command; neither
does God punish Adam simply for being persuaded by his wifes love, but because
Adam did prefer the love of his wife to the command of his gracious God and
Creator, to whose infinite love, both Adam and Eve were so infinitely obliged.
In which respect all the love and command of man and woman, whosoever must be
misregarded: And so much for the two branches of the censure pronounced against
the woman as she is the body of her husband her head. Next therefore of the
mystical sense of the two branches of the censure.

CHAP. XXVI.
The mystical sense of the two branches of the censure pronounced upon the
woman, as she is the body of man her husband.
BY the mystical sense of this censure (literally pronounced upon the woman)
as she is the body of her husband: First, by the woman; the Church of God is
mystically to be understood: As by the husband, the Lord Jesus Christ, the head
and husband of the Church. Secondly, by the concepon and the bringing forth of
children by the woman, the conception and bringing forth of the moral and
spiritual children of the Church (by the Ministers of the Word) is mystically
signified: For, by the preaching of the Word, and by the Ministers exemplary
instruction, 2 Timothy 4.2. (in season and out of season) the children of the
Church, are, first, brought forth (by moral faith) to know and practice the
works of faith, that moral obedience may be given to the Word. Thirdly, by the
sorrow and grief of the woman in conceiving and bringing forth of children; the
sorrow, grief, and pains of the Minister, is mystically signified, by his hard
conceiving and bringing forth of the rebellious natural man, nuzled up in the
lusts and pleasures of the flesh, by the continued temptation of Satan and his
seed, whereby the natural man is led to all wickedness of life, to the sorrow
and grief of the whole Church: As by the joy of the woman, that man is brought
forth in the world; the joy of the Church at the conversion of the penitent
sinner, is mystically signified. Fourthly, by the barrenness of the woman in
bringing forth of children; not only the Ministers barrenness, in the neglect
of his weighty calling, but also, the barrenness of faith, in the particular
members of the Church, is mystically signified. Fifthly, by the second
conception of the woman, while by the intellectual information of the Infant
in the womb (by the immediate act of God) man (as he is man) is conceived and
brought forth man by the woman; the spiritual conception of the regenerate man
by the Church, whereby he is brought forth a spiritual man, is mystically
signified: For, in the act of regeneration, the natural man having continued
in his moral obedience to the preaching of the Word, till Gods prefixed time
of spiritual calling, the natural man's spiritual darkness is enlightened by
the immediate spiritual light of the Lords holy Spirit, by spiritual faith,
whereby he is actually regenerate, and so conceived and brought by the Church,
a mystical indivisible member of his mystical head, to the great joy and
comfort of the Church. Sixthly, by the strict natural and spiritual union
between man and wife, the strict union of the Lord Jesus Christ to his body
(the Church) is mystically signified, which is both natural and spiritual:
For, as the Church (his body) is flesh of his natural flesh, and bone of his
bones, (as he is man, of the seed of the woman) so the Church, (morally and
spiritually brought forth) is of the same spirit with the head, whereby the
head and body are spiritually, mystically, and indivisibly united, arising of
the essential spiritual union and unction of the divine and humane nature of
the Word, in the womb of the blessed Virgin. Seventhly, by the subjected desire
of the woman to her husband; (which is in all mutual love) the subjected love
and desire of the Church, to the Lord Jesus Christ (the head) is mystically
signified; who out of his infinite love to his Church, by fulfilling of his
promise to man, as he did subject the desire of his own natural life, to the
cursed death of the cross, to manifest himself truth to man: So his mystical
members are to subject all their love and desire, to his will, and to prefer
the love of his truth to the love of their own natural lives; for he is
unworthy of the crown of life, (so dearly purchased by the merit of his truth)
who for any worldly respect whatsoever, does unthankfully deny his truth before
men in this life. And so much for the literal and mystical sense of the
censure pronounced upon the woman, as she is the body and wife of her husband.
Next of the censure of God pronounced upon man, as he is the husband and head
of his body the woman.

CHAP XXVII.
The literal and mystical sense of the censure of God, pronounced upon Adam,
as he is the head of the woman, his body and wife by matrimonial union.
THe last censure is pronounced by God, upon Adam (the last delinquent) as he
is the head and husband of the woman, his body and wife by matrimonial union:
For, in this sense only Adam is the redeemed head of all men naturally to
descend of Adam. The censure is set down (by Moses) in these words, Genesis 3.17,
18, 19 Because thou have harkened unto the voice of thy wife, and have eaten of
the tree of which I commanded thee, saying, Thou shall not eat of it. Cursed is
the earth for thy sake: in sorrow shall thou eat of it all the days of thy
life: Thorns also, and Thistles shall it bring forth to thee; and thou shall
eat of the herb of the field: In the sweat of thy face thou shall eat bread;
till thou return unto the earth: For out of it wast thou taken; for dust thou
art, and unto dust shall thou return. First, the cause of the censure is set
down; and next the censure is pronounced. The sense and meaning of the cause of
the censure, is this; because thou have obeyed the voice of thy wife, and have
most unthankfully preferred her love to thy love, to me thy gracious God and
Creator, and have contemned my command, (which is the command of me, God of the
Law of Righteousness) and have eaten of the fruit whereof I commanded thee
that thou should not eat: Next the censure is pronounced, which has a
literal and mystical sense. The literal sense of the censure is set down
from the eighteenth verse, to the end of the chapter, and has four branches:
The first is, cursed is the earth for thy sake: By the second branch of the
censure, natural death is inflicted upon Adam, as he is the head of the woman
his body, and redeemed head of man. Thirdly, Adam is excluded Paradise, to till
the ground: Fourthly, the Cherubims, and the flaming sword, are placed at the
East of the Garden of Eden, to keep man from entering to the tree of Life,
growing in the earthly Paradise. First, therefore of this curse inflicted upon
the earth.

This curse inflicted upon the earth, is no ways to be taken for the curse of
the Law: For, first the earth did no ways come within the compass of the
transgression of the Law: Secondly, the curse of the Law (which is eternal,)
is clearly taken away from man, and from the creatures created for man, by the
promised cursed death of the blessed seed, except the only curse which was
inflicted upon the sensitive Serpent. And therefore this curse of the earth is
only a privation of the former fertilnes, and a positive barrennes, inflicted
upon the earth, instead of that fertilnesse, that by that means of that
positive barrenness, the earth might bring forth Thistles and Thorns; for Adam
was then (by the censure) to eat bread of the herbs of the field, that is, of
the corn and grain which was to grow upon the barren earth; and therefore,
Adam, (by his toil, labor, and pains) was to bring some fertilnesse upon the
earth, or Adam must starve; by means of which toil, pains, and labor, Adam
must eat his bread in sorrow and care, in the sweat of his face, by which
forced sweat, surfets and colds must arise, weakening the sensitive spirits and
powers of man, inducing temporal natural death in the end. But though this
barrenness was inflicted upon the earth for man; yet in the great mercy of God
by the power of the redeemed word in the heart of man: First, man is naturally
enabled by his labor, pains and industry, to procure some fertilnesse upon the
earth: And therefore it is said, 2 These. 3.10. that he that does not work and
labor, is not to eat: Secondly, by the power of the redeemed word of the Law
and life of righteousness of faith written in the heart of man, man is morally
enabled to pray for the blessing of God upon his labor and pains, who has
promised to hear his prayers; by whose only blessing, the curse of barrenness
is taken from the earth: Thirdly, for the defending of man from the danger of
his heats and colds, God in his mercy, did cloth our first parents with skins.
By the second branch of the censure inflicted upon Adam (the redeemed head of
man;) Adam, and all men redeemed in Adam, shall return to dust, which is to be
understood of temporal natural death, by the dissolution of the intellectual
and sensitive nature of man: And therefore their sin is set down, Because thou
wast taken out of the dust of the earth, to dust thou shall return: But Adams
humane spirit, with the word of the Law, and life of Righteousness,
spiritually and indivisibly written therein, was neither taken out of the dust
of the earth, neither can it return to dust. For, first, humane spirit is
necessarily coeviternall with the Word and Law of God: Secondly, humane spirit
is of the same real specificall sphere with the humane Spirit of the Lord
Jesus Christ, as has been formerly demonstrate, which was never taken from the
earth, or can return to the dust of the earth. Temporal natural death
therefore, by this branch of the censure, is i^flicted upon Adam, as he is the
head of his body, the woman, who is flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone;
and therefore natural temporal death being inflicted upon the head, is
necessarily likewise inflicted upon the body, the woman; and consequently and
necessarily upon all men and women naturally to descend of both: For, in this
sense only, Adam is the redeemed head of all redeemed men, naturally to descend
of Adam. By the third branch of the censure, Adam, the redeemed head of man,
(and consequently the woman) are excluded out of the earthly Paradise; the
reason is set down: Lest they should eat of the tree of Life, as they did
formerly at their pleasure: For, there was a singular virtue in the tree of
Life, to maintain the sensitive natu e of man eternally; by the eternal
preservation whereof, the union of the intellectual and sensitive nature of
man was eternal; for by this eternal union, man was to have continued
eternally upon earth, in the state and felicity wherein he was created.

It was therefore the infinite mercy of God to man, to cast man out of the
earthly Paradise: For, if man had had that freedom to eat of the tree of Life,
as he had formerly, man must have lived in sorrow and misery, subject to the
continual temptation and afflictions of Satan, and of his wicked seed
eternally in this life; while as then by faith in the promised blessed seed,
Adam, (the redeemed head of man) after this life, should live in the heavenly
Paradise eternally in all joy and happiness.

For this cause (by the fourth branch of this censure) the Cherubims and the
flaming sword, were placed at the East of the Garden, to keep the way of the
tree of Life, that man should not come to the tree of Life, growing in the
earthly Paradise, by the way which he run before. Next therefore of the
mystical sense of the censure. The main mystical point of this censure
inflicted upon Adam (as he is the head of the woman, and the redeemed head of
man) is to let our first parents understand, that the word (the promised
blessed seed to be made flesh of the seed of the woman) is the second person of
the blessed Trinity.

First, therefore by the curse inflicted upon the earth, the curse of the Law
for the sin of Adam, to which Adam, and all men naturally to descend of Adam,
the created head of man, were condemned, is mystically signified. To the end
that all men might then, and now know, that all men were redeemed from that
curse of eternal death and darkness; and that all men are concluded in
temporal spiritual darkness, called unbelief, and original sin; and that
natural death, by the censure of God, did follow that sin. And therefore it is
said, Romans 5.12.14. As by one man sin entered in the world, and death by sin, so
death went overall men, from Adam to Moses.

Secondly, by the sorrow, labor and pains, and sweat of the face which arises
to man, by reason of the curse of barrenness inflicted upon the earth, whereby
it does produce Thistles and Thorns, which are to be weeded out by the care
and labor of man, is mystically signified: the sorrows, labor, sweaty pains,
and prickly thorny afflictions, which our Savior, the promised blessed seed,
was to sustain by the curse of the Law for man, to put man in continual
remembrance of the never to be forgotten love of God to man, in his Son Christ
Jesus.

Thirdly, by the skins, wherewith the Lord clothed and covered our first
parents nakedness, the righteousness (which is the skin of the promised Lamb
of God, to be sacrificed for the sins of man) was mystically signified, to the
end that our first parents might understand, that it was by their only faith
(in the merit of the righteousness of the blessed seed, the Word, to be made
flesh of the seed of the woman;) that all their actual sins and
unrighteousness was covered.

Fourthly, while as the Lord says, Behold, man is become like one of us, to
know good and evil, (whereby our first parents did see the state which their
desire to know good and evil had brought to:) the Lord would have our first
parents understand that the promised Redeemer of man (the blessed seed) was one
of us, that is, one of the distinct persons of the glorious Trinity.

Fifthly, by the excluding of our first parents from the tree of Life growing
in the earthly paradise, is mystically signified, that our first parents were
admitted to the tree of Life, growing in the Paradise of God, which is the
promised blessed seed.

Sixthly, by the Cherubims and flaming sword, the moral power and literal
light of the sword of the Word, is mystically signified, by which only light,
^ll redeemed men are morally enlightened, to enter the way of the tree of Life,
planted in the heavenly Paradise which is the promised blessed seed.

By this flaming light of the sword of the Word: First, the flaming light of
the redeemed Word of the Law of Righteousness of faith, written in the heart
of man is signified, which is the flaming Light of conscience. Secondly, by
this flaming Light of the sword, the flaming literal light of the Word of the
seventh days rest, of the Law of righteousness of faith is signified, which
is of one real flaming light with the light of the word of the Law and life of
Righteousness of faith, writtten in the heart of man; of the real unity of
which flaming light, moral faith does arise; that by the moral hands of
faith, the redeemed man may lay moral hold on the word of promise, shining
with the same real flaming light, which was then the tree of Life, growing in
the Paradise of God, to wit, the promised blessed seed, who is now our tree of
life, by his fulfilled promise. And though the Cherubims and the flaming sword
were placed at the East of the Garden of Eden, pointing, as it were, to the
Land of Canaan, (for the promise of the blessed seed was to be made afterward
to Abraham, and to his seed, in a more particular manner then it was made to
Adam; which promise was to be performed; before the promise first made to Adam
could be fulfilled;) yet the flaming sword turned every way; that as by the
power of the sword, all men were barred from entering to the tree of Life,
growing in the earthly Paradise: So that by the flaming light of the sword of
the Word, all redeemed men might be morally enlightened to enter the way to the
tree of Life, which is planted in the Paradise of God, which is the promised
blessed seed. Here (by the way) the question may be moved, whether this
barrenness, whereby the earth was cursed for man, does still remain.

CHAP. XXVIII.
The first and second rain.
TO the Question moved in the former Chapter, I answer: Though the earth was
cursed, by a positive barrenness for man; that by his toil, labor, and pains,
he may eat the bread of sorrow, and the bread of the thorny cares and
afflictions of this life, inducing natural death in the end, to put him in
continual remembrance of the continued sorrow and afflictions, which the
eternal Son of God, the Word (to be made flesh of the seed of the woman) by
making himself a curse for man, did sustain in this life, enduring the cursed
death of the cross in end; yet the curse of barrenness is removed, and the
fruitfulness of the earth is restored by the moral and spiritual blessing of
the word of the seventh days rest, of the Law of righteousness of faith;
which moral and spiritual blessing of the Word, Deuteronomy. 11.14. is called the
first and second rain in the Scripture; But yet the earth is not restored to
the measure of the former fruitfulness: The reason is, that the redeemed man,
by his continual labor and care, might be put in mind of his thankful
obedience to his gracious Redeemer, by his exercise in the commanded works of
faith, that his faith may be watered with the dew of the moral and spiritual
blessing of the Word.

This blessing of the word of the seventh days rest of the Law of
Righteousness of faith, then to the Fathers in the promise of the blessed
seed; and now to us in the fulfilled promise is twofold: The first is the
natural blessing of the word to the natural life of man, as he is man: The
second is the moral and spiritual blessing of the word to the moral and
spiritual life of man, by the moral and spiritual grace of faith: For,
without the blessing of the nature of the redeemed man, his moral and
spiritual life must perish in this life. This natural blessing of the word,
is freely extended to all redeemed men, without all respect to the merit of
their obedience, or disobedience to the command of the Word. And therefore it
is said, Mat. 5.45. That his Sun does shine, and his rain does fall upon the
just and unjust. And this is, to the end, that as God does freely confer the
blessings of the earth without respect, to some in great plenty, which he has
denied to many of his redeemed poor members. So the plentiful redeemed man, may
out of his plenty, relieve the wants of his redeemed poor brethren, without all
respect to their merit; who are the Lords redeemed members, whereby the
plentiful man does testify his thankfulness to his gracious Redeemer, by the
works of mercy and charity, which are the commanded works of faith: For, what
is freely given to the Lords poor redeemed members, (who are disabled of all
means to supply their necessities,) it is freely given to the Lord himself, as
may appear by his own words, Mat. 25.40. When I was hungry, ye fed me not; when
I was thirsty, ye gave me no drink; when I was naked, ye clothed me not: For
want of means for the preservation of the life, is a sore temptation; which
many times is prevented by the charity of the plentiful: For, by such means,
the poor indigent wretched man is diverted from attempting unlawful courses to
supply his necessity: Though I must confess, that plenty (without the special
dew of the blessing of the Word) be the greater and more dangerous temptation
of the two. The second blessing of the word of the seventh days rest of the
Law of Righteousness of faith, is the moral and spiritual blessing of the
word, necessarily implying the natural blessing of the word. And this moral
and spiritual blessing is due by the Law of faith, to the moral and
spiritual faithful worship of the seventh day of the Law of faith: For, by
the moral faithful worship of the seventh day by the natural man, and by the
spiritual faithful worship of the regenerate man by faith in the Lords merit;
the whole Law of faith is morally and spiritually fulfilled in the seventh day
of the Law. And therefore the moral and spiritual blessing of the word of the
seventh days rest, does rest upon the natural and regenerate man, whereby the
natural man is enabled to bring forth the moral works of faith, and to
continue in his moral obedience, till the time of Gods spiritual calling: and
the regenerate man is enabled to persevere and continue in his spiritual works
of faith by his spiritual obedience to the spiritual command of the Law of
faith. And this is the first and second rain, which is the dew of the Lords
influence by the blessing of his Word; to the grace of the moral and
spiritual faith of man. Thus have we briefly set down the literal and
mystical sense of the censure, pronounced upon our first parents for the
transgression of the Law of Righteousness; and the second covenant established
upon the immediate command of the word of the seventh days promised rest of
the Law of Righteousness of faith then employed in the prophetical Sabbath,
whereby Adam the redeemed head of man, and all men naturally to descend of
Adam, were formally, prophetically, and ceremonially obliged to the command of
the Law of Righteousness of faith, in the promised rest of the blessed seed,
which is the last part of this second Book; yet, before we proceed, a question
is to be resolved, which is this: How long did this formal prophetical
ceremonial obligement of the Law of Righteousness of faith continue, and how
long were all redeemed men obliged by the prophetical ceremonial Law of God?

CHAP. XXIX.
The continuation of the formal prophetical ceremonial obligement of the Law
of righteousness of faith, in the promise of the blessed seed in the first age
of the Church.
TO the question moved in the end of the former chapter, I briefly answer: The
formal obligement of man by the prophetical ceremonial Law of faith, in the
promise of the blessed seed, did continue from the very period of the promise,
first made to Adam, (the redeemed head of man) till the day of our Saviors
resurrection from the grave, whereby the promised rest of the blessed seed, was
totally and absolutely fulfilled. The continuation whereof may be divided in
these two points: The first is the formal obligement of our Fathers by the
promise, before any part of the promise was fulfilled. And this formal
obligement did continue till our Saviors coming in the world, by whom the
promise was fulfilled by degrees, which is to be declared in the third Book: As
for the continuation of the formal obligement of the Law, obliging Adam and
the Fathers in the promise; it may be distinguished in the first three ages of
the Church.

The first was from Adam to Noah: the second from Noah to Abraham: the third
from Abraham to Moses, which continued till our Saviors coming; wherein my
purpose is only to show, that the formal obligement of the prophetical
ceremonial Law, by faith in the promise of the blessed seed; and that the
covenant was really one and the same in all the first three ages of the Church,
though the figures prefigurating the promise were more significant, the more
near that the promise came to be fulfilled. After the covenant (in the promise
of the blessed seed) was entered with Adam, the redeemed head of man, and with
all men naturally to descend of Adam: Satan, that old raging Lion, fearing the
breaking of his head by the promised blessed seed to be born of the woman, did
begin to roar afresh, intending to devour the line whereof the blessed seed
was to descend, as he had devoured all men formally, by the betraying of our
first parents to fall under the curse of the Law by eternal death: For, Satan
knowing the severity of Gods justice, (whereof himself had such experience)
resolved to set the whole world in such a fire of sin, as that God in his
justice should consume all men off the earth again; and Satan put fairly for
it: For, after by his sting of enmity (baited by his false deceiving light,) he
had incensed Cain to murder his Innocent brother Abel: Satan never left
stirring up of Cains ungracious generation from time to time; till be set the
whole world in such a fire of sin, cruelty, and uncleanness, as neither the
mercies of God, (by sparing them so long) or the judgments of God threatened by
his Prophets, could reclaim from their sin and cruelty. God therefore in end,
stirred up Noah, the tenth from Seth, a Preacher of Righteousness; who was a
Preacher of the Law of righteousness of faith, in the promise of the blessed
seed; that by his preaching of the Word, the miserable people might be
reclaimed from their cruelty and uncleanness to the works of faith by
repentance, that they might obtain mercy in the promise of the blessed seed;
and that by denouncing the merciless curse of the Law of faith, Noah might
terrify the people from their wickenesse. But though Noah did continue in the
faithful discharge of his Calling many years; yet all was to no purpose,
Satan had so incensed the miserable people to such obstinacy. God therefore in
end, commanded Noah to build an Ark, that by the ark Noah might denounce the
utter subversion of the obstinate rebellious people, by the flood of his
incensed wrath against their sin and cruelty, if they did not speedily turn to
the Lord, and leave their provoking of his long patience: For which cause the
Ark was so long a building, that the wretched people (notwithstanding of their
continued contempt,) might have yet time to repent, though all was to no
purpose; for such was the incensed obstinacy of the miserable people, as they
continued in their rebellious contempt, both of the word of the Preacher, and
of the Ark, till the very day that Noah and his family was commanded to enter
in the Ark, whereby the wrath of God was so incensed, as by that fearful
inundation, the whole earth was overflowne, and eight persons only saved, of
whom the promised blessed seed was to descend.

As for the Covenant which is said to be made with Noah (after his coming out
of the Ark in the continuation of times and seasons, and of the creatures
created and redeemed for man) it was the same real covenant which was formerly
made with Adam, in the promise of the blessed seed, which after this fearful
judgment, was renewed to Noah, for the strengthening and confirming of Noah's
faith, in the continuation of the promise first made to Adam: For, first, after
Noah's coming out of the Ark, Noah did offer the like real burnt sacrifices and
offerings upon the Atar of such real clean beasts and fowls as were first
commanded to be offered by Adam, and the Fathers before Noah; which beasts and
fowls were preserved in the Ark with Noah; by which sacrifices offered by
Noah, the cruel death of the blessed seed was prefigurate.

Secondly, the Ark it self did prefigurate both the promise, and the fulfilling
of the promise: For, first, by the Ark, the woman, of whose seed the Word was
to be made flesh, was prefigurate: Secondly, by Noah, and his sons and
daughters (who was the eight from Seth) the line whereof the promised blessed
seed was to descend, was prefigurate: Thirdly, by their receiving in the Ark;
the conception of the Word to be made flesh of the seed of the woman was
clearly prefigurate: Fourthly, by the safe delivery of Noah, and his sons and
daughters out of the Ark, the safe delivery of the blessed seed by the woman,
to wit, the blessed Virgin, was prefigurate; whereby it does manifestly
appear, that the covenant, and the formal prophetical ceremonial obligement
of the Law of Righteousness of faith, in the promise of the blessed seed,
prophesied by the prophetical Sabbath, and prefigurate by the ceremonial
worship of the Sabbath, was really one and the same, from Adam to Noah: As by
the preservation of Noah and his family; (of whom the blessed seed was to
descend, according to the flesh) the great power of God by his preservation of
his Church, against the great power of Satan and his instruments does
manifestly appear to his great glory, to the utter shame of Satan, and to the
confusion of his wicked instruments. And so much briefly for the first age of
the Church.

CHAP. XXX.
The continuation of the formal prophetical ceremonial obligement of man in
the promise of the blessed seed, in the second age of the Church.
AS in the time of Noah, the eighth from Seth; God stirred up Noah, to manifest
his power in the preservation of his Church, which did then consist in the
preservation of the line of the blessed seed: So in the second age of the
Church, God raised up Abraham, (the tenth from Noah) that his glory might
appear by his continual care of the truth of his promise to his Church: For
God renewed his promise in a more clear and particular manner to Abraham then
he did first to Adam; which was, that in Abraham's seed all the nations of the
earth should be blessed; that is, that the woman of whose seed the Word should
be made man, should descend of Abraham's seed, by whose promised cursed death:
As all men were then actually redeemed from the curse of the Law for the sin of
Adam (though the promise was afterward to be fulfilled:) so all men by faith in
this promise might be saved from the curse of the Law of faith for actual sin.

In this promise therefore, Genesis 22.18. that in Abraham's seed all the nations
of the earth should be blessed, God does oblige himself to Abraham and to his
seed by covenant, and does mutually oblige Abraham to believe his promise. This
covenant therefore made to Abraham was the same real covenant and promise made
to Adam, though the blessed seed promised to Adam was by this promise to
descend of Abraham's seed, the only difference is; that the woman of whom the
Word was promised to be made man, was to descend immediately of Abraham's seed,
though immediately from Adams seed: For Abraham did descend of the seed of Adam,
and consequently the promise made to Abraham must be performed before the
promise made to Adam could be fulfilled: For, the promise made to Adam could
not be fulfiled, but by our Saviors birth, death, and resurrection from the
dead. By this promise made in this particular manner to Abraham, the Church of
God was now in the family of Abraham and his seed, and posterity. To the end
therefore, that Abraham's family might be distinguished from all the families of
the earth, God commanded Abraham and his family to be marked with the
sacramental seal of circumcision, by shedding of the blood of man; whereby it
was prefigurate that the blood of the promised blessed seed, to descend of
Abraham (according to the flesh) should be shed by the cursed death of the
cross, which was formerly prefigurate to Adam and the Fathers by the shedding
of the blood of sensitive beasts and fowls. And therefore the figure of the
promised blessed seeed, by the sacrament of circumcision was more significant
then all the former bloody figures by the sacrifice of the Altar. By the
sacrament of circumcision therefore, Abraham's family was distinguished and
divided, from all the families of the earth, till they were reunited by the
fulfilling of the promise by the new covenant: For, by the new covenant, all
the families of the earth were called, and united in one Church and family: For
the strengthening of Abraham's faith in this gracious promise; the inheritance
of the Land of Canaan was promised to Abraham and to his seed; whereby it was
prefigurate, that Abraham and his seed (by faith in the promise made to
Abraham,) should be inheritors of the heavenly Canaan, the Kingdom of heaven.
The Church of God therefore being established in the family of Abraham, and of
his posterity; the protection of the Church, and the preservation of the line
of the promised blessed seed, was committed to Abraham; to this end, God did
enable Abraham with the power of wisdom, valor, and with such an admirable
gift of spiritual faith, as Abraham is styled in the Scripture, the Father of
the faithful. And though I must pass over the History of Abraham's continual
victories over the enemies of the Church, and leave the Reader to inform
himself by the sacred History; yet I cannot omit four memorable points of
Abraham's faith, whereby he is most justly called the Father of the faithful.
The first was, though Abraham was above an hundred years old (when this promise
was made;) and Sara was old and barren, and both, as it were, dead (by the
course of nature) and past all such hope; yet faithful Abraham considered not
the deadness of his own body, or the deadness of Sara's womb, but steadfastly
believed the promise against all natural hope, in hope that God, according to
his gracious wood would perform his promise. Secondly, Abraham's faith did
wonderfully appear to his obedience to the command of God by his Word, Genesis
12.1. commanding Abraham to depart from his native soil, and to leave his
kindred, friends, and possessions, where he was seated in such plenty, and to
go into a strange country, inhabited with the power of such mighty men, who
were every way unknown to Abraham, and where he had no earthly help to trust
unto, but did, (as it were) expose himself and his family, to be made a prey
unto strangers; yet faithful Abraham setting all doubts, fears, kindred,
friends, pleasures and possessions aside, did give obedience to the command of
God, and marched boldly to the Land of Canaan. Thirdly, how admirably does our
Savior commend Abraham's faith, while as our Savior told the Jews, saying,
John 8.56. Abraham did see my day, and was glad, and rejoiced therein: For,
Abraham, with the eyes of his spiritual faith, did see the Lords day, in the
eighth day of the Sacrament of circumcision; for the child was circumcised upon
the eighth day, though the eighth day of the circumcision fell out upon the
seventh day of the great prophetical Sabbath, which was commanded long before
the Sacrament of circumcision; and so precisely commanded as no mann^r of work
was to be done upon the seventh day of the prophetical Sabbath, much less the
shedding of the blood of man: for, the only commanded works of the prophetical
ceremonial worship of God were to be done upon the Sabbath; Abraham therefore
observing with the spiritual eyes of faith, that the seventh day of the
prophetical Sabbath did give place to the administration of the Sacrament of
circumcision: Abraham did apprehend, that the eighth day should be worshipped
in place of the seventh day of the prophetical Sabbath. The reason was,
because the Sacrament of circumcision did prefigurate both Christ's death, and
the day of his resurrection from the dead; for as by the shedding of the child's
blood, the shedding of the blessed child's blood by the cursed death of the
cross was prefigurate: So by the stenching of the child's blood, upon the
eighth day (whereby the life of the child was preserved) the day of our
Saviors resurrection from the dead was prefigurate, to wit, the Lords day,
which was the eighth day from the last Jews prophetical Sabbath; for the last
Sabbath whereon our Savior did rest in the grave, was no ways the Jews
prophetical Sabbath; neither was there any Jew or Gentile bound or obliged to
fulfill the command of the seventh day of the last Sabbath: For, all men
naturally descended of Adam the redeemed head of man were only obliged to the
command of the seventh day of the prophetical Sabbath, which did prophecy our
Saviors rest in the grave, by whose rest in the grave all the prophesies
prophesied by the prophetical Sabbath were fulfilled. The last Sabbath
therefore, whereon our Savior did rest in his sacred grave was no ways
prophetical, neither was there any man naturally descended of Adam obliged to
fulfill the command of the last Sabbath. Let us therefore leave the last
Sabbath to the Lord of the Sabbath, and add seven days more to the last Jews
formal prophetical Sabbath; and we have the Lords day (the day of his
resurrection from the grave) to be the just eighth day, as the Lords day was
prefigurate to Abraham by the eighth day of the circumcision: But let us
account the number of days from the last formal Jews prophetical Sabbath,
and begin the account at the first day of the week, according to the Jews
computation of the days of their Sabbaticall week, as both Jews and Gentiles
were obliged to the Law of God; and the Lords day is the just seventh day from
the last formal Jews prophetical Sabbath, and the true seventh day of the
Evangelicall Law of faith, more satisfactory to be declared hereafter. What an
admirable faith was this in Abraham to see the Lords day so far off, as it was
prefigurate by the Sacrament of circumcision? though the Lords day be the true
seventh day of the Evangelicall Law of faith, as all men naturally descended of
Adam are obliged to the command of the seventh day of the Law; for without the
command of the seventh day of the Law, there is no Law to command man. The
fourth memorable point, wherein the excellency of Abraham's faith did appear,
was in Abraham's readiness at the command of God, to offer up in sacrifice his
son Isaac, his only hope, and heir of the promise, and his only comfort next to
God: For, it may justly amaze the heart of a natural man, that Abraham,
against nature, (by forgetting of all natural affection) should be so forward
to attempt such cruelty with his own bloody hands, to cut the throat of his so
dearly beloved child, the only hope and heir of the promise. Though this
command was out of the infinite love of God to Abraham; for God did never
intend that Abraham should commit any such cruelty: But that Abraham, and all
men of the faith of Abraham, might understand, that God spared not his only
Son, (the Son of his love) to sacrifice him (as it were) with his own hands,
for his love which he does bear to man: For, all the created powers of God were
not able to bereave our Savior of his life, without his own gracious
permission, who out of his infinite love and mercy to man, did most lovingly
and mercifully lay down his life for man.

Here the question may be moved: Was the Church of God upon earth then, only in
Abraham's family, and his posterity, and no where else?

I answer: As the Lord Jesus Christ is the head of all his redeemed members,
the Lord from the beginning had his universal Church through all the Nations
of the earth, though his particular Church, according to his promise, was then
in Abraham, and in the posterity of Abraham for the time. And therefore, though
the Apostle did tell the Gentiles that they were not of the circumcision,
Ephesians. 2.12. but aliens from the common wealth of Israel, and, as it were,
without any Christ, and consequently without God; For, Christ, according to the
flesh, was to descend of the circumcised; yet the Gentiles had the prophetical
Sabbath, and the altar and sacrifice, as it was prescribed to Adam, and the
Fathers before the promise was made to Abraham, and consequently, the covenant
and formal obligement of the Law, really one from the beginning. And the
Apostle does acknowledge, that the Gentiles did do the things contained in the
Law, Romans 2.14. which was the ceremonial works of the Law, though the Gentiles
did them not in that precise manner as they were done by the Jews. And through
the Apostle says, that the Gentiles did do the things contained in the Law by
the light of their conscience; yet that light was the light of the redeemed
word of the Law of Righteousness of faith written in their heart, which was
really one with the light of the seventh day of the prophetical Sabbath, and
with the ceremonial light of the altar and sacrifice, whereby they were
enabled to do the things contained in the Law. And who should bar the free
Spirit of God to blow where it lists, John 3.8. and to enlighten many of the
Gentiles? Did not the Lord commend the Centurions faith, and say, Luke 7.9.
that he did not find such faith in Israel? And how greatly did our Savior
commend the faith of the Canaanitish woman, Mat. 15.28. and the faith of one of
the ten Lepers, and Luke 17.19. yet the promise made to Abraham was not then
fulfilled. And did not Christ himself him, according to the flesh, descend of
the Gentiles, though immediately of the seed of Abraham? Let no man therefore
think, but that the Lord had his universal Church in all ages, though his
particular Church was then in the family and posterity of Abraham. And so much
for the second age of the Church, and for the real unity of the covenant and
formal obligement of the Law, as the promise was made to Abraham, which was
really one with the covenant made with Adam.

CHAP. XXXI.
The continuation of the formal prophetical ceremonial obligement of the
Law, in the third age of the Church.
THe third age of the Church from the beginning, was in the time of Moses,
descended of Abraham, whom God raised for the preservation of his Church, then
in the posterity of Abraham, whose posterity the Lord (according to his
eternal purpose) would not permit to be established in the Land of Canaan, for
the space of forty years, to the end that God by the Ministry of his servant
Moses, might manifest the glory of his power in the protection of his Church
against the great power of Satan, and of his mighty instruments; for which
cause God enabled Moses with the power of wisdom, valor, and faith, amongst
the number of whose memorable acts, I will only touch three; leaving the rest
to the Reader to be informed by the sacred History; my purpose being only to
show, that the covenant, and the formal obligement of the Law, was really one
and the same from the beginning, as it was made to Adam and to Abraham.

The first memorable act of Moses Ministry, was in the delivery of the people
from the Egyptian servitude, who were the seed of Abraham, of whom the promised
blessed seed, according to the flesh, was to descend; and were then miserably
oppressed under the tyrannous hand of great King Pharaoh the proud Egyptian
King, stirred up to that cruelty by the instigation of Satan, and of his wicked
seed: For, whose delivery God raised up his servant Moses. To this end, first,
God sent Moses to King Pharaoh, commanding King Pharaoh, that he would permit
the people of Israel to depart from the Land of Egypt; but God (according to
his eternal decree) did harden the heart of Pharaoh, that he should not let
the people of Israel depart from Egypt, until such time as God should make his
continual care appear in the preservation of his Church, against the great
power of Satan and the power of his mighty instruments in this life. And
therefore, upon Pharoahs rebellious restraining of the people of Israel from
time to time, contrary to the Lords command; God by the Ministry of his servant
Moses, from time to time did plague the proud Egyptian King and his kingdom;
and though plague after plague was with such fearful miraculous and wonderful
judgments, as did astonish the hearts of the whole world; ye such was the
obstinacy of Pharoahs rebellious heart stirred up by the enchantments of his
Sorcerers (whose power God did of purpose permit:) as Pharaoh did resist the
command of God, with such a high hand, thirsting after the destruction of the
Church till Pharaoh with his great army was overwhelmed in the red sea of Gods
raging wrath; which mighty act was done by the Ministry of Moses, by stretching
out his hand upon the red sea at the command of God. By this miraculous
overthrow of the Egyptians, the mighty deliverance of the Church of God from
the Egyptian servitude was wrought to the amanement of the world, to the end
that the Church of God in future ages might never distrust the Lords continual
care in the preservation of his Church against the power of Satan, and against
the power of his mightiest instruments upon earth. In that night of the
fearful Egyptian plague of the born, the sacrament of the Passover was
institute by God, to remain in the Church, with the sacrament of circumcision,
during the formal prophetical ceremonial obligement of the Law, by which
ceremonial sacrament of the Passover, the promise of the blessed was more
significantly prefigurate, then formerly: For, first, by the sacrifice of the
Paschal Lamb, which was commandded to be eaten: the Lamb of God (the promised
blessed seed) was signified, who was to be sacrificed for the sins of man.
Secondly, by the bitter herbs, Exodus 12.8. with which the flesh of the Lamb was
commanded to be eaten; the bitter currse of the wrath of God, against the Lamb,
who made himself a curse for man, was mystically signified. Thirdly, by the
anointing of the door posts with the blood of the Lamb, that the destroying
Angel might pass over the Israelites houses, whereby they were saved from the
plague, was mystically signified, that by faith in the merit of the blood of
the Lamb of God (the promised blessed seed,) they were saved from the plague
and curse of the second death (which is for actual sin,) as by the promised
cursed death of the Lamb, they were saved from the first death, which was the
curse of the Law for the sin of Adam.

The second memorable act of Moses Ministry was, first, in the sanctifying and
assembling of the people of Israel at the command of God to hear the word of
the Law commanded by God himself immediately, which was in a most majesticall,
glorious manner delivered by God unto the people of Israel, in ten distinct
several precepts. The delivery whereof was with such fearful thundering and
lightning, and with the sound of trumpet, as the mountain was exceedingly
shaken, all to signify the power of the sound of the word of the Law,
commanding the obedience of man. By this glorious delivery of the word of the
Law, the people of Israel were stricken with a reverend fear and obedience to
the command of God, though their fear of the voice of God was such, as they did
entreat that Moses might deliver to them what the Lord should further command.
Wherefore the moral Law being first commanded by God, God by the Ministry of
Moses, did next set down the civil Law between man and man, to the end that
all men might understand, that all the laws between man and man, must be
grounded upon the moral Law of God. As for the ceremonial Law, it was the
same which was before to the Fathers employed in the ceremonial altar and
sacrifice, until such time as at the erection of the Tabernacle, the
ceremonial Law was commanded after a more particular manner, to the people of
Israel, though really one with the ceremonial Law of the altar and sacrifice,
prefigurating the promise of the blessed seed. Secondly, the Lord afterward
called Moses up to the mount, to deliver to Moses the two Tables of the Law,
written by God in stone, which was formerly delivered by his Word, to the end,
that by the Ministry of Moses, his written Word might be delivered to the
people of Israel, that the people might be instructed in the knowledge of the
written Word; where one thing is to be observed, to wit, that Moses by his
conversing with God in the mount for the space of forty days and forty nights,
Exodus 34.29. the skin of Moses face became so shining, as while Moses was about
to deliver the written Word of the Law, the people were not able to behold
Moses face; in so much that Moses was fain to vail his face, while he spoke to
the people; by which shining light of Moses face, the glorious light of the
written Word was mystically signified. As for Moses zeal (moved at the people
of Isreal's Idolatry,) in breaking of the Tables of the word of the Law, and the
renewing of the Tables, and all such memorable passages, I must leave the
judicious Reader to inform himself by the written Word of the sacred History.

The third remarkable act of Moses ministry, was the erection of the Tabernacle
at the command of God, according to the pattern which God did show and set down
to Moses, Exodus 25.40. while he was with God in the mount; which of all the
types, figures, and ceremonies, prefigurating the promise of the blessed seed
to all the Fathers of the former ages, was most clear and significant: For, by
the Tabernacle and Temple (which were really one, which the Lord calls his
body) the fulfilling of the promise, both made to Abraham, and to Adam, were
plainly prefigurate: For, first, by the types and figures of the first
Tabernacle, called the Holy Place; as by the golden Altar, by the table of
Shewbread, Exodus 39.38. by the golden Candlesticks, by the brazen Altar and
Laver before the porch, which did appertain to the service of the Holy place of
the Tabernacle; by which ceremonial Rites and Ceremonies, the high Leviticall
Priest was to discharge the service of the Holy place, whereby the fulfilling
of the promise made to Abraham was prefigurate: For, as the Leviticall high
Priest (who was descended of Abraham) was the figure of the high Priest, after
the order of Melchisedeck (to wit, the promised blessed seed descended likewise
of the seed of Abraham;) so, by the discharging of the Leviticall high Priests
office, the execution of the high Priests office, after the order of
Melchisedeck, was prefigurate: For, first, as the Leviticall high Priest did
offer up the ceremonial sacrifice of the hard brazen altar: So the hard cursed
sacrifice of the high Priest, after the order of Melchisedeck was offered upon
the cursed altar of the cross, who made himself a curse for man. Secondly, as
by the Leviticall high Priest, after the offering up of the sacrifice of the
brazen altar, Exodus 30.19, 20, 21. did wash his hands and feet before he entered
the holy place of the Temple: So after the offering of the cursed sacrifice of
the cross, the high Priest, after the order of Melchisedeck, did wash the
cursed bloody wounds of his hands and feet, and wash all men for whom he made
himself a curse, before he entered the Tabernacle not made with hands. Thirdly,
as the Leviticall high Priest by his entering into the holy Place of the Temple,
did offer sweet incense at the golden Altar, whereby God was said to smell a
savor of rest: So the high Priest, after the order of Melchisedeck, Hebr.
9.24. did enter the Tabernacle not made with hands, by his sweet pleasing
sacrifice, to make eternal peace between God and man for the sin of Adam, and
to make continual intercession for the actual sins of his mystical members,
at the altar of Righteousness of faith; by the pleasing savor of whose bloody
sacrifice the wrath of God is eternally appeased for the actual sins of his
mystical members, whereby they rest freed from the curse of the second death
in this life, and shall rest eternally in their mystical head in all glory and
happiness in the life. By this means, the promise of the blessed seed made to
Abraham was fulfilled: Our Savior, according to the promise made to Abraham,
did descend of Abraham's seed; for he was born man of the seed of the blessed
Virgin, lineally descended of Abraham's seed, and lived man upon the earth, and
in the end was most cruelly crucified for man. At the expiration of whose last
breath, Mat. 27.51. the great vail of the Temple was rent, from the top to the
bottom; that by this great rent, it might be known to all the world, that the
benefit and blessing of his cursed death did belong to Adam, and to all men
naturally descended, and to descend of Adam to the end of the world, according
to the promise made to Adam. And therefore, upon the day of his resurrection
from the grave, both the Jews and Gentiles were graciously called, to whose
faith, the blessing of the promise made to Abraham, was freely offered by the
new covenant; by means whereof, the promise made to Abraham, that in his seed,
all the nations of the earth should be blessed, was graciously and faithfully
fulfilled. And this is the reason, that the Apostle says, Heb. 9.8. that while
the first Tabernacle was standing, the second Tabernacle could not be opned;
for all the nations of the world could not be blessed in this promise, till our
Savior did first suffer; though his suffering was first and immediately for
the Jews, which was prefigurate by the Levitical high Priests breast plate,
Exodus 39.8.14 wherein the names of the twelve Tribes of Israel were written,
while he was to offer up the sacrifice of the altar; whereby it was signified,
that our Savior was first and immediately to be offered in sacrifice for the
Jews; and therefore it is said, John 4.22. that, Salvation is from the Jews.

Thus have we briefly declared, that (in the three first ages of the Church)
the formal prophetical ceremonial Law was really one and the same, obliging
of the Fathers, before any part of the promise of the blessed seed was
fulfilled: So by the Tabernacle and Temple (which our Savior calls his body)
whereby both the promise made to Abraham, and the promise made to Adam were
prefigurate, it was signified, that the same formal obligement of the Law, did
continue from Moses till our Saviors coming in the world, and from his coming,
till the day of his resurrection from the grave, which is to be declared in the
third Book of our Theological key; in the mean time, for a conclusion to this
second Book, certain material objections are to be answered against the
perfection of the redemption of man, which does concern both that which has
been delivered in this second Book, and likewise, that which is to be delivered
in the third.

CHAP. XXXII.
Satan's cunning by his tempting of man by the sensitive natural object of his
understanding.
FIrst, it is objected: Satan has the power to unite the free love of man so
inseparably to the sensitive object of his pleasure, as man does necessarily
produce his action contrary to the Law of faith. Satan therefore has the power
to necessitate the free will of man to disobedience, contrary to the
declaration of the perfection of redemption.

I answer, The inference is fallacious: For, though Satan has the power (by
his false envious deceiving light) to unite to the love and desire of man to
the object of his sensitive pleasure; yet it is by the free act of the love of
man, that man is induced to that union, and not by Satan's necessitating of his
will: I clear the point by Satan's cunning in tempting of man. Satan does tempt
man to disobedience, both by the natural and moral object of the
understanding of man: First, of Satan's cunning in tempting of man by the
natural object; and next, of his cunning in tempting man by the moral object
of his understanding. By the natural external sensitive object of man's
understanding; I understand all things in nature, whereby the understanding and
will of man is produced in act, by the mediate senses; all which things are the
proper objects of the five external senses of man. These several sensitive
objects, Satan by himself and his instruments, does so continually and actually
enlighten, with his false envious deceiving natural light, as the species of
these sensitive objects, (thus Satanically enlightened) being received in the
understanding, the love of man is so incensed, to unite it self to the object
of its pleasure, as it does hate all things that does resist the union by which
miserable union these fearful effects are produced.

First, by this foul incensed love and desire of man, to apprehend the
sensi^ive object of his pleasure, slaming in the heart of man; the light of the
redeemed word of the Law written in the heart, is so obscured and darkened, as
wretched man does greedily grasp the sensitive object, without all respect to
the Law of faith; and this is the first degree of actual sin, which is by the
darkning and obscuring of the word of the seventh days rest of the Law of
Righteousness of faith, whereby the works of faith are formally comm^nded: for
the light of the word of the Law in the heart (which is really one with the
light of the word of the seventh days rest of the Law of Righteousness of
faith) being obscured, the light of the word of the seventh days rest is
necessarily obscured and darkened. And therefore this false envious deceiving
light of Satan, is called the Devils darkness, and the works produced by this
false deceiving light, are called the works of darkness.

Secondly, the incensed natural love and pleasure of man, and the sensitive
object of his pleasure being once actually united; such continual fuel is
added to this incensed fire, (by Satan and his instruments) as wretched man
does lie and continue in his filthy love and pleasure, and hate all things
which does resist the enjoying of his foul desire: And this is the reason that
the Lord says, John 3.20. he that does evil, does hate the light; which is
the light of the command of the Law of faith: For, by the command of the Law of
faith, all such continued filthy pleasure is condemned. And this is the second
degree of actual sin, which is by continuance in sin.

Thirdly, by this false envious deceiving light of Satan, whereby the love and
desire of man, and the object of his pleasure are so united; the more that
wretched man is pressed with the command of the Law, the more strictly does he
unite himself to the object of his pleasure, by resisting all command of the
Law, and the pressure of the command: And this Medea could see, while, as she
says, we press against what is forbidden, and still affect what is denied.
And this the third degree of actual sin, while by the continuance of man in
actual sin, the long patience of God (leading him so graciously to
repentance,) is contemned with such a high hand; as God does justly give him
over to such a reprobate mind as he cannot repent, though he has all the
days of his life to repent: For, by this means, that moral power of
repentance, which wretched man has by the redeemed word of the Law, and life
of Righteousness of faith, written in his heart, is taken away; and this is
the reason that it is said, Luke 19.26. from him that has not, that which he
has shall be taken away; that is to say, because wretched man will not repent
(having moral grace to repent;) therefore he shall be deprived of the power of
moral grace to repent. For the better conceiving of this point two questions
are to be answered:

The first is; wherein stands Satan's cunning, that he thus betrays man to lie
and continue in the pleasure of sin. I answer: Satan's cunning stands in this;
that by his false deceiving envious light, the free act of the natural love
and pleasure of man, to apprehend the object of his pleasure, is extended to
the pleasure of pride; that is to say, by Satan's false deceiving envious light,
the formal natural act of the will (which works by love, and is naturally
good) is strained and extended to the formal moral evil act of the will, and
to the height of pride by continuance in actual sin: For, all continuance in
actual sin, is originally from pride, and pride from the devils darkness. And
this is the reason that actual sin is called Idolatry; for pride in the
pleasure of sin, is the Idol of the heart, resisting all command of the Law of
faith. To make this appear by one example which shall serve for all; It is in
the free act of the natural will of man (which works by the love of man to the
sensitive object of his pleasure,) to drink a cup of wine (sometimes) for his
health; but while his love and desire to wine (by Satan's false deceiving
envious light,) is so continued, as he hates all company, but only such as
love that which he loves: For, in this union stands the pleasure of sin,
because by this multiplied union, the strength of the pleasure of sin is
multiplied and extended to such a height, as it does resist all power of
command of the Law: For, the drunkard out of his pride, hates all light which
is averse to his filthy pleasure. And this is the old Serpents sting of enmity,
whereby he stings wretched man, to such a height of unlawful pleasure, which
does beget sin upon sin, as by daily experience is seen in the drunkard. And
this is the Devils cunning in all actual sin whatsoever; for by his false
deceiving envious light; he does incense the good natural act of the
concupiscence of man, to the pleasure of pride, which is Idolatry, and in this
only sense the act of the concupiscence, 1 Timothy 6.10. is said to be the root of
all evil, which is otherwise good by nature.

The second question may be moved, Does Satan by his false envious deceiving
light, thus enlighten all the several sensitive objects of the natural love
and pleasure of man? this were an endless work for Satan

I answer, Satan, either by his own immediate suggestion, by enlightening the
species of some former sensitive object in the fancy; or by the help of his
instruments, does actually enlighten all the several external sensitive
objects of the natural love and pleasure of man, by his false envious
deceiving light; and these instruments be such, as Satan (by the sowing of his
cursed seed of enmity, baited by his false lying deceiving natural light) has
begotten his children, in a manner, from the cradle, who by their so often
swallowing of the pleasing bait, are become as cunning and expert in the
faculty of tempting, as Satan himself; in so much, that there is not that
several natural pleasure, proceeding from the love of man to the exernall
sensitive object, which is not incensed by some or other of Satan's instruments,
who swarm so in all places, as an honest Christian has much ado to avoid the
danger of their cunning; such is their audacious officiousness, to invite the
natural love and pleasure of man to sin and mischief. And these are the old
roaring Lions welps, and the false deceiving lights of the Devils lanthorn,
that leads the hopeful youth of this Kingdom from one consuming place of
filthy pleasure to another, till their hearts are so incensed with the pride of
pleasure, as all is so spent and consumed, that (for the most part) the poor
wretches are necessitate to such wants, as (without the preventing mercy of
God) they must either starve, or take some such desperate course to supply
their wants, as they are brought to a shameful end; to the shameful scandal
of the Church of God, while under the Law of Grace, the hopeful plants of his
Church, are by this miserable means brought to despair of all Grace. What hard
hearted Christian is not sensible of this misery? But all are at their wits
end, how to remove the cause of the misery, such is the hellish power of this
cursed brood. Let the moral power therefore of the slaming sword of the Word,
be put in the right hand, and neither the Devil or his instruments shall have
such domineering power: For, by the slaming light of the Word, the most
rebellious roaring rakeshame, is either conformed to the command of the Law of
faith; or by the stroke of the sword cut off, from being such a foul scandal
to the Church; and without repentance and submission, banished the Kingdom: So
by this means, such wild Boars of the forest, shall not have such power to
root up the hopeful plants of the Lords Vineyard; and as for such plants as
these wild Boars did so labor to root up out of the Lords Vineyard, and are
brought to such a low ebb, let never their case seem desperate, either to
themselves or to us, while as they are sensible of the shame that they are
brought unto, by the pride of sin for shame, for the the pride of sin, is the
first grace that the Lord does confer upon those whom he has predestinate, to
be made like to the Image of his Son; for such the Lord does enable with
patience to endure his hand till they be thoroughly humbled for their pride, and
then they are fitted for the grace of spiritual preferment: For, God does give
his spiritual grace to the humble, but he does resist the proud; and therefore
it is said, Isai. 40.4. every valley shall be exalted, and every high mountain
(which is the mountain of pride) shall be brought low; for the Lord never
leaves his own, till (by their humiliation) they be brought so low, as they are
fitted with patience, to wait upon his prefixed time for their spiritual
calling; that by the grace of his spiritual light, that they may be led by the
hands of faith, to lay such fast hold on the Lords merit, as all their actual
sins are covered, which was the cause of their shame and afflictions: And that
by the power of his merit; that as the Lord has removed the cause of their
shame, so he is able, even in this life, to raise and exalt them from the
greatest affliction: or, if (for the continuance of their obedience) they are
not totally freed in this life, yet their comfort is, that their greatest
scarlet sins shall never have power to condemn them; the reason is, because
their spiritual faith, and the Lords merit, are really and spiritually one,
whereby they are justified by the Law, and who is he that dare condemn them?
for it is the Lord that does justify them by his merit. And therefore, though
it be the Lords pleasure (for their trial) to keep them in some measure, under
the yoke of affliction in this life, yet they are enabled with patience to bear
his hand, till in his good time, he determine their afflictions, by calling
them to himself, where they shall be exalted to an incorruptible crown of
glory, and (in their mystical head) enabled to tread on the neck of the old
roaring Serpent, and upon the neck of his cursed brood, to their eternal
confusion, for betraying them by the pride of sin, to the shame and afflictions
of this life. And now, to conclude this point of Satan's cunning, by this
tempting of man by the natural sensitive object: Of all the temptations of
Satan, his accusing of man, whom he has betrayed to such long continuance in
actual sin, is the most fearful. And from this fearful accusing of man,
Satan is called the Devil, and in this diabolical faculty stands the
masterpiece of the Devils cunning: For, when the Devil does once begin to
accuse wretched man for his continuance in unrepented sin, the fearful
severity of Gods justice (for the high contempt of the Law of faith, and the
impossibility of his mercy to such high continued contempt) is so continually
suggested by Satan, as he never leaves, night and day, racking and torturing of
the guilty conscience of the wretched sinner, till his spirit be so
insupportably wounded, as he is induced to believe, that all repentance comes
too late, and to despair of all mercy; and unless by the Lords unexpected
concursive grace, the fearful blow be prevented, such is the insupportable
wounded spirit of the wretched sinner, by the Devils continual accusation; as
the Devil does easily induce the tortured restless desperate man, to lay
violent hands on himself as a present remedy for his torture and pain. O that
the wretched sinner would in time (but by moral repentance) accuse and condemn
himself for his obstinate continuance in actual sin, as he is morally enabled
thereto by the perfection of his redemption, and then he shall prevent the
Devils cunning: For, by that happy means the Devils fearful accusation should
come too late; for there is always such mercy in store to the least repenting
sinner, as there is no place for the Devil to plead at the bar of the Lords
mercy, and to accuse man for actual sin. I next proceed to the declaration of
Satan's cunning in his betraying of man by the moral object of man's
understanding.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Satan's cunning by his betraying of man by the moral object of man's
understanding.
BY the moral object of man's understanding; I understand the word of the
seventh days rest, implying the command of the whole Law, whereby man from the
beginning, by every several covenant, is formally obliged to produce his
action according to the formal command of the Law, as he is actually enabled
to produce that formal action by the power of the Word of the Law and life of
Righteousness, written in his heart. This light of the word of Law in the
heart; Satan from the beginning, has, and does obscure, by a false deceiving
moral light, contradictory to the light of the word of the seventh days rest:
By the obscuring of which light of the word of the Law written in the heart,
the light of the word of the seventh days rest, is necessarily obscured and
darkened, by means whereof man does produce his action without all respect to
the formal command of the Law. By this false moral deceiving light, as Satan
from the beginning did obscure the light of the Law of God totally and in
general; so by his false deceiving moral light, Satan does now obscure and
darken the light of the Law of faith in particular, by his obtruding and
suggesting false fundamental particular points of faith, whereby the Church of
God has been so miserably distracted in all ages: So Satan, by his false
deceiving moral light, did betray our first parents to transgress the Law of
God: For, while God by his first covenant had obliged man to fulfill the
command of his Law, by his Word commanding man to abstain from eating of the
fruit of the tree of knowledge, upon the curse of a dying death: Satan by the
Serpent did suggest a false moral deceiving light, contradictory to the light
of the command of God, which was, that by eating of the forbidden fruit, our
first parents should not only be freed from all fear of any dying death by
covenant, but that by eating of the fruit, they should be equal to God
himself; by which false great suggested moral light, the hearts of our first
parents was so incensed to such a height of pride, to be equal to God, as they
did greedily grasp the fruit without all respect to the command of God by his
Word, commanding man, which was the command of the word of the first seventh
days rest of the Law of Righteousness: For, by the foul incensed desire of
our first parents to be equal to God, flaming in their hearts; the light of
the Word in their hearts was obscured and darkened, by obscuring whereof, the
light of the word of the first seventh days rest was so totally obscured and
darkened, as the whole Law was transgressed, whereby Adam, the created head of
man, and all men naturally to descend of the head, were condemned to the curse
of the Law of Righteousness by the first covenant: So after the second
covenant was made in the promise of the blessed seed by the promised rest of
the prophetical Sabbath, and after the word, (the blessed seed) was born man,
of the seed of the woman, and after he did manifest himself to the Jews by his
glorious works, wonders, and miracles, that he was that promised blessed seed
of the woman, and the eternal Son of God, by whom they were to enjoy the
promised rest of their prophetical Sabbath, extending his love and mercy so
generally toward all, by curing of all sensitive diseases incurable by nature,
and the diseases of the souls of many, whereby he did so engage the reverend
love and fear, of all, leading the world so by that glorious light, that happy
was he that could but touch the Lord of Life. In so much, that the glory of his
light was such, as the Jews began to be possessed with a jealousy, that by this
great glorious light, the glory of their great prophetical Sabbath should be
obscured, whereby they were so famous above all nations, and that the honor
and dignity of the Leviticall Priesthood, and the great preferment which they
did hold by the Priesthood should be quite taken away from them. At this
jealousy of the Jews, the Devil takes occasion to suggest a remedy for this
fear, and that was, that they should kill the Word which did so gloriously
shine amongst them; though this suggestion of Satan was but a cloak to color
his own fear, lest the head of the Serpent should be broke by the seed of the
woman, which suggested remedy, the Jews did diverse times attempt, but the Lord
did prevent their purpose by escaping their bloody hands, because his hour was
not come; yet this fear did so possess Satan, as he never left with all
diligence, to watch his opportunity till the hour was come that our Savior was
to suffer for the sins of man; for then Satan did bestir himself, by incensing
of the high Priest, Scribes, Pharisees, and the rabblement of the Jews and
Gentiles with most cruel bloody hands to murder the Lord of life, the Word,
whereby the light of the whole Word was obscured and darkened for a time. And
then both Satan and the Jews thought themselves secure. But after the Lords
resurrection from the dead, Satan apprehending himself so horribly deceived,
the roaring Lyion did so rage, as he did incense the Jews to keep afoot the
ceremonial worship of the Jews prophetical Sabbath, for which effect Satan's
instruments were set awork to persecute the planters of the Evangell, amongst
which crew, who was so busy as Paul before his conversion? By this means,
Satan again, did attempt to obscure and darken the light of the whole Word, by
a false deceiving moral light, contradictory to the Evangelicall light of the
word of the seventh days rest of the Evangelicall Law ^f Righteousness of
faith: For, by keeping afoot the ceremonial worship of the prophetical
Sabbath, the death and resurrection of the Lord Jesus Christ was plainly
denied, and the Evangelicall light of the Lords day, implying the whole
Evangell, attempted to be obscured. As Satan by his false moral light, did
obscure the light of the word of the seventh days rest from the beginning
totally and in general: So does he now by his false deceiving moral light,
obscure the Evangelicall light of the word of the seventh days rest of the Law
of Righteousness of faith in particular, which Satan does effect by suggesting
a false moral deceiving light, contradictory to the light of the Evangelicall
Law of faith, whereby some fundamental points of faith is subverted, and
stiffly maintained, contrary to the Evangelicall Law of faith; some of which
points be ancient, some modern, of the ancient subjected points of faith, such
are these: First, salvation from the curse of the Evangelicall Law of
righteousness of faith may be merited by the good works of man. Secondly,
Christ died for original sin only. Thirdly, the actual sins of the dead and
of the quick, are taken away by the surmised sacrifice of the fictious
ceremonial altar. Fourthly, the power to pardon actual sin, as it is a
transgression against the spiritual command of the Law, is in the Church.
Fifthly, universality of spiritual grace, to fulfill the command of the Law,
is by the act of the external sacrament of baptism. The authority of
canonical Scripture depends upon the allowance of man, and a world of such
errors: So of modern fundamental errors, be such as these: First, the elect
only, and not all men lost in Adam the head, are redeemed from the curse of the
Law, for the sin of Adam. Secondly, all the promises of salvation are made to
the elect only, and not to all men in general. Thirdly, universal grace of
moral faith by the perfection of the redemption, is peremptorily denied, and
consequently and necessarily the grace of moral repentance. Fourthly, the
moral freedom of the will, without any necessitating of the will of man to
moral disobedience, is denied by the act of the redemption. Fifthly, the
election of man to salvation, is out of the alone free pleasure of God, without
all subordinate respect to the Lords merit. Sixthly, the condemnation of man to
the eternal torments of hell, is out of the alone pleasure of God, without all
subordinate respect to the Law of God, or to the merit of man, by transgression
of the Law. Seventhly, children dying unbaptized, are saved by the parents
faith, and a number of such. All which pretended fundamental points of faith,
are contradictory to the light of the truth of the Evangelicall Law of
righteousness of faith; for removing of which false fundamental errors, and
of all manner of erroneous tenants, repugnant to the command of the
Evangelicall Law of faith, the judicious Reader is enabled by a short rule or
canon in the third Book. And so much for answer to the first objection; by
answering whereof, the judicious Reader may plainly observe, that though Satan
and his instruments has the power, by his false deceiving natural light, to
unite the natural love of man, irresistibly to the sensitive object of his
pleasure; yet the union is by the free yielding and assent of the will of man,
to be so induced by Satan, and not by Satan's necessitating of the free love of
man: And that it is in the freedom of man's natural election, before Satan's
temptation, to be induced to disobedience by his false deceiving envious
natural light. As for Satan's false deceiving moral light, whereby he does
incense the heart of man to maintain such pretended points of faith, so
contradictory to the Evangelical Law of faith: The judicious Reader may
likewise plainly perceive, that it is in the freedom of man^ moral election,
to be induced, or not induced by any such false moral light, to maintain any
such pretended points of faith, while as by his maintaining of which erroneous
tenants, he does divide his faith from the proper object of the Lords merit by
the intervention of a false object; though after the faith of man, and the
false object be once united, and the erroneous tenent being once set abroach,
it shall not want a world of propugnators, whose hearts, by the Devils false
moral light, are incensed to maintain the tenent for a main pretended point of
faith; by the multiplication of which united maintainers, of the opinion, such
strength is added to the tenent, as does resist all Evangelicall light of the
Word, and command of the Evangelicall Law of faith, by the only power of which
Evangelicall light, all tenants contradictory to the Law of faith are
discovered, and by the power of command of the Evangelicall Law of faith, all
exploded from the Church of God. And so much for answer to the first objection.

CHAP. XXXIV.
The true sense of the words, that both the will and deed is from God, and the
sense of the words, that the thoughts of man are only and continually evil;
original sin is not the corruption of nature, and of the rebellious will of
the flesh, which is said to be enmity against God.
IT is secondly objected: God gives both the will and the deed; man therefore,
by the perfection of the redemption, has neither the free power of will,
neither to will or do any good. I answer, the Antecedent is most true, but the
Inference is false; for the grace of moral faith, which is the act of the
redeemed will of man, proceeding from the power of the redeemed word of the Law
and life of righteousness of faith, written in the heart of man, and the deed
of the will, which is the work of moral faith, proceeding from the immediate
power of the life of righteousness of faith, is the gift of God, in his Son
Christ Jesus, by the immediate act of the redemption given to man; by the
immediate act of which gracious gift, man does both will and do moral good:
Neither is it affirmed by us, that the redeemed man, by the moral free act of
his will, has the power simply to will, or do any good, but that he has this
moral freedom without any manner of necessitating of his will to moral
disobedience: For, otherwise, as has been formerly and necessarily
demonstrate, it were impossible for God without injustice, to oblige man,
either to his old or new covenant.

Thirdly, it is objected: The thoughts of man are only and continually evil,
Genesis 6.5. Man therefore, by the perfection of the redemption, cannot so much as
think of any good, much less to do any good; To this I answer: The thoughts of
man, in this place, and in all such other places of the Scripture to this
purpose, must be understood of the thoughts of the natural man, and not of the
regenerate, as he is a spiritual man; for the regenerate man, (1 John 3.9.) is
born of God, and cannot sin, neither can his thought be evil, as he is a
spiritual man: And though the regenerate man, as he is a natural man, and not
perfectly sanctified in this life, does actually sin, too often against the
command of the Law, both as the Law is spiritual and literal (for as the
regenerate man does know but in part, so he does do but in part, while he is in
this life;) yet by the regenerate man's spiri^uall faith in the Lords merit, all
his actual sins are covered; and herein stands the regenerate man's only
comfort. And therefore Paul does affirm, Romans 7.22, 23. that in the inner man
(that is, as he is regenerate) he does delight in the Law of God, and does
disclaim his actual sins, both of thought and deed, to be his (to wit) as he
is regenerate, but as he is a natural man, attributing all his actual sins,
to the rebellious will of his flesh. The thoughts of man therefore in this
place, are to be understood, chiefly of the thoughts of the wicked man, though
they may be always understood of the natural man in general before he be
regenerate: For, all the natural man's thoughts and works before he be
regenerate, are spiritual sin, and spiritual evil, because he wants
spiritual faith; and because his moral evil action is both actual,
spiritual and moral sin and evil; and therefore his thoughts accordingly are
evil continually; for at the best, they spiritually and continually evil; and
this is the reason that Job says, Job 14.4. Who can bring a clean thing out of
an unclean thing? that is to say, who is able to bring forth a clean thought or
work out of an unclean heart: For, Job does acknowledge himself, as he is a
natural man, to be corrupted from his youth by actual sin: But Job does
justify himself, as he is regenerate, by faith in the assurance of his
salvation. But though the natural man, before he be regenerate, has not the
spiritual power, either to think or do any spiritual good; yet by the power
of the redeemed word of the Law and ^ife of Righteousness of faith, written in
his heart, he is enabled with the moral power, both to think, and to do a good
moral work of faith, without any manner of necessitating of his will to moral
disobedience. As by the power of that word he is likewise enabled with the
moral grace of repentance, to repent morally of his sin when he falls by the
Devils temptation, and that without any power to necessitate his impenitencie.

Fourthly, it is objected, that the will of the flesh, is enmity against God, (
Romans 8.7.) and cannot be subject to the Law of God. The redeemed natural man
therefore, by the perfection of the redemption, cannot produce a good moral
work of faith, because his best moral work is enmity against God. I answer:
This subjection of man to the Law of God (meaned in this place by the Apostle)
is the subjection of man to the spiritual command of the Law, as the Law is
spiritual: and this enmity is spiritual enmity against God. In which sense,
it is impossible for the redeemed natural man, before he be regenerate, to be
subject to the spiritual command of the Law; but though the natural man,
before he be regenerate, cannot be subject to the spiritual command of the
Law, as the Law is spiritual; yet, as the command of the Law is literal and
moral, the natural man, by the power of the word of the Law, and life of
righteousness of faith in his heart, he is morally enabled to be subject to
the literal command of the Law, without any manner of necessitating of his
will to moral disobedience; and though the moral act of his will be
necessarily spiritual enmity against the spiritual command of the Law
(through want of spiritual faith;) yet the act of his moral obedience is not
moral enmity against God or his Law.

Fifthly, it is objected: Man is born in the corruption of nature, which is
original sin; by which natural corruption, man is necessitate to actual sin.
The act of the will of man therefore, by the perfection of the redemption is
not free from all manner of necessitating to moral disobedience. I answer:
Though original sin be commonly called the corruption of nature; yet it is
falsely called the corruption of nature; though I do not deny that actual sin
may be called the corruption of nature; and yet this assertion must be warily
conceived: For, we must not think, that the nature of man is essentially
corrupted; for so the incorruptible soul of man, which is the first act of man,
as he is man, must be corrupted, which is impossible. But it is the formal
moral act of the will only, which is corrupted by the multiplied acts of sin,
which is only actual, and not original sin: For, if we should take the
corrupted act of the will, by the multiplied acts of sin, for original sin,
God must be the inevitable author of actual sin since the fall; and original
sin, which is no sin, to death, must be a sin to death, I mean, actual death,
contrary to all truth; for God by concluding all redeemed men in spiritual
darkness, Romans 11.32. which is called unbelief, and original sin, has mercy
upon all men; for without the concluding of man in spiritual darkness, it is
impossible, in the ordinary calling of God, that any man can be regenerate by
spiritual faith, and consequently and necessarily original sin is not the
corruption of nature.

Sixthly, the objection is further pressed: The Apostle, Ephesians. 2.3. does affirm,
that all men are the children of wrath by nature. This wrath of God therefore,
must be for the original sin, and consequently original sin is the corruption
of nature, I answer: If the wrath of God must be for original sin, then Gods
wrath must be upon his own immediate act; for original sin is the immediate
act of God, proceeding from the Spiritual darkness and unbelief, wherein all
redeemed men are concluded by God, that he might have mercy upon all, and not
that his wrath should be upon all: But it is plain, that in this whole Chapter,
the Apostle speaks of actual, and not of original sin: For, the Apostle does
acknowledge, that he had his conversation in times past, amongst the children
of disobedience, which disobedience is by the multiplied acts of sin, and
actual sin from the false deceiving light of Satan and his instruments, in a
manner, from the cradle, by the continued acts whereof, sin becomes so
habitual and connaturall, as it seems to be natural to man; and this is the
sin, and not original sin, which does draw down the wrath of God upon man
temporally in this life, (and without repentance and amendment) eternal wrath
in the life to come; and therefore because Paul, before his conversion, had his
conversation amongst the children of disobedience from his youth; Paul calls
himself the child of wrath by nature; for the children of disobedience, are the
begotten children of Satan; for such is Satan's vigilance and early care, to
breed up his children by the sowing of his cursed envious seed, sweetened with
his false natural deceiving light, as he begins to sow his seed in the ears
and hearts of all children before the children can sin actually, or know any
kind of evil. To this end, Satan has his young instruments, that by their
conversement with children, they may be taught to lie, curse, and swear, in a
manner, so soon as they are able to speak. By this means, little children do
begin to be acquainted with the terms of evil, though the envious poison of
the evil do not burst out, until children come to actual moral
understanding and action, and then by the poison of Satan's envious seed,
children do begin to practice childish evil, and to be averse; and with a
childish obstinacy, to resist any controler of their childish evil actions;
for the more they are checked, such is the power of Satan's seed, that they will
bend their power to do evil, the rather by this means, unless they be
sanctified from the womb; the act of the child's will, (by degrees) becomes to
be morally corrupted with sin and evil; and as the child grows up in years,
sin and evil grows up with the child, and becomes so habitual and
connaturall to man, as (without the great mercy of God by his concursive grace,
and the great care of the parents) it is as easy to take away his nature, as
to win him from the pleasure of sin; such is the corrupted multiplied act of
his will, morally to all evil and mischief, by his continual conversement
with Satan's instruments the torch-bearers of Satan's false deceiving natural
light: For, by the power of Satan's envious deceiving natural light, the heart
of man is so incensed to every foul object of sensitive pleasure; as the
natural pleasure of man is extended to the pride of natural pleasure: And
this is the reason that actual sin is called the corruption of nature: For it
is the formal natural act of the will of man, which is so abused by Satan's
false deceiving natural light, as it is extended to such a height, as the
formal natural act of the will becomes formally moral, and morally sin and
evil. And these are the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2.3. which are called
the children of wrath by nature; and these are the children of disobedients,
amongst whom, Paul does acknowledge himself to have had his conversation in
times past. This corruption of the natural act of the will of man, by the
multiplied acts of sin, is called the rebellious will of the flesh, because the
will of the natural man before he be regenerate, rebels against the spiritual
command of the Law, and cannot be subject to the Law. It is called the old man:
First, because this corruption of the natural act of the will of man, (by
Satan and his instruments) is from his childhood. Secondly, it is called the
old man, in respect of the regenerate man, who is called the new man: It is
called the body of sin, because the natural man, before he be regenerate, is
dead in actual sin, and therefore, Romans 6.23. it is likewise called the body
of death; because death is the wages of sin: It is called concupiscence,
because by the multiplied acts of sin, all the parts and powers of the natural
man are corrupted. By the long continuance of man in actual sin, whereby the
long patience of God, (leading man to repentance) is contemned with such an
high hand, as God in his justice does give wretched man over to a reprobate
mind: He is called by the Apostle, the compacted vessel of Gods wrath: For,
the wretched obstinate sinner, is compacted of actual spiritual sin, and of
actual moral evil, and therefore the body of sin and death.

By my answer to this objection, I hope the judicious Reader is fully
satisfied, that original sin is not the corruption of nature: And that it is
plain blasphemy to be so called; for so God must be the inevitable author of
actual sin; yet the objection is further pressed.

CHAP. XXXV.
Though David was conceived and born in original, sin, yet there was neither
any natural, moral, or spiritual corruption in that sin.
SEventhly, it is objected, Psalm. 51 5. David does affirm himself to be
conceived and born of his mother in sin and iniquity; which sin and iniquity
must be by the corruption of the natural, moral, and spiritual act of his
will. Though David therefore was not conceived and born in any essential
corruption of his nature; yet David was conceived and born of his mother in the
natural, moral and spiritual corrupted act of his will.

I answer: In David's first conception by his mother, (which is the seminall and
sensitive conception of man) there is neither any natural, moral, or
spiritu^ll corruption in the act; for it was the good natural act of David's
mother, as she was the good redeemed creature of God. And as for his mothers
second conception, while as David was conceived man, and the son of Adam, in
the womb, by the essential union of his intellectual and sensitive nature,
this was the immediate act of the Father of spirits; by which immediate act of
God, as David was redeemed in Adam, the redeemed head of man (according to his
eternal decree): So David by the immediate act of God in the womb, was shut up
in temporal spiritual darkness, and so brought forth by his mother, shut up
in that spiritual darkness which is called unbelief and original sin; But
there was neither any spiritual or moral corruption in that spiritual
darkness: For, though David by his concluding in spiritual darkness was
dead, as he was a spiri^uall man, without any spiritual understanding or
action, till he was regenerate; yet the spiritual act of his will cannot be
said to be corrupted; for he had no spiritual act at all, but was dead, and
therefore freed from the Law of sin, as he was a spiritual man; though David
was alive, as he was a natural man, and did actually and freely sin by his
moral evil action, both spiritually and moral^y. Neither was there any moral
corruption of the will in this spiritual darkness wherein David was shut up in
the womb, and conceived and born by his mother; for the moral corrupted act of
the will is actual, and not original sin. And this is the manner that
original sin does descend upon all men from Adam, the redeemed head of man;
and this is the sin and iniquity (which is spiritual sin and iniquiquity,
through descent of spiritual faith,) wherein David does acknowledge, that he
was conceived and born by his mother, proceeding from the spiritual darkness
wherein David was shut up and concluded in the womb; and this is that sin which
is said, Romans 5.12. to have entered by one man in the world, and natural
temporal death, which followed that sin. Though David therefore, out of the
agony of his spiritual passion, for offending of his gracious God, does extend
his passion to his very conception, bewailing, as it were, the time of his
conception and birth, by his mother; yet far be it from any Christian heart to
conceive, that David did attribute the cause of his foul adultery and murder
to his mother; for so David must charge not only his mother, but God himself,
as the cause of his foul fact: For, God did conclude David in original sin,
and his mother did conceive and bring forth David in original sin. But David
does not attribute the cause of his sin, either to his conception, or to his
birth; no, not so much as to the Devil and his instruments, by whose false
envious deceiving natural light, David's heart was so inflamed to that
miserable adulterous bloody fact, but David does attribute the cause of all to
his own heart: For, after David was rowzed up from his deadly security by the
Prophet, David's heart, for his sorrow and grief for his sin was broke (as it
were) in pieces; for he fell down before God, humbly confessing his sin, and
acknowledgeing, that by the foulness of his sins, he had most justly deserved
to be cast from the eternal presence of God, which with all humbleness of his
broken heart, he prays to God to be forgiven; and that God would renew his
heart, which the sorrow of his sins had so broken: For, it is the unclean foul
heart of man, corrupted by Satan and his instruments, that is, the immediate
cause of all actual sin (and neither the father or mother) which the Lord
called the storehouse of evil. And therefore David does pray to the Lord again
and again, to purge and purify his heart from the uncleanness of his
adulterous bloody fact.

But it may be instanced, David's mother was to offer (by the Law) a
sin-offering, for the purification of her uncleanness, in bringing forth of
David, which was the uncleanness and corruption of original sin, wherein
David was conceived and born. I answer: There was neither any natural, moral,
or spiritual corruption, or uncleanness in women, in bringing forth of
children, under the ceremonial Law, only the flux of blood in women by
bringing forth man, was made ceremonial sin and uncleanness by the positive
command of the ceremonial Law, that by the offering up a sacrifice for her
ceremonial sin, the woman might be put in mind of her thankfulness to God,
for the bloody sacrifice of the blessed child to be born of woman, whose blood
was to be shed for the redemption of man; the benefit whereof the woman did
then enjoy, whereby she was enabled to bring forth man into the world.

The Objection is yet further pressed: David was circumcised the eighth day: By
the amputation of David's foreskin, the corruption of David by original sin was
signified. I answer: The sacrament of circumcision was not instituted, either
for original or actual sin; but it was instituted for the sacrament of the
second covenant, in the promise of the blessed seed; and that for these two
reasons: First, that the child coming to the years of actual understanding,
might be put in mind, by the shedding of his blood by the sacrament of
circumcision, that he was saved from the first death, for the curse of the Law
for the sin of Adam by the blood of the blessed seed to be born of woman; and
that by faith in the promised merit of the blessed seed, he was saved from the
second death. The second reason was, that by the sacrament of circumcision, the
child might be assured, that he was as really and truly in the covenant, as
either Adam or Abraham, to whom the promise was made.

CHAP. XXXVI.
The immediate object of Gods eternal purpose by his Decree of election, in
the order of cause, is the redeemed state of man.
Eighthly, it is objected, Romans 9.13. God did hate Esau in the womb, whose
hatred to Esau must be for original sin. By original sin therefore, the will
of man is necessitate to disobedience from the womb.

I answer: Gods hatred to Esau, was neither for original or actual sin; but
that the purpose of God might stand according to election, by him that calls,
to wit, by spiritual faith. The denying therefore of this election by him that
calls to Esau, is signified by this word hate: For, in this case, by the word
hatred, the free act of God is expressed in electing one by his spiritual
calling, and not another; and this was only Gods hatred to Esau: For, though
Esau was Isaacs first born, and the natural seed of Abraham, and heir of
Isaacs temporal estate; yet Esau was not heir of the spiritual promise, the
reason is, because the spiritual promise is only by spiritual faith, which is
the free gift and grace of the holy Spirit, and cannot be tied to the natural
seed of man, to any time, place, or person; but it is in the free gift of God,
in his Son Christ Jesus, to bestow on whom he will. And this is that free gift,
by conferring or denying whereof, God is said to have mercy, or not to have
mercy upon man: For, though God should bestow the greatest temporal blessing
of this life upon man; yet without the free gift of spiritual faith, such
great temporal blessings are but so many temptations to induce man to actual
sin. Who could have more temporal blessings then great King Pharaoh? or Esau,
of whom so many Princes and Nobles did descend; yet neither Pharaoh, or Esau,
had the gift of spiritual faith, which was from all eternity decreed to be
denied to both. And why? because the gift of spiritual faith is the free gift
of God, Romans 9.18. who will show mercy on whom he will show mercy, and will deny
his mercy to whom he will deny his mercy; for in this case, Gods love and
mercy, in his Son Christ Jesus, is free, and not obliged to any redeemed man,
naturally descended, or to descend of Adam. I say, to any redeemed man, because
this promise of spiritual faith in the blessed seed was made to Abraham and
his seed in his redeemed state. And because the grace of spiritual faith is
the free gift of God, God did decree from all eternity, that Jacob, and not
Esau, should be heir of the spiritual promise. And therefore, God decreed from
all eternity, that the blessed seed should not descend of Esaus line; for God
in his eternal prescience, did foresee, that Esau would sell his birthright,
without any manner of moral reason, to necessitate his ungracious sale: For,
though the spiritual promise was never intended to Esau, yet it was more then
Esau knew, who by his ungracious sale, did contemn and misregard the spiritual
promise made to his father Isaac; and therefore it was said, of the children
before they were born, Romans 9.12. The elder shall serve the younger, which was
afterward accomplished: For, the Edomites were expelled the Land of Edome, and
overrun and subdued by the Israelites. And this is the reason that David says,
Psalm. 108.9. Over Edom will I cast my shoe; whereby the trampling down and
subjection of the Edomites is mystically signified. Of this example of Jacob
and Esau, set down by the Apostle, two special points are to be observed:
First, Paul having to do in this ninth Chapter, with the bragging Jews, who did
brag that they were heirs of the spiritual promise made to Abraham, because
they were the natural seed of Abraham; and because the Oracles of the
prophetical ceremonial Law was committed to them, the Jews therefore secured
themselves; that by the performing of the ceremonial works of the Law, that
they were heirs of the spiritual promise. Paul therefore brings in the example
of Jacob and Esau, to check the Jews of their arrogancy, and tells them
plainly, that though they were the natural seed of Abraham, and had the
Oracles of the Law, yet they were never the nearer, because the spiritual
promise is according to election, by him that calls by faith, and not by the
works of the Law; and that the Jews by their ceremonial works of the Law did
utterly overthrow all faith, by which they were called. The Apostle therefore,
to the end of the Epistle, out of his true love to the Jews, does exhort the
Jews, now under the Evangelicall Law of faith, to leave off the ceremonial
works of the Law, if they intended to be heirs of the spiritual promise, which
is by faith of him that calls; and to bring forth the works of faith by
repentance, and amendment of life; that by continuation in their moral
obedience (till Gods prefixed time of spiritual calling) they might be
spiritually called, whereby they should be assured that they were heirs of the
spiritual promise made to Abraham. The second point to be observed of the
words is this: that in the order of cause, the redeemed estate of man from the
curse of the Law, for the sin of Adam, shut up in spiritual darkness, called
unbelief, and original sin, is the immediate object of Gods election: For,
though this estate of man does necessarily presuppose both the condition of
man, created in the state of natural and spiritual perfection, in Adam the
head, and the state of man condemned to the curse of the Law, by eternal death
and darkness for the sin of Adam, the head; yet neither of both the states of
man, in the order of cause, can be the immediate object of Gods election; for
it is impossible that the state of natural and spiritual perfection, wherein
man was created, can be the immediate object of Gods election in the order of
cause: For, the Law by which man was obliged, by the first covenant, was the
Law of Righteousness, and not the Law of righteousness of faith. Now, by the
Law of Righteousness, the eternal blessing of the first seventh days rest,
was due by the Law, immediately to the works of man's obedience, whereby man was
enabled to live eternally upon earth in the state of perfection and felicity,
wherein he was created; while man therefore, did stand in the perfection of his
obedience, there was no place or need of Gods eternal purpose of election by
him that calls, to wit, by spiritual faith: For the period of Gods election,
by his calling by spiritual faith, is, that man may be crowned with an
incorruptible crown of glory after this life; while man in the state of
perfection was to live eternally upon earth in that state of felicity wherein
he was created. And as the eternal blessing of the first seventh days rest
was due by the Law, immediately to the works of man's obedience, so upon the last
merit of man's disobedience, man was inevitably condemned by the Law to the
eternal curse of the Law, to the actual inflicting of which curse, God,
according to his decree from all eternity, did so bind and oblige himself by
covenant, as there was no mercy to be showed to man: For, in this case man
being condemned by the Law to the curse of eternal death by the first
covenant; it had been all one for God not to be God, as not to inflict the
actual curse of the Law upon man: For, by this means, Gods truth and justice
had been overthrown. His truth had been overthrown by the breach of his
covenant; and his justice by disabling the power of his Law. There was no place
therefore for God to show mercy, or not to show mercy by his Decree of election
in the condition of man created in the state of natural and spiritual
perfection, either to the merit of man's obedience, or to the merit of man's
disobedience. It was likewise equally impossible in the order of cause, for the
state of man actually condemned by the curse of the Law to eternal death and
darkness to be the immediate object of Gods election: For, first, Gods
eternal fiery wrath proceeding from the curse of the Law, to which man was
eternally condemned, and Gods mercy by his election does stand at an eternal
distance and opposition, without a mediator; by whose mediation in satisfying
the transgressed Law for man, and in reconciling of man to the love and favor
of God, there may be place for the freedom of Gods mercy by his election.
Secondly, if this state of man actually condemned under the eternal curse of
the Law in the order of cause, should be the immediate object of Gods election,
then the elect only, and not all men fallen under the curse of the Law in Adam
the head; for the sin of Adam should be redeemed, contradictory both to the old
and new covenant, and to the whole current of Scripture. Thirdly, the Potter of
Righteousness, is said to make and temper the lump and mass of man whereof he
makes his vessels of honor and dishonor, Rom 9.21. But the mass of man
actually condemned to the curse of the Law, by eternal death and darkness,
for the transgression of the Law in Adam, is a mass of the Devils tempering;
for it was by the Devils false betraying of man, that man was brought to that
cursed estate. It is therefore impossible that God should make his vessels out
of this cursed mass of man; and that this state of man should be the immediate
object of Gods election in the order of cause. The mass of man therefore,
whereof the Potter of Righteousness does make his vessels of honor and
dishonor, is the only state of man redeemed from the curse of eternal death
and darkness, for the sin of Adam, shut up in temporal spiritual darkness,
called unbelief, and original sin, which mass of man is tempered with the
sacred blood of Christ Jesus, the Son of God, as he is man, Gal. 3.13. who made
himself a curse for man, to redeem man from the curse of the Law, for the sin
of Adam: For, out of this only estate of man, it is in the free pleasure of God
in his Son Christ Jesus, (without all impeachment to his justice) to show mercy
on whom he will show mercy, and to deny his mercy to whom he will deny his
mercy; and at his free pleasure, out of this mass, to make vessels of honor
or dishonor. The reason whereof is next to be declared.

CHAP. XXXVII.
The reasons that the redeemed state of man is the only immediate object of
Gods election.
THat the redeemed state of man in the order of cause, is the only immediate
object of Gods election, the reasons are these: First, in this estate of man,
Gal. 3.13. all men condemned to eternal death and darkness to the curse of
the Law for the sin of Adam, by the first covenant are equally redeemed from
that curse, by the cursed death of Christ Jesus, the eternal Son of God, as he
is man, begot of the seed of the woman, in time. Secondly, Romans 11.32. all men
freed from the cu^se of eternal death and darkness; for that first sin are
shut up in temporal spiritual darkness, called unbelief and original sin,
whereby God has mercy equally upon all. Thirdly, by the cursed death of the
Lord of life, 2 Cor. 5.19. whereby the transgressed Law by man was satisfied,
all men in this redeemed estate are justified by the Law for that first sin.
Fourthly, all men by his death in this redeemed estate, Romans 5.10. are
perfectly reconciled to the love and favor of God for that first sin. Fifthly,
by the perfection of the redeemed word of the Law and life of Righteousness,
first written in the heart of man, from the curse; all men by the power of the
redeemed word in the heart, are equally enabled again to live the natural life
of man; and morally to live the life of Righteousness of faith, without any
manner of natural or moral necessitating the will of man to moral
disobedience: For, unless all men were so naturally and morally enabled by the
perfection of the redemption, it were impossible for God to make any covenant
with man since the fall, as has been formerly demonstate. In this redeemed
state of man therefore, all men were equally and morally enabled to enter the
old covenant with God, and now all men are equally enabled to enter the new
covenant, and to give moral obedience to the Evangelicall command of the Law,
without any manner of power to necessitate their will to moral disobedience.
And this is the first grace of God to man, and therefore called the state of
grace; for the state of the redemption of man, does so far surmount the state
of the created perfection of man, as far as the invaluable sacred blood of the
Son of God, does surmount all the creatures created by God. Out of this
redeemed state of man, God, according to his eternal purpose, has decreed
from all eternity, to elect a certain number, by predestinating them to be made
like to the Image of his Son, whereby they are preserved from being overcome by
the temptation of Satan and of his instruments, till they be spiritually
called; that by spiritual faith they may overcome the strongest temptation of
Satan in this life, and that in recompense of their spiritual valor in this
life, they may be crowned with an incorruptible crown of glory in their
mystical head in the life to come. And these are the vessels of honor
mentioned here by the Apostle. As for the vessels of dishonor, which are said
here by the Apostle to be made by God, it is most warily to be conceived: For,
as it is most certain, that God has decreed to elect a certain number to be
made like to the image of his Son, out of the redeemed state of man: So it is
as certain, that God has decreed from all eternity, to relinquish a certain
number in the grace of this redeemed estate; and to leave them at their
pleasure to be finally overcome, or not overcome, by the temptation of Satan
and his instruments: For, by man's wilful yielding to be finally overcome by
Satan's temptation, he wilfully deprives himself of his spiritual calling. But
in this dereliction of man in the grace of his redeemed estate, four main
points are to be judiciously considered: The first is, that this number of men,
who are thus relinquished, are known to God alone. The second is, that these
men are so armed by the perfection of their redemption against the power of
Satan and his instruments, as all the powers of hell are not able to
necessitate the will of the redeemed man to moral disobedience, but that he
must freely and willingly yield himself to be induced by the temptation of
Satan and his instruments, or he can never be overcome by Satan. The third
point is this, that such is the power of their moral grace, that though Satan
by his false envious deceiving light, do make them stumble and fall, yet by the
perfection of their redemption, they are morally enabled to rise again to
repent them of their sin, to pray to God to pardon their actual sin, and to
reconcile themselves again to God, without any manner of created power to
necessitate their impenitency; and God has so obliged himself by covenant, as
his arms of mercy are outstretched to the penitent sinner at what time soever.
The fouth point to be considered is, that the new covenant is as freely made to
these whom God has relinquished in the grace of their redeemed estate, as to
the elect: For, the new covenant is made to all the nations of the world,
obliging the moral faith of the natural man to the obedience of the
Evangelicall Law of faith, as the spiritual faith of the regenerate man to his
spiritual obedience; and therefore the Evangelicall Law of Righteousness of
faith, is first and immediately morally commanded, though necessarily implying
the spiritual command, and the moral blessing of the seventh days
Evangelicall rest, is as due morally to the moral faith of the natural man,
as spiritually to the spiritual faith of the regenerate. And this is all that
can be affirmed to God by his relinquishing of man in the grace of his redeemed
estate. Who is therefore able to say, that these men are the vessels of
dishonor? do not the regenerate man many times foulely fall? and many times
more foulely then the natural man; for these men, whom God has thus
relinquished, are known to God alone, except a few, who are branded in this
life, that all men may be warned by forsaking of their sins, Phil. 2.12. to
work out their salvation with fear and trembling. And therefore we are
commanded not to judge; for who knows the time of Gods spiritual calling? does
not the greatest sinner many times by his spiritual calling in Gods prefixed
time, become a pillar of the Church, and such was Paul? Then the question may
be moved: How comes these men thus relinquished by God, to be made by God the
vessels of dishonor? The Apostle does answer the question; which is this, in a
word, God does suffer these wicked men to contemn his patience so long with
such a high hand, as God to show his wrath, and to make his power known, Romans
9.22. has justly made them to destruction; and these are the vessels of
dishonor, and the vessels of his wrath. The immediate cause therefore, that
God has made these wicked men the vessels of his wrath, is their obstinate
final contemning of Gods long patience; and the immediate cause of their
final contemning of Gods long patience, is the base abusing of the freedom of
their moral grace, purchased at the high rate of the sacred blood of the Son
of God; for by their final continuing in unrepented actual sin and
wickedness, they abuse the free power of their moral grace, without any
manner of power to necessitate their disobedience, and by their abusing of the
grace of their redemption, they do tread underfoot the blood of the new
covenant. It is in the behalf of these wretched men that the Apostle does move
the objection in the 19. verse of this Chapter, and answers to the objection.
The sense of the objection is this: If God has made me to destruction, who
has resisted his will, or who can help it, God has made me thus, and I much
not be against it? To this the Apostle answers, O man, who art thou that
pleadest so injustly against God? shall the thing formed, say to the former,
why have thou made me thus? to wit, while thou have given him so just reason to
make thee thus. Has not the Potter power of the clay to make of the same lump
one vessel to honor, and another to dishonor? As if the Apostle would have
said, Was thou not made of the same lump of the redeemed state of man that the
elect was made? and was not thou left in the like grace of moral power with
the elect? and was there any thing to necessitate thy foul final contempt and
disobedience more then was in the elect? And now, while by thy wilful final
obstinate contempt of God, thou have brought thy self to such a miserable
pass, that God has most justly made thee the vessel of his wrath; thou do
now most injustly blame God for thy own miserable act. But in the mean time we
must warily consider against whom Paul does press this point: For, Paul does
here dispute against the Jews, whose salvation he prefers to his own. And
therefore we must consider, that the Apostle by pressing of this point, is far
from giving any occasion to the Jews to despair of the mercies of God in his
Son Christ Jesus, which of all sins is the most fearful: For, the Apostle by
pressing of this point, labors to break the Jews from their ceremonial works
of the Law, whereby they did so obstinately contemn the Evangelicall Law of
Righteousness of faith, exhorting them to the end of the Epistle, by the works
of repentance, and amendment of life; and, as it were, to work out their
election and salvation with fear and trembling, and to leave off their
ceremonial works of the Law, to the upholding whereof they were so incensed by
the power of Satan and his instruments, whereby they did so contemn the long
patience of God leading them so graciously to repentance.

Here arises an objection to be answered: God by his Decree of election, has
predestinate a certain number out of the redeemed state of man to eternal
salvation; God therefore, (according to the rule of contraries) by his eternal
Decree, has predestinate a certain number relinquished in their redeeemed
estate, to destruction, reprobation, and actual condemnation.

I answer: First, the inference is most false and blasphemous: For, by this
inference, God is made the inevitable author, not only of actual sin, but of
the final continuance of man in actual sin; and of man's contemning of his
long patience, whereby man is made the vessel of wrath to his eternal
destruction, and all by God.

Secondly, I answer, that the election of man out of his redeemed estate of man
to salvation, and the reprobation, destruction, or condemnation of man, are no
ways immediate contraries, and therefore the inference most false and
fallacious: For, though the election of man out of the grace of the redeemed
estate, and the relinquishing of man in the grace of the redeemed state of man
be immediately opposite; yet many things does interveen before God can make man
the vessel of his wrath to destruction, to show his wrath, and to manifest the
glory of his power according to the Apostles words: For, first, temptation of
Satan and his instruments must incense the heart of man to the pleasure of sin:
Secondly, man must continue in sin, wickedness, and uncleanness: Thirdly,
though the natural man continue in sin, yet all this while he may morally
repent; for as yet there is nothing to necessitate his moral impenitency: For,
it is only the final ostinacy, contempt, and impenitency of man, that bars him
from moral repentance: Fourthly, God must suffer his patience to be long
provoked, until the obstinate final contemner make himself the compacted
vessel of Gods wrath, past all feeling of sin, giving himself over to all
uncleanness with greediness. And this is the man whom the Apostle says, that
is made by God to destruction; the immediate cause whereof, is the immediate
precedent act of man; for God cannot condemn man, but by the mediate
condemnation of the Law; and his Law can never condemn man, but by the merit
of man's final obstinate contempt and impenitency to the command of the Law
interveening. Against this it is instanced, all things that comes to pass in
this world, are by the power of Gods Decree of predestination. That these men
therefore do so contemn the long patience of God; and that God does so suffer
in this world, it is by the power of his Decree. To this I answer, It is most
certain, that all things that does, or can come to pass in this world, falls
under the compass of Gods decree; but all things that comes to pass in this
life, are not from the positive actual power of his Decree: For, a world of
things comes to pass by the permissive power of his Decree, and so does his
suffering of his long patience to be so contemned by these wicked wretches, on
whom he has decreed to show his wrath, and to declare his power to their
eternal destruction, which is never actually inflicted upon man, till the
great day, because this fiery wrath of God does proceed from the curse of the
Law inflicted upon man in the full extent, as he is man intellectual and
sensitive, which never can be inflicted upon man in this life, because of the
dissolution of man in the intellectual and sensitive nature of man; and
because of the new covenant, whereby man has all the day of this life to
repent. Out of this which is declared in these last two Chapters, arising from
the light of the truth of the sacred Word of God; I do infer this necessary
conclusion: That absolute imaginary decree, whereby God is affirmed out of his
alone mere pleasure, to elect a certain number of men to salvation, without all
respect to the immediate object of his election, without respect to his
spiritual calling, whereby the election does stand, without respect to the
immediate object of his spiritual calling, which is the Lords only merit, and
consequently without all respect to the Lord himself, second person of the
glorious Trinity. And that absolute imaginary decree, whereby God is affirmed,
out of his alone free pleasure to condemn the rest of the world to the
eternal torments of hell, which is the curse of the Law, without all respect
of man's meriting by his transgression of the Law, without respect to the first
covenant, whereby God and man were mutually obliged, without respect to the
creation of man, in the state of natural and spiritual perfection, whereby
man was perfectly enabled to fulfill the command of the Law of Righteousness,
withot respect to the f^ll of man from that state of perfection under the
eternal curse of the Law, without respect to the redemption of man from that
fearful curse, by the sacred blood of the Son of God, without all respect to
the new covenant, whereby all the nations of the world are called to believe in
the Lords merit by his fulfilling of the pomise of the blessed seed, to whose
faith, the blessing of the Lords merit, by his Evangelicall rest, (which the
blessing of eternal life) is most freely offered, which is most freely cut off
from all men, by this miserable imaginary fictious decree; for by this
blasphemous fictious decree, the immediate cause of the salvation and damnation
of man, is peremptorily affirmed to be the alone free act of the will and
pleasure of God, which is but the only immediate cause that God does elect one,
and not another, out of the redeemed estate of man for the immediate cause of
his election, is his eternal love to the elect in his Son Christ Jesus, by his
spiritual calling; as the immediate cause of the condemnation of the reprobate
is their own immediate act by their obstinate final contemning of the long
patience of God, as may appear by the words of the Apostle faithfully delivered
in these two last Chapters.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
The child departing this life unbaptized is saved by the precious blood of
Christ Jesus, by the immediate act of the redemption.
NInthly, it is objected out of our Saviors words: John 3.5. Except a man be
born of water, and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God.
Children therefore departing this life in original sin, unbaptized, are
condemned by the eternal curse of the Law.

I answer, the inference is fallacious: For, first, our Savior speaks here to
Nicodemus, a Ruler and Teacher of the Jews, and not to man, that is a child.
Secondly, Christ speaks not here to Nicodemus simply, of the external
sacrament of Baptism (which was then administered by John, and the Apostles)
but of spiritual Baptism, which the external sacrament did represent; by
which spiritual Baptism, the natural man's spiritual darkness (wherein he is
shut up and dead, as he is a spiritual man) is spiritually enlightened; by the
sanctifying power of which spiritual light, the natural man is quickened
again, and raised a new lively spiritual man by spiritual faith, who by the
eyes of his spiritual faith, does now see to enter the spiritual Kingdom of
God. And this is the spiritual Baptism which our Savior does call the birth
of the Spirit, and tells Nicodemus, that a man by external Baptism simply
(without this spiritual Baptism) cannot enter the Kingdom of God, because it
is the free gift of God, and not tied to the external administration of the
Sacrament of Baptism. And therefore our Savior does compare this free gift of
God by regeneration, Joh. 3.8. to the freedom of the wind: For, as the wind
does freely blow where it lists; so does the spiritual light of God
enlighten whom he lists, by dispercing the spiritual darkness of the soul
of man, to see the way to enter into the Kingdom of heaven. As concerning the
child's departing this life unbaptized by the external sacrament of Baptism:
First, the child is freed from the curse of the Law, in Adam the redeemed head
of man (in whom the child transgressed the Law,) who by the perfection of the
redemption, is freed from the eternal curse of the Law by the first covenant.
Secondly, there is no actual sin in the child whereby the child can be liable
to the curse of the law of faith by the new covenant; which curse is due only
for actual sin by final obstinate contempt of the Law of faith. The child
therefore is baptized with the sacred blood and water issuing from the blessed
heart of our Savior upon the cross, which the external sacrament of Baptism
does represent. The child therefore departing this life, is saved by the sacred
blood of Christ Jesus, and a glorious Saint in heaven, for of such are the
Kingdom of heaven: As the child therefore is said to sin in Adam, so the child
is redeemed in Adam. It is not therefore the want of external Baptism which
can condemn the child, unless the child were of such discretion of
understanding, as the child did contemn the sacrament of Baptism, (by the
sacramental water) signifying the water of eternal life, whereby the baptized
is washed from his actual sins, wherein he is (as it were) drowned and dead,
and is raised to the new life of faith to believe in the Lords merit, to save
him from the second death: For, in the primitive Church, they were only
baptized who did actually believe. Al children therefore in the Primitive
Church, departing unbaptized, (by the consequence of this fearful objection)
should be damned, contrary to the very words of the new covenant, he that does
believe, and shall be baptized, shall be saved. It is neither by the preaching
of the Word, or by the ex^ernall administration of the Sacraments, but it is by
the immediate faith of man in the Lords merit, that man is saved from the
second death. Thus having declared the perfection of the redemption of man,
from the curse of the Law for the sin of Adam, shut up in spiritual darkness
(called unbelief and original sin) according to the eternal Decree of God, as
the act of the redemption, does concern all men in general, male and female,
created in Adam, naturally to descend of Adam to the end of the world: And
having answered and determined the most material objections, against the
declaration thereof, we now proceed to the third Book.

THe Author of this small Tractate, having fully ended it, did intend to fit it
for the Press as soon as conveniently he could, but being at London about his
other occasions, he did accidentally come into the company, where some worthy
Gentlemen were earnestly in discourse about some points of Religion. After
which conference, he did resolve at his coming home, to draw his Book into as
short and plain a way as possibly he could for the Readers better
understanding. And thus far he went; and then it pleased God to take him to
himself, before he could write one word of the third Book, which he did intend
to contract very much, because he had spoke so much of the Lords day before.
But I, not knowing how to get it done according to his mind; and being loath to
mangle so excellent a Work, have rather thought good to set forth this third
Book, word for word, as it was in his first method, and to venture the censure
of some, rather then to keep it in any longer, being exceedingly troubled in
mind, that it has been kept almost this six years from the public view.

The third Book of the Theological Key, containing the third Covenant made by
God with man.
CHAP. I.
Christ manifesting of himself at his coming in the world.
WE are now, (according to our Method) to declare such acts of the blessed
seed, as they are set down in his sacred Word, performed by him, while he was
personally upon earth. Christ Jesus the eternal Son of God, made flesh of the
seed of the woman, in time, according to the Decree of God from all eternity;
as he is the first begotten Son of the most High (by his birthright) Prophet,
Priest, and King, so by the execution of his threefold office, Christ Jesus did
manifest himself, Prophet, Priest, and King: First, therefore, of the execution
of his Prophetical office: Secondly, of his Priestly; and, Thirdly, of his
Kingly office.

The execution of Christ's Prophetical office, (while he was personally upon
earth) was by the immediate power of his Word, as he himself was the promised
rest of the seventh day of the Prophetical Sabbath. Christ Jesus, (the Word)
as the redeemed Word, (his Image) is internally written in the heart of man,
his Word is the redeemed light and life of man. And as his Word is externally
objected to the external senses, he is the continuation of the redeemed life
and light of man: His Word, under the prophetical obligement of the Law, was
the word of the seventh day of the prophetical Sabbath, implying the whole
prophetical Law, and the whole old Testament: As the life and light of the
promised Sabbaticall rest did proceed from his love to man; so Christ Jesus, at
his being personally in the world, did manifest himself light, love, and life
to man. His light was in the sound of his Word; and by the power of his Word,
his miracles were wrought; and this was the light which did gloriously shine
amongst the Jews, while he was personally conversant with the Jews. This
glorious light, by the sound of his Word, did shine to the Jews, first, and
immediately, by his own immediate Word: And secondly, by the commanded ministry
of the Apostles. By the light of his immediate Word; first the understanding of
the Jews was enlightened in the prophesies, prophesying of the coming of the
blessed seed, from the foundation of the world, Mat. 4.17. Mar. 1.21. Luke
4.21. Ioh. 3.13. whereby our Savior did manifest himself to the Jews, that he
was the promised rest of their Sabbath; and that he was the seed of the woman,
who must die for the sins of man, and rest after his death, upon the Sabbath,
for the recovering of the eternal rest of the first seventh day, lost by Adam;
and that he it was, that must rise again to break the head of the Serpent, for
the betraying of man. All which was so many prophesies of himself, whereby
Christ did discharge his prophetical office, Joh. 3.14. as he did likewise
prophecy his death by the lifting up of the brazen Serpent, and his resting in
the grave, Mat. 12.40. by Jonas rest in the Whales belly, and both his death
and resurrection in saying, Joh. 2.19. Destroy this Temple, and in three days
I will raise it again: So did he prophecy of the destruction of Jerusalem,
Luke 21.6. So his second coming, and the day of judgment, and many such like.
Secondly, by this glorious shining light by the sound of his Word, our Savior,
Mat. 5.20. did clear the obscured light of the Law, corrupted by the false
gloss of the Scribes and Pharisees, arising from the Devils darkness.
Thirdly, as Christ Jesus, while he was personally in the world, by the light of
the sound of his Word, the Jews understanding was enlightened to know, that he
was the promised blessed seed: So by the light of the power of his Word, by his
wonders and miracles, he did manifest himself to be the eternal Son of God.
With the glorious fame of whose wonders and miracles, the whole world was
filled and amazed; insomuch that the Jews were constrained to acknowledge the
Lord of life to be the Son of God, though the Jews darkness (led by the Devils
false deceiving light) could not comprehend that glorious shining light.
Fourthly, at this glorious light did proceed from the love of the Lord of life
to man, by his promised Sabbatical rest: So he did manifest his love (while he
was personally upon earth) to man, in curing of all manner of incurable
sensitive diseases of the body, and the diseased souls of many, by the
pardoning of sin. None were denied the blessing of his rest, who came to him by
the light of his love. As this glorious light did shine to the Jews immediately,
by Christ himself, as he was the promised rest of the prophetical Sabbath day;
so this glorious light did shine immediately by the ministry of the Apostles,
whom our Savior did send abroad, Mat. 10.7. to preach and teach this glorious
shining light, shining from the Son of God; whom likewise (before his death and
resurrection) he authorized to preach and to teach the Evangel, and to
administrate the Sacrament of Baptism; as John did first, before Christ's
manifesting of himself to the world. And to the end that both Jew and Gentile
might understand, that our Savior was the promised blessed seed, prophesied by
the prophetical Sabbath; our Savior himself, Mat. 3.13. was baptized by John,
to let both the Jews and Gentiles understand, that as by his submersion, as it
were, in the water, (by his baptism) that he it was, who must be drowned in the
sea of Gods eternal wrath, (by his cursed death of the cross) to redeem man
from the curse of the Law, for the sin of all men in Adam: So by his rising out
of the water, both Jews and Gentiles might understand, that he should rise
again from the cursed death of the cross. And though our Savior himself did
not baptize; yet the night that he was betrayed, he did institute the Sacrament
of the supper. All this was done by our Savior, that all men might then know
and understand, that Christ Jesus was the end of the Law.

Here does arise an objection: It was affirmed in the 29.30, 31. Chapters of
the second Book, that the continuation of the prophetical obligement of the
Law was from the first period of the promise of the blessed seed to Adam, till
the day of Christ's resurrection from the grave; and now by our Saviors own
doctrine and preaching of the Evangelicall Word: And by his sending of his
Apostles to preach and teach, and to administrate the Sacrament of Baptism,
and by his own administration of the Sacrament of the supper, all manifesting,
Mat. 5.17. Christ Jesus to be the end of the prophetical Law. The prophetical
Law therefore, and the prophetical Sacraments were actually determined by our
Savior before either his death or resurrection.

I answer: It is most truly affirmed by us, but the consequence is falsely
inferred: For, though Christ Jesus before his death, did make his Evangelicall
Will and Testament, sealing his Will by the Evangelicall Sacraments; yet his
Evangelicall Will and Testament, was not in force before the death of the
Testator: And therefore, though our Savior, did thus manifest himself before
his death by the execution of his prophetical office, by making of his last
Will and Testament, and by sealing of his Will, by the institution of the
Evangelicall Sacraments; yet his prophetical Will and Testament sealed by the
prophetical Sacraments, was in force till the prophetical Sabbath day,
(implying the command of the whole prophetical ceremonial Law) was actually
determined by the blessed day of Christ's resurrection. And so much for the
discharging of Christ's prophetical office at his first manifesting of himself
to the world. Next of the execution of his Priestly office.

CHAP. II.
The execution of Christ's Priestly office, while he was upon earth.
THough Aaron, and the high Leviticall Priest, is said to be the figure of
Christ Jesus, (the high Priest of our souls) yet our Savior was not a Priest
after the order of Aaron or Levi; neither was he of the Tribe of Levi. But
Christ Jesus was a Priest after the order of Melchisedeck, Psalm. 110 4. Heb.
7.17. Neither must we conceive that the Leviticall high Priest was the figure
of our Savior in all respects, as he was a Priest: For, though the sacrifice
of the brazen altar was offered and sacrificed by the Leviticall high Priest
himself; yet our Savior did not offer and sacrifice himself, prefigurate by
that sacrifice; though (out of his infinite love to man) our Savior (patience
it self) did lay down his life, willingly and freely to be taken away by the
bloody cruel hands of the wicked, incensed by the malicious darkness of the
great Dragon: For, all the created powers of God could not have bereaved our
Savior of his life, without his own gracious permission. The Analogy
therefore, between the Leviticall high Priest, and our Savior, was in the
Priesthood (though not in every respect) and in the sacrifice offered by the
high Priest. And though the Analogy between the two sacrifices be the chief
point of this declaration; yet the Analogy between the two high Priests must
be first, (though briefly) declared. And next the Analogy between the two
sacrifices: The Leviticall high Priest did prefigurate the Priesthood of Christ
Jesus, specially in three respects: First, both the high Priests did make
atonement by the sacrifice which was offered. The Leviticall high Priest
morally, ceremonially, and temporally; Christ Jesus spiritually and eternally.
The second respect was in the circumstance of time, when the atonement was
made. The Leviticall high Priest (beside his moral and ceremonial atonement)
Exodus 30.9.10. did once a year (to wit) in the end of the year, enter the inner
Tabernacle to make atonement (at the Mercy-seat) both for his own actual
spiritual sins, and for the actual spiritual sins of the people; by whose
entering in the inner Tabernacle once in the end of the year, the end of the
prophetical obligement of the Law was prefigurate: But Christ Jesus, Heb. 9.28.
did enter the Tabernacle not made with hands, but once in the end of the year
(as it were) of the prophetical ceremonial obligement of the Law. And
therefore Christ Jesus is said, Heb. 10.10. to have entered but once for all:
For, though the high Leviticall Priest, by the quotidian, and by the
Sabbaticall sacrifices, and ceremonial commanded rites, did purge the
transgressors of the moral and ceremonial Law, morally and ceremonially,
according to the command of the Law; yet, by the command of God by ^is Law, the
high Priest was to enter the inner Tabernacle once a year, to obtain the pardon
of actual spiritual sin at the Mercy-seat, whereby it was signified, that
there is no pardon of actual sin, as it is spiritual, but by God himself only
and immediately; and therefore the pardon was given to the high Priest
immediately in the behalf of the people, as he was the figure of the high
Priest, Christ Jesus to whom all power in heaven and in earth, is given by the
sacred Trinity. The third point of the Analogy between the high Priests, was,
that as the Leviticall high Priest, before he entered the inner Tabernacle, (the
holiest place) first, he did sacrifice the Holocaust sacrifice of the brazen
altar, with the rites and service belonging to that sacrifice: as the offering
up the sweet insence at the golden altar, kindled by the fire of the brazen
altar, which came down from heaven; after the offering whereof, Levit. 16.3, 4.
clothed with a white robe, besprinkled with the blood of the sacrifice of the
brazen altar, and with sweet insence kindled with the same fire, the high
Priest did enter the holiest place: So our Savior, after he was first offered
in a sacrifice upon the hard brazen cursed altar of the cross, clothed with
the rich white robe of his Righteousness, besprinkled with the precious blood
of his own sacrifice, and with the odoriferous insence thereof, did gloriously
enter the Tabernacle, not made with hands, (by his infinite merit) to make
eternal intercession and atonement at the Mercy-seat of Righteousness, for
the mystical members of his body, spiritually and indivisibly united to their
mystical head, by his indivisible love. As for the Analogy between the
sacrifice offered up by the Leviticall high Priest, and the sacrifice
prefigurate thereby, it did likewise consist in three special points: First,
as the blood of the Leviticall sacrifice of the brazen altar, was first shed,
and then laid upon the brazen altar: So the sacred blood of the Son of God was
shed first by his crowning with a crown of sharp prickly thorns, causing
streams of blood to besmeare his glorious face and body. Secondly, by his
cruel scourging, which was a most c uell kind of bloody punishment, according
to the manner of the Jews. Thirdly, by the flood of blood, by reason of the
great boisterous nails to hold his body fast to the cursed altar of the cross,
prefigurate by the brazen altar. The Analogy of the second point between the
two sacrifices, was, that both was an Holocaust, sacrifice: For, as the
Leviticall sacrifice of of the brazen altar was wholly burnt up, and consumed by
the fire which came down from heaven; so the sacrifice of the Lord of life, (as
he is man) was burnt up, and consumed by the fire of Gods wrath, which came
down from ^eaven, for the actual curse of the Law for the sin of Adam, to
which C^^st did oblige himself to sustain for wretched unthankful man, by
whose to fed death, all men are redeemed from that curse. The third point of
the A^alogie of the two sacrifices, was, Levit. 4.12. that as the ashes of the
whole burnt sacrifice of the brazen altar was taken from the brazen altar, and
carried in ash-pans, and laid apart from the altar, in a clean place: So the
blessed body of our Savior, Joh. 19.38, 39, 40, 41. was taken down from the
cursed altar of the cross by Joseph of Arimathea, Nicodemus, and others of
that religious company, prefigurate by the ash-pans, and carried and laid in a
new sepulcher, wherein no man was formerly laid. Because the point of this
declaration is in the sacrifice of our blessed Savior, the declaration thereof
shall be discharged in these two heads: First, our Saviors cruel cursed
death, by the cursed altar of the cross, shall be declared: And secondly, the
place where the Lord was laid, prefigurate by the ashes of the sacrifice of the
brazen altar, which were carried apart from the altar, and laid in a clean
place. Because the sacrifice of our Savior is plainly set down in the
Scripture, we will first, only make a brief and summary relation of the
several pasges thereof; and next, certain mystical concerning points shall be
observed of the death and suffering of our Savior. Of all the stratagems of
Satan by his false deceiving bewitching light; his incensing of miserable men,
with such bloody cruel hands, to crucify the Lord of life, was most admirable
and strange: For, first the power of actual freedom, of natural and moral
grace, which they then enjoyed by the redemption of man from the curse of the
Law, by the eternal Decree of God, (though to be performed in time) was such,
as Satan, and all the created powers of God, could not necessitate the will of
man to any moral evil; but that man must be willingly and freely led and
induced to commit that evil. Secondly, the prophetical Sabbath was the glory
of the Jews nation, whereby the Jews were so eminent, and had such great
preferment above all the nations of the earth, which glory and great preferment
the Jews did then enjoy by faith in the blessing of the promised rest of the
blessed seed, prophesied by the prophetical Sabbath, as it was the seventh day
of the prophetical ceremonial Law, which was then the immediate object of the
Jews faith. And though our Savior did manifest himself to the Jews, that he
was that blessed seed, which was prophesied by the prophetical Sabbath,
(shining then so gloriously amongst the Jews) by his gracious light, leading
them to his love, which was freely extended toward all, rich and poor, in his
curing of all manner of sensitive incurable diseases of the body, and the
diseased souls of many, engaging thereby so the general love of all, that
happy was he who could but touch the Lord of life; to none was his love and
help denied, who were led to him by this gracious light of the sound of his
Word, who by the power of his wonders and miracles, did manifest himself to be
the Son of God, engaging the reverend fear of all by the convincing power of
whose wonders and miracles, the wretched Jews were constrained to acknowledge
so much; yet that Satan (by his false deceiving light) should notwithstanding
so induce the unthankful Jews not to suppress, but (with such bloody hands)
to extinguish the light of their own eternal life and rest, it cannot but
amaze the heart of man; though all was by the hand of Gods permissive power:
For, though the power of Satan's false deceiving light be wonderful, yet Satan
with all his power, must work all his mischief only by the betraying of the
willing consent of man, to have man to effect what he would; of whose help
Satan himself did then stand in great need; for this miserable act of Satan was
not so much out of his malice to man, as out of Satan's own fear: For, by the
greatness of this glorious light of the promised blessed seed, Satan began to
be afraid, that the head of his power must be broke by the seed of the woman;
and therefore it did stand Satan in hand, in time to prevent this so great and
eminent danger, which that false Serpent did by suggesting such a light of
apparent fear to the Priests, Scribes, and Pharisees of the utter loss of
their glorious Sabbath, and of the Leviticall dignity, means, and preferment,
if they should give way to this glorious light to shine amongst them, whereby
the world was so led and carried; by which false suggested fear of Satan's false
deceiving light, the Scribes and Pharisees, and the rest of that rablement,
were furiously incensed with all greedy desire, not to suppress, but
extinguish the light it self, whereby both might rest secure from any such
fear, which this barbarous crew did with most cruel bloody hands effect,
though while their cruel hands were in external action, their hearts were
internally pricked with the power of this light, as may appear by the sacred
History, from the first point to the last: For, first, while the Scribes and
Parisees did hire their Helhounds to apprehend the Lord of life, the Lord told
the Helhounds, John 18.5, 6.12.13. that he was the man whom they did seek. And
though by the power of his Word they fell back to the ground; yet up again, and
to the Lord they went: And though Malcomes ear, Luke 22, 50, 51. (being struck
off) was miraculously cured by our Savior; (a glim of the light of the rest of
their glorious Sabbath) yet such was the power of the Devils darkness,
obscuring that glorious light, as our blessed Savior (like a malefactor) was
haled to the judgment hall. And though Pilat (convinced by the power of this
glorious light) did thrice pronounce the Lord innocent, yet Pilat, (led by
Satan's light) his tongue condemned the Lord of life. But Pilate, by hearing one
of the murdering crew say, Joh. 19.7. that Christ affirmed himself to be the
Son of God, Pilats heart (being pricked again by that word) sought to set our
Savior at liberty; till another told Pilate, Joh. 19.12, 13. that if he should
do so, Pilat should show himself an enemy to Caesar; at which words, Pilate
fearing, by his letting of Christ go free, the loss of his place, if not his
life; Pilate delivered the King of glory to the murderers: For, the Scribes
and Pharisees cried out that they had a Law, and that by that Law, Christ ought
to die, and there was a reason of right for all. Our Savior therefore being
delivered to the merciless band; first, Mar. 15.15. he was cruelly scourged, a
fearful bloody punishment, and of no less cruelty, according to the judicial
Law, used amongst the Jews: Secondly, his glorious head (in derision) Mar.
15.17. was crowned with a prickly crown of thorns, by the sharp pricks
whereof, streams of his precious blood did besmear his gracious face, and
blessed body: Thirdly, being so bloodily crowned, Mat. 27.29. a reedy Scepter
was put in his hand, (by their Apish gestures) saluting the King of glory for
the king of the Jews, though by right descent, Christ Jesus was their King
indeed: Fourthly, our Savior was commanded (by the cruel torturors) John
19.17. to bear his cross, the curse whereof he was to bear, both in soul and
body: Fifthly, our Savior was (with merciless cruelty) nailed to the cross,
and (most ignominiously) hanged between two notorious thieves: Sixthly, our
Savior thirsting (in the agony of his passion) Mat. 27.34.38. was offered the
bitter potion of vinegar and gall to drink; so that all the sensitive powers of
the Lord of life, the Son of God (as he is man) from his head to his body,
hands and feet, were most cruelly and mercilesly martyred by the bloody
murderers, for the space, from the sixth hour to the ninth; though nothing to
the martyrdom of his burned soul, burnt up by the fiery wrath of God from
heaven, proceeding from the actual inflicting of the curse of the Law, to the
sustaining whereof, the Son of God, (as he is man) out of his love to man, did
freely oblige himself by covenant. The sustaining of which torture, upon the
cursed altar of the cross, made our Savior cry out, My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me? All which miseries, (proceeding from the curse of the law)
the Lord of life, the eternal Son of God, God equal with the Father, (out of
his infinite love to man) did predestinate himself, by his Decree from all
eternity, to suffer, as he is man. And last of all, these bloody Helhounds,
(that they might be sure, that his glorious light might never shine again) John
19.34. did with a spear pierce the Lord of life to the heart, of which wound,
issued blood and water. And so much for the brief summary relation of the
sacrifice of our Savior, offered for man, condemned to the eternal curse of
the Law, whereby the Son of God, Christ Jesus, out of his love to man, made
himself a curse for man, to redeem man from the curse of the Law, for the sin
of Adam. Next, some mystical concerning points are to be observed of the
cruel martyrdom of our blessed Savior.

CHAP. III.
The mystical sense of the sacrifice of Christ Jesus, the Son of God, out of
his infinite love to man.
FIrst, by our Saviors coaction, to bear his cross, to which he was
predestinate, by the Decree of God from all eternity: The cross of afflictions
of his mystical members, predestinate to be made like to the Image of his
afflictions in this life, is mystically signified: For, his mystical members,
as they are the Image of his afflictions, must participate with their mystical
head, and taste of the cup which their mystical head has drunk, charged up to
the brim; that as they have suffered with their mystical head in this life, so
they may reign in their head, crowned with an incorruptible Crown of glory,
eternally in all heavenly happiness in the life to come: For, afflictions is
the strait gate in this life, whereby his mystical members must enter into the
kingdom of heaven. Secondly, by our Saviors thirsting upon the cursed altar
of the cross, while he was offered the bitter potion, of vinegar and gall (by
the torturing helhounds) to quench his thirst, is mystically signified the
eternal torments of the Reprobate in hell, burnt up with the actual
inflicting of the curse of the Law in the full extent, by the consuming fire of
Gods eternal wrath; who, while as they thirst, no other liquor shall they have
to quench their unquenchable thirst, but the gally dregs of the Devils
darkness, with the voluptuous sensitive pleasures whereof they did so surfeit
in this life. Thirdly, by the words of our Savior (while he did endure and
sustain the curse of the Law upon the cursed altar of the cross) saying, My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? The extremity of his sustaining of the
wrath of God in the full extent, in the torturing of his soul, is mystically
signified, as the tortures of his sensitive body, by his sensitive martyrdom,
was patient to all; whereby our Savior did manifest himself true man to the
world. Fouthly, by our Saviors words, (at the giving up of his Spirit) saying,
John 19 30. It is finished; was mystically signified, that by his death; all
the material altars and sacrifices; all the figures, types, rites, and
ceremonies, prefigurating the coming and death of the blessed seed, were all
finished and determined by his death, never to be reiterate in the Church of
God. Fifthly, by the darkness from the sixth hour to the ninth, (which was the
hour of his death) at which hour the darkness vanished, was mystically
signified, that all the cloudy darkness of the prophetical ceremonial Law,
were quite vanished away, never to be reiterate in the Church of God. Sixthly,
by the rending of the vail of the Temple at Christ's giving up of his Spirit,
(which has been formerly mentioned) the calling of the Gentiles, with the Jews
in one Church, was mystically signified; who upon the next day following, (to
wit, upon the day of the Lords resurrection from the grave) were all actually
called in one Church by the new covenant, to the great joy and comfort of all
the nations of the world. Seventhly, by the piercing of our Saviors heart with
the spear, where the intellectual and sensitive spirits of man, (as he is man)
are essentially united, It was mystically signified again, that all the types,
figures, and rites of the ceremonial Law, prefigurating our Saviors cursed
death of the cross, from the foundation of the world, were all pierced (as it
were) to the heart, never to be reiterate in the Evangelicall Church of God.
Eighthly, by the blood and water, issuing from the wound of our Saviors heart,
the sacramental seals of the new Testament, were mystically signified: For, as
in the sacrament of Baptism, by the sacramental water, the water of eternal
life is signified, representing the water issuing from our Saviors wounded
heart, accompanied with his heart blood, whereby the baptized's actual sins
are signified to be washed away, and whereby the baptized is raised from his
death in actual sin, to the new life of says; to let the baptized, and all
men understand, that actual sin is washed away by our Saviors heart blood,
which was accompanied with the water issuing from his wounded heart; and
therefore it is said by the Apostle, 1 John 5.6. This is he that came by water,
not by water only; but by water and blood. So in the sacrament of the Lords
Supper, by the sacramental bread, the bread of eternal life is signified, as
by the sacramental wine our Saviors heart blood is signified; whereby the
bread of life is purchased, to let all men understand, that the new life of
faith is fed and nourished by the bread of life, purchased by his sacred blood;
which bread of life is the Word, blessed and sanctified by the Lords infinite
merit, in the spiritual understanding whereof is eternal life, according to
our Saviors own word, John 17.3. This is life eternal, to know thee, who is
only known by his Word. Ninthly, by our Saviors last words upon the cross,
Luke 23.46. Father, into thy hands I commend my Spirit (which was our Saviors
humane Spirit,) it was signified, that as our Savior was man, the Son of God
from all eternity; so is man, begot by his Father, of the seed of the woman in
time; and every way true man the Son of God. Tenthly, and lastly, by our
Saviors outstretched arms, nailed to the cross, the new covenant to be made
with all the nations of the world, was mystically signified again. And so much
for the mystical points of the sacrifice of Christ Jesus, the eternal Son of
God, as he is man; prefigurate by the sacrifice of the brazen altar, offered by
the Leviticall high Priest. Now, since our Savior was not a Priest after the
order of Aaron or Levi, the question may be moved, What manner of Priesthood
was this, whereby Christ is said to be a Priest after the order of Melchisedeck?

CHAP. IV.
The reason that Christ is called a Priest after the order of Melchisedeck; and
the execution of Christ's Kingly office, while he was upon earth.
THe Question moved in the former Chapter, is commonly answered, that the
Reason, that Christ is said to be a Priest after the order of Melchisedeck, is,
that as Melchisedeck was without father or mother; So Christ, as he is man, is
without a natural father, naturally descended of Adam; and as he is God,
Christ is without a mother. But this point is warily to be conceived: For,
though it be said, that Melchisedeck was without father or mother, we must
understand the words in this sense; that Melchisedeck was without any known
father and mother; for his parents are concealed by the Scripture, not that we
should conceive that Melchiseck was not man, naturally descended of Adam, but
for another reason which shall be showed; neither must we conceive, that there
was any such sacrifice offered by Melchisedeck, as was offered by our Savior:
For, Melchisedeck could offer no other manner of sensitive sacrifice, then the
sacrifice of the Altar, which was commanded by the prophetical Sabbath. But
Christ Jesus is said to be a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedeck,
in respect of the eternity of the Priest; for Melchisedeck having neither known
father or mother, or kindred; Melchisedeck is said to be without beginning or
ending, and consequently his Priestly office: For, there was no lineall
succession of the Priestly office, till it was established in the Tribe of
Levi, which did only continue, during the formal prophetical ceremonial
obligement of the Law. Before which time the Priesthood was in private
Families: Of this lately declared, I infer these three necessary demonstrative
conclusions: First, the Apostles, and Apostolical successors, are not Priests,
or to be called Priests, either after the order of Melchisedeck, or after the
order of Levi: For, first, they can be no Priests, or called Priests after the
order of Melchisedeck; for so their Priesthood must be for ever: Secondly, they
can be no Priests, or called Priests after the order, or by the name of Levi;
for so they must be ceremonial sensitive Priests, by offering of ceremonial
sensitive sacrifices and gifts, still prefigurating the cursed death of our
Savior, whereby the truth of his fulfilled promise of the blessed seed, is
belied and denied.

Against this it is objected: Our Savior in the institution of the sacrament
of his last Supper, before his death (as he is high Priest, after the order of
Melchisedeck,) did by this blessing of the bread and wine, change and
transubstanciate the substance of the bread and wine in the real substance of
his body and blood, and did offer up his real body and blood (under the
external forms of bread and wine) in a propitiatory sensitive sacrifice to his
Father, for the dead, and for the quick; which sacrifice is really one with his
sacrifice of the cross, after the offering up whereof, he did give his
sacrificed real body and blood (under the external forms of bread and wine)
to his Apostles, for the sacrament of his last Supper, commanding the Apostles
(and in the Apostles the Apostolical successors) to offer up his real body
and blood in a propitiatory sensitive sacrifice, for the dead and for the
quick. And after the offering up thereof, to give his sacrificed real body and
blood, for the sacrament of his last Supper to the communicants. The Apostles
therefore, and the Apostolical successors, (by the power and authority of his
command) are still ceremonial Priests, and must offer this propitiatory
sensitive sacrifice at the material Altar, for the quick and for the dead,
under the external forms of bread and wine.

The question therefore here, is not of any metaphorical sacrifice, or of the
spiritual sacrifice of the Lords mystical members, commanded to be offered at
the spiritual Altar of righteousness; but of a proper real sensitive
propitiatory sacrifice: First, I answer to the affirmed propitiatory sacrifice
of our Saviors real body and blood, which is pretended to be offered up by
our Savior, under the external forms of bread and wine in the institution of
the sacrament of his last Supper before his death, which is the main ground of
the objection. Secondly, I answer to the affirmed real unity of this pretended
sacrifice with our Saviors sacrifice of the cross: As for the first, it is
manifest, both by the truth of the sacred History, and by the very words of the
institution of the sacrament of the Lords Supper, (before his death) that our
Savior did neither offer; nor intended to offer his real body and blood (in
the institution of the sacrament of his last Supper) in a propitiatory
sacrifice (under the external forms of bread and wine) for the quick and f^r
the dead, as is falsely pretended, contrary to all truth of the Evangelicall
History: For, as our Savior (while he was personally upon earth) having
execute his prophetical office, by delivering to his Disciples his last Will
and Testament by his sacred Word; sealed by the sacramental seal of baptizing,
which was to succeed in the Church in place of the sacrament of circumcision:
So our Savior (at the feast of the last Passover) being the next day, to
discharge his Priestly office, as he is High Priest after the order of
Melchisedeck, by his sacrifice of the cross, whereby his promise of the
blessed seed was to be fulfilled; our Savior before his death, did likewise
seal his last Will and Testament, with the institution of the sacrament of his
last Supper to succeed in place of the sacrament of the Passover, though not
to be (in force, Heb. 9 17.) till after the Testators death and resurrection
according to the Scripture; which Sacrament was not institute till the night
before his death of the cross; (in the end of the feast of the last Passover)
and that for these two main fundamental reasons: The first is, that by the
institution of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper (implying his whole last Will
and new Testament) the Disciples might understand, Heb. 10 9. that the
sacrament of the Passover, (which is the sacrament of the old Testament,
implying the whole prophetical ceremonial Law) was actually determined. The
second reason, that the Sacrament of the Lords Supper was not institute, till
the night before his suffering was, that the Disciples faith might be
strengthened against the sore temptation whereby they were to be assaulted the
next day, by our Saviors martyrdom, in sustaining the fearful curse of the
Law, by the cursed sacrifice of the cross: For, though the Sacrament was
instituted before our Saviors death; yet it is expressed in words of the
preterit time: This my body which is given for you; this my blood which is shed
for you; as if all had then been done and past, and as if our Savior had been
then dead, and risen from the dead, which was a main reason to strengthen the
Disciples faith in the Lords resurrection; though they did see him dead and
buried. And therefore our Savior that night, Mat. 26.31. did put the Disciples
upon their guard, telling them, that the Shepherd must be smitten that night,
and the sheep scattered; yet comforting them withal, that he should rise
again, Mat. 26.32. and go before them into Galilee. By the truth of this
relation of the sacred History, the judicious Reader may manifestly perceive,
that there was not the least intent in our Savior, (by the institution of the
Sacrament of his last Supper, before his death) to shed so much as a drop of
his precious blood, much less to offer his real body and blood in a
propitiatory sacrifice for the dead, and for the quick, by his death, which he
was to do the next day after, by his cursed sacrifice of the cross, as he is
high Priest, after the order of Melchisedeck. Next, to make the falsehood of
this assertion appear as plainly to the Reader, by the very words of the
institution of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper: Our Savior (in the end of
the last Passover) by prescribing the manner of the celebration of the
Sacrament of his last Supper to the Disciples, (which is by blessing and
thanksgiving) Mat. 26.26, 27. having blessed, took the bread and brake it, (to
wit) the bread, and gave it, (to wit) the bread to the Disciples, saying, Take,
eat, this is my body; that is, this bread is my body of the new Testament which
is given for you, to wit, as the flesh of the Pascall Lamb was my promised body
of the old Testament, which was promised to be given and broken for you. Also
(having given thanks) he took the cup, (to wit) with the wine, and gave it, (to
wit) the wine to them, saying, This is my blood of the new Testament, which is
shed for you; that is, this wine is my blood of the new Testament, as the real
blood of the Pascall Lamb, was my promised blood of the old Testament which was
promised to be shed; but not to be drunk by any; Drink ye all of it, that is,
of this wine: And lest there should be any mistake in the word Wine, (which our
Savior calls his blood of the new Testament, Mat. 26.28.) he does after (in
plain terms) call it the fruit of the Vine, saying, Mat. 26, 29. I will not
drink henceforth of the fruit of the vine, until that day, when I shall drink
it with you in my Fathers Kingdom; which is meaned of the Evangelicall day of
the Kingdom of Grace (to wit) the Lords Day; whereby the Lord (by his
resurrection and rest from the fulfilling of his promise of the blessed seed)
did open the kingdom of Heaven to all Believers, leading all men by the light
of his Day, to lay the hands of faith upon his merit; whereby all Believers are
made heirs of the Kingdom of Grace in this life, and of the kingdom of
Heaven, in the life to come, whose gracious merit is that bread of eternal
life, signified by the bread of the Sacrament; as by the breaking of the bread,
the breaking of our Saviors body by the curse of the cross; and by the wine,
the shedding of his precious blood is signified, whereby he did merit the bread
of eternal life. Our Savior therefore, by the institution of the Sacrament of
his last Supper, did deliver to his Apostles, and in the Apostles to the
Apostolical successors the formal Sacrament of his last Will, and new
Testament; and consequently not the real s^crifice of his real body and
blood; for there being both a real and a formal difference between the
formal Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and his sacrifice of the cross: As the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, cannot be his formal sacrifice of the cross;
so can neither his formal sensi^ive sacrifice of the cross, be the formal
Sacrament of his last Supper: For, in the Sacrament of his last Supper, (by the
sensitive sacramental elements,) the immediate object of faith is presented to
the understanding by the medi^te senses, which is the Lords merit, by his
cursed death of the cross, by his bloody rest in the grave, and by his
resurrection from the grave to be apprehended by the hands of faith, while by
our Saviors sacrifice of the cross, not the immediate, but the mediate object
of faith, is (by the mediate senses) presented to the understanding; which
mediate sensitive object (by interveening between the faith of man, and the
Lords merit) faith and the immediate object are separate, whereby the faith of
man is overthrown. And this is the reason, that all Imagery, painted or carved,
of our Savior, (as he is man) implying his death and humility, are condemned
for Idolatry, as has been formerly declared. No such surmised sacrifice
therefore being offered by our Savior in his institution of the Sacrament of
his last Supper; no command was given to the Apostles, to offer any such
fictious sacrifice; and consequently the Apostles and the Apostolical
successors; (the Ministers of the Word and Sacraments) no commanded Priests to
offer any such fictious sensitive sacrifice, at the material altar, as is
falsely pretended by the objection. Next, I answer to the affirmed real unity
of this pretended imaginary sacrifice with our Saviors sacrifice of the
cross. Leaving the Philosophical distinction of unity, as genericall,
sperificall, udomericall, real, formal, and such like. In this encounter, I
take the two last distinctions of unity (Theologically) to wit, one really, and
one formally. This affirmed unity therefore, of the two sacrifices, cannot be
formal; and therefore it must be real. This affirmed real unity therefore,
of the two sacrifice, is all one to say, as that our Savior (in the
institution of the Sacrament of his last Supper, by offering of his real body
and blood, under the external forms of bread and wine in a propitiatory
sacrifice for the dead and for the quick) did as really and in effect, sustain
the curse of the Law in the full extent, by the cursed death of soul and body,
as he did by his cursed sacrifice of the cross; which fearful assertion is
repugnant to the truth of all Christian faith: For, by this affirmed real
unity of the two sacrifices, these subsequent inevitable conclusions must
necessarily follow. First, by this affirmed real unity of the two sacrifices,
the first surmised propitiatory sacrifice, (pretended to be offered by our
Savior) must be a cursed sacrifice: For, such was our Saviors sacrifice of
the cross, Gal. 3.13. And consequently, our Saviors sacrificed real body and
blood (which is pretended to be given to the Apostles) cursed, which is highest
blasphemy to affirm. Secondly, by the affirmed real unity of these two
sacrifices, the pretended propitiatory sacrifice (affirmed to be offered by our
Savior, in the instituting of the Sacrament of his last Supper,) must be a
sensitive real bloody sacrifice; for there is no propitiatory sacrifice for
sin, Heb. 9.22. without the sensitive blood of the sacrificed; for such was our
Saviors propitiatory sacrifice of the cross: But the propugnators of this
surmised propitiatory sacrifice, will acknowledge no sensitive real blood in
their sacrifice; and therefore they must acknowledge this pretended
propitiatory sacrifice to be no propitiatory sacrifice. Thirdly, by the
affirmed, real unity of these two sacrifices; this surmised pretended
sacrifice (affirmed to be offered by our Savior) must be a deadly sacrifice,
by the sensitive death of the sacrificed, for such was our Saviors sacrifice
of the cross: But the propagnators of this surmised sacrifice, must
acknowledge no such sensitive death of our Savior (by the institution of the
Sacrament of his last Supper,) and therefore, they must acknowledge their
pretended sacrifice to be no sacrifice. Fourthly, by the real affirmed unity
of these two sacrifices; the only one sacrifice of our Savior by the death of
the cross, as be is high Priest after the order of Melchisedeck, once offered
for all, is plainly denied: For, by this affirmed real unity of the two
sacrifices, our Savior died twice. Fifthly, by the affirmed real unity of the
two sacrifices, the first surmised pretended sacrifice is a false sacrifice:
For by the adoration of this imaginary sacrifice, the truth of the Lords
commanded worship (by the Lords Day) is contradicted, which is commanded to be
celebrate in spirit and truth, and not in the adoration of such a false
sacrifice. Sixthly, by the affirmed real uni^y of these two sacrifices; the
first pretended sacrifice is a faithless sacrifice: For, by this pretended
sacrifice, the faith of man, and the immediate object of faith, (which is the
Lords merit) are actually separate. Seventhly, by the real affirmed unity of
these two sacrifices, the pretended sacrifice affirmed to be offered by our
Savior, in the institution of the Sacrament of his last Supper, is an
Idolatrous sacrifice: For, by the adoring of this sacrifice, the sensitive
object does interveen between the Lord and his immediate commanded worship.
Eighthly, by the real affirmed unity of these two sacrifices; Christ was
really dead before his last Will and Testament was sealed by the sacrament of
his last Supper, implying the whole Evangel and new Testament, and consequently
his last Will and Testament no Will. Ninthly, by the affirmed real unity of
these two sacrifices; man was actually redeemed from the curse of the Law for
the sin of Adam, and the Law was fulfilled for man by our Savior before his
death of the cross, before his bloody rest in the grave, and before his
resurrection from the dead. Tenthly, by this affirmed real unity of the two
sacrifices; all the prophesies prophcying of the blessed seed (from the
foundation of the world) were fulfilled before our Saviors death, by the
cursed altar of the cross, and resurrection from the dead. Eleventhly, by this
affirmed real unity of the two sacrifices; all the types, rites, figures and
ceremonies, prefigurating the death of the blessed seed from the foundation of
the world, were actually determined, by the first pretended sacrifice, which
all the sacrifices of all the creatures of God could never determine, till they
were all actually determined by our Saviors last breath upon the cursed altar
of the cross, while as he said, It is finished. The twelfth conclusion does
necessarily follow from the former three: For, by the affirmed real unity of
the two sacrifices, our Saviors death by the cursed altar of the cross, was
superfluous. Thirteenthly, by the affirmed real unity of these two sacrifices,
this first surmised sacrifice (pretended to be offered by our Savior in the
institution of the sacrament of his last Supper) must be a real Holocaust
sacrifice, cursed and burnt up by the fiery consuming wrath of God for sin; no
part or portion whereof must remain to be given to the Apostles; for such was
our Saviors sacrifice of the cross, prefigurate by the Holocaust sacrifice of
the brazen altar.

Hence I necessarily infer, that by this affirmed real unity the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper is falsely denied to be given to the Apostles; for by this
pretended surmised sacrifice, our Saviors real sacrificed body and blood
(which in this case profits nothing) Joh. 6.63. is affirmed to be given to
the Apostles as a sacrament; while as in the sacrament of the Lords Supper, by
the sacramental bread and wine (given by our Savior to the Apostles) the
bread of eternal life, purchased by his sacrificed real body and blood, is
signified to be given. By the faithful receiving whereof, God in his Son
Christ Jesus, dwells in the heart of man by his love; and man by faith in the
love of God, which is the only means whereby a man knows himself to stand in
the state of Grace, whereof no man can be ever assured, till he find his love
such to the truth of the Lords love by his merit (implying the truth of the
whole Evangell and Law of God) as neither all the hopeful preferments of this
life, nor all the threatened dangers of natural death it self can move him to
deny the truth of that merit; and this is that faith which our Savior says,
is able to remove the greatest mountain of temptation. By the real affirmed
unity therefore of these two sacrifices, all Christian faith is rased from the
foundation. And so much for answer to the objection: And for the declaration of
our Saviors sacrifice, by his death of the cross: we are next to return to
the place where the Lord was laid. But because the main point does consist in
the Declaration of the new covenant, immediately depending upon the Lords
resurrection from the grave, which we must no ways interrupt: We will
therefore first, briefly in a word, set down the discharge of our Saviors
kingly office upon earth, prefigurate by Melchisedeck, and then come to the
declaration of the place where the Lord was laid. Melchisedeck was the figure
of Christ, as he was Priest, Prophet, and King: And though we read not of any
Prophecy of Melchisedeck; yet Melchisedeck, as he was Priest, in discharging
of the Priestly office, did necessarily prophecy: For, by the Priests
ceremonial execution of the sacrifice of the altar, and of the rites of the
prophetical Sabbath; the Priest did necessarily prophecy. And this is the
reason, that Christ says, Luke 11.50, 51. that the Law and the Prophets did
prophecy from Abel, which is chiefly meant by the Priestly office. And
therefore it is said, that Caiphas did prophecy the death of our blessed
Savior, as high Priest that year, saying, Joh. 11.49, 50, 51, 52. Ye perceive
nothing, neither do ye consider, that it is expedient that one man die, then
the whole nation should perish. Though Caiphas did prophecy out of his fear of
the overthrow of the Priestly preferment; yet his prophecy was no other
indeed, then the prophecy of the prophetical Sabbath. As Melchisedeck
therefore did prefigurate our Savior, as he was Priest and Prophet; so
Melchisedeck did prefigurate Christ Jesus as he was King: For, Melchisedeck was
king of peace and righteousness; and so he was the true type and figure of our
Savior, Exodus 25.11. whose regal authority was signified by the golden crown
placed above the ark of the Covenant, compassing the cherubims, overshadowing
with their wings the Mercy-seat. The discharge of our Saviors Kingly authority
upon earth, was chiefly in these three respects: First, Christ Jesus, by the
infinite act of his own immediate power, by his resurrection from the grave, in
his resting from the work of the redemption, did, as a royal King, redeem his
subjects, (to wit) Adam, and all men naturally descended, and to descend of
Adam, from the captivity of sin, Satan, eternal death, and darkness, from the
curse of the Law, to which all men were condemned for the sin of Adam.
Secondly, our Savior, as he is King of Peace, did reconcile all men to the
love and favor of God, by removing of the wrath of God from all men for the
sin of Adam. Thirdly, Christ Jesus, as he is King of Righteousness, out of his
Kingly authority, did command all his subjects of the world, (thus redeemed) to
the obedience of his Law of righteousness of faith upon the twofold reward of
his Law by his new covenant. And so much briefly, for the discharge of our
Saviors Kingly office upon earth. We do therefore now return to the
Declaration of the second part of the sacrifice of our blessed Savior, (the
high Priest, after the order of Melchisedeck) and to the Declaration of the
place where the Lord was laid after his cruel bloody death, prefigurate by the
ashes of the sacrifice, and the clean place where the ashes were laid apart
from the Altar.

CHAP. V.
The mystery of the last Sabbath, which was no ways prophetical.
WE are come to the Declaration of the most sorrowful, mournful, and most
lamentable estate of the Church of God from the foundation of the world: And
likewise to the declaration of the most joyful, comfortable and Evangelicall
estate that ever came to all the nations of the world, arising from that
sorrow: For, there could never come a sorer cut and temptation to the Church
and children of God, then to see the rock of their hopes thus trodden under
foot, massacred, despised, and cast down to the ground: Though for fear of the
Priests, Scribes, and Pharisees, they durst not show their sorrow and passion.
And though by this tragical bloody persecution of the Shepherd, the sheep were
scattered, yet Joseph of Arimathea, one of Christ's Disciples, and a man of note
and worth, with honest Nicodemus, and others of that religious company, out of
the loyalty of their love to our Savior, did gracefully intomb his gracious
body in a new tomb, hewn out of a rock, wherein no man was formerly laid. And
though for their great care and graceful neatness in intombing of the body of
our blessed Savior, they be only named; yet out of all doubt, there must be
more at the carryi^g of the blessed body of our Savior from the cross, to the
place where the Lord was laid, though the place was not far distant from the
cross. But to the point of our purpose in hand: In our Saviors rest in the
grave, and in his resurrection from the grave, does consist the very period of
the mystery of all mysteries, hid from the beginning of the world, to wit, the
mystery of the Lords Day. And though the mystery be plainly revealed; yet,
because some men will have it a mystery still, we must use the help of our
Theological Key to open this mystery; by the concealing of the truth whereof,
the glory of the Lords Day (implying the command of the whole Evangelicall Law)
has received for too long a time, such great prejudice. The declaration of the
truth of this fundamental point of faith, does consist in the twofold rest of
the eternal Word. The first was his bloody rest, as he is man, made flesh o^
the seed of the woman; by his resting in his sacred grave, after his bloody
cru^ll d^^^h, for the full space and time of the last Sabbath from end to end.
The second was, his Evangelicall joyful rest, as he is the infinite eternal
Word, by the day of his resurrection from the grave, whereby he did rest from
the fulfilling of the promise of the blessed seed, both which rests were
mystical. The mystery of his bloody rest is twofold: The first mystery is in
the prophetical covenant, and in the last Sabbath obliged by the covenant:
For, as the eternal Word did oblige Adam, and all men naturally to descend of
Adam to believe his promised rest of the blessed seed, to rest upon the last
Sabbath, from the redemption of man from the curse of the Law (prophesied by
the prophetical Sabbath) to whose belief the blessing of his promised rest
was due by the Law: So he, graciously and freely, obliged himself to man, to
redeem man from the curse of the Law for the sin of Adam, and to redeem all
which was lost by that sin, and consequently to redeem the blessing of the
first seventh days rest, lost by Adam, which was the blessing of his promised
rest by the prophetical Sabbath; all which he graciously performed by his
bloody rest in the grave upon the last Sabbath: For, our Savior upon the last
Sabbath, did rest from the redemption of man, from the curse of the Law for the
sin of Adam: And by his resting (in his sacred grave) for the whole space of
the last Sabbath, (our Savior in the seventh day, having fulfilled the whole
Law, as he was obliged to the fulfilling of the Law, in the promise of the
blessed seed) the eternal rest of the first seventh day, (lost by Adam) was
due by the Law of God, to the merit of his bloody seventh days rest; where
three main fundamental points of faith are precisely to be observed by the
juditious Reader.

The first point is, that the last Sabbath, (whereon our Savior did rest in
his sacred grave after his death) was no ways prophetical: For, all the
prophesies, prophesying the birth and death of the blessed seed, from the
foundation of the world, were all fulfilled and determined by our Saviors
bloody rest upon this last Sabbath; by whose bloody rest in his grave, for the
space of the whole last Sabbath, from end to end, the Law was fulfilled for
man. And this is the reason that our Savior said, Mat. 5.17. that he came to
fulfill the Law.

The second point of faith is, that no man naturally to descend of Adam, was
obliged to fulfill the command of the Law by this last Sabbath: For, Christ
Jesus only, (the Son of God, as he is man, begot of the seed of the woman) was
only obliged to fulfill the command of the seventh day, by the last Sabbath, as
he graciously obliged himself by the prophetical covenant.

The third point of faith is, that Adam, and all men naturally to descend of
Adam, were only obliged to fulfill the command of the seventh day of the
prophetical Sabbath. And therefore Christ Jesus being born under the
prophetical Law, (obliged by the prophetical Sabbath) was circumcised the
eighth day, and did observe other ceremonies of the Law, as other men did: For
though our Savior did not naturally descend of Adam, yet he did descend of the
seed of Adam, according to the flesh.

The second mystery of his bloody rest was, that by his bloody rest, the
promise renewed to Abraham was fulfilled: which was the same real promise
first made to Adam, though renewed to Abraham, after a more clear and
particular manner, which promise, had two branches. The first was, that the
blessed seed (according to the flesh) should descend of the seed of Abraham,
which promise was prefigurate, first, by the glorious light of the Golden
Candlestick, by the table of shewbread (signifying the life, which was in that
light) whereby the blessed seed, (who is light and life to descend of Abraham's
seed) was prefigurate. Secondly, by the sweet insence burned, upon the Golden
Altar, the appeasing of Gods wrath, by the blessed seed, to descend of Abraham
was prefigurate: all which were placed in the holy place of the Tabernacle. The
second branch of the promise made to Abraham, was, that in Abraham's seed, all
the nations of the earth should be blessed; which was likewise prefigurate, by
the sacrifice of the brazen Altar. For at our Saviors giving up of his last
spirit (upon the cursed altar of the cross) the veil of the Temple was rent
from the top to the bottom: within which veil (which was the holiest place)
was the Arc, with the word therein, and the Golden Crown, the Cherubint
(covering with their wings the mercy-seat) prefigurating the conception of our
Savior, of the seed of the woman; whereby the first promise made to Adam was
signified. Now the veil of the Temple being rent asunder (by the power of our
Saviors death) the first promise made to Adam, was laid open, and made
patent, both to the Jews, and Gentiles, who were mutually called the next day
by the new covenant, which was the day of Christ's resurrection. Now the new
covenant being made, with all the nations of the world, the promise made to
Abraham (that all the nations of the earth should be blessed in his seed) was
fulfilled. And so much for the twofold mystery of our Saviors bloody rest.

The mystery of his joyful Evangellicall rest, did consist in these two maine
fundamental points of faith. The first was, by his resurrection from the
grave, whereby our Savior, by his triumphant victory, over sin, Satan, eternal
darkness, and death, the curse of the Law, and the grave, (by the infinite act of
his own immediate power (did manifest himself Truth to man (in his faithful
fulfilling of his promised rest of the blessed seed (and in that Truth, Lord
Jesus Christ God and man, in the three coessentiall distinct persons, of the
glorious Trinity [God] by the infinite act of his own immediate power, [Man]
begotten of the father of the seed of the woman, by the immediate act of the
holy spirit, in the essential union of his divine and humane nature, implied
in the word [Lord] which is the sacred name, of the essential union, of the
divine and humane nature, of the Lord of life, comprehending, both the names of
Jesus, and Christ, afterward to be declared. For though Jesus Christ as he is
the Son of God (begotten man of the seed of the woman) did perform his bloody
rest: Yet his Evangelicall rest (by his resting from the fulfilling of the Law,
implying his rest from the redemption of man) was performed by our Savior as
he is Lord, Jesus, Christ, God, equal with the Father and holy Spirit, in whom
the Godhead dwells bodily. And therefore the day of his resurrection is called
the Lords day.

In the second point of the mystery, of the Lords Evangelicall rest, does stand
the very period of the mystery of the Lords day: for man naturally descended of
Ada^, being only obliged, to the command of the seventh day of the Prophetical
Sabbath, and no ways to the seventh day of the last Sabbath (to which man
Christ Jesus only was obliged) the day of our Saviors resurrection from the
grave (the Lords day) does fall out to be, the just seventh day, from the last
formal prophetical Jews Sabbath, still obliging man to the seventh day of
the Law. Though by including, the last formal prophetical Jews Sabbath, in
the account, the Lords day is the eight day, as it was prefigurate by the eight
day of the Sacrament of circumcision. To the administration whereof the great
prophetical Sabbath, did necessarily give place, whereby the Lords day, was
mystically prefigurate, to succeed, in place of the Jews prophetical Sabbath.
The day of our Saviors resurrection therefore, being the next day immediately
succeeding the last Sabbath (whereon our Savior rested in his sacred grave) is
the just seventh day of the Law, from the last formal prophetical Jews
Sabbath: As man naturally descended of Adam, is obliged to the command of the
seventh day of the Law of God, implying the command of the whole Law. The Lords
day therefore (the day of the Lords resurrection from the grave) is the true
seventh day of the Evangelicall Law of God, decreed by God from all eternity.
Where three fundamental points of faith are necessarily to be observed by the
Christian Reader. First, as the first seventh day of the Law, was blessed and
sanctified, by the Lords rest from the works of the creation. And as the next
seventh day of the prophetical Sabbath, was blessed and sanctified by the
truth of the word of the Lords promised rest, in the promise of the blessed
seed, to rest upon the last Sabbath from the redemption of man, from the curse
of the Law, for the sin of Adam. So the Lords day (the seventh day of the
Evangelicall Law of faith) is blessed and sanctified, by the truth of the Lords
fulfilled promise, by his Evangelicall rest. The last period of whose fulfilled
promise, was in his conquest of his last enemy, by his resurrection from the
power of the grave upon the Lords day. Whereby the Lord rested from the
fulfilling of his promise, of the blessed seed. By the power of whose infinite
merit (by his Evangelicall rest) the Lords day is the blessed and sanctified
seventh day of the Evangelicall Law, the word of eternal life and rest, and
the immediate object of Christian faith.

Secondly, as the seventh day of the prophetical Sabbath, was immediately
commanded by the power of the Lords word (by his promised rest) commanding Adam
and the Fathers, to believe in the truth of his merit, by his promised rest,
which was then prophesied, by the word of the prophetical Sabbath, commanding
the ceremonial worship of the Sabbath immediately, as it was the seventh day of
the prophetical Law, and in the seventh day the obedience of man to the
command of the whole prophetical Law, by faith in the promise of the blessed
seed: to whose faith the eternal blessing of the Lords promised Sabbaticall
rest was due by the prophetical Law. So the Lords day is immediately commanded,
by the power of his immediate word, commanding all the nations of the world, to
believe the truth of his fulfilled promise by his seventh days Evangelicall
rest, as the Lords day is the seventh day of the Evangelicall Law, implying the
command of the whole Law, first and immediately commanding, the seventh days
worship by faith in the truth of the Lords fulfilled promise, to whose faith
the blessing of the Lords merit, by his Evangelicall rest is due by the
Evangelicall Law of faith, which is the blessing of the Lords day. This is
therefore the hour and blessed day, which the Lord told the Samaritan woman,
should come, when God should be worshipped, In spirit and truth: that is in the
spirit of faith, in the truth of the Lords fulfilled promise. Thirdly, as by
the light of the prophetical Sabbath day Adam and the Fathers, were literally
lead, to the blessing of the Lords promised rest. So by the light of the Lords
day, all the nations of the world are literally lead, to the blessing of the
Lords merit by the truth of his fulfilled promise. Whosoever therefore does
deny the light of the truth of the Lords day (sealed by the precious blood of
his blessed heart) does necessarily deny the Lord, truth it self.

By this opening of the mystery of the Lords day, blessed and sanctified by his
Evangelicall rest (necessarily implying his bloody rest) the judicious Reader
may easily perceive the reason of the mistake, of the lords day: the only cause
of which mistake, is in the mistaking of the last Sabbath, for the formal
prophetical Jews Sabbath: which was no ways the Jews prophetical Sabbath,
neither was either Jew or Gentile, obliged to the command of this last Sabbath:
or had any hand in the fulfilling of the command of this last Sabbath being too
hard and impossible a task for man as he is man. Let us leave therefore the
command of this last Sabbath, to the Lord of the Sabbath, who as he (did in his
great mercy) oblige himself, to the obedience of the command of this last
Sabbath: so (in his love and mercy to man) the Lord graciously fulfilled the
command thereof for man. Let us leave I say this last Sabbath to the Lord of
the Sabbath (who was only obliged to the command of this last Sabbath, as it is
the seventh day of the Law, obliging the Lord himself as he is man) and we
shall have the Lords day the just seventh day of the Evangelicall Law, as the
Law of God obliges man, naturally descended of Adam. And this is properly the
Sabbath, whereby the Lord is entitled, Lord of the Sabbath. And the Sabbath
(properly) that the Lord says was made for man. For by the Lords fulfilling of
this last Sabbath (by his bloody rest) the Lord rested from his cursed death of
the Cross for the redemption of man; and by his bloody rest in the grave did
merit the eternal rest lost by Adam. By whose resurrection from the grave, the
Lord did triumphantly and Evangelically rest from the fulfilling of his promise
of the blessed seed. This twofold rest of the eternal word arising from the
last mystical Sabbath, was prefigurate, by a twofold type and figure. Of which
twofold type and figure next.

CHAP. VI.
The twofold type and figure whereby the last Sabbath was prefigurate.
THe last Sabbath according to the mystical sense was prefigurate, by a
twofold type and figure. First the fulfilling of this Sabbath was prefigurate,
by the blessed Virgin. Secondly, by the year of Jubilee. First therefore of the
prefigurating thereof, by the blessed Virgin. As by the Arc, with the word
placed therein, and the Cherubins overshadowing the Mercie-seat, the blessed
Virgin was prefigurate, from her conception of the blessed seed till her
delivery of the blessed Child. So by the bessed Virgin, the rest, of Christ
Jesus in the grave, upon the last Sabbath, till the day of his resurrection was
prefigurate. Wherein a threefold type (most worthy of observation) is to be
marked. First, by the virginal conception, of the blessed seed: the virginal
conception of the blessed body of our Savior, in the new hewn Tomb, out of a
Rock, wherein no man was ever laid, was prefigurate. Secondly by the Virgins
going three quarters of a year with the blessed Child: the three days rest,
of the blessed body of Christ Jesus in the grave was prefigurate.

Thirdly, as the renting the Veil of the Temple did prefigurate, the renting
of of the sacred Virgins womb, in the bringing forth of her first borne, the
word made flesh; without the help of woman or man, (which was the natural
birth day of the Son of God. (So by the Virgins bringing forth of her first
borne (the word made flesh) the mystical bringing forth of the first borne
evangelicall Word, by the mystical Virgin Sabbath (without the help of any
created power) was prefigurate. Which was the mystical birth day of the
Evangelicall word. Whose mystical birth day, being the just seventh day, from
the last formal prophetical Jews Sabbath (as man naturally descended of Adam
is obliged to the Law of God) his mystical birth day, is the true seventh day,
of the Evangelicall Law. By the power of the word of his seventh days
Evangelicall rest, commanding the Evangelicall worship of the seventh day of
his Law by man, and in the seventh day, the Evangelicall obedience of man, to
his whole Evangelicall Law, implied in the seventh day. To whose faithful
obedience, the eternal blessing of his Evangelicall birth days rest is due by
the Law of God. The second type and figure, whereby the mystical Virgin
Sabbath was prefigurate: was the Sabbaticall year of Jubilee. For first as in
the year of Jubilee, all bound men, all sold and pawned Land, the earth and the
laboring Cattle were set at liberty; So by the bloody rest of Christ Jesus
blessed body in the grave (for the space of the whole last Sabbath) all men
condemned and bound by the curse of the Law for the sin of Adam, to eternal
death and darkness, and the creatures created for man, where freed from the
eternal curse of the Law, and set at liberty. Secondly as the year of Jubilee
(by the immediate influence of God) without all labor, help, or industry of
man the earth (of its own accord) did produce the fruit thereof, for the
comfort of man, and for the creatures created for man, So by the mystical
Sabbath, (without all the help, aid, or asistance of any man naturally
descended of Adam) did bring forth the Evangelicall word (enabled by the
immediate act of his own infinite power (upon the joyful day of his
resurrection: Who is the life, light, and food of man, and by whom only man
and all the creatures created for man, do live, move, and have the
continuation of their redeemed being. The blessed day of whose mystical
Evangelicall birth, being the just seventh day, from the last formal Jews
prophetical Sabbath (as man naturally descended of Adam, is obliged to the Law
of God) the blessed day therefore of the Lords resurrection, is the true
seventh day of the Evangelicall Law of righteousness of faith, whereby the Son
of righteousness, in his blessed day began to shine one high, by inlightning the
ceremonial darkness of the prophetical Sabbath (prophesying his death)
through all the Nations of the world, by the light of his blessed day, leading
all men (by the hands of faith) to lay hold on the Evangelicall word, the Lord
of the life, light, and rest of man, and of the creatures created for man, to
be inbelized by the thankful praises and Jubiles of all the Nations of the
world. The mystical Evangelicall birth day therefore, of the Evangelicall word
(the Lords day) is the true joyful day of all the years of this life,
prophesied by the mystical year of Jubilee; which by the truth of the Lords
Evangelicall rest, from the fulfilling of the promise of the blessed seed
(arising from his bloody rest) is the true Evangelical word of the seventh day
of the Law of righteousness of faith, next to be declared.

CHAP. VII.
The declaration of the Evangelicall word.
THe Evangelicall word is taken in a twofold sense, first, the Evangelicall
word is taken essentially for the second person of the sacred Trinity (God
equal with the Father and Holy Spirit) in which sense the Evangelical word is
incommunicable to man or Angel. Secondly, the Evangelical word is taken for the
word of the Lords day (the 7th day of the Evangelical Law of faith) as it is
the Image of God in his Son Christ Jesus. For as the Lords days Evangelicall
rest, is the Image of the Lords eternal life and rest: So the light of the
Lords day is the Image of his inaccessable light, and in this sense the
Evangelicall word, is communicable to man, and it is the life and light of man,
and has a twofold acception; first the Evangelicall word, is taken for the
word of the Lords day, as it is the Evangelicall word of the seventh day of the
Law of righteousness of faith. Secondly the Evangelicall word is taken, for the
word of promise and new covenant, whereby both God and man are mutually
obliged. For though the word of the seventh day of the Law, and the word of
promise and covenant, be really one, yet they are of a formal difference.
First therefore of the Evangelicall word of the Lords day, as it is the word of
the seventh day of the Evangelicall Law of righteousness of faith.

The Evangelicall word of the Lords day, is the same real word which was from
the beginning. And therefore it is said by John 1.4.5, that in it (that is) in
that word was life, and that that life, was, the light of man, which does in
this manner appear. First in the state of perfection, by the word of the Law
written in Adams heart spiritually enlightened, Adam did live, move, and had the
perfection of his natural and spiritual being, and felicity. Whereby Adam was
the Image of righteousness and holiness. And the word of the first seventh day,
of the Law of righteousness (implying the command of the whole Law) was objected
to Adams external senses, obliging Adam to the command of the Law of
righteousness. To the merit of whose perfect obedience, the blessing of the
first seventh days eternal rest, was due by the Law of righteousness. Whereby,
Adam had the continuation of his created estate of perfection and felicity,
while Adam did stand in the perfection of his obedience: And was to have
continued, eternally upon earth, to Adam by covenant; if Adam had continued in
the perfection of his obedience. The word of God therefore to Adam, before the
fall (as he was the head of all men natural to descend of his loins) was the
word of the first seventh day of the Law of righteousness, implying the command
of the whole Law. Secondly, Adam (in whom as in the head, all were created)
having transgressed the command of God, of the Law of righteousness, the
transgression was infinite, for the transgression of the Law (as it is the Law
of righteousness) is an immediate contempt against the infinite Majesty of God,
and consequently the sin infinite. And the second Person of the Trinity in
whom is only mercy (being then not revealed to Adam) the sin was without any
hope of revealed mercy: whereby Adam and all men created in Adam (as head)
naturally to descend of Adam, were (in the justice of God by covenant)
condemned to the eternal curse of the Law of righteousness, by the curse of
eternal death and darkness. Adam therefore, and all men naturally to descend of
Adam (as head) out of the infinite love and mercy of God to man in his Son
Christ Jesus (according to his decree from all eternity) being redeemed from
the curse of the Law by the cursed death of his only Son (which was to be
sustained in his prefixed time) the word of the Law then written in the heart
of man, was the redeemed Image of God in his Son Christ Jesus, by the power of
which redeemed word, Adam after the fall did live, move, and had his redeemed
grace of natural and moral being; but shut up in spiritual darkness till he
was regenerate. And the word of the seventh day of the Law, was then objected
to Adams external senses, as it was the prophetical word of the seventh day
of the Law of righteousness of faith in the promise of the blessed seed: then by
the name of the Sabbath of the Lord, prophesying the rest of the Lord (to wit)
the blessed seed upon the Sabbath from the redemption of man from the curse of
the Law for the sin of Adam, whereby Adam (and all men naturally to descend
of Adam) till the promise of the blessed seed was fulfilled, were obliged to
believe the promised rest of the blessed seed. To whose faith, the blessing of
the Lords promised rest (by the prophetical Sabbath) was due by the Law. The
word of God therefore to the Fathers (till the promise was fulfilled) was the
prophetical word of the seventh day of the Law of righteousness of faith, in
the promise of the blessed seed, by the light of the sabbaticall seventh day,
leading the faith of man, to the blessing of the Lords promised rest of the
blessed seed. By which faith, all the Fathers were saved, before the promise
was fulfilled, in the Lords prefixed time according to his eternal decree.
Thirdly, the promise of the blessed seed, being fulfilled, (by the Lords days
Evangelicall rest) as by the redeemed word of the Law written in the heart, the
natural man, does live move and has his redeemed grace of natural and moral
being, shut up in spiritual darkness till he be regenerate. So the Evangelicall
word of the Lords day (as it is the seventh day of the Evangelicall Law of
righteousness of faith) is objected to the external senses of man, as it is the
word of the truth of the Lords Evangelicall rest, from the fulfilling of his
promise of the blessed seed, obliging the faith of all the Nations of the
World, to believe the truth of the Lords fulfilled promise, to whose faith, the
blessing of the Lords merit of eternal life and rest, (by the fulfilling of
his promise) is due morally by the Law, whereby the natural man's redeemed
grace of natural and moral being, is continued while he is in this life, and
being regenerat, has his eternal life, light, and rest in the life to come.

The judicious reader therefore may plainly observe that the Evangelicall word
of the Lords day (the seventh day of the Evangelicall Law of righteousness of
faith) is the same real word, which was from the beginning, in the true
knowledge whereof is the life, light, and eternal rest of man: for as by the
literal light, of the Lords day, the natural man is literally led to the
moral blessing of the Lords merit, by the Lords days Evangelicall rest: So by
the Lords spiritual light (in Gods prefixed time) the natural man
apprehending himself dead in actual spiritual sin (as sin is a fearful
contempt against the infinite Majesty of God.) The natural man in this
spiritual fear (being led by this spiritual light, to the Lords infinite
merit) does (by the hands of his spiritual faith) lay such spiritual hold on
the Lords infinite merit, as all the created powers of God, and all the
temptations of the Devil, and the World, are not able to part the natural man
(being regenerate) from the grace of his spiritual hold. And this is that
faith, which the Lord says, is able to command, the greatest Mountain of
temptation, and to cast it self in the Sea, if it stand in the way, to
separate the regenerate man, from his spiritual hold of eternal life. Though
his spiritual faith be so little, as a grain of mustard seed. For the
threatened Mountain of natural death it self, is not able, to separate the
regenerate man, from this spiritual hold totally and finally. This light of
the Lords day therefore, is that light of that spiritual fire, which came
down from Heaven: not the fearful fiery light, of Gods consuming fire, which
came down from Heaven to burn the Holocaust Sacrifice of the Lamb of God:
but the gracious light of the Lords dear love, warning, quickening,
inlightning, and raising from the dead, where it does shine: By which gracious
light, as all men were raised from the first death of the curse of the Law for
the sin of Adam: So this gracious light does now shine, to enlighten the
faith of all the Nations of the World, to save them from the merciles curse of
the Law of faith which is the second death. Here two special things are to be
observed by the reader.

CHAP. VIII.
THe first is, the difference of the word of the Law written in the heart of
man, and the word of the seventh day of the Law (implying the command of the
whole Law) externally objected to the external senses of man.

The second is the formal difference of the word of the seventh day of the Law
from the beginning. First in the state of perfection, the word of the Law
written in Adams heart, was the power of the Image of righteousness and holiness,
enabling Adam, to merit eternal life and rest upon earth. And the word of the
first seventh day of the Law of righteousness, was objected to Adams external
senses, obliging the perfection of Adams obedience, to the command of the Law
of God: to whose merit (by his actions of holiness) the blessing of the first
seventh days eternal rest, was due by the Law to Adams merit. Secondly man
being redeemed from the curse of the Law, the word of the Law, written in the
heart, is the redeemed word, and Image of God in his Son Christ Jesus, first in
the promise of the blessed seed, enabling Adam, from faith to faith to believe
the promise of the blessed seed. And the word of the seventh day of the Law of
righteousness of faith, by the name of the Sabbath of the Lord, was objected to
Adams external senses, prophesying the rest, of the blessed seed, upon the
Sabbath, from the redemption of man from the curse of the Law, obliging and
commanding Adam, to believe the promised rest, of the blessed seed; to whose
faith, the blessing of the Lords eternal rest, was due by the Law, to Adams
faith: in believing the the promised rest of the blessed seed. Thirdly after
the Lords resurrection, the promise of the blessed seed (being fulfilled) the
redeemed word of the Law written in the heart of man, is the Image of God, in
his Son Christ Jesus in the truth of his fulfilled promise of the blessed seed
enabling all men by moral says, to believe the Lords fulfilled promise of the
blessed seed. And the Lords day (the seventh day of the Evangelicall Law of
faith, blessed and sanctified by the truth of the merit of the Lords
Evangelicall rest) is now objected to the external senses, obliging all the
Nations of the World, to believe the truth of the Lords merit, by his rest from
the fulfilling o^ the promise of the blessed seed. To whose faith, the blessing
of the Lords eternal rest, is due by the Evangelicall Law of faith.

As for the formal difference, of the word of every several seventh days
rest of the Law, from the beginning, it does consist in these two points.
First the formal difference of the seventh day of the Law (implying the
command of the whole Law) does arise from the formal manner, of Gods revealing
of himself, by the word of his several seventh days rest, by the formallity
of which several rest, the formal worship of the seventh day is commanded.
The second difference is, that by the least transgression of the Law of
righteousness (in the state of perfection) the sin was, without all hope of
any revealed mercy, or time of repentance. But the transgression of the Law of
righteousness of faith, is withal hope of mercy, and time of repentance, while
there is day in this life. Of this declaration of the Evangelicall word, as it
is the redeemed word of truth written in the heart of man: And as it is the
Evangelicall word of the Lords day, the seventh day of the Evangelicall Law of
faith, (implying the perfection of the redepmtion of man from the curse of the
Law for the sin of Adam,) I infer these subsequent necessary demonstrative
conclusions.

CHAP. IX.
Conclusion. 1.
IT is by the redeemed word of the Law (as the Law is spiritual, immediately
written in the soul of man, necessarily implying the power of intelectuall
life and light) that the soul does live, and has its intellectual moving,
and being, which is the first act of the soul of man, as he is intelectuall,
and a true humane spirit in potency, to his second intelectuall act. And it is
by the word of the Law literally written in the heart of man (necessarily
implying the power of natural life and light) that man (as he is man) does
live, move, and has his redeemed being, which is the first act of man, (as he
is man and a rational creature) in potency to his second natural and moral
act, by the species of the external sensitive object, and this is the reason
that John says John 1.4. in it was life, and that life was the light of man.

Conclusion. 2. It is by the litterall light of the word of the Lords day (the
seventh day of the Evangelicall Law of faith) objected to the external senses
(which is one real light with the literal light of the redeemed word of the
Law in the heart) that the understanding and will of the natural man is
formally and morally produced in act: necessarily implying the natural light,
without which, the species of the external object, can neither be morally, or
naturally apprehended by the act of the understanding of man.

Conclusion. 3. Though man as he is a spiritual man (shut up in spiritual
darkness till he be regenerate) be said to be dead as he is a spiritual man,
because he is deprived of the spiritual light of the holy Spirit for the time,
(yet by the word of the Law immediately and spiritually written in the soul
(necessarily implying the intelectuall life and light) the soul of man (humane
spirit) does live, and move intelectually, which intelectuall life and light,
the spiritual light of the holy Spirit, does necessarily presuppose: for the
formal, action of holiness, does as necessarily presuppose, the intelectuall
act of the soul, as the formal moral action, the natural action of man:
which are both by one real light, though the intelectuall, be a pure unmixed
light, and the natural, a mixed light: by the essential union of the
intelectuall, and sensitive nature of man, without which light, man were
neither, an intelectuall or rational creature, as has bin formerly
demonstrate.

Conclusion. 4. As by the internal word of the Law, which is eternally,
spiritually, and immediately written in the soul; the soul of man (humane
spirit) is spiritually, immediately, and eternally obliged, to the Law, as the
Law is ^pirituall: So by the eternal word of the Law, literally written in the
h art of man, man as he is man, is eternally and morally obliged to the Law of
God, and consequently, the sensitive body being resolved from the soul, must
remain in its principle, to be reunited to the soul in the great day.

Conclusion. 5. The Lords day (blessed and sanctified by the Lords blessed
resurrection and rest from the fulfilling of the promise of the blessed seed in
time) was (in the eternal purpose and council of God before all time) the
dec^eed seventh day of the Evangelicall Law of righteousness of faith.

Conclusion. 6. The literal light of the Lords day (the seventh day of the
Lords Evangelicall rest) does far surmount the light of all the several
seventh days rest, of the eternal word, from the foundation of the world, for
by the literal light, of the Lords day, the natural man is fundamentally and
literally led to all the former seventh days rest, of the eternal word, from
the beginning: all proceeding from the love of God to man.

Conclusion. 7. The literal light of the word of the Lords day, does emply,
the literal light of all the Scripture of God; and consequently, the whole
excercite act, of the sacred decree of predestination, so far as is revealed
to man in this life.

Conclusion. 8. By the Lords days Evangelicall rest, from the fulfilling of
his promise of the blessed seed, (arising from his bloody rest) the Lord did
manifest himself truth, and in that truth, love, and mercy to man.

Conclusion. 9. As our Savior (by his birth, life, death, and by his rest in
the grave) did manifest himself true man and (by his wonders, and miracles)
did manifest himself the Son of God begot of the seed of the woman, by the
immediate unction of the holy Spirit: So by the infinite power, of his
Evangelicall rest (in his triumphant victory, over the power of Satan, sin,
eternal death, and darkness of Hell over the power of the curse of the Law,
and over the power of the grave his last enemy) the Lord did manifest himself,
Lord God and man, in the three coessentiall distinct Persons, of the glorious
Trinity, the manner whereof, is clearly set down in the Chapter following.

Conclusion. 10. As by the Lords Evangelicall rest, from the fulfilling of the
promise of the blessed seed (arising from his bloody rest) was by his infinite
power. So his merit by his rest from the redemption of man (from the curse of
the Law, and from his fulfilling of the Law for man by his bloody rest) was
likewise infinite. By the power of whose infinite merit, by the Lords days
Evangelicall rest (as it is the word of the eternal life and rest of man) the
formal worship of the Lords day is commanded in spirit and truth. And
therefore the Lord told the Samaritan woman. The hour comes and now is, when
the true worshippers shall worship the Father (and consequently the Son and
holy Spirit) in Spirit and truth. For God is a Spirit, and they that worship
him, must worship him in Spirit and truth. By which words, the formal
Evangelicall worship of the Lords day is both set down and commanded by the
Lord of the Lords day: For first, the Lord told the Samaritan woman, commanding
her to believe that the hour should come, which is the hour of the Lords day,
which was then to come. Secondly, the Lord commanded the Samaritan woman to
believe that God is a Spirit, and must be worshipped in Spirit and truth, (that
is) in the Spirit of faith, in the truth of his Evangelicall rest from the
fulfilling of his promise of the blessed seed: Which is the formal
Evangelicall commanded worship of the Lords day, which must be sanctified by
man after that formal manner, in the Spirit of faith in (the truth of the
Lords merit by his Evangelicall rest as he) has manifested himself to man by
the day of his resurrection, (to wit) Lord God and man, in the three
coessentiall distinct Persons of the glorious Trinity.

Thirdly, whereas the Lord, told the Samaritan woman that God must be
worshipped in Spirit and truth, and that the Father requires such worship. The
formal Evangelicall worship of the Lords day, is immediately commanded by the
Lord of the Lords day, for Gods will and requiring of man, by his word, is the
Lords immediate command to man. Fourthly, whereas the Lord said to the
Samaritan woman (the hour is) in these words, the Lords last will and
testament (to be executed after the testators death) is fully implied, for in
the commanded worship of the Lords day, the whole Evangelicall moral Law of
God (which is the whole Evangelicall word) is necessarily implied. Fifthly,
while as the Lord says to the Samaritan woman, the hour comes, when ye shall
neither worship the Father, in this Mountain or at Jerusalem: By these words,
the formal ceremonial worship of the prophetical Sabbath (implying the whole
prophetical ceremonial Law) is actually determined by the actual immediate
commanded Evangelicall worship of the Lords day, to the great comfort of both
Jews and Gentiles, in t^eir freedom, from the sore yoke of the ceremonial
Law.

Conclusion. 11. All prophetical ceremonial worship, is barred from the truth
of the Lords commanded worship, for by such ceremonial worship, the truth of
the Lords fulfilling of his promise of the blessed seed, is belied and
necessarily denied, by the will worship of man.

Conclusion. 12. All ceremonial pretended worship of God; by any manner of
carved or painted Image, objectively representing to the eyes of man, the Son
of God (as he is man) is contradictory to the truth of the Lords commanded
worship by his Evangelicall rest, from the fulfilling of his promise of the
blessed seed, as he is God and man: For first, by this ceremonial pretended
worship, God is immediately worshipped as he is man: Secondly by the intervening
of the sensitive object, between the Lord and his worship, the Lords worship is
necessarily interrupted, and consequently the worship, a false faithles,
idolatrous worship, necessarily denying the truth of the Lords commanded
worship.

Conclusion. 13. All mediate pretended worship of God, by invocation of Angels
or Saints departed this life, is repugnant to the Lords infinite merit, by the
truth of his Evangelicall rest. For first, by the immediate object of such
worship, intervening between the worshipper and the Lord, (as by his infinite
merit, he is eternal life, and rest) the infinitnes of his merit is confined.
Secondly, prayer being a most essential part of Gods immediate worship, by
such invocation of the object, to which the prayer is directed, the worship of
God is necessarily interrupted, while as man (by the Lords own immediate
command) is commanded to call upon the Lord himself, immediately, in the day of
trouble, and neither upon Saint or Angel: And consequently such mediate
pretended worship of God, equal idolatry with the former.

Conclusion. 14. As all men for their first sin in Adam (as head) were
condemned to the curse of eternal death and darkness: So (by the infinite pow^^
of the Lords merit) all men were redeemed (in Adam as head) from the curse of
eternal death, and from eternal, natural, and spiritual darkness, shu^ up
its ^^m^orall spiritual darkness, called unbeleefe and original sin, for ^he
infinite good of man.

Conclusion. 15. As by the perfection of the redemption of man (by the power of
the Lords infinite free merit) all men are freed from the curse of eternal,
natural, moral, and spiritual death, and from the eternal curse of
natural, moral and spiritual darkness, (though shut up in temporal
spiritual darkness:) So all men by the redeemed free power of the word in the
heart (as they are natural men) are restored to the free grace of natural and
moral life, and light, without any manner of necessitating the act of the
understanding will or senses, either naturally or morally.

Conclusion. 16. All men (redeemed from the curse of the Law) by the eternal
decree of predestination: being concluded in spiritual darkness (called
unbeleefe and original sin) all natural men (coming to actual moral
understanding and action, before they be regenerate) are necessarily dead in
actual sin by their transgression of the Law of faith.

Conclusion. 17. By the redeemed word of the Law in the heart of man, man is
the Image of God in his Son Christ Jesus, as he has revealed himself, by the
light of the word of the Lords day, truth, love, and mercy. First therefore the
natural man (by the power of the redeemed word of the Law written in his
heart) is enabled to produce the works of truth, love, and mercy morally,
though not spiritually, which are the works of moral faith. Secondly, and
consequently (by the real unity of the power of light and command of the word
of the Law in his heart, with the light and command of the Lords day) the
natural man's heart is morally moved, to assent and to believe the truth of the
Lords day: and to give moral obedience to the command of the Law implied in
the Lords day: Thirdly, and consequently (by the power of the redeemed word in
the heart) man is enabled to moral repentance, which does necessarily proceed
the act of moral faith.

Conclusion. 18. All tenants and assertions, denying, the universal grace of
the redemption, of all men, from the curse of the Law, for their sin in Adam,
shut up in spiritual darkness (called unbeleefe and sin) are contradictory to
the truth of the Lords infinite merit, contradictory to the whole current of the
sacred word, and consequently, to the sacred decree of predestination.

Conclusion. 19. All tenants and assertions, denying, the freedom of the
natural man's redeemed grace, by the free act of his understanding will and
senses,) without any manner of the necessitating of the free act of man, either
naturally or morally,) are contradictory, to the perfection of the redemption
of man, by the Lords infinite merit. For the natural man's will being
necessitate, either naturally or morally, man is no man, as has bin formerly
demonstrate. And consequently the natural man, by the perfection of his
redemption, is enabled, with moral grace by the act of his understanding
(actually enlightened by the literal light of the Lords day) to understand
morally, the grace of the Lords merit of eternal life and rest: and by the act
of his will, to believe morally, the Lords offered grace as has bin formerly
declared.

Conclusion. 20. All tenants and assertions, affirming, the universal
spiritual grace of man, by the only act of the redemption; (which grace is
only by the spiritual light of the holy Spirit, enlightening the spiritual
darkness of the natural man, in the act of regeneration) are contradictory,
to the sacred word, and consequently, to the sacred decree of predestination:
For all men freed from the curse of eternal death and darkness, are shut up
in temporal spiritual darkness (called unbeleef and sin) by the eternal decree
of God.

Conclusion. 21. By all tenants and assertions, affirming that the natural man
(by his moral good works) does merit eternal life. The infiniteness of the
Lords merit is denied. Such assertions, are contradictory, to the very words of
the new Covenant. For by the new covenant, the moral blessing of the Lords
merit of eternal life, is immediately offered, to the moral faith of the
believer. And therefore the Evangelicall Law, is called the Law of
righteousness of faith, and not the Law of works, for, from the moral faith
of the natural man, his moral good works do immediately proceed and
consequently, can merit nothing at all, and therefore the moral blessing of
the Lords day (as it is the seventh day of the Evangelicall Law) is due morally
and immediately by the Law to the moral faith of the natural man, whose
faithful works of truth, love, and mercy, are mediatly commanded, as the
effects of his moral faith, whereby the truth of the Lords infinite love and
mercy is testified, by the natural man, without the blessing of whose truth
(by the Lords infinite merit) the natural man could not so much as craule upon
the earth.

Conclusion. 22. All tenants and assertions, affirming, that the free grace of
the Lords infinite merit (by the new Covenat) is offered only to the elect, are
contradictory to the very words of the new Covenant, whereby the free grace ^f
the Lords infinite merit, of eternal life and rest, is freely offered, to all
the Nations of the world. And therefore this state is called the state of
grace, for though the state of man, under the prophetical obligement of the
Law of faith, in the promise of the blessed seed, was likewise the state of
grace, yet that was the estate of promised grace, and this is the state of
grace of that fulfilled promise, for as the faithful Fathers, were saved, from
the curse of the prophetical Law, by faith in the promise of the blessed seed:
So the faithful are now s^ved, by faith, in the fulfilled promise.

Conclusion. 23. All tenants and assertions, whereby the faith of the believer,
and the Lords infinite merit, are separate, and divided, (which is the Rock,
whereon the Lord told Peter the Church of God is builded,) are false and
adulterous tenants and assertions, arising from the false light of error. Now
because the Church of God is so much distempered by a multitude of such tenants
and objections, all arising from the false light of the spirit of error; two
short Theological Canons, or rules shall be set down whereby the judicious
Reader, is enabled, to make the strongest objection, against the truth of the
sacred word, to vanish with the objecters breath. By means whereof, the spirit
of error is discovered according to the Apostles command.

CHAP. X.
The first Canon. ALL tenants and assertions of faith, repugnant to the
literal light and truth of the Evangelicall word of the Lords day, (the
seventh day of the Evangelicall Law of righteousness of faith) are from the
false light, of the spirit of error.

The second Canon. All pretended worship of God, repugnant, to the truth of the
commanded Evangelicall worship, of the Lords day, is a false adulterous worship.

The explanation of the twofold Canon.

As the immediate object of faith is the Lords infinite merit, by his rest and
resurrection, from the fulfilling of his promise of the blessed seed (the
eternal life, light, and rest of man:) So is the literal light of the Lords
day, the light whereby the object is enlightened, to be apprehended by the faith
of man, which being one real light, with the literal light of the redeemed
word of truth, love, and mercy, written in the heart of man, whereby man does
live, move, and has his being. As by this literal light, the natural man's
understanding, is morally produced in act, to apprehend, the object of the
Lords merit (as it is the Lords truth.) So his will (by its love to that truth)
is moved, to apprehend the object of the Lords merit, as it is the eternal
life, light, and rest of man.

This literal light, is in the sound of the word of the Lords d^y: For as by
the light of the Sun, fire, or of any material light, the understanding of
man is produced in act, by the mediate sense of seeing: So the s^u^d of the
word, is the light, whereby the understanding is produce in act, by the mediate
sense of hearing.

I do not mean hear, the light of the sound of the words ^s ^^^y are simply
words, but as they are the sound, of the Evangelica^ word of the Lords day, the
seventh day of the Evangelicall law of faith, the word of the eternal life and
light of man; which being founded, by the faithful Minister, in the natural
man's hearing, his understanding and will, is morally produced in act, to
understand and believe, the truth of the Lords fulfilled promise of the blessed
seed, as the Lord did (graciously) oblige himself to man by covenant, which was
fulfilled by the Lords twofold resurrection.

The first was, by his resurrection from the grave; the second was by his
resurrecti^^ from the earth to the heavens, from whence he did descend: For, as
the Word is man, (the Son of God, with the Father and holy Spirit before all
time) he did descend from the heavens to the earth; and as the Word is man,
(the Son of God made flesh of the seed of the woman in time) he did ascend
again to the heavens.

This twofold resurrection of the Word, does comprehend the twelve Articles of
Christian faith, all depending one upon another, like as many links of a chain,
linked one into another, all arising from the literal light of the Lords day,
(by his rest and resurrection from the fulfilling of his promise of the bl^ssed
seed) as the Lord did graciously oblige himself to man by the covenant: First
therefore of the Lords resurrection from the grave, and next of his
resurrection from the earth by his ascension to the heavens. The Lords
resurrection from the grave, does comprehend these ten fundamental points of
faith.

First, by the literal light of the sound of the evangelicall Word of the Lords
day (really one with the literal light of the redeemed Word of the Law,
written in the heart of man, whereby man does live, move, and has his redeemed
state of being;) the natural man's understanding is morally produced in act,
(by the mediate sense of hearing) to understand, that the Lords resurrection
from the grave, was the last period of his rest from the redemption of man, and
all things lost by man, from the curse of the Law for the first sin of Adam.
And that the Lords resurrection from the grave, was from the bloody rest in the
grave; and his bloody rest in the grave, from his sust^i^ing of the bloody
cursed death of the cross; and his bloody cursed death of the cross, from his
love and mercy to man.

Secondly, as by our Savi^urs bloody death, and rest in the grave, (necessarily
presupposing his birth and life) our Savior did manifest himself true man: so
by our Saviors gracious words, glorious wonders and miracles, while he was
personally upon earth (as our Savior was man, the Son of God before all time;)
so he did manifest himself man, the Son of God, in time, begot of the seed of
the woman, by the overshadowing act of the Almighty.

Thirdly, as our Savior, (as he is the eternal Son of God) by his sustaining
of the eternal curse of the Law, did merit the salvation of Adam, (and of all
men naturally to descend of Adam) from the first death (which was the curse of
the Law for the sin of Adam:) so our Savior by his bloody rest in the grave,
for the full space of the seventh day of the last Sabbath (whereby the Law was
fulfilled, as he was obliged to the Law for man,) as our Savior is the
eternal Son of God, he did merit, the eternal life and rest of the first
seventh day lost by Adam, due by the Law, to his eternal merit, which is the
blessing of the Lords day, offered to the faith of all the nations of the
world, by the new covenant, whereby all the faithful are saved from the second
death, which is the curse of the Law of faith.

Fourthly, (by the literal light of the sound of the word of the Lords day)
the natural man's understanding, is morally produced in act (by the mediat
sense of hearing) to understand that the Lords resurrection from the grave, was
by his rest from the power of eternal death and darkness of hell, from the
eternal curse of the Law, the cause of eternal death; from sin (which he made
himself for man) the cause of the curse of the Law, from the power of Satan,
the cause of sin, and from the power of the grave, his last enemy; whereby the
Lord, by the immediate act of his own immediate infinite power, did gloriously
and triumphantly manifest himself truth to man, by the fulfilling of his
promise of the blessed seed, and in that truth, love and mercy to man, and by
that truth, love and mercy, Lord God and man, in the essential union of the
divine and humane nature, Lord, God and man, equal with the Father, and holy
Spirit: Lord, God and man, equal with the Father, by the work of the
redemption of man eternally lost, by the eternal curse of the Law, and by the
redemption of the creatures which were cursed for the sin of man, which are
equal to the works of the creation: and the Lord did manifest himself, Lord,
God and man, equal with the holy Spirit, as by the continual influence of his
blessing, the creatures which he has redeemed, are conserved in their redeemed
estate, which is the proper blessing of the holy Spirit, proceeding from the
Father and the Son.

The name (Lord) therefore, is the name of the essential union of the divine
and humane nature, necessarily implying the three coessentiall distinct persons
of the glorious Trinity, and consequently implying the name Jesus, and Christ:
For, as by the Lord, God and man, the lost creatures are r^stored, the Lord is
the Father, Lord and commander of the creatures: And as he is the Savior of
man from eternal death; he is Jesus the eternal Son of God: and as by the
continual influence of his blessing, the creatures are conserved; he is Christ
the anointed with the oil of gladness, the holy Spirit, and sanctifier; and
consequently, as the redeemed word written in the heart of man, (by the power
of which redeemed word, the natural man does live, move, and has his redeemed
state and grace of natural and moral being) is the Image of God in his Son
Christ Jesus, so the redeemed word in the heart of man, is the Image of the
Lords truth, love, and mercy, whereby the natural man is morally enabled (by
the act of his understanding and will) to produce the works of truth, love, and
mercy.

Fifthly, the Lords rest and resurrection from the fulfilling of his promise of
the blessed seed, being by his infinite immediate power, his merit by his
resurrection and rest is infinite; and his love and mercy to man by his rest,
is infinite.

Sixthly, as by the infinite power of the Lords merit (by his resurrection and
rest) the day of the Lords resurrection, is blessed and sanctified for his
worship by man (to whose faithful worship, the infinite blessing of the Lords
merit of eternal life and rest, is due by the Evangelicall law of faith:) so
by the infinite power of his merit, the Evangelicall worship of the Lords day,
is immediately commanded, and in that immediate worship, (as the Lords day is
the Evangelicall seventh day of the Evangelicall law of faith, implying the
command of the whole law) the whole Evangelicall law is commanded, obliging all
the nations of the world to believe the truth of the Lords fulfilled promise,
to whose faith the blessing of the Lords Evangelicall eternal rest is due by
the law, whereby the faithful man is saved from the second death, which is the
curse of the law of faith, and does enjoy eternal life.

Seventhly, the natural man, being commanded to believe that by faith in the
Lords merit, he is saved from the second death; and Evangelicall faith being
the act of the redeemed heart of man, and the original of all his natural and
moral actions, (to which all men are enabled by the power of the redeemed Word
of truth, love, and mercy, written in the heart of man:) faith therefore being
commanded immediately by the literal command of the law, (though necessarily
implying the spiritual command) in the command of faith, the works of truth
love and mercy, are necessarily commanded, which are the works of faith,
without which, faith is but a dead faith, and man but a dead man; dead in
actual sin, though he does live, all the days of this life. To the knowledge
of which actual sin as the natural man is led by the literal light of the
law, employed in the command of the Lords day: So by the knowledge of death, by
actual sin, the natural man is moved to moral repentance; And by repentance
to amendment of life, by the works of truth, love, and mercy, to which he is
morally enabled by the power of the redeemed Word of truth, love and mercy in
his heart, which are the works of faith, whereby the Lords merit is morally
apprehended.

Eighthly, the new covenant made between God and man, being established, upon
the immediate command of the Lords day, (the seventh day of the Evangelicall law
of faith) as the Lord does oblige himself to man, to confer the actual
blessing of the Lords days eternal rest to the faithful believer; so the
Lord by his covenant does oblige the final contemner of his infinite merit, to
the actual merciless eternal curse of his Law. The Lords merit of mercy
therefore being infinite, there is mercy for man all the day of this life: For,
the new covenant is made to all men whatsoever, and at what time soever: For,
Mar. 13.13. whosoever shall endure to the end shall be saved. This end to the
natural man, is his final perseverance, in his moral obedience, till the
Lords prefixed time of his spiritual calling, by the spiritual grace of
faith, whereby the natural man, being regenerate, is saved, who has nothing
to necessitate his moral disobedience: And though he does stumble and fall;
yet (by the power of the redeemed word written in his heart) the natural man
has freedom to repent morally, without necessitating of his impenitency; for
moral repentance must necessarily precede moral faith. As the natural man
therefore is no ways to despair of the Lords infinite mercy, while there is
day in this life, (for the dispairer of the Lords infinite mercy, does belie
the Lords mercy, and does detract from the infinitensse of the Lords merit;) so
the natural man is no ways, (by his presumptuous continuance in sin and
wickedness) to contemn the Lords long patience, leading him so graciously to
repentance, lest the Lord (in his justice) give him over to a reprobate mind,
that he cannot repent, though he has all the days of this life to repent by
covenant.

Ninthly, the law of God being eternal, (eternally obliging man, as he is man)
and the reward of the law, due by the law, to the merit of man, being according
to the law eternal; there must be therefore resurrection from the dead, that
man, as he is man, intellectual and sensitive, may receive the eternal reward
of the law in the full extent, to wit, eternal life and rest to the faithful
believer, in the merit of man, Jesus Christ the eternal Son of God; and the
curse of the law by eternal death, to the merit of man the proud final
contemner of the Lords infinite merit, offered so freely to him in this life.
The reward therefore of the law, in the full extent (as the reward is eternal)
cannot be received by man till the last day.

Tenthly, (the Lord being the head of all men redeemed from the curse of the
law for the sin of Adam) as the Lord has his universal redeemed Church in all
the nations of the world, (who by the power of the redeemed word of truth,
love, and mercy, written in their heart) are all morally united by one faith,
in one body, and by that faith, morally united to their head, the gracious
Redeemer of all men: So the Lord being the mystical head of his mystical
members, the Lord has his mystical universal Church, all united in one
mystical body, by spiritual faith; and by spiritual faith, all spiritually
and indivisibly united to their mystical head. These are the first ten
fundamental points of faith arising from the literal light of the
Evangelicall sound of the word of the Lords day, by the Lords rest and
resurrection from the grave, leading the natural man's understanding by faith,
to apprehend the Lords merit, to save him from the curse of the law of faith.
Next therefore of the fundamental points of faith arising from the Lords
resurrection from the earth by his ascension to the heavens; to which his
resurrection from his grave does extend) where the Lord sits at the right
hand of the infinite power of the Father, whence two fundamental points of
faith does arise.

First, the Lord (according to his promise, that the seed of the woman shall
break the head of the old Serpent, and the head of his cursed seed) has
obliged himself by the new covenant, that by his second coming from the heavens
(gloriously united to his mystical members) shall revenge the blood of man
upon Satan and his cursed seed. First, the blood of man, first betrayed by
Satan, to fall under the curse of the law. Secondly, the blood of man, Jesus
Christ, the eternal Son of God, by his redemption of man from the eternal
curse of the law. Thirdly, the blood of the Lords mystical members, persecute
by Satan and his cursed seed, for their valorous defending of his sacred truth
in this life: For, the Lord as head, united to his mystical members, is the
mystical man, who must break the old Serpents head, and the head of his cursed
seed, in the great day, afterward more fully to be declared This breaking of
the head of the old Serpent, and of the head of his cursed seed, is by the
Lords judging, condemning, and by the actual inflicting of the eternal curse
and reward of the law (in the full extent) to the great glory of God, the
eternal comfort of the faithful, and to the final eternal and utter
confusion of Satan and his cursed seed, in the great day.

The second fundamental point of faith, arising from the Lords resurrection
from the earth by his ascension to the heavens, is, that the Lord has
graciously obliged himself by the covenant, to send the Comforter, John 16.7.
(the Spirit of truth) by whose spiritual light, (enlightening the spiritual
darkness of the natural man) the Lords mystical members are begot, and by
the spiritual power of whose spiritual life, by that spiritual light, the
regenerate are enabled, with the gift of patience to overcome all the
afflictions and temptations of Satan and of his cursed seed in this life, which
is the Lords earnest of their incorruptible crown of glory in the life to come
for their valor, in their defense of his truth in this life. In these twelve
fundamental points of faith, as by the literal light of the sound of the word
of the Lords day, (by his rest and resurrection from the grave) the natural
man's understaning is morally enlightened: So by the power of the redeemed Word
of truth, written in the heart, the natural man is morally enabled to believe
these twelve fundamental points of faith: And therefore by the new covenant,
all men are obliged and commanded to believe these twe^ve fundamental points
of faith upon the twofold reward of the law. By this literal light therefore
of the sound of the truth of the Evangelicall word of the Lords day, the
judicious Reader is enabled with all boldness to condemn all tenants and
assertions of faith, repugnant to the truth of this light; for false adulterous
tenants and assertions. And with the like boldness, to condemn all pretended
worship of God, repugnant to the truth of the Lords Evangelicall commanded
worship in spirit and truth, for a false adulterous worship of God, arising
from the false light of error.

This false light from whence this adulterous worship of God does arise, is the
ceremonial light of some sensitive visible object, whereby the understanding
is produced in act, by the mediate sense of seeing, which for the most part, is
the sensitive objective carved or painted image of the eternal Son of God, as
he is man, which is a most faithless false adulterous and idolatrous worship.
It is faithless, because faith is by hearing of the Word (the Image of God in
his Son Christ Jesus) and not by the seeing of the Image of our Savior in his
humility, as he is man. It is false worship, because it does belie the truth of
the Lords glorious resurrection: it is an adulterous worship, because it is
repugnant to the truth of the light of the Lords commanded Evangelicall
worship, in spirit and in truth: It is an adulterous worship, because the
sensitive visible object does interveen between the Lord and his worship; and
in this sense, a lier is called an Idolater, because the falsehood which the
lier does maintain, does interveen between the lier and the light of the Word
of truth, love, and mercy in his heart, which is the Image of God, obliging the
heart of the lier, to declare and witness the truth, which is called the light
and law of conscience; and so is the covetous man, under which name, the lier,
hypocrite, coozener, cheater, extortioner, briber, whoremaster, drunkard,
murderer, and in a word, the foul malicious cruel affection of man: for, by
all such foul desire of the covetous man, the light of the word of truth, love
and mercy in the heart (redeemed by our Saviors sacred blood) is belied,
darkened, and obscured, and the foul desire worshipped as an Idol, contrary to
the light of the command of the word of the seventh day of the law really one
with the literal light of the law written in the heart of man. And though our
Saviors bloody rest, be necessarily implied in the Lords Evangelicall rest;
yet his bloody rest is not to be represented by any sensitive visible object to
the sense of seeing, but by the light of the sound of the commanded word of
truth (to wit) the Lords day, to the sense of hearing preached by the faithful
Minister of the Word. Neither must any man excuse the hanging up of our
Saviors Image (in his humility as he is man) pretending that he has the Image
objected to his eyes, only to put him in mind of our Savi^^^ love by his
death. To whom I answer, that by this manner of putting thee in mind of our
Saviors love, thou putst the Lord in mind of his fearful wrath against thee:
For, first it is by the Lords Evangelicall rest that thou art immediately saved,
the truth whereof, thou art commanded to worship in the Spirit of faith upon
the merciless curse of the law. Secondly, the species of the sensitive Image,
does interveen between thy mind and the Lords worship, whom thou art commanded
to worship immediately; and consequently, thy putting in mind an Idolatrous
mental worship; for preventing of which Idolatrous worship, the faithful
Minister, by the sound of the word is commanded to instruct the people
committed to his charge at his peril; for by the new covenant, the Apostles are
immediately commanded, to teach and to preach the truth of the Lords
Evangelicall worship, to all the Nations of the world, as the Lord has
revealed himself, by the Evangelicall rest of the Lords day. And in the
Apostles, the Apostolical successors (the Ministers of the word) are
commanded, to the like teaching and preaching of the truth of the Lords
Evangelicall commanded worship, to the people committed to their charge. The
new Covenant therefore, being commanded, as well upon the merciless curse of
the Law of faith, as upon the blessing of the Lords Evangelicall rest; It does
stand the Ministers of the Sacred word in hand, to look to the faithful
discharge of so strict an imposed task.

Now, though in the commanded Evangelicall Sacraments, (implying the Lords
whole last Will and Testament, which is the Evangelicall word) the word be
objectively presented to the sense of seeing, touching, tasting and smelling;
as by the light of the sound of the word, it is objected to the sense of
hearing, that man as he is man, may receive the word sacramentally, that is, by
faith in the word represented by the external elements: Yet this sacramental
object, does not represent the object of faith, (to wit, the Word Jesus Christ
the Son of God) to come, and to suffer for the sins of man; but does represent
him by his cursed death of the Cross, by his bloody rest in the grave, and by
his Resurrection from the grave, to be received sacramentally by faith in his
merit, by his cursed death of the Cross, by his bloody rest in the grave, and
by his Resurrection and rest, from the fulfilling of his promise of the blessed
seed; which both the Sacraments do most lively signify: for the better
conceiving whereof, it is to be understood, that the Sacraments were not
delivered in the primitive Church, but to such as were come to actual,
natural, and moral understanding and action.

First therefore, in the Sacrament of Baptism, by the baptizeds ducking and
(as it were) drowning in the water, (according to the manner of the primitive
C^^^ch) the party to be baptized (freed from the curse of the Law, (...) ^n of
Adam) is signified to be drowned and dead in actual sin, by (...)
^^an^gression of the ^aw of faith, as by his arising out of the water, his
rising (...) the death of actual sin, to the new life of faith; and that his
actual ^^ns ar^ ^^^ffied ^wa^ by his faith in the Lords merit; which is the
water of eternal life, purchased by the water and blood issuing from our
Saviors ^ea^^, represented by the sacramental water. So in the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper, by the sacramental bread, the bread of life is signified,
whereby the baptizeds faith is nourished and preserved, as by the natural
bread, his natural life is maintained and continued. By the breaking of the
Sacramental bread, the breaking of our Saviors body, by the curse of the
Cross is signified: as by the Sacramental wine, our Saviors heart blood is
signified, whereby the bread of life is purchased, which being Sacramentally
received by faith, the receiver has the temporal blessing of the Lords merit,
by his Evangelicall seventh days rest in this life, and eternal rest in the
life to come; and therefere it is said, We must not live by bread alone, but
by every word proceeding from God, Mat. 4.4. And this is the reason that the
Word is called the Bread of life; as by the sensitive bread, the sensitive
nature of man, is temporally continued and preserved; so by the spiritual
understanding of the Word Christ Jesus, (the Word and Bread of life,
spiritually and Sacramentally received by faith) the spiritual life of the
receiver, is eternally continued, according to our Saviors own word, This is
life eternal to know thee the only true God, and Christ Jesus whom thou have
sent. Here a Question may be moved to be answered in the Chapter following.

CHAP. XI.
The light of the word is in the sound of the word.
THe Apostle does affirm, that faith is by hearing of the word, Romans 10.17.
The Question therefore may be moved: Is not faith likewise by reading of the
word? I answer. The Question here, is of moral faith: And therefore I say,
That faith is not by reading of the word, as the written word, is the object of
the sense of seeing: but as the written word does presuppose the word spoken,
(for it is the word spoken that is read) in which case moral faith may be said
to be by reading. For, many times God (by his objective concursive grace) does
concur with the natural man's reading of the word, and with the reading of
the spiritual Writers upon the word, whereby the natural man's understanding
is enlightened, and his will moved morally to believe the word, and his heart
inclined, to give moral obedience to the literal command of the word: But
while God does not afford his co^cursive objective grace (which is in his free
pleasure) the natural man reads but a dead letter; for the life of the word
is in the sound of the word to the hearing: while as by the spiritual
Ministers word, the heart of man (where the redeemed word of the Law is
written) is rouzed and moved by the sound of the word, threatening of Gods
judgments for sin, whereby man is raised from sin, and moved to arm himself
against Satan and his instruments. And this is the reason that the Ministers of
God are called Trumpeters; for, as at the sound of the Trumpet the whole Army
is roused, to Arm themselves against the enemy: so at the sound of the word by
the spiritual Minister, man is roused and stirred up, to resist the temptation
of Satan, and of his instruments.

The life of the word therefore, is in the sound of the word. And this is the
reason, that the Apostle says, that faith is by hearing of the word which is
the word of the Lords day, the seventh day of the Evangelicall Law of says
implying the whole Evangelicall Law and Word of God. Now as the Evangelicall
Word of the Lords day has bin declared to be the true Evangelicall Word of the
seventh day of the Evangelicall Law of faith. So for the Readers satisfaction
in this fundamental point (the chief point of Christian faith) the manner
shall be set down that the sound of the word of the Lords day does arise from
the written word of God.

CHAP. XII.
The sound of the word of the Lords day does arise from the written word of God.
FIrst, the whole Evangel is only the sound of the word of the Lords day, from
the Lords promise of the blessed seed, to his conception of the seed of the
woman: from his conception to his birth: from his birth to his death, from his
death to his rest in the grave, whereby he did manifest himself, first, that
he was the promised blessed seed, the Son of God, the light and life of man, by
his gracious word, by his glorious wonders and miracles. Secondly, that he was
love and mercy to man (Love) by his gracious curing of many sensitive diseases
of man (incurable by man as he is only man.) Mercy by his pardoning of sin as
he is the Son of God. Thirdly, Christ Jesus the Son of God (begotten of the
seed of the woman) did manifest himself by his death, that he is the Savior
of all men for their sin in Adam: Fourthly, by his fulfilling of the Law (in
his rest in the grave for the whole space of the seventh day of the last
Sabbath) the eternal life and rest of the first seventh day (lost by Adam) was
manifested to be redeemed by our Savior. All performed by Jesus Christ, the
Son of God, man begotten of the seed of the woman. But his resurrection from
the grave (by his rest from the fulfilling of the Law implying his bloody rest
in his grave from the redemption of man) was by his infinite power, as he is
Lord Jesus Christ the Son of God begotten of the seed of the woman (by the
immediate unction of the holy Spirit) God equal with the Father and holy
Spirit, By whose rest the Lords day (the day of the Lords resurrection) was
blessed and sanctified for the Lords thankful worship by man, implying the
light of the word of the whole Evangel: Though the Lords day, was first called
(by the Evangelists) the day of the Lords resurrection, to convince the false
report of the Jews who had suborned the Keepers of the sacred grave, to
affirm, that the Disciples had stolen away the Lords blessed Body, from the
grave. As the Lords day was called by the Apostles, the first day of the week:
least by naming of any other seventh day then the great prophetical Sabbath,
in the first plantation of the Evangel, the stubborn Jews should have utterly
rejected the embracing of the Evangel. All which is but the light of the sound
of the word of the Lords day.

But of all the sounds of the word of the Lords day in the Evangel: John
Baptists sound (that Elias) did pass all: for his sound was, as if the Lord
then had suffered, and had risen from the dead: For first by John's pointing at
the Lamb of God, that takes away the sin of the World, our Saviors death
was signified. Secondly, by John's baptizing of our Savior, (in Christ's
submersion and rising out of the water) his rest in the grave and resurrection,
was lively expressed. Thirdly, by John's affirming, that he did see the Spirit
of God (in form of a Dove) to descend from Heaven upon our Savior; the
calling of the Jews and Gentiles (by the new Covenant) was most lively
expressed, for by the Doves outstreched wings, the Lords arms of mercy (by his
Evangelicall bloody rest) were spread out from Heaven, to embrace all the
Nations of the World. Secondly, the whole tractate of the acts (from end to
end) is nothing else, but the light of the sound of the word of the Lords day.
For by the sounding of the word of the Lords, resurrection by the Apostles,
what a world of wonders and miracles, were wrought, and how many thousands (by
the light of the sound of the word) came (by the hands of faith) to lay hold on
the Lords days Evangelicall rest? Thirdly, the new Covenant, is immediately,
established upon the Evangelicall word of the Lords day by inseparable union.
Fourthly, the Apostle does affirm, that the sound of the word (to wit) of the
Lords day, went to the ends of the earth. Fifthly, John does call the day of the
Lords resurrection the Lords day. Sixthly, the Apostle to the Hebrews does set
down the Lords day, the Evangelicall Word of the seventh day of the Law of
righteousness of faith, most plainly saying, first, that after a long time
(which was the time of the promised rest of the prophetical Sabbaticall
seventh day) there was another certain seventh day, appointed in David (that
is) in David's seed. Secondly, that the Lord of life, to wit the Son of David,
did enter this day into his rest, from his resting from the fulfilling of his
promise of the blessed seed, which is his Evangelicall rest, necessarily
implying his bloody promised Sabbaticall rest from the work of the redemtion:
As he did first rest, from the works of the creation: Thirdly, the Apostle
proves that this day appointed in David, was for the people to enter into this
seventh days rest: For (says the Apostle) Hebrews 4.8. if Joshua could have
given the people of Israel rest (to wit) by the promised rest of the
prophetical Sabbaticall seventh day, then bad not David bin appointed to
speak of another day, that s^ another seventh day, which the Apostle Hebrews
4.12. calls the lively powerful word of God, which is the word of the Lords
day, the true Evangelicall Word, of the seventh day of the Law of
righteousness of faith, (by the Evangelicall sound thereof) sharper then any
two edged sword, d^viding and seperating the soul from the spirit, where the
soul is taken for the soul of man, as he is a natural man, and the spirit is
taken for the soul of man, as he is regenerate and a spiritual man, for by
the spiritual sanctifying understanding of the w^rd, the rebellious powers of
the flesh, of man, as he is a natural man, are divided and subdued by the
power of the Spirit, though not totally in th^s life: And therefore, the
Apostle Paul does affirm, that the sins pro eeding from his rebellious flesh
are none of his, to wit, as he is a spiritual man. Seventhly, David does
prophetically affirm, Psalm. 118 24. First, that this is the day which the Lord
has made, exhorting all men to rejoice in this blessed day; which day David
did see, with his spiritual eyes of faith: for the Lord did fulfill this
prophecy of David indeed, for the Lord made this day with his precious blood.
Secondly, David does prophetically affirm, Psalm. 118.22. that it was the
glorious light of this seventh days rest, (which David calls the corner stone)
which the Judaicall builders did refuse, and now is made the head of the
corner, mounted above the heaven of heavens, (the Tabernacle not made with
hands) wherein the Lord of life, (Head of his mystical members) is entered, to
make continual intercession (as their Advocate,) at the Throne and Alter of
righteousness, by the merit of his fulfilling of the Law of righteousness;
whereby all the actual sins of his mystical members (united to their
mystical head, by his indivisible love) are covered, and freed from the curse
of the Evangelicall Law of faith, by the new Covenant. As by his cursed death
of the altar of the Cross, they are freed from the curse of the Law, for their
sin in Adam by the first Covenant. Eighthly, the Lord himself does affirm,
John 8.56. that Abraham did see this his joyful day, (to wit) with his
spiritual eyes of faith, in the eight day of the Sacrament of circumcision,
wherein there does lie no small mystery; for, the child was to be circumcised
upon the eight day, though the eight day did fall upon the prophetical Sabbath
day: upon which day no work was to be done, under the pain of death, much
less the shedding of man's blood.

The shedding of man's blood therefore upon the Sabbath, was only lawful, by
the command of the Sacramental circumcision: for, both the prophetical
Sacraments (implying the whole prophetical ceremonial Law) were commanded in
the Church of God, before the Law was given to Moses, to the end that the Jews
might understand, that the Law to the fathers, before Moses and after Moses
(till Christ's resurrection) was really one, and the same Law of God, and one
and the same formal obliegement of the Law. The point of the mystery lies in
this; That the Sacrament of circumcision, (which was the eighth day) was
preferred to the command of the Sabbath, which was the seventh day of the Law,
implying the command of the whole Law. Now, the Sacrament of circumcision, was
but the shadow of the Sacrament of the Lords day, which was the eight day from
the last prophetical Sabbath, reckoning the prophetical Sabbath inclusively,
for the first day in the account of the eight days: though by beginning the
account, from the last formal Jews prophetical Sabbath, (exclusively) the
Lords day, as man naturally descended of Adam is obliged to the Law, is the
just seventh day from the last formal Jews prophetical Sabbath, as has been
declared. What an admirable faith was this of Abraham to see this day so far
off, which the Lord affirms that Abraham did see, and that Abraham did
rejoice in the sight of this blessed day? Ninthly, the Lord of life, (the Lord
of the Evangelicall law of the righteousness of faith) the true eternal rest
of the Evangelicall seventh day of the Law, does call this blessed day, his
own day, John 85.6. His own day, by all true title, and right of
righteousness it self, his own; which in spite of the power of darkness
must shine till the eternal day. Tenthly, this is the most joyful day of
days, for by the Evangelicall sound of the Lords days Evangelicall rest, the
Jews and Gentiles, were actually called to one Church, and were made one fold,
to the joyous and thankful jubilising of all the Nations of the world.
Eleventhly, by the Evangelicall sound of the Lords days Evangelicall rest,
(arising from his bloody rest) all the prophetical Sabbaths, all the jubilees
of Sabbaths, and all the prophesies, prophesying from the foundation of the
world, of the coming and suffering of the Lord of life, (the promised blessed
seed) are actually determined. Twelfthly, by his bloody Sabbaticall rest,
necessarily employed in his Evangelicall seventh days rest of the Lords day:
All the altars and sacrifices, (the foundation of the partition wall of the
ceremonial Law) and all the figures, types, rites, and prophetical
ceremonies, from the foundation of the world built thereon, (by which partition
the Gentiles were barred, from the judicial service of God) all are rased from
the very foundation, never to be reiterate in the Church of God. Last of all,
Mary Magdalen did not know the Lord of life, John. 20.16 17: (the eternal rest
of his blessed day) though Mary did see the Lord with her bodily eyes, till she
heard the sound of the word, of the Evangelicall seventh days eternal rest,
calling Mary. At the hearing of the sound of whose Evangelicall word, while
Mary knowing the Lord, would have embraced him, in her arms; the Lord said,
Mary touch me not; to wit, but by thine arms of faith.

The Lord, after his resurrection, did first honor Mary, to be the joyful
trumpeter to sound the news of the word of his mystical Evangelicall
birthday, to the Apostles themselves, as the Lord of life, the Son of God, as
he is man, did honor Mary, the blessed Virgin, to be enclosed in her womb,
and to be the first proclaimer of the joyful day of his natural birth. Though
woman therefore (seduced by the false treachery of Satan) was the instrument of
the fall of man; yet woman, first and last, was the most happy news-bringer, of
the most joyful tidings that ever came to man or Angel. Let a man therefore
honor woman, whom God the Lord has so highly honored: For, first, woman was
the happy instrument of the salvation of man, and of the confirmed grace of the
Angels. Secondly, woman was the happy instrument that man is crowned with the
incorruptible crown of glory eternally in all heavenly happiness; whereas,
though man had stood in the state of perfection, man must have enjoyed his
perfection and felicity but eternally upon earth.

And so much for the declaration of the Evangelicall word, as the word is the
seventh day of the Evangelicall law of faith, implying the command of the whole
law, which is the Lords day, the blessed day of days. We are next, according
to our method, to declare the Evangelicall word, as it is the word of the new
covenant and promise of God. But a question does arise of the Lords day, first
necessarily to be answered.

CHAP. XIII.
The Evangelicall sense of the bowing of the knee at the name of Jesus.
THe Question here may be moved: Since at the name of Jesus every knee must
bow, Phil. 2.10, 11. of things in heaven, of things upon earth, and of things
under the earth; wherefore is not the seventh day of the Evangelicall law of
faith, called rather by the name of Jesus day, then by the name of the Lords
day?

I answer, because it is by the light of the seventh day of the Evangelicall
law of faith, (by the truth of the Lords Evangelicall rest and resurrection
from the fulfilling of his promise of the blessed seed) that Jesus is known to
be the Savior of man, the eternal Son of God, Lord, God and man, equal to
the Father and holy Spirit (as has been formerly declared,) by the infinite
sanctified power of whose blessed merit, the Lords day is blessed and
sanctified, and the Evangelicall worship of the Lords day, immediately
commanded. Though Jesus therefore, be the name of the Son of God, as he is man,
begot of the seed of the woman, and the Savior of man, by his cursed death and
bloody rest in the grave, (without whose resurrection from the dead, Jesus the
Son of God, Adam, and all men created in Adam, as head, must have di^d
eternally under the eternal curse of the law;) yet the name Lord, is (...)
name, by his infinite power he has overcome the power of death and the grave,
necessarily implying the name Jesus, and Christ, as has formerly been
declared. The Lords day therefore is the day of our Lord Jesus Christ,
immediately, and not immediately the day of Jesus: And consequently the bowing of
the knee at the name of Jesus, is the bowing of the knee at the name of the
Lord Jesus; by which bowing of the knee, the Evangelicall commanded worship of
the Lords day is implied; as may plainly appear by the Apostles words, saying,
that God has given him a name above all names, that at the name of Jesus,
every knee shall bow, and that every tongue shall confess, that Jesus Christ
is the Lord: For, as the religious bowing of the knee is from the believing
heart, (implying the Spirit of the mind) that Jesus, the Savior of man, is the
Lord, (wher^by the internal and external worship of God is expressed:) So the
confession of the tongue; as likewise from the Spirit of faith in the heart,
that Jesus the Savior of man, is the Lord, by the truth of his merit, by his
Evangelicall rest and resurrection from the fulfilling of his promise of the
blessed seed upon the Lords day, whereby the worship of the Lords day is
commanded in spirit and truth: In which commanded worship, ^ll the internal
and external worship of God is necessarily implied. In this sense, the Apostle
says, Romans 10.10. with the heart man does believe to righteousness, and with
the mouth man does confess to salvation; that is, with the heart, implying the
Spirit of the mind (enlightened by the light of the Lords day, really one with
the light of the redeemed word of the law in the heart) man does believe, that
the Lord has fulfilled the law of righteousness, by whose merit, the believer
is saved; and with the mouth man does confess, before God and man, that he is
saved by faith in the truth of the Lords only merit; for as by his only merit
all men are saved from the first death, which is the curse of the law for the
sin of Adam; so all the faithful are saved from the second death, which is the
curse of the law of faith.

The external bowing of the knee therefore, at the name of Jesus (without
adding or implying (Lord) proceeding from the believing of the heart) is but a
faithless and irreligious worship of God by man. In these words of the
Apostle, concering the bowing of the knee, (which is a Prophecy, and now
fulfilled by the Lords days Evangelicall rest and resurrection) three special
things are to be observed:

First, though the name Jesus (signifying a Savior) be given to man (as at the
power of the Lords command, ^^n is saved by man from temporal danger;) yet the
name Jesus, as he is Lord, God and man, is incommu^icable to man or Angel; and
a name above all names prop^rly and immediately, ascribed to the Son, the second
person of the Trinity. And therefore we see, that in the Apostles salutations
by their Epistles) they do pray for peace and grace from God the Father and
from our Lord Jesus Christ: For as the Lord is man (the Son of God equal with
the Father and holy Spirit before all time) so he is man, the Son of God in
time of the seed of the woman in the essential union of the divine nature of
the Father, Son and holy Spirit, with the humane nature: Lord God and man. And
consequently, the three coessentiall distinct Persons of the Trinity Lord God
and man.

The second thing to be observed in the words, is, that by the things in
Heaven, the Saints departed this life; and the blessed Angels, are to be
understood: for as the Saints in Heaven do (with all humility) acknowledge
their glory and heavenly felicity, to the only merit of the Lord Jesus Christ:
So do the Angels (with all humility) acknowledge the conserved grace of their
created perfection to the merit of the Lord Jesus Christ, to whom his merit
does extend, who are conserved as ministering spirits, for man: First, for man,
Christ Jesus, while he was personally upon earth, that his foo^e should not
dash against a stone: Luke 4.10. and secondly, they are ministering spirits, for
his mystical members, that the foot of their faith shall not be dashed
(totally and finally) against the stony temptation of Satan and his instruments
in this life. The third thing to be observed, is, that by things upon earth,
man and the sensitive and insensitive creatures created for man, are to be
understood; and by things under (or within the earth) the waters, mineralls,
and other things created for the use of man, which as they were all cursed for
man, so they are all redeemed from the curse with man; in whose behalf man is
to bend the knees of his heart, with all thankfulness to the Lord Jesus
Christ, and to testify his thankfulness, by his thank-worship of the Lords
day, as the Lord has revealed himself by the Lords days Evangelicall rest,
Lord Jesus Christ God and man in the three coessentiall distinct persons of the
glorious Trinity. And so much for the declaration or the Evangelicall Word, as
it is the word of the Lords day the seventh day of the Evangelicall Law. Next
(according to our method) the Evangelicall Word is to be declared, as it is
the word of promise and new Covenant made by God with man.

CHAP. XIV.
The Evangelicall Covenant made by God with man, in his Son Christ Jesus called
the new Covenant.
The Evangelicall Word of the Lords day (the seventh day of the Evangelicall
Law of righteousness of faith) and the Evangelicall Word of promise and new
Covenant, are really one, but of a formal difference. First, of the real
unity of both, and next of the formal difference. The real unity of both,
does consist in this, that the word of promise and new Covenant (which is the
Lords merit of eternal life by his resurrection and rest from the fulfilling
of his promise of the blessed seed) is the blessing of the Lords day: For by
the Lords infinite merit (by the Lords days Evangelicall rest) the Lords day,
is blessed, sanctified, and commanded, for the seventh day of the Evangelicall
Law, implying the command of the whole Evangelicall Law of faith. And
consequently, the word of promise and new Covenant, and the word of the Lords
day really one, for the one is necessarily implied in the other, as may appear
by the several names of the new Covenant. First, the new Covenant is called
the Covenant of grace, because the Lords merit of eternal life (by the Lords
days Evangelicall rest, from the fulfilling of his promise of the blessed
seed, which is the blessing of the Lords day) is freely offered to all
believers, by the new Covenant, without all respect to the merit of any man
naturally descended of Adam, whereby all believers are saved from the second
death, which is the curse of the Law of faith. And consequently the word of
promise, and the word of the Lords day are really one. Secondly, the new
Covenant is called the Covenant of truth, because the Lord, by his Evangelicall
resurrection and rest, from the faithful fulfilling of his promise of the
blessed seed, (upon his blessed day did manifest himself truth to man) by the
truth of whose infinite merit (by his Evangelicall rest) the Lords day is
blessed, sanctified, and commanded. Which blessing of eternal life, is word of
promise, and new Covenant, and consequently the word of promise, and the word
of the Lords day really one. Thirdly, the new Covenant is called the Covenant
of mercy; because, as the Lord (by his Evangelicall rest) did manifest himself
truth to man; so in that truth, the Lord (by his infinite merit) did manifest
himself, love and mercy to man: for, as by his cursed death of the Cross, our
Savior did merit the salvation of all men, from the curse of the Law, for the
sin of Adam: So by his bloody rest in the grave, by his fulfilling of the law
in the seventh day of the last Sabbath, the eternal life and rest (lost by
Adam from the first seventh day of the law) was due to the Lords merit, whereby
all believers are saved from the second death, extending his twofold love and
mercy to all men by the new Covenant: whose mercy (according to the truth of
his infinite merit) being likewise infinite: The Lords gracious arms of mercy,
are outstretched to the penitent sinner, for all the days of this life, by the
new Covenant. And this is the reason, that wretched men do so insult, upon the
Lords infinite mercy, by their continuance in sin and wickedness, because they
see the daily love and mercy of God extended to all men in this life, whose Sun
does shine, and his rain does fall, both upon the just and the unjust, Mat.
5.45. And this is likewise the reason, that many (though most unjustly) do
grudge the temporal blessings of God to the wicked, who, though they do enjoy
the temporal blessings of the Lords merit, by his Evangelicall rest; yet they
are far from the spiritual blessing of the Lords merit, whereby man is only
saved. But the Lord has thus graciously obliged himself by the new covenant;
first, that wretched man should not despair of the Lords mercy, while he has
all the days of this life to repent him of his actual sins: Secondly, that
the wicked may be excuselesse: For, though God wills that all men should be
saved, 1 Timothy 2.4. by testifying of their thankfulness for their redemption,
by the works of truth, love, and mercy, to which they are morally enabled (by
the redeemed word of the law, written in their heart) yet while the wicked man
(without any created power, to necessitate his moral disobedience) does (by
his obstinate continuance in sin and wickedness) make himself the cursed seed
of Satan. The Lord does justly give him over to a reprobate mind, and does
most justly will his condemnation; where (by the way) the difference between
the first and second covenant, is to be observed for the least transgression of
the law by the first covenant, was without all revealed hope of mercy, or time
of repentance; but the second covenant (both Prophetically and Evangelically)
is with all hope of mercy by repentance for all the days of this life:
Fourthly, the new covenant, is called the covenant of faith; because the Lords
merit of eternal life, by his Evangelicall rest, (which is the blessing of the
Lords day) is the immediate object of faith; and therefore the Evangelicall
law, is called the law of righteousness of faith, though the works of faith,
(which are the works of truth, love, and mercy) are equally commanded in the
command of faith, which is the necessary, sole immediate efficient cause of the
works of faith; and therefore necessarily commanded in the command of faith:
while the Apostle therefore does affirm, that man is justified by faith,
without the works of the law, we must understand, that the works meaned by the
Apostle, are the ceremonial works of the Prophetical law, and not the
Evangelicall works of faith; to which works, the Apostle does exhort both the
Jews and Gentiles; and therefore the Apostle James says, show me thy faith by
thy works. Now, the Lords merit of eternal life (which is the blessing of the
Lords day) being really one; the word of promise and new covenant, and the word
of the seventh day of the Evangelicall law are really one, and so much for the
real unity of both: next of the formal difference.

The formal difference of both, does consist in this, that by the new
covenant, God and man are mutually obliged in the Evangelicall word of the
Lords day: For, as God by his new covenant does formally oblige man to believe
the truth of his fulfilled promise of the blessed seed, by his Evangelicall
rest: So the Lord does mutually oblige himself by the truth of his merit (by
his Evangelicall rest) to save the believer from the curse of the second death;
obliging likewise the unbeliever, and final contemner of his free gracious
offer, to the merciless curse of the law of faith.

But, by the Evangelicall word of the Lords day, (the seventh day of the
Evangelicall law) the Lord does formally command man to testify his belief,
to the word of eternal life, as the Lords Word is his law to man. The chief
precept of whose law, is the commanded worship of the Lords day; in which
commanded worship, the whole Evangelicall law of righteousness of faith, as
formally and necessarily commanded, commanding the faith of man in the
original; which is the love of the heart, where the redeemed word of the law
is written, really one with the Evangelicall word of the seventh day of the law
(the Lords day) by the power of which redeemed word in the heart (which is the
Image of God in his Son Christ Jesus, truth, love, and mercy it self) all men
are morally enabled by the works of truth, love and mercy, to give moral
obedience to the command of the Evangelicall law, which are the works of faith;
the chief work whereof is the truth of the commanded worship of the Lords day,
whereby the Lord by his Evangelicall rest, has manifested himself truth, love,
and mercy to man. The judicious Reader, therefore, may plainly perceive, that
though there be a formal difference between the word of the seventh day of the
Evangelicall law, and of the word of promise and the new covenant: yet they are
really one and the one necessarily employed in the other: For, (as has been
formerly declared) God cannot morally command man to his new covenant, but by
the immediate command of the word of the seventh day of the law, implying the
command of the whole Evangelicall law, which is the Evangelicall word of the
Lords day: For, there is neither life, light, or the power of command, in any
precept of the Evangelicall law of righteousness of faith, but by the only
immediate commanded worship of the Lords day, in that commanded worship,
implying the command of the whole law. And therefore the blessing of the Lords
merit (by the Lords days Evangelicall rest) is only and immediately due (by the
law) to the faithful worship of the Lords day, for the fulfilling of the whole
law, which is fulfilled by faith in the Lords infinite merit, by whose infinite
sanctified merit, (by his Evangelicall resurrection and rest from the
fulfilling of his promise) the Lords day is the word of eternal life and the
immediate object of Christian faith; without the command therefore, of the Lord
day, (as it is his law to man,) there is neither life, or light for man, or any
law or new covenant, or any object for the faith of man dead in actual sin, as
all men, (freed from the curse of the law for the sin of Adam) are before they
be regenerate, by their transgression of the law of faith. And therefore as our
Savior by his bloody rest in the grave by his fulfilling of the command of the
seventh day, did fulfill the whole law (as our Savior was obliged to the law
for man) to whose merit the eternal life and rest lost by Adam is due by the
law? so the Lord Jesus Christ (eternal life and rest) by his resurrection and
rest from the fulfilling of his promise of the blessed seed upon the day of his
resurrection, did obliege all men again to his new Covenant, by the immediate
command of the Lords days commanded worship, (blessed and sanctified by his
merit), to believe in his fulfilled promise of the blessed seed; to whose
faith, the blessing of his merit of eternal life is due by the law which is
commanded in the commanded worship of the Lords day, as may appear by the word
of promise and new covenant: Go and teach and preach the Evangel to all
nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
holy Spirit, Mar. 16.15, 16. he that shall believe, shall be saved, but he that
will not believe, shall be condemned. The sense of the word of the covenant is
this: Go and preach the Evangel, that is, go and preach and proclaim the glad
tidings of my resurrection and rest, this day from the fulfilling of my promise
of the blessed seed (which is the sum of the whole Evangel, implied in the
Lords day, by the Lords Evangelicall rest;) go therefore, preach the Evangel to
all nations, baptizing them, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the holy Spirit, as my my resurrection and rest this day from the power of sin,
Satan, hell, eternal death, the curse of the law, and the power of the grave,
I have manifested my self (by mine own infinite immediate power) Truth to man by
the fulfilling of my promise; and in that truth, love, and mercy to man, and in
that truth, love, and mercy, God and man, in the three coessentiall distinct
persons of the Trinity; whosoever shall believe in me, (to wit, eternal life,
and rest by the power of my infinite merit by my Evangelicall rest) shall be
saved from the curse of the second death, for the transgression of the law of
faith, as by my bloody rest in the grave, (from the cursed death of the cross)
all men are saved from the curse of the law for their transgression of the law
in Adam, which is the first death; he that will not believe in me, shall be
condemned, to wit, to the merciless curse of the Evangelicall law of faith,
which is merciless. This salvation and condemnation of man, (being the twofold
reward of the Evangelicall law, due by the law, according to the obedience or
final disobedience of man): The Lord commands man to his new covenant by the
immediate word and command of the Evangelical law, by which command the reward
is only due. The chief precept of whose Evangelicall law, being the precept of
the Lords commanded worship (implying the command of the whole Evangelicall
obedience and Religion of man). The Lords day therefore, (by the Lords
immediate word) is commanded, and in the Lords day (as it is the seventh day of
the Evangelicall law) the obedience of man, to the whole Evangelicall law is
necessarily commanded. Thus, according to the truth of the sacred word, having
set down the true sense of the new covenant; I next set down the formal
obligement of man to the Evangelicall law of God by the new covenant.

As the Lords resurrection and rest, from his fulfilling of his promise of the
blessed seed (upon the Lords day) does extend to the safety of all men from the
curse of eternal death for the first sin in Adam: And to the safety of all
believers, dead in actual sin, for their own natural transgression, of the
Evangelicall law of righteousness of faith: So the merit of the Lords
resurrection, does likewise extend, to the confirmation of the blessed Angels,
in the grace of their created perfection, who are sent as ministering spirits,
for the saving of the elect, from being finally overcome, by the temptation of
satan and his cruel instruments. The Lords resurrection and rest therefore
(upon the Lords day) being the most joyful news that ever came to Man or
Angel, his seventh days rest is formally Evangelicall; and consequently the
commanded worship of the Lords day, formally Evangelicall; which is therefore
commanded in spirit and truth, that is in the spirit of faith, in the truth of
the Lords merit, to the joy and comfort of all the Nations of the world. For
both Jew and Gentile (by the immediate command of the Lords days commanded
Evangelicall worship) are freed from the sore yoke of the sabbaticall seventh
days Prophetical ceremonial worship, implying the whole ceremonial law.

According to the formal Evangelicall worship therefore of the Lords day (the
seventh day of the Evangelicall law) the whole Evangelicall law of
righteousness of faith, is formally and Evangelically both obliged and
commanded, by the immediate word of the Lord of the Lords day by his new
Covenant, obliging and commanding, the faithful obedience of all the Nations
of the world (first and immediately) to the commanded Evangelicall worship of
the Lords day, and in that commanded worship commanding the faithful obedience
of man to the command of the whole Evangelicall law of faith, that by believing
in the Lords merit (by the Lords days evangelicall rest) they may be saved
from the curse of the second death: to which command all men are morally
enabled by the redeemed word of the law written in their heart, really one with
the command of the Lords day.

CHAP. XV.
It was impossible (in any moral right, by the command of the law) that the
last Sabbath could have been worshipped, either for the Jews formal
Prophetical Sabbath, or for the Lords day.
OF the declaration of the Lords day a twofold Question may be moved: The first
is, whether (in any moral right by the command of the law) the last Sabbath,
(by the whole space whereof, the sacred body of the Lord did rest in his grave)
might not have been worshipped for the formal Jews Prophetical sabbath? The
second question is, Whether (in any moral right by the command of the law) the
last Sabbath might not have been worshipped for the Lords day, the first
Evangelicall seventh day of the law of faith?

First, I answer to the first Question.

Lest there be a mistake in this Discourse, I first state the Question. The
question here, is not in the matter of fact, whether the Jews did celebrate, or
did not celebrate, the ceremonial worship of the last Sabbath, for the Jews
prophetical Sabbath. But the Question is, whether (in any moral right by the
command of the Law) the Jews might have worshipped that day, by the Ceremonial
worship of their prophetical Sabbath. And now I answer; And do affirm, that
it is impossible (by any right of the command of the law of God) that the Jews
might have celebrated the last Sabbath, for their prophetical Sabbath; for
such commanded worship had inferred a twofold necessary contradiction in the
command of the law. For first, by such ceremonial worship of the last Sabbath,
Christ's death should have been prefigurate to be hereafter, while as his sacred
body lay in the grave.

Secondly, though the formal prophetical Jews Sabbath day, was not actually
determined, till it was immediately determined, by the day of Christ's
resurrection from the grave: yet all the prophesies, of all the prophetical
Sabbaths, all the jubilees of Sabbaths, and all the prophesies, prophesying of
Christ, from the foundation of the world, were all actually determined, by his
rest in the grave, for the whole space of the last Sabbath. So that if there
should have been any such command of the law; the prophesies should have been
fulfilled, and not fulfilled as by the ceremonial worship of the last Sabbath
Christ should have been dead, and not dead, which is a twofold contradiction.
Neither in all reason, durst the High Priest that day, offer to celebrate the
ceremonial worship of the golden Altar, (which he was to discharge, after the
service of the brazen Alter) and that for this twofold fear. First, the great
rent (from the top to the bottom) of the Vale of the Temple, was just between
the golden Alter, and the Table of Shewbread, where a great deal of stones
and rubbish must fall, whereby the table of Shewbread, and the golden Alter
were parted; mystically signifying to the High Priest, that the bread of life
was separate, and departed from the ceremonial worship of the golden Altar.
Now, the golden Altar standing so near to the great ruinous wall, the Priest
in his coming up to offer sweet Incense at the golden Altar, might have been
afraid to be brained with the stones falling from the great rent of the Vale.

The next fear was far greater: for, the high Priest in his coming up to
offer Incense at the golden Alter, (the rent of the wall being so great) must
have seen the Arc of the Covenant, the golden Crown and the Cherubims
covering the Mercy-seat, to which the glorious lights of the golden
Candlesticks were directly opposite; Now it was death for the Priest himself
to look on the Ark of the Lord, with any material light: Insomuch, that (out
of all question) by the reflex of the light of the golden Candlesticks, from
the golden Crown, Cherubims, and Mercy-seat, and from the glistring gold of
the golden Alter: All the Priests were that day confounded. Though the High
Priest, or any man that day, without any fear, might have entered the highest
place, and have touched, and looked on the Arc; but it was more then was then
known to the high Priest. Against this it may be objected: Luke the Evangelist
says, Luke 23 56. That the women, according to the command of the Law, rested
from going to the sacred grave that day, which command of the Law, was the
command of the prophetical Sabbath day, I answer. Luke, the faithful
Historiographer of the sacred History, does faithfully relate the act of the
religious women, with the precise circumstance of the time of the act, what the
women (then full of sorrow for the Lord of life) were constrained to do, out
of their respect to the command of the Sabbath, which was that day in force,
for ought that the women did know: But Luke, does not relate what the women
might have done that day: Neither had it been sitting for the Evangelist so to
have done; for the formal command of the Sabbath day (as it was the formal
prophetical Jews Sabbath day) was not actually determined, till it was
determined by the next day, the day of Christ's resurrection from the grave, to
wit, the Lords day though the prophesies of the Sabbath were then actually
determined. And so much for answer to the first Question.

To the second Question, I answer. That it had been as impossible (in any
moral right by the command of the Law) that the last Sabbath (for the whole
space whereof the blessed body of our Savior rested in the sacred grave) could
have been worshipped for the Lords day. For first, the mournful, sorrowful,
and lamentable light of the sound of the word, of the seventh day of the last
Sabbath, had been repugnant to the joyful Evangelicall sound, and light of the
word of the Lords day. Secondly, the Evangelicall worship of the Lords day, to
have been celebrate, upon the last Sabbath; had employed a manifest
contradiction, in the command of the law; for, so the law should have commanded
the day of the Lords resurrection to be worshipped in spirit and truth; while
as contrary to all truth, the sensitive body of our Savior did lie dead in the
grave that day. Thirdly, by the commanded worship of that Sabbath, to be
celebrate by the Evangelicall worship of the Lords day had been contradictory
to the sacred written Word of God, by his eternal decree; for the last enemy
to be conquered by the Lord of life, was the grave. Fourthly, the commanded
Evangelicall worship of that day, had been contradictory to Christ's own
prophecy, which was, that he should rise again the third day, while by his
Evangelicall worship, he must have risen the second day. Fifthly, by such
commanded Evangelicall worship of the last Sabbath; the Apostles must have been
false witnesses, in preaching and proclaiming, that the Lord was risen from the
grave, while his sacred body did rest in the grave. Sixthly, such Evangelicall
worship of the last Sabbath had overthrown the chief Article of Christian
faith: For all Christians are obliged to believe, that the Lord of life rose
the third day from the grave, and not the second day; and so much for answer to
the second question against this declaration of the Lords day, three
obejections are to be answered.

CHAP. XVI.
The reason that God is said to be Alpha and Omega, the first and the last.
FIrst, it may be objected; that by the establishing of the Lords day, for the
Evangelicall moral seventh day of the law of faith, there is one seventh day
of the law, (implying the whole law) lost in the account. Now, heaven and earth
must perish before a jot or a tittle of the law shall perish, Luke 86.17. For
the law of God is eternal. I answer, By this account, there is neither any jot
or tittle of the seventh day of the law of God lost; neither by this account is
there my prejudice at all to the decreed six days work, allowed by the law to
man: For the seventh day of the last Sabbath, implying the whole law (as Christ
Jesus was obliged thereby, as he is man) was fulfilled by himself. Now, by the
fulfilling of the law, the law is established, and not lost; if man (by his
final obstinate contempt of the law) should escape the curse of the law, at
Christ's second coming, then the law we lost indeed: Or, if the Lord had not
fulfilled the command of the seventh day of the last Sabbath, (as the Lord did
oblige himself by the prophetical covenant) the seventh day of the law
(implying the command of the whole law) had been likewise utterly lost, as man
Christ Jesus, the Son of God, was obliged to the command of the law. This
objection therefore, is easily answered, by the former declaration: For, God
and man being mutually obliged to the prophetical covenant, by the seventh day
of the law, (then by the name of the Sabbath of the Lord) the obligement of man
to the prophetical covenant, was formally twofold: First, man (to wit) Adam
(and all men naturally to descend of Adam) were formally obliged to the command
of the seventh day, as it was then the prophetical Sabbath, obliging the faith
of man to believe the promised rest of the blessed seed, prophesied by the
prophetical Sabbath, until the promised rest was fulfilled by the blessed
seed: Secondly, man, the Son of God (Christ Jesus the blessed seed) was
formally obliged by the prophetical covenant, to fulfill his promised rest, by
his obedience to the command of the seventh day of the last Sabbath, as it was
prophesied by the prophetical Sabbath: who having fulfilled the command of the
last Sabbath (by his obedience) even to the death of the Cross by his
redemption of man, from the curse of the law for the sin of Adam: And by his
rest in the grave (after his death) upon the last Sabbath, having fulfilled
the whole law in the command of the seventh day: The eternal life and rest, of
the first seventh day lost by Adam, was redeemed likewise for man, and due by
the law to our Saviors merit. Now the eternal life and rest of man, being in
our Savior: The Lord by his resurrection from the grave, did manifest
himself, truth to man (by the fulfilling of his promised rest) and in that
truth, Lord God, Jesus Christ the eternal Son of God, God equal with the
Father and holy Spirit, the eternal life and rest of man, The day of whose
resurrection, being the just seventh day of the law, as man naturally descended
of Adam, is obliged to the law of God; the Lord by the power of his merit by
his Evangelicall rest, from the fulfilling of the law for man (implying his
bloody rest from the redemption of man from the curse of the law for the sin
of Adam) does command the day of his resurrection (the Lords day) to be
worshipped by man, for the seventh day of his Evangelicall law. And therefore
to conclude this answer, The seventh day of the law (by the last Sabbath) being
fulfilled by our Saviors obedience even to the death of the Cross: and the
seventh day of the law (as man naturally descended of Adam is obliged to the
law) being continued, in the command of the Lords day, there is not any seventh
day, or any jot or tittle of the law lost, as man is obliged to the law of
God. Where the judicious Reader may observe, that as the gracious promise of
the blessed seed, went forth from the eternal Word, (eternal life and rest)
So by the fulfilling of his promise, the eternal life and rest of man, is
returned to the Word. And this is the reason, that God is called Alpha and
Omega, the first and the last, Rev. 22.13. all in all. Even as we see the
great Ocean, from whence all the wells, springs, brooks, rivers, and all the
waters falling from the clouds do proceed; So all do return to the Ocean,
from whence they came: and so much for answer to the first objection.

The second objection is this.

Neither Christ Jesus or his Apostles, have set down the command of the Lords
day, in the written word of God. The Lord therefore, has left the power to
command the Lords day, to the Apostolic Successors, Ministers of the Word
and Sacraments to command (for that blessed day) what day of the week they
shall think fitting. Of all the objections, that ever was objected by man,
this is one of the most fearful: which does raze from the foundation, all what
has bin faithfully declared in this tractate, and the very foundation of truth
it self: where there is two maine fundamental points of faith overthrown:
the first is in the antecedent: the next is in the consequent. I answer first
to the antecedent. By this assertion, that the Lord of life (the Lord of the
Law of righteousness of faith) or his Apostles has not commanded, the Lords
day (the Evangelicall seventh day of the Law of righteousness of faith) the
Lord of life, is charged with the foul aspertion of untruth: For if the
seventh day of the Evangelicall Law of faith, implying the command of the whole
Law, be not immediately commanded, by the Lord himself, by his immediate word,
there is never a precept, of the whole Evangelicall moral Law commanded. And
therefore to vindicate the truth of God from this horrible aspertion, I answer,
after this threefold manner.

First, if we touch this tenet, with the touchstone of the twofold Theological
Canon set down in the tenth Chapter of this third book; we shall find this
tenet, to vanish with the objecters breath; first, therefore to touch the tenet
with the first Canon. First, the foul adulterous light of the sound, of the
false word of this assertion, is repugnant, to the light, of the sound of the
word of the Lords day, and to the truth of the Lords Evangelicall rest: For by
the immediate power of his infinite merit by his Evangelicall seventh days
rest, the seventh is blessed and sanctified, and the worship of the seventh day
commanded, and in the seventh day, the whole moral Evangelicall Law of faith.
To the faithful obedience of man, to which command the temporal blessing, of
the Lords days Evangelicall rest, is due to man, whereby man has the
continuation of his redeemed light, life, and rest in this life, and eternal
rest in the life to come: contrary to the adulterous light, of the sound of the
words of this tenet, whereby the Lords day, is affirmed to be by the immediate
command of man, by means whereof, we must hold our life, light, moveing, and
being, in this life, and eternal rest in the life to come, immediately from
the command of man. Next to touch the tenet with the second Theological Canon
set down in the forenamed Chapter. By the sound of the words, of this false
assertion, the command of man does interveene, and come between the faith of
the believer and the Lords merit, by his Evangelicall seventh days rest; which
being the rock and rest, whereon the visible Church of God is built, by this
assertion, the Church of God it self, and the Lords commanded worship is rased
from the very foundation. For my second answer to this assertion, to wit, that
neither Christ or his Apostles, has commanded the Lords day in the written
word of God. I answer with the Apostle John. 1 John 2, 7. There is no new
command, but the same which was from the beginning; and that was the sound of
the word of the first seventh day of the Law of righteousness to Adam and now
it is the found of the word of the seventh day of the Law of rigeteousnesse of
faith, first prophetical and now Evangelicall. And though the Apostle to the
Hebrews: Hebrews 7.12. does affirm, that with the Leviticall Priesthood the
Law was changed: Yet we must understand, that the Law of righteousness is
never really changed, though the Law be formerly changed, from the formal
prophetical ceremonial obligement, by the prophetical Sabbath, to the
formal Evangelicall obligement of the law, by the Lords day, by the immediate
command whereof, the seventh day of the prophetical ceremonial Sabbath,
implying the whole moral prophetical ceremonial law is actually determined,
and the Lords day, the seventh day of the Evangelicall law, implying the whole
moral evangelicall law, actually established by the new Covenant.

Let the thankelesse objecter therefore, do but determine the seventh day of
the prophetical Sabbath (set down to Moses in the decalogue) by the Lords
day, as the Lord himself has determined the same, by the word of the Lords
days Evangelicall rest: And he shall find, that the Lords day, and the whole
moral Evangelicall law, is set down in ten several moral precepts. My third
answer to the antecedent of this fearful objection, is this. It was the
infinite wisdom, and the infinite love and mercy of God to man, that the
Evangelicall moral law of faith, was not set down in the written word, in
distinct formal precepts, as it was set down to Moses, in the prophetical
decalog: for if the Evangelicall law had bin so set down: the moral
prophetical law, and the whole old Testament had bin quite misregarded:
Without the true knowledge whereof there is no foundation for Christian faith:
I next answer to the consequent, of the objection.

CHAP. XVII
The Lords day is by the immediate command of the Lords own word, and not by
the command of the word of the Church.
THe consequent of the objection, is, that the Lord has left, the power of the
commanding of his blessed day to the Apostolical successors (the Ministers of
his Word and Sacraments) to appoint, for the Lords day, what day of the week
they shall think fitting: To this I answer, that this is all one to affirm,
that the Lord has left, to the Apostolical successors, the power to be God
himself. For it is by the only merit of the Lords Evangelicall seventh days
rest, arising from his bloody rest, that the Apostolical successors
themselves, and that all men under the heavens have the continuation of their
redeemed light and life, moving and being. It is most certain, that there was
great power given to the Apostles, and in the Apostles, to the Apostolical
successors, though all the power given to the Apostles, was not given to the
Apostolical successors, and Ministers of the word.

But all the created powers of heaven and earth are not capable of any such
power, as to command the Evangelicall worship of the Lords day, implying the
command of the whole Evangelicall moral law of God.

The great power which was given to the Apostles, was, for the maintaining of
the Evangelicall word of the seventh day of the law of righteousness of faith,
implying the whole word and law of God; which the Lord of the Lords day, did
plant, while he was personally upon earth, and watered with his precious blood:
for the enabling of the Apostles to the establishing and increase whereof, the
Keys of the kingdom of Heaven (that rich Pearl) were delivered to the
Apostles, which are the keys of the Old and New Testament; this power of the
keys of the kingdom of heaven, delivered to the Apostles was threefold. The
first was the power of the light of the word, which did shine from the word it
self, the Lord of the law of righteousness of faith. By which power the
Apostles were enabled to teach and preach the Evangell to all the Nations of
the world. The second power of the word was, the power of healing,
disposessing, and the power of miracles, whereby their doctrine was confirmed,
and the Evangell established. The third was the power of command, whereby
obedience was given to the word taught and preached by the Apostles.

The power of the light of the word, whereby the Apostles were enabled to teach
and preach, was moral and spiritual: the moral light, was the light of the
sound of the mediate word of the Lord of life; by which light, the Apostles
were first literally led to the Lords merit, by his Evangelicall rest, which is
the first light leading to the kingdom of heaven. The glorious riches of this
light, (bought at the price of the sacred blood of the Lord of light) was
prefigurate by the light of the golden Candlesticks, in the holy place, and by
the rich robe and vesture of the high Priest; as also the sound of this rich
word, was prefigurate by the sound of the bells, hanging at the high Priests
rich vesture, Exodus 28.33.

The spiritual light, by which the Apostles were enabled to teach and preach
the Evangell, was in the spiritual sanctifying understanding of the word of
the law of righteousness, which the Apostles received of the holy Spirit, of
the Lord of light and life, immediately signified by our Saviour^ breathing
upon the Apostles, John 20.22. while as he said. Receive ye the holy Spirit,
by which power of sanctifying light the Apostles were enabled with the
spiritual power, to teach and preach, and with the holiness of spiritual
action, whereby they shined as pure light in the darkness of the world,
leading all men to the kingdom of heaven, who were able to be led by that
light. This pure light of spiritual righteousness, was likewise prefigurate,
Exodus 28.36. by the inscription of righteousness and holiness engraven in the
Breast Plate of the high Priest, and by the high Priests white pure vesture,
with which he was clothed, when he went in once a year, into the holiest
place, to obtain pardon of actual sin, at the Mercy-seat. And this is the
light and holiness of life, with which the Apostolical successors, are to be
continually vested to go in and out before their charge.

The second power of the Keys of the word, whereby the Apostles were enabled,
Mark 16.17. was the power of healing, disposessing of possessed with evil
spirits, and with the power of miracles, which was given to the Apostles, for
the confirmation of their doctrine, and for the establishing of the Evangell,
planted by the Lord of the Lords day, sealed by his precious blood. Which being
established by the Apostles, and the establishing thereof sealed likewise by
their own blood, the power of healing, dispossessing, and miracles, did
determine in the Apostles, according to the eternal decree of God. And this
power of the word given to the Apostles, was likewise prefigurate by Aarons
Rod, placed by the word, in the Arc of the Covenant.

The third power of the Keys of the word, given to the Apostles, John 20.23.
(which is likewise given in the Apostles, to the Apostolical successors) is
the moral power of commanding the obedience of man, to the command of the
word. And this power does consist in mercy and justice: In mercy, the authority
is given to pardon the moral sin of the penitent scandalous contemner, of the
command of the word delivered by the Apostles and Ministers of the word. The
power of justice, is in the authority of the moral sword of excommunication.
Whereby the proud rebellious contemners of the word (preached by the Apostles
and Ministers of the word) are cut off from the visible Church, and from the
blessing of the Lords merit, which is by the hearing of his word. To the end
that Evangelicall moral obedience, may be given to the teaching and preaching
of the word. Now because the pardon of spiritual sin, is incommunicable to
any created power of God; The Lord therefore did obliege himself by Covenant
to the Apostles, and in the Apostles, to the Apostolical successors, to remit,
or retain, spiritually, what moral sin soever the Apostles should pardon or
retain morally upon earth, which is a most admirable power, given to the
Ministers of the Word: For, by this power of the keys, the proudest rebellious
contemner of the command of God, sounded by the Ministers of the word and
sacraments, is brought to subjection. And that for two main reasons: The first
is, because the proud contemner being excommunicate, the sin is never pardoned
by God, before it be first pardoned by the Ministers of the Word, which is a
most fearful case, if the contemner, should die in his impenitency and
obstinacy. The second reason is, because the civil sword of the Magistrate, is
to second the power of the moral sword, to free the Church of God from such
proud contempt, to whose protection the militant Church of God is committed, as
to the Father of the family, to be preserved in the purity of the light of the
word, and in the freedom of the profession of the word, in which respect the
twofold portion of the first born, is due by the law of God to the King. The
first is, the inheritance of the crown; for the enabling of the King to advance
the obedient (to the command of the word) who are always his most faithful
and loyal subjects. The second is the power of the civil sword (implying the
power of the King) to cut from the militant Church, the proud contemner of the
command of God by his Church, that by banishment, imprisonment, or what manner
of punishment in that kind (it shall please the King to inflict) the word
commanded by the Church may be freed from contempt; for it is impossible, that
he that is a rebel to God and to his Church can ever be a faithful subject to
the King.

To the Kings faithful execution of this twofold power of righterousnesse, the
infallible blessing of the Lords merit by his seventh days Evangelicall rest
is due by the law of God, whereby the King has the happier continuation of
redeemed grace of life and light, and the temporal blessing of God upon all
his actions in this life, and his eternal rest, (crowned with an incorruptible
crown of glory) in the life to come; and so much for answer to the second
objection. The last objection is of no great consequence, yet the objection
must be answered.

CHAP. XVIII.
The reason that Paul does call the Lords day the first day of the week.
THe Apostle Paul, Acts 20.7. does call the day of Christ's resurrection from
the grave, the first day of, the week, and not the Lords day. I answer, The
Apostle John, Rev. 1.10. does likewise call this blessed day, the Lords day.
And it was so truly called by bothp: For, John, Joh. 8.5, 6. does name the day,
as the Lord himself did name his blessed day to the Jews, calling it his own
day: and Paul does call the Lords day, the first day of the week, as the Lords
day is the eighth day inclusively, from the last formal Jewish prophetical
Sabbath, prefigurate by the sacrament of circumcision, which was the true first
day of the week, according to the Jewish sabbaticall account, who did begin the
first day of their week upon the next day immediately succeeding the formal
prophetical Jews sabbath; and the first day immediately succeeding the last
formal Jews Sabbath was the day of Christ's resurrection from the grave, the
Lords day. For it was the wisdom of the Spirit of God in the Apostles (I in
the establishing of the Evangell) not to name the Lords day, either the seventh
day of the Evangelicall law, or the seventh day of the week; lest thereby the
Apostles should have given such distaste to the obstinate Jews, as that the
Jews should have utterly rejected the embracing of the Evangel in the first
entry: For, the seventh day of the prophetical Jews sabbath, was the very
ground and foundation of all the Jews religion, which was the moral glory of
the world at that time: and the ground of all the means, and of the great
preferment of the tribe of Levi. And therefore both Paul and the Apostles (at
first) did mildly wink at, and pass over the Jews using (or rather the
abusing) of many judaicall ceremonies, even to the administration of the
prophetical sacraments; and all to win the obstinate Jews by all fair means to
the embracing of the Evangell, not otherwise to have been tolerate.

But after (by the great mercy of God) the Evangel began to take some footing,
the Evangel by degrees, began to be boldly preached, and the Lords day began to
beworshipped, and (in tract of time) practiced by the Apostles, received by
Emperors, Kings, Princes and states from age to age, and at length, to be
decreed in General Councels, to the admiration of the world: For, such was the
former glory of the Prophetical, Judaicall Sabbath, as it might have seemed
(to a natural man) impossible that the Lords day could ever have been so
generally received. But whatsoever men may conceive, the only reason was, that
the sound of the word of the Lords day, does pierce by the ears, to the heart
of God man, where the redeemed word of the law is internally written; the
literal light whereof, being really one with the literal light of the Lords
day, the heart is immiediatly convinced, and the conscience moved to consent to
the commanded obedience of that blessed day; for the seventh day of the law of
God (implying the command of the whole law) has the prerogative above all the
laws of man under the heavens: For the Evangelicall seventh day of the law of
faith, does immediately oblige the conscience, which all the laws of man cannot
do, but mediately; and that neither, unless the law of man be grounded upon
the law of God: So that now (in the great mercy of God in his Son Christ Jesus)
by our received Christian account, the Lords day, is the seventh day of our
Christian week, beginning the first Lords day of our Christian week upon the
next day immediately succeeding the Lords day, vulgarly called Monday; from
which day, reckoning to the seventh: The seventh day is the Lords, which is the
last day of our Christian week, containing the ^umber of seven days, commonly
called a sev' night, which account, must continue till the planetary Sun cease
to be the measure, of hours, days, months, years, and time it self: And so
much for answer to the last objection. And now for a conclusion, that this
blessed day may never hereafter be brought in question, (by the assistance of
the Lord of the Lords day) I do Theologically d^monstrate (from the
fundamental grounds, set down in this Tractate arising from the truth of the
sacred Word) that the Lords day is commanded by the immediate word of the Lord,
of the Lords day.

CHAP. XIX.
The Lords day is Theologically demonstrated to be commanded by the Lords
immediate Word.
1. THat day whereby the new covenant is immediately establised between God and
man; that is, the decreed seventh day of the Evangelicall law of faith (by the
Lords immediate word of his new covenant) obliging and commanding all the
nations of the world to the Evangelical worship of that day; upon the Lords day
the new covanant is immediately established between God and man.

The Lords day therefore is the decreed seventh day of the Evangelicall law of
faith (by the Lords immediate word of his new covenant) obliging and commanding
all the nations of the world to the Evangelicall worship of the Lords day.

2. That day, whereby the last formal Jewish prophetical Sabbath was actually
and immediately determined: that is, the established Evangelical 7th day of the
law of faith, implying the command of the whole law (by the Lords immediate
word by his new covenant) obliging and commanding all the nations of the world,
to the Evangelicall worship of that day. By the Lords day, the last formal
Jews prophetical Sabbath was actually and immediately determined. The Lords
day therefore is the established seventh day of the Evangelicall law of faith,
implying the command of the whole law (by the Lords immediate word by his new
covenant) obliging and commanding all the nations of the world, to the
Evangelicall worship of the Lords day.

3. That day which did immediately succeed the last formal Jews prophecall
Sabbath: That is, the decreed seventh day of the Evangelicall law of faith (as
man naturally descended of Adam, is obliged to the Evangelicall law of God) by
the Lords immediate word of his new covenant, obliging and commanding all the
nations of the world to the Evangelicall worship of that day. The Lords day did
immediately succeed the last formal Jews prophetical Sabbath. The Lords day
therefore is the decreed seventh day of the Evangelicall law of faith (as man
naturally descended of Adam, is obliged to the Evangelicall law of God) by the
Lords immediate word of his new covenant, obliging and commanding all the
nations of the world, to the Evangelicall worship of the Lords day.

4. The word of eternal life, which all men (by the new covenant) are obliged
to believe, to save them from the curse of the second death all the nations of
the world are obliged to the Evangelicall worship of that word of eternal
life. The Lords day (by the merit of his Evangelicall rest) is the word of
eternal life, which all men (by the new covenant) are obliged to believe, to
save them from the curse of the second death. All the nations of the world
therefore, are obliged to the Evangelicall worship of the Lords day.

5. By the immediate power, whereby the Lords day is the blessed and sanctified
word or eternal life, (whereby the new covenant is immediately established) by
that immediate power, the evangelical worship of the Lords day, is immediately
commanded, implying the command of the whole Evangellicall law. By the
immediate power of the Lords merit, by his Evangelicall rest and resurrection
from the fulfilling of his promise of the blessed seed, the Lords day, is the
blessed and sanctified word of eternal life, whereby the new covenant is
immediately established, by the immediate power (therefore) of the Lords merit
by his Evangelicall rest and resurrection from the fulfilling of his promise of
the blessed seed; the Evangelicall worship of the Lords day is immediately
commanded, implying the command of the whole Evangelicall law.

6. What the Lords new covenant does oblige men to believe to save them from
the second death. The Lords day commands all men to worship for the only object
of Christian faith. The Lords new covenant does oblige all men to believe the
Lords day, by the merit of his evangelicall rest, to save them from the second
death. The Lords day therefore does command all men to worship the Lords day,
by the merit of his evangelicall rest, for the only object of Christian faith.

7. By the only blessing of which day, all the Nations of the world, do live,
move, and have the redeemed grace of being continued by the new Covenant; all
the Nations of the world (by the Lords immediate word of the new Covenant) are
obliged and commanded to the joyful worship of that day. By the only
blessing of the Lords day, all the Nations of the world, do live, move, and
have their redeemed grace of being, continued by the new Covenant. All the
Nations of the world therefore (by the Lords immediate word of his new
Covenant) are obliged and commanded to the joyful worship of the Lords day.

8. The light of the sound of the word of which day does necessarily imply. the
light and life of the whole word and law of God the whole Evangelicall
commanded worship of God, and all Christian Religion: By the power of the sound
of that word, all men are commanded to the Evangelicall worship of that day.
The light of the sound of the Lords day, does necessarily imply the light, and
life, of the whole word and law of God, the whole Evangelicall commanded
worship of God and all Christian Religion. By the power therefore of the light
of the sound of the word of the Lords day, all men are commanded to the
Evangecall worship of the Lords day.

9. Without the only blessing of the sound of the word of which day, there is
no object for Christian faith: By the immediate power of that days blessing,
all men are commanded to the Evangelicall worship of that day. Without the only
blessing of the sound of the word of the Lords day, there is no object for
Christian faith. By the immediate power therefore of the Lords days blessing,
all men are commanded to the Evangelicall worship of the Lords day.

10. Without the immediate power of the light and command of which day, no man
can either know, or give obedience to any precept of the Evangelicall moral
law of faith, That is the necessary seventh day of the Evangelicall law of
faith (by the Lords immediate word of his new Covenant) oblieging and
commanding all the Nations of the world to the Evangelicall worship of that
day. Without the immediate power of light and command of the Lords day, blessed
and sanctified by his Evangelicall rest, no man can either know or give
obedience to any precept of the Evangelical moral law of faith. The Lords day
therefore, is the necessary seventh day of the Evangelical law of faith (by the
Lords immediate word of his new covenant) oblieging and commanding all the
Nations of the world to the Evangelicall worship of the Lords day.

11. To the faithful worship of which day only, the blessing of the merit of
the Lords Evangelicall 7th days rest, is due by the law, for the fulfilling of
the whole Evangelicall law of faith. All the Nations of the world (by the Lords
immediate word of his new covenant) are obliged and commanded, to the
Evangelicall worship of that day. To the only faithful worship of the Lords
day, the blessing of the merit of the Lords seventh days Evangelicall rest is
due by the Law for the fulfilling of the whole evangelicall law. All the
Nations of the world therefore (by the Lords immediate word of his new
covenant) are obliged and commanded to the evangelicall worship of the Lords
day.

12. By the faithful of which day, the whole evangelicall law of faith is
fulfilled, that days worship is commanded by the power of the word of the
seventh day of the evangelicall law of faith. By the faithful worship of the
Lords day (by faith in the Lords merit) the whole evanglicall law is fulfilled.
The Lords days worship therefore is commanded by the power of the word of the
seventh day of the evangelicall law of faith.

13. By that day whereby the Lord by his resurrection from the grave
(victoriously triumphing over sin, Satan, hell, the curse of the law, and the
power of the grave) did clearly manifest himself powe, life, and light it
self; and in that power, life and light, Truth, by his fulfilling of his
promise of the blessed seed: and in that truth, love and mercy to man, and in
that truth, love and mercy, Lord God, and man, in the three coessentiall
distinct persons of the glorious Trinity: All the Nations of the world, by the
Lords immediate word of his new covenant, are obliged and commanded to the
Evangelicall worship of that day. By the Lords day (the day of the Lords
resurrection from the grave) the Lord (victoriously triumphing over sin,
Satan, hell, the curse of the law, and the power of the grave) did clearly
manifest himself, power, life, and light it self; and in that power, life and
light (Truth) by his fulfilling of his promise of the blessed seed, and in that
truth, love, and mercy. Lord God and man, in the three coessentiall distinct
persons, of the glorious Trinity. All the Nations of the world therefore (by
the Lords immediate word of his new covenant) are obliged and commanded to the
evangelicall worship of the Lords day.

14. By the truth of the Lords merit, by which days evangelicall rest
(necessarily implying his bloody rest) all the Prophesies, prophesying of the
coming of the blessed seed, and all the Altars, sacrifices, types, figures and
ceremonies, prefigurating his death from the foundation of the world are
actually determined: All the Nations of the world (by the Lords immediate word
of his new covenant) are obliged and commanded to the evangelicall worship of
that day. By the truth of the Lords merit, by the Lords days Evangelicall rest
(necessarily implying his bloody rest) all the Prophesies, prophesying the
coming of the blessed seed, and all the Altars, sacrifices, types, figures,
and ceremonies, prefigurating his death, from the foundation of the world, are
actually determined: All the Nations of the world therefore (by the Lords
immediate word of his new Covenant) are obliged and commanded to the
Evangelicall worship of the Lords day.

15. By the truth of the Lords resurrection from the dead, upon which day, all
men condemned by the curse of the law to eternal death, for the sin of Adam,
are raised, and reconciled to the love and favor of God for that sin: All
the Nations of the world, are obliged to the joyful worship of that blessed
day. By the truth of the Lords ressurection from the dead upon the Lords day,
all men condemned by the curse of the law to eternal death for the sin of
Adam, are raised and reconciled to the love and favor of God for that sin.
All the Nations of the world therefore are obliged to the joyful worship of
the Lords blessed day.

16. That day which the Lord rested from the fulfilling of the law, that day
was blessed, sanctified and commanded, by the power of the Lords merit of
eternal life due by the law to the Lords fulfilling of the law. The Lord
rested his own day, from the fulfilling of the law: The Lords day therefore,
was blessed, sanctified and commanded, by the power of the Lords merit of
eternal life, due by the law to the Lords fulfilling of the law.

17. By the Evangelicall sound of the word of which day, all Jews and Gentiles
were called and united in one Church of God by the new covenant: All the
Nations of the world are obliged to the joyful jubilizing and worship of that
blessed day. By the Evangelicall sound of the word of the Lords day all Jews
and Gentiles were called and united in one Church of God by the new covenant.
All the Nations of the world therefore are obliged to the joyful jubilizing
and worship of the Lords blessed day.

18. Without the knowledge of which day, no man can know that he is a sinner
against the Evangelicall law of faith, or that, he stands in need of the
Lords merit to save him from the curse of the Evangelicall law. That day
commands all men to the Evangelicall worship of that day, and in that day to
the obedience of the whole Evangelicall law. Without the knowledge of the Lords
day, no man can know that he is a sinner, against the Evangelicall law, or that
he stands in need of the Lords merit to save him from the curse of the
Evangelicall law of faith. The Lords day therefore, commands all men to the
Evangelicall worship of the Lords day.

19. By the only literal light of the sound of the word of which day, all the
Nations of the world are literally led to the blessing of the Lords merit by
his Evangelicall rest: By the power of that word, all the nations of the world
are commanded to the Evangelicall worship of that day: By the only literal
light of the sound of the word of the Lords day, all the nations of the world
are literally led to the blessing of the Lords merit, by his Evangelicall rest.
By the power therefore of the word of the Lords day, all the nations of the
world are commanded to the Evangelicall worship of the Lords day.

20. By the only command of which day, (necessarily implying the command of the
whole Evangelicall law) the heart of the natural man is moved to give moral
obedience to the command of the Evangelicall law; that day commands all men to
the Evangelicall worship of that day, and in that day, the obedience of man to
the whole Evangelicall law. By the only command of the Lords day (nenecessarily
implying the command of the whole Evangelicall law,) the heart of the natural
man, is moved to give moral obedience to the command of the evangelicall law.
The Lords day therefore commands all men to the evangelicall worship of the
Lords day, and in the Lords day the obedience of man to the command of the
whole evangelicall law.

21. With the standing or falling of which day, the blessing of the Lords
merit, and the whole evangelicall law of faith, does necessarily stand or fall:
That is, the decreed seventh day of the evangelicall law (by the Lords
immediate word of his new covenant) obliging and commanding all the nations of
the world to the evangelicall worship of that day. With the standing or falling
of the Lords day, the Lords merit, and the whole evangelicall law does
necessarily stand or fall. The Lords day therefore is the decreed seventh day
of the evanglicall law, (by the Lords immediate word of his new covenant)
obliging and commanding all the nations of the world to his evangelicall
worship of the Lords day.

22. Whom the Lord Jesus Christ, by his immediate word, did command to preach
and teach the Evangelicall blessing of his merit, whereby the Lords day is
blessed and sanctified; them the Lord Jesus Christ (by his immediate word) did
command the Evangelicall worship of the day, to which the blessing of his merit
is only due. The Lord Jesus Christ, by his immediate Word, did command the
Apostles to preach and teach, to all the nations of the world the Evangelicall
blessing of his merit, whereby the Lords day is blessed and sanctified. The
Lord Jesus Christ therefore, by his immediate word, did command the Apostles to
teach and preach the Evangelicall worship of the Lords day, to which the
evangelicall blessing of his merit is only due. And now to conclude, lest I
weary my Reader.

23. That day of days; that decreed day (sealed by the precious blood of the
immaculate Lamb) which no power, time, or day, can determine, but the second
coming of the eternal day, when the mystical members of Christ Jesus, shall
rest in their head, crowned with an incorruptible crown of glory in the heaven
of heavens eternally; that is, the true evangelicall seventh day of the law of
faith by the new covenant, obliging and commanding all the nations of the
world, to the joyful jubelizing of that blessed day. The Lords day, that
decreed day, (sealed with the Lords precious blood) no power, day, or time, can
determine, but the second coming of the Lord, (the eternal day) when his
mystical members shall rest in him their head, crowned with an incorruptible
crown of glory in the heaven of heavens eternally. The Lords day therefore is
the true evangelicall seventh day of the law of faith, by the new covenant,
obliging and commanding all the nations of the world, to the joyful jubelizing
of the Lords day.

Thus by the only and immediate assisting grace of the Lord of the Lords day,
(without the aid or help of any mortal man) have we finished these three books
of the Theological key, by manifesting of the revealed truth of his sacred
day, so long darkened and obscured, by the darkness of the miserable age. And
now for a full conclusion of this Tractate (according to our pomise in the
second Chapter of the second book) the pretended absolute decree, (whereby the
hearts of so many Christians has been from time to time distracted) shall be
examined, with other opinions in the like kind, concerning the sacred decree
of Predestination, (which for the Readers better satisfaction) shall be
demonstratively resolved, from the lowest and last effect, in the supreme and
first cause, as the eternal word, from the beginning has execute the same by
his first three covenants made with man, as they are set down in the sacred
written Word.

Certain Opinions, concerning the sacred Decree of Predestination.
CHAP. I.
The Pelagian and semipelagian opinions, concerning the sacred Decree of
Predestination.
COncerning the sacred Decree of Predestination, there be four several
opinions set down by the Authors: The first is, the Pelagian and semipelagian
opinion, which in substance and effect, are both one: For, by both, the grace
to fulfill the law of God, is ascribed to the freedom of man's own election;
though by the semipelagian opinion, the grace is parted between God and man.
Both the opinions are pretended to be grounded upon a fundamental Theological
principle; which principle is set down in the first Chapter of the first book
of the Theological key, which is in this manner: As God does command the
action of his intellectual creature man, as well upon the eternal curse of
the law; as upon the blessing of the seventh days rest: So God in his justice,
by his covenant, is obliged to enable man to the performing of the command of
his law, and man being the free intellectual creature of God, it is affirmed,
that it is in the freedom of man's own election, to fulfill or transgress the
Law of God: And that God (out of his eternal prescience of man's fulfilling or
transgressing of the law) has decreed accordingly the election or condemnation
of man; so that the suspending, or not suspending of the sacred decree of
Predestination, (by these opinions) must stand at the beck of the creature. The
only truth of these two opinions is, that the will of man is not necessitate,
by Gods eternal decree, to transgress the law. Now, because the untruth of
these two opinions, has been from age to age condemned; as contradictory to
the sacred Word of God: my purpose is not to do an act done; but to declare the
gross error in the mistake of the fundamental principle, whereon the opinions
are pretended to be grounded. It is most certain, that God in his justice does
oblige himself to man by his covenant, to enable man to the fulfilling of the
command of his law. But, by the favor of the authors and maintainers of these
opinions, the state of man must be considered, wherein God does oblige himself
to man, by his several Covenant; in which sense, this principle is to be
conceived, and not simply. It is without all doubt, that God by his first
Covenant made with man in Adam, created in the state of natural and spiritual
perfection, did oblige himself to Adam, to enable Adam in the state of
perfection, wherein he was created, by the eternal blessing of his first
seventh days rest. But God did mutually oblige Adam to merit that blessing, by
the eternal perfection of his obedience to the command of his law, obliging
Adam likewise to the eternal curse of his law, upon Adams disobedience, whose
obedience or disobedience (by the first Covenant) was left to the freedom of
his own election, to stand or fall, at his pleasure or peril, for the
freedom of Adams election wherein he was created, was such, as no increated or
created power could necessitate Adams will to fall, and yet Gods eternal
decree, was not suspendible by Adam, as has been formerly and necessarily
concluded: to which I must refer the Reader.

So it is likewise most certain, that God has entered his new Covenant, with
man, in the redeemed state of man from the curse of eternal darkness, and
from eternal death by that darkness, (to which all men were condemned) shut
up in temporal spiritual darkness, till the natural man be regenerate,
whereby man (as he is a natural man,) is enabled to give moral obedience to
his calling, by the new Covenant, without any manner of necessitating the will
of man, either naturally or morally to disobedience. It is likewise most
certain, that God has obliged himself, by his new Covenant, to the actual
continuation of the redeemed natural and moral grace of man, for all the day
of this life, upon the continuation of man's moral obedience; till Gods
prefixed time of spiritual calling, to whose final, perseverance, in his
moral obedience, the spiritual grace of faith is then due to the natural
man, by the new Covenant. And therefore the Evangel is said to be, the power of
God to salvation from faith to faith, that is from the grace of moral faith,
to the grace of spiritual faith.

But the maintainers of these two opinion^ must understand, that God (by his
new Covenant) has likewise re^liged man, to the final continuation of his
moral obedience upon the mercylesse curse of the law of faith as well as upon
the e^ernall blessing of the law, by his Evangelicall seventh days rest. Now
though neither S^tan, or his inst^uments can necessitate the will of man to
moral disobedience, yet the natural man (having no spiritual grace till he
be regenerate,) the natural man is easily en^uced by Satan, to the moral
final contempt of the law of God; without Gods special objective concursive
grace, to which God is no ways obliged: who (in this case) will show mercy on
whom he will show mercy. And therefore the final perseverance of the naaturall
man, and his spiritual calling is the immediate, free gift of God, and no
ways in the freedom of man election. And this twofold grace, in the
Scripture, is called the first and latter rain, which is from God immediately.
And therefore to conclude this point; the judicious Reader, may plainly
perceive the gross mistake, of the Theological Principle, whereon the two
first opinions are grounded, which are flat repugnant to the twofold
Theological Canon set down in the tenth Chapter of the third book of the
Theological Key, and consequently to the whole written word of God.

CHAP. II.
The absolute decree subverted.
THe third opinion, concerning the sacreed decree of predestination, is, the
fearful absolute respectivelesse decree; which, according to the authors and
maintainers, is set down after this manner. God, out of his alone inscrutable
will and pleasure, (to be adored by man) by his decree of predestination,
without all respect to the creation, fall, and redemption of man, and without
all subordinate respect whatsoever, did decree from all eternity, to elect a
certain number of men to eternal salvation, and to condemn a certain number
of men, (to wit) the rest of the world to the eternal torments of hell. And
because nothing can come to pass, which must not fall under this irresistible
decree; therefore it is peremptorily affirmed, that by this decree, Adams will
was necessitate, to fall under the eternal curse of the law, and in Adam, all
men created in Adam.

But we must likewise conceive by this opinion, that though by this
necessitating o the will of Adam, Adam was irresistibly necessitate to fall
under the eternal curse of the law; yet Adam as he was man, did likewise
freely fall; and this falling of man, implying his creation, is called (by the
Authors and maintainers of this opinion) the execution of his decree: of whom,
if we do ask the efficient cause of the fall of man; it is answered, that it
was the willing yielding of man to Satan's temptation, but necessitate by this
absolute irresistible decree.

Now, because the impossibility of the necessitating of Adams will, to fall
under the fearful eternal curse of the law, by any act or decree of God
whatsoever, has been formally necessarily, and demonstratively concluded, in
the second Chapter of the second book of this tract^^, (...) contradictory, to
the written word and truth of God; I must therefore, without reiterating
thereof, thither remit the Christian Reader. Next therefore, it does rest that
this absolute decree be examined; which we will do, by looking thereon with
the light of the truth of the sacred word, that the Reader may see whether or
not there was any such irresistible power in this decree, to necessitate Adams
will, to such as fearful fall, being created in the state of such spiritual
perfection, as was equal to the perfection of the command of the law, whereby
he was obliged; though it was in the freedom of his election, by the first
Covenant, to stand or fall, at his pleasure or peril.

First therefore, I say, and do boldly and perempto^ily affirm, that it does
transcend the power of the understanding of all the intellectual creatures of
God, as far as the absolute decree does transcend all manner of respect, to
conceive what manner of God this should be, who should decree such a cruel
decree: or to conceive the man, who is pretended to be condemned, by this
decree, to the eternal torments of hell, (which is the eternal curse of the
law of God) without respect to the merit of man, by transgressing of the law.
Or to conceive that any man can be elected, out of the alone free pleasure of
God, without respect to his mercy to man in his Son Christ Jesus, by fulfilling
of the law of faith. By the conceiving of God therefore by this opinion: First,
God must be conceived, without respect to God as he is God, of the law of
righteousness; and secondly and cons^quently, without respect to his justice.
For, by this opinion man is condemned, out of the alone pleasure of God,
without respect to the merit of man. Thirdly, God must be conceived (by this
opinion) without respect to his attribute of Creator, for such respect is
subordinate to this absolute decree. Fourthly, God must be conceived without
respect to his word: and fifthly and consequently without respect to his law.
Sixthly, (by this opinion) God must be conceived without respect to the creation
of man, to his own Image, as God (from all eternity) decreed to create man,
whereby man was to be enabled to fulfill the law, whereby he was to be obliged
by Covenant. Seventhly, (by this opinion) God must be conceived without respect
to his Covenant, whereby he did decree (from all eternity) to oblige both
himself and man. Eighthly, (by this opinion) God must b^ conceived, without
respect to his omniprescience, in his foreseeing of the inevitable f^ll of man,
under the eternal curse of the law. Ninthly, (^y this opinion) God must be
conceived without respect to the redemption of man from the curse of the Law,
decreed by God from all eternity. Tenthly, (by this opinion) God must be
conceived to elect man out of his alone pleasure, without respect to the
redeemed state of man, from the curse of the law by the sacred blood of the
Son of God, which (in the order of caus^) is the immediate object of his
election. Eleventhly, man (by this decree) must be conceived without respect to
his creation, or to his merit by his fall, or to his redemption by the blood of
Christ Jesus. Twelfthly, (by this opinion) man must be conceived to be elected,
without respect to the love and mercy of God to man in his Son Christ Jesus:
and to be condemned by the eternal curse of the law, without respect to his
merit by any transgression of the law: All which respects are subordinate to
this absolute decree, which the decree does transcend; for it is out of the
alone pleasure of God, summounting all such subordinate respect. And so much
for my first affirmation.

Secondly, I do boldly and peremptorily affirm that man is to conceive and
apprehend God only, as he has revealed himself to man by his sacred word and
covenants, established upon his several seven days rest, and not to prye
saucily in the secret counsel of God, and to imagine such a fictious opinion,
contrary to his word and truth, and to obtrude the same to man for his sacred
truth; for by this opinion, all the promises of salvation, offered to all the
Nations of the world (by a world of frivolous distinctions) are made only to
the elect: and consequently this absolute decree, is absolutely repugnant to
the truth of the sacred word of God. What is regestred in the sacred word of
God, we may boldly conclude to be decreed by God from all eternity; but we
must not imagine a decree to be decreed by God to constrain us to wrest the
Scripture to maintain the credit of any such imaginary opinion of man.

Thirdly, I do boldly and peremptorily affirm, that the very terms, whereby
the authors and maintainers, do express this pretended absolute decree, does
necessarily imply, all the respects formally set down by us: For first, in the
naming of God, we necessarily name God, as God has revealed himself to man;
which was first, God of the law of righteousness Creator, by his word of the
first seventh days rest. Secondly, God of the law of righteousness of faith,
in the promise of the blessed seed, by the word of his Sabbaticall seventh
days rest, whereby God did manifest himself to man, God, in the three
coessentiall distinct persons of the Trinity, Creator and Redeemer of man;
first Prophetically by the wo^d the Prophetical seventh day of the law, then
by the name of the Sabbath of the Lord: And now Evangelically by the word of
the Lords day, the seventh day of the Evangelicall law of righteousness of
faith. Secondly, by the word of election (which is only in the Lord Jesus
Christ the eternal Son of God, God equal with the Father and holy Spirit)
the creation of man (in the state of perfection) the obliging of man to the
first covenant, the fall of man under the eternal curse of the law, and the
redemption of man from the curse is necessarily employed. Thirdly, by the
condemnation of man (out of the alone pleasure of God) to the eternal torments
of hell (which is the curse of the law) both the merit of man by the
transgression of the law, and the justice of God by condemning of man are
necessarily employed. So that this absolute pretended decree, which the Authors
do obtrude to us, as free from all respect (by the very terms whereby they
do express their imaginary decree) is charged, with all manner of respect
subordinate to God: and consequently there is a flat contradiction between the
furmised opinion, and the terms whereby the opinion is expressed. The
absolute decree therefore being repugnant to the literal light and truth of
the word of the Lords day (the seventh day of the Evangelicall law of faith
necessarily implying the literal light of all the several word of the seventh
days rest from the foundation of the world.) The absolute decree (according to
our twofold Theological Canon, set down in the tenth Chap. of the second book
of our Theological key) is a false and adulterous tenent of faith arising from
the spirit of error. This error does proceed from the confounding of the
immanent and transeant act of God, which must no ways be confounded: for the
immanent act of God (being God himself essentially) is only absolute,
necessary, infinite, and incomprehensible by the act of any created
understanding. And his transeant act is only free; which as it is transeant and
terminate to man, it is only by his word, which is his law to man, the image
of his eternal life and light of righteousness, necessarily implying the
natural life and light of the word: for by the only power of the word written
in the heart of man, man is enabled to understand God by the word of the
seventh day of the law, as God has revealed himself to man by his several
seventh days rest from the beginning. Now the surmised decree being absolute,
and without all subordinate respect, it is pretended to be the immanent act of
God; but because the immanent act of God is infinite: The maintainers of the
absolute decree, are constrained to express their imaginary opinion by the
terms of the transeant act of God, which is by his word; for the salvation
and damnation of man, is the twofold reward of the word and law of God; to wit,
the blessing and curse of the law. Fourthly and lastly, by the salvation of man
(out of the alone pleasure of God) without respect to the Lord Jesus Christ;
the alone pleasure of God does intervene between the faith of man and the Lords
merit; whereby the faith of man is overthrown, and by the damnation of man (out
of the alone pleasure of God) without respect to the merit of man, the alone
pleasure of God by the condemning of man does intervene between the merit of
man (by the transgression of the law) and the law; whereby the justice of God
is overthrown. Now though the fearful unworthiness of this miserable
opinion, does not merit the refutation thereof, by any Theological pen: yet
for the Readers satisfaction, I thus demonstrate, that such a pretended
absolute decree never was, or could be decreed by God.

1. That absolute decree, whereby God is affirmed to elect and condemn man
(out of his alone pleasure) without all respect to God, as he is God of the law
of righteousness: That decree never was or could be decreed by God. By this
absolute decree, God is affirmed to elect and condemn man (out of his alone
pleasure) without all respect to God, as he is God of the law of
righteousness. This absolute pretended decree therefore, never was or could be
decreed by God.

2. That pretended absolute decree, whereby God is affirmed (out of his alone
pleasure) to elect and condemn man, without all respect to his subordinate
word, as his word is his law to man: That decree never was, or could be decreed
by God. By this absolute pretended decree, God is affirmed (out of his alone
pleasure) to elect and condemn man without respect to his subordinate word as
his word is his law to man. This absolute pretended decree therefore, never was
or could be decreed by God.

3. That absolute pretended decree, whereby God is affirmed (out of his alone
pleasure) to elect man to salvation, without all subordinate respect of his
love and mercy to man in his Son Christ Jesus, that decreee never was or
could be decreed by God. By this pretended decree, God is affirmed (out of his
alone pleasure) to elect man to salvation, without all subordinate respect of
his love and mercy to man in his Son Christ Jesus. This pretended absolute
decree therefore, never was or could be concluded by God.

4. That pretended miserable absolute degree, whereby God (out of his alone
pleasure) is affirmed to condemn man to the eternal curse of the law, without
any subordinate respect to the merit of man by transgressing of his law: That
miserable decree never was or could be decreed by God. By this miserable
pretended absolute decree, God is affirmed to condemn man to the eternal curse
of the law (out of Gods alone pleasure) without all subordinate respect to the
merit of man by transgressing of the law. This miserable absolute pretended
decree therefore never was or could be decreed by God.

5. That pretended miserable absolute decree, which is repugnant to his
suordinate justice by his law of righteousness, whereby he decreed from all
eternity to oblige both himself and man. That miserable decree never was or
could be decreed by God. This miserable pretended absolute decree, is repugnant
to Gods subordinate justice, by his law of righteousness, whereby he decreed
from all eternity to oblige both himself and man. This miserable pretended
decree therefore never was, or could be decreed by God.

6. That miserable absolute pretended decree, whereby it is affirmed, that the
will of man in his state of perfection, was necessitate to fall under the
fearful eternal curse of the law contrary to Gods obliging of himself, by
his first covenant to man. That miserable absolute decree, never was, or could
decreed by God. By this miserable pretended decree, Adams will in his state of
perfection, is affirmed to be necessitate, to fall under the fearful eternal
curse of the law, contrary to Gods obliging of himself to man by his first
covenant.

This miserable pretended decree therefore, etc.

7. That miserable pretended decree, whereby it is affirmed, that the elect
only are redeemed from the curse of the law, for the sin of Adam, by the sacred
blood of the Lord of life, and not all men, naturally descended, and to descend
of Adam; that decree never was, or could be decreed by God. By the maintainers
of the absolute decree, it is absolutely affirmed, that the elect only, and not
all men naturally descended and to descend of Adam, are redeemed from the curse
of the law for the sin of Adam, by the sacred blood of the Lord of life.

This absolute miserablee decree therefore, etc.

8. That miserable absolute pretended decree, whereby all the gracious promises
to salvation (made by the new covenant, to all the nations of the world) are
restrained to the elect only; that miserable distracting absolute decree, never
was, or could be decreed by God. By this miserable pretended distracting
absolute decree, all the gracious promises of salvation (made by the new
covenant to all the nations of the world) are restrained to the elect only.
This miserable distracting absolute pretended decree therefore, never was, or
could be decreed by God.

9. That absolute pretended opinion, which is transcendent and repugnant to the
joyful light of the Evangelicall seventh days rest, necessarily implying his
blody rest: That decree never was, or could be decreed by God. This absolute
pretended decree, is transcendent, and repugnant to all such subordinate,
joyful gracious light. This miserable pretended transcendent absolute decree
therefore, never was, or could be decreed by God.

10. By that miserable distracting opinion, whereby the alone pleasure of God
does necessarily interveen between the subordinate respect of the faith of man,
and the merit of Christ Jesus, by his Evangelicall seventh days rest; that
miserable decree, never was, or could be decreed by God. By this miserable
distracting opinion, of the absolute pretended decree, the alone pleasure of
God, does necessarily interveen between the subordinate respect of the faith of
man, and the merit of Christ Jesus, by his Evangelicall seventh days rest;
this miserable opinion therefore by this absolute pretended decree, never was,
or could be decreed by God.

11. By that miserable distracting pretended absolute decree, whereby the
absolute alone pleasure of God is affirmed to interveen and come between the
merit of man, by the transgression of the law, and condemnation of man, by God,
to the eternal torments of hell, such a miserable pretended distracting
abs^lute decree, never was, or could be decreed by God. By this miserable
distracting absolute pretended decree, the absolute alone pleasure of God, does
interveen and come between the merit of man, and the transgression of the law.
Such a miserable distracting pretended decree therefore, never was, or could be
decreed by God. And so much for the third opinion concerning the sacred decree
of predestination.

CHAP. III.
The fourth assertion concerning the sacred decree of Predestination.
BEcause the fourth assertion concerning the sacred decree of predestination is
so much oppugned by the maintainers of the absolute decree: The fourth
assertion thererefore, shall be set down, as I find it set down by the
oppugners of the assertion, which is in this manner:

God in his eternal purpose, has decreed from all eternity, to offer his
gracious promises of salvation, in his Son, Christ Jesus, lost in Adam, in the
state of corruption, of which corrupted estate, God has decreed from all
eternity, to elect a certain number, by predestinating them, to be glorified
with his Son Christ Jesus, and to relinquish the rest in their state of
corruption; who, because they do wilfulfully contemn the grace so freely
offered; God therefore has most justly decreed to condemn them.

This assertion I do affirm, (by receiving of a safe instruction) to be the
true effect of the sacred decree of predestination, as the decree is execute,
by the eternal word immediately, by his several covenants made with man,
established upon his immediate several seven days rest, which is the reason,
that this opinion is so distasteful to the maintainers of the absolute decree,
being so repugnant, to such false adulterous light; for this assertion does
necessarily imply all the respects which are denied by the absolute decree:
First, by this assertion (contrary to the absolute decree) Gods free purpose of
the election of man, is with respect of his love and mercy to man, in his Son,
Christ Jesus. Secondly, (contradictory to the absolute decree) Gods
condemnation of man, is with respect to the final contempt of man, by his
contenming of the gracious promises of salvation, so freely offered by the new
covenant. Thirdly, (contradictory to the absolute decree) by this assertion,
Gods free election in his Son Christ Jesus is affirmed to be with respect to
the object of his election, which (in the order of cause) is the state called
by them, the state of corruption, to wit, the state of man freed from the curse
of the law for the sin of Adam, shut up in spiritual darkness. By which
estate of m^^, (man being deprived of spiritual action) because the best
moral action of the nat^^^ll man, before he be regenerate, must be actual
spiritual unbelief and sin; therefore the action of man, in this redeemed
esta^e, is said to be corrupted, by reason whereof this estate of man, is
commonly called the state of corruption, which estate does necessarily imply:
First the creation of man in his state of perfection: Secondly, his obliging to
the first covenant: Thirdly, the fall of man under the curse of the law by the
first covenant: Fourthly, the redemption of man from the curse of the law for
the sin of Adam, shut up in spiritual temporal darkness, called unbelief,
and original sin. Fourthly, (contradictory to the absolute decree) this
assertion is with respect to the natural and moral freedom of the action of
the natural man by the immediate act of the redemption, without any manner of
necessitating of the natural or moral act of man, by any decree of God: For
by affirming that the gracious promises offered by the new covenant, are
wilfully contemned by man; this redeemed freedom of natural and moral action
of the natural man, is necessarily implied. Fifthly, (contradictory to the
absolute decree) this assertion is first with respect to the subordinate
obliging of man to the law of righteousness by the first covenant; necessarily
implied in the corrupted estate of man, named by the authors of the last
assertion: Secondly, the assertion is with respect to the new covenant; for the
Evangelicall promises of salvation, are offered by the new covenant. Sixthly,
(contradictory to the absolute furmised decree) by this assertion, Adams will
is not affirmed to be necessitate to fall under the fearful curse of the law,
by any actor decree of God. Seventhly (contradictory to the opinion of the
maintainers of the absolute decree) the gracious promises of salvation, are
affirmed to be made to all the nations of the world. Eighthly (contradictory to
the opinion of the maintainers of the absolute decree) the redemption of all
men from the curse of the law for the sin of Adam, is necessarily implied in
this assertion. Ninthly, this assertion, (ontradictory to the absolute decree)
is consonant to the literal light of the Lord days Evangelicall rest,
necessarily implying the literal light of his bloody sabbaticall seventh days
rest; and consequently the literal light of all the seventh days rest of the
eternal word from the foundation of the world upon which several seven days
rests, all the several covenants made by God with man, are imediatly
established; as has been faithfully delivered throughout this whole Tractate,
whereby the whole exercite act of the sacred decree of predestination is
execute by the eternal Word imediatly.

To the end therefore that the judicious Reader may conceive, that this
assertion, (by receiving of this safe construction) is consonant with the
exercit act of the sacred decree, by the several covenants made by God with
man. The covenants shall be resolved by demonstrative resolution from the last
effect in the supreme cause, for a full conclusion of this whole Tractate.

CHAP. IV.
The demonstrative resolution of the sacred decree of eternal predestination
from the last effect of the covenants of God made with man in the supreme
indemonstrable cause.
THe first three covenants made by God with man, are only the execution (or to
use the school phrase) the exercit act of the eternal decree of
predestination, so far as is revealed thereof to man in this life, by the truth
of the sacred word. Which three several formal Covenants, are established
between God and man, upon the immediate command of the word of the seventh day
of the law of God (implying the command of the whole law) obliging the
obedience of man to his law, as God has revealed himself to man, by his
several formal seventh days rest. The first Covenant is established, upon
the immediate command of the word of the first seventh day of the law: whereby
God by his first seventh days rest, from the works of the creation did
manifest himself externally by his word to Adam) Creator of heaven and earth,
of man, and of the creatures created for man. As by the lively word of the law,
written in Adams heart, God did reveal himself internally to Adam, God of the
law of righteousness. By which lively word (in Adams heart) Adam was enabled to
fulfill the command of the law, implied in the first seventh day, by fulfilling
whereof, Adam was to merit, the continuation of the perfection of his created
estate and felicity, eternally upon earth. But Adam and all men created in Adam
(naturally to descend of Adam) by his disobedience (deceived by the treachery of
Satan) was condemned by the first Covenant, to the curse of the law by eternal
death and darkness. Upon Gods eternal prescience, of which fearful fall of
man (by Satan's malicious treachery) God (out of his infinite love and mercy to
man in his Son Christ Jesus) did decree from eternity to revenge the blood of
man, upon Satan, by man the only son of his love, who according to his eternal
decree, made his second Covenant with man, in the promise of the blessed seed:
which Covenant (called the old Covenant) is established upon the word of the
second seventh days promised rest, then by the name, of the Sabbath of the
Lord, obliging Adam (and all men naturally to descend of Adam) to believe the
Lords promised rest of the blessed seed, who did covenant to rest upon the
Sabbath from the redemption of man, from the curse of the law, for the sin of
Adam.

By the third seventh days rest (which is the Lords days rest) the Lord, by
his resurrection from the dead, did rest from the fulfilling of his promise of
the blessed seed; upon the immediate command of which seventh day (to wit the
Lord day.) The new Covenant is established between God and man, obliging all
men, to believe the fulfilling of the Lords promise by his Evangelicall seventh
days rest, to whose faith, the ^l^ssing of the Lords infinite me^it, by his
Evangelicall seventh days rest, is due by the new Covenant. The old and new
Covenant therefore being really one, the one containing the gracious promise of
the blessed seed, the other the fulfilling of the promise, by the resolution of
the new Covenant both are resolved, in this demonstrative resolution, therefore
the first and new Covenant are resolved: For the Readers better conceiving of
this resolution: First, both the first and new Covenant are to be resolved,
first as both the Covenants are referred to God, and next as they are referred
to man.

Secondly, it is to be observed, that all the mediate effects arising from the
Covenants, as they are effects produced by the next immediate superior cause.
So the same effects, are the immediate causes of the next immediate subordinate
effect: All except the supreme indemonstrable cause of all: And except the
immediate cause of Adams and Eves fall, which have no positive influence, from
the decree of God; though God did decree from all eternity, to permit the fall
of both (for God did Covenant with man, to leave Adam, to the freedom of his
own election to stand or fall at his pleasure and peril.) So that all the
mediate causes and effects of the decree, are like so many linkes of a chain,
linkt one into another; all depending from the supreme cause of all: for as
they do all proceed from the supreme cause, so they do all return to the
same supreme indemonstrable cause. So that if a man be disposed, to set out
the decree in a table, the two linkes of the chain (where Satan does deceive
Eve by the Serpent, and Eve does induce Adam to fall) must not be linct one
into another, but must contiguously depend after such a form in a Table which
the Author did intend if he had lived.

Thirdly, it is to be observed, that God by obliging both of himself and man,
upon the word of the seventh day of his Law: God and man (by his law) are linkt
and (as it were) chained and bound one to another. God does bind himself to
man, to the eternal continuation of the blessing of his seventh days rest,
and man to the eternal continuation of his obedience to the command of his
law, and to the eternal curse of the law upon his disobedience: which mutual
bond is the maine ground, from whence all the mediate cause and effects of the
Coven^^ts do arise to the supreme cause, both as the Covenants are referred to
God, and as they are referred to man.

The fourth thing to be observed in this demonstrative ^^solution, is, that i^
our ascending from the Covenants with the resolut^^^ when we^ come to the third
mediate cause, in both the Covenants as they are referred to God; we must stop
from ascending with our resolution, till by resolving of the Covenants, as they
are referred to man, we meet with the like collateral causes, which will be
in all, four in number. And then we ascend from these four causes, (as they
are effects produced by one and the same next and immediate superior cause)
till we come to the supreme indemonstrable case of all. To begin therefore
with the first Covenant.

First, as the Covenant is referred to God, and next as the first Covenant is
referred to man. God by his first Covenant, does first oblige himself to Adam,
(and to all men created in Adam naturally to descend of Adam) to the eternal
continuation, of the natural and spiritual perfection of man, and the
felicity wherein he was created, by the blessing of his first seveth days
rest. Secondly, God by his first Covenant does mutually reoblige Adam (and all
men naturally to descend of Adam) to the eternal continuation of the
perfection of Adams obedience to the command of his law, both upon the eternal
blessing, of his first seventh days rest, to Adams obedience; and upon the
eternal curse of the law, to Adams disobedience. From this reobliging of man
by God to his Covenant, the word Religion does take the name, implying the
whole obedience of man to the law of God. To come therefore to the resolution
of the first Covenant, first, as the Covenant is referred to God. The last and
lowest effect, of the first Covenant, as the Covenant is referred to God, is
Gods obliging of man to the obedience of the command of his law, upon the
eternal blessing, of his first seventh days rest, and upon the eternal curse
of the law by the first Covenant. The immediate cause of this obliging of Adam
by God, in his state of perfection, was. Gods eternal purpose, to manifest
himself to man, in his attribute of justice, by rendering the reward of the
law, according to the merit of man. The immediate cause whereof, was Gods
enabling of Adam, with such natural and spiritual perfection; as was equal
to the perfection of the command of the law, whereby Adam was enabled to merit
the continuation of the perfection, and felicity wherein he was created,
eternally upon earth; whose standing or falling, was left to the freedom of
Adams election, by the first Covenant.

The immediate cause of Gods thus enabling of Adam, was the perfection of Adams
creation; we must stop our resolution at this cause, till we have the like
collateral cause, arising from the first Covenant as it is referred to man.

The first Covenant, as it is reffered to man, must be resolved, both as the
first Covenant was fulfilled by Adam, while Adam stood in the state of
perfection, and likewise as the first Covenant was broke and transgressed by
man. The last and lowest effect of Adam, as he was obliged by the first
Covenant, (while Adam stood in his state of perfection) was his perfect worship
of the first seventh day; for, in the fulfilling of the seventh day, the whole
law was fulfilled by Adam: by fulfilling whereof, Adams faith, and the eternal
blessing of the first seventh days rest, were actually (but not eternally)
united: for the continuation of the blessing of the first seventh days rest,
to Adam, was according to the continuation of the perfection of his obedience.
The immediate cause of Adams fulfilling of the command of the law (while Adam
stood in his state of perfection) was Adams says in the eternal continuation
of his eternal rest by God, which was due to his obedience, by the law: and
promised by Covenant, to which God obliged himself. The immediate cause of
Adams faith, was Adams love to spiritual righteousnssse; that is, to God,
spiritual righteousness it self, his gracious Lord God and Creator. The
immediate cause of Adams spiritual love, was the spiritual sanctifying light
of the holy Spirit, enlightening Adams intellectual soul, in the understanding
of the law, as the law is spiritual. The immediate cause of this spiritual
perfection of spiritual light and love in Adam, was the perfection of his
creation, as he was created in the perfection of a spiritual man, and in the
lively Image of God. And here we meet collaterally with the first cause, as the
first Covenant is referred to God, and so we have two of the four causes: but
we must not proceed to make the other two causes arise, from the new Covenant,
till we resolve the first Covenant, as it is referred to man, by Adam
transgressing of the l^w obliged by the first Covenant.

The lowest and last effect therefore of Adams breaking of the first Covenant,
was Adams transgression and contempt of the command of the Law, which is sin;
by which transgression, Adam and all men created in Adam, naturally to descend
of Adam, were eternally united to the curse of the law by the first Covenant,
whereby all men were condemned to eternal death and darkness, for the curse
of the law; the transgression of man, by the first Covenant, was peremptory,
without all time of repentance, or hope of revealed mercy.

The immediate cause of Adams transgression of the law, was the suggested
virtue, of the objective forbidden fruit, offered by Eve; by eating whereof,
Adam did apprehend himself, that he should become like God. Where (by the way)
the Reader may observe, that the immediate cause of Adams fall, was external
to Adam, which was the forbidden fruit, and Eves suggestion of the virtue of
the fruit. The immediate cause of Eves presenting of the fruit, and of her
suggestion, of the virtue of the fruit of Adam, was here dear love to Adam, to
have Adam equal to God himself, as Eve did apprehend her self to be, by the
virtue of the fruit which she did first eat. The immediate cause of Eves
eating of the forbidden fruit, was her ambicious desire, to have her self
equal to God, and to be freed from that dying death, threatened by the
Covenant. The immediate cause of Eves foul desire, was the false suggestion of
the Serpent, in suggesting such admirable virtue in the fruit. To the eating
whereof, (without all doubt) Eve was the more easily enduced to believe the
Serpents suggestion, of the virtue of the fruit of the tree of knowledge,
because there was such virtue in the fruit of the tree of life, for by eating
thereof, the sensitive nature of man was eternallv preserved; and therefore,
after the fall, both Adam and Eve were excluded from Paradise.

The immediate cause therefore of Eves fall, was the Serpent, and the
beautiful objective fruit of the tree of knowledge, and the suggested virtue
of the fruit, which were all external to Eve. Next, before we arise with the
resolution to the supreme cause of all, the new Covenant is first to be
resolved, both as the new Covenant is referred to God, and as it is referred to
man, where we shall meet with the two like collateral causes; all which 4.
Causes, as they are effects they are al produced by one and the same, next and
immediate superior cause: from whence we arise to the supreme cause of all.

By the last and lowest effect therefore of the new Covenant, as it is referred
to God; God in his Son Christ Jesus, does oblige the natural man, in his
redeemed state of natural and moral grace. First and immediately to the
Evanglicall faithful worship of the Lords day (the seventh day of the
Evangelicall law) as the eternal word Christ Jesus, has revealed himself by
his Evangelicall seventh days rest, arising from his bloody rest, Truth, in
the fulfilling of his promise to man, and in that truth, God in the three
coessentiall distinct persons of the glorious Trinity, clearly and
Evangelically, without all prophetical mystery or Ceremony. Secondly, God does
oblige the faithful Evangelicall obedience of man, to the command of his whole
Evangelicall law of righteousness of faith, employed in the Evangelicall
seventh days commanded worship, both upon the eternal blessing of the Lords
days Evangelical rest, and upon the merciless curse of the law of faith.

The immediate cause of Gods obliging of man, thus by his new Covenant, is,
Gods eternal purpose, to manifest himself, mercy and justice to man, by
rendering of the reward of his Evangelicall law of faith, according to the faith
of man obliged by his law. The immediate cause whereof, is Gods enabling of the
natural man, with such freedom of natural and moral grace, as he is able to
give moral obedience to his calling, by the new Covenant, without any manner
of necessitating of his moral disobedience. To the natural man's final
perseverance, in which moral obedience till Gods prefixed time of spiritual
calling, the spiritual grace of faith is due to the natural man by Covenant,
whereby he has the temporal blessing of the Lords days of Evangelicall rest
in this life, and eternal rest in the life to come. The immediate cause of such
natural and moral grace, is the perfection of the redemption of man. And here
we fall in with the two former causes of the first covenant; for both the
creation and redemtion of man, are by the same immediate cause: we must
therefore yet stop our resolution, till we meet with the fourth colatorall
cause, arising from the new covenant, as the new covenant is referred to man,
which must be likewise resolved, both as the new covenant is fulfilled by man,
and as the new covenant is broke and transgressed by man.

The last and lowest effect of the regenerate man, as he is obliged to the
command of the law of faith by the new Covenant, is, the faithful Evangelicall
worship of the Lords day, to whose thankful faithful worship, the blessing
of the Lords days Evangelicall rest, is temporally, naturally, and spiritually
united in this life, and eternally in the life to come; as the temporal,
natural, moral blessing, of the Lords days rest, is morally united to the
moral worship of the natural man. The immediate cause of the regenerate man's
faithful worship of the seventh day, implying his obedience to the command of
the whole law, is his spiritual faith. The immediate cause of his spiritual
faith, is, his love to spiritual righteousness. The immediate cause of his
spiritual love, is the sanctifying light of the holy Spirit enlightening his
understanding by his spiritual calling, in the immediate act of regeneration.
The immediate cause of his spiritnall calling, is the final perseverance of
the natural man in his moral obedience, according to the word of promise,
Mat: 13.13. whosoever shall endure to the end, shall be saved. This end to the
natural man is Gods prefixed time of spiritual calling: for the natural man,
by his spiritual calling, being actually regenerate, is saved by spiritual
faith, and consequently justified. The immediate cause of the natural man's
final perseverance, in his moral obedience, is first and immediately, the
perfection of the redemption, and secondly, Gods special free concursive
grace, in saving of the natural man, from being overcome by Satan's
temptations. This immediate cause, of the perfection of the redemtion, does
fall in, collaterally, with the three former causes, and so we have four in
number. But yet we must not rise without resolution, from these four causes,
till the new Covenant be resolved, as the law is finally contemned and
transgressed, by man, obliged to the new Covenant. The lowest and last effect
to the Reprobate, obliged to the new Covenant, is, his final, wilful,
obstinate, contempt of the gracious promises of Salvation, purchased by the
sacred blood of the son of God. To the reprobates final wilful contempt
whereof, by his unthankful merit, the merciless curse of the law of faith, is
eternally united, whereby the reprobate is eternally condemned by God, upon his
eternal prescience of the reprobates final contempt, according to his
eternal decree: which is actually inflicted upon the soul of the reprobate,
so soon as he departs this life; and in the full extent both of soul and
body in the great day, while by the resurrection from the dead, the soul and
body being essentially reunited, the curse of the Law in the full extent, is
actually and eternally inflicted upon man as he is man. The immediate cause of
the reprobates final wilful obstinate contempt, is the hardening of his heart.
The immediate cause whereof, is the reprobates wilful impenitent, obstinat
continuance in all sin and wickedness, by his contemning of God, in the
contemning of his law and truth, and of the professors of the truth. The
immediate cause whereof (as the cause is external) is the objective
temptations of Satan and of his wicked instruments, whereby the reprobate is
spiritually and morally corrupted from his childhood. The immediate cause of
the reprobates continuance in sin, (as the cause is internal) is his wilful
yielding to be induced by the temptations of Satan, and of his instruments,
while there is nothing to necessitate his moral disobedience, whereby the
reprobate does so wilfully, ungraciously, unthankfully, and presumptuously
contemn the blood of the new covenant.

Thus having the four causes met together, we are to ascend from the four
causes, as they are effects, produced by the next superior immediate cause, to
the supreme cause of all. The immediate cause therefore, of these four
several effects, as they are the immediate subordinate effects of the next and
immediate superior cause, is Gods eternal purpose, of the election of man, in
his Son Christ Jesus: For the immediate object of Gods eternal purpose of
election is the state of man, redeemed from the curse of eternal death and
darkness, shut up in temporal spiritual darkness, till he be regenerate:
For, in this estate, all men are equally redeemed from the curse of eternal
death and darkness, for their sin in Adam; all equally shut up in temporal
spiritual darkness, all equally reconciled to the love and favor of God, for
that first sin; with such freedom of moral grace, as all the created powers of
God, are not able to necessitate the will of the redeemed natural man, to
moral disobedience. To whose final perseverance, in his redeemed grace, (by
his moral obedience) till Gods prefixed time of spiritual calling, the grace
of spiritual faith, is due by the new covenant; which is established with all
men in the grace of this redeemed estate. Of this redeemed estate of man, God
(without all impeachment to his justice) did decree, from all eternity, to
elect to his mercy, a certain number of this redeemed state of man, known to
himself, by preserving of them, from being finally overcome, by the temptation
of Satan and of his instruments in this life; and to leave a certain number,
(known only to himself) in this redeemed estate of natural and moral grace,
to be induced, or not induced, by Satan and his instruments to final
disobedience at their pleasure and peril: For, there is nothing to necessitate
their will morally, and finally, to disobedience. The immediate cause of Gods
election of man in this redeemed estate, is the freedom of his mercy, who, in
this case, will show mercy on whom he will have merry, in his Son Christ Jesus.
The immediate cause of his showing of mercy to some in this redeemed estate, is
his foreknowledge of them, whom, from all eternity, he has predestinate to be
made like to the Image of his Son in this life. The immediate cause, that they
are predestinate to be made like to the Image of his Son in this life, is, that
Christ Jesus, the eternal Son of God (made flesh of the seed of the woman, in
time) may be the first born amongst many brethren, who are his mystical
members. The immediate cause that they are the mystical brethren and members
of their mystical head (Christ Jesus) is, that as their mystical head (by the
bloody persecution of Satan and his cruel instruments) did seal the truth of
his fulfilled promise of the blessed seed, with his heart blood: So his
mystical brethren and members, by tasting of the cup of his afflictions, (by
the bloody persecutions of Satan, and his cursed crew) may stand in the defense
of the truth of their mystical head valiantly, to the end of this life. The
immediate cause whereof is to the end; that whereas the Lords mystical members
has born the Image of his bloody persecution in this life: So in the great
day, they may (in their mystical head) revenge the blood of man upon Satan, by
the final breaking of the old Serpents head, and the head of his cursed seed,
to their eternal confusion. And that in recompense of their valor they may
(in their mystical head) be crowned with an incorruptible crown of glory,
eternally and triumphantly; in all heavenly happiness in the life to come. The
immediate cause whereof, is the Lords promise of the blessed seed, that the
seed of the woman shall break the head of the Serpent; which seed of the woman,
is first the Word the Lord Jesus Christ, begot by his Father, man of the seed
of the blessed Virgin: And next his mystical brethren, begot by the literal
and spiritual light of the Word, brought forth by the woman, the Church. The
immediate cause of the Lords promise of the blessed seed, is Gods eternal
decree of predestination upon his eternal prescience of the full of man, by
the malicious treachery of Satan. The immediate cause of Gods eternal decree
is Gods infinite love a and mercy to man, in his Son, Christ Jesus (the Word
made flesh of the seed of the woman) from whose infinite love to man, as all
the effects of his sacred decree do proceed: So all return to the infinite
eternal word, second person of the glorious Trinity, God and man; God equal
with the Father and holy Spirit, to whom with the Father, and holy Spirit,
three coessentiall distinct persons; one incomprehensible, indivisible,
infinite essence, God of all power and majesty, be ascribed (of all creatures)
all eternal honor, glory, power, praise, and thanksgiving, for his infinite
truth, love and mercy to man, the only Rock and Rest of the faith of man.

FINIS.

