A SERMON Preached in the Metropolitical Church OF CANTERBURY, October 17.
MDCLXXII.

AT THE FUNERAL Of the very Reverend THOMAS TURNER, D.D. Dean of the same
Church.

By Peter du Moulin, D.D. Canon there, and One of His Majesty's Chaplains.

LONDON: Printed for Henry Brom, at the Gun in S. (...) Churchyard near the
West End. 1672.

PHIL. 1.21. For to me to live is Christ, and to die is gain.
THE Gospel is the only Doctrine of true Wisdom, and therefore the only
direction to true Happiness. Thereby the Christian learneth to walk before his
God unto all pleasing, and charitably and uprightly with his Neighbors; to
instruct his ignorance, and correct his perverseness, to stand fast erected and
contented in the several turns of this World; to live well, and to die well,
which is all.

That sacred Doctrine is then most effectual to those great ends when it comes
seconded by example, and attested by experience. Give me lessons like my text
and the two before, where the Teacher teaches himself, and sets forth his
doctrine by his practice. The good Apostle was in bonds, in imminent peril of
death. And besides the persecution from Pagans, he was maligned by false
brethren, who preached Christ out of contention, not sincerely, supposing to
add affliction to his bonds.

In that double trial, see how the holy champion puts on the breastplate of
righteousness and the helmet of salvation; and takes in one hand the sword of
the Spirit, in the other the buckler of faith. Verse. 19.
I know (says he) that this shall turn to my salvation through your prayer,
and the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ: According to my earnest
expectation, and my hope, that in nothing I shall be ashamed; but that with all
boldness, as always, so now also, Christ shall be magnified in my body,
whether it be by life or by death. For to me to live is Christ and to die is
gain; or (to make it more English) Either way, or rather both the ways, Christ
is a gain unto me both to live and to die. Yet he had declared before, and so
he does after, that he held it a far greater gain for him to die for Christ,
and would rather glorify him by his death than life.

This was also the godly mind of our dear and highly honored Dean, in his last
sickness especially; So deep was the gaining of Christ in his pious soul, that
he could be sensible of no comfort but through death, that he might gain
Christ. The mention of recovery did afflict him, yea offend him. I fear nothing
so much (would he say) as to recover; I long to be dissolved and to be with
Christ. That sentence was continually in his mouth, That resolution was
steadfastly fixed in his mind. Did any speak to him of life and health, and the
comfort of his wife and children, Away, would he answer, I have enjoyed all
these long enough; Christ I would have. O when shall I be dissolved and be with
Christ! Much in the same style as David, As the heart pants after the
waterbrooks, Psalm. 42.1.
so pants my soul after thee O God: My soul thirsts for God, for the living
God; When shall I come and appear before God?

One may tell me that I press the practice of my text before the doctrine. But
I will say for my self that in this text the practice is the leader of the
doctrine. Unto me to live is Christ and to die is gain. And to show how Christ
was a gain unto St. Paul, and to those that are his followers as he also was of
Christ, it is the life of the text. Yet because the doctrine is the pattern of
the practice, this is the kernel of the doctrine of the text, and the order to
be kept in the exposition.

Christ being sent unto men to be a gain unto them, it is presupposed thereby
that they are at a loss without him. Man's natural losses are the deprivation of
Gods knowledge in his understanding, and of Gods righteousness in his will;
Whence follow heavy judgments upon him in his life, and eternal woe after his
death.

To help him in this sad condition, The Son of God has brought from the bosom
of his Father unto mankind that heavenly doctrine of glory to God on high, and
on earth peace, good will toward men; Which being embraced with obedience of
faith will prove such a gain unto him, that those spiritual losses shall be
repaired, his temporal wants shall be supplied, his afflictions shall be
removed, or so sanctified that they will prove lucrative unto him. And Death,
that proper and dismal stipend of sin, will prove unto him the greatest gain of
all; for instead of tumbling him down into hell, it will power him into the
bosom of his Father which is in heaven, that bottomless depth of goodness and
glory. Of which goodness and glory the summary is to be fully conformed (in
man's measure) unto Christ his sovereign good, and to be joined with him for
ever.

To resume these, consider a little what a wretched thing a man is that has
not learned Christ. As for his understanding, he is plunged in deep ignorance,
knowing neither God nor himself, nor his danger nor his remedy. Much like one
who being fallen from a high place is so stunned with the fall that he knows
not that he is fallen. Carnal men are much like moles that dig under ground
with great industry, but are blind in the sunshine: So naturally ignorant in
the things of God, that the wisest of this world, the Philosophers, were
divided into more then two hundred opinions about the sovereign good: And that
the ingenious nations the Egyptians and Grecians were the most monstrous of all
in their religions; The Egyptians worshipping oxen and crocodiles, onions and
leeks; The Grecians imagining in heaven feasts and combats and adulteries among
their Gods. And even in our days, corrupt men have so intailed ignorance upon
religion, that we are taught by Popery that faith consists in ignorance,
which is a virtue easily attained.

Well, to heal men's minds of ignorance in the things of God, God has sent his
Son into the world, 2 Timothy 1.
who has brought life and immortality to light by the Gospel. Here is a gain
indeed. Mat. 13.46.
Here is that pearl of great price which that a man may have he must sell all
that he has and buy it. Prove. 3.
Here is that wisdom the merchandise whereof is better than the merchandise of
silver, and the gain thereof then fine gold. She is more precious then rubies,
and all the things thou can desire are not to be compared unto her.

The excellency of that gain is then made most manifest when from the
illuminating of our understanding it passes to the regulating of our
affections and the sanctifying of our hearts: Christ enabling our spirits
freely to join with his Spirit to subdue all our inward rebellions, and
bringing them captives under the throne of Christ, say unto him, Lord rule thou
in the midst of thine enemies. Is not liberty a great gain to a slave and a
prisoner? To a man that served his lust, his belly, his money, his revengeful
mind, and the Devil by them, what a gain is it by serving God to become Master
at home; to feel in his breast, instead of a storm of unruly passions, the
peace of God which passes all understanding; and to find to his great comfort
that where the Spirit of the Lord is there is liberty?

What a great gain is it to be made rich in good works, rich in God? What a
great gain is it for us to give those goods which we cannot keep, and thereby
to purchase goods which we cannot loose? To sow upon earth that which we shall
be sure to reap in heaven? To put out our money to Gods bank who will repay it
an hundred fold?

And how great a gain is the practice of godliness? (...) Godliness is a great
gain, (...), with sufficiency. A great gain which brings along sufficiency and
contentment, for so the text must be understood.

Of that many a good soul could say much by feeling experience. For although
the great gain of godliness be not for this world, (as the kingdom of Christ is
not of it) Yet Christ who is the Sovereign Lord of nature, as well as King of
the Church, engages his Royal word that all that serve him, and sincerely seek
his glory shall not need to say, What shall we eat, or what shall we drink, or
wherewithal shall we be clothed? because their heavenly Father knows that
they have need of all these things. Mat. 6.33.
But seek ye first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all these
things shall be added unto you. This is the Charter of Christ's Disciples, that
they may confidently cast their cares upon him for he cares for them, and so
forsake all interesses to follow him.

But this is the least gain that we get by Christ in this life. The great gain
is the beginning of eternal life. For the spiritual life in a godly man's breast
is of one piece with life everlasting after the temporal is ended. To have at
hand the directions of his word, the counsels of his Spirit, the comforts of
his love, the joys of his salvation; To have a free access unto the throne of
grace at all times; To make one already in the quire of Angels and Saints
singing with them Holy Holy Holy Lord God of hosts, heaven and earth is full of
the Majesty of his glory; To be joyful in hope, looking up unto Jesus the
Author and finisher of our faith, who went up through the rough way of the
Cross to glory, to make us a plain way to the same: This is the gain that comes
to us, even in this life, by having Christ.

Join to these the comforts that we relish in all conditions. Is it prosperity?
the true Christian takes it as an effect of Gods promise (which was made good
to this reverend godly Divine) that by humility and the fear of the Lord are
riches and honor and life, Pro. 22.4.
and that godliness is profitable for all things having the promises of this
life and of that which is to come. 1 Timothy 4.8.
In every morsel he will relish how the Lord is gracious; In his health, in his
wealth, in his hopeful family, he will ever look more to the giver than to the
gift, and adore him in whom he lives and moves and has his being and his
well being.

Is he in adversity? He will say, I know whom I have believed. God has a hand
in all this. Psalm. 39.
I will be dumb and not open my mouth to murmur, for thou O Lord have done it.
My cross is my Saviors livery. My humble conformity to his sufferings will end
in a conformity to his glory, if I may have the same mind which was also in
Christ Jesus, who humbled himself and became obedient unto death, even the
death of the Cross. Wherefore God also has highly exalted him, and given him a
name which is above every name.

Now that gain which we have by Christ in this life, is but a preparative to
that grand and unmatchable gain in Christ which his true Disciples attain unto
by death.

Christ is a gain unto them to die, two ways, by avoiding the sting and the
terrors of death, and by a passage unto an eternal life of holiness and glory.

The sting and terror of approaching death is most tormenting to those that
have taken no pains to make Christ the gain of their life. What a cutting of
their heart is it when they have fixed it upon the beloved world, and they must
be violently torn off from the world! Linquenda tellus and domus and placens
uxor. And of all the wealth which they have heapt up with anxious care and
wicked labor, they see they carry nothing away but a winding sheet.

But the worst sting of death is that which they feel in their conscience, when
it sets before them the years spent in deboish, the unrighteousness of their
purchases, their contempt of Gods word, their slighting of his service, their
blasphemous and unclean conversation, and upon that pronounces unto them (as
Gods Officer) the doom of divine justice which must be shortly executed upon
them.

It is true, many of those sinners in grain die senseless; Yet before their
death the sting of eternal death meets with their consciences, even in the
midst of their jollities. And many sinners of a lower form feel it all their
lives time.

To heal consciences of that sting was the great end of the Son of God's coming
and dying in our flesh; As you have it illustriously set forth Heb. 2.14. That
Christ took part of flesh and blood, that through death he might destroy him
that had the power of death, that is the Devil; And deliver them who through
fear of death are all their lives time subject unto bondage.

This is the great remedy against that mortal sting of death sent by the Father
of mercies to poor sinners: A never sading remedy, when sinners have the grace
to receive it with a sincere faith, effectual in an humble repentance, and a
serious amendment. For then the soul reconciled with God looks upon death with
quite another eye then before, and says, O death where is thy sting? Romans 7.
O grave where is thy victory? Death do not look grim upon me, I know who has
overcome thee; Conscience do not think to fright me, I know whom I have
believed; I have committed my spirit assoiled with Christ's blood into his
victorious hands. And I know he is both willing and powerful to defend it
against all the principalities and powers of hell that are roaring about me to
devour me.

After that deliverance from the sting and the terror of death follows the
attainment of eternal life, and death it self is the passage unto it. There is
that difference between the death of the reconciled and that of the
unreconciled sinner as was between the Butler's and the Baker's of Pharaoh
going out of the same prison, the one to the gallows, the other to enter into
the joy of his Master. Oh the blessed hope of a soul arrived even into the
mouth of that haven of salvation, Psalm. 118.
saying with a holy impatience, Open me the gates of righteousness; I will go
into them, and praise the Lord; This gate of the Lord into which the righteous
shall enter. Lord Jesu thou art gone in before unto thy Father and our Father,
and to thy God and our God; Oh make good now thy promise, that thou will come
to us and take us to thee, Joh. 14.18.
that where thou art there we may be also. Let me have once, let me have now
the final completing of my Christian happiness, 17.24.
and of my gain in Christ.

It was a gracious speech of St. Ambrose on his deathbed to his friends
weeping about him, Non sic vixi ut pudeat me inter vos vivere: Sed nec timeo
mori, quia bonum habemus Dominum. I did not so live as to be afraid to live
among you: Neither do I fear to die, because we have a good Lord. So did our
Reverend dear Dean speak after him; but went beyond him in his alacrity, and
being on the wing for heaven; knowing that when this earthly house of this
tabernacle was dissolved, 2 Cor. 6.1.
he had a building of God, a house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens.
Therefore did he sigh, and long, and pant for that eternal house, and in that
house he now dwells, beholding Gods face in righteousness.

My brethren, I make no doubt but that every one that hears me is desirous
that Christ may be to him a gain to die; so that when his soul departs out of
his body it may be received by Christ, and brought into his eternal
habitations. Who can blame you? But then I must beseech you to take great heed
of dis-joyning the parts of my text. For be ye sure that Christ shall not be a
gain unto you in your death, if you neglect to make him a gain unto you in your
life. Piety (says St. Paul) is a great gain: Do you labor to make that great
gain by Christ? Do you study to follow him who left us an example that we
should follow his steps? Do you learn of him that he is meek and humble of
heart, that you may find rest unto your souls? Do you learn of him not to seek
your glory, but that of him that sent him? Do you go about doing good as he
did? Do you love your enemies? Do you pray for those that persecute you as he
did for those that crucified him? I tell you if you do not endeavor to be
conformable unto him, and to be guided by his doctrine and example in your
life, you shall not find him a gain unto you in your death. The spiritual life
of the Christian in this world, and his eternal life in the next world, is but
one life; all the difference is in the growth, in earth it is growing, in
heaven it is full grown. O let us now to our power make Christ a gain to live;
so, and no otherwise, he shall be our gain to die, and to live for ever with
him after our death.

The nature of this text requiring an illustration of the doctrine by example,
Now God sends us here an example which makes a comment upon the text. It is
true St. Paul speaks here for himself, Christ is a gain unto me both to live
and to die. But he spoke it for all to speak after him that could. And when I
look upon the life and death of our reverend, holy, and now glorified friend, I
find that he might have been exactly true in saying Christ is a gain unto me
both to live and to die.

In his tender years he began to dedicate himself unto Christ. And though by
the means which he was born to, and by the goodness of his ex^^^^^ion, he might
have applied his studies to (...) lucrative condition then that of the M^^^^^^y
(by which not one in fifty thrives in (...) ^orld) yet Christ's espectial
servant he would (...) that holy Office.

And (...) ^^uth is, God had separated him from the womb for the Ministry,
giving him the ^^oice^^ ^^^owments for so high a calling. (...) ^herished in
him by his Tutor, no (...) great and good man Archbishop (...).

There is (...) of all the graces requisite for the Episcop^^ and pastoral
Office in those hierarchical Epistles to Tim^thy and Titus, but may be
exemplified in this excellent Divine: For he was blameless, the husband of one
wife, vigilant, sober, of good behavior, given to hospitality, apt to teach,
not given to wine, no striker, not greedy of filthy lucre, not a brawler, not
covetous, one that ruled well his own house, having his children in subjection
with all gravity, not self-willed, not soon angry; but patient, just, holy,
holding fast the faithful word as he had been taught, able by sound doctrine
both to exhort and to convince the gainsayers. Compare the rule with his
practice, the pattern with his qualities, and let envy and detraction find an
unconformity between them if they can

He was at his first entrance into Holy Orders a most practical useful
preacher, which few young men attain unto. A famous man for the pulpit near
fifty years ago, and kept up that high genius to the very last.

His first step was into the domestic service of that rising active Bishop
Laud, who took a singular affection to his great parts of nature grace and
study, and kept him long for his household Chaplain. But that excellent Judge
and encourager of meriting persons, King Charles the First, being extremely
pleased with his extraordinary pious and powerful way of rational preaching,
after he had heard him twice or thrice at the Court, never left soliciting the
Bishop to find some settled preferment for him, to enable him to attend upon his
own person. And upon these easy terms came all his preferments.

And here it is most observable how Christ was a gain unto him for prosperity.
For in his whole life of above fourscore years, he never opened his mouth for
preferment, never either directly or indirectly importuned any man for any
thing, never had contest with any competitor for any of his dignities. Christ
his great and good Master, whose glory he sought as his only gain, brought him
to his fair places without his seeking. For this partage of cares he had made
with him, Lord I will take care of thy service, do thou take care of my well
being. And truly as he was a rare example of an easy advancement, so was he a
rare example of casting all his cares upon God, because God cared for him.

Among the prosperities wrought for him by the fatherly care of God, I must put
in the first rank his matching with a wife of excellent virtue and eminent
extraction, daughter to that Honorable Person Sir Francis Windehank then
flourishing and in high favor at the Court, and soon after sworn Privy
Counselor and Principal Secretary of State. A match so wrought for him by his
powerful friends, that it may be said that God brought her by the hand to him,
as he brought the first wife to the first man.

Wealth and favor thus flowing upon him, his moderation made him an observer
of Solomon's precept, Pro. 23.4.
Labor not to be rich. For being possessed of the great living of St Olave, when
the late King his gracious Master conferred upon him the Deanery of Canterbury
(which was done in his absence, and ten days before he knew it) he freely
resigned St. Olave into his Majesty's hands, though the King never intended to
lay any obligation upon him to resign his living. Which he did not do quia
infirmi est animi non posse pati divitia^, because he found his back too weak
to bear wealth; for he has showed sufficiently that he could wield it, and
employ it to the best uses of charity, wisdom and magnanimity, with a serene
and pious easiness: as he could possess wealth he could also despise it, and be
abstinent in the midst of plenty.

Much about that time he showed that he could relinquish his own patrimony as
well as that of the Church; for he resigned his paternal estate of considerable
value to his younger brother; and gave portions to several of his sisters, and
settled them and others of his kindred very handsomely in the world, though he
was then a married man and a father, and in a time when the lowering face of the
sky could make him presage the great imminent storm. Yea when the storm was
most raging, and his own fortunes were at a lower ebb, even then he took into
his care his aged parents, harassed and ruined by the iniquity of the times,
for their most eminent loyalty; and made them a very fai allowance, that they
might live like themselves. For which they used to bless him and call him their
second Joseph.

A great point of his prosperities (and that on the score of Christ who ever
was a gain unto him) was the choice made of him by his late Majesty three
several extraordinary times to attend him in his holy function; The first time
in his progress to Scotland for his coronation. The second time when he was in
the hands of the Army at Hampton Court. The third time in the Isle of Wight in
the time of that ugly Treaty. Where the good King preparing himself for his
Matyrdom gathered about him such spiritual forces as he might be allowed to
have, which might strengthen him in that great trial.

In that honorable and perilous employment of framing a King in his enemies
power to be a Martyr, our excellent friend was himself a great Confessor,
daring to own loyalty and obedience, before those monsters, who made high
treason the highest pitch of godliness.

And now was the time for this Reverend good man to seek gain in Christ through
adversity. In the very beginning of the wars he had been sequestered, plundered,
forced to fly, rudely and barbarously carried away by a troop of Parliament
horse, and imprisoned at London. But what! this must be put among the mercies;
Since thereby he got that gain of conformity with the sufferings of Christ, and
had that glory to bear his cross with a patient, erected, and contented mind.

Could I now trace him in his several flights and shifts from place to place,
with his wife and little children, during that long storm, you might see a web
of crosses and mercies enterlaced, and that continual and never failing mercy,
the Christian constancy whereby God upheld that religious couple, making Christ
their gain and their joy in their losses.

But the storm being once over, Christ must be again their gain in prosperity.
And here was eminent this reverend man's virtue: For whereas at the Kings return
he might have had a rochet, he did studiously decline it, contrahens vento
nimium secundo turgida vela, wisely and modesty choosing rather to set out too
little than too much sail. And rather than getting more he resigned a living of
good value, which he had recovered by the general reformation of the Church,
desiring to ease his aged shoulders of the burden of cure of souls; and caused
it to be bestowed upon a person altogether unacquainted with him, but
recommended very justly under the character of a pious man and a sufferer for
righteousness; preferring him before one nearest to himself in blood.

His behavior in his several stations, at Canterbury and at Paul's, must not be
forgotten. May it be remembered to his honor that he was affable and courteous
to all, kind and obliging to all deserving persons, highly bountiful and
compassionate to the poor, hospitable to great and small, especially to the
Clergy of the Diocese, and to his brethren. With them he desired to live in a
perfect fraternity, and though he knew how to preserve his authority as well as
any man, it was without any supercilious distance. If there happened any
difference, none was more peaceable or more reconcilable then he. He did not
only forgive injuries, but many times he did perfectly forget them. Which art
of oblivion was a strange faculty in him, whose memory till within three days
of his death was incomparable, I had almost said prodigious; yet he could
hardly remember many offensive passages against him, till he was reminded of
them.

What more! He did not only forget the offenses done to him, but also some good
works done by him; or so little minded them that he spoke little of them. Of
which none can be a better witness than my self. For when the most Reverend
Archbishop Juxon made some doubt whether he should confirm me in the possession
of Adsham by a new Collation, this excellent Dean, this peerless friend of
mine, showed him that he could not in honor and gratefulness do otherwise; In
Clamore Regii sanguinis ad Coelum.
putting in his hands the true and honorable account which I had given to the
world of his rarely virtuous behavior in assisting our late holy King in his
martyrdom, and in his trials for his sake after his death. This favor of the
first magnitude, of which I must ever have a grateful remembrance, was like to
have been buried in perpetual oblivion; for the doer of it did not acquaint me
with it but eleven years after, a few months before his death upon an occasion
given him to remind it. This was doing good merely for God and goodness sake,
without expecting thanks from men; which is the liveliest character of a
really honest soul.

But above all let it be recorded of him that there was never a more
publick-spirited Governor in this or in any other Church soever. He was most
zealously promoting and upholding the public worship of God in the beauty of
holiness, and decent splendour in the house of God, advancing the good of the
place wheresoever he presided, what ever toil or censure or money it cost him.
Of which he has given magnificent memorials to our Church and Library. It is
memorable that in thankfulness for a great deliverance from an imminent danger,
he vowed and dedicated to our Holy Table that costly Folio Bible with covers of
beaten silver double gilt. His behavior at Paul's has given many signal
testimonies how much he preferred the honor of Gods house, and the benefit of
the Society, before his private emolument. The fair house which he lately built
there for his successors having little hope to enjoy it himself, and yet spent
the better part of a thousand pounds upon it, is a great proof of that truth,
and a lasting monument of his magnanimous and public spirit.

In all the relations of a Son, a Husband, a Father, a Kinsman, or a Friend, he
ever acquitted himself with singular wisdom, constant piety, and almost
unparalleled generosity. Take him any way you shall find in him a right
tetragonismus, a firm cube equal on all sides.

I cannot but once more touch his superlative bounty to the poor, who therefore
were his constant attendants, appropriating to him Christ's saying to his
Disciples, The poor you shall have always with you. But his secret alms were
far greater then the open. Thereby indeed Christ was a gain unto him, and the
promise for this life made good, The liberal soul shall be made fat; and the
greater promise of the heavenly kingdom to them that have fed and clothed
Christ in his members is now fulfilled to him.

But may I not say that as Christ was a gain unto him, he was also a gain unto
Christ? Why? Has not Christ said, In as much as you have done it to one of the
least of my brethren you have done it unto me? Mat. 25
To Christ then he has brought as much gain that way as any of his time and
means. His memory be ever blessed for it, for so is his glorious soul.

Having then seen how Christ was to him a gain to live, Let us see now how
Christ was a gain to him to die, which is the end that crowns the work. His
good life was a continual preparation to a good death. But he made a particular
preparation for it, without any design. For when he preached in his last course,
which was the Eleventh Sunday after Trinity, being in perfect health, he took
for his text Into thy hands I commit my spirit, Thou have redeemed me O Lord
God of truth: His excellent Sermon he delivered with full vigor, continued in
that vigor four days longer: But on the Friday after that Critical or rather
Prophetical Sermon, he fell sick of the sickness of which he dyed. And when his
sickness began he could say that he had preached his funeral Sermon. How well
did he teach us then to commit our spirits unto God while we live, by a full
resignation, submission, and obedience unto his holy will; that in our death we
may with confidence and joy commit and give up our spirits into the hands of
our Redeemer, that God of truth, who will faithfully preserve, perfect and
glorify the souls that have committed themselves to his keeping!

With these thoughts God armed his servant against his last combat at hand. The
sharp assaults of his disease, the stone, after thirty years of good health,
were not terrible enough to shake his constancy, or give him any dreadful
apprehensions, except of living. No man ever feared death more then he desired
it; Yet with all submission and resignation to Gods heavenly will. No word so
frequent in his mouth as Cupio dissolvi and esse cum Christo, I desire to be
dissolved and to be with Christ; To which he would pray the company to say Amen.

The reading of a Penitential Psalm to him would melt him into tears of
contrition, and he would repeat it after the reader. And when he said nothing,
he practiced St Paul's precept, Pray continually. Wherefore he desired often
that the prayers of the Liturgy (when they were said near him) should be
shortened, assuring his friends that he had said them all already to himself.
But he did not limit his devotions to the Liturgy, but entertained himself with
God with high and savoury expressions of his own, with such a strength and
serenity of mind that in his greatest weakness, and in his sorest pains, scarce
did he speak one ill placed word to the last minute. When his throat and tongue
were most grievously parched, being asked how he felt himself, he answered that
his soul was athirst for God, for he had David's longing to refresh and satiate
his weary soul with the fountain of Gods life, and the fatness of his house.

The day before he surrendered his blessed soul into the hands of God, he
received the Holy Sacrament very devoutly, conquering his aversion against any
thing offered to him to swallow. And although he had not been able to take down
any arid nutriment, scarce any liquid, in forty eight hours, yet he forced
himself to receive the Viaticum.

The innocent gayety of his humor, which made his company so singularly
agreeable to all sorts of men, did not utterly forsake him to the last. He
would smile at his dear relations when he saw them flatter themselves with
hopes of his recovery two or three hours before his death, telling them
pleasantly that what he took to please them would not do the work. Yet was he
extreme tractable to any thing prescribed, however contrary to his discerning
judgment of his own condition. And when he was desired for Gods sake and for
his and his friends conscience to submit to some painful applications, but an
hour before he expired, he put forth his whole strength of body (which was as
well built as most in the world) and raised himself twice in his bed to their
admiration, for it seemed that it was more the strength of conscience than that
of his limbs that made him thus active.

He would be sure to thank any one most affectinately that prayed by him,
directing his friends to the use of the Liturgy, or to call upon God in the
words of the Holy Spirit, either places of the new Testament, or of the Psalms.
Most of his discourse was ghostly, fatherly, heavenly counsel. And about an
hour before his last breath he gave his blessing to all his by the imposition
of his most reverend hand. And gave up the ghost with the greatest Christian
magnanimity, and yet with the deepest sense imaginable of godly sorrow working
repentance unto salvation, not to be repented of.

So ended the life of that excellent man: That great owner of those two
heroique virtues Humility and a Public spirit; And of whom it may be said,
That never was Clergyman freer from Pride and Covetousness.

After such a life and such a death, he deserved to have two banners carried
before and after his hearse; The one inscribed (...), To the honor of him that
lived well; The oath (...) To the honor of him that dyed well. And the proper
elogy on his Tomb is (...), Christ is a gain unto me both to live and to die.

FINIS

