THE Comical History OF DON QUIXOTE, As it is ACTED AT THE QUEENS THEATER IN
Dorset-Garden, By Their Majesty's Servants.

PART I.

Written by Mr. D'Urfey.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Briscoe, at the Corner of Charles-street, in
Russel Street, Covent Garden, 1694.

To Her GRACE THE Dutche^s of ORMOND.
DON Quixote having not only been well Received upon the St^ge, but also having
cleared himself with Reputation* from the Slunder and Prejudice which malicious
Critics h^d resolved upon, to ^ully and blast him; I could not forbear
suffering him to aspi^e to this Second Honor of Dedicating himself to your
GRACE, from whose Noble and unbiased Judgment, he may assure himself of an
Obliging Reception, and a Generous Security.

The Honor your Grace, and the rest of the Nobility and Gentry did me to see
this Play in its Rehearsal or Undress, was a happy presage of its future good
fortune; the Stars were all in conjunction to do me good; and I think I may
safely say, without offense, That when the Ladies came to my Third Day, there
never was at this time of the year, in the Hemisphere of the Playhouse, so
dazzling and numerou^ a Constellation seen before.

It Is, Mad^m, from your GRACE's prosperous Influence that I Date my good
Fortune; and I shall be very glad if this poor Offspring of my Brain, has
Merit enough to deserve the Honor of a Smile from so Great and so Good a
Patroness.

Further, I dare not proceed on this Subject, lest I should involve my self
rashly, in praise of what is even too great for praise it self, and so only
show my own Ambition, in aspiring to write on so Glorious a Theme, witho^t
doing you any Justice, who are always infinitely above what ever my Genius can
ever pretend to in that Nature.

The World, that knows the Noble Stock from which you sprung, are sensible that
it is impossible for you to derogate from such flourishing and signalized
Virtues; And those likewise that consider you, as the Happy Consort of the
Great ORMOND, whose indefatigable Zeal to Serve His Majesty, and his afflicted
Country, with his dearest Blood and Fortune abroad, leaves him scarce leisure
to dry your Tears up for the last Parting, or pay his Paternal Blessing to his
dear Children at home, ought to behold your Grace with doubl^ Reverence, and
unite their Prayers and Wishes, that all things in his Absence may tend to your
Comfort, satisfaction, and Honor; and that the troublesome Hours may run
swiftly off, to give way to the ^ransporting News of his Happy Return with Fame
and Victory.

One of these general Admirers of both your Matchless Leserts and Virtues, I
beseech your Grace to believe me, whose Dutious Wishes are constantly Devoted
to your ^ervice -- And now particu^arly, may the whole Hierarchy of Angels
protect ye in the expected Hour of Trouble; and may the Rejoicing Worthy Part
of the Worl^ be Blessed ^^th another Noble, Loyal, and Valiant OSSORY ^reat and
Admired as his Illustrious, and never to be forgotten Grandfather. And that
this unvalu'd Blessing, and all other that can make your Grace, and that Truly
Noble, and most Dearly Loved Hero abroad, Happy in one another; May Succeed as
your Desire, is the Devotion and daily Wish

Of MADAM, Your Graces most Faithful, And most Humbe Servant T. D'URFEY.

PROLOGUE.
Spoken by Mr. Betterton. IN hopes the coming Scenes your Mirth will raise
To you, the Just pretenders to the Bays;
The Poet humbly thus a Reverence pays
And you, the Contraries, that hate the Pains
Of Labored Sense, or of Improving Brains:
That feel the Lashes in a well-writ Play,
He bids perk up and smile, the Satyr sleeps to Day.
Our Sancho bears no Rods to make ye smart;
Proverbs, and Merry Iokes, are all his Part.
The Modish Spark may Paint, and ^ie in Paste,
Wear a huge Steinkirk twisted to his Waste;
And not see here, how foppish he is Dressed.
The Country Captain, that to Town does come,
From his Militia Troop, and Spouse at home,
To beat a London-Doxies Kettle-Drum:
One, who not only the whole Pit can prove,
That she for Brass Half-crown has bartered Love:
But the Eighteen-penny Whore-masters above,
With his Broad Gold may Treat his Pliant Dear,
Without being shown a Bubbled Coxcomb here.
Grave Dons of Business, may be Bulker's Cullies,
And Crop-ear'd Prentices set up for Bullies,
And not one Horse-whip Lash here, fla^g their Follies;
Nay* our hot Blades, whose Honor was so small,
They Would not bear Arms, because not Colonels all:
That wish the French may have a mighty Slaughter;
But wish it safely, -- on this side of the Water.
Yet when the King returns, a^e all prepared
To beg Commissions in the Standing-Guard;
Even these, the Sons of Shame and Cowardice,
Will 'scape us now, though it is a cursed Vice.
Our Author has a famous Story chose,
Whose Comic Theme no Person does expose,
But the Knights-Errant; and pray wh^re are those?
There was an Age, when Knights with Lance and Shi^ld,
Would Right a Ladies Honor in the Field:
To punish Ravishers, to Death would run;
But those Romantic Days -- alas, are gone;
Some of our Knights now, rather would make one,
Who finding a young Virgin, by Disaster,
Tied to a Tree, would rather tie her faster.
Yet these must 'scape too; so indeed must all
Court-Cuckold-makers now not Jest does maul;
Nor the horned herd within you City-Wall.
The Orange-Miss, that here Cajoles the Duke,
May sell her Rotten Ware without rebuke.
The young Coquet, whose Cheats few Fools can dive at,
^ay Trade, and the Old Tope Kniperkin in private.
The Atheist too on Laws Divine may Trample,
And the Plump Jolly Priest get Drunk for Church-Example.
EPILOGUE.
By Sancho, Riding upon his Ass. Amongst our Forefathers, that pure Wit
professed,
There Is an old Proverb, That two Heads are best.
Dapple and I have therefore jogged this way,
Through sheer good Nature, to defend this Play:
Though I Have no Friends, yet he (as proof may show,)
May have Relations here, for ought I know.
For in a Crowd, where various Heads are addle,
May, many an Ass be, that never wore a Saddle.
It Is then for him that I this Speech intend,
Because I know he is the Poet's Friend;
And, as it is said, a parlous Ass once spoke,
When Crab-tree Cudgel did his Rage provoke;
So if you are not civil, 'sbud, I fear,
H^'ll speak again, --
And tell the Ladies, every Dapple here.
Take good Advice then, and with kindness win him,
Though he looks simply, you don't know what is in him:
He has shrewd Parts, and proper for his place,
And yet no Plotter, you may see by's Face;
He tells no Lies, nor does Sedition vent,
Nor ever Brays against the Government:
Then for his Garb he is like the Spanish Nation,
Still the old Mode, he never changes Fashion;
His sober Carriage too you have seen to day,
But for's Religion, troth, I cannot say
Whether for Mason, Burgis, Muggleton,
The House with Steeple, or the House with None;
I rather think he is of your Pagan Crew,
For he never goes to Church -- no more than you.
Some that would, by his Looks, guess his Opinion,
Say, he is a Papish; others, a Socinian:
But I believe him, if the truth were known;
As the rest of the Town-Asses are, of none;
But for some other Gifts -- mind what I say,
Never compare, each Dapple has his Day,
Nor anger him, but kindly use this Play;
For should you with him, concealed Parts disclose,
Lord! how like Ninneys, would look all the Beaus.
Dramatis Personae.
Men By Don Quixote. A frantic Gentleman of the Mancha in Spain, that fancies
himself a Knight Errant. Mr. Boen. Don Fernando. A young Nobleman. Mr. Powel.
Cardenio. A Gentleman, that being treacherously deprived of L^scinda his
Betrothed Mistress, fell Mad. Mr. Bowman. Ambrosio. A young Student, and
Stranger, a Friend to Chrysostom, and a great Woman-hater. Mr. Verbruggen.
Perez. A Curate. Mr. Cibber. Nicholas. A merry Drolling Barber. Mr. Harrris.
Sancho Panca. A dry shrewd Country Fellow, Squire to Don Quixote, a great
speaker of Proverbs, which he blunders out upon a^loccasions, though never so far
from the purpose. Mr. Doggett. Gines de Passamonte Mr. Haines. Pallameque,
Gally-slaves. Lope Ruiz, Gally-slaves. Quartrezzo, Gally-slaves. Tenorio,
Gally-slaves. Martinez. Gally-slaves. Guarding the Slaves. Officers. 2d.
Barber. Vincent. A humorous Host, or Innkeeper. Mr. Bright. Women. By Marcella,
A young beautiful Shepherdess that hates Mankind, and by her scorn occasions
the Death of Chrysostom. Mrs. Bracegirdle. Dorothea, alias, Princess
Micomicona, a young Virgin betrothed to Don Fernando, but deserted by him for
Luscinda, but afterward reconciled. Mrs. Knight. Luscind^, A young Lady
betrothed to Cardenio, stolen from a Nunnery by Don Fernando, whom she fled
thither to avoid. Mrs. Bowman. Teres^ Pancha, Wife to Sancho, a silly credulous
Country Creature. Mrs. Leigh. Mary the Buxom, Sancho's Daughter, a Rude,
laughing, clownishHoyden, Incomparably Acted by Mrs. Verbruggen. Hostess,
Maritornes, Her Daughter. The Body of Chrysostom. Knights of several Orders.
Shepherds, Shepherdesses, Inchanters, Inchantresses, Singers, Dancers, and
Attendants.

The SCENE, Mancha in Spain,

A Pleasant Champian with a Windmill in Prospect.

THE Comical History OF DON QUIXOTE.
ACT I.
SCENE I. A Champian, with a Windmill at distance.
The Curtain Drawn, Don Quixote is seen Armed Cap-a-pee, upon his Horse
Rosinante; and Sancho by him upon Dapple hi^ Ass, -- ^^ting a bunch of Haws.
Don Quix. SAncho.


San. Sir.


Don Q. We are now in pursuit of Valorous Adven^ures; entered into the pleasant
Fields of Mon^iel, the Air is fragrant and delightf^l, and the Valley, near
yonder Tuft of Virdant Trees, Cool and Shady; therefore let us alight -- And
prithee take the Bridle from ^osinante's Head, that he may the better taste the
Refreshment of this flowery Pasture; and when thou have done so, show the same
Courtesy to thy own friend Dapple, for they have born us day with a fortitude
and patience that exact from us, an answerable Return of Civility.


San* With all my Heart* Sir; and I wish that Dapples generosity could be as
Civil to me, as I to him, and return me a good refreshing too, for as the Case
of my Belly now stands, I find my fortitude and patience inclining to yield to
the Giant Hunger; and methinks, I begin to wish my ^elf an Ass too, that we
might Improve good fellowship, and lovingly Dine together. Kissing Dapple.


Don Qu. Do not indulge thy self, too much upon thy Belly, good Sancho; an
Epicure contradicts the function of the Squire of a Knight Errant, entirely;
go, do as I have ordered, and a^ thy return I will give thee the honor of a
Conference.


San. If the Conference were to be over a good piece of Beef and Cabbage, I
could confe^ no^ like any Clergyman; but I don't like these windy Exhortations
without meat, -- aside. Now am I to be fed with a ^edious Tale of
Knight-Errantry, when my Guts are all in uproar within me for want of better
provision.


Exit with Rosin* and Dapple. Don Qu. The gross and sordid quality of this
Fellow, gives me the better reflection upon my self, for as his thoughts are
grovelling like his Nature, so mine are elevate like my Profession: On which
let me now consider a little. What art thou? And what would thou be, Don
Quixote? A Renowned Knight Errant, a Tamer of Giants, a Righter of Wrongs, a
Defender of Virgins, a Protector of Justice; In fine, a Scourge to the Infamous
World, and a noble Retriever of the Golden Age; but hold Illustrious Don, you
are not Knighted yet, and consequently incapable of these Performances. What
then? as I have read in Books of Chivalry, I may still undertake an easy
Adventure, under the Title of the Maiden-Knight, till I receive that honor;
and then proceed the glory of that function, the terror of all Miscreants, and
the delight and wonder of ensuing Ages.


Re-enter Sancho. S^n. So, thanks be to Lady Flora, the Beasts are well
provided for, Dapple is happy, he is exercising his Grinders yonder, whilst I
carry mine here only for show; for the Devil of any other use will my Master
let me have for 'em; See -- now is he making his Dinner upon Cogitations, and I
am to have the Scraps of 'em for mine* Honor and Air is always our fa^e. Oh
Sancho, Sancho! What have thou brought thy self to?


Don Qu. Oh Dulcinea d^l Toboso* Thou light of all Eyes, Empress of my Soul,
and Sovereign Princess of my Heart and Vitals.


San. Ay, it is so, Thought of his supposed Mist^ess, a Murrain take her, is the
first Course, and no doubt a Conceit of the next beating for her will be the
second; Oo^s this is choice Diet, I grow damnably ^at upon it; Oh D^nce! You
must leave Wife and Children to go a Squiring, must ye? Well! can you eat
Grass, good Squire? Can your Worship Dine upon Clovet, you may find Salleds in
abundance, but like the Spanish Boors, your Countrymen, the Devil of any meat
to 'em, most Noble Squire.


Don Qu. Now Animal of little Faith, and less Ingenuity, what are you grumbling
at?


San. Why troth, Sir, if your Worship will needs know, my Belly and I have had
a sharp Combat, it was grumbling at me for a good Dinner, and I was cramming it
as well as I could with the good hopes of the Island your Worship has promised
me, when you come to be Emperor of -- what do you call it.


Don Qu. Empires, Sancho, have their Titles as various as the ways to Atchieve
'em; but let it suffice thee, that when I am Dubbed Knight, as with the first
opportunity I mean to be, Adventures of that Nature will flow in upon us; so
that in the ^pace that one may trim a Beard, an Empire may Drop into my Mouth,
and an Island, or at least an Earldom into thine.


San. Pray Heaven my Government afford me Beef enough, to make amends for all
these Days of Fasting: But I have found to my sorrow in your Service hitherto*
that fair Words b^tt^r no Parsnips; he is blind enough that sees not through
the Holes of a S^ive; Desert and Reward seldom keep Company, and none are Fools
always, though every one sometimes; better on bare Foot then no Foot at all; and
thou art known by him that does thee feed, not by him that does thee breed; and
he that --


Don Qu. Wheiw! a plague on thee, where the Devil art thou running with thy
flim flams? what time of Year hence do think I shall answer thee, if thou
runn'st on threading thy Proverbs at this rate.


San. Well, well, Sir, that is all one* Let every one be the Son of his own
Works, for under the name of a Man one may become Pope; for my part, I see Land
every day more then other, you promised Islands and Earldoms; but how you shall
get 'em or I govern 'em is the question; the Sancho's know better how to govern
a Plough than a Province; and since I have been your Squire I have got no
preferment yet, but Cudgels and more Cudgels, blows, and more blows^ I have
been but three days out a Squiring, and if drubbing could get me an Island I
have deserved one as big as Great Britain already.


Don Qu. Battles of Honor, Sancho, should not be disparaged by the base
Epithete of drubbing; thou have done Nobly, and as Noble shall be thy reward;
therefore I once more tell thee, fear not thy Bones, and thou shall be great,
only because I know thou art an Admirer of Proverbs, always remember this --
That Patience grows not in every ones Garden.


San. Ay, and pray, Sir, do you remember this, That there is not always good
Cheer where there is a Smoking Chimney, and there is Proverb for Proverb; -- But
yet a plague on it, this plaguey Government wont out of my head, and methinks he
promis^s it with as much Confidence as if he were Emperor already, and carried
the Keys of it at his Girdle. -- Let me see, -- to be Don Sancho, -- good; to
sit upon my Velvet Cushions of State, and look big upon my Vassals, -- good
again; then to have my Wife be a Countess, and come to me in a Morning with --
Good morrow my Lord the Governor, hah, ha, ha, very good, faith -- Admirable!
I am transported at the thoughts on it; therefore Bones ach, Guts grumble, I am
resolved to be great in de^iance of ye both.


Don Qu. Hah! What do I see! -- Thanks to those propitious Stars that Usher my
Renown and Fortune, occasion offers it self in a most glorious Adventure.


San. What Is the matter now?


Don Qu. Se^st thou that Giant, Sancho. points at the Scene.


San. Giant, Sir.


Don Qu. That monstrous Giant, with Arms almost two Leagues long! see how he
swings 'em about, and fans himself to Cool his head.


San. I see no Giant, not I, I see a Windmill.


Don Qu. It Is the dreadful Giant Caraculi^mbr^, Tyrant of the Island
Mallindrania, who devours every day to appease his hunger, ^2 new born Children
baked, whose Bones he grinds between his Teeth to powder.


San. Ha, ha, ha, ha, -- It Is the Giant Windmilliambro you mean, Tyrant of the
Island of Wheat, Barley, and Oats, twelve Bus^els of which he every day
devours, and grinds the Grains between the Stones to powder.


Don Qu. See there, an Innocent Wretch dressed all in White, whom the horrid
Canibal is Just now drawing into his Mouth.


San. Oons! What Innocent? what Wretch? what Mouth? Why don't you see it is the
Miller in his White Coat, going to carry a Sack into the Mill Door?


Don Qu. I tell thee it is one of the brood of A^^aeon, whom I am obliged to cut
off* from the face of the Earth; therefore Saddle Rosina^te instantly, and i^
thou art afraid go aside thy self, and pray whilst I enter into Cruel and
unequal Battle.


San. Battle, Gadsbud, Sir, are ye blind, will ye Battle a Windmill, have ye a
mind your Brains should be dashed out with the Sails.


Don Qu. Jolthead, to thee, they may seem Sails, but to me they are like the
hundred Arms of its Brother Giant Briareus, whom I will Instan^ly Lop off and
destroy, with whose spoils we will begin to be Rich. -- Away, I say, that I may
perform an Exploit for aftertimes to wonder a^ -- Stand thou proud Miscreant,
and fly me not; I will attack thee a^one, Oh Beautiful and Adored Dulcinea,
In^luence now thy Knight, I b^seech thee, I come Canibal, I come, -- Stay,
stay, thou Monster,


Exit Don Quixote. Sancho. Stay, Stay, Ay you need not fear but the Windmill
will stay ^or ye, d'sheart he^l be knocked of the Head now; and there is my
Island gone before I come to it -- Why Sir, Sir, come back for Shame: Ah Plague
of his mad Pate, What a Devil shall I do with him.


Exit Sancho after him. SCENE II. An Inn.
Enter Perez and Nicholas. Nicho. Gone from her Fathers House?


Perez. Most certainly, and as it is thought in search of Don Fernando, who
forgetting all his fo^mer Vows and Promises of Marriage to her, as common Fame
reports, suddenly intends to Wed Luscinda.


Nicho. Luscinda -- Why it is in every ones Mouth that she has long since been
Car^enio's Mistress.


Perez. Ay, and more than that -- has been Betrothed to him; but that is all
one* the old Man her Fathers Love of Money, Luscinda's Frailty -- and Don
Fernando's Treachery, has it seems brought my poor Niece Dorothea to this
Distress; and poor Cardenio to a worse; who, as it is said, stark Mad runs wild
amongst yonder Mountains of Sierra Morena.


Nicho. But leaving this discourse, now lets mind our new Affair that we agreed
on last Night about Don' Quixote, when we heard the two Mad Fools, Master and
Man, were gone a Knight Erranting.


Perez. I have been Cudgelling my Brains ever since, with studying how to
retrieve 'em; for I confess it troubles me, that a Man of clear Sense, good
Learning, and sound Judgment, on all other Subjects and Affairs, should be so
strangely bewitched upon the most ridiculous of all, Knight Errantry.


Nicho. It Is indeed a strange Infatuation.


Perez. But I think I have employed my time very well to day in your absence,
for whilst you have been enquiring which way the Whimsical Knight is gone, I,
and the old Woman his House Keeper, have been burning his Books.


Nicho. That was our last Resolve, I remember, and will no doubt contribute to
his Cure; for it is most certain, that those Romantic Books of Knighthood and
Poetry have been the main Cause of all his Frantic Humors -- but see here
comes mine Host.


Enter Vincent Laughing. Vinc. Hah, hah, ha, ha, ha.


Nocho. How now mine Host; What price bears Oats and Barley, hah; What new
Ambassador, or noble Guest, with his large Pockets crammed wi^h Spanish
Ducats, has made you so merry this morning.


Vinc. Ha, ha, ha ha, -- Oh my Heart, Oh my Lungs, -- ha, ha, ha, ha, Don
Quixote, Don Quixote, ha, ha, ha, ha.


Perez. Why what of him --


Vinc. The Mad Fool has been charging a Windmill yonder, and swears 'twas a
Giant; The Sails whisk'd him about like a Rat in a Mill Wheel, indangering his
Neck every Minute, till at last, Fortune unwilling to spill the small quantity
of Brains remaining, threw him some twenty yards off into a Fish*Pond, ha, ha,
ha, ha, Oh I shall burst, ha, ha, ha, ha.


Nicho. And where is he prithee.


Vinc. Here just by, with his Booby Sancho; but the best Jest is, he persuades
himself that it is all done by Enchantment of some Magician that owes him a
spite, and that this Misfortune has happened only because he was not Knighted;
and therefore has entreated me to do that Honor for him; Calls me, Sir
Constable, and my Lord; and my Inn, a Castle; and I am now going to get my
Wife, my Daughter, and two or three other merry Fellows to assist me in the
Ceremony, for I Am resolved to carry on the Jest; and if you will stay with me
till to morrow morning you shall share in it.


Perez. With all my Heart, the diversion must needs be surprising Exit Vincent.
Come, prithee lets go and find him out.


Nicho. Oh yonder comes Sancho, first lets hear what he says.


Enter Sancho. Sancho. Thanks be to good luck -- he has saved his Neck,
however, Gramercy Fish Pond, our Adventures had all been at an end else Faith;
and so had my Government too, with all the noble hopes of Sancho's Preferment:
Yonder he is, as wet as a Water Spaniel that has just been Diving; and as
Angry, as if the Windmill had called him Coward; or Son of a Whore; and to
provoke him more, had railed against Knight-Errantry.


Nicho. Oh -- Neighbor well met, -- well, how goes matters, how fares our
noble F^iend, your Master; mine Host tells us he has been Fighting a Devilish
Giant yonder; prithee how wa'st, for I am sure you must know.


Sancho. Though I know no such matter, I Am re^olved to banter the Barber
however, aside; Why, it is even too true Friend, 'twas a damnable Giant, his
Name was Garlic de Gambo; And would you believe it Neighbor; Each Eye of him
was a big as one of your Basins; each Tooth as long as one of your Poles, and
as sharp as a Razor; His Chin had Beard enough to serve a whole Parish with
Brushes; and his Mouth was as wide as your Shop Door Neighbor: This is truth
upon my Squirehood* I saw him.


Nicho. Bless us, why this was prodigious; come lets go and congratulate him
immediately.


Perez. The Lie is prodigious indeed, aside, ay come, with all my Heart.


Sancho. Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha* Exeunt Perez and Nicholas.


Enter Hostess. Hostess. Good luck betide us, have I found ye so merry at last;
there has been such a Noise within yonder, the House has been ^oo Hot to hold
us: There Is two Women, or Furies, (for I know not what to make of 'em)
inquiring for ye: One of 'em has a Tongue louder than a Sow-gelders Horn; She
says, she has come three Leagues after ye this morning, and will have ye if ye
are above Ground. She has a long lean withered Wallnut colored Face; She Is as
dirty as a Gipsey, and as ill Dressed as a Rag-Woman.


Sancho. Oh Plague, that must be my Wife by the Description; and what kind of
Creature is with her prithee?


Hostess. A young Todpole Dowdy, as freckled as a Ravens Egg, with ma^ted Hair,
^notty Nose, and a pair of Hands as black as the Skin of a Tortois, with Nails
as long as a Kites Tallons upon every Finger.


Sancho. Ah, that is my Daughter too, I know by her cleanliness* I stole away
from 'em with design to surprise my Wife with a Countess-ship before she was
aware; but since they have found me out by the Scent, let 'em come in with a
Pox to 'em. Exit Hostess.


Enter Teresa and Mary; weeping. Teres. Oh, thou Dromedary, thou Foundered Mule
without a Pack-Saddle; o^ what other soul Beast shall I call thee, for Man thou
art not, nor have not been to me, Heaven knows the time when; ar^ not ^hou
ashamed to see me, t^ou Nicompoop.


Sancho. Why how now Crooked Rib, how now Cro^kadile* can your Tongue wag this
Morning, is the Matrimo^ial Horn Pipe Tuning already.


Mary. Oh Lord Vather, why would you run away so Vather; and how do you think I
shall get my new pair of Green S^ockings home, and have my Sabbath days Shoes
mended, if you leave me and my Mother in this Fashion, oh, ho, oh. Howls out.


Sancho. If any one wants a pair of Marriage ^^g Pipes, I can sell him now a
rare Bargain: A Man that had her for a Wife, and an Acre of Thistles, need not
care which ^e burnt first* oons what a coil is here.


Teres. How have I deserved this, thou Man of the Devil; Have not I been a most
true, and loving to thee, mended thee weekly from Top to Toe, and taken as much
care of Dapple thy Ass as if he had been Born of my own Body; Have I not clipped
the Bristles of thy Beard with Wiselike Patience, that no filthy Vermin might
breed there; and washed thee with my own Hands when thou have been as full of
Mire as a Hog in a Highway: Nay, and what is more, the last Night we were in Bed
together, would I may never Drink more, if I did not move to thee in the wa^*
kindness whilst thou lay'st Snoring like a Drunken Carri^r, and at last gav'^t
me a huge thump, enough to spoil a Woman's Childing for ever after.


Sancho. Why, thou she Cormorant, thou Man Devourer, have I been beating the
Conjugal Drum this twenty years, and do thou blame me now for Snoring: Oh
Conscience, Conscience, Where art thou?


Mary. You don't do well Vather, so you don't, to call my Mother such Names,
she is no Drum; lookee slidikins, if any one else had called her a Drum, I Would ha
set my Nails in the Jaws of un.


Sancho. Here Is a mettled Whore too, sbud, a word or two more would make that
young Cat set her Claws in my Face indeed.


Teres. Ay, you see the Child will take her Mothers part, however, go to him
Mary, speak to him Child, don't be afraid of hi^ whittle Truth, has a good Face,
though the Quoif be torn, speak to him I say M^ry.


Sancho. Nay, Mary's an admirable Speaker, I Will say that for her; Well,
Offspring, mine Mary, the Buxome, What say you humph?


Mary. Why, I say, you shall go home with us now we have found ye Vather; I
cant get the Cow home to Night without ye; And there is a Bag of Barley must be
carried to the Mill too: Gadsniggers I Will hold fast by this Arm. Takes hold of
his Arm.


Teres. And I Will stick close to the other. Takes the other.


Sancho. So, Now ^s here the true sign of the Marriage Mousetrap; and I, a Pox
on me, am the unlucky Vermin that is caught in it: I Am a notable Figure now I
believe if my Picture were drawn: Sbud you Man Leaches let go my Hand; Or by my
Hollidame.


Mary. O Lord, you maynt Swear Vather, the Devil will have you if you Swear.


Sancho. And his Dam, there, will have thee, if thou follow'st her advice ye
young Oaf. Here am I, that by seeking noble Adventures, am going to be an Ea^l;
and in the twinkling of a Star to be able to make ye both Countesses; and yet
this Devil of a Woman will be always crossing me, and daming her self ^o
Clouted Shoes, and a Canvas Smock all days of her Life.


Mary. A Countess! O Lord, Is that true Mother?


Teres. I shaw, waw, nee^ mind those great so (...) Titles Fool, they are a
great deal too big for our Mouths, Mary; My Name has been always Teresa, and
Goodwi^e Panca; and thou, time out of mind, have been called M^ll or Mary, and
^t the latter end of my days to be called Coun^e^s, and I know not what, I
shall Die, I shall never be able to be^r it. Weeps.


Sancho. Why, there it is now; A Plague on it, who would put Honey into an Asses
Mouth: I am making my self a Gove^nor, and setting her upon Velvet Cushions of
State; and this Plaguey Woman of Barrabas, in spi^e of me will sit ba^e
B^ttock'd upon a Dunghill.


Mary. And do you say, that I should be a Governors Daughter, and sit upon a
Cushion too, Vather.


Sancho. Wowns, thou shall be a Countess I tell thee in a Months time, if that
Adder ^^ere would leave her Hiss^ng, and let me be quiet: I would Ma^ry thee in
^n instant to the great Lord Don W^irligigaric* Son and H^ir to the the other
great Lord Don Wha^hum: Thou ^houldst walk in the Streets wi^h ^hy Train held
up, and two Embroidered Laqueys holding an Umbre^ over thee, to keep thy
amiable Phiz from Tanning.


Mary. Ha, ha, ha, ha, -- on Gemini* and that will fit my Humor to a Button,
Vather: Well, the first thing I would do, should be to learn to be Proud, and
look Scornfully, I warrant I Would carry my self like a Countess quickly.


T^res. Alas, poor Mawkin, she is bewitched already; I find this Earldom will be
the undoing of the poor Jade do what I can: Why hear me, thou Father of Folly,
thou willful Corrupter of thy own Flesh and Blood; Does that Child look as if
she could walk in State with her Train held up, d^heart 'twill give me Gripes
to hear how the Folks will Laugh at her; Look how Stately the Hoggrubber goes,
says one; she that was yesterday at her Spinning Wheel, and went to Church with
the Skirt of her Coat over her Head, to keep her from the Rain, has now a Tail
three yards long, says another; and an Umbrel to defend her Olive colored
Countenance, with a Pox to her, says a third; This will be the cry all the
Village over; therefore come away Mary, and don't ^e a Countess Child.


Sancho. Call thy Mother Fool, Mary the Buxom, and be a Countess in ^pite of
he^: Remember thou art to be Married, and Breed a Race for the Honor of the
Panca's, think upon the young Lord Whirligigario, Child.


Teres* Think upon thy self, Mary, remember thou have sometimes worn Shoes,
and sometimes none Child.


Sancho. Crooked Loggs make good Fires, think upon Don Whirligigario, M^ll.


M^ry. Ay, ay, Vather, I Am for Don Whi^l^gigario, and there is no more to be
said, but let my Mother sit ^are B^ttock'd upon a Dunghill, if she will, I Will
be a Countess, ^.


Sancho. That Is my good Girl, look'ee Teresa, the Court has given their
Judgment, your Caus^ is lost in Course.


Teres. Well Satan, I know thou do it to break my Heart thou Cruel Man; for
the very hour that I shall see that Girl a Countess, will be the hour of my
Death; I Am sure, the Jade will never be able to know her self, she will be every
Minute hoydning and discovering her Course Thread: Well, she is thy own, do what
thou will with her; but for my part I Will near consent to it, and so farewell: A
Countess, O Lord, I Have no Patience to think ont. Exit Teresa.


Mary. Good Lord, now is my Mother as Rusty as an old Cow that has got the
Belly Ach, but I care not; She dares not beat me, because she knows I Will beat
her again. Well, de hear Vather, be sure you make me a Countess as soon as ever
you can.


Sancho. I warrant thee Girl; and let thy Mother go and Fume at home with the
Smoke in the Chimney corner: He that looses his Wife and Six Pence looses a
Tester: Thou art my Darling, and shall ere long be a Lady; for she that has
luck has better than a good Estate in Reversion; and the full Bags of Fools
Command Wisemen for Followers. I by following Adventures intend to be a
Governor; and when I am so, I intend to make thee Rich; And when thou art Rich,
no Body will say thou art Freckled, nor think thee a Dowry. For Gold makes
Country Joan look fair and Bonny,
Though old and chopped, and Skinn'd like Orange Tawny.



ACT II.
SCENE I. Continues.
Enter Perez with a Letter, and Nicholas. Nicholas. AND are you sure, Mr.
Curate, that your Letter is Authentic, and that it says positively your Niece
Dorothea lives disguised amongst the Shepherds of Cordova?


Perez. It Is most certain, for the Discover of her is my particular Friend; one
o^ ^^e best of that Quality too in all the Country, and h^s been often with
(...) at her Father's House.


Nicho. It Is very odd, that when this Devil Love gets once into a young Female
Noddle, what Tricks and Gambols will it make her play: ^ had rather be obliged
to tame a Hare in the beginning of March, and mak^ it come to my Hand, than any
Woman in her Pride of Eighteen, if once she be touched with this loving Fury.


Perez. He writes me word here, he discovered her one Evening by her Singing,
for she can Sing ^oo like an Archangel. The pretty Rogue was washing her Feet
in a little Brook that runs just by his Cottage, the Whiteness of which made
him at first suspect her Sex, till viewing her Face nearer, he knew her
perfectly, yet discovered not himself, but followed her, and by that means
found her Abode among the Shepherds.


Nicho. And how do you intend to get her thence?


P^rez. Occasion offers f^ly, to Morrow will be the Funeral of Chrisostom, a
young, witty and learned Engli^h Gentleman, that for the Love of a ^oy
beautiful Virgin of these Precincts, called Marcella, put on a Shepherd's Habit
to Court her, but she disdaining him, dispair'd and died. At this Ceremony will
atte^d all the Shepherds hereabouts, and there will be a Di^ge ^ung, with other
Rural Games, made by a dear Friend and Countryman of his, called Ambrosio, in
Honor of the dead Man's Memory. Now amongst this Troop it is probable she
comes, and I may then surprise her.


Nicho. It Is likely enough I co^fess, and to assist a little, good Mr. Curate,
I Will be there too, and if the Clergy miss her, perhaps the Laity may come in
for a Snack; but come, let us mind our present Diversion, here comes mine Host,
the Antic Ceremony of the Knighthood will be performed immediately.

Enter Vincent, Hostess, and Maritorness. Ah! the Devil take all mad Fools: Was
ever Man so plagued? Come, Wife, Daughter, and Gentlemen, pray mind all your
Instructions, that I may humor this Frantic Ass wi^h a Sham Knighthood, and so
get him out of my House, for I shall be undone if he stays a day longer in it --
He rose up in a Dream just now, and fancying he was fighting with Giants, falls
a Slashing two Baggs of Red Wine, that stood up in a Corner, and has spilt upon
twenty Gallons on it about the Floar. D'sheart! he has made me almost as mad as
himself; therefore Wise, be sure you make haste, and remember your Part of the
Ceremony.


Hostess. Ceremony! Hang him; Gad I Will Charge him with a Constable, if he does
not pay me for my Wine.


Perez. Ha, ha, Oh Neighbor! you must consider he is a mad Man.


Nicho. And such are not only excused from Civility, but Law too.


Marit. He calls me Princess, Radiant, and Incomp^rable; and told me my Eyes
glittered brighter than Venus or Mercury, with a World more of such Gibberish,
tha^ for my part, I thought the Devil was in the Man.


Vincent. Ay Gad, I get clear of him presently -- O^, yonder I see him! He Is
coming with his Armor to this Well, which he takes to be a consecrated
Fountain, and therefore a Place ^^tto be Knighted in. Come, come all in, let us
leave him to himself a little, whilst I go and get all my merry Grigs ready for
the Song and Dance; we'll Fool him methodically however. Exeunt.


Enter Don Quixote Stripped, and Sancho following, c^rrying his Armor, and
Laughing at him. Don. Q. Set down the Shell of my Renown, my Armor^ that
wondrous Ca^e, that must defend this Body from vile Inchanters, Monsters,
Giants, Furies; there, set 'em down by that most Holy Fountain, whilst, like a
Tortoise, strip^d of her Defense, I craule about, and grovelling, kiss the
Earth, till Fate or^ains the Honor to retrieve 'em. Go Sancho, go thou aside,
my faithful Squire, and Pray, Squires have no other Office in this Ceremony.
Sancho lays down the Ar^^r.


Sancho. Why the truth on it is, Sir, you have nicked me there to a Hair, for my
whole Office has been to Pray and Fast ever since I came into your Service: I
have told my Wife Teresa Wonders of ye, that I am to be an Earl and a Governor,
and the Devil and all, but the Horse next the Mill carries the Grist, Mischiefs
come by the Pound, and go away by the Ounce; God send me a good Deliverance, I
say, I am a Fool, ^ find it.


Don Q. No, if thou woul'st have thy self unravel'd, thou art a Mixture of
Knave and Fool; the Weights are often equal, but now I think, the Fool weighs
down the Ball^nce; thou art now a silly desponding Varlet.


San^ho. Well, well, where nothing is, a little goes a great way, and an old
Dog will learn no Tricks* What a Devil do you call this Well a Fountain for? And
who the Devil consecrated it, unless it be two or three dozen of b^ld pate
Frogs I heard croaking in it.


D^n Q. Hark, I hear 'em coming; A Marshal Noise of Drums and Trumpets are
heard within. Away, I say, and do as I command thee; and if thou have a Prayer
better than ordinary, that treats of Knighthood, and of brave Exploits, perform
it with a Stomach, do it, as thou usest to Eat, voraciously.


Sancho. Why there is another very pretty Task to, a thing that would baffle the
whole Clergy, as I Am a true Squire, to Pray as heartily as one can Ea^; ds'bud,
there is never a Priest in Christendom can do it.


Don Q. I have a shrewd Suspicion that this Belly of thine, Sancho, will
hinder thy Preferment; when ever the Squire of a Knight Errant gives himself to
Eating, Honors fall off insensibly.


Sancho. Why then the Devil take all Honour^; a hungry Horse makes an ill
Journey, and half a Loaf is better than no ^r^ad; rather than starve for a
Governorship, I Will be plain with you Sir --


Don Q. Away, thou Prater; I Will hear no more, away I say.


Exit Sancho, Gru^bling. Enter Drums and Trumpets Sounding. Then Enter Vincent,
Crowned with Laurel, and a Scutcheon in hi^ Hand. Then Perez, Nicholas,
Hostess, Meritorness, with Scu^cheons. Then Singers and Dancers, representing
Knights of several Orders, two and t^o, carrying Br^^^^^s of Laurel. They march
solemnly round Don Quixote, who kneels whilst Vincent puts a Circle abo^t his
Head, and the^ Sp^^ks. Vincent. Thou God that love loud Drums that rattle.
Raw Heads and bloody Bones, and Battle;
That try'st with Blows our Sense of Feeling.
Look down upon this Mortal Kneeling:
Grant him Honors, with Redundance,
Thumps and Blows, and Kicks abounda^ce;
And when his Bones all broken be,
Be this the Type of Victory. Sti^ks ^he Sc^^cheon in his Circl^: Don Q Bows.

Perez. Proud Giants let him better quell,
Than when he from the Wi^d-Mill fell.
No more may Fish Ponds drench his Carcass,
Nor waggish Ho^s make him a stark Ass. Sti^ks his Scu^^heon.

Nicho. Let no Soul-Broker have a Hand in
The Shaving of his Understanding.
Fame let him get at Tilt and Barriers,
And never more be swing'd by Carriers. Sticks his Scutch^on. Don Q. Bows.

Hostess. Claret, no more for Blood be spilling,
Nor no more costly Wine-Baggs killing;
Least some hard-fisted Ostler flys on it,
Or angry Hostess scratch his Eyes out. Sticks her Scutc^eon. Don Q. Bows.

Maritor. May Dulcinea del Toboso,
That likes his Tawny Phiz but so, so,
By being in her Rigor lasting,
Get him more Honor, and more Basting. Sticks her Laurel, and now altogether,
round his Head, bear these Words; The Knight of the Ill-favor'd Face.

Vincent. So, now remove him, whilst these Sons of Fame, these Knights that
represent the Times past Glory, perform the rest of this high Ceremony.


Here Hostess and Maritorness raise up Don Quixote, and lead him to the farther
Part of the Stage, and Arm him. Then a Dance is performed, representing Knights
Errant Killing a Dragon: Which ended, they bring Don Quixote to the Front of
the Stage. Vincent. Now Sing the Song in Praise of Arms and Soldiery.

SONG.
SIng all ye Muses, your Lutes strike around;
When a Soldier's the Story, what Tongue can want Sound?
Who Danger disdains, Wounds, Bruises and Pains,
When the Honor of Fighting is all that he gains.
Rich profit comes easy in Cities of Store,
But the Gold is earned hard where the Cannons do roar.
Yet see how they run at the Storming a Town,
Through Blood and thr^ugh Fire, to take the Half Moon.
They Scale the high Wall,
Whence they see others fall.
Their Hearts precious Darling, bright Glory pursuing,
Th^' Death's under foot, and the Mine is just blowing.
I^ springs, up they fly, yet more still supply,
As Bride grooms to Marry, they ^asten to dye.
Till Fate claps her Wings, and the glad Tidings brings,
Of the Breach being entered, and then they are all Kings.
Then happy's she whose Face
Can win a Soldier's Grace,
They range about in State,
Like Gods disposing Fate;
No Luxury in Peace,
Nor Pleasure in Excess,
Can parallel the Ioys the Martial Hero Crown,
When flushed with Rage, and forced by Want, he storms a wealthy Town.

Vincent. Ladies, the last great Honor now afford,
And arm the Cha^pion with the Spurs and Sword.

Hostess. Let this bright Spur, with prickly Rowels,
That wounds thy Courser near the Bowels, Putting on the Spur^^*
Mind thee in thy Adventures thick,
How thou for Women's Rights should kick.
So Fortune, thou bold Knightly Tony,
Send thee more Wi^, and me more Money.

Maritor. About thy Loins I gird this doughty Blade,
To fight thy Battles, and make Foes afraid*
Cudgel, and Cudgelled be, be no Man's Debtor,
The more that stupid Pate is mauled the better.
Thy Fate defends thee from the Pains of Killing,
Who has no Brains, is past all S^nse of Feeling.

Vincent. Then lastly, with this Knightly Thwack, Draws the Sword and strikes
him.
And these about thy Sides and Back.
I Dub thee for an Arms Professor,
Champion for War, and Wrongs Redres^or.
Once, twice, and thrice, now rise with Grace,
The Knight of the Ill-favored Face* Don Q^ixot ^ises.

Don Q. Sir Constable, the Honor you have done me, devotes me to your Service
during Life; show me a Monster, Giant, or Inchanter, though never so huge or
terrible, that has wronged ye, and you shall see me make him do you Justice,
and lay his Recreant Head beneath your Fee^. And you great Princesses, and
Illustrious Beauties, that this great Hour have done Don Quix^te Honor, low at
your Feet your Knight offers his Homage. My grateful Thanks likewise to you my
Friends, by whom this Sword and Arm shall always be commanded. To Perez and
Nicho.


Per^z. All Honor to the Son of Fame, and brightest Planet of Knig^t Errantry,
Don Quixote de la Ma^cha.


Nich^. May his Heroic Deeds make Amad^s du G^ul a Tri^ler.


Vincent. Don Bellianis of Greece, and Felixmarte of Thriani^ be Mushrooms to
the Pine of this tall Glory.


Don Q. Good my Lord, your Excellence too much honors me; and so does your
fair Lady -- of whom I must presume to beg one Courtesy -- additional -- which
is -- a Plaster -- for wi^h your Lordships too much Zeal in Dubbing me, I
humbly do conceive -- my Head is broke.


Vincen^. Most happy Omen!


Perez Yes, if it bled three Drops.


Don Q It has, three hundred, I feel 'em in my Collar.


Hostess. Run Maritornes, fetch the Vng^entum Album.


Don Q. Most Radiant Princess! I shall trouble ye.


M^rit. Why truly Sir, since you have made me a great Lady, I cannot help being
as proud as one; and to send a Princess for a Plaster, is, in my Opinion, a
little undecent.


Nicho. Oh Madam! your Highness shall not need, I have one ready here in my
Pocket. P^ll^ out his Bo^.


Enter Sancho Hastily. Sancho. Odsbodokins! if ever you will see a fine Sight as
long as you live, come away quickly to the Inn Door.


Perez. How now Sancho? Where Is your Obeisance to this Noble Knight?


Sancho. Mum, Mum, I understand ye -- Most Noble Emperor, that is to be, I kiss
your Majesty's Foot.


Don Q. It Is well, my Squire -- but prithee what Sight is this thou have seen
at the Castle Gate?


Sancho. Why at the Castle Gate then, since you will have it so, there^^ a dead
Man walked by in more State, and with greater Noise after him, than a London
Alderman, whose Soul is gone to Hell for Usury, then he has, I say, when his
Son and Heir hires a whole Troop of Blue Coat-Boys to sing Psalms, and try if
they can bawl i^ out again.


Vincent. Oh! it is the Funeral of Chrysostom, that died for Love. My Lord Don
Quixote, it is fit you should be there, perhaps some Adventure may show it self.


Don Q. Your Excellence Councels well, there may indeed, for now methinks I Am
weary of soft Ease, and long for some Exploits to rowse my Valor * The^ put on
his Helmet. now Giants Monsters tremble, for I come, To purge the World of Vice
by powerful Arms,
In spite of Hell, and Necromantick Charms.
Exit Don Q. and Sancho.


Host^ss. The Devil go with him; Must we lose our Money for our Wine after all
then, for a Jest? ds'life I Will run after him, and fetch him back.


Perez. No, no, prithee good Hostess let him alone now, I Will see thee paid upon
the Word of a Priest; I Will be his Pledge for once, for out of Kindness to his
Family, I intend very suddenly, by a Trick, to core his Frenzy, and bring him
Home again.


Hostess. The Word of a Priest, Thank'ee good Sir, I desire no better Security
for all the Wine in my Cellar.


Nicho. If there be any sport in it, you are sure of me Mr. Curate.


Perez. Oh, thou art to be my Chief Engine -- but more of that another time;
now let us to the Funeral, and if I can but find my Niece there.


Nicho. We'll Fuddle mine Host to night in his own Castle, as Don Quixote calls
it.


Vincent. Ah, would I could see that, my jolly Lads, I Would try your Forces i
faith.


Maritor. And did not I do my Speeches purely, Mr. Curate?


Perez. Ay, little Maritornes, that thou did, I assure thee. Exeunt.


SCENE II. A Deep Grove.
Enter Dorothea alone, Dressed like a Shepherd in Mourning, and Crowned with a
Cypress Garland. Doroth. They come with Sighs, and as half dead with Sorrow,
Attend the Body of the wretched Chrysostom,
Whilst I, that seem to mourn another Fate,
Dissolve in real Tears, to know my own:
Poor Dorothea, Where are now the Comforts
That used to make thy Days Divinely happy?
Where now are Blessings from Indulgent Parents,
That used to smile upon thy Morning Duty,
Kiss thy refreshing Cheeks, lean on thy Bosom,
And in soft Rapture, invoke Heaven to guard thee?
All gone, quite lost, you are now a Friendless Vagabond*
Undone by Love, and by a Man betrayed,
For who could else undo an innocent Maid?
Forced in these Groves among the stranger Swains,
To waste a woeful Life, -- Oh false Fernando!
But hush -- no more, they come. -- Goes to meet 'em.

Then Re-enter Dorothea with Ambrosio, and other Shepherds and Shepherdesses
Crowned with Cypress; then the Body of Chrysostom^ follows on a Bier, Crowned
with a Wreath, and covered with Flowers; they march in Solemn Procession round
the Stage, then the Bier being set down in the midst of it, Ambrosio speaks.
Ambros. Thus to the Grave the last retreat of Mortals,
Has sad Ambrosio brought his dearest Friend,
Oh that he could revenge his hapless Death upon the cruel Tygress that has
caused it, with what a pleasure would I fly to execute; or could my Breath blow
Plagues among the Sex, and only amongst them, no Malething suffering, what
Rapture should I feel; but alas, I wish in vain, no Pestilence can hurt 'em:
One poisonous Viper cannot hurt another: A Woman is the Plague, the hottest
Plague, and where they harbor, breed Contagion round 'em.


Dorth. To me I Am sure a Man has been a greater, and bred more desolation.
Aside.

Enter Don Quixote and Sancho. But good Ambrosio, was this fair Murdress
thoroughly satisfied of your dead Friends Affection?


Ambr. Too too well, there past no Minute on of stealing time, that he past
unimploy'd to do her service; he was a Man, the brightest of her Sex, if they
could ever consider, would be proud of, an admirabl^ Scholar, rare Musician,
Learned without Pride, and Valiant without Passion; The Elements were all so
tempered in him, that except Love, his Breast was still and calm; no Gust
within to ruffle his rare Judgment, so knowing too, and yet withal so modest,
that tho his Reason could instruct great Teachers, he never thought himself the
Wiser Man.


1 Shep. He was indeed the wonder of his time.


Ambros Oh ye immortal Powers! How comes it then that all this Worth is thrown
away on Woman? Woman, that as the Poet nobly tells us Deceitful Woman, that
will in time forestall,
The Devil, and be the Dam^ing of us all.



Don Quixote comes up to Ambrosio. 2 Shep. Bless us! What Romantic thing have
we got here?


1 Shep. I know not, he looks like the Ghost of some Murdered King in a
Tragedy; Prithee observe the the other too that comes slowching after him, that
must be some rare Fellow by his Look.


2 Shep. By the Mass I admire him, I must go stare at 'em.


They stare at Sancho, and Sancho at them. Don Q. I am, Sir, by profession a
Knight Errant, renowned for Righting Wrongs; my Name's Don Quixote; otherwise
called the Knight of the Ill-favored Face.


1 Shep. Faith it is Ill-favored indeed, there you are in the right, in troth
Sir Knight.


Sancho. And you must know I am the Renowned Sancho Panca, this Renowned
Knight's Renowned Squire, and, all in good time, am to be a Renowned Governor.


Don Q. I have with wonder heard some part of your Discourse, and therefore, as
it is my Duty, make Request to know if you are wronged.


Doroth. Some Madman, sure.


Ambros. He looks no better, Sir Knight, who ever you are, if you will have
patience till we have performed the Funeral Ceremonies, I shall have time to
answer, but till then --


Don Q. With all my heart, most Courteous Knight, and will assist my self.


Enter Don Quixote, Perez, and Nicholas, Sancho. Perez. He Is got hither before
us, I see.


Nicho. And I warrant they ta^e him for some strange Monster, How they Stare
and Grinn at Sancho?


Ambros. Perform the Dirge, and let all other Rites be done in solemn Order:
And oh thou dear best pattern of true Friendship, a^cept this poor last Tribute
from a Friend, whose Love to thee was boundless as thy Merit. Kisses
Chrysostom.


Here a Song is Sung by a young Shepherdess, then they all Dance a Solemn
Dance, expressing despairing Love; then Ambrosio and others, lay Chrysostom in
the ^rave; mean while a Dirge is Sung by a Shepherd and Shepherdess. SONG.
I.
YOung Chrysostom had Virtue, ^ense,
Renown, and Manly Grace,
Yet all alas were no Defense,
Against Marcella's Face.
His Love that long had taken Root,
In Doubts cold Bed was laid,
W^ere She ^ot warming it to Shoot,
The lovely Plant Decaid.
II.
Had coy Marcella owned a Soul,
Half Beauteous as her Eyes;
Her Judgment had her Soul controlled,
And taught her how to Prize:
But Providence that Formed the Fair,
In such a charming Skin,
Their outside made their only Care,
And never looked within.
DIRGE.
SLeep poor Youth, Sleep in Peace,
Relieved from Love and mortal Care;
Whilst we that pine in Life's Disease,
Uncertain Bless'dlesse happy are.
Couched in the dark and silent Grave,
No ills of Fate thou now can fear;
In vain would Tyrant Power enslave,
Or scornful Beauty be severe.
Wars, that do fatal Storm disperse,
Far from thy happy Mansion keep;
Earthquakes that shake the Universe:
Cannot Rock thee into sounder sleep.
With all the Charms of Peace possessed,
Secure from Life's Torment or Pain.
Sleep and indulge thy-self with Rest,
Nor Dream thou ever shall rise again.
CHORUS.
PAst is thy fear of future Doubt,
The Sun is from the Dial gone,
The Sands are sunk, the Glass is out,
The Folly of the F^rce is done.
Ambros^ Oh, I shall choke with a Revengeful Spleen, against that cursed She
that robbed me of this Jewel, each single Ray of whose transparent Virtue,
out-shin'd a Million of those Counterfeits, those dull false Pebbles, Women.


Doroth. My Uncle, as I live, how shall I shun him. Exit


Perez. I Am sure it is She, I know her by that Blush.


Nicho. Follow her close, then the Game lies just before ye. Exeunt.


Don Q. Sir, to me, there is no brighter Jewel than a Woman, and he that dares
affirm my Peerless Mistress sweet Dulcinea del Toboso, is a Pebble, is but a
Turf himself, and holds his Soul at nothing.


1 Shep. Ha, ha, ha, ha, this is rare stuff.


Ambros. Some Officer sure grown frantic.


2 Shep. The Squire-Governor too looks with the same Air, ha, ha, ha, ha.


Sancho. What a Plague do these Frogs in green Liveries grin at? A Knight
Errant to these Fools now, I warrant, is as strange a Sight, as a Rhinoceros,
hoh hoh, ha, ha, Laugh on, Laugh on, Boobys, there is some difference sure
between a Kite and a Pismire; What a Pox, Earldoms, are not got by keeping of
Sheep -- hoh, hoh, hoh, hah.


Enter Marcella. Don Q. Hah, here is some wonderful Adventure, What beauteous
Vision's this.


Sancho. Oons, if this should be some Empress or Queen now, and my Government
at my Elbow before I Am aware.


Ambros. By Heaven it is She, the very Charming Devil, that has done all this
mischief.


Marcell. Great cause thou have to wonder, rash Ambrosio, that I who from my
Infancy Devoted to Solitude, have shunned all Human Converse, should now
un-ask'd, expose my Person here; but know I do it to defend my Hon^ur, against
the poisonous slander of vile Tongues, who render me the Cause of their
un-rest, and the late Death of thy-ill-fated Friend.


Ambros. Oh! Tigress of more Cruel and Fell kind than ever yet in Africa
Deserts bred, can thou defend thy self?


Marcel. Yes, and with Justice too, his Death was caused by his ob^^inate Folly.


Ambros. Of loving thee too well. Oh barbarous Women, the Sacred Powers above,
lent^^y Beauty to give Delight, not Kill, though it had Power, yet you all filled
with the old Serpents Primitive Mischief, knowing that Power, --

Convert it to our Ruin.


Marcell. Oh, filly Men, that knowing then our Mischiefs, will ye^ turn Amorous
Coxcombs to provoke us.


Ambros. Thou very Devil in an Angels shape, thou know it was the Fate of my
dear Friend, he could not help his loving thee.


Marcel Why then, thou very Fool in thy own shape, the less my Obligation; who
is obliged to one for any Courtesy, that cannot help the doing it?


Ambros. Yet do not pity him.


Marcel. Pity's the Child of Love; and I never yet Lo^'d any of your S^x, I
might have some Compassion for his Death; but still the Occasion of it moves my
Mirth.


Ambr^s. The Occasion of it! why thou strange Cruelty! art thou not
The Occasion? Did he not die for thee?


Marcel. For me! No, certainly; Was he not a M^^, one grounded too in
Knowledge, a Philosopher, dressed in the Pride of all those ^littering Arts
that raise your Sex, you think so much above us? Poor Ignorant Women, I warrant
he despised us in his Heart; Toys, Puppets, fashioned only for the Pleasure,
Mirth, and Convenience of Lordly Man; and could he die for Love? Fie! it is
Impossible! Who ever knew ^ Wit do such a thing?


Ambros. Triumphant Mischief; Have you no Remorse?


Marcel. I rather look on him as a good Actor; that Practicing the Art of deep
deceit, as Whining, Swearing, Dying at your Feet, Cracked some Life Artery
with an overstrain,
And died of some Male Mischief in the Brain.



San. Ah plague, I find now this is no Queen; this Woman is too much a Tattler
to be of any great Quality.


Don Qu. Peace Bottlehead.


Ambros. Oh! that some Power would bless me with a Charm, to Plague thy Heart,
as thou has Tortured his; that thou might feel the force of those hot
flames, that burnt the Life out of the Noble Chrysostom.


Marcel. 'But since your words have no bewitching Arts,
'No Charm your Person, nor your Eyes no Darts.
'Happy Marcella, who no danger sees,
'Untouch'd by Love does neither burn nor freeze.

Ambros. His Merit, though not mine, would Inspire Love
In any generous Woman.

Marcel. That Is as she prized it,
Men will be vain, and value their own parts;
But it is our ^ancy that bestows our Hearts.
Merit is what we Love, sometimes a Fool
Outdoes the ^hilosopher in a Woman's School;
But if she is wilful, and has no remorse*
Believe me, Fool, 'twill be in vain to force.

Ambros. Heaven! Why did our Creation come by Women?
Can Mankind be no other way Increased.

Marcel. No other way; so set your heart at rest.


Ambros. We doubt 'em, even whilst in their Arms we lie
Prospect of Cares we find, but none of Joy.

Mar^el. Pish -- Now I laugh at ye, you know you lie Smiling scornfully.
^eauty, you as your greatest bli^s pursue,
Feign what you can, nay, Fool we know it t^o
Fair is my Face, my Liberty my own,
I will accept no Love nor promise none:
Nor pity any would my Peace betray;
Though there should die ten thousand in a Day.

Ambros. Once to Revenge this Lover that lies Dead
Grant ye, immortal Powers, that I may Wed,
I Will quel the Pride of your Rebellious Race,
Form Woman new and make her know her place.

Marcel. Hear him sweet Heaven, and let his Consort be
Armed with another Soul like that in me.
A Soul that too fond Pa^^ion never Confined,
But knows the Cheats of all his Cosining kind;
Your Rage, weak Sir, will slenderly prevail;
My Rule's Effectual, and it cannot fail:
Our easy Natures often with Pride you vex;
But know that I was born to plague your Sex.
Formed to Attract, and featured to Excel,
Beauty's a Charm against which you want a Spell*
When Heaven conveys such Influence to you,
Correct with awful Frowns and make me fue;
But whilst your Fate's submitted to my sway,
I know my Power, and Men shall Obey. Exit.

Ambros. Do You hear the Insolent, Shepherds you, that were Friends to the brave
Chrysostom? ds'Death, shall she brave us thus? for shame run some of ye, and
bring her back; let us make her have some sense of her Barba^ity, at least. They
offer to follow her, and Don Quixote draws and opposes.


Don Qu. Let no one dare to follow her on his Life; I find she does but Justice
to her Sex, that are too often much abused by ours, therefore as I profess my
self Knight Errant, it is fit that I protect her.


2 Shep. You protect her, ha, ha, ha, ha.


Don Qu. Knights, I will do it, and more then that against ye all.


San. That he will, srogs, and against a hundred more of ye for all your
Grinning.


1 Shep. Oons what do the Bedlams mean; Come Friends, let us bind 'em, and put
'em into the Dark, the Fools are Distracted.


Don Qu. I Will try how sound your Senses are, Sir Dogbolt.


Fight here, and Don Quixote and Sancho beat 'em all off, then Re-enter Don
Quixote and Sancho, strutting. San. There Is for your ^rinning, Rogues, I think
I am even with ye now; woons! what a fine thing fighting is, when a Man is sure
of having the better of it? And what a delicate difference there is between a
Toledo-Blade, and a Sheephook? But come, Sir, let us get away for fear they
Rally, 'sbud I think I behaved my self bravely.


Don Qu. Why troth, if thou could but keep thy Eyes open a little better,
thou might in time come to do something: But a plague o^ thee, thou fight'st
as a Crab Crawls* backwards, for Instead of giving one of 'em a side long thump
Just now, if I had not stepped quick aside thou had struck my Knighthood over
the Pate? But however, thou mean well, I dare swear, and I believe fight'st
as well as thou can. And he is no braver that subdues ^n Host,
Then he is that stands still and keeps his Post.



Exeunt. ACT III.
SCENE I. The Inn.
Enter Perez and Dorothea. Doroth. AH, Sir, I beg ye for my Mother's sake, or
if you e^^r loved poor Dorothea, when with her Prattling Infant Innocence* and
springing Beauty in it is early blossom, she used to please, by both I do
Conjure ye, let me not see my Father.


Perez. Trust to me; You must to your past crime add a gre^^er, by Hateful
Disobedience.


Doroth. Oh! I shall dye with shame; Alas! I left him alone unfriended, warped
with Age and Sorrow! That good Old Man* That kind Indulgent Father, I shall
never dare, forlo^n as now, to meet his Eyes again! Barbarou^ Fernando, that
False Cruel Tyrant, pleased with the spoils of my dear Virgin Honor, has
Ravished that blessed ^ight for ever from me.


Perez. Had you no Contract from this false Fernando.


Doroth. In Vows and Oaths a thousand; I was too Artless to desire him more:
Heavens! He would swear till he was black in the Face; Dissemble six long hours
by the Clock; and when he Vowed the truth of his Affection, the Potestation^
came so fast and thick, so feirce withal and Eager in Expressing, that I Have
been fain to let him kiss and breath for fear the thronging Lies should
suffocate him.


Perez. Yet after all this to pretend to marry Lucinda; Nay, forge a false
Letter from her, to her betroath'd Love Cardenio, implying she had deserted
him; and then sacrilegiously steal her from a Nunnery, to which she fled for
Sanctuary, is such a stain to his Nobility as wants Example* and rather than
not have Justice done thee, Girl, I resolve the Court shall know it.


Doroth. To marry Luscinday there is the dart that stung me! Oh, let all Virgins
by my Fate take Warning, and never more believe that faithless Sex.


Perez. Come, no more Tears; a Cause so Just as thine can never want an
Advocate.


Doroth. 'Twas that Heartbreaking News that stabbed me most; so that
forgetting Father, Sex, and Honor, in this disguise I w^^ resolved to seek
him, and either Cause him to perform his Vows, or Die in the pursuit of my
desire.


Enter Nicholas. Perez. The Lady Luscinda shall be instantly informed of his
Treachery and what Interest I can make against him thou art assured of: Come
let us about it -- How now, thy Face seems to have some surprise in it. Is there
any News stirring? (...)


Nicho. Yes, and some that will surprise you, indeed, or I Am mistaken; As I was
standing at my Post without, to give you the better opportunity of Discourse,
who should I see below at the Inn door, but Don Fernando, and in the Habit of a
Nun, a Lady with him.


Perez. Strange Fortune, art thou sure 'twas he?


Doroth. Oh Heaven, how my Heart throbs?


Nicho. I saw his Face, and also guess the Lady, to be the Fair Luscinda,
there is some strange difference between 'em, for by her Actions she seemed much
dissatisfied; hark, they are coming up this way, step but into the next Room
you may discover more.


Perez. Do so, good Niece, and let us observe 'em, then when thou see thy
opportunity -- appear and charge him boldly, I Will not be far off.


Doroth. Nay, I will speak to him, though Death attends it. Exeunt


Enter Fernando, and Luscinda, in the Habit of a Nun. Luscin. Is there no end
of your Impiety, have Nunnery Walls, strong Gates, nor Iron Bars, nay, nor the
Deity Adored within, to whom I fled for help in my distress, not power enough
to hinder one Man's wickedness? you Sacred Powers, Have you forgot your
Justice? that you send none to succor poor Luscinda.


Fernand. The Powers you speak of, Madam, that knew what is better for ye, than
you did for your self, you see assisted me in my design.


Luscind. Oh Impious Wretch, dare you think Heaven assisting in wicked Actions?
No, 'twas the Aid of Hell, in some cursed Minute, when all good Angels slept, or
else stood Neuter.


Fernand. Hell, Madam, what has Hell to do in Love Affairs? the Devil is Foe
progess'd to Amity, no, my sole Aid, was my own prosperous Genius, Courage
t'attempt, and fortune to succeed, this gave me power to scale your Nunnery
Walls, and recompense my Love with spoils of Beauty.


Luscind. Have you no Conscience, you are of Noble Blood, and in your Veins
should run a stream of Virtue, that should distribute Justice through your
Soul; Cardenio was your Friend, my betrothed Husband, and in severing us, you
do not only fix a foul stain upon your Houses Honor, but violate the Laws of
all Humanity.


Fernand. Why then let that most great and strong Omnipotence, that to my Fames
Confusion, makes my Love, answer for all my Crimes* I love Luscinda, and it is
in vain to tell me the mischiefs I have done, I know 'em all, I know I have
been Treacherous to Cardenio, False to my Friend, but 'twas for Love of thee, I
own I forged a Letter in thy Name, which caused his sad Distraction, and Ruin,
but thou were still the cause; nay, more than thy Beauty, made me a Traitor to
an innocent Virgin; forget my Vows, break all my Oaths and Promises, and leave
her Pregnant, with Heartbreaking Sorrows, and Love's dear Load, the Trophy of
my Conquest, to follow still my headlong Fate and Thee.


Luscind. Oh Heaven, and can you own all this without a Blush, a scarlet Blush,
to stain your Cheeks for ever.


Fernand. Why should I deny it, I still have too much Honor to dissemble, I Have
told this Truth only to let thee see, the power of thy Attractions and my Love,
think what the Man would do for thee, when his, that could do all these mighty
Ills to get thee; if thou would have me virtuous, do but Love me, the Miracle
is wrought, for it is a Sacred Verity, what Sins soever Love drives me to
commit, thou art the certain cause, And since I know the scruple, which the
Priests call Honorable, Affects you Women, more than Love or Fortune; take
there my Hand, and be this hour my Wife, I vow it most Religiously.


Luscind. No, kill me rather, and wed me to the Grave, I Will dye a thousand
deaths, rather than falsify one Sacred Vow, or the least Particle of plighted
Faith to my beloved Cardenio.


Fernand. Keep then that Faith for him, give me but the Reward, that my Desire
and Services deserve, and I Will be satisfied.


Luscind. Vile wretch, Would you dishonor me?


Fernand. Not I by Heaven, your stubborn obstinacy and faulty noise, these may
perhaps dishonor ye, not I, I Will be as secret as the Virgins Blush, that with
a Rosy Tincture paints her Cheeks, when trembling she consents.


Luscind. You will not force me, rash, as you are, young and ungovernable, you
dare not be so base.


Fernand. Oh thou needst not fear it, thou will be kind, and give me no
occasion; I must confess, it is not with my liking to Cater for my Love as
Satyrs do, Beauty's most sweet to me that is won with Patience, Heart-burnings,
Dangers, Plottings, and Contrivances; I Will wait on thee, and watch thee into
yielding, tire thee with Sighs, and mould thee soft with Kisses, dress the dear
Banquet with industrious skill, that I may hereafter feed with greater
pleasure.


Luscind. Come, come my Lord, let Reason take its place, and let these flowing
Tears quench your hot Blood; remember who you are, what I am too, then you must
do me Justice.


Fern. And you must do it me, remember who thou art, I do most sensibly, thou
art mine by a double Right, by your Fathers consent First, and next by
Stratagem: you will urge, perhaps you were betrothed t'another, fled to a Nunnery
to perform your Vow, and I that forced you from it, act strange Sacrilege: but
I, sweet Creature, am not of that opinion: Are those dear Eyes that warm all
Hearts -- with Passion, that lovely Face and Body, fit for a Nunnery? F^e,
Sweet, it is Contradiction to the intent of Providence, that gave thee Beauty to
Delight and Love; A Nunnery Air in two days time would kill thee, make thy
plump Youth lean as Anatomy, and Prayer would waste thee into a Consumption.


Luscind. Ah! never think to move me with your Fallacies, I Am fixed as Fate.


Fernand. 'Twas Sacrilege to Love, not to have freed thee, and Treason to my
Self had not I Loved; as for the failure to my Friend, it is trivial, when
Beauty Charms, Friendship avails but little, and I may think, had the occasion
offered, Cardenio would have done the same to me.


Luscind. Oh no, he was too good, too true a Friend, see me, my Lord, thus
Prostrate at your Feet; if ever Pity Lodged within your Bosom, If Human Nature,
or the S^nse of Honor, have not quite left your Soul, and the Brute entered,
by all the Sacred Powers I do implore ye to desist from your bad purpose, for
be assured, I never will consent. Luscinda Kneels and Weeps.


Fernand. What sudden shock was that? a Bolt of Ice, methought shot through my
Heart: I Am cold, as if an Ague Fit had seized me: hah, What am I doing? What
lovely Tears are those? I find I Am but a squeamish Whoremaster, I am not
hardened enough to go through with it, -- Ah! that sparkling Glance has shot new
Fire again into my Soul, and I would dwell upon this Breast for ever; Oh thou
Great God of Love, that Rul'st our Passions, Command'st our Wills to baffle
Reason, Honor, Virtue, Religion, Fame, and all Morality, influence her Bosom
with thy hottest Flame, and let her feel thy Power.


Enter Dorothea. Doroth. I am come.


Fernand. Hah, -- What art thou?


Doroth. I am what you called for Love, or if you please to have me use another
Nomination, to express all tender Attributes of Passion, in Sorrows, Sighs and
Tears; I Am Dorothea.


Fernand. Dorothea, by Heaven it is she dropped out of the Clouds, I think.


Luscind. A very Angel, sure, sent to relieve me.


Doroth. I am a Messenger from him you invoked, who gives you strict Commands
to obey his Laws; and in a more especial manner, Constancy for breach of that
his dreadful Vengeance, punishes much more than all the rest; this I am come to
tell ye.


Fernand. You are come very opportunely indeed, you have nicked the time, that
I must needs say.


Doroth. Oh my dear Lord! the Joy I have to see ye, exceeds my Sorrow to have
heard what is past, for I have heard it all.


Fernand. Why then you have heard enough in Conscience, a Plague of my hot
Head, that could not consider the inconvenience of a damned Inn, when a Love
Intrigue was going forward -- so then I know I must expect your hatred.


Doroth. Oh Heaven! my Hatred, what for a small frailty, a slight
forgetfulness, which all young Men have Naturally, when their Loves are absent,
to remedy which, and to prevent such danger in this Disguise, through Groves
and Plains I Have sought ye, left Parents, Kindred, Friends, and all the World to
follow my dear Lord.


Fernand. And now you have found me, shall I beg one Favor.


Doroth. You may Command my Life.


Fernand. It Is this then -- to leave me instantly.


Doroth. Ah, that is not in my power till I am dead, I Am bound by Oath, as you
are, to the contrary, but that I ever can hate ye, is impossible; no, no, my
Lord, what would make other Women Loath and De^ert, has no effect on me; what
though I see you cling to that young Beauty, dote on her Looks, and languish for
her Favors, it moves not me, I know too well my Power; I am as Fair as She, as
young, as Charming, Formed for the Pleasure of my Dearest Lord; Blessed too with
Virtue, Constancy, and Duty equal to her, or any of my Sex, and when he
pleases, he will return to me, in the mean time, I will not grudge the Kisses he
gives others, but Love him for my own.


Luscind. You shall have small occasion, Madam, to grutch me.


Doroth. I know it, Madam, for you are Wise (...) Fair, and know to take
another Right's Injurious, this is my Lord, my Dear, my betrothed Husband.


Fernand. So, now all is ou^, I never was so tric'kd in all my life, I know not
what to say to her.


Doroth. Madam, I hope you will not think me Rude, if I desire a little
Privacy, I have a thousand Pass^onate things to say, fit for no Ear but his.


Luscind. With all my Soul.


-- Is going, and he stops her. Fern. Oh! I must beg your Pardon, the Jest must
not go so far neither.


Doroth. Nay, let her go my Lord, am not I here, the happy She that you were
once fond of, What can you seek from her, I cannot give you? Remember, oh
remember the dear Hours, when with transporting Passion you have sued for such
an opportunity, when every Visitant was irksome as a Feavor, each flying Minute
tedious, and too long, and all your Prayers and Wishes were Addressed, to
invoke Night, that we might be alone, and can I now be troublesome?


Fernand. 'Ds'death, I shall never hold out, I find I Am softning, her pretty
Pleading Eyes, and Charming Tongue melt, me I know not how.


Luscind. Blessed Accident, there is pity in his Look, she wins upon him. Aside.


Doroth. Madam, My Lord has thought on it now, and you may retire, if you
please.


Fernand. Art thou resolved to ruin thy self, dare thou provoke my Anger.


Doroth. Not by my Will, Heaven knows, I Would lose my Life to please ye.


Fernand. Too Credulous Fool, How could thou believe I would affront 'my
Quality, by mixing with thy Lowness.


Doroth. I was not basely Born, besides, could boast a Noble value in my Face
and Virtue, which made Don Fernand think me worthy of him, and raise me to his
Love, which while Life lasts I will preserve for ever.


Fernand. Why will thou add to thy Misery, by Obstinacy, poor Creature, I shall
kill thee.


Doroth. Why then, no harmless Dove, or tender Infant, will ever dye so
patient: death I long have Courted, and should you stab my too fond Heart this
Instant, you should perceive me smile to meet the blow; make me your Slave, put
round my Neck a Chain, wear my poor Arms with Fetters to the Bone, torture this
Body where your Image lies with Cruelties unpractised, and what is worse then
all, before my Face, Act Kindness to another. You are my Fate, which still I
must pursue,
To show the World what constant Love can do.



Fern. And might I choose a Wife amongst you bright Host of Radiant Angels, thee
I Would prefer before 'em; Runs and Embraces her. Oh thou dear Charmer, thou have
once more won me, cured my dull Sight, and made me see my Folly, shot thy
Perfections to my Heart, so strongly, they shall live there for ever.


Doroth. Oh killing Joy.


Luscind. Ay, now my Lord I honor ye, this was a noble conquest over your
Passions.


Fern. Ah Madam, it is with Shame I bend my Knee to beg your Pardon for my
Brutal Folly, I was Enchanted, Mad.


Luscind. Not more my Lord, you have it.


Fern. Heaven, what a thing is Man when Reason leaves him, but I Will retreive my
Fame by my new Services, I Will seek Cardenio out, heal his Lovesick Frenzy, and
fraught with Joys present him to your Arms.


Doroth. Sure without some allay, my Heart cannot bear these Transports of true
pleasure.


Fern. By Heaven, my Breast is so overcharged with Joy, there is no room for
thought; call all below, there I Will have a thousand Witnesses of my new
Contract and repeated Vows*


Doroth My Uncle Perez that with diligent care found me among the Shepherds, is
within, and waits with Impatience, I know, my coming out.


Fern. That good Man then shall join our Hands this Instant fast, fast, for
ever, lead the way Luscinda, whilst I and my unvalued Blessings follow. Oh my
best Life! how could I talk of killing thee, thou tenderest sweetest good, but
with Love's Balm. 'I'll heal the hurt my rude Expressions gave,
'I was thy Tyrant, but am now thy Slave.
Exeunt.


SCENE II. Mountains and Rocks at the end of the Deep Grove.
Enter a Barber with a Basin on's Head, and carrying Triming Instruments,
followed by Don Quixot, and Sancho mounted at distance Barber Sings. With my
Strings of small Wire -- etc. Odsdiggers. -- This was a rare Contrivance to
keep me from the Rain, the Shower would have peppered me else Faith.


Don Qu. Stand, Insolent Knight, and yield that precious Helmet or thou Dyest.


Barber. Helmet, Oh Lord, what do you mean Sir, what Helmet?


Don Qu. That which thou bear Wretch, the Golden Helmet of Mambrino.


Barber. Mambrino, ds'heart Sir, I know no such Man, I am a Barber Sir, and
going to Trim a Gentleman in the next Town here, I never use a Helmet, this is
nothing but a Basin, Sir.


Don Qu. Hah, dare thou dispute, prepare then for the Combat. goes to thurst
at him.


Barber. Help, Murder, Murder, ds'heartliking's is the Devil in the Man. Runs
off and let^s the B^son fall and Don Quixot takes it up.


Sancho. Hey day, what a Plague are ye doing now, Zoons* will ye Rob the poor
Barber.


Don. Qu. What Barber, Jolthead? do not see the Treasure I am Master of, for
which I Have watched so many Nights and Days, and often resolved to lose my Life or
purchase, this is the precious Helmet of Mambrino, Rascal, which I have got as
the spoils of Victory, from the Renowned Knight of the three Roses.


Sancho. From the Knight of the three Razors, you have indeed.


Don Qu. Is it not rare? do not admire the Workmanship?


Sancho. Why, troth Sir, the Basin I must needs say is as clever a Basin as a
Man would desire to be Lather'd in, but as for any great Workmanship that I see
in the Basin.


Don. Qu. Basin, what Basin Sott, I tell thee it is a Helmet.


Sancho. A Helmet, ha, ha, ha, ha, what is this a Helmet?


Don Qu. A famous one, and made of Spanish Gold, in value wor^^ a Province,
only there wants a Beaver.


Sancho. Only you want Brains rather, say, ha, ha, ^a, ha. And so this Helmet
you say is all Gold, so, is it?


Don Qu. Of Purest Gold, by art too made Impenetrable.


Sancho. Ha, ha, ha, ha, very good, why then I know where the Wind sits, but of
little meddling comes great Ease, let not the fault of the Ass be laid upon the
Pack-Saddle, every Herring must hang by its own Gills, and he that hears much,
and speaks not at all, is welcome both in Bower and Hall, and he that --


Don Qu. And he that has the Tail and Cloven Feet, take thee for a Blockhead,
art thou stringing thy Proverbs again, And a Pox take thee, without Head or
Tail to 'em, look out th^re, D^lt, and see who is coming, if my Eyes dazzle not,
here is an Adventure will give occasion to employ this Helmet.


Sancho. Pray Heaven we meet no more Carriers, my Bones ache still with the last
Combatt of Honor, but I think if my Eyes inform right, here is no great fear of
a Quarrel, these People are all bound to the peace already.


Enter Palameque, Quartrezzo, Lope, Ruiz, Martinez, Tenorio, and Gines de
Passamonte, Chained as Galley Slaves, with two Officers and other Soldiers
Guarding them. Don Qu. Bless me, what Scene of Cruelty is this, do thou
observe how they have Chained and Bound these honest People.


Sancho. Honest People, what a Plag^e are ye Blind again, Zoons! don't you see
that these are Rogues, Condemned for some Notorious Crim^^ and forced by the
King to serve in the Galleys.


Don Qu. Force, Sancho, the King can force no Body, I must examine this.


Sancho. Nay, if you come to examining once, here is like to be fine Work.


1 Officer. Pedro, go before to the Inn, at the bottom of the Hill yonder, and
bring hither some Wine and a Manchet, tha^ we may refresh a little, the heat of
the Day and the Dust have almost Choked me Ex Pedro. come you Sir Thief, of
more then common mark, what To Gines. are you employing your self about? what
are you gnawing of your Ch^in hah?


Gines. Gnawing it, why do you make an Ostrich of me? do you think I can digest Iron?
Confound the World, you know well enough I suppose the strength of the Necklace
I wear here, or you would not be so Rusty; I should teach you another manner of
Speech if my Ten Pickers were at liberty: But come, it is well enough, there is
no more to be said.


^. Offic. Sirrah, hold your Tongue, and leave swelling, least I make St.
Andrew's Cross upon your Pate.


Don Q. By this Man's Inhumanity, Sancho, I do perceive these Wretches have
great need of my assistance, therefore I have some thoughts to free 'em.


Sancho. The Devil you will.


Don Q. It falls out fitly for my Knightly Function to succor the Distressed;
therefore no more of your Proverbial Fooleries. I tell thee I Will make them free
as Air.


Sancho. O Lord, O Lord! Why, pray, Sir, consider a little, you are going to
free these Rogues from the Galleys, and the Holy Brotherhood will send us
thither in their places; oh that ever I was born! Oons, consider, Good Sir,
consider what you are doing.


Don Q. Thou foulest Insect, can thou fear the Brotherhood, when I am by
thee; follow me, I say, and Courageously too, or by the Star of my hopes, my
fairest Dulcinea del Toboso, I Will spit thee like a Frog.


Sancho. Oh what will become of me; 'sheart, I shall have that grim Fellow's
Sword in my Guts within this two Minutes.


Don Q. Captain, as a Knight Errant, on whose sacred Office depends the Laws of
executing Justice, and consequently to be well Informed in the Case of the
Afflicted, I request to know the reason why these Men are carried thus; for, if
my Judgment has informed me right, it is much against their Wills.


1. Offic. Against their Wills, Sir, why troth, I think there need no great
dispute to be made of that; I suppose, there are few Malefactors so very stout
hearted to go to the Galleys with their own consent.


Don Q. Generous Sir, your Answer is Ingenious, and I beseech you therefore,
give me leave to add a little to this Obligation, and know from you, before you
pass on further, the nature of their several Crimes.


Sancho. So, he is got into his Examinations, and the Devil cannot hinder him.


1. Offic. The Nature of their Crimes, ha, ha, ha, viewing Don Q. what has he
got on his Head there, a Basin? who the Devil is this Scarecrow, I wonder? a
Man would take him for one of the Knights of the Round-Table, if 'twere no^ for
his Brazen Headpiece there aside. The nature of their Crimes, ha, ha, ha, ha,
why faith, Sir Knight, or Sir Errant, or what you please to call your self, I Am
not at leisure to give you a six hours Information of their several Affairs;
but if you think fit to take a brief Relation from themselves there they are, I
shall have patience till my Comrade comes, and so your Servant, good Knight of
the Basin; ha, ha, ha.


Don Q. Captain, your Courtesy obliges me. Well Friend, To Palam. what adverse
Planet, or odd turn of Fortune has made thee we^^ that Collar, hah.


Palam. Love, Sir.


Don Q. Love, Can there be such Barbarity in Nature to Chain the Brave, and
make 'em Slaves, for Loving: Heavens, I my self had bin long since in the
Galleys, if Love had bin a Crime that could Condemn me: No, no, dear Brother,
set thy Heart at rest, whilst there is a Lover's Arm, and Conquering Sword to
strike in thy defense, for this thou shall not suffer. Embracing the Slave.


Palam. Ay, but good Sir, your patience, my Love was not the sort that you
conjecture, for you must know, Sir, I was in Love with a parcel of Gold Plate,
and that so desperately, that hugging on it too closely had not the Commissary
took me napping, I believe we had joined Affections till this hour.


San^ho. Look'e, Sir, the Lover there has opened his Case very plainly, He that
handles a Thorn shall prick his Fingers; your dear Brother has told ye he is no
better than a Thief, in few words.


Don Q. The Function discovers Wit in it however, Blockhead. And History tells
us, some have made themselves great by it, the Wise Lacedaemonians had none but
Thieves in their Privy Council; but let that pass now. My young-Stripling, what
say you to the matter? how came you strung here? what brought your Neck to the
Yoke?


To Lope Ruez. Lope. The King's Evil, Sir.


Don Q. How so, Can the Law punish thee for a Disease.


Lope. No, no, Sir, want o^ Money and ill Friends, that is the Evil I mean.


Don Q. Gad you are in the right, Brother, that is a King's Evil indeed.


Sancho. So, that is his Brother too, he will pick up a World of Relations amongst
these honest People.


Lope. My fault was nothing, only a slip of the Tongue, a little Perjury or so,
but having no Money, and a damned Covetous Lawyer, that would let no Man Swear
falsely but himself, I could not get it off, so was sent hither.


Don Q. 'Twas hard, troth Brother, but come, to the next in Order, what says
your thoughtful Neighbor here, what is he in for?


To Quartrezzo. Quart. Why, for a few hot words the Law called Treason, I hate
the Government, and I spoke my Mind.


Don. Q. There Is a brave Fellow for ye now!


Sancho. Oh! a very brave Fellow indeed! -- damned Rogue, I warrant* the
Gallows groans for him. Aside.


1 Officer. His Brother, there too, has the self-same Kidney; there are not two
such Traitors in all Spain.


Don Q. Gad, a mettled Fellow that too, I warrant him, and who knows but some
Villainous Lie of some Court Pimp or other has brought him into this condition.
Gad, I have seen many a Priest that has not had so honest a look.


Sancho. Nay he is an extreme honest Person without doubt -- Oh Lord, now do I
begin to tremble.


Don Q. But come to the Text: What says my old Friend here? What unkind Star?
What strange malevolence brings that gray Beard to this calamity? Thy Aspect
does seem wise, and I should guess thy Occupation has been Noble too.


Tenorio. It has, Sir, and most Ancient: I have bin now this Fifty year^ a
Bawd, but that brought me not here, Sir; 'Twas foolish curiosity to know
Simples, dealing in Herbs, Wax, Crooked Pins, and Needles, which the vulgar
said they found in Sheep and Children; this brought me hither. To be plain,
Sir, I am hampered now for Witchcraft.


Sancho. Oh! A small matter, a thing of nothing.


Don Q. For Witchcraft, Umph! 'Twas there then the Devil owed thee an ill turn:
Thy Bawding Trade was honorable enough; great Ministers and Court-Matrons have
bin Bawds; the Occupation is of ancient standing. But now to the last; here is,
methinks, a Fellow that has a written Volume in his Face of Actions wonderful,
chained more too than the rest: The Reason, Captain?


1 Officer. The Reason: Why, the Reason is, because that is the very Devil of a
Fellow; his Name is Gines de Passamonte, a most notorious Villain, that has
done more Mischief alone than all the rest have; and, besides, so plaguey
strong, that we are not sure he is fast enough, for all he is chained so.


Don Q. 'Faith he is a fine Person to look on, his Face and Whiskers would
become Knight-Errantry extremely, pray look up, Sir, and as the rest have done;
be plea^ed to tell me how the Galleys chance to be honored with your Company.


Gines. Oh, Sir, for that your humble Servant; it is no new thing to me, they
have bin honored with that before now, Sir; I know how the Water and Bucket
will agree with my hot Stomach.


Don. Q. What! for some Duel of Honor, I warrant; some Governors proud Nephew
killed by thy Noble Hand.


Gines. No, no, Sir, my Hand was employed another way; I was condemned for
seven Years the first time, for ravishing my Sister: Confound the World; I
liked her, and there is an end on it.


Sancho. Oh! there is another very honest Fellow too.


Gines. And now I Am going thither for Robbing a Church: I had occasion for the
Plate and Ornaments, to raise some Money to buy my Whore a Petticoat; and, just
as I had got 'em, the Devil sent the Priest to stop me; but I soon gagged and
hamstring'd that poor Fool, fought through the Town, and, had not a whole Troop
of Dragoons, that were by chance a Must'ring, fallen upon me, I and my Purchase
had bin now at liberty.


Sancho. Very good: Did you never hear of a thing called Conscience, pray
Friend?


Gines. Conscience! What Is that, the Itch? I had it when I was a Boy, I
remember.


Sancho. O Lord, Conscience the Itch! -- here is a damned Son of a Whore for ye.
-- Aside. And so then I warrant, honest Gines, you would fleece me too upon
occasion, were you loose, and I had a good Booty?


Gines. No, no* thou look too much like a Thief thy self, thou should
pass free; we always spare one another.


Don Q. Ha, ha, ha, ha, there is for you, Bufflle; by the Honor of Knighthood
thou deserve thy Freedom, if 'twere but for that Jest -- Give me thy Hand.


Gines. I have use for them; but there is my Foot at your Service.


Kicks him. Don Q. Oh, I cry thee Mercy, I see thou art manacled -- but prithee
don't be angry, Friend; hark ye, what would say now if I should give thee
Liberty?


Gines. Nothing.


Don Q. Why so?


Gines. Because an impossibility offered by a Fool, deserves no answer from a
wise Man.


Sancho. Ha, ha, ha, ha, there I think, Sir, your Brother Gines was even with
you too.


Don Q. That thou shall see presently, and whether to our Profession any thing
is impossible. Sir Captain, I have with Care examined all your Prisoners, and
find though there are several heinous Faults committed, for which the Law should
punish 'em, yet the main Stroke of Justice belongs to Heaven; to Heaven's
Vengeance therefore let us leave 'em. And, since I am by Oath bound to relieve
'em, as Wretches and distressed, let me entreat you, as a Respect to me, to
give 'em Liberty.


1 Officer. Liberty! what a Plague, would you have me set the King's Prisoners
at Liberty? 'Oons, who would be mad then? No, no, good Sir Errant, march on
your way, and settle your Basin right there -- Free the King's Prisoners! that
were a good one 'faith.


Don Q. Your Pate shall want a Basin, Captain Scoundrel. Knocks him down and
disarms him. Run, Sancho, and help Gines; now, peerless Dulcinea, aid thy
Knight; unfetter Gines, dear Sancho.


Sancho. Now cannot I deny him for the Soul of me, though Heaven knows what
Mischief will come on it.


Here Sancho trips up another's Heels, then unfetters Gines, then they all
release one another, th^n they strip the Captain, who runs off: Then enter
second Officer with Wine; Gines siezes it, strips him, throws all the rest down
on one another, and beats 'em. 2. Offic. On, the Devil! what is here to do!
Treason, Treason; Murder, Murder.


Don Q. Now let the World declare, whether Knight-Errantry is not the Noblest
of all Sciences! Struts about.


Sancho. Or, whether Noble Squires of Knights-Errants ought not to be Earls and
Governors of Islands! Struts about.


Omnes. Huzza, Liberty, Liberty: Thanks to the Noble Knight Errant, Liberty,
Liberty, Huzza.


Gines. Thanks to our Noble and Valiant Redeemer; here is to his Health; and,
Brothers, let us entertain him with a Song. Confound the World. Dear Redeemer,
we are no more Rogues than the rest of Mankind; all the World are Rogues, and
deserve the Galleys as much as we. Come sing the Song to that purpose, Brother.


SONG.
WHen the World first knew Creation,
A Rogue was a top Profession;
When there were no more in all Nature but Four,
There were two of them in Transgression,
And the Seeds are no less,
Since that you may guess,
But have in all Ages been growing apace;
There Is Lying and Thieving,
Craft, Pride, and Deceiving,
Rage, Murder and Roaring,
Rape, Incest and Whoring,
Branch out from one Stock, the rank Vices in Vogue,
And make all Mankind one Gygantical Rogue.
View all humane Generation,
You Will find in every Station,
Lean Virtue decays, whilst Interest sways,
The Will Genius of the Nation.
All are Rogues in degrees,
The Lawyer for Fees,
The Courtier Le Cringe, and the Alderman squeeze;
The C^^ter, the Toper,
The (...) Interlop^r,
(...) ^unk, and the (...) of Piet^ (...);
(...) all, he that (...),
And deserts the (...)
He that first to mend the (...)
Made Laws to bind our Nature,
Should have found a way,
To make Wills obey;
And have Modeled new the Creature*
For the Savage in Man,
From Original ran,
And in spite of Confinement now Reigns as began*
Here Is Preaching and Praying, and Reason d^splaying,
Yet Brother with Brother, is Killing and Slaying;
Then blame not the Rogue that free Sense does enjoy,
Then falls like a Log, and believes -- he shall lie.
Don Q. I do acknowledge, Sirs, your Musical Courtesy, and am well pleased to
see your Gratitude; yet one thing more I must enjoin, without which the rest
appears as nothing.


Gines. Any thing: Confound the World; dear Redeemer, comman^ ^^y thing.


Don ^ It Is this; That you all, laden with that Chain from which ^ow have
freed ye, go instantly to the great City of Toboso, and there, before my
Mistress, Dulcinea, present your selves, letting her know, her Beauties Slave,
Don Quixote de la Man^ha, has sent you to her to enquire her Health.


Palam. ^^^oso.


Quart* ^ulcinea!


Mart. Enquire her Health!


Gines. And how far is this Toboso off, good Sir?


Sancho. Not above a Thousand Leagues; not very far; it is a very pretty Message
truly.


Gines Confound the World, do you know what you say, Sir, to desire us to go a
Thousand Leagues? 'Oons, we must ^ide our selves in the Mountains here by, for
fear of being taken^ we must shun all Roads and Cities.


Don Q. How Is that? Dare you disobey my Commands, Rascal?


Gines. Rascal! Keep good Words in your Mouth. Do You hear Friend, we are no Sheep.


Sancho. Good Sir, come away whilst you are well; that devilish Gines has
Mischief in's Heart, I see by's Looks.


Lope. We cannot go to Toboso, not we, that is in short, Knight.


Gines. No, Knight, we'll go to no Toboso; if you have a Wench, there, and any
News for her, you may send^ by your Booby there; we thank ye for you (...)


Don Q. But -- (...) thee (...) self, and like a Cut to (...) Legs. -- ^all on,
Sancho, let us chas^^se (...)


Sancho. (...) will become of us now?


Here (...) upon 'em; they run to a hea^ of Stones, and (...) him and Sancho
down, and beat 'em. Palam. Come, Sirs, the Coast is clear* now let us away.


Gines. Follow me, Boys, I Will carry ye where ye may soulk securely,
To a plump Doxy here hard by of mine
Shall cheer your Hearts with Kisses and good Wine. Exeunt.

The End of the Third Act.
ACT IV.
SCENE I. The Mountain of Sierra Morena continues.
Don ^uixote and Sancho appear lying along on the Ground. Don Q. SAncho.


Sancho. Umph. -- Groans.


Don Q. Son Sancho, Art thou asleep?


Sancho. Oh, yes, upon a Down-Bed, the Governor lies, as you ^ee here,
stretched at his Ease, thanks to your most Invincible Arm, only with some Two
or Three Hundred Bruises of State upon his Bones. I have got my Earldom, and a
load of Honor now, or else the Devil's in it.


Don Q. Look'e, Sancho, I have often told thee, these Successes of Chivalry
cannot always be of one Degree or Value; so that though naturally, as it may
happen, that a Kingdom or a Continent may drop into a Knight-Errant's Mouth,
and an Earldom or a Province into his Squire's; so sometimes too they may
chance to meet with Carriers Packstaves, Giants like Windmills, Thumps with
Stones, and the like; nor are they to grumble or repine at the variety of
Accidents, because they are liable to our Profession.


Sancho. Profession! 'Oons, yours is the Devil of a Profession, besides all
your Accidents, I mean your ill ones (for good I despair of) are, a plague
on it, all of your own making. Would any one with an Ounce of Brains, after he
had miraculously done such an Exploit, have pretended to force those rude
Rogues to go a Thousand Leagues off, upon a sleeveless Errand to the Devil, to
Toboso? -- I know not where. Ah.


Don Q. Very well, Sancho, talk on, talk on, the smarting of thy Bones I do
perceive has made thee sharp and witty. San. grins at him.


Sanch. Come, come, Sir, Brabling Curs never want sore Ears: It Is but an ill
Procession where the Devil carries the Candle: He that speaks does sow, and he
that holds his Tongue may reap. I think I pay dear enough for it if I do talk.


Don Q. I confess thou have Reason, as I have, to resent it; but who could
expect such Ingratitude after so good a Turn?


Sancho. Who? Woons! Who could expect otherwise from such honest People? Have not you heard often enough the old Proverb, Save a Thief from the Gallows, and he
shall be the first to hang ye? -- Ah, plague of your Brethren, your Brother
Gines of Passamonti, the Devil pass him, 'has made me black and blue on my left
Side here: But let it go, the Governor will be wiser one day.


Don Q. If a desponding Puppy were fit to make a Governor of, I say that for
thee, Sancho, thou would make a rare one: But come, I Will not anger thee now,
because I know thou art in pain; prithee come hither, and see how many
Cheek-Teeth and others they have beaten out here, for it seems to me that my
Mouth is quite empty.


Sancho. Ay, there is some other part of your Head empty too besides your Mouth,
if I am not mistaken: But come, let us see, O monstrous! here is six Grinders
wanting on one Peeps in's mouth. side: Oh unfortunate and deplorable State of
Knights-Errant! that wander over Mountains and Valleys, committing Omicils and
Slaughters, not heeding the Sun, the Moon, nor the 'Clipses, or the wild
Campaigne, though never so Estill for the reward of broken Teeth and Bruises.


Don Q. Oh Profanation to all Learning and Sciences! Omicils, 'Clipses,
Campaigne, and Estill, for Homicides, Eclipses, Champion and Sterril! Be dumb,
thou Earth-worm, or speak in thy own Style, on pain of Annihilation. A plague
on thee, thou confounded Prevaricator of Language. Cardenio Sings within.


Sancho. Why then, in my own Style, for you know well enough that I Am no
Schollard, I believe here is another Adventure coming, and I hope 'twill end
better than the last, because it begins Musically.


Don Q. Ha! who have we here?


Cardenio enters in Ragged Clothes, and in ^ wild Posture sings a Song. Then
Exit. SONG.
LEt the dreadful Engines of eternal will,
The Thunder roar, and crooked Lightning kill;
My Rage is ^ot, as theirs, as fatal too,
And dares as horrid execution do.
Or let the Frozen North its rancour show,
Within my Breast far greater Tempests grow;
Despair's more cold than all the Winds can blow.
Can nothing, nothing warm me?
Yes, Lucinda's Eyes;
There Etna, there, there Vesuvio lies,
To furnish Hell with flames,
That mounting reach the Skies.
Ye Powers, I did but use her Name,
And see how all all the Meteors flame,
Blew Lightning flashes round the Court of Sol,
And now the Globe more fiercely burns
Than once at Phaeton's fall.
Ah! where are now those Flowery Groves,
Where Zephir's fragrant Winds did play?
Where guarded by a Troop of Loves,
the fair Lucinda sleeping lay;
There Sung the Nightingale and Lark,
around us all was sweet and gay;
We never grew sad till it grew dark,
nor nothing feared but short'ning day.
Glow, I glow, but it is with hate,
Why must I burn for this ingrate?
Cool, cool it then, and rail,
Since nothing will prevail.
When a Woman Love pretends, it is but till she gains her ends,
And for better, and for worse, is for Marrow of the Purse,
Where she filts you over and over, proves a Slattern or a Whore.
This hour will teize and vex,
And will Cuckold ye the next:
They were all contrived in spite,
To torment us, not delight,
But to scold, and scratch and bite,
And not one of them proves right,
But all are Witches by this light:
And so I fairly bid'em, and the World Goodnight.
Don Q. By the Matter delivered in this Song, I perceive this poor Gentleman's
distress was occasioned by Love; therefore it is fit I follow and relieve him.


Sancho. You relieve him! 'Sbud, why, don't you see the Man's Mad; how the
Devil can you relieve him, unless you could give him Physic? Pray, Sir, hold
your self contented; you may be a good Knight Errant, but for a Brain-curer,
the Lord have mercy upon ye.


Don Q. Thou art a Clod, Sancho, and have not Soul enough to fathom the depth
of my Understanding; but know, thou Lump unformed, that our Profession extends
to aid the Mind, as well as Body; were he as Mad as Ajax, or that stout Peer of
France, Orlando Furioso, with one hours Conference, I Would make him spout
Politics, with a Secretary of State, Law with a Judge at the Assizes, and
Theology with a Convocation of Bishops, therefore follow me, and saddle
Rosinante immediately, for I intend to overtake him, and then thou shall see
this done in an instant. Exit Don Quix.


Sancho. I shall see my self well thrash'd again, I believe, and so it is likely
will end the Adventure of the Madman; but hanged, the Devil is not always at
one door, He that is in is half way over, there is no help for it now, I must
follow him, though my Government come at last to be no better than to govern a
Herd of Cattle; Well, He that blows in the Dust will make himself Blind; and If
it were not for hope, the Heart would break, there is Three Proverbs left yet to
comfort me.


Exit after him. Enter Don Fernando, Lucinda dressed like a Nun, Dorothea in
her Shepherdess Clothes, with Perez and Nicholas. Doroth. Can you then be so
good? Do I not dream that you have repented of your late unkindness, and now
resolve to own poor Dorothea.


Don Fern. The Resolution is as firm as Fate; you are now my own for ever.


Lucind. Blessed Accent! And now, my Lord, I honor ye: This was a noble Conquest
over your Passions.


Perez. It Is Great and Worthy, like himself.


Don Fern. Ah! Madam, it is with shame I bend my Knee to beg your pardon for my
Brutal Folly: But I Will retrieve my Credit by my new Service, in presenting to
your Arms the wronged Cardenio.


Lucind. All Honor and Happiness attend your Lordship; and pray Heaven we may
find him quickly: Oh how I long to give that Heart a Remedy that lost its Peace
for me!


Perez. He cannot be far off; for, as the Shepherds have directed us, yonder is
the Rock wherein he sleeps by Night, and where it is likely we may find him.


Nichol. And did they say Don Q^^xote was here too?


Perez. Both he and Sancho: Therefore, my Lord, if you are resolved to further
the Contrivance I lately told ye of, and do an Act of Charity, by getting the
poor Lunatic Gentleman home to his House, this is the Place and Juncture.


Don Fern. Most willingly, and will make one my self: For the Scene well Acted,
must needs create Diversion. Come, my sweet Love, you must have your part too.


Perez. Oh! my Lord, she is to be the Principal Actress, and we have a Dress
ready for her: She Is to Personate the Princess Micomicona, Queen of the geat
Kingdom of Micomicon in AEthiopia; who being deposed and driven from thence by
a monstrous Giant called Pandafilando of the dusky sight, comes some three
thousand Leagues to the famed Don Quixote to redress her Wrongs and re-^nstate
her: This Plot will doubtless draw the frantic Fool from these wild Deserts,
and we shall share the Mirth.


Doroth. Let Us about it presently: And for your Princess, let me alone to
divert my dearest Lord here; you shall see me Act it like any Player.


Don Fern. Ha, ha, ha, ha! I shall die with Laughing -- I Will be some Don to
Usher in your Majesty.


Nichol. And I Will be your old Squire to introduce your coming: I have the Tail
of mine Hosk Mare to make me a Beard shall reach to my Knees.


Don Fern. 'Twill be rare Sport; my Servants shall all be disguised too for the
business: Come, Madam, pray be Merry with us, all will be well; I warrant ye,
we shall soon find your Love Cardenio, and cure him of his Frenzy: I have
already sent for a Doctor, and given order what to do: And, Madam, doubt not
but you shall meet with Joy.


Lucin. Heaven grant we may; let me but see Cardenio once more mine; I Will envy
not the rest of the World's Pleasures. Exeunt.


Enter Don Quixote, Cardenio, and Sancho. Carden. You much amaze me, Sir, in
this wild Desert; a place that only suits the Miserable, where People Civilized
never inhabit, to meet such Courtesy as yours.


Don Q. Sir, Humanity is one of the best Rules of my Profession; and I shall be
highly pleased, if my good fortune Salute here. has led me to be any way a
means, that may contribute to your Satisfaction.


Carden. Your Person I am wholly a stranger to, and cannot but admire, why in
this Country, so blessed with Peace, you practice Arts of War, and Travel thus in
Armor: But perhaps there is a secret in it not proper for my knowledge; I Will
therefore stint my Curiosity, and beg you, if you know where there is any thing
to drink, to give a little to assuage my Thirst, for in this slender interval
of Sense, I can make use on it; but if my Fit should take me, as at uncertain
times it often does, all Charity were lost.


Don Q. Run Sancho and search the Wallet, there is, I think, some Wine, bring
it hither presently. Sancho stares at Cardenio.


Sancho. Why, here is another of the Starving too; a Knight Errant, I warrant
him, by his Tatters: What a devouring meagre look he has! 'Sbud, he makes me
hungry at the very sight of him. Exit.


Carden. And now to satisfy your Curiosity, Sir, of knowing what I am, and how
I came thus wretched, I will relate my Story, but with this Condition, that you
will promise me upon your Honor, during the time of telling, not to Interrupt
me, nor by a Question or Contradiction stop me, for if you should, my Accident
of Madness would return, and I should then do things Extravagant.


Re-enter Sancho with Wine. Don Q. Oh! fear not, Sir, you shall find me more
attentive: Come, fill a Cup, Sancho: -- Here, Sir, here is to your better
Fortune. Drinks.


Carden. May yours be happy, Sir, with perpetual Blessings, whatever becomes of
me.


Sancho. Why then, by my Governourship, I believe this plaguey Devil my Master
can Conjure in good earnest; to my thinking the Madman talks as wisely as any
Bishop of them all already. Cardenio drinks, they sit down.


Don Q. Now pray begin, Sir, I am silent as a Dormouse; sit down Sancho.


Carden. Know then, good Sir, my Name's Cardenio, a Gentleman of Arragon, well
descended, who from my Childhood to my riper Years, lived with a Credit and
Content unparalleled, till Love, that fatal bane to humane happiness, subdued
my senses to bewitching Beauty, and forced my Soul to dote upon Lucinda, a
noble Virgin of unmatched perfection.


Don Q. Hum, hum, hum. Don Quixote makes signs of applauding his Story without
speaking.


Sancho. Come, Sir, Sorrow's dry, and before you go any further, here is your
Lady Sindys health.


Drinks and fills to Cardenio. Don Q. Peace, Blockhead; or if you must be
Mannerly, with a pox to ye -- do it by Signs as I do. Don Q. seems to threaten
Sancho.


Carden. Take heed, good Friend; pray remember the Conditions. Sir, I loved
her, and was loved with that Success, nothing was wanting but the happy Day, to
crown our Wishes, which was at last appointed.


Don Q. Hum, hum, hum. Makes Signs.


Carden. And because Love's best Guard is Secrecy, I trusted my Affair only to
one, the Son of a Grandee, his Name Fernando, my Youth's Companion, and, as I
thought, my Friend: him I entrusted with my dearest Treasure, and in his Honor
thought my self secure.


Don Q. Hum, hum, hum.


Sancho. Hey, hoe, hum. Drinks.


Carden. But ah, let none depend on the Hearts Sincerity, because the Face
seems honest; for some few Days after, Lucinda having a great Wit and Genius,
and one that still delighted much in Reading, I sent to her by my false Friend,
Fernando, a foolish Book of Chivalry, called Amadis du Gaul; not that she
valued it for the Contents, for she had Sense to know 'twas all ridiculous, the
Exploits of the Knights-Errant, all Romantic, and their whole Volumes filled
with lying Fables. But --


Sancho. But! A plague on your Buts, -- You Don Qu. starts. and stares. have
done your Business: Gad'zooks, here will be Murder presently, my Master will
tear out the Soul of him, if he speaks a Word more against Knights-Errant.


Carden. But that before, we had a rallying Argument upon a modern Madman
called Don Quixote, a strange whimsical Don. Q frowns. Monster, in which I
affirmed, That the Bright, Renowned, and Peerless Dulcinea, famed Mistress of
that foolish frantic Idiot, had once a Bastard by her Apothecary. Don Q. rises
suddenly Sancho trembles.


Don Q. Oh Fire, and Furies! Oh shame to Arms and Honor.


Sancho, Nay then, the Storm comes with a Vengeance: fire, fire; murder, murder.


Don Q. Am I a Knight, and hear this hellish Slander. -- Awake, Don Quixote,
thou sleep'st, awake I say -- Hark'e, do hear me? Madman, Fool, or Devil, if
thou hereafter dare but move thy Lips against sweet Dulcinea, or but so much
as name that cursed Pothecary with Peerless Dulcinea, or think of any of his
Tools, or Implements -- Storax, or Savine, get thee each Day a Heart, for I
will be as cruel in the tearing it, as is that abhorred Tongue, that slanderous
Viper, in poisoning the Fame of Radiant Dulcinea. -- Here Card. throws the Wine
in's Face suddenly.


Sancho. So, there is the first Gun, the Broad-side's coming, here will be
devilish work between the Two Madmen presently.


Carden. The Rack's a foolish Torture, Phallaris Carden falls into his mad Fit.
Bull, or the Iron Wheel of witty Dionysius, that were proper for him -- Hah!
What art thou! the Traitor Fernando! And thou art his Catamite, his Pimp, art
thou? To Sancho.


Sancho. Not I, Sir; I Am none of his Pimp not I. Would I were a Mouse for Two
Minutes, so I had but ever a Hole to creep into.


Carden. Oh, that I now had Thirty Rows of Teeth, or were an Eagle with an
Hundred pair of Claws, that I might tear and eat this Traitor, Traitor. Falls
upon Don Q. and Sancho, throws 'em down, beats and kicks 'em, and then Ex.


Don Q. Oh, Dulcinea del Toboso, pardon my Negligence, I beseech thee; I had
forgot to invoke thy Influence when first I rose this Morning, and see what
comes on it: -- is the Madman gone, Sancho.


Sancho. Yes, yes, and wonderfully recovered; you have been as good as your
Word, you have cured him to a Miracle. Whether he can spout Politics like a
Statesman, or Law like a Judge, I know not; but he can kick and cuff like a
Devil, that I Am sure of. Weeps.


Don Q. A Plague of his mad Pate, the fit was a little too far gone upon him.


Sancho. A Plague of Radiant Dulcinea, I say, would the 'Pothecary had poisoned
her; or would her Nurse -- had drowned her -- in her Cradle -- with a Water of
her own^making -- rather than my Bones had been concerned about her, or her
Bastard either. -- But come, better late than never, I Am resolved now to retire
in time from this Highway to Battoons and Bruises, and visit my Wife and
Children again, whilst I can make shift to crawl to 'em; for to that Scantity of
Traveling my Squireship has brought me. Sancho speaks sobbing.


Don Q. Will thou then leave me, Sancho?


Sancho. Leave ye? ay, and it is high time, I think, Sir: It Is an old Saying,
The Ant had Wings to do her hurt: Farewell Knight-Errantry in faith: And to
begin to get rid on it, there Sir -- there is the dudgeon Dagger you gave me, the
Rust upon it has kept it warm and quiet; Besides I never showed it the Sun to
tan it, not I: There Is the Murrion too, that did Service at the Siege of
Golletta; this Jerkin likewise, that has defied all Weathers; pray give 'em
your next Squire, together with some hard Crusts here to keep his Teeth going,
least he forget to use 'em: These, I think, are the main part of my Equipage,
and so part fair.


Don Q. It Is very well.


Sancho. As for the Government of the Island you promised me, even let that
hang a drying a little, for some more able Earl than I to manage, for I Am
satisfied now, That the Hen lays as well upon one Egg as upon many; and several
come for Wool that return shorn; so much you are worth as thou have, and so
much thou have as you are worth. I know you don't like my Proverbs, but now
it is as broad as long, Better Play a Card too much than too little; a good
Play Master needs no Surety: And my Grannum used to say, The Legs carry the
Belly, and not the Belly the Legs; and there is an end on it.


Don Q. Oh Pox! Nay go on, go on, thread 'em, string 'em, away with 'em, take
thy Belly full of Proverbs at parting however, but remember this when I am an
Emperor, Dogbolt


Sancho. An Emperor, ah! Gad save your hot head, you had better go home along
^ith me, and look to your Ploughmen.


Don Q. It Is very well, Clodpole.


Enter Nicholas, disguised with a long White Beard. Nicho. Know thou most
doug^ty and renowned Knight Errant, that I am called the Squire of the
White-Beard, Servant to the mighty Princess Micomicona, Queen of the great
Kingdom of Micomicon in AEthiopia, who, by the Fame of thy most noble Deeds,
has Traveled from her Country to this Place, to beg a Boon of thee; and now,
behind you Bush she stands on foot, and begs admittance to thy Lordly Presence.
Bowing.


Don Q. Friend, go and tell the Queen, Don Quixote's at her Service, and will
attend her here -- hum, hum, looking scornfully on Sancho.


Sancho. How Is this? A great Queen come from her Country to beg a Boon of him;
'sbud, if this Squire of the Beard should speak Truth now, I have made a fine
business on it. Zookers, here she comes as fair as a Church Saint, as bright as
a Cherubin; 'sdheartlikins, I never saw such a Creature in my Life.


Enter Don Fernando leading Dorothea as the Princess Micomicona, with a Retinue
of Servants Dressed after the Moorish Fashion. She Kneels. Don Q. By the Honor
of Knighthood, Madam, it is too much, your Greatness must not kneel to your
unworthy Servant; nay, I beseech your Majesty.


Doroth. Thrice Valiant Knight, thou flower of Chivalry, Soul of true Lovers,
and quintessence of Courtesy, I Have sworn to l^ve for ever in this Posture, and
make my bended Knees one piece with the Earth, unless you grant me the Request
I come for.


Don Q. Madam, I Will do it whatever it be, therefore pray rise, let me but know
what Miscreant has wronged ye, this powerful Arm shall Thunder in your Quarrel
more swift than the hot Bolts that split the Clouds.


Don Fern. I see, most Renowned Sir, loud Fame has done you Justice in sounding
through the World your Courtesy.


Doroth. Assured of this, I now may rise with Comfort. Rises.


Enter Perez. Perez. All Honor to the blazing Comet of Knight-Errantry, ^he
Rose and Tulip of Fame and ^ortitude, my Noble Countryman Don Quixote de la
Mancha, the Report of this great Queen's coming being spread already through
our Neighborhood, so far increased my Joy and Wonder, that I could not contain
my self from seeking ^ou out and being an E^e witness.


Sancho. Ay it is so, I am utterly undone, a most miserable Rogue; stay, is
there no way to Rigg my self without his taking notice.


Sancho steals on his things again. Don Q. I am glad to see your Reverence
well, good Mr. Curate, and would entertain ye longer, but that I thirst to
receive the Queen's Commands.


Perez. The Trick takes rarely I see. Aside.


Don Fern. As we could wish, but how thrives our Affair, have my Servants found
Cardenio.


Perez. Just as I came hither, as he was lying fast asleep under a Cork-Tree,
he was very unruly at first, he being overpowered by Numbers, they soon bound
him, and carried him to the Inn you ordered.


Den Fern. And has Lucinda seen him.


Perez. Not yet, I have advised the contrary, till he has taken the Medicine
the Doctor ordered, and slept upon it.


Don Fern. It Is well; in the morning I my self will be his Doctor; at present
let us mind the Game on foot.


Dorth. To be brief then, brave Sir: In AEthiopia, where the Sun sheds his
swarthy Influence, making my Natives all of Sable hew, as I had bin, had not
the skill in Charms of my kind Father, wise Finacrio, hindered it in those
Dominions: You must know, I Am called -- I Am called -- Most Generous Knight: --
I say I Am called -- O Heavens! the memory of my Griefs hinders my very Speech!
What, am I called quickly, 'dslife I Have forgot? To Perez aside.


Perez. The Princess Micomicona!


Doroth. I Am called, the Princess Micomicona, so named from the Kingdom of
Micomicon, late left me by my Father.


Sancho. How Proud he looks already? There Is some great Honor coming to him, I
see it in's Face: -- O Dog, Dog Sancho! don't you deserve to be Hanged? aside.


Doroth. The good old King knew by his Skill in Magic, what would befall me
after he was dead, how Pandafilando of the Dusky Sight, a horrid Brutal and
misshapen Giant, should treat of Marriage with me, which refused, should then
make War, and drive me from my Kingdom, to relieve me from which distress, he
told me at his death that I must travel into Spain, where I should happily meet
with a Knight Errant, the honor of his Country, and that Order, the Valor of
whose Arms should kill the Giant, and presently restore me to my Kingdom; which
Knight must be your self, to whom (my Father has commanded me) after the
Giant's Death, if you think fitting, to give my self in Marriage, and make you
Monarch of Micomicon.


Don Q. Oh Madam, your Father was too gracious, -- what think you now,
Hog-grubber, is Knight Errantry worth chawing, hah? -- Which had I better do
now, be an Emperor, or go home and mind the Ploughmen, umph, Jolthead? To
Sancho.


Sancho. Ah, dear Sir, consider no man is born wise; a Bishop is no more than
another Man without Grace, and good Breeding. (...), I ^^^fess my self a Booby,
Sir, a fearful Scoundrel: There Is (...), I ^^^eech ye, Sir, break it across, or
if you please to honor (...) a Dozen or two of Kicks, Sir, I shall think my
self (...), so you dissuade your anger, and forgive me.


(...). Her Majesty I hope remembers likewise that the wise King to reward my
Fidelity when this good Knight had slain Pandafilando, gave charge to make her
Suit to him, that I might be an Earl or Governor of some Island.


Sancho. You an Earl! hark'e Friend, Slow Fire makes sweet Malt. There may be
more than one Egg in a Hen-Roost. If you meddle with my Mouth I shall snap at
your Fingers; do you see, therefore look to your self; what a Plague, all is not
got by wearing of long Beards.


Don Q. No, no, Friend, you know you must go visit your Wife and Children.


Sancho. Ah Sir, if you mention that, you slay me, -- you flea me alive. Alas,
Sir, I dare as well hang my self as go home without my Government; my Wife, and
the young Cockatrice my Daughter, now I have put this plaguey Countess-ship into
her Head, will worry me if I fail her.


Don Q. Well, Vermin, for some good service past, in consideration too of some
late Drubbings, I will once more take thee into Grace; but if again I catch
thee Grumbling, thou art no more my Squire; there are others would be Earls
too, you see, Sancho.


Sancho. What, that dry old Kex? 'Gad I Would have throtled him with his own
Whiskers if he had said Three Words more. -- But come, it is well enough now;
and since we are reconciled, as soon as ever you marry that delicate fine Queen
there, -- my Island will be within an Inch of me in a twinkling.


Nicho. I shall laugh out. I Am not able to hold. Aside.


Perez. Was ever Fool so transported! Aside.


Fern. Hush; look Grave; his Master turns this way. Aside.


Doroth. You have raised me from the lowest Vale of Sorrow, to the highest
Mountain, Sir, of Humane Happiness: I Am all Air methinks. Let Music sound
there; and let my menial Slaves begin a Dance to entertain this wonder of
Knight-Errantry. Dance here.


Sancho. This will I make my Black Subjects do every Morning to divert me. --
I Will sing a Song that was made at Teresa's and my Wedding, that her Majesty may
know my Parts.


Sancho Sings a Song, and then Dances ridiculously. SONG.
It Was early one Morning, the Cock had just crow'd:
Sing hey ding, hoe ding, langtridown derry;
My Holyday Clothes on, and Face newly mowed,
With a hey down, hoe down, drink up your brown Berry.
The Sky was all painted, no Scarlet so Red,
For the Sun was just then getting out of his Bed,
When Teresa and I went to Church to be sped,
Wi^h a hey ding, hoe ding, shall I come to Woo thee;
Hey ding, hoe ding, will ye buckle to me,
Ding, ding, ding, ding, ding, ding, derry, derry, derry ding, ding,
ding, ding, ding, hey langtudown derry.
II.
Her Face was as fair as if it had been in Print;
Sing hey ding, etc.
And her small Ferret Eyes did lovingly Squint,
With a hey down, etc.
Yet her Mouth had been damaged with Comfit's and Plumbs,
And her Teeth that were useless for biting her Thumbs,
Had late, like ill Tenants, forsaken her Gums,
With a hey ding, hoe ding, etc.
III.
But when Night came on, and we both were a Bed;
Sing hey ding, etc.
Such strange things were done, there is no more to be said;
With a hey down, etc.
Next Morning her Head ran of mending her Gown;
And mine was plagued, how to pay Piper a Crown,
And so we rose up, the same Fools we lay down,
With a hey ding, hoe ding, etc.
Doroth. This is unexpected.


Don Q My Squire, Madam, -- honest and trusty, but no great Head piece.


Doroth. He has performed to a miracle, and I resolve to do him grace. Kisses
her Hand.


Sancho. Now spawn of old Father Time, let me see your Beard do as much.


Nicho. Her Majesty values me more for my Head than my Heels, Skip-Jack.


Don Fern. Madam, you must needs have heard of the Renowned Sancho Panca; his
Fame sounds almost as loudly as Don Quixote's; this is the famous Squire,
Madam, That by his Master's side defies Battoons and Clubs,
Whose Back and Sides, both Black and Blue now, wear the honored Drubs.



Sancho. That I do by my Faith, Madam; which, if your Majesty will give me
leave to strip, you shall see if you please.


Doroth. I know him now, he is just the very Person my Father once described,
who I also remember was sorry for a Misfortune which he knew by his Art had
happened to him, which is, that Sancho's married, to whom I else had been
obliged to give one of my Maids of Honor.


Sancho. Why then, the Devil take all Ill Luck; now I see that old Saw is true
that says, Every Man once in his Life will find a minute to curse his Marriage.
If I had not bin yoked now to my Blouze at home, a Pox take her, I might have
had a May Lady, a Virga tacta, with a Head as gaudy as a Tulip, and a shape as
slender: 'Odzookes, I Have no patience to think on it; I Will go and hire some
Rat-Catcher to anoint the Cups and Dishes at home: Who the Devil would lose
Preferment for the sake of Two-Penny-worth of Ratsbane?


Perez. In troth, my good Friend and Neighbor, honest Sancho, I am Sorry to
hear this; for as I remember, 'twas my luck to give Teresa and you the Blessing.


Sancho. A Plague on your Blessing; I perceive I shall have occasion to wish
you hanged for your Blessing -- Good finisher of Fornication, good Conjunction
Copulative.


Nicho. The profane Wretch defame's the Holy Ordinance of Marriage, and ought
to be presented to the Inquisition.


Perez. Speak reverently of our Function, Sancho, or I Will Excommunicate you the
Church.


Sancho. I care not; I should lose nothing by it if you should, but my Nap in
an Afternoon.


Doroth. Is your Valor, Sir, at leisure to begin the Journey toward the Giant?


Don Q. Madam, I am. Sancho, a word with thee* I Have bin considering on this
Adventure, and must confess, though I may be an Emperor, my Head runs more on
Honors Ecclesiastical; a Pope, methinks, or Cardinal; I Am for some grave and
solid Dignity that tends toward Religion.


San^ho. Religion! Oh Gadzooks, Sir, never mind it; take care of being
Priest-ridden, good Sir, whatever you do, unless you have a mind to lose all
your Dominions as soon as you come to 'em.


Don Q. I must reflect upon it. Now Madam, please your Majesty to set forward.
Lead me where ever you please; it is still my duty
To right a Ladies wrongs, and fight for Fame and Beauty.



Don Fern. Long live the Illustrious and Incomparable Knight, Don Quixote de la
Mancha. Exit Don Quixote, leading Dorothea, and Fernando following.


Perez. How I admire his Fortitude and Virtue! -- Well Neighbor, what'^ your
business. Perez going out, Sancho stops him.


Sancho. Why, look'ee Neighbor, though I wished you hanged just now, 'twas only
in my Passion, do you see, -- and never the sooner for a hasty Word -- you know;
and therefore because I know you can forget and forgive, I Will make bold to
desire a Favor of you.


Perez. Well Neighbor, though you were a little hard upon the Priesthood; yet
because I know 'twas done without any intention of harm, I Will pass it by for
once; come, what is it?


Sancho. Why, you must know that my Master, Don Quixote, is just now breeding a
new Maggot in his Pate, not to be an Emperor, but a Pope, or a Cardinal: And if
so, my Preferment's gone again, for I am wholly unfit for any (what do you call it)
Ecclastical Dignity, because I am a married Man; and for me to be every foot
hunting for Dispensations to enjoy Church Livings, were to pound a Snow-ball in
a Mortar, with design to make Powder on it; therefore I would desire you as his
Friend, to advise him to be an Emperor by all means, that I may have an Office
proper; for to say the truth, I may chance to make an Angel of a Governor, but
I shall be a very Devil of a Churchman.


Nicho. How Is this? Have I caught thee a second time vilifying the Church? nay
now the Inquisition shall know it, and the Maid of Honor be mine for my good
service: I Will about it instantly; you are a precious Rogue indeed.


Sancho. Will ye so, ye old Bearded Goat? I Will have a Tuft on you first
'ifaith; I Will send ye marked to the Inquisition however. How now! What a
Plague, does he shed his Beard Sancho goes to take him by the Beard, and pulls
it off. as Snakes do their Skins? Hey day, who the Devil have we here? our
merry Neighbor and Townsman Mr. Nicholas the Barber?


Nicho. The Planets have decreed it -- Sword, Stares as if mad. Fire, Ruin,
Plague and Desolation. Woe be to Spain! the fatal Beard is off. Exit Nicho.


Perez. I must second the Barber, -- or this Accident will -- discover us --
Aside. The great Eclipse is coming; Doomsday too is near. Woe, Woe to Spain!
the fatal Beard is off.


Exit Perez. Sancho. The Beard is off indeed, and as cleverly as the wearer
himself could have shaved it: But what this is to Spain, and Eclipses, and
Doomsday, there I am puzl'd again. The Beard has discovered the Barber, and if
the Barber don't discover the Trick of the I^^hanted Beard, I shall begin to
fear there is some Dog trick in ^^e business; I knew him for an arch Rogue when
he was at home, and therefore doubt him the more now; 'Gad I must after him and
know the Truth -- But stay, first let us take a Dram of Consideration, Friend
Sancho -- Let me see -- The Fortunes of this Day are worth repeating*
My Mornings Breakfast was a lusty beating;
My Nooning time, more lucky though by far,
Crammed then with hopes to be a Governor.
But now, this Evening Whim has changed it so,
That what I am, Plague take me if I know;
Whether an Earl, fit to wear Pearl and Ruby,
Or Sancho, as I was -- a Country Booby.
Exit.


The End of the Fourth Act.
ACT V.
SCENE I. The Ordinary*
Enter Fernando and Lucinda. Fernand. He Is dressed, and ready to come out; the
Doctor tells me too his Sense is perfectly recovered, the Frenzy being only
continued by Colds and ill Diet, the Medicine has taken effect, which, assisted
by his gentle Sleeps, have quite restored him.


Lucind. The Sorrow and Distresses he has suffered, have changed him so, I fear
he has forgot me.


Fernand. Never fear it, Madam -- Here he comes, pray step in there till I am
ready for ye. Exit Lucinda.


Enter Cardenio new dressed. Carden. My Lord, it seems I stand indebted to ye
for Courtesies relating to my Health of Brain and Body, but my wounded Soul, in
its most dear and tender part, my Love, stabbed by your Falsehood and unnatural
Cruelty, stands yet unsuccour'd, that is, unrevenged; therefore as I must thank
ye for the one, my Sword for the other demands Satisfaction. Cardenio draws.


Fernand. Hold, pause a little: The Sacred Blood of Friends is of more value
than to be shed rashly without debate or reasoning. What Is your Quarrel to me?


^arden. Oh, bring me not to my mad fit again, from whence I Am just relieved, by
such a cursed Repetition. Lucinda! think on Lu^inda.


Fernand. Well, I Will speak the rest, I know I took her from thee.


Carden. And can thou hope to live? Offers to fight.


Fernand. Hold yet, and hear me speak: 'Twas my resistless Love, not I,
betrayed thee; the God of Amity opposed in vain; all the soft Bonds of our
endearing Friendship, were scorched and burnt, by her bright Eyes, to Ashes.


Carden. I Will hear no more; defend thy self, or die. Offers again.


Fernand. I will not fight with thee. Is this obscure Cottage a proper Stage to
drink the Blood of Friends? No, I Will reserve it for some Amphitheatre, that
when we play the Prize for fatal Beauty, no less than Thousands may admire the
Action.


Carden. Away thou Trifler, I am loath to call thee Coward.


Fernand. I believe thee, and know thou can not do it with a safe Conscience;
for I, too often in our days of Friendship, have proved my self so contrary,
that well thou know I fear thee not, Cardenio; no, the reason why I refuse,
is -- I have wronged thee; and by my good Will, I would have my Blood be the
last means of giving Satisfaction; therefore I charge thee first mark my
Proposals: I took a Lady from thee -- Well, to atone it, here is one in
Exchange, whom if you use ill, or with undecent Obstinacy slight, we then must
fight indeed. Brings in Lucinda veiled.


Carden. And so we must, Sir; your Women shall not be your Bucklers long. --
Hah! -- This is a Face indeed that my Heart bows to, whose Eyes, tho guilty,
are too fierce for mine. She unveils and embraces him.


Lucind. My dear Cardenio, I am thine for ever; cheer thy sad Looks, and smile
with Joy upon me; for Fate shall never, never part us more.


Carden. Oh thou sweet Vision, get thee from my sight, for I must love thee,
though I know thee false.


Lucind. By Heaven I am as true as Truth it self; the Letter thou receiv'st,
was not of mine, but of Don Fernand's counterfeiting.


Carden. Hah! What is it I hear! Don Fernand's counterfeiting?


Fernand. I must confess it was, Sir; for which I ask your Pardon; my headlong,
rash, and most ungoverned Passion, checked at no Crime, that would indulge my
Wishes: This caused her flight into a Nunnery, from whence I forced her, and
had no doubt proceeded, had not my Guardian Angel, my dear Doro^hea, proved my
good Genius to prevent my Mischief.


Enter Dorothea. Carden. Oh Heaven! is this Dorothea!


Luci^d. The very same, Sir.


Fernand. Let this atone then for my rash Offense, that I surrender back this
precious Jewel, bright and unsullied; and for my Sin in seeking to corrupt her,
with Shame and sorrow once more beg your Pardon.


Carden. My Lord, you have done me Justice, and I thank ye. Oh my sweet Life! I
shall grow wild with Joy, such vast content crowds in, I cannot bear it. Oh,
Madam! How shall I repay your Goodness too? To Dorothea.


Doroth. Let me be happy in the re-uniting my Lord and you, I then am overpaid.


Carden. Let this declare my willingness, I have forgot what is past.


Fernand. And this mine -- we will be Friends for ever. They embrace.


Enter Perez, and Nicholas. Carden. Oh, my honest and worthy Friend, I am thy
Debtor too.


Perez. My Care, Sir, was my Duty, and I Am heartily glad to see my Diligence so
well succeed. And now if you please to change the Scene, and give your selves a
little Diversion, there is Matter working within, will occasion it I Am sure.


Doroth. Ha, ha, ha, ha, -- what, Sancho has told his Master, I suppose, the
Accident of the Beard?


Nicho. Yes, and in the horriblest fright you ever knew; he is now with him;
the Rogue begins to stumble upon our contrivance of the Princess too, Madam; so
that we must set more Wheels a-going.


Fernand. But 'prithee how will thou tope upon him now, for he must needs know
thee now thy Face is bare?


Perez. We'll make him believe that all things are governed by Enchantment. The
Innkeeper has provided half a dozen merry Fellows, with Magicians and Devils
Vizards, such as are used in Carnaval time, with other rare Anticks, and all to
assist in the Frolic. He also has a rare Contrivance to carry him off, which
is, a great wooden Cage, in which Two Eagles formerly were kept; the use of
it, if you please to be present, you will see with Satisfaction; and if you can
laugh, you will have cause I warrant you.


Nicho. Your Lordship must take no notice that you know me, ^^t look and speak
as if you never had seen me.


Fern. I Will warrant thee, my merry Face-Smoother, I Will humor the Jest.


Doroth. And to confound Sancho the more, I Will go to his Master presently, and
press him to go on with his Journey toward the Giant.


Perez. I Will wait on ye, and second what you say.


Nich. And then come I enchanted.


Lucind. We must be Spectators of the Sport too, one way or other.


Carden. Oh, that may be easily done; and to help forward with the Jest, I Will
go and act the part of an Enchanter, and assist in the Song. I long, methinks,
to see this strange Knight Errant, for I remember him not; though once in my
Distress, I Am told I met him to his cost.


Fernand. Ha, ha, ha, -- I heard indeed you swing'd him once confoundedly. But
come, 'prithee, let us make haste to him, and see this rare performance of
Enchantment.


Doroth. ^Tis time we were there. Come Uncle, you are to second me. Exeunt.


SCENE II. The Town with the Inn.
Enter Don Quixote and Sancho with the Beard. Don Q. THou tell me Wonders,
Sancho.


Sancho. Strange, and true, Sir -- There Is the Beard, and within is the Barber;
I am sure these Eyes saw him; and I think I know his sniveling, Sheep-stealing
Phiz too well to be mistaken in him.


Don Q. I am not a Jot the more of thy Opinion because thou say thou have
seen him; for, Sancho, I am satisfied thou can not see.


Sancho. Not see! --


Don Q. No, thy Sense is often blind -- thy Reason always; besides a Thousand
strange Defects brood in thee to clog thy Understanding.


Sancho. Very good: Well, will you do me the Favor to let me feel then, if I
cannot see? Will you let me be sensible of the Dash in the Chops, that damned
Squire of the Horse-Tail gave me before I unbearded him; I hope I may with some
Assurance say I felt that, may not I?


Don Q. Why, according to the Stoical Philosopher -- no.


Sancho. No? 'Gadsbud, what a strange kind of a Creature am I then, that can
neither feel nor see! But whatever you say of my Understanding, I Am sure I know
this, That a Man's Life is a Winters Day, and a Winters way: A Cudgel that
bruizes, is a thing that contuses* I have a sore place here in my Shoulder,
occasioned by a Stone from one of the Galley Slaves, shall make me believe I
can feel, whatever your damned Stockick or Philosopher, with a Pox to him, says
to the contrary.


Don Q. I tell thee, Clod-pate, there is no certainty in Nature; so that if thy
Nose were battered flat with a Smith's Hammer, or thy Head opened with a
Church-key, so that one might see thy Brain^, thou ought not unlearnedly to
say, thy Head is really broke, but that thou supposest it to be so.


Sancho. Ah, the Devil take your Suppose, will you make me mad? Will Not you let
me feel I am beaten, when the Cudgel is upon me? nor see that the sham Squire
yonder, is that cunning Rogue, Nicholas the Barber of our Town, that comes to
put a Trick upon ye? and that the Beard you hold in your Hand there is a White
Horse Tail tied on to play his Prank in?


Don Q. Why 'Faith as to the Beard, it may seem to thee a Horse Tail indeed, as
I confess it does to me; but it is Obstinacy to be positive in it, because thou
know too well how these Inchanters persecute me.


Sancho. Ah plague, nay, if that Whim possess your Brain again, you will find a
number of Enchantments within yonder: There Is your Lady Misrisoma, what a Devil
do you call her, is as much a King's Daughter too, as I am a Knight of the Garter,
or Golden Fleece; the Giant Dandipratdando may dance a Jig in her Dominions as
long as he pleases, for all your Prowess: for Curiosity tempting me to peep
through the Keyhole of a Door this Morning, who should I see, but your chaste
delicate Misrisoma, sitting in the Lap of the young Rampant Spanish Don that
came with her, and clinging as close as two Faces in a Medal.


Don Q. How Is this! -- O excommunicated Rascal, dare thou affront the Queen?


Sancho. Queen! 'Oons, what Queen? it is a hopeful Queen that will let one of
her Subjects ruffle her like a Bulker in a Bawdy House. 'Sbud, I saw him brush
his Whiskers upon her Face twenty times one after another.


Don Q. Oh slanderous Villain, thou have lived too long. Beats him.


Sancho. Oh, good Sir, Mercy, Mercy, I may be mistaken -- I do but suppose I
saw all this -- I do but suppose it, Sir.


Don Q. Suppose this then too, Rascal -- to confirm ye. Beats him.


Enter Dorothea. Doroth. Hold thy dead-doing Hand, most Noble Errant: Wonder of
Wonders! What Empire's revolution, or other accident of vast and mighty moment,
could raise the Anger of the great Don Quixote?


Don Q. That Rat, that Vermin there, that but for the Reverence I bear to your
Majesty's Person, my Foot should tread into his primitive Clod, amongst his
fellow Worms that there inhabit: Would you believe it, Madam? the Blasphemous
Varlet had the Impudence to tell me you were no Queen! And that you were as
familiar with the Master of your Ceremonies, as if he had been privy to your
Intellect, and had got ye an Heir to the Kingdom of Micomicon.


Doroth. Oh! I forgive him freely; his Error, no doubt, is caused by some
Illusion, that often happens in my Affairs: Therefore, Noble Sir, let us go with
our best speed to attack the Giant; when he is dead all these Chimera's vanish.


Don Q. Desponding Hang dog, what say you to this now? Is she a Queen, or no?


Sancho. Why? as well as a beaten Governor can give his judgment, I do suppose
she is.


Enter Perez and Nicholas. Perez. Miracles! Miracles! Bold Knight, stand on thy
Guard; for here is a wonderful Adventure coming; the Inn's all in Confusion; and
by the several Transformations there, we find the Inchanters are in search for
thee: My Hostess within Mews like a Cat, and Maritornes answers like a Screech
Owl; two bawling Carriers are turned into He-Asses, and Bray incessantly; and
the good Reverend Squire here to this Sage Princess, seems in my Eyes, changed
like to our Town Barber.


Don Q. Oh Power of strong Enchantment! Is this possible? But that I know how I
am persecuted, I should have sworn this was my very Neighbor, that often with
Razor-keen and Lathering Washball, mowed the rough Stubble from my dented Chin,
and snapp'd his Fingers with acute Agility.


Doroth. This cannot be my Squire, I know him not.


Sancho. Hah -- ah -- Sancho grins and shakes his head.


Nichol. I am thy Squire, O Queen, but now Enchanted by the Sage Merlin, who is
coming hither for endeavoring to deprive great Sancho Pancha of the Wife the
Fates allot him, the Maid of Honor; for in short time the Destinies so order,
Teresa shall bequeath to Death her Beauties, and he survive with the fair
Rumpibella.


Don Q. Do You hear this, Bacon-face? Are not you a damned desponding Son of a
Whore, hah? What can you say now?


Sancho. Why, I say, good News and a Bag-pudding, is better than ill with
nothing to Dinner: If Mistress Rump, what do you call her, fall to my lot by your
means, you shall suppose me another drubbing as soon as you please; and as for
Teresa's Beauty, let her bequeath it to the Devil, or where she pleases: All
Shoes fit not all Feet; Sancho shall bear the loss of that well enough.


Enter Don Fernando and Lucinda. Fernando. Prodigy on Prodigy! Stand forth,
thou most Renowned, for an Adventure's coming hither to thee, has struck us
blind with gazing: A Golden Chariot drawn by fiery Horses, descended from the
Sky, and out of which came forth an Aged Man with a Majestic form.


Lucind. He comes, he comes; O how I tremble!


Don Q. Madam, dismiss your fear; whilst I am by ye, you are safe as in a
Sanctuary.


Enter Vincente disguised like Merlin. Vincent. To thee, O Knight of the
Ill-favored Face, from my low Cell near hot Vesuvio's Mount, where our black
Spirits with perpetual labor, surrounded with blue Flames and sulphurous
Smoke, with horrid silence, forge our Magick-Spells; I, the Sage Merlin, come,
sent by the Fates, to hinder for a time, thy present Enterprise: The Queen must
Patience have, and Pandafilando revel and range within her large Dominions,
till it shall come, that the Manchegan Lion and the Tobosian Dove are joined in
Wedlock; for so it is fixed, spite of Trinacrio and his Pristine Charms:
Therefore, all you my Partners in the secret, dark and mysterious Art of
Necromancy, appear, and with a Charm as strong as Destiny, seize on the most
Illustrious Knight and Squire, and in the Enchanted Chariot bear 'em hence, to
the place the Fates have ordered. Dreadful sounds of Music heard.


Enter two Women representing Urganda and Melissa, two Enchantresses, led by
Montesmo, another Inchanter. They seize Don Quixote and Sancho Pancha. Don Q. I
feel the Charm already; my Blood freezes, and my Enervate Arms, inured to
Battle, grow weak and spiritless.


Sancho. What do you feel? 'sbud, Sir, you only fancy so; for my part I feel
nothing, not I, only my Fingers itch to be battering that old Fellow; who for
all his disguise there, is as like mine Host of that plaguey Inn, where I was
tossed in a Blanket ^'other day, as one Thumb is like another: Ay, and now I
look nearer him, it is he, Sir, it is he: -- A Trick, a Trick, 'Gadzooks, I know
him.


Don Q. Peace, sordid Wretch.


Nichol. Oh Impudent Scoundrel! Dare thou affront the Great Merlin, that
designed so well for thee. The Inchantresses seize him, he struggles to get
loose.


Fernand. See, Merlin frowns; woe, woe be to thee, Sancho!


Doroth. I fear we shall be punished for his sake.


Lucind. Oh, naughty Sancho, have thou no sense of fear, when thou see the
very. Offspring of the Devil before thy Eyes? I shall laugh out; I am scarce
able to contain -- Lord, how the Fools look!


Aside to Lucinda. Music sounds in Recitative, then an Inchanter and two
Inchantresses, sing in parts this Song. SONG.
Montesmo WIth this, this sacred charming Wand,
I can Heaven and Earth command.
Hush all ye Winds that curle the angry Sea,
And make the rolling Waves obey.

Urganda. I from the Clouds can conjure down the Rain,
And make it Deluge once again.

Melissa. I when I please make Nature smile as gay,
As at first she did on her Creation Day.
Groves with eternal sweets shall fragrant grow,
And make a true Elyzium here below.

Chorus. Groves with Eternal sweets shall fragrant grow,
And make a true Elyzium here below.

Melissa. I can give Beauty, make the aged young,
And Love's dear momentary Rapture long.

Urgand. Nature restore, and Life, when spent, renew;
All this by Art can great Urganda do.
Why then will Mortals dare
To urge a Fate, and Justice so severe?
See there a Wretch in's own Opinion Wise,
Laughs at our Charms, and mocks our Mysteries.

Melissa. I Have a little Spirit yonder,
Where the Clouds do part asunder,
Lies basking his Limbs
In the warm Sunbeams,
Shall his Soul from his Body plunder.

Urganda. Speak shall it be so? No,
That Fate's too high; I Will give him one more low.

Melissa. Let it be so, etc.
Appear, ye fat Fiends that in Limbo do groan,
That were, when in Flesh, the same Souls as his own.
You that always in Lucifer's Kitchen reside,
Amongst Sea Coal, and Kettles, and Grease newly tried:
That pampered each day with a Garbidge of Souls,
Broil Rashers of Fools for a Breakfast on Coals.
These Mortals from hence to convey try your skill;
Thus Fates and our Magical Orders fulfill.

Chorus. Appear, ye fat Fiends that in Limbo do groan,
That were, when in Flesh, the same Souls as his own.
You that always in Lucifer's Kitchen reside,
'Monst Sea-Coal, and Kettles, and Grease newly tried:
That pampered each day with a Garbidge of Souls,
Broil Rashers of Fools for a Breakfast on Coals.
These Mortals from hence to convey try your skill;
Thus Fates and our Magical Order fulfill.

Then enter Furies bearing a great Cage, into which they put Don Quixote.
Sancho struggles to get off; the Inchantresses wave their Wands, and then there
is an Antic Dance of Spirits to fright Sancho, who at last drive him into the
Cage by Don Quixote. Vincent. You Mortals that have viewed our Magic Skill,
As you would 'scape our dreadful Charms, be still:
Whilst we our secret Consultations make,
None but the Enchanted must have leave to speak:
For Sancho's Fault, you all had felt his Case,
Had you not been relieved by Merlin's Grace. Magicians go aside and Consult.

Don Q. You must be Saucy, with a Pox to ye, and now see what comes on it: Had
not Merlin been Gracious, the Queen and all this Company had been Enchanted
through your Insolence; you see how narrowly they have 'scap'd.


Sancho. I see! 'sbud, why, don't you say I can see nothing? I suppose I am in
a Cage now, cooped up like a green Goose with your wise Worship: But to say I
see this were Madness, unless I resolve to have my Bones broke.


Don Q. A Cage! Oh blind Stupidity! Now will I referr my self to any thing
that is Wise, to know if thou do not deserve to have thy Bones broke, to call
the Enchanted Chariot here a Cage?


Sancho. Oh! -- so then, this is a Chariot, is it?


Don Q. Yes, Rascal, what else can it be? did not the great Merlin call it so?


Sancho. Oh, very good -- Nay, nay, I suppose it. Shaking his head at Don Q.


Don Q. It Is something odd, I confess: The Knights of old that suffered on
these occasions, were carried through the Air in some strange Cloud, or mounted
on a flying Hippogryphis: -- But perhaps the Method's changed.


Sancho. It Is changed to a very pretty Method, truly: -- If any one would see a
Raree-Show, let him come hither: Here Is the Emperor and the Governor Cheek by
Jole, like two Paraguites hung up in a Hall Window: Lord, if we were in England
now, what a World of Fools Six-pences we should get for a sight of us: A Groat
to see the Emperor, and Twopence the Earl; 'Oons we should put down all the
Holiday Monsters clearly.


Don Q. Very well, Dogbolt; you are Witty again, are ye? and I suppose, know the
Privilege of the place you are in.


Sancho. The narrowness of the place I Am in, I suppose I do; it is in vain to be
angry here, Sir, here is no room for drubbing.


Don Q. No, I forgive thee, because I perceive the Enchantment works upon thee;
besides the Fable says, That in the Toil, once the Wolf and the Sheep were
Friends: Then I know thou art nettled too about the delay of thy Preferment;
which troth, as things stand, I must needs say I cannot now prefix a time to.


Sanch. Why troth I as faithfully believe ye.


Don Q. What grieves me most, is to see the trouble the Queen is in yonder:
But, Madam, I beseech ye don't despair, these Accidents are common to Knights
Errant; but it is only for a time, for I shall soon be free again to aid ye --
till when, confirm your hopes in my past promise -- She thanks me with a Sign;
but the rest, that by thy Fault are now deprived of Speech, by their Actions,
Sancho, seem to threaten thee.


Sancho. Why, let 'em threaten; if they will help me out of my Enchanted Castle
here, I Will give 'em leave to take their Revenge: But a pox on my ill breeding
and folly, Old Father Merlin has found another way, and there is no more to be
done but Patience, and be wiser another time: -- A scalded Cat fears cold
Water: If Wishes could bide, then Beggars would Ride: The worth of a thing is
best known by its want; and One Nightingale in a Bush, sings better than two
Iackdaws in a Cage: And so, Sir, let us behold our selves, as one blind Fool
said to the other.


Don Q. Oh Plague! why, thou art in thy Kingdom, I see now; this is the rarest
place to string thy Proverbs and thy Flim-flams in; I must get Merlin to
Inchant that Tongue of thine a little, I find there will be no peace else.


Music sounds again; the Magicians return; then a Dance of Furies; which
ended, they take up the Cage and prepare to go out. Vincent. The Hour is come,
and all the Sons of Art in Council sit; have and set forward there.


Enter Hostess and Maritornes. Hostess. Why Dolt, Madman, Ass; a Murrain take
thee, whither will thou let them carry thee -- thus like a Fool?
'D'sheartlikins, have not Brains enough to see it is only a Trick upon thee to
make thee a -- mew -- mew -- Mews like a Cat, when Vincent waves his Rod.


Maritor. And you, Jolthead Governor, don't you know a Proverb, that says,
Bray a Fool in a Mortar, and you will find all of him but his Brains. Where the
Devil are you riding like a -- whoo, whoo, whoo, whoo -- Shrieks like an Owl.


Don Q. Alas, sweet Ladies, I pity ye, I see you feel my Fate, but cannot help
me. Till Merlin does ordain I shall be freed,
Valor's in Bonds, and Chivalry lies dead.



Sancho. Earl Sancho is cag'd, past all relief, Not like a Governor, but like
a Thief. They are carried off.


Don Fern. Ha, ha, ha, ha, -- rarely performed of all Hands: Gramercy mine
Host, thou have acted thy Part like any Comedian.


Vincent. Ah, to divert your Lordship and the good Company here, I could do
twice as much as this is.


Perez. There was no way to get him home but this, which has been excellently
well-humour'd on all sides.


Lucind. The Princess Micomicona deserves a real Kingdom for the Wit she has
shown in it.


Carden. She has indeed done it to a Miracle; and managed, not only the Action,
but the Romantic Style so naturally, that a wiser Head than Don Quixote's
might have been deceived.


Doroth. Not unless he had some Sparks of his Phrensy. But what pleases me most
is Sancho, who is every foot at a loss, whether he shall be a Governor or
nothing.


Fernand. Ha, ha, ha, -- Come now, let us go dine, and laugh an Hour away about
it within.


Nicho. Ay, ay, a Jest sounds always most merrily at a good Dinner, my Lord;
and to say the truth, the Squire of the Beard has been enchanted so long, that
he begins to be hungry.


Fern. Oh, thy Mirth shall begin presently then; were thy Hunger as sharp as
one of thy one Razors it should be blunted -- Come* mine Hostess too, and
little Maritornes -- y' have all done admirably* Oh, how every little Subject
pleases us, when Love has tuned ou^ Souls by his sweet. Harmony! Now, Embracing
Dorothea. my dear Friend, I hope your Joys are perfect too. To Cardenio.


Carden. In my Lucinda's Love, mine are as perfect as Heaven has Power to make
'em.


Lucind. And mine in meeting with my dear Cardenio.


Doroth. And let each kind, too late repenting, Maid,
That fears she is by inconstant Man betrayed,
Yet by peculiar Fate, and Grace Divine,
At last retrieves her Lover -- guess at mine.

Exeunt omnes. FINIS.
THE Comical History OF Don QUIXOTE, As it is Acted at the Queen's Theater in
Dorset Garden.

By Their Majesty's Servants.

Part the Second.

Written by Mr. D'urfey.

LONDON, Printed for S. Briscoe, in Russel Street, Covent Garden, and H. Newman
at the Grasshopper in the Poultry, 1694.

To the Right Honorable Charles Earl of Dorset and Middlesex, Ld. Chamberlain
of Their Majesty's Household, and Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter,
etc.
My Lord,
AS in old times, when Wit had flourished long,
And Rome was famous for Poetic Song,
The Learned Bards did round Mecaenas throng:
To him as Wits Dictator, brought their Store
And Standard, that best tried the Muses Ore.
So in our Albion, tho her Bards are few,
Yet each one covets a Dictator too,
And for Mecaenas, fix (my Lord, on you.
You, like the famous Indian Gourd, are set,
Under whose shade, sits cool each pigmy Wit,
Free from the railing Critics blasting heat.
Let the rich Spring flow clear or be impure,
Fenced with your Name, the Poet is secure:
Your Wit's a Sanctuary, where each one
Is safe, that wisely does for refuge run.
The roving Icarus in Poetry,
By you is levelled, when he soars too-high.
By Judgments Rules and awful Sense reclaimed,
The wild Hig^flyer is to Nature tamed:
Nor does the grovelling Muse crawl off ashamed:
But by your mild reproof his faults discern;
Made fit for Fame, if not to proud to learn.
Each Genius still is by your candor prized
The Great not flattered, nor the Less dispis'd.
For as great Maro, Naso, Flaccus, may
In your indulgent beams with freedom play;
So Bavius too, and Maevius uncontrolled,
May busk about -- and graced with smiles, be bold.
Oh bou^dless Glory! yet for eas^ too great,
A^xious, tho praised, and restless in its State:
Wit's fate* and that of Soveraignty's the same,
Both sit high crowned, both plagued by too much fame
As Courtiers for Preferment teazing come,
And at the Levee throng a Monarchs Room.
So when Apollo Crowns a darling Son,
Thelesser Tribe will all be pushing on,
To get a Scien of his sacred Bays,
To plant their Credit in suc^eeding Days.
Thus your Renown -- your ^rouble does increase;
Less great (my Lord) you had been more at ease.
Like Hero's, that to War u^summo^'d come;
If less couragiou^, had been safe at home.
A common Fate best suits with common Clay,
Stamped off in haste upon ^he first Ess^y,
But Poets are not products of a Day.
Kings Reign by Conquest, Choice or Right of Bi^th;
Soldiers get Fame -- and Grandees share the Earth.
But Wi^'s a prize so rare, there scarce appears,
One mighty Dorset in a Thousand Years:
And then too, Heaven that knows the Gift is great,
Thinks one enough to honor a whole state.
Thus are the two great Blessing^, Wit and Love,
Kept (^s sublimest) with most care above.
He^ven gr^nts us sparingly of both a taste,
One rarely found, and the other not too last;
Lest the weak Mortal, in his ecstasy,
Like the first Man, may know too much and dye:
Yet has this nice forbidden fruit, which Heaven
From Millions keeps, to you been frankly given.
You have (^y Lord) a Pa^ent from above,
And can monopolize both Wit and Love;
Inspired and blessed, by Heavens peculiar care,
Adored by all the Wife, and all the Fair;
To whom the World united give this due,
Best Judge of Men, and best of Poets too.
Please to permit me then, as all the rest
Of Moses Sons already have addressed;
Thus, for your Patronage, to make appeal
The last Attending, but the first in Zeal.
Let but this Play the usual Grace receive,
And if your generous breath says -- Let it live,
Don Quixot then, is fixed in deathless Glory,
And Sancho, on the Stage is famous as in story.
Which is, My Lord, The humble Suit of Your Lordships most obliged and
eternally devoted Servant,

THE PREFACE.
THE good success, which both the Parts of Don Quixote have had, either from
their Natural Merit, or the Indulgence of my Friends, or both, ought
sufficiently to satisfy me, that I have no reason to value the little Malice
of some weak Heads, that make it their business to be simply Criticizing.

I will therefore desist from any Answer in that kind, and wholly rely upon,
and please my self, with the good Opinion and kind Censure of the Judicious,
who unanimously declare, that I have not lessened my self in the great
undertaking, of drawing two Plays out of that ingenious History, in which if I
had flagg'd either in Style or Character, it must have been very obvious to all
Eyes; but on the contrary, I have had the honor to have it judged that I have
done both Don Quixote and Sancho Justice, making as good a Copy of the first as
possible, and furnishing the last with newer and better Proveabs of my own than
he before diverted ye with.

Besides, I think I have given some additional Diversion in the continuance of
the Character of Marcella, which is wholly new in this Part, and my own
Invention; the design finishing with more pleasure to the Audience by punishing
that coy Creature by an extravagant Passion here, that was so inexorable and
cruel in the first Part, and ending with a Song so incomparably well sung, and
acted by Mrs. Bracegirdle, that the most envious do allow, as well as the most
ingenious affirm, that it is the best of that kind ever done before.

Then I must tell my severe Censurers, who will be spitting their Venom against
me tho to no purpose, that I deserve some acknowledment for drawing the
Character of Mary the Buxom, which was entirely my own, and which I was not
obliged to the History at all for, there being no mention of her the^e, but
that Sanchica, which was her right name, was found washing in a River by the
Dukes Page, and leapt up behind him on Horseback to guide him to carry her
Fathers Letter to her Mother; yet by making the Character humorous, and the
extraordinary well acting of Mrs. Verbruggen, it is by the best Judges allowed
to be a Masterpiece of humor.

The rest of the Characters in both the Parts were likewise extreamwell
performed, in which I had as much Justice done me as I could expect, nor was
the Musical Part less commendable, the Words every where being the best of mine
in that kind, and if in the whole, they could draw such Audiences for so long
time, in such violent hot Weather, I shall not despair, that when the Season is
more temperate, to see at their next representation, a great deal of good
Company.

I have Printed some Scenes both in the first and second part which were left
out in the Acting -- the Play and the Music being too long; and I doubt not
but they will divert in the reading, because very proper for the Connection: And
as I have in this, and in all my things, studied to promote the Pleasure and
Satisfaction of my Friend; so I am very well satisfied, to find by my profit,
that I have not lost my Labor.

PROLOGUE For Mr. Powel.
THis Sou^lry season which was wont to clear
The Town, of all the friends we held most dear,
Believe we are very glad to s^e you here*
The Wits that now defy their God the Sun,
(Proof against his beams) to see Don Quixote run,
Such miracles have he and comic Sancho done
Faith since good Nature did your Hearts inspire
To use us kindly once don't let it tire;
But let our second Merry Scenes be graced
With your united praise, as were our last.
If you object the weather is too hot,
The World is in a ^erment, think of that:
Heroes abroad sweat for the glorious day,
And I am sure you cannot choose but say,
That it is much safer sweating at a Play:
For in the main, vast difference will appear,
Twixt those that sweat for pleasure or for fear.
Well, then it is time to doubt ye were unjust,
Since you have been so civil to our first;
For those abroad as well as here at home,
To see our last, we thank 'em, all have come;
Some to oblige us, from the B^th have stayed,
The unteeming Wife, and the Green sickness Maid,
Such Sport has been, it seems, in what we played.
From Richmond some, where crowds of Beauty dwell;
Nay the Cits have left their darling Epsom W^ll,
And jogged from them to us like honest Men,
Upon their trotting Pads of Three Pound Ten:
Then, we have had some of the Blackcoats too,
Men skilled in Books, that our Don Quixote kn^w,
That fearing to be found o^t at a Play,
Sat in the Pit, in Coats of Iron gray.
In short, it is plain, we all degrees have had,
Their Money too -- for which we are not sad;
And if you please to favor us once more,
TO encour^ge ye, the Poet just now swore,
This is a better play than that before.
EPILOGUE,
By Sancho and Mary the Buxome. Sancho. COme, prithee, Mary, tho our Case be bad
Let Us make the best on it -- humor thy Old Dad,
And speak to the Folk.

Mary. I cod, I think y' are mad.
What would you have me say?

San. Why tell 'em that
Tho the plaguey Poet makes us lose our State,
And doff our Robes that made us look so gay,
That thou will serve 'em in some other way,
Provided they will be civil to the Play.

Mary. What other way Zooks can I serve 'em in,
Unless they have any Lockram Smocks to spin;
Will these, dee think, prefer a Country Tool
In Serge and Dowlas -- Vather you're a Fool:
For ought I see amongst this long nosed Crew,
They Would rather wear out Smocks, than pay me to make new
These Love your Flaunters, trickt in huge Commode,
Sprunt up with Wire and Ribbons a Cart-load:
Lord! how each Courtier-man would scowle at's Wife,
Dizzen'd as I Am now here in aCoif,
Gadslids your Top high Flyers of the Town,
Now, scarce wear any thing that is their own;
One has false Teeth, another has false Hair,
One has an Eye-brow made, another's bare:
Some flabby, lank, unwholesome, barren Phillies,
Stuff Cushions up, to counterfeit great Bellies,
And others, that they may look round as Drums
Dress to other place, and wear 'em on their Bums.
These are the Dishes that these Folk esteem,
A Country Rasher will not go down with them;
Therefore, for my part, I Will no favor crave,
I know their humor, and my breath I Will save;
^et to conclude, I say this of the Play,
I ^od'tis good, and if they like't they may.

The Represent^rs Names, and Characters.
Duke Ricardo. A Grandee of Spain, Mr. Cibbe^. Cardenio. A witty young
Gentleman, his Companion and Friend, acted by Mr. Bowman. Ambrosio. A young
Student of Salamanca, and Ki^sman to the Duke, an inveterate enemy to women,
ever since his dear Friend Chrysostom died for Love of Marcella. Act^d by Mr.
Verbruggen. Don Quixot. A frantic Gent^eman of the Mancha, who ran mad with
reading Books of Chivalry, and supposes himself a Knight Errant. Acted by Mr.
Bo^n. Mannel. Steward to the Duke, a pleasant witty Fellow, who with Pedro and
the Page, manages all the designs used in the fooling Don Quixote. Acted by Mr.
Powel. Pedro Rezio. A Doctor of ^hysick, and Assistant to Mannel in fooling Don
Quixote. Acted by Mr. Freeman. Bernardo. Chaplain to the Duke -- A positive,
testy, morose fellow. Acted by Mr. Trefuse. Diego. A rough ill na^ur'd vicious
fellow, Master of the Dukes Game, and chief Shepherd, in love with Marcella.
Acted by Mr. Harris. Page to the Duke. Another witty young Fellow, and agent in
the fooling Don Quixote. Acted by Mr. Lee Sancho Pancha. Squire to Don Quixote,
a dull, heavy, Country Booby in appearance, but in discourse, dry, subtle and
sharp, a great repeater of Proverbs, which he blunders out upon all occasions,
tho never so absurd, or far from the purpose. Acted by Mr. Underhil. Tailor,
Gadener, Painter, Grazier, Small Man and Woman, Petitioners to the Governor
Sancho. Duchess. A merry face^ious Lady, that perpetually diverts herself with
the extravaga^t ^ollies of Don Quixote and Sancho. Acted by Mrs Knight.
Luscinda. Wife to Cardenio, her Companion. Acted by Mrs. Bowman. Dulcinea del
Toboso. Page to the Duke, commanded by him to personate Don Quixotes feigned
M^striss. Acted by Mr. Lee. Marcella. A young beautiful Shepherdess of Cordoua,
extremely coy, and Averse to men at first, but afterward passionately in Love
with Ambrosio. Acted by Mrs. Bracegirdle. Dona Rodriguez. Woman to the
Du^chess, antiquated, opinionated and impertinent. Acted by Mrs. Kent. Teresa
Pancha. Wife to Sa^cho -- a poor clownish Country woman, Acted by Mrs. Lee.
Mary. Her Daughter, a ramping ill-bred Dowdy. Mrs. Verbruggen. Rico^ta, Flora.
Two other Co^ntry Lasses. l^chant^rs, Furi^s, Carver, Crier, Constable, Watch,
Musiti^ns, Singers, Dancers and Attendants.

ACT I.
SCENE I.
Enter Ambrosio, Mannel, Pedro. Ambros. SO Gentlemen, are all things in order
for the Dukes design of entertaining this whimsical Knight Errant?


Man. They are Sir, every Servant in the house answers to his Cue as readily as
if he had been brought up in a Theater.


Ped. We find no one tardy in the business but Diego the Dukes Master of the
Shepherds, who we hear has almost lost his wits for Love; and the Coxcomb grows
every day so mop'd with it, that he neglects all other business.


Ambros. There Is something in that fellow more than ordinary, a swarth
complexion, hot and Saturnine, you had best look to him Master Steward, for I
know him to be of a mischievous nature, and not honest. Farewell, I must go seek
the Duke, who is gone to the Grove, just by the Park side yonder, to meet Don
Quixote, and bring him to his Castle.


Man. Have they lodged the Knight then?


Ambros. 'Twas all the work of the neighborhood to watch his motion: Sancho we
hear was sent of an Errant to Toboso this morning, but about what we know not
-- and the Knight stays yonder, waiting for his coming -- farewell, you had best
make haste home before, to get all things in readiness. Exit Ambrosio.


Man. I intend it Sir. Come Doctor, we shall have rare sport.


Pedro. -- 'Sdeath! is it possible the Frenzy should still be so ^^rong upon the
Fool: it is not above a Month, since a Brother of my Profession, told me that he
administered to him at his House, and had great hopes of his Cure.


Man. There was such a report indeed. The manner of his ridiculous Enchantment,
and bringing home in a Cage too, is very authentic -- But Sancho and he one
Night, made a shift to give 'em all the slip, and this is now his second Sally.


Pedro. Ha, ha, ha -- And in good time, he undertakes it to give the Duke and
Duchess diversion -- Come let us be gone, that I may be ready for my part in
the Scene.


Man. The Chaplain must not know of it. Exeunt.


Enter Diego Solus. Diego. What are their Frollicks or their Sports to me, that
have a burning Fever in my breast, that hourly consumes me. I know no Master
now, but raging Passion, nor own Obedience, but to Love's great power; and my
hearts Murdress, the adored Marcella, whom to enjoy, I Will hazard Credit,
Fortune, nay venture at once, my Souls and Body's ruin, and never believe that
I can pay too dear. Pulls out a Letter and muses.


Re-enter Ambrosio. Ambros. I Have r^iss'd the Duke and Duchess strangely, who I
believe, are gone the left hand way over the Pattock, -- How now, who have we
here, Diego the chief Shepherd, -- This is the loving Fool they lately talked
of. I Will stay a little to observe him. Absconds behind.


Diego. This Letter here, shows me the road to happiness, which is just sent me
from a trusty friend that I employed to watch her Evening Haunts, and now it is
done effectually -- Reads. Know she is the proudest of her Sex, as well as the
most beautiful, and therefore shuns all Conversation with ours, and generally
with her own; therefore to indulge her humor, I have observed her several
evenings together to walk alone exactly about seven in the Myrtle Grove, that
joins to the Ambassadors Garden, where at the aforesaid hour, you may securely
seize her. I would assist ye, but the Ambassador is this minute sent for to
Court -- But at my return, I expect the pleasure, to hear that you are revenged
upon that proud Beauty, that so long has tortured ye -- the account of which
Action will give a secret pleasure, to your faithful Friend, etc.





Diego. The Action -- Oh how my heart leaps in my breast to think ont! Remorse
avaunt, I am resolved this Evening to force the scornful Fair to quench my
flame, and glut my love with the sweet Spoils of Beauty -- Exit. Diego.


Ambros. Here Is a pretty business going forward; why what a damned Wolf or
Satyr of a Fellow, have I discovered here among the Sheep-coats -- In Love, did
they say? -- ay, this is the very Devil of a Lover, a most admirable Monster to
justify my quarrel to' the Sex: this sort of Coridons now, would fit the Female
Devillings. Dam 'em ^le take no notice on it; no usage can be bad enough for
'em, -- But hold, is that resolution like a Gentleman? does it consist with
honor? Pox on it, would chance had never led my feet this way. Now I Am a
greater Villain than the Ravisher, if I permit the mischief. It Is so, and I
must prevent it. In spite of Rancour she shall succor find,
I Will save her honor, tho I hate her kind.
Exit.


Enter Don Quixot solus. Don. Q. Oh that I had, as once young Phaeton, the rule
of the bright Chariot of the Sun, that I might whip the Hours into more speed,
or for a minute could disarm the Furies, to give one good smart lash to ^agging
Sancho, whom I this morning sent, with a Love Message, to my Adored and
Charming Dulcinea. Post on ye sluggish Minutes, run dull Squire, and let thy
Thoughts inform thy heavy Heels, the longings of my Soul: In the mean time,
here in this Grotto, rest thou load of Love, think on thy lovely Charmer, and
let thy amorous Soul, send forth no other sound but Dulcinea, oh Dulcinea. Exit.


Enter Sancho. Sanc. Yonder he lies, and as melancholy as a Cat in a Church
Steeple, expecting my return, -- and now good Brother Sancho -- be pleased to
go on with your design, and since you don't like the Mess^ge you are sent
about, let us see how your Wit can bring you off -- let me see, your maggot
pated Master Don Quixot sends you to Toboso, to the P^incess Dulcinea -- very
good -- Did you ever hear of any such Princess Sancho? -- no -- or has your
Master ever seen such? -- neither, -- why then your errand appears to be but a
kind of mad whimsey Sancho -- no doubt on it -- well then, what remedy? -- why
thus Brother -- if your Master can fancy Princesses, where none ere were --
Windmils to be Giants, and flocks of Sheep, Armies -- and say every foot that
his sight is beguiled by Enchantments -- 'twill be as easy for you to take the
next Comer Sancho -- and perswadehim to believe it is the radiant Dulcinea.


Enter two Country Wenches. 1. C. W. Come Couzin Ricotta, prithee come along;
Udsliflikins, I Will be hanged if the Bride b'ant gone to Church, before we can
get thither.


2. C. W. Why prithee how can that be fool, when Father Iodolet ^he Priest, and
Gasper the Piper, are just gone before us.


1. C. W. Pshaw that is all one, the holy Cormorant has been at Breakfast
already, he has devoured half a Turkey, and drank a Bottle of Malaga, -- this
Morning, so that he has nothing to do till Dinner, but to chop up Mass, and see
'em joined according to custom.


2. C. W. He see 'em joined according to custom, why how now you plaguey Hoyden
you, -- dee make a pimp of the Priest.


Sanc. Why how now you young pert baggage, a pimp of a Priest, why is that such
a miracle. This comes as pat as I could wish, these are two rare Jades for my
purpose. Aside.


2. C. W. What ails the Slouch, cannot you go on your way, I spoke to my Couzin
Flora, I did not meddle with you swag-belly.


Sanc. Ha, ha, ha, ha, it shall be so faith, this shall be the Princess
Dulcinea Gadzookes, -- and this other Dowdy here, shall be her waiting woman --
ha, ha, ha. Sancho stops 'em.


1. C. W. What Is the matter with the Paunch, what ails the bristle chops, cannot
y^u let us go and be hanged.


Sanc. Till my Lord Don Quixot, has kindled his amorous Taper at the Glowworm
Rays, of your Lady the Princess there, not for the world -- my dear Lindabrides.


2. C. W. What Lady, what Princess? what a Dickins, is the Booby mad?


Sanc. Therefore appear, thou mirror of Knight Errantry, thy Queen, here is
thy Dulcinea, Moon of thy hopes, North Star of thy desires, shining with all
her fiery beams upon thee.


Enter Don Quixote. Don. Q. 'Twas Sancho's voice, -- and see yonder he stands
-- welcome thou blessed, thou longed for Messenger, -- well and what success good
Friend, hah! was the God of Love compassionate?


Sanc. Success, sbud -- kneel, kneel; Sir, oons are you blind, why there she is
Sir, the Princess, the Peerless Dulcinea, the grand Toboso, the silver Trumpet
of Renown, the fire Arms of Beauty, and the Touchhole of Love, attended by the
most beautiful Babberlips of Spain, the lovely -- Wiffundera. They kneel.


Don Q. Where is the Princess Sancho. Staring about.


1. C. W. Ah Devil on ye, what game, what foolery's this? pray let us go will ye.


Sanc. Oh Princess and Universal Lady of Toboso, why does not your magnanimous
heart relent, seeing the Pillar, and prop of Chivalry prostrate before your
sublimated presence: 'Sbud Sir are you dumb? -- or a^e your senses ravished
from you, at the beams of those fair Eyes, those lushious Bubbies, and Amber
Locks, adorned with Pearl and Diamonds.


Don Q. Pearl and Diamonds? Rubs his Eyes.


Sanc. 'Dsheart, what dee lie rubbing your Eyes so for? Why don't you see all
this?


Don Q. Upon my Knighthood -- No.


Sanc. The Devil were in ye if you should, -- how the clownish Jades stare at
one another. Aside.


Don. Q. I see no Princess: the objects that present themselves to me, are
Faces most uncomely, do thou see this rare sight, Sancho? Rises up.


Sanc. Do I? I think I do, I see the Princess shining with Gold there, like a
Sun beam, and the most bright and altified Whiffundera, blazing like a Star of
the first Magnitude.


1. C. W. Well enough Brewis-belly; Adshdikins leave off your fooling, and
let us be gone, or I Will call out to the Vineyard yonder.


2. C. W. There be Folks there that will take our parts, you may chance to get
a drubbing for your Jokes, if you have not a care, Bacon-face. Exeunt.


Sanc. Zooks, Queen Blouze may be in the right in that, therefore I Will make
haste.


Don Q. If that be the Princess that spoke last, some Devilish Spell this
moment is upon me, I am bereaved of all my sight and senses.


Sanc. How, how is that Sir? I hope not so -- This is what I looked for, ha, ha,
ha, ha, the Trick fadges rarely. Aside.


Don Q Do thou smell nothing, Sancho?


Sanc. A perfumed sigh or two, the Princess breathed, Sir, nothing else.


Don Q. Nay, then it is plain I Am enchanted -- again, by my Knighthood, ^t seemed
to me of Garlic.


Don Q. Garlic! oh Villains, now could I eat one of these Enchanting Rogues.
And I warrant the Princess and her Lady, Sir, seems to you like two Hog-rubbing
Dowdies?


Don Q. Todpoles! Witches! I have not seen two uglier.


Sanc. Good lack a day, that these Devilish fellows can do this! -- Keep in
your breath, and be hanged. Aside.


2. C. W. Keep you off and be hanged. So ho, in the Vineyard there.


1. C. W. Pedro, Valasco, Tarzoe, so ho; odslid come near me again -- a couple
of Cogging Scoffing Gibers, what a Murrain cannot you let people go along the
Road? did we meddle with you? odslid come near me again, and I Will give thee such
a gripe on the Weazon, I Will make thee kackle again. They run out.


Don Q. Ugh -- ^here's another whiff, the very -- quintessence of Garlic. Oh
thou extreme of all wickedness, thou abhorred Inchanter, whoever thou art,
think not because thou can pervert my Smelling faculty, and put these Clouds
and Cataracts in my Eyes, to eclipse that dazzling Beauty from me, that it shall
serve thy turn; no Misc^eant, the time shall come, when by my powerful Arm all
Charms shall be dissolved, and this bright Planet, hid by vile Enchantment,
shine bright and clear for ever. Is she gone, Sancho?


Sanc. Yes Sir, and upon so fast a gallop, that it is impossible for Rosinante
to overtake her; therefore pray Sir consider the Proverb that says, To ill
accidents apply patience; Let every Conscience fit itself to the times; we
shall have a smiling minute, when we shall ferk these plaguey Inchanters before
they are aware: In the mean time be pleased to think of being an Emperor as
soon as you can Sir -- that I may be a Governor, and raise my Family, for to
my thinking I should become governing hugely. Well, and now I talk of
governing, yonder comes a company that I think look like Emperors and
Governors indeed.


Don. Q. Not a word more -- I know 'em, it is the Great Duke of that noble Seat
thou see there, with his fair Duchess: And I suppose my Fame has reached his
Ears; he comes hither now to find me out.

Enter Duke Ricardo, Duchess, Cardenio, Luscinda, Rodriguez and Servants. Down
swelling griefs a while be hushed and silent, whilst from these great ones I
receive that Ceremony my noble Function merits: And dee hear Sancho, be sure
you behave your self with that Decorum as suits my Squire, and the place you are
in.


Sancho. Well, well, Sir, a word to the wise is enough -- Manners makes the
Man, quoth William of Wickham -- Now we are to deal with People that have a
scence of governing; I warrant ye let me alone for behaving my self.


Duke, Lure off the Hawks, the day's too hot for sport, we'll out again in the
Evening -- Most noble Knight Don Quixote de la Mancha -- Fortune has now
obliged me to my Wishes, thou Quintescence, thou Soul of Arms and Honor,
welcome into my Province.


Don Q. Your Graces most devoted, lives no longer, than whilst he is yours in
all humble duty.


Duke. Illustrious Errant, I am proud to thank ye -- Madam that you may know
highly Fortune honors me, I am obliged to tell ye this is the Knight of the
Ill-favored face, the shining Sun of Spain, the Mars of Arms and Chivalry,
whom I desire you to invite to my Castle, that we may show how we admire such
Virtue.


Dutch. I am his Greatnesses most humble Servant, and hope he will so far honor
us.


Don Q. I kiss your beauteous Hand most excellent Lady, and wholly subject my
self to your Commands.


Sanc. Subject himself to her Commands, -- Gadzooks very pretty, that, -- well,
this plaguey Devil my Master, has a notable way with him sometimes.


Card. We are all -- Valiant Sir, your humble Servants and most obliged.


Lusci. But most of all our Sex -- as to a Champion whose daily Endeavor is to
right our wrongs, with Sword and Lance, on Mountain or in Valley, to vindicate
the cause ^f injured Ladies.


Duke. And this good Fellow, if I mistake not, must sure be trusty Sancho, the
honest Pa^tner of this brave Knights dangers.


Sanc. Your Mightiness h^s hit it to a hair -- I am the very Sancho, indeed a
Governor elect too, for all I look so* and as for dangers, why little said is
soon amended, common fame is seldom to blame, but Patience is a plaster for
all sores. My master and I have heard Wolves howl at Midnight before now, -- we
know how an Oaken Cudgel can bruise, and what danger is in cold Iron: we are no
Flinchers, we.


Don Q. You will forget blunderhead. To Sancho aside. A Clownish Prater, my
Lord, I hope your Grace will excuse him. To the Duke.


Duke. Oh, Sancho is very pleasant, and his Proverbs become him extremely -- Go
some of you and bridle this noble Knights Horse, that I see feeding yonder, and
bring him to the Stable; we'll go in the back way over the Garden.


Sanc. And pray Mrs. since I see you have nothing else to do, will you be so
kind as to go to yonder Hedge, where to Rodrigues. you will find a dapple gray
Ass, -- tied and do so much as put him up with Rozinante, and pray take what
care of him you can, because the poor fool is a little skittish, and I cannot
wait on him my self, by reason you see me obliged to follow my Master.


Rod. How now ignorant Bufflehead, do you know who you talk to?


Don Q. Oh confound him, did you ever hear such a sordid Son of a Whore? Why
thou complicated lump of Dullness, does this good Gen^lewoman look like a
Groom? Does she seem fit to manage in a Stable, thou incomprehensible Rascal.


Dutch. 'Twas only a small mistake, Sir Knight, my woman's very good natured,
and I know Sancho intended no affront.


Duke. No, no, 'twas a civillity any one might have begged; besides Dapple may
be nearer related to Sancho than we imagine. I have bit my tongue almost
through* I shall never be able to hold out.


To Cardenio aside. Carden. Nor I, I dare not look that way for fear of
laughing aloud.


Luscind. How Mrs. Rodriguez swells, I warrant she could poison Sancho now with
all her Soul, for she knows nothing of the design. To Card.


Rod. I shall hardly expose my sense, to resent any thing from such a Rustical
Brute; my Breeding and his, I suppose, have been in different stations,
therefore the best way of expressing my self about it, is by contempt. I
despise the Creature.


Duke. Well, well, since you despise him, so let it end then. Come most
Heroic, shall I lead the way -- My Wife attends your motion. Don Quixote leads
out the Duchess.


Don. Q. Her Grace extremely honors me -- Hah -- Dunghill Vermin is this your
manners with a Pox to you. Aside to Sancho.


Sanc. Where the Devil's the harm ont? Gadzooks I thought Waiting Women might
have gone into Lords Stables, as well as Footmen into Ladies Bed-chambers; hut
Live and learn, and be hanged and forget all; there is a good Proverb however.
Exeunt.


SCENE II.
Enter Bernardo, Mannell, Pedro and Page. Man. COme, are the Musicians ready
now for the Entertainment, the Duke and Duchess are just at the Gate.


Page. They are all tuning their Instruments in the next room.


Man. Page, prithee run and tell the Cook and the Confectioner my Lord will
have the Banquet after the Music is ended. Exit Page.


Bern. And what is all this preparation for I wonder: What silly gambol is going
to be played now?


Man. And why silly gambol? Lord you are always so p^^^ish Mr. Cuff-cushion,
there is no living with ye, any thing that does not suit your grave testy humor
is silly presently. Pox methinks you should know your station of being
unmannerly a little better, be civil here, and be rude when you get into your
Pulpit.


Bern. Ah, thou art a pretty fellow to govern a Family with a flashy Head, and
a Heart void of Conscience, Morality and Religion. How dare thou profane the
Pulpit, Reprobate; a Whore were a more natural thing for thee to talk of.


Man. Why that is a Pulpit you love to preach in too, as well as I, for all your
canting.


Pedro. No, you must let him govern every thing, and then Sir gravity will be
easy; let but the head Butler be his Croney, and my Ladies pretty Chambermaid
sit on his Bedside in a Morning, and mend his Stockings, and then you shall
hear him rail no more, nor ever have a Sermon against Drinking or Whoring.


Bern. Why thou infect, bred from excrement; thou Quack, with not skill enough
to cure a Lap-dog of the Mange? thou venery-promoter, art thou shooting thy
Turpentine Pills at me too.


Man. Put him but into a fret, and 'twill be better sport, than a Bearbaiting,
ha, ha, ha, ha.


Bern. Fulsom Idiot, poor wretch.


Man. Ha, ha, ha, ha, -- poor Vestry dawber.


Pedro. Come, come, prithee, -- now let us leave him to chew the Cud upon
contemplation -- here comes my Lord.


Enter Duke, Cardenio and Page. Duke. Is he unarmed?


Page. They are doing it my Lord, and treating him in all points, as your Grace
has ordered.


Card. My Lady Duchess will grow fat with laughing, I never saw her take so
much pleasure in any Jest before


Duke. Go you and assist in the Ceremony, and be sure To Man. and Pedro. to use
him according to the custom of Knight Errants of old, which I have read ^'e in
books of Chivalry -- how now Bernardo, what is your reverend solidity musing
on, hah? Exit. Man. and Pedro.


Bern. I am musing my Lord, on those books of Chivalry, which I have of late
often found you reading, and I profess I wonder that a man of your clear Sense
and good parts, should waste your precious time so unprofitably.


Duke. Testy Fool, now if I would permit him, would this peevish Blockhead, be
impertinent two long hours by the Clock, -- Come, come, I Will endure no reproof
now; if thou wilt be sociable, and take part of the Music and the Banquet, it is
well, if not. --


Bern. The Music -- No, not I, Heaven estrange my ears from hearing such
Vanity, -- as for the other part, it is my duty to give a Blessing to it,
therefore I shall attend. Exit Bern.


Card. Ay to the eating part, I warrant thee, if any of thy Tribe are wanting
at that I much wonder.


Music sounds, then enter Don Quixote unarmed, with a rich Mantle over him,
and led between the Duchess and Luscinda, Sancho following with Rodriguez and
Servants, they place Don Quixot in the chief Seat, and all sit down. Duke. Long
live the Flower of Knight Errantry, the renowned Don Quixote de la Mancha.


Dutch. Vivat the Succourer of Widows and Orphans.


Card. The Righter of Wrongs, and Retriever of the ancient and most noble Laws
of Chivalry.


Luscind. The Tamer of Giants, and undaunted Queller of Monsters and Furies.


Duke. Let the Sports begin to entertain him, and let no part be wanting to do
him honor.


SONG.
I.
IF you will Love me, be free in Expressing it,
And henceforth give me no Cause to complain;
Or if you hate me, be plain in Confessing it,
And in few words put me out of my pain.
This long decaying, with sighing and praying,
Breeds only delaying in Life and Amor,
Cooing and Wooing,
And daily pursuing,
Is damned silly doing, therefore I Will give over.
II.
If you will propose a kind method of ruling me,
I may return to my Duty again;
But if you stick to your old way of Fooling me,
I must be plain I ^m none of your Men;
Passion for passion on each kind occasion,
With free inclination does kindle Loves Fire,
But Tedious prating,
Coy folly debating,
And now doubts creating, still makes it expire.
The Lady's Answer.
I.
YOU Love, and yet when I ask you to marry me,
Still have recourse to the tricks of your Art;
Then like a Fencer you cunningly parry me,
Yet the same time make a Pass at my Heart.
Fie, fie, deceiver,
No longer endeavor,
Or think this way ever the Fort will be won?
No fond Caressing
Must be, nor unlacing,
Or tender embracing 'till the Parson has done.
II.
Some say that Marriage a Dog with a Bottle is,
Pleasing their humors to rail at their Wives;
Others declare it an Ape with a Rattle is,
Comforts Destroyer and Plague of their Lives:
Some are affirming,
A Trap it is for Vermin,
And yet with the Bait tho not Prison agree,
Ventring that Chouse you,
Must let me Espouse you
If e're, my dear Mouse you will nibble at me.
Here follows an Entertainment of Dancing, then the Banquet is prepared and
brought in; the Duke places Don Quixote at the upper end of the Table, but he
refuses it. Enter Bernardo and says Grace. Don Quix. I do beseech your Grace, I
shall dye with Blushing*


Duke. The highest merit must have highest place.


Don Quix. My Lord, you confound me with excess of favor.


Duke. Nay, nay, it must be so, Sir.


They sit, and Sancho waits on Don Quixote. Bern. O^ my Conscience this is that
Scarecrow Knight Errant Don Quixote, that I have heard the Duke talk so often
of; oh the whimsical Idiot! Sits at the lower end.


Dutch. Indeed, Sir Knight, if I may speak my thoughts, your Modesty is a great
deal too nice: You needs must know your place, wheree're you are.


Sancho. Now have I two Proverbs at my tongues end, that I Would give half my
Government to vent -- One is, He that has more manners than he ought, is more a
Fool than he thought; and the other is* there is more ado with one Jackanapes,
than with all the Bears.


Dutch. How now Friend Sancho, what are you muttering, come we must have no wit
lost.


Sancho. Ah blessing on your Noblenesses prattling place; y're a princely Jewel,
I Will say that for ye: And now my Master Don Quixote has put me in the mind on it
-- I could tell ye a very pretty tale that happened in our Town, concerning
places.


Don. Quix. You will prate Jolthead -- I beseech your Graces, let this Coxcomb
be thrust out, we shall hear a thousand follies else.


Bern. By my sincerity these are both crazed alike, and I shall never have
patience to hear half their Fooleries.


Duke. By no means, my noble Sir, Sancho must needs go on with his tale.


Card. Oh we lose our chief diversion else -- for his wit and good humor must
needs make it very pleasant.


Lusc. Therefore begin quickly, honest Friend, for my Lady Duchess and I are
impatient till we hea^ it.


Sancho. Why then thus it goes, you must know then, that there was a Gentleman
in our Town, nearly related to Don Alonzo de Maranon, Knight of the Order of
St. Jacques, who was drowned in the Heradura, about whom that quarrel was a
little while since in our Town* Master mine, pray Sir, were not you in it --
Where little Thomas the Madcap. Son to Balvastro the Smith, had a deep wound in
the Scrotum as they called it, about the Widow Waggum.


Don Q. A plague on thee for a Crust-grinder, do thou begin a Tale without
head or foot, and then ask me a question -- Now do I sweat for the Rogue. Aside.


Sancho. Well, well, then it is no great matter -- And so this Gentleman that I
told you first of* invited a poor Husbandman to Dinner; and so the poor man
coming to the Gentleman Inviters House, Heaven be merciful to him, for he is
now dead; and for a further Token, they s^y, died like a Lamb -- for I was not
by, for at that time I was gone to another Town to reaping.


Bern. Ay, and prithee come back from reaping quickly, without ^urying the
Gentleman, unless thou have a mind to kill us too with expectation.


Omnes. Ha, ha, ha, ha.


Don Quix. Oh tardy Hellhound, I Am in a Fever for him. Aside.


Sancho. Never ^ear, Sir, I Will be mannerly. To Don Quixote apart. And so, as I
was saying, both being ready to sit down to Table, the poor man contended with
the Gentleman not to sit uppermost, and the Gentleman with him that he should,
as meaning to command in his own house, but still the Country Booby pretending
to be mannerly and courteous, would not; till the Gentleman very angry,
thrusting him down, said to him, sit there you Thrasher, for wherever I sit
with thee shall still be the upper end: and now you have my tale forsooth, and
I hope pretty well to the purpose. Don Quixote frowns on Sancho.


Omnes. Ha, ha, ha, ha.


Duke. A very admirable tale and quantity delivered, ha, ha, ha.


Dutch. Poor Sancho will ^ay for this anon; the Knight looks very angry, I Will
try to divert it -- My Lord, Don Quixote, I beseech ye, if my request be not
improper, how fares the gracious Dulcinea del Toboso, -- and what Giants,
Bugbears and Captives have you sent her lately.


Don Q. How could I mumble that Dog, if I had him in a corner. Aside.


Sancho What a plague's the matter, I Have said something amiss now I see by's
look.


Don Q. Ah Madam, there you divide my heart in ^under, the beauteous Dulcinea
is enchanted.


Dutch. Is It possible!


Bern. Ye Crack brained Idiot, I profess I can bear no longer. Fie, fie, my
Lord and Madam, what dee mean -- I vow your Graces are much to blame to indulge
the Frenzy of this Lunatic.


Don Q. How? What Is that Sir, Lunatic?


Carden. Now comes the sport.


Lusc. The Priest has smothered his testy humor till he is black in the face.


Bern. Who thrust it into your brains Don Quixote, or Don Coxcomb, that you are
a Knight Errant, with a murrain tee, and that you c^n kill Giants, Monsters,
B^gbears -- Or know of any Princess that is enchanted? Is not this Spain,
incorrigible Dull pate? What Errants are (...) here? Or what use of them, hah?


Don. Q. Oh monstrous! Oh thou old black Fox with a Firebrand i^ thy tail thou
very Priest, thou Kindler of all Mischiefs in all Nations, dee hea^, Homily,
did not the Reverence that I bear these Nobles bind my just rage, I would so
thrum your Cassock, you Church Vermin.


Bern. I profess, I have a great mind to strip, I have much ado to forbear --
but hold, I will not shame my Coat -- I will absent me prudently -- Well,
Madman, passion is an ill arguer, some other time we will dispute this point --
Till when farewell -- Add^e pate.


Don Q. Adie^ Scriptures groper. Exit Bernardo.


Duke A waspish strange old Fool: I hope, Sir, you take no offense.


Don Q. None, none, my Lord, upon my Honor, Women and Priest^ may say any
thing.


Duke. He shall beg your pardon* Hey Page, bid the Chaplain wait m^ in the
Park. Exit Page.


Dutch. Come will you retire, Sir, for an hour, and then we'll divert you
abroad with Hawking.


Don. Q. I am your Graces ever. Exit leading the Duchess.


Sancho. I am glad of this; that Black Coat's prating has made him forget me.


Carden. Come, my Dear, lets follow and laugh.
This ^ut begins the Farce which yet we see:

Lusc. -- Where these Fools are, there must Diversion be. Exeunt.


ACT II.
SCENE I.
Enter Diego disguised, pulling in Marcella. Marcel. HElp, help, for Heavens
sake help.


Diego. You call in vain, nothing can help you now but fair compliance.


Marcel. Help, help -- is no blessed charitable creature near, to help a Maid in
her distress?


Diego. Yes I.


Marcel. Thou art a Devil.


Diego. So, my Dear, art thou, a very Devil, and the Hell I Have suffered,
through thy nice Female Pride and Obstinacy, is greater than the Damned below
endure; but I am now grown a profound Magician, and I can conjure that proud
Demon from thee, that late insulted over all human kind. You now must love,
Marcella.


Marcel. Cursed sound, and now more cursed than ever, coming from the mouth of
such a Fury.


Diego. Ay, this is well now -- I am pleased to see that Lucifer keeps his old
station in your proud heart; my Spell will work the better. Mildness perhaps
had wrought me to a style of whining Love, to court and sue for favor, look
like a Fool, be modest, cringe and bow, lie like a Chambermaid, and at last get
nothing, but You Are an Ill-favored Monster, and I scorn ye.


Mar^el. No succor yet! no kind relieving Passenger!


Diego. But now you show your Sex in their true quality you more oblige me; I
now can bluntly seize thee without wooing, and like a man claim Beauty as my
due, pattern the noble Savages of old, when Woman, like the rest of other
Females, patiently couched under the Male Prodominance; and since you are
obstinate and stubborn, instruct the rest of men by my example.


Marcel. What do thou propose, oh, thou most abhorred?


Diego. To make a Convert of thee -- What a str^nge, coy, wild, impertinent,
unnat^ral thing have thou been hitherto, thou wo^est thy Eyes as if thou were a
Ba^ilisk, destroying others, still to please thy self; thou taughtst thy tongue
to murder all thy Lovers by proud refusals -- thy hands to tear their Letters,
and thy feet to run away like an ungrateful Daphne, tho an Apollo followed.


Marcel. It Is my nature, born for my self; all men are my aversion.


Diego. Then know, that I was born to new create thee; I will not have those
Beauties lost through Pride, which Nature first intended for Enjoyment; your
Eyes shall learn to smile, your Lips to kiss, your Tongue to praise your Lover;
Arms to embrace him: I Will mould your body to a proper form, make every part
about you do its office, and fit ye for the business of the world.


Marcel. The Devil shall have you first.


Diego. The Devil shall have me after, Child, as he and I agree upon it; but
before hand I Will beg his Devilships pardon.


Marcel. Oh, how I hate this fellow! What a rage I feel within my bosom glow
against him? What! Shall I sue to any man for favor; I that have through the
series of past years, made 'em the business of my jest and railery? Shall I
submit and beg? I Will rather dye first.


Diego. I can but think how much ^he case is altered; how many tediou^ hours
with downcast Eyes, pale Cheeks, a throbbing Heart, and Arms across, have I
wa^ched a kind look of this Calisto, who now I can command -- Come will you be
kind and f^eely.


Marcel. If, (as the word has always been a stranger to me, when it related to
thy Sex) i^ I ^ould be kind, can thou believe, oh thou foul Crimin^l, such
words ^s these could win me!


Diego. Oons I have no Complements; all women have been spoiled since men first
used 'em. Kiss and Consent at first begot the Joy; '^was Sighs and ^hinings
bred the Pish and Fie -- I will be fooled no longer. Strikes him.


Marcel. Stand off rude Hell-hound, I yet have some defense; when Innocence
fights, each Pin, each little Bodkin, will prove a Lance to wound the cursed
Assailer! Oh, ^hou most vile of Creatures that is, (thou man) do thou belie^^
I wi^ yield ^amely to thee? No, I will make each Nail an E^gles Tal^^, my T^eth
shall (...) thy Flesh, my Eyes shall blast thee; and in this noble ^^use, this
lit^^e Arm, in my defense, be like the Club of Hercu^^s, thou worst of all Male
Devils, Ravisher. --


Diego. Oh, I shall coo^ your Cou^age. G^es to seize her.


Enter Am^rosio. Ambrosio confronts him. Ambr. And I you^s Sir, I must make
bold to interrupt you^ sport a little, the Duke shall have no S^tyrs in his
Family. Come, come, Sir, deliver me your Sword.


Diego. My Sword? It must be this way then: ^'m upon the forlorn hope, and so
have at ye, Sir, Fight and Ambro^io disarms him.


Marcel. Ambrosio! He^vens! Is It he I am obliged to for thi^ Succor! The Man
of all ^he World I Have least deserved from -- I Am so confounded with shame I
cannot look on him. Aside.


Ambr. Now Villain, you shall obey in spite of ye; but more of that presently,
first let us see the Woman -- Hah, Marcella! Oh blind, blind Chance, Oh ill
con^riving Fortune, thou know I hate the cursed Cleft Tribe in general; and
could thou amongst the rout of female mischiefs, find me no other to oblige
but thi^! This worst of all ^he Sex! This damning Eve, with not one only, but
Legion of Serpents round her!


Marcel. What do I feel! His words shoot through my heart, as if 'twere wounded
with a Sheaf of Arrows; I am not angry neither to hear him rail, but changed
so, that methinks I could hear more.


Ambr. Oh thou dear Manes of my brave Friend Chrysostom, art thou not ang^y
with thy poor Ambrosio whose ill placed stars maliciously compel him to
vindicate the honor of thy Murdress?


Marcel. Si^ce the good deed y' have done, cause 'twas for me* so much offends
your thoughts, oblige us both, and kill me; for I can bear death better than
your words. Kill me, and I am then ou^ of your debt, and you revenged for
Chrysostom.


Ambr. No, live however, and (if a woman can) repent; for 'twe're damnation
certain, now to kill thee; live therefore, but let me see those baneful Eyes no
more; lock from henceforth those Ignes Fatui up, that lead men wandering into
Bogs and Ditches; veil 'em I say, that I again may never be troubled to defend
your Caterwawling; a creature that can purr, and ^hen can squeak, that
scratching can repulse the eager Lover, and yet be prompt and willing to
inge^der: Away, there is counsel for ye. Come, Sir, now march before me;
something remains for you too -- go on.


Diego. Had I but done the deed I had not cared. Exeunt.


Manet Marcella. Marcel. Yet thou art brave: Oh Heaven what shall I do to pay
the Debt of Gratitude I owe thee; what a forlorn and miserable Wretch had I
been but for thee! Oh I am lost! What Beauty, Riches or the Gloss of Honor,
with all the allurements never could subdue, is conquered by this great, this
generous Action: My Heart is melting, and a new strange passion fills all my
bosom, that firm resolute will, that stood unshock'd to the deserts of
Chrysostom, is wholly Captive to the brave Ambrosio. In vain is Art or
Obstinacy now. In vain does weakened Force resist the stronger;
The Fort's o're-pow'r'd, and can hold ou^ no longer.
Exit.


SCENE II.
Enter Duke, Cardenio and Mannel. Duke. Is the Doctor ready with his disguise
for Merlin.


Man. He has be^n dressed this hour my Lord; the Page too is perfect in his part
of Dulcinea; we only wait my Lady D^tchesses coming back, who is gone after the
Hawk the back side of the Wood -- And then we shall begin the Comedy.


Carden. The Knight and the Parson are still in hot argument yonder; the
Cassock and the Helmet are at mortal odds; the Church Militant scorns to
truckle to the Camp, he will not ask him pardon, he says, tho all the Knights of
the Round Table were by to back him.


Duke. I took this opportunity of slipping from 'em, to take-breath a little,
and laugh by my self -- See here they come, away Mannel to your Fellows, and
as soon as ever it begins to be dark do as I Have ordered.


Man. We'll be punctual as the minute, my Lord.


Enter Don Quixote and Bernardo. Duke. Well, Chaplain, is the business
reconciled; have you done Justice to this noble Knight?


Bern. I profess, I think I have, I have told him plainly he is a Madman, and
have conscientio^sly proposed to him a certain remedy


Don Q. I have not told you yet, that a Clergyman may be a Bl^ckhead, tho I may
suppose it, only to show the different manners betwixt my Function and yours.


Carde^. Nay, if the Swo^d and the Gown can agree no better, we are like to see
but an ill Reformation.


Duke. Once more, I say, ask him pardon Bernardo.


Bern. For what my Lord, I profess, I begin to fear, he has infected your Grace
with ^is own distemper.


Du^e. Ha, ha, ha, ha, -- He Will call me Fool presently.


Be^n. For me that have swallowed and digested Sciences, as common as Loins of
Mutton, to aff^ont Lear^ing so vilely, to compare with one that is ignorant of
all -- A downright Madman.


Don Q. Good words, Priest, g^od words, did Religion teach you to be rude, Sir
Cassock? Besides* to show I am not so ignorant, as you would make me, know I have
learnt the Sci^nces -- and made a^dition to excel your Gown by one much better
than ^he rest, Knight Errantry.


Bern. That a Science, oh ri^iculous, ^harkee; prithee prepare thy brains a
little, to answer me one question.


Duke. Ay, now they buckle to it.


Bern. What Is a Knight Errant good for?


Don Q. Every thing: He that is honored with that Function understands a
Science that contains in it all the rest, which thus I make appear. First, He
must be skilled in the Law, to know Justice distributive and commutative, to do
^ight to every one: He must be a Divine, to know how to give a reason clearly
of his Christian Profession: He must be a Physician, and chiefly an Herbalist,
to know in a Wilderness or Desar^, what Herbs have virtue to cure Wounds; for
you^ Knight Errant must not be looking out every pissing while for a Surgeon to
heal him: He must be an Astronomer, to know in the night what a Clock it is by
the Sta^s: He must be also a Ma^hematician, and principally a good Cook,
because it may very often happen, he may have occasion to dress his own Dinner.
Nor should he only be ador^'d wi^h all divine and moral virtues, but he must
descend to Machanicks also; for he must know how to shoe a Horse, to mend a
S^ddle, to soal a Boo^, to dearn a Stocking, to stitch a Doublet; and in short,
to do all things that reason can imagine. And all these things, and as many
more, is your Knight Errant good for.


Ca^d. What say to this, my good Divinity Teacher; methinks the Knight has
given ye a very fair account of his F^nction.


Don Q. And now I have answered his question, I think it is but reasona^le to
ask him one: I demand of hi^ ^hen, and put it fairly to his Co^^cience, I say,
I desire to know of him -- What a Chaplain's good for?


Duke. By my troth a shrewd question.


Card. And p^t home too, as the case now stands.


Bern. Oh sinful Caitiff, is that a question to be asked in these religious
times: Come, come, I Will tell thee that presently -- Humh, good for? Why in the
first place, let me see, What Is a Chaplain good for? Oh, now I have it; why all
the serious part of the world must allow that. They laugh Humh -- What Is a
Chaplain good for? Well, I profess I was never so puzzled in all my life.


Chaplain offers to speak, and they hinder him. Carden. Ay, it is plain now, the
cause is lost, the Chaplain's confounded, he has not a word to say for himself,
ha, ha, ha.


Duke. Ha, ha, ha, ha, Eagerness and Rage have so choked him, he has no
utterance -- Ha, ha, ha, ha.


Bern. What am I become a jest, fie my Lord, where is the decency, where is the
sagacity! Oh strange this is very unseemly -- And I Will be gone lest choler
arise, and I exceed the bounds of discretion: Oh, my Lord this is very
unseemly. Exit.


Duke. Now will he be musty this month, and we shall not get a word from him.


Don Q. Hah, what dreadful sounds are these. Horrid Sounds are heard within.


Card. Most wonderful! A Noise like a Woman's Shreeks.


Duke. Oh yonder are the Lights, I see they are coming. To Card.


Don Q. That last to me seemd like the cry of women, this may be some Adventure
worth my notice.


Enter Duchess, Luscinda, Rodriguez, and Sancho, as frighted. Dutch. Oh save
me, my Lord, save me.


Duke. How now, for Heavens sake what is the matter! Embr. her.


Lusc. The Wood's all in a Flame, a thousand Spirits are in it, and all coming
this way, oh -- What will become of us?


Rodr. One of 'em made me shreek so loud with a fright, that I Am sure I could
not be louder, if I were to be ravished.


Sancho. All Hell is broke loose yonder! There are Devils a foot, and Devils in
Coaches, and Devils of all sorts, shapes and sizes, oh! Where Is this plaguey
Chaplain now; I never had such a mind to pray in my life? Fly, fly, good Sir,
oh gadzooks, they will be here in a twinkling.


Don Q. Why let 'em come, stand by me and fear nothing.


Horrid noise again. Duke. This is something more than natural, and I confess
amazes me.


Enter Mannel disguised like a Devil, blowing a Horn. Lusc. Save us ye powers
-- What horrid thing is this?


Duke. I Will speak to it, for by Don Quixotes side, how terrible soever it be I
cannot fear, speak thou frightful Vision -- What art thou --


Man. I am a Devil.


Duke. Lucifer?


Man. No, his Butler; I fill up molten Lead in Cups of Agat to all the Wretches
that are damned for drinking.


Card. What do thou from thy Office then, and whither art thou going?


Man. My Master now has lent me out to Merlin, Prince of the Inchanters, who is
coming yonder, bringing the Princess Dulcinea del Toboso with him enchanted,
and I am sent before to seek a famous Knight they call Don Quixote de la
Mancha, to tell him how the Princess may be freed.


Don Q. If thou were a Devil of Parts and Understanding, thou would have
known without my information, that I am Don Quixote.


Man. By my Conscience and Soul, Sir, I think you are, and I beg your Pardon
with all my heart, but I was so busied in my several cogitations, that I forgot
the chief, as I hope to be saved.


Sancho. Gadzooks, I am not half so much afraid now as I was, this Devil seems
to be a very honest fellow, and I Will warrant him a good Christian, because he
swears by his Soul and Conscience; but yet he makes me laugh to talk of
Dulcinea's Enchantment, ha, ha, ha -- Mum for that, I Am sure I know the trick
of that better than any Devil of 'em all. Aside.


Man. Prepare thy self therefore, oh most renowned, for here they come, clear,
clear thy Eyes from dust, and pick thy ears, that thou may take the secrets
with attention; nor be thou daunted; for Merlin holds thee well -- I can no
more, the rest himself will tell.


Exit blowing his Horn. Don. Q. I see impertinence is a vice amongst those in
the other world as well as this, this foolish Spirit might have spared his
bidding me not be daunted, if he had known how to manage a Speech wisely.


Duke. The Butler was in the right, Sir, here comes more of the Devils Officers.


Don Q. Let him send all his Family, my Lord, I know how to answer 'em, I Will
warrant ye --


Music sounds, and then a Dance of Spirits is performed, which ended the Scene
opens, and discovers Pedro dressed like Merlin, and Page like Dulcinea, sitting
in a Chariot. Pedro. I come, O valiant Knight, to let the sea, tho all the rest
of sage Inchanters hate thee, that Merlin is thy Friend; here is thy Mistress
enchanted to a soul rude Country Dowdy by the malice of thy cruel Foe
Lyrgander, and if thou see her now beauteous as formerly, it is through my
present grace, and to move pity in those that are concerned to disinchant her,
for she must turn to her vile shape again till the cursed Spell be ended, which
to perform observe my words with care, and listen to what the destinies ordain.


Don Q. Most reverently, and in all humble duty, I thank the gracious Merlin
for his Clemency.


Sancho. What a plague have I been in a dream then all this while; and when I
thought I had fooled others, am I a Fool my self, and is she really enchanted
after all.


Dutch. Now is Sancho at his wits end to know, whither he may believe his Eyes
and Ears, or no.


Luscin. But his Master there is wholly transported, the Lady Dulcinea's fair
eyes have enchanted him more than she is by the Magician Lyrgander, ha, ha, ha.


Card. Softly, sweet Love, they will hear ye.


Sancho. Why a man shant be sure, that he has his own Nose on at this rate; I
would have laid my Earldom that I am to have to a Cucumber, that I had
enchanted her my self, and now Mr. Merlin there makes it out, that it was done
before* Gadzooks I believe we are a^^ enchanted, and Swarms of Devils like
G^ats and Flies are buzzing in every corner.


Don Q. Peace Babbler, eternal Mill-Clack, let your Clapper lie still a while,
that the great Merlin may unfold himself.


Duke. We have had the Prologue to it already, he has strok'd his Beard three
times -- now one good sound hem -- and we have it. Pedro* speaking with a grave
and loud voice. If Dulcinea, from an ugly Creature,
Would be transformed to this her former feature,
The Powers, who now her Beauty do r^tain,
To free her from the Curse, do thus ordain;
That Sancho shall three thousand Lashes give
Sancho starts, and looks dismayed. Himself; and them on Buttocks bare receive:
This done, from her Enchantment shall relieve her;
But not performed, she shall be charmed for ever.



Don Q. A thousand Blessings fall on Merlins Tongue, that like an Oracle has
now delivered these happy sounds -- Oh Sancho, Brother Sancho, or how shall I
style thee, to express my self more tenderly; my Son, my Friend, how am I
overjoyed to know that thou art to be the glorious means of Dulcinea's freedom;
for now I reckon it as good as finished*


Sancho. Oh not too fast, good Sir; there is a great deal to be said upon this
matter yet; An old Ape has an old Eye: I know well enough Mr. Merlin has owed
me an ill will ever since the Cage business, and now thinks to revenge himself
upon my Buttocks for it; but it is all one, forewarned, fore-arm'd, better a fair
pair of heels, than dye at the Gallows; tho I have not an ounce of Brains I may
have a dram -- I can tell that four and five make nine, tho I am no Conjurer.


Don Q. Oh prithee sheath, sheath up thy Proverbs now if ^hou love me, and
prepare thy self to disenchant the Princess, dear Sancho.


Sancho. Ay now it is dear Sancho, now you have occasion for my Buttocks it is
dear Sancho; but just now I was a Babbler, a Mill-clack, and every foot a
Hound, a Vermin, and I know not what; therefore I'gad I Will make much of one,
good men are scarce, the Hound shall have more wit than to l^sh himself, I Will
tell ye but that.


Don Q. How Is this! Dare thou provoke my Rage by a Denial?


Duke. Consider what you owe to the merits of your Master, Sancho that sure
must soften your hard heart.


Carden. And to the Princess too -- his Soul, his better part, from whose
benign and wonderful Influence, all honors must arise.


Dutch. It Is but three thousand Lashes -- and alas -- what are those.


Sancho. Alas those are nothing, I warrant nothing; Sancho mimicks her. ^ut if
your Ladyships render hide were to disenchant some body at this ^^te, I believe
you would be glad to bate some of those. Oons does your Grace believe my
Buttocks are made of Buckskin?


Luscind. Realiy it is great pity the world should be deprived of such an
excellent Beauty, and I am very certain that generous Sancho will quickly
relent, and willingly sacrifice his Backside to end the Enchantment.


Sancho. Why there is another now, I warrant that squeaking Devil could fla^g a
man to death by her good will. Why what a plague has my generous Backside to do
with Enchantments? Mimicking her. or why must I be obliged to demolish the
Beauty of my Backside, to recover the Beauty of her Face; it is my Masters
business I think, and since he is to enjoy the one, let him take the the other
along too, for my part I Will have nothing to do with it.


Page as for Dulcinea. Is it then possible, thou Soul of Lead, thou
Marble-breasted Rocky-hearted Squire, that thou should boggle at such easy
penance, to do thy Lord and me so great a favor? Had thou been doomed to eat
a hundred Toads, three thousand Lizzards or a peck of Vipers, to sheer thy Eye
lids, flea thy Head and Face, or broyl thy self three hours upon a Grid-Iron,
this ha^ ^een something for thee to refuse; but since the thing imposed is but
a flauging, a punishment each paultry Schoolboy laughs at, and which each
rampant antiquated Sinner chooses for Pleasure; this to deny, especially when
the performance would retrieve my Beauty, supple my Skin, and make this
Olive-colour'd face as fair as now it seems, is a Barbarity unpardonable, and
the World will hate thee for it.


Don Q. And let thy sweetness know, that he shall do it, tho he could herd with
a young brood of Giants, fierce as the old that combated with Jove -- Harkee,
Rascal, Garlick-eater, I will tie thee naked to a Tree, and instead of the
three thousand Lashes give thee six, and each of those six inches deep, if I
but hear thee breathe another word like a refusal.


Takes hold of Sancho, who trembles. Pedro. Hold, noble Knight, thou errst,
that must not be, for the great powers have ordered the Penance done must not
be forced but willingly.


Sancho. Why then every one as you were, and face about to the right again; God
a mercy for that in faith Master Merlin. Getting from Don Quixote Lookee, Sir,
there is no more to be said, you hear what the grand powers have ordered: Come,
come, it is ill shaving against the hair; the wearer best knows where the Shoe
wrings him; besides you know the old saying, Scratch my back, and I Will claw
your elbow; there is nothing to be done but by fair means, think of that, Sir.


Don Q. Why then a thousand times begging thy pardon, Sancho, I do entreat thy
favor in this business.


Sancho. Humh -- humh -- entreat my favor.


Don Q. Consider friend our future rise depends on the performance; for wanting
her influence I can be no Emperor, nor thou no Governor, which i^ once done I
promise thee within a month at farthest.


Sancho. Why, ay, Sir, this is something now -- but yet three thousand Lashes,
humh --


Duke. Nay, as to that, if Sancho be so generous to disinchant the Lady, he
shall not stay so long to have a Government, for I have now an Island at his
service.


Card. Oh fortunate Sancho, Oh most happy Squire, I shall be proud to wait on
him.


D^^ch. And I.


Lusc. And all of us.


Sancho. Ay marry Sir, now you sound well indeed, there is no squeaking in this
Bagpipe; why it is a wonderful thing to think now, how benefits have power to
alter resolutions, and how merrily an Ass will trip it up Hill that is laden
with Gold and Jewels; methinks I am strangely altered on the sudden, and am not
so averse to this Lashing as before.


Don Q. Well, are things yet according to thy wish, a^t thou now satisfied,
that by my means, thou shall become a Governor, does thy heart yet relent?


Sancho. It does, Sir, and you may see it in my Eyes. weeping You may find by
me too, that he that is obstinate wears his Coat soonest thredbare, and folly
may hinder a man of many a good turn. I beseech ye, Sir, to pardon my Proverbs,
and thank the Duke there for his noble favor, which I do now resolve to
deserve by my speedy disenchanting the Lady Dulcinea, who yet e're morning
shall find her business much bettered, if my Buttocks can be but in humor.


Don Q. There spoke my Brother, my Right hand* my Genius.


Duke. The Islands name is Barataria -- and here I do declare before ye all,
Don Sancho is the Governor.


Omn. Long live the Governor of the Island Barataria.


Pedro. It Is well, and more to celebrate this hour, I by my Art will show how I
approve it.


Pedro waves his Wand, then here is performed this Song sung by a Milkmai^* and
followed by a Dance of Milkmaids. SONG.
I.
YE Nymphs and Sylvan Gods,
That Love Green Fields and Woods*
When Spring newly born,
Her self does adorn,
With Flowers and Blooming Buds;
Come Sing in the praise,
Whilst Flocks do graze
In yonder pleasant Vale,
Of those that choose
Their sleeps to lose,
And in cold Dews,
With clouted Shoes,
Do carry the Milking Pail.
II.
The Goddess of the Morn,
With blushes they adorn,
And take the fresh Air;
Whilst Linnets prepare
A Consort on each green Thorn,
The Ousle and Thrush,
On every Bush;
And the Charming Nightingal;
In merry Vain,
Their Throats do strain,
To entertain
The Jolly train
That carry the Milking Pail.
III.
When cold bleak Winds do Roar,
And Flowers can spring no more,
The Fields that were seen,
So pleasant and green,
By winter all Candy'd over,
Oh! how the Town Lass,
Looks with her white Face,
And her Lips of deadly Pale:
But it is not so,
With those that go,
Through Frost and Snow,
With Cheeks that glow,
And carry the Milking Pail.
IV.
The Miss of Courtly ^ould,
Adorned with Pearl and Gold,
With washes and Paint,
Her Skin does so Taint,
She Is withered before She Is old,
Whilst She in Commode,
Puts on a Cart-load;
And with Cushions plumps her Tail;
What Ioys are found,
In Russet Gown,
Young, Plump and Round,
And sweet and sound,
That carry the Milking Pail*
V.
The Girls of Venus game,
That venture Health and Fame,
In practicing Feats,
With Colds and with Heats,
Make Lovers grow Blind and Lame;
If Men were so Wise,
To value the prize,
Of the Wares most fit for sale,
What store of Beans,
Would dawb their Clothes,
To save a Nose,
By following those
That carry the Milking Pail.
Carden. Merlin is pleased at Sancho's condescension, which he has drovd by
this strange Entertainment.


Don Q. And Dulcinea smiled most radiantly.


Luscind. And at her going made a low bow to Sancho.


Duke. Come Governor, now let us home to Supper, where we'll confer about some
public matters relating to your Charge.


Dutch. Take heed you are not cruel, our Islanders will never endure a Tyrant.


Sancho. Oh let me alone for that Madam, I Will be as mild as a Milch Cow: I have
nothing rough about me but my Beard. Thus goes the World Sirs, many must fall
low,
^hilst others rise up high;
Many get Governments the Lord knows how,
And so Gadzooks have I.
Exeunt.


ACT III.
SCENE I.
Marcella walks over the Stage pensively. Afterward Enter Cardenio and
Ambrosio. Card. -- SO Cynthia rose amidst the Myrtle Grove, Speaking as
Marcella passes by.
Like the Queen Mother of the Stars above.
Oh, dear Ambrosio, good morrow to thee, what you come from seeing Execution
done upon Diego?


Ambr. I have seen him soundly whipped, and turned our of his Employment this
morning.


Card. Insolent* Villain! was there no one to attacque but the chief Beauty of
our Groves, the Glory of the Plains, and Darling of the Shepherds, the admired
Marcella. Leandro her Father it seems was there too, who, I hear, has made a
particular Suit to the Duke about his Daughter.


Ambr. Your Intelligence is good, Sir.


Card. My Intelligence is good? Why, how now Friend, art thou grown resty, is
that all, to say my Intelligence is good? nay, then you shall find my
Intelligence is better; for I heard a Bird sing, that the old Man, weighing
your late b^ave action done for her, and knowing you to be the Dukes kinsman,
has made an offer of his Daughter for a Wife for you.


Ambr. So S^r.


Card. So, Sir, I gad, and I think very well too Sir, what a Pox ails thee? Why
thou art as musty, as if thou had been offered a Witch without a Portion, or
do thou banter me with a fit of dissimulation? Hah, come, come, Sir, welcome
your happy Planet with smiles, Plato, Socrates and Aristotle are good
Companions when a man has an Estate, but horribly dull and phlegmatic fellows
when the Assets are wanting.


Ambr. Very well, Sir.


Card. Thou art the Duke's Relation, and I know he loves thee, and will do very
well for thee, but still a fortune of thy own making is more honorable, and I
know Leanardo dotes on his sine Daughter, and will give her a world of Wealth;
nor is his Family to be despised for all he fancies a rural Life among the
Shepherds, he being, as I Am informed, lineally descended from the noble Cid Ruy
diaz.


Ambr. And what of all this, Sir?


Card. What of all this? Why then you are a happy fellow, I think to have the
prospect of enjoying so sweet a Creature with so plentiful a Fortune: Yet what
most surprises me is, to hear that her sudden Love to thee, has quite altered
her nature, and she that from her Infancy was noted for the most reserved and
coy of all her Sex, now talks of Love, blushes, sings amorous Sonnets, and
lives quite contrary to her former custom.


Ambr. So let her live, prithee why do thou trouble me with the recital of a
Woman's follies; their Wiles, their Mischief^, and their Protean Changes I know
too well already; I am as well skilled in the Philosophy of that damning Sex as
e're was Aretine, and hate 'em as he did, with such a rancour, that I have an
Odium even for her that bore me, for being female in her generation; if thou
would please me say the plague's amongst 'em. But he that bids me for a Wife
prepare,


Is forming the worst Hell, and fixing of me there Ex. Card. What the Devil
ails him? the young fellow's bewitched I think, I thought he came hither on
purpose to follow her, for I Am sure I saw her go down that walk just know --
But since it is otherwise, I Am certain she must meet him, and then a kind word,
and a sweet look or two I warrant willsoon convert him from his Heresy.


Enter Page. Page. My Lord Duke has been looking for ye, Sir, this hour, he is
now in the Hall with the Duchess, ready to see the second Exploit which we are
going to banter Don Quixote with, which is the Adventure of the Countess
Trifaldi; if you intend to laugh, Sir, come away for we are just going to begin.


Card. I Will follow thee; the Jest must needs be excellent. Exeunt


Re-enter Ambrosio and Marcella following* Ambr. Was ever man so teiz'd with
what he hated, the more I shun the Plague, the more I am infected, how dare
thou follow me?


Marc. What dares not Courage do? I am in your debt, Sir, and like a generous
Bankrupt am so honest I cannot rest, nor harbor any quiet till I have made
repayment.


Ambr. By tor^uring me, is that the way Tormentor!


Marc. Heavens can you talk of tortures I being here, that undergo the greatest
that are possible: Is there a greater torture for a woman, than to suppress her
humnour, vail her Pride which she sometimes calls Modesty, and be forced,
blushing beneath a thousand thousand shames, to curse her Stars like me, and
own she loves.


Ambr. Why then Antipodes to Amity, do thou pretend to Love?


Marc. Oh that thy tongue were a sharp pointed Dagger to wound my heart, that
it might bleed an answer, as it does now my -- Soul when it compels me to
answer yes -- I do.


Ambr. What me, is it me thou love, speak sweet damnation.


Marc. I will not speak, thou Devil! -- Gods what am I doing -- Oh -- give me
back one minute of my past strength, that I may have the pleasure but of
railing a little at him, and 'twill be heaven to me; where does thy Witchcraft
lie, thou Sorcerer, in thy eyes, thy tongue, or in what other part? Tell me,
that I may tear the fatal Charm, and give my poor tormented Soul some ease.


Ambr. Hey, Fits, Eruptions! This is woman right now, there is now a Legion of
Cub Devils within her, that tumble up and down and make her mad.


Marc. Forgive me, Sir, these strange effects of passion, these stubborn weeds,
which I will now endeavor to root out and demolish.


Ambr. That was a flattering Feind now; soft and moving to make us think she is
a Foe to Pride.


Marc. I have seemed proud, Sir, but 'twas all Hypocrisy, which Patience and
warm pursuing had discovered, as now your Charms have done, and made me
flexible.


Ambr. Ha, ha, ha, ha, now dearest Chrysostom look down and smile to see the
Victim offered to revenge thee.


SONG.
I.
DAmon let a Friend advise ye,
Follow Cloris tho she flies ye,
Tho her Tongue your Suit is slighting,
Her kind Eyes you will find inviting:
Women's Rage* like shallow Water,
Does but show their hurtless Nature;
When the Stream seems rough and frowning,
There is still least fear of drowning.
II.
Let me tell the adventurous Stranger,
In our calmness lies our danger;
Like a River's silent Running,
Stillness show, our Depth and Cunning:
She that rails ye into Trembling,
Only shows her fine Dissembling;
But the Fawner to abuse ye,
Thinks ye Fools, and so will use ye.
Ambr. A well tuned Devil this, oh she has great variety --


Marc. There are a thousand frailties in our Sex which every day and hour
succeed each other, uncertain natures with uncertain Passions, swayed by the
Ebb and Flowings of our Blood by Seasons, as the Tide is by the Moon; like
Rowers we look one way -- move another. Sooth with our Tongues to make Mankind
obey,
But scarely ever think the things we say.



Ambr. Go on, for now you are on a Theme that pleases me, rail at thy Sex, and
I will hear with patience, nay help thee onwards thus -- Even from your Infancy
you show the Serpent in your perverse natures. cry for each Bawble, then powt
and be sullen: The stubborn Curse grows as 'twere seededin ye, and springs
unculter'd from the first original.


Marc. We very often show a bud, it is true of mischeifs, that bloom out in
riper years.


Ambr. Why that is honnestly owned, and shows thou have some conscience, prithee
proceed; come to the Girl of ten.


Marc. Her chief delight is, e're she can be one, to be thought a woman; she
always stands on Tiptoes, and her hand is never from her Breasts to make 'em
grow.


Ambr. Right again, right dear Sin breeder, very right -- proceed.


Marc. Boys of her own age she hates mortally, but still extremely pleased when
men accost her; to call her Miss is an affront unpardonable; but tell her she is
grown tall and fit to marry you win her heart, then you shall see her smicker,
and make a thousand silly apish faces, to let you see how well she understands
ye.


Ambr. Young Crocodiles, but go on thou incomparable Orator, thou Cice^o in
Petticoats, prithee, go on -- Come to their Womanhood, their Pride of eighteen,
and so to one and twenty; what are they the^ thou Sibill?


Marc. He rallies me, this base invective pleases him. Aside. Then -- Why then
they are a second Race of Angels -- The greatest Blessings Heaven e're gave
Mankind. Angrily to him.


Ambr. Aw -- nay if thou flagg'st to thy old course I hate thee: come I Will
refresh thy Genius with a scrap of Poetry I lately met with in an honest Satyr,
that suits exactly with the present Theme. At fourteen Years young Females are
contriving Tricks to tempt ye,
At sixteen Years come on and woo, and take of Kisses plenty;
At eighteen Years full grown and ripe, they are ready to content ye;
At nineteen sly and mischievous, but the Devil at one and twenty.
There, there is a Poetical touch now to inspire thee; come, prithee go on now.


Marc. Oh Heaven, he makes me his mere jest, and I ungratefully have been
exposing my Sex to entertain his vanity.


Amb. Nay, either rail quickly or I Will be gone, I have no other business with
thee.


Marc. Yes, thou insulting Monster, I will rail, but it shall be at thee, thou
seed of Rocks, unnatural Brute, thou shame of all that call themselves of
humane race.


Ambr. Thou Woman.


Marc. Have I been from my Infancy adored, my Person been he Idol of thy Sex,
and drawn more worshippers than often Heaven it self, to pay Devotion to my
Beauty's Altar; and is it possible that thy humanity can so degenerate, to
think me --


Amb. Woman.


Marc. Reject a joy too precious for thy hopes, and barbarously use me like --


Amb. A Woman -- Woman, that I could wish with all her kind were doomed to
stand in one great field of Flax, and I had power to set it on a blaze.
Remember Chrysostom, ^here, there is the cause That 'twixt thy Sex and me
breeds endless jar,
And for'whose sake I shall till death abhor.
Exit.


Marc. Do: But yet e're thy death, I beg the powers divine, thou may find
one, one Woman, to give thee as little rest as thou have left me now; for I
shall never never rest again: Racks, Poison, Flames, Halters, and Cutting
Swords, I long methinks, I long to use ye all; this comes of being coy, and of
dissembling. All stubborn Maids, let my Example guide,
Henceforth never sacrifice your Love to Pride:
Take whilst you can the kind deserving he,
Lest in Refusing, you Repent like me.



SCENE II.
Enter Duke, Don Quixote, Duchess, Luscinda, Cardenio and Rodriguez. Don Q.
Your Grace has here a very pleasant Prospect, the Landscape filled with sweet
variety; and then the Sea at distance near that Champian, makes the view more
delightful.


Duke. A seat for sports, Sir, during the Summer season, I hope your Valor
rested well to night Sir: How fares the noble Governor of Barataria too? have
you seen him this morning?


Don Q. Not yet my Lord, which in some little measure causes my wonder.


Dutch. Oh you must consider Sir, the task he has undertaken; his zeal perhaps
to disenchant your Lady speedily, might make him lash himself so much last
night, as may require him to rest more in the morning. But see here he comes.


Carden. Your Grace has found the Reason, it must be so.


Lusc. Mrs. Rodriguez there tells me he has been writing a Letter to his Wife
this morning, to inform her of his change of fortune, and invite her to his
Government.


Rodrig. He write it, I beg your pardon, good Madam, I told ye the Stewards
Clerk writ it for him; for his part poor Peasant he can neither Write nor Read;
he will make a rare Governor.


Duke. Oh never the worse for that, Mrs. Rodriguez, the essential part of a
Governor is Judgment.


Dutch. And Rodriguez I Would advise you to take care how you vilify him Sancho is
very satirical -- and there is an old grudge depending between ye, about Dapple
you may remember, here he comes, we shall now have an Account of his Letter and
the rest.


Enter Sancho. Don Q. How does my Friend, my Intimate, for since the Duke has
honored thee, and the Fates have ordained thee to do me such a signal
Courtesy, it is fit I take thee into the List of Friends: Well, and how go
matters, hah -- troth thau look st lean upon it, I Am afraid thou have overjerked
thy self; no don't do so neither -- Dear Sancho, come prithee tell me how many
hundred hah.


Sancho. Hundred, Sir, hold a blow there a little, sost and fair goes far, and
let him that owns the Cow take her by the Tail, it is easy to be prodigal at
another man's cost. Oons dee think a Governor has but one business in's head at
a time -- Charity, Master mine, begins at home, you know, and ever while you
live, christen your own Child first; I have be^n cudgelling my brains all this
night about writing a Letter to my Wife Teresa, and my Daughter Mary, (pray
heaven she don'^ dye of a fit when she hears she must come away and be a
Countess) so that betwixt one and to other, as concerning the Lashes, to be
plain with ye, I could give my self but five of the three thousand yet.


Don Q. But five, oh unreasonable Hang-dog, my Lord Duke did your Grace ever
hear such a pitiful sneaking Account.


Duke. I faith, Friend Sancho, five was too few of all conscience.


Card. It Is a palpable affront to the Princess, five hundred had been too few.


Sancho. Dee hear, pray Friend, will you meddle with your own matters, go too
there is many will shuffle the Cards that will not play, and I beseech your Grace
consider me rightly, I Will make my Master full amends another time, for tho the^
were but five, yet they were laid on with my hand, and with a thumping good
will I promise ye.


Dutch. Blows with a hand, Friend Governor, are rather Claps than Lashes, and
yours, I see there, is so soft, that I fear the sage Merlin will hardly accept
of such effeminate discipline.


Sancho. Why then, if your Grace pleases to provide me a good Holly-bush
against night, I will so fegue my Buttocks before morning, that you shall say I
have earned my Government I Will warrant ye, and I propose this the more
willingly, because I intend to enter upon it to morrow, as my Lord Duke has
promised.


Lusc. That indeed, Madam, may do something to the purpose.


Dutch. Dee hear, Rodriguez -- Let there be such a Bush got ready.


Rodr. What means your Grace, I beseech ye consider my place, and what I
officiate in; and since lashing the Buffoon is necessary, let some of the
fellows of the Stable exercise him with a Horse Whip.


Sancho. Marry gep goody Sock-mender, what you are too good are ye -- Well from
the Conscience of an old Bawd, and the Pride of a fusty Waiting Woman, good
Lord deliver me. If I had desired ye to lead my Dapple after me to my
Government, how you would have cocked up your Nose, I warrant.


Rod. What Creatures of that course kind, what Asses are ever used to go to
Governments, thou unpollish'd Animal.


Sancho. Why, thou Pomatum Pot, did never hear of an Ass that went to a
Government in thy life -- Ah pox on thee, where have thou been bred.


Duke. Oh a hundred, a hundred, the grand Sancho speaks but reason.


Dutch. What noise is this? Drum beats within, and Trumpet sound.


Don Q. The sound is dismal, and it seems to me, as if some strange Adventure
were at hand.


Card. It must be so, see here they come upon us.


Card. Some Embassy to the great Don Quixote without doubt.


Sancho. A plague on their Embassy, who e're they are, I don't like their
coming at this time -- If this Adventure now should put any stop to my
Government -- I should make bold to wish their long nosed Ambassador hanged
there.


Enter two with Drum and Fife sounding hoarsly, and marching solemnly over th
Stage; then Enter Pedro disguised like a Chinese, with great Whiskers, and a
large long Crooked Nose on his Face, leading in Mannel dressed antickly in a long
Robe, with three Skirts held up by three Pages and veiled, attended by four
Waiting Women veyl'd and dressed antickly, then 4 Anticks in s^veral shapes,
bearing a Table, on which stands the Figure of a large Golden Head; they go
round the Stage, and then the Table and Head being placed in the middle they
dance, then Pedro advances to the Duke and speaks. Pedro. Most noble Prince,
you must be pleased to know, that in the flourishing Kingdom of Candaya, I am
known by the Name of Pierre^ the hardy, otherwise called the Knight of the
Roman Nose* only Brother to the Countess Trifaldi, otherwise called the
afflicted Matron: The Lady you see yonder, who in her prosperity, was chief
Lady, or Waiting woman, to the Queen Dona Magunsia, Dowager to King
Archipiello, and from his Territories, thus far is come to kiss your mighty
hands, and your fair Dutchesses, and to entreat a favor.


Duke. Thrice worthy Knight -- Your self and the good Countess are most welcome.


Dutch. And tell her Sir, if any griefs oppress her, we shall be very glad to
bring her comfort.


Pedro. Your Beauty is most generous: but e^e I proceed to that, I must desire
to know, whether the valorous and invincible Knight Don Quixot de la Mancha be
in your Castle, in whose search principally, to say the truth, she comes.


Duke. Tell her then likewise noble Pierres, that here is the valiant Knight
Don Q^ixot, from whose generous condition, she may safely promise herself all
courtesy and assistance.


Pedro. Then, blessed be our happy Stars -- I will inform her instantly.


Card. Oh admirable function of Knight Errantry, beyond all other happy!


Lusc. Oh Virtue excellent, to whom Ladies come from the remotest Regions of
the Earth, to sue for succor.


Duke. Secure in his strong Arm and never failing Valor.


Don Q. Now I could wish my Lord that prating Gownman, that dull Bag-pudding
Priest, that lately railed at Chivalry -- were by to see whither such Knights
are necessary.


Duke. Oh, a home bred Bookworm, you must not think of him. Nay Madam this must
not be, we are your Servants all.


Dutch. Your Merit claims respect, Madam, from every one, therefore pray sit by
us, and please to unfold your Griefs.


The Trifaldi comes and kneels to the Duke, he takes her up, and he, and the
Duchess seat her in a Chair. Man. Illustrious Beauty, as soon as my full heart
and faultring tongue will give me leave I shall: But in the first place, I must
desire to know whether the most purifiediferous Don Quixote of the Manchissima
and and his Squireiferous Panca be in this Company or no.


Sanc. Why look ye forsooth without any more flourishes, the Governor Panca is
here, and Don Quixotissimo too, therefore most afflictedissimous Matronissima
speak what you willissimus, for we are all ready to be your Servitorissimus.


Don Q. Upon my honor straighten'd Lady, let me but know the tenor of your
wrongs, they shall not want redress, and now you hear Don Quixot speak himself.


Man. Art thou the Man? blessed be that Madrid Phiz, those Toothless Jaws, and
that way beaten Body, here at thy Feet I prostrate my nuworthiness to beg
assistance from thy Magnanimity.


Don Q. Oh Madam, Madam, what do you mean? By my honor this must not be.
Raises her up.


Man. And thou more Loyal Squire, than ever followed in past or present times,
the ragged fortunes of so august and so renowned a Master; thou second part of
Errantry, longer in goodness th^n my Brothers Nose there; thus do I shake thy
Fist and thus conjure thee to be^r thy part in my affair with willingness.


Sanc. Why truly Mistress, as to what you say, of my honesty in following my
Master -- Ragged or not ragged, wet or dry, I think you are pretty right; but
when you say my Goodness is longer than that Gentleman's Nose, there I must beg
your pardon, Gadzooks it is a mere Complement, faith it comes short of that, I
assure you.


Man. Be pleased to know then, valorous and untamed Sir, that in the Queen
Donna Maguncia's Court, I being Governess to the young Princess Antonomasia,
and hindering her from marrying the Giant Malambrurio, a great Inchanter; He to
vent his rage more sensibly upon us, did it on our most tender part, our Faces,
thatching our Chins as you may behold 'em, with these unseemly Beards and
loathsome Bristles.


Duke. It Is wonderful!


They unveil themselves and show their Faces all Bearded. Dutch. Beyond all
thought amazing!


Lusc. The Inchanter showed his Malice to the height.


Card. To make a Witch of a Woman before she comes to be fifty, is very hard.
Sancho feels one of the Beards.


Sancho. The hair is plaguey fast set on; the Inchanter as ye call him has
bearded 'em with a vengeance; why this would undo the poor Devils in a little
time: if they are inclined to be cleanly they will spend all their Portions in one
year, only in paying for their shaving.


Don. Q. How my blood boyls against this damned Inchanter! for I perceive now
this disgrace of theirs is done in spite to me, he knows I hate a Woman with a
Beard -- and now has plagued me with 'em in a Cluster.


Man. But see how harmless Innocence gets Friends; we were no sooner bearded,
as you see; but to our wonder, in the place appears this golden head, charmed
with prophetic speech by the great Merlin, who bid us instantly travel into
Spain to find Don Quixot, and with him his Sword and Buckler Sancho Panca, in
whose renowned presence, he would discover the remedy to ease us of our shames
-- This is our dismal story, and thus far are we come famed Knight in quest of
you, and least you doubt the truth of my relation, question the head, and you
will then know more.


Don Q. Not that I question, most afflicted Lady, the truth of your strange
story; but to be satisfied in the method I must use in your releif, I will
presume t'interrogate the head.


Duke. Now for the Oracle, thus far it is rarely carried.


Card. They act it to a miracle. Sancho is so confounded yonder, he cannot
speak.


Luscin^^ Oh! they will give him vent presently.


Dutch. Pray Heaven, the Head be in a good humor, and has not got a cold, that
we may hear distinctly, Merlins order.


Sancho, Good Sir be pleased to begin as soon as you can, for els^ the Head to
my thinking by his gaping, will attack you with a Speech first.


Don Qu. Hem, hem, thou admirable Head, what is thy name?


Head Don Quixot de la Mancha, otherwise called the Knight of the
Ill-favoured-Face.


Sancho, O, Lord, and who am I pray Mr. Head?


Head, the trusty Sancho-Pancha, and now the famous Governor of Barataria.


Sancho, The Devil's in it, I see there is no keeping preferment secret, every
ones Head, enchanted or not enchanted, will be meddling with other peoples
matters; and when am I to be settled in this Government, good Mr. Golden-pate?


Head, Not till the Adventure of the Beards is ended.


Sancho, Why then pray, let it be ended quickly, for my Cloths are making; and
my Wife is coming, and I must govern to morrow, whether these good women have
beards or no beards.


Don Qu. Be brief, incomparable Head, and let me know the way to disenchant the
Countess.


Head, This night between the hours of twelve and one, Merlin will send thee an
enchanted Horse, on which thou and thy valiant Squire must ride through the
Region of the Air, un^o Candaya, to Combat the Cursed Giant Mala^bruno, who by
thy hand shall f^ll, and from that instant, the hairs shall peel from these
disconsolate faces, and every Chin be smooth as Infant Beauty*


Don. Qu. Thanks to the gracious Merlin, and let the Horse but come, i will in a
trice be with this horrid Giant. Sancho, prepare, for I will lose my Beard
among those Infidels, e're suffer these to grow a moment longer.


Sancho, Dee hear, dee hear Sir, pray let d^scretion rule the roast with ye a
little, I am a Governor now, and can speak Sentences by the Dozen, what a
plague have we to do with Giants of Candaya? how do you think the Princess
Dulcineas business will go on, if I am galling my Buttocks in a Journey toward
Candaya? And as for these Gentlewomen, they will do well to get into some Country
or other where there is but little Sunshine, they may do business well enough
in the Dark, for the Proverb says, when Candles are out all Cats are Gray.


Mannel. Oh, barbarous, art thou to be a Civil Judge, and can thou want
compassion; whither inhumane shall we fly for Succor, who will take a
Waiting Woman with a Beard on.


Sancho, Well, well, that is all one, I shall not ride for all t^^t.


Carden. Truly Sir Governor, the Countess is in the right, a Lady with a
Bea^d, will look but odly in a Queen's Bedchamber.


(...). Oh, the grand Sancho, is a greater friend to our Sex (...) ^o suffer
such ignominy through his default.


^on ^u. I Have taught him more humanity I am sure.


S^ncho, Ay, you may talk, but this shan^t get me on Horseback, ^or tho I am a
friend good enough to the Sex, yet I am for letting ^^ery one shave her self as
she can. Now am I piping-hot just ready to enter upon my Government, and here is
the devil of a Head would (...) it, to send me of a fools Errant, as far as
Candaya, gadzookes, ^et Waiting-wo^en go hairy to their Graves, i will not jolt so
far to take way any ones Beard; not I, if my Master has such a mind to it let
him do^t alone, I Have other business eno^gh he knows.


Duk^, Why friend, the Island is rooted fast in the earth, 'twill stay for ye
till ye come again, besides, I find there is a necessity for your going: what
say^st thou famed Head? Can Don Quixote end the Charm alone?


^^ad, No, it is impossible, Sancho must go, or these be Bearded ever.


S^^cho, Oons, ye damned chattering devil, ye lie, and i will see if I ca^ Cunjure
yo^ into a better opinion; now I Am provoked, i will see what ^ind of witchcraft
lurks w^thin ye here. How now. Snatches off the Golden-head from the Table, and
discovers the Page barefaced, who is hid within it. What a plague have we here?


Pedro, A Pox on him, the Chollerick fool has discovered us.


Man. ^Tis so, he has spoil^d the rest of the Scene, come let us take the Page
away, and carry off all with a Laugh -- ha, ha, ha, a trick, a trick, ha, ha.


Omn. A trick, a trick, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha. They all get off, Ex.


Duke, It Is pl^in now, this is a mere piece of Roguery.


Dutch. Invented I warrant by some enemy to Knight Errantry.


(...). And acted by some of the Mobile of the Village.


Queen, That heard of his high soaring fame no doubt, and therefore tho^ght to
blast it with this jest.


Don Qu. Poor infects I despise 'em.


Sancho, Ha, ha, ha, ha, -- but what says Mr. Head here all this while to the
business? Shall my Master and I go a voyage to Candaya? good Mr. Head, ha, ha,
ha, ha, humph, what dee ye say nothing to it, to Shave a parcel of rotten
Waiting-women? admirable Mr. Head, ha, ha, ha, ha, I think I have routed your
enchantment, In Faith, ha, ha, ha, what thinks your Worship of the business; as
the Natural said to the Bishop, who is the Fool now?


Don Qu. Peace Buffle, all Drolls are below me to take notice of.


Duke, Ay, ay, Don Quixote's in the right; and so is likewise the Grand Sancho,
to honor whom for this last witty discovery, i will instantly send for his Robe,
and prepare his Officers to wait on him to his Government. To do such feats
Ages to come shall brag on,
Nay, when I Am there, i will govern like a Draggon.
Exeunt.


ACT IV.
SCENE I. The Town.
Enter Teresa, and Mary Panca, in poor Clothes. Mary, COme, come, Mother, pray
be pacified and cheer up a little better, and since my good Vather is got to be
a Governor, and has sent for us hither to this curious place to be Countesses
an vine Volk, slidikins let us go to it merrily, and not look sneaking, as if we
were going to be hanged for Sheep stealing.


Speaks broad Country like. Teres. Ah, Mary, if I am melancholy it is upon thy
account, for thou wilt prove but an awkerd Countess I Am afraid, now the blessing
is fallen upon us; have left off blowing thy Nose between thy Fingers Mary, and
wiping it upon thy Smocksleeves Child.


Mary, Yes that I have pray, and dipping my Knuckles in the platter too.


Teres. And playing at see-saw a stroddle cross a board with the Ploughmen; and
above all thy dearly beloved delight, moulding of Cocklebread.


Mary, Aw, I have left 'em all off I fackins, my Va^her shall see when he
comes, that his daughter Mary, shawnt disgrace her Gentillity, he shall find me
so chang^d in my discourse, and my way so altr'd, that odslidikins, he shall
hardly know me again.


Takes a Letter out of her Bosom. Teres. Ah blessing on the good Man's heart,
here is his Letter, and little did I think that my Sancho, could have made his
words good that he said to me, when he left me to go a Squiring:
Good-lack-a-day, I have been so overjoy^d ever since I had it, and have read it
so ^ften, and kiss^d it and thumb'd it so much, tha^ ^ have almost worn the
Letter out; it has had two or three mischances too, for the same day I had it,
putting it into my Bosom as I was a washing, and being taken up with thinking,
I dropped it into the Tub amongst the fowl Suds; but I warrant ye I snatched it
out with have enough; but then again, to see the ill accidents that come by
being over fond of a thing, at night carrying it to bed with me, and reading it
with joy, by an inch of Candle, which I he^d in my hand, I fell a sleep, the
light went out I know not how, and in the Morning I found the Candle in my
hand, squeezed as flat as the Letter, and gad forgive me, the Letter in the
Chamber Pot.


Mary Goodnow let us see it a little, for I Am hughly pleased with the dress that
the Dutch have found out for us here. Takes the Letter.


Teres. The Dutch have found out, why did every any one see such a simple
Holden, it is not the Dutch that have found it out for us fool, it is a huge
great Lady that^s Wife to one Duck, a huge great Lord that the Letter says has
done it, ye silly Jade.


Ma^y, Duck, Duck, good lord Mother, that you should mistake so, why what a
dickins, dee think I can^t read, here is no Duck nor Mallard neither, I tell ye
it is the Dutch, look here else; let us read again.


Mary reads, Therefore now goody B.E.A.N. goody Beanbelly (Lord bl^ss us, my
Vather you know used to Joake, and often call ye so Mother) ha, ha, ha, ha,
l^ft up your G.O LL. S, and thank heaven that you are now a Governors Wife, My
Lady the Dutch, ay here it is now.


Teres. Where, where, is it now, ye blind Oatmeal-e^^er, * Teres^ reads. humh
That you are now a Governors Wife, my Lady the Dutc^es, the Duchess ye
ignorant Jade, that is as I said before the Ducks Wife, has sent my Daughter
Mary a rich p^ice of St^ff, to make her a modi^^ ^ress: it is she has sent it
Clodpate, not the Dutch, wh^ever knew them mind any Modes or Dresses either, ye
senseless Mawkin.


Mary, Well, well, but then here again a little farther She takesthe Letter. is
best of all, I intend to marry Moll out of hand ha, ha, ha, ha, for her B. V.
B. her Bubbys grow large and seem to make motion for a Husband, ha, ha, ha. --
Well my Vather's a parlous man i will say it, O my Soul and Conscience he knows
ones mind as well as if he were in one.


Ter^s. Ay, Lord save him, the man had more in him than ever we thought Mary,
and then lets see here I come in, in the She read^. next Line -- humph. Come to
me as best thou can, and against thy coming I will provide thee a Coach, for
I go to my Government to morrow, with intent to make money, as all other
Governors do. -- Dapple is well and commends him heartily to thee. She t^kes
the Letter.


Mary, Ah bless the Soul of him, would the pretty Creatue were here, that I
might buss him a little. Teresa takes the Letter.


Teres. Ah Gimminy, I could eat the Letter up methinks: -- well dear Sancho, or
dear Governor, here I am come to thee at last; good Lord Mary! I can but think
upon his former words, which odsdiggers I could never have believe then, tho now
I find 'em true* Teresa, said he thou were born to be a Countess, the what de'e
call 'ems, Plannets I think he called 'em, have allo^ted thee Honors, said he,
Thou have an Eye like a Countess, says he a Cocking Nose like a Countess, says
he, a shape like a Countess, a jetting Bum like a Countess, and a -- every
thing like a Countess, said he; and good lack a day, to see how the dear man's
words fall out.


Mary, Odsl^dikins, I am so merry, I could l^ap out of my skin methinks; but
come Mother, now lets settle our faces and enquire for the Governor Sancho's
House pray.


Teres. It must be here about I Am sure, by the directions of the Letter: Oh!
here comes a Gentleman, i will inquire of him. Now Mary look to your self, be sure


Enter Mannell. Mannel, Well, they may talk of Proteus, and his changes, but in
so ^mall a time, if ever he wore so many shapes as I have done, I much wonder,
the blunt fool Sancho by chance made shift to frustrate our last design; but
i will try if he has brains enough to find me out in this disguise. I am now by my
Lord Dukes order to be Secretary, and Civility Master to fool him and his Wife
in there new Government: He I hear is upon his way hither, and she too ought to
be here to meet ^m, with the dowdy her daughter, I wonder their Tawny Ladyships
sta^ so long.


Mary, Sir, Gentleman, if I may presume to be so bold.


Teres. Prithee hold thy Tongue, i will speak to him my self, hem, ^em, if your
business Sir, * Putting her by* Mak^s awkerd Courtesies. be not much in haste,
be pleased to know Sir, that I am the Governor Sancho's Wife Sir, and therefore
desire you would do your self the honor Sir, to conduct me to his house Sir.


Mannell, It must be they, their Comical Figures show they can be no other.


Mary, And look friend, I am his daughter Moll you must know, otherwise called
Mary the Buxom; and now yo^ know us, pray will you tell my Vather, -- that we
are come, de'e hear.


Mannel, In happy time good Ladies, for I have been here ready this two hours,
to attend your motion.


Mary, Deslikins, de'e hear Mother, he calls us Ladies already. Aside.


Teres. Humph, you will be prating still, you will show your self a hoyden; why
look Friend, to deal plainly, we had made our noble entrance sooner, but the
Wagon broke, and we were forced for three hours to tarry the mending.


Mannel, The Wagon, why did your Excellencies, then condescend to make your
approaches to your Government, by the contemptible ^onvenience of a Wagon.


Ter^s. Why truly yes friend, for want of better, our Excellencies for once
made a hard shift.


Mary, There was never a Cart to be had in Town, you must know but one, that was
carrying Lime to make Mortar to mend the Town Hall.


Mann^l, A Cart! a Chariot sure you must mean Misse-Pritty.


Teres. A Cart did you ever hear such a Jade, ay, ay Sir, Miss meant a Chariot
as you say: Pox take her, would she were whipped at a Cart* a little; a thing
that runs upon Wheels Sir, a fine stately thing that runs I say upon Wheels. To
Mary aside.


Mannel, Ay, it may run upon Legs for any thing thou know of it. Aside.


Mannel, Ay, ay, your Ladyship is in the right, it does run upon Wheels indeed:
But come now I beseech you give me leave to usher ye to your House, I am my
self a small Officer under the Governor and your Ladyship; to him I serve as
Secretary, and to you as Civility Master.


Teres. Good Mr. ^ivility, I shall ^oon know your good qualities.


Mary, Oh, ho, ho, O Lord! I can^t keep from laughing for the life of me.


Mannel, My duty at present, is to conduct you to the Chief Matron, to be new
dressed, as fits a Governors Wife, -- it must be done instantly, -- therefore
pray follow me, that you may be ready to receive your Lord, who intends to be
here at Dinner.


Teres. Well, pray lead the way friend, i will warrant i will keep touch with ye.


Mary, Lord bless us, what^s to be done now, I am in such a quandary I know not
what I say nor do, for my part. Exeunt with Mannel.


SCENE II.
Enter Duke, and Sancho dress^d Fantastically as a Governor, between hi^ and
the Duchess, Luscinda, Cardenio, Rodriguez and Servants following. Duke, HAve
the Chief Citizens and leading Men of the Island notice, of their new
Governors Arrival.


Servant, They have my Lord, and this is the place, where they design^d to meet
him.


Duke, It Is well, is there ought else, my most illustrious Don, in which my
self or the Duchess there can honor ye.


Don Q^. Ds'death, is that a look like a Governor, hold up thy head for shame,
his joy my Lord has pressed so much upon his spirits, his Tongue at present is
not at liberty.


Carden. The favors these illustrious persons bestow hourly, would make a Dumb
man speak to return thanks.


Luscin. And yet he stands as if he did not mind 'em.


D^tch. Any thing in my power the Noble Governor is sure he may command,
unless it be to give him leave to Ravish my woman Rodriguez.


Rodr. Me, I had rather see his Governourship hanged, than he should come but
as near as to whisper me, -- marry choke him what the first day of his wearing
Socks.


Don Quix. Oons is he Dumb indeed. Ioggs Sancho.


Sancho, Hark good Mistress Conserve-maker, hold your self contented: All Rats,
lookee care not for moldy Cheese, if you Virginity is to be hanged upon the
Tree till I shake it off, the Crows may come and pick at it for Sancho.


Carden. Oh, this is well now, a few wise sayings from a Governor look decently.


Sancho, Some of which should profit your pert Lady then methinks, that she is
so quick at putting her Spoon into another man's Porridge: look friend too much
Tongue, too much Tail, -- I say no more, but the Hen discovers her Nest with
Cackling.


Luscin. Oh unfortunate person, now have I rowz'd a sleeping Lion that will
tear me to pieces.


Dutch. No, no, Madam the wise Governor will consider the f^ailty of our Sex.


Sancho, As to your Grace, I must needs say I am beholding, and if my
Government stretch to my mind but an inch or two, I will show my self thankful
as well as I can, -- but for your flee^ers, -- and especially Goody Warming Pan
there, the Governor turns his Rump upon 'em, as things below his place and
Sagacity.


Rodrig. Well, and I turn my Rump upon the^ too -- 'dslife ye were but a
Stirrup holder the to'ther day, were ye.


Duke, Come good words Roderiguez, there is distinction between Sancho and you
now.


Rodrig. Ay, the worse world in the mean time, -- I thought I might have
de^erv'd an honor from your Grace, considering all things, as well as that
Sheepsheerer. Weeps.


Carden. Ha, ha, ha, Faith my Lord, Mistress Rodriguez is the right, and but
that the Governor here has got the start of us, and that his people are coming
to wait upon him, I would put one Shoulder to heave him out of his Authority,
for the hard Joke he gave my Wife.


Sancho, I but in the mean time, don't sell the Bears Skin before you have
caught him: All are not Thieves that Dogs bark at, you may turn the buckle
behind ye now Friend.


Enter Pedro, and Baratarians. Pedro, Health to the Duke and next, the
Governor, Bowing to the Duke and Sancho. to whom I, as his Physician in
ordinary, -- and the Mouth of these grave Citizens, thus tender homage, -- and
am proud -- t'inform him we come to wait upon him to his Government.


Don Qu. Your hat, Sancho your hat, 'dsdeath, don't you see they are all
bareheaded: Come, come look grave and speak after me, we^l imitate* the Polish
Election, and give it them in Latin, -- Sit bonus Populus.


Sancho, Sit bonus Populus. Speaks loud and Clounishly.


Don Qu. Bonus ero Gubernator.


Sancho, Bonus ero Gubernator. They shout.


Duke, So then, since all things move in their right orde^, here now let us
part, and bonos nocios Governor.


Sancho, The Governor is your Graces Footstool my Lord.


Dutch. I hope your Excellency will let us hear s^metimes of your Transactions.


Sancho, Madam, there shall not be a Pound of Butter weighed, nor yet a Pudding
be enriched with Plumbs, wherein your Graces shall not have a Finger.


Duke, Oh! Air, Air, -- I shall choack else, ha, ha, ha. Aside.


Carden. Well, since it must be so, adeiw most noble Governor.


They make their Conge, and Exit all but Don Quixote, Pedro and Baratarians.
Don Qu. I yet must be a minute with my friend, i^e follow your Grace instantly:
you Sirs, I must desire t'absent a little too, I have some private business
with the Governor How now my kind companion in my Travels, what means this
tenderness? Pedro and the rest go out, Sancho weeps.


Sancho, Nature works, Sir, -- I never look upon that scurvy Phiz of yours, nor
think upon the many drubs and bruises you are to suffer* but my bowels earn
after ye, just like a Mother, for her first born, -- oh* ^eeps.


Don Qu. Brother, Sanc^o, in troth this is too kind, come think of governing
Man, and let that cheer thee, in which Station to give thee some few
instructions I have picked out this minute, therefore mind m^.


Embraces him. Sancho, I will, Sir, and beseech ye, speak slowly that ^ may
keep pace with ye, because you know my understanding was always rather for the
Trot than the Gallop.


Don Qu. I Will fit it to a hair, hem, to begin then, if thou would make thy
self a proper Governor for these times, thou oughtst principally to adorn thy
self with these three virtues or qualifications, which are Morallity,
Conscience, and Decency. -- And first, of the first, to have or be thought to
have Morality, is extremely useful for a Governor, if it were for nothing but
to be a Screen, that people might not pry too much into his Religion, for if he
is once noted for a moral Man (whither he be really so or no) let him be a Jew
in his opinion, or of no Religion at all, it is not three half pence matter.


Sancho, I am glad of that Sir, for my Religion, like the rest of my good parts
is somewhat Clowdy at present, it is like a Field of Corn ill managed, there
will want a great deal of weeding before the Crop would come to be good for any
thing.


Don Qu. Another part of Mor^lity, Sancho, is self knowledge, to be sure not to
forget thy Original, nor blush to own that thou com^st of a poor Linnage for
when thou art not asham^d thy self no body will seek to make thee so, but if
thou should like the Fr^g, fancy thy self an Ox, thou art undone, for many
hundreds now live that know thou were at first but a Hog-keeper.


Sancho, That Is true, Sir, but then, 'twas when I was but a Boy, for when I
grew up to be Mannish, ^ kept Turkeys and Geese, which is counted the better
preferment by much in Spain, you know.


Don Qu. Well let that pass, in the second place, a Governor ought to take
care to have an admirable Conscience; he must have a Conscience so very tender,
that a Fly cannot buz upon it without making him squeak, it ought to sit straight
and close to him, like a Thimble upon a Ladies finger, and not as it is
customary, like a Jockeis Boot that he can stretch which way he pleases, this
will best appear in his impartial execution of Justice, and to avoid
Corruption, or taki^g of Bribes which is so tempting, and withal so crying a
sin, that there^s not one Governor in forty can forbear damming himself about
it do what he can.


Sancho, Why then, Lord have mercy upon my Soul too, for to deal plainly, ^ am
afraid my fingers (as well as the rest) will itch damnably to be handling the
money. Apart.


Don Qu. As to the manner of getting the Government, that piece of self-denial
is generally smothered, for if thou have the Conscience to think thou deservest
it, it is thy own fairly if thou can get it in Course: I could be somewhat
Satirical upon thy parts now, but that I love thee Sancho, and therefore will
desist; besides, to do thee justice, thou art not the first that has got a
Government he was not beholding to his desert for.


San^h^, No nor shall not be the last, Sir, for desert is governed by fo^tu^e you
know, and in a double manner, for if some were to have their true deserts, they
would be Princes and Governors presently, and if others, again, were to have
theirs, -- Oons what an Army of Subjects here would be hang^d up in one Summer.


Don Qu. Well d^ar Sancho, for that saying thou deservest not only to Govern an
Island, but an Empire: therefore to proceed briefly, because I see thy people
wait, i will come to the third good quality proper for a Governor, which is
decency.


Sancho, I have an inckling, that that good quality will be as proper for me as
any of the rest, -- because I suppose it relates to cleanliness, good breeding.


Don Qu. Thou have nick^d it, therefore be sure to take care to pair thy Nails,
and scowre thy Teeth clean; and when thou sit upon the Judgment seat, take
special heed thou do not Belch, nor Yawn, for those are b^astly neglects,
though too commonly used among our Modern Ministers of Justice.


Sancho, Why looke'e, Sir, as to Belching, tho I learnt it of a Stout Dutch
Trooper that thought it became him very well, yet, I shall make no great matter
to leave it off; but as for Yawning, it is impossible for me, Zooks, I can as
soon leave off my Proverbs, and that you know were to unhinge all in faith: why
look now, your very putting in mind on it has set me at it already. Yawens and
Gapes.


Don Qu. Oh, the Devil, what a Yell is there, for a Magistrate, but come, since
I see Nature is not to be expelled with a forke, observe the rest, take heed of
eating Garlic as thou have used to do, for that will discover thy Course
Extraction, and be nauseous to all about thee, for in that manner I once knew a
Country Recorder that used to give poor Criminals double deaths, first by his
abominable breath, and afterward by his Sentence.


Sancho, That will be a plaguey hard Chapter too, for to my thinking a Clove of
Garlic gives ones Dinner a curious hautgoust.


Shaking's head. Don Qu. Be sure always to walk Slow and Stately, and let the
fullness and gravity of your look atone for the vacuum, and cavity of thy head;
and lastly, above all to be sure to manage that beard of thine wisely, Scrub
it, Sancho, Comb it, mundifie the Whiskers, I say, that when thou waggst it on
some great occasion, thou may scatter no Vermin upon those that occasionally
come to thee for Justice: And so good fortune guide thee. Embracing.


^nter Pedro and Bartarians. Sancho, Well, Sir, I can but thank ye, you have
given me a plaguey deal of good Counsel, if I have but the Grace to follow it;
but come many ventures make a full freight, i will do what I can, ^ut especially
for that about Garlic and Belching let me alone, and so, Sir, wishing ye to be
an Emperor in the space of a whistling-time, we take our leaves. To feast and
give our Islanders a Playday,
And meet our Spouse, who now must be a Lady.



Pedro, and the rest. Long live the Governor of Barataria, Huzza.


Exeunt Sancho and Baratarians one way, and Don Quixot another, weeping SCENE
III.
Enter Teresa, and Mary, new dress^d with Mannel. Mary, LOrd is this me,
odslidikins, they have made me so fine, that would I were hang^d if I know
whither it is me or no.


Teres. Well, and what is to be done next good Mr. Civility, what you have shown
us already is cur^ou^^^fine i^akins.


Mannel, Leave off that course, that Clownish word ifakins, and if you would
swear like a Lady oth' Mode, ^ou must say by my Soul m^ Lord, by my Honor
Madam, by the universe Cavalier, unless you are at Cards among your selves, and
then you may enlarge a little, as thus, SoonsI have had horrid ill luck to
night, I have lost 50 quadruples, Damme.


Teres. Well that^s very pretty by the universe Caval^er.


Mary, It has such a pure sound with it when one swears a little, and methinks
the words Mother come off so round^^, that would I may never make water more,
if I had not rather


Teres. O Lord, O Lord! there the Queen had it out broad, why ye clownish Jade,
have I --.


Mannel, Hold, hold, good Madam, let me manage her, you must consider she is
not yet weaned from her Countr^ Dialect. Oh s^e Miss, you have said such a paw
thing, that I warrant never a one of the Town Ladies would have said for a
Thousand pounds: Oh, you must not offer to say such a paw thing as that, nor do
such a paw thing as that for the World, though ye are in never so great an
extremity.


Mary, No, I cod that is very hard though.


Teres. Let me come to her, Sir; 'dlife this rude Hilding will spoil all our
preferment.


Mannel, Oh, Patience, patience, Madam; she must come to it by degrees: Young
Lady, I blame you not for speaking, but for the manner of it; therefore from
henceforth, when you would express your self on that occasion, if you are
visiting or elsewhere, you must say, Dear Co^sin, or Madam, I Have an extreme
desire to make a Natural Evacuation.


Mary, A Natural Evacuation! O Lord, that is pretty I swear.


Mannel, Oh, Modesty is the most darling Jewel amongst all well-bred Ladies,
though it often occasions 'em distress enough too. I remember once at a certain
noble Lord's Trial, a certain ruddy plump young Lady, dyed a green Manteau and
Petticoat into a perfect Blew, through her riggid Modesty and the violent
Effect of Natural Evacuation. -- But come now, practice your gate again a
little; -- Walk, walk hold up your Heads -- So, snap your Fanns -- Very good --
Wag your Hipps a little more -- Admirable, Adroit and Easy -- leave but off
the Country hobble now, and I defy any Court-Lady of 'em all to outdo ye. They
Iig about.


Ter^s. Well, I swear, methinks I^m changed quite to another thing already.


Man^el, Oh, here is the Governor -- I hear the Music. Loud Trumpets within.


Enter Sancho s^rutting, with Pedro and Baratarians. Mary, Oh, that ever I was
born! is that my Vather?


Staring and clapping her hands. T^r^s. Ah, Blessing on the precious Eyes on
thee, my dear Yokemate, my Sancho; and art thou then a Governor indeed, mine
own Oosle-cock? She runs to embrace him.


Mannel, Oh, hands off, good Madam; such greeting is not decent in great
Ladies. Takes her from Sancho 's Neck.


Ter^s. Gadslidikins I could smother him in that fine Coat methinks.


Mary, I must speak to him; he looks like one of the great fat Men they call
Judges, that used to ride so purely through our Town -- Oh brave Vather! Oh
brave Father! is^t you, Vather? is it you? Oh Law! oh Law! Iumps and laughs.


Sancho, Ha, ha, ha, ha; the poor Fools are almost crazed through mere Joy;
it is well, Spouse; mine, it is well: but not too much of ^ondness now, good
Crooked Rib -- and Daughter, mine, take care of Romping: Remember who I am.


Teres. Ah, dear Gravel-face, dear Ferret-eyes. Leering at him.


Mannel, Madam, Madam, you forget.


Mary, I am my Lord the Governor Sancho Panca's most humble Servant, upon my
Honor; and would I may never make ^^ter if Mannel stops her.


Sancho, Well, said Mary the Buxom; that is my good Girl, hold thee there, Moll.


Teres. And I am his Lordship^s every thing; his hot Loaf and Butter,
Suet-pudding, his Pancake, by the Universe.


Mannel, Pretty well, that, Madam, indifferent.


Sancho, It Is very well good Mouse-trap in me, it is v^ry well; and you see I
have been as good as my word; I told ye what my Squireship would come too,
Teresa; but you would not believe, you would be obstinate: A Woman, a Woman.


Teres. I was under some little doubt, my Lord; by my Soul, I must confess.
Speaks mincing.


Mannel, Very well, that last, Madam, extremely well.


Mary, I would have laid a Groat I should have had no new Lockram Smocks of
your giving me Vather -- not this --.


Mannel, Aw, not a word more of that; it is well he do*s not hear ye.


Sancho, Here Is Dapple too; come along with me, Chuck; the poor Ass, on my
Conscience, is as glad of his Preferment as thou art; I Would have brought him in
here, but that we should have wanted an Elbow-Chair for him to sit down in.


Mannel, There*s an Alcove within with a State and Velvet-cushions, my Lord


Sancho, No, no; it is no matter now, though the Creature is good Company
enough: Faith, he is trapd so richly, you would wonder if you saw him: he*s all over
Embroidered like a High Sheriff of a County upon an Entertaining-day.


Pedro, Please your Excellence to sit and rest a little, for I Am of Opinion
that this sultry Climate bears no Affinity with the Choler of your Complexion,
especially when irritated by Motion: Excuse me, my Lord, it is my duty to be
careful of your Constitution, which I perceive at present to be somewhat
languid and sudorous; be pleased therefore to sit, and see the Sports that are
provided to entertain ye.


Sancho, Ay, with all my heart; and do you hear Doctor? Prithee let me have as
few of your cramp words as you can, for they will work more upon my Constitution
than any Dose of Pills you can give me. Come family of the Panca's, set down by
me, and let us see these Sports he talks of, and afterward let us go to dinner,
for I feel a kind of a governing stomach, that methinks grumbles to be
satisfied: I could eat heartily.


Pedro, Good my Lord, think not too much of Eating, it is very unwholesome.


Sancho, How! Eating unwholesome! prithee honest Gut-scowrer, persuade me to
that if thou can: Ha, ha, ha, that*s a very good Jest, ^aith


Sancho Teresa and Mary sit down, then Music sounds, and an Entertainment
follows of Singing and Dancing: which ended, a Table is brought in furnished;
Pedro and Mannel wait, then is a Dance of Spinsters. A SONG
Sung by a Clown and his Wife. He. SInce Times are so bad, I must tell thee,
Sweetheart,
I*m thinking to leave off my Plough and my Cart;
And to the fair City a Journey will go,
To better my Fortune, as other folk do:
Since some have from Ditches,
And course Leather-breeches,
Been raised to be Rulers, and wallow'd in Riches.
Prithee come, come from thy Wheel;
For if Gypsies don't lie,
I shall be a Governor too, e're I dye.

She. Ah, Collin! by all thy late doings I find
With sorrow and trouble the Pride of thy Mind;
Our Sheep now at random, disorderly run,
And now Sundays Iacket goes every day on:
Ah! what do thou mean,

He. To make my Shoes clean,
And foot it to Court, to the King and the Queen,
Where showing my Parts, I preferment shall win.

She. Fie, it is better for us to Plough and to Spin;
For as to the Court, when thou happen'st to try,
Thou^'t find nothing got there, unless thou can buy;
For Money the Devil, the Devil and all is to be found,
But no good Parts minded without the good Pound.

He. Why then I Will take Arms,
And follow Allarms,
Hunt Honor that nowadays plagueily charms:

She. And so lose a Limb by a Shot or a Blow,
And curse thy self after for leaving the Plough.

He. Suppose I turn Gamester;


She. So Cheat and be banged:


He. What think of the Road then?


She. The Highway to he hanged.


He. Nice Pimping however yields profit for (...)*
I Will help some fine Lord to another's fine Wife.

She. That Is dangeorus too,
Amongst the Town-Crew,
For some of 'em will do the same thing by you;
And then I to Cuckold ye may be drawn in,
Faith, Collin, it is better I sit here and Spin.

He. Will nothing prefer me? what think of the Law?


She. Oh! while you live, Collin, keep out of that Paw:


He. I Will Cant, and I Will Pray;


She. Ah! there is naught got that way*
There Is no one minds now what those black Cattle say:
Let all our whole Care
Be our Farming affair,

He. To make our Corn grow, and our Apple Trees bear*


2 Voices. Ambition's a Trade, no Contentment can show; She. So I Will to my
Distaff,


He. And I to my Plough.


CHORUS. Let all our whole Care
Be our Farming affai^
To make our Corn grow, and our Apple Trees bear.
Ambition's a Trade, no Contentment can show;
So I Will to my Distaff,
And I to my Plough.
Pedro, How does your Excellence like the Entertainment? do our Music and
Sports please ye? Enter a Carter.


Sancho, Yes, yes, I like your Sports well enough; -- but here is a Sport that I
think at present surpasses 'em, -- Gad there is a rare Turkey, and I Have a furious
Inclination to be familiar with him. How now!


Carver goes to cut the Turkey, and Pedro strikes the Dish with a Wan, at which
the Waiters snatch it away. Pedro, By no means, Sir, it is hot, undigestible,
and corroding; the Flesh of that sort of Fowl, are highly pernicious to a
Constitution that abounds with Choler: You must excuse me, Sir, I am stipended
in this Island to take care of its Governors, and study day and night to
prescribe a Diet proper for 'em. Teresa takes a Comfit, and Mannel snatches it
from her.


Mannel, You must not eat yet, Madam; it is ill Manners; the Carver has not
helped your Lord.


Teres. By the Universe that is true: Well, Sir; pray excuse me, I shall
remember better another time.


Mary, O Lord, how my Chopps water at one of them fat Birds there!


Mannel, Young Lady, keep your Elbows off the Table: Oh fie, it is highly
indecent.


Sancho, Well then; Prithee honest fellow, hand hither one of those Partridges;
those, Doctor, are harmless Meat I Am sure.


Pedro, Oh horrible, this plaguey Cook has sent 'em in blood-raw; the Rascal has
peppered the Sauce too, as if they were to feed a Jew -- away with 'em quickly:
'Sdeath this Rogue ought to be hanged, he will poison the Governor in two days
time. Dish snatched away.


Sancho, Poison him! no, gadzooks he is in more danger of starving for ought I
see. -- Come, prithee what Mannel this while is teaching the Women to behave
themselves. must I eat then? Quickly, quickly man, and don't square my stomach
by thy own; give me a good hearty Collop of something that is warm and good, and
don't judge me by thy self; thou look as if thou had fed upon Smoke all
thy lifetime.


Pedro, Oh, that's very well, Sir: Jesting is wholesome, and I am glad to find
your Excellence so disposed; it is more nourishing for ye then any Meat that I
see here: Reach me that Dish there, friend.


Teres. Is it always the Custom, friend, for the Governors to have thy hungry
Preamble before Dinner?


Mannel, Ever, Madam; the Doctor very often makes a Speech upon Temperance an
hour or two long; it is the Custom.


Mary, The Devil take the Customs then, I say; for I Am damnably sharp-set.


Pedro, Look ye, your Excellence may Gives him a Dish of Wafers. Regale upon
these with safety till better provision be ordered; and, Madam, these are light
too, and of good digestion for Governor's Ladies: but for any thing else here.


Little Dishes of whipped Cream are brought in. Sancho. These, Oons why a
hundred of 'em wont fill a man's Mouth: Why, ye plaguey Paracelsian you, do you
think I can dine upon Paper?


Mary, Or I upon Froth.


Sancho, 'Sbud give me a Glass of Wine there, I shall choke with Rage else:
What a plague is the meaning of this?


Pedro, It Is Death for him; therefore I charge ye all forbear upon your Lives,
till I have corrected it: Let me see the Glass. Takes the Glass and prepares it.


Sancho, Why ye damned Son of a Glister-pipe, must not I drink neither?


Pedro, Not till I have allayed the Assid quality of the Wine, my* Lord, and
made it agree with your stomach; if you should be sick, alas, it is as much as
my place, nay, as my life is worth; therefore it behooves me to be exceeding
careful: you are inclining to a Hectic, my Lord, hot and dry, and too strong
Liquors will infallibly destroy the Humidum Radicale. -- There now, I think I
may venture it.


Sancho, Oh, confounded Potion-maker, this is mere Water, the very Liquor of
Frogs, gadzooks -- Hark ye, what is your Name, friend?


Pedro, Sir, I Am styled Doctor Pedro Rezio de Agnero, I am a Native of Tirte
Afuria, which lies between Caragnel and Almodona del Campo, and took my Degree
in the University of Osuna.


Sancho, Why then Doctor Pedro Rezio Agnero of Tirte Afuria, and Graduated in
Osuna, take that ( throws the Glass at him) and get you out of my sight, or
I Will throw my Chair at your head: wh^, ^e Commonwealth's Hangman, let me eat,
or take ^our Government again with a Pox to ye; for an Office that wont afford a
Man his Vi^uals is not worth two Pilchers. Exit. Pedro.


Mannel, Oh, my Lord, Passion is very unbecoming a Man of your Place: pray have
patience, 'twas the good Man*s overmuch Zeal to serve you.


Sancho, Here Is another too, a mannerl Coxcomb, that preaches Patience to me,
when I am ready to be starved -- Gad I Will rid my Island of such Vermin as you
quickly -- you shall know that a Governor must eat in defiance of ye all,
Rogues: Come, Spouse, fall on; I Will have this. They snatch and eat ravenously.


Teres, I this.


Mary, And I this: But first, friend, I Have great occasion for a little ^atural
Evacuation. As^de to Mannel.


Enter Messenger. Mannel, 'Dsheart not at Dinner time, Madam! that were such a
plaguey indecency*


Messenger, M^ Lord the Governor, ^our Excellence is sta^'d for in Council,
where are to be de^ated some Matters of great Moment; on must come awa^
immediatel^.


Sancho, How now, Jack Sauce! must come awa^! Soft and fair goes far; after
Dinner is time enough.


Mannel, By no means, my Lord; stay not a minute, I beseech ye; the Council
will take it so heinously to neglect em at your first coming, that I fear on
such an occasion they will rise and mutiny; therefor it is extremely proper your
Excellency should go instantly, your Supper shall be mended, and atone for
this to your satisfaction a^on.


Sancho, Why this it is to be a Great Man now; when I was poor Sancho, the devil
of any Mutineers had I occasion to be afraid of; but now Cares and Dangers
crowd on a-pace: Come, Teresa, we'll take our amends anon; and, do you hear, let
my Supper make me satisfaction without D^ctor Pedro Rezio's dire^^ion; for if I
find him here again flirting my Dishes, or squirting Advice, Gadsbud I will
begin with a Cudgel upon him, and so on, till I leave never a Physician in the
Island.


Exeunt Sancho, Teresa and Mary. Mannel, Ha, ha, ha: Go thy ways, Governor;
this will be rare sport to send my Lord the Duke an account of, which I will do
instantly, and tell him how methodically Great Sancho learned in naught but
Carts and Ploughing;
Rules without Power, and Judges without knowing.



Exit. ACT V.
SCENE I. The Iudgmen^-Hall.
Enter Page, Mannel and Pedro. Page, I Assure ye, Gentlemen, my Lord and Lady
were extremely pleased with the last Acco^nt you sent 'em of your new
Governor's Actions; we had the story every night at Supper, and with so much
laughing, that an old Philosopher, plagued with the Spleen and Gout, could
hardly have forbore. I am now dispatched hither upon a new design to further
the Jest; I have brought the Grand Sancho a Letter.


Mannel, Ha, ha, ha: So, do know the Contents on it, prithee?


Page, Oh, each particular, my Lord Duke read it to us in public; it is a
terrible Scrowl, and pretends to discover some Enemies that have laid a Plot to
attack the Island; 'twill try the Governor's courage, for here is horrible
frightful news in it. Here, Doctor, you must give it him, I must back to my Lord
again immediately.


Pedro, Ha, ha, ha; this will, no doubt, have the designed Effect, especially
surprising him, now in this juncture; for we have kept him these three days so
hungry, and so little in heart, that he will be frighted with the least shadow of
danger.


Mannel, This is the best place to give it him too, for he is just now coming
hither to hear Causes. -- But, Page, prithee how thrives the Jest at home? how
does the uncurably maimed Don Quixote behave himself after the Loss of his
Right Hand, Sancho, hah?


Page, Why, faith, so lamely, and the Jest grows so stale now, that my Lord
Duke begins to be weary; and therefore to get rid of him wittily, and send him
home to his House, he designs a new contrivance for me to Act; what it is as
yet I know not; but I suppose, by that time the Squire-Governour trotts from
his Island here, the Knight Errant will be moving the same pa^e homewards.


Pedro, It must be very suddenly then, for the upshot of our Government is
drawing on a-pace, the Mob will soon be prepared for the Jest. And see, here
comes the Pageant -- 'dslife and the Petitioners too. -- Now if any one can
l^ugh at Clumsie Justice, they may have a rare occasion: I must not be seen yet.


Page, Nor I. Exit Pedro and Page.


Enter Sancho, Constable and Watch, and Crier, with Tailor, Gardner, Canter,
Small Man and a Woman: Sancho sits down in the Chair. Crier, Oh, yes! Let all
manner of person or persons that come not hither for Justice, keep Silence; and
let those that would have their Grievances redressed, express 'em boldly, for
the Governor is prepared to hear 'em.


Sancho, He is prepa^'d as far as hunger will let him; and though I have
observed my self to have much a clearer Judgment upon a full stomach than an
empty one, yet since they say spare diet and f^sting whets a man*s
Understanding, I Will try for once how wise 'twill make me. Come, friend, what*s
your Complaint now, humph?


Tailor, Why, and please your Honor, my Name is Snip; I am a Woman*s Tailor,
and a Man that the Parish knows to be a Man that is not a Man, who, as a Man
may say, will willingly let a Man, though it may chance a Man may be deceivd
with fair Looks; yet, as your Honor knows, who are a Man.


Sancho, Who am a Man that is like to know very little of your business at this
rate, friend: Come, come, your Complaint Mr. Snip, your Complaint*


Tailor, Why, your Honor must know then that my Complaint is against my
Neighbor Radish there the Gardner, who has feloniously, not having the fear of
Heaven before his Eyes, taken from me and defrauded me of a tame Cock-Pheasant,
which I brought up by hand, and upon which I set an extraordinary value; yet
this ravenous Cannibal laid violent hands upon the poor Bird, carried it home
to his Wife, roasted it; and had I not come just in the Nick and hindered ^m,
they had devourd it immediately.


Sancho, Umph; and what say you to this, Radish, hah?


Tailor, He, he can say nothing, my Lord; for lookee, to prove what I say is
true, I have brought the Pheasant here along with me, poor fool, just as I
snatch^d it out of the dish from 'em. Puts the Pheasant on the Table. And n^w
since no proof is plainer than sight, I desire your Honor to do me Justice,
and make him give me satisfaction.


S^^ch^, By my faith, and nothing but reason, Mr. Snip; What, what an Enormance
is here; what can you say to this, Radish, hah? is it your Conscience to come
into a Neighbor's house, and steal away his Goods and Chattels; for his
Pheasant in this place is a Chattel.


Tay^or, Nay, I had not valued it so much, my Lord; but, to say the truth, the
Creature was my Wives, and the poor Woman was always s^^oking and playing with
it.


Sancho, Gad it is a delicate tender young Bit; Sancho touches it and licks his
fingers. are not you a Rogue for this now Radish, to purloin and filch in this
manner; it has an excellent taste, faith: must paltry Diggers and Delvers eat
like the Gentry? Oons, with a little good sauce to it, this were a Dish for a
Governor.


Tears off a Leg and eats it. Guard. But, p^ay will your Honor hear me a little
now; One man's Tale is good till another is told: This Nitty Jerkin here, this
Thimble, this Bodkin, this Cuckoldly Woman's Tailor, Snip, here.


Tailor, Why how now ye Dunghill-raker, ye old rusty Pruning-knife, ye Maggot
in a Pescod, ye Catterpiller: What, ye wont deny it, will ye?


Sancho, Oons, is not here a plain proof? what, you wont deny a plain proof,
will ye, Rascal? Speaks with his Mouth full.


Gardn. Ay, but pray do but hear me, my Lord, for yet you don^t know the trick
on^t: for you must know this Snip and I used commonly to go to one another
Houses, and jestingly snatc^ away several sort of things to eat and drink, I
from him, and he from me, 'twas ^ommon among us; and particularly the other day,
I had a curious Flask of Florence sent me for a Present, by a friend that I
used to accommodate with Fruit, of which, through neighbourly Courtesy, I gave
Snip and his Wife a taste.


Sancho, Well, what then? Go on go on; let him go on, Snip, let him go on; Gad
I never eat a better thing in my life.


Speaks with his mouth full. Aside. Gardn. Now, what do these cheating
Companions do, being resolved to have the rest of my Wine, but come t^other day
to my house; and whilst his Wife, who pretended friendly to cut my hair, put my
face in her Lap, this sneaking Louse-snapper, Snip here, ran away with the
Flask; for which, knowing no other way to be even with him, I yesterday made my
Attack upon his Wive's Pheasant.


Tailor, Why, ye Inoculating Rascal, dare you say 'twas Florence, hah?


Gardn. Yes, that I dare, Co^cumber; and to prove it to your face, that I mean
what I say, I have here another Flask of it, which was just now sent me by the
same person. Sancho takes the Flask.


Sancho, Nay, lookee, Snip, take heed of Lying; I don^t sit here to see Justice
abused; and if this be really Florence, look too^t, Snip. Drinks.


Tailor, Besides, if it were, I think I have not bin behind-hand with ye; you have
bin free to every thing in my house Time ou^ of mind; it had a damnable sour
taste I Am sure; and whatever you say, I cannot think 'twas Florence, not I.


Sancho, What cannot you think, Pimp-whiskin? what cannot you think? it is
Florence, I say it is Florence; and Snip, you are a -- What a pox sure, I cannot be
mistaken. Drinks again.


Mannel, The Governor has made himself amends for his fasting as it happens:
But what will the Judgment be after all, I wonder? Aside.


Sancho, Ay, ay, Florence; it is Florence. I knew I was right; and are these
things fitting for Gardners and Tailors? fat Pheasants and rich Wines food for
such Vermin? I am inrag^d at it; I burst with Choler.


Mannel, How will you please to punish 'em, my Lord?


Sancho, Punish 'em! Oons, I know not how I shall punish 'em: but since they
have made a practice to steal from one another, it is plain each of 'em keeps a
House to encourage Thievery, and it is likely, in short time, may practice upon
others as well as themselves; therefore I condemn 'em to pay ten Ducats
a-piece to the Poor, and from henceforth to be upon their good behavior -- not
a word more -- away with 'em -- They shake their heads, and are thrust out.


Mannel, Bring the rest forward there. Constable. brings a Man forward.


Sancho, Well, Mr. ^onstable, who have you got here?


Constable. Why, and it please your Honor, a strange hypocritical kind of Rascal,
that formerly we knew to be a common Cheat and Thief; but of late he has taken
up a Trade of Can^ing and Devotion, which we all believe only to be a Blind,
that he may manage his old profession the better; for last night we took him up
upon suspicion of stealing a Velvet Cloak.


Sancho, To cover his Knavery withal: Very well Mr. Constable; Well, and what
say you to this, Cloak-Merchant, hah?


Canter, Why verily, I may not deny to thy Superio^ity; but that in my Pristine
days of Vanity and Youth, I was a great Sinner, before the Spirit of Grace had
entered into me; nay, with shame I do confess it to thee, oh Governor.


Sanch, Take him away then and hang him, there is no more to be said.


Canter, Aw, but I will tell thee what I am now; let me plead, I beseech thee.


Sancho, Oons, what, after Confession? 'Shud, ant it confess and be hang^d all
the World over? What an impudent fellow art thou! Gadzooks, i will not spoil such
a curious Proverb to save never a Canting Rascal in all Spain -- Away with him,
I say.


Canter, Ah, Mercy, mercy; Ah, woe is me. They drag him out.


Constable. This is the worst Confession, friend, you have bin at a great while.


Sancho, Come, come, for more, for more; I find my Judgment much cl^arer now
than at first: Well, woman, what say you?


Woman, Ah, I have many sad things to say upon my honesty, my Lord; ^'m an
undone person, I am crack^d, I am violated, or, to speak it in plain terms, I
am Ravish^d as one may say. Weeping.


Sancho, Alas poor tender young thing, th^^ look as if thou had bin hardly
put to it indeed: but where, where is this mighty Gogmagog that has done it? he
must be of the Race of the Giants sure.


Woman, No, my Lord, it is not so much for his largeness, as for his strength
and ability: this is the vile Man, Points to a very little fellow. my Lord;
this is he that, as I may say, has abused my body like an unwash'd Rag.


Sancho, The Devil he is; What a plague, did he attack thee upon Stilts?


Small M. My Lord, your Honor shall know, that there is not such another
Impudence as that Woman in all Spain: I met her upon the Road this morning, and
I know not how the Devil ordered the matter, but I found a small Ambition in me
of boarding such a huge tall Pinnace; and so we agreed for half a Ducket about
the matter; and upon the finishing of the business, I pulled out my Purse, in
which I had about twenty more, and paid her honestly.


Sancho, Nay, thou seem to be an admirable finisher of such a business:
Well, go on, friend.


Small M. Now you must know, my Lord, this plaguey Queen, seeing my Purse better
stuffed than she tho^ght, pressed me to give her more* which I refusing, as
soon as I came to Town, she swore a Rape against me, which now occasi^ns my
appearance before your Honor.


Woman, Oh vile Creature, oh thou slanderous Monster; the guilt of whose lying
Soul equals thy prodigious strength of body; Can thou think to be believed,
against my tears and protestation? No, no, wretch, the noble Governor
understands Justice better.


Sancho, Alas, go^d Woman, don't afflict thy self so: Look'e friend, Finisher,
there must be more in this than ordinary -- Have you that Purse about ye?


Small M. Yes, my Lord, here it is.


Sancho, Give it me, friend, and we'll make an end of this business presently:
Come hither, Woman; you say this prodigious strong fellow here forced you
against your Will, and you struggled and defended yourself all you could, hah?


Woman, Yes upon my honesty, my Lord.


Sancho, Very good; then to let thee see how much I value honest Women, whose
weaknesses are often unwillingly overcome by such monstrous fellows, there,
there is that Purse for thee; and to make thy self amends for the wrong he has
done thee, get thee gone with it. Throws her the Purse.


Small M. Oh, good my Lord, if you take that, I Am utterly undone, it is all I Am
worth.


Woman. Ah, blessing on your Honors sweet face, you are a heavenly Judge upon my
honesty, and I shall pray for ye the longest day I have to live: -- Ah, Gad
save ye, ye are an upright Magistrate in troth. Exit.


Small M. Oh Lord, I Am ruined, I Am lost, it is all I have got this two years by
hard labor, and I have not a penny more left in the world to help my self. Oh,
that ever I was born. Howles out.


Sancho, Sirrah, you prodigious, you Finisher, leave your bawling, and gather
up your Legs, and run after her as hard as you can, and force away the P^rse
from her, and bring it hither to me.


Small M. Oh, I Will do what I can, but I fear 'twill be a hard matter for the
Jades as strong as a Horse. Exit after her.


Sancho, I begin to perceive that this Island of mine is very full of
Enormities, which will require a plaguey deal of trouble to weed out; a Fool
always sees more in his own house than a wife Man in another, if they will be
Rogues, let 'em look to it. How now, see how they agree about the business
without there. Noise of shreeking, and scuffling within.


Exit Constable, and reenters again with the Man and the Woman fighting; he
tattered and beaten. Sancho, How now woman, what is the matter now.


Woman, Why this impudent Fellow my Lord, contrary to your Honors judgment,
has followed me, and would have taken the Purse away from me again by force.


Sancho, And has he got it.


Woman, No I warrant ye, he get it, 'dslid, i will tear his eyes out first*


Sancho, Give it me hither, let me see if there is none missing; She gives it.
there Fellow, take your Purse again: and dee hear Constable, bid the Beadle
give that honesty there two hundred Lashes.


Woman, Ah mercy upon me, what means your Honor.


Sancho, If you had defended your honesty as well as you did the Purse ye
Whore, you need not have feared Ravishing: away with her, and de'e hear you
finisher, if I catch you finishing in such another affair, I shall put an end
to you with Halter, and so with a Quibble thrown at your head, get ye out of my
sight too Sirah.


Exeunt Man and Woman with Officers. Crier, Mannel and People, A Solon, a
Solon! Huzza.


Sancho, Come, is there any more of ye, hoh, gad my hand is in rarely for
business ever since the Cause of the Flask, and the Pheasant. Aside.


Enter Pedro hastily. Pedro, Room, room here, where is my Lord the Governor?


Mannel, There he is Doctor, what^s the matter?


Pedro, Arm, arm, Sir, you are not safe this Minute, here is news now come, that
several thousand of Buccaneers, Pirates and Banditty have entered your Island:
here is a Letter sent too from the Duke to give you information, you must
prepare for your defense immediately; there it is, pray read it and let us hear
the Contents of our condition.


Sancho, Humph, Tirte Aufuria, art thou here again, then there can be no good
toward me I^m sure, the spightful-Rogue bids me read it too, and he knows I
can as well do that as fly. Here, you Secretar^, let us hear what this matter
is, come read out, from another mouth I can Judge the better on it.


Mannel reads the Letter. Signior Sancho,
I am given to understand that c^rtain Enemies of mine, and of that Island,
mean suddenly to give it a furious Assault: I know likewise that several Spies
are entered there with design to kill you, for they stand much in aw of your
great Abilities; take care of your self and Charge, and I will be ready to send
you what Succor I can.

Your Friend The DUKE.



Pedro, Oh, unfortunate Estate of this unhappy Island, that because of its
Wealth and Fertility is perpetually plagued with Enemies, who bear a mortal
spite to all those that rule; those damned Banditty and Buccaneers have taken
and flayed three or four of our Governors already.


Sancho, The Devil they have.


Mannel, The noise comes nearer, they are certainly entered my Lord, therefore
come away quickly and Arm, and be our General, to lead us against the Enem^.


Sancho, 'Dslife, I know no more what belongs to a General, than a General does
to Cow-keeping: you knew my abilities well enough, and if you had not liked
'em, you should have told me so, and have taken your Government again, for if I
am to be flayed about it, I have made a fine bargain indeed.


Mannel, 'Dslife, they will come upon us before we have taken up our Arms; but it
never shall be said that I stood tamely and saw so famous an Island lost: i will
go and defend the Gates as long as I can against 'em. Exit Man.


Pedro, And i will go and prepare a certain Poison, and squirt it into their Eyes
with a Sirringe, through the loophole of some private Avenue. Exit.


Sancho, Squirt at 'em, said he; ay, if that would drive the Enemy away, I am
as well prepared for it as any body; but these Buck -- ^anditti Rogues I warrant
carry Guns with Leaden pellets, that will make no more of a Governor's noddle,
than if twere made of Pastboard -- Hark, they are coming still -- this your
Ambition has brought you to Don Sancho; you must be a Governor with a murrain
to ye, you Plough-jobbing Rascal, you. Noise of Drums, fighting and shouts.


Enter Teresa and Mary in their old Clothes. Teres. Oh that ever I was born;
Oh, undone, undone, lost, ruin^d.


Mary, Oh Vather, the saddest day that ever was known, my Mother and I have bin
plundered and stripped yonder, the Men with the black Whiskers and Buff-Coats
yonder have rouzled and frouzled us so, that they have left never an inch of us
unhandled -- Oh Lord, and one of 'em snatched so furiously at me to get off my
vine Petticoat, that udslidikins I thought once he had got away all.


Sancho, Here one may see now, the true Emblem of fallen Authority; here is the
Countess and her Daughter metamorphos'd already.


Teres. Countess! Ah shame on it, thought what my Countessship would come too,
if we had not s^ved our old Clothes by chance, we had gone home to Spin again as
naked as ever we were born.


Mannel -- within. Make this breach good, keep that gate there, raise those
Ladders, fire the Pitch and Rozin, and get some Kettles of scalding Oil ready.


Pedro -- within. Bring out the Governor, we know him by his R^be; deliver him
up, we'll make a Truce, for here are a hundred of us have sworn to Roast him
and Eat him for Supper.


Sancho, Oh, Gadzooks, for Supper! Sancho tre^bles.


Teres. Do You hear that, thou wretched Man? Come away quickly; down the back-way
here, there is a close Walk to the Gard^n door may yet secure us.


Mary, Come away Vather, come away; Oh Lord, when shall I be married now, I
wonder?


Sancho, Nay if like an Ermine I am so known by my Skin, even take it among ye,
faith * Strips from his Robe.; if you would have the Muske-Cats fee too, I
should hardly stand out if I thought you hunted me for that; but there^s no
disputing the case now, you must fly, Governor; and if you save your Bones by
the loss of your Jacket, Thank Fortune that did safe through Dangers carry
Earl Sancho, from his Land of Baratary.
Exit Sancho.


Enter Mannel and Pedro. Mannel, Ha, ha, ha, ha; they are gone, the whole Nest
are flown.


Pedro, Here Is the Robe of Authority left; the poor Snake has cast his Skin
through fear.


Mannel, Come, now let us make have to the Duke, I know he longs to hear of the
Comical Exit of the Governor.


Pedro, Let Us give the people a Hogshead of good Liquor to make merry with, for
playing their parts so well, and then take horse and away.


Mannel, Oh, I warrant ye they shall want no tipple, I have given order
already. Exeunt.


SCENE II.
Enter Cardenio and Ambrosio. Card^n. NOT see this famous Combat? prithee, in
what old rotten Tree or Tod of Ivy have thou bin lurking? 'dsdeath thou give
thy self over to moroseness and melancholy of late -- A pox, when once a Man
of Letters comes to be mop^d, he grows a Coxcomb, and not fit for a friends
Conversation.


Ambros. Prithee, I gave no heed to the flying report; I heard indeed that a
new-come Errant, that called himself the Knight of the Screech-O^l, had
challeng^d Don Quixote to Combat him about the Beauty of their Mistresses; but
I thought it only a Romantic Jest, and could not imagine it would have gone
further.


Card^n. If the Duke had not caused one of their Lances to be blunted unkno^n
to him, it had gone further assure you; but as the Tilt was now, our famous Don
here was only vanquished, by being over^^rown from his Horse, and b^ that was
oblig^d to perform any Injunction the Knight of the Screech-Owl should impose
upon him.


Ambros. And who is this new doubty Knight, prithee?


Card^n. Nay, that as yet is a Secret; but h^s Commands are, That Don Quixote
shall retire to his House, and bear no Arms for the space of one whole year --
This, according to the Conditions of the Combat, he is punctually to perform,
and the Duke and all are just coming hither to entertain the new Knight, and
see the business ratified.


Ambros. Why this will certainly murder Dox Quixote with grief; he will never be
able to have patience -- How now, Winter-pippin; what news bring you? what
Smock-stratagem or Curtain-intreague are you laboring with now, hah?


Enter Rodriguez. Rodr. Ay, you are a cruel hard-hearted Wretch, to use a poor
young thing as you have done her without there: she is come after ye again,
in faith, and as mad as a March-hare: A shame on her shallow pate, it should be
long enough before I Would have cracked my Brain for ere a one of ye.


Enter Marcella, Mad. Carden. By all that is good, Marcella -- And now I
remember me, I heard indeed she was run Mad for Love: What a barbarous fellow
art thou to destroy a whole family at once!


Rodr. Well then, there is an end of 'em: prithee let me go.


Carden. Not yet, by Heaven; thou ^^alt hear her speak.


Marcel. 'Twill be to night; the God of Love has promised me, he will bring him
to me in his Mothers Chariot, drawn by white Doves, and with her Breath
perfumed: there lies my dearest crowned with fragrant Roses, vigorous and
young, and charming as a Deity. Hah! what do I see! The dear Man turned to a
Draggon! See! see! his Mouth and Nostrils breathing Flames that singe my veins
and scorch my heart to Cinders.


A SONG, at the Duke's Entertainment, by St. George and the Genius of England:
Sung by Mr. Freeman and Mrs Cibber. Mr. Freeman. Genius of England, from thy
pleasant Bower of Bliss,
Arise and spread thy sacred Wings:
Guard from Foes the British State,
Thou on whose smile does wait
The uncertain happy Fate
Of Monarchies and Kings.

Mrs. Cibber. Then follow brave Boys to the Wars,
The La^rel you know's the Prize;
Who brings home the noblest Scars,
Looks finest in Celia's Eyes.
Then shake off the slothful Ease,
Let Glory inspire your Hearts;
Remember a Soldier in War and in Peace
Is the noblest of all other Arts.

Rodr. Alas poor crack-brain'd Creature!


Ambros. Devil --


Card^n. Sdeath, have thou no human Nature? does it not trouble thee (...) see
her thus?


Amb^os. To see her thus! why now she is in her Kingdom; her darling Mischiefs
now have gathered head, and riot in her Brain: Oh, take this from me, friend;
when once a Woman's mad, she is in perfection.


Marcel. What, is he going? nay then farewell dissembling -- all female Arts
and Tricks begone, avaunt, and let the passion of my heart lie open: Turn, turn
thou dearest pleasure of my Soul, and I will bathe thee with my Eyes fond
Tears; lay thee upon my Breast panting with Love, and speak the softest words
into thy Ears that ere were spoke by a kind yielding Maid; kiss thee with eager
Joy, and press thee close, close to my heart till I am lost in transport, and
am for that short time a Deity.


Ambros. 'Dsheart the Duke's coming too; prithee take her away, dear Rodriguez
-- I Will get thee a Husband for it one time or other.


Marcella sings. A SONG,
Sung by Marcella. I Burn, I burn, my Brain consumes to Ashes;
Each Eye-ball too, like Lightning flashes:
Within my Breast, there glows a solid Fire,
Which in a Thousand Ages cannot expire.
Blow, blow, the Wind's great Ruler;
Bring the Po and the Ganges hither,
It Is sultry, sultry Weather;
Pour 'em all on my Soul,
It will hiss like a Coal,
But never be the cooler.
'Twas Pride, hot as Hell,
That first made me Rebel,
From Love's awful Throne, a cursed Angel I fell:
And mourn now the Fate,
Which my self did create;
Fool, fool, that considered not when I was well.
Adieu, adieu, transporting Ioys,
Off ye vain fantastic Toys,
That dressed the Face and Body to allure;
Bring, bring me Daggers, Poison, Fire,
For Scorn is turned into Desire;
All Hell feels not the Rage which I, poor I, endure.
Rodr. Ay, hang y^; ye all promise for one another, but you never care to come
to it your selves -- Well, not for that, but to get some Remedy for the poor
Creature; I Will do it for once: Come Bird. Exit.


Marc. Bird, right; thou art the bird of Night: Come, I Will go with thee; by thy
broad Face and toothless Gums I know thee, and that hooked Nose that shades the
Stumps remaining, thou art Grimalkin -- Whoo, whoo, whoo -- Come along, Bird.
sings. Exeunt Marcel. and Rodr.


Carden. Well, if thou art not strangely punished for this, I shall wonder.


Ambros. Pish, prithee no bantring* See the Duke and Company.


Enter Duke, Duchess, Luscinda, Don Quixote unarmed of his Sword, and without
a Helmet* Page, armed like a Knight, having a tawny Mask on with large black
Whiskers, and a Buckler, whereon is painted a large Owl: Squire with a Lance
and Slipper. Don Qu. Vanquished, because my Horse fell -- Oh rigourous Laws of
Chivalry! must my hard-got Renown, purchas^d with Danger, be poorly lost
through Rosinante^s weakness? My Courage still stands fast, though he is
fallen: I beg the Combat once more, I Will fight him in my Shirt, with a Dutch
knife set sharp as any Razor.


Duke, Oh, it must not be, friend; the Laws of Knighthood are, you know,
inviolable: besides for you, the Quintessence of Errants, thus rashly to recant
your own agreement, will be a flaw in your Renown for ever: Therefore take
heed, not a word more of fighting.


Page, What, does he murmur? does his high-flown Vanity think he is disgraced to
be overcome by me? Hah, noble Don, is it so?


Duke, No, no: Valiant Sir, the Knight is highly satisfied in being vanquished
by so brave a Warrior -- Look up quickly and seem pleased, for this damned
Knight of the Screech-Owl, now his hand is in, will worry us all else --
'dsheart what a terrible voice he has.


Page, The Devil worry him and his Voice too, it is a very Screech-Owls to me
indeed.


Dutch* Courage is not disgraced, though it is unfortunate; and though Don
Quixote is battered and o*re-thrown, he is valourous as ever.


Lusind. And when his year of Penance is past over,
Again may cudgel, and be cudgelled more.

Carden. One may see by his Looks, that his pate is plaguily harrass'd about
this business. Aside.


Ambros. Oh, the whimsical Worms are all now at work -- Ha, ha, ha. Aside.


Don Qu. Damned fortune, thou inconstant treacherous Strump^t, have thou then
serv^d me thus?


Duke, Mum, mum, Sir; the Knight of the Screech-Owl observes ye.


Page, Sir, I perceive you do not grace my Conquest with that clear brow, that
Aspect of Contentment my Valor has deserved, but seem to lowre and grumble;
and your fortune, as if you thought my Chains disgraces to ye -- Hah, speak
thou conquered, art thou so presumptious?


Dutch. Oh, by no means Sir, the Knight was always a person of few words; and
as to the Moodiness of his Phiz, 'ti^ natural t^ him; I dare ^^y for the Knight
of the ill-favored face, it is not in his power to mend his Looks.


Lusind. Besides, here being no occasion for mirth, some g^^vity is becoming.


Page, Could I but think my easy penance given him exto^ted frowns, he soon
should know my power. Blood of the Heroes, did not I in Ar^agon, overcome the
proud Don Guzman de Alvaro, who being my Slave by a just right of Conquest, I
made his Neck my footstool to mount my horse by, nay, over the parched Plains
forced him to carry a Sack of Barley for his provender; nor was that all, for
when at night we rested, to show my Power and punish his Ambition, I made him
wash my Shirts and mend my Stockins.


Don Qu. This is the very devil -- Oons I tremble every inch of me. aside.


Page, And if I thought this Shrub, this Mushrom-Errant durst mutter
discontents, or look as if Tobosian Dulcinea excelled my bright Castara de
Vandalia, I Would set him instantly to stitch my Boots, and grease em with the Oil
of his own labor.


Card. Say something quickly to him to mollify; stitching of Boots is but a
scurvy employment.


Don Qu. Lord ^ir, what need you be so chollerick, I said nothing of Dulcinea
that ^ know -- Oons he has so cowed me with his plaguey Voice and his confounded
Whiskers, that I cannot get out a hard word for the heart of me.


Ambros. Ha, ha, ha, his heart's quite sunk, the blustering of the Screech-Owl
has bullied him clearly.


Duke, Come noble Warrior, be pleased to sit down a little, and to show how
much we prize all Knights of your brave Order; I Will beg ye to let my Servants
show their duty in a Musical Entertainment.


Page, Your Grace is generous; and to show my gratitude, I dedicate thus far of
my sharp Sword to you, and yo^rs for ever; the rest is bright Castara de
Vandalia's -- Come I Will sit down, you Sir, stand by and wait. To Don*


Dutch. Oh, not so, I beseech ye Sir; for my sake let him sit with us.


Page, Your Grace shall then prefer him: sit down. They seat themselves.


Don Qu. Ah plague on your Whiskers -- I Am in an Ague still.


A Dance here of the Seven Champions, then a Song
by St. Dennis. DE foolish English Nation,
Dat former Conquest brag on;
Make strange a Discourse
Of St. George and his Horse,
And de Murdering of de Dragon:
But should de French Invade 'em,
And boldly cross de Water,
How de Williamite here
Voud trembla for fear
Of de Jack grand Roy, mon Maitre.
You boast of your Fifth Henry,
Dat once in France did Forage;
But to answer dat same
Do but read Nostredame,
Garzoon will cool your Courage:
Our Gold will take your ^ity,
Though Fighting never can get one,
Veel (...) Salsbury-Plain
Bring on Millions of Men,
D'en -- Whei^ -- vere is Great-Brittain.
Page, As much, my Lord, as can be possible for us that carry Arms to like soft
pastimes -- I am obliged for this; and that ^ may, when your occasions offer,
be grateful to my power, be pleased to Command Alonzo de Bubone of Castile,
your Grace^s Champion, you soon may find me out, my Lord, by fame: bes^d^s, I Am
of a family numerous and ancient, the Owls at Court are my relations all --
City and Country throng with the Bubones, and 'mong^^ the Priesthood and the
dagled Law are Numbers of Screech-Owls; in honor of whom This ample form ^ on
my Buckler place,
And wear it for the Glory of my Race.



Dutch. We are his Greatnesses, the Knight of the Screech-Owl's m^st humble
Creatures.


Duke, And now, brave Sir, I hope all animosities betwixt you and your nobl^
Brother here are forgot: Come, I must have the honor to reconcile all matters;
he has resolved to obey your Command, and retiring home, and bearing no Arms
for a year; and you, according to the Conditions of the Combat, in honor can
demand no more.


Page, I am not lim^ted, my Lord; and I must tell your Grace, there is another
small Injunction, which in obedience to the Laws of Chivalry I must impose and
he must execute: It Is this, my Lord; that since the Peerless Castara de
Vandalia has influenc^d me with Conquest; and he adores the conquered Dulcinea;
he therefore be oblig^d to wear that pre^ious Rellick my Squire has there;
which is, that fair ones, Slipper, during his Truce from Arms, and Year of
Penance --


Duke, Oh* that he shall do most Ceremonially. Duke puts the Slipper on Don
Quixote.


Carden. 'Twill look like some new kind of Order, and give him good occasion
from thenceforth to call himself the Knight of the Order of the Slipper: that
once performed, he is free.


Don Qu. Well, I see now that wise Man was in the right, that s^id Valor was a
Virtue between two vicious extremes, Cowardice and Tem^rity: I Am in the snare,
and I must get out on it as well as I can; make Laws and keep Laws, as Sancho
used to say when his Mouth run over with Proverbs: And therefore since it is my
fortune, I will travel home with my new Order here as patiently as I can: And
so farewell to ye all; nay, let no one touch me, nor speak a word more, for my
heart's too full to bear any Complementing; and as low as my stomach is
brought, I could eat that roaring Knight up methinks if it were not for his
Whiskers: but since it is as it is, let Fate bear the blame on it, whilst I* This
long Year study to wipe off my stain;
The next, in glittering Arms, shine out again.
Exit.


Duke, Ha, ha, ha, ha; farewell poor Knight-Errantry, you must know I have bin
weary of the mad fool of late, and so contrived this trick to send him home to
his house to be cur^d. -- And now Signior Don Alonzo de Bubone, be pleas^d to
veil your Whiskers.


Carden. The Page, as I live, the Rogue altered his vo^ce, so I did not know
him.


Dutch. Ha, ha, ha; nothing could be acted better indeed: Well Sir, my Lord
Duke shall not forget your diligence.


Page, One of the Servants told me in a whisper just now* my Lord, that your
Grace may now have an account of Sancho's f^ight from B^rataria, for the
Steward and the Doctor are just come from thence.


Duke, Oh come then, let^s in, that story will be very grateful at dinner:
Cousin, I have a small affair with you too, but this is no time to chide:
besides, I hope you will satisfy me in some passages I heard lately of you,
which seem to blast your Virtue and Reputation: I must have a Minute to confer
with you about it.


Ambros. With all my heart, my Lord.


Lusind. I have heard of your humor, Sir; and I hope my Lord Duke will punish
thee, for refusing poor Marsella, thou inveterate Woman-hater.


Dutch. Come my Lord, Methinks I long to hear how the Countess Teresa, and her
Daughter Mary the Buxom, behave themselves in their change of fortune.


Carden. Very Comically, no doubt, Madam, and must certainly divert when your
Grace comes to hear their several Histories.


Duke, Which, to relish our Meat and Wine the better, I intend shall entertain
us presently; amongst the rest of diversions, there are two that are always
very recreative, which are a fool in Person, and a fool in Character; the fool
in Person, we have just now had a Scene of; and as to the fool in Character,
The Governor not being now before ye,
You must content your selves with Sancho's story.



Exeunt omnes. FINIS.
THE Comical History OF DON QUIXOTE. The Third Part. WITH THE MARRIAGE OF Mary
the Buxome.

Written by Mr. D'Urfey

Non omnes Arbusta juvant humilesque myricae.
Vir. LONDON, Printed for Samuel Briscoe, at the Corner of Charles-street, in
Russelstreet, Covent Garden. 1696.

Where is also to be had the Songs, set to Music by the late famous Mr.
Pursel, Mr. Courteville, Mr. Aykerod, and other eminent Masters of the Age.

To the Right Honorable Charles Montague Esquire one of the Lords Commissioners of
the Treasury, Chancellor of the Exchequer, and one of His Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council.
SIR,
THough I know your Character is adorned with so much Goodness and Humility,
that it could dispense with, and excuse even such a presumption as a Dedication
of the following Piece, yet I must with Modesty decline such Pretensions, and
own, That though its innate Defects are not so obnoxious as are supposed, yet its
public Misfortune has so lessened its Reputa^ion, as has made it incapable of
deserving such an Honor.

My whole Extent of Ambition then is, having th^s Opportunity of the Press,
(instead of it) most humbly to dedicate my self, a Presumption perhaps little
inferior to the other; nor can I forbear to br^ng you what all the rest of my
Tribe do to Indulgent Patrons, viz. an Inconvenience -- whilst Poetical
Impertinence attends the good Offices you do, and Generous Condescension and
Good Nature creates your Trouble.

But Sir, be pleased to remember however, That you are the Cause of this
Inconvenience -- Had you been less affable and obliging, I had been more
^imorous and modest. Had your eye shot the haughty Austerity upon me of a right
Courtier, great i^ Dignity and Office, mine had quickly been dazzled and had
seen no farther; nor had your valued minutes ever been disturbed with dilatory
Trifles o^ this Nature; but my Heart, amongst the rest of the World, on dull
Consideration of your Merit, had supinely wished you Prosperity at a distance,
tha^ now, warmed by your Influence, and embolden'^ by your Smiles, can be
contented with nothing les^ than laying it self at your Feet, and pretending to
the particular Honor of your Favor.

Condescension to grant Admittance, and Generous Will to do good Offices, are
rare Virtues in Great Men at Court; and he is fortunate whos^ Dependence there
answers his Expectation. Bu^ when a Poet's happy Stars guide him to one who not
only is glad to meet occasion to befriend him, but that eagerly seeks it out,
who though continually fatigued with great Employments in the State, and hourly
busied in the noble Service of his King and Cuuntry, yet will generously spare
a few Minutes from public Affairs to do an humble Suito^ a good Turn; one that
never entertained such a on^ without a welcome Smile, if he could effect his
Desire, or a good natured, courteous and modest Dismission, if he could not:
One that, though a Courtier, never forgot his Promise, but perpetually gives the
World occasion to own his Word as sacred as his other Virtues. ^Tis to a
Mecaenas like this my Heart devotes it self; it is him it will admire; nor is it
possible for me to suppress its Ambition.

Now Sir, since every discerning Judgment must allow this to be your Character,
be pleased to pardon me, who write it as a plain Truth, not as Praise, but your
undoubted Due: For I dare no more pretend to praise you, than presume to equal
your Wit or other Excellencies. My Design is only gratefully to acknowledge and
publish to the World how much I am obliged to your Virtues, without lessening
their Value by my unnecessary Applauses.

Amongst all good Qualities that seem Praiseworthy in human Nature, the most
proper and most reasonable is Gratitude; and amongst all persons, on whom for
Benefits received there is a Duty Incumbent, I, Sir, am most obliged to own my
Acknowledgments to you: for never had any one less Opportunity to deserve your
Kindness, nor ever had any one more generous or hearty Proofs of it. And since
it is decreed that my humble Fate will permit me to express my Gratitude no
other way than by Expression, Thanks, and verbal Acknowledgment, That, Sir,
whilst I live be pleased to believe you shall hourly receive, large and
unbounded as your Generous Intentions to me.

Amongst all your numerous Favors, be pleased, Sir, to let me own the first,
(which shall eternally grow to my Heart and Memory,) which was your sending for
me to introduce me to The late Adored Queen of ever Glorious Memory: Of all
whose gracious Smiles on me, enriched with Royal Bounty, you and your good
Lady, my ever honored Patroness, were the happy Causes. When Majesty, like the
Sun, shone with a Heavenly Influenee, you took care to plant me in the View,
and gave me the Opportunity of receiving the Grace that followed; nor did you
stop there, but afterward made me known and honored me with your good Word to
most of the principal Nobility, the true Patrons of Poets and their Art, by
whom I have not since been forgot, and whose Favor is a certain Fortune to any
Son of the Muses. And this most generous and uncommon Grace, Sir, when I cease
to remember, or fail in point of Duty, you may certainly take it for granted, I
am ceased to be at all.

And now Sir, That my Ambition may know its bounds, and soar no farther, let me
beseech you to accept of this Dedication of my self and Duty; and likewise be
pleased to receive this Trifle of a Play, ^ack'd to it to divert you a Minute,
when such a space from Business will permit: For I am not ignorant, no more
than the rest of Mankind, of the troublesome Diligen^e your Zeal for the King
and your Country exac^s from you, the Care of your great Charge and Offices, or
of the Envy your Virtue raises in ill Men; yet I am confirmed it cannot
possibly turn to your Prejudice, but that as you was an Honor to the last
Parliament, you will still be acknowledged so to this, and raise your
Reputation yet higher, (if possible) to an Eminence equal to your Merit; whilst
I with Pride fix my Fame at its Ne plus ultra, in bearing the Title of,

SIR, Your most Humble, and most Devoted Servant, Tho. D'Urfey.

PREFACE.
I Had not troubled the Reader with a Preface, did I not find it extremely
reasonable to vindicate my self a little, as well as the en^uing Sh^ets,
against the unnatural Mistakes, (...) Judgment, and Malice of some part of the
Auditory when this Play came upon the Stage: And as I will not de^end the
^aults which with Justice and unby^ssed Opinion it is taxed with, so on the
other side I will not be run down without defense, when perhaps I can prove the
cause of its miscarriage not to be through its own defect, (as it is generally
believed) but occasioned by the ill nature of an inveterate Faction, and some
unlucky accidents happening in its representation. In the first place therefore
I must inform the Reader, that this Third Part before it came upon the Stage
was acknowledged and believed by all that saw it, and were concerned (as well
those that heard it read, as those that were Actors, who certainly, every one
must own, are in their Affairs skilful enough to know the value of things of
this nature) to be much the best of all the Three Parts; of which Opinion I
must also confess my self to be, and do not doubt, that when it is impartially
read and judged, to find many more to join with me in that belief.

But as all Dramatick Pieces that depend upon Humor must receive their good or
ill Fate from the good or ill Humor of the Audience, this it seems had the
(...) to meet with the latter; and tho prepared by my indefatigable Diligence,
Care, Pains, nay, the variety which I thought could not possibly miss the
expected Success, yet by some Accidents happening in the Presentment, was
disliked and exploded; The Songish part which I used to succeed so well in, by
the indifferent performance the first day, and the hurrying it on so soon,
being straightened in time through ill management -- (tho extremely well set to
Music and I Am sure the just Critic will say not ill Writ) yet being
imperfectly performed, was consequently not pleasing; and the Dances too, for
want of some good Performers, also disliked; all which, tho impossible for me
to avoid, and not reasonably to be attributed any way to a fault in me, yet the
noisy Party endeavored to use me as ill as if it were, till the gen^rous
Opposition of my Friends gave me as much r^ason to thank them for their
Iustic^, as to despise the others Malice.

I must confess when I heard the Ladies were prejudiced about some A^^ions and
Sayings in Mary the Buxome's and Sancho's Parts, I was extremely concerned, not
that I was conscious to my self I had justly offended, because I know no other
way in Nature to do the Characters right, but to make a Romp speak like a Romp,
and a Clownish Boor blunder out things proper for such a Fellow, but that I
should in doing this unfortuna^ely have 'em counted nauseous and undecent, and
so disoblige that Essential part of the Audience which I have always 'studied
with so much Zeal to divert in all my former Plays with Innocent Mirth, Scenes
of Decency and Good Manners.

In exposing Humor, some Course Saying^ will ^^turally happen, especially in
Farce and Low Comedy and ^tis some sort of Excuse for me that I can affirm^ A
Jest adapted to the Genious of the Pit bearing some little distant Obscenities
and double Ente^ders, has past currantly in all the Comedies of the past and
present Age, tho I have now the ill Luck to be most detected; I am sure,
offending in that nature is much against my design of pleasing; and I have
through Nineteen of the Twenty Plays I have writ, always studied to shun it as
much as I can, for my own particular satisfaction, as well as to oblige the
Nicer part of the Audience.

As to the Poppet Show in the Fourth Act, the Accident of its being, placed so
far from the Audience, which hindered them from hearing what either they or the
Prolocutor said was the main and only reason of its diverting no better; and as
I cannot blame a^ Audienc^ for finding fault on such (...) occasion, so I
desire my Impartial Reader and Judge to w^^gh in the ^e^usal o^ it whether I
have no^ done my Part, and whether that Scene is not wove in properly with the
rest of the History, and more likely to give satisfaction than any of the rest,
tho it unhappily succeeded otherwise; As for those that call it
Bartholomew-Fair St^ff they, I Am sure, never digested Don Quixote's History, or
at least tha^ part of it where the Poppet Show is presented, that Passage
being, as I always thought, and as a Noble Person of as much Honor and Wit as
any that pretend to Judge of these Matters, was pleased to allow is the m^st
Material Extravagant Foolery that ever Don Quixote was guilty of throughout all
his Whimsical A^ventures, and therefore most proper to be inserted in the Play.
To finish then* as it is the most difficult undertaking that can be to find out
new Humor to please in so Critical an Age as ours is, so it is some pleasure to
me to know, that my severe Judges cannot hinder me from the Reputation of
having diverted them for several years together in spite of their own ill
Nature: A hard task indeed, -- And amongst Men of Sense and Justice, one would
think should exact a modest hearng, if once in Seven years a Play should fail
in diverting, especially when Accidents are the Material Cause, -- but since
that blessing is not to be expected by a Poet, nor the Modest Method of the old
Romans at all proper to be an Example to our Critical and over-witty Britains,
let Folly and ill Nature vent its Spleen till its own unreasonableness makes it
nauseous to the World. Obliged with the kind Indulgence and Instruction of some
few Superior Judgments, I will contentedly sit dow^, ^^d s^y to all the others,
as a famous Wit once said before; Let but some few, whom I omit to name,
Approve my Work, I count their Censure Fame.


PROLOGUE
Enter Mr. Horden. Hord. THrice on one Subject to empl^^ a Muse,
It Is owned has very seldom been in use.
Yet thus far I the Poet's Ca^se pur^ue;
Suppose one had a Mi^tr^ss fair and true;
Is three times Visiting so much to do?
Don Quixote like a Beauty that never clo^d,
Should charm anew, though twen^y times, enjoyed.
Thus for the Author then most humbly praying --

Enter Miss Cross. Miss C. Hold Mr. Horden, hold, what are you saying*
If it be any thing of Prologue nature,
K^ow I am come to help ye in the matter.
Come, make your Honors, and begin again;
You are to court the Ladies -- I the Men.
Come, come, your Bow -- your Speech too, quick and ^hort.
Lord, you are so dull methinks --

Hord. Lord, you are so pert.


Miss C. Your Love to the Poet sure i^ wondrous small.
Why, you say nothing --

Hord -- Because you say all.


Miss C. I must say something, if you wonn^^ spe^k
Toth' Ladies; come, what offers can you make?

Hord. Fai^^, I can offer nothing that they will take.
The Poet must excuse me; I cannot prattle,
N^r a^k 'em ought -- unless to drink a Bottle.

Miss C. -- A Bottle -- Are good manners quite forgot?
I^ that a thing to ask the Ladies -- Sot?
Are Ladies prop^r to be so Harrangu'd?

Hord. Why not --


Miss C. Incense should smoke where Beauty's Beams do sh^ne,
The Mistress of all hearts, a Power Divine.

Hord. Every one in ^is way -- a Bottle's mine.


Miss. C. Nay, then I see it is an Affront designed*
F^r which henceforth I Will B^nter all your kind,
Praise a pert Coxcomb's awkerd Shape and Air,
T^ll^ b'Chesnut colored Spark he is wond^ous fair*
Admire a third, w^^se C^^t (...) gr^y,
Lo^ks li^e a Mill^r ^n a M^^^e^ day.
Or his, (...) Flanders come^,
With ^o^^t^ing Sleeves that reach down to his (...)
Commend ^ue's Foot and hand, another's Nose.
I Will have ^ thousand Tricks to feel the Beans.
Show 'em by dancing what to ^rt belongs;
Or if that fail, I Will charm 'em with new Songs:
And thus I Will dr^w 'em to the Play in Throngs.
I will but throw 'em out my Hook and straight
Shoals of Male Gudgeo^s nibble at the Bait;
Some by Diversion of my Voice -- and some
I^ Expectation of my Prime to come.

Hord. Why then you think --
Your Interest with the Sparks i^ ^^^drous strong.

Miss. C. Yes: What think you --


Hord. -- Child, the art three years too youn^.


Miss ^. Perhaps as much too young, a^ you too good;
Yet it is as I would have it understood.

Hord. Nay* I confess thou art planted in a pla^^,
Where, like a M^llon underneath a Glass,
The Towns wa^m Beams soon Ripeness will prod^^^.
No Hot Bed like a Playhouse for that use.

Miss C. Think what you please I Will follow Virtue's Rules,
And keep my Mellon close from Kn^ves and Fools.
And now, to turn out of this (...) way --
Be pleased but quietly to bear the Play,
Then if you can laugh, you shall do it to day.

Hord. Why, that is w^ll said, my D^^^ -- So let us away.


Exeunt. EPILOGUE
By Mary the Buxo^e. WEll, Gentlefolk, I dare now Wage a Crown,
You take me for the veriest Romp in Town --
But e're I part from ye* I Will let ye see,
There Is other Molly Buxomes besides me.
More Hoydens, that as awker'd G^mbols show:
I Will warrant Forty in that upper Row to the Gallery.
Icod, perhaps too, Forty more below. to the Pit.
They Are just like Hens; They Will b^ amongst the Cocks.
Let Us see, is never a one in the Side Box?
Yes -- There Is a S^inger -- by yo^ Bully Rocks.
Then let me look in the Places too foreright.
Humph! strange; I think there is ne'ere a one tonigh^.
Each of 'em thought I Would paint her for a Blowze;
And so they are gone, Icod, to the other Horse.
Gadslidikins! What would I give to have showed
You, Errant Knights a Romp in a Comm^de.
For if the Trut^ with R^ason man be spoke,
One may be found among the Gentlefolk;
Who, though she gravely does to Visit come,
Will ^^ap upon the Fo^tmens Backs at home.
The Country Wife too, she that comes to town,
To see her Ki^^, and buy a tawdry Gown.
Goes to a Play, there hoydens with the men,
C^ckolds here Spouse, and so Romps down again.
H^re too about the Streets they swarm like Bees;
And all the Nation round, through all Degr^es:
From the Court Velvet Scarf, the Gay and Witty,
To her that slabbers Custard in the City:
From thence back here again to Bulking Betty.
And so good night. It Is time to end my D^^ty.
Exit. Don Quixote. Mr. Powell. (...) M^. N^^th. (...). An ^c^omplisht
Gentleman, but poor, (...) to Quitteria. Acted by Mr. Horden. Camach^. A jolly
fat-headed Farmer, very rich, but very dull and ignorant, given by her Friends
for a Husband to Qui^ter^a. Acted by Mr* B^llock. Jacques. A ^lownis^ Country
Fellow* Hind to C^macho, and to be married to Mary the Buxome. Acted by Mr.
Pinke^an. Carrasco. A Bachelor of Salamancha, Friend to Basilius, learned,
drolling, brisk, and witty, and perpetually bantring Don Qui^ote and Sancho.
Acted by Mr. Verbrugen. Gines de Passamonte, Peter. alias Master of the
Puppet-sh^^. Acted by Mr. Lee. Charlemain. Puppets, designed to be Acted by
Children. Mar^ilius. Puppets, designed to be Acted by Children. Orlando.
Puppets, designed to be Acted by Children. Don Gayf^ros Puppets, designed to be
Acted by Children. Melisendra. Puppets, designed to be Acted by Children.
^ishop Turpin. Puppets, designed to be Acted by Children. Guards and Retinue.
Puppets, designed to be Acted by Children. Carter to the Lion. Mr. Smeaton.
Women. Quitteria. A young witty Virgin, Daughter to an old Gentleman of small
Fortune, betrothed to Basilius, but forced by him to marry Camach^. Acted by
Mrs. Finch. Dulcinea del T^boso. Mr. Smeaton Teresa. Sancho's Wife. Acted by
Mrs. Power. Mary the B^xome. His Daughter. By Mrs. Verbruggen. Altisidora,
Woman and Confident to Quitteria. By Mrs. Cross. Clowns, Musicians, Dancers,
and Attendants.

The SCENE, A Pleasant Meadow, near a Village.

THE Comical History OF DON QUIXOTE.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
Discovers a Cage with a Lion in a Cart, Don Quixote with his Sword drawn
standing over the Carter kneeling; Carasco, Basilius, standing by, and Sancho
upon a Tree near him. Don Quix. SLave, open the Cage, or die. offers to kill
him.


Carter, Oh, Good Sir Knight be pacified.


Basil. 'Dsdeath, Sir, are ye mad? do you know what you bid him do? Have you a
mind to have us all torn to pieces?


Carras. 'Dslife, I have cried up Knight Errantry to fine purpose, if I must
stand by and see him and my self worried about it.


Don Q. Oh! good Sir Counsel-giver, if you fear that, put your self in safety,
and begone -- Sirrah, open quickly, or I Will open your puddings with this. offers
to run him through.


Cart. Oh Lord, Sir, the Lion has not eaten all this day, and is so hungry that
he will make no more of us than of so many Kittlings -- At three mouthfuls we
shall be in his Puddings our selves, Sir.


Don Q. Cowardly Villain -- Dog, Dog, do it, or -- offers again.


Cart. Well, well, Sir, I will, I will -- Oh* that ever I was born! What will
become of me --


Basil. Nay, if my Counsel has no better Effect, even let your Donship fight
your Battle by your self; if you are for duelling of Lions, you had best get an
armed Rhinoceros for your Second; for my part, I Am for no Tilts with these
four-footed sharp-phang'd Antagonists, so will prudently withdraw.


Carras. And I -- This is no time for bantring. Exeunt.


Don. Q. Poorness of Spirit! How I look down upon 'em -- Of all the Passions
plaguing weak Humanity, the basest sure is fear -- Come, Fellow, have thou done?


Cart. Done! yes, yes, Sir, time enough, Sir, time enough Done! -- sbud, where
shall I save my self?


he unbolts the Cage, and runs and gets upon another Tree Don Q. The General of
Oran sends not this Lion, as thou have said, ^oth' King; but some Enchanter
sends it to try me -- to prove my Courage and undaunted Soul -- He shall be
satisfied -- Sancho, where art thou?


Sanc. Here, here, Sir, here, 'oons where speaks out of the Tree, should I be?
I intend to be no Lyon's meat to day, not I -- And do you hear, Sir, pray take my
advice for once, and let him alone; you see he says nothing to you, but as the
Proverb says, tho the Bear be gentle, don't bite him by the nose -- Sweet Don,
let him be quiet, and come away.


D. Q. Dull Insect, that can imagine to knock manly Resolution oth' head with
a Proverb: Come away! Alas, poor Soulless Wretch, what, from the Road of Glory,
on which this third time I have made my Salley, to exercise the Function I was
born for! No, no, Don Quixote stirs not from the Path of Honor, tho hemmed
with Lions fiercer than that famed one that in the Nemaean Vale was quelled by
Hercules -- Let me see, where shall I best attack him? Lions, to me, to me,
your Lion; Whelps. Come all ye Inchanters, that have formed this Monster to ^ry
my Valor, bestride your fiery Dragons, and behold me; behold this hand tear
from his hollow Trunk the bloody Heart, and dash it in your Faces.


Cart. on the Tree, Hark ye me, Friend, now I have got my self out of harms
way, I don't care much if I spend another wise word or two upon ye: Therefore
for your life, do you hear, don't meddle with his Throat, but get you packing if
you intend to eat your Supper to night. Gadslidikins, there are a pair of
Portcullises before it, that some Folk call Teeth, that will make no more to
grind that Arm of yours than if 'twere a black pudding; therefore once more I
say take care.


Don Q. Come forth, thou miscalled Terror of the Forest, and try if thou can
make me give thee ground. Men say thou art the King of Beasts; come forth, and
show thy Royal Bravery; do it, and whet thy clawish Weapons keen to oppose my
Force, and speedily, or I shall believe thee-not to have Courage proper for thy
Bulk, but that like thy Diminutive, a Ca^, thou art only valiant in Confinement
-- Come, come forth, I say* The Lion turns his Tail to him.


Sanc. Oh! for Heaven's sake, Sir, don't go so near him; you see he turns his
back side to ye, to let you see how much he minds what you say; therefore pray
don't trouble your self with picki^g his T^eth, nor challenging his Claws, for
if one of those crooked Nippers should get hold on ye, the Lord have mercy upon
ye for a Knight Errant.


Don Q. Hah! By Dulcinea's Life, the Monster fears me, and ^a^es not meet the
Luster of my eyes -- ay -- it is so -- it is now shown plain, his back parts
tremble at me.


Cart. O Sir, pray hold your self contented, he only shakes his Tail in
contempt -- and if you are wise, stand farther off; for if he gives ye a thump
with the b^nch at the end on it, he will knock you as flat as a Flounder.


Don Q. By all my Fame, it is now as clear as Truth, my daring Co^rage has quite
daunted him -- Sancho, come down, and give him three Bastinadoes with a Cudgel
to provoke him to come out.


Sanc. I give him three Bastinadoes -- not for three Kingdoms Gadzooks, I --
Come Sir, too much Mettle is dangerous in a blind Horse: Content your self with
the thought that he dares not come out to ye, and so the Victory is yours -- And
good Sir, put him to no f^r^her Trial


Don Q. I have challenged him fairly.


Cart. Ay, ay, Sir, we are both Witnesses of that -- I Will cokes in with him, it
may be he will leave off, and I may save my Horses by it, aside that else would
certainly be torn to pieces.


Don Q. Dared him, and boldly; and the Inchanter sent him.


Sanc. Ye have ye have, Sir, and we'll both of us give ye a Certificate that he
has refused to answer ye.


Cart. 'Sbud you have done wonders, Sir -- and to stickle more in the business
were only to tempt Providence as one may say.


Don Q. Fellow, you are in the right, and I Am obliged to think my Honor
satisfied: For as the Laws of Chivalry direct us, no Combatant is tied to do
more than to defy an Enemy; if he refuse, he is discomfited.


Sanc. Right, right Sir; Odsheartlikins you never argued better in your
Lifetime -- He speaks a little Sense now; pray Heaven it hold.


Don Q. Come down then, Friend, and shut the Cage -- And Sancho, descend, and
call to those that fled -- come quickly -- thou art so tardy in every thing.
Carter comes down.


Sanc. Hold a little, good Sir, and let me but see the Pin in the door, and
I Will be as nimble as an Eell in your Service; for perhaps the Lion, though he
cares not to scratch the Hide of a lean Knight, may have a Fancy to chew the
Cud with a plump Squire -- Oh! now I think I may venture. Comes down, and Exit.


Cart. So, now all is secure again, and give ye Joy of your Victory* Sir Knight
-- for Gads digs, little did I think to see that Madrid Face of yours look so
cheerily by this time -- But let it be as it is, you have done Wonders, as I
said before.


Don Q. It Is well, and there is a Ducket for thy Reward -- Oh, the unvalued
Virtue of true Valor: Well may Inchanters make me unfortunate, but of that
Essence they can never bereave me.


Enter Basilius, Carrasco, and Sancho. Basil. Though Sancho has told us how the
business was, yet let us resolve to cry up the Exploit,


Carras. O as much as if he had quartered the Lion and eaten him. May Wreaths
of Oak, the Meed of mighty Conquerors, for ever flourish on Don Quixote's head.


Basil. Thrice worthy, and eternally renowned, I congratulate your Victory. We
hear the Lion trembled to behold you, nor durst accept your Challenge.


Don Q. Both these saw it.


Cart. Yes truly, the Beast's hinder parts shook like an Aspen Leaf, as the
saying is.


Sanc. The truth on it is, he did wag his Tail very frightfully.


Don Q. The Inchanters therefore have not now prevailed: This is my hour, my
Friends.


Basil. Still may it prove so, fortunate and happy. Embracing.


Corasc. Thou Soul, Heart-blood, and Genius of Knight Errantry.


Don Q. Go, fellow, to Madrid, and tell the King Don Quixote did this Action,
no longer now Knight of the Ill-favored Face, but with new Title graced --
Knight of the Lion.


Cart. Very well Sir, When ever I Have occasion to drink a Flagon with his
Majesty, I shall make bold to do your Errand; and so Good by to ye. Ha, ha, ha,
tell the King, said he -- Ah Lord save thy crazed Pate.


Exit. Scene shuts. Basil. When I saw first the Lyon's flaming eyes, I could
not think the Adventure was so easy.


Don Q. Ah -- to a valiant Heart and resolute Will, nothing is hard.


Carrasc. I was confirmed, he would succeed -- and do still prophecy that more
and greater things shall court his Valor -- But now Friend, setting this
Discourse aside, I think it proper to inform the noble Knight of the Lion your
Suit to him, which is to make one in the Plot to morrow at Camacho's Wedding,
who is, by Compulsion of Friends, to marry with Quiteria, the rich Andr^gio's
Daughter. I suppose your Greatness has heard of the former Love between her and
my Friend Basilius here.


Don Q. I have, thou Frog of Ag^nippe, thou Nursling of Parnassus, perpetual
Delight of the Salamanca Schools, I have; and am well known ^oo in his Worth
and Virtues: I Have also heard Camacho is a Dolt, a sordid Lump, a Glutton, that
crams his Paunch, but that neglects his Mind, laughed at and scorned by every
Man of Sense, not praised by any one but Sancho there, whose Brains are in his
Belly.


Sanc. Ay* ay, say what you please of my Belly, or Camacho's either; he has
refreshed me often with good Bee^ and Brewis -- and as f^r as a good Word or a
Compliment goes, my Paunch and my Brains too shall be at his Service* Besides,
he has sent for my Wife and Daughter from home, and offers Mary a good Dinner,
who is to be married to morrow, and so to let both Weddings go as one. Come,
'^is an ill Workman that quarr^ls with his own Tools. I wonder when my Master
would have done as much for her.


Don Q. Why, Sancho, I did not think the Girl was prone to marry.


Sanc. Not prone! yes, and blown too; She Is so ripe, she would have fallen off the
Tree with a little more shaking -- Oh! yonder comes her Mother, and Gadzooks my
Son-in-Law with her -- I warrant they want me for something.


Don Q. Oh! It Is likely, therefore we'll leave thee to her. And now worthy Sir,
to Basilius. be assured, That in any Action where Justice or Honor are
concerned, tho never so dangerous, Don Quixote shall be foremost.


Basil. Spoke like the Star of Gallantry.


Carasc. Farewell Sancho; Whatever business employs us, we shall reserve a
Minute to wish Mary the B^xom Joy.


Basil. Oh, that we must in course. Exeunt D. Q* Bas. and Car.


San. Ay, you may wish her what you please; but I Am sure I wished her hanged
this morning; my wise Son-in-Law that is coming yonder will have a hopeful
Bargain of her; she is the plaguiest Ramp, the veriest Hoyden, and, what is the
mischief on it, grows every day worse than other. As I was looking up to the
Sun-dial this morning, to see what a Clock 'twas, what does this heedless Queen
do, but throws out of the Window a great Jordan full of Liquor luke warm just
into my mouth; Gadzooks, I was over head and ears, like an Ache-bo^e in a
Powdering tub -- But come, thanks to good luck she is going; this Fool will
venture on her, and much good may she do him: He loves Mutton well that can
dine upon the Wool. Marry your Son when you will, your Daughter when you can.
And if Coxcombs went not to Market, bad Ware would no^ be sold -- There Is three
Proverbs for her however; it is all the Portion she is like to have, that I know
of.


Enter Jaques and Teresa. Teres. Come, Man, what have you been doing? I thought
you would have made more haste home, being you know to morrow is to be so busy a
day.


Sanc. Doing? Why, conquering Lions, challenging wild Beasts, getting Honor,
crooked Rib -- a whole Cartload full.


Ter^s. Lions! What Lions, Fool?


Sanc. What Lions, Fool! I will not tell ye, Fool -- Oh, Son in-Law, good morrow,
good morrow.


Iaq. Good morrow, Vather-in-Law.


Sanc. Well, and how go matters -- How does your Spouse that is to be and you
agree, humph?


Iaq. Why, by Conscience I like the young Woman well enough; she is a thought
too thick and squat, but when she is married, that Belly of hers will come down
with working.


Sanc. How Is that? Gadzooks have a care what you say; why, she had rather her
Belly should get up than down when she is married, man: Not a word more of that
good Son-in-Law.


Teres. Gadslid, I would not Mary should have heard him for a hundred Pounds.
Clapping her hands I know the Girl's humor so well, that if she had heard him
say that, she would never have endured him after.


Iaq. Pshaw wagh, I did not mean jokingly, not I by Conscience; I warrant when
she is my Wife, Mary shall have no cause to complain: And by Conscience I like
Mary much the better, because I think she is a Maid; and for my part, I don't
love a Pippin that other Folks have handled: Now, though she be a little
unsightly sometimes, yet I believe Mary is a pure Maid by Conscience.


Teres. As when I bound her head first with a Biggen, I Will be sworn for her;
besides, the Girl is mighty meekly minded, she will not speak for Money, Meat,
nor Clothes -- she will soon think she has enough, I Will say that for Mary.


Sanc. Ah, the Devil's in that old lying Jade; 'oons the noise of 20
Powder-mills come not near her, if she want but her Bread and Butter in a
Morning -- aside Contrary to Womankind, Crooked Rib; for the Proverb says, a
young Woman, a Priest, and your Poultry, think they never have enough -- Ha,
ha, ha.


Teres. So, old Sandy-beard, you have always some good thing to say of the
Women still -- but I Am sure you have no cause to prate, for you have had a good
one; and if you did not like me because I was young when we married, you might
have taken my Mother, she was old enough, and we both lived in a house.


Sanc. No, No, Matrimony, not so neither; one had as good eat the Devil, as the
Broth he is boiled in: Besides, you were both so like, there was naught to
choose. She had a Tongue like Thunder -- and I think, Spouse mine, yours is not
always as still as a Dormouse: Like Mother like Daughter, faith -- and if the
Mare have a bald Face, the Philly will have a Blaze.


Teres, Humph, will it so, goodman Garlick-eater -- Hang ye, don't lie vexing
me, but come your ways home, and help to sit our Mary; she is like to have her
Shoes soal'd, and her blue Jacket edged with green, if you will not look after it,
but stand Idling here.


Iaq. Nay, pray be quiet now, by Conscience I must have a word or two more with
my Vather in Law about Mary's good Parts; for I confess I like her mainly,
because she is a (...); I was (...) to a Widow a while ago, but I would not have
her; for besides that she was no Maid, she had four great Faults, she had three
Children and a lame Leg.


Sanc. He that marries a Widow and three Children, marries four Thieves. You
have (...) it a Scouring, Son in Law.


Teres. Well then, since you must have another Cup of Prate, I Will leave ye, and
get me gone to Mary; the Girl must have some Colberteen Lace set upon her
Wedding Smock: Bless me! what a do has there been about that Smock? Mother, she
cries, are the Gussets big enough here? Is it sloped enough at top, and wide
enough at bottom. I Have had above a hundred Questions about that Smock: I
warrant that Smock has been bleaching in her head above this two Months. Ex.
Ter.


Iaq. So, now she is gone, Vather, let us dicourse a little more; for I Have a huge
Inckling to know a few more of Mary's good qualities. By Conscience I look upon
Mary to have a notable Understanding, Vather-in-Law.


Sanc. Understanding; She can make a Pudding; that is as much Understanding as a
Wife has need of.


Iaq. Now if she be but virtuous -- against which she has one wicked sign, your
Nose, Vather-in-Law, for, to quip you with a Proverb too, one may know by your
Nose what Mutton you love -- I say, if she be but virtuous, and has but an eye
to her honor as Gentlefolks call it, then all is right.


Sanc. Virtuous! Ay, I warrant her she is as virtuous as the Skin between her
Brows; but you must not give your self so much to Jealousy nor Doubt,
Son-in-Law: He that is afraid of every Grass, must not piss in a Meadow; if you
fear, why will you go to it, why will you marry?


Iaq. Why, by Conscience I don't know; I go to it as other folks do, I think,
for ready Pudding: Besides, Mary has such a way with her, such a jigging
crumptious whim with her Backside, that she is as full of Temptation as an Egg
is full of Meat, she has a pure stroke with her, fackins -- Then, to say the
truth, Mary's very well forehanded too.


Sanc. Forehanded -- oons this Oaf makes a Mare of my Daughter.


Iaq. We shall do hugely together; I Will set her to weeding in the Wheat the
next day after we are married; she has curious spud Fingers to grub up the
Charvil.


Sanc. Fingers! I think she has, and the nails of them are an Inch long for the
purpose; she has not cut them this Twelvemonth, to my knowledge.


Iaq. Then by Conscience she must help the Plough too a little now and then:
You wont be angry if I documentize her, and make her a good Huswife, Vather-in
Law.


Sa^c. Angrly -- ^o not (...) prithee ^o^e her in wi^h thy ^elf, Tib, and
Crookhorn, and the rest of the O^en, if thou will* An (...) Wife lets the Pig
burn by the ^ires when thou have her, Boy, even draw together a gods-name.


Iaq. By Conscience, and so we shall, for my mind gives me we shall do mighty
well together; for it is odd to think how it came about, bu^ ever since I saw
Mary's Bubbies, as she was sitting without her Wastcoat at our Sheering, I have
had a main Good will to her; by Cons^ience I have thought of those Bubbies I
warrant above a hundred times; and things have grown up to a head, and put
forward mightily since that time. Can Mary spin, Vather-in-Law?


Sanc. Spin! Oons, like a Spider, boy: Her Mother before her was as good at it
as ever put Spindle between her legs.


Iaq. Gadsdiggers -- come away then; for I Will go presently, and get ready my
Wedding-Tackle -- and to morrow go to Church and say the words -- and then at
night, Vather-in-law -- at night -- oh Lord, ha, ha, ha, ha. Exit Jacques.


Sanc. Ha, ha, ha, ay, at night; oh, poor Man -- ha, ha, and yet she will hold ye
tack, if I don't mistake her, for all you are so crank; and so take this Proverb
with you by way of Advice. If you an old Flea-bitten ride, you need not fear
the Dirt;
But when you back a young Colt; See your Saddle be well girt?
Exeunt.


The End of the First Act.
ACT II.
A poor Cottage discovers Teresa and Mary sitting on Stools busy about making
a Smock. Teres. HEre Mary, prithee thread my Needle, good girl, while^t I turn
down this Selvidge here.


Man. Ay, come, let us see it. rises from the Stool And so, Mother* you say you
had a main deal of Prate about me with Vather and my Man that is to be -- hoh,
hah, hoh, hah -- What a dickins, I think I cannot do it here. -- I Am blind, I
think, with living so long a Maid, hoh, hoh. Do You think I shall thread it
better to morrow, Mother? Hoh, hoh, hoh.


Teres. Ay, ye Jade, if my Husband's Proverb be true, that says Sweet Marjoram,
and Marriage is good for the eyesight.


Mar. Hoh, hoh, hoh -- there, now it is done Gives Ter. the Needle, and sits
down again. purely. Well, and pray Mother let us hear a little; Icod 'twas rare
stuff you talked, I warrant, if one had been by to hear it; for my Vather wont
spare none of the broad Words when his hand is in, he will not spice the matter,
not he, Icod -- And my Man, whar said he, I wonder?


Teres Who, Iaquey, ha, ha, ha -- why, I thought he would have bewater'd
himself for joy when I told him I was sure thou were a Maid; he swore a great
Oath he loved a Maidenhead better than Buttermilk, or a Sunday-Dumpling at the
Parson's. Sewing as she speaks.


Mar. Hoh, hoh, hoh, Did he ^aith -- Well, and good Mother, what said Vather
then? -- hoh, hoh -- Hold, but stay a little -- Icod you will make it too narrow
at bottom here; I shall not have half room enough, if you pinch it so in this
place; -- odslidikins, if it b'ant wide enough here, Mother, you spoil all.


Teres. I think the Girl is betwattled -- why, Stands up, and shows the Smock.
prithee do but see now -- where is the pinching? odsdiggers it is wider than mine
was, by a Foot and half.


Mar. Well, let me see now, I can tell to a Ba^ly corn i^ I measure; look here,
from my left Thumb to my Nose is just measures the Smock. a Yard -- Humph,
Icod, I think it is pretty well -- ay, ay, it is well enough -- So. And now
Mother pray go on: What said Vather then -- ha?


Teres. Phoo, Pox take him, he stood choking himself with laughing at his own
Proverbs, but ne'^r a one of 'em on our side; I had like to have pulled him by
the ears three times, as I Am a Christian.


Mar. Well, I think the Devil's in my Vather for that; he makes no more of a
Woman, Icod, than of a wisp of Hay, he loves nobody but Dapple; on my
Conscience and Soul he is civiller to that Ass, than to you, Mother.


Teres. Ah! '^is even too true, Mary; this plaguey Knight Errantry, a murrain
take it, crams his head so, that the Man is, as I Am a Christian, I know not how
besotted -- so that he never thinks of Family matters, not he -- I Have had no
Comfort from him this half year, Lord help me.


Mar. Icod that is very hard -- There, come, now let us set on the Lace.


Teres And a married Woman's but a solitary thing without Comfort, Mary; if I
had married Diego of our Town, as I might have done if I had not been a Fool,
for he cast many a loving Sheeps eye at me, I had had Comforting enough, I had
had my Belly full of Comfort then as I Am a Christen.


Mar. If my Husband don't comfort me when I Have occasion. I Will make him a
C^ckold faith -- I Would do my self Reason, Icod. Hoh, hoh, hoh, hoh.


Teres. Ay Mary, in another Country now that might be; but in Spain here, the
more's the Pity, a Woman cannot do herself Reason if she would; if a Woman does
her self Reason here, her Husband confines her presently -- she is under Lock
and Key the next minute.


Mar. O Lord! I understand ye; and that is a plaguey thing Icod.


Teres. Ah! well fare little England, odslidikins, they say there a Farmer's
Wife, or such a one as I now, may have leave of her Husband to be sociable if
she can make any advantage on it; she has no Confinement upon her; all things
are open there; they lock up nothing there, but the Cupboard.


Mar. Why, that is a pure place then, I Will swear: but hold ye, what do you think,
Mother, shall I put any Lace at bottom or no? you know I Am to be a great Lady
Before I die: And now we are talking of England, I Have heard there was one at
London, near the Court I think they call it, that wore Lace thus long, and
always took care to have it se^n coming down Stairs, or going out of a Coach;
and that the Fool her Husband --


Ter^s. Knew nothing of the matter, Moll, he never came so near my Lady, he
knew nothing of the Lace. I Am sure.


Mar. No, hoh, hoh, hoh, hoh, Icod that is good, he know nothing on it! why who
should then?


Teres. Who, fool! why, some young Blade with long powdered cu^l'd hair, and a
Patch on's Nose, that watched her motions -- Why, Husbands have the least to do
with their Wives there, Fool, o^ any folk, either to lie with, or to lead 'em
there, is unfashionable and unmannerly.


Mar. Hoh, hoh, hoh -- Well Icod, then that is a crumptious place I say again --
and then Mother, there is a sort of Ca^tle they call Citizens, hoh, hoh, hoh;
Icod, they say they don't get their own Children neither.


Teres. Why no, if they will drive a subtle Trade, no more they must not, ye
silly Ja^e; if they intend to be rich and be Aldermen, the Courtier must
Cuckold the Citizen in course, then in course he gets into Debt, and then the
Citizen gets his Estate ^or Satisfac^ion in course.


Mar. Hoy day! why, this is whirly curly murly, round about our Cole-fire, hoh,
hoh, hoh, hoh -- Icod, ^his is driving a subtle Tra^e indeed.


Jacques within whistles, Holloa, Mother-in-Law, and my Flesh that must be,
where are ye?


Teres Odslidikins -- it is Iaquey, he is come to call ye to Church, I Will be
hanged else; I Will go and make an end of my Work within, and get things ready;
in the mean time, be sure to coy it, and stand off, and niggle him purely,
dost' hear, Mary?


Exit Teres^. Mar. Ah! Icod, I Will niggle him so he was never so niggled since
his Mother* bound his head, hoh, hoh, hoh -- Go, go, I warrant ye, Mother, let
me alone with him.


Enter Jaques. Iaqu. Why, how now, Flesh of mine, what no farther yet? Good
Lord! now how comes this -- Why, the what do you called, scratching. the Can --
the Can -- the Canondrical Hour will be past by Conscience: come, good now,
d'on thy Jacket lightly, good ^lesh o^ mine, d'on thy Clothes.


Mar. I cannot d'on my Clothes Mary turns away and seems coy.


Iaq. Gadsdiggers, Master Camacho and his Bride, and the Man in in the black,
tarry for us; good now, Mary, go dizzen, and come away and be married lightly;
good now do, Mary.


Mar. Pish, I cannot abide to be married -- I Am altered.


Iaqu. Gadsdigge^s, that is a good one by Conscience; not abide to be married*
Was there ever one of thy Age that could not abide to be married -- Pshaw, you
must not say so, Mary; come buss, come buss.


Mar. Pish, I cannot buss.


Iaqu. Pshaw, you can buss, and you must buss; 'sbud, she makes me as hot as a
Tossed -- What a devil ails her tro? Come, good honey Flesh of mine, buse now.


Mar. I cannot buss, I will not buss.


Iaqu. Not buss!


Mar. No.


Iaqu. Not Buss me at all!


Mar. No, no, no, no.


Iaqu. Not at all? sings out of tune.


Mar. No, no, no, no.


Iaqu. Nor go to be married?


Mar. No.


Iaqu. Gadsdiggers, nor lie with me to night?


Mar. Oo -- I Am ashamed.


Iaqu. Ah, dear sweet honey Mary, don't say No -- By Conscience I shall hang my
self if thou art in earnest: Look here, I Will give thee this pure white Turnip, if
thou will but buss and pulls out a great Turnip say I -- Odsdiggers, you must
go.


Mar. Nay, pish, I will not go.


Iaq. You shall go.


Mar. Nay, fie -- be quiet; O Lord, I cannot go.


Iaqu. Master Camacho will laugh me to death; I would not but be married to day
for a hundred Pound.


Mar Nor I neither, Icod, for all my fooling. asid^.


Iaqu. Therefore, Gadsdiggers, come along, for I must buss, and I will buss: I
must marry, and I will marry, and there is the Resolution of -- pulls her out.


Mar. Well, I will, I will, I will, I will -- What a-dikins ai^s the Man? Icod,
you will not be so sharp set seven years hence. Exeunt.


SCENE II.
Enter Don Quixote, Carrasco, and Sancho. Don Quix. SIR Bachelor, I have with
care considered on each particular of your discourse; nor shall this Sword ever
keep back its Aid, when Beauty, Wit, or injured Love's in danger -- I am my
self a Lover, learned Batchellor, and therefor doubly will assist Basilius.
Sancho starts and stares at him* St^cho shall be my Second; he shall fight too,
if there should be occasion.


Car^s. My Friend and I are doubly yours, heroic Sir.


Sanc. I fight! with whom must I ^ight, I wonder? Good Sir, don't let your head
run so much upon this Fighting Work: We are going to a Wedding now; and I see
no Monsters that I should be engaged a Second to attack there, unless it be an
Ox that is roasting yonder; -- And I^ll attack that presently, with all my
heart, if you please.


Don Quix. An Ox -- A Calf -- Ha, ha, ha, ha -- Sancho's a Droll, Sir
Bachelor, you will excuse him -- But at a dire Adventure, brave as Hercules.


Sanch. A Plague of your Commendations -- aside. -- 'sbud, I never knew him
praise my Fighting, but some damnable Drubbing or other happened presently
after.


Don Quix. But ar^ you sure the Virgin has her Cue? Is she resolved? Will she
assist your Friend? To Carrasco.


Carras. Most vigorously; it is the morose Compul^ion of an Uncle has brought
the thing so far -- She hates Camacho.


Don Q. No more then to be said* Sir* if your Plot fails, this Arm shall do her
Justice.


Carras. Triumphant Voice* How I adore its Author! Now, by Apollo and the
sacred Nine, that dip in Helicon to write of Glory, you seem^, great Sir, an
Emperor already*


Sanc. Ah! the Emperor of (...) take thee -- art thou putting him in mind of
being an (...) again? Gadzooks, I, begin to find this tongue-padding Fellow is
a vary Rogue: They ^ay he is a Scholard, and can tell by his Art how many pound
of Candles are set up in the Sky from one years end to the other; and that he can
expound Dreams -- I was such a Fool to try him once, but nothing came on it but
Folly that I know; see, they are complimenting still: -- Ah! go thy ways for a
Dream-teller.


Caras. Who talks of Dreams there -- Then, Sir, i^ that Title sound too weak
for your high ^elish, to be Emperor of Constantinople -- is most grand.


Don Q. Ye've hit it, Sir; that place I must renown, since one of our best
Knights Patrons of Chivalry, the Star of Arms, great Palmarin d'Oliva, ^eign'd
there long since.


Sanc. They have made a ^^ick Voyage on it; they are got as far as
Constantinople in two Minutes -- This plaguey Conjurer, I lay my life* is
interpreting a Dream for ^y mad Master too.


Don Q. What do thou m^tter about Dreams, Sancho?


Caras. Oh, Sir, his head runs strangely on the Topic; I late was his
Interpreter. Sancho dreamt he was at Sea, very much tossed in a Ship, but
amongst the rest, had three great Tosses, that shook him so, he waked -- I told
him the first signified Preferment -- which so happened; for in two days after,
he was tossed -- into his Government.


Sanc. And in two days after that, I was tossed out again -- that was the second
-- But now, where was the third, good Mr. Conjurer? How was I tossed the third
time?


Carras. In that, indeed Sancho, the Stars are cloudy*


Don Q Oh Sir, that falls within the Verge of my small Understandi^g. Sancho
was, just before that -- tossed in a Blanket; and I suppose the Stars meant
that the third.


Sanc. A plague on your suppose -- have you found it out -- Yes, if that were
the third Tossing, I was tossed with a Vengeanc^ and you were ^he Cause, I
thank ye -- for quarrelling with the Carriers at the (...) -- B^t come, look
not too high, lest a Chip fall in your Eye* and don't scald your lips in
another Man's Porridge -- I shall take Warning one day, and ^o perhaps escape a
fourth Tossing, I shall, Gadzooks.


Carras. But tha^ I know Sancho's a Virtuoso, I should imagine these were marks
o^ Choler.


Don Q. He is angry -- Which passion as others do express by Oaths and Curses,
he always does by Proverbs -- But hark, I hear the Marriage Instruments are
sounding, and the procession coming.

A noise of Pipes and Rural Instruments are heard within. I Will stand by; and,
when you (...) Sign --


Carras. Great Sir, I Will soon inform you -- how to get your head broke. aside.


Enter, first, Music playing; then Camacho led like a Bridegroom between two
Maids; after him, Quiteria like a Bride, led between two Men: After them,
Shepherds, Shepherdesses, Dancers and Si^gers, Men and Women. They plac^
Quitteria in a Bower on a Bank of Flowers. Cam^c. Come Neighbors, merry be
your hearts all: And now, let us see ye sing your Songs, and foot it ^ightly for
the Honor of Camacho and Qui^teria I have got her a^ ^as^, do you mind me* What,
must every poor Fellow ^hink to ou^ (...) or me -- A Sneak, a Mortgaging Rat;
No, I Would have bought his head off, boys, but I Would have had her -- What, I have
Money enough, do you mind me.


1 Shep. Ay, ay, Cousin, I am glad she is so well bestowed*


2 Shep. I wonder what she could see in the other, to like him; he could jointure
her in nothing but Fidling and Poetry: and her good Uncle left her too well to
give it a way all to nothing.


1 Shep. Besides, he has been always bred in the Town: I Will warrant him as
rotten as a Medlar -- as (...) too as a Lath; and his Legs stand as if they
were set on the wrong end upwards -- Now yours* Cousin, have some Substance.


2 Shep. Ay, ay, they will carry him out o'th dirt; those Legs are sit for
business now -- Ah, the Bride showed her Understanding in her Choice, I Will say it


Camac. Oh, thank ye, thank ye, this is kind ^aith -- Come, where are these
lazy Rogues -- Is Dinner ready? Quickly, quickly there -- let me be served, ye
Knaves -- What, I have Money enough, do you mind me -- Let me have two Sir-Loins
in one Dish, a dozen of Capons in another* for my first Course at my own Table.
Then let the Ducks swim in a River of Sauce, and the Pigeons be stu^t with
Parsley till they crack again: Quick, quick, I say; and you are all welcome, Boys
-- What, I have Money enough, do you mind me?


Omnes, A Camacho -- a Camacho, hey. Sancho leaps for Joy.


Sanc. Two Sir-lyons! humph -- and a dozen of Capons! -- Royal Fare, Gadzooks:
-- And I Have a Stomach as sharp as Heart can wish; -- I shall claw those Capo^s
off. -- Give your Worship Joy.


Camac. Oh, honest Sancho, welcome: What! Thou art hungry, I warrant; hoh, hoh,
hoh. Well, thou sha^^ suck at the Horn of Plenty presently, thou shall. Eat,
Rogue, till thy Guts can hold no more. Where Is thy Lean-jaw'd Master?


Sanc. Mum, mum, Sir; within Ear shot.


Camac. What, he is too proud to dine with us* I warrant, without the Ceremonies
of the Great Mogul to usher him in, though he be half starved. -- Hoh, hoh, hoh;
How I laugh at these poor Scoundrels!


Don Q. Sancho.


Sanc. I come, Sir. -- Pray Sir, To Camatho don't turn your Grin that way* for
if he sees it, Lord have mercy upon your two Sir-loins, and your Capons; your
Spits will be poking in our own Bellies* and the Blessings of your
Porridge-pots be showered in Carves on our own Pates.


Don. Q. Sancho, I would not have thee, for I ^ind thee prone, to hold too
great a Correspondence with these People, because I know not yet whether they
are Friends or Enemies. -- And one thing more I tell thee as a Secret; Give me
thy Ear -- Here Is an Adventure coming -- we shall have Action suddenly.


Sanc. Action! What, -- Dinner you mean, Sir, I suppose. Why, Troth, Eating is
a very pretty Action, I must needs say; and I am prepared, Sir; you need not
put me in mind.


Don Q. Nor do I, Sancho; and therefore thus I charge thee, by the unquestioned
Homage that tho^ owe me, not to dine to day.


Sanc. Not dine, Sir!


Don Q. No, unless on Thoughts of Honor, as I do; Dinner will strangely dull
thy Animal Spirits, which I shall presently have occasion for. -- Once more thy
Ear; mark me attentively: Within this Hour one more and thou and I must fight
with all this Company.


Sanc. The Devil we must! Oh -- that ever I was born.


Don Qu. Conquer 'em -- and do an Act Ages to come shall story.


Sanc. Canquer 'em -- 'Oons, what do you mean, Sir? They are tame enough, I
think; here is no Strife amongst 'em, that I see; and to provoke 'em to fight --
not I, faith, Sir. He goes too soon to that Market where nothing's to be bought
but Blows.


Don Q. Will thou not ^ight then?


Sanc. Not a Stroke, Gadzooks: Besides, to forbid me eating too, when my Belly
has rung all^in above this two ho^rs -- Sir, I Am your Vassal; but to think I
wont Dine at my Daughter's Wedding, i^ such a Tyranical Whim, that I must
rebel, if you were fo^ty Emperors.


Don Q. Scoundrel -- Thou shall not have it in ^hy power to eat -- So: No more
Words for this time. -- I see the Sports begin.


Here follows an Entertainment of Music and Dancing; which ended Camacho rises
at the sound of some Shrieks and Cries without. SONG. Sung by one representing
JOY.
VErtumnus, Flora, you that bless the Fields.
Where warbling Philomel in Safety builds;
And to the Nymphs and Swains
That revel on these Plains
Dispose the Ioys that Heaven and Nature yields:
Call Hymen, call him from his merry home;
Bid him prepare his Torch, and come;
To sing and drink full Bowls; Call loud, I say:
It Is Beauty's Feast, Quitteria's Wedding Day.
The Second SONG, By one Representing Hymen or Marriage.
HEre is Hymen, here am I,
Some Men's grief, and some Men's joy:
Here Is for better and worse,
Many Bless and many Curse.
2.
Tender Virgins soft and young,
They that to be Mothers long,
By my Aid Loves Raptures try,
Save their blushes and enjoy.
3.
But none must Loves Banquet tas^e,
Tho^ it is dressed, till I say Grace;
Till I Lice^se so to do,
Maids that wish, must not fa^^ too.
4.
The vast Universe I sway,
Humane Kind my Laws obey:
By a Power that equals Fates,
I give Honors and Estates.
5.
Thousands me a Pillory call,
Mouse-trap^ Stocks, the Devil and all:
For who tries how I can bind,
Is for all his Life confined.
6.
But if any honest Swain,
Ask if I am Joy or Pain,
I am both, the truth to tell,
Sometimes Heaven sometimes Hell.
The Third Song, By one Representing Discord.
CEase Hymen cease, thy Brow let Discord awe,
Thou Yoke, where Fools with toil and trouble draw;
I am sworn Foe to-all thy Law does bind;
Marriage from first Creation was designed
A Curse, Entailed on wretched Human Kind.
It Is noble Discord, generous Strife,
That gives the truest taste of Life;
Marriage first made Man fall,
Had I been in the Garden placed,
The Woman never had made him taste;
'Twas foolish Loving damned us all,
Had I been in, etc.
Joy. Happy Mortals you from me,
Shall have all felicity.

Hymen. I Will b^^tow, to raise your Joys,
Charming Girls and Lovely Boys.

Discord. And to quell each fond Delight,
I will make y^u scratch and Bite.

Chorus of all. Let Mortals then know,
Let 'em know, let 'em know, let 'em know, let 'em know,
Let us by reflection show,
What attends the Marriage Vow,
And what Ioys and Troubles grow;
Let Mortals then know,
Let 'em know, let 'em know, let 'em know, let 'em know.

Here follows a Dance of six or eight Men and Women, representing the Happiness
and Unhappiness of Marriage. First Man within. A Surgeon, a Surgeon, help, help
for Heavens sake.


Second Man within. He faints, he faints, keep the Spirit to his Nose, Oh ^elp,
help --


Enter Carrasco as frighted. Carasc. Oh unfortunate Accident, Oh dreadful
Mischance, make room there; Where Is the Bridegroom, where is the Cruel Bride?


Came. What are ye mad, do you mind me; here we are, what is the matter? How now,
what business have you here Friend?


Carasc. Basilius, my dear Friend Basilius, Oh, if you have any pity, let him
come in and spea^ to the Bride.


Came. Basilius -- should, what my Rival -- no, no, such matter, he comes not
here, do you mind me.


Carasc. Oh poor Basilius, he is past being your Rival now Sir, for no sooner
had the Friar told him, that he was to Marry Quitteria this morning, but in a
desperate Frenzy, with a sharp Tuck he run himself through the Body, and there
he is without, weltering in his Blood, nor will be Confessed do what they can,
till he speak with the Bride, and she consents to hear his Dying Words.


Came. What -- has he run himself through the Body, do you say --


Carasc. Oh! ay Sir, ay -- he has killed himself, he has killed himself, he
cannot live half an hour.


Came. Nay, look ye, do you mind me, if he has killed himself, I care not much if
I do let him come in and tell his Tale -- What says Quitty -- let the
hotheaded Fool come in, he cannot Prate long, if he has run himself through the
Body.


Quit. Oh, Sir, believe not I will hinder him, the Man that sacrificed his Life
for me; if in my Bosom lives a generous thought, must certainly have there a
large possession.


Came. We'll bring him then, -- and do you mind me, tell the Cook we'll send him
word when the simple Fellow's dead, and then we'll go to Dinner.


Enter Basilius carried between two a Sword stuck through his Body, which
appears all Bloody -- with him a Friar. First Shep* Bless us, what a Wound's
there, the Sword comes above five inches out at his Back.


Second Shep. Ah, he has taken occasion for the Sun to shine through him
Neighbor.


Basil. Oh! to Quitteria thou to whose fair but relentless Eyes, I sacrificed
my Youths entirest Duty, behold the latest Tribute Love can offer, my Life paid
to appease the cruel fates; Who would not grant that I should live with her,
for whom I only thought Life worth enjoying.


Quit. 'Twas the effect of both our rigid Fortunes -- Alas! I was not in my
own dispose, my Heart never had the power to make amends for your true Love
since 'twas confined by Friends.


Came. The short and the long on it is, Friends did it, do you mind me, I had
Interest with her Uncle, and you had none; What! ^he thing is plain enough, you
lost her, because you were poor; and I had her, because I was rich -- What! I
had Money enough, do you mind me.


Basil. Live happy Sir, and long, as you can enjoy her, I only beg o^ you for
my Souls sake, to grant me one request before I dye.


Came. Request; Well, what is it, let us hear, let us hear.


Basil. That whilst I live, which is but till this Weapon be drawn out out of
my Body -- for then it is certain my very Soul flows with it -- that you would
resign Quitteria to me, and to confirm it subscribe here this Paper.


Came. How! subscribe, I don't understand that, do you mind me.


Basil. Alas, Sir, it is but for a wretched minute.


Friar. Come, good Sir, mind your better part, your Soul, leave these
transitory thoughts, and prepare for your Confession.


Basil. It Is for my Souls sake, Reverend Sir, I beg this, for I, alas, have
rashly made an Oath, that till she is mine, I never would be Confessed, -- and
now am in a State of Desparation; Madam, you may have Charity, though no Love
-- Do you persuade him, alas, you know a Soul's a precious thing.


Q^it. I am given all to him, but yet, alas Sir, whether my Interest be so
much, as can assure the Grant of any Suit, I dare not yet affi^m -- Don Quixote
beckons Sancho.


Don Q. Let 'em alone Sancho, stand Foot to Foot by me.


S^ncho. What can be the meaning of all this, sure this plaguey Devil, my
Master, has not persuaded this Man to kill himself, only to h^^^e^ me of my
Dinner.


F^y^r Your Charity should exert it self on this Occasion, troth Sir, (...) the
Lady says -- A Soul's a precious thing.


Came* Why, I should be well enou^^ inclined, do you mind me, to take pi^ty of his
Soul, if it would be civil, and go from his Body in good time, and not hinder
us too long from Dinner; but to be sure of that now.


Carasc. That, Sir, -- alas, it will be gone next minute, draw out the Sword,
you draw out his Soul too; Besides, Sir, you will be haunted fearfully if he
should die without shrift in this desperate Condition -- his Ghost will be
glaring ye in the Face every minute.


Came. His Ghost!


Carasc. Ay, Sir, his Ghost in a Bloody Shroud, with a pale Face and gogling
Eyes -- 'twill come every day to Dinner to ye; and to have a Ghost you know
always dipping in one's Dish, Sir.


Came. Humph, dipping in my Dish!


Carasc. Ay, Sir, with his cold scraggy Knuckles.


Came. Why, troth, do you mind me Friend, I should not much like that, I confess
-- a Ghost is but an odd Companion at Meals.


Basil. The ebbing Pulse about my Heart grows weaker, and little Spirits skim
before my Eyes, all gay and fine in party-colored dresses, to catch my
fleeting Soul -- therefore consent this Instant, or for ever.


Quit. You have, Sir, mine, and with it all my Heart, and were my Hand my own
I Would give that too.


Basil. Fiddlers, Physicians, Songs, and Glisterpipes. Staring as distracted.


Carasc. He begins to talk idly, therefore if you love your quiet, Sir,
subscribe quickly, it is but for a minute you know -- besides think on the
Ghost, Sir. Gives the Paper.


Came. Dipping his scraggy Knuckles in my Dish -- my Hair stands an end at the
thoughts on it -- There, Sir Writes there is my Hand, and for the little time he
lives I do resign her to him, but not a jot longer, dye mind me.


Carasc. No, no, Sir, longer, we desire no longer -- there is Sir, there is
Balsom for your Wound, to Camacho and now, Sir, Bridegroom, welcome to our
Comedy; stand up Friend -- Basilius starts up and draws out the Sword*


Basil. When stately Rosius on the Roman Stage
Was like some valiant General to dye
The Steel, not through himself he thrust in Rage,
But slily through a Wooden Trunk close by * Throws away the Trunk.
The Purple stains, which were a Sheeps warm Blood,
Upon his snowy Linen sprinkled were:
But, Oh! the Fools that nothing understood,
How they did wonder, Oh! how they did stare!
Ha, ha, ha, a Trick, a Trick, a Trick -- Oh, my Dear to Quit. sweet pretty
Actress, this was a Scene indeed -- Noble Sir, we have the License here to go
about our b^^^^ess^ -- We thank you for this preparation -- but we have another
Entertainment elsewhere, and so sweet. Sir, adieu. Takes Quitteria.


Quitter. Oh cruel Man, am I turned off at this rate, I shall cry my Eyes out,
Ha, ha, ha --


Carasc. Ha, ha, ha, you may get another Wife, Sir, you have Money enough, do you
mind me.


Came. Odsbodikins, am I fob'd off thus, -- it shall not do, Sir, I Will have her
again with a Vengeance, ^all on, Friends, I Am abused; I Will give a thousand
Ducats for her again, fall on Boys,


Carasc. Now, to Don Quix. Sir, this is your time, now show these Rascals your
Heroic Virtue.


Don Q. Ten Millions shall not fetch her back -- Draw Sancho. Rascals go on and
fight, or -- here Don Q. Car. and San beat 'em off and return; So, Sir, now
she is your own in peace.


Basil. Brave, Brave Don Quixote, what Honor shall I pay him.


Carasc. We Will have a Statue for him and for Sancho, we will instantly to his
Daughter's Wedding, and caress him there.


Sancho. Ay, when you have taken away my Stomach with drubbing, you will give me a
Dinner.


B^sil. And now, dear Angel, let us to our own Happiness -- Thus, let all Lovers
that by Friends are crossed,
Thus let 'em be rewarded for it at last



The End of the Second Act.
ACT III.
SCENE I.
Enter Teresa, Mary, and Jaques, Mary in her Wedding Clothes s^rutting. Jacques.
WHy, here has been mad doings in the Meadow yonder, if all be true as Vather in
Law has told us, Master Basilius has whipped away the Bride, it seems, and by
Conscience they have made a mere Fool of my Master Camacho.


Teres. Ay, and there is a woundy many Stories about it already; some say the
Weapon came out above a handful at's Back, and some say there was above eight
or nine inches seen out at's Belly, and every body has a several Tale; but let
it be how it will, Mary, since Master Basilius has offered thee thy Wedding
Dinner, as well as 'tother, he is as proper a Man as 'tother, and deserves a
good Wife as well as 'tother, every whit, hah!


Mary* Ay, ay, Mother, so I can but be Married, and you can but Dine, we care
not which way it comes, aside not we Icod; but stay, Codslidikins I had forgot,
I must not be so Rompish before Jacques, I Will set my Mouth in Prim. He looks on
her, she Prims.


Iacques. Well, Flesh of mine, Rumpsy, Plumpsy, how is it? hah! does Heart thump
yet, the hour's a coming Chuffy Chaps -- it is a coming Long Nose Pinckaninny,
are your Twincklers twinkling in faith -- well the Domine will have said Grace
presently -- and then I Will fall to^ with a Tantararara, I Have a swinging Stomach
by Conscience.


Mary. O Lord, what do you mean tro? pray Man don't talk so. Setting her Face.


Jacques. Ah -- ye Bubbys you, I must talk so, ye little tempting Rogue, I will
talk so; well, go thy ways, thou puts down all Spain for Bubbys, that is certain
-- Hark, Mother in Law, she goes back Coyly never believe me more. if Mary the
Buxome's Bubby's there be not the making of us when I have made her Milch once,
she will be sent for to Suckle all the great Do^s Children about Court, she will
yield a Pailful a day by Conscience.


Mary. Pish -- fie upon it, fecks now I cannot abide such talk, cannot you let
Bubbys alone I wonder.


Teres. Ah, splice ye for a Cunning Carrion -- the Jade simpers as if Butter
would not melt in her mouth, but Cheese of three half pence a po^nd will not choke
her, as the old saying is.


Man within. Come, where is the Bride and Bridegroom, Bagpipes within Sounds
here -- Holloa, Holloa.


Jacques. Hark now, by Conscience our Friends are come to fetch us to Church,
come Molly, come away Flesh of mine, p^ithee come.


Mary. Fugh, I cannot tell how to come, I Am so ashamed. He pulls her out.


Teres. Ah -- cunning Queen -- Ha, ha, ha, ha -- Exeunt.


SCENE II.
Enter Basilius, Carasco, Quitteria, and Altisidora. Basil. THus far kind
Fortune has improved our Joy, and when the Law has perfected the Work, then I
shall call this Treasure of my Soul, my own securely, Embracing Quit. Oh, my
best Brother, how am I bound to thee too? how shall I pay thee for thy friendl^
service.


Carasc. The Pay of Friendly service is the doing it, and I am glad at Heart it
has succeeded; I know the Mad Knights assistance was Authentic, and therefore
blew him up with Praise and Flattery, which made him, when the brunt of the
Business came, to lay about him so; Where have you left him, Madam?


Quit. In The Garden, dedicating his Fond Thoughts to his Romantic Mistress
Dulcinea; To divert him from whom, and to promote our Mirth, I have laid a
Plot; That Al^y here, my Niece, shall feign he^ self passionately in love with
him, meet him at every turn, and sigh and languish as if she were despairing.


Basil. 'Twill make us excellent Sport -- but she must be sure then to cry up
Knight Errantry -- sing Amorous Dittys often, and humor him in his Romantic
Vein.


Alitsid. Humor him, 'dslife I have got Parismus and Parismenos almost by
heart, and am as familiar with Don Belianis of Greece, as if I had been his
Squire; and then for singing, I have got the most deplorable Matters, the most
Melancholy miserable Madigrals, that being dismally howled about twelve at
night, would make all the Cats of the Parish come into the Consort.


Car^sc. Ha, ha, ha, ha, the Witty Rogue will mimick it better than any Actress
in Spain, and the Knight will be puzzled Damnably; but a Pox on it, we want him
all this while -- Oh, here he comes and Sancho.


Enter Don Quixote and Sancho. Basil* The beauty of the Morning bless ye, Sir,
-- and may the Rays of the Meridian Sun shine gently on the Head of the most
^am'd of all Knights Errant in the Universe.


Don Q. Oh good Basilius, generous young Man, -- you do me too much Honor, --
good faith it is far beyond my mean deservings.


Quit. No flattery can reach Don Quixote's Head, he looks above it still.


Carasc. As far as high Olympus does a Molehill.


Quit. Or Heaven the lowest Earth.


Don Q. Most Beauteous Lady, happy I am above all other Knights, to have such
Praises from so sweet a Mouth; and my most learned Sir, I thank you for your
Goodness. To Caras.


Basilius. Nor must my good Friend Sancho lose his share in our best
Compliments -- whose Service has been notable, -- well my trusty Squire -- to
an Immortal Knight; Is Mary sped yet, are the happy Couple coming, you see we
wait for 'em.


Sanc. Yes, yes, Sir, the jobb is over by this time, the two Fools are hobling
hither as fast as they can: I should have had a new Jerkin on by right, my
Masters Worship gave me an old Mantle to make me one I thank him, but I have
laid it up till another time, I love to be saving.


Sancho speaks as fluster'd. Don Quixote. I gave thee that as a Reward for the
Bruises thou gottest in the late Skirmish; for though thy Mettle, like a resty
Jade, ran back at first, yet with my Spurring thou gott'st Honor afterward;
and Scars and Br^ises that are got with Honor, all merit to be covered with a
Mantle.


Altis. Ah sweet Man * Altisidora looks amorously on Don Quixote., how sweetly
he talks.


Don Quix. What says the Nymph unspotted Looks proudly on her.


Altis. Ye sweet Face -- Ah ye dear Man, you.


Quit. Fie Altis, fie, did you not promise me to be more moderate. You must
excuse her, Sir, the poor Girl cant hide a Passion for you, which you had known
before, had not I feared the Charms of the bright Dulcinea -- were so rooted in
you, you could heed nothing else, -- but now, since she has broke the Ice her
self, -- I can no longer forbear telling ye, you have bewitched my Niece.


Altis. Ah -- those alluring Eyes.


Quit. Fie Alty --


Don Q* Prevailing merit, Madam, is not Witchcraft -- I cannot help my --
influence, it is not my fault, you should lock up your Sisters and your Neices.


Al^is. That Heart-seducing Nose.


Garas. This is almost Distraction, the young Lady is far gone.


Basil. Ah poor young thing, this has been breaking out a great while.


Altis. That precious --


Don Quix. Prithee.


Altis. Graceful.


Don Quix. Nay -- look off Maiden.


Altis. Honey wording Mouth,
And that most charming Phillamote Complexion.

A SONG sung by Miss Cross, when she makes Love to Don Quixote.
DAmon Feast your Eyes on me,
Whither simply would you lead 'em:
Can you think another she,
Has more Charms than I to feed 'em*
He that leaves a Ro^ie Cheek,
Lips Vermillion'd like a Ruby,
Blindly courser fare to seek,
Pox upon him for a Booby.
If a Smile, the Lovers Joy
Can Delight, I Will do it Divi^ely,
Or do you love a Sleepy Eye,
Here is one can Ogle fi^ely:
Charms would make another Man
Gaze an Age, I Will show to win ye;
And when I Have shown all I can;
If you go the Devil's in you.
-- Oh Flower of Knights, Don Quixote de la Mancha.

Don Quix. Oh! Dulcinea del Toboso, guard well the Castle of my Constancy --
The foe is strong, the Nymph is wondrou0s Lovely. Oh I hear Music -- now I
shall get Breath. Music within The Married Couple's coming -- this was lucky.


Altis. He shuns me -- then break Heart, I Will go and cry my Soul out. Exit Altis


Don Quix. Very strange this --


Sanc. Ay, Here comes Mary, the Jade tosses her Head like the fore-Horse of a
Team; She has made me almost Drunk with Aqua Vitae this morning -- and will be
Fox'd her self before night, she is so crank upon the matter.


Music plays; The^ Enter Jaques led by two Maids; and then Mary led by two
Men; Gines de Passamonte and Lopez disguised; Then Teresa follows, and Singers
and Dancers. Caras. A very jolly Troop; their ^aces too look merrily.


Quit. A sign their Hearts are Tuned: This is their time, a Wedding Day's the
Jubilee of Life.


B^sil. Welcome, welcome all, and I wish you Joy my Friend -- Your Spouse there
is well pleased I see by her looks.


Iaq. Ay, I Will make her look nine ways at once before I have done with her, by
Conscience.


Caras. Take heed of Threatening F^iend, Mary's a Girl of Courage.


Mary. Ay, Ay, l^^ him threaten, it is all he can do to hurt me, -- I Will deal
with him well enough I warrant ye; Odslidikins, what de think I cannot deal with
him: When I was a Maid, and under subjection, I prim'd and simper'd and was
mealy-mouthed as they call it; but now I am a Wife, I gad, I Will talk what I
please -- and be Master too in my turn, old Rock. Gives Jaques a thump on the
back.


Basil. -- Why well said Mrs. Bride -- give her a Buss for that Friend.


Mary. How now, What, do as you are bid, every Fool does as their bid, Lobcock.
He rumples her to Kiss her, and she gives him a Box on the Ear.


Teres. Ha, ha, ha, -- it is a plaguey mettled young Queen, but it is no wonder;
for at her Age I was just so my self. This Jade puts me in mind of a pure
P^overb, that says, Honest Men marry quickly, but Wise Men not at all.


Sanc. Nay, Mary, -- Gadzooks you will balk my Son in Law if you f^ght upon your
Wedding Day; that is a little too soon -- your Mother and I did not go to Cuffs
in a fortnight after at least, Child.


Caras. Oh, it is nothing, she intended perhaps to entertain him as the famous
Spartan Ladies used to do at their Marriages, where a good Box on the Ear given
by the Bride to her new Husband, was held a special favor.


Sanc. It Is a special favor that she will entertain him with then, as often as
any Spartan of 'em all, I Will say that for her.


Don Q. A blow may be a sign of over fondness, as Mothers sometimes Kissing
Bite their Children.


Basil. Ay, ay, 'twas a Jest, they play the play together; I warrant they are as
fond of one another as two Kittlins.


Iaq. Nay I meant no harm not I, -- it came a little sour though upon my le^t
Ear, by Conscience -- but come, we wont fall out for all that Mary.


Mary. Fugh, I care not for falling out nor falling in -- I cod I wont be
Buss'd but when I please -- What de think I Am a Fool, to be slopt and slopt
every time you are bid do it, I cod I wont be slopt but when I Have a mind to it my
self; nay, look as you will -- I wont be mealy mouthed not I, I Am Married now,
mun.


Basil. Faith Mrs. Bride, and nothing but reason* and now to end the difference
in Mirth -- lets have some Music, the great Don Quixot's Melancholy: Come,
let the Wedding sports go forward, and bid the Servants get Dinner ready in the
Lodge next to the Grove. I Have heard the Bride Dances and Sings her self too my
Dear To Quit. and I hope will pleasure us too, add to the Entertainment upon
her Wedding Day.


Quit. I hope she will be so kind, and to encourage her, there is something
toward Housekeeping. Gives her a Purse.


Mary. O Lord -- it is Gold -- Fackins -- Thank your noble Ladyship.


Iaq. Give your Honor many Thanks.


Mary. Hoy, What do you thank her for -- Look here Presto, you are like to see
no more on it, Puts up the Purse, and makes Mouths at him.


Basil. Nay here is another for the Bridegroom too* we must not be kind by
halves. Gives another Purse to Jaques.


Iaq. Heaven bless ye, by Conscience, you are a noble Gentlemen. Now Flesh of
mine. Shakes the Purse, and she snatches i^ away.


Mary. What now -- Why now, it is where it should be -- nay stand away, I cod
I Will keep it -- I Will make it in my bargain, I Will keep all the Money.


San. So -- the Jade begins already -- she will show him rare Pranks ere long.


Iaq. Odsbodikins that were wise work.


Caras. Ah, let her have it, let her have her Humor till night, you know then
you must strip her of all.


Basil. Oh by all means; and besides, 'twill hinder our Mirth should you cross
her now ^ Come begin there.


The Clowns Song at the Marriage of Mary the Buxome, in Eleven Movements, Sung
to a Division on a Ground Bass: The Words implying a Country Match at
Stool-Ball. Ground Bass.
COme all, great, small,
Short, tall, away to Stool-Ball.
First Movement.
Down in a Dale on a Summers day,
All the Lads, and Lasses, met to be merry;
A Match for Kisses at Stool-Ball play,
And for Cakes, and A^e, and Cyd^r and Perry.
Will, and Tom, Hall, Dick, and Hugh, Kate, Doll,
Sue, Bess, and M^ll, with Hodge, and Bridget, Ned and Nanny,
But when Plump Siss got the Ball in her Mutton Fist,
Once fretted, she would hit it further than any.
Third Movement.
Running, Hairing,
Gapeing, Staring,
Reaching, 'Stooping,
Hollowing, Whooping,
Sun a Setting,
All thought fitting,
To sit down and rest 'em
Fourth Movement.
Hall got Sue,
And Doll got Hugh,
All took by turns
Their Lasses and Buss'd 'em.
Fifth Movement.
Jolly Ralph was in with Pegg,
Tho freckled like a Turkey Egg,
And she as right as is my Leg
Still gave him leave to Touze her.
Sixth Movement.
Harry then to Katty,
Swore her Dugs were pretty,
Though they were all sweaty,
And large as any Cows are.
Seventh Movement.
Tom Melancholy was
With his Lass,
For Sue, what he e're could do,
Would not note him.
Eighth Movement.
Some had told her
Being a Soldier,
In a Party
With Macarty,
At the Siege of Limerick,
He was wounded in the S^rotum.
Ninth
But the cunning Philly
Was more kind to Willy,
Who of all their Ally
Was the ablest Ringer.
Tenth Movement
He to carry on the Jest
Begins a Bumper to the best,
And winks at her of all the rest,
And squeezed her by the Finger.
Then went the Glasses round,
Then went the Lasses down,
Each Lad did his Sweet Heart own,
And on the Grass did fling her.
Ground Bass.
Come all, great and small.
Now Mrs. Bride. Mary. I cod I Will sing my Song then of the Mil^ers Daughter;
Come give me the Trenchers.


A Song sung by Mary the Buxome.
THe old Wife she sent to the Miller her Daught^^
To grind her Grist quickly, and so return back.
The Miller so workt it, that in eight months after,
Her Belly was filled as full as her Sack:
Young Robin so pleased her,
That when she came home,
She gaped like a stuck Pig, and star'd like a Mome;
She hoyden'd, she scamper'd, she hallowed, and whoop'd,
And all the day long,
This, this was her Song,
Hoy was ever Maiden so Lerricom Poop'd.
Oh Nelly, cried Celie, thy Cloths are all Mealy,
Both backside and Belly are rumpled all ore.
You Mop Mow, and Slubber, why what a Pox ail ye,
I Will go to the Miller, and know all you Whore.
She went, and the Miller so grinding, did ply*
She came cutting Capers a foot and half high;
She wadled, and strodled, (...) hollowed, and whoop'd,
And all the day long,
This, this was her Song;
Hoy, were e're swo Sisters so Lerricom Poop'd*
Then Mary of the Dairy, a third of the number,
Would fain know the cause they so gig'd it about.
The Miller her Wishes, long would not encumber,
But in the old manner, the secret made out.
Thus Celie, and Nelly, and Mary the Mild,
Were all about Harvest time all big with Child.
They Danced in a Hey, and she hollowed and whoop'd,
And all the day long,
This, this was their Song;
Hoy, were three Sisters so Lerric^m Poop'd.
Basil. Most excellently performed, I see the Bride's an Artist at it.


Quit. Her motion quick and graceful, her Voice good too.


Teres. Nay, at our Wake Mary used always to carry away the Garland, I Will say
that for her; Bless us, how the ^^lding sweats, here tak^ my Muckender Child.
Takes out a Clo^^.


Iaq. Do Flesh of mine, and wipe Bubbies. He throws it to her.


Ma^y. I wont now because you bid me. She throws it in his Face.


Caras. Oh, her Spirits are warm, you must not thwart her now Mr. Bridegroom.


Don Quix. This exercise of Dancing is of use; it is as one may say, a kind of
Vaulting, and Vaulting ever was held very useful, a proper Science in the Art
of War, when I was young I had it in Perfection, and can now without Boots come
over Rosinante.


Basil. Sir, you excel in every thing.


Gives. Lets in amongst 'em * To Lopez. now is the proper time; save ye
Gentlemen.


I^ques. O Lord, here is Master Peter come, and has brought his Motion with him,
I warrant: Oh Sirs, if ever you will see a fine thing whilst you live, lets see
Master Peter's Poppet Show; by Conscience this is the purest chance that he
should come to set out our Wedding too.


Mary. Oh Gemini Vather, the Poppet Show, I cod I am glad of this, for I have
longed to see a Poppet Show as much as ever I did to be Married, I Will Swear.
Mary Iumps and Dances about.


San^ho. Well, well, don't make such a noise, don't be such a hoyden.


Teres. And I too iffecks --


I^ques. There we shall see Kings and Queens, and Moors, and Jews, and Bulls,
and Bears. and Ladies, and Bishops, and Barbarians, and all the World by
Conscience: Oh rare Master Peter, are you come In Faith.


Quit* Ha, ha, ha, -- how the Fool has mixed 'em, Bears and Ladies, and Bishops
and Barbarians.


Basil. Ay, I minded it -- Well honest Friend, and what new matters have ye,
hah.


Gives. Of all sorts Sir: I have Motions proper for all kind of Stories. First,
Sir, I can entertain y^ with a pretty piece, called the taking of Namur, with
the utter routing of the Confederate Army; you will say it is very fine when it is
performed.


Basil. Ay, that will be a very fine piece indeed.


C^r^s. Ay marry Sir, these are notable things indeed


Jacques. Did not I tell ye what a pure Fellow he was; well by Conscience, there
is not the like of this Master Peter in all Spain.


Gives. Then I Have a third, and please ye* upon an English Plot, it is called,
English Men Satisfied; or, the Impossibility; It Is plaguey Satirical, it makes
'em the verriest Maggots; the mearest Shatter brains, for it shows, that
neither Monarchy nor Commonwealth, nor Pope nor Protestant, nor War nor Peace,
nor Liberty nor Slavery, nor Marrying nor Whoring, nor Reason nor Treason, can
satisfy a right Englishman.


B^sil. ^umph -- these are shrewd Matters Friend.


Gives. Then, Sir, if you please to see any Mimickry, here is my Comrade shall
divert ye better than any one in Spain; He shall Mimick a Cat in a Coal-Basket;
a Mastiff Dog in a Court Yard; a Shoulder of Mutton upon a Spit; and a hundred
things: beside, all so naturally -- you would swear it was real.


Sancho. Pox take him for naming a Shoulder of M^tton, the Rogue has set my
Mouth a watering at it -- besides, this plague Aquavitae works so much in my
Head, that if they don't make haste to Dinner, I shall never hold out till
Night, Gadzooks.


Don Q. Peace Sancho, but d^ye hear Friend -- What Tracts of History can ^our
Motion perform, I am for that now? Can you show nothing about Knight Errantry.


Gives. Oh, the finest Piece in the World, Sir, I can show you the History of
the disastrous Loves of Don Goyferos and Mellisandra.


Don Q. Hah! -- Cans^ thou?


Gives. Yes, Sir, how he freed Meli^endra from a strong Castle in Sansuena,
where she had been close locked up by the Moorish King Marsilius.


Don Q. Ay, that, that, Friend for my Money, methinks I long to see how the
valiant Knight Errant, Don Gayferos, behaved himself in that dangerous
Adventure, -- What, say Gentlemen and Madam, shall we see this noble History?


Quit. Oh, with all my Heart, Sir, I am a great Admirer of 'em.


Basil. That shall be our Evening Diversion -- Now let us in to Dinner, I
warrant the Bride and Bridegroom are hungry; besides, we must have a Rowse or
two to their Healths: Come, Mr. Bridegroom, manage your Spouse, and Noble
Knight, pray follow. Jacques leads Mary, and Don Q* Quitteria.


Sancho. Ay, ay, come -- a Rowse, a Rowse, let us Sing, and let us Bowze,
Gadzooks my Master must Squire himself to day, for I must tope a Brusher or two
more, now my hands's in, come what will on it.


Exit Sancho. Enter Manet, Gines, and Lopez. Gives. So, thanks to good luck,
thus far I Am undiscovered, little does this Whim^ical Knight think that I am
that famous Gines de Passamonte, that amongst the rest of my Brethren
Gally-slaves whom he freed, beat him so damnably in the Mountains of Sierra
Morena -- My disguise here, and false Name of Peter, has, I f^nd, secured me
from his knowledge; Adventures on the Highway was my noble Function then, but
some time after cunningly cheating a poor dull Fellow of his Motion, I have
ever since set up for Master of the Poppets my self, under the umbrage of which
Profession, I have played Pranks innumerable, no Man scaping my nimble Hand or
subtle Brain, that I knew had either Money or Moveable -- The two Purses,
Comrade, that were given to day, are too weighty to stay long in the Possession
of those Fools, therefore are marked for ours -- This Foolish Don and Clodpate
Squire have Beasts to Ride on too, this must not be, Brother, whilst Men of
Brain and Action go on foot -- therefore in reason likewise are for us too.


Lopez. Say but how this is to be done, Brother, and I Will warrant I Will play my
part.


Gives. Why easily, as easily as you may Steal a Hen; As thus now When all
these here are gapping at the Poppets, which I Will take care to hold 'em by the
Ears with, the Purses carelessly put in some Box or Cupboard in the Lodge
there, then thou like Mercury, gliding through the Doors, may snap 'em in a
moment.


Lopez. I Will do my best endeavors.


Gives. Then with what pleasure at a private hour shall we laugh at these
Fools; Ah, of all Trades a Rogue is the most pleasant; They may talk of
Merchants with their subtle Bargains; of Shopmen with falacious Weights, and
Measures; of Gamesters with false Dice, Lawyers with Lying; but for the Wit and
Pleasure of Mystery, the Ingenious, the right true modeled Thief, is the
delightful function in the World -- Come Brother, first lets to the Stable --
they are too busy within about themselves to take care of their Beasts without
-- but hold I think here is some coming out, -- d'sdeath, it is the Knight and
Squire, -- and leading the Ass with them -- let us Steal cunningly in behind 'em
there is, the Horse left still, -- and I Have a close private place to secure him
in -- let 'em search how they can. Exeunt.


Enter Don Quixote and Sancho drunk, Don Quixote leading the Ass. Don Q.
Sancho.


Sancho. -- ugh -- well. Hiccoughs as drunk.


Don Q. Fixing just now an Eye of Observation, I found in the Economy of thy
Behavior, something Oprobrious to the Character of him that is my Squire, thou
took'st thy Cups at a too lavish rate; a thing offensive to our sobe^ Order;
and though I six times called thee to make ready Rosinante for an Adventure I
had just then thought on, thou answeredst not; which considering my Greatness,
and what I am to thee, is a prodigious fault.


Sanc. Why looky -- ugh -- though it is true, you did call me 6 times, -- yet I
was just then drinking 6 Bumpers in a hand -- which I think, ugh, was another
guess Adventure than yours -- And as to your Greatness, ugh; why looky, I am,
ugh, six times greater than I was too.


Don Q. Ah, shame on thee, thou art now less than ever -- A Flea's a Creature
of much larger Soul, nay and much larger Merit -- thou great, no ^orbid Fool,
the Man that is Drunk --


Sanc. * Hick^ups like one drunk. Is as great as a King, Gadzooks.


Don Q. Ceases to be at all, thou Soulless Insect -- heaven -- what affront is
this to Chivalry -- what scandal to thy Office.


Sancho* Ugh -- hang my Office, it is a paltry lou^ie Office -- an Office that*
ugh -- Gadzooks I^am ashamed of.


Don Q. How'^ that, Brute?


Sancho. And as for Chi, Chi, Chivalry, look ye -- the Man that, ugh, carries
Guts to the Bea^s, has a better Trade by half.


Don Q. Oh Profanation, oh monstrous Scoundrel, this to my Face*


Sancho. Nay, nay; look'ee, it is true, it is true; for my part, I speak nothing
but the truth; and ugh -- now am I resolved to speak my Belly full. When you are
an Anvile hold ye still; But when you are a Hammer strike your fill. Pop --
there is a Proverb for ye too.


Don Q. What am I bound to bear for being rational? Poor Slave! this is the
Wine, not him.


Sancho. And do you hear, Friend, ugh, to be even with ye for all the Counsel ye
have given me, let me advise ye, do you hear, to leave your Errantry, and go
home, ugh; for to be plain -- look'ee, as ye are, they take ye for no better --
than a Fool-Master of mine.


Don Q. Oh Dog! -- 'Sdeath, I shall want Patience -- Come, Sirrah, and mount
presently -- I am your Squire for once, and will see ye safe to night -- but to
morrow, Rascal --


Sancho. Mount -- ay* come, with all my heart -- that I may ride away from --
Chi, Chi, Chivalry. Do You hear, Friend mine, the Ass thinks one thing, and he
that rides him another. I Will get far enough from Chivalry, Gadzooks.


Don Q. The Villain sputters Proverbs, tho he is so sleepy, that he can hardly
Sancho gets on his Ass. see to get up. I Will go now and fetch R^sinante, and
then get him into some adjacent Grove or other, that the Company within may not
see him. See, the drunken Slave's fast asleep already.


Gines. peeping. Ah Pox on him, there is no way to get by him.


Lopez. ^'ll bark like a Dog, and try to fright him. Barks like a Dog, D. Qu
starts.


Don Q. Hah, what is this I hear: A Dog, a fierce one too, yet none kept h^re,
nor in the Houses round us; it is obvious now this can be naught but Magic:
some cursed Inchanter here takes Sancho's part, on purpose to disgrace me. But
Dog, or Devil, I Will not fear to attack him: Therefore come forth, thou
tripple-headed Cerberus, that with thy Hearts Blood I may quell the Charm, and
prove the force of my undaunted Valor draws. Not yet; nay then I Will drag thee
from thy Kennel, and dare thy sharpest Phangs. pulls out Lopez staring Hah!
What art thou? Can Dogs that bark turn Men? -- O monstrous Metamorphosis! Lopez
is going. Nay, shun me not, for I will speak to thee, to know why thou assumest
the Face and Shape of one I saw to day -- If thou art Substance, I dare thee
with my Sword; or if a Ghost, that perhaps want Revenge, I promise that too
-- What, gone! Thou shall not leave me thus; I Will follow thee, tho to the
Center.


Lopez goes out, Don Quixot after him. Enter Gines. Gines. So, I see Lopez is
got away, and the Knight follows, but must return quickly; for he can no more
overtake him, than a paltry Village Cu^ can a light-foot Roe upon the Mountains
-- But hush, who have we here? -- hah! -- oons! it is the motly Squire, drunk
too, and fast asleep. Humph, though we have mist our Design upon Rosinante, yet
methinks that Ass tempts me strangely -- Gad, I must have him, and I think I
have a trick will do it -- but I must go back to the Stable for some Engines I
saw there. Goes out and returns with stakes. So, he is at it still, and gaping
as if he were devouring Sleep by mouthfuls. Now dear Morpheus, let him but
dream that he is regaling with Buttock Beef, Bacon, Brewis, and such like, and
the Prize is my own. I think I have done, it now; wheiwh, wheiwh -- Come,
Dapple, come. Props Sancho 's Panel up with Stakes, and steals the Ass from
under him, and Exit.


Don Quixot returns. Don Q. I Am out of Breath with running -- the Inchanter has
given him Wings upon his Feet to speed him, lest with my Sword I should undo
the Charm, and triumph over his Art. I Am strangely embarassed, but must have
Patience. Come, where is this Sot here? I Will first remove him to some private
hole, and then recount the Miracle within. Sees Sancho asleep on the Stakes Ha!
what is this I see? By all my Fame, a second Metamorphosis -- the Ass turned
into Wooden Stakes. Hoa Sancho!


Shakes him, he falls to the ground, Sancho. Another slice of Pudding, good
Molly. dreaming.


Don Q. He Is dreaming he is at Dinner. Wake, Dolt, Fool, wake.


Sancho. Hoa, Dapple, hoa; not too fast, good Dapple. Scrambles up, and reels
out.


Don Q. Thinks the Ass has run from him too, insensible of what has befell by
Magic. Oh Confusion seize this Inchanter! what senseless Tricks they play me;
as if Asses transformed, and Dogs turned into Men, could quell Don Quixot's
Courage. No, ye Hell-searching Crew, if damned Medusa, or Infernal Circe,
should round incircle me with Stigian Monsters, and Fiery Dragons threaten to
devour me, No Terror my undaunted Heart should charm,
Or e're abate the Vigor of my Arm.
Exit.


The End of the Third Act.
ACT IV.
SCENE I.
Enter Don Quixot, Basilius, Carasco, and Quitteiria. Basil. YOU tell us
Wonders, Sir.


Don Q. Sir, my Life is full of 'em. No day e're passes me without some
Accident worthy of Wonder^ -- This last was but a Trial: my Enemies the
Inchanters did but try what Metal I was made of.


Quitt. And when they found you Proof against their Malice, shrunk back with
Shame -- Oh wondrous Power of Chivalry!


Caras. Against the Charm of whose Heroic Virtue, Eg^ptian sharp-fang'd Dogs,
nor Russian Bears, Tartarian Tigers, Lybian Cat a-Mountains; tho one attack it
with envenomed Teeth, and the other whisk about with Tabby Tails, can ever
prevail a jot.


Basil. But what said trusty Sancho, whom this strange. Adventure did most of
all concern?


Don Quix. A Sot, a Swine, Drunk as a Bachinal, past saying any thing, quite
drowned in sleep, his faculties all doz^d,' nor could my Wisdom open his sealed
Eyes, nor sound Instruction penetrate his Scull.


Quit. A mighty fault indeed, Sir Knight, considering the Credit of Knight
Errantry's at stake, amongst whose Virtues cool Sobriety is still placed
foremost, -- I see it has a little troubled ye; but come, I hope Sir, this
Evening's diversion will drive it from your thoughts, the Poppet Show's
preparing, the mirth of that will mollify -- And see here comes the Bride and
Bridegroom, Messengers I warrant from Don Gayferos and Melisendra, to invite ye
to it.


Enter Mary, and Jaques. Mary. Gad slidikins, come away Gentlefolks, the
Motion's ready. Master Peter has been so busy within yonder, he has almost
sweated himself away with setting on it up; I Cod there is the purest fine things
that ever was seen, there is curious fine Poppet with a long Train, that is in
Yellow -- and another curious fine Poppet that is in Carnation -- and then
there is one with a little round Pearmain-face, full of Patches -- with a what
do you called, a Commode cocking -- as 'twere any Lady, or Duchess, I Cod.


Jacques. Ay, and then there is a Crumptious fine little Gentleman with a long
Peruke, and a long Sword, -- and about five inches long himself; so glistering
and brave, that if he were in another place, he would be taken for a Lord by
Conscience -- odsbodikins, pray come away quickly.


Quit. What says your Greatness, are your thoughts at leisure t'imploy
themselves upon this Sport?


Don Q* Madam, your Beauties Servant shall wait on you this moment, and the
rather, because I think I see Sancho coming yonder, whose odious Metamorphosis
from Man to Beast, is more horrible to me, than what I saw to day from Beast to
Man.


Mary. I Cod, and there is my Mother with him too; get away Master Knight, if
you love your hearing, for she is in such a plaguey fusse about losing the Ass to
day, that she will be as loud as a Storm; I Will warrant you may hear her forty
mile, if the Wind sit right.


Basil. The Bride's in the right, Sir, therefore let us dodge 'em, it is no
matter if they follow to the Poppet Show, there they will be quiet -- and perhaps
cause more diversion, for they are both now in admirable humors for it. Aside to
Carasco.


Caras. I Will stay behind a little, and blow the Coals, we shall have the
Comical effect on it another time. Aside to Basilius.


Exeunt all but Car. Enter Teresa and Sancho Drunk. Ter. Don't let him tell me
of Enchantment, and I know not what* the Ass is gone by, a mere trick, it is
plain, and you, like a drunken Sot as ye are, to put it up thus* 'odsbores, I Would
have pinched his lockram Jaws 'till I had made him bray again, but I Would have had
my Ass again, or Money.


Sancho. No noise, Crooked-Rib, no noise, as you hope to escape Correction.
Reels.


Caras. I have some inkling -- of your Affair Mistress -- and truly am of your
Opinion too -- the Ass was gone by a Trick, and not Enchanted.


Teres. Enchanted, 'ods bores, no more than I am, Sir -- which my Swine there
shall understand when he is sober, or he shall have such a din about his ears
shall make him weary on it.


Caras. Harkee, the Knight's at bottom on it, I heard him say the other day --
Sancho was too well mounted -- and that Dapple far out-shin'd his Rosinante.


Teres. Why look there now; 'ods bores, were I a Man, he should have heard on it
at both Ears I faith -- but you see what I am yoked to there, Sir. Weeps.

You see what a Condition he is in -- he could pour whole quarts to day down his
ungodly throat, -- but could not spare me so much as a Knipperkin to wet my
Whistle, as the Saying is.


Sancho. Reason, -- Iniquity, Reason -- I must not let my Mouse-Trap smell of
Cheese; he that lets his Wife drink of every Cup, ugh, and his Horse at every
Water, shall be sure to have neither of 'em good for any thing.


Caras. Ay, but to deny her a Knipperkin, friend Sancho, shows that you love to
be a little in the mode, and don't value a Wife very much, who, in troth to me
appears now to be a very comely Person, a handsome presence, and very fair.
Teresa simpers, and makes cursies.


Sancho. Fair, ugh, ay, she is peerless Fair indeed; but do you hear Sir, the
fairer the Hostess, the fouler the Reckoning; she is a plaguey Devil for all her
fair looks.


Teres. Too good for him that has her, Gravel-face. Simpers, and makes cursies
to Carasso.


Sancho. How the jade smickers, and mops and mows at him.


Enter Mary in have. Mary. Good Lord, Mother, if you are not bewitched, come
away presently, Mr. Peter is just sending out a little little Gentleman all in
Gold, to speak the Pro -- Pro. I Cod I cannot tell what they call it; come away
with me, good now Mother, come away. Pulls Teresa.


Teresa. Will your Worship please to go first?


Ca^^s. Oh no* I Will lead ye thi^her. Exeunt, Teresa making mouths at Sancho.


S^^^^o. Hugh, she is v^^y sweet upon his Worship, methinks -- she gave me a
scurvy look too, that was half as bad as calling me Cuckold to my face, -- or
doe^ the ^craggy Que^n design to give me Horns to make her self fat? I believe
the Jade has read the Proverb, that says, Change of Pasture makes fat Calves;
humph -- Zooks I Will go in and watch her water. Exit.


SCENE II.
The Poppet-Show dis^overs one Poppet dres^'d like the Emperor Charlemain
Seated, another like Orlando Furioso, and a third like Archbishop Turpin
standing by. On both sides of the Stage without, are Seated Don Quixot,
Basilius, Carasco, Quiteria, Altisidora, Jaques, Mary. Then Enters Sancho, who
sits do^n by Gines, who stands with a Rod in his hand to Explain the Motion;
then Don Gayferos Enters as Prologue. Gines. Gallants, and Noble Auditors, in
the first place, be pleased to observe, that before I discover who those Noble
Persons are that appear yonder in motion -- I must inform ye that this is the
Valiant Don Gayferos, who respectfully introduce^ himself by way of Prologue.
Come, Noble Knight, make your Honors, and begin. The Poppet bows to the
Company, and Don Quixot rises up, and bows to the Poppet.


Don Quix. A Noble Presence, and by my Profession of Arms, looks like the
Character is given of him.


Quit. The very shape and air of a Knight Errant, I warrant he will fight for his
Mistress briskly.


Basil. Oh like a Fury no doubt* his Whiskers declare as much.


Mary. Look Mother, look there is a fine little Man, there is Clothes! Oh Lord,
there is a Sword!


Jacques. By Conscience that is he I told ye of, and he that sits within yonder,
is a Pope I warrant.


Ters. A Pope, -- a Fool, prithee let us hear a little.


Caras. This must be a very Noble Knight -- his very looks are Valiant.


Sancho. Looks, oons -- he looks as if he just came from the Sucking-Bottle, --
he, a Knight Errant, -- why he can fight with nothing but a Frog, nor that
neither if it has ever a ^ulrush in's Claw.


Don Quix. Do You hear that Rascal -- that filthy Firkin there Gentlemen, will do
nothing but stink, and disturb us: Pray give me leave to roll him out.


Basil. Oh! it is below ye, Sir, we consider Sancho's condition. Aside. I shall
laugh out.


Gines. Silence, Silence, pray Gentlemen, -- Come* once more your Honor's Don,
and then begin. Poppet bows again, and Don Quixot returns it.


PROLOGUE
You Will find by the Ensuing Matters,
That I Am a Cuckold, kind Spectators;
Resolved, for the honor of our House,
From Huckster's hands to free my Spouse:
For though I Would wink at a small shame,
A Cuckold's such a kind of Name,
A Scandal so against the hair,
Our Spanish Puncto cannot bear:
No more than you can, that sit there.
Besides, though Female Plagues are common,
Yet there is something still in Woman;
Some sweet alluring Jen Scay Quoy,
Some pleasing pretty tickling Toy;
Will make us venture without fears,
Through Dangers -- over head and ears:
It Is this that sends me to the Moors,
To fetch her from those Sons of Whores:
And spite of all their Guards, do you mind me,
To make her gallop home behind me;
As fast as ever my Horse can carry,
I Have given my word, -- so sit ye merry. Exit Prologue.
Gines. This -- Now Gentlemen, and Ladies, is Satyrically merry, as most
alluding to the present Custom of Writing Prologues.


Mary. I Cod, he spoke it purely, When shall we hear him again, I wonder?


Don Quix. Patience, patience, prit^^e go on Friend.


Altis. Oh! let me warm me by his ^air Eyes -- let me sit by him, his very
touch will charm me. Oagles Don Quixote.


Quit. I vow now I Will lock you up, if you are thus unruly -- pray sit still
Sir, I Will keep her from ye, she will sit in your Lap else.


Gines. Be pleased to observe now then, Courteous Spectators, that he that sits
there with a Crown on's head, and a Scepter in his hand, is the Emperor
Charlemain, the Father of the Princess Melisendra.


Teres. Look there now, he is an Emperor, do you hear -- I thought he was no Pope.


Mary. Ods heartlikins, that ever I should live to see ^n Emperor! But hold,
let us hear more.


Gines. And he that stands by him there, with that fierce look, and Beard of
Martial overture -- is the very Scarecrow of France, and Flower of Knight
Errantry Orlando Futioso, Cousen German to Don Gayferos, who would fain have
tickled the Intellects of the Emperor's youngest Daughter Angelica; but she,
as great Ladies have their Fancies, rather thought fit to take up with Medoro
her Page.


Don Q. No more of that, good Friend -- Her Quality is too great to be jested
with -- And is that then, that most famed and most excellent of all our Order,
Orlando Furioso -- He was one of the twelve Peers, Gentlemen, the only Scourge
of Rodomont and the Pagans. till he fell mad for Love of the bright Angelica.
Oh most Heroic and Immortal Knight! I reverence thy Shoo-lappets.


Gines. And now pray observe, Gentlemen, the moody Countenances that both the
Emperor and the Knight have, because Don Gayferos makes no more have to
release the Princess Melisendra, who was ravished away by Marsilius King of the
Moors, and kept in a strong Calste in Sensuenna. And pray note how Don Gayferos
enters, wearing his Cozen Orlando's Sword Dirundina, which he had sent him to
fight, and to free his Wife with. Pray likewise mark with what Submission he
excuses himself to the Emperor, and with what Courage he resolves upon the
noble Enterprise. Come Don Gayferos, where are ye? -- Pox upon ye, why don't ye
enter?


Don Q. No cursing, Friend; no cursing -- Here the Noble Knight comes.


Basil. His Boots were not greased, I warrant; without doubt it is that has made
him so tardy.


Enter Poppet Don Gayferos. Caras. Ay, or swift-footed Bayard might want
shooing.


Teres. Odsbores, here he comes again; now we shall hear him claw it away, Mary.


Mary. Ah, ah, so we shall -- I cod, it is the littlest tiniest thing for a
Husband -- I cod, if he were mine, I should not tell what to do with him,
unless 'twere to carry him about with me in my Pocket. But come, now let us hear
what he says.


P. Don G. 'Great is my Sorrow, high and mighty Sir, To Charlemain.
'That I this Journey did so long defer:
'But this a little may excuse the same,
'My self have had ^ke Stone, my Horse was lame.

Carras. Ha, ha, ha -- that was sad indeed.


Don Q. Oh! and by my Honor a very solid Excuse, and very reasonable.


Quitter. Extremely reasonable; for to have undertaken such an Enterprise in
such a Condition, and on foot too, might have very much hazarded the happy
Success.


Don Q. Right, Madam; it may be so indeed.


Mary. O lord, do you hear, Mother, he said he had the Stone -- I cod, I Am sorry
for that with all my Heart.


Jacques. He would have but ill riding by Conscience. He said his Horse was lame
too.


Teres. Well, well; I heard what he said well enough. Hark! he is going to speak
again.


P. Don G. 'But now all things are suiting to my mind,
'My Horse is well before, and I behind;
'I'll free my Spouse, spite of what e're retards,
'From the cursed Moorish King, and all his Guards.
'For her Dirundina I thus unsheath,
'And speedy Death to all oppose, bequeath.
'She shall behind me be on Courser placed,
'And if she by the Pummel but hold fast,
'I'll fetch her spite of Bars or Iron Lock;
'And you to morrow, Sir, by Five a Clock
'Shall find her in my Bed without-her Smock.
Bows, and Exit.
Gines. Shall find her in Bed without her Smock. Very well, Sir Knight, and a
very good Conclusion that.


Mary. I cod, that is pure; hoh, hoh, hoh -- Did ye hear that, Mother?


Teres. Did I? -- I think I did -- 'Dslid, I begin to like the Man a great deal
better than I did -- Though he is but little, there is Mettle in him, I see.


Sancho. 'Oons, what plaguey Stuff's this! -- Ugh, I cannot understand a word
on it, not I -- I Will take the other Nap, Gadzooks.


Basil. Now -- What thinks the Noble Don Quixot? Does not your Brother Knight
promise very fairly?


Don Q. Faith, yes; I like his Promise well enough: But to tell the Emperor
her Father, that he should find her in Bed without her Smock, that methinks
wanted a little Decency -- He should have allowed her a little clean Linen to
be seen in.


Quitt. I confess I Am of the great Don Quixot's Opinion clearly; nay, it should
have been very fine Linen too, to show her Quality.


Carasc. Ah, it is all one for that, if the Emperor owned her: A Princess is a
Princess as well without a Smock as with one.


Mary. Come now, Mother -- I wonder what is to be next, hah.


Teres. Pish, hold your Tongue; Master Peter will tell us presently.


Gines. Now, Gallants, be pleased to observe, how the Scene changes to a strong
Castle in Sansuenna, where the beauteous Melisendra is Imprisoned by Marsilius
King of the Moors; and cast your Eyes a little further, and you shall see him
with her upon the Terras Walk, first making Love, then threatening her with
Torments, if she reject it; which she, resolved on Constancy to her dear
Spouse, contemns. Pray note 'em, here they come.


Enter Poppet Marsilius, and Poppet Melisendra. Teres. Oh Gemini! here is two
pure fine things more.


Mary. Oh Lord, but one of 'em's a black thing tho; I warrant he is to eat the
the other for being so fair.


Gines. Observe how he seats her, and now commands some ^ersons of Art of his
Retinue to entertain her with a Song and a Dance.


SONG. Performed by Two Poppets, one representing a Captain, and to other a
Town Miss.
To the Tune of a Minuet.
Pop Capt.
DEar Pinkaninny,
If half a Guiny
To Love will win ye,
I lay it here down:
We must be thrifty,
'Twill serve to shift ye,
And I know fifty
Will do it for a Crown.
Duns come so boldly,
Kings Money so slowly,
That by all things holy
It Is all I can say.
Yet I Am so wrapped in,
The Snare that I Am trapt in,
I* as I Am true Captain,
Give more than my Pay.
Pop Miss Sings.
GOod Captain Thunder,
Go mind your Plunder;
Odzounds! I wonder
You dare be so bold.
Thus to be making
A Treaty so sneaking,
Or dream of the taking
My Fort without Gold.
Other Town Misses
May gape at Ten Pieces;
But who me possesses
Full Twenty shall pay.
To all poor Rogues in Buff
Thus, thus, I strut and huff;
So Captain Kick and Cuff,
March on your way.
To all poor Rogues, etc.
P. Mar. Since your bright Eyes and Beauties of your Face
Have scorched my Heart like any burning Glass,
Think not that I will longer bear your Scorn,
Or cherish these strong Flames without return.
If because I am black retards my Joy,
I Will come at Night, and not offend your Eye.
But if you flight my Love without Remorse,
Rather than perish for you, I must force.

P. Melis. My Love long since locked up is given away,
And of that Lock my Husband has the Key.

P. Mars. But for that Casket I a Picklock have.


P. Melis. A Picklock suits a Thief, Sir, not the Brave.


P. Mars. We all are Thieves in Love's free Commonweal,
And know the Treasure sweetest when we steal.

P. Melis. I know not what by stealing you may win,
But through my Will you never shall enter in.
Don Gayferos my Heart must only have;
A famed Knight Errant, valiant, bold, and brave.

Don. Q. Ah -- Well said, sweet Lady -- Now by my Knighthood thou deservst him
richly.


P. Mars. I scorn Knights Errant, and such ragged Imps;
Yours is a fool, and all the rest are Pimps.

Don Q. You're a black Son of a Whore, and ye lie; and by the Life of Amadis du
Gaul, were you and I together on a Mountain --


Gines. Oh good Sir Knight be patient -- Good lack, Sir, the Poppet does not
mean any thing to you, Sir; he only speaks the Words as they are writ.


Don Q. Such Words as those are odious and offensive.


Basil. That Jest was rarely timed, ha, ha, ha, ha.


Mary. I cod, I Am cruelly afraid for all this, that black Devil will swallow up
that dear white pretty Creature.


Teres. No, no, Fool; I tell thee there is no harm in him; he only means to
ravish her a little, or so.


Jacques. Ay, ay -- that must be all; my Mother-in-Law has hit it by Conscience.


Don Q. Go on then, Friend -- I shall see how he behaves himself.


P. Mars. Since then for Diet Conjugal you moan,
I Will teach you how to chew the Cud alone:
In you strong Castle you shall guarded lie,
And to refresh ye no one come but I. Exeunt, he dragging her.

Teres. Look'ee there now; he says he'^l only refresh her. I told thee, he
would not eat her --


Mary. Nay, then it is well enough.


Don Q* That M^orish Tyrant, Mr. Peter, is very barbarous; I have hardly
Patience with him.


Gines. Patience -- 'Dsheart, this is ridiculous enough -- He takes the Poppets
for real Persons, ha, ha, ha, ha -- Well, thus far you see how much the poor
Princess is in Distress; but now cheer your Hearts, and lift your Eyes to
behold the valiant Don Gayseros come pransing to Sansuenna, to release his Love
and dearest Melisendra -- You must suppose it now to be Night, and that by
Instinct he has found her Window the North side of the Castle; and see how she
appears there with a ^ape^, as ready to recieve him. Poppet Melisendra comes to
the Window.


Enter Poppet Don Gayferos on H^rseback. Mary. I cod, here he comes; this is
pure now; I hope he will get her d^wn, Faith.


P. Don G. Look down, bright Star, if Love has guided right,
With glittering Beauty gilding gloomy Night,
Appear, and bless thy amorous weary Knight.

P. Melis. Who calls with Voice as sweet as Morning Lark?


P. Don G. It Is I, my Love, who come from France Inth dark,
My dearest Piakaninny to set free.

P. Melis. Don Gayferos my Husband! Is it thee?


P. Don G. It Is ^, it is ^, the truest kindest Spouse
That ever Marriage Mouse-trap did enclose.

P. Melis. Ah me! what shall I do?


P. Don G* Rouse up thy Wits,
And through the Window slide down by the Sheets:
Tie fast the Knot, and when thou have done so,
I, thy Dear Spouse, will Horse thee here below:

P. Melis. I Will venture Bones and Neck, for who is she
My Dearest Lord, would not be Horsed by thee?

Don Quix. Brave Lady, upon my Honor her Love and Constancy. move me so, that
it brings the tears into my eyes, I could weep for her, -- oh vexation -- is
that Teizer -- still there to plague me? Altis. makes Love signs to him


Quit. This was a very passionate Scene indeed, -- pray observe Altis. the
little Rogue Acts it rarely. To Basilius.


Basil. Ha, ha, ha -- I see her, she makes the rarest faces at him.


Mary. Hey Boys, he Boys -- she is coming Mother, she is coming down faith.


Teres. Ay, and if the Sheet be but tied fast now, she will be Horsed in a
twinkling.


Iacques. The Gentleman's Nag stands very quiet too, I warrant he knows who he
is to carry behind him.


Gines. But now, Noble Spectators, to show Fortune's mutability in Love
Affairs, and to show ye withal, the regular ingenuity of the piece we present
-- here is to be a turn -- which is held by all to be a Beauty in Dramatick
Writing; the turn therefore thus explains it self. Come Beauteous Lady
Melisendra -- open your Window, and come out.


Here Poppet Melisendra coming out of the Window to get down by the sheet, is
hitch'd by a Tenter-hook, and hangs half way. P. Melis. Oh! Fortune, Fortune,
still unkind to Love,
I neither can get down -- nor stay above.

Gines. There Is the turn now, she was just falling into his Arms, and now is
hanged half way, upon a Tenter.


P. Don G. Why sighs my Love?


P. Melis. Alas! I Am hung in the Air;


P. Don. G. I Will cut thee down -- with a swift Lover's care,


P. Melis. Ah, Sir, not for the World, my knees are bare:
And something may undecently be shown,
You must not peep upon, though it is your own:

P. Don. G. In such distress, we the best means must prove,
To save your Modesty, I Will wink, my Love.

Gines. Here you may observe the modest Candor of the Lady Melisendra's nice
Character, who would not suffer her self to be unhitch'd, till Don Gayferos had
promised her upon his Honor to wink: Do You mark that?


Caras. That was nice truly, and considering she is a Married Woman too, very
rare.


Mary. I Cod, I Will lend her my Muckender -- here Friend, pray give her this to
cover her knees a little, though it is course, it is clean.


Teresa. Pish, nay, prithee Mary let her alone.


Mary. What, and let every body see all -- I Cod but I will not though don't you see
how her Legs hang sprawling there; here friend, take it I say. Holds out her
Muckender


Gines. Oh thank ye, Mistris^, thank ye, but you see the Knight has done the
business without -- and now there is joy on both sides; get up, get up --
quickly sweet Lady get up. Here Poppet Melisendra gets up behind Poppet Don
Gayferos, and he gallops off with her.


Mary. Hey Boys, hey boys, he has got her, he has got her, hogh, hogh, hogh,
she is gone, she is gone, faith. Stands up, and jumps.


Gines. But for all this good Success, you must now hear the fatal Catastrophe;
for by this time some malicious Spies have informed the Moorish King she is
fled, who presently Consults his Chancellor, Secretary of State, and Principal
Officers of his Household and Army to fetch her back -- To perform which, see
on a sudden how they and all his Guards are ready, and he at the head of 'em,
foaming with Rage. Hark, hark, pray hear what he says, -- And see how the
Emperor Charlemain and his Party are, though far infe^iour in number, yet to
assist Don Gayferos, have marched a Journey to meet 'em.


Here Poppet Marsilius appears at the head of the rest on Horseback, and
Charlemain and the rest on it 'o^her side. P. Mars. Follow me, Sirs, I Will fetch
her back again,
And spite of the feeble Power of Charlemain,
And all his Resty Knights, the Wench enjoy,

Don Quix Ye noisy blustering sooty Fool -- ye lie. Here Don Quixot rises up in
a rage.
For as a Brother of her Husband's Order,
And to revenge me on your Pagan Insolence, I the Renowned Don Quixot will
defend her, and so have at ye all.


Here Don Quixot draws his Sword, and fancying he is to fight with Armed M^n --
cuts, slashes, hacks and demolishes the Spectat^rs: All run ou^ but Carasco,
and Sancho. Gines. Hold, hold, why, Sir Knight -- mercy on me, are ye mad? why
these are but Poppets, they are not real -- oh! undone, undone -- why hold,
hold -- they are but Poppets, I tell ye.


Sancho. What Is the matter now? hey -- what, more fighting work, gad zooks,
I Will get out of harms way. Exit.


Don Quix. Poppets, ay Pigmys too, -- and would be Giants presently, if the
Inchanters please -- but I think I have mawl'd em, and the Lady's at home by
this time.


Gines. Ay, you have mauled em, oh that ever I was born -- my Motion spoiled,
my Livelihood lost, oh, undone, undone, oh, Howls out.


Caras. Bless me, what a Massacre is here, -- What have you done, Sir?


Don Quix. Done, Sir?


Gines. Done Sir? ay, and undone, Sir -- Oh Lord! was there ever such a mad
prank?


Don Quix. Why, have I not assisted the Noble Knight Don Gayferos?


Caras. Sdeath you have assisted nothing, Sir -- the Figure^s were not real,
you have only confounded the Motion, spoiled the Poppets, and undone the poor
Fellow here.


Don Quix. Humph -- why then by my Renown I thought 'em all in earnest, and
being very angry with that black King there for his insolence, gave my relief
accordingly.


Gines. You thought -- ay that is fine amends for me indeed -- will your thought
mend my Motion -- Oh unfortunate hour, oh! Howls.


Caras. Peace Friend, the generous Knight will consider on it, and pay thee for
thy loss.


Don Quix. It Is I confess against my Order to do wrong -- therefore go Fellow,
gather up thy fragments, and put rates upon 'em, I^ll make thee satisfaction.


Gines. Why look ye, in the first place, here is the Emperor Charlemain with his
head off, oh poor Emperor, Takes up the Poppet. I shall never get such another,
it deserves a Pistol as well as one Penny deserves another -- but Six and Eight
Pence I must have for him, that is the lowest.


Don Quix. Is this that Noble Emperor that so boldly held Paris against the
Pagans? Oh, I heartily b^g his Pardon, and am ashamed to see him thus
dismembered -- thou shall have Six and Eightpence Friend.


Gines. But then, oh dismal to behold -- here is Orlando Furioso without an Arm,
and his neither Jaw -- here is a Furioso for ye, here is a Knight Errant, a
router of Giants, and killer of Dragons, see how he looks -- oh dismal to
behold Shows the Poppet.


Caras* Sirrah -- hold that up at a good rate, Knights Errant are worth money.


Gines. I know it, I know it -- Aside.

As for him, considering his Chivalry, I look upon him to have twice the value
of the Emperor, a Pistol is the least, the least that can be, and cheap too.


Don Quix. It Is so indeed -- but prithee take him from my sight Friend, for I
cannot look on the Brave Knight thus hacked without remorse of Consience -- and
by his Fame I cannot help confessing that I deserve for those two blows I gave
him, to be served so my self: But prithee go on Friend.


Gines. Then here is Archbishop Turpin -- pox on it, I go to Church so seldom my
self, that I don't know how to value a Bishop.


Caras. Ha, ha, ha, what would I give Basilius were here!


Gines. Then here is -- the Chancellor -- and Privy-Counsellor to the black King
-- Gad forgive me, one without a Nose, and the other an Ear snipt off, and three
fingers of his left hand; let me see, a King's Chancellor and Privy-Counsellor
-- I should have a Statesman here now, to help to value these.


Don Qix. They should be valued it is true by their own Peers -- But come, make
have Friend.


Gines. Why look ye then, Nine Pence a Piece I think one with another; for you
know one must rate them according to their honesty, and as they are true to
their trust.


Caras. Very reasonable, faith.


Don Qix. Ay, ay, it is so -- but come, without praising more in particular,
let us know what thou valuest the rest at in a lump, and come in and take your
Money.


Gines. You have gelt the Kings Captain here too, maimed above twenty of the
Guards, and hamstring'd their Horses; Oons you laid about ye like a Devil, so
that between Turk and Jew, if you will pay for them in the lump I think forty
shillings more will but just do.


Don Qix. That makes in all much about three pound; well, come in, and thou
shall have it Fellow.


Caras. Why this is Noble, like Don Quixot's Character.


Gines. Why bless him I say, and send him to be a King as soon as possible.
Gines makes mouths at him.


Don Quix. All this now was for want of heed and patience. But we must do
right, good Sir, we must do right, for here I was in the wrong unhappily. Fate
send me far from such another broil,



Gines. And me more Motions, for such Fools to spoil. Exeunt.


End of the Fourth Act.
ACT V.
SCENE I.
Enter Basilius, Carasco, Quitteria and Altisidora. Basil. HA! ha! ha! has he
paid the Poppet-Man?


Caras To a Farthing, and is now retired there into that Closet to avoid the
intolerable passion, as he calls it, of your Niece Altisidora.


Quit. His sculking up so close shall not hinder our coming diversion; for we have
a new Plot upon him, our new Dary-Maid is to Act Enchanted Dulcinea -- and
Altis. is ready here for a new attack upon him.


Altis. I intend to teize him now with a whimsical variety, as if I were
possess^d with several degrees of Passion -- sometimes I Will be fond, and
sometimes freakish; sometimes merry, and sometimes melancholy, -- sometimes
treat him with Singing and Dancing, and sometimes scold and rail as if I were
ready to tear his eyes out. Go you to your peeping place, and you shall see
such a Scene.


Basil. And then I have given order to the Servants to supply Sancho with more
Liquor -- we must have a C^mbate Royal about the Ass too, or we lose half our
sport.


Caras. Time enough for that anon. Let your Niece Act her Whim first: Come,
let us to our Peeping-Hole, I hear him moving within.


Exeunt all but Altisidora, who knocks at the Door. Don Q. within. What
boldness dares me from my Thoughts remove? What art thou? Speak.


Altis. A Votary of Love;
Fond as the Lids that close those precious Eyes,
From whence, though Sun be missing, Day dos rise.

Enter Don Quixot undressed in his Nightcap. Don Q. Oh luckless Maid! Why do
thou follow me?


Altis. I cannot help it, ye sweet, sweet hony-Man you.


Don Q. Thou talkst Erroneously -- I am not sweet; none of our bustling Order
can be so -- nor am, nor ever was, a Honey Pot: I Have not a drop of Honey, Child,
about me. Man's but a better sort of Animal -- If he be brave and honest, he
may smell -- in Virtues sweet, tho he is himself not Amber --


Altis. Ah -- me -- Must I never hope then to find Grace -- in those adored
black Eyes?


Don Q. Gray, gray -- Another notorious Mistake -- my Eyes are gray as
Grimalkin -- Bless me! how blind is Love?


Altis. Gray let them be then; they are twinkling still, and in their Sockets
like two farthng Candles burn out themselves, and leave poor me in Darkness.


Don Q. Hah! -- there is another sign now, how much the poor Creature's Sense is
disturbed -- her defect in Simile; she would else have put in Tapers of Four in
the Pound -- For to say my Eyes are like Farthing Candles, is but a diminutive
Complement.


Altis. Death, Dungeon, Darkness, Furies, Fate, and Fire! What Is in him that
can cause this Wrack within me? For now I consider better, and look on him,
he is not handsome a bit; nay, by my Virginity here she starts into her freakish
Fit not tolerable, nor so sweet as a Dock-leaf, nor so cleanly as a Radish new
pulled -- his Shape awkard and ghastly.


Don Q. So.


Altis. And his Face -- ugly and abominable.


Don Q. Very good -- she looked Eastward last Minute, but now some little Cub
Devil sits upon the Fane of her Fancy, and turns it Northerly.


Altis. And then for his foolish Profession, his Knight Errantry.


Don Q. Hah --


Altis. It Is the most absurd, the most ridiculous, the most -- hah! what am I
saying? here she turns in a very passionate Tone. O mighty Love, forgive me; I
lie, I lie, I lie, I lie, he is handsome, he is sweet, he is clean; his Wit is
admirable, his Profession glorious; his Shape a Droit, and grateful as a
Hero's; his Fa^e serene, and charming as a Cherubin.


Don Q. Hey -- show me, thou famed and skilful Mariner, the Face of the
unfathomed Gulf of Florida, where Winds from all the Corners of the Globe, by
fickle Nature change their Course each moment, and I Will show thee this other
Gulf of Woman -- Young as she now appears, yet right, right Woman -- Woman,
that like the Satyr in the Fable, can with the self-same Breath blow hot and
cold.


Altis. Ah -- must then, Dulcinea -- have ye all -- what parts has she --
beyond me -- look in my face -- Is it not pretty --


Don Q Compared with hers, a Pebble to a Diamond -- A virgin indeed thou art
like her, and --


Altis. Younger I Am sure by far -- Perhaps too young; but I^ll so swell my
Breasts, and heave and fall, and mould 'em with my Hands to make 'em grow --
pull down my Stays, that they may show themselves, and Jett it up and down.
Ietts up and down the Stage Pray mind me, Sir, to show my Shape and Air; that
as the Loadstone does the Obedient Iron -- should draw by force to me all
Hearts but yours -- Sighs, and looks amorously on him


Don Q. Thus will it be wherever I reside -- If Women chance to see me, there
is a Saying old and very famous, That when a Man's a Favorite of the fair, he
has been wrapped up in his Mother's Smock. Sure mine, to make me charm thus,
flead her self, and made me Blankets of her very Skin.


Altis. Has Dulcinea Legs? I Will lay ten Ducats that mine are straighter; for
if Fame not lie -- she had the Rickets once* and hers are crooked; her Feet too
big and splay, as I have heard, and turn in like a Mawkins at a
Boarding-School. But loak how small mine are, like little Mice. Shows her Feet.
And had I leave to speak of other matters -- ah, Sir --


Don Q. By Fame, if I don't (...) her, the Creature is so rapt, that she will
talk Bawdy.


Altis. She may boast of gaining ye by her rare Qualities; but, Sir, did I but
show --


Don Q. No, Maid* no showing -- I will conceive things well of ye without it --
it is as I said -- Oh strong effect of Passion!


Altis. I mean some rare Perfections of the Mind, as well as Graces of the
Body, Sir. Come now, you shall see me sing and dance, and how far I excel dull
Dulcinea. H^re Altisidora sings.


In Five Movements. 1. Movement. Love.
From Rosy Bowers, where sleeps the God of Love,
Hither ye little wanting Cupids fly,
Teach me in soft melodious Strains to move,
With tender Passion my Hearts darling Joy.
Ah! let the Soul of Music tune my Voice
To win dear Strephon, who my Soul enjoys.
2. Movement. Gaily.
Or if more influencing,
Be doing something a^ry,
With a Hop and a Bound,
And a Frisk from the round,
I Will trip, trip like a Fairy.
As when on Ida dancing
Were three Celestial Bodies,
With ^n Air and a Face,
And a Shape and a Grace,
Let me charm like Beauty's Goddess.
3. Move. slow. Melancholy.
Ah! it is in vain, it is all, it is all in vain,
Death and Despair must end the fatal Pain;
Cold, cold Despair disguised, like Snow and Rain
Falls on my Breast: Blea^ Winds, in Tempests blow,
My Veins all shiver, and Fingers glow:
My P^lse beats a dead March for lost Repose,
And to a solid lump of I^e my poor fond Heart is froxe,
4. Movement. Passion.
Or say, ye Powers my Peace to Crown,
Shall I thaw my self, and drow^
Amongst the Foaming Billows,
Increasing all with Tears I shed;
On Beds of Ooze, and Crystal Pillo^s,
Lay down my Love sick Head.
5. Movement. Swift. Frenzy.
No, no, I Will straight run mad,
That soon my Heart will warm;
When once the Scense is fled,
Love has no Power to Charm.
Wild thr^' the Woods I Will fly,
And dare some savage Boor;
A thousand Deaths I Will dye,
E're thus in vain Adore.
D. Q. This I confess, another Heart might charm, but mine is Constant as the
Northern Star -- and Dulcinea only must Enjoy it.


She pause^, and then Frown^. Alis. Let her Enjoy it then, and some Ten
Thousand, some Fifteen Hundred, Fourscore and odd Furys; take her for her
pains; but I Will not Dye however -- No, hear me, Don Bullet-head; thou
Jack-a-lent, fit to hang on a Sign Post; thou Scheliton of Barber
Surgeons-Hall; thou Wall-Nutt-Colour'd, Lean Jaw'd, Head of a Base Vyol -- thou
Baboon on Cock-Horse, fit only to ride before the Bears: Thou maimed,
miserable, mischievous, moldy, mangy, Maggot-eaten Monster: Thou poor, paltry,
Pimping, putrifi'd, proud, Penny-less Puppy, hear me. Merlin is coming, he will
revenge all my Wrongs;

I see him there in Vision, and Dulcinea with him, Who spite of thee, shall be
Enchanted still,
And so thou Withered Eel-skin stuffed, farewell.
Exit in a Rage.


Merlin and Dulcinea rise out of the Stage. Don. Q. Why, what a Hurricain of
Extravagancy is there in Woman, when she is once enraged -- but hold, either my
Senses fail me, or Dul^inea greets my Eyes indeed -- It Is so, and the Immortal
Merling with her. Could then that little passionate Imp speak Truth? O Gracious
Figures! what do ye intend?


Dull. To Frica^ee thy Soul, thou dull performer of Women's business, when
there is most occasion; and to Dine upon thee, if I could get leave of my
Reverend Keeper here, to have my Wish and Diet that I long for: Is this the
honor of Knight Errantry, to promise and not do? Oh most dishonorable! was I
not to be freed from my Enchantment by some few Lashes laid on lazy Sancho? Yet
to thy lasting shame, the Debts not paid yet, when though he might be resty --
yet a Lover, as thou pretend'st to be -- might have Engaged him, or at least
have* from its Covering, stripped thy own tough Hide, and with a Horse Whip or
strong Bridle Raigns, have given thy self five hundted Jerks by Proxy; this had
begun a means for my releasement; but on the contrary, I have a Rival here; and
Dulcinea is no more remembered then the Old Boots are when they are left off.
Well, since it is so, farewell Ingrate for ever; I'leto my Cave again, far under
ground -- Chaw Roots and Acorns, and Enchanted lie,
Worm Eaten Knight and musty Squire de^ie;
And wish they both were hanged, and so Godbuy.
Descends.


Don Q. Stay Princess, sweet surprising Vision, stay. I have been much to blame
in not performing, by my Authority, dull Sancho's Task -- which when I meet him
next, shall trebly make amends; and see blessed Fortune sets him before my Eyes
this very moment, but in a vile Condition -- Drunk -- no matter; that may now
chance to be Convenient to make him bear his Whipping-Pennance better.


Enter Teresa, and Sancho. Tere. Here he is and I^ll begin with him first my
self -- here is a foul House as one may say in a twinkling, the whole Family is
together by the ears already -- the Ass was lost yesterday, and Master Carasco
tells us your Worship can tell within a mile of an Oak where he is -- and now
the New Married Couple have lost their Purses that were given 'em, no one knows
how, and they believe each other is the Thief; there is a fowl House within
yonder.


Don Qix. Prithee Woman leave me, why prat'st thou to me of Purses and of
Asses, I cannot hear these vulgar matters now -- Sancho, a word.


Teres. Vulgar Matters -- nay, then let me tell ye, as vulgar as the matter is,
your Worship is shrewdly suspected to have a hand in it -- and that the Ass and
you are not far off one another.


Don Qix. Alas I hear thee not, nor mind thee, To Tersa. Come hither Sancho --
I have had a Vision just now of Dulcinea -- has torn my heart in pieces -- she
complains Sancho --


Sancho. Look ye, Master, ^ine -- ugh -- let us divide things equally, ugh,
Dulcinea -- is your Friend, and Dapple is mine.


Don Qix. Still muttering about Dapple -- what do thou mean, why do thou
clog my ears with thy strange folly?


Teres. Your ears, Odslidkins I Will be drumming there this Month unless we have
the Ass -- you need not have put this trick upon us, my Husband has not got so
much in your Service.


Sancho. Well said, ugh -- Buttock -- thour't in the right, and do you hear, Sir,
as great as you are, remember this, the Nightingal and Cuckoo sing both in a
Month, therefore let Dapple be produced -- what, I am not grown so Rich with
being a Squire, but I can miss 'em, when any of my goods are purloyn'd --
better have a Mouse in the Pot, than no Flesh at all -- Dapple was a
considerable moveable.


Teres. I am sure, if I had brought him forth -- I could not have been more
careful of him -- and therefore Odsbores, bring him again, and quickly, of --
you shall hear such a noise -- Noise within. I must be gone now to make peace
between Mary and her Husband, whom I hear in a filthy squobble yonder -- but if
Dapple be not forthcoming against I come back again -- the Roaring Sea shall
be nothing to me. Exit Teres.


Don Qix. Was ever such a Couple joined as these, one's Drunk and dos'd,
the other bewitched, and mad -- but at this juncture I must bear with all -- and
as I was telling thee Sancho, the Beauteous Dulcinea complains -- as well she
may, of our remisness to her, that thou have not yet given thy self the Lashes
-- nor I ungrateful have refresht thy memory -- but come, five hundred I expect
this moment -- the Place is as it should be, still, and proper, thy Doublet too
unbutton'd seems consenting -- and I my self will help thee to unstrip.


Sancho. Strip -- yes, yes, you are good at stripping -- my Wife ^ays you have
stripped me of my Dapple already -- and if you can, strip me of my Doublet too,
gad zooks you shall strip me of my Skin, and that will be pretty difficult.


Don Qix. No, fleaing will be over-doing it -- some brisk smart Lashes to the
blood or so, will serve to disenchant the Princess, and those thou have already
given thy word for.


Sancho. Ay -- ugh, that may be -- but there is difference between a word and a
blow, Seignior -- besides, I promised for a Government worth something -- now
my Government happening to be worth nothing, my Promise is void in Law.


Don Qix. Come, I Will bear part with thee, to honor the performance, I Will take
off fifty from thee, and flaug my self.


Sancho. That you may -- and to honor -- the performance, as you say, I Will
help you to unstrip, if you please -- but by thinking to have me curried, is a
malignant design upon my person; come, come, Sir, it is a hard Winter when one
Woolf eats another; if Dapple had been here, and promises performed -- some
Lashes might have followed, but now --


Don Qix. What now, ungrateful?


Sancho. Why now I shall say unto my Buttocks -- ugh, Friends mine sit ye down
in a whole skin -- for if flauging must do yours and the Princesses business --
all that I can advice is, to flaug one another.


Don Qix. You shall be kicked into compliance, incorrigible Rascal.


Sancho. Hearkee Master mine -- not a Word more of kicking -- A small Sum,
look'ee, will pay a short Reckoning, I am not so much in your Debt now Dapple's
gone -- to bear that; and therefore if you kick here, as the Song says, were
you as good as George a Green, I should make bold to kick again.


Don Q. Oh Slave! What? Rebel against thy Natural Lord! I Will pound thee into
Ashes. Here they fight; Don Quixot falls, and Sancho gets astride on him.


Sancho* Ay, ay, come on -- many Words go to a bargain -- Now have I great
Enter Basilius, Quitteria and Altisidora mind to beat him from a Knight to a
Squire, that we may be both upon equal terms.


Basil. Wonder of Wonders! What Is this I see? Don Quixot overthrown, and by his
Varlet too -- Why how now, Sancho! -- do you know who you are pounding so?


Sancho. Why, he was for pounding me; and now you see the Dice are turned, I Am
pounding him. They take him off.


Altis. What! the famed Knight swing'd by his Man. Oh! I shall die to see this
-- ha, ha, ha --


Don Q. Have then my cruel Stars disgraced me thus, Knight Errantry avaunt --
forgot be Dulcinea -- I Will never see the Sun shine forth again.


Rises up, and runs out in a Rage. Quitter. Ha, ha, ha, ha; this is Currasco's
Trick upon him; I find he has been managing Sancho.


Basil. Her^ comes (...) of (...) and brawling; never was Marriage turned to
such a Cou^ter-Scuffle.


Enter Te^^sa, Jaque^, and Mary. Mary. Come, come, say what you will I Will have
my Purse again; I cod, I will not be choused so -- What* ta^e away your Wife's
Money the first Week of her Marriage? Ah, Nicompoop*


Jacques. You choused -- No, no, it is -- I am choused by Conscience. What? Do You
think I Am blind? Do You think I cannot see how things go between ye?


Teres. Between us -- Come Son-in-law, don't put your Afflictions upon me, you
had not best, ^or tho I Have had my Daughter's concerns, I have never had your
Concerns in my Hand, I Am sure -- And say what you will, you must have the
Money, or no body; and truly, as she says, it is a Nicompoop thing to be ^o
^^rty the first Week -- No body robs their Wives the first Week they are
married, whatever they do after^ards.


Basil* How Is that? Robbed do you say'


Quitter. Of the Purses we gave 'em, I warrant.


Mary. Ay, as true as you are there, Madam; and I never handled it but once
^ince I had it.


Teres* ^y, and I Would have it (...) and upon his Knees too, or he should never
handle (...) long (...) he ^ad a Nose on's Face, if I were as Mary.


Mary. No m^^e he s^^n't, I (...). Clapping her Hands.


Jacques. 'S^udoi^ th^^k you are all mad -- I know no more what is beco^^ of the
(...), than I know what I did before I was born. And if I must no^ ^andle, nor
have to do with my own Wife, Mother-in-law, by Conscience that is very ^ard --
Come, I Will tell ye what we'll do; we'll go (...) Cunning Man -- he will tell us
which way it is gone presently.


Teres. Do, do, Mary ^ sin^^ he is so crank about it.


Mary. With all my heart -- to the Cunning Man, faith -- He Will ask the Devil,
but he will tell ^s what is become of 'em -- And if I have but this, if eve^ thou
g^^t^st a^y thing of* Mine in thy hands again, Then tell (...) thy Friends once
in thy Life
Thou found'st a C^ckold ^isen than his Wife.
Exeunt.


^nter Carrasco. Basil. How now Friend, thou look as if thou were big with
some new Event* what is the matter?


Carras^. 'Dsh^art, we have carried the Jest too far, the Knight is dying
yonder -- swounded twice at his Chamber Door, and is now got to Bed, and has
sent for a Notary to make his Will. He Is troubled with delirious Fits too; for
^ hear him often mutter Dulcinea -- but against Sancho he r^ils perpetually.


Quit Nay, this last Miscarriage must needs stick upon his Conscience, if he
has any, as long as he lives -- Come let us go and comfort the Knight. See
Sancho looks wisely now, this frightful News has made him sober. Exeunt Bas.
Quitt* and Car.


Carrasc. To beat his Master -- Oh Incorrigible!


Sancho. Oh -- Drink, Drink, Drink -- thou Devilish damnable Enemy, that do
more to a Man's Brains in a Minute, than all the good they can recompense in
his Lifetime: Thou Jordan of fowl Juice, thou have undone me -- I shall never
get into favor again now -- nor into his Will I Am sure, and that is worse --
Well, I Will go to him, fall down on my Knees, and if he does not pardon me --
rise instantly and hang my self at the Window. Oh Drink, Drink, Drink! Exit.


SCENE II.
Don Quixot is discovered in Bed, Basilius, Quitteria, Carrasco, Notary* and
Servants standing by; Sancho enters cringing, and looking sneakingly. Don Q.
Remove my Pillow -- set me up a little -- so, speaks squeaking and sickly draw
near, pray Gentlemen -- What, Sancho too? Ah -- thou ungodly -- Vermin. Sancho
cringes, and shakes his Head.


Sancho. I Will hang my self, Sir -- I can do no more.


Basil. No faith -- that is pretty reasonable satisfaction.


Don Q* Egh, egh -- you wonder, Sir -- sat this sudde^ Alteration; but this is
nothing in the hand of Providence -- Thousands that are struck so have died
ever this time -- Therefore pray wonder not, but e're I go witness my Will --
and so farewell -- Are ye ready, Friend?


Notary. Yes, Sir, yes; begin when you please.


Quitter. Methinks his Sense is very clear now.


Notary. For a minute or two, Madam -- but then he falls to strange
Extravagancies -- I am only here to humor him.


Don Q. Well first then -- egh, egh -- without complementing the Worms about my
Carkase; for it is so lean and scraggy, that they will have but poor ^eeding -- I
give my chiefest Quality, my Knight Errantry, to the veriest Idiot amongst my
Countrymen, that he may have it in his Head to conquer Kingdoms; and that ^e
may be heartily drubb'd about it as ^ have been -- Quickly, quickly, set it
down, I say.


peevishly. Notary. I do, I do, Sir. Now pray observe -- Now the Fit begins.


Don Q. In the next place I bequeath my Valor, which in me was but a worse
sort of Itch, to all the Cowards and faint-hearted in the Armies abro^d, that
they may fight with one another to the end of the World, without knowing why
or wherefore.


Carrasc. That is indeed -- a very mad Leg^cy.


Basil. Satirical tho if you mind it.


Don Q. Egh, egh -- Set me a little higher -- so -- my Conscience and one half
of my Brains -- I give to the French -- that -- they may learn to be contented
with their own Country -- and not le^p like wild Horses into others Men's
Ground, till they are secure their Neighbors are not strong enough to lash'em
out again.


Quitt. These are I confess, more than common Legaci^s.


Basil* Well said again* Faith -- punc;


Don Q. To all Statesmen Politicians, Privy-Counsellors, and such like, I
bequeath my Integrity of Soul to be an Umpire between their Gain and their
Honesty -- that when ever they chance to boil over in 'em, it may cool and
allay, like a Wooden-Ladle, when the Fire has provoked the Pottage into fury.


Basil. A Solon -- A Solon -- I say s^ill.


Don Q. To the great Clergy, and the small -- I give my Voice and Lungs, loud
and sound as they were at twenty -- and a good will to use 'em often -- they
preach so ^aintly now* as if they were ashamed of their Trades, and the Priest
dozes at Church as often as the Parish.


Caras. Good again* that was close somewhere too.


Don Qix. To all Knights of the Curtain, Court-followers, and so forth, -- I
generally bequeath -- the Empire that I proposed to my self to get, to defray
their reasonabl^ Expenses, 'till they come to Preferment.


Notary. This is strange, I ^xpected he would have changed -- before now.


Don Qix. Give me a Tun of Wine there -- Bourdeux, Burgundy, Sherry, Shampaign,
quick, quick, I grow thirsty. Starts suddenly into a Rage.


Notary. Oh, now, Sir, mind him*


Don Qix. My Soul's upon a Spit alive -- I feel it Roasting -- hark, it squeaks
like a Lobster; some Wine, I say -- ye Scoundrel.

Sancho gives him a Bottle, trembling he drinks. Hum -- hum -- your ears once
more, my Friends. Mildly again. To all Old Batchelors, Drunkards, and Amoreto's
above Sixty Five and upwards -- I give -- humph -- I give -- a Whore -- and a
Bottle, Throws his Nightcap at Quitteria, and the Bottle at Basilius. that
they may not lose their Character at last, but die as they lived in their
Calling.


Notary. I told ye there would be a turn, -- see now he is calm again.


Don Qix. To all Loyal and Wise Citizens that are Married, I soberly bequeath
my hollow eyes, and my hearty p^tience, that they may never see the sprouting
of their own Horns, nor grumble at the payment of the King's Taxes.


Caras. That Is soberly said enough, I Will swear.


Don. Quix. You too -- that wait here to see my End, must ^ave some
remembrance; and first to you, Sir, that are newly Married, I frankly give my
lepid Age, and limber Experience, that by knowing the folly you have committed
now, it may prevent ye from Conjugating a second time.


Quit. How Is that, Sir Knight?


Don Quix. Nay, nay, no noise, no noise, and ye shall all have something -- to
you, Madam, I give and tran^^er, and much good may it do ye, my Chastity, to
support your own, for a Woman of your Age and Constitution -- has not singly
enough to keep her honest, I Am sure.


Basil. Ha, ha, ha -- the Knight grows merrier as he draws nearer the bottom.


Don Quix. To you, Sir, that are a great Scholar -- and Book-learn'd, I
bequeath my Wit and g^ntile Air, to help your College Breeding; for search the
Universities, and you will find this Saying true, The greatest Clerks are still
the awkerd'st Blockheads.


Caras. Oh, thank ye, Sir, I should be loath to have been left out.


Don Quix. Lastly, to Sancho there, --


Sancho. Ay, a small Purse, if you please, poor honest Sancho, Sir.


Don Quix. Dull, Saucy, Drunken Sancho, I do bequeath two Gallons a day of my
Small-beer -- to keep him cool from state of reprobat^on, during his Life --


Sancho. Small-beer, Oons, that is small Comfort; well, I Will go get the Rope
ready, oh, oh, oh -- Weeps, and goes out.


Don Quix. This is all, Sirs, there is no great need of Executors, or Overseers
-- the Will can walk alone, without Leading-string^ -- and now methinks I would
fain rest a little.


Basil. Do, Sir, and to divert your melancholy, and cheer the fading Spirits,
we'll treat ye with some Mus^cal Performance, you used to love it, let 'em
begin there.


Here follows the last Entertainment of Singing and Dancing, which Ended, Don
Quixot sleeps. A Dialogue Sung between Lisis and Alti^idora, a Boy and a Girl,
supposed to be Brother and Sister.
I
Lisis. AH my Dearest Celide,
T^ other day I asked my Mother,
Why thy Lo^ging changed m^st be,
Why not still lie with thy Brother?

^ltis. I remember well you did,
And I heard too what she said.
Lisis, You Are a great Boy grown,
Therefore now must lie alone.

Lisis. To part us the Custom of Modesty Votes,
Unless both had Breeches,

Altis. Or both had long Coats.


II.
Lisis. Ah! what mischief can there be
In these little tyny Breeches,
That can part me thus from thee;
Sures there is Witchcraft in the sti^ches.

Altis. Or what Devil here resides,
That my Petticoat thus hides;
Mother Laughs a^ hour or t^o,
When I sometimes ask to know.

Lysis. Why a He,


Altis. And a She,


Lysis. May not Bed at our Size,


Altis. As well as two Girls,


Lysis. Or as well as two Boys.


III.
Lysis. I will since I Am kept from you,
Get a Wife as soon as may be,

Altis. And I Will get a Husband too,
Three times bigger than my Baby:

Lisis. Father to Mamma tells all,
When in Bed they chatting fall.

Altis. And when we are Married too,
We as much as they s^all know.

Lisis. The Secret will out,


Altis. In Comparing of Notes,


Lisis. What Is hid in th^se Breeches,


Altis. Or lies in these Coats.


Chorus of both. Let Us laugh then, and follow our innocent play,
And Kiss, when Mamma is gone out of the way;
For I fear, I fear, we shall cry when we know,
It Is all that a Brother and Sister may do.
Basil. He Is fallen asleep, remove him out there softly, 'twill either ease ^r
end him.


Quit. It Is pity he is condemned such Extravagance, the man has Ex^ellent parts.


Caras. And on all Theams, excepting his Knight Errantry, most read^ and acute.


Basil. Come, Sweet, let us take the Air. Whilst I amongst all great
Contentments known,
Looking on thee, am happiest in my own.
Curtain falls.


FINIS.

