TWO PRAYERS; ONE For the safety of His MAJESTY'S Person; THE OTHER For the
Preservation of this University and City of OXFORD.

To be used in all Churches and Chappells.

OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to the University. M.DC.XLIV.



A PRAYER FOR THE KING.
O Lord God, infinite in Power, by whom the Thrones of Kings are established,
and their Persons made Sacred; Take, we beseech thee, into thy immediate and
Divine protection thine anointed servant the King, that no Sacrilegious
profane hand may come near to touch him: In all his ways let thy Spirit
guide him, and thy holy Angels pitch their Tents about Him; Comfort him in his
troubles, defend him in his dangers, support him in his Cause, bless him in
the happy Delivery of his QUEEN, in the safety of the PRINCE, in the confusion
of all those that rise up against him; show some token on him for good, even
now, O God, when the Sons of Violence are in the highest of their Pride, when
they have joined Nation to Nation, Covenant to Covenant, and Army to Army to
pull down Him whom thou have exalted, and to root out that Religion which
thine own right hand has planted. Defeat their Purposes, O thou preserver of
men, and let not their mischeivous imaginations any longer prosper; but blast
all their Counsels, wither away their Armies like grass scorched by the
Sun, bow down, at last, their stiff necks, and obdurate hearts to a desire
of that Peace which has so long been an abomination to them; That this
miserable Nation may no further pursue their own Ruin, and take pleasure in
shedding their own blood; but being by so many bitter punishments made
sensible of thy Anger for this unnatural Division, may at last be reduced
within their first obedience, to the Glory of thy Name, the vindication of our
defamed Religion, the Joy of our afflicted King, and the happiness of this yet
bleeding Kingdom. And confirm all this to us, O Lord, by the merits, and
through the mediation of thine own dear Son Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer for the Preservation of this University and City.
O Almighty God, who art the only sure Refuge and strong Tower of defense to
all them that put their trust in thee, receive our humble Petition; Save this
City, This Nursery of thy Church, and thy afflicted People, from the hand of
their Enemies. We know that unless thou keep the City, the Watchman watches
but in vain; unless thou defend us, our Foundations, which are laid in dust,
cannot stand firm. We acknowledge our own weakness, and that which makes us
weaker, our sinful demerit; But thou art both the Lord of Hosts and Prince of
Peace, able to destroy the strongest Army with an Army of most despicable
Creatures, with things of nothing, with sudden weakness and follies, with a
Rumor or Imagination. Thou can bring us to the brink of destruction, and
call us back again; Look down therefore, most merciful Lord, upon this
Place, and according to thy wonted goodness resist the Proud, and give grace
to the humble that run to the shadow of thy wings for succor: Thou that
stillest the raging of the Sea and the madness of the People, say to the one
as to the other, hither shall thy proud waves come and no further. Suffer not
the purpose of our Oppressors to stand, nor their Counsels to prosper, nor
their Force to prevail; But set thy hook into their nostrills, to turn them
back, or confound them, according to thy good pleasure and secret wisdom by
which thou disposest all Events beyond the means and reach of man; But arm
thy lowly servants with Faith and Patience, raise our Spirits, guide our
Consultations, strengthen our Hands, help our wants, bless our endeavors with
success; That we being delivered like them that dream, may praise thee as men
awaked out of dust; and having seen and escaped thy Rod, may serve thee ever
hereafter with true obedience, through Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior. Amen.

FINIS.

