LVTHERS ALCORAN Being

A Treatise first written in French by the Learned Cardinal Peron, of famous
memory, against the Hugenots of France.

And translated into English by N. N. P.

The Page following shows the particular Contents of the Book.

Which consists of Symbolismes. Parallells. Identities.


Prophet^ ciu^ vesam, Vir^ (...)

Sophon. cap. 3. Imprinted with License MDC.X^^^.

This Treatise is deuied into two Parts.
IN the first Part is showed, that Lutheranisme agrees with Mahumetisme, or
Turcisme, in Forty points, concerning Faith and Religion: which here are
called, so many Symbolismes.

In the second Part, are compared twenty Points of faith, and other Accessories
thereof, differently believed by the Mahumetans or Turks, and the Lutherans. In
the which it is proved, that Lutheranisme (which is the Religion of the
Hugenots in France) semees to be no more (if not less) warrantable and
justifiable, then Mahumetisme: and these Comparisons are called, Parallels.

Hereunto is adjoined a short Appendix, called the Hugenots second Looking
Glass, wherein is demonstrated, that threescore Articles touching Faith, and
other Circumstances thereof were condemned for Heresies, in the ancient
Heretics, by the Primitive Church. All which 60. Points without any
difference, are now believed by the Lutherans and Caluinists of these days,
for Evangelical doctrine. And these (as varying in no sort from those former
condemned) are here termed, Jdentities.

Tam inuitus Turcam gladio inuaderem quam Christianum fratrem. Luther.
inconfut. Doctorum Paris. Plustost Tures, que Papaux. This was the French Mot,
insculpted in the Hollanders Ensigns of War, at their first Rebellion: They
meaning thereby, that they ha^ rather become Turks, then Papists.

The Epistle of the Translatour, to the Puritan Reader.
You, who are vulgarly called Puritans, may here see, that I have taken some
pains in tra^slating a Treatise, first written in French, by the learned
Cardinal Peron (a man of worthy Memory) against the Hugenots of his own
Country, entitled Luthers Alcoran. The reason of my translating it, is the
Affinity, or rather Identity of the Religion of the Hugenots in France, with
the Religion of the English Puritans. Therefore if this Treatise do justly
condemn the Hugenots of France, I refer to the judgment of the learned,
whether it may not seem to inuolue within the like Censure, the Puritans of
England,

Such English Protestants, as be more moderate, and learned, this Work in no
sort concerns; For it is known and confessed, that the more sober, learned,
and retired English Protestant, does hold (among others) these Points, and
Articles following with us Catholics, and against the Puritans: To wit, He
houlds the Churches ever Visibility; That, Christians dying in the Church and
faith of Rome, may be saved: He houldeth that Christ descended into Hell: He
houldeth Freewill, Universality of Grace; That Christ's bodily death (without
his suffering in Soul) is sufficient for the Redemption of mankind: He
houldeth, That God does not decree sin, but only suffers it; That temporal
punishment is to be inflicted by God (to satisfy his Justice) after the sin
is remitted; That the Pope is not Antichrist; That Bishops are not
Antichristian; That Ecclesiastical Ministers do truly forgive sins, and not
only pronounce the forgiveness of them: That Baptism may be performed by Lay
Persons in time of Necessity* That there is no extraordinary Vocation to the
Ministry in these days: That in case of Adultery, the innocent Party may not
marry again: Finally (to om^^ some others), He houldeth Confirmation, the
lawful Use of the Cross in Baptism, and does defend the Honor of the
Imm^^^a^e Virgin, the Mother of God: Diverse of which Points (maintained by the
more moderate and ^^terate Protestants wi^h us Catholics) are in this en^uing
Treastise defended by the Cardinal, against the Hugenots of France. Thus we
see, that this Treatise, neither through its own Contents, not through the
suspicious and wrongful surmise of others, can take just hold of such
learned, and grave English Protestants.

But to return more particularly to the Book. This Treatise of Cardinal
Peron, was printed in French, not many months before the death of the said
Cardinal, during which short time (I the^ being in France) some few Copies
were spread abroad. Presently upon his death (as it was for certain reported)
some Hugenot Ministers of Rochell, and the places near adjoining, through the
Benevolence of their followers, did buy up all the Press then left vndiuulged,
and burned the copies. Whether it has been reprinted since, I know not: But if
it has not been, I cannot, but blame the want of zeal in the French
Catholics, as to suffer a Work of so eminent a man of their own Country, to
lie wholly buried. Thus ceasing to enlarge my self any further, but thinking it
convenient to acquaint the Reader with these Particulars, I remit this small
Book to the diligent perusal of You English Precisians, and rest

Your Christian friend, N. N. P.

The Preface of the Author. CHAP. I.
MY Dear Countrymen of France. You, who vauntingly style your selves, De la
Religion reformee, and, De la way^ Eglise de Jesus Christ; of the reformed
Religion, and of the true Church of Jesus Christ, (thus laying for your own
Honor, such specious and fair colors upon the foul grain of your own
Faith:) You (I say) cannot be ignorant (I presume) how I have endeavored by my
particular congresse with diverse of your Religion, as also by my several
Writing^ (according to my ability) to pull you out of the mire of your present
Errors (too myld a word) your present Heresies (yet over languide) your
present Blasphemies; but all in vain.

For when I drew forth my proofs from the ^orce of Reason (bearing in Man's
soul the stamp of Gods own Genes. i^ ^aciamus bomin^m ad ima^inem nostram.
Seal) from the authorities of the Ancient Fathers, from O^cu^^^icall
Counsels, from the long hand of time, and vnnitermittee. Apostolical
Tradition, from the stupendous miracles exhibited for greater confusion of
your Innouations; and lastly from the most sacred, and inviolable authority of
Gods holy Written Word; You to all this give us this yawning, and heedles
answer: To wit, that the private Spirit of och of the Faithful (among which
number, you ambitiously range your selves) is to balance and poyse the weight
of all the forsaid proofs; and even to Oracle forth the meaning of the holy
Ghost in the said Venerable Scriptures. O Circulation strange, and incredible!
For you hereby do advance the private judgment of Monsieur Plessis Mornay
(heretofore my Antagonist, and a great Arche of your Church) of Monsieur
Casanbon, Monsieur de Mo^in, or some other such obscure Terrae filius, above
all authorities, above all Tribun^lls, above all seats of Judicature: Which
Private spirit. and prejudice of judgment in you, are the Remor^'s, or lets,
staying and flowing you from further sailing into the deepest Mysteries of
Christianity.

Therefore seeing this former Course of disputing can prevail nothing with
you, ^^am at this time forced to proceed another way, and to imitate that
General in the Wars, who bends his forces, not to strengthen and fortify
his own Cittyes, Castells, and Forts (as not standing in need of any such
defense) but to demolish and ^uine the Rampires, Fortress^^, and Holds of the
Enemy. Now the Course here to be h^^ld^n by me, shall be this.

We observe, that if a Man be told, that he has some spo^s upon his face,
occasioned by any unexpected means, he presently h^iteth to a Glass^, to see
himself ^h^rin (...) And if he find the blemishe^ to appear i^ the G^asse, he
then acknowledges the truth thereof, and instantly seeks to dry, and wype
them away. The like I h^^r^ counsel you to do (O you Hagen^^s of France.) You
are by me in this Treatise ^^^^ged wi^^ d^ue^s ^oales, and spo^s of T^rcism^;
Glass your selves in the Turkish A^oran (for so i^ the Book called, wherein
the Articles of the Turkish Faith were first ^^at down.) Y^ you find therein
your own blemi^^^s to be exhibited to your sight; I mean, if yo^ find
thereby, that you do^^ part with (...) Turks, in belie^^ng with them di^^^^
po^^^ of their own faith, diffe^en^ly from a^^ other Christians (as by
^^^pa^ing your Faith with theirs you shall ^^nd,) then ^^bou^ to ab^^erge all
such deformity from the face of your Christian ^^r^^e^^^on? And thus you may
make the Turkish ^l^^^a^, in part, the G^asse of your present Religion.

The labor I here undertake will ((...) suppose) appear in your ^^dg^^^^^^ to
(...) ^ore then an Her^^^e^^ ^^bour; and mo^^ difficult^ to wi^, to prove (...)
who^^ you^ May^ters fear (...) to (...) Apolog. Angli^.
God to e^^g^^^^ the World The Book styled, Antichristus, s^^s Prognosticon
s^^is Mu^di.
fore^^^ (...) the Scriptures, and a (...).
(...) a^ also (...) chief Senod^^^, (...), and others (so much magnified by
you) to have in many points of their faith, wholly joined themselves with
Mahumet, Christ's mortal, yea immortal Enemy. Now, if I do assume more in these
words, then I shall perform (for I do expect this Treatise will he ouerlooked
with many Aristarchian, and censuring Eyes) then let me become infamous to my
own Country, and even to the Professors of my own Religion, inglorious, and
despicable.

For the more clear accomplishment of my undertaken Scene. I will not insist
in the authority of Gods holy Writ, (as unworthily, and irreligiously de^orted
by the pride of each of your Private spirit;) neither in any other kind of
proofs above rehearsed (all which you behold with the eye of scorn, and
contempt,) but I will rest only in your chief Masters own words, yet extant
to be read in their Writings: So as I may here say with our Savior, De ore
Lu^. ^9.
tu^ ^e iudico, S^ru^nequaem. For, but read their Sentences by me alleged, and
compare them with the words of the Alcoran, and with the words of diverse
Authors, recording the doctrine of the Turkish Alcoran and Faith, you shall
find them in many dogmaticall points (for I say not in all) most conspiringly
to agree: Non facies vn^, nec diuers^ ^am^n -- And thus your Religion may with
some show of reason be called, Turkish Hugenotis^s, or Hugenotish T^rcisme.

Now whiles you ^^ad their words in their Books, remember, that the Penn^ is
the souls secondary Tonque* delivering without voice, or sound, its mental
Language: Thus you shall rest assured, that it is most true, that so they did
write, though most false what they did write. And thus I refer you to the
impartial Witnesses of your own Eyes. And in regard of this great
consociation and affinity of Luthers doctrine with Turcisme, it is less to be
wondered, that the great Turk* (as Manlius In loc. com. page ^16.
the Protestant relates) demanding of the Christian E^perours Ambassador, of
what years Luther was, wished he had been younger, and promised him to be his
good Lord. In retaliation of which proffered kyndnes we may presume, that
Luther was more easily invited to write thus in the Turks favor: To war
Luther, tom. ^. Wittenb. in a^^ers. damnas. per L^o^em. Art, 34. fol. 100.
where we thus read: Praeliari aduersus Turcas est repug^are D^vis^ta^ti i^i,
quitates nostras ^e^ illos.
against the Turk is to resist Gods visiting our Iniquities And more: Luth. in
Explicat. Art. ^4.
He that has ears, let him hear, and abstain from the Turkish Wars, whi^^
the Popes name prevails under Heaven. O sacred and holy friendship,
contracted between the Turk and Luther: And thus by allusion we may here say:
Facti Luc. ^3.
sunt a^tic^, Her^des and Pilat^s.

But to return to the Treatise. I have entitu^ed it, Luthers Alcoran; not
because Luther did particularly first dogmatize all the points, wherein the
Nouellists of these times conspire with the Turk, and M^^^^^t; but in that he
did first broach many of them* And the r^^t were after taught by Swinglius,
Calvin, Beza, and others, all Luthers Prosely^s and scholars; and all
descending originally from the Ioynes of Luther. Now the denomination of a
thing is commonly taken a praestantior^: And according hereto, throughout this
Treatise, I take the words, Lutheran, and Lutheran^sme in a general sense, as
comprehending all the followers of Luther, and such doctrines, as were first
taught by Luther, or after by his followers; though I grant the forsaid words
in a strict acceptance have reference only to those men, who more peculiarly
swear fealty to Luther, and to Luthers doctrine, in some points different from
that or the Swingi^ans, and the Caluinists.

Here I will demand after your diligent perusal of this small Work; is
Turcisme (...) false religion? How then can Hugenotisme be true? Is Hugenotisme
a true Religion? How then can Turcisme be false? Such an indissoluble knot of
doctrine shall you find in many points between these two sects* Therefore you
must be forced either to abandon Lutherranisme, or by embracing of it, withal
to imb^ace Turcisme, and Mahuinetisme. What grief then is it, that our noble
Country should be con^aminated, and defiled with such pitch of Blasphemies, in
this Treatise discovered?

O Blessed Lewis, once King of France; Great ^eretofore in Empire, and
Domination; Greater in Virtue and de^^o^^o^; but now Greatest in thy fruition
of the light of the Allmighty; since thou now be houldest him, Non tanquam 1.
Cor. 293
Speculum in enigmars, b^^^ facie ad scieno; and him all things lntuitiuely;
Look upon France thy dear Country (where thou did once ^ow the care of
Soueraingty;) See, how it is torn asunder touching matters of faith, with
Apostasy, and through a most strict combination in says, with Mahumet, Christ's
open Enemy* I know well, that the felicity of thy present State stand^ not
compatible with any grief, or sorrow, in regard of the Conformity of thy Will,
to the Divine Will, and permission of the Highest; nevertheless since Thou,
and all other Saints now reigning with thee in Heaven, through your Scraphicall
Charity are become Aduocats for us poor miserable Worms, during our exile in
this Vale of Misery, forbear not the^ to power out daily thy Vills of Iucense
(A mean thy Prayers) before his divine Majesty; Besiege his eats with thy
uninterrupted Oraisons, that so he would be pleased to withdraw his scourne
from this one most dear Country; and that he would mollify the obdurate Hates
of those men therein, who introduce Nouelty, under the tecture of Truth, and
change Christ his Gospel into the Turkish Alcoran. Pray (O pray) most glorious
Saint, that his our famous Idation may be wholly induced and brought back to
that Apostolical and Prim^^^^ Eayth, which then reigned in it when tho^
^ignedst over it; it th^^^ (...) in the (...) Moon (as it were) of its own
resplendent Honor.

But to recall my self: It seems to me, I perceive some of you (Hugeno^s) who
are plus fiues, que religueux, more subtle, then religious, looking upon these
leaves with the eye of liuour and malignity; saying, the indignity and wrong,
by comparing our reformed Religion with Mahumetisme, or Turcisme is
infus^^^^ble; since we believe in Christ, in the Trinity, the Writings of the
New Testament, that there are the Sacraments of Baptism, and the Lords supper
etc. from all which the Turks do disclaim. To this I answer several Ways.

First I compare you with the Turks in some Points only of your says, not in
all: Therefore the comparison here made is no further to be extended, then is
by me intended. Secondly, I grant, you believe these supreme Points in
general, but you have commonly annexed in your belief of them so much poison,
touching some Circumstances of the said Mysteries, as that it has vitiated,
and corrupted the whole Ma^te of your Belief, and then that saying, here
houldeth: (...), False belief is plainly worse, then misbeliefe, or Infidelity.

Thirdly, I make a Comparison in this Treatise, only of Hugenotisme or
Protestancy, with Turcisme: But the former sublime Articles of Christian
Religion you do not believe, as you are Hugen^ts, or Protestants, but only as
Catholics, or at the most as Christians; since from our Catholic Church only
you receive your belief of them. For thus Luther acknowledges: We Luther
contra Anabaptist.
confess, that under the Papacy there is most of the Christian Good, yea
rather all the Christian Good, and that from thence it came to us. And
Whitakerus (a Protestant Doctor of England) says no less in these his Words:
The De Eccles. p. 36^.
Papists have the Scriptures, and Baptism etc. And these came to us from them.

Now, these former Points (I say) you believe not as Protestants, or as
Professors of your reformed Religion. The reason hereof being, because you are
Protestants in respect (and not otherwise) of your Denial of the affirmative
Catholic Points, whereby you divide your selfs from the Catholic Roman
Church; as in denying the Sacrifice of the Altar, Prayer for the dead, praying
to Saints, Peter's Supremacy, and his Successors etc. Finally in denying other
positive, and affirmative Articles of our Catholic Religion, wherein by such
your denial you dissent from us; And in regard of your first Masters
protesting to deny the said Points, according to their Confession of Faith
exhibited at Augusta, they were then first styled Protestants, as your own
Sleidan Sleidan. l. c. fol. 8^.
and other Protestant O^iander in Epit. C^^^^. 10. page
History graphers have recorded. And thus far in solution of your former
suggested Crimination (if any of you should suggest it) and in further warrant
of my undertaken Mothed in this Treatise.

It may by further viged by some of you (especially of such as be illiterate)
that you do not give your consent, and belief to such blasphemous doctrines,
wherein your Grand-marster do agree with Mahumet, and the Turk; yea that you do
not, as much as hear of some of these their agreements, or of the wicked
Positions, where with Luther, Swinglius, Calvin, and such others stand charged
in this Treatise; and that therefore it is iniustide and wrong in me, to in
simulate you within the belief of such impious doctrines, I take away this
your poor Evasion in this sort: I grant it may be true, that you have not
heard of many wicked Tenets of your own Brethren, produced hereafter by me;
nevertheless you with an inuolued, and implicit Faith do believe them to be
^^^e.

The reason hereof is, because you give in gross such affiance and credit to
Luther, Swingliues etc. as that what Religion they have taught to be true, the
sme you belieus to be true: But these men did diuulge with the same authority,
the blasphemies and wicked assertions here related, with the which authority
they did teach such other points of Protestancy and Hugenetisme, to the which
you give an ^^^^sse, and explicit affent. And thus whiles you believe other
Protestanticall points to be true, only by reason of the authority of your ^^st
Masters teaching them you are therefore by force of the same authority, to
believe what false doctrines soever your foresaid Instructours have disgorged
out in the it Writings; since they were warranted with the pretext of equal
security of not erring in all their writings. And therefore hence I conclude,
that every one of you, who do acknowledge Luther, and the rest here alleged,
for your prime Catechizers or Doctors in your says, does stand guilty of all
their blasphemies vented out by them, in that by force of the reason above
delivered, you potentially, and implicitly believe the said Blasphemies. Thus
farte hereof.

Well I will draw to an end of this my Fieface (which shall serve in place of a
formal Epistle Dedicatory) putting you in mind, that your Proge^itours have so
comported themselves in their first stamping the Principles of their faith as
that they may be said partly to stand in competency with Mahumet, and Sergius (
Mahumets Scribe, or Penman) whether should transcend, and surpass the one the
other in impiety of doctrine. A miserable Emulation!

One thing yet before I end, I will add; which is, if it can be proved, that
you of the Reformed Religion do partake but in any one point only (as I will
make it evident; that you do in forty) with the Turks, differently from the
belief of all true Christians, and of Gods Universal Church, (you by this
means declyning, le grand chemin battu de la foy Catholic, and Orthodoxe,
the high beaten way of the Catholic, and orthodoxall says) then it clearly
follows that your faith cannot be perfect, and sufficient to Salvation. For
faith is supernatural; and infallible; But who erreth in any one point of
faith (since such a Man relyeth not upon God revealing, and the Church
propounding, the two necessary Means for the obtaining of a true and
profitable faith:) This man (I say) may possibly err in any other point; and
then by necessary inference he cannot be a Member of the true Church; for to
speak in S. Cyprians Dialect: Cyprian. lib. do Vnita. te Ecclesiae.
Adulterari non potest sponsa Christi; incorru^pta est and pudica.

Now with this I refer you to the perusal of this discourse, wherein I do
apply to the diseases of your soul, Paracelsian Physic (as I may say) since
the Ingredients thereof will either (perhaps) presently cure you, or presently
dispatch you; for upon your reading and serious pondering of it, it may be, you
will shake of your present faith of Hugenotisme, or else (which God prevent)
will be more corroborated in Mahumetisme; so precipitating your selves into the
infernal Abysme of miscreancy, and Infidelity.

Ia. Card. Peron*

Of the Method houlden in this Treatise. CHAP. II.
THe prescribed Method, which I intend to take in these ensuing leaves, is
first, to exemplify in many particular Articles of Belief, wherein Mahumet and
the Turks do agree with Luther and the Lutherans; concerning which I am to
prefixe this Caution. To wit, that as by Luther, and the word Lutheran, I
understand also the Swinglians, and the Caluinists, (though I grant (...), and
abusiue) seeing they all originally were begot by Luther, though now through
tract or time they be branched forth into several distinct families: So in
like manner I take these words following promiscuously; I mean, Mahumet,
Sergius, the Mahumetaus, the Saracens, the Turks, Mahumetisme, Saracen^sme, and
Turcisme; all comprehending one and the same Religion, first sprung by Mahumet
and Sergius, and only varying in appellation through diversity of Places, and
Times.

Well then to proceed. This Agreements of Mahumetisme and Luthera^isme, I call
Symbolisme. This Word Symbolisme is taken from natural Philosophy, where it is
peculiarly applied to the agreements of several Elements in several
qualities: Thus the Air (for example) in its heat Sy^holizeth, and agrees
with the fire; in its moisture, with the Water. After I have displayed forty
Points (most of them Articles of faith, and the rest necessary Circumstances,
attending the Turkish, and Lutheran Religion) wherein these two Religions do
conspire and agree, I then in the second Part of this Treatise do particularize
twenty Points of faith, and inferences, or deductions from thence, in which I
compare the Lutherans with the Mahumetans, or Turks; wherein it is made
evident, that the Positions, and Articles of the Lutherans, and their
answerable practice of them are at least equal, if not more wicked, and less
justifiable by force of all Reason, then the contrary Tenets of the Mahumetans,
and Turks. These my librations and waighings of these several Points I term
Parallels; because I compare together the said Points or Articles, as
severally maintained by them; as also I compare together the several first
Inuentours of Mahumetisme, and Lutheranisme.

After the end of both these two Parts of this Treatise, I subnect (as an
Appendix) a Discourse, which may serve, as a Second Glass to you of the
Reformed Religion, wherein you may behold threescore of your own Positions or
dogmaticall Points of faith, and other Accessories thereof, to have been wholly
condemned for Heresies, by the ancient Fathers of Christ's Primitive Church; and
the maintayners of them to have been ^^anded, and anathematized for cursed
Heretics. These wicked Positions I call in this place, so many Identitio^^;
seeing they are the same erroneous doctrines without any variation, heretofore
exploded for old Heresies, and now embraced of new, and revived by our
Sectmaisters of these days. Now by all these several Passages of this little
Work, we may observe, that although the true Church of Christ has been forced
to be embroyled with Mahumetisme; and anciently condemned Heresies; yet she
never partaked with Mahumetisme, or the said Heresies in any one point of their
Wicked Paradoxes; no more then Eternity, though it coexisteth with the time
past, and the time future, is neither the time past, nor the Time future.

Thus much touching the method by me holden; Only I end with this premonition
once for all; That whereas I do mention (by way of Reprouall) often the words,
Protestancy, and Protestant, in this discourse, and Appendix, my meaning is,
that thereby I understand, and take Protestancy only for such points of faith,
which the more earnest, violent, and fiery Protestants and Calainists maintain
(this their doctrine being the same with Hugenotisme, and the belieuers of it,
the same with you Hugenots) not extending these two former words to such
Articles of faith, or to the Professors thereof, which the more learned, grave,
and sober Protestants do hold and believe.

The Particular Passages of the Alcoran, alleged in this Treatise, according
to the Order, as they do occur in this Book: Of which Passages diverse are
several times upon several occasions repeated, and urged. And here we are to
note, that the different Passages of the Alcoran are distinguished (as by so
many Sections, or Paragraphs) by the word, Azoara 1.2.3. etc. CHAP. III.
Azoara 5. DEus pius, Azoara 13. Increduli, and minime Deum (videlicet absque
Filio and Spiritu Sancto) adorantes, cum postulantur praeceptis a Deo positis,
suoque legate (Mahumeti) fidem adhibere; Aiunt se nolle quicquam mutari, nisi
quod Patres imitati sunt. Quibus tamen fit Obiectio: Vtrum Patres semper non
nisi rectam sidem tenuerunt? Azoara 1. Sciendum est geueraliter, quoniam omnis
recte ^iuens, benique gestor; Iudaeus, seu Christianus, seu l^ge sua relicta in
aliam tendens; Omnis scilicet Deum adorans, indubitanter diuinum amorem
assequetur. Azoara 61.62. and seqq. Per Ventos inflantes, and Nubes, Azoara 12.
Increduli sunt qui lesum silium Mariae, Azoara 19. Confundat Deus Christianos
Azoara 12. and 20. Iudaei Mariae blasphemiam, Azoara 27.28. Deus est substantia
necessario existens, Azoara 4.9. and 53. Constanter dic illis Christianis, Deum
vnum esse necessario omnibus, qui nec genuit, nec generatus est; nec habet
quicquam simile. Azoara 13. O Iesis fili Mariae, tu persuades hominibus, Azoara
8. Vnore quotiescumque placuerit, Azoara 5.11. Jesus Mariae filius, Azoara 12.
Jesus fuit Sapientia, Azoara 31. Omnium mulierum optimae Mariae, Azoara 31.
Spiritus Dei intrauit Mariam, Azoara 76. Maria aliquid inali, Azoara 5. Maria
fuit omnibus vtris, Azoara 4. Angelui Gabriel ad Virginem Mariam a Deo missus
est, Dei tam^n Omnipotentia filium concepturam. Azoara 43. Omnes mulieres tuae
manui per emptionem suppositas, and Amitae tuae* Materteraque filias; Azoara
10. De Dei promissionibus in Lege, and Euangeli^ propositis, non est
disputandum. Azoara 20. Emina, matter Mahumetis, testabatur filium Mahumetem nec
in vtero, nec in partu vlli^^ sibi dolorem fecisse. Azoara 74. Nuntium vobis
affero, de Nuntio post me venturo, cui nomen Mahumetus. Azoara 63. Tanti spatij
interuallo, quantum sagitta his discurreret. Azoara 54.65.66. In Paradiso
fideles habebunt hortos, and fontes, vestientur sericis and purpura; puellas
habebunt cum oculis claris and immensis, quorum ^lbugines candidissimae, and
pupillae nigerrimae.
Thus far of these passages of the Alcoran; where it is to be observed, that
one and the same Azoara, is upon different occasions several times alleged,
as above I aduertized. And it is to be further observed, that besides the
forsaid Passages of the Alcoran above alleged, there are also produced many
Testimonies, and Authorities of several grave Writers, whose Books treat of
the Alcoran, or of the Religion, Manners, and Customs of the Turks or
Mahumetans, whose sentences are here alleged against the Lutherans, either by
way of Symbolisms, or Parallels. The names of which Authors I have thought
convenient here to set down.

1. Theodorus Bibliander in Praefatione Alcorani. 2. Cusanus in Cribratione
Alcorani. 3. Richardus Ordinis Praedicatorum in confutatione legis Saracenae.
4. Septem-castrensis de fide, and Religione Turcarum. 5. Christopherus
Richerius, de moribus Turcarum, ad Franciscum Galliae Regem. 6. Cuspinianus de
Religione Turcarum. 7. Postille de la Republique des Tures. 8. Bellanius des
singularites. 9. Chronica Saracenorum. 10. Munsteri Cosmographia. 11.
Georgensis de Turcarum Moribus. 12. Theueti Cosmographia. 13. Literae
Constantinopoli scriptae ad quendam Venetum Patricium.
Extant in fine libri, de furoribus Galliae.

Of Symbolismes in general. CHAP. IV.
BEfore we come to dissect the particulars, wherein our Reformists, and the
Turks do conspire, I hold it much conducing to our purpose (thus observing
Method perhaps in breach of Method) to show what agreements they have in
Generalities; Some of which Generalities are hereafter discoursed of more
particularly.

The 1. Symbolisme.
First then we find, that he who first composed the Turkish Alcoran, was
Sergius, an Apostata Monk; for though by the authority and commandment of
Mahumet (a temporal Prince) yet by the peculiar industry, wit, and labor of
Sergius, the Alcoran (almost a thousand years since) was framed and devised.

In like sort, the First dogmatizer of the Reformed Religion was Luther; first
a Monk, but after forsaking his Religion, coined your Gospel. Thus both of
them were first Votaryes; and both of them after became forsakers of their
first embraced Catholic Religion, and burst out into open Renegado's, or
Apostata's.

The 2. Symbolisme.
The second general Course, wherein Sergius, and Luther do interleague, is
their mutual condemning of the Church of Christ for the former ages. And this
their condemnation is Lapis angularis in the edifice both of the Alcoran, and
of your Gospel; the which stone except it had been first placed, Sergius and
Luther could never have raised the walls of their future buildings, nor could
have declined the confessed Note, and Mark of Heretics. Now according to this
my Assertion Mahumet living in the age of S. Gregory the Great, or presently
after, charged those times with Incredulity, and want of true Belief; and
therefore gave out, Septemcastrensis, and others.
That he was sent by God to restore the Church to its purity in doctrine: And
answearably some twenty years after the death of the said S. Gregory: he began
his restoration of the former supposing erring Faith.

The very same times of S. Gregory, your chief Sectaries do condemn of
Antichristianisme, and Idolatry (so conspiringly they agree with Mahumet,
touching the times of the first imaginary decay of true Christianity.) For does
not Hospinian the Protestant thus write: Gregorij Hosp. histor. Sacram. l 2. p.
157.
Magni aetate etc. In the age of Gregory the Great, all kind of superstition
and Idolatry did (as a Sea) ouerflow, and ouerwhelme the Christian World? And
Simon de Voyon In his discourse upon the Catalogue of Doctors.
(our Countriman) sortably auerreth, that when Bonifacius (who succeeded
Gregory) was stalled in the Papal Chair, then was the whole world overwhelmed
in the dreggs of Antichristian filthiness, abominable superstition, and
traditions of the Pope. With these former Sectaries. Iunius Iunius in Apocalyp.
in c^p. 10.
the remarkable Nouellist, and Bullinger in his Treat concerning Antichrist
page 110.
agree. Finally Hutterus the Protestant places the first decay of the faith in
the same times, saying: Libenter Hutterus, de Sacrif. Missatico. page 377.
concedo Idolomaniam etc. I freely grant, that the Popish Idolatry has invaded
almost the whole earth, for these last thousand years. Thus we see, that
Mahumet, and the Professors of your Gospel do unanimously iumpe in the time,
when (according to their conceits) the Church of God began to decay, through
the professing in its members of a false Religion.

The 3. Symbolisme.
The third point, wherein I will insist here, is that as Sergius, without any
calling, or Vocation, labored to overthrow the Christian Religion then
professed: Even so your Predecessors scorning all ordinary Mission, and
Vocation, assumed the charge of reforming the Church of Christ. And accordingly
hereto In loc. com. lo^ 63. page 198.
Aretius, and Danaeus in Isagog. Christian. part. 4. l. 2. page 36.
Duneus (two Protestants) maintain; That Luthers Calling was extraordinary. In
like manner Calvin discoursing of this point, thus confesses: Quia Lascitius
the Protestant so relates Calvin to say, in his Book, de Russorum, (...)
Moscouitarum religious.
Papa tyrannils etc. Because through the tyranny of the Pope, the true Course
of Ordination was dissolved, therefore we needed a new help; and therefore this
function, which the Lord has imposed upon us, was altogether extraordinary. In
the same dialect speaks your Patriarch of our neighboring Town of Gene^^^ (
Beza Beza i^ his Conference at Poys^*
I mean) for being expostulated of his own, and other (his Associats)
Calling, for their reforming of the Roman Church, and planting of their
Innovations, peremptorily he affirmed, their Calling to be Extraordinary.

So fully do Mahumet, and Sergius sympa^^^^ with our still Gospellers, in
maintayning the Church of God to begin to be Erroneous, about the time of
Gregory the Great, and in promiscuously vendicating to themselves (with
contempt of all lawful Vocation, and Mission) an extraordinary peculiar
calling, for their first sowing of their Blesphemies, and Heresies. This was
the proceeding of your first chief Masters, whom their own learning (for
that they were learned it cannot be denied) thus embouldened to stamp their
Errors, by ambitiously pretending a Miraculous Vocation. But we are the less
to marvel thereat, since Learning oftentimes makes men proud, and Pride
begets Heresy: and this is the unexpected, and lamentable Gradation, between
Learning and Heresy.

But to proceed in this ungrateful combination and Conjunction; In which who
had the advantage over the other, I refer to the judicious; seeing where the
Balance is eauen, there the least grain does cast it.

Mahumet after he had by the industry and policy of Sergius, invented, and
pretended a reformation of the Roman Church, did instantly thereupon So
relates Cuspinianus in Mahumets.
shake off the yoke of Obedience and Loyalty toward Is^^clius the Emperor,
and did draw diverse Provinces from him, even by force and open Rebellion,
subiugating them to his own power. In all which said Provinces he after
planted his misbeliefe, and Infidelity. Thus did Sergius become Mahumets
Dedalus, in making him Wings for his high soaring. And did not Luther tread
(according to his power) in the same tract with Mahumet? For after he had
seasoned the Germans with his Nouellisme, he presently Foedere Smalcaldico,
taught his Proselyts and followers, to rise in rebellion against Charles their
Emperor. And whereas the Germans were obliged by Oath to the Obedience of the
Emperor, Luther and the Lutheran Deuines (to free them of all such fears and
scruples) decreed by solemn Sentence, that, Quia Sleidan the Protestant, lib.
1.
Caesar Religioni etc. Because Caesar did threaten an overthrow to Religion, and
the liberty thereof; therefore he gave just cause, why the Lutherans did vis^^g
against him with safe and good Consciences. And thus Luther first planting his
Religion by the sword, and open Rebellion, no less then Mahumet did, caused
such combustions, insurrections, and bloody wars throughout all Germany, as
that himself thus vauntingly speaks thereof; Videor Luther in loc. com.
class. 4. c. 30.
mihi. videre Germaniam in sanguine nature etc. Christus ^^^us viuit and
regnat, and ego viuo, and regnabo. But touching the Wars waged by the
Lutherans and the Nouellists of this age, originally for the advancement of
their Heresies, I cease here further to discourse of; since in a more
convenient place hereafter, I will more fully enlarge my self.

Thus far now to show the great association, and affinity, which the Turks and
your Ghospellers have in the foundation, and enlarging of both your Religions.
To wit, First, that the Broachers of Turcisme, and Hugenotisuse were Apostata
Monks. Secondly, that they mutually agreed in equally condemning the
Universal Church of Christ, even from such a peculiar Age, or Century.
Thirdly, that the sowers of both their Religions did promiscuously enallege to
themselves an extraordinary Vocation. Finally, that they maintained, and
increased both their Religions (once disseminated) by the sword and traiterous
rebellions. And thus did these former Wretches think good to stamp their
wicked doctrines (though to their own eternal damnation) chiefly (among other
allectiues) that they might be spoken of in after times. Madmen! who covet at
so high a price to enjoy a little Air, after they cease breathing: Landantus
August.
vbi non sunt, torquentur vbi sunt.

You will I hope (O You my Countrymen) disclayme (at least in words) from
Mahumetisme; and can you then embrace your own Gospel as divine, since it is
impossible, that Truth and Faisbood should indifferently be seated upon the
same Beginning. Basis, Ground work, and Foundations?

The 4. Symbolysme, touching the writings of the Apostles. CHAP. V.
Having laid down above the general foundations, whereupon Sergous and Luther
raised the Mount of their promiscuous Errors; It remaynes now to descend to
the particular Heresies by them indifferently maintained, which they wrought
upon the Anuile of their own private Judgments. And first, though Mahumet in
his Alcoran admitted the Old Testament, and the Gospells; yet as making no
mention of the Epistles of the Aposties, or of the Apocalypse, he wholly
disca^noneth, and excl^deth them. For thus Mahumet writes in his Alcoran:
Azoar^
Deus pius and misericors p^^ils Testamentum Vetus, (videlicet legem Moysis and
Psalterium) deinceps Euangelium, rectas vias hominsbus tradidit: God being
pious and merciful, first delivered to men (as the right ways) the Old
Testamen (to wit, the Law of Moses and the Psalter) then he after delivered
the Gospel; From whence we see, that he pretermitteth all the other Writings
of the Apostles. Now in this point our new Evangelists do join with Mahumet
and Sergius, by their expunging, and obliterating most parts of the writings of
the Apostles.

To begin with Father Luther, who speaking of the Epistle of S. James,
betrampleth it in these Words: The Epistile of James is In Praefa^an Epist.
Iacobi, in editione Iene^si.
contentions swelling strawy, and vnmorthy an Apostolical spirit. In like
sort. Luther re^^^cteth as Apocryphal the book of the Apocalypse even by the
^udgment of Bullinger the Protestant, thus writing Martin Bulling. upon the
Apocaly^s cap. 1. sermon. 1.
Luther has (as it were) wounded this book (meaning the Apocalypse) with a
sharp Preface set before his Edition of the New Testament in Dutch; For which
his course taken therem, grave and literate men are displeased with him.

To proceed further: Kempnit. in Enchirid. page 6^^
Kempnitius (a chief Lutheran) peremptorals hud^^ateth, and condemns the
second Epistle of Peter, the second, and third Epittle of John, the Epistle to
the Hebrews, the Epistle of James, the Epistle of Jude, and the Apocalypse;
stiling all these Apocryphal: further assirming, That these Books Kempuit. in
examen part. ^. p. 56.
have not testimony for their authority. With Kempuitius, Adamus Francisci (the
Protestant) thus agrees saying: Apocryphi In Margarete Theolog. page ^48.
libri etc. The Apocryphal Books of the New Testament, are the Epistle to the
Hebrews the Epistle of Imaes, the second and third of John, the second of
Peter, the Epistle of Jude, and the Apocalypse.

Thus much to demonstrate, that Luther and diverse of his scholars agree with
Mahumet, in denying most (at least) of the Epistles of the Apostles. And
therefore we have less reason to be amazed at that profane saying of Calvin,
in dishonor of the Apostles in general. His words are these: Apostoli Caluin^
^. Instit. 4. c. l. 9.4.
non debent garrire quicquid illis collibitum fuerit etc. The Apostles ought
not to babble, and speak idly of things, as it pleases them; but they are to
relate the Commandments of God sincerely. We are indeed to believe the
Apostles; but this only as they speak out of the Word of God, not as they
speak from themselves, but from the precept and special commandment of their
Legation. Thus Calvin. O wonderful procacity, and insolency of Heresy. As if
the Apostles did sometimes babble, and talk idly, did speak only of
themselves, and not as instructed and directed by God.

The 5. Symbolisme, Touching the erring of the Apostles. CHAP. VI.
THe Turks, or Mahumetans, as they do not believe the writings of the Apostles;
So they hold the Aposties to have erred in diverse of their Actions; since they
maintain that the Apostles had not greater warrant for their not erring in
their Actions, then they had for their not erring in their Writings.

The same point is maintained by several of your first Instructours (so great
is your conformity with them herein.) For according hereto Luther says of S.
James speaking of Extreme Unction: I say, Luther de Captiuit. Babylon. cap. de
extrema Vnction^.
thaeth in any place James erred, in this place especial. b^^e erred etc. For
it is not lawful for an Apostle (...) ^is own authority to institute a
Sacrament. As (...) the Apostle would, or dared to ordain a Sacrament, without
the authority, and command of Christ our Savior.

In like manner, Brentius (the Lutheran) thus boldly writes: Peter In Apolog.
Confess. cap. de Conciliss.
the Chief of the Apostles and also Barnabas (after the Holy Ghost received)
together with the Church of Jerusalem erred. The Magdeburgians thus prosecute
this Point: Paul does Cent. ^. l. ^. c. 800
^u^ne to James the Apostle, and a Council of the Presbyters being celebrated,
he is induced by James and the^est, that for the offended Jews, he should
parisy himself in the Temple, to which Paulyieldeth, which without doubt was
no small slip in so eminent a Doctor.

Finally to o^^^ the like condemnation, given by our Reformist, Whitaker (the
English Sectary) thus has left written: It De Eccles. contra Bellar. controu.
^. q. 4.
is manifest, that after the descending of the Holy Ghost, the Apostles erred
in the Vocation of the Gentills; And that Peter in like sort erred in manners,
touching the abrogation of the Cerem^^^all Law. Now where can we find any
Mahumetan or Turk (all who condemn the Apostles) to speak more unworthily,
and debasing of them, then these alleged Ghospellers have done?

The 6. Symbolisme, touching the Ghospells. CHAP. VII.
TO proceed: Touching the Scriptures, which the Mahumetans, and our new
Gospellers do admit as pure, and sacred, the Saracens, or Turks (I ever mean
the Mahumetans) agree with the Lutherans in the manner, reason, and custom of
Proceeding with the said Scriptures. The sole Reason, why the Mahumetans do not
admit the New Testament, as now it is (though they allow of it, they say, as it
was first given, by, Jesus) pretending that it has been corrupted, i^, because
Cuspin. de relig. Turcarum. Septem-Castrensis de relig. Turca^.
the Sentences and authorities of the New Testement touching Christ are
repugnant to their faith, first in^ti^u^ed by Sergius in the Alcoran; so as
they make their Mahumetan faith to be a square, where with to measure the
Truth, or falsehood of the New Testament. And do not out Evangelists run in
one and the same live of proceeding?

According to this it is, that Luther in the balancing of the four Evangelists
thus writes: Qui Luth. tom. 3. p. aefat in epist. Petri.
potismu^ and maiort prae cateris studio docent etc. Such Evangelists are the
chiefest, who more carefully teach (then other Euangetists do) that faith in
Christ only without our works does make us just, and in state of Salvation.
Thus Luther lesning the worth of the Evangelists, according as they seem more
to impugn his conceyted doctrine of Justification by faith only.

Again the Centurists in rejecting with Luther the Epistle of James, give this
reason, saying: The Epistle of James is countrary to the doctrine of the
Apostles, because Cent. 2. c. 4. p. ^6^
it makes Abraham to be justified not by faith only, but by Works. In like
manner Beza rejects those words, as surreptitious, in Luke 22. This is the
Chalice, the New Testament in my Blood, which shall be shed for you; Beza in
annotat. in ^a, Lucae.
because as Beza says, The words in the Greek Copyes confirm the Real
Presence in the Sacrament.

Thus we observe, that both the Mahumetans. and the Lutherans do jointly make
the Religion, which they profess the foundation o^ groundwork, why they do
disauthorize such, or such Books of Scripture, not reputing them to be the
Word of God. A strange, and retrograde proceeding: for since faith, and
Religion is to receive its approbation from Scripture, here with he Mahumetans,
and the Lutherans, the Scripture is to take its force, and authority from faith
it self; that faith I mean, which every particular Sectary (whether
Mahumetan, or Lutheran) shall in his own private judgment hold to be true.

The 7. Symbolisme, Touching the Ancient Fathers. CHAP. VIII.
FRom the authority of the Scripture, let us descend to the authority of the
ancient Fathers of the Church of God. All whom we shall find to be equally
rejected and contemned by the Mahumetans, and the Lutherans. Yea Luther and his
Offpring, before they will lend a favorable ear to those Sentinalls of Gods
Church for the good of their own souls, will sooner endanger their own
Salvation; they bearing themselves therein with such desperate resolution,
wherewith Cato did, of whom it is recorded: Occidii se Cato, ne diceretur,
Caesar me seruauit.

And first touching the Fathers. We find Mahumet in his Alcorans thus to
disualew them: Azoara 13.
Increduli and minime adoranies, etc. The Christians are incredulous, not
worshipping God, when they are required to give credit to the Commandments of
God, and to his Legate, or Mesienger (videlicet Mahumet) for they say, se nolle
imita^^^ quicquam, nisi quod Patres imitati sunt; They will not i^ntate others
in any thing, but in what the Fathers have imitated. But to this is objected:
Virum Patres non nisi veram fidem semper ^e^uerunt, Whether the Fathers did
ever hold the true faych? Thus Mahumet in his Alcoran.

But now let us see, how Luther, and the Lutherans even tread upon the ancient
Fathers with greater contempt of Words, and contumelies, then ever Mahumet did.
To begin with Luther, who in these words discharges his shot against the
Fathers in general: The Luth tom. 2. Wittenb. an 1551. lib. de seruo arbitrio.
Fathers of so many Centuries have been blind, and most unskillful in the
Scriptures, and if they did not correct and alter themselves before they dyed,
they were neither Holy men, nor belonging to the Church. But Luther coming to
censure particular Fathers, even shoots hayle-shot against them in this
manner: In the writings Luther in colloquijs mensalibus, cap de Patribus
Ecclesia.
of Jerome there is not a word of true Faith in Jesus Christ, and per fect
Religion. Tertullian is very superstirious. I am persuaded, that Origin was
long since accursed. I make small rekoning of Chrysostom. Basil is not to be
much regarded; he is wholly, and merely (...) Monk; I prize him not of a
bar. Cyprian is but a shallow and weak divine. Finally, against Austin, and
Cyprian he thus vaunteth: I Luther^^m 1. contra Rege^^ Angliafol. 344.
care not, if a thousand Austins, a thousand Cyprians opposed themselves
against me.

With Luther (to omit the like censures of other Lutherans) Melanct^on runs
in full chase, thus ba^king: Presently Melanth. in 1. Cor. c. 3.
from the Infancy of the Church, the ancient Fathers obscured the doctrine
concerting Justification by faith, augtriented Ceremonies and coined peculiar
Worships. O how distant in the judgment of these Nouelists (who have bouche
ouuerie and gorge desployae, an open mouch, and full of gause) from the
judgment of S. Austin, deliueredin this his Sentence: Quod Aug. to. J. contra
I^^lian. l. 1. c. 5.
(Patres, credunt, credo; quod tenent, teneo; acquiesce istis, and requiesce a
me.

The 8. Symbolisme, Touching general Counsels. CHAP. IX.
AS Mahumet rejected the Fathers in particular, so also he rejected the
authority of the ancient Cou^cells, consisting of many hundred Fathers,
gathered together in one place, for the disquisition and search of Truth in
matter of Religion. According to this my Assertion, we find no mention of any
authority, ascribed to General Counsels to be made in the Alcorans. Neither
would Mahumet admit the authority of any one Council celebrated either before,
or in his days; even betrampling with contempt the first Council
Septemcastrens. defide and relig. Turcarum.
of Nice, which was about some three hundred years before the being of
Mahumet, since by that Council, his blasphemy of denying Christ (who is God
before all time, but Man in time) to be God, and the Son of God, was
particularly condemned.

How do our Adversaries compart with Mahumet in contemning all Counsels? For
does not Brent. in Apol. Confess. Wittem. cap. de Concilijs.
Brentius charge even the said Council of Nice with several Errors? In like
sort Calvin a ftirmed, that the Fathers of that Council were Calvin de verae
Ecclesreformat. inter opuscul. page 480.
fanaticall: and Musculus, that they were Musculus in loc com de Ministr^s. p.
19^.
a Satana in stigati. But V^banus Regius (the Protestant) insimulateth all
general Counsels within this his Censute: Quod omnia Vrb. Reg. 1. part oper
in inter pret. loc. com. de Ecclesia. fol. 51.
Concilia parni^^^^^ lapsa sunt* luce clarius est: It is more c^ear^ then the
sun, that all Counsels have most fowly erred. And Beza sortably maintayneth,
that, Primis Beza in his preface of the New Testam. anno 1587.
isque optimis Ecclesia temporibus, Satan Episcoporum coe^^^^bus praefuit; Even
in the very first and best times, Satan did govern and preside over the
Counsels, and Bishops. But Peter Martyr, to the end he would not be short to
his former Brethren in so pious a work, thus sharpeneth his rafory tongue,
against all Counsels in general: Peter Mar^. l de votis, page 47^.
At long, as we insist in general Counsels, so long we shall continue in the
Papists Errors.

Did ever any Child bear greater resemblance in face to his Father, then our
Evangelists do carry to Mahumet in doctrine herein? Thus we find, that though
the Error of contemning General Counsels in these our times, be not properly
Luthers, yet it is of Luther; I mean, defended by those, who are the
descendents of Luther: So little do these New Brethren regard the words of the
Evangelist, recorded of the Council of the Apostles, and implicitly of all
other lawful General Counsels: Visum Act. 15.
est spiritui Sancto, and Nobis.

The 9. Symbolisme, Concerning Traditions. CHAP. X.
MAhumet, and his followers ascribe such perfection to the Alcoran, as that
they Cusantis in cribatione Alcorain. l. 1. and 2. and Richardus Ordi^is
Praedicat. in confutat. legis Saracen.
made it the bounda^y of their Religion; believing or giving credit to nothing,
which was not found expressly set down therein; not performing any thing not
written therein; So much they slighted the force of all Traditions, though
most ancient. And hereupon we find an Author in these patricular words to
discourse of this point: Est in Turcarum Beinbus ^^slor, V^gnet. l. 4.
legibus, vt quae sua lingua scripta non sunt, ea praestari non est necesse.

And do not our New Evangelists so admirt the written Word of God (and yet but
that of the written Word, which themselves hold for his Word) at that they
even spit at all Traditions, which have not their express warrant from the
said. Word? Upon this ground their maine Throrame is, That nothing is to be
believed, but what the Scripture evidently teaches. And therefore whereas S.
Basil says: Some Basil de spiritu Sancto c. 27.
things we have from Scripture, other things from the Apostles Traditions, both
which have like force to godliness; as also whereas Epiphanius writes: We
Epiphan. haeres. 61.
must use. Traditions, for the Scripture has not all things; and therefore the
Apostles delivered certain things by writing, and certain by Tradition: Now I
say, these Sentences are so displeasing to Reynoldus (an English Protestant) as
that he thus speaks of these two foresaid Fathers: I Reynoldus in his
Conclusions, or Thesibus.
take not upon me to correct them, but let the Church judge, if they have
weighed this point with advice, and consideration.

In like manner whereas Chrysostom most clearly speaks in defense of
Traditions in this sort; The In 2. Thess^l. Homil. 4.
Apostles did not deliver all things by Writing, but many things without
writing; and these later are to be as much credited, as the former; does not
Whitakerus condemn this sentence in the dialect of his said brother, and
Countriman Reynoldus, saying: I Whitak. de sa^ra Scriptura, page 678.
reply, that this is an indiscr^et and rash speech, and not worthy so great a
Father? A point so evident, that the said Whitakerus Whitak* de sacrascrip. p.
678.681.683.685.690.695. and seq.
does insimulate (and with all reprehend) these ensuing Fathers, within his
supposed error of maintayning Traditions; to wit, Damascene, Eusebius, Leo,
Basil. Austin, Cyprian, Tertullian, Chrysostom, and Epiphanius. How can these
Protestants decline the force of that sacred Testimony of the Apostle: Tenete
^. Thessalonians 1.
Traditiones etc. Hold fact the Traditions which you have received, either by
Word, or by Epistle?

The 10. Symbolisme, Touching the not Necessity of Faith in Christ. CHAP. XI.
THough the Turks do reverence Christ, as a holy Brophet, sent by God to
reform the world in doctrine yet does their Alcoran teach, that a man not
believing in Christ may obtain Salvation; Thus does Mahumet and his followers
deny the Necessity of Christ's birth; whose corporal birth begot our spiritual
birth, and his being borne in body, procures us to be borne in Soul; and thus
is his Incarnation the cause (as I may term it) of our Spiritulization. But to
proceed. This is one of the Azoaraes in the Alcoran: Sciendum Azoara 1.
est generaliter, quoniam omnis recte piuens, Iudaeus, se^ Christianus, seu
iege sua relict^ inaliam tendent, omnis scilicet Deum adoram indubitanter
diuinumtamorem assequotur: It is generally to be known, that every man living
well, whether Jew, or Christian, or leaving his own law and religion,
imbraceth another; that is, every Man adoring God, shall infallibly obtain the
Love of God, and consequently Salvation.

Diverse markable Forefathers of yours do teach the same; for according to this
doctrine Swinglius thus writes: Ego certe Swingl. de Provident. c. ^.
malim si optio detur, Socratis, and Senerae sartem eligere etc. I had rather
cause (if is were put to my election) the fortune and lot of Socrates, or
Seneca, then of any Roman Bishop, or Papisticall Emperor King, or Prince. And
hereupon Swinglius (that malheureux Heretic, ou plustost Atheiste) concludes
in particular, that Swingl. tom. 2. fol. 118. and 339.
Hercules, Theseus, Socrates, Aristides etc. are now in Heaven. Neither is
Swinglius alone full in this his blasphemy, but Gualterus, Bullingerus,
Simlerus, the Tigarine Deuines (all Proteltants) do jointly teach with
Swinglius. the Salvation of Heathens, dying Heathens. Which point appears not
only from their own Gualterus in Apolsol 27. Bulling. in his Preface of
allowance to Swinglius his exposit? ficei ^d Regem, fol. 55^ Simlerus in vita
Bulling.
Sentences hereof, but also by the acknowledgment of Eucharius, a Protestant,
whose words are these: Quod Eucharius in his Pasciculus Controuers. printed
Lipfi^^ anno 609. c. 19.
Socrates, Aristides, Numa, Camillus. Hercules, Scipiones, Catones, and aly
Gentile^ comparticipes sunt vi^ae aternae, scribit quidem Swinglius ad Regem
Galliae, quem defendunt Tigurini, Bullingerus, Gualterus. Hardenburgius etc.

Now the groundwork and foundation whereupon Swinglius, and the rest do rely;
is coincident and the same with the Reason of Mahumet, delivered above in his
Alcoran; And is expressed by Swinglius in these words: Ethnicus, Swingl. in l.
Episto^arum Swingl. and Oecolampadij l. 1. page 30.
si piam mentem domi fouerit. Christianus est, etiamsi Christum ignoret; A
Heathen, if he have a good mind or Conscience, is a Christian, though he be
wholly ignorant of Christ. I en^ in further displaying this blasphemy, being
desirous to know, how Swinglius and his Associats can break through that most
strong and invincible Sentence of the Evangelist: There Act. 4.
is not anyother name under Heaven (meaning the name of I sus Christ) given to
men wherein we must be saved.

But now give me leave (my Countrymen) to expatiate a little in my discourse. I
here demand, Are they Christians, who affoard Salvation to such as are not
Christians? If such as believe not in Christ, can be saved, in vain then was
the second Person of the most B. Trinity incarnated; In vain did the
Archangell Gabriell salute the holy Virgin; in vain did Christ Jesus spend
diverse years in reconciling sinners to God; Finally in vain was he whipped
crowned with thorns, buffeted upon the face, suffered many Indignities, and
lastly most bitter death upon the Cross, by the hands of the wicked Jews. But
alas, are any who profess themselves to be Christians, arrived to that ascent
of impiety, as with their misbeliefe and miscreancy even to Crucify Christ
again?

When the Jews did crucify Christ (which originally did spring from their
misbeliefe in him) God to manifest that their flagitions impiety, did work
diverse and stupendous Miracles; for (among other prodigious signs) there was
a sudden Darkness made throughtout the whole earth, to adumbrate the spiritual
darkness of the Jews. Then also, there was a Concussion of the Earth, and
Scission of the stones, which did imply, that through the Passion and death of
Christ (who is clothed with essential Majesty) men ought to be moved to
penance, and the stony hearts of the obdurate to be (as it were) cloven, and
cut asunder. Then the Sepulchers did open; signifiing thereby the glorious
resurrection of the dead to be wrought by the death of Christ. Finally then the
Veyle was rent asunder, by which means the Sancta Sanctorum did appear;
intimating therein, that through the Merits, and sufferings of Jesus Christ,
all the Saints were after to be admitted, to behold the face of Christ.

Such of you of the reformed Beligion, who by your giving assent to the former
doctrine of Swinglius, do not believe in Christ, and by your not believing in
Him (who is the only Author of Man's Salvation) do crucify him again, and
verify in your selves the words of the Apostle: Runsum Hebr. 6.
crucifigentes sibimetipsis filium Dei: crucifiing again to themselves the
son of God; is it any wonder then, if in this second crucifixion of Christ, a
horrible darkness do ouercloud the powers of your Souls? O how truly did Esaias
prophecy of you, and all such others: Ecce Esaias. 60.
teuebrae operient terram, and caligo populos: behold darkness shall cover the
earth, and a mist the People?

And have you not just reason to suffer a knocking, and renting asunder of your
flinty hearts, that so through penitency you may say with those, returning from
the Passion, Percutiente Lue. 23.
pectora sua? Or how can you hope for a happy resurrection of your Bodies, if
you do not confess, that the most happy resurrection of the dead is the effect
of Christ his death? Of lastly, when shall you be admitted to the sight of him,
(in whom there is lux 1. Timoth. c. 6.
inaccessibilis) if you will not withdraw the Veyle of your ignorance, and
pertinacy, which yet remains interposed between your sight, and things most
sacred and holy? But let me recall my self; I grant the Honor, I bear to my
Dear Savior, and the atrocity of the former Protestants Blasphemy have thus
far transported my Pen.

The 11. Symbolisme, That Mahumetisme and Lutheranisme are engendered of ancient
Heresies. CHAP. XII.
TO pass further: Melanth. l. 3. Illyric. in Apolog.
Melancthon, Illyricus, Bibliander, and others affirm thus in express Words:
Alcoranus ex veteribus Haeresibus consuitur: The Turkish Alcoran is wouen, or
sewed together of the Old Heresies. This these Protestants did affirm, because
they perceived, that Mahumes and Sergius did hold certain opinions, condemned
for Heresies by athanasius Austin. Jerome, Gregory, and other ancient
Orthodoxall Fathers. Thus the Alcoran denies the Trinity with Prateol^^^n
(...) Blench. Haeresil. 11^ c. 3^
Sabellius; It reaches with Arius, and Eunomias, that Christ was a mere
Creature; With Carpocrates, and Nestorius, that Christ was not God, but only a
holy and divine Prophets with the Manichees, that Christ was not crucified, and
with the Donatists it denies many Sacraments and the Church. Now the reason,
why Melancthon, Illyricus, and Bibliander, and others hold these opinions of
the former men to be Heresies, is, in that they were condemned for Heresies by
Athanasius, Austin, Jerome, Gregory, and finally by the consent of the whole
Primitive Church of those days.

Here then I say, that it is an inexpugnable Truth, that many Article of Faith,
believed at this day by Protestants, were in like fort condemned for explorate
Heresies (and accordingly ranged in the Catalogue of Heresies) by the foresaid
Fathers, I mean, Athanasius, Epiphanius, Austin, ^erome, Gregory, and other
pious, and learned Fathers of those Ages. From hence then I irrepliably euict,
that Mahumets Alcoran, and the new Gospellers do conspire and agree together in
this point; to wit, that the Religion of Mahumes, and our Innouatours are
engendered and compounded of diverse ancient comdemned Heresies, though not
altogether of the same Heresies. If then Mahumetisme, and Lutheranisme do agree
in this one Commons point, must not their affinity and assotiation be great,
since that saying is true: Quae conueniunt in vno tertio, conueniunt inc^rse? I
mean, that they do agree in this particular thing, though in some other points
different; for I grant* that two faces may be a like to a third face, yet
dislike in several proportions in themselves.

But now to prove, that diverse Positions maintained by Luther, Swinglius,
Calvin, Beza, and other Sectaries of this Age, were anathematized by the former
ancient and learned Fathers, is so easily accomplished; as that seeing the
proof thereof ought to prevail much with any Man, not blinded with Prejudice;
I have therefore seposed a short Appendix, annexed to this Treatise for the
demo^strating of the same; In the which the Reader* shall find the former
ancient Fathers, and others of the same times, to be most luxuriant (as I may
say) and riotous in condemning many (yea very many) points of Lutheranisme, for
most hateful, and execrable Heresies.

And thus as this Treatise (as I expressed in the beginning) is the Glass,
wherein you Hugenots of France may behold diverse of your impious Opinions,
conspiring altogether with the faith of the Mahumetans, Saracens, and Turks, so
this subsequent Appendix I may well term your Second Glass (as I have
intimated elsewhere) which will exhibit to you the face of the ancient
Heresies, condemned by the Church of God for such, and yet the same Heresies
are now entertained, and believed by you of the reformed Religion. Thus I will
furnish you with a double Glass to see your blemishes the rein. I cannot say
with the wise Man, that it is Speculum Wisdom c. 7.
sine macula, seeing it is fraught with deformities, partly of the Turks, and
partly of the Old Heretics; all which said scarrs, and sedities do remain at
this day upon the face of your New presumed Gospel.

The 12. Symbolisme; Touching the Plantation of Mahumetisme and Lutheranisme,
is warranted by Scripture. CHAP. XIII.
But to go on forward in showing your Symbolizing, and agreement with Mahumet,
and Sergrus. The next point then, which I will urge is, that Mahumet and his
followers (though this resemblance has in part been unfolded above, but in a
different manner) do proceed after one and the same way in plantation of their
Religions. And First, for the greater honoring (forsooth) of both their
Commings and Vocations, there must be certain Passages of Holy Scripture
detor^ed, as though both their Missions to plant the True Faith, had been
prophesyed in the same Texts of Gods Word. Thus we find Vide Azoara 58.
Sergius, and the Mahumetans to expound a great part of the twenty eight
Chapter of Deuteronomy, of Mahumet, wherein are expressed the benedictions given
to good men. They also expound that Passage Math. 13. Marc. 4.
in the Gospel, where the graint of seed being cast into the earth, did
multiply, and bring forth great store of increase of the spiritual fruit,
which Mahumet should cause by planting his Religion.

And are the Lutherans slow (think you) in ennobling the breaking out of that
incestuous Monk ( Luther I mean) by misapplication of certain texts of
Scripture? For Illyricus Illyric. in Apoc. 14.
maintayneth, that Luther was prophesied in that place of the Apocalypse; to
wit* of the three Angels flying through the midst of the Heavens, and
prophesying. And other Couradus Schlusselb. in Theolog. Caluinist. l. 2. fol.
124.
Lutherans are not afraid to auerre, that Luther was the chief Angel flying
through the midst of the Heavens, having the eternal Gospel, of which we
read in the Apocalypse. Thus do the Professors of Mahumetisme, and
Lutheranisme indifferently allege Scripture, to the dishonor of him, who
first instituted the Scripture.

The 13. Symbolisme; Touching the further Plantation of Mahumetisme and
Lutheranisme.
The next point, wherein they both conspired in planting of the Gospel, was
their mutual maintayning (as above is said) that the true Faith and Religion
of God was wholly decayed, at both their first Commings. For Cuspinianus Cuspiu*
de Religion^ Turcarum.
writes, that Mahumat (as himself said)* was sent by God, Vt doctrinam ab
Apostolorun^ discipulis corrup^am alcorano sue em^ndar^t; That he should
reform in his Alcoran the Evangelical doctrine, corrupted by the Disciples of
the Apostles.

And certain it is, that Luther proceeds in the same manner. For having
condemned all the Fathers of the Primiti^e Church, for superstitious (as above
I showed,) Il fur si effronte, and esbonte* he was so impudent, and shameless,
as that he assumeth the correcting of their Errors, and replanting the true
faith of Christ to himself, in this manner speaking most ambitiously. Non
sinam Luther tom. 2. contr^ Regem. A^^^^^ fol. 344.
Angelo^ de mea doctri^a iudicare: I will not suffer the Angels to judge of my
doctrine. And again: Gods Luther ^^idem^
Work makes for me, in so much that I regard not if a thousand Aus^^^^ a
thousand Cyprians stood against me. Luther vaunteth himself to be Christ^
disciple; But where do we find Christ's words to be in the lowest degree
verified in him, Mitis Math. ^^*
sa^^, and ^umilis cerde?

The 14. Symbolisme, Touching the want of Miracles. CHAP. XIV.
TO proceed: It is confessed, that Mahumet, and Luther so far agreed, that
both of them acknowledge, they never performed any Miracle for the warranting
of their doctrines. And first touching Mahumet, he plainly says in his
Alcoran, That he never Azoare ^7.
wrought any Miracle in confirmation of his Religion. And the like defect of
Miracles is acknowledged by the Lutherans, to wit, That neither Luther, nor any
other of our Nouellists wrought ever any one Miracle, for the greater
fortifying of their late appearing Faith. Sorribly hereto diverse Protestant
Deuines thus ingenuously speak of Luther: Theologi Casiniriani in edu^onit, sua
de lib. Concordiae Bergensis (...)
Mir^culum, quod Lutherus edulit, nall^ nudi^^^^s; We have not heard that
Luther did ever exhibit one Miracle. And if it should be urged (as a Miracle)
the speedy spreading of Eutheranisme in so short a time, over so many places
and Countries; this is acknowledged for no Miracle both by Mela^ncth. Cron. l.
3. a page ^11. ed page 317.
Melancthon, and Illyricus; Illyric. in Abocalyp. cap. ^.
who maintain, that Mahumetisme was from no less small a beginning, and yet
was more generally for the time dispersed, then ever Lutheranisme was I.

The 15. Symbolisme; Concerning the like Protestation of Mahumet and the
Lutherans, for the proof of their Religious. CHAP. XV.
TO conclude, Mahumet and Buther being in extreme want of Miracles in defense
of their Religions, were both indifferently forded to fly to their own pricat
Spirtis, and vehement Protestations, that they were sent by God to correct the
Errors of their Times. To this (end (as to supply) the want of all Miracles)
Mahumet uses in his Al^or^^ these Protestations and asseuerations: Pe^ In
Azoar^ 61.62.68.^1.50. and seq.
(...) sufft^nces, and nubes, and naues aquere curre^les, and Angelos nun^io^^
per^^montem Syna^, and donium superne adificatam etc. I swear by the blou^ing
^^^ds and Clouds, and by the ships sailing upon the Sea, by the Angels Gods
Mes^^nger^ by the Mount Syn^^ etc. That I am not, Demoniacus, possessed with
the Devil, or a Magitian, but the M^ss^^ger of the best and highest God; that
I do not err in any thing, nor speak out of my proper Will but that only I
del^^er what is commanded me to say from about. This is Mahumets vehement, (and
withal ridiculous) Protestation of the Infallibility and Truth of his Doctrine^

Now let us see how Luther (for his like want of Miracles) bears himself
herein, who thus boasts of the doubtless certainty of his Innouations: Scire
Luth. tom. (...) Wittemberg contra Regem Ano Gliae. fol. 333.
vos v^lo etc. I will have you all to know, that hereafter I will not vouchsafe
you this Honor, as to suffer you or the Angels of Heaven, to judge of my
doctrins; for seeing I am certain of it, I will therefore through force of it,
be both your Judge, and Judge of the Angels. And further: Certus Luth. vbi
supra.
sum dog^^a^^ this habere de Caelo; I am assured, that I have ^ay opinions from
Heaven; and my Opinions shall stand, etc.

In like sort Calvin (the chief Resiner of Luther) for the like assurance of
his doctrine, makes this vehement Appeal to Christ (see how Heresy masketh it
self under the ^^cture of confident zeal) in this for^^ T^ Calvin Vltime
admonit. ad Westphalum page 1140.
Christum silium Dei appello, vt nuns, and in ^^trema die facias etc. I appeal
to thee Christ being the son of God, that thou would make it clear, both
at this time, and at the last day, if ever so great a fury invaded my judgment
and will, as to infect thy doctrine with any one lie, or imposture. And if thou
see me free and innocent of so hocrible a Crime, then be thou to me a
faithful Witness, that I have sincerely, and unfeignedly professed that
doctrine, the which I have ^earned out of thy most sacred Gospel etc.

Thus we see, how Luther boast^eth of the inexpugnable Truth of his Faith; as
also how Calvin forgeth his feruerous Appeal to Christ, for the security of
his doctrine; and how these Prime Sect masters join hands with Mahume^t, in
making their own prestigious, and deceitful Protestations, etc ^iurations, a
sufficient Warram for the first d^uulging of their most impious Heresies and
Blalphemies. So firmly and without the least deuiation, do these and other our
Ghospellers, trace the stepped of Mahumet herein.

The 16. Symbolisme; Touching the denial of the Blessed Trinity. CHAP. XVI.
HItherto we have discoursed chiefly of certain Generalities; wherein Mahumet,
Sergius, and the Turks do conspire with Luther, the Lutheran^, and such
Nou^^iste of these days: We will now descend more punctually to diverse
dogmatical Christian Mysteries, wherein we shall find their like Concordance,
and Sympathy.

The first of these shall concern the most Blessed Trinty. That Mahumet (and
in him the Turks) absolutely deny the most sacred, and undivided Trinity (...)
is evident from their faith professed in the Alcoran^: Behold here, les
execrables blasphemes, qu'il auoit von^y in son Alcoran, for thus Mahumet the^^
dog matizeth: Incredi^^ Azoara 12.
sunt qui ^^sum fi^^^ Mar^^ De^^^ esse di^^^m, cum ipse Christ^^ d^cat^ in
dominum John ^0.
Deum me^m and vestra^^ credit, They are incredulous, who say, that Jesus the
son of Mary is God, seeing that Christ himself says: believe in my God, and
your God. And its another passage of the Alcoran Mahumet uses this wicked
deprecation: Confundat Azoara 19.
Deus Christ^^anos, qui Mariae filium loco Dei venerantur, cum ipsis
praceptumsit, non nisi vnum Deum venerare: Let God: confound those Christians,
who worship the Son of Mary in place of God, seeing they are commanded, that
they shall worship but one God. A point so evident, that Bibliander thus
speaks hereof: Primus Biblian. in praefac. Alcor. 3.
and maximus ^rror Turcarum est, quod Trinitatem in Vuitate negant: The chief
and greatest Erro^^ of the Turks is, that they deny the Trinity in the Unity.
And hereupon another Author writing in confutation of ^^^cis^^e thus says:
Principalis Ricardus Ordinis Praedic^t. in confutat. legis Saraci^^, ca. 8.
intentio Mahum^ts est* persuadere Christum neque Deum esse neq^^ filium Dei.

Now let us see, how Luther and other Gospellers do accord with Mahumet in the
denial of this suprame Mystery of Christian Religion. We first find Luther to
put our of the Letany those words: Holy Vide Enchirid. Pre cum anno 15^3.
Trinity one very God, have mercy upon us. Ad also he further says: The Word
Luth. in Postill. maiore, Basi^e^e a^ud Heruagium in euarrat. Euang. Dom.
Trinity is but an hu^^^ne Invention, and sounds coldly. And hereupon it is,
that Calu. epist. 2. ad Polonos extat. in his tract. Theol. page 796.
Calvin following Luther he in, thus writes: Precatio vulge trita est, Sancta
Trinitas vnus Deus miserere nostr^ and mihi non placei, That Prayer Holy
Trinity etc. is very vulgar, and pleases me not. And in ^egard of this former
doctrine, and as not acknowledging Christ to be Consubstantiall to his Father.
Luther belcheth out these blasph^^uous words: Anima Luth. in lib. contra
Iacob^^ Laco^^^ ^ons. 2. Wittemberg. edit. ant^o ^351.
mea odit? Om^usion, and optime exigerunt A^iani nevocem illem prophanant and
no^am, regulis fidei statut liceret: My Soul^^ hates the word Hom^ousi^s or
Consubstantialis, and the Arians deservedly insisted upon, that this Word
should not be inserted in the rules of faith.

Finally from hence it rises, that Luther expungeth out of his duch Bibler
that markable passage of sacred Scripture, in proof of the Trinity: There 1.
Joan. 5.
are three, which give witness in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy
Ghost, and these three are One. And according to this doctrine of Luther it
proceeded, that the Protestant Deuines In Synod. Vilnae habis. anno 1589.
of Lituania enacted by Synodicall authority, that the Word, Trinity thould not
be used any longer. So cross these men are in doctrine to the ancient
Apostolic Faith, teaching Christ to be God, and Consubstantiall with his
Father, and that the divine Majesty Bernard.
did send the Word into the World, and yet retained with him the Word.

Concerning Caluins dislike (besides what is above said) of the doctrine of the
Trinity, and consequently of Christ being God. it is more fully discovered by
his interpreting of all chief places of Scripture, produced by all Antiquity
in proof of the Trinity with the Ariahs, and against all other Christians: He
thus by his false commenting of them, main ^^yping, that they are wrongfully
alleged in defense of the doctrine of the Holy Trinity. I will here insist in
some few particulars. And first that markable place ^l John. 10.
and the Father are Vnum, one thing, this stigmaticall Aposta^^ thus
paraphrazeth: Abusi sunt hoc loco Veteres, vt pr^barent Christaine esse Patri
(...): The ancient Doctoure have abusiuely alleged this place, to prove Christ
to be Consubstantiall to his Father. Neque enim Christus de Vnitate substantia
disputat, sed de Consensis. For hear Christ disputes not of the Unity of
substance, but of Consent. Again, where it is said. The Lord Genes. c. 19.
rayned upon So dome and Gomor^^, fire, from the Lord; Calvin thus anoideth
this restimony by saying: Calvin in Gones. c. 19.
Quod Veteres Christ's diuinitatem hoc testimony probare conati sunt, minime
firmumest^ It is noc solid and firm to prove from this Testemony, the divinity
of Christ, as the Fathers attempted to have done.

In like sort. Where it is said: Thou Hebr. 1. and Psalm. 2.
are my somne (hodie) this day I have begotten thee, Which place is produced
not only by the Fathers, but even by the Heb. 1.
Apostle. to prove Christ's divinity: yet Calvin thus shifteth it of, saying:
Scio Calvin in Psalm. 2.
, hunc locum de aetorna generatione Christ's etc. I know well, that this place
is expounded by many of the eternal Generation of Christ, who, touching the
Word. (Hodie) in this te^^ have ^uer subtily disputed. To o^^it diverse other
Touching the word Eloim, in G^nes. c. 1. and out of the Psalm. 33.
passages of Scripture, urged by the Fathers in proof of the Trinity, where we
read that most ^^^uin^ing Text: There be three 1. John c. ^.
which give testimony in Heaven, the Father the Word and the Holy Ghost, and
these three be One; Calvin thus auoydeth the force thereof by saying: Quod
dicit. Tras es^e Vnum ad Essentia^non refertur Calvin in 8. Joan. c. 5.
sed ad Co^sensum po^iu^s, Where the Apostle says that. Three are One, these
words are not to be referrad to the Essence. but rather to Consent.

Thus we see, how Calvin, thereby to conspire with Mahumet, the Turks, and the
Arians in denying the Blessed Trinity, and Christ to be God, has poisoned the
chiefest, and most forcing passages of Gods Word, ever anciently produced for
proof of that supreme Mystery, with his most wicked expositions of them: A
Point so clear, that Aegidius Hunius in his books entitled, Caluinus
I^daiza^^.
Huunius (the Protestant) charge Calvin with Iudaisme, for such his pestilent
deprauing of the former sacred Texts of Scripture. O Impiety scarsly piacular,
since he, who created the World, is here not acknowledged by the World: Mundus
John 1.
per ipsum factut est. and mundus euni non cognouit.

The 17. Symbolisme, Concerning the suffering of Christ. CHAP. XVII.
TO proceed further: Mahumet affirms, that Christ did not suffer for Mankind,
since he says, that Christ did not suffer death at al. Thus did Mahumet even
wound, and crucify Christ of new, in teaching with Eutiches, that Christ was
not wounded, or crucified at all. For thus we read in the Alcoran: iudaei
Azo^^^ 1^. and ^^.
Mariae blasphemiam. and immoderatam contumeliam inferunt, dum eius filium
Christu^^. Dei nuncium. se interemisse per^ibent; Euns ^^im ^equaquam, sed
alterum et ^milem interfecerunt, quia Deuteronomy incen^prehensibilis and sap^ens eum
ad se migrare fecit. The Jews do offer blasphemy, and immoderate contumely to
Mary, whiles they say they did put to death Christ her son being the
Messenger of God; for him they killed not, but another like to him; for God
being incomprehensible and wise, caused him to leave the World, and remove to
him. From whence we infer, that since Christ (according to Mahumets doctrine)
did not dye at all, that therefore in his judgment, he dyed not for the
Redemption of Mankind.

Luther, and his followers do (at least in words) grant that Christ did
corporally dye. But they further teach, that his death of Body could not, nor
did redeem the World, except his Divinity had also suffered. Thus they:
annexing this Impossibility of Christ's suffering according to his Godhead
(since true Divinity is impassible.) And thus potentially they teach with
Mahumet, that Christ did not redeem the World; contrary to the Sentence of
Gods Universal Church, maintayning, that Christ, who had no sin, became a
Sacrifice for sin. Now that Luther teaches, that Christ suffered (besides
his Corporal death) according to his divinity, is evident out of Luthers own
words, which are these: Cum Luther in Confess. maiore, de caena Domini.
credo, quod sola humana natura prome passa est etc. When I do believe, that
only the Humane Nature suffered for me, Christ is a Savior of a vile and small
account, and needs also a Savior for himself: an execrable Blasphemy, since
in Christ his Passion, through the conjunction of the Divinity with the
Humanity, an infinite debs was discharged by a finit payment; and yet only
infinity of satisfaction does truly expiate infinity of sin.

The same Luther in another place thus writes: Pertinacissime Luther. l. de
Council. par. 2.
contra me pug^abant, quod diuinitas Christi pati non posset. They contended
most pertinaciously with me, for that they maintained the divinity of Christ
could not suffer. And Musculus (a great Lutheran) agrees with Luther herein,
of whom Siluester Checanorius (a Protestant) thus writes: andraas Musculus non
veritus fuit palam dicere etc. Andrew In dialog. de corruptis moribus v
triusque partis. Art. 3. fol. 5.
Musculus was not afraid openly to say, That the Divine Nature of Christ (which
is God) was dead together with the humane Nature upon the Cross. Thus did
Luther and his scholar conspire with Mahumet, in frustrating the Redemption of
the world by Christ, seeing Luther would not grant his Corporal death prevailed
any thing except his Divinity (which was impossible to do) did suffer also. O
how forgetful was Luther (with Mahumet) of the words of the Apostle:
Reconciliati Romans 5.
sumus Deo per morte^ filij eius: We are reconciled to God by the death of his
Son? And how far distant was his judgment from S. Austins judgment herein,
who writing of Heresies in general, particularly records this opinion of
Luther in these words: There August. com. ^. de Haeresi, ad Quodvult Deum.
Haeres. 73.
is an Heresy, which teaches, that Christ's divinity suffered, when his flesh
was fastaned upon the Cross?

The 18. Symbolisme; Touching the second Person in the B. Trinity. CHAP. XVIII.
TO pass yet further touching the Second Person of the most Sacred Trinity.
This is an Azoara, in the Alcoran: Deus Azoara, 27.28.
est substantia necessario existens, eui impossible est, vt naturam aliunde
mutuetur: God is a necessary substance, to whom it is impossible to take, or
borrow his Nature from another. And again in another part of the Alcoran, we
thus find set down: Constanter Azoara, 40. and 53.
dic illis Christianis, Deum vnum ess^^ecessario omnibus, qui nec genuit, nec
generatus est, nec habet quidquam simile. Mantaine constantly to those
Christians, that God is but one to All; who has neither begot, or is begotten,
and who has not like to him.

From these passages of the Alcoran, we find, that (according to Mahumet) God
cannot borrow his Nature from another. Now to apply this: The Protestants
teach, that Christ has his divine nature from himself, and not of his Father:
So teach Calvin Calvin in examine. persidiae Valentini Geneilis, exta^ in eract.
Theolog. page 77^.
and Beza, Beza contra H^chusium.
besides many others. And the main Reason, why these Protestants teach, that
Christ has not his Essence of his Father, but of himself, is taken our of the
former Azoara in the Alcoran, and in that respect borrowed from Mahumet. To
wit, because God cannot borrow, or take his Nature from another. And thus we
see how our Ghospellers conioyne with Mahumet, in denying Christ, as God, to
have his divine Essence from his Father; and by consequence, admitting Mahumets
ground to be true (which also is their ground) that Christ is not God. Which
Blasphemy of theirs is wholly repugnant to the Nic^^^ Council, and Athanasius
his Creed* Both which teach, that Christ takes his Divine Nature from his
Father, and that he is God of God.

Behold here (O you my Countrymen) how these Blasphemies have begun, a
pulluler, and ^'enracener entrerous; and how your chief Doctors by way of
necessary Inference (grounded upon Mahumets Alcoran) do deny Christ to be God,
and therein do deny (with Mahumet) the most Blessed and rudeuided Trinity; in
which most Reverend Mystery (to speak in the Churches Idiome) God remained
that, which before he was, and assumed that, which before he was not^ suffering
neither commixture, nor diuesion.

But to return: According to what is above delivered, Osiander the Protestant
had just reason thus to exprobrat the Reformed Arians of these days in
Poloni^, which Men are Protestants refined, or sublimated: Illi Osiander C^^^.
^6. page 26^.
aiu^^ Deum vnum in Essentia, tri^^^ in Personi^, esse commentum Antichristi
etc. These reformed Arians teach, that to say, God is One in Essence, but three
in Person, is a fiction of Antichrist: And that it is the three headed
C^rb^^^s, the God Baal, Moluch etc. Did ever Mahumet, or Sergius eructate out
of their impure breasts such poison, as the Arions of these times (comparting
with Mahumet) and all originally Protestanis, have done?

The 19. Symbolisme, Touching the overthrow, and implicit denial of Christ
his Passion. CHAP. XIX.
YEt further to discourse touching the supreme Mysteries of Christ. Mahumet in
his Alcoran teaches (as above is showed) that Christ did not suffer death upon
the Cross, Azoara (...).
but one like unto him did suffer. Well Luther, Luther. lib. quod Verb Domini
firmiter stant.
and the Lutherans Kempni^ius 2. part. Examine. c. 4.^.13. Illyricus, lib. de
mystica, Sacramentali, and extrema praesentia Corporis Domini in Caena.
with joint consent maintain, that the Body of Christ (through its
hypostaticall, and inseparable Union with the Divinity, is in all Places. True
it is, that the Deity is every where; yet no where, but in it self; And that
Gods immensity is such, as that it includes in it self every thing, and yet
is included in every thing. But howsoever this he, notwithstanding certain it
is, that the doctrine of the Vbiquity of Christ's body and humanity, maintained
violently by Luther and others, does utterly overthrow all the mysteries of
Christ, and particularly of his Death and Passion; and thereby it makes our
Nouellists to join hands with Mahumet, in Vertually denying the said
Mysteries. For once granting that Christ's body is in all places, then follows
it, that it was in the Virgins womb after its birth, or death; That it was in
the grave before Christ's death, and after his Resurrection; Finally, that it
was upon the Cross after it was taken down, and in Heaven before its
Ascension. Thus we observe, that this doctrine of Vbiquity taught by Luther,
wholly destroys, and frustrateth the Mystery of our Saviors death, and
Passion. Therefore I conclude, that Luther, and the Vbiquitaryes do join and
agree (by inevitable deductions taken from their own doctrine) with Mahumet,
in implicitly denying, that Christ did really, and truly suffer death for the
Salvation of Man. And thus though the Deity be finite (to speak in a reserved
sense) only in Infinity; so contrariwise by force of this absurd doctrine of
Vbiquity, the body of Christ is become infinite, though really and truly but
finite, and limitable.

Here now I will give a parse to my Pen (for the present) in unfolding, How
Mahumet, and Luther with his brood (with equal forces) labor to annihilate
the chief Articles touching the Trinity. Only with this I will conclude: That
if Mattathias, and his sons (as is recorded in the 1. Machab. c. 2.
Machabees) so much lamented to see the Mysteries of their Law profaned; How
much then more ought every zealous Christian, even with disconsolate sighs, and
suspirations to mourn, whe^^ they behold the Carcinall Articles of
Christianity (of which the former were but Types, and adumbrations) to be by
Miscreants, and Heretics promiscuosly betrampled upon, contemned, yea denied?
Videte Thren. 1.
si est dolor, sicut dolor iste.

The 20 Symbolisme, Touching the particular Motiu^s of Mahumets, and Luthers
Apostasy. CHAP. XX.
IN this next place, we will take into our Consideration, what Articles of
Christian Faith were the particular Motives of Mahumets Apostasy; and observe,
whether your spiritual Progenitors do run in the same Tract with Mahumet, or not.

In the Alcoran, we read, that Mahumet thus by supposal demanded: O Jesus
Azoar^ ^3.
fili Maria tu persuades hominibus, vi te, Matremque tuam, duos Deos habeant,
and venerentur? O Jesus, Son of Mary do thou persuade men, that they may
have, and worship thee, and thy Mother, a^ two Gods? Upon which Azoara.
Bibliander makes this Annotation: Bibliand. in Margino Aleorani. ad Azohram.
(...).
Mariam pro Deo coli obijcit Mahumetes; Mahumet does object, that Mary is
worshipped for a God: Bibliander in the same place more plainly speaking in
this sort: Constabat Bibliand. ^bi supra
Diuam Virginem superstitios^ a multis Chri^teaxis celi, quod hodie quogus fi^.
dum eius opem supersti^^o^e implerani: It wareuident that the Holy Virgin was
than superstitiously worshipped by many Christians, as also at this day the is,
whiles men superstitiously implore her help.

The second Cause or Mahumets Revolt from Christianity, is delivered by the
foresaid Bibliander in these words: Quod simulacra venerantur Christiant:
Because Christian do worship Bibliand* ibidem.
images. The dislike of Mahumet concerning the doctrine of Images, is further
witnessed by Septem-castrensis, thus writing: Saraceni Septeme. defide and re^
lig. Yurc^rum
and Turcae imprimis Imagines omnes seu pictas, se^ sculptas, sic detestantur
etc. The Saracens, and Turks do so hate all Images, whether they be pictured,
or engraven, that therefore they call Christians, Idolaters; Yea they will not
seal their Letters with any ^^graum print, or Image.

And are not these two points great stumbling Blocks for men's reuolting from
the ancient Christian Faith in these days? So firmly do our Innouatours
compart with Mahumet, the Saracens, and the Turks in the Causes and Motives of
forsaking the Christian Faith. And to begin with the first. Luther Luth. in
serus, de N^^ ^ali (...). Mari^.
, and Peter Peter Mart* in Comment ad cap. ^. prioris ad Cor*
Martyr charge the Catholics with Idolatry, committed in saying the Antiphona,
beginning thus: Sal^^ Regina, Matter Misericordiae etc. mantayning. that the
Catholics do ascribe hereby that honor to the B. Virgin, which is proper only
to God. In like manner the Protestants through Ignorance, and Malignity
insimulate the Catholics within the forsaid crime of superstition, for their
saying the Hymn, directed to the Mother of God* which thus begins: Aue
Maris In offieio B. Mariae.
stella, Dei matter Alma etc.

To come to Images. Whereas Vide Cochlaeum in Vita Lutheri.
Carelostadius (the Heretic) was the first in this Age, who overthrew Images
in the Churches; we find Luther to approve this his fact; only he was
displeased, in that for the perpetrating thereof, Carolostadius did not demand
authority, and warrant from him. Melancthon Molanct. in oc. cont in explicat.
Decasogi.
in like sort reprehendeth the worship of Images, as superstitious. The
Magdeburgenses Magdeburg. Cent. 8. passim.
and Calvin Calu. Instic. l. 2 c. 11. and lib. ^ c. 9.
proceed herein with the same pertinacy. and frowardnes. And answerably to this
their doctrine of Images (carleur Theorique, and Practique ^'accordent) the
custom of such of our times, who did cast of the Roman Religion, was ever most
violent and impetuous upon their first embracing of Protestancy against Images.

For to turn our eye upon Flanders, We find Osiander (the Protestant) thus to
record: Osiander Epitom. Cent. ^^. page 491.
The Low-Countrimen by publiq^e writing renounced all Subjection, and Obedience
to Philip their Lord and King; And when above four hundred of them of good
rank, had sued for liberty of Religion, and did not obtains their motion, the
impatient people moved with fury and rage, at Antwerp, and other places of
Holland, Zeland, and Flanders, brake downs Images etc. And France (my dear
Country) I would to God* I could not say so much of thee; But it is otherwise,
since diverse Iconemachyes in thee, at their first abandoning of our Catholic
Religion practiced the like sacrilege. Witness hereof is the History of France
written by a Protestant, who thus relates: The History of France i^ entitled:
The general Iuuentory of the History of France, written by John d^ Serres.
The Protestants did grow eager, and violent in all places where they had
power; They took reueng^ upon Churches, Images etc. Witnesses also hereof is
the Town of Rochell, and all other places in thee, possessed by the Hugenots,
who through their (more then Vatinian) fury have leaft no Images unbroken, nor
Cross (the remembrance of our Saviors death for Mankind) vncast down, and
not shiuered in pieces.

But to expatiate no further in Examples, and to wynd up the several threeds
of this Paragraph; I conclude, that our Sergius of Saxony (I mean Luther) and
his ^pidr^mi, or Followers, did wholly conioyne with Mahumeticall Sergius* in
making the doctrine of the Honor exhibited to the Mother of God, and of the
Worship given unto Images to be (among others) two strong inducements for their
abtenunciation of their most Ancient, Catholic, Apo^tolicall, and Roman
Religion: May we not ^^inke then, that the punishment of these two Apostaticall
Monks for such their flagitious proceedings, are at this present all One?

The 21. Symbolisme; That the Turkish, and Protestant Clorgy do marry. CHAP.
XXI.
But let us go to other points, Who write of the Religion of the Turks,
affirms, that the Turkish Priests do marry, and take wives. For thus one of
their Historians says: Sacerdotes Sept^^^a^^^. d^ fide and relig. Tur^^^^m,
page ^9.
Turcici habent ^xor^s, and vxori liberis, and familia vacant. The Turkith
Priest^ have wives, and all their care and employment, as about their wife,
their Children, and family. Yea the Turks are so great enemies to Virginity, as
that the former Septemcastr. c. ^3.
Historian, and others Richerius lib. d^ moribus Tercerum, dedi^ated 10
Francis, king of France.
thus record of Mahumet: Mahumetes multum vrget. ne quis matura atate eutra
matrimonium degat: Mahumet much presses, that not any of full and ripe ago,
should live out of the stace of Matrimony. Mahumet further teaches (as another
Historian records) That, Veluptate^ Cuspin do Religione Turearum.
corperis futarae faelicitati minime obsunt; The pleasures of the Bedy are
(...) hindrances to future felicity; whi^^ is included in the eight Azoara of
the Al^^ran, touching multiplicity of wives.

Well now my dear Countrymen of France. Is not all this good Hugen^tis^^^, or
Prote^tancy? Let us examine the Particulars. And first touching Marying of
Priests, or of Ministers among those or that Reformed Religion; What Minister
among them almost (and this soub^^le protexte, and veil de la gloir^ d^ Die^
(under the recture (forsooth) of Gods glory) who is not matried? And how ready
are they wrongfully to detor^ in defense of their Marriage those Words of the
Apostle, Honorabile Hebr. 1^.
Connubium in omnibu^? A wife indeed is so inseparable a Character of our new
Ministers, as that a Minister without a Woman, is but Half himself, and
wants that which conduces to the (...). or perfect accomplishment of his
function. So much does the Flash dominere in these good men, who vaunt
themselves to be All-spirit* who indeed living in flesh, do also liu^ after the
flesh.

Now touching the advancement of marriage in all persons without exception, and
depressing of Virginity with Mahumet, and Sergius, I^ is most strange to
observe, what the pens of your chief Professors have left written. The first
broaches of the vnsavery Vessel of your Religion, thus balanceth Matrimony
with Virginity saying: If we Luther tom. ^. Wi^temberg. ad cap 7.1. Corfol. 107.
weigh the Nature of Matrimony, and single (...) unmarried life in themselves;
Matrimony is (...) Gould, and the spiritual state of single life, as Dunge. To
whom subscribeth Whitakerus, saying: Virginity Whita^^ contra Comp. rat. 8.
is not absolutely good, but only in some respect and manner. And hence it is,
that the forsaid Luther more fully thus expresses himselfe^ He that Luther*
tom. 7. Epist. ad Wolfgengum, fol^ ^0^.
determines to be without a Woman, let him lea^^ of the name of a man and
become a plain Angel, or spirit. A goatish assertion!

Concerning the other point above mentioned, where Mahumet decreed, that (if we
will believe the Alcoran) the Pleasures of the Body are no lets to future
felicity; It is the very doctrine of Luther, invested in other words, who
ascribes so much to Faith, as that no corporal Pleasure (how unlawful
soever) or any other sin can prejudice a Man's Salvation. His words are these:
Tam Luther com. 1. Wittemb. de Captiuie, Babyl. fol. 74.
diust est Christianus etc A Christian is so ^ith, as that though otherwise he
would, notwithstanding he cannot loose his Salvation, by any s^nne how great
seeuer, except he will not believe. And hereupon Luther further thus
catechizeth his Scholars: No Luther in his Sermons.
work is dirallowed of God, except the author, and worker thereof be
disallowed. With whom the fornamed Whitaker^s accords in these words, full of
incirement to sinnet Si Whitak, de Eccles. contra Bellarm. controuer. 2.
quaest. 5.
quis actum fidei, babet, ^i peccatae non nocent: Thus fortably to these men's
Gospel, no pleasure, or sin (as Mahumet touches) can hinder man's future
Happiness: Thus much of these forms Points: And of this last point more fully
hereafter.

The 22. Symbolisme; Concerning the conjunction of Ecclesiastical supreme
Authority, with temporal Authority. CHAP. XXII.
TO come to other Symbolysms and Agreements, between Mahumet and your
Grand-Maisters* Mahumet to his temporal Authority adjoined spiritual
Authority, making himself supreme Cuspin. in Mahumeto.
Head of his Church, (if so I may call it) and by force and violence of such
his authority, proposed to his subiect^ and vassa^s only such point^ of faith
(and not any others) to be believed, which he had caused to be set down in the
Alc^ra^* Thus making his sword his M^yses, or some new Euange^ist, to ordain,
what was to be believed, and what not.

And do not most of our Protestant writers maintain the same spiritual
Authority in secular Princes? And do not the said secular Princes put the same
in execution? True it is, that diverse of your Religion teach, That the first
Popes were but as Tu^* tours only (so to speak) of the st^te of the Church,
during the time other Infancy: But to the Temporal Prince they affoard at most
absolute Primacy, and Soueraig^^ys over the Church: Hear, what Muscul^r (who
seems, that, il abi^^ pri^^n tincture de Mahumet, he has received some dye
from Mahumet herein) writes of this point, saying: Confidenter M^scul. in loc.
com de Magistrate. page 570. and 520.
asserimus omnens eam potestatem etc We confidently aver, that all that Power,
by the which Authentical Laws bynding the Consciences of subjects, are
constituted whether they be called Civil, or Ecclesiastical Laws) do neither
belong to the Church (that is, to the Multitude of the faithful) neither to
the Ministers of the Word of God, but only to the Magistrate, to whom is given
Soueraingty, and Command over the subjects. And according to this doctrine,
almost all Protestant Princes in most Cou^tter where they reign, do challenge
to themselves an vnappealable soueraingty and supremacy in all Ecclesiastical
Causes. The first example whereof they took of King Henry the eight of that
Name, King of England; Who was the first (as elsewhere is showed in this
Treatise) that dared to vendicate to himself Supreme spiritual authority;
prescribing what Articles of faith should be believed, and what not, as is
auer^ed by some Catholic Writers Sanderus de Schismate Auglicano.
of that Nation.

And here we are to observe, that as Mahumet, and temporal Protestant Princes
did indifferently erect themselves Heads of the Church, within their own
Ditions, and dominions; So also what places of Scripture Protestant Princes (by
misconstruing of them) may allege in warrant of this their assumed Exoticall
authority; the very same Text of holy Writ may Mahumet (with as much reason)
produce with them in defense of his pretended Ecclesiastical Primacy. Thu^ for
example, Mahumet may alledg in behalf of himself (through the same
construction of them, which the Protestants give) these Texts (besides others)
following: Omnis R^m. ^^
Anima Potestati sublimi^ri subdita esse debet; idque non propter iram, sed
propter conscientiam. Every soul ought to be subject to higher Powers, not
only for wrath, but for Conscience sake. And again: Propter 1. Petr. ^
De^u^ Regi par^ndum est, tanquam praecellents: The King is to b^ obayed, as
excelling. Thus we see, that Mahumet, and our New Gospellers agree in doctrine,
of this strange kind of Supremacy, in the practice of it, and in their proofs,
and supposed warrant thereof, out of their mutual false wresting, and racking
of God^ Holy Word. But to the rest.

The 23. Symbolisme; Touching the denial of Original sin. CHAP. XXIII.
THe next Point, in which I will alledg Mahumet, and out New Evangelists
fraternal combination, shall concern their mutual denying of Original sin.
We thus read in the Writers Cuspi^^. de religions Turc^ium, Septem castr^^sts,
R^cherius de (...) de moribus T^rc^rum.
of the Turkish History: In Alcoran^ pracipitur Circumcisio, quanquam um a^
expiationem peccati Originalis, quod nullum ^sse arbitrantur Mahumetani. In the
Alcoran Circumcision is commanded, though not for expiation of Original sin,
the which the Mahumeta^s do not Delieue to be etc.

Now let us see, if our l^te apearing Gospellers do not iampe in doctrine
herein with Mahumet. Swinglius does thus dictate of this point: Quid Swingl. l.
c. Epist. fol. 2^.
breutus aut clarius dici potuit, quam Originale Peccatum non esse Peccatum,
sed Morbum; and Christianorum liberos propter illum morbum non addici aeterno
supplicio? What can be spoken more briefly and clearly, then that which we
call Original sin, to be no sin, but a disease, and that the Children of
Christians through this disease, are not adjudged to eternal punishment? And
furthe^: Morbus Swingl. tom 1. de Baptism. fol. 90.
hic damnationem nobis afferre nequit; This disease (meaning of Original
sin) cannot bring damnation to us. And yet more: Theologi Swingl. de Baptism.
vbi supra.
nostri Originalem illum morbum peccatum esse dixerunt, sed toto caelo errant.
Those our deuines, which call this Original disease a sin, do extremely err.

Finally to omit many other such like sayings of Swinglius, he concludes thus:
Culpa Originalis Swingl. tom. 2. de Peccato Originali. fol. 110.
non vere, sed Metonymice culpa vocatur. Original sin is called a sin, not
truly, but only by the figure Metonymia: So great an assotiation there is
between Mahumet, and Swinglius herein: Whom notwithstanding Beza honoreth with
this Eucomion: Beza de Hoereticis puniendis, page 175.
Swinglius, insignit ille nostris temporibus Christi Apostolus; The which
commendation Beza never would have ascribed to Swinglius, if Beza himselfes had
been of a different doctrine from Swinglius in this most weighty point of faith.

The 24. Symbolisme; That Baptism is not Necessary. CHAP. XXIV.
AS Mahumet did not believe, there was any Original sin; so also h^ did not
think, there was any necessity of Baptism, so far forth, as it should conduce
to the taking away of Original sin: the reason being (as is here implied)
because Mahumet did believe, that there was no Original sin to be taken
away, either by Baptism, or Circumcision. Now, do not our New Masters beat
the same Path in their Writings with Mahumet* Mark (my dear Countrymen) how
contemptuously they pronounce of Baptism, and be ashamed of their Mahumetan
Infidelity.

I will begin at the source with Luther; And, Si la fountain est corru^^pu,
que deuiendront les ruisseaux: If the fountain be corrupted, much more then
are the small rivers thence descending. Luther thus instructs his Neophyts:
Si Luther lib. de Captiuit. Babylon.
habeas, been; sin careas, nihil damni; creed, and saluus eris, antequam
abluare. If thou have Baptism, it is well with thee; if thou want it, thou
suffer no loss thereby; bel^eue, and thou art saved, before thou be
baptized, Swinglius in like sort stretches forth his hand, for the suppressing
the dignity of Baptism, saying: Baptismus Tom. 2. l. de Baptism. fol. 96.
paruulorum externum quiddam, and caeremoniale est etc. Baptism of Infants is
a certain external and Ceremonial thing, the which (as other external
things) the Church may either worthily and justly retain, or omit, and take
away.

With these two forteth in doctrine Calvin, thus muttering: At ( Calu. Justice.
l. 4. c. 15. ^. 2^.
dicum quidam, qui Baptismi necessitatem vrg^ns, periculum esse, ne Infans, qui
aegrotat, si absque baptismo decesserit, Regenerationis gratia priuetur* Mimime
vero etc. But such say who urge the Necessity of Baptism, that there is
danger, if the Child, who is sick do dye without Baptism, that he is deprived
of the Grace of Regeneration. Not so truly, seeing God does pronounce over
Infants, even before they be borne to be adopted into his partage: Wherefore it
follloweth not, that the Children of the faithful* are bap^ized, that thereby
they should be first made the Sons of God etc. Thus far Calum. Finally to
pretermit many other like sayings, Whitakerus thus sleighteth Baptism: We
Whitak Controu. 4.^.M.^.^. page 710.
may abstain from Baptism with this caution, that no contempt, or scandal do
follow thereby.

Can any Mahumetan, or Saracene speak more unworthily, and depressingly of
Baptism, then all these former Evangelists have done? Whose judgments herein
admitting for true, away then with that admonition of our Savior: Nisi John 3.
quis renatus fuerit etc. Unless a Man be borne again of Water, and the
spirit, he cannot ^uter into the kingdom of God; As also away with that
Sentence of Austin: Baptism Austin, ^o^. 7. contra duas epi^t. ^^^^g l. 3. c.
3.
washes one all sins, either deeds, Words, thoughts, or Original. Thus we
find, that Baptism is, out of Gods good Providence toward us, one Chief
preordayned means of man's Salvation, even feeding the soul with Grace; for as
Gods Creation does (as it were) motherly bear us, so his Providence does nurse
us.

The 25. Symbolisme; That Polygamy i^ jointly taught by Mahumet, and the
Lutherans. CHAP. XXV.
WE thus read in the Alcoran: Vxores Azoar^ 8.
quotiescumque placuerit, duas scilicet, tres, aut quatuor ducite etc. canisi
timuritis eas nullatenus pacificare posse; Cum contingerit vobis eas non
diligere. vnam pro alta mutare licet. Take as many wives, as you will; to wit^
two, three, or four etc. except you fear they will not live peaceably
together; And if it shall chance, that you love not your Wife, it then is
lawful for you, to change one for another. This point is partly touched else
where, by showing Luthers like doctrine therein. Now in this place I will show,
that Polygamy, or having many wyfes at once, is grounded upon your Gospellers
own Principles; and consequently that the doctrine of Polygamy is jointly
taught by them, with Mahumet.

And first, our New Gospellers do teach, that Matrimony is not a Sacrament, but
only an Office, or Function of Nature, ordained for the Conservation, or
perpetuating of Mankind; In respect of which Office or End, it is nor
repugnant, but rather consonant, and suitable to Polygamy. For in this sense
Matrimony is but a Civil Contract; but every Civil Contract by the joint
Consent of the Contractors may be dissolved, and the same, or a like Contract
(without any Injustice to any) may be made again with others. Secondly, the
Protestants general doctrine of the Necessity of having the Use of a Woman,
most strongly induces the doctrine of Polygamy.

Now touching the Necessity of the Act of Copulation between man and Woman,
observe I pray (besides that above said of this point) what your Parent (from
whose loins all you Hugenors are proseminated) speaks hereof Luther then,
your first Apostle, thus (...) ^^^heth: Quam Luther tom. 5 de Matrimon fol. ^19.
non est in meis viribus, vt Vir (...) sim; tam non est mei iuris, vt absque
muliere sim. As it is not in my power not to be a Man; so it is not in my
power, to live without a Woman. And again in the same place: Verbum hoc,
Crescite, and multiplicamini, non est praeceptum, sed plus quam Praeceptum.
That Sentence; Increase, and multiply, is not a Precept, but more then a
Precept, being a divine Work, which is not in our power to be hindered, or
omitted; but is as necessary, as that I am a Man, and more necessary, then to
eat, to drink, to sleep, to walk etc.

And speaking in the same place to women, Luther thus indoctrinateth them: Vt
in manu tua non est vt f^mina non sis; sic nec in te es^ vt absque viro degas.
As it is not in thy choice, not to be a Woman; so it is not in thy power, that
thou thouldest live without a Man. For the Counsel or Election is not here
free, but it is Necessary? For Marem feminae, feminam mari sociari oportet, Now
then dreaming Luthers doctrine herein to be true, does it not unavoidably
inuolue in it self the doctrine of Polygamy, if the parties married, through
impotency, or some casual disease cannot perform the duty of Marriage; or
should for a long time be separated in place, the one from the other; since it
is taught (we see) as true, That A Man cannot live without the use of a Woman,
nor a Woman without the use of a Man?

The third Ground of our Evangelists, implying the doctr^ne of Polygamy, is the
Ordinary doctrine of Divorce (even for any small occasion) taught by them, and
most fully by Bucer, who much enlarges himself herein. Sortably hereto Bucer
allows the liberty of divorce, and marying again, in case of departure Bucer
in Script. Anglic. de regn^ Christi. l 2. c. 16.
of the one party from the other; In case of Homicide, Bucer ibidem cap. 37.
or Theft; Or of the Incurable Infirmity Bucer, ibidem c. 4^.
of the Woman, by Childbirth; Or if the Man prove Lunatike; Or when either
party is become unable to render nuptial duty; In all which cases Bucer Bucer
ibidem cap. 124.
concludes, lawfulnes of divorce and Marriage again; maintayning the same to
be, Verbo Bucer, ibidem, cap. 124.
Dei consentiens; agreeable to the Word of God.

Now according to this doctrine of B^cer, Luther thus adiudgeth: The Luther,
tom. 5. Wittemberg. Sermon. de Matrimonio, fol. 123.
Magistrates duty (if the myfe be froward, and will refuse ^er Husbands bed) is
to curb the wife, yea to put her to death. This if the Magistrate omit, the
Husband must imagine, that his wife is stolen away by ^heau^^, or dead; and let
him consider how to marry another. Thus Luther, And thus we observe, that from
the former Principles, and Theo^^^s of your own Teachers (to wit, that Marriage
is no Sacrament; That it is not possible for a Man to live without a Woman, or
a Woman without a man; and lastly that Divorce upon several Cases, and to
marry again is most lawful) the doctrine of Polygamy is warrantable, and is
to be put in practice. From all which it is necessarily euicted, that Luther,
and the Lutherans consent with Mahumet and the Turks, in maintenance or
defense of Polygamy, or having many Wives at one, and the same time. Who
observes then not here, that the spirit of our Gospellers (of which they do so
much glory) like to those things which beget mere Contraries, ingenders
corporal, and fleshly desires?

The 26. Symbolisme; Touching the contempt of the Cross. CHAP. XXVI.
IN the Alcoran Az^^r^^.
we thus read: Iuda^ Maria blasphemiam immoderatam etc. The Jews do offer
great contumely to Mary, when they say, they put to death her son Christ
Jesus; for him they did not kill, but another like to him. Now upon this ground
Mahomet, and the Turks, did extremely hate the Crosse^ no^ enduring the sign
thereof, or suffering (...) Cross to stand in any place or Nation subject to
them. Our Reformists (though upon another ground) do no less hate the Cross^^
then the Turks do, as the whole World knows, and is above in part I have
showed. Thus Mahumet, and our Reformists do conspire and agree, in presecuting
the Cross with an intestime hatred, though the Reason of this their Hatred be
different to them both. And thus the Crosse^ is despised, as being the
remembrance of Christ's Charity, dying upon it; whose grave after the taking
down of his sacred Body from the Cross, became (as it were) that womb, from
whence, the life of our Salvation did rise.

The 27. Symbolisme; T^^^hing other several points of Faith. CHAP. XXVII.
I Have been long in giving (...) to the Concordences, or Harmony, tuned by
Mahumet or Turks, and the Protestants; in touch of the strings thereof, we can
find small iarring, but rather a perfect agreement; I mean, I have spent many
leaves in laying open the particular Symbolismes between them: Therefore for
greater expedition, I will make here a coacetu^tion, or heaping together of
diverse other Points of Religion, equally defended, taught, and practiced by the
Turks, and our new Evangelists.

28. First then the flery Protestants do teach that. Christ did not descend
after his death unto Limbus statrum. 29. That, we ought not to bow at the Name
of Iesue. 30. That, Christ did not leave in the Sacrament his true and yeall
Body, to be received by faithful Christians. 31. That, Seven Sacraments were
not instituted by Christ. 32. That, not any Sacrament does confer Grace. 33.
That, the Church of God it not free from Error in faith. 34. That, there is
not any Universality of Grace proceeding from Christ's Passion. 35. That we
ought not to pray to Saints. 36. That Priests have not true Power to remit
sins. 37. They in like manner teach, that there are not any Evangelical
Counsels. 38. That the Church of Rome was, and is a false Church. 39. That
there is no implicit Faith; but that all things, which are to be believed,
ought to be expressly known by the faithful. 40. That there is no Sacrifice in
the New Testament, according to the Order of Melchisedech. 41. That the Church
of God is not ever Visible.

Now all th^se points (besides some others) are tought by our late more refined
Evangelists: And in like sort, are they taught by Mahumes, and Sergius. From
whence it necessarily resulteth, that Mahumet, Sergins, the Turks, and your new
Reformers of Religion in this age, do wholly agree in belief, touching the said
Points. Whereupon we are to observe, that all these Point thus taught by the
Protestants, are in themselves but Negative, as denying the contrary
affirmative Articles to them, taught and believed by the present Church of Rome.

Now that Mahumet, and Sergius taught the said Negative Points with the
Protestants. I thus irrepliably prove: Mahumet, and Sergius do maintain, That
the Alcoran Cusoinianus de Relig. Turca^um. Septem. castr^nfis, Bibliander, in
praefat. Alcor^^^.
is the true rule of faith, or the boundary containing (within its own
cancells, and limits) the express belief of all such articles of faith, which
are to be believed; Yea Mahumet ascribes such perfection, and fulness to his
Alcor^n, as that he dares (by it) to correct the Christian Gospel it self,
as supposing it was corrupted by the Disciples of the Apostles: For thus do
some writers record of him: Euangelicam Richerius de moribus Turcarum. Cuspin.
de religione Turcarum. etc.
doctrinam, quam alioqu^ laudabat Mahumetus, ab Apost^lorum discipulis
corruptam, Alcorano suo se emendeturum promi^tebat. Mahument did commend the
Evangelical doctrine; notwithstanding he promised to purge i^ of its faults by
his Alcoran; which faults, or Errors he said, the Disciples of the Apostles had
before brought in.

Well then, since the Affirmative Positions, contrary to the forsaid Negative
Points believed by the Protestants, are not found to be set down in the
Alcoran (for the Alcoran passes them over altogether in silence, as making no
mention of them at al:) Therefore even (...), and demonstratiuely, it may be
inferred, that Mahum^^ and Sergius did not believe our Catholic Affirmative
points or Articles; but wholly comparted with our New Evangelists, in believing,
and dogmatizing the said Negative points above rehearsed. Add hereto, that it
is evident, that the Turks at this day, agree in belief with the precise
Lutherans in all those Points. Now, if it be replied against what here is
delivered, that seeing the Catholic, and Affirmative belief of most of the
said Points, does ever presuppose belief in Christ, seeing they are grounded
thereon; That therefore Mahum^^ (as not beliening in Christ) cannot
consequently believe the said affirmative Articles, but hold only the Negative
part in them.

This Answer I auerre to be most defective. For I rest not here in the
Motive, or Reason, why Mahumet belieueth not the foresaid Affirmative Catholic
Tenets (since this is impertinent in this place;) but I only insist in the
Conclusion, as the thing hereby chiefly intended (let the reason thereof be what
it will) to wit, that Mahumat, and our new Evangelists do wholly agree in their
Negative belief of them. Again, I perceau^ no reason, seeing the Protestants
do believe (at lest, they say, they do believe) in Christ, but that they might
he well pleased (were it not, their Serpentine Malice against our Catholic
Church, is the chief Hinderance) also to believe the affirmati^^ Articles to
their Negatiues; since most of them have their foundation, or Basis upon our
Belief in Christ, as our Redeemer.

Thus far now of these several forty Points of faith, and other Circumstances
conducing thereto; In the belief of all which it is made most evident, that
the Turks, and your Reformed Religion do sympathize, and agree together* In so
indissoluble a knot of Amity, and Association have Sergius, and Luther (two
Apostat^ Monk^) tied themselves together.

Here now (O you Hugen^^s of France) I demand of you; Do you mean to persevere
in your Reformed Religion (as you style it) and yet not to be reputed Turks, in
many Points of faith? With as much probability may a man desire to be an
Ethiopian, and yet not to be black; or covet to put his n^ked hand into a ^oat
fire, and withal count to avoid burning: For it is ou^r ^uident, out of the
Premises, that concerning several Passage^ of Religion, your Belief consists
in Mith^liefe. your Faith in Infidelity, and your C^e^d^ in Miscreancy; you
making the Turkish Al^^ran your Catechism, for your instruction in many Points
thereof. O ^^l^ssed I^^^my, we ^eer^ want thee, to deliu^^ this ^^gicall and
mournful subject, i^ thy accustome^ Thr^^^s, and Lamenrations?

An Answer to an Objection, That the Catholics do agree with the Turks in the
doctrines of Sacrifice, and Vows. CHAP. XXVIII.
MY presaging thoughts do probably foretell; that some of your Chief Ministers
of France, reading this Treatise, with a scornful, or subriding Eye, and
suspended nose, will instantly shape an Answer thereto. Or if nor any of them,
yet (perhaps) some spiritualized Sectary of Genena (through the conformity of
their language with France, and proximity of place) houlding himself to be, un
grand Theologien, will undertake that task. And in like sort, it well may be,
that the Answeater will endeavor to wype away this spot, caused through his
Brethrens agreement with the Turks in matter of faith, by laboring to
insimulate us Catholics within the said danger, in retorting; That the Papists
(as in the foame of their malicious dialect they term us) stand no less
chargeable with maintaining certain Points of Belief with the Turks, then
themselves do: To wit, that there ought to be in the Church of God, a true and
real Sacrifice (besides the spiritual Sacrifice of Prayer.) Also, that
Religious Vows are lawful; both which points, as we Catholic, so Mahumet at
his first rising, and the Turk of these times de teach, and practice as pious,
and most warrantable.

Here I say, if any of our Adversaries, (whosoever, or from whencesoeuer)
shall endeavor hereby to wound us, (themselves being already wounded) or to
hurt us by the recoyle of out own Bullet, against this recrimination I thus
reply. And first, admit as true, that we believe the former in general
Articles with the Turks; yet what is the agreement of the Catholics, in two or
three Points of faith with this Turks, to be compared to the Reformists
agreement with the Turks in forty Points of Religion and Collateral
dependencies thereon? Secondly, to speak of Sacrifice, and Vows in
particular, I aver, that every Religion (either false, or true) in every place
and time, had, and have their Sacrifice, and Vows annexed to their Woship o^
God. From whence we gather, that Sacrifice, and Vows proceed from the instinct
and light of Nature; and that to have Sacrifice, and Vows is a main Principle
implanted in Man by God; and consequently is in it self most religious, and
warrantable*

Neither will it au^yle, to avoid the force of this Answer, to say with K^^^
in (...) parts, Examine. p. 741.
Ke^pni^^^es, That this Instinct of Nature, is the instinct of Nature as
corrupted, which is the source, or too^e or all Blindn^s, and Supe^stition.
This aduantageth nothing; For although Nature corrupted is, and has been the
fountain of Blindness and Superstition; N^^^^^^elesse, whereas all Countries do
agree in one common Principle, this Agreement doublesly ^^^eameth not from the
Corruption of Nature, but from the Good o^ N^^ure; That is, i^ ris^th out of
that light, which God has engrafted, and sowed in Natu^^. For what things
proceed from Corruption, those are various, and not the sam^, among all m^n.
Therefore that God is t^ be worshipped, to be inuocated, to have Sacrifices (so
truly called) and Vows offered to him, and the like, which were in general
among all People, and ever were the same; do rise from the good of Nature. But
that there should be many Gods, that Ido^^^ hold be worshipped that men should
b^ sacrifi^ed, that Vows should be made to False Gods, and such like, which
are diversely varied, all these do spring from the Corruption of Nature.

Thirdly, I say, Sacrifice is congenite, and borne (as I may say) with
Religion, as appears from the Examples of the first sonn^s Genes. 4.
of Adam; and after from Nee; Genes. 8.
and (...) fr^^ the Prophets. Therefore their Conjunction is most Necessary.
Fourthly, Sacrifice (so properly called) and Vows are worships
in^on^^inicable, and peculiar to God, That i^, they are due only to God; for
other kinds of Honors are (in some sort) to be imparted to Creatures;
Therefore no^ Religion (...) subsist without S^^ifice, and Vows. And though
Vows in a secondary manner may be said to be made to Saints, we are to
conceive hereby, that this is but only the subject of a Vow; whereas the Vow
formally, and really is made only to God, as the Chief S. Themas 2.2. qu^^.
88. ar^. 5.
Schoolmen do teach. Thu^ much in clearing this retortion, made against us
Catholics.

Now from hence, (to apply it to our Purpose) the judicious and learned Reader
may gather, that we Catholic is ho^lding the doctrine of Sacrifice, and Vows,
do indeed agree with the Turks herein; but not with them as they are Turks, but
as they are men endued with Reason; in whose Souls (as in the Souls of all
other Men) God even by the instinct of Nature, and light of Reason, has
indifferently infused the belief of the said former Points. And thus if we
Catholics be blind, and superstitious in these doctrines, (as Kempniti^s
suggesteth) yet are we warranted with the like blindness and superstition, not
only of Christ's primitive Church (the which point here to show would be over
tedious) but even of all Mankind, as it is incorrupted.

Of the conjunction of the Turks, and some temporal Christian Stater, against
Catholic Princes. CHAP. XXIX.
NOw after I have sufficiently displayed the great Conjunction in doctrine,
which our New deuines do bear to Mahumet, and to his offspring, the Turks; I
hold it conducing to our subject in hand, in part to lay open to the world (and
particularly to you, my Countrymen) the secret combination of mynds both of
some Protestant States, and Protestant Ministers, banding with the Turk,
against the Pope, the Emperor, and other Catholic Princes, and all originally
for matter of Religion; the which motive most of them make the cementation of
their Amity: So much in these men's perverted Judgments, does the Turkish
Religion ouerballance, and weigh down in Worth, and dignity the Roman
Catholic Religion. By which their Heathnish Proceeding may not our Savior
(the Institutour of our Religion) say with Moses: Cui Isay. 40.
comparastis me?

To begin. It is evident and known to the whole World, that when they of
Holland, for Religion, did first rise against the King of Spain, diverse
Troops, and Companyes of their soldiers did bear in their Ensigns, a siluar
figure, or stamp of the Moon increasing (being the Arms of the Turkish
Emperor) with these French Words insculpted therein: Plus^ost Turcs, qu^
Papaux; That is, We will rather be Turks, then Papists.

In like manner, Erasmus records, that when the Emperor Charles was to wage
War with the Turkish Emperor, leuelling forces throughout several parts of
Germany; the Lutheran Party, and faction was so far from yealding any help, and
succurrency thereto, as that they openly proclaimed their dislike and
disaffection of that Action in these word: Malle Erasmus, in Epist ad Fratres
Germania Inf^rioris.
se pro Turca non baptizato pugnare, quam pro Turca baptizato; They had rather
fight in defense of a Turk not baptized, then for a Turk baptized, thereby
meaning the Emperor of Germany, and thus preferring only for cause of Religion
the Turkish Emperor, before the Christian Catholic Emperor. So deep an
impression had these ensuing Words of Luther (their Proto-pater) made in the
Germans minds; Religio Luther in Genes. cap. 48.
Romana magis est Idololatrica, quam Turcica; Et Pontifex ille magis est
periculosus Christi hostis, quam est Magnus Turca. The Roman Religion is more
idolatrous, then the Turkish Religion: and that Pope or Bishop of Rome, is a
more dangerous Enemy to Christ, then the Great Turk is.

The less wounder their it is, that we find Luther (as above is showed) in one
of his Books thus writing: Praeliari Luther, ^om. ^. Wittemb^rg. Artic.
da^nat. per Leonem ^0. Art. 34.
aduersu^ Turcas etc. To fight against the Turks, is it withstand God
chastizing our sins by them. And more. Let us Luth. in explice. Art. 34.
abstain from the Turkish War^ as long as the Popes Name preuailes under
Heaven. And further: Ore Luther in Epist. contra ^uo mandeta Imperialia.
cunctos pios Christianos no vilo modo vel in militiam cant, vel dent aliquid,
contra Turcas, quandoquide^t Turca dec^es prudentior probiorque est quam
Principes nostri. And yet the said Luther more fully vnbreasteth his Love and
affection toward the Turk, saying: Luther in confutat Doctorum Paris.impress.
Neob^rgi.
Vi libere animum meum aper^am; Hoc aperie de me praedico, quod tam inuitus
T^rcam gladio inuaderem, quam Christianum fratrem. To open my mind freely, I
openly confess, that I would as unwillingly assault with my sword, a Turk, as
any other that is my Christian Brother. Thus Luther, in affection fully
equalling a Turk with a Christian. O the monstruousnesse of Apostasy!

But to proceed further. The Prince of Condy Matthew. de Lanoy en s^ replique. l.
^. chap. 13.
in France in the year 1570. being banished France, and retiring himself to
Basil, and consulting there, how to raise Rebellion against the King of
France; The Protestant Ministers of that City persuaded him, to be subject
himself to the Turkish Emperor, and crave assistance of him. In like sort we
Frenchmen, or rather, we Franco-Turca in the Rebellion to the year 1568. made
a Petition to the Turk for aid, against our own Sovereign King, and
Country; giving our reasons thereof to the Turkish Ambassador in these Words?
Quia In literii Constantinop. scriptis ad Venetum Patricium, in fine libri de
furoribus Gallisis,
fides Protestantiam, Turcicae erat quam simillima. Because the faith of the
Protestants, was most like to the Turkish faith: As also in that, the
Protestant Princes of Germany favoring the Turkish Emperor, might hinder all
the designs of the Roman Emperor.

These were the Reasons in particular. Which said French Men did thus promise
the Turk in the forsaid Petition: Sefore In lit. Consta^s. ^b^. suprd*
semper paratissimos, ad turbas in Galia, Germaniaque concitandas etc. That
they would ever be most ready to cause Combustions and Troubles, by incensing
the Communalty in France, and Germany whenever the Turkish Emperor should
hold is convenient. Such is the diabolical, and Hellish malice of Heresy,
thus taking part with Misbeliefe, Infidelity, and Miscreancy, against our most
ancient, and Apostolical Roman Faith. Which course must needs seem the more
deplorable, if we call to mind, that our Kings through their piety, and
constant professing of the true Religion have most deservedly purchased the
Title, of Reges Christianissimi: Why then should not their subjects in
imitation of their Virtue, be styled, Subditi Christianissimi? But (alas) their
state is far different from this. For how can those men be truly called
Christianissimi, who are scarce (at least imperfectly) Christiani? For does
Nature ever afford a Superlatiue without a Positive?

The Reasons of the frienshippe between the Turk, and some Lutheran States.
CHAP. XXX.
IN this place, we will penetrate a little into the Reasons and Grounds, why
our New Gospellers. and the Chief Lay-Professours of the Reformed Religion do
bear such a favorable Aspect to the Turks, and their Princes. This we shall
find to proceed from Certain Principles of the Protestants doctrine (of which
some above are briefly touched.) Which being believed, do even dispose the mind
for the full entertayning of Turcisme in general; and consequently do beget in
their Wills, a well-wishing to the Turk in temporal Affairs, against all
Professors of the Catholic and Roman Faith. For our New Brethren do so
corrupt, and disualew the Articles of the most B. Trinity, of the Incarnation
of Christ, of his Passion, and merit thereof (in all which Mysterious Passages,
Mercy did draw God from Heaven to Earth, that he might thereby draw man from
Earth to Heaven) with their pernicious, false, and pestilent Scholia's, as that
the next step is utterly to deny those supreme dogmaticall Articles and
Positions of faith; and so by embracing Miscreancy, to rise up absolute Turks,
or Jews.

And according to this my assertion, we find AEgidius Hunnius (a most forward,
and eminent Lutheran) to confess no less* Which Hunnius did write a book
against Calvin bearing this Title: Caluinus Iudaizans; Hoc est, Iudaica Glossae
and corruptelae quibus Ioannes Caluinus illustrissima Scripturae sacrae loca
and testimonia, de gloriosa Trinitate, deitate Christi, and Spiritus sancti;
cum primis autem vaticinia Prophetarum, de Aduentu Mes^iae, Natiuitate eius.
Pas^ion^, Resurrectione, Ascensione ad Caelos, and Sessione ad dextram Dei,
detestandum in modum corrumpere non abhorruit, Wittembergae, anno 1593. Thus in
English. Calvin playing the Jews that is, The Judicial Glosses and
Corruptions, by the which John Calvin has not been afraid, detestably to
corrupt the most clear places and testimonies of the Holy Scripture, touching
the glorious Trinity, the Deity of Christ, and of the Holy Ghost, and
particularly the Prophecies concerning the Aduent and Coming of the Messiah,
his Nativity, Passion, Resurrection, Ascension to Heaven, and sitting at the
right hand of God.

Another Protestant writes in like sort a book entitled: Antiparaeus; Hoc
est, Refutatio venenati scripti a Dau^de Paraeo editi, in defensionem
stropharum and corruptelarum, quibus loannes Caluinus illustrissima Scripturae
Testimonia, de Mysterio Trinitatis, nec non Oracul^ Prophet arum de Chr^sto,
detestandum in modum corrupit. Francosurti, Anno 1598. Thus: Antiparaeus; that
is, A Refutation of the virulent writing, made by David Paraeus in the defense
of the impostures and Corruptions, by the which John Calvin derestably
dep^^neth the most evident Testimonies of the Scripture, touching the Mystery
of the Trinity, as also the Oracles of the Prophets, concerning Christ.

A third Protestant thus styles his book written against Cal^in: Alberti
Graueri, Belluns Ioannis Caluini and Jesus Christi; That is, the Wars between
Calvin and Jesus Christ, written by Alberius Grauerus, printed at Brapta. 1598.

To be short a Fourth Protestant writes a Treatise, bearing this Inscription:
Oration de Incarnatione filij Dei, contr^ imp^os, and blasphemos Errores
Swinghanorum, and Galuinistarum, Tubingae, 1586. An Oration, or discourse of
the Incarnation of the Son of God, against the wicked and blasphemeus Errors
of the Swinglians and Caluinists.

Now the Swinglians. and Caluinists thus writing against the most supreme
Articles of the Trinity. the Incarnation, the Passion etc. do they not open a
sluice to their Readers, for the absolute denial of the said sacred Mysteries?
And once denying them, what then remains for the last tincture and dye of
their says, but to become a Turk, a Ie^, or an Atheist?

This former point is made no less evident, by the several Testimonies of the
more sober and temperate Protestants. For Yacobus Andraeas thus complains:
Minime mirandum est ex Caluinianis etc. We Andraas in ^raefas. vefucat. Apolog.
Danaei.
are not to wonder; that of the Caluinists in Poland, Transsiluanis, Hungary,
and in other places, some embrace Arianisme, others Mahum^iisme; to whose
impiety the doctrine of Calvin prepares the way. Thus this Protestant. And
Pel^rgus a Protestant thus writes: Non Pelargus in Admonis do Arian^s.
it is Caluini^m, and Caluinianos in pluri^nis Scripturae expositionibus (...),
and (...) lab^rtose ^^tendam: I will not spend much time, in ^hewing, bow
Calvin and the C^luinists, in many ^^positious of Scripture do play the Jews,
and the Arians.

Now from this former source it s^ringe^n, that a book was written by a
Scholar of Luther, the Argument, or Subject whereof was in the frontispisce
delivered in these words: Admonitie ex Verbo Dei, quod Caluinistae non sunt
Christiant, sed cantum Indaei, and Mahumetani baptizata. An Admonition out of
the Word of God, that the Caluinists are nos Christians, but only Jews, and
Mahunistans Christened.

And an other famous Lutheran (being Supe^intendent of the Church of Raceburg)
thus fully pronounces of this point: Caluinistae In lib^ entitled, Dae
Theologi^ Caluinist. libritres. Francoforts anno 15^^.
alunt in pectore impietatem Arianam, and Turcicam, quae non raro suo tempora
palam se prodit, and quod Caluinistae hominibus ad Arianismum, and Mahumetismum
fenestram and ianuam aperiunt, nostri Theologi publicis libris demonstra^^runt.
Vz. Our Deuines have demonstrated in their public writings, that the
Caluinists do nourish in their breast the Arian, and Turkish Impiety, which
often upon fit occasion discouers it self. And that the Caluinists do open the
Window, and Door to Arianisme, and Mahu^^tisme, our deuines have demonstrated
also in their public Wey^ings. But enough of this point.

Of certain Eminent Caluinists, who forsaking their Christianity, became open,
and blasphemous Turks. CHAP. XXXI.
AS in this first Part of this Treatise, I have showed, first, That the Turks,
and our New Gospellers, who have been (Prescheurs seditieux, and dignes d'vn
chastiment tres-rigoreux) seditious fellows against the Church of God, and
worthy of severe punishment, do agree in forty points touching faith, and the
necessary Attendants thereof. Second^y, how the chief Protestants by deprauing
the doctrine of the Trinity, and the Incarnation, have in their Writings
playned the way to Turcisme, or Mahumetisme: So now for the closure and
shutting up of this first part, I will produce the Examples of several most
emine^t Protestants, who have in their own persons actually incorporated (not
some, but) all the Blasphemies of Mahumetisme, openly professing themselves in
faith, and external Practice thereof, to be Turks; renouncing and disclayming
from all Christianity. Obstupescite Ierem. ^.
caeli super hoc.

And to begin. The first of these Monsters (Monstrum horrendum, ingens, cui
lumen ademptum) which I will name; shall be Bernardinus Ochinus, a man much
commended by L 9. fol. 297.
Sleidan, and by Bullinger Si^^lerus Vita Bullingeri, fol. 28.
both Protestants, and whose praise Calvin celebrateth in these Words: Whom
Calvin, l. de Secondalis, extat in eract. Theolog. p. 111.
can I truly oppose against Bernardinus Ochinus? Now this presumed worthy
Protestant, in the end became an impious Apostata, entertayning Turcisme: of
whose fall Beza thus writes: Polygamium nemo vnquam callidius, velimpudentius
defendit quam ille impurus Apos^^ta, Bernardinus Ochinus. His Apostaly is in
like sort recorded by Conradus In Theolog. Calis. l. 1. fol. 8.
Schlus^enburg. Yea Beza in the place above alleged, says, that Ochinus was,
omnium, Christianae Religionis dogmatum irrisor: A mocker or scoffer of all the
Articles of Christian Religion.

In like manner, Adam Neuserus (no vulgar Protestant) became a Turk, of whom
Osiander the Protestant, thus speaks: Adam Ofiand. in Epitom. Cent. 19. pare.
2. page 818.
Neuserus, Pastor Heidelbergenlis, prolapsus est in Turcismum, Constantinopoli
circumcisus. Adam Neuserus, Pastor of Heidelberg, did fall into Turcisine, and
was circumcised as Constantinople. Of this Neuserus the foresaid Schlussenberg
(the Lutheran) thus speaks: Adam Schlussenb. in Theolog. Caeluinist. l. 1.
Ar^. 2. fol. ^.
Neuserus elim Heidelbergensis Ecclesiae primarius Pastor, ex Swinglianismo,
per Arianismum ad Mahumetismum, cum alijs non paucis Caluinistis ^^^gressus
est. Adam Neuserus, heretofore chief Pastor of Heidelberg, with many other
Caluinists, proceeded from Swinglianisme, through Arianisme, unto Mahumetisme,

In which testimony of Schlussenb. we may observe two things. First, that
Neuserus (as not being content to be defiled alone) did draw many others with
him to Turcisme. Secondly, that Swinglianisme, and Arianisme are the two
subordinate Passages, or Ways to Turcisme. And therefore a German Protestant
Doctor Ioqunes Schutz in l. 50. causarum, cousa. 41.
calls Swinglianisme, Arianisme, and Mahumetisme, tres fratres vel sorores,
vel tres caliga^ eiusdem panni. Three brethren, or three sisters, or three
pair of hose made of the same cloth. A truth so evident, that he forsaid
Neuserus writes of this point in this sort, being then at Constantinople:
Nullus So Stephenus Gerlatius records these words, as spoken by Neuserus.
nostro tempore mihi notus, factus est Arianus, nisi antea suit Caluinista etc.
No man in our days, that I know, became an Arian (which is the next step to
Turcisme) except he was first a Caluin^st, as Seruetus, Blandrata, Alciatus,
Franciscus David, Gentilis, Gribaldus, Siluanus, and others. Igitur, qui timet
sibi ne incidat in Arianismum caveat Caluinismum. Therefore who is fearful of
himself to fall into Arianisme, let him take heed of Caluinisme. Thus
Neuserus speaks of his own, and diverse others experience.

The next shall be Asam^^^^s, of whom the foresaid Schlussenburg thus speaks:
Alamannus Courad. Schlussenb. vbi supra, fol. 9. and 10.
Bezae fannliarissimus, and strenuus Caluinista, Religioni Christiana Congum
Vale dixit, and factus est Apostata, and Iud^us blasp^^mus. Alamannus being a
most fath^liar friend of Beza, and an earnest Caluinist, has given his last
fare well to the Chistian faith; and is become an Apostata, and a blasphemous
Jew. Of whom even Beza himself thus complains; Alamannus Beza in Epist.
Epist. ^5.
affirmant ad Iudaismum defecisse; though some authors constantly affirm,
that he became a Turk. But howsoever the difference is but small, since a Jew,
and a Turk do mutually agree in denying the most Blessed Trinity, the
Incarnation of Christ, and in denying all other Articles of Christian Faith,
proceeding from these two former.

In like manner David Georgius, who lived a long time at Basil, much esteemed
by the Protestants of that City; of whom Osiander thus writes; Osiand. epit.
cent. 16. part. 2. page 647.
V^^batur publico Vir De^ ministerio Basillensi. David George, being a man of
God, used the public Ministry at Basil. Now I say, this David George became
a most blasphemous Turk, or Jew, as the Deuine^ In bistoria Georgij Dauidis
printed Anewer^. anno 1568. and ple^^^shed by the Deuines of Basil.
themselves of Basil have published, and recorded.

Paulus Alciatus (an Italian) being before a Protestant, much labored to plant
the ^^eds of Mahumetisme, in Polonia, and finally became a Turk; as Beza Beza
in l. Epist. Theol. Epist 65.66.
witnesses.

Andraeas Velanus (an eminent Caluinist) not only became a Turk, but withal
corrupted diverse others with his pestilent Writings In Parenesi.
against the B. Trinity.

^alius Socinus (once brought up in the School of Geneua) forsook his
Christian^ty, and did write against the most Sucred Trinity, of whom Beza thus
peaketh: T^lius Beza, Epist. Theolog. Epist. 8^.
Socinus mihi quidem videtur, omn^^s ^^^ruptores long superasse. I a^^ of
mind, that ^^lius Socinus has surpassed all other corrupt Writers.

I here pass over the Examples of other Caluinists, who shaking of the
Christian Religion (as Waterdogs do water, when they have no further need
thereof) entertained Mahumetisme, and so became open, and execrable Turks; to
wit, Petrus Vide Simlerum de aeterno Dei filio.
Sartorius, Georgius Paulus, Franciscus Lismanus, all who cooperated with the
forenamed Alciatus, in disseminating Turcisme in Polonia.

And thus far of the Apostasies of diverse Markable Protestants, who made show
in the beginning to profess the name and faith of Christ; and accordingly
received their Baptism in that faith, and Religion; And yet before their
deaths. spurning at all the Mysteries of Christianity, they entertained and
openly professed the doctrine, and Religion of Mahumet, and Sergius, two most
capital Enemies of Christ, our Redeemer, Thus ranging themselves among those,
who circa ^. Timoth. 1.
fidem naufragauerunt. And indeed, it deserves observation, that by experience
we find (as is partly above touched) that Protestancy, first resolves it self
into Caluinisme; Caluinisme into Anabaptisme; Anabaptisme into Arianisme; and
Arianisme for its last change into Turcisme, or Tudaisme. Now it is a principle
in Alchimy, that the last sublimation of Metalls (as purging and refining away
the dross, and refuse matter before remaining) is ever the purest. Will you
admit (O you Hugenots) this Theoreme, or Axiom, as true?

Well now, what can we justly conclude out of the Contents of this Chapter? It
is prophesied of the Church of Christ, that she shall convert Heathens unto
her, according to those words of Esaias spoken of and to the Church: Thou shall
Isa. 60.
suck the milk of the Gentills? And the Regal Prophet says to the Church, in
the person of God; I will give Psalm. 18.
thee the Heathens for thy inheritance? To be short, the foresaid Prophet Esaias
is commanded and directed by God, to speak thus to the Church of Christ:
Enlarge Isa. 54.
the place of thy Tents; spread out the Cur^a^^^s of thy habitation etc. Thy
seed shall poss^sse the Gentills.

If now the true Church of Christ's shall be honored, and enriched with this most
worthy privilege of converting Heathens, and Gentills unto it. What Church
then may we repute the Synagogue of the more fiery Protestants to be; of which
many most remarkable Professors, who are Christians (in lieu of converting of
Heath^^s) after become Mahumetans, Turks, and Miscreants, little inferior in
Misbeliefe to the very* Heathens, and Gentills? Is not this to change Christ
for Mahumet, his sacred Gospel for the Alcoran, and to turn light into
darkness? And with this I impose an end unto the first Part of this Treatise.

THE SECOND PART.
Wherein is demonstrated, that in twenty Points of faith, and other accessory
Circumstances thereof, Mahumet and the Turks do in their belief and practice
of them, seem less to derogate from the honor of Christianity, then Luther
and his Scholars do, in believing the contrary. And these Comparisons made
between the Turks, and the Lutherans, are here styled, Parallels. CHAP. I.
IN the precedent Part, I have laid open to your fight (My dear Countrymen)
the many Symbolismes, and Agreements of doctrine between Mahumet, and your
Progenitors. Here now I undertake a more unexpected Province, and Charge;
which is, to show, that your first Masters (and in them implicitly your
selves) do equal, if not transcend in impiety of Misbeliefe, and practice
thereof, the said Mahumet and his Followers, touching several Points of faith,
and other accessory Circumstances thereof. We read in Holy Writ, that, Creders
Hebr. ^^.
^pert^t accede^t^^ ad Deum. And the same Holy Writ teaches us, that God is
Truth: Eg^ sum Via, and Varitas. And can then man arrive to Truth, by believing
what is false?

It is a thing miserable, John 1^
for a Man to be a true Belieuer, but a bad liver: It is more miserable to be
an Heretic, not believing rightly the Articles of Christian Faith: It is more
then miserable, to be so absorpt in misbeliefe, as to consociate in Miscreancy
with Mahumet, and the Turk^: But what it is, to exceed, and surpass in
atrocity of misbeliefe the very Mahumetans, Sara^^ns, and Turks, cannot be
expressed in Words, and therefore a horrid and silent astonishment must be the
Dialect, or Tongue to proclaim it.

O my Native Country, in which are bred many guilty of so high a Treason
against their Creatour^ How unlike art thou to thy former self! And how little
of France is now found in France? Art thou weary, and ashamed of thy former
Virtue? In ancient times thou wast able to equal (yea to ouerst^ip) other
Nations in the profession of the Christian faith; which faith is a
supernatural light, given to man to fyn^ out the Eternal light. Art thou then
now so degenerated from this former purity in faith, as not only to Symbolize
with Infidells, but even to exceeds them in their Infidelity? But pardon me (O
you of the Reformed Religion) and suffer me to breath out my Grief, through
these my laments, and inconsolable Words* since I cannot, but (grandement
ressentir d'^n crime si enor^ne) have a feeling, and sensible touch of your so
enormous a Crime.

But to turn my Pen to that, which I have voluntarily imposed upon it; and the
rather since a discovery of Errors is here an establishment of the Truth: I
say, I do undertake in these ensuing leaves to manifest, that in diverse points
of faith, and practice thereof, and other Collateral accessions, Mahumet and
his Sect in their belief, and execution of them, do far less derogate from
the Honor of the Christian faith, then your Grand-Maisters, or most of you yet
do.

These my Comparisons touching the said Points, differently believed and
practiced by Mahumet, and your Masters, I call so many Parallels (as in the
beginning of this Treatise I insinuated) seeing they consist in comparing, and
balancing the said points, as they are severally maintained by Mahumet, and by
your Party; The proof whereof I draw from the Sentences delivered by Mahumet,
or by such, as have written of the Mahumetan Religion, compared with that,
which your Doctors have leaf^ recorded in their own Books.

The I. Parallel; Between Mahumet, and Henry the Eight, King of England. CHAP.
II.
NOw before I approach to compare Things together, I will compare Persons
together, and will make two Parallels. The first Parallel shall be between
Mahumet himself, and Henry the Eight of that name, king of England; The second
between Sergius, and Luther; the one inuenting first the Law of Mahumet, the
other stamping his Innouations in this our Age. All which men, being originally
Christians (yea Catholics) by abandoning their former Religion, did find
darkness in Light; whereas such as be either Infidells or Heretics, by embracing
the truth of faith, find light in darkness. Now in the trutination of these men's
lives, and actions, I cannot say with the Apostle; Spiritualibus 1. Cor. ^*
spiritualia comparens, but only Carnalibus carnalia, and vi^ijs vitia.

To begin with Mahumet, and Henry the eigh. It is well, that Mahumet and Henry
lived not in the days of Plutarch the Philosopher; For if they had, he would
perhaps have paralleled them together, not as among the Worthies of the Romans,
and the Grecians, but among the Vnworthies and Monsters of Mankind, registring,
and mutually conferring, not their faults (for in so tearming them I speak
over indulgently) but their Enormous Crimes, and flagitious lives: But seeing
they both crept into the World long after the former learned Historiographer. I
will therefore be content to take the pains, as to place them in the scales of
a steedy, and impartial judgment.

First then Mahumet erected Bibliander in praes^^, Alcor^^^.
himself by sub^elty and treachery, a great Prince, subiecting to his
government, no small part of Asia Syria, Arabia, Egypt, and Afrike; in which
places he first caused his blasphemies to be planted. He at the first of his
presumed correction, and emendation of the then Church of God, made it an
Article Bibliander vbi supra.
of the Mahumetan Religion, that himself was the Supreme Head of the Church of
God; so he depriving the Successors of S. Peter of that dignity, and
Prerogative. Thus to his Princly Authority did he join the Pontifical
Authority, so making himself Caliphas, that is, King, and supreme Prelate; and
ordayning by his sword, and Regal sovereignty, what should be believed
touching faith, and that the contrary Points should not be questioned; and
punishing with death such, as would not submissiuely yield, and give their
appiobation to his wicked doctrines.

Henry the eight was by birth King of England, and Ireland (a great Monarchy)
and did run in the same line with Mahumet. For he was the first Christian
Prince, who either in those Nations, or throughout all ^ur^pe, assumed to
himself the Title of Head Vide Sand. de Schismats A^gli^.
of the Church, and decread by a Parliament or (general meeting togeath^^ of
all the States of the Realm) that all C^no^^ of the Church, and Counsels,
formerly ^nacted, should be wholly ^^iec^ed and dis^nulled; those only excepted,
which himself vouchsafed to app^ou^. And accordingly such Canons and decrees,
which himself, and some few, others substi^ured by him, did make, were to be
reputed as sincere and Evangelical, being warranted under his Letters Patents,
and Regal Seal.

It is said above, that Mahumet did punish (yea sometimes with death) such, as
were refractory to his Will, and would not allow the doctrine, published in his
Alcoran. The like Course did this Engli^^ Antiochus (to the dishonor of all
Kingly Sovereignty) take for did he not (besides many reverend Abbots, and
other Religion, men) put to cruel death that Pair of Marty^s (the Pride, and
Honor of that Nation) I mean the Bishop ^ossensis, and Thomas ^ore (...) his
Chancellor, for their not subscribing to the wicked Ar^icle of Suprema^y,
first established by that unfortunate King?

Mahumet had diu^rs wiu^^, and C^^^^ines together, and at the same time:
Whereas Henry of England (who otherwise, (...) doubt, wanted not his Seraglio)
had indeed (in compare.) but few wives, ye^ when (...) was we^^y of one Wife,
his accustomed stratageme was commonly to accuse her of some forged disloyalty,
and so force them (one after an other) either to divorce, or to loose their
heads; thus making Cruelty and murder, a st^u^king horse (as it were) for his
next Marriage. An impiety never practiced by Mahumet.

Henry had in all six wives, of which the first was Catharine, daughter of
Ferdinand the six, King of Spain, who was his wife twenty years; But then
through his dislike toward her, or desire of having another, he caused a
sentence of divorce to be given against her, by the Archbishop of Canterbury*

Anne, his second wife, was the daughter of Sir Thomas Bullen, who was not his
Wife above three years, but she was condemned of disloyalty of Body, whereupon
she lost her Head.

Anne (so impatient his l^st was of delay) he married his third wife Jane, who
was daughter of John Seamer Knight. She was his wife but one year, and five
months. She died in Childbed; but who knows if of child-byrth, seeing easily
he might take the opportunity of the time?

Anne his fourth wife, being sister to Willam Duke of Cleue, was his wife for
six Months; but after (for he could not feed of one dish any long time) she
was divorced from him by Act of Parliament.

Catherine, his fyfth wife was nece^^nto Thomas Howard Duke of Suffolk; yet
within one year, and six Months, the must also be condemned of unchasteness, and
was beheaded.

His last Wife was Catherine, daughter of Sir Thomas Parre; She was his wife
three years, and had the privilege neither to be divorced, nor beheaded, but
suruiued him. And thus his death was in likelihood the occasion of prolonging
her life.

But now in one kind of Wickedness Henry surpassed Mahumet. We read that
Mahumet (after his planting or his Blasphemies) did exeruct diverse Postili. de
Repub. de Turcis.
Monasteries, and Hospitalls in Constantinople it self; as the like did
Baiaze^ and Selymus, his Successors, even in that City. We further read,
that Mahumet did not destroy any one Religious house, or Monastery exected
before his time. But how great then is the disparity herein? For even all
Europe has trumpeted forth the irreligious proceeding of King Henry in this
Case; Who did overthrow all the Monasteryes, and Religions Houses in England,
(in the abundance whereof, no Nation, by the record of Historyes, was able to
compare with it.) This flagitious King (whose All, was Luxury, Murder, and
Sacrilege) prostrating even with the ground, so many Religious Houses, and
buchering so many Religious Persons of the said Monasteries, did lastly
confiscate all the Lands and benefits belonging to them (which were almost of
incredible Opulency and riches) to himself; partly to spend in all sensuality,
and dissolution of life, and partly to maintain his flattering Attendants, and
Followers.

Now then (to encircle the several Passages of this King, displayed in this
Chapter, or Parallel,) we may from hence gather, that the before mentioned
Ecclesiastical Primacy of the Church, was never challenged, or assumed (during
this last nine hundred years) by any temporal Prince, confessing the name of
Christ until this Mahumetan Henry, through more then a Ne^trodian ^^ns. 10.
Avarice, had demolished several thousands of Religious Houses; and through an
unheard Homicidy, had made himself Husband successively of six Wives: O
blemish, and dishonor to Nature!

With this I end this Parallel between King Henry, and Mahumet the great
Prophet, as vuulgarly the Turks and Saracens do style him; And yet I see no
just cause (to be somewhat pleasant with you, my Countrymen) but that this
Henry might be reputed as great a Prophet, as ever Mahumet was. My reason is
this; we do not read of any thing particularly prophesied by Mahumet; whereas
this our Prophetical King was able (supernaturally forsooth) to foretell,
diverse Months before, of what kind of death, for what cause, and at what time
his present living Wife (though then being in good health) must after dye. A
stupendous Vaticinatour Thus whiles England is England, so long shall the
memory of the Actions of this baroarous King continue; And here may well take
place that Sentence of Cicero: Salamina shall be soouer forgotten, before the
shings done in Salamina be forgotten.

The 2. Parallel; Between Sergius and Luther. CHAP. III.
I Will in this next place balance Sergius, and Luther together. In
discoursing whereof I will more fully spread and enlarge my self, that so the
implety of Luther being in part laid open to the eye of others, they may the
more willingly be induced to have a loathing, and hatred of the Heresies, first
in our Age ventilated by him. For if the Conduite or Pipe be foul and muddy,
can the water, which streams through it, be clear and sweet?

And to begin. Sergius, and Luther were the first Apostles (so to style them)
of their Religions; The first of Mahumetisme, or Turcisme; the second of
Lutheranisme, or Hugenotisme. They both (as above is touched briefly were
Monks, leaving (with breach of solemn Vow) their Monasteries, though in a
different manner. For Sergius through his miscariage was cast out of it; But
Luther voluntarily (and therefore with greater impiety) did relinquish his
Monastery; and thereupon yoaked himself with a professed Nun; so vshering
his Vocation with the sin of Sacrilegious Adultery.

Both of them secured their molitions and had Attempts, under the Wings and
safeguard of temporal Princes; Sergius under Mahumet, and Luther under the Duke
of Saxony. Both of them had for their Master and Instructour in planting their
several Faith, the Devil; so as the words of our Savior might truly take
place in either of their plantations: Qui Math. 11.
seminauit ea, est diabolus* Sergius had him originally, but not immediately;
since humane respects of pleasure, and the like were to him a forcible
allectiue* inuiting him to his after Apostasy: But Luther had the honor and
favor (forsooth) to be instructed by the Devil both originally, and
immediately; The This disputation between Luther and the Devil, is confessed
by Hospinian, the Protectant, in Hist. Sacram. part. altera, fol. 131. As also
by Manlius Luthers Scholar in loc. com. and by Morton, in Apolog. Cathol.
part. 1. l. 9. c. 21.
Devil by that means Catechizing this his Proselyte, to abandon his Catholic
Religion; and by telling him, that by saying daily Mass, he committed
Idolatry. To which, and other of the Devils arguments he yealded.

This his Conference with the Devil is so certain, and undoubted, as that
Luther himself (as not being ashamed of enjoying such a Master) very solemnly
delivers it in these his own Words; It Luther, tom. 7. Wittenberg. anno
15^8. de Missa ^ngulari.
fortuned, that at a certain time about Midnight, I was suddenly awaked from
sleep; then Satan began this dispute with me, saying: Hearken, right Reverend
Doctor Luther; Thou know, thou have for the space of fifteen years
celebrated private Masses every day; but now what say thou, if such Masses
were horrible Idolatry? Haec illo dic^ute: The Devil thus speaking, did use
voce forti, and grani, a strong, and base Voice. I did burst forth into a
sweat, and my heart began to beat, and tremble. Thus Luther himself hereof;
and through force of this colluctation, and dispute with the Devil he
renounced his Priesthood, and instantly began to stamp from the same origin,
the rest of his Heresies; but this, (auet vne impudence effrenee, and trop
audacicuse arrogance.) most shamlesly, and bouldly.

Here then I demand, Who first denied the doctrine of Private Luth. de
abrogand^ Missa priuatu.
Mass, and Priesthood? The Devil, and Luther. Who first denied So Sleyd^n
witnesses of Luther, l. 26. fol. 232.
Pardons? The Devil and Luther. Who first denied Papal Luther in captiuit.
Babil. tom. 2. fol. 68.
Jurisdiction, and Monastical Luther de Votis Monain tom. 2. Wittenberg.
life? The Devil, and Luther. Who first denied Four Luth. tam. 2. fol. 63.
Sacraments? The Devil, and Luther. Finally, who first denied Freewill,
Luther, de seruo arbitrio, i^ tom. 2. fol. 424.
Justification by Works, and several Parts of Canonical Luther, in praefat in
Euist, lacobi,
Scripture? The Devil, and Luther. Since than the Devil. and Luther were so
intrinsicall and in ward friends, and that Luther became so serviceable an
Achates to the Devil, as publikly to preach and maintain, whatsoever the
Devil did dictate unto him; I leave to your own judgments (my Countrymen of
the Reformed Religion) what hope you can have of your souls Salvation, in
embracing, and believing the damnable doctrines, first invented by the Devil,
and Luther, in their before mentioned solemn. Conference.

But to return. Sergius, and Luther did unanimously contemn the ancient
Fathers of Christ his Church, that thereby (as prestiming the Errors of those
Fathers) they both upon this ground with greater considency, might urge a
Reformation of the supposed Errors in our Catholic Religion, as is above
said. Sergius his dislike of the Fathers is discovered in the thirteenth
Azoara, above set down. Luther (to omit many other unworthy aspersions, and
reproaches cast upon them by him) thus writes: The Fathers Lath tom. (...).
Wi^^onb^^^o 1991 (...) seruo arbi^rie, (...). ^^^*
of so many Ages, or Centurios have been wholly blind, and most unskillful in
the Scriptures, and have erred during all their lyse time; and except they were
amended before they dyed they were not to be accounted Sainis, nor belonged to
the Church. In which Censure Luther delivers his mind in far greater
acerbity of speech, then we find Sergius in writing the Alcoran to have done.

To pass on. Sergius, and Luther did jointly write lasciuiously, and
^ust^ully. Sergius thus decrees in his Alcoran: Muheres Azoara 8.
quotrescunque placuerit, duas sci^ces ant tres, aut quaetuor ducite etc. But
is Luther any whit short to Sergius herein? Read what follows: Si non Luth.
J^^^n de M^^ri^^io.
vult Vxer, aus non possit, veniat Ancilla. If the wife either will not, or by
impotency cannot, let the maid come in her room. He further teaches, That a
Man may mary another woman, if his own Wife be fled from him; And then upon
this ground Luther thus concludes: A man Luth. tom. ^* Wi^^an. berg* fol. ^^^.
may have ten, or more wises s^^l from him and and all yet living. Luther
further proceeds, thus teaching: Polygamy Luth. in Propofit. de bigamia.
(...) 15^8. propes. ^2, 65. ^^.
is no more disanulled or abiegated then is the rest ^f Mayses Law. And it is
free, as being neither commanded, nor forbidden? Thus far of Luthers doctrine
(agreeing with Sergius) touching the firm of Carnalicy.

Now whereas Sergius, and Luther above thus write only speculatiuely, and by way
of Instruction: Yet here we find a difference between Sergius, and Luther. For
touching the personal Incontinency of Sergius, we find but little, or nothing
written; Whereas Luther, as willing to incorportie his former doctrine in
himself, (besides his espousing of a Votall Nun) thus speaks of himself,
and of his own incontinency? Quam Luth tom. Wittenb. de Matrimon. fol. 119.
non est in meis vitibus etc. It is no more in my power to be without a Woman,
then not to be as, Man. He further thus confesses of himself: I have Luth. in
colloq. Mensal. ^ol. 526.
been almost furious, through the rage of lust and desire of a Woman. And yet
more particularly: I am burned Luther, tom 1. Epist, Latin. fol. 334. ad
Philippum.
with the great sire of my untamed flesh; etc. Eight days are past, during
which time, I did neither write pray or study; being vexed partly with
temptations of the flesh etc. Did ever Sergius disgorge such fifth, touching
his own sensuality?

To proceed. Sergius as not believing in Christ, contemned the Sacraments of
Christ; and therefore makes little, or no mention of them in the Alcoran.
Luther admits some Sacraments, yet writes so hearth mishly and irreuerently
of them, as that his sin is little less in wrongfully reaching of them, then
is the sin of Sergius in not believing them at all. For Hospinian thus
speaks of Luther: Lutherus cousque Hospin. 1. histor. Sacrament. pars.
aliera. fol 14.
progreditur, vt diceret Sacramentum verum futurum, etiamsi a Diabolo
conficeretur. Luther proceeded so far, as that he maintained, a Sacrament to be
true, and effectual, although it were celebrated, and ministered by the
Deuill-Would Sergius have ever uttered such blasphemous Words against any
Sacrament, if he had been persuaded, they had been first instituted, and
ordained by God?

The next point, of which we will discourse is, how Sergius esteems of the
Old Law, and of Moses; and what Luther delivers of Moses. First then, we
find Sergius thus to write in the Alcoran: Deus Azoara ^.
pius and misericors prius Testamentum vetus, deinde Euangelium rectas vias
hominibus tradidit. God being holy and merciful, did first deliver to men (as
two right ways) the Old Testament, and then after, the Gospel. And according
hereto a writer of the Turkish Religion, thus speaks: Nullum Cusanus in
cribratione Alcorani, l. 8. c. 2. and l. 2. c. 24, and l. 3. c. ^,
Prophetarum contradicit, sed approbat libros a Deo fidelibus traditos,
scilicet legem Moysis etc. Sergius, and the Alcoran, do not contradict any of
the Prophets, but approve the Law of Moses, the Pentateuchus etc.

But does not Luther (your I doll) speak of Moses in another dialect, and of
diverse parts of the Old Testament? For first you know, that Luther with his
faction impugneth the writings of diverse Prophets of the Old Testament. Hence
it is, that Luther holds many Books thereof not to be Scripture, but Apocry
phall; to wit, the first and second of Esdras, Toby. the Book of Wisdom,
Ecclesiasticus, the Machabees, and some others. Now touching Luthers acerbity
of writing against Moses, observe what follows: Habuit Luther, tom 3.
Wittenberg. in Psalm. 45. fol. 42. fol. 412. and tom. 3. German. fol. 40, and
41.
Moses labia, sed in facunda, impedita; irata, in quibus non est Verbum
Gratiae. Moses had his lips unpleasant, stopped, and angry, in the which
there is not one Word of Grace, but of Angar, death, and sin etc. If you
collect all the wisdom of Moses etc. you shall sind it to be in the sight of
God, either Idolatry, or Hypocritical Wisdom, or at most, the Wisdom of
Wrath. Again: Moses habuit labia diffusa fell. and ira. Moses had his lips
full of Gall, and anger. Away therefore with Moses. Blush you not hereat, (My
Countrymen) to see how unworthily and profanely Luther (with reference to
Sergius) censureth of a great Part of the Old Testament, and particularly of
Moses?

I will conclude this Parallel between Sergius and Luther, that dreaming for
a time, that the doctrine of Gods Church was corrupted, at Sergius first
breaking out, and also at Luthers revolt (as Sergius, and Luther do teach,
auerring their own Mission, or Vocation to have been in regard of the
reformation of the supposed corrupted faith of God in those times:) I say,
imagine all this as true, I then auerre, that Sergius broached his Religion in
a more conuonient time, and place, then Luther did. For first touching the
time, whereas Sergius, and Luther do jointly teach (as abous is intimated) that
at the time of Gregory the Greas (being a thousand years since) all the true
Religion of God was corrupted, or rather exiled out of all Countries, Now
Sergius at that very time by the appointment of Mahumet did first restore the
Church of God (as he presumed) to its primitive faith: Therefore (I say) it
ineuitably follows upon Mahumet^ Principles, that Sergius reformed the Church
in a more convenient and profitable time, then Luther did; who some ^^ne
hundred years after Sergius began his Reformation; during all which ages the
Church of Christ (according to Luthere doctrine) wanted this re^lauration to
its former Purity.

Now touching the Places, which received the presumed benefit by both their
risings, and appearance to the World; Sergius planted his Religion (by the
strength of Mahumet) in many most vast Nations, which at his first spreading of
his doctrine, were infected with diverse Heresies of the Arians, Nouatians,
Manichees, Eunomians, Eutichians, Nestorians, the which (besides some other
Heresies) had invaded at that time Asia, Syvin, Arabis, Egypt, and Affrike:
Whereas by the coming of Luther (admitting, he had instituted a true Religion)
only England, Scotland, some parts of Germany, and of France have receaned
benefit thereby: So great a difference there is, touching this imaginary
benefit to the Church of God, procured by the several Commings and preachings
of Sergius, and Luther, Thus far I have thought good to proceed, in the
libration of Luther with Sergius; where we see, that in diverse points of
Impiety Luther equals Sergius, in others much transcends him.

The 3. Parallel; Touching the dignity of Christ. CHAP. IV.
WE will in this place touch the worth and dignity of Christ, and will observe
how differently Mahumet, and Luther with his Attendents do speak of Christ,
whereby we may lament the Vnfor^^^ate and Ca^icu^ar days, in which we live, to
see Mahumet and his Sect, not believing in Christ, surpass in praises of
Christ, our Gospellers, who say they believe in Christ, True it is, that
Mahumet did not believe in Christ, as in his Redeemer, yet mark how reverently
he writes of Christ, and compare his words with the Words of your first
Instructours.

Thus then we find Mahumet to teach of Christ in his Alcoran: Jesus Maria
Azoara 5. and ^^ and 12.
Thus fuis Dei Nuncius, and Spiritus and Virbum, Dei cali^^s Immisum; Cui Dei
legato omnis de^ent credera. And again in another place of the Alcoran: Jesus
^uit Sapienita and Verbum Patris and Me^^tas, and Princeps, Fuit Des Speritus,
and men's grincepiumque, and caput omnium bominum. Jesus the son of Mary, was
the Messinger and spirit, and Word of God. He was sent from Heaven; and him (as
the Legate of God) all men ought to believe. Again: Jesus was the Wisdom and
Word of the Father; and the very spirit and mind of God; and the beginning, and
head of all Men.

Now according to these Passages of the Alcoran, Theodorus Bibliander (the
Protestant) thus writes of the doctrine of the Turks: Primus Bibliander in
praefas. Alcoran. page 3.
and maximus e^ror Turcarum est quod Trinitatem in Vnitate neg^^t etc.
Christium, ^ec Dei fil^um, ^^c Deum esse credunt, sed Prophe^am bonum,
veracissimum, omn^s meudacij alque peccati immunem. The chiefest, and greatest
error of the Turks is, that they deny the Trinity in the Unity; They believe,
that Christ is neither the Son of God, nor God; but that he was a good, and
most true Prophet, and free from all lies, and sin. Thus we se, how honorably
and magnifically Mahumet did teach of Christ, and so accordingly the Turks do
believe of him, even at this day.

But now let us observe in what contrary Idiome of speech, (altogether
depressing the dignity of Christ) our Adversaries do speak. And to pass over
(as above touched) how Luther and his Scholars will not acknowledge their
Redemption from Christ; except his divine Nature suffered, in which their
fantastical, and conceated dognea they much dispretiate, and vnderualew the
worth of the Human^ty of Christ. First then whereas Mahumet above styles
Christ to be Supientia, and Verbum Patris, and Dei Spiritus, and Men's; And all
this Mahumet did understand of Christ, as he was Man (for as we read in the
former Azoara's, he did not acknowledge Christ to be God.) Now Christ being in
the judgment of Mahumet and the Turks, the Wisdom, and the Word of the
Father, as also the Spirit, and Mind of God, it unavoidably follows, that
Christ (as Man) in the judgment of Mahumet did know all things, and was free
from all Ignorance; as also did not stand subject to any sudden ungoverned
perturbations of the Mind, and such, as after ought to be corrected (which
correction vertually implies in it self a former sin;) since otherwise we
should be forced to grant a thing most absurd, and no less derogatory from the
Majesty of God) that the Wisdom, the Word, the Spirit, and Mind of God, and,
He, whom God commands all men to hear (as above we noted out of the Azoar^
11. and 18.
Alcoran) did stand obnoxious to Ignorance, to disordered Passions, yea to
sin it self.

Now this inference being inevitable, let us see, how your Forefathers in
opposition hereto, stand guilty in charging Christ; as man, with Ignorance.
Thus then we find one of them to teach: Christas Bucerus in Luc. ^. So Calu^^.
^s H^rm. c. 11.
^b infantia non fuit gratia consummatus, sed ani^i does us, relu^i cateri
homi^es, adoleuit, vsu factas qui^di^ sapientior, (...) us puerulus ig^orauia
l^ber^^is. Christ from his Infancy was not consuenmate with Grace, but did
increase (a other men do) in the guilts of the Soul. He was made by use daily
more wise, so that he labored with Ignorance as a little Child. The same
doctrine is taught by Beza, Baze in respons ad act. colloq. Montisbelg. part.
1. p 147. and 148.
and by one Willettus Willet in Synops page 599. and 600.
an English Doctor; All which I^nouatours sucked their poison touching the
supposed ignorance of Christ, from Luther (their Great Cham) who thu^ writes
in one place: Christus sicut non Luther, in Concion. de Natali Domint, tractans
locum Marci, ^5. de illo die.
quoli^et tempore omne^ vidis audius ^^gue sens^^ (...) itaetiam cord non
omnia s^mper ^gn^u^ etc. As Christ at all times did not see hear. and
understand all things* so did he not know all things in his Heart, but so much
only, as the Lord vouchsafed him to know.

To proceed fu^^her* When Christ prayed in the Garden, Marloretus (the
Protestant) says; Voceus Marloret. in Math. 2^.
edidit sine rations, sine spiriti^. With whom Calvin agrees in these Words.
Christus metu Calvin in cap. ^. Matthat.
perculsus etc. Christ being streken with fear, did waver among several
floods of. Temprations, with change, or vicis^tude of desires; And this is the
reason, why he praying in the Garden against death Moxsib^ fraenum ini^cit,
Putris^, imper^^ sub^jciens, votum illud subite el, sum castig^uit and
r^^ocauit; did presently bridle that his desire, and submitting himself in the
Will of his Father, did instantly correct land recall that his Petition, or
desire as suddenly falling from bim.

And further Calvin in the same pla^e more enlarges himself, saying; Non fuit
hac meditat^ Christi Oratia, s^d vis and imp^^^^^^loris subitam ei vacem
^^torsie, cur statim addita fuit correctio; Eadem whementia praesentem calestis
decreti memoriam illi abstulit. This prayer of Christ (meaning, If (...) be
possible, let this Cup pass from me) was not premeditate, but force and
violence of Grief did extort this sudden Word from him, the which he presently
corrected; The same vehemence of dolor did take from Christ the present
remembrance of the Celestial decree. Thus far Calvin. Where we may gather from
those former words in him: Subit^ clapsum cast^gauit, and recouauit; As also
those other; Non fuit meditata oration, cui statim addita, suit Correctio; And
again; eadem ve^ementia praesentem ^alestis decreti memoriam ei abstulis, tha^
Calvin does charge Christ not only with Ignorance, and Forgetfulness, or
Inconsideration; but even with Sin, since that is only a sin, which
stands in need of Correction, and reuocation.

But to close up with Calvin. This See the Records of Noyon, in France, and
S^blus^enbur. Theol Calu. 2. fol. 7^.
Sodomiticall Fugitive (for my Pen cannot at this present affoard him better
terms) entered in to that height of Blasphemy, as that he thus taught: Christus
Calvin. (...) 2. Instie. c. 16.. 10.
dires in ^nima orucietus damnati, and perditi ho^inis pertul^^: Christ did
suffer in his soul the earefull ^oxations of a damned, and lost Man. And
thereupon Calvin teaches, that Christ Calvin. vbi supra. ^^ 11.
was not secu^e of his o^ne Salvation; reprehending the Catholic for teaching
the Contrary, in this manner, Calvin vbi supra ^.1^.
^^ic (...) quidam indocts clamitant me atrocem facere Chrissto iniurtam, quia
minime consentaneum fuerat, Christum de antmae salute timere. Here now rise up
certain ignorant lewd fellows, exclayming against me, that I offer to Christ
an atrocious injury; seeing (they say) it is not agreeable to him to fear the
Salvation of his own Soul. The said Calvin, the more to depresse the power
and dignity of Christ, and to debase the worth of those, who first believed in
Christ, thus censureth of his Disciples: Christus Calvin, in Luc. cap. 7.
discipulos, non nisi ex face populi, and quisquilij sibi colligere potust
Christ could not gather to him any disciples, but such as were of the dregs, or
refuse of the People: Thus Calvin charging Christ with want of Power herein.

Now here I demand of any indifferent Man, who with an impartial eye, shall
observe (cerenormes indagnitez commises cozire Jesus Christ) how those former
words of Mahumet in his Alcoran, delivered of Christ (to recapitulate some of
them) That Christ, is Sapientia, and Verbum Patris; Messiah, Spiritus. and Men's
Dei, and cui Deilegato omnos credere debent: that he is Propheta veracissimus,
and omnis peccatiimmunis, and the like Encomia; Here, I say, I demand how
these Praises can stand with the Ignominy and Dishonor, which your Masters in
their former alleged Sentences, have offered to Christ, in making him to
become thrall to Ignorance. Impotency, Passion. Forgetfulness, Sin, and
doubtfulnes of his own Salvation? Him (I mean) who was absolutely ^eatus, when
he was but Viator here upon earth; and whiles he was sailing upon the seas of
worldly Misery, was arrived to the port and Haven of Rest; briefly who was (so
to speak) intuiniuely discursiue, in regard of different respects?

The 4. Parallel; Concerning the (...). Virgin Mary. CHAP. V.
FRom the Son, we will descendingly ascend to the Mother; I mean from our
most Blessed S^^i^ur to the Blessed Virgin Mary; and see, whether Mahumet, or
our Gospellers do write with more reverence, and Honor of that most
Intemerate, and Sacred Virgin* Mother of God, and chief Patroness of all true
and virtuous belieuers.

And to recurre (for trial hereof) to Mahumet his Alt^ran; We read these
following Elogi^, and Praises of the Virgin Mary the^i^ (notwithstanding that
he was persuaded, as our Adversaries are at this Present, that too much honor
was exhibited to her, by the Christians of his days.) Thus then the Alcoran
celebrateth her Worth. saying: Omnium Az^^^^
mul^er^i^ op^i^a Mari^, ab omnibus intactae, ani^^am suam Deus insuff^^^is,
and ill^^^ ^^liu^^, suum ^anifestu^ Geni^^^^ M^^ac^l^^^ p^^u^^. God did breath
the soul into Mary, being defiled by no man, and being the best of all Women;
and made her, and her Son an evident Miracle to the Gentills. And more: Maria
fuit Azoar^ (...)
omnibus viris and mulieribus splendidior, and mundeor, atque purior, soli
D^^perseueranter studens. Mary was more fair, more clean, and more pure then
all Men and Women, ever perseuering, and studying to please God. And further:
Spiritus Azoar^ ^1,
Dei intrauit Mariam, and Iesum ex ea genui^. The spirit of God entered into
Mary, and begot of her (being an immaculate Virgin) Jesus. Again: Maria Azoar^
76.
aliquid mali, sieve Malit^ae non oper^ta est. Mary did never commit any Evil,
or Act of Malice.

These, and the like praises an given by Mahumet to the B. Virgin; yea one
Author has left thus recorded of Mahumet, saying: Nullus Lyra in tract.
contra quendam Iudaeum, in fine Noui Testam^nti.
de fi^ijs Adam nasci^ur, quem non tangat Satan, praeter Mariam, and filium
eius. There is not any borne of the Children of Adam. whom Satan has not
touched, or assaulted, excepting Mary, and her Son. And according to these
Praises, we find that Mahumet in his Alcoran usually gives her, the title of A
Virgin. For example (to omit other such like passages.) Angelus Gabrie^ Azoara
^.
ad Virginem Mariam a Deo missus est, narra^grus eam (qu^mquam Virginem) Dei
tamen omnipotentia filium concep^uram. The Angel Gabriell was sent from God to
the Virgin Mary, to relate unto her, that though she was a Virgin,
nevertheless through the omni^^^ency of God, she was to co^n^au^ a Son, And
concordantly hereto Bi^ reports the doctrine of the Turks herein, Biblia^der
in Praefat. Alcoran. page 3^
saying: Credant Turci, quod Ma^^a (...) Pa^^ genitus e^t. Now out of the^^
^^^mer Passage^ of Mahumet, and the Turks, delivered in the honor of the
Mother of ou^ Sa^i^ar, we collect first, that in the Judgment of Mahumet, and
the Turks, she was and ever continued a Virgin. Secondly that ^^e was more
perfect, and pure, then any Man; or Woman; Christ only excepted. Thirdly, which
is partly coincident with the former, that she never committed any sin, and
was free from the Temptations of the Devil.

Let us oppose to these Pass^ges the W^^tings of our first Innouatours, and
observe the great disparity between them, and Mahumet. And first let us take
into our Consideration, how they ^uer^e, that the B. Virgin by the birth of her
Son lost her Virginity. M^linan^ (a great Protestant) thus writes here^^ in
Molina^^ in vnion^ qu^tuor Euangeliorum part. 3.
Concep^ion^ quidem ^^llo ^^ds fui^ visrus Mariae aper^us, ^id s^^^ in
^^^iuilate. In the Conception or Christ, the Womb of Mary was not opened, but
it was in the Na^iuity. And more in the same place: Virge supernaturali^er
pregnans, naturaliter peperit, which could not be without breach of her
Virginity, according to those words of S. Austins Sivel per Christum nasce^te^
c^^ramper^^u^ ^s^^i^ Mati^ in^egri^as etc. If the integrity of Mary the mother
(...) be corrupted by Christ, in the time of his b^^il^, then follows i^,
that he was (...) bor^^ of a Virgin; and th^^ consequently (which God forbid)
the whole Church should err in believing, and confes^ing, that Christ was
born^ of a Virgin. Thus S. Austin.

To proceed further. Your Grandmaisters are not content to ^each, ^^^t not only
in the birth of Christ, the most Blessed Virgin lost her Virginity; but they
write most doubtfully (contrary to those words of Mahumet above mentioned,
Mulier ab omnis^us intact^,) that she had the company of Joseph after the birth
of Christ, and perhaps might have some other child: Yea they blush not to
allege Scripture in warrant of this horrible blasphemy. According to this,
that refined Heretic ( Calvin I mean) thus writes: Non Calu^^ in Harmonis,
fuit pass^rae Virgo etc. The Virgin did not suffer herself to be marted to
Joseph, thereby to delude him; and certainly it would have been a perfidy in
her, deserving great repraehension, if she should thus continue the duty of
Marriage; and this not without mocking of God; Thus intimating, that the Blessed
Virgin did corporally know Joseph, after the birth of Christ.

And from this puddle it springs, that the Nouellists of these days cannot
endur^ to hear, that the Mother of God ever vowed Virginity. For thus we find
that Ps^^de-Martyr to reprehend S. Austin: S. Austin Peter Martyr. de Eucharist
and Votis, col. ^6^^.
i^ his book of holy Virginity believed, that B. Mary^ vowed Virginity; which
allmo^^ easily know, how absurd this Sentence i^. Yea out Aduers, are so full
of this sensual blasphemy, as that they are ready to press with I^^i^^an, and
Hel^^di^^ (two old Heretics, branded therefore by the censure of the Primitive
Church) that place of Scripture, against the perseverance of our B. Lady in her
future Virginity: Et non Math 1.
cog^^sceba^ came, donec etc. Whose detorted, and Heretical Scholia of this
place (chiefly resting in the word donec) is avoided by other passages of V^^^^
^^ Psalm. 109. Math. 18. Math 5.
Scripture, wherein we find the said Particle, donec.

The Bethsamites (we Regum 1.
read) were severely punished, only for unworthily behoulding of the Arc,
wherein the Tables of the Typical Law were kept and reserved: What
Punishments, what tortures, what torments then are prepared for those, who do
by their enuenomed Pens, and raso^y tongues, violate the inuiolate dignity of
the Sacred Virgin; within whose chaste Womb for the space of nine Months the
most Venerable Body of Christ was (as I may say) ^nchased; of him I mean,
whose Aduent and Coming was shadowed in the Typical Law, and whose birth did
abrogate and cancel it? O sacrilegious Impiety!

Now where the former Azoar^s in Mahumet auerr^, that God did breath the Soul
into the Virgin; that ^he was more p^r^, and cleans, then any m^n or wom^^;
incess^ntly st^^^ing to pleas^ God; Finally, that she never committed any Act
that was evil, or proceeding of malice: How dissonant this doctrine is from
the doctrine of our Innouatours, shall appear, from the Opinion of some of
them, who will not affoard to her the title of being Blessed; Yea they are not
afraid to introduce even her own son (an offense, which surpasses the
nature of sin) ^o deny her to be Blessed.

According to this my Assertion, we find Calvin himself to vige certain words
of Christ, where we read, that when upon those words spoken by a Woman to our
Savior, Beatus Luc. 11.
venture ^uite portauit etc. Our. Lord answered: Quimimo bea^i, qui audiunt
Verbum Dei, and sustodiunt i^^ud, This answer (I say) of our Lord, Culuin
Calvin in M^^monia.
tortures and racks to deprive the B. Virgin of being (even ^o her sons
judgment) Blessed. O good God! Are they Christians, who thus conui^^ate with
their S^tyticall Inuectiues the Mother of Christ? Or hope they to find favor
with the Savior of the World* who thu^ ^ea^e a sunder the Mo^our of her* who
is the Mother of the Savior of the World?

An Aduertisment of the Translatour.

Seeing the Cardinal (as not understanding our English tongue) could not
produce the authority following therefore the Translatour has thought good to
insert it (as being most pertine^ to this matter* (...) T^^^ i^; the (...)
^^onny (an English Minister) of great ^ni^^ency, in his Treatise of
Pacification fears not to chargeous Blessed Lady (I have a horror partly but
to relate his Words) with sour^ mortal, sins, committed at one time; for he
says She did break the first Commandment, the fifth ^he sixth, and the nynth
Commandment, because ^he defended not her Son upon the C^osse. Would ever
any Mahumetan speak that (...)

Thus far (or rather to much) of this dista^tfull subject. Only I refer to the
Censure even of your selves, my Countrymen; (for I do not fear partiality in
so clear a point) whether after you have per^^sect diligently all the
Premises you be persuaded, that Mahumet, or your Prime Masters, have borne
greater veneration, and reverence to the Mother of Christ, our Redeemer: yet
before my Pen here cease, let it turn it self particularly to thee, O B.
Virgin, and by dece^ping some Panegyricks out of the ancien^ Fathers, and other
Doctors, delivered upon thee, celebrate in part thy praiser. Thou art then
both^ Gregory Nyssene Orat. ^. de Natiuit. Christi.
Mother, and a Virgin, Neither did thy Virginity take away thy Chil^byrth, no^
thy Childbi^^ (...) thy Virginity. Only Ierom. l. ^. contra Pelag. c. 2.
Christ did open the closed gate of thy Virgin^^ ^ombe, which nevertheless
ever continued soul. Thou art the Proclu^ Constantin. ^rat. de Na^iuit, Christi.
Temple of God ^hou art the Mansion of Heaven and earth. Thou art the Win^^our
Fulgentius, sermon. de laud. B Virg.
of Heaven, because through thee. God did send forth true light to all Ages:
Thou in time di^^^ Methodius orat. in Hypag. This Father lived in the second
age after Christ.
bring fore^ him, who was con^e^ued before all time. Thou art the Methodius
ibid.
circumscription of him, who cannot be circumscribed; the comprehension of him,
who comprehends all things. Thou Proclus Constant. Homil. de Natiuit. Christi.
art the shop, wherein the two Natures are united; the Bedchamber, Proclus vbi
suprd
wherein the Word espoused human flesh: or the Bridge by which God descended
from heaven. Thou art Higher, Athauasius in Euang de Beat Virgin.
then the Blessed of Heaven, more honorable, then the Cherubims, more holy then
the Seraphims, more glorious then all the Hosts of Heaven. Finally. As Eua
^^eu^us contr^ Haeres. circa ^^^dium.
was seduced. that thereby the might fly from God; So thou (Mary) art persuaded
to obey God, that so Mary (being a Virgin) might be an Advocate for Eua a
Virgin.

Since then most Holy ^^rgin, thou art an Advocate, plead for me (thy
suppliant, and Client) who with all humble gratfulnesse, do acknowledge thy
several corporal, and spiritual Benefits bestowed already upon me. Besiege
the ears of thy B. Son, with seruerous Prayer in my behalf, that during my
peregrination here upon earth, and sailing in the Sea, and waves of humane
Misery, my poor Soul may escape the Rocks, and sands of mortal sin; making
Heaven my Pole-starre, and thy Son, my Pilot; that so after my troublesome
voyage is ended, I may arrive to the Haven of interminable selicity, there to
enjoy those Joys, qua 1. Cor. 2.
oculus non vidit, nec auris audiuit, nec in cor bominis ascendit. But to
remember my self, and to proceed to other Parallels, or Comparatiues.

The 5. Parallel; Concerning the Antiquity of Mahumetisme, and Lutheranisme.
CHAP. VI.
I Will in some ensuing Comparatiues insist in certain Prerogatives, which may
seem to agree to Mahumetisme; of which Prerogatives Lutheranisme is wholly,
deprived, and consequently inferior therein to Mahumetisme. I will not call
these the Marks of the true Church, since a false Church; (and such is the
Church of Mahumet) is in some sort, and comparatively capable of them. And thus
though every Religion, or Church enjoying them, is not a true Religion (for
they are not absolutely conuerrible with a true Church) notwithstanding that
Church, which wants them, is doubtlesly a false Church, or Religion.

The first then of these shall be Antiquity, which is far greater in
Mahumetisme, then in Lutheranisme. For about Cuspi^ ad Mahumet^.
some nine hundred years since or more (to wit, within some fifty, or more
years after S. Grogery the Great) Mahumet first appeared to the World, and
planted his Religion: Which his Religion has ever from that time continued
even to this day, without any Interruption.

Now Lutheranisme in compare hereof is of so late a date, as that being first
broached by Luther, it is not past one hundred years since it was first heard
off. According to which my speeches, we find* that Bucer (the Protestant) does
style Luther, Primum Bucer in Epist^an to 1536. ad Episcop. Hereford.
Apostolum purioris Eu^ligeli^^ the first Apostle of the Reformed Religion.
Another Lutheran thus writes (...) Georgius Milutus in Augustan, Confess.
explicat. art. 7.
^ntecess^^^ Lutherus in ^fficia^^bersset etc. If Luther had any Predecesso
(...) and function then there had been (...) of ^uthers. Reformation. In like
manner, a thir^ confesses in this sort: It is impudency Sch^ussenberg in
Theolog. Caluinist. l. 2. fol. ^10.
to^maintaine that any learned men did b^^ld the doctrine of the Gospel in
Germany, before Luthers days. A fourth thus writes: I^ is ^ridiculous
Bernard, Morgenstern. Erect. de Eccles. page 145.
to think, that before Luthers days; any had the purity of the Gospel;
considering it is euiden^^^^^he whole World, that before Luthers time all
Churches were drowned in more then a ^y^mtri^^ darkness. To contract this
point^^ Luther himself thus boasts h^^^ of i^ (...) a (...) primo ^^^gain^^
audemus^ gloriari. We dare vaunt, that Christ was first (...).

The 6. Parallel; Touching Universality of Mahumetisme, and Lutheranisme.
CHAP. VI.
ANother Prerogative is, to be dispersed through many Nation^ and Countries:
For this respect also is Mahumetisme superior to Lutheranisme. For Mahumetisme
possessed in former Ages, as also at this present (as above I have declared) a
part of Persi^. Tartaria, India, Asia Minor, Arabia, Mauritania, Bathory etc.
Whereas Lutheranisme is confined, and circumscribed (as it were) within most
narrow Precincts of England, Scotland, some small parts of France, some parts
of Flanders, some parts of Germany, of Denmark, of Sweueland, of Tra^siluania.
Which Religion as yet never did set foot our of Europe.

The 7. Parallel; Concerning Unity of doctrine in Mahumetisme, and
Lutheranisme. CHAP. VIII.
THe third Prerogat^^e, shall be Unity in Doctrine: Certain it is, that in the
Turks dominions, Wherein Mahumetisme has been first planted, and in which the
same Religion at this day reigns, there has been and still is, Great Unity
in that Religion. And hence it proceeds, that in those Nations subject to the
Turk, there are very few, or no Books written among themselves, wherein any
diversity of Faith, or Points in religion is maintained and defended; for if
any such were written, the Historiographers of their Countries, Nature, and
Religion, would make some relation of them, and would not pass so great a
matter over in silence. Therefore it follows, that the Mahumetans, and Turks
with a joint consent for the most part preach, and practice the same points of
Religion, without difference, or contradiction among themselves.

Now, how far distant our New Gospel is from Unity, it is a world to observe,
into how many Sects, Lutteranisme is divided and distracted. The first
disagrement among them is, their Account of Touching the retecting of these
books, See Luther, in Prafat in Epist. Iacobi etc. Kempnitius, in Euchiridio
p. ^^. Adanius Praucis^^. in Margarita Theol. p. 448. The Centuvists, cent. 1.
l. 2. c. 4. Bullinger upon the Apocalyp^. c. 1.
Canonical Scripture. Luther, and such as are most linked to him in
obserua^cy, do reject (as Apocryphal) the book of Wisdom, the second Epistle
of Peter (as else where I have noted) the second, and third of John, the Episle
to the Hebrews, the Epistle of James, the Epistle of Jude, and the Apocalypse:
All which Books are commonly acknowledged for Canonical Scripture by the
Swingliani, and Caluinists.

Their disagrements Touching their mutual reprehensions herein, see Osiander
his reprehensions, mentioned by Luther, in Colloq. Mensal. ^idis. Germ. sol.
145. So also Beza in respons. ad def^^l. and respon^ Cast allouis Also Beza in
Testam. 1556. in prafas. Hospinta^^ in ^istoria 8^. cram. part. (...) tera.
fol. 183. Moli^aus in ^ua Translatione noui Testam. part. 12. fol. 110.
Castatio in defens. Transl^t. page 170.
Secondly are, touching the Translation of such Books of Scripture, which they
all acknowledge for Canonical. The Translators of it, to wit, Luther,
Swinglius, O^colampadius, Calvin, Biza, Castal^o in great acer^ity of Words, do
reciprocally charge one another Translation with sacrilege, corrupting the
sense of the Holy Ghost, with making the Tent to leap^vy and down, with
actually changing the Tent; sinally with sacrilegious (for all these are their
own Words) Ethuicall, and wicked proceeding therein.

Their next disagreement consists among those, who in a more restrained sense,
are called Of this poins see Nicolaus Galiu^ in Thesibus, and Hypothesibus.
Lutherans, for their main tayning of the Real Presence. Of these men, some
are called Osiandrians, others, Mai^rists, others, Placcians, others,
Adiaphorists, others agains Phiquitaries; each of these holding all the rest for
Heretics.

Another disagreement is between the Lutherans (so called in a limited sense)
and the Caluinists. Concerning which point we may aduertize you, that the
Books written by the Protestants, against the Protestants, in matter of faith
only and Religion, do amount to several Hundreds, as may be gathered out of
I^docus Coccius his Thesaurus, out of Hospinian in his historia Sacramentaria,
part. altera; and finally from the Catalogues of Books returned for many
years past, from Franckford.

Thus far I hold it convenient to discourse (in general) of the
disagreements, and Vant of Unity in Faith among our New Brethren, And now I
refer to your own judgment (My Countrymen) whether a greater^ble mish
rests upon the face of Lutheranisms, or of Mehumetisme (to recapitulate a
li^^e) if we respect, touching faith and Religion, either Antiquity, Multitude
of Belieuers, or Ve^ity in Doctrine.

The 8. Parallel; Whether Mahumet, or the Lutherans stand more chargeable, in
teaching God to be the Author of Sin? CHAP. IX.
I Will now descend to parallel, and weigh the particular Opinions, or
Articles maintained several ways by Mahumet, and Luther and his Scholars;
and so by conferring them together we may observe, whether Sentence is less
justifiable. I will begin with the Questions Whether God be the Author of
sin, or not's Mahumet teaches, That God is not the Author of sin; Your
first Masters teach, That he is the Author of sin.

That Mahumet, or Sergiu^ did not teach God to be the Author of sin, I thus
prous. First we find no such Tenet, or Article thereof in the Alcoran. But if
they had taught this Doctrine, that God were the Author of sin, they would
infallibly have placed is in their Alcorans Which Books they made ((...) it
were) to become the Catechism of all their Mahumetan faith.

Secondly, the Alcoran necessarily implies, that God is not the Author of
sin; and this in several passages thereof. For example; In one of the
Azoara's Mahume^ calls God, Pius Azoard ^.
and Misericors. Again, in another Azoara, he thus teaches: Omnis Azoard 1.
recte viuens bonique gestor indubitanter diuinum amorem consequetur: Every one
living well, and doing Good, shall infallibly obtain the divine Love. Now here
I demand; If God be pious and thercifull in the judgment of Mahumet; how can
then Mahumet be induced to believe, that God should irresistably force a Man to
sin, thereby without any Mercy to punish him after, with eternal forments
for the same?

Again in this later Azoara, Mahumet, teaches, that the means to obtain the
Divine Love (as he calls it) meaning the Love of God, is to live well, and to
perform works accordingly; therefore it follows, that Mahumet thought not,
that God would forcibly impell man to sin, and to do wickedly, or live badly;
seeing by this course, a Man was to purchase not the Love of God (to which this
Azoara exhorts) but his wrath, and indignation.

But now to come to your Progenitors, and to see, how they dogmatize herein*
Your Grandfather Luther thus teaches* Qu^modo Luther, in Assert. damnat per
Leonem, Art. 3^.
potest homo se^^ (...) ^onum prepardre etc. How can a Man dispose himself to
goodness, seeing it is not in his ability to make his ways wicked, or evil: Nam
mala opera in impijs Deus operatur? for God does work the evil works in the
wicked? And again, the said Luther auerreth: Nullius Luther, vbi supra.
est in manu etc; It is not in any Man's power to think Good, or Evil, since
all things have their proceeding from absolute Necessity.

To descend to Luthers descendents. Swinglius thus says: Mouet Tom. r^de
Prouidentia.
Deus Latronem, ad occidendum: God moves the chief to kill; And more: Latro
coactus Swinglius vbi supra.
est ad peccandum; The theife is constrained to sin. Aretius (a Protestant)
in like manner thus writed: Deus Aretius in loc. com. loc. 41. page 179.
excaecat mentes hominum and obiturat corda etc. God does blind the mynds of
Men and, harden their hearts; not only by his sufferance, for this is over weak
to express the force of Obduration. Finally to omit many others Melancthon
thus conspireth with his former Brethren: The Adultery Molancth. in Romans 8.
of David was the peculiar Work of God, no less then the Conversion of Paul.

Now, let any dispassionate Man in his most retired, and impartial thoughts,
give up his Ce^sure, whether Mahumet be not far from accusing God to be the
Author of sin; and whether our Gospellers rest truly chargeable with so
pernicious a doctrine, who ascribe the fource of all sin to him, who became
Man for the expiating of sin, and whose very Essence is Goodness it self. Can
a Well send forth at once, Water which is pure, and Water which is muddy? No
more can Sin, and Goodness take their emanation, and flowing from one source
or fountain. Therefore it is no small impiety to charge God with impiety; And
it is as much as to maintain, that Light can produce Darkness, and Fire
Couldnes; yea it is to transform God into the Devil, since sin proceeds
from the devil. Qui 1. Joan. 3.
facit peccatum ex diabolo est. But let us hasten to other matters.

The 9 Parallel; Concerning the Paschall supper of the Turk, and the Communion
of the Caluinists. CHAP. X.
THe next shall concern the Paschall Supper of the Turks, and the Communion
among the Caluinists, or Hugenois: And let us see, whether be kept with show of
Greater Reverence. Touching the Celebration of the Paschal supper with the
Turks, we thus read: The Turks. See hereof Munster Cosmogr. l. 4. page 973.
Theuet, Cosmogh l. 2. c. 26 Postist de la religion des Turcs. page 64.65.
after they have kept their Quadragesimall Fast with their accustomed
abstinence, begin their Paschall Feast; aforehand purifying their minds of all
hate, and maleuolence; every man that is wronged, remitting the offense, and
the party of fending humbly craves Pardon; That done, They go unto their
Temples, and supplicate God; Their Prayers being ended, they do kiss the
Cheek of one another, in show of Charity; They then return to their Howses;
and such, as be of richest sort, give Alms to the Poor.

Now let us observe the custom of our New brethren, in the Celebration of
their Communion. They chiefly communicate at Easter, and very seldom at other
times of the year. Which custom, and manner of their Communicating I will set
down in Caluins own Words, he thus writing thereof: Vbi finem Calvin, in vat.
celebrandae Coenae, page 609
dicendi Concronator fecit etc. After the Preacher has finished his Sermon,
then the Ministers of the Word, do give the bread to the People; and the Elders
of the Church (who are the Overseers of Men's manners) do distribute the Cup
to the People; Some few words being spoken, that every Man shall come thither,
in an honest and decent manner. In the mean time a Psalm is song, or some
Part of Scripture sorting to the Sacrament is pronounced, with a high Voice.

This is the description of celebrating the Communion, prescribed by Calvin
himself. Now the disparity of these two Paschall Feasts of the Turks, and the
Caluinists (so far forth only, as may concern reverence, and preparation in
performing of them, though both of them be in themselves otherwise most wicked)
I refer to the Reader.

The 10. Parallel; Whether the Turks, or the Lutherans are by their Religion,
more obliged to Prayer? CHAP. XI.
TOuching Prayer (though their Prayers be most sacrilegious, and profane) the
Turks are more devoted to it, then the Lutherans, and Calumists are. For we
find recorded, that Mahumet has appointed in his Alcoran (only to mask his
profane, and impious religion, under the tecture of devotion) that five times
a day, the Mahumetans Of the praving of the Turks Vide Cuspin. de religion^
Turcarum.
shall pray at appointed, and designed times. The first Prayer is to be made,
at the rising of the sun. The second Prayer, about the middle of the day. The
third toward night. The Fourth, at the setting of the Sun; The fyft, some
hour after Supper.

Now touching Prayer among you Hugenots, I refer to each of your private
Consciences, how little it is practiced by you. Yea in regard of your seldom
using of prayer some of you Satyrically term us Catholics, Superstitious, and
dorish Papists, for our prolixity in Prayer. Well, howsoever; I refer to the
Reader, I mean to such a Man. who has much been conversant with you, Whether
the Mahumetans (supposing they prayed in a right manner) do come more near,
then you Hugenots, in accomplishing that precept of our Lord: Oportet Luc. 18.
semper orare and non desinere.

Now in lieu of true and holy Prayer (which is the Ambassador between God,
and Man, treating for reconcilement to his divine Majesty; or the very Pen,
wherewith Man cancelleth out his spiritual debts, recorded in the Book of God
Justice:) you Hugenots of France, yea the very Women, and Children among you,
can cry out, Allons a la Presche, a la Presche: Let us go to the Sermon, to
the Sermon. The which after you have heard (it being ordinarily but a virulent
Inuectiue against the Church of Rome, delivered by an ignorant, and malignant
fellow,) If your Women (I say) can but repeat some Words of the Text, they
repute themselves to be learned, and much conversant in the holy Scriptures.
Poor Souls! how is their Credulity abused? And what punishment are your
spiritual Masters to undergo, for their impoysoning of them with their
pestiferous doctrines, occasioned through their misunderstanding of Gods most
holy Bible? and giving to them Liberty, promiscuously, and at their own
freedom, to read the sacred Scriptures?

In regard of our Salique Law here in France, (which excludes Women from all
supreme Sovereignty) you know, we have a saying: La Churone ne tomb pas^soubs
la que^^ouille: The Crown falls not upon the distaffe; I cold wish this
sentence might be extended also to Gods holy Written Word: My meaning is, that
every silly Woman, (who is sitter rather for a distaffe to span, or with the
nedle to prick a cloth) should be restrained from their private reading of
the Scriptures; from whence through their falsely understanding of it, they
suck their Souls poison; their judgments resembling vnproportioned
Instruments, not sorting to work upon any curious Matter.

But to return back. Therefore touching Prayer (my Countrymen) so little used
by you, and your greedines of hearing an illiterate Companion to spit out
nothing, but declamatory Philippicks in the Pulpit, and sacrilegiously to
detort Gods holy Word; I may justly conclude, That the greatest part (it not
all) of the practice of your Religion rests in your ears, the least in your
tongue, as most of your Mortification lies in casting up the white of your
Byes.

The 11. Parallel; Touching the Proceedings of the Turks against Christians,
and of the Protestants, against other Protestants and Catholics. CHAP. XII.
THe next Comparatiue has reference to the Proceeding of the Turks against
Christians and of Protestants against other Protestants, and against Catholics.
True it is, that Mahumet did put to Cusanus vbi sub a Semptem^^str. and alij.
death such Christians (through most wicked cruelty) in Arabia, and other
bordering Countries thereto, who would not embrace his Religion, and also most
sacrilegiously killed diverse holy Hermites, and others, at the first plantation
of Mahumetisme. Now the better to observe the Comparison here made, let us
look into the comporement of our prime Ghospellers, and some of our
Evangelical Princes. But in discoursing of this subject, let us ascend by
degrees, and first observe in part the carriage of Protestant Writers, even
against other Protestant writers. I will not here insist in their dissentions
in Faith (as partly above laid open) but I will rest only in their outward
proceeding among themseluer.

First then, they brand one another with the name of being Heretics. Thus for
some taste hereof, we read, that Luther vomiteth out these words against the
Swinglians, and Sacramentaries. We Luther contra artic. Louamens these 27 tom.
2. Wittenb. fol ^^3.
in earnest condemn the Swinglians, and Sacramentaries to be Heretics. and
estranged from the Church of God. Which charitable Censure the Tygurine Deuines
(all Swinglians, and Caluinists) do thus kindly retaliate: Luther terms us
Tyzurini tract^^contra supr^m^m Luthert Confess ^ag. ^1.
Condemnat ans and execrab^lem Sectam etc. Acobdemned, and execrable Sect; but
let him beware that he does not discover himself to be an Arch-Heretike, since
he will not nor can brook to have any society with the Confessors of Christ.
And according hereto Swinglius thus says of Luther: En vt Swinglius i^ tom. ^
respo^s ad confess Luth^^i^^ fol. ^78.
totum istum hommem Satan occupare ^^netur. Behold how Satan endeauoreth
wholly to possess this Man.

To proceed: Our Evangelists do prohibit the sale and reading of each others
Books, as Hospinian Hospinian in histor. Sacramentepart. altera fol. 39^.
the Protestant confesses. Yea they approve Hospinian, vbi supra.
Articles of Visitation, and enquiry of each others Adversaries though all call
themselves by the name of Protestants. And which is more, they commit (6) one
another to prison, and restrain the giving (7) common entertainment, due to
trauaillers and strangers. And which is yet more; They enter into open Arms
among themselves, as the foresaid Hospinian Hospinian vbi supra, fol. 195. and
197.
records.

But now, it is no less^ strange to observe how ready and prompt those of the
Reformed Religion have been, in raising seditious tumults, and entering into
open hostility against their Sovereign Catholic Princes. The former
Proceedings of this kind in Scotland, the Lomcountries, Germany, Bohemia,
Denmark etc. do proclaim the outrage ousnesse of them to the whole World.
Therefore pretermitting them, I will infist in briefly displaying (as most
pertinent to us) the insurrections, and rebellions here in my own Country of
France, and all originally for Matter of Religion. Thus shall my Pen reveal
(but with intention to prevent the like hereafter) the scars of my own noble
Country; as the Surgeon makes a deep and rough incision in his Patients Wounds,
thereby to cure them.

First then it is ourr evident, that out Country of France has been infested
with Civil Wars, begun by them of the Reformed Religion (for the maintenance
of their said Religion) during the full space of forty years and more, until
Henry the fourth, our late King (the very Prototypon of a valiant, and most
worthy Monarch) became Catholic. for answearably hereto Osiander Osiander
Epit. Cent. 10. page 688. and 804.
relates, that the French Protestants under show of exhibiting a Confession of
their Faith, came armed unto the Kings Palace. That Civil Wars for Religion
were renewed; and that the Constable of France (being the Kings General) was
slain, and upon his death the Kings Brother entered into his place. In like
sort Crispinus thus writes* After Crespinus de stat. Eccles.
diverse messages sent to the Protestant Princes from the King, but all in
vain; the Wars had a second beginning, and the Prince of Condy rose up in
arms; under whose solemn Protestation these words were subscribed: Deo, and
victricibus armis.

Another Protestant In the history of France, written by Joan Serres.
writer relates thus: The Protestants grow earnest, and in all places, where
they are of Power, they take revenge of Churches, Images, Priests, and
Religions Howses. In like manner, Fayus Antonius Fayus de vita, and obitu
Clarissimi Viri, Theodori Bezae
the Protestant, records the battle of Druce, and says, that Bez^ was
there present, even armed with weapons, encoraging the soldiers to fight for
the defense of their Religion. We further may read, how it is registered, that
the In the History of France, written by John de Serres.
Protestants of France treated touching peace, partly as humble subjects,
partly as armed men, like to such, who beg an Alms, with their naked swords in
their Hands.

Now to show, who were the Battefeu's in all these Rebellions, and
Insurrections, I will produce the Words of the French Ministers themselves, who
in their Assembly, did see forth certain Canons, printed at Berna, Anno 1572.
where we thus read in the third Canon: In every City all shall swear, that
they, and their Posterity shall not violate, but observe the Points following,
Canon. 40. Until it shall please God (in whose hands are the Hearts of Kings)
to change the heart of the French Tyrant etc. In the mean time let every City
choose an ancient Magistrate to govern them, as well in war, as in peace etc.
Let all Captains and Leaders never lay down their weapons, as long as they
shall see their Adversaries, to persecute the doctrine of Salvation etc. And
yet further: If God shall vouchsafe to raise another Prince, to take revenge of
our Adversaries Sins, and to deliver his People, they are then to subject
themselves to that Prince, as to another Cyrus, sent to them from God etc.

Thus we see, how our French Ministers do indoctrinate their Proselytes in the
mystery of Rebellion, and Treason, against their lawful and natural Princes;
and this only in maintenance of their innouations in Faith, first disseminated
by Luther, and his Scholars. But here let me use an introuersion, and reflex
upon my own Country. How much then, O France, art thou departed from thy
self? In former times our own forces united with a true conjunction of mynds,
made us not only formidable to other Nations, but also advanced our state to
that largenes of Empire, which at this day it enjoys. But since your Gospel
(My Countrymen) first got on wing, what secret molitions, what proditious, what
euisceration, and disbowelling of your own dear Country has this viperous
brood of your Reformed Religion attempted? But I will stay my self, in
discoursing of my own Country any further.

I am loath to be offensive to neighboring Princes, either alive, or dead;
Nevertheless before I end this Parallel, I cannot but in few words touch upon
one Act of immanity, perpetrated by Elizabeth heretofore Queen of England,
upon the Queen of Scots, Mother to James, at this present King of England, a
peaceful, merciful, and learned Prince. This foresaid Queen (to whom Nature
and Fortune had contributed much, but Grace and Virtue nothing:) This English
Semiramis (a fitting branch of such a Stem) exercized an unheard vnhumanesse
and ferocity by putting to cruel death the forsaid most worthy Catholic
Princess; who in her youth, was married to our Prince Dolphine of France.
Concerning whom, only Virtue, and Doscent came in not to plead for (for that
must not be admitted) but to accuse her: In which most barbarous Act, a Woman
did butcher a Woman; The Regnant, her next Successor; The anointed, Gods
anointed; finally a Queen, a Queen.

But as un willing to soul my Pen any further in this most dishonorable
subject, I will pass to the next Paralle^^, Only I here refer the Reader, to
observe the cruel, and barbarous proceedings of Mi^humet against Christians;
and of those of the reformed Religion, against their own Br^thren, against
their Catholic Princes, as also against their Catholic Neighbors; which
done, I hope it will appear, that our New Ghospellers, though (perhaps) they
do not fully equal Mahumet in immanity and cruelty, yet are not many degrees
short to him therein. And here I would not be reputed to be of that severe
judgment, as to charge all the French Protestants with disloyal minds against
their Catholic Princes. No, God forbid. For I do hold diverse of them trusty
and faithful, though not for such acknowledged by all other Catholics: So,
many counterfeite Jewels make the true suspected.

The 12. Parallel; Whether Mahumetisme, or Lutheranisme more inclines their
Belieuers to Vice and Sin? CHAP. XIII.
IN this place I will compare the doctrine of Mahumet, with the doctrine of
Luther and his Ospring; And so see, whether of them stand more changeable in
lesning of Vice and sin, as not reputing it hurtful to man's Salvation. To
begin then with Mahumet; We find him (as above I have showed) thus to teach in
his Alcoran: V^ores quotiescunque Azoera 8.
placuerit, duas scilicet, tres, aut quatuor ducite, Et cum contingerit ea^ non
diligere, vnam pro alia mutare licet. Take as many wives as you will, either
two, or three, or four; And if it happen, that any of them you shall not love,
it is lawful to change her for another. Wherein Mahumet (I freely confess)
warranteth the perpetrating of sin; though he might make a show (though
falsely) of securing this his wicked Position, by his own unlawful doctrine of
Polygamy; to which doctrine Brentius (the Protestant) affoardeth great liberty,
as elsewhere is made manifest.

The like lustful doctrine Mahumet teaches in another passage of his Alcoran,
saying: Omnes Azoare 43.
mulieres iua manui per emptienem suppositas; and amitaetuae, materieraeque
filias, omnes item bonas mulieres tibi volenti gratis succumbere captentes,
licitas constituimus. We ordain, that it shall be lawful for thee, to lie
with all such bond slave women, which thou shall redeem by bying; also it
shall be lawful for thee, to have the use of the body of the daughters of thy
Aunts, either by the Fathers side, or the Mother side; yea of all sayre Women,
which cover to prostitute themselves to thee willingly. These two, are the two
chiefest, passages in the Alcoran, for the patronizing of sin.

Now let us look into the doctrine of our New Gospellers, and observe, how
they teach, that Sin (as if it were, but an intentionall Notion of the Mind)
is in no sort prejudicial to the Soul. First then, Luther does thus strangely
oracle in defense of sin: As Luther, (...) loc. com. class. 5. page 27.
nothing does justify: but faith; so nothing sins, but unbelief. Again; A
Christian Luther. tom. 2. Wittenb. de Captiuit. Babylon. fol. 74.
or baptized Man is so rich, as that he cannot loose his Salvation, by any
Sin (how great soever) unless he will not believe. And Luther yet more: No
Luth. in sermonibus.
work is disallowed or condemned by God, except the Author thereof be
disallowed. According to which most licentious doctrine Beza thus writes:
David Beza, in respons. ad Act. colloq. Montisbelg^ page 44. and 48.
by his adultery, and neurther did not loose the Holy Ghost, and fall from his
Faith. And semblably hereto Whitaker us says: Si quis Whitak. de Eccles.
controu. ^. quast. 5.
certum fidei etc. If a Man enjoy an Act of Faith, to that Man sin cannot be
prejudicial, or hurtful.

Thus far for a taste of our Lutherans doctrine touching sin; where this
difference seems to be between Mahumet, and them; that Mahumet allows only
the sin of the flesh (to the which a Man is prone by Nature:) Whereas Luther,
and the rest above alleged, give the reynea to all kind of Sin in general;
whether it be the sin of Carnality with Mahumet, Theft, Homicide, Sodomy, or
any other flagitious Crimes whatsoever; maintayning, that the committing of
any, or all of them, can bring no hurt or loss to the soul. Interrogate
I^^^^. ^.18.
gentes, quis audiuit talia herribilia? nough hereof, seeing much of this
matter is delivered before upon other occasions, and respects.

The 13. Parallel, Whether Mahumetisme, or Lutheranisme do more depresse, and
visify Virtue, and good Works? CHAP. XIV.
AS we have balanced the Sentences of Mabuinet, and Luther, touching the
extenuation and lessening of Sin; So in this place we will take into our
consideration, whether Mahumet, or Luther with his Par^eners do more depresse
and vility Good Works, as in no sort conducing to Man's Salvation. And first we
find, that Mahumet thus teaches in his Alcoran, as above is alleged: Omnis
(1) recte viuens bonique gestor, indubitanter diuinum amorem consequentur Every
man living well, and doing Good, shall doubtlesly obtain the divine love; then
consequently his own Salvation.

Thus in this Azoara Mahumet seems to exact two things to be performed for the
gayning of Heaven. One, that a Man should live well, and commit no sin; The
other, that he should do good, and practice works of Piety, which is signified
in those former Words: Bomque gestor. The first Point we have briefly examined
touching Mahumet, and Luther. Now to the second. Let us see, how little Luther
and his Sect regard Good Works, and the practice or exercise of them, and ^ow
with all contempt in their writings they tread the worth of them under their
feet.

To come then first to Luther himself: He thus teaches: It Luther, upon the
Galathi^us
is wickedness to mai^^ (...); that Faith not beautified with good Works, does
not justify. And further Luther thus auerreth: ^ides, Luther, com 1 Propos. 3.
nisi sit etc Excop^ faith be without good Works, it does not justify; nay it
is hot Faith. So he. And Illyricus, Luthers Scholar, thus treads his
Masters steps: It is Illyricus in praefat. ad Romanos.
a Papisticall Error to say, That good Works are m^any respect necessary to
Salvation Conradus Schlusselburg (so often above alleged) writes. That Good
In Catalog. Haretici in Epist. Dodic^t.
Works are not necessary to Salvation, only necessitate praesentiae. Finally
to contract this point Amsdorphius (a remarkable Nouellist) was not ashamed to
write a book bearing this Title: Quod bona opera perniciosa suns ad salut^^;
That good Works are p^^nicious, or hurtful to Salvation.

Thus far now hereof. And here Idem and of you ( My Countrymen, Whether you
think Mahumet) or Luther was more precipitious* and headlong in extenuating of
sin and dis^^lowing of pious, and good Works? If you say that Luther and his
Party were inseriour to Mahumet herein; then I will you to show, where in the
Alcoran, or in any books written of the Religion of Mahumet and the Turks, you
can find such virulent sayings for the lessning of fin^e, and depressing of
good Worker, as here from (...), and his Scholars I have produced?

Thus to conclude: According to these Men's Principles, the Faith of our
Nouellist^ in respect of Good Works, may be fitly compared to Mare mortuum,
which never brings forth any thing with life. And so commonly the Soul of
such a Man may be termed, Paralytisks, seeing it does not perform the faculty,
and operations of a good Christian Soul.

The 14. Parallel; Whether Mahumetisme, or Lutheranisme seek more to
frustrate the Promises of God, made for reward of Good Works, in the holy
Scripture? CHAP. XV.
I Will next briefly lay down the Sentences of Mahumet, and of some of our
Great Ghospellers; and see, whether does more wrong the holy Scriptures, for
the vilifying and dishonoring of Good Works: I mean only so far forth, as the
Scripture promises most immense, and honorable Rewards to such, as practice
good Works. Mahumet discovers his judgment hereof in his Alcoran in these
Words: De D^^ Azoara ^0.
promissionibus in lege, and Euangelio propositis, non est dubitandum: We are
not to doubt of the Promises of God, proposed in the Law, and the Gospel. His
meaning is touching, A good Life. Thus Mahumet encourages his followers to the
performance of Good Works, and embracing of Virtue.

But to confront this, and to disanimate men from practizing of Virtuous Works,
and living piously, Swinglius (see here how Infidelity, and misbeliefe masketh
it self under the veil of the Gospel) teaches: S^ingl. tom. 1. de
prouidensia Dei. fol. 371.
Si ris ad vitam ingredi. serua mandata etc. He^, and quaecunque alia promissa
oper^bus nostrisfacta, sunt Hyperocha, atque Hyperbolae etc. When it is said in
the Gospel, Tf thou will enter Match. 1^.
into life, keep the Commandments etc. this, and all other like promises,
made in the Scripture to good Works, are but Hyperbolicall speeches, surpassing
the Truth of the matter, or intention of God, or of our Savior speaking them.
Here you see the difference between Mahumet, and Swinglius herein.

The 15. Parallel: Whether the doctrines of Predestination, and Reprobation,
differently taught by Mahumet, and the Lutherans, induce man more to sin?
CHAP. XVI.
THe next Parallel shall touch other Doctrines, differently maintained by
Mahumet, and Luther, and according to which doctrines, it will appear, whether
Mahumet, or Luther do more or less exhort a man to live a Virtuous life, and
to avoid sin. These doctrines respect Predestination, and Reprobation.

Mahumet teaches, that these points of Predestination, and Reprobation depend
of a Man's belief, and of a Virtuous of Wicked life, according to the Azoara so
often about recited: Omnis Azoara ^.
recte viuens, bonique gestor indub^tanter diuinum amorem assequotur. A
Principle so much insisted upon by Mahumet, as that he makes it his first
Azoara in the Alcoran: He thus persuading men, that the obtaining of divine
Love, and purchasing of Heaven does depend of pract^^ng of Vor^^^, and avoiding
of Sin.

Contrary hereto our Prim^ Gospellers ^oach, that Predestination, which has
reference to Heaven, and Reprobation to Hell, proceed only from Gods Secret
Will, without any relation, or respect to a Good, or Wicked Life, or to
virtuous, or impious Actions; thus they then further catechizing their
Scholars: That let a man who is predestined to Heaven, perpetrate never so
many atrocious sins, he cannot thereby loose Heaven, or be damned: As on the
other side, if a Man be re^orobated, though he regulate all his actions in all
Virtue and Godliness, yet he cannot escape Hell, and Damnation. According hereto
we find Luther (as about we showed) thus to dogma^ize: (2) Luther, in ^ssere.
damnat. per Leonem. Ar^. 3^.
It is not in ^^ns p^^^er to ^^inke good or ^^ill, but all things proceed from
a^^lute N^^^ssity. If all things, then Predestination etc Reprobation (which
are the chiefest things) proceed from the like obsol^^e Necessity. But Calvin
delivers this doctrine, more articulately, and in more express words,
saying: Consilio, Calu. Instit. l 3. c. 23. sect. 6.
nuiuqueue suo etc. God does ordain by his Counsel, and decre^, that among
men some be borne ordained to certain damnation from their Mothers Wonibe, who
by their perdition may glorify God etc. And Beza teaches the same, affirming,
Beza (...) respons. ad act. Colloq. Moutisbelg. part. 2. p. 23^.
That God decrees some men to perdition, and creates to damnation Peter Peter
Martyr in his loc. Com.
Martyr, and others jointly affirm the same: A doctrine most derogatory to
Gods Justice, and which strongly inuiteth man to sin, and deadeth all
Virtuous attempts. Thus we see, that Mahumet is not so large in his Alcoran for
persuading man to sin, as these Protestanticall several doctrines of
Reprobation, and Pre^^stination do impell him thereto.

The 16. Parallel; Whether the first Composer of Mahumetisme, was of a more
flagitious lyf^, and conversation in manners, then the chief disseminatours of
Protestancy? CHAP. XVII.
IN this place I will descend from the Theory to the Praxis, I mean, from the
different doctrines of Mahumet and Luther with his brood, to the putting in
execution the said doctrines; That is, whether, He, who first compiled the
Alcoran, was of greater exorbitancy in course of life (according to the
speculation of their several doctrines) then such, as were the Headmen, in
enlarging of Protestancy.

To begin then. It is evident, that Sergius by the authority of Mahumet
composed the Religion of Mahumetisme; I do here pretermit the ballancing of
Sergius with Luther. (as already performed) and will briefly compare,
concerning manners and life, Sergius with Luthers chief descendents: I mean,
with Swinglius, Calvin, and Beza. Touching Sergius his personal sins (though
I presume he was a most profane, and spicked apostata) we read little; But
that through procacity, and disobedience, he was cast out of his Monastery; and
thereupon through liuour, and discontent, ventilated his most blasphemous
doctrines.

Now first touching Swinglius: His own Writings do indite, and accuse him of
Carnality, and raging lust: For he thus confesses of himself, and other
Ministers his Associates: Hoc Swinglius, ^ow. 1. fol. ^15.
vero sunimis precibus contendimus etc We humbly entreat that the Use of
Matrimony be not denied us, who perceaning the weakness of our own fle^h,
observe, that the ^out of Chastity is not given to us by God etc. That lustful
desires of the flesh do burn in us, we cannot deny; seeing by reason thereof we
are become infamous in the sight of our Congregations. And more: Carnis Swingl.
Ibid. fol. 110.
nostra infirmitatem experti sutuus etc. We have made tri ill that the weakness
of our flesh has been (O the grief!) the cause of our often thamefull. fall.
And yet further: Arsimus Swingl. ibid fol. 12^.
proh puder (...) etc. We have so burned (O the ^hame!) as that we have
commuted many things very indecently.

To come to Caliun, who besides his other less sinful pleasures, was charged
with the execrable Crime of Sedo^^y, committed in Noyon, a City here in our
own Country for which his said Crime he was burned upon the shoulder with a
Hoat-iron, as the public Records of Neyo^ yet extant, do witness. A point so
clear and confessed that Couradus Schlusselburg (the often above alleged
Lutheran) thus discourses hereof, as also of Caluins most miserable death,
occasioned through his slagitious life: Deuteronomy Schlusselburg. in Theolog.
Caluinst. l. 2. fol. 7^.
manu sua potenti etc. God by his powerful hand, did so strike Calvin, as that
desparing of his Salvation, he called upon he Deuill^, and swearing and
blaspheming be rendered up his wicked Soul. And then further: Haec publicis
scripits Caluina ob^jctuntur; videlices de ipsius flagiujs and Sodomiticis lib
dinibus ob quas stigma ferio candenti derso Caluini impressum suerat a
Magistratis etc. These matters are objected to Calvin by public writings to
wit of his enormous crimes and Sodomitis all Lusts, for which the Magistrate
did sear Caluins back with a burning Iron; de quo dum vixit horrenda narran
u^^ Of whime whiles he lived, horrible things are related. Thus far this
Protestant discourses of Calvin.

To come to Beza, who, as he was consociate with Calvin in spreading of
Protestancy; so was he also consociate with him, in the abominable sin of
Sedemy. Who, besides that he kept his strumpet Candida several years before
he espoused her, did also through unnatural lust, abuse the body of a fair
Young boy, called Andebertus, and in compare of his different pleasures, with
Candida, and Andeber^, he made certain beastly Verses (of which most of
Christendom took notice) and in the end of the said Verses, prefers for
lustful pleasure his Ganimeda Andebert, before his Queen Candida. The Verses
thus begin:

Abest Candida, Beza quid moraris?
Andebertus abost, quid hac morares? etc.
Beza his keeping (as Concubine) Candida before his marying of her; as also his
writing these Verses upon this occasion, is so vndoub edly true as that the
forsaid Protestant Schlusselburge thus writes of both these points: Constat
Schlusselb. in Theolog. Caluine^t. c. 1. fol. 18.
Bezam cum Candida quatuor annos consueuisse, ea Concubina viende antequam
illam vrorem duxerit etc. It is clear, that Beza did accompany his Candida as
his Con^^hine, four years before he married her. And concerning Beza his
Verses, the said Protestant thus speaks: Constat Bezam Schlusselb. Vbi jupro
fol. ^^.
obscanesiimos versus ad Andebertum Aurelis electum; and cundem tanquam
Adonidem a Beza factum esse. It is euedent that Beza did write most obscene
Verses to Andebertus, huing at Orleans, whom Beza (by abusing the boys body)
made his adonis. In like manner Hesihusius. (the Protestant) records the same
of Beza in these words Beza Hesshusius in his book called Verae and sacae
Coutessiours (...).
nefandos amores, illici^or concab^tur, foor^^^^^nes, food^ adul^oris,
sacrilego carna^^ de^antaui^ Orbi. Beza did publish to the whole wor^^ in his
sacrilegious Verses his own a recrable lust, his unlawful use of pleasures,
his w^oring, and filthy adulteryes. Thus far in ball^ncing these three
sublimatours, and refiners of Protestancy concerning wickedness of life, with
Sergius the Authout of the Turkish Alcoran.

But now to turn my Pen upon the Premises, and to you, my deate Countrymen of
the Reformed Religion: Such is the deformity of this your Reformation as that
notwithstanding you see, that Protestancy does consist of doctrines, which even
euaporate and ^^^ath forth all Libettinisme, and impurity of manners; and this
in a more full degree, and excess, then Mahumetisme does; and that your first
diuulgers thereof, personating in themselves their own doctrines, do surpass
in liberty of life, the first ^^mper of Turcisme: and yet nevertheless you
will still perunaciously insist in your present Innouations, with all scorn and
neglect of our Roman Catholic layth. Why will you thus cease to be your
selves; I mean, why will you abandon the use of Reason, the Character
imprinited in your souls by gods own hand: Fecit Genes. 1.
^^mi^^m ad imaginem suam? You are men, therefore proceed in your Actions, as
men God has even settled this privilege in Man's Soul, that according to the
last di^^amen of his Understanding he ever those to in his election of things
that which is best, at least which (...) bo^^^ Why then is the choice of your
Religion will you prefer Protestancy, and Hugenotisme, which in a clear
judgment is neither good (much less the best) not but apparently good, before
our ancient, and Roman Religion?

Must mixed and compounded Miscreancy he advanced by you, before pure, and true
Christianity? Must a Religion, whose Center is nothing but Sensuality
(extending its lines to all sorts of several sins whatsoever) be by you
still professed, and that sacred Religion of ours, which is Lex Psalm. 18.
Domini immaculata, be betrampled under your feet with all Indignity? Or did
God inuest himself with man's flesh, and suffer a most cruel and opprobrious
death for the cancelling of all sin, and yet would institute a Religion for
the saving of Man's soul, most forcibly (yea irresistably) impelling Man to
sin?

If you think this to be a secure course, and if you will needs still give
assent to these your Thearems, and Speculations of says; then my best Counsel
is, that you cease to be men; then expung^, and obliterate in your Souls the
print of Reason; Finally then (d'vne belle gentillesse d'esprit) out of a
gallantry of resolution, contemn and slight that admonition of the Prophet:
Nolite Psalm. 31.
fieri sicut equus* and mulus etc. And as spurning thereat, say ^ch of you
freely to your selves, Volumus fieri secut equus, and mulus, quibus non (...)
e^^^ellectus. But then withal in recompense of this your spiritual madness,
let me entreat you to interest your selves, in that most dreadful relegation
of our Savior: (11) Math. ^^.
Discedita a me maledicti in ignem aternum, qui parasus est* Diabolo, and
Augelis suis.

The 17. Parallel; Whether Mahumetisme; or Lutheranisme consist of more ancient
conde^aned Heresies? CHAP. XVIII.
TO go on in my undertaken Method. My next Parallel shall show, whether
Mahumetisme, or Luther^^isme does consist of more explorate, and condemned
Heresies. In the former part of this Treatise, I made a Symbolisme between
Mahumetisme, and Lutheranisme, showing that both of then did conspire and agree
herein; To wit, that both of them were engendered of ancient Heresies: Now here
I presupposing the foresaid combination, between them, do by way of
parallelling them together, evidently prove, that Lutheranisme is engendered
incomparably of far more old damned Heresies, then Mahumetisme ever was, though
I still grant, that in reference to the atrocity of his blasphemies, Mahumet
(as laying battery to the chief Mysteries of Christianity) did infinitely
surpass our Nouellists.

It is showed above, that Mahumet did borrow his blasphemous doctrines (though
in respect but few in number* yet in weight and importance most execrable) from
Sabellius, arius, E^^omius, Nestor^^, Manich^us, and the Donatists. Now in live
hereof. I will demonstrate, that at least sixty Articles and Circumstances of
those of our New Gospel, or Hugen^tisme, are but the same Articles or
Circumstances (and therefore I call them so many Identities) condemned in the
firster times of the Church, by Epiphanius, Athanasius, Theodoretus, Iereme;
Austin, and other Orthodozall Fathers. But because the discovery and unfolding
of this Point will require some prolixity of discourse. I have therefore
purposely seposed (as I intimated above in the first part) the ensuing Appendix
to that end, which I do style, The Hugenots second Glass; wherein I hope (My
Countre^^^) you may more clearly see your own faces.

The 18 Parallel; The different respect given by Mahumet, and Luther to the New
Testament, and to the Evangelists, CHAP. XIX.
THe next Parallel shall balance together the different respect, which
Mahumet, and Luther do give to the New Testament, and the Evangelists, though
this in general by way of Symbol has been in part touched. We find then
Mahumet (as above is said) to speak thus honorably of the New Testament: Deus
Azoara 5.
^ius and m^seri^^^s, prius Testamentum Vetus* d^^^ce^s Euaugel (...) rectas
^ia^ ^^^^^ibus tradidi^* God being prou^ and ^^rcifull, did first give the Old
Testament, and then after* the Gospel, as direct ways for men (...) follow.
According to which Sentence C^sanus discoursing of the Alcor^^, thus speaks:
Mahumet^^ Cusonus in cri^^^^^ Alcoran^. (...) ^^ c. 1. and 14. and l 3. c. 2.
approbat Euangelium tradi^^^ Jesus Christ^, filio Mariae Virgins. Mahumet
approves the Gospel delivered to Jesus Christ, the Son of Mary the Virgin.

Thus we see, that Mahumet acknowledges, as sacred, the Gospel, (...) it was
first given. But the reason, why the Turks do not admit the Gospel, as they
find it now written, is delivered by ^ibl^^nder in these words, wherein he
shows the pretext of Mahumet at his first appearing: Christians, Bibliender
in prae^a^. Alcor^^^, page 3.
qui iam a long temp^re Legem, atqu^ Euang^lium perdiderum, ^u^ propter
discessum Christi, (...) ^^iam propter mortem Apostolorum, atque discip^larum,
legem suum perfect doce^it Mahumetus, Mahumet undertakes, that he will
perfectly teach Christians his Law, the which Christians had for a long time
lost, ^oth the Law, and the Gospel, partly through the departure of Christ,
and partly through the death of his Apostles, and Disciples.

Thus we see the reason to be, why Mahumet did not allow, the Gospel, as now
it is written; because he presumed (though falsely) that it was corrupted* in
process of time. But the Case here is different with Luther and his Seed;
for Luther Categorically. and positiuely disualeweth three Gospells of loure,
even as they were, and are, first written by the Evangelists themselves; Thus
he not transferring the Cause of the supposed Errors in them, through the
corruption or deprauation of the Originalls of the Gospells (as Mahumet did)
but upon the Euangelisti themselves as committing Errouts in them, in their
first writing, and penning; so far was Luther from thinking, that the
Evangelists in writing of the Gospells were assisted infallibly by the Holy
Ghost.

But let us for the more particular dissecting hereof, recurre to Luthers own
Words, who first preferring the Epistles of S. Pau^ much before the first three
Gospells, does finally in the libration of the four Gospells in themselves,
thus pronounce: The Luther in sermon. de Phavis. and Publicanis.
Gospel of John is to be advanced in worth and digmity (as fair, pure, and
chief) above the other three; thus implicitly, and covertly charging the first
three Evangelists with errors, and faults in writing their Gospells. In like
sort the said Luther thus speaks in other of his Writings (a testimony upon
other occasion above alleged, in the first part of this Treatise.) Qui Luther.
in praefat. Epist. Petri.
potissimum, and maiore pracateri^ studio etc. Such Evangelists are the
chie^^^^, who more carefully teach (then other Evangelists) that faith in
Christ only without our Works, does make to Just, and in state of Salization;
insinuating in these Words, that some of the Evangelists did tench erroneously,
touching the doctrine of good Works, and Justification.

And thus much for some touch, to make it evident, that Luther had a far more
unworthy conceyte of some of the Gospells, then ever Mahumet had; Since Mahumet
admitted them all, so far forth (as above is said) as they were first penned by
the Evangelists, and remained incorrupted; Whereas Luther misprizeth, and
rejects three of them, as they were first written by the Evangelists,
presuming (and that truly) that they were not corrupted.

The 9 Parallel; Concerning the Mahumetane Clergy, and the Lutherane Clergy.
CHAP. XX.
HEre I will treat of the Turkish Clergy, and of the Prolystants Clergy, and
will in part observe the disparity between them; since we shall find, that the
Clergy of Mahumet enjoys several privileges* which (...) wanting in the
other. For example* First we Th^u^^. Cosm^graph. V^^^ersal. l. 6. c. 8.
read, that the Turks in honor of their Religion, cannot brook, that such
strongers as do not profess their Religion* should enter into their Temples,
or be present at their Service; much less, that they should minister the
Mysteries of their Religion: Where^^ our New Gospellers will admit such men as
are created Priests by the Bishop of R^^^ (whom they teach to be Antichrist)
without any new Creation of them, to exercise the rites of the Protestants
Religion. And herein it is evident, that the Turkish practi^^ in this point is
more conformable to the practice of Christ's Primitive Church* (he^ the Practice
of our New brethren are: Since in those times, one, that was Catechi^m^nu^ only
(that is, who was of the number of the faithful but not as yet baptized)
should not be suffered to see, and be present at the celebration of the
Myst^ryes of Christian Religion; much less to preach the Word, and to dispense
the Sacraments, as S. Austin Austin, tract. 11. in Joan.
relates, and Beza Beza, in Epist. Theolog, ^p 8.
acknowledges.

Secondly, the Turkish Priests are obliged by their Profession Septem.
castrensis de religione Turcarum, cap. 1^. Richerius, l. 1. de moribus Turcorum.
to spend more time in prayer, both for themselves, and for the People, then
our Evangelical Ministers either are bound to do; or actually do. For the
Turkish Pries^* (as above is showed) are t^e^ by Mahumets rule) to pray five
times euer^ day. Now how little our late illuminated Ministers are given to
prayer; I refer to ^ch Man's experience herein; seeing that among them, a^kiling
Inuectiue (which they g^^e^ with ^haritie of Preaching) must for the most part
supply all want of Prayer.

Lastly, the Mahumetan^ and Turkish Priests have wives, and such Women are
reputed, and taken of their lawful Wines (...) like sort the Children begotten
on their Wiuer* are accounted the lawful issue of their Fathers, and may
inherit lands, and other goods of their Parents; and all this by the first
Institution of Mahumetisme: Whereas if the book styled, Schisma Anglican^m,
relate the Truth, the Ministers, who in England do marry, are in that respect
reputed Adulterer: In proof whereof, the Children are accounted Bastards by
their Municipal Law, still remaining in force in England, and vnrecalled; So as
they are wholly deprived in rigor of Law, from all title of Inheritance. Thus
we see, with what Prerogatives (to pretermit some others for breuity) the
Turkish Clergy is honored, the which in the Lutheran Clergy we find most
wanting.

The 20. Parallel; Whether the Turks, or the Lutherans may seem to have mere
erred in their different Belief of some inferior Points of Faith; and
consequently, whether may seem more to be punished for such their Misbeliefe?
CHAP. XXI.
THis twentieth, and last Parallel shall consist in a Perisma, resulting from
the due observation of several See touching the contents of this Chapter,
Chronica S^^r^ce^orum.
Parallells above expressed; And it shall be this, to wit, That in regard of
diverse of the former Parallells (abstracting only their denial of the Blessed
Trinity, of the Incarnation, and Passion of Christ; blasphemies, I most
willingly acknowledge infinitely tra^scending any Errors, believed by the
Lutherans;) the Turks may seem to have less erred, then the Lutherans, and
consequently may seem to be less punished for such their Heresies, then the
Lutherans, and our Evangelical Brethren are to be. For it is to be believed,
that such men, who labor (more then others) to depresse in their Writings the
dignity of Jesus Christ; who conuitiate in words the Mother of the Redeemer of
the World; Whose Religion is engendered of more old condemned Heresies; Finally,
whose doctrines, do more vilify good Works and virtuous life, and do more
extenuate Vice and Impiety, then the doctrine of others does; It is necessarily
to be believed (I say) that these men so more offending in all these points, do
sin more grievously, then other men, who do not in such measure offend in the
same points; and therein may seem to be worthy of greater Punishments.

Now it is clearly euicted out of diverse of these former Parallells, that
Luther, and the Lutherans do believe and write of these Passages in greater
estuation and heat of malice, and with less reverence, then Mahumet, and the
Turks have done. How probable then at lest is it, that Luther and his Sect, as
having more erred herein, are for such their Errors to be punished with
greater severity of pains, then Mahumet and the Turks in that particular
respect are? Here I (say) I balance the punishments due to Luther and his
party, only for such their wicked proceedings, and not with reference to the
torments allotted to Mahumet, and the Turks (which no doubt are, and shall be
infinitely greater, and more grievous) for their denial of the most Sacred
Trinity, and rejecting Christ, not acknowledging him for the Redeemer of the
World.

To the fortifying of this Parallel, I add, that Luther, and his followers
have impugned (in hostile manner) the authority of Gods Universal Church,
teaching that it has wholly erred in doctrine for the space of sixteen hundred
years, as may be gathered by his and their charging of all the Fathers since
the Apostles days with superstition and Errors, (as above we have showed.
Mahumet first contemned the Authority of the Church, but for six hundred years
at the most: Is not then Luthers sin far greater, and are not his punishments
to be proportionably more intolerable therefore?

Again, certain it is, that such men, who have received from God greater
means of finding out the true Religion (if so they neglect, and contemn those
Means) do stand in a far higher degree of Gods indignation and wrath, then
others do, to whom the like means of searching the Truth have not been
afforded. Well then, not only in several ages before Luthers bursting out but
even after his appearing, God has vouchsafed to work many most stupendous
miracles, in confirmation of ou^ Catholi^e Religion. Witnesses hereof (to omit
former Ages) S^o this point confessed of former ages by the Centurist^, Cent.
^. c. 11. and Cent. ^0. c. 13. Ber^ard. in Visa Malachiae, See Also the History
of Matthew Paris, printed at Tyguro 1589, touching the great Miracles of S.
Francis.
are the Miracles exhibited at Loreto in Italy, and but the last day at Sichem
in the Low Countries, in the Province of Brabant; The truth of which Miracles
done in both those two places, Impudency it self has not the forehead to
deny. Which Miracles have no doubt come to the ears of our Evangelical men,
according to the difference of the times wherein they were wrought. And yet the
Consideration of these Miracles (though often exhibited in proof of our
Catholic Religion) is so far from winning ground upon our Adversaries
judgments therein, as that the Luthera^^ (acknowledging them, as truly done)
commonly style them, Antichristian Osiander, Cent. 10.11. and sequentib.
Wonders, and lying signs, as also, prestigious Peter Martyr, l. contra
Gardi^^^um.
sleights of the Devil.

Now I say, the report of these Miracles as being wrought here at home, were
never made known to the Turks, through the great distermination of Countries.
And if they had come to the intelligence of the Turks, in all likelihood they
would have wrought more efficaciously (for less they cold not) with them, then
they have done with Luther, and his Sectaries: So as perhaps that saying of our
Lord (with reference to the Turks, and our New Evangelists) might here have
been justified: If in Luc. c. 10.
Tire and Sidon had been wrought the Miracles, which have been wrought in you,
they had done penance in sackcloath, and ashes long ago. From hence then I
conclude, that Luther and his Sectaries, as contemning all such true Miracles,
stand far more culpable for such their neglect of them, and consequently are
with greater severity to be punished, then the Turks, who had no perfect Notion
of the said true signs, and astonishing Effects; they being of that force for
proof of what they were wrought, as that we may say of them in the words of
the Prophet David: Mirabilia Psalm. 91.
tua credibilia facta sunt nimis.

And thus far of the Parallels between Mahumetisme, and Lutheranisme; where
we evidently discern, even by force of all true Judgment, and strength of
Reason, that several chief Persons of Luthers Religion have been far more
wicked (at lest as wicked) in their deportment, then the first broachers of
Turcisme have been; And that many doctrines, ventilated and introduced first by
Luther, and his false Coapostles, are more pernicious in their own Nature, and
more exiciall to the Belieuers, then are the different doctrines, and Positions
to them, maintained by Mahumet, and the Turks.

That Mahumetisme, or the Turkish Religion, is first, most foolish or
ridiculous; Secondly, that it warranteth all sensuality, and unlawful
Pleasures; Lastly, that it is most horrid, blasphemous, and damnable. CHAP.
XXII.
TRue it is, that Protestancy, or Hugenotisme seems to stand in a higher
degree more chargeable, and iniustifiable in the Points above paralleled, then
Mahumetisme does: Nevertheless, my project in discoursing of the said
Comparatiues, is to lay open the deformity of Lutheranisme, or Hugenotisme, and
not in any sort to advance a good opinion to be had of Mahumetisme. For
although this later be in some points less* Evil, yet follows it not, that
therefore it is in any sort Good; since there is a great disparity or
difference betweens a Positive and real Good, and a tesser degree of Evil.

Now therefore for fear, that men should in any fort worthily conceive of
Mahumetisme, I have thought good to reserve this Chapter, for the preventing of
such a spirirituall Mischief, wherein the Vglines of Mahumetisme shall
summarily and briesly be dismanteled, and laid naked. And for the more
perspicuous and methodicill accomplishment of this my design, I will reduce
what here follows, to these several Heads. First, I will insist in the
fabulous and ridiculou^ fooleries, which Mahumet and the Turks do maintain as
true. Secondly, I will show, that Mahumetisme in doctrine principally tends to
the patronizing of Lust, and sensuality, which Mahumet tastes to be no sin.
Lastly, and chiefly I will lay open how Mahumet and the Turks greatest atrocity
and blaesphemy consists in the denial of the most Blessed Trinity, and of Man's
Redemption by Christ Jesus.

To begin with the first branch, and to gather but dispersedly here and there.
First then we Cuspin. in Mahumeto page 514 Thenet Cosmographia. l. ^. c. 3
Codrenus Chronograph. Zonaras.
read, that the spirit of God did descend upon Mahumet in the form of a Dove,
dictating unto him, what to write in his Alcoran. The which doctrine while it
was promulgated, a fierce and untamed Bull did run to Mahumet, prostrating
himself before his knees, and kissing and sicking his Hand. The Mahumetans
further report, that the Angel Gabriell accompained with seauenty thousand
Angels (so prodigious is this fiction) descended from Heaven to visit Mahumet,
being then but four years of Age; moving the minds of men to give Credit to
that, which Mahumet should after teach, touching his doctrine and Religion.

In like manner Mahumet thus writes in his Alcoran: Emina Azoara ^0.
matter Mahumetis, testabatur filium Mahumetum nec in vter^ nec in parto vllum
sibi dolorem fecisse. Emina the Mother of Mahumet did witness, that her son
Mahumet caused no grief to her, remaining either in her womb, or at his
birth. See here how this ambitious Impostour (emulous of our Saviors Honor)
thought good (to ennoble himself the more) partly by prestigious forgeries,
partly by force, to assume to himself the like credit and dignity in some of
these former relations, which we find the holy Scriptures, and the authority of
the Church of God do ascribe and give to our Savior, Jesus Christ. But to
proceed.

Mahumet further teaches, that Christ in the New Testament did admonish the
Jews of Mahumets after coming into the World; For thus he introduces Christ
saying: N^ntium Aroara ^4.
vobis affero, de Nuncio post (...) venturo, cui nomen Mahumetus. In like
manner the Al^oran Azoara 71.
reports, how in the Old Testament also the Nativity and Birth of Mahumet was
foretold.

To pass on further; It is Georgensis de Turca. ^^m moribus.
recorded (such are the Portentiue sables touching Mahumet) that at Mahumets
prayer, God commanded every Mountain, or great Hill near to Mecha, to bring a
certain heap of stones for the building of the Temple of Mecha. And whereas
one Mountain (called Araphat) was more slow in coming then the rest, and
seeing the Temple to be already finished, the Mountain did abundantly weep,
that it was not present at so great, and fair a work; But Mahumet did
compassionate the Mountain, and willed it to lay down its heap of stones in
a fair place near to Mecha; the which stones Mahumet had no sooner gently
struck with his foot, but presently there did rise up a most large, and sweet
fountain of Water from out of the stones. Is not this strange fooling? But let
us relate yet more.

The writers Vide Bellonium des singularites. l. 3. c. 7.
of the manners of the Turks record this ensuing fictitious Narration; To wit,
that Mahumet being accompanied with the Angel Gabriell, did once ride up to
Heaven, for the approbation of his Alcoran; being carried upon a learned beast
called, Alborach, (de la grandeur d'en Ausne) of the greatness, and shape of an
Ass (an Ass indeed was Mahumet for forging this, and Asses are the Turks for
believing it:) The which Beast would not suffer Mahumet to ride upon him, till
before he had gravely disputed with Mahumet, and till Mahumet had seriously
promised the Beast, that he should not be left at the Ga^e of Heaven, but
should enter into Heaven with Mahumet. And thereupon Mahumet entered Heaven, and
passing through fair spacious Halls, hanged with Tapestry and Arras, he was at
the last brought to the sight of God, who sat in a Chair of Estate; and yet
as the Alcoran says, he stood, Tanti Azoara ^^.
(spatij interuallo, quantum, sagi^ta bis transcurreret) so far distant from
God, as an Arrow might be shot at twyce.

The foresaid Author Bellonius vbi supra.
relates, that the Porter, or dorekeper of Heaven would not open the door to
the Angel Gabriell, until he heard the name of Mahumet pronounced. But Mahumet
coming into Heaven, he saw several Great Halls; wherein were many kinds of
Angels, some bearing the shapes of men, others of Beasts, Horses, Oxen, and
Byrds. But enough (if not too much) of these commentitious and incredible
fantasies, which are sufficient alone to discover the futility and Vanity of
Mahumets own Religion. From whence we may further gather, that Mahumet
(contrary to all Philosophy, and Divinity) supposes, and dreameth, that God,
and the Angels are corporeal, and have Bodies. In like manner, we may infer
now incompatible these Untruths are with true Faith, and how displeasing they
are to God, since we read: Job. 13.
Numquid Deus indiged vestro mendacio?

Finally I refer the Reader to that madd, and fantastical Protestation of
Mahumet above related, in warrant of the Truth of his doctrine: Per Azoara
61.6^. and sequentibus.
ventos inflantes and nubes, and naues aquore currentes; per montem Synai, per
stellam vespertinam, per stellas retrogradas and combustas quod non sum
damomacus aut Magus; sed Dei Optiminuncius etc. So certain it is, that Mahumet
was a man, wholly made of Sophistications, and imposturs.

To descend to the second Point; Which is, that the doctrine of Mahumet wholly
tends to Pleasure, sensuality, and Lust, with all warrant of Impunity to the
Practizers thereof. For first touching his doctrine, even steaming forth lust
during a man^ life in this World, we have above showed, that Mahumet thus
ordains in his Alcoran: We Azoara 43.
constitute and decree, that it shall be lawful for thee, to have the Company of
all Women which as bondslaues thou buyest, and subiectest to thy hand; as also
the daughters of thy Fathers sisters, or thy Mothers sisters; and to have the
company of all fair Women, who are willing thereto. According to which his
doctrine, it will not be impertinent to repeat that other passage of his
Alcoran, above related, teaching the same: Vx^res Azoara 8.
quotiescunque placuerit duas, tres, ant quatuor ducite etc. Take as many
wifes, as you will, either two, three, or four; except you fear, that they
cannot live quietly together; And when it shall so chance, that you cease to
love any of them, then it shall be lawful for you to make exchange of such an
one, for any other.

And Mahumet for the greater warrant of his sensual doctrine, does vaunt of
himself in his Alcoran, Azoara 43.
that he had a special power and ability of body, conferred upon him from
Heaven, (see what bestiality, and filth this miscreant disgorgeth) for the
exercise of his lust, as that (said he) he was able to deflowre forty Virgins
in one night. O! can that be the Religion of God, which is first invented by
him, whose brutish Animality (so to call it) transgresses all limits and bonds
of humane Verecundy, and shame? Animalis 1. Cor. 2.
homo non percipit ea, quae sunt spiritus Dei.

We have heard, how Mahumet allows to man in this life all pleasure of the
body, ex^^ing all chastity and purity. Now hereafter the Reader shall take
notice, that Mahumet places the joys of the future life, in like corporal
pleasures, and sensuality; for thus he writes in his Alcoran: In Azoara
54.65.^0.
paradiso sideles habeb^ant hortos, and font^s, vestientur seri^is, and
purpu^a; puellas habebunt cum oculis claris and immensis quorum albugmes
candid^ssima, and pupilla nigerrimae. In Paradise (he meaning hereby Heaven)
the faithful shall have Gardens and fountains being clothed in Silk and
Purples they shall also have young Women with cleave and great Eyes, the
brightness whereof is most whit^, and the pupil, or sight of the Eye most black.

The Turks further believe, Bellonius, vbi supra, cap. 9.
that when they shall arrive to Heaven, they shall presently be entertained
with a most exquisite banquet; and there shall most fair young Women come
forth, each one to embrace her Turk, and shall accompany him to his bed, and
shall enjoy the pleasure of each others body, for the space of fifty years,
without intermission. How nauseous and displeasing is but the thought of this
doctrine to chaste ears; and how far discosted, and estranged is this
luxurious Course from the Words of Christ? No Galat. ^.
foruicatours shall inheris the kingdom of Heaven; since the way of pleasure
is the Math. 7.
broad Way leading to destruction, provising 1. Peer. 3.
Libery, and transferring Jude. v. ^.
the Grace of God into wantounes.

Now to come to the third and last branch, which infinitely exceeds (in
impiety and Horror) the former two Heads; since this wounds Christianity in
its Mayster-veyne; for it consists in the absolute denial of the most sacred
and undivided Trinity, and of the Incarnation of God for the Redemption of
Mankind. For to recapitulate that, which (touching this point) we have above in
this Treatise showed Mahumet to have taught in his Alcoran; He there thus
further teaches: Indredul^ Azoara 12.
sunt, qui Iesum Maria filium, D^^^ dicunt esse. They are incredulous, who say,
that Jesus, the Son of Mary, is God. And Azoara 49 and ^3.
more: Constanter dic ultis Christianis, (...) nec genuit, nec genitus. Speak
constantly to those Christians, that God did neither beget, nor is begotten;
thus speaking against Christ the Son of God. And further against the death
and Pas^ion of Christ: Iudai Azoara 1^.
Christum Dei ^uncium nequaquam interfecerunt, sed alterum ei simil^m. The
Jews did not put to death, Christ the Messenger of God, but one like unto him.
To conclude, Mahumet thus execrateth most blasphemously in his Alcoran:
Confundat Azoara 10.
Deus Christianos, qui Maria filium, loco Dei venerantur. Let God confound the
Christians, who worship the son of Mary, in place of God. And hereupon it is.
that (as above I noted) Bibliander says: Prim^s Bibliander in praesat*
Alcoran. p. 3.
and manimus error Turcarum est, quod Trinitatem in V^^tate negant. In like
for: Cusa^us. Cusanus no cribation^ Alcoran. l. ^. c. ^. and l. 2 c. 14.
Richard^o in conf^legis Sar^^^^^.
and Richardus Ordinis Pradicat^rum do thus write: Principalis intentie Mahumet
j^st pers^adere, Chri^tum ^aque Deum* neque (...). Both which authorities are
(upon other occasion) above expressed.

O the Incredulity of Mahumet and his Sect, who will not acknowledge him, whose
lineaments (as I may say) of body, I mean, whose several Passages of his
Birth, Life and Passion are most lively drawn, and pourtrayted by the pensills
of the Prophets in the Old Law. To insist only in some few points. His birth of
a Virgin was prophesied in Esaias c. 7. The Place of his birth, in Michaeas 5.
The death of the Innocents killed by Herod, in Jeremy 31. His Miracles, in Esaias
35. His betraying by his own disciple, in Psalm. 41. His preaching, in Esaias,
61. That he should suffer diverse Kinds of Torments, in Esaias. 53. That he was
to suffer for our sakes, in Esaias. 53. His four Evangelists, in Ezechiel, 1.
His Crueisixion, in Psalm 22. His Resurrection, Psalm. 15. His Ascension into
Heaven, Psalm. 14. The sending of the Holy Ghost, Joel, 2. Thus Mahumet by
disclaiming from Christ, as his Redeemer, disclaymeth withal from the
authority of the Old Testament; and with like contempt sleighteth the dignity
of the New Testament, under pretext, that both the Old and the New were
corrupted from their original Purity. In a serious perusal of which New
Testament, our Soul is of power to lance forth into an Ocean of Mysteries
touching Christ; but our Understanding through the gloriousnes of his worth, is
not able to aprehend them (so the stars are darkened through over much light)
and our eyes are too weak to behold those radiant beams of his divine
Majesty.

For we therein read, that it is He, who being the comfort of Angels,
vouchsafed Math. 4.
to receive comfort from Angels; Who was nourished Math. 20.
with meat, and yet first gave to meat the Virtue of nourishing; so as when
he did eat, or drink, then did the Earth after an unaccustomed manner,
nourish the Heavens. It is He, in whose Incarnation the Celestial Math. 17.
sun received its light from the Earth: ( Orietur Malach. 4.
Sol Iustitiae) (to wit, from the B. Virgin:) and thus did the Earth power out
its influence upon the Heavens. It is He (O happy Sinicon!) who, when thou Luc.
2.
in^ou^des him within thy Arms, did infould within his Arms the whole
Universe. It is He, who being Lapis Angularis, Act. 4.
became Petra il Petr. 2.
scandali; And who being Humilis Math. 11.
cord, was filius Marc. 9.
Alussimi. It is He. who being Puer Luc. ^^
was before All time, ( in John 1.
principio crat Verbum) and but proficiens Luc 1.
Sapientia. then enjoyed omnes thesauros Coloss. ^.
sapientiae Dei.

It is He, Who conuersing here upon Earth, did suspend for the time his own
Greatness, thereby the more easily to accommodate himself to Man; and who
ruling the whole frame of this World, subiecteth himself (in the patration of
Miracles) to the Voice of Man: Obediente Deo Jesus. c. 10.
voci bominis; Who also being Plenus John 1.
gratia, and veritatit, semetipsum Philip. 2.
exinaniuit. It is He* who being the Light made, Ego sum John ^.
lux mundi, was derived from the Light unmade. It is He, who through the mist,
or cloud of his Humanity, darted forth beams of his splendor, and brightness
Lux in tenebris lucet, John 1.
and tenebra came non comprehenderum; Whose glory was really the glory of the
only begotten Son of the Father, and yet recorded to be but, quasi Vnigentii
John 1.
a Patre. To conclude, It is He, who invested himself with our Humanity, that
through an opprobrious death he might save mankind. O how many Christians have
shed their blood, in defense, that Christ for them did sheed his blood*

Since then the sacred Scriptures do further most largly celebrate the
incomprehensiblenes of thy Mercy (Most Blessed Redeemer) for therein we read,
that God the Father said: Propter Esaias, ^3.
scelus populi mei percusii cum: For the wickedness of my People I have stricken
him; That Christ for our sake was made obedient Philip. 2.
unto death, even the death of the Cross; That Christ loved us, and Ephesians. 9.
delivered himself for us, an Oblation and Host to God, in an odor of
swe^tnes; That Christ is the 1. Joan. ^.
Propitiation for our sins, and not for Ours only. but for the whole world:
Finally (to omit infinite other texts of like Nature) that God 1. John. ^.
has sent his Son, a Propitiation for our sins. Seeing then I say (Most
Blessed Jesus) so many Passages of thy Divine Word, do even proclaim forth thy
Mercy, I (poor wretch) most humbly beseech thee, not to suffer my sins to
overthrow that in my Soul, which thy goodness has builtt therein: Acknowledge
in me what is thine, but absterge and wipe away what is not thine.

Thou once did take mercy on the Woman of Canaan, of Mary Magdelen, of the
Publican, of Peter thy Apostle, and of the Good th^ese hanging upon the Cross
with thee. Vouchsafe (I humbly beg of thee in all prostration of Body, and
Soul) to make me partaker of thy like ineffable commiseration and goodness. I
do acknowledge I have sinned more highly, then any of these former: For I grant
with the Woman of Canaan, my daughter (my poor Soul, I mean) has been vexed
with the Temptations of the Devil; say then to me (Good Lord) through the
intercession of the intemerate Virgin, thy Mother and my Patroness (and with
all make it good) that which thou said to the Canaan: O Woman, Math. 15.
great is thy faith, be it done unto thee, as thou will. I have committed
uncleanness; let thy words spoken to Magdelene; that Blessed sinner (though
blessedness be incompatible with sin) be also spoken to me: Thy sins Luc. 71
are forgiven thee. I pray with the Publican: God be Luc. 18.
merciful to me, a sinner; Vouchsafe then to pronounce of me, as thou did
of that Publican: This Man departs home Justified. I have denied thee with
Peter, in my works, and badnes of life: O let it be said of me with Peter,
through the force of thy Grace, causing in me a most feeling Contrition: Math.
2^.
Pleuis amar^: To conclude, I have committed theft with the Fuangelicall thief
(and yet the Euangell brooketh no thief) in robbing thee (by committing of
sin) of the Honor due unto thee; Say unto me upon my true confession of thy
goodness, in my last sickness, and at the point of my dissolution, as thou said,
to him: This day Luc. 24.
thou shall be with me in Paradise. O most merciful Redeemer, even by the
merits of thy five most Dolorous wounds, and bitter Passion, accomplish all
this in me, poor sinner.

And now before I close up this short discourse, give leave (You of the
reformed Religion) to my Pen to take more room to turn it self in; and to
direct its words to your Country, and mine. Then (O France) who have begot, and
nourished us all: Blushest thou not, that thou, who heretofore have brought
forth Kings, who for their Piety, have been honored with the Title of the most
Christian Kings, should now produce men, who are Enemies to all true
Christianity; contracting a most strait combination with that Hellish Mahumet,
in misbelieuing most points of faith, and Religion; As also in maintayning with
their own Prime-Maysters, diverse other points of faith, and circumstances
thereof (both for the speculation, and the Practice) in a more pernicious and
wicked degree, then either Mahumet, or his Sect have done? Alas is thy Flower
de* Luce thus turned into a Bryar? Is thy former glory thus ouerclouded with
the mist of Miscreancy* O what disparity is there between the King, and the
Subject?

But pardon (O my Country) this my sudden Rapt. There is a nere Conjunction
between thee and me; It is no weak twyne wherewith I am tied to thee: Thou
have begot, and brought me forth; Thou have nourished. and sed me; Thou have
eue^ shewred down dignities, and Honors upon me: How then can I suddenly cease
to euaporate out my grief (in thy behalf) into disconsolate sighs? Therefore
my dear Mother, my Nurse, my Mecanas, give care to what I shall now say.

Are these of the Reformed Religion in thee (I mean the Hugenotes) true French
Men, who swear fealty to such their first Doctors, who thus compart with
Mahumet in Religion, or otherwise do exceed him in malice against Christ, and
his Church? Noe, they are not; They are Gallo-mahumetani, but spurious, and
adulterate Embrio's, wanting the true french shape. Thou dealest most liberally
with them, in not denying them to breath thy wholesome Air; in not withdrawing
thy hand, from affoarding them thy Natural Benefits; and in not suffering them
to statue in thy fecundity: Thou do charitably, and well herein with them (O
my Country) since thou art Mother to them All, howsoever they become but Moles,
and blemishes to the face of thy Honor. And with this I here end, and give a
full Pause to this Treatise.

AN APPENDIX INTITVLED, The Hugenots second Looking-glass.
Wherein is demonstrated, that threescore Points of Faith, and Accessories
thereunto, maintained, and first invented by the old Heretics, were condemned
by the ancient Fathers of Christ his Primitive Church, for explorate, and
damned Heresies; and the Inuentours of them for Heretics: And yet the same
doctrines are believed at this day, by the Lutherans and Caluinists, as most
true, and Evangelical. And in this respect (as being without any difference)
they are here called so many Identities.

You have seen (My Countrymen) how in the former discourse, you may take a
picture of your own Religion out of the Turkish Alcoran; glassing your faith
(I mean, with reference to very many points) therein. Now in this Appendix. I
present to your View, A second Mirror, or Looking-glass of your said
Religion: understanding herby, the ancient Heresies condemned by Gods Church in
those Primitive times. In those Heresies (I say) you shall behold your own
Articles of faith; they being coincident, and the same with the said Heresies,
only revived in these our unfortunate days, by the first broachers of
Lutheranisme, or Hugenotisme.

By this then we may gather, that what may seem defective and wanting in
Mahumetisme, to the (...), and fulness of an Erroneous Religion in the highest
degree, that is supplied and made up, by the accession of beliese of many old
Condemned Heresies. And thus Mahumet, and the Old Heretics have jointly
contributed much to your Reformed Religion; each of them as being ready to
bring several stones for the raising of the Walls of your false Evangelical
Church.

But before we particularize the Heresies revived by your men (in the number of
which you shall find (as I said in the former Treatise) that Hugenotisme does
greatly, or rather incomparably, surpass Mahumetisme;) I hold it convenient
to prefixe this ensuing Prolegomenon; In the which I will briefly insist in
these Points following, to the end, that the said Heresies, (n'ayent pouuoir
d'esbranler autres hommes,) may be of less force to shake the vnsteedy
judgments of other men.

First, we will take into our Consideration, What Heresy is in its own Nature.
Secondly, how Heresy is condemned both in Holy Writ, and by the ancient
Orthodoxall Fathers, as being incompatible with man's Salvation. Thirdly, I will
show, that the Opinions, or Paradoxes hereafter set down, were condemned in
those Primitive times, for most explorate Heresies, and now are renewed by the
first Planters of Protestancy.

To begin with the first* Heresy in its own Nature, is of that Vility, and
Irreality, as that it is but a denial of a Truth (and consequently, it is but
a Privation (as blyndnes is of sight.) Now, in that Heresy is but a Privation,
it therefore in it self has no Reality, Entity, or subsistence; but only Is
(in respect of its Nature) in that, it Is not: And in regard hereof, as having
no Efficient, but only a deficient Cause, it proceeds not from God, who
G^^^s. 1.
made all things; For Gods Word was Gods hand, wherewith he created the whole
World.

From this ground then it resulteth, that Every Heresy is in it self false,
and not true, according to that Principle in School divinity: Falsuns S.
Thomas part. 1 quaest. 17.
est id quod non est apprehendere, Vt esse; and quod est, Non esse. That is
false, which is not to be apprehended* as it is a thing, but as it is not. And
again: Verum S Thomas vhi supra, Durandus l. 1. distinct. 80. quaest. 6.
non potest apprehendi, nisi apprehendatur sub ratione Emis. Truth cannot be
apprehended, but as it is apprehended as a thing, which has a Real Being. Now
from all this the inevitable in erence is, that every Heresy (as being a
Privation) resting only in the denial of what is true, is therefore false, and
proceeds not from God, who is Truth it self: Ego sum Joan. 14.
Veritas. And though perhaps some Heresies may be delivered in Positive terms;
yet they are bu^ Negative affirmatiues (as I may call them) since potentially
they ever include the denial of some affirmative Truth.

To come to the Second Point, which is, to show the Atrocity of Heresy, both
from Gods Holy Word, as also from the learned Monuments of the ancient Fathers;
from both which it appears, that Heresy, and man's eternal felicity cannot
stand together; but that Every Heretic, in that he is an Heretic, is subject
and obnoxious to sempiternall damnation. O then (My Brethren of France) why
will you by embracing of Heresies, even espouse your Souls to Hell, since by
force of your Creation, that which is the Circumference to your Bodies ( Heaven
I mean) ought to be the Center to your Souls?

First then may occur that Sentence, or rather commination of the Apostle:
Haereticum bominem Ad Titum 3.
post vnam and alteram correptionem deuita, sciens quia subuersus est qui
eiusmodi est; and delinquit, cum sit proprio iualicio condemnatus. A man that
is an Heretic, after the first and second admonition, avoid, knowing that he,
who it such, is subverted: and sins, being condemned by his own judgment.
Thus the Apostle precludeth the Gate of Salvation from all Heretics. Again, we
find the same Apostle thus to preach to the Galathians: The ad Gol. 8.
works of the flesh be manifest; which are Fornication, Vncloanes, Sects etc.
They which do such things, shall not obtain the kingdom of God. Now, if Sects
in profession of faith do exclude man from Heaven, much more then, Heresies (as
being in their own Nature more pernicious, and exitiall to the Soul) exclude
man from Heaven. Hence therefore it is, that S. Paul, speaking of certain
Heretics, says: Quidam 1. Timoth. c. 1.
circa fidem naufragauerunt; Certain men have suffered ship wrack touching
faith; meaning thereby. that through their maintayning of Heresies repugnant to
the true faith of Christ, they were not to arrive to the Haven, and Port of
Salvation.

To descend to the Fathers. They are most luxuriant in this subject; but I will
content my self at this time, by retayling some few of their Authorities. S
Cyprian thus writes: Cum Dominus Cyprian, l. 1. Epist. 6. ad ^^lagnum.
noster Jesus Christus etc. Where our Lord Jesus Christ did testify in the
Gospel, that those were his Enemies, who were not with him; He noted not any
one Heresy, but manifestly shows, that all Heretics whosoever, are his
Enemies, saying: He that is not with me, is against me; and he, that does not
gather with me, disperseth. S. Ambrose says: Negat Ambros. l. 6. in Luc. c. 9.
Christum qui non omnia, quae Christi sunt, confitetur. He disclaymeth from
Christ, who does not confess and hold all the points of faith, concerning
Christ. S. Austin: Imagine Au^^. l. 4. contra Donatist. c. 8.
a man be chaste continent, ministering hospitality to the poor and needy etc.
Yet it he be an Heretic, no man doubts, but in this alone (that he is an
Heretic) he shall not possess the kingdom of God.

I will pretermit many other Fathers (to avoid prolixity) and will conclude with
Fulgentius, who thus pronounces of Heretics: Firmissime Fulgent. l. de side
ad Petrum, c. 38. and 39.
tone etc. Believe firmly, and waver not; that not only Pagans, but also Jews,
Heretics, and Schismatiks who dye out of the Church, are to go to everlasting,
and inextinguishble fire. Thus you of the Reformed Religion, do see, in what
dreadful manner both the Holy Scriptures, as also the ancient, and learned
Fathers do thunder out their threats against Heretics; depriving them of the
hope of Eternal Salvation, and mancipating them to the interminable, and
Horrible torments of Hell.

Now I will come to the third and last poin^; to wit, to demonstrate, and make
clear, that those Opinions, which hereafter I am to recite in this discourse,
truly and dese^uedly were condemned for Heresies by the Doctors of the
Primitive Church; and now of new are entertained and embraced by Luther,
Swinglius, Caelui^ etc. and your selves. For the proof of so illustrious a
Verity, I will use several Media, of which the first shall be this. Vincentius
Ly^mensis, I^ene^^, Jerome, Epiphanius, Philastrius, Austin, Theodoret, and
others most eminent and Learned Watchmen of Christ's Church, according to that
of the Apostle: Christ has Ephesians. 4.
placed in his Church, Pastors and Doctors to the consummation of Saints etc.
These former Fathers (I say) by several ways of writing, much labored and
toyled to condemn and record for acknowledged Heresies these ensuing
Positions; in which their different courses they always had their Eyes fixed
upon the conformity of the Heavenly Faith, first planted by the Apostles: so
the Celestial Orbs are ever changing their places, but never change their
Center.

Now, we read not, that any other ancient Orthodox all Fathers, either in
those ages, or in the Ages succeeding, reprehended these Fathers for their
ranging the said Opinions in the Caralogue of Heresy; Therefore it follows,
that the whole Church of God did conspire, and agree with the said Fathers in
such their proceeding. For if other Orthodox all Writers, either of the then
present times, or of subsequent ages, had disliked the Condemnation of the said
Opinions, they would instantly have sharpened their Pens against the
registring of the said Opinions; as we find the succeeding Fathers did write
against the confessed Errors of Origin, Tertullian, and S. Cyprian.

Secondly, Vincentius Lyrinensis, Irenaeus, and the rest above specified, were
most literate, and most godly religious men; Can any man then of a clear
judgment be persuaded, that through Ignorance they could mistake true doctrine,
for false and erroneous doctrine; or through want of Charity, they would
iniustly insimulate men within the compass of believing presumed Heresies,
they not being Heresies?

Thirdly, those Fathers, who first registered the ensuing Opinions for Heresies,
with other Fathers not contradicting or impugning (and therein silently
agreeing with them,) did in those times represent the face of the whole Church,
as being the Principal Members thereof; Whereas these other men making choice
of doctrines different from the whole Church, did thereby manifestly discover
themselves to be Heretics, according to the Etymology of the word. Haeresis, as
coming of the Greek Verb, (...), Eligo: And thus they, by their Election;
and Choice of strange Opinions, did range themselves in the number of those, of
whom S. John writes: Exierunt 1. John ^.
ex nobis, sed non erant exnobis.

Now then if these former learned and pious Fathers should have er^^d in the
condemning the said Doctrines for Heresies, and in wrongfully anathematizing
the broachers of them; then might it be inferred, that the whole Visible, and
Primitive Church of God could err, and then actual did err: Which granted,
how then could the Apostles words stand inuiolate, and immovable, he stiling
the Church: Colu^^a, 1. Tim. 3.
and Firiname^tum Veritatis? Or could the praises given, even by our
Adversaries, touching the Infallibility of the Universal Primitive Church in
matters of faith, be true? For thus we read in these alleged writers
following* all being remarkable Protestants: Sarauta in defens. tract. de
diuersis Ministro^um gradibus. page 8.
Sarauta says: Spiritus Sanctus, qui in Ecclesia praeside^ etc. The Holy
Ghost, who presideth over the Church, is the true Interpreter of the
Scriptures, Therefore it is not a thing reasonable to reject the authority of
that spirit, which presided over the primitive Church, and governed the sams by
its Bishops. Thus this writer. Kempnitius (thus aue^^eth: Kempnitius in Exam.
Council. Trident. part. 1. page 74.
We doubt not, but that the Primitive Church received from the Apostles, and
Apostolical men, not only the Text and Words of Scripture, but also the right
and Nati^e sense, and interpretation theref. To be short, and to pretermit
others, In the Confession of Bohemia Confession of Bohemia, in the Harmony of
Confessions, page 400.
we thus read: The ancient Church is the true and best Mistress of
Posteri^ty, and she going before, leads us theway. Thus much of the
Protestants Confessions in this point.

Fourthly, and lastly, diverse Theorems or Speculations of faith, and the
professors of them (by me urged) did take their denomination and names, from
the Authors of them (being but illiterate, ignoble, and obscure man) the very
impression, or indeleble stamp^ of Heresy. according to those words of S.
Chrysostomes Prout Chrysostom. ^omil. 3^ in Act. Apost.
Haerestarcha nomon^ita sec^^ vocatur: As the name of the Heretic is, so is
the Sect, or Heresy called. These Names (being imposed upon the men so
believing, after the beginning and first rising of the said Heresies, and taken
from the first Coyners of them) were invented out of Necessity, and constraint;
that by such their Appellation, they might be distinguished, and divided from
the true, and Orthodoxall Professors of the Christian Faith. Thus the
Manichees, the Arians, the Eutichians, and the like, do borrow their
Appellation from Manichaus, Arius, Eutiches, and accordingly their Heresies are
called, Ma^ichenism^, Arianisme, Eutichianisme etc.

Here now I will pause, and stay my self; and as prefixing this short
Prolegomenon (as before I called it) I will hasten to the Particular Heresies,
in those pure times condemned for such, by many famous and worthy Fathers of
Gods Church, and now in this Iron Age revived with a most strong bent, and
endeavor by Luther, Swinglius, Calvin, and others of the later brood; in all
whom are justified the words of an ancient Father: Haereses Tertul. l. do
praescript.
apud eos mul^um valen^, qui in fide parum valent. Now, in reading hereof I
would entreat you (My Countrymen) casting of your former sluggish security
(touching the presumed certainty of your faith) to recur in a secret reflexe of
mind to the former Aduertisments of this Proleg^m^^n, and to what here
follows; and withal to observe by application of what is delivered in the
first Part of the former Treatise, that the Catastrophe, or Closure of all is,
that ^ug^^^tis^^s is engendered between Mah^^^^s^^^, and old condemned.
Heresier. O how much is the deformity of that Child to be bewailed, which is
begotten of such ugly Parents?

Identity 1.
But to begin with these Heresies. The first Heresy shall be of certain men, who
denied the Eucharist to be the true flesh of Christ; teaching, that it was but
only a Figure thereof. These Heretics were condemned in those ancient times by
Ignatius (as Theodoret Theodor. in Dialog. qui dicitur Impatibilis, Dial. 3.
relates) in these Words: Eucharistias, and oblationes non admittunt, quod non
confiteantur Eucharistiam esse carnem Saluatoris, quae pro peccatis nostris
passa est etc. These Heretics do not admit Eucharisties and Oblations, because
they acknowledge not the Eucharist to be the flesh of our Savior, which flesh
suffered for our sins. These men were in like sort condemned in the seventh
Synod: So hardly could such men (being immersed in sense) believe, that the Eye
of faith sees things invisible.

Identity 2.
Simon Magus taught, that God was the Author of sin, of whom Vincentius
Vincent. Lyr. l. aduers. Haeres. post med.
Lirinensis thus says: Who before Simon Magus was bold to affirm God, to be
the Author of our wickedness and deeds? And S. Austin: Detestanda etc. Austin,
ad artic. sibi falso impositis, Art. 10.
It is a detestable opinion, to believe, that God is the Author of any ill
will, or works. Finally the Heretic Florinus taught the same doctrine, of
which Irenaeus thus speaks: This Apud Eusebium, l. 5. histor. c. 80.
Opinion is more, then an Heresy.

Identity 3.
The Heretic Aerias taught, as Epiphanius Epiph^^. Haeres 7^.
and S. Austin Aust. Haer^sae. 33.
record, That Orare vel offerre pro mortuis oblationem non oportet: We ought
not to pray, or offer Sacrifice for the dead.

Identity 4.
The Manichees denied Freewill, according to those words of S. Jerome: Ierom.
im praefat. ^1^. log. contra Pelag.
Manichaet damnant hominum naturam, and liberum auferunt arbitrium. The
Manichees do condemn the Nature of Man, and do take away free will. And S.
Austin; Aug. Haeres. c. 4^.
Peccatorum originem non tribuunt Manichaet libero arbitrio. The Manichees do
not ascribe the origin of sin to Free will.

Identity 5.
The Heretic Xenaias, was the first, who denied the Due worship to Images; Of
whom Nicephorus thus writes: Xenaras Nicephor. in hist. Eccles. l. 16.^.27.
iste primus (O a^^^cem animam, and os impudens!) vocem illam euomuit, Christi,
and illorum qui illi placuere, imagines renerandas non esse. This Xenaias was
the first (O shamles, and impudent Man!) who belched out, that the Images of
Christ, and of those that pleased him, are not to be worshipped. This point
Functius (the Protestant) confesses in these Words: Xendias Inl. 7. Comment.
in praced. Chronolog. it anno, Christi, 494.
primus in Ecclesia bellum contra imagines excitauit.

Identity 6.
Denial of Voluntary Poverty, and monastical Profession is raught by
Vigilantius, of which Iereme says: Quod ^^rou^. contr^ Vigilantiuna propofine.
asseres cos mebles fac^re, qui viuntur rebus suis etc. Where thou (Vigilan^us)
affirmest, that it is better for a man to use his own riches, and by degrees
to give part of them to the poor then to sell all his Possessions, and to part
with them allat one time: Thou thalt receive an answer hereof not from me but
from our Lord, who says, If Math. 19.
thou will be perfect gee, and sell all that thou have, and give to the Poor,
and come, and follow me In like sort the Heretic Ianuarius is condemned for
this doctrine by S. Aust. sermon. 49 ex ^^uersis, cap. 1.
Austin.

Identity 7.
In like manner the said Vigilantius is condemned for denying Worship to the
bodies of Mantyrs, and their Relics, by S. Austin, thus writing: Sanctorum
Austin. de Eccles. ^ogm^e. 73.
Corpora and pracipue beatorum Marryru^ resiquias, c^si Christ's membra
sincerisume honoranda credimus^si quis contra have sententiam venerit non
Christianus, sed Eunom^^nus, and Vigilanti^us creditur. We do beliene, that the
bodies of Saints, but especially the Relics of the Martyrs, are most
sincorely to be honored, as the members of Christ; If any one shall impugn
this doctrine, he is to be accounted not a Christian, buran Eunemian, and
Vigilantian.

Identity 8.
The denial of the Necessity of Childrent Baptism, is recorded of the
Pelogians, by Innecentius in these words: Illud vero Innocen^. in rescript, ad
Milcuitan. Council. post med.
quod vostra Fraternitat cos asserit praeditare, paruales aeternae vitae
praemijs, absque Baptismatis gratia posse donari perfatuum est. That is most
simply spoken, which your Brotherhood affirms the Pelagians to teach, that
little Children may be on dued with the rewards of Eternal Life, without the
Grace of Baptism. The same is in like sort condemned in those Heretics, by
August. Haeres. 88. and, contra Julian. P^lag. l. 6. c. 7.
S. Austin.

Identity 9.
The denial of Remission of sins by Baptism, is condemned in the Manichees,
as appears from the Confession of the Protestant writer Whitakerus, thus
saying: Peccatae Whita^^. l. contra Duraeum. p. 883.
remini and gratiam conferri in Baptism, negare soliti sunt Manichat. The
Manichees are accustomed to deny, that sins are remitted, and Grace conferred
in Baptism. Now how the Protestants (though not all) are interessed in this
doctrine of the Manichees, may appear from the small account they make of
Baptism: of which point peruse the former Treatise.

Identity 10.
The denial of our ability in keeping the Commandement^, was taught by
certain Hereti^^^ of those days, but in p^gned by S. Jerome, who thus writes
hereof: Exceramer Ierom, in explanat. Symbol. ad Damasum.
blasphemiam little, qui dicunt impossible aliquid hoturni a Des prace
ptumsesse. We accurse the blasphemy of those Heretics, who reach, that any
thing, which is impossible, is commanded to man by God.

Identity 11.
The denial of the B. Sacraments reservation for some days after, was taught
by the Authropomorphyts, of whom Cyrill thus speaks: Cyril ad Cerosyrium.
I here say, they say (meaning these Heretics) that the Mystical blessing is
unprofitable to sanctification, if any remnants thereof be reserved, till the
day following; But they dote in affirming so; for Christis not made another,
neither shall his Body be changed; but the Virtue of Benediction, and lively
Grace does over cominue in it.

Identity 12.
Diversity of merit of works, was denied by the Heretic Iouinian, whom S.
Austin brandeth in these words: Iouiniam damnamus Aust. do Temp. ser. 198.
errorem, qui dicit unllain in futuro meritorum distantiam. We condemn the
Error of Iouinian, who affirms, that there is no disparity of merits, in the
time to come S. Jerome Iorom l. 1. aduers. Iouinian. c. ^.
also charge Iouinian with the same Heresy.

Identity 13.
The denial of enjoined times of Penu^nce, was taught by the Heretic
Alldinn^, of whom Theoderet Theod. l. 4. bared. Pab. de Au^^nis.
thus speaks d^inde Confessis etc. They (Andians) give remission to such, as
are confessed, without prescribing time for Penance, as the Law of the Church
commands. Thus Theodoret.

Identity 14.
The denial of Single and vn^^aried life in the Clergy is taught by the
Heretic Vigilantius, whom S. Jerome condemns in this sort: Quid faciunt
Ierom. contra Vigilant. c. 1.
Orientis Ecclesiae? Quod Aegipts, and sedis Apostolica? Quae aus Virgins
Clericos accipiunt, aut continentes; aut si vxeres hahuerint, marit^esse
desinunt. What do the Churches of the East herein? What the Churches of Egypt,
and of the Apostolical Sea? The which do take and allow to be of the Clergy,
those, who are Virgins, or at lest continent; or if they have wives, do
nevertheless cease to live as married men.

Identity 15.
That Concupiscence is a sin, and not taken away by Baptism, but as it were
cast a sleep by faith, is condemned in Proclus, whom Epiphanius introduces
thus speaking: Constat Epiphan. haeres. 14.
contrahi quidem, ac sopiri per fidem nunc peccatum Concupiscentiae, vine
frectus noxtos producat, non tamen radicis us tollitur. It is evident, that the
sin of Concupiscence still remains, being cast a sleep by says, yet so,
as that it is not pulled up by the root. Thus Proclus: Which very doctrine is
renewed by Mela^th. in loc. com.
Mela^c^ho^^, and Calu. l. 4. Instit. c. 15. ^, 10.
Calvin.

Identity 16.
Overthrowing of Altars, is condemned in Donatus by Optatus; who writing
against the Donatists, thus says: Optatus l. 6. contra Donatistas.
Quid est tans sacrilegum, quam Altarin Des (in quibus vos aliquando
obt^listis) frangere, raders, remouere? What is so sacrilegious, as to break,
to cast down, and remove the Altars of God, upon which you (Donatists) have
sometimes offered up sacrifice? etc. Quid est enim Altar etc. For what is an
Altar, but the Scate of the Body and blood of Christ? Quid vos offenderit
Christus, etc. In what has Christ offended you, whose body and blood do
remnine upon the Altar for a certain Season?

Identity 17.
Denial of Chrisme, or Confirmation by a Bishop, to the Baptized, was condemned
in the Nouatians; For Eusebius thus speaks of Nouatus, being baptized: Neque
Eusebius. ^ist. l. 6. c. 35.
caetera, quibus post baptismum (secundum Ecclesiae Canonem) imbui opertuerat,
acquisiuit; neque Domini sigillo ^b Episcopo obsignatus fuerit: quo quidem
neuti quam potitus, quo^^odo quaeso, spiritum sanctum adeptus est? Neither did
Nouatus seek to have those things, which (according to the Canon of the
Church) he ought to have after Baptism; Neither was he signed with the seal
of our Lord by a Bishop; the which he not enjoying, how could he obtain the
Holy Ghost? Theod^re^ Theod. l. 3. Haret. ^^b.
also charge the Nouatians herewith.

Identity 18.
Exorcisms, and exafflation, was denied by Iulianus the Pelagian, of whom S.
Austin thus relates: Iulianus Aug. de nupt and Concupis. l. 2. c. 2^.
antiquissiman (...) Traditionem nefariscrimine asp^^get, qu^ exercizantur, and
vidixi, exufflantur par^ul^. Iul^anus does cast a wicked aspersion upon the
most ancient Tradition of the Church, by force whereof little Infants are
exor^ized, and (as I have said) ^^eathed upon. Thus S. Austin.

Identity 19.
That Adam lost the Image of God, was maintained by the Origenists, but
condemned by Epiphanius, thus writing: At Epiph. hoeres. 64.
vero quod secundum Imaginem est. Adam per^idisse dicit. Origin affirms, that
Adam did loose that, which was according to the Image. And again: Et Epiph.
Haeres. 70.
Vide. quod corr^^ se^^^^ little qui dic^^nt Adam id, qu^^ sec^nd^m I^^^ginem
Dei, perdidisse. Benold, ^ow the words of those men (he meaning the Origen^^ts)
fall away, who maintain, that Adam did loose that, which was according to the
Image of God. Now this Heresy of the Origenists is revived by Calvin. who thus
expressly writes of Adam: Obl^terata Calu. l. ^. Instit. c. ^. sect. 1.
fuis in ^o calestis Image: as also by Illyricus Lib. de orig, P^^cat.


Identity 20.
The Visibility of the Church was denied by the Donatists, whom S. Austin
reproved as being Heretical, in that they labored to certain texts of
Scripture: Vt ea (says this Father) detorquere Aust. de Vnitat. Ecclesiae c.
1^.
in Ecclesiam Dei, vt tanquam defecisse and perijsse de to^o orb videatur: to
the end, to misapply them against the Church of God, that it might be thought
to have suffered a defection, and to have perished out of the whole world. And
according hereto this Father alleged the Donatists own words (the very
dialect of the Protestants of these times,) which are these: Apostatquit S.
Aug. repeateth this saying of the Donatists, in Psalm. 101. con. 2.
and perijt Ecclesia de ommbus Gentibus. The Church of Christ has apostatated,
and perished away out of all Countries. To the which words S. Austin thus
answers presently: Hoc dicunt quim illa non sunt. O impudentem vocem! They
speak this, who are not in the Church. O shameless tongue of theirs!

Thus far I have proceeded in showing, that twenty main Articles of
Protestancy were condemned in the Primitive Church by the ancient, learned,
pious and Orthodoxall Fathers of those times; Which Fathers stood as so many
Centinells to discover the approach of any new arising Heresy; and being
discovered, were as many Spiritual Captains, ready with their Pens to
encounter the same. I have thought good (you see) in the former Instances,
(though with some tediousnes) to set down the Fathers condemnation of those
Heresies in the Fathers own Words, thereby to assure you (My Countrymen) of my
Candor, and Integrity herein; for I hope to prove none of those. Qui
mendaciorum funiculis Hester c. 16.
^onautur subuecriere.

Here now shall follow Faur^y more Points of Protestancy and other
circumstances concerning Protestancy, in like manner professed by the Heretics
of those ancient times, and registered for Heresies and Errors by the said
former lights of Gods Church. In setting these forty down, I will only rest
(for greater expedition) in the references of the Fathers Books and Writings,
wherein they are for such condemned, without expressing their particular words
of condemning them. I hope you, or any judicious Reader, will rest assured,
that I use no fraud, or calumny herein. And if any man shall think otherwise,
him I provoke herby to recurre to the Fathers books themselves, for the
greater trial of my plain and upright deportment. But I should presume this
Admonition of mine to be less needful, considering, that in the former twenty
Protestant Articles, being more weighty, then most of these following, he may
see, how fully I have displayed the condemning of them, even from the Fathers
own Sentences.

Identity 21.
Well then, the one and twentieth Article shall be, the denial of the Diuills to
be really cormented at the Relics, and momuments of Martyrs; This point was
condemned in Vigila^tius, as S. Ambrose, Ambr. sermon. 93. de initent. Cor^.
Geruas^^ and Protasij,
and S. Jerome Ierom. contra Vigilantium.
do testify.

Identity 22.
The referring of the Churches Miracles to Witchoraft, was condemned in the
Arians, as Victor in persecus. Vandal.
Victor records. And do not the Centurists. Cent. 4. col. 1445.
and Osiander. Cent 10.11.12. etc.
Osiander (all Protestants) seek also to avoid the force of Miracles performed
in our Catholic Church, by stiling them, Antichristian, and lying Wonders?

Identity 23.
The denial of the Devils flying away at pronouncing of the Name of Jesus;
and at the sign of the Cross, was condemned in the seduced of those times, by
the Fathers, as Theodoret Theod. hist l. 3. c. 3.
, and Arnobius Arnobius contra gentes, l. 10.
do witness.

Indentity 24.
The affirming, that the Godhead of Christ did suffer in his Passion, was
condemned in Eutiches. The same does Luther, and his scholars teach, as
appears in the former Treatise. And Musculus As Checauorius a Protestant,
witnesses.
in like manner teaches the same.

Identity 25.
The denial of the Reverence to the holy Cross, condemned in Probianus, as
the Tripartite History Histor. Tripere. l. 8.^.89.
witnesses.

Identity 26.
The affirming of the Ignorance in Christ, was condemned in Themistius, and in
the Agneites Herotil^s (who took their Name upon this their Heresy) as we read
in S. Ambrose Am^^. l. 5. de fide. cap. 8.
, and Grag. l. 8. Epist. 42.
S. Gregory.

Identity 27.
The denial of Visible Sacrifice, was condemned in the Manichees by S. Austin
August. tom. 6. cont. A^uers. leg. and Proph^^. c. 19. and Tom. 6 cont Faustum.
Manich. l. 20. c. 18.
as himself witnesses.

Identity 28.
The Appointed fasts upon Sunday, was condemned in the Arians; of which point
see Epiphau. Haros. 75.
Epiphanius; and the first Council of Carthage C^^^^^. 64.
. And do not many of our more Precise Caluinists choose to make their firsts
upon Sundays, rather then upon any other days?

Identity 29.
The denial of the Mixture of Wine and water in the Chalice, was condemned in
certain Heretics, who would not allow such mixture in the Celebration of the
Eucharist, as Theoph. in John. 1^.
Theoph^lac^ witnesses.

Identity 30.
Absolute Reprobation was houlden by certain Heretics, and condemned by
Vincentius Vin^^^. Lyrin. aduer. Haeres c. 34.
Lytinensis, and S. Austin Aug. ad artic. fibi fals^ imposis. art. 10.
. The same condemned in Florinus, by Eusebius. hist. l. 5. c. 3.
Eusebius.

Identity 31.
That there is (...) Originati ^^inne, especially in the children of the
faithful, was taught by Pelagius So affirms S. Aug. l. ^. contra luli^a.
(as in the former Treatise is showed) do teach the same.

Identity 32.
The Arians taught, as Epiphanius E^i^h. Idaeros. 69.
relates, that the Son of God was lesser then his Father; The New Arians in
Polonia, Transiluania, and other Provinces (who are all Protestants, or rather
Caluinists) teach the same.

Identity 33.
The Civil Magistrates Clayming of Ecclesi isticall Primacy, was condemned in
the Emperors Co^istantius and Valentinianus; see S. Athanasius Athan. (...)
Epist ed foliear.
hereof, and Ambr. Epist. 32. and 3^.
S. Ambros.

Identity 34.
The Assembling of Counsels without the Sentence and Authority of the Roman
Bishops, was condemned in the Arians, and Dioscorus. See Histor. Tripart.
Tripart. l. 4. c. 9.
, and Socrates, l. ^. c. 5.
Socrates.

Identity 35.
The demolishing and impropriating of Monasteryes to secular uses, was
condemned by the Cahon. ^3.
Council of Chalcedon.

Identity 36.
The pretented sufficiency of only Faith. was condemned in Eunomius, and Simon
Magus. See hereof Trenaus Iren. aduer. Haeres. l. 1. c. 20.
, Theodo^^^ Theod. de Haeres. Faballs, l. 1. c de Simons.
, and S. Aust. haeress. 54.
Austin.

Identity 37.
The eating of the flesh in (...), was condemned in the Aerians, and others, as
Epiphanius Epiph. haeres. 75.
S. Ambrose Ambr. sermon. 25.34.36.
, and the eight of Council Can. 9. and the Laodicea^ Council C^^. ^0.
of Toledo do witness.

Identity 38.
The affirming of our Iusties, not to be an inherent Grace, or Quality, but
extrinsicall, and consisting only in remission of sin, was condemned in the
Pelagians, and others, as Celestinus Ep. 1. c. 10.
, Chrysostom Chrysostom. hom. 3. de po^nit.
, S. Austin Aust. Epist. 100. act Bonifacium.
, and the Mileuitan Canon 3.
Council do record.

Identity 39.
The denial of Christ's descording into Hell was condemned in certain ancient
Heretics, as S. Austins Aust. Epist. 57. ad^^ord. and ep. 99. ad Eunoditim.
teaches.

Identity 40.
The allowing of Marriage again, in ease of divorce upon Adultery, was
condemned in certain ancient Heretics, by the old Council of Eliberis Elib.
Canon. 9.
, by the Council Mil^nit anum Mileuit. c. 17.
, at which S. Austi^ was present, and by S. Ierom in epist. ad Oceanum de obitu
Fabiolae.
Jerome.

Identity 41.
The Rejecting of ancient Fathers, and Antiquity, was condemned in the ancient
Heretics, by S. Aust. ^om. 7. contra, I^^l, Pel. l. 2. c. ^ l. 1. c. 2.
Austin.

Identity 42.
The denying of the Books of Sapieutid, the Macha^eas, and certain Parts of
Da^^el, to (...) Canonical, was condemned in certain ancient Heretics, as S.
Austin Aug. l. ^. de praedest. Sa^ct. c. 14.
witnesses. And touching Daniell being rejected, see S. Ior. (...) Apol. ^.
ad. ^^^rs. Russinis.
Jerome.

Identity 43.
The Urging of 1. T^^. 4. against Abstinence, and singl^ life of the Clergy,
and of accounting the same to be Manichisme, was condem^ed by S. Touching
Abstinence, see S. Austin, condemning the denial of it in Faustus* the
Mani^^ee* l. 3^. c. ^. con^. P^^st. and touching single life, see S. Austin
contra d^as, Epist. Pelag. l. 1. c. 2.
Austin.

Identity 44.
The expounding of that Text: I and the Father, are One, Ioah. 10. to be one in
Will* and not in Substance, was condemned by all ancient Fathers, who ha^^
commented upon that place; yet received by Calvin Calvin, in Ioa^. c. 10.
Whitakerus Whi^^^^ contra ^amp^a^. 8.
, and most o^^ier Caluinists.

Identity 45.
The Condemning of the ancient Prima^^ of the (...) Church* was condemned in
John Bishop, of Constanti^^^^, as S. Gregory Epist. ^^. ad Eus^^iuin.
witnesses.

Identity 46.
The affirming, that the Clergy is to be ordained by popular Election, Was
condemned by the ancient Fathers of the La^dicean Can. ^^.
Council.

Identity 47.
The Undertaking of Ecclesiastical sanction, without Ordination by a Bishop,
was condemned in certain Old Heratiks, as Socrates Hist. l. ^. c. 10.
relates, as also by Theodoret Theod. l. 2. c. 8.
, and S. Cypr. l. 1. Epist. ^. ad Magnum.
Cyprian.

Identity 48.
The insisting upon Only Scripture without Tradition, was condemned in the
ancient Heretics, by S. Austin Aust. contra Maximin.
. and Theodoret Theodor. Dialog l. 3. c. ^. and 4.
. This point was further partienlarly condemned in Nestorius, and Dioscorus, as
the second Council of Nice Council. Nic. Act 1.
witnesses.

Identity 49.
The denial of a Triple Immersion in Baptism, was condemned in Eunomius, as
Theodoret In Haeret. Fab. l 4. de (...) etc.
witnesses.

Identity 50.
The neglect of Kneeling at time of Prayer. in the Church, and at the Priests
benediction, was condemned by S. Chrysostom. homil. 40. ad Popul. Autioch. and in
Act. Apost. homi^. ^^.
Chrysostom.

Identity 51.
The Profaning, and contempt of Sanctuaryes was condemned in Bonifacius, as S.
Austin Auct. to^^. 2. Epist. 1^7. ad ^^^^fac. and dec^uit. Dei. l. 2. c. 4.
relates. Socra^. hist. l. 6. c. 5.
The like does Secrates (98) witness, and Concilium Can. 29.
Agathense.

Identity 52.
The forbidding to disinherit our selves, of our Posterity, for the Churches
use, was condemned in the wicked Tyrants, by Prudent. in bym. de S. Leuren^^^.
Prudentius.

Identity 53.
The obiecting of the Epistle to the Hebrews (cap. 10.) against Sacrifice, is
condemned by S. Chrysostom, S. Ambrose, Occumenius, and Theophilact, in their
Commentaries in Hebr. c. 10. And yet are some Texts produced out of this
Chapter by the Caluinists at this day, against Sacrifice.

Identity 54.
The affirming of Pharo's Induration, was condemned in some ancient Heretics,
by Philast. l. de Haeresib. Haeres. 77.
Philastrius.

Identity 55.
The restrayning of the Text in Genesis, Cap. 4. touching Cains dominion over
sin, was condemned by Philastrius Thilast. de Haeresib. Haeres. 80.
, and S. Aust. de ciuitat. Dei. l. 85. c. 7.
Austin.

Identity 56.
The denial of. the Epistle to the Hebrews, was anciently condemned by
Philastrius Haeres. ^^.
Which Epistle is in like sort rejected at this present, by many Lutherans, as
is showed above in the former Treatise.

Identity 57.
The denial of the Apocalyp^ by the Heretics Alogiani, was condemned by S.
Austin Aust. de Haer. Haeres^ 30.
, and Epiphanius Epiphan. Haeres. 3^.
The same book is not accounted Canonical by Luther, and some other
Lutherans, as may appear in the former discourse.

Identity 58.
The obiecting (in respect of the Sacrament) the gross, and Carnal ^ating of
humane flesh (the which Objection the Sacramentaries make at this present) was
condemned by Justinius Justinius, in colloq. cu^ Triphone.
Martyr, Tertullian Tertull. in Apolog^^. c. 7.
, Origin Origin. l. ^^ contra C^lsum.
, Eusebius Eusebius Histor. l. 5. cap. 1.
, Prudentius Prudentius, in Hy^^no oe S. L^^rentio.
, and others.

Identity 59.
Appearing Innovation, without coming out from of an Elder Society, was
condemned in the ancient Heretics, by Vincentius Vincent* aduers. Haer. c. ^
c. and ^^. and 34.
Lyrinensis, S. Aug. l. 3. de Baptism. contra Donat.
Austin, and S. Ierom. contra Lu^^^* in fine.
Jerome: And yet the Lutherans (though late appearing) cannot prove, that they
came out (touching doctrine) from any elder Society.

Identity 60.
Lastly, which here I will alledg; The obiecting of many Parts of our
Christian Religion to be taken from the G^^ills (the which Kemp^^tius
Kemp^^tius, in Exa^^. Con^. Tridp^rt. 3. page ^^. and 8^.
, and Rep^^id^s (an English In his book de Romen. Eccles. Idolas. pa.
10^.24^.^^^. etc.
Writer) do object against us Catholics) is condemned by S. Austin S. Austin
condemns this in the Manichees, contra Faust. Maniech l. ^0 (...). and ^^.
and de Ciuitate Dei, l. 10. c. 19. and Epist. 49.
, Tertullian Tertull. l. de Praescrip^. cap. 40.
, S. Jerome Ierom. l. ^. contra Iouin. post medium.
, and Origin Origin, l. ^ contra Celsum, ante medium.
.

Lo here (My Countrymen) I have presented to your eye, a large Glass, to
behold your faith in, made of threescore Protestanticall Points, (formees sur
le moul des anciens Heretics) wrought upon the Anuise of the old Heretics,
and condemned for Heresies by the Church of Christ in those days. What can you
say hereto? Will you urge, that howsoever this be, yet this proves your
Religion to be ancient? If any of you be of such transparency of judgment, as
thus to reply; let him remember, that as these his doctrines were ancient; so
also that they were anciently condemned. And we ought to have as great a
loathing of ancient? Heresies, as of but yesterdayes Nouellismes.

Secondly, we are to observe, that Protestancy was not n^re in being in its
full Orb in those days; Because only this, or that point thereof, was houlden
by this, or that Anonymus, or obscure Fellow: Whereas now all the former Points
above rehearsed are become (as it were) so many seu^rall Ingredients, of all
which the Comp^and of your Reformed Religion is made. And the men believing in
those firster days the said Points, were in compare of the worth, and
celsitude of the Fathers condemning them, but as Bow thrubs, (...) to be moden
upon by every on^, in respect of (...) high Cedi^^^ of (...).

Well, here I am to acquain^ yet, that some of our more learned Adversaries,
who are not a little moved through the great scandal risen against them, for
their own known Opinions, so condemned by the Primitive Church, have
therefore, not as in clearing of themselves(which they cannot) but by way of
recrimination, endeauored to return the like upon us; thinking insufficient
honor, if they can be able, but to leave things perplexed, and doubtful* They
hearing themselus herein like to that man, who in a Duellism^, or single
Combat, does not so much expect to get an absolute Victory over his Enemy; but
holds it glory enough, if he can come off with giving as many, and as dangerous
wounds, as himself received. O Weakness of judgment* since Truth consists in
a f^^^e establishment of it self, and not in a seeming redargution of the
Contrary Doctrine. According to this Method some of our Adversaries have
pretended, that many of our now Catholic. Opinions were in like manner
condemned by the ancient Fathers of the Primitive Church. I will particularly
insist in the writings of one Willett^s, a Protestant of England, making choice
of some few of his Instances of this nature, thereby to show the impost^^^,
pe^sidy, and want of all Ingenuity, and vpright^es in such his proceedings.

This Author then in hi^ book cati^^led: Intrastyl^n Papism^, gives an
example of a Woman, saying: Harcellina (the companion of Carpocrates) was noted
of Heresy, in that the used worship to the Images of Jesus and of Paul, as S.
August. Haeref. 7.
Augustine witnesses. I answer, that this Author uses fraud herein; For S
Austins words are: Colebat Imagines Jesus, and Pauli^ and Homeri, and
Pythagorae, adorando incensumque ponendo. She did worship the Images of Jesus,
of Paul, of Homer, and Pythagoras, and she offered incense unto them. Which
point Epiphanius further exployneth, saying of this Carp^crates, and his
followers: Insuper Epiphan. Haeref. 27.
Philosophe^^^ quorundam etc. They placed the Image of Jesus, with the Images
of the Philosophers, Pithagoras, Aristotle etc. and, did afterward keep the
^^tes of the Pagans. Now what is this to us Catholics? Do we worship the Images
of the Philosophers? Or do we observe the rytes of the Pagans? Or do we offer
incense to any Image?

He secondly produces the Heretics, called, Heraclionitae, who (he says)
after a new custom purged, and redeemed those that were dead by anointing
their bodies with Oil, and Balm. S. Austin Haeref. 1^.
witnesses also this. Now how impertinently is this objected against us? S.
Austins words are these: Feruntur, suos morieutes nouo tuedo redimere; id est,
pet Oleum, belsamum, and aquam, and inuocationes, quas Hae^^aicis verbis dicunt
super capita eo^um etc. But we Catholics do neither anoint, nor baptize the
dead; neither do we pray, by using such Innocations over the heads of the dead:
such strange detortion of S. Austins words is here used.

Thirdly he insimulates the Catholics (...) the Heresies of the Ta^^ani, who
(says he) did condemn Marriage, and accounted it no better then Fornication;
and did not receive any married Persons (in suorum numerum) into their number.
S. Austin Austin so witnesses, Haeres. 24.
How can this touch us? For we do not equal Marriage with Fornication; We know
all our Ancestors were married; and we teach, that Marriage is a Sacrament.

Fourthly, he says: The Pepusiani allow Women to be Priests; In like manner,
the Papists do suffer their Women to confer Baptism. Austin witnesses this
of the Heretics Pepusiani. Austin, Haeres. 27.
To this I answer, that the Pepusians Error consisted in making Women the
ordinary Ministers of Baptism, and of all other Priestly functions. Now, this
is impertinent to the Ministering of Baptism by Women, or Laymen, in the only
Case of Necessity.

Fifthly, he proceeds further, saying: The Heretics called Apostolici, did
not admit into their Society and Communion those, that had wines, or proper
Possessions. Austin Aust. Haeres. 40.
And further, Those Apostolici would not in any sort suffer those, which had
vowed single life, to marry, as Epiphanius Epiph. Haeres. 6^.
says. To the authority of S. Austin I first answer; S. Austins words are
these; The Apostolici receive not into their Communion, those that have wives,
or Possessions, Quales habet Catholica Ecclesia, and Monaches, and Clericos
pl^rimos: Which the Catholic Church has, and (besides these) ^he also has
Monks and Clergy men* Now these Apostolici are Heretics (says S. Austin) for
that they think those to have no hope of Salvation, who use these things,
which themselves do want. Thus S. Austin. But this touches us nothing at all.
For do not our married mon, and such as have Possessions live within the Unity
of our Church?

Touching the produced words of Epiphanius, this Father is mightily wronged by
this Protestant; For Epiphanius delivers not prohibition of Votaries to
marry, as being the doctrine of the Heretics Apostolici themselves; for
Epiphanius his Words following are these: Tradidorunt Sancti Dei Apostoli
peccarum esse, post decretam Virginitateni ad Nuptias vener^i: The Holy
Apostles of God delivered it to be a Suine, to marry after one has vowed
Virginity. Thus what Epiphanius spoke in the name of the Apostles, this Author
fraudulently produces in the name of the Heretics, called Apostolici. Belike
this man is of a short sight, not being able to distinguish between these two
words, Apostoli, and Apostolici. But to proceed.

Sixthly, he alleges the Hierarchites (being Heretics) saying: The
Hierarchites admit only Monks, and Nuns to their society Austin Aust. Haeref.
47.
. But what is this to us? Does our Church admit only Monks, and Nunns into its
Society? How rouingly is this testimony alleged?

Seauently, This Author says: There is an Heresy, of which the Professors
walk with bare seete; because God said to Moyse^k Exodus ^3.
* Put off thy thees. Austin. Thus this writer glanceth at such of our Religious
men, who go barefoote. But S. Austin August. Haeref. 68.
in the very place alleged, thus presently adds: Inde ergo Harests est, quia
non propter corporis afflictionem sic ambulabani, sed quia testimoniae taliter
intelligunt. But this is an Heresy, (...) that they did walk bare foot, not
thereby to puni^h their bodies; but because they did understand the testimony
of the Scripture in their own sense; So untowardly does this Protestant
allege S. Austin, against his own true, and evident meaning.

He further enlarges himself, saying: There were certain Heretics, who
believed, that by Christ's descending into Hell, the Unbelievers believed; and
that all Scales were delivered out of Hell, at Christ his coming thither
Austin Haeres. 79.
. This example is alleged against the Catholic doctrine of Limbus Patrum. But
what does this Instance concern us? Do we think, that Christ by his
descending into Hell, delivered the damned from thence, or any offers, but such
as were faithful? This Testimony is so idly and impertinently extended to us
Catholics, that Danius de Haeres. 79.
Danius (a learned Protestant) confesses most plainly. That these Heretics
Error concerned only the damned.

The foresaid Author alleges, that the Heretics, Coluthians affirmed: Deum
non facer^ ma^^t That no evil was wrought by God, expressly repagnant to that
saying of the Scripture: Ego ^^u^ creani mal^; as Austin August. Haeres. 15.
Witnesses. From this Heresy the Papists are not clear, says he. Thus far
this Writer; understanding plainly in this place by the Word; Eui^^, not the
^a^t of punishment (which he knows, we grant is from God) but the Evil of
sin, Danaeus in his Commentaries upon S. Austin and Haere. ^ib. Haeref. 61.
whereof indeed we deny that God is the Author. I answer herto with the
foresaid Protestant Danaus; That, Coluthiain Deum poenas, and supplicia
sceleratis hominibus immittere and irrogare negarunt. The Coluthians denied,
that God did inflict any pains or Punishment upon wicked men etc. And then
Danaeus further says: Est malum duplex, quem admodum ipse Augustinus docet;
Aliud malum Culpae, aliud Poenae: Mali Culpae non est Author Deus; Poenae Deus
est Author. There is a twoofould Evil, as Austin teaches; To wit the Evil of
the Fault, and the Evil of Punishment* God is not the Author of the Evil of
the Offense, or Fault, but he is author of the evil of Punishment. Thus this
Protestant, with whom we Catholics agree herein. So ignorantly (at least
maliciously) is the Heresy of the Coluthianes objected to us by this Willettus.

He goes yet forward, and says: The Anthropomorphites (being Heretics) did
imagine, that God was in shape and proportion like to a man; As Austin August.
Haeres. 50.
records: So the Rhemists do teach, that God may be pictured like an old man.
Hereto I answer, that this no more proves us to hold with these Heretics,
that God is in proportion, like to a Man, then our picturing of the Holy Ghost
in the form of a Dove, or of the Angels in form of young Men, that therefore
we think the Holy Ghos^ to be a Dove, or Angels, young Men. And we hold it no
more unlawful to paynt these so, as they visibly and corporally appeared, then
it was indecent for them to appear in such forms; or, then it was unlawful
for the Scriptures so to report the same.

He after insimulats us Catholics within the Heresy of the Pelagians; saying:
The Pelagian Heretics did hold; That a Man may be perfect in that life, and
keep all the Commandments ^^ Austin witnesses. The like do the Papists hold:
But how can this touch v^? For the Pelagians affirmed, that their natural
hability for the performance hereof, without God assisting them with his Grace,
was sufficient. For thus S. Austin speaks of them: Pelagiani August. Ep. 20.
ad Aselicum.
ipsi Gratiae Christi su aduersantur. vt se humanis Viribus diuina existiment
implere mandata The Pelagians were such Enemies to the Grace of Christ, as that
they thought themselves able to keep the divine Commandments by human
strength. But do we teach this? No, we acknowledge it to be a blasphemy against
Christ.

I will conclude, with this same Authors imputing to us the Heresy of the
Manichees. Who (as he says) condemned the eating of flesh, as being unclean,
and impure: See August. Hares. 4^.
Austin hereof. How can this example endanger us Catholik^? Do we condemn the
Creature, for impure? Do we not also eat flesh? Therefore what is the
Manichees doctrine of ever abstayning from flesh (as impure by Creation) to our
observed abstinence, upon appointed days, without condemning of the Creature?

Thus far now for some taste of the impurity of this Author; Out of whose
book I have insisted only in a dozen of his immateriall, and froathy
Instances. Of these I have made choice in particular, as seeming more
conducing, then the rest, though they conduce nothing ar all* As for some other
few examples in him (by me here omitted) they are so grossly impertinent; as
that I will not abuse your longer Patience with recital of them. Only I say,
by this already set down, ye^ may consecture, what the rest of his Book is. A
Book (barren of matter) is commonly termed, Un liver set, A dry Book; yet
perhaps I might be thought to wrong this his Book, in calling it so; for you
see it is still of Froath, and Frosth is moist.

Well, having thus answered the chief objected Examples of our Adversaries
(all which, or any other by the^ objected, are so pregnantly o^^^enting, and
different from our doctrine, that not so much as any one of them can be a^amed,
which being holden, as it was by the Heretics of those times, and for such in
them condemned, is not as yet to this day by us in like manner condemned;) I
further answer, as in further Explication, and Prevention in general, that
Heresy is not (in some sort) an open Ane^ay to Religion; But is a subtle
Corrup^cy thereof, by absitacting from it, or adding to^h: So as Truth, and
Error having one Material object or ground work, are divided (though ever
really) oftentimes (as to the conceauing of the unlearned) but in a seeming
slender ^icity, or difference of Words, or in a point (to common Understanding)
s^arce diuisible. In which respect he, that will object pertinently in this
^ynd, must object not any neerenes, resemblance, or lykelyhood, but an Identity
of Opinion (as I have done in my obiecting of the Sixty Articles of
Protestancy, maintained by the Did Heretics, and in those days condemned for
Heresies by the Church of Christ;) Since otherwise the now wicked Obiecting by
the New Ari^ns (both against but Adversaries, and us) of the Heresy of the
Tru^^^^^, as a sti^ming three Gods, might, in regard that both of us hold three
several Persons, (every of which is God) be more insisted upon, against both
of us, and with more color, then any of the former alleged Examples be. And
with this I and this Appendi^.

The Conclusion.
IT is an accustomed D^a^^ct of many of your Prime-Maysters both in the Pulpit,
and in their writings, to voci^^rate and try out, That the Catholic Roman
Religion is Antichristian, and the Pope Awit^^st, and in proof hereof they
produce certain T^ats, put of the second of the Thes^^^nians 1 Thessalonians. 2.
, and the Av pocal. 8. and 12.
Apocalypse, which they ^^ench and disi^ynt (as it were) with their stained, and
violent. Constructions. But if they were able to set down thirty or forty
Articles of says, which Antichrist hall teach; and these to be acknowledged
his particular ^act^ines, by the consent both of You Protestants, and V^
Catholic; as also could alledg so many old ^^^restes condemned by the
Pr^^mitiue Church of God: And withal, if further they could produce out of our
Catholic w^llets, that we Catholics do ^each, and be^^^^ the said
Antichristian Articles, and the said anathematized Heresies: I say, if your Men
(O you Hugenots) cold effect thus much, how would they insult? What words even
of brass, would they yell ou^? What Prophies of Victory, and Triumphan^ Arches
would their Pens have erected before this day, and all in memory of our
overthrow, and dishonor of the Roman Religion, and its Professor? But the
Case here ( God be praised) is far otherwise* for they are your Writters (My
Countrymen) who stand at this time chargeable.

I have (you see) set down forty Articles, touching the Turkish Religion, and
diverse Circumstances thereof, chiefly out of the Turkish Alcoran (the Book (as
above I said) wherein that Law was first written) as also out of warrantable
Authors, hoth Catholics, and Protestants, who have written of the Religion and
Manners of the Turks: So as, it is acknowledged (...) all sides, that the
Turkish Articles produced by me, are indeed the Articles at this day believed
by them. I have in like sort insisted in threescore Old Heresies, condemned by
the Church of God in ancient times, and for Heresies at this day acknowledged;
by us Catholics, and by the more learned and moderate Protestants. I have
further proved, even from the express Testimonies, taken out of the first and
chief Lutherans, that themselves have taught in their Writings (articularly,
and punctually) the said Mathemetan; or Turkish Articles, and in lieu of some
others, Articles more pernicious, even by the light of Nature; as also that
they have pertinaciously defended (and their Followers do at this day defend)
the said expl^rate Heresies for Good Lutheranisius, and Euangelical doctrine.

Now then what remains for us to doc I Not unkindly, and uncharitably to
insult over you, and in virulent and gaulfull terms to exprobate you there
with, but in all Christian zeal, to pity your poor distressed states, and to
pray, for your abandoning those most wicked Turki^h Doctrines, and other
Helli^^ Heresies; and for your future in corporating into our Catholic Church;
To him (I say) who upon man's true repentance, has pronounced: Numquid Ezech.
18.
Voluntatis mea^est m^rs impi^^ And again: Nolo Ibidem.
mortem morientes, conueru^mini and viuite.

Well then (My Countrymen of France) to repeat what above I have faith (that
thereby my Words may more intensly, and forcibly s^rike your Memory,) since you
have seen, how your own chief Doctors in Forty Points of their Religion,
do commilitate and serve under the Colors of Mahumet; Since also it has been
made plain, that in twenty passages of Faith, or necessary Circumstances
thereof, Protestancy is less warrantable, then Mahumetisme: Lastly, since it is
demonstrated, that in Sixty Positions of Faith, and other collateral points
thereof, Protestancy, or Hugenotisme comparts with the ancient Heresies, or
rather is identifyed with them; what then may seem to be inferred (O pardon me
for speaking that with grief, which you are to hear with shame!) but that a
Mahumetan, and an Old branded Heretyke, and a French Hugen^is, are (In part)
word^ Sy^o^ymons?

Now therefore, if notwithstanding all this, you will still prefer your own
Religion before ^oe encient Roman Faith, (which even by y^ar own Brethrens
Whitak ad respons. Cam^. ra^. 7. Huttevus de Sacris. missatieo p. 377. besid^
diverse others:
acknowledgments has bren perpetu^ted from hand to hand, from the Apostles,
and in which (by their like Hum f^idus Jesuit. part. 2. rat. 2. Osined, C^nt.
12. page 30^. Luther in colle^. Germ. c. de Miss^.
Confessions) men dying, may be saved;) If (I say) by your pe^seuering therein
you will violently and desperately run upon the Hykes of your own damnation I
cannot but commiserate your forlorn Souls, and (though with inconsolable
sorrow) close up my speack^s, with the Ac^lamation of the Apostle; O Galas. 30
O insensati Galata (sieve Gall^) quis vos s^sc^^ ^u^ ^on obedire veri^nat^! O
sansi^s French Hugenois, who has bewitched you not to ^h^y the Truth?

^aus Deo, and Beat^ Virgini Mariae.

A Table of the Contents of this Treatise.
First Part, consisting of Symbols. THe Preface of the Author. Chap. 1. page 7.
The Method h^ld in this Treatise. Chapter 2. p. 19. The particular passages (or
Azoara's) of the Alcoran, alledg^d in his Treatise. Chap. 3. page 12. Of
Symbolisms in general, Chap. 4. page 26. Touching the w^^^ings of the Apostle,
Chap. ^ page 33. Touching the ^rring of the Apostles, Chap. 6. page 35.
Touching the holy Gospel. Chap. 7. page 36. Touching the Ancient Fathers.
Chap. 8. page 38. Touching General Counsels. Chap. 9. page 40. Concerning
Traditions. Chap. 10. page 42. Touching the Necessity of Faith in Christ. Chapter
11. p. 44. That Mahumetisme and Lutheranisme are engendered of old Heresies.
Chap. 12. page 48. Touching the Plantation of Mahumetisme and Luthranisme.
Chap. 13. page 51. Touching the want of Miracle^. Chap. 14. page 54. Conceining
Mahumets and Luthers pr^te^tati^^ for proof of their Religion. Chap. 15. page
55. Touching the de^fall of the B. Tr^^ty. Chap. 16. p. 57. Concerning the
suffering of Christ. Chap. 17. page 61. Touching the second Person of B.
Tr^^ty. Chapter ^8. p. 64. Touching the denial of Christ's Passion. Chapter 19. p. 66.
The particular Mo^iues of Mahumets and Luthers Apostasy. Chap. 20. page 68.
That the Turkish, and Protestant Clergy do marry. Chap. 21. page 72.
Conjunction of Ecclesiastical, with Temporal Authority. Chap. 22. page 75.
Touching the denial of Original Sin. Chapter 23. p. 77. That Baptism is not
necessary. Chap. 24. page 79. Polygamy i^intly taught by Mahumet, and the
Lutherans. Chap. 25. page 81. Touching the Contempt of the Cross. Chap. 26. p.
84. Touching other several points of Faith. Chap. 27. p. 85. That Catholics
and Turks agree in the doctrine of Sacrifice, and Vows. Chap. 28. page 90.
The Conjunction of Turks, and some temporal States, against Catholic
Princes. Chap. 29. page 94. Reasons of friendship betweens the Turks, and some
Lutheran States. Chap. 30. page 98. Of diverse Caluinistes, that became Turks.
Chap. 31. page 102.
Second Part, consisting of Parallels. A Demonstration, wherein Mahumet is
paralleled with Luther. Chap. 1. page 108. Mahumet paralleled with K. Henry the
Eight of England. Chap. 2. page 111. Sergius the Monk, and Luther paralleled.
Chapter 3. p. 117. Touching the dignity of Christ. Chap. 4. page 125. Concerning
the B. Virgin Mary. Chap. 5. page 131. The Antiquity of Mahumetisme, and
Lutheranisme. Chap. 6. page 139. The Universality of Mahumetism^ and
Luther^^^^^ Chap. 7. page 141. The Unity in doctrine between Mahumetisme, and
Lutheranisme. Chap. 8. page 141. Whether Mahumet or Luther d^ were teach God
(...) be Author of Sin. Chap. 9. page 144. Of the Paschall Supper of the
Turks, and the Comu^^nion of the Caluinists. Chap. 10. page 147. Whether
Turks, or Lutherans pray more. Chap. 11. page 149. Proceeding of Turks
against Christians, and of Protestants against Catholics. Chap. 12. page 151.
Whether Mahumetisme, or Lutheranisme incli^es more to Vice and Sin. Chap. 13.
page 157. Whether Mahumetisme, or Lutheranisme do more depresse Virtue, and
Good works. Chap. 14. page 160. Whether Mahumetisme, or Lutheranisme seek
more to frustrate the Promises of God. Chap. 15. page 16. Of Predestination,
and Reprob^tion differently taught by Mahumet, and the Lutherans. Chapter 16. p.
163. Whether the deuisers of Mahumetisme, or Protestancy, were of more
flagitious line^. Chap. 17. pa. 165. Whether Mahumetisme or Lutheranisme
consist more of old condemned Heresies. Chap. 18. page 17^. The different
respect given to the New Testament by Mahumet and Luther. Chap. 19. page 172.
Concerning the Mahumetan, and the Lutheran Clergy. Chap. 20. page 175. Whether
the Turks, or Lutherans have ^^re erred in their Belief. Chap. 21. page 177.
The ridiculousnes of the Turkish Religion etc. Chap. 22. page 182. An App^ndix,
th^ugh that threefore Points (...) Faith, and Accessories thereto, which a^
thirday are believed by the Luther^ns and Caluinist^, more first invented by
the old Heretics, and condemned by the Fathers of the ^^^^tions Church; and
for this respe^t, they be termed so many Identiti^^. page 199. The Conclusion
of the wh^le Treatise. page 233.

FINIS.

