Heavenly Pastime, Or, Pleasant Observations on all the most remarkable
Passages throughout the Holy Bible, Of the OLD and NEW TESTAMENT. Newly
ALLEGORIZ'D, In several Delightful DIALOGUES, POEMS, SIMILITUDES, and DIVINE
FANCIES.


By JOHN DVNTON, Author of The Sickmans Passing Bell.

LONDON, Printed for JOHN DVNTON, at the Black Raven, at the Corner of
Princes-street, near the Royal Exchange, 1685.

The Epistle to the READER.
Candid Reader,
THy courteous and ready reception of those three well known and delightful
Treatises entitled The House of Weeping, etc. Dyeing Pastors last Legacy, etc.
And Pilgrims Guide, with the Addition of the Sick-mans Passing Bell, in a
pleasant Allegory, etc. (All of them in a few Months coming to several
impressions) has encouraged me now a fourth time to present thee with another
very useful Piece, bearing my Father Dunton's Name, Entitled HEAVENLY PASTIME,
etc. Which is on purpose digested into Dialogues, Poems, Similitudes, and
Divine Fancies; as being most easy and taking to the meanest capacity, and
which to an ingenious fancy cannot but be welcome, here being the pith and
marrow of many Voluminous Authors of that Bulk and bigness, that many People
have not time to read them, more have not Money to buy them, and therefore by
that means seeing the tediousness and chargeableness of attaining to knowledge
break of their Journey at the beginning of their race, and despairing of
attaining to the end, begin not to run at all.

To help then those who are desirous to learn and mind true knowledge this
Reverend Author has taken the pains with the Be, to extract Honey out of the
Flowery Writings of several Authors, taking only that, which was most
conduceable to his purpose, and which he imagined might draw the Reader on with
delight to his own profit.

What his Endeavors have been herein, you will find in the peruseall thereof.

All that I shall desire of thee ( Gentle Reader) is to read seriously, judge
heartily, and censure rightly, and I make no doubt but when thou have done,
thou will for the present thankfully accept of what is here offered, (till
something more of this Authors can be transscribed fair for the Press, which
will now be very speedily done) and remain a Cordial w^ll-^isher to thy most
obliged

Friend and thrice Humble Servant, JOHN DVNTON.

INTRODUCTION To this Book, by way of Question and Answer.
Quest. WHat is the Chief end of Writing Books?

Answ. For instruction and information; whereas i^le Books are no other than
corrupted Tales in Ink and Paper; or indeed Vice sent abroad with a Li^ense,
wherein two are guilty of evil, he that Writes them, and he that Reads them;
being in effect like the brutish sin of Adultery, wherein two are concerned in
the same sin; and therefore his Resolution was good who said, That for bad
Books he would write none, least he should thereby hurt others in the Reading
of them; nor would he Read any of them, for fear the Author should answer for
his sin, by being co^rupted by them.

Quest. What Book of all others is the best?

Answ. The Holy Scriptures, contained in the Old and New Testament, wherein the
Mysteries of our Savior are contained* being the Book of all books, and in
comparison of which no book is Comparable.

Quest. Of how many Chapters does this Bo^k consist?

Answ. In the Old Testament or Bible, there are 777. In the New Testament 260.
In the Books of Apocrypha 173. The total being 1210. And for thenumber of
Verses in the Old Testament, the ^ewish Rabbis have computed them thus: In the
Books of the Law, Verses 5845. In the Prophets, 9294. And in Haggai 8064. Total
23203.

Quest. Are there no other Books mentioned in the Old Testament, but those
which we have now at this day?

Ans. Yes, there were the Books of Iddo and G^d the Seers; besides, Solomon
wrote three thousand Parables, and five thousand Songs, with a Book of the
Nature of all Herbs, Trees, and Plants, from the Cedar to the Hysop upon the
wall. Samuel also writ a Book of the Office and Institution of a King. There
were also Chronicles of the Kings of Judah and Israel, besides those we have in
the Scripture, being, as is judged, written far larger; all which were supposed
to be lost in the Jewish Captivity at Babylon.

Q. What was St. Augustine 's answer to one who demanded what Go^ did before he
made the World?

A. That he was ordaining a Hell for such kind of Enquirers. Wh^re the
S^ripture has not a Mouth to speak, we ought not to have a Tongue to ask.

Q. What was the greatest Love that ever was shor^^ in the World?

A. The love of God to poor Sinners, who gave his only begotten Son to dye for
us; of which one thus writes.

God is my gif^, himself he freely gave me,
Gods gift am I, and none ^ut God shall have me.
Q. Wh^t Bo^k next to the Holy Scripture would you chi^fly desire, the rest
being taken away?

A. Th^o^ore Beza being a^ked this question, answered Plu^arch, an excell^nt
Author for his Lives and Morals. Another said Seneca, whose divine ^entences in
his Book are so squared by the Rules of Christianity; that St. Hi^rom concluded
him amongst the Catalogue of Divine Writers. Another preferred the Thesaurus
Histori^rum, being a Compendium of most Histories and worthy Examples; and that
Ornament of History, a worthy Person gives the preheminency to Sir Walter
Rawleigh's History of the World, which he calls Primus in Historia.

Heavenly Pastime, Or, Pleasant Observations throughout the Old TESTAMENT.
CHAPTER I. Giving an Acco^nt of the Birth of the Universe.
Genesis 1. In the beginning God makes Heaven, and Earth,
To Sea, to Light, to Stars he gives a Birth,
Fishes, Fowls, Beasts, and Worms he does Cre^^^,
All which Gods power and might do intimate.

THough God was what he is, and in the perfect fruition of his Grandeurs,
before his omnipotent hand had drawn the Creatures out of their Nothing* yet
^i^ Nature required Hommages, his Majesty Servitudes, his Glory Admirations,
his Goodness Acknowledgments, and his Beauty Hearts and Affection^. It was
needful, though he were independent of all beings, immense in his extent,
Eternal in his duration, and infinite in all his perfections, that (...) should
cause himself to be seen and felt by E^an^^ons out of himself.

And here I represent unto my self how that Nature sighed ^ven without Tongue
or voice, The sighs of Nature.
before she had a being: Methinks I^ hear her silence, and that she speaks
th^s to God before her Creaton;

Sp^ak th^n, O sp^ak (Great God) stretch forth thy arm and c^st thy looks out
^f thy self; issue forth of thy Luminous Dark^^ss, which forms thee a day
without Night, an^ a Night more resplendent then the day. Give so^e little
passage to those Ejaculations and Flames which from ^ll Eternity are i^cl^s^d
within thy Bosom, and which frame th^r^in a Circle ^f Light and Love. The least
of thy ^rradiations will dissipate the shadows, and open that abys^, in which
they are burie^. In fine thou art a Go^ of Love, and this love would be
Cap^ive, if it had no^ S^lli^s, and Ejaculations. It was not sa^isfied to
r^main in thee by eminence, and as it were in the source of beauty and
goodn^ss; but having made its sol^s wi^^in its s^^f by numberl^ss revolutions,
it must d scend upon external objects, to attain that effect and property,
which is natural to Love.

Well th^n, Creatures, come sorth of the Mass in which you lie co^fused,
^e^ven, Earth, Sea, Stars, Tree^, Fi^hes, Furnaces of Fire, and Flames, The
first All^rum of Nature.
vast ^xtents of Air, Clouds, Aby^es, Pr^cipices, listen to the voice and
Command of Go^: But in fine, this glorious and happy moment, which saw the
birth of times and seasons being arrived. From that instant the World was
chosen as the blanck Tabl^, wh^r^on God resolved to draw the first strokes of
his goo^ness.

First Heaven, Earth, Water, and Darkness appeared in an instant as the Field
on which all the effects of a most Amorous and sage Wisdom and Prodigality were
to be displayed. It was before any other thing that this tenebrous Compound,
this confused Medley and this heap of Water and Earth, was the object of him
who alone was able to chase away its shadows, and convert its dust into Gold
and Cristall. This is the Throne on which the Title of Sovereign Monarch and
Lawgiver shall be seen ingraved; But what! This Theater is too obs^ure to
behold therein the Birth of the World; we must expect the Aurora and the rays
of the day.

But by the way Kind Reader let me tell thee that:

The World is a Book in Folio Printed all,
With Gods great Works in Letters Capital,
Each Creature i^ a Page, and each effect
A Fair Character, voi^ of all defect:
But as young Trewants trying in the Schools,
Instead of Learning, learn to play the Fools,
We g^ze but on the Babyes and the Cover,
The gaudy Flowers, and Edges Gilded over;
And never further for our Lesson lo^k;
Within this Volumn of the Various Book:
Where learned nature modest ones instructs,
That by his Wisdom God the World conducts*
CHAP. II. Giving an account of the Work of the si^ days; Of the Creation.
NAture awake, it is time for the Wor^^ to rise, the Night has proceeded, The
first day of the Creation.
and twelve hours are as it were alread^ past since Heaven and Earth have been
in obs^^^ity. Behold the break of day; and those delightful Colors, which
play upon the Waters, are the Companions of tha^t light, which in Pa^estine
has already opened the Doors and Windows of the East, and is going to spread
it self upon another Hemisphear. Nevertheless to finish this Carriere, to
perfect this course, and to round the whole Globe twelve hours more are
required; and then counting from Evening till Morning, and from Morning till
Evening, you shall find all the Moments, which form the first day, a glorious
day, a day illustrious for having first received the light, which gives glory
and splendour to all days.

The second day was not less glorious: For it was that in which God chose to
raise up the Firmament, The second Day.
like a Circle of Brass, or rather like a Globe of Gold and Azure, which might
serve to divide the seven Orbs of the Planets from the Empereal Heaven.

The next day God descended from Heaven upon Earth, The third Day.
and it was on this day, he marked out bounds, and limits to Rivers, Streams,
Seas and Torre^ts, so that the Waters retyring some on one side, and some on
the other, just as they were shut up within their Banks, Clifts and Channels,
the Earth appeared, and immediately her sides were found pierced with Caverns,
and her back laden with Mountains and Rocks which raised her in a stately
mann^^. Instantly her entrals were filled with Stones and Metals; and ^hilst
those four great portions of the Earth which divide the World, and all the
Islands of the Ocean and Seas were Levelled to serve for Empires and
possessions of men, the hand of God as just as liberal, did in the bosom of the
Earth uphold the Arches of her Prisons and Dungeons, to the end that if the
Paradise of Eden was a Garden of delights and pleasures, Hell on the contrary
might be an abode of dread, horror and Misery. It was likewise very convenient
that as God had mixed Light wit^ Darkness, he should create Wild places and
desart^ to render the Gardens, Fields and Meadows more delightful; and finally
having the very same day given Plants, Herbs and Flowers for an Ornament to the
Earth, his wise Providence mingled Thorns with Roses, and the most wholesome
(...) sprung out of the same soil with the Mandra^^ and Aconite.

The fourth day, having bin as it were the Chariot of the Sun, Moon, The Fourt^
Day.
Stars, and Planets which shine in the Heavens, may in some manner be called
the day of days, since it has bin the Origin of the fires brightness and
flames, which are the Soul of the Day.

Then were the frozen and condensed waters gathered together with more light
and heat to form the Body of the Planets: Next the Sun, Moon an^ Stars began
their courses, periods and revolutions, and took the tracks and ways which were
traced out to them from East to W^st.

Let us turn them upon the Fifth d^y, wherein God created the Birds which fly in
the Air, The Fifth Day.
and the Fishes which swim in the Water: One must hear represent unto his
thoughts some fair Summers day, and imagine that he sits in the cool upon the
shore of some Island, from thence he must lift up his eyes toward Heaven, and
beho^ld over head thousands of little feathered bodies, cleaving the Air with
their wings, piercing the Clouds, and mingling with their flight the sweet
Harmony of their warblings; He must afterward behold at his Fe^t a River full
of Fishes armed with Scales, some of which ^ut their way nee^ the surface of
the water, and others through the midst of the waves; some swim alo^t against
the stream and Current, others are carried down at the pleasure of the winds,
and by the favor of so sweet and rapid an Element.

Scarce had the Morning brought news of the arrival of the Sixth day, The sixth
Day.
but at the same instant the Earth opene^ her eyes unto her Su^, and her ears
unto the voice of her God. This dull heavy and insensible Mass not satisfied to
have brought sorth Flowers Plants and Trees, yet farther displaid it self to
produce all sorts of ^ea^ts and Anim^ls, behol^ the World in her Cradle, and
Nature in her Infancy, the unmovable Earth round about her Center is sown with
Flowers, tapistr^d with Tur^ and Virdures, beautified with Woods and Forests;
she is s^ately in her Mountains, pleasant in her Valleys, delightful in her
Meadows; She is rich in her M^tals, ^ertill in her Fru^ts, and plentiful by
her Rivers and Seas which inviron her on all parts, and form her a thousan^
liquid transpa^ences. The Air incompasses her on all ^ides, an^ serves her ^^r
a veil to temp^r the over-hu^^d influences of the Moon, and the too ar^ent R^y^
of the Sun. The Heavens like pe^dent Roofs and rolling Ar^hes are strewed with
Fl^wers, Emeraul^s and Rubies. What does remain aft^r all these Prodigies of
Power, and all these works of Love? O Power! O Love! I cannot condemn his fancy
who sai^ that Love produced Heaven out of a Chaos, and the World in six days
out of a confused and undisgested Lump.

Not ^ut God c^uld have in a ^em^rt made
This Flowery M^nsion where Mankind does Trade*
Spread Heavens blue Curtens and those La^ps have Burnisht,
Earth, Air, and Sea with Beasts, Birds, Fish ^ave (...).
CHAP. III. Wherein you have an account of the Creation of Adam.
Genesis 2. Yet still there wants a Creature which may
Over these Senseless Beasts have Rule and Sway:
God t^^n makes Man with Face toward the Sky,
He Is the true likeness of the Deiti^.

GOD now deliberates upon the enterprise of a Noble Work, and the Counce^^ is
held in the Conclave of the most holy Tri^i^ie, the three Persons are
assembled; Power, Wisdom, and Love take their seats near the Paradi^e of E^^n.

An^ it is concerning Man and hi^ Creation, and not concerning those proud and
Rebelli^us Spirits, whose shamefu^l revolt have justly expelled them from the
Heav^nly I^rusalem, that the ^ecree i^ past; it is on him God Ref^ected, and it
is he who must be substituted in the place of Angels. It is thi^ Act which
makes the World behold Gods M^ster-piece, the object of his Favors, and the
most glorious term of his Power. O Sun stop here thy Course and (...) witness
of his Birth who h^th bin the cause and end of thine:

It was as I conceive about high Noon, The time of Ma^^ Creation.
when the Earth was resplendent with Light, that this Animated Sun was born. I^
was by the Light of Natures greatest Bon^ire that God vou^hsafed to stoop so
low as Earth to take Clay, out of which he formed the Body of the first Man.

Now of all Cre^tures which God did mak^,
Man was the last tha^ living ^^^ath did tak^.
Not that he was the least, or that God durst
Not undertake so Noble a Work at first,
Rather, because he should have made in vain,
So great a Prince, without on whom to Reign,
A wise Man never brings his bi^den Guests
Into his Parlour till his Room be dressed,
Garnished with Lights, and Tables neatly spread,
Be with full Dishes well nigh furnished.
So our great God, who (bounteous ever) keeps
Here open Court, and the ever-bound lesse-deeps,
Of sweetest Nectar Onus still distills,
By twenty times ten thousand sundry Quills.
All the admirable Creatures made beforn,
Which Heaven, Earth and Ocean do Adorn
Are but Essays, comp^red in every part,
To this Divinest Masterpiece of Art,
Therefore the supreme Peerless^ Architect,
When (of mere nothing) he did first erect
Heaven, Earth, Air and Seas, at once his thought
His word and deed all in an instant wrought:
But when ^e would his own selfs Type Create,
The Honor of Nature, the Earths Sole Potentate:
As if he would a Council hold, he Cites
His Sacr^d Power, his Prudence he inviteth,
Summons his Love, his Justice he adjourns,
Calls his Goodness, and his Grace returns,
To (as it were) consult about the Birth,
And building of a second God of Earth*
And each (a part) with liberal hand to bring,
Some excellence unto so rare a thing.
Or rather, he consul^s with his only Son,
(His own pourtrait) what proportion,
What Gifts, what Grace, what Soul he should bestow,
Upon his Viceroy of this Realm below.
When the other things God fashi^n'd in their kind,
The Sea t'aboun^ in Fishes he assigned,
The Earth in Floc^s, but having man in hand,
His very self he seemed to Command.
He both at once both life and Body lent
To other things, but when in Man he meant,
In Mortal Limbs immortal life to place,
He seemed to pause, as in a weighty cause,
And so at sundry moments finished,
The Soul and Body of Earth's glorious head.
And now Adam, and Eve too (who was yet to be formed out of one of Adams Ribs)
must be the causes of our Good or Evil, and on their good or bad Fortune ours
must wholly depend.

CHAP. IIII. Giving a Pleasant account of the Terrestial Paradise or Garden of
Eden, in which Adam was first placed: together with the miraculous manner of
Eves production with the supposed manner of Adams first nuptial addresses to
her, and of their joyful Marriage.
Genesis 2. In Edens Garden full of fruitful Trees,
Adam is placed, to taste all Fruits he sees;
Except the Fruit of one Tree, which if he
Do taste, the forfeit is that he must die,

Scarce was Adam created but he found himself a Paradise; and he even from the
Morning his birth, was placed under the most happy and d^lightfull Clymate that
Nature did afford.

Go then Adam, it is God who both calls and c^^ducts thee. Enter happily this
Garden of Eden (...) Paradise into which he leads thee; put thy self (...) the
shelter of this Tree: For it is the Tree of Knowledge and immortality, which he
has Planted for thee: Divert thy Eyes upon these Tulips, upon these
Gilli-flowers, upon these Roses, upon these Purple Velvet flowers, and upon
these Lillys; walk thou over the Daffidill, over the Thyme, over the Camomyle,
and over this green Tapestry, which is so odoriferous; be not affrighted at the
sight of th^se Tigers, these Leopards, and of all these more furious Beasts:
For God ^ath given thee power to Rule them, and there is no^ one in whom thy
Innocence begets not respect. Take then the Rod into thy hand, and Govern all
these Flocks and Herds, im^ose Laws on them, and Give them wha^ Names thou
please,

Doubtless, when Adam Saw our Common Air,
He did admire the mansion rich and fair
Of his Successors, for Frosts keenly Cold
The Shady Locks of Forests, had not pol'd;
Heaven had not Thundered on our Heads as yet;
Nor given the Earth her sad divorces Writ:
But when he once had entered Paradise,
The Remnant World he justly did despise:
(Much like a Boor far in the Country Born,
Who, never having seen but Kine and Corn:)
Oxen, and Sheep, and homely Haml^ts Thatcht;
(Which found, he counts as Kingdoms, hardly matched)
When afterward he happens to behold
Our wealthy Lon^on's wonders manifold:
The silly peasant thinks himself to be,
In a new World, and gazing greedily;
One while he, Art-less, all the Arts admires;
Then the fair Temples, and the Top-less Spires:
Their firm Foundations, and the ma^^ed Pride
Of all the sacred Ornaments be side.
Anon he wonders at the differing Graces,
Tongues, guests, Attires, the Fashions and the Faces;
Of-^usie-buzzing Swar^s, which still he meets,
Ebbing and Flowing over all the Streets:
Then at the Signs, the Shops, the Weights, the Measures,
The Handy-crafts, the Rumors, Trades, and Treasures.
But of all Sights none seems him yet more strange,
Then the rare beauteous, sttately rich Exchange.
Another while he marvels at the Thames,
Which seems to bear huge Mountains on her Streams:
Then at the fair built Bridge, which he does judge
More like a Dreadful City then a Bridge;
And glancing then along the Northern shore,
That princely Prospect does Amaze him more.)
For in this Garden Man delighted so,
That (rapt) he wished not if he awak't or no:
If he beheld a True thing or a Fable;
Or Earth, or Hea^'n, all more ^hen admirabl^.
For such Excess his ecstasy was small,
Not having Spirit enough to muse withal,
He wished him hundredfold redoubled Senses,
The more to taste so rare sweet Exc^^l^ncies:
Not knowing, whither Nos^, or Ears, or Eyes,
Sm^ll, heard, or saw, more Savours, Sounds, or Dies.
Immediately after God resolved to give him a Companion, The production of Eve.
for it was not convenient that Man should be all alone: For this end he closed
Adam's Eyelids, and charmed his senses by a Heavenly Sleep, which the Major
part of the Greek Fathers, according to the Translation of the Septuagint, call
an extatick and ravishing repose. This man then thus rapt in his Ecstasy felt
not Gods hand, which gently and without pain plucked out a Rib, whereof he
formed the first Woman, who was immediately brought unto Adam to be his
Companion and his dear Moity.

Scarce had Adam cast his Eyes on her but he cried out, Ah, these are Bones of
my Bones, and this Fles^ was drawn out of my Flesh; just as if he had said,
Come O my Love, the dearest portion of my self, you shall be from henceforth my
Wife, and I will be your Husband. We will be but one Heart in two Bodies; And
though ^e have two Souls we will have at least but one Mind and Will.

Now after this profound and pleasing trance,
No sooner Adams ravished Eyes did glance,
On the rare beauties of his New-come-half:
But in his Heart he 'gan to leap and laugh,
Kissing her kindly, calling her his Life,
His Love, his Stay, his Rest, his Weal, his Wife,
His other-self, his help ( him to refresh)
Bone of his Bone, Flesh of his very Flesh.
Source of all joys, sweet He-Shee coupled one. Adams Epithalamium, or Wedding
Song.

Thy Sacred Birth I never think upon,
But (ravished) admire how God did then,
Make two of one, and one of two again.
O Blessed Bone! O happy Marriage!
Which do the match 'twixt that and us presage:
O chastest Friendship! Whose pure Flames impa^t,
Two Souls in one, two Hearts into one Heart.
Oh Holy knot in Eden insti^uted,
Not in this Earth ^ith Blood and wrongs polluted;
This done the Lord commands the happy pair,
With chaste embraces to replenish fair,
The unpeopled World; that, while the World endures,
Here might succeed their living Portraictures.
Wives and Husbands, learn then from hence a lesson which teaches you the Laws
of Conjugall Love, An excellent lesson for Husbands and Wives.
and what powerful Motives you have to live in Unity, and in a most perfect
and holy Union. Let Man remember that he is the Master, but not a Tyrant. Let
Women also never forget their own extraction, and that they were not produced
out of the Head as Queens, nor out of the Feet as Servants and Slaves; but out
of the Side, and near the Heart, to the intent they may spend all the time of
their Marriage in a most sweet Intelligence, and in a most inviolable society:
To which Love having given a beginning, nothing but Death alone is able, or at
least ought, to Dissolve it.

But now, the Nuptials of Adam and Eve being past, nothing remains but the
Banquet. The Tables are already furnished, and they need but choose amongst all
the Dis^es of the World, that which shall appear to them the most Delicious.
They are Masters of all that Flys in the Air, of all that Swims in the Water,
of all that Creeps or Walks on the Earth; B^iefly of all Fruits that are in the
Terrestiall Paradise they have the choice; and amongst all the Trees which God
had Planted there, h^ only reserved the use of the Tree of Knowledge of Good
and Evil, of which he Expressly and upon pain of Death forbids these two guests
to gather any Fruit.

In this Conjuncture of time the Moon began to assemble her shadows, and God
finding all his Works perfect entered into his repose with the Seventh Day.

Adam and Eve enjoy then at present, all that their Hearts can desire. They
possess the Monarchy of the Universe for their Inheritance and Government:
Their Empire extends over all out-bounds and limits, the Winds do not blow but
at their pleasure, the Rivers and Streams do not Roll along but at their
Command; the Birds do not tune their Warblin^ Notes but to afford them delight.

In a word, they are as it were the Gods of the Terrestiall Paradise, and
partake in a manner of all the delights which can be tasted in Heaven.

And now therefore we may suppose Eve thus to bespeke her Husband, or better
self in the following manner. Wherein you have a brief account of what befell
them after their Fall, viz.

1. Eves first addresses to Adam, and her Industry in making a Garment for her
Husband.
Sweetheart, quoth she (and then she Kissed him)
My Love, my Life, my Bliss my Joy, my Gem,
My Souls dear Soul, take in good part (I prithee)
This pretty Present that I gladly give thee.
Thanks my dear all (quoth Adam then) for this,
And with three Kisses he requites her Kiss.
Then on he puts his painted Garment new,
And Peacock-like himself does often view;
Looks on his Shadow, and in proud amaze,
Admires the hand that had the art to cause,
So many several parts to meet in one,
To fashion thus the quaint Mandilion.
2. Adam and Eves Winter Suits.
But, when the winters k^ener breath began
To Cristalliz^ the baltic Ocean,
Our Grand-sire, shrinking, began, to shake and shiver,
His Teeth to Chatter, and his Beard to quiver.
Spying therefore a Flock of Muttons coming,
(Whose Freze-clad bodies feel not Winters numing;
He takes the fairest, and he nocks it down:
Then by good hap, finding upon the Down
A sharp great Fish-bone (which long time before,
The Roaring flood had cast upon the shore.)
He Cuts the Throat, fleyes it, and spreads the fell,
Then dries it, pares it, and he scrapes it well,
Then Clothes his Wife therewith; and of such Hides
Slops, Hats, and Doublets, for himself provides.
3. Their Lodging and first Building.
A Vaulted Rock, a hollow Tree, a Cave,
Were the first Buildings that them shelter gave;
But, finding the one to be too-moist a hold,
The other too narrow, the other over-cold,
Like Carpenters, within a Wood they choose,
Sixteen fair Trees that never Leaves do loose;
Whose equal front in quadran form prospected,
As if of purpose Nature them erected,
Their shady bows first bow they tenderly,
Then enter braid, and bind them curiously;
That one would think that had this Harbor seen,
'T had been true, Seeling painted-over green,
4. At length they get better Habitations.
Afther this trial, better yet to sense,
Their tender flesh from the Airy violence;
Upon the top of their sit-forked Stems,
They lay across bare Oken boughs for Beams,
Then these again with Leavie boughs they load,
So covering close their sorry Cold abode.
And then they ply from the Eaves unto the Ground*
With Mud-mixt Reed to wall their Mansion round,
All save a hole to the Eastward situate,
Where strait they clapped a Hurdle for a Gate;
(Instead of Hinges banged on a With)
Which with a slight both Shuts and Opens.
5. Their first Invention of Fire.
Yet Fire they lack^: But lo, the Woods that whistle*
Amidst the Groves, so often the Laurel justle,
Against that Mulberry, that their angry Claps
Do kindle Fire, that burns the Heath bour Cops.
When Adam saw a r^ddy vapor rise,
In glowring Streams; as turned with fear he slies,
It follows him, until a naked Plain,
The greedy fury of the flame restrain:
Then back he turns, and coming somewhat nigher
The kindled Shrubs, p^rceiving that the fire
Dri^s his dark Clothes, his Color does refresh,
An^ un-benums his Sin^ws and his Flesh:
By the unburnt end, a good big brand he takes,
And hying home a fire he quickly makes.
And still maintains it, till the Starry Twins,
Celestial breath another Fire begins.
But Winter being come again it grieved him,
TO have lost so fondly what Relieved him;
Trying a thousand ways sit^ now no more,
The justling Trees his damage would restore.
While (else where musing) one day he sat down
Upon a steep Rock craggy-forked crown,
A foaming Beast come toward him he spies;
Within whose Head stood burning Coals for Eyes:
Then suddenly with boisterous Arms he throws
A knobby Flint, that hummeth as he goes;
Hence flies the Beast, the ill-aimed flint shaft grownding
Against the Rock, and on it often rebounding,
Shivers to Cinders, whence there issued
Small sparks of fire no sooner born then dead.
This happy chance made Adam leap for Glee;
And quickly calling his cold Company:
In his left hand a s^ining Flint he l^cks,
Which with another in his right he knocks.
So up and down, that from the coldest stone,
At every stroke small lively Sparkles Shone.
Then with the dry Leaves of a withered Bay,
The which together handsomely they lay*
They ^ake the falling fire, which like a Sun
Shines clear, and smok-less in the Leaf begun.
6. Eves Mouth at first serves in stead of a pair of Bellous.
Eve, Kneeling down, with hand her head sustaining,
And on the low ground with her Elbow leaning,
Blows with her Mouth; and with her gentle blowing,
Stirs up the heat, that from the dry Leaves glowing;
Kindles the Read, and then that hollow Kex
First fires the small, and they the greater Sticks.
CHAP. V. ^herein you have an account of the Disasters and Banishment of Adam
and Eve out of Paradise, with a supposed Dialogue between Adam and Eve, and
likewise between Eve and the Serpent.
Genesis 3. The Woman's tempted by the Serpents whiles,
To eat the Fruit, she strait the Man beguiles.
A Cherub chaseth them with Sword and Fire,
Out of fair Edens Garden in great Ire.

ADam and Eve are happy, but how long will- this happiness endure? Does Adam
remem^er that he is a Man, and a Man of Earth? Does Eve well understand that
her Sex is mo^e Light, ^ore frail, and less constant? Adam art thou Igno^ant
that nothing is more flattering, and more cun^ing than a Woman, when her mind
is excited by ^ome passion? Beware then Adam of this Woman; ^or my own part I
imagine to have in a manner seen her ^ehind a Tree, and to my thinking I have
heard her ^^eak something unto a Serp^nt.

The Serpent if I mistake not first beginning to ^ialogue with her after the
following manner, viz.

^erp. Not eat? Not taste? Not touch? Not cast an Eye?
Upon the Fruit of this fair Tree? And why?
Why eatest thou not what Heaven ordained for Food?
Or can tho^ think that bad which Heaved called Go od?
Why was it made if not to be enjoyed?
Neglect of Favors makes a Favor void:
Blessings unused, pervert unto a Wast,
As well as Surfeits: Woman do but taste:
See how the Laden Boughs make silent suit
To be enjoyed: Look how the bending Fruit
Meet thee half way; Observe but how they crouch
To kiss thy Hand; Coy Woman, Do but touch:
Mark what a pure Vermilion blush has di'd
Their swelling cheeks, and how for shame they hide
Their Palsy Heads to see themselves stand by
Neglected: Woman, do but cas^ an Eye,
What bounteous Heaven ordained for use, refuse not;
Come, pull and Eat: Y' abuse the thing ye use not.

Eve, Wisest of Beast, our Great Creater did
Reserve this Tree, and this alone forbid;
The rest are freely ours, which doubtless are
As pleasing to the Taste, to the Eye as fair:
But touching this, his strict Commands are such:
It Is Death to Taste, no less then Death to Touch.

Serp. Pish, Death's a Fable: Did not Heaven inspire
Your equal Elements with Living Fire:
Blown from the spring of Life? Is not that breath
Immortal? Come, ye are as free from Death
As he that made you. Can the flames Expire
Which he has kindled? Can ye quench his Fire?
Did not the Great Creatours voice proclaim
What ere he made (from the blew Spangled frame,
To the poor Leas that trembles) very good?
Blessed he not both the Feeder and the Food?
Tell, Tell me then, what danger can Accrue
From such blessed Fruit, to such half Gods as you
Curb needless fears, and let no fond Conceit
Abuse your freedom; Woman take and Eat.

Eve. It Is true, we are immortal; Death is yet
Unborn, until Rebellion make it debt,
Indeed, I know the Fruit is good, until
Presumptuous disobedience make it ill.
The Lips that open to this Fruit's a Portall,
To let in Death and make immortal mort^ll.

Serp. You cannot die. Come Woman, taste and fear not:

Eve. Shall Eve transgress? I dare not, O I dare not.


Serp. A fraid? Why draw'st thou back thy timorous Arm?
Harm only fa^ls on such as fear a Harm.
Heaven knows and fears the virtue of this Tree,
'Twill make ye perfect Gods as well as he.
St^e^ch sorth thy Hand, and let thy fondness never
Fear Death: Do, Pull, and Eat, and Live for ever.

Eve. It Is but an Apple, and it is as good
To do, as to desire. Fruit's made for Food:
^le pull, and taste, and t^mp^ my Adam too,
To know the Secrets o^ this dainty.

Serp. Do.


EPIGRAM.
Vnluckey Parliament! Wherein at l^st,
Both Houses are agreed, and firmly p^st;
An Act of Death confirmed by higher powers:
O h^d it had but such Success as ours.
And now Eve being thus seduc't by the Serpent, we may suppose Adam Advancing
up to her, bespeaking her after the following manner, viz.

Adam. From whence do tho^ come* an^ why do thou leave him all alone, who
is the heart of thy heart, and the soul of thy soul? Where can be the Members
without the Head, and the Head without the Members? What, do thou not know,
that I am to be wit^ess of all thy Actions, and that I must give an account
unto God, for what thou shall do? what fruit is this, that thou hold'st in thy
hand?


Eve. Ah my Son, my Friend, my dear Husband, would you did but know what has
happened since I was absent from you? Not far from hence I met a Serpent of a
Prodigious and extraordinary shape, he also spoke to me, contrary to the use of
Beasts. For my part I did believe that he was a Prodigy of Heaven, and an Angel
which God sent me under the form of a Serpent. He showed me the Tree of Life,
and promised me, that if I would Eat of is's Fruit, I should become like unto
God, and have a perfect knowledge of Good and Evil; I told him, that God had
forbid it us upon pain of death; but he protested to me, that on the contrary
this fruit has the Juice of Life and Immortality: For my part I have gathered
it. I have eaten of it, and I entreat you to taste as little of it as you
please.


O God! how eloquent is the malice of a Woman* and what powerful charms and
persuasions has she? Her Lips and Mouth dis^ill at once both Honny and Poison;
her Tongue shoots forth Arrows of Death and Life; her very looks are so many
Lightnings, which she mingleth with the darts of her Passions.

This is that which destroyed the Angel of the Terrestial Paradise, the Monarch
of the World, and the Father of all Mankind. He chose rather to disobey God,
than contradict his Wife: For it was from his own Wife's hand he took this
fatal Apple, which would choke his Posterity. O wretch* What have thou done?
Open a little thine Eyes, and blush r^ther at the sight of this Crime, than at
thy Nakedness? Adam what have thou done; why do thou hide thy (...)?

Adam where art thou? God calls thee, thou must Answer, thou must appear; in
vain is it to seek out ^hades and groves, to oppose the Word who gives ^peech
to the Dumb, and those Eyes whose least glances make the day to break in the
darkest Dungeons and greatest obscurities.

Adam, what answerest thou? Alas, have thou no pity on thy self, and all thy
Children.

In con^lusion Adam lays the fault on his Wife, the Woman accuses the
Serpent, and instead of accusing themselves, to sweeten the indignation of the
Judge, they make excuses to inkindle his Wrath, and to render themselves
unworthy of Pardon. Ah! How far more prudently had both of them done, if with
bended Knees on the ground, with tears in their Eyes, with sighs from their
Hearts, and con^ession from their Mouths, they had said unto God, Lord take
pity on us, and upon all our poor Children? But alas, they are wholly
insensible, they ^ann^t acknowledge their offense, wherefore no Clemency, no
Pardon.

Go then Serp^nt accursed of God, go creep upon ^he ^arth, and with shame trayl
thy Body and thy S^ales, biting the Earth with thy Teeth. It is thou that have
un^appily se^uced the first of Womankind, and therefore War shall be eternally
inkindled be^ween thee and the Woman.

As for thee O Wo^an* who were the Origin and ^^urce of Evil, know that thy
m^series shall daily find ^^plorable incre^ses: Mo^^over thou shall conceive
with ^^in, and shall not (...) forth the Fruit but amidst the ^hrows of a
painful Labor. In fine, thou shall be un^er the Command of Man: And he shall
be not only ^hy Master, (...) someti^es thy Tyrant.

As for th^^, O Man! Remove far from this Sa^red abode: Go seek thy Bread at
the price of thy ^weat and Blood; go follow the Plow and Cart, to ^e the
Companion of Beasts, and to cultivate the Earth, which thy pride has swollen
up with Winds, and covered with Thorns, Brambles, and Briars. Go whether thou
please: but know that thy life shall be but a large course of misfortunes,
and a disastrous list, where thou must continually wrestle with all Creatures,
and be the fatal mark of all sorts of accidents and mis-haps, which in f^ne
will give thee no repose till thou shall return into the Bosom of the Earth.
For dust thou art, and to Dust thou shall return.

Genesis 3. Poor banished Adam plows with sweat and pain,
The barren Earth, and there in sows Grain:
Eve fares as ill, her Children she does bear
In grievous pain, an^ nurses them in fear.
Scarce were these destroying Thunderbolts darted upon the head of Adam and
Eve, and consequently on all Mankind, but an Angel environed with Fire and
Flames, seized on the gate of Paradise, and shut it for ever against these
miserable and exiled Persons. Alas! why would not the Earth have rather
swallowed them up? And why would not that beautiful Garden, which had been the
Throne of their Innocence, become at least the Sepulcher of their Sin?

But seeing it was not so, Ah! Poor Children of Adam, pittyful Relics of an
unfortunate Father, let me address my self to you, behold then your Patrimony,
the Rights of your Families, and what Adam and Eve have left you for Legacies.
Let no Man hereafter be astonished to see you wandering about Countries like
Pilgrims, Adams legacies to all his Children.
and going from door to door in Cities, with Tears in your Eyes, sighs in your
Hearts, with dusty Hair, and Sunburned Faces; Let no Man ^e any more astonished
to see you go bare-Headed, and Barefooted, a Wallet on your Sho^lders, and a
Staff in your Hand: for these are the portions of Sin. Miserable Mortals, the
Earth from henceforth shall be to you but a Dark Prison, Life but a Gally, and
the World but a great Chain of Misfortunes. The Elements shall join in Arms
against you. The Fire shall inkindle frightfull Comets over your Heads; The Air
shall dart forth merciless Thunderbolts upon your Houses; The Sea shall raise
its Billows against your Towers, and the Earth shall be the Theater of Wars,
the Meadow in which the Plague shall Mow, and the Field of Battle, where all
the powers of the World, and Hell it self shall deliver you up to Tragic
Combats. In fine your Bodies shall be Subject to all sorts of Mala^ies* and
your minds to all kinds of Passions.

But Hark! Hark! Methinks now I hear already E^vy grumbling and murmuring in
the Heart of Cain. I hear methinks the cry of Abel. Let us therefore observe a
while what passes.

CHAP. VI. The Murder of Abel, and the Despair of Cain, together with a
supposed Dialogue between Conscience, Tyrant Sin, Cain and Abel.
Genesis 4. Cain and Abel after Sacrifice,
God accepts Abels, Cain's be does despise;
Cain enraged his Brother Abel slayes,
For which God Scourges Cain all his days.

ABEL was from his Birth, of so sweet and facile, so plyant, and tractable a
disposition, a A^am and Eve were even enforced to bestow on him their most
tender affections. Cain on the contrary* who was his Elder Brother, appeared to
be of s^ fierce, and imperious a Nature, that at length t^ sweeten it, they
resolved to oblige him to cultivat^ the Earth, that his spirit might learn how
to softe^ the hardest of Elemens, and to temper the harshnes^ of his Courage.

Abel at the same time employed himself in keeping Sheep, and guiding his
Fathers Flo^ks amidst the Pastures: His mind in repose, and amidst the silenc^
of the Field^, began to take his flight to Heaven.

Upon which we may now suppose the cruel and monstrous TyrantSin setting forth
on his first Travels into t^eWorld, Sin began his first Travels.
Apollyon following him close at his he^ls* to see him do his business
effectually, and to assist him in every enterprise; and so it fell out, just as
he began his Journey, Cain and Abel were offering Sacrifices; and having
intelligence of both their Dispositions, he made up to Cain's door, and there
lay co^ching down, like a hurtful Beast, ready to devour; and secretly
whispering in to his Ear, to spare the best of his substance to enrich himself;
and also intimated to him, that all that he offered to the Lord was lost, and
would never be rewarded; and Faith not being in Cain's House, he harkned to
this cursed stranger, and did accordingly; yet he brought his Offering, least
he should displease his Father A^am, who, it is thought, at that time, was high
Priest, which Office, afterward, fell to the Firstborn in the Family. But
when Cain saw his Offering was not excepted, and his Brothers was, this Enemy
being near, knocked at h^s door.

Cain. Who is there?


Sin. Have you, Sir, any Room for a Tra^eller.


Cain. What are you?


Sin. A Friend, one that loves you dearly, and am troubled to ^ee how you are
abused and basely dealt with, by your younger Brother. Can you bear the
thoughts that he should be in the favor of his Maker, and be the only Darling
of his Father, and you slighted and contemned in this sort?


Cain. By this, I cannot but think tho^ art indeed a Friend, and do bear good
will to me; pray come in:


And he presently lo^g'd him in the best Room he had: neither do I read of any
opposition made against him, by any in the H^^^e.

He had no sooner received him, but immediately (by secret in^tigatio^^ and
Instructions from Apollyon, who was glad to see him entertained) he apply^ed
himself to him after this manner:

Sin. Let this Villain Ab^l, be the object of thy hatre^: never speak friendly
to him more in love; but let thy Wrath out against him to the uttermost: shall
he be accepted; what is he; art not thou better th^n him? He will ere long
(though thy younger Brother) be come thy Lord and Master, and Rule ^ver thee;
and thou shall be made a mere Underling.


Cain. I am truly of your mind; my Father and Mothers Heart. I find alrea^y i^
taken from me, and s^t upon this ca^^ing Suppla^ter.

I hate him as^ ^^te a Toa^, neither can I ^ndure to see him: Thu^ Cain was
^^ll'd with Wrath, and his countenance ^^ll; i. e. he showed himself s^ll of
Rage and Dis^ontent.


Sin. Most Noble C^i^, Heir of the World; I have a Business of great Importance
to imp^rt to thee.


Cain. Sir, what is it?


Sin. I am a Servant to a mighty Prince, whose Power and Kingdom, it is like
thou have not heard of it: And he has a dear and cordial love for th^^, and
has sent me to thee, with certain instructions, to put thee in a way to be rid
of this your Canting Brother; and I will assure you, it is high time, for he is
now at Prayer, and begins to grow more and more in favor, etc.


Cain. I am Glad to hear this News: But which way can the thing ^e done?


Si^. Sir, you will nev^r be at Peace, nor have any Ground to con^lude your
Fa^h^r will mak^ you his Heir* or indeed ever r^gard you, until he be rid out
of the World: But if this be once done, all is your own.


Cain. But how shall I do to get rid of him?


Sin. Why, since there is none you can employ secretly, to do it; do you kill
him; and then de^lare ^e murdered himself, being overcome with ^e^anch^lly, or
blown up with Pride and self-^on^^it upon his late ambitiou^ th^^ghts, in
aspiring after Rule and Government. Ill warrant you Sir, this will hide the
Fact and you shall never be discovered.


Presently upon this motion, Conscience stepped in; and spoke after this m^nn^r:

Conscience. Sir, do not this evil Deed; he is your ^nly Brother and hi^ Blood
will cry for Veng^ance.


Sin. What do do my Cain; why do t^ou m^ke a (...)?


Cain. I am hin^^r'd by a timorous F^llow in my H^^se, whom I know not: some
Body I think has (...) him hither, on purpose to be a Plague to me.


Si^. Re^ard him not, I will undertake to stis^e him, ^^d spoil his telling
Tales. Go call thy Brother s^^th, and walk together in the ^ields. Be sure
^ar^y it lov^ingly to him, lest he mistrust thee: and I warrant you he will
talk with you about Religion, and condemn your way of Worship: and though he be
your younger Brother, yet will undertake to teach thee: and if thou will be a
Fool, and suffer it, do.


Cain. I will try that, so far I am resolved to take thy Counsel.


And immediately, away he went and called his Brother forth; and they walked
together in the Field.

Cain. Brother, what a vast Fabric is here? This World in which we are placed
is full of great Wonders and excellent Rarieties; and all after our Father Adam
is dead will be ours; all the Riches, I mean, and Glory thereof: and my Heart
Brother, is wonderfully pleased with the thoughts of it: I desire no greater
Glory, nor Happiness; though I have heard my Father talk of a Future state
beyond the Grave, that exceeds all things here below.


Abel. Brother, this World, and all the Wonders we do behold, does show sorth
the Glory and handy Works of Jehovah our Blessed God and Creator; whose we are,
and whom we should serve: for he is a jealous God; and executes Righteousness
and Justice in the Earth: and is a Rewarder of all those who diligently seek
him.


Cain. You are a Fool; I do not believe there is any Reward for Justice and
Righteousness, nor Vengeance for Vngodl^ness.


Abel. Brother it grieves me to hear you speak after this manner, for I have
had evidence of his Merry, and favorable Acceptance already. I am afraid,
truly, you are misled by some Enemy: The way you go in Brother is not good;
Think upon the World to come.


Cain. Wisdom is only with you: I see how you are swollen up with Pride; and what
you aim at; leave off your talking of a World to come, for I believe none.


Abel. Brother, you show a very wicked, naughty, and unbelieving Heart; I am
ashamed to hear your Discourse.


Some things of this Nature, it is rationally supposed they might discourse of:
And Cain being a^re^h moved to Wrath thereby, took the Devils counsel, and rose
up and murdered him,

See Reverend Mr. Answorth upon this Matter:

Thus this Tyrant and Monster prevailed; and in a second attempt* over came the
Fourth part of the World. But see how Sin and the Devil deceived Cain: The
Murder was soon discovered; for lo* on a sudden, a mighty Cry was heard;
Vengeance! Vengeance! God, who is the searcher out of Blood, cries, Where is.
Abel thy Borther? Nothing can be hid from his Eye. Murder shall not go
unpunished: The Voice of thy Brother's Blood cries to me from the Ground. Guilt
follows his Sin with the dreadful Wrath of God; And now thou art cursed from
the Face of the Earth, etc.

At this stroke the Heart of Cain becomes a little sensible, and the hardness
of his Soul, although too late, begins to soften.

Alas Lord! (said he) my Iniquity is greater than thy Mercies, and my Sin is
too enormous to hop^ for Pardon. I confess it, and from this very moment I
depart from hence like a banished Man to wander day by day without peace or
relaxation. Besides, my Brothers Ghost persues and torments me, with too much
severity: Even thy self, O my God, and my Judge, chasest me away far from thy
Countenance, and far from the pleasing glances which issue from thine Eyes. Ah
then let the Sun and Moon cease to enlighten the World, and let me for ever
wander amidst the Murtherous shades of Abel, and let my life pine away in
obscurity: Otherwise I fear (says he) that at the first sight and encounter,
some one may kill, and treat me according to my deserts.

No no, Cain, says God, nothing of what thou ^earest shall happen to thee; and
if any one be so rash to attempt on thee, I will make him feel the excess of my
Wrath* For this effect God imprinted a sensible mark upon his forehead, which
served him for a safeguard against all the Assaults of his Enemies. This done,
the poor wretch went away all alone, pale, trembling, The disquiets and the
banishment of Cain.
pursued by the stings of his Soul: And after some wan^rings arrived in the
L^nd of Ede^, lyi^^ Eastward. It was under this Cl^m^te, and near unto Mount
Libanus, that this fugitive at last made his retreat: There it was, where he
built a City, and had by his Wife a very numerous posterity.

And now Mankind with Fruitful Race began,
A little Corner of the World to Man.
CHAP. VII. Wherein you have an Account, both of the Building of Noah's Ark, and
of his manner of entering into it: Together with a Description both of the
Deluge and Drowning of the old World, and of Noah's descent out of the Ark, and
his Sacrifices on the Hills of Armenia.
Genesis 6. God for Man's sins intends the World to drowned,
With Men, and Beast, and all that is in it found:
But he in the Ark saves Noah, and his Seed,
With pairs of all kinds which on Earth did breed.

THe Decree is now given, and I see nothin^ that is able to withold an arm
wholely irritat^d.

God repents himself for having created Man, and bestowed on him all his
labor, and affection; he repents himself, and his Heart rises at the sight
and thought of this Object: In fine, being no longer able to restrain his Wrath
and indignation, I swear b^ my self, says he, that I will d^stroy Man, and
ef^ace hi^ name and memory over the face of the Universe. I will not spare ev^n
Be^sts and Birds: To the end, that what has been a wi^^ess, complice, or even
a slave of his crime; shall also be the Companion of the pain and punishment
which is ordained him. This said and done: Of so many men, who then lived upon
the Earth, and of so many Families, that only of No^h deserved favor, and was
freed from Shipwreck.

God then calls this Holy Man, an^ great P^triark, ^o advertise, and
communi^ate his whole de^ign unto him.

Fri^nd, ^aith God, the World is in its agony, and my justice shall put an end
to this Work, which my Love began. All my patience and delays h^^e only served
to make way for evil; and my cl^mency is converted into rigor; after all, my
good^ess is tired, and I am resolved to open all the Torre^ts of my Wrath; that
the World being no longer ^ut a great Abyss, and a vast Sepul^her, may be
drowned in it sel^, and that there may never be more m^n^ion of it.

Go then Noah, and build an Ark of Timb^r and Planks: Make small apartments in
it, and pitch it ^oth within and without. Let it be ^hr^e h^^dre^ Cubits in
length, and fifty in brea^t^, and thirty in ^^ight: Make th^n a Win^ow a Cu^it
h^gh, and in the s^^e contri^e a do^r to go in and out; dispose also Ch^mb^rs
therein, and be car^full, that the wh^le be ^ivided in^o three St^^i^s, t^ the
and the Body of ^^is l^r^e st^u^ture may be the more commodio^s, and ^etter
proportioned. Afterward I will make my accord and p^ct with thee: And thou
shall presently enter in with thy Wife, Children, and Cattle. Besides thou
shall conduct into this Sanctuary all sorts of Beasts and Birds, with this
distinction, that amongst the clean thou shall choose seven of every sp^cies;
and of the unclean, two only: Pairing alw^yes the Male and Femal^, that they
may repair the Earth and Air by their Copulations.

This good Man performed exactly all that God had commanded him; he is already
in the Ark, and he bu^ieth himself in disposing and nourishing all these
different Species of Beasts, and Birds.

Seven days were spent about these preparations* and in the miraculous
enclosure of this new House: At the e^d whereof the Heavens opened on all
side^; and the Sun, Moon, and Stars, seemed to be changed into Sources and
Channels, the Air and Clouds became a Sea, and all the ^lements joined together
to make of the who^e Worl^ an Ocean without ^hoars, without bottom, without
H^ven, and without limit, Genesis 7. The hig^est Hills by Waters are over spread,
Mou^tains, Trees, Towers* in Floods lie buried,
Men, Women, Be^sts, and Birds are quite d^stroy'd,
W^ters possessed all that the Land e^joy'd.


M^an while, where are you the unhappy Inhabit^nt^ of the City of Enos? Poor
Heirs of Cain, Children of Men, eff^minate Spirits, wa^ton Souls, where are
you? The Heavens f^ll on your Heads, the Air stifles you, the Water swall^ws
you up, and the Earth vanishes away. Fath^rs, Moth^rs, Children, Husba^^s and
Wives, Brothers and Sisters, Kindred, Friends wh^re are you? I behold, I behold
your Towers bur^ed u^d^r the Waves: I hear your cries, your sighs, and your
voices notwithst^nding the Tempest; in fin^ your flo^ting Bo^ies and your dying
Souls ack^owledg^ ^ut too l^te the excess of your Sins.

Ah sin, sin, these are thy spoils, and this is the tempest thou have raised;
sin do thou discern the state into which thou have reduced the World, the
Air, the Earth, and the Heavens?

O God! Must all the Elements weep forty days, and ^s many Nights: And in fine
must all Nature be in Mourning, or rather in Triumph? Since every where she
erects Trophies, and Mountains of Water to swallow up the most shameful, and
most insolent of all Vices.

During this Triumph, and mourning, Noah stears his Vessel, his Family, and
Troops, upon the Billows. This holy man enjoyes a Calm, and say^^^ securely
over these Storms and Billows. He behol^s the Day in the midst of Night; and
the Tempe^t, which sinks the whole World even as low as Hell, lifts him up
even as high as the Heavens.

Range then O Noah, range upon the Waters ^f the Deluge, and expect the day and
moment^* when God shall land thee in the Haven. And thou O Ark that carryest
the World, and its Spoils, behold how the Sea makes a halt at thy approa^h, and
keeps back its suspended Waves as it were out of compl^^ency, and an orderly
respect. Holy House of God; Fortunate Sanctuary of all Mankind! Float on
without Oars or Sails, float on, for it is the Spirit of God, and the hand of
the justest of men which directs and Guides thee.

In effect, scarce were the Forty days expired, when in an instant the Heavens
dried up their sources; the air appearded most serrene* and the great drops of
Rain were turned into Pearls and Dew as it were to give notice of the return of
the Sun and Morning. At length, after seven Months contest and conflict, this
wandering Island, which carried Noah and his Family, landed upon the Mountains
of Armenia expecting till the tenth Month, when the other Hills showed their
heads and tops: Forty days after which, this most Holy and wise Pilot, who had
almost spent a whole year in the pleasing obs^urities of his prison, still
victorious and triumpha^t, resolved at last to op^n its window to give flight
and p^ssage to a Grow, which indeed went forth but never returned, There needed
then a purer and more faithful Messenger: Noah chose a Dove amongst all the
Birds, that she might discover whether the waters were quite retir^d. But this
innocent Creature, and a^iable Spy, finding no resting place clean enough,
re^urned pres^ntly into the Ark and advertised Noah that the waters of the
Deluge were not wholly de^reased. It was this news that obliged Noah to expect
yet the space of Seven days, after which he took the Dove again and instantly
gave her leave to take her Liberty and Flight.

Noah in expectation, stands one while himself, ^n other some one of his
Children, at the Window to see whether this Angel of peace would return or no.

Behold good news, the Dove is returned; I have a glimse of her with the
Olive Branch she carries in her Beak.

Noah what say thou? Make have I pree-thee* Receive this little Lega^, and
take from his mouth the earnest of peace; And if thou have a mind t^ have more
certain assurances, the term of seven daye^ will put a period to all thy
desires.

And as soon as the seven days were expired, Noah cast out again the Dove to
the mercy of the Waters, of the Air and Earth, where having at las^ sound
footing, she resolved to abide.

Genesis 8. The Heavenly Floodgates are sh^t, and the Wi^d
Dries up the Waters, the Dove, Land does find;
The Ark's aground, Noah does come ^ S^ore;
God promises to drowned the World no more.
Noah seeing what had passed uncovered the roof of his Ark, and presently
perceived the Earth, the Islands, the Haven, the Fields, and the dryedup ways.
He heard God also commanding him to depart out of the Ark with all his Company,
that he might re-people the universe. And here I leave it unto the curious to
imagine what pleasure Noah had at the opening of his Cage: when he saw Eagles,
Vultures, Austridges, and all Birds take their flight; following the track
which was to carry them unto their own Climate; God knows also how the Sheep
fled far from the Wol^e, the Lion from the Co^k, the Hare from the Dog, which
nevertheless by secret and devine charms, held in the Ark a Correspondence
without Noise, War, or Enmity.

In sine, during this Iayle delivery, and these separations, Noah was careful
not to do like Seafaring men, who during the Storm and Tempest, invoke all the
Saints of Paradise, and make a thousand vows unto them, which nevertheless they
perform not in the Haven, and calm, but by an infinity of Blasphemies, and by
the continuation of their Impieties.

Scarce was this eminent Man (chosen by God for the conservation of the World)
descended out of the Ark, but he instantly built an Altar, on which he offered
Holocausts and victimes in honor of him who had so sweetly, and by such
mavelous ways, conducted him to the shore and harbor.

It is then peradventure for this cause God promises unto men and Noah, that
the Earth shall be no more accursed for their sake: He assures them that his
revenging hand shall never take the Rod so universally to scourge all sinners:
that from henceforth Winter and Summer, Cold and Heat, Day and Night, shall
have their courses, periods, motions, and vicissitudes, with order, and by
regular intervals.

In all the compass of our floating Inns,
Are not so many Planks, and Boards, and Pins:
As Wonders, Strange, and Miracles that ground,
Man's wrangling reason, and his wills confound.
And God no less his mighty power displayed,
When he restored, then when the World he made.
CHAP. VIII. Giveing an account of the Rainbow in the Heavens: Wieh God
promised should appear after the Flood, as a sign that he would drowned the
World no more.
GOD resolving to confirm the Oath* and Covenant he had made with Noah, was so
good and gracious as to imprint the Seal of his contract in the Clouds, to the
end the malice of men might never be able to efface it, and that on the
contrary he might be obliged never to make war against them, when he should see
between him and the World, those illustrious characters of Love* and those
magnificent Articles of truce, pardon, and peace. Moreover this sign, which
appeared in the Heavens, was but a Bow without Arrows; it was a resplendent
Arch, and a Circle beset with Diamonds, Emeraulds, and Rubies; it was a chain
of Gold, Silver, and Pearls; it was a Scarf interwoven with the most lively
splendors and the most sensible lights of the Sun and Day. It was the portraict
of Peace which appeared under feigned and imaginary colors, or to express in a
word all that can be thought, and said when we cast our Eyes on this wonder of
the Air; it was the Diadem which St. John discovered on the Head of Almighty
God: and which therefore was to be for all eternity the Crown of a God, who can
never change, but will everlastingly conserve this Garland and Diadem of peace.

From henceforth fear no second Flood, that shall
Cover the whole face of the Earthly Ball.
CHAP. IX. Giveing an account of Noah's being over ta^en with Wine.
Genesis 9. Naked and Drunk a sleep Came, Noah saw,
He mocks and jeers him against natures Law;
Sem and Japheth cover his nakedness,
Came he does curse, Sem and Japheth does bless.

IT is true; that Men were never more at Pe^ce, the Earth never more pure, and
Heaven never powered down so many savours as it shed upon the Earth and the
Children of Noah. Nevertheless in the midst of Pleasure, Peace, Concord, Love,
Joy, and all sorts of Benedictions, this poor Man, whom all the Waters of the
World, and of the Deluge, could not vanquish, was drowned at last in a Glass of
Wine.

O God! What scandal, what shame, what disquiet, and what disorder in the
Family of Noah? This good old Man, fell cold and stiff on the ground, and it is
not known whether he be dead or alive. His Children run presently to help him,
but as if the s^^ne of the Wine, which their Father-had taken too
inconsiderately, had dazel'd and blinded the youngest of them; instead of
casting ashes, and Water on the Flaming Coals, which consumed his poor Father,
he made a Bone-fire of Mirth, and scorn about his Nakedness: And with an
unparalleld impudence discovered to the Eyes of all his Brethren, what Nature
has concealed. His Brothers nevertheless were more respectfull, and prudent
than himself: For immediately Piety cast veyls over their Eyes, and Love, though
Blind, found out Artifices to cover an Object which was neither decent nor
Lawful to behold. It was in recompense of these chaste duties, that No^h being
returne^ out of that Abyss, into which Wi^e had precipitated him, opened the
Eyes of his Bo^y, and Soul, and a^terwards perceiving the unnatural impudence
of Cham, he darted forth the Thunder of his malediction against his Son Canaan,
beseeching likewise God to bless, and fill Sem, Iaphet, and all their Progeny,
with his Graces. It was from their Posterity all the Generations of the World
are descended; and they were the Persons who laid the foundation of Sodom,
Ninivie, Salem, and Gomorrha; as also of so many other Famous Cities, from
whence afterward Arts, ^epublicks, Policies, Governments, and all the Empires
of the Universe took their Rise.

Noah being willing to beguile the rage,
of bitter griefs that vexed his feeble age;
To see with Mud so many Roofes over grown,
And him left alm^st in the World alone;
One day a little from his strictness shrunk,
and making Merry, drinking over Drunk:
A^^ silly thinking in that Honey-^a^l,
To drown his woes he drowns his wits and all.
His Head grows giddy, and his Foot in^ents. A description of a Drunken Man.

A mighty f^me his troubled brain tormen^s,
His idle poattle from the purpose quite,
Is abrupt Suttering all confusd' and light,
His Wine stuffed Stomach wrung with Wine he feels,
His trembling Tent all topsey turvey wheels;
At last not able on his Legs to stand;
More like a foul Swine then a sober Man;
Oppressed with Sleep, he wallows on the Ground,
His shameless snorting Trunk so deeply dround
In self Oblivion that he did not hide,
Those parts that Caesar covered when he died.
CHAP. X. Giveing a full account of the Building of the Tower of Babel.
Genesis 11. To Build up Babel, Adams Race decree,
As high as Heaven what passes there to see;
God gives them Diverse Tongues their thoughts to cross;
One calls for Mortar, and one brings Moss.

SO it happened not long after this that the Inhabitants of the Earth feeling
the Justice of their own Consciences, and they not calling upon God, they
feared the coming of another Deluge, so they resolved to build a Tower, and
raise the top of it even as high as the Clouds. The chief Undertaker of this
famous Structure was the Giant ^^mrod, Grandchild to that Reprobate Cham, who
discovered his Fathers shame. This Architect was of a proud Nature, and of a
Capricious humor, believing that his enterprises, and his designs, were to be
executed without the least opposition.

In effect, never was any work undertaken, and advanced with more Expedition,
nor with more Ardor, Zeal, and Submission. But the Grand designer of the World,
the Architect of the Universe, and the general Producer of all things, who
takes delight to confound the Wisdom of the Wi^e, and to overthrow the Plots,
and Enterpri^es of the most Powerful, beholding these Fortifications raised
near midway, and being able no longer to endure this Audacity, and these
presumptuous Attempts, resolved at last to overturn all these Fort^, and to
cast a general confusion of Tongues amongst the Carpenters, and Masons. This
made a Tower of Babel, that is to say of Disorder, War, and Confusion. This
Stately Building, this lofty Cittadell, this impregnable Fort, was but a
Labyrinth of deaf and dumb people, who spoke without hearing one another, and
cried out when it was not in any man's power (...) help them.

Bring me quoth one a Trow^l, quickly, quick;
One brings him up a Hammer: Hew this Brick
Another bids, and then they cleave a Tree;
Mak^ fast this Rope, and then they let it flee;
One calls for Planks, another Mortar lacks,
They bring, the first a Stone, the last an Ax;
One would have Spik^s* and him a Spade they give;
A^oth^r asks a Saw, and gets a S^ive:
Th^s crosl^-^r^st they pra^e and point in vain,
What ^ne ha^h ma^e, a^^ther Mars again.
Ni^h Br^^^^l^ss all with t^^ir confused yawling,
In (...) l^bour now begins appawling.
In Bri^f, th^se ^l^^^rs s^ein^ the Storm arrived.
Of Gods j^st Wrath, all we^k (...) Heart deprived,
Fors^ke their purpose, and like Frantic Fools,
Scatter their stuff, and tumble down their Tools.
Behold the Enterprises and Designs of the World* Behold the Structure of the
Giants of the Earth, and the Sanctuary of their Pride.

Vanity of this World! Glory of a few days! Phantasms of the Earth! seeming
beauties! Men, what do you think? and why I beseech you, so many Houses, so
many Castles, Cities and Villages? cast your Eyes on the Tower of Babel, and
dread at least the fate of the like disast^r. Finally then make your Wills,
Ingrave your Epitaphs, seek out six or seven Foot of Earth, and from
henceforth think only on erecting your Tombs. Go, consult your Ancestors, your
Fathers, and Masters; cast your selves at their Feet, enter into their
Sepulchers, search into the bottom of their Monuments, and be not affrighted to
behold so many ravell'd Crowns, so many broken Scepters, and so much Purple
serving only to cover Worms.

CHAP. XI. Giveing a full account of Abraham's departure out of his Territor^es,
and his entri^g into the Fields of Moreth, where he erected an Altar, and where
God appeared to him a second time.
Genesis 12. Abraham to obey the Lo^ds Command,
Forsak^s his na^ive Soil, for Canaans Land,
His Parents leaves lik wise, and takes away
With him, Wife, Servants, and Lot without stay.

NOw it was, by the Favor and Splendour of conquering Lights, The calling of
Abraham.
and Victorious voices, that Abraham was chosen amongst Men, as the Person who
would be the most obedient, most faithful, and most conformable to the will of
God. And now it was as we may suppose by means of an Angel clothed with an
humane Body, that Abraham heard distinctly the Voice of God, which said unto
him,

Abraham, It is time to leave thy Country, and Kindred, and to abandon thy
Fathers House.

Follow me then, and repair unto a Land, and under a Clymate, which I will show
thee; every where I will be thy Star, thy Pole, and my Eye shall serve as a
Guide, and Torch to conduct thee to thy Haven and Landing-place.

Well then Abraham, get thee out of thine own Count^^y, leave all thy Friends,
and break those many ties, which Bloo^ has woven in thy Veins and Heart. The
Milk thou have sucked is from hence forth no other than p^^son, the Nourishment
(...) have received from t^y Parents does but sustain thy Body, and stifle thy
Soul: In sine the Light an^ Brightness of Heaven cannot be seen ami^st the
Shades and Smoke of thy Country.

But what! must poor Abraham leave himself? O my God! why do thou oblige him
to forsake ^is beloved Chaldea, and why woul^st thou have him separate himself
from his near Kindre^ and dearest Friends. He wants nothing at home, and it may
come to pass, that every thing will sail him amongst Strangers.

Alas! sai^ Abraham, must I needs ^orgoe
Th^se happy Fiel^s where Euphra^es does slow:
Here I have spen^ the ^^st part of my Age:
H^re I poss^ss a plenteous (...):
Here have I ^ot me many Fri^nds and Fame,
An^ by my D^e^s att^ind a glorious Name:
And must I h^nce, an^ le^ve t^is certain State,
To Roam un^ertain ((...) a Runagate)
Over fearful Hills, and thorough foreign torrents,
That rush down mountains with their roaring currents
To seek a country (God knows where and whither,
Whose unknown Name has yet scarce sounded hither.
With Staff in Hand, and Wallet on our Back:
From Town to Town, to beg for all we lack?
TO have (briefly) nothing properly our own
In all the World; no, not our Grave-place known.
Is It possible, I should endure to see
The Sighs and Tears my Friends will shed for me:
O! can I thus my native Soil forsake?
O! with what Words shall I my Farewell take?
Farewell Chaldaea, dear delights adue:
Friends, Brothers, Sisters, Farewell all of,
But now these were motives too weak to break the Desires, and designs of a
Soul which God courteth. It is a delicious thing to leave the streams for their
source, and to forsake our selves and Friends, to give our selves unto our
Maker.

Abraham understood all these veryties from the very morning of his vo^ation;
and at the first overture of the savours which God imparted to him, he took a
Staff in his Hand, and became a Pilgrm in the World, su^^iciently discovering,
that the life of Man is but a Pilgrimage, and that a Man shall first, or last,
reach to the Port.

And now methi^k^ the Sun does not rise, but to present unto him a thousand
Portraictures of those whom he has left behind. The Moon, and the Stars, show
him by Night, and in his sleep, nothing but the Images of those whom he has
abandoned, and he awakes a Thousand times with sighs from his Heart, and tears
in his Eyes, to embrace the shadows, and Phantasmes of his dearest Friends.

And now this poor man is not gone a Musket Shot from the City, and scarce has
lost the sight of his steeple, but he presently resumes his former ways, and
returns with an intent to build his (...) rather his Tomb, on his Chimney's
(...)

March then Abraham: Carry with (...) Sara, who makes up the moity of (...)
till God shall please to give thee (...) be the Son and be thou a Father to
(...)

Farewell then for ever dear Land of (...) you Lot, Abraham, and Sara go joy
(...).

They are already gone, and I see (...) out of the Territories of Sichem to
(...) directly unt^ (...) plains of Moret^ ^^ere God a secon^ time appe^red to
Abrah^m, and there also he gave him both (...), and possession of the Land of
Canaan for himself and his posterity.

God in Man's shape appeared to Abraham,
As he sought shelter from the Suns hot Flame.
Abraham feeds God with what good ^heer he could,
That Sara should bring forth a Child, God told.
Is not this a most admirable draught of Gods sage prodigality and illustrious
Magnificence, who in exchange of a foot of ground gives entire Worlds? He will
have the Heart, and for the Heart he gives himself, and in him the Creator of
Souls, and the Soul of all Hearts. Alas! what is a corner of the Earth compared
with the Land of promise? What is a Country and City in respect of the
Firmament? And where shall we find Brethren, Kindred, or Friends, without
pretension, interest, or any suspicion of deceit, as are found in Heaven?

It remains then for all thos^, who he has taken by the hand, as he did
Abraham, and led them over the Banks of Jordan, and through the shades of
Hermon, ^o build there an Altar on which they might offer Sa^rifices of Love,
and Acknowledgments, as Abr^^am did.

CHAP. XII. (...) account of the Voyages of (...) Sara into the Land of Egypt.
Genesis 12. (...) on, and 'tho the Age
And (...) Terah slow'd his Pilgrimage;
The rest of his he (...) in sine,
To Canaan (since called (...).)

ABRAHAM now leaving his own Country, instantly cast up his eyes, and well
resolved to follow God every where, who served him for a Master, a Conductor, a
Sanctuary and Country. He left then the plains and val^ies, to ascend the
Mountains, as still desireous always to make new progresses, and to advance
without any intermission.

It is he then whom I see spreading his Pavillions on the top of a Mountain,
and erecting an Altar to invoke the name, and assistance of God his Conductor.

Listen a while, and hear from his Mouth the thoughts of his Soul!

Great God! I have forsaken all for thee, A farewell to the World.
and at the first command I received, I obeyed the voice of thy most amiable
providence; at length b^hol^ me here out of my Country, f^r from my own
Poss^ssi^ns, and severed from my (...) Friends: I am ig^orant, where I am; but
^ only ^^ow that I am with th^e. It suffices me, O my God, all my desires are
pleased, and my Soul is fully s^^i^fied. Farewell all my K^^dred, farewell my
Frien^s, f^rewell my Coun^rey. O my God! me t^^nk^ at ev^ry st^p I make, I
Conquer a Kingdom, all m^ Guests are Kindred, the little Hills are my Dungeons
^he F^elds my Ci^i^s, and all t^^t the day discovers to (...) of Earth, of
Rivers, of Air, and of Seas, is my Country, my House, an^ my pl^^e of
Entertainment.

And now without further d^lay I leave the east to ^^vance unto the South.

Now I no ways doubt, but our Pilgrim in his ^^urneys, toward the South ^eels
also more resplen^^nt ardors, and more infired lightnings, which (...) him with
more violent, and more lively (...) and designs.

Mean while a general ^amine came over all the ^and of Canaan* in so much a^our
h^ppy Traveller is ^^forc'd to take a farther jo^rney, and to descend ^^to
Egypt.

This Man Wholly inlightn'd by God, and who (...) in the Bosom of his faithful
moity, the (...), and most holy flames of his Love, beheld a far (...) the
smoke of a most dangerous fire, and fearing (...) his dear Sara should be there
either by mishap (...) force surprised, he thought it h^ to say unto her (...)
the manner following:

Abraham. Dear Wife, we are h^re on the Confines of ^^ypt: But yet I am afraid,
least these Souls a thousand: (...) more ^l^ck than their Bodies, (...) not
some blemish o^: (...). Tell them then I pray the^, th^^ thou ar^, (...)
Sister, and that I (...) ^hy Brother* ^o the (...) may ^^pe by this (...)
Stratagem.

All these for^^asts were not grounded on a vain (...), and some erroneous
Judgment; for scarce ^re these (...) Doves of Chaldea, these two Turtles, (...)
these two chaste Lover^ ^^tred into Eg^pt^; but (...) the Pr^uces of Phar^oh,
who (...) the (...) impurities, carried away the chaste Sara, (...) brough^ her
to Court; which was a Saraglio of (...). But however c^urage! co^rage Abraham,
(...) no ways doubt but the fidelity which thy Sara (...) ^ow'd unto thee will
be proportionable to that thou rendrest unto God. Lay aside therefore now all
thy fears, and thou also Sara do the like, for thy Heart is a Sanctuary of
Peace, and a Temple of Love, of which God alone, and Abraham keep the Keys.

And now let us return to Pharaoh, who was really constrained to stifle his
unlawful loves in the Ocean of his miseries, and who at last restored to
Abraham the flower, which had been cruelly wrested from him.

CHAP. XIII. Giveing an Account of the agreement of Abraham and Lot, upon the
controversy between their Sheepherds.
THo Holy Abraham seemed to have some just cause to commence a suit, and to
wage war against Lot for the preservation of his rights, and authority, which
might receive some prejudice by the strife, which arose between his Servants,
and those of Lot, their design being to become Masters, contrary to Justice and
reason. Which Abraham seeing, to prevent all the disorders which might ensue on
this first design, he says unto Lot.

Abraham. Nephew I pree-thee remember, that ^^therto I have not treated thee as
an Uncle, but rather as a Brother; what a scandal would it be, if we should
begin to live together either like Strangers, or else as Enemies? I had rather
lose all the goods of the World* than that of thy Friendship: But I see clearly
that these Sheepherds and mercenary Friends, are the Person^ who endeavor to
engage our passions with their interests: it would then be more prud^n^ly done
to sever our Flocks, than to disunite our minds, and therefore dear Nephew take
what you please. of thou go to the right hand, I will take the left: and if
the left, I will pass to the right. Oh let there be no difference between thee
and me, for we are brethren.

There wealth so grows that wantoniz'd withal,
There envious Sheepherds broach a cruel brawll.
But lest this mischief by the Grooms begun.
Between their Masters might. Unkindly run
The Grave-mild Gran-sire of the faithful there,
And Ammons Father to cut off the fear,
Of farther Strife, and to Establish rather
Their Minds then Bodies in a League togather;
Divided duly with a deep foresight,
Their Flocks and Herds in number infinite:
Then pleased and parted, both go live apart,
The Uncle kept the Mountain for his part:
For's Nephew Chose the Fat and Flowery Plain,
And even to Sodom stretched his Tent and Train;
And dwelling there became a Citizen,
Among those monsterous nature Forceing men.
My God! These are generous, and heroic thoughts; to hear them, A pleasant
description of the Golden Age.
I conceive my self to be in those golden Ages when men carried their hearts on
their Lips, Crowns of Olive-branches on their heads, horns of plenty in their
hands, their eyes in each part of their Body, and the Chains of a holy
friendship as bracelets and collers of Gold; Finally where the goods of the
Earth were trodden under foot as common to all men. And this caused that plenty
of all things was carried every where upon a Triumphant Chariot, casting Gold
and Silver to all that would but take the pains to gather it. God himself
Governed the Reigns of this fortunate Chariot, and as if he had a purpose to
make every man a Monarch of the Universe, he said the very same to them as to
Abraham, when the love of Concord and Peace had severed him from Lot.

CHAP. XIII. Giveing an account of the Victo^ies of Abr^ham, and the assurances
which God gave him of many favors, and of a Posterity (...) numerous as the
S^nds on the Sea, and the Plan^ts and Stars of the Firma^^n^.
Genesis 14. Abraham rescues Lot with Men and Spoils,
from diverse Kings whom he in Battle foils.
Melchisede^k ^rings Abra'm Bread and Wine,
And Abraham pays him Tenths of Corn and Wine.

BUt now who would have believed, that Abra^ams humor, and courage* ^ad been
of a valourous temper, when he was only seen to take Lot by the Hand, and say
unto him* that all his goods belonged unto him, and that to avoi^ War he gave
the World for a Field of Peace, an^ for an assured t^stimony, that he pref^r'd
a quiet Life before all pretensions whatsoev^r.

Nevertheless when news was brought him, that the King of Sennay, the King of
the El^mites, the ^ing of Pont^s, and he that was commonly calle^ the King of
Nations, were become Masters of the Field, and of the Sodomites Country, (who
were his cons^^erat^^*) and that even after the taking o^ Sodom, poor Lot, who
fell into their Hands, wa^ lead by their command into a sad captivity; at the
very same instant this p^aceable Traveller, instea^ of a Staff, took Arms into
his Hands, and having selected three hundred and eighteen of his bravest
Servants, he went forraging the Country, and so courageously pursued his
Enemies, that afterward being come to the confines of Judea near the Fountains
of Jordan, and finding them still wholly puffed up with the success of their
Victories, and laden with their booty, he set upon them with so great courage,
and dexterity, as at last he put them to a shameful rout, and gave them so
general a defeat, that he brought back both Lot, and all his Goods, with the
remainder of the spoils of all the Assyrians, who were all either dead or put
to flight.

After this defeat Melchisedeck, who was King of Salem, and also high Priest of
the most high, offered Bread, and Wine, as a thansgiving for the Victories he
had gained: Afterward he gave his benediction to Abraham, who also presented
him with the tenths of his spoils and of ^is whole booty.

The King of the So^omites too failed not to render his duties unto this
Conqu^ror.

After this God made Abraham come out of his Pavillion, and then not satisfied
with having promised him a Posterity numerous as the Sands of the Sea, he
showed him the Heavens, with promise that the number of his Children should
equal the Planets and Stars of the Firmament. Adding to him afterward, that
suddenly he should have a Son by his dear Sara, who should be the Heir of his
poss^ssions, and the Ornament of his Family.

Notwithstanding all these Assurances and promises Sara who felt her self
Barre^ permitted her Husband what the Law and Custom of that time allowed; and
much more, for this chaste Wife humbly entreated, that Agar though a Servant,
might share with her in his Bed and affections: But Agar was no sooner become a
Mother, but she would be at the same time also a Mistress.

So Agar having been disgracefully driven out of Abraham's and Sara's House,
when her wandering heart had leisure to entertain more humble and mild thoughts;
God who has fatherly tendernesses for those who place their whole strength and
Consolation in Meekness and Humility, immediately sent an Angel to her, who
promised her a favorable return; and besides, gave her assurances that shortly
she should have a Son, who should be called Ishmael: In effect, she conceived,
and was delivered, as the Angel had said, Abraham being no less than fourscore
and six years old or near upon.

But what! was it not sufficient to have even run for the spa^e of Ninty and
^ine years, and been in a Continual journey during the whole course of his
life? Was it not time to make a halt, when he saw himself near the shore, and
that his life was arrived almost in the Haven?

It imports not (says God unto him) it is I that speak, and thou must obey: On
then Abraham, pass farther, I will be a Spectator of thy Voyages, and of the
Progresses thou shall make in the way of perfection.

Presently after, as if this f^rtunate and glorious Name had been the Seal of
the Contract, and of the Alliance which God made with Abraham, he would render
it more sensible. and add to these Ciphers of Love an Impression of Grie^, and
a Charactor of Blood.

Then was Circumcision commanded not only for Abraham, Commandment for
Circumcision
but for all his Children* and Servants, and in general for all those that
should be numbered amongst his Generations; provided nevertheless they were
Males; for Women were exempted from the Law: Concerning the time prefixed for
tho accomplishment of this precept, it was not to pass the term of Eight days;
and the proposed end was no other than men's accord and peace with God.

CHAP. XV. Giveing an Account of the Charity of Abraham toward Pilgrims, and
the Tenderness of God toward him.
GOD gives himself entirely to Abraham, and Abraham has nothing which he gives
not for his sake.

He made this evidently appear, when being in the Valley of Mambre at the
opening of his Tents, about high Noon, he saw three Pilgrims tanned with the
Ardors of the Sun, and tired at least in appearance with the pains and toil of
their journey: for immediately this magnificent, cordial, and devout Man, who
bore God and men in his heart, prevented these travellors, and his Soul which
always discovered truth amidst shadows, adored the Majesty of one God hidden
under the habit of these three Pilgrims. Afterward he offered them his Table
and House and not satisfied with these profers, he treated them in words and
deeds, and then to render his duties more perfect he mixed them with so much
sweetness, so much cordiality, and so much reverence, that afterward he would
needs wash their feet, honoring them not only as guests, but also as Masters
of his House.

This Heavenly practice is in a word, as Solomon said, to cast ones Bread upon
the torrent of Waves to receive it in aeternity.

In ^ffect, these three guests whom Abraham re^eived into his tents with so
much affection, zeal, and reverence, made a Paradise under one Pavillion; these
were also Angels of Heaven, having only the shape and countenance of Men; from
whence I gather, that under Ragged Garments, and a skin torn with Ulcers, and
eaten up with Cankers, God and his Angels often conceal themselves; but to
proceed when the crimes and execrations of So^om and Go^o^rha pres^i^gly ca^e ^
upon Gods Justice, and when the bl^ckest vapor^ of these horrid (...) ascen^ed
even as high as Heaven, this most a^^^lure Judge, who makes (...) de^^^tive
decrees without d^^^ndence or ^ounsell demeaned himself as if he dur^t ^ot do
it witho^t the advice of A^raham.

Ah wh^t! says he, c^n I con^^^l my d^signs an^ thoughts from my dear Abraham,
who is to b^ the Pillar, of the Worl^, and the Father of so many Na^io^s? No
certainly, but I m^st discharge part of my displeasure into his b^s^me, th^^ he
may shar^ with me in my d^signs as well as in my cont^^tm^nts.

H^arken then Abraham, do thou well un^erstand, (...) God, what p^sseth? For
my part I hear a confused (...). which daily sounds louder and louder; it is
surely the Voice of my Justice which requires vengeance against the ^^habitants
of Sodom and Gomorrha, which have re^^red their Cities an Abyss of horrors and
abominations. Do thou not hear these impure Mouths, these poy^^^^us Tongues,
these bewitched Hearts, these fleshy Sou^s, these Soul-less Bo^ies, an^ these
ungodly Men without Faith, without Law, and without Honor?

Abraham, But what my God! have thou not Eyes which pi^rce from the highest
Heaven, even into the center of Hell? And is not the least of thy gl^nces abl^
to diss^pate all the shadows of the Night. Why do tho^ t^en say ^^ou wilt
descend into Sodom, and s^e in pers^n what p^ss^th before thine Eyes. But now
when A^raham himself at last beh^ld the Lighted Torche^ which were to be the
Instruments of this sad Incerdium, the Sanctity and freeness of his Heart
permitted him to say.^

Ah! What great God! Could it possibly happen that thy indignation should be
Blind, and that thy Thunderbolts should equally fall upon the Just and Sinners?
God of Goodness can thou behold the innocent in the midst of punishments,
without some touch of Compassion? Alas Lord! Will thou not pardon this
Criminal City, if in c^se but fifty innocent Persons be found in it; is not
this a Motive powerful enough to invite thee unto Commiseration? Ah! Let it be
never then said, that thy just providence, which extends it self over all the
Empires of the World, has stifled Vice and Virtue under the same Ashes.

Is not this an innocent freedom, and capable of moving even the Bowels of Gods
mercy? Indeed God promised him to deliver all those that were invelaped in that
^rime, in case there were s^und not fif^y, but ten only worthy of pardon.

But it seems the iniquity of Men is so much the more enormous, as the goodness
of God is immense and admirable. And who would believe that Virtue and Piety
are in such sort banished from the Earth as some good Men may not be found in
it? It is then for this cause God advanced toward Sodom, to cha^tise their
Vices, and to extinguish the lust of their Women with a Deluge of Fire.

CHAP. XVI. Giveing an Account of the firing of Sodom and Gomorrha, and the
deliverance of Lot.
Genesis 19. In wrath approaching God shows mercy here,
Sole righteous Lot must leave his Coun^ry dear:
Warned by two Angels which the Almighty sent,
Thereby escapes Sodoms sad punishment.

AND here behold the Portraict of Gods Justi^e, her Scepter has not been seen
hitherto in the Land of Sodom and Gomor^ha, but upon the Wings of a Stork, that
is to say, by Clemency and Meekness. But too long have the horrors of Sodom
irritated and provoked God: The night already approaches, and there remains no
day but to behold two Angels in the habit of Pilgrims, who seek out Lot even at
the Gates of Sodom; observe how welcome they are, and certainly, they have met
with an Heart who perfectly understands the rights of Hospitality; observe what
have he makes to them, how he casts himself at their Feet, how he conjures them
to spend at least one night in his House: In fine, after some refusals and
Complements, he inforceth them by his charitable importunities to shelter
themselves in his Lodging; they enter into it, and nothing but Feasts and
congratulations are seen in this House. But they were no sooner risen from the
Table, and preparing to take some repose, when immediately Sodomites came from
a^l parts like enraged Wolves howling and trembling as if they had already felt
the Agony of Death, and the Flames which were ready to devour them.

Mean while Lot is very much afflicted; for these Cyclops of Hell are come out
of a Furnace of obscurities with Hammers and Iron Bars in their Hand^ to break
his Gate in a thousand pieces, to destroy Fathers and Children, Masters and
Servants.

Mean while the night slips away, and from the break of day, as if the Sun
should have served to inkindle the Pyle of Sodom, two Angels delegated for the
preservation of Lot, taking him by the Hand with his Wife and two Daughters,
constrained them to depart together out of the City, advertizing them that to
preserve their lives, and to enjoy the benefit they had received, they must
seek out a refuge upon some high Mountain, without turning their Heads or Eyes
toward the unhappy Sodom, least some Whirlwind of Flames should chance to
surprise and devour them.

Behold then Lot much astonished: Nevertheless he conjures these amiable
Spirits to afford him a retreat in a little Town not far from thence; the
Angels granted all he desired, and the Village assigned him for a Sanctuary was
also freed from the Flames for his sake.

But as there is nothing weaker and more wavering than a Woman's mind, Lot had
not power enough to hinder her Head, which was filled only with Wind, from
moving at the sight of the first Lightnings which preceeded this Storm; so in
testimony of her inconstancy she was transformed into a Pillar of Salt, as if
Go^ intended by this exemplary punishment to leave unto over light Souls a
Tragic monument of inconstancy, and a dreadful effect of Temerity.

Mean while the ^eavens are no longer but a lively source of Flames and Fires:
The Sun, Moon and Stars are so many Channels through which God powers down upon
Sodom and Gomorrha all the Thunderbolts of his wrath. The Clouds are the
Torrents of Thunder which makes a hideous noise which tears the Skies and
carries away all without pity; nothing is seen in the Air but Flaming
obscurities and ardent shadows heaped upon one another, which form a
Hears-cloath to cover the shameful Relics of these loathsome Coals.

The Earth on the other side is an inlivened gulf of burning Coals, which
vomit forth so many Firebrands and Torches, as at length one would believe that
the Air, the Skies, the Clouds, and the Earth were no other than a Hell.
Nothing is heard there but Clamors, Sobs, Rages, Blasphemies and roarings out.

What a spectacle is it to see Men and Women with Bodies all on fire running
through the Streets, their Hair flaming, their Eyes sparkling, their Mouths
burning, and their Hearts filled with Sulphur? What a Monstrous Spectacle is it
to behold an Infant in his Mothers bosom, and in his Nurses Arms like a lump of
Sulphur which is consumed with the flash of a Torch? Who has ever heard that
the World was watered with a rain of Sulphur, with a Deluge of Fire, and with an
Inundation of burning Coals and Flames? What Thunder, what spoil, what
desolation of Wood-piles, of Houses, and Furnaces? Beds, Tables, Cubbords,
Gold, Iron, Marbles, and Diamonds turned into Firebrarnds? Alas! where are the
H^avens? Where is the Air? Where is the Sea and Earth, when the whole World is
on Fire? Ah poor Lot! What is become of thy Wife, and where are thy Kindred,
and what may thy Daughters think beholding the smoke of that Fire which devours
the Bodies of their unfortunate Husbands.

Me thinks I see him with his Daughters in the foulds of a Mountain, where he
endeavors to shelter himself from these frightfull inundations, which burn and
desolate all his Country. But with what grief will Abraham's chaste Heart be
touched when he knows that the Daughters of Lot are consumed with an other
Fire, and they inkindle such black Flames, as even hinder them from knowing
their own Father, or at least from treating him with that respect which Nature
and piety required?

Genesis 19. God Sodom and Gomorra burns quite,
Lot and his Wife do ^ave themselves by flight.
Yet Lot does burn with a Flame far more wild,
For he gets his own Daughters both with Child.
None but Abraham remains constant in his sincerity; he is still in the same
place where God spoke to him with so much tenderness and privacy.

Faithful Friend of God, Father of all Nations, support of men, Vice-King of
the Earth, Abraham, can thou behold this dreadful fire without Sighs and
Tears? Weep then Abraham, weep to quench these Flames; but rather inkindle some
pile to swallow up these Monsters which infect the World by the contagious
shasts of their incestuous brutalities.

CHAP. XVII. Giveing an account of the Birth of Isaac, and of the Banishment
of Agar and Ishmael.
Genesis 21. Poor Agar's banished from Old Sara's Face,
With Ishmael, the wildest of his Race;
Through unknown Paths they Range, till by a Spring
Sitting, Gods Angel to them Joy does bring.

IN fine, Heaven has heard the vows and prayers of Abraham: Isaac is born,
and Sara is so much ravished at the sight of this happy prodigy that she can
hardly believe what she sees.

What a wonder is it to see this Child of Tears and Desires become an object of
a ravishing Joy. Sara art thou afraid that the life of thy Son will bring thee
death, and that the excess of a joy so little expected, will even melt thy
heart? For my part I already apprehend lest the pastime of Isaac and Ishmael
prove the occasion of a quarrel, and that at last either the Mother or Child
must be chased away: In effect, Sara could not endure the sight of Agar and
Ishmael, she entreats Abraham to put both of them out of his House. But Abraham
who has the tenderness of a Father for Ishmael, cannot condescend to her
desires. It seems to this good Man that the severing of Isaac and Ishmael
would even cut his heart in two. There is a necessity Nevertheless of obeying
the request of Sara, for God commands Abraham in this occasion to execute all
his injunctions, with promise that notwithstanding all contrary appearances
Isaac and Ishmael shall be the first Seeds of a most ample and happy posterity.

What pity was it to see this poor Handmaid enter with her Son into a solitary
and uninhabited Desert, and leave a plentiful House, where she had ever lived
as a Mistress?

What pity was it to see Agar and Ishmael in the deserts of Bersheba with
hunger and thirst, and in a general want of all the conveniences of Nature,
will not men believe them to be as it were dead in the World, and alive in a
Tomb? What hope is there amongst Stones and Rocks? What society in the midst of
Woods, where nothing is heard but cries, and roarings of Monsters? What succor
amidst Wild places, and out of the Road of men? What light under the shades of
Pits and Caverns, where the Sun dares not approach? What means of Livelihood,
where all Animals are dead? Where nothing but frightfull Dens are seen, but
aride sands, and some old Trunk of a Tree, without Branches, Leaves; or Fruits?

What then will Agar do, she has no more Water nor Bread? And mean while her
life, her Love and hear dear Ishmael can no longer endure the torments of
hunger and thirst; he is already constrained to stay at the foot of a Tree, and
there to cast forth loud cries; Distressed Mother, what will you do? What a
happiness would it be for you to die first that you might not die twice? Sara
what have you done? Abraham where are you? Ah God! What grief is it unto a
Mother to see between her Arms the Tomb of her Son?

Ismael has now lost his speech, he is without hope, and Agar abandons him as
no longer able to live, seeing her heart half dead before her Eyes.

Farewell Ismael, farewell poor Orphan, farewell all the affections and hopes
of Agar.

And when any Man shall chance to pass by this solitary place, let him ingrave
upon this Trunk, that here Agar and her Son found their exile, their Death, and
at lengt^ their Monument.

Genesis 21. Why Weep'st thou Hagar, it is not lack of Love
To thee, or thine; J^hova from above,
Has so Commanded, Agar be content!
That Is Destiny, which thou d^emest Punishment.
Agar what do you say? Is this the hope you repose in God? And are these the
promises he made unto Abraham? Ah! do you not know that Heaven has Eyes
always open to Innocence, and the least of Ishmaels sighs is able to draw God
into this Desert?

In effect, when Agar was removed a flight shot, from Ishmael, as she sent
forth her Cries after the Moanings of her Son, an Angel called her by her Name,
and said unto her,

Go Agar, and return to thy Son, take him by the hand, and reanimate this
little dying Body. O God! who will not admire thy sage Providence, and the
miraculous conduct of thy Designs.

A Dialogue between Abraham and Sara, etc.
The Argument.
Sarah's rebuked for Laughter and repents,
Admiring with her Lord the great Events
Of Heavenly Blessings, and resolves to be
No more in Love with Incredulity.
Abraham. Now now it is with my Sarah as our glorious Guest presaged, how then my
Love, my Life, my Sole delight, how could it be that you durst doubt the great
decree of Heaven, and with a smile, as at a tale Incredible, reflect upon
omnipotence.


Sara. My Lord, I own I could not then believe what now I find true as the
Eternal Oracle that speak it* and therefore blush with much confusion, that I
gave no more belief to so much Verity.


Abra. Even so you ought, and with unfeigned Tears bewail the unadvized
Laughter, you denied and prostrate on the Ground, implore his pardon for so
great a crime.


Sar. That I have done long since, and learned to know I am but Dust, not
worthy to dispute his will who ma^e me and the World of Naught, and with his
Word is able to reduce all things to their Original.


Abra. It Is well resolved, nor ever must we dare displease that Majesty under
whose feet bright blazing Thunders burn. The God whose presence melts the
Mountains, and whose Looks dries up the deep, who holds the winds in the hollow
of his hand, and makes Creation tremble at his Word.


Sar. If not for fear, through Love we ought with low Submission to revere that
tremendious Majesty who has done such wonders for us.


A^ra. Wonders indeed, and past our numbering for who can count the Endless
Blessings he with plenteous hands has showered upon our heads, since first we
lest Vrr of the Chaldees; nay with what favors does he Load us still.


Sar. It Is true my Lord, his bounty has completely stored us with what ever we
could wish to gain us high Esteem amongst the Nations of the East; so dreaded
and renowned has his signal blessings rendered you that at your sight the Supl^
Knees of Pagans bend, and s^ep^^rd Mo^arcks court your Smile, making your
Friendship the (...) h^p^s of their Ambition.


A^ra. Nay more, he by his power in^lines the roughest Na^ions to such Mildness
for our sakes, that even Abim^lech the cruelest of Men, having snatched you
from my Arms, returned your unstained beauties without War, repenting the rash
deed and begging my devotion.


Sar. Happy, even wondrous h^ppy are all they that put their ^rus^ in him, who
takes such care of those that love his Name; therefore O that Men would praise
the Lord.


Abra. It Is just they should return him with unfeigne^ Lips, tribute of Praise,
and ever more be thankful for the many mercys they receive, nor will we or our
Children be wanting in this Duty.


Sar. Indeed we ought not, for a thankful heart is (...) the mighty King
requires for all he gives to Mort^ll M^n.


Abra. It Is that indeed beyond all ceremonies that can please him most, but see
the Glorious Sun declyns, and Night with her Sable Mantle waits at the portals
of the Eastern sky to cloth the World in Darkness; Therefore let us to our
Tent, and there er'e Slumber close our Eyes, pay our vows to him that is our
Sovereign protector.


Sar. My Lord, I am all obedience, for so it still becomes a Wife to be to him
whom Heaven appoints her head.


The Application.
Thus reader may you see a happy pair,
Whom Heavens high favors in abundance share,
Laying all doubts aside that so they may,
Their great Creators will in all obey,
Which should induce us so to imitate
Their ways, that we may reach their blessed state.
A Dialogue between Lots two Daughters.
The Argument.
Lots Daughters burn with lust and lay a Plott,
To take incesteous Wine inspired Lot,
The Plott takes right, and from each pregnant Womb,
A Brother and a Son at (...) do^s come.
First Daughter. How is the famous Sodom sunk with cattaracts of Fire? How
dreadfully the flameing Storm on fearful Wings decended, and how narrowly we
escaped the sad Destruction?


Second Daughter. It Is true we escaped by Miracle, the Firey Clouds began to
drop Ciconian Sulphur e're we reached the Gate, nor could we escape to Zoar e're
Sodom and Gomorrha lay in Ashes.


1. Daughter. It grieves me much for those of our relations that we left
behind, but for our Mother more whose curiosity to see her Habitation blazing
turned her to a Monument to stand the gaz^ of all that pass the plains.


2. Daughter. Our Father now is all the comfort we have left, and now are we
again become exiles, and must still wander in strange Lands without any fixed
abideing place.


1. Daughter. It Is true, yet me thinks had we entered into Nuptial bands, and
in our pregnant Wombs contained the dear pledges of Conjujal Love, it would
have been the greatest comfort we can think.


2. Daughter. You can not more desire that happyness than I, O methinks I long
to see a little smiling Boy upon my Knee! The very thoughts of such a blessing
transports me.


1. Daughter. There is but one way seeing we are in a strange Land and
Husbandless.


2d Daughter. And what is that? O let me hear it! My Heart leaps at the sound
of such a Sentence.


1. Daughter. You know our Father to drive strange cares from his aged Heart,
addicts himself to Wine, and we out of pretense of kindness may urge him to
take excess, and in the night when horrid shades over casts the World, one of
us may steal into his Arms, and with warm beauty charm him into youthful Vigor.


2. Daughter. But he is our Father and can that be Lawful. Know you not 'twas
sin that sunk the flameing Cities and disobedience that reaft us of our Mother.


1. Daughter. But that this is sin I am not well assured, however there is a
necessity of raising up posterity, or else our names will be forgotten.


2. Daughter. If I thought Heavens anger would ^ot burn against us, I could
joyfully comply with what ^ou say.


1. Daughter. Trust it for once, and see our Father with weary steps returning
from the Field, no better night then what insues to put our design in practice,
the first nig^t is mine the second shall be yours, nor will he when his Heart
is merry and his senses stupefied remember that my Mother i^ lost, but as we
slide into his Arms think he embraces her.


2. Daughter. Well you shall rule me, and as you direct I Will steer my course in
this loved longed for and so important business.


1. Daughter. Then let us have to meet him, and bid him well-come-home.


2. Daughter. Go and I Will follow with as much delight as when I traced the
Str^^ts of Sodom, and grew proud to hear my beauty praised by every breath
above the Daughters of the Land.


Conclusion.
Lot in a Drunken Mood is twice defiled,
A Father gets his Daughters both with Child.
Their charming words and burning kisses move.
A fire in Age, and change it with strange love.
So in our days too often it is seen.
Preposterous Loves have most bewitching been.
CHAP. XVIII. The manner of Abraham's Sacrificing his Son Isaac, together with
the remarkable Trial, both of his Constancy and Fidelity, with a supposed
Dialogue between God and Abraham, and Abraham and Isaac.
Genesis 22. God Abraham commands to slay his Son,
(To try his heart) for an Oblivion:
He Is ready to strike, but Gods Angel spoke:
Hold thy hand Abrah'm, spare thou Young Isaac.

THe Faith of Abraham is excellently well discoursed of by an eminent Minister
of Christ's, now with God, says he.

Abraham feared God, but was not afraid of God; his Faith was all tried, but
not at all tired but he rejoiced as a strong man to run his Race; which is the
more to be admired, if we consider what seeming reasonable Objections and fair
Excuses Abraham might have made, when God tempted Abraham, and said,

God. Abraham my Servant, my Friend: where art thou? Come forth, attend to
execute my Com^ands.


Abraham. Behold, here I am, speak Lord, for thy ^^^vant hears; I am wholly
at thy Command and Service, do with me and mine what seems thee good; if thou
bid me go, and if thou bid me come I will come; whatsoev^r thou bidst me do I
will do it.


God. Go then, says God, take now thy Son, thine only Son Isaac, whom thou
love, and get thee to the L^nd of Moriah, and offer him there as a
Burnt-Offering upon one of the Mountains which I t^ll thee of.


A^raham. To this he did not, but might have pleaded* Why Lord, thou art
Bl^ssed in thy self, and n^edest not any thing; thou d^sir^st not Sacrifice,
^^se would I gi^e it thee; and thou ^elightest not in Burnt-Offerings: It Is
true Lord, thy Sacrifices are a broken an^ a contri^e Spirit, and that I will
willingly offer; ^o not despise bu^ accept thereof.


God. But says God, Offer thy Son.


Ab^^ham. Lord (...) thou will have an Offering, all my ^^rds and Fl^cks ^re at
thy Ser^ice: Beh^ld (as long (...) th^s Ar^u^ah s^id to Davi^) here ar^ Oxen
for ^^rnt S^^rifices, an^ (...) Instruments* and other ^^struments for Woo^:
all th^se things will I give unto (...) King, and the Lo^^ m^ G^^ accep^ it.


Go^. N^ s^^th God. I w^^l t^ke no Bullock out (...) thine H^use, nor
(...)-^^^ats out of thy Flock; (...) ^very Bea^t of the Forr^st is mine, and
the Cat^le o^ a thousand Hi^^s* (...) all the Fowls of (...) Mountains and the
Will Be^sts of the Fields are (...): If ^ were an hungry I would not tell thee
for (...) World is mine, an^ the ^ulness thereof: Will I eat the Flesh of
Bulls, or drink the Blood of Goats? No Abraham, no, but offer thy Son.


Abraham. Lord, it is true, thou art above these things, and he that offers thee
Praise, honors thee; and therefore thou call upon us to offer unto God
Thanksgiving, and to pay our Vows to the most high; and Lord I am willing to
pay my Vows in the great Congregation; accept of my thanks, and I will tha^
thee the more; receive these Vows as part of the (...) and I will vow and pay
thee more.


God. No, says God, nothing but thy Son, offer Abraham, offer thy Son.


Abraham. Lord if thou will have the Flesh of Man to be Sacrificed, and his
Blood to be powered out, then take one of (...) Servants: Do not call my sins to
remembrance and slay my Son; Good Lord spare my Son.


God. No, says God, offer up thy Son.


Abraham. Lord if thou will have a Son* take Is^mael; spare mine Isaac, Lord
spare mine Isaac.


God. No, says God, take thy Son, even Isaac.


Abraham. Lord he is my only Son; he has not a Brother, nor are there any more
in Sarah 's Womb: Lord I beg only this, spare mine only Son.


God. No, says God, take thine only Son.


Abraham. Why Lord, I have had him but a little while; if thou will take him,
yet good Lord let mine Isaac and I rejoice together yet a while.


God. No, says God, take him now.


Abraham. But ah Lord I love him, and so to take Isaac, is to take my Life,
which is bound up in the Life of the Lad; and if thou take him away, thou will
bring down my Gray Hairs with sorrow to the Grave.


God. Well, said God, I know thou love him, but must not you love me better:
Offer up this Son, this only Son Isaac whom thou love.


Abraham. But Lord, though thou art righteous, when I plead with thee, yet let
me talk with thee of thy Iudgm^^ts* what will the wicked say, when they shall
hear that thou delightest in Blood, and that thy Servants must offer their
Children to the Lord; who will serve thee at ^his rate?


God. Well, but, says God, is not all the Earth mine own, and may not I do
with mine own what I please; I that give may take: and therefore mind not you
what the World will say, but what I say; and I say offer thy Son.


Abraham. But Lord have thou not commanded me to do ^o Murder, and must I now
embrue my Hands in Blood and in mine own Blood too: Oh happ^ me, might my Blood
^o for his: Oh! Isaac, Isaac, my Son Isaac; my ^on, my Son, would to Go^ I
might die for thee: Oh! ^saack, my Son, my Son. Lord how can this stand with
^he Law that thou have given me?


God. Abraham, says* God, such things are not first ^^st, and then willed by
me; but willed by me, and ^^erefore just. A^raham, Do not you know that I ^an
repeal or make exceptions? It Is I that say it* ^h^refore do it: Who is this
that dark^neth counsel ^y words without knowledge? Gird up now thy ^oins like a
Man; s^ite him, kill him? Have not I ^ommanded thee? be courageous, and a Son
of va^our: Go offer thy Son.


Abraham. But goo^ Lord, thou have made this ex^^ption when thou di^st show Man
what was good and ^^asing in thine Eyes; thou woul^st not ^ha^ he should ^ive
his firstborn for his Transgression, ^or the fruit of ^is Body for the sin of
his Soul* but to do justly, an^ to ^^ve Mercy, and to walk humbl^ with his God:
To ^bey ( thou sa^st it) is better than Sacrifice, and to ^earken than the sat
of Lambs.


God. Well then, says God, hearken an^ o^ey: ^^is is to do Justice, this is
(oh wonder) to show Mer^^, this is to walk humbly with thy God.


A braham. Seeing I have taken upon me to speak unto (...) Lord, I will yet
say: Lord he is the Son of the Pro^ise, in whom thou have said, that all the
Nations of the Earth shall be blessed: Now Lord if he die, an^ die a Child
without Children; where is then the blessed^ness thou speak of: what will
become of the Blessing?


God. Well Abraham, says God* perform what ^ command, and I will perform what
I promise: what will Abraham, who was once not weak in Faith, an^ considered
not his own Body, nor Sara's, when twic^ dead, who staggered not through
unbelief at m^ Promise, but was strong in Faith, and gave me Glo^ry; w^o was
fully persuaded that what I promise^ I was able to perform, an^ was not
disappointed o^ his Hope, though against Hope: Will this Abraham now call me in
question? Have thou known my Name^punc; and will thou not trust in me? Am not I
the Lord which change not? Have I said it is, and shall it no^ come to pass? Is
there any thing too hard for God* Am not I able even of Stones to raise up
Children unto Abraham? Cannot I say to dry Bones Live, tho^ have received him
from the Dead in a Figure; an^ were Isaac in the Grave, could not I, who am
the Resurrection from the Dead, say, Isaac come forth arise and walk, that thy
Father may receive th^^ with double joy; saying, Isaac my Son, who wa^ dead,
yea, who was twice dead, is now alive? There^fore Abraham offer thy Son.


Abraham. My dear Lord, seeing I who am but Du^^ and Ashes, have taken upon me
to speak unto thee, O^ let not my Lord be angry if I speak once more: If I man
not prevail (oh that I might prevail) to save Isaac ^^live; yet let me entreat
th^^ that I may not be the Pries^ let not mine hand be upon him: Can I see the
death (...) the Child? Good Lord let some other do it: Surely ^ cannot lif^ up
my Hand, or if I do, shall I not wish (...) may wither, or be turned into a
stone? Will not these Eyes run down with Rivers of Tears? Ah Lord! I ca^ speak
no more; my heart will break, my hand will sh^k^ send by whom thou will send,
but let not me, Oh let (...) m^ go.


God. Yes Abraham, thou, take him thou, and go thou, and offer him thou, none
but thou.


Abraham. Ah Lord! Yet once more, but this once more and I have done. I am old
and full of days, past Travail; spare me a little, let me not go so far as the
Land of Moria; let it (if it must be done) be done at home.


God. No Abraham, Take now thy Son, thine on^y Son Isaac, whom thou love,
get thee into the Land of Moria, and offer him there, no where but there.


He is then all alone upon the way with his Son and his two Servants, and he
advances directly to Mount Moria as to the appointed place.

My dear Reader, I leave unto thy imagination what pa^^ed for the space of
three days this journey ^^sted; repre^ent unto thy self, I beseech thee, that
thou art with him, whom thou do love above ^ll men, thou see him, thou
speak to him, thou ^rinkest to him, and sleep with him, how will it ^e if
at thy departure thou must see him die? And ^f thou thy self must present him
the Poison which (...) to stifle him? Husbands and Wives, Fathers and M^thers,
Brothers, Kindred, A ^ociats, Friends, what Torments? What despairs? What
punish^ents? When you stand at the Beds Feet, where ^ou shall behold your
dearest affections, and your ^ost pleasing delights in the Agony of Death, what
combats, Duel of Grief and Love.
and what Duels ^f Love, and Grief? What strength and ^esolutions to receive
the last wor^s and ^^ghs of a dying Mouth, to which a thou^^nd and a thousand
chaste kisses have been given, ^^d whose least breath was able to wipe aw^y all
^orts of sorrows? What Prodigy of constancy to ^ose with your Hands two Eyes
which served as (...) in the saddest obscurities of Life, which is but ^o much
intermingled with mourning and pleasure? In fine, how can we see with out
dying, an^ other self at the point of death?

Nevertheless, this was but the image of a dying life, Martyrdom for three
days.
which Abraham led for the space of three days; on^ would swear that God had
undertaken to make him dye ten thousand times upon thi^ sad way; every glance
of Isaac was a mortal Jave^lin, which pierced his Heart, and yet he must have
him three times four an^ ^wenty hours before hi^ Eyes* there was a necessity of
eating, drinking* and speaking with him: were not these entertainments, and
Feast of Death? He was constrain during the night to lay on his Breast, and in
his Bo^som, that Head he was to cut off with his ow^ Hands: was not this a
murdering sleep and a crue^ repose? In sine, he must render all the duties of
^ Father to so amiable a Son, before he was to be hi^ Executioner, and he must
needs hear almost ever^ moment the voice of Isaac calling him Father, wh^ went
to m^rther him.

My God! What Preludes of death? What prepar^^tion to a Martyrdom, what
Dialogue of Passions? Wh^^ affections, what dissimulations, what sorrows, wh^^
pleasures, what hopes, and what despairs? A Fat^e^ a Son, a Priest, a Victim,
Wood, Fire, a Swor^ I^aacks Eyes and Heart are fixed on his Father, a^^ Abraham
lost not the sight of Isaac but to behold b^ God. At every step this poor old
Man sends a sigh (...) Heaven to evaporate grief, which being shut up
redo^^bl^s the more.

Surely my Heart even bleeds upon the ba^^ thought of this pitiful object.
Alas! How cou^^ Ab^aham look on the criminal Sword which was (...) give the
stro^k? Where did he carry this ^nstr^^ment of Gods Justi^e? Me thinks I hear
Isaac* every step saying, My Father: and Abrah^^ a^^swering Son, take courage,
let us go my de^^ Child, we draw near to Moria.

O God! what vision and what approaches? Mountain of Moria have thou no
compassion, will not thy Tops, thy Rocks, and thy Stones mollify rigours, at
the fight of ^o tragic an act, and which ^eems so unnatural? Mountain of
Moria become thou a plain rather than put this poor old Man, and this young
Child to the trouble of ascending thy Top, where they are going to erect an
Altar, and hew a Tomb.

But what! Nature cannot be sensible when her God deprives her of feeling, and
Moria must not have greater tenderne^^es than the Heart of Abraham.

Let Abraham then perform resolutely the Office of God the Father, and let not
Isaac be ashamed with his own Blood, to mark out the way unto Jesus, (of whom
he was an Image and Figure) Let Abraham take his Sword to strike off Isaacks
Head, and let Isaac take the Wood on his Shoulders which was provided to
consume him.

A Dialogue between Abraham and Isaac.
The Argument.
Abraham long struggling with himself at l^st,
His bound dear Isaac on the Altar placed,
Acquaints him with Gods pleasure, nor denies
The Lad to be a willi^^ Sacrifice;
But the drea^ stroke is by an Angel stayed,
When in his stead* a Rain's an Offering made.
Abraham. In Isaac must my Seed be called, and yet here must he die; strange
thoughts perplex me, yet I must o^ey the will of him that gave me Being, and
with relen^less hand destroy the Son of my desire; but God will have it so, and
it is not ^or ^rail man to dispute his great Commands.


Isaac. What means my Father by thus talking to himself! O how his Countenance
dos often change* What cause can cause this mighty struggling in the Breast of
Abraham, Father, dear Father speak, say what is the reason of this sudden
Alteration: Where is the Sacrifice? You told me God would provide himself, is
it through disappointment that you grieve? Nay Sir, why turn you from me, as
displeased with him, you often called your joy, with him you use to dandle on
your Lap, and seem well pleased, delighting in his Innocent discourse, smiling
at the pretty pastime, and informing him that Kings and Princes should arise in
his pos^^rity.


Abra. O me! What shall I do, Heavens high command on one hand urges^ and on
the other Nature pleads, telling me Isaac is my Son, my unoffending Child, m^
Ages Sole delight, in whom alone I promised my self such store of true
felicity.


Isaac. Nay Father, Father, speak to me, and tell me what it is g^ieves you
thus: What makes these Winter Clouds sit on your Brow? Why that M^p of Sorrow
in your Face?


Abra. O my Child, it is a dreadful cause, thou the Sole comfort of my Age,
must here be made a Sacrifice, my dear, dear, much loved Isaac, must become
the sport of Crackling Flames, and have his Ashes scattered in the W^n^.


Isaac. How must I die? O me! what have I done: Tell me, tell me, dear Father,
have I conspired your Death, betrayed you to your Enemies, or with vile Slander
spotted your Immortal Fame. Will you not speak? Why does my Father thus
severely turn away his Eyes, and with a fatal Knife threaten the Life of his
poor helpless Son. O tell me, tell me but my Crime, that I may die contented!


Abra. Alas! there is no Crime in thee my Son: It Is Gods command that urges
what I here intend, the Great ^mmense Creator of the World, desires thee as a
sweet ^melling Savor to his Nostrils, that he free thee from ^he miseries to
come, and take thee to himself.


Isaac. And is it Gods decree that I must bleed? Then welcome Death. O Father
fear not then to ^ake my Life contentedly, I Will Bleed to be with him that gave
me being.


Abra. O wretched Father, that I am, I now must do a deed at which the World
will blush, and all those ^remble who see no farther than ^rail Natures Eyes
^ermit; but as for me, the Eye of Faith gives me a prospect of much Glory in it,
and that Gods promise, that in Isaac shall my Seed be called, will never fail;
for though my Son expire now by my Hand, yet God can ^aise him soon to Life
again, and Recollect his scattered dust, though driven into every Wind.


Isaac. Why does great Abraham pause thus? Strike, Strike, my Father; see my
willing Throat's prepared to meet the stroke; Heavens Anger will kindle at this
cold delay, and Burn like a Consuming ^ire.


Abra. O Man me Faith! whilst thus with averted Eyes, I strike the fatal
stroke, that penetrates my heart; mean while that wretched Isaac Bleeds, and
wounds my Soul more deep than this d^structive Steel c^n pierce. Yet God the
mighty God of Abraham, must, must, be statisfied in Isaacks death; and thus I
prove my Faith. Ah! why faulters my trembling hand? What whirlwind's this that
thus disturbs the Air? What Cloud* involving dazzling brightness is it that
descends? What power invisible restrains me from p^rforming that which Heavens
all glorious King Commands.


Angel. Abraham, Abraham.


Abra. How Is this? A voice in Thunder too: O dreadful! what amazment seizes
me, and yet I Will Answer it? Lord, here am I, thy Trembling Servant speaks.


Angel. Abraham, Abraham, lay not thy Hand upon the Lad, neither do thou any
thing unto him; for now I know that thou fear God, seeing thou have not
withheld thy only Son from him.


Abra. O Wonderful! O Goodness all Divine! God, mighty, infinite, Omnipotent,
and ever with sincer^st hearts to be Adored. How, How, shall I express my self
in praising as I ought; a Majesty Tremendious, that still beams his Loving
Kindness on unworthy me. See, see my Son, thy Life is safe, Heaven will not let
thee die.


Isaac. Heaven's will be done; If the Allmighty, the All-glorious King command
my ^reath without a murmur, I Will resign what his Bounty lent me to Improve for
him.


Abra. It Is well resolved my Son, but see a Sacrifice prepared; who in thy
stead shall Bleed? A Sacrifice our God has for himself provided; so in the
days to come, the Blessed Messia bleeding for lost Man, shall purge his Sins
and once more render frail^ Mortality the favorit of Heaven.


The Conclusion.
The Ram is by Glad Abraham slain, and made
A Sacrifice, that pleases well his God;
Which done, with Isaac he returns to tell,
Vnthinking Sarah all that had befell;
And has his Faith imputed Righteousness,
Called Friend of God, the chi^f in Faithfullness.
Now Abraham is already at the foot of the Mountain, he commands his Servants
away, he takes his only Isaac, he loads him with the Instruments of his
punishment. Let us go my dear Child, let us go my Son, let us go my Isaac, my
Joy, my Hope and my Love.

Father whither do we go, answered Isaac? Alas what is your desire? I indeed
see the Fire and the Sword which you carry, as also the Wood on my Shoulders,
but where is the Victim, which must be offered as an Holocaust? My Son trouble
not your self; for God will provide one.

So Abraham still persists in his fidelity to God, he makes ready the Altar, he
sets the Wood in order, he kindles the Fire, he draws his Sword out of the
Scabbard, he takes Isaac into his Arms, he places him near the pile, he ties
his Hands, and puts the cover over his forehead; in sine, this innocent Lamb
being on both his Knees, his Body half naked, and his Head bowed a little
forward sighing sweetly without making the least complaint, or demanding any
more why, expected the stroke of Death, when his Father (as it is very
probable) began to acquaint him with the secret of his happy lot.

Isaac my most dear Son, thou did ask me at the foot of the Mountain, where
was the Victim of our Sacrifice. I answered thee, that God would provide one;
his Paternal Goodness has done it, and his will i^ that thou must be the
Victim, and I the Priest: it is very true, that thou art the object of my
sweetest hopes, and that I should look on thee as the support of my ^ouse; but
it is in God we must place our only hope; it is he that serves for a Basis and
Pillar to all fortunes, and it is his sage Providence, which holds in its hands
good and evil, favors and disgraces, Life and Death. Dye then cheerfully my
dear Child, and rest assured that I would willingly put my self in thy place,
if God had so ordained. I adore his will, and I am too happy to serve as an
instrument unto his commands? As for thee my poor Son, I had very constant
proofs of thy sweet disposition, and if I had not often tried how obedient and
pliable thou art unto Gods will and mine, I should endeavor more efficaciously
to persuade thee; but it would be fruitless, and it is from Gods goodness and
thy constancy I hope for the Grace of being enabled to offer and immolate thee
with my own Hands.

What can Isaac say to this? It is enough for him to assent and be silent; I
yet frame in my imagination, that he besought his Father to give him his Sword,
that he might kiss it as the rod of the wise Providence of Heaven. I believe
also he bowed down his Head a little more forward to testify that his thoughts
accorded with his Heart, and that his most real affections were ready to be
immolated unto God and his Father.

In the mean while Abraham takes his Sword again into his Hand, and having
bathed it with his tears, he lifts up his arm to discharge his blow upon the
Neck of his Son.

But what will be the issue, will not all the Angels of Heaven who look upon
this Sacrifice put some Victim, in Isaacks place? Divine Spirits, I call on you
for Abraham and Isaac.

In conclusion, as Abraham had already lifted up his Arm, and was ready to dart
the Thunderbolt God had put into his Hand, the Voice of an Angel cries out,
Abraham, Abraham, I command thee from God not to touch the Child, and to pass
no farther.

Ah Lord, never was Love like thine;
And thy Love O God to me
Surpasses that of Abraham to thee.
The word is out, poor Abraham must be gone,
Must take his Isaac, take his only Son:
The Son of his affections; him from whom,
From whose blessed Loins so many Kings must come:
Even him must Abraham slay; Abraham must rise*
And offer Isaac a Burnt-Sacrifice.
God scorns the offals of our saint desires;
He gives the best, and he the best requires.
Abraham forbears to question, thinks not good,
To reason or converse with Flesh and Blood.
Begs not young Isaack's Life, nor goes about
T'object the Law of Murder, makes no doubt.
He rises, rises early, leads his Son,
Hastes where this Holy slaughter must be done:
When God bids go, that very Breath's a Warrant;
We must not linger, for haste crowns the Errant:
His Servants must no further, they must stay;
Private Devotions claim a private way.
They must abide with the Asses, whilst the aged Sir^
In one Hand takes the Knife, in the other Fire.
The sacred Wood of offering must be pil'd
On the young shoulders of the innocent Child.
Oh here mine Eyes must spend a Tear to see
Thee bear the Wood, great God, that since bore thee:
Mistrustless Isaac, seeing the Wood, the Fire,
The sacrificing Knife, begins to inquire:
But where is the Sacred Lamb that must be slain?
Resolved Abraham, least the Flesh should gain
Too much on Nature; says, Not thou my Son
Art he: But the Almighty will provide us one.
Where God commands, it is not enough to effect,
But we must baulk the occasion of neglect.
The Faithful Abraham now erects an Altar,
Orders the Wood; what Tongue can choose but faltes
To tell the rest? He lays his Hand upon
His innocent Isaac, binds his only Son:
He lays him down, raises his Priestly Knife;
Up rears his Arm to take his Isaack's Life.
True Faith is active, cove^s to proceed,
From thought to action, and from will to deed.
Before the strengthened stroke had time to fall,
A sudden voice from Heaven cries hold, recall
Thy threatening Arm, and sheath thy Holy Knife,
Thy Faith has answered for thy Isaack's Life.
Touch not the Child, thy Faith is thoroughly shown,
That has not spared thine own, thine only Son.
How easy is our God, and Labor, who
Counts it as done, what we have will to do.
CHAP. XIX. Giveing an Account of the Death of Sara.
THe most smiling prosperities often swim amidst Tears; the clearest and most
serene days are followed sometimes by the most obscurest and dusky Nights:
Bodies for Companions have their own shadows, Roses are mixed with Thorns, and
even the Life of Man never ends but in Death. To see Abraham, Sara, and Isaac,
after their deliverance, and the trials God had of their fidelity, would not
one have believed them almost immortal and exempted from all the miseries of
Life? And yet scarce were they returned to their own home, but Abraham and
Isaac met with a new occasion of grief for the Death of Sara. But so it is,
the strictest unions must break, the sincerest friendships must have an end,
and even M^rriages themselves of which God was the sacred knot, must at length
make a Tragic Divorce upon a Bed which is the most common Theater of the blind
furies of Death.

We ought to confess nevertheless that it is a spectacle able to excite the
constancy of a good Courage, when we shall behold this unmercifull Murdress
which snacheth away Daughters out of their Mothers Bosoms, and Sons in the
sight of their Fathers, and Wifes between the Arms of their Husbands.

In such a case, if Nature had not some tenderness, she would be unnatural,
and we must have Hearts of Marble not to be touched with some sense of grief
and pity: Abraham had then just cause to testify by his tears, the regret he
had for his dear Sara's Death; and surely since he lost so rare a blessing,
well might he disconsolately bewayl it.

This mourning was not yet blameable, and he was very careful not to do like
those, who bury all their affections in the preparation of a Funeral pomp, and
who have but a shadowed mien, or else not being able sufficiently to disguise
their looks, strive to hide under the Veils and shadows of a Bed or dark
Chamber, the shame of their insensibility.

Abraham shed more tears from his Heart, than by his Eyes, and in rendering all
duties to Nature and his Wife, he most amply satisfied God, and his own piety:
while he was a Pilgrim and stranger in the Land of Canaan, Sara being Dead in
the City of Hebron, he went directly into the place where his Wifes Body
reposed.

There he offered up his Prayers unto God, and kissed a thousand times those
amiable relics, watering them from time to time with his tears.

He presently entreated Ephron to sell him a double Cave which was close by the
vale of Mambre to interr Sara in that place.

Ephron is willing to grant what he asks; but being at last as it were
enforced to take a sum of Money for the purchase of his Land, Abraham became
Master of the Field and Groat in which he laid the Body of his dear moity.

It is in this monument where the most generous Woman of her time reposeth; and
under this Rock of Diamond will be found a Diamantine Heart in the Body of
Sara, who was a perfect pattern of Constancy and Fidelity.

CHAP. XX. Giveing an account of the Marriage of Isaac with Rebecca, and the
Death of Abraham.
Genesis 24. The fair and chaste Rebecca comes to draw,
At a Well-Water, where a Man she saw,
Who gifts to her in Isaacks Name presents,
Which she accepts, and to Wed him consents.

THis poor Man Abraham was in the Hands of God and Providence, as a feather in
the Air, which serves for sport unto the Winds, and as a Planet in the Heavens,
which never rests, or as a Wheel in the Water, which is always turning and in
a continual motion: God led him out of Chaldea, Mesopotamia, Canaan and Egypt;
from thence he causes him to return unto the Cananites, where he stays for
some time in the City of Sichem, sometime in that of Hebron, afterward in
^erara, and then in Bersheba, and again in Hebron, as if he could not live but
in Traveling, during whose Voyages Heaven is pleased to afford him a thousand
Combats, and as many occasions of Victory.

In fine, after the deliverance of his Son, and the death of his Wife, he
feeling himself wholly broken with old age, and upon the point of following the
happy lot of Sara, resolved to seek a Wife for Isaac, and for that end he
calls one of the most Faithful Servants of his House called Eliezer, and
having commanded him to lay his Hand under his Thigh, he conjured him by the
name of God to seek a match for his Son in the Land of Haram.

Which being done, this wise Ambassador chosen amongst the Domestics of
Abraham, began his journey to execute the designs and Commission of his Master,
and departing from Bersheba he went directly to Mesopotamia carrying with him
ten large Camels laden with the rarest and most magnificent presents which
were in Abraham's House.

Behold him then in the City of Nachor meditating with himself upon all the
readiest and most facile means to expedite what had been given him in charge.
What will he do?

First he departs out of the City and repairing where Women in their turns were
wont to draw Water, he there rest his Camels, expecting until Heaven should
offer the opportunity he desired.

During this expectation he offered up his prayers unto God, saying* Lord God
of Abraham, cast I beseech thee some propitious and favorable looks upon the
designs of my Master.

This Faithful Servant will not feed until,
He do his trust reposing Masters will.
There Is many now that will not Eat before
They speed their Masters Work, they will drink the more.
Great God take pity of Abrah^m thy Faithful Servant, it is by his
appointmen^ I am in these territories, I expect here but the hour when the Maid
shall come to draw Water out of this Fountain; i^ then, My God, thou do give
me this advice, I resolve no entreat the first which shall approach it* to
afford me some Water to drink, if she grant me this favor, by this sign I
shall presently believe* that it is doubtless she, whom thy holy Providence
has appointed for Isaacks Spouse.

Scarce had Eliezer ended his Coloquie, when a Mal^ called Rebecca appeared,
fair and chaste as the Day* who carried under her Arm an Earthen Pitcher to take
up Water, Eliezer presented himself, humbly beseeching her to afford him some
drink, to which Rebecca presently assented performing all that Courtesy and
Charity required.

The holy Scripture observes, that Eliezer very seriously contemplated all the
actions of Rebecca, as being a Myrrour, in which he was to discern the marks of
Gods conduct concerning Abraham and Isaac.

In fine, this prudent Man chose a fit time to present unto Rebecca some
Earrings and Bracelets. Afterward he informed himself of the conveniences
which were in the House of his Maids Parents who spoke unto him. Being then
well instructed concerning the alliances of Rebecca, and what was in her House,
seeing also that all corresponded with his desires, he threw himself on the
ground to render thanks unto his God, and to adore his ineffable goodness
toward Abraham.

Mean while Rebecca hastens to her Parents to bring them the first news of what
had passed, whereof her Brother whose name was Laban, having taken notice, he
went presently unto the Well from whence Rebecca came.

Finding Eliezer, he most affectionatly entreated him to visit his Fathers
House, and having conducted him thither, he immediately gave Hay and Straw to
his Camels, afterward he washed his Feet, as also the Feet of those who came
with him. Then Eliezer took occasion to publish the Commission which had been
given him, and the artifices he had used to bring them to a Head, and to
understand whether it were the will of God that Rebecca should be Isaacks Wife.

Eliezer could not doubt it, and Rebecca but too much testified by her silence
that her desires consented thereunto. Bathuel and Laban were also of this
opinion, and therefore they were to dispose themselves to the commands of God.

The promise then of Marriage being given on both sides; Eliezer made presents
to Rebecca and her Brethren; after this there was nothing but Feasts and adieus
to the Kindred of this new promise; briefly some Days must be spent in
rendering those duties which Honor and Nature required.

At last Rebecca took leave of her Mother and Brethren, she with Eliezer and
his Servants got up upon Camels, and they advanced with the best diligence they
could to arrive at A^rahams House.

Isaac, who was always in expe^tation, first received the news of Rebecca's
arrival. I leave to your thoughts what Joy, what Kisses, and what Embraces.
However it were, Rebecca is brought into the same apartment which Sara had
w^ile she lived, and immediately the Marriage of Isaac with Rebecca was
accomplished according to the Ordinances of Heaven, and the desires of Abraham,
who after this Marriage took a Wife called Ketura, by whom he had six Children,
who served to carry their Fathers Name and Blood through numerous Generations.

But here by the way we may suppose Isaac to Salute Rebecca upon her first
Arrival, after the following manner, viz.

A Dialogue between Isaac and Rebecca upon their first meeting.
Isaac. Welcome, welcome to my happy Arms* so made by this Embrace, my joy, my
life, my love, my better part, how Gracious is the God of Abraham, in sending
Isaac such a treasure.


Rebecca. Alas my Lord! you make me blush to see you transported at this rate,
for one not worthy of Great Abraham's Son; some Queen with Kingdoms to her dow^
had been more suitable than I.


Isa. Not all the Queens the Eastern Countries yield, could have been half so
welcome to my Arms as my dear joy, my much loved and much admired Rebecca. O
thou Phaenix of the World, let not so mean a thought enter thy Breast, as to
conceive thine Isaac can este^m the Glittering honors black Ambition brings,
or all the Glories that attend on pompeous Majesty, comparable to the warm joys
of Love, that fire his Heart when his Rebecca smiles.


Reb. Alas! Alas! I blush to death, if you proceed at this rate, all I can
afford you, indeed is Love, and that shall never be wanting; my Arms shall
still be open to receive you, and my Breast s^are your Cares, to do your will
next his that made us, shall be the height of my Endeavors, never dareing to
dispute what you my Lord Command.


Isa. This Humility makes thee more lovely in my Eye than beauteous Morn, or
Earth when decked with her ImbroideredLivery, Innameld with ten-thousand
different Fragrancys.


Reb. O you value me at too high a rate, and I must make it the future business
of my self to deserve such an Esteem.


Isa. Esteem, Why words can never express the boundless love my Soul conceives,
thy Name was pleasant and transporting to my Ravished Ear, e're I beheld thy
pleasant Face, adorned with so much dazzling brightness that I scarce conceive
my self on Earth: So soft, so kind, so charming, and so beauteous a Treasure,
Sceptered Monarchs would be proud to gain, and count themselves in the
possessions happyer than to command the Knees of supple Nations, when their
wastfull Sword had brought the World into subjection.


Reb. O you overvalue me at such a rate, that you will make me more indebted to
your tender Love, than all the Service of my life can pay.


Isa. My Tongue cannot express thy worth, nor tell the Limmits of my Love; No
more then, but lets to our Bridal Chamber, that my Actions may supply my
Tongues defect, and there transported on thy dear Bosom in soft Murmurs,
breath my passion forth till thy blessed Womb grows pregnant with the Issue of
our Loves, and thou become the soft kind Mother of a hundred Princes.


Reb. My Lord I Am all obedience, what your will's my Law, as now entirely yours
to be disposed of at your pleasure.


Isa. Then thus we go a Heaven united pair,
To Reap the joys that past expressions are;
From our chaste Loves, let all a pattern take,
Which must the Sons of Men thrice happy make;
And be a means to lift their Soul^ above
The World, where all is Joy and sacred Love.

But to proceed amongst all the Children of Abraham, Isaac is the Master of
the House, and Heir to all the possessions of Abraham.

I leave men to think as they please in what Ocean of delights Abraham's Heart
did Swim, seeing all the Graces wherewith God had filled him, I am astonished
why he dyed not a thousand times for Joy at the sight of Isaac and his dear
Wife, who had no affections but for God, for him, and for the general good of
his family.

But Abraham must render unto Nature the ordinary tribute due unto her.
Abraham's Death.
This happy old Man, this Father of all the faithful, this King of Nations,
this incompareable Patriark* having lived like a Pilgrim upon Earth was obliged
at l^st to arrive at the Haven, and to die in the Arms of Isaac and Ishmael,
who buried him in the sa^e place where his Wife was intered.

When Natures health in Abraham was spent,
Death does distraine his Life for Adams rent.
His Sons do leave their Fathers Corpse in Grave,
Under an Oak where stands a double Cave.
CHAP. XXI. Giveing an account of the Birth of Jacob and Esau.
AT the earnest request of Isaac Heaven was obliged to grant that at last,
which a long time before God had promised him; and in conclusion therefore,
behold Rebecca great with Child and ready to lie down. But as the pleasures of
the World are not durable, so she quickly feels the approaches of her labor;
They are no other than pains and throws, and her Womb seemed to be a thick
Cloud of Thunders, and a Field of Battle, in which two little Children begin an
intestine War against each other, which cannot end but by the Destruction of
the Mother, or the death of her Children.

However it were, she consulted God; and God answered her, that she bore too
Nations in her Womb, and that two People should issue forth of her Bowels, one
of which should Triumph over the other, and the Elder be slave unto the
Younger; And Jacob though the Younger, supplanted Esau who was his Elder
Brother.

For this reason Jacob received his name; for as his Elder Brother was styled
Esau because his whole Body was covered with rough Hair; so Jacob was called
Jacob, because at the issuing sorth of his Mothers Womb he h^ld Esau by the
soal of his Foot, to testify that he would supplant him?

Is not this an early beginning to War with each other, since in their Mothers
Womb they began the intestine Duel?

But what ever happens, Jacob shall be vanquisher; for Heaven is on his side,
and the supplanting of Esau shall rather proceed from the Hand of God than that
of Jacob.

But alas! What strife? What Victory? What ^riumphs? When the Crowns we gain
are but Roses staind with Blood, and Laurels which wither in a moment, and
transform themselves into eter^all Thorns.

It is not for this prize Jacob sought in his Mothers Womb, but he assaults and
supplants Esau for the purchase of Immortal Crowns.

CHAP. XXII. Giveing an account of the Education of Esau and Jacob, and the
shameful sale he made of h^s Birthright.
Genesis 25. The twin-born Brothers are of different minds,
Jacob loves Cattle, Esau pleasure fin^s
In hunting, whence returning home be does
Sell his Birthright to Jacob for Red-^roath.

WE need not be over much versed in Physiog^omy, to fo^^t^ll what Esau would
prove; for in hi^ Birth he gave so many evident ^^gns, as we cannot be ignorant
of his future inclinations. His Body Hairy like a Bear, could not be animated
but by the Soul of a Beast.

Jacob on the contrary had only the qualities of a Dove, and his Heart had less
Gall than a Lamb. He went scarce ever out of the House, and showed so much
simplicity, sweetness, and moderation, as but to see him a Man was constrained
to love him.

Notwithstanding Isaac had more violent inclinations toward his Eldest Son:
And this Love was only grounded upon Esau's constant custom in bringing him
every Day some piece of Venison.

However it were, the Liberty Isaac gave to Esau of running all the day long
through Woods and Forests, was the occasion which brought him to his first
misfortune: For this poor Chaser coming one day weary and Hungry from hunting,
and meeting with Jacob who had c^used some Pulse to be sod, he entreated him to
give him a share of it; to which Jacob willingly agreeded, upon Condition he
would yield up to him his right of Primogeniture.

Alas! ^ dye for very hu^^er answ^red Esau, what will this Right avail thee
after my death? if it be so replied Jacob, take an Oath that thou will give it
me; Well, in truth then I swear it (says Esau) and I acknowledge thee in
quality of my Elder Brother: whereupon this poor wretch took immediately Bread
and Pulse from his Bro^hers Hand, little valueing the loss he had made of the
first advantage wherewith God and Nature had ^^voured him.

CHAP. XXIII. Giveing an Account of the Dexterity of Rebecca to procure for
Jacob the blessing of Isaac.
Genesis 27. Isaac Dim-sighted, Jacob takes to be
Esau, deceived through his minds jealousy;
Jacob the Blessing gets, Esau returns
And marks the Cheat for which he Grieves and Mourns.

Isaac waxing old amidst many misfortunes, insensibly felt the approaches of
Death, and as if his ^yes abhorred to serve as witnesses to the disasters of his
old age, they covered themselves with the Darkness of a lamentable Blindness.

Amongst these Accident^ his Eyes being shut against all the Claritie^ of Life,
his Soul went penetrating the shade and Night of the Tomb. He calls Esau, and
says to him with a pitiful Tone, Alas my Son! I am upon the Brink of my
Grave, and yet I know not when I shall descend into it.

This good man feeling his life to extinguish as a Lamp whose Oil begins to
fail, ^alled Esau, and commanded him to take his Quiver* his Bow and Arrows,
and to go a hunting that (...) might bring him something to eat, with this
promise, that at his return he would give him his be^ediction before his Death.
Esau immediately performing what his Father commanded him, Rebecca who heard
Isaacks whole discourse, made use of her time very seasonably to do^ what the
Spirit of God directed her.

Ah! how ingenious is virtue! and how dexterous is Love when it follows the
will of God! who would believe that a Woman durst undertake what Rebecca did?
Her Artifi^es then were innocent, and her intentions very just and holy, when
she disguised Jacob to deceive Isaac and frustrate Esau of the blessing he
expected.

Go then my Son (says she) and make choice amongst our Flocks of the two
fa^test Kids you shall find, I will so dress them, that I will make them ser^e
for your Fathers repast, to the end having fed on them, he may bless you before
his death.

But what replied Jacob? Mother you know that my Body is not Hairy like my
Brothers; I am fearful then lest my Father touch me, and believe I intend to
mock him, lay on me his malediction.

But Jacob would never have been so adventurous as to undertake an action which
might irritate the goo^ness of Isaac, if Rebecca had not relieved him in his
fear, and if she had not made appear to him that her Wiles were very just, and
her design most innocent. Ah! s^ith she, my Son, leave unto me this fear: I
will preserve thee from this danger thou apprehendest, and if any ill chance to
happen, I wish it may fall on me; do then boldly what I shall say unto thee.

She presently apparelled him in Esau's Garments, covered his Neck and Hands
with Skins which had some resemblance of his Brothers, and gave him such Bread
and Meat as she knew would be pleasing to Isaacks taste.

Jacob presents them unto his Father, who hearing his voice asked if he were
Esau; he answered that he was his Eldest Son, and that having exactly performed
all his commands, he besought him to eat of the Venison he had prepared for
him* But what? Said Isaac to him* how could thou take and provide it in so
short a time? Jacob answers, it is God who has so disposed it, and made it as
it were fall into my Hands. If it be so, approach my ^on, and give me thy Hands
that I may to^ch them, and feel whether thou art my Son Es^u or not. Jacob
obeyed, and after Isaa^k had touched him, he says unto him, surely this is the
voice of Jacob I hear, but if I be not deceived these are the Hands and Hair of
Esau I feel: Notwithstanding this doubt Isaac gave his benediction to Jacob
and mad^ good cheer of all he had presented to him.

Imagine whether Rebecca stood not watching to observe all that passed. I
represent unto my self that she encouraged Jacob with Gestures and Signs which
made up a good part of this action: The time must needs seem long unto her out
of the fear she might have lest Esau should come in and disturb the ^ourse of
Divine providence, and the conduct of her prudent designs.

Genesis 27. At Esau's coming Jacob is dismayed,
And to get Favor, Gifts before him laid:
Instead of Blows, he Jacob Kisseth often;
Instead of Wrestling gives Embraces soft.
Approach my Son says Isaac, and bestow a Kiss (...) thy poor Father:
Presently Jacob leaps on his ^eck, embraces him, huggs him, and lays his eyes,
^is lips, and mouth on him; and then Isaac thus ^le^^e^ him, viz.

Be thou blessed then for all Eternity, my most dear (...), let God b^stow on
thee the Dew of Heaven, the (...) of the Earth, Wheat and Wine in abundance:
Let (...) Nations be subject to thee, and let all the Tribe odore (...). Be
thou Lord over thy Brethren, let them bo^ (...) Knees before thee: Let those
that give thee their. ^^nediction be Blessed; and if any one Curse thee let
(...) be also Cursed.

CHAP. XXIII. Giveing an Account of Gods design in preferring Jacob.
AND now unhappy Esau! where are the privi^ledges of thy Birth, where is the
right of the Primogeniture, and the Blessing thou do expect Who art thou? In
vain is it for thee to say thou (...) Esau, and the Eldest Son of Isaac, Jacob
has sup^planted thee, and when thou did hunt he foun^ at home what thou
soughtest abroad. Jacob sayin^ that he was Esau and the Eldest Son, knew we^^
enough that in effect and according to the right (...) Nature, he was Jacob and
the Younger Brothe^ Nevertheless Isaac stood in admiration even to rapture,
and at first he could hardly imagine, that I^^cob had deceived him: but at last
in the ecstasy his astonishment, God showed him as St. Austin b^^lieved, his
manner of conduct in Jacobs proceedin^ He saw the just intentions of this
unmalitious dec^^^ver: And at length he discerned that the Benedic^^on he had
given him was valid.

Jacob is then the Elder Brother, and from hen^ forth his Brethren shall be his
Servants. It is in (...) for Esau to ^ear his Heart with a thousand sighs,
(...) to no purpose for him to lament and roar lik^ Lion.

His sorrows and roarings may well excite (...) pity in his Fath^rs Soul. But
this poor old M^n (...) no other thing to give him but some drops of Dew, and
at best but some humid and clammy pours which ^atten the Earth.

CHAP. XXIV. Giveing an Account of Jacobs Ladder.
Genesis 23. Jacob Flies, from his Brothers (...), away,
And sees a Vision as he Sleeping lay;
It is a Ladder on which Angels ^alk
From Heaven to Earth, whence God to him does Talk.

Isaac though blind clearly discerned what his wife pretended; and then
feeling some touches of this wise hand which managed the whole business, he
^ommanded Jacobs presence, to give him his Bless^^g, and to express unto him
his trouble to see him ^ep^rt out of his house before his death: But
never^heless since time pre^sed him for his ^arriage, it ^as most convenient to
take the way Mesopotamia to ^btain one of Labans Da^ghters for his Wife.

Go then my dear Chil^, said this good old Man, (...), and let the God of
Abraham be thy Guide, during (...) whole Voyage* For my part, I beseech him to
aug^ent on thee the benedictions I have most willingly gi^^n thee. Above all I
b^g of him to multiply thy off^ring, and to put thee in possession of the
Country where ^^ou shall be as a S^ranger or Pilgrim.

Farewell th^n my m^st dear Son, far^well all my Joy, and all the Love of my
House; which said, he Kiss^th (...), he Embraces him, he (...) him with his
Tears. ^everthel^ss Rebecca to who^ all Moments were longer (...) Day^s,
endeavored speedily to draw him thence, (...) she might put him in the Equipage
of a Traveller, (...) give him her farewell, l^ast Esau should disturb the
^^parture and the design of this Voyage. It was indeed a trial of constancy
for this poor Mother, when she must leave this Son, but at last she bad him
adieu, and brought him on his way after she had spoken to him some few words
which issued less from her Mouth, than from her Heart.

I wonder how the Father, Mother, and Son did not die upon this sad Separation.

In fine, the wise Providence of God expects Jacob at his resting place, and
intends by the favor o^ the Night visibly to discover the manner of his
conduct, and the Model of his Government.

Jacob is gone then from Barsheba, and travels (...) alone under the protection
of Heaven, and with the confidence that God would never abandon him.

But what! Behold Night already sounding the re^^treat, and shutting up all
passages to our Pilgrim, (...) beheld the Sun stealing from his Eyes, and the
Mo^^ giving no light but to discover to him on the Plai^^ of Bethel a bed of
Earth, and some stones to ser^^ him for a Bolster. Poor Jacob! What Bed? Wh^^
Bolster? What Night? And what Inn?

Repose then Jacob, and spend all the Night in s^^curity, since God has been
pleased to Assign yo^ this Lodging.

O happy Retreat! O pleasing Night! O delici^^^ Bed! O divine Repose?

Jacob is fallen a sleep, but God, who allways wat^^^eth, showed him a Prodigious
Ladder which touc^^^ the Earth with one end and the Heavens with the (...),
Angels by turns descended and ascended (...) Ladder* and on the top God himself
appeared as were supported by it.

But behold indeed a strange Spectacle upon Theator of Sanctity. I am not
astonished if (...) Jacob had taken his rest he awaked at this (...) bearing
God in his Mouth and Heart* He calls H^^^ven to witness, and prote^ts that
Bethel is the (...) of God where the most glorious rays of his (...) are seen.
Ah says he, how venerable is this place, and how full of a holy terror, it is
the Gate of Heaven! And if Jacob could live a hundred-thousand years, he would
have no other God, than he that appeared to him.

In fine, under the protection of the Divine Providence, Jacob pursues his
design, and this was the promise made him during his Vision. Yes Jacob, says
God, I am the Lord of thy Progenitors, Abraham and Isaac* and I will bestow
the Land where ^hou repos^st, on thy self and all thy Chil^ren: I will multiply
them as grains of Sand which are upon ^he Earth^ and their Progeny shall extend
as far ^s the four Corners of the Universe. I my self will (...) thy Guardian
during all thy Voyages, and will ^ring thee back to thine own House.

CHAP. XXV. Giveing an account of the constancy of Jacob in the Quest of Rachel.
Genesis 29. Jacob to Haran comes, a Stone there rowles
From off a Well, to Water Rachels fowldes.
Laban receives him kindly, whom he serves,
And for his pains, his Daughters both deserves.

^ACOB being now waked out of this mysterious sleep and Divine rapture, in
which God had ^ept him for the space of a whole Night on the ^^ains of Bethel,
he took his way toward the East, ^here a while after near unto a Well, he met
with ^^ocks of Sheep and Sheep-herds, of whom he en^^ired whether they were not
acquainted with Laban, and whether they knew not his House. Behold, at the same
time a Rachel approaching, the second Daughter of Laban, who kept her Fathers
Sheep, and led them to drink where Jacob stayed.

And here we may suppose Jacob thus to bespeak his fair Rachel, upon his first
approches to her, viz.

A Dialogue between Jacob and Rachel.
Jacob. Fair beauteous Maid, the lovelyest of your Sex: How long shall I
admire, and not enjoy so great a Treasure.


Rachel. Alas! you see it is not in my power to yiell my self to your Arms, the
custom of our Country denies it.


Jacob. Yet 'twas for you, for you my Love, ^ labored, long (...) Winters
Stormy Blast, an^ Summers p^^^hi^g Heat, whilst all your Father^ tender F^^^ks
with care were tended and secured from danger by my vigilence.


Rachel. It Is true and for your service my Sister i^ fallen to your share and
you in her made happy.


Jacob. It Is so, she is mine, but your deluding Father gave (...) to my Bed,
when I expected t^ pass the night in transports with my beauteous Rachel, for
whose sake I now have undertaken (...) years service yet to come.


Rachel. Alas must I stay seven year longer, tha^ cruel Father, why was I not
given at first according you ha^ contracted.


Jacob. Grieve not my beauteous fair since (...) your Fathers will, but give me
leave to lo^ you at that rate, the love of you transcending the pleasures Earth
afoards, will render servit^^ delightful, and make short the years of my
in^^sant labor.


Rachel. And is your love than more to me than to Sister, it cannot surely be.


Jacob. Infinitely more by how much more thy virtues and thy beauties do excel.


Rachel. Yet perhaps when I am yours, your mind will alter, and I shall be
negl^cted.


Jacob. Never, never, thou best of Earthly blessing to you my love shall stand
immoved as Mountains, firm as Rocks, and boundless as the O^ean.


Rachel. Could I believe such constancy in Man, I sh^^ld esteem the Sex at a
high rate.


Jacob. Witness all you shining Lamps of Heaven, that nightly dance your
mistick round, through the (...) Ar^hes of the Firmament; that my passions
shall never diminish, but you next the Di^tie that I adore shall be Admired and
Loved.


Rachel. No more, I am confirmed, and what I urged (...) but to try the
co^stancy of Heaven, befriend Jacob: Isaack's Son shall be the darling of my
thoughts, ^one else shall ever sit upon my heart.


Jacob. Blessed Resolve, O now I Am happy above ^he World! more Rich than La^an,
and in lofty ex^a^y transported beyond Expre^^ion. Now my days will seem but
few, and Labor will be pleasure, ^ince I am assured of Rachels Love. But see
your Father comes, I must hence to Fi^l^, least the spread^ng flocks should
wander. Take, take this dear, ^ear Ki^s as a firm pledge of my unalterable Love:
An^ for thi^ time farewell my only Joy.


Rachel. All joy and my b^st wishes wait upon the M^n on whom my Happiness
depe^ds.


The Conclusion.
Thus Jacob flying from Stern Esau's Face,
Finds Comfort, prospering in every place:
God guards his Chosen from the storms of Fate,
And Raises those, bad men Conspire to Hate:
He gives him Wives and Children, Flocks and Herds,
And saves him from bold Esau's Threatening Swords:
Through all Calamities he is safely brought,
To'h Heavenly Canaan that he long had sought.
I know not whether the Day were far advanced: but in some part of its course
where the Sun may be seen, I am well assured that the Eyes of Rach^l did cast
sorth a thousand Love Darts and lights into the Soul of Jacob. R^chel was a^
Aurora which marches before the Sun, and instantly these two Planets did that
which the Sun and Moon could not effect since their Crea^ion. Jacob ki^^ed
Ra^hel, and knowing that she was his C^si^, he began s^e^tly to cry out, and
presently hi^ Eyes sh^d some (...), which expressed the excess of his
cont^ntm^^t. Rach^l would have done the same if her ^yes ha^ been l^nger fixed
on I^^ob: but she ran from thenc^ to a^vertise her Father, that not far from
the House she had happily met with one of her Cosen-german^, the Son of Isaac
and Re^ecca. Which La^an hearing, went to meet and bring him to his Lo^ging, as
also to know the cause of his coming. Jacob freely declared to him what h^d
passed; to which Laban answered he was very wel^ome, and that he re^eived him
as his d^ar N^phew, and as a part of himself* But for the r^st, although he had
a desire to entertain him as his own Brother, yet he must resolve to serve and
merit some ways by his labors.

Jacob had no mercenary Spirit, nor Body trained up to labor; Nevertheless of
a Master he must become a Servant, and learn by Serving others, more prudently
to Command hereafter: He made a contract then with his Uncle, and obliged
himself to serve him for the space of seven years, at the end of which Laban
promised to Merry him unto Rachel, the youngest but the fairest of his
Daughters. The ^ldest which was called Lea, had a Face of Wa^ which melted
through herEyes, and rendered her deformed and Blare-Eyed: but the youngest had
so many beauties and attractives, as the least of her glances had power enough
to render her Mistress of Jacobs affections. It was for her sake and for the
Love he bore her, that he became a Servant.

Jacobs Love was not of the nature of those petty Devils which possess
lascivious Souls, it was neither deceitful nor violent, neither indiscreet nor
arogant, neither irregular nor impious, neither variable nor impudent, neither
capricious nor sporting, neither fantastic nor stupid, neither remiss nor
unworthy of a virtuous Man: but sincere, moderate, prudent, humble, stayed,
constant, respectfull, simple, condescending, equal, provident, courageous,
and such as could be desired in a good Man.

Jacobs Courtships were most just and holy; he lived like an Angel incarnate
amidst the flames and ar^or^ of a most pure and holy affection; he excited
himself to patience and labor by the sight and upon the hopes of Rachel; and
he di^ like those who running at Rings, fix only their Eyes on the prize
proposed to them; he found also no weariness at the en^ of his course, and saw
himself upon the point of enjoying his reward after seven y^ars Service, which
scarce seemed unto him to have lasted so many days.

But what! as the Hopes we repose in Men very often deceive us, so after the
Wedding Night, the day discovered unto Jacob the cheats of Laban, who instead
of Rachel gave him Lea. Never was any man more astonished than Jacob, who
expected nothing less than such a Metamorphosis.

He fails not to complain unto Laban of this deceit, b^t for answer they told
him, that it was not the custom to marry the younger Daughter before the Elder;
that if he would yet for one week accomplish this Marriage with Lea, Rachel
should be given him for his second Wife, provided that he would again oblige
him to serve for the space of seven years.

Behold a lively Image in the person of Laban, of the deceipts and fals^oods of
the World, which gives Straws for Gol^, Bri^rs for Roses, Counterfeits for true
Diamonds, Chains for Liveryes, Bondage for Rewards, and at l^st, fables, errors
and lies, which cause us to spend our lives in a detestable blindness.

Ah! Jacob, Jacob, serve then not only seven days, but even seven years more
entire, to obtain Rachel. Jacob, it suffi^^th to love her: For in loving, every
thing is animated; every thing lives, every thing prospers, and every thing
passes away most sweetly under the Laws of love* and since it is not for a
Man, but for a Go^, nor for a mortal beauty, but for an imm^rt^l happiness you
captivate your self.

It was no trouble unto Jacob to receive this yoke, seeing himself the
posse^^o^ of his dear Rachel; he resumed the Trade he had so happily begun, and
he believed that the shackles of his second service, would not be less
supportable than the former.

Behold him happy to see himself in a Bondage, where he was a Servant to Laban,
and the Master of Rachel. All his misfortune was only because he contemned Lea
which pr^ceeded from the excessive love he bore unto Rachel.

But God taking pity of Lea rendre^ her considerable by her Fruitfulness, and
by the Birth of four Sons, the first of which was called Ru^en, the second
Si^^on, the third Levi, and the fourth Judas, which were the four principal
causes of Rachels envying Lea.

Rachel will dye, she s^ith, if no Children be g^^ven her. What man I beseech
you can bestow a sa^vour which God has reserved to himself? Was (...) then a
means to make Jacob dye, seeing that (...) Wife asked that which lay not in his
power to give her? It was requisite nevertheless that the goodness of God should
aleviate the grief of this sad Mother; giving unto her handmaid two Sons, one
of which was called Dan and the other Nepthalim.

God immediately after showed the same favor to the Handmaid of Lea who
brought forth G^d and Asher.

After which Lea her self conceived of Issachar, then of Zebulon, and at last
of a Daughter called Dinah.

It was by the means of these Generations God began to accomplish the Promise
he had made to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; And it was out of these first
springs issued a thousand and a thousand streams of this blood of Patriarcks,
which was to overflow the fairest Lands of the Universe. At that time Jacob saw
the time approaching during which he had tied himself to serve his
Father-in-Law Laban. Rachel nevertheless was troubled at her Barrenness: But at
length God heard her prayers, and made her the Mother of a Son, whose birth
effaced all the marks of her shame and dishonor. This Joseph, this miraculous
Infant, was the delight of his Parents, the glory of Rachel* the love of Jacob,
the wish and desire of both, the support of his Family, the King of all his
Brethren, the Savior of his People, an^ the masterpiece of the graces and
favors of God.

A Dialogue between Balaam, his Ass, and the Angel.
Balaam puss't up with Pride, dos take his way
To Moabs King; The Ass that is wont to bray;
With Humane voice afright ^im till he see
An Armed Angel urging Heavens decree,
Who l^ts him pass, that Jacob bl^st may be*
Balaam. How am I Honored? In what high Esteem is Balaam held? That Moabs
Princes thus attend his Morning wake, and Kings become his supplicants? Did
they know what little power I have to serve them, surely they would not be
Solicitous at such a rate. Alas! Alas! my Curses in this case are fruitless.
Jacobs God, at whose dread Name I Tremble; frustrates all my purposes, and by
his power dispoyles me of those juggling Arts wherewith I blin^ed the delude^
Eyes of Godless Nations: Yet must I go and visit Balack* or the King will storm
at my delay. Ha! Why stars my Ass? Why cro^ds she to the Wall, the Coa^t is
clear: No dreadful Apparition sure does represent it self to her Amazed Eyes.
How Is this? The more with Stripes I load her, the more she does Recoile: My
Heart misgives. Terror s^izes every part. Ha! now she is fallen, and I Am
crushe^: But with redoubled Stripes I Will thus rev^^ge my self.


Ass. Wick^d and Sin bli^ded Man, what means this cruelty to me? Wh^^ h^ve I
done to thee, that thou have Sm^tten me th^se three times?


Balaam. Ha! A^azment seizes me! What is it (...) h^^r* or am^^^ur delad^d with
the ^cho of some sound r^bo^^^ing ^^^m the Nei^^^ouring Hi^^s* ^or what st^ang*
po^er can th^^ inspi^e a Brute with humane Voice, to sou^^ A^^^ul^t^? And yet
it seems no l^ss: What ^ave I ^one ^o th^e, that thou have (...) me th^se three
ti^^s? Where not they the words* Yes, yes, they were: But yet s^av, I Will try
again if any ^urth^r ^ou^d r^mai^s: ^hy have! Stricke^ thee (...) t^^u? Was
th^re no^ a reason for i^ (...) t^ou ^^st (...): and O that th^re were Swo^d In
my (...)! ^or no^ would I Kill th^e.


Ass. Am (...) thine Ass, upon which thou (...) Ridde^ ever si^ce I was thi^e,
to this day: And (...) ever wont to do so unto thee?


Balaam. Ha! Yet again: O s^^pendious and Ama^^ing; what can this speaking
prodigy in Nature signify? or to what end tends it? Sure Angry Heaven forbids
my further pa^sage, and commands my swift return, least dire destr^ction meet
with me in the way. Was I ever wont to do so unto thee, were not they the last
words? Ay, they were: Why no thou di^est not, but it is now too soon: Yet sure
there is something further meant by those misterious sentences. O miserable me! my
Eyes are open now, and it is too to plain: The Ass was wiser th^n the Prophet. A
bright Heavenly Warrior with a flaming Sword, wide wavering threatens me with
present death. Wretch that I am! What shall I do? But falling prostrate,
strait implore his mercy.


Angel. Balaam, wherefore ^ast thou smitten thy Ass these three tim^s? Behol^ I
went out to withstand thee, because thy way is preverse before me, and the Ass
saw me and turned from me these three times. Unless she h^d turne^, surely now
also I had Killed thee, and saved her alive.


Bal^am. O mighty Lord sp^re me! poor wretched me! Who with a strange Confusion
must confess, that through ignorance I have ^rovoked thy Anger, and th^s
^in^^d; for I kn^w not th^^ thou stoodest in the w^y against me. Now therefore
if it displease thee, I will get me back again.


Angel. No, it is the Allmighty God of Jacobs will, you s^ou'd p^oceed, but only
the words that I shall speak unto thee, that shall thou speak; bewar thou
degress not, le^st swift vengeance over^ake thee.


Bal^am. How sud^^inly the glorious Apparition's vani^h'd; now I know that
Israel is blessed; nor can my words prevail against them, nor must I Curse the
chosen of the Lord, but bless them; Even so transcendant happy are all those
that put their trust in him. But my Companions call, I must away, though my
visit will be little pleasing to the King.


The Conclusion.
The Madbrain'd Prophet goes to Balack, where
He Sacrifices does with speed prepare,
And blesses Jacob, which does much displease
The King who gives him strait his Writ to Ease;
And sends him packing to his place again,
Where soon he is by the Sword of Israel slain.
A Dialogue between Joseph and his Mistress.
The Argument.
The shameless Wife of Potiphar, whose Eyes
Were full of Lawless love, no sooner spies
The beauti^s of old Jacobs captive Son;
But big with lust, she tr^es if he will be won,
To Act a thing that must displ^ase his God:
But finding him avers, and that he stood
At distance with the sin, her love at last
Turns into rage, and he is in Prison cast.
Mistress alone. What a strange Passion do I feel how my heart beats, and how
my blushes come and go? O me! I am all s^aver so fierce my Blood boyls in my
Veins, this passion must be alay'd, yet how nothing but the beauteous Hebrews
Love can satisfy my desire: Wherefore then do I refrain to let him see how
much I dote upon him? He Is my Slave and will not sure deny me such a favor;
yet methinks had he intended to be kind, he might e're this have read the
language of my Eyes, perceived my eager gazings on his lovely face, observed m^
blushes, and the many gentle grasps I Have given him, these not regarded makes m^
^ear he will not yield me Love for Love, and then O me I am miserable! But see
as I could wish he comes, and now the House is still, now, now I Will tell him
all my mind, and stifle this tormenting Flame no longer. Welcome my Hebrew to
your Mistress presence, how does my lovely Joseph do, come wave this cringing
distance an^ be free.


Joseph enters. What means the consort of my Lord, by so much kindness to her
Slave.


Mrs. No, no, it is I Am the slave, come sit, sit down my Love, it is I Am the
Captive fettered in the Chains, the snares of your b^wi^ching Eyes.


Jo. Ha! What is it I hear? A sovnd that makes my He^rt to tremble, and
confounds my every part,


Mrs. O be be not so Coy, nor Frighted, but sit near my Love: Why starts the
Object of my Sole delight? Why change his Looks? And wherefore looks my Love so
wildly? Know's he not who it is that humbly sues for favor.


Jo. Too w^ll I know, and thus wi^h low prostration on my Knees beg you would urge
this talk no further.


Mrs. O rise! and wound me not by a denial! How, urge no further: Sure could
you perceive the passion that thus melt my Soul to tend^rness, you would not be
thus averse, but pity her whose Breast the fatal shafts of Love sent from your
Eyes, burn with Incessant fury.


Jo. Alas! my Master.


Mrs. Your Master, what of him, he is far from home, his busin^ss at the Court
detains him from prying into the secrets of our Love.


Jo. But Gods all-seeing Eyes which pierce through the A^strusest secr^ts, and
from which the dark^st Councels are not hid behold us.


Mrs. Pish, let not such vain fears keep back my Love, my much Loved Hebrew
from m^^ting my ^ager Joys, and seeing transports in my Arms.


Jo. Consid^r well, you are my Masters Wife, behold my Master knows not what is
with me in the House, having committed all unto my Hand; there is no greater in
the House than I, neither has he kept any thing back from me; but you because
you are his Wife. How then shall I do this great wickedness and Sin against God.


Mrs. O stand not on this niceties, wave, wave such fond Excuses in Compassion
to a Kind Indearing Mistress, who Burns, who Languishes, and must Expire,
unless your kind compliance save her Life. Still, still, you shall be great,
nay more then ever.


Jo. I dare not Sin against my God, were in your power to bribe me with the
Scepter of the Universe: Therefore let me implore you would name some other way
that is lawful to oblige you, and I Am all Obedient.


Mrs. O it is not in thy power, in ought besides, to indear me to your intrest.
Come, come my Joy, my Love, my Life, you shall, you shall I say.


Jo. Horror and Mischief! I Will not stay, but winged with speed and resolution,
leave the Tents of wickedness.


Mrs. O he is gone! he is gone! Stay, stay my Love, my Joy, my Life. O! Leave me
not, I dye, I Languish if you take your presence from me; hard Hearted Man, and
have thou quite forsaken me? O Restless, Restless is my mind! What shall I do?
Was ever Woman Slighted thus? Well Hebrew well, since I am thus rejected, and
counted unworthy of your Love, I Will turn my Pa^sion into Mortal hate, and
persecute thee with all the Malice i^jured Love can form in Woman's angry mind;
his Garment he has left* I Will Charge him to have att^mpted what I so intre^ted
for, and loaded with Chains I Will have him in a Dung^on laid, where Meg^r
Famine soon shall wast his Beauty, and make him repent he was unkind to her who
held him once as dear as her own Life.


The Conclusion.
Joseph, at Potiphars returns, accused
Falsely, that he his Mistress had Abused;
Cast into Irons, yet finds favor there,
From his Stern Ialor, God being every where
At hand, to keep him from the Rage of Men,
And soon's Exaulted to highstate again.
A Father unto Pharaoh he is made,
And saves from Death old Jacob with his Bread:
When fearful Famine made the Nations Groan,
So prosper those that fear the Lord alone.
A Paraphrase upon the Plagues of Egypt. Isreal's delivery from Bondage. And
Pharo's overthrow in the Red Sea.
The mighty God of Jacob lo^king now
Upon his sacred Covenant; his Vow
He made unto the Patriarch: Hear's the Groans
Of his oppressed Children, their sad Moans
Sounded so loud, that he compassi^nate
Pitying their wretched and deplored state.
S^nt Moses and Wise Aa^on to the King,
His Sons from Nilus Land with sp^ed to bring,
And that hi^ mighty power might more appear;
He loads the Land with Plagues, with Death and Fear,
Till by a stretched out hand he brought them thence,
Passing the Seas whilst Waters mak^ a Fence
On either side, and Heavenly Beacons Light,
Them over the dry dusty Sands by Night;
But bard^n'd Pharaoh's wrath at what was done;
Thus to his Warriors in a Rage began
Have, have my Horses, and my Arms provide;
Let all my Chariots March on either side.
The Fugitives that fly us are shut in
The Sea and Wilderness they are between;
They soon shall know their God's to weak to save,
When our devouring Swords will dig their Grave.
Thus in Blasph^mious boasting he prepared,
And Armed with Fury followed on them hard,
Frighting the fearful Rout, though Seas gave w^y
And Heaven conspired proud Pharaoh to dismay,
For coming to the deep, and finding all
The smitten Waters tur^'d into a Wall;
And Israel p^ssing in, he venture too,
Though much Amazed for Jacobs getting through;
The Storm began to rise, the Skies shoot flame,
And Rushing winds from either qu^rter came:
The Horses flounce and cast their Rid^rs down,
The Wheels fly off, off tumbl^s Pharoahs Crown.
Swift Horror and Amazment every where
Besets them, an^ in drea^full shap^s a^p^ar
Tenthousand Furys seem before their Ey^s,
And now is heard not^ing but woeful Cries,
For why the Roaring Billows ^ast amain
To s^ill the late made Val^y, when in vain
The Swift^st Horseman st^i^es against its might,
In vain they Strugl^, vainl^ urge their flight.
The Co^quering Waves their Str^ngth and Wit confound,
Plebeans with a Mo^ark th^re are drow^d,
For whom, while Egypt Gro^ns, glad Israel Sings,
And sends up praises to the King of Kings,
Their great D liverer, and Glorify
Him in his wondrous Power and Majesty.
A Dialogue between Samson and Delilah.
The Argument.
Samson the strong, the bold Philistines dread,
By a lewd Woman is at last betrayed.
D^lilah. O my Lord you once prosest you loved me dear as your Eyes! And that
you would lay your Trophies at the feet of her you called so often your joy and
your delight* but now it is plain all was but flattry, mere d^simulating which
makes it appear you love me not.


Samson. Why weeps my only happiness? sure she cannot doubt my love, since it is
in her power to ask and have what ever her kind Soul can form.


Delilah. Still, still desembling; O you men have al^ the Arts to make us fancy
what is not, for if you loved me as you say, you would not see my tears thus
unprevented, when it is in your power to dry the Eyes of her you have been
pleased to call your love, your joy, your life, with a thousand such indearing
soft expressions, but your former kindness is forgot an^ now it is plain that
you despise me.


Samson. Despise thee! No I love thee, even to madn^ss, would do any thing to
hush thy cares, use all my force to be revenged on those that injure thee, if
any dare be so presumptious; Nay, lay my life down at your feet: But if I Am
ignor^nt and know not whence this Storm of grief that Clouds thy beauteous face
arises, how can I remove it.


Delilah. You may soon guess whence, since it is caused by your unkindness, in
not daring trust me with the secrets of your Heart, if you loved me as you say,
you would not hide ought from me, as if afraid my Breast could not conceal it
from the giddy Vulgar.


Samson. What is it my love would know? speak and it shall be told, were it the
inmost secret my large Breast contains.


Delilah. You know this my meaning, I have often asked the question, and as
often been deluded with pretended truths that proved feigned stories in the
end; I would know from whence that mighty courage springs that makes you
dreadful to mankind, and has so often proved fatal to the Philistines.


Samson. And wherefore would my love know this secret, whom God commands me to
conceal, is it as you often attempted to betray me to my Enemies.


Delilah. O my dear Lord! how can such suspicion sink into your mind, that she
who doats upon her glorious her redoubted warrior, should act so base a part.


Samson. Was it not once or twice attempted, nor can you be ignorant by whom.


Delilah. P^ha, 'twas but in a way of merriment could you imagine I would have
exposed you to the danger you conceived, 'twas all fancy through desire to see
your courage tried that your renown might rise, and shine the brighter by my
conduct.


Samson. May I believe this and that nothing else is intended, if I might
methinks I would not hide the secret on which my life and well dos depend, from
one who sits so high in my esteem.


Delilah. By this tender kiss and the indearment of all past and future joys,
I Will never reveal it if you deal but faithful with her you are pleased to call
your love, your Delilah, and your delight.


Samson. Methinks I Am loath to tell the mighty secret, and yet love charms it
from me, though I tremble at the thought of trusting it in any Breast, but
where it has so long been treasured.


Delilah. Still, still, is it you doubt, your dear, dear Delilah, now, now, I
see you hate me. Oh!


Samson. Nay, dry those tears, and take the secret though the sad relation
prove my ruin. My hair, my hair, in that my strength is confined, that shorn,
no more thy Samson can encounter Armies; But in strength is equal to the
meanest Philistine.


Delilah. And is this true my Lord. Nay, don't deceive her any more that loves
you dear as life, or any thing that has a name.


Samson. By all that's good, by the Tremendious Majesty that I adore, no
falsehood is in my words.


Delilah. Now I believe thee, and am joyed to think that you have so much
confidence in Woman, but come my love, let us retire that with warm kisses, and
my soft embraces, I may make you recompense for such a favor.


Samson. With willingness I fly into thy Arms, and in the midst rapture meet
thy eager joys.


The Conclusion.
He goes and lulled a sleep's deprived of that,
The Nations had so often trembled at:
Robbed of his strength producing hair, his foes
In fetters, his now weak grown limbs in close,
Make him their sport till strength returns again,
When midst a thousand dead himself is slain.
A Dialogue between Jeptha and his Daughter.
Daughter. Long live my Father, and now blessed be Heaven that ha^ made him
Triumph over Jacobs Enemies, and trod upon the Necks of those that spoiled
Israel.


Father. Oh! wretched, wretched that I am, what have I done? And yet my vows
are past recall.


Daughter. What means the mighty the Victorious Ieptha to be thus dismayed what
trouble can afflict the Conqueror, can Pagan Blood shed in so just a cause make
him relent.


Father. O no my Daughter, my dear comfort, and my Ages Sollace: But I h^ve
passed my vows in lieu of victory to offer to the mighty God, who has delivered
Israel: what er'e I met first appertaining unto me and thou, unhappy thou more
dearer to me than Life with ill timed Music, art come first to meet thy
wretched Father.


Daughter. Great Sir be not dismayed, but boldly keep your vows: What Glories
greater then to live and dye a Virgin; all I ask is time to bewail my
Virginity, and then dispose of me as you have vowed and longer trifle not with
Heaven.


Father. Thy Courage, O my dear dear Child Inspires my drooping Soul, though
Tears burst from my Aged Eyes, which dry could view whole Nations Tragedies:
take your freedom while you may, and then let Heaven claim it is due; nor shall
thy memory be less lasting (...) the World; not only famous shall thou be in
sacred Story, but yearly the Daughters of Israel shall bewail thee on the
Mountains.


Daughter. O speak no more, least I offend the Great Creator of the Universe,
with growing proud to be oppressed with such a load of honor: Farewell my Father
and my Lord, till two Months expire, and then I Will with obedience return to be
at your dispose.


Father. Tenthousand bl^ssings wait upon my Darling Love till she return.


The Conclusion.
The days expired, the ^eautious Maid returns,
And's offered up while grieved Israel mourns;
Though not a Bloo^y S^crifice as some.
Vainly believe, but spends her days to come,
As a Recluse till Heaven is made her home.
Psalm. 6.2. Have mercy Lord, upon me, for I am weak: O Lord, Heal me, for my
Bones are vexed.


Soul. Jesus. Soul. Ah! Son of David, help;


Jesus. What sinfu^^ Cry Implores the Son of David?


Soul. It is I.


Jesus. Who art thou?


Soul. Oh! a deeply wounded Breast, That Is heavy laden and would sain have
rest.


Jesus. I have no Scraps, and Dogs must not be fed Like Household Children, with
the Childrens Bread.


Soul. True Lord, yet tolerate a hungry whelp To lick your Crumbs: O Son of
David, help*


Jesus. Poor Soul, what ail'st thou?


Soul. O I (...) I sry,
I cannot rest, I know not where to fly
To find some ease; I turned my blubbered Face
From Man to Man; I roll from place to place
TO avoid my tortures, to obtain relief,
But still I am dogged and haunted with my grief,
My Midnight torments call the sluggish Light
And when the Mornings come, they woo the Night.

Jesus. Sir cease thy Tears, and speak thy free desires.


Soul. Quench, quench my flames, and swage these scorching Fires.


Jesus. Can thou believe, my Hand can Cur^ thy Grief?


Soul. Lord I believe; Lord help my unbelief.


Jesus. Hol^ forth thy Arm, and let my Fingers tr^ Thy Pulse, where chiefly
does thy torment lie?


Soul. From Head to Foot, it reigns in every part,
But play's the self-law'd tyrant in my Heart.

Jesus. Can thou Digest? can Relish wholesome Food?
How stands thy taste?

Soul. To nothing that is good:
All sinful trash, and Earths unsav'ry stuff
I can dig'st, and relish well enough.

Jesus. Is not thy Blood as cool, as hot by turns?


Soul. Cold to what is good, to what is bad i^ burns.


Jesus. How old's thy Grief?


Soul. I took't at the fall
With eating Fruit.

Jesus. It Is Epidemical:
Thy Blood's infected, and the infection sprung
From a bad Liver: it is a Fever strong
And full of Death, unless with present speed
A vein be opened, thou must dye or Bleed.

Soul. O I am faint and spent, that L^unce that shall
Let forth my Blood, lets forth my life withal:
My Soul wants Cordialls, and has greater need
Of Blood, I (being spent so far) to bleed
I faint already, if I bleed, I dye.

Jesus. It Is either thou must bleed, Sick Soul or I:
My blood's a Cordial. He that sucks my Veins,
Shall cleanse his own, and conquer greater pains
Then these: Cheer up, this precious blood of mine
Shall cure thy Grief; my Heart shall bleed thine:
Believe and view me with a faithful Eye,
Thy Soul shall neither Languish, Bleed, nor Dye.

Epigram.
Can thou be Sick* and such a Doctor by?
Thou can not live unless thy Doctor dye.
Strange kind of Grief, that finds no Medicine go^
To swage her pains, but the Physicians Blood!
Psalm. 143:2. Enter not into Judgment with thy Ser^ant, for in thy sight shall
no man living ^e justified.
Jesus. Justice. Sinner. jesus. Bring forth the Prisoner, Justice.


Just. Thy commands
Are done, just Judge: See here the Prison'r stands.

(...). What has the Prisoner done? Say, what is the cause Of this Commandment?


Just. He has broken the Laws
Of his too Gracious God; conspired the death
Of that great Majesty that gave him breath.
And heaps transgression, Lord* on trangression.

(...). How k^ow'st thou this?


Just. Even by his own confession,
His sins are crying; and they cried aloud;
They cried to Heaven, they cried to Heaven for Blood.

(...) (...) What say thou Sinner? Have thou ought to plead,
that Sentence shall not p^ss? Hold up thy head,
and show thy Brazen, and rebellious face.

(...). Ah me! I dare not: I Am to vile and base
^o tread on the Earth, much more to lift
^^ine Eyes to Heaven, I need no other shrift
^han mine own Conscience; Lord I must confess,
^m no more then dust, and no whit less
^hen my in^ictment styles me; Ah! If thou
^^arch too severe, with too severe a Brow,
that Flesh can stand; I have transgressed thy Laws,
(...) merits plead thy vengeance; not my cause.

(...) Lord shall I strike the blow.


Jes. Hold Justice stay.
Sinner speak on, what have thou more to say?

Sinner. Vile as I am, and of my selfabhor'd,
I am thy handiwork, thy Creature Lord,
Stamped with thy glorious Image, and at first,
Most like to thee, though now a poor accursed
Convicted Caitiff, and degen'rous Creature
Here trembling at thy Bar.

Just. Thy faul's the greater.
Lord shall I strike the blow?

Jes. Hold, Justice, stay Speak Sinner: Have thou nothing more to say?


Sinner. Nothing but mercy, mercy; Lord my state
Is miserable poor and desperate;
I quite renounce my self, the World flee
From Lord to Jesus; from thy self, to thee,

Just. Cease thy vain hopes, my angry God has vowed,
Abused mercy must have blood for blood:
Shall I yet strike the blow?

Jes. Stay, Justice, hold*
My Bowels yearn, my fainting Blood grows cold,
To view the trembling Wretch? Methinks, I spy
My Fathers Image in the Prisoners eye.

Just. I cannot hold:

Jes. Then turn thy Thirsty Blad^
Into my sides, let there the wound be made.
Cheer up dear Soul; redeem thy life with mine,
My Soul shall smart; my Heart shall bleed for thine

Sinner. O groundless deeps! O love beyond degree
The offended dies, to set the offender free.

Epigram.
Mercy of mercies! he that was my drudge
Is now my Advoca^e, is now my Judge:
He suffers, pleads, and sentences, alone:
Three I adore, and yet adore but one.
Deutrenomy 32.29. O that Men were Wise, and that they understood this, that
they would consider their latter end.
Flesh. Spirit. Flesh. What means my Sisters eye so often to pass
Through the long Entry of the optic Glass?
Tell me, what secret virtue does invite
Thy wrinkled eye to such unknown delight?

Spirit. It helps the sight, makes things remote appear
In perfect view; it draws the Obj^ct near.

Flesh. What sense-delighting objects does thou spy?
What does the Glass present before thine eye?

Spirit. I see thy Foe, my reconciled Friend,
Grim Death, even standing at the Glasses ^^d;
His left hand holds a branch of Palm, his right
Holds forth a two-edged Sword.

Fle. A proper sight,
And is this all? does thy prospective please
The Abused fancy with no shapes but these?

Spirit. ^^es, I behold the darkened Sun bereav'^
(^f all his light, the battl^m^nts of Heaven
Shel^ring in flames; the Angel guarded Son
Of Glory on his Tribunall-Throne;
I see a Brimstone Sea of boiling fire,
And f^inds, with knotted whips of flaming Wire,
Tor^er'ng poor Souls, that k^ash their Teeth in vain,
And kn^w their flame torment^d tongues for pain.
Look, Sister, how the queasy-stomack'd Graves
V^mit their dead, and how the Purple waves
Scald their Consumeless Bodies, strongly Cursing
All Wombs for Bearing, and all Paps for Nursing.

Flesh. Can thy distemp^r'd fancy take delight
In view of Tortures? these are shows t'affright:
Look in this Glass triangular; look here,
Hear's that will ravish eyes.

Spirit. What see thou there.


Flesh. The World in colors, colors that disdain
The Cheeks of Proteus, or the Silken train
Of Flora's Nymphs; such various sorts of hiew
As sun-confronting Iris never knew,
Here if thou please to beautify a Town
Thou mai'st; or with a hand turned upside down.
Here mai'st thou scant or widen by the measure
Of thine own will; make short or long at pleasure:
Here may thou tire thy fancy, and advise
With shows more apt to please more curious eyes.

Spirit. Ah fool! that dot'st on vain, on present toys
And disrespect'st those true, those future Joys!
How strongly are thy thoughts befooled, alas,
To dote on Goods that perish with thy Glass!
Nay, vanish with the turning of a hand!
Were they but painted colors, it might stand
With painted reason that they might devote thee,
But things that have no being to besot thee?
For sight of future Torments is the way
To baulk those ills which present joys bewray.
As thou have fooled thy self, so now come hither,
Break that fond Glass, and let us be wise together.

Epigram.
What Soul, no further yet? what never commence
Master in faith, still Batchelour of sense,
It Is insufficiency, or what has made thee
Oressip thy lost degree? thy Lusts have stayed thee.
Canticles. 7.11. Come, my Beloved, let us go forth into the Field, and let us
remain in the Villages.


Christ. Soul. 1.
Christ. Come, Come m^ dear, and let us ^oth retire,
And whi^^ the dain^ys of the fragrant Fields:
Where warbling Phil'mel, and the shrill mouth quire
Ch^n^ forth their raptures, where the Turtle builds
Her lov^ly N^st; and where the n^w born Brier
Breaths forth the sweetness that ^er April yi^lds.
Come, Come, my lovely fair, and let us try
These rural delicates; where thou and I
M^^ m^lt in priva^e fl^mes, and fear no stander by.
2
^oul. My hearts eternal j^y, in lieu of whom
The ^arth's a blast and all the World's a bubble!
^ur City-man Sion is the faire^t hom^,
But Country sweets are ta^g'd wi^h lesser tro^ble,
^et's try them both, and ch^se the better; come
A change in pleasure, makes the pleasure double.
O^ thy Commands depends my go or tarry,
I Will stir with Martha, or I Will stay with Mary,
Our Hearts are firmly fit, although her pleasures vary.
3.
^^rist. Our Countryman Sion (situat^ on high)
With various object, still renews delight
(...) arched Roof's of unstained Ivory,
Her Walls of Fiery-^^arkling Chrisolite,
(...) Pavement is of hardest Porphiry;
Her spacious Windows are all Glazed with bright
And flaming Carbuncles no need require,
Titans faint rays, or Vulcans feeble fire;
And every Gate's a Pearl, and every Pearl, entir^.
4.
Soul. Fool that I was, how were my thoughts deceived?
How falsely was my fond conceit possessed!
I took it for an Hermitage but pau'd
And daubed with neighboring dirt, Thatcht at best
Alas I never expected more! nor craved;
A Tu^^le ^^p'd, but for a Turtles nest:
Come, Come, my dear, and let no idle stay
Neglect the a^vant^ge of the headstrong day
How pleasure gr^tes that Feels the Curb (...) delay.
5.
Christ. Come then, my Joy, let our divided paces
Conduct us to our fairest t^rritory;
O there w^'ll twine our Souls in sweet embraces,
Soul. And in thy Arms I Will tell my passion stor^
Christ. O there I Will Crown ^hy head with all my grace
Soul. And all these Graces shall reflect thy Glo^^
Christ. O there I Will f^^d thee withCel^stial Man^
I Will be thy (...).
Soul. And I, ^hy Hanna.
Christ. I Will sound my Trump of joy.
Soul. And (...) resound Hosanna.
Epigram.
Mechanic Soul, thou must not only do
With Martha, but with Mary ponder too:
Happy's that House where these fair Sisters vary,
But most, where Martha's reconciled to Mary.
Ecclesiastes 3.1 To every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose
under the Heaven.
Time. Death. 1.
Time. Behold the frailty of this slender snuff,
Alas, it has ^ot long to last:
Without the h^lp of either ^hief or puff*
Her weakness knows the way to wast.
Nature has made her substance apt enough
To spend it self, and spend to fast:
It needs the help of none
That is to prone,
To lavish our untuch'd, and languish all alone.
2.
Death. Time, hold thy peace, and shake thy slow pace Sand,
Thy idle Minutes make no way,
Thy Glass exceeds her hour, or else does stand,
I cannot hold, I cannot stay.
Surcease thy Pleading, and enlarge my hand,
I surfeit with too long delay.
This brisk, this bold faced light
Does burn too bright;
Darkness adorns my Throne, my day is dark as night.
3.
Time. Great Prince of darkness, hold thy needless hand,
Thy Captiv's fast and cannot fly:
that Arm can rescue? who can countermand?
What power can set thy Prisoner free?
(...) if they could, what Close, what Foreign Land
Can hide the Head that flees from thee?
But if her harmless light
Offend thy sight,
What need'st thou snatch at Noon, what will be thine at Night.
4.
Death. I have not stayed my patience, my quick trade
Grows dull and makes too slow return:
This long-lived dept is due, and should been paid,
When first her flame began to burn:
But I have stayed too long, I have delayed
To store my sast, my ^raving urn.
My p^tent give^ me power
Each day, each hour,
To strike the pleasant Thatch, and shake the princely Tower.
5.
Time. Thou count'st too fast: t^y patient gives no power,
Till Time shall please to say, Amen.
Death. (...) thou appoint my sha^t?
Time. Or thou my hour?
Death. It Is I ^id, do.
Time. It Is I bid, when:
Alas thou can not make the poor^st flower!
To h^ng the drooping head till then:
Thy shafts can neither kill,
Nor strike, until
My power give them Wings, and pleasure Arm thy will.
Epigr^m.
Expect, but fear not Death: Death cannot kill
Till Time, (that first must Seal her pati^nt Will)
Would thou live long? keep time in high ^steem,
Whom gone, if ^hou can not recall, redeem.
A Dialogue between the Harlot and the Unadvised Youth.
The Argument.
Words smooth as Oil the Simple Youth betray,
Whilst he to certain Ruin takes his way.
Harlot. O! my Enchanting Youth, why stand'st thou Gazing thus? why at this
distance, when the burning Glances of desireous beauty dart with so much
Ardency and covet thy Embraces? Come be not Coy, nor Start, nor turn Aside;
consider who it is Calls, who Courts thy Favor.


Youth. What Voice is this I hear? What Female Form is it my Eyes behold? What
Lovely shape is it that th^s Approaches me?


Harlot. Why, why this distance? Wherefore shrinks the Comely Youth? Why shuns
he her that would be proud to lay him in her Bosom, and with much Joy hug him
in her warm Embraces.


Youth. Alas! I know not why I Am thus invaded, therefore is it you pursue me
thus? What is it you see in me that should prove so Alureing?


Harlot. Come, come, these niceties they must ^e waved, I see you are an novice
in the Arts of Love, and want to be instructed; this distance ill ^ecomes you,
when a kind, a most obligeing lover wooes you, to be frolic and complacient.


Youth. Could I but understand your meaning, I should tell the better how to
answer: But as yet I Am ig^^rant of your design, nor know I what it is you would
have ^e do.


Harlot. All that I ask is that you would be kind, (...) Husband is absent, and
his distance from his ha^itation gives free scope to love. Peace Offerings I
^ave made, and by this kiss came out on purpose to find to meet my lovely
Youth, to lead him to my rich Imbroider'd Bed, persumed with Amber, and the
Civit of Ethiopi^, strewn all with Ros^s, and o'respread with Gessamin; Aloes
and Cynamon are scattered round about it, come than my joy lets loose no time,
but whilst we may with hasty steps hie thither, and upon that soft recumbancy
till morning take our fills of Love, where midst a thousand transports with
kind kisses and low murmurs, I Will relate my passion.


Youth. The words you speak methinks move rapture in me, yet I Am ignorant in
the affairs of Love, and drea^ the combat, as not knowing how I must behave my
self.


Harlot. How dread, why will my joy forsake so soft a list? Will he be so
fainthearted as to fly a yielding foe, who fainting with a passion tho to
fierce to be withstood will melt into his Arms, whilst he may f^e^ly ri^^e all
those joys that lovers meet, and the Dame that love^ him more than life, become
his well pl^a^'d Victim.


Youth. M^thinks I Am more and more transported with the word st^at ^rem^ling
(...) rough the wide Organs of my Ears, and reach the (...) sea^s of life, yet
something though I und^rstand not w^ll what it is checks me: Nay, bids me
for^ear and fly the offer you have made.


Harlot. Alas* '^is Youthful fear, just so was I possessed before I had ent^red
loves delightful combat, long time I hoverd on its Flo^ry Verges before I
entered, but being in I sur^aited without controwl upon the sw^ets that nearly
must in course resemble Heavenly joys, th^n sti^le those conspiring fancies
that would ro^ y^u of your bliss, and ca^^ your self into my open arms.


Youth. I am convinced there is something more th^^ words can well express in
loves transporting happyness a ^^ing so generally coveted by man, therefore
laying (...) side all other thoughts, I resolutely throw my self in^o your kind
embraces to be at your dispose.


Harlot. Spoke like a lover, and now will we fly with all the Wings of love to
my retirement, where my joy shall find far more than he with reason could
expect: There, there my Snowy Arms shall twine about him like the clasping Ivy,
whilst with a declyning head he pants upon my riseing Breasts and rifles all
the sweets of love.


The Conclusion.
She has prevailed the Youth, she has ensnared
In those dark Nets, she for his Soul prepared,
Whilst he pursueing falls deluding joys,
Amidst his revels, his own Soul destroys.
So to the snare unthinking Birds still fly:
So goes the Ox where he must surely dye.
A Dialogue between Jonah and the Mariners.
The Argument.
Jonah supposing though in vain, to fly
From Gods dread presence, his all-seeing Eye.
Takes shiping; but the dreadful Storms preven^
His disobedience, when a Whale is sent
To take him in, when cast into the Sea,
And cast him on the Coast of Niniveh.
1 Mariner. O what prodigeous storms arise in the dark Ai^ what tracks of f^re
appear, how loudly roar the fighting Winds, and what a hight mount up the brivy
Waves, whilst black faced terror does dis^use it self throughout the Ocean, no
Sun nor Moon appears to cheer us with their light, no Star to guide us in our
course.


2. Mariner. It Is true the danger's great that the wild Ocean teems with all;
uncertain it is what Wind rough East or West we now must yield unto, the Clouds
and Skies express the South-winds rage, the murmuring Seas the North-winds
fury, speak not safe nor Shipwreck, can we reach the port?


1. Mariner. See, see, the glareing lightning seems to set the Waves on Fire,
whilst Heaven powrs down its cattaracts of Rain, no Fire but that in such a
Storm could live, how are we born by Winds and Seas fell rage, up to the
trembling Pole, and down again to Accharons deep cave.


2. Mariner. That clap of Thunder rent the Mainmast, and has born it by the
^o^rd, the shrouds are rent, and now the leaking Vessel sucks the Waves apace,
^ll h^lp is vain, unless the power that rules the Winds and Seas, with speed
call back his angry Messengers, and still the boistrous Flood.


1 Mariner. Yet let us use our utmost skill, no hand must now be unimploy'd to
save our lives. Cast, cast the Carg^ forth, lighten the Vessel, and perhaps she
then may weather the rough Tempest; so, so my Lads, come over with it all.


2. Mariner. Now this is done the danger is never the ^ess, the Maisen is
shivered, and the Rudders rent, the searchingWaves suppli^s the weight of what
we have cast forth, no safety is expected from our l^bour, for me^^i^ks I see
grim death stand a d^ncing on the angry Billows and each yauning surge expose
wide Graves to my amazd sight, no hope remains but what we can expect from
prayer, then with prostration let each call upon his God, and seck for s^fety,
from the angry Deity, perhaps he may relent and bi^ the Winds be still. Ha,
see here is one regardless s^oring on the brink of ruin. Ro^se, rouse thou drowsy
wretch and call upon thy God.


Jonah. Whose that disturbs me with loud clamor, is it not night the time that
weary mortals should repose.


1. Mariner. It Is true, but know before many moments p^ss we are no more,
death, horrid death is hasting (...) Lives, the Ship is sinking, all our skill
to


Jonah. How! then is Death so near? Oh! now I hear the Storm, the fighting
Winds, and rattling Thunder shivering the swolen Clouds, and feel the heaving
Ocean toos the laboring Bark.


2. Mar. Yes, yes, too well we hear the like, but for whose cause is all this
wrath of Skies; sure Angry Heaven would not destroy us unless some mighty Sin
gave provocation. Come then and let us cast each Man his Lot, that we may find
who has transgrest.


1. Mar. Agreed, agreed. Ha! on the Stranger it is fallen: tell, O tell what
thou have done, and who thou art?


Jonah. I am a Hebrew that fled from the Face of him that ma^e the Universe,
who lives for ever, and is only God in Heaven and Earth; who rouses or makes
still the Seas at pleasure: It Is I, it is I that have occasion^d all that
threatens you; no way there is for safety, but by casting me into the Swelling
Flood.


2. Mar. O wonderful! But how shall we then Answer for your Blood? Let not the
God whom you A^ore impute to us, if in this our great necessity we do a deed
we shall hereafter blush to own; therefore we'll try.


Jonah. In vain you strive to get a shore: nor is there safety but in what I
have advised.


1. Mar. Then lay not Lord, the blood of Innocence, the blood of him that never
offen^ed us, to our sad charge; if thus we give him to the Waves, seeing we
have no other way to save our lives.


2. Mar. So now he is doust in the Rough Billows: Ha! a monst^rous Whale has
sucked him in, an^ now the Winds are still, the Ocean leaves to Rage: the
Clouds are ch^st away, bright day appears; and all our Leaks are stopped by
Miracle.


1. Mar. It Is true, though wondrous: This was sure some Homicide, or Altar
Robber, that thus provoke the Angry Powers: but see we have with safety reached
the wished for port.


The Conclusion.
Jonah cast Over-baord, soon finds a Tomb
In a dread Fishes huge insatiate Womb;
Who three days bearing him from Coast to Coast;
Him on dry Land with horrid Roaring tossed.
When he to Nineveh does have and cry
Against them for their great Iniquity;
Who concious of their Guilt, bewail their Sin,
And blunt God's Anger er'e their woes begin.
At which the Prophet being displeased, the Lord
Shows him his folly, by a senseless ^ourd.
A Dialogue between Nebuchadnezzar, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego.
The Argument.
Long tempted though in vain, good Men at last
Are by the Tyrant bound in Fetters fast;
Doomd to a ^iery Tr^all for his sake
Who Heaven and Earth, the Sea, and all did make.
Nebuchadnezzar. How Is this, can what I hear be true? dare ye you preverse
Captives still deny to fall on bended Knees and kiss the ground, when you
approach the Shrive of great Diana? Know you not she is a Goddess by your King
adored, and humbly sought unto in all Events of Peace and War?


Shadrach. We know no God nor Goddess but the God of Jacob, whom with fear and
R^verence we Serve, and to no other dare we, can we, will we bow.


Neb. What Insolence is this, is this an Answer fitting to return a Monark?
Know you not the great decree that is unalterably past, and that your Lives are
in my Hands.?


Meshach. All this w^ know, nor would not, could we help it, disobey or
disoblige the King; but in the thing be now requ^res, we dare not be complya^t.
The mighty God, in whose dread Presence now we stand, must be Obeyed rather
than Man; we must not Rob him of his Honor and give it to an other.


Neb. And these are your Resolves, you will not Worship at the shrine of Gold I
have set up? but dare preversly break the firm decree Established by the
Princes.


Abed-nego. Our great Resolves, O King are past, and here we stand, do with us
as you please:


Neb. Wretches, vile Slaves, whom I exaulted to heights of honor, in hopes you
would comply with my Commands. How dare you trifle with a Monarck at this rate,
when Death and Horror sit upon his frowns? I have been heitherto placeable
mild, which makes you yet more obstinate: wherefore know that now all mercies
Banished from my Breast; in crackling flames you shall be broiled alive, the
fury of the fiery Furnace shall plainly speak the Anger I conceive: and who is
then that God that shall deliver you out of my strong hands.


Shad. Your Anger, mighty Monarck, frights us not* nor are we careful to
reply: For if the mighty God whom we Adore, the God who made all things, and
(...) whose will the World and all that move in it depend, (...) let us fall to
Glorify his Name; and in's Eternal Wisdom thinks it not convenient to rescue
us from the devouring flames; know not withstanding, we'll patiently expire for
his dear sake, rather than prostrate our selves before base Idols, the vain
work of mortal hands.


Neb. Horror and Death! here is ^nsolence beyond degree: Heat, heat the burning
Furnace with a Seavenfold Fire, and cast them instantly into the flames, that I
may glut my well pleased Eyes to see them fry, and that their cries may prove
sweet Music to my Ears; bind them in all their Gaitie to add more fuel to the
Flames; and that the terror may b^ more gird every ^art with strongest Chains,
tha^ they may be exposs'd the better to the circling Fires


Meshach. We smile to see a Monarck storm (...) against those that are
regardless of his Rage, and stand prepared to bear what er'e his fury can
inflict; though we in ought have not transgrest against him.


Neb. My Ga^rds, why are you slow in executing my Commands? He dies that
disobeys a moment longe^: So hence with them, whilst I and my Nobles follow to
behold the Spectacle.


The Conclusion.
In flames the Servants of Jehovah's Cast,
Their Chains fall off that lately bound them fast,
Whilst the sharp Element does loose it is heat,
A whistling wind makes it a pleased retreat:
The Execution that, that day was seen,
Was on the Men that durst to cast them in:
God saved his Chosen. And his Angels sent
The Monarcks Page to frustrate and prevent
Whom be Amazed beholds to walk in Fire,
With those that were the subject of his Ire;
Calling them forth, on them he finds no harm,
The gentle (...) their Garments did not warm;
Which strange stup^ndious great deliverance
Converts his Rage to Love, and does advance,
Jehovah's worth for the Kings decree,
Forbi^s loud to Praise to other Deity.
A Dialogue between Darius and Daniel.
The Argument.
Daniel through envy is against the mind
Of great Darius in a Den confined,
With hungry L^ons who d^ him no harm,
Gods Angel dos their furious fury charm.
Darius. What horrid Dreams have terrified me (...) my br^ken slumbers? How has
sweet sleep fled ^^om my Eyes, and tedious tossings made a restless night? Sure
it was because the Prophet is in danger, from which a Monarck could not rescue
him. But now the Morning Dawns, and I am at the fatal Den, into which malicious
Men have cast him as a Prey to hungry Lions: I Will see if that great God he
serves, has hitherto preserved him from their rage. O Daniel, Daniel! Servant
of the highest, speak, it is a King your Friend that longs to hear your voice,
which would be Music to his Ears. Say, say, has God, the God wh^m you have
served been able to deliver you.


Daniel. Great Monarck live for ever, thy Servant is in safety; the God of
Jacob, at whose tremendious name I bend me to the dust, has s^nt his Angel, and
has closed the rending Iaws of the stern Lions, causeing them to faun on me
without a power to hurt, since integrity in me was found before him, nor in
ought have I offended great Darius.


Darius. O welcome sound! And is my darling safe? Blessed, blessed, for ever be
thy God, whose power has kept the cruelest of Beasts, from bathing their stern
Jaws in Blood of innocence. With speed, with speed; draw, draw him thence, draw
out the man my Soul so much delights in. O let me embrace my Daniel, my dear
Prophet! Whom the malice of ill-minded so far exposed to danger.


Daniel. Thus low I kn^el to meet the favo^^ great Darius dos vouchsafe his
Servant.


Darius. O Rise! My Love, my Life, my Soul; and say, how looked your stern
assoc^a^es, when you first took lodging in the Den.


Daniel. At first great King they roard aloud in expectation of decending prey,
as being almost famisht, but having at a distance glar'd on me with firey Eyes
they came and couched beneath my feet, fa^^ing and swindging round their Tails,
so tame that all appearance of their natural fierceness vanished, suffering me
with much delight to stroke them and make pastime with curling Maines, nor was
I ignorant whose power restraind their rage, but as I mused the Den at the top
divided and a brightness shone throughout - the gloomy place, when as a man
decended with refreshment for your Servant, brought by an Angel from a distant
land: And the same way he came, returned, on which repast having well fed, I
laid me down to slumber till your Royal voice awaked me.


Darius. Amazing, yea stupendiously amazing is what you relate, nor hence will
Darius trust in any God but him, that has been able to deliver his much injured
Servant, to him I will pay my vows, and Death shall be his Doom if subject to
my Scepter, that dares once bend his knee to any other Deity: Nor shall the
malicious and revengefull men that durst traduce my Daniel escape dire
vengeance, and not only they, but all that appertains to them of their cursed
race, not one shall live, the Lions shall have plenty of their Blood. Than come
my Faithful Friend, come to the Palace of thy Monarck, whilst I give command
for the quick Execution of what' I decree.


Daniel. Great Sir I Am all obedient, and with joyful steps thus wait upon my
King, who has vouchsafed to load his Servant, with so many favors and next him
whom I adore will make it my delight to do his just commands.


The Conclusion.
Daniel delivered and yet greater made,
His foes the Murdrous Lions soon invade,
Breaking in pieces with resist less force,
Their feeble Bodies, and their Souls divorce.
Whilst a decree is sent through all the Coast,
That each fall down before the Lord of Host.
CHAP. XXVI. The Combats of Joseph for defense of his Chastity.
THe Wife of Potiphar, to whom Joseph was sold by the Ishmaelites, made it
sufficiently appear, when she was so impudent, as to attempt the Chastity of
her Servant; this Female Wolf had only Eyes to gaze on this Lamb, all his
gestures and motions were artifices to entrap him; and she would have willingly
preferred the inthrallment of Joseph before the Command over her Husband* All
her bonds of Marriage were but Chains which kept her in Captivity, and the most
just, and most holy Laws imposed on her, a Yoke which rendered all the duties of
fidelity, which Wives own unto their Husbands, insupportable to her.

It is a strange thing that we can hardly trust our selves, and that the Tongue
dare not speak a word, or at least if she speaks, it is but after she has
pondered all her discourses. Wherefore the Eyes are the first solicitours of
Evil, and then their silence has an Eloquent voice, which is yet not heard,
but by those that are Confederates.

It is no wonder then, if Joseph heard not this unchaste language, when his
Mistress speak to him more from her Eyes than her Mouth. This impudent Creature
cast a thousand glances on him: But the heart of Joseph was a piece of Marble,
which could not be pierced, all the Flames of this Egyptian Woman fell into a
dead Sea, and all her lightnings found nothing but water which instantly
quenched them.

We must pass then further, and see whether the Mouth peradventure will have
more powerful persuasions than the Eyes. This shameless Woman (...) so much
enraged as to declare her design.

Courage then Joseph, it is a Woman who assaults and sollicites you! she is
light, be you constant* she has stratagems, be you prudent; she is bold, be
you generous; she runs, fly away; she Flatters, disdain her; she asks, refuse
her. Joseph what do you say?

For my part, says he, I neither can nor will consent unto a Woman's Lascivious
desires, Victorious Innocence.
nor submit unto her will, preferring it before that of my Master; and I should
not be what I am, if I forfeited the qu^lity of a f^ithfull Servant, and of a
Person to whom the honor and remembrance of the favors I have received from
him, is a thousand times more precious than Life. If I have been sold, it was
only for my Innocence, and the chains of my Captivity could never force the
constancy an Hebrew ought to have in the way of virtue. I am Jacobs Son, and my
Actions shall never ^ely my Birth, I am a Servant, I ought to dye for fidelity:
Your Husband trusts me with all his Goods, and with all his Wealth, which the
favor of the King, and his own meri^s have b^stowed on him; he reserved only
to himself the soly Enjoying you: it is not for me then to r^vish from him what
is due by so many titles. Command me with Justice, and I will serve you with
sincerity; perform all that you ought, and I will omit no part of my duty to
you. Keep your self within the Laws of Marri^ge, and leave me in the duties of
my condition. I should be ungrateful if I abused the favors of my Master, I
should be a thief if I stole away his fairest goods, and no death could be
cruel enough to punish me, if I should attempt on that which is more dear to
him than life. All you flames can find in me but a heart of water and ice, and
all your eyes cannot inthrall the liberty of my min^, and your rigors will
never molifie a soul on which God has imprinted his love and fear. Know then
that I would rather choose to dye free from blame, than to live a complice in
your disloyalty. I prefer my bondage if it be innocent, before all unjust
Powers; and what misfortune soever befall me, I shall be too happy* if I remain
innocent. It was in the power of my Brethren to sell my Body, but they could
not engage my Soul; I may serve without prostituting my self, and my glory will
ever be illustrious enough if I shall do no dishonorable act, and unworthy of
my Extraction. In fine, I adore a God who has most pure eyes, and should all
Creatures be blind, it satisfies me, that he be the witness of my actions; I
reverence all his decrees, and if all the Judges of ^he World could authorize
vice, it would comfort me to have a God always armed to punish them. How can
you wish me then to bring Adultery into your Family, and to change your bed,
which ought to be the Altar of your glory, Angelical Resolution.
into an infamous Pile? No, no Madam, either leave honor to me with life, or
take from me my life, and leave me my honor.

Is not this to speak like an Angel, and to have the sentiments of those
spirits who live in flames without being consumed, and amidst Lightnings
without being dazzled.

But now such was the Devil of this Epyptian Woman, The Devil of Egypt.
who so eagerly persued Joseph, he was an insolent* importunate and furious
companion. His rage notwithstanding had by fits some relaxation, he knew the
art of dissembling, and to be silent for a time; his Element was solitude, and
the night his refuge, he sighed always after Joseph, and nothing pleased him
when he was absent. In fine, he seems to have the power, to possess this Soul
if she be alone, and if all witnesses be drawn aside.

Beware then Joseph, what you do; you are alone, you are young, you are
beautiful, and Esteemed. Remember that the eyes of Women dart as many
lightnings as glances; call to mind that their mouths shed honey and poison,
and that their tongues cast more dangerous darts than Adders: Contemn then what
ever this impudent Creature can say unto you.

She will peradventure say she is your Mistress, and that you ought to obey
her; And that if she affect you, you cannot hate her; and if she seek you, you
have no reason to fly from her; she will conjure you to tell her, what in her
displeases you. Since she omits nothing that may content you, and without
injustice you cannot refuse her one single favor she expects from you;
especially she being ready, on her part, to grant all that you can ask of her.
There is no color, she will not employ to represent unto you her passion; and
her Eyes though silent, will swear to you, that they have often enough spoken
to you, when her mouth durst not utter a word: that if it were possible, she
would believe that she has by her words manifested to you all the thoughts of
her Soul, when they might have been kept secret: Besides, she will flatter you,
saying, you have refused her that out of prudence, which now you ought to grant
her through love and goodness. Moreover, if you fear any thing, she will assure
you that she has foreseen all that may expose you unto danger.

In fine, she will entreat, that if she has no fortunes in the World, which
are not at your disposure, you would yet receive her respect and affections to
render you more absolute and independent, concluding by all these reasons, that
you must at last satisfy her, either by violence, or sweetness, and that she
will have either honor or life, death or consent.

Mean while let us see I beseech you, what strong endeavors are used to stay
him. They flatter him, they praise him, they love him, they honor him, they
conjure him, they threaten him, they make him promises. What will you have, and
what more can be done to gain him, and po^^ess his affections? Entreaties have
hitherto received but refusalls, Alurements disdains, and threats constancy,
and neglect.

In fine, this furious Woman being no longer able to restrain her passion, an
attempt must be made o^ the life of him whose honor she could not wound* she
leaps on his neck, as it were to strangle him, but presently Joseph flies away,
and leaving his garment in her hands, she had but the Feathers of this Bird
which she thought to detain in her nests.

Behold then all her designs defeated; Joseph i^ escaped, he is in safety, and
out of the reach of this ravenous She-wolf, which pursued him.

This enraged Woman seeing then that Joseph wa^ fled, and that he had only left
her his Cloak, resolved at the instant to revenge this affront, and accuse him
whom she knew to be too pure to excuse himself.

This Dame cried out first, and the fear she has to be accused, is the
occasion she takes those for Witnesses of her innocence, who could have
prevented her. After all, seeing her Husband at her Door, help says she, to
what am I reduced? A^* who has given me for a Servant an importunate Devil,
who persecutes me beyond measure? Ah* my Husband, my Friend, what have you
done? And what a perfidious man have you given me? Is it peradventure to try my
Loyalty and Virtue? tell me, I pray, what is your intention? and whether you
keep him in the quality of a Servant or Companion? For my part I esteem it as a
great honor to be your Handmaid, and yet I conceive not my self obliged to
obey your meanest Servant. He has been nevertheless so presumptuous in your
absence to sport with me, and take the place you hold in my heart. No, I swear
by the respect I owe you, that I would have strangled him if my strength had
been answerable to my will; but he is escaped, and seeing I called for help, he
left his garment in my hands.

Immediately this man giving too much credit to the discourse of his Wife,
without inquiry, whether what she said was true or false, caused Joseph (...)
stayed, and commanded him to be put in (...)

Wh^^ (...) Egyptian Lady did invite
Well favored Joseph to unchaste delight,
How well the motion and the place agreed!
A beastly place, and 'twas a beastly Deed:
A place well seasoned for so foul a sin;
Too sweet to serve so foul a Master in.
Ioseph's Speech to his Brethren.
Go fetch your Brother (says the Egyptian Lord)
If you intend our Garners shall afford
Your craving wants their so desired supplies;
If He come not, by Pharaoh's life you are Spies:
Even as your suits expect to find our Grace.
Bring Him, or dare not to behold my face:
Some little food to serve you on the way,
We here allow, but not to feed delay;
When you present your Brother to our hand,
Y^ shall have plenty and possess the Land,
Away, and let your quick obedience give
The earnest of your Faiths, do this and live:
If not, your wilful wants must want supply,
For ye are Spies, and ye shall surely die:
Great God, the Egyptian Lord resembles Thee
The Brother's Jesus, and the Suitors We.
CHAP. XXVII. Giveing an Account of the wonderful manner of Pharaoh's being
swallowed up in the Red Sea.
AND now methinks I see Pharaoh with all his Egyptian forces ready to be
swallowed up in the Billows of an unexorable Element, which will open its waves
to make a dreadful Sepulcher (...) ^his cruel and disastrous Tyrant, about
whom (...) most holy sweetness and the most amiable patience ^f Heaven is
wearied.

Having then received news that the Israel^^^^ ^ere encamped upon the side of a
little Hill situated ^etween the Fort of Magdalin and the Red Sea, and ^ery
near Mount Beelsophon: He believed this wa^ ^^e best way to surround them; and
that in (...) ^^ese Rocks, Dungeons and Seas, serve but for (...) ^rge* Grave
to bury them, and to extinguish (...) the name and memory of this People, which
(...) occasioned to him so many misfortunes. He sa^ ^^em at least in a
condition to dye of Hunger and ^hirst, after he had engaged them all in 'these
bad ^^ssages, or re^uced them to the necessity of yield^^^^, and returning unto
the same servitude out o^ ^^ich they thought themselves delivered: But no^^^ng
being able to resist this wise hand which levels (...) most rugged paths,
makes straight all crooke^ ^^ys, and Arms invisible Troops, and the (...)
^^^erfull squadrons, went on conducting this (...) Prince directly into the
Abyss, where he (...) to precipitate the Israelites; and the I (...) in which
he prepares to enclose these (...) was the sepulcher of his life, and the (...)
Rock toward which his power and greatness advanced to be dash^d in pieces.

P^or Worldly Men, unhappy Egyptians, you who bandy against Heaven, and make
War against the Almighty, how we^k are your designs, and how rash are your
enterprises? Whither think you to go with so great a train, with such a convoy,
with so much Baggage, and so much noise? whither think you to conduct all the^e
Instruments of horror and threats? Are you not afraid that the lightnings of
Heaven and the Billows of the Ocean, will conspire against you? And that at
length the same lot will befall yo^ as unto Pharaoh, who being accompanied with
hi^ bravest Captains, and followed by all the Chariot of Egypt, went pursuing
Moses and the Hebrew^ when these poor People no longer knowing on wh^^ side to
turn themselves, and with an Eye of pitt^ beholding their Conductor, began to
say unto hi^ with weeping and trembling hearts.

Ah Moses! Why have you brought us into this So^^tary place? Are there not
Tombs enough in Egy^^ without coming to seek them in this de^art? Alas! whe^^
are we? and did we not tell you, that it were much b^^^ter to live in the
service of the Egyptians, than to (...) in these savage places desti^ute of all
hum^ne S^^cours?

Courage my Friends, answred Moses, you must (...) nothing, for God has
determined to make his power ^^^pear in your favor, and all these En^mies
which p^^^sue you, are even ready to perish before your Eyes; (...) when you
hold your Arms across, and your Mouth is (...) vengeance will Thund^r over
their Heads, and (...) which has a thousand armed hands will (...) in an
instant.

In effect, (...) soon as Moses had lifted up his (...) Mouth and hands toward
Heaven, his voice (...) made so loud an Echo, as God himself (...), what moved
him to such violent Clam^^ though he were not ignorant of it; But he did this
to excite him the more, and more strongly to invite him to pass the sea.

Thus then did Moses cry out speaking unto God, and his prayer, says Josephus,
was in this manner.

O Lord, these Seas, and these Mountains are yours, and ready to obey the least
of your Commands. They may (...) us then to pass; and it rests only in you,
that we (...) our flight in the Air like Birds, and find a Sanctuary in every
place where you ordain.

No, no, Moses, says God, March in the head of your Troops, and when you
approach near the Sea, lift up your Rod, stretch forth your arm upon the
billows, that (...) may cut them in two, and cause all your Company to (...)
over without wetting their f^^t. Meanwhile I will harden pharoah's heart, who
following you, shall (...) as a subject unto my Glory, to raise unto it self
(...) eternal trophy upon the (...) of this proud Element; which must submit
unto my Laws and Commands. Hence-(...) Lord, and that when I please, I can make
(...), and their whole train become the (...) of an eternal reproach.

At the same time the Angel of God which conducted the people of Israel (...)
during the (...), and by a Christ in the day, went to a place (...) between the
two Armies, casting forth rays slight, and a pleasing shallow upon the
Israel(...), whilst it (...) the Egyptians with a tenebrous (...), and a thick
darknes^, which left them only (...) glimmering to follow their enemies, whom
ne^ertheless they could not discern.

In (...), as this (...) Light and Darkness (...) to the orders it has
received, the Spi^^t which animated this miraculous body, divided the (...) in
two parts, and made a large passage through (...) Waves, to cause all these
troops to march in safe^^, which were ushered by a hot and violent wind which
left not one drop of water upon the Sand. This was an admirable prospec^, and a
spectacle worthy the eyes and h^nds of the Almighty God. And truly when did we
ever see so many millions of men (without counting their baggage) pa^sing from
midnight till morning between banks of Christ ^ll, and mountains of Water,
where by means of the light and rays of this i^luminate^ Pillar, a man would
have sworn that there had been a thousand little Suns?

Let us look now upon Pharaoh, who having ranged his Tribes by compani^^, and
in order, begins to lift up his hand toward the Sea, which at the same time
made all these liquid bulwarks, and floating arches, it had suspended in the
Air, to roll down, so that all the Egyptians, who had advanced too far, were
swallowed up, with all their Chariots an^ baggage. The great God of Moses, and
of the Israe^lites, having made use of this miraculous elevation of the Waves,
to make for them a deep Abyss, and to erect a trophy for those who have but the
Victims of their fury; it was also through the flames which formed the Pillar
of fire, that the reve^ging looks of Justice gave them their last assignations,
and that her hand overthrew their Chariots, a d dismounted all these Wheels, to
make a lamentable shipwreck of all their pompous and magnificent preparation
which attended them. In si^e, these blind people discerned that God was against
them, and for the Israelites; but too late, for when they thought to escape by
flight, they perceived that the elements, and total nature had revolted
against them, and that they could have no longer any refuge or retreit, but
under the waves of the Ocean.

In fine, Pharaoh is drown^d, this great Dragon is dead, his rage is satiated;
he has h^ard the voice of Thun^er, and Thunder has broken the wheels of his
Chario^; He is no more, or at l^ast is groaning and dispairing in a Pool of
Sulphar, in a Sea of flames, and in an Eternity of Punishment. Moses and the
Israelites on the banks of the shore, and in a Paradise of delights (...)
Canticles of joy and Songs of triumph, to render thanks unto God for their
deliverance. Which they do in the following manner: Saying,

Let us sing, Let us sing Victory: And let it be every where known, that it is
the great God of Israel who has freed us from Irons, and from the slavery
under which we have so (...). He has loosned our fetters, he has brok^n our
Chains, and thrown both Horses and Ri^^rs, Pharaoh and his Troops, Egypt and
^er Chari^ts, into the bottom of the Sea.

Grant then, O Lord! that at the entry into this desert, our Enemies may (...)
such a horror as may render them insens^^le, and unable to hurt us, until we
are on (...) Land of Promise, and in our Country where thou will (...) us as
flow^rs of Paradise, and as so many slips of (...). Our Conquerours are already
vanquished, and all strangers are affrighted. The Philistians already (...),
all the Princes of (...) are (...): Fear has (...) on the minds of the most
Courageous, and the (...) even of (...) are become as bodies without So^ls or
resentment.

(...) them with f^ar and terror, whilst we shall (...) with joy and delight
into thy Sanctuary. Mean^^^^^ reign in the Ages of Ages, and if it may be, even
^^yond Eternity: For in fine, Pharaoh is no more, and (...) all that he ever
was, there scarce remains so much as (...) of it, and none but Mariners shall
find some (...) of those Chariots, which shall be seen upon this (...), where
he intended to erect his Trophey, his Throne, (...) fairest hopes.

Well then my faithful Companions, let us sing victo^^, let us sing together
you chaste Virgins of Judea, (...) Daughters of Sion, holy Souls, let us sing
Canticles (...) joy, in honor of him who is our Redeemer; Lucifer (...) fallen
from his Throne; the Dragon is swallowed up in the billows of the Sea, and all
these Traitors, who intended to drown us, are overwhelmed with the waves, and
where they thought to gather Laurels, and P^lms, they found nothing but an
harvest overspread with Cypres, and a vast Sepulcher in the bottom of the Sea,
where they prop^se to themselves to erect a Theater of (...), and a field of
Triumph.

On Jacob's Purchase.
How (...) was Jacob's motion, and how strange
(...) how (...) was the exchange!
(...) inheritance?
Why could not hungry Esau strive t'enhaunce
His price a (...)? So much under foot;
Well might he give him broth and drink too boot:
An easy price! the cas^ is even our own;
For toys we often sell our Heaven, our Crown.
On Esau.
When have thou (...); Nay, what shall Esau do?
L^st both his Birthright and his Blessing too!
(...) has poor Esau l^st but empty tears,
And plain^^ (...) cannot reach the old Man's ears?
What wi^^ the Father's Di^^ and thine own.
The Birth-right's (...) and thy blessing's gone:
How does one mischief overtake another?
In both, how overtaken by a Brother?
Could their imperious stomach but have stayed,
And if thy Father's had not been delayed,
Thou had not need have wept and pleaded so,
But kept thy Birthright and thy Bl^ssing too.
Had thy unprosperous, thy unlucky hand
Dispatched thy Ven'^on, as it did thy Land,
Thy sorrows had not made so great a heap;
That had not been so dear, nor this so cheap:
Had thine given place but to thy Father's will,
Thou Had thy Birthright, and thy Blessing still.
On Jacob's Pillow.
The Bed was Earth, the raised Pillow Ston^s,
Whereupon poor Jacob rests his Head, his Bones;
Heaven was his Canopie; the (...) of night
Were his drawn Curtains, to exclude the Light;
Poor state of Isaack's heir! it seems to me,
His Cattle found as soft a Bed as he:
(...) God appeared there his (...), his Crown;
God us not always seen in Beds of Down;
O, if that God, shall please to make my Bed,
I care not where I r^st my Bones, my Head;
Wi^h thee, (...) wants can never prove extreme,
With Jacob's Pillow, give me Jacob's Dream.
On Zacheus.
M^thinks, I see, with what a (...).
Zacheus climd the Tr^e: But, O how ^ast,
(...) full of speed, can thou imagine ((...)
Our savior called) be powdered down again!
(...) never made trial, if the boughs were ^ound,
Or rotten; nor how far 'twas to the ground:
T^^re was no danger feared; at such a Call,
He Will venture nothing, that dare fear to fall,
Needs must he down, by such a Spirit driven,
Nor could he fall unl^ss he fell to Heaven.
Down came Zacheus ravished from the Tree,
Bird that was shot never dropped so quick as he.
Short Legged Zacheus, 'twas the happiest Tree
That ever mortal clim'd, I mean to thee;
Thy pains in going up, received the Crown
Of all thy labor at thy coming down:
Thy Statute's lowness gave thee fair occasion
To mount that Tree, that Tree, to find Salvation:
But was it the Tree, Zac^eus? No, 'twas he,
Whose ^leeding Body died upon the Tree.
W^ll clim'd Zacheus, '^was a step w^ll given:
From hence to the Tree, and from the Tr^e to Heaven.
On Abraham's pleading for S^dom.
^ow ^^ath was right^ous Abraham to cease,
To ^eat the price of (...) p^ace!
M^^k how his h^ly boldness interc^pts
God^s Justice; brings his mercy down by steps:
He dares not bi^ so few as ten at first;
Nor yet from fifty righteous persons, du^st
Hi^ zeal, on sudden, mak^ too great a fall,
Although he wished Sal^ation to them all.
(...) thy dying Son has Pow^'r to clear,
A Wo^ld of Sin, that one shall not appear
^^f^re thine angry Eyes: What wonder then,
To s^e thee fall, from fifty d^wn to ten!
On the E^yptians Famine.
Mark but the course the pined Egyptians r^n:
When all their Coi^, when all their Corn is go^
They come to Ios^ph, and their stomachs plea^
They change their Beasts for Corn, the I (...) Bread;
Yet still the^ want: Observe now what they (...)
They give their Lands, and yield their Bodies to^
Now they have Corn enough; and now they sh^^
Have Seed to Sow their barren Soil withal;
P^ov^ded that the fi^^h of their Increase
Be Pharo^'s: Now their stomachs are at pea^^
Thus when the Famine of the World shall strike
Our hungry Souls: our Souls must do the like.
We first must part with, (as by their directions)
Our Flocks our Beasts, our Bestial affections;
When they are gone, and then must sinners do?
Give up their Lands, their Souls and Bodies too;
O, then our hearts shall be refresht and fed,
We shall have Seed to sow, and present Bread:
Allowing but the fifth of our Increase,
We shall have plenty, and our Souls have peace.
How art thou pleased, good God, that Man should live,
How slow art thou to take! how free to give!
On Gods Law.
The sacred Law of God,
Is like to Moses Rod:
If we but keep it in our hand
It will do wonders in the Land;
If we ^light and throw it to the ground,
'Twill turn a Serpent, and inflict a Wound.
^ Wound that Flesh and Blood cannot endure,
Nor salve, until the brazen Serpent cure:
I wish not Lord, thou should withold it
Nor would I have it, and not hold it:
O teach me then, my God,
To handle Moses Rod.
On Balaam's Ass.
^he Ass that for her slowness was forbid
^o be employed in God's service, did
^erform good service now in being slow;
^he Ass received stripes, but would not go:
She balked the way, and Balaam could not guid^ her:
The Ass had far more wisdom than the Rider:
The Message being bad, the Ass was loath
To be the bearer: 'twas a happy Sloth;
'Twas well for Balaam: had his Ass but tried
Another step, Balaam had surely dy^d.
Poor Ass! And was thy faithful service paid
With (...)-repeated stro^kes? Ha^'^t thou obeyed
Thy Lo^d had b^ught thy travel with his bloo^
Such is M^rs pa^ment, often bad f^r good:
The Ass begins to question with his Master,
Argues the case, pleads why he went no faster*
Nay, show him M^st^ries, far beyond his reach*
Sure God wants Prophets, when dull A^s Preach*
The Ass p^r^eives the Angel, and falls down;
When Balaam sees him not, or sees unknown:
Nor i^'t a won^^r this: God's Spirit did pass
From bli^dfold Balaam into Balaam's Ass.
David's Epitaph on Jonathan.
Here li^s the fair^st Flower that stood
In Isra^ls Garden; now in Bloo^:
Which Death to make her Garland gay,
Has ^r^pt, against her Triumph-day:
Here, h^re, lies ^e whose Actions pend,
The perfect Cop^ of a Fri^nd:
Whose milk white V^llam did i^ear
No least suspicion of a Blur:
Here lies the example of a Brother
Not to be followed by another:
The fair int^nded Counter-part
Of David's jo^, of David's heart.
R^st then, for ever rest alone,
Thy Ashes can be touched by n ne,
Till Death has picked ou^ such another?
Here lies a Flower, a Friend, a Brother.
On Solomon and the Queen of Sheba.
It spreads the sweet perfume of Solomon's Fame,
Affects the Coasts; and his Illustrious Name
Cannot be hid: the ^nbeliev'd report
Must fly with Eagles wings to th'honoured Court
Of Princely Sheba: Sheba must not rest,
Until her eyes become th'invited Guest,
Of Fame's loud Trumpet; her Impatience strives
With light foot Time, while her Ambition drives
Her Chariot-wheels, and give an airy passage
To th'quick delivery of her hearts Embassage:
True Wisdom, planted in the hearts of Kings,
Needs no more glory than the glory 't brings;
And lik^ the Sun is viewed by her own light,
B^ing by her own reflection, made more bright:
The emulous Queen's arrived she gone to the Court,
No eye-delighting Masque, nor pricely sport,
To entertain her? No, her eye, her ear
^s take up, and scorns to see, to hear
^n^eriour things; Sh' allows her ear, her eye
No less than Oracles and Majesty:
^ow empty pastimes do desolve and fly
To their true nothing, when true wisdom's by!
The arrived Queen has audience, moves disputes*
Wi^e Solomon attends replys, confutes;
^he objects, he answers; she afresh propounds;
^he proves, maintains it, he decides, confounds
^he smiles, she wonders, being over-daz'd,
^ith his bright beams, stands silent, stands amazed.
^ow Scripture-like Apocrypha's appear
^o common Bo^ks! how p^or, when Scripture's near!
The Queen is pleased who never yet did know
The blast of Fa^e less pro^igal* than now;
For now the gr^at^st part of what she k^ew
By Fame, is sound the least of what is true;
We ^ften find that Fame in prime of Youth:
Do^s add to F^lshood, and su^stract from truth,
The thankful Queen does with a liberal hand,
Pr^^ent him with the Riches of her La^d,
Where wis^om go^s before, we oft^n find
That temporal Bl^ssings s^ldom slay b^hind:
Lord, g^ant me Wisdom, and I shall posses
Enough, have more, or have content with less.
On Job's Temptation.
God questions Satan: Bo^^s is Job's desert,
In the perfection of a simple heart.
I^b's Faith was fervent; S^tan was as chill
To yield it* but must yield against his wi^^;
Condems it to be servile, to be bought
With God's own coin: Does Job serve God (...) naught?
It is a common trick the Te^per uses*
The Faith he cannot conquer, he abuses.
Alas, that ^aith requires not so much praise,
It Is a good Faith, as Faiths go now adays:
It is not strength^'d by the indulgent hand
That blessed his Labors, and enriched his Land,
Puff out the Fire; his Faith will quickly chill:
Satan puff tho^: nay, Satan puff thy will:
Nor (...), nor ^lou^* of small, or great estate,
Are certain ba^g^s of God's love or hate.
What Is now to do? Poor Job must be (...)
Of all his strong^r Herd^; Fire, sent from (...)
Must burn his f^uitful Flocks, that none (...)
His house fall and all his Childer'n slain;
And yet not curse? Alas poor Job addre^ses
His thoughts to heaven, he worships God ^ ble^ses:
The lively Faith that can retain her God*
May groan^ but seldom rave beneath the Rod.
But what says Satan now? The hedge is broke,
That fenced my Servant Job? What further Cloak
For his uprightness has he? What pretense
For his continual Love and Innocence?
Has not thy malice had her own desire?
'Twas soundly puf^'d, thy puffs has blown the fire:
Gods trials are like bellows: Satan's blower,
Blows out false Faiths, makes true ones blaze the more:
True, Lord, his faith is tough; but Snailes as well
Can thrive without, as live within their shell:
To save alive who would not lose some skin?
Touch but his Horns, O how he will draw them in.
Satan, I give thy malice leave, be free
To peel the Bark, but spare to touch the Tree;
Fear not the li^^ flock: The great^st ill
Your f^es can does to scratch: They cannot kill:
What now is the exploit? Afflicted Job does lie,
A very Hospital of ^^^sery:
I think that all the Ulcers, that have bin
In Egypt cured are broken out again
In his distempered flesh; Job is still
The very same, not charged ^is God with ill.
A Faith that lodges in a double Breast,
May stand the touch, non^ ^ut true faith the Test.
If these be ^lames poor man must swelter in,
He needs a World of patience, not to sin.
On Solomon's Rejoice.
Young Man, Rejoice: What jolly mirth is here;
Let thy heart char thee; What deli^ious Cear?
In thy young days; Thy ca^es will relish swe^ter
Walk thy own ways; Thy cares will pass the ^leeter:
Please^t^ own heart; Carve where it likes thee best:
Delight thine Eyes; And be a joyful Guest:
But know withal, the day will come, whereon
Thy Judge will doom thee for the deeds thou have done:
O what a Feast! O what a Reck'ning's here!
The Cates are sweet; the Shot's extremely dear:
Lord, I have been, and am, a daily Guest
(Too often invited) at the Young-mans Feast?
The Reckning's great; although I cannot pay,
I can confess; Great God, before this day,
I had been dragged to the redeemless Jayl,
Had thou not pleased t'accept my Savior's Bail;
Lord, he must bear't, I doubt, for I can get
Nor Coin to pay, nor labor out the debt:
I cannot Dig, my Joints are stark and lame:
But I can Beg, although I beg with shame;
I have no Grace in begging; can receive
The first repulse; I have no Faith to crave:
If the entertainments of the Feast be these!
Lord, give me Famine, take the Feast, that please.
CHAP. XXVIII. Choice remarks upon Daniels being cast into the Lions Den.
HOly* Daniel was once chief in commission under great Darius, the very first
Minister of ^tate. Thus you have him in the Zenith of his Honors, Lord high
President over all the Kings, Councils and Treasures, next and immediately under
himself supreme Governor, together with ^he reason which justifies the Kings
great Prudence and Policy in promoting him to so high degree, viz. Because an
Excellent Spirit was found in him --. He was every (...) qualified for his
station.

But this mighty pre^erment soon contracts an uni^versal E^vy upon him from
those whose dim Eye could not see, or whose cank^^ed Spirits would no^ weigh
his merits in a Righte^^s S^ale. The Hi^ of H^nour i^ dangerously tro^, though
by never so ^air and meritori^us Fe^t. Envious Men hat^ to a^knowle^ge a worth
beyond their own, and loo^ with a squint Eye on all above themselves. The
pro^motion that f^lls not ^n their own Heads, grieve^ their Hearts, an^ i^
plotted against.

Yet safely may the Heavenly Aspirer fix h^^ steps while he has no Competitor
to contend wit^ him; and few are emulo^s of the Celestial Crown The four and
twenty* ^lders may pass an Eternit^ e'ro any below disturb their Honors, while
wea^^ Eyes wax sore at the sight but of a Corone^^ though Darius himself had
stuck it on.

They soug^t to find occ^sion, etc. And methinks fancy them sitting in ^lose
Consult against him, an^ ransacking every In^h of his Life and Manners. N^ an
un^^r-Officer, but is brought in and strictly ex^^min'd upon Oath, if possibly
the l^ast defect mig^^ be found in his Managements or Accounts: And pe^^h^ps
the very Attendants of his Family Bribed (...) Menaced into an unreserved
con^ession and discl^^sure of the daily Customs of his House, nay (...) those
of his very Oratory and Bedchamber. (...) must the freedom of his Table ^e
allowed him u^^purge^. ^f probably even there but a Syllable mig^^ escape him,
which may be A^tificially interpret^ into Treason, or wrench'd (but) into the
mispris^^ of it; or but any thing which might bear the lea^ shadow or
Reflection of dish^nour or damage to t^^ great Person, Dignity or Int^rest of
his Roy^^ Master.

But when now after all this, nothing is squeez^ out that can (though but)
colour^bly charge him; how do they fret and vex, and are ready to indict even
his Care and his Caution? And are vexed that they want Eyes to penetrate into
the v^ry recesses of his Soul. For it may be, there might sculk some Traiterous
and Disloyal thought, which gladly would they tear out from his Heart, and
produce in evidence against him. But if, even that he White and Innocent too,
they again wax mad, and curse his very Loyalty and Truth, and could wi^h that
his Snowy Innocence would take a Crimson Dye, and be (though but superficially)
Criminal* They ^ought occasion but could find none, forasmuch as he was
^aithful -- Neither was there any err^ur or fault found in him, Chap. 6.4.

But now what a plague is it to envy innocence, and ^o make another Health
ones own Disease? Is the thine Eye evil because mine is Good?

Yet for ever ^e it remarqu'd, to the Honor of ^hese eager Conspirators, that
the height of this ^eavourish rage did not distemper them into the ^istraction
of perjurious Revenges, nor the detest^ble contrivances of Subornation against
Daniel. They will not Damn Souls to destroy Bodies. Their ^ery Heathen
Cons^iences boggled at that Hellish ^ractice.

And now very despair make these Plotters witty, ^hey alt^r the measu^es of
their Counsels. And ^^nce nothing can be discovered defective in his alle^iance
to his Prince, they will weave a Net that shall ensnare him in the exactness of
his ob^dience ^o his God. Hi^ very Devotions shall be twisted ^^to a Cord that
shall strangl^ him. And if he dare ^y servi^^ to ^is M^ker, even that shall be
High ^reason against his King And (to s^ve them the la^our) h^ shall (...)
^im^^lf unto the Gr^ve. For, (...) th^se men, w^ shall find n^ o^^^sion against
this ^aniel, except we find it ag^i^st him concerning the ^^w of his God, verse
5.

But I would wish no greater Judgment upon Plotters than to find them bending
their Wits against Heaven, which is ever engaged to destroy them, f^r its own
security and Honor. Nor can an Arrow be shot against Piety without hitting God
himself direc^ly in the Face. Since all that is in the Worl^ is but his
reflection upon the Soul, and he is as much in one Beam or Ray of his Holiness
that shines in the Creature below, as in the whole Sun of it that makes Glory
above. The Malic^ that wounds a Saint, would destroy the Deity if it could.

How do I see them Chuckle, and ^less their Wits in this new contrivan^e. A
Plot so exquisitely woven, that there is no room for so much as the least fear
or jealousy of its miscarriage and failure. They question not the success in
the least. Daniel must turn Atheist to prevent the danger; and forsake his God,
or his Life.

Projecting Heads may Plot together, and jumble out a decree of Death. Yet to
as little Reputation or Issue, as a Club of Physicians that vote that disease
to be Mortal, which Heaven cures by a ^igg.

The Decree is universally agreed on by Daniels Enemies. And the Monarch
addressed for his Royal A^^ent. They Enact him a God (by Law) upon Earth, and
make it Death to acknowledge another in Heaven. They put a trouble upon hi^, to
receive all the addresses of Men, and (...) thirty Holy Days for all his
fellow Deities to re^t i^: Whosoever shall ask ^ Petition of any God ^r Man f^r
thirty Days, save of thee, O Kin^. etc. verse. 7.

D^rius consults not his Cabal to unriddle this Flattery in his No^les, much
less d^e* he apprehend any treacherous design in the bottom, but is willing to
interpret it pure Loyalty, and a Politic advance of his Glory, and greater
security in his Empire now at his first approaches unto it; and therefore
easily inclines to the proffered Honor; and (since they will have it so) is
content to justle out his Maker from his Throne for a Month. Therefore God
punished his rash and unadvised Folly and Pride, whose hand Signs the Decree
which afterward makes his Soul to Ache, and because he did not sleep on it,
a-non cannot; and endangered the breaking his Heart, as well as his sleep.

The Sagacious Daniel qui^kly penetrates through this shallow desig^. He easily
sees the Warrant for his own Execution written on the backside of this
plausible De^ree, yet will not prevent it. His great Soul bids defiance to it,
and them that framed it. He scorns to live when he cannot serve his God* yet
will serve him: though he dye for it. He will not neglect his Duty for thirty
days together, no not to save his Bloo^. But r^solves rather to pass into
Immortality to serve him there.

The King having passed the Law -- The Trepanners begin to s^eak about D^ni^ls
Lodgings. Malice degen^rate^ them into Eve^-^roppers, they creep up and down
un^er his very Win^ows. If the Casement chance to s^ye open, the project
thriv^s, their hopes swell, and the Blood capers in their Veins. And he (brave
Spirit) opens it on purpose, to let them see and know that he dreaded not their
impious Law, nor would slack an A^e of his daily Zeal and devotion to his God;
and thi^ he di^, When he knew, that the Writing was signed, verse 10. 'Twas
below his great Person and Spirit to deny or dissemble his Religion. Faith and
Love makes him trusty to it, against all Conspiracies of Men or De^vils.

And what know we, but some were so impudent as to steal up Stairs and peep
through the very Keyhole to discover (but) the first motion toward a
Genuflection. But when those Sacred joints incline to bend to the resolved
Worship, how greedily do they suck in the very first Spiration, and preparatory
^ighs?

But (brave Belshazzar!) how little do we know what various Passions agitate
thy Sacred Breast at this time? What contests between Nature and Gr^^e, ^lesh
and Spirit? Or were thou all Soul and transported beyond the cares and
remembrance of thy Mo^tal and su^fering part, that I hear thee (...) i^to such
Rap^ures as the^e?

Wha^! and must I fors^ke my God now, or not Live? Spirit.
and fors^ke him too upon such unhappy Terms as th^se, to gratify the wishes
of these malicious con^ederating Heathens? Is Devotion become fatal, and must
Pra^er it self kill? Cannot I go to my God, but the next st^p must be to the
Grave? It Is worse than Death to live ^ut one day, without him who i^ the Life
of my Soul* how then shall I live thirty? Must I w^ar these (...) upon min^
affections and ^ips, which th^se Men^ envy and can^ing h^ve clapped on me, with
design to enslave me f^r ever? R^ther let (...) Beasts tear ^p^n a pa^sage for
this Captive within me (...) p^ss into the liberties of e^erl^stingness, than
thus to b^ Cag'd up in so insufferable a V^ssalage! Do they think to immure up
my Soul? Let them r^n^ me from the Court of Da^iu^, my Heaven is not there, as
is ^^eirs; my Bod^ is the Kings to his pleasure and service, but my Soul is
Gods unto his. (...) venture an in^^rg^ment into the Bowels of the Lio^s, e're
they shall ^l^ry over mine Ap^stacy from my Religion and my God.

But hold! whither does this Noble but Temerarious Zeal transport th^e Daniel?
Flesh.
Is this the kindness to thy dearest self? An^ have thou no regard to the
Glorious and sweets ^f Life? Is that Holy Fire, that devours its own Altar? And
call^st thou that Zeal that hurls thee into nothing, and temps thee to an
Annihilation? Is Death so d^sireable? and such a Death as will gratify thine
Enemies too? Whose M^lice will Feast it self on thy Ruins, with greater Luxury
than the Lions Banqu^t on thy Flesh? What is this but to Execute the Plot
against thine own Life, which they cannot p^rf^ct without thee? and will thy
God thank thee for destroying thy self, and throwing ^way thy life for ^
Nicety, the Ceremony an^ Cark^^ of Devotion, which his Grace is so r^ady to
disp^nce with, an^ for so little ^ time as a M^nth too? Is he not the Father of
Spirits, and regards more the Orator^ of a sigh than all the lusciou^ Expr
ssions of the Lips? Vn^erst^nds he not the Language of the Soul, ^n^ heark^ns
to the very desires of the Humble? May thou not Offer up the pur^r Sacrifice
from the s^cret Altar of a Flaming (...), and be safe? What an advantage have
thou to (...) the Conspiracy by a Mental* Devotion, an^ to Countermine the
Villa^^^s of their Cursed Policy by looking up thy Soul in its self?

Ah no! The brave Vot^ry s^orns to compound with his God for his Life, Spirit
prevails.
nor will save himself by so much as Latching the Door of his Lips; he will not
^ti^le the vent of his Soul, tho it self were sure to fly through it: He will
glorify God with his speech, tho he speak himself into Air; he will not
di^figure the Body of his Duty, to save his own from mangling; and would rather
the Lions should open their Mouths to swallow him, than he by shutting up his,
to ^mprison his Zealand Affections. He resolve^ that his Mouth shall Confess
unto God (and the World) that his Heart believ^th unto Salvation; and (while
his Enemies were watching) imagine this devout Supplicant thus pouring out his
Soul unto God.

The Prayer.
GOD of my Soul and of my B^ing, the Glorious Ieho^^h that (...)
everlastingness, and hum^l^st thy self to b^^old the things that are in Heaven
and Earth -- ^ear and have mercy. Thou art God alone, and besides thee there is
none else: What is this Darius, whom these m^n have blasphemously Ex^ulted to
Rob thee of thy Glory and Worship, and (...) a God of him that cannot help,
that cannot save ^^rs^lf or others -- O Pardon their Sin. And this they (...)
done with d^sign to Rob me too, of this Glorious Liberty of Access to thee my
God, who art the very Life ^f my Soul, and whose loving kindness is better than
Life, (...) without whom Life is none at all. They would shut (...) from thy
Presence, but do not thou; Op^n the Door (...) thy Grace and my Soul, that I
may fly unto thee; and (...) [these] these mine Enemies lie in wait for my
(...); yet let me Praise thee with joyful Lips, and Serve (...) without fear.
What, though they have decreed to (...) away my life, are not my Times in thy
hand? and without thee sh^^^ ^ot fall an hair from my Head. O (...) me a Faith
beyond my Fear, and a Courage beyond (...) Malice, that I may dye rather than
disown thee; (...) D^voting my self a Sacrifice to thy Glory, may (...) all the
World know that thou Lord, art the only God (...) the Souls of thy Servan^s who
put their (...). R^deem thy Church and People --

(...) Noise interrupt^ him: The (...) cry out amain, The (...).
(...) Traitor a^ai^st our (...) and his (...), away with him to the Lyo^s,
Darius ^^^s^lf cannot sav^ hi^.

Th^se, we may su^pose, were the Evide^ to Swe^r against him* who could safely
(...) (without fear of Perjury) that they h^ making his Petitions to the God of
Heaven, and so breaki^g the Decree.)

And now ha^ the Plot taken effect, the Inno^ent man falls by the Councils of
the Wicked: (...) art thou O Lord, yet le^ me talk with th^e of (...):
Wher^fore does the (...) of the Wicked prosper? Wher^fore are ^hey happ^ (...)?
Jer. 12.1. So foolish was I and ignorant -- Surely thou did set them in
slippery (...), thou cast est them down in^o (...) are they brou^ht into
D^sol^^ion as in a (...) wi^h Terrors, P ^l. 73.1^, 19.22.

Now may you see them troop together with j^y and speed to Darius Court, where
they subti^^y r^pe^t the Co^^ent^ of the Law to the King, with a Cursed P^licy
of d^signing to oblige him to a sacred and inviolable observance of his own
E^ict, e're ever they discover the Transgressor, who (they knew) was so dear to
him, that (for hi^ sak^) he might have strai^'d hi^ Prerogative unto the length
of a Pa^don, (i^po^^^ble.) But having once obliged him by the honor of his
Royal word to confirm the decr^e, then they presume to produce the Indictment
and thus A^^res^:

O King Live for Ever.
THat Dani^l who pretends so much Love an^ Loyal^y to thy Royal Person, so much
Vene^^tion an^ respect to all thy Laws, (...), he is the (...) Ung^^t^ful man
that he is, whom (...) of (...) thou have (...) whose very weight (...) in hi^
Loy^lty (...) th^^ ^he su^limity (...) into fo^ly too; he (...) other Go^, as
if ^^ou O King went not (...) enough for him, who have been so kind and Royal
to him. Never has the large^se of Princely Bounty (...) unluckily mi^carried by
ing^atitude and Treachery, which dares be so insolent to give so pernicious an
Ex^mple of first Violating that Law, which he should have valued infinit^ly
dearer than his Life, and rather than have prostituted it to (...) Co^^empt,
should have (...) the warm^st Blood of hi^ Heart to it^ Glory.

We pray therefore that he may (Suffer the Pains and Penalties of the
Irrevoca^^^ Decree he has so Prophan^ly despis^d, may r^ceive the just
R^comp^^se of his h^ughty R^bellion and Pride.) -- Be thrown to the Lions.

Now is the King almost dead, with sorrow, the fatal News m^re wounds his Royal
Heart than the P^i^oners: The King himself suffers in this Plot, and is
persecuted in the Captive; and now is basely betrayed to sign the Decree, which
Seals his own vexation and trouble: For it is they, and not Daniel* were guilty
of the Treason against his Royal tranquillity and peace.

Unhappy Dani^l! to b^ so loved and so hated! so pa sionately loved by Darius,
so universally (...) by his Nobles. Here^^ not one of all the Peers h^s a pity
for thee, they joy^^ly address for thy (...) Executi^n; ( N^min^
Co^tradicent^.) The King, singly demures, and while he does so, they
imp^tientl^ ad^r^ss a second time, (and had not so ^^^^^erously (...) hithe^to.
now to (...) their Plot to perish in ^m^rio.) (...) makes them fo^^^et good
mann^rs, they (...) and uncourly* (...) O Ki^^, that the L^w^ the (...) and
(...) it, that no Decr^e nor (...) which the King (...), v. 15. q. (...) We
have (...) a B^y, (...) Re^el may no^ be pardoned, the Laws of t^y Kingdom will
not bear it, tho thou would; therefore in vain do thou labor to ^eliver
him, for dye he must and shall.

But now met^^nks how do I see the great Darius hugging him in his A^ms; whilst
he beholding him (as he fears) with his last Eyes, breaths out his very Heart
to him in such dear Expressions as these?

Daniel, my dearest Dani^l, the brightest Star that ever illustrated a Princes
Court; the faithfullest Servant that ever blessed a Master; the very Glory and
Flow^r of my Kingdom and Palace, who art passing up into those more glorious
Mansions, where only dwell such Spirits* as thine. Thou wi^t no more envy the
toys of Regality, nor need the aerie Honors of an Earthly Palace; I am
distre^sed for thee my dearest Daniel; how willingly could I uncloath my self
from these vain Badges of Majesty to pass into Spirit with thee? But ^tay, may
not thy God meet thee in the Den, as (I have heard) Sha^rach's did him in the
Furnace; and methinks I have Faith to believe he will; and least thine Enemies
should think so too, and send in Russians more cruel than the Beasts to destroy
thee, my care shall obviate that danger* while I Seal thee up under the
Protection of Heaven and thy God.

How stately passes the Captive (...) the Den, He passes to the Den.
richl^ laden with the Troph^^^ of his Princes affections, and the graces of
his God! He leaves nothing behind him, th^^ he should take to Heaven with him,
but the thought ^f Revenge.

A Dialogical Discourse between Adonibezeck, and one of the 60 Kings he
tormented and kept under his Table: The Discourse supposed to be in the other
World.
The Argument.
The mighty King, the Tyrant, whose delight
In tortures was; who sixty Kings, in spite
Of Regal Power that did their Brows adorn,
Maimed, and beneath his Table kept in scorn,
Is in like manner served: so fares it still,
With those that seek their fellow Creatures ill.
(...). HOw now great Monarch! by what fatal chance
(...) you from lights of splendid pomp advance
(...) these dull Regions? how cut off by death
(...) you the sternest Tyrant of the Earth,
(...) midst of all your Glories lose your breath.

^don. Torment me not in asking how I fell,
^ow the Fates durst my Ambition Quell.

^ing. Know you not who I am? know you not me.


^don. I know too well the dreadful shape I see;
^^ke it from mine Eyes, I would not know,
^wou'd be known in these sad times of woe.

^ing. Yet pittyless you durst our patience prove,
(...) could our Tears, nor Groans your Mercy move.

^don. It Is true, they could not, but I thought me then
(...) the blasting Fate of Vulgar men.
(...) made me seem in heights to fly
(...) the reach of frail Mortality.

^^ng. So we once thought, yet all we urged was vain,
^ou'd our Sighs, when fallen, ease our pain.

Adon. You were my Captives, by fierce war so made*
Your Countrey's mine, by me in Ashes laid.

King. It Is true, yet pity in a Monarch's Breast
Renowns him more, pity to those oppressed,
A God-like nature in Mankind creates,
And Envy's Keen-soul piercing Shaft Rebates.

Adon. But then Compassion knew not my Abode,
Revenge and Fury waited on my Nodd,
My will was then my law, Death marked my Frowns
On wh^m they bent, there he bestowed his wounds.

King. Yet now too plain you see, the God whose Eyes
Into the darkest of Man's Secrets pryes,
Has found you out, and by his chosen Seed,
Now made the Proud Adonibezeck bleed.

Adon. It Is to my Shame, and sad Confusion know^
As I have done, to me so be it done;
In a base servitude a M^narch died,
Maimed as he maimed, Crush't as he crush't the pride
Of daring Mortals whom he made to stoop,
E're they his Towering Cedar could o're-top.

King. Just is thy plague, thy punishment is com^
And we with joy, behold thy juster doom?
So fares it with all those that pityless
Afflict their Brethr'n when in most distress;
Who proudly triumph over those they may,
And make a sport of them they make their Prey
So may it fare with Tyrants, so with those,
Whose Breast no mercy, but fell rage Enclose,

Adon. My guilty Conscience wounds me, Let that
Revenge enough, no more then torture me.

King. Still, still, I Will haunt you, since the (...) decree
Your Fortune equal in our Misery.

Adon. I Will shun you then; my Soul no more can (...)


King. Yet you unmoved our sad laments could (...)


Adon. It Is true, I did, and scoffed at all your (...)
^lutting with your hard Fates my well pleased eyes.

King. Then what can you expect, but to endure
Our hate and scorn, who could your self enure
^n pr^sperous days, to naught but cruelty.

Adon. That I Will prevent, for with swift wings I Will fly
To dismal shades of Night, beyond your reach.

King. In vain's such flight, your Walls cannot now Impeach
Our following fury; now your Guards are gone
No power to torture's left; Death has undone
The knot of power, and now like us you are,
Like us who vow with you perpetual War.

Adon. Spare, spare me, I repent my wicked deeds;
^y Rage is lost, my Heart now melts and bleeds;
^our want of power this feigned repentance breeds.

King. No, we'll pursue you through the Gloomy Coasts.
and tell your Story to the well pleased Ghosts.
^ho laughing loud shall join with us in Mirth*
^o plague you, as you plagued us on Earth.

Adon. O wretched me? how woeful is my case,
^ho find in Life nor Death no resting place;
(...) Earth I was to Jacob's Sons betrayed
and here the Scorn of once my Slaves I Am made.
therefore by me let Tyrants warning take,
^^st they are scorned by those, their scorn they make.

A Dialogue between Jael and Sisera.
The Argument.
Sisera routed, flys to Jael's Tent
And's Introduced with a Complement;
But sleeping, a sharp Nail his Temples wound;
Till he his Death in that low Lodging found.
^^el. Ha -- who is this? that thus with hasty steps makes to my poor Abode; If
I mi^^ not, it is the Warrior that has troubled Israe^ yes, yes, it is Sisera.
-- Speak, speak my Lord, why come you thus alone? where, where are all the
mighty Captains that were wont to wait upon you, marking your Frowns and Smiles
as sure portents of Life and Death; the Signals of the Nations Peace, or dire
Calamity.


Sisera. Alas! Alas! The God of Jacob has prevailed, and they are no more; the
Battle has devoured them, and their slaughtered Carcasses ly scattered on the
Plains of Israel.


I. How! is the mighty Jabins Army overthrown.


Sisera. It is, and still the danger is too near to admit of time to tell the
dreadful ruin; for the well fleshed Foe besmeared with blood and slaughter,
hastily pursue; O had you seen the fearful havoc Barak's Sword has made; how
wheeling with a swift reverse it mowed down Ranks of men? You would have
trembled.


Iael. My Lord, I tremble at the thoughts of his wide wasting fury; but see the
Enemies upon the Mountain-tops.


Sisera. It Is true, -- With speedy steps they hitherward advance, Now! now! My
life is in your hands, secure me from their fury by denial, and stay my thirst
with water, and I Will largely recompense your care.


Iael. Doubt not, my Lord, of safety in my Tent; -- Here, here, Drink, drink
thou mighty Man of War, drink what my homely Tent affords.


Sisera. It Is Nectar most delicious, and has much refreshed my weary Soul; --
But I Will repose, and leave my safety to your conduct.


Iael. This covering my Lord; -- Ha? -- wha^ a sudden drowsiness has seized
the Man of blood -- Why can it be that he can securely snore, when Death is
hovering round him -- Now, now is the time to be revenged for all the slaughter
he ha^ caused; for all the Widows and sad Orpha^^ tears, burnt Towns,
deflowred Virgins, ravish'^ Matrons, and the bleeding Wombs, whence gasping
Infants by rude hands were torn: Heaven prompt my Zeal to act the Tragedy. This
sharp Instrument well fits my purpose; and now to free my Country from his
future rage. -- Thus -- thus I seal his Eyelids with eternal slumber. -- The
deed is done; convulsive Death now triumphs over him, whose breath has doomed
so many thousands to the Grave: unfear'd he lies, whose name was wont to make
the Sons of Ia^ob tremble, and at whose approach the well fenced Towns were
slighted, whilst for safety the Amazed Inhabitants lurked in the Caves and
solitary Wildernesses.


Conclusion.
The mighty Sisera slain, glad Jael meets
The conquering Captain and his death relates,
Which joys the Israelites, and makes them sing
For their deliverance to the Eternal King;
Who grants them Peace and Plenty many days
And chears them with the brightness of His rays
Ruth. 1. Verse. 16, 17. And Ruth answered; entreat me not to leave thee, ^or
to depart from thee; for whether thou go I will go, and where thou dwell
there will I dwell: thy People ^all be my People, and thy God my God. Verse.
17. ^here thou dyest will I dye, and there I will be buried; ^e Lord do so to
me, and more also, if ought but death ^a^ thee and me.


Here we have the resolution of Ruth portray'd (...) lively colors: so that if
we consider her Sex, (...) Woman, her Nation a Moabite; we may boldly ^^onounce
of her what our Savior did of the Cen^^rion, Verily I say unto you, I have not
found so great ^aith, no, not in Israel.

Entreat me not t^ le^ve thee. Some read i^, be not (...) against me, as it is
in the ^^rgen of the ne^ Translation Where we see that t^^se ar^ ^o be
accounted our adv^rsar^es and against us, who pers^^^d^ us fr^^ our vo^a^^ to
Cana^^, from going to Go^s true Religion. They may be ou^ Fath^rs, they cannon
b^ our ^rien^s; though they promise us all outwa^d Profits and (...) yet in
very deed they are ^or with us, but against us, and so must be acco^^^ed.

Where thou L^dgest, I will lod^e. A good Companion says the L^tine Proverb,
i^ proviati^^. I may add also p^^ diverse ri^. Ruth, s^ be it she may enjoy
Naomie's graci^^^ company, wi^^ be content with any lodging, though happily it
may be no better than Jacob had, Genesis 28.

Thy People shall be my People, Haman being offended with Mordicai, as if it
ha^ been lean and weak revenge to spit his spite upon one person, hated all
the Jews for Mordicai's sake the mad Bear stung with one Be, would nee^ throw
down the whole Hive. But clean contrar^ Naomi had so graciously demeaned her
self, the Ruth for her sake is fallen in love with all the Jew^ Farewell M^ch^n,
farewell Chemosh, farewell (...) Welcome Israel* welcome Canaan, welcome
Be^^lehe^; all of a sudden she will turn Convert, (...) will turn Proselite.

Thy God shall be my God. Iehos^phat when he joined wi^h Aha^. 1 King. (...)
said unto him, my People is as thy People, (...) H^rses are as thy H^^ses,
(that is) he would com^ with him in a politic League, but Ruth goes ^^^ther to
an unity in Religion, Thy God shall be (...) God.

Where thou dyest will I die. Here Ruth supposes two things, that she (...) her
mother in law should both dye. It is appio^^ once to die. Secondly, That Naomi
as the eldest, should die first: for according to the ordinary custom of Nature,
it is the most probable and likely, that those that are most stricken in years,
should first depart this Life. Yet I know not whether the Rule or Exceptions be
more general; and therefore let both Young and Old prepare for Death, the first
may die soon, but the second cannot live long.

And there will I be buried. Where she supposed two things more, first, that
those that survived her, would do her that favor to bury her, which is a
common courtesy, not to be denied to any: It was an Epitaph written upon the
Grave of a Beggar, Nudas eram vivus, mortuus ecce tegor. 2 ly. She supposes
they would bury her, according to her instructions, near to her Mother Naomi.

Observation.
As it is good to enjoy the company of the Godly while they are living, so it
is not amiss, if it will stand with convenience to be buried with them after
death: The old Prophets bones escaped a bur^ing by being buried with the other
Prophets, and the Man who was tumbled into the grave of Elisha, was revived by
the virtue of his Bones. And we read in the Acts and Monuments, That the body
of Peter Martyr's wife was buried in a dunghill, but afterward being taken up
in the Reign of Q. Elizabeth, it was honorably buried in Oxford, in the Grave
of one Frideswick, a Popish-the-Saint; to this end, that if Popery, which God
forbid, should overspread our Kingdom again, and if the Papists should go
about to untomb Peter Martyrs Wifes Bones, they should be puzzled to
distinguish betwixt the Woman's body and the Relics of that their Saint, so,
good it is sometimes to be buried with those who some do account pious; though
perchance in very deed they be not so.

The Lord do so to me and more also. To ascertain Naomi of the seriousness of
her intentions herein, Ruth backs what formerly she had said, with an Oath,
lined with an execration.

If ought but Death See here the large extent of a Saints love, it lasts till
Death, and no wonder, for it is not founded upon Honor, Beauty, Wealth, or any
other sinister respect in the party beloved, which is subject to Age or
Mutability, but only on the Grace and Piety in him; which Foundation because it
always lasts, the love which is built upon it, is also perpetual.

Part thee and me. Death is that which parts one Friend from another; Then
the dear Father must part with his dutiful Child, then the dutiful Child must
forget his dear Father, then the kind Husband must leave his constant Wife,
then the constant Wife must los^ her kind Husband, then the careful Master must
be sundred from his industrious Servant, then the industrious Servant must be
sundred from his careful Master. Yet this may be some comfort to those, whose
Friends death has taken away; that as our Savior said to his Disciples. Yet a
little while, and ^ou shall not see me, and yet a little while, and you shall
see me again. So yet a little while, and we shall no^ see our Friends; and yet
a little while, and we shall see them again in the Kingdom of Heaven, for, n^^
mi^^umur, sed pr^mittumur, we do not foregoe them, but they go before us.

A Dialogue between Naomi and Ruth.
Argument.
Kind Ruth, her Husband dead, to Naomi
D^'s cleave, resolving so to live and die;
In all adversity she makes a Vow
To follow her, and her kind Aid allow:
To prop her Aged years, when kindly she
Accepts of her dear Daughters company.
Naomi. See thou not that Orpah thy Sister has left me, and is again
returned to her People; why should thou then remain, since Heaven's Eternal
King has taken to himself Chilion, the dear. Pledge of your tender Love? there
live happy, since all hopes are vanished, that from my aged Womb more Sons
should spring.


Ruth. Have I not lived with you these many years, even when wall-breaking
Famine bared the sunburned Fields, and Men as well as Beasts (by thousands)
fell, to fat the Bosom of our Common Mother.


Naomi. It Is true you have; but then Heavens plenteous hand showred blessings
on me; then my Husband and my careful Sons drew breath. But now. --


Ruth. Now -- why -- Can you once imagine that want can cause my love to wast,
no, for your own, and my dead Chilions sake, I Will love you still, and render
you ^he Duty that becomes a Daughter in Law.


Naomi. Thy tender years can never undergo the ^ardship that poor wandering
Na^mi may meet with (...) she can be settled in the place where first she ^rew
her Breath; therefore consider, and whilst ^ou are in Moabs borders, think of
the plenty that ^bounds in your own indulgent Mothers Womb.


Ruth. I have already cast the business in my Mind, and am resolved, that
Winters chilling Storms, nor Summers scorching beat attended with the sharp
Contests of poverty and pining want, shall never part us; Death it self in all
his dismal shapes is not of force to shake my fixed determination.


Naomi. You yet are young, and have not strugled with Misfortunes, nor
contended with the world, and therefore know not of what force they are;
consider how belated Naomi (in her long Journey) must be often forced to make
the Ground her Bed; and underneath some spreading Tree lie stretched: Exposed
to all the injuries of weather, whilst soft sleep flys from her careful Breast,
and she with sighs and groans is forced to wound the murmuring Air.


Ruth. If upon some bleak Mountains top, whose covering is Snow and Globes of
Solid Ice, where Winters lasting Tyranny still Reigns, you should be forced
(...) make your Bed, I Would there repose: This Arm should be your Pillow, whilst
your Daughter, your obedie^^ Ruth froze to your side.


Naomi. Could you do this -- Yet think again, and well consider, that old Age
comes fast on me, and I shall soon be summoned to the Grave; where you being
left a stranger in the Land of Israel; and far from your Relations; meet with
much contempt and scorn from the proud Daughters of the Land. Then will be the
time of your repentance, the^ you will blame that ill starr'd day you left your
Country and your Friends for the sad company of wretched Naomi.


Ruth. Let that not trouble my dear Adopted Mother; for when unf^iendly Death
with his cold Icy hand, shall grasp your Life, I Will mourn much like a Widow
Turtle, till in floods of swelling Grief I Am wasted to Eternity; and then our
bodies shall not be disjoined; but in (...) Grave we'll lie, till our returning
Souls shall wake (...) drowsy courses; and hand in hand we take our way to
Heaven.


Naomi. Can there be such constant Faith in Woman? O thou glory of our Sex! let
me embrace thee. Thus whilst my poor heart o'reflows with Joy, O thou dear
recompense of all my toils; who make amends forHusband and for Sons loss; may
Heavens Favors shour upon your Head, and you be blessed in all you undertake.


Ruth. Your kind Expressions are too large a retribution for what I have
resolved; but see the Morning Dawn salutes the World: let us lose no time, but
strait begin our Journey to the wished Bethlehem of Juda.


Naomi. Be it as you have said, my only Comfort and blessed Solace of my age.


Conclusion.
Thus setting forth, they unto Bethlehem came,
Where Naomi desired to change her Name,
As grieved at her great loss; but in the end
Rich Boaz weds Ruth, and soon becomes her Friend.
Ruth Soon grows fruitful, and from her does spring
The Lineal Rank, good David, Isreal's King.
Dagons Fall before the Ark.
The Sins of Israel growing great, Gods rage
Was bent against his Chosen Heritage,
Old Ely's Sons polluting holy things,
And with vile Hands disdain the Offerings.
The Lord of Hosts convenes the Heathen Powers
To batter down aspiring Jacobs Towers.
Before their Swords the routed Hebrews fly,
And fill the Hills and Valleys with their cry.
The wicked Seed of the High Priest are s^ain,
And the tremendous Ark it self is taken.
In which the Mighty God was pleased to dwell,
Before whose wrath so many Nations fell
And now the bold insulting Foe, as proud
Of such a Trophie, bare it shouting loud,
To the base Temple of their false feigned God,
Composed of Gems of Gold and precious wood;
A stock inspired by an Infernal Fiend,
On whom they durst in Peace and War depend;
Ascribing to his power the great success
Of their weak Arms, and joyful words express,
When lo! the fearful Fiend with hideous cries,
From his adored Idol swiftly flies;
Not daring view that Face which brightness shrouds
The God whose Thunder rends the Marble clouds:
Who grasps the Poles, and turns the Spears about,
Whose Eyes survey the Universe throughout;
Whose Anger kindled is so deadly great,
That Hell it self from it would fain retreat.
Had not strict Fate fast fixed it in it is place,
With whom alone the Righteous can find Grace.
And now forsaken Dagon, wreft of voice,
No answer gives, from it proceeds no noise,
In vain his Priests enquire of Future things,
In vain the Prince his cur'st Oblation brings.
Deluding Satan bears perforce the shame,
And though aloud they call on Dagons Name,
Yet dares not the fate babbling Demon come,
Least he before his time receive his doom;
And with linked Thunderbolts be driven back,
Or sunk fast chained into the flaming Lake:
But whilst they rend their Threats, their wooden God,
Begins to totter and most strangely nod;
Whereat affrighted the rude Rout recoil;
When down at last upon his Face he fell.
Yet up the foolish People rear again
Their shame and folly, yet it is but in vain;
For e're the Sun reviewed their wicked Coast,
The helpless Stock his Head and Hands had lost:
Whilst fearful Plagues his Worshipers dismay,
Who gladly send the holy Ark away;
Not daring keep what eagerly they sought,
Lest all their Land be to destruction brought.
On Dagon and the Ark.
What news with Dagon? Is thy shrine so hot,
Thou can not keep it? or has Dagon got
The falling sickness, that his godship's found.
In such a posture, prostrate on the ground?
Poor helpless god! but stay! Is Dagon grown
So weak in the, hams: nor stand, nor rise alone?
A god, and cannot rise? It Is very odd!
He must have help, or lie: A proper god!
Well, Dagon must require help of hands;
Up Dagon goes the second time, and stands
As confident, as though his place had bin
His own, in Fee: down Dagon falls again:
But Dagon's shrewdly martyred with the jump,
Lost Hands, and Head; and nothing left but stump:
Sure all is not well with Dagon, now of late
He Is either sick, or much forgot the State
Belonging to so great a God: has none
Offered some stinking Sacrifice, or blown
Some nauseous fume into his sacred Nose.
And made his Godship dizzy? or who knows,
Perchance h'as taken pet, and will resign
His sullen place, and quit his empty shrine.
No wonder, a false God should stoop and lie
Upon the flour, when as a true God's by?
It was unlikely Dagon should forbear
Respite of Homage when the Ark was there;
If I would worship a false God at all,
It should be one that would not scorn to fall
Before his Betters; whose indifferent Arm,
If it could do no good, could do no harm:
I Would rather choose to bend my idle knee,
Of all false Gods, to such a god as he,
Whose spirit's not too quick: The Fabulous Frog
Found greater danger in the Stork than Log:
And to conclude, I Would choose him Dagon like;
Not having Head to plot; nor Hands to strike.
Saul chosen King.
THe murmuring people, who Gods Wonders saw,
And Glorious presence when he gave the Law.
In Peals of Thunder on the dreadful Mount,
Themselves unhappy in his Rule account;
And like their Neighbor Nations, ask a King,
That may their Armies out to battle bring.
To which the Mighty God, though grieved, consents,
Yet lets them know the sad and dire events
Of their sad wish; tells what their King shall do,
And that too late repentance would ensue,
Which to headstrong Israel proved too true;
But long they are not debarred of their desire,
^ood Samuel marks them out what they require,
Confirming* after many signs, the Son
Of Aged Kish, a Benjamite, well known
By his huge Stature, who for many years
The Helm of Jacobs mighty Empire steers,
But not regarding who the Scepter Gave,
The Scepter giver does the Monarch leave:
Who long disparing, did in Jacob dwell,
Till by his Sword on Gilboa he fell,
And scattered Israel felt the rage of those,
Who ever vowed themselves their mortal Foes.
On Saul and David.
SUre Saul as little looked to be a King,
As I: and David dreamed of such a thing
A^ much as he, when both alike did keep,
The one his Father's Asses, the other Sheep:
Saul must forsake his Whip, and David flings
His Crook aside, and they must both be Kings.
Saul had no sword, and David then no spear,
There was none Conquered, nor no Conqueror there,
There was no sweat, there was no blood to shed:
The unsought Crown besought the Wearers head,
There was no stratagem, no Opposition
No taking parts, no jealous Competition.
There needs no Art, there needs no Sword t^ bring,
And place the Crown, where God appoints the King.
A Dialogue between Agag and Samuel.
The Argument.
Saul having spared the proud Amalekite,
Samuel is grieved, and when the Pagan quite
Had banished fear of Death, to Death ^e's giv^^*
In order to appease offended Heaven.
Agag. WWhat means the Prophet with (...) stern Aspect to gaze upon a Monarch^
misery, suffices it not that my slaughter^d People ^at the Plains with streams
of blood, and that my burning Citys cloud the Lamp of Heaven with ascending
smoke.


Samuel. No haughty man, it is not enough; the (...) of Jacob is displeased with
such small Vengeance.


Agag. Then try to turn away his wrath with S^^crifice, let ten thousand Altars
blaze with fat (...) Bulls and Rams, the spoil that once belonged to Amaleks
now fallen Sons.


Saul. In vain thou urgest such ab^mination, such Sacrifices would be odious in
the Nostrils of that God Who dwells between the Cherubims, whose f^erc^ wrath
can be appeased with no less Sacrifice than thy cursed Life.


Agag. Ha -- my life -- why sure the fear of death is past now, know you not
that your King has promised Life.


Sa. I know him, who in sparing you and your unlawful Spoils has made himself a
Rebel to the King of Kings.


Agag. Yet he is your Lord, and ought to be obeyed, to him I appeal, to him, who
has already signed my pardon.


Samuel. In vain are all Appeals to Mortal Man, when God, the mighty God, in
whose strong Hands is all the Breath of Life; has doomed you dead.


Agag. How -- doomed me dead! O name not such another fatal Word -- Spare,
spare my Life, and all the Treasures I have hid* when first the Rumor of the
dreadful War alarmed my affrighted coast are ^t your service.


Samuel. Your Treasure perish with you; not all the (...) of the Universe shall
rescue you from Death.


Agag. O draw not, draw not in this rage your (...) Sword! Consider I am a Man,
a Father, (...) ^onarch; See thou not what Robes of (...) adorn me? see
thou not this awful Circle (...) over with Gems: This Scepter, at whose wave
the Princes cring'd, and kissed the dust; see not him, to whom a thousand
knees were wont to ^end; him on whose Breath, depends Life and Death, now
prostrate on the ground, imploring (...) for himself.


Samuel. All this I see, and as far as humane fr ail^^ can bear sway, am moved;
yet must not, dare not, (...) not disobey my God.


Agag. O! consider once again, that my Mother (...) a Queen in distant Lands; O
think what grief will be to her to hear her only Son is slain.


Samuel. In vain is all you urge, and this last ^aying whets my Anger more,
when I consider how your blood-bedaubed Hands have made the Nations mourn; how
your destroying Sword has raised the Widows cries and tender Infants sighs;
lo! the many slaughters you have made in Jacob's borders, rendered thousands
c^ildless; wherefore the self same Fate be on the Womb that bare you, whilst
thus -- thus -- I execute Gods wrath on thy pernicious Head.


Agag. Oh -- Oh -- I Am slain -- I Am slain? I that have escaped a thousand deaths
in battle, tamely fall a Victim to the Zealous Fury of an enraged Prophet.


Samuel. Thus what Saul left undone, my aged hand finished, and atton'd for
Jacobs Land.


A Dialogue between David, Saul, and Goliath, upon their Encounter.
The Argument.
David Anointed King of Jacobs Seed,
Hastes to the Camp of Saul, with swiftest speed,
And undertakes to fight the mighty Foe,
Who with proud boasting, forty days durst show
His monstrous Bulk; defying Isreal's Host;
But David with a sling soon quells his Boast.
Saul. SPeak, speak young Stripling, is it as my Captain has related, dare
thou, that art but a Youth, Expose thy self against this Monster that defies my
Host.


David. My Lord, I dare, though not presuming on the Arm of flesh, but totally
relying on the Living God, who has delivered me from the devouring Rage of
(...) and of Bears; nor dare I now doubt the assistance of his power to b^ing
low the haughty Pride of this bold Philistine that has defied tbe Armies of the
living God.


Saul. Bold is your Spirit, and your courage brave, the two first steps to
Glorious Actions shine in you, but yet consider, he is a man of War, mighty in
strength, and dreaded by the most ^edoubted Captain of the Israelites.


David. Great King. did I rely on my own strength, I must confess his monstrous
shape might dash my resolution, but his strength, on whom the high success
depends, is capable by meanest things, to quell the mighty, and bring low all
strength and power: with him there is naught impossible.


Saul. Spoke like a Champion worthy to subdue the world; A Champion on whose
Head your King will stake the Di^dem of Israel, -- my Armor there -- so, put
it on, and gird your self in Walls of shining Steel, to fit you for the danger.


David. Alas my Lord, it needs not, for with these few stones I Will quell your
Foe, and make him kiss the the humble Plain.


Saul. Braver in bold resolutions still -- Well go thou worthy, and be
prosperous; may the bright Minister of Heaven protect you from his rage, and
make him fall before you.


David. All thanks great King, and may the God Jacob prosper you; while thus
your Servant posteth to assured Victory. David and Goliath come near each other.

Ha -- ha -- ha -- how am I moved to laughter, when I think the King of Israel
in forty days could find no fitter man than this to fight me, sure this unarmed
Stripling is but sent to mock me as imagining when he has teized me with some
Railery, to run away, and escape my following fury by reason of my heavy Armor.


David. Why laughs the Monstrous Philistine? why with wide Iaws dare he disdain
my youth? knew I no other God than Moloch, and accursed Dagon, I should not
come resolved to the Combat.


Gol. How! to the Combat; Know thou with whom, poor youth, thou art to
fight? Have thou not heard of the sad Slaughters I have made? how this
powerful hand has broke through the affrighted Squadrons of the Foe, and mowed
with Whirlwinds Fury on each side, cutting through Groves of Spears, a bloody
way to Victory, till h^^ps of slain have ^ali'd me in; and think thou with a
Staff to drive me hence? May Moloch and great Dag^^ blast thy foolish thoughts.


Dav. Not all the bloody deeds thou have done, can fright the Son of Jesse, n^r
once dismay the Man that h^t avowed to vi^ oppressed Israel of so great a curb,
that henceforth haughty man may not so boldly trust in Arms of Flesh.


Gol. Why hoverest thou then round me at this rate, and shunnest my fury, art
afraid to come within my reach? Come to me, and I will give thy Flesh to the
Fowls of the Air, and to the Beasts of the Field: Tear thee in ten thousand
pieces, and thy scattered Limbs set up as Trophies of my Victory in all the
Coasts of Israel, when this fatal Sword has made its Monarch stoop to the
Phili^^^nes yoke.


Dav. In vain are all thy unregarded Threats; A^though thou come to me with a
Sword, ^ Spear and Shield, and I to thee in the name of the Lord of Hosts, the
God of the Armies of Israel, whom thou have defied.


Gol. O how hot is my revenge! To what a height boils up my ragi^g Fury; O that
thou were this moment in my reach, how would I toss thee in the Air, and pash
thy falling Body on the Rocks.


Dav. I Will not be long e're I advance to t^y destruction; for this day will the
Lord deliver thee into mine hands; and I will smite thee, and take thine head
from thee; and I will give the Carcasses of the Philistines this day unto the
Fowls of the Air, and to the wild Beasts of the Earth, that all the Earth may
know there is a God in Israel; and all this Assembly shall know, that the Lord
saves not with Sword and Spear, and he will give it into our hands.


Gol. I Will not endure this longer, but chastize thy Insolence with flaming
Steel; whose very touch shall make thee fly in sunder.


Dav. Nor will I fail to meet your utmost fury; and thus I Will thunder on ^our
lofty Front, and bring you to the ground.


Gol. O horror! Death and Ruin; what dark Mist is this benights my Eyes? what
dreadful bolt on flaming Wings, thrown by some envious power, ^as thus
overthrown the great Goliath, and laid all his Trophies level with the dust.


Dav. Now Monster, now know there is a God in Israel; and as I promised, thus I
take thy head; -- It Is done -- done with the Sword thou threatenedst mine: And
thus I bear it to the King, taking thy Armor as my lawful prize.


Conclusion.
Goliath slain, the faint Philistines fly,
Whilst after them pursuing Israel cry;
And fearful slaughter rages every where,
The Sword no Mercy has, nor knows to spare,
Till all or most are slain: Then David's sought,
And to the King in glorious Triumph brought,
Declaring who it is, whilst Honor high,
Crowns him at last with Rays of Majesty.
On David and Goliath.
SAtan's the great Goliath, that so boasts
And threats our Israel, and defies her Hosts;
Those smoother stones courageous David took
From the soft bosom of the silver brook,
Are Scriptum ests: the Sling that gives them flight,
Is Faith; that makes them fly, and fly aright:
Lord, lend me David's sling, and then I know,
I shall have David's strength, and courage too:
Give me but skill to pick such stones as these,
And I will meet Goliath when he please.
A Dialogue between David and Michal.
The Argument.
David advanced, Saul envies his loud fame,
And fears his Glories, will Eclipse his name;
Wherefore fair Michal's given a snare to be
To him; She loves, but does not in it agree;
For when death hovered round his threatened head,
She cheats them with an Image in his stead.
Michal. MY Lord, I wonder you will expose your self at this rate, to my Fathers
rage; Know you not that he seeks your life?


David. Yet God, the God of Abraham, is able (...) defend me from his rage,
seeing I have done nothin^ that deserves his hate; but in the uprightness of my
heart go in and out before him.


M. Know you not, that I was given to you as a snare, to sound the secrets of
your heart, and to pry into your Councils.


D. I know it, my dear Love, my happiness, and all I prize on this side Heaven;
but dare not think that such virtue, tenderness, and innate goodness, can be
wrought upon to prove a Traytoress to him, that can admire nothing but the
eternal maker of the glorious Universe, above her.


M. I question not your love, but sure it is, my Father urges me continually to
lay open your secrets, that he may find occasion against your life; but
hitherto his threats and promises have proved ineffectual.


D. And ever will, I hope, my Joy. -- Nay, nay, I dare not doubt it; it were
sin once to mistrust your Virtue. It shall never sink into my thou^hts, that
Michal will betray her David.


M. And dare you trust to that, consider well, what glittering Gems, a Prince
in Marriage, and a Kingdom at command, may tempt me ^o consider I Am a Woman,
and that all the Sex is ^rail.


D. All this, and all the Splendid Pomp the haughtiest Monarch can bestow, I
have considered; yet cannot once Imagine they can move my Love to entertain so
base a thought.


M. Yet once more -- what if my Father should threaten me with Death and
torture if I disobeyed his lawful will; and if he finds me trifle with him;
rashly put in execution what he threats.


D. Nor can this make me once imagine, my dear happiness, that you would give
me to his Fury; though in this case I Would willingly meet his fierce wrath, when
high, to save my Love from such a danger: There is no Torment so outrageous,
that I would not with a smile embrace, look pleasantly on Death, and tamely bow
my head at your rough Fathers Feet, whilst his blood-thirsty Sword cut off my
days -- Thank the hand that took my Life for yours, and bless the King for
such a Favor with my dying breath.


Mi. Let me embrace my Lord, and let him be assured, that neither hopes of
Glory, Threats, nor promises, shall move me to betray him. Rather than I Will
prove false to him I love as Life, I Will undergo whatever witty Horror can
invent, be for ever banished from my Native Land, to live in lonely Deserts,
and dye comfortless in some dark pathless Wilderness; no, all I urged wa^, but
to try how much you valued me.


Da. O! you ravish me with too much joy; I was before confined, and now it is
doubly done: no more but to our Chambers, where the first fruits of our Love
were reaped, and there I will tell my Love how much I am transported.


Mi. I am obedien^, and with eager Eye^ feedding on your manly beauties, thus
cast the Daughter of a King into your Arms to lead her where you please.


Conclusion.
The happy Lo^ers scarce their Loves repeat,
When Readiness stern Guards a fierce Al^rum beat,
For David's head they come; but Michals Wit
Sends thence her Lord; and with this Counterfeit
Deludes the Captains, whereat Readiness enraged,
But by his Daughters feigned Tale's asswag'd.
A Dialogue between Jonathan and David.
The Argument.
The Son of Saul to David does express,
A Friendship great, nor does he prove it less.
Ion. WWhat fears my Brother David? wherefore shuns he me?


Da. You know, my Lord, that Men in danger ever dread, especially when they
suspect the danger near.


Ion. Why, what of danger; whence do these affrighting thoughts proceed? why is
the mighty Warrior thus disturbed.


Da. Know you not that your Father seeks my Life; and are not you ^is darling
Son.


Io. And does my presence create a fear in David?


Da. Let my Lord pardon when thus low I beg it? If I have some doubts that your
Commission is to bring me to your Fathers presence.


Io. Far be that thought from Iesse's valiant Son, whom I must chide for
wronging me in such A nature: O? can thou once Imagine that an Action so
ignoble can e're lurk within my breast? Can you suspect the Man (whose Soul
moves in sweet harmony with yours) can be so basely tretcherous, as to betray
his Friend,


Da. Forgive me, my rash fear, my Lord, and I Will not dare to fear again, I must
confess, your love to me has been so great, that I condemn my self for once so
much as harboring a suspicion, that you e're intended to harm me.


Io. Let this dear kind Embrace sign your free granted Pardon, and in Oblivions
darkest Land, let your hard censures ever rest.


Da. O boundless Love! how can I, how shall I deserve it! What recompense is
David capable to make that in the smallest measure can requite the Heir
Apparent to his Fathers Scepter -- thus low. --


Io. No more this cringing distance, but to my Arms: I know thy Innocence, and
will become a shield to save you from my Fathers wrath; through me, he makes
his way to David's Breast, if Fate decree his ruin.


D. O my dear Lord; You make me blush, and at the same time to weep for joy, to
hear what you express; such faith, such constancy, such boundless Love, was
never known from man to man before.


Io. Although I know you must succed my Father in his Throne, yet will not I
for Empire-sake, that by succession should descend to me; suffer my Love to
lessen.


Da. O! My Lord no more; I am confirmed that I am happy in so brave a Friend,
happy as Man can wish; and must make it still the business of my Life, to
recompense so great a favor.


Io. All I request is, that you would be kind to my Posterity, when Heaven
incircles your calm (...) with the bright Diadem of Israel.


Da. Whatever my dear Friend can wish, I Will do; nor shall there be ought
wanting in me to retaliate the kindness of my --


Io. I ask no more, nor will I dare to doubt your Generosity; but see the
Captains of my Fathers Host approach, which urges my departure; but ^'re long
I Will find a ^eans to meet my Friend, and tell him all my Fathers thoughts. Till
then, ten thousand blessings on your Head.


Da. All thanks to my Kind Lord; and may the God, whose Eyes survey the secrets
of each Heart, shower ^lessings on you, and make your Posterity flourish in the
Tents of Jacob.


Conclusion.
Jonathan goes to Court, and sounds the Heart
Of cruel Saul, which he does soon impart
To David, and advises him to ^^y: who after many Ramblings, fears to die
By Saul's dread hand, and does at Gath remain,
Till Readiness overthrown, and by his own Sword slain.
An Account of Solomon's Concubines with the number of his Wives.
^Ne does seldom begin wickedness at the top: Vices have their degrees as well
as Virtues; (...) at first began to grow cool in the worship ^he true God,
conversations with him were not often nor so pleasing, the pleasures of the
World (...) him, the delights of the Court charmed (...), actions that are so
free, soon become evil, (...) evil ones turn themselves into custom, and (...)
into habit; this Child of God saw the Daughters of men, these strange Beauties
which pricked him by their Novelty, he became a man, and made of them his
Goddesses. The Daughters of the Moabites, and of the Amorites, those of Egypt,
of Sidon, of Idumaea, and so many others, whereof God had forbidden him any
alliance, were the Idols of his Heart, after they had been the Plague and
Poison of his understanding. He which had pronounced so many excellent Parables
against Love, which had so many times advertised Youth, that the Lips of an
unchaste woman distilled honey at the beginning, but at the end they gave a
portion of Wormwood, was taken by the eyes, inchained with infinite
af^fections; his Love was pompous; his Luxury ^ sumptuous: he loved as much for
glory, as for co^^cupiscence, he would act the King in his unchastnes^ as
stately, as in the Furniture of his Temple. (...) had about seven hundred
Women, which were (...) Queens, and with that three hundred Concubine^ which is
according to the Scripture account, a tho^^sand wives, which he had shut in the
Seraglio, for the pleasure of his eyes and of his flesh, and of so man^ loves,
there is but one Son to be found, Rehobo^^ void of wisdom and understanding.
What (...) a Prince do among so many delights, so many ^^^lurements, so many
charms, and so many bewit^^ings! A Man is oft-times much hindered, by (...)
troublesome brain of one Woman only. What se^^^ous business could he then set
himsef to, that (...) them multiplied by hundreds? These strange ^^came each of
them with all the inventions of (...) Nation for to surprise him, there was one
(...) would gain him to her, another that would (...) him, another that would
draw him from one (...) another, even unto the bottom of Hell; It is (...) more
easy to become a fool with a woman tha^ make her wise; he had endeavored
perhaps to (...) them to his Religion, but they perverted (...) and drew him to
theirs. He took their loves, and afterward their behaviors, and at last their
Superstition.

Every one of these Women would bring her God into esteem: And thought not her
self to have any credit in her love, if she did not make her false Deity to
partake thereof.

THe great, the Wise, the Glorious Solomon,
For whom the Lord of Hosts so much had done,
By Woman's subtiltie's at last beguiled,
And with base Idols his great Heart's defiled:
Strange Women tempt the King to go astray,
To prove Ungrateful, daring disobey
The God of Jacob, whilst with Idols vain
Strange Wives his Kingdom (he conniving) strai^
Exalting false pretended helpless wood
In places sacred where Gods Altar stood;
^amn'd Ashtaroth, the curs^d Zidonians shame,
^ilcom the wicked Amorites chief blame;
With Chemosh dire by darkest fiends inspired,
and cruel Moloc who man's blood required.
^o whose dire Orgies horrid Sacrafice,
^ith clouds of smoke obscure the blushing Skies;
^hilst he well pleased, beholds the Rites profane,
^or which the Canaanites were sadly slain.
^he Heathen Women stupifie his Sense,
and with base charms drive sacred Wisdom thence.
^ven hundred Wives, three hundred Concubines
(...) State maintains; who with Philterick Wines,
^witch him still, and sway him as they ple^se,
^^eir lawless Laws a Monarchs reason seize;
which weakness in him makes Jehovah frown,
(...) raise up Foes to bring his glory down;
^hilst all the Tribes but Judah, from his Son
^olt, and straiten his Dominion.
^^^ares it still with those that dare rebel;
^^ainst the mighty God of Israel.
The disobedient Prophet slain by a Lion.
THe foolish Son of Solomon bereft
Of Isreal's Aid, no Tribe but Judah left,
The bold revolters Jeroboam chose
Their King and Captain to subdue their Foes:
But he damned Idols made, fixed bleating Gods
In Dan and Bethel; to whose cur'st Abodes
The mudding People soon a whoring went,
For whose restraint a Man from God was sent
To cry aloud, whose voice their Altar rent,
Poured out those Ashes, which as relicts vain
Of their unhallowed Sacrifice remain;
Which made the wicked Monarch storm and stretc^
His Sceptered hand, commanding some to catch
The Prophet, but the blood it soon forsook,
And every Joint was with such numbness struck,
That all in vain, he strugl'd to draw in
A Member guilty of so great a sin,
Till humbly he entreats, and is restored,
And kindest Entertainment would afford;
But that is rejected, and the Prophet flies
The guilty City; but the hasty Spies,
Sons to an old deluding Prophet, tell
What had in Jacobs Heritage befell:
Who soon o'retakes the loitering Seer, and the^
With feigned tales decoyes him back again
To taste forbidden food; but when dismissed
He meets his Fate, and vainly does resist
The rending Lions, Death's commissioned pa^^s,
And bloody Fury of his roaring Jaws;
Slain is he strait, but not devoured; so did
The Lord, whom all but Man obey and dread.
When soon the news was spread, when soon (...) known
On whom the Execution had been done;
Nor stays the Man who caused his hapless Fate
But to a Grave the Carkase does translate;
Commanding all his Sons, when Death possessed
His Aged Limbs, and life flew from his Breast,
To lay his Bones by his, affirming all
The Prophet said, should suddenly befall.
A Dialogue between Elijah and the Woman of Zarephath
The Argument.
The Raven fed Elijah, finding d^y
The Brook of Cherish, at Gods word does fly
To Zerephath, and near the Gate does find
A Widow, for whose kindness he proves kind,
Saving her Life by miracle, that done,
He shows Gods Power in raising her dead Son.
Eli. THis is the place, the happy place, appointed by the God of Israel to
give ^li^ah rest. And see, according to his word, the Widow, in whose House I
must sojourn till wastful ^amine destroys the Land, makes her retreat to those
vast D^sarts, where the scorching Sun forbids ^he falling showers.


Wid. Ha! What stranger is this, that hasts to our (...), wretched, half
starved City, whose faint inhabi^^^ts resemble Death's pale Image, and seem
rather ^andring shades, than Mortal substances.


Eli. Haste, haste, thou happy Woman, whom Heaven ordains to find refreshment
for a weary Travel^^r, have I say, and fetch me bread and water speedi^^ to
stay my fleeting Soul.


Wid. Alas Sir! As for bread, it is become so great (...), that scarce a
Morsel's to be found in this (...) City; Water indeed we have, yet that of late
is (...) over plenty.


Eli. Can it be that such a stately Pile, such lofty Edifices are so quickly
drained of that which is the Staff of Life.


W. Know you not Sir, that Meagre Famine, with dreadful howlings, terrifies the
Nation; tearing up with brazen Talents the long barren Soil, crushing with Iron
Teeth the hardest Flints, whilst all her Bones appear through her close
cleaving Skin; and her sunk Eyes and shrivled Dugs make her look frightful to
poor pining Mortals.


Eli. I know for sin, for dire heart hardening sin, the just i^censed Majesty of
Heaven has chased away the swelling Clouds, grown big with showers, whose
gentle distillation should assist kind Nature in performing her desired task,
and close the crannies of the yauning Earth; nor shall the cattaracts give rain
in years to come, so Jacobs God decrees.


Wid. If Earth deny her Fruits much longer, wh^ can live! since we already see
so many thousands gasping for a moments Life; and hear no other cries than what
proceed from sad necessity, whilst nothing that is unclean, is left unfed upon;
As for my self, all I have left, is but a handful of course meal, and a small
quantity of Oil, nay, and half that is my Sons to dress, which am gathering
these few sticks for, that we may eat an^ dye.


Eli. Dread not Death? since Heaven is carefu^ of your preservation; dress
instantly what now yo^ have, and still your store shall be continued.


Wid. It cannot be -- or if it do remain with (...) unconsumed a while, it soon
will wast, and then we have no more to eat, nor know we where to buy; for now
pur^ Gold and Silver, once a precious bane, is gladly give for the vilest
things, with which the worst of Creat^^^ heretofore were fed.


Eli. Dispute not what I bid, but do as I comman^ and live, dare you doubt that
ought's impossible wi^^ God, who sent me to preserve your life, whi^^ ^ll the
streets are paved with dead and dying wretches.


Wid. My Heart misgives me, and something as it were, does wisper me in my Ear,
that it is a Prophet; speak; therefore totally relying on your word, I Will
instantly make trial: If I live, I live, at the worst I can but die. -- Ha --
all I have taken out cannot be mist; the Cruse and the Barrel fill again by
Miracle.


Eli. And so they shall, till plenteous Harvest bends with Golden Ears the
feeble stalks, and Wine and Oil is every where abounding.


Wid. Blessed for ever be the Name of Isreal's God, Who has sent his Servant to
his Handmaid, to preserve her by ways unexpected, from a Death that could not
but by miracle have been prevented.


Eli. No more, but dress what is in thy hand whilst I revive, and render thanks
to his all glorious Name who has vouchsafed this favor.


Wid. With eager Willi^gness I fly, to do what you ^^mmand.


Conclusion.
On unexhausted food three Persons fed,
Till fatal sickness struck the youngest dead;
But by the Prophet he to Life is brought:
When bold Elisha furious Ahab sought,
And tries by Sacrifice, who is the God
That heals and wounds; shedding the cursed Priests blood.
Then tells of Rain, that quickly does ensue,
And Earths dry face with Vervant Robes renew;
Whilst Iezabel his Life with labor sought,
From Earth he is in a fiery Chariot caught,
Leaving Elisha, who does strait inherit
A double Portion of Elija's Spirit.
A Dialogue between Ahab and Naboth.
The Argument
Naboth by Ahab sent for, waits upon
His King, to know what it is he would have done,
Who asks his Vineyard, Naboth it denies,
For which denial, stoned with stones he dies.
Naboth. LOng live the King of Israel -- why is it my Lord has sent to speak
unto his Servant? Why is such an honor as the presence of a King conferred
upon unworthy Naboth? Thus low I beg to know the reason.


Ahab. Rise worthy Subject, it is a Monarch bids you leave that Posture, it is
your King that has a Suit to Naboth.


Na. Can Isreal's great and glorious Prince, the Ruler of the God of Jacobs
Heritage, on whose Breath my Life depends, sue to his Subject, or seek ought of
him, that his obedience shall not readily comply with?


Ahab. You will oblige me much, if my Expectations are but answered, it is a
small Request, yet prized by me at no low rate.


Na. Speak mighty Monarch! Let your Servant know your Pleasure, nay command,
and be obeyed.


Ahab. Have you not a Vineyard joining to the Palace of your King.


Na. I have great Sir, your Servant has a poor Inheritage, in which he takes
delight to recreate himself, and pass the flying day in rural Labour^^ one
while guiding the growing Tendrils where to clime, directing the rich Vines to
their beloved Elm, at other whiles pruning the luxurious branches cultivating
the hard Soil, and drawing softer Mol^ about their spreading Roots; and when
the long wished Harvest comes, it is my delight to crop the swelling Clusters,
and press out the Necterous Juice, Umbrag'd by the lea^^e Verdure from the Suns
hot Beams, and taught to know the Works of Nature.


Ahab. It Is sure you cannot but be much delighted with the pleasant
divertisement, since you s^em so much transported with relating it. But to urge
my meaning home; suppose your King should be desirous to possess it, Would
Naboth without grudging part with what does render him such pleasure.


Na. How most gracious Lord -- what part with my Inheritance! O let me on my
knees implore my King would urge this thing no further.


Ahab. Nay, let not Naboth be mistaken, Ahab asks it not without a price; Its
value you shall have in Ophirs of finest Gold, or else a Vineyard far exceeding
it in Circuit, and abounding more in Trees, producing Nectar and Ambrosia.


Na. But let the King of Israel consider, that the Vineyard he demands is his
poor Subjects dear Inheritage; O rather ask Life, and take it at your pleasure.


Ahab. Then I have sued in vain, and you but tri^le with your Prince; consider
who demanded it, and mourn for your rash refusal.


Na. Ha -- 1the King has left me, and in such a rage, as does presage no less
than ruin to poor Naboth; yet let the angry Monarch use me as he please, I Will
never yield to part with my Inheritance.


Conclusion.
In an ill time Naboth denis the King,
Who grieves, till Jezabel does comfort bring,
And plots the ruin of the Israelite;
Wh^'s stoned to death, but what got Ahab by it;
It Is true, he has the Vineyard, but's soon slain,
As is his Son, his Wife, and all his Train.
A Dialogue between Jehu and Jezabel.
The Argument.
King Joram, and King Ahazia slain,
To Jezreel goes Jehu with his Train,
Where Jezabel rebukes him, but cast down
Is slain, and by the Horses trampled on.
Iez. Stay haughty Rebel, stay thy rapid wheels, pollute not Jezreel with thy
Bazlick breath, A Queen commands thee to retire.


J. O! art thou found in all thy dazzling Pomp and Gallantry, thou baneful
mischief of the world, worst of things, whose Whoredoms and prodigious
Witchcraft^ have caused Jacobs Seed so long to mourn under the Scourge of
Heaven, and polluted all the Land with blood of Innocents.


Iez. Ha -- Inglorious Traitor, dare thou this to me, am not I still a Queen?
A Queen whose nodd, Whilst Ahabs power remained, made Princes startle; and
whose Frowns and Smiles were sure presages of Life, or of Death; then know your
distance, and be dumb.


J. Yes, witness the consecrated Priests that fell ^ Sacrifice to your revenge!
Witness the blood of Naboth, and the many mischiefs more the wicked Iezabel ha^
done, causing not only Ahabs fall, but Jorams and unthinking Ahazia's Fates.


Iez. How! Is Ioram slain, as it was reported by your cruel hand; consider
well, Had Zimri peace who slew his Master; no, fierce vengeance followe^ ^lose,
nor shall the bold aspiring Iehu escape li^^ mischief, but over taken by the
stratagems of an enraged Queen: new Tortures, and unheard of Torments shall
overthrow his pride, and then too late you will know the keenest vengeance of a
Queen provoked, like Ahabs wife.


Jeh. In vain are all your threats; your power's too short to execute your
will: this moment ends your malice, with your life, that so the Prophets words
may be fullfill'd. -- Slaves, who waits there! -- Ha, A Troop of Eunuchs. --
Yes, yes, fit panders for a lustful Queen! Come, throw your gaudy Mistress
down, that so much pride in falling, may be made the fluttering sport of Winds.


Iez. Ha, ha, ha, can you imagine Tyrant, that those who live but by my Smiles,
dare use their Queen at such a rate? Their Queen, on whom their Lives and
Fortunes Center.


Jeh. Dare, yes! He dies that dare gainsay, or once delay what I command. --
Slaves obey, or Tortures shall force out your wretched lives. He that a moment
longer trifles with my pleasure, shall not live to see the falling Sun.


Iez. How! Slaves stand off; unhand me Villains. Dare you thus approach your
Queen! Vile wretches, Monsters, damned ungrateful Monsters! Are you turned*
Traitors too? Ah, Ah, I fall; whilst all my Pride and Glory is dashed in death.
O World, instable world, for ever now adieu.


Jeh. So, it is as I wished; I knew the fawning slaves durst not refuse
compliance. There let the Pride and Bane of Israel lie trampled till I take
possession of the Kingdom, and extinguish Ahabs house.


Conclusion.
The wicked Queen, with lofty falling's slain;
Nor weltring in her blood does long remain,
E're Dogs devour her, next her house does feel*
The dreadful fury of revenging Steel;
And Baals accursed Priest the Swords devour,
Whilst Jehu (as God bid) does use his power.
A Dialogical Discourse between Isaiah and Hezekiah, relating to the fifteen
Additional Years.
The Argument.
The Syrians, by the wastful Angel slain,
Jerusalem is freed, but then again,
Good Hezekiah sickens, and is bid
To order all things as a man but dead:
Yet prayers and tears prevail; for whilst he prays,
God fifteen years does add unto his days.
Hez. HOw, -- set my House in order; why must death with his cold hand, make
Judah Kingless, whil^t in Tears the Widow Nation drowns, and the calm Air is
tormented with her sighs?


Isa. It Is the Decree of him that gave you life, and has preserved you to this
day; by him I am commissioned to relate the doleful message, and command you to
prepare for immortality.


Hez. Dye! O terrible; the very thoughts of Death affright me more than the
Convulsions of expiring life can pain! O! Can it be, that he who ruled the
chosen Seed, whose hand so long has held a golden Scepter, and every where
received the loud applauses of the glad Plebeans, must in the prime of strength
and glory, have his luster shro^ded in a Grave; and there be made the sport and
food of crawling Worms.


Isa. Consider Sir, that you was born to dye; and that stern death claims as
his due, the lives of Adams Sons, as forfeited by our great Parent, and
subjected to his power; nor can the glittering vanities, in whom frail men too
often put their confidence, keep back his shaft a moment, when his Commission
is to seize their breath; therefore let not the King delay to set his house in
order.


Hez. O fatal sound! but stay good Prophet, stay, is there no mercy for your
King? must, must his rising Sun so soon endure a black Eclipse; his life so
soon set in the gloomy Grave? O for a longer course of days, that I might live,
if but to tell of all the wonders God has done for wretched me! O with what
adoration would I bend before the footstool of his mercy-seat, would he be but
entreated for my life.


Isa. Urge it n^ more; Deaths Harbinger I am, nor will the ghastly Terror long
delay the execution; therefore be wise O King, and do as I have bid before it
be too late, before the King of Judah be no more.


Hez. Alas! Alas! The strong Disease by preying on the vital powers, has
weakened me to that degree, that now I am unfit to take recognisance of worldly
things, I know not what my Treasures are, nor how to call my Fields and
Vineyards by their proper names; nor can I tell the number of my Servants, nor
whom I design the Scepter of Jerusalem: I have put off too long these matters,
and now through fear and sickness, am quite incapable of stating 'em; but could
I live, I Would be no more so negligent.


Isa. Your hopes of life I fear are vain, therefore consider well what I have
said; and think them not my words, but his on whom the breath of life depends:
and so great King, in Tears I take my leave.


Hez. O stay* thou sacred Prophet stay, if but to close the wretched eyes of an
expiring Monarch* Hah, will not the man of God vouchsafe to see his King put
off his Scepter, Crown, and Robes of Majesty, to be soon clad with vile
corruption, loathsome putrefaction, and deserted by his cringing Courtiers, who
will fly the scent, and turn their faces to adore the rising Sun. O now too
plain I know, that all the glories of the world are fading shadows; things not
worth our smallest care. -- But see, the Prophet is returned, and my heart
leapeth with joy, in expectation of some milder sentence. Speak, speak most
sacred seer, is there not yet some hopes of a Reprieve for poor condemned
Hezekiah.


Isa. There is: the God of mercy has inclined his Ear to your low supplication;
your humility has conquered his displeasure, and melted* him into compassion:
Fifteen years are added unto your days, and for a sign of confirmation, Heavens
glorious Lamp shall Retrograd^ no less than ten degrees upon the Dial of Ahaz.


Hez. I am confirmed, and dare not be so bold as to dispute ought further, than
the sign he is pleased to seal his mercy with.


Isa. See then it is done; and now it much concerns you to employ this large
addition to the Glory of the Donor.


Hez. That shall be all my care; nor will I dare to displease that God that has
showed such favor to his worthless Servant as this, to snatch him from the
Jaws of death, and respite his declining body from the Grave.


Conclusion.
Thus Hezekiah lives beyond his date,
And joys to think of his revived fate,
Walking uprightly till the time expires,
And then surrenders as grim death requires*
A Dialogue between Hester and King Ahasuerus.
The Argument.
The Captive Hester to a Throne is raised.
And by the great Ahasuerus praised,
Subduing him with Love, whose Scepter swayed
All Eastern Nations, whom great Kings obeyed.
Aha. A Happy day unto the beauteous fair, welcome thou loveliest of
womankind* welcome my Queen, to the soft stretched out Arms of a transported
Monarch; whom your charms have (...) beyond what words can tell.


Hest. -- Al^^, great Emperor, I blush to think that ought in me should be of
force to give delight to him, whose aweful word commands so many Monarchs, yet
at the same time must confess, a joy surprising seizes every part, that he^l
vouchsafe thus to esteem his handmaid.


Aha. Amongst the Beauties of the Land, there is none so charming, so enchanting
fair; none so worthy of a glittering Diadem as my beloved Hester; nor could so
much amazing brightness (as beams from her starry eyes) shine better than upon
her kind Ahasuerus. O what transports found my Age when fired by those warm
Joys that spread themselves throughout all your parts.


Hest. It shall be still the care of your obedient Queen to do what best may
please her gracious Lord; who from a low Estate has daign^d to raise her high
above the Persian Princesses.


Aha. Thou shall be still more highly in esteem; to you shall bend all Knees:
Princes shall wait upon your train; and whatsoever conduces to the Glory of the
greatest Potentate shall be at your command, only be pleasing to your admirer,
and Life and Death shall hang upon your breath.


Hest. In me, great Emperor, Obedience still shall shine; whatever you command
that I can do, my readiness in a compliance with my will, shall testify the
high esteem I have for him that is s^le Monarch of the East.


Aha. O now you charm me more than ever! now fresh Joys are struggling in my
Breast: A passion rises, not to be allayed but by the soft inspiring touch of
your alluring Beauti^s. Then let us my fair, my much beloved Queen, to our
retirement; where feeding my insatiate Eyes with many an eager gaze, I will
tell thee all the secrets of my heart.


Hest. Lead me my Lord, wheree're you please; for your sole will is my law.


Aha. Ten thousand blessings on my darling happiness; who by this quaint
humility, makes me more indebted to her Love.


The Conclusion.
Whilst thus we haste to Joy, too great to tell,
To streams of Love that 'bove their banks do swell.
A Dialogue between Haman and Mordecai.
The Argument.
Proud Haman envies Mordecai, because
He will not bend and break his Nations Laws;
Yet thinking him too mean a sacrifice,
He Is not content less Jacobs remnant dies.
Ham. How Is this! Will not the stubborn Jew bend to the Favorite of a mighty
King? To him that next his Monarch sways the Empire of the East, to whom
Crowned Heads give way.


Mord. To man, great Sir, I dare not bend my knee* to God alone that Tribute I
must pay; to him both heart and knee I bow, but to no mortal dare presume it,
lest I rob him of his honor.


Ham. See thou not how the Servants of great Ahasuerus, far above you in the
rolls of Honor, cringe when I pass by; and yet dare you refuse to Grace my
state, by standing on a nicety, waving what is but in it self a Complement:
know, wretched Captain! it is not veneration due to powers Divine, that I
expect, but such obeisance as becomes a Monarchs Counselor, the chief among
the Princes.


Mord. It Is what I cannot give. In this case vain is all you urge; nor dare I
pass such Complements.


Ham. You dare not; nay, you will not: it is your proud and stubborn nature, or
a set d^sign to cast a stain upon my greatness; which may in some measure
shroud its luster. But, by sad experience you shall quickly know, whose anger
you pro^oke by your irreveren^e; such havoc, such a slaughter shall be made of
your stiff-necked Tribe, that e're the silver Moon twi^e waine her Orb, not one
shall live in all the Coasts of Media, or the Land made fruitful by the Streams
of Euphrates. The thing is r^solved, and I will about it strait.


Mord. There is a God that limits your fierce rage, that can in the midst of
a^l your pride, bring your ambition low, and frustrate all your wicked
purposes; nor shall the means to move him to compassionate his Captive People,
be by Mord^^ai neglected. Prayers and Fasting shall be rise throughout the
scattered Tribes; nor must the Queens endeavors want to cross the purposes of
this blood-thirsty man* whose fall will let him know experimentally, there is a
God that can correct his insolence. -- Yet must these measures speedily be put
in execution, to supersede the mischief his dire malice is swelled big with,
lest innocence should suffer for what is unjustly called a crime in me. First
then I will haste and let the Queen know his intentions.


Conclusion.
Haman his sure obtains, it is decreed,
That all the Captive Jews should quickly bleed.
For Mordecais neglect the day is set,
Which causes lamentations loud and great:
But Counter-plotted is the bloody man,
And hanged at last for what himself had done.
Nor escape his Sons, but fall into the snare,
Their wicked Father boldly durst prepare
For those that were not guilty of a crime;
So let Ambition fall where e're it climb.
Haman on the Gallows.
HAman the Son of Amedatha, of the Kindred of Agag, and the People of Amalek,
were highly favored by Ahasuerus Emperor of Persia. I find not what precious
properties he had; sure he was a Pearl in the Eye of Ahasuerus, who commanded
all his Subjects to do lowly reverence unto him; only M^rdecai the Jew excepted
himself from the rule, denying him the payment of so humble observance.

I fathom not the depths of Mordecais refusal, perchance Haman interpreted this
reverence farther than it was intended, as a divine honor, and therefore
Mordecai would not blow wind into so empty a bladder, and be accessory to puff
him up with self-conceit; or because Amalek was the Devils first fruits, which
first broke the peace with Israel, and God commanded an Antipathy against them,
or he had some private countermand from God, not to reverence him: Whatever it
was, I Would rather accuse my self of Ignorance, than Mord^cai of Pride.

Haman swells at this neglect, will not his knees bow? his neck shall break
within a Haltar; but oh! this was but poor and private revenge; one Lark will
not fill the belly of such a Vultur. What if Mordecai will not stoop to Haman,
must Haman stoop to Mordecai to be revenged of him alone? Wherefore he plotteth
with the Kings Sword to cut off the whole Nation of the Jews.

Reparing to Ahasuerus, he requested that all the Jews might be destroyed. He
backs his Petition with three Arguments: first, it was a scattered Nation, had
they inhabited one entire Country, their extirpatio^ would have weakened his
Empire, but being dispersed, though killed every where, they would have been
missed no where; secondly, his Empire would be more uniform, when this
irregular People, not observing his Laws, were taken away; ten thousand Talents
Haman would pay into the Bargain, into the Kings Treasure.

What, out of his own Purse? I see his Pride was above his Covetousness; and
spightful men count the revenge a purchase which cannot be over bought; or
perchance this Money should arise out of the confiscation of their Goods. Thus
Ahasuerus should lock all the Jews into his Chest, and by h^^p of Hamans
Chemistry convert them into silver. See how this grand destroyer of a whole
Nation pleads the Kings profit. Thus our puny depopulators allege, for doing
the King and their Country good; and we will believe them, when they can
persuade us that the private Coffers are the Kings Exchequer, But never any
wounded the Common Wealth, but first they kissed it, pretending the public
good.

Hamans Silver is Dross with Ahasuerus, only his pleasure is current with him:
If Haman will have it so, so it shall freely be, he will give him and not sell
him his Favor.

It Is woeful when great Judges see Parties accused by other men's eyes, but
condemn them by their own mouths. And now Posts were sent throughout all Persia
to execute the Kings cruel decree. I had almost forgotten, how before this time
Mordecai had discovered the Treason, which two of the Kings Chamberlains had
plotted against him, which good Service of his, though not presently paid, yet
was sco^ed up in the Chronicles, not rewarded but recor^ed, where it slept,
till a due occasion did awaken it. Perchance Hamans envy kept it from the Kings
knowledge; and sometimes Princes to reward the desert of Men, want not mind,
but minding of it.

To proceed; see the Jews all pitifully pensive, and fasting in Sakcloath and
Ashes, even to Queen ^sther herself, (which unknown to Haman) was one of that
Nation. And to be brief, Esther invites Ahasuerus and Haman to a Ban^uet, whose
life shall shall pay the reckoning, and next day they are both invited to a
second Ent^r^ainm^nt.

Mean time Haman provides a Gal^owes fifty Cubits high, to hang Mordecai o^;
fi^e Cubit^ would have served the turn; and had it took effect, the b^^ght of
the Gallows had bu^ se^ his Soul so much ^he farther on his journey toward
Heaven; his Stomach was so sharp set, he could not stay till he had dined on
all the Jews, but first he must break his fast on Mordecai, and fit it was that
this bell-weather should be sacrificed before the rest of the flock, wherefore
he comes to the Court to get leave to put him to death.

The night before Ahasuerus had passed without sleep, the Chronicles are called
for either to invite Slumber, or to entertain waking with the less tediousness.
Gods hand in the Margin points Reader to the place were Mordecai's Good service
was related, and Ahasuerus a^keth Haman (newly come to his presence) what shall
be done to the Man, whom the King delighted to honor?

Haman being now (as he thought) to measure his own happiness, had been much to
blame if he made it not of the largest size. He cats out a Garment of Honor,
Royal both for matter and making, for Mordecai to wear: By the Kings command,
he becomes Mordeca's Herald and Page, lacqueying by him, riding on the Kings
Steed, (who he hoped by this time would have mounted the Wooden Horse) and then
pensive in Heart, hasts home to bemo^n himself to his Friends^ Hamans Wife
proves a true Prophetess, presaging his ruin. If the Feet of a Favorite begin
to slip on the steep Hill of Honor, his own weight will down with him to the
bottom; once past Noon with him, 't^s presently night. For at the next Feast,
Ahasuerus is mortally incensed against him, for plotting the Death of Esther,
with the rest of her people. For had his project succeeded, probably the Jews
had not been spared for a Jew being Queen, but the Queen had been killed for
being a Jew. Haman in a careless sorrowful posture, more minding his Life than
his Lust, h^d cast himself on the Queens bed, Will he force the Queen, said
Ahasuerus, before me in the House. These words rang his passing Bell in the
Court, and a^cording to the Persian Fashion, they covered hi^ Face, putting him
in a winding sheet that was dead in the Kings Favor. The next news we he^r o^
him is, that by exchange, Haman inherits the Gibbe^ of Mordecai, and Mordecai
the House and greatnes^ of Haman. The decree against the Jews being generally
reversed.

A Dialogue between Job and his Wife.
The Argument.
Job's wicked Wife does urge him to despair,
And curse that God that of him still took care:
But wisely he rejects her cursed advice,
And is restored to's former Paradise.
Wife. WHat a strange temper is this! Can Job still cringe and bend to him, who
from the height of happiness suffered him unpityless to fall under such a load
of sad adversity? Know you not yet your substance is destroyed; your Sons that
should have been the comfort of your Age, slain; and your self in every part,
afflicted with tormenting, torturing and consuming Sores.


Job. Yet must we not repine, since it is the pleasure of that great Omnipotent
who made us out of nothing, breathed into us breath of life; and from whom all
we did enjoy, pro^eeded.


Wife. Yet better it is you never had had being, than to be thus contemptible,
thus miserable, to undergo this ill-star'd; what wellcomer can be than death,
to one who labors under such an Agony? Then turn your praises into curses,
that his wrath may vex yet hotter; and by putting a full period to your days,
take you from this sad world of woe.


Job. Base wicked woman, vile and foolish; dare thou let a thought so
monstrous harbor in thy breast! much more, how dare thou urge me to such
damned Impiety? Shall Job, on whom he showred his favors, once move his lips,
though in the softest murmur, when he is pleased to stay his giving hand, or
call back what he gave; no, nothing ever shall prompt me to a guilt so horrible.


Wife. Then you it seems will suffer patiently, and stand the mark of fierce
indignation tamely.


Job. Whatever he inflicts it is for our good; his chastening is to try if we
are worthy of his favors; nor will he wound beyond what he designs to heal.
His mercies are past numbering, which in the midst of Judgment he often calls to
mind, and makes a full recompense for what he takes away; therefore ever will I
praise, and with just adoration bless his holy name; nay though he kill me, yet
will I trust in him; and with dying Arms embrace the wounding Shaft sent by his
hand to let out life.


Wife. Well, well, I see then all I urge will work no effect on your meek mind,
inured to slavery, serve him still, and be the subject of his Tyranny; bear all
the Stripes he can bestow; and fawning, kiss the hand that strikes you: do this
and more, whilst loud I laugh at the dull man that hugs his misery, and will
not daigne to pity him.


Job. All you have said is my resolve, no pain, nor loss, nor scorn, shall
shake my dear integrity; all torments witty horror can invent, were they
comprised in one, shall never break my constancy, or make me prove a Rebel to
the King of Heaven: but with Faith unmoved I will trust in him till life's last
Sand is run, expecting then to see him as he is, and Hymn his. Throne with
Songs of praise.


Wife. If that be your resolve, I will fly the Mansion of such sorrow, and seek
shelter elsewhere, whilst his Arrows beat on you.


Job. Yet shall I not be comfortless; his hand shall still sustain me, and my
Eyes shall yet see happy days.


The Conclusion.
Thus Job bears through afflictions stream, which past,
He is restored to health and Riches vast,
And once more is the Glory of the East*
Nor dare the fiend his quiet than molest;
So those that trust in God are ever blessed.
A Dialogue between Saul and his Armor-bearer on Gilboa.
The Argument.
Saul routed flies, but finding flight was vain,
He and his Armor-bearer both are slain.
S. NOw, now, it is almost come to pass as the grim Ghost related; Israel is
ov^^thrown, My Sons are slain in Battle, and the bloody Foe makes havoc of the
flying people.


A. B. Great King, it is true, the smiling Plains that looked so gay, when first
saluted by the Morning Sun put on a crimson Robe, and wear instead of Flora's
many colored mantle, the sad Livery of Death.


S. Yet Saul still lives, -- he lives to see the mighty ruin -- to see his
Children slain, and all his mighty men of War fall by the Sword.


A. B. And still may live to be revenged of his now Tyrannizing Foes, live to
return as many deaths as now his Eyes behold the Philistines to triumph in. --


S. O! Name not Life, for that is the only thing that now is grievous to me --
Wretch that I am, why did I fly? why fell I not amid'st the file^ of War? Why,
why did not I break through the pointed Squadrons, and there bravely fighting,
rushed upon a thousand Swords, and from a thousand enraged hands received a
Death that well beseemed ^ Monarch.


A. B. O! Let not Isreal's King despair; although the Fortune of the War now
turns against him, ^et fresh Armies may be raised, and the Foe repelled; live,
live? If but to be revenged.


S. No -- Heaven decrees my fall, and cutting short my Glories, dates them with
this day, draw then your Sword, and e're the Philistines overtake us, sheath it
in my Breast, f^r now my Life is grown burdensome.


A. B. What means the King by this c^mmand, can be imagine that his Servant
dares stret^^ (...) his ^and against the Lords anointed.


S. O let me beg you would not dispu^e what I request, Renown and Glory will
attend you for so brave a Deed, nor can you do me better service than to let
out my afflicted Soul.


A. B. Command me to kill my self, and I will obey, (...) bid me meet the
following Foe, and charge A Squad^on with my single Arm, I Will gladly do it, but
dare not ^tretch my hand against my Sovereign.


S. The Enemy is now at our heels, and time ^dmits no longer argument; see --
see without your ^elp, your King can find a way to the dread Palace (...)
magnificent Death: Whilst falling thus -- upon ^is Sword, his loathed Life
takes flight.


A. B. Hold, hold my Lord for Heavens -- * ^is past recall, the desperate Deed
is done, the cru^^ word has pierced his Heart, and I Will not long survive; (...)
imitating his Example, fall thus by his side, it is (...), it is done, my blood
flows fast, now, now I swim (...) dazy mists, and now a gloomy darkness seals
my (...). dies^


Conclusion.
Saul slain with his three Sons, the haughty For
Cuts off his Head, and his guilt Armor show
In all their Coasts, possessing Jacobs Towns*
And much enlarging their own scanty bounds:
Nor so contented, but the Corpse of Saul
They fasten to subdued Bethshan's wall:
But thence the Iabish Gileadites it rest,
And for the burying of their Lord are blessed.
David saluted King.
DAvid, who after Gods own Heart, was chose,
Having escaped the danger of his Foes,
Run through the hazzards, numerous to tell;
Saul slain, he is crowned great King of Israel;
Him the Glad People from all Cities meet,
And loudly sing his praises in each Street.
Though Readiness rejected House does strive with him
For Jacobs Scepter and bright Diadem;
Yet it is in vain, Heaven soon does end the strife,
Whilst mighty Abner is bereft of Life.
When as the Darling, from whose Loins must spring
The great Messia, Heavens all Glorious King,
In Triumph rides, all fearless, and does see
How much he owes for his felicity*
To his Creator, by whom Kings command,
On whom their regal Glories all depend;
Who sets them bounds, and limits Kingly sway,
Chastizing those that dare but disobey
His strict resolves, whose will alone is Fate,
And whose bare word can all annihilate.
David's kindness to Mephibosheth.
KIng David high established in his Throne,
On former dangers safely now looks down,
Remembering how Saul sought his Life, and ho^
Between him and kind Jonathan a vow,
Passed in the great Iehova's sacred Name;
Then calls to mind Mephibosheth, who lame,
And in distress, was Son to him, who still
Had held him dear, preventing the dire will
Of Death conspiring Saul, and that he must
Relieve his wants, or prove himself unjust,
Revolving thus, he sent a message great
To his low House, who thinking now his Fate
A pace dr^w on, and that his doom was past,
Came trembling, and thus to the King at last,
Through abrupt stammerings soft speech broke its way;
O pardon mighty King, your slave does pray,
Nay prostrate on his knees implores that he
A guiltl^ss Man, for others guilt may die.
The Smiling Monarch soon perceives his fears
And with kind words does quickly hush his cares,
Commanding Royal Robes over him be cast,
And he thenceforth be at his Table placed,
Which banished Fear, and made him joy as fast.
A Dialogue between David and Bersheba.
The Argument.
Bersheba's tempting Beauties snares the King,
Who strait commands his Servants, and they bring
Uria's charming Wife, whom David wins,
To sport, and add fresh number to his Sins.
(...). WHat would my Lord with me, the lowliest of his Handmaids? why ^is
Honor heaped on me thus unexpectedly, to ^ntroduced into the closet of a King.


(...) There is a mighty Cause, -- See at your feet a ^arch bends, and wounds
the Air with sighs.


(...) O! Rise my Lord for Heavens sake, what (...) you by this complement.


(...) Thus low to beg a Favor of the fair enchanting (...).


B. Of me! Beg ought of me, what can the valiant, the Victorious King of Israel
request, that is in my power to give, when tribu^ary Nations heap on him the
Riches of the Eastern World, and Sceptred Princes pay him Homage.


D. O! Read my blushes, and you will know what it is that I petition for, or if
you understand the Language of my Eyes, they will tell you plain it is in your
power to ease my laboring restless thoughts.


B. Alas my Lord I understand you not, or if I do, I dare not.


D. How dare not -- Can so much Beauty, so much brightness, in whose lovely
Face the Graces chose t^ dwell -- be cruel, when a Scepter is at her feet.


B. Cruel! great Monarch, no my nature is too soft to harbor cruelty; consider
I am a woman.


D. Yes, and the wonder of your Sex, the glorious Masterpiece, and chiefest
boast of Nature, who started when she formed you to behold a work so fair, and
cried a lucky hit.


B, O me! You Will make me blu^h to death, if thus you flatter your unworthy
Handmaid.


D. Such Beauty as adores the lovely Bersheba, is not capable of flattery, but
casts it off, as Crystal dx^^ her stains; the utmost praises of the smoothest
Tong^^ cannot enough describe your rare Perfections, O! how (...) fair Cheeks
the Roses and the Lillys strive for mastery* How your bright Eyes, more bright
than rising Stars ^ dart Beams of comfort; what Nectre dwells upon th^^ ruby
Lips, enclosing Orient Pearls, and what a fragra^^ send they forth, what
curling Amber dangles on your ^ory Shoulders, and how those gentle Hills of
war^ Snow expose the happy Vails between -- Oh! I am ^^^vished with a Sight so
much transporting, -- Oh! languish, and shall soon expire, unless you yield
(...) Love.


B. How, love my Lord, is that the thing (...) press your handmaid for.


D. Yes Love, and an enjoyment of those Beauties I admire; grant these, and be
sole Mistress of a Monarchs Heart.


B. Alas my Lord, know you not I am Vria's Wife.


D. I do, but you was born to be a Queen, and this happy Womb designed to be
the first abo^e of P^inces, those Breasts to nourish him, who after me must
weild the Scepter of Jerusalem.


B. O speak no more my Lord, it never can be.


D. Yes you shall be adorned with Robes of Majesty, and with an awful nod,
command the Knees of cringing Courtiers.


B. But would you have me, for the trif^ng honors that attend on state, break
my marriage vows, sully my Virtue, and leave a lasting stain upon my Fathers
House.


D. Uria is my Servant, fighting now against the Amorites -- All shall be done
in secret, what we do shall not reach his Ears.


B. Yet if I should dishonor him, by giving my self into the arms, though of a
Monarch; how if he should come to know it, should I look him in the face, or
stand the fury of an enraged Husband.


D. Let not such thoughts disturb my Love, my Power and Credit shall protect
your Fame; what tongue, and d^^es move against the darling Favorite of a King;
Come, come thou all composed of transport and delight, trifle not with a
Monarchs Passion, till it quite burn out, and in expiring leave him miserable.


B. It Is true my Lord. I am your subject, and ^ought not to dispute your will,
but yet methinks ^n this case --


D. Come, come thou beauteous Object of my t^oughts, (...) these vain fears
aside, and let us retire strait to (...) Alcove strewed all with Roses and with
fragrant ^essimine, shining with Saphiers, dazzling Diamonds and Rubies,
overlaid with Gold Imbroidery, studded every where with Orient Pearl, and
wrought by the most curious needle work of Egypt and Palastine, a soft
recumbancy that can only be suitable to the dazzling beauties of my Bersheba.


B. My Lord I am amazed at what you tell, and am unworthy to approach a place
so glorious, or if I should presume, it might set me a longing the o^tner to se
it, than perhaps might be convenient.


D. O no my Love, it can be only graced by your fair Eyes, then let us hence,
and in the midst of transports I Will relate what you must needs delight to hear.


B. To your conduct my Lord, I recommend my self, you are my Sovereign, (...)
i will not prove disobedient to what you command.


D. In this your kind, and thus to joys we have, A Queen thou shall be when
some days are past,


Conclusion.
Bersheba yields, and by the King conceives
Vria sent for, David's Army leaves,
But will not b^d his Wife, the crime to hide:
For which he by the sword of Ammon died
When David takes his Love, but scarce enjoyed
Is she again, e're the Infant is destroyed;
And A^^alom against him does rebel,
In which the Rebel and his Army fell.
A Dialogue between Amnon and Tamar
The Argument.
Amnon does feign him sick, and begs of the King
That Tamar may P^ovision to him bring:
B^t it is a Pl^t, incestu^usly to gain
His lustful will, and his chaste Sister stain.
Am. WHy is it my lovely Sister that (...) slight me thus, what have I done the
you should prove regardless at this rare? wherefore neglect you him that loves
you as his Life?


Ta. My Brother, it was far from Tamar 's knowledge that you were indisposed;
the first news I received was from the King, our Father.


Am. That Is strange; I thought the Son of David could not have been in such
disorder, but the Court e,re now had rung on it.


Tam. I feared indeed you was not well by reason of your absence, but ^ad the
relation from non^ but (...) I named. But what is the reason all your S^r^ants
a^e retired?


Amn. It was my command; because I would be private with my lovely Sister.


Tam. Ha! What means this eager gazing on me? Why this wildness in your looks?
Why t^emble you, and wherefore ebbs and flows the bl^od in your dis^rde^ed
Countenance? Sure you are taken with some sudden (...); shall I go and call
the Kings Ph^sitians?


Amn. It needs not; you are the only Physician can case my grief: it is you
alone can s^^e your Brothers life.


Tam. Alas, I have no skill in Physi^k; ^now not (...) disease.


Amn. You bear about you what will ease my ^^in. The distemper that torments me
i^ Lov^s ^urning Fever, which long time h^s pr^y'd upon ^y spirits.


Tam. Love. -- Why, can you conceive y^^r Si^ter ^^tes you? Sure you will not
inj^re her so much.


Amn. Then come to my Arms, my lovely dear, ^ar enchanting Tamar, and con^ei^
me none of David's Son.


Tam. How -- why, am not I your Sis^e^? -- Ha^, that mean you by this
roughness?


Amn. To satiate my self with love, and quench ^e Feavorish passion of my mind
with Tamars Vir^n Beauties.


Tam. Consider it is not lawful: wherefore then should Amnon shame himself and
me by such a f^lly.


Amn. My fierce un^ounded passion has no room for reason; and therefore urge
not any thing in opposition to my vast desire.


Tam. If you love me, as you say, forbear to violate a^ Sisters Honor, and
demand me of the King in Marriage, that Jacob 's Sons may all applaud your
Wisdom.


Amn. In vain is all you urge. This hour, this hour is that wherein I chose to
perfect my felicity* Then tamely yield what I request, or by my Fathers
Scepter, thus I will force a passage ^o my Joys.


Tam. Why sure you dare not once approach your Sister with a design to force
her Honor.


Amn, What dares not Love attempt when it grows high; when reason is wracked,
and virtue bears no form.


Tam. Oh! Look not thus se^erely wild upon me; poor me, a wretch betrayed into
your power! Consider, you are David 's Son, and I his much loved Daughter: If
not for mine, yet for our Fathers sake; if not for love, yet in dread of his
fierce Anger, send me hence at this ^ime undefiled, that I may not bec^me a
^y-word (...) the Daughters of the Land. T^us low upon my knees, I beg it of my
dear, dear Brother.


Amn. To all your plaints I will be as deaf as Seas* were they as loud as
fighting Winds, I Would not regard them. My desperate resolves are fixed
immovable as Mountains, or the Wave-rep^llin^ Rocks, against whom (in vain)
the dashing Surge^ roar. No Storms at Sea, nor Ships in them, Ablaz^ with
whirling sumes that make the Topmast crac^ creates more terror than my wild
desire. And sinc^ you will not tamely yield, but trifle with a passion hot as
Ae^na's mounting Fires, with these stron^ Arms I force you to my bed.


Tam. O help, help, help for Heavens sake! I wi^^ die, I will die before my
honor. O spare me, spa^^ me! Oh, Oh, Oh wretched, wretched me! what shall I
do, I am undone, undone for ever.


Amn. Now the trifling shadow you so prized is gone; and I have surfeited upon
your sullied Beauties. Therefore hence with speed, lest a worse ruin fall upon
you; and for the future, know what it is coily to parley with a Princes Love.


Tam. O never, never will I hence; but where I lost my honor, there I will
lose my Life. See, see my Bosom bare to stand your utmost fury; sheath, sheath
your welcome Dagger in a Breast polluted by your Breath.


Amn. No, your Life is too mean a sacrifice for my Revenge; but since you dare
continue here against my will, I will call my Servants to remove you. What --
ho -- See, see, they come. Io. Bear this Woman hence; and see that all be made
fast after her, it is I your Lord commands it, see it be quickly done.


Tam. This, this is cruelty beyond degree: O may the just avenger judge my
cause, and recompense my wrongs upon your wicked, your incestuous head, that
all such Monsters for the future, may take warning by your fall. She is forced
out, etc.


Conclusion.
Tamar thus forced and driven out, does fly
With Garments rent, and many a piteous cry
To Absalom: who smothers his fierce rage,
Till at a Sheep-shearing he does engage
The guilty Amnon; causing him to fall;
Which on his head great David's wrath do^s call.
A Dialogue between Absalom and Joab.
The Argument.
Absalom flying's tangl'd in an Oak,
Where Joab finding him, the fatal stroke
Forbid by David: the bold youth receives,
Which him of Life in the midst of Treason reaves.
Abs. O Fatal mischief! What could worse befall me, than thus to struggle
betwixt Heaven and Earth, not being capable of reaching either; but here, for
ought I know, must be the sport of whistling Winds, and dangle till I dye? Nor
is this all; my Glory is no more: the battle is gon^ against me, and my bold
Confederates in Rebellion fallen by the Sword. My Conscience stings me with
remorse, and all the dreadful shapes that have been ^eigned, methinks glare on
me, and deride the posture I am in. -- But hark, the rushing Boug^s give way,
and trampling of Horses now invade mine Ear. Hah, it is the Foe, the
bloody-minded Ioab; now death is near to ease my pain, and wellcom is it to
afflicted Absalom.


Joab. Hah, Rebel, are you taken in a snare? H^w strangely ha^ eternal
providence fast hampered him, whose Life with eagerness I sought?


Abs. Ioab, consider who I am; think on King David, and the charge he gave you.


Joab. I have considered, and am come resolved to put a period to his life that
durst rebel against a too indulgent Father, and with impious Arms, not only
seek ^is Crown and Life, but trouble peaceful Israel with unexpected War.


Abs. My Crimes I grant, and tremble at what ^eadstrong rashness prompted me to
undertake* yet what injury have you sus^ained. Let him whom I have injured pass
my doom; let him drain out the Rebels blood, that Absalom well pleased at his
revenge, may bless with dying murmurs the kind hand that gives the wound.


Joab. In vain; you ask a favor that will not be granted. -- No, the King is
too indulgent; and will melt in mercy toward him that urged his ruin, and
pe^haps may be inclined to hearken to your protestations of future obedience;
and in pardo^ing, give you opportunity to reach his life. Therefore --


Abs. Therefore what -- Sur^ly you dare not touch a life the King would save: a
life that is so dear to David.


Joab. Yes Traitor, Joab dare, and came r^solved to make the Rebel bleed; to
let out that rank blood that has infected the unstable Tribes.


Abs. Does it become a man of War to bait a Lion thus in the toils; Thus to
reproach a Prince, at whose bare beck (when high in favor) you wo^ld fly, and
humbly cringe to kiss the ground whereon he trod, and fawning on him for
self-interest, flatter his Ambition till it swelled him into ruin.


Joab. I will hear no more, but Thus -- become the messenger of your death. --
Thus make a passage for your Rebel-Soul.


Abs. O! I am slain; my blood and Abners* be upon your head, -- that -- blood.
-- thou-hast-so -- ^^sely sh -- sh -- shed --


Joab. So, I have cropped the bold aspiring Rebel in the ^l^om of all his glory,
and given peace to Israel. Here, ^ake him down, and cast him in this deep pit;
the^ (...) his Carcass with a pile of massy stones, that so (...) memory may
be forgot.


Conclusion.
The Captain slain, the battle ceases, strait
The crooked Trumpets sound a still retreat:
Then word is sent the King of all that is done,
Who full of grief sheds Royal T^ars alone
For his slain Son; which makes the Conqu'rors steal
Into the City, and themselves conceal:
Till Ioabs threats oblige him to descend,
And comfort that did his life d^fend.
A Dialogue between Solomon and Pharoah's Daughter.
The Argument.
Old David dead, King Solomon enthroned,
Weds Egypts Princess in his ^wn abode;
Rich are they both in all that men approve,
But more than usual, are they rich in Love.
Sol. THrice welcome to a Monarchs Arms, my lovely Queen; whose Eyes enlightened
swarthy Egypts face, and whose enchanting Beauties charm the heart of Solomon.


Queen. My Lord; you cannot love, nor yet admi^^ me more than (blushing I must
own, though with ^ feeling joy) my fancy feeds on you.


Sol. Then are we happy far above ^he reach o^ Fate; and may look down as from
some Towerin^ height, and pity those that toil and labor for ought le^s than
Love.


Qu. It Is that indeed my Lord, that can best contri^but^ to man's felicity; for
where it is absent, nothi^^ but disorder and confus^^n rule.


Sol. It is true, my solace and my dear delight nor has the great establisher
of my exalted Thron^ ^een wanting to add this blessing to the rest; (...) with
paternal care placed a Spring of Cordial^ (...) Essential Love in either breast.


Qu. A Spring indeed that flows with Nectar and Ambrosial Ioys, more than our
hearts are capable, without overflowing to receive.


Sol. It Is such a blessing Princes seldom meet with, since their Eyes make not
their choice; but they are still forced to take their hopes of happiness on
trust.


Qu. Although they are; yet the great wise disposer of the worlds affairs so
orders it, that at first sight their hearts do mostly move in a sweet har^ony,
supplying the defect of tedious Courtship.


Sol. Then since Heavens Architect the glorious maker of the Universe, has
ordered all things equal to our wish; wha^ more remains, but that with
unpolluted Souls and Bodies, day ^y day we send up Tribute-praise^, and with
all humility adore his goodness.


Qu. You know m^ Lord, what G^ds the sons of Egypt worship; I doubt no^ but you
have heard of Isis and Osiris, who are dreaded through the Memphian Coast of
seven horned Nilus hundred pointed plain.


Sol. With detestation I have heard them named, and tremble to think, that the
Sons of Adam should still b^ so senseless as to Worship Monsters, or at most,
(...) stooks i^spir'd b^ Hellish f^e^ds.


Qu, A^e they no Gods then? Sure it is, I have heard them speak, and tell
s^range things.


Sol. Ye^* as the magic ^owers of darkness have inspired. G^ds they a^e not,
but base deluding forms to blind the ea^^e ^ulgar; the advice of Egypts Magi.


Qu. Who is it then that gu^rds, protects and guides us in our great affairs.


Sol. The glorious trem^^dous Majesty of Heaven, whose name is known in Israel;
who made the wonders that are every where beheld; at whose brightness Angels
vall their Faces, and in whose hand is all the breath of Life: the God who made
the World of nothing, and whose power shall raise us after death, and bring us
(if we trust in him) to Mansions of eternal bliss, where with Ages numberless
we shall rejoice, and join in Chorus with the dazzling Cherubims and Seraphims
to sing hi^ praise.


Qu. You tell me wonders, such as never entered at my Ears; but where does such
transcendent excellency dwell? What place is capable to shroud such Majesty.


Sol. His dwelling is above all lights; nor is he circumscribed: for though
Heav^n is his Throne and Earth his Footstool, yet the Heaven of Heavens cannot
contain him; he fills all places, and communicates his bounty with a liberal
hand to all his Creatures; riding (when he pleases) on the Winds spread Wings,
and often makes the Deep his Chamber. Clouds are his Pavilion; and thick
darkness is his secret place: whilst his bright beaming Eyes behold the
abstrusest things, and pierce our secret thoughts.


Q. Wonderful and much amazing is what you relate, nor could I er'e believe
that this vast Fabric could so so many thousand years continue in perpetual
Harmony unguided, unsustained, nor sinks it into my weak Breast, that Fate or
chance rules all below, but that each stand to the Law of over ruling
Providence.


S. Your thoughts were not in vain, were it possible that power, that sacred
essential Divinity would withdraw his care, and his conduct by crea^ion, so on
would totter; and the warring Element^ ^onfound the glorious Fabric; nay
Heavens brigh^ Lamps would mix with Earths Impurity; natures ^oncord then would
break, and all return to a con^used Chaos, if not quite vanish into nothing,
when ^t was derived, -- but let us at this time enquir^ no further into these
stupendous secrets, but with ^oy and fear ador^ the Lord of Lords, the King of
Kings, Even Jacobs mighty God, by whom, through whom, in whom all things were
made, preserv^d, and have continuance.


Q. My Lord shall be obeyed, i will wade no fur^her, in these devious deeps, but
at an awful distance revere that d^zling brigh^ness, that essential good who
shines so glorious in his crea^ures.


S. Observe what you have said, and then expect for ever to be blessed; but now
time calls away, we must this moment to the House of high magnificence, built
to the honor of his Name, who shakes Earth, and rends the Clouds with Thunder,
before whose face, when wrath, goes a consuming fire, to burn up Rebel Atheists
that disown his power.


Q. My Lord, I g^e, and from this day shall make it my chief Care to
contemplate him and his mighty wonders, and next to admire the man I love.


Conclusion.
The promise holds not with the feeble Sex,
For with strange Gods she soon does Jacob vex,
Causing the Heart of Solomon to stray,
Where Wisdom dwelt, and sometimes lose his way.
The Justice and Magnificence of King Solomon's Court.
Bold Adonija's hasty Treason dash't,
And all his hopes, when but in Embrio pash^*
Old David sees his Son anointed King,
And to the Throne they him no sooner bring,
But executing his dead Fathers will,
Ioabs and Shimei's blood his Sword does spill;
The Harlots case decides wise Solomon,
And gets renown, no sooner was this done
But at hi^ c^ois^ Wisdom and Honor stand;
With Riches more than Avarice can command;
But the two last, as fading things, he cast
Behind his back, and the bright Queen embraced:
All glorious Wisdom, eldest born of Heaven,
For which the others were as handmaids given
To wait on her, and next the King proceeds
To Famous, glorious, and amazing Deeds,
A mortal man does build a House for him,
Who rides upon the Starry Cherubim:
What David had designed, his Sceptred Son,
Will have with Speed, and countless cost begun,
Mount Lebanon with Axes loudly sounds,
Whilst cloud-invading Cedars kiss the gro^nd,
The Rocks hard intrails are in pieces torn,
And Gold from all the Richest Lands is born;
From Ganges to Hydaspes Crystal Streams
Are brought the Glittering glorious Gems,
The Silver Mines exhausted every where,
And dies the richest Grain with sof^est hair
Of Beasts, but rarely seen, hard to be caught,
And all were by most curious workmen wrought,
Before they were set up, that there no sound
Of Ax or hammer, the calm Air might wound;
But that what had been said, might be fulfilled,
That he should then a peaceful Temple build,
Of sixty Cubits length, of twenty broad,
And thirty high, a Mansion for the God
Of Jacob, who established his high Throne,
In peace and truth, whilst none more great was known,
Adding a Porch of twenty Cubits long,
And ten in breadth, compiled of Marble Strong;
Whilst all within the doors and walls did shine
With Gold and Gems, Mozaick work divine
In every place appeared, Each place was bright
By the reflec^ion of so rich a Light,
All woods of price were there, each overlaid
With Gold expanded, or brigh^ Silver spread,
Studded with orient Pearls, and Rubies fair,
Jasper^ and Jacincts too were shining there,
Crystal, and Topaz, Beril, Ama^hists,
And glitt^ring Diamonds, no stone there was mist
That could contribute to the dazzled sight
Of wondrin^ man, or give his Eyes delight;
P^lm T^^^s that flourish and still seemed to bloom,
Adorn'^ the stately place, and all the Room,
With shapes of golden Cherubims was set;
But those that spread above the Mercy Seat
Were t^rrible to the b^holders eyes,
As those that fill the Sacred Throne with cries
Of Holy, holy -- for God chose to dwell
In th'inmost place, to guide his Israel
^y sacred Oracle: All this, and more
The King performed with Treasure, wondrous store
In sev^n ^^^rs space, and all the Vessels brought
Into the House, for sacred uses wrought;
When Sacrificing with loud praise, a Cloud
Enclosing, dazzling brightness soon does shroud
The mighty Fabric, then the Heavenly Guest,
Who had the Labor, and the Laborers blessed
Descended, and well pleased, the place possessed.
Wond^r of wonders, so amazing great,
That none can think on it, but must wonder at;
That he who crowned with rays of brightness, he
Whom Angels dare not, without vailing, see,
Should take up his abode with wretched Man,
Who Is but a Vapor, Fading Grass, a Span,
A Bubble, Shadow, Smoke, or what is less,
A thought, that is past; O how can man express
Sufficient Praise for such, such Humility
In him who made all things e're they could see.
A Dialogue between King Solomon and the Queen of Sheba.
The Argument.
From distant Lands with a most splendid Train
Came Sheba's Queen to hear the King explain
Mysterious things, and is p^^a^d to find
A King so Rich, so wise, so Just and Kind.
Q. S. I Plainly see great King of Israel, that babbling Fame has not been over
lavish, as too often she is wont, in setting forth theGl^ries of your Court such
Magnificence as every where appears, my Eyes in all their tedious search never
viewed before: It Is true, the P^inces Treasure and his Mind must both be great,
that could ere^t such glorious Fabrics.


S. Illustrious Qu^en, whose awful S^epter stretches its Commands through the
wide Sabean Coast, consider this aspiring Mansion was not built for Mortal Man,
but for the dread Reception of the Mighty God of Jacob, who is pleas^d to dwell
therein, and condesc^nd to an acceptance of his Servants Sacrifice, and mean
oblations.


Q. S. It seems no less, and well befits a Deity, ^or dare the Nations round
you boast their Gods insh^ined in such a glorious Palace.


S. The Gods they worship are unworthy of their lowly Cells -- base Idols --
But the workmanship of foolish Hands, and those that make them, are much like
unto them.


Q. S. It Is true, they are but senseless Images, take them simply, but inspired
by Powers in^isible, they tell strange wonders, and point at the Nations Fates.


S. Yet those inspiring Spirits, who still reply in Ambigu^ties, and cause the
too credulous Nations to deceive themselves, by making wrong constructions of
the Hellish Syllogisms; work not the strange effects they tell, but are in all
things limited by hi^ who made them, and whatever else was made, who of
himself does all things, and in his Eternal Counsel foresaw what was, is, and
is to come.


Q. S And is he then the highest, the Supremest Deity.


S. He is alone from all Eternity, besides him there is none, no God, but
Jacobs God; the great Jehovah, the Almighty Fountain, when^^ what ^ver is, has
flowed, Heaven, Earth and Sea ackno^ledge his dread power; and all the Creation
tremble at his Frown.


Q. S. How! Is his power so great, that senseless Creatures can be capable of
understanding when he is Angry.


S. Yes, all the Glittering Host that dance round us, hear his Voice; the
ruff^ing Winds are still when he commands, nor dare the Ocean rage, if he
forbids it is Fury; the ponderous Earth by him is sustained without a prop of
ought but thin and fleeting Air; the glorious Lamp of day, when he commands,
denies the world its Beams, nor dares it run its Course, but by his order; the
fruitful Ground by him forbid, dares not produce her frui^s, Nature runs
backward when it is his command, and does her work preposterously.


Q. S. I start at what I hear, and am amazed -- But say great King, in whom
such Wisdom dwells a^ to enable you to know this mighty God, and be
accquainted with his will; are there not second Causes that produce strange
visible effects.


S. It Is true there are, but all of them have their original from the great
Fountain of all power and Wisdom; who out of nothing, made what ever we behold,
nay all the orders bright, of Angels, Archangels, Cherubims and Seraphims, are
the creation of his hands, or sp^ung from n^thing at his word.


Q. S. Leaving those glorious Spirits far above the reach of Mortal Eye; let us
contemplate his wonders ^isible; say mighty Monarch by what secret extinct ebb
and flow the briny waves? why shakes the Earth? say why the Bellowing Clouds
dart flame? How dreadful Comets, on whose horrid hair hang pestilence and War,
kindle; and by what matter fed; how is the days bright Eye eclipsed; and why
does the Silver Moon in the midst of all her luster lose her light at times?
and where^ore keep those Luminaries their unerring course through the twelve
signs of Heaven? say, say most sapient King, proceed these not from second
causes.


S. Hard things you ask, yet give attention, and I will answer brief to all you
have proposed.


Q. S. With Joy I would hear these Mysteries unrevealed.


S. Then thus the great Work-master in six days having created Heaven and
Earth, Sea, Beasts, Birds, fish, Plant, Men, and every creeping thing that has
the breath of Life; nay, all that we have ever heard of, or beheld; to show
himself a God of order, he set bounds to all his Creatures that they move
harmonious, and firm concord rest througout Creation^ and in some cases suffers
the superior Bodies, as made of matter more refined, and nearer participating
with Celestial substance by their influence to dispore and move inferior
qualities; as the pale Moon, predominant in wa^ry things, draws after her the
Sympathizing Ocean, making it to rise or fall as she ascends or descends in our
Horrizon; or in that deprest, or as some take it under us; though the World it
self centered, a^mits no under part; but every part is uppermost (that is) Men
travel with their Heads toward Heaven; on the other side the Suns hot beams
and fiery influences of the Stars insusing heat into the Earth; and there it
meeting with cold winds, and watery damps convented in the vacant corners;
imbodying and mustering all its force; the contrary Elements strive with each
other, and after long struggling with impetuous Fury, rend the trembling globe
to vent themselves: again the fiery vapors flying upwards, and not being able
to Break through the Region, armed with cold, in order to unite with what is
above; they headlong plunge into some interposing Cloud, grown big with showers
and shivering it into a thousand pieces, fill the hollow Concaves with
prodigious Thunders: whilst the sallying fire dispersing, vanishes. As for
those Shivering fires that are contracted as it were, to warm the world; to fly
the wrath of angry Heaven, they are composed of unctious oily matter, exhaled
from Earth and Sea; and fired by vehement Agitation, or too near approaching
the Aetherial fire, that circles in the Air, lasting no longer than the
exhalation contracted; or ascending, feeds them, being mostly in or this side
the flaming Region.


Q. S. Great and mysterious are the words you relate; but say are these the
effects of second causes, is not Nature most predominate in these
contingencies.


S. The God of Nature, as the great first mover, it is true, permits the course
of things, but orders and disposes by his over ruling providence, as he sees
fit; allotting them their times and seasons, nor is ought done without his high
permission.


Q. S. Infini tely have you satisfied me hithe^to, yet let me beg you would
proceed to what remains, that I may admire still more the donor of such wisdom.


S. As for the glorious Luminary, to whom, by the Creators own appointment, is
assigned the rule of the Day, when its all chearing Beams are screened in part
from us, and thrown Ascance; behold the Moons dark Body (which is never filled
with luster, but borrowed light, all her Silver Beauty is but a bare reflex)
interposing betwixt the prime Orb and us in the Ecliptic node; nor can the Sun
Beams be fully on us, till that let us removed by the various motions of these
Planets; the Moon in like manner wanting light, is often screened from from the
Suns bright Rays by Earths ascending shade; which does at certain times, when
the great P^anets cross, reach the concave of the lowest Orb, and rob her of
her pale reflection, That the Sun, Moon, and other celestial Bodies continue a
mistick dance; it is that their influence may pregnate Earth for Man-kinds
benefits. So that it is plain, the great, the wise Creator of the Universe, has
subserviated those glorious Bodies to the Terrean sedentary Globe, which with
far lesser labor might make its diurnal revolution, and as it were, on its
soft Axels revolve with noiseless Motion.


Q. S. How strangely am I pleased at what I hear, and could dwell upon this
theme for ever; admiring next to him that gave it; him that possesses so great
a share of Wisdom. Thrice happy are all they that are under the Guidance of
such a Monarch, and more happy they that are attendant on you, and have their
delighted Ears still filled with knowledge.


S. Alas great Queen, these high applauses are not mine; I am but mortal Man,
and subject still to humane frailties. If the eternal Fountain, whence not only
Wisdom, but all other Graces flows; has endued his Servant with an
understanding Heart; let all the Glory be ascribed to him, who has enabled me
to satisfy you in all your curiosities.


Q. S. Than be it so, and henceforth shall the God of Jacob only be adored by
her, who has with Fear and Rev^rence heard of his mighty wonders; nor shall
^here blaze an Altar in my Kingdom to any power beside; for he alone is God
infinite, and incomprehensible.


S. Bravely resolved, and like a Queen, whose Wisdom has hitherto appeared
above her Sex; and may that God, whom Israel adores, be ever propitious;
granting you Wisdom, Honor, length of days, and crown you with a peaceful and
happy Reign.


Q. S. All thanks be returned, and may what you have wished return an hundred
fold on your head, the rest my presents soon shall speak.


S. See, see the glorious Lamp of day sits on his meridian Throne, and views at
equal distance, the smiling East and West: It Is time great Queen, I wait on you
to your repose.


Q. S. With joy i will be conducted by the wise, the great, the glorious King of
Israel.


Conclusion.
Highly pleased, great Sheba's Queen presents
The King with Spices, Gold, and Ornaments;
And then from him again she does receive
Such Presents as became a King to give:
When taking leave, and blessing Jacobs Seed,
Well pleased, she to her country does proceed.
Luke 16. v. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. There was a certain rich man which was
Clothed in Purple, and fine Linen, and fared sum^tuously every day.

And there was a certain beggar, named Lazarus, which was laid at his Gate full
of sores,

And desiring to be fed with the crumbs that fell from the rich Man's Table:
moreover, the Dogs came and licked his Sores.

And it came to pass that the beggar dyed, and was carried by the Angels into
Abraham's bosom: the rich man also dyed, and was buried.

And in (...) in torments, and seeing Abraham (...) Lazarus in his bos^m, etc.


A Paraphrase on St. Luke, the 16th Chapter, from the 19 (...) the end. Being a
real Scripture Dialogue between the most happy Lazarus and the tormented Dives.
To the Reader.
BEhold these Lines crave thy most solid view,
Since by the Scriptures they are proved true,
Do thou want Riches? here without all measure
Is a most blessed stock of lasting Treasure.
This Heavenly Treasure will enrich thee more
Than all the Jewels on the Indian shore,
Receive it joyfully, and say no more.
Poor men rejoice, while rich men houl and cry,
Such is the pleasure of the Deity.
Then cease thy tears, poor wretched soul, and lend
An ear unto poor Lazarus thy Friend.
Lazarus. Most Noble sir, view but these sores I bear,
And how each one does like a Mouth appear;
For some relief my wounds do loudly cry,
And humbly beg your Christian Charity.
(...) I ve lain here day by day unable,
E're to obtain the scraps fall from your Table;
The very Dogs more kindness show than you,
Who lick my my sores and heal my ulcers too:
Alas great Sir I languish? nay I dye,
Only for want of timely Charity.
Let me request your bounty, for I know,
God will repay you double what I owe;
For Gods sake and your own, let me but have
Some kind relief to shield me from the Grave,
Scraps from your Table I do only crave.

Dives. Why how now Sirrah! how dare you presume
To urge my patience with your begging tune?
How dare you venture at my Gate to ly?
Up and be gone, or else prepare to dye.
Talk you of Sores and Wounds, what is that to me?
The Dogs indeed your fittest consorts be:
My Table is not spread to grant relief,
To every begging idle lazy Thief;
Such as your self may be for ought I know.
Be gone you Idle rascal. Sirrah go,
Or I Will release your idle cries and groans
With a good Cudgel that shall break your bones.
What if you languish, perish, rot, or dye:
Do so or hang your self, pray what care I.
You tell me God will double what I give,
Yet will not I believe it, as I live.
Go to him then your self, if you are able,
And tell me then who keeps the better Table:
So get you gone you lazy idle Theif,
I fear you there will find but small relief.

Lazarus. Farewell proud scornful Dust and Ashes, I
Will henceforth only on my God rely;
With winged speed I will approach thy Throne,
And all my grief and misery make known.
Lord thou art able to relieve my wants,
^elieve my misery, and hear my plaints.
from thee, my God, I do expect much more,
^han ever I yet found at Dives door.
^^wever Gracious God, I now must try,
^y strength decays, Great God, behold I dye.

Angels. (...) blessed Lazarus! all Hail we say,
^e're sent thy Soul to Heaven to convey.
^est Abraham attends with open Arms,
^ho will secure thee from all future harms.
^uze then bright Saint, and Hallelujah sing,
^hilst we with expedition take the Wing.
In order to transport thee to that place
Of joy, where Tears shall never bedew thy Face.
Dives lifting up his eyes in Hell.
Behold me Father Abraham, I lie
Surrounded with eternal misery:
Shall Lazarus a blessed place obtain,
Whilst I all Hellish Torments do sustain.
Have mercy on me, Father, pray now send
Thrice happy Lazarus to dip the end
Of one of his blessed fingers, and assuage
My hell tormented Tongue, which fire makes rage:
Some cooling Water for my Tongue, for I
Must now in Hells Eternal Torments fry.

Abraham. Remember Son, to add unto thy grief,
When living, you allowed him no relief.
You then possessed your good things, he his bad,
You swam in mirth, whilst Lazarus was sad.
But now the case is altered much, for he
Shall ever joy, whilst you tormented be;
Besides a Gulf between us two there lies,
More deep than is the Earth beneath the Skies.
And let me tell you, you will find it true,
You cannot come to me, or I to you.

Dives. Dear Father, let me then this suit obtain
Send him unto my Fathers House again;
Five Brethren there I have, O let him tell
To them the torments I endure in Hell:
And if they will not then their sins refrain,
Let Lazarus return to thee again.

Abraham. Moses, the Prophets too must be their Guide,
And pray what else should they desire beside.

Dives. Nay Father Abraham, but if one went
Unto them from the Grave, they would repent.

Abraham. If Moses, and the Prophets will not do,
They Will not believe a Messenger from you.

But further, let me paraphrase on the Cha^ter as follows.
Hearken therefore now, and I will speak of a great rich man, that flourished
here on Earth. (as a learned Divine observes) In all pomp and abundance, that
shined in courtly purple Robes, that was clothed in Bissus and fine silk, and
fared deliciously, that was lodged sof^ly, that lived pleasantly. But
understand what became of this rich man; his years being expired, and his days
numbered, and his time determined, he was invited to the fatal Banquet of black
ugly death, that makes all men subject to the rigor of his Law, his body was
honorably buried, in respect of his much wealth: but what became of his Soul?
that was carried from his body to dwell with the devils, from his purple robes
to burning flames, from his soft Silk and white Byssus to cruel pains in black
Abissus, from his Palace here on Earth, to the Palace of Devils in Hell: from
Paradise to a dungeon, from pleasures to p^ins* from joy to torment, and that
by hellish means, dam^ed ^pirits, into the infernal Lake of bottomless
Barathrum, where is woe, woe, woe!

Hearken also of a certain poor Beggar clothed in ^^gs, with miseries pained,
pained with griefs, grieved ^ith sores, sorely tormented, unmercifully
cond^m^ed ^ing at this rich Man's Gate, desiring to be refreshed (...) with the
crumbs that fell from the rich man's table* ^e dogs had more pity than this
rich man, on this d^^essed creature, for they came to visit him, they came
comfort him, they came and licked his sores, Well, his time being also
determined, he went the (...) of all flesh, and death was the finis^^r of all
his miseries and griefs; Vita assumpsit mortem, ut mors vitam acciperet; he
dyed once, to live for ever. And what became of his Soul? it was carried from
his body to his Master, from a House of Clay, to a House not made with hands,
from a Wilderness to a Paradise, from an earthly prison, to a heavenly palace,
from the rich man's Gate, to the City of the great God, from pains to pleasures,
from miseries to joys, from Adams corruption, to Abraham's bosom. It was carried
by Angels into the quires of Angels, to have his being and moving in the very
moving Heavens with God himself. Where is life, food and abundance, and glory,
and health, and ^eace, and eternity, and all good things: all abo^e all that
either can be wished or desired: And this is the subject that I shall now speak
of.

What poor Lazarus! What! lying at a gate* and full of Sores too? Would not
this rich Man afford thee some out-house to ly in, to shroud thee from storms
and tempests? no: would not his servants pity thee? no: would not his Children
speak for thee? no: would not his Wife intre^^ her Husband for thee? no: Had
thou ever do^^ them any wrong? no: But, Lazarus, it may be thou art stout, and
oftentimes Beggars will (...) chusers? thou perhaps would have some gre^^
Alms, or some Copyhold, some Farm of this ri^^ Man? no: Or thou would have
some delic^^ Meat? no: Many Dishes? no: Or thou would^ sit at the Table with
his Sons and Servants? no (...) What is it then that thou do desire? Nothi^^
but Crumbs to refresh my Soul, nothing (...) Crumbs to save my Life: Nothing
but Crum^^ Crumbs, Crumbs that fall from the rich Man's (...) I know that he
fared plentifully, and that he (...) well spare them.

What shall I say of the hardness of this (...) rich Man's Heart? Let me speak
for Lazarus (...) ^his rich Man; yet I shall but Asinam comere, ^ one well
observes) get nothing of this hard Fellow: I have a Message unto thee, O thou
Rich Man, from the great God of Heaven, and he does desire thee that thou
respect the Beggar that lies at thy Gate pained with Sores, pained with grief,
and even starved through Hunger: And I beseech thee in Gods stead, that thou
have pity on this Beggar, as God shall have Pity, Mercy, and Compassion on
thee, and look what thou layest out, it shall be paid thee again. But he
answered, I warrant you he is some Runnagate Rogue, and so long as he can be
maintained by such easy means, he will never take any other Trade upon him:
Nay, but good Sir let it please you only to behold this poor Creature; which
suppose it were granted, and he coming to the Gate where this wret^hed object
lay, seeing him bewrayed with Sores, betattered with Rags, and the Dogs licking
him, stopping his Nose with a squeamish Face, and disdainful look, began to say
unto him: I see thou art some lude Fellow, that such Miseries happen unto thee,
and such Plagues come upon thee; it is not for thy Go^dness or Righteousness,
that these afflictions light on thee. But he replied, O good Master, some
comfort, some Relief, some Crumbs to save my Life, I shall dye else, and starve
at ^our Gate; Good Master, I beseech you for Gods sake, for Christ's sake, take
some Pity, some Compassion, some Mercy on me. But he with an angry look
disdaining Lazarus, said, Away hence thou Idle Rogue, not a penny, not a
Morsel, not a Crumb of Bread; and so stopping his Nose from the scent, and his
Ears from the cry of Lazarus, returned unto his stately Palace: And this poor
man's Throat being dry with crying, his Heart fainting for want of Comfort, his
Tongue cleaving to the roof of his Mouth, being worn out with Fastings and
Miseries, starved at the Rich man's Gate. Now must I speak for dead Lazarus
against the Rich Man. Nam si hic tacuissent, nonne lapides clamabunt; If I
should hold my peace, the very stones would cry. O thou rich Miser, and more
than Cruel wretch, Lazarus is dead, he is dead at thy Gate, and his Blood shall
be upon thee, thou shewedst no Mercy unto him, no Mercy shall be showed to
thee, thou stoppedst thy Ears unto his cry, thou shall cry and not be heard. It
is inhumane Wickedness to have no Compassion on distressed Lazarus, but most of
all, to let him starve at thy Gate for want of Food: What did he desire of thee
but only Crumbs to save his Life? Is it not a small thing, I pray thee, that
thou having abundance of Meat, should see him starve for Bread? That thou
flourishing in Purple and Silk, would see Lazarus, lie in Rags? That thou
seeing eve^ thy Dogs have pity on him, thou would have no pity upon him thy
self? What Eyes had thou that would not see his Sores? What Ears had
thou, that thou would not hear his cry? What Hands had thou that would not
be stretched ou^ to give? What Heart had thou, that would not melt in thy
Body? What Soul had thou, that would not pity his silly Soul, this wretched
Body, poor Lazarus? If the stones could speak, they would cry (...) upon thee:
If thy Dogs could speak, they would condemn thee of unmercifulness: If dead
Lazarus were here, his Sores would bleed afresh before thy face, and cry in
thine Ears, that thou art guilty, guilty of his Blood, and that thy sin is more
than can be pardoned.

Why should not I tell thee the Portion that i^ prepared for thee? This shall
be thy Portion to drink: Let thy days be few, and another take thine Office:
Let thy Children be Fatherless, and thy Wife ^ Widow: Let thy Children be
Vagabonds and beg their bread, let them seek it also out of desolate places,
l^^ the Extortioner consume all thou have, and let the stranger spoil thy
Labor: Let there be no man to pity thee, nor to have Compassion on thy
Fatherless Children: Le^ thy memorial be clean forgotten, and in the next
Ge^^ration let thy Name be clean put out: Let him be (...) accursed example to
all the World: Let him be curse^ in the City, and cursed in the field; let him
be cursed when he goes out, and when he comes in; let him be cursed when he
lies down, and when he rises up: Let all Creatures and the Creator himself
forsake him, Angels reject him, Heavens frown at him, Earth open thy mouth,
Hell receive him, Spirits tear him, Devils torment him, let no mercy be showed
unto him that showed no mercy; Thus shall the miseries of Lazarus be revenged
by the just plagues that shall justly fall upon the rich man's head.

And now the rich man being in Hell Flames, methinks I hear him crying out,
saying; O Wretch that I am, why did I suffer Lazarus to starve at my Gate? for
which I am shut in the Gates of Hell. Why did I not give Lazarus a crumb of
bread? for which I cannot have here one drop of water to cool my tongue. Why
did I show Lazarus no mercy on Earth? for which no mercy is showed to me in
Hell. What shall I do? for I am tormented in this flame, I will cry unto
Abraham, Abraham have mercy on me, and send Lazarus, that he may dip the top of
his finger in water to cool my tongue. I am tormented here: Abraham, I am
plagued and continually pained here; Abraham, here my purple raiment in flaines
of fire, my light is darkness, and my day night, my companions are Devils. O
how they hale me! O how they pull me! O how they ^ex and torment me! Here my
feet are scorched, my hands are seared, my heart is wounded, my eyes are
blinded, my ears are dulled, my senses are confounded, my tongue is hot, it is
very hot: send Lazarus therefore Abraham with a drop of water to comfort me;
one drop, good Abraham, one drop of water.

But Abraham answered him: Thou damned wretch, once thou did disdain Lazarus,
once thou did refuse Lazarus, once thou did scorn Lazarus, now Lazarus
shall disdain, refuse, and scorn thee; once thou stoppest thine ears from the
cry of Lazarus, now he stops his ears from thy cry: once thou turnest thy face
from Lazarus now he turns away his face from thee: once thou denyedst crumbs
to Lazarus, now he denies water to thee, not a spoonful, not a drop of water.

Oh Abraham, but now if I had my goods, I would give Lazarus all for a drop of
water: Now if I had a million of gold, I would give it all for a drop of water,
now if I had a world of wealth, I would give it all to Lazarus: therefore good
Abraham, one drop; But he answered, No, not a drop.

Not a drop; then cursed be the day wherein I was born, and cursed be the night
wherein I was conceived; cursed be my Father that begot me; and cursed be my
Mother that bare me; cursed be the place that kept me; cursed be the delicate
Robes that clothed me, cursed be the delicate meat that fed me: let me be most
accursed of all creatures both in Heaven and Earth.

Oh! cursed, cursed, most accursed Soul,
Where am I now? what Fiends are those that howl*
They seize upon me, they torment me sore,
I Shriek with anguish, they in fury roar.
In Earths deep center; dark and dreadful Cell,
Where only angry damned Spirits dwell
In grossest darkness, yet my sight so clear,
M^^t hideous Visions to the same appear.
In Hell, indeed, where I endure that curse
Which shall not cease, but be hereafter worse
In fire infernal; out of measure h^t,
Which ever burns, and yet consumes not.
I rave, I curse, and I accuse my fate,
As if such torments were unjust, too great;
But Conscience nips me with, not so; I try
To kill that worm, but oh! it will not dye.
Most wretched I, besides the Woes I have,
Methinks I hear my bones within my Gra^e*
(As troubled with some fatal Trumpets s^und)
Begin to shake and shiver in the ground.
Alas, alas, what shall of me become
When wretched, go ye cursed is my doom.
How shall my Soul and Body both affrighted,
Then curse the hour they were again united.
How shall the Devils then with fury driven
Seize me for Hell, when sentenc^d out of Heaven;
And on me with much insultation rage,
As if my torments might their own assuage.
Then with the hideous howling heard of Hell,
I shall he thrown to that dreadful Cell,
Where we in Flames that never fail shall burn;
From whence we never, never shall retu^n.
A fancyed Dialogue between Dives and Lazarus.
The Argument.
Dives contemns poor Lazarus's wretched state,
Who humbly sues for crumbles at his gate,
Deriding his advice, till in the close,
One mounts to Heaven, the other to Hell goes.
Di. HOw kind has Fortune been to me? how am I made her Favorite, whilst with
a lavish hand she heaps the worlds chief treasure on me; which makes me be
admired, and sought unto by all; the golden Goddesses charms them at the rate,
that still they watch my looks, and when ^ smile are overjoyed, -- But who is
this that cries thus at my Gate, -- Ha, a miserable wrech, an outcast of
Fortune, whose miseries have made him loathsome, and contemptible an object,
that offends mine eyes.


La. O why turn you from me, mighty Sir, consider that I am your fellow
creature, made of the same mold, inspired by the same Breath of Life, and
retain in me the self same faculties.


Di. Ha, ha, ha, can thou boast thus, nay make these comparisons, and but the
mere shadow of a man, a skeleton, whom famine with her pressing hand has
griped, and turned into a thing detestable to behold.


La. Despise me not, great Sir, nor slight me for my miseries, it is in his
power, whom I adore, to raise me to the heights of Honor, and depress your
towering greatness.


Di. No, no, that never can be, my Chests are ^rammed too full of Gold, the
precious Idol of mankind.


La. Yet cannot your Riches in the least avail you, if he please to stretch out
his hand against you; nay granting you continue as you are, admired and courted
by the crouding vulgar; yet the wretched, the poor despicable thing thou see
is far happpier.


Di. How -- happier -- why now you make me smile, sure you but jest, sor one
more miserable ^ never yet could fix my eyes on.


Laz. It is not Riches, Pomp, nor high applause that makes men happy, but a
mind armed with content (...) bear him through all sad misfortunes, and a faith
(...) firm affiance in the Donor of all things that we can (...) or in the
world to come possess. O true content is an (...) estimable treasure.


Di. Content is an Eternal treasure; why, (...) more create contentment, than
to have (...) World at will? be waited on by crowds, and feed upon what ever
Sea, Earth, or Air affords.


La. Yet this, without a conscience void of guilt, can yield you no felicity, a
good Conscience is a continual feast.


Di. Conscience, why I never knew what Conscience balls, nor know I whether I
have any; for when first she checked me for laying my foundation upon Widows
and sad Orphans tears, I shook hands with her^ and bid her trouble me no more,
nor since that ^^me has she much molested me, or when she does, Music and
charming Beauties shall divert my cares, and hush her into silence.


La. Although at present she is still, yet there will come a day when she will
cry as l^ud as thunder, and proclaim the wrong you have done her before the
Judge of all the Earth^punc; from who^e dread Presence none can fly.


Di. Mere f^bles are they that you tell, think you to scare me from my Joys
with telling me what I will never believe; why, when I dye, I am no more, nor
^an ought trouble me, why should I not enjoy my se^^ then whilst I live?


La. Yes, (...) deluded, that after de ath you must appear before (...) dread
tremendous Majesty of Heaven, and answer for the smallest sin com^itted; know
there is an everlasting Lake of burning Sulphur* for all those that trust in
vaniti^, and joies unspeak^ble for such as tread the paths of ^prightness,


Di. Pish, tell me no more of such vain dreams, the mere imagination of such as
pretend Religion for a Trade, things all together unworthy of my great
thoughts, nor will I stay to hear, but retire, and glu^ my self with pleasure.


La. Go and be fatted, for you shall laugh now you^ fill, that you may mourn
hereafter.


Conclusion.
The rich Man not believes, but slights till death
Seizes him, and rob him of his breath.
The poor Man likewise dies, but now their state
Is different far, one Angel does translate
To Abraham's happy bosom, whilst the fiends
Snatch the other where fierce Torments never ends.
In vain is then his cry, no mercy is found,
He must endure, whilst t'other's with joy crownd^
Luke 15.17, 18, 19, 20, 21. And when he came to himself, he said, how many
hired Servants of my Fathers have bread enough and to spare, and I perish with
hunger.

I will arise and go to my Father, and will say unto him, Father, I have sinned
against Heaven, and before thee.

And am no more worthy bo be called thy Son, make me as one of thy hired
Servants.

And he arose and came to his Father; but when he was yet a great way off, his
Father saw him, and had compassion on him, and ran and fell on his neck and
kissed him.

And the Son said unto him, Father, I have sinned against Heaven, and in thy
sight, and am no more worthy to be called thy Son.


Take the Paraphrase upon the whole, as follows, Viz.

A certain Man had two Sons, one whereof, and he the Eldest, continued always
in his Family, content with his provision, subject to his Govern meant, and in
diligent Obedience to all his Commands. But the other, viz. the Younger
Brother, full of Juvinal heat and confidence, and (...) the Age of Discretion,
grows impatient of Restraint and desirous of Liberty, especially fancying that
he could live better to his own content, and every whit as well provide for
himself; if he were at his own disposal: Therefore he desires his Father to set
him out his share, and to put his Portion into his own hands, and leave him to
his own conduct. The Father gratifies him in all his desires, gives him his
Portion and his Liberty; which done, the Son, as if his Fathers presence or
vicinage would put too great a restraint upon him, and give check to his
freedom, he betakes himself to another Country; where being in the height of
Jollity amongst his Harlots and lewd Companions methinks I hear him speak to
his own Heart after this manner following, viz. O! sweet, what rare felicity is
here,
Where naught offends, where all things fit appear;
Where Natures shop full furnished with supply,
Stands always open to the Passers by.
My thoughts, what think you of these Streams so clear?
My Senses, can you not suck Honey here?
Affections, can you here not feed desire
And with contentment to the Heart retire?
Here are the Beds where sweetest Roses grow,
Here are the Banks where purest Streams do flow,
Here are the only Instruments of Mir^h,
Here are the only Jewels upon Earth.
My straggling thoughts then here set up your stay*
My striving Senses seek no richer prey;
Affections, here your Fancies may be quieted,
My pleased Heart then rest thou here delighted.
But to proceed: This Prodigal being now out of his Fathers Eye; Reach and
Control* he indulges himself in the highest surfeit of Licentiousness, by
which means in a short time (whilst he enjoys the present, took no care for the
future) the the stock his Father allotted him, was utterly exhausted; and with
that his pleasures also fail; the Roots that ministered to them being thus dried
up; and where his pleasures end, his cares begin: For now he has leisure to
look about him, and finds himself in a bad case, having no course left, but
either to reurn to his Father, and confessing his Folly, and imploring his
compassion; or to put himself a Servant to a Stranger; thereby to get a mean
livelihood; the former of these he was yet loath to come to; having not as he
thought tried sufficiently the folly of his own counsel, and to take to himself
the shame of his own ill conduct, by so plain a retreat, was thought a sharper
calamity than any he yet felt; therefore he resolved upon the latter; as if the
severities of a stranger were more tolerable than the repro^^hes of a Father:
For he concluded a Man was not perfectly miserable that had no body to upbraid
his Folly. And now being in a strange Country, he comforted himself with this;
that if he should find none to pity him, he was sure there would be none could
torture him with the g rating remembrance of what he was and might have been.
Well, he becomes a Servant, and he that could not brook the grave restraint of
paternal Authority, now feels the yoke of servile obedience; for he is put to
the base drudgery of feeding Swine, and has the coursest fair for his
maintenance: the Swine and he feed alike upon Husks, only with this difference
some body cares for the Hogs, but nobody for the Slave; and the former have
enough of that which agrees with them, but the latter is pinched with hunger,
having not allowance of that sordid diet answera^le to the importunity of his
needs. B^^ng sorely afflicted with this, he that formerly dreamed of nothing
but sweets of liberty, and the surfeits of voluptuousness, and never once
thought of those hungry Wolves, Want and Necessity, which now stand at his
door, after many a sad sigh, discourses thus with himself:

Ah fool that I was, who knew not when I was well, that understood not
contentment without satisfaction, nor could take up with the substance, but
must grasp at shadows till I lost both; that knew not what it was to be happy,
but by the sad experiment of becoming miserable, that could not distinguish
between the chastisements of a Father, and the wounds of an Enemy, nor believe
but all yoaks were equal, until I was convinced by trial, that could not brook
the Government and restraints of my Fathers Family, though indeared by the
reverence of my relation, and sweetened by the benignity of his countenance, and
liberal provision for necessity and delight; nor be satisfied of my Fathers
wisdom, but by the effects of my own rashness and folly. Time was when I had
the respect and dignity of a Son at home, wha now find the contempt of a
Servant abroad. I was then put to no drudgery, nor had other task than to serve
the honor and interest of my Father, and in so doing I consulted also my own;
for my duty and my happiness were then united, but I am now put to the basest
office, to the vilest employment, as if my drudgery were not so much imposed in
order to my Masters profit, as to my own contumely. But that which comes nearer
to me yet, and pinches me very sore, is that wherea^ in my Fathers House I
could neieher feel nor fear want, I can now hope for nothing else, there the
meanest servant had bread, not only to the full, bu^ to superfluity; much less
was any thing wanting to me then a Son; now the case is sadly altered, I that
seldom had so much hunger as might serve for sauce to the plenty of my Fathers
Table, feel now the difference between the liberal hand of a Father, and the
evil and nigardly eye of a hard master. Oh the sweet fumes of Plenty, and the
gnawing pains of Wind and Emptiness!

And here methinks I hear him speaking to Extravigant and headstrong Youth in
the following manner, viz.

Ah! wanton Youth take warning by my woes,
And see in me the sum of vain repose;
Which like a Bud Frost-bitten e're it blooms
Appears, but unto no perfection comes.
All Earth^^ Pleasures are but like a bubble,
Straight turn to nothing, which were raised with trouble.
The fairest Faces soonest change their dye,
The sweetest Charmers are most apt to lie.
Thus moved with sorrows I may tell the same,
And make the world take notice of my shame;
But till I had experience of this woe,
No means could make me think it would be so.
But now I think upon my Father here,
Whose Foresight now I find exceeding clear;
He often told me, and with many a Tear,
What would befall, but then I would not hear.
Ah fellow companions! what would I give now for what I have formerly wasted or
despised! the^ I loathed wholesome food, and now feed upon husks; how do I now
envy the meanest Servant in my Fathers house: they have enough of all things,
and I the want of all things; they surfeit, I starve. But alas, it is to no
purpose to complain here, the Swine I feed cannot pity me, and the Master I
serve will not: There is no other choice left me now, but I must return to my
Father or perish; little did I think what would come of it when I forsook him,
and perhaps little does he think what I have suffered since: If my sufferings
have brought down my proud heart and taught me submission, it may be, my
deplorable condition may move his Bowels; it is true, he cast me not out, but I
forsook and abandoned him: My Youthful heat and folly precipitated me upon my
own Ruin, but as he has more Wisdom than I, so perhaps the affections of a
Father are more strong than those of a Child; and the more he sees my
Foolishness, the more arguments he would find to show me Mercy; at least, I
will make trial of his Clemency, I will humbly prostrate my self before him, I
le embrace those knees that educated me, I Will lick the dust of that Threshold
which I contemptuously forsook, I Will own my fault, and take shame to my self,
and so both magnify his Mercy if he receive me, and justify his proceedings
if he reject me.

I know my Father is subject or obnoxious to no body, who shall blame him for
pardoning, or set limets to his mercy? nay, who can tell the measure of a
Fathers Bowels? it may be too there is irresistible Eloquence in misery; and
the spectacle of a Sons adversity may have Rhetoric enough in it to carry a
cause where the Father is Judge: Or if he, provoked by my Folly at first, and
Extravagances since, will no more own me as a Son, perhaps he may receive me as
a Servant; for if my rebellion ^ath extinguished in him the peculiar affections
of a Father, yet it has not destroyed the common Passions of Humanity, Mercy,
and Pity; if he will receive me in that lower quality, I am now broken to the
condition of a Servant, and shall think his Yoke easy hereafter, having been
innured to so sharp and heavy an one; I will cheerfully submit my Ear to be
boared to his Door-post, and be his Servant for ever.

Or, Lastly, if he will not trust a Runnagate, nor believe he will ever prove a
constant Servant that has once deserted his station, let him be pleased to
take me as a hired Servant, whom he may turn off at pleasure; make trial of me,
and admit me only upon good behavior. But if all fail, and he should utterly
cast me off (which yet I hope he will not) I can but perish, and that I do
however.

Well, this being resolved, he casts a longing look toward his Fathers House,
and puts himself on his way thither: but no sooner was he on his way, (though
yet a great way off) but his Father spies him. Those lean and wan Cheeks, and
the hallow funken Eyes his extremity had reduced him to, had not so disfigured
him, nor those rags unable to cover his Nakedness, so disguised him, but his
Father knew him; and the memory of his former disobedience had not so cancelled
the interest of a Son, or shut up the Bowels of a Father, but that the sight of
his present misery kindled his Compassion. And whilst the Son, partly through
that weakness which his Vices and his Sufferings had conspired to bring upon
him, and partly through a Combination of shame and just fear of his Fathers
indignation, with difficulty makes toward him; the Father, prompted by
Paternal affection, and transported between joy and Pity, runs to meet him,
falls on his Neck, and kisses him.

And now see what entertainment his Father gives him being come into his
presence. He calls for a Robe; yea, the best Robe, and so clothes him; for a
Ring to adorn and beautify him; for Shoes for his Feet, that stones might not
annoy or hurt them; for the fat Calf to feed and refresh him; and whatsoever is
wanting he bestows upon him. Now, had the Father fit time, and his Sons sins
deserved it, that he should rip up unto him his former Faults, and call to
remembrance the offenses of his Youth, and welcome him home after this manner:
Ah, Sirrah, are you now come, is all spent amongst your Whores and Harlots?
Return unto them, let them provide for you, come you no more within my doors.
But behold the love of this his Father, he uses no such thundering speeches, he
threatens not to cast him off, nor yet does he cast him in the teeth with the
former Courses; he Remembers not old reckonings, the Offenses of his Youth are
not spoken of: But he (seeing this his Riotous and unthrifty Son return home
with an humble Heart) presently offers himself to his Child, and before he had
made an end of his Confession, or could beg a supply of things needful, his
Father intercepts him by his hasty calling to his Servants, Bring hither the
best Robe, the Shoes, the Ring, let the fat Calf be killed, make a Feast, send
for Music, let all be forgotten that is past; let my Son^ old Courses no more
be remembered.

And here further we may Fancy the joyful father thus bespeaking his returning
Child, viz.

Welcome my Son, thrice welcome, is it not meet
Thou should be welcomed by Embraces sweet?
Thou who were lost, and now art found again;
Thou who were dead, do now alive remain,
Long have I longed for this thy safe return,
Whereat my Bowels of compassion yern:
Why shak'st thou then, why blushest being poor?
Thy fear is past, thou shall have Rags no more.
Revive, my Son, be cheerful then, my Child,
And cease thy sorrows, I am reconciled:
Oh! let those Tears be taken from thine Eyes,
They stir the Fountain where Compassion lies.
Come* taste my dainties, I have choicest Fare,
And sweetest music to delight the Ear:
This is my Pleasure, I will have it done
Inspight of Envy, for thou art my SON.
The Son, though astonished at this condescension, and surprised with the
unexpected benignity of such a Reception, yet could not but remembe^ what his
Fathers Joy made him forget; namely, his former Dis-ingenuity and Rebellion:
and therefore humbly falls on his knees again, and with shame and remorse makes
his contrite acknowledgement after this manner. Father, (for so this admirable
goodness of yours gives me encouragement to call you, more than the Blood and
Life which I derived from you) I have, I confess, forfeited all the interest
the privileges of my Birth might have afforded me in your Affection, having
become Rebel both toward God and you, had I not first neglected him, I am sure
I had never greived you; and having forsaken you, I have not only violated the
greatest Obligation I had upon me (save that to his divine Majesty) but also
despised and affronted a goodness like to his; whatsoever therefore I have
suffered was but the just demerit of my folly and contumacy, and whatsoever
Sentence you shall pass upon me further, I will willingly submit to and here
expect my doom from you: I condemn my self, as no more worthy to be called your
Son, be pleased to admit me but into the condition of your meanest Servant, and
I have more than my miscarriages give me reason to hope for.

Whilst the Son was going on at this rate, the Fathers Bowels yearned too
earnestly to admit of long Apologies, and therefore chooses rather to interrupt
him in his Discourse, than to adjourn his own Joys or the others comfort: and
because he thought not sufficient in this case, he makes his deeds the
Interpreters of his mind, commanding his Servants forthwithto bring out the
best Robe, and put it upon his Son, together with a Ring on his hand, and Shoes
on his feet, i. e. in all points to habit him as his Son, and as a Son of such
a Father; by all which he makes the full demonstration of a perfect
Reconciliation; and not content herewith, to give vent to his Joy, that it
might not overpower him whilst he confined it to his own bosom, and perhaps
those also who had shared with him in his sorrows for the loss of a beloved
Son, might participate also in the joy of his Recovery; he goes on, bring out
also the fatted Calf, and kill it, and let us eat and be merry; for this my Son
was dead, and is alive again, was lost and is found; and they began to be merry.

In the midst of this extraordinary Jollity, it happens the elder Son, who had
always continued in his Duty toward his Father, comes out of the Fields, where
he had been Negotiating his Fathers Affairs, and wonders at this the unusual
Iubilee: And when (demanding the occasion) they of the Family made him
acquainted with the whole matter, he takes it ill, and interpreting this
mavelous transport of joy at his Brothers return, to be in derogation from
himself; as if his Father was too easy and inclinable toward him, but severe
to himself, and unmindful of the long and faithful service he had done him,
begins to expostulate the matter somewhat warmly with his Father; but the good
Old Man mildly replies: Son, I am very sensible of, and set a just value upon
the long course of your Obedience, and I have it both in my Power and in my
will to reward you. It Is true, I have not hitherto made such solemn expressions
of my Love to you, as I have now done upon this Occasion, for the case did not
require it; you, as you have been always dutiful to me, so you had my House
and all I have constantly to accomodate you; as you have never rebelled against
me, so you have never felt the hardships your poorBrother has undergone by his
foolishness; and as you that have never offended me, never could distrust my
Favor, nor need not such demonstrations of my Reconciliation, which this
former Guilt and Extravagancies of your now penitent Brother renders necessary
in his case, so also was I never overwhelmed withGrief for you who were never
lost; but for as much as we have beyond ^ll ^xpe^ta^^on received your brother
again, whom we long ^inc^ d^^paired of, and had given up for lost; you cannon
(...) and you must allow me this unusual transport; ^or ^ say again, This your
Brother was lost, and is found, was dea^, and is alive again.

An Imagined Discourse between the Prodigal Son and his Father.
The Argument.
The Son returned, relates the wretched state
He underwent; when absent does create
A tenderness in his aged Sire, whose Love
On his repentance never the less does prove.
Son. Alas dear Sir, my disobedience has bin so great, that without shame, I
dare not lift my Eyes to look upon your aged Face, without confusion, and
disordered countenance; I cannot hear you speak thus kindly to the man that is
unworthy to be called your Son, but merits more the name of slave.


Fa. Come to my Arms, my dear dear Child, I cannot see you stand thus cringing,
nor can I permit you this range distance.


Son. The more your kind indulgence shows it self, the greater are my wretched
Crimes, to leave so good a Father, leaving him in tears for my departure, nay
to spend the substance he had gotten on the lewd profane debauches of the
flattering world, whilst he was sighing for absence.


Fa. O! Name not what is past, but let your future care prevent the like
revolt, the like extravigance.


Son. I dare not think I am forgiven; I am sure I could not well expect
forgiveness from the man I had so much offended.


Fa. All, all is forgiven, whilst I sign this pardon with this kiss, this kind
embrace, nay with my aged tears that spring from streams of joy.


Son. Thus low I bend to meet your blessing, and will henceforth be circumspect
and cautious how I move, least I again, though unwittingly, offend such innate
goodness, such a tender Father.


Fa. Arise my Son, and may ten thousand blessings and happinesses more than
your aged Sire can wish, fall all you: but tell my Son, tell of the strange
adventures that befell your absence.


Son. My Father shall be obeyed -- Then know great Sir, that when I left your
Mansion in my pompous Gaityes, I soon betook my self to places of resort, and
found the joval crew that courted me to recreate my Fancy with delights made up
of Pleasure; Riotting and Music was our recreation for the most, though
sometimes we dwelt upon a Harlots smile, and spent at other times the flying
hours in gaming, or beholding some vain Pagentary, till in the end my stock
being gone, I soon had lost my gay Companions, who studied then to shun me
more, than they had done to court my Favor: when ashamed to return home, I
wandered as a man forlorn and friendless over many a dewy Plain, and through a
thousand devious Paths; till in the end I met a humane shape, though dreadful
to behold, who seemed to take compassion on me, and used many subtle arguments
to bring to his lure, till in the end I was content to yield to his desire,
Imagining what he pretended was real and substantial; but having got me in his
power, he shackled me with Chains; and laden with strong fetters sent me out
to feed his swine, yet scarce would suffer me to feed upon the Husk^; nor was
Famine all, for still my Stripes were as grievous as my wants; which lamentable
case made me begin to cast about and think from what a happiness I fell;
bewailing sore my rashness, till in the end, inspired or prompted by some good
Angel, I resolved to leave my Hellish Tyrant, and throw my self at the Feet of
you my Father, and to try, if peradventure I might move you to compassionate
your wretched Son.


F. In a blessed hour were your resolves, and more happy was the moment when I
again recei^ed my much beloved Son, for whose return loud Instruments of Music
shall proclaim, and feasting for his sake last many a day; then let us in and
order it.


Son. A thousand thanks your now obedient Son (if I dare own that name)
returns, resolving for the Future to devote my chief endeavors to deserve such
favor.


Matthew. 25. Verse. 34. and 41, Then shall the King say unto them on his right
hand, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from
the Foundation of the world.

Then shall he say also unto them on the left Hand, Depart from me, ye cursed,
into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels.


I Will begin here and speak something of this sentence to the ungodly, wherein
every word speaks woe and wrath, fire and fury, death and damnation; and every
syllable speaks the deepest Sorrow and dreadfulest Sufferings to wicked
Pilgrims. The Lord Chief Justice of the whole World, the Judge of the Quick and
Dead is now (as it were) in all his Robes and Royalty, with millions of
glorious Attendants, in the G lory of his Father, with all his holy Angels, set
on the Bench. The poor prisoner, whose trembling Soul is newly reunited to the
loathsome Carcass of his Body, is dragged to the Bar awaiting and expecting some
doleful Doom. He is lately come from hell, to give an account of his Life on
earth, and to receive his Sentence; and loath he is to go back to that place of
torments, as knowing that the pain of his Body will be a new and grievous
addition to his misery, when that shall burn in flames as his soul does already
in fury. Therefore he pleads.

Prisoner. Lord let me stay her^ (though poor wretch he has his Hell about him
in his accusing, affrighting Conscience) rather then go to that Dungeon of
darkness. A sight of thy beautiful Face may possibly abate my Sorrows, and thy
Presence may mitigate my Sufferings.


Judge. No, says Christ, here is no abiding for thee, be gone hence. Thou
may remember when my Presence was thy Torment, when thou did bid me depart
from thee, choosing my room before my company. Now my Absence shall be thy
Terror, I like thee not so well to have thee (...) me. Depart, I say, from me.


^risoner. Lord, If I must undergo so dreadful a doom, as to depart from thee,
the Father of Lights, and Fountain of Life, yet bless me before I go; One good
wish of thy Heart, one good word of thy Mouth will make me blessed where ever I
go. Those whom thou blessest, are blessed indeed; Bless me, even me, O my
Father: At this parting grant me thy blessing.


^^dge. Sinner, be gone, and my Curse go along with thee. Thou have many a time
despised my Bl^ssing when it has been offered to thee, though I was made a
Curse to purchase it for thee; therefore, I say, depart from me, and the Curse
of an angry Lord, and of a righteous Law accompany th^e for ever. Depart, I
say, Thou cursed.


Prisoner. Lord, if I must go, and thy Curse with me, send me to some good
place, where I may find somewhat to refresh me under thy loss and curse. It Is
misery enough to lose thy presence, Good Lord command me to some good place.


Judge. No, Sinner, be gone with my Curse to that place which will torture and
rack thee with extr^mity and universality of pains. The time has been that
thou have wallowed in sensual pleasures, now thou must fry in intolerable
flames. Depart thou cursed into fire.


Prisoner. Ah Lord, if I must go with thy Curse, and to so woeful a place as
fire, I beseech thee let me not stay there long. Alas, who can abide devouring
flames one moment? material fires of man's kindling are terrible, but how
intolerable are those flames which thy breath, like a stream of brimstone,
has kindled! I beseech thee, if I must go to it, let me pass swiftly through
it, and not stay in it.


Judge. No, Sinner, depart, and my Curse with thee, to those extreme Torments
that admit of no ease and no end, where the worm never dies, and the fire
never goes out? to the Lake that burns with fire and brimstone for ever.
Depart thou cursed into everlasting fire.


Prisoner. Lord, this is dismal and dreadful indeed to go from thee, who art
all good, and to go to fire which has in it extremity of all evil, and to lose
thee, and fry in flames for ever, ever, ever; yet, Lord, if it is thy Will it
should be so, hear me yet in one desire let me have such society as may
mitiga^e, at le^^^ such as may not aggravate my misery.


Judge. No, Sinner, thy Company must be such (...) ev^r as thou did choose in
thy life time. (...) who was thy Tempter shall be thy Tormentor. And they who
led thee captive at their will, shall be bound with thee in chains of
everlasting darkness, and faggoted up with thee together for unquenchable fire.
Such fiery Serpents, gnawing Worms, stinging Adders, poisonous Toads, roaring
and devouring Lions, hideous Monsters, frightful Fiends must be thy eternal
Companions. Depart from me thou cursed, into everlasting fire prepared for the
Devil and his Angels.


But now, kind Readers, because particulars do ^sually most affect us, we may
here again at this Gene^al Judgment, suppose we here the Judge crying out with
a loud and angry voice, saying, Bring now ^ll the wicked Prisoners severally to
my Bar, that so ^hey may all distinctly receive their Sentence, ^or those
particular sins by which they have most ^ffended my Justice;

And first, Come forth all ye ignorant persons: who ^ave not known the Father,
nor me, nor the my^eries of salvation. Take them Devils, bind them hand and
foot.

2. Come forth all ye slothful and unprofitable persons. ^ad not ye talents
committed to you for my use and ^^rvice, and what have you done with them? did
^ou bury them in the earth? or lay them up in a ^apkin? what, could you lie
down and slumber, ^hen you had so much work to do? could you tri^^e ^ray so
many hours, when time was so precious ^^d sweet? Take them Devils, bind them
^and and foot.

3. Come forth all ye that have neglected Family (...), and never sought after
God in your Closets; Were (...) you creatures, and did the law of Creation
re^ire no worship; were not you subjects, and should (...) you have shown
homage to your Sovereign* (...) not you live upon God's finding and bounty
every day, and should not you have ackowledged your dependence; did not God
bring you into your Family Relations, and did he require no duty? Did not he
threaten to pour out his wrath upon irreligious Families? and yet would not you
set up Religion in yours? Take them Devils, bind them hand and foot.

4. Come forth all ye Sabbath Breakers, you that have spent the day in
sleeping, in eating and drinking to excess; who instead of holy meditations,
have been thinking and contriving your worldly business; who instead of
religious conferences, have discoursed only of earthly matters: instead of
going to Church to worship God, have walked into the Fields, and spent the time
in Recreations. Take them Devils, bind them hand and foot.

5. Come forth all ye Swearers, and Profaner of the Name of God; did you never
read or hear of the third Commandment, which forbad this sin? Did you never
hear of my strict Injunction, that you should not swear at all in your
discourses, but that your Communication should be yea and nay? were you never
told that swearers would fall into Condemnation? was the great and dreadful
name of God of so little regard, that you could not only use it irreverently,
so frequently; but also even tear it in piec^^ by your Oaths? You called upon
God sometimes to damn and sink you; can you speak in that language now, now
damnation is so near you? Take them Devils, bind them hand and foot.

6. Come forth all ye scoffers at Religion, and the zealous profess^rs thereof;
who taught and spoke of Re^igion, as if it had been a fancy, and cunningly
delised Fables; and of the most holy, humble, and (...)-denying Christians, as
if they were the mos^ mean spirited, foolish, and contemptible People upon
Earth: and have used the name of a Saint in derision, and proverb of reproach.
Have you the same mind now, that Religion was but a fancy? Is your Resurrection
and my appearance, but a fancy? Is your punishment eternal in hell, like to be
but a fancy? Have you not a sure ground and bottom for your faith in the
Scriptures? Could you have desired more reasonable evidence of things done
before your age? Could you laugh at Scripture threatenings: And can you laugh
now you are come to* Execution? Take them Devils, bind them hand and foot.

7. Come forth all ye Persecut^rs of my Disciples; was it not enough for you to
mock them; but you must persecute them too? Was it not enough for you to
persecute them with the tongue, but you must persecute them with the hand?
What, could you betray them like Judas for a piece of money, or out of malice,
which was worse? Could you disturb them in their service and worship of me,
when they were praying for your very Conversion and Salvation? Take them
Devils, bind them hand and foot.

8. Come forth all ye intemperate and licentious persons; who have indulged
your flesh, and laid no restraint upon your sensual appetite; who have made
provision for your flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof; but made no prov^^ion
for my glory, and took no care to fulfil^ my commands; did you never hear of
such a duty as self-denial, which I required of all my Dis^ipl^s and Followers?
Take them Devils, bind them hand and foot.

9. Come forth all ye Gluttons, who have prepared you flesh with delicious
food, but never had the least rega^d to feed your souls. Take them Devils, bind
them hand and foot.

10. Come forth all ye Drunkards, who if ye have not ^vercharged your bellies
with excessive eating, ^et have often intoxicated your brains with the fume; of
excessive drinking; what excuse can you find for this sin? were you enticed to
it, and overtaken before you were aware? but who could entice you to drink a
potion which would kill your bodies? and was not the death and damnation of
your souls more to be avoided? Take them Devils, bind them hand and foot.

11. Come forth all ye Adulterers, you that have neighed like full-fed Horses
after your neighbors Wives, and assembled by troops into Harlots houses; or if
not so, have committed this sin in secret corners; was there no shame in you to
keep you from this nasty filthy sin? Take them Devils, bind them hand and foot.

12. Come forth all ye Covetous persons, whose treasure* and heart, hope, and
confidence has been in earthly things. Take them Devils, bind them hand and
foot.

13. Come forth all ye unmerciful persons; whose bowels have been shut up
against the poor and ^eedy; who have spoken churlishly to the poor, and looked
upon them afar off. Take them Devils, bind them hand and foot.

14. Come forth all ye unrighteous persons; who have wronged Widows and
Orphans; who have overreached your neighbors in your dealings; who have heaped
an estate together by unrighteous practices; who have squeezed and oppressed
the poor* which have had no helper. Take them Devils, bind them hand and foot.

15. Come forth all ye liars; you who have taught and accustomed your selves to
this sin; who have not only reported lies, but also made them. Take them
Devils, bind them hand and foot.

16* Come forth all ye Slanderers and Back-biters* who have walked about with
slanders; and carried about tales unto the reproach and injury of your
neighbors good name: Did you not know it was your duty to endeavor the
preservation of your Neighbors Reputation as carefully as your own? Take them
Devils, bind them hand and foot.

17. Come forth all ye proud and ambitious persons; you that have builded your
nests on high; that have taken many dirty steps to get into the seat of honor,
whose hearts have been lifted up with high towering imaginations and conceits
of your own excellencies unto the scorning and contempt of others; who have had
proud hearts, and proud looks, and proud speeches, and proud carriage toward
others Take them Devils, bind them hand and foot.

18. Come forth all-ye envious and malicious persons; ye that have grieved at
the good of others, which they have had, or done; that have grieved at the good
Estates of others, or because they have thrived faster then you in the world.
Take them Devils, bind them hand and foot.

19. Come forth all ye wrathful and contentious persons* ye that have had fiery
spirits, and fiery tongues; whose tongue, have been like swords, wherewith* ye
have lashed and wounded others in your reproachful r^viling speeches. Take them
Devils, bind them hand and foot.

20. Come forth all ye civil and moral persons, who have had moral
righteousness, and been upright in your dealings, but wholly strangers unto the
power of godliness, who have observed some precepts of the second Table of the
Law in reference to your selves and others externally; but have grossly
neglected the duties of the first Table. Take them Devils, bind them hand and
foot.

21. Come all ye Hypocrites, who have made a show of Holiness; and have born
the name of Zealous professors of Religion, but have been acted by carnal
designs and principles, who have used Religion as a Cloak for your
Covetousness, who followed me only for the Loaves; who have been hollow at the
heart, rotten at the Core, painted-Sepulchers, blazing^ Comets, wandering and
falling Stars, for whom the mist of darkness is reserved for ever. Take them
Devils, bind them hand and foot.

22. Come forth all ye Back-sliders and Apostates, from me and my ways; You
that turned back to ways of profaneness, and open wickedness, after some time of
profession, and joining your selves with my People, was my service so
burdensome that you could endure it no longer? was the way to heaven so
unpleasant, that you would walk no longer therein, after some trial in show of
me, did you prefer and make choice of the Devil before me? Take them Devils,
bind them hand and foot.

23. Come forth all ye impenitent Persons and Unbelievers, all ye that* have
not yielded obedience to the Gospel; were you not called to repentance by
Ministers, and the Spirit in Ordinances? and when a stiller voice was not
heard, were you not called louder by God in his judgments? did you not know,
that except you repented you would certainly perish. Take them Devils, bind
them hand and foot.

Zacharias and Elizabeth. An imaginary discourse.
The Argument.
The way preparing Prophet born, his Birth
O'rejoys his Parents, who with holy mirth
Return their thanks to Heavens eternal King,
The Maker, Giver, Author of each thing.
Z. WHat Wonders has God wrought? how gracious has he been, in opening thy
barren Womb, and giving us a Son in our old Age; nay, more, a Son that is a
Prophet to prepare the way of him on whom the happiness of mankind does depend.


E. My Heart is o'reflowed with joy, nor can my tongue relate what I conceive;
nor am I capable of rendering sufficient praises to the Lord, who has been
peased to ^isit his low Handmaid, and took from her, ^ her loathed reproach.


Z. Had you but seen the glorious Vision, the bright Messenger of Heaven, that
brought the happy news, that blessed assurance of what is come to pass you would
have been the more transported.


E. I dare believe no less, yet you durst doubt the truth of what his high
Behest imorted.


Z. I did indeed, and had my punishment for so much incredulity, the Organs ^f
my voice denied their office, rendering me a Mute, till my aged Eyes beheld the
dear, the welcome, the thrice welcome Babe sprung from the Womb of my Elizabeth.


E. It Is just with Heavens eternal King, who had done such great things for
you, that you were so punished, and stand as an example to the diffident.


Z. But since I am restored, i will use my diligence to make Atonement for my
vile stupidity, apply the voice returned in hyming him, and telling of his
wonders; nay more, that we may both be happier in our Son, let us observe to
train him up as Heaven has given directions.


E. That, next to praising our great Benefactor, who with Mercies and choice
Favors every way incompasses us, shall be my chief care, but see the
Sacrifices wait, you must now to the Temple.


Z. With joy I go to glorify the God who does ^ouchsafe to dwell with his
Inheritance.


E. Have then whilst I retire, and offer up the Sacrifices of a contrite Heart,
which God has promised never to reject.


Conclusion.
Thus joy the blessed Pair in their success,
Whilst God, what e're they take in hand, ^^es bless.
A Diologue between the three Kings of the East upon their return.
The Argument.
The Sceptered Monarchs that so lately came
To worship him that made the Glorious Frame
Of the whole Universe: Herod deceive
Of what he durst expect, and Juda leave
Unknown to him, which makes him storm and grieve.
1 K. WIth what earnestness the bloody minded King of Judah made inquiry for the
Heavenly Infant; I then perceived his drift was ^ut to get him once into his
power; for why, the prophecy concerning the all-glorious Babe, and our enquiry
started him, and made him doubt his ^mpire.


2 K. It could no less to one who (blinded with the Guilt of such great crimes
as he by his Tyranny has pulled upon himself) had no further sight of Sacred
things: The Babe is born a Heavenly not an Earthly Prince, his Kingdom is above
all heights transcendent, glorious, beautiful beyond expression.


3 K. It Is true, and we have seen a God on Earth, this, this is he of whom the
Cybils did so darkly sing: The Child let down from Heaven in a bright burnished
Chain of Gold, that should shut Ianus's Temple, and invest the World with Peace.


1 K. Undoubtedly the same, and happy is the Jewish Nation, if they understood
aright this blessing, this is the Star that should arise out of Jacob, this is
the great Deliverer, the great Preserver of his People, this is he of whom the
Prophets have so loudly told.


2 K. Nor are we less obliged to wise Omnipotence, that did vouchsafe to make
us privy to so great a mystery, revealing to us what had happened, and
disposing us to follow the bright Star hung low in the thin Region of the Air,
that it might be our kind Conducter to the happy place.


3 K. Nor was the glittering Angel less careful of his Lord, when in our
slumbers he forwarned us to return another way, and not as we determined, see
the wicked King.


1 K. I can but think how Herod's rage will rise, to find himself so much
deluded.


2 K. Doubtless it will, but all his fury will be spent in vain, the end, for
which the Glorious God came down, and was incarnate, must be accomplished e're
he does ascend to seat himself upon his Sapphire Throne.


3 K. It must, so all the Prophets say, yet in the end, when as his g^^rious
course is (...) when he has finished his great (...) ^or lost (...)


1 K. That indeed must be the result, but then triumphing over the Grave, he
will in rays of brightest Majesty ascend, and draw all those that love him,
and adore his goodness after him


2 K. No less do I conclude, but see we are arrived at a fair City, here let us
repose this night, and contemplate on this wonder.


3 K. Agreed great King, we will be content to do as you have said.


Conclusion.
Thus to their County the pleased Monarchs go,
And there whatever they have heard and seen they show.
A Dialogue between Herod and his chief Captain.
The Argument.
The bloody minded Tyrant in a rage,
To kill him, whom the Prophets did presage
King of the Jews, in Bethlehem murders all
'Neath two years old, that he in the crowd may fall.
H. AM I then deluded by the Eastern Kings, say you, are they departed to their
own Abodes, and he that Fame has rumored must deprive me of my Scepter, is
hid, past, finding out.

It Is so most Potent Monarch, the Kings are journyed through the Wilderness,
and by this time have reached their Native Lands; the Infant, though all
diligent inquire has been made, is no where to be found.


H. So to be served makes me all Fury, O! that (...) was not such a March over
the vast Deserts to the ^ands of those deluding Monarchs; Fire and Sword should
speak myanger; what is in my power I Will do, to make my Title sure; Captain make
have, and draw up all my men of War, I have a great design in hand, which
Labors in my Breast.


C. What means my Lord the King, what are his thoughts? thus low I beg to be
made privy to the intentions of a Monarch.


H. You are my faithful Counselor, and to your Care and Conduct, what your
King intends shall be committed; all the male infants in suspicious Bethlehem,
and throughout every Border appertaining to that City, are doomed dead from two
years old and under; that amongst them, him that I suspect, may fall, so that
the madding People, who are ever fond of innovation, may be retained in their
obedience.


C. It Is brave, though bloody, yet the King shall be obeyed before to morrow
this time; not a Brat shall live beneath the Age you mention, no ^ity or
rem^rse shall be of force to stay our Hands, to the cries of tender Mothers we
will be deaf as Seas, and whilst the Younglings sprawl upon our Spears, our
Hearts shall be as hard ^s Adamant, no lurking holes shall save them from our
fu^y; death, death shall be their portion, from the tender breasts we will
snatch them to untimely Graves.


H. Your resolution fits my purpose, and when put in execution, will quickly
hush my fears; therefore about it strait, make^ no delay, whilst I retire, and
with impatience expect a full account of your proceedings.


C. My Speed shall show my willingness in what I undertake, Death and Fury now
inspire me for the blackest Murders the bright Lamp of Day ever yet beheld.


Conclusion.
The Plot thus laid, in practice soon is put,
The Throats of near six thousand Infants cut
By Herod's cruel Soldiers, whilst the cries
Of tender Mothers, pierce the weeping Skies:
But vain the Tyrant seeks the Life of him
That wears the glorious starry Diadem;
For he to Egypt flies, but Rachel sore
Laments her Sons, because they are no more.
Imagined Discourse between Joseph and Mary upon their returning out of Egypt.
The Argument.
The blessed Pair admire Gods Providence,
And glorify his great Omnipotence,
Who, murdering Herod struck with fearful Death,
Bri^ging them safely to fair Nazareth.
I. THe cruel Tyrant that late raged in slaughter, and dyed deep his hands in
blood of Innocents, is tumbled in the dust, his bold Ambition is sunk beneath
the Grave.


M. In vain he strove to rob us of our only Joy, in vain he plotted to surprise
the Life of our dear Son and Lord.


I. All that Man does against the great decrees of Heaven, is unprosperous, no
force nor policy can ever prevail against Omnipotence.


M. It Is true, but yet his murder^^^ (...) have made some thousands childless.


I. Although his cruelty, by Gods high sufferance, extended to the shedding of
their blood; yet they are happy, falling for the sake of him who came to save
them from eternal Death; and God that can make fruitful barren Wombs, can when
he pleases give their Parents a supply.


M. With him it is true, there is nothing impossible, therefore how ought men to
adore his sacred Name, and at an awful distance struck with admiration,
contemplate his wonders.


I. They ought indeed with lowest reverence admire, and love such boundless
goodness; nor shall my Tongue ever want praises for the Mercies he has showed,
nor will I spare to tell of all his loving kindness.


M. We will praise him in the Beauty of his Holiness' and never cease to bow
before the Footstool of his Throne of Grace, and with humility revere his
tremendous Majesty.


I. It Is fit we should, but now Night hasts apace* and we must rest our selves
awhile, and in this hospitable place refresh the blessed Infant, the sole car^
of Heaven.


M. It Is indeed convenient, that when the Sun, risin^ ^lorious in the East
sends forth his Beams to cheer the Bosom of the Earth, we may reach the much
desire^ Coast of Galilee, it not being yet safe for us to go t^ Bethlehem,
because the Tyrants Son reigns in Judea.


Conclusion.
Thus out of Egypt did God call his Son,
Whom there ^e sent, the Tyrants rage to shu^
An imagined Discourse between Jarus and his Daughter, after her being raised
from the dead.
D. Alas my Father, why is it you suffered me to slumber thus unmeasurably.


F. Slumber my dear Child, had not Heavens Favorite been propitious, it had
been everlasting sleep.


D. Indeed I could have been contented to have slept on, if I thought you would not
have chid me for my drowsiness, for I was much delighted with the pleasant
Visions I beheld, or Fancy represented.


F. Vision says my Child -- Alas they were Visions, but must needs be strange
ones.


D. O me! I must confess they were something strange, for I remember whilst you
and my Mother sat weeping by the Bed, that a blew mist came over my Eyes, and
doz'd my Senses; when methoughts a lovely Youth ^l^d in a glorious Garb, stood
by me, and with beaming Eyes so dazzled me with rays of Light, that I was much
amazed; But long he pawz'd not, e're he snatched me from my bed, and with
expanded Wings slew swift, as I thought, through many Regions paved with Stars,
a shining with glittering Fires; where I beheld strange shapes, and heard
amazing voices, when mounting still, at last he brought me within sight of a
most Glorious Mansion, whose outside shone with such exceeding brightness,
that I was obliged sometimes to shut mine eyes, as not capable of steady
gazing: At the Gate stood throngs of Glorious Forms, in Robes of purest White,
with Crowns of Gold upon their Heads, Palms in their Hands, and Golden Harps,
whereon they play melodious, and ravished all my Senses with their charming
voices, seeming in their Songs to express much joy at our approach; but being
about to enter, methought I heard a voice as loud as thund er cry, return, when
on a sudden down I sunk like Lightning, and starting at the supposed fall, I
waked.


F. And do you fancy then you only slept.


D. What more, since what I saw, I wakening, find to be a dream, the mere
representation of a roving Fancy.


F. Mistake not my dear Daughter, for to your Fathers grief, your Soul was
separated by the hand of Death from its loved Mansion; this beauteous Form in
which now streams warm blood, was some hours since a cold, pale, lifeless
course.


D. How? -- was I dead -- How? dead, O speak.


F. Yes, Death had snatched thee from me, leaving me to mourn for so great a
loss, and thou had been no more, had not the mighty Prophet by his word
called back thy fleeting Soul.


D. How can it be that I should be dead? but if it be no more pain to dye than
what I felt, I shall hereafter dread Death less; yet say, was that the Prophet
that stood by me when I waked, methought he looked most lovely.


F. It was the wonder-working Prophet, whose great Miracles astonish all
mankind; but since my joy again is full, in having my sole comfort by his
power restored, and rescued from the Grave; let us hence, and publish the
amazing news to our Relations, that they all may join with us in praising him,
who has given back my Daughters Life.


D. My Father shall be in what he thinks fit, obeyed, and I for my part will
addict my self to Virtues ways, that when I die, if die I must again; I may
enter at the glorious Gate I was, or fancied that I was so near.


Conclusion.
That there with those blessed Spirits I may sing
Loud praises to the Glorious Heavenly King;
And him adore who kindly brought me back
To Life again, for his d^w Mercies sake.
A Dialogue between Herod and Herodias's Daughter.
The Argument.
The nimble footed Virgin pleased the King
So well, that he commands her to ask any thing
That Is in his power to give, the crafty Maid
Consults her Mother, and does ask the Head
Of John the Baptist, who for her must bleed.
H. HAs the beauteous Maid, whose nimble feet in mystic order moving, so well
pleased a King, considered what to ask, that as I promised, I may grow lavish
to complete her wish.


Dam. My Lord I have considered, and it is neither Gold nor Silver I demand, no
nor Gems, nor places of high Honor, but --


H. But -- What, speak out thou pretty charming Creature, and be soon possessed
of whatsoever your thoughts can form.


Dam. It is but a trifle, My Lord, that I demand.


H. A trifle, why were it half my Kingdom, it is at your command; my Oath is
past, and shall not be recalled; therefore let me soon know what it is you long
for.


Dam. Then great King it is -- it is -- the -- Head --


H. The Head, what Head? speak boldly, come.


Dam. Why, to be plain, the Head of John the Baptist.


H. A trifle say you, O! that I had never past so rash a Vow; this it is to
trust a Woman with a power unlimited -- But why is it you demand the Head of
that good Man? you are young, and should not thus delight in cruelty.


Dam. Great Sir, he has displeased the Queen my Mother.


H. O are you thereabout -- Cruel -- Cruel Woman, could no revenge, but such as
bears a horrid guilt even in its name, appease her fury.


Dam. She charged me on her blessing I should ^^k no other recompense,
therefore the Guilt be upon your Queen, your Brother's once beloved Wife, and
not on me; for so much crudelity is contrary to the soft Nature of a tender
Virgin.


H. Although I much repent I trusted a W^mankind with Vows unnamed, yet shall
it never be said a Monarch broke his Oath -- Go Executioner, and fetch the Head
of him I dearly love, and give it her, to satiate the cruel eyes of her
Blood-thirsty Mother, from this moment my much hated Queen.


Dam. Well great King, I Will wait its coming, though you are very angry, for I
will assure you, I dare not return without it.


H. What would you more, have not I given command; though I must needs confess
it was more for honors sake, than any kindness to my Queen, or you, whose Bold
Petition has disturbed my rest; and may the blood return upon your Heads,
whilst I retire, and mourn my unadvised concession.


Dam. How angry is my Father in Law -- yet let him know I fear not all his
Frowns, for well I am as^ured my Mother soon can smooth his wrinkled Front, and
calm the tempest of his mind. -- So, it is brought, and in a Charger; O! how
wan it looks? how throb the Lips with dying murmurs; but however, I^le go bare
it to my Mother as it is, that it may save her longing.


Conclusion.
Thus, thus the glorious Prophet fell
By Malice deep, as could be forged in He ll.
A wicked Woman and an easy King
The stroke of Death to that great Prophet bring,
Whose voice cried loud; he who was sent before,
As Messenger to him we do adore.
An Imagined Dialogue between the five foolish Virgins.
The Argument.
The foolish Virgins mourn their oversight,
And grieve, their Lamps retained not Oil to light
The Bridegroom through the dark and gloomy Night.
1 V. O! What has our Folly done? in what sad darkness are we left? how
wretched! O how miserable!


2 V. Indeed we are, though we feared no such matter; alas, alas what shall
we do? you see companions that we are shut out, not for a time, for then there
was some hopes, but out for ever.


3 V. How! For ever! O Heartbreaking news, must we never see the Bridegrrom
then? no not see his Face.


4 V. No, he has withdrawn himself, the Gates are ever closed against us, and
our knocking will be vain.


5 V. O! I am almost mad to think how foolishly we lost the happy opportunity,
that would for ever have enabled us to stand in his bright presence.


1 V. Name, name no more our fatal oversight, least it add yet to our weighty
Sorrow


2 V. Yet methinks I cannot forget the h appiness we lost, methinks the bright
and dazzling Idea of the loved Bridegroom still represents it self to my well
pleased Eyes.


3 V. And yet we never must behold him more, his Face is turned away, he knows
us not, his Countenance so Amiable, so ravishing, and so transporting, will no
more shine on us with Soul-inlightning Rays, his Smiles most af^able, we never
more shall be delighted with.


4 V. Since it is so, let us retire and mourn the loss our Follies have
occasioned, weep till our heads are water, and our eyes a Fountain of continual
Tears.


5 V. Weep for our Folly, fill the world with grief,
Since our condition is beyond relief,
Torment the Air with sighs, and loudly cry
For want of Oil, though it is too late to buy.

A fancied Dialogue between Judas and the High Priest.
The Argument.
Judas is tempted to betray his Lord
Taking the Coin the wicked Jews afford,
To mark him out, whilst he is seized at last,
And into bonds the Lord of Glory cast.
H. P. COme, come, why boggle you? at what, when once recorded, will make you
known in story, till the world shall be no more? why, who would not act a thing
of such small moment, to have his name registered in the Rolls of Fame.


Ju. What will that profit me? when it is but to my Infamy, my shame and
everlasting blot; I shall b^ so exposed to after Ages.


H. P. Have you not the protection of the great High Priest, Aarons successor,
and expounder of the Law, to guard your Fame by countenancing wh^t you
undertake.


J. But yet my Conscience -- Methinks something within informs me it is a
horrid Crime, the basest of Ingratitude, to prove perfidious to so good a
Master.


H. P. Pish -- Let not such vain imaginations startle you; come, come, resolve
to do it, nay I find what it is that you expect; here, here is the thing that
must prevail above all arguments.


J. How! thirty Roman Pence -- A Sum it is true would tempt a man to do a
daring deed. But, --


H. P. But what -- nay trifle not, see night comes on, the night that must be
followed by the day, that must behold him that does style himself the King of
the Jews, in bonds.


J. Well waving further Ceremony, I Will stifle my upbraiding Conscience; sere it
with all dark resolves, and desperately comply with your demands.


H. P. Bravely spoke, our Guard^ shall instantly attend you; but what is the
sign by which you will distinguish him.


J. With a Face as bold as Death, frought with mischief, I will bare up to him,
and with a treacherous kiss salute him, and then let those that have the
charge, be sure to catch him.


H. P. No fairer token can you give, but it is no time now to delaythe thing;
come, come, let us about it, and secure him e're the Sun salutes the East;
least the mad People, fond of innovation, should murmur, nay should mutiny upon
such a seizure, which they will term an outrage; for we are not ignorant what
fame his Miracles have won, and ^ow he is beloved; see, see the Guards are
ready, ^hen along with them* whilst I retire to the consul^ing Sanadrim, and
there contrive what shall be ^urther done.


J. I go, though to perf^^m the blackest deed that Hell ever put into the Heart
of Man, yet I have promised, and I will perform, though Fa^^ and Destiny does
push me ^^^dlong into monstrous ruin.


Conclusion.
The Plot thus laid, the Lord of Life's betrayed
And bound before the Sanadrim is lead,
Scorned and reviled, scourged, and at last condemned
Crowned with sharp thorns, and impiously blasphemed.
Stretched on a Cross, the Lord of glory dies
Who reigns in H^aven above the starry Skies.
Peter's Lamentation.
WRetch that I am, what have I done? how great
Is this black Crime, O where shall I retreat?
To hide my Guilt, what blushes burn my Face,
What Stings my Conscience feel, what hiding place
Can shelter him; from woes he cannot fly:
No place can shroud me from his piercing eye,
Who views at once Hells depth, and Heavens vast height;
To whom all gloomy darkness is as light.
Fool that I was to be so confident,
So resolutely, so presumptuous bent
Upon my strength, when I Am at best but dust,
Frail man, too weak my own resolves to trust;
But it is past -- sad thought -- yet now in vain
I would recall what I have done again
All I can do is now to mourn the sin,
That I, presumptuous I, have plunged in:
O let my eyes then be a Stream, a Flood,
Nay let me weep for tears, a stream of blood,
Sighs and sad Groa^s shall all my music be,
Sobs and laments shall dwell, shall dwell with me;
Lord look on me, me^ wretc^^d man,
Who wanting thy Compassion, am undone.
O mercy, mercy ease my troubled mind,
Let me, ungrateful me, some mercy find,
Me that denied him, who first gave me breath,
Me that denied him who is condemned to death.
O pity me, my weakness Lord forgive,
Without thy Pardon, Lord, I cannot live;
My Soul's distracted, a fierce war's within
Disturbs my rest, the bold, the shameful sin,
Preys on my Spirits, and will give no rest:
Then mercy show to him that is oppressed:
O let thy dear compassion take away
The Sting of Conscience, ease me Lord, I pray;
I cry ^loud, covered with dust I lie
Even at thy Feet, O pity, or I die.
Raise, raise a sullen Wre^ch, that he may be
An object of ^hy saving Clemency.
My Cries are heard, a calm o'respreads my Soul,
No storms of trouble my free thoughts control:
O boundless, boundless is his goodness still,
Therefore I Will strive henceforth to do his will.
(...) Swine possessed.
SEe, see how Satan's Malice still is bent,
He who was in a guilful Serpent pent;
When he in Eden did seduce fair Eve,
And her, to man-kind's misery, deceive:
Rather then now he will idle be, he will join
Infernal nature with the dirty Swine;
Not sparing senseless Brutes, such is his hate
To all, that God for his glory did create;
Yet limited is his fierce wrath we see,
It cannot without Christ's permission be:
But having leave, the spightful Legion strait
The grunting Herd with horrid cries amate,
Who now grown wild, their Keepers put to ^light,
And all the Tribe with antic dancing fright.
Sometimes they stand an end, sometimes they roll,
Nay, bound aloft, and l^ap without control,
E're all that does oppose them in their way;
No bars nor bounders their fierce course can stay,
Till like a to^rrent down the hills they scour
Into the S^as, which does them all devour.
Considerations upon our Saviors compassion to the Thief upon the Cross.
HOw good, how great, how merciful, how just,
Is God to those who in him put their trust;
How is his Arms of mercy open wide
To those that in his saving Power confide;
See, see the Thief, who all his life had bin
A Drudge to Satan, slave to wr^t^hed sin;
At that sad time when Death looked grimly dr^a^,
And he of Li^e b^t a f^w m^m^nts had,
Rep^nting, is r^stor'd, ^ay more, i^ blessed,
With io^^s, that are with m^ns tongue expr^s^*
^^rely acknowledging (...)
To rai^e his So^l above the (...) Skies,
Ackno^^^^^in^ his sin, and ^reachi^g thence
The lord of gl^^i^s p^r^^^^ innocence:
(...) care was not ^or (...) h^ppi^es^,
^ut sudden (...) him to expr^^^,
^emember me, Lo^^, when (...) into
^ Kingdom that can only be thy ^ue.
^ut his comp^^r d^sirous still (...)
^reaming o^ Pl^asur^s (...) jo^^^ w^t^ stri^e,
^orgot his Soul* an^ ^ail^d ag^^^^^ t^^ Lo^^
^ho for his sake, did (...).
^o that (...) ^ellow chose the be^ter part,
those w^^s once ^^ded, swift as (...)
^hes his d^luding S^ul to th^^^ ble^t ^oys,
^here Care nor (...) no more mankind (...)*
Judas his Despair.
Wretch that I am, why do I view the light?
Why sink I not in everlasting night?
Why do not hottest lightnings strike me dead?
Why fall not Bolts of Thunder on my h^ad?
Why yauns not Earth to suck me in? and why
Find I not means my self wi^h speed to die?
Why live I in these torments worse than death?
In this sad torture, this sad Hell on Earth;
O Wretch! what sting of Conscience do I feel?
More sharp th^n all the force of fatal steel,
More deadly than the poison stings of Asps:
Dread horror my affrighted soul now clasps:
Accursed Silver that could make me prove
A Traitor to my Lord, who sacred love
Beamed on me o^t, but I have cast it back,
May it my ruin on the givers wrack,
Whilst this fit Cord stops -- thus my loathed breath
Whilst thus I seek some easement in my death.
A Dialogue between Pilate and his Wife.
The Argument.
The virtuous Wife of Roman Pilate`s grieved,
Because she was not as she ought believed,
Telling n^w plainly wha^ is her true sense,
And let`s him know his desperate offense.
W. UNhappy are you to be overruled by the man rout; why would you yield to
their roug^ clamours, to destroy the innocent?


P. I labored to deliver that just man, but found it w^ in vain, for still no
other cry than crucify him, sound^ through the Iudgment-Hall.


W. Yet you might have used your high Authori^^ ^o still the rout; who being
set on by their malicio^ Rulers, knew not against whom they cried, nor wh^ it
was they did.


P. I dare believe as much, but the sad deed is p^ ^ecal, and all you argue now
is vain.


W. As to retrieve the fact it is; but yet the glorious Prophet, whom the
foolish People think now dead, if my Dreams inform me right, lives, lives
Immortal, never more to dye.


P. How, lives! Then fear strikes me, horror chills me, and I tremble at what
you relate.


W. It was no common man, that in that barbarous manner they have used; but one
who in his Hands has power of Life and Death: A Power invincible, not to be
subdued by Armies, had he not consented to lay down his Life.


P. Indeed his meekness melted me into Compassion, and made me labor to
deliver him.


W. This, this was he of whom the Cibils sung in mistick numbers, this, this
was that dear Prince of ^eace* that should give Peace to the long warring World.


P. Then I am guilty of a horrid Crime, but now it is ^ast, in vain it is to
argue it; what I have done, I in a ^anner was compelled to do; therefore the
Blood s^ ^^ed, be on the guilty Nation, as the clamorous Rout ^equired.


^hilst I go mourn to wash away the Guilt ^f Blood so precious, yet so vilely
spilt.

W. And I likewise retire with fear and dread ^o worship him the foolish Jews
think dead.


Zacheus in the Sycamore Tree.
A Prophet Risen, yes, a Prophet great,
Good, just, and wise, if Fame the truth rel^te,
^s is wonder-working power has raised in me
wond^rous longing his loved Face to see;
^t still he is encompassed with such croud^,
^^at each huge bulk the happy Object shrouds,
^om my low stature, yet I heard men say,
(...) was to travel through a narrow way
^ading directly to my house, if so,
(...) add a height to what appears so low;
Upon the Branches of this shading Tree
Little Zacheus shall advanced be:
So -- now I`m up, and hither flows the crowd
With shouts, with Praises, and Hosannahs loud;
It Is, it is the Lord, now I shall see his Face;
O that I in his eyes may find some grace,
How lov^ly looks he? O! ^ow innocent,
And now on me his radient eyes are bent:
Ha -- see he beckons, I^le with speed descend,
And on the wonder-working Lord attend.
Conclusion.
Thus goes the fai^hful Man, and by command
Does entertain the Lord of Sea and Land,
The King of all the Gl^^ious Heavenly Band.
Nicodemus his Considerations, formed into a Dialogue between him and the World.
The Argument.
By night the Ruler comes, resolved to hear
The sacred Doctrine, 'c^use the Pani^k fear
He had of misbelei^ing Juda ^w'd,
More than the wrath of an inc^nsed God.
W. STrange it is you should neglect my moti^^ at this rate, and pin^ away with
Imagin^^tions of you know not what.


N. Be s^ill l^ud (...) F^lly, s^mething wit^ command^ me to obey i^s di^tates,
and fly wit^ speed the Physician.


W. To the phy^itian, why? are you dis^ase then if so, it is su^e I have a
thousand Cordials give you ease, made up of rich ingredient^, such seldom fail
mankind.


N. Al^ss, t^^ often they do, and a^e at b^st but luscious P^is^n, which man be
antidoted f^r a time, but in the e^d de^tr^^s the Patient.


W. How -- why sure the Man on whom I have ^^stowed so many Favors, c^nnot be
so much in^r^^^ful to reject my kind advice.


N. Forbea^ t^ trouble m^, s^^^e it is no^ in your ^ow^r t^ ^ive me ease, a
wounded So^l you cannot c^re, but (...) make it w^rse.


^. (...) that the thing that thu^ distur^s my darling, (...) i^ that be al^,
it is (...) ^^ing ^o^al f^r a day ^r ^^o, but f^asting ^our dull Sen^^s wi^h
d^light, and all your cares ^ill vanish.


N. In v^in you ^rge i^, therefore u^ge no m^re, from ^his da^ I ren^unce you
and yo^^ guil^^d v^niti^s; my (...), Tre^sures, or wh^te^^^ you (...) a soli^
(...) hencefo^th be no (...) the s^ll^ce of m^ mind, b^t Vi^tue, that essential
ha^^^n^ss, shall b^ my de^r com^ani^n.


W. And will you then cast off ^our Grandeur, Gai^y, lay by your awful Robes,
an^ leave your sump^uous Fare, to pine and languish, to be fed with ^ears and
sighs, as those that do forsake me are; will you, I say, fall under sad
reproach, contempt, and scorn.


N. This and much more I`le do for everlasting Life. ^^r will I argue longer,
least the happy motion tha^ dis^^ses me to happiness, should fail; but with
s^ift feet, ^hilst ^ark^ess ^antles in the World, fly ^o the Fo^ntain ^f all
^o^s.


W. But thither I will ^ollw th^e, and pull th^e ^ick, if possi^le.

(...) ^our belei^* and st^ive to blind your Sense,
That you shall dimly see true Excellence.

A Memento to Hypocrites, or an Imagined Dialogue b^tween Ananias and Saphira.
The Argument.
The Plot's contrived, they would have Heaven, and yet
Too great a price they would not give for it,
But purchase at a rate themselves think fit.
SEe how the crowding Pe ople flow to hear the new sprung Doctrine, and bring
daily Gifts to those that teach it.

A. It is true, nor must we be behind hand, since we have embrac^t it.


S. It is true, but if we sell our poor inheritance, and part with all the
price, how shall we afterward subsist; Indeed I Would willingly partake of the
joys the Teachers promise; yet methinks I would not be poor, for that will
r^nder us contemptible.


A. Take no care for that, we`ll give, and yet we will save enough to keep us
from contempt.


S. But how if the fraud should be discovered.


A. O fear it not, what M^rtal can discover it? he that bought it, knows not
ou^ intention, or if he does, will never inquire how we bestow the coin.


S. I dare believe as much, therefore go you, and lay a part of it at the great
Teachers Feet, whilst ^ secure the rest, and then I will follow for my
Benediction.


A. I Will do as you advise, and hope to be as well accepted as those who part
with all they have,


S. But if you should be asked, if what you bring, is the total Sum, where are
you then.


A. Why think thou, he that has devised, cannon without a blush, affirm it
is the whole? nor let you^ assuration be less, least we should differ, and by
tha^ means be detected.


S. I Will warrant you I Will have my lesson, therefore be concerned no further,
but about it.


Conclusion.
Thus is the project laid, though all in vain,
Yet such an one as might deceive mere man;
But good St. Peter filled with holy fire,
Sees through the thin device, and as their hire
Gives them to death, by whose hard hand they die,
That to the holy Ghost durst boldly l^.
A Dialogue between Satan and Simon Magus.
The Argument.
The Prince of darkness angry that his power
Is baffled by Gods sacred Word, a shower
Of wrath designs to rain, but cannot devour.
S. HOw now my Viceroy, wherefore is it you give ground? have not I furnished
you with Miracles, and sealed you with my mighty wonders.


Si. Great Prince of ^^^kness, whom I still admire, I^ cannot be that you are
ignorant of all the wond^^s; that of late have overspr^ad the Coast, Miracles
so far exceeding what is in my power, that now w^atever I do, but dimly
shines, my Fame is quite eclipsed, and all my Reputation is lost.


Sa. Ha -- Can such a thing ever be, when I use such transcendent dilig^nce to
make you dreaded throughout every Coast; what Miracles unheard of have thou
wrought? when once assis^ed by my flaming Legions; what storms have risen at
thy bidding? What loud thundrings roared, and lightnings seemed to burn the
World? how has the trembling Earth been tossed? and how the ocean stilled and
s^irr'd; what Mac^ins have thou reared by Magic power to please the eyes of
Princes? how at thy voice have swiftest Rivers stayed? and when you pleased,
the standing pools raved like the Ocean; how have you turned clear Waters into
Blood? and formed dire serpen^s, from whose threatening stings amazed man kind
fled, and is it possible that you should be out do^e.


Si. It i^, and all my Magic Power i^ vanished, n^r can you b^ igno^ant of
whose command I am utterly disabled.


Sa. It is true, I am not, yet I will do what is in my Power, to overthrow the
Power set up against my Kingdom, nor must you be wanting, as an ins^rument in
my Fierce hand; all my dread L^gions shall be set on work to raise up Ene^ies
against them and inspire my Servants with revenge to shed the blood of those I
hate; and such a storm I will raise, that they shall soon be sensible against
what power they strive; be diligent then, and expect to ^e protected, if my
force and stratagems do not deceive me, whilst I descend and muster up my
Legions.

vanishes.
Si. I wish I were well rid of this di^e slavery, O
what a Wretch is he that is ^^und to such a Master!
But I Will st^ive, alth^ugh I think it vain,
To cast his hellish yoak^ and break his chain.
T^ those blessed men I Will g^, that do s^bd^e
Infernal p^wers, and h^mbly t^ them sue
That the ^ll (...) on me a power that may
Obliege my wicked Master to obey.

A Dialalogue imagined between the dispossessed Damsel and her Master, when
Paul and Silas were released out of Prison.
The Argument.
The Mutineer's rebuked, and grieves to find
His wickedness so vainly was designed.
Dam. CRuel man, how durst you raise an accusation against those who have
commission from the highest God, even him that rules all things and fills all
places.


Ma. Was there not a cause, since they have disposessed me of my profit, that
was daily wont to accrae t^ me by y^^r strange divination, when to purchase you
of your aged Pa^ents, I was obliged to sell my dear Inheritance.


Dam. That was not cause sufficient, but if it was, you see your purpose is
quite frustrated; I knew them who they were, and therefore cried on purpose to
be thus released, to be delivered from the s^rugling Fiend that labored in my
Breast, and see ^is come to pass as I could wish.


M. It is so, and by it I am undone for ever; O! how rich should I have been,
had not these Men unhappily arrived; but yet they went not hence unpunished.


D. Yet woe to them, whose wicked hands have done so cursed a deed; better it
was they never had ^iewed the light: It plain appears how much their God was
angry, when he shuck the Earths foundation, that the tottering World seemed to
unhinge; his presence too was seen in the amazing brightness that filled all
the place, 'twas he that loosed them from their bands, and stayed the Goalers
rash design, he bowed the hearts of those proud Magistrates, and made them
tremble at what they had done.


M. It Is all mysterious, and methinks I am smitten with remorse, but tell me
are you pleased now as heretofore, when your admired breast was held the
Cabinet of Fate, to tell things admirable, and unriddle darkest Mysteries,
proclaim what future Ages should produce, and well presage the sure events of
Peace and War.


D. Pleased infinitely more, for now instead of a damned fury that inebriated
all my Senses, whilst he yell'd his horrid stories, divine rays of saving
Grace enlighten my dark Soul, O blessed change.


M. You tell me stories strange, but yet I must believe them true, and
henceforth make it my endeavors to bew^il my crime.

That I may escape the Fury of that God,
That shook the Earth, unfixing its vast load.

D. It Is well if you repent you of your sin,
E're his fierce wrath to fall on you begin;
And ask a pardon where you did offend,
Least Cattaracts of flame on you descend.

A Supposed Dialogue between Demetrius and his Fellow.
D. SEe you not Fellow Labourer, how great Diana's Name is almost sunk, since
this new Doctrine has or'espread our Coast, none now regard her Shrines as
heretofore.


F. It Is true, we see it but too plain, how her neglected Altar stands, no
crowds of Grecians now rest her Faun, but listening to new Doctrine, are become
regardless.


D. Our trade you see is lost thereby, and we reduced to poverty, therefore
give counsel what course we must take to uneclipse the Goddess fame, and settle
the giddy Multitit^de to their old de^otion.


F. No better way, than by insinuating the dangerous consequence of this new
doctrine, to set the rout a madding, raise a tumult, and whilst each gabbles
out he knows not what, put all into confusion.


D. But what would be the effect of such disorder, should we raise it?


F. O! slow of apprehension, why in the uproar, these Teachers, ten to one,
will fall a Sacrifice to the unruly Fury of the vulgar, who in their heat
triumph in mischief, that when cool they sadly lament.


D. Let us loose no time then, but disperse our selves amongst them, and
proclaim the wonders great Diana has already done, and tell what more she is
like to do, and clamor loud, great is Diana of the Ephesians.


F. We will instantly put this in practice, that your trade may be restored;
come, come about it.


Conclusion.
Thus boldly they presume, for gain, to do,
A wickedness, and madness does ensue,
Unheard of insolence, the senseless rout
Haling the blessed Apostles, who past doubt
Had there been slain, had not the Town Clerk stood
Their Friend, and saved the shedding of their blood.
Euticus his considerations after his being raised from ohe dead.
O Fatal slumber! Satan's gilded bait;
Our Souls, of Gods most powerful word, to cheat.
O dismal drowsiness! in such a place,
Could I not give attention for a space;
No, the temptation was grown strong, and I
For not resisting it, deserved to die:
Die, yes, why dead I was, and dead I might,
Have plunged by this time into eternal night,
Had not the great Apostle taken care,
In Christ's dread Name, e're my Soul stragled far,
From its left Corpse, to call i^ back again,
And by his word restored it without pain:
Rescued thus from the hands of cruel death,
Who had already seized upon my breath.
I live a monument to glorify
The Lord of Host, whose dwelling is on high,
And henceforth will not dare offend my God,
Who in his mercy is to me so good.
A Dialogue between the Mariners, after St. Paul's shipwreck.
The Argument.
The Mariner's now safe at land, ad^i^e
The great Apostle, who from Seas dread ire
Preserved them safe, and Heavens hot darling fire.
1 M. O What a Tempest have we escaped! how the rough winds assailed from all
their quarters our distressed Bark, and yet strong she labored with the waves.


2 M. It Is true, the ^laming Skies sent fire upon us in such dreadful sort,
that every moment I expected we should be a blaze.


3 M. It Is wonderful that none of us should perish in sogreat a danger.


1. M. We might have prevented this sad ruin, had we taken the good Prisoners
word, who told us what would come to pass.


2 M. Sure he is some Angel, that was sent to save, for I never thought we
could have weathered such a Tempest, to have brought our Ship into the Harbor.


3 M. He is a Heavenly Man past doubt, some man protected by a power divine, or
else the Viper would have killed him.


1 M. Nay ^he wicked Soldiers were about to do it, and we should have perished
for his blood.


2 M. I wonder what he is sent to Caesar for.


3 M. They say about his Doctrine, If so, I doubt not but he will come off, for
all he speaks is Heavenly, and I hear him ever.


1 M. Nay of us admire; but now night calls us, and we must to our apartments,
and for the future, if we get another Vessel, I kope our Master will regard him
more, and give good heed to all he says.


2 M. He ought to do it, and no doubt when Caesar hears of what has passed, he
will not frown upon a Man, for whose sake, Heaven has spared our lives; but
come for this time let us hence.


Conclusion.
Thus far the great Apostle is arrived,
In vain is all, his Foes have yet contrived;
To Rome he next proceeds, and wins applause
In pleading his dear masters sacred cause:
Strengthening the weak, confirming those that stand,
Converting many, and has great command
Over Hearts of men, till monsterous Nero, stirred
By Satan's Malice, kills him with a Sword.
On the Infancy of our Savior.
HAil blessed Virgin, full of Heavenly Grace,
Blessed above all that sprang from humane race,
Whose Heaven saluted Womb brought forth in One
A blessed Savior, and a blessed Son:
O! what a ravishment'^ had been to see
Thy little Savior perking on thy Knee!
To see him nuzzel in thy Virgin-Breast:
His milk-white Body all unclad, undrest!
To see thy busy Fingers close and wrap
His spreading limbs in thy indulgent Lap!
To see his desperate Eyes, with childish grace
Smiling upon his smiling Mothers face!
And when his forward strength began to bloom,
To see him diddle up and down the Room!
O, who would think so sweet a Babe as this,
Should e're be slain by a false-hearted Kiss!
Had I a Rag, if sure thy body wore it,
Pardon, sweet Babe, I think, I should adore it:
Till then, O grant this Boon (a Boon far-dearer)
The Weed not being, I may adore the wearer.
On the Young man in the Gospel.
HOw well our Savior and the landed Youth
Agreed a little while? And, to say truth,
Had he had will and power in his hand,
To keep the Law, but as he kept his Land;
No doubt, his Soul had found the sweet fruition
Of his own choice desires without petition:
But he must Sell and Follow, or else not
Obtain his Heaven; O now, his Heaven's too hot;
He cannot stay, he has no business there:
He Will rather miss, than buy his Heaven to dear:
When broth's too hot for hasty Hounds, how they
Will lick their s^alded lips, and sneak away!
On Peter's Cock.
THe Cock crow'd once; and Peter's careless ear
Could hear it, but his eye not spend a tear:
^he Cock crow'd twice, Peter began to creep
^o the Fire side, but Peter could not weep:
^he Cock crow'd thrice, Our Savior turned about
and look on Peter, now his tears burst out.
'Twas not the Cock, it was our Savior's Eye,
Till he shall give us tears, we cannot cry.
On the Penny.
HE that endured the tyranny of Heat,
The Morning sorrow, and the Mid-day-swea^,
The Evening toil, and burden of the day,
Had but his promised Penny for his pay:
Others, that loyter'd all the Morning, stood
In The Idle Market, whose unpracticed blood
Scarce felt the warmth of labor, nor could show
A blush of action: had his penny too:
What Wages can we merit, as our own:
Slaves that are bought with price can challenge none,
But only Stripes: alas, if Servants could
Do more, than bid, they do but what they should:
When man endeavors, and when Heaven engages
Himself by Promise, they are Gifts, not Wages,
He must expect: we must not look to obtain
Because we Run: nor do we run in vain.
Our running shows the effect, produces none:
The Penny's given alike to every one
That works in the Vineyard; Equal price was shared
T'unequal Workers; therefore no Reward:
Lord, set my hands awork; I will not serve
For Wages, least thou give what I deserve.
On Ananias.
THe Land was his, the Land was his alone
'Twas told, and now the money was his own*
The Power remained in the Possessors hand
To keep his money, or have kept his land:
But once devoted to the Churches good,
And then concealed, it cost his life, his blood.
If those that give may not resume agin,
Without a Punishment, without a Sin
What shall become of those whose unjust power
Despoils the widowed Temple of her Dower?
Who takes her profits, and instead of giving
Increase to her revenues, makes a livi^g
Upon her ruins, growing plump and full
Upon her wants, being clothed in her Wool:
While she sustains the extremes of cold and hunger,
To pamper up the fat Advowson-munger;
To thrust their Flesh-hooks, and their thirsty Pot,
And only leave her, what they value not,
And whilst her sacred Priests that daily tread
Their slighted Corn, must beg their early B^ead;
Or else, be forced to purchase easy shar^^
With that dear pri^e of their ungranted Prayers:
Let such turn back their Sacrilegious eyes,
And see how breathl^ss Ananias ^^es,
Behold the Wag^^ that his s^n procures,
That was a Mole-hi^l, to these Al^s of yours:
He took it from the Church, did but con^eal
Some parts he gave: But your false singers steal
Her main Inheritance, her own Possession:
His was but ^are deceit, yours bold Oppression:
O, if no less than the first death was due
To him, what death do you think's prepared for you?
So often as your pa^per'd eyes shall look
On your Estates, think on the Flying-Book.
There is Newly Published Fifteen extraordinary pleasant and useful Books,
which are to be sold by John Dunton at the black Raven at the corner of Princes
street near the Royal Exchange, London.
[1.] A Very delightful New Years Gift, entitled Heavenly Pastime, or pleasant
Observations on all the most remarkable passages throughout the Holy Bible of
the Old and New Testament, newly Allegoriz'd in several pleasant Dialogues,
Poems, Similitudes, Paraphrases, and Divine Fancies, To which is added: (1) The
Miraculous manner of the production of our Old Grandmother Eve, with the
supposed manner of Adams first Nuptial Addresses to her, with the pleasant
circumstances of their Marriage. (2) You have an account of Eves first
Addresses to Adam, and her Industry in making a Garment for her Husband. (3)
You have a pleasant account of Adam and Eves Winter Suites, their lodging and
first building, with an account in what pretty manner they first invented a
Fire to warm them. (4) You have abundance of supposed Dialogues, very full of
delightful reading, The first is between Adam and Eve, and Eve and the Serpent,
the second Dialogue is between Cain and Abel, Monster Sin and Conscience: 3.
Between Abraham and Sara^ upon her laughing at the thoughts of her bearing
Children in her old Age. 4. Between Abraham and hi^ dear and only Son Isaac
before his Father went to offer him up as a Sacrifice. 5. Between Isaac and
Rebe^^a at their first meeting. 6. Between Jacob and Rachel, upon his being
willing to serve fourteen years to obtain her love. (5) A wonderful Account how
Pharaoh and all his Host were drowned in the Red Sea. (6) A Dialogue between
Grim Death and the ^lying Minutes. (7) Between Balaam and his Ass. (8) The
Triumphs of Chastity, or a Dialogue between Joseph and his Mistress upon her
tempting of him to uncleanness. (9) A Dialogue between the wanton Harlot and
the Debauched Youth. (10) A Dialogue between Sampson and his beloved Dalilah
(11) Between Ruth and Naomi upon these words, Nothing but Death shall part thee
and me. (12) Between David and Goliath upon their first encounter (13) Between
Jonathan and David including all the sweets of an entire friendship. (14)
Between David, Vriah, and Bathsheba. (15) A choice Dialogue fancyed between
King Solomon and the Queen of Sheba, about the wonderful works of God
throughout the whole Creation; to which is added the glory and splendour of King
Solomon's Court, together with the Queen of Sheba's glorious progress to it.
(16) A Dialogue between Iehu and wanton Iezabel. (17) Haman on the Gallows, or
a Dialogue between Haman and Mordecai. (18) Between Adonibezeck and one of the
sixty Kings he tormented under his Table, supposed to be in the other world.
(19) A Dialogue between Job and his Wife (20) Between Isaiah and Hezekiah
relating to the fifteen years that was added to his Life. (21) A Dialogue
between Nebuchadnezzar and the three Children, called Shadrack, Mesheck, and
Abednego, that were cast into the fiery Furnace. (22) Between Darius and
Daniel, when he was cast into a Den, to be devoured by roaring Lions. (23)
Between Jonah and the Mariners in the Storm before he was ^wallowed up alive by
a Whale. (24) Between Zacharias and Elizabeth. (25) A fancied Dialogue between
ri^h Dives and poor ragged Lazarus. (26) A very affectionate Dialogue between
the returning Prodigal and his loveing Father, together with choice Meditations
upon our Saviors great compassion to the Converted Thief upon the Cross. (27)
A Dialogue between Judas and the High Priest about betraying of Christ, together
with Iudas's doleful desspair. (28) Between Nicodemus and the deceitful World,
wherein the World promises glorious matters. (29) A Dialogue between Pilate and
his Wife after he had condemned our Blessed Savior. (30) A choice Dialogue
between Iairus and his Daughter after her being raised from the dead,
representing what ravishing sights probably her Soul might behold during all
the time her Body lay dead in the Grave, (31) A memento to Hypocrites, or a
Dialogue between Ananias and Saphira. (32) A strange Dialogue between the Devil
and Simon Magus, (33) Between the dispossessed Damosel and her Master, when Paul
and Silas were by a Miracle released out of Prison, (54) Useful Meditations
upon Eutichus* falling down dead, sleeping at a Sermon. (35) An awakening
Dialogue between the Mariners after St. Paul's Shipwreck: With above fifty
extraordinary pleasant Dialogues and Poems besides. By John Dunton Author of
the Sickmans Passing Bell. Price Bound two Shillings and six pence.

[2.] The Complete Tradesman, or The Exact Dealers daily Companion, Instru^ting
him throu^hly in all things absolutely necessary to (...) all those who would
thrive in the (...) in the whole Art and Mystery of Trad^ (...) and will be of
constant use for all (...) whole-salemen, Shop keepers, Retailers* Yo^^g
Tradesmen* Country Chapmen, Indust^^ous Y^o^en, Traders in petty Villages, and
all Farmers, and others tha^ go to Countrey-Fairs and Markets, and for all me^
whatsoever that be of any Trade, or have any considerable Dealings in the
World. Written by N. H. Merchant in the City of London. The Third Edition with
large Additions, wherein is now fully taught The pleasant and delightful Art of
Money-Catching* Price Bound ^ s.

[3.] An Ingenions Discourse against Naked Breast and Shoulders, Patches,
Painted Faces, and Long Perriwiggs: By Mr. Iay Rector of Chinner in
Oxfordshire. Price Bound, 1 s.

[4.] A Con^iuation of Morning Exercise Ques^i^ns and Cases of Conscience,
pra^^i^ally resolved by 31 Reverend Divines in the City of London, October
1682. Some of the Cases in this Exercise are as follows: 1. How may we
Experi^nce it in our selves, and Evidence it to others, that serious Godliness
is more than a Fancy? 2. What may most hop^fully ^e attempted to allay
animosities amongst Protest^nts, that our Divisions may not be our Ruin? 3.
How may we best cure the love of being flattered? 4. What are the best
Preservatives against Melancholy and overmuch Sorrows? 5. How may our belief of
God's governing the whole World support us in all worldly distractions
whatsoever? 6. Wherein is a middle worldly condition most eligible. 7. How may
we improve those Doctrines and Providence that transcend our understanding. 8.
How ought we to do our Dutys toward others though they do not theirs toward
us? 9. What distance ought we to keep in following the strange and ridiculous
Fashions of apparel which came up in the Days wherein we live. 10. How may
Child bearing Women be most encouraged and supported against, in, and under,
the hazard of their Travel With 21 most excellent choice cases of Conscience
more, which I have not room here to insert. Price bound, 8 s.

[5.] The Pilgrims Guide from the Cradle to his Deathbed, with his glorious
passage from then^e to the New Jerusalem, represented to the L^^^ in a
Delightful New Allegory, wherein the Christian ^raveller ^s more fully and
plainly directed than yet ever he ^ath been by any in the right and nearest ^ay
to the Celestial Paradise, to which is added the Sick man's Passing Bell,
together with the Customs of several Nations in the burial of their dead, with
no less ^han 50 several pleasant Treatises besides, rarely if ever handled
before, all of them being distinctly useful, and will aff^rd the Reader
e^traordinary Pleasure and D^light in the perusal, if either Profi^ or Novelty
will do it: To these are an^^xt, (1.) An awakening Dialogue between the Soul
and ^ody of a Damned ^an, ^ach laying the fault upon the other, fancied in a
Morning Dream: In which Dialogue the Speakers are, the Author, a Soul lately
departed, a dead Carcass, and lastly the Devils. (2.) An impartial Treatise
concerning Devils, Apparitions, Specter, Phantasms, Pharies, Familiar Spirits,
Goblings, Hags, Witches and their Imps; Wizards and Witchcraft (with the manner
how Persons become Witches) of Conjurors, Impostors, places haunted, and of the
Ghosts of Persons walking after they have been buried a long time in their
Graves; together with two real Dialogues that passed between the Devil and two
famous Divines. And lastly is added the Sighs and Groans of a dying Man:
Written by John Dunton, late Rector of Aston Clinton. The whole Work is
illustrated with eight curious Copper Plates* Price Bound 2 s.

[6.] The Travels of true Godliness, from the beginning of the World to this
present day, in an apt and pleasant Allegory, showing the Troubles,
Oppositions, Reproaches, and Persecutions, he has met with in every Age:
Together with the danger he seems to be in at this present time, by Vice,
Papistry, and other grand Enemies, also where he makes hi^ last and final
abode. The Second Edition, to which is now added five lively Cu^s, together
with ^ue Godlines's Voyage to Sea, with many new Additions besides. By B.
Keach, Author of the War with the Devil. Price Bound. 1 s.

7. The Progress of ^ in, or the Travels of Ungodliness, from the beginning of
the World, to this present* Day; in an apt and pleasant A^legory. Wherein you
have an account of his cunning and roguish Sub^^^^ties and hateful Villainies:
Together with the wonderful Victories he has obtained, and abominable
Mischiefs he has done to Mankind, by the help of the Devil, in all his
Travels. As also, how a great Hue and Cry was sent after him, to search for him
in those Houses where he was used to lodge in his Travels; with a remarkable
Account of his Apprehension, Arraignment, Trial, Condemnation, and Execution,
etc. In which Trial, Old Father Adam, the whole Creation, and the Lady Grace,
with her three Beautiful Daughters, were subpoena'd as Witnesses of
Ungodliness; who all appearing in Court, and their Evidence being strong and
clear (after a full hearing of all Vmgodliness had to say for himself, why
Sentence should not pass upon him) the Jury brought him in Guilty; upon which a
Quaker, with his hat on, stood up in open Court, and pleaded hugely for a
Pardon for him; but it would not be granted. In the First Chapter, you have an
an Account, how the Devil gave Ungodliness a Commission to travel all the World
over; with the base Retinue that does accompany him, and the great success he
had in his first Enterprise. The Second Chapte^ shows, how Ungodliness came
into a Country called Nonage; and of the strange projects he played there.
With a pleasant account of some little Bantlings* that (to to their eternal
Renown be it spoken) were too hard for him. Upon which in the Fourth Chapter he
sneaks into Youthshire, where one pious Youth (above all the rest) made up to
him, and cuft him so ^riskly, that he was forced to cry out, Quarter, Quar^er,
Quarter, but being rescued at last by some ^oor Plow-jobbers of the Country (
after he had recovered Breath) he Travels in the Fifth Chapter, ^long with the
Father of Hell and Damnation, into a ^ast Country, and City, called Sensuality.
With the manner how three poor honest men made there e^^^pe out of the said
City and Country. The Sixth Chapter shows, how Ungodliness came huffing aga^^^
a little Town called Religion, or Mount Zion, with ^ great Army of mixed People,
and besieged it. Wit^ the huge and bloody Battle he fought there. The Seventh
Chapter shows, how Godliness and Ungodliness happened to meet each other in
their Travels upon the Road: With the various Discourses that passed between
them: With the manner of their parting. The Eight Chapter shows, how
Ungodliness traveled into the great City Babylon; and from thence into a great
Country of Commerce, that stands by a small Village called Morality, with the
mad Tricks he played there among the Tradesmen and Citizens Wives, etc. With
abundance of more Heads; and a lively Cut. Written by B. K. Author of the
Travels of true Godliness.

[8] The English Rogue complete in four parts, wherein you have a discovery of
the Knavery of all Trades in the City of London, Illustrated with several
Copper Plates, Price Bound 8 s.

[9.] A Famous and Impartial History in large Folio, written by the Learned
Doctor Frankland, entitled the Annals of King James and King Charles the
first, wherein you have a full and large account of the great Affairs of State,
and the Transactions in England for several years, wherein several material
Passages relating to the late Civil Wars omitted in all former Histories are
now made known, Price Bound 18 s.

[10.] The Key to the Holy Bible, unlocking the Richest Treasure of the Holy
Scriptures, whereby the (1) Order (2) Names, (3) Times, (4) Penmen, (5)
Occasion, (6) Scope, And 7. Principal parts, containing the Subject matt^r of
the Books of the Old and New Testament, are familiarly and briefly opened for
the help of the Weakest Capacity in the understanding of the Whole Bible. A
Book very useful for all Christian Families. The fourth Edition diligently
revised, Written by Francis Roberts, D. D. Price Bound 12 s.

[11] A Ravishing glimpse of the Crown of Glory, wherein the Christians
Portion, or the unseen Beauties of the other World are fully as^erted and
proved ( serving as a Cordial to the Heaven^^ Traveller in his way to Paradise)
together with several choice Funeral Sermons occasionally preached, and now
published by Samuel Willard an eminent Minister o^ the Gospel at B^ston in New
England. Price Bound, 1 s. and 6 d.

[12.] Mr. Hows Sermon at the Funeral of that faithful and laborious Servant of
Christ* Mr. Richard Fair^^^ugh (late of Bristol) who deceased July the 4th.
1682. in the 61 year of his Age. price 6 d.

[13.] A choice Pattern for all Young P^rs^ns of either Sex, ^isplay^d ^o the
Life in a Ser^on pr^ach^d by Mr. (...) D^^th of a ^oun^ Pious Gentlewoman Mrs.
(...), Daughter of Mr. Nathaniel (...) late of Hackney, together with her (...)
and Death, price 6 d.

[14] The Pilgrims (...) in a Dream: by John Bunian. Price 1 s.

[15.] The Life and Death (...), with large Additions. Price 8. d. T^gethe^
with all manner of ^a^eable Chapm^ns Books.

Likewise some of the most Delightful Histories that ever were yet extant, are
to be sold by John Dunton at the Black Raven at the Corner of Prin^es-^^reet
near the ROYAL EXCHANGE in Lon don, together with all manner of good, pleasant,
and practical English Books.

Note, that whosoever buys a complete set of all those fifteen books mentioned
in this Bill, shall be used very kindly for them all together.

FINIS.

