John Dunton at ye Black Raven in the Poultrey over agianst the Stocks MArkett
London -- T: Catlett Sc^



THE INFORMER'S DOOM: OR, AN Amazing and Seasonable Letter FROM UTOPIA,
Directed to the Man in the MOON.

Giving a full and pleasant Account of the Arraignment, Trial, and
Condemnation, of all those grand and bitter Enemies, that disturb and molest
all Kingdoms and States, throughout the Christian World.

To which is added (as a caution to honest Countrymen) the Arraignment, Trial,
and Condemnation, of the Knavery and Cheats, that are used in every particular
Trade in the City of LONDON.

Presented to the consideration of all the Tantivy-Lads and Lasses in VROPE, by
a true Son of the Church of ENGLAND.

Curiously Illustrated with about Threescore Cuts.

Entered according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for John Dunton, at the Black-Raven, in the Poultrey,
over against Stocks-Market. 1683.

THE Epistle Dedicatory TO THE CITIZENS OF LONDON.
Gentlemen,
YOu have here presented to your candid View, a full and impartial Account
(with many other remarkable things) of the Arraignment, Trial, and
Condemnation, of all those grand and bitter Enemies, that disturb all Kingdoms
and States, throughout the Christian World, etc. But the Application and
Improvement of them is to be (if you tender your Temporal or Eternal Interest)
made by you, your selves.

I am not Insensible that by the exposing this Book I shall expose my self too,
to the censure of those who take measure of every thing by their petulant
humors, and have no other way to set off ^^eir own barren Inventions, but by
perpetual In^^ctives against the multitude of Books which appear every day in
the World. Whereas indeed the mischiefs which they complain of have proceeded
not from their number, but quality.

For should every Man write an exact Narrative of the various Experiences and
Circumstances of his Life, comprehending as well his Vices as Virtues, and have
them with simplicity related, how useful would this prove to the public, though
it would much increase the number of Books, but this so impartial an Account
may rather be wished for than expected, since Men have ever preferred their own
private Reputation before the real good of themselves or others.

I have comprised this Treatise in an Eighteen Penny Book, (though considering
the Cuts, it cannot be well afforded so) that as it is of real use and public
concern, so it might be the better dispersed throughout this English Nation.

I Rest, Dear Fellow-Citizens, Your most Humble Servant, PHILAGATHVS.

AN ACCOUNT FROM UTOPIA, OF The late Famous and Remarkable Trials of all those
grand and bitter Enemies that disturb and molest all Kingdoms and States
throughout the Christian World.
WHen the Assizes were in Vtopia, Conscience the Judge of that Country,
(attended on by the Sheriff, the Justices of the Peace, and such as necessarily
were to be there) being seated on the Bench of Impartiality, caused the
Commission of Oyer and Terminer to be Read, for the speedy Trial of all those
grand and bitter Enemies that disturbed and molested that Country, and all
other Kingdoms and States throughout the Christian World. And the very first
that was called to the Bar, was that Grand-He-Rogue Innocent the XI. Pope of
Rome.

Iayler, set Pope Innocent the XI. to the Bar.


Pope, Pope, Hold up thy Hand.




Pope, Thou art here Indicted by the Name of Pope Innocent the XI. The Pope
Arraigned and Indicted.
of the Famous City of Rome, in the Parish of Babylon; That thou being an
illegitimate Son, begotten of Falsehood, Murders, Assasinations, Heresy,
Paganism, Iudism, have by great Violence murdered the Territories of the Church
of God, and by Spanish Inquisition. bloody Massacres, stabbing, poisoning, and
killing of Kings, Gun-owder Plots, Treasons, Rebellions, and other hellish
Practices, usurped Authority; and thrust upon God's People their humane
Traditions, Inventions, Superstitions, Will Worship, Heresies, Jewish
Ceremonies, add Paganish Idolatry, to the damnation of many Christian Souls,
contrary to the Peace of our Sovereign Lord the King, his Crown and Dignity:
What say thou hereunto? Art thou guilty, or not guilty?


Not guilty my Lord.


By whom will thou be tried?


By God and the Country.


But (good my Lord) let me have a Jury of my own choosing. The Pope's Petition.



Judge, Because neither thou, nor any of thy slanderous Favorites may say,
that thou have been proceeded against rigorously and unjustly, without respect
to the Truth of the Cause. I am content to call a Jury of thine approbation, if
here we can have so many as will make up the number.

I humbly thank you (my good Lord) God reward your Lordship for it.


Mr. Sheriff, Impannel a Jury of very substantial men, the chiefest you can
find, and fittest to go upon this Prisoner now at the Bar.


My Lord, I supposed, that as he would crave, so from your Lordships
uprightness, he should obtain this Favor, therefore have I prepared a full
Jury to this purpose.

It was done wisely of you ( Mr. Sheriff) let them be called.

Crier, A Jury against Pope Innocent.
Call in the Jury.

1. Call Common Principles. Vous aves Common principles.

2. Call Apostles Creed; Vous aves, The Creed.

3. Call Second Commandment. Second Commandment, come in.

My Lord, I cannot get in.


What Is the matter?


My Lord (says the Crier) the Papists keep him out.


Command to let him in: Vous aves, the second Commandment.

4. Call Pater noster: Vous aves, Pater noster.

5. Call Holy Scriptures: Vous aves, Holy Scriptures.

6. Call the Apocripha: Vous aves, Apocripha.

7. Call Counsels: Vous aves, Counsels.

8. Call Ancient Fathers for the first six hundred years after Christ: Vous
aves, Ancient Fathers.

9. Call Contradiction among themselves: Vuos aves, Contradiction.

10. Call Absurdity of Opinion: Vous aves, Absurdity of Opinion.

11. Call Consent of their own men: Vous Consent.

12. Call Testimony of Martyrs: Vous aves, Testimony of Martyrs.

Count, says the Clerk.

Then the Crier bids them answer to their Names.

Common Principles, By these twelve means the Pope may be confuted.
one; Creed two; Commandments three; Pater noster four; Holy Scriptures five;
Apocrypha, six; Counsels seven; Fathers eight; Contradiction, nine; Absurdity,
ten; Consent of their own men, eleven; Testimony of Martyrs, twelve: Good men
and true stand together, and hear your Charge.

My Lord, here are some more summoned by Master Sheriff's Authority.


Who be they Master Sheriff?


Master Law with his Sons, Civil, Canon, Common, and Municipal.


Well, let them attend the Court for the King's service, for use if need be.


Pope, If thou can justly accept against any, I give thee leave to challenge
any such of the Jury.


Good my Lord, Holy Scripture is excepted against, for Papists may be confuted
by their own Translation.
only one of the Jury I except against, which is Holy Scripture, except it be
our own Translation.


Holy Scriptures excepted against by Pope Innocent.


Well, says the Judge, I am content it shall be so, let it be either Montanus,
or the Rhemist, or the Vulgar Edition; we desire a just Proceeding with all the
indifferency that may be.


Then the Crier called aloud; If any man can give Evidence, or can say any
thing against the Prisoner at the Bar, let him come in, for he stands upon his
Deliverance.

Here is my Lord, two worthy Gentlemen, Mr. Sincerity, and Mr. Protestant.

Mr. Sincerity and Mr. Protestant witnesses against Pope Innocent. the XI.


Master Sincerity come near, what can you say concerning the ^^^soner at the
Bar?


My Lord, this I am able to j^stifie: First, That he has been a False-teacher
from the beginning, fraught with Error and Heresies, teaching as the
False-teachers did, such as be recorded in Scripture, if they were paralled
together, as the Doctrine of Devils, 1 Timothy 4.1, 2. Traditions and Commandments
of men, Matthew. 1. 52. Mar. 7, 8, 9, 33. Col. 2. 22. Venial sins, Matthew. 2316,
18. Childrens neglect of Parents for Churches profit, as they pretented, Matthew.
15.5. Mark 7.11. Superstitious observation in meats and holy days, Matthew.
15.11. Col. 2.16.21. Laying heavy burdens upon the people, Luke 11.46.
Justification by works, therewith troubling the Churches, Gal. 2.18. and 3.2.
and 5.4, 12. Voluntary Religion, and Will Worship, Col. 2.4.18.23. The worship
of Angels, Col. 2.18. Carnal liberty, 2 Pet. 2.19. Rev. 2.15.20. And teaching
for filthy lucre, 2 Tit. 11. Thus are they, as were the false Teachers (as the
Scriptures in the New Testament set them out) like in all these things.


How like they are (my Lord) to after Heretics, learned Whitaker in his Book
De Ecclesia, in the first Question, shows in many particulars.


Secondly (my Lord) he has used the very same Practices which False-teachers
have used; h^doth to make way for his Doct^^ne, Worship, and Advancement, even
as they did. They played the Hypocrites in outward humility in lay Prayers and
forms of Devotion, and so misled silly Women. They graced their Doctrine with
show of Forefathers. They took away the Key of Knowledge, and neither would
enter into life, nor suffer others. They told the pleople old Wives Fables, and
told Lies in Hypocrisy. They used slights and cunning craftiness to deceive.
They boasted of their Learning, using profane and vain babbling, and
oppositions of Sciences as they termed it. They pretended Revelations,
Apostolical Traditions, and alleged counterfeit Writings. They had the
Prophetical Women, and deceiving Prophetesses. They had their Miracle-workers,
Casters out of Devils, and Dreamers if Dreams. They would slander men's
persons, and the Doctrine of faithful Teachers, and lay to their charge what
they could not prove, speaking of them contemptuously, and railing on them.
They boasted to be the true Church, and that by Succession they were of the
Fathers. They would use fair and smoothing words, and teach with enticing
words, and did strive for excellency of speech of man's ^isdom to deceive. When
they could not prevail by fair means, th^^ they would suborn false Witnesses.
They threated, beat, imprisoned, banished, and slew the faithful Teachers and
Christian Believers. They would plot Conspiracies to the shedding of blood, and
the Priests must be acquaint^d herewith beforehand, to encourage them hereto.
They would make open Insurrections, and stirs up great Personages to take part
with them. And what Rebellion, Treasons, Conspiraci^s, Insurrections, and
Persecutions this Pope has wrought, my Lord Bishop of Lincoln, has openly
discovered to the World. And this (my Lord) is not what I could, but what I
thought sufficient to testify at this time, because I would not be tedious.


Mr. Sincer^ty, By this you have uttered, it is easy to see how this man has
followed, both the False-teachers in Doctrine, and the Enemies of the Gospel in
their Practices. If there be any more Witnesses, let them come forth.


Yes, my Lord, here is Mr. Protestant.


Mr. Pro^estant, What is it that you have to say against this Prisoner at the
Bar?


My Lord, I was commanded to be here to Day to give Evidence what I know
against this man; and this I am willing to do for the Service of my Sovereign.


This it is (my Lord) which I have to say, That this man with his Associates,
has instead of Christian Religion, set up a Service of Judaism and Paganism,
which I am able to prove in a multi^ude of Particulars; but because I am loath
to be tedious in my relation, I have brought here with me Three Books, that the
Jury may judge of all the Particulars; or that they may be read before the
Prisoner, if your Lordship shall be pleased to have it also.


What Books, Mr. Protestant?


My Lord, One is that, that is called the Three Conformities set our lately.
The other is, De Origin Papatus, set out by one Doctor Morisin, and Dedicated
to his late Majesty: And our third is, our learned Countryman, Doctor
Raynolds, his Conference with Heart, never answered by any Papist to this day;
who shows how the Popish Service is like unto the Jewish in very many
particulars, and wherein they be more Heathenish than Jewish.


I am content to have them read, to spare your speech, touching the Jewish
Service.


So having been read, the Judge yet wished Mr. Protestant to declare openly,
how Pagan-like the Pope is, nay, he is as bad as the Heathenish Idolaters in
Israel and Judah were.


My Lord, I shall (says Mr. Protestant) perform this task with as great
brevity as I may; that this Prisoner (if it be possible) may see how wickedly
he has dealt with Men's Souls, to set up instead of Gods Service an Idolatrous,
and Pagan-like Worship.


These Pagans set forth God like a Man. The Idolatrous Isralites had a Queen of
Heaven; they had Images of Gold and Silv^r, Brass, Iron, Wood and Stone, and
some of Clay; some molten, some carved and graven, some portrayed upon Walls,
and other Pictures; some were like men, Lam. 3. 1. 1 Samuel 5.3, 4. and some like
women, Act. 19.27. 2 Maccab. 1.13. 1 Samuel 31.10. some like beasts (like St.
George and the Dragon) Exodus 34. Wisdom. 11.15. They adorned them with silver
and gold. Ier. 10.4. and set Crowns upon some of their heads, covering them
with costly garments, and of diverse colors, Deuteronomy. 7.25. Heb. 2.19. Baruc.
6.8.9, 14, 15 29, 39, 30, 55, 58. Ezekiel. 16.18. Aisd. 13.14. carrying a Scepter
in the hand, or a Dagger, or an Axe, Baruc. 6.14.15. They set them up with
great devotion and solemnity, with music and melody, Dan. 3.3. with singing
dancing, and other delights, Exodus 32.5. They built Temples for these Images,
Joel, 3.5. 2 Maccab. 1.13.15. Baruch, 6.18. which were the houses of their
gods, Judge. 17. 4. 1 Samuel 5.2. and called them Sanctuaries, Isa. 16.12. They
had Chapels for them, Amos, 7.12. Yea, they set upon tops of hills, 1 King.
14.23. 2 King. 17.10. They had them in private houses, Judge. 17.18. in
Chambers, Ezekiel. 8.12. and in secret places, Deuteronomy. 17.15. they had their
pleasant Groves planted, Ier. 17.2. 1 King. 14.23. 2 Cor. 15.16. 2 King. 17.10.
They had their standing Pillars and Images, as the Papists their Crosses. Deuteronomy.
12.3, and 16.22. 2 King. 17.10. Lev. 16.1. These were in the head of
highways, and streets of Cities, Ezekiel. 16.31. Ier. 11.13. The multitude were
allured by the gorgeous decking of them, Wis. 14.20. and 15.5, 6. Yea, they
doted upon them, Ezekiel. 8.10, 11. They worshipped them, bowed unto them, and fell
down before them, Dan. 13 2. Isa. 44.7. Ios. 23.6. They would lift up their
eyes unto them, Ezekiel. 33.25. Pray unto them 1 King. 18.26. Hab. 2.16. Isa. 44.
17. Kiss them, Hos. 13.2. King. 19.8. set up Candles before them, Baruch. 6.19.
Make vows on them, Baruch, 6.35. and go Pilgrimage to some of them very far,
Ier. 51.44. expecting some miraculous cure from the Image, Baruch, 6.41. In
entering into their Temples they sprinkled themselves with water. Altars they
had of stone, Isa. 65.3. They used vain repetitio^s in their prayers, Matthew.
6.7. They measured their Religion, and goodness thereof by plenty, Ier. 44.7.
They had their sacrificing Priests, Act. 14.13. and they were shaven Priests,
Baruch, 6.31.32. Sometimes they were of the basest of the people, 1 King.
12.31. whosoever would, might for money, or for money-worth, make himself a
Priest, 1 King. 12.31. 2 Chronicles. 13.9. And some served for base wages, Judge. 17.
They had their Concubines, Baruch, 6.11. Hos. 4.14. Some of them would wear
their hair-cloaths, and torment themselves, 1 Kings 18.26.28. Zach. 13.4. and
of a Devotion in a Willworship, macerate their bodies, punishing and not
sparing their bodies, Col. 2.23. Their Teachers taught for hire, Mich. 3. 11. 2
Pet. 2.13, 15. Rev. 2. Tit. 1.11. For gifts, they would promise life and peace,
Ezekiel. 13.22. Ier. 23.14, 17 In their service they had variety of music, Dan.
3. Their set holy days* Exodus 32. 2 King. 13. They had their holy women
attending their Idol-service, Ezekiel. 8. ver. 14. working for them, 13.18. 2
King. 23.7. and prophesying lies Ezekiel. 13.22. and were great worshippers of the
Queen of Heaven, Ier. 7.18. and 44.19. They had also their several Gods for
their several Countries, as Papists have their Saints, 2 King. 17.29 and 18.34.
They would pray to these, and swear by them, Ier. 57. and 12.16. Genesis 31.53. 1
King. 19, 2. 2 King. 17.35. Zep. 1.5. Some in Israel which fell to Heathenish
Idolatry were like Church-Papists; for they would worship Idols, and yet go to
God's House, and hear his Prophets, Ier. 7.8, 10. 2 King. 17.14. Ezekiel. 14.3, 7,
and 20. 1, 31. and 23. 29. When Idolatry was cast out of the Church (as we have
done the Idolatry of Rome) the Idolaters would condemn it as an ^ll act in
them, and speaking against the serving of God aright, as Papists do against us,
2 Kings, 18.22. They worshipped toward the East, Ezekiel. 8.16. They were very
superstitious, Acts 19. They lived in very gross ignorance of the Truth, and in
liberty of sinning, Isa. 44.18, 19. and 45.29. Ephesians. 4. 18, 19. Wisd. 14.15, 16,
17. They worshipped they knew not what, John 4.22. Their Festivals after their
Idol Service they spent in Eating, Drinking, Singing, Dancing, Exodus 32.6, 18,
19. They had their Revellings and Meetings, full of Excess and Riot, 1 Pet.
4.3. And wonder at, and speak ill of such as would not be like them. They had
Brothel-houses, Ezekiel. 16.24. 2 Kings 23.17. 1 Kings 15.12, 13. and 14.24. and
22.26. They had amongst them Conjurers, Wizards, Charmers, Observers of times,
Southsayers, Astrologers, Star-gazers, and such like. To these the People
resorted and consulted with, 2 Kings 21.6. 1 Samuel 5.2. 1 Chronicles. 10.13. Hest.
37. and 9.24. Deuteronomy. 18.14. Isa. 19.3. and 47.1213 Hos. 4.12 Ezekiel. 21. 21. Ier.
8.17. Act. 8.10. They sacrificed to Nets, and burnt incense to Drags, Hab. 1.
16. They believed that some of their Images were approved of their great God
from Heaven, Act. 15.35. They were cruel and bloodily minded against all that
were against their Idolatry, Hos. 10.14. and 13. 16. 2 King. 21.15, 16. Judge.
6.30. 2 Chr. 24.18.21. The Idolaters in Israel and Judah brought in the
Heathen, as Gods plague upon them, to punish them for their Idolatry, 2 Chro.
24, 23. and 21.16, 17. and 33.11. and 30.6, 10, 17. King. 17.18. as the Papists
have brought the Turks upon the Christian World by their Imagery and Idolatry,
Revelations, 9. They were stupid, and without understanding in their
Idol-making, and in setting them up to worship them, Isa. 44.14, 20. and so
continued therein obstinate, as the Papists do. And thus have I showed what I
can say (my Lord) touching the Heathenish Idolaters and their practices.


Your evidence is so clear (Mr. Protestant) as hereby all may see how
Pagan-like the Pope is in his Imagery, Priests and Temples. Is there any
further ^vidence?


Then stands up Mr. Attorney General; and did prove him to be guilty of high
Treason, both against the Person and the Laws of his Sovereign. My Lord (says
he) this Fellow under pretense of Religion (for all must be covered with this
shadow) has set up another spiritual Head over the Church, besides Christ
(even Antichrist his greatest enemy (as is sufficiently proved. He has set up
also Mediato^s of Intercession besides Christ; also in his rebellious pride of
heart he has exalted Man's merit, and made him a part^ Savior of himself, by
satisfactory punishments, either here, or in thrir feigned Purgatory. Thus is
he a Rebel, and an Abettor of Rebels against Christ.


Again, the Law of Christ (the holy Scripture) he has notoriously corrupted,
and abused many ways.


1. He makes it no perfect rule.

2. He teaches blasphemously that the Original is corrupt, and so shakes the
Faith of all such as rest on the Scriptures.

3. He has added to them Man's Writings, called Apocrypha, to make them
Canonical.

4. He has feigned a Traditional word, and equalleth the same with the
Scri^tures.

5. He debarred for a long time the Translating of God's Word into a known
Tongue, to keep the people from the understanding thereof.

6. Being enforced at length to translate it, he has of ^urpose done it
corruptly, and with many u^^outh and obscure words, has hidden the Truth
still, to keep the people in blindness.

7. Yet this their so corrupt and obscure Translation is not admitted
indifferently to all, but to some, and to those under license, for which they
pay money.

8. These Parties, though they may read the Scriptures, yet must it be with the
Popes Spectacles, and may not see farther ^han the False-teacher pleases, nor
conceive otherwise of the sense, than he suggesteth, though the Text be never
so clear of it self.

9. He does blasphemously publish, that the Scriptures are a Nose of Wa^, a
dead letter, sowterly Ink; dumb Judges, and a black Gospel, Inkie Divinity; and
may have one sense one time, and another at another time, according to the
Churches state and condition.

10. They set up a corrupt Latin Translation; far as authentical as the
Originals in the Hebrew and the Greek.

11. And lastly, He brought into the Church instead of the Holy Bible, a Book
of Lies to be read. Thus is the wicked Wretch guilty of High Treason against
our Sovereign.

Besides that, He has counterfeited his Majesty's broad Seal, inventing new
Sacraments, never of Christ's ^nstitution; and has conspired and plotted the
Death of innumerable multitude of his Majesty's Subjects in a most cruel and
bloody manner: My Lord; he is no way longer to be endured; for we shall never
be at peace, as long as he may have liberty to live, for he is a rank Traitor
to our King and State, and Underminer of Religion, and the true Church of
Christ, and an Enemy to our Peace and Welfare in the Commonwealth.


Gentlemen (says the Judge) you of the Jury have heard Mr. Attorneys Witness;
also what both Mr. Sincerity, and Mr. Protestant have spoken against him: Now
that you have heard the Evidence so fully, what say you touching the Prisoner,
Is he guilty or no?


Then the Foreman in the Name of all the rest, answers, Guilty, my Lord.


Whereupon the Judge turns to the Prisoner, and says, Pope Innocent, thou
hear what grievous Iniquities, foul and filthy Abominations, Murders and
Massacres have been laid to thy charge; thou have heard the Verdict of these so
learned and well-approved Gentlemen, chosen without all partiality to go upon
thee: And they in their Judgments, upon their Consciences, have found thee
Guilty, what can thou say for thy self, that Sentence of Death should not be
pronounced against thee?


My Lord, the Jury assuredly is corrupted by some means or other, else would
they never have found me guilty; for our learned men have cited many of these
in my behalf, and therefore I appeal from them to a General Council, for the
trial of their Honesty in this Verdict.


Upon this lewd Surmise, and brazen-faced Accusation, all the Jury fell a
murmuring, being much grieved to be taxed of Faithlesness and Perjury. So the
worshipful Gentlemen, the Justices and Mr. Sheriff began to speak in their
behalf, but the Judge standing up, stayed them, and made answer for them.

Judge, To be brief with thee, Thou art shamelesly impudent to accuse these
worthy Gentlemen, for justly proceeding according to the clear Evidence to thy
face. For thy learned men, they have only cited the Names of some of these,
but without their knowledge or consent. Yea, many Testimonies they bring under
their Names, which indeed are proved to be Counterfeits, abusing their
unadvised Readers in their unjust defense of thee. As for thy Appeal to a
General Council, it is but to set a good face upon an ill Cause; for thou
know that we have long desired a Free General Council? but not a gathering
together, like the lewd Convention of Trent.


But art thou not ashamed to conceit the bringing of these men's verdict to the
trial? we must by them be tried, and not they by us. But what can thou try
the Principles of Religion? Will thou deny them? Must Fathers, Councils,
Scriptures, and all be brought under our judgments? Thou had no cause to tax
the Jury, if any had been in fault, it should have been the Witnesses; but
can thou tax Mr. Sincerity of lying, or Mr. Protestant of falsehood? As for
Mr. Attorney, his speech is no more than your own words, writings, and practice
do testify.


Hear therefore thy Sentence, justly deserved before God and men.


Judge, Thou have been Indicted by the Name of Pope I^nocent, of all these
former Treasons, Rebellions, Conspiracies, Gunpowder-plots, Murders,
Massacres, Falsehoods, Heresies, Judaism, and Paganism, and of that thy
detestable Idolatry; and for the same have been arraigned: Thou have pleaded
Not guilty, have put thy self upon the Trial, and being found guilty, having no
more to say for thy self, this is the Law.


That thou the M^ster of Iniquity, with the old Ser^ent, calleed the Devil, or
Satan, thy Father with thy lewd Mother that great Whore, drunk with the blood
of the Marty^s of Jesus, which sits upon a Scarlet colored Beast; as also
with that false Prophet, the Son of Perdition, thy Guide and Governor, shall
be cast alive where the D^agon is, into the Lake of Fire, burning with
Brimstore, there to be tormented with all the marked Ones in the presence of
the holy Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb, without rest day and night,
the smoke of which Torment shall ascend up for ever and for ever, without mercy
or hope of redemption.


And so Orders came to the Iayler, that he should be Executed out of hand.


The Execution of Pope Innocent the XI.


And so the Judge and Court commanded Mr. Implacable a Justice of the Peace in
Vtopia to be set to the Bar.

Iayler, Set Justice Implacable to the Bar.


Justice Implacable holds up his hand to the Bar.


His Indictment.
Judge, Justice Im^lacable, Thou art here Indicted by the Name of Justice
Implacable, In the Parish of Goodness-spight; for that perniciously and
sinfully thou have maintained and asserted, That no Moderation ought to be
showed to them that differ from thee, in those things which thou thy self
call Indifferent, and this thou have done in contempt of that Sacred Word,
which says, Let your moderation be shown unto all men. And also, that thou art
a man of no good Principles, but a perfect hater of all Pious men, be they of
what Persuasion they will. And also, that thou make dai^y Commotions and
Divisions where ever thou come.


Implacable's Answer.
Then Implacable answered and said, That he was in no respect guilty of those
Crimes that were laid to his Charge: And said, As for Disturbances I make none,
being my self a man of Peace, and therefore I defy any man for what he can do
against me; I fear not Belzebu^ himself, no nor all the raging-roaring Devils
in Hell.

Proclamation was made.
Then Proclamation was made, That they that had ought to say for the Lord the
King against the Prisoner at the Bar, should forthwith appear and give in their
Evidence; so there came in three Witnesses, Mr. Moderation, Mr. Heal-breach,
and Mr. Quiet. They were then asked, if they knew the Prisoner at the Bar, and
what they had to say for their Lord the King against him.

Moderation begins.
Then stood forth Mr. Moderation, and said to this effect,


My Lord, I have known this man a long time, and will attest upon my Oath
before this Honorable Bench, That he is --


Iu^ge, Hold, give him his Oath; so they swore him: Then he said, My Lord. This
man, not withstanding what he has said, is a wicked F^llow; nay, his very Name
shows him to be so, he is, as I can call in several Neighbors to attest, one
of the vilest men in our Country, he neither regards Prince nor People, Law
nor Gospel, Civility nor Custom; but does all that he came to possess all men
with certain of his disloyal Notions; and in particular, I heard him once my
self affirm, that the true Religion was diametrically o posite to his daily
practice: By which saving, my Lord, he does at once not only condem all
laudable Things, but us in the doing of them.


Judge, Then did the Judge say to him, Have thou any more to say.


Moderation, My Lord, I could say much more, only I would not be tedious to the
Court; yet, if need be, when the other Gentlemen have given in their Evidence,
rather than any thing shall be wanting that will dispatch him, I will enlarge
my Testimony against him: So he was bid stand by. Then they called Mr.
Heal-breach, and bid him look upon the Prisoner: They also asked, What he could
say for their Lord the King against him? Then they swear him; so he began.


Mr. Heal-breach, My Lord, I have no great acquaintance with this man, nor do I
desire to have farther knowledge of him; However this I know, That he is a very
pestilent Fellow, from some discourse that the other day I had with him in this
Town; for then talking with him, I heard him say, That our Religion was naught,
and such by which a man could by no means please God: which saying of his, my
Lord,your Lordship very well knows, what necessarily thence will follow; to
wit, That we still do worship in vain, are yet in our sins, and finally shall
be damned. And my Lord, he cannot endure a faithful Minister in his Parish. and
to be sure, if he knows where such an one preaches, he forthwith sends for a
Constable, commanding of him to take him and carry him away to Prison. And my
Lord, heee stands Mr. Constable ready to attest what I now say.


Mr. Constable ready to attest against Justice Implacable.


Then was Mr. Quiet sworn, and bid say what he knew, in behalf of the Lord the
King, against the Prisoner at the Bar.

Mr. Quiets Testimony.
Mr. Quiet, My Lord and you Gentlemen all, This Fellow I have known of a long
time, and have heard him speak things that ought not to be spo^e. He rails
daily against Mr. Belief, Mr. True-heart, Mr. Upright, Mr. Hatebad, Mr.
Love-God, Mr. See Truth, Mr. Moderate, Mr. Good-work, Mr. Humble, Mr.
Seriousness, and against all that are friends to these worthy persons. And he
has said moreover, That if all men were of his mind, if possible, there is not
one of these Gentlemen should have any longer a being in this Town; Besides he
has not been afraid to rail on you my Lord,, who are now appointed to be his
Judge, calling you an ungodly Villain, with many other such like villifying
terms, with which he has bespattered most of the Gentry of our Town.


When Mr. Quiet had told his Tale, the Judge directed his Speech to the
Prisoner at the Bar; saying, Thou Runnagate, Heretic, and Traitor, have thou
heard what these honest Gentlemen have witnessed against thee?


Implacable, May I speak a few words in my own defense?


Jude, Sirrah, Sirrah, Thou deservest to live no longer, but to be slain
immediately upon the place; yet that all men may see our Gentleness toward
thee, though thou art violent toward others; Let us hear what thou vile
Runnagate have to say.


Implacable's last Speech.
My Lord, I must confess that I am not altogether free from breaking the Laws,
from Violence and Passion; but yet, good my Lord, for this once, save my life,
but if you will not, the Lord have mercy upon my Soul.

The Judges Speech to the Jury.
Then the Judge called to the Jury (who all this while stood by, to hear and
observe;) Gentlemen of the Jury, you see this man about whom so great an
uproathath been made in this Town; you have also heard what these worthy
Gentlemen have witnessed against him; also you have heard his Reply and
Confession: It lies now in your breast to hang him, or save his life,
therefore do as your judge meet.


As soon as ever the Judge had ended his Speech to the Jury, Mr. Huff a
Corporal came into the Court, and said, That if his Lordship pleased to hear
his Evidence, he had much to say for the Prisoner at the Bar.


Mr. Huff a Corporal takes Implacable's part.


But the Judge told him, That he looked like a swaggering Fellow, and therefore
he and the Jury should give no credit to what he said.


Then went the Jury out, whose Names were, Mr. Love-good, Mr. Patience, Mr.
Hate-lust, Mr. Live-well, Mr. Low-mind, Mr. Hate-lyes, Mr. Love-light, Mr.
Heavenly-mind, Mr. Zealous for God, Mr. Meek-heart, Mr. Piety, Mr. Fidelity:
And every one gave in his private Verdict against him among themselves, and
afterward unanimously concluded to bring him in guilty before the Judge. And
first among themselves, Mr. Love-good the Foreman, said, I see clearly that
this man is an Heretic. Then said Mr. Patience, Away with such a Fellow from
the Earth. Ay, said Mr. Hate-lust, for I hate the very looks of him. Then said
Mr. Live-well, I could never endure him. Nor I said Mr. Low-mind, for he would
always be condemning my way. Hang him, hang him, said Mr. Hate-lyes. A sorry
Scrub, said Mr. Love-light. My heart rises against him, said Mr.
Heavenly-mind. He is a Rogue, said Mr. Zeal for God. Hanging is too good for
him, said Mr. Meek-heart. Let Us dispatch him out of the way, said Mr. Piety.
Then said Mr. Fidelity, Might I have all the world given me, I could not be
reconciled to him; therefore let us forthwith bring him in guilty of death.


A Spy set a work by Mr. Implacable.


Besides, yonder stands a Spy, one that he set to watch Sincere Christians, for
fear they should serve God, and he not having timely notice to disturb them,
that can tell more of his Tricks; but we have enough against him without his
Evidence.


And so he was presently condemned, to be had from the place where he was, to
the place from whence he came, and there to be hanged.


They therefore brought him out to be hanged. Thus came Implacable to his end.


And 'twas observed by some, that there stood a Chariot and a couple of Horses
behind the rejoicing multitude that went to see Implacable hanged) to post away
his Soul to Hell.


Mr. Implacable posting to Hell.


As soon as ever his body was dead, they opened it, and found in his belly
twelve Informers, whose Names were as follows; Viz. Mr. No-good, Mr. Malice,
Mr. Lovelack, Mr. Live-loose, Mr. Heady, Mr. Highmind, Mr. Enmity, Mr. Liar,
Mr. Cruelty, Mr. Hate-light, Mr. Falsity, and Mr. Uncharitable. And in his
Heart they found (to their greater amazement) Mr. Hot-spur the Constastble, Mr.
Envy-good the chief Informer in Vtopia, and Mr. Violence an Headborough (one
that was Brother to Mr. Im^lacable the Justice) whose Trials follow next in
order. So Mr. Hot-spur was first set to the Bar.


Mr. Hot-spur the Constable holding up his hand at the Bar.


Then said the Clerk,

Hot-spur, Hold up thy hand, Thou art indicted by the name of Hot-spur, For
that thou have wickedly taught and maintained that there is no God, and so no
heed to be taken to Serious Religion. This thou have done against the being,
honor, and glory of the King, and against the peace and safety of the Kingdom.
What say thou? Art thou guilty of this Indictment, or not?


Hot-spur, Not guilty.


Crier, Call Mr. Honesty, Mr. Vouchtruth, and Mr. Hate-rogue into the Court.


So they were called, and they appeared.

Clerk, Then said the Clerk, You the Witnesses for the King, look upon the
Prisoner at the Bar, Do you know him?


Mr. Honesty giving in his Testimony.


Then said Master Honesty, Yes, my Lord, we know him, his name is Hotspur, he
has been a very pestilent Fellow for many years in this Country.

Clerk, You are sure you know him?


Honesty, Know him! Yes, my Lord, I have heretofore too often been in his
company, to be at this time ignorant of him. He is a Tantivy Hot-spur, the Son
of a Tantivy Hot-spur, I knew his Grandfather, and his Father, his Brethren,
and his Sisters.


Clerk, Well said, He stands here indicted by the name of Hot-spur, etc. and
is charged, that he has maintained and taught that there is no God, and so no
heed need be taken to any Religion: What say you the Kings Witnesses, to this?
is he guilty or not?


Honestly. My Lord, I and he were once in Villains-Lane together, and he at
that time did briskly talk of diverse Opinions, and then and there I heard him
say, That for his part he did believe that there was no God. But, said he, I
can profess one, and be Religious too, if the company I am in, and the
circumstances of other things, said he, shall put me upon it.


Clerk. You are sure you heard him say thus.


Vouch-Truth. Upon mine Oath, I heard him say thus.


Then said the Clerk, Mr. Vouch-Truth, What say you to the Kings Judges,
touching the Prisoner at the Bar?


Mr. Vouch-Truth, giving in his Testimony.


Vouch-Truth. My Lord, I formerly was a great Companion of his, (for the which
I now repent me) and I have often heard him say, and that with great
stomachfulness, that he believed there was neither God, Angel, nor Spirit.


Cler. Where did you hear him say so?


Vouch-Truth. In Blackmouth-lane, and Blas^hemers-row, and in many other places
besides, in the Country of Vtopia.


Cler. Have you much knowledge of him?


Vouch-Truth. I know him to be a Rascal, the Son of a Rascal, and an horrible
Man, to deny a Deity; his Fathers Name was Never be good, and he had more
Children than this Hot-spur. I have no more to say.


Clerk. Mr. Hate-Rogue, look upon the Prisoner at the Bar, do you know him?


Hate-Rogue. My Lord, this Hot-spur is one of the vilest wretches that ever I
came near, or had to do with in my Life. I have heard him say that there is no
God, I have heard him say that there is no World to come, no Sin, nor
Punishment hereafter: and moreover, I have heard him say, That 'twas as good to
go to a Whore-house, as to go and hear a Sermon in a Meeting House.


Cler. Where did you hear him say these things?


Hate-Rogue. In Drunkards-row, just at Rascal-Lanes-end, at a house in which
Mr. Im^iety lived. Besides, he does Devillishly and Traitorously practice evil
things, and say filthy words: He says it is lawful and profitable to a Man to
give way to his Carnal desires, and that for his part, he never will deny
himself of any sinful delight, as long as his Name is Hot-s^ur.


Mr. Hotspur pleading on his Knees.


Then said Mr. Hot-spur, being on his Knees, My Lord, I am a Man of high birth,
and have been used to a pleasures and pastimes of greatness. I have not been
wont to be snub'd for my doings, but have been left to follow my will as if it
were Law. And it seems strange to me that I should this day be called into
Question for that, that not only I, but many Men, do either secretly or openly
countenance.

Cler. Sir, we concern not our selves with your greatness (for the higher, the
better you should have been) but we are concerned, and so are you now, about an
Indictment preferred against you. How say you, are you guilty of it, or not?


Hot-spur. Not guilty.


Clerk. Crier, call up more Witnesses to stand forth, and give their Evidence.


Crier. Gentlemen, you the rest of the Witnesses for the King, come in and give
in yout Evidence for Our Lord the King, against the Prisoner at the Bar.


Mr. Well-doe giving in his Testimony at the Bar.


Clerk. Come Mr. Well-doe, look upon the Prisoner at the Bar, do you know him?


Well-do. Yes, my Lord, I know him?


Clerk. What Is his Name?


Well-do His name is Hotspur, he was the Son of one Beastly, and his Mother
bare him in Flesh-street; she was one Evil-concupiscences Daughter. I knew all
the Generation of them.


Cler. Well said, You have here heard his Indictment, what say you to it, is he
guilty of those things charged against him, or no?


Well-do, My Lord, he has as he says, been a great man indeed; and greater in
Wickedness than by Pedigree, more than a thousand-fold.


Cler. But what do you know of his particular Actions. and especially with
reference to his Indictment?


Well-do, I know him to be a Swearer, a Liar, a Sabbath-breaker; I know him to
be a Fornicator, and an unclean Person; I know him to be guilty of abundance of
Evils. He has been to my knowledge a very filthy man.


Cler. But where did he use to commit his wickedness, in some private corners,
or was he more open and shameless?


Well-do, All the Town over, my Lord.


Cler. Come Mr. Good-deed, what have you to say for our Lord the King against
the Prisoner at the Bar?


Good-deed, My Lord, all that the first Witness has said I know to be true, and
a great deal more besides.

Cler. Mr. Hot-spur, do you hear what these three other Gentlemen say?


Hot-spur, I was ever of Opinion that the happiest life that a man could live
on earth, was to keep himself from nothing that he desired in the World, and
Idefie them all.


Several Constables rush in to rescue Mr. Hot-spur


As soon as he had said so, he calls several other Constables, for his rescue
perceving, it would go ill on his side, but they were kept out of the Court.

Court. Then said the Court, There has proceeded enough from his own mouth to
lay him open to condemnation, wherefore set him by Jayler, and set Mr.
Envy-good the chief Informer in this Country to the (...).


Envy-good set to the Bar.


Cler. Mr. Envy-good, Thou art here Indicted by the name of Mr. Envy-good ( an
Informer in Utopia) for that thou do wickedly, illegaly and unseasonably,
disturb all good men, where they live; and do instigate others to do the
same; and wilt sooner inform against a good Preacher than a Bawdy House, a
Drunkad, or a Swearer


Then said Envy-good, I am guilty of no such thing, what I do I do out of
Conscience.

Court. Then said the Court, the man as you see is incorrigible, he is for
maintaining his Villainies by stoutnes of words, and his Rebellion with impudent
confidence.


Then said Envy-good, Gentlemen, and at this time my Judges, as to the
Indictment by which I stand of several Crimes accused before you; pray
attribute my Crimes to mine Age, and not to my wilfulness; to the craziness of
my Brain, and not to the carelessness of my Mind, and then I hope I may by your
charity, be excused from great punishment, though I be guilty.


Then said the Court, Thy Crimes were not simply of frailty, but of purpose,
and for that thou did loath to keep virtuous things in thy mind. What was bad
thou could retain, but what was good thou could not abide to think of, thy
Age therefore, and thy pretended Craziness, thou make use of to blind the
Court withal, and as a cloak to cover thy Knavery. But let us hear what the
Witnesses have to say for the King against the Prisoner at the Bar, is he
guilty of this Indictment or no?


Mr. Integrity, My Lord, I have heard this Envy-good, the Informer, say, That
he could never abide to think of goodness, no not for a quarter o^an hour and
he lives next door to the Sign of the Conscience feared with an hot Iron.


Cler. Mr. Peaceable, what can you say for our Lord the King, against the
Prisoner at the Bar?


My Lord, I know this man well, he is a Knave, the son of a Knave? he is the
scum and froth of the Earth, and a perfect runnagate; his Fathers name was
Love-bad, and as for him I have often heard him say, that he counted the very
thoughts of goodness the most burdensome thing in the World.

Clerk. Where have you heard him say these words?


Mr. Peaceable. In Flesh-lane, right opposite to the Church.


Then said the Clerk, Come Mr. Love the Peace, give in your Evidence concerning
the Prisoner at the Bar, about that for which he stands here, indicted before
this honorable Court.

Love the Peace, My Lord, I have heard him often say, he had rather think of
the vilest thing, than of what is contained in the Holy Scriptures.


Clerk. Where did you hear him say such grievous words?


Love the Peace, Where I in a great many places? particularly in Nauseous
street, in the house of one Shameless, and in Fi^thlane, at the sign of the
Resprobate, next door to the Descent into the pit.


Envy-good, My Lord, I never knew what remorse or sorrow meant in all my life;
I am impenetrable, I care for no man, nor can I be pierced with Men's Griefs,
their Groans will not enter into my heart; whomever I mischief, whomever I
wrong, to me it is music, when to others mourning, therefore it is that I love,
not the Scriptures, therefore pray my Lord acquit me.


A Ghost appears to Mr. Envy-good publicly.


As he was thus speaking, an affrighting Ghost appears to him in the Court, and
says that Hell groaned for Him, and guilty he was


But Gentlemen, and you now appointed to be my Judges, I deny that my name is
Envy-good, and if your Honors shall please to send for any that do intimately
know me, or for the Midwife that laid my Mother of me, or for the Gossips that
was at my Christning, they will any, or all of them, prove that my name is not
Envy-good. Wherefore I cannot plead to this Indictment, for as much as my name
is not incerted therein, and as is my true name, so also are my conditions. I
was always a man that loved to live at quiet, and what I loved my self, that I
thought others might love also. Wherefore when I saw any of my Neighbors to
labor under a disquieted mind, I endeavored to help them what I could, and
instances of this good temper of mine, many I could give: As


First, When ever I saw any to be disquieted in Vtopia, I presently sought out
means to get them quiet again

2. When the ways of the old World, and of Sodom, were in fashion; if any thing
happened to molest those that were for the customs of those times, I labored
to make them quiet again, and to cause them to act without molestation.

3. To come nearer home, if in Vtopia I saw any troubled for sin, I endeavored
by someway, device, invention or other, to labor to bring them to peace again.

Wherefore, since I have been always a man of so virtuous a temper, as some say
a peacemaker is, and if a peacemaker be so deserving a man, as some have been
bold to attest he is, then let me, Gentlemen, be accounted by you, who have a
great name for Justice and Equity, for a man that deserves not this inhumane
way of treatment, but liberty, and also a license to seek damage of those that
have been my accusers.


Then said the Clerk, Crier, make a Proclamation.


Crier, O Yes, for as much as the Prisoner at the Bar has denied his name to
be that which is mentioned in the Indictment, the Court requires that if there
be any in this place, that can give information to the Court of the orginal and
right name of the Prisoner, they would come forth and give in their Evidence
for the Prisoner stands upon his own innocence.


Then came two into the Court and desired that they might have leave to speak
what they knew concerning the Prisoner at the Bar: The name of the one was
Find-right, and the name of the other Telltruth; so the Court demanded of these
men, if they knew the Prisoner, and what they could say concerning him, for he
stands, said they, upon his own Vindication?


Then said Mr. Find-right, My Lord, I --


Court. Hold, Give him his Oath, then they swear him. So he proceeded.


Find-right. My Lord, I know, and have known this Man from a Child, and can
attest that his name is Envy-good; I knew his Father, whose dame was Mr.
Dissembler, and his Mother before she was married, was Mrs. Hypocrite.


Mr. Envy-goods Mother, used often to chuck him under the Chin, and play with
him, to encourage him in his bad practices.


called by the name of Mrs. Hippocrite, and these two when they came together,
lived not long without this Son, and when he was born, they called his name
Envy-good. I was his Play-fellow, only I was somewhat older than he; and when
his Mother did use to call him home from his play, she used to say Envy-good,
Envy-good, come home quick, or I Will fetch you. Yea, I knew him when he sucked;
and though I was then but little, yet I can remember that when his Mother did
use to sit at the door with him, or did play with him in her Arms, she would
call him twenty times together, chucking him under the Chin, My little
Envy-good, my pretty Envy-good, and O my sweet Rogue E^vy-good; and again, O my
little bird Envy-good; and how do I love my Child! The Gossiips also know it is
thus, though he has the face to deny it in open Court.


Then Mr. Tell-truth was called upon to speak what he knew of him. So they
swear him.


Then said Mr. Tell-truth, My Lord, all that the former Witness has said is
true; his name is Envy-good, the Son of Mr. Dislembler, and of Mrs. Hippocrite
his mother. And I have in former times seen him angry with those that have
called him any thing else but Envy-good, for h^ would say, that all such did
mock and nickname him, but this was in the time when Mr. Envy-good was a great
man, and when the Informers were the bravest men in Vto ^id.


Court. Gentlemen, you have heard what these two men have sworn against the
Prisoner at the Bar: and now Mr. Envy-good to you, You have denied your name to
be Envy-good, yet you see that these honest men have sworn that that is your
name. As to your Plea, in that you are quite besides the matter of your
Indictment, you have pleaded for your self, is, that you have denied your name,
etc. but here you see we have Witnesses to prove that you are the man.

For the peace that you so much boast of making among your Neighbors; know,
that peace that is not a companion of truth and holiness, but that which is
without this foundation, is grounded upon a lie, and is both deceitful and
damnable: thy Plea therefore has not delivered thee from what by the Indictment
thou art charged with, but rather it does fasten all upon thee.

But thou shall have very fair play; let us call the Witnesses that are to
testify, as ^o mattter of fact, and see what they have to say for our Lord the
King against the Prisoner at the Bar.


Clerk Mr. Peaceable, What say you for our Lord the King, against the Prisoner
at the Bar.


Peaceable, My Lord, This man has of a long time made it, to my knowledge, his
business to keep Vtopia in a sinful quietness in the midst of all her lewdness,
filthiness, and turmoils; and has said, and that in my hearing, Come, come,
let us fly from all trouble on what ground soever it comes, and let us be for a
quiet and peaceable life, though it wants a good foundation.


Clerk. Come Mr. Love the Peace, what have you to say?


Love the Peace, My Lord, I have heard him say, That peace, though in a way of
unrighteousness, is better than trouble with truth.


Clerk. Where did you hear him say this?


Love the peace, I heard him say it in Folly-yard, at the house of one Mr.
Simple, next door to the sign of the Self-deceiver. Yea, he has said this to
my knowledge twenty times in that place. Besides, he sets himself to deface,
and untterly to spoil all the remainders of goodness in Vtopia.


Clerk. Mr. Envy-good, How could you have the face to plead, Not guilty, when
you are manifestly the Doer of so much wickedness?


Envy-good, Sir, I thought I must say something, and as my name is, so I speak:
I have been advantaged by lies before now, and did not know but by speaking
lies, I might have reaped the same benefit now.


Clerk. Set him by Iayler, and set Mr. Violence the Headborough to the Bar.


Mr. Violence the Headborough brought to the Bar.


Mr. Violence, thou art here Indicted by the name of Violence, for that thou
do most traitorously and wickedly shut up all bowels of compassion to the
Ministers of Christ: And for that thou do hale and rout them from place to
place, and do at all times fly from those thoughts that had in them a
tendency to lead thee to repentance. What say thou to this Indictment? Guilty
or not guilty?


Not guilty of Violence, my Lord, I Will assure you.

Clerk. Call for the Witnesses: What say you the Witnesses to this Prisoner?


Mr. Know-much, My Lord, his Name is Violence, so he has writ himself in all
Papers of concer^s where he has had to do. But these Violent-men love to
counterfeit their Names: Mr. Avarice covers himself with the name of Frugality,
or the like; Mr. Flanting can when need is, call himself Mr. Piety, or the
like, and so of all the rest of them.


Clerk. Mr. Sober, what say you?


Sober, His name is Violence, my Lord; I have known him from a Child, and he
has done all that wickedness whereof he stands charged in the Indictment; but
there is a company of men that are not acquainted with the danger of damning,
therefore make no bones of cursing and damning, and lying.


Mr. Violence kills a man, and pleads he did it in his passion.


Violence, My Lord. I have always been a man of Courage and Valor, and have
not used, when under the greatest clouds, to sneak or hang down the head like a
bulrush: And though to other day I killed a man, 'twas in passion, and
therefore it is I am thus accused.


It Is true, I did not use to consider who was my Foe, nor what the cause was in
which I was engaged. 'Twas enough to me if I carried it bravely, fought like a
man, and came off like a Victor. Therefore my Lord, let me be acquitted.


Court. Mr. Violence, You are not here Indicted for that you have been a
valiant man, nor for ^our courage and stoutness in times of distress, but for
that you have made use of this your pretended valor to draw men into acts of
rebellion both against Peace and Love. This is the crime and the thing
wherewith thou art charged within the Indictment. But he made no answer to that.


Now when the Court had thus far proceeded against the Prisoners at the Bar,
then they put them over to the Verdict of their Jury, to whom they did apply
themselves after this manner.


Gentlemen of the Jury, You have been here, and have seen these men; you have
heard their Indictments, their Pleas, and what the Witnesses have testified
against them. Now what remains, is, that you do forthwith withdraw your selves
to some place, where without confusion you may consider of what Verdict in a
way of truth and righteousness you ought to bring in for the King against them,
and so bring it in accordingly.


Then the Jury, to wit, Mr. Prudent, Mr. Harmless, Mr. Good-heed, Mr.
Christian, Mr. Love-worth, Mr. Free-love, Mr. Temperate, Mr. Hope-well, Mr.
Compassion, Mr. Merciful, Mr. Self-denial, Mr. Love the peace, withdrew
themselves in order to their work: And when they were shut up by themselves,
they fell to discourse among them selves in order to the drawing up of their
Verdict.


And thus Mr. Prudent, for he was the Foreman, began: Gentlemen, quoth he, for
the men, the Prisoners at the Bar; for my part I believe they all deserve
death. Very right, said Mr. Harmless, I am wholly of your opinion: O what a
mercy is it, said Mr. Good-heed, that such Villains as these are apprehended!
Ai, ai, said Mr. Christian, this is one of the joyfullest days that ever I saw
in my life. Then said Mr. Love-worth, I know that if we judge them to death,
our Verdict shall stand. Nor do I at all question it, said Mr. Free-love, He
said moreover, When all such Beasts as these are cast out of Utopia, what a
goodly Country will it be then! Then said Mr. Temperate, it is not my manner to
pass my judgment with rashness, but for these their Crimes are so notorious,
and the Witness so palpable, that that man must be wilfully blind who says,
the Prisoners ought not to die. Blessed be God, said Mr. Hope-well, that the
Traitors are in safe custody. And I join with you in this upon my bare knees,
said Mr. Compassion. I am glad also, said Mr. Merciful. Then said the warm
man, and true hearted Mr. Self-denial, Cut the^^off, they have been the plague,
and have sought the destru^tion of Utopia, and the Protestant World.


Thus therefore being all agreed in their Verdict, they come instantly into the
Court.


Clerk. Gentlemen of the Jury, answer all to your Names, Mr. Prudent, Mr.
Harmless, Mr. Good-heed, Mr. Christian, Mr Love-worth, Mr. Free-love, Mr.
Temperate, Mr. Hope-well, Mr. Compassion, Mr. Merciful, Mr. Self-denial, Mr.
Vouch-truth, twelve: Good men and true, stand together in your Verdict; are you
all agreed?


Jury. Yes my Lord.


Clerk. Who shall speak for you?


Jury. Our Foreman.


Clerk. You the Gentlemen of the Jury being Impanelled for our Lord the King,
to serve here in a matter of life and death, have ^eard the trials of each of
these men the Prisoners at the Bar: What say you? Are they guilty of that, and
those Crimes for which they stand here Indicted; or are they not guilty?


Foreman, Guilty my Lord.


Clerk. Look to your Prisoner, Jayler.


This was done in the morning, and in the afternoon they received the Sentence
of death according to the Law.


The Iayler therefore having received such a Charge, put them all in the inward
Prison, to preserve them there till the day of Execution, which was to be the
next day in the morning.


After all these Trials were over, there came then Constables into the Court
puffing and blowing, with all the several distinct sorts of Witches that were
in Vtopia. And the chief Constable told the Judge, that he had Orders to bring
those Withces that were there in the Court before his Lordship, that they might
be tried for their lives. When the Constable had done speaking, the Judge
commanded the Iayler to set them to the Bar, and they were accordingly set to
the Bar, and their Indictment was read, which was this.


(VIZ.) The several Names given to Witches.
Holt, Iarmara, Vinegar-Tom, Sack and Sugar, and you old Hag with your four
mps, Elem^uzer, Pyewacket, Peck in the Crown, Grizzel Greedig^t, etc. Hold up
your hands, and hear your Charge; so they all held up their hands whilst their
Indictment was read. Which was;


You whose Names are now called over, are Indicted and Arraigned, for that you
are all notorious and malicious Witches, and make it your constant trade to
bewitch Men, Women, and Children, Cows, Horses, Sheep, Oxen, and every thing
besides that disturbs or molests you in the least punctilio; and that you are
the Verminie of the place where you live, and disturbers of the whole Kingdom
of Utopia.


As soon as ever the Indictment was read, they all cried out unanimously, Not
guilty my Lord,; so the Judge ordered the Witnesses to be called in, and said,
they should (to make short work of it) be all tried at the Bar together: Then
there came into the Court Mr. Witch-f^nder General, Mr. Hate-device, and Mr.
Spy-Imp, and said, They could prove all the Prisoners at the Bar guilty of
heinous Crimes and Offenses, and that they were real Witches.


Mr. Witch-finder General stands up and gives in his Testimony.


With that Mr. Witch-finder General told the Judge, he could say much against
the Prisoners at the Bar, and if his Lordship pleased, would begin to declare
what he had to say.


Judge, Pray Mr. Witch-finder let us hear then what you can say against the
Prisoners.


Mr. Witch-finder General, my Lord, then first as to Vinegar-Tom, He is a Witch
in grain.


Vinegar-Tom's Effigies.
He is one that can transform himself into all shapes, (all infallible sign of
a Witch) Sometimes he appears to me like a long-legg'd Greyhound, with an head
like an Ox, a long Tail, and broad Eyes; sometimes he transforms himself into
the shape of a Child of four years old; sometimes into the shape of an old
Woman sitting upon a green Pitcher, and then straight-ways vanishes away, and
this I have seen him do often.

Judge. I pray Sir, how gained you the knowledge of these things.


Mr. Witch-finder, my Lord, I never traveled far for it, for there was twelve
or thirteen Witches in the Town where I lived, who with abundance of Witches
from adjacent parts, met every Friday-night at my house, and had there several
solemn Sacrifices offered to the Devil, among whom Vinegar-Tom was chief.


Judge, Was Vinegar-Tom (as you call him) used to have a Teat or hard bunch of
flesh under his Armpits to demonstrate him a Witch.


Mr. Witch-finder, Yes my Lord, he had, and at those Teats his Imps Tog-raggin,
Baconface, Long-tayl, Mungrell-nose, and Will-tellus, were used every Night to
suck.


Mr. Recorder, Of what nature are those Teats, Mr. Witch-finder, they are most
commonly insenble, and feel neither Pin, Needle, or Awl, if you thrust them
through; these Teats have their frequent mutations, and variations, sometimes
of one color, and sometimes of another; sometimes higher, and sometimes lower;
sometimes big, and sometimes little.


Mr. Attorney Ceneral, Pray Mr Witch-finder, How comes it to pass, that the
Devil being a Spirit (and so consequentially wanting no Nutriment or
Sustentation, should desire to suck any blood; and indeed as he is a Spirit he
cannot draw any excressences, having neither flesh nor bone, and cannot be felt.


Mr. Witchfinder, He seeks not their blood, as if he could not subfist without
that Nourishment, but he often repairs to them and gets it, the more to
aggravate the Witches Damnation, and to put her in mind of her Covenant; and as
he is a Spirit and Prince of the Air, he appears to them in any shape, what he
pleases, which shape is assumed by him through joining of condenced thickened
air together; and by this means it is, he does assume the shapes of many
Creatures; but to create any thing, he cannot do it, it is only proper to C.
The Devil also uses the Organs of that body he assumes to speak withal, to
make his compact up with the Witches.


Judge, I pray Sir resolve me in one thing ( now we are upon the trial of
Witches) and that is this; viz. Is it a truth that Witches will swim like a
Duck, if they are flung (tied by the Thumbs) into a Pond of Water.


Witch-finder General, my Lord, It is a real truth. and the reason is this,
because Witches deny their Baptism, when they covenant with the Devil, and
Water being the sole Element of Baptism, when they be heaved into the Water,
the Water refuses to receive them into her boso^e, they being such miscreants
to deny their Ba^tism but causes them to float on the top of it; and this was
likewise King James his Opinion.


Judge. One Question more I pray resolve me, and that is this, What is the
reason that Witches, when they are called either Whores or Thiev^^* or any
other bad names, are so ready to wring their hands, and cry out with abundance
of tears, running, usually, to some Justice of the Peace to complain of the
wrong that is done unto them; and when they are accused of this damnable sin of
Witchcraft, they never alter their countenances, nor let so much as one tear
fall.


Witch-finder, My Lord, The reason of this is because the Devil has so hardened
their hearts, that they look upon their Heaven-daring sin, of giving up their
Souls to the Devil, but as a small thing; but they think the approbious name of
Whore and Thief, will spoil their credit amongst men; and therefore they are
more concerned for that.


Judge, Well Sir, You may now stand by, for you have very well satisfied us of
the nature of Witches in general; and you have likewise proved satisfactorily,
that Vinegar-Tom is a real Witch. But before we proceed to pass Sentence, we
will hear what the other two Witnesses, Mr. Hate-devil, and Mr. Spy-imp, have
likewise to say against Vinegar-Tom, Sack and Sugar, News Iarmara, Holt the old
Hag, and her four Imps, Illemauzer; Pye-wacket, Peck in the Crown, and Griezel
Greedigut, etc.


Mr. Hate-devil stands up and speaks to the Judge.


Mr. Hate-devil, My Lord, Mr. Witch-finder General having said enough against
Vinegar-Tom, to prove him a Witch, and worthy of death, I pass him by, and
shall only give in my Testimony against Sack and Sugar, News Iarmara, etc. And
in a word, my Lord, They are notorious Witches all, and deserve Death (and
seeing, my Lord, that the Sacred Scripture says, That thou shall not suffer a
Witch to live, I hope your Lordship will sentence them all to Death.


But, my Lord, to come to particulars, they had all of them (as my Brother
Spy-Imp can tell) an hand in bewitching several men and women, and an whole
herd of Cattle in this Country; and besides, they can, like Vinegar-Tom,
transform themselves into all shapes at pleasure.


Spy-Imp confirms Hate-devils Testimony.


Then stood up Mr. Spy-Imp, and told the Judge, that he knew what Mr.
Hate-devil had attested against the Prisoners at the Bar was really a truth;
and for his own part, he could say no more but what had been said, and what had
been said he would swear too, if his Lordship desired it.

The old Hag stands up and answers for her self, confessing her Imps Names to
the Judge, and the reason how she come to turn Witch.


Hag. My Lord, I must confess I am a Witch, and have several Imps, whose Names
are Illemauzer, Pye-wacket, Peck in the Crown, Griezel Greedigut; but I hope
your Lordship will spare my life.


The reason why some become Witches.

Because I had never been a Witch had not Poverty come upon me like an armed
man. and that continuing, filled my mind with discontent; and in that
discontented humuor, the Devil striking in, told me, if I would give up my self
to him, I should not want as long as I lived. Oh, p^ay my Lord, therefore spare
me, spare me, for I had never been a Witch had it not been for Poverty!
Poverty! Poverty! and a discontented mind.

When she had done speaking, up sta^^^

Holt speaks to the Judge, and as she speaks her Imp Scondrel comes and licks
her Fingers.


And likewise begged of the Judge that her Life might be spared, adding withal,
that if the Judge would forgive her, she would confess to his Lordship, The
Cheats and Delusions the Devil imposes upon Witches, and many other remarkable
things. When she had done speaking, the Judge told her, He could not save her
life, but if she would make any Confession, he would not put her to so severe
Death as she deserved both by the Law of God and Man.

Holt makes large Confessions of the Wiles of the Devil.
Holt, My Lord, (to begin then) The Devil does (as I now can tell by dreadful
experience) often play the Deluder and Impostor with Witches, in persuading
them that they are the cause of such and such a Murder, and that he hope them
in the effecting of it, when indeed neither he nor they had any hand in it: And
he being of long standing, above six thousand years, must needs be a great
Scholar in all knowledges of Arts and Tongues, and so have the best skill in
Physic, judgment in Physiognomy, and knowledge of what Disease is reigning or
predominant in this or that man's body, (and so for Cattle too) by reason of his
long experience. This subtle Tempter knowing such a man liable to some sudden
disease, (as by experience I have found) As Plurisie, Imposthume, etc. he
resorts to diverse Witches; If they know the man, he seeks to make a difference
between the Witches and the party, it may be by telling them he has threatened
to have them very shortly searched, and so hanged for Witches; then they all
consult with Satan to save themselves, and Satan stands ready prepared.


The Devil's Speech to the Witches.
What will you have me to do for you, my dear and nearest children, covenanted
and compacted with me in my hellish league, and sealed with your blood, my
delicate firebrand-darlings.

Oh thou (say they) that at the first did promise to save us thy Servants
from any of our deadly Enemies discovery, and did promise to avenge and slay
all those, we pleased, that did offend us; Murder that Wretch suddenly who
threatens the downfall of your loyal Subjects. He then promises to effect it:
Next news is heard, the party is dead; he comes to the Witch, and gets a world
of reverence, credence, and respect for his power and activeness, when and
indeed the Disease kills the party, not the Witch, nor the Devil, (only the
Devil knew that such a Disease was predominant) and the Witch aggravates her
damnation by her familiarity and consent to the Devil, and so comes likewise in
compass of the Laws. This is Satan's usual i^postring and deluding, but not his
constant course of proceeding, for He and the Witch do mishief too much.

Judge, Hold, hold, set her by Iayler, she has discovered enough to make the
whole Court to tremble, and my heart to bleed. As soon as ever she was
commanded back to Prison, in order to suffer Death, The Judge orders the Jury
to examine Sack and Sugar, News and Iarmara, with the rest of that vast company
of Witches that were then in the Iaylers custody; but as they were coming into
the Court, the Iayler accidentally looking back, they took the opportunity
(fearing the Fate of those that went before) and vanished all away.


Sack and Sugar, Jarmara, News, vanish out of the Court with the rest of the
Witches that had not been examined, and it was feared they would multiply to a
new brood of Witches in Utopia.


As soon as ever the Judge perceived this unhappy accident, he commanded
immediately that the Jury should be impanelled, that Verdict forthwith might be
given upon those that were yet in custody; and accordingly there was a very
honest Jury impanelled, who within half an hours time brought in the Verdict,
That Vinegar-Tom, Holt, the old Hag, with her four Imps, Illemauzar, Pyewacket,
Peck in the Crown, Griezzel Greedigut, and were Witches and grand Criminals,
and deserved Death.


The Judge passes Sentence upon the Witches.


And so the Judge past Sentence upon them all, which Sentence was this: Viz.


You Vinegar-Tom, Holt, old Hag, with your four Imps, etc. shall return from
the place whence you came, and from thence he dragged upon an Hurlde to the
chiefest Street in Utopia, there to be buried alive in the midday, that all
may see your sin and folly, and fly for ever, the first thought that ever shall
dare to enter into their minds of making Contracts with a deceitful Devil.


After the Trial of Witches, Mrs. Bad-wife (otherwise called Mrs.
Tittle-tattle, or Prate-to-fast, was ordered to be set to the Bar.


Mrs. Bad-wife holding up her hand to the Bar.


Her Indictment read by the Judge himself.
Judge. Mrs. Bad-wife, You are here Indicted by the name of Mrs. Badwife (or
Prate-to-fast) in the Parish of Gossiping, For that you by your daily
Junketings, Revelings, Merry-makings, and for your proud and vainglorious
twatling and boasting, are a stain and blemish to Womankind, and a scandal to
the place where you live, and a Plaque and Curse to your poor contented Husband.


What say you Mrs. Bad-wife, are you guilty of such irregular actions, yea or
no.


She denies the Crimes laid to her charge.


Mrs. Bad-wife, My Lord and please you, I am no ways guilty of what is here
laid to my charge, for I regulate my life and domestic affairs, with
unspeakable prudence, discretion, and modesty, and never was suspected to be of
a gossiping temper, or juncke^ting humor, and love my dear-contented husband
as I love my own life.


When she had pleaded Not guilty, the Kings Attorney stood up and made the
following Speech; Viz.


My Lord, and you Gentlemen of the Jury, My opinion is, that there is little
heed to be given to the Assertions of any of the Female Sex (and none at all to
what Mrs. Bad-wife avoucheth in her own behalf. Alas, the Devil knew when he
first adventured to sting the woman, and tempt her as the weaker vessel, what a
rare Piece he had to deal with, naturally apt to all mischiefs and folly, he
knew she was ready to affect all his Plots and purposes, and that she would
leap at any opportunity, by which she might disturb the Fabric of the whole
Creation, and bring the World into a woeful desolation: Nay, do but observe the
Devil's after-works since the Fall, and you will see in all ages he has made use
of the Female Sex to atchieve and compass his chiefest Plots and Designs in
former times, who were the Engines in Kings, Princes, and Noble-mens Courts, to
beget and maintain Vice and Folly, but the Daughters of Eve; And besides, if
all things are not according to their will, there is no peace iu Court or
Country, and how frequently do the lascivious sort of them undo men of all
sorts and degrees, whilst bewitched with their Syren-tongues, they enchant them
and their Estates, Souls and Bodies unto utter desolation.


Then were the Witnesses called out, which were, Mrs. Good-huswifry, Mrs.
Nim^le, Mrs. Timely-up, Mrs. Chaste, and Mrs. Ever-doing.


Judge, Well Mrs. Good-huswifry, what can you say concerning the Prisoner?


Mrs. Good-houswifry giving in her Testimony against Mrs Bad-wife.


Mrs. Good-houswifry, My Lord, this wicked woman Mrs. Bad-wife, keeps holy
Exercises out of her house, she never takes car^ to have her Children
instructed, she approves of niggardly housekeeping, she breeds much
contention where she lives, and is hated by all the honest Neigbourhood. My
Lord, she makes it her business to go from house to house to gossip and idle
away her time; And now it is the property of a Good wife to set up a Sail
according to the Keel of her husbands Estate; I believe, my Lord, in a little
time she will bring her husband (good man) with sorrow to the Grave. But
because other Witnesses stand here by me, I will trouble your Lordship with no
more Complaints at present.


Mrs. Nimb^e giving in her (...).


So Mrs. Nimble stood up and said, My Lord, This Prisoner Mrs. Bad-wife is a
person not fit to live, for we had in the Town where I lived a company of very
good Neighbors, whose Names were Mrs. Amity, Mrs. Kindness, Mrs. Gentleness,
Mrs. Love, Mrs. Peace, Mrs Charity, Mrs. Ready-good-will, Mrs. Good-turn, with
many other such persons, etc. but as soon as ever she came, she routed them all
by her ill example, and in their room she brought in Mr. Naked; Mr. Discord,
Mr. Niggardliness, Mr. Strife, Mr. Deceit, Mr. High-mindedness, and Mr.
Makebate; Therefore my Lord, my judgment is, she ought to suffer Death, or be
banished quite out of Vtopia.

Mrs. Timely-up giving in her Testimony.


As soon as Mrs. Nimble had done complaining, up stands Mrs. Timely-up, and
said, my Lord, I have much to say against Mrs. Bad-wife, and if your Lordship
pleases I will begin to speak.

Judge, Ay -- pray Mrs. Timely-up begin then.


Mrs. Timely-up, My Lord, this Mrs. Bad-wife has forced all H^spitallity out
of door, and in his stead (at the backdoor) has let in Pride of Apparel,
sumptuous Buildings, affectation of vain Titles, and Madam Ambition.


Judge, D^d you know her before her marriage?


Mrs. Timely-up, Yes my Lord, I knew her and her husband both before they were
married.


Judge. What kind of man was her husband.


Mrs. T.V. He was a Leather-seller and a very honest man, and one of an
incomparable good humor; when he was a Bachelor, I could not come to his
house, but it was presently, Dear Friend, (for I was first cousin to him) How do
you, Good morrow, Good-even, I am glad to see you well, will you sit down and
eat; Be not so strange in my house, but take it for your own. for I am yours at
command: But now since he is married, poor contented man, he dares hardly speak
to his friends, when they come to see him, and a wink and a nod, is an high
favor from him; my Lord, she spoils all that come near her. Besides, my Lord,
she is of a most froward and pievish temper, and her husband (do what he can)
can never please her. Sometimes her clothes are not find enough, her Diet sweet
enough, her house sumptuous and brave enough, her husbands friends kind enough,
and sometimes again she loves not the City, but must have her Country House,
forsooth, and an hundred things more she ails every hour of the day. But my
Lord, I confess I could not forbear laughing at a passage I saw the other day
between her husband and she.


Judge, What was it, speak out, that the whole Conrt may hear


Her Husband strives to make her better, but in vain.


Mrs. Timely-up, My Lord, It 'twas this the other day as I went by her house, I
accidently peeped in at the window, and there I saw her husband bespeaking of
her after this manner, Pray my love, my dear, my sweeti^g, my chick, my child,
my honey, my life, my Joy, (with an hundred more such endearing expressions) Be
not angry, be not displeased, ask what ever tho^ wilt, thou shall have it, if
that thou will but let me live at quiet: But, my Lord, for all this kind
carriage of her husband, she called him Rogue, Rascal, Knave, and bid him be
gone, for she could never live at quiet for him, my Lord, I believe she will
quickly break his heart.


When she had ended her speech, Mrs. Badwife stands up and desired that Mrs.
Slack, Mrs. Sloathful, Mrs. Careless, Mrs. Wastful, Mrs. Goose-belly, Mrs.
Toss-pot Mrs. Wayward, Mrs. Love-bed, Mrs. Drowsy, Mrs. Light-finger, Madam
Go-gay, Mrs. Wanderer, Mrs. Spendal, her Witnesses might be called into the
Court to speak in her behalf but the Judge stood up and said, That the Court
would give no heed to the E^idence of such persons, except she had any better,
for he said, their very Names bespoke them sorry persons.

The Sentence upon Mrs. Bad-wife.
Then said the Judge to the Prisoner, hold up thy hand and hear thy Sentence,
viz. You shall return to the place from whence you came, and from thence be
Carted to the Great Ducking-stool that is in this Town, and there shall you sit
(in the presence of all the women in Vtopia for a warning to them) tell you
expire out your poisonous and infectious breath.

Mrs. Bad-wife put into a Ducking-stool to suffer Death.


Soon after the Execution of these Malefactors, the Judge in a great Passion,
commanded Sir John Fraud to be set to the Bar.

Sir John Fraud set to the Bar.


That so likewise the Knavery of all Trades and Professions might be publicly
Discovered, Arraigned, and Legally Condemned; so he was set to the Bar, and his
Indictment read: which was this; viz.

His INDICTMENT.
Sir John Fraud, Thou art here Indicted by the Name of Sir John Fraud, for that
thou art an Vpstart, come out of Italy, begot of Pride, nursed up by Wicked
Consciences, (and brought into this Country by thy Father the Devil) that thou
art a Raiser of Rents, an Enemy to this Kingdom, and have insinuated thy self
into all Trades, Estates and Professions throughout the Christian World.


When the Indictment was read, the whole Court laughed, and clapped their hands
for joy, saying, they hoped now they should see all Roguery come to light: And
the Judge spoke as follows to the Prisoner;

Judge. Sir John Fraud, Art thou Guilty, or not Guilty of these Misdemeanors
laid to thy Charge?


Prisoner. Not Guilty, my Lord: And I desire to have a Jury impannelled, and
then no doubt but the Verdict will be given on my side.


The First he desired for one of his Jury was a P^ick-louse Tailor.


As he was thus speaking to the Judge, he saw coming down a Hill afar off, a
brave dapper Dick, quaintly attired in Velvet and Satin, and a Cloak of cloth
rash, with a Cambrick Ruff as smoothly set, and he as neatly spunged, as if he
had been a Bridegroom; only he guessed by his pace afar off, he should be a
Tailor; his head was holden up so pert,and his legs shackle-hamm'd, as if his
Knees had been laced to his Thighs with Points. Coming more near indeed, he
spied a Taylor's Morice-pike on his Breast, a Spanish Needle, and then he
fitted his Salutations, not to his Suits, but to his Trade, and encountered him
by a thredbare Courtesy, as if he had not known him, and asked him of what
Occupation he was? A Tailor, quoth he, Marry then my Friend, quoth he, you are
the more welcome; for I must be tried for my Life; the Matter is come to an
Issue, there must a Jury be impannelled upon me, and I would desire and entreat
you to be one of the Quest.

The Judge likes not the Man.
Not so, quoth the Judge, I challenge him; for I know he cheats with Silk,
Lace, Cloth of Gold, of Silver, and such costly Stuff, to welt, guard, whip,
stitch, edge, face, and draw out, that the Vails of one Velvet Breech amounts
to I know not what: And I know there is no Tailor so precise, but he can play
the Cook, and lick his own Fingers; though he look up to Heaven, yet he can
cast large Shreds of such rich Stuff into Hell under his Shop-Board. Besides,
he sets down like the Clerk of the Chancery, a large Bill of Reckonings, which
because he keeps long in his pocket, he so powders for stinking, that the young
upstart that needs it, feels it salt in his stomach for a month after. Beside,
Knavery has much advanced him; for whereas in my time he was counted but
Goodman Tailor, now he is grown to be called a Merchant, or Gentleman,
Merchant-Taylor, giving Arms, and the Holy Lamb in his Crest, where before he
had no other Cognizance but a plain Spanish Needle, with a Welsh Cricket on the
top; since then his Gain is so great, and his Honor so advanced by Knavery, I
will not tr^^t his Conscience, neither shall he come upon your Jury.


Indeed you have some reason, quoth the Prisoner, to except against him; but
perhaps the Tailor does this upon mere Devotion, to punish Pride; and having no
other Authority, nor Mean^, thinks it best to pinch them by the Purse, and make
them pay well, as to ask them twice so much Silk, Lace, and other stuff as
would suffice, and yet to overreach my young Master with a Bill of Reckonings,
that will make him scratch where it itcheth not. Herein I hold the Tailor for a
necessary Member, to teach young Novices the way to weeping Cross; that when
they have wasted what their Fathers left them by Pride, they may grow sparing
and humble by inferred Poverty; and by this reason the Tailor after his fashion
exalts the poor, and pulls down the proud; for of a wealthy Esquires Son,
he makes a thredbare Beggar; and of a scornful Tailor, he sets up an upstart
scurvy Gentleman. Yet seeing My Lord, you have made a reasonable Challenge to
him, the Tailor shall be none of the Quest.


The Next he desired for a J^ry-man, was a Broker.


As Sir John bade the Tailor stand by, there was coming along the Valley
toward him a square set Fellow, well fed, and as briskly apparelled, in a
black Taffata Doublet, and a sp^nce Leather ^erken, with Crystal Buttons, a
Clook faced before with Velvet, and a Coventry Cap of the finest wool, his Face
something Ruby Blush, Cherry-cheek'd, like a shred of Scarlet, or a little
darker, like the Lees of old Claret Wine, a Nose, autem Nose, purpled
preciously with Pearl and Stone, like a counterfeit work, and between the
filthy Reumicast of his blood-shotten Snowt, there appeared small Holes,
whereat Worms Heads peeped, as if they meant by their appearance to preach and
show the ^Antiquity and Aucieutry of his House.


This fiery-fac'd Churl had upon his fingers as many Gold Rings as would
furnish a Goldsmiths Shop, or beseem a Pandor of loug Profession to wear.
Wondering what Companion this should be, he enquired of what Occupation he was?
Marry Sir, quoth he, a Broker: Why do you ask? have you any Pawns at my House?
No, quoth he, nor never will have; but the reason is, to have you upon a Jury.


The Attorney General starts up.
At this word starts up the Attorney General, and swore he should be none of
the Quest, for he would Challenge him; for this base Churl, says he, is one of
the Moths of the Commonwealth: beside, he is a spoil of young Gentlemen, a
blood-sucker of the poor, as thirsty as a Horse leach, that will never leave
drinking while he burst; a knave that has interest in the Leafes of forty
Bawdy-houses, a receiver for Lifts, and a dishonorable supporter for
Cutpurses. To conclude, he was gotten by an Incubus, a He Devil, and brought
forth by an overworn refuse, that had spent her youth under the ruins of
Bawbies Barn.


Moreover this Villain is the Devils Factor, sent from Hell to torment young
Gentlemen upon Earth? he has fetched me over in his time, only in pawns, in ten
thousand pound in gold. Suppose that Gentlemen through their liberal minds may
want that I need, money: let me come to him with a pawn worth ten pound, he
will not lend upon it above three pound, and he will have a Bill of sale, and
twelve pence in the pound for every month, so that it comes to sixteen pence,
and the Bill must be renewed monthly: and if you break but your day set down in
the Bill of sale, your pawn is lost, as full bought and sold, you turned out of
your Goods, and he an unconscionable gainer. Suppose the best, you keep your
day, yet paying sixteen pence a month for twenty shillings, you pay as good for
the lone as fourscore in the hundred: is not this monstrous exacting upon
Gentlemen? Beside, the Knave will be diligently attending and waiting at dicing
Houses, where we are at play, and there he is ready to lend the loser money
upon Rings, and Chains, Apparel, or any other good pawn, but the poor
Gentleman pays so dear for the Lavender it is laid up in, that if it lie long
at a Brookers-house, he seems to buy his apparel twice. Nay, this worm ea^ten
wr^tch has deeper pit falls yet to trap Youth in. For he being acquainted with
a young G^ntleman of fair living, in issue of good Parents, or assured
possibility, soothes him in his monstrous expenses, and says, he carries the
mind of a Gentleman, promising if he want, he shall not lack for a hundred
pound or two, if the Gentleman need. Then has my Broker an Usurer at hand, as
ill as himself, and he brings the money, but they tie the poor Soul in such
Darbies bands, what with receiving ill Commodities, and forfeitures upon the
band, that they dub him Sir John Had-land before they leave him, and share like
Wolves the poor novices wealth betwixt them as a prey. He is (Sir) to be brief,
a bowzie, bawdy Miser, good for none but himself, and his trugg; a Carl that
has a filthy Carcass without a Conscience, a body of a man, wherein an
Infernal spirit, instead of a Soul, does inhabit: the scum of the seven deadly
sins, an Enemy to all good minds, a devourer of young Gentlemen, and to
conclude, my mortal Enemy, and therefore admit of my challenge, and let him be
none of the Jury. Moreover, were not Brokers bad, there would be less filching,
and fewer Thieves; for they receive all is brought them, and buy that for a
Crown, that is worth twenty shillings. desire of gain binds their Conscience,
and they care not how it be come by, so they buy it cheap. Beside, they extort
upon the poor, that are enforced through extreme want to pawn their clothes and
household stuff, their Pewder and Brass; and if poor souls that labor hard,
miss but a day, the base-minded Broker takes the forfeit, without remorse or
pity: It was not so in Diebus illis. I have known of late, when a poor Woman
laid a silver Thimble, that was sent her from her friends for a Token, to pawn
for six pence, and the Broker made her pay a half penny a week for it, which
comes to two shillings a year for six pence; since then his Conscience is so
bad, let him be shuffled out amongst the Knaves, for a discarded Card, and so
the Broker was put by,


A Barber, a Surgeon and an Apothecary summoned to be of the Jury.


When the Broker was gone Three pert Youths come up cl^se to Sir John in a
cluster very nea^ly ty^ed, who questioning them what they were? the one said he
was a Barber, the other a Chiru^geon, and the third an Apoth^cary. How like you
of these (quoth Si^ John to the Judge) shall they be of my Jury? Of the Jury,
(quoth the Judge) never a One, by my consent; for I challenge them all.


And first the B^rber, he cannot be but a partial man, ^ith he gets more by one
time dres^ing of the Judge than by ten times dressing of me: I come plain to be
poll'd, and (...), ^eard cut, and pay him two pence: The Judge he sits down in
the chair wrapped in fine Clothes, as though the Barber were about to make him a
footclothe for the Vicar of Saint fools: Then begins he to take his Scissors in
his hand, and his comb, and so to snap with them as if he meant to give a
warning to all the Lice in his nitty Locks for to prepare themselves, for the
day of their destruction was at hand, then comes he out with his Fustian
Eloquence, and making a low conge, says Sir, will you have your Worships Hair
cut after the Italian manner, short and round, and then frounst with the
curling Irons, to make it look like a half Moon in a Mist? or like a Spaniard,
long at the ears, and curled like to the two ends of an old cast Periwig? or
will you be Frenchifyed with a Love-lock down to your shoulders, wherein you
may wear your Mistress Favor? the English cut is base, and Gentlemen scorn it,
novelty is dainty: speak the word, Sir, my Scissors are ready to execute your
Worships will. His head being once dressed, which requires in combing and rubbing
some two hours, he comes to the Basin: then being curiously washed with no worse
than a Camphire ball, he descends as low as his beard, and asks whether he
pleases to be shaven or no? whether he will have his Peake cut short and
sharp, amiable like an Inamorato, or broad pendant like a Spade, to be
terrible, like a Warrior and a Soldado? whether he will have his crates cut low
like a Juniper bush, or his Suberches taken away with a Razor? if it be his
pleasure to have his appendices prim'd, or his Mouchaches sostred, to turn
about his ears like the branches of a Vine, or cut down to the lip with the
Italian Lash to make him look like a half faced Bouby in Brass? These quaint
Terms the Barber greets the Gallant withal, and at every word a snap with his
Scissors, and a cring with his knee; whereas when he comes to the poor man, he
either cuts his beard at his own pleasure, or else in disdain asks him if he
will be trimmed round like the half of a Holland Cheese, mocking of him; for
this his Knavery, my will is of him, he shall be none of the Jury.


For you Mr. Surgeon the Statutes of England exempt you from being of any
Quest; and beside, alas, I seldom fall into your hands as being quiet, and
making no brawles to have wounds or sores, neither do I frequent Whorehouses to
catch the Marbles, and so to grow your Patient: I know you not, and therefore I
appeal to the Statute, you shall have nothing to do with this matter.


And for you Mr. Apothecary, alas, I look not once in seven year into your
Shop, without it be to buy a pennyworth of wormseed to give my child to drink;
or a little Treacle to drive out the Measles, or perhaps some dregs or powders,
to make my sick horse a drench withal; but for my self, if I be ill at ease, I
take Kitchen Physic, I make my Wife my Doctor, and my Garden my Apothecaries
Shop, whereas the Town Fops cannot have a Fart awry, but he must have his
Purgations, Pills, and Glisters, or evacuate by Electuaries; he must, if the
least spot of Morphew come on his face, have his Oil of Tartar, his Lac
Virginis, his Camphire dissolved in Verjuice, to make the Fool as fair
forsooth, as if he were to play Maid-Marian in a May Game or Morrice-dance:
tush, he cannot digest his Meat without Conserves, nor end his Meal without
Suckats; if Sir John hap to have a stinking Breath, then forsooth the
Apothecary must play the Perfumer to make it sweet; nay, what is it about him,
that blames not Nature for framing, and forms it anew by Art? And in all
this, who but Monsieur the Apothecary? threfore, pray Sir, (quoth the Jury) let
those three, as partial companions, be packing.


The next desired for a Jury-man, was a Lawyer by S^. Dunstans Church.


As Soon as these were packed off, there comes stalking down from a neighboring
Grove an ancient grave Sir, in a black Velvet Coat, and a black Cloth Gown,
welted and faced, and after him, as he supposed, four Servingman, the most
ill-favored Knaves he thought as ever he saw; one of them had on a
Buff-leather Jerkin, all greasy before with the droppings of Beer, that fell
from his Beard; and by his side a Skein like a Brewers Bung-knife, and muffled
he was in a Cloak turned over his Nose, as though he had been ashamed to show
his Face. The second had a Belly like a Bucking-tub, and a thredbare black coat
unbuttoned before upon the Breast, whereon the Map of Drunkenness was drawn,
with the bawdy and bowsie ^xcrements that dropped from his filthy leaking mouth.
The third was a long lean old slavering slangril, with a Brazil staff in one
hand, and a whipcord in the other; so purblind, that he had like to have
stumbled upon the company before he saw them. The fourth was a (...) Chaff,
with a sour look, in a black (...) faced with Taffata, and by his side a great
side Pouch like a Falkoner: For their Faces, all four seemed to be Brethren,
they were so bumbasted with the flocks of strong Beer, and lined with the Lees
of old Sack, that they looked like four blown Bladders painted over with red
Oker, or washed over with the Suds of an old stale Die. All these, as well the
Master, as the following Mates, would have past away, but that he stepped before
them, and enquired first of the foremost what he was? Marry, quoth lie, a
Lawyer. Then Sir, quoth he, we have a Matter in controvers^ie that requires
Counsel, and you are the more welcome. Marry, said he, I am to be Tried for my
Life, and I would have you of my Jury: At this the Lawyer smiled, but said
nothing; he marvelled he was not so well as the Surgeon, exempted by an Act of
Parliament, from being of any Quest; since as the Surgeon was without pity, so
he was without conscience; But presently Mr. Attorney stepped in, and made his
Challenge, saying, the Lawyer was never friend to Honesty; for when Lowliness,
Neighborhood and Hospitality lived in England, West^inster-Hall was a
Dining-Chamber, not a Den of Controversies, when the Duke, Earl, Lord, Knight,
Gentleman and Esquire aimed at Virtue, not Pride; and wore such Breeches as was
spun in his house; then the Lawyer was a simple man, and in the highest degree
was but a bare Scrivener, except Judges of the Land, which took in hand serious
matters, as Treasons, Murders, Felonies, and such Capital Offenses, but seldom
were there any Pleas put in, before the proud Lawyer, for his Maintenance,
invented strange Controversies; and since he began to domineer in England, he
has buz'd such a proud, busy, covetous and encroaching humor upon every man's
Head, that Lawyers are grown to be one of the chief Limbs of the Commonwealth;
for they do now adays de lana cana caprina rixari, go to Law if a Hen do but
scrape in a Neighbors Orchard; but howsoever Right be, Might carries away the
Verdict: If a poor man sue a Gentleman, why he shoots up to the Sky, and the
Arrow falls on his own head; howsoever the Cause go, the weakest is thrust to
the wall. Lawyers are troubled with the heat of the Liver, which makes the
palms of their hands so hot, that they cannot be cooled, unless they be rubbed
with the Oil of Angels; but the poor man that gives but his bare Fee, or
perhaps pleads in for^^a pauperis, he hunteth for Hares with a Tabor, and
gropeth in the dark to find a Needle in a Bottle of Hay: tush, these Lawyers
have such delatory and foreign Pleas, such Dormers, such Quibs and Quiddits,
that beggaring their Clients, thye purchase to themselves whole Lordships; it
booteth not men to discourse their little Conscience, and great Extortion, only
let this suffice, they be not so rich as they be bad, and yet they be not too
wealthy. I inveigh not against Law, nor honest Lawyers, for there be some well
qualified; but against extorting Ambodexters that wring the poor; and because I
know not whether this be such an one or no, I challenge him; he shall not be of
the Jury. Why then (quoth Sir John) his Worship may depart.

A Sergeant desired on the Jury


Sir John questioned what he in the BuffJerkin was? Marry (quoth he) I am a
Sergean^, Sir John. He had no sooner said so, but Sir John leaped back, and
drawing his Rapier, he did not only challenge him for his Jury, but protested
if he strid one foot toward him, he would make him eat a piece of his Po^^ard.
And what is the reason (quoth he) that there is such mortal hatred betwixt you
and the Sergeant? O Sir, (quoth the Judge) search him, and I warrant you, the
Knave has Precept upon on Precept to arrest me, has worn his Mace smooth,
with only clapping it on my Shoulder; he has had me under Coram so often. Oh
the Reprobate is the Usurers Executioner to bring such honest Gentlemen to
Limbo, Sir John, as he has over-thrown with his base Brocage, and bad
Commodities; and as you see him a fat Knave with a foggy face, wherein a Cup of
old Sack has set a Seal, to mark the bowsie Drunkard to die of the Dropsy, so
his Conscience is consumed, and his Heart robbed of all remorse and pity, that
for Money he will betray his own Father; for will a Cormorant but set him to
arrest a young Gentleman, the Rake-hell will be so eager to catch him, as a Dog
to take a Bear by the ears in Paris Garden, and when he has laid hold upon
him, he uses him as courteously as a Butchers Cur would do an Oxe-cheek when
he is hungry; if he see the Gentleman has Money in his Purse, then straight
with a Cap and Knee he carries him to the Tavern, and bids him send for some of
his Friends to Bail him; but first he Covenants to have some brace of Angels
for his pains; and besides he calls in for Wine greedily: But suppose the
Gentleman wants Pence, he will either have a Pawn, or else drag him to the
Counter, without respect of Manhood or Honesty. I should spend the whole day
with displaying his villainies; therefore briefly let this suffice, he was never
made for any goodness, but his slovenly carcass was framed by the Devil, of the
rotten Carrion of a Wolf, and his Soul of an Usurers damned Ghost, turned out
of Hell, into his Body, to do monstrous wickedness upon the Earth; so that he
shall be none of the Jury, neither shall he come nearer than the length of my
Rapier will suffer him.


Indeed, quoth Sir John, generally Sergeants be bad, but there be amongst them
some honest men, that will do their duties with lawful favor; for to say
truth, if Sergeants were not, how should men come by their Debts? Marry they
are so cruel in their Office, that if they arrest a poor man, they will not
suffer him (if he has not Money) to stay a quarter of an hour to talk with his
Creditor, although perhaps at the meeting they might take Composition; but only
to the Counter with him, unless he will lay his Pewter, Brass, Coverlets,
Sheets, or such Household stuff to them for pawn of payment of some Coin for
their staying; therefore let him depart out of the place, for his Room is
better than his Company to me, because of a late Prank I played


A Sumner, a Iaylor, an Informer appear for Iury-men for Sir John.


After this three other men offered their Service to Sir John; the one said he
was a Sumner, the other a Jailer, and the third an Informer. B^ess me (quoth
the Judge) what a Gang is here gathered together! no doubt Hell is broke loose,
and the Devil means to keep Holiday: I make Challenge against them all, as
against worse men than those that gave evidence against Christ: for the Sumner,
it boots me to say little more against him, than Chaucer did in his C^nte^bury
Tales, who said he was a Knave, a B^iber and a Bawd: But leaving that
Authority, although it be authentical* yet thus much I can say of my self, that
these drunken, drowsy sons go a tooting abroad (as they themselves term it)
which is to hear if any man has got his Maid with Child, or plays the
Good Fellow with his Neighbors Wife: if he find a hole in any man's Coat that
is of wealth, then he has his peremptory Citation ready, to cite him unto the
Archdeacons or Officials Court, there to appear, and abide the shame and
penalty of the Law: the man perhaps in good credit with his Neighbors, loath to
bring his Name in question, greaseth the Sumner in the Fist, and then he wipes
him out of his Book, and suffers him to get twenty with Child, so he keep him
warm in the hand. He has a Saying to wanton Wives, and they are his good
Dames, and as long as they feed him with Chee^e, Bacon, Capons, and such odd
Reversions, they are honest; and be they ^ever so bad, he swears to the
Official, Complaints are made upon Envy, and the women are o^ good Behavior.
Tush, what Bawdry is it he will not suffer, so he may have Money and good
Cheer? And if he like a Wench well, a Snatch himself; for they know all the
Whores in a Country, and are as lecherous Companions as may be. To be brief,
the Sumner lives upon Sins of People, and out of Harlotry gets he all his
Gains. As for the Jailer, although I have been little troubled in Prison, to
have experience of his Knavery, yet have I heard the poor pri^oners complain
how cruel they be to them, extorting with extraordinary Fees, selling a double
Curtal (as they call it) with a double Jugg of Beer for twopence, which
contains not above a pint and a half. Let a poor man be arrested into one of
the Compters, though he but set his foot in them but half an hour, he shall be
at almost an Angels Charge; what with Garnish, Crossing and Wiping out of the
Book, turning the Key, Paying the Chamberlain, seeing for his Jury, and twenty
such Extortions, invented by themselves, and not allowed by any Statute. God
bless me, Jailer, from your Hen-houses; I Will assure you, I Will keep you from
coming into the Quest.


And as to you Master Informer, you that look like a Civil Citizen, or some
handsome Pettifogger of the Law, although your crimson Nose betrays you can sup
a cool Cup of Sack without any chewing, yet have you as much Knavery in your
side-Pouch there, as would breed the confusion of forty honest men. It may be,
Sir John that you marvel why I exclaim against the Informer, since he highly
pretends to do all he does against honest men, according to Law: To wipe out
this, this Officer is one that abuses Law, when he should use it, and such a
one I guess this Fellow to be, by the Carnation Tincture of his Ruby-Nose.
Therefore let us search his Bag, and see what Trash you shall find in it; with
that, although the Informer were very loath, yet we plucked out the stuffing of
his Pouch, and in it was found a hundred and odd Writs; whereat I wondered; and
Mr. Attorney smiling, bad me read Labels, and the Parties Names, and then
examine the Informer how many of them he knew, and wherein they had offended? I
followed his Counsel, and of all he knew but three, neither could he tell what
they had done amiss, to be arrested, and brought in question; and yet this
Varlet swore they deserved punishment.


But the Prisoner Sir John Fraud seeing me stand in amaze, began thus to
resolve me in my doubt. Perhaps, quoth he, you marvel why the Informer has all
these Writs, and knows neither the parties, nor can object any offense to them?
To this I answer, that it being a long vacation he learned in the roll all
those men's names, and the places where they live: Now means he to go abroad,
and search them out and arrest them, and though they know not wherein or for
what cause they should be troubled, yet rather than they will come up to London
and spend their Money, he thinks they will bestow some odd Angel upon Mr.
Informer, and so sit at home in quiet. But suppose some be so stubborn as to
stand to the Trial, yet can this cunning Knav^ declare a Tanquam against them,
so that though they be cleared, yet can they have no recompense at all, for
that he does it in the Courts behalf, I will not unfold all his Villainies, but
he is an Abuser of good Laws, and a very knave, and so let him pack away with
his Fellows.


A Collier and a Ropemaker.


As they were going Sir John saw two in the Valley together by the ears, the
one in Leather, the other as black as the Devil; he stepped to them to part the
fray, and questioned what they were, aad wherefore they brawled? Marry, quoth
he, that looked like Lucifer, though I am black, I am not the Devil, but indeed
a Collier of Croyden and one, Sir, that have ^old many a man a false sack of
Coals, that both wanted measure, and was half full of dust and dross. Indeed I
have been a Lieger in my time in London, and have played many mad pranks; for
which cause, you may apparently see, I am made a curtal; for the Pillory (in
the sight of a great many good and sufficient Witnesses) has eaten off both
mine ears: and now, Sir, this Ropemaker (the other that was with him) hunteth
me here with his halters. I guess him to be some evil Spirit, that in the
likeness of a man, would since I have past the Pillory, persuade me to hang my
self for my old offenses; and therefore I lay about his shoulders with a
Crab-tree Cudgel, that he may get out of my Company.


The Ropemaker replied, that honestly journeying by the way, he acquainted
himself with the Collyer accidentally, but I my self am an honest Man; How,
quoth the Collier, can he be honest, whose Mother I guess was a Witch? For I
have heard them say, that Witches say their Prayers backward, and so does the
Ropemaker earn his living by going backward; and the Knaves chief Living is by
making fatal Instruments, as Halters and Ropes, which diverse desperate men hang
themselves with; so immediately Sir John asked them, if they would be of his
Jury? The Judge answered and said in the Ropemaker he found no great Falsehood,
therefore he was willing he should be one; but for the Collier, he thought it
necessary, that as he came so he should depart: so then, Sir John bade the
Ropemaker stand by till more came, which was not long; for there came three in
a Cluster.


The Cheats used by the Tanners, Shoemakers, and Curriers.


As soon as they drew nigh, he spyed one, a fat Churl with a side Russet Coat
to his knee, and his hands all so tanned with shifting his Ouse, yet would he
not take notice what they were, but questioned with them of their several
occupations.


Marry, quoth the first, I am a Tanner, the second a Shoemaker, and the third a
Currier: then turning to the Court, he asked them if they would allow of those
parties? No, quoth the Attorney General, I make challenge unto them all, and I
will yield, reasons of import against them.


The Cheats used by the TANNERS.
And first to you, Mr. Tanner, Are you a man worthy to be of a Jury, when your
Conscience cares not to wrong the whole Commonwealth? you respect not public
commodity, but private gains; not to benefit your Neighbor, but for to make
the proud Princox your Son an upstart Gentleman; and because you would marry
your Daughter at the least to an Esquire, that she may, if it be possible, be a
Gentlewoman; and how comes this to pass? By your Tanfats forsooth: For whereas
by the ancient Laws and Statutes of England, you should let a, Hide lie in the
Ouse, at the least nine months, you can make good Leather of it before three
months; you have your Doves dung, your Marl, your as^en Bark, and a thousand
things more, to bring on your Leather apace, that it is so badly Tanned, that
when it comes to the wearing, then it ^^eets away like a piece of brown Paper:
And whereas your Backs of all other, should be the best tanned, you bring them
so full of Horn to the Market, that did you not grease the Sealers of
Leaden Hall thoroughly in the Fist, they should never be sealed, but turned
away, and made forfeit by the Statute. I cannot at large lay open your subtle
practices to beguile the poor communalty with bad Leather. But let this suffice
you leave no Villainy unsought, to bring the Blockhead your son to go before the
Clown his Father, trimly trickt up in a pair of velvet breeches.


The Cheats used by the Curriors.
Now Mr. Currior, to your Cozenage; you cannot be content only to burn the
Leather you dress, for fault of Liquor, because you would make the Shoemaker
pay well, and you put in little stuff; and beside, when as in Backs you should
only put in Tallow hard and good, you put in soft Kitchen stuff mixed, and so
make the good and well tanned Leather by your Villainy, to fleet and waste away,
but also you grow to be an extorting Knave and a Forestaller of the Market; for
you will buy Leather, Sides, Backs and Calve Skins, and sell them to the poor
Shoomakers at an unreasonable rate, by your false retailing, getting infinite
goods by that excessive price; both undoing the poor Shomaker, and causing us,
that we pay extremely for Shoes. For if the Currier bought not Leather by the
whole of the Tanner, the Shoemaker might have it at a more reasonable price;
but the Shoemaker being poor, is not perhaps able to deal with a dicker of
Hides, nor perhaps with a couple of Backs, and the Tanner will not trust him;
then the extorting and couzening Currier comes up with this, I will lend you
for a day; and so pincheth him, that he is scarce able to find his Children
bread. But well has his Majesty provided by an Act of Parliament, That no
Currier shall buy Leather, either Backs or Hides of the Tanner, so to bridle
the extorting and forestalling Couzenage; but craftilier and subtilier has the
Knave Currier cros-bitten the Statute, in that he deals thus with the Tanner,
he makes him hold his Leather unreasonably to the Shoemaker; and so when he
cannot sell it, he lays it up in the Curriers house, under a color, whereas
indeed he has sold it him. Suppose this shift be spied and prevented, then
compoundeth he with some Knave Shoemaker, some base Rakehell without a
Conscience, that neither respects God, the Commonwealth, nor his Company,
and forsooth he is half with the Currier, who lets him have some hundred
Marks to lay out for Leather every Month, whereas he spends not in his Shop a
hundred Marks worth in a year; so the Shoemaker buys it to abuse the Statute,
for the Currier, and the Currier by that means undoeth the other Shoemakers:
thus two crafty Knaves are met, and they need no honest Broker.


The Cheats in the Shoemaking Trade.
Now to you Mr. Shoemaker; you can put in the inner sole of a thin Calves Skin,
when as the Shoe is a Neats-leather Shoe; which you know is clean contrary both
to Conseience and the Statute. Beside, you will join a Neats-Leather Vampey to
a Calves Leather ^eel: Is not here good stuff, Mr. Shoemaker? Well, for your
Knavery, you shall have those curses which belong unto your Craft: you shall be
light-footed to travel far, light witted upon every small occasion to give your
Masters bag: you shall be most of you unthrifts, and almost all perfect
Goodfellows. Beside, I remember a merry jest, how Mercury brought you to a
dangerous Disease, for he requested a boon for you, which fell out to your
great disadvantage: and to recreate us, hear a little Gentle-craft, what ^ell
to your Trade by that winged God. As it happened on a time that Jupiter and
Mercury traveling together upon Earth, Mercury was wonderfully hungry and had
no Money in his Purse to buy him any food, and at last, to his great comfort he
spyed where a Company of Tailors were at Dinner with buttered Pease eating
their pease with their Needles points one by one: Mercury came to them, and
asked them his alms: they proudly bade him sit down and do as he saw they did,
and with that delivered him a Needle. The poor God being passing hungry, could
not content his maw with eating one by one, but turned the eye of his Needle,
and eat two or three together. Which the Tailors seeing they start up, and
said, What Fellow, a shovel and Spade to buttered Pease? have thou no more
manners? Get out of our Company, and so they sent him packing with many
strokes. Mercury coming back Iupeter demanded of him what news? and he told him
how churlishly he was used amongst the Tailors. Well, wandering on further,
Mercury espied where a Company of Shoemakers were at Dinner with powdered Beef
and Brewess: going to them, before he could ask them any Alms, they said,
welcome good Fellow, what is thy Stomach up? will thou do as we do, and taste
of Beef Mercury thanked them, and sat down and eat his Belly full, and drunk
double Beer, and when he had done went home to his Master. As Soon as he came,
Iupeter asked him what News? and he said, I have light amongst a crew of
Shoomakers, the best Fellows that I ever met withal, they have frankly fed me
without grudging, and therefore grant me a Boon for them. Ask what thou will,
Mercury, quoth he, and it shall be done: Why then, quoth he, grant, that for
this good turn they have done me, they may ever spend a groat before they can
earn twopence. It shall be granted: Mercury, as soon as Iupeter had said the
word, bethought himself, and said, Nay, but that they may earn a groat before
they spend twopence for my Tongue slipped at the first. Well, Mercury, quoth he,
it cannot be recalled, the first wish must stand; and hereof, by Mercuries Boon
it grew, that all the Gentle-Craft are such good Fellows and Spendthrifts. But
howsoever, none of these three, neither Shoemaker, Tanner nor Currier shall be
of the Jury.


A Parcel of Gentlemen appear next to Sir John.


As they went away with Fleas in their ears, being thus taunted by the Court,
Sir John saw coming to him a Troop of ancient Gentlemen, with their Servingmen
attending upon them: The foremost was a great old man with a white Beard, all
in Russes, and a fair black Cloak on his back, and attending on him he had some
five men; their Cognizance, as I remember, was a Peacock without a Tail; the
other two that accompanied him, seemed meaner than himself, but Gentlemen of
good worship; whereupon Sir John went toward them, and saluted them, and was
so bold as to question what they were, and of their Business.


And the ancientest answered, he was a Knight, and those two his Neighbors,
the one an Esquire, the other a Gentleman, and that they have no urgent
Affairs, but only to walk abroad to take the fresh Air. Then did he desire them
all to be upon his Jury.


They smiling, answered, they were content; but the Attorney General storming,
stepped in, and made challenge to them all, and said, thus you may guess the
inward Mind by the outward Apparel; and see how he is addicted by the homely
Robes he is suited in; Why this Knight is a mortal Enemy to Honesty, and so to
me; he regards not Hospitality, yet aims at Honor; he relieves not the
poor; you may see though his Lands and Revenues be great, and he able to
maintain himself in great Bravery, yet he is content with homespun Cloth; he
holds the worth of his Gentry to be and consist in Velvet-Breeches, but
valueth true Fame by the report of the common sort, who praise him for his
Housekeeping and great Spendings. His Tenants and Farmers would if it might be
be possible, make him sink into Atoms with their Prayers and Praises; he
raises Rent, racketh Lands, takes Incomes, imposes merciless Fines, envies
others, buyeth Houses over his Neighbors heads, and respects not his
Country, and the Commodity thereof, as dear as his Life, and therefore not fit
to be in a Kingdom; he regards not to have the needy fed, not to have his
Board garnished with full Platters, he minds to be famous, and great, and rich
in Furniture and Apparel: Nay, he loves Pride, and therefore I must proclaim
him mine Enemy, and therefore he shall be none of the Jury; and such as himself
I guess the Squire and the Gentleman, and therefore I challenge them all.


Next appears to Sir John a Troop of Citizens.


A Discovery of the Cheats used by Skinners, Ioyners, Sadlers, Watermen,
Cutlers, Bellows-menders, Plaisterers and Printers.
As Mr. Attorney was thus talking, there came a Troop of men, in apparel
seeming poor honest Citizens, in all they were eight; he demanded of them what
they were, and whither they were going? One of them that seemed the wealthiest,
who was in a surr'd Jacket, made answer, that they were all friends, going to
the Burial of a Neighbor of theirs, that yesternight died, and if it would do
Sir John any pleasure to hear their Names, they were not so dainty, but they
would ^ell them.


The first said he was a Skinner; the second said he was a Joyner; the third
was a Sadler; the fourth a Watermam, the fifth was a Cutler, the sixth was a
Bellows-mender, the seventh a Plaisterer, and the eighth a Printer. In good
time, quoth he, it is commendable when Neighbors love so well together; but if
your speed be not overmuch, I must request you to be of a Jury; they seemed all
content, and so Sir John turned to the Court, and asked if they would make
challenge to any of these? I scorn, quoth one of the Court to make any great
Objection against them, being they are Mechanical men, and almost hold them
indifferent: With that up starts the Judge himself, and said, Sir, they are not
indifferentmen, I challenge them all.


The Knavery of Skinners.


And first with you, Mr Skinner, to whom I can say little, but only this, that
whereas you should only put the Backs of Skins into Facing, you taw them, and
so deceive the Buyer; beside, if you have some fantastic Skin brought you,
not worth twopence, with some strange Spots, though it be a Leopard, you will
swear it is a most precious Skin, and came from Musko, or the furthest Part of
Calabria.


The Cheats of the Sadler.
The Sadler, he stuffs his Pannels with Straw or Hay, and overglazeth them with
Hair, and makes the Leather of them of Morts, or tanned Sheeps-skins.


The Cheat of the Joyner.
The Ioyner, though an honest man, yet he makes his Joints weak, and puts
sappy wood in the Mortises, which should be Heart of the Tree, and all to make
his Stuff tender.


The Cheat of the Cutler.
The Cutler is a Patron to Ruffians and Swash-Bucklers, and will sell them a
Blade that may be thrust into a Bushel; but to a poor man that cannot skill of
it, he sells him a Sword or Rapier new overglazed, and swears the Blade came
either from Turkey, or Toledo.


The Knavery of the Watermen.


Now, (Mr. Waterman) you will say there is no subtilty in you, for there is
none so simple but knows your Fares, and wha^ is due between Greenwich and
London, and how you earn your Money painfully, with the sweat of your Brows;
all this is true, but let me whisper you one thing in your ear, you will play
the good fellow too much if you be well greased in the Fist; for if a young
Gentleman and a pretty Wench come to you, and say, Waterman, My friend and I
mean to go by Water, and to be merry a night or two, and I care not which way
nor whither we go; and therefore where thou think we may have best Lodging,
thither carry us: then off goes your Cap, and away they go, to Brainford, or
some other place; and then you say, Hostess, I pray you use this Gentleman and
his Wife well, they are come out of London to take the Air, and mean to be
merry here a night or two, and to spend their Money frankly, when God wot they
are neither man not wife, nor of any acquaintance, before their Match made in
some Bawdy Tavern, but you know no such matter; and therefore Waterman, I
pardon you. And so for you Plaisterer and Bellows mender, you shall be on the
Jury.


At those words of the Judge, Sir John rejoiced, hoping that now quickly the
Jury would be full.


A Printer made a Jury man for his Indifferency.


As for the Printer, he cheats the Bookseller sometimes in working of half an
Impression for himself, when the Bookseller has had his Number he is to pay
for; but because the Printer only does thus to those Booksellers that he
thinks will never pay him, he shall pass on the Jury as an indifferent honest
man.


The Cheats of the Brick-layers:


As Sir John looked about him, he saw one alone come running as fast as he
could; he wondered what he should be that he should make such haste; when he
came near him, he told the Judge he was a good honest simple man that had been
long in his work, in building him a sumptuous House: I challenge him (quoth the
Judge) for he is a Jugler; for though he goes very homely in Leather, and has
his Ruler in his hand, and his Trowel at his side, and he seems not as one
that was given to such qualities, yet he has his Policy; when he makes a
stately place all glorious to the eye, and full of fair Chambers, and goodly
Rooms, and about his House perhaps some threescore Chimneys, yet he can so
cunningly cast by his Art, that three of them shall not smoke in the
Twelvemonth, and so spoils he much good Mortar and Brick.


Why, quoth Sir John, the Fault is not in the Workman, but the Housekeeper;
for now adays men build to please the Eye, not to profit the poor, they use no
Roast, but for themselves and their Household; nor no Fire, but a little
Court-Chimney in their own Chamber: How can the poor Bricklayer then be blamed,
when the niggardliness if the Lord and Master, is the Cause no more Chimnies do
smoke? For would they use ancient Hospitality as their Forefathers did, and
value as lightly of Pride, as their great Grandfathers, then should you fee
every Chimney in the House smoke, and prove that the poor Artificer had done
his part. Why then (quoth the Judge) as you please, admit him on the Quest.


But what be those (qouth the Judge) that come here so soberly? I hope they be
honest men, for they look d^m^re; I will enquire, said he; and with that,
stepping to them, he demanded their Names; and very courteously one said he was
a Brewer, the other a Butcher, the third a Baker, and the fourth a Victualer.


Hearing what they were, the Judge was glad, guessing, since they were so
honest substantial men, that they would help to make up the Jury.


When he had said so, Sir John Fraud, with a grim and sow^ countenance, gave
them this Challenge: I hold it not necessary (quoth he) that these have any
thing to deal in my Cause, since I am at odds with them all, at least in forty
pounds apiece; for this seven year have I been indebted unto them for Bread,
B^^f, Beer, and other Victuals; then since they have credited me long, and I
have had so little a care to pay them, I doubt now they will revenge
themselves, and pass against me in the Verdict. Nay (quoth the Judge) rather
will they hold on your part; for if they be honest wise men (as they seem to
be) they will be careful of your pre^erment, seeing the more highly you are
advanced, the more they are like to come by their own: if therefore you can
object no other points of Dishonesty against them, I see no reason why they
should be put by. If you do not? (quoth Sir John) I do, and I will prove them
un^it to have any dealings here; and first for the Butcher:


The Knavery of the Butcher.


I pray you Goodman Kill-Calf, what havoc play you with puffing up of meat,
and blowing with your Pricker as you slay it? have you not your artificial
Knaveries to set out your meat with pricks, and then swear he has more for
money than ever you bought: to sell a piece of an old Cow, for a chop of young
Ox; to wash your old meat that has hung waltring in the shop, with new blood,
to truss away an old Ewe, instead of a young Weather: and although you know it
is hurtful, and forbidden by the statues to slay your Hides, skins, backs, with
cuts and flashes, to the improverishing of the poor Shoemaker when he buys it:
yet I pray you how many slaughters do you make in a poor Calves skin? Oh
Butcher, a Long Lent be your punishment: for you make no Conscience in
deceiving the poor.


The Knavery of the Brewer.
And you Brewer, that grow to be worth forty thousand pounds by selling of
sodden water, what subtilty have you in making your Beer, to spare the Malt,
and put in more of the hop to make your drink (be Barley never so cheap) not a
whit the stronger, and yet sell never a whit the more measure for money; you
can, when you have taken all the heart of the Malt away, then clap on store of
water; it is cheap enough, and mash out a tunning of small Beer, that it scours
a man's maw like Rhenish wine; in your Conscience how many Barrels draw you out
of a quarter of Malt? sie, sie, I conceal your falsehood, lest I should be too
broad in setting down your faults.


The Knavery of the Baker.


And for you, Goodman Baker, you that love to be seen in the open Marketplace
upon the Pillory, the world cries out of your wiliness, you crave but one dear
year to make your Daughter a Gentlewoman: you buy your Corn at the best hand,
and yet will not be content to make your bread weight by many ounces: you put
in Yest, and Salt, to make it heavy, and yet all your policy cannot make it,
but you sine for the Pillory. The poor cry out, the rich find fault, and the
Lord Mayor and the Sheriffs, like Honorable and Worshipful Magistrates, every
day walk abroad, and weigh your Bread, and all will not serve to make you
honest men: but were extremity used, and the Statute put in the highest degree
in practice, you would have as few ears of your heads, as the Collier.


The Knavery of the Tapsters.
Last to you, Tom Tapster, that tap your small cans of Beer to the poor, and
yet fill them half full of froth, that card your Beer (if you see your Guests
begin to be drunk) half small, and strong; you cannot be content to pinch them
with your small pots, and your Ostry Faggots; but have your Truggs, to draw men
on to Villainy, and to bring Customers to your house, where you sell a joint of
meat for twelve pence, that cost you scarce fix: and if any chance to go on the
score, you score him, when he is asleep, and set up a Groat a day more than he
has, to find you drinking pots with your Companions. To be short, thou art a
Knave, and I like not of any of the rest, the way lies before you, and
therefore you may be gone, for you shall be none of the Quest.


The Judge hearing this smiled and said, I see Rogues among themselves can
never agree, as the Judge was thus speaking, Sir John saw five fat Fellows, all
in Damas^*Coats, and Gowns welted with Velvet, very brave, and in great
consultation, as if they were to determine of some weighty matter. Drawing
near, he saw they were wealthy Citizens: so he went, and reverently saluted
them, and told them how he needed their aid, about his Jury; they were
contented; but the Judge excepted against four of them, and said, they were
none of his friends; that was the Merchant, Goldsmith, Mercer, and Draper. His
allegations were these, that they were all feathered of one wing, to fetch in
young Gentlemen by commodities, under the color of lending of money.


The Knavery of the Merchant.


For the Merchant, he delivered Iron, Tin, Lead, Hops, Sugars, Spices, Oils,
brown Paper, or whatsoever else, from six months to six months; which when the
poor Gentleman came to sell again, he could not make threescore and ten in the
hundred beside the usury.


The Knavery of the Mercer.
The Mercer, he follows the young upstart Gentleman, that has no Government
of himself, and he fe^deth his humor to go brave; he shall not want Silks,
Sattins, Velvets, to prank abroad in his pomp; but with this proviso, that he
must bind over his Land in a Statute-Merchant, or Staple; and so at last
forfeit all unto the merciless Mercer, and leave himself never a foot of ground
in England; which is the reason, that for a few remnants of Velvets, and Silks,
the Mercer creeps into whole Lordships.


The Knavery of the Goldsmith.
The Goldsmith is not behind; for most of them deal with Usury, and let young
Gentlemen have Commodities of Plate, for ten in the hundred, but they must lose
the fashion in selling it again (which cuts them sore) beside, they are most of
them skilled in Alcumie, and can temper metals shroudly, with no little profit
to themselves, and disadvantage to the buyer; beside, puffed rings and quaint
conceits which I omit.


The Knavery of the Draper.
And for you Draper, he fetches them off for Liverie Cloth, and Cloth for six
months and six, and yet has he more knacks in his budget; for he has so dark
a shop, that no man can well choose a piece of Cloth, it so shadows the Dye and
the Thread, a man shall be deceived in the wool and the nap, they cause the
Cloth-worker so to press them; beside, he imposes this charge to the
Cloth-worker, that he draw his Cloth, and pull it passing hard when he sets it
upon the Tenters, that he may have it full breadth and length, till thread and
all tear and rent a pieces: what care they for that? have they not a Drawer to
serve their turn; to draw and seam up the holes so cunningly, that it shall
never be espied? My self has seen in one broad Cloth eighteen score holes
torn, rackt and pulled by the Cloth-worker only to please the Draper, and
deceive the Commonwealth. To be short, the Cloth-worker, what with rowing and
setting on a fine nap, with powdring it and pressing it, with sheering the wool
to the proof of the thread, deal so cunningly, that they prove themselves the
Drapers Ministers to execute his subtilties: therefore if he chance to come,
let him be remembered.


The Knavery of the Vintner.
And as for the Vintner I hold him to be as deceitful as any of the rest; for
he is a kind of Negromancer, for at midnight, when all men are in bed, then he,
forsooth, falls to his charms and spells, so that he tumbles one Hogshead into
another, and can make a cup of Claret that has lost his color, look high with
a dash of red wine at his pleasure. If he has a strong Gascoin Wine for fear
it should make his ghests too soon drunk, he can allay it with a small Rochel
Wine, he can cherish up white wine, with Sack; and perhaps if you bid him wash
the pot clean when he goes to draw you a quart of Wine, he will leave a little
Water in the bottom, and then draw it full of wine. And what if he do? it is no
harm, wine and water is good against the heat of the Liver. It were infinite to
rehearse the juggling of Vintners, the disorder of their houses, especially of
the persons that frequent them and therefore seeing the Merchant, Goldsmith,
Mercer and Draper be put by, the Vinter shall go with them for company.


As these were going away in a snuff, for being thus plainly taunted, Sir John
saw a mad merry crew come leaping over the field as frolickly, as if they ought
not all the world two pence; and drawing nearer he did perceive, that either
Bottle Ale or Beer had made a fray with them; for the lifting of their feet
showed the lightness of their heads.


A Tantivee-Parson.


The foremost was a plain Country Sir John, or Vicar, that proclaimed by the
redness of his Nose, he did oftener go into the Alehouse, than the Pulpit; and
him Sir John asked what they were, and whether they were going? What are you,
quoth the Priest, that stand by the high way to examine me and my friends?
here is none in my Company, but are able to answer for themselves, he seeing
they were all set on a merry pin, told the cause, and said, that he needed them
to be of the Quest. Marry (quoth Sir John) a good motion; know these all are my
Parishioners, and we have been drinking with a poor man, and spending our money
with him; a neighbor of ours, that has lost a Cow. Now for our names, and our
Trades, this is a Smith, the second a Weaver, the third a Miller, the fourth a
Cook; the fifth a Carpenter, the sixth a Glover, the seventh a Pedlar, the
eight a Tinkar, the ninth a Waterbearer; the tenth a Husbandman; the eleventh a
Dyer, and the twelfth a Saylor, and I the Vicar or Parson which you please to
call me; How could you Sir, have a fitter Jury than me, and my Parishioners?


You are a little too brief (quoth Sir John) for you are a Fellow that raises
up new Schisms, and Heresies and Divisions among your People, and the world was
never in quiet, Devotion, Neighborhood and Hospitality never flourished in
this Land since such upstart Boys, and shittle-witted Fools becam of the
Ministry; you preach Faith, and say that doing of Alms is Papistry; but you
have taught so long, Fid^s solum ju^^ific^t, that you have preached good Works
quite out of your Parish; a poor man shall as soon break his N^ck as his Fast at
a rich man's do^r.


Alas Sir John, you are mistaken, for, my friend, though indeed I am none of
the best Scholars, yet I can re^d a Homily every Sunday and Holiday, and keep
company with my Neighbors, and go to the Alehouse with them, and if they be
fallen out, spend my Money to make them friends; and on Sundays sometime, if
good Fellowship call me away, I say both Morning and Evening Prayer at once,
and so let them have a whole Afternoon to play in. This is my Life, I spend my
Living with my Parishioners; I seek to do all good, and I offer no man harm.
Well (quoth Sir John) then I warrant thou art an honest Vicar, and therefore
stand by, thou shall be one of the Quest.


No Cheat in the Smith's Profession.


And as for you, Smith, I see no great fault in you; you earn your Living with
the Sweat of your Brows, and there can be no great Knavery in you; only I would
have you to mend your life for drinking, since you are never at quiet unless
the Pot be still at your Nose.


The Knavery of the Weaver.
But you, Weaver, the Proverb puts you down for a crafty Knave, you can filch
and steal almost as well as the Tailor; your Woof and Warp is so cunningly
drawn out, that you plague the poor Country Huswives for their Yarn, and dawb
on so much Dregs, that you make it seem both well wrought, and to bear weight,
when it is slenderly woven, and you have stolen a quarter of it from the poor
Wife. Away, be packing, for you shall be cashiered.


The Miller and Weav^r shake hands


What Miller, shake hands with your Brother the Weaver for Knavery; you can
take Toll twice, and have false Hoppers to convey away the poor man's Meal: Be
gone, I love not your dusty looks?


The Cheats of the Cooks.
And for Company, Goodman Cook, go with them; for you cozen the poor men and
Country Termers with your silthy meat, you will buy of the worst and cheapest,
when it is bad enough for Dogs, and yet so powder it, and parboil it, that you
will sell it to some honest poor men, and that unreasonably too. If you leave
any Meat overnight, you make a shift to heat it again the next day. Nay, if on
the Thursday at night there be any left, you make Pies of it on Sunday Morning,
and almost, with your slovenly Knavery poison the poor people. To be short, I
brook you not, and therefore be walking.


For the Carpenter, Glover, and Water-bearer, the Husbandman, Dier and Saylor,
since your Trades have but petty ^lights stand you with Mr. Vicar, you are like
to help to give in the Verdict.


Tinkers and Pedlars Knavery.


But for the Pedlar and the Tinker, they are two notable Knaves, both of a
hair, and both Cousin-germains to the Devil. For the Tinker, why he is a
drowsy, bawdy, drunken Companion, that walks up and down with a Trugg after
him, and in stopping one hole, makes three; and is in convenient place, he
meets with one alone, perhaps rifles him or her of all that ever they have; a
base Knave, without fear of God, or love to any one but his Whore, and to
himself. The Pedlar as bad, or rather worse, walks the Country with his Doxy
at the least, if he have not too his Morts Dels, and Autem Morts; he passes
commonly through every pair of Stocks, either for his Drunkenness, or his
Lechery. And beside, it is reported you can lift or nip a Bung like a guire
Cove; if you want pence, and that you carry your Pack but for a color to
shadow your other Villainies. Well, howsoever, you are both Knaves, and so be
jogging. Well, at last, quoth the Judge, I suppose, Sir John, your Jury is
almost full; I believe you want not above three or four persons; look you
yonder where they come to make up the Number; and they should be men of good
Disposition, for they seem to be all Countrymen of Vtopia. As Soon as they came
close, Sir John met them, and told them the Matter, and they were content to be
of the Jury. The one said he was a Grasier, the other a Farmer, the other a
Shepherd to them both. What think you of these three, quoth Sir John? Marry,
says the Judge, two of them are honest men, but the other is a base Knave; but
it is no matter, shuffle him in amongst the rest. Nay, by your leave, quoth Mr.
Attorney, I will shuffle out these two, for they are the very Cormorants of the
Country, and devour the poor people with their monstrous exaction.


The Cheats used by the Grasier.
And first I allege against the Grasier, that he forestalleth Pastures and
Meadow grounds for the feeding of his Cattle, and wringeth Leases of them out of
poor men's hands; and in his buying of Cattle, he commits great Usury; for it
it prove a wet year, then he makes havoc, and sells dear; if it be a dry
year, then he buyeth cheap, and yet having Pasture, keeps them till he may come
to his own price; he knows as well as the Butcher by the feed of a Bullock,
how much Tallow he will yield, what his Quarters will amount unto^ what the
Tanner will give for the Hide; Nay, what the Sowse-wives were able to make of
the Inwards; so that he sells it so dear to the Butcher, that he can scarce
live of it; and therefore what subtilty the Butcher uses, comes from the
Grasier, so that I exempt him from the Quest as a bad Member, and an ill Friend
to Justice.


The Cheats used by the Farmer.


And for you Mr. Farmer, you know how through you covetous Landlords raise
their Rents; for if a poor man have but a Plough-Land, if you see his Pastures
bear good Grass, and his arable ground, good Corn, and that he prospers and
goes forward on it, and provideth and maintains his Wife and Servants
honestly, then,


Invidus alterius rebus macrescit opimis,
Vicinumque pecus grandius uber habet.
Then straight Envy pricks the Farmer forward, and he bids the Landlord far
more than the poor man pays yearly for it; so that if it be a Tenant at will,
he puts him out to beg in the Street; or when his Lease comes out, he overloads
him in the Fine, and thus blood-sucketh he the poor of his own private profit.
Besides, the base Chuff; if he sees a forward Year, and that corn is like to be
plenty, then he murmureth against God, and swears and protests he shall be
undone, respecting more the filling of his own Co^^ers by a Dearth than the
profit of his Country by a general Plenty. Beside, Sir, may it please you,
when new Corn comes into the Market, who brings it in to relieve the State? Not
your Mastership, but the poor Husbandman, that wants Pence: For you keep it
till the back end of the Year; nay, you have your Garners which have Corn of
two or three Years old, upon hopes still of a dear Year, rather letting the
Weasels eat it, than the poor should have it at any reasonable price. So that I
conclude, You are a Cormorant of the Commonwealth, and a Wretch that lives of
the spoil of the needy, and so I leave you to jet with the Grazier.


Shepherds honest men.


As for the Shepherd, unless it be that he kills a Lamb now and then, and
says the Fox stole him, I know little Craft in his Budget, therefore let him
among the honest men of the Jurie.


Several Citizens come to hear the Trial of Sir John Fraud.


Well said Sir John to the Judge, here comes three or four Citizens, will any
of these serve turn: I cannot tell (quoth the Judge) till I know their names
and conditions. With that Sir John stepped before the company, and enquired what
they were: the eldest of them being a grave Citizen, said he was a Grocer, the
rest, his good and honest Neighbors, a Chandler, a Haberdasher, a Clothworker,
and two strangers, one a Wallon, the other a Dutchman. How like you these?
(quoth Sir John to the Judge) ^'le assure you, my Lord, these men are seen
every Sunday in their Silks. I marry (quoth the Judge) but they never get that
Bravery with Honesty; For the Cloth-worker, his Faults were laid open before,
when we had the Draper in question, and therefore let him be packing.


The Knavery of Chandlers.
For you Chandler, I like not your Tricks, you are too conversant with the
Kitchen-stuff-wives; you, after your Wiek or Snaft is stiffened, you dip it in
^ilthy Dross, and after give him a Coat of good Tallow, which makes the Candles
drop and waste away, to great hinderance of the poor Workmen that watch in the
night. Beside, you pinch in your weights, and have false measures, and many
other Knaveries that I omit; but this be sure, you shall not meddle in my
Matter.


Neither the Haberdasher, for he trims up old Felts, and makes them very fair
to the eye, and faceth and edgeth them neatly, and then he turns them away
for good ones, and so abuses us with his Cozenage. Beside, you buy gumm'd
Taffata, wherewith you line Hats, that will straight asunder as soon as it comes
to the heat of a man's Head. To be brief, I am not well skill^d in your
Knaveries; but indeed you are too subtle for a Jury-man, and therefore you
shall be none of the Jury.


The Grocer seems an honest man, and I am content to admit of him, only take
this as a Caveat by the way, all Gentlemen here present, that you buy of the
Garvellers of Spices, the Refuse that they fifth from the Merchant, and that mix
again, and sell to your Customers. Besides, in your beaten Spices, as in
Pepper, you put in Bay Berries, and such Dross, and so wrong the poor; but
these are ^light Causes, and so overpass them, and vouchsafe you to be of the
Quest.


But I pray you, what be these two honest men The one (quoth the Grocer?) a
Dutchman, and a Shoemaker; the other a Frenchman, and a Millener in St.
Martins, and sells Shirts, Bands, Bracelets, Jewels, and such pretty Toys for
Gentlewomen.


Oh, they be of Sir John's Acquaintance, Upstarts as well as he! that have
brought with them Pride and Abuses into England: But these we will pass, knowing
they abuse most Occupations, and they shall not be of the Quest


Well (quoth Sir John) now I suppose the Jury is full, and we see no more
coming; let us call them, and see how many we have.


The Jury being called over, two are wanting. Immediately enters an Honest
Bookseller.


As Soon as Sir John had spoke the Word, there comes into the Court a
Bookseller, a reputed very honest man indeed, and of a Gentile Profession;
as soon as ever the Judge perceived who he was, he commanded he should be one of
the Jury: With all my heart, said the Prisoner at the Bar; for I know he is one
that gives in his Verdict impartially; he is one that will act honestly
(without fraud or deceit) and he is one that has a good Report in Vtopia; and
so he was admitted as a Jury-man.


What is it not possible, quoth the Prisoner, to have one more to make up the
four and twenty? as he was thus speaking, he spied afar off, a certain kind of
an overworn Gentleman, attired in Velvet and Satin, but it was somewhat dropped
and greasy, and Boots on his Legs, whose Soles waxed thin, and seemed to
complain of their Master, which treading Thrift under his feet, had brought
them to that Consumption; he walked not as other men, in the common beaten way,
but came compassing circumcirca, as if we had been Devils, and he would draw a
Circle about us, and at every third step he looked back, as if he were afraid
of a Bailiff or Sergeant.


After him followed two pert Applesquires, the one had a Murrey Cloth Gown on,
faced before with gray Coney, and laid thick on the sleeves with Lace, which
quaintly bare up, to show his white Taffata Hose, and black Silk Stockings, a
huge Ruff about his neck, wrapped on his great head like a wicket-cage, a little
Hat, with brims like the wings of a Doublet, wherein he wore a Jewel of Glass,
as broad as a great Seal. After him followed two Boys in Cloaks like
Butterflies, carrying one of them his cutting Sword of Choler, the other his
dancing Rapier of delight. His Comerade that bare him Company, was a jollie
light timber'd Jack-a-napes, in a Sat of watche^ Taffata, cut to the skin,
with a Cloak all to bedawbed with colored Lace; both he and the gowned Brother
seemed by their pace, as if they had some Suits to Mosieur Boots. At length
coming near, Sir John could discern the first to be a Poet, the second a
Player, the third a Musician, alias the Usher of a Dancing-School. Well met,
Master Poet, quoth Sir John, and welcome you Friends also, though not so
particularly known. So it is, though none of you three be Commonwealths men,
yet upon urgent necessity, we must be forced to employ you. We have a Jury to
be impannelled immediately, which one of you three must help to make up, even
he which approves himself the honestest man. They are all honest men, and good
Fellows, quoth the Attorney, therefore it is no great matter whether of them we
choose.


The Doctors doubt of that, quoth the Jugde: and I am of a different opinion
from you.


The Poet admited a Iury-man.
This first, whom by his careless slovenly gate, at first sight I imagined to
be a Poet, is a wast-good, and an unthrift, that is born to make the Taverns
rich, and himself a Beggar. If he have forty pounds in his purse together, he
puts it not to Usury, neither buys Land nor Merchandise with it, but goes to
Wenches feeds on Capons, and spends ten Pounds on a Supper. Why, it is nothing,
if his Plough goes, and his Ink-horn be clear. Take one of them worth twenty
thousand pound, and hang him. He is a King of his Pleasure, and counts all
other Boors and Peasants; that though they have Money at command, yet know not
like him how to domineer with it to any purpose as they should. But to speak
plain, I think him an honest man, if he would but live within his compass, and
generally no man's foe but his own, therefore I hold him quoth the Prisoner, sit
to be of my Jury. Nay, quoth the Judge, I have more mind to these two; for this
Poet is a proud fellow, that because he has a little wit in his Budget, will
contemn and mislike that which is Reason and Sense, and think we are beholden
to him, if he do but bestow a fair Look upon us.


Players and Vshers of Dancing-Schools pretty honest men


The Player and the Usher of the Dancing School are plain, honest, humble men
that for a penny, or an old cast Suit of Apparel, will do any thing. Quoth,
the Recorder, you say Truth, they are but too humble; for they be so lowly,
that they be base-minded; I mean, not in their looks, nor apparel, for so they
be Peacocks, and painted Asses, but in their course of Life: for they care not
how they get crowns, I mean, how basely, so they have them; and yet of the two,
I hold the Player to be the better Christian, although he is in his own
imagination, too full of self-liking, and self-love, and is unsit to be of the
Jury though conceal his faults and fopperies, in that I have been merry at his
Sports, only this I must say, that plain Country Fellows they bring in as
Clowns and Fools to laugh at in their Play, whereas they get by us, and of our
Alms the proudest of them all does live. Well, to be brief, let him trot to the
Stage, for he shall be none of the Jury: And so you, Mr. Usher of the
Dancing-School, you are a leader into all Misrule, you instruct Gentlemen to
order their feet, when you drive them to misorder their Manners; you are a bad
fellow, that stand upon your Tricks and Capers, till you make young Gentlemen
caper without your Lands. Why Sir, to be flat with you, you live by your Legs,
ass Jugler by his hand; you are given over to the Pomps and Vanities of the
world. And to be short, you are a keeper of Misrule, and a lewd fellow, and you
shall be none of the Quest. Why then, quoth the Judge, the Poet is he that must
make up the four and twentieth; He and none but he.


The Names of the Jury to be impannelled.
1 Knight. 2 Esquire. 3 Gentleman. 4 Priest. 5 Printer. 6 Bookseller. 7 Grocer.
8 Skinner. 9 Dyer. 10 Pewterer. 11 Sadler. 12 Joyner. 13 Cutler. 14 Plaisterer.
15 Saylor. 16 Ropemaker. 17 Smith. 18 Glover. 19 Husbandman. 20 Shepherd. 21
Waterman. 22 Waterbearer. 23 Bellowes-mender. 24 Poet.
Then the Judge calling them all together, he bade them lay their hands on the
Book. And first he called the Knight, and after the rest, as they followed in
order; then he gave them the Charge, thus;

Worshipful Sir, with the rest of the Jury, whom we have elected of choice
honest men, whose consciences will deal uprightly in this Trial, you and the
rest of your Company are here upon your Oath, and Oaths, to inquire whether Sir
John Fraud have deserved Death, yea or no? If you find him Not guilty of those
crimes that are laid to his charge; then let him set in his former Estate, and
allow him reasonable damages. Upon this they laid their hands upon the Book,
and were sworn, and departed to the scrutiny of the offender, by inquiry
amongst themselves, not stirring out from the bar, but straight returned, and
the Knight for them as the foremost said thus: So it is, that we have with
equity and conscience considered of the Prisoners Crimes, and have upon strict
examination found that he deserves death; when the Forman had spoke those
words, the Judge stood up, and pronounced this Sentence.


Sir John Fraud, you have been here indicted, arraigned and tried for your
Life, and the Jury (who have gone according to Evidence) have found you really
Guilty of what has been charged upon you; and therefore Your Sentence is,


That you shall be expelled all Kingdoms and Nations and Societies and
Countries for an hundred years, and when that time is expired, you shall be put
to the severest Death, that can be thought on, or invented by poor, abused,
wronged Citizens, Gentlemen, Yeomen, and Farmers.


The Prisoner left in the Executioners hands.


And so to conclude, the poor, condemned Prisoner was left to the Mercy of the
Executioner.


FINIS.

