EVANGELICAL POLITY, OR, A GOSPEL CONVERSATION.

A Sermon preached at St. PAVL'S LONDON, May 20. 1660. Being the Sunday next
(but one) before his Majesty's happy return to his said City.

BY JAMES DUPORT, (now) D.D. one of his Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary.

GAL. 6.16. As many as walk according to this rule, peace be upon them, and
mercy, and upon the Israel of God.

CAMBRIDGE: Printed by JOHN FIELD, Printer to the Universitie. Ann. Dom. 1660.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
I Suppose I shall do but justice both to my self and thee, if I give thee an
account why I let this poor inconsiderable piece go abroad into the world;
especially now, when there is such a swarm of printed Sermons flying up and
down already. Know then, that I thought my self concerned to give some public
testimony of my thankfulness to that Honorable Audience to whom it was
preached; particularly to the then L. Major, Sr Thomas Aleyn.
who was pleased freely and of his own accord, without any motion or seeking of
mine, to call and invite me to that service. And I have the more reason to
acknowledge his respects to me herein, because heretofore for several years
last past it was otherwise with me. For when some offers and overtures were
made in my behalf by some friends for my preaching at S t Paul's, which I was
bound to do (once at least in two years) by virtue of a place I hold in the
University, The Lady Margarets Preacher.
yet I found not a door open unto me, nor had the favor to be admitted or
accepted of. I speak not this by way of complaint, nor with any unkind
reflections upon any particular man, or company of men whatsoever (as imputing
it wholly to the common distractions of those times) but the more to testify my
gratitude to the aforesaid person for his great civility to me, and (so
undeserved) good opinion of me: A further evidence whereof he was pleased to
give me, by his favorable and candid acceptance of my weak unworthy pains,
with an intimation of his desires to have them made public by recommending my
Sermon to the Press. Now though this indeed alone might be a sufficient motive
and encouragement to me for this publication; yet there were other arguments
and inducements moving me thereunto. Not to mention that stale and common
midwife of the Press, importunity of friends (though of them there wanted
neither godly nor judicious to solicit me to it) That which somewhat prevailed
with me was the seasonableness of the argument, both as to the former part of
it, concerning Evangelical walking, or a Gospel-conversation; as also to the
latter, touching Evangelical worship, or a Gospel-adoration; both which rightly
and duly preached, considering the profaness of some, and the hypocrisy of
others, and the un-Gospel-like lives of the most, I conceived to be very
useful and necessary doctrine for these times either from Press or Pulpit. But
next to Gods glory and the common benefit and good of the Church, which I
desire to make my principal aim in all my designs, that which most of all
persuaded me to present this rude unpolisht discourse to the view of the world,
was I confess partly for my own vindication, and partly for the further
satisfaction of some, who, as I am told, seemed to take a little distaste and
offense at a passage or two I then delivered concerning the misuse and
profanation of that famous Cathedral wherein we were assembled, and the
burying-place or Churchyard adjoining thereunto. As to this, I must needs
profess, I have been so much affected to see and observe the ruins and
devastations of that Church, that of late years as I could never pass through
it almost without fear least the stones should drop down upon me, so I could
never pass by it without pity and regret to behold so sad a spectacle.
Whereupon I resolved with my self (I had almost said solemnly vowed) and, I
hope, in the fear of God, and out of zeal to his glory, that if ever providence
called me to that place, I would speak my thoughts freely and plainly (though
soberly and modestly) as to that particular. And now if by any thing I have
said, I have cast in any the least mite into the treasury of the Church, or
contributed the least stone to the rebuilding of the house of God, or rather
thrown the least stone that may sink into the forehead of that great Goliath of
this latter age, I mean Sacrilege, that has so defied not only the hosts, but
the houses of the living God, then I shall think my self abundantly happy.
However I have paid my vows in thee, O Paul's; I have discharged my duty,
liberavi animam, and must leave the success to God to give a blessing as it
pleases him. My witness is in heaven, and my comfort is the singleness and
integrity of my heart, that my earnest desire and endeavor was to deliver such
doctrine as might be most suitable and seasonable to the time and place I
appeared in; and that I aimed at nothing in all my discourse, but the glory of
God, the good of souls, and the honor of that renowned city, whereof that
(once magnificent and stately) Cathedral has been accounted (and I hope shall
be again) both at home and abroad, the chief beauty and ornament. But woe and
alas, that ever it should be said, to the shame of Christian religion, yet say
it we must, for so it is ( -- Pudet haec opprobria --) As things consecrate to
God and his Church, are indeed a Noli me tangere, not to be meddled with by rude
and sacrilegious hands, so is sacrilege it self with some, a Noli me tangere
too, a tender and delicate sin not to be touched. Gal. 4.16.
If upon this account I am become any man's enemy, because I have told them the
truth as becomes the messenger of Christ, in the spirit of meekness, then I
must count it my unhappiness, but not my crime. I would not willingly offend
nor displease any; but then again I consider, it is impossible to please all,
((...),) and so I sit down with that of S t Paul, Do I seek to please men? Gal.
1.10.
For if I yet pleased men, I should not be the servant of Christ. How far from
any personal reflections, or harsh and bitter invectives my expressions were;
what tenderness and moderation I used in disapproving (rather then reproving)
the sacrilegious encroachments made upon Churches in these latter times, more
particulary, as the place put me in mind, upon that of S t Paul's; I say quam
molli manu hoc ulcus tetigi, I appeal to the judgment of all unprejudiced and
impartial Readers: Who, I verily believe, will be apt to think, that I rather
touched this sore too lightly and gently, then rubbed or grated too hard upon
it. Nor am I altogether out of hopes, but that they (if any there were) who for
want of due attention or consideration either mistook or took amiss what was
then delivered, will upon second and more mature thoughts do themselves and me
that right, as to mend with the eye what was marred with the ear, and upon a
serious review afford it a right understanding, and a candid reception. To
which purpose as well for my own vindication, as their satisfaction, I have
printed my Sermon verbatim almost as it was spoken, with very little or no
alteration, I am sure with no alteration at all of those passages concerning
the abuse and misimployment of Church and Coemetery, at which, if at any, some
exceptions, it seems, were taken; but how justly, I shall leave it, as I said,
to all unbiased and indifferent Readers to judge. The Lord in much mercy make
up the rents and breaches of our Church, and put it into the hearts and hands
of our Rulers and Governors, both Civil and Ecclesiastical, like good
Nehemiahs, to promote and set forward the building of the Temple, and to help
to repair the breaches and ruins of our Churches and Cathedrals: that so we may
all with one heart and mind glorify God, and agree together to worship and
serve him in the power of godliness, and the beauty of holiness, as it becomes
the Gospel of Christ. This is (Christian Reader) the constant and hearty prayer
of

Trin. Coll. Cambridge. Nov. 21. MDCIX. Thy friend and servant in our Lord
Christ J. D.

PHIL. 1.27. Only let your conversation be as it becomes the Gospel of
Christ.
PROVIDENCE so disposing of me, that I have not occasion to speak often in one
place, it makes me strive the rather to single out such portions of Scripture
to treat upon, as are of most useful importance, of grand fundamental
concernment, and such as hold forth the most comprehensive truths, comprising
in them the very pith and marrow, the sum and substance of all Christianity;
that so, if possible, I may preach the whole Gospel (...), altogether; and at
once declare the whole counsel of God, and the whole duty of man. The whole
counsel of God, in the language of the best Preacher under the Gospel, and that
was Paul, Act. 20. The whole duty of man, in the language of the best Preacher
under the Law, and that was Solomon, Eccles. 12. Such a comprehensive truth, I
conceive we have here before us, wherein is briefly, and yet clearly contained,
both the whole counsel of God, and the whole duty of man: the whole counsel of
God, the Gospel of Christ, that is, the doctrine of man's salvation by faith in
Christ: the whole duty of man, a conversation suitable and agreeable thereunto.
And these two might pass for the parts of the Text: or else there might be
these three things considered in the words, Regula, Regulatum, and Applicatio
Regulae. First, The Rule, The Gospel of Christ: Secondly, The thing to be
regulated, ordered, and squared by this rule, a Christian conversation:
Thirdly, The (...), or application of this rule to the thing to be regulated,
ordered, and squared by it, as becomes the Gospel, that is, suitably and
agreeably thereunto: and all this ushered in with a (...), this being the unum
necessarium, the (...), and the (...), the one only thing to be regarded and
looked after, (...), says S. Chrysostom upon the place, this is all in all, the
(...) of a Christian; all that Paul or any other Minister need to preach, all
that the Philippians or any other people need to practice, a Christian
conversation, a life conformable to the precepts and rules of the Gospel.

But because these three, Regula, Regulatum, and Applicatio Regulae, should in
our practice always be joined together, therefore I shall not divide them in my
discourse, nor put them asunder, but take them jointly as they lie together in
the words, and so they spell out this grand fundamental truth; a truth writ in
such legible characters in the words of the Text, that he that runs may read
it, A Gospel-profession requires a Gospel-conversation: or, A Christians
conversation should be conformable to the rules of the Gospel. There ought to
be a sweet harmony, concord, and agreement between the life of a Christian and
the Gospel of Christ. Several books I have seen bearing this title, Harmonia
Evangelica, The Harmony of the Gospel: this is the true Gospel- Harmony
indeed, when there is a mutual harmony and agreement between a
Gospel-profession, and a Gospel-conversation, between the life of a Christian,
and the Gospel of Christ. This lies so clear in the words, as if it were writ
with a sunbeam; so that I shall not need bring any reasons or arguments,
either to demonstrate and prove the Doctrine to you, or to press and enforce
the Duty upon you. Else I might tell you, 1. That this is the only way, (and
so take in the (...) too) the only way to adorn the doctrine of God our
Savior in all things, Tit. 2.10.
the way to put a luster and beauty upon religion, to bring the Gospel into
credit and repute in the world, and to gain proselytes to it. 2. That this is
the grand design, the main scope and end of the Gospel, to bring men to a
compliance with it, Tit. 2.11, 12.
and a conformity to it. The grace of God (that is, the Gospel of Christ) that
brings salvation has appeared: Why? to what end? to teach us to live soberly,
righteously, and godly in this present world. Tit. 1.11.
3. That this is the only way (...), to stop the mouths of gainsayers, 1 Pet.
2.15.
(...), by well-doing to put to silence the ignorance of foolish men, and to
confute and confound the adversary, whether heretic or schismatic, whether
Papist or Anabaptist. 4. And lastly, That this is the (...), the only thing
God expects and requires of us, a Conversation suitable to our Profession, and
(to allude to that, 1 Cor. 9.14.) that they which live under the Gospel should
live up to the Gospel. But this in the general is so evident in the Text, and
withal so rational in it self, that it needs neither proof, nor pressing. And
therefore in stead of this, I might rather come to particulars. Indeed
Generalia non pungunt, while we hover in generals, we do but beat the air, and
flutter about the head; seldom touch the quick, or pierce to the heart. And
therefore here I might bring sundry particulars, to show wherein this
conformity stands, wherein this harmony and correspondence between a
Christians conversation, and the Gospel of Christ should hold, and wherein it
consists; and to this purpose I might lay down several intrinsic essential
marks and characters and properties of the Gospel, wherein, and according
whereunto a Christians conversation should be suitable and agreeable to it; as
viz. these five especially.

First, The Gospel of Christ is a Gospel of truth and faithfulness, sincerity
and plainness; (...), a faithful saying, 1 Timothy 1.15. the word of truth, Ephesians.
1, 13. 2 Timothy 2.15. and truth it self, Joh. 1.17. Gal. 3.1. Suitably and
agreeably hereunto a Christian conversation should be a true, upright,
single-hearted, sincere conversation, without fraud or deceit, lying or
dissembling, guile or hypocrisy.

Secondly, The Gospel of Christ is a Gospel of peace, expressly so called, Romans
10.15. Ephesians. 6.15. The main design of the Gospel is, to make peace in the
world, to compromise all differences, to unite all parties, to reconcile God
and man, man and man together: therefore it is called the ministry of
reconciliation, and the word of reconciliation, both in one chapter, 2 Cor. 5.
Christ is the Alpha and Omega of the Gospel, Isa. 9.6.
the great peacemaker, the Prince of peace; the Spirit of the Gospel, the
Spirit of peace; the Ministers of the Gospel, 2 Cor. 5 20.
Gods Ambassadors, messengers of peace; and the Gospel it self the Gospel of
peace. Now in a conformity hereunto, Christians should be men of peace,
peacemakers, as Christ himself was, lovers of peace, and livers in peace,
followers of peace with all men; men of closing, reconciling, healing, uniting,
cementing spirits; and a Christian conversation a quiet, calm, and peaceable
conversation.

Thirdly, The Gospel of Christ is a Gospel of love, and philanthropie, grace,
and goodness, and mercy; the Gospel is wholly made up and compounded of love:
or if truth be the matter of it, love is the form: if truth be the body of it,
love is the soul: it is a design of pure love and philanthropie, of free grace
and mercy; that is the very essence and genius of the Gospel all along; every
leaf, every line, every letter in the Gospel, breaths nothing but love, and
pure love. Such is the rule, and such should our conversation be: this the true
character of the Gospel, and this the character of a true Christian: the badge
and cognizance of Christ's disciples this, the mark and brand of his sheep, by
which they are known to be his, and distinguished from all other. Joh. 13.35. By
this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to
another. And this was the mark and character whereby the Primitive Christians
used to be painted and pointed out: Tertull. Apologet*
Vide, inquiunt, ut invicem se diligant; See how these Christians love one
another. If then you would have your conversation suitable to the Gospel of
Christ, it must be an amicable, loving, and charitable conversation.

Fourthly, The Gospel of Christ is a Gospel of humility and meekne^s; indeed
the Gospel is nothing else but a continued history of Christ's humiliation, from
the cratch to the cross, a Sermon of humility all along. Christ the great gift
of the Gospel, and the Spirit the great promise of the Gospel; the one a lamb,
the other a dove, both emblems of humility and meekness; and the chief lesson
of the Gospel Christ came to teach, was humility and meekness, Learn of me,
Matthew. 11.29.
for I am meek and lowly in heart. Ye see what the rule is, would ye frame and
square your life and conversation according unto it? why then it must be an
humble, lowly, and meek conversation; ye must follow the Lamb, flee after the
Dove, be clothed with humility, 1 Pet. 5.5. (...), that is the Gospel robe,
Christ's livery, the Christian garment, even the ornament of a meek and quiet
spirit, 1 Pet. 3.4. Humility the first, second, third thing in Christianity,
as Pronunciation in Rhetoric.

Fifthly and lastly, The Gospel of Christ is a Gospel of holiness and purity,
Sacrosanctum Evangelium, the Holy Gospel, is the proper style and epithet of
it. The Gospel is a glass, wherein we behold the glory of the Lord, (...) 2
Cor. 3.18. and it is a pure spotless mirror, a clear crystal glass. The
fountain of Christ's blood that runs so fresh and so freely in the current and
stream of the Gospel, it is a clear and a pure fountain, the Gospel-promises
are purifying and cleansing promises, 2 Cor. 7.1. God a holy God, the Spirit a
holy Spirit, the Gospel a holy Gospel. Suitably and agreeably hereunto a
Christian Conversation should be a pure, and holy, and spotless conversation. A
profane, unholy, impure Christian, is contradictio in adjecto. Saints by
profession, should be Saints indeed: the Gospel says to us, as God himself
does; Lev. 11.45.
Be ye holy, for I am holy.

Thus I have given you as it were the sceleton of a Sermon already; Ezekiel 37.6.
I might lay sinews and flesh upon it, and cover it with skin, as the bones in
Ezekiel: and so I would have done in another congregation: for indeed, these
particulars might deserve to be further enlarged, and set home upon us, as
being very useful and profitable in themselves, and likewise suitable to the
scope of the Text, and not unseasonable for the times we live in; wherein there
has been so much profession of religion, so much noise, and sound, and talk of
the Gospel of Christ, and (God knows) so little life and practice suitable and
agreeable thereunto. Yet I shall not go this way neither, but wave all these
for the present: first, because these are common themes, ordinary beaten
tracks, and I would willingly go off of the threadbare common, or at least
handle (...). secondly, because these are transcendents, of an universal
aspect, and of general concernment to all, and I desire to be a little more
particular, proper, and pertinent in my discourse to such an Audience,
considering where I am, and to whom I speak. I shall therefore crave leave to
use another method, and that is a little to insist upon those two words in the
Text, which speak the duty of Christians in compliance with the Gospel of
Christ, the Verb and the Adverb; the one expressing the matter of the duty, the
other the manner: the matter we have in the Verb (...) the manner in the Adverb
(...), both words very emphatical, full, and significant: the strength and
energy, importance and improvement whereof I shall endeavor to make out unto
you, and to fasten upon you.

First, for the Verb, take it first in the general, as we render it, according
to Calvin, and the Vulgar Latin, Conversamini, Let your conversation be, or as
Beza very well, Vos gerite, Carry, or behave your selves, or as Castelio not
amiss, Vitam agite, Lead your lives: and so it denotes an uniform, constant,
continued course. Let your constant carriage and behavior, your whole course
and conversation be agreeable to the Gospel of Christ. Have a care of your
conversation, that is, of the constant continued frame, and model, and tenor,
and course of your carriage. Good men may have their flaws and failings, bad
men may have their fits and flashes; but what a man is in his common ordinary
course and conversation, that he is. What ever trade or occupation ye are of
besides, to be sure there is one trade and vocation ye all profess, viz.
Christianity, that is your profession; religion, that is your trade: I pray
then, make it so, and use it so. Ye are not at your trade by fits and girds; a
man is at his trade, at the works of his vocation and calling every day, and
commonly all day long, it is his business, his constant, daily, ordinary
employment. If then Christianity be your trade and profession, ye must be at it
continually, ye must show what trade ye are of by your constant course and
conversation. That that is called conversation here, is termed a walking
elsewhere, (...) very often in the New Testament: nothing more frequent and
ordinary in Scripture, then to express the course of a man's life and
conversation by the metaphor of a way or walk: so we find, (...) and (...)
utraque pagina, all along in the Hebrew of the Old Testament, whence (...) so
often in this sense in the Hellenistical, or rather Hebraistical Greek of the
New. Now walking ye know, is an uniform, constant, continued motion, course, or
progress. Tell me not then of this or that good work that you do once in a
moon, of one or two holy duties you perform now and then in your holy day
clothes: Is your general carriage good? is your constant ordinary course and
conversation right? To him that orders his conversation aright, will I show the
salvation of God, Psalm. 50. last. Would ye be good Christians, good Gospellers
indeed? have a care of your general carriage and conversation; look to the
constant frame and bent of your spirit, be sure to get your bias right set, to
get a good bias clapped upon you, a good principle grafted and planted in you,
pointing, and winding, and bending toward heaven; let your common, ordinary,
habitual course and conversation be right and good. Thus in the general. But
then again further;

Secondly, and more particularly, take it as it is in the Original, (...). The
word would afford much work for a Critic; but I come not hither to trouble you
with Grammatical notions, or verbal niceties; only thus, if you please: The
word in heathen Authors signifies, Rempublicam gerere, To bear rule or office
in a Commonwealth or city: and hence I might take occasion, if I might be so
bold, to press the exhortation, and set it home in a more especial manner upon
Rulers and Magistrates, and men in authority; and particularly upon you, my
Honorable Lord, and the rest of the worthy Aldermen and Governors of this
famous City: whose proper work it is, in this sense, (...). And certainly it
concerns you especially above all others, who are the (...), the (...), (S.
Lukes word, Act. 17.) the rulers of the city; you who are set in a more
eminent place, and move in a higher and larger sphere then ordinary men, whose
example has such a commanding influence upon those who live under your rule
and authority; I say it concerns you above all, so to walk in all holy
conversation and godliness, 2 Pet. 3.11.
that your lives may be every way suitable and agreeable to the rules of the
Gospel. Ye are as so many beacons set upon an hill, to give light to others;
therefore the more eminent and conspicuous ye are in place and authority, the
more exemplary ye ought to be in your conversation. It concerns you especially
to walk up to the rule, to stick close to the rules of the Gospel, yea, and to
see that others do so too. It is your duty, not only to observe the rule, but
to preserve the rule, and in so doing ye will preserve your selves; so that it
is not only your duty but your interest too. Tu me defend gladio, ego te
defendam colamo. Dictum Occhami ad Henricum IV. Impe ratorem. Which though
spoken to the Supreme Magistrate, yet in a due proportion, may be applied to
the subordinate.
Do ye defend and preserve the Gospel, and the Gospel will defend and preserve
you: for I assure you, Sirs, the purity of the Gospel is your Palladium, your
fort-royal, the safeguard, strength, and security of this great City: I say
again, Your main strength and security lies not so much in your men and money,
your arms and ammunition, your Tower and Militia, as in your sincere profession
of the Gospel of Christ, your maintenance of the true, orthodox, reformed
religion. The Gospel is the glory of a kingdom or city, of England, and of
London in particular: if the Gospel go, then comes Ichabod, where is the glory?
the glory is departed from you. Wherefore, Honorable and worthy Sirs, ye that
do (...) in this sense, upon whose shoulders the government lies, to whose care
and trust the good and welfare, safety and prosperity of this great and
populous city is committed, look well to the rule, the Gospel of Christ, to
safeguard, secure, and preserve that from all invasions, attempts, and
encroachments that are or may be made upon it, by untoward and malicious, by
ignorant or ungodly men, men of unruly passions, or corrupt principles, who
would either break and divide the rule by sects and schisms, or else pervert
and distort it by false doctrines and heresies. As ye your selves conform to
the rule, so (as much as in you lies, and in your proper sphere) look that
others do so too: employ and improve your utmost skill and ability, power and
authority, interest and influence, for the maintenance and defense of the
Gospel; for the support and encouragement of an able and faithful Ministry,
and for the increase and advancement of true piety and religion: so shall ye
(...), govern and rule aright indeed. But now though this be the genuine and
proper notion of the word in Classical and ancient Greek writers; yet this is
not the meaning of it here in this place: for (...) here, as elsewhere in
Scripture (and it is used but once more in all the New Testament, Act. 23.1.
and the verbal (...) too, but once neither, Phil. 3.27.) is put in a different
acception from what it has in other Authors, viz. in a more extensive and
large signification, and so it reaches to all in general, to high and low,
rich and poor, one with another; not only to men of place and power, rule and
authority, but to those also of inferior quality, rank, and degree: and so it
is no more then (...), or (...), or (...), or (...), to live, walk, or
converse: nor yet does it signify any kind of life or conversation neither,
but with some restriction, viz. such a kind of life properly, as citizens live
in a city, borough, or town incorporate. (...) from (...), a citizen: and so
the word implies a regular, strict, and orderly course of life. All know, and
none better then you, that citizens they are tied to observe the rules and
orders, the laws and customs, and constitutions of the city, or corporation,
or body politic, whereof they are members. Now Christians are free denizons of
heaven, citizens of the holy city, of the heavenly Jerusalem, the Church of
Christ: not (...), (as he said) but (...), citizens of heaven, and (...),
fellow-citizens with the Saints, Ephesians. 2.19. therefore they should be governed
by the rules and orders, the laws and statutes of their heavenly city, the
society of Saints, the Church of God; and not conform themselves to the guize,
and fashion, and course of the world. Christians then are (...), citizens, and
Christianity is (...), a polity, or policy if you will, not in a carnal,
worldly, atheistical sense, as by too many of late years religion has been
made a matter of state, and piety turned into policy, (modern piety, and modern
policy indeed, too much of this we have had already) but I mean in a true,
sober, Christian sense, so Christianity or a Christian conversation is (...),
(S. Paul's word) or (...), and indeed the best policy it will prove in the
conclusion; and so to live as Christians, is (...), that is, to walk orderly,
and exactly, (...), to live by rule, not loosly and at large, and at random,
but strictly, precisely, and regularly, as citizens in a city, as men in a
civil society, who are bound up and tied to the rules, and laws, and orders of
their fraternity, community, or corporation. Shall I need apply this to you? I
know your thoughts have already prevented me. Ye are (as S. Paul said of
himself) citizens of no mean city, Acts 21.39.
(...), of no ignoble or obscure city, but of one of the famousest and noblest
cities in Christendom: and I make no doubt, but that in this sense ye do
(...), live as members of a civil society, observing the laws and customs, the
orders and rules of your city, company, and corporation: and you do well to do
so; but, I pray, remember withal that ye are citizens too of a far nobler and
better city, viz. the Church of God, the heavenly Jerusalem, the city which
is from above. Members ye are and freemen, at least ye profess your selves to
be free of this corporation, of this company, Ephesians. 2.19.
and to be of the polity, or commonwealth of Israel, fellow citizens with the
Saints. Do ye then (...) in this sense too? are ye Saints indeed? do ye behave
your selves as citizens of this city? do ye conform to the laws of your
heavenly city? do ye frame your lives according to the rules of the Gospel?
for the Gospel of Christ that is your grand Charter, by which you hold all your
spiritual privileges, rights, and immunities. O take heed of forfeiting this
charter howsoever, of running into a praemunire, by transgressing and breaking
the laws and orders of your corporation, by neglecting your duty, and
rebelling against the King of heaven. And truly it concerns you (worthy
citizens) above all that I know in this Kingdom, to be exemplary unto others
in holiness, and piety, and all manner of godly conversation: for all men's eyes
are upon you. A city that is set on an hill cannot be hid, Matthew. 5.14. and
such an one is this Metropolis in regard of its eminency, grandeur, and power.
Now the more noble, eminent, and conspicuous a place ye live in, the more
should ye outshine and outstrip others in the holiness of your lives. I am
not skilled in Politics and forms of government; but by what I have heard, and
read, and observed, I verily believe, there is not a city under heaven better
modeled, that has a more axcellent frame and temper of government: now the
more you transcend others in your reiglement and polity, the more likewise
should ye strive to excel in religion and piety. Ye are the head-citie; ye
know what an influence the head has upon the rest of the members: and we all
know by experience, what a leading example ye have been, and still are to the
whole nation, both one way and other, Una cademque manus -- Ye derive law down
from hence to the whole Kingdom, (men coming up to you from all parts for law
and justice.) O that ye would derive Gospel too! I mean, that by your
Gospel-like conversation, ye would give example, and set a pattern to the rest
of the nation; that the sweet perfume of your Christian graces might cast a
fragrant smell over the whole land! that your love and charity, patience and
humility, peace and purity, zeal and piety, justice and equity, obedience and
loyalty, like the precious oil upon the head of Aaron, might run down from
this head-city to the skirts of the kingdom round about you! And so I hope it
does; Qui monet ut facias -- only give me leave to be your remembrancer, or,
if you will, your encourager, to proceed in your Christian course, (...). and
still to put you in mind of the (...), that as ye are citizens, so ye would
live as citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem, according to the rules and laws of
the Gospel of Christ, which is your grand Charter: a conformity whereunto I
have already in brief commended unto you, as to the several marks and
characters of it, which I shall not repeat, but only desire you to reflect
upon them, and so frame your conversation accordingly. And so much for the
Verb, I come now to the Adverb.

(...), the word in the Original, properly signifies worthily, dignam Evangelio
vitam agite, as Castelio renders it; and so the Vulgar Latin, digne Evangelio,
worthy of the Gospel: and so Col. 1.10. (...), walk worthy of the Lord: and
Ephesians. 4.1. worthy of the vocation, so we render it. In these and the like places
where the word (...) or (...) is used, worthy, or worthily, the Papists run
away with it, and catch as greedily at it, as Benhadad did at the word Brother,
supposing thereby they have got a fair plea for their merit ex congruo at
least, if not ex condigno. But, as the learned Grotius (in this no Papist I am
sure) observes upon the word, Grot. Annot. in Matthew. c. 10. v. 10.
Vox ista Graecis non semper (...), sed qualemcunque rei convenientiam notat:
the word worthy, or worthiness, in Greek Authors does not always imply merit
or condignitie by way of equality; but only a fitness or decency by way of
congruity: and so the Reverend Davenant upon that place to the Colossians:
Davenant. Comment. in Epist. ad Coloss. c. 1. v. 10.
Dignitatis vocabulum in Scriptura non semper denotat exactam proportionem
aequalitatis rei ad rem, etc. not an exact proportion of merit by way of
equality, but only a suitableness or correspondencie; not analogiam, seu
proportionem meriti ad praemium, but only analogiam seu proportionem regulati
ad regulam: in a word, not a condignity, but a conformity. And in this sense,
sticking close to the original, the word worthy, or worthily, may pass well
enough, and we may make a very good use of it. Christians should walk worthy of
the Gospel. There is an (...), or (...), a twofold dignity, worth, and
excellency in the Gospel of Christ, (in regard of the author, and end,
matter, and form) which a Christians life and conversation should come up and
reach unto, at least in some degree and proportion. There is a specifical
worthiness, and there is a gradual worthiness; a specifical worthiness in the
Gospel above the Law, and a gradual worthiness in regard of the different
administration of Gospel ordinances, some men enjoying greater means now under
the Gospel then others. In respect of the first, there is more required now of
us Christians under the Gospel, then there was of them under the Law: in
respect of the second, there is more required of some Christians then others.
Look how much any enjoy a greater degree of Gospel Light, so much the greater
measure of holiness and obedience is expected of them. The more powerful means
of grace any place, or person, or people enjoy, the clearer light they have,
the more glorious Gospel-dispensations they live under; the more holy, exact,
and regular should their conversation be; and this is indeed to walk worthy of
the Gospel, when men make suitable improvements under the means of grace, when
they bring forth fruits worthy of the Gospel, worthy of that cost and charges
God is at with them, in a proportion to those plentiful dews and droppings of
a Gospel-ministrie falling upon them. And does not then this (...) here come
home to us of this Kingdom in general, and more especially to you of this
City in particular? For what nation or people under heaven have had more
powerful, more plentiful and precious means of grace then we have had? what
City in the world has enjoyed such a bright gleme, such a glorious noontide
and sunshine of the Gospel, as ye have done now for an hundred years together?
what a series and succession of burning and shining lights and lamps have ye
had among you, that have sunk in the socket for your sakes; that have spent and
consumed themselves in the work of the Lord, for the good of your souls? (Ye
have had so many, I shall name none,) I am sure the British clergy,
particularly the Ministers of the Church of England have been counted and
called the wonder and envy of the whole Christian world: Stupor mundi Clerus
Britannicus. Bp. Hall. Columb. Noae.
and have not ye had the cream and the flower of them? and it is fit ye should,
there is an (...) in that too; it is meet and fit that the chief City should
have the best watchmen. If then God has blessed you so much, and blessed you
so long with so able and powerful a Ministry, what say ye then to the (...)?
do ye bring forth fruit worthy of all this? do ye make a suitable impovement
under so plentiful means of grace? is the increase worthy all this planting
and watering? do ye walk worthy of the Gospel, worthy of that great and
glorious Gospel Light that has for so many years together shined so brightly
round about you? Psalm. 16.6.
Your lines are fallen to you in a wealthy and a pleasant place; ye are like
sheep in a fat pasture: do ye show by your wool and your milk how well ye are
fed (as Epictetus has it)? Epictet. Enchirid. cap 69.
do ye credit your meat, the word and Gospel, which is the food of your souls?
do ye make it appear by your life and conversation, what good Pastors and
Preachers ye have? I beseech you, remember the (...), and consider that in a
proportion to your receipts, God expects suitable returns from you. And so much
of the Adverb as to the Original, (...), worthily.

Take it now secondly, as our English translation gives it, as becomes. I
confess, it is a word I am much taken with, and therefore I have reserved it
for the close of all, as becomes the Gospel of Christ. There is a (...), a
(...), a decorum, or decency, a comeliness or becomingness in a Christian
carriage, in compliance with the Gospel of Christ. Alexand. apud Q. Curtium,
As he said, That might become Parmenio, which would not become Alexander; so
that may become another man, which will not become a Professor of the Gospel.
Holiness becomes thy house for ever, Psalm. 93.5. Let them adorn themselves
with good works, says S. Paul, as becomes women which profess godliness, 1 Timothy 2.10. Avoid all uncleanness, as becomes Saints, Ephesians. 5.3. A Christian
will have a care of doing any thing that is uncomely or unhandsome. There is a
comeliness in a Gospel conversation; and that not only as to the inward man,
but as to the outward man too. There is a Cynical kind of sect of Christians
lately sprung up among us, who under pretense of a Gospel-austeritie and
strictness, affect a sordidness and undecency in their attire: and under a
color of an Evangelical parity, profess unmannerliness and rusticity in their
behavior, making it a great part of their religion to forbear all outward
signs and expressions of respect and reverence, civility and courtesy. I
confess I cannot skill of these men's religion. I wish there be not a spice of
pride and singularity in it; that there be not something of humourousness, and
affectation, and self-conceit in the bottom, (to say no worse.) Calco Platonis
fastum, Calcans Platonis stromata, dixit Diogenes, (...). Cui respondit Plato,
(...). Diog. Laert. in Vit. Diog.
ye know who said, and how he was answered, sed majori fastu. Otherwise, for
those that are misled and drawn away merely out of weakness and ignorance, may
they be dealt with in the spirit of meekness, and used with all manner of
mildness and tenderness, in a way to reduce and reclaim them: for I cannot but
extremely pity such poor mistaken creatures, such miserably deluded souls, who
think the inward beauty of the mind, inconsistent with outward bodily
comeliness; as if the Gospel did supersede all civil respects, and cancel all
bonds and rules of natural and moral decency; as if Christianity and courtesy,
holiness and humanity could not stand together. There is a comeliness no doubt
in a Christian garb, suitable to the Gospel. Ye know the Gospel that is a
sweet, gentle, mild, and merciful dispensation: so now a mild and affable
deportment; a smooth, gentle, courteous, and civil behavior and carriage
toward all, it is that that marvellously becomes Christians under the Gospel;
it is that that puts a comeliness, a beauty and loveliness upon religion. On
the contrary, a froward, harsh, and sour conversation; a morose, rough,
rugged, brow-beating garb, or temper, or behavior, is exceeding uncomely for a
Christian, it no way becomes the Gospel of Christ. Let us walk honestly as in
the day, Romans 13.13. that is, in the day of grace, in the times of the Gospel
(as the Contents of the chapter give it very well). Walk honestly, the word is
decently in the Original, (...), comelily, as it becomes the Gospel. There is a
decency or comeliness to be observed in a Gospel-walking.

And what if I should carry it a little further, and say, As there is a
comeliness in a Gospel-walking, so likewise there is a decency or comeliness
too in a Gospel Worship. And the word (...) will bear me out in it, and give me
some ground for it. An Evangelical Polity, and an Ecclesiastical Polity both
require order and decency: I speak not here of order and decency in reference
to Church Government, or Ecclesiastical discipline; and yet thus much I must
needs say upon this occasion as to that particular. Which is the most decent
and regular, orderly and comely form and face of Church Government now under
the Gospel; by this time, I hope, it is pretty well out of question with us:
For suppose we had doubted before, and the Primitive practice grounded upon
Scripture, and the prescription of 1500 years, had not sufficiently taught and
informed us; yet methinks the sad experience we have had of those manifold
factions and divisions; distempers and disorders, distractions and confusions,
which of late years have so miserably rent and torn the body, so fearfully
blemished and defaced the beauty of our Church: I say, this alone were enough to
confirm and settle us. But I speak not now of Ecclesiastical government, but of
Evangelical worship; and sure it is fit this should have order and decency in
it. The same Apostle that enjoins an (...), a comeliness in a Gospel-walking,
prescribes an (...) too, a decency or comeliness in a Gospel Worship, 1 Cor.
14. the last, speaking of public worship in religious assemblies, Let all
things be done decently and in order: and so in the 11 chapter of the same
Epistle, taxing their irreverent and undecent behavior in their
Church-meetings, Is it comely (says he) for a man or woman to behave
themselves thus and thus? Certainly when we come to perform Gospel-duties in
the public congregation, there is a right temper and moderation as to modes,
and garbs, and dresses, and addresses in divine service; I say there is a mean,
could we hit on it, between a scrupulous ceremoniousness, and an irreverent
rudeness, between a fantastic gawdiness, and a supine carelessness; between an
anxious preciseness, and a slovenly sordidness; and that is S. Paul's (...), a
handsome and a comely deportment, that all things be done decently and in
order. As for those who under pretense of inward spiritual worship, cry down
all outward order, and decency, and comeliness in our Christian assemblies in
the public worship and service of God; I earnestly entreat them to consider,
what spirit they are of; or rather whether they are all spirit; whether they
are pure spirits or no: for truly as long as men have bodies, as long as they
are men and not Angels, I must needs crave leave to think, that an external
decency and reverence in performance of holy duties, is extreme requisite and
necessary: The (...), is in S. Paul's esteem, a (...), a very reasonable
service, Romans 12.1.
and (...), a sacrifice acceptable and wel-pleasing to God. If any turn the
(...) into (...), let them bear the blame; Or if the lean kine must needs
devour the fat; if the outward man must needs thrust himself too far, and
justle away the inward; if outward decency and comeliness in Gospel Worship,
cannot but be an enemy, a rub or a pul-back to true inward piety and holiness,
by all means away with it, send it packing: But on the contrary, If it be
rather a help then a hindrance, as doubtless it is, I pray make much on it, and
encourage it. If this magnificent Church and Cathedral wherein now we are, this
comely and stately pile of building, once (and, I hope, still) the beauty and
ornament of this renowned City; if this and the like splendid and sumptuous
fabrics, the goodly monuments of our Ancestors zeal and devotion, consecrate
and set apart for the solemn worship and service of God; I say, if these prove
any obstruction or prejudice to true piety and religion, down with them, down
with them, even to the ground; but till then, I pray, let them stand; stand,
and not drop down for want of repair; stand, yea and be decently and handsomely
kept and maintained; though not trimmed and set out with any garish, gaudy,
flaunting meretricious dress, yet clad in a cleanly and a decent garb; this
mother- Church especially, like a grave and a chaste matron, let her be kept
comely and handsome. And why not? surely this is no way unbecoming the Gospel:
for if you will allow Temples, or Oratories, or Churches, call them what you
will, places set apart for Gods public worship now under the Gospel; as I
presume ye will, then all the reason in the world, they should be kept decent
and handsome; there is a decor congruus, Maxim sacerdo^^ hoc convenit, orr^re
Dei templum decore congruo. Ambros. De offic. lib. 2. cap. 21.
a fitting comeliness to be bestowed upon them, and at least a negative
reverence and respect due unto them, so as to be secured and kept free from any
irreverence, pollution, or mis-imployment, that nothing unseemly nor uncomely
be done in them, or practiced upon them. And therefore truly, that I may speak
my thoughts freely, (I hope ye will bear with my plainness, it is out of my
zeal for Gods glory, and the honor of this city) when I see my Savior
whipping the buyers and sellers out of the Temple, Matthew. 21.12.
that is, out of the verges and precincts of the Temple; when I see him
overthrowing the tables of the money changers and exchangers; when I see and
consider this, methinks it is no very comely nor handsome sight, to see so much
ivy cleaving and twining about so royal and stately an oak, till it eat the
heart out. To see either Church-isles exchanged into shops, or Churchyards
into markets, with submission to better judgments, in my apprehension I
confess, is a thing not much becoming the Gospel of Christ. I put no holiness
in wood and stone; nor yet much less do I place any holiness in pulling down
Churches, or letting them fall, or taking away wood and stone and lead and all.
I never read of any that envied the cost and comeliness bestowed upon Christ
and his Church, but a Judas, or a Julian: Mat 26.^ compared with John 12.4.
Ut quid perditio haec? said the one: (...). Theodoret. Hist. Eccles. lib. 3.
cap. 11. Niceph. lib. 10. cap. 29.
Ecce qualibus vasis! was the speech of the other, by the mouth of his
Treasurer Felix: back-friends, I assure you, to the Gospel, both: And truly I
cannot count them any fast friends to religion, to whom the beautiful gate of
the Temple is so great an eyesore. And it would be considered in sober
sadness, whether they that have been so forward to demolish our Churches, have
not gone the ready way to ruin our Church, at least occasionally, if not
intentionally. For my part, I clearly profess, I cannot yet see any sufficient
grounds to secure me from my fears, but still to me it seems very suspicious,
that our fanatic Hieromastix has been plowing with the Romish heifer, and the
hand of Ioab has been in all this: Yea sure, Hoc Ithacus velit. For did not
they that cried down our Churches and Parishes, cry down our Church, and our
Ministry, yea and Universities too? and then the work is done, welcome you know
who; Venient Romani certainly: for once take away an able and a learned
Gospel Ministry, and who shall hinder them, or keep them out? But blessed be
God, who has disappointed the hopes of our Adversaries, and infatuated the
counsels of our Achitophels, and put a stop to these furious hotspurs in their
full carere. Blessed be God, of whose only goodness and mercy it is, that our
poor Church, though by the rash, indiscreet, and intemperate heats, and unruly
passions of men, like Moses's bush, Exodus 4.2.
it has been all this while a burning, yet it is not consumed. And blessed be
they of the Lord, who have been any way instrumental in quenching these flames,
and giving check to those wild, exorbitant, phrenetick spirits, who, being in
all probability prompted and put on by some Popish emissaries, under pretense
of a Gospel-purity, would have brought in the greatest deformity, even a chaos
of confusion, by subverting all order, and decency, and government both in
Church and State. But if this be the way of the Gospel, if this be the genuine
issue and fruit of the true Christian religion, Sit anima mea cum Philosophis.
Averroes.
As God is the God, so the Gospel is the Gospel, 1 Cor. 14.33.
(...), not of tumult and disorder, of unsetledness and discomposure, as the
word signifies, of confusion, as we render it; (...), but of peace and order.
And Ministers of the Gospel have their spiritual power given them (...), 2 Cor.
13.10. for edification, and not for destruction, in a proper literal sense too,
for building and setting up, and not for demolishing or pulling down. That such
places as these should (not be pulled down, or suffered to drop down, but) be
kept up and maintained in a comely, decent, and orderly manner, questionless,
is very agreeable to the rules of Christianity, and altogether becoming the
Gospel of Christ. There is a decorum certainly, a decency and comeliness to be
used and observed as to the time, and place, and manner of Gospel Worship.

And now, if after all that has been said, this must needs be counted and
called superstition, who can help it? I am sure it will be hard to prove it to
be so: and I dare boldly say, That among those who exclaim most against
superstition, our Separatists, I mean, and Sectaries, not one of an hundred
knows what it is, either name, or thing. But whatever it be, truly I think* as
the case stands, there is little fear of it now adays. For were we not rather
in the other extreme? were we not run so far from the Scylla of superstition,
that we were fallen into the Charybdis of Atheism and profaness? Did not ataxy
and confusion, rudeness and irregularity, irreverence and irreligion, swell,
and overflow, and break in upon us like a land-floud, or a mighty torrent? High
time, I trow, to mend the banks, and put a stop to the inundation, if ever we
look to have an orderly, decent, comely face of a Church, and such a public
worship, as becomes the Gospel: nay, if ever we look that holiness and
righteousness, true religion and the fear of the Lord should get up, and grow,
and spread, and flourish among us. And indeed this is that that I drive at in
my discourse all this while: for to this purpose only it is, and for this
reason and no other, that I commend order, and decency, and comeliness in a
Christian Church, and a Gospel Worship, because I conceive, it really makes for
the advancement of godliness, and has a natural tendency to the increase of
true piety and religion: so far am I from thinking it bears any antipathy or
repugnancie to it, or any the least inconsistency with it. And therefore upon
these grounds I shall once be bold to ask the banes; If any one can show any
just cause, why outward decency, and inward devotion; bodily service and
spiritual worship; due reverence without, and true religion within; the comely
face of a Church, and the heavenly heart of a Saint, the beauty of holiness,
and the power of godliness may not-be joined together, let him speak: for my
part, I must needs profess and declare before God and man, that I know none: no
reason in the world, that I know, why they may and ought not join hands, and be
linkt, as it were, together in the bond of wedlock, seeing they are such a
mutual help and advantage one to another. Did I think otherwise, far be it from
me to further or favor the match, or to speak the least word in behalf of
external reverence, order, and decency in the worship and service of God. But
being verily persuaded, and clearly convinced of the truth hereof, viz. that
outward comeliness does very much conduce to inward holiness, and that order
and decency in worship, is a great help and furtherance to religion and
godliness, and a means to kindle and increase true piety, zeal, and devotion;
upon this account, and upon this occasion, at this time, and in this place
especially, I could not choose but set my seal to it, and give this fair
testimony of it, and recommend it to you, but still in order and reference to
the main end, viz. as it conduces to the (...) here in the Text, the one only
thing, true piety and religion, inward holiness, and the power of godliness:
that so a Christian conversation, and a Christian adoration; Evangelical
walking, and Evangelical worship may go hand in hand together in a decent and
comely equipage, both becoming the Gospel of Christ: a conformity whereunto in
life and practice, is that which I have been laboring to press upon you all
along from first to last, and so I shall leave it with you, and conclude as I
begun.

Only I shall add this memento, as fit premises to the conclusion. Remember, I
beseech you, and consider how great things God has done for you: it was
Samuels advice to Israel upon the coming in of their King, 2 Samuel 12.24.
Consider, the better to stir you up to practice this duty of the Text, what a
prevailing argument and engagement thereununto God has laid upon you, by his
late miraculous providence, and those wonderful changes and revolutions he
has wrought among you. What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits
toward me? Psalm. 116.12.
now may England say, and now may London say, (which truly may be called
Angliae Anglia, Antholog. Epigr. lib. 3. cap. 25.
as Athens was once (...), the Greece of Greece.) Indeed, how shall we express
our gratitude to God for his great and manifold mercies to this unworthy
Nation! especially for this so remarkable, so extraordinary, so transcendent a
mercy, the very top-stone, crown, and complement of all his other mercies and
deliverances vouchsafed unto this Church and State; that mercy, I mean, never
to be forgotten, the memorial whereof ye have so lately celebrated by your
triumphant gratulations, and public thanksgivings to God: that mercy wherein
the Lord has made you of this City, among others, so signally, and so
succesfully instrumental, even the plucking us out of the midst of our
confusions, like so many brands out of the midst of the fire: the
reestablishing and settling the Kingdom upon the good old foundations, even
the sure foundations of truth and righteousness, by so seasonable, and so
peaceable a restoring of our King to his throne, and us thereby to peace and
happiness. But not to deprive any of that honor and praise due unto them, much
less that eminent and worthy instrument, whose spirit the Lord stirred up to
stand in the gap, and to assert our liberties, and work deliverance for us; yet
after all we must say, Psalm. 118.23.
This is the Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes. And if ye will, let
us take in that too which goes before, The stone which the builders refused, is
become the head stone of the corner.

And now, me thinks, I hear every one of you singing David's song, Quid
retribuam Domino? What tribute shall I pay him? or what homage shall I do him?
What shall I render unto him? or what does he require of me, as a token of
thankfulness, in lieu of so unparalled, and so unexpected a mercy? Will the
Lord accept, Mic. 6.7.
or does he require thousands of rams, or ten thousands of rivers of oil? No
such matter, no, he requires no such thing at your hands: he requires not your
lands, or revenues; your goods, or estates: he requires not all your money in
your bags or bonds, all your wares in your ships, or shops, or warehouses: and
yet, though he should, this were no dear price neither to pay for such a
purchase; it were neither too much for him to ask, nor too much for you to
give, for those two precious, nay invaluable pearls of Peace and Truth: I am
sure it were not above the rate of Mephibosheth's Accipiat totum, 2 Samuel 19.30.
Let him take all, forasmuch as my Lord the King is come again in peace. But
God requires neither all, nor half, no nor any of all this; all that he
requires of you is only that, or rather that Only of Samuel in the place
aforementioned, Only fear the Lord, and serve him in truth with all your heart,
and consider how great things he has done for you. Samuels Only there is
almost parallel with S. Paul's here, and his exhortation the same in effect with
this here in the Text, with which I shall conclude, Only let your conversation
be as it becomes the Gospel of Christ.

FINIS.
printer's or publisher's device


