MADAM FICKLE: OR THE Witty False One.

A COMEDY.

As it is Acted at his Royal Highness the DUKE's THEATER.

Written by Tho: Durfey Gent.

HORAT. Non cuivis homini contingit adire Corinthum. Licensed

November 20. 1676. ROGER L'ESTRANGE.



LONDON, Printed by T. N. for James Magnes and Rich. Bentley in Russel Street
in Covent Garden near the Piazza 's. M.DC.LXXVII.

TO HIS GRACE THE Duke of Ormond, Lord High Steward of His Majesty's Household,
Knight of the Noble Order of the Garter, and one of His Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council.
May it please your Grace,
THough the Presumption I might have been guilty of in this Dedication, is
somewhat excused in your Graces Permission; yet the meanness of this Trifle,
infuses a secret shame into me, when I consider how ill a Present I have made
to a Person of such eminent Merit and Grandeur, whose obliging, and not to be
exampled Clemency, induces him to Patronize a Piece that rather diminishes,
than brings the least addition to his Fame. Had it been an Heroic Poem, I
might have opened my eyes with greater assurance, and cherished my ambitious
thoughts with the resolution of honoring some happy Hero with your Graces
illustrious Character, and so under pretense of a slender merit springing from
the Work, have insinuated my self into your Favor. But whereas other Authors
are happy in this particular, how little have I to boast of, when all I can say
in my defense, is, That its only good Fortune was, in being the Subject of the
Courts diversion, where their Noble Clemency and Good Nature were extremely
requisite, in covering its defects from the too Censorious; His Majesty,
according to His accustomed Royal and Excellent Temper, was pleased to descend
so far, as to give it a particular Applause, which was seconded by your Grace,
little considering, my Lord, the Pride a young Author might be infected with,
in seeing his Play honored with so dignified an Approbation. But when I had
the honor to wait upon you, and saw shining in all your Actions the glorious
Beams of Humility, Courtesy, true Honor and Virtue, Perfections seldom seen
in Great Men, it is impossible for me to decipher my thoughts, nor had I power
to utter them; for my Minds surprise added to the imperfection of my Speech,
though I had leisure to consider how despicable a thing is Pride, when suppressed
by the pious Inclinations of a generous Virtue. Pardon me, my Lord, if the
indefatigable Zeal I owe your Grace, makes me wander from the nicer Rules of
Dedication; And I beseech you believe, that as to Admire you I never can
enough, so to Flatter you, is far beyond my power, you being far above it; I
have more reason to beg your Pardon for this Trespass, than to incur your Anger
for another Default: A Buffoon, though he may be often styled the sport and
diversion of Princes, would very ill become the Name of their Companion. And so
this Play, though it had the Fortune to please you as Spectator, must needs
blush at its insufficiency, being received as a Bosom Friend. Confession (my
Lord) makes an abatement of the Crime, and to make it wholly pardonable, the
rest must be imposed upon your Graces Clemency that authorized my Boldness; the
Clemency that drew me from a melancholy Retirement, where Content and I were
often quarrelling about a slender Fortune, to visit the blissful Habitation of
Virtue and Grandeur. Birds sing most sweetly that sit in the Sunbeams; and
it is, I confess, the Natural Ambition of most Poets, to shelter themselves
under the Wings of Nobility, Encouragement adding more sweetness to their Pens,
and more vivacity to their Fancy: But to study to deserve the blessing of your
Favor, shall be ever the great and sole Ambition of,

MY LORD, Your Graces most humble, And most devoted Servant, Tho: Durfey.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
Lord Bellamour Mr. Betterton. Manley Friend to Bellam. Mr. Smith. Sir Arthur
Oldlove, an Antiquary Mr. Sandford. Captain Tilbury, an old fashioned blunt
Fellow Mr. Medbourn. Zechiel Toby Sons to Tilbury Mr. Anthony Leigh. Mr. James
Nokes. Old Iollyman Mr. Underhill. Harry, Son to Iollyman Mr. Ievan. Flaile,
Servant to Tilbury Mr. Richards. Dorrel, alias Friendlove Mr. Norrice.
WOMEN.
Madam Fickle Mrs. Mary Lee. Constantia, Daughter to Sir Arthur Mrs. Barrer.
Arbella Mrs. Gibbs. Silvia, Attendant to Fickle Mrs. Napper. Three Wenches
Constable, Watch, Footmen, Maskers, Musitioners and Attendants.
SCENE Covent Garden. Prologue by Mr. Smith.
FAncy and Sense the glorious Twins of Wit,
That used to imbellish what a Poet writ,
Are now as poor and despicable grown,
As an old wrinkled Trader of the Town,
With hollow Eyes, no Teeth, and tattered Gown;
Like her they are neglected by you Wits,
And forced to trade with Country Squires and Cits,
Who with their Eighteen-pence uphold the Stage,
Which you would ruin with your Critic Rage,
By Heaven, Sirs, it is a Cursed Age.
Too late it is now for Poets to get Fame,
Their Works are only fit for you to Dam.
They toil, it is true, but gain, instead of Praise,
Malignant Censures; Thorns, instead of Bays.
The great Cabal so partial do appear,
An Authors Wit lies buried in his Fear.
And as a Painter in his skill grown nice,
Still mends and mends till he has spoiled the Piece;
So too much care in striving to essay
New Scenes of Wit, often ruins a good Play.
The Factious Club are Merciless of late,
Carping, Ill-natured, and Degenerate;
Sifting so much to find each little Fault,
They lose their best diversion in their Thought.
And though facetious Plays, and the learned Pit,
When Colleges have failed, have taught them Wit;
The Stages Ruin unconcerned you see,
And Dam the Original of Gallantry.
Should we leave off then, we should hear you say,
Dam 'em, what Drones are these, why don't they Play?
'Sblud I shall never leave this Wenching vein,
Jack, my last swinging Clap's broke out again.
And if we do Play -- then you Censure raise,
And to encourage us, Dam all our Plays;
Nothing will please, I wonder what a Devil
Makes Men of Wit so formally uncivil.
But since it is so, and you thus Cruel prove,
We must appeal to our Friends that sit above,
Whose wise indifferent Censures grace a Play,
As Squibs and Crackers do -- a Lord Mayors Day.
MADAM FICKLE, OR THE Witty False One.
ACT. I.
Scene 1.
Enter Jollyman and Harry. Ioll. Sir! Not a Penny: I say it is lost upon thee.


Harr. I say -- How Sir!


Ioll. How Sir: I Will tell you Sir -- First thou art a Melancholy Fellow, a
kind of Hypocondriack, as I am told, and instead of making, spoilst good
Company.


Harr. Pish: Good Sir believe it not.


Ioll. Secondly: Sir, thou have quite forgot to sing a Quality that was
Hereditary, a Benefit that has Graced our Family for above these 20 years, and
like a Varlet thou have neglected it.


Harr. Not I in faith Sir! You are mis-inform'd. I am not melancholy, nor any
thing of that which you imagine. I can sing too, loudly, and for the Benefit of
Company. It Is true Sir, want of Money --


Ioll. Sir, Sir, a lie deserves a Cudgel. Do not vex me. Udsbores, Did I
not see you yesterday at Sir Arthur Oldloves, holding your hands up thus --
conning your Lesson? What business can you have with Antiquaries, except it be
to practice disobedience, or turn Precisian to disgrace thy Family?


Harr. Why Sir. I Will tell you what.


Ioll. No Sir: You need not;
I know the trick already. Speed the Plough Sir.
Alas! What should you do with Money? To you that neglect the World -- Money's
a Torment. I have considered it -- and will not tempt you -- Money was made for
those that laugh, and drink with appetite, whose merry Souls -- put Padlocks on
dull Conscience, and live the life of sense cum Privilegio.


Harr. I will excel in Mirth Sir. Every day shall give you proof, each hour
variety, your House shall ring with shouts of Joy and Music: I long have
wished it so: But still the Duty, the reserved Reverence that I bore you Sir
made me forbear -- But since you will have it otherwise, it meets my wishes fully.


Ioll. And mine too Sir. And a pox on Reverence I say, an Ounce of true English
Mirth is worth a Pound on it: But this Antiquary -- What Business had you there
Sir? answer me that.


Harr. Sir, there is a rich Widow lodges at his House, one to whom my private
inclinations have been long devoted; and by feigning an Austerity yesterday in
Sir Arthur's Company, I got access to her.


Ioll. Is she merry, can she sing?


Harr. To a Miracle Sir. She Is extremely Musical: Plays of the Guittar, and
tells a Story with the best Grace I ever saw.


Ioll. 'Sbud a fine Woman: I warrant her. Hang pinching, Harry thou shall have
her.


Harr. She Is very reserved; but withal uses a modest freedom that is infinitely
taking.


Ioll. Udsbores! I like it well, a merry Modesty, and an unstained Integrity
add much to Feminine Capacities: Let the world rub, Harry -- I say thou shall
have her. There, there is Money for thee -- Nay if thou were there upon design,
it is another matter, I must allow that. When I was a young Man I was the best
at a design: Ah, I could have gone through stitch in faith: But come, hang
pinching -- Harry thou shall have her.


SONG.
Away with the Causes of Riches and Cares,
That poison our Spirits, and shorten our Years:
No pleasure can be,
In state or degree,
But it is mingled with trouble and fears.
Then perish all Fops by a Sobriety dulled,
Whilst he that is merry reigns Prince of the World.
The Querks of the Zealous of Beauty or Wit,
Though supported by Power, at last must submit.
For he that is sad
Grows wretched or mad,
Whilst Mirth like a Monarch does sit:
It cherishes life in the Old and the Young,
And makes every day be both happy and long.
Ioll. By Heaven a rare Woman, a most Divine Creature. Sir there is more
Money, and do but wheedle dexterously. Do but get this Woman, and then hang
pinching, let the World rub.


Harr. I Will warrant you Sir* So, I have opened his Purse at last! How now,
who is this?


Enter Tilbury and Toby. Ioll. Hoh! My old Friend and Fellow-Collegian Mr.
Tilbury: IN faith I am glad to see you. This was good luck to meet you here
after so long absence. Pray how fare all our old Friends in Salisbury.


Tilb. In health Sir; hard labor, plain Diet, and Hearts Ease, are still the
best Physicians. All well -- All well --


Ioll. Why, let the World rub: I am glad on it in faith. This is your Son I
think Mr. Tilbury.


Tilb. One of 'em Sir. Toby -- your Hat. The Other hand Sir! Well, this Boy
will never learn breeding.


Ioll. Oh I Will warrant you Sir, here he will soon learn that, a very hopeful youth
indeed --


Tilb. Ay, Ay. God send him Grace Sir, he may do well enough! What Mr. Harry!
By Coxbodikins I did not know you. You are grown a lusty stripling since I saw
you last: Ah -- Lord, how time passes! I am heartily glad to see you, Good Mr.
Harry. 'Sbud he sprouts up finely. -- I hope your Mother's well Mr. Harry.


Harr. Very well Sir.


Tilb. Still twirling your Hat, and sqeezing your Gloves. [ To Toby. Sir
leave that trick, or by St. Iago I Will lame thee. I wonder when you see Mr.
Harry in such a posture. --


Ioll. Oh give him a little time Sir, he is not yet weaned from the Country.


Tilb. No, no, my Cudgel shall wean him. Good Sir, let me go: Sir, Sir, --
Have I not told you of this?


Ioll. He Will mend it quickly Sir. Pray -- have a little patience, and setting
this apart, what business brought you to Town good Mr. Tilbury?


Tilb. Why Sir, I have a Suit of Law depending here in the Chancery, which I am
resolved to make an end of; and my next business is, I intend to marry both my
Sons to two Fortunes, which are here provided for 'em.


Ioll. Both! Why have you another Son?


Tilb. Another! Yes Zechiel. Did you never hear of Zechiel? H'as been a Student
in the Temple this three years, another-ghess fellow than this I assure you,
all Air and Spirit he -- 'Sbodikins, I am told in the Country there is not a
true Wit in all the Fraternity but he.


Ioll. Why then hang pinching; he is a brave fellow. Come Sir, here is a Glass of
excellent old Hock here at Longs. I Will give you your welcome to Town.


Tilb. Old Hock! what a Dickins is that? Sir a Dish of Racy Canary if you
please, I am for no Hocks! 'Sbodikins Wine was never good since it has been
corrupted with such barbarous notions.


Ioll. Well Sir, I Will warrant you I Will please you.


Tilb. Sir, walk you yonder in the (what do you call 'ems) the Piazza's, and if
Flaile my Man come, direct him hither: And do you hear, leave that sneaking
Dog-look of yours, or by St. Iago -- Well, -- I say no more for this time.
Do'nt provoke me.


[ Ex. Till. Joll. Tob. What a peevish old fellow it is: Sure he has been stung
with a Wasp to day -- He Is so fretful -- But Udshash, I Will not be controlled
so, and so I Will tell him when time serves.


Harr. Faith Sir he is a little too severe: Why he uses you like a mere Child.


Tob, Ay -- like an Infant -- huh -- because he is old, he thinks no body has
breeding but himself; but Udshash -- in Salisbury I assure you I pass for the
more accomplished person.


Harr. Without doubt Sir he were an errant Coxcomb that would dispute that --
why, you have a good Presence.


Tob. Yes; thank a good Nurse: I am pretty well fortified by Nature, and yet
every thing I do, he forsooth mislikes, as if I were a Fool, and knew not how
to carry my self: Udshash, I wonder he has no more Civility --


Harr. O Sir! Old Men that have the prerogative of being Fathers, think it but
decent to use that liberty: But setting aside this Discourse; Mr. Toby, may not
my Ambition desire the satisfaction of knowing the name of this excellent
person you are to marry.


Tob. Why Sir -- to tell you the Truth of the business, I don't know her name
my self; for I never saw her yet. For the old Fool my Father carries matters so
closely, that I can never know any thing: But by Jeroboam I Will fit him; For if
I marry without good pre-meditation, I am the Son of an East India Bagpiper;
and so Udshash I Will tell him.


Harr. Marry a stranger, and one you never saw? By Heaven it is unreasonable.


Tob. Udshash! He Is the most unreasonable Cormudgeon you ever knew -- in the
Winter he will not let me come near the fire for fear of catching Chil-blanes.


Harr. Not warm your self --


Tob. No: Did you ever hear the like: But Zooks I fitted him once; for I burnt
a whole Stack of Hay down to the ground on that occasion, and warmed my self in
spite of him.


Harr. Ha, ha, ha -- a Witty invention by my life; but Mr. Toby, I suppose you
know what Quality she that must be your Wife is.


Tob. Yes, yes: She Is of very good Quality, and a Widow, and very rich I am
told.


Harr. A Widow Sir? 'Sdeath if it should be my Mistress --


Tob. As to her Conditions, I am ignorant of 'em; but they had need be good;
for I have missed many a Wealthy Match for her sake.


Harr. Certainly Sir I Have the honor to know this Lady; pray where does she
lodge?


Tob Do You know her? I Am glad of that in faith: You may do me a great kindness in
telling me some of her Conditions -- Why Sir she lodges here in Bridges-street
at the House of Sir Arthur Oldlove the famed Antiquary.


Harr. The same by Heaven, 'Sdeath was ever such luck. Sir I was involved in a
mistake. I thought she had been a Lady of my acquaintance: But good Sir, how
came this Match so forward, since you say she is a stranger to you?


Tob. Why Sir! You must know this same Sir Arthur is my Fathers intimate
Friend, and this Widow lodging at his House, he presently gave notice of it:
Telling him, he doubted not but he could make her a Match for me. But the main
Cause of his kindness is, because he designs my Brother Zechiel to marry his
Daughter.


Harr. Very good -- now have I an itching mind to swinge this [Aside Rascal:
But it is so notorious a Fool, that a beating is lost upon him. Then you are
resolved to marry --


Tob. Yes! Hanged I will marry -- I fancy there is a great deal of pleasure
in it. First to command a Family, and sit at the upper end of the Table. Then to
make my Wife serve instead of a Vallet de Chamber, and never pay her no Wages
neither: Then to command her this way; that way, the other way, and every way;
for this thing, that thing, the other thing, and every thing: Udshash it is very
pretty --


Harr. But Sir, you still miss the right end of Marriage.


Tob. That Is all one Sir -- why we must take our Fortune. It Is as the Fates
decree --


Harr, Gad, the Fates are very uncivil to meddle in a matter that so nearly
concerns you: But Sir! There Is one thing more; there is a certain ill Fate
attends Marriage -- Horns Sir; are you not afraid of being a Cuckold?


Tob. A Cuckold! ha, ha, ha -- I see he is a little foolish -- a Cuckold Sir,
Udshash -- in Salisbury they know not what it means. It Is your London Air that
breeds Cuckolds: Here Is your horny Forest -- But Udshash, they say here a
Courtier cannot walk the streets without being perpetually troubled in returning
the Complements to some of his Cuckolds: Besides, they are so general a Society
here, that no body minds 'em -- but in Salisbury -- if a man is suspected to be
a Cuckold, he presently gets into Office, either of Constable, or head Church
warden, that his degree may recover his disgrace -- Nay for better security,
some of 'em Padlock their Wives: And Udshash that is certainly the safest way;
and I wonder the Citizens here don't take it into Consideration.


Harr. Get one of the Common Council to petition the King for an Act of
Parliament to that purpose.


Tob. 'Tmay be necessary as things stand sometimes -- But see here comes
Flaile: Udshash my Brother too, now for a peale of Wit.


Enter Zechiel and Flaile. Zech. Hah Toby -- Beangarson touch Flesh, touch
Flesh: Welcome to Town in faith -- upon honor thou lookst well, only thy
Clothes a little disguise thee; but no matter, where is my Father, hah -- Bandog
and I have been seeking him this hour, prithee where is he?


Tob. Gone to the Tavern with an old Friend of his.


Zech. Come! Let us go thither too; Upon honor the Tavern's a sweet place, and
next to the Playhouse, the most becoming a Gentleman of any thing -- Sir I
kiss your hand, and beg your [ To Harry. Pardon for neglect in Salutation: But
my Eyes being serenely fixed upon my Brother, there happened an accedental
Eclipse between my imprisoned Aspect, and Sir, your Person: But the Luminaries
of my Soul being kindled by discretion, I have now liberty to acknowledge and
amend my fault committed in point of Demeanor.


Tob. What! What Is all this? Udshash Zechiel's mad --.


Harr. Sir! I am very unskilful in a Repartee of this Nature, and therefore beg
your excuses, if all I can say is, that your wit had no occasion for half this
Apology.


Zech. Sir, your very Servant. Toby, Come let us to the Tavern, upon honor I Will
make thee drunk to night, give me thy hand. What dull -- flat -- like a Poet in
a Church, prithee hold up thy head and laugh Man, and let us sing, and roar,
and drink away the night like Sons of Thunder, to morrow will be time enough to
see my Father. Hey, come along Boy. Bandog, Sir, you shall go too. You shall
drink Bumpers out of your Custard-Cap you Rogue, and be drunk for the honor of
your Country --


[ Strikes off Flailes Hat. Tob. Yes, yes! He Is mad --


Flail. 'Slid! For ought I see you need no Wine: Prating will in a short time
make you too drunk for any civil Maps company.


Zech. Well said Ploughshare: Why how now Bully! still in thy Dumps! not a word
to save a Man's longing?

[ To Toby. Prithee look up and speak like a Man of Worship: 'Sdeath I must new
mould you e're we part: I perceive that you will degenerate else: Upon honor he is
no kin to me that is not as brisk as a Dancing Master. Give me the Spirit of
Conversation, a Man that sings, and talks, and laughs, and stares -- and comes
aloft thus with agility, hah --


[Vaults. Harr. Like a Tailor ore' a Washing-block: Well, I must leave 'em; for
the Disease of Folly is as catching as that of the Plague. -- Gentlemen your
Servant.


Zech. Ah Sir, you will not leave us: Shall we not break a jest together over a
Glass of Burgundy! Upon honor a Man of Wit is to me as welcome as a Beautiful
Woman. Toby, address your self the Gentleman your Friend.


Tob. Sir! the Truth is, my Brothers a little off oth' Hooks; but 'twill
quickly away -- It Is only the over-flows of Wit. You know the old saying. Sine
aliquo Dementio nullus Phoebus! This Wit is plaguey troublesome.


Harr. Right Sir. Therefore to prevent, I Will take my leave till some other time.

[ Exit Harry. Is he gone? Dam him he has no Money now, not a souse -- I know
it. Upon honor, in this age a Man knows not who to bestow his Gallantry upon:
If he gets among Persons of Quality, they are so Critical, that he has not
matter enough to work on: If amongst the Vulgar; it is lost upon 'em; for the
sense of paying a Reckoning, makes them as dull as a Cantabrigian newly entered
into Orders.


Flail. Ay, this London's a wicked place, that is the Truth on it. Che' have gone
3 mile about, and can hardly see ought but Ale-housen and Taberns.


Tob. Nay, the worst is, one can hardly know a Church from a Tavern, but only
the Church has never a Sign.


Zeeh. A good Observation! Gad I Will pinch thee for that. Pinch him Bandog,
leave your Church you Dog, and execute my Mandates. Ha, ha, ha.


[Kicks away his Staff, he falls down. Tob. Ha, ha, ha, up again Flail; there is
no harm done. Udshash! Zechiel's grown an arch wag.


Flail. Arch quoth a! 'Slid he has broke my Nose -- Do You laugh? Ah you may be
ashamed of your Actions. Your Worshipful Father would never have served me zo.


Flail. Nay! No anger Flaile! No anger! What Is a fall to a Man of thy parts;
Upon honor it is customary here to give or take a fall from any Man, especially
amongst Friends.


Lord Bellamore, Mr. Manly, and Footmen pass over the Stage. Bella. Sir take
this Letter, and do as I command you, away -- you shall find me in the Mail --

[ Ex. Footmen. Come Manly, lets away -- how now? Who Is here? My Fop of the
Temple Jack? This is he I told thee of. I won 300 Guineys of him the other night
at Back-gammon.


Manl. 'Twas well you won 'em: They might else have been thrown away upon one
of far less merit; for I see he has a kind of a losing Face -- he will never thrive
at play.


Zech. My Noble Lord! I kiss your Lordships great Toe. Worthy Sir your Adorer.
Upon honor my Lord you had the most Victorious Chance the other night I ever
knew: But since it was my Fortune to lose, Fate did me a great honor in
choosing your Lordship for my Conqueror.


Bella. Sir! the most worthy are still more subject to ill chance, and it is as
absolutely impossible for me to excuse my own good Fortune, as to enlarge upon
your Merits.


Zech. Ah! Your Lordship o'rewhelms me in the deluge of your Gallantries. Be
pleased to know my Brother my Lord. It Is true, he is meanly apparel'd, because
newly come from the Blessing of 1500 a year in the Country, to spend a Month or
two in Town -- but else upon honor of a good stature, straight Back, and a
Head of most hopeful expectation.


Bella. He seems no less Sir. I wish I had leisure to comment upon his
Perfections.


Zech. Then here is my Bandog, a tough Rascal, a Fellow of so strange a
Constitution, that 'thas been often disputed which was the better bred, he or
his Oxen! Upon honor a second Hobson; my Lord, an everlasting Plough-share --
do but view him! Stand forth O Man of Motley! Ha, ha, ha -- he blushes upon
honor, he changes Countenance.


Manl. Not for a worse I hope.


Bella. No not unless he should steal one off the Poles at London Bridge. But
come, Prithee lets away: Such another description would induce me to beat his
Fellow for spoiling my Stomach to my Dinner --


[Aside. Zech. What Is that? Dinner! Will your Lordship dine with me? a dish of
Partredges, and a Jowl of Salmon (my Lord.)


Bella. But your sauce is scurvy, and will doubtless corrode upon my Nature.


Zech. Gad! the best sauce in the World. This Fellow was Cook to the King of
France, and upon honor is the most ingenious in his Function of any Man in
Christendom.


Man. But Sir, our intrigue lies another way.


Bella. Sir, we are today Men of great Business, and there is a pressing Affair
that requires instant performance: Therefore adieu.


[ Ex. Bell. Man. Zech. This is the bane of our Nobility. Pride -- Sloth, and
ill Manners undoes the Nation.


Tob. A Lord quoth a: If all Lords have no more breeding than this, the Nation
is like to have a hopeful House of Peers. Udshash, I could have carried matters
better than so my self -- For with reverence be it spoken, and under the Rose,
my Lord was as unmannerly a Fellow as I ever saw.


Flail. Ha, ha, ha -- He a Noble Man, and punctilio no better. Byth' Mass the
Mayor of our Town has more manners by half.


Zech. Pshaw -- What Is matter? Let 'em go, upon honor I scorn their Ignorance,
and to let 'em see the Power of a Man of Wit: Thou and I will Lampoon 'em. I Will
teach thee within this three days to be a Man of Mode; and thou shall talk, and
roar, and fight, and sing even with the best, nay Cocks of all the Bullies.
I Will teach thee the most new and dextrous way of picking Wenches up. Then thou
shall know their tempers, constitutions: Whether they are in the Boat or may be
Boarded. Thou shall know every thing Boy. I Will be a true Brother to thee.


Tob. Hoy Boys, then I Will warrant I Will learn quickly: Nay Udshash -- I Am very
quick at any thing I give my mind to.


Zeeh. No more blowing of Noses on your sleeve, nor twirling of Band-strings,
do you hear? but when you are in Company, Cock your Hat, place your Arms thus,
look like the Son of Thunder, and cry Hoh.


Tob. Hoh -- Udshash! I Will warrant thee I Will do it.


Zech. Then we will have our names altered: Let the old Prophets keep their
Appellations; we will be new Christened: Mine shall be -- Filloflorido; thine
Rounsivell -- Hey Rounsivell: Upon honor it sounds rarely -- and then for
humor.


Tob. Ay, ay, I warrant thee Boy! If I can but get a little Wit into this Pate
of mine, let me alone for humor.


Zech. Then my Pithagoras, shall thou and I make a Transmigration of Souls.
Thou shall marry my Mistress, and thy Wife shall be my Gracious Paramour: 17
Puncks shall be thy proportion, thou shall sleep in the comfort of clean
Linen; Wench with a safe Conscience, and eat no more fresh Beef at Supper; but
the Fleshpots of Egypt shall fatten thee, and the Grasshopper flourish in thy
Summer.


Tob. Hoy! Rare, rare Phillorolido! Prithee give me a note of thy Name; Udshash
I shall never hit on it else --


Zech. Come away then, we will go presently and practice --
And to the Tavern door make our Approaches,
Like Hect'ring Gallants rushing from Gilt Coaches.

[Exeunt. Finis Actus Primi.
ACT. II.
Scene 1. The Mail:
Enter Lord Bellamore and Manley. Bella. A Fool is a Vacuum in Nature; a Prolix
story without Marginal Notes; in whose Company a man neither gets credit nor
profit: If he be Rich his greatest perfection is Avarice: If Poor, he is
altogether despicable, and unfit for Society --


Manl. I am not of your mind* for if Profit turn the Scale. there is certainly
most to be got by half-witted people; and as to the disgrace, the Notion of a
Fool is so general, and there is so many sorts of 'em, that a man loses not an
Inch of Reputation, but rather gets credit by their defect.


Enter Page. Bella. Now Sir! what news?


Page, I delivered your Letter as your Lordship directed; and she desires your
Visit to be as speedily as you can; for she has a Kinsman that about an hour
hence has engaged himself to wait on her; whose Company she fears may be very
prejudicial.


Bella. I Will be with her presently, Jack! I must beg thy pardon.


Manl. What an assignation my Lord! A Love-challenge I warrant.


Bella. Even so in faith; and I must thither instantly. Where shall we meet at
night?


Manl. At Lambs with the Fidles and a Talboy.


Bella. Agreed: I will not fail thee -- Jack farewell.
Sir follow me --

[Exit Bell. and Page. Manl. So! I am glad it happens thus; I should else have
been put to the trouble of excusing my absence from him. Let me see, it is now
five a Clock! at six I promised Celia to visit her, and his absence gives me a
happy opportunity. To perform it, I Will take a walk round the Park, and by that
time 'twill be very near the hour.

[Ex. Man.
Enter Zechiel and Toby in a new Suit. Zech. Splendid and Gent, upon honor
thou art Metamorphos'd; a Courtier of the first Edition. Thou have the Town Air
already, and wearst thy Clothes with a boon mean. Walk a little! walk! ah --
observe always to keep your Toes outward, and your Elbows as far back as you
can; that is right! give me thy hand: Upon honor thou art a modish Fellow --


Tob. Udshash -- I must quarrel. I shall not be a right Gallant till I have
beaten some body, or am beaten, it is all one: Hah! Philloromine. Plague on it I
shall never hit of thy name.


Zech. Thou shall beat a Constable to night, thou and I will scour through the
Flannel Mermidons, and come off Conquerors; nay, rather than fail thou shall
beat me: But I Will have thee fleshed. Stand here! Suppose me now a Drawer, and
that I had been tardy in procuring a Wench according to your order: What would
you do oth' sudden?


Tob. Do! Why thus? a Box oth' Ear for a Prologue, you know that is but
reasonable --


[Strikes him. Zech. Right upon honor. It Is necessary -- but forward!


Tob. Hoy; Scaramouchi, Rascal, Poltron, Popinjay! Son of 20 Fathers, besides
out-liers, comers and goers; must a Man of honor wait your leisure, you Dog,
and miss his necessary diversion, through the negligence of such a Scarab:
Udsbores, I Will beat thee into a Tripe. No have? No attendance?


[Beats Zechiel. Zech. Hold, hold! ha, ha, ha; the right Town-humour Ned, Flash
to the life -- ha, ha, ha. Let me kiss thee for this; if thou can but get the
art of gleaning from Plays, and remember'st but my Rules for picking up
Wenches; upon honor in a short time not a Bully Rock of 'em all can come near
thee for Gallantry.


Tob. Ay; but they say the best way of picking up Wenches is to speak Bawdy to
'em. and the Truth is, I am a little shame-fac'd at present; but I shall
quickly come to it.


Enter Arbella, Constantia and Page. Arb. So pleasant and so inconstant a
Temper till now I never knew: Her Carriage is so graceful and obliging, that
it is infinitely delightful to all Companies; and if she happens to speak of
love, me thinks there flows a sweetness from her Language, that charms the Ear.


Constable. And yet she is false as Hell; so strangely wedded to inconstancy, that
the Town begins to take notice of her, and speak the more loudly, as being
ignorant of her quality: Sir carry that Letter as I directed you --


Tob. Udshash! Here Is Women Brother; good Boy! I Will begone: My Heart fails me
already. I shall never be able to speak to 'em.


Zech. Not speak to 'em! Upon honor thou shall, bravely too. What flinch in
thy first Charge. Come back for shame; observe me, I Will begin -- I Will introduce
thee -- Ladies! the Devil take me if it be not a Maxim against Reason and
Civility, for you to walk thus without Servants. But obliging Fortune, a
particular Friend to your Sex, has sent hither for that Employment my Brother
and my self; and if your pleasure --


Arb. Sir! you will add very much to our pleasure to leave us; for we are in so
ill a humor, that the Overtures of your Imaginary Wit will be lost upon us.


Zech. Leave you! Shall I leave a Lady to the Tyranny of Melancholy, that may
be diverted with the pleasure my Company: Madam, I know more of the Punctilio's
of Civility than so; therefore as I was saying, My Brother and my self --


Constable. Oh Heavens Madam! This is the very Fool that my Father designs me to
Marry.


Arb. It seems he knows you not.


Constable. No; he never saw me but once, and then 'twas at a Window.


Zech. My Brother and my self Madam, two of the most accomplished Sparks in the
Town --


Arb. Two of the most conceited Fops in the Town --


Zech. That shall be punctual in observing your Commands.


Constable. That shall be beaten most unmercifully; if you stay a little longer.


Zech. Beaten Madam! What rash Presumer, careless of his life, dares think a
thought like that -- Beaten!


Tob. Udshash, she has quelled my Courage already, would I were at home again.


Zech. But I see Madam you are disposed to rally: Beaten! There goes more to
the beating of a Man of Parts, than you imagine. Upon honor I was my self once
so well skilled in beating people, that the Herald had like to have given me a
Battoon for my Crest; thereby to have signalized my Valor to Posterity.


Arb. I wonder you missed so decent an Honor: For I am of opinion 'twas an
excellent Device, and very suitable to your new-coind Gentility.


Zech. New-coin'd! Damme, this comes of walking without a Footboy: Brother
prithee come and espouse my quarrel. These Eternal Talkers have made my Throat
as dry as a Sponge already -- Come! Address, Address -- They tell me that ours
is a new-coin'd Gentility.


Constable. Well Sir, and what has your large quantity of Wit to say on this
occasion?


Tob. I say! why I say -- Say you what you will: The Family of the Tilburies is
an Ancient Family, God bless the Royal Family, as any Family in Christendom,
and he that says the contrary is the Son of a Whore, and my Brother here shall
cut him into Steakes --


Zech. Well said Rounsival.


Arb. 'Slight! Prithee let us away; this angry Fool will beat us.


Tob. So, so -- now they begin to fear me: I shall do well enough; The Coat of
the Tilbury's new-coin'd -- Udshash it is as old as Tilbury Camp, and that was
in the same year with Noah's Flood.


Constable. Insufferable Impertinence! They may well be Brothers; for their united
Folly out-vies their Consanguinity.


Enter Manley. Manl, Madam! the Mail may now boast of a Happiness unparalled,
enjoying the sweetness of your Company.


Arb. Still your Rhetorical Vein Mr. Manley, you consider not the weak
Capacities of Women.


Manl. Yes Madam: I may consider it; but am sufficiently satisfied in my
knowledge of your Capacity to think it mean: But me thinks your looks are not
so lively as it is usually: Your Eyes have lost part of their fire: No late loss
I hope Madam has caused this alteration.


Arb. None Sir. only a little molested with the present heat, and the continual
buzzing about of Flies that haunt me.


Manl. Flies; I understand you Madam.


Tob. Come; I think we had best go: Here Is some mischief hatching.


Zech. I Will not stir upon honor, what a Pox he dares not draw in the Mail.


Manl. Sir! I see your Presence has the misfortune to be distastful to these
Ladies, to whom I have the honor to be known: Therefore 'twill become you and
your Brother Fop there, to leave 'em, and retire to your better Conveniences.


Zech. Brother Fop Sir! Upon honor you license your Tongue by the privilege
of the place; such an attribute should not have passed unrevenged else -- but
Sir a time will come --


Manl. When I shall cut your Throat Sir: Come Ladies, I Will be your Guardian;
Let these Mushrumes stand if they dare. The respect I bear the Noble Company
that usually walk here, ties up my Sword; but if they sleep on it hang me.


Ex, Manl. and Ladies, Tob. Udshash! I Will go hire a Coach, and into the Country
immediately.


Zech. The Country! Such another word and I Will renounce thee forever; Prithee
think no more on it: He Will be hanged before he will challenge us.


Tob. I see he has a murderous intention, and it is an act of prudence to be
careful.


Enter Flaile. Flail. Oh have I found you at last? I wonder where the Dickins
you ramble! ch'have searched all the Coffe-housen and Taberns 'twixt this and
Westminster for you: What byth' Mass my young Mr. Toby turned Gallant too.
Whoop! by Coxounty what a change is here. Come you must go to Sir Arthur
Oldloves to your Father: Byth' Mass he is almost out on's wits for you.


Zech. Go Bandog; tell him we come, and Sir bid him get a Bottle of Claret,
and a Neats Tongue ready -- Go -- Brother come, cheer up: Pox ont, a Rencounter
is nothing when thou art used to it -- Prithee let us be merry --


Tob. If this Man had not come to disturb us, I could have been very merry --
Udshash I could have beaten the Woman into a Jelly; but no matter, Time and
Experience shall mend all.


[Exeunt. Scene 2.
Enter Madam Fickle and Silvia. Fick. Is he come! give me the Glass.


Silv. Yes Madam, and I Have led him into the Parler. I protest he is a handsome
Man, and one that in my opinion little deserves the Cruelty you intend him.


Fick. Call you Affection Cruelty?


Silv. Flattery in Affection is extremest Cruelty, I know you love him not: I
have heard you often confess it: and to possess him with a belief you do, and
at last dash his hopes with a denial, is a horrid Torture.


Fick I am glad he moves your Pity. Do you love him?


Silv. I commiserate his Fortune -- his love is a Happiness too high for me;
but good Madam, let me presume to ask the reason why you use all your Lovers
thus?


Fick. Well, in hopes to make thy diligence the surer, I Will tell thee why.
'Twas my unhappy Fate some three years since to fall in love,
To give away my Heart, and throw my self into the Arms of
One of mean descent -- and also slender Fortune: Yet had Destiny
So linked my Soul with his, that each kind glance
Shot from his darting Eye, me thought went through me.
I loved, nay and adored with so much zeal,
I could have died -- nay willingly been tortured:
I thought he could not wrong my Innocence; for then I
Swear I was so innocent I knew not what sin was;
Yet this deluding Wretch! this base Seducer, although
I slighted all for him, laughed at my fervent
Passion, scorned and left me, and when I thought his Heart
Was mine for ever, 'twas then most treacherous, and farthest
From me: Therefore I Have made a strict and solemn
Vow, on the whole Sex to execute revenge -- Flatter, and
Wheedle all I can, and ever.
To practice to ensnare -- but to love -- never --

Silv. The strangest revenge I ever heard; but I doubt not Madam in a short
time Love will alter your condition.


Fick. I Will venture that -- Go and Conduct him hither, and fetch thy Lute and
sing.


[Exit Silvia* SONG.
Beneath a Shady Willow near,
A Rivers purling Streams;
Astrea Careless of her Sheep,
With folded Arms lay fast asleep,
Possessed with Golden Dreams;
Her working faculties supplied, with drowzy sleep denied;
For often she would sigh, and smile, and grasp the Air,
Thinking her much-loved Celadon was there.
But as this sleeping harmless Maid,
Lay raped in silent Joy.
Possessing all that could be saught,
In setter'd sense or happy thought,
Her Swain came fishing by;
He eager of such rapting Bliss, awaked her with a Kiss,
She Blushing rose, and cried, unhappy Fate l
Ah Celadon thou now art come too late.
Enter Bellamore. Bella. Mirror of Beauty! Abstract of perfection,
Sweeter than Banks of Roses, and more
Glorious, than the Bright Empress of the Ruddy
Morn; when early Titan rises --

Fick. So early in your florid Vein my Lord. I thought that 12 at night had
been always your facetious hour: For Heavens sake no more of this. You Will lose
your self in these Hyperboles.


Bella. To lose my self in you -- were to find Heaven -- hah -- Gad

Me thinks I have expressed my self in as decent
A whining Method, as it is possible for a Lover to do.
Come! shall we abroad, my Coach is at door: Prithee let us to the Park, it is a
fine Evening.


Fick. No, I am obliged to stay at home to receive the visit of a Kinsman, that
sent word he would wait on me.


Bella. A Pox on Kinsmen! Gad we have other Business than to mind Relations; in
these Cases an assignation disappointed with one of them, is no more than the
telling of a Lie, or an ordinary Frailty; but to spoil an amorous Intrigue when
persons are not at all times provided, i'gad it is a most inhumane offense, and
merits condign punishment in the World to come.


Fick. Ay Sir -- but this is such a Kinsman --


Bella. Such a Kinsman? Why the nearer he is related to you, the better he may
stay: The cold business of Consanguinity is seldom tied to an hour, once a
week, or a month will serve the turn well enough; but the pressing affair of
Love brooks no delay. The minute must be watched that guides our Souls to
perfect Joys, and they who neglect are Fools.


Fick. Well, if Impudence be a Grace in a Lover, I swear, my Lord, you have as
large a portion as any one I know: What man but you durst contradict his
Mistress thus?


Bella. What Woman but you durst provoke a Lover thus? Nay one that is to marry
you; and consequently to have power to Tyrannize over you; To lie with you but
once a week, and then with an ill will too; To send you into the Country to
look to your Dairy; To keep a Mis in Town, and live three times beyond my
Estate, according to Custom.


Fick. It is not also in my power to be false? Is my Beauty so mean think you,
that no one would make Addresses? Lies it not in my ability to wheedle you into
a Belief of Love, and at last to forsake you -- assure your self it does -- but
Heaven knows I am too constant.


Bella. A Miracie in Nature! A Notion of so strange an extravagance, that the
very sound is incredible! Constancy in Woman is a second Maidenhead: It Is lost
e're they know they have it, and your Constitution Madam certainly tends that
way, and the Truth were known --


Fick. He little thinks how right he guesses --


[Aside. Bella. But since you are in so ill a humor, and are resolved to spend
this Afternoon here like a Turtle, solitarily in your Cage, I Will leave you, and
strive to divert my self with other Company: I have a Present here too. which I
intended to Dedicate to you; but to the Melancholy all things are di^^^stful.


Fick. A Neck-lace of Pearl! I must not lose that so -- use your pleasure, my
Lord. The Virtue of a Present seldom makes me fond of any Man's Company.


Bella. You think I warrant, this indifference becomes you extremely. That
modish turn of your head, and glance of your Eye, you imagine was infinitely
taking: But Madam, I am now in a more serious humor, and not to be fooled with
such Dilatory motions; so begging your pardon for my obstructing your Kinsmans
Visit -- I take leave --


Fick. Well! I am the very'st Fool. I swear, my fondness makes you insult over
me; another Woman would have made you comply, and be glad to ask her pardon;
but my good Nature makes you slight me.


Bella. No, this action has indeer'd my Soul to thee, and I am faster thine
than ever: Oh, I could live for ever in thy Arms -- feed on thy Lips, and
surfeit with thy Kisses.


Enter Silvia. Silv. Madam the Gentleman is come:

Fick. Unlucky minute! Sweet my Lord away;
I would not have him see you for the World.

Bella. The Devil blow him hence in a Whirlwind: I will obey you* but by Heaven
with as ill a will as ever Coward faught a Duel; but since it must be so --
adieu: Nay do not smile upon me; by the Lord I shall tire your Kinsmans
patience, and stay if you do. Farewell. A Pox upon him I say -- Farewell Madam.

[Exit.
Fick. So, there is one dispatched. I was fain to tell him 'Twas a Kinsman, to
get him gone the sooner -- stay; this is my passionate Lover; one that Wooes by
Method, and speaks blank Verse. Now must I change my temper suitable to his
Tone, and speak in the same style: Let me see; When Sapho loved! Oh Heaven!
What throngs of woes oppressed her harmless Breast? Very well -- I have it
rarely. Now to my Posture -- This Book -- Languishing Eyes -- So -- And
necessary Handkerchief to wipe Imaginary Tears off -- So -- The Devil's in it if
this is not Melancholy enough. Here he comes.


[Sits at the Table. Enter Manley. Manl. Life of my Soul (...) bright Treasure
of the World,
Queen of perfections, and the best
Of all thy Charming Sex -- What Dismal Fate
Has caused this alteration? Why are thy Eyes,
Late the extremes of Glorious Light, now clouded?
Adding more trouble to the frighted World,
Than when the Sun Eclipsed threatens a Chaos.

Fick. Pardon my Frailty Sir: I have not learned the
Power to dissemble: Who could read
The hapless Fate of wretched Ariadne?
Hear Theseus falsehood, and the piercing Mones
Of a distressed Maid? By Love undone,
Left all alone within a Desert Isle,
And not pay Tribute of a Tear or Two to grace the story.

Manl. 'Twas a horrid act,
And I confess deserves it; but in us
That Love and Glory in the Passion, it is
Not fit Despair should Tyranniz*

Fick. Let them despair that merit no return,
My passion has been permanent.

Man. And mine
The truest Heart that e're obeyed the Dictates
Of Loves Imperial Power, from that hour
That first obtained my Eye the happy Object
Of your Perfections, my poor fettered Heart,
Proud of the Chains of such a Conquering Beauty,
Resolved to Grace the long wished Victory
With a perpetual Constancy.

Fick. And mine,
Blessed with the Pleasure of your Loves Addresses,
Grew proud of such a Fortune: Happy Celia
Would I often cry; if thou can purchase him,
Thy Race is finished, the abstract of all Love,
Virtue and Valor: Then with my Minds Perspective
Would I survey your Soul, and sigh, and covet:
Love to my sense such pleasing Motions brought.
That I was lost in my own various Thought.

Man. Sweet Creature! Oh my Soul how I adore thee!
The transport of whose touch has power to kill:
If I should visit often, speak sweet Charmer,
Will you be always true? always thus Constant?

Fick. Constant ^ Alas! What power have I to change*
When you posses my Heart.

Manl. My Soul!


Fick. My Heart!


Manl. My Life! My Vital Spirits! Oh Heaven I fool my self in too much Love,
and dote on my own Happiness.


[Kneels and kisses her Hand. Fick. He Is finely caught! Wit, where art thou now?


Manl. Eiring Philosophers that Knowledge praised
Above the Bliss of Women, Women, Delicious
Women, Women the
Quintessence of Nature: Heavens Treasures
Framed to enrich Mankind, and make 'em Deities:
Travel fond Cynick through the spacious Globe;
Dive through the Sea. Thence through the Airy Region
Soar, to find out new pleasures; and at last,
When thou have known the Joys of Earth and Heaven,
Believe with me it terminates in Women.

Enter Silvia. Silv. Madam your Kinsman is below, and desires the favor of
your Company.


Fick. Unfortunate Minute; for Heavens sake Sir begone: I am undone if he sees
you. Hark! he is coming up.


Manl. Was ever Fate like mine -- Wear this Sweet Creature, and remember me --


[A Ring. So! adieu Divinest, Sweetest, Kindest! O Heaven!
Must I begone? --
Exit Manley. Fick. Ha, ha, ha; I think I did it to the life! Silvia, did
thou hear our Court?


Silv. Yes Madam and I swear I pity the poor deceived Gentleman,


Fick. Pity him, prithee talk no more on it: but who is that below?


Silv. The Young Brisk Gentleman that fell in love with you yesterday; he that
your Ladyship gave the Song to.


Fick. Tell him I Will come to him.
[ Exit Silvia. Now for a Brisk Airy Humor to agree with the Temper of this
Fool.
This is the most easy Fop of all my Pretenders.
There needs no Net for him; his own actions are
His best Betrayers. The other two I confess have
More wit: But what then? Love makes a Dunce of a
Councellor, and their fondness proves as prejudicial
As to others folly. O Men! Silly Men! That fettered with
A Smile, forget the Business of their Creation; the Motives
Of their Honor; and the safety of their Country -- Thus
Far my revenge is prosperous; and I Will forward. My Panthers
Breath shall draw em to the Snare; my Tongue shall
Charm; my Smiles kindle Loves Fire in their amorous
Souls, till they are scorched severely; then forsake 'em
Whilst in my Breast, my Heart obdurate Flint
Shall hear, and yet not pity.
Thus all shall know that were like me refused,
No Serpent like a Woman when abused.

[Exeunt. Finis Actus Secundi
ACT. III.
Scene 1.
Enter Sir Arthur Oldlove (ridiculously dressed, hung with Medals) Tilbury,
Jollyman, Dorell. [A Table with Scull, Sword, Vial, Shooing-horn, Box and
Picktooth, cum caeteris. Sir Arth. SIR, it is no matter what the World thinks.
The World think? why let it think, I say once again; it is such as we redeem lost
time from its Chaos of Confusion; Is there any thing more pleasant than
Antiquities? The knowledge of the distinction of Ages, or the deeds and manners
of the Ancient, I say is there any thing more pleasant? -- Oh happy Romans that
took this into consideration, for my own part I am nothing, a man of Ignorance,
a mere Reptile in these Rarities.


Ioll. Every man in his humor, and let the World rub; Appetite and Fancy are
two great Monarchs that sway Mortality, and hang pinching, udsbores it is fit
they should be satisfied; but good Sir Arthur, what are these? Doubtless these
are Rarities too.


Sir Arth. Right Sir, and such Rarities, that were their worth valued, the
West Indies were too small to purchase them.


Tilb. I warrant this has been some Princes or great man's Scull, 'sbodikins he
looks still with the face of Authority.


Sir Arth. Fie, fie, Sir, your Hat on: This Relic should be touched with
reverence, but your ignorance must excuse all -- Pray stand a little back* and
give attention -- This Scull, this noble prudent politic Scull, once belonged,
or as I may more properly say, was pertinent to the Body of St Gawaine, a
Knight of the round Table.


Tilb. St Gawaine! A Dutchman, was he not? I believe I know some of his
Relations.


Sir Arth. A Dutchman! oh insupportable -- Sir, did you ever know a Relic
made of the Scull of a Dutchman? No, he was a Britain Sir, a hardy Britain, and
Nephew to the famous King Arthur of happy memory; and this Scull was late
resident in Dover Castle, brought thither by a famed Antiquary, whose name time
has outworn, and since purchased by me, to illustrate this City, amongst the
rest of my memorable Antiquities.


Ioll. Very well, Sir, proceed.


Sir. Arth. And this here is the famed Hero, Sir Lancelot du Lake's Sword.


Tilb. I Will warrant this has been the death of many a Constable; but methinks,
Sir Arthur, the Rust has been a little too bold with it.


Sir Arth. Ah Sir! Rust adds to an Antiquity, it is our Friend: And we that are
skilled in these matters, can by the Rust on a Sword tell how long it has been
durable.


Ioll. Hang pinching, 'twas well discovered; I see a man may live and learn,
though he be never so old, good Sir, forward.


Sir Arth* This here is a Shooing-horn, d'mark me -- Hats off still -- pray
observe it -- a Shooing horn --


Ioll. It Is so --


[Call Servant. Sir Arth. This Shooing-horn, Gentlemen, the first that ever was
invented, was, with reverence be it spoken, the necessary implement of the
Queen of Sheba, and left by her careless Chambermaid at Jerusalem, after her
visit to King Solomon.


Tilb. By St Iago an admirable discovery, 'sbodikins who would have thought so
much ancient Honor could depend upon a Shooing-horn.


Ioll. Very strange! very strange! by St. Iago, as you say; but the stranger
the merrier, the merrier the better company, and so hang pinching, let the
World rub.


Sir Arth. This is the Silver-box that Nero's Beard was kept in; 'twas in the
Vatican 300 Years, and lately presented to me by a Friend of mine, a man of
great authority in Rome.


Tilb. Somewhat like a Tobacco-box --


Sir Arth. No comparisons, good Sir, but observe, this is the Rubbing-Brush of
Silvius Otho, and this the Picktooth of Heliogabalus.


Ioll. Carefully preserved from the ruins of time, To grace your Study, Sir
Arthur.


Sir Arth. Lastly, this last -- though most precious and best of all my Relics;
this Vial is full of the tears of St. Ierom, in former Years pendant upon the
Spire of St. Sepulchers Steeple; but by my indulgent care and great charge
redeemed from thence when the City was on fire.


Tilb. A thing of moment, Sir, and worth your diligence.


Enter Servant. Serve Sir, there is two Gentlemen below desire admittance.


Tilb. Sbodikins my sons, my sons: Sir Arthur, I ordered them to come hither,
that they might see the Ladies you writ me word of. Friend show 'em the way up
--


[Ex. Serve. Sir Arth. You did well Sir; Dorell, go see if my Niece be at
leisure, and bid my daughter come hither.


[Ex. Dor. Ioll. Ay, ay, come, hang pinching, let us see the Lady, let Women
make up the Consort, and then let the World rub, there is mirth and frolic
in it, but without Women, udsbores it is prolix, it is impertinent, it is every
thing ill, and nothing well; hang pinching, Women, Women, I say.


Tilb. Well said 5-and-50, by St. Iago thou grow'st young again, you are a very
Boy.


Ioll. Not frozen, not frozen, heart whole, and warm enough to keep out
Weather; udsbores, when I was 1-and-20, I was the sprightly'st Fellow -- I
could have sung and danced, and leapt and jumpt -- hey troll -- faith -- but
it is past now -- however I am sound -- hem -- not so old, but I am a jolly man
still, and hang pinching, let the World rub.


Sir Arth. Well, I say still, there is nothing so becoming as Gravity.


Enter Zechiel, Toby and Flaile. Tilb. Zechiel -- my Boy -- how do thou --
kiss me sir -- s'bud I am glad to see thee -- they tell me you are grown an
arch Wag -- hah -- how now! what Metamorphosis sir! where got you them
Clothes?


[ To Tob. Tob. Now must I give him a private Item, or this ignorant old Fool
will disgrace me before all the compay.


[Takes him aside. Tilb. Oh! are they so Sir? Well, God give ye joy:
But Zechiel, prithee, what News in Town?
Do thou thrive -- hah --

Zech. Thrive! there is a Salisbury question already; upon Honor, it is pity my
Father was no better bred: Sir, the nourishing facundity pertinent to our
sphere, has bestowed a better Talent on me than can be possibly acquired by
Fortunes donation, and therefore -- Noble Sir Arthur, I sue to kiss your hand
-- I was so buried in my Fathers Caresses, that I protest my eyes were Traitors
--


Sir Arth. Sir! I hope you and I shall have a nearer affinity and knowledge of
one another ere long.


[ Tob. surveys Sir Arth. Clothes. Tilb. By St Iago my pains were ill employed
else! Why I came to Town for that purpose --


Sir Arth. But where is your Brother Sir?


Zech. Here Sir -- taking a particular view of your Habit -- Upon Honor Sir
Arthur, methinks your Clothes are not made according to Mode.


Sir Arth. Mode -- ah good Sir, no more o'that, no Modes I beseech you: my
Habit is the Mirror of my Mind, little do you know the value of this outside:
Sir, in brief, it is more than the Kings three Dominions can purchase.


Tob. Udshash! I Would like to have spoiled all, I took him for a Morrice-Dancer.


Sir Arth. To display my meaning more plainly Sir, this Medal was the Badge of
Peace 'twixt Scanderberg and the Turks; this was the Doublet of Gustavus
Adolphus; and these Breeches, renowned be the tattered Linings, were the
Breeches of Pompey the Great; he was called Pompey the Great, by reason of
these great Breeches.


Ioll. Peace be to the ancient Cobwebs betwixt the seams; Sir Arthur, your
Servant, I must go seek my son: Odsbores here is the Lady -- Ill stay a little
longer now, and let the World rub --


Enter Constantia. Sir Arth. How now, where is my Niece?


Constable. Gone to the Park Sir, with my Lady Arbella.


Sir Arth. Park! What without my permission? Passion of me, I shall have her
stolen. Huswife, this is your fault, you are still prating to her of the
pleasure of Intrigues as you call 'em; Well, these new damnable Customs utterly
undo the Nation.


Constable. Sir, I am not her Guardian, though you are; nor do I think it a
particular of my duty to pry into her actions.


Ioll. This certainly the Lady Hurry told me of, udsbores a merry Mushrum I Will
warrant her.


Sir Arth. Well, since it is so, we must practice patience, and Mr Tilbury it
shall be my care hereafter to have her ready for your sons addresses -- in the
mean time, pray Daughter know this Gentleman, whom I have elected for your
Husband [Zech. hides his face, and goes backward.] And let it be a mark of your
duty to use him kindly. Come, Sir, along, along -- a young brisk Fellow, and so
backward -- fie.


Zech. The very same Woman I affronted in the Mall* What shall I do, she will
discover me.


Tilb. Why how now sir, what flinch, recreant, dastard -- Bodikins thou art a
disgrace to the Family; the Tilburies have been good Holdersforth for above
this 90 Years, and shall they now be dashed like a Knight at a Bear-bating; for
shame to her, to her again I say, by St Iago Ill cudgel thee forward if thou
do not.


[Toby breaks the Vial. Sir Arth. Mercy a'me, what is that?


Tob. No harm, no harm, only a little Vinegar Bottle, an accidental Mischance,
as I hope to be saved Sir Arthur.


Sir Arth. How! the Vial! oh Heaven the Vial! What St Ierom! St Ierom's tears!
oh Hell! Fate! Death! Destiny! I Am undone, lost, ruined for ever -- the Vial*
St Ieroms tears spilt, the Holy Relic spoiled; oh I am miserable, oh
insupportable loss. Out of my doors thou Varlet: away; I abominate thee, detest
thee, and thy whole Race for this deed, away; I say, St Ierom! St Ierom! oh
dismal accident!


Tilb. Good Sir have patience, I Will make restitution.


Sir Arth. Patience! Restitution! 'sbud both the Indies cannot do it: Had thou
burnt my House, murdered my Wife and Daughter, stolen my Plate, any thing but
this, I could have forgiven, but to disoblige St Ierom, St. Ierom; O
insufferable! insufferable! it is a capital crime, and not to be forgotten! --

[Exit.
Tilb Sir, this is your unlucky hand. Come, we must go and comfort him, he will
run mad else --


[Ex. Tilb. Jollyman. Constable* So I hope this accident, and my Fathers anger,
will be a means to keep me from the future impertinences of this Fop. Lord! how
you look, Sir. What Is the matter?


Zech. Nothing, Madam: only a little troubled at my Brothers late miscarriage,
and the disturbance of the Company.


Constable. You may repair that inconvenience in the Mall to night Sir -- there
will be variety.


Zech. A pox on her, she has discovered us! Well, Madam, I guess your meaning;
and, though my behavior expressed a little too much the freedom of the age.
That I can give my self this satisfaction, That I did nothing but what was
Courtly, and like a Gentleman.


Constable. A Gentleman of the first rate I grant, Sir; that is, an insignnificant
Squire, whose addresses are so formal and common* that your Fleetstreet
Prentices have better, whose head, hands, and body are diversely employed in
fashioning a bow; and, when he speaks, he might be called a walking Bagpipe,
being obliged to his nose for gracing his utterance.


Tob. Nay, if you talk of Noses, here is a Nose, and udshash, under the Rose,
another manner of Nose than yours is, if you go to that.


Constable. Suitable to the owners person, I confess; and were my judgment asked in
this particular, I should guess your Nose and Understanding to be much of a
length; only there is this difference, your Nose is more visible, but both
very equivalent to your person and behavior.


Tob. Madam, let me entreat you to be so much your own friend, as not to
question my behavior. The shame will be yours, if you do, I assure you that --
'Sbud, I knew how to behave my self, before you knew how to -- (mum, I had like
to have spoke it --) to discern behavior.


Constable. Your brisk air, bone Meine, and gentile garb expresses it, Sir. You are
the exact picture of your Brother there: Nature drew you from its Copy. And,
Sir, she has furnished you, as the World may see, and you your self doubtless
imagine, with all graces pertinent to your Sex: but we are seated in so
relentless an Air, that I protest I am blind to your perfection, and you appear
to me a very ordinary person, considering the advantages you have of
Impertinence, Impudence* and good Clothes. What your Brother may be in my Lady
Fickles eyes I know not: but if she desires his Company as little as I yours,
we shall both sleep without dreaming.


Call Jollyman. Zech. Damme, I Will be gone. This eternal fleerer will jear me to
a Consumption -- Come Toby, let us to the Tavern, and rore to night: I Will
warrant thee I Will procure a Couple of Females, that shall be good Company, and
glad of ours -- This is the most everlasting Repertee -- Ounds, she has given
me the Griping of the Guts in studying an Answer -- Come, come away.


Tob. Will, I am certainly the unlucky'st fellow in the World: Why should not I
be now as witty as thee? -- but only Natures a son of a Whore, Destiny's a
Slut, and Fortunes a Bitch; or else Men had had predominance in talk, not
Women: well, the Devil will have them for it one day, that is my comfort.


[Exeunt. Constable. Hard fate of Women, that bestow your hearts where is no
return: and that often hate such as love them. If Manley knew I loved him, I
question the success, and yet without a hazard nothing is perfected. I wonder I
have no Answer of my Letter. I Am sure he had it: but I must have patience, I
expect the event, as time gives opportunity.


Enter Jollyman. Ioll. Your servant Lady. Your Father's in an extravagant rage
yonder about breaking his Viniger Bottle. His Relic, as he calls it. Nothing
can pacify him. He swears he will fill another with his own tears, and never
stir abroad till it is finished.


Constable. It Is, what pleases his humor, Sir. I hope he has gained so much of
time to satisfy himself in every particular, without disgracing his Quality,
or reproaching his years.


Ioll. Prettily expressed that: Udsbores, Madam, you speak well, pithy, and to
the purpose. My Son Harry has a Love-intrigue with a Lady that lodges in this
house, and pardon my presumption, at first I thought you to be the person.


Constable. No Sir! I am not the person; and, because I am loath to see good Nature
abused, I Will tell you a secret. Therefore know, this person your Son loves is at
this time engaged to twenty besides this old Gentleman's son you saw here.


Ioll. How! Twenty pretenders!


Constable. At least, Sir: all which she wheadles for revenge or profit, without
the least design of Love or Marriage: for to tell you the truth, Sir, (however
secretly she carries it) she is married already.


Ioll. Why then my Son is wheadled.


Constable. Very near the brink of a precipice assure your self.


Ioll. I Will go instantly and disingage him: This was a lucky discovery, my Son
gulled: no, my Caution shall secure him from the danger, and then let the World
rub.


Constable. Sir, I had not presumed to so free a Relation, had I not known how
nearly it concerns you, who bear an estimable Character amongst the greatest
Grandees. Sir, I beg your pardon, I must visit my Father.

[ Ex. Constance.
Ioll. Udsbores, a Woman of pretty parts, and methinks of an excellent humor
-- hah -- old Harry, not so old yet but such a Nut may be cracked: but more of
this hereafter. Now to my Son. I Will get his neck out of the Noose, and then
follow my own Designs as occasion serves.

[Exit.
Scene 2. Covent Garden, Letter.
Harr. Melancholy is either the dregs of Sickness or Love, and may properly be
termed the poison of life, and the odium of Society; for a Man of Wit that is
melancholy, and says nothing, is in my opinion as unnecessary a Creature, as
a man that wants wit, and says every thing.


Man. I have as few pretensions to Melancholy as to the Wit you speak of; the
one disagreeing with my Constitution, and the other surpassing my Capacity.
It Is true, I am somewhat troubled at the receipt of a Paper here, which is the
reason my face is not dressed in my wonted air: but I think 'twill hardly induce
me to be very melancholy.


Harr. A paper! prithee, What is it a Challenge?


Man. No, Sir, I have good fortune seldom to look on such Missives as
Challenges with a clouded brow, It Is a Letter from a stranger that knows my
Amors, and takes the confidence upon her to ^^ll me here, My Mistress is the
most inconstant of Women.


Harr. I Will lay my life a malicious design of some Jilt or other, that intends
you for her particular use.


Man. The Letter discovers some affection in the Writer: but my thoughts can
never carry me to a belief, it can come from any of my former Mistresses: for I
know none of them is acquainted with my present Intrigue -- here, prithee read
it.


Harr. IF your Sex had as great a value for sincere affection, as for inreads.
constancy, you would not be so ignorant of your present condition, nor cherish
a Serpent that delights to sting ye; I mean your Mistress, h, to my knowledge
hates ye, as much as another loves you, whom your self-willed indifference has
made miserable.

I confess this is Mystical: yet carries a greater resemblance of truth, then
first I imagined.


Man. An Oracle by heaven: and the Devil is so cunning, that with imaginary
doubts, it adds an intolerable addition to my misfortunes.


Harr. It Is certainly a general plague, pertinent to all Mankind, for I have a
Mistress that I mistrust too, and were she not extremely obliging when I am
with her I should be more dubious: for I never come to visit her, but some
Kinsman or other comes to interrupt us: so that certainly she must have a World
of Relations, or else I have this Misfortune, to come just at their hours for
business --


Man. My fate to a tittle: by heaven just so I am tormented. I am scarce yet
within doors -- but I am molested with some Uncle or other.


Harr. She calls her self Cleio, one of the Muses; and to pursue that humor, I
went to visit her last night, and engaged three or four friends to entertain
her with a Dance, where we were fain to stay an hour ere we could get
admittance.


Man. I hope at last your patience was well rewarded by her kind acceptance of
your gallantry?


Harr. Indifferently: she appeared! to be very merry, and expressed a graceful
thanks for the Diversion I gave her; for, the Truth is, I accosted her in this
manner, the more to endear her to approve my passion: I having that very
morning spoke with one, that ignorantly confessed, his Father brought him to
Town, upon design to Marry her.


Man. That was a lucky discovery. I hope you was not idle in your endeavor of
supplanting him --


Harr. No gad, I did make the best on it I could: for I went instantly to her,
and with the best Rhetoric I had, endeavored to weed the Fool out of her
thoughts: 'Twas fortunes bounty also to me, to find her at leisure, and alone;
for had her Guardian Uncle, Sir Arthur, been at home, it had been impossible
to have had any access to her.


Man. Who, Sir! Who? pray that last again.


Harr* Sir Arthur Oldlove. The Antiquary here in Bridges-street, she is his
Niece, a Widow, an approved fortune.


Man. Hell and the Devil. The very same Woman I have so sighed for: but I see
he is ignorant that I am his Rival, and I Will get all I can out of him, that I may
have the more to upbraid her with: Well, Sir, you made a happy conclusion, I
doubt not she was kind without scruple afterward, hah --


Harr. By Heaven, kinder than I expected: she told me, I had the largest share
in her heart, and spoke the sweetest, softest things, 'twould melt a man to
hear. I presented her a pair of Diamond Pendants, which she unwillingly
received; and, as a Crown of my Courtship, told me at parting, she had just
before thrust away an impertinent Suitor, that came to make addresses,
purposely to make room for me.


Man. Very well. Dam her, she entertains a Legion: I Will visit her instantly, and
with the extremest sentiments of rage and jealousy, shower my afflicted
thoughts into her perfidious breast.


Harr. What say thou, was it not pleasant? what a pox not a word? methinks
thou do not relish my discourse.


Man. As well as a Rival can Sir: One that has the fate to follow the wheel of
your Chariot, whilst you triumph in Loves Empire: Hark'ee, for your further
satisfaction, this Woman you speak of is my Mistress too, the very same person
intimated in this Letter: one that I have Courted this six Months, and was in
hopes within a week more to have Married.


Heart. How, Sir, Married to my Mistress?


Man. Ay, Sir, to our general Mistress; for, as far as reason imbellishes my
judgment, I am apt to believe you, and I come but in the Rear of twenty more.


Harr. Now the plots unravelled: I begin to have a knowledge of the visitant
Kinsman that used to molest us.


Man. One of which I Am of opinion often usurped your shape: all will out at
last, Sir: And, I Am resolved I Will not rest till I Am resolved that I may be in a
capacity of revenging my self in the blood of him that dares usurp my right in
her affection.

[Ex. Manly.
Harr. Fortune was a damned Jilt to make me discover my intrigue, nay to my
Rival: The only man I should conceal it from. Well, I must not sleep in this
business: if she be false, my loss is the less: but, if constant,

My Sword my Rival's claims must strait remove,
Bravely he dies that Victim falls to Love.
[Exit.
Enter L. Fickle, Arbella, and Friendlove disguised. Arb. So much Beauty, and
so many attractive graces I know cannot want adorers: but, too many Lovers,
Madam, in my opinion, is like too much Money, The abundance of enjoying takes
away the pleasure of possession.


L. Fick. What you call much Beauty in Me, is so little, that this complement
you make me, argues, Madam, a defect in your judgment: and as to my servants,
which you call my adorers, they are so few, and those so meanly fettered, that
I am beholden to fortune more than Beauty, for the credit I have got in the
World.


Arab. Fie, fie; I swear yon wrong your self: your perfections are the general
discourse of the Town.


Fick. The Impertinence of Fops and Citizens -- a man of wit can find a better
subject.


Arb. I hope you think my Lord Bellamore a Wit; and, to my knowledge, you are
the only Saint he adores: a pretty man by Heaven, tall, strait, and well
proportioned, only a little vain, an intolerable Talker, that is his worst
fault.


Fick. Now is this, to my knowledge, a Lie of her own Invention, The monstrous
effects of envy and jealousy --


Aside. Arb. The happiness I wish you, you may guess in the contentment I shall
receive in seeing you so well married.


Fick. If constancy and immaculate affection may merit happiness, I doubt not
but to have as large a portion as another, but want of desert makes me suspect
the event, although I know he loves me -- This searches her --


Aside. Arb. Insufferable! confession! Oh I could kill her*


Aside. Fick. Happy chance! see yonder he comes.


Arb. I Will take my leave.


Fick. Oh fie! By no means, Madam, pray stay a little longer.


Arb. I will not for the World: Some other time I Will give you a reason. Till
when your humble Servant.


Enter Bellamore, as she goes out, meets her. Bell. Madam! the Parks unhappy,
so soon to lose the pleasure of your company.


Arb. Your ear my Lord --


Whispers. Fick. Here is certainly some plot contriving, her wheadling me and
whispering with him sufficiently declares it: and, by heaven, I Will search into
the depth of Magic, but Ill find it out; I am already sufficiently prepared
with arguments: and, the more difficulty lies in the matter, the better it is
often performed: hard shifts, and dangerous plots suit Women's Wits better than
dull adventures; and, whilst in tedious search dull men run on, armed by our
minutes thought, the thing is done.


Bell. To morrow, Madam, I will not fail -- Ex. Arb. now if you had so much
Divinity in you, as would amount to a scruple of Conscience, you would be in a
continual fear of future ill, for drawing me from the innocent conversation of
this Lady.


Fick. The innocent conversation!


Bell Ay, Madam. She Is a Soul-saving Creature, a female-Moralist, her discourse
is a continual Sermon, and has the same influence that an Ague has upon me, I
do so tremble.


Fick. I imagined it a kind of quaking Zeal, never durable an hour. Jack Manly,
thine, Dear Rogue!


Enter Manley. Man. What M^lancholly! qualmish! The sting, of a debauch last
night I warrant.


Fic. By heaven my to other Suitor. 'Twas happy I brought my Masque -- This
will disguise me --


Puts on her Masque. Man. In one sense you are right; for, Loves grand
influence considered nearly, is but a debauch, and we our selves the Parasites
that sooth it.


Bell. It Is so: and therefore why should men of honor, that practice the
Distinction, and know better, resent its treachery: Prithee, What is it, Jack?


Man. A thing of nothing, and yet every thing that could torment me! Oh that
dull appetite should make a Monarch of the slave of Nature, to tyranize over
that noble Soul that gave it first its being.


Bell. Dangerous resentments, by heaven, Jack: but, prithee discover, come, be
genuine.


Man* I received a Letter this morning from a stranger, skilled it seems in my
Amor, full of invectives against my Celia, especially of her inconstancy. This
I confess troubled me, for the reasons urged: it had some appearance of Truth,
and afterward conferring with young Iollyman, whose misfortune seemed to suit
with mine, he made so ample a discovery, that I found we were Rivals, and that
this false one Carest him more than me: and, in all probability, entertains
several others. This put me into so extravagant a rage, that had not my
curiosity of knowing the truth, tied my hand, my Sword had pleaded my interest;
I am going now to her Lodging to be resolved --


Fick. If he had seen me now, here had been fine work! How near are my plots to
discovery? --


Aside. Bell. Gad it is a business of importance.


Man. So much, that by heaven I am resolved to search it through.

Exit.
Fick. So! now will I instantly home, and persuade him, that all is false, and
only the motions of envy. Come my Lord, shall we go -- Dorel! bid the Coachman
come round to St. James's Gate.


Bell. What is that Fellow? I never saw him before.


Fick. Sir Arthur entertained him in his service to day to look to his account.


Bell. And, brush his antiquities -- ha, ha, ha.


Fick. Never was man so besotted: he dares not sleep o'nights for fear of
Thieves.


Bell. Dam him and his old Imaginations: Let us mind our own business: Come,
let us to the Mulberry Garden* I have not treated you this week: methinks we live
already as we were Married, not a word of Love in a whole Scene of Discourse.


Fick. It Is better in the Heart than in the Tongue; besides, from a Man of
quality, Love has so strange a sound: no, in my opinion, the Eyes are the best
Orator, and now and then the Serious Look, with a short sigh for a Prologue.


Bell. Thus! ha!


Fick. And sometimes the exalting the hand to the lip, with a short Kiss and
away.


Bell. Thus.


Kisses her. Enter Manley. Man. Now I consider better, I shall have occasion to
be punctual to an hour: My Lord, prithee lend me your Watch: hah -- blood and
death, What do I see?


Fick. Returned again! this was a Cursed trick of fate.


Man. Ungrateful Traitress! now I plainly see (all I have heard is true.)
Perfidious Celia: more false than Crocodills, that mourn the slain, and yet
delight to kill 'em: Do you not blush? Are you so armed with impudence, this
object cannot startle? yea, this beguiled object, that bathed his passion in
warm Tears of blood, and laid it at your feet, deceitful Celia.


Bell. Celia! What a mistake is this, by heaven my Friend's mad.


Fick. Now Wit assist me, or I Am lost. Mad -- Why do you not fee't? look, look
how his eyes roll; how pale his lips are; see how his Perriwig stares with his
wild passion; his hands and body tremble. Oh this Celia's a cruel Wretch.


Man. Ah, perfection of ill: Would you convert your infamy? Disguise your
falsehood in my shroud of madness? No, no; it shall not do. Madam, all shall
out, assure your self it shall.


Fick. So handsome, so well composed a man: Oh heavens what pity it is: run, my
Lord, run to the Gate, and call your Footman to fetch a Doctor! two hours in
such a fit will kill him.


Man. Stay, my Lord, and hear me -- I Will discover all -- This Lady --


Fick. Ah, delay not a minute, as you love his life!
Shreeks out. My Lord -- away, away.

Bell. Poor Manley, thou shall not dye for want of so small a Courtesy.

Exit.
Man. Well, Madam, What Is your design in this? What new plot is contriving?


Fick. Oh heaven! Am I thus requited? Sir, I never expected such an action from
you: Was there no way to augment my misery but this?


Weeps. Man. Your misery! Ha, ha, ha. Your misery! --


Fick. You know well enough that this is the person my Uncle designs to Marry
me, and that it is impossible for me ever to see you, if he knows you are his
Rival.


Man. Hah, this may be true; for he has formerly told me something of an
Intrigue like this: Well, suppose this true Madam, I am sure Mr Iollyman is a
person not interested in your Uncles favor, though in yours.


Fick. In mine! That an impertinent Serenader, only accepted for the Company's
sake he brought with him, should have the impudence to talk thus.


[Call Bellmore Footman. Man. He protested it to me a truth, and swore your
extravagant favor exceeded his hopes.


Fick. And you believed it: Well, I Will take care with whom I trust my heart
again --


[Weeps. Man. Ugh, I can hardly believe this; yet sure these tears are real, it
must be so -- Come, I do believe thee, forgive me Celia; and consider how
insupportable is Jealousy lodged in a Lovers breast.


Fick. If I had not hit of this Plot, what should we have done then? I warrant
you will not believe I love you yet.


Man. By this I do, thou have confirmed it in me.


Fick. He Will come back immediately, and I would not have him see you for the
World; therefore be gone, I Will expect you this Evening at my Uncles.


Man. I will not fail you Sweet, I am glad it happens thus.

[Ex.
Fick. Ha, ha, ha!
Thus with the snowy Veil of Innocence,
Contriving Women cover their pretense;
When Women weep, look, Gallants, for surprise,
For all deceit lies drencht in watery eyes.

Enter Bellmore and Footman. Bell. There Is a Coach ready at the Park Gate, how
now, where is he?


Fick. Ah! gone, gone, all my entreaties could not stay him, frighted, I
believe, at my naming a Doctor; I saw him cross the Mall, but in such a strange
posture, that caused both pity and admiration in all that beheld him*


Bell. Poor Jack, I see the fits of Madness are as sudden, as those of Love,
and commonly work the same effects, Fate keep me from the trial of it; for
Excess in any thing is a perfect torment, especially this Modish Passion we Men
so hunt after, and which is so generally admired, though conducing to Madness.
--

He that of Loves ripe Joys takes over measure,
Abates his Bliss, and loses half the pleasure.
[Ex.
The End of the Third Act.
ACT. IV.
Scene I.
Enter Sir Arthur, Tilbury, Jollyman and Friendlove, al. Dorel. Sir Arth. URge
me no more, Sir, you have my answer, my final and my punctual answer, I will
proceed no further in this business; nor shall my Niece join issue with a man
so wild, and so unfortunate: St Ierom's tears spilt, my treasure, my chiefest
treasure lost, a blessing which this forty Years we cherished, snatched from me
in an instant! oh unparalleld misfortune! I say, let him forbear my house.


Tilb. Well, of a Knight, and a Justice of Peace, this is the simplest man of
Worship I ever saw; good Sir, let it not so nearly concern you, you shall have
restitution, by St Iago I Will fell half my Estate, but Ill make you amends; What
a Pox, do you think I ll be ungrateful?


Sir Arth. Half your Estate! a pretty Proposition; 'sbud, Sir, the Grand
Signiors Revenue would not purchase a drop on it.


Ioll A very costly Liquor by Mahomet, I think that Turkish Oath sounds well --
hah -- *


Sir Arth. Old Oaths are not to be despised, Sir, therefore by Melchizedech,
which, I conceive, was well thought on, my resolutions fixed, your son shall be
a stranger to my house, my daughter is not for him, tell him so; 'zlid should
he come here, within a Week I should have my ancient Medals of the Romans played
off at Gaming-houses.


Tilb. Sir, upon my Reputation, he knows not what belongs to a Gaming-house;
alas Sir! You are ignorant of his Principles, he is Country bred, Sir --
Country Learning, Country Manners, and Country Wit; 'sbodikins he knows
nothing of the Town.


Sir Arth. But he may know every thing in time, Sir; and I Will harbor no person
within my doors, whose future knowledge is more dangerous than his present.


Ioll Udsbores a necessary Maxim.


Sir Arth. Trouble your self no more, Sir, my Will is my Law; and though I am a
Justice of the Peace and Quorum, I think my proceedings in this both necessary
and judicial -- My Niece is an Heiress, and there is great care required in her
bestowing; nor shall my Daughter match into a Family, when I give such evident
proofs of my dislike. Mr Tilbury, you, as being my old acquaintance, shall be
welcome to my house; but give me leave to tell you, my eyes are opened to your
sons folly, you understand me, I do not like their tricks Sir.


Tilb. Tricks Sir! -- I find it is you have your tricks Sir -- But by St Iago
Ill go Fee my Lawyer immediately, force shall compel what good words cannot
persuade; and I Have a Bag of old Harry-Groats have lay'n by me these twenty
Years, which I Will scatter amongst the Gownmen, rather than be thus abusd.

[Ex. Tilb.
Sir Arth Old Harry Groats! What pity it is so meritorious an Antiquity should
be so ill employed -- is he gone?


Dorr. Yes Sir -- just turned the corner of the street in so hasty and
discomposed a manner, that it argues him plotting some business of importance.


Sir Arth. Would he were here again. Now would I rather his son should have my
daughter, than that he should waste any of that precious money.


Ioll. Let it go, let it go, there is enough to be had in Lumberstreet: But, Sir
Arthur, to my present affair; since you have been so generous to deny him your
daughter, I hope my address may be successful.


Sir Arth. Troth, Sir, Hope is very necessary in this affair; and if you can
but hope my daughter will like your Person and Years, as well as I like your
Estate, your Hope will have as ample a Field to range in, as any man's I know.


Ioll. My Person and Years -- Why, Sir, it is impossible she should dislike it;
whatever my Years are, I assure you my Imagination is but One-and-twenty.


Sir Arth. But, Sir, in the space of a Week, the strength of your Imagination
will be worn away, and your Person will be left to the deliberate age of
Eight-and-fifty a month or two over.


Ioll. No, it is three-months under by my faith, Sir Arthur, and what, then?
With me it is an age of 21; Look in my face, Sir, observe how the blood mounts;
here, here is your Complexion, without art, fucus, or any thing -- * Then, Sir,
peruse my Person -- Hah -- I think I am well set -- Hem -- And as found as
another man -- Besides, I can talk well, walk well, and make Water well --
which, udsbores, is as provoking a quality as any man is Master of.


Sir Arth. Sir, in a young man I confess these are additions; but a man that
has the misfortune to decline into the vail of Years, were he really Master of
all this, would not get credit with the World, he would not be believed.


Ioll. Not believed! Sir, my actions shall give continual demonstration, I am
not in the Catalogue of your infirm persons; my Back, Sir, is strong, by Body
active; nor has my infirmity been so much my Foe, to abate any part of my
vigor: But I can Run, Wrestle, Fight, or Play a Game at Tennis with any Spark
in the City, and let the World rub. To confirm you, you shall see me do it --
(Not believed!) Udsbores you shall see me Ride the Great Horse, or jump over a
Stick for the King of England.


Sir Arth. Well Sir, I will consider on it -- in the mean time address your self
to my daughter; come, you shall sup with me: Dorrel, if any one ask for me -- I
am not at leisure -- be careful, and let no eye be Spectator of my Rarities
without my knowledge, come Sir --

[Ex.
Dorell manet. Dorell. The uncertain Dice of Fate thus far runs well, and my
designs are prosperous -- My disguise, shroud to my troubled mind as well as
person, secures me yet from knowledge; and my eye attains the liberty to gaze
at all her actions, and yet pass undiscovered -- Oh cursed Jealousy, how
crooked are thy paths!


Enter Bellamore and Arbella. Bell. Unconstant, and to me! by Heaven it is so
strange a Notion, that methinks it is incredible.


Arb. And why incredible? Lord how you Men are deceived in your opinion! Your
term your selves Princes and Lords of Nature, imagining the easy tempers of
Women slaves to your nobler quality; and yet for all your pretenses, to my
knowledge some of you are often mistaken.


Bell. Well, if she be false --


Arb. What then?


Bell. Why then she is damned, that is one comfort however; but Madam, this
extraordinary favor in you, obliges me in gratitude to a return. Shall I wait
on you to your Lodging, by Heaven I hate ingratitude? Come, Madam, what
satisfaction?


Arb. Such a question to a mercenary Spirit, might perhaps be accepted under
the Notion of gratitude, but you having a perfect knowledge of my quality, and
obliging temper, give me leave to tell you, my Lord, 'twas very unbecoming,
especially from the mouth of a Man of Honor.


Bell. I gad I mean it cordially, and if my service --


Arb. Hold, Sir, you are observd, yonder is Sir Arthur's Man from him, you may
doubtless learn the truth of all, my presence will be unnecessary, therefore
I Will withdraw -- So, I hope this will wean him --

[Ex.
Dor. This is one of her Suitors, now for a new discovery, and I Am resolved to
be prepared for him -- Your Lordships humble Servant -- *


Bell. Dorel, Come hither, I Have some business with thee.


Dor. It Is too much Honor, my Lord.


Bell. I long have looked on thee as on a Man above the common Pile of Menial
Servants; and since I know thee such, I dare request a secret from thy tongue
to me of great importance; Come, I Will bind thee to me in golden Fetters; shall
I trust to thee? --


[Gives a Purse. Dor. I am your Lordships Creature, and if my ability extend to
serve your Lordship, I am proud on it.

Sure he has not discovered me.


[Aside. Bell. I Will try thee instantly. The truth is, Dorell, I am grown
jealous of my Mistress, several Reports declare she is unconstant; and though I
do not positively believe 'em, yet Gad I must confess they trouble me; now I
know thou have a Catalogue of all her Suitors, and know all her intrigues,
prithee disclose 'em, am I the Man or no, or has she others?


Dor. This is so dangerous a point, my Lord, I know not how to answer.


Bell. Fear nothing, but speak to the purpose, I Will be so much thy friend, thou
shall not need to fear the frowns of any.


Dor. My Lord, there is one Mr Manley comes hither often.


Bell. So, who else?


Dor. And one Mr Iollyman; I heard her swear one night she would marry him.


Bell. Very good, prithee proceed -- oh perfidious Traytress.


[Aside. Dor. Now has he a fretting Fever on him. Several others there are my
Lord that visit her as Pretenders, but with what success I know not, one of 'em
I heard her appoint to visit her to night; and because your Lordship shall see
how willing I am to serve a person of so much worth -- Follow me, and I Will
place you, where you shall, unseen, hear all their Courtship.


Bell. Do that, I am thine for ever.


Dor. More than that, owes Tribute to your Bounty; Come my Lord --

[Ex.
Enter Manley and Constantia. Man. Can this be real, Madam?


Constable. True as Heaven;
I swear she is the falsest of her Sex,
Designing Love upon fallacious terms,
Without a spark of passion or desire
To possess him that Courts her --

Man. Perjured Creature,
Oh Heaven that Providence gave Man a heart
To lose in such Abyss of Treachery;
But, Madam, is there no ocular proof to be given of this?

Constable. There is Sir, and to that purpose I brought you hither; My Chamber
joins to hers, whence from a private Closet door you may hear all; one of her
Suitors is now with her, and by their discourse you may soon guess the truth of
her treachery; for doubtless 'twill be amorous enough, and very suitable to such
an adventure.


Man. O Dam her! Dam her! Is this her Constancy! Madam, the Debt of Gratitude I
owe you for this discovery, is so far above my present ability --


Constable. Good Sir, no more of that -- but follow me -- *


Man. All her feigned Caresses come to this! a Curse upon the Sex -- Madam, I
wait your leisure.


[Ex Ambo. Scene discovers L. Fickle in a Morning Gown, and Harry sitting. L.
Fick. And could you credit so ridiculous an Asseveration, knowing how tender my
Caresses have been to ye, I thought my actions might have given you sufficient
demonstration of my constancy.


Har. By Heaven I never doubted it, I confess I was a little surpised to hear
him say he was at the expense of a six months Courtship, and within a Week more
it was to terminate in Marriage. But now you have told me his intrigue with
Madam Constantia, I am very sensible of the mistake* --


L. Fick. Had I not told you, I Will lay my life you would have been jealous.


Har. No, no, 'Faith I should not -- jealous* -- I know I have no cause, thou
art the Heaven of truth, and in thy breast Astrea reigns and triumphs. Suspect
thy Faith, what Fiend could be so envious? I Will prove thy Constancy as firm as
Fate, and against all defend it.


L. Fick. So, I think I have carried matters rarely.


[Aside. Har. But, Madam, pardon me, if I presume to ask you why our interview
is to be thus in the dark?


L. Fick. It Is because Sir Arthur's coming often into the next Room, seeing a
Light here, will be very apt to come and disturb us.


Har. 'Sdeath -- I Have ignorantly left my Sword and Gloves upon the Table there,
which should he come in, would infallibly discover my being here -- I Will go
fetch 'em immediately. --

[Ex. Har.
Enter Nurse (with a Light) in a Morning Gown. L. Fick How now, what is the
matter?


Nur. Oh sweet Madam -- ugh -- I am so out of breath, there is the basest Plot
contriving --


L. Fick. A Plot! pritheewhat Plot?


Nur. Where Is the Gentleman? get him into another Room, or you will both be
discovered immediately.


L. Fick. How prithee? by what means?


Nur. Madam Constantia has watched you all this night, with an intent to betray
you; I saw her bring Mr Manley into her Chamber, I Am confident with design to
place him where he may hear the discourse 'twixt you and the Gentleman.


L. Fick. Manley brought hither by Constantia! her envy now is apparent -- What
shall I do Nurse?


Nur. Alas! I know not -- Fire the House, I think, and say you called him in
for help.


L. Fick. No, so dangerous a Remedy must not be tried -- Humm -- I have it --
Sit you down, and personate me, our Gowns are alike -- and in the dark there
can be no difference in Faces -- He Is in the next Room, looking for his Sword,
when he comes, feign my voice, and Caress him like a Lover; in the mean time
I Will go, and with a Counterplot deceive both Manley and Constantia.

Prosper designs, and by this Act I Will try
Which is the Witty'st False One She or I --

[Exit with the light. Nurse sits in the Chair. Nur. Well, I Have known the time
when I Have employed my self in such an Adventure with a better Will -- But
however I Will warrant I Will fit him with a Repertee -- I am not so old, but I can
Repertee as well as another, if occasion serve.


Enter Harry with a Sword. Har. It Is so dark, that igad I could hardly find the
Table. Where art thou my Dear?


Nur. Here my Dear.


Har. I have been often thinking on the products of time, and have often
wondered how they employed themselves before the Deluge -- When Love was like
the storming of a Castle attained by violence, not as now, with fair words,
address, and insinuation; Men were not then such Fools to kiss a Glove -- fall
on their knees and sigh -- igad they were wiser in those days --


[Kisses and embraces her. Nur. Fie, fie, I protest you are not civil -- Do You
know who I am --


Enter Manley (peeping) and Constantia, Constable. Do You hear 'em Sir -- They Are
yonder in the Alcove.


Man. I do Madam, and am sufficiently confirmed in her treachery; but hush --
let us observe.


Constable. Sir, Ill go and get a Coach to the Garden gate, that you may get away
undiscovered -- I think -- [Ex. Constan. This was well plotted --


Nur. I protest! methinks your carriage is too Licentious, and in my opinion
you treat me ill -- Your Love should still be clothed with a respect due to my
Youth and Beauty -- But I vow you are so wanton --


Man. Very well -- she will deny this anon --


[Aside. Harr. Can any ill arrive from so much Love, I swear there cannot,
Madam; your charms are engraven in my heart, and in my soul your virtues -- I
die when you are absent, and it is your influence that raises me from death to
newborn life, and makes me current from the dross of Nature.


Nur. Give me no cause to doubt what you have said, I then shall be contented;
but I protest you Men are so subject to flatter, and we poor tender young
creatures are so apt to believe, that it often proves very prejudicial --


Man. She doubts his Love -- oh death -- I shall want patience --


Harr. To flatter thee -- by Heaven it is a thing so far from me, I hardly know
its meaning: Let Parasites, such as get Bread by fawning, flatter their
Patrons: Let the empty Fopp, that is sensible of some defect in Nature, and sees
the little beauty in his Mistress, flatter her to exalt it, but in me it would
appear a Crime unpardonable, your Luster wants no foiles; but like a Diamond in
his Native Rock, you shine without the aid of Art or Flattery.


Nur. Now by my quondam Maidenhead this is very pretty, well Sir, you shall
find my heart --


[Coughs. Man. And Lungs pray Heaven -- would she might Cough 'em out -- she
has caught cold with sitting up so late. Oh damned Incendiary.


[Aside. Harr. Could I live out Methusalah's long Age, or number Years with the
old Patriarchs, and every day study new Themes of Virtue, I could not merit
half so great a blessing; brightest of Women, fresher than the Dew that early
sits on Roses -- oh I Am rapt with my own happiness!


Nur. Well, as I Am Virtuous this is fine -- I see I shall not be able to hold
out long -- I shall grow bold with him -- I hope, Sir, my Love deserves this
from you, you have entire possession of my heart -- and though I have broke my
faith with all my other Suitors, I Have kept it firm for you.


Enter L. Fickle behind him. L. Fick. Sir, Sir!


[Pulls him. Man. Limb of the Devil -- I hear her Madam, I hear her.


L. Fick. You should not hear 'em Sir, pray come back, they are Lovers --


Man. Lovers, Dam 'em -- Have a little patience, I Will wait on you immediately
--


L. Fick. I Swear you're uncivil, Sir, thus to disturb them -- for heaven's sake
come away --


He turns back, sees her, and starts. Man. Wonder of wonders -- Is there two
Celia's -- or, Am I in a Dream?


Nurse. Yonder Is a Light -- Let Us step in here -- I fear, Sir Arthur's coming
--


[Ex. Harry and Nurse. L. Fick. What ailes you, Sir? For heavens sake why do you
stare so! Dee ye not know me!


Man. By Heaven I know not: Are you Celia?


L. Fick. What strange questions are these, You know I am?


Man. And, Is that yonder Celia too?


L. Fick. Heaven! What a humour's this? That Celia? No: it is a Lady that lodges
here, one that Mr. Iollyman Courts.


Man. Young Iollyman!


L. Fick. Iollyman? yes -- What do you wonder at? if this humor hold, you need
not counterfeit a Madness.


Man. By heaven you are right -- I am mad! stupid, insensibly mad: and have
been so these three hours -- 'Sdeath, Was ever any thing so strange as this?
sure I Have been enchanted; pray Madam give me leave to question ye, Where have
you been all this night?


L. Fick. In my Chamber -- Sir -- expecting you.


Man. Who told you I was here?


L. Fick. Constantia; I met her coming up stairs; and, seeing me, she brake
into a violent laughter; and asking her the reason, she told me, she had put a
pleasant trick upon you; and then fell a Laughing till she shook again.


Man. I'gad I have been trickt, that is the truth on it -- Oh the Devil* Am I
thus abused?


L. Fick. This from a Woman that loved ye, is very strange -- Who did you
expect to find?


Man. You -- she told me you was in that Alcove, and placed me to hear you --
where I have stood this half hour in the most insufferable Torture! the Agony
of jealousy and despair, that it is impossible to express it.


L. Fick. Me! Did you expect me there? and after all my actions, to declare my
unspotted constancy; Are you still jealous, ungrateful man? -- Was ever woman
so unhappy? Will nothing(...) Weeps* make you credit me! I Swear I am the most
unfortunate of Women! How has my Soul and Heart been fettered to you? How have
I dreamt of you, and thought a look to any other man was an offense to Love?
slighted the Oaths of Gallants -- shunned their presents! despised their
persons, and refused their gifts all -- all for you, And do you still suspect
me? -- Would I could be unconstant! would I had the power to be so, that I
might revenge my self -- Oh misery! still suspected!


Weeps. Man. If she be false, there is no such thing as truth: I Will credit it no
more -- Madam, I see my error, and thus low sue for pardon -- It Is my last
trial: and I will henceforth more adore thy virtues than ere I did suspect them;
Thou art the soul of Truth, so excellently good: Nature is proud of her great
work; nor will I ever be betrayed again into the gulf of jealousy, but live
blessed in thy love, the Prince of all content, and dye old in thy Arms.


Fick. You will relapse again.


Man. Never by Heaven -- by this kiss I Will never --


Enter Constantia. Constable. Come, Sir! the Coach --


Sees Fick. and starts. Man. May return again if it please, Madam -- your
servant, you see your plot han't took --


Ex. Man. and Fick. Constable. This Devil has outwitted me -- nay, in this plot,
which I thought so securely laid, it was impossible to break it. Her cunning is
so prosperous, that I believe Hell designs her for the only person to wheedle
Souls with:

I Will try once more --
And if my next plot hit not right, give over.
Ex. Constable.
Enter Harry and Nurse -- Bellamore after. Bell. Here they are. I have from
yonder door, now too late, resented her treachery -- Dam her! was mine a heart
to play with? Was there not Fools enough to feed with hope, but she must fly me?
-- but I ll revenge my self immediately --


Harr. Here Is some body coming toward, let us retire my Dear.


Bell. Sir! I have a Message first --


Strikes him. Harr. Such Messages are thus to be returned.


Draws and fights. Nurse. Ah help, help! Murder, murder -- help, help --


Enter L. Fickle with a Candle. L. Fick. What Is the matter Nurse? Oh heavens my
Lord Bellamore! and Mr. Iollyman! How came you hither at this time of night?


Bell. 'Sdeath! What a mistake is this -- Have I fought for this pippin?


Looking amazedly at Nurse. Harr. Zounds! Have I bestowed all my Caresses and
Courtship to night upon this Beldam?


Nurse. Well, Sir; I shall find a time to requite your favors for all your
jesting.

Ex. Nurse.
Bell. Gad, I thought it had been you Madam --


Harr. And so did I by Heaven. I durst have sworn 'twas her voice.


Bell. Your thoughts were ill employed, Sir, in a thing that so little concerns
you: I hope you have no pretenses here.


Harr. How, Sir, no pretenses! Has any man? --


Fick. 'Buz: 'Sdeath are you mad! why this [Stops his mouth. is the person my
Uncle designs me to marry --


[To Harry. Bell. Nor is this boldness pleasing, Sir.


L. Fick. My Lord! for heavens sake what do you mean? Will you ruin all -- This
is the very Gentleman my Uncle designs for my Husband -- and if he knows you
are his Rival -- I Am undone.


Enter Manley. Man. Come, Madam, Whither do you run? by heaven I Am so
melancholy -- without you -- have, my Lord Bellamore and Iollyman! 'Sdeath!
What new intrigue's this?


L. Fick. O Fate! Is he come too? What a spiteful minute is this? [Aside. Why
Sir! What do you mean? Do You not see my Lord there, unknown; To be he supt with
Sir Arthur to night, and has chosen this Minute to accost me -- Stare, stare!
counterfeit your self Mad, or we are lost: Then leave the rest to me. Pray,
Sir, to bed.

(Aloud this.) To bed. Fie, What mean you by this unseasonable rambling? Sir
Arthur will be very angry if he knows it. Stare! stare!


Bell. Jack Manley here at this time of night -- Hark'ee Madam, What makes him
here?


L. Fick. Sir Arthur seeing him in his mad fit, brought him hither to night,
with intent to administer a potion, which he had made for Lunatic persons;
and, it seems, they left his Chamber door open, and he is got out. Look! look
how he stares!


Harr. Gad, it is a miracle to me to see him thus -- I have often heard him say,
Love is the Parent of Dullness, and Wine of Madness. Madam, How came his
misfortune?


L. Fick. Love, Sir, Love. Passion for one Celia, a Lady in the Town here, an
obdurate, inconstant person I have heard -- and it seems she has wheadled him
into this condition.


Man. She shall be dressed in Flames! Pendants of Ice shall hang at either ear,
and cool her as she burns -- whiz -- buz -- shugh Bough -- she is gone, ha, ha,
ha -- Ah Celia! How sweet were thy amors? Dam her! she eats Onions -- and her
blew veins are all but colored Lute-strings, in which she hangs her Cupids,
Sir -- Sir, I would have your Nose pared less -- adieu, adieu pop -- Let me
hear no more on it --

Ex. Manley.
Bell. Had I not seen this* I should have thought it incredible, a man of the
Town, and run mad for Love -- by heaven it is above the common rate of wonders,
and doubtless portends some visible Calamity that threatens the Nation --


Harr. Madam, a word with you.


L. Fick. No whispering, Sir; 'twill cause him to suspect us -- you know my
promise -- visit me to morrow morning, and then by an unexpected choice, I
shall declare the man I think most worthy of my Love,


Harr. Enough, I will not sail. I guess the night far spent, and in slaying
longer I may obstruct your rest: I Will take my leave, Madam, your faithful
servant -- My Lord, your Lordships devoted. He little thinks what pollicy's in
this --

Aside. Ex. Harry.
L. Fick. Now, Am not I extremely kind, thus to send him away, that I may have
the freer discourse with you? I hope you will say this is very obliging.


Bell. I confess it weighs somewhat more then a common favor; but, Madam, I am
not yet satisfied in his proceedings; his coming hither so late must be upon
some design: and, how that old Woman should interpose, is to me a Mystery --


L. Fick* Oh dull* dull man! Why do you not see 'twas by my plot? I ordered the
light to be taken away, and laid her a Bait for him, purposely to keep my self
free from his troublesome Impertinences --


Bell. Was that it -- by heaven 'twas a Witty one --


L. Fick. Was that it? What else could it be -- I wonder what recompense I
shall have for this care, in preserving my Love entire, I Swear my Lord you will
be ungrateful.


Bell. No: by heaven I Will heap together as much Love, and strong Imagination,
as would serve forty men: But, I Will be out of thy debt -- prithee do not
censure till the trial is made: I'gad I Am sure I never failed yet -- But, When
shall be the day?


L. Fick. To morrow, Sir! a sudden thought has so ordained it. Visit me in the
morning, where I suppose will be the rest of my Amoretto's; and you shall see
what sentiments of private passion my heart retains for you.


Bell. To morrow! I am rapt with the thought on it! To morrow.

Call up the Sun! black shades away;
Bid Phosporus go fetch the Day.
As my friend Cowley has it: Madam, I Will be as early as the Lark; nay, by
heaven, I Am very passionate! You see your Beauties power, Madam -- And, I Will go
and prepare my self --


L. Fick. And I Will go and think of my purpose.


Bell. Think on to morrow night -- A pox on purposes,

Ex. Bell.
L. Fick. You shall have reason to curse it when you know what purpose I mean
--


Enter Manley. Man. Are they gone, Madam.


L. Fick. Both gone, Sir, and full of different hopes -- I Swear the love I
bear you makes me commit strange frailties.


Man. Oh my Dearest; my heaven of love; How shall I recompense thee? My life's
service as nothing, if considered. When, when my Sweet?


Fick. To morrow, Sir.


Man. Happy accent!


L. Fick. You carried the plot so well, in counterfeiting madness,
That I were ungrateful, should I not recompense to visit
Me to morrow morning, Sir; and, by a happy choice,
Receive what you have so long sighed for.

Man. Oh Transport of Delight!
By heaven I fear I shall not live till then:
Excess of joy will kill me -- Best of Women:
Best, 'twas too vilely said, thou art so good;
By heaven thou art a Miracle -- and I
The happy man elected to possess it:
Till the morning comes I will employ my self,
In thinking on thy Beauties -- and then die,
In the possession of so sweet a Joy --
[Exit
L. Fick. Ha, ha, ha, ha --
That Heaven should give man so proud a heart,
And yet so little Knowledge -- Silly Creature,
That talks, and laughes, and kisses often that hand,
That steals away its reason; As if Nature --
Had played the Traitor, and seduced the Sex,
Without the aid of Destiny, or Women.
Ah! With what pleasant ease
The Bird might be ensnared -- Set but a wanton look
You catch whole Covyes: Nay, there is a Magic
Pertaining to our Sex, that draws them in,
Though in the Long Vacation -- And, by Heaven,
I Am resolved to work my sly deceipts,
Till my revenge is perfect (...)Thus far I Have done well,
And I Will persevere in the Mystery.
Wheedle them to the snare with cunning plots;
Then bring it off with quick designing Wit;
And quirks of dubious meaning. Turn and wind
Like Foxes in a storm; To prey on all,
And yet be thought a Saint -- Thus Queen I Will fit,
And Hell shall laugh to see a Woman's Wit.
[Ex. L. Fickle.
ACT. V.
Scene, The Street.
Enter Zechiel, Toby, Flaile, Jollyman, Linkboyes, and Musicians playing and
singing. Zech. HEy! rare Boys! rare Boys. Done like sons of Thunder:
True heirs of mirth and jollity, upon honor we have outdone
Example in our frollick to night, the Town shall talk of us,
With admiration, and call us Children of the night; The night,
The happy night. 'Pox of your day-debauches, the dull and insipid
Common-way of frollick. Give me the Night to roar in --

Ioll. 'Sbud, well said:
The night or nothing, I say -- Give me thy hand,
I love thee, Thou art a merry Wagg: I am pleased with it,
Udsbores I am. I thought I had a son here too,
But I see now he is grown a serious Rascal,
He never seeks good Company, such as thine is --
No matter, hand pinching, I Will be even with him,
And let the World rub.

Zech. Banter him, banter him Toby. It Is a conceited old Scarab, and will yield
us excellent sport -- go play upon him a little -- exercise thy Wit --


Tob. Not I(...)uds hash -- I had like to have had my head broke with his
Halbert just now, for going about to exercise my wit.


Ioll. Come, another Song, another Song my merry Wags,
And hang pinching, I Will make a third man -- hem --

SINGS.
And underneath the Greenwood Tree
This Youngster laid her down a,
And there he Kissed her once or twice,
Sing hey derry, derry, derry, down, a.
Zech. O brave old Signior -- Flail! Sir, Bimdog, what a pox dreaming. Sing
Sir to entertain the Company.


Flail. I Sing, Zing, What do you mean, Sir! I Sing! Lord save us: alas I canno
Sing, Sir, Ich was never so well bred.


Zech. Whistle then you Dog, do something for Diversion --


Flail. Whistle! by Coxbones I cannot whistle neither. Bless us, Must I never
go to bed -- Bless me from London, if this be the Trade.


Zech. Trade! Thou son of Assafaetida! call a Gentleman's divertive Custom a
Trade. Come, all hands, we will go Pump the Rogue.


Jolly. Ay, ay; a dull drowsy Rascal: Pump him I say --


Enter three Wenches. Zech. A prize! a prize! Petticoates upon honor;
Stand there! come before a man of Authority -- And why
Thus early my Lady of the Lake? Whither are you going.

1. Wench. To Hell* Will you follow me?


Zech. Not I, upon honor: There I Will leave you --


Tob. By your favor, Madam, What Is a Clock?


[To 2 Wench. 2. Wench. I am sorry the pawning your Watch, Sir, forces you to
Ask so necessary a Question --


Tob. Now will this damned bulking Queen be too witty for me;
'O my Conscience if I shall ask her any more Questions!
Uds hash! I Will even proceed to the Business, and say nothing.

Joll. goes to the other, and she slights him. 3. Wench. Fie, fie, Sir! an old
man and talk thus!


Ioll. An old Man! 'Sbud! You Are a Whore, an old man! Call a
Gentleman, in the midst of a night Debauch old -- Hem,
Hem -- Sound Lungs and Heart-whole -- old quoth a!

Zech. Come, upon honor, ye shall all to the Tavern with us, and
We Will complete the nights debauch with Credit: But first
A Song. I know you have your parts in the last new Verses,
Made of the Nights Ramble. It Is a part of your Function, a
New Song is as necessary for a Town Woman, as a Suit of Knots,
Or a new Gown -- Hey! strike up there!

SONG.
Happy the Man that takes delight,
In Banqueting the Senses;
That drinks all day, and then at night,
The height of Joy commences.
With Bottles armed, we stand our ground,
Full Bumpers crown our Blisses;
They rore and sing the Streets around,
In Serenading Misses.
Chor. With Bottles armed, etc.
Pleasures thus free and unconfined,
No drowzy Crime reproaches;
No Heaven to a frollick mind,
No pleasure like Debauches.
Whilst rambling thus, new Joys we reap,
In charms of Love and Drinking,
Insipid Fops lie drowned in sleep,
And the Cuckold he lies thinking.

Chor. Whilst rambling, etc.

Zech. Rarely done of all hands: come, now let us to the Tavern,
I am resolved to make a night on it.

Ioll. Well said, again, Boy. Toth' Tavern! toth' Tavern -- hah --
Merry Rascal -- hang pinching. 'Sbud 'thou'rt a brave fellow --

Tob. Come my little pignies, you and I will go and be drunk together:
Hey -- you shall see me perform rare exploits, in faith.

Tob. Nay, Gad, now my hands in, I shall pepper you with wit,
I feel it growing in my head like a Bunch of Parsenips.

Zech. Again! Igad pinch him again; but come, of this at the Tavern,
We lose time -- Strike up there -- Sing. Whilst rambling.

[Ex. singing. Enter L. Fickle in Man's Clothes, and Silvia, Dorel at a
distance. L. Fick. So, is all fit? prithee how do I look? may I pass for a
Bully of the first Rate amongst Dablers in the Mystery? how sit my Clothes?


Silv. Decently I swear, and well become you; you have as masculine an Air as
any Man, I mean any Man that has no more Beard than you.


Dor. This gives an end to my suspicion; the Plot's unravel'd, and my late
doubts have now their period --


[Aside. L. Fick. Away then, and be sure you miss not a tittle in the charge
I Have given you, but with a seign'd sigh, and a tear or two, tell Sir Arthur I
went away unknown to you, and supposing it to be discontent, relating to his
designs of Marriage; do this handsomely, and I Will come in person, and prosecute
the rest: This habit will, I am sure, disguise me, and I intend to invite my
self to another Banquet of Wit with the Suitors, ere I have done with 'em --
away -- a day or two's time will make all quiet -- and I shall be in readiness
for as many more.


Silv. Madam, I have my Lesson perfectly, and am so much your Creature, as not
to dispute your Commands.

[Ex. Silv.
L. Fick. Now am I in my opinion a second Machiavil, my Wit has finished Works
as strong and great as Hercules 12 labors! Oh I could hug my self for my
inventions -- they are so prosperous, as if Fate meant to make my Wit a Miracle
for Men to wonder at. To betray in me's a Virtue, being first betrayed. The
thought of which does like an eating Canker prey on my heart and vitals.
Therefore sweet Revenge Thou art my Darling. Thus I Will blind their eyes, It Is
on the neck of Wit Revenge must rise. --

[Exit.
Enter Dorel. Dor. Can this be true! oh Heavens what have I heard!
Is It possible she should be thus affected
To him that basely so deserted her?
If so I am a Devil, and my jealousy
The sin of all Corruption -- I Will redeem it,
Watch all her actions, and discover all,
Lest she should lose her self in her Revenge.
'Twas well I overheard her -- Happy day!
That does all former fears with Bliss repay.
[Ex. Dor.
Scene 2. The Street, a Tavern Bush hung out.
Enter Bellamore, Zechiel, Toby, Jollyman, Three Wenches and Musicians
drinking. Zech. 'Twas well my Lord your Valor interposed betwixt me and the
danger, by Heaven I had been stockado'd else --


Bell. I am glad Sir, Fate guided me that way, and made me capable of doing you
so good an office, pray how came your quarrel?


Zech. Why one of the Rascals would needs take the wall of me, nay, though I told
him in French I was drunk, and had a Whore with me -- Was ever such an
incivility? But I think I am revenged, for if I may believe my eye, my last
full Pass pierced his Diaphragma -- I Am sure I killed him.


Ioll. How, killed him! Not so, I hope, my merry Wag, not so --


Zech. Not so, upon Honor I am sure it is so --
Whoo -- Pox it is accounted nothing now in Term-time.
The killing a Man's no more looked on in a Nights Debauch,
Than getting a Clap in a Mornings Ramble.
The Town's full, the Town's full.

Tob. I hope the consequences are no worse than he makes 'em;
But udshah -- my heart goes a-pit-to-pat.

Bell. Though I hate this Fellows impertinence, yet for diversion sake I Will make
one in the Debauch to Night: Sir, bid the Coach go home, tell Raines I have
no occasion for him to Night. --


[To his Footman. Zech. Come Music strike up there, Damme' you sleepy Dogs,
Come, we'll have a Song and a Dance, hey -- Drawer.

Enter Drawer. Draw. Will you not be pleased to take a private Room Sir*


Zech. A private Pox Sir. [Strikes him. What I warrant you take us now for some
of your serious brood of Aldermen, do you Sir? But such another word, and I
shall make a private Room in your Guts for this Engine here.


Tob. Sir, you shall be hufft and cufft, and flip'd and kicked, Sir, if you
talk of private Rooms -- Now am I as valiant as a Hector, methinks I could beat
this Drawer into a Wicker Bottle --


Zech. Sir, as a Reprieve for Life, bring out the Butt, we'll have the
triumph of Bacchus to Night, my Lord you shall be Spectator; now of one of my
Frolicks, I invented it in Paris, for the benefit of all Lovers of the Grape,
and cherishers of Burgundy, and I hope you will speak it a faceti^us one; it is
called a triumph to Bacchus, my Lord.


Bell. A good Theme Sir -- worthy of your Wits invention; no doubt a great
piece of ingenuity. --


[Aside. Zech. Come my witty Devottees of Venus,
You must be assistant here.
[To three Wenches. Hey -- Drawer, where are you Sir?
Enter Drawers with an empty Butt. Come hither Toby, thou shall personate god
Bacchus --
Give him Wreath there -- and a Bumper --
Come, up, up, advance into the Throne --
[ Tob. gets on the Butt. So, now Ladies kneel, and pay obedience to your
Emperor --
My Lord, I must beg your Lordship to bear part in the Ceremony --
There on that side, my Lord --
Drawer give every one a Glass --
Flourish Music and drink --
Hey --

[Flourish, all drink. Tob. How do I present it, ha! methinks it becomes me
very well.


Zech. Look big, look a little bigger, you know the Effigy.


Ioll. By the Lord Harry I Will kiss thee for this, my Darling of the dark-Well,
I am resolved to disinherit my Son, and adopt thee -- hang pinching, I Will do it
Boy, and let the World rub.


Zech. Come, now to the Song -- and let all parts be ready for the Chorus.


SONG.
Bacchus thou mighty Power Divine,
Great God of Mirth, and sprightly Wine,
Behold us here that Kneeling show
The Duty that we owe --
We through thy influence rejoice,
And thus with free and cheerful voice
The Fame and Praises sing
Of Bacchus our great God and King.
Chor. It Is Wine, it is Wine, that still controuls,
And Fame and Love must both strike Sail;
There lies such vigor in full Bowls,
The Fate of Princes cannot prevail.
The Wreaths of great Heroes his Altar shall Crown,
Whilst the Grave and the Prudent bow down.
When Beauty darts a smiling Beam,
Our Souls are (...)by Loves extreme;
But one brisk Glass takes Care away,
And yields us back the Prey:
No Fate of Love or piercing Dart
Can wound when Wine surrounds the heart;
Still guarding it from Care,
It baffles Fate, and slights the Fair.

Chor. It Is Wine, it is Wine, etc.

[Dance. Ioll. Spark, let me embrace thee, 'udsbores thou art the Mirror of our
Age, and have the best principles of English Gallantry I ever saw -- Ah would I
were but 5-and-20 for thy sake -- but come -- hang pinching -- it is well it is
no worse, as my friend Hearty says --


Zech. What think you my Lord? is it not Modish? -- by Heaven it is new, that is
one good property, and I believe 'twill take very well.


Bell. Sir, if you will take my opinion in this business, I think it an
excellent Invention, and were I you, I would have Books printed, that the World
may not be ignorant; 'igad you have this encouragement, the Press has been
troubled with matters of less consequence.


Tob. I tell you I have 200 l. a Year, I Have my Lands free and unmorgag'd, and
am resolved to keep a Miss, according to the Mode, therefore speak now, or for
ever hold your peace.


1 Wench. But which of us would you have Sir?


Tob Either of you -- Udshash I Am a right Country Squire, any thing will serve
my turn, if the properties be not wanting -- What Is your price? --


1 Wench. Why in truth Sir, I have had 40 s. a Week, but in kindness to a Man
of your Complexion, I Will abate a Crown.


Tob. My Complexion! ah wheadling Queen --


Ioll. Come Sir, Drawer fill each his Glass. Hey -- Let the World rub, and
let us have the other Song.


Enter Flaile. Fla. Zong quoth a -- Lord zave us a Zong -- pray, pray good
folks -- pray -- oh, oh --


Zech. How now Bandog* what makes you howl thus? ha!


Fla. Howl! by Coxnowns you will howl too, if you stay longer; you have killed a
Mon yonder, he that you quarreled with about your Crack there, 'slid she have a
good mind to crack her for it, and God save his Soul they think he is dead: The
Constable, and a Regiment of Beggars, I mean Bilbo's, are searching for you,
and just coming up the street, uds-diggers up you go, if they can catch ye. Oh
that ever the ancient Family of the Tilburies should come to such disgrace!


2 Wench. Nay then, this is no time for Merchandising.


[Exeunt Wenches. Zech. Malicious Fortune, Heaven what shall I do, if I am
taken, I shall certainly be hanged?


Bell. Pox, not for killing a Man in Term-time, Sir, you know the Town's full.


Ioll. Hanged! Heaven defend, my merry Wag, is it come to that? Hanged!
Gentlemen your Servant, I Have a little earnest business. --


Bell. Nay, Sir, leave not your Friends in adversity, for my part I Am resolved
to stick to it, if we are hanged. --


Tob. If we are hanged quoth a? Ah Lord! the very word has put me into an Ague.


Bell. If we do miscarry Sir -- why let the World rub as you say.


Tob. Ay, ay, you need not fear, you are a Lord, you will come off well enough,
it is we shall stretch for it; udshash nothing vexes me, but that I cannot stay
to perform my bargain with Mrs Juniper there.

[A noise without. Hark, they come, the Devil take the hindmost.


[Runs into the Tavern. Zech. And so say I.


Bell. Dam 'em! Are they gone? What Scarabs are these, to trust a Tavern
security beyond a Sword -- What Sir are you creeping away too? turn back, and
help to defend you Dog -- or --


[Noise within, follow, follow. Fla. O Lord Sir! I defend Sir! --


Bell. Fight Sir, and fight valiantly too, or by this Steel --


Fla. Well Sir, I will, I will, oh what will become of me!


Ioll. Come my Lord, have at 'em, since it must be so, here is old Madge has not
seen Sun these 20 Years, shall be scowr'd in some of their Guts, rather than
I Will be taken; udsbores I have been valiant in my time.


Bell. I must quickly dispatch, for fear of a disappointment with my Corinna --


Enter Constable and Watch. Constable. Oh here they are, Caitiffs, Rogues,
Murderers, down* down with 'em my Men of Midnight, fall on in the Kings name,
fall on --


[They fight, Constable and Watch are beaten off. Enter Toby. Tob. No hole,
never a corner to creep into? This is the worst contrived house I ever saw.
Hanged did he say? Marry Heaven defend, I am too raw a Bully to venture hanging
yet -- oh well remembered in faith -- here is the Butt, the Throne of Baccbus, as
Zechiel calls it; this will be a rare place to secure my self in [gets into the
Butt] the Devil's in 'em if they search here -- I Will stay till the Cry is over,
and then home to my Lodging; I love a Debauch, till it comes to Fighting; but
then, methinks, it grows troublesome -- Hark, here they come, now close like a
Coney in a Burrow.


Re-enter Constable and Watch. Constable. Why Neighbors we were mistaken, these
were none of those that hurt the Man I am told, 'twas two Brothers, and that
they were dogged to this Tavern. Come, come -- they must be here still -- let us
in, and see --

[Ex.
Enter Zechiel above in a Baloony. Zech Was ever poor Night-walker in such
distress? What shall I do? They are searching within, and the damned Rogues are
so curious in the discovery, that they miss not an Anger-hole; I found this
Ladder of Ropes upon a Shelf, but dare not venture down yet, for fear some
prying Rascal shall snap me between Earth and Heaven -- 'Sdeath I Will creep into
this Bush, it may be this may secure me -- [Gets upon the Tavern Bush. Hah!
upon Honor I grow cheerful, this is so Modish a Device, that I Have great hopes
of good success --


Tob. They Are all gone in, and now I Am in a Tub of Troubles about vent'ring
out; if some of 'em should watch at the Gate, I should be snapt -- if snapt --
hanged -- Udshash, my stomach cannot relish that word -- Yet I Will couch a
little longer, and see what will come on it --


Enter Tilbury drunk, with a Torch. Zech. Here comes a Man with a Eight -- now
sit close --


Tilb. A Son of a Whore to question a Man of 1500 l. a Year, and dispute the
Family of the Tilburies, by St. Iago he deserves to be mortified -- Constable
-- What Is a Constable, to a Man of Worship! a Man of drunken reeling Worship* a
Worm! a Scarab! it is fit he should be Carbonado'd. Let Us see, where am I? What
Tavern's this? oh it is the Rose, I Will take another dose of Sack here, and then
-- home -- ho -- within there Drawer, gives a Cup of Sack here --


Zech. Ah Lord! it is my Father -- and drunk as a Wheel-barrow, I shall be found
out, for he holds his Torch so high, that any one that comes by must needs see
me.


[Takes Orange-peals out of his Pocket, and throws at Tilbury. Tilb. Why
Rascals, Poltroons -- Sons of Popinjayes, what do you mean, hah Dare you affront
a Man of Quality -- I mean a Man of Country Quality -- Hah Puppies, by St Iago
I Will break all the Windows -- I Will teach you to be civil-now, now -- cannot I
find ever a stone. This is the great enormance of this City -- here is Wenches in
abundance, but not a stone to throw at a Dog -- no matter -- I Will set fire on
your Bush, it is all one -- I Will mortify your Owls Nest by St Iago.


Zech. Oh! I shall be burnt! [Offers to burn the Bush. Why Father, Father, I Am
here! I Am here! Your Son! Your hopeful Son -- Oh Lord if I cry out too, I shall
be hanged -- What shall I do? Fire! Fire! Fire! --


Enter the Constable and Watch. Constable. How now! What Is here one going to fire
the house? Awa^* away with him to the Lodge; here is fine work indeed! Come
bring him away, stay some of you here and watch, the rest must be hereabouts --


[Ex. Constable with Tilb. 1 Watch. But is it possible Neighbors this house
should be haunted, and yet Folks live in it!


2 Watch. Possible? as sure as you are there Neighbors. They say the Devil
appeared to 'em every Night in the likeness of a Hog.


1 Watch. Lord bless us Sirs! a Hog! but see what the Devil can do.


2 Watch. Set down the Lanthorn Patch, and come let us sit down on this Butt --
I Will tell you the Story --


3 Watch. Ay come, silence ho, let us hear Neighbor Cobble --


[They sit. 2 Watch. Why look you Sirs, one Winter-night the Maid here sitting
up late in the Kitchen, and busy about her Household affairs -- who should come
in at the Window but this Hog --


Omn. So!


2 Watch. And you must know the Devil's a cunning Hog, when occasion serves
kept such -- such a grunting and shuffling, and jumping, that the poor Wench
was even out of her wits; she would have prayed, but her memory being very
short, and her Prayer Book out of the way, she could not. In short, Sir, this
Hog, or this Devil, er this Devil of a Hog, for'ts all -- having thrown down
several Pewter Dishes, and swallowed a whole Porridge-pot of Brewis -- takes me
his way into the Cellar -- there makes such a wrack among the Butts and Bottles
-- such havoc among the Glasses -- [ Tob. puts out the Candle in the Lanthorn.
How now, who puts out the Candle there?


1 Watch. Not I.


2 Watch. Nor I.


Tob. Ugh! Ugh! Ugh! --


[Grunts like a Hog. Omn. Oh it comes! it comes! the Devil, the Devil --

[Ex.
Tob. Udshash! this Ugh, Ugh, was a rare invention, [ Tob. comes out. I think I
have outwitted the Rogues: Now give me a Man that can help a danger at a pinch,
for though I say it, Machiavil was an Ass to me at a nights intrigue; but I Will
away, for fear of insurrections --

[Ex.
Zech. That was Toby's voice, I believe he is gone; what the Devil was it scared
the Watchmen so -- No matter now, the Coast is clear -- I Will venture down -- so
-- [Gets down the Ladder. Upon Honor I have been severely frighted to Night:
But the uncertain Fate of a Night-walker feldom meets better success --

I have escaped two eminent dangers, Burning and Hanging,
The thought of which has made me as dull as a rifl'd Cully.
Thus with the Brawny Crew of Suburb Roches,
We swim the Brackish Ocean of Deboches,
Without the Sense of Honor or Reproaches.
[Ex.
Scene 3.
Enter Sir Arthur, Silvia, Arbella, Constantia. Sir Arth. Come, come, I say,
there is a trick in it, some cunning scurvy lewd design, I know it; have I not
fostered her with tenderness? and before she could write Woman, bred her
carefully! What cause has she then to desert my house? Answer me that, what
cause?


Silv. Only fear Sir, you should match her against her Will,
Heaven knows I know no other cause.

Sir Arth. No, no, there must be more in it, 'twas your pleasure Mistress often
to quarrel with her, it caused your envy to see her so beloved -- hah -- But
bring her again, and quickly too, or see my face no more, out of my doors, by
Jacobs Pantible -- a Relic of Renowned memory: Thou art no more my daughter,
unless my Niece return --


Arb. Indeed Sir Arthur you are a little too severe in this, for I am confident
Madam Constantia knows nothing of her going, she always kept her intrigues
from her knowledge, and consequently this, being, it seems, of more importance
than any of the rest; what her design is Heaven knows, but a day or two's time
will doubtless discover all.


Sir Arth. Madam Arbella, you are one I respect, your Father Sir Andrew
Swipplethrop is my intimate good Friend, a Man I love and honor; and by St
Augustines Nightcap -- Madam Arbella you are welcome to my house, but seek not
to defend an ill Argument -- I say once more there is a trick in it -- and give
me leave, Madam, I will persevere in my justice -- therefore Minion look to it.


Enter Dorel. Dor. Sir, there is three Gentlemen below, Suitors to Madam
Fickle, that desire admittance --


Sir Arth. Conduct 'em up, I hope here is some discovery.


Enter Bellamore, Manley and Harry. Bell. Though I was ignorant, Sir, you were
my Rival, I thought I had known you for a Gentleman, one that would not have
carried a design under the disguise of counterfeit madness; but assure your
self Sir, such an injury shall require satisfaction.


Man. And have it, my Lord, when you dare demand it: all falsehood I deny; nor
can I condemn my self with carrying on a Love intrigue with policy.


Har. 'sDeath! I see I am baffled at last, these are two of her Suitors -- I,
it seems, the third; but I hope her choice will dissipate all doubts --


Sir Arth. My Lord and Gentlemen, your humble Servant, may I request to know
what business brings you hither so early?


Bell. I suppose my business is not unknown, I come Sir Arthur, to pay my
devotion to the charming Corinna.


Har. And I mine to the glorious Cleio.


Man. And I the particular tender of my heart to the adorable Celia.


Sir Arth. Corinna! Cleio! Celia! They are names of Antiquity, I confess -- But
for Heavens sake express your selves more largely Gentlemen, I know none of the
persons.


Arb. Now the Plot begins to be discovered, now we shall know all.


Constable. Prithee do but observe the alteration of countenances, oh this was a
subtle Devil!


Bell. Your Niece, Sir Arthur, the rich Widow -- I have had the honor to be
long interest'd in her favor, and she commanded me to wait on her this
morning, and promised publicly to make choice of me.


Man. By Heaven she promised to make choice of me.


Har. Nay gad she promised to make choice of me.


Bell. Was ever such insufferable impertinence? Sir Arthur, I protest by my
honor, all I say is true; and by virtue of her premeditated choice and
election, I am the Man.


Man. Death! What impudence is this? I say, by virtue of her choice, I am the
Man.


Har. Hell and Furies! I say I am the Man.


Sir Arth. Hey day! What are all of ye the Men? By the Threshold of Mahomet's
Temple, this is very fine! Has she a tripartite Husband, a threefold Father of
Children? But hark ye Gentlemen, let us come nearer to the business; for as far
as I can perceive, you have mistook the house -- Here are no Chio's, nor
Celia's, nor Corinna's under my roof, I can assure ye. It Is true, I had a
Niece, a Widow, and such a Fortune as you describe -- who is this day gone, I
think, to seek her Fortune -- her name is Fickle -- sure she cannot be the
person you seek after?


Bell. It Is so! We are all most finely gulled, I find it! oh! 'sdeath, now
could I eat my flesh for madness, dull Blockhead, not to perceive her Wheadling.


Man. Fickle is her name; Dam her, she has been fickle enough I see -- oh Hell!
Hell! Were ever hopes so frustrated? It Is plain now she has entertained us all
with equal Caresses, and by taking a several name, has thus long kept us
ignorant! --


Har. Sure there must be some Plot in this, Sir Arthur, pray be particular in
the Narration -- is she certainly gone Sir?


Sir Arth. Why, Sir, upon my Honor, and the Honor of our Family, I protest
Sir -- she is certainly gone Sir.


Har. The Devil go with her Sir, -- oh confusion seize her, after all my hopes,
and fears, and doubts, am I thus abused?


Arb. Oh Heaven! Was it possible your Lordship should be so deceived? Nay, by a
person that should have been proud of the honor she receivd in the Amors of a
Man of Quality, who was unsensible of any beauty but the charms of Corinna,
nothing could penetrate but the eyes of Corinna! Nor nothing appear attractive,
but the Person and Mein of Corinna! --


Constable. I protest Sir I pity you, Heaven knows how constant you have been --
how adored Celia dreamt of Celia, sighed for Celia! Mourned out the tedious
Night in meditations, and visited the light with thoughts of Celia, and now to
have so strange a Metamorphosis, an ungrateful Fickle instead of a constant
Celia, by Heaven it is great Tyranny in Fortune --


Man. Well Madam, well!


Enter Lady Fickle. L. Fick. Sir Arthur, your Servant, permit a stranger
somewhat interest'd in your present affair, the liberty of speaking a word or
two.


Sir Arth. Sir, any Man that wears the presence of Gent. has liberty to express
himself here --


L. Fick. Then briefly and boldly thus -- My Lord and Gentlemen -- I know you
better than you imagine, you are all Pretenders to my Lady Fickle, a person to
whom my private inclinations have been long devoted, and having last Night the
honor of kissing her hand, she in tears told me, she had deserted Sir Arthur's
house, only to be rid of your troublesome impertinences; she also did me the
favor to desire me to give you this assurance, That she hated you all three,
and her former proceedings with you, have been only to divert herself with your
ceremonious Addresses.


Bell Sure it is impossible a Woman should be such a Devil? Dare you prove this?


Man. Dam him -- this is the impudentst young Hector I ever met with.


Har. Hark ye, dare you fight Sir?


L. Fick Yes Sir, with you if you dare Sir! Fight! Blood of the Heroes, do you
question it -- There Is my Glove -- I Will sight you all three, appoint your place
and time.


Man. The Soul of a Giant by Heaven, a very Devil in decimo sexto.


L. Fick I scorn to win a Lady of her perfections, with the loss but of a drop
of blood, a River full I say, my veins drawn dry, and on the active gore fierce
atoms darting to win my Love through streams of Death and Horror. I Will bathe my
Lips in gore, kiss bleeding Wounds, cleave Helmets, stand a Breach, and dare a
Cannon, divide a Heart in two, hah! hah! -- it is done. Soul of Belona, I Will
exhaust a Flood, turn Earth to Chaos, Oceans into Blood. Consume your timorous
cringing Amorists, that would possess their Heaven, but dare not bleed for it.
Blood is my Province, therefore with you all am I resolved to fight -- A single
Man's too poor for my Revenge; All, all I say, and all at once, it is base else.


Bell. This is the daringst young Rogue I ever saw, I must dash his hopes --
Hark'ee young Huffing Sir, no more of this here, follow me, you shall find one
of us sufficient to cut your Throat.


L. Fick. All or none by Heaven, I will not fight else --


Dor. Now is the time, and this mysterious Plot shall be no longer hid -- fie,
fie my Lord -- I thought your Lordship cherished too much honor ever to draw
your Sword against a Woman!


Omn. A Woman!


Dor. Look on her well, Sir Arthur, My Lord and Gentlemen, do you not know her?
Nay, Madam, blush not, all must out -- You must be discovered. This is the very
person you are speaking of, my Lady Fickle! your Cleio Sir! your Celia! and
your Corinna, my Lord!


Sir Arth. By Pharaoh it is the same, I know her now. Why how Niece!


L. Fick. Discovered! and in the end of all my Plots: what Devil told this
Fellow my designs -- Well Uncle -- it is I.


Bell What in your Masquerading habit, Madam? if I may presume, what intrigue
to night are you designing for?


L. Fick. It Is frustrated my Lord, you might have known else.


Man. Ungrateful Creature! Was I so desertless? Was my hearts passion so far
wanting merit, to deserve this return?


Bell. Was I not worthy of your favor?


Har. And was my heart too base to be your slave?


L. Fick. By Heaven, no; all your deserts are boundless, and I am far unworthy
your addresses; and since I am discovered, you shall know why I have used you
thus. I loved, and was betrayed, and for this cause swore a Revenge on all that
should love me. To make it plainer to ye I am married. My husband fired with
jealousy, forsook me to spend his time in Travel; since I have lived a Widow
in opinion, and wheadled many Suitors, but loved none.


Sir Arth. Why then your Husband lives!


L. Fick. I know not Sir, I have not seen him since.


Dor. Yes Sir, he lives, and lives to bless the hour he took up this disguise
-- oh my Sweet -- Consider humane frailty, and forgive my Crime of too much
Jealousy.


[Pulls off his Beard. L. Fick. My dear Friendlove! Can this be true? Am I then
once more blessed with thy Caresses?


Sir Arth. Hey Dorel metamorphiz'd to Mr Friendlove, by Melchizedech this is
strange!


Bell. Married! Gad I have spent my time very finely well! if ever I trust a
Widow again, may I wear Horns like Acteon, and seek for a Patrimony in terra
incognita.


Dor. I swear I have been cruel to thy Virtue, but my whole life shall sue to
make amends; and my noble Lord, and you Gentlemen, whatever Presents on this
Ladies behalf have been received, shall be returned with ample satisfaction,
and since espousing her perfections, I am bound to have a particular interest
in her actions: If any one here holds himself wronged, my person shall give him
the acknowledgment he demands, and my Sword the satisfaction of a Gentleman --


Bell. Sir! I hope you think I dare fight -- and refuse not through fear -- but
since I see she had some reason for what she did, my particular resentments are
not worth a quarrel: My thoughts now bowing down to this shrine of beauty.


[To Arb. Man. And mine to this. Madam! Can you forgive --


[To Constable. Arb. 'Twere an excellent revenge to use you as my Lady Fickle did,
I swear my Lord you have deserved it.


Bell. We have all fallings, Madam, you must pardon.


Sir Arth. I like this well. I like this well: win her and wear her: Mr.
Manley, I like your Person and Estate well. By King Pharoab I 'em very merry,
come, we will have a Dance.

Enter Constable and Watch with Jollyman. Tilbury, Zechiel, Toby. How now,
What Is here Mr Iollyman* and my old Friend Tilbury indurance -- How came this
Friend? hah!


Constab. An't please your Worship! these are the Gentlemen that wounded the
Man last night, and they got from us once, but we caught um again; and we took
this other firing a house.


Sir Arth. Well, leave 'em with me, I Will be Ball for their appearance to morrow
-- I am resolved nothing shall hinder my mirth to day -- Mr. Tilbury and Mr
Iollyman, I have heard of all your frollicks last night, both yours and your
Sons. Let it be so no more: for the present all shall be well -- But there is
no hopes of my daughter now -- she is bestowed --


Ioll. Since she is bestowed; God give her Joy. I Will cherish my self with a
merry Song and a Fidle, and hang pinching, let the World rub.


Tilb. My Son's unmarry'd, and the Family of the Tilburies thus disgraced -- By
St. Iago, I Will take post and away for Salisbury immediately --


Tob. And so will I. Udshah -- if these distasters belong to Men of parts, as
ye call 'em -- give me a Country life -- for though there is less wit, there is
more security.


Zech. Infamous, impertinent! Can thou repugne the pleasures of a Debauchee!
through the apprehension of a walking Nightrap, and a gilded Truncheon, with
the City Arms on it -- Upon honor thou art a Libel to my Fame, and unworthy to
break a Glass in my society.


Tob. Udshahh, I might ha bin hanged in your society for all that, but that
Fortune was my Friend, and reserved me for the future benefit of my Family --


Zech. Hanged! A man of parts! An honest Nightwalker hanged!
Intolerable Impudence! no Sir -- assure your self no such*
Fate attends us Brothers of the Bottles -- a Stockado, a
Gentile thrust through the Lungs or so, might have
Happened -- but no hanging, Brother Bullfinch: no hanging.

Tob. Come, come, a word to the wise is sufficient -- I have resolved a
reformation -- I relish not your Stockado's not I, nor is a gentile thrust
through the Lungs, as you term it, so agreeable with my Nature to persevere.
In brief, Sir, I am converted: I will into the Country immediately.


Sir Arth. Come, come, embrace and be friends, I am in a good humor, and by
Melchizedech -- strife shall be a stranger to my house, to day: so, so; all,
all well -- and though you are not partners in this Wedding, you shall be merry
at it -- and let the World rub, as my old Friend here says -- go call in the
Fiddlers there --


[Dance. Dor. Come, my dear sweet, and let us loose our selves
In Loves Embraces. This is a happy day

L. Fick. Through crooked paths, dark plots, and ways obscure,
Revenge still roves, to make it is action sure.
I have been false to night, and purchased hate,
But Ladies, on your smiles depends my fate:
Let me then gain one happy glance from you,
And the Witty False One shall be ever True.

[Ex. omnes. Epilogue.
ANd now to you Gallants that smiling sit,
And with insipid Votes infest the Pit,
Because the Play was by a Stranger Writ;
The Poet says, he knows his Merit's small,
And trembles at the thought of a Caball;
But since a Bully in his Play I was,
I am resolved a Champion in his Cause:
Therefore let him that boasts of too much strength,
Appoint the place, and send his Rapiers length:
A barbarous Critic shall not walk the Street,
Nor from this moment dare to censure Wit,
By Heaven I Will pepper you if once we meet.
You smile, and perhaps doubt my want of skill,
But I Will revenge it, Blood and Death I will.
I must confess there is a safer way,
You may walk safely if you will like the Play;
But else, if you your Censures raise anew,
Fate sends his Darts abroad, Blood must ensue.
Let him that on that Basis honor builds,
Meet me to morrow in Lambs-Conduit- Fields,
There he shall find a Woman now turned Bully,
Has power to turn a Critic to a Cully.
FINIS.

