A Commonwealth OF WOMEN.

A PLAY: As it is Acted at the Theater Royal, By their Majesty's Servants.

By Mr. D'URFEY.

Anguillam Cauda tenes. Eras. Licensed.

Sept. 11. 1685. ROGER L'ESTRANGE.



LONDON, Printed for R. Bentley in Russel Street in Covent Garden; and I.
Hindmarsh at the Golden Ball in Cornwell, over against the Royal Exchange. 1686.

To the truly Noble and Illustrious Prince CHRISTOPHER Duke of ALBEMARLE, Earl
of Torrington, Barron Monck of Potheridge, Beauchamp, and Teyes, Knight of the
most Noble Order of the Garter: And one of the Lords of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council, etc.
May it please your GRACE,
I HAD not presumed to trouble you with the reading this Trifle, had I not bin
proud of an Occasion of Dedicating my self, as well as it, to your service:
Scribles of this Nature are usually designed only to insinuate the Author into
the good Opinion of his Patron; but besides that, my Lord, I must confess
another meaning, and acknowledge this Minute my happiest, since it gives me an
Opportunity of prostrating my self, and Book, at the Feet of a true, Loyal
English Nobleman, whose Virtues Lineally descended, have justly received no
blemish; One who may, like the Heroes of Old, suffer depressions through the
want of Justice, from biased or mistaken Opinions; but never through want of
Merit. Besides my own humble Acknowledgements, my Lord, for the favors I have
particularly received from your Grace; I think it is my Duty, and indeed the
Duty of every good Subject, as well as my self, with Tears of Joy, to thank you
for your late Loyalty, Dil^^ence, and unwearied service of the King, against
the Rebels; in which you faithfully showed the unvalued Virtue of your Temper,
sparing no Cost, nor ommitting no Stratagem, that could advance to the eternal
fixing our Great (though then scarce settled) Monarch in this Throne; as once
your Immortal, and I hope (never forgotten) Father, did the late glorious
Prince before. We cannot now doubt, but that Almighty Providence has pronounced
a long and happy Reign to our Great and Glorious Master; his late wonderful, as
well as fortunate success, sufficiently shows the Eternal Arm was lifted for
him, in the Miraculous and speedy scattering and confounding so formidable an
Eenmy, as the Rebels were, or would have bin, upon the least fleshing and
encouragement. Nor shall we ever, I hope, forget your Graces Indefatigable
Zeal, Policy and Diligence, in defending and keeping a City, which they so
vehemently aimed at, as highly conducing to their Designs; this was a Piece of
Service, which (without offense to any one) I hope I may presume to say, none
but the Son of a Restorer could have done, the Brood of Rankest Rebellion, like
the Plague, having reigned there long before; and the Mobile being all poisoned
with the pernicious Tenets of a misled, ungrateful Usurper; who some years
since took his Progress that way, to prepare the Party for this purpose. This,
Sir, your very Enemies (if it is possible you can have any) must acknowledge:
Nor can I omit the Conflicts of your Graces vexation, and dissatisfaction, by
being disappointed of engaging the Enemy, as you heartily wished, and
endeavored to do: I know the Noble Old General's Genius inspired ye; and your
Martial Spirit even burnt with the Lust of Action; you might well be said in
this juncture, to be tortured with as much rage for not fighting, and
Conquering, as a Masterly Poet has written of your Glorious Father, when in the
late Dutch War Engaging almost a whole Fleet, he was disabled by Du Ruyter.
Ruyter he spies, and full of Martial heat,
Though half the Number, thinks the Odds too great;
And swollen with Sense of former Glory won,
Thought Monk must be by Albemarle outdone
And at last describing the Fight, and the General's Rage for the ill success,
he goes on, Not Virtuous Men, unworthily abused;
Not constant Lover, without Cause refused:
Not honest Merchant broke, nor skilful Player
Hissed off the Stage, nor sinners in despair;
Not Parents mocked, not Favorites disgraced,
Not Rump by Monk or Oliver displaced;
Not Kings deposed, nor Prelates e're they dye,
Feel half the rage of Generals when they fly.


This, though on a Contrary Theme, I am sure is not Improperly adapted; your
inward and secret disturbance for being deprived of the Glory you hoped for,
being rightly considered, was not less, than that of your Noble Father.

And now, my Lord, for fear of troubling your Grace with two prolix an Epistle,
which cannot excuse my fault, for the meanness of what I present ye, I must
make use of the Confidence, natural to Poets; and briefly beg to shelter my
self under your Graces Patronage; whose true Virtue, and uncommon Sweetness, in
favoring Wit and Merit, wherever you find it, emboldens me to expect a
favorable reception, in hopes, that the true English Noble Temper, which
influences all Mankind with Admiration, that have the Honor to know you, will
not fail to bless particularly with your good Opinion, and pardon the Errors,
and Presumption of,

My LORD, Your Graces most devoted, Humble Honourer, and Obedient Servant, T.
D'URFEY.

Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
CAptain Marine. Mr. Williams. Du Pier, his Lieutenant. Mr. Griffin.
Boldsprite,The Ships Master. Mr. Percival. Three wild Fellows of the Town, that
Ramble to Sea, and desert their Wives. FranvilMr. Ievan. Frugal. Mr. Leigh.
Hazard. Mr. Hains.
Surgeon of the Ship. Mr. Sanders. Don Sebastian. Governor of several
Portuguize Islands, but chased form thence by French Pirates. Mr. Gillow.
Nicusa. His Son. Mr. Bowman. La Mure. A Vilainous French Pyrate. Mr. Norris.
Bourcher. His Companion, and Friend. Mr. Harris. Boatswain. Mr. Low. Chaplain.
Mr. Far.
Women.
Roselia. Protectress of the Amazonian Country. Mrs. Cory. Clarinda. Her
Eldest Daughter. Lady Slingsby. Aminta. Her youngest Daughter, ravished from
her by La Mure, in her Infancy, and bred up with him. Mrs. Cook. Amazonians.
Menalippe. Mrs. Twiford. Iulietta. Mrs. Percival. Hippolita. Mrs. Price.
Ariadne. Mrs. Osborn. Aglaura. Mrs. Knight. Clita. Miss. Nanny.

Sailers, Dancers, Guards, and Attendants. SCENE, Covent Garden. PROLOGUE.
Spoken by Mr. HAINS with a Western Scyth in his Hand. FROM the West, as
Champion in defense of Wit,
I come, to mow you Critticks of the Pit,
Who think we have not improved what Fletcher Writ.
This Godly Weapon first invented was
By Whigs, to cut down Monarchy like Grass;
But I know better how to use these Tools,
And have reserved my Scythe to mow down Fools:
Yet of my Conscience they would sprout again,
And the Herculean Labor were in vain.
The Pit, like Hydra's, still would yield supplies,
From one lop't Block-head, twenty more would rise.
A sort of City Critticks yonder sit,
For this destroying Engine not unfit,
Cuckolds were always Enemies to Wit;
For Wit often draws the Wife to leave her Spouse,
To take a small refreshing at our House.
Fantastic Tastes how hard it is to please!
Critticks, like Flies, have several Species.
There Is one that just has paid his grutch'd half-Crown,
Cries, Rot the Play, Pox on it, let us cry it down.
The censuring Spark would fain seem Great and Witty,
Yet Whispers Politics with Orange Betty;
She cracks his Philberds, whilst he, in her Ear,
Is Fighting over again the Western War,
Bragging what numbers his sole Arm has killed,
Though the vain Fop perhaps was never in the Field.
Thus Worm that snugs in Shell where it was bred,
Is nothing to the Maggot in his head,
For Harmless Insect that those Nuts create
Is nothing to the Maggot of the Pate,
Now such a Fop as this would I be at.
Another to complete his daily Task,
Fluster'd with Claret, seizes on a Mask,
Hisses the Play, steals off with Punk in the dark,
He Damns' the Poet, but she Claps the Spark.
I wonder if the Law could doom one dead,
That now should lop off such a Fellow's Head!
It cannot be found Murder. -- And to share
This dreadful Fate, You Critticks all prepare.
For besides all my Scythians yet unseen,
We Have yet a Female Commonwealth within,
Who strongly Armed, like Furies venture on,
And if y'approach their Trenches once, you are gone.
A Commonwealth OF WOMEN.
ACT I. SEEN I. Covent Garden.
Enter Marine at one Door, Aminta masked at another. Mar. MY Love!


Amint. I hope I am.


[Putting off her Mask.] Mar. Most certain; so punctual, and so fair, it must
be she!


Amin. Punctual, you have reason to own me, for if you knew the Difficulty I
have undergone, to get out to you.


Mar. I can guess at it, and am too sensible of the Villainy of that
French-firework, thy Damned Guardian, not to know the Difficulty. But 'prithee
tell me, what pretty Stratagem did Love instruct thee with, to make me thus
happy?


Amin. After Dinner, it is always his Custom to call for Tea, in which I
cunningly infused a Dram or two of Opium, which made its Operation instantly;
for after sneezing two or three times, and according to his usual manner,
fetching a Rhumatick Cough from the bottom of his Lungs, which I always pray
heartily may choke him.


Mar. And so do I too, Faith. I hope our prayers will be heard one Day.


Amin. He fell fast asleep, and by that means gave me Opportunity to meet an
ungrateful Creature here, that is more ready to laugh at me for my Weakness,
than reward me for my Love.


Mar. What a barbarous thought is that! Deny it, and make me amends, or I swear
I will kiss thee into an Ecstasy.


[Kisses her. Amint. Oh! I am fond and foolish: All my Actions show Woman,
silly Woman, and must confess, deserve it.


Mar. Prithee, no more of this, it wrongs my Love. And since we have leisure to
talk an Hour, make me so happy to hear the remainder of thy Story; the story of
thy Father, and the manner of thy bringing hither to England, under the Tuition
of that Villain, that Cursed Pirate La Mure: You have often begun it, but we
have bin still interrupted.


Amint. It Is a sad Tale; but I can deny you nothing: If you remember then, I
told you that Don Sebastian was my Father. A generous Portuguise; of Noble
House, and Nature; and Governor of several large Plantations in the Happy
Islands; his Industry and Care made him so rich, that he might vie with
Princes; so stored he was with Friends and Gifts of Fortune! But many years he
had not thus continued, when Hell contriving how to blast our Joys; drove on
our Shore a number of French Pirates; of which La Mure was the most Villainous,
and being Captain of the rest, and well stored with Ammunition, entered upon
our Fortress, ruined our Plantations; and chased the Peaceful Industrious
Portugals, like Flocks of Sheep upon the barren Mountains.


Mar. Inhumane Villains!


Amin. My Father, in this distress, willing to save his Treasure, with the help
of my Brother, and a Party of Negro Slaves, secretly Conveyed his Plate, Money,
and Jewels into a small Vessel, and put to Sea, with design-to return, when
they were gone, and comfort us with his Fortune and Policy.


Mar. The Design was prudent, whatever the Event was.


Amin. Oh it was fatal! For this Cursed La Mure having Intelligence by his Spies
of my Fathers escape, and not knowing how to pursue him, turned his rage upon
my poor Mother, my Sister, and my self. And having Laden his Ship with the
Spoils and Riches of our Island, carried us with him, and the put to Sea.


Mar. Where will this end?


Amin. You shall know instantly. And the greatest Barbarity that ever Villain
acted: For sailing thence a few Leagues, and resolving to be revenged on us,
for the loss of my Father's Treasure, he leaves my sighing Mother and a little
Sister alone and comfortless upon a wild and barren Island.


Mar. Damned Hellish Dog!


Amin. And since that hour, I never heard of 'em. As to my self, (though an
Infant,) it pleased his Devil-ship to like my face. And therefore brought me,
(with my Nurse, who has since told me this Story;) with him to London; where I
have lived a melancholy and hated Life ever since: And now am hourly plagued
with the intolerable Harangues of his Nauseous Love, and Impertinent Follies.
Oh Marine!


Mar. Why sighs, my dearest?


Amin. What shall I do?


Mar. I Will tell thee, and charge thee by thy Love,
Nay, by thy Soul, and its divinest Virtue,
To perform my Injunction.

Amin. Can I with Honor do it?


Mar. Yes, else I would nor propose it.


Amin. Speak then, nay quickly, for I fear he will wake e're I get back again.


Mar. This coming night,
When the Tell-tale Clock has told its midnight story,
And sleep Charms all but Libertines and Lovers,
Steal from his House, and fall into my Arms;
I have a Ship lies ready in the Port,
Laden and fit to sail, the wind stands fair too,
In her I Will place my Love, and free her from
The hated bondage of her Cursed Jailer.

Amin. Oh! I shall never endure the Sea again.


Mar. Rather endure a Storm in all its frights and dangers, than live to be
enslaved to Villainy.


Amin. But if you should forsake me! Oh misery!
And leave me helpless on some blasted Country,
As he once did my Mother!

Mar. Yet more doubts: by all that is good, you wrong me; prithee no more of it.
Come, your Promise?


Amin. I do: I must.


Mar. At twelve.


Amin. Exactly.


Mar. Till then farewell. Heaven and its Angels guard thee.


Amin. Oh Love! thou make us do we know not what.


[Leads her to the Door. Ex Amint. Enter Du Piere, ( his Sword drawn)
Bold-Sprite after him. Bolds. Nay prithee Lieutenant, get off further; Life, I
am afraid the Fellow is killed.


D. Pier. Killed! Hang him; no Sword can hurt him; His Soul and all his Spirits
are shrunk so low into his heels. It Is impossible any wound given him should be
Mortal. A Slave, to abuse our noble Admiral. By this Hilt, if thou had not
stood in my way, I would have cut the Rogue into Stakes, and have eaten him up
for my Breakfast.


Marin. How now, Lieutenant, what is the matter?


D. Pier. Captain, your Humble Servant. I Plague on it, I know not, a damned
huffing fellow yonder, a Rebel, Whiggy Buffle head -- I know not what to make
of him, not I -- had the Impudence, to my Face, to affront our great Master the
Admiral.


Marin. And thou have killed him, I warrant.


D. Pier. Clapped him through the Guts -- Ham-string'd him; broke out six or
seven of his Teeth with the Pummel of my Sword, or so: But I Will be pox'd, if he
does not live to be hanged, for all this.


Mar. Prithee, do not thou tempt thy Fate, and live to be hanged instead of
him: Our City Juries will show thee but little favor or affection, if thou
once come into their Clutches.


D. Pier. Consume 'em: I Will sooner make my self Immortal, with a pennyworth of
Rats-bane, than stand to the Courtesy of such a Cry of Bloodhounds. But
prithee, Captain, when shall we to Sea again? Pox of, this Dirty part of the
World, a Man only fowls his Linen here, and draws Air amongst a rout of Rebels
-- I am clearly for the Watery Element: And had rather Converse with Dolphins,
Whales, and Porpices, than our Natives: Why, they are honest Creatures, and
better Company.


Mar. They are so in faith: And thou shall be with them suddenly. For I have
some urgent business will call me aboard within these few hours. And to morrow,
if the Wind sit fare, adieu old England.


D. Pier. By the green Neptune, I am glad on it: A Brummingham Son of a Whore,
affront the Noble Admiral! Nay, it is well they scoured, we should have made a
separation between some of their Souls and Bodies else before this time, hah,
Master!


Mar. What, has my Master bin in the Skirmish too?


D. Pier. Yes Faith, the old Lad was all hands aloft with 'em. I saw him clap
one of 'em through the Shoulder, and throw a couple more into the Cellar; that I
saw him do.


Mar. Why, well said old Sea-mark.


Bolds. Me! Why, how now, do you doubt me? Give me but a good Cause, and a good
Sword, and if I flinch, hang me on the Top-Mast-head, or flea me, and make
Ship-Buckets of my Hide. What, I have not had so many Towels drawn through me
for nothing, sure!


Mar. Ha, ha, ha. But hark you, Lieutenant, a word with thee; I must require
thy assistance in a business to night.


D. Pier. Require -- Command, dear Captain! Pox of requirings and requests --
your Ear -- is there a Man or a Woman in the Case?


Mar. A Woman, Du Piere! an Angel-Woman! a Fortune too, and Young as the
Rose-bud -- Beautiful as the Blushing Morning; and as willing as my self.


D. Pier. Good. Well, must we scale for her, or steal her Cunningly? Must we
mount the Counterscarp like Men of Mettle; or squeeze our selves, like Cats,
into the Cellar Window?


Mar. Neither; she will meet us half way.


D. Pier. Gad, a Gentlewoman I warrant her: Is there no one else but her to
take care of?


Mar. Why, Faith yes, there may a Man come into her rescue, which if it happen,
I must enjoin thee to --


D. Pier. Cut his Throat -- Humh.


Mar. No, no: only oppose him, whilst I get off with my fair Prize.


D. Pier. Well, I shall Cut his Throat, my mind gives me, I shall; if he takes
away the Woman, he must take away this too; then Lord have mercy upon his
Winde-pipe, I say.


Mar. But what shall we do for a third Man, in case of Danger? who, amongst the
Ships Crew, can we trust in such a business?


D. Pier. Why, Old Tarr there, against the World: There was not such another
for a Wench, since Noah's Flood.


Bolds. Captain, if you dare trust me in your Affair, they shall saw off my
Beard with a Back-Sword, e're I leave you: Though I care not this for the Woman
-- for my part, I am past these things.


Mar. Well, well, my good Friend, I will be obliged to thee. Go then instantly
and prepare the Barge, and meet me at Eleven, here at the Corner of the Piazza.


D. Pier. The Wind favors our Design rarely too; besides, we shall have more
Company, for there are three or four young Blades, Acquaintance of mine, that
it seems are married to ill Wives, and to avoid 'em, design to take a Ramble,
and go Reformades with us; for I told 'em it could not be long before we should
put to Sea; and since it happens thus opportunely -- I Will send instantly to
give 'em notice.


Mar. Do -- if they are of the Town-breed, they may prove very good Diversion
for us.


D. Pier. The best in the World, Faith, I know 'em to a Hair -- They supt to
night at the Rose, and I believe are there still, for they are no Starters, to
my knowledge -- I Will step into your Lodging, since it is so near hand, and write
a Letter to 'em to be ready.


Mar. I Will go with thee, and prepare all things for our Adventure -- Ah,
Lieutenant! This Fortune-stealing is a blessed business, is it not?


D. Pier. Ah, if she were but old, tough, and stanch! Pox on it, I hate your
young Weehees, Skitish Colts -- they are so hard mouthed, there is no dealing
with 'em.


Mar. I hope to see thee fitted one day: Come, Let Us away, --


[Exeunt. SCENE, A Tavern.
Enter Franvile, Frugal, and Hazard, at a Table with two Lights. Fran. ARe we
all agreed then?


Frug. Haz. All, all! most Constantly.


Fran. Let Us hear the Oath once more. Come, Frugal -- my Merchant Royal; thou
shall be Speaker. Silence.


Frug. First we have sworn to take a Ramble to Sea for three years, and during
that Term, we have obliged our selves never to converse with our Wives, kiss
our Wives, nor remember our Wives.


Fran. No, nor Children, but let them stay at home, keep Lent, and chew the Cud.


Frug. And to this we all once more swear.


All. All, all.


Frug. Kiss the Book.


[Kisses a Woman's Shoe. Haz. But harkee, Gentlemen, now I have sworn this, it is
fit I should know the meaning on it -- It Is but just we declare some Reasons why
we leave our Wives, -- hah?


Fran. It Is so: Let one speak then, and the other two shall be Judges.


Haz. Do you begin then.


Fran. With all my Heart: Why, first then, most Judicious Auditors, the Reason
why I desert my Matrimony is, because she grudges me my Dress, and Garniture,
and takes more care to Lace her own Petticoat, than my Pantaloons. Besides, she
knows that Dress and Garniture, as I said before, are the only Comforts of my
Life: I should lead the life of a Dog, if it were not for my Feathers, my
Fiddles, and my Fineries: But I Will be revenged for her, for I have prepared a
Wardrobe, that shall outshine the Sun in the new World, where we are going. And
resolve to bid adien to my damned Dog with a Bottle at home: What say you now?
Have I not Reason?


Frug. Reason! reason! great reason.


Haz. Reason! reason! great reason.


Haz. Come, now Merchant -- now, let us here thine?


Frug. Mine! nay, if I have not Reason, the Devil's in it! Mine! why, look ye,
In the first place, Gentlemen, you must know that I am a Cuckold.


Fran. Very good.


Frug. My Wife is an eternal Scold, and had two By-blows before I married her.


Fran. Hem! Let Us have no more on it; Tace! thou have very Substantial Reason,
Faith.


Haz. Most Powerful! there is great strength of Reason in it.


Frug. I think so. Besides, she was lavish and extravagant, and continually
railed at my Usury, and honest turning the penny: but to be revenged on her, I
cunningly broke lately, have put all my Plate, Money, and Jewels into two
Chests, and intend to seek some other Country; where I will live, grow rich,
and plant a Colony. Now your approbations, Gentlemen? Have I not Reason?


Fran. Ay; the Deem take me, if thou have not. But come Sharper, now for thee.
What occasion had thou to leave thy Wife?


Haz. Oh! occcasion enough, Faith.


Frug. What, prithee?


Haz. Because I could not keep her.


Fran. Pithy and short.


Frug. A very solid Reason in troth, and must pass muster.


Haz. Besides, I have had an Antipathy to Womankind, ever since I saw one of
'em unscrue her Nose one night -- Oh, that Nose! that Nose has stuck in my
Stomach plaguily.


Fran. Hell. I see we are all fixed, and of one mind: And resolve to forget and
despise that Vexatious and Impertinent Sex. For my own part, I hate a Woman
heartily.


Haz. And I.


Frug. And all things with flat. Bottoms I abominate.


Enter Drawer with a Letter. Drawer. Sir, here is a Letter just now left at our
House, directed to you.


[To Fran. and reads it. Fran. News, news, my Lads! rare news!


Haz. What, prithee?


Fran. The Captain's just a going; the Ship is fallen down, and the Barge given
order for: here is a Letter from the Lieutenant, that says, they will be gone by
four a Clock this morning. I Will even go instantly and get ready my Money and
Wardrobe: And then adieu dear Dog with a Bottle, as I said before.


Frug. And I my Chests of Plate and Jewels.


Haz. And I my Cat, and my Bale of Dice: For that is all my Cargo.


Fran. Come away, Boys; make haste, we shall lose the wind else.


Frug. I Will be ready in a moment.


[Exeunt. Haz. If I can but draw 'em in to play in the new World, where we are
a going -- I am made for ever. Well, Fortune for me, there lies all my hopes.

[Exit.
SCENE, Covent Garden.
Enter Marine, Du Piere and Boldsprite. Mar. Do thou see that Light in the
Window there?


D. Pier. Yes, I thank my Fortune, I have been acquainted with such Stars
before now: And on these Occasions two: But I had rather that Meteor were
extinguished for all that, Captain, left we should be seen.


Mar. It Is past twelve, and few people pass this way.


D. Pier. I fancy your Fortune-stealer to be very like your Venison-stealer,
that thinks himself obliged to the Moon, till he has got his Game, but
afterward wishes her in a dark-Lanthorn, for fear it should be taken from him.


Mar. Master, be sure you scout diligently, and tell us if any one comes.


Bolds. Go too, go too, mind your Business, and make haste; it is well there is
Money in the Case. Before I would stand quaking here for a squab-sucking
Rabbit; that is hardly worth the skinning, I Would as soon stand Sentinel upon one
of the Moles at Argier, though I were sure of neither Pay, nor Provender.


Mar. Hark! What noise was that? Did hear no noise?


D. Pier. Some body at prayers, I think: Pox on it, we shall have ill luck.


Bolds. It Is some dreaming Phanatick or other is singing of Psalms in's sleep.


D. Pier. Come, Captain, prithee give the Sign. I long to have the Treasure in
our Custody: That if any resistance happens, we may fight for something.


Mar. This must be the Door. Harkee, Lieutenant, prithee look to that corner of
the Street -- I think I hear the Constable and Watch.


D. Pier. No. Rot 'em, they are making themselves drunk with Brandy. They Will
never mind us. Come, come, the sign, the sign.


[Marine whistles. Enter Aminta with a Candle and Casket above. Amin. Who Is
there?


D. Pier. What Is that there in white?


Mar. Hush, it must be she.


D. Pier. In her Smock, I hope: To make a quicker dispatch of the Business.


Amint. Who Is there?


Mar. It Is I.


Amin. Are you alone? What Is that yonder?


Mar. Two worthy Friends, that I Have entrusted to assist me.


Amin. Oh my my Love: How shall I get to thee? For this jealous Wretch has
taken the Key of the Street door into his Chamber.


Mar. Leap into my Arms, I can bear thy weight with ease.


Bolds. 'Sbud, would I had her weight in Tobacco or Pepper. Why, what a
bustle's here with a green Artichoak?


Amin. No -- I must venture to get it from thence: In the mean time, catch this
Casket; keep it diligently; for it is worth your Care: whilst I go and try my
Fortune.

[Exit.
Mar. Make haste, my Dearest: For I am impatient, till I have thee in my Arms.
Lieutenant!


D. Pier. How now? What has Heaven sent us?


Mar. There Is something in this Casket, Lieutenant, that will pay for our
trouble.


D. Pier Why, merry be her Heart: I like a Wench that pays well for her Man,
before she has him: And of all Mistresses, your giving Mistress ought most to
be admired.


[A noise of breaking a Looking-glass within. Mar. Hark, what is that?


D. Pier. Mischief! I Will lay my Life: The Truce is broken, and War will ensue.
Tarr, hawl up thy Main Sheet, there is a Storm a coming.


[Enter Aminta below. Amin. Oh, undone, undone! ruined for ever!


D. Pier. I thought so.


Mar. What Is the matter, Sweet! Fear nothing. Thou art safe as in a Castle here.


Amin. Eagerly reaching the Key out of the Window, my Sleeve hitcht in the
great Looking-glass, pulled it after me, and broke it in pieces: Which has, I
am sure, alarmed the House. Hark -- I hear 'em coming.


D. Pier. Well, well, and let 'em come. Captain, retreat you off with your
Lady. Tarr, Come hither, and fix thy foot to mine: By this Hilt, if they come
on, we'll mawle 'em.


Bolds. Is there any Plunder to be got, Boy? This scouring for nothing, is such
cold Work --


Enter La Mure and Bourcher, with their Swords drawn -- and three more. La Mur.
O Diable! Rascal! Robera Teefe! V'ere are ye? Vat hoa! Iacka, Petra, Tobee!
Vere are ye all, Sons of Whore? I am rob: Oh Jernee! Mondieu. Here de are!
fall on.


D. Pier. Harkee, Diable! Rascale! Teefe! or what do you call your self? Get
you gone, or I shall so pink your Guts, do you hear?


La Mur. Morbleu, Villain! pinka my Guts. Courage.


D. Pier. Nay, if you will be paunch'd, have at your French paunch.


[Fight, and beat 'em off. Bourch. What, hoa, Watch! Watch! Thieves, Thieves,
murder.


Bolds. Sirrah, I Will spoil your Cackling presently.


Enter Constable and Watch. Constable. Stand, who goes there?


D. Pier. Oh, Mr. Constable, you are come opportunely: Here are a Company of
disguised Turks, would have Committed a rape upon a Lady just now; if it had
not bin for this Gentleman, and my self.


Constable. How, Turks in my Territories!


D. Pier. Notorious ones. They are all housed within there.


Constable. Do I represent the Kings Person, and suffer Mahomet under my Nose, hah?


Enter La Mure, etc. La Mur. Monsieur Constable, Monsieur Constable!


D. Pier. Seize, Seize him, Mr. Constable. He is a Mufti; and came over from
St. Omers, with Doctor what do you call him?


Constable. A Mufti! down with him, down with him, I say.


La Mur. Why, Monsieur Constable, vat you do? Is de Teevil in you?


Watch. Search the House, search the House --


[All go in. Du Pier. Come ^arr, let us put off now: And go aboard immediately:
I think the Coast is clear --


[Exeunt. ACT II. Scene I.
A Tempestuous Sea. Thunder and Lightning Enter Boldsprite and three Sailers.
Ro'ds. LAy her aloof: the Sea grows Boistrous: How it spits against the Clouds!
how it Capers! And how the Thunder-thumping Element frights it back -- There
are Devils dancing Air, I think; I saw a Dolphin just now hang in the Horns of
the Moon -- shot from a Wave! Hey, how she kicks! how she yerks! Down with the
Main Mast there, lay her at Hull. Furle up her Linnens, and let her ride it out.


1. Sail. She Will never brook it, Master: She Is so deep Laden, that she will bulge.


2. Sail. We have discovered the Land, Sir; pray let us make in, she is so drunk,
she may chance to cast up her Lading.


1 Sail. Stand in, Stand in. We are all lost else.


Bolds. Steer her a Starboard there. What, hoa! call up the Boatswain. Holloa
-- below there!


Enter Boatswain, Marine, Du Pier, Franvil, Frugal, Hazard, Surgeon. Boats.
What says my Master? what shall we do? We must cast up all her Lading: She will
not swim an hour else.


Mar. What comfort, Master? I never saw, since I Have known the Sea, so rude a
Tempest! In what condition are we?


Bolds. Dangerous enough, Sir. We have sprung five Leaks; and no little ones;
Besides, her Ribs are open: and Rudder almost spent: But come, have good
Courage. Death comes out once, and let him come in all his fury.


[Thunders still. Boats. The Storm is so loud, we cannot hear one another.


D. Pier. What Is the Coast.


Boats. We know not yet. Let Us bear in with all the Sail we can.


[Thunder again. Surg. Master, see what a Thunderclap is coming: Oh Lord! how
dreadful it looks.


D. Pier. Ye fearful Rogue. Sirrah, thou have bin praying, I see it in thy
Face; thou have bin mumbling, when we are splitting. You Slave, is this a time
to discourage your Friends with your Cold Ejaculations: Sirrah -- let me but
see thee look Religiously again, and I Will flea thee, as I would an Eele.


Mar. Is It not possible to make in to the Land? It Is here before us.


Fran. Here, hard by, Sir.


Boldsp. Death is nearer, Gentlemen.


Frug. Oh, oh, oh.


D. Pier. Why, there is another Rogue now with his Bagpipes: Prithee, Dear
Captain, give me leave to throw that Maudlin Fellow overboard.


Haz. Come let us go in, and read.


Frug. Ay, come --


[ Ex. Fran. Frug. and Haz. Mar. Let Us hoist the Boat out, and go all at one
Cast; the more the merrier.


Bolds. Hold, you are too hasty, Captain; do you long to be in the Fish-market,
before your time? hold her up there*


[Thunder still. Enter Aminta, and Chaplain. Amint. Oh miserable Fortune!


D. Pier. So! now we are like to have rare Music?


Chapl. Mercy, mercy, what will become of us? Pray, Gentlemen -- pray.


D. Pier. Lookee! prithee, my Dear; no more words now, by this Light -- thou
art the most unseasonable Rogue in a Storm. Nay, prithee be gone.


Chapl. Pray, Gentlemen; pray, pray --

[ Ex. Chaplain.
Amint. Nothing but horror sounding in my Ears: No promise of rest to my poor
frighted Soul! gentle Master, is there no hopes?


Bolds. None, that I know! Devilish, Clap this Woman under hatches.


Mar. Prithee speak mildly to her. Have patience, Sweet.


Bolds. Keep her thus, keep her thus.


Amint. Oh, that Wave will devour me! Oh --


Bolds. Carry her down, Captain -- or by these hands I Will give no more
Direction. We have never better Luck, when we have such Stowage as these
Trinckets with us. These sweet Sin-breeders; how can Heaven smile on us -- when
such a Burden of Iniquity -- lies tumbling like a potion in the Ships belly.

[ Ex. Bolds. D. Pier. Seamen.
Amint. What shall I do, my Heart and Senses fail me?

Mar. Come in with me. And try if thou can sleep:
Thy pretty Heart wild-fears so long have rocked;
Calm rest will steal upon it.

Amint. Oh Marine,

Remember, it is for you I meet these Dangers.
For you, expose my self to Seas and Horrors, and fears innumerable.
Marine. I know thou do.

And think too, I have treasured the Remembrance within me here, fast locked up
in my heart; and yet I doubt not but a Day will come -- To Crown our
flourishing Loves, and make us happy.

[Ex.
Enter Boldsprite, Du Pier, Franvil, Frug. Hazard, Surgeon, and Boatswain.
Bolds. Throw out the Lading, it must all overboard.


Boats. It clears to Sea ward, Master: Heave out there: Let Us lighten her! all
the Meat and the Cakes. We are all gone else. That we may find her Leaks, and
hold her up.


Frug. Must my goods over too? Kind, honest Master: Why, here lies all my Money
-- the Money I have raked by Usury, to buy new Lands and Manors in new
Countries. -- I have been these 20 years a raising.


D. Pier. Over with it.

The Devils are got together by the Ears, who shall have it. -- And here they
quarrel in the Clouds.


Frug. Oh, I am undone!


D. Pier. Hang ye, Mungrels, would you be only happy?


Frug. Save but one Chest of Plate!


D. Pier. Away with it lustily, Sailers; it was some Pawn that he has got
unjustly, down with it low enough; and let Crabs breed in it.


Enter Marine. Boldsp. Over with the Truncks too.


Mar. Take mine, and spare not.


Bolds. Nay, nay; all that has weight must go.


Fran. Will you throw away my Lordship, that I sold, to buy me a fine Wardrobe
-- For pity's sake, be favorable to my fine Wardrobe.


D. Pier. Over with it -- I love to see a Lordship sink. My Friend, you left no
Wood upon it, to buoy it up, you might have saved it else.


Haz. For my part, I have nothing of weight, but my Prayer Book: And that, I am
resolved, shall not burden the Ship. There it is. --


[Throws it Overboard. D. Pier. Why, well said!


Surg. Come, come, Lieutenant, you may lose too.


D. Pier. Thou lie: I have nothing to lose, but my Maidenhead, my Skin, my
Clothes, my Sword here, and my Self, two Crowns in my Pocket, two pair of
Cards, and three false Dice -- I can swim like a Fish, Rascal, nothing to
hinder me.


Boats. In with her of all hands.


Bolds. Come Captain, come Gentlemen: Ye must all help, my Life now for the
Land. It Is high, and very Rocky.


Mar. However, let us attempt it.


Bolds. Then Cheer lustily, my Hearts, and away with her.


[Exeunt. SCENE, a Barren Island.
Enter Sebastian, and Nicusa, savagely dressed. Sebast. IT must be a Ship -- I
see it now; a tall Ship, she has wrought lustily for her Deliverance! Heavens
Mercy! what a dismal Day has here been?


Nicus. To still and quiet Minds that know no Miseries, it may seem wretched;
but with us it is ordinary. Heaven has no Storm in store, nor Earth no Terror,
that can seem new to us.


Sebast. It Is true, my Son;
If Fortune were determined to be wanton,
And would wipe out the story of Men's Miseries,
Yet we two, living still, should cross her purpose:
Can thou see 'em? Do they live still?

Nicu. Yes: and make to Shore!


Sebast. Most miserable Men, I pity 'em.


Nicu. What Shouts of Joy they make?


[Shout. Sebast. Alas! poor Wretches!
Had they but once Experience of this Island,
They Would turn their Shouts to Howlings.

Nicu. Nay, to Curses!
That ever they set Foot on this fad place.

Sebast. Sad indeed: where nothing is but Rocks and Barrenness;
Hunger and Cold -- Here Is no Vineyards
To cheer the Heart of Man: Nor Crystal Rivers,
After his Labor, to refresh his Body;
If he be Feeble, nothing to restore him,
But Heavenly Hopes: Nature, that made those Remedies,
Dares not come here, nor look on our Distresses,
For fear she turn Wild, like the place, and Barren.

Nicu. Then, Sir, the memory of what we were,
When we were seated in our blessed Homes,
Gives us a double Misery.

Sebast. Oh Curse on those French Pirates that displanted us,
And drove me from my Wife and pretty Children,
To live a wretched Life, upon this fatal Island.

Nicu. They are living yet, I hope, Sir; such Goodness Cannot perish.


Sebast. They may live -- but never to me, my Son,
Never to me again -- Look on it -- What bear
Their Flagg-staves?

Nicu. The Arms of England.

Sebast. They get to Shore apace. What Is that which Swims?

Nicu. A strong young Man! with a hansom
Woman hanging about his Neck.

Sebast. A Noble Fellow, I warrant him!
May this brave Charity, who e're thou art,
Be spoken in a place that may renown thee,
And not dye here.

Nicu. Their Boat it seems turned over,
And forced them to their Shifts, yet all are landed --
They are certainly Pirates.

Sebast. Let 'em be what they will, they will not Rob us;
For none will take our Misery for Riches;
Come, Son, let us descend, and try their Pities;
If we get off, we have a little hopes;
If not, we shall but load this wretched Island
With the same Shaddows still that must grow shorter.

[Exeunt. Enter Marine, Aminta, Du Pier, Boldsprite, Franvil, Frugal, Hazard,
Boatswain, Surgeon, and Sailers. D. Pier. Wet come a Shore, my Hearts; we are
safe arrived though.


Mar. Thanks to Heavens Goodness! and no Man lost neither, but the poor
Chaplain.


D. Pier. Ay -- the poor Soul-Broker's gone, he was washed, with a Wave, off
the Quarter Deck -- I saw his Cassock and he fluttering between Wind and Water,
a great while -- Well, Peace be with him, he was too good for us.


Mar. The Weather's turned more Courteous: and the Ship rides fair too, and her
Leaks in good plight:
How does my Dear? Alas, poor Heart!
How weak she is, and wet!

Amint. I am glad I escaped with Life:
For which, Dear Captain, I am obliged to you:
Oh let the Heavens but bless me with a means
How to reward such Love, and I am happy.

Mar. This Rosy kiss rewards me ten times over,
And this ten thousand.

Amint. I cannot speak for Joy.

[Embrace. Mar. My Dearest Life -- Well, what cheer, my Lads?


D. Pier. Faith! no great Cheer, Captain! a piece of Sous'd Biscuit, and half a
hard Egg: For the Sea has taken order, being young and strong, we shall not
surfeit: For my own part, the Water has made a mear Toste of me; I am sopt
rarely: However, I Will Dance* till I am dry: Come, Surgeon, out with your
Glister-pipe, Sirrah, and strike a Galliard.


Mar. Why, what a brave day is here? And what fair Weather, after so foul a
Storm?


Frug. Ay, if the Master had not been bewitched, he might have foreseen this
Weather, and have saved our Goods! Oh my dear Plate and Jewels! Oh my dear
Money! Vengeance on the Master.


Franv. Ay, and twenty small Curses beside; I have lost my fine Wardrobe; oh
insupportable! the Ladies will hate me.


Mar. Oh never think on 'em: We have our Lives and Healths!


Haz. For my part I Have lost nothing, but my Prayer Book: I saved my other
Cargo, my bale of Dice: therefore I am happy.


Frug. Not think of 'em, Sir! I must and will think of 'em: And that 'twas most
maliciously done, to undo me


Fran. And me too: I lost all: I had fifteen fair Suits: the worst of 'em
Embroidered; and now I have not so much as a Shirt left.


D. Pier. Ha, ha, ha, have not, Faith?


Fran. No, by this Light; nor ragg of Clothes neither, but these poor things.


D. Pier. Give me thy hand: I am glad on it with all my Heart. Is thy Skin whole?


Fran. Sir, you may spare your Raillery.


D. Pier. Faith, I shannot! Harkee, will thou see a Dog- fish now rise in one
of thy brave Doublets? And tumble like a Tub, to make thee merry? Or an Old
Haddock rise with thy Beaver Hat on? A Mermaid in a Wastcoat of your Worships;
or a Dolphin with your Point Crevat?


Fran. You are merry, Sir; but if I take it thus -- if I be foisted and jeered
out of my Wardrobe --


Frug. Nor I, neither.


Haz. Nor will I leave my Friends.


Frug. Neither Master, nor Mate, nor none of you shall abuse me: I say our
Goods might have been saved; and I Will have satisfaction.


Mar. Nay, be not angry, Gentlemen.


Fran. Sir, we have reason: And some Friends I can make.


Bolds. Why, you Scoundrels! was not what I did for the general Safety? if you
aim at me, I am not so tame --


Haz. No, nor we neither.


[Offer to draw. D. Pier. Pray take my Counsel, Gallants: Fight not till the
Surgeon be well, do you hear? He Is damnable Sea-sick yonder: and may spoil all:
Besides he has lost his Fiddle-stick -- And the best Box of Boars-grease. Nay
-- do not draw your Swords; for if you do. --


Mar. Who would you fight with, Gentlemen? Who has done you wrong? For shame be
better tempered; no sooner come to give thanks for our safeties, but we must
raise new Civil Broils among us -- Put up, put up, for shame. --


Fran. We have been wronged, Sir, and damnably too.


D. Pier. Nay, lookee; if you will needs fight, and think to raise new Riches
by your Valors, come -- have at you: I have little else to do now: I have said
my Prayers -- You say you have lost, and make your Loss your Quarrel, and
grumble at my Captain here, and the Master: two worthy Persons, indeed, too
worthy for such Rescals -- Come you Wardrobe Gallant, come on: and you, Money
Merchant, that build on Golden Monuments in Potosi. Come, draw all your Swords,
ye say ye are miserable?


Mar. Put up, Gentlemen, or, by this light, he will swinge you damnably -- I
see it in's Face.


D. Pier. Captain stand by a little: And see how I Will correct 'em. I Will make
'em ten times poorer -- I will not leave 'em -- for look you, fighting is as
nourshing to me, as eating: I was born quarrelling.


Mar. Come, they will Consider.


D. Pier. I will not leave 'em skin to cover 'em: there is no joint shall stand
in's proper place. Do You grumble when you are well, you Rogues?


Frug. A Devilish Fellow this Lieutenant. Gad he has quashed me already.


D. Pier. 'Scape drowning, and do you prate?


Amint. Pray, Gentlemen, for my sake be quiet; let it become me to make all
Friends.


Fran. We have so much breeding, not to deny a Lady any thing: Come let us put
up.


Frug. Ay, ay: We were to blame, to draw before the Lady, that is the truth on it.


Haz. This Passion, and too much Courage, is a damnable fault.


D. Pier. It Is well, it is very well: There Is half a Biscuit, break it amongst
you all, and thank my Bounty; that is Clothes and Plate too now. Come no more
quarrels.


Enter Sebastian and Nicusa. Mar. Ha! in the name of wonder, what have we here?
Are they humane Creatures?


D. Pier. I have heard of Sea-Calves.


Amint. They are no shadows sure, they have legs and arms.


D. Pier. Ay, they hang but scurvily on though.


Surg. What Beards they have?


D. Pier. They have sown Horse Tails to their Faces, to keep -- 'em warm.


Amint. How their Eyes are sunk, as if they had bin frighted; sure they are
wretched Men?


D. Pier. There are Wardrobes for you: Look you, my Friend, what do you think
of these now for a Couple of Courtiers?


Bolds. They kneel, sure they would beg something.


Mar. What are you? Speak, are you Substances, or wandering shadows, that find
no peace on Earth, till you reveal some secret?


Sebast. We are Men as you are, only our Miseries make us seem Monsters; if
ever pity dwelt in noble Hearts --


Mar. Stand up, and speak boldly.


Nicus. If you are Christians, and by that blessed Name bound to ^elieve us.
Convey us from this Island.


D. Pier. Speak -- what are you?


Sebast. Of honorable Birth; to tell you more,
Were but to number up our own Calamities,
And make our Eyes wild with perpetual weepings;
This many years, in this most wretched Island
We two have lived, the Scorn and Game of Fortune,
Bless your selves from it! noble Gentlemen!
The greatest plagues that Humane Nature suffers,
Are seated here: VVildness and Wants innumerable.

Mar. How came you hither?


Sebast. In a small Vessel: Driven hither by French Pirates, to save my Wealth
from those insulting Robbers.


Amin. French Pirates! Oh my heart!


Mar. Is all the Island uninhabited?


Nicus. Most desolate, neither Man nor Beast to comfort or sustain us.


Sebast. No summer here to promise any thing,
Nor Autumn to make full the Reapers hand;
The Earth, obdurate to the Tears of Heaven,
Let Us nothing shoot or grow, but poisonous Weeds:
No Rivers, nor no pleasant Groves: No Beasts.
All that were made for Man's use, fly this place.
Serpents, and ugly things, the shames of Nature.
Roots of malignant tastes, foul standing Waters,
Sometimes we find a fulsome Sea Root,
And that is a Delicate; a Rat sometimes,
And that we hunt, like Princes in their pleasure;
And if we take a Toad, we make a Banquet.

Frug. Oh Lord! we shall be starved too! Mercy on us, eat a Toad! did he say?


Fran. Would I were at home again with my dear Matrimony, I begin to be weary
of rambling.


Amint. For Heaven's sake, let us aboard, I would discourse with this Fellow;
for my mind gives me, he can tell me something of my Father?


[Apart to the Captain. Mar. Do You know no farther?


Nicusa. We have sometimes seen the shadow of a place
Inhabited: And heard the noise of Hunters.
And have attempted to find it as far as a River,
Deep, slow, and dangerous, fenced with high Rocks,
Would give us leave; but not able to atchieve that hazard,
Returned to our old miseries: And, Gentlemen,
If this sad story may deserve your pities --

Mar. You shall aboard with us; we will relieve you.


Sebast. We will not be unthankful for this Benefit;
No, Gentlemen, we'll pay for our deliverance*
Look you, that plough the Sea, for wealth and pleasure,
That outrun Day and Night with your Ambitions:
Look on those heaps, remove 'em, view 'em fully.

D. Pier. By Heaven, it is Gold and Jewels!


Fran. How!


Frug. What Is that? Gold and Jewels!


Sebast. Be not too hasty, here lies another heap.


Bolds. And here another; all Gold! by this Light.


Mar. Stand farther off, you must not be your own Carvers.


Frug. We have shares, and large ones -- I Will have my Plate and Money made
good.


Fran. And I my VVard-robe.


Haz. Ay, and we'll Carve our selves too. What hoa! Fellow-Sailers, stand to
your freedoms: Gold, gold.


[Enter Sailers. Sebast. Take heed, Gentlemen;
This Gold was the overthrow of my happiness.
For landing here with a party of Negro-Slaves,
That I commanded to assist me against the Pirates:
This cursed Gold enticing 'em, they set upon me, and my Son here; wounded us
almost to Death.
And then their Civil Swords, who should be owners:
First in their rage, consumed the Vessel that brought us,
And next themselves by heaps. Oh be you wise and careful.

Frug. Tell not me of Care, Sir -- holloa! All that will share with us --
assist us. I Will have all this.


[They scramble. Fran. And I this.


D. Pier. You shall be hanged first: Captain, let us set in.


Mar. This Damned Gold will undo us all.


Frug. My Losses must be made good.


Fran. And so must mine; or else this Sword shall right me.


Mar. Nay if you will be Dogs --


[Draws. D. Pier. Let me come, Captain.
This Golden Age must have an Iron ending:
Have at the Bunch.

[Falls on, and beats 'em off. Amint. Stay, dear Marine! Lieutenant, oh
Heavens! what will become of us?

[Exit after them.
Sebast. Now Fortune favor us. Come Son, if we stay here, we dye: Here rides
their Ship. Whilst they are gone to the spoil -- let us make quick use, and get
off.


Nicus. Away -- Dear Father.


Sebast. This Gold was our overthrow.


Nicus. It may be now our happiness.


[Exeunt. Re-enter Marine, Du Pier, and the rest. D. Pier. You shall have Gold:
Yes! I Will cram it into you -- you shall be your own Carvers, yes; I Will carve
you, base greedy Rogues. Captain, let us make an end of 'em.


Mar. No -- hang 'em, though they are Villains, yet they are our Contrymen:
prithee Master get the Boat ready, and let us aboard.


Fran. Oh, I am hurt to Death.


Frug. And I -- my Leg is almost cut off -- Oh.


Re enter Surgeon and Boatswain. Surg. Oh Captain, we are undone, we are
undone; all miserable! ruined -- lost -- the ship -- the Ship.


Mar. What of her?


Surg. Oh she is under sail, and floating: See where she flies -- see to your
shames, you Wretches, those poor starved things that showed us Gold, have
choused us.


D. Pier. We are snapt finely.


Boats. They have cut her Cables, and got her out: The Tide too has befriended
them.


Mar. Oh damned misfortune! why, where were all the Sailors that kept her?


Bolds. Here in the mutiny, to take up Money, with a Pox to 'em: And left no
Creature; left the Boat a shore too. Oh this Gold! This damned bewitching Gold.


Frug. Oh we shall be starved, we shall be starved.


Haz. Come back, good Men; come back, good old Men --


Frug. Come back, good honest Men.


[Kneeling. D. Pier. Come back, good Men, come back: Yes, it is very likely they
will! Do You look like Dogs now? Are your mighty Courages abated?


[Ieers 'em, and throws 'em down. Amint. This is the worst of miseries: Oh what
shall we do?


D. Pier. Retire, Sir, and comfort her, and let us make the best use of our
Misfortune: I Will but vex these Rascals a little, and come to you straight --


[Ex. Mar. and Aminta. Frug. Oh I am hurt and hungry, hurt and hungry, very
hungry.


D. Pier. Here Is a pestle of a Portigue, Sir. It Is excellent meat, with sour
Sauce: And here is two Chains, you may suppose 'em Sawsages: Then there wants
Mustard; but the Surgeon there will supply that presently with Salves.


Surg. My Salves, and all my Instruments are lost, and I am hurt and starved.


D. Pier. Starved! what in a Land that flows with Milk and Honey! a second
Canaan! Come, Faith, let us go all to supper.


Omnes. Ay, where is the meat?


D. Pier. Where Is the meat? Why, what a Veal voice is there?


Frug. Veal -- gad would we had it.


Fran. Ay, or Mutton either: though 'twere of a rotten Sheep that died in a Ditch.


D. Pier. Now would I cut your throats ye Dogs; but that I will not do you such a
Courtesy to keep you from the Benefit of starving; which will be, and
suddenly; unless you can eat Mud, and fancy it is Custard; to which excellent
repast, I leave ye: Your first Couse is served up. Expect the second hereafter
--

[Exit.
Frug. Ah, Pox of these Jewels.


Fran. Haz. Oh this Cursed Gold. --


[Ex omnes. ACT III. Scene I.
A flat Rock.
Enter Marine and Aminta. Mar. NO Comfort yet, nor hopes of a relief,
No welcome Plant, or wholesome Fruit to help us,
Against oppressing Famine: Oh Heaven!
To what Fate do our Cruel Stars reserve us!
How does my Dear, art thou not faint and weak?

Amint. Not much; your Company is still a Cordial to me.


Mar. You good Angels, that are engaged, when our Ability
Fails, to reward Virtue, look on this Lady;
For me, though Famine gripes my Croaking Entrai's,
Yet when I kiss these lips, methinks
I am at a Banquet; a refreshing Banquet.
Speak, my Dearest life, art thou not hungry?

Amint. Indeed, I could eat to keep you company.


Mar. Blush, unkind Nature! Can thou supply a Drunkard?
And with a prodigal hand give choice of VVines,
Till he disgorge thy Blessings? Or a Glutton,
That robs the Element, to sooth his Pallat;
And only Eats to beget Appetite,
Not to be satisfied? And suffer here
A Virgin, which the Saints would make their Guest,
To pine for hunger.
[Horns blow within. Hah, if my Sense
Deceive me not, these sounds take Being
From the breath of Men: Confirm me, dear Aminta*
This way the gentle Wind convey's it to us;
Hear you nothing?

[Horns again. Amint. Yes, plainly; it seems the Hunters Music.

Mar. Still it is louder: And I remember the two Portugals
Informed us, they had often heard such sounds;
But never could touch the Shore from whence they came.

Amint. Nor is it to be hoped we shall: This envious
Torrent's cruelly interposed to hinder us, and we
Have no Vessel that may transport us:
Nor has Nature given us Wings to fly.

Mar. Better try all hazards,
Than perish here remediless.
To serve my sweet Aminta,
These Arms shall be my Oars, with which I Will swim,
And my Zeal, to save thy precious Innocence,
Like wings shall bear me up spite of these horrid waves.

Amint. Will you then leave me?

Mar. But for a moment, Sweet: And believe,
Though pleasure met me in most ravishing Form;
And happiness courted me to entertain her,
I would not eat, nor sleep, till I returned;
And Crowned thee with my Fortune.

Amint. Oh but your Absence, and my Fears, what mischief
May happen to you in that Fatal place,
Will certainly distract me.

Mar. Suppose it but a Dream, and try to sleep.
Think you have sent me for discovery
Of some most fortunate Continent, yet unknown;
Which you are to be Queen of.
And all ye Powers, that Value Lovers prayers,
Or Cherish true affection, guard my Love
In your protection, let her cease to mourn,
Nor sigh, or shed a Tear till my return.

[Exeunt. Scene draws off, and discovers a Grotto, and Rosy Bower, placed in
the midst of a pleasant Country. And Roselia seated high, with Clarinda,
Hippolita, Julietta, Menalippe, Aglaura, Ariadne, Clita, and other Ladies, all
dressed in Amazonian Habits, placed about her. A SONG between two Amazons.
1 Am. LIberty's the Soul of Living,
Every hour new Ioys receiving;
No sharp Pangs our hearts are grieving,
Liberty's the Soul of Living.
2.
Here are no false Men pursuing
Youth or Beauty to its Ruin
Murmuring sighs, like Turtles Cooing;
Nor the bitter Sweets of Wooing.
Liberty's the Soul of Living,
Liberty's the Soul of Living.

2 Am. 3.
In soft dreams our Souls are wasted,
All our solid Ioys are blasted.
Sweet Diana, e're I Am past it,
Change thy Law, and let me taste it.
4.
But how vain are Hopes or Sorrows,
Pensive Nights, or sighing Morrows
Love's a Prey, not destined for us.
All our Quivers want their Arrows.
There Is no Liberty like Loving,
There Is no Liberty like Loving.
Chorus of Both.
Then since, we are doomed to be Chaste;
And loving is counted a Crime,
We'll to our new Pleasures make haste.
Sing, Revel, and laugh out our Time,
And do what we can,
Not to think of a Man,
But make the best use of our Prime.



Rosel. They that say Women are not fit to Govern,
Betray their weakness, and their want of Knowledge:
For what Perfection is there in the Male,
That is not in the Female: Grant, their Composure stronger,
Their Bodies Courser, and more fit for Wars,
Which some of us, do happily contradict:
I cannot yet Conceive, why this should bind us
To be their Slaves; our Souls are Male as theirs;
And that we have hitherto forborne t'assume,
And manage Thrones: I say, although we have not
Challenged a Sovereignty in Arts and Arms;
And writ our selves Imperial, has bin
Men's Tyranny, and our Modesty -- not defects,
Or want of Judgment: Blessed be then the hour
That threw me on this Shore, inhabited by Warlike Women,
That keep men in Subjection: And by them, chosen to rule:
Where, since I lost Sebastian, and Nicusa;
My Husband, and dear Son, by those French Pirates;
All others of their Sex have met my hate.

Clar. And shall they still do so?

Rosel. For ever, Girl!
Thou darling of my life: my Dear Clarinda,
I say for ever.

Hip. And must I always dream, and dream then, and to no purpose -- by this
light I will have a Husband, or she shall never live a good day.


Ariad. Nay, the Protectress is too severe, that is the truth on it.


Juliet. Because she is Old, she thinks every one has as little Occasion for a
Husband, as her self: But she is mistaken in me, I can assure Her.


Clita. Ay, and in me too.


Rosel. And therefore more to confirm my Resolution,
That we may still keep out insulting Man,
I here appoint, when-e're I chance to dye,
That the succession fall on my Clarinda.

Clar. Madam, with humblest Duty,
I pay my thanks: but fear the Commonwealth
Will murmur at this positive Election;
She being always chosen to Govern here,
That Is voted by the People, as you were --

Hip. Which Custom shall continue. We'll have no Arbitrary proceedings.


Iul. No: nor will we have our Privileges imposed upon, unless she will give us
Men.


Rosel. What Is that you murmur about men?


Menal. Men! Out upon 'em, I Will assure your Highness, our thoughts are --


Iul. Of nothing else, if the truth were known.


Rosel. Once more I vote Clarinda my Successor:
And will in this Position be obeyed,
Or like a storm my Rage lets loose upon ye:

I give you leave to consider -- Menalippe, Clita, follow me. You are too young
to engage in private Factions: And therefore meet my pity -- but for the rest
--

Let them take heed, how they my Will debate, Or act a Crime they may repent
too late.

[ Ex. Ros. Clarind. Menal. Clita, Guards. Hip. She behaves her self, as if she
were Immortal,
Or as the Sun, or she had equal Influence,
And did oblige the World with mutual Blessings.

Iul. If such Pride as this hold long, we are like to have a hopeful Government.


Ariad. Ay, and without Men too, to keep us Company, And be Civil to us, I
assure ye: my Dears, now we are alone, and have liberty to speak our thoughts,
In my Opinion, this usage of our Protectress is not to be endured.


Iul. Endured! by my Virginity, it is downright Tyranny: For I confess, for my
own part, I have no liking to this single solitary Life; nor do I love hunting
other Creatures so well, but I had as lieve be hunted my self.


Hip. Nor I, by Venus.


Iul. By Venus! by Diana, I hope you meant to swear, Hippolita? she, you know,
had the most Virtues.


Hip. It may be so: But I Am sure the other had the most Wit.


Ariad. Very fine: I wish you could influence the Protectress with this
Doctrine.


Iul. Pox on her, nothing can influence an old Woman, but a Iulip.


Ariad. Oh, Eringo's, or an Ownce or two of Green Ginger, would work admirable
Effects.


Hip. I know not what Consolation she may have, but if I have any Comfort in
this life, but when I sleep, I am a Whore.


Iul. A Whore! Oh Venus! what a sweet charming luscious honey word, has this
raw Creature thrown away -- A Whore! what the Devil, would you be an Angel?


Hip. Would I were a Whore upon a good account.


Iul. Or I either: Oh little England's a sweet place for this purpose, the
Whores have as much respect there as the Women of Quality.


Ariad. And more than their Wives, I hear, a thousand times.


Iul. But you were talking of Dreams, Sweetheart: And last night I had the
sweetest sure, that ever woman had; for methought as I was lying in my Cabine,
a fine young brisk, well shaped man, stole softly to me all unbutton'd, and
taking me in his Arms, kissed me, on my Conscience, above twenty times.


Ariad. Deuce take you: You have made my mouth run with water.


Iul. Lord! what a man is this, thought I, to do this to a Maid: And so
stretching out my Arms, thinking to Catch him fast --


Hip. You waked, and found nothing --


Iul. Even so: Therefore the Devil take all false Figures, I say.


Hip. And so say I too: For my part I have wished the Statues in the Garden had
bin real, a thousand times.


Enter Clarinda, Menalippe, Clita. Clar. Come, Ladies, are you not for hunting?
We dull our selves for want of Exercise.
There Is not a gilded Hour adorns the day;
But smiling, greets us with some new adventure;
Away for shame, and clog not your clear bloods
With that perpetual Bane of Beauty, Idleness.

Hip. Madam, we wait on you: Who roused the Stag?


Menal. Clarinda, and in the instant, Lodged a Steel-Headed Arrow in his Hanch,
With which he is fled.


Enter Marine. Hip. Ha, what is this comes here?


Ariad. By all that is good, a man: shall I shoot him.


Clar. No, no: It Is a handsome Beast, sure.


Menal. Would we had more of the Breed, really it is a very Comely Creature.


Let Us hear if it can speak?

Mar. What Heavenly place is this?
Where Beings more than humane keep their Residence?
Sure I have past the Baleful stygian Gulf?
And now touch on the blessed Shore: It Is so,
This is Elysium: And these the happy Spirits;
That here enjoy all pleasures.

Clita. He comes toward us! O Lord! will not it eat me?


Hip. Stand, or I Will shoot.


Clar. Hold -- he makes no resistance.


Mar. Be not offended Goddesses, that I fall
Thus prostrate at your feet? Or, if not such,
But Nymphs of Diana's Train, that range these Groves;
Which you forbid to men: Vouchsafe to know,
That though I am a man, I am not sold
So far to Impudence, as to presume
To press upon your privacies for my self,
No, that I am an humble Suitor to you,
Is for a Virgin -- Comes as near your selves
In all perfection, as what is mortal may
Resemble things Divine: O pity her,
And let your Charity free her from you Desert;
If Heavenly Charity can reach to Hell.
For sure that place comes near it: And where e're
This wretched frame of mine shall find a Being,
Eternally I shall pour Blessings on you.

Hip. By my Maden-head I cannot hurt him now:
Well, some of these mankind have strange influences.

Menal. Really, it is the finest thing that ever I saw in my life:
Would he would come and kiss me.

[Aside. Clar. Cruel Hippolita, how could thou find in thy Heart to kill him?


Hip. Madam, if I had done it, I had but obeyed your Mother's Commands.


Clar. If she Commands unjust and Cruel things,
We are not to obey her.

Iul. Oh, sits the Wind there?

Clar. Pray see what an excellent shape it has?
Why should it be infectious?

Aglau. I have heard my Mother say, I had a Father: And was not he a Man?


Ariad. Questionless, Madam.

Aglau. Your Fathers too, were men?

Clita. Without doubt.

Aglau. And without such, it is impossible
We could have bin.

Hip. A sin against Nature, to deny it.


Aglau. Nor can we ever hope to be made Mothers without 'em.


Menal. Never, never; it is impossible.


Iul. Ay, by my faith is it.


Clar. Why, how then could you have design of killing the likeness of the thing
by which you are.


Hip. Only in obedience to your Mother.


Clar. Age is not sensible of it is own Barbarity. I swear I am resolved to
defend and keep him.


Iul. For your own Use.


[Aside. Ariad. Nay, if you are resolved on it, I Will assist you.


Ariad. And I.


Menal. And I.


Clita. And all of us.


Iul. Well, I see by instinct, though a Maid have never seen a Man; there are
some certain motions that inform her -- but here is the Protectress; now I
expect a Storm.


Enter Roselia and Guards. Rosel. Child of my flesh,
But stranger to my fair unspotted mind;
Unhand this Monster.

Clar. Monster, Mother!

Rosel. Yes, Monster, I say Monster.

Iul. Would I had him alone in my Cave for all that;
I should not be afraid he would swallow me.

Rosel. Whose every word is as a Sirens note,
To drown the careless hearer: Have I not taught the
The falsehood, and the perjuries of men?
On whom, but for a woman to show pity,
Is to be cruel to her self: The Sovereignty,
Proud and Imperious men usurp upon us,
We confer on our selves. And love those Fetters
we fasten to our freedoms. Have we, Clarinda,
E're since Sebastian's loss, thy noble Father,
Planted our selves here in Commonwealth,
With execrable Oaths, never to look
On man, but as a Monster; and will thou
Be the first President, to infringe those Vows
We made to Heaven?

Clar. Vows made in heat, and wild temerity, With Heaven, still pass for
nothing. Alas! Madam, should women always use this rigid abstinence, in a few
years the whole world would be peopled only with Beasts. Besides, pray look on
him: Is there not something nobler in his Face, Than graces others?


Ariad. Spoke to the purpose, Madam: Let Us speak well of the man now we have
him -- Come, come, there is but few of the sort.


Iul. We must, and will have the man: therefore speak boldly, Madam.


Clita Ay -- or we'll shake off all Obedience.

Clar. Madam, you will lose your Subjects hearts for ever,
If you deny this Justice.

Rosel. Are you all mad?
That no persuasion can have power upon you;
Suppose you had my Suffrage to your Suit,
Can this weak Ship-wrack'd wretch supply you all!

Hip. Not together, indeed.

Menal. No -- but by Times, and Turns, he may, for ought I know.

Mar. Gracious Lady,
I have Fellows in my misery: Not far hence,
Divided only by that hellish River,
There live a Company of wretched men;
Such as your Charity may make your Slaves;
Imagine all the miseries Mankind
May suffer under: And they groan beneath 'em.

Clar. But are they all like you?

Iul. Speak they your Language, are they kind men?

Ariad. Are they young, healthy men? Come, there is the point.

Mar. They were when I left 'em,
And in their May of Youth, and flowing blood,
And such as might deserve you; now cold and hunger
Has lessened their perfection, but restored
To what they were, I doubt not they will appear
Worthy your favors.

Clita. This is a Blessing we could not hope for.

Clar. Dear Mother -- be not obdurate.

Rosel. O thou fond foolish Girl! when thou shall find
Their Levity, and their Neglect of Love,
Thou't mourn thy easiness, and Curse their Sex.
But come, for once your Suits are granted:
And first, all you that are for the Men, hold up your hands;
Very well.
[All hold up. Now you, whose colder Blood, and chaster Tempers
Bid a defiance to loves bewitching Charms,
And flight that Childish God to follow me,
Hold up your hands -- is it possible, not one!

[None hold up Hip. I find the Protectress will have few followers, at this
rate?

Ariad. We shall have men to follow now.

Rosel. Hear then my Resolution; and endeavor not to add to what I grant, for
'twill be fruitless: you shall appear as good Angels to these wretched men.

In a small Boat they shall pass over to us,
And crave comfort: If you like their Persons,
And they approve of yours; for we'll force nothing;
Each one shall choose a Husband, and enjoy
His company a Month; but that expired,
You shall no more come near 'em: If you prove fruitful,
The Males you shall return to them, the Females
We will reserve our selves: This is the utmost you shall obtain, Therefore as
you think fit, dismiss this Stranger. And all prepare to morrow for the meeting.


[Ex. Ros. Guard, etc Clar. Come, Sir, pray walk with us,
We'll show you the pleasant Groves and Springs, and Grotto's, and you shall
eat and drink with us.


Mar. Excellent Lady!
Though 'twill appear a Wonder, one near starved
Should refuse Rest and Meat -- I must not take
Your Noble Offer -- I left in yonder Desert,
A Virgin almost pined.

Clar. She Is not your Wife, I hope.

Mar. No Madam -- she is my Sister. It Is now dangerous
To speak truth --
[Aside. To her I deeply vou'd not to taste Food or Rest,
Till I returned: Now, if you please
To afford me but an easy passage thither,
And some Convenient Sustenance for her;
I shall for ever bless you, and thankfully
She shall acknowledge to you she owes her life.

Clar. You plead so well, I can deny you nothing.
Come in; and I my self will see you furnished,
And with the next Sun visit and relieve you.

Mar. Let this declare my thanks.

Clar. This act would prove,
In others gratitude: But in me, it is Love.
[Exeunt.
SCENE, The Barren Island.
Enter Franvil, Frugal, Hazard Surgeon. Frug. OH what a Tempest have I in my
Stomach? My Guts are grumbling a kind of Tune, Like the Base Pipes of an Organ:
I am starved into a Substance so thin, that my Body is transparent; you may see
my heart, and the appurtenances, hang up here in its mortal Closet, as easily
as a Candle in a Lanthorn.


Haz. For my part, I Have forgot to eat.


My Bellies grown together, like an empty Satchel. I have bin throwing a main
yonder, to pass away the time: But I can get nothing -- my Guts grumble still.

Fran. I am thinking, Gentlemen, what a happiness --


Hazard. How Is that! have you the Courage to think of any happiness! Gad you
have a hoard of meat then, Sirrah. You could never have a happy thought,
without the encouragement of Beef, or some such Blessing.


Frug. Beef, Rogues, Beef; who the Devil talks of Beef there? I Will draw. I
rage, I storm louder than the Winds or Weather. I am not naturally Valliant,
but to provoke my Courage with the sound of Beef, and give me none, makes me a
fury -- I roar like the Sea: Therefore you happy Rascal, make atonement
quickly; or in the name of Famine, I will so grind you -- ah --


[Grins at him. Fran. Is the Devil in you? Why I am more starved than any of
ye, have three times louder Bag-pipes in my Guts. And am ten times as thin, I
was diving in the Sea to find Oysters last night, and the Sailors took me for
Will with the Wisp -- The Moon shone quite through me.


Surg. Why, Sirrah, what happiness is that you are thinking of then? Answer me
that.


Frug. Ay, ay, answer that; the Dog has blood in's face; an apparent sign of
nourishment, he has Eaten lately -- I fee't plainly -- this Rogue has half an
Ox by him, I warrant, in some corner now -- hah -- my Mouth Waters at the
Rascal Confoundedly.


Fran. An Ox! Oh Parradise! 'Sbud, would I had but the Hoof of one, on
Condition you were all hanged -- or any part else that had the honor of
belonging to blessed Beef.


Frug. Pox on thee, do not talk on it then: Do not charm my starving Intellects,
with that most delightful sound -- Now if I were a great man, the word should
be nothing but Beef, through my Kingdom; my Armies should exercise nothing
else: And my Butcher should mouth it instead of a Drum.


Fran. When I was speaking of happiness: I was thinking what a pleasure my Dogs
had, when I kept House at Home -- they had a Storehouse, a Storehouse of most
blessed Bones, and Crusts; hard and happy Crusts.


Haz. Would I had one to gnaw now: or were but amongst 'em; I Would snarl for a
short Dinner with 'em.


Frug. Now has this tantalizing Rogue set my Mouth a watering, a second time,
with talking of his Hounds.


Haz. A Son of a Whore, when he knows too, that a fat Beagle is as good as a
fat Buck -- And that the Loyn of a Bull-dog --


Frug. Ah, is better than a Loyn of Veal a thousand times.


Enter Aminta. Surg. Here comes the Woman;
It may be she has meat, and may relieve us,
Let Us stand aside and mark, and then be ready -- she will hide her
Store else, and so Cozen us.

Amint. How weary, and how faint is all my Body,
My Eyes like spent Lamps, going out, grow
Heavy; my sight forsaking me, and all my Spirits,
As if they heard my passing Bell toll for me,
Take in their Powers, and leave me up to Destiny,
Oh for a little meat! a little water.
I had whole Floods of Tears awhile, that nourisht me,
But they are all consumed for thee, Marine;
For thou art dead. Oh take my life, sweet Heaven!
Or make me once more happy in his sight.

Frug. [Lies down. She Is fallen asleep, sure?
Why should she have this Blessing, and we wake?

Fran. This thing has bin our ruin: The Captain had not gone to Sea, but for
her sake; and all those mischiefs that are fallen upon us, are come by her
means.


Frug. Why should we consume thus and starve? Have nothing to relieve us: And
she live there that bred our Miseries, unrosted or unboil'd, hah!


Haz. Right; I have read in Histories of such restoring Meats: Besides, we have
Examples, a thousand Examples, Women that have eaten their Children, Men their
Slaves, nay, their Brothers: But these are nothing; Husbands devoured their
Wives. (They are their Chattels.) And of a Schoolmaster, that, in time of
Famine, powdered up all his Scholars -- she is young and tidy -- on my Conscience
she will eat delicately, just like young Pork; a little leaner: your Opinion,
Surgeon?


Surg. I think she may be good meat; but we shall want Salt.


Frug. A pox, she wants no powdring, Man.


Fran. But to suck out the humorous parts: by all means let us kill her in a
Chafe; she will eat the sweeter.


Surg. Let Us kill her any way, and kill her quickly; that we may go to supper.


Haz. But how if the Captain --


Fran. Oh -- he is dead, and the rest famished. Come, wake her,


Surgeon. Cut her throat, and then divide her; Every man his share.


Haz. Hush -- she wakes her self --


[She wakes. Amint. Who Is there! Oh, Gentlemen! give me some Food, or else I
perish: I am just now dying.


Surg. You Will save a labor then: You bred our miseries,
And you shall pay for it: We have no meat;
But all are sick and famisht: However, e're
We dye, we'll have one dainty meal.

Amint. Shall I be with you, Gentlemen?

Frug. Yes, marry shall you; in our Bellies, sweet Lady:
You see we love you well.

Amint. What said you, Sir?

Frug. Why, Faith, only we'll eat your Ladyship, that is all.

Surg. Come, come: Say your prayers, that I may perform --
We are wondrous sharp set. Come, Gentlemen*
Who are for the (...) parts?

Fran. I, I.

Frug. I, I.

Surg. Pray be patient: They will not fall to every ones share.

Amint. Oh, hear me! hear me, you barbarous Men!

Surg. Not a word --

[Runs at her. She shrieks. Enter Marine with a Basket of meat. Du Pier,
Boldsprite, Boatswain, Sailers. D. Pier. The Lady's Voice! stand off, Slaves!
How now,
What do you intend, Villains?

Amint. Oh, my dear Friend!

Mar. My kindest, best Aminta! see, what I have brought thee?

Bolds. -- These Rogues would have ravished her.
Speak, how was it, Lady?

Amint. Forgive 'em, 'Twas their hungers.

D. Pier. Their Hungers! Choke 'em, they would have eaten her!
Oh damned Canibals! speak, is it true?

Frug. For my part, I confess an appetite.

D. Pier. An appetite! I Will fit you for your appetite! since you would be such
Devils! why did you not begin with one another handsomely? And spare the Woman
to beget more Food on?


Amint. For my sake spare 'em, Lieutenant: And pray come into the Cave, and eat
with us.


D. Pier. Stir not within forty foot of this Food, if you do, Dogs --


Omnes. Oh Lieutenant! Lieutenant! Dear noble Lieutenant.


Mar. Come Master, and honest Sailers: Let Us go in: Oh my Dear! I have strange
news to tell thee: I have discovered a new World, a Paradise of Angels, such as
thou art; that have supplied me with these Meats and Drinks. We shall see 'em
to morrow, and they will relieve us further: I Will tell thee more within.

And with Devotion thank the Powr's above,
For giving me this means to serve my Love.

Amint. Thou best of men! how am I bound to thee.

[Ex Omnes. ACT IV. Scene I.
A Barren Island.
Enter La Mure, Bourchier, Sebastian, and Nicusa. La Mur. FInd d'em out
quickly, vid out excuse or delays, or begar your Troate sal be Cut.


Sebast. Alas, Sir, we left 'em here: But you see the place is fatal, and who
knows but they may be starved, and dead, and rotten.


La Mur. Rotten: De Dev'la rot 'em! dat is no matre, I will have my revenge on
d'em; dead or alive! Morbleu! I will search every Corner of de World, but I will
have d'em.


Nicus. You see these Footsteps, and the tracks new made, show that they have
bin here -- hah! and see a further discovery -- what is that moves there upon
the River?


Bourc. I see it now plainly. It Is a Vessel, and thronged with people -- They
seem as sailing over to that other Country there.


Sebast. It Is they, Sir. I know the Captain by his Feather; and if you observe
narrowly, look yonder, you may see the Woman too.


La Mur. Oh Diable! it is she, begar I know her.


Bour. But how is it possible they should get thither?


Sebast. That indeed is most difficult: And much I wonder by what strange
adventure they had this help: Yet thus far I can advise you, whilst we were
Crusing up and down, before you took us, we chanced to touch upon a place,
governed by Women, and went by night on shore to get fresh Water: Thither, as I
suppose, that Vessel's gone; for it lies Westward.


La Mur. Show us de vay, make us come thither, or begar you sal be no living
Creature.


Sebast. Sir, I Will do the best I can, though I am but an ill Pilot.


La Mur. Look to it: For if you fail, expect no mercy.

[Exit.
Nicus. Was ever Fate like ours, to be so taken.


Sebast. And by this Vallain La Mure too! for now I know It Is he, though misery
and Age disguise me from him. But to relieve us -- take this advise, Son, when
we are landed yonder, instead of searching for the Fugitive Woman, throw thy
self on the mercy of the Protectress; there is more pity to be expected from
them, than from this Barbarous Wretch.


Nicus. Well counseled, Sir -- I Will do it -- and hope good Heaven will take
compassion on us.


Sebast. We are undone else.

[Exeunt.
SCENE, The Grotto.
Enter Hippolita, Julietta, Ariadne, Menalippe, Clita. Iul. Come, my dear, the
Song, the Song! methinks I Am so merry of the sudden!


A SONG.
CInthia, with an awful Power,
Over all Hearts extends her sway:
Did the Eastern Natives know her,
They Would less prize the God of Day.
On her Brow Night shady lies,
Whilst Morning Breaks from her fair Eyes.
2.
When she Dances, all the Graces
Charming motion treat your Eyes;
When she sings, she doubly blesses,
With her skill, and Angels Voice.
Musicks soul in Airs sublime,
Whilst every Heart still beats the time.
3.
When she smiles, you may discover
Golden Coasts, and wealthy Bliss;
But her Frowns throw back each Lover*
To Cold Green-land, where we freeze.
Men may see the Glittering Shore,
But never deserve, to reach the Ore.


Iul. This is the happiest Day that ever blessed our Life. Some of the men are
landed already.


Hip. Where, where! did you see 'em, my Dear?


Iul. Through the West-Gate of the Garden that looks toward the Sea. Well, I
swear there is one of 'em so pretty a fellow, that I could not forbear Oagling
him for my Heart.


Ariad. You mad Creature, you: And yet he may be a Monster under his Clothes,
for ought you know.


Iul. If he were: He is not the first Monster a Woman has bin fond of, I hope.
I knew one so fond of a Monkey once, she desired to be married to it.


Menal. Why really the Masculine Creature comes so near the Nature of Humanity,
that really one would wonder: But did she desire to wed the Creature!


Hip. But, Sister, prithee are they all young Men: Can thou tell? For you
know Age will but trouble us; Their Imperfections are not to be reformed: And
your man, when he comes to be old, is good for little or nothing.


Iul. Why, troth, I think these are a mixed Party, some young, some old; some
weak, and some strong; some that look briskly, as if they had Wit; and others
Clownishly, as if they might be made Fools.


Hip. Venus direct me to one of them. I long to make a Fool of a Man strangely.


Clita. Ay, that is a general longing amongst us: For I never heard yet, that a
woman was very desirous that a man should get the upper-hand of her.


Iul. Then she is a Fool. For my part, Ple give a Man the upper hand of me, with
all my heart.


Menal. Alas! she is too young to understand good Decorum. To use a good Decorum
is a wonderful thing: And wonderful things are beyond thy knowledge, Child. The
Girl is very ignorant, really.


Clita. Why then I desire to be instructed really. It Is strange you will allow no
one to speak of a man, but your self.


Menal. It Is likely my Abilities are more --


Clita. Your Abilities --


Menal. Alas! thou art a young, raw, crude insipid thing, really.


Clita. And you are a stale, musty, undesirable thing, really; nay, to vex you
thoroughly, a thing of five and forty.


Menal. How! five and forty -- let me come to her. Really the Creature provokes
me now.


Hip. How now Malapert! how dare you mention any ones age?


Menal. I five and forty! you Squab-Duckling?


Clita. Yes, that you are, and more; and your Desires lie so hid in the Ashes
of your age; that it is impossible to kindle ye.


Hip. But if I were as she, I Would kindle ye --


Clita. What, are you coming in with your Abilities too?


Hip. I Will tell you instantly.


[Offers to strike her. Iul. Hold, hold -- pray let us not enter into Battle
upon the Point; but leave it to the Men rather, who by this time are coming to
receive Audience: But come, enough of this dear Sister; we shall have our hands
full, I warrant you --


[Exeunt. Enter Marine, Du Pier, Boldsprite, Aminta, Franvil, Frugal, Hazard,
and Surgeon. D. Pier. A Commonwealth of Women, say you, Captain?


Mar. Most certain! all Women; and such as share the Vanity and Ambition of the
Sex, secure and unconfined.


Fran. What will become of us now? All Women! what! never a Man amongst 'em, to
get 'em Children; and do such Drudgery.


Mar. Not one, Sir.


Amint. Sure they will be good to me, for Sexes sake?


Haz. And have we then, like Flounders, leapt out of the Drying Pan into the
Fire: Fled from a Female Fiend or two at home, to be plagued here with a whole
Nation of Devils?


Surg. For my part I expect to be unmanned within these two days, so preferred as
a Chambermaid to one of 'em, and daily employed in the most Heroic Exercises
of washing and starching.


D. Pier. Washing and starching! why, thou speak of Honorable Employments.
Come, shall I give thee a taste of thy true Office? Thou will be preferred to be
Gentleman Usher in ordinary to her Ladyships Lap-Dog.


Fran. Oh!


D. Pier. Nay, hear it out, Man: And daily be Commanded to exercise thy
patience in holding him out upon natural Necessities.


Frug. Oh! Zooks, I Will be hanged first.


Mar. Ha, ha, ha.


D. Pier. And for thy part, thou will [To Frug. be doomed three times a week to
pair her Nails, and Cut her Corns; and without any hopes of going further, upon
the forfeiture of a Limb, for every such adventure.


Haz. Oh insupportable! the Devil shall have her first.


D. Pier. And if thou fail'st in the least punctilio of Duty, then expect the
lash, for thou will be jerk'd unmercifully. Nay they will do it only to breathe
upon thee; and scourge thee every Morning to keep themselves in wind.


Frug. Oh, dear Lieutenant, not a word more, unless you would see me give up
the Ghost before you. He has given me the griping of the Guts with the thought
on it already.


[Soft music. Mar. Come, come, take Courage; they will be kinder.
And hark! the Music sounds, they are coming,
Be sure you all stand ready, and look boldy;
And with your best Behavior make addresses.
Our Lives and Liberties depend upon their pities,
And Death waits on their Anger.

[Lowd Music. Enter Roselia, Clarinda, Menallippe, Clita, Hippollita,
Julietta, Ariadne and Guards. Frug. Oh, the Pox take 'em, how imperiously they
look?


Fran. Sure they are Furies!


D. Pier. Let them be Devils, they are Devils of Flesh and Blood. And after so
long a Lent, to me they are Angels.


Rosel. Oh Heavens! are these the Jewels you run mad for? These Jack-a-Lents!
these shrivel'd poor stufft Eel-skins!


Fran. Pox on her! what does she call us Eel-skins?


Rosel. What can you see amongst these signs of Men, that can oblige from you a
gentle look?


Frug. Signs of Men! very fine --


[Aside. Surg. The Devil take 'em, they fright me plaguily!


Ariad. We see with our own Eyes, Madam. Besides Age makes your Highness look
through the wrong end of the perspective.


Rosel. Can nothing persuade you to love your selves; and place your happiness
in Cold and Chaste Embraces of each other? -- alas! my Child: Thou know not
what man is.


Clar. No -- but I desire to know, that is the Point.


Rosel. And when thou do; how soon will thou repent?


Clar. I know not: but I fancy I should not a great while.


Rosel. But they are starved!


Menal. No matter, we'll feed 'em up; we'll cram 'em as we do Chickens, but
we'll fatten 'em really.


Clita. Besides, Madam, we had your grant to have 'em as they were.


Menal. Do You see the Woman, Madam?


[To Clarinda. Clar. I have viewed her long -- I swear, it is a sweet Creature!
And to my self I do appear deformed, when I consider her. And yet she is the
Stranger's Sister! why then should I fear? She cannot be my Rival.


Rosel. When you repent
That you refused my Council; may that add
To your afflictions, that you were so forward
To leap into the Gulf of your misfortunes.
But have your wishes -- I will keep my promise.

Amint. I am instructed: But take heed, dear Friend, you prove not false; my
life you know depends on it.


Mar. Thou art thy own assurance.
And should so well discern thy own perfections,
No doubt should reach thee: Not a word more.
You know me.

Bolds. They make toward us: I am damnably afraid of that Old Woman, her Blood
is Curdled: Pox on her, she has no Devil in her.


Rosel. That you are poor and miserable Wretches,
My Eyes inform me: That, without our Succors,
Hope cannot flatter you to dream of safety,
The present Case you are in can resolve you;
That to be merciful, is to draw near
The Heavenly Essence. Whether you will be
Thankful, I do not question, nor demand
What Country bred you, what names, what manners.
To us it is sufficient we relieve
Such as are miserable: And I command you,
As we are not ambitious to know
Farther of you, that you, on pain of Death,
Presume not to enquire, what we are,
Or whence derived.

Mar. In all things, we obey you.

Rosel. You speak as becomes you.
First then, and willingly, deliver up
Those Weapons we could force from you.

Bolds. How! Have I bid defiance to the rage of Fire and Water, and held the
Devil at staves end so often, to be baffled at last by an old Weather-beaten
Fire-ship?


Mar. We lay 'em down most gladly at your feet.

D. Pier. I have had a Combat with many a bold Wench,
But never was disarmed before.

Fran. Well -- I do hope to live to see her turned into a Gibb-Cat, and mewing
upon the top of the House for all this.


D. Pier. Hark you! have yon a mind to be hanged, Scoundrel, ha?


Fran. No great Stomach to it, Lieutenant: I had rather go to ^upper, for my
part.


D. Pier. Mum then -- not a word more, for your life.

Rosel. And now hear Comfort.
Your wants shall be supplied: And though it be
A debt, Women may challenge to be sued to;
Especially, from those we may Command;
We give you up that Power. And therefore
Freely each make his Choice.

Fran. Can this be true, Sirs! sure we dream?

Haz. It Is certainly true, and we are the happiest Rogues --

Frug. O rare old Woman, gad sa' me! why, who would have thought this of her?


Surg. Ay, who indeed? But come, let us mind our Business.

Fran. Then here I fix.

[To Clarinda. Haz. Nay, hold -- she is mine, I chose her first.

Frug. And this mine! ah, this little Rogue, will lie so snug.

Surg. And this mine: There Is nothing like Womans-flesh after a long Lent --
dear Fubs, I make bold.


D. Pier. Yours, Rascals, yours! what, before my Captain here,
And I am served? hah! Stand off, Varlets;
Touch 'em not, on your peril: Harkee Monsieur Wardrobe,
You are not giving order to a Tailor
For the fashion of a new suit now?
Nor are you in your Warehouse, Mr. Cit.
Stand back, and give your betters place; we are Soldiers.
And grumble not, for if you do, as I love meat,
I will so swinge the salt Itch out of you --
Away, I say. And now Captain, Master, and the rest
Of us, that are Brothers, and good Fellows, we have bin
Too late by the Ears, and yet smart for our Follies.
To end therefore all future Emulation,
If you please to trust to my Election, you shall say
I am not partial to my self. And doubt not,
I Will give you all Content.

Mar. Agreed; with all my heart.

Bolds. Ay, ay; agreed, agreed.

Boats. Ay, ay; agreed, agreed.

D. Pier. Then do but observe how learned and discreetly
I will proceed; and as a skilful Doctor,
In all the quirks belonging to the matter,
Read over your Complexions -- for you, Captain,
Being first in place, and therefore first to be served,
I give my Judgment thus: For your aspect, you are much inclined to
melancholy, and that tells me that sullen Saturn (...) predominance at your
Nativity; a malignant Planet,
And if not qualified by a sweet Conjunction,
A soft and sanguine Girl, born under Venus,
It may prove fatal: Therefore to your arms
I give this blooming Creature.

[To Clarinda. Clar. As I could wish: Till now I never was happy.


Aminta. Nor I accursed!


Fran. A curse of that Lieutenant; I hope I shall have the heart to cut his
Throat, one time or other.


[Aside. D. Pier. Master, you are old, and may want spurring up:
Therefore to oblige you, here is a Bradamanta,
[To Iulietta. Young, wanton as the Roe, and brisk, and sound Boy.

Iul. A weak old Man allotted to my Share!
[weeps. I Will have none of him.

D. Pier. Thou would have two -- nay, I think twenty;
But fear not, sweetheart; though he be old, he is tough;
He Will never flinch for it.

Hip. A very pleasant fellow that.

D. Pier. Here Is a fair Heard of Does methinks before me,
And now for a Barren one.
For though I am Arts-Master of the Science,
I do not love to Father Children: Like the Grand
Signior then, thus I walk in my Seraglio;
And view 'em as I pass: Then draw I forth my Handkerchief;
And having made my choice: I thus bestow it.

Rosel. On me, why thou art not mad?

D. Pier. No, faith -- I have only a fit of Love upon me, or so:
And now my Choice is made -- fall on ye hungry Rascals. --

[They all run in. Mar. Ha, ha, ha.

Amint. He Is merry. Oh my heart! now, dear Marine, remember your Vows.


Mar. Hush, no more of that, if you love me; we are observed.

Clar. Do but see what a strong Contention there is, betwixt my
Mothers mirth and anger.

D. Pier. Nay, nay, no Coyness, Madam: Be Mistress of your word,
For I am resolute, and must, and will enjoy you.

Rosel. Be advised, Fool: I am old.
What can thou e're expect from one that is fifty?

D. Pier. Never talk on it; the older the better:
For your youthful stomachs are still Craving.
[All laugh. Ay, laugh on, laugh on: Good Gentlemen, do:
I shall make holyday, and sleep.
When it is ten to one your Hearts ache.

Rosel. A strange mad fellow this!
Well, Sir, I Will give you hearing. And as I like
Your wooing and discourse -- but I must tell you, Sir,
We rich Widows, look for great Sums in present;
Or assurances of Ample Jointures.

D. Pier. Sums in present -- with all my heart -- I Will present
Ye a Jewel worth 500 pieces immediately.

Rosel. Ay, if thou can but do that now!

D. Pier. Can do it -- why, what is it a young brisk able Fellow cannot do?
Harkee, Captain, a word with you.


Mar. What say thou?


D. Pier. Why, faith, that to woo a Widow with empty hands,
Is no good Heraldry; therefore let us to the Gold,
And share it equally, 'twill speak for us,
More than a thousand Complements or Cringes.
Besides, 'twill beget us respect,
And if ever Fortune befriend us with a Ship,
Largely supply us with provision.

Mar. Well advised: Defer it not: bring in the Trunks there.

D. Pier. Are you all contented?

Omnes. All, all.

[Trunks brought in. Ros. This Fellow talks Mountains.

Clar. Nay, Madam, now your grief is unseasonable.
Indeed I love you as my Sister. And you
Shall find it -- I love your Brother two.

Amint. Oh my Cruel Fortune --

[Aside. Mar. See here, the Idol of the Lapidary.

[To Clarinda. D. Pier. To get these Pearls, the slavish Negro
Dives to the bottom of the Sea. And thus
I make good my promise.

[To Roselia. Frug. And here is Gold, for which the Industrious
Merchant touches at either Pole --

[To Iul. Rosel. Hah -- Oh ye immortal Powers!

Haz. I Will give my Mistress this Jewel: then draw her into play, top false Dice
upon her, and rook her on it again.


Fran. Here Is the never-failing purchase of Lordships and Honors.

[To Hip. Bolds. For which the Sailer Scorns tempestuous winds,
And spits defiance in the Sea.

[To Menal. D. Pier. Ay, she is surprised, Boys --
I knew this would take her strangely.
What says my reverend illustrious Mistress,
Look I not lovely now?

Rosel. Uglier than Hell -- Oh my Stars!
Be now for ever blessed, that thus have brought
To my revenge these Robbers: Take your Javelins all;
And nail these Monsters to the Earth.

Surg. What Is that, are we Monsters again, already?

D. Pier. Hey day -- what a plague's the matter now?

Rosel. Oh Daughter!
And you Companions with me in all fortunes,
Look on this Treasure; and these Jewels.
These were my own, I know 'em perfectly:
With these my dear Sebastian put to Sea.
And, doubtless, these the Villains, these the Pirates,
That not alone deprived him of this Treasure,
But took his life.

Frug. Harkee, Lieutenant, you see this does take her strangely.


Fran. Confound your Politiques: now we are ten times worse than ever.


D. Pier. Peace, ye Curs you: Do I live to be the Subject of your moldy jests?


Mar. What Cruel Fate pursues us! this Chance is past redressing.

D. Pier. I am well enough served, that must be offering Jointures,
Jewels, and precious things; more than I brought with me.

Rosel. Now strike all; revenge, revenge.

Clar. Hear me, Dear Mother!
And when the greatest Cruelty is justice,
Do not show mercy. Death to these starved Wretches
Is a Reward, not a Punishment: Let 'em live
To know the full weight of your displeasure,
And that they may have sense to feel the Torments
They have deserved: Allow 'em some small time.

Rosel. It Is well Counseled. Be it so.

Clar. For the Captain here, I Will be his Jaylour;
I Will fetter him to purpose.

Mar. Gracious Madam -- hear us but speak.

Rosel. Insolent Traitors! would you speak! Away with them.
Chain 'em in Prisons: Vengeance, though slow paced,
At last o'retakes the Guilty. And the rage
Of the incensed Powers, still falls most sure
On Villains, when they think they are most secure.
[Ex. Omnes.
ACT V. Scene I.
A flat Rock.
Enter Clarinda. Clar. SInce Love the noblest passion of our Souls,
With sacred influence, was ordained by Heaven;
To refine us from the Dross of dull mortality,
Why is it a fault in me? It is not, must not.
I am sure I was Created to love on;
And be I hope beloved -- Oh this dear Stranger,
Can he be guilty of such Villainies? No, it is
Impossible! my Mother wrongs him sure!
Here comes his Sister -- she must be my
Agent -- I have her in my Power.
And she must serve me.

Enter Aminta. Amint. Can any misery be compared to mine?
Or any love have so severe a Fortune?
Oh, Marine! Where art thou now, my life,
My better part?
Or what is this senseless frame, without thee!
Hah, the Protectresses Daughter! your pardon,
Madam; I fear I am to blame.

Clar. Not at all. Come hither, be not frighted,
And think not you steal this Liberty: For
I give it you.
Your tender years, and Innocence, assure me
You had no share in the wrongs these men did us:
Your Brother was misled sure.

Amint. He misled, Madam!
Alas! he is innocent of all he is taxed with:
But I Perhaps know something of your Story.

Clar. How! you know something?

Amint. Yes, Madam, there is something in your late relation,
So like my own misfortunes; that my heart
Has ever since bin racked with hopes and doubts.
I think you said Don Sebastian was your Father.

Clar. Most certainly! a noble Portugal! undone by Pirates.

Amint. Such a Sebastian was my Father too, like him,
A Portugal, and like him undone! Oh! speak on,
For my mind gives me, I can make some great Discovery.

Clar. It Is impossible it should relate to us. But however,
Some other time I Will give you hearing; now I
Have other Business, you say your Brother is entirely innocent.

Amint. He is; I am sure he is: For he is a Man
Grounded in so much Virtue, and so noble:
No baseness e're could shelter in his heart.

Clar. I must believe it: and now share my Soul,
With it its dearest secret -- I love him.

Amint. Love him, Madam!

Clar. Yes, and never shall have peace, till I am His wife.


Amint. Oh Heavens --


[Aside* Clar. Ha! the meaning of that sigh, does the news Displease you?


Amint. No Madam: 'Twas only the effects of my surprise.


Clar. Take care, how you abuse me. I have trusted you with more than my life,
my first Love: Therefore use me well. And dearest Sister: For so I Will call you
ever. And methinks we should be Sisters, Natural Sisters: Yet, if you were, I
could not love you more; befriend me in this Business.


Amint. To my power, Madam. Yet though he has some Virtue,
He has faults too! nor can deserve your Love,
For you will find him dangerous, fickle, proud:
Soon glutted with your love, and soon forgetful;
I could say more --

Clar. Do not, lest I suspect you.
But use your utmost art to win him for me.
(For I perceive you have an interest in him.)
Or failing, lose your self, and me for ever:
I have given him liberty to walk in the Grove
By the Seashore. And where to night you will find him,
Moaning his Fortune; there alone accost him.
Be but successful, and by this I swear,
[Kisses her. I Will always love, and ever keep thee here.

[Ex. severally. SCENE II.
Discovers Franvile washing in a Tub, Hazard sowing, and Surgeon spinning, with
Waiters looking over them with Whips. Surg. AH the Devil take the Captain, that
brought us to this Cursed Place. Why, rowing at the Galleys is better by half
than this slavery.


Fran. Ay, if I had bin ruled by my poor Spouse at home,
I had never come to this; well, dear Peggy,
I find the loss of thee now?

Haz. Come, come; few know the goodness of Wives, till they want 'em. Ah would
I were at home, I Would never throw a main again, but live sober, and sing Psalms --
prithee Surgeon thread this Needle for me?


Surg. Alas, I cannot see, Man! I have made my self blind with weeping.


Waiter. Come, come, mind your business.


[Whips him. Surg. Oh that ever I should come to this -- little did I think,
when I put to Sea, to fall into the hands of these Petticoat-whipsters! Oh,
gads bud -- I have spun a fair thread.


Enter D. Pier, with a Bottle of Wine, Boldsprite -- Hippollita, Menalippe. D.
Pier. Nay, Faith you do well to air us, Ladies, we should grow musty else. But
prithee, my dear Penthisilea, whence comes this kindness -- It Is excellent
Wine, Faith.


Menal. Sir, it is the favor of the Protectress Daughter;
I wish you deserve it.

D. Pier. Nay, the best way to make us deserve it,
Is to fill our bellies, that is the truth on it.
Here, Master.

[Drinks. Bolds. Come, skink away Boy.


Surg. How, the Lieutenant at liberty! and drinking Wine too! whilst we are
famishing here. Choke him.


Fran. I thought they would free him -- ah these Women love a strong Fellow
strangely.


D. Pier. Madam, my service to you -- here is a health -- let me see -- here is a
health -- to your merry thought.


Hip. Now their hearts are steept in Wine, and their bones at rest. They can
talk a little.


Bolds. Prithee do not slander our bones -- but let 'em be quiet, they have bin
our Servants thus long, and had their share of Pains and Recreations; and to
affront 'em now, gad is fowl play.


D. Pier. Well, Fools may talk of Mythridate, Cordials, Elixers; but from my
Cradle this was my only Physic -- why, here is a Color now! what Lady's Cheek,
though Cerus'd and Virmillion'd like a picture, comes near it? Here Is your
Complexion for you! O my dear, faith I love thee with passion.


Bolds. There Is Fruits, and Confections within too, Lieutenant.


D. Pier. A pox, Boys meat -- I am past it, here is strong food for Men. Nectar,
old Lad. Mistress of Merry-hearts, once more I am bold with you.


Bolds. Take heed man -- prithee be temperate: [Drinks. Let Us be sober.


D. Pier. Temperate! why, how now Tarr! have thou lived at Sea so long, where
to be sober, whilst we have Wine aboard, is Capital Treason, and do thou
preach Temperance, and Sobriety?


Hip. See, the rest of your Companions are at their Duty.
What think you now, are you not happy in us?

D. Pier. Ha, ha, ha.


Haz. Hang him, he has found us out; now shall we be jeered to Death.


Menal. And what think you of changing places with one of these now -- hah --


[To Bolds. Bolds. I Will be hanged first.


D. Pier. Ha, ha, ha -- why, how now Monsieur Wardrobe, what in the Sudds?
Well, scour the Shifts clean, do you hear! Sirrah -- Or your Patroness will
swinge you. Look, Master, here is another of 'em at his Exercise.


Surg. Prithee, dear Lieutenant, leave Joking; and give us a sup of the Bottle.
We are almost starved.


D. Pier. What, my honest Partner, and Companion in starving, Ned Glister-pipe
too! Harkee; Thou have skill in Phlebotomy. Let the Ladies blood. Cool 'em,
Cool 'em; do you hear? It Is a better Employment; and leave spinning, you Fool,
leave spinning.


Surg. Leave spinning! Ay, would I could in faith.


Haz. One gulf, dear Lieutenant; but one gulf.


D. Pier. Well said, honest In and In -- Come 7 or 11? Sirrah, I set you this
Bottle.


Fran. Oh that this damned Epicure, should have the pleasure of being drunk,
and we ready to Choke.


Enter Frugal, with a Monkey in's arms, followed by Julietta, who is fondling
it. Frug. Oh, oh.

Iul. Oh my Jewel, my pretty Dear Jewel.
Sirrah take him up again: what do you grow lazy?

[Strikes him. Frug. Oh the Devil; what a Jewel's here! Insupportable! Zooks,
I Will hang my self. I will never lead this life.

D. Pier. What Is here, my Baboon Merchant too! ha, ha, ha; not to hinder your
business, Friend; one word with you -- what think you now,

Am not I a Conjurer?

Frug. A Devil, I think.

Iul. Sirrah -- Carry the dear Creature to the River side, and let him drink --
do it quickly -- must I spur you on, you dull Drone --


[Strikes him. Frug. The dear Creature! a pox on it is Dearness -- gad I Will hang
my self to night -- But I Will first be revenged on her -- for I Will hang up her
Monster too -- I am resolved on that --


[Ex. Julietta, and Frug. D. Pier. Well, honest Towzer -- farewell to thee.


Menal. Come, let us be gone -- I see Clarinda coming yonder.


Hip. Go march, Sir, march. Nay, without reply, as you expect to be obliged
hereafter.


D. Pier. One word to my Friends first, and then I am for you.
Well, Gentlemen, why don't you Joke now?
What not one jeer all this while -- hah -- harkee, Friends.
[To the Waiters. Look to 'em, do you hear! and give 'em due Correction. They Will
never mind their Business else. I know 'em to a hair. Ha, ha, ha --


[Exeunt. Fran. Is there no remedy? Must the Captain, and this Devil of a
Lieutenant, perpetually plague us? And we not revenge it.


Surg. Well thought on, faith: I have found one way to do it, and home too.


Haz. What is it?


Surg. Yonder comes the Protectresses Daughter: Who, I am certain, loves the
Captain. And he has told her, this Lady that came with him, is his Sister. Now
the only way to be revenged on 'em all, and procure our Liberty, is to --


Fran. Inform her the contrary.


Surg. Right.


Haz. Let Us do it instantly, here she comes.


Enter Clarinda. Fran. Bless thy Divine Beauty.


Haz. Mirror of sweetness, vouchsafe one word, we beseech thee.


Clar. Poor flattery! what would you have, ye wretches?


Fran. We can discover something that concerns you --


Haz. Something about the Captain.


Clar. Ha. The Captain!


Fran. Promise us but our Liberty, and a little meat, and you shall know all.


Clar. Know all! how they make me tremble! what shall I know? Speak, and if it
merits favor, you shall have it.


Surg. This little Gentlewoman that is with the Captain --


Clar. Well -- what of her -- his Sister, you mean.


Surg. Sister -- ha, alas! you are deceived in her!


Clar. Deceived in her.


Surg. She is no Sister.


Clar. No Sister -- what is she then? speak quickly! Oh my heart.


Fran. She is his --


Surg. Peace: Let me speak -- why, faith, sweet Lady, she is as a Man would say
his --


Clar. What?


Surg. His Mistress -- or so. That Is the plain truth on it.


Haz. They say, she is Virtuous -- but she has bin his Cabin-Mate this six
Months, to my knowledge.


Clar. His Cabin-mate too -- oh this slye Serpent: Be sure you do not lie to me.


Surg. If I do -- hang me empty --


Clar. No -- you shall be fed -- but with such food as you have given me, new
misery -- away with 'em to Prison -- speak not a word -- begone. Oh I could rage
and Curse, and kill now. Kill him, her, any thing in my revenge; which they
shall feel, and instantly. And now brave Mother, follow thy noble Anger: And
I Will help thee.

[Exit.
Enter Hippolita, Julietta, Ariadne, Menalippe, Clita. Hip. What storm is
coming now? What must we lose the Men again?


Clita. I Will lose my life first -- I assure you, I like my Man extremely.


Iul. The Rogues are plaguey unfortunate. I am afraid we shall have but an
unlucky breed from 'em.


Menal. Yes really, the fellows behave themselves with diligence enough.


Ariad. What betwixt fear, and love, they do their Duty:
But for my part, I begin to distate the mercinary Rogues.

Menal. They say they are Gentlemen: But they prove Mungrels.


Clita. Pray do not rail at the men: I Will assure you, mine proves admirably.


Ariad. How do thine suffer; Juliet?


Iul. Faith, like Boys: They are fearful in all Fortunes -- when I smile, they
kneel, and beg to have that Face Continued -- And like poor Dogs, adore the
ground I go on; when I frown, they hang their Tails, like fearful Sheep-hounds
-- show 'em a Crust of bread, they will Saint me presently.

Frisk up and down, and skip about like Apes;
And for a drop of Wine, be whipped like Hackney's.
I can saddle 'em, ride 'em -- do what I will with 'em.

Menal. Ridiculous Wretches: Have they names like Christians.


Iul. Oh, very fair names, and brag of mighty Kindred too. They offer very
handsomely. But that I am a Fool, and dare not venture too much; they are sound
too, of my Conscience, or very near upon it.


Ariad. These are poor, base, Creatures.


Iul. Pax on 'em -- it is that makes me hate 'em: If they were, or would be
manly in their sufferings, perhaps one might strain a point or two.


Hip. Mine, I assure you, were not cast in such base Mould -- Afflictions,
Tortures, are Names, and Natures of delight to my Men. They sleep soundly, and
seldom troublesome, unless, it is when they dream of Fights and Tempests -- And
then they roar, and whistle for Bottles of Wine. And sometimes down they will
throw me -- and in that rage, for they are violent fellows, they play such
Freaks --


Clita. Yes, indeed, the Rogues will fumble one strangely.


Hip. If they have meat, they thank me; if none, they heartily desire they may
be hanged.


Ariad. Come, come; let us all go to the Protectress, and intercede for 'em.


Menal. For my part really, I Will mutiny if I have not mine freed to night.


Clita. And I mine -- for I assure you, he is a Man every inch of him.


[Exeunt. Enter La Mure, Bourchier, Sebastian, Nicusa, and Sailers, with a dark
Lanthorn. Sebast. This Grove, Sir, belongs to the Protectresses Palace. And the
Lights, that we saw just at our Entrance, I suppose belong to her.


La Mur. Begar you had best supposa right. And lead us right too. If I no find
this damned Woman, I shall find your head: Morbleu I will hang you, dat is in
plain Term.


Bour. Hush, Sir -- and pray let us hide our selves behind these Bushes. For,
if my Eyes are perfect; I see a Man coming down the walk.


[They go behind. Sebast. Fly Son to the Protectress, this is the Minute, or we
are lost. Throw thy self at her feet, and discover us -- I Would rather be at her
mercy, and in Slavery, than live to be thus used by this horrid Villain; away
-- that is the Palace just before thee.


[Ex. Nicusa Marine Crosses the Stage. Bour. I could discern him plainly -- I
am certain, 'twas a man -- ha, and yonder I think he comes.


Enter Aminta. Amint. Marine! my Love, where art thou?


La Mur. Jerne, is not that she?


Bourch. It is, Sir -- I heard her Voice.


La Mur. Stand close, make no noise.


Amint. How well this darkness suits my melancholy? Who Is there?


Marine! but who else can it be? No other Man's at liberty in the Island. Oh my
best life: I have the saddest news to tell thee: But come, let us go farther
off, to secure us from being overheard.


[La Mure takes her hand. La Mure. Ay begar, you sal be secura presantly! I
will secure you --


[Aside. Exeunt. Bour. He has carried her off; come, let us follow.


Sebast. I must obey you, Sir! Cruel Fortune! no news of my Son yet!


[Exeunt. Enter Roselia, Clarinda, Nicusa, Menallippe, Clita, Guards. Rosel.
Search round the Grove -- And all you find bring hither, if they resist, or,
seem unwilling, force 'em --


[Ex. Guard. Clar. Force Marine hither too, and the sly Witch, his pretended
Sister.


Rosel. Stranger, thou have told me wonders, which if true, as by my beating
heart I have some hopes, this day will be the happiest of my life -- You say
your Name's Nicusa?


Nicus. It is, Madam -- And the Son of Don Sebastian a Portuguise; by adverse
Fortune thrown upon your Coast, Slaves to La Mure, a barbarous French Pyrate.


Rosel. More wonders still, for by that name they stilled the Villain that was
Author of our Misery.


Clar. Believe him not, Madam; he is a Man: And men have the Cursed trick of
lying from their Cradles.


Rosel. I hope he does not. And now methinks there are some features in his
face -- I am acquainted with -- what was your Mother's name?


Nicus. Roselia.


Roselia. Oh Heaven!


Nicus. One, whom though I can hardly remember, yet if I may presume to speak my
thoughts, had some features just like yours -- But here comes one will satisfy
you fully.


Enter Sebastian, Marine, La Mure, Aminta, Bourchier, guarded* Rosel. So much
of joy crowds fast into my heart,
There is not room for utterance: Oh, speak Sir, speak!
And if you are Sebastian; speak it boldly:
And give me joy as great, as is my wonder:
For sure you much resemble that dear Man --
Which if you prove -- look up, and see Roselia,
Your Roselia.

Sebast. It Is so, by all that is sacred. Thou art mine indeed.
For sure as thou art Roselia, I am Sebastian.

Rosel. Oh my dear Lord!

[Embrace. Sebast. Propitious Stars, I thank you.
And Fortune! now thou have rewarded me
For all past miseries.

[Nicusa Kneels. Rosel. Rise Son. And now, my Dear Sebastian!
Look on Clarinda here; this is thy Daughter.

Sebast. Thou beauteous Spring, and Fountain of my joys, receive my Blessing --
But Aminta, my lost Aminta -- were she but here too, then my joys were perfect.


Amint. Who calls Aminta -- here I am, and come to make a third in this strange
meeting.


Rosel. Miracle, on Miracle!


Mar. This Adventure would make a Theme for an Excellent History --


Amint. I am Aminta, and, as I was informed by my Nurse, am Daughter to
Sebastian and Roselia. More of the business, that French Pyrate there, whom
Heaven has strangely thrown upon this Island, can soon inform you --


Rosel. By all that is good -- It Is he! that Villain, La Mure; I know him.


Bour. So -- we are in a hopeful condition.


Sebast. Suspend your wonder, Madam -- It Is the same, that Execrable Robber,
that caused our separation.


La Mure. I was saying just now, I vud hang him, Morbleu, now I fear he will
hanga me! Oh damned Whore, Zh^lt, Fortune.


Sebast. Speak, abhorred Villain! And if thou can discover any thing to save
thy life, do it quickly.


La Mure. The Diable take you all. Dat is all I will discover, vor, vrom dis
moment, me vil no open my Lips.


Rosel. Let him be racked; Slave, we'll make you confess.


Bourch. Hold, Madam!
[Ex. La Mure. I, as his Companion, can inform you
In any thing you demand.

Rosel. What is this Lady here?

Bourc. She is you^ Daughter, and her name, Aminta!
The Infant that La Mure carried away with him,
When he left you alone upon this Island,
She has bin bred in England, from whence to avoid his Love, she lately fled
away with this young Gentleman, and afterward wrackt upon that Island, where
you found 'em.


Sebast. The rest I can make out: upon that very Island,
Seeking for shelter from this Insolent Robber:
I landed with my Son, and some Negro-Slaves,
That set upon me for my treasure, and after in
The fray ruined themselves. There for the space of sixteen tedious Years, we
lived oppressed with all the miseries humanity could suffer, till Heaven grown
weary of afflicting us, by the means of this young man, at last relieved us.
Captain, look in my face, do you not know me?


Mar. Not I, Sir; nor can I ever call to mind, that I, till, now have seen you.


Sebast. I shall refresh your Memory:
Have you forgot two wretched Portugals?
That, whilst you were mutining for the Gold
They showed you -- Cut the Cable, got your
Ship away, and left you?

Mar. That trick of Fortune, Sir, I have reason to remember.


Sebast. Those famished Portugals, were my self and Son -- but being at Sea, we
were afterward retaken by La Mure, and describing your company, and this young
Virgin, who now I Will call my Daughter; whom it seems he came in search of; we
were brought back, where now we live to make you some amends for all past ills.
But where are all your Comrades?


Rosel Go, set 'em all at liberty -- and bring 'em hither:
The Case is clear now, how they got that Treasure:
And, dear Aminta! let me hold thee fast,
Here to my heart -- whilst tears Express my joy,
For this most strange unlooked for change of Fortune.

Amint. Oh Mother! what a happy hour is this! How blessed! how full of rapture!
And as the chief Author of all our present Happiness, receive this noble
Gentleman. No Brother now, but my betrothed Husband.


Rosel. Sir, for your ill usage, happening through our Errors, let this atone.


[Gives him Aminta's hand. Mar. A gift Heaven cannot mend.

Sebast. Which thus I ratify -- Captain, she is thine --

Amint. Now, dearest Sister, I can truly call you so!
Forgive the small offense done to your Love;
Oh pardon it, -- I conjure you by your Virtue.

Clar. I do with all my heart. And from this moment banish all fond desires.


Enter Du Pier, Franvil, Frugal with a rope about their necks. Hazard,
Boldsprite, Surgeon. Mar. Madam, though Fortune willing to oblige me,
And make amends for many days of sorrows,
Gives me your Sister: And in her all happiness:
Yet in the midst af all this Crowd of joy,
My grateful heart does still remember you;
And thankfully acknowledge all your favors.

Menal. So, so! I like this very well -- now sure some of the men will fall to
our share again.


Clita. I hope so -- I am sure there can be no good Conclusion without 'em.


Fran. What Is to be done with us now, I wonder?


Haz. There are not many new ways of starving, that is my Comfort.


Rosel. Gentlemen, I am to beg your pardon too, and inform you, that you have
suffered by a mistake: But now you are free, as if in your own Nation.


Frug. Gad -- 'Twas well you sent as you did: For I was just upon the Swing,
the Devil and I had fully agreed upon the matter -- you may see by my Bridle
here. I was just ready for a journey.


[Takes off the rope. Rosel. And what say you, my merry mad Lieutenant?
Were you in the same humor?

D. Pier. I in the same humor! Ha, ha, ha.


Rosel. Ay, were not you almost ready to Dangle in one of your Garters, for the
loss of your Widow, and the rest of your mighty Expectations?


D. Pier. No -- If I were, the Dence take me.


Rosel. Nor you have not bin concerned about it?


D. Pier. Perhaps I have had the griping of the Guts, A kind of a grumbling
humor, or so, to be at you, -- But no more -- for my part, I gave you over for
an obstinate Old Woman, and resolved to think no more of you.


Rosel. Well, Sir, with my self I can do you no justice -- because this
Gentleman here takes possession of me by a better Title.


D. Pier. How, a better Title! Faith, methinks a Widow, and a Woman of your
Sense, should think my Title better than his, by twenty years purchase, by your
favor, Madam.


Rosel. Ay, a Widow indeed might think so: But know, (Gallant that should have
bin) the Fates have so ordered it, that I am now found to be a Wife.


D. Pier. A Wife!


Rosel. Even so. And to this very Gentleman, that lays such Claim. But to make
thee full amends, for the loss of my self -- if this Lady can creep into thy
heart -- Take her, she is thine; she is rich, but a little foppish.


D. Pier. With all my heart, by this light; she is rich you say -- I Will marry
her, that I may beat her, and make her Loyal.


Rosel. Come, let us retire, and make a glad relation of our Fortunes: 'Twill
add to our content; Oh my Sebastian! I have miracles to tell thee, how I came
hither to the Women's Commonwealth: How chosen Protectress! it is a Tale bears
full variety.


Sebast. And so does mine, which we'll recount at leisure.

Rosel. Convey those Pirates straight away to Prison,
Till we consider of their punishment:
For times are altered now, so is the Government,
Whilst my Sebastian lives: It Is he must rule it.
Prepare a Banquet, and let Music wait us,
For now we have all the Blessings Fate can give.

Mar. And I all joys that Crown a happy life,
Possessing my Aminta for my Wife.

[Ex. Omnes. FINIS.
EPILOGUE.
HOW silly it is for one, not yet Thirteen,
To hope her first Essay should please you Men:
You cannot taste what such a Creature speaks;
Would she were three years older for your sakes;
Two handfuls taller, a Plump pretty Lass,
I doubt not then my Epilogue would pass.
But, as I am, for your Applause I sue,
Pray spare me for the Good that I may do.
Gallants, I better shall perform e're long,
Despise not a poor thing because she is young.
Twigs may be bent, Trees are too stubborn grown;
And the Roses Bud is sweet as Roses blown.
In China (as I often have been told)
The Women marry at eleven years old:
Our Playhouse is a kind of China too,
And nothing like the Stage to make me grow;
For, though not Power, I have the Will to please,
And Will's a mighty help in such a Case.
We on this fruitful Soil have Women seen,
That in few Months have grown as big again.
Oh Iemminy! what is the Cause of that?
I wonder what they Eat to grow so Fat?
We young ones know not how that business is;
But for all that we may be allowed to guess;
And I beginning now to chatter Sense,
Encouraged, may divert a Twelvemonth hence:
And therefore humbly thus I make Address,
Excuse Faults, and accept my Will to please;
But if you fail me, may you nevermore
Kiss Woman under (at the least) fourscore.
FINIS.

