A Discovery of GLORIOUS LOVE OR The Love of Christ to Believers. Opened In the
Truth, thereof, In the Transcendency, and thereof, In the Sweetness, thereof,
Together with the necessity that lies upon every Believer, to strive after the
Spiritual and Experimental knowledge of it.

Being the sum of VI Sermons Preached upon Ephesians 3.19.

By JOHN DURANT, Preacher of the Gospel in the City of Canterbury.

-- (...) i.e.

We will make thy love to be remembered more than wine,

Cant. 1.4. (...) i.e.

He brought me into the house of wine, and his banner over me was love,

Cant 2.4. London Printed for R. I. to be sold by W. Gilbert son at the Bible
in Guilt-spurstreet without Newgate. 1655.

To the Right Honorable Robert Earl of Warwick, etc.
My Noble Lord,
I Presume your Lordship well knows, that Christ's love is our soul (and
therefore sole) life: Then (and indeed not till then) do we live, when we
enjoy divine love: Our bosoms cannot breath forth the breath of life, before
Christ breaths in the breath of love.

Indeed, its the misery of most, that they are strangers to this truth. To
speak to many of the Lord Jesus, and to tell them of a life in love, above what
sense feels, and of a comfort, a glory, a happiness flowing from thence, far
surmounting what sight fees, is a mystery, which they cannot perceive (nor
indeed believe) for it is foolishness unto them. Not only the News-mongers at
Athens counted this News which they never heard of; But even the Philosophers
there themselves accounted Paul's preaching of these things a strange doctrine.

But I hope I may without either falsenesse or flattery say: your Honor is
well acquainted with these things. As experimentally knowing, that all your
honor, joy, felicity, lies in this, that you know the love of Christ passing
knowledge.

And this is one ground of this dedication of these ensuing Sermons; But its
not the only ground. For,

I desire by this also to declare to the world, and your self, how sensible and
mindful I am of those obligations, which your Honor has laid upon me, not
only by your owning of, and respect unto my person, but (which I prize most)
my Ministry.

His person is above my praise, whose pen has blotted the common way of
dedications. Quia laudatur ^laudatoviro est la is vera.
But his ground was, because for the most part they only flatter. And yet he
allows of dedications, when the argument of the Book agrees with the person
whom its dedicated to. Sir Francis Bacon de augment. s^en. lib. 1. page. 19.
The consid^ration of which I hope (as has been hinted) will secure me from
his, or others censure.

Besides, I know, there is a difference between flattery, and gratitude; though
the one be odious, as a vice; yet the other is amiable, as a virtue: And it is
at this which I have aimed in this dedication.

I know that the bare remembrance (how grateful soever) of favors received,
is no requital. But yet, though it serves not to remunerate the favor, yet
'twill to vindicate the benefactor, that he has not ill bestowed his benefits.

My Lord, If I say that I cannot requite all your favors, its no more than all
know: And if I say, that Christ can, its no more than I know you believe, and I
desire. Twill be no over-exalting of Christ's love, nor any diminution unto
your favors; If I say, that the least grain of love from Christ to you, will
abundantly compensate all the weight of your love to me. And this (My Lord) is
not only my prayer, but my beliefi in your behalf.

I shall not trouble your Lordship with many words. Only let me have leave ^o
sound in your ears, two words of the Lord Jesus; the one was a word of
Prophecy, the other of Advice.

1. His word of Prophecy was, The love of many shall wax cold. Its your duty
to search, Mat. 24.12.
and twill be your honor to find, that there is no fulfilling of that in your
soul. But alas! who can say, that he sees not too great a fulfilling of this
in himself! Oh! the decay of love, zeal, activity, appearance, etc. in the
things of Christ that is every where! Its a thing that calls for bloody tears;
that besides the abounding: of iniquity in enemies, there is such waxing cold
of love in friends. I have sometimes thought Christ spoke this Prophecy (as
Paul did his rehearsal, Phil. 3.18.
viz) weeping.

II. Christ's word of advice was this, Strengthen the things that remain, that
are ready to dye. Apoc. 3.2.
Its well that under spiritual decays we have any thing that remains (happy
they who have not lost all.) Its wisdom to strengthen that which languisheth;
(holy they that strive to do thus:) and the following Sermons may be helpful
herein. If the Spirit lay this truth upon our hearts, That Christ loves us with
a transcendent love; 'twill at once make us bleed for coolings, and burn (yea
blaze) a fresh with the fire (internally) and flames (externally) of love to
Christ, his people, his truths, his designs, etc.

But I have gone beyond my intentions, though I hope not beyond your
acceptance. If you will permit me to add, that I am in the number of those,
who both praise, and pray for you, and profess to be much obliged to you. I
shall trouble you no further, save with the sincere subscription, that I am, My
Lord.

Your Honors singularly obliged Souls servant. JOHN DURANT.

To his beloved friends, the godly Inhabitants of the Town and Port of Sandwich.
Particularly The Congregation over which the Holy Ghost has made my reverend
Brother (Mr. Francis Prentice) Overseer.
Beloved in Christ,
HOwever those who are in the world, may account the ensuing Sermons riddles,
and paradoxes: yet to you (whom I hope Christ has taken out of the world) they
are experienced truths. Its true, ye know them already (for I have preached
them to you.) But that you might have them in remembrance; I have been willing
to Print them for you; And yet not for you only, but for as many as believe in
the Lord Jesus.

It was Peter's care to perpetuate those things by writing, which he had
preached by word: That so albeit his hearers knew, yet they might be
established * in the truth. (...) i.e. rooted or settled as upon a firm
foundation.
Certainly next to the knowing of truths, is the establishment in them, which
some wanting, are gone aside after airy vanities.

It Is true; your establishment primarily, and causally depends on the Spirit.
But yet secondarily, and instrumentally, it is attained unto by the word. For
therefore it was that Peter writ (as he says 2 Pet. 1.12.) and surely his
writings were words. And yet the words of Christ were not bare letter: No, they
were Spirit and Life. And the truths of Christ held forth by any, according to
the measure of the gift received, are as truly Christ's words now, John. 6.63.
as when he was here on earth: else how could Paul say? (...) i.e. according
to the eyes sight.
that Christ came and preached to the Ephesians, and was evidently crucified
before the Galatians (as it is Ephesians. 2.17. and Gal. 3.1:) neither of whom heard of
Christ, till after his ascension. I hope it will be no pride but a grateful
and necessary witness to the grace of Christ, if I say I have both spoke and
writ the truth, as it is in Jesus, and as the Spirit has given utterance. Yea
and that in a measure also I can say, that those things which I have heard, and
seen, I have declared unto you, that your joy might be full.

I know nothing so directly tending to both the truth, and fullness of a Saints
joy (of which I account my self obliged to be a helper) as the knowledge of
the love of Christ. 2 Cor. 1. ult.
Now this is the subject I treat of. And this I desire to put you in
remembrance of, as knowing nothing more strong, and constraining unto duty, 2
Cor. 5.14.
than joy springing forth of this well of salvation.

I shall not trouble you with a large Epistle. Four words only in this public
view (for so is printing) I shall leave with you, as my witness unto Christ in
some present truths now denied) which I desire may never be a witness against
you.

1. That Jesus whom we preach, and whose love we declare, is the same Christ
still: i.e. the same God in man's nature (which is the choice thing in him
capable of being anointed, (...) i.e. the self same, not another.
and so of making him Christ) he that ascended is the same that descended, and
he that descended, is the same also that ascended (as it is Ephesians. 4.9, 10.) He
still retains the human nature which once he took: and so is still not only
the same God, but man. Its true the manhood or flesh of Christ is now
glorified, but it is not annihilated, his body is made glorious, but still it is in
body. The man is set down on the right hand of God, Heb. 10.12.

2. This Jesus shall come again in the same mann^r in which he did ascend, as
he was visible (even to the eyes of the flesh) when he went away, so shall
he be seen in like manner coming again, Act. 1.10.11. He is not so
swallowed up in Spirit, (...).
as that he is gone out of the flesh* But albeit his all and only presence
be now in Spirit; yet he shall come again, and all eyes shall see him: and
they also who pierced him; and all kindreds of the earth, as it is Apoc. 1.7.
Whoever shall say these Scriptures are not to be taken in the letter (I know I
have the mind of Christ, if I say in this) he has not the Spirit.

3. That till this coming again, we are to wait for him, and upon him in the
spiritual, and yet external observation of the Ordinances of the Gospel. And in
them we are to expect, and shall find, the sweet and spiritual incomes of
himself, in discoveries of that love of which I treat.

4 That in the day of Christ's coming again, those Ministers will be found
blessed, Lu. 12.42.
who as faithful and wise Stewards shall be found giving the household their
portion of meat in due season. And these Saints will be blameless, who in that
day shall be sound exercised in, and yet living above the observation of
preaching, fellowship, prayers, and breaking of bread, which Christ has
commanded to be kept up til he come.

And now (beloved) what is the panting of my Spirit, both for my own soul, for
yours, and for all the Saints? Is it not this? that the morning of that day
would dawn? Is it not, Christ is (...) i.e. the day dawning: and (...), i.e.
the light bringer, and he is also the morning star.
that the shaddows would fly away, and that the day spring from on high, might
again (in the glory of Christ (God and man,) visit us? Surely these are the
daily groanings of the Spirit in me: But with these there is also a mixture of
sighs: oh! that the Spirit would make us diligent, that we may be found of
him in peace, 2 Pet. 3.14.
without spot, and blameless: and oh! that we may be counted worthy to escape
all these things which (in part are already) come to pass: and to stand before
the son of man, yea, and oh! that when the Lord shall call us to an account,
concerning the oracles, Romans 3.2. (...). i.e. to commit as a choice treasure.
the ordinances which he has committed to us: we may be found First, neither
as having defiled them with our own inventions: Nor Secondly, as dis-esteeming
them upon pretense of our seize: No nor thirdly to have made them our
rest and confidence. But I shall sigh the rest in secret, I beseech you believe
that my heart underwrites this, that I am

Yours, entirely affectionate in the love and labor of the Gospel. JOHN
DURANT.

A word to the Reader.
IN these Sermons I presume thou will perceive the plainness of man; and my
prayer is, that thou may likewise perceive the power of the Spirit.

The time of their preaching, was (some eleven years since) even the noon of
the day of Englands trouble; At that time they were accounted seasonable.

The matter of them, is some Gospel light, of the glorious love of Christ, and
this makes me think they can never be unseasonable.

The manner of their delivery, was (as it ought to be) not with enticeing
words of man's wisdom. But in the simplicity and plainness of the Gospel.

The end was, and is, next to Christ's glory, thy good (O believer!) who ever
thou art, and if this be not attained, I must cry out, I have labored in
vain! And

Two requests I have unto thee, The first is, that thou charitably cover the
failings of the Preacher. Remember the heavenly treasure of the Gospel, is in
earthen vessels. The second is; that thou carefully correct the Errata's of the
Printer, which by reason of my absence from the Press could not be avoided.


If to these two thou will over and above add thy prayers for me, that I may
still be enabled from an experimental knowledge of Gospel truths so publish
the same unto poor souls; Thou will do more than requite me for my pains in
this, even oblige me to a publication of some other Papers. In hope whereof, I
subscribe my self,

Thine in the sincerity and strength of Gospel-love. John Durant.

SERMON I.
EPHESIANS. 3 ver. 19. And to know the love of Christ which passes knowledge.


KNowledge is the perfection of the Rational Creature: It is that whereby we
come (...) (as the Philosopher speaks) i. e. to partake of Divinity, to be like
unto the Deity. God is Light, and Knowledge, and the more we partake of it, the
more like we are to him. Now by how much the likelier Note.
we are unto God, by so much the nearer we come up to perfection.

Knowledge is exceeding precious: It must needs be so, since it tends to
perfection. Indeed, as Aquinas says of seeing, Though the object of sight be
mean in it self, yet the very act of seeing is sweet: So also he determines of
Knowing, that however the object be low and poor, yet the very act it self of
knowledge, is high and precious.

Now of all knowledge there is none so precious, nor so perfecting, as that
which is Divine. Other Knowledge (viz. Human) can make us perfect only as men:
This knowledge (viz. Divine) gives us a perfection as Saints. But,

Of all Divine knowledge, the knowledge of Jesus Christ in the light of love,
as most precious, as tending most to the perfection of our souls: As there are
degrees of luster in the heavenly lights; so there are degrees of glory in
Divine truths. Every Star in the Firmament has a glorious light; but yet the
light of the Sun exceeds them all in glory: And every truth (which is as a
Star in the heaven of Divinity) has a peculiar excellency in it, and the
knowledge thereof is precious: But Jesus Christ (who is as the Sun in
Divinity's heaven) has a transcendent excellency in him;. and to know him,
does sarre more tend to the perfecting of our souls, than the knowledge of any,
or all Divine truths else besides. Therefore it is that Paul accents this
knowledge with an excellency, Phil. 3.8. Yea doubtless (says he) I count all
things but loss, for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord.
And certainly Paul might well say thus: for albeit he had attained the
knowledge of other things, yet without this, he had been at a loss in point of
Soul-sacred perfection. So that however other knowledge (as being some way
perfecting and precious) be desirable; yet there is no knowledge which is so to
be desired (at least by Saints) as the knowledge of Jesus Christ.

But yet, as although the Sun be the most glorious of the heavenly Lights, yet
Mortals receive more comfort by its heat, than by its light: In like manner,
though the knowledge of Jesus Christ be the most transcendent of divine
truths, yet our souls receive more sweetness by the warmth of his love, than
by the luster of his light. Look as Moses could not see the glory of God and
live, and yet must dye except he saw his grace: Even so our souls cannot see
the luster of the bright beams of Christ's glory, and live (we must dye ere we
can behold that) yet notwithstanding we must see the light of the bosome-love
of Jesus, or else we dye. If this light dawn not upon our bosoms, if this
knowledge shine not into our hearts, we shall sink and dye in our souls,
especially if we are in fear of any troubles.

Hence it was, that the Apostle Paul, among the rest of those precious
Petitions, which he puts up to the Father of our Lord Jesus, in the behalf of
the Ephesians, lest they should faint at his tribulations, he adds this, that
they might know the love of Christ which passes knowledge.

I shall briefly give you the context, that it may give some light to the text.

The Apostle having hinted in the first verse of this Chapter, Context.
that he was a prisoner of Jesus Christ for the Ephesians, who were Gentiles;
and having also upon that spoken something of the excellency of the Gospel, and
the warrant which he had to preach the same unto them (which two things were
as two great supporters of him in his sufferings) he comes in the fourteenth
verse to pray for the Ephesians, that they might not faint at his tribulations.
Now there might be a double ground of the Apostles fear, why the Ephesians
might faint at news of his tribulations.

1 Sympathy. It is usual with Saints to sympathize each with other in their
tribulations. And Paul upon this ground, might rightly think, that the tidings
of his imprisonment would be sad to these Ephesians; and happily he might fear,
that out of their tender love, both to his person, and preaching, they would be
over-sad, by sympathy, to understand, that now their Preacher was in prison.

2 Fear lest themselves might meet with the like sufferings. For what might
they think? Is Paul in prison for Preaching the Gospel? then sure may we fear
the like for receiving the Gospel.

It is commonly seen, that the receivers of Gospel Truths suffer as well as the
revealers. Note.
And certainly (the Ephesians might say) we shall be accounted as faulty for
our faith in, as Paul is for his Preaching of the Gospel. This peradventure
they might argue, and fear, and faint; Therefore the Apostle bends his knees
to him who alone is able to keep from, and support in faintings, i. e. To the
Father of our Lord Jesus: And three things he beggeth in the behalf of the
Ephesians, that they might not (upon any ground) faint at his tribulations.

1 Divine strength. That he would grant according to the riches of his glory,
that they might be strengthened with might by his Spirit, in the inner man, ver.
16. The spirit of man (the Apostle knew was weak, and so would faint, unless
God did strengthen it; therefore he begs the Spirit of God (which is the power
from on high) for their strengthening in the inner man, that they might not
faint in their outward man.

2 Christ's inhabitation. That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith, says
he, v. 17. If any thing will keep up the heart from fainting, Note.
it is the indwelling of Christ with the soul. Christ's presence creates
comfort, and there is no such fence against fainting under any fears, as Christ
in the soul. The inhabitation of Christ within, will support the soul from its
faintings at tribulation for Christ without.

3 The knowledge of Christ's love* That they might know the love of Christ which
passes knowledge, as it is in the text. Paul well knew the power of Christ's
love, and the efficacy thereof this way. So that now you may gather up the
Apostles Petitions into one Prayer, and you may conceive him pouring out his
heart after this manner: Thou Father of our Lord Jesus, since thou art the God
of all comforts, and comfortest thine in all their tribulations, so that they
faint not; vouchsafe to grant according to the riches of thy grace, that the
Ephesians may not faint at my tribulations. And to this end, strengthen them by
thy Spirit of power in their inner man; fill them by the glorious presence of
Christ dwelling in them; but above all, let them know the love of Jesus Christ
which passes knowledge.

Thus you see by the Context, the drift and scope of the Text. But before I
speak any further to it, I must clear one thing, which happily may be an
occasion of doubt, and that is the seeming unreasonablenesse of this part of
Paul's prayer: Doubt.
For may some say, what reason is there that Paul should pray for that, which
he hints is impossible? Why should he pray that the Ephesians might know that,
which he expressly says was above knowledge? The love of Christ which passes
knowledge.

There be three things which may satisfy this scruple, Satisfaction.
and demonstrate the reasonableness of this request.

1 Admit the love of Christ be above knowledge, yet it is not unreasonable to
desire to know it. For look, as albeit the fulfilling of Divine precepts be
above our power, yet notwithstanding it is to be in our endeavor. In like
manner, albeit the knowledge of Christ, of Christ's love, though its above our
intellectuals, yet it may be in our desires, The same infiniteness, which
Grace puts in the Will, making it endeavor to fulfill that, which it cannot;
nay, yea and does also put on the desire for the obtaining of that which cannot
be obtained. But,

2 To know the love of Christ may be said to be above knowledge with reference
to men, as men; not unto Saints, as such. Indeed the spirit of man is not able
to know, or search into the love of Christ (that is above its knowledge:) But
the Spirit of Christ is able both to search into, and to reveal his love. And
though Christians as men, cannot attain to the knowledge of the love of Christ,
by the light of reason, yet as Saints by the light of faith they may;
especially the Holy Ghost (in the mean time) shedding it abroad in their
hearts, as it is, Romans 5.5.

3 The love of Christ may be said to be above knowledge, in regard of its
perfection of degrees, not simply inregard of its parts.

It Is true, the perfect knowledge of Christ's love passes the understanding of
men, and Angels (which is its glory:) But yet in some measure it may be known
(the which is our duty.) For that which cannot be known perfectly (in the
highest degree) may yet be known partially, (and in some measure.)

Thus the Text may be cleared from the doubt propounded. Now there are four
ways in which I shall look upon this Scripture, and so speak unto it.

1 As it includes the truth and reality of Christ's love to the Saints. Division
of the word.
2 As it concludes the height, and royalty, or transcendency of that love. 3 As
it holds out the Apostles desire, that the Ephesians might know both. 4 As it
contains the ground of keeping up the Ephesians hearts from fainting at Paul's
tribulations; which is the drift and scope that Paul drives, or aims at in
them.
And thus there will be four Doctrines which I shall take up, and speak unto
from these words.

I. There is love in Christ's bosom toward all believers. Doctrines from the
words.
II. That love which Christ bears to believers, is a transcendent love. III.
It is a thing of necessary concernment for every Christian to know the
transcendent love of Christ. IV. The Spiritual knowledge of the transcendent
love of Christ toward Believers, is of special efficacy to keep up there hearts
from fainting under any trouble.
I begin with the first, which however it might more fully be gathered from
another Text, yet because it will be a good foundation for the following
Discourse, and is clear enough in this place, I shall briefly speak unto it
now, viz.

There is love in Christ's bosom toward all Believers.

I suppose it is clearly (couched at least) in these words; Science supposes
ens; Paul would not doubtless pray that the Ephesians might know that which
was not; things must be, ere they can be known.

Nothing falls under the understanding, till it first be in being.

I shall briefly open the Point, Point opnened.
and then prove it, and apply it.

How love may be said to be in Christ.
How love may be said to be in Christ (as any other affection) I shall not need
to inquire; though happily love may be said to be in Christ as God (for as he
is man there is no doubt of it) in far more proper sense, then any other
passion may, because it is (as it were) his essence, God being (as John says)
love, 1 John 4.16.

What Christ's love is.
What the love of Christ is, I shall not curiously define. The Moral'sts have so
many definitions of love, that indeed it is hard among them (as the Proverb)
is, to find this wood for trees, i. e. to know what love is, among their
various definitions thereof. Passing by therefore their nicities, I shall
content my self with this plain description of love.

It is the commanding affection of the Soul, Love described.
consisting in the expansion or going out of the heart, toward a person or
thing, in wishings and workings for its good.

Cunctorumque Deum primum quaesivit amorem.
I call it an affection, and the commanding one: it being indeed on all hands
assented unto. Love is Queen regent in the Soul, and it sits upon the Throne
commanding all. It is the Centurion in the bosom, and has the same power over
all the affections, which the Centurion has over all his servants.

I say, it consists in the expansion or stretching out of the heart. Look, as
hatred contracts and gathers in, so love opens and dilates the heart. I add,
that it consists (in the general) in wishings and workings for good. I do not
specify the end, for that describes, and denominates the particular kinds of
love; therefore only in the general, I say, it consists in the going out of the
heart, in wishing and working for the good of the person, or thing loved.

So that now, when I say that there is love in Christ's bosom toward all
believers, I mean, that the commanding affections of Jesus Christ is set upon
them; that his heart is open, and stretched out unto them; and that the
wishings and workings of his Soul are toward them for good.

Believers who they are, described.
By Believers, in a word, I understand all those who close with Christ as
tendered in the Gospel. However there be difference between them in the degrees
of their faith, and the ways of their light, yet all agreeing in this, that
they see themselves lost without Christ, and that God the Father does freely
tender him in the word of grace; they do thereupon go our in the strength and
sincerity of their souls, to embrace him as he is tendered: They are believers
all of them; and in this thing Christ puts no difference (as it is Act. 15.9.)
between them, but burns in his bosom with real love toward them all.

For proof, Point proved.
I should but darke^ the point, if I should bring all that cloud of witnesses,
which would gladly come and set seal to this sweet truth. Ask John, and he will
witness that Christ loved him. He was indeed a bosome-beloved Believer; Joh.
13.23 and 19.26
and of him it is often said, he was the Disciple whom Jesus loved: yea and
John will witness for more than himself, He says Jesus loved him, and all
Believers besides him: For speaking to them he says, He (i. e. Christ) has
loved us, Apoc. 1.5. Call in Paul, and he will prove that Christ loves
Believers; for Christ loved him; and such was the love that Christ bare to
Paul, that he professes that he could, nay, did live upon it. I live (says
he) by the Son of God who loves me, Gal. 2.20. Nay Paul further bears record
to this truth, and witnesses, that Christ's love stretches forth it self to
every believing Soul, We are (says he) more than conquerers, through him that
loves us, Romans 8.37. I shall add no more testimonies to prove this truth. Even
the least Believer, though but a babe, is able to lisp in the language of this
love, and tell you, that there is a divine fire of love in Christ's bosom,
burning brightly toward Believers.

I shall hint three Demonstrations of the Doctrine taken from the behavior of
Christ toward Believers, which will evidently clear cordial love unto them.

Ch^ists love demonst ated Oculus amoris index.
1 Christ's eye is always on Believers; and he takes delight to look there where
they are. The eye is the Index of love. It is a sweet star always shining over
the hearts and houses of those whom we love. The Proverb tells us, where we
love, there we look. Ubi amor, ibi oculus.
Now it is easy to observe the rowlings of Christ's eyes: how that still they
are toward Believers. Will you listen to Christ's love in its language this way?
Let me sethy countenance (says he to the Believer) for it is lovely, Cant.
2.14. (...) i e. Thy appearance.
Such is the pleasure that Christ takes in beholding of believers, that he
seems to live upon their looks, and speaks as if he were ravished with their
sight. Thou have ravished my heart, my Sister, my Spouse, thou have ravished my
heart with one of thine eyes, (...) i. e, Thou have heartened me.
Cant. 4.9. He speaks once and again (as if he did suck sweetness from the
speech) thou have ravished my heart with thy sight. How can we question Christ's
love to believers, when his eyes are thus fixed on them, that their sight does
ravish his soul? Build upon it O believing soul! Christ's delight in looking on
thee does demonstrate his love to thee. He peeps through the Lattesses, to
declare his love, Cant. 2.9. Nay, as if he were over-powred (as indeed such an
effect does a look of love produce) while he beholds believers, he says, Turn
away thine eyes from me, for they have overcome me, Cant. 6.5. The word is,
(...), and it signifies, have made me proud, or as our Margent has it, have
puffed me up, Christ seems to pride himself in the looks of believers; his eye is
on them, and his heart is taken up, if their eye be on him.

2 Christ's tongue speaks his love to believers. Lingua amori tuba.
The tongue is loves trumpet; the breathings of the Heart fill the Lips with
sounds of love: Love that is secret in the bosom, sounds sweetly in the
breath. Speech as a Silver trumpet loudly sounds love. It is said of Shechem
the Son of Hamor, that his Soul clave unto Dinah the daughter of Jacob, and the
Text says, he loved her, and his tongue spoke it; for it is added, that he
spoke kindly to the Damsel, Genesis 34.31. Believers, Christ's tongue bewrays
him; his lips speak his love to you; Oh how often has Christ spoke sweetly to
thy Soul? O believer! Can not thou gather by his speaking to thy heart (for
that is the Hebrew phrase for speaking kindly) the love of his heart? (...)
How near thy heart, O foul! do those words of thy Savior go? If any thirst,
let him come and drink freely. Does not his heart open as a fountain of love in
this speech? And speaks he not to thy heart, i. e. very kindly, when he says,
If thou do but thirst, come and drink? Ask the poor Woman that had the bloody
issue, Mark 5. whether or no Christ did not speak to her in the language of
love, when he said, Daughter, thy faith has made thee whole? Poor heart, she
had touched him as she thought at unawares; and when she heard him speak of it,
she trembles, as if she expected words of wrath: But while she touched his
garment secretly, love touched his heart sweetly, and his tongue bespeaks it,
when he called her Daughter. And as Christ's tongue trumpets out love, when he
speaks to, so when he speaks of believers. O the high Epithites, (...).
ap^a Hermog.
(i. e. that which he adds to believers names, when he speaks of their
persons!) how rhetorical, how encomiastical is the language of his love! when
he speaks of his Spouse, Thou art fair, (says he) thou art fair, thou have
Doves eyes; thy hair is as a flock of Goats, thy teeth are like a flock of
Sheep; thy lips are like a thread of scarlet, thy neck like the tower of David,
etc. Cant. 4.1, 2, 3, 4. As believers declare their love to Christ by speaking
highly of him; so Christ declares his love to believers by speaking highly of
them. If believers call him the Lilly of the valleys, he calls them the Lilly
among the thorns. Christ's love will not permit him to speak of them in low
language. Thus the lips of your Lord, O believers! are a demonstration of his
love to you.

3 Christ's actions seal to the truth, and strengthen the demonstration of the
Doctrine. If there were nothing but the eye or the tongue, it might be feared,
lest the love expressed by them, were but either feigned or fond: But actions
following these, seal it up, that the love is not complemental, but cordial. If
love be only in the lip, it is without life, and it may be suspected as
counterfeit: But when men not only speak, Act i^ amoris ancill^.
but act love, then love lives, and is love indeed. Indeed, where love is in
truth, it will be seen in act; every action being only Loves Lackey to go of
its errands, and Loves servant to do its work. Now should we take a view of the
actions of Jesus Christ, we shall see that they strive to excel and exceed his
words in the declaration of his love to believers. I shall only hint at some,
as intending the larger Discourse of them in the next Doctrine.

1 Consider Jesus Christ manifesting himself, and his secrets, to believing
souls: and this will demonstrate the truth of his love. Dalilah questions the
truth of Sampsons love, from the concealment of his secrets from her, How can
thou say, I love thee, when thy heart is not with me, says she, Judge. 16.15.
Thus she seems to argue, Where there is love in truth, there will be a
communication of secrets: But this I find not in thee; therefore I question
whether thou indeed do love me. How ever Dalilah did, or might argue thus
against her Sampson, Believers cannot argue so against their Saviors love. The
Lord Jesus unbosometh himself to Believers, the secrets of his heart are with
them. Christ tells his Disciples that he would manifest himself unto them,
(...) i. e. lny himself open.
Joh. 14. The men of the world are strangers to Christ's affections, and
therefore they are so to his secrets. Carnal people do not know the mind of
the Lord, because he does not love them: But we (says Paul) that is, we who
are beloved by Christ, we have the mind of Christ, 1 Corint. 2.16. Look as the
Father loves the Son, and declares it by this, that he shows him all things
which himself does, Joh. 5.10. In like manner, the Son loves believers, and
actually demonstrates it by this, that he declares all things ( i. e. all these
secrets which were needful for them to know) that he heard of the Father, Joh.
15.15. The secrets of Christ's Cabinet-councel are with those whom he loves.

2 Christ often takes Believers to his house, and feasts them. Thus we deal
with our friends, and thus we declare to them our loves; Christ deals so with
his, The King has brought me into his Chamber, Cant. 1.4. Nay he has brought
me into his banqueting house, Cant. 2.4. When David would declare his love to
Barzillai, he said, Come thou over with me, and I will feed thee with me at
Jerusalem, 2 Samuel 19.23. thus Christ often speaks, and declares his love to
believers, Come thou to me, poor soul, and I will feed thee with me in
Jerusalem. Nay, Christ declares his love, not only by inviting and bringing
believers to his house, but also by coming to theirs; He does stand at their
door, and knock, and if they will but open, he will enter, Apoc. 3.6. if they
love him so much as to let him in, he will come and declare his love by
dwelling with them, Joh. 14.23. (...) i.e. make out abode, or long stay with.
And he will feast with them in their house, i. e. their hearts. And because he
will declare he comes to show love, he will make the feast at his own cost. He
has gathered his myrrh with his spice, for this purpose, as it is Cant. 5.1.

3 Christ unites himself to believers, and in that demonstrates that he loves
them. Affection begets union. Austin (long ago) defined Love to be the juncture
of two in one. Amor est junctura duo copulans; Love it makes one of two. It is
said of Jonathan and David, that their souls were knit together, 1 Samuel 18.1.
Christ and believers are knit together, and it is Christ's love which makes the
knot. Its a more than moral union which is between Christ and believers, they
are not only his friends, and brethren, but his Spouses, and Members. If he be
a Head, they shall be the body; and if he be a Vine, they are the branches: Nay
the union between Christ and Believers, is nearer than that of the vine and
branches; of no branch can it be said (properly) that it is in the vine, and
the vine in it: But of Believers it is said, Christ is in them, and they are in
him. This union demonstrates also the truth of Christ's love to believing souls.
I shall now make a word of Application, and conclude this point. There be but
three uses unto which I will speak* viz. a use of Information, Comfort, and
Counsel.


Use I. The point informs us of the sweetness of Christ to all the Saints. O
how sweet! how kind! how gracious! is Jesus Christ to believers, thus to mind
then, thus to set his heart upon them? Believers, the Lord loves you, Is he not
in this sweet unto you? Ruth at the consideration of Roaz his love, falls on
her face, and faith, Why have I found grace in thine eyes, that thou should
take knowledge of me, seeing I am a stranger? Fall on your faces Believers, you
were once strangers to Jesus Christ, but you have found grace in his eyes; your
names are written upon his heart in letters of love: well may you say that
Christ is sweet, seeing he loves such strangers as you were. The King of Israel
is surely sweet in setting his love upon you, who were strangers unto Israel. O
how happy art thou, O poor believer, in being the object of thy Lords love! The
meanest believer may raise up a very high structure of happiness, upon this
corner stone, Christ's love. O how blessed art thou in thy beloved (poor soul!)
and how sweet is he to thee! that has always a fire of love burning in his
bosom toward thee?

II. This point is very comfortable to believers; It is a cordial to you, is it
not, O believer! that Christ does love you? does it not revive your hearts (my
brethren) to hear, that he who is the Lord of Life, and glory in himself, is a
Lord of grace and love to you? Jesus Christ who has written upon his Garments,
Lord of Lords, has also written upon his bosom, love to believers. Certainly
(Believers) could you but see how near you are to Christ, how highly he prizeth
you, how dearly he loves you; I should not need to bid you rejoice, or be glad,
or be of good comfort.

Object. No, will the soul say, Indeed you need not, if I could but see that
Christ loved, me, but I doubt that.

Res. Doubt it not (O believing soul) but be confident, and in that confidence
be comforted: Christ loves you, and that (as we shall show hereafter) with a
transcendent love.

Object. But it is good to have a ground of confidence; and in vain shall you
comfort me, if I see no reason in your words. Why what reason is there that
Christ should love me?

Res. Christ's love is its own reason. He therefore loves because he will. It
may be the vanity of our wanton love, that we love merely because we love: But
it is the glory of Christ's love, that he does so. Mark and mind this.
The reason why Christ loves thee (O poor soul) is in his own bosom. If thou
look in thine, thou will not find it (because it is not there) but look up
into Christ's bosom, and there it is. He will have mercy upon whom he will.
Christ will love thee, and does love thee (O Believer) because he will. Do not
therefore stand questioning why he should, but be comforted, and rejoice in
this, that he does love thee, even thee (O poor soul.) Though it may be thy
faith be little, yet Christ's love to thee is true.

Q. But though he love me now, will he love me still? Will not Christ dislike
me hereafter, and upon that dislike desert me? Sure I am I shall give him
cause, and I fear he will take it. And certainly if Christ desert, I dye, I
cannot live longer than I have his love

A. Neither dye, nor doubt, poor soul! Thy Lord so loves thee, that he will not
leave thee; or if he do for a time, he will not always. Christ's bowels burn with
love, and that fire, however smothered for a time, will break out in a flame at
last. Christ's love is like himself, immutable and unchangeable. Love is Christ's
life as well as thine: He will not surely kill himself by deserting thee. Thou
can not live except Christ do love, neither can Christ. You Lord has sworn
(and surely if he break his oath he dies) that the Mountains shall be removed,
but his love shall not leave thee.

Obj. Oh! But though Christ do love me, yet men hate me. I cannot be so
cheerful in Christ's love, because I meet with the creatures wrath.

Rep. I pity thee poor Creature, thou have the love of the Potter, and thou
fear the wrath of the Potsherd. Why art thou so weak, as to sink under the
Creatures wrath, while thou have the Creators love? Be of good comfort, Christ
can break in pieces all thy enemies with his Iron rod, while in the mean time
he will comfort thee with his Shepherds-crook. Why do thou droop at the
hatred of him, who dwells in a Tabernacle of clay, and not rather triumph in
the love of him, who is set down at the right hand of the Majesty on high? Look
up Believer, Heaven is clear over thy head, though the earth be dirty under
feet; though thou be in a storm among the creatures, yet the Sun of love shines
on thee from Christ. He smiles and loves thee, what though men frown and hate
thee? Fear not him who hates thy body, and at worst can but destroy that;
rejoice rather in him who loves thy soul, and at the last will raise up thy
body from the Grave, and give thee a glorious body like unto his own, and fill
thy soul with eternal joy in the enjoyment of his everlasting love.

The last use of the point is-for counsel. Since Christ loves his Saints, I
would (surely the point might, and does) counsel, both the world, and believers.

First, you men of the world; If you have an ear to hear, hear: Christ loves
believers, be ye counseled to do the like. Certainly Christ will take it well
at your hands, if you love them who are beloved by him. His friends are
sometime strangers in your Land, use them well, show them love, put it upon
Christ's score; he loves them, and he will reward you: Jesus Christ does so love
believers, as that he will not let a cup of cold water, given to them in his
name, (that is, because he loves them) go unrewarded. I say it again, since
Christ is gracious, and loves believers, be ye wise and love them also.
However, take heed that ye do not wrong them. If you will not do them good,
beware you do them no hurt: Believe it, if you do, Christ loves them, and he
will not bear it. Tremble, lest, (while you lift up your hand against
believers) that Jesus Christ who loves them, dash you in pieces. Beware of
persecuting Christ's beloved ones under pretenses. It will be but a poor excuse,
to say they were Schismatics, Christ knows them to be Saints: Believe it, the
blood of believers is very precious, and as he will punish Antichristian
wretches, under what names, or titles soever distinguished; So also will he be
avenged upon all those who dare touch believers, under what nicknames soever
disgraced. Therefore if you will not be so wise, as to love; yet be not so mad,
as to hurt those whom Christ loves.

But secondly, let this counsel believers, since the Lord Jesus loves them, that
they would walk worthy thereof. Believers, live as the objects of Christ's love;
Advance his Kingdom, embrace his counsels, love all his members, be abundant in
his work, and service. In all things show that Christ's love to you has a
constraining power in you; at least be ye counseled to love Christ, who loves
you and that so much the rather, because Christ deserves thy love, though thou
do not deserve his. O let not the love of Christ plead against you, and say, I
ran out to them, but they returned not in to me. Let not Christ say, I gave
you counsel, and you did reject it; In love I gave you Commandments, and you
did transgress them. No, but since Christ loves you, love him; and if you love
him, keep his Commandments. Rouse up your selves, O believing souls! and
considering that Christ loves you, demean your selves accordingly. If he call,
come; If he bid you go, go; If his Kingdom be advancing, join in the work ( it
is the Kingdom of him that loves you) If his Spirit counsel, take it (for it
comes from love.) In a word, in all things live as those who indeed are beloved
of Christ. And let your carriage be exactly obedient, kind, and loving unto
him, who does stoop so low, as to love such poor creatures as you be. And if
any ask, why you love, and labor for Jesus Christ? tell them, it is because
you love him: And add withal, that did they but know how Christ loves you,
they would rather ask; why you love him so little, or do for him no more. But
if they demand, how does Christ love you? Tell them, that question is
unanswerable. Indeed say, he loves you and that truly; but withal
transcendently. That Christ loves you, tell all the world of you know; but how
he loves, tell them, that passes your knowledge: yea and the knowledge of
every creature, for it is a love passing knowledge. And this is the next thing,
and the chief thing which we shall speak of.

SERMON II.
EPHESIANS. 3. ver. 19. And to know the love of Christ which passes knowledge.


CHRIST'S love is the Saints life. Paul tells you, he was dead to the Law, that
he might live to God. And the ground thereof was this, that he lived by faith
in Christ, who loved him, Galath. 2.20. As the life, so likewise the comfort of
the Saints is wrapped up in the love of Christ. A believer can neither live,
nor rejoice, if the Lord Jesus smile not upon his soul: But if Jesus Christ will
but smile, and shine in the light of love, Believers know, not only how to
live, but also how to rejoice, in all, even the worst of times. Hence it was,
that this Apostle praying to the Father of our Lord Jesus, for the Ephesians,
that they might not faint at his tribulations, He entreats, that, to this
purpose, they might know the love of Christ which passes knowledge.

Having briefly touched at the reality of Christ's love to believers (as it is
included in this place) I shall now speak more largely to the royalty thereof
(as it is set out in this phrase) that it passes knowledge. Whence our second
point was this, viz.

That love which Christ bears to believers, is a transcendent love.

You see how fully this point lies in these words. It must needs be
transcendent, since the Apostle says, it passes knowledge.

I shall endeavor to open the point, and give you the meaning thereof, by
bringing you to the top of this high hyperbolical expression, in three steps or
stairs.

First, The love of Christ to Believers is transcendent, it being above
expression. Those who enjoy Christ's love, they know not how to express it,
such is the transcendency of the love, that it passes their knowledge how to
express it in any Language. The Scripture sets out the height of things by
this, that they are unspeakable: So when it would heighten, and declare the
transcendency of that rapture in which Paul was (when wrapped up to the third
heavens) and the glory of that which he then heard, it sets it down by this,
that it was unutterable, He heard unspeakable words, (which may be an Hebraism
for things, word and thing being in the Hebrew convertible) which it was not
possible for a man to utter, (...) apud Hebraeos est and verbum, and res.
2 Cor. 12.14. In like manner when the Scripture speaks of the transcendent joy
which Believers rejoice withal by believing, It uses this phrase, that it was
unspeakable, 1 Pet. 1.8. Ye rejoice with joy unspeakable.

And it must not be passed by in silence, that the joy of which Peter speaks,
is that which Believers have by faith, which certainly is founded upon Christ's
love; So that if the joy in the faith of Christ's love be unspeakable, the love
it self is much more: For quod efficit tale, est magis tale (as the Logicians
speak) i. e. That which makes any thing so, or such, is much more it self so,
or such. This may be the first step to ascend the height of the expression, and
to declare the transcendency of Christ love to believers, It passes knowledge
in this, that no man (no, though he had the tongues of men and Angles) knows
how to express it.

2 Christ's love is transcendent, and may be said to be above knowledge, in that
it is above apprehension. As the Language of Believers cannot express, so
neither can their knowledge apprehend the height of their Saviors love. Men
often can apprehend more than they can express; when the tongue is silenced,
the understanding may be comprehensive. But now, in the love of Christ there is
that, which poseth and confounds the very intelectuals of men and Angels. It
is so high, as that there is no reaching of it; so deep, as that there is no
sounding of it; so long, as that it exceeds measuring; and so broad, that there
is no comprehending it. The most Spiritual Mathematician is not able to
commensurate Christ's love in all its dimensions. It is as possible for that
little Crevise of the body (the Eye) to let in all the light of the Sun, as it
is for that great eye of the Soul ( knowledge) to let in the luster of Christ's
love. The Holy Ghost, when he would set out a thing as transcendent, he uses
this phrase, that it is such as cannot be comprehended. As now, speaking of the
great* things which God does, it is said they are such as we cannot
comprehend, Job 37.5. Without doubt, as the operation of the Fathers hand, so
the expansion of the Sons heart, is such, as cannot be comprehended.

In this, the Fathers works, and the Sons loves, do equally transcend, that
they pass knowledge, and are not able to be apprehended.

3 Christ bears to believers a transcendent love, and it passes knowledge, in
this, that it is above conception. Fancy can conceive that which Reason cannot
comprehend. The Understanding being bounded by Reason, cannot go beyond its
limits; and therefore where Reason cannot suggest, the Understanding cannot
apprehend. But now fancy is winged, and it will fly: It does (as Scaliger
speaks) Aspernare caeterorum finium praescriptionem, It scorneth to be bounded,
though by Reason it self: It flies high, and will guess (at least) at the
transcendent height of that which reason cannot reach. Yet such (my beloved) is
the love of Christ; It is so high, so superlatively-transcendent, that let
fancy loose, and let it fly as high as it can, it is not able to soar to the
top thereof. As the understanding going to its utmost bounds: So fancy flying
beyond all bounds, is not able to conceive what is the love of Christ to
Believers.

So that now when I say, the love which Christ Bears to Believers is
transcendent, and when you read in the text, that it passes knowledge, You may
take the meaning thus; That it is above the expression of the finest Oratory,
the comprehension of the deepest Theory, and the conception of the sublimest
Fancy; In so much, as let Oratory speak, Wisdom study, Fancy fly, yet neither
the one, nor the other, nor all, are, able to express, apprehend, or conceive
what is the love of Christ to believers. Indeed the love of Christ is such, as
heaven it self (though it be the state of sight) does not (as hereafter we shall
show) exalt the Saints so high, as to make them able to comprehend that love,
in the fields whereof they do walk and live. It is with the Saints in Heaven,
as with the Fishes in the Sea; they swim up and down the mighty waters, but yet
they do not, cannot comprehend that watery world in which they live: In like
manner, the Saints above, though they swim up and down the infinite Ocean of
love (which is in their Saviors bosom) yet they can no more comprehend that
vast sea of love, in which to eternity they shall bathe, and bless their
souls, than the little Fish can comprehend the great Sea in which it swims.
Wherefore (ere I proceed further) let me premise this, That it is not in my
thoughts, nor dare I presume this, neither would I have you expect, that by any
thing which I shall or can say, I shall be able to set out the infiniteness of
that love (of which we shall treat) according to his full Latitude, and worth.
No, this I despair of; only I desire to let you see some of the glimmering
beams of that transcendent love which is in Christ's bosom toward believers,
so as that you may wonder at it, and set about the exacter study of it. And
look as a Painter, when he intends to draw out the Sea, or the World in a Map,
he makes only some little shadows of the Earth and Sea, that so the beholder
may be enabled to guess at the vastness thereof: In like manner I shall draw
before you (in my Discourse) some little shadowy pricks, or lines of Christ's
love, that thereby I may help you somewhat to imagine, what is that infinite
transcendent love, which neither Saints nor Angels are able (in all its luster
and dimensions) to paint out or discover.

For the proof, I shall not need to add more Scriptures, it being clear enough
by what the Apostle speaks in this place of Christ's love, that it is
transcendent. In the verse before this, the Apostle hints, that there are all
the dimensions in Christ's love, which may serve to declare any thing vast and
infinite. There is a breadth, and length, and depth, and height in the love of
Christ. And it is worth the noting, the Apostle does not tell how great those
dimensions were; He does not say how broad, or how long, or how deep, or how
high; but (as if the dimensions of Christ's love did transcend his knowledge) he
passes it by, and only adds this, that this love passes knowledge.

I find not this phrase (to my best remembrance) but once more in the New
Testament, and that is Philip. 4.7. where Paul speaking of the transcendency of
the Peace of God, he says, it passes understanding. Certainly, it is the
glory of Christ's love (as well as of his Fathers peace) that it also passes
understanding.

If at your leisure you read, and reading spiritually consider, what is
presented to faith, in the Book of the Canticles, you will see this truth (that
the love of Christ to believers is transcendent) in the glory and convincing
power, and proof thereof. It may be in your time you have misspent some hours
in reading of some Romances, And you have wondered at some strange Stories of
Love which you have met withal: But alas! should you compare the highest love
that ever you read of, with the love of Christ to Believers, you will be forced
to confess; that that love, in comparison of this, is but like the story it
self, i. e. a mere fancy. If ever strength of affection were set out in
sweetness of expression, It is in that Book to a Spiritual eye: when I do but
consider the fourth Chapter only of that Song, I cannot choose but wonder at the
high transcendency of Christ's love to believers. Surely I conclude, the
affections are sweet, strong, glorious, unconceivable, when the expressions
thereof are so ravishing, so great, so high, as in that Chapter they are.

I shall give one general demonstration, to let you see the truth of the
Doctrine, that Christ's love to believers is transcendent: The demonstration take
thus; That love which includes in it, and comprehends all kinds, acts, or
demonstrations of love whatsoever, must needs be a transcendent love.

But such is the love of Christ to Believers, etc. Therefore, etc. I suppose
the Major is clear enough, and needs no proof. The Painter took the direct, and
undeniable way to make the Picture of Minerva transcend, and excel all other
Beauties, when he epitomized, or contracted all the several rays, and
particular beauties that were scattered up and down in other Persons, or
Pictures, in that one pecce. It is upon this ground an axiom indubitable, and
beyond or above Dispute, That the Sun does far transcend in Light, any, or
all the other Lights, Moon, or Stars, etc. because in its Light, all theirs is
contained, and that in an eminent manner.

All the question is about the Minor; whether that Christ's love be such to
believers, as that it includes and contains in it, all other kinds or acts of
love whatsoever. Now this I shall put out of question by an Induction, or
enumeration of the several kinds, or acts of love.

Amongst other (how exactly I will not determine) the Moralists tell us of
these four kinds of love, as the chief, viz.

1 A love of Friendship. 2 A love of Pity. 3 A love of Sympathy. 4 A love of
Complacency.
In these four only, I shall instance (which I had rather call several
demonstrations, or degrees of one and the same passion of love, than particular
kinds distinct) and shall show that Christ's love to Believers, includes, and
contains in it all of them, and that therefore it must needs be transcendent.

1 The love of friendship is so called (not as if it were the habit of
friendship it self, but) because it is that kind, or act of love, whereby we
prosecute or follow one, whom we look upon, and love as a friend; and to whom
we wish good. Now this kind (or rather degree) of love, is in the love of
Christ to believers; Christ looks upon, and loves all believers as friends;
hence it is, that he counts, and calls them all by that name, ye are my
friends, Joh. 15.14. And that this is real, appears by his dealing with them.
Therefore it is added, Henceforth I call you not servants; for the servant
knows not what his Lord does: but I have called you friends; for all things
that I have heard of the Father, I have made known unto you, ver. 15. Those
whom we love as friends, we open our minds unto; and it is their privilege,
we communicate to them secrets which we have heard. Christ deals thus with
believers, and thus dealing, does not he declare to them the love of friendship?

2 The love of pity. This falls in, and follows upon the former; for (as
Job says) To him that is afflicted pity should be showed by his friend, Job
6.14. This also is included in Christ's love to believers. For upon that love of
friendship which he bears to them, he acts this of pity still toward them;
when no eye pitied them, his eye did. When sinners, and Satan rather laugh at
their misery, and say, Aha, Aha, so would we have it. Christ he as it were
sighs to see their sorrows, and indeed pities their souls: Hence it is said,
Isa. 63.9. In his love, and in his pity he redeemed them (it was real pity it
did work) and he bare them, and carried them all the days of old.

3 The love of Sympathy (which in truth is but a high degree of pity) is also
contained in the love of Christ to believers. Men sympathize with those whom
they love; when they do (as it were) take up their miseries upon themselves,
and be as if they were in their Friends case. Thus does Jesus Christ, when he
sees any believer groan either under sin, or sadness, he comes, and by a
sympathy does afflict himself (For in all their afflictions (says the Prophet)
he was afflicted, Isa. 63.9.) as if he himself was in their sadness, and under
their sin. The Author to the Hebrews tells us, We have not an high Priest who
cannot (...) i. e. sympathize with our infirmities, cha. 4.15. His meaning is,
that indeed our high Priest, Jesus Christ, does sympathize with believers in
their sorrows. And in Chap. 5.2. it is said of Christ, that he can have
compassion of the ignorant; that word is (...) and it signifies as much as, He
knows how to pity according to the measure of our misery. Let the misery be
never so great (for with reference to great measure) I believe the Metaphor is
used) Jesus Christ knows how to measure out as great a measure of sympathy, as
is needful. So that Christ's love to Believers you see contains in it also the
love of sympathy.

Lastly, For the love of complacency (which indeed is the highest degree of
love) this also is in Christ's love contained. You have a description of this
love of complacency (and a demonstration also of the thing in hand) Zeph. 3.17.
The Lord thy God (which I understand of Christ) in the midst of thee, God is
only ours in Christ. Christ is called, (...) i. e. God with us, or our God.
is mighty, he will save, he will rejoice over thee with joy: he will rest in
his love, he will joy over thee with singing. It is the nature of the love of
complacency to rest in its self, and to rejoice in its lettings out unto its
object, as it were with singing. Thus does Christ to believers: He first loves
them, and then rests in that love, and after solaceth himself in their souls,
and rejoices with singing, while he rests in his love, with them, over them,
in them. Look as the Father did from all eternity, by his love of complacency,
rest in the Son, and took his delight in him, as it is, Prove. 8.30. So does
Jesus Christ rest in beleeverss, and he solaceth himself in their persons; for
as it is there added, ver. 31. His delights were in the sons of men. Thus does
Christ's love to believers (you see) comprehend in it this highest kind, (or
rather degree) of love, viz. that of complacency.

So that (now to wind up the demonstration) Look as the Sea does transcend all
other Rivers, because that they all come, and empty themselves into it: In like
manner does the love of Christ excel all loves whatsoever, and is transcendent;
In as much as all the kinds, acts, or degrees of love which run up and down
among the creatures, (as it were in several Channels) do all meet, and empty
themselves in Christ's bosom, as into the vast ocean of love, and thence flow
forth into the bosoms of Believers, as the sole choice peculiar Cisterns of
the same: great, high, transcendent love.

But because my design is a little to lose my self in this Discourse of love. I
shall for the further making out, and discovery of the transcendency of Christ's
love to Believers, Speak to it more particularly: And at this time I shall
touch at the substance and circumstances of this love, and in both, show how it
does transcend, and pass all knowledge.

1 For the substance of the love of Christ to Believers: It is such as if
rightly (i. e. spiritually) considered: will appear to be transcendent. There
are (to omit others) but four things which I shall touch upon briefly, as the
substantial declarations of the Hyperbolical excellency of this love.

viz. 1 The nature 2 The degrees 3 The duration 4 The operation
of this love.

1 To begin with the Nature of Christ's love to Believers, It is transcendent,
it being of the same nature that the Fathers is to him. Jesus Christ loves
believers with the same kind, or nature of love, with which the Father loves
himself. His love to them, and his Fathers love to him, for nature are all one:
And if there be transcendency in the one, ( viz. the Fathers love to Christ)
there must needs be also in the other, ( viz. Christ's love to Believers) for
they are in their nature both the same. Christ himself bears record to this
truth. As the Father has loved me, so I have loved you, Joh. 15.9. That you
may fully feel the weight of this demonstration, take it in these three
Conclusions briefly.

1 Of all love, that is the most transcendent love which is in God. For God (as
the Spirit says) is love, 1 John 4.16. Water in the Fountain is the sweetest,
and love, in like manner, in God is clearest, for he is the God of love, 2 Cor.
13.11. Look as light in the Sun is the most transcendent; So love in God must
needs transcend, because love is in him, as light is in the Sun, i. e. In its
primo, and proper orb or seat. And indeed, as every beam of light is but the
irradiation of the Sun, so all the love which is in the bosoms of Creatures,
is but like some little drops of dew, which first fell from the Heaven of love,
Gods bosom.

2 Of all the love which is in God, that is the most transcendent, which he
lets out to Christ. It is Christ's glory that he is crowned with the flower,
beauty, and glory of the fathers love. Jesus Christ was he, who is still, not
only the beloved, but the wel-beloved of the Father; in whom he was well
pleased, i. e. In whom the Father did rest in the highest degree of his love.
And apparent it is, by all the actions of God, that he loyed Christ with the
most transcendent kind of love. In as much as that he made all things for him,
gives all things to him, and lets not out so much as a drop of love to any
creature, but that it first runs into his bosom, and so through him to the
Creature. The very spirits and quintessence of that love which is in Gods
bosom, was let out (and that without measure) into Christ's. Now,

3 That love which Christ bears to believers, is the same which he had from the
Father. As it flowed from the Fathers bosom into his, so it flows from his
bosom into believers; It is the same love for nature, and quality. As every
drop of the Sea is the same for quality, that all the water in the Sea is: So
every drop of love which falls in upon the bosoms of Believers, from Christ's,
is of the self-same nature, and is the same for quality, which the Father bears
to him. Indeed there is difference in the quantity. And the reason is, because
our Cisternes are not so capacious as Christ's Cistern. And yet so much as we
can contain, we shall have, as I shall show by and by.

So that now, herein is the first thing, wherein the transcendency of Christ's
love to Believers appears; It is the same for nature with that which the
Father shows to himself. Hence it was, and is, that Christ both did, does, and
will, declare the Fathers name to believers, that (as it is, Joh. 17. ult.) the
love wherewith the Father loved him, may be in them, as he himself is in them.

2 If we consider the degrees in which, or the measure according to which
Christ lets out his love to Believers, we shall see it is transcendent in that
also. Christ fills the bosom of believers with is much love as they can hold.
The creature when enlarged to the utmost, is not capable, neither can it
contain more then they have, So that as the nature of the love is high; in like
manner the degree is full. The Prophet Jeremiah speaking of Gods wrath against
sinners, uses a Metaphor in which he compares Gods wrath unto Wine (as also
the Psalmist does, Psalm. 75.8.) and sinners unto bottles; and setting out the
degree of that wrath, He says, every bottle is full of wine, Jerem. 13.12.
Beloved, Christ's love is compared to Wine also, Cant. 1.4. And if you compare
the bosoms of Believers unto bottles, (as you may) then certainly know, every
bosom is full of the wine of Christ's love. The Justice of the Father is not
more exact to fill the bosom of sinnets with his wrath, than the grace of the
Son, is free to fill the bosoms of Believers with his love. Hence it is that
he says, Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it, Psalm. 81.10.

You read a Box of Ointment, which when it was opened, the whole house was
filled with the odor thereof, Joh. 13.3. such a Box of Ointment is the bosom
of Christ, (as may be gathered from Cant. 1.3. which being opened in the
houses, i. e. the hearts of believers, fills them [full] with the sweet favor
thereof. And indeed, as Christ bids believers ask the Father, that their joy
might be full: So he is as bountiful himself (as he would have his Father to
be) and therefore without their asking (for he loves first) he lets out, yea
and fills them with his love. In this life believers have (at least might) as
much love as faith can let in; and if the soul be not full, it is only because
the mouth is narrow (as the bottle with the narrow neck in the Ocean;) And
hereafter, as much as vision it self can swallow. So that now the transcendent
fullness of that degree in which Christ lets out his love to believers, does
evidently declare the love to be transcendent also.

3 Add to both these the consideration of the duration of Christ's love to
believers; and this will further demonstrate its transcendency. As the nature
is high, and the degree full, so the duration is constant, and perpetual.
Having loved his own, he loved them, else (...) i. e, to the end; it may be, to
the perfection, Joh. 13.1. Christ's love is once and ever. It is of the same
nature with himself, unchangeable. As nothing in Believers was so good as to
make him to set his love upon them; so nothing is so bad, as does make him take
it off again. Indeed sometime the visible actings, or demonstrations, may be
concealed, but still the love it self remains sure, and is never violated; That
look as Divines say of Christ upon the Cross, The beatifical vision was
suspended, but the hypostatical union was not dissolved; In like manner, though
the light of Christ's love may be for a time obscured, yet the life thereof is
still preserved. The love may be dark sometime, but dies never. There is
nothing, no not sin, that can totally, and finally separate between Christ's
love, and a believers soul. Paul asks the question, (to this day it is
unanswered, yea and unanswerable) What shall separate? Romans 8.35. The mountains
shall depart, and the hills shall be removed (says Christ) but my kindness
shall not depart, Isa. 54.10. Believers, those high Hills which you sometimes
see, at whose sight ye wonder: And the mighty mountains which you behold
sometime, and are amazed at their vastness; those very hills and mountains not
only may, but shall depart: But yet the love of Christ toward you, is so
transcendently high, and sure, that it shall not, nay cannot depart. So that,
as the very heavens themselves wax old like a garment, and yet the person of
Christ remains; even so shall heaven, earth, every creature wax old, decay,
and dye; But still the love of Christ toward believers, shall continue young,
fresh, and flourishing: Such is its duration, such shall be its continuance.
Indeed the very life of Christ, must depart, and he dye again, ere his love to
his can decay: For his love is not only the Believers life, but his own, (as
was hinted formerly) O the transcendency of this love, which shall thus last.

4 Consider now in the last place, the operation of Christ's love to believers;
and you shall see its transcendency answerable to its nature, degree, and
duration. We guess at the transcendency of things by the nobleness of their
operations. It is a certain rule, the more noble any thing does operate, the
more noble it is in its self. Love of all the affections being the most noble,
answerably it has the most noble operations. Christ's love will easily appear
to be transcendent, if we consider how much more nobly it operates than any
other love in the world. From the first point of time until this, yea and till
time shall be no more; the operations of Christ's love to believers, have been,
are, and shall be transcendently glorious and noble.

I shall not in this place so curiously search into all actions of Christ
(because I shall more particularly speak to them by themselves) to let them
therefore pass; I shall only instance in five particulars, and in them you
shall see the transcendent operations of the love of Christ to believers.

1 There was no condition so low, unto which Christ did not condescend, to
declare that his love did transcend. High love stoops low; and the higher still
the love is, the lower still it stoops. You may take loves elevation, by its
condescension; and the lower still that you observe love condescendeth, the
higher always you must conclude it is elevated. I think it was but a fancy,
which one reports of a great Prince, who (it is said) took upon him both the
habit, and employment of a Days-man, working to build a House (in which his
beloved was) that he might visit her. Yet let me tell you, it is no fancy, but
a reality in Jesus Christ, that out of the height of his love to believers, he
took upon him both the form, and the employment of a Days-man, (which some
think, though I do not, to be intended in that of Job 9.33.) to declare not
only his obedience to his Father, but his love to believers. He emptied
himself, or made himself vain (for so the word (...) may be translated) and
took upon him the form of a Servant, etc. Phil. 2.7. Christ became of no
reputation, that his love to Believers might be of high reputation. O how
nobly did Christ's love operate toward believers, when he stooped so low for
their sakes!

2 There was no action so mean, which he did not cheerfully undertake, to
declare his love to believers. Royal love does (as it were) debase the Soul,
to any (though the meanest) service, to declare it self. Jacob will be a
Servant, and keep Sheep in the heat of Summer, and the cold of Winter, rather
than not show his love to Rachel. And Jesus Christ will wash his Disciples feet
(a mean employment) and though he be Lord of all, will be a servant unto all
his Disciples, that he may not only teach them humility, and love one unto
another, but also that he may declare the height and transcendency of love unto
them all.

3 There is no failing so foul, which he does not pass by, to declare the
surpassing greatness of his love to believers. Great love passes by, and
pardons, great faults; And the greater the faults are which be committed, the
greater is the love by which they are pardoned. Peter failed grossly, when he
denied, and forswore his Master: But love operated transcendently, when it
passed that by. What failing more gross against the bed of love, than
Adultery? Surely the Sons of men will not pass it by; this fault does
transcend their love: yet though men will not, Christ will (as it is, Jer.
3.1.) His love transcends this fault. Christ's love to believers is far greater,
and does much transcend the love of men to their Wives, and therefore he does
that which they will not, i. e. Pass by the foul failing of Adultery. I take
the Prophet clearly and precisely to speak this of Christ; for it is he alone
who, as it is verse 14. is married unto believers. It is the glory of man's love
(and then does love operate nobly) when he passes by an offense: It is much
more the glory of Christ's love, and that shows it self transcendently glorious
in its operation, by passing by the gross, and greatest failings which are in
believers.

4 There was no gift so great, which Christ did not bestow upon Believers. Love
produces gifts. Isaacks love to Rebecca was seen to be great, by the great
gifts he sent her, A golden earing of half a shekel weight, and two bracelets
of ten shekels weight of gold, Genesis 24.22. Christ gives Grace (which is far
more precious than gold) to believers: Out of his fullness we receive grace for
grace, Joh. 1.16. Nay, so great was his bounty, and so large were his gifts,
That he became poor for our sakes (that was by giving) that by his poverty we
might be made rich, 2 Cor* 8.9. But what greater gift than himself? yet such is
the transcendent operation of Christ's love, that he gave himself for Believers
sakes, and to their souls.

5 Add to all these, this also, that such is the transcendent love of Christ
to believers, that there is nothing almost so mean in them, but he highly
prizeth it. Love prizes every thing in the party beloved. Christ does both
prize, and praise mean things in believers, because his love toward them is
mighty. Their voice (though inarticulate (for so the word (...) signifies) is
sweet, Cant. 2.10. Their love (though faint) is fair with him, Cant. 4.10.
Their gifts (though small) are so prized, that wherever the Gospel of his
love shall be preached, the gifts of their love shall also be divulged, Mark
14.9. Thus you see all along, how transcendently glorious, and noble the love
of Christ operates toward believers: And what does it declare but this, that
the love of Christ is indeed transcendent, passing knowledge?

Having thus briefly touched at some demonstrations of the transcendency of
Christ's love to believers, substantially: I shall now add but a word or two,
to demonstrate the same yet clearer, from some considerable circumstances about
Christ's love to believers.

There be four Circumstances, which I shall but mention, viz. The
consideration, 1 Of the Person loving. 2 Of the Persons beloved. 3 Of the time
of this love. 4 Of the end thereof.


1 Consider the Person loving, i. e. Jesus Christ. He being a transcendent
Person, his love is like himself, transcendent also. Persona est amoris
mensura, According to the dimension of the Person, so are the dimensions of the
affection. The height of the lover, is the height also of the love. As the
Moralists judge of the magnitude of Crimes, by the persons against whom
committed: So we may also conclude the greatness of the love, from the
greatness of him by whom it is declared. A little wrath revealed by God is
great, because he himself is great: And a little love let out by Christ, must
be great love also, because he is great. Fire is by so much the greater, and
hotter, by how much the fuel, or matter in which it is, is the more
combustible: Love is fire, and the flames thereof transcend and exceed,
according to the vastness of the bosom in which it burns. Fire in Wood makes a
great flame, and gives a great heat, but Fire in Brimstone flames more, and
burns hotter; Love being in Christ, it is as fire in Brimstone, or rather as
fire in a Mount of Spices, it must needs therefore give a great heat, and make
a great light; and that light will discover his love to be transcendent. As the
man is, so is his strength (said they of Gidcon) Judge. 8.11. As the Lord is
(may we say of Christ) so is his love. He is wonderful, and his love must needs
be so too. Because we are but little, therefore our love cannot be great; and
because Christ is great, his love cannot be little. The love of the Lord Jesus
cannot choose but be transcendent, passing knowledge, because himself is such.
But

2 Consider the Persons beloved, and this (especially joined with the former)
will indeed demonstrate that the love of Christ is transcendent. Who are
believers, that are thus beloved? Are they of any note or name? nothing less,
Worms they are, and not Men. Nay not big, but poor Worms: For so Jacob is
styled, Isa. 41.14. He that knows their frame, remembers well they are but
dust, Psa. 103.14. But this is not all: for as they are Worms, so worthless
ones; and as they are but dust, so defiled dust too. Now that the rich Jesus,
should love poor Jacob; That he who is so mighty, should affect believers so
mean; That he who is so pure, that he is without spot, or blemish, should open
his heart to such as are spotted all over, and whose very beauty (without him)
is but a blemish; This heightens the love indeed, this declares that it does
transcend. He that knows how mean, worthless, contemptible Creatures believers
are (without Christ) will quickly (if he consider that Christ loves them)
conclude that the love passes knowledge.

3 If we take into our thoughts the time of love, either when it was first
set, or first drawn forth, we shall see by this also, that it is transcendent.
For the beginning therefore, when it was first set, it bears date before time.
Before time had either beginning, or being, Love had both, in Christ's bosom,
toward believers. Christ's love to believers is an antienter building than the
world: for when the one had no foundations, the other had.

Surely, if (as it is Proverbs 8.31.) his delights, were in the Sons of men,
that is, Believers, (for you may call all the rest of the World, Sons of Satan
rather than Sons of men) if (I say) his delights were with the Sons of men,
before the fountains of the deep were strengthened, or the foundations of the
earth were appointed; Then certainly his love was also toward them before that
time, for his love was the ground of that delight. Indeed the first words which
Christ wrote, was, Love to believers, and this was written with glory (for it
was before Gold was) upon his bosom, for then other Books were not. And if the
love were begun time out of mind, (as we say) then certainly the love is
passing knowledge (as the Text says.)

And for the time when it was first declared, The Prophet tells us, it was at
such a time, as in which we were most unlovely, when we lay in our blood, and
were not so lovely, as to provoke any eye to pity us: Then did Christ pass by,
and it was the time of his love; and then did his love break forth with the
light of Life; for then he said Live, as it is, Ezekiel. 16.

Surely he did show wit, who fancied the feigned beloved, all besmeared with a
poisoned hand, and made leprous thereby, and yet stories, that the Love was as
constant in love as ever: But we shall show only the truth, and the
transcendency of Christ's love to Believers, if we affirm from Scripture
History, When believers were all poisoned with the leprosy of sin, and lay as
Lepers by the way side, then Jesus Christ came and took them by the hand, and
opened the love of his heart, in letting out a stream of blood to wash them,
and make them clean. Now, that before ever the fountains of the deep were laid,
a fountain of love should spring up in Christ's bosom to believers, and that it
should be opened in his side, at such a time as they lay in their filth; What
does this declare, but that Christ's love to believers is transcendent, and (as
it is in the Text) passes knowledge; it being set, and declared at, or in such
a time? Yet.

Lastly, take in the consideration of that end which Christ aims at in his
love to believers, and this will declare it also to be transcendent. Christ's
love to believers is its own end: He loves that he may love; and this makes the
love glorious. Jesus Christ (Believers) in all the love which he lets out to
you, aims not at himself, but at you. He loves you now, that he may love you
ever. The end which he drives at in declaring love in a lesser measure here,
is, that he may declare love to you in a greater measure hereafter. He makes
you vessels of Grace in this world, that you may be vessels of Glory in that
which is to come. All the glory which he aimed at for himself, was the glory
of his Grace, and that shall be toward you: Christ delights to set the golden
apple of his glory, in the silver picture of your good. He being Love, only
aims that men may see the light thereof, and he chose your bosoms (believers)
as the golden Candlesticks to set up the glorious light of his love to shine in.

Now then, that so infinite a Majesty as Christ is, should love such mean Worms
as believers be; And that he should set his love before the first of the times,
and let it out in the worst of times, and that only for their good, as the end:
Oh! who can consider this, but must sit down, and wonder, and cry out, O the
transcendency of Christ's love! How! how! does it pass knowledge? Having thus
demonstrated a little, I would now apply this point, at present, in three uses.

viz. 1 Of Consolation. 2 Of Conviction. 3 Of Counsel.


1 In as much as Christ loves believers with a transcendent love; How may this
comfort Believers at all times! Thou complainest, O believing Soul, that the
World does not love thee; nay, thou say it does hate thee; Why, be of good
comfort; though the World hates, Christ loves; and the World cannot hate thee
so much, as he will love thee; His love does transcend the Worlds hatred. What
the Angel told Daniel, that say I to every believing soul, who groaneth under
the hatred of the World, Dan. 10.19. Fear not O man greatly beloved: Why
complain you (O believers) for want of the puddle drops of the Creatures love?
you have the pure spring of Christ's love; what weakness is it, to cry for want
of the light of the Stars, so long as you have the light of the Sun? Thou have
the Creators love (believer) be not sad therefore in wanting the love of the
creature; especially considering, what a transcendent love it is. Comfort your
selves (O my brethren) with these thoughts, Jesus Christ loves you, and that
love of his which he bears to you passes knowledge.

2 Let this be a word of Conviction unto sinners. Wretches, be ye convinced,
that however you say no body regards Believers, yet there is one who is
greater than all, who regards them, and that in a high manner; know, that
Christ loves them with a transcendent love. You break their souls in pieces,
you slay them, and you murder them, and yet you say the Lord does not see,
neither does the God of Israel regard it, Psalm. 94.7. But be convinced now to
the contrary: The Lord Jesus does see, and he does regard them; and ere long he
will make you know, that (however you deal with them) they are dear unto him;
though you love them not at all, yet he loves them highly. Were you not afraid
(says God) to speak against my servant Moses? Number. 12.8. God wonders that they
were not afraid to speak against a man, whom he loved so much. And who can
choose but wonder, that ever any wretches should be so vile, as to speak, and
act against those, cruelly, whom Christ loves transcendently? But I pity ye
(poor Creatures:) It may be you think that Christ slights them as you do; yet
be convinced now, and take heed hereafter what you do; certainly whoever they
be, whom you oppose, if they be believers, be convinced, that the Lord Jesus
loves them all with a transcendent love.

3 This Doctrine might be a Counselor, and it counsels all to look after, and
prize a part in the love of Christ, above all the loves of the world. O friends
I why do you spend your selves, and lay out your souls in the pursuit of that
which is not love, at least not transcendent love. I wish you would now bewise;
you who court the creature, court them now no more: I show you a more excellent
way of love. Consider the transcendent love of the Lord Jesus, and be ye
counseled to labor to get a share in it. O that the hearing of this, that
Christ loves believers with a transcendent love, might make you sick in your
souls, till you participate of this love.

When one heard of the great love which was between two choice friends, he
said, Utinam tertius essem, i. e. O that I were but a third, that I might share
with them in their great love. Consider it, you have heard of the high
transcendent love which is between Christ and believers; Be on fire therefore,
and burn with desire, that you may partake of that love, and that at least you
may enjoy that love, which those that have most, are not able to express, or
conceive, it being a transcendent love, passing knowledge.

SERMON III.
EPHESIANS. 3. ver. 19. And to know the love of Christ which passes knowledge.


WE are lanched out into the great depth of our Saviors love, wherein our
souls may swim very sweetly; and although I can neither sound ground, nor see
shore, yet I am loath to desire to be from this Sea, for it were delight in the
highest manner to be drowned here. The love of Christ is so surpassing sweet in
it self, and so infinitely necessary for our souls, as that it is my desire (at
least) to make some further discovery of its transcendency.

You see what an Hyperbole the Apostle uses to express the greatness of
Christ's love by, viz. That it passes knowledge.

The last time we gave out the meaning of the expression, and entered upon the
proof of it, in the prosecution of this point of Doctrine, viz.

That the love which Christ bears to Believers, is a transcendent love.

This being the main thing which I eye in the Text, and indeed the main thing
which every soul ought to eye, and live upon, I shall proceed further in the
prosecution thereof.

All which I spoke the last time, for the demonstration of the truth of the
Doctrine, was but in a general way: I shall therefore now go on to demonstrate
the love of Christ to be transcendent, from a brief survey of the course of his
life.

Indeed Christ's Life was (as it were) but one great act of love, begun at his
Birth, and carried on even to the time of his Death. If we follow this Lamb, in
the whole tract of his Life, we shall see, that from his Cradle, unto his
Cross, the whole way was paved (as the bottom of Salomons Chariot was) with
love.

There be three Heads, or demonstrations, which I shall now touch upon, that
the transcendency of Christ's love to Believers, may appear yet more full and
glorious.

They are these: 1 His Birth, and Incarnation. 2 His Life, and Conversation. 3
His Death, and Passion.


Each of these seriously considered, will abundantly demonstrate the love of
Christ to believers to be transcendent.

First, consider his Birth and Incarnation. How does Christ's love transcend in
this act? The low condescension of Christ, in becoming Man, does evidently
declare the high transcendency of his love to believers. Had it not been great
love in the Lord Jesus, to have taken upon him the Angelical nature? Sure it
had. If Christ would have come into the World, with tidings of love, and life,
he might have came as an Angel of glory (not as a pe ce of clay) and such a
condescension as that had been much. But he passed by the nature of Angels, and
took upon him the nature of man; that in this act he may declare love to
believers. The Apostle tells us, that he took not upon him the nature of
Angels, Heb. 2.16. (...) i. e. in no wise, at no hand, would he take upon him
the Angelical Nature, but he took upon him the seed of Abraham, to declare his
love to the Children of Abraham. That we may see a little more clearly how the
love of Christ does transcend in his birth, I shall speak to this head in some
particulars; and by all of them you shall see how Christ's love unto believers
did appear, and shine gloriously in this act of his, when he became man, and
was born for their sakes.

Here I shall consider therefore particularly (under this Head) these four
things. 1 Whence Christ came, 2 Where Christ came, 3 How Christ came, 4 Why
Christ came,
when he was incarnate. And out of all these you will see the transcendency of
Christ's love.

1 Consider whence he came. Christ was in the bosom of the Father, where he
lay, and lived in his Fathers love; hence he came to declare love to believers.
John tells us, he came down from Heaven, Joh. 6.38. Jesus Christ from all
eternity was in Heaven. There he had his Fathers company; There he enjoyed his
Fathers love; There he was blessed in his Fathers bosom (for so the Scripture
says) he was (...) Joh. 1.18. He was living in the light of the Fathers love:
And being with God, he solaced himself in God. In that very light, and glory in
which God himself was, in that same light and glory did Christ triumph: And yet
from this, from this he came for believers sakes. He forg at (as it were) his
Kindred, and Fathers house, to be born for believers. To undertake a long
journey; and from a rare place, for any, does declare much love to them; O how
long a Journey did Christ undertake? and from what a Paradise of pleasure did
he come unto believers, when he was born? Surely great was his affection,
transcendent is his love, who came (at least for a time) from the house of Love
(his Fathers bosom) to open to Believers the fountain of love, (his own
bosom.)

2 But where did Christ come, when he came from Heaven? was it into some
Goshen, some land of light? was it into some Paradise, some land of life? was
it into some Elysium, some place of pleasure? Nothing less. The place to which
he came was Egypt, where believers sat in darkness; It was the Wilderness,
where believers were in the shadow of death; It was into this World, where
nothing is but vanity, and vexation. Here it was, that Christ came for
believers sakes: And on what transcendent love was it, that brought Christ
here! His eyes saw, that his beloved ones were in a defiled place (which
therefore could not be their rest, as it is, Micha. 2.10.) his love therefore
prevailed with him to come here, to fetch his beloved hence. It was great love
which Ebedmelech the Ethiopian showed unto Jeremiah, when he came to the
brink of that filthy Dungeon, in which the Prophet was, and put down cords to
draw him thence: But what great love had it been, if Ebedmelech had not only
come to the brink of the Dungeon, but come down into the Dungeon, and not only
drew him up with ropes, but carried him up in his arms? this had been love
indeed. Why let me tell you (believers) you were in this World, in a worser
Dungeon, than Jeremiah was, in which you were ready to dye for hunger, and to
be drowned in the mire thereof: And the Lord Jesus Christ came (when he was
born) not only to the brink of the Dungeon with cords to draw you up, but into
the Dungeon it self, to take you up in his very bosom, and to bring you out
from perishing here. I came forth from the Father (says Christ) that was great
love; but he adds, I came into the world, Joh. 16.28. Here was love indeed:
For Christ to come from Heaven (the Fathers Throne) into the world (Satan's
Kingdom.) For Christ to come from the place in which glory shines (Heaven,)
unto a place which lies in evil (the world.) For Christ to come out from the
presence of the Father; who always smiled upon him, and to come into the place
of men, who ever frowned upon him: For him to come from thence, where he always
heard the Hallelujahs of Angels, to come here, where his ears were filled with
the revilings of sinners (...)! O the height, and the depth! O the breadth, and
length! O the transcendency of Christ's love to believers!

3. But how came Christ here? Came he in pomp with glory? Came he with the
sound of a Trumpet, that all might know, that though he did come into a
cottage, yet he was a Prince? No, but rather in a poor mean way. Indeed when
Christ was born, an heavenly Host appeared, praising of God, and singing: But
that was rather, to discover unto the World, that the Saints lover was come
into their Country, than any way to dignifie him, who indeed was above all
glory. Some expound that place, Isa. 42.12. He shall not cry, nor lift up, nor
cause his voice to be heard in the streets, etc. As if it did mean, that Christ
should not carry the matter (about which he came) in an outward glorious
manner, with pomp, but that in a silent way, he should both come and do all
that, unto which his Fathers love, and his own, did design him. And if you
consider the History of his Nativity, you will say, that Christ came not with
any great show; he was born, not the Son of some great Queen, but the Infant
of a poor Virgin: His reputed Father was not a mighty Monarch, but a mean
Carpenter; This was it, with which he was twitted in the teeth, as disgraceful,
Is not this the Carpenters Son? O how mean did Christ come into the World! when
he was born in an Inn, and that happily none of the best (for there were not
many Lodgings in it) and therefore his traveling Mother was fain to lie in the
stable, and there was he brought forth. And how did he lie? when being
swadled with some homely Clothes, his Mother laid him in the Cratch. He that
was wont to sit upon the Throne amidst the Cherubims, was content to be found
in the Cratch among Brutes. Verily, while we consider this, we must needs
conclude, that Christ's love was surpassing great, in that he would vouchsafe to
seem (at least) yea, and in a Human way, to be so little, and to lie so low for
your sakes. But,

4 Join to all these, the end of Christ's coming into the World, and this will
exceedingly heighten the demonstration, and evince, that indeed the love of
Christ passes knowledge. Why, for what did he come? upon what design came the
King of glory from Heaven to Earth, in so mean a way? came he to take the
Crowns off from the heads of Kings, and to put them upon his own? Indeed Herod
feared this, but without ground, for Christ came for no such end. But the end
for which he came was love. His design was to declare, and make known that love
which lay hid from eternity (in his own, and Fathers bosom) unto believers.
Therefore it was that he was born in time, viz. that believers might see, and
know that love which he bare to them from before time.

I will in a word mention (omitting others) six particular ends for which
Christ was born, and came into the world, and you will see them (like so many
several lines in a Compass) meet all in love, as in their alone center.

1 The first end for which he was born was, to redeem the precious souls of
believers from that slavery in which they lay; yea and their bodies also from
that vanity unto which (with the rest of the Creatures) they were subjected*
Christ saw his beloved, Captives in Satan's Kingdom, bound with chains* and
made slaves unto his will; This sight went to his Soul, and his love could not
contain it self, but he must come, that his beloved might be set free. That
this was the end of his Nativity, the Apostle witnesses, Gal. 4.4. When (says
he) the fullness of time was come, God sent his Son (and he readily came) made
of a woman, made under the Law, to redeem them that were under the Law, that
we might receive the adoption of sons. You were once slaves (believers) and
Christ was born that you might be sons; And a part of that adoption to which
you were redeemed, is not only the redemption of your souls (though that be
the chief) but also, the redemption of your bodies, as it is clear, Romans
8.23. This was the end why Christ was born, and I think I need not say, it was
an end of love, for you cannot consider this, but you must confess that.

2 Another end which Christ aimed at in his Nativity, was to be fitted to
suffer for Believers sakes. As Christ was God, and shined with the glory and
Majesty of the Deity, buffetings, spittings, binding, etc. could not, durst
not, take hold upon him; when he spoke but that word, I AM HE, the glory of
his Godhead shining through it as through a crevise) it is said, they that
came to seize him, went backward, and fell to the ground, Joh. 18.6. Christ
knew, that as he was God, he could not suffer, and yet a necessity he saw of
suffering for believers sakes; therefore he was contented to cloud the glory of
his Deity, with the mantle of the seed of Abraham, that so he might be fitted
to suffer for them. When Codrus saw that his death would profit his Country,
and that while he had on his Imperial robes none durst slay him, the Historian
says, Depositis imperii insignibus, famularem cultum induit, etc. i. e. He
laid aside the royal robe, and put on an homely habit, that he might be fit to
dye in that disguise. My beloved, the Lord Jesus saw that the blood of Bulls
and Goats could not take away sins; he saw also, that yet, if ever believers
lived, it must be by blood: And therefore, the Father having prepared him a
body (as it is Heb. 10.5.) his heart had this law of love written in it, that
he took the Body, that thereby he might be fit to bleed. Surely you are blind
if you see not love in this end, viz. That Christ was born to be fit to dye.

3 A third end why he was born, was, that he might be like believers. Love
tends to likeness, Christ, because he loved, would be born, that he might be
like to them in all things, whom he loved above all things. He was made (says
the spirit) in the likeness of man, Phil. 2.7. He beheld his beloved in the
form of servants, and he would be born, that he might be in their form. Christ
saw his dear ones, clothed with the sackcloth of Human Nature (for that
compared with the Angelical is but as hair to silk) and therefore stoopt to a
Nativity, that he might be in the same fashion, and appear in the same suite.
Though the Human Nature (especially clothed with infirmities) were but a very
mean array, yet his Divine love made him esteem it above the Angelical;
Therefore passing by the nature of Angels, he took upon him the nature of man,
and was born, that he might be like unto believers. Surely this was love. But,

4 Christ in his Nativity aimed at another end (as like, in love, the former as
might be) and that was, to unite himself more clearly and convincingly unto
believers. Union is an effect of affection, and love desires to unite. And if
union be designed as the end of any act, we may safely say, Love was the Agent
in that design. Christ indeed unites himself to Believers, by communicating
unto them his own Divine Nature; but that he might make the Union more firm,
he was born to take upon him their Human nature. Believers, Christ is nearer
united to you, than unto the Angels; his love to you did in this respect
transcend his love to them; he took not upon him their nature, and so was not
united to them that way; but he took upon him your nature* and was for this end
born, that he might be united to you this way. Say, is not this love? Yet

5 Christ had another end of love, for which he was born, viz. That he might
be fitted in a more familiar manner to condescend to the capacities, yea, and
to sympathize with the infirmities, of believers. Christ desires to converse
with them sweetly, and to sympathize with them seriously; neither of which he
could so clearly do as God, therefore it was, he would be born man. As he was
God, and had only the divine nature, believers were not able in so free a
manner to converse with him: his glory was so amazing, that their weak eyes
could not behold it; his Majesty was so overpowering, that then frail spirits
could not converse with it; He was therefore pleased to take our nature, and
be born, that they might converse familiarly with his grace and not dye, who
could not behold fully his glory, and live. Had Jesus Christ took upon him the
nature of Angels, and so have come into the world unto his, alas, his presence
(like that of the Angels) had been terrible! Believers could not have borne
it. For this end therefore the word was made flesh and dwelt amongst us (as
it is John 1.14.) That so we might behold the glory of God, in the only begotten
son; the divine glory can now more safely be contemplated by believers, while
it is in the tent (that I may allude to the word (...)) of flesh; then it could
be by it self.

Now Believers may look upon the luster of his Deity more sweetly, while they
can behold it as (it were) through the love-hood of humanity. Besides, Christ
being born, he is now fitted to sympathize with the infirmities of his. It
behoved him (says the Holy ghost) in all things to be made like (and this is
spoken of his becoming man) unto his Brethren, that he might be (...): i. e.
one that can show tender mercy or pity, Heb. 2.17. Christ by his being born,
and so actually experiencing the infirmities of the humane nature, knows now
the better how to sympathize with his. Now tell me, is not this great love,
that Jesus Christ (who might (if he would) have solaced himself in the
contemplation of his own glory, and never have stoopt to the sense of our
infirmities, yet that he) would be born, that so we might behold his glory, and
he might sympathize with us? he by his birth condescending to our capacities
and making himself sensible of our infirmities.

6 Add to all these ends, this in the last place, That Christ by his nativity
has raised our humane nature, the dignity of which was another end of it. Oh!
how might I show the love of Christ to transcend in this end of his nativity!
Certainly believers Christ by uniting your nature to his own, did mightily
dignifie it. How does the humane nature shine in the luster of the divine? How
does the peble (man's nature) glister in the golden (I should say the glorious)
ring of the divine nature? O the transcendency of Christ love, that he would
stoop so low, as to be born for this end, that thereby he might raise high the
nature of his beloved ones, i.e. believers!

So that thus you see how the birth of Christ (thoroughly viewed) gives a
bright discovery of the transcendency of his love. Certainly, if you
spiritually contemplate all that love which shines in the birth of the Lord
Jesus, you will easily conclude, that his love to believers passes knowledge.

The second head (from which I said I would demonstrate the transcendency of
Christ's love) was the life of Christ. And now a little to speak to this: you
must not imagine, that I dare undertake the whole History of his life, and
demonstrate his transcendent love from every Act thereof; No, this were too
large a field to walk in. I shall hint something in the general of it, and
then I shall in a more particular manner speak to some remarkable passages
thereof, all speaking transcendent love to believers. Generally, the life of
Christ was a perfect myrrour of his love: every action of it was full of love,
and if we put all the actions of his life together, we may conclude, that he
was born, not so much to live, as to love. There was not a word which dropped
from his lips, but it was full of love, and for his works which he did, they
all spoke love so loud, as that the deafest ear might hear it. So that we may
say (as the Psalmist in another case) There is no speech, nor language, where
the voice of his love was not heard, the line thereof went through every act of
his life. Should we begin at the Temple, where he disputed with the Doctors,
and follow him to the mount, where he was crucified by the soldiers, we should
see all the way strewed with love-roses. And as there is no beam in the Sun,
in which there is no light; so there was no Act in the life of Christ, but to a
spiritual eye, shines with the light of love. But (omitting others) I shall
instance only in five particulars, and show how Christ in the actions of his
life, did declare the transcendency of his love.

1 Jesus Christ did run for believers sakes through all the miseries of this
life. You cannot be in any misery (which is humane) but Christ was in it for
you, to sweeten it unto you. Art thou hungry? he was, Mat. 4.3. Art thou
thirsty? he was: Art thou weary? he was, John 4.6. Meetest thou with
scoffings, scornings, derisions, blasphemies, buffettings, Why thy Lord Christ
out of his transcendent love) runned through all these in his life for thee.
Believers, I beseech you mind it, when ever you meet with any of the miseries
of this life, your beloved met with them for your sakes, and that for this end,
that he might sweeten them to your souls. And therefore when you meet with,
and are pressed by the miseries of this life in any kind, then think upon your
Saviors love, who lived a life sensible of these miseries, out of his love to
you. And I doubt not but you will say, O transcendent love!

2. The Lord Jesus submitted to all the duties of religion (which was not only
to fulfill the righteousness of the law) but to declare the infinitnes of his
love: for by it believers may see, he requires of them at no time, more than he
did himself. The yoke of Christ, by this is made smooth and easy. Now his
commandments will appear, not to be grievous, because he did obey them first
himself. There is no duty (O believing soul) unto which thou can be called in
the whole course of thy life, but thy Savior in his life did the same. The
child may well say, he has a loving father, when as he can see him first doing
that himself in his own person, which he commands it to do. Your everlasting
Father Jesus Christ (O ye children of faith) in his life went through (in his
own person) all those performances which you are to do in Religion. And is not
this transcendent love?

3. Our Lord, ^n the whole course of his life, was ever careful to provide and
use all possible means for the strengthening of believers graces. Knowledge and
Faith, are the two great graces for the sweetning of the life of believers, and
Christ was very careful to strengthen them. Therefore it was that he spoke
chiefly to those things which might strengthen these graces. For knowledge, how
lovingly did he speak that which his Disciples were able to bear? And if he
thought they did not well understand what he said, how lovingly did he expound
all things to them when they were alone? as it is, Mark 4. 33, 34. Yea when they
asked him of any Parable, what its meaning might be, How lovingly did he
satisfy their desires, telling them, that it was their privilege, and to them
it was given to know the mysterys of the kingdom of God? Luke 8.9, 10. nay,
when Jesus had spoke any thing which they understood not, and did but perceive
their reasoning among themselves about it, he did voluntarily (not being asked)
inform them, as in that, Mat. 16.7, 8, 9. And for faith, its easy to observe
how ready Christ was to strengthen it. Did he not rejoice when he had an
opportunity so to do? Mark that in Job. 11. when Lazarus was dead, and he knew
how his raising of him would conduce to the confirming of their faith, he
professes (speaking of it) that he was glad for their sakes, that he was not
there when he dyed, to the intent they might believe, verse. 15. Now (my
beloved,) what does this care of Christ to strengthen your graces declare, but
the transcendency of his love to your souls?

4 Jesus Christ in his life aimed more at, and rejoiced more in Believers
comforts than his own. When he heard that great voice from heaven, saying, I
have glorified it ( i.e. his name) and I will glorify it; He said, This voice
came not for his sake, but for his Disciples. It seems his end in that request
(for that voice was an answer to his prayer) was not his glory, but their good.
And therefore, not rejoicing himself in the excellent glory of that voice from
heaven, he speaks to them, and applies it to them, professing it was for their
sakes, Joh. 12.30. Hence it is also, that he, when he was to die, and knew
that his hour was come (and so one would think should have retired, and spent
his time for himself) he set himself to comfort his Disciples, that in so
doing, he might declare that having loved them, he loved them to the end with a
transcendent love, Joh. 13.1. Tell me (my beloved) should you see one going to
the Stake, or Scaffold to dye, and should you observe him spend all his time,
breath, and eloquence, in comforting some one dear beloved; would not you say
his love did transcend, in making him forget himself, to comfort her? why so it
was with your Savior, There were but few hours ere he was to be taken, and to
suffer. And yet, as if he minded (as indeed he did) the comfort of his
Disciples more than his own, he improves all that time, and spent (as it were)
all his eloquence upon them, laboring to silence their dispairings, and
sorrows, not minding his own death, and sufferings. Oh transcendent love!

Lastly, it must be also minded, that Jesus Christ being to pray to his Father
(the last action as it were of his life) he in that prayer declared the
transcendency of his love, by putting up more requests in the behalf of
believers, than of himself. You know the prayer in Joh. 17. And if you observe
it, you shall find, that albeit in the beginning he prays for himself, in
that (Father the hour is come, glorify thy Son) yet having but (as it were)
mentioned this in the 1 verse. and reiterated it in verse. 5. he does (in a
manner) shut himself out of all the rest of the prayer, and spends it wholly
for believers. And oh what glorious things did he beg in their behalf! That the
Father would keep and preserve them, ver. 15. That he would own and sanctify
them, ver. 10, 17. That they might be one with the Father, as he was one, ver.
21, 22. And in the close of all, how does he entreat the Father, to admit them
to be there where he was, and to behold his glory? and how strongly does he
argue for this? does he not use the cogent motive of love? for thou love me,
ver. 24. As if he should say, Father, I know thou love me, thou did so
before ever the world was; now I beseech thee, by that love, as if ever thou
would declare that thou do love me, own, preserve, sanctify, make one
with thyself, mine, as I am (for this is the argument to the whole prayer) and
let them, whom I loved in the world, be with me when they leave the world: O
Father, as thou love me, hear, grant this (as my last) request for my beloved
ones. Tell me now, how transcendent is Christ's love? and how near do believers
lie to his bosom? who being now (as it were) to pray and dye, forgets himself,
and breaths out his last requests in so many, so transcendent particulars in
their behalfs.

Thus you see how easy it is to run through the life of Christ, and yet
running, to read all along transcendent love to believers. But I must now speak
a word to the death of Christ, and you shall see this also as lively
demonstrating (as either, or both the other branches) the truth of the point,
viz. That the love of Christ to believers passes knowledge.

The third head of demonstrations being the death of Christ, I shall speak to
it a little distinctly, though briefly.

But where shall we begin his passton? and at what part of it shall we enter
upon this demonstration? shall we go with him into the Garden (indeed there it
began) or shall we ascend Mount Calvary (how upon it, it ended) or shall we
speak of what he suffered in the high Priests hall? I think it not amiss to
mention each.

To begin therefore at the Garden in which Christ was taken. O how
transcendently sweet is the smell of his love here!

Believers look upon your Savior in the Garden; See him, when his soul began
to be sorrowful and very heavy, and listen a little to what he says, My soul
is exceeding sorrowful, even unto the death, Matthew. 26.38. you experienced
Saints! Tell me, what manner of love is this: For your Lord to be sad unto the
death, that he might remove those clouds, which have sometimes kept your souls
in the shadows of death and darkness? But go on and listen to your Lords cry
to the father, once, and again, when he begged that the cup might pass from
him: Surely the wrath in the bottom of the cup was very bitter (which made him
desire to be delivered from it:) But as surely the love in Christ's besome was
very sweet, which yet prevails with him, to submit his will to the Fathers,
and to drink it up for your sake. Did you hear ever of sweating in a cold
night, and that upon the cold ground, in an open Garden? Surely you will say
he must be hot within, that can, or could do so. Why the heat of your Saviors
love was such, as that it supported him to bear the heat of Gods wrath, than as
cold as the night was (and it was a winters night as is rationally conjectured)
and as open as the place was (a garden) yet then, and there, he did sweat, and
that clods of blood (his veins issuing out freely, and the air congeling it
presently) and this, in the beginning of his sufferings, believers, for your
sakes. I presume you are not blind (and yet certainly you are) if you cannot
read matchless love in this. Some have been so weak (reports reiterated tell
us so) as to write letters to their beloved with their blood: If it be true,
you will say it is much (and I Will say, 'twas mad) But yet let me tell you, its
no simple tale, but a sweet truth, Christ in the garden bled enough to write a
large letter of love to you And if you read spiritually, you read such love, as
yet, when you read, you cannot expres it, while you read the story of Christ's
agony in the garden. The greatness of Adams folly is not so legible in his
eating the forbidden frult in the garden (which was the shutting or us out of
paradise) As the transcendency of Christ's love, is in his agony in the garden
(which was to re-instate believers in a happyer state than Paradise was, or
could be.)

But lets follow our Lord, from the garden to the High Priests hall, and here,
let us hear a little the hideous outcries of the rude rabble against him. Ah
Lord! what was that stopped our Saviors ears, so that he would not regard?
and silenced his tongue, that he would not reply? was it not love? when you
read, how some spit upon, and others railed at Christ; How some blasphemed him,
and others buffetted him; how many scoffed, how many scorned, how many accused,
how all cried out against him? I say, when you read this, cannot you as sweetly
read the transcendent love of Christ to you, as the transcendent malice of the
Jews against Christ?

But not to stay here, go out with Christ to Calvary. (As he ascends the
Mount, does not the demonstration ascend too?) See him nailed to the Cross,
for your sakes, and tell me, if that sight does not clear this truth ( as a
nail fastened by the masters of assomblies, such as Paul was) viz. That the
love of Christ passes knowledge. Surely, believers, Christ's hanging on the
Cross, and then breathing out his last breath, and powreing out his hearts
blood, in a shameful, cursed, and tormenting way, for your sakes, is enough to
make you [cry] out, O the depth of his love! 'Twas well said by one, that Mount
Calvary, was Loves Academy: and he is worse than a Dunce, that cannot learn the
transcendency of Christ's love to believers here.

The blood of the Cross speaks love in strength, and no such Sermon of love in
the Bible, nor in the Creation, as the blood of the Cross, says a fine pen.
Greater love than this has no [man] that a man lay down his life for his
friends, Joh. 15.13. Indeed, man has no greater (nay scarce so great a love as
that:) But Jesus Christ had, and showed as great, (nay a far greater love than
this) for he laid down his life for his foes (such, believers, you were.)
'Twas but a brag of Peter (his words were greater than his love) when he said,
he would dye for Christ: But 'twas a reality in Christ, when speaking of the
baptism of his death, he said, How am I streightened till it be accomplished?

Certainly it was large love, that streightened his soul, till he tasted of
death for you. The Scriptures record it, as the character of the transcendency
of the Martyrs love to Christ, that they loved not their lives unto the death
for his sake: But alas, their death for Christ was but their duty (they were
bound to it, because Christ loved them;) Whereas Christ's love to us is grace,
for he loved us first. Ask a condemned Malefactor, what if the Prince's Son
should go to his father and say, Father, I confess the wretch is deservedly to
dye, but I see a willingness in thee, that he should live; only I perceive it
sticks with thy Justice: Thou would magnify thy mercy in his pardon,
could thou also satisfy thy justice: why? for that Father here I am, and I
will dye my self to satisfy thy justice, only let the poor wretch live, to
the glory of thine, and my free grace; and having thus said, should go to the
place of execution, and dye indeed: Ask (I say) the Malefactor, what kind of
love he counts, and calls this? Believers, ask your own hearts (for you were
the Malefactors) and tell me, what word is great enough to express the great
love of Jesus Christ, which he lively expressed to you, in his death for you?
Surely you will say, the thought of the love is too big for your mouth, you
cannot through your narrow expressions, let out your large conceptions, of
Christ's love in his death.

I must profess, if you can, I cannot: This head of demonstration, is fitter
for meditation, than expression. And yet when we have meditated the most of
it, we shall never be able to reach the height of it. The thoughts of Christ's
life are swallowed up by the thoughts of his death; His death does set out his
love most to the life. I will wind up this head with this conclusion; You are
no Scholars in Christ's School, if you cannot read a large and long lecture of
love upon Christ's Cross. Let it pass as an aphorism, The love of Christ,
expressed in his death, transcends so high above our thoughts, that we shall
never be able to come to the height thereof, all our life. His love transcends
our expressions, confounds our conceptions: yet it must be believed and applied.

At present, I shall offer but three words, to help you in the application of
the transcendency of Christ's love to believers.

First, stand and wonder (O believing souls) at this love; Indeed it is fitter
for wonder than words: Think upon this that I have said, and let your thoughts
dwell upon the meditations hereof; and when in the working of your thoughts,
you haveascended to some height, then, in the wonderment of your souls, cry
out, O the depth of the love of Christ, which passes knowledge! Wonder and
say, Lord Jesus, what is man (by sin the worst of creatures) and what am I (by
unbelief the worst of men) that thou should thus mind me, as to be born
for me, to live, yea to [dye] to declare love to me! O that you would live, and
lose your selves in the thoughts of your Saviors love! And when you have lost
your selves (which you may interpret found your souls) in the bottomless gulf
of your Lords love; then recover your spirits again, and cry out, Oh the
dazzling heights! Oh the confounding (yet comfortable) depths! Oh the divine
(yet immensurable) dimensions of the love of Christ, which passes knowledge!

2 Lament! O lament (believers) when you consider, that notwithstanding Christ
does thus love you, yet you are too too apt to neglect the consideration
thereof, and too too poor in it is requital. That holy man (Mr. Welsh) wept,
because he saw his heart so dull, that he could not consider the love of
Christ as he should, and would. And truly, who can with a dry eye consider, the
neglect of the thought of the transcendent love of Christ? what O soul, does
Christ love thee much, and do thou think on it but little? Can thou spend
days and weeks in reading the fond fancies of feigned loves? And have not thou
an hour to meditate on the real royal love of the Lord Jesus? And as thou
mindest it but seldom, so thou requitest it but sorrily. What small returns of
love, has Christ had from thee, for this vast expense of love upon thee? He
loves us richly; but, alas, we love him poorly. His love passes knowledge,
none can understand it; and our love in a sad sense, passes knowledge too, for
none can perceive it. How little, alas, do we, will we forsake for Christ?
(And yet he forsook much for us.)

He forsook Heaven, and came into the world for us; and we will not forsake
earth (although it be to go to Heaven) for him; he did much for us (and
counted it but little) he lived from first to last for us; but we do but
little for him, and yet we count it much, grudging to give him the last and
least, though Satan has had the first, and most part of our life. He, as you
have heard, suffered for us even death it self; but which of us is willing to
taste of suffering for him? True, some have said, If they had a thousand heads,
they would lose them all for Christ; yet these some are but few: For who of us
would lose one head for him? Ignatius (in former times) said, he was willing
to endure fire, cross, butcheries, and all for Christ; but these are the
latter days, and though his love was hot, ours is grown cold; we can scarce
endure a word, a jeer, a scoff for Christ. Well, I beseech you sit, and sigh,
and say, Oh! how meanly do we requite the love of Christ! He was born, lived,
died out of love to us: But we are so far from dying for Christ, that we scarce
are willing to live to Jesus Christ

Thirdly, in as much as Christ thus loves you (O believers) with a transcendent
love, Be you satisfied herewith, and be content (if it must be so) to want the
love of men. Its a shame that any who are the beloved of Christ, should mourn
for not being loved of the creature. Why should the Kings daughter, who has
(or at least should) forget her kindred, and her fathers house, Why (I say)
should she ( i.e. the believing soul) weep, because the scullion scorns her,
when the King himself embraces her? Its but meet that you should rest
satisfied in the love of Christ, since its so transcendent. Wherefore, drink
waters out of thine own cistern! (O Christian) and (as Solomon says) rejoice
with the wife (or rather with Christ the husband) of thy youth: let him be as
the loving Hind and pleasant Roe; let his breasts satisfy thee at all times.
Do not err, in mourning for the want, or hunting after the enjoyment of
creature-love; but err always, or (as we render it) be ravished always with
his love. Bathe thy self (Oh believer) always in Christ's bosom; live upon,
and be contented with his love: Let others sip, and drink (if they will be so
weak) of the puddle waters of the creatures love; while thou, as wise, neither
enviest, nor desire to partake with them. Surely did you but remember this,
that the love of Christ (toward you) passes knowledge, you would not be
discontented at the want of the love of any, or all the creatures; considering
therefore that it is such, be you contented with it. Its a sign that the love
of Christ passes thy knowledge, in the transcendent worth thereof, If in the
midst of the absence of all other loves, thou can be content and satisfied
with this.

SERMON IV.
EPHESIANS. 3. ver. 19. And to know the love of Christ which passes knowledge.


WE are yet upon the consideration of the transcendency of Christ's love to
Believers (And oh how sweet is it to lose our selves in this consideration!)
How loath am I to leave a point of such infinite necessity and sweetness? How
gladly could I, not only live, but die in the declaration of the love of Christ
to believers? I doubt not but the very mention of the point, That the love of
Christ to believers is a transcendent love, makes the hearts of you to leap
for joy. Tell me (O believer) could thou not wish to have thine cares ever
followed with this sound? That Christ loves thee with a love passing
knowledge. Something we have already hinted, and something more we shall add
at this time; yet because when I have said all that I can about the
transcendency of Christ's love to believers, I shall come many thousand steps
short of its height, I am resolved to say all that I intend to this point, at
this time.

Therefore a little more to demonstrate this, That the love of Christ passes
knowledge, I shall entreat you to view

First, His command over them. Secondly, His care for them. Thirdly, His
endeavor, not only to declare to, but to persuade believers of this love.
Christ's Commands speak love

First, If we do consider the command which Christ exercises over believers,
we shall see the transcendency of his affection even in that. It is Christ's
glory, that he is the King of the Saints (in a peculiar manner) and it is his
grace, that he exercises that Kingly power in a sweet way. How ever he rules
the Nation with a rod of iron, yet he rules the Saints with a golden Scepter.
Hence it is, that although in wrath, his iron rod break the Nations in pieces,
yet his golden Scepter is still stretched out in love, to entertain the Saints.
You read in Cant. 3. that Solomon made a Chariot of the wood of Lebanon, he
made the pillars thereof of silver, the bottom of gold, the covering of it of
purple, the midst being [PAVED WITH LOVE] Cant. 3. v. 10. That Chariot which
Solomon made for himself, and in which he rode, might well set out the Chariot
in which Christ rides up and down the world of believers, whom he governs.
Indeed it is very glorious, and it glitters with beams of light, but withal it
is very gracious, as being paved with stones of love; Love is the throne in
which he sits, love is the Scepter with which he rules, and all his
government is managed in such a way, as that believers may say, that he is the
Lord of love even in his ruling of them. Absalom did but flatter, when he
stood by the way of the gate, and kissed all that passed by (and by it
insinuated how sweetly he would govern, if he came to the Kingdom) but that
which was flattery in Absalom, is reality in Christ, When any of the spiritual
pilgrims come (as believers do) to do him obeisance (as they ought to do,
being under his commands) he puts forth his hands, and takes them, and
kisseth them, and does not only promise, but perform transcendent love in all
his commands over them. But to read this more particularly, you will see the
transcendency of Christ's love discovered in his command over believers, if you
consider three things.

First, Christ lays no commands upon believers, but such as are full of love
and sweetness. He reduces all the Decalogue to these two heads, Thu shall
love the Lord thy God with all thy heart; and with all thy soul, and with all
thy mind: and thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self, Mat. 22.37.39. Well
might John say, That his Commandments are not grievous, 1 John 5.3. (the word
is burdensome) and indeed what burden is there in the commands of Christ,
(...), from (...) a weight.
unless love be a burden? Indeed he might have commanded (which is his
peculiar Prerogative) what he pleased, but he commanded nothing but what is
pleasant in it self, and will be so to a sanctified soul (which is the
transcendency of his love) A new Commandment (says he) do I give unto you,
that ye love one another, as I have loved you, that ye also love one another,
Joh. 13. v. 34. Well may the Commandment be called New, it being such as was
never given by any King besides himself: And surely there was great love in his
bosom to believers, when he only laid a burden, or a command of Love upon
their shoulders. All her ways are ways of pleasantness, Prove. 3.17. The ways
of Christ (which are his Commands) are ways of pleasantness (for I take it,
The word is (...) which is used for the pleasantness of a life of love. 2 Samuel
1 26.
that Solomon there by wisdom understands Christ.) Believers, if you could
but live in love, you would fulfill the Law of your Lord; for he being a Lord
of love to you, Love is the fulfilling of the Law he lays upon you. Yea such
is the transcendency of his love to believers, that he lays no Commandment
upon them, to do any thing, which he did not himself. Flesh and Blood may
think it a hard, and a harsh Command, to wash the feet of a poor believer, a
fellow servant: But grace will see the Command to be sweet, and lovely? (and
Jesus Christ to be loving in laying this Command) because it is no other than
what himself has done before: Ask the servant whether his Lord be loving, who
lays no Commandment upon him, but that which is sweet in its self, and sweet
in its fruit, and no worse than his Lord himself will undertake. Believers, it
is your case, all the Commands of your Lord Christ are sweet in themselves, and
sweet in their fruit; and they are such as he himself (while he lived) stooped
unto. Does not this declare transcendent love?

Secondly, Christ lays all his commands in a way of love; that which he
bids believers do (who are under his command) it is in a loving way: As the
command is, so is the manner of its imposing, i. e. sweet and loving. It is
possible, that a sweet thing may be enjoined in a harsh way: An easy
commandment in it self may be burdensome in the way of its imposall. To
command with a bended fist, and a frowning forehead, is not to command in a
loving way: but now Jesus Christ, when ever he commands, he commands
sweetly, and smilingly: he does not lift up his voice, and cry (as some
understand that place) Esa. 42. v. 2. He does not speak in an austere, rough,
rugged manner: But as the Lord is, so is his language, loving. Observe with
what love he lays his commands on believers; You are my friends, if you do
whatsoever I command you, Joh. 15 14. He does not threaten, and say, I will be
your Foe, if you will not obey; but if you do, you shall be my Friends. And so
again, If you love me, keep my Commandments. It is worth the noting, that
grace may be said to come in this respect by Christ: He gave not his Law (as
Moses did) with thundering and lightning, in a dreadful manner; But he gave the
Law to his Disciples himself, in a sweet and loving way. He begins his
Sermons, with Blessed are ye: And all his commands drop from him like the drops
of dew upon the tender grass; He shall come down (says the Psalmist, Psalm.
72. v. 6.) like rain upon the mown grass, as showers that water the earth, i.
e. He shall come down, both softly and sweetly; this is spoke of Christ's
coming as a King; so that you may see the transcendency of Christ's love unto
you, in the manner in which he lays his Commandments on you.

Thirdly, Consider the end that Christ does aim at in all his Commandments*
and that will also discover the transcendency of his love to believers. He
seeks not himself, but them, in all his Commands. He bids the believer
work, not that he may reap any thing himself, but that the believer may get
all; he puts them to labor in his Vineyard, that they may have all the
harvest. As it is inconsistent with his Deity, to have any thing added to him,
so also it is inconsistent with his love; He puts his servants to reap,
that they may have all the corn, and he sets them to work, rather that he
may give them wages, than that himself shall get any thing by their workings.
Take my yoke upon you (says he) and you shall find rest unto your souls.
Christ lays a yoke upon their necks, not to burden them, but to ease them;
not to break their backs, but to refresh their bosoms. Many Kings, and Rulers,
aim at themselves in their commands, and they seek too too often, rather their
own greatness, than their Subjects good. But (believe it) Jesus Christ your
King, is not such an one; All that he aims at in his government is your good:
The end of his Commandments are your comfort; As his government increases
over you, so his peace increases in you: This is the effect, and fruit of all
his Commandments, not so much that others may take notice of his glory in
commanding, as that you may find his grace in obeying. Indeed, love is the work
and wages of his Commandment; he therefore bids you do so, that he may love
you; therefore it is, that though you are frail, and weak, and cannot obey, he
will be kind to love you, notwithstanding all.

So that now the Commands of Christ, being as it were love materially (in the
substance) and love formally (in their imposals) and love finally (in their
aim) what can you conclude from all this, but that the love of Christ, even to
believers, is declared to be transcendent in the exercise of his command over
them?

Christ's care speaks love.
Secondly, consider the care that Christ has of them. O the transcendent love
that Christ expresses to believers, in the care that he takes of them for
all necessities! He is not only a Lord to command, and to set them on work; but
he is a Father to take care, and provide for his. And it is easy to observe
transcendency of love, in the transcendent care that Christ has to provide for
his. Food, and raiment, and lodging, are the least things that can be taken
care for; and yet you shall see Christ does not only take care for them, but he
does take care for other things also; yea, and as he does take care that
believers have food to eat, so it is of the finest ( the kidnys of the wheat,
and the finest flower;) Raiment, and glorious raiment, a house, and a brave one
too. First, Christ takes care that believers may have food to eat. He knows
they must have bread, and therefore he has provided bread of life; he
knows they must have drink, and therefore he has opened the sealed fountain
of the water of life. The care that God has to feed his people in the
Wilderness, did demonstrate his love unto them, that he gave them quails and
mannah, etc. Believers, while you are in the wilderness of this world, your
Lord has declared his love, in making rich provisions of spiritual food for
you: He has prepared the hidden mannah which he will give unto you; A feast
of fat things, full of marrow, of wine on the Lees, well refined, as it is
Esaias. 25.6. Nay, even in the midst of your enemies he has prepared a table
for you: And not only that you may be sure of food, but that the food might be
surpassingly sweet, He has made himself to be meat for you. If it be true,
that the Pelican feeds her young ones with her own blood; then that Bird may
be a type of your beloved: His flesh is meat indeed, and his blood is drink
indeed; and this does he give for the life of your souls (O believers.)
Cleopatra, that she might outvie Mark Antonies love, caused (as the History
relates) a pearl of great price to be dissolved, that he might drink thereof:
Christ, believers, has done more for you, and has outvied her love to him;
Gold, and silver, and pearls, are but corruptible things, in comparison of this
precious blood, and yet that blood he has prepared for believers to drink,
that they might live for ever.

Secondly, Christ has provided not only food for the belly, but raiment for
the back too. And as the food, so also the raiment do transcend in love. A
garment of needle work, Psalm. 45.14.
rich, and costly attire, Christ has provided for believers: When thou wast
naked, (believer) and had no clothes to cover thee, but the filthy rags of
thine own works (which did defile thee) then, even then he clothed thee in
broidered work, Ezekiel. 16.10, 11, 12, 13.
and shod thee with badgers skins, and covered thee with fine linen, and
decked thee with ornaments, and put bracelets on thine hands, and a chain on
thy neck, and a jewel on thy sorehead, and earrings on thine ears, and a
beautiful Crown upon thine head; etc. Thus did he adorn thee, and thus did he
array thee, and thou wast exceeding glorious with the garments he put on thee.
Greater love can none declare than this, to give another as good garments as
himself does wear; why, this does Jesus Christ. In the mount of
Transfiguration, ( Matthew. 17. v. 2.) it is said, his raiment was as white as
the light: And when the Saints appeared to John in his vision, they appeared in
garments of the same color; it is said, They were arrayed with white robes,
Rev. 7 13. Righteousness is his garment, and so it is believers too. It was an
act of great love to Mordecay (and Haman thought the King could express no
greater) that the Royal apparel should be brought which the King used to wear,
and to be put on him. Why, believers, such is the transcendent love of Christ
to his, in his care for your apparel, that the royal apparel which he wears
himself is brought to you, and is put on your souls Now (and you are all
glorious within here,) and it shall be put on your bodies hereafter; even that
body which is now vile, Phil. 3. last.
shall be made glorious, like to his glorious body: And when Christ shall come,
and appear in his garments of glory, Col 3.4. 1 John 3.3.
you shall appear with him in the like: And then he shall be admired, not only
in himself, 2 These 1.10.
but in you. O transcendent love, that Jesus Christ should provide such
clothing for us poor creatures!

Thirdly, as for lodging, Christ has provided that likewise for believers.
Indeed himself had no house here on earth (not so much as a hole wherein to lay
his head) and therefore believers fare no worser here than he did, they have as
good a lodging as their Lord: In this world indeed they have not a house to be
in, nor a bed to lie on (as their own;) But as to hereafter he has provided a
house, and that not a mean one, but a mansion house, and the building thereof is
brave; It is a building of God, and the bravery of it appears in this (which
was the bravery of Christ's body, Heb. 9.11.) that it is a house not made with
hands. The Shunamite did declare her love to the man of God, by making of him a
little chamber, and by setting a bed therein, and a table, and a stool, and a
candlestick for him, 2 King. 4.10. Jesus Christ shows greater love than this,
in having provided a better room for believers; not a little Chamber, but a
great Mansion (a bed of glory, Abraham's bosom) not a stool, but a Throne, not
a candlestick (no nor the Sun) but himself, to be as a light, this not on
the wall (as it were without his own Palace) but even within, where himself is,
in his own presence, Joh. 17. 24. Father (says he) I will that they whom thou
have given me, be with me where I am. Consider this, believers, Christ has
prepared as good a house for you, as for himself, and when he was, as it were,
in the entry thereof, he stood at the door, and did in a manner agree with the
Father before hand, that you should come in as well as himself: and therefore
it was, (he said) he went to propare a place for them.

So that now here is rich provision of necessaries, food, and raiment, and
lodging: And what does this declare, but rich love in Christ, that he should
take such care of believers?

We might add, not only that Christ has prepared these things which are the
necessaries, but he has prepared other things which are glorious. But oh, who
shall be able to declare all the gracious provision which Christ has made for
his! When as eye has not seen, neither has ear heard, nor has it entered into
the heart of man to conceive those things; we will therefore break out with the
Psalmist, O how great is thy goodness, which thou have laid up as a secret
treasure (for so the word signifies) for them that love thee, (...)
and believe in thee, To hide as a treasure hence (...) a treasure.
Psalm. 31.19. Thus you see the transcendent love of Christ in his care for, as
well as his command over believers.

Thirdly, and lastly, we might abundantly demonstrate the transcendency of
Christ's love to believers, Christ's endeavor to persuade believers of his love,
speaks its greatness.
in his endeavor to declare and persuade the hearts of believers of all this
love. That Christ should love at all, and love so much is transcendent; But
that he should take pains to persuade the hearts of believers to believe this,
is an addition to the transcendency of the love. Christ saw how backward we
would be to believe, and how hardly we would be brought to persuade our selves,
that indeed he did love us at all; therefore it is, he took such care, and made
such provision, for the persuading of the hearts of believers to close with the
truth of this, that he loved them. I have (says he) declared thy name, and
will declare it, that the love wherewith thou have loved me may be in them.
This is the great work which he did himself, when he was on earth, and which
his Ambassadors now do in his name (now he is in Heaven) viz. To persuade the
hearts of his that he loves them. What a great deal of love was there in that
cry of his, when he was on earth, That if any came to him, he would in no wise
cast them out? And if they did but thirst, they might come to him, and drink?
How did he declare the strength of his love, in persuading souls to come to
him, that they might taste, and see how he loved them. It had been much, if
Jesus Christ would have given a poor soul leave to love him, and would have
accepted it upon his seeking to him, but that he should love, and woo us to
love him, and take pains to make us believe that he does love us, This is
transcendent love! O believers, such is the strength and transcendency of the
love of Christ toward you, that when he was upon earth himself, he made it his
great work, not only to tender love freely, but to persuade you to believe it
fully. And now he is gone to Heaven, he has taken care to appoint Ambassadors,
and they always in his name do beseech you to believe, that he does love you:
And it is the great longing of his soul, to fill you, not only with his own
love, but with his Fathers love too, wheresoever the Gospel of free grace does
sound, the sum thereof is this, That God so loved the world, that he sent
his Son: And that Jesus Christ himself so loved poor souls, that he came
himself, that if any would but believe, they might have him, and in him
everlasting life and love.

To all this I might add the consideration of the easy price that Jesus
Christ sets upon his love, which he tendereth; It is but acceptance. If any
man will but come to (his bosom) the fountain of love, he may take the waters
thereof freely; that fountain is not a sealed, but an open fountain: And this
is the transcendency thereof, that it is open, even for those, in whom there
was a fountain of wrath and enmity flowing up, and that against himself. O my
brethren! if you did but consider, that the love of Christ passes knowledge,
that in its nature, it is every way full, and in its tender free; And that he
profereth rich love to those, who by nature were the children of wrath, and
that all this is in a beseeching way; Certainly you must conclude, that the
love of Christ is a transcendent love, and that it passes knowledge. It was
the tenderness of the love of Jonathan, and David, that it passed the love of
women; Thy love to me (says David) was wonderful, passing the love of women,
2 Samuel 1. v. 26. Surely, believers, the love of Christ to you is wonderful
(transcendently wonderful) passing the love of women (passing the love of
Jonathan and David) comprehending (as formerly has been hinted) yea and
surmounting any, or all the loves of all the creatures whatsoever: Neither man,
nor Angels could, or ever did, express so much love, as Jesus Christ has not
only expressed, and declared, but does even tender, and besceeh, believing
souls to accept of. I shall add no more for the demonstration thereof, but
only this; That when I have said all that I can (though I had all the tongues
both of Men and Angels) of the love of Christ, you that find it in your
bosoms, will have reason to tell me, that the one half was not told you: For
the love of Christ is such, as all the Saints, who do in the fullest measure
enjoy it, are not able to express it, but must be fain to cease speaking, and
so wrap up their souls in wondering at it, and cry, That it is a love passing
knowledge.

Before I come to the Application, I shall briefly answer two Objections which
may come in, and be made against the truth of this Doctrine.

Ob, First, it will be objected, If the love of Christ be so transcendent to
believers, Whence then comes it to pass, that he permits them oftentimes to
lie so low, that their enemies triumph, and insult over them? Surely will some
weak (for weakness is the around of the Objection) believer say, If Christ
love me so highly, why does he permit me to lie so low? If I be so near to his
heart, how is it that he suffers wicked men to tread upon me? If he lays me
in his bosom, why is it that he suffers me to lie at the worlds feet?

Answ. 1. This may consist with love; tell me (thou weak soul) was not Christ
the dearly beloved of the Father; and yet did not the father permit wicked men
to persecute him? Can thou be reviled, buffeted scourged, or crucified worse
than he? and yet notwithstanding all, he was beloved of the Father, and that in
a transcendent manner: in like manner, thou may be the beloved of Christ's
soul, and yet be delivered into the hands of thine-enemies (as it is) Jer.
12.7. Nay, this is not only consisting with love, but*

2 It is an act of love; for while Christ permits these sufferings of thine,
he makes thee like unto himself. It is desired of Paul, as it makes him
conformable unto Christ, Phil. 3.10. Even a mourning garment is glorious when
it is the same that Christ wears. (...). i.e. We boast in a glorying manner.
What soul is there that may not, as it were, be proud, and glory in its
tribulations (as the word signifies, Rom 5.3. (when he considers in them he
is made like to Christ; yea, a suit of sackcloth is to a spiritual soul brave,
and fine, when the Lord of glory goes in the same fashion.

Object. 2 But some will object further, and say, I do not question whether
Christ loves me transcendently because of the sufferings I lie under, but
rather because of the desertions in which I am. Alas! I question whether he
loves me at all, because he withdraws himself from me so long: much more
reason have I to question, whether be loves me transcendently; while I see him
altogether deny me his company. Indeed in a sense, I think that the love of
Christ passes knowledge (for I know but little of Christ) Methinks I see him
withdrawn, I will not deny but he has sweet smiles, but I am a stranger to
those smiles. Time was, when I thought he loved me transcendently, but now I
fear he loves me not at all, for he deserteth me.

Answ. To such a soul as objects thus, I would say but three words.

First, These withdrawings of Christ (whereof thou complainest) are but in
show, not in substance. The Sun is but absent in show, when it does not shine,
it is prerent still, though behind a cloud: I have often thought that Christ's
withdrawing, in this respect, may be called rather his concealed presence, Note
this
than his real absence: He was close by Mary, although she did not see him; He
was in the company of his Disciples, though they knew it not: His presence was
not manifest (not because his person was not there, but) because their eyes
were held, that they should not know him, Luke, 24, v. 16.

Secondly, These withdrawings (whereof thou complainest) are not total; Christ
never so withdraws from the believer, but he leaves something behind, he
puts in his hand before he goes (as it is Cant. 5. v. 4.) And surely, his
hand was never empty. Mind this
If he be absent in shining, he is present in strengthening; though he does not
appear rich in love, yet he is still present, upholding thy life. The very
breath that thou breathest (poor deserted creature) does declare that Christ is
present in some measure: It were impossible that thou should breath, if
Jesus were not within thy bosom; thy weepings after him, are demonstrations,
that in some measure he is with thee.

Thirdly, Christ's departure will not be final, he will be found again, though
he be not felt now: And when he comes he will make rich amends for his
absence. This said Mr. Peacock after this desertion, The Sea is not more full
of water, nor the Sun more full of light, than my heart is full of joy, the joy
that I feel in my heart is incredible. Ah said another poor soul, (that had
cried Christ was gone) He is come, he is come, he has kissed me with the
kisses of his lips, his love is better than wine, he has not deceived me,
neither will he deceive any.

I shall therefore retort the Argument thus, Though believers give Christ
occasion to go away very often, yet Christ never goes away altogether, but
even in his conceived absence, vouchsafes a concealed presence, and at his
sensible return makes rich amends for his staying, and going away: What do
these declare, but that his love is transcendent, and (as the Text says)
passing knowledge.

Four words I shall add by way of Application, viz.

A word of 1 Information. 2 Reproof, 3 Exhortation. 4 Persuasion.


First, for Information, in as much as it is thus clear, that Christ loves his,
with transcendent love, then it may inform us of these four things.

First, in the deservednesse of that great, and dreadful curse, which Paul
denounces against those who love not Christ, 1 Cor. 16.22. If any man love not
the Lord Jesus, let him be Anathema, Maranatha. That is, let him be cursed with
the highest, and greatest degree of cursing that may be possible; for of those
three degrees of cursing, which the Jews used in their threefold
excommunication, this of Anathema Maranatha was the highest; and it includes as
much as this, Let the Lord come, and strike this person with eternal
perdition. And tell me. do not those deservedly expose themselves to this
dreadful curse, who do not love such an one as Jesus Christ is; who loves all
his with a transcendent love? Mind this, wretches! (you who love not the Lord
Jesus) what can you say for your selves, that you should not lie under this
curse? Why do not you love Jesus Christ? what reason have you for it? Is not he
lovely, fairer than the sons of men? Is not he loving? Does not his love to
his, pass the love of women? Were Christ unkind, you might with some pretense
plead, that you have reason not to love him; but being so kind, so loving as
that he opens his bosom, and lets out transcendent love to all that are
his: Certainly, you may expect, and that justly, to be accursed in this high
degree, for not loving Christ.

Secondly, See here the true ground of a believers glory. Is it not a ground of
glory to be beloved of Christ, with such a transcendent love as you have heard?
Well may believers make their boast of Christ all the day long; and well may
they glory in the love that they enjoy; for why? that love is transcendent,
passing knowledge. None of all the sons or daughters of men have any, such
just ground of glory (though they should enjoy the love of all the creatures)
as believers have, who do enjoy only the love of Christ. For that love they
have, in him, transcends, and excells, (and that infinitely) all that love which
any can have from all the creatures. Let the world falsely and fondly brag of
their creature-loves (and pity them (Oh believers!) when you see them do so:)
But rejoice your selves in the mean time, with joy exceeding great, and full of
glory: And the point will bear you out in it, for you have such a love, as is
not to be found in all the world beside. Having the love of Christ, you have
that love which passes knowledge.

And surely, believers, if the men of the world think they have good ground to
glory in this, that they enjoy the Low love, (though of some seeming great
creatures) you have much more ground to rejoice, who enjoy this high love, of
him who is indeed greater than all the creatures (Jesus Christ). Do men think
they have just ground to sit and glory, in that they sip the puddle drops of
creatures loves? Have not you more ground, and that juster, and truer, to sing
and glory in this, that you drink in the pure love of Jesus Christ? which is so
sweet, so excellent, and so transcendent, as that it passes knowledge.

Thirdly, in as much as Christ loves believers with a transcendent love; then
see here the rise and ground of all that which Christ does for them. You wonder
believers (at least you might) and that justly; whence it is that Christ does
so much for you. One while he is filling you with his unsearchable riches
another while he is crowning you with his own glory Now you have him giving you
choice gifts, and anon you have him bringing of you choice graces: In this duty
you have him embracing of your souls in his arms; And in that duty you find him
kissing you with the kisses of his lips; and you are ready to cry out, Whence
is it that Christ does all this for me! One while thou art sick, and Christ
visits thee, and makes thy bed, and sits by thy bed side other whiles
thou go abroad and Christ walks with thee, and thou leanest upon him, as
upon thy beloved. Now thou art in the wilderness (it may be under some
banishment) and Christ comes to thee: And anon it may be thou art in prison
(under some restraint) and Christ visits thee there too? And all this makes
thee cry out, Whence is it, that my Lord should thus come to me? Why see the
Point, and in that see the cause; He loves thee (O believer) and he loved thee
with a transcendent love: And hence it is, that he does all that he does for
thee, and gives all that he bestows on thee. You wonder why Christ should
sanctify such unsanctified hearts as yours are, and cleanse by the washing of
water, and by the word, such impure spirits as yours be: And you are ready to
say, Whence is it that the Lord of glory should stoop to wash such a creature
as I am? Whence is it that he at whose feet Angels fall, and bow, should come
and wash the feet of such a creature as you be? Hence it is (believers) Christ
has loved you, and that with a transcendent love: Wonder not therefore
henceforth (unless it be with the wondering, why Christ does any thing, or all
things, for you) there is a reason, yea great reason (though not in you) yet in
himself: It is this we have been speaking of, i. e. the transcendent love he
bears to you.

Fourthly, let this inform believers, that (since Christ loves them with a
transcendent love) at all times, they have then a just: ground to act their
faith upon him in any case. Why is it (O believer) that thou doubtest, whether
Christ will do this for thee, or give that to thee, when as thou considerest he
loves thee with such a transcendent love? upon all occasions, act your faith
(O ye children of faith) in your beloved: what ever it is that you want, and he
has; what ever it be that thou would have, and he can give, Believe that
Christ will not let thee go without it; for why, he loves thee with a
transcendent love.

In three cases more particularly this truth will inform you of the sure ground
that believers have to act their faith on Jesus Christ.

First, in case of hearing of their prayers. These things I touched at in the
first Ser. mon, but not so fully.
Surely he that so transcendently loves their persons, will without doubt hear
their prayers, Thou say (O believing soul) thou have great necessities (and
they force thee to make many prayers.) Thou say, that Christ can help thee
at all hands (and therefore thou art calling upon him at all times) But thou
say, will he hear me? Why should thou not believe that he will, when
thou considerest the transcendent love he bears to thee? The love that is in
his bosom, toward thee, will open his ears, to hear the breathings that come
from thee. Indeed, sometimes he may seem to be deaf, and not hear thy prayers;
and sometimes also he may seem harsh, and not accept of thy person: But it is
to try thy faith: For notwithstanding, he will hear thee, and accept of thee,
in what thou desire according to his will, for thy good, that he may declare
his transcendent love. You know Christ called the woman of Canaan Dog, and
seemed to speak harsh to her; and yet even all the while that he looked (as it
were) sourly upon her, and spoke (as it were) sadly against her; yet even then
did his bowels roll for her, and even then was there love in his bosom to
her: And therefore though (for a while) he seemed to deny, that he might try
the sincerity of her faith; yet afterward he granted her requests, that he
might declare the reality of his own love. In this case therefore you have a
sure ground of faith, O believers, Christ will not reject your prayers, because
he loves your persons, and, the more transcendent his love is toward the one,
the more sure may you be that he will hear the other.

Secondly, In case of obtaining counsel from Christ, and knowing the mind of
Christ. This Point will inform us in a sure ground of faith, and love. (O
believer) love will open Christ's bosom, and let thee see the counsels that are
there: Surely he will counsel thee in case of doubts, because he loves thee,
as he does: Thou say here is a Scruple, and there is a question, and I would
fain know the mind of Christ concerning this or that: But how can I hope that
ever he will open his mind to me, either in the one, or about the other? Why
say thou so (O believer?) is not his transcendent love, a good ground for
the acting of thy faith, in this case? Verily because his heart is to thee,
therefore it will be with thee (That I may allude to that phrase. of Judges 16.
v. 15.) How ever Dallilah said to Sampson, How can thou say, I love thee,
when thine heart is not with me: thou have no reason to say, as she said (in
such a way as she did:) Thou may believe that his heart will be with thee,
because thou hear that he loves thee. I would fain persuade my own heart,
and yours also, in these times of doubting, and of darkness (in which we need
counsel, and would be glad to know the Mind of Christ more) I would I say,
persuade mine own heart, and yours also, to this Point, to act faith upon
Christ in this case, whatever the truth of such a Scripture be (as you would
know) or of such a question (as you would fain be resolved in.) Since Christ
loves you with a transcendent love; act faith in this case, That in due time,
he will reveal even the one, and the other to thee.

Thirdly, Christ's transcendent love gives a sure ground of faith in the case
of raising up of the saints out of suffering. Verily (O you children of faith
and love) believe it, Jesus Christ who loves you in such a transcendent manner
(as you have heard) will not let you always be under those great sufferings
which you do: His great love (for the present) makes him sympathize with you
(in all your afflictions, he is afflicted.) Men that persecute you, they
persecute him that loves you: He looks upon your sufferings as his own. (And
because heeloveth you so transcendently, he will ere long tell those that
persecute you, the same terribly) believe it, Christ that has appeared to you
in this, saying, I have loved you with an everlasting love, and therefore with
loving kindness have I drawn you out of the state of sin, will also say unto
you, I do love you with a transcendent love, and therefore with the same loving
kindness will I draw you out of the state of sufferings. (I say) Act faith (O
believers!) upon this ground of Christ's transcendent love, even a sweet, and a
singular faith, in the case of delivering you out of sufferings. As he will not
always strive himself with you, so neither always will he suffer wicked men to
trample on you, because he knows (and his love makes him afraid) lest your
spirits should fail, as under the one, so under the other.

Use. Secondly, It may be a word of Reproof. This point, that Christ loves his
with a transcendent love, may justly reprove the world, yea, and the Saints
themselves also.

First, It may reprove the world, who are ready, not only to think, but to say
(as he in the Parable) that Christ is an austere man, Luke 19.21. No my
brethren, Christ, you see, is not austere, but sweet: As his name is, so is his
nature, love; and that in a transcendent manner. Be reproved, wretches, in
entertaining unkind, or reviling thoughts of Christ: You wrong him in his love,
and your selves in the truth, while you think, or say, that he is not a loving
Lord; you shall ere long not only see that he loves, but that he loves all
his, with a love passing knowledge.

But secondly, It reproves the Saints also, who are ready very often to
question, if not the reality, yet the transcendency of Christ's love. Be
reproved, for saying Christ loves you not at all, or if he does, but very
little; for you hear, that he loves even all his with a transcendent love. I
profess it is sad to see, upon what petty poor occasions, even believers
themselves are ready to question (at least the greatness) of Christ's love. If
he denies them, (though but a vanity) yet because their hearts are set upon
it so much, they think that his heart is not set upon them at all, such is
their weakness, they are ready to think that Christ loves them but a little,
because he does not give them, (happily a knife, which he sees they would
use to cut their own throat with.) Your bosoms, O believers, will hint you the
particulars in this case, and therefore I pass them by: Only let the word of
reproof fall upon you, who for any occasion, whether great or small, dare to
question the transcendency of Christ's love; when as you see it to be a clear
truth (written as with a Sunbeam upon your souls and bosoms) that the love he
loves you with, is passing knowledge.

Use, Thirdly, This point is a word of Exhortation, to exhort believers (upon
the consideration of this transcendent love, which Christ bears to them) to
do at least these four things.

First, Tremble to think that ever you should sin against him, who loves you
so much. View thy sins (O believer) in the light of thy Saviors love; and when
thou see the transcendency of that love which is in his bosom toward thee,
then sit down, and bleed to behold thy great sinnings against him. Then indeed
has transcendent love a sweet working upon thy spirit, when as the thoughts of
it can make thee mourn for thy sins. How sweetly did love work upon that
woman (who was a sinner) when she tasted the transcendent love of her Savior?
The sight of the great love which was in his bosom toward her, makes her sit
at his feet, and weep bitterly at the thoughts of her sins. For the present, I
will not dispute the point whether mourning for sin before closing with Christ
can be sincere, Sure I am of this, that after closing with Christ, and tasting
of his love, then mourning for sin is most sweet: And though nothing in the
world melt the heart for sin, yet the thoughts of the love of Christ will.
Well, believers, let in then have such a work in your bosoms. O let his
transcendent love (which you may read written with the blood of his heart)
dissolve thine adamantine heart: And let it make thee mourn for thy sins
greatly. They shall see him whom they have peirced, and mourn (says the
Scripture) Zach. 12.10. Why (believers) do you see him whom you have peirced
with your sins? Do not you mourn, especially when you see him in the light of
love? I say no more but this, either you have not tasted this transcendent love
of Christ, or else your spirits are very much hardened, if the sense and
thoughts thereof do not cause you to mourn for sin. Therefore let this word
of Exhortation sink deeply into your hearts (O believers!) weep, and weep
tears of blood, to think that ever you should sin against Jesus Christ, who
has written in his own blood this truth, that he loves you with a love passing
knowledge.

Secondly, Be exhorted to be ambitious to answer this transcendent love of your
Savior, with the like. Let this love of thy Lord, be the loadstone of thy
love; Let it constrain thee to love him transcendently, who loves thee so. I
know it is impossible that thou should parallel it, (which is the glory of
Christ's love) yet strive at least to imitate it, (which will be the glory of
thine.) Do not content thy self to love him little, that loved thee much; Since
Christ has loved thee richly, be ashamed to love him but poorly. Ambition in
this respect will be a grace, if so be that the sire of Christ's love to thee,
set thee in flames of great love to him: O! be ambitious to declare as much as
in thee lies, the exceeding greatness of thy love to thy Lord.

Mirandula notes it as a badg of love that it makes the person willing, yea
and desirous to suffer for the party beloved. Believers, Christ's love to you,
had such a work as that, and if your love to him has not yet risen so high as
to desire to suffer for him, yet let it at least rise thus high, as to be
willing to suffer any thing for him, if he call thee to it; It will be a
sweet, and a sure character of love.

As Christ wrote a letter of love to thee in his own blood: So do thou (upon
occasion) write a letter of love back to him, in the same rubric. The love of
Christ (says Paul) constrains us, because (says he) we thus judge, etc. 2
Cor. c. 5. v. 14. the consideration of Christ's love had a constraining power
upon Paul's spirit, and he could not choose but judge this, that if Jesus Christ^
dyed for him, he should be willing to dye for Christ. Then is a Christian
sweetly exercised, when as the Golden ball of divine love, is tossed too and
again, between Christ's bosom, and his. Let this therefore sink into your
spirits, labor to answer (O believers) this transcendent love of Christ
toward you, which passes knowledge.

Thirdly, upon all occasions, have recourse to this transcendent love. Populus
me sibilat, etc. (as the miser says) people deride me abroad, but I comfort
my self, when I come home, (he meant by looking into his boxes, and there
seeing his gold.) Believers, though the world deride you abroad, yet you may
have recourse to this love of Christ, and comfort your selves when you come
home: To look as it were into the glorious box (Christ's bosom) and there see
that, which (I am sure to thee) is better than gold, id est, his grace. Weak
people are thus far wise, as they have their little bottles of spirits, and
cordials to carry about with them, to refresh them when they are faint;
Believers, you (especially you that are weak) imitate their wisdom: Let this
bottle of Christ's transcendent love, always be in thy bosom, and have
recourse to this; Refresh thy spirits upon all occasions (especially when thou
beginnest to faint) and without doubt, there is a refreshing power in this
transcendent love of Christ, to keep up your hearts from fainting under
troubles (as we shall see in the next point, when we come to it.) Jesus Christ
in his trouble had recourse to his fathers love, why then in any trouble, have
not you recourse to Christ's love?

Fourthly, (In as much as Christ loves all his with a transcendent love) let
it be your care (O believers) to imitate your Savior: Love all his as he does,
with such a transcendent love. Ephesians. 5.2. 1 John 4.11.
Beloved, if Christ have loved us, we ought then to love one another. At least
(O believers) be persuaded to have salt in your selves, and to love one
another, and that very dearly, since Jesus Christ does the like: Be ye followers
of Christ (in this) as dea^ children, and be you walkers in love one to
another, as Christ has loved you all; who ever they be that are believers,
Christ loves them very dear, because they are his: He does so, why should not
you? O that where ever you see the light of Christ's love shining upon any
bosom, that there you would cause your love to shine also upon the same:
Especially take heed, that you do not frown upon those, on whom Christ does
smile. You have heard (and therefore mind it) that Christ loves all his with a
transcendent love, therefore take in this exhortation also; who ever they be,
that belong to Jesus Christ (though in many things they differ from thee) yet
let them have thy love, for this one thing, viz. Christ in them: At least learn
to love them really, because you hear Christ loves them transcendently, Christ
loves different Saints with the same love: sure I am, that believers, of all,
or any opinions, are the object of Christ's affection, and though they are
unhappily, it may be, erring about some truths, yet they are all of them happy
in the enjoyment of this truth, that Jesus Christ loves them all with a love
passing knowledge. Sad it is to see those look strangely one upon another, who
are yet all beloved of Jesus Christ: But sadder it is to see any Saint look
upon another with a frowning countenance, when as Christ looks upon him, as
well as upon himself, with a smiling face. Who does not bleed to see one
believer to write a book of revilings against another, when as you look upon
the Gospel (as a glorious book of love) writted by Christ to them all; Tell it
not in Gath, publish it not in the streets of Askelon: O! let not the daughters
of the unbeloved triumph, to see you who are the highly beloved ones of Jesus
Christ, traducing and reviling one another. I say no more but this, since Jesus
Christ does love all the Saints, and every believer, with a transcendent love,
do you who are believers (and so share in the sweetness of this truth) do the
like.

Fourthly, I shall add but a word of persuasion, and let it be to persuade all
those, who as yet are strangers to Jesus Christ, to come in unto him. O that
you could behold the glorious beams of transcendent love toward all
believers, doubtless such a sight as that, could not choose but work upon your
hearts, and strangely draw your spirits to close with him, who is so lovely in
himself, and so loving unto his wandering souls, that err up and down the
Wilderness of the world: Return (ye sinners) unto holds of love, kiss the
Son, embrace Jesus Christ, know, he is the Lord of love: One who imbraceth all
that come to him freely; and then loves them all transcendently: I fear you
are ignorant of this truth, that Christ loves his with a love passing
knowledge.

And it may be your ignorance of this, keeps you from closing with him; But
know it now, and be persuaded to come to Christ; to close with him, to embrace
his Gospel, to love his truth, to be conversant in his ordinances, as knowing,
if you be, you shall have love from him, which passes knowledge. Be contented
now to break off from the ways of sin, and vanity, and come into the ways
of righteousness; Be contented to bid the creature adieu, and now be willing
to embrace Christ. do not say if you take up Christ in his Gospel and in his
ways, Friends will leave you, and the World will loath you, and the Devil
will stir up the Sons of Belial against you: It matters not, though the
creatures leave you, Christ will embrace you; Though they loath you, Christ
will love you. And what need you fear the rising up of the Sons of Belial,
when you shall enjoy the loves of Christ's bosom? Hear and give ear, (O ye
children of folly) be wise at least once, and you shall taste love. Christ
calls you all, whoever you be, come to him, embrace him cordially, and you
shall find him loving you transcendently. I have said all (and happy I were,
and you too) if I could but prevail with you to be drawn to Jesus Christ with
these cords of love.

However you are strangers to it now, yet if you would but come in, you should
know the love of Christ, and know the truth of this point. Your own experience
should be forced to witness to this, That Jesus Christ loves believers with
a transcendent love, passing knowledge.

SERMON V.
EPHESIANS. 3. ver. 19. And to know the love of Christ which passes knowledge.


THere is nothing of greater force to allure men, than the desire of knowledge;
Job tells us, Job. ^^.12.
Vain man desires to be wise, though man be born like a wild Asses colt.
Albeit it is our fate, that since the fall we are subject to folly, (and in
that sense we are vain) yet there remains (at least) so much wit in us, as to
approve of knowledge, and to desire to be wise: only here is our misery, that
there is a great deal of vanity in our desiring knowledge; We are all of us
apt, either to desire the knowledge of that that is above us (and so
unattainable) or else beneath us (and in that respect not so much desirable.)
It was this golden apple of knowledge, which was so taking, and tempting with
our Grandmother Eve, that albeit the best that she got by eating that apple,
was but the knowledge of evil, (which we had all been better without) yet
she was drawn to eat of the Apple: Not only as persuaded of its being
pleasant to the taste, but because it was desirable to make one wise: And
surely; as our Grandmother did eat those sour grapes, so we all her children
have ever since had our teeth set on edge with the same desire.

Hence it is, that too too often, out of an eager desire, and affectation of
knowledge, we are apt upon the one hand for to five too high, and to pry into
those hidden secrets which God has not revealed) or else on the other hand,
we are apt to stoop too low (and to dive into niceties and vanities, at least
into the knowledge of such things in which we are not concerned) but as the
Apostle does say) I shall show you a more excellent way; by declaring how you
may poise your desire of knowledge, so as that you should be neither too high,
nor too low in the pursuit thereof: Do not say therefore, who shall ascend, to
bring down Jesus Christ from above, and to reveal the knowledge of hidden
glories, and unconceiveable mysteries? Neither say, who shall descend? to raise
him up from beneath, but remember the word (the Scripture) is nigh, even the
Gospel which we preach: Labor to know it, and you shall know enough, not only
as to salvation, but even as to the perfection of your knowledge. Christ who is
the Wisdom of God, and in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom, and
knowledge, is fully and clearly revealed in the Gospel, and by the study and
the knowledge of it, we shall come to the knowledge of him. Now of all
knowledge, the knowledge of Christ, as it is most sacred, so it is most
satisfactory: And of all things in Christ, the knowledge of his love: And as
that is most satisfactory, so it is most sweet. It is this knowledge, which the
Apostle here prays that the Ephesians might obtain, (and by consequence that
knowledge which all Christians ought to desire, and labor for.) It concerns
you not so much to know Arts and Sciences (though in themselves, and their way,
they are necessary, and of worth) neither does it concein you (at least) so
much, to be acquainted with other truths of the Scriptures (which in their
place are very precious) But this is that which does so mainly concern you,
viz. That you know the love of Christ passing knowledge.

Our third Point in order taken up, and to be spoken to from these words, is
this, That it is a thing of necessary concernment, for every Christian to know
the transcendent love of Jesus Christ.

We have already endeavored to hold out, at least, a beam of light toward
the discovery of that bosome-love, that is in Christ toward his: And at this
time my desire is, to hint something, which may at least put you on to
endeavor to make a further discovery of the riches, and the glory, and the
transcendency of that love: For my design is to make it appear, That the study
for the knowledge thereof, is of very choice, special, and necessary
concernment for you all.

Explication what knowledge we should labor for
The subject of the point, you see, Is the knowledge of the love of Christ. Now
when I say, That the knowledge of the love of Christ is of necessary concernment

1 A clear and full.
1 I do mean, not simply the bare believing of this truth, but a clear and full
understanding of it, the substance, and circumstances thereof. There are
divine, and infinite dimensions in the love of Christ, and it is our duty to
labor for the knowledge of all these: We should strive to be able to measure
both the length and the breadth, yea and also to take the height, and to sound
the depth of the love of Christ: Christ's bosom is a very glorious Mine of
love, and it concerns us to dig very deep into it, and not content our selves
with a bare discovery of that Golden Oar, or vein of love, which is upon the
superficies or top of the same Mine; and in which we may easily discover, as it
were in the very letter of the Gospel; but it does concern us to endeavor to
attain unto the deep and mysteriall discoveries thereof, which Saints by the
light of the Spirit come to attain.

2 A spiritual and experimental.
2 Yea, and not only so, but also to endeavor to get an experimental knowledge
of this love; That as the Painter curiously painted love, by drawing the type
of it out of his own bosom; So we in like manner may be able by our Christian
discourses to paint forth, and to declare what the love of Christ is, taking
especially the grounds thereof, out of our own bosoms, our own experiences.
Divines observe that the Scriptures own not any thing for knowledge (at least
saving) which is not experimental. And certainly that knowledge of the love of
Christ (whereof we shall now speak) ought to be, not only a bare head
knowledge, but especially a heart knowledge, an experimental knowledge; This I
thought good to add for the explication of the subject of the Proposition.

Now for the predicate (or the thing that we do affirm of this knowledge of the
love of Christ) you may do well, for the clearer apprehending thereof, to take
it in these particulars.

First, This knowledge is of concernment. There are many things, the knowledge
whereof may be expedient, but not of such concernment. But this knowledge
whereof we speak, is such a knowledge, as not only may be expedient for us to
know, but also of concernment for us that we should know.

Secondly, I say it is of necessary concernment; some knowledge may be of
accidental concernment to be known, which is not of necessary concernment:
some things indeed as being accidental to some greater truth, and the
discovery thereof, are in that respect of concernment, to be known; (and so may
concern a man to endeavor for the knowledge thereof) But now this knowledge
has a necessity laid upon it; and woe be to every soul that knows not the
love of Christ.

Thirdly, I add, it is of necessary concernment for every Christian; some
truths there are, which albeit they may be of necessary concernment for some
persons, who are as it were anointed with an higher anointing, and employed in
a more special way (as officers in the Church, etc.) may yet not be of such
necessary concernment to all: But now this knowledge, (whereof we are speaking)
is of necessary concernment; for every soul that is named by the name of
Christ, (and so pretends to be a Christian) but especially every soul that is
united to Jesus Christ (and so is indeed a Christian) ought to labor for a
solid knowledge of the love of Christ. As the Fathers in Christ's School, are
not above this knowledge; so neither the babes and children in Christ's School
are beneath it, but all, even the one and the other, are bound, and it lies
upon them, as that which does concern them very near, and very necessary, to
know this love of Christ, which passes knowledge.

One word I shall only add by way of Caution; I do not speak, neither would I
have you understand me, as if this were the only knowledge to be labored
for. Indeed it is the sovereign, but not the sole knowledge, which Christians
should desire, and endeavor to obtain.

In all that therefore I shall speak, I desire to be understood, not
exclusively, shutting out other truths, but as inclusively, and eminently
driving at this in a peculiar manner. And as Christ said with reference to
doing, Those things, you ought to have done (that is especially) and not
leaving the other undone ( i.e. altogether neglect) I say in like manner of
knowing, the knowledge of the love of Christ, you ought especially to labor
for (as a thing of more choice, and special and necessary concernment) but you
are not altogether to neglect the knowledge of other Gospell-truths, as if they
were of no necessity, or of no necessary concernment at all.

For the Proof I shall not need to add many places (it being so fully laid
down in this;) Certainly this wise Apostle Paul, would never have so earnestly,
and particularly begged of God, that the Ephesians might know the love of
Christ, which passes knowledge, if it were not of special and necessary
concernment for them. I shall only add to this his desire for the Ephesians,
that determination of his for himself (which he expresses to the Corinthians)
I am determined (says he) not to know any thing among you, save Jesus Christ
and him crucified; Now the knowledge of Jesus Christ crucified (as I hinted
once before) is the knowledge of Christ in his love; Though the whole life of
Jesus Christ, was but (as it has been showed) like one great Sermon of love,
yet the death of Christ was as it were a longer, and clearer Sermon of love,
than all his life was. Never did Christ speak love, more fully, and more
freely, than when he was as it were in that Pulpit, the Cross: Now then, if
certainly Paul did determine to know nothing but this; we may safely conclude,
both from his determination for himself, and his desire for the Ephesians, that
the knowledge of Christ's transcendent love, (especially in a clear
experimental way) is of necessary concernment for every Christian.

I shall offer some reasons to make this point yet clearer.

First, The knowledge of the love of Christ contains in it the sum of the
Gospel. (Christ being the sum of the Gospel, and love the sum of Christ.) God
so loved the World, that he gave Christ, and Christ so loved the world, that
he gave himself, contains in it the morrow and pith of all the Gospel: This
little word love (written in the golden letters of free grace upon the bosom
of Jesus Christ) is an epitomy of the Gospel: Look as O love the father, is
the fulfilling of the Law; so Christ's love to us, is the fulness of the
Gospel. You have done the Law, if you love God sincerely, and you understand
the Gospel, if you know Christ's love soundly.

Secondly The knowledge of Christ's love is of necessary concernment, because it
contains in i^ the chiefest motive to duty. You will never do duty (at least
with that sweetness in your own spirits which you should) and with that
acceptance of God, which you would) if you do not act from a principle of
love. Now the love of Christ known to us, is that which chiefly enflameth our
love to him; what was the reason, that notwithstanding that love that God
showed to Israel, when he was a child, and taught him to go, taking him by the
arms, had not that impression upon Israel which it should have? the Prophet
hinteth the reason, because, Israel knew it not, Hos. 11.3. God showed, but
Israel did not understand his love; and therefore it was that Israel would not
walk answerable thereunto. In like manner, we shall never walk answerable by
doing our duty, (for I take duty, to be at least an answer of love) in case we
do not know what the love is, wherewithal Christ has loved us. Paul was more
abundant than all ^he rest of the Apostles were, in his ^abours. And surely
this might be ^he reason, that happily he understood more of the love of
Christ, than the rest did: Hence it may be that it is, that you have that
expression in the 2 Cor. 4.14. The love of Christ constrains us. The
consideration of Christ's love (which Paul came to have, by the knowledge
thereof) it was as it were a whole crowd or throng of Arguments, or like to a
whole siedge of motives (for the word will bear both metaphors) unto Paul,
(...) see Luke 8.45. and Luke 19.43.
both to dye and to suffer for Jesus Christ. There is no soul but needs a
spur to duty, being dull in himself. Now the knowledge of the love of Christ,
being of such special efficacy this way, must needs also be of necessary
concernment for every Christian.

Thirdly, Christ's love is a fountain of a believers life, and therefore it must
needs be of necessary concernment for a believer to know it, in as much as he
cannot live without it; verily this is life eternal to know the love of Christ
which passes knowledge, If it be of necessary concernment for the soul to
live, it must be also of necessary concernment to know Christ's love, in as much
as without the one, he cannot enjoy the other. I live (says Paul) but how? by
the faith (now faith is but a higher degree of knowledge of the love of Christ)
of the Son of God, who loves me. As Moses pressed the Israelites to the
sincere keeping of the Law, for it is (says he) your life; In like manner may
we press Christians to the serious knowledge of Christ's love, because it is
our souls life.

Fourthly, The knowledge of Christ's love, is the foundation of a souls joy,
and Christians comfort, and therefore of such necessary concernment. The reason
why the Saints are sometimes so sad, is because they do not know the love of
Christ, (at. least in all the dimensions thereof,) Hence it is that Peace is
joined with love, sometimes in the Gospel: Peace (says Paul) be to the
brethren, but from whence? from this (as it is added) and love from God the
Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 6.23. the hearts of believers would
be at Peace, if so be they did but fully understand the love of Christ. O
(says the soul) of that believer, and of this believer, indeed they live
sweetly upon Christ's love, because they have it, but I go sadly in the want of
Christ's love, because I think there is none for me: The soul is sad, because it
sees not the fullness of the love of Christ: I (says another soul) such an
one who has more grace than I, and such an one who has less sin than I
have, he may live joyfully because of Christ's love, but I must go sadly
because I fear he will not love me. The reason of this souls sadness, is
because it knows not the fulness of love, that is in Christ, and the
freeness thereof; without doubt, did we but know the love of Christ better
than we do, we should not be so sad, so often as we are. That bosom Disciple
John (who knew much of the love of Jesus, and had declared the knowledge of it
unto others) he says it was for this end: these things write I unto you (says
he) that your joy might be full; Since therefore the joy and the comfort of
our souls is built upon the love of Christ, as its foundation, it does
necessarily concern us, to get the knowledge thereof.

Fifthly, the knowledge of Christ's love, is of necessaay concernment, because
it is the rise of Christian thankfulness. Hence it is that thankfulness
springs, it is from this fountain whence it flows. Those souls will be most
thankful for the love of Christ, that understand is most; Ignorance begets
ingratitude, but knowledge makes thankful: Bless the Lord O my soul, and
forget not all his benefits; Men will not be thankful for that which they do
forger; neither can men remember that which they do not know: All that Christ
looks for from the Saints, is this, that they should acknowledge the
transcendent love he bears unto them. We will never be able to sing glory
and dominion be to him, who has loved us, except we know how he loved us.
Look as a Lark, at the discovery of the light of the day, ascends chirping, and
chirping; and the lighter the Heavens appear, the higher she ascends, and the
sweeter she sings; In like manner the soul, who knows the love of Christ,
and sees the light thereof, mounteth and sings, and the more bright the
beams of Christs-bosome love shines in upon them, the higher is the soul
elevated, and the sweeter it does chirp, and chant that spiritual song of
thankfulness unto Christ. You are bound believers, to thank Christ for his
love, but you will never to purpose go about to cancel that bond, if so be you
do not know the transcendency of that love with which he has bound you.

Sixthly, Christ's love is all the legacy he has left Christians. Surely it is
of necessary concernment, for Christians to know that which Christ left them in
his will. He has not left them ample possessions, nor brave buildings in this
world: (his father (though he loved him) left him not a house to put his own
head in here) but dear love, rich love, transcendent love, love passing
knowledge, this Christ has left to believers (as his father left him) as the
father has loved me, so have I loved you, Joh. 1.5. ver. 9. Ask the widow,
whether it does not necessarily concern her, to know that which her husband
left her; Ask the child whether there lie a necessity upon him to know that
which his father left him, both the one and the other will say, yes. Why
believers, your everlasting father, and your souls husband, Jesus Christ, has
left you nothing but his love, surely it is necessary that you should know it.

Seventhly, As the soul is filled with the knowledge of the love of Christ; so
it is filled with the fullness of God. You empty creatures, does it not concern
you, (and that necessarily) to be filled with the divine fullness, the fullness
of God? surely you will say, yes; then know, it does as necessarily concern you
to be acqainted with the love of Christ; without that you cannot be so filled.
Some have thought, that knowledge is nothing but an union between the thing
known, and the understanding; Hence it is, that they say and conclude, that by
how much any partake of knowledge, by so much they partake of fullness: God is
love, and if the knowledge of Gods love be the union thereof with the soul,
then certainly, by how much we know the one, by so much we partake, and are
filled with the other. Observe how the Apostle therefore joyneth this in the
Text, To know the love of Christ which passes knowledge (says he) that you
may be filled with all the fulness of God. Every drop of this knowledge of
the love of Christ, tends toward the filling of the soul with the fullness
of God: surely therefore to be filled, and to be filled with God, and to be
filled with the fullness of God, yea with all the fullness of God, being so
necessary for every soul as it is, and the knowledge of Christ's love being so
advantageous to this, It must needs be a thing of special concernment for
every Christian, to labor to know the love of Christ, which passes knowledge.

Briefly now for application:

First, it may serve for a use of Lamentation, that notwithstanding the
knowledge of the love of Christ is thus necessary, yet

First, that this knowledge has been little studied. Secondly, though it
should be much studied, yet it can be little obtained.

First,, I say, it has been but little studied. Men have been very swift in
searching after other truths, but they have been slow in searching after this.
An ample, exact discovery of this love of Christ, may well be set down among
the desiderata, i.e. the desirables of Divines, it having been so little
handled by any. Indeed much of the Law (in the point of duty) has been
discovered, but little of the Gospel, (especially in this point of Christ's
love) has been inquired into. I do not know any one Author of eminency,
(indeed as yet I have met with none at all) who on purpose has handled, or
discoursed exactly concerning this subject, viz. the transcendency of the love
of Christ; I have heard, that that precious Divine Dr. Preston, was wont to
complain of the great defect this way: Surely it is very sad to think that the
knowledge of the love of Christ, being of such necessary and high concernment,
has been so little inquired into; O what a gallant Gospel-designe were it, for
some one who is acquainted with the Spirit in a large measure, to go over the
whole history of the Gospel, and to observe the glorious shinings of the love
of Christ to believers in all. It would be precious if some would take it in
hand, and perfect it to the purpose: But it is sad to think it has been
neglected so long.

Secondly, we may lament, not only to think this knowledge has been but
little advanced by the labors of any, but especially, that it is such, that
after all labor it can be but little gained. We may weep to think, how little
of the love of Christ it is, that those who have. most knowledge of it, do, or
can know. We read of a Book which was sealed, and John wept much (says the
Text) because no man was found worthy in heaven or in earth, that was able to
open the Book, or to look thereon. Beloved, the heart of Christ may be compared
to a glorious Book, in which the mysterious history of his transcendent love is
written: But alas! who is there, not only in earth, but in heaven, that is
able to open this Book, and to discover the mysteries thereof? Beloved, when we
shall come to heaven, we shall then be in a capacity of more perfect knowledge
of the love of Christ: But alas! even then we shall never be able to
comprehend the love of Christ in the perfection thereof, that is, so fully as
it may be known; Then indeed we shall apprehend it in the perfection of our
knowledge (i.e.) so far as it can be known by the finite knowledge of
creatures; but yet then we shall not know it so full as it is. The Schoolmen
speak of knowledge (as they do of seeing: Duplex plenitudo scientioe, and
visionis, viz Plenitudo 1 Subjecti. 2 Objecti.

) There is a twofold fullness of knowledge.

First, a fullness in regard of the object (i.e.) such a fullness as regards the
thing it self.

Secondly, a fullness of knowledge in regard of the subject in which it is. Now
for mine own part, I incline (at least for present, to conclude, that although
without doubt, there shall be a fulness of knowledge of Christ in respect of
our knowledge (i.e.) according to the utmost bounds, or extents, which our
knowledge, when it is perfected to the highest, is capable of; yet
notwithstanding in regard of the fullness of knowledge, as it relates to the
thing it self, viz. The love of Christ, quoad essentiam, and virtutem
intensivam, and extensivam (i.e.) when it is considered so far forth as it may
be had unto all the effects, and purposes, whereunto that knowledge does extend
it self; this I say, I think we shall not have, but to all eternity, we shall
be admiring and adoring of this love of Christ which passes knowledge.

Wherefore then we must needs lament to consider, that although the knowledge
of the love of Christ be of such necessary concernment, yet it has been but
little searched after by many; and when we shall make the greatest search
after it, we shall never be able fully to attain it.

Use. Secondly, it may be a use of Reproof unto those who neglect this study of
the knowledge of the love of Christ altogether. Many there are, who are little
in the study of the Bible, less in the study of the Gospel, but, least of all
in this, which is the light, and luster, and glory of all the Gospel, the love
of Christ to believers: And I cannot choose but think those blameworthy, and to
be reproved, who in these times speak much of their parts and abilities in the
beating out of some truths merely controversall (which yet I speak not against
in its place) and yet neglect this knowledge which is of such necessary
concernment. I do not altogether blame those who study this headship of Christ
(I mean this Government) it being I think this present truth, which is most
controverted in these times; yet notwithstanding, to study so far the head of
Christ, as to neglect his heart, so far to mind his government, as to neglect
his love, is, without doubt, a thing to be reproved.

But much more are those to be reproved, who study neither the one, nor the
other, but spend all their time, their pains, and their parts, in
controversies, and niceties, prying either into unrevealed positions, or being
busied about needless questions, neglecting, in the mean time, this one
necessary thing, viz. the knowledge of the love of Christ. How many are there
that may (as one said of the Schoolmen) be like unto Travelers, or men in a
journey, who have good bread about them, but go gnawing, and biting upon hard
stones? so indeed some men, who have (at least means to have) the bread of
life, Christ's love, but they neglect it, and spend their time in gnawing upon
hard trivialls, at least not useful questions. Be reproved, O all ye, who so
far spend your selves, about the obtaining of any knowledge, when in the mean
time, you do neglect the study of this knowledge, (the love of Christ) which
is of necessary concernment.

Lastly, we shall add a word of Exhortation to stir up all to the study of the
love of Christ. You who have spent, or rather misspent, many a precious hour in
reading of Romanses, and fond histories, of feigned loves, yea, you who spend
all your time, though it be about some matters of concernment, but neglecting
this; be stirred up now, to lay out your selves in the study of that which is
sweet, and necessary, viz. the study of the love of Christ which passes
knowledge; you must conceive, that (as I hinted in the explication) my desire
is, that you would labor to be well versed, and to be exact students in this
business; I would not have you content your selves in some generals, but
labor to make a particular discovery of the love of Christ in its substance,
in its circumstances, and in its sundry actions, and declarations: O remember,
that this knowledge includes in it all that knowledge which is necessary to be
known for salvation.

When you have studied it well, you shall find that there is nothing in the
whole doctrine of salvation, which is not comprehended in this love of Christ
(as Calvin has well observed upon the place) This knowledge is both safe and
sweet; it is not such knowledge as will puff up the head, but it will purify
the heart: I do not doubt that any can grow wanton, who attaineth to any
spiritual saving degree of this knowledge. The love of Christ will constrain
to duty, and restrain from sin; therefore betake your selves to this study
above all others.

Now I shall offer something as means to help you, and as motives to encourage
you. Only by way of caution, learn to take heed of promising your selves too
much; Do not think that you shall ever come to perfection of knowledge in this
point, at least while you are in this life: It is a point which may take up the
study of all the Saints; (happily so much may be couched in the 18 verse of
this chapter, that you may be able to comprehend with all Saints.) He
speaks, as if it were a Text, about which, not only every Saint is to set
himself, but as which does require all the abilities of all the Saints. Look as
some great point does require the abilities of many Scholars (and all little
enough, when joined together) to make a good discovery thereof: such is the
love of Christ, as that all the Saints may well spend themselves in the study
of it, and when they have brought all their notes together, and added all their
studies together, they will be able to make (at least in this life) but a very
little discovery thereof. Therefore take heed of promising your selves
perfection in this study.

Now I add this caution, not to deter you from the study, but to make you the
more serious in it; and also to keep you from casting of it off, after you have
begun to understand it. It is with some Saints, as with Scholars, who having
set about some study, and after some progress, find the business so hard, and
high, as that they can never come to the perfect knowledge thereof, they begin
to slack in their endeavors, and to cast it off: But now beloved, consider it
beforehand, that you may not afterward cast off the study of the love of
Christ, when you have spent your selves to the uttermost, you shall never come
to a perfection.

Yet let me add this, the least beams of the love of Christ have so much
light in them, as that they will be very sweet, and every piece or part of
this knowledge, will be of very special worth: yea, the low, and imperfect
knowledge of the love of Christ (if experimental, and spiritual) is of
infinite more value, than the high and perfect knowledge of Ten thousand
things besides: Yea, and one thing more let me add, it is possible for you to
attain to a very sweet and satisfactory degree of this knowledge.

Qu. But what shall I do to attain a satisfactory degree of this knowledge of
the love of Christ, so as that albeit I cannot attain to the knowledge thereof
fully, yet I may be able to attain so much, as may make me (at least) say, as
it is in the Text, The love of Christ passes knowledge?

Answ. For that I shall offer some directions, as concerning the means and
helps how you may obtain the knowledge of the love of Christ; And also as
concerning the manner how we should carry our selves in that study.

First, For the means, I shall name these particulars.

First, Be much conversant in reading of the Gospel. How ever the Bible in
general, does give testimony concerning the person of Jesus Christ, and also in
some measure concerning his affection to the Saints; yet the Gospel (of all
parts of the Bible) does in a more ample, clear, and satisfactory Way, hold out
the love of Christ to believers. That which all the Prophets spoke of him, or
of his love, is so allegorical, and so darkly, as that it is not easy (at
least for every one) to observe the light of Christ's love, so clearly shining
in them. Indeed the sun shine of Christ's love is in the firmament of the old
Testament, but as it is there, it is much clouded and much veiled. But in the
Firmament of the new Testament it shines in its full brightness; luster, and
glory. And therefore be most coversant in reading of it. And while you read
the Gospel, be sure to carry this along with you, that all that which you shall
read there, either there in the life, or death of Christ, is still to be
understood, as a demonstration of his love to believers.

Secondly, If thou would know the love of Christ, be sure to labor to get
into the bosom of Christ; that Soul knows little of Christ's love in the
power, and sweetness, and Spirituality thereof, who knows only Christ in his
head, as being without him, and is a stranger to the knowledge of Christ in his
heart, as being in him. Labor therefore to have Christ revealed in thee (as
Paul speaks of himself) otherwise all that knowledge which thou have of the
love of Christ, will be to little or no purpose. Look as Jesus Christ did
therefore know the Father most, because (as the Scripture says) he lay in the
Fathers bosom. In like manner do thou labor to be in the bosom of Jesus
Christ, that thou may the better know what is his love to believers.

Thirdly, Consule with Believers. Ask those objects of love, concerning the
love of Christ to them. They that have had experience of his love, can best
inform thee. I make no question, but that a poor believer, who has tasted of
the love of Christ, and in some measure experienced the transcendent sweetness
thereof, is far better able to help thee in this great study of the love of
Christ, than the greatest Scholar in the world is, who it may be has read, or
heard something of his love, but yet has no experience thereof in his soul.

Fourthly, Study thine own experiences. Consider the carriage of Christ
particularly toward thy soul. Remember how long he bare with thee, whilst
thou wast in the state of nature, I and an enemy unto him. How long did he
stand knocking at the door, ere thou did open? How long did he come wooing of
thy soul, ere thou did embrace him? How many ways did he take to work upon
thee, to open thine heart to let him in, that he might love thee? How freely
did he tender love to thy soul? was there any other condition, on which he
tendered himself to thee, than thine acceptance of him? Said he not, when he
came and knocked at thy door, if thou will open, I will come in and sup; and
thy heart shall be at no cost to prepare, I have brought that with me that
shall feast thee? Said he not, if thou do but thinst, come and drink, and if
thy heart be but willing, eat the good things of my bosom, and live for ever.
Thus mind those experiences of Christ's acting toward thee: Remember all the
Feasts of love which he has given thee, and by these thou will come to see,
how good, how kind, how loving he is.

Lastly, Add prayer to all these. It is the choycest wisdom to be wise in the
knowledge of Christ's love: And if you lack this wisdom, James gives you his
advice, ask it of God, and if you ask of God a wise heart in this particular,
doubtless he will not deny thee; for he gives liberally to those that ask and
upbraideth no man. Then ask of him much, Beg of him a wise and an understanding
heart, to know the love of Christ which passes knowledge. Entreat God that
thou may be taught of him, to know what is the love of himself, and of his
Son. As Christ says, Every man that has heard, and learned of the Father,
comes to me: So every Soul that the Father teaches, will quickly learn to
know what is the love of Christ to believers. And that thou may be able to
know the love of Christ in its luster, beg of God to bestow upon thee his
Spirit. Christ has said, The Father will give the Spirit to him that asks
him; And the Apostle says, As no man knows the things of a man, but the
spirit of a man which is in him; so none can know the things of Christ, but the
Spirit of Christ. Go to the Lord Jesus, and remember him of his promise: Tell
him, he has promised to send his Spirit, and that when the Spirit is come, he
shall take of Christ, and show it unto the Soul. Entreat him therefore to show
his Spirit, and entreat him also, that his Spirit would come with the shedding
abroad of his love. Say, O! that the Spirit would take of thy love, and shed it
into me; and O! that he would shed it abroad into mine heart, that I may be
able with all Saints to comprehend the height, and the depth, and the length,
and the breadth of the love of Christ, and that I may be able also to know that
love which passes knowledge.

Having thus hinted a few words as concerning the means (how we may attain the
knowledge of Christ's love) I shall now add a word or two concerning the manner
how we should behave our selves in the use of this means, while we study the
knowledge of Christ's love; and for this take these directions.

First, Be very exact. Exactness is requisite in all studies, but especially in
this: Gather up (O Believer) all the crumbs and filings of this gold (Christ's
love.) When thou read any thing concerning Christ, be exact to observe the
smiles of his countenance, the words of his lips, the gesture of his hands, the
turning of his eye, love does thus observe them: Sic oculos, sic ille manus,
sic ora ferebat.

Observation was made of eyes, and of hands, and of countenance; so do thou
observe: be very curious ^o study this love in all its circumst^^ces, in all
its doings, in all its demonstrations: If ever you would show exactness in any
study, show it in this. Doubtless the exacter you are in this study, the
clearer you will be able to comprehend Christ's love.

Secondly, be loving. Those know most of Christ's love to them, who abound most
in love to him: John seems to be most loving of all the Disciples, and
therefore he seems to have the greatest knowledge of Christ's love; he was so
happy as to lean on the bosom of the Lord Jesus; and to him was revealed more
than to the rest of the Apostles. Look, as that man does but in vain expect
mercy of God, who is without mercy himself; so does that soul in vain desire to
know Christ's love, who is without all love himself: you may do well to observe
the context, here in this 3 Ephesians. 17, 18, 19. v. The Apostle says, that you
Being rooted, and grounded in love, may be able to comprehend with all Saints,
what is the length, breadth, and depth, and height of the love of Christ, etc.
To be grounded in love, is an excellent way to comprehend love: And doubtless
Christ will be very kind in the revelations of his love, to those in whom he
observes the workings of love.

Thirdly, be very admiring in all the study; let all your reading be mixed
with admiration at every love-passage of Christ; sit and meditate at every word
of love; stay, and wonder; adore the glory of that light which appears in any
beam of love: And in the admiration of that love which does appear, cast thy
self at the feet of Christ, and cry out, O the depth of love in thee! O the
riches of the love of thy bosom! that should thus let out thy self to
believers.

Lastly, when thou come as it were at a stand, and can not comprehend the
transcendency of this love, Imitate the Philosopher, and cast thy self into
that sea of love, which thou would fain fathom, or sound, and art not able;
Let that love comprehend thee, which thou can not comprehend thy self:
Emerge, and drown thy self, in that vast Ocean of thy Saviors bosom, and
because thou art not able with any line of thine to sound the depth, sink thy
very Soul, that it may be able to taste that, which thy study will not help
thee so much as to see.

I shall now add but a word to stir you up (in the use of these means, and in
this manner hinted) seriously to prosecute the sweet study of the love of
Christ.

First, I might tell you, That all the time that you spend in this study will
be very delightful, and very profitable, and you will have no reason to repent
thereof. Those who have spent (or rather misspent) their time in reading of
the fine Histories of feigned Loves, have at last been forced to confess their
follies in so doing. That well-deserving person, Sir Philip Sidney, is reported
to have lamented upon his Deathbed, the mis-spending of those parts which God
had given him, in the penning of that well-penned piece, his Arcadia. But
surely (believers) to lie upon a Deathbed, and to consider, that although all
thy time were (every hour thereof) spent in the study of Christ's love, you will
be so far from repenting of it, as that you will have just cause to rejoice
in it. But not to urge this, do but

Secondly, consider the times in which we live. How little love is there in
these days! surely, the love of many is waxen cold, though it be pressed
much, yet it is but little practiced; Though all pretend to complain of the
want of love, and seem to press the exercise of love: Yet where is the man,
that makes it the sweetness of his life, to let others taste the sweetness of
his love? Surely while there is such little love among men, it is but meet that
we should study the love that is in Christ. But

Thirdly, especially consider the sweetness that the knowledge of the love of
Christ will bring to thy soul in any case. Little do you know what comfort is
wrapped up in the knowledge of Christ's love. How often does but a thought of
this, revive the spirits of the fainting Saints? With what a composure of
spirit is a believe able to behave himself in any tribulation, when he knows,
that the love of his Savior is without knowledge? Without the knowledge of
this love, nothing will be sweet, but with the knowledge of this love, nothing
can be bitter. And this is that which we shall come unto, as the last thing
observed from these words, viz. to let you see, how efficacious the love of
Christ is unto the supporting of believers in any tribulation.

SERMON VI.
EPHESIANS. 3. Ver. 19 And to know the love of Christ which passes knowledge.


HE that is but little skilled in the knowledge of the face of times, may very
well see, that these times wherein we live are very sad: Calamity lies upon
every Creature; and woe has (as it were) entered upon the Stage of the World,
and acts a very bloody part, to the terror of all, even believers themselves;
some put on black, and walk disconsolately; yea almost all the sons of men
are clad in mourning, as being sensible of the misery under, which most of the
world at this day groans. In these times therefore what can be more suitable to
our thoughts, than to consider of that which may serve to support our spirits.
It is the wisdom of such as are weak, and liable to faintings, to carry about
them some cordial or other to revive them: And it should be (doubtless) the
wisdom of believers (who are liable always to tribulations) to lay in
something which may keep them from fainting under these tribulations. Indeed
our Lord Jesus, out of the riches of his mercy, has prepared, and provided,
rich, and glorious cordials to support the souls of his: And it is our duty
(especially who are the Ministers of the Lord Jesus) to help believers with
these cordials, which our Lord and their Lord has prepared: And therefore
while others, forgetting not only the Saints, but themselves, take leave to
press and urge great things (as matters of faith) upon poor souls (as if they
had dominion over their faith.) I shall endeavor to imitate the great Apostle
Paul, rather to show my self a helper of your Joy, 2 Cor. 1. ult
than a Lord of your faith. It was this indeed which Paul was much upon, viz.
the furtherance of the joy, and comfort of believers: And it is this which he
drives at in these words, in the behalf of the Ephesians; for fearing lest the
news of these troubles in which he was, should so far trouble the Ephesians,
as to make them faint, he therefore boweth his knees to the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, that he would be pleased to give them the knowledge of the love
of Christ: that so by it, their spirits may be kept from fainting, either at
the news of his, or fear of their own tribulations; This being therefore the
end why Paul prays to God in the behalf of the Ephesians, that they might
know the love of Christ which passes knowledge, I did observe this Doctrine
from it, viz.

That the spiritual knowledge of the transcendency of Christ's love toward his,
is of special efficacy to keep our hearts from fainting under any troubles.

I suppose you easily see both the foundation, and the proof of this point, in
this place; yet that you may see both the clearer, let me hint these three
things.

First, consider it, That the Apostle supposes, that the Ephesiant hearts were
apt to faint at their tribulations. At the 13 verse, his desire that they might
not faint, does clearly intimate this, that they were apt to faint. Indeed the
children of faith, are not only prone to fear, but are apt to faint in those
fears.

Secondly, observe how upon this fear of the Apostle, lest they might faint, or
(if you will) upon his desire that they might not faint, he falls to prayer,
and makes it his request to God, (whose alone royalty is to support the
fainting spirits of all the creatures) that be would be pleased to keep them
from fainting: For (says he) for this cause I how my knees to the Father of
our Lord Jesus; (that is) upon this desire of mine, that you might not faint, I
bow my knee to him, who alone is able to support your spirits.

Thirdly, Consider, that among the rest of those things which he prays to God
for, in their behalf, that they might not faint, he prays for this in the
Text (as in the last place) that they may know the love of Christ which passes
knowledge.

And indeed, the very spirit, and strength of all that, which the Apostle had
prayed for (in the former verses, in their behalf) lies in this last. And
happily therefore it was that he brings in this as the last particular,
being (as it were) that last cordial, which he prayed for, in their behalf,
and if it had failed, he knew not (as it were) what to ask of God for them:
This is, as it were, the last Dosis of the Doctor, which if it help not the
patient, the Doctor is at a stand, and is puzzled, and knows not what else to
give; so that I suppose you may easily see, not only the footing that this
Text affords for this truth; but also a great, and solid proof of the truth
thereof in it.

And yet, that you may see this truth more clearly from this place, I will in a
word show you, how that the very spirits and strength of the other cordialls
which he here prays for, are as it were wrapped up in this, viz. The
knowledge of the love of Christ. For consider,

First, he prays that they might be strengthened in the inward man by his
Spirit, verse 16. Now what is that strength of the inward man by the Spirit?
but that divine and spiritual joy which is through him. The joy of the Lord
does give strength, Nehem. 8.10. Now it is easy to demonstrate, that the chief
ground upon which the Holy Ghost does build that joy (which through him is in
the hearts of believers) is this, viz. the shedding abroad of the love of
Christ in them. Christ having promised to send the spirit as a comforter to
believers (he says) that he (i.e.) the spirit) shall take of mine, and show
unto you, John 16. ver. 14, and 15. Now what is there in all Jesus Christ, of
sweeter efficacy and power, which the spirit can take, and declare to
believers, than the knowledge of his love, which passes knowledge?

So that if the strengthening of the inward man by the holy Ghost be that
which helps to support thy soul from fainting: And if that working of the holy
Ghost, be by a creation of divine joy, or bringing of divine comfort; And that
bringing of comfort in the spirit, depends upon revealing something of the
heart of Christ to the soul, then it must needs be, that the spirit of this
cordial, lies in the knowledge of the love of Christ, which alone the Spirit
is able to bring in, as it were from Christ's heart, and shed it into the hearts
of believers, for the strengthening of the inward man.

Secondly, the Apostle does pray, as a means to keep the Ephesians from
fainting, that Christ may dwell in their hearts by faith, ver. 17. Now a very
few thoughts will discover, that the strength of this comfort does lie in the
knowledge of Christ's love. For whereas the soul may say, ah! but will Christ
dwell in my heart? I would fain believe it, but what ground have I for such a
belief? He is the high and the lofty one, and I am mean and a poor creature;
He is not only the brightness of his fathers glory, but the fullness of the
fathers holiness; And will such a pure person as he is, come and dwell in
such a polluted house as I am? Thus the soul would, or might reason; but now
all this reasoning is quieted, and this doubting will be easily resolved by
the knowledge of Christ's love; for he that knows the love of Christ, knows
how willing Christ is to come into the heart of a poor believer, and how that
daily and hourly he does stand at the door knocking for entrance.

So that I say, the very Spirits of the other cordials, and as it were their
quintessence, lying in this, the knowledge of the love of Christ,

It is very plain, That the knowledge of the love of Christ, is of special
virtue and efficacy, to keep the hearts of believers from fainting under
tribulations. But I shall a little more demonstrate this point,

First, By opening wherein this knowledge of the love of Christ does consist.

Secondly, By showing wherein the special efficacy of that knowledge does
appear, for the supporting of the soul^ from fainting fits in the time of
trouble.

And then in the cloze of all, I shall make some Use and Application.

For the first, Wherein does the knowledge of Christ's love consist, or what
kind of knowledge of the love of Christ is it, which keeps the heart from
fainting?

In the general, I hinted it in that expression, the spiritual knowledge of
the love of Christ; That is, such a knowledge of Christ's love, as the soul has
by the revelation of the Spirit, acting by the shedding abroad of that love,
even upon the spirit of a believer. Look as the carnal knowledge of Christ's
person ( the knowledge of him after the flesh (as the Apostles phrase is) is
not saving, neither is it sweet; So neither is the carnal knowledge of his
love. It is the spiritual knowledge of his person, and the spiritual
knowledge of his love, which furthereth the everlasting happiness of a soul
hereafter, and the sweetness, and comfort of a soul here.

But more particularly, I shall hint two words for the explication of the
knowledge of Christ's love, what it is.

First, Negatively, It consists not in the bare notion of it. All divine
knowledge (whatsoever it be) is without any efficacy, if it be but barely in
the notion. Look as in reference to duty, knowledge is not effectually
imperative, to put the soul upon doing, unless it sink deep into the soul (for
the word falling among stones, and wanting root, did not arise up in fruit.) In
like manner with reference unto joy, knowledge is no way efficaciously
restorative (although it be the knowledge of Christ's love) unless it sink
down from the head, into the hearts of believers. But as the Apostle puts
the knowledge of the glory of God the father (as to salvation) in this, viz.
that God who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, had shined into their
hearts, 2 Cor. 4.6. In like manner he puts the virtue of the knowledge of
the love of God in making the soul patient in its waitings, (and by consequence
not fainting in his troubles) in this, that the Lord would direct the
Thessalonians hearts into the love of God; the Lord (says he) direct your
hearts into the love of God, 2 These. 3.5. wherefore then, this is the first
thing by way of negation, (that you may know wherein the knowledge of the love
of Christ does not consist) it is not the bare notion, or apprehension thereof
in the head.

Secondly, and positively, The right knowledge of the love of Christ, in
reference to the matter in hand, I conceive chiefly does consist in two things.

First, In a particular application of the love of Christ to the soul by faith,
(i.e.) that the soul should be able to lay home that to himself, in particular,
which he understands to be in the heart of Christ, to every believer in
general. The soul should be able to say of the love of Christ, it is mine,
for else (as he said) quid haec mihi, nisi mea? what is all this to me, if it
be not mine? In like manner will the soul say, what is it to me, if there be
a transcendent love in the bosom of Christ to believers, if I have not a share
in it? Look as the preaching of the word does not profit them, in whom it is
not mixed with faith (i.e.) (in the particular application thereof to
themselves.) In like manner, neither does the love of Christ comfort any, if it
be not mixed with faith (i.e.) particularly applied to their own souls; this
is a faithful saying (says Paul) that Jesus Christ came into the world to
save sinners, of which I am chief, 1 Timothy 1.15. Herein was the truth of the
saying, that Christ came to save sinners, but herein was the joy and comfort of
Paul, that he could say, I am chief. It is most clear, that the knowledge of
the love of Christ is comforting, but the efficacy of it does lie in the
application: Just as now, how choice soever the cordial be, that is
prescribed by the Doctor, it is of no comfort to cure the patient, if it be
not taken; In like manner, though the knowledge of the love of Christ be one
of the choicest cordialls which is revealed, yet it is of no virtue to the
soul, unless it be taken (i.e.) particularly applied by faith. This is the
first thing, wherein the right knowledge of the love of Christ, as it is
efficacious to comfort in troubles, does consist.

But secondly, It consists not only in the particular Application, but in a
serious Meditation thereof, being applied. Application takes the cordial (as
it were in the mouth) and lets it down into the stomach; But meditation sucketh
out the sweetness thereof: And therefore it is said, my Meditation on him shall
be sweet, Psalm. 104.4. Not only the knowing, and believing of it to be the
souls, but also the meditation is that which makes it more sweet; if the
cordial which the patient takes, be never so sweet, yet, if it be spit out
again, and not chewed (as it were) or swallowed down, it affords but little
refreshing: In like manner, though the love of Christ be surpassing sweet (yea
and albeit it be as it were applied in the general:) If it be not meditated
upon, it will be but of little efficacy to keep the heart from fainting. We
will be glad, and rejoice in thee (says the Spouse) Cant. 1. v. 4. yea but
wherein would they find them joy? it follows, in thy love: But how would they
find out the sweetness of that joy, out of that love? it is hinted in this, I
will remember thy love more than wine. The remembrance, or the meditation upon
the love of Christ, does greatly rejoice the heart of a believer, more than
wine does the heart of any carnal creature.

So that this shall suffice, as to the first particular, viz. the declaration,
wherein the knowledge of the love of Christ, as it is efficacious to keep the
heart from fainting in troubles, does consist.

Now in the next place we shall show, wherein the efficacy of such a
knowledge as this is (of the love of Christ) does appear, for the supporting of
fainting souls, and this we shall show in two branches.

First generally: The knowledge of the love of Christ will appear, in its
effecting of five things, which are of great virtue, to bear up the heart that
it faint not in any troubles, as now,

First, in that it freeth the soul from those doubts and fears, in which it is,
about its eternal condition. There is a great deal of virtue in such a
freedom as this is, to keep up the soul from fainting in troubles; usually
even those that are faithful, when they are in any troubles, are fearful of
their eternal estate, and do much question it: But when that fear is removed,
and that great question is resolved, they are exceedingly enabled to bear up,
not only in regard of fainting under, but also cheerfully to go through all
their troubles. The example of that Martyr (Mr. Glover) is famous for this; he
much doubted his condition a little before he suffered, and there were a great
many despondencies in his Spirit, and a great many faintings (as it were) so
that he did not carry himself so cheerfully as he would; but afterward, when
God was pleased to shine in with the assurance of his love, and to free him
from this doubt, under which he did saint, then was he enabled, not only to
bear out from fainting, but to go out, and suffer, with a great deal of joy and
cheerfulness.

Now it is easy to show how the love of Christ serves to free the soul from
those doubts in which it is, about its eternal condition. He that knows the
transcendency of Christ's love, will be easily freed from doubting about his
condition. The knowledge of Christ's love in this respect casts out fear: And
indeed the chief ground of this doubting, is the want of the knowledge of the
love of Christ; when once the believer is able to say, I know the love of Jesus
Christ, and I know it not only for others, but my self, then he will be able
to resolve, What should I doubt? Or who should I fear? Since Jesus Christ loves
me with such a transcendent love? And thus being freed from his fears, he is
also freed from his faintings.

Secondly, An assurance of a rewards; after all sufferings, and tribulations,
this does mightily support the soul from fainting under them; therefore it was,
that Moses did not faint (though he were in afflictions with the people of
God) because he was assured of the recompense of reward; Therefore it was that
Paul, notwithstanding his great tribulations, was kept from fainting, because
he was assured of a Crown of life, which was laid up for him: Therefore it was
that Jesus Christ himself, was enabled to endure without fainting, because of
the joy that was set before him. Now the knowledge of the love of Christ does
effect, and produce this assurance. The soul that knows how dearly Jesus
Christ does love him, and what transcendent affection he bears unto him,
will with a little pains be brought to believe, that certainly he will fully
and gloriously reward him, for all the tribulations he endures for him. O!
says the believer (that knows the love of Jesus Christ) albeit what I feel
be sore, and what I fear be sadder, though my tribulations be many, yea and
heavy too, yet I know I shall have a reward for all after all, because Jesus
Christ loves me, with a love passing knowledge. And thus the believer will
be sweetly supported from fainting.

Thirdly, a full acquiescence, for rest in Christ, is very efficacious, to keep
the soul from fainting under troubles. That which causes the heart to despond,
and to be apt to faint, is because it is apt to be tossed up and down: An
unstable soul, is like to the vessel in the storm without an anchor, tossed up
and down with every wave, and every wind; therefore it is, that souls are apt
to fret, and to faint, because they do not, and cannot rest in God. Hence is
that exhortation, Psalm. 37. v. 7. Rest in the Lord, fret not thy self. Men do
fret, and faint, because they do not rest in the Lord: whereas if they could
do the one, they would be free from the other. Now the knowledge of the love
of Christ, does bring the soul to such a resting and quiescance on Christ. O
says the believer, when I consider how Christ loves me, how out of that love
to me he will plead my cause for me, and will one day make those by whom I
now suffer tribulation, to come and worship before me, that they may know that
he loves me, Apoc. 3.9. When I consider this, says the soul, then am I
enabled quietly to rest my heart in Christ, and to solace my soul in him, and
to be so far from fainting under, or fretting at my tribulations, as that I am
able in my patience to possess my self, and to rejoice in Christ. Thus the
knowledge of the love of Christ works a resting upon him, and that rest
keeps from fainting.

Fourthly, Strength of love to Jesus Christ's person serves to support the soul
from fainting under tribulations. Jacobs love to Rachel kept him from fainting,
under any hardness which he did endure for her. And the spouse being sick of
love to Christ, was made strong by that sickness, to endure much for Christ
without fainting. The Watchmen smite her, and wound her; the keepers of the
wall take her, and abuse her, taking away her veil from her: yet she holds
out, yet she faints not at all this trouble, and why? because she was sick of
love for the Lord Jesus: Thus strength of love to Christ, keeps a soul from
fainting under sorrow.

Now the knowledge of Christ's love does very facily, and freely work this: He
that knows how transcendently Christ does love him, cannot choose but at least
really love Christ again, yea, and strongly too. Believers cannot choose but
love him, whom they know loved them first. Hence it is, that (Phoenix like)
gathering together all the spicy actions of Christ's love, and sweetly
meditating upon them, they can fetch fire out of all, and sweetly dye in the
flames of that fire, and never faint. O how easily can the soul support it self
from fainting under tribulations for Christ, while it burns with love to
Christ? And how easy also is it for a soul not only to fetch fire to kindle,
but even to inflame? How also when it considers the transcendent love of
Christ to him.

Fifthly, Add to this in the last place this consideration, that divine joy is
ever efficacious to keep the soul from fainting under trouble. There is a
strengthening power in spiritual joy, to keep the souls of believers from
fainting fits (as was hinted in the beginning.) Now the knowledge of Christ's
love is that which is able to produce that divine joy, and that divine joy
keeping the heart from sinking under sadness, it is easy to gather up this
conclusion, that the knowledge of Christ's love, is of special efficacy for
keeping the soul from fainting under troubles.

Now you have seen in a general way, the efficacy of the knowledge of Christ's
love, to support the spirit from fainting in times of trouble. If you will see
the sum of these five things reduced into one argument, take it thus.

If freedom from fear about a man's eternal condition; If assurance of a
reward, after all tribulations; If resting upon Christ in a time of trouble; If
strength of love to Christ, and also of divine joy through the Spirit, be
efficacious to keep the heart from fainting under troubles, then the knowledge
of the love of Christ, must needs be efficacious, because it produces all
these.

But now we have seen that freedom of the soul, 1 From doubts, about the
eternal condition, And 2 assurance of a reward after all tribulations, And 3
an acquiescence or resting on Christ in time of trouble, together with 4
strength of love to Christ, And 5 divine joy, is ever efficacious that way,
therefore, etc.

But now more particularly, I shall show the efficacy of this cordial (the
knowledge of this love) to keep the heart from fainting under troubles, in
these four things.

First, In that the knowledge of the love of Christ, does (especially in such a
nature as has been described) go to the heart, and refreshes the Spirits of a
believer. Therefore is any thing cordial, and refreshing, because it goes to
the heart, and has a power on the Spirits. As now wine, hot water, Spirits and
quintessences, etc. do therefore cherish, because they warm the heart, and
revive the Spirits: Thus now the knowledge of the love of Christ, because it
goes to the very heart, and reviveth the Spirits of the Saints (which if
revived there is no fainting) therefore it must needs be so efficacious as it
is. As now the fear of God is most sovereign to keep from evil, because (as
the phrase is) it is put into the heart; so likewise the knowledge of the love
of Christ is most sovereign, and efficacious to support from fainting under
trouble, because it goes to the heart, and cheareth the Spirits. Hence is that
phrase, of the shedding abroad the love of God in your hearts.

Secondly, This knowledge of the love of Christ does appear to be efficacious
to keep from fainting under troubles, in that it makes the faculties of the
soul so intense. Intension makes insensible, and so freeth from fainting.
Saul, though he were opposed, and much mocked of the sons of Belial, yet
being newly lifted up to the kingdom (was so intense upon that) that he did
not at all mind the sons of Belial (much less did he faint at their fordid
carriage. 1 Samuel 10.27.
) Some conceive that therefore men in a frenzy do not faint at any thing (as
others do) because of their intensivenesse; what was it that kept the Apostle
from fainting in affliction, but the intensivenesse of his Spirit, about
everlasting and eternal objects, For which cause (says he) I do not faint,
while we look not at things which are seen, but things which are not seen, 2
Cor. 4. c. 16, 18. Paul was so intense upon higher objects, that he did not
faint at his tribulations. Now the knowledge of the love of Christ, makes the
soul very intensive in the contemplations of all its sweet dimensions. Thus
says the soul that knows the love of Christ, O the height, and depth, and
length of the love of Christ! O that so great a person as Christ is, should
love so mean a creature as I am! Oh that one who is not only man, but God,
should set his heart upon me, who am not only a man, but a worm! And thus now
being intense in that contemplation of Christ's love, it is kept from fainting
under tribulations.

Thirdly, it appears, that the knowledge of Christ's love is efficacious etc.
because it makes the soul to forget all the loves of men. The reason why we
are apt to faint under tribulations, is because we are apt to overprize the
love of men. Did we not set our hearts so much on the love of men, we should
not faint for the want of that love. What though men (yea all the sons of men)
shall hate and oppose? so long as I do not prize their love, nor fear their
hatred, I shall never faint. Now the contemplation of the love of Christ to the
soul, does work this effect upon the heart, It makes a man to forget all love
of men. Peter forgot the earth when he saw but a glimpse of glory in the
Mount. Man's glory is not seen, when Christ's glory does appear; the light of the
Stars is not seen, when the light of the Sun does shine. And while the soul is
taken up in the meditation of the love of Christ, which passes knowledge, he
does not mind the loves of men, and therefore he is free from fainting, at the
want of them.

Fourthly, and lastly, the efficacy of the knowledge of Christ's love etc. will
appear, in that it has a power to make a man forget all those tribulations
which he lies under; we give wine (says King Lemuel) to them that be of
heavy hearts; and strong drink to him that is ready to perish, Prove. 30.6. let
him drink and forget his poverty, and remember his misery no more. A soul that
can make application, and meditation of the love of Christ, drinks as it were
that wine, that makes him forget his sorrows, and remember his troubles no
more. Hence it is you shall have the poor believer say, I was so taken up with
the remembrance of the love of Christ, that I forgot I was in prison: As Paul,
when he wrote this Epistle (being a prisoner at Rome) yet was so taken up with
the love of Christ, as forgetting in a manner his imprisonment, Note this.
he prays not for himself, lest he should faint at tribulations, but he
powers out his heart that way in the behalf of the Ephesians, that they might
not. So that there is a divine, spiritual, intoxicating power in the love of
Christ, to cause a man not to mind, or to remember the tribulations under which
he lies; and surely the soul does never faint under that which it does forget.

Thus now we have gone over the second thing, and showed you both generally,
and particularly, wherein the power of the knowledge of the love of Christ (as
it helps in keeping the heart from fainting under troubles) does consist; we
will wind up all in a word of Applition; Now

Use first, for Information. This point ( That the knowledge of Christ's love is
of such special efficacy to keep up the heart from fainting under troubles)
lets us see what great need we have to study the love of Christ. Men have much
studied the nature of some Plants and Mineralls, because they are of special
use for cordials; you hear of what special use for spiritual cordialls, the
knowledge of the love of Christ is; have not you ground then to study it?
Paracelsus concluding all to lie within the compass of his Sol, Sulphur, and
Mercury, spentall (or most of) his study, in the search, and knowledge of them;
The love of Christ is the most catholicall cordial; not only including all
other cordialls, but the life that the soul does find in all other; Look as
Gods love is put for all causes, Joh. 3.16. when he gave his Son. So Christ's
love is put for all cordialls, when the Saints get comfort: Tribulation,
distress, persecution, famine, nakedness, perils, sword, neither any, nor all
these, can bear down, when the soul knows the love of Christ that loves him.
And as it is the most Catholicall cordial, so it is the most Homogeneall.
Those cordialls are of most efficacy, which are most natural, and most suiting
to the Spirits; why, love is our life, Gal. 2.20. Christ's love falls in with
the life of a Christian, it is most suitable to it, and therefore most
sovereign. Verily if there be need of studying that which may be a cordial
to any condition, there is necessity of studying of the love of Christ, which
is such a Catholicall, and Homogeneal cordial as it does suit with the
Spirits, and as it fitteth all the troubles, that any believer may meet withal.

Secondly, this Doctrine speaks lamentation also: How sad is it to see! that
though this love of Christ be such a cordial to believers in any trouble, yet
either,

First, they neglect it, and make no use of it, such is their folly, that they
have this precious price in their hands, and they do not know it, so as to
make use of it; what a sad thing is it, for the fainting man, to see a cordial
at the beds head, and not to use it?

Secondly, in stead of using this, they use other cordials. Who laments not? to
see believers in these times of trouble, one while eying counsels, another
while eying Armies; and in the mean while, not eying the love of Christ (which
alone is able to comfort, when all other things fail.) It is lamentable to see
how believers leave this fountain of living comforts, and seek after, yea and
dig for cisternes, yea broken cisternes, that neither have, nor can hold any
comfort in them.

Thirdly (which is worst of all) when Christ offers this cordial, they put it
by, and will not take it. How often does Christ open his bosom to the
believer? and lets him see love written in the golden letters of Free grace;
and beseeches the believer to look, and live, to contemplate it, and to take
comfort from it. How often does Christ say, Soul, I love thee, I love thee with
an everlasting love, therefore have I drawn thee into this wilderness of
trouble, that here I might speak comfort unto thee, where none can help thee?
And yet lamentable it is to hear believers saying, that they will not believe
it, though their souls might be comforted by it.

Thus believers, this cordial point may set you all a weeping, that
notwithstanding the love of Christ be so comfortable, you use it not, but
instead thereof use other cordialls* That when Christ opens this cordial,
you will not open your mouths widely that he may fill them with it.

Use, Thirdly be reproved you children of faith for this fault. Has Christ
provided such a cordial for you, and do you neglect it? Is there such
refreshing for your souls in his love, and will not you use it? Does he (as it
were) bring it home to your hearts, and will not you take it? be reproved for
your folly (O ye of little faith) suppose the Mother should provide some
cordial for the weak, fainting child, and bring it to the child, beseeching
the little one to take it, that it might live; were not the child much to be
reproved, if (forgetting all the Mothers care and cost) it should put it by? It
is your folly, and your blame (O believers) who notwithstanding all the care
(yea and the cost of Christ too) in preparing, and bringing this cordial (his
love) unto you, yet too too often you put it by, and Rachel-like, because your
children (creature comforts) are not, you will not be comforted with this
cordial of Christ's love.

Use, Fourthly, let it be a use of direction, to direct believers whither to
go for a cordial in time of trouble. What have you to do with the waters of
Sehor? Run you to the bosom of your Savior; why do you spend your selves to
go after the pudled streams of creature sweetness? go you to the running
river of your Lords love, drink thereof, and be refreshed, and be comforted
in any case.

Object. I says some soul, I would go thither (as being indeed in a sad case,
needing comfort) but how shall I do to draw out the water of life, that is in
Christ's love?

Rep. Why what is thy case poor heart? what is thy case in which thou need
comfort? and for which thou would go to Christ's love?

Answ. My case is spiritual, my soul is troubled within: I see much sin but
little grace, and this goes to my heart, filling it with trouble; how shall I
improve Christ love in this case for a cordial?

Answ. For that (believer) know, Christ loves thee notwithstanding all this. I
beeleeve you think that Christ does not affect you, because your sin is so
much, and your grace is so little. Know soul, though the woman was a sinner (in
the City, and so full of sin) yet Christ's love passed by her sin, and pardoned
her: Christ's love took the advantage of her many sins, to show much love to her
soul. And it is his custom, where sins abound, there to make love superabound.
Therefore thou may comfort thy self (O sad soul) with the thoughts of Christ's
love. This love made him to suffer for sin, and this love makes him every day
to pardon sin: yea and he will show the transcendency of his love, in passing
by the transcendency of sin.

Object. O but I have not only much sin, but little grace!

A. Be it so (O believer) yet the love of Christ may comfort thee
notwithstanding it. Thou think that grace is the cause of love, but thou art
deceived, it is the effect of love; Christ loves not because there is grace;
but because he loves, he gives grace. Grace is given in a time of love;
Love is not shown because of grace; therefore comfort thy self (O believing
soul) at the consideration of the transcendency of Christ's love. It is the
glory thereof, that it pardons much sin, and that is loves little grace; and
it will work so, that in time sin shall be little, and grace much.

Ob. O but says the poor soul, I have lost Christ. I think there was a day, in
which I saw, that his love was my life, and the consideration thereof was my
comfort; but I have lost the one, and so cannot solace my self in the other.

A. Why yet (believer) the consideration of Christ's love, may be a choice
cordial here. Did thou consider the very nature of Christ's love aright, thou will know this to be the glory thereof, that once had, it can never be lost.
It may be the Sun may be in a cloud, and thou not see it, but it will appear
again: But the Sun shall sooner leave the Firmament, than Christ's love shall
leave thee: Did thou but also consider the transcendency of Christ's love,
thou would know, that though Christ seems to withdraw himself a while, yet
his love will not permit his withdrawing to be long; yet a little while, and
you shall not see me: (It is but a little while that Christ is seemingly lost)
and yet a little while, and you shall see me again. Christ knows your
Spirits would fail, if he should be long away: Love therefore looks to it,
that it shall never be so long, as in the loss thereof thou should faint,
and dye. Did thou know the transcendent nature of Christ's love, thou would
know this, that though thou may faint a little, yet thou shall not dye: Love
will come and revive thee; yea did thou but consider the love of Christ
aright, it will be a cordial in other particulars also, in that it makes a
large amends for a little tarrying; for a moments withdrawing, it lets out
everlasting kindness, and it therefore departed for a season, that thou
might have it for ever

O.b. O but says the soul, I faint to think that I have lost Christ through
mine own defect: I have been so base as to drive him out of my bosom; and I
faint to think that he will never come again.

A. Why (poor soul) thou art ignorant of the nature of Christ's transcendent
love: Could thou but know it, thou would easily resolve thy soul in this
case, and support it with a sweet cordial: such is the nature of transcendent
love, that though you have been foolish to drive Christ away, yet it is so
powerful to bring Christ again. It was the folly and the fault of the spouse,
that though her beloved was knocking at her door, till his locks were wet with
the dew of the night, yet she sluggishly lay in her bed, and would not let him
in: Indeed he went away, that she might see her folly, but he came again,
that he might show loves transcendency.

Ob. Nay says the soul, with all this, I have violated and wronged conjugall
love; and the thoughts of these sink my Spirit: I faint and dye to think of
this, for fear that Christ will not pass by these.

Answ. Still I say (believer did thou but know the nature of the transcendent
love of Christ, it would afford thee a cordial in this case also: This is the
glory of this love, that it passes by such violations. Indeed the love of men
will not, but the love of Christ will pass by this foul transgression, because
that Christ's love transcendeth men's love. Thou have played the harlot with many
lovers, yet return to me, Jerem. 3. ver. 1. and surely (says he) as a wife
treacherously departs from her husband, so have you dealt with me, O house
of Israel, yet return you backsliding people, and I will heal your
backslidings: O transcendent love! which is in Christ's bosom, which knows
how to pardon the defilement of the bed of love. Indeed there is no failing so
great, but did thou know the transcendency of Christ's love, thou would see
it to be greater, than any failing of thine can conquer, so that now in case
this fear should be able to disturb thy comfort, and to make thee faint, yet
the consideration of Christ's love may support thy soul, and be a cordial unto
thee, even in this case.

Object. But yet I hear others cry out, and say, how shall we do to draw out
joy, out of this well of salvation. How shall we make the consideration of
Christ's love, a cordial to us in our troubles?

Quest. Why? what are your troubles (poor souls) which make you stand in need
of the comfort of this consideration?

Answ. I have lost much, nay all, for Christ, because I stood to his cause; I
have lost all the creatures, lands, and livings too, yea, and house, and
household too, etc. I have lost all.

Answ. But yet consider Christ's love, and it will comfort thee in the midst
of this loss: It is the nature of transcendent love, to repair all losses, and
that double; in your land, you shall possess double Isa. 61.17. And there is no
man that has left for Christ Parents, Brethren, house, or children, but love
will make up all that, as Luke 18. ver. 29. Transcendent love, scorns to let
any be a loser by it. May not this comfort thee?

Ob. O but says another, I have not only lost all, but am still opposed; they
have stripped me to my change for Christ's sake, and yet oppose my very skin:
How shall I comfort my self with the consideration of Christ's love now?

A. Why thus (poor soul) consider, Christ will comfort as fast as men oppose;
transcendent love gives the soul answerable consolation to any tribulation in
which the soul can be. In the world you shall have tribulation (says Christ)
but be of good cheer, I have overcome the world, and in me you shall have
peace. Transcendent love gives a smile for every frown, a kiss for every
buffet, an embrace for every blow; this is the nature thereof, consider it, and
be of good comfort.

Ob. O but says the soul I have not only lost all, and been stripped to the
change, but am brought to the stake, how shall I fetch comfort out of Christ's
love now?

A. Consider thou (dying soul) Christ's love has provided a comfort for it; It
says, you shall have your life by thus losing of it; You are in the way to
secure your life; by this you shall not dye, but live; thus says transcendent
love, because I live, you shall live also, Joh. 14. v. 19. After one blast,
into Christ's bosom; It is but a wink with the eye, and into the land of the
living presently.

Thus you see whither to go for comfort in any tribulation, viz. to Christ's
bosom, and there you may find in his love, a cordial suitable to any
tribulations, whether within, or without, spiritual or corporal: Be directed
therefore upon all occasions, O you believers, to run to Christ's love, and to
comfort your selves in the consideration thereof.

Use, Fifthly, it may be an use of Terror to Christlesse creatures: you hear
the consideration of Christ's love is a cordial, able to support in any trouble;
but wretches that you are, you have no right to it; tribulation is for every
soul that sins, Romans 2.9. you will meet with tribulation, Christlesse
creatures; ere long, divine wrath will come and visit you surely; and what will
you do in the day of the visitation thereof? Whither wll you run for
consolation in the hour of your trouble? Will you run to men, alas! miserable
comforters will they be, and so thou will find them to be: Men of a high
degree are vanity, and men of a low degree are a lie. Whither will you go in
the anguish of your souls for a drop of sweetness? Will you go to duties?
alas, without Christ they are but dry! and you that are Christlesse, will not
know how to manage duties, so as to suck comfort through them. Will you say you
are in Christ? the Scriptures will confute you; you are told, but if any be in
Christ, he is a new creature, 2 Cor. 5.17. Do not say, I am baptized; Many are
baptized into Christ's name, who are not baptized into his person; you will say,
you have heard him preaching in your streets, that you have eat in his presence
(been as you say, at the Sacrament) alas poor creatures! all this may be, and
yet you have no right to Christ. Tremble therefore you Christlesse creatures,
his love is the cordial in trouble, the consideration thereof may support the
soul from sinking in any tribulation; but woe to you! woe to you! you have no
part in that; what will you do? what will become of you when Christ shall
appear in wrath? It will be in vain for you to call to the mountains, to hide
you from the wrath of the Lamb: It will be in vain for you to think upon the
creatures, nothing, nothing, will be able to support your souls. Indeed,
believers (when he shall appear in flames of fire) will be able to comfort
themselves, with the knowledge of his transcendent love; but alas, you who have
no right to Christ, what will you do in that day? you must doubtesse (if you
remain as you are) sink in despair, and dye under his wrath.

Use, Lastly, I shall add one word of exhortation, and conclude: In as much as
the knowledge of the love of Christ is of such special efficacy (as you have
heard) to support your souls under tribulations, then be exhorted.

First, to labor to be well acquainted with the love of Christ in the substance
thereof, in the circumstances thereof, and especially in the fullness and
freeness thereof. Read, study, pray, do what you can, that you may be
acquainted with this love; the knowledge, and consideration of which, is a
cordial in any trouble.

Secondly, labor to clear it up to your selves, that you have a share in this
love, and a right to it. This is the cordial of this cordial of Christ's love,
viz. for the soul to see that it is this; so much I hinted in the explication
thereof: Especially strive (poor souls) to clear up this; know, you once had no
part in it, you were born children of wrath, without Christ; Let it be your
constant care therefore to make it appear, that now you have a share in that
transcendent love which is in Christ.

Thirdly, upon all occasions run to this fountain of love. Draw out of it
suitable Cordials for any troubles. You have heard that it will comfort (and a
word was hinted to direct you.) Now, up, and be doing; and in all occasions,
labor that the love of Christ may keep your Spirits from fainting.

Consider what times you are fallen in, you may expect to meet with
tribulation. I cannot assure you, of sweet, and loving dealing from the world;
neither can I assure you of kind dealing from those who call themselves by the
name of Brethren: But this I can assure you, If upon the words of grace you act
faith, and come to Christ, that he will sweeten your troubles.

You have heard, There is love in his bosom for every believer, and that love
is of a transcendent nature.

You have also heard how that, It concerns you all to labor, and study for
the knowledge of it: And now you hear, That if you attain the right and
spiritual knowledge thereof, it will be very comfortable to you in any
trouble.

I beseech you therefore, as you prize your souls, as you prize comfort in
tribulations, Believe, and labor to get a part in Christ; and then know, that
let your condition be what it will be, however the World shall go well or
ill with you, yet you shall still find a Friend of Christ, he will still
follow you, with a full, a free, a cordial, and a transcendent love.

I have no more but this: Let the consideration of the love that is in Christ
to Believers, and of all the comfort that is in that love in any troubles,
prevail with you to look after it, and to lay hold upon Jesus Christ, Then
shall you know experimentally That the love of Christ passes knowledge.

FINIS.

