PROPOSALS For Printing by Subscription Bibliotheca Patrum:
OR, A New Ecclesiastical History. Containing an Account of the Authors of the
several Books of the Old and New Testament; Of the Lives and Writings of the
Primitive Fathers, and other Ecclesiastical Writers; An Abridgment of their
Works, with a Catalogue, and their different Editions, and Censures upon them,
determining which are Genuine, and which are Spurious; As also a Judgment upon
their Style and Doctrine, and a Compendious History of the Councils. Written in
French with great Integrity by the very Learned and Judicious LEWIS ELLIES DU
PIN, Doctor of the Sorbon. Translated into English, and carefully Reviewed by
Mr. WILLIAM WOTTON, B. D. who has very much improved the Author, by making
proper Remarks and Notes throughout the whole Work. The Two First Volumes now
in the Press, containing the Authors that flourished in the four first Ages of
the Church, of which see the particulars in the Table here annexed.
THE Works of the Learned and Judicious L. Ellies du Pin, Doctor of the Sorbon,
have met with that Universal Approbation in the World, that several Gentlemen
have been desirous to have them put into English, for the Public Benefit.

The Author is a Person of that Integrity and Judgment, and so far from
suffering himself to be carried away by a Spirit of Bigottry, so peculiar to
the Writers of that Communion, that no one, perhaps, has so freely laid open
the Forgeries of their old Liturgies, Decretals, Spurious Works ascribed to the
Fathers, etc. as himself. But what deserves a particular Commendation, he has
in his Prolegomena generously and learnedly defended the Authority of the Holy
Scriptures against all the Attempts of Spinosa, Hobbes, and Father Simon.

The First and Second Volumes are now almost Printed; and the Translation has
been Revised by Mr. William Wotton, B. D. who has made Remarks upon several
passages, and many Additions, which are Printed in separate Paragraphs, not
intermixing them with the Original.

A Paper of this Nature will not admit a recital of all the advantageous
Characters that have been given this Learned Author, by several Foreign Divines
of the Reformed Religion; we shall therefore content our selves with setting
down some of many honorable Testimonies he has received from some of the most
Eminent Members of our own Church.

The Bishop of Worcester, in his Treatise entitled, The Doctrine of the
Trinity and Transubstantiation compared, p. 33. speaking of the Liturgies of
St. Peter, St. Paul, and St. Matthew, quoted by the Papist, the Protestant
answers, Do you not know that these are rejected as supposititious by your own
Writers? And a very late and Learned Author [Du Pin in the Margin] has given
full and clear Evidences of it. -- And a little after, He proves (speaking of
Du Pin) St. Peter' s Liturgy to be later than the Sacramentary of St. Gregory,
and so can prove nothing for the first 600 years; and the Aethiopick Liturgy,
or St. Matthews, he shows to be very late; that of St. James he thinks to have
been some time before the Five General Councils, but by no means to have been
St. James' s.

Dr. Cave, in his Prolegomena to the Historia Literaria, p. 1, 2. Ex eo tempore
duo Scriptores Galli idem Argumentum ex part tractarunt; viz. Lud. Ellies du
Pin, Facultaris Sorbonicae Theologus, qui Auctorum Ecclesiasticorum novam
Bibliothecam Gallico sermon, Edidit Paris. 1686. 80. Vir (quantum ex iis quae
Latin Edidit, perspicere licet. Gallica enim haud satis capio) Doctus and
Candidus and Antiquitatis Ecclesiasticae cultor diligentissimus. Alter Casim.
Oudin, etc.

Mr. Fleetwood, in the Preface to the Life and Death of the Blessed Virgin, p.
16. We are more obliged to Monsieur du Pin, a late French Author, both for his
Candor and good Nature, whose words I will set down, etc. Again, p. 22. But
because the aforementioned Ellis du Pin, Doctor of the Sorbon, and at present
in great Repute with the Church of France, has dispatched this business
effectually, etc. I shall take leave to transcribe a short Chapter of his, etc.
-- Again, p. 29. [speaking of Dionysius the Areopagite, that the Books which go
under his Name are spurious] But du Pin (says he) has done the Work
effectually, and therefore I will not grudge the pains of making an Abstract of
his Judgment -- [too long to insert.]

Mr. Gee, in his Veteres Vindicati, p. 63. No body (I mean no Learned-Man)
believes St. Peter' s Liturgy, etc. I could furnish you with more intrinsic
Arguments against it, and against the rest which labor under the same or worse
Absurdities, out of your own (to omit our) Authors; the Learned and Judicious
du Pin has gathered enough against it, etc.

Many more such Testimonials might be collected out of the Writings of our
Clergy: but these we hope are sufficient to convince the World of the Value of
this Excellent Book, and of the Integrity of its Learned Author.

PROPOSALS.
I. THAT this Book shall be Printed in Folio, upon the same Paper, and with the
same Character as these Proposals: The Two Volumes containing about One Hundred
and Seventy Sheets. II. The Price to Subscribers of both Volumes to be Thirteen
Shillings in Sheets; Five Shillings whereof to be paid in Hand, Five Shillings
more at the delivery of the First Volume, and the rest at the delivery of the
Second. III. And for an Encouragement to Subscribers, Any Gentleman who shall
Subscribe for Six Books, shall have a Seventh Gratis, which will reduce the
Price to Eleven Shillings and Two pence. IV. The Price to any other than a
Subscriber shall be no less than Fourteen Shillings in Sheets; and there are so
few Printed, that none will be left to be sold under hereafter. V. The First
Volume is almost finished, and will be ready to be delivered by the 10th day of
June next to such Gentlemen as desire it, paying Five Shillings as above; and
the Second Volume at Michaelmas Term next.
And in the mean time we shall prepare the Third Volume for the Press, it being
already in hand, intending to Publish that by Christmas next; and shall proceed
with all expedition with the rest.

The Subscribers are desired to make their first Payments with what speed they
can, to ABEL SWALLE and TIM. CHILD, at the Unicorn at the West End of St.
Paul's Churchyard; Or to any of these Booksellers following, who will give
Receipts for the same, and deliver the Books according to the Proposals; Viz.

Mr. Gilliflower Westminst. hall. Mr. Hensman Westminst. hall. Mr. Patridge at
Charing Cross. Mr. Not in the Pall Mall. Mr. Harding in Newport-street near
Long-Acre. Mr. Bentley in Covent Garden. Mr. Lownds in the Strand. Mr. Crook
without Temple Bar. Mr. Brown without Temple Bar. Mr. Basset in Fleetstreet.
Mr. Wilkinson in Fleetstreet. Mr. Rogers in Fleetstreet. Mr. Freeman in
Fleetstreet. Mr. Wotton in Fleetstreet. Mr. Walford in Ave Mary-Lane. Mr.
Clavel in St. Paul' s Churchyard. Mr. Kettleby in St. Paul' s Churchyard. Mr.
Watts in St. Paul' s Churchyard. Mr. Bennet in St. Paul' s Churchyard. Mr.
Tailor in St. Paul' s Churchyard. Mr. Mortlock in St. Paul' s Churchyard. Mr.
Meredith in St. Paul' s Churchyard. Mr. Bonwick in St. Paul' s Churchyard.
Mr. Adamson in St. Paul' s Churchyard. Mr. Robinson in St. Paul' s
Churchyard. Mr. Saunders in the New Exchange. Mr. Churchil in
Paternoster Row. Mr. Everingham in Ludgatestreet. Mr. Lawrence in the
Poultrey. Mr. Ayhner in Cornhill. Mr. Horn in Cornhill. Mr. Crowch in Cornhill.
Mr. Hindmarsh in Cornhill. Mr. Rich. Parker in Cornhill. Mr. Christopher
Bateman in Holbourn. Mr. Powell at Lincolns-Inn-gate. Mr. Sare at
Grays-Inn-gate. Mr. Littlebury in Little-Britain. Mr. Sawbridge in
Little-Britain.
Or to these Booksellers in the Country.
Mr. Geo. West in Oxford. Mr. John Wilmot in Oxford. Mr. John Crosley in
Oxford. Mr. Hen. Clements in Oxford. Mr. John Howell in Oxford. Mr. Anth.
Pisley in Oxford. Mr. Hen. Dickenson in Cambridge. Mr. Rich. Green in
Cambridge. Mr. Sam. Simpson in Cambridge. Mr. Edward Hall in Cambridge. Mr. Yeo
in Exeter. Mr. Hide in Exeter. Mr. Hildyard in York. Mr. Green in Lancaster.
Mr. Churchill in Dorchester. Mr. Walker in Lincoln. Mr. Minshell in Chester.
Mr. Lasley in Hereford. Mr. Robinson in Ludlow. Mr. Adey in Bristol. Mr. Wall
in Bristol. Mr. Jones at Worcester. Mr. Palmer in Gloucester. Mr. Hill in
Shrewsbury. Mr. Pickerin in Warrington. Mr. Hows in Nottingham. Mr. Ward in
Leicester. Mr. Fowls in Northampton. Mr. Smith in Daventry. Mr. Powel in
Southampton. Mr. Hartford in Portsmouth. Mr. Smith at Stratford upon Avon. Mr.
Giles in Norwich. Mr. Oliver in Norwich. Mr. Randal in Newcastle. Mr. Johnson
in Lichfield. Mr. Hunt in Coventry. Mr. Courtney in Salisbury. Mr. Warden in
Durham. Mr. Weeks in Plymouth. Mr. Fran. Blithe in Colchester. Mr. Burges in
Canterbury.
And most other Booksellers both in London and the Country. As also,
Mr. North at Dublin.
Whereas there is lately Published the first Volume of this Book in Latin, and
pretended to have been Printed at Paris, thereby to insinuate that it was
translated by Monsieur du Pin himself: This therefore is to disabuse the World,
and to assure them, That it was never Printed there, but at Amsterdam only,
without the knowledge or consent of the Author. Their Performance may be
guessed at, by their Integrity in this particular.

A Mathematical Dictionary; Or, General Idea of the Mathematics: Being lately
Published in French by Monsieur Ozanam, Professor of that Science to the French
King. The same is undertaken to be done in English by several Gentlemen
Eminently Famous for their Skill therein, and capable not only of Translating
it Properly, but also of Adding, Abridging, or Correcting, such Things as they
shall find amiss. Illustrated with many Copper Cuts and Schemes, more, and
better, than in the Original In Folio. Is now in ^he Press, and will be
Published with all convenient speed; by Abel Swalle and T. Child.

The CONTENTS of the First Volume.
PREFACE. Of the Authors of the several Books of the Old Testament. Of the
Canonical Books of the Old Testament; of Books Doubtful, Apocryphal, and Lost,
that belonged to the Old Testament. The History of the Hebrew Text; of the
Version of the Septuagint, and other Greek Versions of the Old Testament. Of
some Authors, whose Works have a relation to the Old Testament, viz. Philo, Fl.
Josephus, Justus, Aristeas, Aristobulus, Josephus Bengorion, Berosus, the false
Dorotheus, Zoroaster, etc. Concerning the Authors of the Books of the New
Testament. Of the Canon of the Books of the New Testament, and particularly of
those Books that were formerly doubted of. Of the Letter falsely supposed to be
sent by Jesus Christ to King Agbarus, and of that of Agbarus to Jesus Christ.
Of some Letters falsely attributed to the Virgin Mary. Of the Counterfeit
Gospels. Of the Counterfeit Acts of the Apostles, and of the false Revelations.
Of the Epistle to the Laodiceans, and some others attributed to St. Paul. Of
the Epistle of St. Barnabas. Of the Liturgies that are falsely attributed to the
Apostles. Of the Apostles Creed. Of the Canons and Constitutions attributed to
the Apostles. Of the several Books attributed to Prochorus, Linus, and Abdias;
of the Acts of the Passion of St. Andrew. Of the Books of the Sibyls, Mercurius
Trismegistus, and Hystaspes; of the Letters of Lentulus and Pilate concerning
Jesus Christ; of the Epistles of Seneca to St. Paul; and of a Passage in the
History of Josephus concerning Jesus Christ. Of the Life and Writings of
Hermas. St. Clemens Romanus. St. Dionysius the Areopagite. St. Ignatius. St.
Polycarp. Papias Quadratus and Aristides. Agrippa. Hegesippus. St. Justin the
Martyr. Melito. Tatian. Athenagoras and Hermias. Theophilus Bishop of Antioch.
Apollinarius of Hierapolis. Dionysius of Corinth. Pinytus, Philippus, Modestus,
Musanus, and Bardesanes. St. Irenaeus. Victor, Polycrates, Theophilus of
Cesarea, and Bachillus of Corinth. Several Writers of whom nothing remains, and
who were little known amongst the Ancients. Serapion of Antioch. Rhodon.
Pantaenus. St. Clement of Alexandria. Miltiades; the two Apollonii; and the two
Anonymous authors, who wrote against the Heresies of Montanus and Artemo.
Tertullian. Caius. Hippolytus. Geminianus or Geminus. Alexander. Julius
Africanus. Minutius Felix. Ammonius. Origin. Ambrose and Tryphon, Disciples of
Origin. Beryllus. St. Cyprian. Pontius. Cornelius. Novatian. St. Martialis.
Sixtus. Gregory Thaumaturgus. St. Denis of Alexandria. Theognostus.
Athenogenes. Denis Bishop of Rome. Malchion. Archelaus. Anatolius. Victorinus.
Pierius. Methodius. Pamphilus. Lucian. Phileas. Zeno of Verona. Arnobius.
Lactantius. Commodianus, and Julius Firmicus Maternus. Of the Councils held in
the three First Ages of the Church. Of the false Decretals attributed to the
first Popes. Abridgment of the Doctrine, the Discipline, and the Morals of the
three First Ages of the Church. A Chronological Table of the Authors of the Old
Testament. A Chronological Table of the Authors of the New Testament. A
Chronological Table of the Ecclesiastical Authors treated of in this Volume. A
Table of the Books, Canonical, Apocryphal, and Lost, which belong to the Old
Testament. A Table of the Books that belong to the New Testament. A Table of
all the Works of the Authors treated of in this Volume, showing what are
Genuine, what are Spurious, and what are Lost. A Table of the Works of the
Authors disposed in the Order of Matters on which they treat. An Alphabetical
Table of Authors Names. An Index of the Principal Matters.
The CONTENTS of the Second Volume.
Of the Authors that Flourished in the Fourth Century.
EUsebius of Caesaria. Constantine, the first Christian Emperor. Juvencus.
Rheticius. Eustathius, Bishop of Antioch. Peter of Alexandria. Alexander Bishop
of Alexandria. St. Athanasius. St. James of Nisibis. Marcellus of Ancyra.
Hosius. Julius. Asterius. Theodorus. Tryphyllius. Heliodorus. Donarus; and
Vitellius and Macrobius, his Disciples. St. Anthony of Egypt. St. Pachomius.
Oresiesis. Theodorus. The Macarii. Serapion Bishop of Thmuis. Eusebius
Emisenus. Basil of Ancyra. Liberius. St. Hilary. Lucifer. Victorinus of Africa.
St. Pacia^^^^ Gregory of Baetia. Phebadius. Opratus. Acacius of Caesaria.
Photinus. Aetius and Eunomius. George of Laodicea. The Apollinarii. Titus
Bishop of Bostra. Didymus of Alexandria. Peter of Alexandria. Lucius. Aquilius
Severus. Euzoius. St. Cyrill of Jerusalem. St. Ephrem Syrus, Deacon of Edessa.
Pope Damasus. St. Basil the Great. St. Gregory Nazianzen. St. Gregory Nyssen.
St. Cesarius. St. Amphilochius. Maximus. Eusebius of Verceilles. Meletius.
Diodorus Bishop of Tarsus. Hilary the Deacon. Priscilian; and Matronianus,
Tiberianus, and Dictinius, ^^^ Disciples. Ithacius, or Idatius. Faustinus.
Philastrius. Timothy of Alexandria. Nectarius. Gelasius of Cesaria. Siricius.
Sabinus. Ambrose of Alexandria. Theotimus. Evagrius of Antioch. St. Ambrose,
Bishop of Milain. St. Epiphanius. Philo Carpathius. Q Julius Hilarion.
Of the Councils held in the Fourth Century, etc.
OF the pretended Council of Sinuessa. Of the Council of Cirtha. Of the Council
of Alexandria, under Peter Bishop of that Church. Of the Council of (...) Of
the pretended Council of Carthage. Of the Council of Rome. Of the Council of
Arles. Of the Councils of Ancyra and Neo Caesarea. Of the first Council of
Alexandria against Arius. Of the pretended Council of Bithynia for Arius. Of
the second Council of Alexandria against Arius, held in the Presence of Hosius.
Of the Council of Nice. Of the pretended Council of Antioch against E^stathius.
Of the Synod of Cesarea. Of the pretended Council of Tire against St.
Athanasius. Of the Synod of Jerusalem. Of the Council of Constantinople against
Marcellus of Ancyra. Of the Council of Constantinople against Paul Bishop of
that City. Of the Council of Alexandria for St. Athanasius. Of the Council of
Rome under Pope Julius for Athanasius. Of the Councils held at Antioch. Of the
Council of Milain. Of the Council of Cologne against Euphratas. Of the Council
of Sardica. Of the first Council of Sirmium. Of the second Council of Sirmium.
Of the Council of Arles. Of the Council of Milain. Of the Council of Bezieres.
Of the third Council of Sirmium. Of the Council of Antioch. Of the Council of
A^^^^^. Of the fourth Council of Sirmium. Of the fifth Council of Sirmium. Of
the Synod of Ariminum. Of the Council (...) Of the Council of Constantinople.
Of the Synod of Meletene. Of the Synod of Antioch. Of the Council of
Alexandria. Of the Council of Paris. Of the Council of Italy. Of the Council of
the Egyptian Bishops held at Antioch. Of the Council of Antioch under Meletius.
Of the Council of Lampsacus: Of the Council of Singidunum, composed of Arian
Bishops. Of Synods held by the Semi-Arians. Of the Synod of Tyana. Of the
Council of Gangra. Of the Council of Laodicea. Of the Council of Rome under
Damasus. Of the Council of Rome under Ursicius. Of the Council of Valentia. Of
the Council of Antioch for restoring Peace in that Church. Of the Councils of
Constantinople Of the 2d Council of Constantinople. Of the 3d Council of
Constantinople Of the Council of Aquileia. Of the Council of Saragossa. Of the
Council of Sy^^a in Pamphilia. Of the Council of Bourdeaux. Of the Council of
Capua. Of the Councils of Rome and Milain against Jovinianus. Of the Council of
the Novatiana held at Sangara. Of the first Council of Carthage. Of the second
Council of Carthage. Of the Councils of Carbasussa and Bagai^ Of the Council of
Hippo. Of the Council of Carthage in the Year 394. Of the Councils of Carthage
in the Year 397. Of the Council of Carthage in the Year 398. called the IV. Of
the Council of Carthage in the Year 399. Of the Council of Carthage in the Year
401, commonly called the V. Of the Council of Constantinople in the Year 394.
Of the Council of Alexandria in the Year 399. Of the Council of Cyprus at the
same time. Of the Council of Turin. Of the Council of Toledo. An Abridgment of
the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church in the fourth Century. A
Chronological Table of the Authors treated of in this Volume. A Chronological
Table of the Councils held in the fourth Century. An Alphabetical Table of the
Authors Names. An Alphabetical Table of the Councils. A Table of all the Works
of the Ecclesiastical Authors of the fourth Century, showing which of them are
Genuine, which Spurious, and which Lost. A Table of the Acts. Declarations of
Faith, and Canons of the Councils held in the fourth Century. A Table of the
Works of the Authors disposed according to the Order of Matters of which they
treat. An Alphabetical Index of the Principal Matters.

