THE FOOL Turned Critic: A COMEDY:

As it was Acted at the Theatre-Royall. By His Majesty's Servants.

By T. D. Gent.

LONDON, Printed for James Magnes and Richard Bentley, at the Post Office in
Russel Street in Covent Garden, 1678.

PROLOGUE.
HE who comes hither with design to hiss,
And with a bum reversed, to whisper Miss,
To comb a Perriwig, or to show gay clothes,
Or to vent Antique nonsense with new oaths,
Our Poet welcomes as the Muses friend;
For he will by irony each Play commend.
Next these we welcome such as briskly dine,
At Locket's, at Gissord's, or with Shataline.
Swelled with Pottage, and the Burgundian Grape,
They hither come to take a kindly nap.
In these our Poet don't conceive much harm;
For they pay well, and keep our benches warm.
And though scarce half awake, some Plays they dam,
They do it by Whole-sail; not by Ounce, and Dram.
But when fierce Critics get them in their clutch,
They Are crueller then the Tirannick Dutch.
And with more Art, do dislocate each Scene,
Then in Amboyna they the limbs of men.
They wrack each line, and every word unknit,
As if they would find away to cramp all Wit.
They are the terror of all adventurers here,
The very objects of their hate and fear,
And like rude Commonwealths they still are knit
Against English Plays, the Monarchies of wit,
They invade Poetique Lisence, and still rail
At Plays, to which in duty they should vail.
Yet still the' infest this Coast to fish for jests,
To supplement their Wits at City feasts.
Thus much for Critics: to the more generous Wit,
Our Poet Frankly, does each Scene submit;
And begs your kind Allience to engage
Those Hogen interlopers of the Stage.
The Fool turned CRITIC.
ACT. I.
Scene I. Covent Garden.
Enter Frank Amorous, and Bernard. Frank. PIsh, never doubt it man, thou shall
enjoy her;
Give me thy hand, I say thou shall: a man of thy
Perfections, and despair of gaining a slight woman?
Come, come, no more, Thou shall possess her Bernard.

Ber. Prithee Frank,
Leave off thy Railery, thy mirth's unseasonable;
I am not pleased to hear thee flatter me
With hopes of what thou never can perform,
Especially this way.

Frank. I last thou a Faith?
Can thou believe the thing thou feast achieved?
Give credit to an act is done and finished before thy Eyes?

Ber. Yes sure, I could do that.


Frank. Why then I say once more aloud to thee,
Thou shall enjoy this woman* I will, to do thee
A kindness, be an honorable Procurer.

Ber. Ha! Procurer!


Frank. Nay, nay, mistake me not, I mean I Will get her for thee.
Procurer, or Match-maker, its all one,
The word has several meanings.

Ber. Though I know thy vanity to be such, that in
Thy thoughts thou could do wonders, but
Thy power, barren as Earth on Rocks of
Unknown height; yet in thy words lies something
that is pleasing, though far from my belief,
Thou can perform it.

Frank. Try me, and if I do not. --


Ber. How can thou think to do it, Thou know her not,
Art unacquainted with her Family, Friends and Relations.

Frank. I grant I am Sir -- But Heaven be praised I Am
Owner of a certain confidence, that never fails
To usher my acquaintance with any of that Sex.
The least thing that of a thousand.

Ber. But thou art wild, and wavering in thy Temper,
Apt to run out into Extravagancies, unfit for her
To hear, much less commend. Can thou be serious Frank.

Frank. Can thou be wise -- serious --
Ud's death, do take her for an Abbess?
Or one o'th Zealots at Amsterdam?
That thou do School me thus -- hark, hark,
Bernard, Were she a Widow zealously devout,
One doting on some brawny suburb Parson,
That preaches, following him the way to Heaven;
A mess of phrases, serious, loud and chiming, might
Work upon her Spirit: But a Girl who is as
Thou describ'st her, free and airy, sanguine of her
Complexion, young and healthy, a serious speech
To her, is like a long Grace to one of an eager
Appetite, fruitless, as it is distastful.

Ber. But prithee how -- what will thou say to her?


Frank. I know not yet -- but do not doubt me, I Will do
Thy business; never fear it Bernard: Thou have,
I thank thee, supplied me with money, and thereby crossed
My miserable Fathers purpose of marrying me
To an old Widow here in the City. -- And to gratify
Thee, this Woman shall be thine -- and by my means.

Ber. A strange confidence!
But perhaps -- he knows something of her -- That
Makes him thus presume -- I am resolved to try --
Well Frank, this once I Will trust Thee -- I am to
Night invited by her Father to Supper; Thou shall
Go with me; and if thou can perform this,
Thou art my Friend indeed.

Frank. And thou shall find me so, Come lets away.


Exeunt. SCENE II.
Enter Old Winelove, Tim, Smallwit. Old Wine. Is your name Smallwit?


Small. Iervas Smallwit, Sir. the meanest of your Worships
Humble Servants, One that shall prouder be to kiss
Your hand, then to be crowned with Laurel by Apollo.

Old Wine. Good Mr. Smallwit!
No Flowers of Rhetoric to me, your stock I fear
Will be exhausted soon enough, -- by him there,
Without ^is loss on me, you are commended to me
By a good Friend of mine, Old Sir Formal Ancient.

Small. He is my Patron Sir.


Old Wine. He sends me word, you have your Tropes and Figures,
Your Syllogisms, Epithetes and Phrases, I could
Have named them right in my young days, ready by heart,
And that you can accost, Repartee, come on, draw off,
Retreat, and hold discourse even with the best of
Our Tongue Combatants.

Small. I should do something Sir, I Have studied long for it.


Old Wine. And that you can with fair becoming Grace,
And modish cringes vouch your gallantry
Against any Squire of the Pantofle
Within the Kings Dominion.

Small. I hope I can Sir.


Old Wine. Very well -- I Am glad on it.
I Am very glad your skill is so unquestioned,
There Is one will want it all -- and more I doubt not.
Come hither Sir.

Small. Is this the Gentleman?


Old Wine. The same Sir, -- it is my Heir, the only he
That ever called me Father;
And though he seems to have but a course outside,
He has a cunning Headpiece -- a shrewd pate;
His inner Rooms are furnished well Sir,
Take my word; besides, he keeps good Company
That edify him much, good Singing, Dancing, Swearing,
Jovial Company; Then has seen all the new Plays;
And you will find him a Proficient.

Small. It were a sin to doubt it Sir.


Old Wine. Yet though he be well furnished thus by nature,
He has not the Town virtues, Talk and Impudence;
No modish Gallantry to gloss his parts, and make them shine,

Small. Sir fear not, he will soon learn.


Old Wine. I should be grieved else, troth I should Sir.
Now I would have you Sir as you are styled
The Mercury, nay the Apollo of this age
To teach him these indowments -- I would have him
Learn how to Court his Mistress, huff a Rival
That crosses his designs, quarrel with Bullies,
And pick a Wench up with alacrity.
Then to see Plays, and how to firut in the Pit,
Manage his Comb, swear modishly Gad damme;
Talk aloud, to make his parts be noted.

Small. Never doubt Sir,
He shall be soon instructed with these Rules.

Old Wine. And when the Play's begun, I Would have him sit
In the Wits Corner, play the Critic, hiss
At any thing he does not understand:
Be the Scene never so witty -- That Is no matter,
It Is Modish and Gentile.

Small. He shall not fail Sir:
Nay he shall hold a parley with the Wits:
Propound and answer things beyond his knowledge,
And yet come off with credit.

Old Wine. Shall he faith?
Shall he come off with credit? -- do but that Sir,
Bring him but off with credit, and you bless me;
And I Will not be ungrateful -- see here is 50 Guineys;
This as an Earnest of my future Bounty:
And if he come off, and as thou say, with credit,
A hundred more shall pay obeisance to Thee!
Tim, come hither Tim, how do Thou like this Gentleman?
Ha, prithee tell me, -- Come be not so bashful.
You two must be acquainted.

Tim. Faith Sir, -- I like him very well -- But --


Old Wine. But -- pish no Buts -- he will make a Courtier Tim.


Small. Ah, do not fear it Sir, The Squire and I
Shall soon be intimate, we will be Chamber-fellows,
Be Drunk together, Sing and Roar together,
Ramble till two in the Morning, and then Slip
Into some private Lodging in the Park,
And get a Wench or two.

Tim. Withal my heart:
A very pleasant fellow; I like him Sir extremely.

Old Wine. Nay, doubt him not Sir, he is cock oth' game,
I told you, you should find him a true Winelove:
He had it from his Father, -- ay in my capring days:
I would have Wrestled, Leapt, Run, pitched the Bar;
And kissed a sound Wench in a frosty morning,
With any Squire in Northamptonshire:
But now, I must consess my Ages Autumn,
Bafflles my weak endeavors.

Small. Oh, not so Sir.


Old Wine. Faith it is very true -- but it is no matter,
Be you but careful to instruct my Son;
It Is all I wish -- in him my youth shall flourish:
And be you sure Tim, to observe his Doctrine,
Follow his Precepts with a greedy Ear;
And let me see you strut it in the Streets,
Display thy Garniture, Hat, Curled Shaddrew
With my bully Gamester, in White-Fryers.
Never doubt the means, Thou shall have Money store,
I have been scraping it this 50 year:
And thou shall never want that my Boy.

Tim. I will do what you please Sir.


Old Wine. Why, I would have you Tim, to be a Fine Courtier,
A Jauntee, Modish follower of the times,
Hah will thou strive?

Tim. Yes Sir, I will strive;
I Will be as Impudent as you please to have me.

Old Wine. Will thou? -- why, well said - ha, what think you now Sir*


Small. A pregnant Wit, believe me Sir.


Tim. And Sir, to show my duty more -- I will be drunk
Very often, lie a Bed all day, and rise at midnight;
I Will get a Wench Sir, and if you think good a Clap,
And then I shall be sure to be o'th fashion.

Old Wine. Now by Honor rarely thought upon,
A Clap indeed is Modish.

Tim. I Sir, it is so,


Old Wine. We Will talk further of this point within:
I must entreat you Sir to dine with me,
Pray let us be Familiar.

Small. I am in troth too bold Sir.


Old Wine. Fie not a jot -- come lets in -- Tim follow your T^^^^.


Tim. Yes Sir.


Exeunt. SCENE III. Hall.
Enter Sir Formal Ancient, and Penelope. Sir For. Daughter I say, be wise;
these are ill times,
And we should therefore be more provident:
I do not like this Bernard, that frequents
My house, and your company; Daughter I say,
I do not like him.

Pen. Why Sir?


Sir For. Nay, nay, I know not that; yet to satisfy you,
His Father was a roaring Cavalier,
Apeaching Raskal, that betrayed our Faction:
H' had like to hanged my Uncle; and for that trick
I hate the generation: Yet to say truth,
It is a Courteous Varlet, and a my conscience,
Would stake his Life for his Friend: but what then,
His Lineage all were Knaves, conforming Rogue's;
Fellows that strained their throats for a free state,
And for that cause I hate 'em.

Pen. You are my* Father Sir, and 'twould be thought
Great folly in me to question your Commands,
Much less deny 'em.

Sir For. How, deny 'em!
Dare you deny my commmands.

Pen. Sir, you mistake, I always meant to obey
What you and Heaven should impose upon me.

Sir For. Did thou not say at first,
Thou would deny my just Commands.

Pen. No Sir, I said 'twas folly in me to deny 'em.


Sir For. And do no doubt dissemble with me,


Pen. Believe me Sir, I do not, I am now
As I was ever, ready to obey you,
In any just Command.

Sir For. Thou art my Daughter, and should practice duty;
Therefore I say once more, and with a parent like authority,
I do not like this Bernard, therefore Discard him;
See that my doors close locked oppose his entrance:
I have no house-room for him, tell him so,
How now!

Enter a Servant. Serve. Sir, there is one Sir Peter Winelove at the three Crane
Tavern, desires your Company about Earnest Business.


Sir For. Go tell him I come -- I guess his Business, Exit Servant
He has a Son lately come out 'oth Country;
And wants a Wife -- Daughter go you to your Closet,
Fall on your knees, and pray my hopes may be successful:
There is a Blessing coming, and I Will work for it

Exit. Pen. Such Blessings I expect not, nor desire:
-- when 'ere I marry, or intend it, my Father
I see, by this Carriage to Bernard, will oppose it,
If it suites not with his liking, I Am vexed;
Extremely vexed at my ill Fortune, and though
I have no passion for this Bernard, he does
Deserve it: And it might have been my Fate, as
Well as now it is his: Well -- I Will leave all to
Time; the Dice may turn, and I may yet be happy.

Enter a Servant. Serve. Madam, there is a Lady, accompanied with a Gentleman
Below is come to visit you.

Pen. Wait on 'em in. Exit Servant. Enter Franck Amorous and Lucia
Dearest Madam, a thousand, thousand Welcomes;
To what happy accident am I obliged,
That obliged me with your presence.

Lue. To no accident; I came to Sit and talk with you:
Or if thou like the Weather, lets take a turn in
The Park: I have been so melancholy since
My Brother went out of the Town.

Pen. Is not that Franck Amorous? Heavens! it is he,
-- how came he with her Aside.
Madam, what Gentleman is that?

Lue. Why, don't you know him?


Pen. Not I.


Luc. No, that is strange, I met him at the door*
And hearing me ask for you, pretended business,
And desired the favor to conduct me to you.

Pen. Business with me? What this should mean I know not.


Fran. Madam, although 'its my unhappiness to be a stranger
To you, and consequently to be destitute of what
Would make me blessed, could I obtain it -- your
Acquaintance, yet emboldned by the Cause, I
Presume to tell you that I have Business.

Pen. With me?


Fran. Madam, with you.


Pen. Heaven grant it be to the purpose: Madam I beg*
Your excuse for a Minutes Conference -- pray
Declare it Sir.

Fran. I have a Friend that Loves you*


Pen. Well Sir.


Fran. That dies for you.


Pen. Not unlikely.


Fran. And to this Friend, have I engaged my honor,
That you shall.

Pen. What I


Fran. Receive his Love -- permit him to enjoy you,
The only Cure I know.

Pen. But whence Sir springs your Confidence in my consent,
That you durst promise this?

Fran. Why, Faith no Confidence in you, but in my own
Ability, made me do it: Besides, the knowledge
I have that a woman of honor, as you are, or
Would at least be thought, could not refuse so
Fervent an address, when offered by so brave
A Gentleman; especially when urged by persuasions.

Pen. I will not trouble my self with reproving your vanity;
That were a fruitless work, but I desire to know,
Who it is that is thus pained -- pray Sir, what is he?

Fran. Why, Faith a man, that were a Non Parelio,
But that he doats on women -- a general fault.
Ye have the Ascendant over us.
This Paper will make all plain;
There you may read his name.

Pen. Well I am strangely taken with this Fellow; Aside.
How many Bernards live in him.

Reads. Fran. I cannot much blame Bernard for his choice;
This is no ordinary woman, and therefore not
To be dispis'd: But yonder is a Lady, through whose
Vizard -- I met an eye that darted fire into me --
What a presence she has: Now would I give a
Million for an invisible hand to snatch away that Mask.

Pen. Well Sir, I Have read the Letter -- and to let you
See, I neither flight the message nor the Bearer:
I Will Write an Answer to it; he may hope
Still, assure him I will do it: In the mean time
I will not fail to commend your fidelity.
Madam, I Will wait upon you instantly, please you to
Permit this Gentleman to keep you Company; I know
Him now, and can assure the general voice of
Fame denotes him Noble.

Exit. Fran. So, this has introduced me, and I Will forward:
This must be a rare woman: Bows to her. She lets fall her Mask, he snatches
it up:
How great a reason have I to bliss
Fortune, that by an accident permits my eye,
The view of so much Excellence.

Luc. No Excellence Sir.


Fran. 'I faith it is -- O cast away that cloud,
That shuts up so much Beauty.

Luc. Pray spare your Rhetoric, and let me tell you Sir,
I hate a flatterer,
As I hate the Devil, and would as soon avoid him.

Fran. A flatterer Madam, damn him -- I hope
You have heard nothing in my words,
That you should take me for flatterer;
I know too much of honor to dissemble.

Luc. Pardon me Sir, If I make doubt of that,
You are a man I hope.

Fran. I was this morning.


Luc. And are yet, doubt not, -- if so you may dissemble
By the charter of your Sex.

Fran. But your known beauty, by all so much admired,
Deserves, nor needs no flattery, besides I
Applaud a truth, and that is still allowed.

Luc. By some I grant it is -- and since your searching wit
Has thrust me on Discourse against my will;
I Will let you know my temper.
I hate a man that flatters worse then death;
He that should fawn, and sooth me in my Error;
I Would shun him, as I would the Pestilence --
I am not made perhaps of the same mould,
That other women are; I do not love to hear
A Fop cry Madam, I vow to gad that smile
Became you sweetly.
No'tis a careless, blunt, and
Manly Carriage that likes me best -- Besides
Sir, I think it is newer, and more modish.

Fran. It Is a witty Wanton --
There Is no way but to wheel about; and begin with
Her in her own Style -- Madam I must confess,
I did mistake your temper; but from henceforth,
You shall perceive I am more given to satyrise,
Then flatter or dissemble.

Luc. I am glad on it.


Fran. Fortune in this has been most kind to me, to make
Me worthy of your joy.

Luc. Still in that vein -- take heed.


Fran. I have done Madam -- the Devils in me;
I cannot out of my road, though I am punished for it.

Luc. I doubt not but I am meanly prized in your thoughts,
For being thus free.

Fran. No, no, not much for that; -- I know your Sexes frailty.


Luc. Our frailty.


Fran. I your ambition, or call it worse, your pride.


Luc. But pray refresh your memory Sir,
Did not you first accost me, did not you long
To break the Ice, and speak to me? come confess.

Fran. I long to speak to you, ha, ha, ha, that is fine;
Pray Madam, recollect, peruse your self,
What is there in that face that I should long for?
I think I fit her now. Aside.
-- long to speak to you. -- That Is a good jest in faith.

Luc. If I mistake, and am indeed so indifferent in your eye,
As you declare I am; you will oblidge your self
To remove from me to some more taking object.

Fran. No Madam, you may do what you please -- I have business.


Luc. I shall not want entreaty.


Is going away* Fran. 'Ds death she is going indeed -- Madam, sweet Madam,
What do you mean? Now have I like a Puppy,
Overdone my part, and made her angry -- you
Will not go in earnest?

Luc I use not Sir to jest with strangers.


Fran. You know I did this but in obedience to your
Command, far from my own good Temper, Heaven
Knows, and if your mind be changed, and you affect
Another Courtship better -- it is but wheeling a little
Way about again* Madam, I Will be with you presently.

Luc. No Sir, it is needless, I am very well satisfied in
The knowledge of your Temper, as I hope you are
Of mine, and am at present very unwilling to
Urge a further trial.

Fran. Then make me so happy to know your Lodging,
That I may have liberty to pay my duty to you,
In requital of this favor.

Luc. That I cannot neither, he that Loves me must seek me;
Perhaps the reward will not be worth the search:
But it is my humor Sir.

Fran. Nay, now you are cruel Madam -- *dsdeath do
You make a Beagle of me, and think I can
Hunt you out, upon the scent? In Faith you
Are too rigorous.

Luc. My words are irrevocable, and 'twill be discretion
In you not to urge me further.

Fran. I Have done, and will be patient -- but if I do
Meet you again, as it shall go very hard if I
(...) I will -- but no matter, let this suffice
At present, I love you beyond thought, and will
Find a time to let you know it at large.

Enter Penelope with a Letter written. Pen. Here Sir, it is done; I have in this
discovered
My mind to him: And besides, have given him to
Understand how much he is engaged to you:
But let him for a time forbear our house,
It is my fathers pleasure; his mind may alter
And set all right again. Pray tell him so.

Fran. Madam, you have obliged us both, and I shall be
Most happy in an employment to gratify
This favor; in the mean time, all I can do is to
Acknowledge it, and live your humble servant.
Fair Madam yours -- 'dsdeath she will perceive my
Extafie -- Ladies -- your servant --

Exit. Turns back and sighs. Pen. Well I do love this Fellow, and will
Devise some means that he shall know it;
Come Madam lets abroad.

Luc. I am ready to wait on you.


Pen. He has a cunning Tongue, but that I value little: No,
The choice of prudent Judgments I approve;
Honor and virtue, must obtain my Love.

Exeunt. The End of the first Act.
ACT. II.
Scene I. Covent Garden.
Enter Bernard. Ber. TO be in Love, is to be mad, and live a phrase,
That rarely sits my present disposition; for
Certainly if I had sense; or any reason left,
I should have kept my self free, at least from Love,
The plague of all mankind.
Sure the Devil, when Providence first
Quickened men with life, mingled this amorous
Poison with their blood, as a continual torment.

Enter Frank Amorous. Frank. Dear Frank! -- what returned already?
Well! and how go matters? ha! did speak to her?

Frank. Yes, I did speak to her, and thanks to my good Tongue,
And fluent Rhetoric, a great deal, a great deal
To the purpose -- hark, -- thy business is done, --
She Is thine, she is thine Rogue.

Ber. But art thou in earnest? prithee do not flatter me*
For to fall from these hopes to which thou have raised me,
Would be a horrid Torture.

Frank. Peruse this Paper, and then credit me; it is her own
Handiwork: Sir, I assure you I could have had
A Token for you, a Ring, or a slight Bracelet
From her Arm; but that I thought 't was needless.

Ber. A Letter, and from her? I am transported!
My best of Friends! how am I bound to thee?
I almost fear to read what is Writ within, least
The Excess of my delight should kill me.
But I must venture.

Frank. I prithee come, let us hear it.


Ber. reads, I have such a sensible knowledge of your sufferings, That I would
willingly, if it could be without prejudice of my Honor, redress them; But Mr.
Amorous can certify you; to whom you are infinitely obliged for his fidelity.


Frank. Do You mark that Bernard?


Ber. reads, That it is not mine, but my Fathers will, that debars your coming;
which also can be affirmed by your worthy Friend, sweet Mr. Amorous.


Frank. Ha! this is more then I expected, well go thy
Ways, thou art a kind hearted little Rogue,
I Will say that for thee.

Ber. reads. But from henceforth I desire you to have patience, and pray for an
alteration, and forget not to be grateful to the deserving and noble Mr.
Amorous. Your Friend Penelope.


Frank. Very well! do hear
What a commendable Character she gives me?

Ber. I do Sir, -- a thousand suspicions gnaw my heart. reads again.
Can be affirmed by your worthy Friend sweet Mr. Amorous, --
'dsdeath, she loves him, it is plain -- reads still.
(Still more!) her phrase is passionate, oh dull!
Dull Fool! to trust him with a secret to undo thee.

Frank. Come, prithee what art thou musing on?
Methinks this should make thee leap for joy;
Sing Catches, Frisk, and know no Earth to tread on:
What a Devil ayl'st thou?

Ber. Nothing Sir, nothing, only a sudden Melancholy.


Frank. Melancholy, Apox upon it, laugh it away man;
Think on thy Mistress; thou see I Have done thy business.

Ber. Ha! --


Frank. Ha! why do thou stare on me?


Ber. The business!


Frank. I the next visit shall finish it.


Ber. Dares he upbraid me? Sir, you shall answer this.


Frank. Answer that -- d'slight he is jealous; I find it now, and now I consider
on my past proceedings, it may be he has cause; he^ commendations in her Letter
were somewhat more then Ordinary: She addressed her self to him, but her praises
were for me. ('It Is so) what a damned dull Rogue was I not to receive it? I Will
go visit her straight, and if I find her true, Friend I shall not fear to
answer your demand, though with the hazard of my Life and Fortune.


Exeunt. Scene II. A Tavern.
Enter Old Winelove, Tim, Formal, Smallwit, Drawer. Old Wine. Well done Tim,
bravely done Boy -- Drawer, Sirrah give him the other glass of Sack for that last
action, and my little Minion of the Muses bring him but to it; let me but hear
him talked of in the Playhouse, feared by the Bullies, and renowned in Taverns,
and I will be a Friend to thee for ever.


Small. Your bounty Sir, has sealed me yours: believe he shall within a little
space of time be famous, and such a one as you could wish he was; he has
already profited extremely.


Old Wine. But prithee let me see that Congie over again, and your posture;
in faith 't was very modish: Come Tim, prithee once again.


Small. Look Sir in Company, take notice your Garniture, fit adjustee, and
advantagiously as you can, especially if you are among Ladies; and let your
Comb be ready thus for your Perriwig; whether it want or no it is a good
posture: if you are saluted, make your Congie thus, with a start, your head
bowing to your left Shoulder, as if it meant to kiss it. Very well! what think
you of that Sir? did he not do that better then the last?


Old Wine. In Faith 't was very well, Sir Formal did you see it?


Sir For. Yes, but to tell you the truth, I am not for this new Fantastic way
I like your ancient custom, the old way of saluting gravely, it is more manly;
these cringing Tumblers postures I like not. Give me your method of fair
salutation, a rule to grace behavior. These new ways approved by being of the
fashion, meet not my approbation.


Old Wine. Old Formal, still in faith -- but mind him not Boy: I Am pleased to
see thee exercise thy parts with Judgment and Discretion, Persevere Boy, Thou
have thy Fathers word for it, go on and prosper.


Tim. And so I have Sir, never doubt, I have designs here budding in this pate
of mine, that cannot choose but prosper, but methinks my Father in Law there,
that must be, gives me small encouragement.


Old Wine. Oh! it is no matter, do not mind what he says: He! alas poor Dotard,
only understood the way to purchase wealth, and make his Daughter a Fortune fit
to embrace thee, that is his Masterpiece.


Sir For. Mr. Winelove, I hold it prudence in you first to deck his mind with
internal Endowments, before you proceed to external Ornaments; for the Body,
mark me Sir, is but as a Tenement, bare and unfurnisht, till the mind adorns it
with her Household Stuff.


Old Wine. Sir, he shall be adorned both ways; his mind shall be the business
of his Tutor; his body of his Tailor; he shall be perfect, do not doubt Sir
Formal.


Tim. I Sir, never doubt me, I have a spirit I assure you, perhaps a Wit too
adorned with Endowments, such as you mention; and by my Tutors help I may in
time be able to discourse with -- I Will say no more -- your Daughter -- but let
that pass.


Old Wine. Why well said Tim -- thy Fathers temper just.


Tim. Now I have a great mind to carp at some of his words, if I had but
confidence enough to pretend to be a Critic.


Old Wine. Well said again in faith, why now I like thee; this shows thy ready
Wit to apprehend; I Am pleased with this extremely.


Small. Sir, you shall find great alteration in him within these two days; for
take it from me, he has a ripening Genius, a Wit that will be poynant, and
Satirical; and some perhaps will find it.


Enter Fiddlers. 1st. Fid. Will it please you Gentlemen to hear a new Lesson, or
a Song A-la-mode.


Sir For. S'bud you impertinent Raskal get you gone,
Or I Will so batter that Musical sconce of yours.
Song A-la-mode Quotha, I had as lieve hear a
Gibb Catt howl, and as much pleasure I take in it.

Old Wine. Fie Sir Formal, this is plain rashness, beat a poor fellow for
offering to divert you.


Sir For. Divert me with a Pox. -- Sirrah do not provoke me, but go.


Old Wine. Stay friend, stay, this is only a little peevish
Blood he has within him -- 'twill be allayed presently.
Sir Andrew, for my sake have a little patience; why,
We came hither to be merry; it is a day of Jubilee,
In Faith he shall Sing.

Sir For. Sir, were his Songs moral and edifying, I should dispense with the
noise; but this is a lewd Rogue, that gleans up all the fragments of cast Bawdy
to make Songs A-la-mode, as he calls 'um: Sirrah can you sing the battle of
Mardike?


1st. Fid. No indeed Sir.


Sir For. I told you so -- not sing the Battle of Mardike?
Why thou ignorant Rogue, where have thou bin bred?
Sings And hussing, And puffing,
And Snuffing, And Cuffing the Spaniard;
Whose Brows have bin died in a Tan-yard,
Well got Fame, a Warriors Wife.

Old Wine. O brave Sir Formal.


Sir For. Ah Sir, there is some matter in this now, an ill bred
Raskal, not sing the Battle of Mardike. Here Is
Near a child in Banbury of 7 years old, but can
Sing the Battle of Mardike, and has it readier then
His Horn-book.

Tim. Now have I a jest for my Father in Law there, if I
Durst speak it.

Small. What is it Sir,


Tim. To have told him, that no body would wonder at his
Mettle and testy humor, knowing he was born at Banbury.

Small. Amongst the Tinkers.


Tim. Ay i'gad, was not that a good one.


Small. Ha, ha, ha, ha.


Old Wine. How now my little Mercury, what is the matter.


Small. (Whispers Old Winelove.) Old Wine. Ha, ha, ha, it is a witty Varlet --
but come my friend.


Small. One of thy best Songs now, thy Newest -- a Song A-la-mode --
No matter what he says, I Will reward thee.

Song.
^ THe Age is refined, and the Vulgar no more are despised for their ^ Talent
of sense.
Good Wit, at the best is esteemed but a jest,
A ^ (...) is encouraged, Desert is suppressed:
That will flourish a ^ hundred years hence. ^
2.
Fierce Critics like Kings, rule over this Isle;
As the insolent Judges of Wit:
And though they have none, but what is deer bought,
Yet to be judicious, they fain would be thought:
By the gleanings they get in the Pit.
3.
Then let the precise, despair to be wise,
Let wisdom forsake his abode.
Since Wit is made none, by the Fops of the Town,
Debauches increased, and good fancies overthrown.
Chorus, By a pleasant Vice Alamode.
Old Wine. Very well 'ifaith -- hold there is an Angel for thy
Pains; now Sir Awdrew, what think of this?
Is not this better then your Doggril damned
Rhyme, all sound, no sense. This is new, and made
By a Wit on Wit, on Critic, ah these Critic
Wits are rare Fellows.

Sir For. To practice Surgery upon: To flout at the Decrees
Of Law, or Justice, to burlesque on Religion;
To make a Ballad out of David's Psalms, and
Turn old Hopkins Meeter into Nonsense.

Old Wine. Pish, you mistake me clearly.


Sir. For. Not a jot Sir, -- I Have known him carp upon the
Canticles, and call 'em Canting Lectures; Laugh at
A Pious Pastor that was blind, because he told 'em,
He could show a path to lead to happiness: Ah they
Are lewd Raskals; Lord, Lord, what will this
World come to?

Old Wine. To dust as it 'twas of old, but believe me Sir, your
Judgment gives too harsh a sensure of 'em.

Sir For. It may be so Sir, but pardon me Sir, I speak
My thoughts; I use not to dissemble, I love
Plain dealing -- Drawer bring to pay.

Old Wine. There Is nothing Sir, Fie Sir Formal -- put not
That forced expression on your Friend -- so small
A thing as this should not be spoke of.

Sir For. Well Sir, I know your temper, and will urge it no
Further; I Will go home and prepare my Wife and
Daughter for your Entertainment, pray be no
Stranger to my house, and let your Son come
Often, I shall expect him an hour hence, according
To your promise.

Old Wine. Sir, he shall only go home and change his habit,
And wait on you immediately --

Tim. a Complement
At parting -- de'e hear --

Small. Go Sir -- the last I taught you.


Tim. Sir, when I have imbellish'd my self with external accoutrements, fit to
be seen, and received by a person of your merit and grandeur, I shall not fail
to employ my internal endowments to deserve the honor to kiss the hand of your
fair Daughter.


Sir For. Very well Sir -- I apprehend your meaning, though your phrase be
somewhat odd -- my welcome shall return my answer to you* In the mean time I
take my leave. --


Exit Sir Form. Old Wine. So now lets home* I have commanded my Tailor to make
thee a Rich Suit Tim. Nay, thou shall want for nothing Boy, be but industrious.
And Mr. Smallwit, set him but forward in what he is begun; let me but hear that
he is thought a Wit, and plays the Critic handsomely; the Critic, methinks
the very word is modish.


Small. He shall do this, and more I Will warrant you Sir.


Old Wine. Rail at a Poets lines, and sift the meaning, especially if he be but
a dabbler, a novice in the art; then let him reign tyrannically, 'twill procure
Fame, whether he is right or no.


Small He has that knack already Sir, and fear not he will persevere.


Old Wine. Be sure thou do Boy -- but we waste the time, thou will be long a
dressing: Come let us in.


Exeunt. Enter Lady Ancient, Mrs. Penelope. Lady A. Sir Formal told you right
Daughter, you know not the tricks, nor the debauches of the Town: What Plots,
what secret Jugglings are abroad, therefore I say take heed: I have, I thank my
stars, been ever accounted of an immaculate Life and Conversation, and I would
have that Fame descend on you, which with such great discretion I have
purchased* but then you must deserve it.


Pen. Madam, I hope I shall, I think you yet never saw me guilty of any vice,
could give you cause to doubt my future virtue.


Lady A. Your Virtue -- no, I fear not that, 'twere a sin to imagine my blood
could e're rebel, Sir Formal too, though I mislike his starcht behavior and
opinion, was once a Virtuoso, and therefore think not I doubt your virtue; no,
it is your destiny I fear.


Pen. Your fears are fruitless Madam; I never was yet so wedded to my will, to
choose before a trial had made proof whether he did deserve it: Were I not sure
she knows nothing of my Love to Franck Amorous, this would a little startle me*


Aside. Lady A. I do believe thee, yet give me leave to fear:
Is it not seen, a Lady whose fame for breeding
And descent, is loudly spoken of; gets a toy in her head,
Marries her Footman, and gives the Flambeau for her Crest*
Another, charmed with the flatteries of some smooth tongued seducer,
Sells her honor, and whole race, to infamy,
Ruins her self; and lastly dies a Beggar.

Pen. These are sad Moralls Madam.


Lady A. But most true; when I was young, adorned with blooming
Beauty, for without vanity I could so term it, I
Was admired, su'd to often by many -- many
With Presents wooed me, many with Poetry, some
Would urge their merits, some their Fortunes:
Others would fight; and happy then was he that
Could procure a smile to grace his enterprise:
For I well knowing the power of my attractions,
Kept such a mean of favor 'twixt 'em all,
That none could boast his Fortune or despair:
It Is true, I sometimes longed for what they offered,
But with a trick I had, a cunning trick,
I kept it from their knowing; at last your Father,
Who then was held a man of rare endowments,
Though now they are abused by his Customs:
So took me with his 'haviour and good parts,
For he had excellent parts -- so that for his sake
I quitted all the rest.

Pen. And left them Willowes.


Lady A. Every man of 'em -- Therefore I say look through
The man you love: Observe his parts well,
Then view his Estate; for some there are have neither.

Pen. Neither Parts nor Estate, goodness defend me
From such a one! by your instructions Madam, I
Shall not doubt to guard my self from such
Imminent danger: Bless me, neither Parts nor Estate!

Lady A. Hush, here is your Father.


Enter Sir Formal. Sir. For. Sweet heart and Daughter, are you there?
That Is well, go presently to your Chamber and dress
Your self, here is a Gentleman coming to see you,
Go I say.

Pen. Shall I not know his name?


Sir For. No marry shall you not, let it suffice it is a good
Catholic name, and I approve of it,
No more questions, but obey me.

Pen. I shall Sir! -- this is certainly the new Suitor
He talked of, and heaven knows I am ill provided
For an Amor.

Sir For. Come sweet heart lets go in, for I have
A world of news to tell thee.

Lady A. But little good I fear, If there be a world on it


Sir. For. Thou Wilt find there is a great deal of good in it,
I seldom fail to miss of my designs,
Come in, and be partaker.

Exeunt. SCENE III. Chamber-back.
Enter Frank Amorous, and Betty. Bett. By ventring to bring you hither, I hope
Sir, you
Perceive that I am not unwilling to be ungrateful,
Especially having tasted your bounty in so liberal a manner.

Fran. You over-rate* the triste I have given you: Pray do
Not speak of it; -- Is this the Chamber?

Bett. This leads to hers -- have but a little patience,
With which I know Sir, I you are still provided.
I Will go and prepare her for your visit, In a more
Especial manner, because I would appear
Grateful to a person I have been so sensibly obliged to.

Fran. You speak what I should say, and make me blush,
I am so poor in thanks. Exit Betty.
This will in time make an excellent Bawd,
I find by her palled Rhetoric.
This profit is a powerful charm,
It turns and winds them into any form:
She Is coming up with the Lady, who if I find
But loves me, I have a blessing past all recompense.

Enter Penelope and Betty. Pen. This is the height of impudence, to bring a
man, a young man too into my Chamber without my knowledge.


Bett. Madam, he told me he must needs speak with you
About an important concern, and knowing your
Fathers hasty temper, was afraid to let him see him*

Pen. And was there no where to bring him to, but
My Chamber? No hole, or by Corner to make
Him do penance in for his insolence, but my
Apartment; you had best some other time
Shut him up into my Closet, till i am a Bed.

Fran. Well thought on i'gad Madam if my rude entrance.


Pen. Sir, I need no Apologies and excuses, and indeed considering it rightly,
although my behavior has been such, as not to give any one cause, or license
to intrude into my privacies; you are not so much to be blamed as she is.


Fran. Oh, nay it is well enough --


Aside. Pen. For you perhaps but followed your own inclination, and pursuance
of the affair you say you have, but that he should dare to do this.


Fran. Madam it was at my request.


Pen. At your request! it seems then she is your acquaintance.


Fran. No, 'faith Madam, not my acquaintance; for though there are some certain
seasons when all women are alike to me, yet for the most part my ambition soars
above the fruition of a Chambermaid.


Pen. Sir, the Character you give your self, I was sufficiently acquainted with
in the last visit you made me; I hope you come about the old affair, some love
Embassy from Bernard?


Fran. From Bernard Madam? ha, ha, ha, though once to do him a Courtesy, and as
a Friend I solicited his cause, I am not tied to do that Office: I take no
fees Madam, besides at present, Heaven be praised, I have other business;
business of my own, would you but be pleased to give me a hearing.


Pen. I Am glad of that: aside.
Now if it hit but right -- Sir you will oblige me
To impart it quickly, for I Am a little in have.

Frank. Venus for me then, now the Tale begins;
I saw the Letter you wrote to Bernard.

Pen. It may be so.


Frank. I saw also the Commendations you gave me there.


Pen. Suppose all this.


Frank. And thereby gather that. --


Pen. That, what?


Frank. Command your Woman hence, and I Will declare it.


Pen. Sure it is no secret.


Frank. Faith but it is -- a great one too.


Pen. Wait in the next room till I call for you. Exit Betty.
Now Sir be free in your Relation.

Frank. Why Madam, as I was saying before, I gather by your kind Character of
me to Bernard, that you are -- most desperately in love with me.


Pen. I, in love? -- what shall I do? -- my Blushes will betray me.


Frank. Yes Madam, and with me. Nay, do not mince the matter.
I find it by your Eyes, it must be so; you are deeply
Engaged that is certain; but have a good heart
Madam, I am not cruel, I Am of a melting nature;
You may new mould, and work me even as you please;
An easy yielding temper, I, Heaven knows.

Pen. It Is very likely Sir, -- yet sure 'twill hardly be my fate to put you to
the Test -- I Am in Love -- and with you.


Frank. Yes Madam with me, 'dsdeath is that so strange?


Pen. You had best persuade me to it.


Frank. Faith I am endeavoring it as fast as I can.


Pen. Now I perceive the vanity of your Sex; because a Lady perhaps
accidentally smiles upon you, or grants you an occasional Salute, you presently
think she is in love.


Frank. No; but when a Lady writes to a man she does not; and sends it by a
Gentleman; and in her Letter terms the said Gentleman with the terms of sweet
Mr. such a one, Dear Mr. such a one, Worthy Mr. A. and the like; what should a
man think, is not this Love? 'Gad it is ecstasy, mere ecstasy.


Pen. Common Civility will allow of praises, especially if we think our selves
obliged.


Frank. But praises with such attributes Madam, There Is the point. Praise is
the Friend of Love: And that Woman that praises a man's parts, undoubtedly
covets what she commends; as we extol that Beauty most we desire to enjoy.


Pen. And can you think, if I did ever love you, which assure your self I do
not, I could ever be brought to confess it, when you upbraid me thus; no, I
look upon you as a man unworthy -- base, and illnatur'd -- and perhaps unmanly
-- I Will curb him in a little, though my heart aches for it.


Frank. So, I looked for this -- this fretting has confirmed my Opinion -- it is
certain she loves me above measure; poor Soul! how her heart swells -- But
Madam:


Pen. I Will hear nothing -- tax me with a light Love Sir -- 'twas a word that I
must tell you ill becomes a stranger, nor can our small acquaintance.


Frank. Do but hear me.


Pen. It Is an affront, almost past all forgiveness;
With another 'twould be counted an Insolence,
Past hopes of reconciling -- but my too easy nature. --

Frank. So now she melts again, (this is the very
Quintessence of passion) -- aside.
I know your nature Excellent as your self;
And Madam, make me not unhappy in your
Displeasure, by a few flashy words; Heaven
Knows only the Overflows of a glad Tongue,
Proud to declare your virtues.

Pen. Yes by upbraiding me.


Frank. I upbraid thee! by Heaven I do not, and now,
(Since it must out) know that I love you, dote
On you, and dye till I enjoy you. Now
Have mercy upon me I beseech thee.

Pen. This passion you pretend to, is so short lived, that
The next fair object, I doubt not, will
Reduce it to somewhat newer, and more easy to your temper.

Frank. With other men perhaps it might -- but Madam,
I am the Eternal'st Lover, the most transported
Thing, I am like Chaff before a burning Glass, and
Every glance from your eye converts me into flame.

Pen. Your comfort will be, that you have but a short time
To be tormented.

Frank. Oh, to Eternity Madam; -- when I am absent from you, in
My Dreams, I shall hover over your Idea, and beget
Such an innumerable Quantity of Conceits and Fancies,
'Twould distract another.

Pen. No, not a Man that flies like a Hawk, at all Games,
As you do.

Frank. I Madam -- well, a lie must help me out.


aside. Enter Betty. Betty. O Madam! what shall we do? we are undone.


Pen. Why! what is the matter.


Betty. Slipping down Stairs to see what your Father was doing,
I saw him at the door receiving from a Footman a Letter.
Directed Sir, to you.

Frank. To me!


Betty. To you Sir; for hearing the Foot man affirm he saw you come in here,
and seeing your Father about to open it, I run and snatched it from him; and
came up, leaving him pursuing me with as much have as his Age or Gout would
permit him: but for Heavens sake use some means to hide this Gentleman; for
he will be here immediately.


Pen. What shall I do! I Am at my Wits end.


Frank. And so am I, pox on it how unluckie's this?


Pen. Stay, I Have hit of a device will certainly do,
If Betty, you play your part but well.

Betty. I Madam -- doubt not me, I Will do any thing to appear*
Serviceable to this worthy and bountiful Gentleman.

Frank. 'Gad I will be bountiful to thee indeed, if
Thou can but bring me well off now.

Betty. What is it good Madam?


Pen. Why this Sir, you must pretend to be her Brother,
Newly come from Travel; to which purpose talk of
The Customs of some foreign Countries,
And your excuse for snatching the Letter away,
Being for your Brother, will be more plausible.
I le to my Glass, and seem to be dressing my Head --
Hark, he is coming, be sure you do it handsomely.

Betty. I Will warrant you Madam; come Sir.


Frank. This will certainly do; well, thou art a witty Devil, I Will say that for
thee: I wonder whence this Letter should come, from some of my Mistresses
doubtless that want company: I Will not read it till I have more leisure, -- he
comes.


Sir For. within. Why Huswife, where are you? ha, are you crept into some
Corner, I Will fetch you out with a vengeance, a young baggage to dare to do this.

Enter Sir Formal. Ha, what is here? a Man! and in my Daughters Chamber?


Betty. My Brother Sir, newly returned from Travel;
Well, and are there such rare things in Rome, say you?

Frank. Beyond expression rare -- would I were there
For an hour.

aside. Sir For. But where is the Letter Mistress you snatched from me? did your
Brother bid you do that? hah!


Betty. No indeed Sir; but fearing you would look into the secrets of our
Family, which you conceive is dear to me, I took it of my own accord.


Sir For. Was the Letter yours Sir?


Frank. I must presume to own it.


Sir For. No presumption Sir, but pray from whence came it?


Frank. From Italy Sir, from a good Friend of mine; and intending to visit my
Sister, I bid the Porter bring it to me here.


Sir For. The Porter Sir, why I had it from a Footman.


Frank. 'dsdeath I shall spoil all.


Betty. But Sir he has formerly bin a Porter, though now he is preferred.


Sir For. Umph -- like enough.


Frank. Well said In Faith -- a Guiney more for that.


Betty. But Brother, you have not told me half enough of the rarities you have
seen in your Travels.


Sir For. I, come Sir, pray let us hear some of the wonders at Rome, and other
places, the story must needs be pleasing; pray make a brief description.


Frank. 'Zounds what shall I do now? for I know nothing of Rome but the name;
but 'tmay be he is as ignorant as I, and then I am warm enough -- Why Sir, as to
the Climate, it is much about the temper 'twas of old, hottish and dry, the
Houses largely built, and uniform; the people o^ diverse Complexions, and much
given to Ease, more indeed then to Devotion; a pleasant Country Sir, and for
the most part fruitful.


Sir For. It was when I was there; but it is so long since, that by my Faith I
have almost forgot it; well Sir, and how looks the Vatican? does he stand
stoutly still? and does he still triumph in his Age and Excellence?


Frank. The Vatican! what a Devil's that?


Betty. Now is he a pumping: Madam, it is a damned hard word, that I cannot help
him for my life.


Sir For. Does he still hold his Head above the rest?
And want no Succor, nor no Aid to help him;
He has bin an old Standard, but a brave one.

Frank. This must certainly be the Pope he means, and calls by some
Nickname.

aside. Sir For. Come pray Sir tell me, you're too slow in answer.


Betty. Now do I sweat for him.


Frank. I'gad I Will venture on it: why faith he does very bravely still, and is
very much renowned in Italy; but there has lately happened a disaster.


Sir For. What Is that good Sir?


Frank. Why Sir he has within these few Months bin troubled with a violent --
and very damnable Fit of the Stone.


Sir For. What say you Sir?


Frank. And hardly escaped with life Sir, I assure you.


Sir For. Ha, ha, ha, the Vatican troubled with the Stone: madness in the height;
but hark you Sir, perhaps you mean, there has bin a Hurricane of late that has
damaged some of her Turret, and overthrown some superfluous Stones, whose
strength, age had decayed: mean you not so Sir?


Frank. So Sir, yes Sir, what a Devil should I mean else: well I Will make have
away, least he should ask any more questions. Sir, Your humble Servant: Dear
Sister, adieu; I Will wait on you again at my next leisure, Vatican with a Pox, a
Curse of my dull pate.


Exit. Sir For. A witty understanding man I Will warrant him; how wittily he
Joak'd upon me. Come Daughter lets go down, by this the Gentleman is ready to
come, who, I Will assure you, is first, accomplished with parts to your desire,
and not mine; Secondly, with wealth to my desire, though not yours, and I
command you to use him well, for believe,

No blessing, but a discontent she owns,
Whose want of duty reaps her Fathers frowns.

ACT. III.
Scene I. Covent Garden.
Enter Frank Amorous. Frank. SO, I have got away with much ado; Impudence was,
I must needs confess, my great Friend, or else I had never bin able to hold out
against that Eternal old Fellow, who would have plied me with new questions;
but now to my Letter, I hope it is from some new rare Creature in Love with me,
and sent this to point an assignation. reads. Since you have bin base and
treacherous, you ought in reason to expect the reward of baseness and falsehood;
know therefore, that being betrayed, me and my injury's insupportable, till
revenged: I desire you to meet me in the plain Field below Lambs-Conduit, about
6 this Afternoon, without a second, to render satisfaction; and assure your
self, though your treachery has made me miserable, my action shall speak me
brave and generous,

Bernard.




Was ever hopes so frustrated? this is a Challenge, and of my Conscience if I
should survey my self thoroughly, I am not provided for it. This damned Custom of
Wenching has made me as damned a Coward, as a Bully that fights for hire, (
meet me in the plain Field below Lambs-Conduit) and 'gad I will meet thee
there, come what will, since I am invited. I had Courage once, and have yet I
hope some grains: if I am killed I have the fewer sins to answer for; and if I
live, I Have the longer time to repent; at 6 a Clock, and now it wants of 5,
well, I Will first go dispatch a small affair, and then have at him.

Men only live to further fate's design,
'Twas Plato's moral once, but now it is mine.

Exit Scene II.
Enter Sir Formal, Lady Ancient, Tim, Smallwit, Betty, Mrs. Penelope Sir For.
Once more you are welcome Sir; and pray excuse me if I am not altogether
Ceremonious as some, that love the mode, and cherish vanity: my humor is my
Law Sir, therefore pray excuse me. But where is your Father?


Tim. Sir, he is gone to walk in the Fields, the old Gentleman loves Air.


Lady An. Sir, though Sir Formal hold it unnecessary to express the welcome of
a person of merit in descent, and modish phrases; yet there are some who
understand the behavior fit to be used on such Occasions: Sir! your presence
is an honor to our House.


Tim. Madam, Sir Formal knows that I desire to appear no stranger; I have, I
thank my Fortune, so much knowledge of the Town, not to let modesty obscure
good meaning; I know what is Courtly Madam, and approve it.


Enter a Lawyer with a Deed. Law. Sir, here is the Deed: wilt please you to
peruse it?


Sir For. I come, Sweetheart, prithee thy Ear a little.


Pen. Indeed Sir I think it very fine.


They read. Tim. Madam, it would have bin so, had it bin well ordered; but this
damned Son of a Whore Tailor had made it too narrow in the Breast; the Buttons
are not half big enough neither.


Pen. Methinks they are very well Sir; however, your grateful person, were they
ill made, would make them Comely.


Tim. Why 'faith Madam as you say, a graceful person does much, very much, the
well spreading of the Shoulders, and straightness, adds much to the shape; and
yet without the posture, the modish August Garb, and Courtly mean, the shape is
nothing.


Pen. What an Idol does this fellow make of himself?


Tim. Madam take it from me, it is a hard matter to see a man demean himself
with Judgment, the Town's a strenger to it -- how do I do this? ha --


aside. Small. Exceeding well Sir, but forward.


Tim. There are indeed a sort of empty fellows, that have pretenses that would
seem to know the Essence of good Carriage* but search them thoroughly, -- far,
far short on it.


Pen. Some such there are indeed Sir, but others that though they have not that
Modish mean you speak of, may have Wit which may supply the others want.


Tim. Wit, Madam, -- why there is a famine on it; but now alas the times are
Metamorphos'd, there is no wit stirring.


Pen. Sir, methinks there has been a great many very witty Plays come out
lately.


Tim. Ah, -- dull, dull, Madam, -- dull to the tenth degree, nothing but prolix
phrases, and bombast, hardly a word of sense, or fancy in 'em; our Poets now
take it from me Madam, have nothing of conceit: One writes of Rural Wit bubbled
by Carmen, another of Enchantments, Bears and Monsters, and such a coil they
keep with their new fancies, that wit and sense are lost, quite lost,
abolish't; nothing remains but the mere dregs of fancy; you may believe me
Madam.


Pen. Sir, I Will not presume to question it, or doubt the truth of what you say,
though I confess it seems a little strange.


Tim. I grant it may Madam, and by the way let me tell you, another would not
have found it out; I have I thank my stars, some certain gifts which others
want; it is as Providence decree's, every one has his Talent.


Pen. But not alike, I hope Sir.


Tim. No Madam, I hope to see that: the truth is, I love to be free, and
perhaps sityrical in my opinion, and I doubt not but you are acquainted with
the mode, and know what becomes a Gentleman; for faith should we not sometimes
dive into the secrets of Wit, and reprove mistakes, these Rascally Poets would
grow insolent, there would be no living for 'em, we should be so perpetually
tormented with Lampoons; but 'gad I cramp the Rascals.


Pen. Would thou were crampt and gagged, so I were rid of thee.


Tim. You Would laugh to see how afraid they are of me, to'ther day Madam, I went
to see a Play, and sitting amongst the rest in the Wits Corner; I know not
what, but somewhat I mislik't, and raised a hiss, which presently was seconded
by all the Wits: But to see the poor fellow the Poet, peep out between the
Scenes, and shake his empty head, to see his Ten Months labor so rewarded,
would have made you die with Laughter, ha, ha, ha.


Small. In this Madam, you rather condemn my Judgment, then excuse your want of
merit. But give me leave to tell you, if I have any Wit, you are a woman of
great parts. Do you see that Gentleman?


Bett. Yes Sir, methinks a man of Excellent good Parts.


Small. He is so, yet this -- this Modish Gallant that is now so brisk and
ayrie, did I within these three days draw out of a lump of ignorance, a
wretched lump, a thing of nothing mould, stamped and framed him as you see, and
of a Coxcomb, changd'd him to a Courtier, a Modish fellow, and the Son of
Fortune -- Sir, your Verses, you forget that --


Tim. Hush, I warrant thee -- Madam, to let you see, that what I speak is
Reason, you shall your self be judge; I have a Copy of Verses here, given me by
one of the Poets, who desired my opinion of 'em -- ah, here they are Madam --
I Will read 'em to you -- hum, it is an Encomium on his Mistress. Best of thy Sex,
and brighter then the Moon
At her full Glory, or the Sun at Noon:
Sweet as a bed of Roses, far above*
All that ever yet pretend to Love.
For thou appear'st, as if thou would persuade
Men to believe, for thee, Love first was made.
Or that the bliss of nature should contest
With the delightful Lodging of thy breast.
Zealots release the blessings heapt above
Of lasting Raptures, and immortal Love.
But Jove, and all his Crowd of joys should be
Dispis'd and slighted for a taste of thee.


This and a great deal more such stuff is here, such -- much -- 'gad I am even
sick to read it.


Pen. Methinks they are very well Sir, only a little too full of rapture, and
flattery -- but that may be born withal.


Tim. Well Madam, I see your design, ha, ha, ha, to bantor the poor fellow: --
but -- 'twon't do, what answer do you think I made, -- what de'e think I did
with them?


Pen. Why, I suppose Sir, you spoke indifferently, and the less critically
because you intended to encourage him.


Tim. Encourage him? 'dsdeath encourage a Poet, I Would sooner do it to a Cutpurse,
and more good I shall get by him -- no Madam, I damned it -- damned it to the
Center.


Pen. But Sir, you had no reason for it, the verses did not deserve it.


Tim. Pish -- that is no matter, it quelled the Rascals hopes, why should I
have encouraged him, and praised what he had writ, it is ten to one within this
twelve months, he would have writ a Play, and made a Character of me, but 'gad
I dash't his hopes, his Muse, and he will hardly be reconciled this month
through the fright I put him in.


Pen. Well, this is the most intolerable Fop, that ever I saw, there is no
enduring him.


Aside. Sir For. And let me have that Manor too incerted as a Covenant for
repairs, and fail not on it tomorrow.

Exit Lawyer: Pray Sir, give your excuse, it is only a little parcel of Land
which I determine for my Daughters Jointure -- but come lets in to Dinner, by
this time it is ready -- and once more welcome to my house.


Small. I am too poor in thanks.


Whispers Tim. Tim. I am too poor in thanks Sir; softly you Rogue --


Sir For. Ah not poor in any thing, good Mr. Winelove, 'faith I do not like it
-- but come, no Ceremony I beseech you, but to Dinner.


Exeunt. SCENE III. Landscape.
Enter Bernard and Frank to Fight. Ber. The cause of my quarrel Sir, you cannot
be ignorant of, knowing who I am, and how you have betrayed me.


Fran. My answer lies in this, not in my words, come, come, you are too tedious.


Ber. O this shows your courage Sir, but believe you shall have sighting work
enough e're I kill ye, as certainly I shall before we part.


Frank. Why, then the Surgeon's paid Sir, come we lose time; then once more at
you Sir.


Enter Winelove Senior. Old Wine. How now what is here, Swords drawn and
Fighting; ah, that my Tim. were here now, to put in for a third man, but I Will
try what I can do to part 'em -- Gentlemen hold, hold, you have fought enough,
hold, hold, I say.


Draws and goes to part 'em. Fran. Hark Reverend Sir, 'twill become your
gravity to retire a while, and not disturb us, least that portly shape of yours
be discommoded -- pox on him, h'as given me another thinking while.


Old Wine. Faith he says true, I was too rash, well Gentlemen, since you will
have it so, fight it out bravely, and I Will stand by, and see fair play on both
sides.


Fran. You see your fortune Sir.


Ber. is disarmed. Ber. Yes, and contemned it, and my life too, seeing it is at
thy mercy.


Fran. You will do well to cherish it, for all that Sir.


Old Wine. A brave fellow this, and I Will warrant a right Courtier, he has the
true way on it, now would I give twenty pound my Tim. were here.


Ber. Ah Sir, to insult I know, is Customary.


Fran. To insult? -- to let thee see how far I am from it, there, there is thy
Sword again, and give me thy hand, I could wish I could as easily give back thy
Mistress; but our Stars would have it otherwise; thou know we cannot appoint
our own destinies; besides thou have another Mistress, and two at once is too
much in reason for any one man.


Ber. It Is true, I have another Mistress perhaps fairer then 'tother, whom I
intend to visit as soon as this hurt Arm is dressed; but what excuses can you
bring from that?


Fran. Why, 'faith not many -- but do hear, shall I carry commendations from
thee to her too, hah? -- Prithee let me.


Ber. No, no, Sir, my own Rhetoric henceforth shall serve, but to let you see
I have a sense of generosity, as well as baseness, I Will quit the place, and
henceforth do as my honor shall direct me, and not passion, and if there be a
way for friendship left, I Will find it, if not, it is but adventring another
skirmish, and then perhaps I shall be as loath to take a ^ife, as you to give
it.


Exeunt. Old Wine. By Juno, that is a brave fellow too -- ah, he is gone Sir, you
have sent him packing -- 'faith you fought it bravely, I never saw a Duel
fought with better Judgment; are you not hurt Sir?


Fran. I think not, I feel nothing.


Old Wine. Your Antagonist, believe me, was a shrewd fellow, and says once I
thought would have damaged you, your point being born too low, but you
recovered it.


Fran. I Sir, I did so.


Old Wine. And bravely Sir, you did in doing so; when I was of your years I had
some fame myself for Duelling -- ah, I have seen the time when I have come into
the field with Courage, traversed my ground, fought and passado'd briskly, and
as simply as I now stand here, been victor.


Fran. It Is very likely Sir, this is the most impertinent old fellow I ever
saw, he will enter into discourse whether I will or no -- Sir, your Servant, I
am a little in haste.


Old Wine. Pray Sir, a word more, I have a little business with you.


Fran. Umph -- I am of late grown a man of more business then ever I designed
myself. Pray Sir, what is it quickly? for some present Occasions call me hence.


Old Wine. Shall I then Sir, desire the favor of you.


Fran. Sir, Any favor, be but brief, and tell it.


Old Wine. I shall Sir, it is a small matter, a very small matter, only to know
whether you are indebted to any one, or to be more plain, whether you owe any
money?


Fran. Money Sir? Sir, that is a strange question, nor know I at present how to
resolve it.


Old Wine. Doubt not my meaning good, nor conceit I question this to draw you
into danger, 'faith I do not.


Fran. Why then Sir, know I am a Gentleman, and have means large enough to pay
my debts if they were ten times doubled, methinks you might have guessed that
by my outside without questioning. What is it.


Old Wine. Now I come to you Sir -- I have a Son my Heir, for whom I have these
5 and 50 years been scraping an Estate, he now is grown up to maturity, and
'faith to speak freely of him, is a youth of rare endowments, and pregnant Wit
Sir, and admired Fancy.


Frank. Sir, being your Son, it were a sin to doubt it.


Old Wine. Now Sir, I see you are a man of parts, one that the Town takes
notice of; you can talk well, fight well, sing well, Court your Miss in Rhyme,
with any Modish Bully of 'em all.


Franck. Ah, your servant Sir, not I 'faith.


Old Wine. Sir, I have heard you famed -- talked of, and wondered at, Constables
fear you, Bailiffs creep into Corners, and our witty dabbling Poets of the
time, cry, yonder is Amorous, plague of his Criticisms.


Frank. You are pleased to lay this on me Sir, -- what a devil will this come
to?


Old Wine. All this confessed, then he that has the honor to keep you company,
must needs be very happy; and Sir, as my Son is the happiness of my Life, and
his well doing my chief comfort, it is my earnest request to you.


Frank. To be his Tutor, and teach him the Town Virtues.


Old Wine. No Sir, not his Tutor, far be that dishonor from you, besides, he
has a Tutor already, a pretty quibbling Fellow that has taught him very well:
But Sir, to be of your acquaintance, would make him for ever -- and Sir, to
gratify you, command my Estate. You are a young man, and perhaps by
extraordinary Expenses, are sometimes out of Money, I have some Bags to spare
Sir, pray make use of 'em: My Money, Houses, Land, Estate is at your Service,
be but acquainted with my Son Sir.


Frank. This is unlookt for Fortune -- But it is such a good natured old Fool,
that methinks it is pity to bubble him. Sir, for your proffers, I return you
thanks, and assure your self what lies in me to serve you, or your Son, shall
be done without further Ceremony.


Old Wine. Why, I thank you -- heartily thank you. -- Tim. thou art made for
ever. Sir, he is hard by at a Friends house of mine, whose Daughter he is to
marry.


Frank. Hard by, say you Sir? pray who is it.


Old Wine. An old acquaintance Sir, one Sir Formal Ancient.


Frank. Sir Formal Ancient.


Old Wine. Ay Sir, and his Daughter my Strippling is to marry, it is already
concluded on.


Frank. My Mistress by Heaven, and I consider on it, this must needs be the
Suitor she told me of: This was a happy discovery, for I question not but I
shall go near to forbid the banes. Sir, I Will wait on you thither.


Old Wine. With all my heart Sir, I was just going to request it of you. So I
shall work him rarely.

Exit Frank. He is certainly the fit'st Companionin the world for Tim; he knows
the Town tricks, all the humors, fashions, has all new Songs by heart, knows
with a grace how to accost a Wench, Strut and talk Bawdy, and then he looks
with so composed a shape, as he were only made to be a Wencher. -- Old Peter
rest contented, all is now finished, thy Son shall be aspark, and thou be happy,
happy as thou could wish: well, I Will follow him, and once more refresh his
memory, repeat his promise.

Then triumph in my Fate; this being done,
And boast the best of Critics was my Son.

ACT. IV.
Scene I. Another Chamber.
Enter Bernard, Lucretia. Luc. WIll you not tell me who you fought with;
methinks if you had any Love for me, you should not let me ask so often,
prithee tell.


Ber. Why, I tell thee I do not know him, he is one that belongs to the Town; a
wretched Fellow that hardly knows himself, and I suppose was one hired to
challenge me.


Luc. In some Ladies Quarrel, I Will lay my life.


Ber. Pish, What Lady? I know no Lady, nor like none but thee; Come, Come, this
fruitless Jealousie's still to be avoided, assure thy self I Love thee, only
thee.


Luc. Why, are you then so hasty to be gone? You never come to Visit me, but as
if your minutes came too fast upon you.


Ber. You rack your self with doubts, and think I slight you, when it is my
chief endeavor how to please you; but for my absence at present, it is required
on earnest business, and believe nothing but earnest business, great and
profitable could take me from thee; but have a little Patience, and I Will be
with thee instantly.


Exit. Luc. Well, there must be something more in the wind then he is willing
to acknowledge; but at leisure I will wheedle the secret from him, and then
provide for my self as occasion serves.


Exit. Scene II. Hall.
Enter Tim, Lady Ancient, Penelope, Betty. Lady A. Sir, though I see in your
Phrases a great deal of Wit and Gallantry; yet if I may presume, you are too
poynant, your fancy flows to so extreme a deluge, as 'twould o'rewhelm the
Age: You look Sir, too sharply into the nature of things, and are, I doubt not,
a great Philosopher; but Sir --


Tim. A Philosopher -- what a pox is that? -- Now this Rogue my Tutor has left
me alone, and I shall be mir'd immediately -- but what Madam?


Lady A. But in truth Sir I think you are a little too Satirical in your
Opinion, and though it is probable you have read Alexander Ross: Who let me tell
you was a great Wit, as any in his time, according to my simple Judgment, a
very Excellent Fellow, -- What think you of him Sir?


Tim. Of who Madam?


Lady A. Alexander Ross.


Tim. Alexander Ross, the Devil Ross him, I Am sure he broke my head once at
School -- a very Shrewd Fellow indeed, and to my knowledge a great Scholar, I
have tried him often.


Pen. The Fool has come off a great deal better then I expected.


Lady A. Yet though he was a Critic, and a Scholar, he gave all public
notice, Printed his Books Cum Privilegio, and gave convincing Reasons for what
he did: And Sir, would you do so?


Tim. Reasons Madam, alas you wroung your Judgment; you talk at the old rate of
fifty three, when the World flourisht in its ignorance, when Wealthy Blades
with Velvet Cloakes through lined, Booted and Spurred, and almost hid in Ruff;
would Argue out whole hours with Sense and Reasons, and in Discourse pretend to
expound it too: But now the Worlds grown wise, its grown out of fashion, few
men give Reasons for what they do, at least few Witty men.


Lady A. Then Sir, since you have no Reasons for your Criticisms, good Nature
should oblige you to be favorable.


Tim. Who I! -- 'faith Madam, I am, -- for were I not favorable, many a poor
Fellow about Town would be undone.


Pen. It Is well Impudence is Modish, thou were else to my knowledge a very
miserable Fellow. Prithee Betty, what think thou of him.


Bett. Truly Madam, he suffers in my Censure equal with your Ladyships, and I
think him to be a bundle of Vanity; otherwise called a Fop in Extraordinary.


Tim. Does your Ladyship delight in Songs? I Will sing you one or two of mine own
Penning.


Lady A. Oh! extremely Sir, and now I think on it, I had a Song given me
yesterday of a Kinsman of mine is Penning, Betty can sing it; you shall hear it
Sir, and I pray you give me your Opinion of it.


Tim. With all my heart Madam, and afterward you shall hear mine.


Lady A. The Tune was Set Sir, by a very good Friend of his, one Mr. Smith, and
late Composer to the Kings Playhouse.


Tim. Who Bob! a very Excellent Fellow Madam, believe me, and one the Town
Misses very much to my knowledge; for now a days what ever is the matter with
'em, I know not, but we have such Tunes, such lowsy lamentable Tunes, that
'twould make one forswear all Music, Maiden Fair, or the the Kings Delight,
are incomparable to some of these we have now. It Is true the Theater Music is
something tolerable, because it is for their Credit; but otherwise --


Lady A. Sir, I see you are a great Judge; -- Come Betty the Song: Pray observe
Sir, it is a little wanton, that is all the fault I know in it.


SONG.
^ I found my Caelia one night undrest,
a precious Banquet for languishing ^ Love,
the charming object a flame increast,
which never, ah never, till ^ then I proved;
her delicate skin, and starry eye,
made me a secret bliss ^ pursue,
but with her soft hand she still put it by, and cried,
Fie Amintor ^ what would you do?
2.
Her words and blushes so fired my heart,
I pulled her to me and clasped her around,
And though with Cunning she played her part:
Yet fainter, and fainter, her threats I found.
But when I least thought on her, least I desired,
My Love a forbearance should allow,
A touch of her hand, my heart so inspired:
My Passion was melted I know not how.
3.
Which when fair Caelia's quick eye perceived,
And found by my calmness my passions decay,
Her Fate she inwardly seemed to grieve:
That Fooled her, and Cooled her so base away.
She sighed and looked pale to see me dull,
And in her heart, this oath she swore,
She never again would slight an address:
Nor the Critical minute refuse no more.
Lady A. Now Sir, how de'e like it?


Tim. 'Ifaith a pretty Song, and a great deal of Wit in it, but I am confident
it will not take.


Lady A. Why Sir?


Tim. It wants a little more of that same in it: Those wrappings in Clean
Linen, it should have appeared naked as 'twas meant; To be plain with you
Madam, nothing but Bawdy -- downright, -- rank Bawdy will do now, nor hardly
that neither, if it have not some new meaning.


Lady A. Fie Sir, this is too Satirical.


Tim. Not at all Madam -- it is a lewd Age, a very Pocky, Pitiful, Age, and must
be abused, or know no Reformation.


Enter Sir Formal, Old Wine, Frank. Sir For. Here he is Sir, my Wife and
Daughter with him, close at the business Sir you see he looses no time.


Old Wine. This Sir is he, -- Tim, pray know this Gentleman, a worthy person,
and one has done me great Honor.


The Congee. Frank. 'Dsheart this is the Fool I bubbled one day at Spearings, I
must smooth him with a Complement for fear of discovery.


Aside. Tim. Sir, if I mistake not, I had the honor to see you once before,
but now am proud that Fortune has been so kind as to grace me with this second
interview.


Frank. Sir, 'twas a Happiness I confess unexpected that brought me into your
Company, and this second chance has confirmed the Obligation, and made me
infinitely a debtor.


Pen. Franck Amorous! and in the Company of my Father! this amazes me: Betty,
you must follow still the old humor, and call him Brother, Last my Father
should discover our last Plot.


Bett. O Madam never fear his discovery, I Will warrant you I Will secure him --
dear Brother --


Frank. Sister, how do thou? I have not seen thee a good while, -- but
business must excuse all.


Tim. Is she your Sister Sir?


Frank. Yes Sir, and the best of 'em I Will assure you -- but mum, more of that
hereafter.


Tim. Well Sir, I come indifferent near you, for this Lady here is to be my
Wife.


Frank. Say you so Sir? nay then on your account I may presume to Salute her,
without further Ceremony;

Kisses her. Your Wife say you Sir?


Tim. Faith even so Sir, the Sisters have decreed it.


Frank. You're happy Sir, but pray, how many Months Courtship was your purchase?


Tim. Though this seems to be a Modish Fellow, yet by his Discourse, he seems
to know little of the Town Courtship. Sir, -- Why I never Courted her in my
life, Damme, methinks a man's Parts and Perfections may do it without Courtship:
But Sir, I see you are ignorant of the new way of address.


Frank. I am in troth Sir.


Old Wine. Tim, come hither.


They Whisper. Frank. Did I not know your Judgment, and this Fellows Vanity* I
should fear him as a Rival, but so much Foppery has cleared my doubts, and
given me cause, rather to pity then hate him.


Pen. I know not what it is to pity him, but I am sure I hate him; his
Impertinence has made me sick, -- these two hours have I been in Purgatory.


Frank. Nay, it is the verriest Puppy -- Madam, shall I? --


Pen. No, no, hang him, he is below a beating.


Old Wine. See, he points at thee.


Tim. Who, pox, he is entering into Commendation of me, or one mischief or other,
now it is ten to one but I shall suffer by his Bedridden Genius.


Small. Oh! oh! oh!


Within. Sir For. How now! what voice is that?


Enter Smallwit, his head bound -- Oh, oh. Tim. Hah -- my Tutor -- abused thus
-- 'Zounds, who has done this? I Will be the death of him, a Dog, Rascal,
Villain, Son of a Whore, I Will murder him, he shall not live, abuse my Tutor
thus, a Rogue, a Dog; 'dsdeath I Will cut him to Pieces; let me go.


Lady A, Good Sir, be patient till we know the Accident.


Tim. Father, hold me fast, for by Heaven your ignorance had like to have
dishonored me.


Sir For. The Pericranium's safe, there is no great harm done; but by what
Accident came it? pray be brief.


Tim. No matter how Sir, 'dsdeath let me find the Rogue.


Old Wine. Nay Son, Son -- good Son --


Small. Why Sir, coming through Long-Acre, I chanced to see a very hansom Lady
stand in a Bellcony, at which object my Faculties being alarmed, I stood an
indifferent while to view her; when presently comes out of the house a
Gentleman, and asked me what I star'd at -- I told him at the Lady: Sirrah
says he, (and swore) who are you -- I thinking that would be pleasing, told
who I was; and further, informed him I belonged to you, and what Office I was
employed in: when he heard this, he called me Son of a Whore, drew upon me, and
with the Hilt of his Sword, broke my head a cross, and so surrounded by a crowd
of people left me.


Frank. A very barbarous thing 'ifaith, broke thy head a Cross, 'twas too much
a Conscience.


Sir For. I Will warrant some Papish, or other that owed him a Spite: Do thou
not know his name?


Small. Yes, I understood by some that stood by, that his name was Bernard.


Sir For. Bernard, was it he? I know him Sir, a Rascal, a Cavaliering Vagabond
that hates our party: he was once a Suitor to my Daughter, but I casheer'd him
quickly; alas a broken head, it is nothing with him, it is a wonder he had not
killed thee; had I been there he had pepperd me; of my conscience 'h^s maimed a
Regiment of Roundheads.


Tim. No one to affront thus, but my Tutor -- talk no more on it, he shall not
live -- I Will instantly go and challenge him.


Old Wine. And so thou shall Boy, and I Will be thy second rather then fail: Let
this Pass!


Sir For. Fie, fie, consider better first.


Lady A. Come Sir, go in with me, I Have an excellent Balsome of my own making,
which I Am sure in few hours will heal up the Orisice.


Exit Small. Lady A. Pen. Yonder has Amorous been this quarter of an hour
musing and muttering to himself -- Prithee get behind him, and listen what he
says.


Frank. Bernard did he say! The Lady he talked of in the Balcony, is undoubtedly
Bernards Mistress, whom with such care he concealed over against the Rose.
I'gad the hopes of beguiling him of this second Mistress is so sweet, that I am
not able to resist it, I must see her.


Bett. Oh happy discovery -- who would ha thought this had been in him -- well,
the whole race of men are deceivers, exemplary in this inconstant wretch: But
my Lady shall know it instantly.


Tim. You may let me go now; I begin to cool -- Pox on it, I Have considered now,
it is beneath me to fight him on this quarrel; had it been my own quarrel, and
about a Wench, though 'twere an Orange Wench, I would have pinckt the Rascal,
but seeing it is as it is, my Tutor shall Lampoon him, and there is an end on it.


Frank. Sir, leave the sequel of this affair to me, I know the man better then
you imagine; and assure your self he shall render satisfaction as shall
countervail the Affront, for the pursuance of which, I take my leave. And hark
a word more, forbear addresses to that Lady till I see you next. There Is Plots,
Jugglings abroad; I Will tell you more anon: My Sister neither is not as she
seems, but time will discover all, six thousand pound is Money Sir: See they
observe us; I Will take my leave, the humblest of your Servants -- So this I see
has so amazed him, that he will be fearful to proceed further, till he speak with
me: but now to my new adventure -- I Am almost mad to see her.


Tim. Umh -- there is something more in this then I well understand, but at
night I shall know all.


Sir For. Come Mr. Winelove, pray walk in with me, accept a Glass of my
March-Beer, old hearty Liqour Sir, and good to nourish, pray walk in.


Old Wine. With all my heart Sir Formal, Tim, come follow me.


Exeunt Omnes praeter Penelope and Betty. Bett. No Madam, it is infallibly so;
you may see by his hasty going away how constant he is.


Pen. This Action of his has vexed me extremely, for if he ramble thus already,
what would he do if I should ever happen to marry him.


Bett. Ay Madam, when as they say he is the Husband of your bosom, the firm
supplier of your Necessities, when you are bone of his bone, and for ever one
flesh, then -- to have what so deeply you loved snatched from you by a Suburb
sinner that sues for hire, in truth Madam is intolerable, and were it my self
I could never endure it.


Pen. Did thou hear him distinctly? Methinks I am very loath to believe it,
I always thought him constant, and Betty thou had a good opinion of him
once too.


Bett. In truth I had Madam, I thought him exquisite, and a man of good Parts;
but since I find him false, I assure you I hate an inconstant Fellow: O fie,
indeed he is very odious to me.


Pen. But Prithee tell me, what said he?


Bett. Why Madam, amongst a Crowd of words, which muttringly expressed his Joy, I
heard him say aloud, that the hopes of beguiling Bernard of this second
Mistress was so sweet, that he was not able to resist it.


Pen. It Is so -- he is false, nay what is worse, he triumphs in his falsehood,
but I am resolved to ^it him, though my poor heart suffers for it: It Is well my
love is not so passionate, as some who six their thoughts on such base
wretches. If it were, I see my destiny -- inconstant Frank adieu -- I Am now my
self again -- Betty, get me Ink and Paper in my Closet.

Exit Betty. I Will presently write to Bernard, who perhaps dispaires of
regaining my affection, but the kind expressions in my Letter shall thaw his
frozen hopes, and make him once more mine, -- appoint him to meet me in the
Park, whither Amorous I Am sure will bring Lucia, if he designs an
assignation: If I find him false, my choice is Bernard; if not, my doubt will
augment my future Love, and make my Fate more happy --


Exit. Enter Betty. Bett. She Is gone to Write, and now I am alone, let me
consider a little of my own affairs: Franck Amorous's last words, if well
understood, and quaintly managed, may prove greatly to my advantage; for I
heard him tell the young Squire, I was his Sister, and the best of of 'um;
talked of 6000 l and the Lord knows what, as if I were some vast unbounded
Fortune, that lived disguised for my security: This Plot followed closely, must
needs prove advantageous: For as I past by the door, I saw the Fop Leer at me,
and make a Congee, as if he had already marked me out for his Addresses: Well,
if I am by the Nick name of Sister* cheated into fifteen hundred a year, it is
the only way to make me a Lady, that I know; and Heaven knows how agreeable
that Title is to me, here he comes -- he has followed me hither to speak in
private, -- and I am resolved to be prepared for him.


Enter Tim. Tim. Yonder she is, it must be as he told me -- her very look's too
stately for a Chambermaid -- ha, have they tricks? I find I shall out trick um
-- I Will accost her, and try if she will discover.


Bett. He Is coming, now for a studied speech --


Fim. A very pretty Room this Madam -- good Hangings, and well contrived.


Bett. Madam, that very word is comfortable, it is indeed Sir, now very happy
in Luster, receiving from your presence its greatest Ornament, but else a very
poor appartment, and far unworthy your notice.


Tim. Ah Madam, you do me too much honor, -- Luster from me, alas no -- I Am
clouded, I make no show in the World, blemitht, disguised, I love no noise nor
tumult, and some there are, who shall be nameless, that follow my example.
*This touches her.


Bett. What, walk disguised? pray who are they?


Tim. Persons of Quality, who think it sit to shade their Birth and Fortunes,
but let that pass -- your Brother Madam, by Heaven is a very brave Fellow, and
one that has done me many signal favors, and whoso'er defames him, lies in's
throat, is a Son of a Whore, a Dog, and Poultroon, and shall be Carbonado'd for
your sake; next for his own.


Bett. For mine, alas Sir, indeed you degrade your self.


Tim. Secrets will out at last Madam, the Sun cannot be long clouded.


Bett. Sir, this is too mistical for so barren an apprehension as mine is.


Tim. Madam, you may conceal it how you please; but your Brother has done me
the honor to impart a Secret to me.


Bett. A Secret Sir! -- for Heavens sake, of me, or my Lady?


Tim. Your Lady -- ha, ha, ha, -- who is that -- no, no, that will not pass: I have
a piercing eye, it may be a foreseeing one.


Bett. What do ye foresee Sir?


Tim. Where a great Fortune lies: Nay I can tell too whether 5000 l. or 15
Groats -- your Lady -- ha, ha, ha, hark Madam, deal freely with me -- is she
not your Chambermaid? I suppose 'twill come to that at last.


Bett. O sye, no indeed Sir, but I see my Brother has been too talkative of my
concerns: Yet this committing it to the bosom of a person of so much merit and
worth, as your actions sufficiently demonstrate you to be, has in some measure
released my doubt, I well knowing the extraordinary Perfections Heaven has
bestowed on you, especially in concealing the secret of a person extremely
sensible of Fortunes bounty, in permitting the honor to be enrolled among the
the number of your admirers.


Tim. Madam, your commands can make me dumb, if this had come from a man now:
what a rare speech was here to have criticis'd upon, but I am glad I have
discovered her Quality.


Pen. within, Betty, where are you?


Tim. Who Is that?


Bett Sir Formalls Daughter Sir.


Tim. Methinks Sir Formalls Daughter's a little too familiar, though with one
of your Quality.


Bett. It Is as I please to have it Sir, for a time: Hark she is coming, and it is
not fit she sees this Interview; therefore* Sir* I must beg you to retire, and
leave the pursuance of this affair to a fitter opportunity, always remembering
that your secresy will oblige me; for were my Qualities published, I could never
rest free from the impertinent Addresses of the Town Fops, and that was indeed
the reason.


Tim. Of your disguising your self into a Chambermaid, nay never blush, it must
be so.


Bett. Well indeed Sir, you have the winningst way with you.


Pen. Within, Why Betty, what are you doing of?


Tim. Again, a very impudent woman, this Madam, as ever I saw; but the truth
is, I ever thought her a woman of slender Discretion, but least as you say, she
should come and disturb us, I Will take my leave, and be only happy in
contemplating your perfection, being deprived of the Blessing of your Society.


Exit. Bett. The Blessing of my Society -- ha, ha, ha, was ever such a Fop
seen, he runs faster into the snare then I would have him; I played my
partrarely well, there is but a step more between me and my wishes, if I can get
that my race is finished, if not, it is but so many hopes lost, and the odd
Complements: I Will go and disclose all to my Lady, she I am sure will further
it; the next is, to appoint an Assignation, get a Parson and Marry, and the
next, to take State upon me as befits my Fortune.


Exit. SCENE III. Second Chamber.
Enter Bernard and Lucia. A Letter. Ber. Nay, prithee trouble not thy self
about this, it is a concern of a friends of mine in the Country; but to our own
affair, I saw Frank Amorous coming in the Street, I know he is coming hither:
Put your self into a fit posture, it may be a Husband, and a 1000 l. a year in
your way, if well managed.


Luc. Pray let me alone to manage it.


Ber. I Will go into my Closet, and over-hear and in the middle of his Courtship
surprise him, hark he is coming -- you know your part, -- I Will obscure myself.


Enter Franck Amorous, She offers to run away, he Catches and holds her.
Franck. Nay, do not fly me Madam, you are found, I thank my Stars they have
lighted me the way, the right way now -- I have rambled long enough.


Luc. And now you have found me, what are you the better? what Propositions can
you make your self?


Franck. Why all Madam, all that man could wish for; I have youth enough,
strength enough, Love enough, and Money enough, and what a Pox should bauk my
Propositions: I do propound to my self that I am the man that must --


Luc. -- What?


Franck. Why do a certain affair for you which shall be namless. But before I
proceed any further in Discourse, oblige me so far, as to tell me in what
manner of Phrase I shall accost you? whether in your old way of Raillery and
Affront, or my old of Love and Insinuation?


Luc. Neither Sir, I am not prepared for an Address.


Franck. But I am -- do but try me -- I Will warrant I Will fit your humor.


Luc. You Will find it somewhat troublesome -- mine is a continued Temper.


Fronck. So that is my Cue, it must be the old way -- It Is the strangest humor
I ever met with, nothing will win her but flat abuses.


Luc. Sir, you will oblige me to be brief in declaring your business.


Franck. Why, then to be plain with you Madam, the world takes notice of your
retired life, and has been bold to pass ungrounded Censures upon your
reputation: There is a Gentleman is seen to Visit you often, one I could name,
if occasion were, and to my knowledge -- has above three and twenty Wives,
besides some thirteen Mistresses, conveniently Lodged for each particular
Ramble.


Ber. Impudent Raskal.


Behind. Luc. Certainly not so many as you mention, but if he had, I could
forgive him: Besides Sir, methinks you have little reason to speak of this,
having your self by this Character of you been sixteen times under the Surgeons
hands, and as often Cited into the Court for getting of Bastards.


Franck. Pugh -- a lie -- a notorious lie -- I Cited to the Court Madam, he
only told you this, for fear of being too much interested in your favor.


Luc. Sir, he needs not fear that, for both he and all others are alike to me,
I seldom fawn on any one.


Franck. That fawns on you, you mean, one that will Court you, Serve you, Sing
to you, Play with you, Love ye, Kiss ye, Marry you, Lie with you, Honor you,
and keep you to the end of the Chapter.


Luc. The truth is, it is a great deal better then 'tother, and I Am pleased to
see your endeavors.


Franck. Art thou pretty sweet Creature? and 'igad I will endeavor most
extremely -- most vehemently, but I will please thee at last.


Ber. So now I Will upon him, he is ripe now for the Plot.


Luc. I Am sure now you insult over my weakness, if I should be kind.


Franck. Insult, banish me for ever thy presence, which is the greatest Curse I
can think of, if I do not adore every inch of thee, and think this the happiest
minute I ever saw, my deer, sweet, pretty excellent.


Kisses her hand, Bernard pulls him. Ber. Sir.


Luc. Oh Heavens! Bernard here!


Franck. Ay, I knew the Devil would send him -- well, since it is so, I will be
impudent, and get out as well as I can. Your pleasure Sir -- you see it is I,
make your best on it.


Ber. Then Sir, let me tell you -- you are a Villain.


Franck. And Sir, let me tell you, you lie, there is a Rowland for your Oliver.


Ber. 'Dsdeath can I be patient?


He offers to draw. Luc. Hold Sir, do you know where you are, and what I am,
that you dare do this; must I be affronted with your unseasonable Quarrels? And
must my Chamber be your field to tilt in: call you this Love to me? I grow
enraged at the Affront.


Ber. Madam, can you then take part with my enemy, the Ravisher of my delights,
and continued fo to virtue.


Franck. And fools -- pray put that in too.


Ber. Had thou not Impudence beyond example, and were a liar on record, how
could thou say I had three and twenty Wives, and so many Mistresses, always
knowing the sincerity of my Life and Conversation.


Franck. And were thou not immediate contriver of falsehood under Luciser, and
owner of an impudence surpassing his, how could thou say I had been sixteen
times under the Surgeons hands, and as often Cited for getting Bastards?
knowing my immaculate temper and strange aversion to Unchastity.


Ber. Ha -- thy aversion -- 'dsheart do not I know.


Luc. Sir, what you please, but this is no fit place for you to declare your
knowledge in; and since your nature is so turbulent, think it not strange if I
desire your absence: Pray leave us.


Ber. Madam, I know too much of duty to dispute your commands. But Sir -- you
shall dearly pay for this -- believe't you shall, an Heiress, and ten thousand
Pounds is not so easily won as you imagine: but we shall meet again.


Exit. Franck. An Heiress, and ten thousand pound, I am ravished at my Fortune
-- meet again ah -- i'gad -- I would meet thee in the Quarrel, were it in Hell,
and our Weapons were to be Firebrands -- it is a rare Creature, and I am certain
Loves him entirely -- Madam, he is gone, ha, ha, ha, the poor Fellow is retired;
and now since you have half blessed me already, take pity and complete it, I am
a Gentleman, my Estate a thousand per annum, raise me from death and take me
for your Husband: I love you above life, and 'twill be Charity in you to keep
him from despair, that lives but to adore you.


Luc. You are too hasty Sir, let me consider a while, the cause requires it;
however meet me in Grays-Inn-Walks this Evening, and my answer shall be as
satisfactory, as my honor will permit, or decency allow of.


Franck. I Will be as punctual as the hour, till when, adieu sweet stealer of my
heart; thou precious, melting, charming, snairing -- 'dsdeath I am transported.


Exit. Enter Bernard. Ber. Ha, ha, ha, rarely performed, thou have fired him
so, that he will certainly marry thee, though it were only in hopes to beguile me,
and when it is done, no matter for his frown; I Will be at hand to see thou art
not wronged, go, go in, prepare for the assignation, so it works rare. Now my
young Roving Gallant, I think I Have met we'e, it is the (...). Exit. For he is so
heedless, that he certainly marries her. But now for another affair, Sir
Formalls Daughter I find by this Letter, has cast him off, and re-establisht
me, I Will instantly to her; if occasion serve get a Priest and Marry her, and by
that time I suppose, his business will be done: This once completed, I am
sufficiently revenged on his infidelity, and shall have no cause to complain on
my own ill Fortune.

Friendship and Love, a lofty Fabric raise,
Which when once cracked, immediately decays.

ACT. V.
Scene I. Covent Garden.
Enter Bernard and Penelope. Ber. MAdam, this assurance of your affection has
banished my former doubts, your past displeasure looks but as a Dream, that now
I am awake troubles my Bliss to find the contrary.


Pen Take heed the Dream Sir, is not seconded with one to fright you more, you
have small reason to hope otherwise, if I should look severely into your Life.


Ber. My Life! I warrant you think me Inconstant; Fie Madam; discard such mean
suppositions: But if I were false, how can you complain, knowing how you have
tortured me, by your favoring Franck Amorous.


Pen. I Will not dispute it now, though I know something, something perhaps you
did intend to hide; your Lucia's discovered Sir -- Lord how you men are
deceived, when imagining to hide your Mistresses, you most disclose 'em.


Ber. Well, I do confess. But consider Madam, it was your severity was the
Cause, together with my Constitution, which cannot subsist without a Helper.


Pen. I have considered on it, and because you shall not say I am too rigorous,
I am content to take that for an excuse, more especially because you say you
have laid a Plot to ensnare that inconstant Fellow; but are you sure he will
marry her?


Ber. I am sure the Plot is well laid, and he is of that rashy heedless nature,
that it is a thousand to one he scapes it not.


Pen. As for the other Fop, the Fool turned Critic, his Game lies another way,
and perhaps at last neither of 'em will have cause to boast of too good
Fortune. But let us go in, and be sure you seek to please my Father, who is now
at a great difference with old Winelove, about the Estate he means to give his
Son; loose no time, it may be this minute was ordained to make us happy.


Ber. Madam, you have turtor'd me.


Exeunt. Scene II.
Enter Smallwit Solus. Small. I am scarce recovered of my Bruises yet, this
Iron-Fisted Rascal has so mauled me. If I but think of a Battoon, I tremble,
and a Sword is more dreadful to me then an Execution to a Banckrupt: It Is very
hard yet each man has his destiny,; why may not a beating be as natural to me
as to another Man, I was once a Servitor in a College, and was beaten through
my office very often. But that Bernard; now I stand on the brinck of
preferment, should do this to me is insufferable, and I will be revenged: I
heard of an appointment betwixt him and Penelope, which I will straight
disclose to her Father, and by that means frustrate his designs, this is one
way to plague him, and I Will about it presently.


Exit. Scene III. Hall.
Enter Old Wine and Sir Formal. Sir For. Not a Cross more Sir, I have told you
the utmost, you know my way, and how fixed my resolves are, my Daughters my
Daughter but my Mony's my Wife Sir, two thousand Pounds I Will give her, if you
expect more, you are deceived, I never did intend it.


Old Win. Then let me tell you Sir, I scorn your offer, two thousand Pounds, a
Portion for a Pedlar; my Son Sir, shall be Landed 500 Pound a year, it may be
more, besides his Breeding, which put into Balance makes a thousand, a Fortune
not to be bestowed upon so Mean a person as your Daughter, but only my good
nature.


Sir For. How Sir? Mean?


Old Wine. I said it Sir, and once propound, that if it be a Match, you shall
bestow three thousand Pounds at the day of Marriage, and your Manor of
Broughton in Essex at the Birth of her first Child.


Sir For. But suppose Sir, she has no Children?


Old Wine. How Sir! no Children! ha, ha, ha, my Tim no Children! was ever such
a doubt made? why Sir, he has stockt all the Parishes about us with his
offspring already, there is never a Mumper in Essex but has one of 'em at her
back, nay, they are so numerous, that you may 'em at four pence halfpenny a
piece, and a good penny worth too: No Children quoth he, alas Sir, he has been
tried in that long ago.


Sir For. I, I Sir, so has my Daughter been tried too Sir, but you will find it
not so easy to propagate here, as in the Country.


Old Win. No, your reason Sir?


Sir For. Why Sir, our Air is not so nourishing: Besides, take this from me,
one that has known the City Complexions as well as the Country; you spoiled
your Son when you permitted him to be a man of the Town.


Old Win. Pish.


Sir For. Believe me you did; pray tell me when did you ever know a Critic, a
man of Mode as they call 'em, get Children, never, Ods Bobs Sir, they cannot
do it; why all the Spirit they have is infused with Pottag, Langoone and
Lobsters, no natural Causes to produce Effects, a sort of dry, unsound wretched
Fellows, that can get nothing but Claps, nor that neither, but that it is
hereditary, and entayled from one Generation to another.


Old Win. Sir Formal, think not by this Ribble Rabble, this discourse of
nothing, to put me out of conceit with my Son; I know Sir, he is Young, Airy
and Lusty, and as I said before Sir, a true Winelove, one that can choose a
Doxy with Discretion: what doubt my own Flesh and Blood, not I 'igad, when I
was a young man, I durst have looked a woman in the Face my self, as well as
some that were fatter; but let that pass, my Tim get no Children! ha, ha, ha!


Sir For. I Will stand to what I Have said Sir.


Old Win. Sir, you must not Sir, I shall grow angry then, troth I shall, very
angry, and 'twill be dangerous to urge it farther.


Sir For. I slight your anger Sir, and to persevere, I tell you once more, what
I said is true.


Old Win. What, that my Son can get no Children!


Sir For. No Sir, that deserves that name, since you provoke me, he, -- a thing
made up of Froth and Vanity.


Old Wine. Old man, do not provoke me -- I say do not -- for by the Reverend
Beard of John a Gaunt, I have knocked down as tall a Fellow in my time -- but no
more, I say do not provoke me.


Sir For. Provoke thee Dotard, I defy thee and thy Son too; his Cringes and his
Tricks, let him from henceforth forbear my house, a Critic, a Fool.


Old Win. Fool in your Face Sir, Coxcomb, s'bud were it in another place, I Would
cramb that notion down your throat again, call the greatest Wit in the Nation
Fool, ha, ha, ha.


Sir For. A Wit, why did ever know a right Critic a Wit, no they are Fools
originally, and usurp the name of Critic, only to get reputation among some
few pretenders; this is in brief my opinion of 'em.


Old Win. I shall refine your opinion presently, for I can forbear no longer,
take that Sir, and the Lie.


Strikes him. Sir For. That Sir, 'twas home I confess, but I Will not be behind
hand with you.


They Cuff one another, and pull off both Hats and Perewigs. Enter Smallwit.
Small. Hey day! what work's here? Sir Formal, Mr. Winelove; for Heavens sake,
what do you mean, old Friends and quarrel thus, come, come, forbear.


parts'em. Sir For. A Drunken Dotard.


Old Win. A Testy Cuckold.


Sir For. Hah!


Old Win. It Is true Sir.


Small. Nay Mr. Winelove, for Heavens sake be pacified, I have a World of News
to tell you. News that concerns you too, good Sir be reconciled.


Old Win. Keep him but off, I have done -- I am for peace.


Small. Sir Formal, come forget petty Differences, you little think what News
I have to tell you.


Sir For. What is it prithee? Sir, I shall think on you another time.


Old Win. At your leisure Sir, I seldom walk disguised, my Jim get no Children;
ha, ha, ha,: But come my little Mercury, what News is this thou have to tell me?


Small. Give your Attention, for it equally concerns you both.


Ambo. Say on.


Small. Why then Sir -- your Daughter has to my knowledge, this afternoon made
an Assignation with Bernard to meet him in the Mulbery-Garden, and if you make
not great haste, will be married e're you can get thither, for I saw a little
Black man like one of the Clergy in the Coach with 'em.


Sir. For. Ha! with Bernard? If this be true I am undone.


Small. It Is Certainly true Sir, for I knew him very well, though she pretended
he was her Kinsman.


Sir For. Kinsman! ah cunning Jilt, but I Will take a Coach, and forbid the Banes
immediately.


Exit. Small. And Sir, your Son my Pupil, has instead of Penelope, married as I
hear a vast Fortune, a near Kinsman of Franck Amorous, one that fell in Love
with him, and he taking time by the forelock this morning married her.


Old Win. A Fortune say you?


Small. Some six or ten thousand Sir, it is reported diversely, but for certain a
vast Fortune.


Old Win. There Is for thy News, I Am o'rjoyed at this: But where are they? do
thou know that?


Small. Gone to the Mulbery-Garden, to keep their Wedding Dinner.


Old Wine. I Will make one amongst 'em instantly, six thousand Pounds, and got so
handsomely: This News has made me young again, I could Dance: Methinks I am so
Jocund! Ah it is a Witty Rascal, how cunningly has he carried his business!


Small. He has indeed been very private in it.


Old Wine. Nay he has a Politic Pate on my word; he is as I told Sir Formal, a
true Winelove -- run Mr. Smallwit and call the next Coach, I Will thither
presently; he has outwitted me; but I rejoice at his Fortune; and now a fig for
Sir Formal and his Proposalls, I Am resolved to be extremely Merry, and Crown
this Marriage with my Love and Approbation.


Exeunt. SCENE III. Mulbery Garden.
Enter Franck Amorous and Lucia. A Letter Franck. Madam, till this moment I
never was happy, but in your Company lies such Crowds of Joys, that my soul's
too narrow to receive 'em.


Luc. I Am afraid you do but mock, and you men are such Deceivers that it
imposes a general scandal upon the Sex. Sure you cannot be so, can you?


Franck. No by Heavens, I can sooner be false to my own soul, then think of
deceiving thee; I love thee with so much Zeal, and my Passion is so violent,
that I fear I shall never have Patience till the Parson have Married us.


Luc. Indeed you must, Lord what will become of me if you want Patience, I
shall never be able to endure a man that wants patience.


Franck. Well I Will endeavor, but defer my Bliss as little as you can.


Luc. You are as eager as if you were going to take possession of a Happiness
conducing to your Life.


Franck. My life, ay Gad, my dearest life; my soul is at stake if I miss thee,
for I will certainly hang my self, and wilfully lose a second Heaven, being
deprived of my first: Come, prithee let us go.


Luc. What man's this that is come to us?


Franck. 'Sheart it is young Winelove, I promised to meet him here, and now he
has seen me, it is but vain to avoid him. Dear Madam* step but into the next
Arbor whilst I exchange a word or two with him, and I Will be with you instantly.


Luc. So I think I have him fast enough,, would the Parson were come, that I
might be out of pain. Lord what fools these men are!


Exit, and going out drops a Paper. Franck. What Is this she has dropped?

Reads. To my dear Lucia -- from he Guardian I Will warrant about her Estate;
when Winelove's gone I Will read it.


Enter Tim. Tim. sings. How happy is he that is free
From the Troubles and Cares of the Wise:
That Banquets his sense
With a world of expense,
And hates the dull life of the sordid precise.
Hah! Brother.


Franck. Sir* I see you are a man of your word, but more Merry and Jocund then
usual.


Tim. Why faith I am Sir; the Stars have been kind, and I have been kind, and I
have cause to be so; for I have Married a Lady this morning that is a non
parelio: And I that formerly Criticized upon the whole Sex, now confess my self
foiled in my own Argument.


Franck. Married Sir! may I not beg the favor to know whom?


Tim. Faith I must desire your pardon at present, time will discover all, but
assure your self it is not to Penelope; Fate I thank it, has seated me a little
higher. In the mean time I have Brotherly affection for thee, which shall
continue in spite of Death and Destiny.

Sings. How Happy is he that is free, etc.

I am so Airie I could fly methinks.


Franck. You are the spark of our Age Sir, -- but prithee forward with the,
methinks it begins well.


Tim. Ah Pox no, there is nothing in it, 'twas writ by a Fellow that writes your
Elegies, your News from Rumford, your Murders, Characters of Baleys, and the
like. A damned Tune too, set by a Novice in the Science; but if thou will hear
a Song, I le sing thee one of my own, a new thing; and I think you will say a
good one; that has had the honor to be styled so by some persons of Honor,
that love such things, and sometimes love to write 'em.


Franck. Come prithee lets hear it.


Tim. Stay I Will go call three of my Friends here Drinking in the next
Arbor to bear the Chorus, and I Will be with you instantly.

Exit. Franck. I wonder who the Devil he has Married, but I am glad it is not
Penelope; for though I have her not my self; I should be sorry to have her
enjoyed by such a Fop as this.


Enter Tim and Musicians. Tim. Come Friends, keep your Time, pray observe Sir.


SONG.
No more dull Reason, seek no more
To feed me to thy slender food:
Thy sober precepts have no power,
To keep me from my chiefest good.
In Love and Wine my Bliss relyes,
And he that e're would happy be,
His growing Appetite must prize*
Desie all Cares, and live like me.
^ To ramble from Taverns is nightly our task,
To roar through ^ the streets, and debateh the next Mask;
to baffle the Watch, ^ in despite of their Bills,
get home; and next morning to ^ Breakfast with P^ls;
Till crampt with the Pox, we aspire to renown,
^ take State, and are called brisk Men of the Town.
2.
We know no Rapture, own no Wit,
But what Impertinence is known;
At Plays we range our selves in the Pit.
And hate all Fancies but our own.
We rail and hiss, that men may see
We men of Sense and Judgment are;
But if examined seriously:
The Devil a grain we have to spare.
Chorus
To Ramble, etc.
Well what think thou, is it not Modish?

Franck. Faith it is extremely modish, and more Wit then I expected. But you may
thank a Friend for it to my knowledge.


aside* Tim. The truth is, the world is somewhat ignorant of my Gifts; but
Modesty you know is a Virtue; Besides Wit in a Song is now worth nothing, your
Fighting Songs, your Bawdy Songs, your Drunken Songs, and your Mock Songs, are
the things that take now; and faith I must confess, my Genius has been so
Capricious, that I could never yet allow of 'em, though composed by persons of
Quality.


Franck. Sir, I am so little a Judge in it, that my defense will be worse then
you say the Songs are.


Tim. You may say of your self what you please, but give me leave to think
otherwise; but come pass this Discourse, and now to the Business that you are
to disclose to me, prithee what is it? hah!


Franck. Why something that I know concerns you, but at present I have no time
to declare it; for I have a Friend within waits my presence with impatience,
but by that time you have Dined, I shall be ready for you.


Tim. Well Sir, I will not hinder business, being a man that naturally loves
it, especially the affair I suppose you are engaged in. Sir, your most Humble
Servant, I shall wait with patience, and think it an honor to enjoy your
Company at your own Leisure.


Franck. Sir, I am no stranger to your Rhetoric.

Exit Tim. Opens the Letter. Reads. Dear heart, though I was so unfortunate to
miss your Company last night, and thereby was destitute of that Elysium in your
embraces, which Iused to enjoy --

Hell and the Devil! what is here?

Yet assure your self to night, no Business shall keep me from you: I hope to
see you Married, and then my Revenge will be Completed. Be sure you carry it
cunningly, that he may not perceive our design, when the business is done,
we will meet at the old place, and Laugh; till then I must be a stranger.

Your assured Friend Bernard.

I had rather it had been from the Devil, and less fright 'twould have put me
in: what a dreadful Precipice have I escaped* Certainly there is some great
Blessing Providence has in store, it takes such care of me. For this Plot had
certainly took with another; this woman I find now is Bernards Hireling; a
thing that is his, or any man's for half a Guiny, 'sdeath I sweat to think how
modishly we too should have lived together; well 'twas I confess, very well
contrived, and had it took I had sufficiently paid for my Infidelity. But now
for a Counter-plot to work backward on them, that would be rare. Ha! who is
this? it is Certainly Bernard; it is the same disguise he used to wear upon an
Intrigue.


Enter Smallwit in a Cloak and Disguise. Small. It Is he, this was lucky to meet
him so opportunely; Sir a word with you.


Franck. With me Sir?


Small. I Sir, do not start, do you know me.


Franck. Smallwit?


Small. The same Sir, one that to complete his revenge, for the ill usage he
received of Bernard, and to do you a favor will show you the broad path to
your content; you did love Penelope.


Franck. And do still by Heaven, above all other women Breathing.


Small. Then follow but my Directions, and she is yours; this is his Cloak and
false Beard, the Disguise he came hither in to obscure himself from knowledge
of her Father, who by my appointment intends to come and frustrate his design,
he will be here within half an hour: Bernard now is gone to buy a Ring; now
Sir, follow but your Fortunes and make use of this Disguise, and you may Marry
her before either of 'em come.


Franck. This is the utmost extent of Fortunes Bounty: Dear Rogue let me Kiss
thee, thou art my Esculapius, my Preserver; my every thing, come, come, the
Cloak, if this hit right I will adore the Invention.


Small. Sir, it must certainly hit, if you make have, for she can never
distinguish through that disguise one from the other.


Franck. 'Sdeath I am rapt with the thought on it; but hark Dear Smallwit, I
have one thing more to tell thee; which if thou can but bring about, thy name
shall flourish in our Chronicle: In the next Alley is walking one of Bernards
Wenches: If thou can now but instead of Penelope get him to marry her in a
disguise, 'twill be thy Masterpiece; some thing has past betwixt her and me,
but tell her, my eyes are now open; to convince her, show her this Letter, and
then lay your Plot as you find her Humor.


Small. Well Sir, perfect your design, and let me alone with this; away you
lose time.

Exit Franck. This will be an excellnt revenge if it but take, yonder she
walks; I Am confident that must be she, and I Will accost her instantly


Exit. Enter Penelope. Pen. I wonder he stays so long, being to finish so
weighty an Affair as Matrimony, for I am resolved to marry him in spite of all
Opposers; I have had sufficient proofs of Franck Amorous's falsehood and of
Bernards fidelity, and therefore think it but Justice to choose the most
deserving, 'twas basely done of him at first to betray his Friend, and to
persevere in it, is worse, but I hope he will pay for all, for I saw him come
along the to her Walk with Lucia, whose Company, now I know her, I shall shun,
though heretofore I ignorantly thinking she had been Bernards Kinswoman* gave
her place in my Affections. But see here he comes, I knew he would not stay
long.

Enter Franck Amorous. Oh are you come, you frighted me sufficiently with your
stay, you know I am nothing without your Company.


Franck. Let Us in then, lest we are discovered -- it takes rarely


Aside. Exit. Enter Bernard and Ralph. Dra. Upon my word I saw neither of 'em.


Ber. Very strange, I left her above in the Balcony Room, and the Parson with
my Cloak below in the Kitchen Drinking with the Waterman, and now I can find
neither my Mistress, the Parson, nor my Cloak.


Dra. Perhaps Sir, my Master has laid it up, and the Lady no doubt is somewhere
walking in the Garden; but as to the Parson, I suppose he is otherwise engaged*
for here is another Company in the house, that to my knowledge have occasion to
make use of him.


Ber. 'Sdeath how unlucky's this, the Canonical hour will be past if I stay
half an hour longer, and my design's frustrate for this day, hark you Friend;
will you do me a favor.


Dra. Any thing Sir, in my power.


Ber. Well said, and there is a Guiney for thy willingness; run then and get the
Mourning Cloak thy Master wore last Sunday and a High-Crown'd Hat, I Will procure
a false Beard and a little black Perriwig, and thou shall Act the Parson, and
Marry us instead of the other.


Dra. Shall I, with all my heart Sir, you may command what you please.


Ber. Thou can Read, can not?


Dra. Yes Sir, we have a large Common Prayer. Book within that I can read
perfectly; and let me alone to act Sir Domine, I have their Starcht Grimace,
the Hum, their Ha, and twirling of the Band strings as right Sir, as if I were
Bred to it.


Ber. Can thou? precious Rogue; come then let us make haste: Do it but well,
and I have another broad Piece to Crown thy Service, read but perfectly, and
it is well enough; for that is as much as the best of 'em can do.


Dra. Do not doubt me Sir, I Will warrant you I Will Mimick a Parson rarely.


Ber. Away then, we loose time, I Will get a Witness or two, and we will about it
instantly.


Exeunt. Enter Smallwit and Lucia with the Letter. Small. Madam, you see your
Intrigue's discovered, therefore I think it to be a great deal of prudence, to
make the best use of your Fortune: Mr. Amorous is irrevocably lost, but if
you will take my Council, Bernard shall be yours, which I suppose in some part
will make amends, consider on it, and think, to fret now will little avail you.


Luc. The Devil was in it that I should drop that Letter so unfortunately; But
are you sure you can contrive that Bernard may Marry me? for so I have one of
'em I care not much which it is and to deal freely with you, I stand at present
in great necessity of Marriage, for some private Reasons best known to my self.


Small. It will infallibly be as I told you, so you take Care but to
Counterfeit Penelope's Voice a little: For look here is the Gown she wore this
morning, which Mr. Amorous has got from her by Wile, and it is the Garment
Bernard knows her by, and then your Mask for your Face will disguse you
absolutely like her.


Luc. Well this may do, if Fortune do but aid a little.


Small. Doubt not that Fortune always favors the afflicted: come on with it.

puts on the Gown. So now carry the Plot but handsomely and be happy.


Exeunt. Scena Ultima.
Enter Old winelove and Tim and Betty. Tim. Hey Sirrah, Drawer, bring some more
Wine, and do you hear; bid the Music Strike up: it is a day of Triumph, and shall
be so accounted.


Old Wine. And so it shall Boy, hey Boys, strike us there, toll, loll, loll; a
day of Jubilee Tim, give me thy hand, thou art an Arch Wagge, a dad thou art,
and I did not think it had been in thee -- toll, loll, loll, thou have made me
young again; methinks I could dance a Jig. Madam, I faith you are too
melancholy. Tim, to her Tim, to her I say, it is a rare plump Girl: prithee
sweetheart be Merry, toll, loll, loll.


Bett. In truth Sir, I Am exceeding Merry. Oh Dear how is it possible for me to
be otherwise in such excellent Company; but shall I have a Coach my Dear?


Tim. A Coach, ay that thou shall; and six Flanders Mares too, and a Coachman,
and six Footmen, and three Postillions, doubt that? why thou shall have any
thing, thou shall have me: A Pox on it, how came that damned old end of a Song
into my head.


Old Wine. And Madam, if you like not these Proposals, I Will go and purchase the
Elephant yonder in Fleet street for you, I suppose a man may have him now at a
reasonable rate, and thou shall ride in state like the Mogull in the Indies,
and be seen by the wondering Spectators Gratis toll, loll, loll.


Bett. The Elephant! ha, ha, ha, Sir; your Father's a very merry man, and the
best company I ever met with.


Old Wine. Who I, I faith no, I have lost my merry humor, Age has outworn it,
how old Madam do'e think I am, pray guess.


Bett. Sir, I guess you to be about five and forty.


Old Wine. Ha, ha, ha, five and forty, I faith you are out, though I am above
threescore and ten, by this good light, and yet I have my Health sweet Lady,
and I can Talk sweet Lady, and I can Sing and Dance sweet Lady, and Drink with
the best Roarer of 'em all sweet Lady, and by the help of a good Estate do
intend to do so above this 20 years sweet Lady, hem -- I Am found at heart, and
as Brisk as another man, no disparagement to my Tim there.


Tim. Madam, you must excuse, the Old Gentleman's a little given to vanity, a
Vice I could not suffer in 'em were he not my Father.


Enter a Vintner. Vin. Sir, a Gentleman and a Lady hearing your Music, desire
to be of your Company, if it may be without prejudice.


Old Wine. If they come to be merry with us, they are welcome, and so let 'em
understand.


Exit Vintner. Enter Franck, Penelope, Sir Formal like a Parson. Franck.
Gentlemen pray let us not appear rude to desire this Favor.


Tim. Sir, assure your self, we know so well good Manners, as not to deny a
Gentleman of so worthy a presence, so small a Courtesy, you're welcome -- Dam
him, that I should loose such an Expression on such a Scrub: Methinks he looks
like a Baillss.


Aside. Old Wine. Well said Tim.


Franck. I Am glad they know me not, but I Will stay here as little as I can, ha.


Aside. Enter Vintner, Bernard, Smallwitt, Lucia and Ralph like a Parson. Vin.
There Sir, that Gentleman wears the Cloak you brought; I suppose he is of your
Acquaintance.


Franck. It Is Bernard, but since the Business is done, I value not his threats.


Bern. Sir, I did not expect such an Action from a Gentleman, this Cloak's mine.


Franck. It is so Sir, at your Service, the Beard likewise; be pleased to
pardon the Borrower.


Ber. Amorous! I am amazed.


Pen. Heavens! I am betrayed?


Pulls off her Mask. Franck. But this Lady Sir, is mine now, my Friend here can
affirm it.


pointing to Sir Formal. Bern. 'Sdeath Penelope! and he married to her: who
the Devil have I got then?


Luc. A good Friend of yours, assure your self.


Luc. discovers her self. Small. So, so, now it works.


Ber. Why sure we all dream, Are you awake old Gentleman?


Old Wine. By my faith I think so.


Tim. Ha, ha, ha, Plots, Plots, by Gad I love Plots dearly, as I am a sinner.


Frank. You see my good Fortune in spite of all oppositions has made you mine;
love me for your own sake, as you expect me to be hereafter kind to you.


Bern. Base Treacherous wretch!


Offers to Draw. Old Wine. Hold, hold, Gentlemen, we must have no Fighting.


Franck. I understand you not Sir, you see your Plots have faild you.


Bern. You shall understand Sir, when next I meet with you: Assure your self,
though you have married her, you shall not long enjoy your happiness; you
shall not Sir.


Frank. No Sir? why who shall hinder it?


Sir For. That will I.


Ber. Who are you?


Sir For. One that will cut your Matrimonial knot Sir; look de'e know me yet?


Om. Sir Formal!


Pen. Dear Father --


kneels. Sir For. Go too, you Baggage -- but no matter, wipe your eyes, I Will
talk with you hereafter.


Tim. Ha, ha, ha, more Plots, more Plots? by Gad I like this extremely.


Small. 'Sheart here is a great deal more Plot in this then I designed: the old
Fox was Cunninger then I imagined.


Sir For. Sir, I am no Priest de'e see, I hired my Habit of the man of God that
I suppose you designed for the business, nor shall my Daughter be married
without my approbation.


Franck. Why then Sir, your Humble Servant; pox on it it is but a design lost,
and I Will content my self that he is tied to his good behavior with his Lucia
there.


Bern. Sir, I am not so fast bound as you imagine, and to let you see* I have
sometimes as good luck as others, Know that I am no more married then you are;
witness honest Ralph here.


Ralph. Even so, I can assure you Gentlemen.


Old Wine. Heyday! what more Miracles?


Small. Here has been damnable Counterplots I see, a Devil on it, who would
thought to have found so much Wit in the Spring-Garden.


Tim. A Clergy man* turned Drawer! a Pox on me if ever I saw the like of this.


Luc. Will you not Marry me? the Devil take you if you don't; you know how
matters stand, prithee my dear do.


Ber. Fie, in Faith you must excuse me, how unreasonable's that?


Luc. Well, if ever I believe a Parson more? --


Tim. So will I, I faith, for I am sure he did me right: Come hither
Sweetheart* Gentlemen this Lady is my Wife* and one to my knowledge not unknown
to you; and I desire before she show her Face, my good Fortune may purchase no
man's Envy; she is a great Fortune, and shall when the King comes from Newmarket,
and I am a Knight, be a Lady: But pray let me offend none.


Om. None, none, Sir.


pulls off Bett. Mask* Tim. Why then behold a wonder; dear Brother, I kiss your
Feet*


Om. Betty!


Bett. The very same, one shuffled into a Fortune by very strange means in
truth.


Sir For. Married to my Daughters Chambermaid! ha, ha, ha, this makes amends
for all; I thought what would become of this Modis^ Gallant, this Fool turned
Critic; ha, ha, ha.


Old Wine. Hah -- what is all this? no more Plots I hope.


Tim. Now are all they such Fools they don't understand me yet; well it is the
dullest Age this.


Franck. Hark you Sir, this Wench is not my Sister: But as I hope to be saved I
don't envy you at all, I know not what they do*


Tim. Come prithee Sweethearo, undeceive 'em, undeceive 'em, tell em what thou
art.


Bett. Why then really Sir, I am a necessary Implement to that Lady there.


Tim. Well, suppose this, the ten thousand Pound I hope is yours; what Portion
have you?


Bett. Not a Groat in truth, as I hope to be a Lady Sir.


Old Wine. A Lady Sir! O the Devil! what luck's this Tim? thou art cheated Tim,
thou art, I would give a hundred Pounds to prevent the infamy will follow a
Critic.


Bett. But shall I have a Gilt Coach my Dear?


Sir For. Faith this is better then I thought of; now Sir, what think you of
two thousand Pounds with my Daughter, ha, ha, ha.


Old Wine. Oh pray spare your Jibes. Come Tim, be not disheartened, this has
been many a Gallants Fortune, and I Will get a Divorce for thee, if five hundred
Pounds will fetch one; be merry I say. A pox on it, all that vexes me is, that
it has put me out of my good humor.


Franck Oh sye by no means Sir, We Will have a Song and a Dance a man's ill
Fortune is not to be avoided sometimes, pray let us be merry there.


Old Wine. So now I begin to feel my former Temper, Tim cheer up.


Tim. Had she been a degree above a Chambermaid, I had been patient; but since
it is as it is, I Gad I will Lampoon the whole world, Criticize upon all sorts of
Persons and Things; be very envyous* proud, foolish, and ill natured, and then
I shall be sure to outwear my disgraces and be famous.


Fra. Bernard, give me thy hand, since our Fortunes have been much alike, let us
now forget past Injuries, and unite a firmer Friendship then ever: I have done
thee wrong I confess, but my amends shall be equally to it. For both Sword and
Heart shall henceforth be devoted to thy service.


Bern. This Cancells all distasts, and therefore know as I desire not to be
thought Treacherous, so I have a perfect value for the generous, which your
Action in this demonstrates you to be. Be but my Friend, I shall never wish
other, nor shall a Mistress make us Jarre again: Thy Temper made thee false,
and I well know

As too much Zeal can often distract the Wise,
So Love has power to break what Friendship ties,

FINIS.
EPILOGUE.
OLd Plays, like Mistresses long since enjoyed,
Long after please whom they before had cloyed;
For Fancy chews the Cud on past Delight,
And cheats it self to a new Appetiet.
But then the Second Fit comes not so strong,
Like second Agues, neither fierce nor long:
What you have known before, grows sooner stale,
And less provokes you, then an untold tale.
That but refreshes what before you knew,
But this discovers something that is new;
Hence'tis, that at new Plays you come so soon,
Like Bride-grooms, hot, to go to Bed e're noon!
Or, if you are detained some little space,
The stinking Footman's sent to keep your place.
But, when a Play's revived, you stay and dine,
And drink till three, and then come dropping in;
As Husband after absence, wait all day,
And decently for Spouse till bed time stay,
So, e're the Brethren's liberal fit was spent,
The first wise Nonconformists under-went
With ease, and batten'd in imprisonment.
For greater gains, his zeal refused the less;
Each day to him was worth a Diocese.
But he who now, in hopes of equal gain,
Will needs be Prisoner, tryes the trick in vain;
He melts in durance half his Grease away,
To get, like us, poor thirteen Pounds a day.

