The True and Absolute BISHOP: With the Converts return unto Him.

Wherein is also shevved how CHRIST is our only SHEPHERD, As well as our
truest BISHOP; And also, how lamentable and miserable the condition of those
Men does appear to be, which are out of CHRIST'S Fold, Or, out of CHRIST'S
DIOCESE.

By NICOLAS DARTON Minister of GODS Word, at KILLESBIE, in NORTHAMPTONSHIRE.

HEBR. 7. Ver. 26. For such an High Priest became us, who is holy, harmless,
undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher then the Heavens.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Badger, for Humphrey Mosley, and are to be sold at
his Shop at the PRINCES Arms in Saint PAUL'S CHVRCH-YARD. 1641.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE and every way RELIGIOUS LORD; WILLIAM, Viscount SAY
and SEAL, Master of his Majesty's Court of Wards and Liveries, an especial
Member for God Glory and Great Britains safety, amongst the Right Honorable
Lords in the High Court of Parliament now ass mbled; And one of His Majesty's
most Honorable Privy Council.
Much Honored LORD;
LEt the blisfull streams of Gods eternal mercies, run plentifully, through
all your Parliamentary designs, and others else, to make you, as truly
prosperous in your Acts of State, as Religious in your intentions for Piety,
that is my desire for you. The next for my self, is this, that some drop of
your Honors favor, and Clemency, (how little soever) may through your
Honorable acceptance, of this my small tender, fall on me, to make me as truly
happy, in the enioyment of so great a Patronage, as I am forward in the
dedication of the same, unto your Honor. True it is, you may wonder, I beg
(thus bold) for the latter, especially being that I am so far remote, from
your Honors knowledge: but to speak justly, there is no just cause of marvel,
for though I am a stranger to your Person, I am not to your virtuous practices,
which make our Hemisphere of Great Britain, with admiration to be acquainted
with you. The book ( I confess,) is not worthy your judicious eye, nor
reading, but the Bishop in it, I am confident you love with all your heart:
straying sheep, ( I have heard) your desire is, should return to the fold,
imitating here our great Shepherd, that makes welcome all the Flock, that
come. What you find amiss, in the handling of the propounded subject, which is
good, let your love to goodness pardon, and what otherwise in the rash attempt,
of so bold an adventure as this upon your goodness is, let your wounted
mildness pass by. Greatness in you (I believe) is as pardonfull as your
goodness, for O how sweetly in you, may both Church and State see, how they
go hand in hand together? I dare not speak all I believe, of your almost
unparalleled piety, it is enough for me, to see it, and to hear it abroad, but
for fear of suspicion of unpleasing flattery, to your self, I dare not
speak. What now is to be spoken for the present on my behalf, has an eye
upon your mercy, that you would vouchsafe the same, (though undeserved,) upon
the work and Author. So shall I that am but even the smallest of Christ's
ministry, be encouraged in the painful work of the Lord, and endeavor
daily, (if not more,) to bring Goats hair, (by no means less) to the
building of Gods Temple; continually morn and evening, as long as I have a day
to live, praying heartily, to the eternal Trinity for you and yours, that an
increase of true honors welfare may abound on your Honorable self, Your
truly virtuous and Religious Lady, and hopeful Progeny here, and that an
immortal Crown of endless glory with the communion of Saints through Jesus
Christ, may be your eternal inheritance hereafter.

Your Honors Servant in all Humlitie most devoted, NICOLAS DARTON.

The Epistle to the Reader.
COurteous and Christian Reader, if the Title Page do please thee, (as
perchance it may,) I am confident then that the ensuing Treatise will not
distaste at all, because it tenders thee a salve for thy sores, and a remedy
for thy straying thoughts. Should now the word [Episcopacy,] draw a dislike
upon thine affections, or like a black cloud darken thine impartial esteem
hereof, it is to be feared then, (for the present,) that all is not well within
thee, for here thou have the absolutest, the truest, and the most perfect
Bishop that ever was in all the Christian world, whose Diocese also is from
one end of the earth unto the other, and from the Sea unto the worlds end. This
is the Metropolitan that governes Heavens Universe, and whose [See] as it is
without all contradiction Universal, so in like manner is his [EPISCOPACIE] in
all points uncontroleable. This is he that was called from the Womb hereunto,
and from the bowels of his mother; Isa. 49.1. Zach. 3.8. Mal. 3.1.
unto whom all the Yles must listen, and eke the people from far; who is the
branch of the Lord, and the messenger of the Covenant, who is like a refiners
fire, and like Fullers soap, and will purify the sons of LEVI, (meaning, all
the Ministers of his Word and Sacraments by what names or titles soever they be
called,) and will purge them as Gold and silver, that they may offer unto the
Lord, an offering in righteousness. I write not this now to bark at, or to bite
at any in the world, for that Hostile and scurrilous humor both against Gods
sacred house, and Englands Kirk, I leave to our brawling and railing tongues
wherewithal our times abound, alas and thrice alas, too too much in every
street and corner, nay I had almost said, in every part and place; so that
should not the right honorable and blessed Parliament out of their heavenly
dispositions, forthwith silence the contumelious affronts with irrevocable
censures, of such black-mouthed Sanballats, as without all question the
plenitude ^f their gracious judgment and undoubted religious goodness will
challenge the care hereof, both Zion then and all her sons may sit down in
the dust and weep. But I write, this [scribendo proficere, and proficiendo
scribere,] to satifie the ingenuous reader with some notions of a right and
absolute Bishop, and that upon his benefit and good liking I my self may
receive some comfort. As for the matter here debated before thine eyes, (though
it do not come unto thee, in the beautiful and graceful habit of excellent
and learned rhetoric, yet may thou find therein many an wholesome
expression, both for thy souls health, and life's amendment,) I desire thus
much, that as thou do not receive it with the reverence of a Father, so that
thou would not reject it, as the raveries of a child, for Apollo yielded
Oracles, as well to poor men, for their prayers, as to Princes, for their
presents. If thou have bin a stragler, from the flock and fold of Christ, here
are discoveries for to inform thy conscience, and such demonstrative
Characters, to certify thee of thy souls state, and condition, in that
particular, as that thou can not (unless merely blinded, and that God has
given thee over unto a reprobate sense,) but see whether thou art in the fold
of Christ or not, and whether also thy life be the life of grace, or the life
of sin. I shall not need to labor thee, in this Epistle, how thou art to
demean thy self, toward the great Bishop of thy soul, for that cannot be
exploded thy meditations, if thou do but read and view the matter; all that
I shall advise thee, in the point propounded, is that with the laborious Be,
thou have a desire hence to gather honey, and not with the venomous Spider, to
suck naught save poison. The discourse (for any thing I know to the contrary,)
may put all the world in mind, what a most wretched and a most lamentable case
those extravagant sinful souls are in, that are out of Christ's several, and
out of Christ's enclosure, ranging up and down the world, in the wild and vast
Commons, of all kind of disobedience; or else (which is as bad,) wandering to
and fro, day by day, within the unfortunate pale of some particular enormitie.
For thine own part, (my Christian brother,) I censure thee not at all; (for I
believe to be guilty that way, is an infallible demonstration, and a very
brand and Symptom, of a carnal and a rank hypocrite;) if therefore now thou
art any kind of way the better, for this my small endeavor, bless the
Bishop, for it, I mean, the eternal Messiah, who is the great Shepherd and
Bishop of thy soul; but if like a taunting Ammonite thou fallest to malicious
censurings, against the book, and Author, know, it is the Authors resolution,
more lightly to set by, and value thy ludibrious taunts, then thou can
imagine thy disdainful nature, to be forward, in the mischievous broching of
the same: and besides that, he has found out thine abusive and unchristianlike
sarcasmes, many days agon, and that he is now preparing a scourge for thy
poisonous tongue. What thou do object now out of an envious disposition, my
conscience tells me, that in the minds of the well affected, it shall stand for
nothing, because they have determined at this present, that [dicetur veritas,
and rumpetu^ invidia,] that truth shall be spoken, and that envy shall break
its gall. But and if thou can not abstain, from thine irreligious obloquie,
o be sure then, that thy formality in religion, is but mere Iam. 1.26.
mockery, without Religion; and that in conclusion, whereas for a time, thou
seem to set on fire the whole course of nature, thou shall at length be set
on fire, even by the very Iam. 3.6.
hell it self. And thus gentle Reader, bidding thee heartily to take heed, I
bid thee heartily farewell.

NICOLAS DARTON.

THE TRVE AND ABSOLVTE BISHOP: The Text of Scripture whereon the following
discourse is grounded, is:
1 PETER 2.25. For you were as sheep going astray, but are now returned unto
the Shepherd, and Bishop of your souls.


THe words are an illustration of St. Peter's auditors twofold estate and
condition.

First, Preterit. Secondly, Present.
First preterit, and that in the state of nature, [eratis velut oves errantes]
you were as Sheep going astray, (...), Sheep straggling from Heaven.

Secondly, present, and that in the state of grace, [Sed nunc conversi estis ad
pastorem and curatorem animarum vestrarum,] but are now returned unto the
Shepherd, and Bishop of your souls. An happy regresse for such wandering
sheep, being returned from Babel to Bethel, from Satan to CHRIST.

The first observation.
T^^ir fi^s^ es^ate i^ ^^^entable, being by (...) the children of (...) Ep^^s.
2.^. and ^^ere^ore pastly called here by o^^ Apo^^^ [ev^^ err^^^^s] straying
^^eepe, ^ot [ove^ i^ e^^l^] not sheep that are in the ^old; for so Christ
calls his beloved Saints, Io^^ 10.27, 28. who (as CHRIST professes of them
there) that he does know them, so does he also witness of them, that they are
obedient sheep, and that for three things.

First, for hearing his voice. John 10.27. Sec^^dly, for following him John
10.27. Thirdly, for keeping the fold.
According to that pla^e o^ Scripture, [nec rapiet quisquam cas ex manu mea] As
if our Savior should have said thus as no man shall take them out of my hands,
Ezekiel. 11.20
so no one shall seduce them, to straggle from my sold, John 10.28. hoc est,
retinebunt ovile, they shall keep the sold, they shall keep my laws and
ordinances. The second observation


Secondly, their second estate is comfortable, being in the state of grace, and
seeing they are retu^ned unto the sold again; They are not now like [oves in
deserto] like those sheep in the desert, Prove. 7.22.
that had no shepherd, Mark 6.32, 34. or like Salomons ox posting to the
shambles of most dismal death, but like the Spouse in the Canticles, Cant. 4.8.
returning to her only love, looking from Le^^^on and Amana, from S^enir and
Hermon, from ^he Lions d^^nes and from the mountains of the Leopards;
according also to the words of the Text, (...), etc but now are returned to the
Shepherd and Bishop of your souls. The division of the words.


The words then for divisions sake instruct us in two points of Divinity, very
considerable for our times.

1. In man's misery, living in the state of sin. 2. In man's recovery,
returning to the state of grace.
An ^bsolute and (...) infall^b^e point in Divin^^y.
First, in man's misery living in the state of sin, and teaching us in effect
this point of Divinity, [how that unregenerate men as long as they are out of
the fold of CHRIST, out of the sold of sanctity, are no better in the HOLY
GHOSTS censure, than straying sheep,] as here once the auditors in the Text
are showed also [Vos eratis, etc.] you were, etc.

Secondly, the words instruct us in man's recovery, intimating unto us thus
much, how that our state is never blessed t^ll we be with Christ, our condition
never happy till we be returned to Christ. Our Apostle does not say of them
now, they being retired, and returned to Christ, 2 Pet. 2.2^.
as he does of others returning to the practice of sin, [saying Canis
reversus est ad vomitum, and sus ad volutabrum coeni] the dog is returned to
his vomit, and the sow to her wallowing in the mire. But now as if they were
many thousand times better than before, more holy and pure, more blameless and
undefiled, more zealous of good works, he says [nunc conversi estis, etc.] ye
are now returned unto the Shepherd and Bishop of your souls. Where in brief
we see our Savior for the love he bears to sinners, becomes a Shepherd to
his flock, and a BISHOP in his Diocese; a shepherd to feed them, and a
Bishop to instruct them; a shepherd to tend them, and a Bishop to defend them;
yea, a shepherd to take care for their bodies, and a Bishop to take care for
their souls; all which we find infolded and comprehended in the words [(...)
and (...),] in the words [shepheard and Bishop,] which in our Blessed Savior
like mercy and truth do meet together, and like righteousness and peace do
kiss each other.

For methods sake now, having divided the Text thus, and that we may enjoye the
whole meaning of the words, we will briefly betake our selves to the handling
of the sam^, beginning with the first considerable point of divinity, touching
man's misery living in the state of sin, and arising from the forefront of the
Text, thus [eratis vel^t ^ves errantes, etc.] ye we^e, etc.

And for the better and more clear explanation of this first point of
divinity, touching man's misery living in the state of sin, and running every
day more and more from the fold of Christ, take this observable, and undeniable
ground of truth, (viz.)

How that all men till that they are effectually called from heaven, The first
Doct. Vnden^able Ephesians. 5.8.
(as here Saint Peter's auditors in the Text were) till they are called out of
darkness into light, out of the state of corrupted nature, into the blissful
state of grace, are no better in the Holy Ghosts, censure and opinion than
straying sheep, which is a most fearful condition, a most horrible and a
dismal state for any poor sinful souls to be in, being that they are out of
Christ.

The Doct. proof.
To prove this point, the Prophet Jsaiah cries out in general terms thus,
[omnes sicut oves aberravimus] we all like sheep have gone astray, (meaning
all before Gods effectual calling, Jsa. 53.6.
) yea we have turned every one to his own way, says the Prophet, agreeable
with that universal stain and pollution that the Apostle S. Paul speaks of,
[(...), etc.] They are all gone out of the way, they are altogether become
unprofitable, there is none that does good, no not one, Romans 3.12.

But here perchance you will demand and ask me by and in what particulars do
unregenerate and unmortified Christians show themselves before Gods effectual
calling of them, Ob.
to be straying sheep, and wandering from the fold of Christ.

For the resolution whereof, observe these following discoveries. Sol.


First, unregenerate men run from the fold of Christ like wandering sheep, The
first discovery of a sinner which runs astray. 1 King. 21.
by their unsatiable and greedy avarice, when they do most wickedly thirst
after that which is not their own, which is not their right nor due, when with
Ahab they both bloudily and greedily, seek after poor Naboths. Vineyard, and
when with Demas they leave the word, and immoderately love the world, 2 Timothy 4
10
and hereupon the Holy Ghost calls their [(...)] their love of money,
(meaning inordinate and ins^tiate desires, and practices) to be [(...),] to be
the root of all evil, which while some have coveted after (says the blessed
Text) they have erred from the faith, (that is) they have showed themselves
straying sheep, and have ^ierced themselves through with many sorrows, and
theref^^e says Saint John, 1 Timothy 6.10
[love not the world, nor the things that are in the world: for if any man love
the world, the love of the Father is not in him, 1 Ioh. 2.14.

The second discovery of a sinner which runs astray.
Secondly, unmortified Christians before their calling show themselves to be
straying sheep and wanderers from Christ's fold, by their gross and erroneous
tenants in Divinity, holding those things lawful, that the Text condemns,
and those again unlawful that the text allows, and for this cause we read
of Christ's condemnation of the Saduces, and that they were going astray
touching their judgment and opinion about the doctrine of the resurrection,
[saying erratis;] you do err, [that is] you straggle from the fold of truth,
not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God. Mat 22.29 Ezec. 18.8.
Glomerantur in unum innumerae p^stes Brebi.
I could here condemn sundry that are straglers in the like nature; some
holding the damned sin of usury to be lawful, that the text condemns
others, that it is a sin to take an oath which the text allows, a third with
the nice ruler of the Synagogue, impudently averring that it is a fault to
heal upon the Sabbath day, with infinite others of the like straggling humor,
Luk 13 14.
to whom I say with the Apostle St. James, o do not err any longer after these
courses, and conditions, my beloved brethren, Jam. 1.16.
because the wages of them is death, though the gift of God be eternal life
through Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans 6.23. The third and last discovery of a
sinner when he runs astray.


Thirdly and lastly, unregerate and unmortified Christians before their calling
show themselves to be straying from the fold of Christ sometimes by their
uncleanness and fleshly lusts, which Moses the man of God calls [going
aside, Numb. 5.12.] sometimes by spiritual whoredoms, as superstition and
Idolatry, which the Holy Ghost calls [a turning away from the Lord, or a
thrusting out of the ^ay, Deuteronomy. 13.5.
which the Lord commands, sometimes again by their swinish sensuality and
excessive drunkenness, which as the prophet tells us, causes erring from the
right way, and stumbling in judgment; Isa. 28.7. Isa. 53.6.
sometimes again, by their brain sick fancies which the Holy Ghost calls
[a turning after our own ways,] sometimes again by their wages of
unrighteousness, their greedy taking of bribes following the way of Balaam the
son of Bosor; 2 Pet. 2 15.
which the Holy Ghost calls a forsaking of the right way, and sometimes again
by withholding the means of salvation away from others, to whom they should
dispense them, which the Holy Ghost calls [a driving away from the sold,
crying against the Shepherds of Jsrael, and saying thus [wo be to you, for the
diseased you have not strengthened, neither have you healed that which was
sick, neither have ye bound up that which was broken, neither have ye brought
again that which was driven away, Eze. 4.2.3 4.
neither have ^e sought that which was lost, but with force, and with cruelty
have ye ruled them.] And thus do we see in brief, that by these and by
diverse other sundry ways and courses unmortified Christians remaining in the
state of corrupted nature, like straying sheep, do ever wander and run away
from the fold of Christ.

The Use The Use.
that is to be made now of all that has been spoken, is an use of
illustration, to show the lamentablenesse and accursednesse of the state and
condition of those men, who (as has been showed by the former discoveries,)
run away every day more and more from Christ's fold, and like straying sheep
keep not company with Christ's flock.

There are four most fearful miseries wherein appears the accursed
condition of a straying sheep. The first misery of an unregenerate Christian
that runs astray. Impij sine Custode.
Now their lamentable, miserable and accursed condition appears sundry ways,
especially in and by four most grievous and most fearful miseries.

First, unregenerate men which are straggling from the fold of Christ, that are
not as yet reclaimed by Gods effectual calling, are in a most fearful and
cursed condition; because neither God nor good men are for them. God does not
protect them, and good men do not value them. No shepherd does tend or look
unto those sheep, that are upon the strait, for those that are within the
fold, those come within the compass of his care and providence; in like manner
for application, is it with all such as wander from Christ's flock, and that
keep not his several, they are not [sub divino vexillo] under the protection
and banner of the Almighty, but as they give over God, so God gives over them,
and that many times as we see, to a reprobate mind to do, such things as are
inconvenient, yea during the time of their wandering they are so miserable, that
they have the very devils themselves to be their guides and governors, Romans
1.28. Ephesians. 6.12.
which is a very fearful misery indeed according to the words of the Holy
Ghost in another place to this very purpose, they are aliants from the
Commonwealth of Israel, they are strangers from the covenant of grace, Ephesians.
2.12.
and of promise, having no hope, and without GOD and without Christ in the
world. Next, good men do not value them, because they are like the linen
Girdle hidden at Euphrates and good for nothing. Jer. 13.10. Isa. 13.14.
Nay like the chased Roe, [as the Prophet Isaiah saith] and the sheep that no
man takes up. Whereas on the contrary, we may boldly affirm thus much, how
that concerning Christ's innocent Lambs that keep the fold, they are always
of Gods tending, always of Gods looking to. And which comfortable point the
Psalmist confirms thus, saying, the eyes of the Lord are always over them,
Psalm. 34.15.
and his ears are always open unto their cries, yea and they are always so
tender and precious in his sight, as that the Angels are not thought to be too
good to be their guardians, and attendants; Mat 18.10.
nay and those that offend them are so threatened by the Spirit of God, as that
the Text says of them, and against them thus, (namely) how that it were better
for them that a millstone were hanged ab^ut their necks, and that they were
drowned in the depth of the Sea, Mat. 18.6. a fearful judgment GOD wot, yea
a most grievous penalty.

Secondly, The second m^sery of an unregenerate Christian that runs astray.
the second misery that our unregenerate livers are exposed unto, which like
straying sheep straggle from the fold of Christ, is a continual affrightment:
or a continual, fear and a continual astonishment; for as the silly sheep
as long as he is astray, has never any perfect peace nor comfort; even so for
application, fares it with your unmortified bosoms, who many times when they
are in their chiefest jollities, are notwithstanding so terribly skared, and
frighted as that with drunken Belshazzar their countenances are apt to change,
Dan. 5.6.
and their knees to knock together, according to that saying of the holy
Prophet Jsaiah, speaking of them thus also, Isa. 48.22.
(to wit) they are like the troubled Sea, when it cannot rest, whose waves cast
up mire and dirt, for there is no peace (says my God) to the wicked, Isaiah 57
20, 21.

Thirdly, the third misery that our straying sheep, The third misery of an
unregenerate man which runs astray.
our unregenerate Christians undergo, is a want of the society of the
faithful, a deprivation of the Communion of Saints. For illustrations sake,
the sheep that is astray, has not the compapany of the flock, no more for
application has your unmortified bosom the society and fellowship of the
Saints, for what fellowship says Saint Paul, 2 Cor. 6 14.15, 16.
has righteousness with unrighteousness? and what Communion has light with
darkness? or what concord has Christ with Belial? or what part has he that
believes with an Infidel? and what agreement has the Temple of God with
Idols? meaning none at all, as if he should have said thus, neither
unrighteousness, nor darkness, nor Beliall, nor an infidel, nor Idols, have
any fellowship or ommunion, or concord, or part, or agreement, with the
blessed Shepherd CHRIST or with any that are of his blessed flock.

The fourth and last misery of an unregenerate man running astray. Ps. 95 10 11
Heb 3.18 1 Cor. 6.10
Fourthly, the fourth and last misery and plague that unregenerate sinners
running from Christ and his fold, are likely to undergo, is everlasting death,
they are in danger to provoke God to swear that they shall never enter into
his rest, that they shall never have the joys of heaven, and that they shall
never have the comfort of the flock, whereas on the contrary those that keep
the fold, shall have heavens benedictions according to the language of our
blessed Savior, saying [Ne Timete, etc.] fear not little flock, for it is
your fathers good pleasure to give you a kingdom, yea and according to the
saying of the Prophet Isaiah, Isa. 65.13.
in this paticular, behold my servants shall eat, but ye shall be hungry; my
servants shall drink, but ye shall be thirsty; behold my servants shall
rejoice, but ye shall be ashamed; my servants shall sing for joy of heart, but
ye shall cry for sorrow of heart, and shall howl for vexation of spirit.

Ob.
But peradventure here some will demand and say, if that the case and condition
of our straying sheep be so lamentable and full of woe, why, what should move
then unregenerate bosoms, I mean our unmortified and carnal Christians to
persevere in this dismal state?

Sol.
To which I make answer and say thus much, that there are sundry provocations
and enticing motives that bewitch men to go on in sin, and to run every day
more and more from the fold of Christ. That therefore you may avoid them and
shun them all, I shall briefly lay them open to your Christian
considerations. Note that there are six provocations that even force men to run
astray from Christ our Shepherd and Bishop. The first provocation (...) Sat^an.


The deceiveable provocations that principally cause unregenerate men to go
astray from the sold of Christ, are chiefly six.

The first provocation or provoking motive that makes a man to run astray from
Christ, to the great prejudice of himself and hazard of his poor souls
salvation for ever, is the accuser of mankind Satanas, the Prince of the air.
For illustrations sake, it was he that first made our first Parents Adam and Eve
to run astray from God the father, Genesis 3.13.
and also now labors to deal so in like manner with all his posterity, that
they may run on straggling also from the blessed Savior, from God the Son;
and thereupon does our blessed Apostle advise all Gods people by all manner of
means, to be vigilant and s^ber, because our adversary the devil as a roaring
Lion walks about seeking whom he may devour, 1 Pet. 5.8.

The second provoking motive that occasioneth men to run away from Christ and
his fold, The second provocation is an ill Ministry.
is a number of deceiving Ministers, who in many places either speak not to
the flock at all, and so play the part of dumb dogs, and thereby the people
perish for want of knowledge, or else when they speak, do broch nothing else
but falsehoods, dawbing them with untemtempered mortar, and divining lies,
saying, thus says the Lord, when the Lord has not spoken it. Oh but what
says the Lord against such wicked Pastors? Ezekiel. 34.10
Oh consult with the Prophet Ezekiel, and he will tell us, that the Lord is
extremely angry and incensed against such, (saying,) that he is against them,
and that he^ will require his flock at their hands, and cause them to cease
from feeding the flock, and again, that they shall not feed themselves any
more, and that he will deliver his own flock from their mouth, that they may
not be meat for them.

The third provocation that makes a man to run astray from CHRIST, is the
world, The third provocation is the world
which causes men to go astray two manner of ways.

First, when they love it, more than they should. Secondly, when they fashion
themselves unto it, more than they ought to do.
First, I say, when they love it more than they should, that is, when they
prize it above the things of a better life, and therefore says Saint John,
love not the world nor the things of the world, 1 Ioh. 2.15.
for whosoever loves the world more than he should in conscience, it is most
certain that the love of the Father is not abiding in him.

Secondly, when they fashion themselves unto it more than they ought to do,
that is, when men take their chiefest imitations from the wicked practices
thereof, and therefore says Saint Paul, (to keep all good Christians within
the fold of Christ) in these words, that is to say, Brethren I beseech you by
the mercies of God, Romans 12.1.
that you present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God
which is your reasonable service, and be not conformed to this world, but be ye
transformed by the renewing of your mind, that you may prove what is that good,
and acceptable, and perfect will of God.

The 4th provocation is the retaining of some particular infirmity or
corruption. 2 Kin. 1.20
The fourth is, the keeping or retaining of some beloved sin, that makes
either for our pleasure or for our profit in the pursuit of sin. For
instance sake, what I pray made Iehu to run astray from the fold of God, to
the practice of Jeroboams sins, but even the Golden Calves that were at Dan
and Bethel? Certainly his greedy avarice was the very ruin of his soul, and
therefore, I say in this case as once the Holy Ghost speaks in the like, Romans
6.12, 13. Oh yield not your members as instruments of unrighteousness to
sin, but as instruments of righteousness to God.

The fifth provocation that forces us to run from Christ is our own hearts.
Ier. 17 ^. Diverse deceipts the heart uses to make us straggle from Christ as
first sensual persuasions. Genesis 3 6.
The fifth enticing motive that does instigate us and stir us up, to wander up
and down like straying sheep from the fold of Christ, is a man's own bosom,
a man's own heart, and therefore the Prophet Jeremy calls it [super omnia
fraudulentum,] saying, that it is deceitful above all things. Using all the
deceits in the world to undo us, As

First sensual and fleshly persuasions to make us go astray, as in the case of
Eve; her heart being deluded by Satan's wiles, persuades her that the Tree was
good for food.

Secondly, that it was pleasant.

Thirdly, to be desired to make one wise; and upon those persuasions, falls to
eating of the forbidden fruit, runs from the fold of GOD into the wide and
vast Commons of wilful disobedience, and gives also to her husband, and he
di^ eat.

The second deceit of the heart to make us straggle. Luke 14.16. Mat. 22.2.
Secondly, using apparently fair pretenses, but deceiving excuses; as we see in
the Parable of the Farmer, the Merchant and the married man. When they were
invited to the great Supper, as Saint Luke calls it, and to the Marriage of
the Kings son, as Saint Matthew terms it, see the material cause that
makes them keep back, that makes them rather wander further from the fold of
Christ, than in any sort to come unto it. Every one of them as the Text tells
us, begins to make excuses. The Farmer first pretends that he had bought a
piece of ground, and therefore had cause enough to look to his own Commons,
and to leave Gods several. Another had bought five yoke of Oxen, as he
pretended, and must go to prove them, and therefore desires to be excused, he
by no means will keep the fold, for fear least his Oxen should run astray,
but what says a learned Father on the place, [heu heu quam lamentabile est
Post-ponere Christum bovibus, qui nos aequavit Angelis? Oh how lamentable a
matter is it, to put Christ after Oxen, that has made us equal with the
blessed Angels? Next the Merchant pretends as fair as any of the rest, he
had great traffike in hand, he had great Merchandise to look unto, anabundance
of weighty affairs of great importance, and therefore could not come from
Shipboard to the Sheepfold, could not be at the marriage, could not come to
the Supper, Luk 14.18.19, 20.
but must needs go abroad.

Lastly the married man has his selfe-deceiving pretenses, his selfe-deceiving
excuses too; he had married a wife and therefore as the Text says, he could not
tend the feast, he could not keep the fold. He values more the Spouse of his
bosom, than the bridegroom of his soul, [impar congressus:] and as if the
coming to the marriage banquet would have been an hinderance in the enjoyment
of his love; and this our deceitful hearts as we may justly term them, do
ever pretend, one thing or other, ever make one excuse or other, whereby we run
astray from the fold of Christ.

The 6th and last provocation, The sixth provocation that makes men run astray
from Christ is a loving of singularity more than of sincerity.
that causes men to straggle and wander from the fold of Christ, is a loving
of singularity more than of sincerity, when men are more curious then
cautelous, more captious then capacious; I do not here speak of those or
against those that are circumspect and wary in their manner of life and living,
as in their thoughts and words and actions [for those are highly to be
commended for rare and excellent Ch istians, but against those that will be so
singular in their ways, Luke 13.14.
that with the ruler of the Synagogue they will make sin to be there where
God makes none, and count that to be sin that comes not into Gods ^^^unt.
Thousands and ten thousands run astray by this grand provocation, 1 Timothy 6.20
giving themselves over to profane and vain babbling, and making the sacred
Scriptures at their pleasures and opinions to be like a nose of wax: and
therefore for conclu ion hereof let me say to such, as Saint Paul speaks to
Titus, Tit. 3.9.
(saying) avoid foolish questions and genealogies and contentions and strivings
about the law, for they are unprofitable and vain.

Ob.
I but says the wounded conscience, seeing those are the provocations that
cause men to go astray, how shall we for our parts know when we go astray,
and when not, yea and when we keep the fold, and when not?

Sol.
For answer whereunto, though we have spoken before of some discoveries in this
kind, observe these symptoms and characters in Divinity, which do most
assuredly certify men's consciences when they are out of Christ's fold, and when
they appear to the eye of all GODS people to be like lost sheep.

Diverse symptoms whereby we may know when we are out of Christ's fold. The
first Symptom is an hating of reformation. Acts 7.51. to 54.
First, the first symptom and token that declares a man before God and the
world, to be a lost sheep, to be straying from the fold of Christ, to be a
Wolf or a Goat, and not a Lanb of the flock, is an hating of reformation,
when men cannot endure to be told of their faults, when they will not hearken
to the voice of the Charmer charm he never so wisely, when like galled
backs, and consciences, they cannot endure to be touched, and when
reprehension and instruction is bitter in their eyes. Such straying sheep (for
examples sake) were Saint Stephens mad men, who when the holy man of GOD
tells them of their faults, how stiff necked and uncircumcised in hearts and
ears they were, and how they and their fathers had slain the Prophets, and
how that touching the just one they were no better than betrayers and
murderers; instead of making good use thereof, [frendebant cordibus,] they were
cut to the heart, and gnasht upon him with their teeth; not like Peter's
converts that were the better for their reproof, of whom the Text says
[(...)] that they were pricked to the heart and said, Acts 2.37.
men and brethren what shall we do to be saved? but like Amos his Revolters,
that did hate him that rebuked in the gate, Amos 5.10
and that did abhor him that spoke uprightly.

Now if the Children of God tell such, what a lamentable condition they are in,
how that their ways are the ways of destruction, and how that they are in the
gall of bitterness and in the bondage of death; and they are ready to brass
over their words, and to flint their foreheads, and to say with those straglers
in the Prophets time; It is not the Lord, Jer. 5.12, 13.
neither shall evil come upon us, neither shall we see sword nor famine, and
again, the Prophets shall become wind, and the word is not in them, and again
he further proceeds, come let us smite him with the tongue, and not give
heed to any of his words: but alas alas, what a misery think you do such
wandering goats, such haters of reformation, even hale and pull upon their own
heads and upon them tha^ belong unto them? the Prophet tells us that their
children shall be delivered up to the famine, Ier. 18 21, 22.
and their blood powered out by the force of the sword, and their wives bereaved
of their children and be widows, and their young men be slain with the
sword in battle, and that a cry shall be heard in their houses, when that the
Lord shall bring a troop suddenly upon them: all which is concordant with the
words of the wise man; (viz) he is in the way of life that loves instruction,
P^o: 10.17.
but he that hates reproof erreth.

Secondly, The second symptom of a straying sheep from Christ's fold is a
defileing of the Ordinances of heaven.
the second character and symptom that declares a man to be a straying sheep,
and a great way from Christ's fold, is a polluting or defiling of the ordinances
of the most High, when men do not only forsake the practice of Gods
testimonies themselves, but to their uttermost power speak evil of the good
way of God, that thereby they may discourage others from being zealous in GODS
cause. For instance sake, such accursed wandering Goats the Prophet Malachy
speaks of saying, Mal. 3.14.
how that they said that it was in vain to serve God, and what profit is it
that we have kept his testimonies, and that we have walked mournefully before
the Lord of Hosts? like those rake-hells also in Saint Peter's time, who that
they might cause others to stray from the flock and fold of Christ, as well as
themselves, utter such and the like reproachful taunts and terms, [viz:]
where is the promise of his coming? for since the fathers fell asleep, all
things continue as they were from the beginning of the creation: but what I
pray is like to be the doom and destiny of such straggling Goats? The Prophet
Ezekiel tells such filthy Cattle that foul with their feet the residue of
Gods Pastures, Eze. 34.22.
and that thrust with side and with shoulder, and push all the diseased with
their horns till they have scattered them abroad, that he will at the length
take judgment on them.

The third Symptom of our going astray from Christ's fold is a too much
rellishing of mundane matters. 2 Timothy 4 10 1 Samuel 15.9, 26.
The third and last Character and symptom that declares a man when he is
straying from the fold of Christ, is a savouring or a rellishing or a tasting
of nothing else in the world save worldly matters. Hereupon it was said of
Demas, that he had forsaken the flock of God, and had betaken himself to
this present world, and of Saul sparing Agag and the best of the Sheep and that
Oxen, that he had disobeyed the commandment of the Lord, and that therefore
the Lord had rejected him from being King over Israel, and therefore for
conclusion of this point, remember the golden lesson of our blessed Savior to
his beloved Lambs, which he would have for to keep the fold, Mat. 6.33.
saying, Oh seek first the kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof, and
then all other things shall be added unto you.



[eratis, etc. ye were,] ye were as sheep going astray; but see see the great
goodness of God Almighty calling them and bringing them who were once
darkness, to become light in the Lord, and causing them also who were far gone
a stray, to return to the Shepherd and Bishop of their souls. And therefore
be not dismayed, but take this for an absolute ground of truth.



The encouragements therefore now that I have prepared for thee to keep thee
from despair, and that thou may not make thy self a cast away, though thou
have lived all thy life time like a straggling sheep, are principally three.

The first is taken from the absoluteness of Gods call to have thee come
again to the fold of Christ. 3 Encouragements to allure sinners that they do
not despair, though they have wandered a long time from Christ's fold


The second is taken from the sufficiency of Christ's sacrifice that he has
made through his blood, and which has satisfied the fathers wrath, though thou
by thy going astray have provoked his justice mightily to take vengeance on
thee by reason of thy crying crimes.

And the last encouragement is taken from the free welcome which thou shall
find at the Fathers hands, when with hearty Repentance thou returnest again
unto the Fold of the Son, who is the great Shepherd and Bishop of thy soul.

The first encouragement, I say, The first encouragment.
why thou should not despair, though thou have most grievously run astray
from the fold of Christ, is taken from the absoluteness of Gods call, caling
thee by all manner of means to come away speedily to the fold again.

Never did the Heart desire more after the water-brookes, Psa. 42.1.
then does God desire at this present that thou should return again unto him:
Ho (says he) every one that thirsts come to the waters, and you that have no
money, come notwithstanding, Jsa. 55.1.
buy and eat, yea come buy wine and milk, etc. And again, as if he did
extremely long for the conversion of all that are astray, he divulgeth his
desire thus, [ cast away all your transgressions, and make you a new heart, and
a new spirit, Ezec. 18.31.
for why will ye die o house of Israel? as if he should have said thus, I do
not desire that any one should perish in his going astray, I had rather that he
would return and keep the fold, for J have no pleasure in the death of him
that dies, says the Lord, wherefore says he, turn your selves and live for
ever. And again, I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.
ver. 32.
Oh think not then that GOD does not call thee because thou art so sinful, so
foul and ugly, and so generally abounding with the practice of all crying
crimes, for be assured that it is most true, because thou art so, therefore
does he out of his mere grace and favor call thee that thou should return
again unto him. For illustrations sake, had not David his call to return
again unto the fold, after that his hands were bathed in blood? had not
Rehoboam and Manasseth their call from heaven, 2 Samuel 12.13 2 Chro. 12.
after they had committed most grand idolatries? Farther, had not Mary Magdalen
her call from heaven, and 2 Chr. 33 Luke 8.2. Acts 9.4.
after she was possessed with seven devils? Nay, had not Saint Paul his
effectual calling too, after he had practiced persecution upon the Saints?
Wherefore be not dismayed by reason of thy heinous sins, as if thou were past
all hope that thou should never see the Shepherd of thy soul again, and
that thou can never come to the sheepfold any more at all, for [magis
proprium est Deo misereri pro bonitate quam irasci pro justitia] It is more
usual with God to take pity upon a poor straying sheep for his mercies
sake, than to reject him for ever for his justice sake, and therefore he invites
all to come for comfort [saying, Mat. 11.28.
Come unto me all that are weary and heavy laden, and J will refresh you. Oh
then hearken to Gods call, and obey his voice, least thine impenitency and
ungodly courses provoke the great Shepherd here and Bishop of our souls, at
the latter day to reject thee, indeed, and as upon the foolish Virgins to shut
the door upon thee, Mat. 25.12
[saying, Non novi vos,] J know you not, depart from me ye workers of
iniquity.

The second encouragement why we should not despair though out of the fold.
Isa. 62 3.
The second encouragement why we should not despair and make our selves
cast-awaies though we have even from our very cradles to this very present ran
astray; is taken from the sufficiency of our great Shepherds and Bishops
sacrifice whereby he has appeased the fathers wrath in our behalfes, treading
the Wine Press alone and making an atonement for all our sins.

It may be thou will object and say here, that thy sins are greater than all
the worlds besides, Ob.
and that thou art quite out of conceit that ever thou shall be accepted into
the fold again: that thou art full of poisonous thoughts, full of adulterous
actions, top full of murders; that thou have as many blasphemies as ever were
in any mortals bosom, as many lusts and deceitful robberies, and as many
crying cruelties against God and his Saints, and that therefore thy state and
condition is lamentable and past recovery.

To the which I make answer, Sol.
that if thy case be as bad or worse, yet have thou no warrant to be diffident
of the sufficiency of Christ's sacrifice, and the reason is rendered by the Holy
Ghost thus, [If the blood of Bulls and of Goats, and the Ashes of an Heifer
sprinkling the unclean sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh: Heb. 9.13.14.
how much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal spirit
offered himself without spot to GOD, purge your Consciences from dead works,
to serve the living God? Most certain then and a most infallible and
undeniable doctrine is it, that CHRIST'S sufferings are beyond thy sinnings, his
merits are beyond thy miseries; and therefore be of good cheer, and that also
for these reasons following.

First, because the Son of God was plagued for thy sins, Romans 4.25.
Secondly, because he was delivered to Death for thy sins. Thirdly, Because he
was sacrificed as a Passover for thy sins, 1 Cor. 5.7. Fourthly, Because he
was made a curse for thy sins, that thou might be made the righteousness
of God in him, Gal. 3.13. Lastly, Because he has taken all thy sins with the
handwriting that was against thee, and has nayld them to his Cross, Col.
2.14.
Yea to conclude all in a word, o be not dismayed then by no manner of means in
the world, for though thou can not speak for thy self, 1 John 2.1, 2. 1 Timothy 1.15 The third and last encouragement why we should not despair though
we have been a long time out of the fold of Christ.
yet thou have an advocate in Heaven that will speak for thee, even Jesus
Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation and sacrifice for all thy
sins. Yea thou may say with St. Paul, namely that it is a true saying, and
worthy of all men to be believed, that Jesus Christ came into the world to save
sinners of whom thou art chief.

The last encouragement why thou should not despair though thou have gone
astray from the fold of Christ like a lost sheep, is taken from the free
welcome which thou shall have at the fathers hands when with hearty repentance
thou do return again.

Oh remember, remember the welcome of the Prodigal recorded in the Parable, as
soon as he returns to his father from his wandering errors.

First, the best Robe is called for to be put upon him.

Next, The Father calls for a Ring to put upon his hand.

Thirdly, for shoes to put upon his feet.

Fourthly, and lastly for the satted Calfe to be killed for him, that so they
might solace themselves and eat and be merry.

For applications sake, o know that such, nay a greater welcome has the
penitent sinner at our heavenly fathers hands, when with the Prodigal he
returns in penitency unto the fold again, for first the best Robe is put upon
him, even the Robe of CHRIST'S Righteousness.

Secondly, instead of a Ring and shoes, and the fatted Calfe, he has a
kingdom assured him, and therefore our Savior says, fear not ye little
flock, it is your Fathers good pleasure to give you a kingdom. Luke 15.10.


Lastly, for mirth and joy, the very Angels witness it, joying and rejoicing
at the straying sheep return, and therefore for conclusion of all, and to
end this point in a word, I would entreat all in the fear of God, and for the
salvation of their own souls, that for many years together have any way
erred from the fold of CHRIST, for to perform now the task that our Savior
does enjoyne his Spouse, [saying,] Return return o Shulamite, Cant. 6.13.
return return, that we may look upon thee.

And thus much be briefly spoken for the first estate of Saint Peter's Auditors,
which we called their preterit estate in sin; Now follows their present
condition, their present estate in grace, specified in these words following
[but are now returned unto the Shepherd and Bishop of your souls.]

IN this their estate of grace we are to consider two material points; First,
their action, in the word [returned,] but are now returned, etc. Secondly,
their object, the object of their action, and that is our blessed Savior set
forth here by two Appellations, or titles. 1. SHEPHERD. 2. BISHOP;



As we read in the next words, (viz.) Unto the Shepherd and Bishop of your
souls.

As for the action, that teaches us what we must do; and as for the object,
that teaches us to whom we must so return.

First, again for the actions, that we must observe, is to be performed in the
practice of two particulars, First in our aversion from sin. Secondly in
conversion unto God.


In our aversion from sin we are to observe [ terminum a quo 1.] the matter
from which we are to turn (viz.) from the region and land of darkness and
shadow of death,] in our conversion unto God we are to observe [terminum ad
quem] namely the fountain and well spring of life to the which we must bend
all our course, Jsa. 9.2.
and that is to the great shepherd and Bishop of our souls.

We will not speak here touching the first particular (namly our aversion from
sin) because we are to handle it shortly in another treatise; come we
therefore briefly to the second, namely our conversion and return to God, or
as the Text says, to the Shepherd and Bishop of our souls.

But are now returned, etc. And happy, o thrice happy were all we in this
world, might this heavenly action and practice of Saint Peter's assembly, be as
truly and as really verified of us, as it was of them. But alas alas our
times are such, and men now adays so averse from Piety, as that we may say
with the Prophet, [hee that departs from evil makes himself a prey; yea
[glomerantur in unum innumerae pestes erebi.] The mischiefs of hell are got to
one Croude, and we (God wot,) are scarce free from them. Yea and the Prophet
Isaiahs reproof may justly be cast in our teeth (viz.) Ah sinful Nation, a
people laden with iniquity, Jsa. 1 4.
a seed of evil doers, children that are corrupters, they have forsaken the
Lord, they have provoked the holy One of Israel unto anger, they are gone away
backward. Nay the Poets outcry, may most truly cry down our corruptions
[saying.]

Vivitur ex rapto, non hospes ab hospite tutus,
Non s^cer a genero, fratrum quoque gratia rara est:
Imminet exitio vir conjugis, illa mariti.
Lurida terribiles miscent aconita Noverca,
Filius ante di^m Patrios inquirit in annos,
Victa jacet Pietas, and virgo caede Madentes
Vltima coelestum terras, Astraea reliquit.
Romans 3.12.
Which words of the Poet are concordant with the Apostle (to wit,) they are all
gone out of the way, they are altogether become unprofitable, there is none
that does good, no not one.

But now to alter the course of these men's sinful conversations, whose ways
are the ways of death, and whose steps go down quick into hell, Certain
Motives to move men to return to the fold again.
I would desire them in the fear of God, and for their more speedy conversion
and returning unto the great Shepherd and Bishop of their souls, to
entertain into their considerations these certain motives which like piercing
Goades are able to make to stir even a very heart of flint.

The first motive The first Motive.
why we should speedily bethink our selves of turning the Card of our
affections, and of returning to our blessed Savior and his fold again, is
taken from Gods infinite love most marvellouslie showed this kingdom from time
to time. Oh my dear brethren, Mi^ah 6.4
has not God with a mighty hand brought us out of the land of Egypt and
redeemed us out of the house of servants? was there not a time when we groaned
under the papal yoke, and when darkness and leanenesse went even into our
souls? Besides look unto the miseries of other kingdoms, what almost unheard
of calamities have befallen them, and we notwithstanding as yet (God be
blessed for it, though I confess we have been very much skared of late,) do
sit at quiet under our own Vines, and eat the fruit of our own labors.
Again think upon the unquiet bread long eatee in the Low Countries, and how
that France heretofore has been made as it were a Cocke-pit for Massacres,
and we (God be thanked as yet,) though I confess grievous dangers have been
threatened of late, (God be merciful unto us,) have peace in our borders, and
plenteousnesse within our palaces.

Again, oh how have other kingdoms of late years been affrighted with the
continual noise of the drum, roaring of Canons, rattling of armor, neighing of
horses, yea very Nettles and Brambles growing in those places where once the
feet of Gods Saints have trod. We for all this (God be blessed hitherto) have
our Zion in perfect beauty still, and our Jerusalem as in former days. Isa
29.1^.
Furthermore whereas in other kingdoms heretofore God has made the wisdom
of their wise men to perish, and the understanding of the prudent to be hid,
which is a most lamentable plague and destiny wheresoever it lights; we
(GOD be blessed for it) for our parts have Moses and Aaron and Miriam to go
in and out before us.

In a word, o my brethren, Micah ^^.
consider what Balaak King of Moab consulted, and what Balaam the son of Beor
answered him from Shittim unto Gilgal. I mean how that filthy Harlot the great
Whore of Babylon has cursed us all, our King, our Counsel, our Peers, our
Gentry, and our Commons of this land, and how the eternal God out of his
infinite mercy and goodness has most graciously turned those execrations into
blessings, and therefore now let every one that reads this, seeing the
gracious goodness of the Lord has been so abundantly mercifully extended to
this our Nation, return with a thankful heart unto the Original and donour
of this our happiness, each one resolving with the Psalmist saying thus, [ I
will receave the Cup of salvation, and will call upon the name of the Lord.
Psa. 116.12
]

The second Motive The second Motive.
why we should leave the flesh pots of Egypt, why we should forsake the
Wilderness of sin, and with all care and diligence return to the fold of
Christ, is taken from the most grievous dangers which hang over our heads, and
which otherwise will most assuredly fall upon us, and the reason is taken from
the words of the Psalmist (saying,) if a man will not turn, Psalm 7.12, 13.
he has whet his sword, he has bent his bow and made it ready, and prepared
his arrows against the Persecuters. Oh my dear brethren, I beseech you lay it
to heart, and enter into consideration, what most terrible and fearful
plagues and judgments, our running and wandering from Christ's fold are ready
every minute of an hour to heap upon our heads; Genesis 19.24.
for instance sake, why may not the Lord of Hosts in his most just wrath turn
fire and brimstone upon our heads, as upon Sodom and Gomorrah, and so consume
us quite, for our not returning to him? why may he not suffer our enemies to
ride over our heads, and also suffer us to be led away into captivity, and to
be delivered into the hands of Iabin and Sisera, Iud. 4.2.
as he suffered his own people when they strayed from him? what are we
spotless? are we more just then they? Certainly my brethren, I tell you nay,
and do say besides, that if with all care and diligence we do not speedily
mend our manners and turn over a new leaf and return to Christ, for ought I
know to the contrary, Luke 13.5.
we may all likewise perish. For now may the Lord of glory as justly exclaim
against this kingdom of ours wherein we live and whereof we are members, as
once against revolting Jerusalem, [saying in thee have they set light by father
and mother: in the midst of thee have they dealt by oppression with the
stranger: in thee have they vexed the fatherless and the widow: Ezekiel. 22.7.8,
9, 10.
in thee have they despised mine holy things, and profaned my Sabbaths. In
thee are men that carry tales to shed blood, and in the midst of thee they
commit lewdness. To pillar up therefore the Lords wrath and vengeance and that
his fury do not take place amongst us, let us perform the task that the
Prophet Jeremy enjoynes Jerusalem, Lam. 3.40.
(saying) let us search and try our ways and turn again unto the Lord.
Otherwise our blood will be upon our own heads. Ezekiel. 3, 19.
Wherefore break up your fallow ground, fow not among thorns any longer, be
ci^cumcised to the Lord, and take away the foreskinne of your hearts, ye men
of Judah and Jerusalem, lest my wrath come forth l^ke fire, and burn that none
can quench it, because of the wickedness of your inventions, Ier. 4 4.
says the LORD GOD.

The third and last Motive why we should return again to God, The last Motive.
and have a desire to come to the fold of Christ whence we most mightily have
gone astray, is taken from the superabundance of joy and comfort that all
penitents shall enjoy and reap at the hands of the great Shepherd, which
joys and comforts are in general three.

First, they shall have an abundance of his mercy and an abundance of his
pardons, Jsa. 55.7. Secondly, they shall have a certain assurance of eternal
life, they shall assuredly live and not die, Ezekiel. 18.23. Thirdly, and lastly
everlasting joy shall be upon their heads, they shall obtain gladness and
joy, and sorrow and mourning shall flee away, Isa. 51.11. yea God has promised
them that they shall inherit all things, and that God will be unto them a God,
and that they shall be unto him sons and daughters, Revel. 21.7.
The use now that arises here considerable for our times is to reprove
principally four sorts of Christians, For (...) of (...)
who notwithstanding the consolations and benedictions before specified, run
continually astray still, and seldom or never mind this Evangelicall exercise
of returning to the fold again. As First, The mere formalist: Secondly, The
mere morallist, I mean the mere morally honest man, that looks no farther
into Religion than the heathen did. Thirdly, The carnal humourist: And lastly,
the Lukewarm Laodicean.


The mere formalist to be reproved.
First, I must reprove here the mere formalist that makes Religion nothing else
but a mere fashion, altering it as often as the times afford him cause. Look
unto him on the Sunday, and profane you shall see him like the Dominicall
Letter zealously red, but all the week after, you shall read his deeds in
black. He is just like the Glow-Worme seeming to be all light, but make
trial of him in earnest, and you shall find him a miserable Worm. Great
shows and little substance (God wot) like our high hanged Mills that keep
abundance of clacking when they grind the least store of Griste. Or like your
shallow babbling streams that make a great noise, and murmur in their running,
when alas they carry the least substance of water. Ask him why he does not
abandon these his formal and deceiving vanities, why he does not return in
sincerity to the fountain and wellspring of life, and he will answer that he
does as his neighbors do, and that his Religion is the same that the greatest
part are of; so that we may justly compare such mere formalists, unto simple
and silly children, that will follow one another, though it be into the mire
and dirt; whereas the counsel of the Holy Ghost is far contrary to this
their practice, advising all in the fear of God to present their bodies a
living sacrifice holy and acceptable unto God which is their reasonable
service, Romans 12.1, 2
and not to be conformed to the world, but to be transformed by the renewing
of their mind, that they may prove what is that good and perfect and
acceptable will of God. But what I pray does the Apostle Saint Jude say else of
such? But that they are clouds without water carried about of winds, Jude 12.13
trees without fruit twice dead, plucked up by the roots, raging waves of the
Sea foming out their own shame, and wandering stars to whom is reserved the
blackness of darkness for ever, and therefore does Saint Paul exhort all GODS
children by all means in the world not to keep company with such, but to
turn away from them, because they have a form of godliness, but denying the
power thereof. 2 Timothy 3.5.


The mere morallist to be reproved.
Secondly, I must reprove here the mere morallist, I mean the mere morally
honest meaning man, that looks no farther into Religion than the very heathen
did. These are highly to be condemned, making no care at all to return to
Christ, but conceiving their moral actions to be all-sufficient for their
souls salvation. If they be temperate and not luxurious, if just and pay every
man his own, if chaste, and not fleshly given, if careful of performing
covenants, and not break their day; if honest to their neighbors, and not
defraud them of that which is theirs, if liberal handed, and not penurious, if
constant to their friend and not unstable minded, if moderate in meats and
drinks and not voluptuous, if modest in apparel and not proud and arrogant, if
sober minded and not given to sensuality, then they think they have Religion
enough, and that this duty of returning to Christ, and to his fold, is in vain
and needless for them to look after.

But I would to GOD that these men would consider how that the very heathen
that knew not Christ did equallize them in these moral matters, if they did
not outstrip them; and alas alas, what were they without Christ, and all
their moral virtues? What became of their perfections and their virtuous
designs? Surely my brethren, the best that can be said of them is that they
were but [splendida peccata,] but glistring sins, but shining vanities, and
then I pray, what are we, and our righteousness? What are we and all our
Temperance, and Justice, and honesty, and carfulness, and liberality, and
constancy, and moderation, and humility without CHRIST? Isa. 64.6.
Surely nothing else then an unclean thing, and all our righteousness like
filthy rags: and therefore henceforward let the moral and honest meaning
man think of a return to Christ with all speed and diligence, for being with
him we are at the fountain of life, and without him we a e no better than in
the bondage of death, and the reason is this, 1 Ioh. 2.1, 2
because he is our Advocate, and he is the Propitiation for all our sins.

Thirdly, The carnal humourist to be reproved.
I must reprove our carnal humourists who sometimes, will neglect and slight
this duty of returning unto Christ, and to his fold, because it does cross
their pleasures, and other times again because it does cross their profits.
If that the religious performance of this so sacred a duty of returning to our
blessed Savior do but cross their pleasures, that they cannot put away far
from them the evil day, and cause the seat of violence to come near unto
them; that they cannot again lie upon their beds of Ivory and stretch
themselves upon their couches, Amos 6.3, 4 5.
and eat the Lambs out of the flock and the Calves out of the midst of the
stall; that they cannot chaunt to the Violl and drink their Wine in Bowls;
that they cannot with Zimri and Cosbi enjoy their unlawful lusts, Number. 25.6.
and with the deboist crew stay till the wine inflame them: then and presently
then they deal with this gracious exercise, Isa. 5.11.
with this duty of returning to our blessed Jesus, even as our wanton Gallants
deal with their hunting Horses, when they are not for their sports, they must
to the mill. Or and if this sacred duty do but cross their profits that they
cannot lie and sell and get gain; that they cannot join house to house, and
field to field, Isa. 5.11. Amos 8.6.
that they cannot buy the poor for silver and the needy for a pair of shoes,
that they cannot make the Ephah small and the Shekel Great, and that they
cannot falsify the balances by deceit, then and presently then they behave
themselves like Naaman the Assyrian, desiring to be excused and resolving
rather to lose the favor and service of the King of heaven, than the favor
and countenance of their King here on earth, preferring profit before piety,
and the pleasures of sin before the fold of Christ, [saying,] with the Leper in
the story, in this thing the Lord pardon thy servant, 2 Kin. 5.18
that when my master goes into the house of Rimmon, to worship there, and he
leans on my hand; etc. the Lord pardon thy servant in this thing. Before he
promises most absolute obedience, and that he would offer neither burnt
offering nor sacrifice to any other God save unto the Lord, as, 2 King. 5.17.
but as soon as profit and commodity comes in his way, as soon as he bethinkes
himself of his place at Court, he frames an excuse valuing his preferment
under the King of Syria beyond the true service of the eternal GOD. And so
(for application) is it with our carnal humourists, who when their conversion
unto God begins to thwart their profit, that they must go and leave all and
follow CHRIST, they presently fling up all, and cry out amain [hic durus est
sermo,] this is a very hard saying, who can bear it?

Lastly, I must reprove our Lukewarm Laodicean, who has such a conceit of
his own worth and sanctity, as that he thinks he has no need in the world to
have this duty taught and Pressed unto him; he is holy enough already, zealous
enough already, careful enough to be with Christ already, yea and sufficiently
enough already returned to the fold of Christ: but alas alas, we may
justly apply to his breast and bosom the saying of him that has the seven
spirits of God and the seven stars, Rev. 3.17.
whereas thou say thou art rich and increased with goods, and have need of
nothing; I tell thee that thou art wretched and miserable, and poor, and blind
and naked. Such Lukewarm Laodiceans we may truly compare unto your benighted
travelers, who when they are once out of the way think every step they go is
very right, when there is not hardly a step they step but is quite contrary;
and therefore I would counsel such, as the holy Spirit counsels that
Lukewarm Church, (namely) to buy gold tried in the fire that they may be
rich, and white raiment that they may be clothed, and that the shame of their
nakedness do not appear, and to anoint their eyes with eye salve, Rev. 3 18.
that they may see.

But having done with this reproof, Ob.
me thinks I hear the bleeding bosom propounding a question, and saying, if
it be such a necessary matter with all care and diligence, to return to the
Fold of Christ, and so reproofe-worthy a corruption to neglect the duty, and
to continue astray; why then, when are Gods people says he, bound in
Conscience to begin to take in hand this work, and how in like manner must
they look for to perform the same?

For answer hereunto, Sol.
let Gods Children in the first place know, that touching the time of their
returning, it must not be procrastinated and put off from day to day, but
[subito and in praesenti.] forthwith and out of hand, and the reason is taken
from the words of our blessed Savior [saying. Mat. 3.10.
] For now is the Axe laid unto the root of the Tree, every tree that brings
not forth now good fruit, is hewn down and cast into the fire; Now therefore
is the acceptable time, now is the day of salvation; and again says the Holy
Ghost, to day while it is called to day, Heb. 3.13.
exhort one another to return to our blessed Savior, lest any of you be
deceived through the deceitfulness of sin, and again, to day if you will
hear his voice harden not your hearts as in the provoccation.

But here peradventure some one will object and say; Ob.
put the case we do not instantly endeavor to do this sacred duty, but do
delay the performance hereof till some certain years be over our heads, and
do take the swindge and Career of our sins, for a season, persuading our
selves that the Lord will delay his coming to judgment, and so for the present
fill our selves with the delights and pleasures of sin, what? shall we not be
received when we return hereafter, as upon our deathbeds, or in our dotage
and the like?

Sol.
For answer hereunto, and that thou may be really resolved and satisfied in
this thine objection, and in this point of Divinity; I would entreat thee my
Christian brother, to consult with our Saviors words in this very case, who
says [that if an evil servant shall say in his heart, my master does defer
his coming, and begin to smite his fellows and to eat and drink with the
drunken, o that servants master will come in a day when he looks not for him,
and in an hour that he is not aware of, and will cut him off, and will give
him his p rtion with hypocrites and unbeleevers, Mat. 24, 49 50, 51.
there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth; o then what will become of thy
deathbed? what will become of thy dote-age?

Ob.
I but thou will reply and say again, though I do delay and defer my
returning, yet I hope the way to good manners is never too late, it is never too
late to do good, it is never too late to return to God.

Sol.
I answer, true it is, my Christian brother, that the way to good manners is
never too late, and that it is never too late to turn to God Almighty. But I
pray what is the old saying? [Qui non est hodie, cras minus aptus erit.] He
that is not ready for God to day, will hardly be ready to morrow, and again,
how can God take it well at our hands, to sacrifice the prime of our days to
Satan, and keep the bran (to wit) our deathbed, or old age, or dote-age for
his service? nay and know further that though [rescipiscentia vera nunquam sit
sera, tamen serararo vera.] Nay and though true returning to God Almighty be
never too late, yet your procrastinated lip-labor seldom proves true, for
[dat Deus poenitenti veniam, quum non peccanti poenitentiam.] God Almighty many
a time gives his pardon to many a bleeding bosom, when again to other some he
does not give so much as grace as to ask for pardon, and therefore now take
time while time is, delays are dangerous, and put not off from day to day thy
returning to the fold again, but meditate and ruminate on the Preachers
counsel, who lessons thee to remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth,
while the evil days come not, Eccl. 12 1.
nor the years draw near, wherein thou shall say I have no pleasure in them.

Secondly, for our manner of returning to our blessed Savior and to the fold
again, Five manner of ways to be observed by all sinners in returning to the
fold again.
let Gods Children know that these directions and observations and rules
following are to be performed and observed and put in practice; for there are 5
manner of ways whereby we must return to Christ, and to his blessed fold.

First, we must return [cum humiliatione,] with all contrition of heart for
offending our blessed Savior, and for running astray from his fold, and the
reason is this, because [Deus morum emendatione placatur, and qui desinit
errare iram dei mortalem facit,] because Gods wrath is appeased and pacified
with the humiliation of our souls, and emendation of our manners, and he that
leaves off from going astray, makes the wrath of God to become mortal, which
otherwise would destroy him for ever: more instances we have in Ninive; Ion.
3.7. 1 Samuel 7.2 1 Chr. 1^.^3 2 Chr. 3^ ^2
in the children of Israel weeping at Mizpah. In Rehoboam and Manasses, in Mary
Magdalen, Saint Paul, and Peter, who all in an humble deportment did demean
themselves before the throne of grace, returning with all humiliation unto the
great God they had offended; and therefore for conclusion of this point, for
our parts, we should behave our selves like Benhadad and his servants to Ahab,
1 K^n. 2^ ^1
we should return with sackcloth on our loins and with ropes on our heads,
knowing the King of Jsrael is a merciful King.

Secondly, or the second manner of way how we are to return to our blessed
Jesus, from whom we have gone astray, even from our Cradles to this present
hour, is this, we must retu^ne [cum fidelitate,] with an assured faith and
confidence that his blood and passion has merited our redemption, and also
has merited an eternal acceptance for us into the fathers love and favor
again, and the reason is this, [because he that believes so shall be saved,
Mar. 16.16
but he that believes not so shall be damned. Oh therefore my brethren, let
us draw near with a true heart in full assurance of faith, having our hearts
sprinkled from an evil conscience, Heb. 10.22.
and our bodies washed with pure water.

Thirdly, we must return [cum detestatione iniquitatum,] with a loathing and
detestation of our former conversations; we must be weary of the burden and
pressure of our, sins our former life in sin must be no more pleasant in our
sight than your bitter gall and wormwood is to our tastes and pallates; for so
will the children of GOD behave themselves when they return to God, Ezec. 36.31
according to the saying of the Prophet in this particular (saying) then shall
you remember your own evil ways and your doings that were not good, and
shall loath your selves in your own s^^ht, for your iniquities and for your
abominations.

Fourthly we must return [cum sinceritate,] with the sincerity and integrity
of all our hearts. It Is not enough for us to cry Lord, Lord, we return to thee
and to thy kingdom, and to do this only with a mere orall and verbal
expression, with the utterance and declaration merely of the lips and tongue;
but we must perform and do it [(...),] with and in the truth of the substance
of our hearts sincerely, loving nothing so dearly as to be with Christ: and
therefore says the blessed father of all mankind, Mat. 15.18
fili da mihi cor tuum] son give me thine heart, mightily disliking and
condemning all such manner of men, whose lips are near him, and whose hearts
are far from him, yea and in great wrath and indignation threatening a most
dismal plague and misery to fall upon them, and the kingdom wherein they
live, according to the words of the Prophet (saying) because this people honor
me with their lips, and their heart is removed far from me; therefore behold I
will proceed to do a mavelous work amongst this people, even a marveilous
work and a wonder, the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the
understanding of the prudent shall be hid. Isa. 29.14.


Fifthly, and lastly, we must return [cum perseverantia,] with continual
perseverance, endeavoring this so sacred a duty, daily and hourly, nay even
till our last breath, whereupon says Solomon [bee thou in the fear of the
Lord all the day long, and he renders an effectual reason for it, because
that he that wandreth out of the way of understanding shall remain in the
congregation of the dead. Prove. 21.16.
It ought therefore to be our daily care to be continually busied about so
sanctified a work, and the rather too, Gal. 6.9.
because as Saint Paul says [metemus si non elanguerimus,] we shall reap if
we faint not, that is, we shall enjoy the crop and harvest of everlasting
glory if we persevere to the end without Apostasy; and therefore as S. Paul
says, be steadfast and unmovable, 1 Cor. 15.58
always abounding in the work of the Lord, for as much as we know that our
labor is not in vain in the Lord, I say not in vain, because also an
uncorruptible Crown of life God has promised in his mercy to bestow upon
them; Rev. 2.10. Mat. 24 13
witness his words to Smyrna (thus) be faithful unto the death, and J will
give thee the Crown of life; and again, [qui perdurabit ad finem is
servabitur,] he that endures to the end the same shall be saved.

But how shall I know says the wounded Conscience, Ob.
says the remorsefull heart and bosom, that I do observe all these rules
and directions, that I return to my blessed SAVIOR with Humiliation, with
fidelity, with a detestation of mine iniquities, with sincerity, and with
perseverance?

For the resolution of this point, Sol.
that thou may undoubtedly know when thou art effectually returned unto the
great Shepherd and Bishop of thy soul, Diverse characters whereby we may know
when we from the practice of sin are returned to the fold of Christ. The
first character. 1 Cor. 2.9.
take into consideration these Characters, which will infallibly inform thee
whether thou be returned or not. Which characters are three.

First, if thou be effectually returned from the wild and vast commons of
sin, into the enclosure and pasturings of grace, (namely) unto the great
Shepherd and Bishop of thy soul; then thou will mind nothing more than the
things of a better life (namely) which thy blessed Savior has prepared and
laid up for those that love him. An instance for confirmation hereof we have in
Saint Paul, who being weaned from the worlds vanities, and entered into the fold
of CHRIST, minds nothing more than a dissolution for to be with Christ
[saying, Cupimus dissolvi,] I desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ.
Besides, if it be so with thee, as is before spoken of, thou will have then
such an high esteem and conceit of the happiness that Christ's Lambs enjoy
and are partakers of within the fold, as that for other mundane transitory and
perishing matters, Phil. 3.8.
thou will account them no better than dung for to win Christ. Oh then my
brethren, how far think you are those men from the state of holiness, yea
from Christ and his fold, that mind nothing else but this world? how wretched
are their meditations, yea o how miserably are their minds pestered with
cankering cares? They lie down in carfulness, they rise up in sorrow, and
the pelse they dote on is reserved to their own hurt: Eccl. 5.13.
for conclusion therefore of this point, o you that are sheep of Christ's
blessed pasture, that are Lambs of the flock and are within Gods pale, see
that you show it in your lives and conversations: let the things of a better
life be the chiefest treasure you set your minds upon; set your affections on
things that are above, Col. 3.2.
and not on things that are below. Show to the world that you are risen with
your blessed Savior, by seeking those things above where Christ sits on the
right hand of God. Yea seek you first the kingdom of God and the
righteousness thereof, and then all other things shall be added unto you.
Mat. 6.33.


Secondly, the second Character The second Character.
to testify to thine own bosom and also to all the world that thou art
effectually returned, is a mortifying or a sanctified endeavoring to mortify
all manner of sin within thee, yea thy beloved sins too, that heretofore
thou have loved most dearly: if then thou perceivest not only the acts, but
even the very concupiscence and lusts after sin to be dead within thee; if
the very appearances of evil seem abominable in thy sight, if there be a
resolution in thee not to dispense with any of thy formerly beloved and darling
vanities, if the fear of God be more precious in thine eyes than the practice
of any corruption whatsoever, and if sin, yea all manner of sin whatsoever
be as poison to thy thoughts, and as rottenbane in thy Meditations, then
without all peradventure thou art in a most comfortable state and condition,
thou art got again within the fold of Christ, and art effectually returned to
the great Shepherd and Bishop of thy soul; and therefore say I now in this
case to all the world, as once St. Paul did to the Colossians in the same. O
mortify therefore your members which are upon the earth, Col. 3.5.
fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affections, evil concupiscence and
covetousnes which is Idolatry for which things sake the wrath of God comes on
the children of disobedience. In short therefore, that we all may be branded
with this eare-marke of heaven, that we for our parts may be known to be
sheep of Christ's fold and Lambs of his flock, let us deal with all our
corruptions, nay with our beloved sins too, as once Samson dealt with the
Philistines, I^d. 15.8. Josh. 11.11.
smiting them hippe and thigh with a great slaughter, and sparing none. Or as
Joshua dealt with Hazor, utterly destroying them all, leaving not one to
breath. Yea in a word touching our beloved sins, let us carry our selves to
them, as Joshuahs Captains did toward the five Kings, let us even set our
feet upon the necks of them, Josh. 10.24 Ezekiel. 18.30.
and trample them into the dust, and so our iniquities shall not be our ruin.

Thirdly, and lastly, The third and last character.
the last character whereby a man may know and most assuredly ascertaine
himself, that he is effectually returned to Christ, is a daily and a
continual longing after the performance of the works of piety; so that if thou
be zealous of good works, Tit. 2.14.
if with Zachary and Elizabeth thou strivest to be righteous, before God,
walking in all the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord blameless, ^uk.
1.6. Acts 24.16.
if with Saint Paul thou do exercise thy self to have always a conscience
void of offense toward God and toward men; If with the Cedars of Libanus thou
growest green in the City of our God, Psalm. 92.12, 13. Psalm. 1.3.
if with the flourishing Palm Tree thou do flourish in the Courts of God,
yea if like the Tree planted by the rivers of waters, thou bring forth thy
fruit in due season; then without all question, thou art in the ways of life,
thy condition is the condition of Christ's Lambs, thou art within the fold of
grace, and eff^ctually retu^ned to the great shepherd and Bishop of thy soul:
but if on the contrary thou be barren like Mount Gilboa, if with Hym^naeus
and Alexander thou make shipwreck of thy faith, if with Demas thou betakest
thy self to the world, and forsakest the word; 1 Timothy 1.19, 10.
yea if with Demas thou betakest thy self to the world and forsakest the word;
2 Timothy 4.10
yea if with Isaiahs greedy dogs thou can never have enough of sin, saying,
come let us fill our selves with strong drink, Isay 56.12.
and tomorrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant, then it is a very
fearful sign, that thou art in the state of unregeneration, Deuteronomy. 32 32
that thy Vine is the Vine of Sodom, and of the fields of Gomorrha, that thy
grapes are grapes of gall, and that thy clusters are bitter: and therefore in
this case I say unto thee, as once the Prophet Hosea said unto back sliding
Israel. Hos. 14.1, 2.
O Israel return unto the Lord thy God, for thou have fallen by thine
iniquities.

And thus much for the action and duty of our returning, come we now to the
object, which we call [terminum ad quem,] the principal party to whom we are
to bend our course, illustrated and set forth unto us by two Titles of office.
(viz.) [Shepheard and Bishop, and that with this comfortable qualification too,
[animarum vestrarum] of your souls, To the Shepherd and Bishop of your souls.

And first (...), to the Shepherd.

Our blessed Savior Jesus Christ was an absolute Shepherd three manner of
ways.
That our blessed Savior Jesus Christ blessed for evermore is called a
Shepherd, Saint Paul does restifie, as well as our Apostle Saint Peter here in
the Text, calling him, [(...)] that great shepherd of the sheep; which office
of his also to be a shepherd, will appear more plainly, if we consider three
things.

1. His calling to the office. 2. The Shepheardly instruments and provisions
which he uses in performing the office. 3. His faithfulness in the exact
performance of the same.
First, our blessed Saviors calling to the office, shows that he came not
thereunto by violent intrusion, but in and by a lawful way, even being called
thereunto from the very womb and therefore terms himself, Isa 49.1. Ioh.
10.11.
[(...)] the good Shepherd. Others that come not in so by the door, are
thieves and robbers.

Secondly, the shepheardly instruments and provisions which he uses in the
performance of this his shepherds office, declare him to be an absolute
shepherd also, which instruments first are these.

First, he has [virgam and baculum and Hamum consolationis. Psalm 23.4.
] he has his rod and his staff and his crook to comfort his flock withal,
as that neither Tyrants nor Heretics nor devils shall do them wrong, Ezekiel.
34.25
but they shall sleep as the Prophet says, safely in the woods. Besides he
has [notam cognitionis] he has his brand and his eare-mark whereby he knows
them, Ioh. 10.27.
saying, agnosco eas, I know them.

Next he has [fistulam directionis,] his shepherds whistle, his Shepherds
call, to order them how they shall go, and thereupon says himself [ oves
meae audiunt vocem meam, Ioh. 10 27.
] My sheep hear my voice, and J know them, and they follow me. Thus much for
the instruments he uses in the office, his shepheardly provisions follow.

First, our blessed shepherd, to show himself a careful shepherd over his
flock provides for them, Joh. 10.16.
[unum and bonum ovile,] one good Fold. One in respect of the unity of consent
in Religion, and therefore as they are of one fold, Acts 4.32.
so also shall they be of one heart and of one soul, like the multitude of the
Converts; or like Jsaiahs penitents coming from far, some from the North,
some from the West, Jsa. 49.12. Ezekiel. 34.13.
and some from the Land of Sinim, but all to Gods Mountain, all to Christ's
fold. And good in respect of having an immunitie or freedom from all danger
whatsoever, for they shall not hunger nor thirst, neither shall the heat nor
sun smite them. Isa. 49.10. Ezekiel. 34.14
Now as touching the place where this fold shall be, Ezekiel calls the high
mountains of Israel.

Secondly, or the second provision that our blessed Savior, the great
Shepherd of our souls cares for for his flock, whereby he shows himself to
be a careful shepherd indeed, is [pascua jucundissima,] he provides most
wholesome, and most pleasant feeding for them. Cant. 6.2. Ezekiel. 34.13 Psalm. 23.2.
Solomon in his Canticles calls them beds of spices: Ezekiel the mountains of
Israel, and the inhabited places of the Country, and the Psalmist David calls
them green pastures; all which insinuate Christ's wonderful care and love, in
so richly providing for his beloved flock, Ezekiel 34 29
telling also that he will raise up for them a plant of renown.

Thirdly, he provides for his flock to show testimony of his infinite care
and love toward them [medicamina saluberrima,] all the wholesome medicines that
can be imagined for their cure, and therefore says, that he will not only
seek that which was lost, and bring again that which was driven away, Ezekiel.
34.16
but will bind up that which is broken, and will strengthen that which is ^ick
and will feed them with judgment.

Psalm. 23 2.
Fourthly, he provides [aquaria suavissima,] most sweet waterings for his
flock. The Psalmist calls them the waters of comfort. The Prophet Isaiah calls
them the springs of water, Isa. 49.10.
[saying] even by the springs of water shall he guide them. Rev. 7.17.
Yea and Saint John in his Revelation calls them the living fountains of
waters, (saying, he shall lead them unto living fountains of waters, yea and
he terms them elsewhere the fountain of the water of life [saying] I will
give unto him that is athirst of the fountain of the water of life freely.
Rev. 21.6.
All which most pregnantly illustrate this ground of truth, that the flock of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ blessed for evermore, shall have all
necessaries whatsoever, and shall want no manner of thing that is good.

Lastly, he provides for them [refrigerium tranquillum,] a peaceful quiet and
a most rest-full Lare, Ezekiel 3^.15
[saying,] I will feed my flock, and I will cause them to lie down, says the
Lord God; and again, Ezekiel. 34.28
they shall no more be a prey to the heathen, neither shall the beasts of the
Land devour them, but they shall dwell safely, and none shall make them
afraid; Yea I will make a covenant of peace with them, verse 25.
says the great Shepherd, and will cause the evil beasts to cease out of the
Land, and they shall dwell safely in the wilderness, and sleep in the woods;
whence briefly appears thus much, as is before specified, how Christ's flock
have a comfortable lare, a comfortable resting place, and how that they shall
lie down in peace, and no one shall make them afraid.

The third point now wherein our blessed Savior showed himself to be an
absolute Shepherd, is his faithfulness in the exact performance of that his
office; Which faithfulness he showed two manner of ways.

First, In quaerendo oves, in seeking out his flock. Secondly, In tradendo
vitam ejus propter oves, in delivering up his life for his flocks sake.
First, I say, Mat. 15.24
he showed his faithfulness in the exact performance of his shepherds
Office, by seeking out his flock; and thereupon professes to all the world,
that he was sent to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, and again, I am not
come to call the righteous says he, but sinners to repentance; and again he
says, behold I, even I will both search my sheep and seek them out, and as a
shepherd seeks out his flock in the day that he is among his sheep that are
scattered, Ezekiel. 34 11, 12.
so will I seek out my sheep, and will deliver them out of all places whereby
they have bin scattered in the cloudy and dark day, says the Lord God.

Secondly, he showed his faithfulness in the exact performing of his
shepherds office, by delivering up his life for his flocks sake. He who
being in the form of GOD, Phil. 2, 6.
and thought it not robbery to be equal with God, made himself for his
flocks sake of no reputation, yea humbled himself and became obedient unto
death, even the death of the Cross for his flocks redemption. Oh my Christian
brethren, was there ever shepherds love like to the love of this our great
Shepherd? Oh here is love passing the love of women! Many shepherds there are
which peradventure will be very careful for the safety of their flocks, but
never any shepherd save this our great Shepherd, the shepherd of our souls,
that ever laid down his life for to save his sheep. He did it alone, Gal. 3.13.
and none but he, suffering himself to be made a curse for us, that we might
obtain the blessing of the Father through him, and thereupon terms himself
to be, and that meritoriously [Pastor ille bonus] that rare and excellent and
good Shepherd, that did dare to do such a matter for his flocks salvation,
professing farther, that as the father did know him, that so he did know the
Father, Ioh. 10.15.
and that he did lay down his life for his sheep.

And thus much for the first title of the office which our Apostle Saint Peter
renders to our blessed Savior here (namely) that he was a shepherd: come we
now to the second (namely,) that he was a Bishop also, and that [animarum
vestrarum] the Bishop of your souls, as in the words of the Text, but now are
ye returned to the great Shepherd and Bishop of your souls.

(...); and Bishop. As our blessed Savior is called a Shepherd from governing
and guiding his flock; so is he most justly called a Bishop from his teaching
and instructing them. [(...) ab (...), and that (...),] from the overseeing or
looking into, or searching, or thoroughly considering the nature of his flock,
for so did our blessed Savior carry himself toward his blessed Lambs, even
from the manger to Mount Calvary, even from Mary's womb to Golgotha. In short
therefore, let all the world know that our Savior was a true and real Bishop,
and that because too all the significations, all the interpretations, Nay, all
the full and whole meaning of the word [(...)] that is to say, Bishop, as in
their proper place and center met in him. Three manner of ways is our Savior
justly to be termed Bishop.
Three manner of ways therefore in brief may we call our blessed Savior an
absolute and real Bishop.

1. In respect of the significations of the word [(...)] of the word Bishop,
which were seen upon him. 2. In respect of the qualifications of a Bishop by
the spirits censure. 3. And lastly in respect of all the comfortable agents,
that were ever used in any Diocese for the comforting of Gods Church.
First, therefore as your [(...)] is inspector, is and ought to be an
over-seer and a Controller, Isa. 49.1.
so for application in this respect may our blessed Savior be justly termed
to be [(...) a Bishop,] and the reason is this, because the Father gave him for
this end and purpose, and called him even from the womb and from the bowels of
his mother, (namely) to raise up the tribes of Jacob and to restore the
preserved of Jsrael. Jsa. 49.6.
Yea, and also to be a light to the Gentiles, and salvation unto the ends of
the earth. Yea and our blessed Savior himself to show his care and oversight
that he was an overseer of his flock, saying thus, [ I will bring the blind by
a way that they know not, Isa. 42.16.
I will lead them in paths that they have not known, I will make darkness
light before them and crooked things straight. Next that he was a controller
over the flock, let his own words be judge, o says he [speaking to your
evil and wicked Pastors, because you have thrust with the side and shoulder,
Ezekiel. 34.21, 22.
and pusht all the diseased, with your horns, till you scattered them abroad,
therefore will I save my flock, and they shall be no more a prey, and I will
judge between cattle and cattle.

Secondly, as the word [(...)] is one, [qui alicui rei curandae praefectus
est,] I say is one, that is ruler and governor over any thing that is to be
cared for, so for application also in this respect may our Savior justly be
termed a Bishop, being chief ruler and governor over the flock of God, that
was to be cared for: and to be redeemed from death and thraldom, and hereupon
the Prophet Zachary speaking of this our blessed Bishop and of this rule and
government, Zech. 9.10, 11.
says that his dominion shall be even from sea to sea, and from the river even
to the ends of the earth, Mich. 5.4.
and that by the blood of his covenant he shall send forth the prisoners out
of the pit. Yea and he shall be great unto the ends of the earth, and again,
his government shall be upon his shoulders, and of his rule and Dominion shall
there be no end.

Thirdly as the word [(...) namely Bishop, signifies [custos] to be a
watchman or Guardian ^r keeper or preserver, so for application, may our
blessed Savior be termed a Bishop in this respect also, for he is the
careful watchman of Israel that neither slumbers nor sleeps; Psalm. 127.2 Rev.
21.6. Isa. 49.10. John 10.28
he is the poor souls guardian, and the flocks guide, leading them to the
fountain of life, to the Cristall streams of comfort, he is their keeper and
preserver, suffering not so much as one of them to be lost, but giving unto
them for their everlasting inheritance life eternal.

Lastly as your word [(...) Bishop] is by its clear Etymology, one that is
[ad scopum tendens] one that is still tending and looking toward the mark, so
for application, in this respect also may our blessed Savior be justly
termed to be a true and a real Bishop; o my brethren, what I pray did he
look unto else save the mark that was set before him? save fulfilling his
Fathers will in dying for the sins of the world? save in doing his fathers
commands in satisfying of his wrath and justice? Surely my brethren, he shows
himself so absolute in this nature to be a Bishop, [ad scopum tendens,]
looking still toward the mark, looking still to perform obedience and to do
his fathers will, as that when the extreme bitterness and anguish of death
was presented unto his eyes, Mat. 26.38
when his soul begins to be exceeding sorrowful and heavy even unto death,
nay when his bloody agony is so violent, and so cruel on him, as that his
sweat was like great drops of blood falling down to the ground, yet he
turns not his eye aside from the mark that was set before him, he shrinkes
not one jot from his resolutions of obedience, Mar. 14.36.
but expresses himself thus, (viz.) Father not what I will, but even what
thou will.

Furthermore should any one make scruple or doubt of the realitie of CHRIST'S
Episcopacy, he shall find that all the divine qualifications wherewithal a
Bishop is to be qualifyed by the censure of the Holy Ghost, were really found
upon him.

1 Timothy 3.2, 3 4.
Which qualifications are thirteen.

Thirteen qualifications, to qualify a good Bishop. Lev. 21.17.
First, a Bishop must be [(...),] blameless [reprehensioni non obnoxious,] not
worthy reprehension, he must be without spot or blemish, as was typified and
prefigured in the sons of Aaron; who if they had any spot or blemish at all,
were not to presume to approach to offer the bred of their God. And thus for
application was our blessed Savior a right, and a true Bishop indeed, Luke
23.4, 25.
in whom Pilate, as he testified to the chief Priests, could find no fault at
all, no nor yet Herod, being as the Prophet Isaiah says, Isa. 53.9.
one that had done no violence, neither was there any deceit found in his
mouth.

Secondly, or the second qualification of a Bishop is, he must be [(...), 1 Samuel 2.22
] he must be the Husband of one Wife, not incontinent like Hophni and Phineas;
but he must be [(...),] undefiled, and not distained with uncleannes, his
chastity must be uncorrupted, Luke 1.6.
like Zacharies and Elizabeth's, not daring with Joseph to do that great
wickedness and sin against God, Genesis 39.9.
and in this regard was our Jesus a perfect Bishop cleaving to his Spouse alone
and affectionating none besides (saying) I am come into my garden, my Sister,
my Spouse, I have gathered my Myrrh with my spice, Cant. 5.1.
and I have eaten my honey Comb with my honey.

Thirdly, he must be [(...),] he must be vigilant and watchful, vigilant to
feed the flock, and watchful to chase away all noisome and hurtful beasts;
and in this respect too, was our blessed Jesus a most absolute and blessed
Bishop, Ezekiel 34.^^
saying concerning his flock, [viz.] J will feed my flock, I will cause them
to lie down, yea I will cause the evil beasts to cease out of the Land, ver.
25.26.
and I will make them and the places round about my hill a blessing.

Fourthly he must be [(...),] sober and of a moderate temper, having command
also over distracted passions, and unruly nature. And thus for application also
was our blessed Savior a perfect Bishop, Mar. 6.3.
who when he was nick-nam'd with the flout of Carpenters son, Mat. 9.34.
when again the Pharisees geer'd him and said that he did cast out devils
through Beelzebub the Prince of the devils, is not for all this moved one jot
at all but remains still [(...),] of an unmovable and an unalterable moderate
carriage and conversation thus, (namely) teaching still in their Synagogues,
preaching still the Gospel of the kingdom, ver. 35.
and healing still (notwithstanding all their barbarous language,) every
sickness, and every disease amongst the people.

Fifthly he must be [(...),] of good behavior, not giving offense in his
deportment and demeanor of life, but obeying the Laws. And in this way did
the eternal Messiah our blessed Savior show himself to be a right Bishop
also; for being at Capernaum, with Peter, where tribute was demanded and paid,
and knowing too, that as strangers were liable to the observation of the tax,
so on the other hand, it was as true that the children were free, yet that he
might show himself to be [(...)] of good behavior and without offense, Mat.
17.27.
he wills Peter to go to the Sea for the piece of money that was in the
fishes mouth, saying, take it and give it them for me and thee.

Sixthly he must be [(...)] given to hospitality, he must not have [palmam
contractam, sed expansam] a Nabal-like and a miserable and a niggardly nature
and condition, but a free and open hand to all the world; and after this sort
for application too, was the eternal Son of God a perfect Bishop indeed, for
when he had but 5. barley loves and two small fishes, as a man may say, in all
the world, (though we confess as he was God, so all the beasts of the Forest
were his, and likewise the cattle upon a thousand hills) and when too he was in
a Mountain, a place of hunger, and an argument sufficient rather to keep that
which a man had for his own livelihood, than to part with any, especially to
strangers that he never saw before; yea and when too, the people were so many
(to wit) in number about five thousand, which was enough to give cause to flesh
and blood to dread a famine and a want, should they part with that they had;
Ioh. 6.10.11
the number too of the people being so great, and the provision so small, I say
notwithstanding all these difficulties, does our blessed Bishop distribute with
a merciful and an open hand all the provision that he had for the present, and
most miraculously practices his hospitality upon the whole multitude.

Seventhly, or the seventh qualification of a Bishop, is, he must be [(...),]
apt to teach, Ready to instruct, yea in-season and out of season must be
divide the word; Isa 25.10, 11
dumb-dogs, that neither can, or will not bark, are far unworthy of so high
a function: Jsa. 58 1.
he must cry aloud and spare not, that comes within the compass of this sacred
office: and for application, most condignly then for this cause certainly, is
our heavenly Advocate termed and styled a Bishop, by our Apostle: for who was
more ready to teach then our blessed Savior? who more willing to learn the
ignorant then he? and who more earnest to have men be his Disciples then he
was? look unto him, upon the Sabbath days, and you find him teaching in the
Synagogues; look unto him upon the week days, and you find him teaching
still, sometimes in Mountains, sometimes in deserts, sometimes upon the Sea,
sometimes by the seaside; all ways teaching, never out of action. Whereupon
says Solomon (speaking of our blessed Savior) does not wisdom cry, Pro. 8.1,
2, 3, 4, 5.
and understanding put forth her voice? o she stands in the top of high
places, by the way, in the places of the paths, yea she cries at the gates, at
the entry of the City, at the coming in at the doors.

Eighthly, he must be [(...),] not given to wine, not like the Prophet Isaiahs
greedy dogs, Isa. 56 11, 12
which can never have enough, saying one to the other, I will fetch wine, and
we will fill our selves, with strong drink; and to morrow shall be as this
day, and much more abundant; but he must be [temperantiae filius] carefully
abstemious, by all manner of means, in this particular, looking, that
whenever he makes himself partaker of that creature of God, that he do not
forget God the Creator, but receive it, according to the Gospells rule, for his
stomachs sake, and often infirmities. For application in this point; Luke 21.34.
most truly may our blessed Savior be called a Bishop, for this cause, who
all his life time, practiced temperance in the highest degree, advising all in
the fear of God, to take heed of surfeiting, drunkenness, and the cares of
this life, least the day of judgment come upon them unawares.

Ninthly, he must be [(...)] no striker, that is [non ad horrida promptus
arma,] not desperately forward to manage ruffianlike broils: For Gods
Ministers are peaces messengers, and the strokes and wounds which they are to
lay on sinners, are to be made [gladio oris, non ore gladij,] with the sword of
the mouth, not with the mouth of the sword. For applications sake, our blessed
Redeemer blessed for evermore, was an apparent Bishop in this kind of
circumstance also, for when that Judas had betrayed him into the hands of
sinners, Luke 22.49.
and when that those which were about him, ask't whether they should smite with
the sword or no, yea and when Peter had smote off Malchus his ear, Mat. 26 52
our Saviors counsel straightway is given thus. Put up thy sword into his
place, for they that take the sword, shall perish with the sword. But here
perchance, Ob.
you will object and say that Christ was a striker, because he made a scourge
of small Cords, Joh. 2.15.
and drove out the prophaners out of the Temple, with their Sheep and Oxen,
throwing down also the tables of the money changers, and reproving others that
sold Doves.

To which I answer, and say, first, Sol.
that we do not positively read, of any blow or stroke which Christ gave,
though that he made the scourge, and drove them out, and though without all
question they deserved many too; Next say we, that put the case he smote them,
yet is he not a [(...)] such a striker as the Text condemns, for this he did
[authoritative,] by virtue of his rule, and power, and Magistracy, which he
had over the house of God; others now that offend against the Text, for being
strikers, offend in this, because they have no lawful calling, or warrant, for
the same, to be done by them.

Tenthly, he must be [(...)] not covetous or greedy after filthy lucre, having
his mind addicted to, and pestered with [(...)] the worlds cankering cares,
but he must be [cale deditus, Col. 3.2.
] a man that minds the things of God, setting his affections on things that
are above, and not on things that are below. And how justly (I pray) for
application, may our blessed Savior be said to be a Bishop in this kind? Mat.
4.10.
Oh how infinitely did he slight the world, and the glory of it, when Satan
assaulted him therewith? Mat. 24.2.
what disesteeme again had he of those buildings that the Disciples showed
him? how mightily also does he disrespect the title, of being a King here, when
the people would have taken him by force, and have made him King? Ioh. 6.15.
yea in a word; he is so absolute a Bishop, in this nature also abandoning
filthy lucre, and all covetous desires, and settling his mind, wholly to do
his fathers will, and not looking after the affairs of this world; as that he
says of himself, [though foxes have holes, and birds have nests, yet the son
of man has not where to lay his head. Mat. 8.20.
]

Eleventhly, or the eleventh qualification of a Bishop is, he must be [(...),]
patient, of an enduring nature, one whose endowment of virtuous disposition,
can make a grave at any time, to bury contumelious calumnies. And such a one
for application, was our blessed Jesus too, who when the Soldiers stripped him,
and put upon him a scarlet robe, when they platted a crown of thorns, and put
it on his head, when again, out of mockery they put a reed in his right hand,
bowing the knee before him, Mat. 27.28, 29, 30, 34.
and saying [haile King of the Jews,] when they spit upon him, and also smote
him on the head, when lastly, they dragged him and led him away to be
crucified, and in his torment, gave him Vinegar, mingled with gall to drink,
oh how patient (notwithstanding all these affronts) does he carry himself
continually? yea so patient, as the Prophet Isaiah says of him, that as a
sheep before the shearers is dumb, so opened he not his mouth. Jsa. 53.9.


Twelfthly, he must be [(...),] no brawler, using always the language of
Canaan, and utterly detesting the language of Ashdod. Which virtuous
qualification now (my brethren) most apparently appeared in our blessed Bishop
Jesus, who as our Apostle witnesses of him, when he was reviled, 1 Pet. 2.23.
reviled not again, when he suffered he threatened not, but committed himself
to him that judges righteously.

Thirteenthly, and lastly, he must be [(...)] one that rules his own house
well, having his children in subjection with all gravitie. And such a Bishop
also was our heavenly Savior, who though out of the number of his Disciples he
lost a Judas, A^ts 1.2^.
yet he had the rest of his house in such very good subjection, as that in his
room and stead he had Matthias a better servant. Yea in a word, his oeconomie
was so seconded with such care and vigilance, as that he professes of all his
household, that they had all the marks of a well governed, and of a well
orderd family, as that viz. they heard his voice, Joh. 10.27.
and that they knew him, and that they followed him; sufficient testimonies of
a right disposed family.

Furthermore to add one thing more, and yet no more then needs, we say this
further, that as our blessed Savior was an absolute real and a perfect
Bishop, not only because all the significations of the word [(...), which
signifies a Bishop, Lastly, our blessed Savior was an absolute Bishop, in that
he uses for the good of his Diocese all the comfortable agents that ever
were used in any.
] were both verified in him, and of him; and also because all the
qualifications of a Bishop, according to the relation of the Holy Ghost, in
that case provided, were found upon him in like manner, but farther also do we
say in admiration of our Saviors Episcopacy, and also by way of consolation to
the whole Diocese of the world, we mean his Saints, his flock, his beloved
Church and Spouse that he was a Bishop too; for his having and for his sending
in, and to, and throughout all his Diocese, all the comfortable agents or
agents of comfort, that can any ways be beneficial or advantageous
thereunto. Which agents of comfort (if I may speak so comparatively,) are as
many as any good Bishop has in any Diocese of the world. The first agent of
comfort which our Bishop uses through the whole Diocese of his flock. Joh.
16 7.


First, then the first agent of comfort that our sacred and blessed Bishop
has, and which also he did promise to send unto the whole Diocese of his
flock for their government and consolation is, and also was [spiritus
consolatorius] the great and blessed comforter, of whom our blessed Bishop said
thus (namely) that he would not come, till he did depart and send him.

This [spiritus consolatorius] this great and blessed comforter now being to
come [by the Bishops Mission] to the whole society of the faithful, to Christ's
beloved flock, our Savior relates of him again, that for the benefit of Gods
people he would perform and look unto three principal and material points
very necessary for the guidance of the whole Church of God.

Ioh 16.8.
1. First, that he would [reprehendere peccata,] reprove them of their sins.
For it is impossible that Gods people can see their errors till GODS Spirit do
reprove them. Job. 16.13.
2. Secondly, that he would [gubernare illos in veritatem] guide them and lead
them into all the truth of God. For how can it be otherwise but that sinful
flesh must err, should it not be guided by the Spirit of grace? Ioh. 16.15.
3. Thirdly, that he would [demonstrare quae facienda,] teach them and show
them what things they were to do. For how should Christ's Scholars learn to
perform Christ's will, should not the blessed Spirit their Schoolmasters teach
them their Christ-crosse-row?
And thus [my brethren] and in these respects does [spiritus consolatorius] the
sacred and blessed comforter to the whole Episcopal jurisdiction, peculiar,
charge and cure of Christ, and to every parcel and member of the same, (if
under favor I may so say without offense to any, and without suspicion of
blasphemy) [tanquam consolatorius cancellarius,] as a most loving and careful
Chancellor, glorifying our Bishop Jesus Christ, blessed for evermore, and also
showing whatsoever he received to his blessed flock, of the which we may
comfortably read at large, John 16.14

The second agent of comfort that Christ o^r Bisho^ ^seth in his Diocese is
the holy Scriptures. 1 Ioh. 2.1, 2.
Secondly, or the second agent of comfort that our Bishop has for his Church,
are [sacrae Scripturae] even the holy and sacred Scriptures, which (if I may be
so bold to use the phrase) like faithful suffraganes or surrogates, are
supporters and helpers to the Bishops flock. For instance sake, when any
wounded conscience is terribly skared with the affright of sin, then speak
Christ's suffraganes, even the holy Scriptures, viz. that we have an Advocate
with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for all
our sins. Rom 8.1.
If again death and damnation tell us we are damned, then speak Christ's
suffraganes, even the blessed Scriptures, (namely,) that there is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. In a word, when Satan sets upon
any within the jurisdiction of our Bishops See, telling them they are but lost
sheep and under the shadow of death, then speak Christ's suffraganes, even the
supporters of his poor flock, that they are delivered from the power of
darkness and translated into the kingdom of Gods dear Son. Col. 1.13.


Thirdly, The third agent of comfort which our Bisho^ uses in his Diocese for
to comfort his people withal is his register book.
or the third agent of comfort that our Bishop has for to support, aid and
comfort his little flock the Church, is [Regestum] his Register book, wherein
heavens records are most purely kept and preserved, and this Register book, I
hope without any offense either to the Bishop of our souls, or else to any of
his beloved sheep of his blessed Pasture, may be adjudged of us to be [liber
vitae,] the book of life. Which Register book of our blessed Bishop (that I may
speak all in a word) is extraordinarily helpful and comfortable to the whole
Diocese, I mean, to all Christ's Saints that are members of the same, and that
for these three reasons following.

1. Because all Christ's Lambs, all his dear Saints, all the sheep of his
Pasture, yea all that love him and are laborers in his sacred Gospel, have
their names there recorded, Phil 4.3. 2. Because their names being once there
entered, they shall never be cancelled out, they shall never be obli^erated, but
Christ will confess them before his Father, The fourth agent of comfort which
Christ has in his D^ocesse are his powerful proctors, v^z.

His sufferings and temptations which sollicits his Churches cause.


and before his Angels, Rev. 3.5. 3. Lastly, because they shall be adjudged, and
because they shall have sentence past upon them, by their soule-saving Bishop,
according to the records that are found therein, Rev. 20.12.
Fourthly, or the fourth sort of comfortable agents, that our Bishop has for
to speak for his Church and flock are [procuratores,] are his powerful
Proctou^s, which [my brethren] under him, (he being the grand Advocate of
heaven and earth) do continually in the presence of his Father solicit his
Churches cause, and these [procuratores,] these powerful Proctors are
generally two. viz. 1. Sanguis and passiones, his blood and sufferings. 2.
Temptationes, his Temptations which he endured when he was on earth.


First, I say again the first Proctour that the Bishop of our souls the grand
Advocate of heaven and earth, The first proctour to solicit Christ's Churches
cause is his sufferings.
has for to solicit his Churches cause in the presence of the eternal
Father, is [sanguis and passiones,] is his blood and sufferings. Oh his death
and Passion (my brethren) is a powerful pleader, in the ears of the great
Judge; yea their pleadings and solicitations are so full of power and truth,
that they prevail with the eternal Father to commiserate his oppressed
Church; and thereupon says the blessed Spirit (speaking of the efficacy of our
Saviors blood) namely, Heb. 12.24.
that his blood speaks better things for us then that of Abel. Yea and
again, Heb. 9.13, 14. If the blood of Bulls and Goats, and the ashes of an
Heifer sprinkling the unclean sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh, o how
much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal spirit offered
himself without spot to God, purge your consciences from dead works to serve
the living God?

The second proctour to solicit Ch^ists Churches cause is his temptations
Secondly, or the second Proctour that the Bishop of our souls has for to
solicit his Churches cause in the presence of the eternal Judge is
[temptationes,] is his temptations that he endured for us, when he was on
earth. Oh my brethren, as his wounds plead for us, that we may be made whole,
as his stripes plead for us, that we may not be beaten, as his shame pleades
for us that we may enjoy honor, so his temptations plead for us that we may
not be tempted above our strength, but that we may have through his merits an
happy issue out of all: according to the saying of the sacred Spirit (namely)
In that he himself has suffered being tempted, he is able to succor them
that are tempted. Heb. 2.18.


Lastly, or the last agents that our Bishop uses for the good of his Church
and flock, The last agents of comfort for Christ's diocese, are the
Apparitours he uses.
are [Apparitores,] are his Apparitours, whose office it is to summon all his
flock, to appear before him, either in the Court of conscience here, where he
sits as chief, or in the great Court of Heaven hereafter, where he sits as
Judge.

And these Apparitors in the general we find to be three. The three
Apparitours which our Bishop uses for to summon al his Diocese to appear
before him


1. Reprehensio Sanctorum, the due reproof of his Saints. 2. Castigatio
filiorum, the chastisements he sends his sons. 3. Vox tubae ultimae, the sound
of the last Trump.
The 2. first of these summon our Bishops flock to appear before him in the
Court of conscience here, whereupon they make a conscience of their lives to
come; and the third which we may call [Apparitor Apparitorum,] to wit, the
great and general Apparitor of all, (namely) vox tubae ultimae, the sound of
the last Trumpet, summons them to appear at the great Court of Heaven
hereafter to hear then their judgment that shall last for ever.

First, then again I say the first Apparitor The first Apparitour.
that our Bishop uses to summon his flock that they may appear before him in
the Court of Conscience here where he sits as chief, is [reprehensio
Sanctorum] is the due reproof of his Saints. Witness that one example for
all, namely, Acts 2.41.
our Apostles three thousand souls, who sometimes were rank geerers of our
Bishop and his Gospel too; Oh my brethren, for illustration hereof what I pray
made those mad Cretians at the first, to appear such good Christians at the
last? what summoned them now to appear in the Court of conscience, and that
before him whom they had contemned and scorned, when before, all their life
time, they made no conscience of what they did at all? ver. 12 13.
What makes them to appear now full of sobs, who before were full of scorns?
what draws now tears from their eyes, sorrow from their hearts, and
lamentation from their cheeks, because they had been so rebellious against the
Bishop of their souls, so long, but even [reprehensio apostolica,] the
Apostles due reproof, wherein he tells them, Acts 2.23.
that they had taken and crucifi^d and slain the Lord of life? this done, and
the reproof being served upon them thus, Oh how penitent do they appear
straightway, when as before they had made their faces harder then a rock? how
are they pricked in heart now who before had hearts of flint? Yea, ^cts 2.41.
o how gladly do they receive the Bishops charge and directions too, though
before they were mere enemies to all grace and piety? Certainly (my brethren)
now the Bishops process being thus served upon them, (as we see) and they
readily appearing in the Court of conscience, do mind now nothing more than
to make a conscience of their lives to come, continuing as the Text says,
steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking of bread
and in prayer. verse 42.


The second Apparitour.
Secondly, or the second Apparitor that our bishop uses over his flock whereby
he summoneth them to appear before him in the Court of conscience here, is
[castigatio filiorum,] the chastisements which he sends his sons, and whereby
he makes them fit members of his mystical body. Thus was David summoned to
appear at the Court of conscience, and before too the great Bishop of his
soul, when there dyed even from Dan to Beersheba, 2 Samuel 24.15, 17.
and that within the compass of three days, seventy thousand men, for as we
read, when the most bitter judgments of God were upon him, and his people, and
when he had used little conscience indeed, in distrusting the arm of Heaven
and trusting upon the arm of flesh, and when he saw the Angel that smote the
people; then he cried out and said, [peccavi,] I have sinned, I have done
wickedly, but these sheep what have they done? O let thine hand I pray thee,
(says he) against be me and against my fathers house. Here Gods chastisements
we see are an effectual summons, which brings David to appear at the Court
of Conscience; and now what good use he makes thereof, let the text be judge,
for he says after the hand of God was upon him, and after he had made his
appearance in the Court of conscience, Psalm. 119.71
that it was good for him that he had been in trouble, that he might learn
Gods statutes, for before he was afflicted, as he confesses, again, he went
wrong, verse 6.7.
but now he has kept Gods word. A second instance we have in the children of
Jsrael, what I pray summons them, to appear before the Lord in Mizpeth: and to
come to the Court of conscience and to cry [ peccavi? ^ Sam. 7.6.
] Oh my brethren, was it not [digitus Dei?] was it not the finger of God? was
it not Gods chastisements on them? when he suffered the Philistines to kill of
them in battle about fourscore thousand men? 2 Samuel 4.2.
Yea in a word, ^^ab 3.6.
what made Ninevi that great City to appear, in sackcloth and ashes?
Shechaniah to be ashamed and blush? Yea Daniel to cry [ we have sinned, Ezra.
9.6.
we have done wickedly we have committed iniquity, and have rebelled against
thee?] unless it were [ castigationes and afflictiones, Dan. 9.5.
] Gods chastisements and scourge upon them, which made them at length to give
appearance in the Court of conscience and to return unto the Shepherd and
Bishop of their souls.

Lastly, the last Apparitour that our Bishop uses for the good and comfort of
his flock, and which we call the great and general Apparitour over all, is
[vox tubae ultimae] the sound of the last Trumpet. Both Sea and Land shall
hear its summons fully, for to make their appearance at the great Court of the
last judgment day, according to the saying of our blessed Savior, (to wit,)
Behold, I show you a mystery, we shall not all sleep, 1 Cor. 15.51 52.
but we shall all be changed, in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the
last Trump, for the Trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised
incorruptible, and we shall be changed. Ezekiel 37 5, 6.
Then shall Ezekiels dry bones hearing this sound and summons, receave breath
again, and sinews, and flesh and skin shall cover them, and they shall live.
Then shall the graves yield up their dead, and dust and ashes shall then live
again. Rottenness in decayed nature then shall receive strength, and old aged
mortality shall learn then to be come immortal. The deaf also then at this
summons shall have a quick ear, and willing or nilling shall appear at the
great Court* Thus all men (my brethren) upon this last summons shall give their
attendance, waiting the judgment of the great judge, who in our Text here is
called the Shepherd and Bishop of our souls.

And now to conclude in brief, and that we may make our selves ready for his
second coming, 1 These. 5.23
I will make that prayer for us all, which once Saint Paul made for the
Thessalonians (viz.) now the very God of Peace sanctify us wholly, and I pray
God our whole spirits and souls and bodies may be preserved blameless, unto
the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, unto judgment, who (as our Apostle tells
us in the Text) is the great Shepherd and Bishop of our souls.

FINIS.
PAge 6. line 19. for are read care, p 6 l. 2 r. for strait r. stray, p 11. l.
24. for this r thus p. 14. l. 12. for that, r. the p. 15. l. 26. for should r.
should, p. 19. l. 15. for actions, r. action, p. 24. l. 4. for profane, r.
perchance, p. 24. l 11. for babbling, r. bubling, p. 38. l. 34. for saying, r.
sa th, p. 39. l. 13. for this, r. his.


