A GUIDE FOR THE PENITENT: OR A Model drawn up for the help of a Devout Soul
wounded with Sin.

Tertull. Peccator omnium Notarum,
Et nulli Rei nisi poenitentiae natus.
LONDON, Printed by I. Flesher, for R. Royston Bookseller to his most Sacred
Majesty. MDCLXIV.

TO THE Christian Reader.
AMong the so troublesome multitude of Books, and the no less troublesome
scarcity of good ones, I have no reason to think this little Piece will much
increase the number of the one, or not serve to balance the trouble of the
other: but I rather hope it may be acceptable and useful, if either the great
Eminence of the Author, or the Argument it self, or else the small bulk, which
are things that use to render works of this kind considerable, be sufficient
either to recommend or excuse it. For the necessity of the argument may
recommend it not to most Readers only, but very many Writers too. And without
doubt many of those who have been ambitious to put themselves into the number
of Authors by publishing their abortive labors will need the Rules and Offices
of this Manual, when their Conscience shall cite them to Repentance, and to ask
God forgiveness for nourishing Faction, and sowing the seeds of Discord, and
venting their crude Notions to others trouble and their own shame. For such men
in the use of this little Enchiridion may find more comfort, and do
themselves and the Age more right, then in that small harvest of reputation
their own voluminous labors could bring in, which are now very fitly preferred
from the Closet to the more worthy ministeries of the Shop and Kitchen. But the
most Reverend Author, to whose learned Piety thou owe these following
assistences, who in the sweetness and mildness of these lines has expressed the
features and lineaments of his own candid, serene Soul, did not address them
for his own use in that kind. For that he was of the Highest Order of our
Church, he did not owe to his Interest, which advances some, nor to his Money,
which preferrs commonly too many, but wholly to his Virtues and his Learning,
and those other eminent Graces, that made his Example as great in the Church as
was his Dignity. And this little Book is a great instance of his Humility and
Charity, which he does in some kind still exercise, though he be now gone to
receive his reward for them; and as he used to look into the necessities of
indigent persons to relieve them with his hand, so in this Portuise he descends
to converse with the weaknesses and solitariness of humble Penitents, directing
and improving their Devotions, and instigating their Repentance, and preparing
a constant storehouse of relief for them by his Pen. And now if a Person so
eminent in Grace, so innocent in Life, needed such Exercises as this, (for what
thou receivest here, know, Courteous Reader, it comes from his Counsel and from
his daily Experience and Practice too) consider whether thou thy self art not
concerned to bring thy actions and life to as severe a scrutiny and a
Repentance as operative. If thou joynest with me in Opinion, here is a
Directory ready at hand: but if not, thou need it so much the more. For our
Sins, the less impression they make on our memory, the deeper they make on our
Conscience; and he is in some cases the most guilty who presumes he is wholly
innocent. Retract therefore that conceit, and betake thy self to thy Closet and
the practice of this Book, and God bless it to thy benefit and his own glory.

A GUIDE FOR The Penitent.
Remembrances concerning the Examination of your Conscience.
I.
YOu are to consider the Necessity of this Duty. For if we take care that the
Rooms which we eat or sleep in should be kept clean, you cannot but think that
the cleansing of the Soul is a Concernment infinitely beyond it: and for doing
this there is no other way left but to search out every corner of it, and to
cast out every Sin with every unclean thought that has defiled it.

II.
You are to remember, that there is a great Measure of Discretion to be used in
the Performance of this: so that you may neither omit it, when your own heart
may tell you that there is something amiss in you, which must be looked after;
nor on the other side over-scrupulously pursue it when you are not conscious to
your self of any notable Failings but such as are incident to humane frailty:
for if you do not wilfully pass over any of your greater Offenses, but confess
particularly, and repent seriously of them, God will more easily pass by your
lesser Infirmities, being such as the Holy Prophet despaired of finding out,
when he so sadly complained, Who can tell how often he offends?

III.
That though it may not only seem, but be impossible to you to recollect every
failing, and that your scrupulous endeavoring of it may rather prove a Torture
to the Conscience then an Ease to it; yet you are so far to exercise an
Inquisition upon your self, as by observing these lesser particulars (though it
be but in gross) you may the better discover what the corruption of your Nature
sways you to; and having discovered it, you are bound to strive to subdue it by
degrees, and what you cannot for the present overcome, humbly to ask pardon for.

IV.
That though it be the Duty of every day not to let the Sun go down upon any
Sin that you have committed, without examining of the Merits of it; yet there
are Times when this ought to be more punctually and solemnly done, especially
at such times as you set apart for humbling your Soul with Fasting, or for
preparing your self for the devout Receiving of the Sacrament.

V.
For the Manner of Ordering this Examination several Methods have been
prescribed: some by dividing the subject Matter of it into Thoughts, Words and
Deeds; others as sins are differenced by their several Objects, either as being
immediately sins against God, or against your Neighbor, or against your own
Soul: Others advise to set God's Holy Commandments before you, and to examine
by that Rule what you have done amiss. But in the choice of this you may free
your self from all Perplexity by taking his Advice whom you shall choose to be
your Spiritual Guide. And the Duty it self being once resolved upon, the Mode
of doing may easily be found out.

Advice concerning Confession.
I.
THat besides this Examination of your Conscience, (which may be done insecret
between God and your own Soul) there is great use of Holy Confession: which
though it be not generally in all Cases and peremptorily commanded, as if
without it no Salvation could possibly be had; yet you are advised by the
Church under whose discipline you live, that before you are to receive the Holy
Sacrament, or when you are visited with any dangerous sickness, if you find any
one particular sin or more that lies, heavy upon you, to disburthen your self
of it into the Bosom of your Confessor, who not only stands between God and
you to pray for you, but has the power of the Keys committed to him, upon your
true Repentance to Absolve you in Christ's Name from those sins which you have
confessed to him.

II.
You are to remember that you bring along with you to Confession not only
unfeigned Sorrow and Remorse of Conscience for sins past, but settled
Resolutions for the time to come never to offend in the same kind again: for
without this, Confession is but a mere Pageant, and rather a mockery of God,
then any effectual means to reconcile you to him.

III.
That having made choice of such a Confessor who is every way qualified that
you may trust your Soul with him, you are advised plainly and sincerely to open
your heart to him; and that laying aside all consideration of any personal
weakness in him, you are to look upon him only as he is a Trustee from God,
and commissioned by him as his Ministerial Deputy to hear, and judge, and
absolve you.

IV.
That the Manner of your Confession be in an humble posture on your knees, as
being made to God rather then man: and for the Matter of it, let it be severe
and serious; but yet so as it may be without any inordinate Anxiety and
unnecessary Scruples, which serve only to entangle the Soul, and in stead of
setting you free (which is the benefit to be looked for by Confession) perplex
you the more.

V.
That for the frequency of doing this, you are to consult with your own
necessities: and as your Physician is not sent for upon every small distemper,
which your own care may rectify; so neither are you obliged upon every failing
to be overscrupulous, or to think it a point of Necessity presently to confess
it: For the Confessor cannot be always present, but your God is, to whom if you
apply your self with Prayers and Penitence, confessing in his ears alone
whatever you have done amiss, and steadfastly believing that through the merits
of your Savior they shall never be imputed to you, you may be confident that
your Absolution is at that time sealed in Heaven, but the comfortable
Declaration of it you are to look for from the Priest.

Advice concerning Devout Receiving the Holy and Blessed Sacrament.
I.
YOu are first to consider seriously the Infinite Love of your Savior, who not
only offered himself for you as a Sacrifice upon the Cross, but that this
might never be forgotten by you, left the blessed memory of it in his Holy
Sacrament, which as often as you devoutly and faithfully receive, you are
effectually made Partaker of all the Merits of his precious Death and Passion.

II.
That for the frequency of doing this (if your own Conscience does not speak
home to you) you refer your self to your Spiritual Guide, who knowing the
Temper of your Soul, and how you stand disposed, may best direct you. Only I
shall add this, that the oftener you apply your self to do it, your life will
be the purer, your heart the chearfuller, and the better armed against all
Temptations.

III.
That three times in the year at least, especially on those solemn Festivals
observed by all Christians, who have not utterly cast off Obedience to the
Church, and order in their Devotions, you lay aside all, excuses, and every Sin
that then besets you, and seriously prepare your self for so great a Blessing.

IV.
That as soon as you wake that Morning, (and the sooner you awake the better
sign it is that your mind is set upon it) you rouse your self up with a
fervent expectation of Receiving that day the Bread that came from Heaven,
which whosoever is rightly partaker of, shall not perish, but have life
everlasting.

V.
As for the precedent days of Preparation, how many they should be, or how
they should be employed, you are to refer your self to your Guide, who may
advise you not to be over-scrupulous of the Time, (for the Primitive Christians
communicated every day;) and if your life be innocent from great offenses, you
Prepartion need not be long. Only be sure you bring with you Faith and
Charity, clean hands and a penitent heart: which if you do, be confident the
Master of the Feast will not find fault with you for want of a Wedding Garment.

VI.
That upon the blessed day of your Receiving you do more vigorously prepare
your self, by lifting up your Heart and Hands to God, and offering up your
private Prayers (fitted for that purpose with all possible Devotion.) And that
being done, you may compose your self in quiet and in silence, till the time of
the Morning-Sacrifice be come; when being called to a more Public Oratory, you
may be the fitter to go with an humble Confidence to meet your Savior, and
with that Ardour and Affection as a chaste Virgin goes to an holy Marriage.

VII.
That during the Celebration of this Holy Sacrament you attend earnestly to
what is done by the Priest. When he breaks the Bread, imagine to your self that
you see the Body of your dear Savior torn and crucified: and when he pours out
the Wine, consider that his Blood was thus poured out upon the Altar of the
Cross: and last of all, when he that consecrates shall stand before you ready
in particular to apply it, you may then think that you see Christ himself
reaching out his own body and blood to you, to feed your Soul unto Eternal Life.

VIII.
That farther you are really to believe the words as they are spoken; This is
my Body, This is my Blood: and not to doubt but that it is effectually made
good to you in the Receiving, without any dispute* at all, or scrupulous
inquiring into the manner of it, which neither Christ has revealed, and
neither Men nor Angels are able to pry into.

IX.
That the Celebration of these Holy Mysteries being ended, you are to retire
with all Thankfulness of heart for having been admitted to that Heavenly Feast,
wherein your Savior, who gave himself for you on the Cross, has now more
particularly given himself to you in the Sacrament, never to depart from you,
unless you again wilfully offend him; which you are the more earnestly to
beware, left by frequent Relaples the Sacrament it self prove not only useless
but dangerous to you, and your latter end prove worse then your beginnning.

Advice concerning Fasting.
I.
YOu are to consider Fasting either as a Duty enjoined by the Church, or as a
voluntary undertaking of your own. Your Obedience is required to the former in
every particular as far as it is enjoined, unless the want of Health or some
other Accidents may unavoidably hinder you, wherein not only the Bishop may
dispense with you, but he that has the charge of your Soul, especially if the
Necessity be evident.

II.
Besides the ordinary Fasts prescribed by the Church, you are advised to set
aside some Day, either Weekly or (at least) Monthly, wherein you may mourn in
private, not only for your own sins and personal calamities, but for those
public Judgments now fallen on the whole Church and Nation, and those crying
sins which have occasioned them; offering up your earnest prayers to God for
the removing of them, which, when they come from a mortified Body and a
contrite Heart, are such a Sacrifice that God, (who deceives no man) being true
to his Promises, cannot possibly despise.

III.
That the Fast for the time designed be such as may in some measure be
afflictive to you, abstaining totally that day from all manner of food, if the
condition of your health will bear it; or if that cannot be, that you be so
moderate in your feeding, that it may appear that you rather serve your
Necessities in eating then satisfy your Appetite.

IV.
That you employ this Day (or such a part of it (at least) as you may keep free
to your self) as a Retreat from the world, the businesses and the pleasures of
it, that so you may with the more freedom make up the Accounts between God and
your own Soul, and by Prayer and Penitence reconcile your self to him; for
without this, Fasting is of no use.

Expresses of Humiliation preparatory to the following Devotions.
RIghteousness, O Lord, belongs unto thee; but unto me confusion of face, the
vainest, the vilest, the sinfullest of all the children of men.

Lord, I am vile in mine own eyes, and I will be yet more vile, because my sins
have made me vile in thine.

I am not worthy of the Air I breath, of the Earth I tread upon, or of the Sun
that shines upon me; much less worthy to lift up either hands or eyes to Heaven.

For thou have said that no unclean thing shall come within thy fight: and how
then shall I appear, who am so miserably defiled?

If the Man according to thine own heart could say that he was a Worm, and no
Man, O what am I?

If Abraham, who had the honor to be called thy Friend, could say that he was
but Dust and Ashes, O what am I?

O my God, thou made me of nothing; and thou see how I have spoiled this
work of thine, for I have made my self worse then nothing.

For I am still in my Sins, and what to do I know not.

Acts of Resolution to second this Humiliation.
But this I will do;

I Will confess my wickedness, and be sorry for my sins.

I will stand aloof with the Publican, and smite my breast, and say, Lord, be
merciful to me a sinner.

I will return with the Prodigal, and say, Father, I am not worthy to be called
thy Child; make me as one of thine hired Servants.

I will not suffer mine eyes to sleep, nor mine eyelids to slumber, till I
have by the mediation of thy dear Son obtained my pardon.

And what shall I say more? I will pour out my prayers in the bitterness of my
Spirit; and if my dry eyes want Tears, I will call unto my heart for Tears of
Blood, wherewith I may supply them.

And therefore now, Lord, call my sins to my remembrance: and when thou have
done so, blot them out of thy remembrance, and pardon me.

A Litany of Confession to be made use of by the Penitent Soul that finds it
self burdened with a true sense of Sin.
I.
WOE, Woe unto me, O God, that being a Creature of thine, and made by thee
capable of enjoying everlasting felicity, I have lived so wickedly and leudly,
that, unless thy mercy prevent it, I shall utterly forfeit the very End of my
Creation.

But I Repent, O my God, I Repent.
I am utterly ashamed of it.
Lord, be thou merciful to me a Sinner.
II.
Woe unto me, O God, that I have trifled away so many of my Youngest days
without knowing thee, or taking any notice of those strict duties which I did
owe unto thee; that I was so long a Child in all things, excepting Innocence,
and that only by an overhasty Spring of early Wickedness I was more then a
Child.

But I Repent, O my God, I Repent.
I Accuse, and Judge, and Condemn my self for it.
Lord, be thou merciful to me a Sinner.
III.
Woe, Woe unto me; O God, that as I grew up, the seeds of Corruption which I
brought with me into the world grew up along with me, and by insensible degrees
(which I observed not) Pride and Folly and Lust took possession of me, and Sin
has reigned in my mortal Body.

But I Repent, O my God, I Repent.
I am infinitely confounded at it.
Lord, be thou merciful to me a Sinner.
IV.
Woe, Woe unto me, O God, that being washed in the Waters of Baptism from the
guilt of that Original Corruption which I brought with me into the World, I
have since that time so many ways actually defiled my self, that I can no
longer pretend by any former contract with: thee, that I am either a Child of
thine, a member of thy Christ, or an heir of the Kingdom of Heaven.

But I Repent, O my God, I Repent.
I am utterly confounded at it.
Lord, be thou merciful to me a Sinner.
V.
Woe unto me, O God, that having been received into the Bosom of thy Church
(which so many millions of Souls have not had the happiness to be so) I have
ingratefully dishonored thy holy Faith by an unholy Life; and having so often
confessed thee with my tongue, I have denied thee in my life and actions.

But I Repent, O my God, I Repent.
I Accuse, and Judge, and Condemn my self for it.
Lord, be thou merciful to me a Sinner.
VI.
Woe, Woe unto me, O God, that having abjured the Devil and all his works, and
given up my name to Christ, to fight under the Banner of his Cross, I have on
the contrary treacherously complied with his Enemy in many things, and shall be
found (I fear) to have been more diligent in serving him, then I have been in
serving thee.

But I Repent, O my God, I Repent.
I am confounded and astonished at it.
Lord, be thou merciful to me a Sinner.
VII.
Woe, Woe unto me, O God, that being obliged by that high calling of being a
Christian, to renounce the Pomps and Vanities of the World, I have so
infinitely failed in this, that I have doted on nothing more: for those very
Vanities have been my Idols, and my seduced Heart has gone a -Whoring after
them.

But I Repent, O my God, I Repent.
I am ashamed and confounded at it.
Lord, be thou merciful to me a Sinner.
VIII.
Woe, Woe unto me, O God, that being farther bound by that most Solemn Vow,
utterly to forsake the sinful Lusts of the Flesh, I have, in stead of
forsaking them, pursued and hunted after them, and when other temptations have
failed, have been apt enough to kindle my own Fire, and to be a Tempter to my
self.

But I Repent, O my God, I Repent.
I bate, and loath, and abhor my self for it.
Lord, be thou merciful to me a Sinner.
IX.
Woe, Woe unto me, O God, that knowing thy revealed Will to be the Law to which I
was bound in all obedience to submit my self, I, like an Insolent Rebel, have
not only set up my own Will in opposition to thine, but many times preferred
it before thine, and have listened more to the false Oracles of Flesh and Blood
then to all thy Holy Commandments.

But I Repent, O my God, I Repent.
I Accuse, and Judge, and Condemn my self for it.
Lord, be thou merciful to me a Sinner.
X.
Woe, Woe unto me, O God, that being made according to thine Image (the greatest
honor that could be done thy Creature) I have dashed so many blurs and spots
and foul sins upon it, so defaced all the lines and features of it, that unless
the Holy Spirit please to renew that Image in me again, I tremble to think what
I must one day hear, Depart from me, I know you not.

But I Repent, O my God, I Repent.
I am ashamed and confounded at it.
Lord, be thou merciful to me a Sinner.
XI.
Woe, Woe unto me, O God, that having received a Rational Soul from thee, to be a
Moral Light and guide unto my actions, I have been so brutish as to follow my
sensual appetite in stead of it, and have made no farther use of Reason then to
find out vain excuses to cozen my own Soul into all the by-waies of Sin and
Error.

But I Repent, O my God, I Repent.
I Accuse, and Judge, and Condemn my self for it.
Lord, be thou merciful to me a Sinner.
XII.
Woe, Woe unto me, O God, that being endowed with Memory to serve as a Magazine
to treasure up thy Precepts and holy Counsels in, I have stuffed it so miserably
full with the Ideas of former Vanities and Sin, that I have left no room for
thee at all.

But I Repent, O my God, I Repent.
I infinitely condemn my self for it.
Lord, be thou merciful to me a Sinner.
XIII.
Woe, Woe unto me, O God, that having received a Heart from thee to be the seat
of clean and holy affections, and the only Temple for thy holy Spirit to dwell
in, I have so unworthily abused and altered the property of it, that it is now
become a Den of Thieves, and an unhandsome receptacle of all uncleanness.

But I Repent, O my God, I Repent.
I bate, and loath, and abhor my self for it.
Lord, be thou merciful to me a Sinner.
XIV.
Woe, Woe unto me, O God, that my wretched Heart being corrupted, my Imagination
has run wildly after with a swarm of vain and sinful Thoughts, which, like
importunate Flies, being driven away light again and again upon my distracted
Soul, and intermingle with the best of my Devotions.

But I Repent, O my God, I Repent.
I am infinitely troubled and grieved for it.
Lord, be thou merciful to me a Sinner.
XV.
Woe, Woe unto me, O God, that mine Eyes being greedy after Vanity, have been
upon all occasions as open windows to let in Sin; but when by the same way they
should have issued out Penitential Tears, to wash away the stains those Sins
had made, there has been no passage found for them.

But I Repent, O my God, I Repent.
I am inwardly grieved and deplore my self for it.
Lord, be thou merciful to me a Sinner.
XVI.
Woe, Woe unto me, O my God, that for the entertaining of vain conversation, I
have left mine Ears too often open to light and vain and sinful discourses,
and in all my inquiries have hearkened more to what the world says abroad,
then to what thy holy Spirit and my own Conscience says within me.

But I Repent, O my God, I Repent.
I Accuse, and Judge, and Condemn my self for it.
Lord, be thou merciful to me a Sinner.
XVII.
Woe, Woe unto me, O God, that I have not resolved, with thy servant David, to
take care of my ways, that I offend not in my Tongue, but have many times
vainly and inconsiderately let it loose, and, either to please the Company or
my self, I have spoken words which might unhappily prove occasions of sin both
to them and me, without regard, or remembering how great Flames such little
Sparks might kindle.

But I Repent, O my God, I Repent.
I do infinitely condemn my self for it.
Lord, be thou merciful to me a Sinner.
XVIII.
Woe, Woe unto me, O God, that all the parts and faculties of my Soul and Body
have been abused, and have not served the Laws of their Creator, but have so
eagerly and constantly pursued the corrupt desires of a seduced Heart, that I
have cause to fear that either my whole life may be looked upon as one
continued sin, or at least as having admitted so few inconsiderable Pauses,
that if thou should enter into strict Judgment with me, I should not have
the confidence to say when, or where, or wherein I have been innocent.

But I Repent, O my God, I Repent.
I am confounded and astonished at it.
Lord, be thou merciful to me a Sinner.
XIX.
Woe unto me, O God, that I have wretchedly failed even in my best endeavors,
that I have been cold in my Devotions, weary of my Prayers, inconstant to good
purposes, dull and heavy in the way to Heaven, but quick and active in all the
ways of sin, having made it the whole business of my life, rather to seem to
be Religious, then really to be so.

But I Repent, O my God, I Repent.
I Accuse, and Judge, and Condemn my self for it:
Lord, be thou merciful to me a Sinner.
XX.
Woe, Woe unto me, O God, that I have not washed mine hands in Innocence, when I
have gone unto thine Altar, nor made mine heart ready to receive the bread that
came from Heaven, but have failed in my Preparations, and have not sufficiently
considered either mine own unworthiness, or the high secrets of so great a
Mystery.

But I Repent, O my God, I Repent.
I am grieved and troubled at it.
Lord, be thou merciful to me a Sinner.
XXI.
Woe, Woe unto me, O God, that having so often received those inestimable Pledges
of thy love, the precious Body and Blood of thy dear Son in the Holy Sacrament,
I have been so unwary as to admit my former sins under the same roof with thee,
and have unhappily done what lay in me to drive thee from me.

But I Repent, O my God, I Repent.
I am infinitely ashamed at it.
Lord, be thou merciful to me a Sinner.
XXII.
Woe, Woe unto me, O God, that my Repentance, the only plank left me in the
Shipwreck of my Soul, has been so weak, so slight, and so unsteady, that every
small blast of a new Temptation has been able to drive me from it, and by
frequent Relapses into sin, gives me cause enough to repent, even of my vain
repentance.

But I Repent again, O God, again I Repent.
I hate, and loath, and abhor my self for it.
Lord, be thou merciful to me a Sinner.
XXIII.
Woe, Woe unto me, O God, that having received my Life and Being and Preservation
from thee, with so many advantages to have made me happy in this world, and
blessed in the next, I have been so abominably unthankful, that I have cast
all these thy Blessings behind me, and returned thee nothing back for all thy
favors, but affronts, and injuries, and sins.

But I Repent, O my God, I Repent.
I am confounded and astonished at it.
Lord, be thou merciful to me a Sinner.
XXIV.
Woe, Woe unto me, O God, that being Redeemed by the Death and Passion of thy
dear and only Son, I have not laid his bitter Agonies to heart, nor made right
use of the precious Ransom which was laid down for me: That I have not yet
sued out my Pardon with such Penitent Tears as thou requirest, nor laid hold of
the benefits of it by a lively Faith; but have chosen rather stupidly to
continue in my Sins, and to neglect the Blood of the Covenant as an unholy
thing.

But I Repent, O my God, I Repent.
I hate, and loath, and abhor my self for it.
Lord, be thou merciful to me a Sinner.
XXV.
Woe, Woe unto me, O God, that thy Holy Spirit I have grieved, thy Counsels I
have rejected, thy Motions I have quenched, and have entertained the Lusts and
Vanities of this life with far more earnest and passionate affections then all
thy Holy Inspirations.

But I Repent, O my God, I Repent.
I am utterly ashamed and confounded at it.
Lord, be thou merciful to me a Sinner.
XXVI.
Woe, Woe unto me, O God, that having thus far opened my guilty heart before
thee, I have left so many Sins behind that I cannot number them; some that I
have really forgot, some that I would forget, if my Conscience would give me
leave; Sins known, that I cannot conceal, and sins secret, such as I have taken
so much care to hide from others, that they are now become hidden from my self.

But whatsoever they are, or wheresoever they are Registered, whether in my own
Conscience or in any other Record, that may be proved against me in the day of
Judgment,

I call the whole Court of Heaven to witness,
That I do sadly Repent my self of them all;
That I do abhor my self for them all;
That I resolve steadfastly to renounce them all.
Lord, be thou merciful to me a Sinner.
Amen. Amen.
The Penitent Soul having made this or the like Confession, prepares and stirs
up it self to true Contrition.
WHat shall I say more unto thee. O thou that art the Judge of the whole Earth?
or what shall I do more? I have ransacked my breast and laid it open; I have
spread it before thee, as Hezckiah the blaspheming Letter of his Enemy. I do
not desire that there should be so much as any fold, or pleight, or corner of
it hidden from thee.

Or if this be not enough to transact this great business of my Soul between me
and thee alone, and that possibly I may flatter my self in the several acts of
my intended Penitence, I am ready to go farther, and (to make my self the more
ashamed of sinning) with all humility to confess these sins of mine to some of
those servants of thine whom thou have placed between me and thee, and to whom
alone under thee thou have so clearly given the power of Absolution.

O deal with me then as thou did with thy servant David, who no sooner
confessed his sins, but thou forgavest him all his iniquities.

But are there not they who confess their sins, and have the impudence to glory
in them, or at least pass them over without any act of real Contrition, or any
remorse at all?

But, O my God, (if my heart deceive me not) I am none of those; for I can
neither glory in my shame, nor can I be satisfied with my self when I appear
with dry eyes before thee,

After this Preparation these Express Acts of Contrition may follow.
FOR I am grieved, O my God, I am grieved passionately, heartily grieved that
ever I offended thee.

That I, the work of thy hands, have sinned against thee my Maker.

That I, the price of thy Blood, have sinned against thee my Jesus, who had
so much love for me as to be content to die for me.

That I, the chosen Temple of thy Holy Spirit, have sinned against him who
sanctified me.

For this I grieve, and mourn, and my heart is wounded within me.

And having done all this, yet I have not done; for still I am grieved: grieved
that I can grieve no more, that my Head is not a continual Spring, and mine
Eyes Fountains of Tears.

Woe is me, wretch as I am, that I who have been so easy, so forward, so eager
to sin, should be now so untoward, so heavy, so unable to repent.

Woe is me, that I should be still so drowsy, so dead asleep in sin, that I
should not be yet awake, and sensible of the condition I am in.

O that I had died before my unworthy Soul had given way to those first sins,
which have drawn so foul a Train after them.

But, O my God, though I cannot wait on thee among the Innocent, yet deny me
not a room among the Penitent.

Remember, O my God, that though Ahab had sold himself to work wickedness, yet
because he Prayed, and Fasted, and humbled himself before thee, thou had so
much regard even of this outward Penitence of his, as to promise not to bring
the evil upon him in his days.

But, Lord, if my heart deceive me not, I do not only outwardly and seemingly,
but really and cordially Repent.

And therefore for the evil that I have deserved, O my God, rather let the
punishment light upon me in this world then in the next.

Rather let me perform the Penance of my Tears here, then reserve it for that
sad time, when a whole Sea of Tears will do no good.

And having said all this, if my Repentance be yet imperfect, (as I know it
cannot but want many grains, if weighed in this just balance) let the bitter
Sufferings of thy dear Son Jesus be cast into the Scale, and then I shall not
fear if thou enter into Judgment with me.

But of my self, O God, I am utterly unable, and which way to satisfy thee I
know not.

I dare not say so much as the Servant in the Gospel did, Master, have patience
with me, and I will pay thee all. But rather, Master, have patience with me,
for I can pay thee nothing at all, unless thy bounty be so great as to give it
me to pay thee.

I can Fast from a meal sometimes, (though it be with much a do) and I can
Pray, though coldly enough; and if the fit and qualm of my Devotion holds out
longer, I can strain for a Tear or two to sprinkle upon my dry Devotions.

But should I fast my self into Air and Emptiness, and weep my self into Water;
should I tear the skin from this sinful Flesh of mine, I should never be able
to satisfy for the least of those Millions of Millions of sins which, through
the several moments of my life, either ignorantly or knowingly, weakly or
wilfully, I have sinned against thee.

What I have transgressed against others, I am not only sorry for, but ready,
as far as my power will reach, to satisfy. But for my sins against thee, my
God, I must lay my hand upon my mouth for ever, for I have nothing to return or
answer.

But the comfort is (and blessed shall be my Soul, if rightly I lay hold on it)
that it is thou, O my blessed Jesus, who have satisfied for me, one drop of
whose blood is enough to satisfy for the sins of a thousand worlds.

And this being so, will thy offended Father be so rigorous as to require the
same payment again? Especially will he require it of me, a poor, a broken, and
a bankrupt Sinner?

Can thou exact the utmost farthing of him who has not a mite of his own to
pay thee?

The Transition which the Penitent makes from the Acts of Contrition to the
Acts of Resolution for amendment of life, without which all sorrow for sin is
in vain.
BUT because by thy infinite Mercy, O my God, thou have satisfied for me
already, shall I therefore fold my Arms, and sit down and do nothing toward
it? Or, which is worse, shall I go on? Shall I continue in my Sins that Grace
may abound.

Now God forbid.

No, I here resolve rather to die the Death, then ever wilfully to sin against
thee more.

I do here resolve utterly to avoid the temptations and approaches toward
those former sins, which have hitherto so miserably betrayed me.

I do here resolve (thy holy Spirit assisting me) upon all the duties of a new
life; to be hereafter more wary in my ways, and more constant to good
resolutions, to love thee above all the pleasures and interests of this life,
and sadly to consider what an infinite loser I should be, if to gain all that
my corrupt heart desires I should lose thee:

If after all this I should be so miserably forgetful both of my self and
thee, as shamefully to relapse into any of those sins which I have now repented
of.

I do here once more resolve to abhor and loath my self for it, and not to let
my Conscience sleep, or admit of any rest, till I have with bitter Tears and a
sharp reiterated Repentance obtained my pardon.

Having thus far made his Resolution, the Penitent betakes himself to Prayer.
AND now, O thou great searcher of all Hearts, who see that I am of my self
weak and mutable, and no better then a Reed shaken with the wind, O show thy
strength in my weakness: fasten and confirm me in these good purposes, and so
bind them with Cords unto thine Altar, that ^ may never start from thee more,
or be any longer of that Herd, whose good resolutions are as a dream in the
night; or if they last longer, they are but as the next morning dew, and as
soon vanish away.

O give me the Resolution of thy Servant Joshua; I and my house will serve the
Lord.

O give me the Heart of thy Servant David, who so passionately makes his
Protestations:

I will take no wicked thing in hand, I hate the sins of unfaithfulness, there
shall no such cleave unto me.

I will walk in my house with a perfect heart.

I have sworn, and am steadfastly purposed to keep thy righteous Judgments.

Lord, I am not able to think one of these good thoughts without thee, much
less to resolve upon them.

But I, who without thee am able to do nothing, may venture to say as thine
Apostle did, that in thee I am able to do all things.

Lord, give me the strength to do what thou requirest, and then require of me
what thou please.

Amen.
After these Resolutions the Penitent prepares himself with an humble Soul and
bended knees to beg Pardon.
O The God of my life, and the unexhausted Fountain of Mercy which can never be
drawn dry, I have now by the assistence of thy holy Spirit gone through (though
with weak and trembling steps) the whole exercise of Repentance: for I have
confessed my sins, and thou have promised (upon my confession of them) not to
impute them to me; I have gone one step farther, for I have repented of my
sins, and thou have promised again that upon my repentance thou will remember
them no more; and because thy Holy Word has taught me that a new life is the
only life of a true Repentance, I have this day in thy fight, and in the
presence of all the holy Angels that attend thee in the Conversion of a Sinner,
made my firm resolution never to fall again into the sins which I have repented
of.

And now what remains for a poor Penitent to do more, but humbly and earnestly
to beg thy Pardon?

The Penitent's Prayer.
O God the Father, who can not be thought so cruel as to make me only to
destroy me,

Have mercy on me.

O God the Son, who knowing thy Father's Will, did make it thy business to
come into the world to save me,

Have mercy on me.

O God the Holy Ghost, who to the same end did sanctify me in my Baptism,
and haft so often since breathed holy thoughts and motions on me,

Have mercy on me.

O Holy and Blessed and Glorious Trinity, whom in three Persons I adore as my
one and only true God.

Have mercy on me.

Hear me, O Lord.
Help me, O Lord.
Save me, or else I perish.
Lord, carest thou not that I perish? Thou that would have all men saved?
Thou who would have none to perish?

And will thou now show thine anger against a Worm, against a Leaf, against a
Vapor that vanishes before thee?

O remember how short my time is, and deliver not my Soul into the Power of
Hell.

For, alas! what profit is there in my Blood? or who shall ever give thee
thanks in that bottomless pit?

No, let me live in thy sight; let me live, O my God, that my Soul may praise
thee.

Forget me as I have been disobedient, provoking thee to anger; and regard me
as I am distressed, crying out to thee for help.

Look not upon me as I am a Sinner, but consider me as I am thy Creature.

A Sinner I am, I confess, a Sinner of no ordinary strain; but let not this
hinder thee, O my God, for upon such Sinners thou gettest the greatest glory.

O remember for whose sake it was that thou came from the bosom of thy
Father, and did let thy self down so low as to be content to be born of thine
own humble handmaid.

Remember for whom it was that thy tender Body was Torn, and Scourged, and
Crucified, and thy precious Blood shed.

Was it not for the sins of the whole world? and shall I be so narrow-hearted
to my own Soul, or so injurious to thy Glory, as to think that in all this
crowd thou have particularly excepted me?

Or, which is as great a dishonor to thee, can I possibly imagine that thou
diedst only for Sinners of a lower kind, and leftest such as I am without
remedy?

What had become then of him who filled Jerusalem with Blood? What of the noted
Woman who had lived in a trade of Sin? Nay, what had become of thine own
Disciple who with Oaths and Curses thrice denied thee?

O how easy is it for thee to forgive? for it is thy Nature.

How proper is it for thee to save? for it is thy Name.

How suitable is it to thy only End of coming into the World? for it is thy
Business.

And when I consider that I am the chief of Sinners, may I not urge the Father,
and say, Shall the very chief of thy business be left undone?

Mercy, Mercy, good Lord.

I ask not of thee any longer the things of this world; neither Power, nor
Honors, nor Riches, nor Pleasures. No, my God, dispose of them to whom thou
please, so that thou give me Mercy.

O that I could hear thee once say, as thou did to him in the Gospel, My Son,
be of good cheer, thy Sins are forgiven thee.

How would my drooping Spirits revive at such a Sound? and my now wounded Soul
break forth into Hymns and Praises and Hallelujahs for a Mercy so utterly
undeserved of me, and which the Angels which fell could never hear of?

But, O my weak Soul, what do thou fear? or what do thou scruple at? For
thou art not yet in such a desperate condition, but thou may expect that what
was said to him may possibly be said to thee.

Nay, be confident (though it be with a mixture of fear and trembling) that if
thou do not act the part of an Hypocrite all this while, thy Savior stands
ready at the very doors of thy Heart, to breath the very same words in a
heavenly whisper to thee; Be of good cheer, thy Sins are forgiven thee.

Return then unto thy rest, O my Soul, for thy Sins are forgiven thee.

Only take this Counsel along with thee, Sin no more, lest a worse thing fall
unto thee.

O that I could never sin against thee more; never purposely, deliberately,
wilfully sin against thee more.

And for those sins of daily Incursion, those over-familiar corruptions of my
nature, which thou have not yet given me strength enough to conquer; Lord,
either subdue them to me by degrees, or lay them not to my charge.

But wherein soever my Conscience most accuses me, therein, O my God, be thou
most merciful unto me.

Save me, O God, as a Brand snatched out of the Fire.

Receive me, O my Jesu, as a Sheep that has wandered, but is now returned to
the great Shepherd and Bishop of my Soul.

The Iubile of the Penitent Soul after the sense of Pardon obtained.
REjoice over me, O God the Father, that this thy Child was lost, but is found*
was dead, but is alive again.

Rejoice over me, O God the Son, that thy loud Cries and Tears, and bitter
Agonies which for my sake thou enduredst upon the Cross, were not so unhappily
lost, as to be cast away in vain upon me.

Rejoice over me, O God the Holy Ghost, that thy so many secret and powerful
touches have at last got the upper hand of me.

Rejoice over me, O ye holy Angels, a great part of whose Ministry it is, to
rejoice at the Conversion of a Sinner.

Rejoice over thy self, O my Soul, that thou have received so much grace from
Heaven this day, as sadly to confess thy Sins, seriously to repent of them, and
steadfastly to resolve never to be guilty more of so much brutishness, as to be
likened to the Dog that returns to his Vomit, or to the Swine wallowing in the
Mire.

The Petinent closes all with this short Prayer.
LEt this day, O my God, be noted in thy Book.

Do not thou forget my Prayers, nor suffer me to forget my Resolutions.

For though I am weak, though I am unworthy, though I am unprofitable, yet I am
thy Servant.

And here upon my bended Knees I humbly beg of thee, that I may live and die so.

Lord, hear my Prayers, and let my cry come unto thee.

Lord, pardon my Prayers, and let not my coldness and wanderings and infinite
unworthiness turn them into Sin.

Lord, hear my Prayers, and let my cry come unto thee.

Amen, Amen. FINIS.

