ECCLESIA ANGLICANA, OR DARTONS Clear and Protestant Manifesto, AS AN
Evangelicall Key sent to the Governor of OXFORD, for the opening of the Church
Doors there, that are shut up without Prayers or Preaching.

Open me the Gates of righteousness, that I may go into them, and give thanks
unto the Lord.

Psalm. 118. 19. Liftup your heads O ye gates, and be ye lifted up ye
everlasting doors and the King of glory shall come in.

Psalm. 24. 7. It is written my house shall be called the house of prayer, but
ye have made it a Den of thieves.

Mat. 21. 13. Printed in the Year, (...)

ECCLESIA ANGLICANA, Or Dartons Clear and Protestant Manifesto.
SIR,
ANtipater King of Macedon, being presented with a Treatise of happiness: and
that most sublime, and for his contemplation, answered the Philosopher, the
composer of so sweet a pandect, (notwithstanding the superexcellency, and
rarity of such a transcendentall Systeme,) Ego non sumotiousus, I am not at
leisure, etc.

And truly Sir, I read of Felix, (as bad or worse, and therefore merited the
most hideous and dismal character, of a most extreme, unhappy man, that he
did most incomparably dishonor the glory, of that his place and function, when
after that S. Paul had made his heart to tremble, with his Gospell-Logfek; yet
to do the Jews a pleasure, would needs leave him bound. Act. 24. 27.
Application Sr, I shall make none at present, Act. 24. 27.


For if the innumerabilitie of your warlike actions, and your exceedingly
preoccupated time and leisure, be so extraordinarily preingaged, with
necessitated militaries, as that they cannot Necessitated Militaries.
seasonably admit of a little view upon so small a tender, I shall sorrowingly
doom these my paper overtures, (which indeed ate but a naked prologue, or an
innocent and a conscientious Apology, for the sincere preaching of the pure
word of happiness) to be a very Apocrypha with your more Vera predicatio
ve^b^, vere venetanda. Bern.
then serioas negotiations, and my self a nothing.

However Sir, leave not Paul bound. Oh let not your unusual power to that,
scare Christ's holy ambassadors, into an unwilling slothfulness, and like
wether beaten Mariners, enforce them to run aground the now wrack't and torn
Constantine of all their indefatigable studies, upon the barren sands, of most
hateful and contemptible silence, when rather with a promised sunshine, most
radlantly beaming forth from You have accounted many to be dumb doggss
heretofore, and will you not suffer them in promised times of liberty, to bark
now?
your new enlightened Zodiac, (liberty of conscience in Gods service, being a
kind of an Elisium here, in your judgment*) they should launch out into
religions deep, for the discoveries of Gods wonders there.

Truly Sr, the Temple doors of the perishing Law, were always open upon Gods
holy Sabboths, and shall the Gospelo gates in these illuminated days of yours,
be secured and shur up, with a seeming Evangelicall Percullis, and the
preaching sword?

Certainly, Sr Peter's faith Sir, is far more considerable, and of a greater
unproportionable value and consequence, then Aarons holiest of holies, and the
dispensation of the Gospel, then the promulgation of the Law. Now Sir, if that
the Temple of the Jews (which indeed was but a mere type, and shadow Templum
apertum, and Eva^gelium oper^u^? absit. S. Peter's church doors shut up in
Oxfard and S. Thomas without a preachrr.
as I conceive, of our Gospelline Protestant Church, and which is as we usually
say, in the West, namely at her sunset and gone) I say if that this Temple was
free, and open for, and to all religions sacrificers, shall S. Peter's Church in
the East, and S. Thomas in the West, be irreligiously barracaded, and lockup
from Christ's painful GosPellers?

Oh remember Sir, that most holy expression of the most holy spirit in this
very case provided, [to wit,] The Ministration 2. Cor. 3. 7. 8.
of the Gospel must exceed in glory now, since the ministration of the Law was
most glorious then.

And again Sir, it is most infallibly true, and beyond all contradiction, that
should some most holy and most piously minded men (who in my conscience, rather
then they will turn Apostates, and for swear themselves, will endure, were it
possible, Reliquerunt domicilia, hereditamenta, omnia, sibimetipsis tantum modo
conservaverunt conscientias.
a thousand deaths for their conscience sake) I say, should such most orthodoxe
and most profound Divines be coercivelie tongue-tyed, and unchristianly
constrained (in this age of pretended liberty, to lie irreligiously kenneld up
amongst the most abominable litters of our unpreaching dumb dogs, and S. Paul's
most holy obedientialls, and S. Peter's most holy supreme subjection (two
special garlands of the Gospel's peace) would consumption themselves into a
mere Anatomy, and that rare gift and grace of God, so much spoken of
Obedientia.
through the whole * scriptu^es, and beyond all the sacrifices of our actings
and pretentions, would dwindle away, and be clean forgotten.

Many Sir, I confess of our own cloth and calling, and more too than a good
number, do preach, it is true, and that out of season as well as in, but what
do they preach? Is it Christ, and him crucified? Is it the Gospels golden
rule? [ qua mensura, quo judicio? Mat. 7. 2. With what judgment you judge you
shall be judged, and with what measure you mete, it shall be measured to you
again. Do they preach that? Or Patria amissa laribusque vagari mendicum and
tinnida voce rogare cibos, etc. Cum ^a iter are suis and conjuge moesta cumque
pia ma^e cumque ^arente seen. B Prideaux, D. helden, D. Ha^mond, D. Heywood,
rare men with hundreds more outted for I know not what.
do they press this home unto the erroneous conscience? and apply this, oh
this sacred cataplasme unto the poor and weak and extremely wounded soul?

Oh Sir, they dare not so much as once harp upon that dissonant, that
eare-tingling, and con^ounding string to them, seeing with Ahab they have taken
possession, and Naboth is dead and gone; I mean their unperjur'd and
incomparably learned Betters either dead or as bad or worse, that is to say, in
plain English, Dispossessed, and out of doors a begging.

No, no Sir, their preaching, I mean the aspiring labors of some of our
Diotrepheses, and (as you clearly ken already) is to preach themselves into
power and government, into an authority (I dare be bold were but
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction their desired freehold) that has an intended
capacity, not only to correct the scepter, were it in Cesars hand, but to
cramp the soldier too in his greatest victories; though of late years, it is
confessed, the huge and unlimited bug-beare (as they said) of prelaricall
jurisdiction, was the only tyrant that they seemingly covenanted against,
whereas a little before with their most learned and then authorized several
Diocesans, they swore directly I would entreat such liberal swearers to read Z
ch 5. 3. 4 5. 6. ver.
to maintain it.

Such men's innumerous pretensions Sir, to that superexcellent, and so so much
talked of enjoyment, of a most holy Reformation, are most discernably apparent
to be nothing more, than Sir Thomas Moors Vtopia, ot at the best, but like a
Scottish Decoy, or a Geneva* like stalking Horse, whereby they may entrap the
bird, with the more facility and approbation.

The Independent party Sir, in my hearing, and to my knowledge as well as
Royalists Nauseate already at such conceived insupportable pressures, and I
really dare say, rather than their rigid careere, of domineering like
universal Popes, (though in show, but little Foxes) should have its full
swing, and implantation, would turn Episcopists [contra Gentes,] and keep
holy day with a Lirurgy.

Oh dear Sir, you your self can sufficiently Rhetorique, what an unparalled
plague it is, and an infandous curse and misery, for our Antiepiscopists (who
once cried so much against Popery, as that the very clothes we wore upon our
backs, and the very meat that went into our mouths, were stigmatized to come
either from the whores Wardrop, or from Romes Kitchen) that they should take
upon them now to govern, (I will not say to tyrannize ovet) the weak and
tender Agnum in frote, lupum in cord gerunt.
consciences of most pious and conscientious christians; (a practice most
exteamly prejudicial, (as they onee asserted, and obnoxious to the whole body
of Divinity,) and more then that, Most insultingly to compel the broken in
heart, to the Conscientia no^ debet cogi.
strict observation of such innovations of theirs, in the very service of God,
which God himself does anathamatize, in holy scriptures, and good souls
abhominate.

Truly Sir, for your own part (and give me leave to publish it, without
slatterie) you have had (since my late being in Oxford, and that from a
general vote both amongst scholars and Vox notoria, vox Populi.
Citizens too) the general applause, for and to be of so much civilitie and
mildness, to every body, as that we are in good hopes, that liberty of
conscience shall not be made a Mock-beggar. Alas Sir, is it not a shame of
shames, that the professors of piety should more obstruct it, then promote it?
and impede the servants of the everliving God from the hearing of the word of
truth? What and if some congregations be thin* and others are thronged with
multitudes, ought holy men therefore to be offended at the publication of the
word and sacraments? What and if the people desire to be edified by a Pastor of
their own election, shall therefore that way of serving M^nopolies in our
temporal tradings bred a great distractio^ in this State but a Monopoly in our
spiritualities will breed a greater upon the poor soul.
God, be proscribed for malignant? What if some of our highly exalted
Sermonists be not affected as they desire to be, do you therefore judge it
meet, that they should have a Monopoly, upon Divinity? and a Monopoly upon
Churches? and a Monopoly upon men's consciences?

Farthermore, what and if some scandalized for delinquency, have both the
Universities and the Cities audience, is it therefore either sound Logic or
Religion, that evil eyes should be their censurers, because theirs are good?
Truly Sir, I remember the Psalmists dictate is, how that God gave the word, and
great was the company of the preachers, and is it fit then, or consentaneous to
religions equipage (I appeal to your own conscience for indicature) that man
should give a word to the contrary, whereby great must be the company of the
silenced? Sir, it is heresy, or blasphemy, or treason, or sedition, or
scismaticall faction, or an irreligious, and profane, and most scandalous
conversation, that should incense Moses against Aaron, and cause him to put him
by* that he should not offer the bread of his God. It Is not the love of the
people, or the greatness of our Congregations, or the flocking of the Boni
bonis delectantor.
University, or the numerous resorting of the City, for their souls health;
that should be a bar to any holy duty. Gods people have great cause to Joy, the
more that the Lord is sought after, and when that the fear of the Lord is
pressed unto men's consciences, and the conversion of the poor soul sincerely
aimed at, oh how should you even you rejoice to be even where such and such
things are acted in all godliuesse, and sobriety?

Truly Sir, it is the glory of God, and the advance of Christ's holy incarnation,
and his most satisfactorie death and passion, and the flourishing of the
blessed Gospel, and the Protestant faith, and the peace and preservation of
this embroyled kingdom, that we daily preach up and pray for, and should any
depraving natures (whose mere life is lying, palliating their deceitful
words, with the false and counterfeit dress of pretended holiness) inform
the contrary, we stand upon our justification, and most heartely implore their
pardon.

But put case (Governor) that malicious tongues besmeare us, because that the
University and City do frequent our Auditoriest put case their seats are
empty, when ours are superabundantly replenish't, and that the generality of
the kingdom, thirst after their endeared protestancy: What? shall therefore the
house of prayer want her Angels to declare Gods messages, and the people of the
parish be like the multitude in Sine ducesine pastore.
the Wilderness? Mark. 6. 34. absit.

Oh Sir, let neither injurious informations, nor any prejudicare opinion
anticipate your certain knowledge, or corrupt your opinion or understanding,
or judgment about my sermons, that I preached of late in public.

For certainly had I preached them before the Parliament, or Army, or Kingdom,
as I did at S. Peter's in the East, and I should not have varied one Tittle in
the whole contexture, but sHould have delivered the very same doctrines, and in
the very same precise terms, as I did then entirely. And besides Sir, should
Gods all seeing providence destine me your ears Dicatur veritas tumpatur
invidia.
Apollos as that I had but opportunity to speak home unto the conscience, and
I am really confident your choice palate in Divinity, would never a whit
disrellish our spiritual cookery, sithence wedish up before Gods people
nothing but his own quails and Manna, and how ready still he is to broch his
spiritual Horeb, for the satisfaction of our spiritual thirstings.

Believe it Sir, we preach not our own inventions, we dawb Tempora mutantur,
sed non mutamur in illis.
not the people over with untemper'd mortar, we are no weather-cocks in
Church, or out of Church, we stand to our first principles, and we abhor as
much as we do even Hell it self, to divine lies, saying thus says the Lord,
when the Lord never spoke it.

That which we publicly remonstrate before God and the holy Angels, and
before Gods own people and his congregations, is the most holy breathings of
Gods own most holy spirit and not of ours, the most sacred rule of his own most
blessed will and pleasure, and not of ours, the most holy character of his own
eternal justice, and not our unrighteous bablings, and the most indeleable
Magna Carta, or Court Roll, of his own Saints and servants most incomparable
benedictions, and not the naked ordinances of our most vain imaginations.

Seriously Sir, we would most gladsomely (and in the very integrity of our
hearts be it spoken) and with a most willing alacrity, show our selves to be
the most luminating lights of the world, did we not most unhappily here and
there meet with some certain extinguishers, that have a delight to darken us,
and to quite snuff us out. Again we would painefully plough up the most
rockie and the fallow fields of this unto ward and crooked generation, were we
not muzled when we should tread out the corn. We would most cheerfully prove
our selves to be the salt of the earth, were we not most uncharitably deemd to
be unsavorie, and thrown out unto the dunghill. Vos estis sal terrae.


In a word Sir, were there not some of our own cloth and calling of Esops dogs
disposition, that neither would eat hay himself nor suffer the poor horse to
do it, and without all Curae leves lo. quuntur, ingentes stupen^. Remember how
this once was consirued.
scruple or controversy, there would not be a Church in this Kingdom, but
would be furnished with her preaching Angel; whereas now oh tell me (dear
Sir) what a number both in London, and in York, and in the Universities (which
is a foul shame, and a reproach especially) and in Worcester and in Gloucester,
and in all cities and counties of the Kingdom, that are quite destitute of
Gods holy word, and Sacraments.

Now truly Sir, when most sadly and serious^y I dive into some thoughts for
such accustomed practices, and that my most grieved soul makes an exact
entrance into the narrow disquisition, and consideration of so great a famine,
of so many Church doors shut up, so many parishes without a pastor, and of such
a scantnesse or scarcity of most holy preaching in many places; and the
original cause I find at length thus, Some of our famous pulpit men, whose
greatest learning is to get into the [Learneds Livings] are so covetous and for
filthy lucre, Mark this.
as that they account it an undervaluing for them to lend an ear, to the low
mufique of those Bells, that ring not two hundred pounds, or a hundred a year
at least, whereby we easily perceive that where the Benefice is small, and the
Tithes in an Impropriators pocket, there the church doors must be sealed This
makes me to fear a most dreadful famine of the word in England. Amos, 8. 11.
up, rather than they will officiate there, and the people turned agrazing
without Sacraments seven years together.

We Sir now for our parts, who are not ashamed of our bonds, who patiently
undergo at present, and with Gods assistance shall for the future too, all
crosses for the cross of S. Paul counted all things dung for the knowledge of
Christ and so must we, Phil. 3. 8.
Christ, that without repining, submit to the loss of all things, for the
testimony of a good conscience here, valuing the crown of glory, far beyond
the whole masle of vanity, oh take notice Sir, that we do so long to perform
our functions in the dispensation of Gods holy word, as that we thirstingly
covet after the erecting of Gods holy Tabernacle, though we bring but Goats
hair to the building of it, and rather Sir, then we will show our selves such
ungospelline trivants, as to stand all the day idle, when we should sweat for
it Gods vineyard; be confident, and full assured, that we will into the high
ways, and hedges, that Gods feast may be full, and labor that all may have
the wedding garment, and that none may become speechless.

The lyme-twiggs of preferment Sir, hang not about our heels, we set more by
the Lords small and little flock, then by the worlds richest and biggest
fleece; Judas his thirty pieces M^t. 26. 15. Josh. 7. 21. Exodus 5. 18. Mat.
14. 10.
cannot make us to betray our Master, nor Achans stolen wedg tempt us to
forsake our God. When we light into Pharohs thraldom, we are feign to make
brick without stubble, and when we speak against Herod's lust our heads must be
daunc't off next. Misery and calamity are entayl'd upon our Ministry, and it is
as homogenious Sir, to that christianity we profess, for to take our cross
willingly, as to follow our most blessed Savior cheerfully.

All that we desire in this world, is that we may preach the word most purely,
for such as preach Christ out of envy, will be most grievous loosers by it in
the end. When our Churches are ingrost by our superintendants, we resolve the
fields and the high ways shall be our pulpits next, and truly sir, rather Vae
mihi si ro^ praedicaveto, inquit Apostolus.
then we will be negligent in the service of the everliving God, or
persunctorily desert the most pious and laudable execution of our most high and
holy calling, we will to the sea shore, that the very waves may roar out our
painfulnesse, and the unstable waters attest our integrity and perseverance.

Means we look not after, for that is scarce enough for our Ecclesiastic
reformers, and for those that study our goods; that which must support us, us I
say, in particular, will be the W^ckl^ffs doctrine from the words freely you
have received freely give
uncertain revenue from cold charities exchequer, either at the Church door,
or elsewhere; for now Wicklifs old doctrine is revived anew again (to wit) Our
salarie must be alms in poverty.

But dear sir, tell me, I beseech you, what you think is become of the
pluralities that once our Diotrepheses cried down for antichristian? What think
you? are they not [ in rerum natura. are they dead and gone? Do not our
Calvinistical Directors pretend to those sacred morsels as much right as once
the Mitre did, or the surplisse, or the Dean and Chapters power?

Truly sir, their holiness I will warrant you, can most gree What was a most
heinous sin in us is no sin in them at all.
dily swallow such sweet bits as these, without any sin at all in them, thought
was a deadly crime in others, and in an high de gree abominable.

And again* sir, their* works they know to be so superabundantly meritorious,
having a saintlike propriety to all the good things of the earth, as that in
point of preferment they conceive they may spotlesly parle amongst themselves*
[viz.] And why not that? And why not more?

Now I will not say sir, good luck have they with their honor, or ride on
still, because of the word of truth; for truly, they ride on too fast, and Iehu
like, drive on too furiously and therefore Because of oaths the land mourns.
my Christian oblation to my God for them shall be, that they may
conscientiously lay to heart their former oaths and undertakings, as once Aaron
did his, after that (to please the people) he had polluted himself with his
moulten Calf, Ex. 32

But alas and thrice alas, why do I trouble you, you, you sir, with these
solicismes, and mere impertinencies? It Is the church door at S. Peter's in the
East, that I so vehemently knock at, and S. Peter's church in Oxford. Porta
patens esto, *nulli clauderis honesto.
that I woutd have open to all believers both in the University City and
Country. Oh sir, shall not Gods house be frequented by his Saiuts, and upon
Gods own day? shall not Gods holy word and sacraments there, have free passage
as in other places? If I be not the man, oh let your providence get another to
officiat there; for my part I can live (God be blessed for it) and have more
means than that prisoners pittance, in any part of all the christian world.
Alas it is not lucre but my love to them I do this; there is very little to be
had for maintenance, your judgment can censure it, not half enough to
maintain a preacher. Take notice thereof sir, I look on them, as Christ did on
the multitcde, Oves sine Pastore. Even sheep without a shepherd: Mark. 6. 34.

But you will say peradventure that the College should take care for that, and
that it is [ extra spharam, and our of your orb to progress in such a motion*
Truly sir, it is confessed and granted that others should carry on this overture,
and make it their [ hoc agere] to see Gods house provided for. But what Exodus
29, 4. A^on did need washing.
of that? What and if Aaron and his sons being set apart, for the Priests
office be unclean and unholy, must not Moses by his authority wash them at
the door of the Tabernacle? sir, it is the glory of Magistracy to advance piety
to its purest luster; but in case the magistrate and those concerned now should
not mind this holy work, but mind themselves, and forget their God, nay
should they rather retard so great a blessing from the people, than any way
give a countenance, or an approbation to the same; oh then sir, what an honor
would it be to the sword, should it unlock those doors, and welcome in the king
of glory, that has been shut out a great while?

Sweet sir, let it then be far from your power and jurisdiction, to imprison
Gods holy word and sacraments, or to cause the candlestick to be broken and
dashed to pieces. Suffer Gods Dies Dominicus Dei nundinum.
own people to enjoy their own parish Churches. They have a right and a
propriety to those holy places, more then common or ordinary. Their Churches
upon Gods most holy Sabboths, are Gods peculiar Market, houses, where the
servants of the ever living God may buy Wine and Milk without money and without
price. Yea they are Gods most royal exchange where we get gold for drosle, and
pearls would we but leave our puddles.

Should you exclude them thence, where would you have them go? Conventicles
they will have none, as long as Gods house is standing; Tavernes, and Tap*
houses are to be shunned upon Gods holy rest. Where then? Would you have them
to be idle and to be unprofitable servants in Gods harvest? Oh sir, believe it,
and take it for a certain truth, that spiritual sloth upon Gods day, and the
more when they are debard from Gods house, is an abomination in their eyes.
Their poor souls would feign sing their [ Te Deums to their God. since
Atheism is so rife in England, and would feign warble forth Mary's Magnificat
by reason that the Di^tie is so lessened by Heretics, and Nullfidians.

To be brief then, suffer ihe people of God to enjoy their Christian charity
wll enforce a man to these things.
religion; the very Turk will do it, to those that are his Tributaries.
Suffer them to use their liberty of conscience as you desire to use yours, for
the Parliament has always promised it. They are willing to repair Gods
house, willing to maintain their Minister, desirous of the word and
sacraments, and willing to embrace the truth. Oh therefore let not your
inhibition be a Remora to retard their piety, let them not be driven to seek
to and fro for the food of their poor souls, when Gods glory is the [ White]
they shoot at.

For my own justification sir, that which I have divulgd before God and Angels
and Men, I have had warrant for, from the word of truth. Has any one taxt me
of sedition, or blasphemy or heresy? I desire to appear face to face. Do I
meddle ^et me know my accusers that I may entreat God to forgive them by name.
with state matters? Alas my way as thousands in this kingdom will freely
attest unto you, it is the way of peace. Sir, I pray for peace, and I preach for
peace, and I long for peace, and I study for peace, and I am confident
(notwithstanding the worlds opposals) I enjoy the God of peace.

Again sir, pray tell me, am I a ringleader of any sect in the University?
Are not the souls and consciences of diverse pious and holy christians both
Scholars and Citizens troubled, that they cannot enjoy him in the Gospel,
whom they desire should preach to them Christ Jesus? Infallibly sir, as the
blood of the martyrs is the seed of the Church, so the repressing and
restrainment of our Protestancy, makes thousands the more to hunger, aad to
seek for it with most sharp affections: Sir, we abhominate Popery, we act not
the part of Jesuits, mutinies and disturbances we detest even as the hell it
self. Our congregatio^s I do intend (God Willing) to print all my Oxford
Sermons, that the kingdom may read my innocence.
loath divisions, for we aim at the kingdoms quiet, and there are no
disaffected strivings that come within our labors. Farther did you ever hear
that our holy meetings were stigmamatizd with factious sermons? You will say I
draw the people, and I pray God I may still to God ward. The mystery of
godliness is explained to men's tender consciences, else we speak not
mystically as you perchance may ce^sure* God forbid then sir, that jealousies
should put out the Gospels candle, or that needless fears should remove her
candlestick.

To conclude sir, are we guilty of state-Invectives? Alas sir, he is neither
ch^istian nor divine, that with the holy Archangel, cannot refrain from
railing accusations, be it against the very Devil of hell. Truly sir be
pleased to know then, our course is to beat down sin that has so ruind the
three kingdoms, and to cry up love that is so much wanting in all three; and
had our Church and State incendiaries or our most furious kindle-coales (that
preached ( Curse ye Meroz) but sincerely laid to heart the price of blood, and
what a fearful account they are to make for shedding innocent blood
themselves, when they should have preached [blessed be the peace Makers Mat. 5.
9. had they cried up [ that a kingdom divided cannot stand Mark. 3. 24. when
that their doctrines were continually, fight, fight, and destroy till that your
enemies lick up the dust* and I am confident sir, our swords long ago had
been turned into mattocks, and our spears to pruning hooks, yea we had sat
every one under our own Vines, and under our own Fig Trees, and had eaten the
fruits of our own labors, at our own tables, with peace and happinnesse.

But I pray God forgive the Clergy that have egged men unto blood, I pray God
it may not be laid to their charge, when their souls shall come to answer for
it, before Gods great Tribunal at the last day. And in the interim, I desire
them as brethren and in the bowels of Christ Jesus to study the sweetness of
peace, in the bond of love, to study to love their enemies, and to bless their
enemies, and to do good to their enemies, and to pray for their enemies. Mat.
5. 44. to study again (if it be possible) to live peaceably with all men, and
not to study revenge. Romans 12. 11. 19. and then the God of peace and love will
dwell with them. 2. Cor. 13. 11.

In fine worthy sir, judge of me as God shall give you light' You and I one day
shall come before the most righteous judge, that will judge us both. My crime
at present (it seems) in your eyes) is for standing to my first principles,
and that I have served God, in Oxford, as we all did before the wars. Truly
sir, for this imputative offense, I appeal to my God for judgment, crying
earnestly unto him, with a

Te Deum laudamus.

Te Dominum confitemur.


