Private Forms OF Prayer, Fitted for the late Sad-Times Particularly, A Form of
Prayer for THE Thirtieth of January, Morning and Evening.

With Additions, etc.

London, Printed by Tho. Mabb, and to be sold by William Not, at the White
Horse near the little North door in Saint Paul's Churchyard, 1660.

Private Forms of Prayer Fit for Sad Times: Heretofore Printed at Oxford, and
used (occasionally) upon Days of Solemn Humiliation and Fasting, In his late
Majesty's Royal Chapel of blessed and glorious Memory.

ALSO A Form of Prayer for the 30th. of January, Morning and Evening.

Likewise Prayers of Intercession for the Use of such as Mourn in Secret.

Together with a Collection of several other Prayers.

PUBLISHED, That the world may take notice of the Powerful (though Private)
aids, contributed by the joint hands and hearts of such as were Gods
Remembrancers and Mourners in Sion, during the late distractions in Church and
STATE.

London, Printed by Tho. Mabb, and are to be sold by William Not, at the White
Horse near the little North-door in St. Paul's churchyard, 1660.

St. James 5. 12. Is any among you afflicted? let him pray.

St. Math. 5. 4. Blessed are they that mou^ne for they shall be comforted.

Psalm. ^6. 5. 6. They that sow in tears shall reap in joy.

He that goes forth and weepeth, bearing precious seed, shall doubtless come
again with rejoicing, bringing his sh^es with him.

The Preface.
OUr Savior Compares the Kingdom Mat. 13. 45
of Heaven, to a Merchant Man: And Merchants when they send out a Ship observe
their Returns We have been Long Adventurers to Heaven, and God has been
pleased at last to give us a gracious return; to answer our Prayers even
beyond our expectation and hopes.

When we were with the Disciples in the storm, at Lord Mat. 8 25.
save us, We perish: Then did our savior who before seemed to sleep (being
awakened by the continued and faithful prayers of the seven thousands who had
not bowed their knees to Baal) rebuke the winds and the waves still the raging
of the Sea, and the madness of the people. And We trust now (as Verse 26.
then) there will follow a great happy calm.

Hereupon As the very Heathen, When they had suffered shipwreck and got safe to
land, were wont [appendere votivam Tabulam] to consecrate a votive table, and
bang it up to the honor of their preserver Neptune.

As David after the slaughter of Goliath dedicated the Sword wherewith he had
slain him, and had it kept behind the Ephod in the Tabernacle.

As God Commanded that a Pot of Manna should be kept for the Generations to
come; that their Posterity might see how he fed their Fathers in the
wilderness.

As even in the Land of Canaan, the bitter herbs were still reserved in the
eating of the passover, in memory of that bitter servitude, they underwent in
the House of Bondage.

So are these Prayers here, like the bitter herbs, or a bundle of Myrrh,
collected, reserved and consecrated,

To him, to whom they were devoutly offered up, the Father of mercies, and God
of all Scilicet ut fuso Tuarorum Sangune centum.
Consolation.

To him, who accepts a little Frankincense piously offered, no less then a
Hecatombe. Sic capitur minimo thu ris honor Deus, Ovid.


To him who hears Prayers, and has not rejected ours.

To him, who has turned our captivity, not his mercies from us.

It is of thy Goodness O Lord, that we were not utterly consumed, It is because
thy Compassions fail not.

Not unto Us, O Lord, not unto Us, but unto thy name give the Praise.

And the same gracious God, who has so happily begun, so wonderfully carried
on, and done so great things for us already, whereof we deservedly rejoice;

He in his own time, perfect his own work, his own way, and make us a happy
Church and Nation.

May, O may those black days never return, which at first extorted these
mournful Threnodies, which are here presented for thy Consolation, Quae suit
^urum pati. M^minisse dulce est -- Sen.
(in looking back upon that which is past;) not thy use with respect to the
future, of which may there never be any more occasion.

But for the time to come, may these Prayers be turned into Praises, this
Euchologium into Doxologies, our Elegies into Hosanna's, and our Lamentations
into Hallelujah' s. And let all the People say

Amen.
Private forms of Prayer fit for sad times. The Contents.
SEntences of the S^pture. Page 1 A general Confession. 3 A Le any. 7 A prayer
for forgiveness. 17 The Absolution. 19 The Lords Prayer. 19 A Psalm instead of
venite exultemu^. 21 Proper Psalms and (...). 25
A Form Collected out of the Psalms.
l. Page 26 II. 28 III. 30 Psalm. 51. 33 With (part of) the Commination prayers.
37
Eight Prayers or Collects.
I. Page 39 II. 40 III. IV. 42 V. VI. 43 VII. VIII. 44 Prayers for the
afflicted Church of England. 45. 47. A Collect for Charity, 50 The Conclusion.
50
A Form of Prayer for the 30th of January.
Preface. Page, 55 A general Confession. 61 A Letany. 65 A Pryer for
forgiveness. 75 The Lords Prayer. 77 Lamentations out (...) Jeremiah the
Prophet. 78 Proper Psalms and first Lesson. 82
A Form collected out of the Psalms.
I. P. 83 II. 85 III. 87
Second Lesson.
IV. 90 V. 92 The Creed. 94 The Lords Prayer. 95
Thirteen other Prayers.
I. 96 II. 102 III. 104 IV. 112 V. 113 VI. 117 VII. 119 VIII. 124 IX. 130 X.
XI. 132 XII. 134 XIII. 135 A Proper prayers or the 30th. of January. 136
Evening prayer for the 30th. of January.
The Letany of the Church. 145 The Confession of sins. 157 The absolution.
158 The Lords Prayer. 158 Proper Psalms and I. Lesson. 159 A Form Collected
out of the Psalms. 160 II. 162 III. 164
Second Lesson.
IV. 167 V. 169 The Creed. 171 The Lords Prayer. 172
XIII. Prayers or Collects.
I. 173 II. 175 III. 178 IV. 180 V. 183 VI 186 VII. 195 VIII. 198 IX. X. 199
XI. 200 XII. XIII. 201 A proper prayer for the 30th. of January. 203 An
Anniversary prayer for the 30th. of January. 212
Prayers of Intercession for the use of such as Mourn in secret.
Proper Psalms and lessons. page 2^8 A Preparatory prayer. 219
King David's prayer for the Church and people.
I. 223 II. 224 III. 225 IV. 227 King David's tears. 229
Jeremiah's Lamentations Prophetical of these times:
I. 231 II. 233 Daniel's prayers and Confession. 135 Praers for the King, I.
247 II. 238 III. 280 A Letany of Intercession. 244 A Prayer for the Church. 253
A Prayer for the Queen Mother and the Royal Progeny. 254 A prayer for the
afflicted. 255 An humble and submissive expostulation with God upon Oliver
Cromwells Proclamation against the Loyal Clergy. 258 A prayer for the Church
of England. 268 A prayer for the Kings Birthday May 29. 276 The Ministers
prayer for the people. 279 The peoples prayer for the minister. 282 Aother. 286
Proper psalms for several occasions. 288 Proper Lessons for several
occasions. 289 A prayer for the King. 291 Another, with Prince Charles his
Letany 292 A prayer for the Church. 297
Five other prayers or Collects.
I. 298 II. 300 III. IV. V. 301 A prayer for the Clergy. 332 A prayer to be
said during these sad times of trouble 304 A prayer for preservation from the
enemy. 312 A Confession of sins, and prayer for pardon. 314 A Prayer for the
King. 318 A prayer for the preservation of the University and City of Oxford.
330 A prayer drawn by his Majesty's special directions and dictates for a
blessing on the treaty at Uxbridge. 323 A prayer for peace. 325 A prayer for
the ending of the present troubles. 329 IX. Collects. I. 334 II. III. 335 IV.
V. 336 VI. 337 VII, VIII. 338 IX. 339
Certain additionall Prayers.
In the time of war, 339 A Prayer for a Soldier, 3^ A Prayer upon the
readmission of the formerly Secluded Members, February ^1. 1659. 348 A Prayer
upon the Assembling of the present Parliament, April 25. 1660. 351 A
Thanksgiving for his Majesty's safe arrival and return to his kingdom, May
25. 1660. 354
Private Forms of Prayer, fit for these sad Times.
Psalm 10. verse. 1. WHy stand thou so far off (O Lord:) and hidest thy face
in the needful time of trouble. Psalm. 3 v. 1, 2, 3. Lord, how are they
increased that trouble us? many are they that rise up against us.

Many one there be, that say of our souls: there is no help for them in their
God.

But thou, O Lord, art our desender: thou art our worship, and the lif^r up of
our heads.

Ier. 10. 24. Correct us, O Lord, and yet in thy judgment, not in thy fury,
least we should be consumed and brought to nothing. Psalm. 130. 3. If thou Lord
wilt be extreme to mark what is done amiss, O Lord, who may abide it?

O come let us worship, let us humble our selves, let us fall low, and kneel
before the Lord our Maker.

Then this general Confession to be said, all kneeling.
O Thou Judge eternal, we the finfullest of all the sons of Men; that have
abused thy Mercies, provoked thy judgments, unsheathed thy glittering sword,
forced all the Arrows and Darts out of thy Quiver, and with our multiplied,
abominable crying sins, brought down a desolation on a most pleasant land (that
former delight of thine) the glory of all lands.

We, that after thy wrath was poured out upon us, have yet further increased
our sins, as thou have increased the weight and number of thy Judgments upon
us; walked most unprofitably and obdurately under all thy disciplines and
visi^ations; suffered all thy precious methods of reducing us, (thine
admonitions and thy stripes) to be utterly lost and frustrate among us, brought
down a blast and mildew upon all that has been undertaken to repair our
breaches and reduce our Peace.

We do now at length in the remorse and bitterness of our souls, desire to
cast our selves down upon the ground before thee; to confess and acknowledge
thy patience and Long suffering, that we have not been under the sharpest of
thy displeasure; and to adore thy goodness whatsoever becomes of us; though it
be in the shame and confusion and Condemnation both of our bodies and our souls

Lord, this is the mildest that we have reason to expect from thy Justice in
retribution to our sins: and whatsoever is less then this, whatsoever the
bitterness of our ^up be in this life; though thou should cast us into the
place of Dragons; give us to drink of the wine of astonishment, the most
stupifying deadly po^ion; number us all to the sword, pour out thy fire and
brimstone upon us.

Yet if by thus chastizing of us here thou please to rescue us from that sadder
doom of being condemned with the world, This is a most inestimable mercy of
thine, beyond all that we have hitherto so unworthily enjoyed.

Lord, we desire and profess to acquit thy justice in thy proceedings, to
adore the bounty of thy goodness and patience toward us; that we have not long
ago been as Admah and Zeboim, as Sodom and Gomorrah, that we have this day
liberty to approach thee.

Lord, that it may yet be thy good pleasure to come home to every one of our
souls, to strike our hearts, to break up these fallow grounds of ours, that
all thy precious seed be no longer so cast away among thorns. And by the power
of thy mighty controwling, convincing spirit, that thou would once subdue
all the resistances of our spirits against this most holy, most reasonable
motion of humiliation within us.

Lord, this is the one earnest desire of our souls, that has cast us low this
day before thy footstool, with cries and tears and earnest groans, that thou
would have this mercy upon us, that thou would thus powerfully reveal
thy self unto us, who have thus long smitten and importunatly called unto us.
That being returned unto thee in fasting, weeping and mourning and renting of
our hearts; we might be capable of thy returns unto us, of the further
impressions of thy grace; and never more contradict, or quench, or grieve that
spirit of thine, which has thus long contended and wrestled with us; that so
it may be seasonable with thee to give us the comfort of thy help again, and
the confidence to approach thy p^ce, to praise that Majesty, (...) has not
cast out our Prayer, nor turned his mercy from us. To whom be all honor and
glory, power and praise, now and for ever,

Amen.
O Lord the great and dreadful God, keeping Covenant and Mercy to them that
love thee, and to them that keep thy Commandments: We have sinned with our
forefathers; We, our Kings and our Priests, our Nobles, and all the People of
this Land, and have rebelled even by departing from thy precepts and thy
judgments.

By our impious and godless thoughts of thee, our confidences in the arm of
flesh, by placing our affections too much upon earthly things, by neglecting to
love and delight in thee, by presuming of thy me^ and yet continuing in (...),
we have provoked and r^ed against thee:

O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at
this day.

By our want of reverence to thy service, not considering the awfulnesse of thy
presence, and that honor due to thee in thy House, by our formal and
hypocritical worship, by open profanation and sacrilege; by shows and
pretenses of Piety, to cover our worldly and wicked designs; we have provoked
and rebelled against thee.

O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at
this day.

By vain and rash Oaths, Blasphemies and Per^uries; especially our careless
breaches of Oaths made to our Sovereigns, forgetting that such are the Oaths
of God; and that thou thy self in a more especial manner, art a strict avenger
of them; by our execrations of our selves, our brethren, and our enemies; we
have provoked and rebelled against thee:

O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at
this day.

By our undervaluing thy public Service, and neglecting to bear a part in it,
by mispending of that time, either there or elsewhere, in wanton or worldly
thoughts and employments, and not keeping the spiritual sabath unto thee, in
serving thee truly, all the days of our life [By not duly observing the times
of Festivity or fasting, appointed by just Authority, according to the example
of thy people in all ages], we have provoked and rebelled against thee:

O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at
this day.

By not duly acknowledging thine Ordinance and Authority in the Persons of our
Superiors, by speaking evil of Dignities, and reviling the Rulers of thy
People, by groundless jealousies and suspicions, misjudging and censuring
their Actions; [And at l^st proceeding to that (...) and most ^rrid pitch of
violation of that Image of thine imprinted on them;] by being as a People that
strive with their Priests; by our not obeying them that have the rule over us,
and not submitting our selves to them, who by thy appointment watch over our
souls; by neglecting our care of those Committed to our Charge, not Correcting
those sins which have Cried loud for exemplary Punishment, we have provoked and
rebelled against thee:

O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at
this day.

By rash Anger, Malice, Hatred and Revenge, and the bloody effects thereof; by
uncharitable Contentions and Divisions, Factions and Animosities, by Cruelty
and Unmercifulness, and communicating in the sins of Blood, we have provoked
and rebelled against thee:

O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us confus^on of face, as at
this day.

By the manifold sins of Uncleanness, by seeking or not avoiding the occasions
thereof, by Idleness, Intemperance and Drunkenness, by immodest words and
gestures, by our shameless boasting, or not blushing at those sins, we have
provoked and rebelled against thee.

O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at
this day.

By Thefts, Rapines and Oppressions, scandalizing thereby the Honor and
Justice of a good Cause; by vexatious suites so much practiced and
countenanced, by exactions, by unjust gains in bargaining, by defrauding the
labourer of his hire, by want of due care in expending what we have, and a good
Conscience in acquiring more, We have provoked and rebelled against thee.

O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at
this day.

By lying, detraction and contumely, by endeavoring to advantage a good Cause,
by falsehood and unjust means; by censuring and rash judgments; by false witness
and perverting the course of Justice; we have provoked and rebelled against
thee.

O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at
this day.

By desire of change and uncontentednesse in our Estates; by giving our selves
over to lustful, covetous and inordinate affections; by desiring Peace not so
much for thine honor or the public good, as the satisfaction of our own
private lusts; by neglecting acts of Charity, and doing as we would be done to;
and not doing our duty in that state of life unto which it has pleased thee to
call us; we have provoked and rebelled against thee.

O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us, confusion of face, as at
this day.

By our want and neglect of those necessary Christian duties, of humiliation
and godly sorrow for sins, of due indignation, and revenge upon ourselves for
them; of confessing and forsaking, of restitution and satisfaction to others,
and by not bringing forth fruits worthy of repentance; we have provoked and
rebelled against thee.

O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at
this day.

By impatience under thy correcting hand, by not endeavoring our amendment by
it, in reflecting upon our own sins as the causes of it, by despising thy
chastisements, in not rejoicing in ^lations, and not glorifying thee, that have
counted us worthy to suffer for righteousness sake; we have provoked and
rebelled against thee.

O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us, confusion of face, as at
this day.

By fretting ourselves because of the ungodly, and being envious against the
evil doers; by not loving our enemies, not blessing them that curse us, not
doing good to them that hate us, nor praying for those that despightfully use
us, and persecute us; we have provoked and rebelled against thee.

O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us, confusion of face, as at
this day.

By presuming to do evil that good may come thereon; by placing piety in
opinions, by straining at Gnats and swallowing of Camels, in scrupling at
indifferent things and making no conscience of known sins: we have provoked and
rebelled against thee,

O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us, confusion of face, as at
this day.

By running into open profaneness, under color of avoiding superstition; by
guiding our conscience by humour^ and fancies, and not by the certain rules of
thy Law; by having itching ears, and heaping to our selves teachers, and by
having men's persons in admiration because of advantage: we have provoked and
rebelled against thee.

O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us, confusion of face, as at
this day.

Who can tell how often he offends; O cleanse thou us from these, and from our
secret sins.

Try us, O good God, and search the ground of our hearts, prove us, and examine
our thoughts, and look well if there be any other way of wickedness in us, and
lead us in the way everlasting.

A Prayer for forgiveness
O Almighty and most merciful Father, who art the Lord, the Lord God,
merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth,
keeping mercy for thousands, and forgiving iniquity, transgressions, and sins.
Look down upon us with thy compassionate eyes, who are here before thee, in the
bitterness of our souls, and do now with troubled spirits, with broken and
with contrite hearts; most humbly beg pardon for these multitudes of our
offenses. Look, we humbly beseech thee, upon the blood of thy Son, which
speaks better things then that of Abel^; for his sake spare us, Lord, spare thy
people, that these sins rise not up against us: for his passions sake expose us
not for a prey to their cruel hands, who would both devour and deride us.

R. Spare us, O Lord, spare thy people for the glory of thy name: O deliver us,
and be merciful to all these our sins, through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
The Absolution to be pronounced by the Priest only.
ALmighty God, our heavenly Father, who of his great mercy has promised
forgiveness of sins to all them which with hearty repentance and true faith
turn unto him:

Have mercy upon you, pardon and deliver you from all your sins, confirm and
strengthen you in all goodne^, and bring you to everlasting life, through Jesus
Christ our Lord,

Amen.
The Lords Prayer.
OUr Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy
will ^e done in earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our (...) bread.
And forgive us (...) ^espasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.
And lead us not into temptation but deliver us from evil, Amen.

Priest. O Lord open thou our lips,


Answer. And our mouth shall show for^ thy praise.


Priest. O God make speed to save us,


Answ. O Lord make haste to help us.


Priest. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost;


Answ. As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without
endAmen.


Priest. Praise ye the Lord:


Answ. The Lord's name be praised.


A Psalm instead of Venite exultemus.
O COME, let us humble Psalm. 95.
our selves, and fall down before the Lord with reverence and fear.

2. For he is the Lord our God, and we are his people, and the sheep Psalm. 100.
^f his pasture.

3. If a man will not turn, Psalm. (...).
God will whet his sword, he ^ath bent his bow, and made it ^eady.

4. Let us repent and turn from ^r wickedness, and our sins shall be Acts 3.
^given us.

5. Let us turn, and the Lord ^ill turn from his heavy wrath, Jonah 3.
^d will pardon us, and we shall ^t perish.

6. For we acknowledge our Psalm. 5^
^ults, and our sins are ever before.

7. We have provoked thine ^ger, O Lord, and thy heavy Lam. 4.
displeasure is kindled against us.

8. But there is mercy with thee, Psalm. 130.
that thou may be feared, and t^ art full of compassion.

9. Thy hand is not shortened, Isaiah 65.
that thou can not help, neither is thy goodness abated, the thou will not
hear.

10. Thou have promised, O Lord, that before we cry thou will hear (...), and
whilst we yet speak, that the wilt have mercy upon us.

11. They that trust in the shall not be confounded, neith^ shall any that call
upon thee (...) despised.

12. For thou art the only Lord who woundest, and do heal aga^ Tob. 3. Job 5.
Ose. 6.
who killest and revivest, bring^ even to hell and bring back (...) gain.

13. Our fathers hoped in the they trusted in thee, and tho^ Psalm. 22.
did deliver them.

14. They called upon thee, a^ were helped, they put their trust thee, and were
not confounded.

15. O Lord, rebuke not us in thiue indignation, neither chasten Psalm. 6.
us in thy heavy displeasure.

16. O remember not the sins and offenses of our youth, but according Psalm. 25.
to thy mercy think thou upon us, O Lord, for thy goodness.

17. Have mercy upon us, O Lord, for we are weak: O Lord, heal us for our bones
are vexed.

18. And now in the vexation of our spirits, and the anguish of our Baruch 3.
Jonah 2.
fouls, we remember thee, and we cry unto thee, Hear, Lord, and have mercy.

19. For thine own sake, and for thy Holy Names sake, incline Dan. 9.
thine ear and hear, O merciful Lord.

20. For we do not pour out our prayers before thy face, trusting in our own
righteousness, but in thy great and manifold mercies.

21. Wash us thoroughly from our wickedness, and cleanse us Psalm. 51.
from our sins.

22. Turn thy face from our sins, and put out all our misdeeds.

23. Make us clean hearts, O God, and renew a right spirit within us.

24. Help us, O God of our salvation, for the glory of thy name: O deliver us,
and be merciful unto our sins, for thy name sake.

25. The sacrifice of God is a troubled spirit: a broken and contrite heart, O
God, shall thou not despise.

26. O be favorable and gracious unto Sion: build thou the walls of Jerusalem.

27. So we that be thy people, and sheep of thy pasture, shall give thee thanks
for ever: and Psalm. 79.
will always be showing forth thy praise from generation to generation.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without end.

Amen.
Psalms for Morning Prayer.

Psalm. 6. 31. 38. 39.

For Evening Prayer.

Psalm. 90. 91. 102. 130. 149.

For first Lesson read some one of these chapters.

Ezra 9. Nehem. 9. Isai. 58. Joel 2 Ezekiel. 33.

Or,

Isai. 1. Jerem. 5. Jerem. 9. Ezekiel. 22. Micah 6.

Or,

Amos 4. Ezekiel. 14.

I.
HEar our voice, O Lord, out of thy holy Temple, let our complaint come before
thee, let it enter even into thy ears

Our heart is in heaviness, O let (...) make our Prayer unto thee in an
acceptable time.

Lord our iniquities are against us, our rebellions are many wherewith we have
transgressed against thee: But we confess our wickednesses, and are sorry for
our fins.

Our confusion is daily before us, fearfulness and trembling are come upon us,
and an horrible dread has overwhelmed us, and it is thy great ^rcy only that
we are not consumed, for we have sinned, O Lord, we have transgressed and done
wickedly, yea we have rebelled, and departed from thy precepts, and from thy
Commandments.

Innumerable troubles are come about us, our sins have taken hold upon us, that
we are not able to look up, yea they are more in number then the hairs of our
heads, and our hearts have failed us. O Lord, righteousness belongs unto
thee, but unto us confusion of face, because of all the offenses we have
committed against thee.

Yet compassion and forgiveness is with thee, though we have rebelled against
thee. O Lord, according to thy goodness, we beseech thee, let thine anger and
thy wrath be turned away from us, and cause thy face to shine upon thy
servants. Incline thine ears and hear, open thine eyes and behold our
afflictions; for we do not present our supplications before thee, in our own
righteousness, but for thy manifold and great mercies.

We have sinned against heaven and against th^e, and are no more worthy to be
called thy Sons.

Yet, O Lord, hear, O Lord forgive, ^nsider and do it, defer not for thine
own sake, O our God.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the holy Ghost:

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without end.

Amen.
II.
HEar our prayers, O Lord, and hide not thy self from our Petitions, and
hearken unto the words of our mouth, for strangers are risen up against us, and
Tyrants, which have not God before their eyes, seek after our Souls.

Cast us not away in the time of our weekness: for sake us not when our
strength fails us.

O remember not our offenses, but according to thy mercy think thou upon us for
thy goodness.

O turn thee unto us, and have mercy upon us: for we are desolate and in
misery.

The sorrows of our hearts are enlarged: O bring thou us out of all our
troubles.

Turn us, O God our Savior, and let thine anger cease from us: send down from
on high and deliver us, take us out of these many waters.

Why art thou absent from us so long? why is thy wrath so hot against the sheep
of thy pasture?

Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and forgettest our misery and trouble? for our
soul is brought low unto the dust, our belly cleaves to the ground.

Look upon our adversity and misery: and forgive us all our sins.

Arise, O Lord, and help us, and deliver us for thy mercy sake: so sall it be
known that it is thy hand, and that thou Lord have done it.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be, world without end.

Amen.
III.
WE will cry unto the Lord with our voice, yea even unto God will we cry with
our voice, and he shall hearken unto us. For the Lord is gracious and
long-suffering, and of great mercy to them that call upon him.

The Lord is nigh unto all them that be of a contrite heart, and will save such
as are of an humble ^irit.

And now, Lord, what is our hope? truly our hope is even in thee;

For our Fathers hoped in thee, they trusted in thee, and thou did deliver
them; they called upon thee and were helped, they put their trust in thee, and
were not confounded.

The Lord will be a defense for the oppressed, even a refuge in due time of
trouble: and they that know thy name will put their trust in thee, for thou
Lord never failest them that seek thee.

The merciful goodness of the Lord endures for ever and ever, upon them that
fear him: and his righteousness upon Childrens Children; even upon such as keep
his Covenant, and think upon his Commandments to do them.

Thou therefore that art a Savior to all that trust in thee, thou that
upholdest all such as are falling, and liftest up such as be down, thou that
healest the broken in heart, and give medicine to heal their sickness, thou
that art the Father of mercy and God of all consolation, that art comfort to
the sad, and strength to the weak, hear thy servants, we beseech thee, look
down from Heaven, behold and visit us with thy salvation.

Glory be to the Father, and to the S^, and to the Holy Ghost:

As it was in the beginning, is now ^d ever shall be, world without end

Amen.
After the Second Lesson, Psalm. 51. All kneeling.
1. HAve mercy upon me, O God, after thy great goodness; according to the
multitude of thy mercies do away mine offenses.

2. Wash me thoroughly from my wickedness, and cleanse me from my sin.

3. For I acknowledge my faults, and my sin is ever before me.

4. Against thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight; that
thou might be justified in thy saying, and clear when thou art judged.

5. Behold I was shapen in wickedness, and in sin has my mother conceived me.

6. But lo^, thou requirest truth in the inward parts, and shall make me to
understand wisdom secretly.

7. Thou shall purge me with Hysope, and I shall be clean: Thou shall wash me,
and I shall be whiter than Snow.

8. Thou shall make me hear of joy and gladness, that the bones which thou
have broken may rejoice.

9. Turn thy face from my sins, and put out all my misdeed^

10. Make me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me.

11. Cast me not away from thy presence, and take n^ thy Holy Spirit from me.

12. O give me the comfort of t^ help again; and stablish me with t^ free
spirit.

13. Then shall I teach the ways unto the wicked; and sinners shall be
converted unto the

14. Deliver me from bloodguiltinesse, O God, thou that (...) the God of my
health; and (...) tongue shall sing of thy righteousness.

15. Thou shall open my lips, O Lord, and my mouth shall show thy praise.

16. For thou desire no sacrifice, else would I give it thee; but thou
delightest not in burnt offerings.

17. The sacrifice of God is a troubled spirit: A broken and a contrite heart,
O God, shall thou not despise.

18. O be favorable and gracious unto Sion; build thou the walls of Jerusalem.

19. Then shall thou be pleased with the sacrifice of righteousness, with the
burnt offerings and oblations: Then shall they offer young bullocks upon thine
Altar.

Glory be to the Father, etc.
As it was in the beginning, etc.
Lord have mercy upon us.
Christ have mercy upon us.
Lord have mercy upon us.
Our Father which art in heaven, etc.

Minister, O Lord, save thy servants.

Answer, Which put their tru^ in thee.

Min. Send unto them help from above.

Answ. And evermore mightily defend them.

Min. Help us, O God, our Savio^

Answ. And for the glory (...) thy names sake deliver us, b^ merciful unto us
sinners, for thy names sake.

Min. O Lord, hear our prayer.

Ans. And let our cry come unt^ thee.

Let us pray.
O Lord, we beseech thee, mercifully hear our prayers, and spare all those
which confess their sins unto thee; that they (whose consciences by sin are
accused) by thy merciful pardon may be absolved, thorough Christ our Lord,
Amen.

O Most mighty God and merciful Father, which have compassion of all men, and
hate nothing that thou have made; which would not the death of a sinner,
but that he should rather turn from sin and be saved: Mercifully forgive us our
trespasses; receive and comfort us which he grieved and wearied with the
burden of our sins. Thy property is to have mercy, to thee only it
appertains to forgive sins. Spare us therefore, O Lord, spare thy people whom
thou have redeemed; Enter not into judgment with thy Servants, which be vile
earth, and miserable sinners; but so turn thine ire from us, which meekly
knowledge our vileness, and truly repent us of our faults; so make have to help
us in this world, that we may ever live with thee in the world to come, through
Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Then shall the people say thi^ that follows, after the Minister.

TUrn thou us, O good Lord, a^ so shall we be turned; be favo^ rabble, O Lord,
be favorable to t^ people, which turn to thee, in weepi^ fasting and praying:
For thou art merciful God, full of Compassion, l^ suffering, and of great
pity. Thou sp^ rest* when we deserve punishment, (...) in thy wrath think
upon mercy^ Spare thy people, good Lord, sp^ them, and let not thine heritage
be brought to confusion. Hear us, O Lord, for thy mercy is great, and after the
multitude of thy mercies look upon us.

I.
O Most merciful and gracious Lord, we wretched and miserable sinners, humbly
beseech thee in mercy and compassion to behold our great afflictions; for thy
wrath is gone out, and thine indignation is kindled against us: We confess, O
Lord, that thy ^udgements are just, for we have multiplied our transgressions
like the sand of the Sea; and the cry of them has been so great, that it has
pierced the heavens, and called for vengeance against us: But we beseech thee,
O Lord, forget not thou to be gracious, and shut not up thy loving kindness in
displeasure; turn thee again and be merciful unto thy Servants. Help us, O God
of our salvation, for the glory of thy name; O deliver us, and be merciful
unto our sins for thy names sake. Take thy [sword] and all other judgments
from us, that we be not consumed by the means of thy heavy hand upon our sins.
O satisfy us with thy mercy, and that soon; so shall we that be thy people,
and sheep of thy pasture, give thee thanks for ever, and will always be
showing forth thy praise from generation to generation. Grant this, O merciful
Father, we beseech thee, for Jesus Christ his sake, our only Savior and
Redeemer,

Amen.
II.
OEternal God and most gracious Father, we confess the by our manifold
transgressions, we have deserved whatsoever thy Law has threatened against
sinners: Our contempt of thy Divine Service is great, and we hear thy Word, but
obey it not. Our charity to our Neighbor is cold, and our disobedience
abounds. Religion is with many of us, as in too many places besides, made but a
pretense for other ends, then thy service; and there has been little or no
care among us, to keep Truth and Peace together, for the preserving of both
Church and State. Forgive us, O Lord, forgive us these, and all other our
grievous sins. Send us light in our understandings, readiness and obedience in
our wills, discretion in our words and actions, true, serious, and loyal
endeavors for the peace and prosperity of our Jerusalem, the unity and glory
of this Church and State; that we may love it, and prosper in it, that we may
be guided by thy grace in this life, and received to thy glory in the life to
come, through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
III.
GRant we beseech thee. Almighty God, that we which for our evil deeds, and
our great unthankfulness are worthily punished; by the comfort of thy grace may
mercifully be relieved, through our Lord Jesus Christ,

Amen.
IV.
ALmighty and most merciful Father, who for our many and grievous sins (those
especially which we have committed since our last solemn Humiliation before
thee) might most justly have cut us off, but in the multitude of thy mercies
have hitherto spared us: Accept we most heartily beseech thee, our unfeigned
sorrow for all our former transgressions; and grant we may never so presume of
thy mercy, as to despise the riches of thy goodness: But that thy forbearance
and long suffering may lead us to repentance, and amendment of our sinful
lives, to thy honor and glory, and our eternal salvation at the last day,
through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
V.
ALmighty and everlasting God, which hate nothing that thou have made, and
do forgive the sins of them that be penitent: Create and make in us new and
contrite hearts, that we worthily lamenting our sins, and acknowledging our
wretchedness, may obtain of thee, the God of all mercy, perfect remission and
forgiveness, through Jesus Christ.

VI.
GRant Lord, we beseech thee, that the course of this world may be so ordered
by thy governance, that thy Church may joyfully serve thee in all godly
quietness, through Jesus Christ,

Amen.
VII.
ALmighty and Everlasting God, mercifully look upon our infirmities and
miseries, and in all our dangers and necessities, stretch forth thy right hand
to help and defend us, through Christ our Lord,

Amen.
VIII.
O Lord, we beseech thee, favorably to hear the prayers of thy people, that
we, which are justly punished for our offenses, may be mercifully delivered by
thy goodness, for the glory of thy name, through Jesus Christ our Savior, who
lives, etc.

Let us pray for the whole state of Christ's holy Catholic Church, particularly
of our distressed Mother, the afflicted Church of England.
O Lord God of thine inheritance, who conveyest many blessings to the children
of men, by the prayer and Ministry of thy Church, let our prayers obtain of
thee mercies and deliverances for her.

O Lord, thou have planted thy Church in the humility, and poverty, and death
of thy Son; thou have watered it with the blood of thy Apostles and Martyrs;
thou have made it flourish and spread forth its branches, by the warmth and
heat, and graces of thy Holy Spirit; and have according to thy promise, still
preserved it in the midst of all enmities and disadvantages.

Thy Laws and righteous Commandments have been a scorn and derision to Jews
and Gentiles; the flesh of thy servants has been meat for the beasts of the
land; And still she wears the purple robe of mockery, and the crown of thorns,
which at first she took from the head and side of her dearest Lord.

At last, O Lord, be gracious unto thine inheritance; help us, O God of our
salvation, for the glory of thy name; let not thine enemies devour the Church,
and lay wast her dwelling places: Be merciful unto our sins, preserve all
those that by malice of their enemies are appointed to death, or prison, or any
other misery.

Let us still enjoy the freedom of thy Gospel, the food of thy Word, the sweet
refreshings of thy Sacraments, public Communions in thy Church, and all the
benefits of the society of Saints; and let not our sins cause thee to remove
the Candlestick from us. But make thy people and the sheep of thy pasture
secure and glad in thy salvation; that we may show forth thy praise in this
world, and in the world to come, through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
O Thou Shepherd of Israel, thou that sit upon the Cherubims, stir up thy
strength and come and help thy people that prays unto thee for mercy and
Protection. Thou have made Affliction the portion of thy children in this life,
thou feedest them with the bread of tears, and give them plenteousness of
tears to drink; Yet be pleased to show the light of thy countenance upon us, to
lighten our darknesses, to relieve our miseries, to heal our sicknesses; and
let not thy Church become a strife unto her Neighbors, but reunite her
Divisions, and make her not a prey to them that would devour her, and then
laugh her to scorn. O Lord, hedge her about with thy mercies, with the custody
of Angels, with the Patronage of Kings and Princes, with the hearts and hands
of Nobles, and the defense (...) the whole secular Arm, least the will Beasts
of the field pluck off (...) Grapes, destroy the Vintage, a^ root up the Vine
it self: but let (...) so flourish under the beams of thy fa vour and
providence, that it may (...) root, and spread and fill all lands that the name
of the man of thy rig^ hand, the God and man Christ Ies^ may be glorified, thy
Church enlarg^ and defended, and we blessed with (...) health and salvation:
Grant this, O Lord, for Jesus Christ his sake, our only Savior and Redeemer.

Amen.
O Savior of the world, save us, which by thy Cross and precious blood have
redeemed us, help us we beseech thee, help this ^eeding Church, O thou God of
our salvation.

Though thou have no^ a long ti^ given Satan and his instruments power (...)
all that she has, yet, O Lord, spare her life: Let there be still a re^nant
left to praise thee,

And when by these sharp trials thou have vindicated her integrity, be pleased
to bless her, as thou did Job' s latter end, by giving her a double portion
of all real advantages

And though thou have now violently removed thy. Tabernacle, yet, O Lord, let
not one pin of it be lost: But erect it again amongst us in the wonted order
and beauty, for thy goodness sake, for thy mer^ sake, for thy Son Christ Jesus
sake, ^ur only Lord and Savior,

Amen.
O Lord, which do teach us that all our doings without charity are nothing
worth; send thy holy Ghost, and pour into our hearts that most excellent gift
of charity, the very bond of peace and all virtues; without which whosoever
lives is counted dea^ before thee. Grant this for thine only Son Jesus
Christ's sake.

The Conclusion.
THe Almighty Lord, which is a most strong tower to all^ them that put their
trust in him; to whom all things in Heaven, i^ earth, and under the earth, do^
bow and obey, be now and evermore our defense.

The defense of this afflicted Church: The defense of these di^cted Realms:
The defense of all ^ch who do, or suffer for the testimony ^f a good
Conscience: The defense of ^e blessed and holy offices of our Mo^r the church:
The defense of this and all other congregations that meet ^gether in thy holy
fear: The defense (...) our dear relations, both at home and abroad: The
defense of our ^n persons: The defense of our souls, ^dies and estates.

And make us all to know and ^el, that there is no other name under heaven
given unto man, (...) whom, and through whom, we ^ay receive re-establishment
in our ^eligion, restoration of our Li^rties, reconciliation with thee ^r God,
together with peace and ^fety among men, felicity here, ^d salvation hereafter,
but one^ the name of our Lord Jesus ^rist. To whom with the^, O Father and the
blessed spirit, (...) ascribed, as i^ most due, all H^ nour, and Glory, Praise
Might, Majesty, Dominion and Adoration of all A^gels, of all Men, and of (...)
Creatures, now and for (...)

Amen, Amen.
A FORM OF Prayer FOR the Thirtieth of January.

A form of Prayer for the 30th of January.
Preface to be read standing.
1. RIghteous art thou O Lord, when I plead with thee, yet let me talk with
thee of thy judgments; where^ore does the way of the wicked ^rosper? wherefore
are all they ^appy, that deal very treacher^usly?

2. Thou bast planted them, yea, ^ey grow and bring forth fruit: ^ou art near
in their lips, and ^rre from their reins, where^re hold thou thy tongue,
^ile the wicked devoureth the man that is more righteous the ^e?

3. They have condemned an^ killed the Just, and he does no^ refist them:

4. They make a man an offend^ for a word, and lay snares for him, that
repro^eth them in the gate, (...) turn aside the Just for a thing of naught.

5. They say, let us lay w^ for blood, let us lurk privily for the Innocent
blood, (...) cause; we shall find^ (...) substance; we shall (...) ^es with
spoil:

6. Wherefore they (...) their Net, and burn Iucense (...) their Dr^gg; because
by it. their p^tion is fat, and their ^eat plen^ ^s.

7. Art not thou from everlasting, my Lord, my God, my holy one? O Lord, thou
have (...) them for Judgment: (...) mighty God, thou have establi^ed them for
Correction.

8. But thoug^ the righteous be prevented by death, yet shall he be at rest.

9. For his soul pleased the Lord; therefore he has hasted to take him from
among the wicked.

10. In the sight of the unwise they seemed to die, and their departure is
taken for misery, and their going from us for utter destruction; but they are
in peace.

11. For though they be punished in the sight of men, yet is their reward full
of immortality

12. And after a little chastenlug they shall be greatly rewarded, for God has
proved them, and found them worthy for himself.

13. As Gold in the fire, has he tried them, and received them as a burnt
offering.

14. Blessed are the dead, which die in the Lord, for they rest from their
labors, and their works follow them.

15. For if we have been planted with him in the likeness of his death we
shall also be in the likeness of his resurrection.

16. O our God, we are ashamed, and blush to lift up our faces to thee; for our
iniquities are increased over our beads, and our trespass is gone up to
Heaven; since the days of our Fathers, have we been in a great trespass, unto
this day; and for our Iniquities have we, our Kings, and our Priests, been
delivered to the sword, to captivity, to a spoil; and to confusion of face, as
it is this day.

17. What shall we say, or how shall we clear our selves? God has found out
the Iniquity of his Servants: We have transgressed, and rebelled; thou have not
pardoned.

18. Thou have covered with anger, and persecuted us, thou have slain, and not
pitied.

19. The Lord has kindled a fire in Zion, and it has devoured the foundations
thereof.

20. For the sins of her Prophets, and her Priests, that have shed the blood of
the Just, in the midst of her.

21. And now, O Lord, thou art most Just in all that is come upon us; for thou
have done right but we have done wickedly.

22. Behold we are before thee in our trespass, for we cannot stand before
thee because of this.

23. O Lord, though our iniquities testify against us, yet do thou it for thy
names sake, for we have sinned against thee.

24. Be not wrath very sore, neither remember iniquity for ever.

25. Be merciful, O Lord, to thy people, whom thou have redeemed, and lay not
innocent blood to the charge of thy people.

26. Deliver us from bloud-guiltiness thou God of our health, and our tongue
shall sing of thy righteousness.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be, world without end:Amen.

O come let us worship, let us bumble our selves, let us fall low, and kneel
before the Lord our Maker.

Then this General Confession to be said, All kneeling.
OThou Judge Eternal, we the sinfullest of all the sons of men, that have
abused thy Mercies, provoked thy Judgments, unsheathed thy glittering Sword,
forced all the Arrows and Darts of thy Quiver, and with our multiplied
abominable crying sins, brought down a desolation on a most pleasant Land (that
former delight of thine) the glory of all Lands.

We, that after thy wrath was poured out upon us, have yet further increased
our sins, as thou have increased the weight and number of thy Judgments upon
us; walked most unprofitably and obdurately under all thy disciplines and
visitations; suffered all thy precious methods of reducing us (thine
admonitions and thy ^ripes) to be utterly lost and ^ate amongst us, brought
down a blast and mildew upon all that has been undertaken to repair our
breaches, and reduce our peace. We do now at length, in the remorse and
bitterness of our souls, desire to cast our selves down upon the ground before
thee, to confess and acknowledge thy patience and long-suffering, that we have
not been under the sharpest of thy displeasures; and to adore thy goodness,
whatsoever becomes of us, though it be in the shame, and confusion, and
condemnation, both of our bodies and souls. Lord! this is the mildest that we
have reason to expect from thy Justice, in retribution to our sins: And
whatever is less then this, whatsoever the bitterness of our cup be in this
life, though thou should cast us into the place of Dragons, give us to drink
of the Wine of astonishment, the most stupifying deadly potion, number us all
to the sword, pour out thy fire and brimstone upon us: Yet if by thus
chastizing of us here, thou please to rescue us from that sadder doom, of being
condemned with the world, this is a most inestimable mercy of thine, beyond all
that we have (hitherto) so unworthily enjoyed. Lord! we desire, and profess, to
acquit thy Justice in thy proceedings, to adore the bounty of thy Goodness and
patience toward us, that we have not, long ago, been as Admah and Zeboim, as
Sodom and Gomorrah, that we have this day liberty to approach the Lord! that it
may yet be t^ good pleasure, to come home (...) every one of our souls, to
strike our hearts, to break up these fallow grounds of ours, that all the
precious seed be no longer (...) cast away amongst thorns: And by the power of
thy mighty, controuling, convincing Spirit, that thou would once subdue all
the resistances of our spirits against this most reasonable motion of
humiliation within us.

Lord, this is the one earne^ desire of our souls, that has ca^ us low (this
day) before thy foo^ stool, with cries, and tears, and earnest groans, that
thou would have this mercy upon us, that thou would thus powerfully reveal
thy self unto us, who have thus long smitten and importunately called unto us;
that being at last returned unto thee, in weeping, fasting and mourning, and
renting of our hearts; we might be capable of thy returns to us, of the further
impressions of thy grace, and never more contradict or quench, or grieve that
spirit of thine, which has thus long contended and wrestled with us; that so
it may be seasonable with thee, to give us the comfort of thy help again, and
the confidence to approach thy presence, to praise that Majesty, which has not
cast out our prayer, nor turned his mercy from us; to whom be all honor,
power, glory and praise, now and for ever,

Amen.
O LORD, the great and dreadful God, keeping Covenant and mercy to them that
love thee, and to them that keep thy Commandments, we have finned with our
forefathers; We our Kings, our Priests, our Nobles, and all the People of this
Land, and have Rebelled, ev^ by departing from thy Precepts and thy judgments.

BY our impious and godless thoughts of thee, our confidences in the Arm of
Flesh, by placing our affections too much upon earthly things, by neglecting to
love and delight in thee, by presuming of thy mercies, and yet continuing in
our sin^ we have provoked and Rebelled against thee:

O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at
this day.

By our want of Reverence to thy Service, not considering the awfulness of thy
presence, and that honor due to thee in thy house; by our formal and
hypocritical worship; by open profanation and sacrilege, by shows and
pretenses of piety to cover our worldly and wicked designs, we have provoked
and rebelled against thee:

O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at
this day.

By vain and rash Oaths, blasphemies and perjuries, especially our careless
breaches of Oaths made to our Sovereign, forgeting that such are the Oaths of
God, and that thou thy self in a more especial manner, art a strict avenger of
them; by our execrations of our selves, our Brethren, and our Enemies, we have
provoked and rebelled against thee:

O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at
this day.

By undervaluing thy public Service, and neglecting to bea^ a part in it; by
mispending o^ that time, either there or elsewhere, in wanton or worldly
thoughts and employments, and not keeping the spiritual Sabbath unto thee, in
serving the truly all the days of our life; by not duly observing the times
of Festivity, or Fasting, appointed by just Authority, according to the example
of thy people in all ages, we have provoked and rebelled against thee:

O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at
this day.

By not duly acknowledging thine Ordinance and Authority in the persons of our
Superiors; by speaking evil of Dignities, and reviling the Rulers of thy
People, by groundless jealousies and suspicions, misjudging and censuring their
actions; and at last proceeding to that highest and horrid pitch of violation
of that Image of thine imprinted on them: By being as a People that strive with
their Priests; by not obeying them that have the rule over us, and not
submitting ourselves to them, who by thy Appointment watch over our souls; by
neglecting the care of those committed to our charge, not correcting those sins
which have cried loud for exemplary punishment, We have provoked and rebelled
against thee.

O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at
this day.

By rash anger, malice, hatred, and revenge, and the bloody effects thereof; by
uncharitable contentions and divisions, factions and animosities; by cruelty
and unmercifulness, and communicating in the sins of blood; We have provoked
and rebelled against thee.

O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at
this day.

By the manifold sins of uncleanness, by seeking or not avoiding the occasions
thereof, by idleness, intemperance and drunkenness, by immodest words and
gestures, by our shameless boasting, or not blushing at those sins. We have
provoked and rebelled against thee;

O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at
this day.

By Thefts, Rapines, and Oppressions, scandalizing thereby the Honor and
Justice of a good Cause, by vexatious suites so much practiced and
countenanced, by exactions, by unjust gains in bargaining, by defrauding the
labourer of his hire, by want of due care in expending what we have, and a good
conscience in acquiring more, We have provoked and rebelled against thee;

O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at
this day.

By lying, detraction and contumely, by endeavoring to advantage a good Cause
by falsehood and unjust means; by censuring and rash judgments; by false
Witness and perverting the course of Justice, we have provoked and rebelled
against thee.

O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at
this day.

By desire of change, and uncontentednesse in our Estates; by giving ourselves
over to lustful, covetous and inordinate affections; by desiring Peace not so
much for thine honor or the public good, as the satisfaction of our own
private lusts; by neglecting acts of Charity, and doing as we would be done to;
and not doing our duty in that state of life unto which it has pleased thee to
call us. We have provoked and rebelled against thee.

O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at
this day.

By our want and neglect of those necessary Christian duties, of humiliation
and godly sorrow for sins, of due indignation and revenge upon ourselves for
them; of confessing and forsaking, of restitution and satisfaction to others,
and by not bringing forth fruits worthy of repentance, we have provoked and
rebelled against thee:

O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at
this day.

By impatience under thy correcting hand, by not endeavoring our amendment by
it, in reflecting upon our own sins as the Causes of it, by despising thy
chastisements, in not rejoicing in tribulations, and not glorifying thee, that
have counted us worthy to suffer for righteousness sake, We have provoked and
rebelled against thee.

O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at
this day.

By fretting ourselves, because of the ungodly, and being envious against the
evil doers; by not loving our enemies, not blessing them that curse us, not
doing good to them that hate us, nor praying for those that despightfully use
us, and persecute us, We have provoked and rebelled against thee;

O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at
this day.

By presuming to do evil that good may come thereon; by placing piety in
opinion, by straining at Gnats and swallowing of Camels, in scrupling at things
indifferent, and making no conscience of known sins, we have provoked and
rebelled against thee;

O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at
this day.

By running into open profaneness, under color of avoiding superstition; by
guiding our conscience by humors and fancies, and not by the certain rules of
thy Law; by having itching ears, and heaping to our selves teachers, and by
having men's persons in admiration, because of advantage; We have provoked and
rebelled against thee:

O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of face, as at
this day.

Who can tell, how often he offends; O cleanse thou us from these, and from our
secret sins.

Try us, O good God, and search the ground of our hearts, prove us, and examine
our thoughts, and look well if th^re be any other way of wickedness in us, and
lead us in the way everlasting.

A Prayer for forgiveness.
O Almighty and most merciful Father, who art the Lord God, merciful and
gracious, long-suffering and abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy for
thousands, and forgiving iniquity, transgressions and sins. Look down upon us
with thy compassionate eyes, who are here before thee, in the bitterness of
our souls, and do now with troubled spirits, with broken and with contrite
hearts, most humbly beg pardon for these multitudes of our offenses. Look, we
humbly beseech thee, upon the blood of thy son which speaks better things
then that of Abell; for his sake spare us, Lord, spare thy people, that these
sins rise not up against us: for his passions sake expose us not for a prey to
their cruel hands, who would both devour and deride us.

R. Spare us, Lord, spare thy people, for the glory of thy name; O deliver us,
and be merciful to all these our sins, through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
OUr Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily ly bread.
And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.
And lead us not into temptation: but deliver us from evil.

Amen.
O Lord open thou our lips.
And our mouth shall show forth thy praise.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be, world without end:

Amen.
LAMENTATIONS out of Jeremy the Prophet.
LOok down, O LORD, in the Bowels of thy pity, and lend a tender ear unto the
voice of our Lamentations. Our Adversaries are the chief, our enemies prosper:
For thou have afflicted us for the multitude of our transgressions: The Crown
is fallen from the head, woe unto us, that we have sinned.

O Lord, behold our afflictions, for the Enemy has magnified himself.

The Adversary has spread out his hand upon all our pleasant things; they have
entered into, and have profaned thy sanctuaries: They have seen us low, and
they have mocked at our Sabboaths, our solemn feasts are become their scorn,
and our devotions their derision.

O Lord, behold our afflictions, for the Enemy has magnified himself.

Thou art become our Enemy, thou have increased among us Mourning and
Lamentation, because thou have despised in the indignation of thine anger both
the King, and the Priest.

See, O Lord, and consider, for we are become very vile.

All our people sigh. The yoke of our transgressions is bound by thy hand, they
are wreathed and come up upon our necks, thou have made our strength to fail,
thou have delivered it into their hands, from whom we are not able to rise up
Thou have trodden us as in a Winepresse; our enemies hear our trouble, and they
are glad thou have done it.

Behold, O Lord, for we are in distress: Our bowels are troubled, our heart is
turned within us; for we have grievously Rebelled, abroad the sword devoureth,
at home there is (...) death.

Our enemies have opened their mouth against us, they hiss and they gnash their
Teeth, they say, We have swallowed them up; certainly, this is the day that we
looked for, we have found, we have seen it. Thus are we in derision all the day
long, We are become their Song, and their Music.

O Lord, behold our afflictions, f^ the enemy has magnified himself.

They have cried unto us, depart ye, ye are unclean, depart, depart; touch not;
yea, the^ men have said, they shall no more so^ourn here.

O Lord, behold our afflictions, for the enemy has magnified himself.

The breath of our Nostrils, the Anointed of the Lord is taken in their pits,
and slaughtered by their hands; of whom yet we said, under his shadow we shall
live among the midst of these sad distractions.

O Lord, behold this, and behold our afflictions, for the enemy has very
highly magnified himself.

Thus do we call to mind our afflictions, and our miseries, the Wormwood and
the Gall, our souls have them in remembrace, and they are humbled in us, and
therefore have we hope.

It is of the Lords mercy that we are not consumed, because his compassions
fail not. They are new every morning, great is his faithfulness. For the Lord
will not cast off for ever; but though he cause grief, yet will he have
compassion according to the multitude of his Mercies. For he does not afflict
willingly, nor grieve the children of men.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is no^ and ever shall be, world without end*

Amen.
The Psalms for the Day 7. 10. 22. 37.
First Lesson, 2 Chronicles. 35. from (...) 20. ad fin. Lament. 5. Zac^ 12. v. 10.
ad finem.

A Form Collected out of the Psalms. I.
HEar our voice, O Lord, out of thy holy Temple, let our complaint come before
thee, let it enter even into thy ears.

Our heart is in heaviness, O let us make our Prayer unto thee in an
acceptable time.

Lord, our iniquities are against us, our rebellions are many wherewith we have
transgressed against thee: But we confess our wickednesses, and are sorry for
our sins.

Our confusion is daily before us, fearfulness and trembling are come upon us,
and an horrible dread has overwhelmed us, and it is thy great mercy only that
we are not consumed, for we have sinned, O Lord, we have transgressed and done
wickedly, yea, we have rebelled, and departed from thy precepts, and from thy
Commandments.

Innumerable troubles are come about us, our sins have taken hold upon us, that
we are not able to look up, yea, they are more in number then the hairs of our
heads, and our hearts have failed us. O Lord, righteousness belongs unto
thee, but unto us confusion of face, because of all the offenses we have
committed against thee.

Yet compassion and forgiveness is with thee, though we have rebelled against
thee. O Lord, according to thy goodness, we beseech thee, let thine anger and
thy wrath be turned away from us, and cause thy face to shine upon thy
servants. Incline thine ears and hear, open thine eyes and behold our
afflictions, for we do not present our supplications before thee, in our own
righteousness, but for thy manifold and great mercies.

We have sinned against heaven and against thee, and are no more worthy to be
called thy Sons.

Yet, O Lord, hear O Lord, forgive, consider and do it, defer not for thine
own sake, O our God.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the holy Ghost:

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without end,

Amen.
II.
HEar our prayers, O Lord, and hide not thy self from our Petitions, and
hearken unto the words of our mouth, for strangers are risen up against us, and
Tyrants, which have not God before their eyes, seek after our Souls.

Cast us not away in the time of our weakness: forsake us not when our
strength fails us.

O remember not our offenses, but according to thy mercy think thou upon us for
thy goodness.

O turn thee unto us, and have mercy upon us: for we are desolate and in
misery.

The sorrows of our hearts are enlarged: O bring thou us out of all our
troubles.

Turn us, O God our Savior, and let thine anger cease from us: send down from
on high and deliver us, take us out of these many waters.

Why art thou absent from us so long? why is thy wrath so hot against the sheep
of thy pasture?

Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and forgettest our misery and trouble? for our
soul is brought low unto the dust, our belly cleaves to the ground

Look upon our adversity and misery: and forgive us all our sins.

Arise, O Lord, and help us, and deliver us for thy mercy sake: so shall it be
known that it is thy hand, and that thou Lord have done it.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be, world without end,

Amen.
III.
WE will cry unto the Lord with our voice; yea, even unto God will we cry with
our voice, and he shall hearken unto us. For the Lord is gracious and
long-suffering, and of great mercy to them that call upon him.

The Lord is nigh unto all them that be of a contrite heart, and will save such
as are of an humble spirit.

And now, Lord, what is our hope? truly our hope is even in thee;

For our Fathers hoped in thee they trusted in thee, and thou di^ deliver them;
they called upon thee and were helped, they put their tr^ in thee, and were not
confounded.

The Lord will be a defense for the oppressed, even a refuge in due time of
trouble: and they that know thy name will p^ their trust in thee, for thou Lord
never failest them that seek thee.

The merciful goodness of the Lord endures for ever and ever, up^ them that
fear him: and his righteousness upon Childrens Children; even upon such as keep
his Cove^, and think upon his Command^ to do them.

Thou therefore that art a Savior to all that trust in thee, thou that
upholdest all such as are falling, and liftest up such as be down, thou that
healest the broken in heart, and give medicine to heal their sickness, thou
that art the Father of mercy and God of all consolation, that art comfort to
the sad, and strength to the weak, hear thy servants, we beseech thee, look
down from Heaven, behold and visit us with thy salvation.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be, world without end,

Amen.
The second Lesson, appointed by the Calendar of the Church, for the 30th. of
January, throughout all time, is the 27. Chapter of the Gospel according to St.
Matthew.
GIve the King thy judgments, O God.

The Lord hear him in the day of trouble: the name of the God of Jacob defend
him.

Send him help from his Sanctuary: and strengthen him out of Sion.

Let the King rejoice in thy strength, O Lord: let him be exceeding glad of thy
salvation.

Grant him his hearts desire, and deny him not the request of his lips.

[O Lord, gird him with strength into the battle: throw down his Enemies
under him.

Make them to turn their backs upon him: and disperse them that hate him.]

Deliver him from the strivings of his people.

Deliver him from his cruel Enemies, and set him up above his adversaries;
thou shall rid him from the wicked man: and why? because the King puts his
trust in the Lord, and in the mercy of the most high, he shall not miscarry.

Some put their trust in Charriots, and some in horses, but we will remember
the name of the Lord our God.

Save Lord, and hear us, O King of Heaven, when we call upon thee.

Be thou exalted in thine own strength: so will we sing and praise thy power.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Hol^ Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is no^ and ever shall be, world without end*

Amen.
V.
O Lord God, that do build^ up Jerusalem, and gather together the outcasts
of Israel.

Wherefore art thou absent so long^ Why is thy wrath so hot against t^ sheep of
thy pasture?

O think upon thy Congregation: whom thou have purchased and redeemed of old.

Think upon the tribe of thine inheritance: and mount Sion, where thou have
dwelt.

Lift up thy Feet, and disperse all those our Enemies: which have done evil in
thy sanctuary.

For they have broken down the carved work thereof with Axes and Hammers: they
have defiled the ^welling places of thy name, yea, they said in their hearts,
let us make ha^ock of them altogether.

O God, how long shall the Adversary do this dishonor? ^ow long shall the
Enemy blas^heme thy name, for ever?

Why withdrawest thou thy hand, ^hy pluckest not thou thy right hand ^ut of thy
bosom to scatter the ene^y?

Arise, O God, maintain thine ^wn cause: Remember how the foolish man
blasphemes thee daily.

Forget not the voice of thine Enemies: the presumption of them that ^ate thee
increases ever more and more.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost:

As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be, world without end,

Amen.
The Creed.
I Believe in God the Fath^ Almighty, maker of heaven and earth: and in Jesus
Christ his only Son our Lord which was con^eived by the holy Ghost, born of
the Virgin M^ry, suffered under Ponce Pilat^ was crucified, dead and buried, he
descended into Hell, the third day he rose again from the dead, he ascended
into heaven, and fitteth on the right hand o^ God the Father Almighty: from
thence he shall come, to judge the quick and the dead. I believe in the holy
Ghost, the holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints, the forgiveness of
fins, the resurrection of the body, and the life everlasting,

Amen.
Let us Pray.
The Lord be with you.
And with thy spirit.
Lord have mercy upon us.
Christ have mercy upon us.
Lord have mercy upon us.
OUr Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.
And lead us not into temptation: but deliver us from evil,

Amen.
O Thou most mighty Creator and wise Ruler of all things, who have reserved the
disposal of all events to thine own allseeing Wisdom, and never permittest
any thing to be done by the malice of men, or Devils, but what thou discernest
absolutely most useful and profitable for thy Servants. Thou who a^ good
beyond all that we can judge or choose, even when thy judgments are most
terrible and astonishing; We thy sinful creatures, do here prostrate our souls
before thee, desiring to adore and tremble at thy presence, to admire the
finger of thine own hand, in that great vengeance, which did (as upon this Day)
befall us; Lord, it is the provocation of our ^ns that has reached up to
heaven, that has brought down these amazing punishments upon earth: thou have
abounded to us in mercies, beyond all the Nations of the world, granted us all
the advantages we could pray for, and we murmured against thy bounty, rebelled
against thy most obliging methods of melting and over coming an obdurate
people: And then, what remained, but that thou should withdraw those graces
which we had so long abused and profaned? Deprive us of all our ornaments,
leave us naked and bare, cast us out into the open field, to the loathing of
our persons? Judge us, as women that break wedlock and shed blood, are judged;
and give us blood in jealousy and fury? And thus have thou in thy just
displeasure proceeded with us: thou have abased our glory, thou ha^ in our very
faces, thou ha^ reproach upon all that (...) ^cious amongst us: Thou have
permitted an host, not only against the daily sacrifice, to cast down the
truth to the ground; but even against thine own Ordnance, thine own
inscription, the Image of thine own power amongst us, and in all this to
practice and prosper: Lord thou have called us to lamentation and bitter
mourning, beyond the weeping of Rachel f^ her children, or the mourning of
Hadadrimmon, in the valley of Megiddo: Lord, they are our rebellions against
thee, which thou have Visited upon our late Sovereign, our beloved I^siah; and
(to the aggravation of our sin and woe) they were our hands that executed this
butchery upon him. In this tho^ have more then delivered up the Nation unto
Satan, to the adversary, to buffet and thresh us; thou have delivered us (...)
selves, to assassinate our (...)* Our greatest sin is our (...) punishment: The
utmost of our provocations against thee, is the utmost of thy inflictions upon
us: And yet (O Lord!) all these accursed effects of our sins have not served to
alien us from them: none repents of his way, or says, what have I done? But
every one rusheth into his course, as the horse rusheth into the battle. And
since (O Lord!) we have not in this (...), heard the things that (...) to our
peace, what can we expect, but that they should for ever be hid from our eyes?
That our measure being filled up, and thy righteous servant removed by our
violence, from holding up our Pillars, we should all become one common Ruin?
That the earth should swallow us up for Cora^s sins; or the destruction of
thine own ancient people the Je^ should be the reward of the obduration of
thine own people; And then (O Lord!) it is thy great mercy to our late Sovereign,
that thou have taken him away from the evil to come And it is the joy of our
hearts in the midst of our lamentations that having so fitted him for thy self,
given him that wonderful measure of Patience, Constancy and Magnanimity, thou
we^ pleased to crown all these Graces with perseverance here, and in exeha^
(...) his crown of thorns (...) encumbrances of a broken Kingdom on earth
have received him into a participation of thy crown of Glory. As for us (O
Lord!) we are laid at thy feet, to hear what the Lord God will say, concerning
us: whatsoever thy purposes are we desire to embrace them Christianly, though
it be to cast us away, as straw to the dunghill; but if yet there may be place
of mercy, Lord, lift up the lig^ of thy countenance and be gracious to the
remnant of thine heritage; To this end, O Lord, convert us from the evil of
our ways; and our enemies from the cruelty of theirs; thou God of purity and
peace, grant that we be no longer a wicked, nor a self-destroying Nation; but
that we may all at length, join together in a serious unfeign^ humiliation for
the shed^ (...) that precious innocent bl^, and all those other sins that have
brought down thy desertions on us; Grant this for Jesus Christ his sake.

Amen.
II.
O Lord! this is a day (...) trouble, of rebuke and blasphemy, a day wherein a
wonderful and horrible thing was (...) in our land, most (...) blood, shed
with more barbarous aggravations, then we know where to parallel on this side
the murder of thy dear Son* And because sentence against this evil work has
not been erecuted speedily, the hearts (...) this people are wholly set in the
to do evil; this respite, which thou have given us to work o^ Repentance,
has served on^ to complete our sin, by adding an obstinate impenitency to
(...) former Guilt; and so fitting us for that final excision which thou have
threatened to obdurate sinners. And now, (O Lord,) this fearful expectation of
judgment, and fiery indignation is all that remains unto us, who have thus
despised the riches of thy mercy: Yet (O Lord) out of these depths do we desire
to call upon thee: Lord hear our voice; and (if that final sentence be not
irreversibly gone (...) against us) be pleased yet to turn thy wrath away, and
not to suffer thy whole displeasure to arise? To this end, thou O Lord, who
breakest the gates of brass, and smitest the bars of Iron in ^der; be thou
pleased to rend these unrelenting hearts of our^ to work in every one of us
such a sense of our horrid abominations (especially, that of this day) as may
cast us down in the lowest degree of Humiliation and Contrition before thee:
that so we may be capable of that exaltation which thou have promised to the
humble, that Comfort which thou have assigned to Mourners, through Jesus Christ
our Lord,

Amen.
III.
O Lord God, that rulest over all the Kingdoms of the earth, that have
threatened that for the sins of the Land, the Kings thereof should be many;
and have told us, that if we do wickedly, we should be consumed, both we and
our King: We miserable and wretched sinners, do here in the bitterness of our
soul ^ostrate our selves before thy Throne of Grace, acknowledging against our
selves, that we have made thee to serve with our sins, and wearied thee with
our iniquities; so that in the fierceness of thine anger, thou have wounded us
with the wound of an enemy, and chastised us with the chastisement of a oruel
one: for in the indignation of thy fury, thou have despised the King and the
Priest: Woe unto us, that we have sinned, the Crown is fallen from our Head, and
the beauty of our Israel is slain by the hands of wicked men. Thou have
suffered the Breath of our Nostrils the Anointed of the Lord, to be taken in
their Pits, of whom we said, under his shadow we shall have Peace and
Protection: The fire out of the Bramble has devoured the lofty Cedars; the
Base are risen up against the Honourale; the Subjects against their King, whom
(after much contumelious usage) forgetting the Oath of God, their own Covenant,
their own Protestation, and their often reiterated Vows, to preserve his
Person, Crown and Dignity; and all this, with their hands lifted up to thee our
God of Truth; have yet brought him as a Lamb to the slaughter and with wicked
hands h^ murdered thy Vicegerent, (...) though he had not been anointed with
oil: A wonderful and horrible sin is committed in the Land, over passing the
deeds of the wicked; a sin that no Nation, no people ever committed, and such
as the Sun never saw, since it withdrew its light at the Passion of thy dear
Son, our Savior Jesus Christ: Other Rebels have murdered Kings, but (as it
was, in it self a deed of darkness, so) they acted the sin in darkness,
shunning the light; But this Paricide (...) committed with a high hand,
presumptuously, in the fight of the Sun, and owned as an Act of Justice: The
cry of this Innocent blood of a righteous King, of our own King, a King too
good for so wicked a People, is entered into thy presence, and calls loud to
thee for vengeance upon this whole Nation; so that we may justly expect that
thou should ^ot us and our posterity out of this Land, which is made an
abomination, stained and polluted with the blood of thine Anointed Servant and
Martyr: But the Judge of all the earth will not destroy the Innocent with the
Guilty; for though our sins are many and grievous, yet in our tears we will
wash our hands from this sin, saying, our hands have not shed this blood; And
therefore when thou shall make inquisition for blood, lay not (we beseech thee)
this blood to our Charge! Be merciful, O Lord, be merciful unto thy people,
whom thou have redeemed, and let not this Innocent blood be required, neither
of us, nor of our Posterity: For, as (before this great wickedness was
committed) we prayed against it, and in our Devotions entered our Protestation
in Heaven, before thee, against so impious, so h^ lish Resolutions of the
bloody Assassinates: So, since these sons of Belial have brought their
mischievous imaginations to pass, for which our souls are wounded and humbled
within us, we do from our hearts detest this Damnable Parricide; and do from
our souls renounce this abhorred Murder of thine Anomted Servant, our late
Sovereign King Charles: Saying with Jacob, O my soul, come not thou into their
Secret, unto their Assembly mine honor be not thou united; for in their anger
they have slain a man, the best of men, the Lords Anointed; Cursed be their
Anger, for it was fierce, and their wrath for it was cruel! yea, we will yet
pray against their wickedness, for now they go on to strengthen one wickedness
with another: They Decree unrighteous Decrees, and write grievous things which
they have prescribed, thereby to establish wickedness by a Law, to remove the
bounds of the People, and destroy the very Foundations. But O thou preserver of
men, and God of all order, blast all their designs which tend to nothing but
Anarchy and Confusion, and destruction and scandal of the Christian Religion;
but let all their turning of things upside down be esteemed as the Potters
clay; Let it be in thy sight, as the Rebellion of Corah, Dathan and Abiram; and
now (O Lord, the God of the spirits of all flesh) let not the Congregation of
the Lord be as sheep which have no shepherd; Though our breach be great like
the sea, yet thou can heal it: Be merciful (we beseech thee) to these three
Kingdoms united under one Crown by establishing the King in his Fathers
Throne; Plead thou his cause, and (that thou may give rest unto the Land)
make his w^ prosperous; direct all his Co^ sels, and Crown all his Design^ with
success; raise him up frie^ abroad, and at home turn (...) hearts of the People
to their Sovereign; upon whom, we (...) seech thee to double the G^ and Graces
of his Father, as t^ did the spirit of Elijah, on (...) sha; Cloth him with
Maj^ and Power, that he may subdue (...) Rebellious, and appear terrible to
thine and his Enemies: that so he may restore the daily S^crifice, thy public
Worship (...) Service, relieve the Oppress^ and bring the punishment of t^
Innocent blood of his Father, upon those Murderers that shed it, as water spilt
upon the ground: Hasten, O Lord, by him to restore Peace and Righteousness,
Truth and Equity; Let them kiss each other under his government! O let the
wickedness of the wicked come to an end, but guide thou the just: Give O Lord,
rest from our fears, (...) from our sorrows, and from ^he oppressions under
which we ^n; Let thine hand, O Lord, (...) ^own toward thy servants, and thine
indignation toward ^hine and the Kings Enemies: (...) down, O Lord, from hea^,
and behold from the habi^tion of thy holiness and of thy glory; restrain not
(we be^ thee) thy zeal, nor thy strength, nor the soundings of thy Bowels, and
of thy Mercies ^rds us: Hear us, O Lord, (...) King of Heaven, when we c^l
upon thee, and grant our (...), and that for Jesus Christ sake, our only Lord
and Savior,

Amen.
IV.
BLessed Lord! in whose fight the death of thy Saints (...) most precious, we
magnify thy name for those wonderful (...) ^ions of thy Grace on our (...)
Martyred Sovereign, which enabled him so happily to transcribe the Copy of his
blessed Master in a Constant, Meek suffering of all barbarous indigniti^ and at
last resisting even (...) blood, and even then pursui^ that glorious Pattern,
and pra^ing for his Murderers: Let (...) Memory, O Lord, be ever ble^ among
us, and his example efficacious upon us, that we may follow him, as he followed
Christ* And, O Lord, we beseech thee, let not his blood outcry hi^ Prayers;
but let those that spilt the one, obtain benefit by the other: that by their
Conviction and Repentance, his Innocence may receive the happiest attestation,
our Religion be vindicated from the scandal of so horrid a fact, our Nation
secured from the vengeance of that blood, and thy mercy glorified in the
Conversion of so great sinners; and all for Jesus Christ his sake,

Amen.
V.
O Just and Righteous Judge, who did once for the inquity of thy People
Israel, give up thy Ark into the hands of the Philistines. We thy sinful
Creatures, that are now under as great a degree both of guilt and punishment,
do here cast our selves down before thee, acknowledging that we are not worthy
any longer to retain the honor of Christian Profession, that have so long
defamed it by enormous Practices; and that we, who loved darkness more then
light, deserve to have our Candlestick removed, and to be given up to that
^undation of Atheism and Profaneness, which now invades this gasping Church:
yet, O Lord! deal not with us after our sins, but turn thee again thou Lord of
Hosts, look down from heaven, behold and visit this Vine; do not abhor us, for
thy names-sake, do not disgrace the Throne of thy Glory: Behold, see (we
beseech thee) we are all thy People; though a rebellious and stiff-necked
generation, yet thy name is called upon us; leave us not, neither forsake us, O
Lord God of our salvation; but, though thou feed us with bread of Adversity,
and water of Affliction; yet let not our Teachers be removed into a corner; but
let our eyes see our Teachers; let not Sion complain, that she has none to
lead her by the hand among all the Sons that she has brought up; but provide
her such supports in this her declining Condition, that she may have a seed and
Remnant left; And in what degree soever thou shall permit this storm to
increase upon this poor Church, be pleased proportionably to fortify and
confirm all those that are Members of it, that no one may be shaken or moved
with these Afflictions, nor pervert that glorious advantage of suffering for
thee, into an occasion of Apostatizing from thee; But that we may all run with
patience the race that is set before us, and cheerfully partake of the
Afflictions of the Gospel; that in suffering for Christ here, we may reign with
him for ever hereafter and all for Jesus Christ his sake our only Lord and
Savior, Amen.

O Lord guard the Person of thy Servant the King*

Who puts his trust in thee.

Send him help from thy holy Place:

And evermore mightily defend him.

Confound the designs of all those that are risen up against him.

And let not their rebellious wickedness approach near to hurt him.

Let the Curse of Saul light upon the endeavors of those men, who contrive or
Imagine mischief for him:

And let the blessings of David remain upon his Head, and upon his Seed for
evermore.

O Lord, hear our Prayer.

And let our Cry come unto thee.

VI.
O Lord God of Hosts, who did deliver David, thy servant from the peril of
the Sword! Hear us we beseech thee most miserable sinners; who do here pour
out our souls before thee, entirely desiring the protection of thy hand upon
thy Servant the King, let him find safety under the shadow of thy wings, and
preserve his Person as the Apple of thine own Eye: Suffer not that Sword, which
thou have put into his Hands, to be wrested out by the hand of man; but bless
his Counsels with success, and his enterprises with Victory; that he may
become a terror to all those that oppose him, and as the dew of the latter
rain, upon the hearts of all those that do still continue loyal to him: And O
thou that take no delight in the misery of one single sinner, spare merciful
Lord; spare a great, though most sinful Nation; pity a despised Church and a
distracted State; heal those wounds which our sins have made so wide, that
none but thine own hands can close them; and in the tenderness of thine
unspeakable compassion, hasten to put so happy an end to these wasting
Divisions, that thy service may be more duly celebrated, thine Anointed more
conscienciously obeyed; that the Church may be restored to a true Christian
Unity, and the Kingdom to its former Peace; And that for his sake, who is the
Prince of peace, and that shed his precious blood to purchase our peace, even
Jesus Christ the righteous, to whom, with the^ O Father, and the blessed
spirit, be all Honor and Glory, world without end,

Amen.
VI.
O Thou most mighty Creator and wise Governor of all, that have for our sins
and provocations given us to drink of a most bitter astonishing cup; and
demonstrated by thy late proceedings with us, how inexorable thou art toward
us; who have been so obstinate and obdurate toward thee, that would not hear in
that our Day the things belonging to our peace; and now they are hid from our
eyes: We, those wretched Creatures of thine, do yet desire to adore, and
prostrate our souls before thee, to put our hands upon our mouths, and our
mouths into the Dust, and acknowledge all Honor and Glory to be due unto thee,
whatsoever becomes of us: Though to these amazing Calamities, thou should
yet super-add thy fire and Brimstone from Heaven, and all the horrors of
astonished hearts, and the eternal Worm and Flames, the due portion of the
damned in Hell: O Lord, thou art most just in all thy judgments; and infinitely
merciful, that we live to call upon thee this day: O that these sharp last
necessary methods of thine, may at length prove successful on these thy
gasping forlorn patients, that thy great work of recovery and change, the
cleansing of our polluted leprous souls may be effectually wrought upon us, by
this hand of thine* Lord, save us, from these sad effects, by a powerful
removal of the Cause, or else we certainly perish: To this end, O Lord, we
resign our selves up to thy divine Methods; be they the sharpest that thou
see necessary to dispense to us; we desire to embrace them cheerfully, and
not to interpose any thought of ours in contradiction to thy most safe, most
medicinable prescriptions. It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good;
not ours but thy sacred will be done! Be it unto us according to thy good
pleasure: In the mean time, Lord permit us to intercede for others, that are
not worthy to pray for our selves: O let the sorrowful sighing of the poor,
of the oppressed, and there is no Comforter; let the black gloomy Calamities
that are fallen upon him, that is more worth then ten thousand of us, come
before thee. Let thy Protection still continue unto him, if it be thy sacred
Will, Thy Host of guardian Angels, that once appeared in the Mount, the Horses
and Charriots round about Elisha, environ and surround that sacred Head; and by
thine own ways and means, and in thine own season, restore him (with out the
effusion of any more blood) to his Fathers Crown and Thron: And, Lord, that it
might yet be an acceptable time, a season wherein thou might be accessible
to our Prayers, which we offer up in great Humility, for thy poor, wasted,
disconsolate Church amongst us, That thou would repair her breaches, restore
her days as of old, that thou would arise, and have mercy upon Sion, and
Compassionate to see her in the Dust: Lord, where is thy Pity? And the
sounding of the Bowels, thy zeal to the place where thy rest dwells? Will
the Lord absent himself for ever? And will he be no more entreated? Are his
mercies clean gone for ever? and his promises come utterly to an end for
evermore? Lord, remember thy old loving kindnesses which thou swarest unto
David in thy truth: Arise, O Lord, and come into thy Rest, thou, and the Ark of
thy strength: But if these Calamities and Desolations must still go on, and
advance to the height of an irremediable ruin; yet, O Lord, intermix thy sweet
and Comfortable Allays with this bitter Cup; Take us into thine immediate hand
of Protection and Guidance, sanctify all thy methods unto us, and by the same
omnipotent work, whereby thou bring a most glorious light out of the
blackest darkness, be pleased to produce all thy Divinest good things, out of
the saddest evils, and (if it may yet be thy blessed will) to work the same
work by the return of thy Mercies, which the continuance of thy punishments is
wont to be assigned for: And Lord, receive us all under the safe guard of thy
Divine Presence, the pillar of fire and Cloud to cover and direct us: That in
every turn of thy hand, we may see and admire thy glorious and gracious
Disposals, and by the happy experience, that even this also is to us for good,
we may be for ever engaged to ascribe unto thee all Honor, and Glory, and
render unto thee the uniform obedience of our hearts, world without end,

Amen, Amen.
VIII.
O Most gracious Lord God, the Creator of all things; but of men and all
mankind a tender Compassionate Father in Jesus Christ: Thou that have enlarged
thy designs and purposes of Grace and mercy, as the Bowels and bloodshedding
of thy Son, with an earnest desire, that every weak or sinful man should
partake of that Abiss, that infinite treasure of thy Bounty: Thou that have
bequeathed unto us that Legacy and Example of a sacred inviolable Peace, a
large diffusive Charity; we meekly beseech thee, to overshadow with thy
heavenly grace, the souls of all men, over all the world: (O Lord, thou lover
of souls!) to bring home to the acknowledgment and embraces of thy Son, all
that are yet strangers to that profession, and in whatsoever any of us, who
have already received that mercy from thee, may be any way useful or
isntrumental to that so glorious an end, to direct and incline our hearts
toward it; to work in us all an holy zeal to thy Name, and tender Bowels to
all those whose eternity is concerned in it! O give us a true serious full
comprehension, and value of that one great Interest of others as well as of our
selv^ show us, (the meanest of us) some way to contribute toward it (if it be
but our daily affectionate Prayers) for the enlarging of thy Kingdom, and the
care of approving all our Actions, so as may most effectually attract all
others to this profession; And for all those that have already that glorious
name of thy Son called upon them, blessed Lord! that they may at length
(according to the many Engagements of their profession) depart from iniquity:
That that holy City, that new Jerusalem may at length (according to thy
promise) descend from Heaven, prepared as a Bride adorned for her Husband
Christ: That, that Tabernacle of God with men, may be illustriously visible
among us; that we may be a peculiar People, and thou inhabiting in power among
us: That we which have so long professed thee, may no longer be content with
that form of knowledge, which so often engenders strife, contentions,
animosities, separating from and condemning one another, and that most
unchristian detestable guilt of blood; but endeavor and earnestly contend for
the uniform effectual practice of all the precepts of thy Son, the Fruit and
Power of Godliness: That all the People and Princes of Christendom, the
Pastors and Sheep of thy fold, may at length (in some degree) walk worthy of
that light and warmth, that knowledge of those graces, that the Sun of
righteousness with healing on his wings, has so long poured out upon us; Lord,
purge and powerfully work out of all our hearts, that profaneness and
Atheisticalnesse, those sacrilegious thirsts and enormous violations of all
that is holy: those Unpeaceable, Rebellious, Mutinous, and (withal)
Tyrannizing cruel spirits, those prides and haughtinesses, judgeing and
condemning, defaming and despising of others; those unlimited ambitions and
covetings joined with the Invasion and violation of others rights, those most
reproachful excesses and abominable impurities, which (to the shame of our
unreformed obdurate hearts) do still remain unmortified, unsubdued among us:
but above all, those infamous Hypocrisies of stiborning Religion to be the
Engine of advancing our secular designs, or the disguise to conceal the
foulest intentions, of bringing down that most sacred name, whereby we should
be saved, to be the vilest instrument of all Carnalities; And by the power of
thy controwling Spirit (Lord) humble and subdue all that exalts it self against
the obedience of Christ: And when thou have cast out so many evil spirits, be
thou pleased thy self to possess and enrich our souls, to plant, and root, and
confirm, and secure in us all those precious fruits of Piety, and Faith, and
Obedience, and Zeal toward thee; of Purity and Meekness, and Simplicity, and
Contentedness, and Sobriety in our selves; of Justice, and Charity, and
Reaceablenesse, and Bowels of Mercy and Compassion toward all others: That
having seriously and Industriously, (as our Holy Vocation engages us) used all
Diligence to add unto our Faith Virtue, and to Virtue patience and Perseverance
in all Christian Practice, we may adorn that Profession which we have thus long
depraved; and having had our Fruits unto Holiness, we may attain our End, ever
asting Life, through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
IX.
O Long suffering and eternal King, (that for the Condemnation that for sin
came into the World) were lifted up upon the Cross, and taken from this earth
by that shameful death, and have showed forth thy self to all that Choose to
follow thy stepps, a Pattern and Copy of long-sufferance and Patience: and
offeredst up thy Intercession tothy Coeternal Father, for those Enemies of God
which Crucified Thee! Do thou (O Lord!) Thou the same Lover of Mankind, afford
thy Mercy and pardon to all those that are Enemies to us; which either by
Treachery, or Reproach, or Contumely, or Envy, or by any other means, (through
the subtilty of Calumny of the Devil, that lover of Hatred) have expressed
their Madness or Malice against us; But especially those that have embrued
their hands in the blood of thine Anointed: Father forgive them, for they know
not what they do; Lord! lay not this sin to their Charge, or to the Charge of a
sinful, wretched People! Change thou their Counsels from that mischievous, to
a sweet Christian temper of gentleness; infuse into their hearts sincere and
unfeigned Love; bind them fast to us in the inviolable Bands of Spiritual
friendship, and (by what means thou know most fit) make them Partakers of
eternal Life: and (O thou Father of Compassions) pity all those afflicted that
trust in Thee; draw all to the divine love of thee; be thou president in all
things, and assistant to all, together with us thy sinful and unprofitable
Servants; and make us all Heirs of thy Kingdom; for unto Thee it belongs to
show Mercy, and to save us (O our God) for thine is the Power for ever,

Amen.
X.
O Lord, We beseech thee Mercifully Hear our Prayers, and spare all those which
Confess their sins unto thee; that They, whose Consciences by sin are accused,
by thy Merciful Pardon may be absolved through Christ our Lord,

Amen
XI.
O Most mighty God and Merciful Father, which have Compassion on all men, and
hate nothing that thou have made: which would not the Death of a sinner,
but that he should rather turn from sin and be saved: Mercifully forgive us our
Trespasses; receive and Comfort us which are grieved with the Burden of our
sins! Thy property is always to have Mercy; to thee only pertains to forgive
sins: spare us therefore good Lord, spare thy people, whom thou have redeemed;
enter not into Judgment with thy servants which are vile earth and Miserable
sinners, but so turn thine ire from us which meekly acknowledge our Vileness,
and truly repent us of our Faults, so make have to help us in this world, that
we may ever live with thee in the world to come, through Jesus Christ our Lord!

Amen.
XII.
TUrn thou us O good Lord! and so shall we be turned; be favorable, O Lord be
favorable to thy People which turn to thee in weeping, fasting, and praying;
for thou art (...) Merciful God, long-suffering, and of great pity: Thou
sparest when we deserve punishment, and in thy wrath think upon mercy: spare
thy people, O Lord! spare them, and let not thine Heritage be brought to
naught; Hear us O Lord! for thy Mercy is great, and after the Multitude of thy
mercies look upon us through Ies^ Christ our Lord,

Amen.
XIII.
O Lord the only begotten Son Jesus Christ! O Lord God, Lamb of God, Son of the
Father, that take away the sins of the world, have Mercy upon us; Thou that
take away the sins of the world, receive our Prayers; Thou that sit at
the Right hand of God the Father, have Mercy upon us! for thou only art holy,
thou only art the Lord, thou only O Christ! with the Holy Ghost, art most high
in the Glory of God the Father, Amen.

The Peace of God which passes all understanding, keep your Hearts and Minds
in the Knowledge and Love of God, and his Son Jesus Christ our Lord. And the
Blessing of God Almighty, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost be amongst
you and remain with you always,

Amen.
A proper Prayer for the Thirtieth of January.
O Blessed Lord God, who by thy Wisdom guidest and orderest all things most
sutably to thy Justice, and performest thy pleasure, always in such manner,
that thou can also appeal to us, whether thy ways be not equal: We, thy
poor afflicted People, fall down before thee, acknowledging the justice of thy
proceedings with us, and that the amazing Judgment, which as this day besel us
(in thy permitting cruel men, sons of ^eliall to execute the fury of their
Rebellion upon Our late Gracious Sovereign, and to imbrew their hands in the
Blood and Murder of the Lords Anointed) was drawn down by the great and long
provocations of this Nations sins against thee: For all which, and our own
parts in which, we sinful wretches here met together, desire to humble our
selves before thee, and to tremble at thy presence in this days sore
vengeance, the effect as well as desert of our impieties, the work of our own
hands upon our selves, thy heavy Judgment, but our most horrid sin, for which
alone (did not multitude of other sins cry out against us) thou might justly
descend down upon us all, as thou did in Sodom, and leave us no other
memorial then to be the frightfull Monuments of thy Indignation and fury to all
Posterity. Gracious is the Lord, and merfull, therefore it is, that We are not
consumed! O let thy longsuffering and patience lead us to repentance: And now
Lord, looking on this particular signal Judgment, as thy last Trump warning us
to fly from the wrath to come; We come forth to meet our God, mourning in our
prayers before thee, and begging the aversion of thy further displeasure, and
the removal of these plagues of long continuance from us; for the
all-sufficient merits of the death and sufferings of our blessed Savior. O
forgive our great and manifold transgressions, and for his bloody Passions
sake, deliver this Nation from blood-guiltinesse, that of this day especially,
O God of our Salvation. Let not our crying sins intercept our Prayers, or thy
blessings; but hear the voice of our tears and hearing forgive and heal us:
retire not quite from us into thine own place, laugh not at our calamities,
neither mock in this day of our vifitation: Vindicate thine own Cause, and
thine own Providence, that it may appear unto men, that thou bear up the
Pillars of the earth; and that by thee Kings do reign. And though thou have
suffered our Enemies to proceed to that high pitch of violence against our late
King, even to kill and take possession of his Throne and Revenews: Yet
frustrate now at length their bold hopes and defires; let not their mischievous
imaginations prosper, least they be too proud; let them not be able to
establish themselves in that prosperity and greatness they have fancied; let
them not say of his Family, God has forsaken them, let us persecute them: show
some good token on his seed for good, that their enemies may see it, and be
ashamed: because thou, Lord, have helped and comforted them. Bow the hearts of
the Subjects of this Land, as thou did those of Israel to David, that they may
acknowledge and receive joyfully the Heir of these Kingdoms; and fasten thou
him as a nail in a sure place; behold his injuries; and have compassion on his
Innocence; and let the desire of his enemies perish like that of the Hypocrite;
but bring him, maugre all their oppositions, to a peaceable possession of that
Throne, to which by his Birthright thou have designed him, and establish him
in the Just Rights of his Family. O Lord, we wait on thee this day for this
blessing; make no long tarrying, but according to the time thou have plagued
us, send us deliverance. Snatch the prey out of the Lions teeth, and pull us
out of the burnings like a firebrand: We beseech thee, that We may this day
spread before thee the words of Rabshekah, the proud railings, and scornful
reproaches of our enemies: Behold this day their exaltation, and our mourning:
O Lord, our eyes are toward thee! for whom nothing is hard; let it not seem a
small thing to thee, that we suffer, but concenter our Prayers with the many
thousands that call on thee; That salvation may come to our King, and through
him thy blessing of peace unto thy People. Think upon all those that are
peaceable, and faithful in the Land, and deal thou with us according to thy
Word, wherein thou have caused us to put our trust; Let the world see that
there is a God that judges the earth, and send deliverance to his people in
their needful time of trouble. But whatsoever thy purpose is, let not us behave
our selves, frowardly, but with all Christian humility; run the race that thou
set before us, and qatiently bear the indignation of the Lord, because we
have sinned against him. And we meekly beseech thee, that if the Divine Decree
of thy Justice withstand our Petitions, our prayers may return into our own
bosoms; and that thou will make thy judgments temporal and not spiritual upon
us; but assist us with strength proportionable to our temptations; that we be
not delivered to evil: but that in well-doing we may commit our selves to thee
our God, as unto a faithful Creator: And that both our King and we may say with
all Christian submission and cheerfulness: It is the Lord, let him do what
seems him good.

And here O Lord we offer unto thee all possible praise and thanks for all the
Glory of thy Grace that has shined forth in thine Anointed, our late
Sovereign, and that thou were pleased to own him (this Day especially) in the
midst of his Enemies, and in the hour of death, and to endue him with such
eminent Patience, Meekness, Humility, Charity and all other Christian Virtues,
according to the example of thine own Son, suffering the fury of his and thine
Enemies, for the preservation of thy Church and People.

We Praise thee also for the Courage and Comfort thou have given unto us of his
Party, by that owning and assisting him, or any that have suffered in that
Righteous Cause.

And we beseech thee give us all grace to Remember and provide for our latter
end, by a Careful studious imitation of those blessed patterns of thy Saints
and Martyrs that have gone before us, that we may be made worthy to Receive
benefit by their prayers, which they, in Communion with thy Church Catholic,
offer up unto thee for that part of it here Militant and yet in sight with, and
danger from the flesh, that following the Blessed stepps of their Holy Lives
and Deaths, we may also show forth the Light of a good example for the Glory of
thy Name, the Conversion of Enemies, and the improvement of those Generations
we shall shortly leave behind us, and then with all those that have born the
Heat and burden of the day (thy Servant whose Sufferings and Labors we this
day commemorate) receive the Reward of our Labors, the Harvest of our Hopes,
even the Salvation of our own souls, and that for the merits and through the
mediation of thy Son our Blessed Savior Jesus Christ,

Amen.
Evening Prayer FOR the thirtieth of January.
The Letany.
O God the Father of Heaven: have mercy upon us miserable sinners. O God the
Father of heaven: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the Son Redeemer of the world: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the Son Redeemer, etc.

O God the holy Ghost proceeding from the Father and the Son: have mercy upon
us miserable sinners.

O God the holy Ghost, etc.

O holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity, three Persons and one God: have mercy
upon us miserable sinners

O holy, blessed and glorious Trinity, etc.

Remember not, Lord, our offenses, nor the offenses of our forefathers, neither
take thou vengeance of our sins: spare us good Lord, spare thy people whom thou
have redeemed by thy most precious blood, and ^e not angry with us for ever.
Spare us good Lord.


From all evil and mischief, from sin, from the crafts and affaults of the
devil, from thy wrath and from everlasting ^ation. Good Lord deliver us.


From all blindness of heart, from pride, vainglory, and hypocrisy, from
envy, hatred, and malice, and all uncharitableness. Good Lord deliver us.


From fornication, and all other deadly sin, and from all the deceits of the
world, the flesh and the devil. Good Lord deliver us.


From lightning and tempest, from plague, pestilence, and famine, from battle,
and murder, and from sudden death. Good Lord deliver us.


From all sedition and privy conspiracy, from all false doctrine and heresy,
from hardness of heart, and contempt of thy word and Commandment. Good Lord
deliver us.


By the mystery of thy holy incarnation, by thy holy nativity and circumcision,
by thy baptism, fasting, and temptation. Good Lord deliver us.


By thine agony and bloody sweat, by thy Cross and passion, by thy precious
death and burial, by thy glorious Resurrection and Ascension, and by the
coming of the holy Ghost. Good Lord deliver us.


In all time of our tribulation, in all time of our wealth, in the hour of
death, and in the day of Judgment. Good Lord deliver us.


We sinners do beseech thee to hear Us (O Lord God) and that it may please thee
to rule and govern thy holy Church universally in the right way.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to keep and strengthen in the true worshipping of thee
in righteousness and holiness of life, thy servant, CHARLES the second our most
gracious King and Governors.

We beseech thee to hear us, good ^rd.

That it may please thee to rule his heart in thy faith, fear and love, and
that he may evermore have affiance in thee, and ever seek thy honor and glory.

We beseech thee to hear, us good Lord

That it may please thee to be his defender and keeper, giving him the victory
over all his enemies.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord

That it may please thee to bless and preserve the Queen Mother, the Duke of
York, the Duke of Gloucester with all the rest of the royal Progeny.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to illuminate all Bishops, Pastors and Ministers of
the Church, with true knowledge and understanding of thy word, and that both by
their preaching and living, they may set it forth, and show it accordingly.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to endue the Lords of the Council, and all the
Nobility with grace, wisdom, and understanding.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to bless and keep the Magistrates, giving them grace
to execute justice, and to maintain truth.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to bless and keep all thy people.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to give to all Nations unity, peace, and concord.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to give us an heart to love and dread thee, and
diligently to live after thy Commandments.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to give to all thy people increase of grace, to hear
meekly thy word, and to receive it with pure affection, and to bring forth the
fruits of the spirit.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to bring into the way of truth, all such as have erred
and are deceived.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to strengthen such as do stand, and to comfort and
help the weakhearted, and to raise up them that fall, and finally to beat down
Satan under our feet.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to succor, help, and comfort all that be in danger,
necessity, and tribulation.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to preserve all that travel by land or by water, all
women laboring of child, all sick persons and young children, and to show thy
pity upon all prisoners and captives.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to provide for the fatherless children and widows, and
all that be desolate and oppressed.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to have mercy upon all men.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to forgive our enemies, persecuters and slanderers,
and to turn their hearts.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to give and preserve to our use the kindly fruits of
the earth, so as in due time we may enjoy them.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to give us true repentance, to forgive us all our
sins, negligences and ignorances, and to endue us with the grace of thy holy
Spirit, to amend our lives according to thy holy word.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

Son of God: we beseech thee to hear us.

Son of God: we beseech thee to hear us.

O Lamb of God that take away the sins of the world. Grant us thy peace.


O Lamb of God that take away the sins of the world.

Have mercy upon us.
O Christ hear us.
O Christ hear us.
Lord have mercy upon us.
Lord have mercy upon us.
Christ have mercy upon us.
Christ have mercy upon us.
Lord have mercy upon us.
Lord have mercy upon us.
Our Father which are in heaven, etc.

And lead us not into temptation.

But deliver us from evil. Amen.

The Versicle

O Lord deal not with us after our sins.

Answer.

Neither reward us after our iniquities.

Let us pray.
O God merciful Father, that despisest not the fighing of a contrite heart,
nor the desire of such as be sorrowful, mercifully assist our prayers that we
make before thee in all our troubles and adversities, whenever they oppress
us: and graciously hear us, that those evils, which the craft and subtilty of
the Devil, or man works against us, be brought to naught, and by the
providence of thy goodness they may be dispersed, that we thy servants being
hurt by no persecutions, may evermore give thanks unto thee in thy holy Church,
though Jesus Christ our Lord.

O Lord arise help us, and deliver us for thy Names sake.

O God we have heard with our ears, and our fathers have declared unto us the
noble works that thou did in their days, and in the old time before them.

O Lord arise, help us, and deliver us for thine honor.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, etc.

As it was in the beginning, (...) now, etc.

From our enemies defend us, O Christ

Graciously look upon our afflictions.

Pitifully behold the sorrows of our hearts

Mercifully forgive the sins of thy people.

Favorably with mercy hear our prayers.

O Son of David have mercy upon us.

Both now and ever vouchsafe to hear us, O Christ.

Graciously hear us, O Christ, graciously hear us, O Lord Christ.

The versicle.

O Lord let thy mercy be showed upon us

Answer.

As we do put our trust in thee.

ALmighty God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, ^aker of all things, Judge of
all men, we acknowledge and ^wail our manifold sins and wickedness, which we
from time to time most greivously have committed, by thought, word, and deed,
against thy divine ^jesty, provoking most justly thy wrath and indignation
against us: we do earnestly repent, and be heartily sorry for these our
misdoings, the remembrance of them is grievous unto us: the burden of them is
intolerable. Have mercy upon us, have mercy upon us, most merciful Father, for
thy Son our Lord Jesus Christ's sake, forgive us all that is past, and grant
that we may ever hereafter serve and please thee in newness of life, to the
honor and glory of thy Name, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

ALmighty God our Heavenly Father, who of thy Gr^ mercy have promised
forgiveness of sins to All them, which with Hearty Repentance and true Faith
turn unto Thee; Have mercy upon Us, pardon and deliver us from all our sins,
Confirm and strengthen us in all Goodness, and bring us to Everlasting Life
through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

OUr Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth, as it is in heaven Give us this day our daily bread. And
forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation: but deliver us from evil, Amen.

O Lord open thou our Li^,

And our Mouth shall show f^th thy Praise.

O God make speed to save (...),

O Lord make haste to help us.

Glory be to the Father, and (...) the Son, and to the holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be, world without end,

Amen.
Psalm. 42, 43, 55, 59, 64, 94.

The First Lesson.

2 Samuel 1.

After the Lesson.

A Form Collected out of the Psa^ I.
HEar our voice, O Lord, out of thy holy Temple, let our complaint come before
thee, let it enter even into thy ears.

Our heart is in heaviness, O let us make our Prayer unto thee in an acceptable
time.

Lord, our iniquities are against us, our rebellions are many wherewith we have
transgressed against thee: But we confess our wickednesses, and are sorry for
our sins.

Our confusion is daily before us, fearfulness and trembling are come upon us,
and an horrible dread has overwhelmed us, and it is thy great mercy only that
we are not consumed, for we have sinned, O Lord, (...) have transgressed and
done wickedly, yea, we have rebelled, and departed from thy precepts, and from
thy Commandments.

Innumerable troubles are come about us, our sins have taken hold upon us, that
we are not able to look up, yea, they are more in number then the hairs of our
heads, and our hearts have failed us. O Lord, righteousness belongs unto
thee, but unto us confusion of face, because of all the offenses we have
committed against thee.

Yet compassion and forgiveness is with thee, though we have rebelled against
thee. O Lord, according to thy goodness, we beseech thee, let thine ^ger and
thy wrath be turned away from us, and cause thy face to shine upon thy servants
Incline thine ears and hear, open thine eyes and behold our afflictions, for we
do not present our supplications before thee, in our own righteousness, but for
thy manifold and great mercies.

We have sinned against heaven and against thee, and are no more worthy to be
called thy Sons.

Yet, O Lord, hear, O Lord, forgive, consider and do it, defer not for thine
own sake, O our God.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be, world without end,

Amen.
II.
HEar our prayers, O Lord, and hide not thy self from our Petitions, and
hearken unto the words of our mouth, for strangers are risen up against us, and
Tyrants, which have not* God before their eyes, (...) after our Souls.

Cast us not away in the time of our weakness: forsake us not when ^r strength
fails us.

O remember not our offenses, but according to thy mercy think thou upon us for
thy goodness.

O turn thee unto us, and have mercy upon us: for we are desolate and in
misery.

The sorrows of our hearts are enlarged: O bring thou us out of all our
troubles.

Turn us, O God our Savior, and let thine anger cease from us: send down from
on high and deliver us, take us out of these many waters.

Why art thou absent from us so long? why is thy wrath so (...) against the
sheep of thy pa^.

Wherefore hidest thou thy face, (...) forgettest our misery and trouble? for
our soul is brought low (...) the dust, our belly clea^eth to the g^d.

Look upon our adversity and misery: and forgive us all our sins.

Arise, O Lord, and help us, and deliver us for thy mercy sake: so shall it be
known that it is thy hand, and that thou Lord have done it.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, in now and ever shall be, world without end,

Amen.
III.
WE will cry unto the Lord with our voice; yea, even unto God will we cry with
our voice, and he shall hearken unto us. For the Lord is gracious and
long-suffering and of great mercy to them that call upon him.

The Lord is nigh unto all them that be of a contrite heart, and will ^ave such
as are of an humble spirit.

And now Lord, what is our hope? truly our hope is even in the;

For our Fathers hoped in thee, they trusted in thee, and thou did deliver
them: they called upon thee and were helped, they put their trust in thee, and
were not confounded.

The Lord will be a defense for the oppressed, even a refuge in due time of
trouble: and they that know thy name, will put their trust in thee, for thou
Lord never failest them that seek thee.

The merciful goodness of the Lord endures for ever and ever, upon them that
fear him: and his righteousness upon Childrens Children; even upon such as keep
his Covenant, and think upon his Commandments to do them.

Thou therefore that art a Savior to all that trust in thee, thou that
upholdest all such as are falling, and liftest up such as be down, thou that
healest the broken in heart, and give medicine to heal their sickness, thou
that art the Father of mercy, and God of all consolation, that art comfort to
the sad, and strength to the weak, hear thy servants, we beseech thee, look
down from Heaven, behold and visit us with thy salvation.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be, world without end,

Amen.
The second Lesson, Heb. 12. or St James 5.
IV.
GIve the King thy judgments, O God.

The Lord hear him in the day of trouble: the name of the God of Iac^ defend
him.

Send him help from his Sanctuary: and strengthen him out of Sion.

Let the King rejoice in thy strength, O Lord: let him be exceeding glad of thy
salvation.

Grant him his hearts desire, and deny him not the request of his lips.

[O Lord, gi^ him with strength unto the battle: throw down his Enemies under
him.

Make them to turn their backs upon him: and disperse them that hate him.]

Deliver him from the sirivings of his people.

Deliver him from his cruel Enemies, and set him up above his adversaries;
thou shall rid him from the wicked man: and why? because the King puts his
trust in the Lord: and in the mercy of the most high, he shall not miscarry.

Some put their trust in Charriots, and some in horses, but we will remember
the name of the Lord our God.

Save Lord, and hear us, O King of Heaven, when we call upon thee.

Be thou exalted in thine own strength: so will we sing and praise thy power.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be, world without end,

Amen.
V.
O Lord God, that do build up Jerusalem, and gather together the outcasts of
Israel.

Wherefore art thou absent so long? Why is thy wrath so hot against the sheep
of thy pasture?

O think upon thy Congregation: whom thou have purchased and redeemed of old:

Think upon the tribe of thine inheritance: and mount Sion, where thou have
dwelt.

Lift up thy Feet, and disperse all those our Enemies: which have done evil in
thy sanctuary.

For they have broken down the carved work thereof with Axes and Hammers: they
have defiled the dwelling places of thy name, yea, they said in their hearts,
let us make havoc of them altogether.

O God, how long shall the Adversary do this dishonor? how long shall the
Enemy blaspheme thy name, for ever?

Why withdrawest thou thy hand, why pluckest not thou thy right hand out of thy
bosom to scatter the enemy?

Arise O God, maintain thine own cause: Remember how the foolish man blasphemes
thee daily.

Forget not the voice of thine Enemies: the presumption of them that hate thee
increases ever more and more.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost:

As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be, world without end,

Amen.
The Creed.
I Believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth: and in Jesus
Christ his only Son our Lord, which was conceived by the holy Ghost, born of
the Virgin Mary, suffered under Ponce Pilate, was crucified, dead and buried,
he descended into Hell, the third day he rose again from the dead, he ascended
into heaven, ^teth on the right hand of God the Father Almighty: from thence he
shall come, to judge (...) quick and the dead. I bel^ve in the holy Ghost, the
holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints, the forgiveness of sins, the
resurrection of the body, and the life everlasting,

Amen.
Let us Pray.
The Lord be with you.
And with thy spirit.
Lord have mercy upon us.
Christ have mercy upon us.
Lord have mercy upon us.
OUr Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth, as it is in heaven Give us this day our daily bread. And
forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them the trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation: but deliver us from evil,

Amen.
I.
O Lord! this is a day of trouble, of rebuke and blasphemy, a day wherein a
wonderful and horrible thing was committed in our land, most sacred ^nnocent
blood, shed with more barbarous aggravations, then we know where to parallel on
this side the murder of thy dear Son; And because sentence against this evil
work has not been ex^ed speedily, the hearts of this people are wholly set in
them to do evil; this respite, which thou have given us to work our
Repentance, has served only to complete our sin, by adding an obstinate
impenitency to the former Guilt; and so fitting us, for that final excision
which thou have threatened to obdurate sinners. And now, (O Lord,) this fearful
expectation of judgment, and fiery indignation is all that remains unto us, who
have thus despised the riches of thy mercy: Yet (O Lord) out of these depths do
we desire to call upon thee: Lord hear (...) voice; and (if that final (...)
tence be not irreversibly g^ out against us) be pleased (...) turn thy wrath
away, (...) to suffer thy whole displeas^e to arise? To this end, thou O (...)
who breakest the gates of (...) and smitest the bars of (...) sunder; be thou
pleased to (...) these unrelenting hearts of (...) to work in every one of us
(...) sense of our horrid abom^ ons (especially, that of this day) as may cast
us down in the (...) est degree of Humiliation and Contrition before thee: that
(...) we may be capable of that ^tation which thou have promi^ to the humble,
that Comfort which thou have assigned to Mourners, through Jesus Christ our
Lord,

Amen.
II.
BLessed Lord! in whose sight the death of thy Saints is most precious, we
magnify thy name for those wonderful effusious of thy grace on our late
Martyred Sovereign, which enabled him so happily to transcribe the Copy of his
blessed Master in a Constant, Meek suffering of all barbarous indignities, and
at lost resisting even unto blood, and even then pursuing that glorious
Pattern, and praying for his Murderers: Let his Memory, O Lord, be ever
blessed among us, and his example efficacious upon us, that we may follow him,
as he followed Christ: And, O Lord, we beseech thee, let not his blood outcry
his Prayers; but let those that spilt the one, obtain benefit by the other:
that by their Conviction and Repentance, his Innocence may receive the happiest
attestation, our Religion be vindicated from the scandal of so horrid a fact,
our Nation secured from the vengeance of that blood, and thy mercy glorified in
the Conversion of so great sinners; and all for Jesus Christ his sake, Amen.

O Lord guard the Person of thy Servant the King!

Who puts his trust in thee.

Send him help from thy holy Place:

And evermore mightily defend him.

Confound the designs of all those that are risen up against him.

And let not their rebellious wickedness approach near to hurt him.

Let the Curse of Saul light upon the endeavors of those men, who contrive or
Imagine mischief for him:

And let the blessings of David remain upon his head, and upon his ^ed for
evermore.

O Lord, hear our Prayer

And let our crycome unto thee.

III.
O Lord God Infinite in Power, by whom the Thrones of Kings are established,
and their persons made sacred; Take we beseech thee, into thine immediate and
divine protection, thine anointed Servant the King; that no sacrilegious
profane hand may come near to touch him: In all his ways let thy Spirit guide
him; and thy holy Angels pitch their tents about him.

O Lord! comfort him in his troubles, defend him in his dangers, support him in
his cause, show some token on him for good; even now, O God, when the Sons of
violence are in their pride, and triumph over him whom thou have exalted;
designing and rejoicing to root out that religion which thine own right hand
has planted. Defeat their purposes O thou preserver of men, and let not their
mischeivous imaginations any longer prosper, but blast all their Counsels,
wither away all their Armies like grass, scorched by the Sun. Bow down at last
their stiff necks, and obdurate hearts, to a desire of that peace which has so
long been an abomination to them:

That this miserable Nation may no further pursue their own ruin, but being by
so many bitter punishments made sensible of thine anger for this unnatural
division may at last be reduced within their first obedience, to the glory of
thy Name, the vindication of our defamed religion, the comfort of our afflicted
King, and the happiness of this yet bleeding dom. And confirm all this to Us, O
Lord, by the merits and through the mediation of thine own dear Son Jesus
Christ our Lord,

Amen.
IV.
O Eternal and supreme Majesty, we most humbly beseech thee to pour down the
Richest of thy Mercies on thy servant the King, to take him into thine
Immediate and especial protection, and proportion thine Assistances and RElief
to the Greatness of his Needs and Destitutions: O what great troubles and
Adversities have thou showed him! Thou h^ set up the Right hand of his Enemies,
and made all his Adversaries to rejoice; thou have taken away the Edge of his
Sword, and give him not Victory in the day of Battle: thou have put out his
Glory, and Cast his Throne down to the ground Lord! how long will thou hide thy
self, for ever? Behold, O God our Defender, and look upon the face of thine
Anointed: and though thou have permitted our sins to reduce his Affairs to this
Hopeless Condition, yet from thence let thy Sovereign Mercy raise him: O Lord!
we know not what to do; only our Eyes are upon Thee: O magnify thy strength in
this his greatest weakness, and by thine own power effect that, toward which
he has nothing of Humane Contribution: create peace for (...), and Create the
means for the obtaining it. Protect his ^red person, direct and pros^er all his
designs, fasten him as (...) Nail in a sure place; and hang ^on him all the
Glory of his ^hers House; that he ^ay be the Repairer of the Breach, the
Restorer of Cities to dwell in; that he may be a Nursing Father to thy Church,
and may Comfort the waste places of Sion: But if our sins have so far incensed
thee, that as thou have taken away one King in thy wrath, so thou will not give
us another, except it be in thine Anger: if thou have designed him to succeed
his blessed Father, not in his Throne, but in his sufferings: grant him
likewise to succeed him in his Virtues; Confirm to him that inward Sovereignty
over his own Passions, more valuable then a Thousand Kingdoms. Choose him for
thy self in the Furnace of afflictions, and make him so cheerfully to wear his
Crown of Thorns, with his Savior here, that he may receiv^ a Crown of Glory
from him hereafter; and that for the Mediation of Jesus Christ our Lord and
only Savior,

Amen.
V.
O Thou blessed and only Potentate, most just in thy Judgments, and wonde^ull
in thy mercies: we thy sinful Creatures cast our selves down before thee,
desiring in all humility to adore that Justice of thine, which has suffered
our iniquities to prevail against the cause and enterprises of our Sovereign;
and yet to praise and magnify that mercy which has (...) suffered them to
prevail ^inst his person; but has in (...) midst of the greatest and ^ost
amazing dangers, provided him a way of escape; plucked him as a brand out of
the fire; and by thine own gracious pro^ction, at once defeated both the fears
of his friends, and and the hopes of his Enemies: Praised be the Lord, which
have not given him over for a prey unto their teeth: And since thou have been
pleased thus far to condescend to the prayers and groa^ of thy servants: O
(...) not our Lord be angry, and we will speak, beseeching thee, who have thus
powerfully rescued him from Egypt, not to suffer him to perish in the
Wilderness, but though his passage be through the red sea, yet at last to bring
him to a Canaan: O thou whose ways are in the great deep, who made Joseph's
imprisonment the way to hi^ advancement, and the impoverishing of Job, the
means of doubling his wealth; let the same overruling Providence dispose of
all late adverse events, to those ends, which all Loyal hears gasp after:
Lord! be thou pleased to breathe upon the^ ^y bones, and they shall (...) liv^
in thy sight. In the mea^ time, O Lord! let thy comforts refresh his soul in
the midst of these sad calamities: sanctify them unto him, that he may come
out of these tribulations, like gold out of the fire, purified, but not
consumed; that so, whatsoever becomes of his transitory Crown here, he may by a
constant enduring of temptations be secured of that Crown of life which fades
not away; grant this for Jesus Christ his sake our Lord and only Savior,

Amen:
VI.
O Thou King of Nations, who do according to thy will in all the Kingdoms of
the Earth: who have made us drink deep of the Cup of trembling, and yet seem
to have bitter dregs behind for us: We thy wretched Creatures, that have
highly contributed to that common weight of sin, under which the Land sinks,
humbly prostrate our selves at thy feet, desiring with all sincere contrition,
to confess that thou art Righteous in all that is hitherto come upon us: All
that we have hitherto sufferd, being but the sad arrears of the sins of our
Peace, when we waxed fat and kicked against thee. And that thou shall likewise
be most just in the utmost of thy future inflictions, which (what ever they
prove) cannot exceed the sins of our calamitous days, who, in the time of our
distress have sinned yet more against the Lord; who have passed through the
fire to Moloch with an undaunted obstinacy, suffered all the flamings of thy
wrath, rather than we would renounce any of our detestable things: Nay (as if
our old were too infirm) we have made new Leagues with death, new agreements
with hell, proceeding from evil to worse, and making every new Calamity, thou
sendst to reclaim us, the occasion of some fresh impiety. And now, O Lord, will thou not visit for these things? shall not thy soul be avenged on such a Nation
as this? We are they, O Lord! that have perverted all thy dispensations toward
us, grown wanton under thy mercies, and desperate under thy Judgments, and is
there any third method left for those that have frustrated both these? Behold,
O Lord! these desperate, these gasping Patients at thy feet, who have lost
sense and motion to all things, but the resistance of their remedy: O give us
not utterly over! but continue to administer to us whatsoever may remove this
stupefaction, and bring us to a feeling of our own condition: And what
sharpness and severity soever thou disceruest necessary for that purpose,
forbear not, O Lord! to give us those wounds of a friend: O say not concerning
us, why should ye be smitten any more? but rather cast us into the place of
Dragons, and cover us with the shadow of death, if by so doing we may be
brought to remember the Name of the Lord our God: Lord! this is the one great
necessary wherein we are principally concerned to solicit thee; that our Eyes
may be opened, that we may see every one the plague of his own heart, that so
(instead of those Athe^cal disputes we make of thy providence) we may all ^oyn
in an humble Adoration of thy Justice; and (confessing that our destruction is
of our selves) abhor our selves and Repent in dust and ashes: And when by the
greater deliverance thou have put us in a Capacity of the less; then, be thou
pleased to be jealous for thy Land, and p^y thy people. Consider the troubles
we suffer of them that hate us; and let not all the evils (...) little before
thee, that (...) come upon us, upon our Kings, upon our Priests, and upon all
this people. Restore us our Judges as at the first, and our Counselors as at
the begin^ing; and Comfort us again ^ter the time wherein thou have ^agued us;
And for the years ^erein we have suffered adversity: But if in recompense of
having made thee serve with our sins, servants must Rule over us, though they
have dominion over our Bodies and goods at their pleasure, yet O Lord! let them
not have dominion over our souls: Let not all our oppressions make us act any
thing contrary to our Christian profession, much less wholly renounce it; But
what ever other judgments we must groan under, Lord deliver us not up to that
Barbarism and irreligion which has already made so great a breach upon us.

We cannot but confess it most just in thee to permit Us; who have so long
resisted the power of Godliness, to proceed now to Cast off the very form; and
that we who would not receive the Love of the truth, should be given over to
strong delusions to believe Lies: And this saddest effect of thy wrath has
already overtaken many among us, and does universally threaten the rest: for
since thou have laid waste the wall of thy Vineyard, what can we expect, but
that it should be trodden down? Thou have broken our two staves, Beauty and
bands; all Order and Unity (the necessary supports of a Church (...) at once
perishing from amongst us: the solemn feasts are forgotten in Sion; her Elders
sit upon the ground and keep silence, while they ^om thou have not sent, run;
while they, to whom thou have (...) spoken, prophecy; and (...) these is
profaneness gone into all the Land. We, O Lord! which might once have gone with
the multitude to the house of God, are now driven into se^ret Corners to
celebrate the most solemn parts of thy service, whilst it is become more safe
to blaspheme, then to adore thee publicly: This, this, O Lord, is the
unsupportable pa^ of our afflictions, the sting of all our miseries: If we had
been only sold for Bondmen, and Bondwomen, we could have held our peace; but,
thine abhorring thine Altar, and casting off thy Sanctuary, this is for a
Lamentation, and must be for a Lamentation: Thy servants think upon the stones
of Sion, and it pityeth them to see her in the dust; O Let not all those tears
and prayers that are poured out for her, return empty: And because thou thy
self have recommended unto us the efficacy of importunity; be thou pleased to
give us that grace, to ^cite and stir up all that make mention of the Lord,
that they may give thee no rest, till thou establish our Jerusalem again a
praise upon Earth: To that end, O Lord, give us Pastors af^ thine own heart,
such Priest whose lips may preserve knowledge, and make us diligently to seek
the Law at their mouths, and grant that we, being by this deprivation taught
the value of such precious advantages, and the sin of our former contemning
them, may unanimously contend for the regaining them; by a cordial universal
forsaking of those sins which have turned away these good things from us:
Extend the same mercy to those who have been the most actively isntrumental to
this sad devastation both of Church and State: Withdraw from them those
treacherous prosperities which make them think, that thon art even such an one
as themselves, and by unravelling that webb of strange successes, wherewith
they have hid their shame, discover them to themselves, and to all whom they
have seduced: O let not the temporal ruins, which they have brought upon us,
become the eternal Ruin of any one soul among them, but convince them of the
horror of their guilt, and let that convincement work that godly sorrow, never
to be repented of: That so thou may give them their portion, not with
Hypocrites, but with Penitents; and that for his sake, whom thou have set forth
to be our Propitiation, Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
VII.
O Merciful God, we thy wretched sinful Creatu^es, who have no other
qualification for thy mercy; but that one of extreme misery, do yet presume to
approach thee, humbly beseeching thee, to look not on our merits, but our
wants, and by removing all those obstacles, which our sins have interposed
against our succors, to render us accessible to thy comforts and reliefs; and
then dispense them to us, O Lord! in such order and measure, as thy wisdom
shall see expedient, and when thou see us fit to be again entrusted with our
outward peace, be pleased to restore it to us: but in the mean time deny us not
the inward, nor any of those means which are necessary to the procuring or
maintaining of it: To this end, O Lord! continue to us the light of thy truth
and let not all these unfruitful works of darkness, which we have hitherto
committed in that light, provoke thee to extinguish it.

Avert O Lord, all those sad portents that threaten destruction to this Church:
And though thou have given Satan and his instruments power over all that she
has, yet, O Lord, spare her life; Let there still be a remnant left to praise
thee, and when by these sharp trials, thou have vindicated her integrity, be
pleased to bless her, as thou did Jobs latter end, by giving her a double
portion of all real advantages: And though thou have now violently removed thy
Tabernacle, yet O Lord, let not one pin of it be lost, but erect it again
(amongst us) in the wonted order and beauty; and though she have lain among the
pots, yet let her be as the wings of a Dove, which is covered with silver
wings, and her feathers like gold; let her builders make haste, and her
destroyers, and those that have laid her waste, go forth of her: Deliver her
from those Brutish Pastors which have made this thy pleasant portion a
desolate wilderness, but give her such guides, as may by their doctrine build
us up in our most holy faith, and by their example, shine as lights in this
perverse generation; and make us so to obey them which watch for our souls,
that they may give an account of them with Joy and not with grief; Grant this,
merciful Lord, for his sake, who is the Shepherd and Bishop of our souls,
Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
VIII.
ALmighty and everlasting God, which hate nothing that thou have made, and
do forgive the sins of all them that be penitent; create and make in us new
and contrite hearts, that we, worthyly lamenting our sins, and knowledging our
wretchedness, may obtain of thee, the God of all mercy, perfect remission and
forgiveness, through Jesus Christ,

Amen.
IX.
GRant we beseech thee Almighty God, that we which for our evil deeds are
worthily punished, by the Comfort of thy Grace may mercifully be relieved,
through our Lord Jesus Christ,

Amen.
X.
ALmighty God, we beseech thee graciously to behold this thy Family, for the
which our Lord Jesus Christ was contented to betrayed, and given up into the
hands of wicked men, and to suffer death upon the Cross, who lives and
reigns, etc.

Amen.
XI.
ALmighty and Everlasting God, by whose Spirit the whole Body of the Church is
governed and sanctified, receive our supplications and prayers, which We offer
up before thee for all e^ates of Men in thy holy congregation, that every
member of the same in his vocation and Ministry may truly and godly serve
thee, through our Lord Jesus, Christ, who lives and reigns, etc.

Amen.
XII.
Assist us mercifully, O Lord, in these our supplications and prayers, and
dispose the way of thy servants toward the attainment of everlasting salvation,
that among all the changes and chances of this mortal life, they may ever be
defended by thy most gracious and ready help, through Christ our Lord,

Amen.
XIII.
ALmighty God, which have promised to hear the Petitions of them that ask in
thy Sons Name, We beseech thee mercifully to incline thine ears to Us, that
have made now our prayers and supplications unto Thee, and grant that those
things which We have faithfully asked according to thy will, may effectually be
obtained to the relief of our necessity, and to the setting forth of thy glory,
through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of
the holy Ghost, be with us all evermore,

Amen.
A proper Prayer for the Thirtieth of January.
O Blessed Lord God, who by thy Wisdom guidest and orderest all things most
sutably to thy Justice, and performest thy pleasure, always in such manner,
that thou can also appeal to us, whether thy ways be not equal: We, thy
poor afflicted People, fall down before thee, acknowledging the Justice of thy
proceedings with us, and that the amazing Judgment, which as this day befell
us (in thy permitting cruel men, sons of Beliall to execute the fury of their
Rebellion upon Our late Gracious Sovereign, and to imbrew their hands in the
Blood and Mur der of the Lords Anointed) was drawn down by the great and long
provocations of this Nations sins against thee: For all which, and our own
parts in which, we sinful wretches here met together, desire to humble our
selves before thee, and to tremble at thy presence in this days fore
vengeance, the effect as well as desert of our impieties, the work of our own
hands upon our selves, thy heavy Judgment, but our most horrid sin, for which
alone (did not multitudes of other sins cry out against us) thou might
justly descend down upon us all, as thou did in Sodom, and leave us no other
memorial than to be the frightfull Monuments of thy Indignation and fury to all
Posterity. Gracious is the Lord, and merciful, therefore it is, that We are
not consumed! O let thy longsuffering and patience lead us to repentance: And
now Lord, looking on this particular signal Judgment, as thy last Trump,
warning us to fly from the wrath to come; We come forth to meet our God,
mourning in our prayers before thee, and begging the aversion of thy further
displeasure, and the removal of these plagues of long continuance from us, for
the all-sufficient merits of the death and sufferings of our blessed Savior. O
forgive our great and manifold transgressions, and for his bloody Passions
sake, deliver this Nation from blood-guiltinesse, that of this day especially,
O God of our Salvation. Let not our crying sins intercept our Prayers, or thy
blessings; but hear the voice of our tears, and hearing forgive and heal us,
retire not quite from us into thine own place, laugh not at our calamities,
neither mock in this day of our visitation: Vindicate thine own Cause, and
thine own Providence, that it may appear unto men that thou bear up the
Pillars of the earth; and that by thee Kings do reign. And though thou have
suffered our Enemies to proceed to that high pitch of violence against our late
King, even to kill and take possession of his Throne and Revenews: Yet
frustrate now at length their bold hopes and desires; let not their mischievous
imaginations prosper, least they be too proud; let them not be able to
establish themselves in that prosperity and greatness they have fancied; let
them not say of his Family, God has forsaken them, let us persecute them: show
some good token on his seed for good, that their enemies may see it, and be
ashamed: because, thou Lord, have helped and comforted them. Bow the hearts of
the Subjects of this Land, as thou did those of Israel to David, that they
may acknowledge and receive joyfully the heir of these Kingdoms; and fasten
thou him as a nail in a sure place; behold his injuries, and have compassion on
his Innocence; and let the desire of his enemies perish like that of the
Hypocrite; but bring him, maugre all their oppositions, to a peaceable
possession of that Throne, to which by his Birthright thou have designed him,
and establish him in the Just Rights of his Family. O Lord, we wait on thee
this day for this blessing; make no long tarrying, but according to the time
thou have plagued us, send us deliverance. Snatch the prey out of the Lions
teeth, and pull us out of the burnings like a firebrand: We beseech thee, that
We may this day spread before thee the words of Rabshekah, the proud railings,
and scornful reproaches of our enemies. Behold this day their exaltation, and
our mourning: O Lord, our eyes are toward thee! for whom nothing is hard; let
it not seem a small thing to thee, that we suffer, but concenter our Prayers
with the many thousands that call on thee: That salvation may come to our King,
and through him thy blessing of peace unto thy People. Think upon all those
that are peaceable, and faithful in the Land, and deal thou with us according
to thy Word, wherein thou have caused us to put our trust; Let the world see
that there is a God that judges the earth, and will send deliverance to his
people in their needful time of trouble. But whatsoever thy purpose is, let
not us behave our selves frowardly, but with all Christian humility, run the
race that thou set before us, and patiently bear the indignation, of the
Lord, because we have sinned against him. And we meekly beseech thee, that if
the Divine Decree of thy Justice withstand our Petitions, our prayers may
return into our own bosoms; and that thou will make thy judgments temporal
and not spiritual upon us; but assist us with strength proportionable to our
temptations; that we be not delivered to evil: but that in well-doing, we may
commit our selves to thee our God, as unto a faithful Creator: And that both
our King and we, may say with all Christian submission and cheerfulness: It is
the Lord, let him do what seems him good.

And here, O Lord, we offer unto thee, all possible praise and thanks for all
the Glory of thy Grace, that has shined forth in thine Anointed, our (...)
Sovereign, and that thou were pleased to own him (this Day especially) in the
midst of his Enemies, and in the hour of death, and to endue him with such
eminent Patience, Meckness, Humility, Charity and all other Christian Virtues,
according to the example of thine own Son, suffering the sury of his, and thine
Enemies, for the preservation of thy Church and People.

We Praise thee also for the Courage and Comfort thou have given unto us of his
Party, by that owning and assisting him, or any that have suffered in that
Righteous Cause.

And we beseech thee give us all grace to Remember and provide for our latter
end, by a Careful, studious imitation of those blessed patterns of thy Saints
and Martyrs, that have gone before us, that we may be made worthy to Receive
benefit by their prayers, which they, in Communion with thy Church Catholic,
offer up unto thee for that part of it here Militant, and yet in sight with,
and danger from the flesh, that following the blessed stepps of their holy
Lives and Deaths, we may also show forth the Light of a good example, for the
Glory of thy Name, the Conversion of Enemies, and the improvement of those
Generations we shall shortly leave behind us; and then with all those that have
born the Heat and burden of the day (thy Servant whose Sufferings and Labors
we this day commemorate) receive the Reward of our Labors, the Harvest of our
Hopes, even the Salvation of our own souls, and that for the merits, and
through the mediation of thy Son, our Blessed Savior Jesus Christ,

Amen.
An Aninversary Prayer for the Thirtieth of January.
O Most mighty God, terrible in thy judgments, and wonderful in thy doings
toward the Children of Men, Who in thy heavy displeasure have suffered this
day, that execrable thing to be done among Us, which We cannot mention without
horror, nor remember without astonishment.

We thy poor afflicted Creatures, (...) dejected looks, and bleeding hearts,
humbly confess in the behalf of all the people of this wretched land, that
our crying sins have ^en the Cause that the Crown is the fallen from our head,
and an innocent King given up to the rage of cruel and bloody men.

But O Gracious God, lay not the guilt of this blood (the shedding of which
none but thy blood can expi^e) lay it not on the whole Nation; for thou have
yet a remnant among Us, who having neither hands nor ^earts defiled with it, do
still mourn in secret, and bewail the committing of that fact, which heaven and
earth ^ors.

But if thy justice must be satisfied, Let the thunder of it light upon their
heads, and theirs alone, who ^ot only contrived and acted so foul a murder,
but are as yet so far from being touched with any remorse or repentance for it,
that they justify their sin, and in an high blasphe^ie pretend thy Name, and
Glory, for all that they have done.

Lord in thy good time consider ^is; Consider not only what they ^ve done to
that royal Martyr, who (...) reigns with thee in Glory; But with what
eagerness they have since pursued him, To whom Thou have given the Crown,
saying, with those wicked Husbandmen, This is the Heir, let us kill him that
the Inheritance may be Ours.

But, O merciful God, let not this wicked imagination of theirs ever take
effect; but set thy watchful Providence as a continual fence about him: show
some token on him for good even now; O Lord, when they have swallowed him up in
the pride of their strength, and think they have made their hill so strong,
that thy can never be moved.

This is thine hour, O Lord; this is thy time; Now show thy self: O The who art
the Judge of the W^ (...), judge equally between hi^ and those sons of Belial.

Thou see thy Church is laid waste, thy People oppressed, thine Anointed cast
out, as an unprofitable Branch; his Armies overthrown, (...) Friends ruined,
his Enemies mighty, his Hopes vanished, and all human remedies consumed.

But Thou art the same God that fittest between the Cherubims, be the Earth
never so unquiet. Hear Us therefore in the midst of our confusions. Restore to
Us the light of our eyes, the King whom thou have given Us.

Be from henceforth his Guide and his Counsel, and his mighty Deliverer, and
never leave him till Thou have made the Stone, which those Builders have set at
naught, the headstone of the Corner; That We may evermore rejoice in the
felicity of thy Chosen, and falling down before thine Altars, give thanks to
Thee in the great Congregation. Grant this, O God, for his sake that pleads for
Us, even Jesus Christ the righteous,

Amen.
Prayers OF Intercession FOR The use of such as Mourn in Secret, for the
Public Calamities of these Nations.

London, Printed by Tho. Mabb, 1660.

Lessons appointed to be read on this Occasion.
Psalm. 80. 90. 102. Nehem. 9. 2 Chronicles. 13. Judges 9. Ezra. 9. 2. Sam. 15. 16.
17. 18. 20. Ezekiel. 9. 22. Numb. 16. Isaiah 22. Romans 13. Amos 4. James 5. 1 Pet.
2. Joel 2. 1 These. 5.
A Preparatory Prayer.
O Lord, I find in that Book of thine, which cannot deceive me, That the oftener
thy servant Abraham prayed, the more he got ground upon Thee; and came at last
to that holy Confidence, as not only to Pray to Thee for Himself, but to be
importunate, and press thee in the behalf of others.

Lord, I confess my Case is different: For Abraham was the Father of the
Faithful; But I am not worthy to be reckoned among his Children. He had the
Honor to be called thy Friend; but My sins have been such, that, unless Thy
Mercy intercede, may make thee look upon me as thine Enemy.

He prayed to Thee for a People of whose sins he was not Partaker; But my
address is to Thee for them, in whose iniquities I am involved, and have some
way or other deeply contributed to the hastening and bringing down those
terrible Judgments of Thine, which now lie so heavy on us: So that alas! I am
unworthy to appear before Thee for My self; and how shall I then dare to
supplicate Thee for Others?

O that there were a Moses to stand in the Gap to turn away thy wrathful
Indignation from us! O that there were a David, a Daniel, a Jeremy to pour out
their souls before Thee!

Yet hear Me, O my God; For though these Holy Saints have now no being upon
Earth; Yet their Prayers remain upon Record, for every soul that mourns in
Secret, to make use of

O Holy and Blessed Spirit, kindle but the same Fervency in my Heart (while I
repeat their Words) as was in Them; And I know I shall be Heard.

I. King David's Prayer for the Church and People.
O God, wherefore art thou absent from us so long? why is thy wrath so hot
against the sheep of thy pasture?

O think upon thine Inheritance, which thou have purchased, and Redeemed of
old.

Lift up thy feet, that thou may utterly destroy every Enemy that has done
Evil in thy Sanctuary.

For behold, they break down all the ca^ed Works thereof, with Axes and
Hammers.

Yea, they have said in their hearts, Let us make havoc of them altogether;
And thus have they designed to ruin all the Houses of God in the land.

But O God, how long shall the Adversary do this dishonor? how long shall the
Enemy Blaspheme thy Name, for ever?

Arise, O God, maintain thine own Cause; Remember how the Foolish man
blasphemeth thee daily.

But, O deliver not the soul of thy Turtle Dove into their Hands: For the
Presumption of them that hate. Thee, increases more and more. O God make speed
to save us.
O Lord make haste to help us.


II.
O Lord God of Hosts, how long will thou be angry with thy People that Prays?

How long will thou feed us with the Bread of Tears? and give us plenteousnesse
of Tears to drink?

O Turn us again, Thou God of Hosts; show us the Light of thy Countenance, and
we shall be whole.

Remember that Thou did once plant a Vine amongst us: And when it had taken
Root, it filled the Land.

Our Hills were covered with the shadow of it: and the Boughs thereof were like
the Goodly Cedar Trees.

But now, thou have broken down her Hedge, so that all they that go by, pluck
off her Grapes.

The wild Boar of the Wood does root it up, and the Beasts of the Field devour
it.

Yet turn us again, O Lord God of Hosts; show us the Light of thy Countenance,
and we shall be whole.

For we will not go back from thee; O let us live, and we shall ^ll upon thy
Name. O God make speed to save us.
O Lord make haste to help us.


III.
HOld not thy Tongue; O God, keep not still silence; Refrain not thy self, O
God.

For ^o Thine Enemies make a murmuring, and they that hate Thee, have lift up
their Head.

They have imagined craftily against thy People, and have taken Counsel
against thy secret ones.

Behold they have cast their heads together with one Consent, and are
Confederate against Thee.

They have said, Come let us root them out that they may be no more a People,
and that their Name may be no more in remembrance.

They come daily round about (...) like Water, and compass us on every side.

But, O my God, make them like unto a Wheel, and as the stubble before the Wind:

Who say, Let us take unto Our selves the Houses of God in Possession

O make their Faces ashamed, O Lord, that they may seek Thy Name. O God make
speed to save us.
O Lord make haste to help us.


IV.
O God thou have cast us out, and scattered us abroad; Thou have been
displeased at us, O Turn thee unto us again.

Thou have moved the Land and divided it: O heal the sores thereof, for it
shakes.

Thou have shown Thy People heavy things, and given us a Drink of Deadly Wine.

Thou have made us to turn our backs upon our Enemies, so that they which hate
Us spoil our Goods.

Thou make us to be rebuked of our Neighbors, to be laughed to scorn, and to
be had in derision of them that are round about us.

But though all this be come upon us, yet do we not forget Thee, nor ^ave our
selves frowardly in Thy Co^ant.

Our heart is not turned back, nor our steps gone out of thy Way.

No, not when thou have smitten us into the place of Dragons and covered us
with the shadow of Death.

Up Lord, Why sleep thou? Awake, and be not absent from Us for ever?

But O why hidest Thou Thy Face; and forgettest our Misery and Trouble?

For our soul is brought low, even unto the Dust, and our Belly ^eaveth unto
the ground.

Arise, help us and deliver us for Thy Mercies sake. O God make speed to save
us.
O Lord make haste to help us.


King David's Tears.
O My God, why have thou forsaken Thine Anointed, and art displeased with him?

For Lo Thou have broken the Covenant of thy servant; and cast his Crown to the
Ground.

Thou have overthrown all his Hedges, and broken down his strong holds.

So that all they that go by spoil him, and he is become a Rebuke to his
Neighbors.

For thou have set up the Right hand of his Enemies, and made all his
Adversaries to rejoice.

Thou have put out his Glory, and have cast his Throne down to the Ground.

The Days of his Youth have Thou seasoned with Bitterness, and covered him
with dishonor.

But Lord, how long will thou ^ide thy self, for Ever? and shall thy Wrath
still burn like Fire?

Remember, O Lord, the rebuke that Thy Servant has, and how he does bear in
his Bosom, the Rebukes of many People

And let his Adversaries be clothed with sham; But upon his Head let his Crown
flourish.

O help him against his Enemies; for vain is the help of Man. O God make speed
to save Him:
O Lord make haste to help Him.


Jeremiah's Lamentations Prophetical of these Times.
HOw has the Lord covered us with a Cloud in his anger, and cast down from
Heaven unto Earth the Beauty of Israel, and remembered not his Footstool in the
Day of his Wrath?

For Lo, he has bent his Bow as an Enemy: He has swallowed us up, and has
not pitied; He has made desolate the Kingdom and the Princes thereof.

He has cast off his Altars, and abhorred his Sanctuary, and has given into
the Hands of the Enemies the Walls of his Palaces.

He has caused our solemn Feast^ and Sabbaths to be forgotten, and has
despised in his Indignation the King and the Priest.

For the Lord has now accomplished his' Fury; He has poured out his fierce
Anger; He has kindled such a Fire in Sion, as has devoured the Palaces
thereof.

For the sins of the Prophets, and and the Iniquities of the Priests, who have
shed the blood of the Just in the midst of her.

For the Breath of our nostrils, the Anointed of the Lord has been taken in
their Pits; Of whom we said, under his shadow shall we live in Peace.

But we have Transgressed and Rebelled, and Thou have not pardoned.

And therefore our eyes have as yet failed in our vain help; For in our
Watching, we have watched for a Nation that could not save us.

Behold, O Lord, and Consider to whom thou have done this.

O Lord, Thou have seen his Wrong, Judge thou his Cause.

Thou have seen all their vengeance and all their imaginations against him.

Thou have heard all their Reproach, O Lord, and all their Imaginations against
him.

The lips of those that have risen up against him, and their Devices against him
all the Day. O God make speed to save him.
O Lord make haste to help him.


II.
REmember O Lord, what is come upon us; consider and behold our Reproach.

For our Inheritance is turned to strangers; our Houses to Aliens; our Necks
are under Persecution; we labor and have no rest.

Our Fathers have sinned and are not, and we have born our Iniquities.

Yea, servants rule over us, and there is none that delivers us out of their
hands.

Our Elders have ceased from the Gate, and our Young men from their Music.

The Joy of our Heart is ceased, our Dance is turned into mourning.

For the Crown is fallen from our Head, and Woe unto us that We have sinned.

For this our heart is faint, for these things our Eyes are dim.

But wherefore do thou forget us for Ever, and forsakest us so long time?

O Turn thou us unto thee, O Lord, and we shall be turned; Renew our days as
of old;

And do not utterly Reject us, be not for ever Wroth against us. O God make
speed to save us.
O Lord make have to help us.


Daniel's Prayer and Confession in the Behalf of Himself and his People.
O Lord, the Great and dreadful God, We have sinned, and done wickedly, and
have Rebelled, even by departing from thy Precepts and from thy Judgments

Neither have we hearkened to thy Servants the Prophets, which spoke in thy
Name, to our Kings, our Princes, and our Fathers, and all the People of this
Land.

O Lord, Righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us Confusion of Face, as
at this Day; unto all that are near and far off through all the Countries,
whither thou have driven them, because of the Trespass that they have
trespassed against thee.

For we have not obeyed the Voice of the Lord our God, and therefore the Curse
is poured out upon us.

Even such a Curse, as that under the whole Heaven has not been done, as has
been done unto Us.

But now, O Lord our God, according to all thy Righteousness, I beseech thee,
let thine Anger and thy Fury be turned away from us.

Hear the Prayer of thy servant, and cause thy Face to shine upon thy Sanctuary
which is now desolate.

O my God, incline thine Ear and hear; Open thine Eyes and behold our
Desolation.

For I do not present these supplications before thee for our own
Righteousness, but for thy Great Mercies.

O Lord hear, O Lord Forgive, O Lord do, delay not, for Thine own sake, O my
God, and for thy Peoples sake, that are called by ^y Name. O God make speed to
save us.
O Lord make have to help us.


Prayers for the King.
LOrd Remember our distressed King, and all his Troubles, Amen.

Let thine Hand hold him fast, and thine Arm strengthen him, Amen.

Let not the Enemy be able to do him violence, or the Son of Wickedness hurt
him, Amen.

Let thy Truth and Mercy be ever with him; and in thy Name, let his Throne be
exalted, Amen.

O be thou his Father, his God, and his strong Salvation, Amen.

And let him be as the Fi^ born, and Glorious among t^ Kings of the Earth,
Amen. O God make speed to sav^ him:
O Lord make haste to help him.


II.
O Most Powerful Lord God, the only disposer of all the Kings and Kingdoms of
the Earth, who for the Punishment of the Crying sins of this Nation have
extinguished our Glory, and cast the Throne down to the Ground, Give us not
over utterly to Ruin and Confusion; But bring back in thy good time the Heir
of these Kingdoms, like the Sun with Healing in his Wings, to repair the
Breaches already made, and prevent the Desolations that ^reaten us.

And however thou have been pleased to cast a cloud upon ^im in the Morning of
his Days, yet leave him not in this storm.

Forsake him not, Thou that art the God of his salvation; But look upon his
Wrongs, and have Compassion on his Innocence.

O let it never be in the Power of men to bar him from the Throne, to which by
his Birth thou have designed him; But Guide him with those Counsels, and
prosper him with that success, as may settle him in his Throne in Peace.

Or, if the Guilt and Wickedness of his Opposers shall still continue to hinder
this, Do it after thine own way, O God, with thy mighty hand, and stretched out
Arm; That they may both know and feel, that thou art the Protector of Kings and
the Refuge of all them, who have no other Trust but Thee.

Grant this, O Lord, for the Glory of thy Name, and the Comfort of thy desolate
Church and People, Amen.

O Most Merciful God, the only Sanctuary of sad and distressed souls, Look
down I beseech Thee upon thy servant, who here with bended Knees and a wounded
spirit prostrate my self before Thee. For Woe unto us, we have lived to see the
Crown fall from our Heads, and the Glory departed from our Israel, even the
Anointed of the Lord, driven to fly before wicked men, and they, who have
divided his Inheritance triumphing over him.

But thou, O Lord, how long, how long shall Bloody Designs and Rebellious
imaginations prosper? Shall not the Judge of the whole Earth do Right? Or have
thou forgotten to be Gracious, and shuttest up thy tender Mercy in displeasure?

O No: Thou art the same God, who in the midst of Judgment remembrest Mercy.
Thine Arm is not shortened that thou can not save, nor thine Ear heavy, that
thou can not hear. Arise then, O Lord, Arise, Let the World see, that thou
art the Father of the Fatherless, and the Helper of them to Right that suffer
Wrong. Show it, O Lord, especially at this time, in multiplying all thy
comforts upon our distressed King.

And, as thou have strangely and Wonderfully delivered him from those who so
eagerly hunted after his Life; So let it appear to the World that: thou have
not done this to make him more miserable, or to continue him in the Condition
of an Ex^e; But rather, that thou have reserved him for Faithful Hands, and
fairer Opportunities and more prosperous successes.

And though that was not the Time, nor those the Means, by which thou have
designed to restore the Kingdom to him, Yet that thou have not forsaken him,
but that He is still in thy Care, still under the shadow of thy Wings, who
alone art able to do more for him, then we can pray for; and Gloriously to
bring him back again, by ways we cannot think of. In the mean time, O Lord,
whilst thou think fit to keep him under the sharpness of this Discipline,
Teach him to kiss the Hand that chastens him, and humbly to submit his Earthly
Crown to thy Divine Will and Pleasure; knowing, that thou can either Restore
him That, when it seems good to thee, Or else give him a Crown infinitely more
Glorious, which no man can take from him.

Lord, He is more Precious to thee, then he can possibly be to us: Dispose of
Him therefore in the multitude of thy Mercies, And let thy Holy Spirit take so
(...) Possession and Guidance of ^im, that among all the Diffi^ties of his most
perplexed Af^s, he may constantly perform his Duty toward thee, and live and
die thy faithful Servant in Jesus Christ,

Amen.
A Letany of Intercession.
O That thou would hear me O God! that thou would so prepare my Heart, that
thou may hear me! that thou would hear me once more, though I am but Dust
and Ashes! That thou would hear me for all those, whom by the Bonds of Duty,
and Charity, or Affection, I am bound to Pray for! O Lord hear my Prayers.
And let my cry come unto thee.


The Letany.
THat it may please thee to Bless the whole Catholic Church of thy Son Christ,
as it has been planted in his Death, and watered in his Blood, so it may be
still nourished by his Sacraments, and governed by his Word; That the
Uncharitableness of men may not make the Rents and Divisions of it wider, and
that howsoever we may differ in the superstructions, the Foundations of
Christian Faith may never be cast down.

O hear us for thy Son Jesus sake.

That it may please thee to look compassionately on this persecuted part of thy
Church, now driven from the Public Altars into Corners and secret Closets,
that thy Protection may be over us where ever we shall be scatteted, and a
Remnant prefervcd among us by whom thy Name may be Glorified, thy Sacraments
Administered, and the souls of thy servants kept upright in the midst of a
corrupting and of a corrupted Generation.

O hear us for thy Son Jesus sake.

That it may please thee to be Gracious to Him, who was once defigned by Thee
to be the Nursing Father of this thy Church; But for the sins of both Priests
and People is now cast out as an unprofitable Branch; And that in thy due time
thou would deal with him, according to the Innocence of his Person and the
Justice of his Cause.

O hear us for thy Son Jesus sake.

That it may please thee to comfort him in the sadness of his spirit, and
Guide him in the Perplexities of his Mind, and support him in the straits and
necessities of his Fortunes. To raise him Friends abroad, and to Convert or
confound the hearts of his Enemies at Home; To do some mighty thing for him,
which I in particular know not how to Pray for, and by the secret Working of
thy Providence, to make the Stone which the foolish Builders among us have
refused the Head-stone of the Corner.

O hear us for thy Son Jesus sake.

That it may please thee to preserve him with an unspotted soul, and an
unshaken Faith and that no splendour of any Earthly Crown may so dazzle him, as
to make him forget either himself or thee; or do any unworthy thing to lose
that Heavenly Crown which thou have prepared for him, and nothing but his own
sins is able to keep from him.

O hear us for thy Son Jesus sake.

That it may please thee to show Mercy to the Queen his Mother, the Dukes his
Brethren^ in Exile with him, and the rest of that scattered and oppressed
Family; to guide them thy Counsels, to defend with them with thy Power, to
provide for them in thy Mercy, and to make them in their several ways,
Instruments of thy Glory and our Happiness.

O hear us for thy Son Jesus sake.

That it may please thee to deal Graciously with that Remnant left of the
Loyal Nobility, and all others of that ruined side, who have chosen rather to
suffer in thy Cause, then to participate with the sins of a more successful
Party.

O hear us for thy Son Jesus sake.

That it may please thee to spread the wings of thy Protection over all those
whom thou have made near and dear unto me; to preserve them safe in body and
soul from the snares of their enemies, and the iniquity of the times, that no
sin may lay waste their Consciences, nor no evil come near their dwellings.

O hear me for thy Son Jesus sake.

That it may please thee to recompense all those whom thou have raised to be
Instruments of any good unto me; such as have taken care of my soul, and
instructed me in the way to heaven; such as have counseled me, when I have
gone astray, supplied me in my wants, comforted me in my heaviness, and have
had that high Charity for me, as to Reprove me when I have sinned.

O hear me for thy Son Jesus sake

That it may please thee to let the dayspring from on high, shine upon all
those who sit in darkness and in the shadow of death; who either do not know
thy Name, or knowing it, are carried by strong delusions into the ways of
Error and false Persuasions.

O hear us for thy Son Jesus sake.

That it may please thee to confirm those, who as yet stand fast on the
foundations of thy Holy Truth; that neither the persecution of the Church in
which they were Baptized, nor the temptations of the times, nor the snares of
cunning men, who watch all advantages, may make them fall from their first
Faith, and miserably wander after their own imaginations.

O hear me for thy Son Jesus sake.

That it may please thee to comfort and raise up those weak and dejected
spirits, which are ready to sink under the burden of a troubled or Afflicted
Conscience, that as thou have showed them their sins, and the punishments due
for them, so thou would show them their Savior; and, by directing them to
lay hold on his Cross, keep them from a Final and Everlasting ship wrack.

O hear me for thy Son Jesus sake.

That it may please thee to hear the groans and cries of all those that are
Afflicted, either outwardly or inwardly, in body or soul; Especially such, who
being oppressed for Conscience sake, have no place to fly unto, nor no man
cares for their souls.

O hear us for thy Son Jesus sake.

That it may please thee to listen Compassionately to the deep sighing of the
Prisoners, and by thy mighty Power to deliver such, who for obeying thee and a
good Conscience, are or shall be designed to death or ruin.

O hear me for thy Son Jesus sake.

That it may please thee to soften the hearts of all unrighteous Judges; who
now have the Power over us, and to make them know with trembling that there is
a Judge higher than they.

O hear us for thy Son Jesus sake.

That it may please thee to forgive all who more particularly are Enemies to me
and mine, all that way have any traduced or slandered me, even to turn their
hearts and to extend their Charity to them, in all those degrees of mercy which
I desire may be shown to my own soul.

O hear me for thy Son Jesus sake.

That it may please thee to hear all those servants of thine, who either have
the Charity to pray for me, or desire my Prayers for them: But above all, that
it may please thee to hear the Prayers of thy Son Jesus Christ, who now fits
gloriously on thy Right hand, to intercede both for me, and them.

O hear me for thy Son Jesus sake.

O Lord, hear my Prayers; and let my cry come unto thee. O Lord, pardon my
prayers, and let not my sins and mine unworthiness interpose between thy
Mercy-seat and me,

Amen.
A Prayer for the Church.
ALmighty and Everlasting God, who only workest great marvells, show the
express of thy Goodness to thy desolate and persecuted Church, that now sits
mourning in her dust and Ruins, torn by Schism, and stripped and spoiled by
Sacrilege.

And thou which after a long Captivity did bring back thy People to re-build
their Temple, Look upon us with the same eyes of Mercy: restore to us once
again the Public Worship of thy Name, the Reverend Administration of thy
Sacraments; Raise up the former Government of Church and State. That we may no
longer (...) without King, without I rie^ without God in the World. But may
once more enter thy Courts with Praise, and serve thee with that Reverence,
that Unity and Order, as may be acceptable in thy sight, through Jesus Christ
our Lord,

Amen.
A Prayer for the Queen Mother, and the Royal Progeny.
ALmighty God, the Fountain of all Goodness, we humbly beseech thee to be
gracious to the Queen Mother, to comfort her in her Afflictions, and to direct
her ways and Counsels as may most conduce to the settling of her Posterity
here in Peace.

Enlarge thy Blessings upon all the Royal Family, those that (...) driven to
fly for Refuge into ^rraign Lands. Take them (...) into thy care, cover them
^der thy wings, and in thy due time make them so many instruments of thy Glory
and our Happiness, through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
A Prayer for the Afflicted.
O Lord God, Merciful and gracious, the only Sanctuary and Refuge of all that
are in Misery and Trouble; Hear I beseech thee the groans and cries of all that
are Afflicted outwardly or inwardly, either in body or Mind, Especially such
who suffer in a Righteous Cause, whose loyalty has been more dear to them then
their Fortunes, and a good Conscience more precious then their Lives: conside^
them, O God, in their severa^ Extremities, whether at hom^ or abroad: comfort
them (...) their Distresses, supply them i^ their Wants.

Let the sorrowful sighing o^ all that are oppressed, come before thee, and by
the Greatness of thy Power, preserv^ thou them that are appointed to die.

Convert and soften the hard hearts of their implacable Enemies and assuage
their thirst of blood, which still cries more and more.

Or, if thou otherwise have decreed to bring any more of us through this Red
Sea into the Land of Promise, prepare us for this passage, and guide us by thy
blessed Spirit through the shadows of death. Continue our Christian courage and
constancy to the uttermost; strengthen our Faith, confirm our Hope, and let our
Charity ^erflow, even to the forgiving (...) them, by whose unjust Sen^e we
perish. That so dy^g in thy Peace, we may enter ^to the Joys prepared for us,
^rough the Mediation of our savior, who has gone the same ^y before us, even
Jesus Christ the Righteous,

Amen.
An humble and submissive (...) postulation with God, when (...) Orthodox and
loyal Clergy we^ so mercil^y silenced, by that blou^ U^rper, who by
Proclamation forbid them either to preach or (...) publicly in Churches; or
priva^ ly in Families, not suffering the so much as to teach School.
O That thou would hea^ me, O God, that tho^ would hear me once more, wh^
am but Dust and Ashes, while presume, yet with all humbl^ Rerence, to
expostula^ with thee the great and Glor^ ous God, in behalf of this pe^ secuted
and afflicted Church!

RIghteous art thou, O Lord, when I plead with thee; yet Jer. 12. 1.
let me talk with thee of thy Judgments: wherefore does the way of the wicked
prosper? wherefore are all they happy that deal very treacherously?

Thou have planted them, yea they have taken root; they grow, yea 2.
they bring forth fruit [such as it is, the Apples of Sodom and the Grapes of
Gomorrah] Thou art near in the mouth, but far from their reins.

But wherefore has the Lord done this unto this Land? what means the heat of
this great Deuteronomy. 29. 24.
anger?

O my Lord, if thou the Lord art with us, why then is all this befallen us? and
where be all thy Mercies Judge. 6. 13.
and deliverances, which our Fathers told us of, saying, Did not the Lord bring
us out of Egypt? did he not deliver us from superstition, ignorance and
profaneness, from persecutions of the right hand, and separations on the left?

Did he not save us from our open and professed enemies? and will thou now
suffer us to be destroyed by our own selves?

Say Lord, have thou quite forsaken us, and will thou deliver us over into the
Midianitish hands of our own Mothers sons?

How long shall Iijm and Ziim, the beast of the Island be let Isa. 34. 14.
alone to leap upon thy Mercyseat, which was wont to be fenced with Cherubims?

Or art thou weary of our service, that thou thus go about to disgrace the
Throne of thy Glory, and seem Jer. 14. 21.
to abhr both the cry of our Prayers, and the voice of weeping?

For behold Lord, we have Psalm. 126. 5.
sown in tears: when is it that we shall reap in Joy?

When will thou turn again the Captivity of Sion. 4.


Is it not enough that she has Cant. 2. 2.
been so long, as a Lilly among the Thorns, but will thou now suffer the Thorns
to overtop and to choke up this Lilly?

Or shall the envious man's tares ^roy the wheat, which has been Mat. 13. 25.
^en in thy field.

If there be a necessity that He^s should be, yet, is there any 1 Cor. 11. 19.
^ity that they should bear sway? yea, there is no necessity but that thy Truth
should prevail.

O Lord God, terrible in thy judge^s, but yet most fatherly in thy ^cies; when
shall we hear thee say in this Church of ours, as thou did sometimes to thy
afflicted Israel.

Thus says thy Lord, the Lord, and thy God, that pleads the Isa. 51. 22.
cause of his people, Behold, I have taken out of thine hand, the cup of
trembling, even the ^egs of the cup of my fury; thou shall no more drink it
again. But I will put it into the hands of them that afflict thee; which have
said to thy soul, bow down that we may go over?

Arise O Lord, and have mercy upon Sion: for it is time that thou Psalm. 102. 13.
have mercy upon her, yea the time is come.

And why thy servants think upon her stones, and it pitieth 14.
them to see her in the dust. It pittieth them to see, that there is none to
guide her among all the sons that she has brought up. Isa. 51. 18.


It pittieth them to see the Priests of the Lord s^lenced, and those lips Mal.
2. 7.
sealed up, which preserve knowledge.

It pittieth them to have their Teachers removed into a corner, and that their
eyes cannot Isa. 30. 20.
see their Teachers?

It pittieth them; and yet does it not pity thee, O Lord, who art the God of
pity and compassion.

Art thou not satisfied with the blood already spilt among us, but stand
thou still ^ith a sword upon thine Altar?

Must Aarons rod be suffered to ^ther in thine own house, in thine, Numb. 17.
(...) sight, while Corah's and, Da^han's do bud and blossom? Can thou, O
God, look on, and see the golden pot ravished from thine own Tabernacle? Heb.
9. 24.


Can thou endure to be in Mat. 5. 14.
the Temple, and see those Lights of the Sanctuary put out, which thou thy self
have light up?

Will thou suffer the Laborers to be driven out of thy own Vineyard, after
their working so long there by thy Divine appointment?

Shall thy House of Prayer become at length a den of Theives; Mat. 21. 1^.
and thou thy self stand by as unconcernd? whilst they rob thee of thine
Honor?

Thou that said to the waves, Mat. 8. 26.
be ye still, will thou suffer the winds to arise, the contrary winds of false
Doctrine, and to Ephesians: 4. 14.
blow against this Ship, which thy self have so long been in^ will thou sleep
in the Ship, while thy Disciples are cast over board? Lord, carest thou no^ we
perish?

When shall thy Ministers tak^ down their Harps from the Will Psalm. 137. 2.
upon which they hang.

When shall they be permitted (...).
openly to sing the Lord song, though in this strang^ Land?

When, O when shall we see the 1 Samuel 7.
Ark of God to return back from the House of Dagon, and David 2 Samuel 6. 14.
dancing before it?

When will thou open the mouths of thine own Zacharias's, the Priests Luke 1.
of the Lord, that were called to wait upon thee at thine Altar, but who are
now struck dumb, from of^ating before thee?

When will thou extend mer^ Ezra. 9. 9.
into us in the sight of those ^at hate us, who are set over us, (...) give us
a reviving, to set up the ^ouse of God, and to repair ^he Desolations thereof,
and to give a Wall in Judah and in Ie^salem?

When shall we accompany the Tribes, even the Tribes of the Lord Psalm. 122, 4.
unto the Lords House, there to testify unto Israel, to give thanks un^ the
Name of the Lord, for the ^ation of our Religion in the (...) of so many fiery
trialls, and the restoration of our Liberties af^r so sharp a captivity?

When Lord, shall we be allowed to eat bread again freely in thy House; yea,
though it be but to gather the ^rums that fall from our Masters table?

How long shall it be, ere thou bid (...) look with joy upon Zion, the City
Isa. 33 20.
of our Solemnities, as thou did bid thy People the Jews.

When will thou comfort us, and say, your eyes shall see Jerusalem a quiet
habitation, a Tabernacle that shall not be taken down, not one of the stakes
thereof shall be removed, neither shall any of the cords thereof be broken?

O how amiable are thy Dwellings, thou Lord of Hosts? Psalm. 84. 1.


My soul has a desire and longing to enter into thy 2.
Courts, and to go unto thine Altars.

But Lord, It is not for us to know the times and seasons, which the Father
has put in his own Power. Acts 1. 7.


And therefore I desire humbly to submit the success of all our Prayers and
Supplications, of our actions and sufferings, together with the time of our
deliverance, unto thy sole pleasure, earnestly beseeching thee, for thy Grace
(which is alone sufficient for us) that 2 Cor. 12. 9.
we may cheerfully wait upon thee (without thinking thy stay too long) till
thou have mercy ^on us.

The Lord our God is a God of Jer. 51. 56.
^compences, and shall surely requit^ ^r Enemies. But

The Lord is our Judge, the Isa. 53. 22.
Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is our King, he will save us.

Thou art the Lord; and therefore, 1 Samuel 3. 18.
Lord, even when thou please, and what thou please.

Not our time, but thy time:

Not our way, but thy way:

Not our Will, but thy Will Mat. 26. 30.
be done.

Thy Will be done in Earth, as it is Heaven, Mat. 6. 10.


Amen.
A Prayer for the Church (...) England.
O Lord, look down in mercy and compassion upon o^ dear Mother, the afflicted
Church of England, to whose breasts thou have applied us, And grant, that we
may draw from thence neither blood nor wind, but the sincere milk of 1 Pet. 2.
2.
thy word of an holy Conversation.

Behold Lord, she is none of those Mothers, which are for the dividing 1 King.
3. 26.
of their children; O preserve thou her children, that they also may none of
them be for the dividing of their Mother!

Make her yet once more happy in a Moses and an Aaron: in Isa. 49. 23.
nursing Fathers to go in and out before this People, and holy Ministers to
stand before thee our God: and suffer not ^e sins of this Nation to be ^onger,
to pull down the walls ^our Sion and Jerusalem, then ^s thy goodness and mercy
to ^ild them up again.

O that this Church of England Genes. 17. 18.
^ay live in thy sight!

For which end, behold her Priests, how they keep silence, Psol. 39. 2.
even from good words, which is pain and grief unto them; and are denied even a
place between the Porch and the Altar, though only to weep there for the
sparing Joel. 2. 17.
of the Temple.

Behold her Virgins, how they Prove. 29. 18.
(...), least for want of a Vision, the People perish; and her Widows, (...)
they make Lamentation, to see Judgment begin so severely at the 1 Pet. 4. 17.
House of God.

Behold, how she her self, like another Racheb, weeps for her Ier. 31. 85. Mat.
2. 11.
children, because they are not; because they are not suffered to comfort their
own Mother, and to defend her from all such wh^ mock at her Sabbaths and s^
lemn Feasts, and make her se^ vice and Devotions their de^ sion and scorn.

O Lord, behold her Afflictions for the Enemy has magnified him self Lam. 1. 9.
against her.

See, O Lord, and consider^ for she is become very vile:

But we trust, by how much she i^ become vile in the eyes of man, she 2 Samuel
16. 12.
shall be the more precious in the sight of thee her God. And, though others
set light by her blood, yet thou have promised not to despise her team
especially, when thou thy self have washed them in the blood of thy Son.

O therefore we beseech thee, put thou her Tears in thy bottle; Psalm. 56. 8.
and let not her sighs and her groans seem little in thy sight. Accept of those
Humiliations, and graciously answer the Prayers which are offered up in secret
for her. Visit, O visit her in Mercy and Compassion, now after the time that
thou have afflicted her, and for Psalm. 90, 15.
the many years wherein she has suffered Adversity.

Let that purple Robe of mockery, wherewith first thy self were clad, and now
of late this Church of thine, be changed at length into garments of joy and
gladness.

Let that Crown of thorns, which was taken from thy Temples and platted upon
hers, be now taken from both: and crown her instead thereof, with Roses out of
her own Sharon.

Let the Print of the nails in thy Cant. 2. 1.
hands and feet, be as the Balm of Gilead to heal and close up the wounds which
are made in hers. And let the hole in thy precious side, be a safe hiding place
and Sanctuary, till this Persecution be overpassed.

Though this year be begun in bitterness, yet O suffer it not, to end so. But
cause it to be proclaimed the acceptable ye^ Isa. 62. 1.
of the Lord to all that mou^ in Sion.

As thou have given unto t^ Church an Head of gold, so done Dan. 2. 13.
let her stand like Nebuchadneza^ Image upon feet of clay. Thoug^ she be made
to lie among the po^ yet thou can cover her again wi^ silver wings, making
her feather^ Psalm. 68. 13.
like gold.

Thou art Almighty, and can^ do it: yea thou art Almerciful^ Psa. 86. 17.
and wilt do it: O then show he^ (now especially) some toke^ for good, that
they which hate her may see it, and be ashamed, because thou, O Lord, ha^
helped her and comforted her.

Give her instead of a Rent, a Girdle, instead of vain Repetitions, the Holy
Spirit and Office of Prayer^ for the bread of Adversity, the blessed Manna of
thy Word and Sacraments; and for the cup of trembling and astonishment, the cup
of salvation. Suffer not Pharaoh's thin and ^sted Ears of corn to de^ Genesis 41.
24.
those full and good Ears, which have sprung up here in Gods field. Neither do
thou punish our former (slighted) ^nty with a succeeding famine of thy Word.

Give unto her beauty for ashes, the (...) Isa. 61. 3.
of Joy for mourning, the gar^ Prayer for the spirit of bea^ss.

Give her the custody of Angels, the Patronage of Kings and Princes, the hearts
and ^ds of Nobles, the prayers and tears of Priests, and the de^ce of the whole
secular Arm.

O thou that have the Key of Da^ Rev. 3. 7.
that openest and no man shut^, open thou the mouths of thy Mi^rs, and suffer
no more any man (...) them. Open thou the doors of (...) own House for thy
servants to (...) in, and let no one dare upon (...) p^ill of their souls to
keep us out.

And since we have taken upon us to speak unto our Lord (not for the sparing of
a Sodom but of this thine own Sion) le^ not our Lord be angry and w^ Genesis 18.
32. Judge. 6. 39.
will speak unto him once more

Preserve her, and all her sons an^ daughters in all storms, and again^ all
temptations; in this present storm^ and against the present and all future
temptations, that we may do nothing to scandal our holy Calling, by
sacrificing our Consciences to the purchase of our case. Give us innocence mixed
with prudence, the Doves eye in the Serpents head. And teach us to Ne devoret
Serpens Columbam. Mat. 10. 16.
beware of the Dragons Poison, even when we are made to feel the Dragons sting

And when the winds shall blow fiercest against thine Ark, yet then we beseech
thee to preserve the Vessel, though thou shall change the Pilots; And however
in thy secret wisdom thou may suffer many of the Lights to be blown out, yet
we pray thee Lord, be not so severe upon our justly-deserving sins as to remove
the Candlestick

All this, and whatsoever else thou ^e more needful for our bleeding Mother,
or for any of her persecuted Children, we beg at thy merciful hands, for thy
Sons sake who purchased this Church with his own blood, Jesus Christ our
Savior; To whom with thee, O Father, and the ever blessed Spirit, be all
Honor and Glory, Submission and Adoration in all places, at all times, in all
Estates and Conditions by all men and Angels, World without End,

Amen, Amen.
A Prayer for the Kings Birthday, May 29.
O Lord God, the great disposer of Kings and Kingdoms, and who in thy Mercy
did design thy servant our persecuted Sovereign Lord King Charles to be the
Heir of these Kingdoms, though in thy secret Judgments toward this sinful
Nation thou have suffered the sons of violence to keep him hitherto from
inheriting his Fathers Throne.

We thy unworthy servants are here n^et together, upon the Anniversary Day of
his Nativity to offer unto thee a grateful commemoration and our humble
thansgivings for thy great Blessing in bestowing upon us at first so hopeful a
Prince; And withal, to bewail our unworthiness of having so good and gracious
a Prince as yet to exercise his Reign over us; we bewail those many sins of
ours, whereby we have helped to cut off the Royal Father, and whereby we still
assist to the keeping our of his Royal Son.

However, we beseech thee, O Lord, to grant, that as thy hands did fashion him,
and as he was fearfully and wonderfully made in his Mothers womb, so his heart
may still be in those hands of thine, to preserve him from all danger, and to
mould him to all Christian and Princely Graces.

Give him years of Happiness and Joy, for those years of bitterness and sorrow
wherewith thou have afflicted his soul.

Cause him to know, that the end for which he was born, was not so much to
govern others, as to submit himself to thee; and to lay his Crown and Scepter
at the Feet of the Lamb.

And grant Holy Father, that that as now he has finished twenty nine years of
his life, and Anno 1659
most of those years under the severity of thy Discipline; So he may spend the
Remainder of his life, (and may have those years doubled and trebled to him,)
in the successes of thy favor.

As thou do add days to his years; so let it be thy good pleasure to add
happiness to his days; exchanging his Banishment into restoration, and his
Crown of thorns into a Crown of Majesty here, and of Glory hereafter.

This day did thou take him out of his Mothers womb, to live here a little
time. O may thou at the last day take both him and us out of our Mothers womb
again, even the grave, and the womb of the Earth, to live with thee for ever,
through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen, Amen.
The Ministers Prayer for the People.
O Most merciful Lord God, and Lover of souls, who have given Commandment to
thy Priests to weep and to pray between the Porch and the Al^n, and to cry,
spare thy people, O Lord, spare them.

O most blessed Jesu, who art ^n everlasting Priest, and the great Shepherd
and Bishop of our souls.

O most holy Spirit, who do sanctify and preserve us, building us up into an
holy Temple, for thy self to dwell in.

O Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, three Persons, and one God, who delightest in
the Conversion of sinners, and to see souls daily added unto thy Church.

Bless this whole Congregation, and have mercy upon this Parish, who are
committed to my charge to take care over their souls.

Lord, I am unworthy of so great an honor, and too unfit for so great a
Burden, yet in obedience to thy Call, I have undertaken it; and I trust by thy
Assistance, to be able to feed both thy sheep and thy Lambs.

Keep them always within thy Fold, that they may never wander nor go astray;
preserve them from Wolves, though they should be set in the very midst of them.

Teach them to know thy voice, and to be obedient to thy Call. And when any of
them shall straggle into the Wilderness, yet then Lord, do not thou leave them
(...) their own way; But be thou graciously pleased to look after them; and
when thou have found them, give them a ready willingness to accept of thy
shoulders, and to be carried ^ome.

With thee there is Balm for their wounded consciences: and in thy side there
is oil for for their broken hearts.

Let thy staff, O Lord, be a support to the weak, and let thy rod instruct and
correct the refractory.

And so bless them all in their bodies, in their souls, in their Estates, both
with thy temporal and spiritual mercies, that, here in this life, they may
live in Love, Peace, Plenty, and all Godliness; that so in the Life Eternal
they may be made joint Partakers of Glory, and reign for ever with the Lamb of
God, who takes away the sins of the world.

To whom, be all honor and glory, power and praise from this time forth and
for evermore,

Amen.
The Peoples Prayer for the Minister.
O Lord God, who of thy mercy have bestowed upon us Preachers of
Righteousness, and who for our benefit have appointed the Priests lips to
preserve knowledge.

O Lord Jesu Christ, who have sent laborers into thy Vineyard to dress and
trim it, and there to reach us fruit from the Tree of life.

O holy and blessed Spirit, who satest in the likeness of fiery tongues upon
the Apostles to inspire, thy Church, and of whose gift it is, that a succession
of Ministers is continued among us even to this day.

O holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity, let me never but be thankful to thee
for all these thy Gifts.

Preserve me by thy Grace, that I may never be of the number of those who love
to strive with the Priest. And that I may at no time deserve to be struck blind
with the dust from a Disciples feet.

Keep me from ^surping upon the Ministers Office, from defrauding him of his
right, from maligning his person, from calumniating his Doctrine, and from
abhorring to be reproved by him.

But grant, Lord, that I may readily hear and embrace the Message that thou art
pleased to send by him, be it of mercy or of judgment, always saying with old
Eli, It is the Lord, let him do what seems best in his own eyes.

And here among many other thy servants who wait upon the at thine Altar, bless
Lord, more particularly, that servant of thine to whom thou have committed the
charge of my soul.

O never let him sooth and flatter it, but (as I give him occasion) let him
discipline and correct it.

Give him Grace and Courage to speak boldly in the name of Jesu.

And since thou art delighted with those that tremble at thy Word, Lord, make
me one of their number that thou may delight in me.

Let me never stop mine ears, nor withdraw my self from hearing thy servant,
who speaks home to my conscience.

But when he shall have wounded mine heart with the sword of thy Spirit, O give
him power and wisdom to pour as well oil as vinegar into those happy wounds.

Lastly, Grant Lord, I beseech ^e; that he, by whose prayers and instructions,
thou art gra^ously pleased to advance my spiritual good, may by thy grace and
favor be protected by thy Providence, assisted by thy great mercies, comforted
and relieved in all his necessities bodily and ghostly.

And let me never but thus pray for him, who in discharge of his duty both
prays and weeps for me.

Lord, grant him deliverance from unreasonable and wicked men, who (with so
much danger to himself) endeavors to preserve me from the power of the Devil.

That so at last both Priest and People, the Minister and his Congregation, the
Shepherd and the whole Flock, may walk hand in hand to heaven, and be joyfully
translated from the Church militant here, to the Church triumphant above
through Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior,

Amen.
Another.
O Most gracious Lord God, who have promised to hea^ the Prayers of others for
us, and our Prayers for others, but both theirs and ours, through the powerful
intercession of thy Son. Grant I beseech thee, that I may reap benefit by the
Prayers of all such who are charitably mindful of recommending me and my
necessities to the Throne of Grace.

Particularly, touch both the heart and tongue of thy Servant -- with a coal
from thine Altar. give him zeal and intention in all his Devotions. And since
we are taught by thy holy Spirit, that the effectual servent Prayer of a
Righteous man avails much, grant him Lord, to be Righteous in all his ways,
Faithful in his Calling, and a sincere Example of holy life and godly
Conversation; That so, those Prayers which he offers up for my self and others,
may be the more acceptable in thy sight, and be the sooner graciously answered
with thy Benediction and Blessing both upon our bodies and souls: and all for
the precious bloodsheddings sake of thy beloved Son, and our blessed Mediator
Jesus Christ,

Amen.
Psalms for pardon of sins.
Psalm. 6. 25. 32. 38. 51. 10^ 130. 143.

For Protection from our Enemies and from the punishment of sins.

Psalm 3. 7. 9. 10. 11. 13. 17. 27. 31. 35. 54. 56. 57. 141.

For the Church and all faithful People.

Psalm. 53. 74. 79. 80. 94. 137.

For the King.
Psalm 21. 61. 89. 132.

For Peace -- 46. 122. 133.

In time of Persecution and public Calamity.

Psalm. 52. 64. 73. 61. 142. 120.

In time of War -- 43. 144.

Lessons.
Judgments upon Rebellion. 2 Samuel 18. Saint Judea Numb. 16. Epist.

Idgements up^ Tyrants and ^lse Prophets. Mic. 3. Mat. 7. 23. Mar. 13. 2 Pet.
2. 3.

The Judgment of re^ving the Candle^ick, and threats of it. 1 Samuel 4. Mat. 21.
Ezekiel. 3. Rev. 2.

Threats against Disobedience and Promises to the Obedient. Deuteronomy. 28. Luke 6.
Joshua. 23. sa. 59. Jer. 5.

Lamentation for Iudge^ent on a and. Lam. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Mat. 20. Isa. 64. Luke
13. Jerem. 4. 9. Baruch. 2. 3. 2 Esdras 3. 4.

Exhortation to Repentance and Faith. Deuteronomy. 4, 6, 8, 11. Mat. 6. Isaiah 58.
Hosea 4, 6.

Exhortaion to Fasting and Obedience. Joel 2. Jonah 3. Jerem. (...), 3, 7, 6.

Examples for patient sufferings, and Exhortations thereto. 2 Samuel 15. Heb. 12.
2 Mac. 6, 7. 1 Pet. (...), 3, 4. Jam. 4, 5.

Temporary Prosperity and Eternal Punishment of the wicked. Job 21. Jer. 12.
Act. 12. Habbac. 1. Mal. 3. Wisdom 5.

Persecution of the Church. Exodus 5. Revel. 12, 13.

Comforts to the Penitent and Holy. Ezekiel. 9. Mat. 5. Revel. 7.

Some Prayers for the King and Church, etc. heretofore printed. A Prayer for
the King.
O Lord God, who have commanded us to pray for Kings, and all that be in
Authority, that under them we ^ay lead a quiet and peaceable ^fe in all
godliness and honesty; ^esse thy Servant our King, ^at he may use that Sword
^ou have put into his hands, for ^e protection and reward of ^he good, and the
punishment ^f them that do evil, and give grace unto us, and all other his
Subjects to fear, reverence, and ^bey him as thy Minister, not ^nly for wrath,
but for consci^ce sake, least contemning ^ine ordinance, we incur that
damnation thou have threatne^ to all those that resist the high^ powers. Hear
us, O Lord, f^ his sake, who is the Prince (...) the Kings of the Earth, eve^
Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

O Most gracious Lord God the Ruler of Princes when they are in their thrones,
an^ their Protector, when they a^ in peril, look down mercifull^ from Heaven,
we most humbly pray thee, upon the low estate (...) thine anointed our King;
comfort him in his troubles, defen^ him in his dangers, strengthen him in his
good resolutions, and command thine Angels to pitc^ their tents round about hi^
that he may be defended from the hands of all those that desire his hurt, and
may be reestablished in the just rights o^ his throne, through Jesus Christ our
Lord, Amen.

O God the Father of Heaven, have mercy upon him and de^er him. O God the
Father, etc.


O God the Son Redeemer of the world, have mercy upon him and deliver him. O
God the Son, etc.


O God the holy Ghost pro^eeding from the Father and the Son, have mercy upon
him ^d deliver him. O God the holy Ghost, etc.


O holy, blessed and glorious ^rinity, three Persons and one God, have mercy
upon him and deliver him. O holy, blessed and glorious, etc.


Remember not Lord his offenses, nor the offenses of his Forefathers; neither
take thou ^engeance of his sins; spare him good Lord, spare thy servant ^om
thou have redeemed with thy most precious blood; and ^e not angry with him for
ever. Spare him good Lord.


From all evil and mischief, from the Insurrection of wicked doers, from the
frowardness and madness of the People. Good Lord deliver him.


From mouths full of cursing and bitterness, from all thos^ that speak evil
of dignities, and from those that slander the foot steps of thine Anointed.
Good Lord deliver him.


From them that are confederates, and speak so disdainfully against him, and
from all thos^ that hate him without a cause. Good Lord deliver him.


We sinners do beseech thee t^ hear us, O Lord God, and tha^ it may please thee
to look upon the face of thine Anointed, and to visit him with thy salvation.

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to plead his cause against them tha^ strive with him,
and to figh^ against those that fight again^ him. We beseech thee, etc.


That it may please thee to hear him in these days of his trouble, and to send
him help from thy Sanctuary. We beseech thee, etc.


That it may please thee to arise and maintain his cause, and to remember how
the foolish man blasphemeth thee daily. We beseech thee, etc.


That it may please thee to give him patience in this time of adversi^y, until
the pit be dug up for the ungodly. We beseech thee, etc.


That it may please thee in the multitude of the sorrows that he has in his
heart, to let thy comforts refresh his soul. We beseech thee, etc.


That it may please thee not to deliver him over to the will of his
adversaries, nor to false witnesses risen up against him; or to such as speak
wrong. We beseech thee, etc.


That it may please thee, to defend him under thy wings, and that thy
faithfulness and truth may be his Shield and Buckler. We beseech thee, etc.


That it may please thee to satisfy him with thy mercy, and that soon, so that
he and we may rejoice all the days of our life.

We beseech thee to hear us good Lord.

A Prayer For the Church.
LOrd, who have promised to thine Apostles to be with them always unto the end
of the world, and for a supply of their mortality, have in thy gracious
providence over thy Church, continued a perpetual succession of Bishops and
Pastors to feed their several Flocks, whereof the Holy Ghost has made them
overseers: Inspire them by thy grace, that their lips may preserve knowledge,
and the people seek thy Law at their mouth. Bless them, O Lord, with the
blessings of Levi; bless their substance, and accept the work of their hands;
smite through the loins of them that rise up against them, and of them that
hate them, that they rise not again, that they may shine forth as lights before
us, holding forth the word of life, till we all come in the unity of Faith, and
the knowledge of Jesus Christ, unto that perfection and fullness of thine
everla^ing Kingdom, Amen.

ALmighty God, and gracious Father, we confess against our selves, that we are
most worthy of all the Judgments that thou have threatened against us, these
Kingdoms, and this Church, which is now under the Cross, and near to utter
ruin and extirpation, unless thy mercy step in between thy fierce wrath and our
heinous sins. And howsoever the voice of our crying sins has ascended into
thine ears, and stirred up destroyers to root us out, that we be no more a
people, and that thy name be no more called upon, nor hallowed by us; yet we
most humbly beseech thee to hear the prayers and supplications, with strong
cryings and tears which once our blessed Savior offered for us upon the
Cross, and in the garden, and which he daily represents unto thee. And for his
all-sufficient merits, which speak better things than the blood of Abel, hear
not the cry of our sins, but the cry of his blood, and therein wash all our
sins. Let our great miseries and dangers suffice for that which is past, and
let that Orator in thy own bosom, even thine own fatherly goodness persuade
and prevail for us, and purchase our deliverance and safety. Hear us for our
selves and others, Look upon us with the eyes of pity and compassion, consider
our enemies how many and how mighty they be, and they bear a tyrannous hate
against us. Our goods, our lands, our lives will not suffice their boundless
ambition: our religion, our souls, and if it were possible, our God, is that
they strike at: curse thou their anger, for it is fierce, and their wrath, for
it is cruel. Divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel: As, for us,
deliver us out of their hands, and unite us together in the bond of peace, that
being freed from our many and tyrannous enemies, we may ever bless thy sacred
and holy name, and evermore serve thee without fear in all holiness and
righteousness all the days of our life, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

WE beseech thee, Almighty God, look upon the hearty desires of thy humble
servants, and stretch forth the right hand of thy Majesty to our defense
against all our enemies, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

GRant we beseech thee, Almighty God, that we which for our evil deeds are
justly punished, by the comfort of thy grace may mercifully be relieved,
through Christ our Lord, Amen.

ALmighty and everlasting God, mercifully look upon our infirmities and
miseries, and in all our dangers and necessities, stretch forth thy right hand
to help and defend us, through Christ our Lord, Amen.

ALmighty God, which art more ready to hear, than we to pray, and art wont to
give more than either we desire or deserve: pour down upon us the abundance of
thy mercy, forgiving us those things, whereof we are afraid, and giving unto us
that, that our prayers dare not presume to ask, through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
A Prayer for the Clergy.
O Most merciful Father, Lord God of all Order and Peace, who have appointed
Bishops and Pastors to be our spiritual guides, to oversee, and to feed us in
their taking care for our Souls: We most humbly beseech thee, suffer not a
Rebellious Novelty by violence to remove this most Ancient Christian
Institution. Fight thou for them whose Arms are their Tears and Prayers; and
let not the Patrimony which belongs to thee, be made a prey to the rapine of
these wicked times. That so by the goodness of thy mighty strength this poor
Church may continue till he come again, who is the Shep-heard of our Souls;
even Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom etc.

THe Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of
the Holy Ghost, be with us all evermore,

Amen.
A Prayer to be said during these sad times of Trouble.
O Lord our God, merciful and gracious, and abundant in goodness and truth,
who do according to thy will in the Armies of Heaven, and rulest over all the
Kingdoms of the Earth, in whose hand is power and might, and none is able to
withstand thy Arm; we most vile sinners approach before thy Throne of grace,
bewayling those manifold transgressions that have provoked thy wrath and
indignation against us, We know, O Lord, that affliction comes not forth of
the dust, neither does trouble spring out of the ground, but it is thou that
with rebukes do chasten man for sin. We confess that we were a wealthy and a
careless Nation, and our Land was as the garden of Eden; our deliverances were
great, and thy blessings were multiplied: we dwelt alone without fear of evil,
and were become the envy of those that were round about us. Peace was within
our Walls, and plenteousnesse within our Palaces. But when we had eaten and
were full, and had waxen fat, we kicked against thee our Maker, who had done
so great things for us: our heart was lifted up and forgot thee our God, and
lightly esteemed the rock of our salvation. We loathed the Manna that rained
down upon us; our Peace became a weariness, and we snuffed at our happiness;
we murmured against Moses in our Tents, and made light of thine Anointed, whom
thou had set over us. Therefore have ^ou recompensed our ways upon our own
heads, and suffered our destruction to proceed from our selves: our wickedness
does correct us, our backsliding does reprove us, and our iniquity is become
our ruin. Thou have broken us with a grievous breach: thy anger has divided
us, and thy fury has dashed us one against another. Thou have mingled a spirit
of perverseness in the midst of us; and made us a Nation void of Counsel and
understanding: instead of Peace thou have sent bitterness, and have sent a
fire into our bowels; and it is kindled round about us. And now, O Lord,
behold, the sword is drunk with our blood, and we are numbered to the slaughter:
the highways are unoccupied, and the Travailers go through bypath: our
fields are divided our inheritance is for a spoil, and our substance to the
robbers. We are become a reproach to the foolish people, and servants ^ar rule
over us. The mean man is risen against the Honorable, and the fire out of the
^amble devoureth the lofty ^dars; our Women are cast out of their pleasant
places, and the robe is pulled from the ^ged; there is no respect had to the
Priests, nor favor to the Elders. Thy Sanctuaries, even the excellency of thy
strength, are profaned, and they have defiled the places where thine hono^ur
dwells, and yet still the seat of wickedness frames mischief by a Law; and
it turn^h judgment backward, and ^ddeth justice stand afar off; ^d devises
deceitful matters against those that are quiet in the Land. Nay, there is a
lying Spirit gone out into the mouth of the Prophets; they prophecy falsely,
and the people delight to have it so, and they strengthen the hands o^ evil
doers, that they turn (...) back from their wickedness. Thus are we covered
with a cloud in thine anger, and our beauty is cast down to the ground. But, O
Lord, shall thine Indignation be poured out for ever? shall thy jealousy burn
like fire? O pass by the transgressions of the remnant of thine heritage, and
take away the rebuke of thy people! O remove from us reproach and contempt; and
strengthen the spoiled against the destroyers! Bow down thine ear, and consider
the oppression of the poor, the sighing of the needy, the groaning of the
Prisoners, that are fast bound in misery and Iron. Lift up thy self, because of
the rage of thine Adversaries; consider the desolation they have made in thy
Courts, and all that the Enemy has done wickedly in thy Sanctuary. And yet
still they are compassed with pride, and doath themselves with violence as with
a garment. How long, O Lord, shall they boast themselves in mischief? how long
shall they decree unrighteous decrees, and write grievousnesse which they have
prescribed? O make not a full end with us, but correct us in mercy, though thou
leave us not altogether unpunished. Helps us, O Lord our God; for we rest on
thee, and under the shadow of thy wings, shall be our refuge until this
Tyranny be overpast. Disappoint therefore the devices of the crafty; let not
the Rebellious exalt themselves any more, and suffer not the Tabernacles of the
Robbers to prosper. And as thou have begun to show thy Servants thy greatness,
and thy mighty hand, so continue thy mavelous loving kindness to those who
put their trust in thee. The Battail^ is thine, O Lord, thou have preserved us
from the Arm of flesh; yea, it is thou that have wrought all our works in us,
even when there was no might against that great company that came against us.
When we were few in number, and there was none to help us, then thine own Arm
brought salvation, and thy righteousness sustained us. O perfect therefore thy
handy work! Give salvation to our King, and deliver CHARLES thy Servant from the
peril of the Sword, bind up his soul i^ the bundle of life, gird him with
strength to the Battle, contend with those who contend with him, subdue thou
the people under him, and suffer no weapon formed against him to prosper. O
deliver him at length from the strivings of the People, and lift up his head
above his Enemies round about him, give him the shield of thy salvation, and
let thy gentleness make him great: put a stop at last to the madness of the
people, say to the destroying Sword, it is now enough: send us a seasonable and
quiet calm: visit us with the joy of thy Countenance, and make us glad
according to the days wherein thou have afflicted us. O restore to us our
solemn Assemblies: bring us back into thy Courts to praise thee, and let us
once more worship thee in the beauty of thy holiness! Save us, O Lord, from
our Enemies, and from the hands of all that hate us. That so we may serve thee
without fear, living a quiet and a peaceable life, in all godliness and
honesty, looking for the blessed appearance of the great God, and our Savior
Jesus Christ. To whom with thee and the holy Spirit, be all honor and praise,
world without end,

AMEN.
A Prayer for preservation from the Enemy.
O Eternal God and most merciful Father, we humbly beseech the to be
merciful unto us, and in the Riches of thy unspeakable mercies, be near to
help and succor us, in all those extremities which our sins threaten to bring
upon us. The Rebellious are strengthened against us, by our multiplied
Rebellions against thee: and we deserve to suffer what our Enemies threaten,
even sudden surprizall and destruction to desolation. But there is mercy with
thee, that thou may be feared: and there is mercy with thee that they may not
be fear^. Show us therefore thy merry, O Lord: and let us so fear ^ee, that we
may be never for^d to feel or fear them. And ^hen thou will correct us for ^ur
sins, O Lord, in judgment ^emember mercy, and let us ^all into thy hands, and
not into the hands of men: let us fall ^to thy hands, and not into ^he hands of
ungracious and ^godly men: into thy hands, and not into the hands of
sacri^gious and seditious men: into thy merciful hands, and not into the
cruel hands of thine and our enemies; even for Jesus Christ's sake, our only
Mediator and Redeemer,

AMEN.
A Confession of Sins, and Prayer for Pardon.
O Lord of heaven and earth, God of the spirits of all flesh, we a most
sinful, and therefore now a most miserable People, do in the bitterness of
our afflicted Souls, humbly fall down at the footstool of thy grace, most
sadly bewailing our many and most heinous sins. We have multiplied our
iniquities into a violation of thy whole Law, having neither performed to thee
our God, nor to man, the duties thou requirest of us, so that by onr wicked
works, we have denied that most holy faith, whereof our Mouths have for so long
a time made profession. These things, O Lord, have we done, and because in
goodness thou were pleased to ^eep silence, how many of us have thought
wickedly, that thou ^ert altogether such an one as ^ur selves; which either
did approve, or at least would not punish the Crimes that we do^ed on. And
now in thy just judgments thou have set our sins in order before our eyes; in
the continued scourge of this ^sting Rebellion, we may well perceive, that the
sins we have done, have not been barely infirmities, but Rebellions against
thee. In the Rapines, acted upon the substance thou have given (...), we cannot
but consider, that by Oaths and Blasphemies, we have robbed thee of thine
Honor, and have oft-times stolen much of that precious time which should have
been spent in thy service. Nay we have added sin to sin, so that one Crime has
brought forth another Transgression, and thou have showed us even this in thy
Judg^ ments we now feel, in that the present War has brought forth an
infectious disease, and dot^ now threaten famine to us. We confess, O Lord,
with all thankfulness of heart, that thou have been pleased to sweeten the
bitterness of this Cup by many strange successes, by frequent and unexpected
Victories, and yet thou have so allayed each favor of thine hand, with the
mixture of some sudden cross, that herein, thou have set our Repentance too
before the sight of our eyes, and lets us see it is mixed with so much coldness
and Hypocrisy, that there may be as much guilt in such a kind of Repentance as
before there was in our sins. Yet return, O God, in great mercy, return unto
the many thousands of thy people: do thou accept, and increase in our hearts
detestatio^ of all wickedness, that our sorrows for sin may be as completely
perfect, (...) we desire thou should make ^ur Peace, and that for times
^ereafter, our hearty observance of thy whole Law may still run along with such
sorrows. O let ^ot thy scourge end in a desolation, nor thine anger go on unto
the height of an everlasting mine: But hear us, merciful Father, hasten the
aversion of these thy sharp judgments from us, and let not the noise of this
accursed Rebellion be any longer heard in our streets. Scatter thou the People
that delight in War, and let the blessing of Peace be upon the Heads of all
those who strive and pray for this blessing; and that for his sake, by whose
hand thou give every blessing, Jesus Christ our Lord

Amen.
A Prayer for the KING.
O Lord God, infinite (...) power, by whom the thrones of Kings are
established, and their Persons made sacred; Take, we beseech thee, into thy
immediate and divine protection, thine Anointed Servant the King, that no
Sacrilegious profane hand come near to touch him: in all his ways, let thy
Spirit guide him, and thy holy Angels pitch their T^s about him; Comfort him in
his troubles, defend him in his dangers, support him in his Cause, bless him
in the confusion of all those that rise up against him; show some token on him,
even now, O God, when the Sons of Violence are in the highest of their Pride,
when they have joined Nation ^o Nation, Covenant to Covenant, and Army to Army,
to ^ull down him whom thou ^ast exalted, and to Root out that Religion which
thine own ^ght hand has planted. De^t their purposes, O thou preserver of men,
and let not their mischievous imaginations any longer prosper; but blast ^ll
their Counsels, wither away their Armies like grass ^orched by the Sun, bow
down a last, their stiff necks, and obdurate hearts to a desire of that Peace
which has so long been (...) abomination to them, That this miserable Nation
may no further pursue their own Ruin, ^d take pleasure in shedding their own
blood; but being by so many bitter punishments made sensible of thy Anger for
this unnatural division, may at last be reduced within their first obedience,
to the glory of thy Name, the vindication of o^ defamed Religion, the joy (...)
our afflicted King, and the hap^ pinesse of this yet bleedin^ Kingdom. And
confirm all the to us, O Lord, by the merits and through the mediation o^ thine
own dear Son Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
A Prayer for the preservation of the University and City of Oxford.
O Almighty God, who are the only sure Refuge and strong Tower of defense to
all them that put their trust in thee, receive our humble Petition; save this
City, this Nursery of thy Church, and thy afflicted People, from the hand of
their Enemies. We know that unless thou keep the City, the Watchman watches
but in vain; un^sse thou defend us, our Foundations, which are laid in dust,
cannot stand firm. We acknowledge our own weakness, and ^t which makes us
weaker, our ^full demerit; But thou art ^oth the Lord of Hosts and Prince of
Peace, able to destroy the strongest Army with an Army of most despicable
Creatures, with things of nothing, with sudden weakness and follies, with a
^mour or imagination. Thou can bring us to the brink of destruction, and call
us back again; Look down therefore, most merciful Lord, upon this Place, and
according to thy ^onted goodness, resist the proud, and give grace to the
humble, that run to the shadow of thy wings for succor: Thou that stillest the
raging of the Sea, and the madness of the People, say to the one, as to the
other, hither shall thy proud waves come and no further. Suffer not the purpose
of our Oppressors to stand, nor their Counsels to prosper, nor their Force to
prevail; But set thy hook into their nostrils, to turn them back, or confound
them, according to thy good pleasure and secret wisdom, by which thou
disposest all Events, beyond the means and reach of man; But arm thy lowly
Servants with Faith and Patience, raise our Spirits, guide our Consultations,
strengthen our hands, help our wants, bless our endeavors with success; That
we being delivered like them that dream, may praise thee as men awaked out of
dust; and having seen and escaped thy Ro^ may serve thee ever hereafter, with
true obedience, through Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior,

Amen.
A Prayer drawn by his Majesty's special direction and Di^ates, for a blessing
on the Treaty at Uxbridge.
O Most Merciful Father, Lord God of Peace and Truth, we a People sorely
afflicted by the Scourge of an unnatural War, do here earnestly beseech thee,
to command a blessing from Heaven upon this present Treaty, begun for the
establishment of an happy Peace. Soften the most obdurate Hearts with a true
Christi^ desire of saving those men's blood, for whom Christ himself has shed
his. Or if the guilt of our great sins, cause this Treaty to break off in vain,
Lord let the Truth clearly appear, who those men are, which under pretense of
the Public good, do pursue their own private ends; that this People may be no
longer so blindely miserable, as not to see, at least in this their day, the
things that belong unto their peace. Grant this gracious God, for his sake, who
is our Peace it self, even Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
A Prayer for Peace.
ALmightyGod, terrible in thy Judgments, but more wonderful in thy Mercies,
who turnest man to Destruction, and again, thou say, Come again ye children
of Men; we miserable sinners, prostrate this day before thee, humbly confess,
with Horror in our Hearts, and Confusion in our Faces, that every one of us
has, more or less, contributed to that vast heap of crying fins, which has
now in so high a measure draw down thy vengeance on us; that we have abused thy
Patience so long, till we have at last turned it into Fury, compelling thee, by
our often provocations to visit us in blood, to make us tear out our own
bowels, and by a strange unnatural War, raised we know not why, (thy Justice
and our Sins excepted) to become executioners of our selves, and so to sin
afresh in the very punishments of sin. But alas! what profit is there in our
Blood? or what Glory can come to thee by our Ruin? Let it suffice, O God, that
thou have thus far rebuked us in thine Anger; but consume us not utterly, for
we are all thy People. Say to the destroying Sword, It is enough, and let it be
no longer drunk with the blood of thine Inheritance; But look down upon our
unfamed Humiliation, hear the Prayer which in the bitterness of our Souls we
pour out this day before thee, accept of our Repentance, and where it is
defective, let thy Holy Spirit make it up with Groans that cannot be
expressed. Look upon thy Moses who stands in the gap, beseeching thee to turn
thine anger from thy People; remember what he has suffered, and the heavy
things that thou have shown him; and in the day, when thou make Inquisition
for Blood, forget not his desires of Peace, the endeavors which he has used,
and the Prayers which he has made to thee for it. Return all this, O Lord,
with comfort into his Bosom. And since thou have already wrought so much for
him, as to bring these unhappy entangled differences to a Treaty, take not off
thine hand, till thou have untied every knot, and cleared every difficulty.
Send thy Spirit into their hearts, who are entrusted with this great work, give
them Bowels of Compassion, toward their bleeding and ^piring Country; strike a
Sense into them of the blood already shed, and the Desolation to come, which
threatens all if they prevent it not. But above all, let thy fear run through
all their consultations, that remembering the sad account, which in the last
great day will be required of them, they may lay aside every Sin, and every
Interest that may divert them from the ways of Peace; and by the guidance of
thy Wisdom (for in this all humane wisdom fails) find out those blessed
expedients as may restore the voice of Joy and Peace into our Dwellings, in
such a way, as may be most to the Glory of thy Great Name; the Settlement of
the true Religion so long professed among us, the Honor and Safety of the
Kings Sacred Person, and the Good of all his People. Hear these our Prayers,
and perfect this great work, through the mediation of thine own dear Son Jesus
Christ our Lord,

Amen.
A Prayer for the ending of the present Troubles.
O Most just and powerful Lord God, to whom vengeance belongs, we cannot but
acknowledge, that the manifold miseries which have befallen us, are the due
reward of our deeds, and that we have deserved, that the things which belong to
our Peace should still be hid from our eyes. For when of thy own free mercy
thou were pleased to grant us a long time of plenty and prosperity, more then
thou gave to any the Nations that are about us, we became weary of our
happiness, and by our ingratitude pulled down upon us those judgments which
now threaten desolation to this late flourishing kingdom. And since the time of
our affliction, thou have given us space to repeat, and we repented not;
Iniquity has still more and more abounded. As heretofore thy mercies did not
allure us, so now thy judgments have not humbled us to a serious consideration
of our misdeservings. Now, O Lord, we find our selves entangled, and wearied
by our own Counsels; The troubles of our heart are in larged; Our iniquities
and the punishments which attend upon them, are a burden too heavy for us to
bear. And therefore in the anguish and bitterness of our souls, we return unto
thee, humbly beseeching thee, in whom alone is our help, to have respect unto
the Prayers of thy servants. O shut not up thy loving kindness in displeasure,
let not thine anger burn against the sheep of thy pasture: But bind up the
breach of this People Let the sighing of the Prisoners come before thee, Behold
the tears of the distressed Orphans and Widows, and of all such as are
oppressed and have no comforter. How long, O Lord, holy and true, do thou
forbear to command deliverances? Remember thy tender mercies which have been
ever of old, and save us as thou have done heretofore. Remember thy promise of
deliverance to those who call upon thee in the day of trouble. And when the
blood that has been shed calls aloud for verigeance, O then hearken unto the
voice of thy Sons blood, which speaks better things; behold the Lamb of God,
who was wounded for our transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities. And to
this end, regard the sincerity of thine Anointed, maintain thine own cause, and
preserve unto him that power which thou have given him: bind his soul in the
bundle of life, let mercy and truth preserve him, and let his Throne be
established for ever before thee. Bless them that are peaceable and faithful
in the Land: And as for those that have risen up against him, we beseech thee,
melt and mollify their hearts to the entertainment of compassion and love;
reclaim them to obedience, lay not their sin to their charge, but guide their
feet into the way of Peace. Give to those that have done wrong, the grace to
repent, and to those that have suffered wrong, minds ready to forgive. And if
any shall be averse from Peace, O thou that art the wonderful Counselor, turn
their wisdom into foolishness, confound their practices, and let their
mischief return upon their own heads. And when thou have vouchsafed to give us
that tranquillity which we beg at thy hands, give (...) grace to embrace it
with all thankfulness, to obey our Governors, to live at unity among our
selves, evermore blessing thy glorious name, which is exalted above all
blessing and praise, through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
Collects. I.
LOrd raise up we pray thee, thy power and come amongst us, and with great
might succor us, that where as through our sins, and wickedness we be sore let
and hindered, thy bountiful grace and mercy through the satisfaction of thy Son
our Lord, may speedily deliver us, to whom with thee and the holy Ghost be
honor and glory, world without end,

Amen.
II.
ALmighty and everlasting God, which do govern all things, in heaven and
earth; mercifully hear the supplications of thy people, and grant us thy peace
all the days of our life, through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
III.
ALmighty and everlasting God, mercifully look upon our afflictions; and in all
our d^ngers, and necessities, stretch forth thy right hand to help and defend
us, through Christ our Lord,

Amen.
IV.
GOd who know us to be set in the midst of so many and great dangers, that
for man's frailnesse; we cannot always stand uprightly. Grant to us the health
of body and soul; that all those things which we suffer for sin, by thy help we
may well pass and overcome, through Christ our Lord,

Amen.
V.
O Lord, we beseech thee favorably to hear the prayers of thy People, that we
which are justly punished for our offenses, may be mercifully delivered by thy
goodness; for the Glory of thy name through Jesus Christ our Lord, who lives
and reigns world without end,

Amen.
VI.
LOrd, We beseech thee to keep thy Church and household continually in the true
Religion, that they which do lean only on thy heavenly grace may evermore be
defended by thy mighty power, through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
VII.
WE beseech thee Almighty God, look upon the hearty desires of thy humble
servants, and stretch forth the right hand of thy Majesty to be our defense
against all our enemies, through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
VIII.
GOd the Protector of all that trust in thee, without whom, nothing is strong,
nothing is holy; increase and multiply upon us thy mercy, that thou being our
ruler and guide, we may so pass through things temporal, that we finally lose
not things eternal. Grant this Heavenly Father for Jesus Christ his sake our
Lord,

Amen.
XI.
LOrd we beseech thee, let thy continual pity cleanse and defend thy
congregation, and because it cannot continue in safety without thy succor,
preserve it evermore by thy help and goodness, through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
Certain additionall Prayers.
In the time of War.
O Almighty God, who art high above all Nations, and whose glory is above the
Heavens, the comfortable success of all enterprises is from thee only to be
looked for; Thou art he which give victory unto Kings, to thee it is all one
to save by many or few, thou can make one to chase a thousand, thou can
cause the hearts even of the most valiant to melt, their hands to be weak,
their minds to faint, and their knees to fall away like water. If thou fight
for us, we cannot miscar^y. If thou favor us not, we must needs be
discomfited. O be gracious unto us, and be on our side, now that men are risen
up against us. They take crafty Counsel against thy Church, and consult how to
cut us off from being a Nation, and by what means to quench the light of thy
Truth which has shined in our streets. Their desire is to imbrue their hands
in blood, and to advance their own ambition by our overthrow. O turn their
Counsels into foolishness; Let not their mischeivous imaginations prosper, lest
they be too proud. O our God, make them like unto a wheel, and as the stubble
before the wind, Scatter the People that delight in War.

Go out, O Lord, with our Armies, give wisdom and courage, to our Captains,
gird them with strength unto the battle, be with our Soldiers, teaching their
hands to war, and their fingers to fight. Assist all the Consultations, prosper
the Policies, crown those enterprises with good success which are undertaken
for the common good and comfort of the Wealpublique. Doubtless O Lord, we have
deserved thine anger, and our sins do cry loud in thine ears for vengeance, and
it were but just with thee, if thou should make us a prey and ^spoil unto our
Enemies; But O, Gracious God, let us now fall into thy hands, for thy mercies
are great, and let us not fall into the hands of men, whose displeasure at us,
is not for our sins, but for our Profession and Religions sake, and that they
may fill their own enlarged and insatiable desire, with those blessings of
wealth which thou have given us; Put therefore thy hook into their nostrills,
and bring them back by the same way they came. Let it appear that thou art in
the midst of us, and that we shall not be moved: That thou will help us, and
that very early. Let there be no invasion, no going out, nor no crying in our
streets. But set thou Peace in our Borders. Make strong the bars of our gates,
especially, let the Gospel of thy Son sound yet louder among us; that by it
many Souls may be gathered unto thee. So we thy People and the sheep of thy
Pasture shall praise thee for ever, and from Generation to Generation, we will
set forth thy glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord and only Savior,

Amen.
A Prayer for a Soldier.
O Lord, it is thy glory to be called, The Lord of Hosts: and it is thou alone,
from whom, when men have made their most politic and puissant preparations,
the victory must be looked for. Draw my heart, I beseech thee, from all relying
upon my own valor, or upon the strength of the battle in which I stand: and
teach me to look upward, and to wait and trust only upon thee.

Thou give conquest, and thou give courage: thou deliverest from the peril
of the Sword, or else make death a means of happiness to thy servants.
Forgive my sins, I pray thee, and assure me of pardon by the witness of thy
Spirit, that the guilt thereof make not my heart to tremble within me, and to
behold death as a messenger to convey me into hell. If thou (O Lord) be on my
side, peace being made betwixt thee and my soul through Christ, what can be
against me, what hazard can befall my soul? Nothing shall be able to deprive me
of thy love.

Let not spoil, or blood, or mine own advancement, be the ends of mine
attempts, but make me to aim only at thy glory in the defense of thy truth, and
in the good and safety: of the Kingdom wherein I live.

The issue of all things to thee (O Lord) is known, but to man it is hidden:
Prepare me therefore indifferently to whatsoever shall befall me. If I die give
me comfort in my last breathing, and take my soul into thy gracious hand: If I
be taken captive, give me patience, give me wisdom and godly courage, to do
nothing contrary to the honor of my Country, or prejudicial to the profession
of a faithful Christian, If I return with life and victory, make me thankful:
Keep me from taking from thee any part of thy glory. Preserve me from those
riotous, lascivious, and blaspheming courses, which are the usual fruits of
good success: let me not think devotion to be an enemy to resolution, or that
a religious fear of thy Majesty, does abate the spirit that should be in a
Soldier: but settle me in this, that the assurance of a lawful cause, the
hope and confidence of a better life, by the merits of Christ, the care to
please thee, and to depend upon thy power, are the only true grounds of valor,
which can give a man boldness and life in the day of battle. Vouchsafe me
these, and all other needful favors, in and for Christ Jesus sake,

Amen.
A Prayer upon the strange revolution on the twenty first of February, 1659.
when the formerly secluded Members were readmitted into the House of Commons.
O Most mighty God, who sit upon the Cherubims, be the people never so
impatient; and after thine own counsels governest all that is done among the
children of Men.

We most humbly confess, that it is for our sins, that thou have so often
changed thy rod, and brought such variety of confusions upon us; that all the
world stands a gaze to see what will become of such a people, that will not see
the things that belong unto their peace.

But, O gracious God, though we forget our selves, forget not thou thine own
goodness; for there is yet time for mercy, and such an expedient left as may
cure all our wounds, and close up all our divisions; by restoring him who was
once designed by thee, to be the common Father of us all, though we like
rebellious children have disdainfully cast him from us.

And as thou have begun already to show some glimmerings of our future
happiness, by unexpectedly dissolving the Assembly of those (Achitophels) who
by their dark counsels, have so long obstructed it: so go on (we most earnestly
beg of thee) and let not the sins of this wretched Nation hinder thee from
completing, what thou have for thine own glory so wonderfully begun.

Work powerfully upon the minds of all that are any ways concerned in the
redeeming of our peace; Give them but as much honest courage to do right, as
they have formerly shown in acting all those mischiefs, that have been done
among us, O plead the cause of an oppressed KING; strenghthen the hands and
hearts of all that appear for him; direct his counsels, prosper his
enterprises, make his very enemies to be at peace with him, and when thou shall
vouchsafe to us our former happiness both in Church and State, give us then
thankful hearts to embrace it as a blessing from thy hands alone, who have
wrought these great wonders for us, for Jesus Christ's sake.

Amen.
A Prayer upon the Assembling of the present Parliament, April 25. 1660.
O Most great, most wise, and most powerful Lord God, in whose hands are the
hearts of all men, and turned them as thou do the rivers of waters.

Show thy power and come among us, and be present at this great meeting, when
after so many years of confusion, there is once more a consultation had to
settle this distracted Church and Nation; and as there is nothing hid from
thee, who see the very thoughts and ends, and divided interests of them that
meet together; so there is nothing so impossible to thee, but that thou can
by the hidden workings of thy Providence unite what thou find divided, and
oversway every counsel and design, and every imagination that shall set it
self against thee.

Let there be no root of bitterness among them which are entrusted in this
great work, no thoughts of revenge; No Ambition of making themselves great; no
particular or separate interest of their own; but instead of these, give them
bowels of, compassion toward their bleeding and expiring Country; strike a
sense into them of the blood already shed, and the desolation yet to come, if
they prevent it not.

And let thy fear run through all their consultations, that remembering the sad
account, which in the last great day will be required of them, they may
unanimously set themselves to find out those blessed expedients as may restore
the voice of joy and peace into our dwellings, in such a way as may be most for
the glory of thy great Name, the righting of those that are oppressed, and the
settling of the happiness of this Church and Nation, upon the right basis of
that former government, from which it has stood so long, so unhappily divided.
And ^his as being neither impossible to thy Power, nor unusual to thy Mercy,
we most humbly beg for his sake, to whom thou can deny nothing, even Jesus
Christ the righteous,

Amen.
A thanks giving for his Majestyes safe arrival and return to his Kingdom.
May 25. 1660.
GLory be to God on high on earth, peace, good will toward men.

We praise thee, we bless thee, we worship thee, We glorify thee; and at this
time, in a more especial manner, with the highest expressions of our devoutest
hearts. We most humbly give thanks unto thee, For that thou have been pleased
out of thine infinite goodness, mercifully to look down upon the late low
estate of our gracious sovereign.

That thou have brought him from so much scornful neglect, in so most unjust,
so tedious a banishment, to appear now so terrible unto his enemies, both at
home and abroad, that thou have blessed him through the sole strength of thine
own arm, by thine own way, and at thine own time, so much beyond the hopes and
expectation of Man, with so signal, and with so dry and bloudlesse a victory.

O Lord God, heavenly King. God the father Almighty; O Lord the only begotten
Son Jesus Christ;

As thou have thus begun with thy wonderful providence to shower down thy
blessings upon the head of the King, and upon the hearts of his subjects, so
continue these thy favors to him and us; and perfect we beseech thee, that
glorious work, which none but thine own strength can finish, the establishment
of the throne in righteousness, the settlement of the Church in purity, and
the uniting of these kingdoms in a well grounded and lasting peace.

And to that end, thou that take a way the sins of the world take away for
ever, from this sinful land and Nation, the foul sin of rebellion, together
with its monstrous offspring, the crying sins of sacrilege, of perjury and
hypocrisy.

Thou that fittest at the right hand of God the Father, smi^ through the loins
of those sons of Eelial, who oppose the peace of Jerusalem, and that have evil
will at ion.

Lord make the enemies of our gracious Sovereign to fall down before him like
Dagon before the Ark. That they may neither have heads to plot, nor hands to
put in practice any mischievous design against him. So shall we still bless
and magnify thy Name, in the midst of the great Congregation; so shall we thy
servants never cease to be still praising thee, and saying,

Thou only art holy, thou only art the Lord, thou only O Christ, with the
Holy Ghost, art most high, in the glory of God the Father.

To thee be all praise, and honor, and glory, ascribed, world without end,

Amen.
Errata.
Page 119. for VI. r. VII. p. 135. l. 19. r, and of, p. 141. l 20. r. and will,
p ^r. l. 1. r. Psalms, p. 2^2. l. 1. for Anin. r. Anniversary, p. 218. l. r.
dele appointed etc. p. 339. l. 3. for XI. r. IX.


