THE Maiden-WARRIER: OR, The Damsels Resolution to Fight in Field, by the side
of Iockey her entire Love. To an Excellent New Tune. Licensed according to
Order.

VAliant Jockey's marched away,
To fight the Foe, with Great Mackay;
Leaving me poor Soul, alas! forlorn,
To curse the hour I ever was born:
But Ise swear Ise follow too,
And dearest Jockey's Fate pursue,
Near him be to Guard his precious Life,
Never Scot had sike a Loyal UUife:
Swor'd Ise wear, Ise cut my Hair,
Tann my Cheeks that once were thought so fair,
In Soldiers Weed to him Ise speed,
Never sike a Trooper crossed the Tweed.

Trumpet sound a Uictory,
Ise kill my self the next Dundee;
Love and Rage, and Fate does all agree,
To do some Glorious thing by me:
Great Bellona take my part,
Fame and Glory steel my Heart,
That for our bonny Scotland's geud,
Some brave Action may deserve my Blood:
Naught shall appear of Female fear,
Fighting by his side I love so dear;
All the UUorld shall own, that never was known
Sike a pretty Lass this thousand Year,
Now in Noble Armor bright,
Ise with Courageous Heart will fight;
Fear of Death shall never my Courage stain,
King William's Rights Ise will-Maintain:
For the Glory of our Sex,
Ise aw the Rebles will perplex,
And let them find that UUomen-kind,
Sometimes venture with a UUarlike mind:
Age of Old, our Fame has told,
Therefore Ise will never be controlled;
By Friend or Foe, Ise freely go,
Never was a Trooper armed so.
Ise a Helmet will put on,
Like a right Ualiant UUarlike Man,
Plates of Steel shall guard my Back and Breast,
Carbines and Pistols Ise protest,
In my hand Ise cock and prime,
Now and for ever is the time:
UUhile I thus am mounted Cap-a-pae,
UUarlike Thunder shall my Music be,
Let smoke arise and dim the Skies,
UUhile we do pursue the UUarlike prize;
Laurels shall Crown with true Renown,
The Uictory in City, Court and Town.
Mars the God of UUar shall lead
The Army, that will fight and bleed,
Ever our Foe shall hope to win the day,
Therefore let us march with speed away;
Hark! Ise hear the Trumpets sound,
UUe shall be aw with Conquest Crowned;
Let the High-land Rebels brag and boast,
Death in Triumph shall ride through their Host:
Glory and Fame shall then Proclaim
The Actions of a valiant UUarlike Dame;
If Foes draw nigh, I scorn to fly,
UUith my dearest Love Ise live and dye.
Jockey's Answer.
Have thou such a valiant heart,
To fight and take the Nations part,
By the side of Jockey thy delight,
For to put the Enemy to flight?
I thy Courage must commend,
Yet like a true entire Friend,
I would have thee stay at home, said he,
For the Wars are most unfit for thee;
Moggy you are youthful and fair,
Therefore can thy tender Nature hear
The Shrieks and Cries which fills the Skies,
As the Enemy we do surprise?
Love, said he, the loud Alarms
In midst of night to Arms to Arms,
Will it not affrighten thee, my dear,
Should you such a sudden 'larum hear,
And before the break of day,
Many a valiant Soldier may,
Lie in streams of reeking purple Gore;
Therefore Moggy whom I do adore,
Should thou be slain and I remain,
It would fill my Heart with muckle pain.
She did reply, happy am I
If I in the Bed of Honor die.
Printed for P. Brooksby, at the Golden-Ball, in Pye-corner.


